T869 R33826 13573139 100400
THESAURUS GEOGRAPHICUS. A NEW Body of Geography: Or, A Compleat DESCRIPTION OF THE EARTH: CONTAINING I. By way of Introduction, The General Doctrine of Geography. Being an Ac∣count of the Situation, Figure and Bigness of the Earth in respect of the rest of the World, its Division into Land, Water, and Air, with several Remarks upon the Nature and Properties of each. Also the Division of the Surface of the Land and Water. To∣gether with the Doctrine of the Sphere, the Use of Globes and Maps, &c. II. A Description of all the known Countries of the Earth: An Account of their Situation, Bounds and Extent, Climate, Soil and Production, chief Rivers, Mountains and Seas: Together with the General History and Succession of the Princes; and the Religion, Manners and Customs of the People. Also Analytical Tables; whereby is shewn at a View, the Division of every Kingdom or State into Provinces and Counties, with their Sub-divisions into Diocesses, Bailywicks &c. and the chief Towns situated in each. III. The Principal Cities and most considerable Towns in the World particularly and exactly Describ'd: Shewing the Magnitude, principal Buildings, Antiquity, State, Condition &c. of each Place; as also the Situation, with its Distance and Bearing from other Towns, for the easier finding it in the Map. IV. MAPS of every Country of Europe, and General Ones of Asia, Africa and America, fairly Engraven on Copper, according to the best and latest Extant. And also par∣ticular Draughts of the Chief Fortified Towns of Europe. Collected with great Care from the most approv'd Geographers and Modern Travellers and Discoveries, by several Hands. With an Alphabetical TABLE of the Names of Places. LONDON: Printed for Abel Swall and Tim. Child, at the Sign of the Ʋnicorn at the West-end of St. Paul's-Church. 1695.
PREFACE: IT is needless to make a long Discourse of the Excellency of Geography, and its usefulness in all the Arts and Professions to which Men can apply themselves in the World. It is abso∣lutely necessary to all Persons that would understand the Histories of Foreign Nations, or the Relations of Journeys and Voyages thither. For what Notion can a Man have of any History, when he hath no Idea of the Situation or Distances of the Places where the Actions are said to have been done? When he reads that Hannibal pass'd out of Spain into Italy with a numerous Army, he can Form no Judgment of the Length of the Way, nor of the Difficulties of it, without the Know∣ledge of Geography. This Argument is pursued at length in almost all the Treatises which have been writ∣ten on this Subject; and is so plainly True, that there needs but the reading of a Gazette to prove it. It is no wonder therefore that this Science was as early studied as any. But the Ancients, who arriv'd to such Perfection in the other Parts of Learning, were very defective in this, as their Writings do sufficiently testifie. They knew Asia so far as the Rivers Indus and Ganges, by means of Alexander's Expedition a∣gainst Darius, but they knew nothing of China, or the Islands of the Indian Ocean, and very little of Tartary or Scythia, as they call'd it. The Romans, as appears from Caesar's Commentaries, were altogether ignorant of Muscovy, Sweden, Norway, Poland, Denmark, and the greatest part of Germany. They knew some of the Southern Parts of Britain that lye over against France, but had only dark and confus'd Notions of the rest of it before Caesar's Expedition hither. They knew the Coast of Africa from Egypt to Hercules Pillars, or the Streight of Gibraltar; but imagin'd that the Southern Parts, were altogether waste and uninhabited, being scorch't and burnt up with heat. Some few of them believ'd that the Land and Water made a Globular Body, but they could not conceive the Antipodes, that there were Men living Diametrically opposite with their feet to theirs. They made Maps of the Countries they had Conquer'd, and it made a principal part of their General's Pageantry when he entred the City in Triumph. We are also told, that there were many Geographical Tables expos'd to Publick View, in the Gallery of Lu∣cullus at Rome; but we know not what ways they took, or what Rules they follow'd in making them. In a word, their knowledge of the Earth reach't as far as their Conquests, but no farther; for their Na∣vigation and Traffick (which hath been the occasion of discovering the remotest Parts of the Earth,) was in a manner confin'd to the Mediterranean: and if they ventur'd out of the Streights Mouth, it was only to Coast the Shores of France and Spain; for, for want of the Mariner's Compass, they durst not venture out of sight of Land. 'Tis to the Discovery of this Virtue of the Loadstone that the Improvement of Navigation, and there∣by of Geography, is chiefly owing: without the help of this, America had still been unknown, and many other Parts of the Earth had probably never been visited hy Europeans; whereas in these two last Ages eve∣ry part of it, where extream Cold did not hinder, has been Traded to by Portuguese, Spanish, English and Dutch Merchants. Geography and Navigation have also been much improv'd by the assistance that Astronomy has re∣ceiv'd from the Invention of Telescopes, by means whereof, in this last Age, several Stars and Pla∣nets have been observ'd that the Ancients knew nothing of, particularly the Satellites of Jupiter, whose Eclipses shew the Longitude of Places, but could not be observ'd before Telescopes were made: Besides that, these Glasses help us more exactly to observe those very Stars that we see with our naked Eyes, when from their Elevation we would know the Latitude of Places. Now this is of great consequence in Na∣vigation, since the Longitude and Latitude, or Situation of one Place with respect to another, cannot be known any other way. Thus by the means of Commerce between Nation and Nation, the Observations of Learned and Ingenious Men, together with the Relations of those many Curious Travellers that have survey'd almost all the Earth, this Science of Geography is now arriv'd to a very great Perfection. Many of these Observations and Tra∣vels have been made of late years, and tho' they have been publish'd, it has been at several times, in seve∣ral Languages, and in several Volumes, which no body having before collected together, and digested into a proper Method, the Reader, we hope, will be pleased in finding it done in the following Work; a general Account whereof here follows. The Design of Geography is not only to Describe the Earth in all its Parts, but to shew whatsoever is worthy to be known or useful in any Part of it. For the simple Division of the Earth into Countries and Pro∣vinces, without intermixing Accounts of what is valuable in each, is a very dry and insipid thing: and as it affords little pleasure, it brings scarce any profit; for the Name and Situation of a place is soon forgot
when we know nothing remarkable about it: But when a Story is related as acted in that place, when it produces any thing peculiar and proper to its self; such as being the Birth-place of a great Man, the Scene of a long War, or the Habitation of a Rich or Wise People: These fix and imprint it in our Minds; so that once knowing it by such a signal Mark, we can never forget it. Besides, as the Pleasure of the Study is heightned, the Attention of the Mind is Engaged, and an Account of the things that are chiefly remark∣able in every place, as we come to it in the Description, opens the Mind and makes it receive the Impressi∣on deep, which therefore must be lasting. 'Tis for this Reason that in this Work a short History of every considerable Place is annexed to the Description of it. Geography hath Two Parts: One Considers the General or Universal Properties of the Earth, which are common to all its Parts: The Other is the Division of it into Countries and Provinces, and the Description of each particular Place. The General Geography ought to contain, 1. An Account of the Situation, Motion, Figure and Big∣ness of the Parts of the Universe; for by this we know in what part of the Universe the Earth is, or how it is situated in respect of the rest; also what proportion it bears to the other parts in its Magnitude; and lastly, what different Appearances and Effects must happen, such as Day and Night, and the several Sea∣sons of the Year, according to the various Positions or Motions of these Bodies. Without a just apprehension of this, we can never have a right Idea of the Earth. 2. A more particular Enquiry into the Figure and Magnitude of the Earth, which we are oblig'd to consider more exactly, because it is the proper Object of this Science. Moreover, with this a Division of the Earth into its parts may be joyn'd, and an account given of what we know concerning the Nature and Properties of Land, Water, and Air. Very many Useful and Entertaining Truths may be said upon this Head. 3. Because the most necessary and beneficial Part of General Geography treateth of the Zones, Cli∣mates, Meridians, Parallels, Horizons, &c. which are Terms of Art belonging to the Doctrine of the Sphere; that Doctrine, with the use of the Globe, so far as is requisite for solving Geographical Pro∣blems, must by all means be explain'd. Nor is it improper to add to this the way of making Globes and Maps. This is the General Part of Geography, and we have given it in the following Introdu∣ction in the same Order that we have now mention'd. In this Part of it we see the Connexion that Geo∣graphy hath with several other Sciences, such as Geometry, Trigonometry and Astronomy, and the Principles and Succours that it borroweth from them, especially from Astronomy; tho' it looks like a Mi∣racle, that we must use our Knowledge or Observations of the Heavenly Bodies, which are at such an im∣mense distance from us, for attaining any tolerable Understanding of this Earth wherein we live. In the other Part, after an Account is given of the Names, Situation, Extent, Soil, Climate, chief Ri∣vers and Mountains of every Country, the General History of it is related, the several Kings that have go∣vern'd it, the most considerable Revolutions it has suffer'd; together with an Account of the Temper, Man∣ners and Customs of the People, with something of their Civil Government. This is done in a Chapter by its self before the particular Description of every Region: Also a Table shewing the Division of every Country is premis'd, wherein the Reader, by seeing it at one view, conceives a better Idea of it than he could do by its being told him in any other manner, which the World hath been made sensible of in the Use of those publish'd by Sanson. In the Description of the Provinces of every Kingdom or State, an Account is given of their Name, Situation, Limits, Rivers, Soil and Productions, with their History: Also a Table of the Divisions of the Provinces, and the names of the chief Cities and Towns that are si∣tuated in them. Then follows a particular Description of these Cities and Towns, wherein, besides an Ac∣count of the Principal Buildings, of the Trade and Manufactures, the Foundation, Encrease and Extent of the Cities that have been any ways considerable: A short History is given of all the Sieges, or other remarkable Accidents that have befall'n them; and also their Situation and Distances from the neighbour∣ing places, which will much facilitate the finding them in the Map; where note that the Miles are reckon'd at 60, and the Leagues at 20 to a Degree. The Maps are drawn according to those of Sanson, De Wit and Vischer; and tho' the size of them be small, they contain the Names of all the most considerable Places. The Draughts of the Fortified Towns will give a better Idea of the Strength of the Places than the best Description in Words could do. They are mostly taken from those publish't at Paris by Monsieur du Fer the French King's Engineer, for the use of the Duke of Burgundy, which are generally esteemed the most exact. Concerning the Performance, we can assure the Reader, that no Pains, Care nor Cost has been spared; the Best, Ancient and Modern Authors have been consulted, and the most Authentick Travels publish'd of late years, carefully inspected, in order to make the Work perfect.
THE CONTENTS. Introduction to Geography. Chap. I. OF the World and its Parts. 1 The System of Ptolomy. 2 The System of Copernicus. 2 The Distances of the Planets from the Sun. 3 The Proportion of the Bigness of the Planets in re∣spect of each other. 3 Chap. II. Concerning the Figure and Dimensions of the Earth, also of Measures. 4 That the Figure of the Earth is round or globular. 4 The Measure of the Earth, viz. its Circuit, Diameter, its Suface and Solidity. 5 A Table of Measures. 5 Of the Atmosphere. 7 Chap. III. Some general Observations concerning the three Parts whereof this Terrestrial Globe is compos'd, viz. Land, Water and Air; together with the Division of the Sur∣face of the Land and Water. 8 That the Land is one continuous Substance. 8 That the Shore is always higher then any part of the Sea. 8 That there are Cavities in the Earth down towards the Center. 8 The Divison of the Earth. 8 The Parts of Europe. 8 The Countries of Asia. 8 The Division of Africa. 8 The Countries and Islands of America. 9 The chief Peninsulae of the Earth. 9 The principal Mountains. 9 The most noted Capes. 9 Burning Mountains. 10 A Mountain can hold no more Houses then a Plain equal to the bottom of it. 10 The height of the Mountains bears scarce any pro∣portion to the Earth. 10 The Mines found in several Countries. 10 The chief Forests. 11 Desarts. 11 Of the Water. The Division of the Ocean. 11 The principal Gulphs. 11 The most remarkable Streights. 11 Some Properties of the Sea. 11 That the Sea-water is heavier then fresh. 11 Of the general Motion of the Sea from East to West. 11 Of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea. 12 Of Whirl-pools. Of the Concussion of the Sea. 13 The most noted Lakes. 13 The Names of the principal Rivers. 14 Of the Properties of Rivers. 15 Of the Overflowing of the River Nile. 15 Of the Original of Fountains. 16 Subterrannean Passages of several Rivers. 16 Of the extraordinary length of the course of some Rivers. 17 Of the quantity of Water in the Terrestrial Globe. 17 Of the Air. 18 Chap. IV. Of the Circles of the Sphere. 20 Of the Equinoctial Line. 20 Of the Zodiack. 20 The Horizon and Meridian. 21 The Poles of the Aequator. 21 The Colures. 21 The Secondary Circles of the Aequator. 21 The two Tropicks and Polar Circles. 21 The Zones. 22 The Places of the Earth answering to these Circles. 22 The Parallels of the Aequator. 22 A Table of the Climates. 23 Of the Periaeci, Antaeci, Antipodes, &c. 24 Of the Winds. 24 Of the Angles and Arches of the four principal Cir∣cles. 25 Chap. V. Of the Parts of Time. 27 Chap. VI. The Description of Artificial Globes, Celestial and Terrestrial; together with the way that is commonly taken to make them and Maps: 28 Chap. VII. Shews the Use of Globes and Maps. 34 GEOGRAPHY, or a Particular DESCRIPTION of the EARTH. A MAP of the WORLD. A MAP of EƲROPE, with a General Account of its Situation, Extent, &c. EUROPE in PARTICULAR. ENGLAND in General, a Map of it, its Situation, Form, Soil, Mountains, Islands, Inhabitants, their Origi∣nal, Temper, Religion and Language. 1, 2, 3 Sect. II. Of the ancient State of Britain. 3, 4 Sect. III. The Civil Government of Britain, Ancient and Modern. 5 The Succession of our English Monarchs from Eg∣bert. 5 The Courts of Judicature. 6 Sect. IV. The Ecclesiastical Government and Division of England. 6, 7 Sect. V. The Divisions of England, Ancient and Modern. 7 Particular Description of the Counties of England. Cornwall. 8 Devonshire. 9 Dorsetshire. 10 Somersetshire. 11
Wiltshire. 12 Hamshire. 13 Barkshire. 14 Surrey. 15 Sussex. 15 Kent. 16 Glocestershire. 18 Oxfordshire. 19 Buckinghamshire. 20 Bedfordshire. 20 Hertfordshire. 21 Middlesex. 21 Essex. 23 Suffolk. 24 Norfolk. 24, 25 Cambridgeshire. 25 Huntingtonshire. 26 Northamptonshire. 26 Leicestershire. 27 Rutlandshire. 28 Lincolnshire. 28 Nottinghamshire. 29 Derbyshire. 29 Warwickshire. 30 Worcestershire. 30 Staffordshire. 31 Shropshire. 31 Cheshire. 32 Herefordshire. 33 Yorkshire. 33 Durham. 35 Lancashire. 36 Westmoreland. 37 Cumberland. 37 Northumberland. 38, 39 WALES, in General. 43 In Particular, Radnor and Brecknock-shires. 40 Monmouth, Glamorgan-shires. 41 Caermarthen, Pembroke, and Cardigan-shires. 42 Montgomery, Merioneth, and Caernarvon-shires. 43 Anglesey Isle, Denbigh and Flintshires. 43 The Isle of Man. 44 SCOTLAND in General, with a Map of it; Limits and Extent, Soil and Product, Air, Temper of the In∣habitants. Division of the Country Ancient and Mo∣dern. Courts of Judicature, Degrees of Men. Religion and Ecclesiastical Government. 44, 45, 46 A particular Description of the most considerable Places in Alphabetical Order. 46, 47 Ancient Places that are most remarkable in Scot∣land. 47 Ancient Names and Islands upon this Coast. 47 IRELAND in General. A Map of it, it's Situation, Extent, Soil, Productions, Inhabitants, Religion, Ancient and Modern State, Government, Division, &c. 48 Particular Descriptions of the most considerable Places. 49 Ancient Places of chiefest Note. 49 JERSEY and GARNSEY. 50 FRANCE in General. A Map of it, its Situation, Ex∣tent, Air, Soil, Productions, Inhabitants, Religion, Lan∣guage, &c. 51, 52 Sect. II. Of the ancient State of France. 54 Sect. III. Of the French Kings 56 Sect. IV. Of the Government, Laws, Courts and Officers of Justice, &c. 57 Sect. V. The Arch-Bishopricks, Bishopricks, and Universi∣ties of France. 59 Sect. VI. Extents of the French Dominions, and the Acqui∣sitions of the present King. 60 The Division of France 61 FRANCE in Particular. Chap. II. Normandy; the several Parts and chief Towns Describ'd. 63 Chap. III. Picardy Describ'd. 63 Chap. IV. Champagne. 72 Chap. V. The Isle of France. 76 Chap. VI. Bretagne. 83 Chap. VII. The Government of Orleannois, containing the Countries of Orleannois, Blaisois, Beauce, Perche, Maine, Vendomois, Anjou, Poictou, Aunis, Angoumois, Touraine, Ber∣ry, Nivernois, Gastinois, &c. 89 Chap. VIII. Burgundy, Comprehending besides the Dutchy, the County of Burgundy or Franche Comte, together with Bresse, Bugey, Gex and Dombes. 96 Chap. IX. The Government of Lyonnois, comprising the Countries of Lionnois, Foretz, Beaujolois, Bourbonnois, A∣vergne and Marche. 102 Chap. X. Guienne and Gascony, wherein are contain'd Gui∣enne proper, Bazadois, Agenois, Quercy, Rovergue, Limousin, Perigort, Santoigne, Armagnac, Gascoigne, Condomois, Sandy-Grounds, Territories of Labord, Lower Navarre, Vicounty of Soul, Bearn, Rigorre, Comminge, and Conserans. 105 Chap. XI Languedoc. 111 Chap. XII. Provence. 117 Chap. XIII. Dauphine. 124 Chap. XIV. Lorraine. 126 The NETHERLANDS in General, Name, Situation, Bounds, Extent, Inhabitants, &c. 129 Of the Ancient State; how the Provinces became United in the House of Burgundy. 132 A Map of the Spanish Netherlands. 129 The Government and present State. 133 The NETHERLANDS in Particular. Chap. I. The County of Artois. 134 Chap. II. The Earldom of Flanders. 135 Chap. III. The Dutchy of Brabant. 142 Chap. IV. The Earldom of Hainault. 147 Chap. V. The County of Namur. 152 Chap. VI. The Country of Cambresis. 151 Chap. VII. The Dukedom of Luxemburg. 151 Chap. VIII. The Dutchy of Limburg. 162 Chap. IX. The Country of Liege. 155 Chap. X. A Map of the Ʋnited Netherlands; a short Hi∣story of the Rise of that Commonwealth. 160 Chap. XI. The Province of Holland. 162 Chap. XII. The Islands of Zeeland. 169 Chap. XIII. The Province of Ʋtrecht. 172 Chap. XIV. Guelderland and Zutphen. 173 Chap. XV. The Province of Overissel. 176 Chap. XVI. The Province of Friesland. 177 Chap. XVII. The Province of Groeningen. 178 GERMANY in General. A Map of it, its Bounds, Situa∣tion, Soil, Air, Product, and chief Rivers. 191 Of the Inhabitants of Germany. 191 Religion, Language, Ancient State, &c. 193 A Chronological Table of the Emperours. 149 Of the Power of the Emperour. 195 Of the King of the Romans. The Electors and other Princes of Germany. 195, 196 Of the Imperial and Hanse Cities. 196 Of the Diets of the Empire. 197 The Supream Courts of Judicature. 197 The Arch-Bishopricks, Bishopricks and Universities of Germany. 197 The Division of Germany into its Ten Circles, with the particular Countries that compose them. 198, 199 Chap. II. Of the Spiritual Electorates, viz. Cologn. 200 Triers, 204. Mentz. 206 Chap. III. The Circle of Franconia, containing the Bishop∣ricks of Wurtzburg, Bamberg, and Aichstat, the Marquis∣sates of Culembach and Ohnspach, the Counties of Holach, Castel, &c. the Imperial Cities of Francfurt, Nuremburg, &c. 211.
Chap. V. The Palatinate of the Rhine. 213 Sect. 2. The Bishoprick of Spire and Worms, the Dutchy of Zweybruggen, with the other smaller States that make up the rest of the Circle of the Lower Rhine. 215 Chap. VI. Alsatia. 216 Chap. VII. Schwaben, containing the Dutchy of Wurtemburg, the Marquisate of Baden, the Bishopricks of Augsburg and Constance, the Abbies of Kempten, Buchaw and Lindaw, the Principalities of Furstemberg and Hohenzollern, with the Counties of Oeting, Papenherin, &c. 220 Chap. VIII. The Circle of Bavaria, comprehending, besides the Estates of that Elector, the Arch-Bishoprick of Saltz∣burg, the Bishopricks of Ratisbone, Passaw, and Freising∣hen, and the Dutchy of Newburg. 224 Chap. IX. The Circle of Austria, containing the Arch-Dutchy of Austria, the Dukedoms of Styria, Corinthia and Carniola, the Windischmarck, the Counties of Goritia and Tyrol, the Bishoprick of Brixen, Inspruch, and the Bishop∣rick of Trent. 226 Chap. IX. The Kingdom of Bohemia, with the Dukedom of Silesia, and Marquisate of Moravia. 233 Chap. X. The Marquisate and Electorate of Brandenburg, with Magdeburg, Halberstadt, and Pomerania. 237 Chap. XI. Saxony in General. 241 Sect. II. The Upper Saxony, containing the Duchy and E∣lectorate of Saxony, the Marquisates of Misnia and Silesia: the Landgraviate of Thuringen, the Principality of An∣halt, the Duchies of Hall, Mersburg, Naumburg and Altem∣burg. 241 Sect. III. The Lower Saxony, comprehending the Dutchies of Brunswick, Lunenburg, Hanover, Lawenburg, Bremen, Mecklenburg and Holstein, the Principality of Ferden, and the Bishoprick of Hildesheim. 244 Chap. XII. The Circle of Westphalia, containing the Dutchy of Westphalia, the Bishopricks of Munster, Osnabrug, and Paderborn, the Dukedoms of Cleve, Juliers and Berg, the Counties of East-Frizland, Oldenburg, Bentham, Mark, Diep∣holt, Schaumburg, &c. 251 SWISSERLAND, together with the Allies and Sub∣jects in General. 256 * Switzerland in Particular. 258 * Chap. II. The Allies of the Switzers, viz. the Grisons, the Valteline, the Bishopricks of Constantz and Basil, &c. 264 * Chap. III. The Subjects of the Switzers distinguish'd into twelve Corporations. 268 * SAVOY. A Map of Savoy and Piedmont; a General and Particular Description of Savoy; and a Table of its Dukes. 269 * ITALY in General: A Map of it, its Name, Figure, Si∣tuation and Extent; the Air, Soil, Rivers, Mountains, Lakes, Temper of the Inhabitants, their Language, Re∣ligion, &c. 231 ITALY in Particular. Chap. II. PIEDMONT, with the Dutchy of Aoste and Lordship of Verceil, the Principality of Nasseran, Marqui∣sate of Ivrea, County of Asti, Marquisates of Susa and Saluces, the Valleys of the Vaudois, and the County of Boglio. 237 Chap. III. GENOA, with the Neighbouring States. 242 Chap. IV. MONTFERRAT. 244 MILAN. 246 PARMA. 250 MODENA. 251 MANTUA. 253 The State of VENICE. 254 The City of Venice. 259 The ECCLESIASTICAL STATE. 263 The City of ROME. 264 A Chronological Table of the Popes. 269 The Seven Kings of Rome. 271 A Chronological Table of the Emperours from Juli∣us Caesar to Augustus. 272 TOSCANY. 281 The City of Florence. 281 LUCCA. 284 NAPLES. 285 A Chronological Table of the Kings of Naples. 285 The City of Naples. 287 The ISLANDS on the Coasts of Italy. 295 SICILY. 296 SARDINIA. 297 CORSICA. 298 Smaller Islands. 299 SPAIN in General: A Map of it. Its Situation, Name, Extent, Air, Soil, Mountains, Rivers, Temper of the Peo∣ple, Ancient History, and a Table of the Kings from the Visigoths. 301 SPAIN in Particular. Biscay. 306 Asturia. 306 Gallicia. 307 Andalusia, 307 Granada. 309 Murcia. 310 Valencia. 311 Catalonia. 312 Arragon. 313 Navarre. 313 Old Castile. 314 New Castile. 315 Leon. 316 The Islands of Spain, Majorca, Minorca, Yvica, and Fromentaria. 317 PORTƲGAL in General; its Situation and Extent, Climate and Soil; the Temper of the Inhabitants; Ge∣neral History, and a Table of the Kings. 319, 320 A particular Description of the chief Cities. 321, 322 SCANDINAVIA in General, comprehending the Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway and Sweden. A Map of it. Its Situation, Bounds, Extent, &c. 323 DENMARK with Holstein, Sleswick and Jutland. A General and Particular Description. 324 A Table of the Kings of Denmark. 335 NORWAY, its Situation, Extent, Climate, Soil, State, Di∣vision, Description of the chief Cities, and a Table of the Kings. 335 SWEDEN, Name, Situation, Extent, Soil, &c. Present State, Division and Description of the chief Cities. 339 Gothland. 343 Swedish Lapland. 343 Finland. 344 Livonia. 345 The Islands of Sweden. 346 A Table of the Succession of the Swedish Kings. 346 POLAND in General: A Map of it, its Name, Situa∣tion, Extent, &c. Government and Courts of Judica∣ture. 347 Upper Poland. 351 Lower Poland. 352 Prussia. 353 Red Russia. 355 Lithuania. 357 Samogitia and Curland. 357 A Table of the Succession of the Dukes and Kings of Poland. 357 MƲSCOVIA, or White RƲSSIA in General: A Map of it; its Name, Extent, Soil, Lakes, Rivers, &c. Of the Inhabitants, their Temper, Religion, Government and Present State. The Division of the Land. 358, 359, 360
A Description of the chief Cities. 362 A Table of the Successions of the Czars of Muscovy. 362 HƲNGARY in General: A Map of it, its Situation, Climate, Soil, Rivers, &c. 363 A Table of the Kings of Hungary. 365 A Particular Description of the chief Cities. 365 TƲRKEY in EƲROPE: A Map of it, its Bounds, chief Rivers, Condition of the People. A Table of the Division into Provinces, with the Names of the chief Cities. 373 Particular Descriptions of Croatia, Selavonia, Bosnia and Dalmatia. 376 Servia and Bulgaria. 379 Romania. 381 GREECE. 384 A Description of the chief Cities, with an Abstract of their History. 385 Chiarenza. 394 Belvedere. 395 Zaconia, or Braccio di Maina. 396 Saccania, or Romania minor. 397 BESSARABIA, together with part of PODOLIA and HUNGARY. 399 Countries that are Tributary to the Turks. 400 The chief Towns in Transilvania inhabited by Hungarians, Walachians, Siculi, &c. 402 Moldavia. 403 Walachia. 403 The Allies of the TURKS, or Inhabitants of the Lesser TARTARY. 406 The Islands depending on TURKY. 407 A Chronological Table of the Christian Emperours of Constantinople. 409 A Table of the Succession of the Ottoman Princes. 410 ASIA in General, with a Map of it. 411 Chap. I. A Description of TURKY in ASIA. 313 Chap. II. GEORGIA. 419 Chap. III. ARABIA. 420 Chap. IV. PERSIA. 422 Chap. V. TARTARY. 425 Muscovian Tartary. 427 The Principal Cities of the rest of Tartary. 428 Chap. VI. CHINA. 428 Principal Cities of China. 429 Chap. VII. The Empire of the GREAT MOGUL. 430 Some chief Cities in the Mogul. 431 Chap. VIII. The Peninsula of INDIA within GANGES. 432 Chap. IX. The Peninsula of INDIA beyond GANGES. 434 Chap. X. The ISLANDS of Asia. 439 JAPON, Philippine Islands, &c. 439, 440 Islands in the Mediterranean, Cyprus, Rhodes, &c. 444 AFRICA in General; a Map of it, its Extent, Situa∣tion, Division, &c. 447 Chap. II. Of the Country of the Whites. 449 AEGYPT 449 BARBARY 450 The Kingdom of BARCA. 451 The Kingdom of TRIPOLIS. 451 The Kingdom of TUNIS. 451 The Kingdom of ALGIERS. 453 The Kingdom of FEZ. 454 The Kingdom of MOROCCO. 454 BILEDULGERID or NUMIDIA. 455 ZAARA, or the Desart. 455 Chap. III. The Countries of the Negro's or Blacks. 456 NUBIA. 456 NIGRITIA. 456 GUINEA. 458 Chap. IV. AETHIOPIA. 458 Aethiopia Superior, or Abyssinia. 458 The Lower Aethiopia, containing the Kingdoms of Laongo, Ansigo, Jagos, Cacongo, Goy, Congo, Fungeno, Macoco, and Giribuma, Angola, Benguela, and Ma∣taman, Cafrera, the Empires of Monomotapa and Monoemugi; the Coasts of Zanguebar, Ajan and Abex, &c. 461. to 469 Chap. V. The principal ISLANDS of Africa. 470 473 AMERICA in General; a Map of it, its Situation, Ex∣tent, &c. 473 Canada, with NEW ENGLAND, New York, &c. 476 VIRGINIA, FLORIDA, and New Mexico. 479 A Map of the English Plantations and Islands. 480 MEXICO or NEW SPAIN. 483 The Islands lying about the Northern America, Newfoundland, Jamaica, St. Christopher, Nevis, &c. 484 Bermudas, Barbadoes, &c. 487 TERRA FIRMA. 490 PERU. 490 CHILI. 490 MAGELANICA. 490 Rio de la Plata. 490 BRASIL. 490 Amazon's Country. 490 Panama, Porto Bello, Nambre de Dios, &c. 490 New Granada. 490 Caribana, &c. 490 The Countries about the NORTH POLE. 497 Estotiland. 497 Island. 497 Groenland. 497 Nova Zembla. 497 Spitzberg or Greenland. 497, &c. The manner of the Whale Fishing. 504 The Reader is desired to correct these Errors in the Introduction. P. stands for page, C. for column, and L for line. P. 3. c. 1. l. 51. for round about them, r. round about him. p. 4. c. 1. l. 24. of the 2d Chap. for into r. in two. p. 13. c. l. over against the 18 line in the end of the Table, for 14 ½ r. 14 for 15, r. 14 ½ and 15 below. p. 22. c. 2. l. 11. for Aequinox r. Horizon. p. 26. c. 2. l. 42. for concludes r. coincides. p. 30. c. 2. from l. 7. to l. 10. for 8/21 r. ⅓. p. 32. c. 1. l. 21. for bear the same proportion to anothor as the Countries, r. bear the same proportion to one another in their bigness or extent, as the Countries. p. 32. c. 2. l. 43. for i, a, r. i, a. l. 62. for C D. r. CB. l. 64. for B. r. D. l. 71. for a c r. A, C. p. 37. c. 1. l. 41. for wherein r. where. p. 40. c. 2. l. 16. for until the horary Circle, r. until the Index of the horary Circle. l. 67. for but though, r. but through. p. 41. c. 1. l. 6. for according to Latitude, r. according to the Latitude. l. 17. for which hours noted down, r. which hours were already noted down. In the title of the 2d Theorim l. 5. for part of your Diurnal Circle, r. part of their Diurnal Circle. c. 2. l. 1. for distance r. distant. p. 42. c. 1. l. 61. for sail r. sailed. p. 43. c. 1. l. 22. for affect, r. effect. l. 58. for was made at he shall, r. was made, when he shall. c. 2. l. 11. for an Brandeburgh r. at Brandeburgh. l. 17. for he Longitudes, r. the Lon∣gitudes.
AN INTRODUCTION TO GEOGRAPHY. CHAP. I. Of the WORLD, and its Parts. THE World is a Space that is bound∣less every way, and replenished with great variety of Bodies, which may be distributed into three sorts. 1. The Sun and Stars, that give Light and Heat to the rest. 2. The Aetherial Fir∣mament, wherein the Sun and Stars are set. 3. The Earth, and other gross Bodies like it. The Sun and Stars are conceived to be of a globular or round Form; and if they are not great Globes, or Balls of Flame, they have, at least, a greater resemblance to that, than to any thing else that we can compare them with in the Earth. The Aether surrounds them on all sides. Some of the Ancients conceived it to be a firm and solid thing, like unto Crystal; and that the Sun and Stars were fixed in it, as Nails are in a Wheel: They thought likewise, That this huge Crystalline Mass was divided into so many Orbs, which went round one within another, each with his own Star; but the latter Philosophers are of another Mind: They say, That the Aether is a thin liquid Substance, like to Air, only it is much more fine and pure: They ima∣gine also, That the Sun and Stars float in it, as a Plank does upon the Water. The Earth, the Moon, and the other Planets, are also round, and of a globular shape; but the Substance whereof they consist, and are compos'd, is gross and thick; so that the Light which the Moon and the other Planets giveth us, doth not proceed from the Planet, as the prime and original Cause of it, but it is borrowed from the Sun, and only reflected by the Planet upon us. It hath always, and very deservedly, been accounted impossible for us to number the Stars; for, besides what we discern with our Eyes, they who use Telescopes discover a great many more, and particularly, That white Path in the Firmament, which is commonly known by the Name of the Milkey-way, is now found to be full of little Stars, as if they were pent up, and prest together in it. This innumerable multitude of Stars, may help us in some measure, to imagine the vast extent of the Universe. For though they appear small to us, because of their im∣mense distance, yet, it is very probable, to say no more, That if we were as nigh them as we are to the Sun, they would appear as big as he seems to be. They are not only at a great distance from us, but from one another also; so that, though every Star by it self, is a Body of considerable bulk, yet if they were all added in∣to One, it would not amount to any considerable part of that infinite Space which is full of Aether. For, it is ge∣nerally agreed, That there are many Millions of Miles be∣twixt any two Stars: What an incomprehensible Space then is it, wherein an infinite number of immense Bodies may be placed at such a prodigious distance from each other? The Earth, the Planets and Comets, which are, as we said, gross and thick Bodies, do also float and move in this Aether; they are encompass'd with it all round, and keep always at a very great distance from each other in it. Every Body knows, That the Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars seem to move from East to West, and return to the same Points of the Heaven again, in the space of 24 Hours; and therefore they either do really move so, or we, and the Earth we live upon, are turn'd round in that space; for it's most certain, That if any two things change their distance and situation, one in respect of the other, that one of them hath mov'd. The Philosophers who have attempted to explain these appearances, are of different Opinions concerning it. Pto∣lomy maintains, That the Earth is placed in the center of the Universe, and that it remains fix'd there, whilest the Moon, the Sun, and the Stars, go round about it every Day. The Moon is distant from the Earth 56 Semidia∣meters of the Earth; that is, 234304 English Miles. For the Semidiameter of the Earth is 4184 English Miles, as we shall show in the next Chapter; so that, adding the Diameter of the Earth, viz. 8369 English Miles, to the double of this distance of the Moon from it, viz. 476977 English Miles, the Sum is the Diameter of that Circle which Ptolomy supposed the Moon to describe every Day, and the Circumference it self is very near 15 hundred thousand Miles, which if it be divided by 24, the Quotient gives 62500 Miles, for the space that the Moon traverseth in an Hour. The other Planets, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Ju∣piter, Saturn, and the fix'd Stars, are plac'd at a greater distance from the Earth, and consequently the Circles which they describe by their diurnal course about the Earth, must be proportionally greater, as they are farther from it: So as may be seen in this Figure;
diagram of Ptolomaic solar system SYSTEMA PTOLOMAEI. where the Earth being plac'd in the Center, the Moon is nighest to it; next to the Moon is Mercury, then Venus; after her the Sun; above him is Mars, then Jupiter, and lastly, Saturn, who is above, or beyond, all the rest; after him come the fix'd Stars. This is the situation of the World according to Ptolomy; and it was universally re∣ceiv'd and approv'd of, 'till about two hundred Years ago, when Copernicus, disliking this System, by reason of that rapid Motion which it supposes in the Planets, and especi∣ally in the fixed Stars, which he thought to be utterly in∣credible, because they must at that rate move many Mil∣lions of Miles in one Hour: besides, it did not seem to him to agree exactly with several Observations that he had made of the course of the Heavenly Bodies; and there∣fore he set himself to devise another Scheme, which is this: He places the Sun in the Center of the World, and makes the Earth, as well as the other Planets, take their Tour about him: He says Mercury is nearest to the Sun, Venus next to Mercury; the Earth, together with the Moon (for according to him the Moon follows the Earth, and is carried along with it, and round about it, in the same time, whilest the Earth, and it together, go round the Sun) he remov'd into that Heaven where Pto∣lomy had plac'd the Sun: next to them is Mars; beyond Mars is Jupiter, with his Secondaries, (for there are four Planets which accompany, and go round about him also, as the Moon does about the Earth;) then next to him comes Saturn, with his three Secondaries; and beyond all these, are the fix'd Stars, so as you see it in this Figure. diagram of Copernican solar system SYSTEMA COPERNICI
Two different Motions appear to be in the Heavens; 1. That whereby the Sun, the Moon, and all the Planets seem to rise in the East, and go over our Heads to the West, where they set, or disappear from us; this happens every 24 Hours, and for that reason is called the Diurnal Motion of the Planets. 2. That by which the Sun, the Moon, and other Planets seem to move round from West to East, as to the place of their Rising and Setting. The Sun, for instance, doth not rise in the same place of the Heavens, or with the same fix'd Stars, upon the following Day, as he did upon the preceding, but changeth his place from West to the East-wards, and returns to the same place a∣bout a Year afterwards. Now Copernicus thought that these two apparent Mo∣tions of the Heavens were better explained by his Suppo∣sition than by the other; for the Diurnal Motion he said, That if the Earth mov'd round upon her own Axis once in 24 Hours, from West to East, it would cause, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, would appear to us to move from East to West in the same time: And also, by supposing the Earth to compleat her Tour from West to East, about the Sun, in one Year, the Sun shall seem to move the same way at the same time, with this only difference, That whilest the Earth is really moving, from the beginning of Aries, or from any fixed Star, the Sun in the same time shall appear to a Person looking upon him from the Earth, as if he were moving from the first of Libra, or the Star directly opposite to that from which the Earth moves. For if we suppose the Earth to move round the Sun, in whatever part of her period she be, the Sun shall appear to us as if he were mixed with, and moving among these Stars, which are directly against that part of the Earth's course where she now is. Moreover, Copernicus thought that his Hypothesis satisfi∣ed several Appearances which the other could not; as, Why the Planets seem sometimes to be going forward, at other times to be standing still, and at other times to be going backwards in their periodical Courses; that it gave also a more consistent account of the Appearances of Mer∣cury and Venus. All these things together, with the seem∣ing impossibility of so rapid a Motion, as Saturn and the fix'd Stars must have in their diurnal course, according to the other Hypothesis, have gain'd very much credit and reputation to this System. Des Cartes, in his Philosophy, hath endeavour'd to il∣lustrate how these Motions, which Copernicus ascribes to the Earth, and to the Planets, are perform'd: He sup∣poseth that the Sun continueth fixt in the middle or cen∣ter of the World; that there is a vast Space full of Aether, extending many Millions of Miles round about them; that this Aether hath the several Planets floating in it at unequal distances from the Sun; that it hath also a rapid circular Motion, from West to East, about the Sun, by which the Planets are not only carried forward in their periodical course, but are likewise turn'd round upon their own Axis from West to East as they go along. For he imagines that the same thing must happen in this case, as we see in a River, which whilest it rolleth a Stone along with it in its Channel, the Water, for some space round about the Stone, runneth in a Circle. And as the general Motion of the Aether about the Sun, from West to East, carrieth the Planets along the same way, so likewise the circular Motion of the Aether round about every Planet, turns it round upon its own Axis also. Whatever way be taken to explain them, we are cer∣tain that there are such Appearances as these, viz. 1. That the Sun, the Moon and Stars, seem to rise in the East, and ascend 'till they come to a certain greatest height; after which they again descend, 'till at last they disappear in the West; and this is done every day. 2. The Sun, and the Planets, seem to change their place of Rising and Set∣ting; for the Sun riseth not one day, where it did the last; it is at one time very far North, and in another part of the Year goeth to the South; but he compleats his course of Rising and Setting, and returns to the same Points of Heaven which he had left in the space of one Year. 3. The Sun, as is conjectur'd, by the motion of the Spots which Galileo first observ'd in him; is turn'd about its own Axis in the space of 27 ½ Days. 4. Mer∣cury is carried round the Sun in 3 Months, or in 88 Days. 5. Venus in 8 Months, or in 225 Days. 6. The Earth, together with the Moon, in the space of a Year; or the Sun (according to Ptolomy) moves round the Earth from West to East in that time. 7. Mars is carried round the Sun in two Years, or in one Year 332 Days. 8. Jupiter, with his four Secondaries, in 12 Years, or in 11 Years 318 Days. Lastly, Saturn, with his three Secondaries, in 29 Years, 183 Days. The Sun goeth about the Earth from East to West in one Day, or else the Earth turns round her own Axis in that time, and the Sun only seemeth to do it. The Moon is carried about the Earth from West to East, in 27 Days, 7 Hours. Jupiter goeth round his Axis in 10 Hours, car∣rying his Secondaries about him the first, or that which is next to him, in one Day, 18 ½ Hours; the Second in 3 Days, 13 Hours; the Third in 7 Days, 4 Hours; the Fourth, or utmost, in 16 Days, 18 Hours. Saturn hath 3 Secon∣daries; that which is next to him is carried round about him in 4 Days, 13 Hours; the middle one in 16 Days, and the utmost in 80 Days. We shall here subjoin a Table of the several distances of the Planets from the Sun, or Center of the World, ex∣press'd in such parts as the distance betwixt the Sun and the Earth may contain 100000 of them, which distance is thought to be 1550 Semidiameters of the Earth, or 6485200 English Miles. The distance of the Sun from Saturn, is 951000 Of these Parts. Jupiter, 519650 Mars, 152350 Earth, 100000 Venus, 72400 Mercury, 38806 The distance of the Moon from the Earth contains 56 Semidiameters of the Earth, or 234304 Eng. Miles. That Secondary of Jupiter which is next him, is distant thrice the length of Jupiter's Diameter from him. The Second is distant the lenth of 5 Diameters. The Third, 8, and the outmost 14. The Secondaries of Saturn observe these distances: The First is somewhat less than 3 Diameters of Saturn from him; the Second is about 8, and the outmost is distant 24 of his Diameters from him. The Planets do universally observe this Rule as to their Motion and Distances, viz. That the Squares of their pe∣riodical Times, or of the times in which they finish their Circumvolutions about the Sun, are as the Cubes of their Distances from him. The last thing that we are to consider in these Bodies is, the proportion of their bigness to one another, and we shall assume the Semidiameter of the Earth, viz. 4184 English Miles, as their common measure. The Diameter of the Sun is esteemed to contain 111 Diameters of the Earth. The Proportion betwixt it and the Diameters of the other Planets is set down in this Table. The Diameter of the Sun, is to the Diameter of Saturn, as 37 is to 5 Jupiter, 11 2 Mars, 166 1 Earth, 111 1 Venus, 84 1 Mercury, 168 1 And there∣fore the Sun is to Saturn, as 50653 to 125 viz. the Cubes of thier Diameters. Jupiter, 1331 8 Mars, 4574296 1 Earth, 1367631 1 Venus, 592704 1 Mercury, 4741632 1
The Diameter of the Earth is to the Diameter of the Moon, as 7 to 2, very near; and therefore the Earth is to the Moon, as the Cube of its Diameter 7, which is 343, is unto the Cube of the Moon's Diameter 8. Now the Use of this Table is to show how many times one of these Planets contains another of them. For instance, If I would know how much bigger the Earth is than the Moon, I divide the Cube of the Earth's Diameter, 343, by 8, which is the Cube of the Moon's Diameter, and the Quotient 42 ⅞, sheweth, that the Earth is almost 43 times bigger than the Moon. All these Proportions, if you except that of the Sun to the Earth, depend upon certain Observations which have been made by the ablest Astronomers, with the fittest In∣struments that could be devis'd for that purpose. But the Truth is, the distance of the Earth from the Sun, as well as its bigness, in respect of the Earth, cannot be exactly determin'd, the Parallax is so small. This exact Calculation of the bigness of the Planets de∣pends, as hath been said, upon the Observations of Astro∣nomers, and these are reckoned too nice for ordinary Men; but besides them, we have other proofs, that the Sun is in gross, bigger than the Earth, and the Earth greater than the Moon. These Proofs are taken from the Eclipses, and they are obvious and manifest to any Man. For the shadow of the Earth covers sometimes the whole body of the Moon; and yet that same shadow being in the figure of a Cone, it groweth still less and less, and ends in a Point; now if the Sun were not bigger than the Earth, its shadow would not lessen; and if the Earth were not bigger than the Moon, the shadow of the Earth, in such a part of it, where its Diameter is less than the Diameter of the Earth, could never cover the whole body of the Moon. We shall give a particular Account of the magnitude of the Earth in the next Chapter; but we may observe this, from what hath been already said, That it is not such a great thing in respect of the rest of the World, as is com∣monly imagin'd; for if we compare it with the Sun, and the other Planets, the most part of them do very far ex∣ceed it: But again, If we consider how many Thousands of Miles there are betwixt one of these Heavenly Bodies and another of them, and should we compare that vast Space, not only with the Earth, but with the Sun also, and the other Planets added in one, they would then ap∣pear to make a very small and inconsiderable part of the whole World; so that the Expression of the Poet is very just. Buchan. de Sphaera, near the end of his First Book. Terra igitur cum sit millesima portio Solis Pars orbis Sol parva sui; qui continet Orbis Solem, Stelligeri exilis sit portio Coeli. Stelligero tellus si componatur Olympo Nulla queat numeris ratio comprendere, Tellus Pars quota sit vasti qui continet omnia Mundi. CHAP. II. Concerning the Figure and Dimensions of the Earth, also of Measures. IT was only affirmed in the last Chapter, That the Earth, and all the other Planets, were of a globular shape, we shall now prove it; for the knowledge of its Figure, will help us to discover its dimensions. The Opinions of Men in old Times about the Figure of the Earth, were very various and doubtful; some thought it to be like a large hollow Vessel; others, that it was an immense Plain, supported with Pillars like a four corner'd Table. And this last was stiffly maintain'd by many of the Fathers, particularly by Lactantius, Book 3. Ch. 24. But the true Figure of the Earth is globular and round: This Opinion hath been espous'd and defended by the greatest part of the Philosophers, and by all the Mathematicians that ever were. We shall endeavour to prove it by several Reasons. 1. It's a Geometrical Theorem of undoubted certainty, That if a Surface be cut through a certain Point one way, and the Section be the Circumference of a Circle, and if afterwards it be cut cross-ways through the same Point, by a plan Perpendicular to the former, and the Section be again the Circumference of a Circle, the Surface of the Body so cut is Sphaerical. Taking this for granted, let us conceive a Plan passing through the Poles, and our Ver∣tex so that it may cut the Earth into parts, one of which lies to the West, and the other East-wards from it: ima∣gine also another plan Perpendicular to the Meridian, and equally distant from either Pole; this Plan cuts the Earth also into two halfs, one of which is North, the other South of it. I say, the Sections of these two Plans are two Cir∣cles, and therefore the Body which they cut is a Globe. 1. That the Section by the Meridian is a Circle, is plain from this, That according as you advance or retire in any Line betwixt the two Poles, the Pole comes nigher to, or goeth farther from your Vertex: They who Sail direct South or North, discover new Stars and Constellations in the Heavens, which they saw not before, and lose the sight of others which formerly they had, and this in proportion to the length of their Voyages, i. e. the more way they make, so much more of the Face of Heaven is chang'd to them. This could never happen if the Earth were a Plain, or the Line described by their Course a right Line; for at that rate they would have seen neither more nor less, but the very same Stars they saw at first; because they are all very far above the Earth, and if it be a Plain, in whatever part of its Surface we be, there is nothing in one place more than another of it, which can intercept the sight of them from us. But we may easily understand how this must necessarily come so to pass, if we suppose that the Line which they describe by their Course is a geometric diagram Circle: For if F E be a Man standing upon the round Body c, a, b, d, his sight is bounded on both sides by the Tangents F, A, F, B, passing from his Eye, and touching the Circle in a, and b; and it is plain, that ac∣cording as he changeth his station, and cometh nigher
either to A or B, so much as he sees one way, he loseth the sight of as much the other way. Since then, in all the Lines which can be drawn, or in all the Journeys and Voyages which can be made from the North-Pole to the South, or from the South to it, there are perpetual varia∣tions of the Heavens, new Stars discovered, and the sight of others lost, we may conclude these Lines to be circular; and therefore all the Sections of the Earth, by Plans pas∣sing through its Poles, are circular. Now this alone de∣monstrates the Figure of the Earth to be globular, with∣out insisting upon the Section of the other Plans from East to West; because if one Body be cut with infinite Plans, all which pass through the same two Points of the Surface, and if the Section of these Plans be circular, the Body it self is a Sphere, or Globe. But, 2. The Sections of the Earth, by the Plan of the Ae∣quator, and the Plans of its Parallels, which are perpendi∣cular to the Plans of the Meridians, are circular likewise. For the Sun and the Stars rise and set, sooner to those parts which are East-wards, than to those which lie to the West, and this in proportion to the distance of the Places from each other; so that if you take two Places, one of which is 15 Degrees farther East than the other, the Sun riseth and setteth an Hour sooner in that place, which is so much more East-ward, than the other is. If you take two Places, one of which is 30 Degrees more East-ward than the other is, the Sun riseth and setteth two Hours sooner in it, than he doth in the other place. Again, if one of the places be 180 Degrees farther East than the other, in that case the Mid-day in the one place, is the Mid-night of the other; or the Sun riseth and setteth 12 Hours sooner to that place, which is most Easterly, than he does to the other. It were impossible if the Earth were a Plain, or any thing else but a Globe, that this should be so; for the Sun would rise and set as soon to London, as he does to Venice or Constantinople, if the Earth were a Plain; because the Horizon of all the Parts of a plain Surface, is one and the same, and therefore if the Sun be visible to any one part of such a Surface, he will be seen also through all the rest of it at the same time; for by his being above one part of it, he is rais'd above all the rest too; and if he sink below any part of it, he falls below it all. Since then, the supposing the Earth to be a Plain, involves this manifest Absurdity in it, That the Day should begin and end in all places of it at the same time, we have reason to conclude it a Globe; be∣cause thereby we can easily understand, how the Day be∣gins and ends sooner in one place than it does in ano∣ther. But we need not insist on Proofs of this sort, when the experience of Mankind tells us every day, That it is so, by their Sailing round it. The English and Dutch have al∣ready Sail'd several times about it, setting off from Europe, and steering to the West and South, 'till they came to the Streights of Magellan, and having past them, they steer'd to the West and North, and return'd again by the East-Indie's to Europe. Thus we have prov'd the Earth to be a Globe. The measure of the Earth, which was the second thing to be done in this Section, contains 3 Parts in it. 1. The length of its Diameter, and of its Circuit. 2. The extent of its Surface. 3. Its Solidity. But any of these being once known, the rest may easily be found: For the Dia∣meter of any Circle is to its Circumference, as 7 to 22, sere; or as 100 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 to 314 159 265 358 979 323 846 264 338 327 951. Also, the Diameter of a Globe being given, the Surface of it in square Measure may be found, by multiplying its Diameter into the Circumference of one of its great Circles, viz. such as divide the Globe into two equal Parts, and its solidity may be had in cubi∣cal Measure, by multiplying the Surface into a sixth part of the Diameter. But before we proceed to the Solution of this Question about the Earth, it is necessary to give a short account of the Measures now us'd in the World, and also of the An∣cient Measures, so far as we know them, with their Pro∣portions to our own; for it were impossible to avoid con∣fusion, and frequent repetitions in the following Discourse about the Earth, if we did not explain them first. There is not any thing that hath embarass'd the know∣ledge of History and Geography more than this, that one Age or Nation hath for the most part an indistinct appre∣hension of the just quantity of the Measures which have been us'd in a former Age, or in a different Nation, with reference to their own, and yet they serve themselves of the same terms, when for any thing they know, they mean very differently. We meet with the Names of the An∣cient Measures, which were in use amongst the Greeks and Romans, in all their Writings, but we know not their exact dimension, or what proportion they had to these now in use among us. Time changes the things them∣selves, yet retains the former Names; by which means there is an infinite ambiguity and uncertainty in their signification; and this can never be remedied, but by con∣descending upon some fix'd and unalterable thing in Na∣ture, which may serve as an universal Standard to which the Measures of all times and places may be reduc'd, and bear a certain Proportion. The Gentlemen of the Academy for the Sciences at Pa∣ris, when they had resolv'd to try what the measure of one Degree of a great Circle of the Earth, or the 360th. part of the Earth's circuit was, that other Nations and After-ages might know the quantity of it in their own Measures; they compared the Toyse of the Grand Chastelet of Paris, which was the measure they made use of, with an Original taken from Nature it self, viz. the length of a Pendulum for Seconds. The way that they did it was this: They had two great Pendulum Clocks, each of whose single Vibrations was one Second of Time, conformable to the mean motion of the Sun; by these they determin'd the length of a single Pendulum, and found it to be 36 Inches 8 ½ Lines (the Line is 1/12 of an Inch) of the fore∣said Measure of the Chastelet of Paris. They took the double of this for an universal Toyse, which hath the same proportion to the Parisian-Toyse, which 881 hath to 864. If thus the length of the Pendulum for Seconds be once found exprest, according to the usual Measure of every place, by this means may be had the Proportions of the different Measures so exact, as if the Originals had been compar'd, and for the time to come any change therein would be discover'd. Its true, if this be establish'd as an universal Standard of Measures over all the World, we must suppose that the difference of places causeth no sensible variation in the length of the Pendulums; and this is not agreed upon: For some say that they ought to be shorter in proportion, as the Aequinoctial is approach'd to; and if this be found to be so, the Supposition of an Universal Measure, taken from the length of Pendulums, cannot hold; yet this hin∣ders not, but that in every particular Place and Countrey, their might be a constant and invariable Measure made from them: And even this would be of great use in suc∣ceeding Ages; for by it Posterity would know the di∣stances now spoken of in our Books, as distinctly as any Person now living. And if some thing of this kind had been done by the Ancients, we should not now be at such a loss as we are to understand the proportion betwixt their Measures and ours. A Table of Measures. Supposing the London Foot to be 1350 Parts. The Paris Foot is 1440 of the same Parts. The Rhein, or Leyden Foot 1390 The Boulogne Foot 1686 The Brase of Florence 2580 The old Roman Foot, according to the Model which is to be seen in the Capitol, is 1306 Parts. According to Rieciolus it is 1334
The length of a Pendulum for Seconds, according to these Measures, is, Inches. 1000 parts of an Inch. Of London Measure 39 126 Paris 36 708 Rhinland 37 974 Boulogne 31 352 Florence 20 480 Roman 40 459 As Inches arise from the division of a Foot, so Perches, and Miles, and Leagues, are made from the Multiplication of Feet. An Inch is 1/12 of a Foot, and is sub-divided in∣to more or fewer Parts, according as the measuring re∣quires more or less exactness. The Miles and Leagues differ, according to the Statutes or Customs of their divers Countries; 5000 English Feet make one of our Miles, 6 Paris Feet make a Toyse, and 2000 Toyses a Parisian League; 2853 Toyses a Marine League; and 2282 Toyses is the length of an ordinary League in the Country of France. 12 Rhinland Feet make a Perch, and 1500 Perches a Mile. The Geometrical Pace contains 5 Parisian Feet. The Mile of Scotland contains 1500 Geometrical Paces. The League of Spain contains 3400 Geometrical Paces. The League of Sweedland contains 5000 Geom. Paces. The League of Hungary contains 6000 Geom. Paces. One German Mile, such as the Geographers give com∣monly 15 to a Degree, contains 24345 English Feet, or 4 869/1000 of English Miles. One Italick Mile, such as are 60 in one Degree, con∣tains 6083 of English Feet, or 1 103/5000 of English Miles. The Ancient Measures are estimated to have been thus. The Stadium of the Greeks contain'd 600 of their Feet, which are commonly thought to have made 625 Roman Feet; for the Grecian Foot was a little greater than that of the Romans. The Alexandrian Stadium was to that of the Greeks, as 144 to 125. The old Roman Mile contain'd 1000 Paces, or 8 of their Stadia; their Authors call them Lapides also; because that in places near the City of Rome, upon all the High-ways, there were Stones, or Pillars, set up at every Mile's end, with the Inscription of a Number, showing how many Miles that Stone was from the City. The Orgyia of the Greeks contain'd 6 Foot. The Cubit was 1 ½ Foot. The Parasange, which was the old Persian Mile, con∣tain'd 30 Stadia, or 3000 of their Paces. The Schaenus, a Measure of the Aegyptians, contain'd 60 Stadia, according to Herodot. The old Arabian Mile was equal to 7 ½ Alexandrian Sta∣dia. The Arabian League, in old times, is thought to have been the 25th. part of a Degree, so that 25 of them made up 73 7/200 English Miles. The Mile which the Turks use, is thought equal to the Italick; so that 60 of them make a Degree. 100 Indian Miles are said to be equal to one Degree. The Inhabitants of Cambaia, and the Kingdom of Gu∣zara, use a Measure, 30 of which make a Degree. The Chinese have 3 sorts of Measures for distances, which they call Li, Pu, and Ʋchan. Li is such a distance as a Man's Voice, crying loud, may be heard through in plain Ground, and a still Air, and its thought to be 300 Geo∣metrical Paces, or 1500 Feet. Pu contains 10 Li, and an Ʋchan contains 10 Pu, and this last they reckon to be the measure of one Days Journey. The square Mile consists of square Feet, and the cubick Mile of solid Feet, as the simple Mile consists of Feet of length. The square Mile is produc'd by the Multiplication of the simple Mile into it self. And the Cubick, if you mul∣tiply the square Mile by the Mile of length. If we would reduce any of these Measures into another of them, we must first bring the number of the Measure we would reduce to the proportional parts of its own Feet, that are in the fore-going Table, by Multiplication, and divide the Product by the proportional Foot of that Measure we would reduce it to. Thus we have ended what we had to say concerning Measures, and shall now return to the Question that was propos'd above, concerning the dimensions of the Earth. Because it would be impossible to measure the compass of the Earth intire, its reduc'd to the measure of one part, from whence the bigness of the whole may be con∣cluded; which reduction is ordinarily to the quantity of one Degree, or of one 360th. part of its Circuit. Ptolomy, and many other of the Ancients, have ob∣serv'd, what Space answer'd to one of these Parts or De∣grees, and have found it to contain 66 ⅔ Miles. After Ptolomy, about the 800th. Year of our Lord, there was one Maimon, King of Arabia, or Caliph of Babylon; this Man was a great Lover of Learning, he caus'd the Books of Ptolomy to be Translated from the Greek to the Arabian Tongue; and though he knew what Ptolomy had done, as to the Measure of the Earth, yet being willing to satisfie himself by his own experience, he brought together seve∣ral Learned Men, and appointed them to find out the Circuit of the Earth. For doing it they made choice of the Plains of Mesopotamia, and having taken the height of the Pole together, they separated into two Troops, the one marching as directly as was possible towards the North, and the other towards the South, 'till the one found the Pole one De∣gree more, and the other one Degree less elevated; then meeting again at their first Station, to compare their Ob∣servations, they found that the one had computed 56 ½ Miles, and the other just 56. So that between Ptolomy's Observations and Theirs, there is the difference of 10 Miles in every Degree; and the Circuit of the Earth, ac∣cording to them, is 20340 Miles. These Arabians reckon'd the 500 Stadia, which Ptolo∣my had establish'd as the measure of one Degree, to be equal to 66 ⅔ of their Miles, and consequently one of their Miles was equal to 7 ½ Stadia, which if we suppose them to have been the Alexandrian Stadia, one Degree, accor∣ding to their computation, contain'd 61 4/25 of the old Italick Miles, which had eight Grecian Stadia in each of them. Amongst the Moderns, Fernelius and Snellius are the chief, who not contenting themselves with uncertain Tra∣ditions, were willing to leave us their particular Observa∣tions concerning the bigness of a Degree. Fernelius says, That leaving Paris, he went directly North, until by the Meridian Altitudes of the Sun, he found the Pole to be one whole Degree higher than it was at Paris. But he has not told us the Name of the Place where he stopp'd; all that he says about it is, that it was 25 Leagues from Paris; and that for knowing this distance more precisely, he went in a Coach, and counted all the turns of the Wheels by the way; and having at last estimated how much the turnings and irregularities of the way might increase the length, he judged that a De∣gree of a great Circle of the Earth, contained 68096 Geo∣metrical Paces, which make 56746 Toyses, and 4 French Feet. Snellius took a more certain way; for instead of rela∣ting his estimation, he sought out, by Geometrical ways, the Meridional Distances between the Parallels of Alcmaer, Leyden, and Berg-op-som; then according to the differences of the height of the Pole in these places, he concluded that a Degree was 28500 Rhinland Perches, which are 55021 Parisian Toyses. Amidst this diversity of Opinions, the Academy of Paris thought it was worth the while to try the whole
anew, upon the account of what concerns the difference of Longitudes, but more especially for the use of Naviga∣tion. They consider'd, that because the Earth was not exact∣ly Spherical, but had many Inequalities, Mountains, and Valleys on its Surface, which render'd it not unlike the Peel of an Orange, they consider'd, I say, that though these Inequalities be small, in respect of the Body of the Earth, yet they are so great, in comparison of common Measures, that for obtaining the knowledge of any consi∣derable distance, though much less than that of a Degree, recourse must be had to Geometry, by making a Chain, or succession of Triangles united together, the sides of which are so many great Measures, which passing over the Inequalities of the Surface of the Earth, give us the mea∣sure of a distance, which it would be impossible to mea∣sure otherwise. To form these Triangles exactly, they put Telescopes for sights to their Instrument; because it was necessary to point at far distant Objects, and that with such preciseness, as not only to be sure of directing at the whole Object, but even at a certain Point of it. They judged the Space contain'd, between Sourdon in Picardy, and Malvoisine in the confines of the Gastinois, would be most proper for their purpose; because these two Places are distant the one from the other about 32 Leagues, and are situated very near under the same Meri∣dian; and besides, they found by divers Journeys made for that purpose, that they might be joyn'd by Triangles with the High-way, betwixt Ville-juive and Juvisy; which way being paved in a strait Line, without any considerable windings; and being also of a good length, they resolv'd actually to measure it with Pike-staves, and to make it one of the sides of their first Triangle, and consequently, the Basis of all their following Calculations. Accordingly they did measure it twice, with such exact∣ness, that there was not two Foot difference betwixt their first and second measuring. Its length was 5663 Toyses. Upon this Base they made many large Triangles betwixt Sourdon and Malvoisine, and by resolving them, they mea∣sured out the space of 68430 Toyses, or very near 87 ½ English Miles. Then they examin'd the position of every part of that Line, in respect of the Meridian, that they might make it due South and North; and afterward they observ'd the Meridian heights of the fix'd Stars at the two extremities of it. Thus at last they found the length of one Degree of a great Circle of the Earth to be 57060 Toyses, according to the Measure of the Chastelet of Paris, or very near 73 1/25 English Miles. Its certain they perform'd this with much more exact∣ness than any that essay'd it before them; yet Cassin, in his Preface to his Astronomical Observations, acknowledg∣eth, That though the Instrument with which they took the Meridian heights was ten Foot radius, it was not im∣possible but there might be a mistake of five or six Se∣conds; and because 95 Toyses is the Space that answers to six Seconds, upon this account all he could affirm was, That they had taken the measure of one Degree within 100 Toyses of its precise length, or 640 English Feet. As to the Calculations of Ptolemy, and of the Arabians; we do not certainly know the proportion betwixt their Miles and our own, and therefore we know not whether they were right or not, in reckoning so many Miles to a Degree. Its truly astonishing how Fernelius could come so near to the Truth, when he attempted it in so gross a manner; his method was meerly conjectural; and yet Snellius, who followed a certain and demonstrative way, was farther out than he. The reason of Snellius's mistake seems to have been, That he measured out too small a Base for his first Triangle, upon which all the rest depended, and he was often forc'd to make Corrections, sometimes of 3, sometimes of 4 Minutes in the same Triangle, by the lameness and imperfection of his Instruments; besides, we know not by what means he observ'd the Elevation of the Pole. We have now given a short Account of the various at∣tempts which have been made for finding out the Circuit of the Earth, they who desire to see more particularly the way of doing it, may read the Book which the Gentle∣men of the French Academy have publish'd about it. We shall now subjoin the length of the Earth's Circuit and Di∣ameter, according to their Calculation; also the extent of its Surface, and its Solidity. The Circuit of the Earth is 26293 ¼ fere, of English Miles. The Diameter of the Earth is 8369 English Miles. The Surface of the Earth contains 220048209 ¼ of Square English Miles. The Solidity of the Earth is 306930160535 ½ fere of Cubick English Miles. It's plain, from all the preceding Discourse, that when we affirm this to be the solid content of the Earth, we mean only the Globe compos'd of Land and Water, with∣out including in it the Air, or Atmosphere, which sur∣rounds the Earth. But if we would also know how much the Air is, we must first find its Altitude, which we may learn, by observing the divers Refractions of a Star, in two different Altitudes of it: Now by that means the Al∣titude of the Air hath been found to be near one thousand part of the Semidiameter of the Earth, that is near four English Miles. Having then the Altitude of the Air, you must add the double of it to the Diameter of the Earth, and the Sum is the Diameter of the Earth and Air in one Globe: Multiply your Diameter according to the Rule that was given in the beginning of this Discourse, for finding out the Solidity of any Globe, when the Diameter of it is given, and you shall find this Number, 309271625484, of Cubick Miles, to be the Solid Content of Earth and Air together in one Globe; from which if you subtract the Solidity of the Earth, their remains 2341464949 Cu∣bick Miles, for the solid content of Air. Its true, this supposeth the Air to be every where of the same height, or that the exteriour Surface of it is glo∣bular and round; this we shall easily prove: For we know first, that it is a fluid Body, whose parts easily glide by one another. Secondly, The parts of it gravitate, and press towards the Earth, or towards the Center of the Earth, as well as the Earth and Water do, though not quite so much. From these two the rotundity of its exteriour Sur∣face may be inferred. For let a b, and e f, be two Pillars geometric figure of Air, both pressing to c, the Center of the Earth, because the point d, hath a greater weight upon it than h hath, since it hath more Air above, and yet it is no nigher to the Center of the Earth, it will thrust h out of his place, and come into it, and so of the rest, until a sink as low as e, or till all the correspondent parts of the two Pillars, that are equally remov'd from the Center have an equal pressure.
CHAP. III. Containing some general Observations concerning the Three Parts of which this Terrestrial Globe is compos'd, viz. Land, Wa∣ter and Air, together with the division of the Surface of the Land and Water. WE cannot tell what kind of Substance the Earth is toward the Center; all that we know of it below the Surface, is only so far as Men have digged, and that is but a little way; as to what is below, or beyond, we may have some uncertain conjectures, but our knowledge goeth no farther than our Sense and Observation do in this mat∣ter. Its probable indeed, that those parts which are at any great distance from the Surface, will make a most hard and impenetrable Body, because they are prest strongly together by the gravity of those Bodies which are without, or above them. In the parts which Men have digg'd, they find these Metals, Gold, Silver, Brass, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Stone, Coal, Clay, Chalk, Salt, &c. Besides an in∣finity of different kinds of Earth. It is probable that the Land is one continuous Sub∣stance, and that no part of it is disjoin'd, or entirely se∣parated from the rest. The Figure of it is not round or globular, but an irregular shape, having many heights and cavities alongst all its Surface. The Sea, or Ocean, resteth, and is contain'd in those Cavities; but they are not equal∣ly hollow, some of them are more so, others less, and therefore the Sea is deeper in some places than it is in o∣thers: In like manner, the higher parts of the Land, or that which is above the Water, is not equally high, but there are Mountains and Valleys in it. For the small parts of Earth do not separate and glide by one another, as those of a fluid Body do; but they are rough and hook∣ed, so that they take hold of one another, and stick to∣gether. And this seems to be the reason why the Surface of the Land is not round, as that of the Water and Air is; for that coherence of the parts of Land hinders them from rolling downwards, unless they went all together; whereas if any part of Water or Air were above all the rest, it would presently separate and divide it self into many lesser parts, each of which would take the nearest course they could to the lowest place. From this it appears, that the Shoar is always some∣what higher, or at least not lower than any part of the Sea; for if it were lower that part of the Sea would roll towards it, and over-flow it; because thereby it would approach nigher to the Center, which its gravity inclines it to, and the fluidity of its parts enables them to glide by one another, so that each of them may go down to the lowest place, if there be not a heavier Body betwixt them and it already. In a word, no Reason can be assign'd, why the Water of the Ocean should not flow in upon that of the Rivers, if the Ocean were higher than they; for all the Inundations that have ever happened, have been oc∣casion'd by this only, that the Waters, by some accident, came to be higher than the place which they afterwards over-flowed. Yet we don't deny that some Countries, as Holland and Zealand, lie lower than the Sea, but then their Shoars are higher than it, or they have huge Ram∣parts of Earth and Stone to defend and keep it off. But for the most part, Countries grow higher than the Shoar, according to their distance from it; so that in the middle of any considerable Continent, there is a rising from every Quarter. This is plain from the current of Rivers which rise generally in in-land places, and run towards the Sea. Now they would never direct their course towards the Shoar, unless the Fountains and Springs whence they flow, were higher than it; because Water runneth not naturally from a lower to a higher Place, but the contrary way. Moreover, they allow commonly one in 500, of perpen∣dicular height, for the descent and current of Rivers, for without this its suppos'd they would stagnate. Besides that vast Cavity or Channel for the Sea, there are innumerable Gulphs and Recesses, Whirls, Abysses and Se∣cret Passages within it, in some of which is Salt-water, and in others of them Fresh-water; in others again a fiery and sulphureous Substance. We have many Arguments which prove that there are such Cavities and secret Passages in the Body of the Earth. 1. Rivers have been found in the bottom of deep Mines. 2. There are Whirl-Pools in se∣veral Parts of the Sea; and those in all appearance pro∣ceed from some Passage that the Water hath downwards by a Subterraneous Canal. 3. Earthquakes seem also to proceed from them. 4. Several Rivers dive under Ground and hide themselves. 5. Salt-water Springs are found in many places, and these no doubt flow from the Sea. The Surface of the Land is divided into two Parts; viz. Dry-land, or that which is above the Water; and Wet-land, or that which is covered with Water. This last is the Channel of the Sea, Rivers, Lakes, &c. The other is again divided into four great Continents, or vast Islands, made such by the Sea running in betwixt them; viz. 1. The Old World, which contains Europe, Asia, Africa. This Continent is bounded upon the West by the Atlantick O∣cean; upon the North by the Frozen Sea; upon the East by the Indian and Pacifick Seas; upon the South by the Ethiopick or South Sea. 2. The New World, or America, which is divided into Southern and Northern. It hath for its Bounds towards the North the Streights of Davis, on the East the Atlan∣tick Ocean, on the South the Streights of Magellan, on the West the Pacifick Sea. 3. The Continent under the North Pole or Greenland. 4. Magellanica under the South Pole. But of these two last are known only a little of their Coasts. Europe contains Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, the Low Countries, Germany, Swisserland, Savoy, Denmark, Norway, Swedeland, Muscovy, Poland, Turky in Europe, viz. Hunga∣ry, Greece, Sclavonia, Dalmatia, Transylvania, Moldavia, Valachia, Crim-Tartary. Its chief Islands are 1. Great Britain, containing the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, 2. Ireland, 3. Island, 4. Sicily, 5. Sardinia, 6. Corsica, 7. Majorca, 8. Minorca, 9. Yvica, 10. Candia, 11. The Islands of the Archipelago, 12. The Isles in the Baltick, 13. The Orkney Isles, 14. The Aebuds, or the Isles on the West of Scotland. Asia hath these Parts; 1. Turkey in Asia, 2. Georgia, 3. Arabia, 4. Persia, 5. Tartary, 6. The Empire of Mogul, 7. India on this side Ganges, 8. India beyond the Ganges, 9. China, 10. The Oriental Islands, viz. Japan, the Philip∣pin Islands, the Molucca Islands, Borneo, Java, Sumatra, Ceilon, the Maldives. Africa comprehends Egypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid, Sarra, Nubia, Negroland, Guinea, Congo, Abyssina, Zangueber, Mono∣motapa, Cafferia. Its Islands are Magadascar, the Islands of Cape Verde, the Canary Islands, the Azores or Flandrian Islands.
America contains Canada, New-England, Florida, New-Mexico, New-Spain, Peru, Brazil, Paraguay, Chile. Its principal Islands are California, New-foundland, Bermudas, or the Summer Islands, the Lucayes, Cuba, Jamaica, Hi∣spaniola, Porto Rico, and the Caribbee Islands. A Peninsula is a Portion of Land surrounded with Wa∣ter, except in one narrow Neck which joyns it to the Continent, and this Neck of Land is called an Isthmus. The chief Peninsula's are, 1. Chersonesus Aurea, or Ma∣lacca, joyning to India. 2. Chersonesus Cimbrica, or Jutland, it is joyned to Holstein. 3. New-France, on the East-side of Northern America. 4. Jugatan in the Gulph of Mexico. 5. Corea upon the East of Tartary. 6. Africa it self which is joyned to Asia, by a small piece of Land interposing be∣twixt the Mediterranean and Red-Seas. 7, 8. Northern and Southern America, which are united by a narrow Tract of Land at Panama. 9. The Poloponnesus, or the Morea, a part of Greece. 10. Taurica Chersonesus, or Crim Tartary, or Precop, in the Euxin Sea and Mouth of the Lake Meotis. The chief Isthmus's are these; 1. The Isthmus of Suez, betwixt Egypt and Asia, joyning Afric to Asia. 2. The Isth∣mus of Corinth, betwixt the Peloponnese and Greece. 3. The Isthmus of Panama, betwixt Northern and Southern Ame∣rica. 4. The Isthmus betwixt Malacca and India. 5. The Isthmus of Precop. Mountains, Mines, Woods, and Desarts distinguish some Parts of Land from others, and make them more remarka∣ble; and therefore we shall speak a little of these before we proceed to Treat of the Water. A Mountain is a part of Land rising to a considerable height above that which is round about it. A Promonto∣ry is when a Mountain, or rather a Tract of Mountains, run into the Sea for a great way. And that Part which is far∣thest in the Water is called a Cape. The principal Mountains of the World are In Europe. The Pyrenean Mountains between France and Spain. The Appenine Mountains in Italy. The Alps betwixt France and Italy. The Mountains Krapak, or Carpathii Mon∣tes, betwixt Poland and Turkey in Eu∣rope. The Mountains Coslagnas, or of Balkan, of old Haemus, dividing Turkey into Nor∣thern and Southern. The Mountains call'd Camenypayas, or Hy∣perhraei, or Riphaei, in Muscvy. The Mountains of Darefield which separate Sweden from Norway. The Mountains of Auvergne in France. The Crampian Mountains in Scotland. In Asia. Mount Taurus in Turkey. Mount Caucasus betwixt the Euxine and Caspian Seas. The Mountains of China near Trtary. The Mount Imaus, it divides Tartary or Scythia in two. The Gate in the Peninsule of India, within the River Ganges. In Africa. Mount Atlas between Barbary and Biled∣ulgerid. The Mountains of the Moon in the Con∣fines of Monomotapa. In America. The Mountains of Apalache between New-France and Florida. The Mountains nam'd Andes Cordillera, or Sierra, Nevada run through all the We∣stern Regions of Southern America. The most famous Capes Of the Old Continent, are Cape Nort, situated to the North in Asia. The Cape of Good Hope to the South of A∣frica. The Cape of Liampo to the East in the Coasts of China. The Cape Verd on the West of Africa. The North-Cape on the Coast of Norway. The Capes of St. Vincent and of Finisterrae in Spain. The Cape of Matapan in the Morea. In America. Cape Charles to the North of Canada. Cape Frouard to the South of Magellanica. Cape St. Augustin to the East of Brasil. The Cape of Correntes to the West of New-Spain. Some Mountains are contain'd in a narrow compass, o∣others extend for a long way, in a continued ridge; of this last sort are those mention'd in the fore-going Table; the most noted of the others are; 1. El Pico, a Mountain in Teneriff, one of the Canary-Islands; it is thought to be the highest Mountain in the World; the top of it may be seen distinctly enough at Sea, at the distance of 292 English Miles; one cannot go up to it, except in the Months of July and August; for all the rest of the Year it is cover'd with Snow, though Snow never falls, neither in Teneriff, nor in any other of the Canary-Islands. The top of it is rais'd considerably a∣bove the Clouds; for from Sea it hath been distinctly ob∣serv'd, that the Clouds did encompass the middle of the Mountain, and the top of it appeared a great way above them. Three Days are requisite to ascend to its top, which is not pointed but plain, and in a clear day, when the Air is free of Clouds, all the other Canary-Islands may be seen from it, though some of them are at 200 Miles distance; the perpendicular height of it is said to be one German Mile, or five English Miles. 2. The Pic of St. George, in the Island Pico, one of the Azares; this Mountain is accounted by some to be full as high as the Pic of Teneriff. 3. Pelion, a Mountain of Macedonia in Greece, was mea∣sured by Dicaearchus, and its perpendicular height was found to be 10 Stadia, or ⅓ of a German Mile, that is somewhat less than 2 English. 4. Olympus, a Mountain of lesser Asia, was found by Xenagoras to be 10 Stadia, and 96 Grecian Feet, or ¼ of a German Mile in height, which is 1 ¼ of an English Mile. 5. Athos, a Mountain on the Sea-coast of Macedonia. Plutarch and Pliny say, That this Mountain is so high, that when the Sun is in Cancer, or in his greatest declina∣tion to the North, the shadow of the Mountain reacheth to Lemnos, an Island of the Archipelago, which is 87 Miles distant from it. This is the meaning of that common Ver∣sicle , i. e. Athos shall cover the sides of the Lemnian Cow. For the sha∣dow of the Mountain reacht to the Market-place of Myr∣gina, a Town of that Island, and the Inhabitants set up the Image of a Cow, in brass, in the place where the sha∣dow ended. 6. Cordillera, which was in the Table, is a Tract of Mountains running through Southern America, from the Aequator to the Streights of Magellan, the length of 800 German Miles, or 3800 English; and the tops of these Mountains are said to be so high, that the very Birds flag and grow weary, before they can flie up to them. There is in all that vast Tract only one Passage, and that very difficult too, where Men and Horses may get over, from the West to the East side of America; at least no other hath been yet discovered. Many of them are cover'd with perpetual Snow, many are environed with Clouds, and some of them do rise above the middle Region of the Air.
As the Spaniards were travelling over these Mountains, from Nicaragua to Peru, many of them, and of their Horses, expir'd suddenly upon the top of the Mountain, and stood stiff like Statues, as if they had been frozen to death: the reason of which seem'd to be the want of that kind of Air which our Lungs require for the use of Respi∣ration. These are the most considerable Mountains in the World for their height, but there are others famous upon other accounts, as the burning Mountains, of which number there is, 1. Aetna, a Mountain of Sicily, now call'd Gibel, burn∣ing Flames and Smoke have been always, since the Memory of Man, thrown from the top of it: the Burning is seen more than the distance of 40 German, or 200 English Miles from Sicily. Though it burns continually, it rageth more at some certain times, than it does ordinarily. In the Year 1537, the whole Island of Sicily shook and trembled, from the first of May to the twelfth; then they heard a vast and horrid noise in the bowels of the Earth, as if it had thun∣der'd; Houses were over-thrown every where by the tot∣tering of the Land. When this tempest had continued 11 Days, at last the Earth broke in several places, and let out the Flame which destroy'd and burnt every thing that was within 15 Leagues of the Mountain; and a little after, the Cavity in the top of it, threw out for 3 whole Days together, an extraordinary quantity of hot Embers and Ashes, which were scattered not only over all the Island, but much of them was carried over the Sea to Italy; and Ships 200 Leagues distant from Sicily were said to have suffered losses by them. Within these few Years it quite ruin'd the Town of Syracuse, and destroy'd more than 10000 of the People of the Island: its said the compass about the root of it is 50 Miles. 2. Hecla, a Mountain of Island; it is sometimes as out∣ragious as Aetna, and casteth up great burning Stones: the Fires which are shut up within it do often make strange and wonderful sounds, not unlike the cries and howlings of tormented Persons; and upon this account superstitious and credulous People do believe these kinds of Mountains to be Hell, and that the Souls of wicked Men are tormented in them. 3. Vesuvius in Campania; the present Name of it is Monte di soma, not far from the City of Naples: The sides of it are planted with Vines, which bring forth the old Falernian, the best Wine of the World, in great abun∣dance, when the Mountain does not flame; but it does that frequently, as well as Aetna. Dion Cassius tells us, That in the time of Vespasian the burning of this Moun∣tain was so vehement and terrible, that the Ashes, with the sulphurous Smoke which was thrown up from its Bow∣els, were not only carried the length of Rome, by the Wind, but over the Mediterranean Sea to Africk and Ae∣gypt; besides, Birds being stifled by it in the Air, fell down dead; and Fishes perish'd in the neigbouring Wa∣ters, which were poison'd and choak'd with the burning Ashes. Martial, who liv'd in that time, hath a pretty Epigram upon the sad change of the Mountain; for he had seen it green, and afterwards black and discoloured with the Flames. But when the burning had ceas'd, and Rains had fallen upon the sulphurous embers and ashes which lay on the sides of the Hill, it became wondrous fruitful, and produc'd plenty of excellent Wine. These are the most celebrated, but there are many others besides, of which we shall only name a few. 1. There is one in the Island Java. 2. Another in Sumatra; a third in Japan; a fourth in Nicaragua, a Province of America; in Cordillera, or the Mountains of Peru. There are several of them. There are some Lands also which burn'd of old, as is conjectur'd from the surface of the Ground, which looks black, and as if it had been scorch'd, but now the burning is quite ceas'd: Of this kind is the Island of St. Helen, and several of the Azores, in which also the Earth is found to be full of Brimstone, and other Stuff fit for taking fire: For the Fewel of these Fires is certainly that Sulphurous or Bituminous Substance in the Body of the Mountain, and if that should happen in any place to be all spent, the burning must needs cease. The surface of a Mountain is certainly larger than that of the plain bottom upon which it stands; yet if a City be built upon the Mountain, it will contain no more Houses than a Plain equal in extent to the bottom may do, and not only the Houses of the Plain may be as many as those of the Mountain are, but the distance also betwixt each House, or the Streets of it, would be as large in the one, as they are in the other; because Houses are built perpendicularly always to the Plain on which they stand; and in the bottom of the Hill, there are Plains parallel and equal to the Foundations of the several Houses and Streets of the City that is built upon it. For if it were suppos'd that the Mountain did sink, there would be a correspondent part in the Plain, or in the bottom of the Mountain, for the Foundation of every House, and for the breadth and length of every Street that was upon it. Though a Moun∣tain can bear no more Houses than the Plain upon which it is doth, it may bring forth more Grass and more Corn, for these don't grow, or stand perpendicularly to any one Plan as the other doth. The height of the Mountains bears scarce any propor∣tion to the Semidiameter of the Earth; so that these Ine∣qualities will make no alteration in the round Figure of this Terrestrial Globe. For the Pic of Teneriff, which is thought to be the highest, is but one German Mile, or at most 1 ½, or 7 English Miles of perpendicular height. Now this is next to nothing, if we compare it with the Semidi∣ameter of the whole Earth, viz. 4184 English Miles. And when the height of the highest Mountains hath such a small proportion, as that of 1 to 600, or 7 to 4184, if we remember that there are very few Mountains of this height, but the most part of them are scarce one English Mile, we may very justly conclude, That they will not hinder the roundness of the Earth, no more than the little inequalities on the Surface of an ordinary Globe, do spoil the roundness of its figure. A Mine is a place in the Earth, out of which Metals and Minerals, such as Gold, Silver, &c. and other sorts of Earth are digged. The most famous Gold and Silver Mines are: 1. Those in Peru, which are judg'd to be by far the richest of the World: The Peruvians and Spaniards were wont to boast, That the very Ground of this Country was Gold and Silver. Girava, a Spanish Author, saith, That there were Mines near Quito, out of which they digged more Gold than Earth. When the Spaniards came first to this Country, they saw many Houses in it Plated over with Gold, both within and without: The chief Officers in the Peruvian Army had Mail-Coats of solid Silver, and all their other Arms were deckt and adorn'd with it and Gold. Upon this account, when they had conquered the Country, they built here their strongest Forts, and plac'd their greatest Garisons. There is an extraordinary Silver Mine in the Mountain Potosi, in which twenty thousand Men are em∣ploy'd for digging up the Earth. Its from this that the King of Spain receives each Year such a deal of Treasure, to the grief and envy of all his Neighbours. 2. There are also very good Silver Mines in the Islands of Japan. 3. There are many Mountains in Guinea which produce Gold, but they are at a great distance from the Shore: They do not, however, dig for all the Gold that is found here, they have also other ways of gathering it, from the Sand, and Channel of Rivers, which carries very much along with them. 4. There are several rich Mines of Gold and Silver in Monomotapa. 5. Germany abounds more with Mines than any other part of Europe; some of them afford a little Gold, but many of them give Silver in considerable quantities, others Cop∣per, Iron, Lead.
6. Sweedland hath a very rich Copper-Mine, in a huge Mountain, near one Mile high, which they call Kopperberg. From this they dig so much Copper each Year, as pays a Third of the King's Revenue. 7. There are Mines of Salt in Poland, within a few Miles of Cracow, where great lumps of transparent and white Salt are cut out of the Earth: Also, in Transylvania, and in the County of Tyrol. All the Mountains of the Island Ormus, in the mouth of the Persian Gulph, are Rocks of Chrystalline Salt; yea, the whole Island seems to be no∣thing else; and they build the Walls of their Houses of it. 8. The West of England, and especially Cornwal, abounds with the finest Tin that is in the World. A Wood is a long space of Land, where Trees and Shrubs grow naturally. Most part of Woods consist of Trees of one kind. In Africk, at the Cape Verde, there are Woods of Orange Trees. In Spain and Italy, there are, for the most part, Olives and Myrtles. In England Oaks. In Norway Firr-Trees. The most famous Woods of old were these two: 1. The Hercynian-Forest, which be∣gan in the Low-Countries, and ran through all Germany, Po∣land, Muscovy, Tartary. There are great Woods in these Countries to this day, but much is cut down, especially in Germany, of that which was standing in Caesar's time. 2. The Caledonian-Forest in Scotland, which extended, as the Grampian Mountain did, from Aberdeen to Dumbarton, a∣bout 100 Miles; but much of that Wood is now cut down likewise. The most famous Wood at present, is that of Norway, which abounds with tall big Trees; out of it the Dutch, the Dane, the Sweed, the French, are provided of Timber to build their Ships of. Lithuania is also full of Wood, and it brings in a very great yearly Revenue to the King of Poland. Desarts are great Tracts of a Country, not laboured nor inhabited by Men, because of its barrenness or unwholsom∣ness. Some of these are sandy, as the Deserts of Lop Cal∣mak, or Xamo, and of Arabia Deserta in Asia, those of Lybia and Sarra in Africa, &c. Others are stony, as the Desart of Pharan in Arabia Petraea, &c. Some uninhabi∣ted Countries, although fruitful, are also call'd Desarts, as those of the Ʋkraine in Poland, along the Banks of the Ri∣ver Boristhenes. The Surface of the Water is also divided into several Parts, which are distinguisht by different Names. The Sea or Ocean is that general Collection of Waters which encompasseth the Dry-land. The Gulph is a part of Sea running betwixt two Lands, which do embrace and al∣most encompass it. A Strait is a narrow Sea shut up be∣twixt Lands, and affording Passage from one great Sea to another. The Ocean is divided into four great Seas. 1. The At∣lantick, which lieth between the West of Europe and of Africa, and the East-side of America. This Sea is call'd also Mar del Nort. 2. The Pacifick Sea, which lieth be∣twixt the West-side of America and Asia: it is also call'd Mar del Zur. 3. The Hyperborean or North Sea, which surrounds the Land that lieth towords the North Pole. 4. The South Sea, which encompasseth Magellanica, or the Continent under the South Pole. The Indian Ocean is a part of this. The Parts of the Ocean receive denomi∣nations from the Countries they wash; so we say the Bri∣tish-Sea, the Indian-Sea, the Chinese-Sea, &c. The principal Gulphs are these: 1. The Mediterranean-Sea, the most famous in the World, which runs in betwixt Spain and Barbary, from the Atlantick Ocean, and extends a long way, from Cadiz in Spain unto Syria in Asia, having Africk upon one hand, and Europe on the other. It maketh also several secondary Gulphs, as the Gulph of Lions, the Gulph of Venice, or the Adriatick-Sea, the Archipelago, or the Aegean-Sea, the Euxine, or Black-Sea, &c. It receives different Names from the different Places that it washeth; upon the Coast of Spain, it is called the Gulph of Cartage∣na, the Gulph of Alicant, the Gulph of Barcelona, &c. 2. The Baltick-Sea, or the East-Sea, as it's commonly call'd. It breaks in from the Ocean, betwixt Zealand, an Island of Denmark, and Gotland, a part of the Continent of Swedeland; also betwixt Zeland and Jutland. It runneth East-wards along the Coast of Germany to Koningsberg, and after winds about North-ward to Finland and Lapland. It hath 3 secondary Gulphs, viz. the Botner-Sea, the Finnick, and the Livonick. 3. The Red-Sea, or the Gulph of Arabia, or Sea of Mec∣ca; it runneth in from the Indian-Ocean, betwixt Arabia and Africa. 4. The Gulph of Persia; it runs in from the Indian-Ocean, betwixt Arabia and Persia. 5. The Gulph of Bengal, between India and Malacca; this Gulph runneth also from the Indian-Ocean, and its course is from the South North-wards. 6. The Gulph of Mexico, which floweth in from the Atlantick-Ocean, betwixt Southern and Northern America. 7. Hudson's Bay, which is a Gulph betwixt New-France and Canada, coming in from the Northern Ocean. Streights are of 3 sorts; for they either are a narrow Passage betwixt the Ocean and the Ocean, or the Ocean and a Gulph, or betwixt one Gulph and another. Of the first sort are these; 1. The Streight of Magellan, which unites the Atlantick and Pacifick-Seas, betwixt Chica, a Province of Southern-America, and Magellanica. 2. The Streights of Davis, which are a Passage from the North Sea to the Pacifick, between Greenland, and the Northern Parts of America. 3. The Streight of Waigats, betwixt Samojeda and Nova-Zembla, being a Passage from the Rus∣sian, or White-Sea, to the Tartarian-Ocean. Of the second sort are, 1. The Streights of Gibraltar, betwixt Spain and Africk, through which the Atlantick-Ocean floweth into the Mediterranean-Sea. 2. The Sound, betwixt Zeland, an Island of Denmark, and the Coast of Schonen, part of the Continent of Swedeland; through this the Atlantick-Ocean floweth into the Baltick-Sea. 3. The Streight of Babel∣mandel, through which the Indian-Ocean floweth into the Red-Sea. 4. The Streight of Ormus, which joins the In∣dian-Sea, and the Gulph of Persia. Of the third sort are, 1. The Hellespont, or the Streight of Gallipoli and the Dar∣danelles, a narrow Passage from the Archipelago to the Sea of Marmora: The Dardanelles are two Castles, one on the side of Europe in Romania, the other on the Coast of Asia, over against it, suppos'd to be the Sesios and Abydes of the Ancients. 2. The Streight of Constantinople, from the Sea of Marmora to the Black-Sea. 3. The Streight of Caffa, from the Black-Sea, to the Lake Meotis. Besides these, there are many other Streights made by Islands; such as that betwixt Dover and Calis, and that other at Messina, betwixt Sicily and Italy: But these which we have men∣tion'd may suffice in this place. We shall next consider some few properties of the Sea. Its depth is different, according to the different depth of the Channel, as we said above; for in some places it is 1/8 of a Mile, in others, 1/20, 1/10, ¼, ½, and in some few places it hath been found to be one whole German Mile. Gulphs are not near so deep as the Ocean, nor are those parts of the Ocean, which are nigh to the Shore, so deep as the middle of it; because the wet Land is hollower in the middle, than it is toward the extremities of it. The Sea-Water is compos'd of two kinds of Parts, one of which is rough, picquant, and heavy, the other soft, and much lighter. This last evaporates easily, the former not at all. The saltness of the Sea-Water comes from the parts of the first kind; for it is commonly known by experience, That Salt is made by the boiling of Sea-Water, either upon our ordinary Fires, or by the simple heat of the Sun, which exhales the fresh Particles from the Salt ones. This is the way they make their Salt in France; they cast up some Ditches on the Shore, to which they let in the Ocean, and the Sun does the rest of the work for them, by exhaling the fresh Particles into Vapours, and leaving the rest hard and dry. The Sea-Water is observ'd to be fresher nigh the Poles, than it is under the Aequator; these two Reasons may be given for it; 1. The excessive heat of the Sun there, rai∣seth
more Vapours from the Sea, than are rais'd under the Pole; so that more Salt Particles continue there, and fewer fresh ones in proportion, than under the Poles. 2. As some parts of the dry Land abound with Salt-Rocks and Mines, more than others, so its probable some parts of the wet Land, upon which the Sea floweth, may have more of these than others have. And there is not the least doubt, but those Seas which flow upon Salt Rocks, will taste more of Salt, than those which have another kind of Chan∣nel. The Sea-Water is also heavier than the fresh Water, be∣cause it contains many Particles of fixed Salt in it, which is a much grosser and heavier Body than fresh Water is: Also, the Water in one part of the Sea is heavier than it is in another, because there is more of that Salt in one place of it than is in another. Upon this account, if a Ship is deep loaden at Sea, she will sink when brought into the mouth of a River, except some of her burden be first ta∣ken out: For, the Water of the River being fresh, is thin∣ner and lighter than that of the Sea; and therefore the same weight will sink deeper in it than it doth in the o∣ther; and very many Ships have been lost by this means, in Rivers which had sufficient depth of Water, only by the inadvertence of the Mariners in bringing them from salt Water to fresh, without lessening their Burden. From this it will not follow, that there is no salt Water but what is heavier than fresh; because there is another Salt which they call Volatile, and this is lighter and more spirituous than the parts of fresh Water are, yet being mixt with it, it will make it as Salt as Water can be, and it continues as light as 'twas before, notwithstanding. The Sea doth not freeze so easily as fresh Water; for the Salt resists and hinders it; and there is a Spirit ex∣tracted from Salt, which cannot freeze at all, not with the extremest cold. Though so many Rivers run into the Sea, it grows no bigger; because, 1. the Water returns to the Fountains of the Rivers by subterraneous Passages; 2. The Sun raiseth eery day a great many Vapours from it. The Sea casts out Terrestrial Bodies to the Shore; be∣cause it moving always towards the Shore, must push, and carry the Bodies it meets with, the same way, till it bring them to the Shore also, where its impulse ceasing, the Bo∣dy lieth still. There are 3 kinds of Motion observ'd in the Sea; 1. a direct Motion, by which the Water seems to go all one way, or strait forward, to one quarter of the World. 2. A circular Motion, where it turns round about a certain point, and this is call'd a vortex, or a Whirl-pool. 3. A Concussion, when the Water shakes and trembles. Of the first kind is that universal Motion of the Sea, from East to West, which is observ'd by all who Sail from India to Madagascar, or from Africk to Brasil; also from New-Spain to China: They perceive very plainly, That the Water hath a constant Current from East to West in all these Seas. The Atlantick-Ocean moves towards the Coasts of America, and the Pacifick from them: this is very dis∣cernable of the Pacifick-Sea, at the Cabo des Correntes, be∣twixt Panama and Lima. Yet we are not to think this Motion of the Sea from East to West is always so direct, but that it may be some-what diverted from it, either to the South or North, by the Annual, or Trade-Winds, and the obliquity of the Shores; so that, especially along the Coasts, the Water seems to run different ways; nay, not only so, but on this side the Torrid Zone, the Atlantick-Sea, i. e. that part of it which lieth direct West from Spain, seems to move East-wards, and there is a continual influx of Water from it to the Mediterranean, like to the course of a rapid Stream. Besides this, there is another universal Motion of the Sea, viz. the Flux and Re-flux of it, whereby in the space of 12 ½ Hours, very near, it is observ'd to flow towards most Shores, and retire again from them. In most places the Water flows to the Shore, whilst the Moon is coming from the East to the Meridian of the place, and also as she goeth from the West, to the Meridian directly underneath, and opposite to the other. It retires from the Shore, whilst the Moon moves from the Meridian below, to the East, and also whilst she descends from the Meridian of the place to the West. This Flux and Re-flux of the Sea, is thought to be no proper Motion of it self, but only a modification of that ge∣neral Current of the Ocean from East to West: For the course that the Sea moves ought not to be computed from its flowing to the Shore, and following the windings and turnings of it; because, whatever way it goes, its Waves must still roll to the several Shores as they go along. But the general tendency and course of it, both in its Flux and Re-flux, seems to be from East to West. For, 1. No other Motion is observ'd in these places of the Ocean, within the Torrid Zone, which are far distant from any Land, except that from East to West. 2. In Streights, which lie directly East and West, and which are united with the Ocean at each end, as in that of Magellan, that of Java, and of others of the Indian-Islands, though the Sea riseth and fal∣leth in these Streights, that is, though there be Flux and De-flux (for that is the proper Name of it, and not Re-flux) yet whilest the Sea is falling, it goes off to the West, and does not return by the East-end of the Streight at which it enter'd. So that the Flux is only the arrival of a great Wave, or gush of Water (if I may call it so) going West-ward, and the Re-flux is occasion'd by this, that much of the Water which came along with the Flux, having gone off to the West-ward, and the succeeding Waves not coming in so great abundance for some time after, the Water that filled the Shore naturally runs down to the Channel of the Sea, after that way is once made for it by the removal of what was there before. According to this account, the Flux is a violent and preter-natural Motion of the Sea, pro∣ceeding from some external cause; but the Re-flux of it is a natural effect of the gravity of the Water. The Philosophers have rack'd their Inventions to little purpose for discovering the cause of this Motion in the Sea: the greatest part attribute it to the Moon, though they can give no tolerable account of the way how she should effec it. There is indeed, in all appearance, some connexion betwixt the course of the Moon and it; for in full Moon, and new Moon, this Flux, or Intumescence of the Sea, i greater, and in the time of quarter Moon it is a great del less: Also, at the time of the Vernal and Autumnal Equi∣noxes, it is greater than in any other time of the Year: Again, its least at the time of the Solstices. Though this Motion of the Sea is so irregular, that no precise Rule can be set for it, as to all places and times, yet in most places the Afflux continueth 6 Hours, 12 Minutes, and the Re-flux as long. There are, indeed, some few places where the tide takes longer time to flow, than it does to ebb; and others again, in which it takes a longer space to ebb than it did to flow; but both together make always the space of 12 Hours 28 ⅜ Minutes: And the double of this being 24 Hours 48 ¾ Minutes, or 25 Hours, very near, it follows, That the Tide happens later every Day by the space of an Hour almost. And the reason of it may perhaps be, because the Moon returns later to the same Me∣ridian, by the space of 50 Minutes: If then the time of High-Water were given at any place upon the Days of Full-Moon, or New-moon, we may know the time of it in the succeeding Days, by adding so many Minutes, viz. 48 ¾ to the same Hour of the following Day. For instance, if at any place it be High-Water at Twelve a Clock, in the time of New, or Full-Moon, it will be High-Water there in the following Days, according to this Table.
There is a great diversity of the direct the age of the Moon. the Hou. Min. 1 XII 48 2 1 37 3 2 27 4 3 16 5 4 5 6 4 55 7 5 44 8 6 34 9 7 23 10 8 12 11 9 1 12 9 51 13 10 40 14 ½ 11 29 15 12 mid nig.   12 mid day Motions of the Sea to particular places of it; 1. That of a part of the Atlantick-Ocean, which moveth always with a vio∣lent Stream from Cape Verde to the Coast of Guiney, or the Bay which they call Fer∣nando Poo, from West to East, contrary to the general Current of the Ocean: This Motion is not over all the Bay, but ex∣tends only about the space of 14 Leagues from Land, along the Coast, and the rest of that Sea moveth from East to West, ac∣cording to the general Current of the Ocean. However, this Motion along the Coast is so rapid, that when Ships fall in∣to that Current, it carries them from the Coast of Malaguta to the Rio de benin, which is above 100 Leagues, in 2 Days; nor can they return this way in less than 6 or 7 Weeks, except they get out of it into the Ocean, which is not easie neither in that Gulph, because there is a strong Current also from the Island of St. Thomas, to the Island of Fernando Poo, viz, to the North-East; and therefore they will need a brisk Wind from that Quarter, to carry them out against the Current of the Sea. 2. About Sumatra the Sea runs from the South to the North, into the Gulph of Bengal. 3. Between Mada∣gascar and the Cape of Good Hope, it moves from North-East to South-West, and in some places directly from North to South, according to the situation of the Shores. 4. The Pacifick-Sea, about the Coasts of Peru, moves from South to North; which seems to be occasion'd by the South-Winds; which are both strong and constant upon that Shore. There are 3 kinds of Vortices, or circular Motions in the Sea: 1. Some of them only carry the Water round. 2. Others of them not only carry the Water about, but they swallow it down also, and such things as are in it, and af∣ter some space vomit, or cast them up again. 3. Others take in whatever comes nigh them, but do not refund nor cast up again. There is a famous one of the second sort near Norway, which hath 13 Leagues in compass, it swal∣loweth down the Water, Whales, Ships, and every thing which comes near it, during the space of six Hours, and throws them up again in the like time, with much noise and violence, and a perpetual circumgyration of the Wa∣ter. The Concussion of the Sea, which was the last kind of Motion we mention'd, as belonging to it, proceeds in all appearance from the same Cause that Earth-quakes do, viz. either from some Cavity in the Earth, under the Sea, where the Land falling in, the Sea does so too, or from some Winds or Vapours, which being inclos'd below, and coming to be rarified by a subterraneous Fire, or some o∣ther heat, makes its way upwards, and thereby opens a Passage for the Waters to fall down. Some think that there are different Regions in the Sea, one above another, which move also contrary ways; this the Divers in the East-Indies say they have been sensible of, that the Water, for some space, from the Surface, mov'd one way, and under that, towards the bottom, they felt a Stream going another way; but we cannot affirm this as certain. The word Lake is usually taken for a place of a large extent, deep, and always full of Water, which hath no communication with the Sea, unless it be through some great River. The most famous Lakes of the Universe are these fol∣lowing. 4 great Lakes, or Seas. 1. in the Old Continent. The Lake, or Sea of Salae in Asia, call'd also the Hyrcanian, and Caspian-Sea. The Lake of Zabaca, or the Palus Maeotis. 2. in the New Continent. The Lake Parime, in Gui∣ana. The Lake des Puans in Ca∣nada. In Europe. The Lake of Constance in Germany. The Lake of Verner. The Lake of Arne. The Lake of Geneva. The Lake Maggiore in Italy. The Lake of Ladoga in Swedeland. The Lake of Onega in Swedeland. The Lake of Balaton in the Lower Hungary. In Asia. The Lake of Sodom, or the Dead-Sea, or Asphalites in the Holy Land. The Lake of Burgian in Persia. The Lake of Kithay in Tartary. The Lake of Chiamay in India, beyond the River Gan∣ges. The Lake of Cincuihay, in the Confines of China. The Lake of Annibi in Tartary. In Africa. The Lake Zaire in the Upper Aethiopia. The Lake of Zaflan in the sa Country. The Lake of Niger in Negro-Land. The Lake of Dambea in Abyssina. The Lake of Buchiara in Aegypt. In America. In North-America. The Lake of Canada, or the Gentle-Sea. The Lake of Machoacan. The Lake of Chapala. The Lake of Mexico. The Lake of Nicaragua. In South-America. The Lake of Maracaibo, in the Province of Veneruola. The Lake of Titicaca in Peru. The Lake of Eupana, or de los Xaxaios. Lakes are of four kinds; 1. Some neither receive Ri∣vers, nor send out any from them. 2. Some send out Ri∣vers but receive none. 3. Others take in Rivers, and send none out. 4. There are some which both take in, and send out Rivers. Of the first sort is the Lake Parima, in America, one of the largest in the World, being in length, from East to West, above 1200 Miles, and in breadth, from South to North, about 400; yet no Rivers run into it, nor from it: It's probable that it hath Springs, which emit on∣ly so much Water as the Sun evapourates from it, and that this preserves and continues it: for the cause of Lakes and Rivers is the same; their only difference is, That in Rivers the Fountain is high, and the Water of it plentiful; whereas in Lakes, the Fountain is low, and in a hollow place, with a rising on all hands, which contains the Wa∣ter, as 'twere, in a Vessel, and it does not send forth Wa∣ter in so great abundance as the Spring of a River doth; but there is as much exhausted every Day in Vapours, by the heat, as is supplied by the Fountain. Of the second sort, there are very many small Lakes in Muscovy, Lapland,
and Finland; besides these great ones which we nam'd in the Table, viz. 1. The Lake Chiamay, out of which four great Rivers flow, which Water the Kingdoms of Pegu, Siam, &c. Their Names are Menan, Axa, Cosmo, and Ma∣tava. 2. The Lake Cincuihay, which sends out a great River North-wards, that runneth through China. 3. The Lake Titicaca, which is 80 Leagues in compass; it sends out a great River, which dives under ground, and hides it self in a small Lake to which it runs. 4. Iroquois, a Lake in Canada, out of which comes the River of St. Law∣rence. Though the Fountains of all these Lakes be in a hollow place, they emit more Water than the places can contain, and thereby Rivers flow from them. The Lake Asphaltites, or the dead Sea, is of the third sort; it re∣ceives the River Jordan, but hath no River running out of it. The reason seems to be some spungy Earth near to, or under that Lake, which sucks in the Water, or rather some Passage under ground, which carries off only so much Water as the River brings into the Lake: Of this kind al∣so is the Caspian-Sea, (if we may reckon it a Lake, for be∣ing of so great extent, it may justly challenge the Name of a Sea) it hath many great Rivers running into it, and none from it: The Wolga alone is estimated to pour more Water into that Sea in one Year, than the solid quantity of the whole Earth, viz. the Land and Water together a∣mounts to; yet this Sea hath neither any Communication with the Ocean, for it is every where surrounded with Land, nor are there any Rivers going from it, which might discharge themselves into other Lakes: Its Water is Salt, and there can be no doubt but it hath Communication with the Ocean, by some subterraneous Passages, or gaps in its Channel, though we cannot tell in what place they are, else it would ertainly have overflow'd the Country long before this time, as being over-charg'd with Water from the Rivers. It hath different Names, according to the Coasts of the Countries that it washeth, viz. the Sea of Tartary, upon the Coast of Tartary, the Sea of Astracan, or of Mus∣covy; these are towards the North; the Sea of Zurie, the Sea of Bachu; these two are upon the Coast of Georgia on the West; the Seas of Servan, Gilan, Taberstan, on the Coast of Persia, toward the South; the Sea of Zagathay, or of Jahaspa towards the East. Lastly, these Lakes, which have Rivers both running in∣to, and from them, either send out more Water with the Rivers, than they receive with them, or just as much, or less. If the Rivers coming from them be greater than they were when they enter'd, it's plain there are Springs in the Lake which supply it, besides what it hath from the River, else it would run it self dry. If the Rivers be less when they come out, than they were when they enter'd, the bottom of the Lake is spungy, or it hath secret Passages un∣der ground. If the Rivers be equally big when they en∣ter the Lake, and when they come from it, its a Proof that there is neither Springs in the Lake to increase the Water, nor any secret Shores to carry it off. The greatest part of Lakes are of this sort, or have Rivers running through them; so the Rhone runs through the Lake of Geneva, and the Rhine through the Lake of Constance, &c. A River is a Tract of Water running in a long Channel, from one part of the Earth to another. A Fountain is a place where the Water breaketh out; and springs forth in drops from the Earth. A Cataract is a Precipice in the Channel of a River, from which the Water falleth with a great noise and impetuosity. The most considerable Rivers of the Universe are set down in the following Table. In Europe. In Spain. The Duero, Durius. The Minho, Minius. The Tajo, Tagus. The Guadiana, Anas. The Guadalquivir, Baetis. The Ebro, Iberus. In France. The Loire, Ligeris. The Garonne, Garumna. The Rhone, Rhodanus. The Saone, Arar. The Seyne, Sequana. The Marne, Matrona. The Charante, Caranthonus. In Italy. The Arno, Arnus. The Tyber, Tiberis. The Po, Padus, Eridanus. In Turkey. The Drino, Drinus. The Orpheo, Alpheus. The Vardari, Axius. The Salampria, Peneus. The Mariza, Hebrus. In Germany. The Danow, Danubius. The Rhine, Rhenus. The Elb, Albis. The Oder, Odera, Viadrus. The Weser, Visurgis. In Poland. The Vistula. The Niemen, Chronus, or Nimenus. The Duna, Dwina. The Nieper, Borysthenes. The Niester, Tyras. The Bagg, or Vag, Vegus. In Muscovy. The Volga, Rha. The Don, Tanais. The Duina. The Petzora. In Swedeland. The Onega. The Dalecarlo, and others of the same name, with the 5 Governments in Lapland. In England. The Thames, Tamisis. The Severn, Sabrina. The Humber, Avus and Ʋmber. The Tine, Tina. The Trent. In Scotland. The Tay, Taus. The Twede, Tueda. The Nith, Nitha. The Lid, Liddalus. The Spay, Spaus. The Don. The Dee, Deva, Deuva. The Clyde, Glotta. In Ireland. The Shannon, Senus. The Sewer, Suirius. The Broad-Water. The Borrow. The Boyne, Boina, Bovinda. The Dearn. The Ean. In the Low-Countries. The Maes, or Meuse, Mosa. The Schelde, Scaldis. The Issel, Isala, Sala. The Rhine, Rhenus. In Asia. In Turkey, in Asia. The Ali. The Jordan, Jordanes. The Euphrates. The Tigil, Tigris. In Georgia. The Faro, Phasis. The Arass, or Arais, Araxes. The Caibar in Arabia. In Persia. The Tiritiri, Mosaus. The Bandimir.
In India. The Inde, Indus. The Ganga, Ganges. The Mecan, or Menan, Sobanus. In Tartary. The Oby, Obius. The Jeniscey, Jeniscea. The Chesel, Jaxartes. The Guichon, Oxus. The Yalo. The Quentung. The Saghoa. The Tartar, Orchardus. In China. The Yellow River, Croceus Fluvius. The Quiang. The Luku. The Kialung. The Hoang. The Kiuto. In Africa. The Tansist, in Morocco. In Fez. The Ommiraby, Asama, Cusa, Rutubis, Ru∣sibis. The Caebu. In Barbary. The Mulvia, Malva, Malvana. The Rio major, or Nasabath. The Sufregnar. The Magrida, or Megreda, Bagradas. The Nile, Nilus, in Egypt. In Biledulgerith. The Sus, Susus. The Darha. The Ghir, in Sarra. The Niger in 3. Senega, Asana. Gambea, Gambia. Rio Grande. In Negro-Land. In Abyssina. The Quilmancy. The Zaire, Zairus. The Nile again. The Zem∣hera in 2. Spirito Sancto. Rio des Infantes. In Lower Aethiopia. In America. In Southern America. The River of the Amazons, Orellana, Ama∣zonium Fluvius. The River of Plata, or Paraguay, Argente∣us seu Paraguaius Fluvius. In the main Land. The Orinoque, Orenecus. The River of St. Magdalen, and St. Martha. In Tucuman. The Sedagodero. The Barberanna. The Rio Vermejo, or Salado. Near the Streight of Magellan. The Rio de los Camerones. The Rio of Saguadero, In Paraguay. The River of Paraguay. The River of Parana. The River of Oragay. The River Banco. The River Vermejo. These five Rivers dis∣charge themselves into that of Plata. In Brasil. The Lamiaro. The Pinaro. The Tabourn. The Siope. The River of St. Francis, Fluvius S. Fran∣cisci. In the Countrey of the Amazons. The Maragnon, Maragnoni∣us. The Amarumair, Amaruma∣ia. In the Country of the Amazons. The River Cusinares. The River Cayana. The River Topasis. These five Rivers fall into that of the Amazons, and the least of them is above 200 Leagues long. In Mexico, or New Span. The River of Panuco. The River of Esquitlan. The River of Mexico. The River of los Popes. In New Mexico. The Rio del Nort. The River of Conchas. The River of Tecon. In Florida. Rio Grande. The River of May. In Canada, or New France. The River of St. Lawrence. The River of S. Margaret. The Saguenay. We shall now give a short Account of the properties of some of these Rivers. The Water of Rivers comes either from Springs and Fountains, or from Rain and melted Snow: This last pro∣duceth those Currents of Water which we call Torrents; they arise purely from excessive Rains, or melted Snow, and run with great impetuosity from the Mountains to the adjacent Plains, but after some time, viz. when the Snow is all dissolv'd, or when the Rains are gone off, they cease to run, and their Bed or Channel becomes drie. Brooks, or Rivulets, are small Currents of Water, arising for the most part from Springs; but their course is not very long, and their bed is strait and shallow. As great Rivers are sometimes swelled and increased by Torrents, so their or∣dinary stock of Water seems to be compos'd of a Conflu∣ence of many Brooks and Rivulets together. For a River of considerable bigness, such as the Elb, the Rhine, &c. floweth not from any one Fountain, for then it would be as large at the Head, as it is at the Mouth; but from many, each of which sends out his little Brook or Rivulet to a common Channel; and the longer the course of the River is, it receives the more of these into it, and consequently becomes the greater and more considerable. The Volga, or Rha, takes in more than 200 small Rivers before it reaches the Caspian-Sea; and the Danube hath as many e'er it get to the Euxine. Torrents run into great Rivers also, and are the appa∣rent cause of Inundations: For there are some Rivers which overflow their Banks, and cover all the Country a∣bout, at certain Times and Months of the Year. The River Nile is famous for this; it begins to over-flow its Banks upon the seventh day of June, and still increaseth for the space of forty days, and it retireth again from the Land, and contracteth it self within its old Channel in the space of forty days more. All the while it is above the Country, the Cities and Towns appear as so many Islands; for they are built upon high and rising Ground, and the greatest height of the River above the Plain, is sixteen Cubits. The Ancients were very uncertain concerning the cause of this yearly inundation, being ignorant of these Countries where the Nile riseth, or through which it pas∣seth, before it come unto Egypt. But the English, and Dutch, and Portugese, do now maintain a Traffick with these People, in whose Country the Fountains, or head of Nile is, and from them we understand that it riseth from the Lake Zaire, which is in the middle, almost between the two Shores of that part of Africk, which runs out like a wedge into the South-Sea. This Lake is surrounded with the Mountains of the Moon, and all the Rains that fall upon them, or any Springs which rise there, run towards it, so that it is like a great Vessel which receives and ga∣thers into it, all the Water of the Country about. Now because Zaire is 10 Degrees, or 730 Miles farther South than the Equator, and Egypt is 30 Degrees North from it, it is Winter to the Country about the Lake of Zaire, when it is Summer in Egypt; that is, when the Sun approaches nighest to Egypt, as he does in the Month of June, he is
then at the greatest distance from the Lake of Zaire. It's true, even at this time, which is their Winter, they have no Snow; but the Rains are then so excessive and constant, almost for three Months together, that the Inhabitants, during all that space, scarce ever see the Sun, and the Mountains are continually cover'd with Clouds. This pro∣duceth that vast quantity of Water in these places, which makes not only the Nile, but the Niger also, and several other Rivers which rise in that Country, over-flow their Banks, and drown, in a manner, all the champagne ground which they run through. These Rains begin about the middle of March and April, but they are not then so vehement, as they come to be afterwards in May, June and July; also, in the Months of August and September, they grow more moderate and gen∣tle; and about the middle of September they cease alto∣gether. Now this time agrees with the Inundation of the Nile, for it begins upon the seventh of June, as we said before, and some time must be allowed both for the fal∣ling of the Rains, and their running through all Aethiopia to Egypt, before that. The Indus and Ganges over-flow India likewise, in June, July and August; the reason is the same, viz. the excessive Rains there during that space. All these Inundations fatten and make the Land fruitful, where they happen; for the Nile, (and the like may be said of others) brings much Slime and Earth along with him, which he spreads and leaves upon the Country, when he retires from it; besides, the Water it self, being either Rain, or melted Snow, because of its light and spirituous Nature, is a great deal better and fitter, than any other, for to soften and impregnate the Ground. These Inundations are effected by Rains, and every one knows that they are produc'd by the Vapours which the Sun draws, or raiseth from the Sea, and from Lakes; but it is somewhat more difficult to give an account whence the Water of Springs and Fountains, which by their Rivu∣lets do also feed and nourish great Rivers, doth proceed. For if it be said, That it comes from the Sea, through the Earth, How is it possible that Water should move from a lower to a higher place, viz. from the Sea to the Foot, nay often to the top of a Mountain? And also it is thought there would be no fresh Water Springs, if they come all from the Sea. To avoid these difficulties, some say, That this Water proceeds from the Rain and Clouds; that when it falls, it sinks into the Ground in small Parti∣cles or Drops, which afterwards run together into one place, viz. the lowest they can come to, 'till finding the Passage any farther downwards, within the Earth, impos∣sible, by reason of its hardness, and an accession of new Drops still following the former, they at length find, or force a Passage outwards to the Surface of the Earth, from which they run along in Brooks and Rivers to the Sea. Thus according to them all the Water which is either in Lakes or Rivers, was brought from the Sea in Vapours, by the heat of the Sun, after that distill'd again in Showers; after which it gathers first into Fountains and Lakes, then into Rivers, which carry it back again to the Sea. There are two things which render this Opinion of Rain-Water, as being the only or total cause of Springs improbable. 1. Rain-Water never enters above 10 Foot into the Ground, and Fountains have been found much deeper than this. 2. It seems impossible that so many Vapours should be rais'd, as to furnish Water to all the Rivers of the World, not only in the time of Inundations, but also to their ordina∣ry Current, when especially there hath been no Rain, nei∣ther at the head, nor in any part belonging to the course of a River, for several Months together; for in that time one would think the former Rains should be exhausted and spent, and according to them, no Supplies can be had, but by new Showers. Though this therefore cannot be ad∣mitted, as the only or total cause of that Water which floweth from Fountains, it may very well be accounted a partial cause of it; and the other may contribute its part too. For there are many Cavities under Ground, as we show'd in the beginning of this Chapter, into which Water runneth from the Sea; it's true, that Water, if it go in great quan∣tities together, in a Channel or Pipe, it will rise no higher than the Surface of the Sea; but then there is reason to think, that much of the Land which touches and dips in that Sea-Water, is spungy, so that Drops, or Particles of the Water, entering first into these parts of Earth, which are next it, they climb and creep from them to others, that are beyond or above them, and from these again to others, 'till at last they come to the Surface of the Earth, where many of these Veins meeting together, they drop and distill that Water which we call a Fountain: Just so as we see in a piece of Iron, if one end of it be thrust into the Fire, the other, which is out of it, shall wax hot likewise: Or, if a piece of Bread be put into Liquor, that part of it which is a∣bove the Surface of the Liquor, shall contract a moisture, as if it had also been dipt into it. This account of the passage of the Water from the Sea through the Earth to the Fountain, takes off both these Difficulties which were proposed against it; viz. 1. That it could not ascend from a lower to a higher place; for though this be true of Wa∣ter going in a Channel, and of a quantity of it moving in a Pipe, yet it is otherways in the Motion of small Drops and Particles of it through the pores and passages of a spun∣gy Body, so as is plain from the instances which were just now given, and infinite more which are obvious to every mans observation. 2. While the Drops are passing through these small Pores, they are strain'd and percolated, and the Salt Particles, which are grosser, are squeez'd and separa∣ted from the Fresh ones, which because they are thinner and finer, they pass where the others cannot. And if, after all this, any Volatile Salt come along with the fresh Parti∣cles, it is so little, that it's not perceivable to our taste. From this we see the reason why the Water of Rivers is fresh and lighter then that of the Sea, viz. because it is compos'd, partly of the Water that floweth from Springs, and partly of that which falleth from the Clouds and the Particles of gross Salt, which give that taste and gravity to the Water of the Sea, are separated from both these. But the proportion of their weight is not always the same: for the Sea-water is heavier in some parts of it than it is in others; and it is so with Fresh-water also. For the Water of some Rivers carries along with it many Particles of Me∣tals and Minerals; others again have Particles of fat and oily Bodies mixt with them, and these last are lighter than the former. But the proportion of the weight of Sea-water to that of a River, generally speaking, is as 46 to 45, so that 45 Ounces of the Water of the Sea, weighs 46 of that of Rivers. There are Precipices or Cataracts in the Channel of se∣veral Rivers, from which the Water falleth with a prodigi∣ous violence and noise. Two of these are in the Channel of the River Nile, where the Water falleth with such noise and force, that the People about are said to be rendred deaf by it. The Rhine also hath one near to Scaffhau∣sen. Some Rivers dive under ground, and rise again after some space. Of this kind is, 1. The Niger, which runneth under the Mountains of Nubia, entring on the East-side, and ri∣sing again on the West. 2. The River Orfeo, or Al∣pheus in Greece, which sinks under ground in Achaia, and the old Grecians believ'd that it passed clear under the Sea, and rose again in Sicily, where it had the name of Arethu∣sa, founding their Opinion upon this, That Arethusa every fifth year, threw out the dung of Beasts when the Olympick Games were solemnizing in Achaia. 3. The River Guadiana in Spain, it dives under ground, and when it hath run the space of 30 miles, it riseth again. Polybius, in the Tenth Book of his History, giveth a strange Relation of the Ri∣ver Oxus: He saith that this River, having a considerable descent in its Channel, runs with extraordinary swiftness through the Plains of Bactra, where coming to a steep Rock, its Waters flow with such force forwards, that a passage is left dry under the Water betwixt the Rock and the Place where the Waters fall; that here also the Waters dive un∣der ground, and rise again after they have gone a little way. It was in this place where the Nomades Aspasiacae, coming out of Scythia or Tartary, crossed the River Ous in their way to Hyrcania.
Some Rivers are famous for the length of their course; others for the breadth of their Channel; others for their swiftness; others for the peculiar properties of their Wa∣ter. We shall here content our selves with a short De∣scription of the Course of these Rivers, viz. the Nile, the Niger, the Ganges, the Oby, the Jeniscey, Orellana, or the River of the Amazons, Rio de la Plata, and the River of St. Lawrence, which run as far, and are as large, as any in the World. 1. The Nile, the Niger, and Ganges, run in a strait course, the rest have many and great windings. The Foun∣tain of the River Nile is thought to be in the Lake of Zaire, 10 Degrees of South Latitude, or 730 Miles beyond the Aequator; and the Mouth of it, where it enters the Mediterranean Sea, is 31 Degrees of North Latitude, or 2263 Miles on this side of it, Its Course is from South to North; in some parts it is very broad, and in other parts exceeding narrow. There are two Cataracts in its Channel. The length of its course is about 3000 English Miles. 2. Niger riseth from a Lake of 11 Degrees North Lati∣tude, or 803 Miles on this side the Aequator; however, some think that it flows from, or hath some communica∣tion with the River Nile, by a subterraneous passage; be∣cause it over-flows every Year at the same time that the River Nile doth. One of its Mouths is of the same Lati∣tude with its Fountain, viz. 11 Degrees; the other is far∣ther from the Aequator, viz. in the Latitude of 15 Degrees. It runs from East to West, and falls at last into the Atlan∣tick-Ocean: by the way it dives under Ground, and riseth again. The length of its Course is about 2900 Miles, but it will be less if you discount its principal turnings, and greater if you count them all. 3. Ganges; some say that its Fountain is 43 Degrees North Latitude in Tartaria; others make it 10 Degrees less, or only 33 Degrees Latitude; it runs from North, to South, and goes into the Indian-Ocean in the North Lati∣tude of 22 Degrees: The length of its Course is about 1460 Miles. 4. The Oby; this is a very broad and great River in Tartary; the Fountain of it is said to be in the 48th. De∣gree of North Latitude, in the Mountains of Tartary. It runs into the North Sea, in the 69 Degree of Latitude; and the length of its course, omitting the windings, is 1533 English Miles. In Siberia it sends out a Branch, which after it hath run some space in a crooked Line, re∣turns again to the principal Channel, and thereby it makes an Island, in which the Russians and Siberians have built the City Jorgoet. 5. The Jeniscey: This is another River of Tartary, dis∣covered lately by the Muscovites; it is found to be much larger than the Oby, from which it is distant the Journey of 10 Weeks East-wards. There is a Tract of Mountains extended along its Bank, on the East-side of it, and the Tingaesi live on the Western Bank of it. It over-flows the Country on the West, for the space of 100 Miles, in the Spring, and during that time the Inhabitants betake them∣selves, with their Cattle, to the Mountains, on the East-side of it. We are not yet informed of the place where it rises, nor where it discharges it self into the Sea, but its Course is conjectured to be full as long as that of the River Oby. 6. Orellana, or the River of the Amazons in America, is thought to be one of the largest Rivers of the World; the head of it is in Quito, a Province of the Kingdom of Peru, 12 Degrees of South Latitude; the mouth of it being 15 Leagues in breadth, is in the 2d. Degree of South Latitude. The length of its Course is affirmed by some to be 1500 Spanish Leagues, or 4500 English Miles, and more, by rea∣son of its infinite windings; but its thought that it is not really above 700 of these Leagues, or 2500 English Miles. In some places it is 12, in others 15 Miles broad; but be∣cause it hath more of its Water from the Rains that fall on the Mountains of Peru, than from constant Springs, it hath not very much Water in the dry Months of the Year. It runneth into the Atlantick-Ocean. 7. The Rio de la Plata in Brasil, hath also his Foun∣tain in the Mountains of Peru, and discharges it self into the Atlantick-Ocean, in the South Latitude of 37 Degrees; its breadth there is 20 Leagues. When it over-flows, it forms several Passages or Mouths, by which it enters into the Sea; at other times its Water is not so very plentiful. The Inhabitants call it Paranaguasu, i. e. a River like a Sea. 8. The River of St. Lawrence in Canada; it riseth from the Lake Iroquois, and enters into the Atlantick in the North Latitude of 50 Degrees. This River is exceeding broad, and the length of its course is at least 600 German Miles, or 3000 English, very near. The Danube, the Rhine, the Po, and the Rhone, which are the biggest and noblest Rivers of Europe, do all rise from the Alps, and take their course different ways to the Sea. The Danube riseth in Swabia, and runs above 1500 Miles East-ward, through Germany and Hungary, to the Euxine Sea, which he enters with several Months. He takes in the Drave at Esseck, the Save and the Teysse near Bel∣grade in Hungary. The Rhine riseth from the Mountain Goddard in the Country of the Grisons, runneth South-ward to the Lake of Constance, through which it passeth West-ward to Basle; from Basle it turns its course North-ward again, and divides Germany from France; it takes in several Rivers as it goes, viz. the Maine at Frank fort, the Nec∣kar, &c. At length, a little below Cleve, it breaks into two great Branches, and that which retains the Name af∣terward, into many others, till at last it, is quite lost be∣twixt Ʋtrecht and Leyden. The Po runneth South-East from the Alps; it riseth in Piedmont, and glideth along the Plains of Lombardy; it runs into the Adriatick-Sea, or the Gulph of Venice at many Mouths near Ferrara, and receives a great number of lesser Rivers, both from the Alps and Appenine, as it goes along. The Course of the Rhone is shorter than any of these are; for it runs only a little way West-ward, till it passes the Lake of Geneve, and comes from that to Lions, where it meets with the Saone, and they two go together South-ward to the Mediterranean Sea, into which it empties it self by several Mouths at Aries. It is very difficult, if not impossible, to give the true and exact quantity of the Water in this Terrestrial Globe; for to do this it were necessary that we knew first both the exact Dimension of its Surface, which is very irregular, and in some places, under the Poles, altogether unknown. Also, the Depth of it is extreamly unequal. Besides, we do not see the subterraneous Caverns which are fill'd with Water un∣der the dry Land; because we neither know, nor can know all these, we cannot certainly tell what quantity of Water there is in this Terrestrial Globe; but if we suppose the Surface of the Water to be half the Surface of the whole Globe, and the depth of it every where the same, viz. 1 Mile; and that we pass by that Water which may be in subterraneous Caverns; the quantity of the rest may be found in this manner. Substract the supposed depth of Water, viz. one Mile, from the Semidiameter of the Earth, the remainder is also the Semidiameter of a Sphere; the Solidity of which Sphere, if it be Substracted from that of the whole Earth, the half of the remainder is the quantity of Water that was desir'd: And if you Substract this same half, or the solidity of the Water from that of the whole Earth, there remains the solid content of Land. We shall now proceed to consider the Air, and so conclude this Chapter. The Air, or Atmosphere, is that Space round about this Globe, in which Vapours and Exhalations are rais'd by the heat of the Sun from the Earth: It's uncertain, if any other Body, besides these Vapours, do fill this space; that there are many of them in it, we are well assur'd; for we see, that when the smallest Fire or Heat approacheth any Ter∣restrial Body, it makes it send forth a great many small Particles, which rise and spread themselves round about. Thus the Sun and Stars, being so many Fires, they cannot miss to raise very many Vapours from the Surface of the Earth, and experience confirms it, that they do so, for we see them frequently rise. Now it's probable, That the
Aether which is beyond them, is much more fine and pure; and we find, even here, that the Beams of Light, when they pass from one Medium that is fine and thin, to another that is thicker, or contrariwise, they do not go forward in that same strait Line through the one Medium, which they went in when they past through the other, but they break off from it to one side. For, take a Vessel, and fix any thing, such as a piece of Money, to the bottom of it; then remove so far backwards, 'till the brim, or edge of the Vessel, do quite hide the sight of the Money from you; afterwards pour Water into it, and you shall then see the Money in the bottom of the Vessel, from the same place from which you could not discern it before; because the sides of the Vessel were in the strait Line, betwixt your Eye and it. The reason why you see it now, and not before is, because the Ray passing geometric figure through the Air, from the Eye to the Surface of the Water, doth not go strait forward from a to c, in the same Line as it had done from o to a, but changeth its course towards d; so that the Ray o, a, d, by which we see, is not a strait, but a broken Line. The same Reason makes an Our which is part in the Water, part out of it, appear to be broken. What happens in this case, in respect of Air and Water, the like comes to pass in respect of the Air, and that finer Body of the Aether: For when the Ray hath past through the Aether, and comes to the Surface of the Air, it meets with a Body much thicker than that which it had gone through before, and therefore it must break, and turn off from that strait Line in which it advanc'd. By this means it is that we see the Sun and the Stars very often before they rise, and after they set, i. e. whilst the Earth is in a strait Line betwixt them and our Eyes: and this is commonly call'd the Refraction of Light. From hence it follows also, That if the Air of one place of the Earth is thicker than that of another place, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, are farther below the Horizon of the place whose Air is thickest, when they begin to appear, than they are under that of the other place, when they first appear in it. The Air is naturally heavy; for every thing ought to be call'd so, which goeth to the Center of the Earth, when it is not hinder'd. This the Air does; for when the Earth is digg'd up any where, it descends into the Cavity that is made. And the reason why it goeth upwards at any time is, either, 1. Heat, which rarifies the Air, and makes it seek more space to it self; or, 2. when another Vapour that is some other part of Air pusheth it upwards. The Air, when it waxes hot, possesseth more space than it did before; and the colder it grows, it is contracted in∣to narrower bounds. This is plain in a Thermometer, in which we see that the Air enclos'd in the Glass grows thick∣er or thinner, that is, it possesseth less or more space, ac∣cording to the different degrees of cold or heat. Air may be so rarified by a vehement Fire, that it shall possess se∣venty times the space which it had before; and on the contrary, it may be so condens'd in a Wind-Gun, that it shall fill only the sixtieth part of its ordinary space; but neither does the heat of the Sun produce so great a rare∣faction in the Air, nor the most vehement Frost such a condensation in it. Because the Sun hath a greater force, and casts more heat under the Aequator, than under the Poles; he raiseth more Vapours there, and rarifies, or re∣fines them more, than he does under the Poles: And upon this account some have imagin'd, that they mount higher, or that the altitude of the Air is greater under the Aequator, than it is under the Poles. And in like manner it should for the same reason be higher in any par∣ticular place of the Earth at Noon, or in the Day-time, than it is at Night. But this rarefaction and condensation of the particular parts of Air, makes no change either as to the height or figure of the whole Mass. For the whole Atmosphere is not rarified or condens'd together; but on∣ly some parts of it successively, which when they are rais'd by the heat, above the rest, they move presently, and fall down upon that place where the Air is condens'd, or low∣er, by reason of the cold. So that it still moves from the higher and hotter place, to that where it is cool and condens'd. The Air is commonly distributed into 3 Regions; the first is that in which we live; the second, or middle one, is that in which Snow, Hail, Rain, are generated; the third extends from the Region of the Clouds, to the ut∣most Surface of the Atmosphere. These parts of the Atmosphere which are highest, are more fine and subtle than the parts below; because they must be so much smaller, if they be lighter, or go higher up. But those in the middle Region may be thicker or grosser than the parts next the Earth; because the Va∣pours do easily condensate, and run together in that Re∣gion, being that the hot or small Particles do leave the gross, and go up higher, and the Rays reflected from the Earth, lose much of their force before they ascend so high as that second Region is. The further any place of the Earth is from being di∣rectly under the Sun, or the nigher it is to the Poles, the Region of the Air in which Rain, Snow, Hail, are gene∣rated, is proportionally nigher to the Earth. The reason of it is, because the Sun-beams fall more obliquely upon the places about the Poles, than upon those about the Aequator, and consequently produce less heat; which heat extending a shorter way from the Earth under the Poles, than it does directly under the Sun, the grosser Vapours may more easily unite and come together at a less distance for generating Rain or Snow, than they can do in the o∣ther place where there is a greater heat. From this it appears, That the Surface bounding the first Region of Air is Elliptical, or like a Spheroid, which protuberates in the places directly above which the Sun is. Again, the nearer any part of the Earth is to the Pole, so much farther is the beginning of the third Region of Air remov'd from the Surface of it. For the heat of the Sun being less vehement toward the Poles, it raiseth few∣er Vapours, and does not rarifie, or make them so fine, as they are under the Aequator: Therefore many subtile Particles do rise under the Aequator, which mount above the second Region, when few do it in the places under the Poles. But it was proved in the end of the last Chap∣ter, That the exteriour Surface of the Air is globular, or equally distant in all places of the Earth from the Center; and since there is more of that thin subtile Matter under the Sun, than there is under the Poles, the beginning of it cannot be so far distant from the Earth under the Sun, as it is under the Poles. From this it follows, That the Surface of the second Region of the Air, which distin∣guishes and separates it from the third, is oval, or Sphe∣roidical, protuberating under the Poles. A moderate Cold does not make the Air clear, but cloudy, because Vapours are rais'd, but not discuss'd, or rarified sufficiently, by that small heat which still conti∣nues. But an excessive cold makes the Air clear, so as we see it in a long Frost; 1. Because it condensates and thickens the grosser Vapours of the Air, and thereby makes them fall to the Ground, by which the remaining Air be∣comes finer. 2. The Pores of the Earth are close bound up, and therefore new Vapours cannot rise from it to cloud or thicken it. The Air hath certain peculiar properties in particular places: In Egypt it never Rains, or very seldom, and very little: The over-flowing of the Nile, and the Morn∣ing and Evening Dews, supply the want of it; and if at any time it happen to Rain there, it brings Consumptions, Fevers, and other Diseases along with it. So in the King∣dom of Peru they never see Rain. But in many places under the Aequator it Rains constantly one half of the Year, and never at all during the other.
About the Islands of the Indian Ocean, the Air is fra∣grant and perfum'd, with the odour of sweet Spices. The Mariners perceive it when they ae 5 o 6 Leagues distant, especially when the Wind blows from the Islands to them. The Sea-Air is heavier, and more offensive, than that of the Land, to those who are not accustomed to it. This difference is plainly perceiv'd by Sea-Men when they draw near to Shore; for they can tell at the distance of a League, that they are near Land, purely from the Sense they have of a difference of the Air in which they now breath, from what they felt at Sea. I shall conclude this Chapter with the Observations which David Fraelichius, an Hungarian made, when he vi∣sited the top of one of the highest Mountains in Hungary; for it may illustrate some of these things which we have said concerning the Air. We shall give it in his own Words. In the Month of June, of the Year 1615, being then a young Man, prompted by Curiosity to know the height of the Mountain, call'd, Schnee Geburg, one of the Mountains of Krapak, I set out with two Compa∣nions. When with great difficulty we had got to the top of the first Mountain, and where we thought our la∣bour should have ended, we found another much higher above it, which was full of loose Stones, one of which, if it happened to be tumbled down, it carried many more, and much greater with it to the Valley, with a hideous noise, as if the whole Mountain had fallen. When we had got above it also, we found there was yet another higher than any of the former two, and above it several little Rocks, placed one over another. We got at last to the very top of the whole Mountain, with great danger of our Lives. When I had look'd from the top of the first steep Rock to the Valleys, which I knew were planted with huge Trees, I could see nothing but a dark and deep Air, like the blue Sky in the Fir∣mament; so that it seem'd to me, if I had fallen from the Rock, I should have fallen not toward the Earth, but into Heaven. As I was going up the third Mountain, I thought my self environ'd with very thick Clouds and Mists; but when I had gone on for some Hours, and was now near the top of all, I look'd down to that place where these Clouds had beset me, and I saw a great many white compacted Clouds moving to and fro in it, above which I had a free prospect through the Inter∣spaces and Distances that were betwixt them, of the Plains below. Some of these Clouds were higher than others, and many of them seem'd to be equally distant from the Earth. From this I inferred; 1. That I had then pass'd the beginning of the middle Region of the Air. 2. That the distance of the Clouds from the Earth is not always the same, but less or more, according to the nature of the Vapour. 3. That the nearest distance of the Clouds from the Earth is not above half a German Mile, or 2 Eng. Miles and a half. When I had come to the very top, the Air was per∣fectly still and quiet, though I had felt a brisk Wind in several parts below; from which I conjectured, That the top of this Mountain extended to the third Region of the Air. I fir'd a Gun from it, which at first made no grea∣ter noise than if I had broke a small Splinter, but in some time after there was a most prodigious noise, which increas'd as it went, and fill'd all the lower parts of the Mountain. In the coming down, when I had again fir'd the Gun amongst the Valleys, and the old Snows, it made a greater and more terrible noise by far, then the biggest Cannon do, when they are shot off; and I began to be afraid, lest the Mountain which was shaken by it, should fall with me: it continued half a quarter of an Hour. The Snow and Hail do fall often on these high Moun∣tains in the middle of Summer, when it Rains only in the Neighbouring Plain; and this I also experienced. One may easily distinguish betwixt the Snow, or Hail, which hath lain for many Years on these Mountains, and that which has fallen later, for the old changeth its colour somewhat, and the Scurf of it is harder.
artificial sphere THE ARTIFICIAL SPHERE CHAP. IV. Of the Circles of the SPHERE. THE Two Motions of the Planets which we men∣tion'd in the First Chapter, have been the oc∣casion of inventing the two principal Circles of the Sphere; the Diurnal Motion gave rise to the Equinoctial, and the Proper, or Secondary Motion, to the Ecliptick. For the Diurnal Revolution of the Stars is either per∣form'd in the Equinoctial Circle, or in some Parallel thereof: In like manner their proper Motion either forms the Ecliptick, or a Circle not deviating much on either side from it; or, lastly, one Parallel to the same Ecliptick. To understand this, we must consider the said Motions se∣parately, and imagine that one of them in the mean time did cease; for if we consider both Motions jointly, as it were, one compos'd of both, then indeed they will appear not to be Circles, which are thus describ'd, but spiral Lines. However, it is worth the while to show how these Circles in the Heaven ought to be conceiv'd. Observe, therefore, on the Day of the Equinox, that is, on the 10th of March, or 12th of September, according to the Old Stile, the Path of the Sun; for in that part of the Heaven is situated the Aequinoctial Circle, so call'd, because on whatsoever Day the Sun passeth through it, the Day and Night are equal, in every part of the Earth. This, its true, is only a rough and gross Description of it, but if we would speak exactly, the course of the Sun would deli∣neate the Equinoctial Circle, if his Center, were plac'd in the very beginning of Aries or Libra, and he destitute of all Parallax and proper Motion. The Zodiack is adorn'd with 12 Asterisms, or Images; most of which resembling Animals; the Circle it self takes its Name from thence. The Sun goes about this Circle once every Year, and the Moon once in a Month. The Sun never swerves from the Ecliptick, but the Moon, and the rest of the Planets wander up and down, for the space of 8 Degrees, and sometimes more, on both sides: upon this account the breadth of the Circle it self, is supposed to con∣sist of about 16 Degrees. The upper Planets traverse the same Circle, viz. Saturn in 30 Years, Jupiter in 12, Mars in 2, Venus, one of the lower, which is alternately Lucifer and Vesperugo, in 9 Months. Mercury lies hid for the most part, under the Sun-beams. The fixed Stars follow with a very slow Motion, as scarcely making one Degree within the space of 70 Years. Therefore now, after the Revolu∣tion of many Ages, the Starry Signs have left their former places, and are translated to the following ones; yet be∣cause they had heretofore given a Name to the places of the Zodiack, in which they then were, these places do at this time retain the same denomination, although the Asterisms themselves have long ago departed from them; neverthe∣less,
lest Equivocal Terms should beget Ambiguity, it hath been thought fit, that the meer Places or Seats, which are the Twelve Parts of the Ecliptick, should bear the Name of Signa Anastra, or Signs without Stars; and that the Con∣stellations or Images, consisting of Stars, should be called Signa Stellata, or Starry Signs. These two Circles, viz. the Equinoctial and the Ecliptick, are usually stiled immu∣table, because they are altogether the same to all the In∣habitants of the Earth; for Italy hath not an Equinoctial or Ecliptick, different from those of England, or Ame∣rica. There remain two other Circles, termed Mutable, where∣to the Motion of the Stars hath given occasion, as it hath regard not to the whole Globe of the Earth, but to some one Point of its Surface: These are the Horizon, and the Meridian. For in whatsoever place of the World you live, the Stars rise and set; after they rise, they ascend by degrees to a certain highest Point, and above it, or higher than it is, they cannot go, but they again descend by degrees, 'till they come to set. When they are at the highest Point, they are said to culminate. Their rising and setting hap∣pens on the Horizon, as their Culmination on the Meridian. The Horizon is that great Circle, which any Person being plac'd in a Plain, or in the midst of the Sea, determines with his sight round about, whereby the Heaven seems to be joyn'd to the Earth, as it were, with a kind of closure. Every one understands that this Circle must change, ac∣cordingly as the Eye of the Beholder gets a different situa∣tion, on the globular Superficies of the Earth, and that on this account it is called Mutable. But that which we have diagram The Sensible Horizon Rational Horizon here described, is the Sensible Horizon, as being defined by Sense, from which the Rational differs, for it must be con∣ceiv'd in the Mind, to pass through the Center of the Earth, viz. Parallel to the sensible, and conti∣nued together with the same, to the ut∣most part of Hea∣ven; so that among the fix'd Stars, where the Earth is consider'd, only as a Point we may imagine, both Plans as to Sense to be one and the same. The Meridian is a Circle passing through the Vertex, or the Point directly above every Spectator; also, through the Sun when it is Mid-day, the Culminating Stars, and the Poles of the World to the Horizon. We do not change this Circle in going directly to the South or North, but only in passing from East to West. Every one of the above-mentioned four Circles, hath two Poles betwixt which, it standing exactly in the middle, di∣vides the Globe into two Hemispheres: They also mutual∣ly cut one another into two Semi-circles, and through the Poles of every one of them, except the Meridian, are de∣scrib'd secondary Circles, which every where cut the Prin∣cipals into two parts, at right Angles, i. e. so as to incline no more to one side than another. Forasmuch then as the whole Doctrine of the Sphere is founded on these four Circles, therefore it will be requisite to examine more ac∣curately, the Adjuncts, or particular Properties of every one of them. The Poles of the Aequator are the same as those of the World, namely, the Arctick and Antarctick; the former deriving its Name from the neighbouring Constellations of the Arcti, or Bears; and the other so termed, as being opposite to the Arctick: A right Line extended between both Poles, through the Center of the Earth, is usually called the Axis, or Axle of the World. The Aequator di∣vides the Sphere into the Southern and Northern Parts: And the Ecliptick divides it into the Northern and Southern Signs. Through the Poles of the Aequator are describ'd its Se∣condaries, viz. the Circles of Declination: Among these the Meridian is the most remarkable, being the chief of the Horary Circles, in regard, that together with 11 other Circles of Declination, it divides the Aequator for every 15 Degrees, in 24 Hours. Moreover, the Meridian, and the rest of the Horary Circles, are to be conceiv'd unmoveable, so long as you remain in the same place, whilst the Sphere, together with the Sun and the Stars, are carried about with the diurnal Motion. The two Colures are Circles which mutually cut one ano∣ther, at right Angles, in the Poles of the World, viz. the Colure of the Aequinoxes, passing through the Intersections of the Aequator and Ecliptick; and that of the Solstices passing through the Solstitial Points, which are the begin∣nings of Cancer and Capricorn. These Colures are turn'd round with the Diurnal Motion, in every place where ei∣ther of the Poles is elevated above the Horizon, and they appear as they pass differently maim'd, from whence they seem to have taken their Name. The Colure of the Solstices divides the Ecliptick into the ascending Signs, which are the places of the Sun whilst it ascends towards our Vertex, viz. ♑, ♒, ♓, ♈, ♉, ♊. And the descending, which are the places of the same Luminary, in its descent from our Vertex, viz. ♋, ♌, ♍, ♎, ♏, ♐. But the same Signs which we even now nam'd ascending, are otherwise call'd of the long Ascents, by reason that when the Sun is in them, he appears a long while above the Horizon; for Example of London, suppose more than 16 Hours, whereas when he, or any Planet is in the other six Signs, which before we term'd descending, but now of the short Ascents, they pass in a little space of time, viz. somewhat less than 8 Hours. Now these Pro∣perties are to be understood with respect to the Inhabitants of the Northern Hemisphere; for they are quite contrary to those of the other Hemisphere; because the ascending Signs, or of the long Ascents, to us are the descending, or of the short Ascents, unto them. But both the Colures to∣gether divide the Zodiack into four equal Parts, or Quar∣ters; that is to say, the Vernal, whose Signs are Aries, Taurus, Gemini; the Aestival, having these Signs, Cancer, Leo, Virgo; the Autumnal, wherein are Libra, Scorpio, Sa∣gitarius; and the Hybernal, which hath these other Signs, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces. Now those which in the Celestial Globe bear the Name of Secondaries of the Aequator, or Circles of Declination; in the Terrestrial, they are Meridians, describ'd through the Poles of the Earth, and every tenth Degree of the Aequa∣tor. The Followers of Ptolomy have chos'n to make the first Meridian pass through the most Western of the Canary, or Fortunate-Islands, named Ferro; whilst others chuse ra∣ther to place it in one of the Azores, or Flandrian-Islands, where the Magnetical Needle doth not decline from the Meridian Line: But since the Poles of the Magnet, or Load-Stone, do not constantly point at the same quar∣ter of the World; therefore it seems more expedi∣ent to others, That some notable and constant point in the Earth should be chosen, such as the high Mountain of Teneriff, commonly call'd the Pic, which may not only be seen far and near, but also runs up into a very narrow sharp pointed top; so that by reason of the breadth of it, Longitudes reckon'd from any Point of the Top, cannot be render'd uncertain, or erroneous, so much as in one Minute. The brazen Circle supplies the place of the other innumerable Meridians, by rolling, or applying to it, the Point through which you would have the Circle of Declina∣tion to be drawn. After the Secondary Circles of the Aequator, that pass through its Poles, the Parallels of the same Aequator de∣serve well to be consider'd; among which four are more especially remarkable, viz. the two Tropicks and the two Polar Circles. In the mean time it ought to be observ'd, that all the lesser Parallel Circles in general divide the Globe into two unequal parts. The Tropicks take their name from the turning of the Sun, for they are two Cir∣cles described by this Luminary on the Solstitial days, be∣ing then at his greatest distance from the Aequator on each
side. He describes the Tropick of Cancer upon the 11th of June, and that of Capricorn on the 11th of December, ac∣cording to the Julian Calendar. But the Poles of the Ecliptick, being turn'd round with the Diurnal Motion, describe the two Polar Circles, viz. the Artick and Antartick. Now these four Circles divide the Earth into five Zones, of which the Torrid is contain'd between the two Tropicks, and the Inhabitants thereof are nam'd Amphiscii, because they cast their Meridian Shadow at divers times of the year toward both Poles. From the Tropick of Cancer to the Arctick Circle, lyes the North Temperate Zone, and be∣tween the Tropick of Capricorn and the Anctartick Circle is the South Temperate Zone. The Inhabitants of them two are called Heteroscii, because they cast their Meridian Sha∣dow always, each of them towards that Pole which is next to them. The remaining parts of the Earth, included on either side within the Arctick and Antarctick Circles, con∣stitute the two frozen Zones; and they that dwell in them are called Periscii, because their Shadow is turn'd round a∣bout. The Aequator of the Earth passeth through these places, viz. the Island of St. Thomas in that great Bay of Africk, which is commonly call'd the Aethiopick Ocean: through Ethiopia, through the Indian Ocean, through the middle of Sumatra, through the South part of Molucca on the Con∣tinent, and besides other Islands of the Indian Sea, it passeth through the Molucc, the Pacific Ocean, the Province of Peru, through the Lake Parima and the Atlantick Ocean, unto the Island of St. Thomas. The Aequator divides the Torrid Zone into two equal parts, so that they may justly be called two Torrid Zones, the one South, and the other North of it. The Torrid Zone contains these places; The greatest part of Africk, the Indian Ocean, a part of Arabia, Cambaia, India, the Islands of the Indian Ocean, Java, Ceilon, &c. Peru, Mexico, a great part of the Atlantick Ocean, the Island of St. Helen, Brasil, New Guiney. The Tropick of Cancer passeth through these places, a little beyond the Mountain Atlas in the Western shore of Afric, through the Confines of Libya, and other Inland parts of Africk, also through Syene of Aethiopia, and after having crossed the Red-Sea, it passeth through Arabia the Happy, on the South side of the Mountain Sinai and of Mecca the Country of Mahomet. Then it enters the Indian Ocean, touches the outmost parts of Persia, and passes through India and the Extremities of the Kingdom of Chi∣na, till it come to the Pacific Sea, which when it hath past, it cuts the Kingdom of Mexico below Caleforma, an Island of America; again it enters the Atlantick Ocean by the Gulph of Mexico, glides along by the shore of the Island Cuha, and returns thence to the Western Coast of Africk. The Tropick of Capricorn passes through very little Land, but the greatest part of it falls in the Sea, viz. it passeth through the Promontory of Africk, Madagascar, the Indian Ocean, New Guiney, the Pacific Ocean, Peru, Brasil, and the Atlantick Ocean. In the Temperate Zone towards the North, lye very ma∣ny parts of the Earth, and they are all of them almost known and inhabited, viz. all Europe, Asia, (if you except India, Molucca in the Continent, and the Isles of the Indian Ocean) a great part of Northern America, a part of the Atlantick and Pacifick Seas. In the Temperate Zone towards the South, there is little Land, neither is it all known; however, it contains some of Africk, where it runs out Southward into the Sea, a part of Monomotapa, the Cape of Good Hope, a great part of Magellanica, some of Brasil, the Magellanick Straits, much of the Atlantick, Indian and Pacifick Seas. The Artick Polar Circle passeth through the middle al∣most of Island, Norway, the Northern Ocean, Lapland, the Bay of Russia, or the White Sea, Samojeda, Tartary, Nor∣thern America, Greenland. The Antarctick Polar Circle passeth through Magellanica. In the Frigid Zone towards the North, are the half of Island, the utmost parts of Norway, of Lapland, of Fin∣mark, Samojeda, Nova Zembla, Greenland, Spitsberg, with some parts of Northern America. In the Frigid Zone towards the South, whether it be Land or Water is uncertain. But besides the four Circles we mentioned, viz. the Tropick and Polar Circles, the Aequator hath other Parallels distant in space as far as is requisite to cause the longest day to increase a quarter of an hour under one of them more than under the other; for since under the Aequator it self, where both Poles lean on the Horizon, there is a perpetual Aequi∣nox; by reason that the Aequinox there cuts equally in two parts the Aequator and both the Tropicks, as also all the Diurnal Parallels; so that whatsoever Parallel the Sun traverseth, it stays as long a while above the Horizon as be∣low. If you go back from thence towards either Pole, so that one of the Poles be elevated, and the other depressed, then the Tropick which is nigher to the elevated Pole, as to its greater part, will appear above the Horizon; whence it is necessary that the Sun, whilst he remains therein, should stay longer above the Horizon than below it, and so the Solstitial Day becomes longer then 12 hours. Therefore I say, if in any place of the Earth the excess of the Solstiti∣al or Longest Day above 12 hours, be one quarter of an hour, that place is situated under the first Parallel; and if that excess amounts to half an hour, that then the place lyes under the second Parallel, or, which is equivalent, un∣der the extremity or confines of the first Climate: For as the Parallels are distinguish'd by the augmentation of a quarter of an hour, so the Climates are by the like increase of half an hour. Furthermore, that excess of the Solsti∣tial Day above 12 hours may be continually augmented, by elevating the Pole more and more, until you come to the Polar Circle; for there the Tropick touching the Horizon in one point, appears altogether above the same; whence it happens, that the Sun in passing through doth not set, but glancing on the Horizon with its Center, forms a Day of 24 hours. Now such a Day of 24 hours exceeds an Ae∣quinoctial day by 12 hours; that is to say, 24 half hours, or 48 quarters: From whence it follows, that the number of Climates from the Aequinoctial to the Polar Circle, amounts to 24, and that of the Parallels to 48. But although these things are so, nevertheless the Anci∣ents fixed the first Climate, not in that place where the Solstitial Day consists of 12 hours and an half, as ought to have been done; but omitting (I know not for what rea∣son) the first Natural Climate, they determin'd the middle Parallel of the first Climate to pass through Meroe, an Island of the River Nile, where the longest Day consists of 13 hours; that of the second by Syene; a City situated under or very near the Tropick of Cancer; that of the third through Alexandria, the Metropolis of Egypt, standing on the mouth of the River Nile; that of the fourth through Rhodes, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, lying over a∣gainst Cilicia; that of the fifth through Rome and the Helle∣spont; that of the sixth through Pontus, or Venice and Milan; and lastly, that of the seventh through the Bo∣risthenes, or the Country of Podolia and the lesser Tartary, where the longest Day contains 16 hours Neither did the Ancient Geographers proceed any far∣ther; but the Modern (as it hath been already declar'd) have extended the Climates as far as the Arctick Circle, on the other side of which, since the Sun doth not Set during some days in the Summer season, and on that account the Light is no longer encreas'd with the augmentation of half-hours, but with that of whole Weeks and Months, it was judged convenient, that to the above-mentioned 24 Cli∣mates other six should be added, which are distinguish'd by a monthly augmentation of Light, and continued even to the very Pole it self. Now as many more Climates may be reckon'd from the Aequator to the Antarctick Pole, so there are 60 Climates in all. Before we leave this matter, it is necessary that we give a Table of the Climates, and show what uses it may serve. A Table of Climates ought to have, at the beginning, mid∣dle, and end of every Climate, the Elevation of the Pole, or the Latitude of the Parallel marked; likewise the length of the longest Day, and the distance of the Climates one from another.
A Table of Climates. Climates. Parallels. The longest Days. The Elevation of the Pole. The breadth of the Climat. The First Climate. Its beginning. Hours. Min. Deg. Min. Deg. Min. Its Middle. 12 00 00 00   The end of the first, and the begin∣ning of the second. 12 15 4 14   12 30 8 25 8 25 The Second. The Middle. 12 45 12 30   The End. 13 00 16 25 8 The Third. The Middle. 13 15 20 15   The End. 13 30 23 50 7 25 The Fourth. The Middle. 13 45 27 40   The End. 14 00 30 20 6 30 The Fifth. The Middle. 14 15 33 40   The End. 14 30 36 28 6 8 The Sixth. The Middle. 14 45 39 02   The End. 15 00 41 22 4 54 The Seventh. The Middle. 15 15 43 32   The End. 15 30 45 29 4 7 The Eighth. The Middle. 15 45 47 20   The End. 16 00 49 01 3 32 The Ninth. The Middle. 16 15 50 33   The End. 16 30 51 58 2 57 The Tenth. The Middle. 16 45 53 17   The End. 17 00 54 27 2 29 The Eleventh. The Middle. 17 15 55 34   The End. 17 30 56 37 2 10 The Twelfth. The Middle. 17 45 57 32   The End. 18 00 58 29 1 52 The Thirteenth. The Middle. 18 15 59 14   The End. 18 30 59 58 1 29 The Fourteenth. The Middle. 18 45 60 40   The End. 19 00 61 18 1 20 The Fifteenth. The Middle. 19 15 61 55   The End. 19 30 62 25 1 07 The Sixteenth. The Middle. 19 45 62 54   The End. 20 00 63 22 57 The Seventeenth. The Middle. 20 15 63 40   The End. 20 30 64 6 44 The Eighteenth. The Middle. 20 45 64 30   The End. 21 00 64 49 43 The Ninteenth. The Middle. 21 15 65 06   The End. 21 30 65 21 32 The Twentieth. The Middle. 21 45 65 35   The End. 22 00 65 47 26 The Twenty First. The Middle. 22 15 65 57   The End. 22 30 66 06 19 The Twenty Seco. The Middle. 22 45 66 14   The End. 23 00 66 20 14 The Twenty Third The Middle. 23 15 66 25   The End. 23 30 66 28 8 The Twenty Four. The Middle. 23 45 66 30   The End. 24 00 66 31 3 Climates of the Frigid Zone, where the longest Day increaseth by Months. Months. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Latitude of the Places, or Pa∣rallels. Deg. Min. Deg. Min. Deg. Min. Deg. Min. Deg. Deg. 67 30 69 30 73 20 78 20 84 90
The use of this Table is, 1. The Latitude or Elevation of the Pole of any place being given, to find the length of the longest day of that place, and the Climate where it lyes. For doing this, you must look in the Table for the given Elevation of the Pole, and over against it you shall find the length of the longest day of that Place, and its Climate or Parallel. If you don't find in the Table the very same Elevation of the Pole that was given, you must take these two of the Table which are nighest to it, one of which exceeds it, and the other is less than it, and ac∣cordingly as it approaches to the greater or lesser, the longest day of the place comes nerer to that which is o∣ver against the one or the other of these Elevations of the Pole. 2. The length of the longest day of any place be∣ing given, the Latitude of that Place, its Climate and Pa∣rallel may be found in the Table, by looking first for the length of the longest day, and the Latitude or Elevation of the Pole is over against it: But if the length of the longest day, cannot be had precisely in the Table, we must take the two that are next, greater and less than it, in the Column of the longest day, and as the day that was given approaches to the one or the other, so does the Latitude or Elevation of the Pole which belongs to it, come nigher to that of the one or the other of these two longest days. Besides the Parallels of the Aequator we have already mention'd, we may conceive infinite others drawn through any Point of Heaven parallel to it. Thus for instance, the Circle of Perpetual Apparition is parallel to the Aequator, being delineated by any Point of the Celestial Sphere, which toucheth the Northern Point of the Horizon, and carried about with the diurnal Motion; within which Circle whatsoever Stars are included, they never set, but are always seen above the Horizon. Another removed at a like distance from the Aequator, and call'd the Circle of Perpetual Occultation, contains these Stars, which never ap∣pear in our Hemesphere; but the Stars situated between both the said Circles, do incessantly rise and set. The Inhabitants of the Earth being compared with re∣spect to the Meridians and Parallels, some of them are named Perici, viz. those who live under the same Paral∣lel, but opposite Meridians; whence they have the same Seasons of the Year, that is, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, at the same time; because as the Sun approacheth to, or departeth from the Parallel or Vertical Point of the one, he approacheth to or departeth from the other also; but the Changes of Noon and Midnight are alternate to them, accordingly as the Sun, turn'd round with his diur∣nal Motion, comes to the Meridian of the one, or that of the other. Others again are styl'd Antaeci, inhabiting un∣der the same Meridian, but opposite Parallels; whence Noon and Midnight happen to both at the very same mo∣ment of time; but the Summer of the one is the Winter of the other; accordingly as the Sun in its annual Course advanceth to this or that Parallel. Lastly, Others bear the name of Antipodes, by reason that being under opposite Meridians, as well as Parallels, they go with their feet dia∣metrically opposite; therefore their Summer and Winter, their Noon and Midnight, add, if you please, the Rising and Setting of all the Stars are directly contrary to one another. Thus we have taken a view of the Secondary and Pa∣rallel Circles of the Aequator, the Ecliptick, together with its Properties, ought in the next place to be briefly considered. The Poles of the Ecliptick are distant from those of the Aequator 23 ½ deg. Through the Poles, and the beginning of the Signs, are drawn certain Circles of Latitude, which are six in number, and they divide not only the Zodiack, but also the Sphere into 12 parts. How∣ever, besides these, innumerable other Circles of Latitude may be suppos'd to pass through every Point of Heaven. Moreover, the Zodiack is cut into two parts by the Hori∣zon, so that six Signs always appear above it, and six lye hid below it. The Signs of the Zodiack do likewise di∣stinguish the Northern Constellations of the Starry Globe from the Southern. Let us now proceed to the Horizon, whose Poles are the Zenith, the Point of Heaven directly above us, and the Nadir is a Point of the other Hemisphere directly opposite to the Zenith. The Horizon separates the conspicuous He∣misphere from that which lyes hid, and its Secondary Cir∣cles are the Vertical, call'd Azimuth by the Arabians, de∣scending from the top of ones head through every Point of the Horison. The Quadrant of Altitude apply'd to the Zenith, supplies the place of all these Vertical Circles. The chief of them are the Meridian and the Circle of the ninetieth degree of the Ecliptick. For as the Meridian passes through the Zenith and the Poles of the Aequator, so the Circle of the ninetieth degree of the Ecliptick passeth through the Zenith and the Poles of the Ecliptick. But that nineteenth degree of the Ecliptick is counted from the Hori∣zon, and it is the highest of all the degrees of the Eclip∣tick. There is also a third Vertical Circle remarkable a∣bove the rest, descending through the Cardinal Points of East and West, where the Intersections of the Aequator and Horizon constitute the Poles of the Meridian; but the Poles of this third Vertical Circle, which we are now de∣scribing, fall on the other two Cardinal Points, namely those of the South and North, where the Meridian cuts the Horizon into two halfs, one East the other West. Moreover, of the same Vertical Circle that runs through the Cardinal Points of East and West, six Circles of Posi∣tion are, as it were, the Secondaries, passing from the Cardinal Points of South and North through every thirti∣eth degree of the Equator, among which the Horizon and the Meridian are the chiefest. The whole Heaven is divi∣ded by these Circles into the Twelve Houses; the first whereof, being hid under the Eastern Horizon, is other∣wise call'd the Horoscope, and contains the Stars which are ready to rise. After this the rest of the Subterranean Houses are reckon'd up according to the Succession of the Signs of the Zodiack. The degrees of these Signs, which are cut by the Circles of Position, determine the begin∣ning and end of the several Houses. In the mean while a Circle of Position may be imagin'd drawn from the Car∣dinal Points of South and North through any Point of Heaven. The Horizon likewise hath its lesser Parallel Cir∣cles, which are called Almucantarath, and are delineated in the Astrolab framed to a certain Elevation of the Pole, to show the Altitudes of the Stars above the Horizon. We have nothing more to add concerning the Meridian, unless that it is the Father of the Winds, which is so cer∣tainly true, that in whatsoever place no Meridian is to be found, neither is there any distinction of Winds. Some folks will perhaps ask us, In what place can a Meridi∣an be wanting? We answer, Under the Poles where the Sun in its diurnal Course is never at all, or very little higher at one time than it is at another, and on that account nei∣ther riseth nor culminates; but all the Verticals alike may be esteem'd as Meridians. Here therefore, neither East nor South, nor West nor North, can be any longer distin∣guish'd. Indeed if you stand in the Frozen Zone, but not under the Pole it self, it may so happen (as we have al∣ready said) that the Sun may neither Rise nor Set there during many days, but may nevertheless be daily rolled to a lowermost and uppermost Point of Heaven; whence en∣sues a clear distinction of the Winds or Quarters of the World, which must therefore of right be deriv'd from the Meridian Circle. For the two Cardinal Winds or Points call'd the South and North, lay a foundation for all the rest, and for that cause one of them, viz. the North, in the Ma∣riners Compass, is adorn'd with a Flower de Luce, from whence also the opposite South is immediately discover'd, and the Meridian Line is conceiv'd to be as it were ex∣tended between these Points. Now another Line cutting this at right Angles, shews the other two Cardinal Points, namely East and West, the former of which for distinction sake, is usually mark'd with a Cross; but those that lye in the middle betwixt these Cardinal Points, partake of the Names of the Points next to them on both sides, viz. North-East, North-West, South-East, South-West. Every one of these eight Winds hath two, viz. one on each side of
it, which retaining the Names of their Principals, acquire also a Sirname from the Cardinal to which they incline. For they are thus term'd, North-by-West, North-by-East; North-East-by-North, North-East-by-East, East-by-North, East-by-South, South-East-by-East, South-East-by-South, South-by-East, South-by-West, South-West-by-South, South-West-by-West, West-by-south, West-by-North, North-West-by-West, North-West-by-North. These Collateral Winds are 16 in number, which together with the eight Principal, constitute 24. Lastly, Between the same eight Principal, eight others are situa∣ted exactly in the midst, which prefix to the names of the middlemost Cardinals a fore-name borrowed from the nearest Cardinal. There names are North-North-East, East-North-East, East-South-East, South-South-East, South-South-West, West-South-West, West-North-West, North-North-West. These are the 32 Winds, which being continued through compass the Terraqueous Globe, constitute as many Rhombs or Points of the Compass, whereof that which passeth through the South and North is the Meridian; every one of the others cut all the Meridians at equal Angles, and that Rhomb which is drawn through the East and West, is either the Aequator, or some lesser Circle parallel thereto. The rest are Oblique or Side-winds, seven in every Quarter, to be reckon'd from the Meridian to the East and West, as you may see in the Scheme hereto annexed. But besides these, we must remember that an oblique Rhomb may be con∣ceiv'd as passing toward any Point of the Horizon. Thus having explain'd the four principal Circles, toge∣ther with their Adjuncts and Properties, it remains only that we take an account of the Angles and Arches which arise from their concourse and cutting one another. It hath been already declar'd, That every primary Circle forms right Angles with its Secondaries; those therefore are oblique, which any one Circle makes makes with another that doth not pass through its Poles; and they may be numbred in order thus; 1. That of the Aequator and the Ecliptick. 2. The Angle of the Aequator and the Horizon (that of the Aequator and the Meridian is a right Angle, because one of these Circles passeth through the Poles of the other.) 3. The Angle of the Ecliptick and the Hori∣zon. 4. The Angle of the Ecliptick and the Meridian (the Angle of the Horizon and Meridian is a right Angle.) 5. The Angle of the Meridian and a Secondary of the Aequator, or Circle of Declination. 6. The Angle of the Meridian, and a Secondary of the Horizon, or Vertical Cir∣cle. The first of these which the Aequator and the Ecliptick make in the beginning of Aries and Libra, always consists of 23 deg. and an half; viz. it is as large as is the Arch of the Colure of the Solstices, describ'd upon the Vernal or Autumnal Intersection, as its Pole, and comprehended be∣tween the beginning of Cancer and the ninetieth degree of the Aequator. Therefore this Arch serves to measure the obliquity of the Ecliptick, and the greatest Declination of the Sun from the Aequator. In like manner the Angle which the Aequator forms with the Horizon, is measured by an Arch of the Meridian comprehended between the Horizon and the Aequator. This Arch to us who dwell at London, is of 38 deg. 28 min. and the complement thereof namely from the Aequa∣tor to our Zenith or Vertical Point, is the Latitude of London 51 deg. 32 min. to which the Elevation of the Pole is always equal, to be counted likewise on the Meridi∣an, from the Cardinal Point of the North to the Arctick
Pole; but that Equality may be demonstrated thus. Let geometric diagram AE Q be the Aequator, H O the Horizon, Z the Zenith, P the Arctick Pole. The Arch AE P extended from the Ae∣quator to the Pole includes 90 deg. Z O from the Zenith to the Horizon contains also 90 deg. But these equal Arches AE P and Z O have a common Segment Z P, which if it be taken away from both AE Z the Latitude, and P O the Elevation of the Pole remain equal. Now if we set forward from hence directly toward the South, for the space of 6083 ⅓ of English feet, or for the space of 1 English mile and 1083/5000 parts, or ⅕ of a mile al∣most, we shall come nigher to the Aequator by one minute, and when we travel 73 English miles, the same way we make one whole deg. in the Heavens. In such sort, that by how much Z, or our Vertical Point approach∣eth nearer to the Aequator AE, by so much the Arch AE H or the Angle of the Aequator and Horizon AE C H be∣comes greater, until Z drawing near more and more to AE, and H at the same time retiring back more and more from the same AE, it may so happen, that Z at length falls on the very point AE, that is to say, the Aequator may pass through the Zenith or Pole of the Horizon, and so may make a right Angle with this Circle. The Pole P may likewise lye on the Horizon in the Point O, and the opposite Pole B may be elevated to H, so as neither of the Poles may ap∣pear geometric diagram above the Horizon. This is the situation of a Right Sphere, so call'd, be∣cause the Aequator and all its Parallels stand on the Horizon at right Angles, and are cut by it into two equal parts. Whence it must needs be, that no Stars lye hid here under the Horizon, but that they all Rise and set in order, within the space of 24 hours; as also that they spend equal time in moving above the Horizon and below it; and on that account a perpetual Equinox continues in this place. Moreover, by reason of the right Ascent and De∣scent of the Sun, it happens, that within a little space of time, it descends very far below the Horizon; and there∣fore the Twilights there will be very short. But in our Climate, and the like, by reason of the Inclination of the Aequator, and the Elevation of the Pole, the Stars ascend obliquely, and some of them never ascend at all; this renders the Position of the Sphere oblique, as is represent∣ed in the Fig. where the Aequator is cut into two equal parts by the Horizon, as well as in the right Sphere, where∣fore the Sun continuing it Course along that Circle makes the Day equal to the Night. But geometric diagram the farther it departs from the same toward the eleva∣ted Pole, the Portions of the Diurnal Parallels lying above the Horizon, become so much the greater, and so the Days must exceed the Nights in length with a continual augmentation, as far as the Estival Tropick. The con∣trary happens when the Sun descends towards the Hy∣bernal Tropick. Perhaps it may not be amiss here to note the Difference of the four Seasons of the Year: For from the Vernal Equinox to the Summer Solstice, the days are longer than the Nights, and they continually encrease. From the Summer Solstice to the Autumnal Equinox, the Days as yet exceeds the Nights in length, but they decrease. From the Autumnal Equinox to the Winter Solstace, the Days decrease more, and are still growing shorter than the Nights. Lastly, From the Winter Solstice to the Vernal Equinox, the Days continue shorter than the Nights, but they are growing longer. The Twilights also, by reason of the oblique Descent of the Sun, last a much longer time then they do in a right Sphere. Insomuch, that in some places, during the Summer season, they continue for whole Nights, particularly in Sweden, where one may read a Book without a Candle, even at the very point of Mid∣night, because the Sun there glides slowly, and not so deep under the Horizon as elsewhere. It may also happen that the Pole P may be elevated more and more, until it fall in with the Vertical geometric diagram Point Z. Then the Point of the Aequator AE is de∣pressed as far as into H and Q on the contrary is raised into O. Thus the Aequator concludes with the Horizon, and all the Parallels of the Aequator are also Parallel to the Horizon. This is the Pa∣rallel Position of the Sphere (See the Fig.) by which Position, whilst the Sun continues in the Signs of the Sodiack, which are next the elevated Pole, or betwixt the Aequator and it; because these Signs are on that side of the Aequator, and conse∣quently situated above the Horizon, the Sun whilst he is in them forms the longest Day of six Months by a con∣stant Circumvolution. Afterward departing to the Signs which are on the other side of the Aequator, or below the Horizon, he doth not appear to the Pole for the en∣tire space of six Months. Nevertheless, if any Inhabitants reside there, they do not dwell in perpetual Darkness du∣ring that time; but every Month from the first Quarter of the Moon to the last, whilst this Luminary shines with the greatest part of its Orb, they enjoy its Light. Moreover, after the descent of the Sun below the Horizon, until it hath arriv'd at the eighteenth deg. of Declination in 21 ♍, as also after its return to the ninth deg. of ♒, they are sensible of the longest Twilight. Lastly, The Refractions in so thick an Air, cause the Sun to rise some Days sooner above, and to descend flower below the Ho∣rizon. Then follows the Angle which the Ecliptick makes with the Horizon, which is measured by an Arch pas∣sing through the ninetieth deg. of the Ecliptick and the Horizon. The Pole of that Arch is the rising Point of the Ecliptick. The Angle which the Meridian forms at the Pole with any Circle of Declination, hath for its measure an Arch of the Equator to be counted from the Meridian to a Circle
of Declination passing through the given Star, and that Angle or Arch is otherwise call'd the Distance of a Star from the Meridian. The Angle which the Meridian makes with any Vertical Circle, is measur'd by an Arch of the Horizon between the Meridian and that Vertical Circle. When this Verti∣cal Circle passeth through a Star, the Arch of the Hori∣zon measuring the Angle, is called the Azimuth of that Star; and these Circles are called Azimuthal Circles. In the Terrestrial Globe, whensoever you apply a given place to the Vertical Point, and make a Vertical pass through any other place, the Angle which is thence formed, is commonly term'd the Angle of Position. The Arches rec∣kon'd on every Circle have likewise their particular de∣nominations. In the Celestial Equator we compute the Right Ascension of a Star from the beginning of Aries, to a Point where the Circle of Declination passing through the given Star, meets with the Aequator. Likewise on this Circle of Declination, or the Meridian which supplies its place, the Declination of a Star is counted from the Aequator toward the Poles, viz. the Northern toward the Arctick, and the Southern toward the An∣tarctick. But the oblique Ascension or Descension is an Arch of the Aequator, counted from the beginning of A∣ries, or the Vernal Intersection to a Point, which touches the oblique Horizon when the given Star is rising or set∣ting. Now the Difference of both Ascensions, namely, the Right and the Oblique, is call'd the Ascensional Diffe∣rence. In like manner the Longitude of Stars is computed in the Ecliptick, from the beginning of Aries to a Point where the Circle of Latitude, passing through the given Star, meets the Ecliptick. Also upon this Circle of Lati∣tude is the Northern or Southern Latitude of a Star rec∣koned from the Ecliptick. However, the Terrestrial Lon∣gitude and Latitude doth not follow the Ecliptick; but we compute the Longitude in the Terrestrial Aequator, from the first Meridian to a Point at which another Me∣ridian, that passeth through the given place, cuts the Ae∣quator. The Northern or Southern Latitude of a place is counted upon the Meridian from the Aequator. The Eastern and Western Amplitude is numbred in the Ho∣rizon from the Cardinal Point of East or West, to a Star rising or setting, on both Hemispheres, either Nor∣thern or Southern. Lastly, The Altitude of a Star above, or its depression below the Horizon, is taken in a Vertical Circle. These are the Definitions of the Termes commonly used in the Doctrine of the Sphere. CHAP. V. Of the Parts of TIME. THE chief Parts of Time are a Day, an Hour, a Month, a Year. A Day is either Natural, or Artificial: The Natural, call'd , by the Grecians, is the space of 24 Hours, com∣prehending the Night as well as the Day. The Artificial Day is a space of Time from the rising of the Sun to his setting. The Civil and Astronomical Day differ not from the Natural, unless in their beginning, according to the custom of a Common-wealth, or the pleasure of Astronomers, by deriving it variously from the Sun-rising, Noon, Sun-set, or Mid-night. The Babylonians began their Day from the Sun-rising, (as the Inhabitants of Norimberg now do) the Jews and Athenians from Sun-set, according to the present practice of the Italians, Austrians, Bohemians and Silesians. The Egyptians and Romans of old, began their Day from Mid-night, (which Custom, as yet, prevails among the English, the Germans, the French, and other Nations of Europe.) The greater part of Astronomers begin it from Noon, as Ptolomy, the Alphonsines, and Tycho Brahe; but Copernicus, following Hipparchus, takes its beginning from Mid-night. An Hour is either unequal or equal; an unequal Hour is the twelfth part of an Artificial Day; and in like man∣ner the twelfth part of the Night. It is otherwise call'd Temporary; because in divers Seasons of the Year it is of a different quantity, accordingly as some Artificial Days are longer than others; thus the Hour of a Summer-day, exceeds in length, that of a Winter-day. The same Hour is also termed Planetary, by reason that it is customary to give to some one of the Seven Planets the name of every Hour. Thus, for Example, the first Temporary Hour of Sunday, from the Sun-rising, is attributed to the Sun; the second to Venus; the third to Mercury, and so to the rest in order, to the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars; whence it happens that the first Hour from the Sun-rising of the next Day, is Dedicated to the Moon; and therefore this Luminary giveth a Name to that Day of the Week; the same thing being continued in the ensuing Days, to the end of the Week. These unequal Hours were in use a∣mong the Jews, Grecians and Romans. An equal Hour is the 24th. part of a Natural, or Astro∣nomical Day, and such are now us'd almost throughout the whole World. One Hour contains 60 prime Minutes, one Minute 60 Seconds; and so the Seconds are Sub-divided into Thirds, the Thirds into Fourths, &c. A Month is either Solar or Lunar: The Solar Month is either Astronomical, viz. that space of Time in which the Sun makes one Sign in the Ecliptick; or Civil, consisting one while of 30 Days, at another time of 31, and some∣times of 28, or 29, according to the Custom of every City or Nation. The Lunar Month is likewise either Astronomical or Civil; the Astronomical Lunar Month is either periodical, when the Moon is rolled from a certain Point of the E∣cliptick, to the same again. Or Synodical, which is the time from its departing from the Sun, 'till it overtakes him again. A periodical Month is compos'd of 27 Days, and almost ⅓ of a Day; whereas the Synodical includes 29 Days, and very near an half. For when the Moon hath left the Sun in any Point of the Ecliptick, and is about to return to the same, the Sun, in the mean time, advanceth forward, and passeth through a whole Sign almost; where∣fore, above 2 Days must of necessity be allowed, to the end that the Moon may again over-take the Sun. The Civil Lunar Months are of two sorts, viz. the Full, and these consist of 30 Days; the others are call'd De∣fective, and they contain only 29 Days: Such as these last were of old Time us'd by the Jews, Grecians, and Romans, and they are now in use among the Mahometans. The Year is also either Astronomical or Civil, and the former sort, either Tropical, which is the space of Time the Sun takes to go from one point of the Ecliptick, 'till he return to it again; or, Syderial, which is the time the Sun takes in moving from a certain fix'd Star, 'till he re∣turn to the same again. And this is some-what larger than the Tropical, because the Sun, when it hath left a fix'd Star in a certain Point of the Ecliptick, coming back at the end of its Annual Course to the same Point, doth no longer find the said Star, which in the mean while, through the slow Motion of the Eighth Sphere, hath gone forward 51″: So that, some Minutes of an Hour are requisite, un∣til
the Sun overtake it again. Hence it is that the Aequi∣noxes do every Year anticipate one another, and with re∣spect to the return of the Sun to the Constellations of of Zodiack, happen almost a whole Month sooner than heretofore, in the Age of Hipparchus; and this is call'd the Precession of the Aequinoxes. The Civil Year is either Solar or Lunar, and both sorts again, either Moveable or Fixed. The unfixed, or moveable Solar Year, consists of 365 Days, without taking any Account of the odd Hours, thro' the neglect of which it happens, That every fourth Year, this moveable Year out-strips ours by one Day; and there∣fore in four times 365 Years, that is, in 1460 Years, the beginning thereof moves throughout every Month and Day of our Year; whence it is necessary that the Aequinoxes and Solstices, should in like manner pass throughout all the Days of the moveable Year. This sort of Year was in use among the Egyptians, whence it is term'd the Egyptian, consisting of 12 Months, each of which were compos'd of 30 Days, and 5 Days were added at the end of the Year, which were called . The fixed Solar Year is the Julian, so nam'd from its Author Julius Caesar, and is reckon'd to include 365 Days, and 6 Hours redundant, which over-plus amounts at the end of the fourth Year, to a whole Day. Hence it is that every fourth Year of the Julian Account is Bissextile, con∣taining 366 Days. It was call'd Bissextile from a Day in∣terlaced, or put between the 23d. and 24th. of February; for which cause it is writ by the Latines, bis sexto Calendas Martij. This Julian Year is us'd here in England, and it may be reputed in a manner fixed; because by the Interca∣lation of one Day every Fourth, or Leap Year, the Aequi∣noxes and Solstices are retain'd in their proper seats; at least for the Age of one Man. Thus in the present Cen∣tury, the Vernal Aequinox remains on the 10th. Day of March, the Autumnal on the 13th. of September, the Esti∣val Solstice on the 11th. of June, and the Hybernal on the 11th. of December. Nevertheless, it must be acknowledg'd, That the quantity allowed to a Year, by Caesar, is too much; for it exceeds the just length of a Year, by 11 Mi∣nutes almost. Now these 11 Minutes, within the space of 131 Years, grow into a whole Day; and therefore in the 1260 Years that have pass'd between the Council of Nice, which instituted the Term for the Celebration of the Festi∣val of Easter, and the time of Pope Gregory the XIII. who restored the same Terms that had been remov'd out of their proper place, these 11 Minutes amount almost to 10 Days. For in the time of the Nicene Council, the Vernal Aequinox was fixed on the 21th. Day of March; but in that of Gregory, it was found to have crept insensibly to the 11th. of the same Month. Wherefore when the Pope had determin'd to restore the Aequinox to its former seat, he took those 10 Days out of the Julian Calendar; and, lest the Hinges of the Year should slip for the future, he ordain'd that every hundred Year of the Christian Account of Time, should be common, that is, consisting of 365 Days, which, according to the computation of Julius Cae∣sar, ought to be Bissextile, but that every four hundreth Year should remain Bissextile. The moveable Lunar Year consists of twelve Synodical Months, and this sort is at present us'd by the Turks; whence it happens, that their Months move throughout all the Seasons of the Year, within the space of about 30 Years. The fixed Lunar Year is that which through the Inter∣calation every second or third Year of one Month, which is term'd Embolimaeus, retains the Hinges of the Year from slipping from their proper Months. In the Metonick Pe∣riod of 19 Years, there are seven intercalary Months; but this was never taken into civil use. This may suffice for the explaining the parts of Time; and we shall now proceed to the Use of the Spherical Do∣ctrine, and in the following Chapters give the Description and Use of both the Globes. CHAP. VI. Containing the Description of both Globes, viz. the Celestial and Terrestrial; together, with the way that is commonly taken to make Them, and Maps. OF those things that appertain to the Globes, some are common to both, and others peculiar to each: of these things that are common to both, some are plac'd without the Superficies of the Globe, and others upon it. Without the Superficies of both Globes are seen; 1. Two Poles, about which the Globes are rolled; one of which, near the two , or Bears, is call'd the Ar∣ctick; as also the Northern and Septentrional, from the Sep∣tem Triones, that is the Seven Stars of the greater Wain; the other Pole, opposite to this, bears the Name of the Antarctick. 2. The brazen Meridian, one side whereof only, which is distinguish'd into Degrees, and passeth through the Poles, represents the true Meridian. This side ought al∣ways to be turn'd to the East, as the Arctick Pole to the North; and it is divided into four times 90 Degrees, of which twice 90 begin to be counted from that part of the Equinoctial, which appears above the Horizon, toward both Poles; but the other two 90 Deg. begin to be coun∣ted from either Pole, and end in the Equinoctial, under the Horizon. 3. The wooden Horizon, the upper part whereof re∣sembles the true Horizon, and is divided into divers Cir∣cles, the innermost of which contains the 12 Celestial Signs, distinguish'd by their Names and Characters, and divided, each of them, into 30 Degrees. Next to this is adjoyned the Julian Calendar, and the Gregorian, and both of them are divided into Months and Days; in the utmost part is to be seen the Circle of the Winds, or of the Quarters of the World, as they are now term'd by Mariners. 4. The Quadrant of Altitude, the Limb whereof, which is divided into Degrees, must be apply'd to the 90th. De∣gree of the Meridian, by computing on both sides from the Horizon. In this Quadrant are reckon'd the Degrees from the Horizon, upward to the Vertical Point or Ze∣nith. 5. The Horary Circle, divided into twice 12 Hours, of which the Twelfth for Mid-day points upward, toward the Zenith, and the other Twelfth for Mid-night, toward the Horizon; but both these Hours ought to cincide with the Eastern side of the Meridian, mark'd with Degrees, in such manner that the Pole carrying the Horary Index, may possess the Center, and the Index it self turn'd about with the Diurnal Motion, may shew the Hours before Noon in the Eastern Semi-circle, and those after Noon in the We∣stern.
6. The Mariner's Compass, set on a Pedestal, by which the Globe is adjusted to the Quarters of the World. 7. The Semi-circle of Position, the extremities of which are to be fixed to the Cardinal Points of the South and North; so as the Semi-circle it self may be readily Eleva∣ted, from the Horizon towards the Meridian, to any situa∣tion. These things are to be observ'd, without the Superfi∣cies of both Globes. But on the Surface it self, the following Circles are also delineated, viz. 1. The Equinoctial, divided into 360 Deg. the counting of which is begun from the Vernal Section, or the begin∣ning of Aries, and continued round about, until we re∣turn to the same Point again. 2. The Ecliptick, divided into 12 Signs, and every one of these into 30 Deg. But the Names and Orders of the Signs ought to be remembred. Sunt ♈ Aries, ♉ Taurus, ♊ Gemini, ♋ Cancer, ♌ Leo, ♍ Virgo. ♎ Libraque, ♏ Scorpius, ♐ Arcitenens, ♑ Caper, ♒ Amphora ♓ Pisces. The Sun passeth through the Ecliptick in his Annual Motion, and if a Space of about eight Deg. broad on both sides, be added to it, the Zodiack is form'd, so call'd from 12 Constellations, the most of which resemble, as it were, the likeness of Animals. Under this broad Circle, the Moon, and the rest of the Planets, perform their periodi∣cal Motions. The Ecliptick is easily distinguish'd from the Equi∣noctial; for the Equinoctial, whilst the Globe is rolling about, always keeps the same station, and passeth under the same Point of the Meridian and Horizon; whereas the Ecliptick changerh its situation every Moment, being one while Elevated, at another tsme depress'd; sometime ap∣ply'd to one, sometime to another Degree of the Meridian, and of the Horizon. 3. The two Tropicks, viz. of Cancer and Capricorn, which bound the Suns Excursions from the Equinoctial to∣ward the North and South, and inclose on both sides the Ecliptick, which is the oblique Path he moves in. Nei∣ther would it be improper to term them the last of the Solar Parallels. For since the Sun every day possesseth one degree or another of the Ecliptick during its Annual Course, it happens that that degree being carried about, together with the Sun by the Diurnal Motion, describes a certain Circle Parallel to the Equator, and thus as many Pa∣rallels are made as there are days from the shortest to the longest. Although the Sun, not continuing in the same degree, but advancing in the space of its Diurnal Revolu∣tion to the next, doth not draw a perfect Parallel, but ra∣ther a Spiral Line; nevertheless, forasmuch as the distance of these Spiral Lines is very small, especially near the Tropicks; it doth not hinder, but that those respective Revolutions, and chiefly the last, that is to say, the Tro∣picks themselves, may be esteemed as Parallels, and this is sufficient for constant practice, and much more conve∣nient. 4. The two Polar Circles, viz. the Arctick, and Antar∣ctick, of which we have already treated. Now these things that have been hitherto specified, are common to both Globes; although the Ecliptick, and Semi-circle of Posi∣tion, pcoperly belong only to the Celestial. However, they are added also to the Terrestrial, that the Phaenomena's which depend upon the Annual Motion of the Sun; and the Cusps of the Houses, whensoever it is requisite, may be there∣by explain'd. But those things which are peculiar to each Globe, are 1. Circles; as for instance, In the Celestial, the two Co∣lures, and Circles of Latitude; in the Terrestrial, the Me∣ridians, Parallels and Rhombs, or Points of the Compass, of which a sufficient account hath been given in the Chap∣ter about the Doctrine of the Sphere. 2. Representations, particularly in the Terrestrial Globe of the Earth and Seas, which are the proper subject of Geography; as also, in the Celestial, of the fixed Stars and Asterisms, or Constella∣tions, which are formed of them, being 48 in number; 12 of which possess the Zodiack, and are distinguish'd by the same Names, as the 12 Parts, or Signs of the Ecliptick, without Stars. There are 21 Constellations North, from the Zodiack, and they are thus named, Ʋrsa minor, Ʋrsa major, Draco, Cepheus, Arcto-Phylax, or Bootes, Corona Gnossia, Hercules in Genibus, Lyra, Cygnus, Cassiopeia, Per∣seus, Andromeda, Triangulum, Auriga, Pegasus, Equiculus, Delphis, Sagitta, Aquila, Serpentarius, and Serpens. There are 15 Asterisms on the South-side of the Zo∣diack, viz. Cetus, Eridanus, Lepus, Orion, Canis major, Ca∣nis minor, Navis Argo, Hydra, Crater, Corvus, Centaurus, Lupus, Ara, Corona Australis, Piscis Austrinus. Besides these 48 Constellations conspicuous to us, others are also observ'd about the Southern Pole, to the number of 12; their Names are, Phoenix, Grus, Indus, Xiphias, Pavo, Anser, Hydrus, Passer, Apus, Triquetrum, Musca, Chamaele∣on. We have retain'd the Latine Names of these Constel∣lations, and have not done them into English, because they are all of them proper Names, which are the same in all Languages; nor can any Person think it much harder to discover which is Ʋrsa minor in the Heavens, as which is the lesser Bear; for though this last is English, and the other Latine, yet the Latine Name is more generally us'd, for signifying that bundle of Stars near the North-Pole; and therefore it may more easily be understood: Besides, these are the Names commonly inscrib'd with the several Constellations, upon all the Celestial Globes; and some People would be possibly more perplext to find the Constel∣lations on the Globe, if there Names were given in English, than if they only hear the same Words that are writ upon the Globe it self. The Via Lactea, or the Milky-way, is a broad white Circle, encompassing the whole Heaven, and extending it self sometimes with a double Path, but for the most part with a single one. Some of the Ancients imagin'd, That this Circle consisted only of a certain Exhalation hanging in the Air; but the observations of our Age have discove∣red it to be an innumerable heap of Minute fix'd Stars: However, these little Stars, although different in situation and magnitude, are not usually represented on the Globe, being only discerned by the Telescope; and therefore it is not necessary to Discourse any longer of them in this place. After this Description of the Globes, it was thought best to give a short account of their Contrivance, and the ways of making them, as also of Maps; for thereby their fitness to represent what they are designed for, may be more exactly judg'd of; and the Subject it self is neither unpleasant, nor improper, or foreign to our undertak∣ing. The easiest, the best, and most exact way to make a Terrestrial Globe, is that whereby the Points of a Globe, representing the several Places of the Earth, are fix'd and determin'd from the Longitude and Latitude of every par∣ticular place, which Longitude and Latitude are supposed to be known by observation; for if these be once given, the Place it self which they belong to, shall be represented by a Point upon the Surface of the Globe, of the same Longitude and Latitude. It's true, this method would be too laborious and slow in the making of ordinary Globes, and therefore the common Artificers, who make many of them at once of the same bigness, do it another way, which though it be neither easier nor less chargeable, where one Globe is to be made, yet it is much more convenient, and of less expence, when they are to make many of the same bigness. But when a Terrestrial Globe of an extraordina∣ry bigness is to be made of Brass (such as Princes for the most part have) then the several Points of the Globe must be taken according to the Longitude and Latitude of the particular places, which they are supposed to represent. The Dutch East-India Company employ'd Mr. Bleau to make such a one, which they presented to a King of one of the Islands of the East-Indies. The Diameter of it was five foot, and almost all the remarkable Places of the Earth
were engraven upon its Surface, observing the same pro∣portion of Longitude and Latitude in the situation of the Points, and Carvings on the Surface of the Globe, which the Places themselves had really on the Surface of the Earth; that is, the Longitude and Latitude of every Point of the Globe's Surface, contain'd just as many Parts of the Circumference of the Globe, as the Longitude or Lati∣tude of the Place which it was design'd to represent, con∣tain'd of the Circuit of the whole Earth. Frederick Duke of Holstein had also a Terrestrial Globe made for him the same way; upon the concave Surface of it the fixt Stars were painted in their due places, and a moveable Sun be∣ing set in the Zodiack, he went round every 24 hours by the means of a little Engine contriv'd on purpose; and the Cavity of the Globe was so great, that one might conve∣niently sit within it, and see the Stars rise and set, just as they appear to do to us in the Heavens. Again, The outward Surface of it represented all the Places of the Earth. Thus this Globe was a Celestial and Terrestrial Globe in one. When such large Globes as these are to be made, the Places must be engraven or painted from the Tables of Longitude and Latitude; nor can the Artificers then use their ordinary method of applying sheets of Pa∣per, printed off from a Copper Plate, which hath such a Figure and part of the Globe's Surface engraven upon it, as the Prints may conveniently joyn, when the several pieces come to be pasted on upon a Globe. For they suppose the Surface of the Globe to be divided into twelve equal Parts by the Meridians drawn from Pole to Pole. Then upon a Plain they delineate a Figure like unto this twelfth part of the Globe, inclosed by two Arches of a Circle (which prove afterwards to be Semi-circles of the several Meridians of the Globe) and each of these twelfth Parts of the Globe's Surface is again subdivided into lesser Portions by the Meridians which are conceiv'd to pass through every degree of the Equator, and the Segments or Arches of the several Parallels. There is a twelfth Part of the Equator in the middle of this Figure, represented by a strait Line, and the Meridians meet at the Poles of it. Afterwards they take any one Meridian for the First, and from it they count the degrees of the Equator; un∣der this first Meridian they set a mark for that place of the Earth which their Tables of Longitude suppose it to pass through, so that after they have divided the Aequator into 360 parts, beginning from this first Meridian, they may count the degrees of the Longitude of each place upon it, as they do those of the Latitude upon the Meri∣dian, each Semicircle of which is divided for that very end into twice 90 deg. from the Aequator towards each Pole. This being done, the places of the Earth are mark∣ed upon the several parts of these Plans, according to their degrees of Longitude and Latitude taken from Ta∣bles made by Observation. After all this is done upon Paper, they engrave so many Copper Plates in like man∣ner, from which they print off as many Copies as they please; which Prints are afterward pasted on upon a Globe, so as all their extremities meet at the Poles; yet for the most part these reach no further than the Arctick and An∣tartick Circles, and they make one piece to represent the space contain'd within these Circles; and the application of this one piece is easier than to make the extremities of all these twelve Plans joyn and meet exactly at the Poles. There are two things in this Description which seem yet to require a fuller explication. 1. How these twelve equal parts of the Globe's Surface (after which they en∣grave the Copper Plates) are described upon Paper. 2. How a Plan, such as that Paper is, can be applied to the curve Surface of a Globe. The first may be done thus: Let us take for instance the twelfth part of an Hemisphere from the Aequator to the Pole, and let it be requir'd to describe it upon Paper, so as it may afterward be apply'd to that part of the Globe. First from the Diameter of the Globe, you may find how much its greatest Circumference is, or how much the Ae∣quator is, by the known proportion of a Circle to its Dia∣meter, viz. 22 to 7. If then the Diameter of the Globe be two feet; and the length of a foot taken upon Paper be divided into 10 parts, and each of these into 10 more, so that there be 100 parts in one foot, and 200 in two. Institute this proportion as 7 is to 22, so is 200 to 628 4/7 hundredth parts of a foot, or 6 28/100 feet, which last num∣ber is the length of the Aequator, or of the Globes Cir∣cumference. The fourth part of this is 157/100 or 1 57/100 foot and the twelfth part of it is 52 8/21 hundredth parts of a foot, or ½ a foot and 2/100 with 8/21 of one hundredth part. When you have found this, draw upon Paper a Line to the length of 52 8/21 hundredth parts of a foot; in the midddle of this raise a Perpendicular, which must be 157 1/7 hundredth parts of a foot long. This last Line shall be a Quadrant of the Meridian, and its Extremity the Pole. Afterwards divide these Lines into de∣grees (now you may have the length of a degree by divi∣ding the whole Circumference 628 4/7 by 360). Then upon the Pole, as the Center, describe Circles passing through the beginning of each tenth deg. of the Perpendicular Line, these shall be the several Parallels, if you cut off 1/24 of the Circumference on each hand of that Perpendicular which you drew. And you may know how much this 1/24 of the Cir∣cumference is in the given Scale of feet from the propor∣tion there is betwixt the Aequator and its Parallels, (which is shown in a Table toward the end of the Seventh Chap∣ter.) Certain Points then of every Parallel being thus marked, a Line must be drawn through them, and the rest of the Paper without these Points must be cut off; for that piece of the Paper that is bounded by them, shall answer exactly to 1/12 of the Hemisphere. For the second thing, if the Pieces be small, they may easily be apply'd, and agree with the Globe, especially if the Paper be wet before, and laid quickly on, and the places were mark'd upon the Paper according to their degrees of Lon∣gitude and Latitude before; so that when all the Prints are pasted on upon the Globe, the Points representing the several places shall be in proportional Distances from one another, as the places themselves are upon the Surface of the Earth. Maps are Representations of the Globe, or of the Earth upon a Plan; and because they are of constant use in all the Books of Geography, I shall give a more particular ac∣count of the way of making them, and the uses they are design'd for. The thing that is propos'd to be done in the making of a Map, is this: A certain Point of any Plan being given, which is supposed to represent such a parti∣cular place of the Earth, to find in the same Plan infinite other Points and Lines which may most fitly represent and express to the Life the situation of the other Places and Lines upon the Surface of the Earth compar'd with the given place, and with one another. Because very few of those who study Geography un∣derstand the Rules of Perspective, and yet without some knowledge of that Art, they can neither attain to any distinct apprehension of the Nature and Construction of Geographical Maps, nor form any sure judgment con∣cerning the Perfections or Defects of the Maps they see; therefore we shall here explain a few things from that Art, which furnisheth us with the Principles and Rules according to which Maps are made. The design of Perspective, is to represent upon a Plan all sorts of Objects which may be seen or imagin'd, so that the parts of this Representation or Picture shall be situa∣ted one in respect of another, and appear so to us, suppo∣sing the eye of the Beholder in such a determined place, as the parts of the Body it self which is represented, would appear to the eye, beholding it from the same place. This is the design of Perspective; and the way that is taken to attain it is this. When we would represent a Point, a Surface, or a Bo∣dy of any Figure upon a Plan, (whether we see it, or only conceive it in our mind) we first suppose it to be seen by the eye, as by one Point fixt in a certain place, from which it beholds it. 2. That there is a pellucid or transparent Plan, such as Glass or Paper is betwixt the Body and the Eye. 3. That from every Point of the Object, Rays or Lines pass through that Plan to the Eye. The Points of
this Plan through which these Rays are conceiv'd to pass to the Eye, is the representation or image of the Object it self, and if they be united into Lines, they shall make a figure which so far resembleth it, that whilest the Eye con∣tinueth in that situation, looking to this Picture, it shall have the same impressions as if it beheld the Object it self. Let it be requir'd then to represent upon a Plan the Sur∣face of the Earth, and all the Places and Circles which are suppos'd upon it. For doing this, let us first imagine the Eye of the beholder as a Point situated in the Air, or in any determined place, without the Object that is to be re∣presented. Secondly, That there is a transparent Plan ex∣tended, betwixt the Earth and the Eye, which is suppos'd to be plac'd so that a Line let down from the Eye to∣wards the Center of the Earth, may be perpendicular to it. Lastly, we imagine Lines or Rays to pass through this Plan to the Eye from every Point, Place, or Circle, that is upon the Surface of the Earth, viz. from the Aequator, the Polar Circles, the Tropicks, the Meridians; also from Cities, Rivers, Fountains, Lakes, Mountains, &c. each of these Rays will perforate this transparent Table in certain Points. These Points therefore are the Image or Repre∣sentation of the places of the Earth, and if all the Points of the Table, which are mark'd out by the Rays that come from any one Circle, upon the Surface of the Earth, such as the Aequator, or one of the Tropicks, or one of the Meridians, were joyn'd together in a Line upon the Plan, (whether that Line be strait or crooked) it shall represent that Circle upon the Plan, and in like manner all the other Rays do chalk and draw other Points and Lines upon the Plan, which represent each of them these parts of the Earth, from which the Rays were emitted. Thus we shall have all the Places and Circles that are upon the Surface of the Earth, represented in a Plan. But because the Earth is round, its whole Surface can∣not be conveniently represented in one Plan, for the two places that are in different Hemispheres, and directly op∣posite the one to the other, would fall upon the same point of the Plan; and therefore one half of the Earth's Surface, ought to be represented in one Plan, and the o∣ther in another. Upon this account let us imagine the whole Body of the Earth to be transparent as Chrystal, and that the Eye of the beholder being plac'd at the Sur∣face of the one Hemisphere, is to form an Image of the opposite Hemisphere upon a transparent Plan, which is so situated, that a Line passing from the Eye, to the Center of the Earth, is perpendicular to it; and this Plan also, if we suppose it to pass through the Center of the Earth, it shall divide it into 2 Hemispheres, one of which is to be represented, and the Eye of the beholder is suppos'd to be placed upon the middle Point of the Convex Surface of the other. So that the Eye is suppos'd to see through the Body of the Earth, and the places of the opposite He∣misphere are imagin'd to emit Rays, which perforate the transparent Plan, that is thus set betwixt the Object and the Eye, within the Body of the Earth. All this, I say, is suppos'd to be done, when one half of the Earth's Sur∣face is to be represented on a Plan. And the like must be imagin'd when any considerable part of the Earth, such as Europe, Asia, Africa, are to be drawn; but we may then assume the Center of the Earth, for the place of the Eye. From what hath been said, this manner of Perspective which represents the Surface of the Earth in a Plan, may be well enough conceiv'd. There are only two things in it which need a fuller Explication, because all the diversi∣ty of Geographical Maps ariseth from them. The first is this: We said, That a certain Point be∣hoov'd to be taken for the place of the Eye, some-where without the Object that was to be represented; but because there is an infinite Space round about every Object, and therefore there are infinite Points in which the Eye may be suppos'd to be plac'd whilst it contemplates the Surface of the Earth, (or of Europe, Asia, &c.) And yet if Rays be drawn from the same parts of the Object to different Points, they shall pass through the same transparent Plan in very different places, whilst they go towards one Point from what they pass through when they go to another. And therefore various Figures, and very unlike to one another, are made of the same Object; for according to the diffe∣rent situation of the Eye (without the Earth, or without the Object that is to be represented) there is a various re∣presentation of it upon the Plan or Table; and even tho' there were no Plan nor Table interpos'd betwixt the Eye and it, yet the Object would appear one way, when the Eye of the beholder is directly against it, and another way when he looks obliquely upon it. This every Man may perceive, as he views the Frontispiece of a House. And the like happens in the representation of the Earth on a Plan; for the Hemisphere of the Earth shall have one Fi∣gure or Appearance to the Eye, when it looks upon it from the Pole-Star, and a quite different one if you suppose it to be plac'd in the Plan of the Aequator: The Pole of the Earth shall possess the middle of the Map, and the Aequa∣tor shall be a Circle surrounding it in the first Caice, whereas the Poles shall be at the extremities, and the Ae∣quator a strait Line, passing throngh the middle of the Map in the last Caice. The other thing which I thought needed a further Ex∣plication, was, concerning the Cause of that diversity we see in Maps of the same Object, as to their bigness, why some of them are larger, and others less: For the same Sur∣face of the Earth, and all Terrestrial Bodies, such as Coun∣tries, Cities, Houses, &c. may be represented in a large, or in a little Map. The reason of this is one of these two, 1. The farther the Eye is remov'd from the Object, it ap∣pears so much less, and therefore its representation ought to be so too. But in this case we suppose the transparent Plan, or Glass, to continue in the same situation which it had before the Eye went farther off. For, Secondly, The nigher that the Plan approaches to the Eye, it makes the Object appear less, and when it is remov'd from the Eye towards the Object, (though the Eye continue still at the same distance from the Object) it appears greater. But how far soever the Eye retires from the Object, (the Table or Plan continuing in the same place) the Fi∣gure shall not alter, if it go backwards in the same strait Line; that is, if it continue to be in any part of that strait Line produc'd, which past betwixt it, and the Cen∣ter of the Earth, before it remov'd farther off: The Fi∣gure of the Earth, in that case, does not alter, its big∣ness indeed is diminished, but the likeness continues, and all the difference is, that the one Map is larger, the other less. Just so, if the Table be brought nigher to the Eye, or remov'd farther from it, towards the Object, observing still a position Parallel, to that which it had before, the Projections or Maps of the Object upon the Plan shall be some of them larger, others less, but the several parts shall have a like situation, one in respect of another, in all of them. But if the Table receive a different Position from what it had before, or if the Eye goes off from that strait Line which past betwixt it and the middle of the Object, then the Figures, or Representations of the Object, shall not be like one another; and, besides the diversity of their bigness, the places shall be situated otherways in one Map, than they are in another. In the projection of all kinds of Bodies, as also in that of the Surface of the Earth, they use to place the Table or Plan so, that it toucheth the Body or Surface which they design to represent in that Point of it, upon which a Per∣pendicular Line drawn from the Eye to the Surface falls; and for the making a lesser or greater Figure, the Eye is suppos'd to be more or less remov'd from the Object. Having premis'd these things concerning the Projection of the Earth, and the origine of Geographical Maps, we shall shew the way and method they take to make them. But it may first be justly examin'd, Whether Maps ought at all to be made according to the Laws of Perspective, or if another way may be taken as convenient and fit, as that is, for representing the situation of the several Parts of the Earth; for if that be well done, it matters not whether the Laws of Perspective be observ'd or not. In answer to this we say, That though the Maps of some small Province may, and often are made another way than by the Rules
of Perspective, viz. from the Angles of Position, or by taking the Distances of places from one another, yet there is no method more convenient and proper then that of Perspective for making a Map of the whole Earth, or of any great part of it; although the true situation of places, and their distance from each other be not there∣by exactly observ'd. For in the making of Maps, a respect ought to be had to these three things: 1. That all the places of the Map may have such a situation and distance from the Aequator, its Parallels, and the Meridians, as they have truly in the Earth it self. For unless this be done, we cannot know by the Map the Parallel of each particular place, nor consequent∣ly its distance from the Aequator, from the Pole, its Zone or Climate, &c. and our understanding, many properties of Countries, such as their degrees of heat and cold, and the production of various fruits and commodities in them, as well as the different heavenly appearances depends upon our knowledge of those. 2. That the Representations of the several Countries may bear the same proportion to one another, as the Countries themselves do upon the Surface of the Earth. 3. That each place in the Map may have such a situation and distance from one another as they have truly in the Earth. Maps ought to be exact in the first of these, and for the most part they are so; because the situation of places upon the Map in this respect, is taken from Tables of Lon∣gitude and Latitude; nor does this clash with the Rules of Perspective. But if Maps be made according to the Laws of Perspective, they cannot exactly fulfil the second thing which was requir'd, viz. the proportional bigness of Coun∣tries; because the remoter parts of the curve Surface of the Earth make a lesser Image or Representation of them∣selves in the Glass or Plan interpos'd betwixt them and the Eye, then those parts of it do which lye directly un∣derneath the Eye. Yet this difference becomes so little, that it is unperceivable, when the Eye is conceiv'd to be remov'd at an infinite distance from the Earth. As to the third thing, to wit, the Distance of Places from each o∣ther; this cannot be had in any Map of the whole Earth, or of any very great part of it, such as those of Europe, Asia, &c. though Maps of small Countries may perform it pretty well. We must remember, that in all Universal Maps what∣soever, the middle Point of the Map represents the place that is suppos'd in the projection of it, to be directly un∣der the Spectator's Eye; so that we must conceive the Eye directly above that place, and that it vieweth all the others round about from it. This is true likewise in many parti∣cular Maps, though not in all. Different Maps, or Representations of the Earth, may be made, as we hinted above, according to the different situation of the Eye, in respect of it; but we shall only show the method that is commonly taken to make them, supposing the Eye to be in the Plan of the Aequator; because this sort of Maps are fitter to represent the Sur∣face of the Earth, and are also more frequently made then any other. Let us conceive then the Surface of the Earth divided into two Hemispheres by the first Meridian; these two Hemispheres are to be represented in two Plans or Maps. The Eye is suppos'd to be plac'd in that Point of the Ae∣quator which is every way 90 deg. distant from the first Meridian. The Plan of this first Meridian is the Table upon which the Representation is to be drawn, and that Hemisphere of the Earths Surface, which is below this transparent Table in respect of the Eye, is to be repre∣sented upon it. All this being suppos'd, a strait Line passing through the middle of the Map, at an equal di∣stance from each Pole, shall represent the Semicircle of the Aequator; and another strait Line cutting the Aequator at right Angles, shall represent that Meridian which is 90 deg. distant from the first. But all the other Meridians, the Ecliptick, and all the Parallels of the Aequator, are represented by Arches of Circles. The reason of repre∣senting these by portions of Circles, is to be had from the Conick Sections; and is to nice too be explain'd in this place. The way of describing it on Paper is this; Take a Point E for the Center, upon this describe a Circle a b c d, large or little, according as you design your Map should be. This Circle represents the first Meridian, and that which is over against it: for if you draw the Diameter B D, it shall divide the Circle A B C D into two halfs, one of which B a d, represents the first Meridian, and the other B c d, the opposite one, or that of 180 deg. Longitude, the Diameter B D represents the Meridian that is 90 deg. distant from the first; and its Point B is one Pole, viz. the Northern, and D the South-Pole; but the Diameter A C, which is Perpendicular to B D, re∣presents the Aequator. Divide the Quadrants A B, B c, C D, D a, each of them into 90 deg. or 90 equal parts. Then to find the Arches of the other Meridians and Pa∣rallels do thus; first, the Line of the Aequator A C must be divided into 180 deg. because this Line repre∣sents only one half of the Aequator. To divide it, draw strait Lines from the Point D to every deg. or equal part of the Semicircle a b c, or lay a Ruler at the Point D, and at every deg. of a b c successively: This Ruler, or the strait Lines describ'd by it, shall cut the Line of the Aequator into 180 parts, which shall represent the degrees of Longitude; and therefore the number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. ought to be writ over them, beginning from the first Meridian D A B. Arches of Circles are to be describ'd passing through each of these Points and the two Poles, which Circles shall represent the several Meri∣dians. The Centers of all these Circles are somewhere in the Line A C; and you may find them thus by the first Proposition of the Third Book of Euclid. Bisect the Lines B 1, B 2, B 3, &c. by Perpendiculars; the Points of the Line a c, protracted if need be, upon which these Perpendiculars do fall, are the Centers of the several Circles. But the Center of the Circles, B 91 D, B 92 D, &c. are in E A, protracted if need be. There is yet another way easier and fitter for practice than this is, viz. from B. draw strait Lines through every de∣gree of the Quadrants B A, B C, to A C protracted, which shall fall upon the Points a b c d e f, &c. so i, a, shall be the Diameter of that Meridian which is to pass through 1, and 2 b, the Diameter of that which passeth through 2, and so of the rest; bisect these Lines then, and you shall have the Center of the Meridians which are to be described. For drawing the Arches of the Parallels, the Meridian D B must be divided into degrees just as the Aequator was, viz. by drawing blank Lines from C to every de∣gree of the Semicircle D a B. It may also be done with greater ease, by transferring the same parts from E A to E B, viz. having open'd your Compasses to the Di∣stance that is from A to 20 or 30 upon the Aequator, keep them in the same extent till you mark upon B E the like Distance from B towards E, this shall give you the Point of B E, where the Arch of the Parallel of 70 or 60 degrees is to cut the Meridian of 90. The Line E B being thus divided into parts, we must draw Ar∣ches of Circles through each of these parts and their correspondent degrees in the Quadrants A B, C D. And the like must be done on the other side of the Aequa∣tor towards B. Thus we may have the Parallels, the Tropicks and Polar Circles, as we had the Meridians be∣fore. For the most part they project the Ecliptick, so that its Intersection with the Aequator falls upon the Point a, where the first Meridian cuts the Aequator; and in that case its Projection is an Arch of a Circle. Two of the Points through which this Circle passeth, are a c, where it cuts the Aequator and the third Point, through which it passeth, is that in which the Meridian of 90 degrees cuts the Tropicks of Cancer and of Ca∣pricorn.
geometric diagram To inscribe places in the Map, you must excerpt their Longitude and Latitude from Tables made by observation, and the Point where the Parallel of the places Latitude cuts the Meridian of its Longitude, is the Point of the Map representing that place, and the name of the places should be writ over it. And so of the rest, till the Map be finisht. The Advantages of this sort of Maps are these two. 1. They represent most conveniently the Hemisphere be∣twixt the two Poles. 2. They give the Latitude and Longitude of each place, its Distance from the Aequator and from the Poles, the very same almost which the places themselves have upon the Surface of the Earth. Its defects are, 1. That the degrees of the Aequator are unequal, being greater the nigher they come to the first Meridian D a b, or its opposite B c d, and less to∣wards the middle; and upon this account also Countries which are really equal in extent on the Earth it self, are represented as unequal; for the Countries about E are made less, and these about A and C, and also those which are near the Poles B, D, are made greater than they ought to be in a just proportion. 2. The situation of one place in respect of another, cannot well be had from these Maps, nor the Distance of any two places from each other. What hath been said may suffice, concerning the Con∣struction of Universal Maps; we shall also show the way of making particular ones, and conclude this Chapter. The parts of the Earth which we would represent on a Map, are either small or great. Europe, Asia, Africa and America must be delineated the same way as we take for Universal Maps. Africa and America, because the Aequator passeth through them, are best represented by supposing the Eye of the Spectator plac'd in that Point of the Plan of the Aequator, which is directly above the mid∣dle of the Country, or which is equally remov'd from the two Meridians that bound it. But for Europe and Asia, it is more convenient to place the Eye in a Point of the Plan of the Meridian that passeth through the middle of these two parts of the World, which Point should be at an equal distance from the place that hath the greatest Latitude, and that which hath the least. The most con∣venient way to represent the Frigid Zones, is by placing the Eye at the Pole. First then, a strait Line must be drawn to represent the Meridian of the place, above which we suppose the Eye of the Spectator is directly fixt; this you must di∣vide into degrees, the same way as was shown above; af∣terwards from the Tables of Latitude you must take the Latitude of the two Parallels wihich bound and limit the Country that is to be represented, the one towards the South, the other to the North. The Latitude of these two Parallel Lines must be marked upon the Meridian, and two strait Lines passing through the degrees which were marked, being drawn Perpendicular to the Meridian, shall
represent them. Lastly, The remaining Parallels and Me∣ridians are to be drawn through each degree of these al∣ready set down, and the places are then to be inscribed. Thus the Map is compleated. But Artificers use another method in the making of Maps, when the Countries are not quite so large as in the Maps of Britain, France, or Spain, &c. In these they draw first a Line along the side of the Map, which repre∣sents the Parallel that bounds the Country towards the Aequator. This Line is divided into so many equal parts, as the Country on that hand, viz. towards the Aequator, hath degrees of Longitude. Then from the middle of this Line is a Perpendicular raised, which must also be divided into so many parts as there are degrees of Latitude, betwixt that part of the Country which is nighest the Aequator, and that which is next the Pole: At the end of this last Line draw another Perpendicular to it, or Pa∣rallel with the first. This must also be divided into as many degrees of Longitude as the first had, and they may be made equal to what they were in the first Line, if their Latitudes are at no great distance from the Aequa∣tor, or from each other. But if one of them is very far distant from the Aequator, and the other much nigher to it, the parts or degrees of that Parallel which is fur∣thest off, must not be taken equal to these of the other, but they ought to be less in proportion, as the one Pa∣rallel is nigher the Pole than the other. And this propor∣tion of the Aequator, and its Parallels, may be had from the Table which is set down in the end of the next Chap∣ter. After that parts are thus taken in the uppermost and lowermost Lines to represent the degrees of Longitude, strait Lines ought to be drawn through the beginning and end of these parts or degrees, which have the same num∣ber or denomination. These strait Lines shall represent the Meridians. Again, The remaining Parallels are Lines drawn through the several degrees of that Meridian in the middle of the Map, and their correspondent ones, or these of the same number and name, in the side Lines. Lastly, The places are to be inscribed at these Points, where the Meridian of Longitude, and the Parallel of the Latitude of each place meets. So shall the Map of the Country be perfected. There is yet another way that is commonly taken to make Maps of small Provinces, which gives the situation of places and their distances, much more exactly than the preceding. It consists in this, that we find by Mathe∣matical Instruments the Angles of the Position of one place in respect of others, which we afterwards describe upon Paper. For instance; Let there be five places, such as A, B, C, D, E, whose situation and distance is to be re∣presented. First take A, or such a one as you may see either all the others, or most of them conveniently from it; placing the Instrument at A, observe the Angles of its Position in respect of the rest, or the Angles intercepted betwixt the Meridian of the place where you stand, and the Lines which pass from you to each of the other places B, C, D, E. We may take any Point of the Paper or Plan upon which we would represent these places, to signifie the place A. Upon it, as the Center, describe a Circle, and drawing two Diameters, the one Perpendicular to the o∣ther, you may assume one of them F A G for the Meri∣dian of the place A, and the other H A K shall point to the East and West; let H then be East, and K the West, F the North, G the South. Let the Angle of Position of B to A be observ'd to be 30 degrees from the South to the Eastward, we must take off so many degrees in the Qua∣drant G H, and draw a Line from A through that degree. This shall represent the Quarter of the World in which B lieth in respect of A. The same way are the Quarters of the other places C, D, E, to be noted down after they are once observ'd. Afterwards you must remove with your Instrument from A to any of the other places B, C, D, or E, but you must know the distance betwixt A and the place you choose to go to. Then from B, if that be the place you have gone to, observe with your Instrument the situation or quarter of the other places in respect of it, as you did before in respect of the Meridian of A. When all this is done, geometric diagram a Scale of Miles, larger or less, according as you design your Map should be, ought to be set down in the corner of the Map. The Line that was drawn from A towards B, must be produced so far, that it may contain just so many parts of the Scale as there were Miles betwixt A and B; and B is to be plac'd precisely at the end of that Line so far produc'd. Again, at B draw a Line Parallel to the Meri∣dian of A, this shall represent the Meridian of B. More∣over, describe a Circle upon B as the Center, and draw Lines from it, making such Angles with the Meridian of B, as the places C, D, E, had been observ'd to do. These when produc'd shall cut somewhere the Lines which had been drawn from A; and the Town or place must be mark'd down where the Intersection of the Lines falleth. And you are to do the same how many places soever there are. CHAP. VII. Shewing the Ʋse of Globes and Maps. Problem I. To find out the Longitude and Latitude of a given Place in the Terrestrial Globe. TURN the given place to the brazen Meridian, (meaning still its Eastern side, marked with Numbers, and divided into Degrees) and that Degree of the Aequator which shall be then found under the Meridian, with whatsoever number it is noted, is the Longitude sought for; then you must com∣pute in the brazen Meridian from the Aequator, as far as the given Place, the Degrees of Latitude, which will be Northern, if the given Place lye North-ward from the Ae∣quator, or Southern, if it lye to the South-ward. Problem II. The Longitude and Latitude being given, to find the Place in the Terrestrial Globe to which they be∣long. Seek for the Degree of the given Longitude in the Ae∣quator, and apply it to the brazen Meridian; then count from the Aequator on the Meridian, the Degrees of the given Latitude, toward the Arctick, or Antarctick Pole, ac∣cording
as the Latitude it self is either Northern or South∣ern, and the Point whereon the Reckoning ends, is the Place sought for. Problem III. How to fit both the Globes to a given La∣titude, or Elevation of the Pole; also to apply the Quadrant of Altitude to the Vertical Point; lastly, to adjust the Globes, with the help of the Mariners Compass, to the four Quarters of the World. If the given Latitude of the Place be Northern, let the Arctick Pole be Elevated above the Horizon; if Southern, the Antarctick. Then from the Pole thus Elevated to∣ward the Horizon, count the Degrees of the given Ele∣vation of the Pole in the Meridian, and joyn the Point where the Numeration ends, to the Horizon; so the Globe will be adapted to the given Elevation of the Pole. After∣ward, from the Aequator, reckon upwards the Degrees of the given Latitude (which is always equal to the Eleva∣tion of the Pole) and the Point in which the counting ends, will be the Vertical or Zenith of the given Place. Therefore fix the Quadrant of Altitude, with its little Skrew, to this Point of the Meridian, so that the edge of it which is divided into Degrees, may answer to the said Point. Lastly, the Mariner's Compass being set on the Pedestal of the Globe, the Magnetick Needle will direct the Eye of the Operator towards the Cardinal Points of South and North; and with his hand he may turn about the wooden Horizon, until the brazen Meridian become Pa∣rallel to the Needle, and the Southern part of the wooden Horizon may look toward the real South of the place; by that means the other Quarters of the Globe will be con∣formable to those of the World. Moreover, care must be taken that the Plan on which the Globe stands, be Paral∣lel to the Horizon, that so the wooden Horizon may agree with the true Horizon of the place. Problem IV. To find the Degree or Place which the Sun holds in the Ecliptick, upon a given Day, with the help of the Calendar, and annexed Circle of Signs. Seek for the given Month and Day in the wooden Ho∣rizon (observing always the difference between the Julian and Gregorian Calendars,) then over against the Day, that you have found, in the innermost Circle, which is that of the Signs, you will find the Degree and Sign, in which the Sun is that Day; afterward, in the Ecliptick, which is delineated on the Surface of the Globe, first seek for the Sign even now discovered, and in that Sign the degree of the Sun. Though this method be good enough for com∣mon use, because it gives the place of the Sun in the Eclip∣tick pretty near, yet it is not perfectly exact and just; for the Sun finisheth his Period through the Ecliptick once a Year, or in 365 Days, 6 Hours. Now the Ecliptick being divided into 360 Parts or Degrees, its plain there is not a Degree for each Day, but only 59 Minutes, 8 Seconds. Whereas a Degree is commonly assum'd for one Day, espe∣cially when the number of the given Day is not great, and much exactness is not desir'd. But when we would know the precise place of the Sun, we must seek it either in an Ephemeris, or by Calculation and Tables. Problem V. To find out the right Ascension and Declina∣tion of the Sun, or of any given Star, and thence to fit the Horary Index to the Twelfth Hour. Apply the Degree of the Ecliptick, in which you have found the Sun to be by the preceding Problem, to the Meridian, and note the Degree of the Equinoctial, which lies under the Meridian, for that is the right Ascension of the Sun. Then compute on the Meridian, from the Equi∣noctial to the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, and the number of Degrees so found, is the Declination of the Sun, either Northern or Southern, accordingly as the Sun hath departed from the Equinoctial toward the Artick, or An∣tarctick Pole. But whilst the place of the Sun is under the Meridian, set the Horary Index to the Twelfth Hour at Noon. After the same manner you may apply the place of any fixed Star to the Meridian, and the culminating de∣gree of the Equinoctial will be the right Ascension of the Star; but the distance between the same sixed Star, and the Equinoctial, is its Northern or Southern Declina∣tion. Problem VI. How to observe the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, or of a given fixed Star, with a Quadrant, or other like Instrument. When the Sun is enter'd into the Meridian (which you may know by observing when he hath the least or shortest shadow) lift up one side of your Quadrant, viz. that which is furnish'd with sights, so that the Sun-beam may fall thro' the little hole of the sight that is nearest the Center, into the hole of the other sight, and the Perpendicular, or Plumb-Line, which ought to play freely all the while, will cut a degree on the Limb of the Quadrant, which you must note down; for the Arch contain'd betwixt the side of the Quadrant, which hath no sights, and the Plumb-Line, or that Degree which it cuts, is the sought-for Altitude of the Sun. But the space from the side of the Quadrant, fur∣nish'd with sights to the Plumb-Line, is the distance of the Sun from the Vertical Point. The Altitude of the fixed Stars is taken after the same manner, with this only diffe∣rence, That the beam of a Star not being so lucid and daz∣ling as that of the Sun, it may, and must be receiv'd thro' both sights by the Eye. Problem VII. The Declination and Meridian Altitude of the Sun, or of any fixed Star being given, to find the Lati∣tude of the Place, or the Elevation of the Pole. Substract the Altitude of the Culminating Star from 90 Degrees, and their remains its distance from the Vertical Point. Then in case the Star appears above the Equi∣noctial, add to its distance from the Vertical Point its Declination: But if the Culminating Star is below the E∣quinoctial, substract its Declination out of its distance from the Vertical Point, and the sum or difference is the sought for Latitude of the place to which the Elevation of the Pole is always equal. Problem VIII. The right Ascension of the Sun, and that of a fixed Star being given, to find the time of the Culmina∣tion of the same fixed Star. Substract the right Ascension of the Sun from the right Ascension of the fix'd Star (adding to this last, when it is less than the former, 360 Degrees) so the difference will be an Arch of the Equator, which hath pass'd from Noon-tide to the time of the Culminating of the Star. You may turn this Arch into Time, by dividing the Degrees of it by 15, and the Quotient will give the Hours. Then mul∣tiplying the Degrees remaining, after the Division by 4, and the Product gives you Minutes of time. But if there be Minutes adhering to the Degrees, they must be in like manner divided by 15, and the Quotient will still produce Minutes of Time. Again, if you multiply the Minutes left, after the Division, by 4, you will have the Seconds of Time. Thus the whole Time, consisting of Hours, Minutes, and Seconds, computed from Noon-tide, shows the very Moment of the Culmination. Problem IX. The Place of the Sun, or of any fixed Star being given, to find its oblique Ascension and Descension; also its ortive and occasive Amplitude. Bring the given place of the Sun or Star to the Eastern Horizon, and mark well the Degree of the Equator, that ascends together with it; for that Degree is call'd the ob∣lique Ascension of the Sun or Star. Then an Arch of the Horizon from the Cardinal-Point of the East, which is the Intersection of the Aequator and Horizon, to the place of the Sun, or fix'd Star, is the Ortive Amplitude of the said Star. But if the same place of the Sun or Star be brought to the Western Horizon, the Degree of the Aequator de∣scending together with it, will be the oblique Descension of the Sun or Star. And an Arch of the Horizon from the Cardinal Point of the West, i. e. the other Intersection of the Aequator and Horizon, to the setting Star, is the oc∣casive Amplitude of the Sun or Star.
Problem X. The right and oblique Ascensions of the Sun, and of any fixed Star being given, to find out their half stay, or continuance above or below the Horizon; also, the length of the Day and of the Night, together with the Hours of the rising and setting of the Sun. Substract the right Ascension of the given Star from the oblique, or the oblique from the right, according as either of them is greater or lesser; and that which remains is the Ascensional difference. This you may turn into Time, by the method which was used in the 8th. Problem: Then if the Star declines toward the Elevated Pole, you must add this Time, into which the Ascensional difference was con∣verted, to six Hours; but if the said Star declines toward the depressed Pole, you must Subtract it from six Hours, and the Sum gives you the half of that time the Star stays above the Horizon in the first case; and the difference, or re∣mainder, is the half of the time it stays above the Horizon in the second case. Also, the complement of either of these to Twelve Hours, is the half of the time the Star con∣tinues below the Horizon. If the half of the time of the Sun's continuance above the Horizon be reckon'd from Noon-tide, it gives the Hour of Sun-set; and half the time that the same Luminary continues below the Horizon, being computed from Mid-night, gives the Hour of Sun-rising. Moreover, double half the Time the Sun stays above the Horizon, and you have the length of the Day; double his half continuance below the Horizon, and its the length of the Night. But if you adjust the Horary Index to the 12th. Hour, when the place of the Sun is under the Meridian, and then bring the said place of the Sun to the Eastern Ho∣rizon; the Index will shew the Hour of Sun-rising: again, when the same place of the Sun is applied to the Western Horizon, the Index will point at the hour of Sun-set. Problem XI. The time of the Culmination of a Star, and half the time it continues above the Horizon being given, to find the hour of the Rising and Setting of the same Star. If from the time of Culminating found out by the 8th Problem, you subtract half the time of the Stars continu∣ance above the Horizon, you will have the hour of the ri∣sing of the Star; and by adding to the same time of the Stars Culmination its half stay above the Horizon, you have the hour of its setting, to be computed on both sides from Noon-tide. And if you apply the horary Index to the 12th hour of Noon-tide, when the place of the Sun culminates, and then bring the given Star to the Eastern or Western Horizon, the Index will shew the hour of the rising and setting of the Star. Problem XII. To find the degree of the Ecliptick, which riseth or setteth with a given Star, and from thence to disco∣ver the Cosmical and Acronycal rising and setting of a Star. A Star is said to rise Cosmically when it riseth with the Sun, or with the degree of the Ecliptick in which the Sun then is. The Cosmical setting of a Star, is when it setteth in the Morning, or goeth down under the West Horizon at such time as the Sun is rising in the East. A Star is said to rise Acronically when it riseth in the East-Horizon, as the Sun setteth or goeth down in the West. The Acronical Setting is when a Star goeth down, or set∣teth under the West-Horizon with the Sun. Bring the given Star to the Eastern or Western Horizon, and note the degree of the Ecliptick that riseth or sets to∣gether with it. Then in the Wooden Horizon seek for that Sign and Degree which you had observ'd to rise or set with the Star, and over against the degree rising to∣gether with it, you will find either in the Julian or Grego∣rian Calendar, the day of the Cosmical rising of the Star. And if in the same Wooden Horizon you seek the degree directly opposite to that which rose with the Star, you will find in the Calendar over against it, the Month and Day of the Cosmical Setting of that Star. And over a∣gainst the degree of the Ecliptick that setteth with the Star, you will find the day of its Acronical setting. Lastly, the degree of the Ecliptick, opposite to that which sets with the Star, hath over against it in the Calendar the day of its Acronical rising. Problem XIII. The Latitude of a place, and the Degree of the Ecliptick, which riseth or sets together with a Star be∣ing given, to find its Heliacal rising and setting. The Heliacal rising of a Star is when it comes to be at so great a distance from the Sun, that it is now conspicu∣ous, whereas before it was hid under the Sun-beams. The Heliacal setting of a Star is when it hath approacht so near the Sun that his Beams hide it, and hinder it from being seen. Bring the given Star to the Eastern Horizon, and turn about the Quadrant of Altitude on the Western Quartern, until the 12th Degree of it, (if the Star be of the first Magnitude) meet with the Ecliptick, then mark this De∣gree of the Ecliptick which the Quadrant cuts; for, when the Star riseth, that Point of the Ecliptick is 12 Degrees above the Western Horizon, and therefore at the very same moment the opposite Degree of the Ecliptick is depress'd 12 Degrees below the Eastern Horizon; and if you seek for this Degree in the Wooden Horizon, you will find over against it the Day of the Heliacal rising of the Star, viz. in which it begins to get up out of the Sun-beams. But in case that Star is of the second Magnitude, it would be expedient to observe the Degree of the Ecliptick, which is depress'd 13 degrees below the Horizon; for a Star of the third Magnitude, the depression of the 14th Degree is requisite, and so of the rest successively. On the other hand, if you would know the Heliacal setting of a Star, you must bring the Star it self to the Western Horizon, and turn about the Quadrant of Altitude on the Eastern Quarter, until the twelfth or thirteenth Degree of it, ac∣cording as the Star may be of the first or second Magnitude, meets with the Ecliptick, then you must note carefully the Degree of the Ecliptick which the Quadrant cuts, for the Degree opposite thereto is depress'd as far below the Western Horizon, as this is elevated above the Eastern; afterwards look in the Wooden Horizon, for this degree of the Ecliptick, and you will see over against it, the Day of the Heliacal setting of the Star. These two Problems we have inserted for the sake of some Passages of the ancient Poets, where they speak of these Risings and Settings, and express time by them. Problem XIV. The Latitude of any place, and the place of the Sun being given, to find the beginning and end of the Morning and Evening Twilight. Problem XIV. Having adjusted the Globe to the Lati∣tude of the given place by Prob. III. and set the Horary Index at the 12th hour, when the place of the Sun is in the Meridian; then having brought the degree of the Ecliptick, which is opposite to the place of the Sun, to the Western Quarter, turn the Globe with one hand, and with the other bring about the Quadrant of Altitude, un∣til the Degree opposite to the Sun meet with the 18th degree of the Quadrant, and the Index will point at the hour of the beginning of Morning Twilight. But if you bring the Degree opposite to the Sun to the Eastern Quar∣ter, and there cause it to meet with the 18th Degree of the Quadrant, the Index will shew the hour wherein the Evening Twilight ends. Problem XV. The Latitude of the place, and the place of the Sun being given, if besides one of these three things be gi∣ven, viz. the Hour of the Day or Night, the Altitude and the Azimuth of the Sun or Star, to find out the other two. Adjust the Globe to the Latitude of the given place, at the same time applying the place of the Sun to the Meri∣dian, and the Index to the 12th hour. Then if the hour be given set the Index, by turning the Globe, to the given hour, and having fix'd the Globe in that situation, bring the Quadrant to the place of the Sun or Star; and on the edge of the Quadrant you will have the sought for Alti∣tude: But at the foot of the Quadrant is the Azimuth of the Sun or Star to be counted from the Intersection of the Meridian and Horizon, either Southern or Northern, to the very foot of the Quadrant. Again, If the Altitude be gi∣ven, you must roll the Globe with one hand, and turn a∣bout the Quadrant with the other, until the place of the Sun or Star meet with the given Degree of Altitude in the
Quadrant; then the Index will shew the Hour, and the foot o the Quadrant the Azimuth. Lastly, The Azimuth be∣ing given, joyn the foot of the Quadrant with the given Azimuth, and turn about the Globe until the place of the Sun or Star arrive at the side of the Quadrant mark'd with Degrees: Then the Sun or Star will shew its Altitude in the Quadrant, and the Index the hour. Problem XVI. To find out the Distance and Angle of Po∣sition of two given places in the Terrestrial Globe. Let us call for distinctions sake one of the given places the first, and the other the second. Having then found out the Latitude of the first place by Prob. I. adjust the Globe to the Latitude, and turn the first place to the Me∣ridian. Afterward, having fixed the Globe in that situa∣tion, and the Quadrant of Altitude to the Vertical Point (where the first place shall be then found) apply the Qua∣drant to the second place. Then you may reckon the De∣grees of Distance from the Vertical Point, or from the first place to the second place; as also the Angle of Position on the Horizon between the Meridian and the foot of the Quadrant. Poblem XVII. The time and the place being given, to erect a Scheme of the Heavens. Having adjusted the Celestial Globe (or for want there∣of the Terrestrial) to the Latitude of the given place, bring the place of the Sun, already found from the given time, to the Meridian, and the Index to the twelfth hour; then turn about the Globe until the Index Point at the gi∣ven hour: or if you intend to do it more accurately, to the right Ascension of the Sun found out by Prob. V. add as many Degrees as answer to the Hours and Minutes that have pass'd since Noontide, by computing 15 degrees for every hour, and one degree for four horary minutes, cast∣ing away, if necessity require, 360 degrees. This gives you the right Ascension of the Degree of the Equinoctial culminating at the given moment of time, and so to be plac'd under the Meridian. Then fix the Semicircle of Positi∣on on the Cardinal Points of South and North: afterward from the culminating Degree of the Aequator, reckon 30 deg. towards the East, make the Semicircle of Position pass thro' this 30th degree, and observe wherein it cuts the Eclip∣tick, for this is called the Eleventh House, which you may set down in Paper. Again, set the Semicircle of Position on the 60th degree of the Equinoctial from the culmina∣ting Point, and mark the degree of the Intersection of the Ecliptick, so you shall have the Cusp of the Twelfth House, to be noted likewise on Paper. Afterwards, having turn'd the Semicircle of Position to the Western quarter, compute 30 degrees from the culminating Point of the Aequator toward the West, and through the Point of the Aequator, where the numbering ends, draw the Semicircle of Position, which in the place where it cuts the Ecliptick, shews the Cusp of the Ninth House. Lastly, the Semicircle of Position, drawn through the 60 degree of the Aequator from the Meridian, shews in the Ecliptick the extremity of the Eight House. Moreover, the Meridian it self cuts the Ecliptick in the Cusp of the Tenth House, and the Eastern Horison in its Point of Intersection with the Ecliptick, shows the Cusp of the First House, which is call'd the As∣cendant and Horoscope. In like manner the Western Ho∣rizon cuts the Ecliptick in the Cusp of the Seventh House, which as it is Diametrically opposite to the first, so is the second opposite to the eighth, the third to the ninth, the fourth to the tenth, the fifth to the eleventh, and the sixth to the twelfth. Problem XVIII. To find by the Globe where the Antaeci, Periaeci, and Antipodes of any given place are. Bring the place to the brass Meridian, and beginning at the Aequator, count on the other side of it so many degrees of the Meridian as are intercepted betwixt the Aequator and the given Place. The Point where your num∣bering ends is the place of the Antaeci. Again, Set the Index to the Fig. XII. of the Horary Circle, and consider what Point of the Meridian is direct∣ly over the given place, and also that which is over its Antaci. Then turn the Globe about, till the Index Point at the Fig. XII. opposite to that where it was first set. The place of the Globe that hath come to the same Point of the Meridian, under which the given place was before, is the place of its Periaeci, and the place of the Antipodes is now under the other Point of the Meridian, viz. that where the Antaeci were at first. We have thought fit here to insert a more particular ac∣count of the Properties of the Antaeci, Periaeci, and Anti∣podes, compar'd with one another, then was given in the fourth Chapter, where these words were defin'd, the Antaeci, who live under the same Meridian, but opposite Parallels, have. 1. Noon and midnight together, and count their hours the same way, so that when it is eight or nine a Clock in one of the places, it's the same hour in the other also. In saying this however, we suppose that both divide their time into equal hours. 2. Their Seasons of the Year are contrary; so the Spring of the one is the Harvest of the other; the Sum∣mer of the one the Winter of the other. 3. The Days of the one are equal in length to the Nights of the other. And the Nights of this place to the Days of that in the same time. 4. As the Days of the one increase to the longest, the Days of the other decrease to the shortest; for they have the opposite Days of the Calender equal. So the 10th of April hath neither more nor fewer hours in the one place, then the 10th of October hath in the other. 5. In the time of the Equinoxes the Sun riseth and setteth to them both at the same moment, but in the rest of the Year he riseth sooner, and setteth later to the one then to the other. Moreover, in every hour and moment of these two days of the Equinox, viz. the 11th of March and 13th of September, the Sun hath an equal Altitude above the Horizons of both places; but in the other days of the Year, he riseth higher above the Horizon of the one then of the other. 6. If the Inhabitants of these two places look with with their faces to each other, or both toward the Aequa∣tor; the Sun and all the Stars shall seem to rise on the right and to set on the left hand of the one, when they rise on the left, and set on the right of the other. 7. Each hath a different Pole elevated above the Hori∣zon; but the Elevation is equal in both places. 8. The Stars that never set in the one place, do never appear in the other. The Periaeci, or they who dwell under the same Parallel, but opposite Meridians, have 1. Every Day and Night of the Year equal; not that following Days or Nights are still equal in length to the preceding of the same place; for that is true only of places lying under the Equinoctial, but the Day of the Peo∣ple who live under one Meridian, is equal to that same Day in the place under the opposite Meridian, and as the Days or Nights of the one increase or decrease, these of the o∣ther do it also. Moreover, all the Stars stay an equal time above both their Horizons: The Stars that never rise to the one, do not appear to the other; and these which ne∣ver set to the one, do constantly shine upon the other. The Sun and the Stars rise and set to both in the same quarter of the World, and in an equal space of time they rise alike high above, and descend equally below their Ho∣rizons. The same Pole is alike elevated, and the other e∣qually depressed to both. If they turn their face to the Equator, or to the same Pole, the Stars shall rise and set on the same side of the one as of the other. They have the Seasons of the Year, viz. the Spring, Summer, Harvest, and Winter together. 2. They count the Hours the same way, i. e. give them the same names; for when it is 9 or 12 a Clock in the one place, it's 9 or twelve in the other also; but they are directly opposite, for the one is 12 at Noon, the other 12 at Night; and therefore whilst the Inhabitants of the one do count 1, 2, 3, 4 hours, &c. from Midnight the other com∣pute 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. from Mid-day.
3. In the time of the Equinoxes, viz. on the 11th of of March and 13th of September, as the Sun sets in the one place, he riseth in the other; so the Day of the one is the Night of the other: But in that half of the Year, during which the Sun passeth through the Semicirce of the Ecliptick that lyes betwixt them and the Aequator, viz. in the Spring and Summer, he riseth in the one place before he quite sets in the other, and hereby they have part of Day together; for the Sun hath not entirely descended be∣low the Horizon of the one, when he appears above that of the other. Again, in the other half of the Year, viz. in Harvest and Winter, during which the Sun is in the re∣moter Semicircle of the Ecliptick beyond the Aequator, he sets below the Horizon of the one, some time before he appear to the other; and for this reason they have no part of Day, but only some of the Night, common to both; however, that common part is always the beginning of Night in the one, and the end of it in the other. 4. In like manner they both see these Stars which decline from the Aequator towards their elevated Pole, through the space of some hours or minutes together; for they appear to the one, whilst they they are not altogether set in the other place; and this they do so much longer or shorter while, according as the Star declines more or less from the Aequator towards the elevated Pole. On the contrary, they never see these Stars together and at the same time, which decline towards the depressed Pole; but some space inter∣venes betwixt their setting to the one, and rising to the other, which is greater or less, according as the Star de∣clines from the Aequator. And these Stars which continue always above the Horizon of their Antaeci, never appear to them. 5. A place lying West from one of them, is East from the other. The Antipodes, or those who live under opposite Paral∣lels and Meridians. 1. The Sun and the Stars rise to one of them at the same time that they set to the other, through all the days of the Year; for they have the same Horizon, though they live on different sides of it. On this account all the Day of the one is perpetually the Night of the other. 2. They have the opposite Days and Nights of the Year equal; so that the longest Day or Night in the one place is the shortest in the other. 3. They have contrary Seasons of the Year together, or at the same time, but the same Season in opposite times of the Year; viz. Winter of the one is the Summer of the other, and the Spring of the one the Harvest of the o∣ther. 4. The North Pole is equally elevated above the Hori∣zon of the one, as the South Pole is above that of the o∣ther; they are equally distant from the Aequator, but on different sides of it. 5. They give the same names to their hours, and count them together, but they are really opposite; for the Mid-day of the one, is the Mid-night of the other. 6. The Stars which appear continually above the Hori∣zon of the one, are never seen in the other. Also these which continue long above the Horizon of the one, stay but a little time in the other. 7. If they both turn their face to the Aequator, the Sun and Stars will rise on the right hand of the one, and on the left hand of the other. All these are perfectly manifest by looking on a Globe. Problem XIX. The Sun is only once a Year Vertical at Mid-day to those places of the Earth which lye directly in the Tropicks: but he is twice a Year Vertical to every part of the Torrid Zone, viz. on these two days which are equally distant from the longest; and he is never Vertical to any place which lyes out of the Torrid Zone, or beyond the Tropicks. For when the Sun is in the first Degree of Cancer, which happens upon the 11th of June, he describes by his Motion upon that Day, the Circle in the Heavens, which we call the Tropick of Cancer; but the Tropick of Cancer upon the Earth is just so many degrees distant from the Aequator of the Earth, as that same Tropick in the Heavens is distant from the Aequator there, and therefore the Tropick upon the Earth lyes directly under that of the Heavens. Wherefore the Sun will be Vertical that Day to these parts of the Earth which are in the Tropick of Can∣cer. Upon the 10th of December, or thereabouts, when the Sun hath enter'd Capricorn, the like will happen to these places which lye in the Tropick of Capricorn. And this falls out only once a Year to each Tropick, because the Sun describes the Tropicks of the Heaven only once a Year, viz. upon these two days. Again, That the Sun is twice every Year Vertical to every place lying in the Tor∣rid Zone. Let the place you have condescended on, be applied to the Meridian, as also a little pointed Chalk, then turn the Globe round that the Chalk may draw the Paral∣lel of the place which will cut the Ecliptick in two Points equally distant from the first Degree of Cancer, or the first Degree of Capricorn. When the Sun is in these two Points of the Ecliptick, (which he is upon two different days, one as he is going towards the first of Cancer, and the other as he returns from it) he will be Vertical to the given place, and to all the rest that have the same Latitude, or are under the same Parallel. For the Parallel which the Sun describeth on these days, will be directly above the Parallel of that place describ'd by the Chalk. And there∣fore upon these two das the Sun shall be Vertical to that place at Noon; neither is he Vertical to it upon any o∣ther day, because he declines from the Vertex of it, either to the South or North; and its Plain from his Diurnal Mo∣tion, that he can be Vertical to no place but at Mid-day. Again, That the Sun is never Vertical to places which lye without the Torrid Zone and the Tropicks, appears from this, That no Parallel of the Sun is directly over the Pa∣rallels of these places: And therefore the Sun is never Vertical to any place in the Temperate or Frigid Zones. Problem XX. To find the two Days of the Year in which the Sun is Vertical to any place of the Torrid Zone. Let the given place be applied to the brass Meridian, and observe the Degree of Latitude which is directly above it, or mark it with Chalk. Then turn the Globe round till first one, and then another Point of the Ecliptick come under the same Degree of the Meridian. Note these two Points of the Ecliptick, for upon the days when the Sun is in them, he will be Vertical to the given place. There∣fore find out the Days of the Year when the Sun is in these Points of the Ecliptick, which may be done thus; Look for the same Degrees of the Ecliptick upon the Wooden Horizon, and you will see the two Days of the Year when the Sun is in them, directly over against them, both in the Julian and Gregorian Calendars. This Problem may also be resolv'd by an Universal Map; for if through the given place a strait Line be drawn Pa∣rallel to the Aequator, or a Circular one describ'd on the Pole as its Center, when the Parallels of the Aequator in the Map are curve Lines; that Line will cut the Ecliptick in two Points; the Days in which the Sun is in these Points are these which were desir'd. But if you would solve this Problem without either Globe or Map, you must know the Latitude of the place. Having that, look to the Table of the Suns Declination from the Aequator, and observe the Days on which the Sun is just so far declin'd from it, as the Latitude of the place is. These, in which the Sun is so, will be the days whch the Problem requires. Note, Upon these two Days the very Center of the Sun is directly above the place, though for several Days before and after them, he seems still to be over it; because some part of the rest of his Body, which is very large, may be over it, or near by it when his Center hath past it, or is not yet come at it. Problem XXI. To find what Days the Sun shall constantly shine upon any place of the Frigid Zone, and what days he shall not appear; also the first and last of these Days. To do this first on the Globe: Let the given place be brought about to the Meridian, and the Pole elevated ac∣cording to its Latitude; then turn the Globe round, and mark the two Points of the Ecliptick which fall in direct∣ly
with the Horizon, upon each side of the Globe, and nei∣ther mount above it, nor descend below it. Of these two Degrees that which is betwixt the first of Aries, and the first of Cancer, will shew the first Day, upon which the Sun shall not set to the given place. And the other Point or Degree betwixt the first of Cancer, and the first of Li∣bra, will show the last Day of his shining on it. Upon these two Days the Sun glides along the Horizon, and is pro∣perly neither above nor below it, which must be under∣stood concerning the Center of the Sun; for the Body of it appears above notwithstanding. But all the time be∣twixt these two Days he shines constantly upon the place. Or you may do it thus: Reckon up so many Degrees from each side of the Aequator, upon the Meridian, as the place is distant from the Pole, and mark where they end. Then turn the Globe round, and consider what Points of the Ecliptick pass under these Degrees of the Meridian which you had mark'd; for these two which are near the begin∣ning of Cancer, and the Arch contain'd betwixt them shows the Days that the Sun shines constantly above the Horizon of the given place. The other Arch contain'd betwixt two Points, near the beginning of Capricorn, show the Days the Sun is absent from that place. All this is to be understood of a place in the North Frigid Zone. Upon Maps do it thus: Let the Distance of the given place from the Pole, or the Complement of its Latitude, be counted from the Aequator towards both Poles, upon the Line along the side of the Map; at the end of your numbering, on the side-line draw two Parallels to the Ae∣quator, according as your Map is, curvibineous or strait. They will cut the Ecliptick in two Points; two whereof show the first and last Day of the Suns presence. The Arch betwixt them the Days of his constant abode. The other two Points show the first and last Day of his ab∣sence; and the Arch betwixt them the whole time of his absence. What hath been said in this or the former Proposition, must be understood concerning the Center of the Sun, but if the Problem be made about the limb or exrremity of the Suns Body, we must take a place in the Map which is 15 minutes nearer to, or farther from the Aequator, or we must examine what Days answer to these Points of the Ecliptick, which such a part of the Suns Body possesseth. Besides this, allowance is likewise to be made for the Re∣fraction of the Sun-beams, which is very considerable in the Frigid Zones, and 'tis the cause why the Sun appears there sometimes several Days before he gets up to the Horizon, as also several Days after he hath set below it. Problem XXII. To find those Parts of the Earth to which the Sun shall be Vertical, upon any given Day. From the given Day find out the place of the Sun, ac∣cording to the Method of the Fourth Problem: Then to do it first on the Globe, let the Sun's place be brought to the Meridian, mark that Point in the Meridian which is di∣rectly above it; then turn the Globe round; all these places of the Earth which pass under that Point of the Meridian which you had marked, shall be directly under the Sun upon that Day at Noon. 2. On Maps do it thus: Mark the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, and draw a Parallel to the Aequator through it, which Parallel must be a strait or a crooked Line, according as the Map is: So all the places of this Parallel shall be these which are desir'd; only you must draw the parallel Line in each Hemisphere of the Map. Problem XXIII. A certain Day of the Year being given, to find the place of the Frigid Zone, where the Sun setteth not; so that the given Day be the first of his constant shining upon those parts; also, to find the places where the Sun riseth not, so that this Day be the first of his total absence. The given Day must be betwixt the 11th of March, and the 11th. of June, or betwixt the 11th of September, and the 11th of December: First then find out the Sun's place in the Ecliptick, upon the given Day; do the rest thus: 1. On a Globe; bring about the place of the Sun, which you had marked in the Ecliptick, to the Meridian; and count so many Degrees from the Pole towards the Aequa∣tor, as there are upon the Meridian, betwixt the Aequator and the Sun's place in the Ecliptick; mark with Chalk where the Numbering ends, or describe a Parallel at it. The Sun upon the given Day begins to shine constantly upon all the places that lye in this Parallel; and the same given Day is the first of his constant absence from the places that lye in a Parallel equally distant from the other Pole. To demonstrate the Truth of this Solution, raise the Pole according to the Latitude of the places found out, and then you will see that the Point of the Ecliptick which was marked, and in which the Sun then is, shall not set below the Horizon; but when the Sun is in these Points of the Ecliptick which are nigher to the Aequator, i. e. in all the Days that preceded this, he descends below the Hori∣zon of this place. Besides all the places which lye betwixt the Pole and that Parallel, have the Sun constantly with them, or through the whole 24 Hours of that Day; but it is not the first Day of his presence with them. In Maps, after you have marked the Sun's place in the Ecliptick, you must count its Declination from the Aequa∣tor, and then reckon as many Degrees from the Pole to∣wards the Aequator upon the Meridian, as the Sun's Decli∣nation from the Aequator contain'd. Draw a Parallel to the Aequator, through the Point where your numbering ends: All the places which lye in this Parallel in both He∣mispheres of the Map, answer the first Part of the Problem, and if another Parallel be drawn at an equal distance from the other Pole, the places in it agree to the second part of it. Problem XXIV. A place in the Globe, or its Latitude being given, as also the Day of the Year, to find how many Hours the Sun will continue above its Horizon upon that Day; and how many Hours under it, or how long the Day and Night of that place is upon such a Day of the Year. From the given Day find out the place of the Sun in the Ecliptick, and mark it; then raise the Pole according to the Latitude of the place, bring also the Degree which the Sun possesseth in the Ecliptick, about to the Eastern Ho∣rizon of the Globe, and the Index of the Horary Circle to the Figure 12. Afterwards turn the Globe round, till the Sun's place in the Ecliptick come to the Western Horizon. The Index will shew the number of the Hours of the Day in that place, and what remains to make up 24 Hours, are the Hours of Night in it. Theorem I. If from the Aequator towards the Pole, you take several places of the Earth, whose distance from the Ae∣quator exceed one another in an Arithmetical Proportion, viz. of 10, 20, 30, 40 Degrees, &c. the length of the longest Day in these places keeps not the same proportion, but grows more in places near the Pole, than in these toward the Aequa∣tor. Or, the longest Day of a place, which is only 20 degrees Latitude, doth not so far exceed the longest Day of one that is 10 degrees Latitude, as the longest Day of a place which is 60 degrees of Latitude, exceeds that of a place which is 50 deg. Latitude. Take, I say, several places of the Earth, remov'd from the Aequator towards the Pole, by an equal increase of di∣stance, (because of the convenience of Parallels upon the Globe,) viz. 10 deg. 20 deg. 30 deg. 40 deg. of Latitude; raise the Pole to the Latitude of 10 deg. and turn the Globe round till the first deg. of Cancer co-incide with the Eastern Horizon; mark also that Point of the Tropick which is at the same time in the Western Horizon; for that Arch of the Tropick above the Horizon, contain'd betwixt the first of Cancer, and the other Point in the Western Horizon, sheweth how long the Sun stayeth above the Ho∣rizon of a place of 10 deg. Latitude, upon its longest day. We may know also the Hours of his stay, by the Index of the Horary Circle. Afterward raise the Pole, according to the Latitude of the second place, viz. 20 deg. and again, bring the first degree of Cancer to the Eastern Horizon, and note that de∣gree of the Tropick which is in the Western Horizon at the same time; for the Arch of the Tropick above the Hori∣zon, contain'd betwixt these two degrees, sheweth the
length of the Sun's stay upon the longest Day of a place, of 20 deg. Latitude, which may also be known in Hours by the Index and Horary Circle. Do the same with the places whose Latitude is 30, 40, 50, 60 deg. &c. afterwards compare the Arches of the Tropick, or the Hours of the Sun's stay for that day, above the Horizons of these places, and it will plainly appear, That the length of the longest Day increases more in places remote from the Aequator, than in these which are nigher to it: And therefore in the Table of Climates, which we gave above, you may observe, that though the longest Day increaseth equally in them all, by the space of half an Hour; yet their breadth still lessens, as they retire from the Aequator, or as they approach to the Pole: So the breadth of the first Climate is 8 Deg. 25 Min. That of the second only 8 Deg. That of the 9th. 2 Deg. 57 Min. And that of the 10th, 2 Deg. 29 Min. Problem XXV. A certain number of Hours, not exceeding 24, being given, to find these places in the Globe, where the longest Day of the Year consists of so many Hours. Bring the first Degree of Cancer to the Meridian, (for it is always the place of the Sun upon the longest Day, of all places North from the Aequator,) and the Index to the Fi∣gure XII of the Horary Circle, then turn the Globe round, 'till the Index point at the last of these Hours which the longest Day contains, and observe the Point of the Tropick which is then in the Meridian; after this, bring about the first degree of Cancer to the East-Horizon, and move the Meridian up and down, by raising or depressing the Pole, 'till the point of the Tropick which you had formerly mar∣ked, coincide with the Western Horizon of the Globe, the first degree of Cancer still continuing in the Eastern. Lastly, count the Degrees of the Elevation of the Pole; for it is the same with the Northern Latitude of the Paral∣lel, whose longest day contains so many hours as were given. For Parallels, or Places, South from the Aequator, we must take the first degree of Capricon for the place of the Sun. By this we may find the Latitude of all the horary Climates since the longest day is given in each of them: We may al∣so find the Latitude of the Monthly Climates by the follow∣ing Problem. Problem XXVI. A certain number of Days, not exceeding 182, being given, to find the Latitude of these Places, or that Parallel on the Globe, where the Sun shines constantly during that time. Divide the number of Days into two halves, and count so many degrees in the Ecliptick, from the first Degree of Cancer, (you may count on either hand of it,) as half the number of Days hath Unites in it; mark the degree of the Ecliptick, where the counting ends. If the number of Days is greater than 30, the number of Degrees must be taken less than it by one. Then bring the Point of the Ecliptick, which you had marked to the Meridian, and count the degrees intercepted betwixt it, and the Pole; for the Sum of them is the Elevation of the Pole, or the Latitude of these Places where the Sun shines constantly during that space. This is to be understood of places lying North from the Aequator; for these of the same Latitude South from it, want the Sun all that time. To prove the Solution, you may raise the Pole according to the found out Latitude, and it will plainly appear that the degrees of the Ecliptick, which were marked or num∣ber'd out about the first of Cancer, do not set below the Horizon. Wherefore, the Sun whilst he is in these points of the Ecliptick, will not set; but its certain he is in them the days that were given; and therefore, he must shine con∣stantly during these days upon the places of that Latitude. Problem XXVII. The hour of the day in any place accor∣ding to our way of counting, from Mid-night or Mid-day, be∣ing given to find what hour it is from Sun-rising, i. e. the hour which the Babylonians of old, and the People of Norimberg at present do use. Raise the Pole according to the Latitude of the place, and when from the given day you have found the Sun's place in the Ecliptick, roll it to the Meridian, and the Index to the 12th. hour. Turn the Globe about till the Index point at the given hour. Then fix the Globe, so that it may continue in the same Situation whilst you bring back the Index to the Fig. XII. When this is done, turn the Globe about from West to East, till the Sun's place come to the Eastern Hori∣zon; and count the hours in the horary Circle from the 12th. Eastward, till you come to the Index. These are the hours of that place from Sun-rising. Problem XXVIII. The Babylonick hour, or the hour from Sun-rising, being given to find what hour it is in our way of counting from Mid-night or Mid-day. Raise the Pole according to the Latitude of the Place; mark the Sun's place in the Ecliptick, and bring it to the Eastern Horizen, and the Index to the 12th. hour. Then turn the Globe towards the West, until the horary Circle point at the given hour from Sun-rising. Afterwards fix the Globe in that Situation, whilst you bring back the Index to the Fig. XII; and move the Globe backwards, until the Sun's place in the Ecliptick return to the same Semicircle of the Brass Meridian which it came last from. Then count the hour from the Fig. XII. of the horary Circle to the point of the Index, toward the same quarter that the Globe mov'd to. The hour which the Index points at, is that which was desired, viz. the hour from Mid-day or Mid-night, which according to our way of numbring, answer∣eth to the hour from Sun-rising which was given. Problem XXIX. The hour of the day, according to our way of reckoning, it being given to find the Italick hour, or the hour from Sun-set: For in many parts of Italy, they reckon their day from the Sun-set of the former day to the Sun-set of the follow∣ing. Raise the Pole according to the Latitude of the place: Note, The Sun's place in the Ecliptick upon the given day, and bring it to the Meridian, and the Index to the 12th. hour of Noon (which points always upwards towards the Zenith). Turn about the Globe till the Index point at the given hour, then fix the Globe in that Situation and at the same time bring the Index back to the 12th. hour: After∣ward turn the Globe about Eastwards till the Sun's place be seen in the Western Horizon: Count the hours from 12. to the Index towards the same quarter, viz. Eastwards as the Globe mov'd. These are the hours from Sun-set. Problem XXX. The hours from Sun-set being given to find what hour it is from Mid-day or Midnight. Raise the Pole according to the Latitude of the given place; observe the Sun's place in the Ecliptick, and bring it to the Western Horizon, and the Index to the 12th. hour. Turn the Globe to the West, till the Index shew the given Italick hour, then the Globe continuing fixt, bring the In∣dex back to the Fig. XII. afterwards roll the Globe back∣ward till the Sun's place return to that Semicircle of the Meridian which it came from immediately before: So the hours contain'd betwixt 12. and the Index, counting from West to East, are the hours from Mid-day or Mid-night, ac∣cording to our way of counting them. Problem XXXI. An hour of a certain day from Mid-day, or Mid-night, being given to find what hour that is, according to the ancient way the Jewes and other Nations then used in numbring their hours. The Jewes of old (as appears from what our Saviour saith of the Lord of the Vine-yard, who hired Work-men to Labour in it) and also several other Nations till Astronomy came to be improv'd; divided each day from the rising to the setting of the Sun into 12 hours, and the night into as many. Hours of this sort are unequal, as we observ'd in the 3 Chap. for the days and the nights are not of one equal and fixt length; but though one half of the Year they grow longer, and in the other half they grow shorter, in every place except under the Aequator; thereby it comes to pass that these hours are sometimes longer, and at other times shorter, for as they increase by the lengthning of the day, so they become less when it shortens. But in places nigh the Aequator, their is little
or no difference betwixt any one day of the Year and ano∣ther; and therefore tho the Inhabitants of the Torrid Zone might use that sort of hours, yet they are not so conveni∣ent for the People of Europe, or any who live at a great distance from the Aequator. To Solve the Prob. raise the Pole according to Latitude of the given place; find the Sun's place in the Ecliptick, up∣on the given day, and bring it to the Eastern Horizon, and set the Index to the 12. Fig. of the horary Circle, then turn the Globe about till the Sun's place come to the Western Hori∣zon; the Index will point the hours, conform to the length of the given day. Note down these hours, afterwards you must find out by the 27th. or 29th. Prob. what hour from Sun-rising (or from Sun-setting, if the given hour be after Sun-set) corresponds to the given hour: Then institute this proportion, as the hours of the length of the whole day or night (which hours you Noted down) are to 12 hours, so are the hours from Sun-rising (or from Sun-setting, if it be an hour of the night which was given) to the num∣ber of unequal or judaical hours. Problem XXXII. To reduce a given unequal hour to an equal one, or such an hour as the Jews used being given to find what hour it is according to our way of counting hours, upon any determined day. Raise the Pole according to the Latitude of the given place, and when from the given day, you have found the Sun's place in the Ecliptick; bring it to the Eastern Hori∣zon, and the Index to the 12th. hour: Then turn the Globe about to the West, till the Sun's place come to the Western Horizon: Thus you may know the length of that day in equal hours by the motion of the Index on the ho∣rary Circle. Write down the number of equal hours, which you find the given day to contain; afterwards bring the Sun's place to the Meridian, and the Index to the 12th. hour; then roll the Globe about till the Sun's place come to the Eastern Horizon, the Index will shew the hour of Sun-rising: After Institute this proportion, as 12 is to the num∣ber of the given unequal hour, so the length of the whole day formerly found to another number, which if it be ad∣ded to the hour of Sun-rising, it gives us the hour from Mid-night, according to our way of counting: If the num∣ber of these hours be more than 12, Substract 12 from it, and the remainder is the hours from Mid-day. The hours of the Jews which were mentioned in our Saviours Discourses, cannot be exactly reduc'd to equal hours, such as we use, because the day of the Year is not expressed; so the third hour mentioned in the Gospel, may be the eighth, the ninth, the tenth hour with us. Again, the eleventh hour which he speaks of, may be our seventh hour, or sixth, or fifth, according as we take the day of the Year, to have been about the Summer or Winter Solstice, or near the Equinox: But, because mention is made of the exces∣sive heat, its probable that it was a day in the middle of Summer, or nigh to the Summer Sulstice. Theorem II. The Sun, all the Stars, and every conceiva∣ble point of Heaven, moveth from the Meridian of any part of the Earth, the space of 15 deg. each hour, and in one Minute or 1/60 of an hour, they move 15 min. of a degree; and there∣fore in four minutes they move one deg. or 1/860 part of their diurnal Circle. For an hour is nothing else but the twenty fourth part of that time, in which the Sun moveth from the Meridian of any particular place of the Earth to the West, and returns by the East to the same Meridian again. Now that motion of the Sun being Circular, is supposed to be divided into 360 parts or degrees, as other Circles are; and if you divide 360 by 24, you shall find that 15 deg. correspond to one hour; therefore the Sun moves 15 deg. each hour from the Meri∣dian of any particular place. All the Stars do likewise move from any one Meridian to the same again, in the same space of time as the Sun doth; wherefore they also move 15 deg. or the 24th part of their Circle in an hour, and one deg. or 1/760 part of their Circle in 4 minutes of an hour. Take any two places then Situated under Meridians di∣stant 15 deg. from one another, of these two places, that which is toward the East, shall count its hours sooner by one than the other doth; for instance, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, when the other at the same time counteth 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. If the Meridians of the two places be 30 deg. di∣stant from each other; the more Eastern place shall count 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, when the other counteth 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and so forward; if they be distant 45 deg. the place which is so much farther East, shall in the counting of its hours anticipate, that of the other place by three, and if they be 60 deg. distant, the one shall anticipate the other by 4 hours; and therefore the same Eclipse or Conjunction of Planets, which the Inhabitants of a place toward the West, see at 8, 9, 10, 11, or 12 hours, &c. the Inhabitants of a place whose Meridian is 15 deg. further East, shall see it at 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, &c. but if the Meridian of this place be 30, 45, or 60 deg. further East, the Inhabitants shall count their hours as if they saw the same Eclipse 2, 3, 4, hours sooner than the People of the Western place do, tho' they see it in both places at the same time, yet they give different names to that time according to their different computations from the beginning of their day. On the other hand, if there be two places, one of which counteth the hour 9, 10, 11, 12, &c. in the same time that the other counteth 10, 11, 12, 1, &c. or if the Inhabitants of these places see the same Eclipse at the 9th. hour in the one place, and the 10th. hour of the other, their Meridi∣ans shall be distant 15 deg. one from the other; if the one place anticipate the other by two hours, their Meridians are distant 30 deg. from each other, if by three hours, they are distant 45 deg. if four hours, 60 deg. and so forward. Whence it appears, that if we have the hour of two places in the same moment of time given us, we may find the Longitude of the one place from that of the other, or how much more East the one is than the other. Note, What hath been said in this proposition concern∣ing the Sun and Moon, that they move 15 deg. or 1/24 of their diurnal Circle every hour from any Meridian just as the fixt Stars, and the other points of Heaven do; this if we take it strictly, is not altogether true; for the Sun returns later to the Meridian than the fixt Stars, or any particular point of the Equator doth, by reason that the Sun continues not fixt in one point of the Ecliptick, but is always moving from one part of it to another, towards the East, whilst in the same time he is moving Westward in his diurnal course; and therefore when a Star or any certain point of the Equa∣tor which went off from such a Meridian, together with the Sun, have return'd upon the next day to the same again; the Sun is not yet come at it, but they have reacht it 3 or 4 minutes of an hour before him: And thence it comes to pass, that these Stars which at a certain time of the Year Rise and Set together with the Sun, and seem to go along with him, are at a great distance from him in other parts of it; because every day after that Conjuncti∣on and Vicinity of theirs, the Stars go quicker about, and reach the same Meridian sooner than he, by the space of some minutes, which encrease in a succession of many days, so that the Star gets to the Meridian before the Sun, by the space of two, three, four, five, six hours, and therefore in one hour or 1/24 of the Sun's diurnal motion; there pas∣seth more than 15 deg. or 1/24 of the Equator, and of its parallels under any Meridian. But since this diversity which ariseth from the Sun's annual Course, is so small, that in an hour it scarcely addeth ten seconds to an arch of 15 deg. in the Equator, on this account we over-look it in the com∣parison of Meridians. And places which differ by one hour in their way of counting, the same time are said to have Meridians 15 deg. distant from one another, these which differ two hours, have their Meridians distant 30 deg. and so forth. Theorem III. They who set out from any place of the Earth, and Sail Eastwards, when they have gone round the whole Cir∣cuit of the Earth, and return to the place from which they set out, they number in the same space of time a day more than the Inhabitants of their Country do; so that if it be the first of
January in their Country when they return to it, it shall be the second day of January in their computation; if it be Saturday to those who stay'd at home, it shall be Sunday to them who went abroad; and if they go twice, thrice, four times about the Earth, sailing always from West to East, they shall have and count so many more days, then they who stay'd still all that time in the same place. On the other hand, they who Sail round about the Earth, steering always Westward, when they return to the place which they had set out from, they find, that during their Voyage, they have not had so many days as the Inhabitants of the place, but one day fewer than they; so that if it is the first of January to the People of the place, it shall be only the 31st of Decem∣ber to the folks of the Ship; if it be Sunday to the one, it shall be Saturday to the other. And if they shall Sail about the Earth the same way, viz. still going Westward, twice, thrice, four times, they shall count so many days fewer than the con∣stant Inhabitants of the place they set out from do. Some Ages ago the Seamen were mightily astonisht at this, for when by steering their Course Westward from Europe, they had come about to the Eastern Isles, they met there with other Europeans, who had steer'd their Course East∣wards, and by comparing, they found that their Computa∣tions of Time differ'd by one day, so they accus'd one ano∣ther of having been either negligent in marking it, or of having slept a day. But the repeated Experience of the same thing, did at length convince them of the truth of it, and prompted inquisitive men to search the reason of so sur∣prizing an effect. It's easie to explain it, if we have a true and right apprehension of the Diurnal Motion of the Sun, of the Meridians of the different places of the Earth, and if withal we fix or determine the beginning of the day. For it follows from the Diurnal Motion of the Sun (and not from his Annual Motion, as some have thought) which may be conceiv'd to begin at any Circle, but it's more conveni∣ent to begin it from the Meridian at Noon, so that a day is the time from the Noon of this to the Noon of the follow∣ing day, or from the Sun's leaving the Semicircle of any Meridian, till he return to the same again. Because then they who Sail to the East come unto places where the Sun riseth and setteth sooner, and where conse∣quently it is Noon sooner then in the place they came from, from thence, I say, it comes to pass that when they see the Sun in the Meridian of that place which they have arrived to, they begin to reckon their new day, whereas the same day continues as yet in the place from which they came; because the Sun is not yet come to their Meridian; so that the Folks of the Ship have already begun to count the se∣cond day of January for instance, when the People they set out from, have not yet done with the first of that Month. This Anticipation of Time increaseth every day whilst the Ship continueth her Voyage Eastward, so that when she hath come to a Semicircle of the Meridian, directly opposite to that which passeth through the place the Ship loos'd from, the day of the place where the Ship is now suppos'd to be, anticipates that of the place she set out from, by the space of 12 hours: for it shall be Mid-day to the one, when it's only the Mid-night of the preceding day to the other. And when they have advanc'd to a Me∣ridian 15 deg. beyond that, they shall have Noon 13 hours sooner then it is in the place they first sail from; and when they have come to a Meridian yet 15 de∣rees further, they shall have Noon there sooner by 14 hours than it is in the first Place; and so on∣wards as they come to Meridians, or Places removed one from the other by 15 degrees, they shall have Noon, or the beginning of their Day sooner by 15, 16, 17 hours, &c. then it is in the place they came from; and when at length they return to it, they shall indeed find that it is Mid-day there, if it be so with themselves; but it is such a one, as if all the Noons of that place, from the time of their de∣parture to their return, be counted and compar'd with the number of Noons which the Folks of the Ship had, they shall find that the last Noon of the place doth correspond to the Noon of the preceding Day with them. And that therefore they have had in the same space of time one Day more than the Folks who stay'd at home; but every one of their Days is somewhat shorter then the day of the place. It happens quite contrariwise to them, who set out from any place, steering always Westward, till they have Sail'd about the Earth, and return to the same place again: For the further they go from it, the Sun is so much later in coming to their Meridian, and therefore their day shall not be fully ended when the People of that place which they left have begun a new one. Now during all the time of their Voyage, this late approach of the Sun to the Me∣ridian of the Ship still increaseth, so that when it hath re∣turn'd to the place, the People there find they have had a day more then the Seamen; but every one of the days of the Ship are somewhat longer then the day of the place. Corallary I. If two set out from any place of the Earth at the same time, and the one go Westward, the other Eastward, when they have Sail'd round the Earth, and re∣turn'd to the same place again, he who steer'd his Course Eastward shall have two days more then he who went Westward: And if they Sail round the Earth twice, he who went Eastward shall have four days more; if thrice, he shall have six days more, and so onwards. Yet the time of both is the same; but the days of the one are shorter, and these of the other longer. Corollary II. The same will happen if they meet one another in any part of the Earth. For when Ferdinand Magellan, steering his Course Westward, had found that Streight which hath since retain'd his name, and through it had pass'd to the East-Indies, the Seamen, who met there with other Europeans who had come thither by the ordinary way, viz. steering Eastwards, about Africa, found that their Calendars differ'd by a whole day. The same was afterward observ'd by others when they met at the East-Indies, in their Sailing round the Earth. Corollary III. This is also the reason why a different way of counting the days is observ'd in two places very nigh each other, viz. in the Philippin Islands, and Macao a Maritime Town of China, belonging to the Portuguese. For though they lye under the same Meridian, yet in Macao the days of the Calendar are computed sooner by one day then in the Philippin Islands; so that it is Sunday in Macao when it's only Saturday in the Philippin Islands, and being Roman Catholicks in both places, they are busie eating Flesh in Macao, when Lent is not yet ended in the Philip∣pin Islands. The reason of this difference is, that the Por∣tuguese who live in Macao, came thither from Europe steer∣ing their Course Eastward; whereas the Spaniards in the Philippin Islands, set out from Europe Westward to America, and from thence they came through the Pacifick Sea to these Islands. And therefore from the preceding Corollary it follows, that since they set out from the same place dif∣ferent ways, and met there, that the days of the Portuguese should anticipate these of the Spaniards by one day. Problem XXXV. To find the Meridian Line, or the Line of due South, North, in any given place of the Earth. There are several ways of doing it. 1. The Magnetick Needle is commonly used for this purpose; for one end of it turning always to the North, and the other to the South, the Meridian Line coincides with the length or extent of the Needle. But because in most places of the Earth the Needle declines from the direct North and South, sometimes more sometimes less, this way of finding it is not universal nor exact. Yet it does well enough in common use, where much acuracy is not requisite: Besides, if the Declination of the Needle in that place hath been known by the Ob∣servations of others (as it is for the most part in any re∣markable place) the Meridian may be found very exactly this way. For draw first a Line, such as the Needle shews to be the Meridian, and take the middle point of the Line, or of the Needle, and upon it as the Center describe a Circle. Then count so many degrees of this Circle as the Declination of the Needle is in that place, beginning from the point of the Needle, and counting towards the West, if the Needle declines towards the East and Eastward, if the Needle inclines to the West, then draw a Line from the Center of the Circle to that Point where your count∣ing ends, this shall be the true Meridian of the place.
2. It may be done thus: Describe a Circle upon a Plan, and fix a Style at the Center of it, observe the length of the shadow any time before Noon; and take notice when the Shadow comes to be of the same length after Noon; if the Arch of the Circle intercepted betwixt these two Points where the Shadow cuts it, be bisected by a Line from the Center, that Line is the Meridian. Problem XXXIV. To find the Longitude of any place of the Earth, or its Distance from a certain given Meridian: that is, how much a place, in which we now are, lieth East or West from another place. This is that famous Problem, the Solution of which the Mariners have long desir'd; for if they could have it in a way as easie and certain as that of the Latitude, they would want nothing to render Navigation compleat, and liable al∣most to no mistakes. The greatest Men of this and of the last Age, have rack'd their Wits and their Inventions to find it; and the English, the Dutch, the French have pro∣fer'd Fifty thousand Crowns each of them to the Man who should first discover it; but none hath yet been so lucky as to carry the Prize; though they have contriv'd and pro∣pos'd several ways and methods to effect it: And some, possest with two much fondness for their own Productions, have demanded the Reward that was promis'd to the first In∣ventor, imagining that they had got it. But upon tryal it was found that their Solutions labour'd with one defect or another; so that either they were lame and could not ex∣actly satisfie, or they were so nice, so difficult and subject to mistakes in their use, that they were impracticable in the hands of common Seamen. They all agree in this, That without the Observation of the Appearances of the Planets it cannot be done, as the Latitude cannot be had but by observing the Sun or the Stars; nor will every appearance of the Heavenly Bodies do it, but it must be one that is quick, and where the va∣riations of it are sensible every minute almost; that so these who are in different places, seeing the same appear∣ance, may compare the time that it is seen in the one place, with that at which it is seen in the other; and by resolving the difference of the hour and minutes of the places into degrees, they may know how much the one place lyeth East or West from the other. There are me∣thods of taking it from the Moon's entrance into the Eclip∣tick every fortnight, the appulse of the Moon to any of the fixed Stars, to be observ'd at all times but about the New Moon; the Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Eclipses of Jupiters four Satellities which move swiftly about the Body of Jupiter, and have no considerable Parallax. But these methods are difficult, and subject to mistakes and in∣conveniences. And for all the rest of the Planets but the Moon, they are so slow in their Motions, that the quickest of them seems to us to continue an half hour together in the same Point; and this renders their appearances unser∣viceable to take a Longitude by. Saturn for instance, in the space of one hour advances only five Seconds in the E∣cliptick; so that though we may have from an Ephemeris the hour and minute of the place where the Ephemeris was made, at which he shall be in that Point of his Orbit which cuts the Ecliptick, yet because he moves so slow, he will seem to continue for several hours together in the same place; and therefore we cannot by our Observations discover the exact moment and hour he enters into the Ecliptick: For it might have been in any part of that time during which he seems to continue in the same place. The way there∣fore that is generally used for finding the Longitudes of pla∣ces, is by observing the beginnings, the middle, and the end of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, especially the Moon. It's done by observing upon the place propos'd, the exact moment that they appear to happen there, and comparing it with the time that the same appearance, whether the beginning, middle, or end of the Eclipse, was observ'd to happen else∣where. For the difference of the time that the same ap∣pearance happen'd in one place sooner or later than it did in the other, allowing 15 degrees to an hour, and 15 mi∣nutes of a degree for a minute of an hour, resolves the difference that there is in the Longitudes of those two places: As because the same Eclipse was observ'd at London at twelve a Clock, which began not in Brandenburgh till one, therefore there is 15 degrees difference in the Longitudes of Brandenburgh and London; or Brandenburgh lyeth so much farther East; for the excess of Longitude belongs to that place where the appearance last happen'd. But if it is ob∣serv'd that the appearance happen d in both places at the same moment, the Longitudes and Meridians of the one and the other are the same also. It's certain also, That if we could make a Clock or Watch that were so exact and regular in its motions, that we might depend upon it for showing us the hour that now is in the place which we set out from, there are many ways by which we might find the hour of the place where we now are at the same time; and if we have these two we may find from their difference of time, the difference of the Longitude of the two places, as well and as justly as if the same Heavenly Appearance had been observ'd in both places. But there are so many Chances and Casual∣ties which may change the Motions of these Machines, and either accelerate or stop them, that no stress can be laid upon them almost in a business of this nature. Problem XXXV. Having the Longitude and Latitude of two places, to find their Distance from one another. 1. If the two places have the same Longitude, and if they both lye on the same side of the Equator, that is, if their Latitude are of the same kind, viz. either both Nor∣thern or Southern; subtract the lesser Latitude out of the greater, and convert the degrees of their difference into miles, allowing 73 miles for one degree, and a sixtieth part of that for every minute. 2. If the places have the same Longitude, but the Lati∣tude of the one is Northern, that of the other Southern; you must then add their Latitudes together, and convert their sum from degrees into miles, as before. 3. If the difference of the Longitudes is 180 degrees, and the Latitudes of the places be of different denomina∣tions, the one North and the other South; Take the dif∣ference of the Latitudes, and subtract it from 180 deg. the Remainder is the distance of the two places in degrees, which you may turn into miles the same way as before. 4. If both places are in the Aequator, the difference of their Longitude is their distance in degrees. 5. But if they lye on either side of the Aequator amongst the Parallels, which are lesser in their Circumferences then the Aequator, by every remove that they make from it to∣wards the Poles. Multiply the degrees of the Parallel in which the two places lye, that are intercepted betwixt the Longitudes of the one and the other, by the miles in the Table following. Where supposing Parallels to be drawn through every degree of Latitude betwixt the Aequator and the Pole, it is calculated how many mile (Italick) and minutes of miles answer to a degree in each Parallel. We have made choice of these Italick Miles in the following Table, because of the roundness of the Number, and the readiness of Computation by it, 60 of them answering to one degree of a great Circle.
Latitude. Miles. Minutes. Aequator. 60 00 Parallel. 1 59 56 2 59 54 3 59 52 4 59 50 5 59 46 6 59 40 7 59 37 8 59 24 9 59 10 10 59 00 11 58 52 12 58 40 13 58 28 14 58 12 15 58 00 16 57 40 17 57 20 18 57 4 19 56 44 20 56 24 21 56 00 22 55 36 23 55 12 24 54 48 25 54 24 26 54 00 27 53 28 28 53 00 29 52 28 30 51 56 31 51 24 32 50 52 33 50 20 34 49 44 35 49 8 36 48 32 37 47 56 38 47 16 39 46 36 40 46 00 41 45 16 42 44 36 43 43 52 44 43 8 45 42 24 46 41 40 47 41 00 48 40 8 49 39 20 50 38 32 51 37 44 52 37 00 53 36 08 54 35 26 55 34 24 56 33 32 57 32 40 58 31 48 59 31 00 60 30 00 61 29 04 62 28 08 63 27 12 64 26 16 65 25 20 66 24 24 67 23 28 68 22 32 69 21 32 70 20 32 71 19 32 72 18 32 73 17 32 74 16 32 75 15 32 76 14 32 77 13 32 78 12 32 79 11 28 80 10 24 81 9 20 82 8 20 83 7 20 84 6 12 85 5 12 86 4 12 87 3 12 88 2 4 89 1 4 90 0 0 Having found the Distance betwixt the two Places in these Italick Miles, you may convert it into English by reducing them to the Proportional Parts that were given in the Table of Measures in the Second Chapter. 6. If the two places differ both in Longitude and Lati∣tude, the Solution is more difficult, nor can the distance in this case be had exactly, but by calculating or resolving a Spherical Triangle; two sides of which are given, viz. the Di∣stance of the Places from the Pole (or the Complements of their different Latitudes) and the Angle contain'd betwixt them, which is measur'd by, or equal to the difference of their Longi∣tudes. And the third side to be found is the Distance of the two Places. We show'd in the 16th Problem the way of finding the Distance betwixt any two Places by the Globe; but it can∣not be de done well in an Universal Map, or in these that are made according to the Laws of Perspective, only where Maps are made of small Countries by the last method men∣tion'd in the 6th Chapt. it may be had very exactly; for they have a Scale of Miles commonly annext, and if you extend your Compass from the one place to the other, and after∣wards apply it to this Scale, you will find so many Parts of the Scale representing Miles intercepted betwixt the Points of the Compass, as there are Miles really betwixt the two Places. We think these Problems sufficient to show the use of the Globes, at least so far as concerns our purpose.
GEOGRAPHY: OR, A Particular Description Of all the Known Parts of the EARTH. map of the world THE WORLD IN PLANISPHERE
EUROPE. map of Europe EUROPE OF the Name of Europe the Ancients tell many fa∣bulous Stories, and make it deriv'd from a certain Daughter of Agenor King of Phoenicia, nam'd Euro∣pa, whom Jupiter falling in Love with, metamor∣phiz'd himself into a Bull, and swam with her on his Back to the Island Creet or Candy. But a little to palliate this Fable, the Poetical Part is taken away by others, and the Story told, That one Asterius a Cretan Captain, making War with the Phoenicians, carried away this charming Prin∣cess, and sail'd with her in a Ship call'd The Bull to Creet, where he married her, and had Issue Minos and Rhadaman∣thus, whom the Poets make two of the Judges of Hell. This Rape is by Historians judged to have happen'd about the Year of the World 2660. in the time of Gideon Judge of Israel. But whether this Lady, or any other particular Person, or whether the small Province of Thrace, call'd Europa, gave Name to this part of the World, we must conclude with Herodotus, is utterly unknown. But whencesoever the Name was deriv'd, it was call'd Europa by the Romans, and at this time l'Europa by the Italians and Spaniards, l'Europe by the French, and Europe by the English; but by the Turks, Rumeli or Alfrank, Frankoba by the Georgians, and Frankistan by the rest of the People of Asia. It is bounded on the North by the Frozen Ocean; on the South by the Mediterranean Sea, which divides it from Africa; on the East by Asia, from which it is parted by the Archi∣pelago, the Euxine or Black Sea, and the Palus Maeotis, or Sea of Zabacha, and thence by a Line drawn from the River Tanais or Don, to the River Oby in Muscovy; and on the West it is bounded by the Atlantick Ocean. Europe is seated between the 34th and 72 Degree of La∣titude,
and between the 7th and 100th Degree of Longi∣tude, reckoning the first Meridian to pass through the Island of Teneriffe; and contains in breadth from the North Cape to Cape Metapan in the Morea, about 2000 Miles: and in length from Cape St. Vincent in the West, to the Mouth of the River Oby in the East about 3600 Miles. Altho' Europe be the least of the four Parts of the World, it is however more considerable than any of them; being much to be prefer'd for the Mildness of the Air, the Fertili∣ty of the Soil throughout, the many Navigable Rivers, the great plenty of Corn, Cattel, Wine and Oyl, and all things necessary, not only for Sustenance, but even for the Luxury of Human Life; but especially for the Beauty, Strength, Courage, Ingenuity and Wisdom of its Inhabitants; the Excellency of their Governments, the Equity of their Laws, the Freedom of their Subjects, and, which surpasses all, the Sanctity of their Religion. Europe was Peopled after the Flood, as is generally be∣liev'd, by the Posterity of Japhet, who came from the lesser Asia over the Hellespont into Greece. Tho' others say, that those of Shem passing by Land betwixt the Caspian Sea and the Palus Maeotis, went thro' Tartary and Scythia into Scan∣dia, and thence afterwards into France, Germany, &c. Whe∣ther of these two Opinions be most to be credited, we know not: But be that as it will, Europe hath for many Ages been exceeding Populous, and her Inhabitants Illu∣strious for their Courage, Wisdom and Vertue; by which they Conquer'd the greatest part of Asia and Africa, and made those Parts subject to the two Empires of Greece and Rome. And in these latter Ages, almost one half of the Earth that was formerly unknown, hath been discover'd by Europeans, and possessed by the Colonies they have sent thi∣ther. The CHRISTIAN RELIGION is profest throughout all Europe, except that Part of it possessed by the Turks. But by reason of the Innovations made by the Church of Rome, the Western Church is divided; Italy, Spain, France, part of Germany, and the Netherlands, with Poland, still following the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, whereas England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, great part of Germany, the Ʋnited Provinces, Swis∣serland, &c. have embraced the Reformation, and profess the Protestant Religion. And in Muscovy, some parts of Poland, in Walachia, Moldavia, Podolia, Volhinia and Greece, the Doctrine of the Eastern or Greek Church is fol∣low'd. For Learning and Arts the Europeans have been most re∣nown'd: all the Scholastick Sciences they have brought to a much greater Perfection than either Asiaticks or Africans ever did: and the Invention and Improvement of many use∣ful and ingenious Arts, particularly Navigation, is wholly owing to the Genius and Industry of the Inhabitants of this part of the World. The Languages of Europe are many, but are all deriv'd from these six Original ones, viz. The Greek, Latin, Teu∣tonick or d Ge an, Gothick and Sclavonick; different Dia∣lects whereof, with accidental Additions, being the Lan∣guages of all the considerable Parts of Europe, except Tar∣tary and Turky. The Governments of Europe are mostly Monarchical, but exceedingly more easie and gentle than those of Asia and Africa. In Europe are these Sovereign Princes and States, viz. The Emperour of Germany. The Emperour or Czar of Muscovy. The Grand Seigneur or Emperour of the Turks. The King of Great Britain. The King of Spain. The King of France. The King of Portugal. The King of Sweden. The King of Denmark. The King of Poland. The King of Hungary. The Pope. Six Republicks, viz. 1. The State of Venice; 2. The States General of the Ʋnited Netherlands; 3. The Cantons of Swisserland; 4. The Grisons; 5. The Republick of Genoa. And 6. The Republick of Lucca. There are besides these, no less than 300 Subaltern So∣veraign Princes in Germany, Italy, &c. who tho' they are Tributaries or Feoffees to the Emperour, or some other Su∣periour Prince, have Supream Authority in their own E∣states: Of these there are both Spiritual and Temporal. Of the Spiritual the most considerable are, The Grand Master of Malta. The Grand Master of the Teutonick Order in Germany. The Three Spiritual Electors of the Empire, viz. The Archbishops of Mentz, Triers and Cologn. The Archbishop of Saltzburg, and 22 Bishops in Germa∣ny. The Grand Prior of Malta, who is also call'd, The Grand Prior of Germany. Several Abbots, whereof the Abbot of Fulda in Germany hath the largest Territory. Several Provosties of the Church, whereof the most con∣siderable is that of Berchtelsgaden. Of the Temporal Princes there are Five Electors of the Empire; viz. The Duke of Bava∣ria, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburg, the Count Palatine of the Rhine, and the Duke of Hanover. An Arch-Duke of Austria. A Great Duke of Tuscany. Many Dukes; the most considerable whereof are The Dukes of Savoy, Mantua, Modena, Parma, &c. in Italy. The Dukes of Wurtemburg, Lunenburg, Mecklenburg, Hol∣stein, Lawenburg, Weimar, &c. in Germany. And The Duke of Curland in Poland. Several Marquisses, viz. Of Baden, Durlach, Ohnspach and Culembach in Ger∣many. Several in Italy, whose Estates are of small Extent. The Landgraves of Hesse Darmstat. Several Princes, whereof the most considerable are The Princes of Orange, Anhalt, Dombes, Monaco, Solfarin and Castiglione. Divers Counts, the principal whereof are The Counts Nassaw, Furstenberg, East-Frizeland, Hohenzol∣lezen, Arenberg, &c. Besides these, there are The Cham of Tartary. The Waiwoods of Transilvania, Walachia, Moldavia, and the Ʋkraine. And the small Republicks of Geneva and Ragusa. The Division of Europe into its different Regions is al∣ready set down in the Introduction, and will be seen more particularly in the following Description of them.
BRITAIN. BRITAIN, Britannia, in general. map of England and Wales THE KINGDOM of ENGLAND BRITAIN, an Island large, populous and fruitful, is, in Longitude, about 15 Degrees and 50 Scruples; and in Latitude, in the North-part 50 Degrees, 40 Scruples; but in the South about 50 Degrees and 10 Scruples. Among the Ancients it was look'd upon to be so considerable, that in their Writings they call'd it Insula magna; and Caesar went yet higher, boasting, That he had found another World. By the best esti∣mate that can be taken, 'tis computed at about 1836 miles in compass, viz. from Cathness to the Lands-end, 912. from the Lands-end to the Kentish-foreland,
320. and from thence all along the Eastern-coast to Cathness, about 704. The Ancients differ very much in their accounts of this matter, but their Authority is not much to be heeded: For few of those Writers knew the Island, and those that did, had not yet such a near acquaintance with it, as to take its Dimensions with a tolerable exactness. The FORM of it is Triangular, the Lands-end, the Kentish-foreland and Cathness, shooting out into so many Promontories, and making the three Corners. It's Bound, the Sea, has several Names, adapted to the several Shores: On the North, 'tis call'd the Northern-sea; on the West, the Irish-sea; on the South, the Channel; and, on the East, the German-Ocean. This advantage of the Sea surrounding it, as 'tis a Security against Enemies, so also against the violent Colds to which the Climate would be otherwise expos'd: It supplies us both with Peace and Health. For the Tides and constant Motions of the Sea send us in a softning sort of Vapour which quali∣fies the natural sharpness of the Air, even to that de∣gree, that in some parts of France and Italy they feel more o' the Winter than we do in England. The SOIL does, in a great measure, owe its Fertility to the same cause; the Vapours not only soft∣ning the Air, and by that means nourishing every thing that grows, but also furnishing us with easie Showers in their proper Seasons. Insomuch, that our Forefathers had a fancy, that this must needs be the Fortunate Islands, so much talk'd of by the Ancients; as having of all others the best Claim to those agree∣able Pleasures and Delights, with which they fur∣nish'd that happy place. I know not whether it was not more the Courage and Vigour (observ'd to be in these Westerly Inhabitants) than any natural Cause, which gave rise to that Opinion, That the farther West, the Constitutions were more firm and the Courage greater. That part of the Island which lies towards the Western Ocean, is mountainous, as in Cornwall, Wales, and also a great many parts of Scotland; but the in∣ner Tracts are generally a plain, champain Country, abounding with Corn and Pasture. The most re∣markable MOUNTAIN, is that continu'd Ridge which runs from South to North, dividing, as it were, the whole Island into the East and West parts, and is by Writers call'd the English Apennine. The ISLANDS lie round it in great numbers; some single, as the Isle of Wight, the Isle of Man, &c. others as it were in Clusters, as the Cassiterides, the Orcades, and other little Slips that are scatter'd all along the Coast of Scotland. It has on all sides very convenient Harbours, and is accommodated with navigable Rivers in abundance, which convey the Riches of the Sea and of Foreign Nations into the very heart of the Kingdom. Of all the rest, these three are by far the most considerable; the Thames, the Severn, and the Humber, which carry along with them into the Sea vast numbers of lesser Rivers. Their course, with the Towns and Cities they touch upon, are better represented in the Map, than they would be by an enumeration of Particulars. The INHABITANTS of the several Parts, are of a different original. These of Cornwall and Wales are in a great measure the Posterity of the ancient Britains, who, upon the Invasions first of the Picts and then of the Saxons, betook themselves to those mountainous corners and out-skirts, and have ever since maintain'd both themselves and their Lan∣guage too, against the mixture of Foreigners. Of late years indeed, the Cornish are come over to the English modes and ways of Living, and have begun to lay aside their ancient Tongue; which cannot per∣haps be more plausibly attributed to any one thing, than the great number of Representatives they return to Parliament; for whom 'tis natural to carry back with them the Humours and Inclinations of the Court, and, at their return, to settle themselves in a method of Living agreeable to the Entertainments they meet with in their time of Attendance. But the Welch have no such entercourse with the polite parts of the Kingdom; and so keep on in the old Channel, both as to Customs, Language, and other Circumstances of Life. The Scots are originally Irish, but not with∣out a mixture of Picts, who (tho' they were subdu'd by the former, and fell under their Government) could not yet be entirely cut off, any more than the Conquer'd usually are in other Kingdoms. Bede and our other Historians are very clear and positive in the matter, That the West-parts of Scotland were Peopl'd from Ireland; and the Irish, which is their Language, puts it beyond all dispute: But the exact time when this should happen, is a point the Learned sill quar∣rel about, while the Natives are concern'd for their own Antiquity, and their Neighbours do not love to see them run up their Original too high. As for the rest of the Island, tho' the Britains were for many hundred years in full possession, and after that the Romans made a considerable figure among us; yet we cannot well imagine there's much of the Blood of either Nation among us at this day. The Britains indeed may with some reason value themselves upon their descent from the Romans, with whom, in such a vast compass of time, they could not but have fre∣quent Inter-marriages, and so incorporate themselves as it were into one People. This they may insist upon, and by such a step be carried to the Trojans, (whom they are so fond of) with more reason and less vanity. But whoever considers, how the Foreign Wars under the later Emperors clear'd this Island of the Romans, and how the prevailing power of the Saxons swept off the miserable Britains, will have but a mean opinion of our Title to a Descent from either. 'Tis true, we have more of the Roman Language to shew than the Britains, but we had it at second hand only from the Normans; whereas, the Remains they produce have been deriv'd to them from Age to Age, ever since their mutual Correspondence with that Peo∣ple. So that the Saxons are as far as we can go with any tolerable probability; and they, along with the Danes (who for many years over-ran the whole Kingdom) and the Normans (who conquer'd it) are the great Ingredients of our Inhabitants at this day. And as we are a mixture of the Northern Nations and of the French or Norman; so we seem to retain something of the HUMOUR and TEMPER of both, keeping a mean between the two. The French-man is brisk, gay and airy; the Hollander and German is unactive, heavy and unweildy; the English-man has neither so much of the first Qualities as to carry him to Levity; nor of the second, as make him fairly chargeable with Dulness. His Fancy does not out-run his Judgment, nor his Judgment drown his Fancy. This difference is very remarkable in two particulars, War and Learning. In the first, what more notorious than the slowness of the German, tho quickness of the French, and the settl'd Courage and Conduct of the English? In the second, nothing is more apparent, than the heavy Bulks of ectures, and Comments, and Common-places, that the first have given us; the little Whimsies and pert Essays that we
have had from the second; and the solid Argument and substantial Matter which the last have sent into the World. The French, 'tis true, have done great Honour to Learning, under the protection of a Prince; who has establish'd a more lasting Name, by his emi∣nent Patronage to that, than by the progress of his Arms. But they have this advantage, that their Lan∣guage has settl'd it self in most parts of Europe, and conveys the utmost extent of their Learning, as far as it reaches. Could but our English Tongue propagate it self into as many Corners of the World, or would the great Men among us make themselves Masters of the Roman Style, and so pen their Discourses in a Language universally known, our Books would un∣doubtedly make their own way: They would carry Instruction abroad, and bring Reputation to our own Kingdom. Our Divinity, particularly, as it is grave and substantial, so it is much courted and admired by Foreigners; insomuch, that of late years we have had great numbers of Germans, Sweeds, Danes, and other Nations, who have travell'd into England upon no other design, but to inform themselves in our me∣thods of Preaching, and by learning the Language to be capable of receiving profit by our Writings. The State of RELIGION, so far as we have any light from History, is in short thus. When Ju∣lius Caesar came over, his short stay and small corre∣spondence with the Natives gave him little opportu∣nity of informing himself in their Affairs. But when he observes, that such of the Gauls as desired to be instru∣cted in the Rites and Discipline of the Druids, came over into Britain for that purpose, 'tis plain that this was the Religion of the place. Nor need we build only upon that hint, after he has told us how at that time 'twas a current Opinion, that the Discipline of the Druids came originally out of Britain, and was thence transplanted into Gaul. This was their Reli∣gion, till the plantation of Christianity; for which their old Persuasion (which taught 'em to believe One God, and the Immortality of the Soul) may seem in some measure to have made way. How early it was in∣troduc'd, is a point which has been very much dis∣puted among the Learned. Some will have it, that Joseph of Arimathea sail'd from Gaul, and preach'd Christianity among them: But that, in several parti∣culars, looks but too like a piece of Monkish Forgery. The general Tradition is, that, at King Lucius's request, Pope Elutherus sent over Eluanus and Medu∣anus to preach Christ; an Opinion which is handl'd at large by Archbishop Ʋsher and Dr. Stillingfleet. The latter of these, is enclin'd to have Chri∣stianity very early in this Island, proving it to have been planted by no less Hand than that of S. Paul. The Reasons alledg'd by the particular Pa∣trons of these Conjectures, are too many and too large for this place: The Authors themselves have de∣liver'd 'em at large. Upon the invasion of the Saxons, Christianity was consin'd to that poor corner which was the shelter of the Britains, and nothing but Paganism prevail'd amongst that warlike Crew; till Pope Gregory sent over Austin the Monk, who, by his indefatigable Industry laid such a foundation for Christianity, that his Successors gain'd ground apace, and in some years propagated it over the whole Nation. Such was the pious Zeal of those times, that Religion quickly receiv'd encouragement from all Hands, and Kings and Princes honour'd it with Religious Houses and Churches in great numbers. Thus it went on without Interruption, till the Danes broke in upon them; who, from an innate barbarity and hatred to Religion, as well as a thirst after the Wealth and Riches of those holy Places, spar'd none of them that lay in their way, but burnt and plunder'd what∣ever they came near. Upon an accommodation with that People, it reviv'd and grew mightily; so that England, for number of Religious Houses, was perhaps as considerable as any part of Europe. Till King Henry VIII. by Act of Parliament had them dissolv'd, when (quitting his subjection to the See of Rome) he made a Reformation of the Corruptions that had crept in among us, and establisht the Protestant Religion. The first LANGUAGE in this Nation, was British, which (as the People and Religion) was driven off by the Conquerors, and succeeded by that of the Saxons. By the Danish Invasions, a mixture of that Tongue crept in among us; but did not cause any considerable alterations, especially as to the Fun∣damentals, wherein they agree pretty much. But the Norman Conqueror, so soon as he was settl'd in his new Territories, quickly discourag'd both; and succeeded so well in his endeavours to establish the Norman, that before the end of Henry II. (what by contractions of the Old and interpolations of the New) we find the true native Saxon quite moulded into another form. For how should it be otherwise? Their publick Pleadings were in French, French was the Language of the Court, and Children were to learn no other Tongue. Thus, by degrees, (partly by reason of a fondness we have always entertain'd for French Fopperies, and partly by reason of a harsh∣ness that has been still fancy'd to run through our own Language) our Ancestors have endeavour'd to supply and refine it from the French, and every Age has been bringing in new Words, new Phrases, and new Dialects. So that now it makes a very great figure in our common Conversation and Writings; tho' we may still safely affirm, That the most full and significative Words in use among us, are the re∣mains of the old native Stock. And as it has been an unaccountable Levity in our Ancestors, to affect Foreign Commodities when they had more substantial Wares at home; so would it become their Posterity to look back into the Ruins of their original Lan∣guage, and try whether they cannot meet with Ex∣pressions of a stronger meaning, than that loose and verbal Harangue of our Neighbours, agreeable in∣deed to the Humour of an effeminate Nation, but by no means suited to the masculine Genius of the English. This way of restoring our old Words has been of late practis'd, with good success, by a very eminent Author. SECT. II. Of the ancient State of BRITAIN. The name Britannia and Insulae Britannicae were of a large extent among the Ancients, and us'd some∣times to signifie all the Islands lying in this Western part of the World. But to restrain them to the more limited acceptation: Britain (as I observ'd before) was so little known to Julius Caesar, that, as one says, He rather shew'd it to the Romans than subjected it to the Empire. So that his accounts of it are short and lame, rather taken from report than any certain knowledge he could have of their Affairs. He tells us, That all the Sea-coasts over against Gaul were peopl'd from that Country, but that the inner parts were Aborigines, or sprung out o' the Ground; which is a fair Confession that he knew nothing o'
the matter. Had he drawn the In-landers from the same Original as he did the Sea-coasts, he had light upon that by Conjecture which after-Ages have found reason to advance into an establish'd Opinion. The British Language is so much of a piece with the old Gaulish (as near as we can judge by the broken remains that are left us of this latter;) the Customs of both Nations were so alike; and 'tis likewise so very natural to imagin, that after the propagation of Mankind, in their progress Westward and their quest after new Countries, out of Gaul they should come over into Britain, lying within Sight; that an im∣partial Judge cannot stick in this point. Let it suffice here barely to have recited the common Heads from which the Arguments for this Opinion are fetched; especially since the great Oracle of our Nation, Mr. Camden, has prov'd every Particular with such a strength of Reason and Judgment as puts the matter beyond Dispute. I know the Britains are very proud of their original from the Trojans, and would fain have Brutus to have left his Name to the whole Island; but the same Author has considered their pre∣tences to that Title so exactly, and convinc'd them so fully of their Mistake, that if any thing could, nothing need be added to what he has left us. Claudius was the next Man that came among us, who by his own Conduct and that of Aulus Plautius, made his way into the more inward parts of the Island, by the defeat of the Britains. After these, Vespasian, Publius Ostorius, and Paulinus Suetonius, prov'd very troublesom to the Inhabitants, who all the while omitted no opportunities of return∣ing their kindness, by surprizing the Roman Legi∣ons, entring into Confederacies against their new Governors, and more than once breaking out into actual Rebellion. But it was Agricola, who under Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, gave the finishing stroke to the Conquest of Britain; not by the same methods which his Predecessors had us'd, Hardships and Severities, but by the more gentle ties of an obliging Humour. 'Tis true, he was almost conti∣nually engaging one Party or other of them, for eight years together; but unless his good Temper had se∣conded this success of his Arms, though he might quell them for the present, yet he had left them in an entire hatred to their Roman Lords, and a full resolution to take up Arms upon the first opportu∣nity. By which means, the Supplies necessary to de∣fend the Garisons, would have cost the Romans more than all the Revenue of the Island was worth. But he observ'd, he had a stubborn morose People to deal with; a Nation that was inur'd to all kinds of Hardship: and therefore instead of Threatnings (which could not work upon them) he betook himself to artificial Insinuations, and began to encourage the Roman Customs and Modes of living. This softn'd them by degrees and melted them down into Idle∣ness and Luxury; so that in a short time, he had par'd off that aversion to the Romans, and happy was the Man that could imitate them most. To the Romans succeeded the SAXONS, whoe ame over upon this occasion. In the Reign of Valentinian the Younger, the necessities of the Empire abroad, had oblig'd the Romans not only to recall most of their own Forces out of Britain, but also to deprive the Island of her own native Strength by their fre∣quent Levies. The Scots and Picts (two Warlike People) laid hold of this opportunity of plundring the Frontiers, and making in-roads into the Territo∣ries of the Britains, who by this time were quite dis-spirited by Slavery, and had suffer'd their own native Courage to dwindle into Ease and Cowardise. In this condition, all the refuge they had, was to fly to the Romans, who had neither left them Forces to protect them, nor (which is worse) a manly resolute Spirit to stand upon their own Guard. The Romans were too warmly engag'd nearer home, to relieve them; upon which they send the same request to the Saxons, who had fully convinc'd them of their Courage, by their frequent Piracies upon our Coasts, even while the Romans continu'd among us. So that we find under the later Emperors, the Comes Littoris Saxonici, or Count of the Saxon Shore, to have been a standing Officer, whose business it was to guard the Sea-coasts against their In-roads and Depredati∣ons. Upon this application, they come over, repel the Enemy, and are mightily pleas'd with their new Quarters, especially being a little straitn'd at home. In short, they begin to lay hold of all occasions for a Quarrel with the Britains, pretend they had not stood to their Terms; and carry on their Designs so succesfully, that they never desisted till they had Banish'd the old Inhabitants, and made themselves Masters of the greatest part of the Island. The DANES about the year 800, though they had not so fair a pretence of coming over, yet by main force edg'd themselves in among the Saxons, and us'd them much at the same rate as that People had done the Britains. They Robb'd and Plunder'd, till they had forc'd them to a Composition, and had Lands assign'd them in such and such parts of the Kingdom. Nor would they be content with this; but made fre∣quent Incursions into their Neighbours Territories, which occasion'd the raising of that sort of Tax call'd Danegelt, a Bribe to keep them from overrunning the Kingdom. But neither did this do. Their Inso∣lence was such, that the English could not long bear it; so, entring into a secret Plot, they made a gene∣ral havock of them in one single Night, putting them all to the Sword. At this, Sueno, King of the Danes, was highly enrag'd, and to revenge the Injury, Inva∣ded England with a strong Army, and possessed himself of the Crown; which was enjoy'd only by four Kings of that Race, and then return'd to the Saxons. Scarce had the Saxons recover'd their ancient Rights and Government, but they fell into a worse Confusion, upon the Death of Edward the Confessor. He was an easie Prince, and rather enclin'd to attend the duties of Religion than the secular affairs of his Kingdom. Leaving no issue behind him, the title to the Crown came to be contested by two very pow∣erful Parties, who yet had neither of 'em any right to it; for Edgar Atheling was the only Man then living of the Saxon Line. But Harold Earl Godwin's Son, took advantage of his tender years and posses∣sed himself of the Throne. William D. of Normandy, afterwards stiled the Conqueror, took these proceedings very hainously, imagining, that by his relation to that Family, by virtue of the Confessor's Promise when he was Banish'd into Normandy, and also Harold's obligation to see it discharg'd, he had fairer preten∣tions than any other. Whereupon he landed with a powerful Army, Conquer'd the English in a set Battle, (wherein Harold was Slain) and immediately took possession of the Government
SECT. IV. The Civil Government of BRITAIN. Of the Administration of the ancient Britains, we have these two general Heads left us by Julius Caesar, That in times of Peace, the Druids had the conduct of all Civil Affairs; and in times of War they chose some one of remarkable Courage to be General of their Forces, upon that Expedition. The Romans Govern'd it by their Propraetors and other Sub-ordi∣nate Officers, who were to act according to Instru∣ctions from Rome, and had some Legions ready for their defence upon any emergent occasion. But the Saxons as they gain'd Ground, settl'd so many distinct Kingdoms; which upon their entire Conquest, a∣mounted to Seven, and have been since stil'd the Saxon Heptarchy. The names of them, with their Extent and Jurisdiction, are as follows: The Saxon Heptarchy. 1. The Kingdom of Kent contain'd The Coun∣ty of Kent 2. The Kingdom of the South-Saxons contain'd The Coun∣ties of Sussex Surrey. 3. The Kingdom of the East-Angles contain'd The Coun∣ties of Norfolk Suffolk Cambridge, with the Isle of Ely. 4. The Kingdom of the West-Sax∣ons contain'd The Coun∣ties of Cornwall Devon Dorset Somerset Wilts Hants Berks. 5. The Kingdom of Northumber∣land contain'd The Coun∣ties of Lancaster York Durham Cumberland Westmoreland Northumberland and Scotland to the Fryth of E∣denburg. 6. The Kingdom of the East-Sax∣ons contain'd The Coun∣ties of Essex Middlesex, and part of Hertford∣shire. 7. The Kingdom of Mercia con∣tain'd The Coun∣ties of Glocester Hereford Worcester Warwick Leicester Rutland Northampton Lincoln Huntingdon Bedford Buckingham Oxford Stafford Derby Shropshire Nottingham Chester, and the other part of Hertfordshire. But though these were distinct Kingdoms, yet still there was a face of Monarchy in the Nation; and the Prince that was most Powerful of the Seven, ge∣nerally Lorded it over the rest, as if they had been only so many Tributary Kings. For they were con∣tinually at War one with another, and the Conque∣ror always taking the Dominions of the Enemy into his own Kingdom, they all came at last into that of the West-Saxons, under King Egbert; who by a publick Edict, order'd the whole Kingdom to be stil'd Engla-land, which we have now contracted in∣to England. One of his Successors, presently upon this, took the Title of King of Great Britain, and another that of Monarch of all Albion. The Succession of our English Monarchs from Egbert, is thus: Came to the Crown. EGbert 800 S. Ethelwolf 837 Ethelbald, 857 Ethelbert, 858 Ethelred, 863 Alfred, 873 Edward the Elder, 900 Athelstan, 925 Edmund 940 Eldred 946 Edwin, 955 Edgar, 959 S. Edward, Martyr, 975 Ethelred, 978 Edmund Ironside, 1016 The Danish Race. Canutus, 1017 Harold, 1037 Hardicnute, 1041 The Saxons Re-possess'd. S. Edward, 1045 Harold, 1066 The Normans. William the Con∣queror, 1066 William Rufus, 1087 Henry I. 1100 Stephen, 1135 The Saxon Line Re∣stor'd Henry II. 1154 Richard I. 1189 John, 1199 Henry III. 1216 Edward I. 1272 Edward II. 1307 Edward III. 1326 Richard II. 1377 The Line of Lancaster. Henry IV. 1399 Henry V. 1412 Henry VI. 1422 The Line of York. Edward IV. 1460 Edward V. 1483 Richard III. 1483 The Families United. Henry VII. 1485 Henry VIII. 1509 Edward VI. 1546 Q. Mary 1553 Q. Elizabeth, 1558 Union of the Kingdoms. James I. 1603 Charles I. 1625 Charles II. 1648 James II. 1685 WILLIAM III. 1689 and MARY II. 1689
The King is Supreme in all Causes, both Ecclesi∣astical and Civil; having the same Power, in Mat∣ters relating to the Church, that the Pope had, be∣fore this Island disown'd his Jurisdiction under Hen∣ry VIII. But yet he cannot enact Laws singly and by himself, but must have the Concurrence of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and of the Commons assembled in Parliament, before any thing can pass into a Law. The Parliament does not meet but upon the more weighty Affairs of the Kingdom, and are both call'd and dissolv'd at the King's Pleasure, who is suppos'd to be Judge of the Exigencies of the Na∣tion. This is the supreme Court, wherein Causes are finally determin'd, and from which there lies no Appeal; whereas, Appeals are made to this from the other Courts. The chief Courts are, 1. The King's-Bench, so call'd, because the King us'd to sit there in Person; but now administers Justice by a Lord Chief Justice, and three more Judges, or as many as he shall think fit. 2. The Common Pleas (from deter∣mining Pleas between Subject and Subject) consists of a Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and three other Judges to assist him. 3. The Exchequer (from a Table at which they sat;) where all Matters belonging to the King's Revenue are determin'd by the great Officers and Judges belonging to it, viz. The Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Chief Baron, and four other Barons. 4. The Chancery, (so call'd from sitting within the Rails or Cancels;) instituted to moderate the Rigour of the Law, which by reason of an infinite number of un∣foreseen Circumstances that attend a great many Causes, is too often Oppression and Injustice. Hi∣ther, therefore, they make their Appeals, who think themselves injur'd by the Letter of the Law: And if it appears that they have Equity on their Side, the Judgments given upon strict Law are revers'd, and the Parties reliev'd. In this Court is the Lord Chan∣cellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and twelve Masters of Chancery, as Assessors, the chief whereof is the Keeper of the Rolls. 5. The Court of Admiral∣ty, where Sentence is given in Marine Affairs, by the Admiral of England, a Judge, two Clerks, &c. 6. The Court of Requests (from the Petitions receiv'd there) managed by the Lord Privy Seal, the Masters of the Requests, a Clerk and two or three Attor∣neys. The Court of Wards and Liveries (from taking Cognisance of the Causes of Minor's) and the Court of Star-Chamber (which was chiefly to restrain the Exorbitances of Great Men, and punish Misdemean∣ors, &c.) are both abolish'd. Besides these Courts, the King, for the Ease of the Subject, sends down two Judges into each Coun∣ty; the one of Life and Death, and the other of Nisi Prius, who are to determine Causes without putting the Parties to the Trouble and Expence of giving Attendance at the Superior Courts; except where the Case is weighty and difficult, and then it is referr'd to a Tryal at Westminster: And as these Circuits were contriv'd for the Ease of the Nation in general; so for the Peace and good Government of each particular County, the King has his Lord Lieu∣tenants, whose Care it is that the State suffer no Da∣mage. Each County also has it's Sheriff, who is to get up the Publick Revenues, to attend the Judges, to take care that such as are condemn'd be duely ex∣ecuted, &c. And several Justices of the Peace, who may Commit for Felonies, Trespasses and other Mis∣demeanours. Before the Conquest, we find that England, ac∣cording to its several Branches, was govern'd by three sorts of LAWS, the West-Saxenlage, the Danelage and the Merchenlage. For as the Authority, which the first and last of these three bore in the He∣ptarchy, was sufficient to establish their own Laws in their neighbouring Countries; so the Power to which the Danes arriv'd, did effectually engage such Places as they over-ran most, in the Use of their Customs and ways of Living. But upon William the Con∣queror's coming in, these Laws were in a great mea∣sure laid aside. At first, he intended to have brought in the Norman Usages, and to have establish'd them here entire; till he found the Humor of the English very much set upon their own Laws, and so was in∣duced, from a prudent Regard to his own Safety, only to Reform, Alter, Add, &c. but so, that the old Body was his Foundation. Tho' in his whole ma∣nagement of Affairs, he omitted no Opportunities either of Force or Insinuation, to discourage the establish'd Customs, and to wean them from the Affe∣ction they had to the Usages of their Fore-fathers. Thus, he won upon them by degrees, till he had con∣firm'd himself in his New Conquests, and in an ab∣solute Power, or something that look'd very like it; especially, if we take an Estimate from his Arbitrary Proceedings towards the English, rather than from his fair Words, Contracts and Promises; which Con∣querors, when they find them inconsistent with their Designs, seldom want either Inclination or Pretences to break and cast off. But the succeeding Kings (whether for want of Policy, or Courage, or both) found it hard to maintain themselves in that absolute manner of Government, and to complete what their Predecessor had begun. For the People began to insist upon their Liberties (whether justly or unjustly, I shall not determine; 'tis a Controversie has cost Pains and Paper enough already) omitted no Advan∣tages of Wars abroad or Disturbances at home, where∣by they might gain Ground and extort new Privi∣leges. More especially, in the Reigns of King John and Henry III. they broke into open Wars, for the Redress of Grievances; and brought them to such Straits, that they were glad to come off by submit∣ting to the Regulations insisted upon, and by admit∣ting the Nobility and Gentry into a nearer Share of the Government. Whereupon, the Great Charter, call'd Magna Charta, was granted, and Statutes be∣gan to be made according to the Necessities of the Kingdom; by which, and the Common Law, or the common Usages of the Nation, our Law-Courts proceed at this Day, in their Judgments and De∣crees. SECT. IV. The Ecclesiastical Government. The Church of England is govern'd by two Arch∣bishops and twenty five Bishops. The Archbishop of Canterbury is Primate of all England; the Archbi∣shop of York is Primate of England, but not of all England: A Controversie which caus'd a great many hot Disputes and Quarrels, but was at last deter∣min'd in favour of Canterbury, against all the Pleas and Arguments brought by the other for Independen∣cie and Freedom. The Archbishopricks and Bishop∣ricks, with their Extent and Jurisdiction, will best appear from the following Scheme.
    Contains Within the Province of Canterbury, which hath Part of Kent for its own peculiar Diocess, are, Rochester The other Part of Kent. London Essex, Middlesex, and Part of Hertfordshire. Chichester Sussex. Winchester Hampshire, Surrey and Isle of Wight, with Gernsey and Jersey. Salisbury Wiltshire and Berkshire. Exeter Devonshire and Cornwall. Bathe and Wells Somersetshire. Glocester Glocestershire. Worcester Worcestershire, and Part of Warwickshire. Hereford Herefordshire and Part of Shropshire. Lichfield and Co∣ventry. Staffordshire, Derbyshire, and the other Part of Warwickshire, with Part of Shropshire. Lincoln Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Huntingdonshire, Bed∣fordshire, Buckingham∣shire, and the other Part of Hertfordshire. Ely Cambridgeshire and the Isle of Ely. Norwich Norfolk and Suffolk. Oxford Oxfordshire. Peterburrow Northamptonshire and Rut∣landshire. Bristol Dorsetshire. To these add Four in Wales, S. Davids, Lan∣daff, Banchor and S. Asaph. Within the Province of York, which hath Yorkshire and Not∣tinghamshire for its peculiar Diocess, are, Chester Cheshire, Richmondshire, Lancashire, Part of Cum∣berland, and of Westmor∣land, Flintshire and Denbighshire. Durham The Bishoprick of Durham and Northumberland. Carlisle Part of Cumberland and of Westmorland. Sodor The Isle of Man. As to the Precedency of these, the Archbishop of Canterbury is first, York second, London third, Dur∣ham fourth, Winchester fifth; and the rest according to order of Consecration. As in the Civil Government, the Parliament is the Supreme Court, so is a Synod in the Ecclesiastical; call'd among us a Convocation: Wherein Matters of Doctrine and Discipline are from time to time stated and determin'd, and by the King and Parliament pass'd into Laws. The chief Courts of the Archbishop of Canterbury are, 1. The Court of Arches, where the Dean of the Arches sits as Judge. 2. The Court of Audience, where all Complaints, &c. are received. 3. The Prerogative-Court, where the Business of Wills is handl'd. 4. The Court of Faculties, where the Rigour of the Canon-Law is moderated. 5. The Court of Peculiars, wherein is lodg'd a Jurisdiction over Parishes exempt from the Bishop of the Diocess. Besides, every Bishop holds his Court within his own Diocess, and takes Cognizance of Excommuni∣cations, Censures, and other things relating to the Church. SECT. V. The Divisions of England. The most remarkable Divisions of England, are these three. 1. That of the Romans into Britannia prima, secunda, Maxima Coesariensis, Valentia, Fla∣via Caesariensis. The Bounds of these several Branches are very uncertain, and can only be gathered from Conjecture. Britannia prima seems to have been the South Part of Britain. Secunda probably was Wales. Maxima Coesariensis and Valentia seem to have been those Countries that lay upon the Frontiers of Scotland. And Flavia Coesariensis was likely enough the Heart of England. 2. That of the Saxons, into seven Kingdoms; whereof we have given an Account, under Sect. 3. concerning the Civil Government. 3. That of King Alfred, into Hundreds (call'd in some Parts of England, Wapentakes) and Counties. Besides these, the Romans branch'd it into so many several People, the Names whereof are generally of a British Original, relating either to the Figure of the Place, the Nature of the Soil, or the Disposition of the Inhabitants. This Division cannot be more conveniently represented, than in a Table along with the Counties of England, as they stand at this Day, and fall within the Bounds of the several People. Danmonii Cornwall, Devonshire. Durotriges. Dorsetshire. Belgae, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hamshire, Isle of Wight. Atrebates, Barkshire. Regni, Surrey, Sussex. Cantium. Kent. Dobuni. Glocestershire, Oxfordshire. Cattieuchlani. Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire. Trinobantes. Middlesex, Essex. Iceni. Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire. Coritani. Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire. Cornavii. Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, Cheshire. Silures, Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Brecknockshire, Monmouthshire, Glamorganshire. Dimetae. Caermardhinshire, Penbrokshire, Cardiganshire. Ordevices. Montgomeryshire, Meirionydhshire, Caernarvonshire, Anglesey, Mona. Denbighshire, Flintshire. Brigantes. Yorkshire, West-riding, East-riding, North-riding, Richmondshire, Bishoprick of Durham, Lancashire, Westmorland, Cumberland. Ottadini. Northumberland.
CORNWALL. THE County of CORNWALL has its Name from lessening by degrees into a sort of Horn: which very exactly answers the Nature and Form of that Tract; as may be seen either by the General or particular Maps. As it lies out from the rest of the Kingdom, so had it formerly it's Laws and Usages distinct from England. But 'tis by degrees reconcil'd not only to the same Laws, but even to the same Language. Now, few or none among them know any thing of the old Cornish; having a great Fondness for the English Tongue and Modes of Living. Their greatest Commodity is Tin; which has given occasion to an Opinion that the Phoenicians traded thither, and left Name not only to the County in General, but to a great many Particular Places in it. But whatever Advantage might be reap'd from the Mines anciently (which probably was very conside∣rable;) 'tis certain that the Earls of Cornwall have been prodigiously enrich'd by the Revenues arising from them. Nor could it be well otherwise; all Europe fetching their Supplies, at least the greatest share of them, from these Parts. Which vast In-comes have induc'd the Earls to grant them large Privileges; to procure them such Charters from Time to Time as might tend to the Improvement of their Trade or Convenience of Management, and to erect Courts and constitute Officers, in a Method agreeable to the Nature of the Employment, and the Humor of the People. 'Tis observable, That through the whole County, abundance of Towns are scatter'd, which have their Names from Irish Saints, who had come over into these Parts; and on account of their Piety and Re∣ligious Course of Life had a wonderful Veneration paid them. And after their Deaths, the particular Places wherein they had spent their Time in Devo∣tions and Retirement, were consecrated to their Names, and had signal Pieces of respect paid them by their Neighbours. The most Remarkable Places are, Falmouth, Launston, Truro, Wadebridge, Fawey, Saltash, S. Columbs. Falmouth, a Town of a very considerable Trade, which the Convenience of the Harbour brings to it. 'Tis a Port very Large, and withal Safe, by reason of the Creeks on all Sides, which protect it against the Violence of Winds and Storms. The two Forts, one on each Side, viz. S. Maudit's and Pendinas, ren∣der it a Place of yet greater Strength and Se∣curity. Launston, on the East-Side of the County (call'd in Domesday Launstaveton, from a College there dedi∣cated to S. Stephen) is two Towns, now grown into one, and is become so considerable that the Assizes are always held in it. Truro, a Mayor-Town, suppos'd to be so call'd from it's three Streets; but especially considerable in those Parts for the more than ordinary concern that it has in the Stannaries. Wadebridge, about 5 miles from Padstow, is re∣markable for a Bridge of seventeen Arches, the larg∣est by much in the whole Country. Fawey, a Haven on the South-Side of the Coun∣ty, remarkable for Sea-Fights; and has in Memory of them, for its Arms, a Compound of those of the Cinque-Ports. Saltash, on the West-Side of the River Tamar, a Town conveniently seated for Trade, well stor'd with Merchants, and endow'd with good Privi∣leges. S. Columbs, not far from the Irish-Sea, tho' a Place of no great Trade or Resort, is made famous by its Relation to S. Columba, a very pious Woman, from whom it had the Name. Ancient Places. Voluba seems to have left its Name in our present Falmouth, before-mention'd. Belerium can be no other than the Land's-End; call'd also by Ptolemy  or Antivestaeum. Cenionis ostium, cannot any where be plac'd more probably than at that large Port, the Conveniency whereof we have describ'd under Falmouth. Ocrinum (probably so call'd from Ochr, an Edge) seems to be that Promontory, call'd at this Day, the Lizard. Ʋzella seems to have left some Remains of its Name in the present Lestuthiel, which was a Place of good Note and Trade, till the Sands stopping up the River, hindred Ships from coming up to it. Tamara is the River which parts this County from Devonshire; and likewise a Town upon it, now call'd Tamerton. Things Remarkable. Biscaw-woune (near S. Buriens) a Place so call'd, where are nineteen Stones set in a Circle, which by some are imagin'd to have been erected in Memory of a Victory. But if we compare them with others of the same Nature, in other Parts of the Kingdom; to imagine them Funeral Monuments, will perhaps be a more plausible Conjecture. Main-Amber (near Pensans) a stone of a prodigious Bigness, which yet was so plac'd that one might move it with a Finger. In the late Civil Wars it was thrown down. Other-half-stone (not far from S. Neot's) an Inscri∣ption, with large barbarous Letters, the Reading whereof implies it to have been a Funeral Monument. See Camden's Brit. Engl. p. 9. Wring-cheese; near this Place, is a large Stone like a Cheese, and so plac'd between some others, that it seems to be press'd by them. Hurlers, at a little distance, is a square Set of Stones, so call'd from an Opinion advanc'd by the common People, that they are so many Men chang'd into Stones for hurling the Ball, on Sunday; an Exer∣cise for which they have been exceeding famous. But we need not acquiesce in their foolish Fancies, since it appears plainly enough, that these (as well as many others in this County) were funeral Monuments; from a Cross discover'd upon one of them, by a very ingenious Gentleman.
map of roads in England and Wales A New Mapp of the Roads of ENGLAND Shewing the Reputed distances from one town to another Note that the Market Townes are marked thus †
DEVONSHIRE. AS Devonshire in the Time of the Romans was included under the same common Name, Dan∣monii, with its Neighbour Cornwall; so in after-Ages did it share in several Privileges and Advan∣tages. Particularly in those of the Tin-mines, which it had in great abundance; as the four Stannary-Courts, and the Officers belonging to them do plainly evince. Nay, by the best Computations which can be drawn from the Registers and Publick Papers be∣longing to each County, it appears that this afforded a greater Plenty than Cornwall. And that not only of Tin, but also of Silver; Mines whereof were discover'd about Comb-Martin, in the Time of Ed∣ward I. and did great Service to King Edward III. towards carrying on the French Wars. The Soil of it self is but Lean and Poor; but they improve it strangely, by a sort of Sea-Sand, which they sprinkle upon it: And where that is scarce, they make use of Marie, Lime, and burnt Turf. The more conside∣rable Towns, are, Tavestock, Plimouth, Totnesse, Torbay, Tiverton, Exeter, Bernstaple, Topesham, Okehampton. Tavestock, adjoyning to Cornwall, is not at pre∣sent remarkable for either Wealth or Buildings; but receives all its Glory from the old Abbey, and the Laudable Custom of reading Saxon Lectures, in order to keep up the Knowledge of our old Mother-Tongue. Plimouth, a flourishing Town, occasion'd by the Convenience of its Harbour, for the Reception of great Ships. Which the Government observing, has pitch'd upon it as the most convenient Place in those Parts, for the Building of Ships, and has accommodated it with a Dry-Dock, capable of a First-Rate-Ship, a Bason before it of above two hundred Foot square, and Houses for Officers, Stores, &c. in proportion. They had a Mayor granted them by Henry VI. who governs the four Wards, into which the Town is divided; whereas before, they were govern'd by four distinct Cap∣tains (for so they term'd them) and their inferior Officers. The Place is eminent for the Birth of Sir Francis Drake. Totnesse, upon the River Dert, was formerly a Town of great note, and accordingly had very con∣siderable Privileges granted it by the Kings of Eng∣land. The Condition of it at present, will not bear the Character which it formerly had. Torbay, upon the Eastern Coast, has been very remarkable and much talk'd of for the Landing of the Prince of Orange, now King William III. on Nov. 5th 1688. Tiverton, upon the Ex, is remarkable for a good Free-School, and for its Woollen-Trade, which very much enriches the Inhabitants. EXETER, the most considerable Place in all these Parts, stands upon a gentle Hill, and is en∣compass'd with a Ditch and very strong Walls. That the Romans knew it, is plain from the Itinerary of Antoninus, which begins here. The Saxons came then into the entire Possession of it, when Athelstan turn'd out the Britains, who had not 'till that Time solely enjoy'd it, but had the Liberty of Living in common with the Saxons. As the Kings of England have endow'd it with many Privileges, so has it suffer'd very much from Sieges: Notwithstanding all which, it might however have been more consi∣derable than it is at this day, if the Wears of Tope∣sham did not hinder Ships of Burden from coming up to the City, as they formerly did. On the East-Side stands the Cathedral, built by King Athelstan, and by Edward III. honoured with the Title of an Epis∣copal See. Berstaple, on the Irish-Sea, is a neat Town, go∣vern'd by a Mayor, two Aldermen, and a Common-Council of twenty four. 'Tis a Place of good Trade, so that the greatest part of the Inhabitants are Merchants; and is pretty eminent for a Bridge, built by one Stamford, a Citizen of London. Topesham, a Town near Exeter, had its Rise from the Misfortune of that Place: For upon the Obstructions of the River Ex, made by Edward Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, upon a Displeasure conceiv'd against the Citizens; this began to be a Place of Resort, where the Vessels landed, and from whence the Lading was carry'd by Land to Exeter. But in the Time of King Charles II. such effectual Endeavours were made towards the remov∣ing of these Damms, that now they carry Lighters of the greatest Burthen up to the City-Key. Okehampton, so call'd from the River Ock upon which it stands, is a considerable Market-Town, incorporated by King James I. Ancient Places. Isca, mention'd by Ptolemy, is so plainly convey'd to us in the present Ex, call'd by the Britains Isc; that there's no place of doubt, but this is the same River. Isca Danmoniorum, is our Exeter. Moridunum, tho' it has left nothing of the Name, seems yet to have its Meaning preserv'd in a Sea-Coast-Town, call'd at this Day Seton: For Mor is Mare, and Dunum a Town. Herculis Promontorium is easily discover'd by the present Name Herty-point; of which no tolerable Reason can be given, unless we allow it to be a Corruption from that old Name. Things Remarkable. Lay-well, is a Well near Tor-bay, which in the compass of an Hour Ebbs and Flows several Times; bubling up now and then like a boiling Pot. The neighbouring People look upon it to be Medicinal in some sort of Fevers. At Withicombe, in a Storm of Thunder and Light∣ning (14 Car. I.) a Ball of Fire came into the Church, whilst they were at Divine Service, which kill'd three Persons, and wounded sixty two; and besides, did Damage to the value of 300 l. and up∣wards. And at Crews-Morthard, in the same County, a like Storm happen'd, which melted the Bells, Lead and Glass; and was so violent, that it rent the Steeple: This was in the Year 1689.
The Organ in the Cathedral of Exeter is account∣ed the greatest in England; the largest Pipe being 15 Inches Diameter. At North-Taunton, there is a Pit of ten Foot deep, out of which there sometimes springs up a little Brook, that continues for many Days together. The Common People tell you, That it presages some Publick Calamity; but whether the particu∣lar Times, at which it has been observed to rise, will justifie that Interpretation, I know not. DORSETSHIRE. THO' the County of Dorset lies much upon the Sea, yet have they not those Advantages from Navigation, or such Convenience of Harbours, as other Counties that have less Sea-Coast. Which possibly may be owing, in some measure, to the fruitfulness of their Soil, which both employs the Inhabitants, and supplies them with all Necessaries of Life; whilst Parts that are more barren send the Natives to Sea, both to spend their Time and pro∣vide a Maintenance. The more consi∣derable Towns are, Lyme, Dorchester, Shirburn, Shaftesbury, Blanford, Winburn. Lyme, a Place of good Trade and well-stock'd with Merchants, lies upon the Sea-Coast, near the Borders of Devonshire. Navigation is that which has raised it from a very mean Condition; for the Convenience whereof they have built a very remark∣able Peer, which requires a great Sum of Mony yearly to maintain it. This Advantage supplies it with Wealth at home; but that which has given it a name abroad, was the Landing of the Duke of Monmouth, upon which occasion we frequently meet with it in the Histories of those Times. Dorchester, the Place from which the whole Coun∣ty had its Name, must, for that Reason, have been formerly of much more note than it is at present. Its Decay probably is owing to the Revolutions of Wars; for that it has been a Place of Action, we learn both from our Histories and the Remains of Antiquity they still meet with. Of late Years it seems to have recover'd it self; being thought fit to have the Privilege of a Mayor and Aldermen bestow'd upon it by King Charles I. Shirburn, upon the Edge of Somersetshire, derives its ancient Glory from being an Episcopal See; and its present from Populousness, and their Improve∣ment of the Woolen Manufacture. Shaftesbury seems to have been of considerable Note in the Times of the Saxons; in whose Histo∣ries we find it frequently mention'd. That it was built by King Alfred, appears from a Stone dug up out of the old Ruins; the Reading whereof Malms∣bury has convey'd to us. It grew so considerably, that about Edward the Confessor's Time it had no less than 104 Houses. Blandford (upon the Stour) a pretty Market-Town, which ows its Beauty to a Fire that happen'd in it, and burnt it down; after which it was neatly rebuilt. Winburne, upon the same River, is seated at the Foot of a Hill; being pretty large and populous. In the more early times it was famous upon the account of Religion, and the Nunnery there; but afterwards for being a Seat of War in the Danish Commotions. In this County, we must also observe Portland, an Island of about seven Miles Circumference, guarded with a continued Ridge of Rocks running round it. The Inhabitants are not many; but the Soil affords good store of Corn and Pasture. And on the East-side of the County, Purbeck, which is of a contrary Nature, being mostly Heath and Wood; but well stock'd with Fallow-Deer. Ancient Names. Durnovaria, mention'd by Antoninus in those Parts, can be no other than the present Dorchester, whether we respect the Name, the Distances, or the Remains of Roman Antiquity, which they trace out. Vindogladia also discovers it self in the present Name of Winburn; the first Syllable whereof is manifestly a Relique of the old Denomination: And the second (which implies a River) does very well an∣swer the Gladia, deriv'd from the British Clediau, Swords; by which Expression they sometimes de∣noted their Rivers. Things Remarkable. In the Isle of Portland, Wood is so very scarce that their common Fuel is Cow-Dung dried hard by the Heat of the Sun; which being so order'd makes a clear Fire, without any offensive smell. Maiden-castle, near Dorchester, is a most stately Piece of Antiquity, and appears from the Form, Con∣trivance, and other Circumstances, to have been a Work of the Romans. White-Hart-forest, on the Borders of Somersetshire, has its Name from a White-hart, kill'd by a Gentle∣man of this Country, against the express Order of King Henry III. For which Fact, there is yearly paid into the Exchequer a pecuniary Mulct, call'd White-hart-Silver. It was a pleasant Humor, and a very lucky Dis∣covery, that happen'd some Years ago near Winford-Eagle. Digging a Barrow or Tumulus, the Workmen came to an Oven (with an Urn in it) and one of them putting forward his Hand, in hopes of some farther Discoveries, found it too hot for him to hold it long there. 'Tis probably owing to some Mineral; the same natural Heat being commonly discover'd by the Miners.
SOMERSETSHIRE. THE County of Somerset is not so well accom∣modated with Harbours, as might be expected from a Tract of Ground that lies so much to the Sea. In some Parts it is exceeding Marshy; but in others affords plenty of good Corn and Pasture. The more consi∣derable Towns are, BRISTOW, BATHE, WELLS, Bridgwater, Somerton, Taunton. BRISTOW is parted by the River Avon, which divides this County, for some miles together, from Glocestershire. It's Wealth and Glory cannot be of any great Antiquity, because we find very little or no mention of it in the early Times of the Saxons. No, nor in the Danish Plunders neither; which few Places escap'd, that had Riches enough to expose them to the Depredations of that People. But after the Conveniency of the Place for Trade with most Parts of Europe, was observ'd and under∣stood; then the Inhabitants seem to have flock'd thither, and by their good Success and Commerce to have improv'd it to that degree of Wealth and Beau∣ty, it may justly glory of at this Day. Their Buildings are fair, the Inhabitants numerous, and their Churches and publick Edifices very beautiful. To these Advantages, a new Honour was added by King Henry VIII. who made it a Bishop's See, upon the Suppression of the Monasteries, and gave it for its Diocess the City of Bristow (a County incorporate by it self) and the County of Dorset, formerly be∣longing to Salisbury. BATHE stands upon the same River, and has the same Dignity of a Bishop's See; but in other respects falls far short of Bristow. It lies low, in the middle of a Range of Hills, wherewith it is very much fortified. This natural Strength of the Place was, no doubt, the reason of all that Bustle and Noise which the Saxons and Britains made about it, in their Engagements in those Parts. It's Name and Reputation have both the same Original; the hot Springs, I mean, arising there, which many Ages have known, but none have experienc'd so Medicinal as the present. Great numbers of the Nobility and Gentry flock thither in Summer-time, and the Phy∣sicians begin to frequent them more than ever: Which concourse from all Parts, makes it a little strange that the City should not increase more in Wealth and Buildings. As it affords Remedies to the Sick, so does it give a great Diversion to the Antiquaries, by shewing a vast number of ancient Monuments and Inscriptions, set up in the Walls. That it enjoys the Title of a Bishop's See, was occa∣sioned by Joannes de Villula, Bishop of Wells, re∣moving his Seat thither, about the Year of our Lord 1088. Whereupon, to compose a Quarrel which had risen between the Monks of Bathe and Canons of Wells about the Right of Election; it was agreed among other things, That the Bishop should take his Title from both Places; tho' by others 'tis af∣firm'd that for some Years after, he was only call'd Bishop of Bathe. WELLS, so call'd from the Wells and Springs in it, is situated at the Bottom of Mendip-Hills. It was made a Bishop's See by Edward the Elder, about the Year 905. and the Bishop kept his Residence in it, till John de Villula, the Sixteenth Bishop, having purchas'd the Town of Bathe of King Henry I. transferr'd it thither. The Place is populous, and very beautiful, whether you respect the Publick or private Buildings. Bridgewater (corruptly so call'd from Burgh-Walter, as appears by the ancient Records) lies upon the River Parret, and is a large and well-peopled Town. Somerton, as inconsiderable as it is at present, was once the chief Town in this County; as may be reasonably inferr'd from its giving Name to the whole; and from the frequent mention of it in our ancient Histories. Taunton, a Town seated upon the River Thone, which gives it the Name, is very neat and beautiful in it self; but render'd much more agreeable by the delicate Prospect it gives us of green Meadows, and numbers of pretty Villages all round. Ancient Places. Ʋzella, mention'd by Ptolemy, is an Aestuary on the West Side of this County, occasion'd by the concourse of two large Rivers, emptying themselves into the Sea about the Stert-point. Ischalis, appears from the Coins and other Marks of Antiquity, that are dug up at Ivelchester (a Town upon the River Ivel) to have been seated at that Place. Aquae Solis, by the Course of the Itinerary, and the Import of the Word, can be no other than our Bathe; especially, if we add to these Evidences, the Monuments mention'd to be found, in the De∣scription of that Place. Things Remarkable. Ochie-hole, a remarkable Cave in Mendip-hills, of a vast length; wherein they discover several Wells and Springs. The Serpent-Stones are common at Cainsham near Bristow. Abundance of Diamonds are about the Rocks near Bristow; being lodg'd very artificially in a hollow sort of Flint. A Monument of large Stones, not unlike that of Stone-henge in Wiltshire, is at Stanton-drew in this County; but being interrupted with Buildings and Enclosures, it is not so much taken notice of as it might otherwise deserve. Cheddar-Cheeses (so call'd from the Place near Wells, where they are made) are so large as some∣times to require more than one Man to set them up∣on the Table. The Elvers at Bristow is a Dish perhaps not to be met with elswhere: 'Tis a sort of Eel, which at a certain Time of the Year, swims upon the Surface of the Water in great Numbers. These they skim up in small Nets, and by a peculiar way of Dres∣sing, bake into little Cakes; and so fry, and serve them up. Amongst the Rarities of this County, Glassenbury may justly be reckon'd; which by the Remains of Religion and its venerable aspect, affords abun∣dance of Pleasure to a curious Admirer of Antiquities.
WILTSHIRE. AS the County of Wilts was for many hundreds of Years almost a constant Scene of Action in the Wars between the Saxons and Britains, and af∣terwards between the several Saxon Kings; so does it afford greater remains of Antiquity than perhaps any County in England can pretend to. 'Tis divi∣ded into North and South; and agreeable to this Division, is of a different Soil and Aspect. The first abounds with little Hills, which are render'd very entertaining by the small Rivers gliding be∣tween; and naturally produces much Wood. The latter is a Champain Fruitful Country. Places of greatest Note, are Salisbury, Malmsbury, Devises, Marlburrow, Wilton. Salisbury is two-fold, the Old and New. Old Sarum was seated upon a high Hill (as most of our ancient Towns here in Britain are observ'd to have been) being a place chiefly intended for Strength, and a defence against the Enemy. But what was a security against Foreigners, prov'd a plague to the Inhabitants; who found the insolencies of the Gari∣son-Soldiers to be such, that they seem'd Intolerable. To remedy this Evil, and to accommodate them∣selves with the convenience of Water, (the want whereof had been a heavy grievance in their old Quarters) they began to remove into the lower Grounds in the time of Richard I. where they laid the Foundations of New Sarum. And immediately Richard Poor, the Bishop, began a most stately Cathedral Church, which at this day has deservedly a name a∣mong the most considerable Structures of this Island. The Bishop's See was remov'd to Salisbury, upon the uniting of Sherborn and Wilton into one, by Herman∣nus, about the year 1056. But though that may be of advantage to the place, and set it somewhat forward into its growing condition, yet it could ne∣ver have arriv'd to that Degree of Wealth, Popu∣lousness and Splendor, if the Western-road had not been turn'd that way, by the Authority of some who were nearly concern'd for its Prosperity. Their want of Water was amply supplied by their remove from the higher Grounds; for now every Street has its little Rivulet running through it. Malmsbury, though at present a handsom Town and well maintain'd by the Cloathing-Trade, was yet formerly much more considerable on account of its Monastery. For Maildulphus an Irish-Scot leading here an Hermit's Life, left behind him a Scholar (Aldhelmus) a very eminent Man, who built a state∣ly Monastery; whereupon the place was call'd Mealdelmesbyrig, and by contraction Malmsbury; which Name seems to be a compound of Mail∣dulphus and Aldhelmus, the Master and the Scholar. Devises, anciently very famous for a strong Castle, the Government whereof has been thought an Hono∣rable Post by Persons of the best Quality. But now, that is quite Demolish'd; and the advantage of Peace hath given it what is much more valuable, a good Trade, a thriving People, and plenty of every thing. It is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, &c. and hath in it two great Parishes. Marlburrow, upon the River Kennet, runs along the side of a Hill: It was formerly eminent for its Castle, and is mention'd in our Law-books and Courts of Justice, upon account of the Statute made here for the suppression of Riots, in 32 Henry III. call'd to this day Statutum de Marlburrow. The Keep of the old Castle is figur'd into a Mount of curious con∣trivance, by his Grace the Duke of Somerset, the Owner of it. Wilton does not require a mention upon account of any Figure it makes at this day, but may justly call for that respect, as being once the chief Town in the whole County. And it might have grown as well as its Neighbours, had it been allow'd the ad∣vantage of the Western-road, which at first it enjoy'd. But when that was turn'd through Salisbury, the rise of one was the ruin of the other; and this Place has ever since been dwindling by degrees into that low condition we see it in at present. Ancient Places. Cunetio may very probably be settl'd at Marlbur∣row, the Castle there appearing from Roman Coins to be of Roman Antiquity. Sorbiodunum is agree'd upon by all Authors to be Old Sarum. However they may quarrel about the original of the Name, they are unanimous in their opinion of its Situation. Verlucio, keeps something of its name in the present Werminster, (a Town lying upon the little River Dever-ril;) for by changing the (v) into (w) which without any straining may be done, and adding the Saxon Termination mynster, we have the Name compleat. Things Remarkable. Wansdike, or Wodensdike, (so call'd from the Sax∣on God Woden) is a wonderful Ditch, running a∣cross the middle of this Shire from East to West. Whenever it was cast up, the design seems to have been a Boundary or Fence, either to distinguish Ter∣ritories, or to be a guard against the Enemies in this Frontier Country. Stone-henge is a Monument so remarkable, that it has engag'd many a Learned Pen in conjectures a∣bout its Founder's design and Antiquity. The Opi∣nions contain'd in three or four separate Books writ∣ten upon that Subject, are drawn up, and the whole matter Stated in the new Edition of Camden's Britan∣nia, page 108, whither I refer the Reader. The Barrows upon Salisbury Plain, lying scatter'd here and there, afford good entertainment to a curi∣ous Traveller; and the rather, because they are of several Forms and Figures, which perhaps in other places is not so common.
HAMSHIRE. OF all the Counties which border upon the Sea, there are few or none that have the advantage of so many Creeks and Havens, as Hamshire. By which means the South part is abundantly sup∣plied with all the conveniencies the Sea affords. Through the whole, they have good store of Corn, and plenty of Wood in all Parts; but what they are most remarkable for, is their Bacon, which is reputed the best in the Kingdom, and accordingly is sold into all parts. Towns more considerable, are Winchester, Southampton, Portsmouth, Basingstoke, Andover, Christ-Church. Winchester, whether we consider its ancient or pre∣sent condition, may deservedly lay claim to the first Place. For as it was of good Note in the times of the Romans, so under the Saxon Government was it the Seat of the West-Saxon Kings. But that which has chiefly secur'd its flourishing condition, is the Bi∣shop's See, settl'd there very early by Kinegils the Saxon; and (which is more) never remov'd from its first Foundation, as most of its Neighbours have been, to the great damage of the places from which they were drawn. This favourable concurrence of Cir∣cumstances was encreas'd by Edward III. when he settl'd here the Staple for Cloath and Wool. The Cathedral hath been from time to time enlarg'd and put under the protection of several Tutelar Saints. But its greatest Glory, is the College built here by William of Wickham, Bishop of this See; which supplies both Church and State with great numbers of Learned Men. The Royal Palace began by King Charles II, is very stately and magnificent; and the Hospital built by Bishop Morley for 10 Ministers Widows, is a work of great Charity and Good∣ness. Southampton within these hundred years was a rich, populous, beautiful Place; but now by the loss of its Trade, all this Finery is gone, the Buildings decay'd, the Town poor, and the Inhabitants thin. It ought not however to be omitted amongst the con∣siderable places of these parts, both upon account of its former Eminency, and also for the Figure it still bears in our Naval Affairs. Portsmouth, after it was by Queen Elizabeth com∣pleatly Fortified with new Works, became a place of great Note and Resort, in times of War especially: but in times of Peace, the Trade it has will hardly maintain it in the same Grandeur. And as the Place is of great importance to the Nation by its Strength, and Works of the best Contrivance; so is it of great consequence to our Fleets, being furnish'd of late years with Docks and all other necessaries for build∣ing and repairing Ships of the highest Rates. Basingstoke is a well frequented Market, upon the High-road. Andover is a Corporation pretty large and popu∣lous. Ancient Places. Regnum can be no other than the present Ring∣wood, (lying upon the River Avon) which may seem by a very fair Interpretation to signifie the Wood of the Regni. Alauni Ostium, is probably that Mouth out of which the Stour and Avon empty themselves jointly. Trisantonis Ostium is agree'd upon all hands to be the Harbour of Southampton, beginning at Calshot-Castle. Clausentum, by the distances from the two Stations on each side, as it stands in the Itinerary, must of necessity be that Old Town which stood formerly near the present Southampton, and was call'd by the same name. Brage, by the course of the Itinerary, is probably a little Country Village that lyes between Salisbury and Winchester, the two Stations on each hand, and is call'd at this day Broughton. Venta Belgarum, is undoubtedly Winchester, to which it has probably given the first Syllable of that name. Segontiaci, mention'd by Caesar, by all the Circum∣stances must have been those People who liv'd about the Northern limits of this County, about the Hun∣dred of Holeshot. Vindonum we call at this day Silcester; though by the Britains it was call'd Caer Segonte, as being the chief City of the Segontiaci, just now mention'd. Things Remarkable. Arthur's Round-Table at Winchester is much talk'd of and admir'd as a Relick of King Arthur's. But that Fancy is to be reckon'd among those many ridi∣culous Errors which have been convey'd to the ig∣norant country People by Ballads and Romances, and have got such footing that 'tis hard to undeceive them. This Table is probably as old as the Tornea∣ments: and 'tis a good Conjecture, that it was design'd to prevent all quarrels about Precedency among the Combatants. Silcester, which we observ'd but now to be the Vindonum of the Ancients, shews vast remains of its Antiquity and once Flourishing condition. The thin∣ness of the Corn where the Walls and Streets have run, with other Observations to be made upon the place, afford very good entertainment to a curious Traveller. The Isle of WIGHT. South of Hamshire lyes the Isle of Wight, about 20 miles long, and 12 over where broadest. The North is mostly taken up with Pasturage. Meadows and Wood; but the South bears abundance of Corn. As to Ecclesiastical Government, it is under the Ju∣risdiction of the Bishop of Winchester; but as to Civil, under Hamshire. The Inhabitants are a Stout sort of People, having been all along inur'd to fre∣quent Skirmishes, by lying expos'd to the first at∣tacks of the invading Enemy. Caresbrook, a Castle in the middle of the Isle, of very great Antiquity. Of late years the Imprison∣ment of King Charles I. has made it very Remark∣able. Yarmouth and Cows, both lying over against Ham∣shire, are their two Havens of greatest Safety and Importance. The Needles, the Shingles, the Mixon, and other Shelves round it, are a good security to the Place against an Enemy, but very troublesom to the Seamen.
BARKSHIRE. THE County of BERKS lying out in length from South-east to North-west, as it is accommo∣dated all over with very convenient Rivers, so has it the advantage of the Thames running along one side of it. Which being navigable, is of great pro∣fit not only to the particular Towns seated upon it; but also to the whole County, the narrowness whereof gives the Inhabitants an opportunity of con∣veying Goods by Water, without any great inconveni∣ence or expence of Land-carriage. This I take to be the great enricher of the County: For tho' in several parts, especially in the middle, and where it borders upon Wiltshire, they have good store of Corn; yet this, without the assistance of the River, could not turn to near the same account. Towns of note, Abingdon. Windsor. Reading. Wallingford. Newbury. Hungerford. Maidenhead. Abingdon carries in its very name the character of Religion, being so call'd from the famous Abbey that was built there by Cissa the West-Saxon. Some modern Authors are inclin'd to think this the old Clovesho, so famous in our ancient Histories for the solemn Meetings and great Councils before the Con∣quest. And the situation indeed of the place makes it convenient enough for holding such general As∣semblies, being almost at an equal distance from the several Parties concern'd. But whether this Honour belongs to it or not; 'tis certain, the Abbey grew to be so eminent and considerable, that here (as in many other places throughout England) it lay a good Foundation for a handsom Town; which encreas'd strangely, after that Henry V. had contriv'd the high Road through it. Malt is its greatest Trade, and the Market-house its greatest Ornament. Windsor stands in the North-west corner of this County, upon a high Hill; from whence there is a delicate Prospect of Woods and Fields all round. This advantage of situation, with its convenient di∣stance from London, has induc'd several of the Kings of England to take a more particular delight in it, both on account of its Strength and Pleasure. The Palace is a most noble Structure, adorn'd with a delightful Terrace-walk by Queen Elizabeth, but beautify'd chiefly and brought to perfection by King Charles II. who, at vast expence, adorn'd it with most curious Paintings. S. George's Chappel and the noble Order of the Garter, instituted there by King Edward III. are Honours wherein the place may justly glory; the greatest Princes in Europe having esteem'd it a high favour to be admitted into that Society. And it was an honour to this Castle, to be the Prison of the King of France and the King of Scots, at the same time, under that powerful Prince Edward III. As for the Town: Old Windsor is very much gone to decay, upon the rise of the new one, which lies to the West of the Castle, and (as it were) under it. The growth of the Town is in a great measure owing to the Court, which the pleasure our Princes have taken in it, has drawn hither. And accordingly, 'tis easie to observe, what difference there is between its present condition, now 'tis almost forsaken by the Court; and its state in the Regn of Charles II. by whose inclination to the variety of Diversions it affords, the Town flourish'd very much beyond its Neighbours. Reading is conveniently seated upon the River Ke∣net, at a small distance from its emptying it self into the Thames. It was before the Conquest very emi∣nent for a strong Castle; which lasted no longer than the time of Henry II. by whom it was pull'd down, for fear it should afford Refuge and Protection to King Stephen's Party. About an hundred years ago, Cloath was its greatest Trade and Employment; but the advantage of the situation upon the River has in a great measure drawn the Inhabitants from that Busi∣ness, and turn'd them to the Malt-trade, by which the Wealth of the Town is very much improv'd, The Streets and Buildings are very neat and handsom; and sometimes the Assizes are held here. Wallingford, upon the River of Thames, was also. famous for its Castle, which was exceeding strong and attempted more than once by King Stephen, in the civil Wars between him and Henry II. That which made Abingdon chiefly flourish, was the cause of this Town's decay, viz. the change of the High-Road. But yet for all that, the Malt-Trade does not only support it, but of late years has also encreas'd its Wealth, Buildings, and number of Inhabi∣tants. Newbury carries its rise and original in the very name, which implies a relation to some old Burgh near it; and that was Spene, at a little distance from this new Town. Tho' the name destroys all its pre∣tensions to Antiquity, yet it bears a considerable fi∣gure in our modern Histories, upon account of the Engagements here between the King and Parliament, in the late Civil Wars. The Cloath-Trade and the convenience of the River, have improv'd it in∣to a handsom, pretty Town. Hungerford, upon the edge of Wiltshire, has been all along more considerable, upon account of the Title it has for many Ages given to a very eminent Family, than for either Wealth or Neatness. All the Country round, it has a particular reputation for the best Trouts. Maidenhead, considering what time it has had for improvement, is grown into a handsom Town. For its first encrease was occasion'd by building a Wood∣en Bridge over the Thames; which, before that, us'd to be Ferry'd, at the expence and trouble of the Traveller. But the new Bridge, as it made the Road this way much more easie and convenient, so did it induce the Inhabitants to build Inns and provide all Accommodations for the Entertainment of Strangers. Ancient Places. Galleva was undoubtedly our Wallingford, as ap∣pears both from the course of the Itinerary, the re∣mains of the old Name in our present, and the anci∣ent grandeur and largeness of the Town. Spinae is now an inconsiderable Village, about a mile from Newbury; which carries the old name in its present Spene, and has also left the remains of it in a part of Newbury, still call'd Spinham-Lands. Bibroci, also, a People in those Parts, may seem to have left something of the name in the present Bray near Maidenhead.
SURREY. THE County of Surrey, (as we call it at this day) lyes all along upon the South-side of the River of Thames; from which Position, it has the Name. For, what our Age has contracted into Surrey, was call'd by our Fore-fathers Suthrige. That part of the Country which borders upon the Thames, is so adorn'd with a mixture of Woods, Meadows, and fair Buildings, that nothing can be more Entertaining: The other parts are Fruitful enough, though not so Pleasant. More considerable Towns, are, Southwark, Guildford, Kingston, Richmond, Lambeth. Southwark, (so call'd from its Southerly Situation, with respect to London) by its near intercourse with that noble City, has improv'd it self into a flourishing condition, not only beyond all other Places in this County, but equal to most of our Cities in England. Before the building of the Bridge, their Commerce was maintain'd only by Ferrying; but upon erecting a Wooden-bridge, it seem'd to be a sort of Suburbs to London; and lastly, by the stately Stone-bridge of 19 Arches, (upon which the Buildings are continu'd like a Street) one would think it a part of the City. Accordingly, in the Reign of Edward VI. it was an∣next to London; and by virtue thereof the Inhabi∣tants had a power granted them to use all such Laws within their Burrough, as the Citizens did within their City. Guilford (for so it is commonly pronounc'd, though written Guldford and Guildford) is seated upon the River Wye, and is a populous Market-Town: I know not whether we may attribute its growth, in some measure at least, to the Benefaction of Sir Richard Weston; by whose Industry, principally, the River upon which it stands, was made Navigable. 'Tis certain that all this part of the Country is very much engag'd to the first Contrivers, since they re∣ceive such considerable advantage from it. Kingston upon Thames, has its name from the So∣lemn Coronation of three Saxon Kings, Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethelred, in the Danish Wars. 'Tis a Market-Town, not very large indeed, but populous enough, and of good resort. Richmond, hard by has been particularly pitch'd upon by several of our Kings, for their Diversion and Plea∣sure, whenever the Affairs of the Nation would give them leave to retire out of the noise and Tumult of the City. And his present Majesty is so great an admirer of the Place, as to prefer it before the rest of his Royal Seats near the City, in his intervals from publick Business. Lambeth, over against Westminster, upon the River of Thames, has all its Reputation from the Palace of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, which is very large and stately. It has belong'd to them successively, ever since Arch-bishop Baldwin got a Manour in this Place by exchange with the Bishop of Rochester, about the year 1183. We meet with none of the old Stations in this County; the Noviomagus, (which Mr. Camden places at Woodcot) being more conveniently set∣tl'd in Kent. Things Remarkable. The Mole (a considerable River) in two several places goes under Ground for some space; particu∣larly, for 2 miles together, near Whisehill; from whence the place is call'd the Swallow. At Albury, the Hypogaeum, or Perforation, made through a mighty Hill, and design'd for a Coach-passage, is very Remarkable and Surprizing. Epsom-Wells have been in so great request of late years for their Mineral-waters, as to cause a conside∣rable increase of Buildings, for the entertainment of Gentlemen resorting thither, for their Health or Plea∣sure. A Skeleton of 9 Foot 3 Inches long, taken up in the Churh-yard of Wotton, and distinctly measur'd, may justly be reckon'd among the Remarkables of this County. SUSSEX. SƲssex, (or as it is more truly written, South-sex) derives its name from the ancient Inhabitants, the South-Saxons, who had that denomination with respect to the East-Saxons. The Downs take up the Sea-coast; the middle consists of Meadows, Pastures and Corn-fields; and the more Northerly part of it abounds with Wood. The Iron-works turn to very good account; as did formerly the Glass-houses; but now the latter are quite laid aside. More considerable Towns are, Chichester, Arundel, Lewes, Rye. Chichester, in its Saxon name Cissanceaster, disco∣vers its first Founder, viz. Cissa, Son of Aella, who settl'd the Kingdom of the South-Saxons. Notwith∣standing which Antiquity, we do not find that it flou∣rish'd very much till the Conqueror's time, when the Bishop's See was remov'd from Selsey to this Place; where it still continues in a good condition. The City had undoubtedly been much more Weal∣thy, Large and Populous, if the conveniency of the Harbour had seconded the advantage of the Bishop's See. But the Haven is of it self not very commodi∣ous; and is also at too great a distance. Arundel, ows it name and Reputation more to the Castle and its Earls, than either the populousness of the Town, or wealth of the Inhabitants. The Castle was a place of great strength, and of considerable moment in our Wars; and the Earls, Persons of great Worth and Honour. But though the condition
of the place will not answer either the figure it makes in our Histories, or the reputation it has in the opi∣nion of Strangers; 'tis however a Market-Town, and sends two Burgesses to Parliament. Lewes, at a little distance from the Sea, is seated up∣on a rising ground, and is a Town of good Note: Tho' anciently it seems to have been more considera∣ble. For when King Athelstan settl'd Mints in the more eminent Towns of the Kingdom, he pitch'd upon this place for one, and gave it two Minters. Rye, upon the Sea Coast, joyning to the County of Kent, owes it's rise to the decay of it's Neighbour Winchelsea. For the Sea, in those parts, does as it were dispose of it's wealth among the Coasters, ac∣cording to the several ages. So that by its breaking in one while and retiring another, they enjoy the advan∣tage of it in their turns. Rye has flourish'd by its kind∣ness these many ages, in Buildings, Navigation, and Fish∣ing; whilst a great many of its Neighbours are ready to starve, and are daily drawing on towards ruine. Ancient Places. Portus Adurni (the place where the Exploratores kept watch against the Saxon Pirats under the later Emperours) must be upon this Coast. And we cannot pitch upon any part with greater probability, than Ederington, a Little Village, which seems still to retain something of the old name; and besides, is a very convenient place for Landing. Which indeed in our present search, is a circumstance of great moment; since those Guards upon the Sea-Coast, were set to hin∣der the Pirats from Landing; and by consequence must have been fixt where the shore was most con∣venient for that purpose. Things Remarkable. It was a pleasant humour of John de Camois Lord of Broodwater in this County, in Edward the First's time; to make over his own Wife to Sr. William Pai∣nell, by Will, in the same manner as Men bequeathe their Goods and Chattels. The Arch with the Inscription, at Lewes, in the little demolish'd Church near the Castle, is well worth the sight of a curious Traveller, if there be any thing left of that ancient Building. But if Time has destroy'd it, the best information we can have, is from Mr. Cam∣den's draught, which he has given us in the Britannia, under his Description of this place. KENT. AMongst the Counties of England, no one can pre∣tend to lead us so far back into its Antiquities, as this of Kent. In all Revolutions, this has had the first share: The Romans made their first Attempts upon it; and Julius Caesar has left us a pretty distinct account, in what condition he found them at that Time. Their Successors, the Saxons, after Depreda∣tions, Piracies, and at last open Violence, establish'd their first Kingdom in this Corner, about the Year 456. The Norman too (if we may believe a Tra∣dition, which is not grounded upon much Evidence from History) had it particularly in his Eye; and had us'd it as he did the rest of the Kingdom, but that they obtained the Continuance of their Ancient Customs and Usages, by a notable Stratagem. Nor could it well be otherwise: For as their Situ∣ation exposes them to the immediate Attempts of Fo∣reigners; so do the Riches and Fruitfulness of their Country invite them to a settlement there, before any other Part. The Soil is exceeding rich; so that they abound with excellent Corn-Fields, Meadows, and Pastures. They have Apples also, and Cherries in great abundance; which turn to better account here than in most other Places, by reason of their nearness to London, whither they sell them by whole-sale. Besides this Fruitfulness of the Soil, which furnishes them with most Necessaries; they are supply'd with what conveniences our foreign Trade brings in, by their Harbours and noble Rivers. More Remarkable Places are, Canterbury, Rochester, Dover, Greenwich, Deptford, Maidston, Romney, Chatham. Canterbury, upon the River Stour, as it is the prin∣cipal City in those parts, so is it the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom. For upon the conversion of the Saxons to the Christian Faith, Ethelbert King of Kent gave this place to Austin the Monk; who was made Arch-bishop of the English, and so fixt his See here. And here it has continu'd ever since; save that for a little while it was remov'd to London (the chief City of the Kingdom;) but in honour and memory of St. Austin, it was return'd to Canterbury. The Church that is most eminent, is Christ-Church; for St. Austin's (built below the City for a burying-place for the Kings of Kent and the Arch-bishops, when is was not lawful to bury in Cities) is laid in its own ruines; by which one may perceive what a stately Fabrick it has once been. The City is populous and wealthy; having in it abundance of Walloons and French; the first settl'd here in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and brought along with them the Art of Weaving Silk; the second came over of late years, upon the persecuti∣on of Lewis the XIV. Rochester is the other City of this County, being made an Episcopal See by the same Ethelbert that gave Canterbury to St. Austin, upon his conversion to the Christian Faith. The situation of it, is low, and the bounds narrow, but the Suburbs make it pretty large. Anciently, it was of great note for its Castle, which the nature of the place render'd exceeding strong: So that when Odo held it against William Ru∣fus, nothing could bring him to a surrender but want of provisions. The noble Stone-bridge (through which the Medway runs with a most hideous noise) was built, upon Simon Montefort's cutting down the Wooden one, in his attempts upon this place. Dover, next these two, makes the greatest figure in our Histories; not for its extent or riches, but the convenient passage it affords into France. It has also a Castle of great strength; and was anciently accounted of so much importance, as to be commonly called the Key of England, with∣out which, it was impossible for Foreigners to make their way, with any advantage, into this Nation. Upon this account, William the Conqueror took par∣ticular care to have it well fortified and guarded; distributing vast quantities of Land to his Soldiers, purely for that Service. The Peer was built by Henry VIII. and repaird by Queen Elizabeth at vast expence, after the Sea had begun to break in upon it.
Greenwich, lying upon the Thames, is remarkable for its Royal Seat, built by Humfrey Duke of Glocester, and enlarged by King Henry VII. and is a place much talk'd of in our Histories for giving Birth to that most excellent Princess, Queen Elizabeth. Deptford is at a little distance, and draws its repu∣tation from the noble Dock and other accommodati∣ons for building and repairing of Ships; whereby it is of great use and importance to the Royal Navy of England. Maidston, (so call'd from the Medway upon which it lyes) is a pleasant populous Town, and seems to have been formerly of greater eminence than it's Neighbours, as being the Shire-town, where the As∣sizes are generally held. Unless, possibly, the con∣venience of its situation, almost in the middle of the County, may have been the principal means of procu∣ring that piece of honour. Romney, lying near the Sea-Coast to the South-East, was formerly very considerable both for it's Harbour, and the Sea-Services done by the Inhabitants to the Crown. But when the Ocean overflow'd these parts, in the Reign of Edward I. and remov'd the passage of the River another way, it began to forsake the Town, and by consequence to rob it by degrees of it's former glory. Chatham, near Rochester, is eminent for the station of the Navy-Royal; and has been much more so since the improvements of Docks, Launches, Store-houses, &c. made by King Charles II. and King James II. 'Tis also remarkable for it Fund of Naval Charity, for the support of Persons wounded in the Sea-Service; establisht in the Year 1588. under the Title of The Chest at Chatham. Ancient Places. Vagniacae, by the course of the Itinerary, must be Maidstone; especially if Noviomagus, the next Station on one Hand, may be fix'd at Hollowood-hill, and not at Woodcot in Surrey (as Mr. Camden imagins.) Durobrovis is agreed on all Hands to be Rochester. Regulbium, mention'd by the Notitia, has left the express Remains of its Name in our present Reculver; which also demonstrates its Antiquity by the Roman Coins discover'd thereabouts. Durovernum is beyond all dispure to be settl'd at Canterbury. Durolenum seems to fall in (as to the sound) with Lenham; which yet is too far out of the Road, and has nothing to support it, besides the bare similitude of Names. Bapchild lies directly in the way, and does not want either Antiquity or a due distance to answer the Itinerary; which has induc'd a modern Author to remove the Station thither. Cantium Promontorium, is the Kentish-foreland. Dubris, by the present name and the circumstances of the place, can be no other than Dover. Anderida, mention'd by the Notitia, has been by some fix'd at Newenden, by others at Hastings or Pemsey in Sussex. Indeed the names mention'd in that Book, wanting the assistance of the Distances, are very hard to find out; having no other Directions, but barely their situation upon the Sea-coasts; which we infer from the use of them, viz. to be a Guard against the Invasion of Pyrats. Lemanis is, by Mr. Camden, plac'd at Stutfall-castle near Hithe; but by Mr. Somner at Romney. Noviomagus, by the distances in the Itinerary, must be brought much nearer Maidstone than Woodcot in Surrey is, where Mr. Camden fixt it, The discovery of a large Roman Camp upon the River Ravensbourn (which empties it self into the Thames near Green∣wich) makes it probable enough that the old Novio∣magus ought not to be sought in any other place. Rhutupiae, is the same as our Richburrow; which daily shews the Marks of its Antiquity, viz. Roman Coins of Gold and Silver. To these we may add the Island which Solinus (according to different Copies) calls Thanatos and Athanatos, from whence the present name of Thanet is deriv'd. 'Tis made by a division of the Waters of the River Stour, near its entrance into the Sea, and is about 8 miles long and 4 broad. The Soil is a white Chalk, which produces Hay and Corn in great abundance. Totiatis Insula is probably Shepey. Things remarkable. The vast Pits near Feversham, narrow at the top but within very large, are thought to be some of those out of which the Britains us'd to dig Chalk to manure their Grounds. Which seems a more proba∣ble Opinion, than that the Saxons should contrive them, in imitation of their German-Ancestors, for a sort of Granary wherein to protect their Corn and Goods against the violence of Cold and plunders of an Enemy. Below Greenwich, there is great plenty of Scurvy-grass. Bromley-Hospital, built by the right Reverend Fa∣ther in God Dr. John Warner, for the maintenance of 20 poor Ministers-Widows, is a most noble Founda∣tion, and may very well serve for a Pattern to Per∣sons who are dispos'd to settle such Charities in other Places. The Royal Observatory at Greenwich, furnisht with all sorts of Instruments for Astronomical Observations, and a Dry Well for discovery of the Stars in the day-time, is very curious. Tunbridge Wells have of late years been found so useful for carrying off several Distempers, that the great resort of Gentry has caus'd the building of a good number of Houses near the place; and of a Chapel, wherein Prayers are read twice a day du∣ring the Season. Gavel-kind is a Custom peculiar to this County; whereby all Lands are divided equally among the Males; and in default of them, among the Females. They would derive this and other Privileges from their Composition with William the Conqueror; which Opinion is yet stiffly oppos'd by their Learned Country-man Mr. Somner, in his excellent Treatise upon that Subject. The Cinque-Ports are a Constitution not to be met with in other places, being 5 Ports under the Con∣stable of Dover-castle, establisht by William the Con∣queror for the better security of this Coast. The Ports are Hastings, Dover, Hith, Romney and Sand∣wich; which, upon account of their Sea-services, en∣joy several Immunities; their Governor is styl'd Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports.
GLOCESTERSHIRE. THE County of GLOCESTER, according to its several parts, has a different Soil and Appear∣ance. In the East, 'tis hilly; in the West, woody; and in the middle, a sweet fruitful Vale. The mid∣dle parts are much indebted to the Severn, which runs along for forty miles together, bringing in Ne∣cessaries from abroad, and conveying the native Com∣modities into foreign Parts. The Western Tract was one continu'd Wood, thick and unpassable; but the discovery of the Veins of Iron (which requires vast quantities of Wood to support them) has made it much thinner. The more remarkable Towns are, Glocester, Tewkesbury, Cirencester, Camden, Winchcomb. GLOCESTER, the principal place in this County, is a Town well-built, beautify'd with ma∣my fair Churches, and exceeding well provided with Hospitals for the maintenance of their Poor. The Severn, along which it is stretch'd, secures it on one side, and it has Walls to defend it on others. About the time of William the Conqueror, forging of Iron seems to have been the Business of the Town; since Domes-day tells us, That the Tribute requir'd of them, was a certain quantity of Iron-bars. It has had its misfortunes both from Wars and Fire, but still rose again and flourisht, till at length King Henry VIII. made it an Episcopal See; which at this day is its greatest Glory. Tewkesbury, seated at the meeting of the Severn, the Avon, and another little River, is a large beau∣tiful Town, the great Business whereof is Woollen-cloth. In the Histories of our Nation 'tis mention'd upon account of the Battel between the Houses of York and Lancaster, wherein the latter Party was almost entirely defeated. Cirencester, call'd commonly at this day Ciciter, was of good note both under the Romans and Saxons. Its eminence among the first is discover'd by ancient Coins, Pavements and Inscriptions; and the frequent mention of it in the Saxon Histories make it probable that it bore some considerable Figure a∣mong the latter. Add to this, the extent of the Town, which has formerly been two miles round; but now not above a fourth part of that compass is inhabited. They have also had 3 Parish-Churches, of which only one is left, very fair indeed and large. Camden, in the North part of the County on the edge of Worcestershire, is a good Market-town, fa∣mous especially for the Stockin-trade. The South-Isle of this Church is adorn'd with several most no∣ble and curious Monuments of Marble. Ancient Places. Abone appears by its situation upon Severn, its di∣stance from the next Station, and most of all from the present name, to be that which we call at this day Aventon. Trajectus, where they Ferry'd over the Severn, was probably at Oldbury; which both carries Anti∣quity in its name, and is situate over against Abone. Corinium, mention'd by Ptolomy, was our Ciren∣cester. Glevum is agreed by all to be the present City of Glocester. Things Remarkable. The Whispering-place, in the Cathedral of Gloce∣ster, is a Curiosity much talk'd of and admir'd by Travellers. 'Tis a Wall built so in an Arch of the the Church, that if you whisper never so low at one end, another that lays his Ear to the other end shall hear each distinct Syllable. Which yet the more knowing Inhabitants affirm to be purely accidental, and not the effect of any curious contrivance. Stones like Cockles and Oysters are found about the Head of the River Avon, or the Hills near Al∣dersey. In some parts of the County, they had formerly a Custom very unaccountable, That the Lands of condemn'd Persons should be forfeited to the King only for a year and a day, and after that return to the next Heirs; but 'tis now quite abolisht. OXFORDSHIRE. THE County of OXFORD is accommodated with three large Rivers, which answer the Ne∣cessities of its several parts. The Thames supplies the South and West, the Tame the East, and the Cherwell the middle. The two last empty themselves into the first, and are carried with it in one Chanel into the Ocean. The bottoms of this Shire abound with Meadows and Corn-ground; the Hills are well stor'd with Wood; but were much more so be∣fore the civil Wars between the King and Parliament. The more considerable Places, are Oxford, Woodstock, Banbury, Dorchester, Henley. OXFORD, as it gives its name to the whole County, so is it upon several accounts very emi∣nent: The Air is sweet and healthful, the Prospect on all hands very pleasant; the private Buildings are neat, and the publick sumptuous. But that which gives it a Reputation, not only above its Neighbours, but above all other places in the Kingdom, is, One of the most noble Universities in the whole World. The Constitution whereof is so regular, the Disci∣pline so strict, the Endowments so plentiful and con∣venient for Studies; and, in a word, every thing so agreeable to the education of Youth, that we need not wonder it should daily send abroad such numbers of learned Men, for the Service of
Church and State. Of what Antiquity it is, I shall not pretend to determin: Whole Volumes have been writ upon that Subject already. Let us thank Pro∣vidence, that 'tis in such a flourishing condiion at present, and leave the nice Diquisition of what it has been, to others. The following Scheme will afford the best view of its State and Increase, in the several Ages. Colleges. Founders. King's Reigns. University, King Alfred. Alfred. Baliol, Sir John Baliol. Henry III. Merton, Walter Merton. Edward I. Oriel, Edward II. Edward II. Exeter, Walter Stapledon. Edward II. Queens, Robert Eglesfield. Edward III. New-College, Wm. of Wickham. Edward III. Lincoln, Richard Fleming. Henry VI All Souls, Henry Chichley. Henry VI. Magdalen, William Wainfleet Henry VI. Brazen-nose, William Smith. Henry VIII. Corpus Cristi, Richard Fox. Henry VIII. Christ-Church, Henry VIII. Henry VIII. Trinity, Sir Thomas Pope. Queen Mary. S. Jon's, Sir Thomas White. Queen Mary. Js Queen Elizabeth. Qu. Elizabeth. Wadham, Nicholas Wadham and James I.   Dorothy Wadham.   Pembroke, Thomas Tisdal.   All these are well endow'd with Fellowships, Scho∣larships, &c. The Halls (where Gentlemen live upon their own Expences) are Seven, Glocester, S. Edmund, Magdalen, Hart, Alban, S. Mary, New-Inn. The Disturbances which these Seminaries of Learn∣ing have met with, have come partly from Abroad; but have been chiefly occasion'd by the Insolencies of the Towns-men. The Danes, who were a rude un∣polish'd People, enemies to Learning, Religion, and every thing that was Honourable, sack'd and burn'd this place among others, in their Ravages through the Kingdon. And about the Reign of King John, (at which time 'tis said there were three Thousand Students, who lodg'd up and down in the Town,) the Scholars were heavily pester'd with the rude carriage of the Citizens, and retir'd in great num∣bers to Reading, Cambridge, Salisbury, and other pla∣ces: But about Henry the Third's Reign, and so downward, (as pious Persons built Colleges and Halls for the entertainment of Students) they began to be less dependent upon the Town; especially being supported with good Revenues, as well as accom∣modated with convenient Lodgings. The chief of its publick Buildings are, 1. The Schools, a noble stately Pile of Building, wherein Exercise for the several Degrees are per∣formed, the publick Lectures read, &c. 2. The Library, built by Sir Thomas Bodley, and commonly call'd the Bodleian Library; famous throughout Europe for its prodigious Stock of Books, both Printed and Manuscript. 3. The Theater, a Magnificent Work, and of ad∣mirable Contrivance; built by the Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Sheldon, Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury. 4. The Musaeum, commonly call'd Ashmole's Musae∣um, is a neat Building; the lower part whereof is a Chymical Elaboratory; and the upper, a Repo∣sitory of Natural and Artificial Rarities. Woodstock, distant from Oxford about 6 miles to the North, by its name implies a situation in a woody part of the Country; and accordingly its greatest Reputation has been the Park, along with a Royal Seat built there by King Henry I. who probably was induc'd to pitch upon this place for the convenience of Hunting; a Diversion much us'd and admir'd by our Fore-fathers. At present the Town is not very populous, nor the Trade considerable. Banbury, on the edge of Northampton-shire, is a pretty large Town; and is principally known upon account of its excellent Cheese. Dorchester lyes upon the River Tame, at the other end of the County; and is a place of great Antiqui∣ty and Dignity: For, as it seems to have flourish'd under the Romans, so had it the honour of an Epis∣copal See under the Saxons; till in William the Conqueror's Reign, that was Translated to Lincoln. The removal of the See, and the turning of the High-road another way, have left scarce any Image of its former Grandeur. Henley stands in the utmost Limits of this Coun∣ty, Southward; and is a Town of good Wealth and Buildings. The growth of it has probably been ow∣ing to its situation on the River of Thames; and partly also to the Passage over the same River by a Wooden-bridge, which drew Travellers that way. Ancient Places. Ancalites, a People mention'd by Caesar, seem to have liv'd in these Parts; and 'tis probable, by the Circumstances, that they were seated about the South-corner of the County; and that Henley was their chief Town; especially if it may be allow'd so much Antiquity, as some are willing to grant it. Things Remarkable. Rolle-rich-stones, in the Western part of this County, are a number of huge Stones plac'd in Circle, which some have thought to be Monuments of a Victory; others, a Burying-place; and again, others, a place for the Coronation of the Danish Kings. See Plot's Oxford∣shire, p. 342. The Labyrinth made by King Henry II. at VVood∣stock, for his Fair Rosamund, is much talk'd of; tho now nothing is to be seen of it. Astrop-Wells near Banbury, have been much re∣sorted to of late years by the Nobility and Gentry.
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE. THE County of Buckingham (so call'd probably from great numbers of Bucks in this Woody Country) is for many miles together extended from North to South. The Chiltern is one part of the County; which is a continu'd Ridge of Hills; and below them, lyes the other Branch, call'd the Vale, being a pleasant champain Country, consisting of Meadows, Pastures and Corn-grounds. The more considerable Towns are, Buckingham, Ailsbury, Wickham, Stony-Stratford. Buckingham gives name to the whole County, and is at present a Town of good Note; though anciently it was not very considerable, if we may go by the computation of Hides and Burgesses in Domesday. I know not whether the strength of the place, may not be the reason why it made so considerable a Figure, when the Houses were few, and the Inhabitants thin. 'Tis certain, the Castle (now quite gone) was built a good while before the Conquest; and Nature too has in some measure contributed towards its Safety, by surrounding it on all sides but the North, with the River Ouse; which must needs make it a valuable Refuge in those troublesome and warlike Times. Ailsbury was also a place of Note, in the beginning of the Saxons; being taken from the Britains about the year 572. At present it is a large and populous Market-Town, pleasantly seated in the midst of Meadows and Pastures, wherein are fed prodigious numbers of Sheep. Wickham, in the Road between Oxford and Lon∣don, is a large populous Corporation, well-built, and of good Trade. It has a throng Corn-market; and the Woods all round bring in considerable Revenues yearly, by supplies sent to the neighbouring Coun∣ties; some of which are hard enough put to it for Fuel. Stony-Stratford, in the North part of the Shire, takes its name from the Stony-Ford that led over the River, at that Place. 'Tis a good large Town, in the middle whereof stands the Cross, erected by King Edward I. to the Memory of Queen Eleanor. Ancient Places. Pontes, by the course of the Itinerary, must be somewhere about Colebrook; for if that Guide were wanting, the condition of the place would naturally point this out in our search after the old name: For, where should we search for it, but at a division of the River into four Channels; over each of which there is a Bridge, within a very little space one from another? Lactodorum does not discover it self by the same evidence, but yet seems plainly enough to be Stony-Stratford, both upon account of its Situation upon the Military-way, and also from the import of the name in the British, which by those who are skill'd in the Language, is affirm'd to signifie the same thing as our present Appellation. Things Remarkable. At Borstal they still preserve the Horn, by the Li∣very whereof that Estate was convey'd to Nigel de Borstal in the time of one of the Williams. Pen, and the Towns upon that Ridge, are observ'd to be the highest Ground in all these parts; there being a sensible Ascent thither all along from London, and as sensible a Descent when you are past it. BEDFORDSHIRE, THE County of Bedford in the South part is Bar∣ren; in the middle, Woody, and in the North, Fruitful. As the Soil distinguishes it into these three Parts, so has Nature divided it into other two, by the Channel of the River Ouse, which is the principal River of the County, and runs through it. Towns more remarkable are, Bedford, Dunstable. Bedford, the principal Town of the County, tho it can hardly pretend to Roman Antiquity, was yet of very good repute among the Saxons; and was one of those which suffer'd from the Danish Depredations. But its greatest Miseries were occasion'd by the Castle, built there after the Conquest, which was a certain refuge to one Party or the other in all the Civil Wars that follow'd. The Town is parted by the River Ouse, and join'd by a Stone-bridge: The South-side has two Churches, and the North, three. The Site of the old Castle is now a spacious Bowling-green, whither the Neighbouring Gentry resort for their Recreation. Dunstable, so call'd from its high situation, stands upon the end (as it were) of the Chiltern, upon a dry chalky Soil. This quality of the Soil puts them to some inconvenience for Water; with which notwith∣standing they are supplied tolerably well with four publick Ponds, one in each Street. It is pretty po∣pulous, and well furnish'd with Inns, having the ad∣vantage of lying upon the Northern-road, from London. The Cross in the middle of the Town was erected by Edward, to the Memory of his Queen, Eleanor. Ancient Names. Salinae must in all probability be the place now call'd Chesterfield, near Temesford; by the course of the Itinerary, the Roman Mony, with other marks of Antiquity, discover'd there. Magioninium, need be sought at no other place than Dunstable, which stands upon a Roman-way, and has the evidence of Roman Mony to assert its Antiquity. Things Remarkable. At Harewood, the River was observ'd to stand in the year 1399; and again in 1648; which have been look'd upon as Prognosticks; the first of the Civil Wars that ensu'd, the second of the Death of Charles I. Fuller's-Earth is dug up in great abundance about Woburn. A Woman in Dunstable, had nineteen Children at five Births; 5 at two several ones; and three toge∣ther at 3 more.
HERTFORDSHIRE. THE County of Hertford seems to owe its flou∣rishing Condition more to its situation than Soil: For the many Thorow-fairs to and from London, have mightily Enrich'd the particular Towns, by the ad∣vantage of entertaining Travellers; and its nearness to the City, (together with the Healthfulness of the Air) has induc'd great numbers of the Nobility and Gentry to purchase and build in those Parts. The more remark∣able Towns are, S. Albans, Hertford, Ware, Hatfield, Royston, Stortford. S. Albans, (the old Verulamium of the Romans, and the Watling-chester of the Saxons) was of such consi∣derable Note under the Romans, as to be a Munici∣pium; but in the famous Insurrection of Queen Boo∣dicia, was entirely laid Waste by the Britains: However it recover'd it self, and afterwards had the honour of being the Birth-place of S. Alban (the Proto-martyr of Britain, in the time of Dioclesian;) a Person so eminent for Piety and Goodness, that the Town afterwards took his Name, as the greatest Honour it could do it self. For when Offa had built a large and splendid Monastery, Dedicated to the Memory of S. Alban, the Town presently flourish'd, and was particularly ambitious of a Relation to that Saint. From time to time there have been discover'd vast remains of Roman Antiquity, in the place where the old Verulamium stood, now turn'd into a Cornfield. The Church of the Monastery is still standing, and is a most noble Pile of Building. At present, 'tis a large flourishing Town, having the advantage of being a Thorow-fair, on the Northern-road from London. Hertford, (so call'd, as if one should say a Ford of Harts; for their Arms is a Hart couchant in the Wa∣ter) is a Town rather noted for giving name to the whole County, than any riches or beauty of its own. The Assizes indeed are still kept here, a mark of its ancient Prosperity; but the Place is neither Populous nor of any tolerable Trade. Ware, (so nam'd from the Wear in the River Lea) is a populous thriving Place, owing its rise to the decay of Hertford: For about King John's time, the High-road was turn'd this way; and ever since Ware has been encreasing, and the other dwindling away by little and little. Hatfield is more remarkable for the stately Seat of the Earl of Salisbury, than any thing the Town it self can boast of beside. Royston, or Royse's Town (on the North-side of the County) is so call'd from a certain Lady nam'd Roysia, who erected a Cross in this place. The Town (ever since Richard I. granted it the privilege of a Market) has been still growing; and deals especially in Malt and Corn. Stortford, upon the little River Stort, is of late years grown into a considerable Market-Town, and is very well furnish'd with good Inns. Ancient Places. Verulamium has been by all Men and all Ages, so undoubtedly settl'd at S. Albans, that it is even at this day known by the name of Verulam in several of our Writings; and commonly enough in Conver∣sation. Durocobrivae, upon account of the beginning and end, must be sought somewhere upon a River, dur signifying Water, and briva a Passage. The course of the Road directs us to look for it below Flamsted, where the ancient High-way crosses the Water. Things Remarkable. The little Brook Womer near Redborn, is by the Inhabitants thought to portend Dearth or troublesome Times, when it breaks out. The Font at S. Albans, wherein the Children of the Kings of Scotland us'd to be Baptiz'd, was a most noble Monument, plac'd here by Sir Rich. Lea, Master of the Pioneers; but it is, since taken away, as it seems, in the late Civil Wars. MIDDLESEX. THE County of Middlesex, or Middle-Saxons, (so call'd from its situation between the East and South Saxons) is of no large extent, but is furnish'd with great numbers of fair Buildings and sweet Seats, for the retirement of the Nobility and Gentry. Places most consi∣derable are, London, Cap. Westminster, Ʋxbridge, Hamton-Court, Fulham, Chelsey, Hamsted. LONDON, (the Metropolis of our Nation) as it is one of the most flourishing Cities in the whole World, so is it of such Antiquity, that the most an∣cient Records and Memorials, can give us no account of its Original. Under the Britains, it was a consi∣derable place; and Ammianus Marcellinus, even in his time, calls it an ancient City. Its Glory appears more distinctly under the Romans, who (probably out of a jealousie of its Greatness) would not grant it the privilege of a Muncipium; Governing it by a sort of Commissioners sent yearly from Rome. But though they would not allow it too much Power and Autho∣rity, they own'd its Glory and Eminence, by giving it the honourable name of Augusta. Also, when Con∣stantine had confirm'd Christianity; upon the removal of the Flamin, a Bishop's See was settl'd here. At the beginning of the Saxon Government, it had its share of the Misfortunes with which this Warlike People oppress'd the whole Nation; but bore up however against the Storm, till the Conversion of that People to Christianity. Then Aethelbert King of Kent, built a Church dedicated to S. Paul, which Posterity by degrees improv'd into a most stately Fabrick. This, along with the greatest part of the the City, was Consum'd in that most dreadful Fire which happen'd in the year 1666; and put all things into such confusion, that the ancient State of this noble City, must have been in a great measure hid∣den
from Posterity, had not the industrious and learned Mr. John Stow, rescu'd it from Oblivion by his excellent Survey. To him I refer the Reader for matters of Antiquity; and shall content my self with a short description of the several Buildings, and other Curiosities, which it boasts of at this day. Premising thus much in general; that within these Hundred years, and especially since the above-mention'd Fire, the City has grown so strangely both in publick and private Buildings; has also stretched it self out so far on all sides, that by a Draught of an hundred years old; nay, of one taken immediately before 1666, compar'd with its present extent and beauty, one could not imagin it to be the same City. I. The Tower, at the East-end of the City, is a large stately Fabrick, fortified with Walls and a broad Ditch; where the Arms and other Warlike Prepara∣tions are laid up, as in a common Store. II. Gresham-College, so call'd from Sir Thomas Gre∣sham the Founder, was institued for the improvement of Arts and Sciences; and accordingly there are genteel Salaries settl'd for the several Professors of Divi∣nity, Law, Physick, Astronomy, Geometry and Musick. III. The Royal Exchange was built by the same Sir Thomas Gresham, and a most noble Ornament to the Cty, as well as a singular convenience toth' Merchants. IV Guild-hall, (or the Senate-house) a most beautiful Buil ng. V au's Church, as we observ'd before, was con∣sum d in the dreadful Fire of 1666; but is now ri∣sing again with new Beauty and Majesty. A magni∣ficent Building i , if we look upon its Extent and Strength; and if upon the Contrivance, a most curi∣ous Fabrick. The Quire is well-nigh finish'd, and in a short time will be fit for the celebration of Di∣vine Service. VI. Christ-Church-Hospital was Founded by King Edward VI. for the Maintainance of Orphans; one Thousand whereof are suppos'd to be annually pro∣vided for by this Charity. After they have gone through the several Schools, they are bound out Ap∣prentices, at 15 years of Age; or sent to one of the Universities, where they are maintain'd for 7 years. VII. Charter-house (so call'd from the Carthusian Monks) was erected into an Hospital by Thomas Sutton Esq by the name of The Hospital of King James, endowing it with Revenues sufficient for the Main∣tenance of 80 poor Brothers or Pensioners, who are to be either poor decay'd Gentlemen, or Merchants, or Superannuated Soldiers, 40 poor Scholars, who are either put to Trades, or sent to the University; with a Master, Preacher, Physician, and other Officers. VIII. The Inns of Court are chiefly Four, The Inner-Temple, the Middle-Temple, Grays-Inn and Lin∣colns-Inn; besides several others of less Note. Here great numbers of young Gentlemen are educated in the study of the Laws, and qualified either for pub∣lick Pleadings, or for the service of the Kingdom in any other Capacity, that requires a more than ordi∣nary knowledge of our Customs and Constitution. Besides those Ornaments we have mention'd, the Churches are spacious and beautiful; the publick Halls of the several Companies large and stately; the Squares uniform and pleasant, and the private Buildings and Shops exceeding convenient. A late ingenious Author hath made it probable from the number of Burials and Houses in London, Paris, and Rouen; that the first of these is altogether as big and populous as both the other two. WESTMINSTER, as it is a City distinct from London, with separate Magistrates and Privileges, so was it formerly at least a Mile distant from it, till by degrees the Suburbs of the former joyn'd the latter, and made them both together look like one entire City. It seems to owe its rise to the Church, which Sibert King of the East-Saxons built there to the honour of S. Peter; and which together with its Westerly situa∣tion from London, caus'd its name to be chang'd from Thorney, into the present one of Westminster. Edward the Confessor built it anew, and endow'd it largely: His Fabrick was afterwards demolish'd by Henry III. who erected a new one very stately and magnificent; to which Henry VII. added a Chappel, commonly call'd King Henry VIIth's Chappel, for the burial of himself and Children. It was by Q. Elizabeth con∣verted into a Collegiate Church, consisting of a Dean, twelve Prebendaries, &c. The greatest Curiosities it affords are the Tombs and Monuments of our Prin∣ces, and of the more eminent Nobility, with several Persons famous for Learning and other Excel∣lencies in their respective Ages. Near the Abbey is Westminster-hall, a spacious Room, wherein (and in the places round it) Justice is pub∣lickly administred in the several Courts, mention'd in the Introduction. Nor ought the School to be omitted, since it is so serviceable to Church and State, in fur∣nishing both with Persons every way qualified for the discharge of their several Stations. White-hall is conveniently seated between S. James's Park and the Thames, and is the Residence of our Kings. It was the House of Cardinal Wolsey, and converted into a Royal Palace by King Henry VIII. Ʋxbridge, upon the edge of the County, is a pretty large Town, stretch'd out on each side a long Street; lying upon the Road, it reaps great advantage by the entertainment of Travellers, and is well stor'd with Inns. 'Tis mention'd in our Histories, particularly up∣on account of the Treaty held there, in the Reign of Charles I. Hamton-Court, is a Royal Seat, lying pleasantly upon the River Thames, and accommodated with most excellent Prospects all round. Cardinal Wolsey begun it, and King Henry VIII. finish'd it: But their Structure though very large and magnificent for that Age, is far excell'd by the Additions made to it by his present Majesty; and that whether we compare the Buildings themselves, or the Gardens, and other contrivances about it. Fulham is only remarkable for the residence of the Bishops of Londn, who have here their Palace for a retirement out of the City. Chelsey, situated pleasantly upon the Thames, is no∣ted only for its noble Hospital, built for the main∣tenance of lame and decay'd Soldiers. It was begun by King Charles II, carried on by King James, and finish'd by his present Majesty; a Building as in it self very Magnificent, so accommodated with all manner of Officers convenient for the design, and also with plea∣sant Walks and Gardens. Hamsted, at a little distance from Lndon to the North-west, is remarkable for the goodness of the Air, which has caus'd its enlargement in Buildings of late Years. Ancient Places. Sulloniacae is Brockey-hill upon the edge of this County, as appears both from the distances and re∣mains of Antiquity, (Coins, Ʋrns, Bricks, &c.) that have been discover'd there. Londinum, London, call'd also Augusta, a Title of Preheminence among the Romans. The Green-houses at Hamton-Court, with Stoves un∣der them, to preserve foreign Plants in gradual Heats, suitable to the Climes whereof they are Natives, is an admirable Contrivance.
ESSEX. ESsex is so call'd from the East-Saxons who inhabi∣ted it, and had that name from their situation, with relation to the South-Saxons. As 'tis on one side accommodated with the Sea, so is it in all parts furnish'd with good Rivers, which do not only wa∣ter it, but convey likewise all Necessaries from abroad, and give them an opportunity of sending out such Commodities as they can spare for the use of foreign Parts. Towns more re∣markable, are Colchester, Chemsford, Harwich, Maldon. Colchester, seated on the brow of a Hill and ex∣tended from East to West, flourish'd in the times of the Romans under the name of Colonia, from whence possibly the present Colchester (or as the Saxons call'd it Colneceaster) has its original. Next to this their Antiquity; the Inhabitants glory that Helena, Mo∣ther to Constantine the Great, was born in this place. At present 'tis large and populous, containing a great many Parishes. Chemsford or Chelmesford, has a convenient situ∣ation, just at the meeting of two Rivers. The place seems to have been of no great note, till the Bishop of London, in Henry I.'s time, turn'd the high Road through it, which before lay through Writtle. At present, the Assizes are held in it. Harwich is more famous upon account of its Har∣bour, than either the Riches or Building of the Town. The convenience of Passage from hence to Holland, is the occasion why 'tis so much talk'd of, and so well known. Maldon, tho' of it self large and well-inhabited, (being one Street reaching a mile in length) is yet of greater eminence by reason of its Antiquity, and the considerable Figure that it made among our Fore-fathers. Claudius Caesar, in his attempt upon Bri∣tain, storm'd this place, and left a strong Garrison to hold and defend it. But when the Insolence of the Soldiers came to such a height, that the poor Bri∣tains could no longer bear the Indignities and Op∣pressions; these (under the conduct of Boadicia) form'd themselves into a Confederacy, burnt this Colony, and put all the Inhabitants to the Sword. Under the Saxons we hear little or nothing of it; tho' in the Conqueror's time, it seems to have been in a tolerable condition, Domesday reckoning 180 Houses. Ancient Places. Durolitum, by the course of the Itinerary, the sound of the present name, and the remains of An∣tiquity discover'd thereabouts, cannot well be any other than Leyton, about 6 miles from London. Convennos Insula, has the plain Remains of the old name left it in the Island Canvey, about 5 miles in length, which feeds great numbers of Sheep. Caesaromagus is Dunmow, written anciently Dun∣mage and Dunmawg, the last Syllable whereof is a plain Relick of the old magus; and as for the first (Dun) every one knows how common that is in the ancient names of places. All the Objection is, That it lies a little out of the Road, which the Itinerary seems to take in that Journey; but any one who ob∣serves what wheelings and windings the Itinerary takes in other parts of England, will hardly stick upon that exception. Canonium, is Writtle through which the high way pass'd before Henry I.'s time: And, besides, 'twas a place of note among the Saxons, and after the Con∣quest; which agrees well with that observation, That the Saxons settl'd in the deserted Stations of the Romans. Othona, a Garrison under the Count of the Saxon Shore, seems to have been at Ithancester, mention'd by our Histories, and seated about the utmost point of Dengy-hundred. Camalodunum, from the present name, the course of the Itinerary, and the consent of all judicious Writers, must be concluded to have been at Maldon, which we describ'd before. Ad Ansam seems to be Wittham; for the Road lies through it, the distances answer, and it still shews an old Camp. Colonia is by all agreed to be Colchester. Idumani fl. ostium, is Black-water-bay, ydu in British signifying black. Things Remarkable. The Caverns near Tilbury, in a chalky Soil, have given occasion to some Conjectures; tho' perhaps no one does so well agree either with the nature of the Ground or the custom of the Britains, as the opinion, That they were intended by that People for Supplies of Chalk to manure their Lands. Walfleet-Oysters, are got in great abundance upon this Coast, and so call'd from a Wall (built to se∣cure the Inhabitants against Inundations) along which they lie. It was a pleasant Custom which they had in the Priory of Dunmow, That whoever did not repent of his Marriage in a year and a day, upon Oath made thereof before the Prior and Convent, should have a Gammon of Bacon deliver'd him. SUFFOLK. THE County of Suffolk, contracted from Suth∣folk (for so it was written among the Saxons) is so call'd from its situation with respect to Norfolk or North-folk. The Soil is, in most parts, very fruitful; assisted by a sort of Marle mixt with Clay. Towns more remark∣able, are Bury, Ipswich, New-market, Clare. Bury (so call'd by contraction for S. Edmunds-bury)
seems to ow its original and growth, in a great mea∣sure, to the Translation of the Body of S. Edmund to this place; an excellent Prince, who was barba∣rously murder'd by the Danes. And even the Da∣nish Cruelties, which were the ruin of most other places, did a considerable service to this Town; King Canutus, out of a desire to make amends for the Injuries done it by his Father Sueno, taking a particular liking to it, and endowing it with many Pri∣vileges. The Popes also, out of a regard to the san∣ctity of S. Edmund, granted it large Immunities. So that the Monastery and Town grew apace in Wealth and Reputation, till the general Dissolution by King Henry VIII. And now, tho' the first is destroy'd, the second is still in a flourishing condition. Ipswich, is a place mention'd in our Histories a∣bout the latter end of the Saxons; by whom it was call'd Gypeswic. The advantage of a Harbour has made it considerable; and, accordingly, that of late years having not been so commodious as formerly, the Town it self has gone a little to decay. For about an hundred years ago, they had 14 Churches; which are so far from being encreas'd, that at this day there remain only 12. Their number of Ships also is considerably diminish'd of late years; which must be an Argument that their Trade is not so good as it has been. New-market, upon the edge of Cambridge-shire, by the very name betrays its want of Antiquity. That it is of note at present, is not owing either to Manu∣factures or any particular Commodities; but partly to its situation upon the Road, and partly to its con∣venience for Hunting and Horse-races: By which Entertainments the Court is pretty often drawn thi∣ther; and acccordingly, there is a House built for his Majesty. Clare, upon the River Stour, is very often men∣tion'd in our English Histories, on account of the Earls to whom it has given Title, and who, in their several Ages, have been Men of great Worth and Eminence. Ancient Places. Villa Faustini seems to belong to S. Edmunds-bury, by the course of the Itinerary. Combrelonium discovers it self in the present Breten∣ham, upon the River Breton; the Termination Ham being an addition purely Saxon. Extensio or , a Promontory, shooting it self a long way into the Sea; which we, at this day, call Easton-ness. Gasiononum, is Burgh-castle upon the Coast of Nor∣folk, near Yarmouth. Things Remarkable. That vast Ditch which runs along New-market-heath, is a Work so prodigious, that the common People cannot conceive it made by any but the De∣vil; and upon that fancy have call'd it Devils-dike. Whereas, 'tis plain, that it was contriv'd as a com∣mon Fence and Bound between the two Kingdoms in the Saxon Heptarchy. It was a factious sort of Tenure, by which Hem∣ingston in this County was holden, viz. upon condi∣tion, That every Christmas-day the Lord of it should dance, make a noise with his Cheeks puff'd out, and let a Fart, in the presence of the King. Upon the Sea-coast, near Aldburrow, the Inhabi∣tants valu'd themselves upon a signal favour of Pro∣vidence; which, in a time of great Dearth, sent 'em a Crop of Pease among the hard Rocks, in the begin∣ning of Autumn. But the more judicious find no occasion for the Miracle; but think it may be very well solv'd, by imagining the Sea might cast in some Pulse left in it by Shipwrack, and so cause that un∣usual growth. NORFOLK. THE County of Norfolk is so call'd with respect to Suffolk, as if one should say, the northern Peo∣ple, or the northern branch of the East-Angles. Of all the Shires in England, this is observ'd to be most populous, for the compass, and to be thickest set with Towns and Villages. They are generally rich and live handsomly, which perhaps may be one rea∣son why they have been so much given to the study of the Laws; so that even your ordinary sort are not altogether unacquainted with the little Niceties of Courts and Pleadings. Riches breed Quarrels, and Quarrels Law-suits, and those drive the Parties en∣gag'd to the Examination of their Cause; which would never be thought of nor started, if they were as hard put to it for the common Necessaries of Life, as they are in many other places. The more remarkable Places, are Norwich, Yarmouth, Lynne, Walsingham. Norwich, is as much as one should say a Castle or Fort to the North, with relation to Castor, about four miles South from it, out of the Ruins whereof Nor∣wich seems to have risen. For that it is much more mo∣dern, appears from hence, that we do not find it mention'd before the latter end of the Saxon times; whereas Castor was, no doubt, the ancient Venta. It is seated upon the side of a Hill from North to South, about a mile and a half, or two miles in length: The Inhabitants are wealthy, the City populous, and the Buildings (both publick and private) very neat and beautiful. It has 11 Gates, and is surrounded with Walls, except where 'tis defended by the River, viz. on the East. Domesday tells us, it had not less than 1320 Burgesses; and altho' it suffer'd very much by the Insurrection of Ralph Earl of the East-Angles against William the Conqueror, yet was that damage abundantly repair'd, when the Episcopal See was re∣mov'd hither from Thetford. The great number of Netherlanders, who came over, upon the Tyranny of the Duke of Alva, and settl'd here, seem also to have been a mighty advantage to the City, by settling the Manufacture of Worsted Stuffs. Yarmouth, on the mouth of the River Yare, seems to have risen out of the Ruins of old Garianonum, as Norwich did out of those of Castor or Venta. It is not of so much note, as one would expect from the advantage of the Sea, and the convenience of the Harbor. The reason is, because the violence of the Wind upon this Coast, is such, that they have much ado to keep the Haven so open and free from heaps of Sand, as to maintain a tolerable Trade. At pre∣sent, their great Business, is the Herring-trade. They have but one Church, very large and stately, with a high, lofty Spire.
Lynne, about the entrance of the Ouse into the Ocean, next to Norwich, is the best Town in those parts, having grown in Wealth, Buildings and num∣ber of Merchants, by the convenience of a very safe and advantagious Harbour. The Soil too, all about it, contributes to its greatness; for 'tis fat and lusci∣ous, and very fruitful. The very name implies a moist, fenny situation; Hlyn signifying so much in the old British. Walsingham was one of the most famous Places in these parts, till the Dissolution of Monasteries by King Henry VIII. for then, its Monastery (from whence sprung all its Glory, Reputation and Ri∣ches,) was plunder'd and demolish'd. Before, rich Jewels, Gold and Silver, were heap'd in with so much profuseness, according to the superstition of those times, that it was the great admiration of Stran∣gers and Travellers. Ancient Places. Sitomagus seems to be Thetford, which was for∣merly a place of great note, till the Bishop's See was remov'd to Norwich, and then it fell to decay. Garienis ostium discovers it self by the present name of the River Yare, and of the Town at the mouth, Yarmouth. Venta Icenorum, the capital City of the Iceni, was at Castor 3 miles South of Norwich; now faln to de∣cay, but known to be a place of Antiquity by the old Walls, and the discovery of Roman Coins. Metaris aestuarium, mention'd by Ptolomy, is sup∣pos'd to be the Washes, near Lynne. Iciani, by the name should seem to be Ic-bo∣rough. Brannodunum is plainly Brancaster near Walsing∣ham. Things Remarkable. Carleton in this County was held by a pleasant Tenour, That 100 Herrings bak'd in 24 Pies should be presented to the King, in what part of England so∣ever he was, when they first came into season. The custom is still observ'd, and the Herrings duly con∣vey'd to the King by the Lord of the Manor. Herrings are observ'd to be more plentiful upon this Coast, than any other part of England; which brings, in great advantage to the Inhabitants. S. Bennet's, an Island, is so loose and unfix'd, that it seems to be kept from swimming away, only by the Roots of Trees. CAMBRIDGESHIRE. THE County of Cambridge, according to diffe∣rent parts, is of a different Soil. The South is fertil, well-till'd and bears abundance of Barley; whereof they make vast quantities of Malt. The North is more wet and spungy, and so fitter for Corn than Pasture; not only upon account of its loose softness, but by reason also of the frequent over-flowings in those parts. The principal Towns are, Cambridge, Ely. Cambridge seems to be the Daughter of the old Camboritum, and possibly may have borrow'd the first Syllable of her name from the Mother. The University is her greatest Glory, which for many hundred years has furnish'd Church and State with Persons of Learning, Piety and Prudence. When it was first instituted; let others determine: Thus much is certain, that like Oxford, at first it afforded the Scholars no publick reception or place of Studies, but oblig'd them to take up with such Lodgings in the Town as they could get. By degrees, the incon∣venience of this method was observ'd, not only from the mean Accommodation they met with, but also from the frequent Commotions caus'd by the Inso∣lence of the Towns-men. Whereupon, pious and charitable Persons began to erect Inns and Hostels for the reception of Scholars, in order to give them an opportunity of retirement, and an indepence upon the Town. But still'd they liv'd upon their own Estates, enjoying only the convenience of Lodgings, without any manner of Endowments; till, in the Reign of Edward I. they began to build Colleges, not only for the Reception, but also for the maintenance of certain numbers of Scholars, according to the Re∣venues assign'd to that purpose. The order and time of their Foundation, with their respective Founders, are as follow. Colleges and Halls. Founders. Year. Peter-house, Hugh Batsham. 1284. Clare-hall, Richard Badew. 1340. Bennet or Corpus Christi, Society of Friers in Corpus Christi, 1346. Pembroke-hall, Lady Mary S. Paul, Count. of Pembroke. 1347. Trinity-hall, William Bateman. 1353. Gonvil and Caius, Edmund Gonvil. 1348. Afterwards finish'd by John Caius.   King's College, Henry VII. 1441. Queen's College, Q. Margaret of Anjou. 1448. Katherine-hall, Robert Woodlark. 1459. Jesus College, John Alcocke. 1497. Christ College, and S. John's, Margaret Countess of Richmond. circ. 1506. Magdalen College, Thomas Audley. 1542. Trinity College, Henry VIII. 1546. Emanuel, Sir Walter Mildmay.   Sidney-Sussex, Frances Sidney.   This University, as well as its Sister Oxford, has its publick Schools and Library; but falls far short of them in stateliness of Buildings, number of Books, and other Ornaments. The Structures most remark∣able in Cambridge, are, 1. King's-College-Chappel, which for contrivance and largeness, is look'd upon to be one of the finest in the World. 2. Trinity-College-Library, begun under the government of the famous Dr. Barrow, and now entirely finish'd; for beauty and design (considering also the bigness of it) perhaps it cannot be match'd in the 3 Kingdoms. Ely is seated in the chief of those spungy Islands, wherewith this northern part of the County abounds. Whether it had the name from Eels, I shall not dis∣pute: 'Tis certain, the softness of the Soil and the watry situation do both make the Conjecture more plausible, than Polydore Virgil's fancy about the
Greek  signifying a marsh. For what have we to do here with a Greek original? The place ows its rise to Religion; for Etheldreda Wife to Egfrid King of Northumberland, founded here a Nunnery, which afterwards, by the patronage of Kings and Noble∣men, grew up to an incredible degree of Wealth and Revenues. Insomuch, that in Henry I.'s time it was advanc'd to the dignity of a Bishop's See, and had Cambridgeshire assign'd it for its Diocess, which be∣fore belong'd to Lincoln. Notwithstanding these Ad∣vantages, the City cannot boast of any great beauty, either in publick or private Buildings; for its fenny situation, making the Air thick and gross, has ren∣der'd it no very desirable place of Residence. The Cathedral, indeed, is a spacious and beautiful Building. Ancient Places. Camboritum, situated upon the River Cam, and im∣plying as much as a Ford over it, is the old Grant∣cester of the Saxons, out of the Ruins whereof the present Cambridge seems to have risen. Things Remarkable. The vast Ditches thrown up by the East-Angles in several parts of this County, to prevent the Incursions of the Mercians, are such as few other places can shew. Sturbridge-fair, so call'd from the River Sture up∣on which it is kept every year in September, is very famous for resort of People and variety of Wares. HUNTINGDONSHIRE. THE County of Huntingdon seems to have that name from the convenience of Hunting, an opi∣nion that is back'd by the ancient condition of this Shire, which is said to have been almost one entire Forest till the Reign of Henry II. At present, it is a very good Corn-Country; and the East-parts, which are fenny and very fat, afford excellent Pa∣sture. The more remarkable Towns are, Huntingdon, Goodmanchester, Kimbolton, S. Ives. Huntingdon, the chief Town of the Shire, is seat∣ed upon the River Ouse. Formerly, it was much more considerable, than at present it is; as appears from its fifteen Churches, being reduc'd to two. The cause of this decay seems to be the obstruction mention'd by Speed to have been made in the River which before was navigable to this Town, to the great profit of the Inhabitants. Goodmanchester, call'd formerly Gormonchester, stands over against Huntingdon, on the other side of the River. It has improv'd it self chiefly by Agriculture, wherein the Inhabitants are very industrious; and they boast, that at one time they have entertain'd the King in his progress, with a noble Show of ninescore Plows. And, in this their Employment, they have been so successful, that in the Reign of King James I. the Town was made a Corporation. Kimbolton, a pretty fair Town, seated in a bottom, is the Ornament of the East-part of this Coun∣ty. S. Ives, upon the River Ouse, is call'd by a late Writer, a fair, large and ancient Town: But within these 3 or 4 years it was a great part of it burnt down; and so, possibly, may hardly merit that cha∣racter at present. Ancient Places. Durobrivae, i. e. the passage of the River (viz. Nen) must be Dornford, formerly call'd Dorm-ceaster and Caer-Dorm; whether we respect the course of the Itinerary, the discovery of ancient Coins, or the marks of an old City. Durosiponte, by the import of the Word, must have been some place upon the Ouse; the name signi∣fying a Bridge over the Ouse. Gormonchester bids fairest for it; which, as an Evidence of its Antiquity, throws up old Roman Mony: And, besides, that more modern name was only given it, when King Alfred bestow'd these parts upon Gorman the Dane. Things Remarkable. It has been observ'd of this County, that the Fami∣lies have gone strangely to decay; and that even an hundred years ago, there were few Sir-names of any note, which could be drawn down beyond the Reign of Henry VIII. The cause is uncertain; unless we should impute it to the great quantity of Abby-lands that were in this Shire; which, upon the Dissolution, fell into Lay-hands, and perhaps would no more stick by them here, than they have done by their owners in other places. NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. THE County of Northampton is a plain, level Country, abounding with Pasturage and Corn-fields. The number of Churches is an argument of its populousness; for they are so thick set, that from some places you may see no less than 30 Steeples at a time. For Houses also of the Nobility and Gentry, it may vie with any County in England, of an equal bigness. The more remarkable Towns are, Northampton, Peterburrow, Dantrey. Northampton, seated at the meeting of two Rivers, seems to be of no great Antiquity, since we hear lit∣tle of it in our Histories, till after the Conquest But in the Commotions rais'd by the rebellious Ba∣rons, it was made the Seat of War: And sometimes, the Kings of England have held their Parliaments at it; induc'd by the convenience of its situation, almost in the Heart of the Kingdom. The Buildings of it were very handsome, and the Town it self pretty large; having within the Walls 7 Parish-Churches, and in the Suburbs, two. But in our Age, a most dreadful Fire laid it in Ashes; by which the Inhabi∣tants
must have been ruin'd, and the Town it self have been buried in Oblivion, had not the liberal Contributions of the Kingdom reliev'd the one, and repair'd the other. So that now, the first are wealthy much beyond their Neighbours; and the second need give place to no Town in England for neatness, beauty and situation. Peterburrow, seated upon the River Nen, is so call'd from a Monastery begun there by Peada first Christian King of the Mercians, and dedicated to S. Peter. It suffer'd much from the Danes, who de∣stroy'd the Monastery and Monks together; so that it lay desolate for above an hundred years. Then Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, rebuilt it, and re∣stor'd the Monks; who liv'd in great abundance till the dissolution by King Henry VIII. The same King erected it into a Bishop's See, giving this County and Rutlandshire for its Diocess. The Cathedral is a most noble Fabrick; but was much more so before the civil Wars, when it was defac'd, and depriv'd of many considerable Ornaments. Dantrey is a good Market-town, well stor'd with Inns. Some have imagin'd, the name came from a relation it might have to the Danes; and, that the large Fortification near it, was the work of that People. But the form of it, which is four-square, and the Coins of the Emperors, do sufficiently assert it to the Romans. Ancient Places. Tripontium, is probably to be fixt at Torcester in this County; which by the ancient Coins they dig up, is undoubtedly a place of great Antiquity. Bannavenna is certainly Weedon on the Street, upon the River Nen; not only because it is a place of An∣tiquity, but also because the distances on both sides exactly answer, and a military way goes directly along by it. Things Remarkable Burghley-house, upon the Welland, was a most no∣ble Structure even an hundred years ago; but now, is mightily improv'd by the present Earl of Exeter: So that for the stateliness of Rooms, Pictures, Paint∣ings, Carvings, Gardens, Walks, Terrasses, and all other things which furnish out a compleat Seat, it may vie with the best in England. Few Travellers of Curiosity, that go this way, are willing to lose the opportunity of such a goodly Sight. Near Lilburn, upon the edge of Warwickshire, up∣on digging a Burrow in hopes of meeting with hid∣den Treasures, they found nothing but Coals: From whence some have concluded it to have been rais'd for a Boundary, building upon the Authority of S. Au∣stin and other ancient Writers, who mention that custom. Within the Demesnes of Boughton in this Coun∣ty, is a petrifying Well; from whence a Skull all over Stone (both within and without) was brought to, and preserv'd in Sidney-College in Cam∣bridge. LEICESTERSHIRE. THE County of Leicester is a Champain, abound∣ing with Corn; but very few parts of it afford any Wood. The old Roman-way, call'd Watling∣street, runs along the West-side of it. The more considerable Places are, Leicester, Melton-Mowbray. Ashby de la Zouch. Leicester, standing upon the River Soar, is a place of great Antiquity; for when the Mercian Kingdom was divided into Diocesses, a Bishop's See was settl'd here; which is a great sign of its eminence at that time. But tho' that was quickly remov'd, we find that in the Conqueror's time it was in a very good condition, and continu'd so till the Reign of Henry II. under whom it was grievously harrass'd upon account of the Rebellion of Robert Bossu Earl of Leicester. At present, it is a beautiful Town, pleasantly situ∣ated, and adorn'd with handsom Churches. Melton Mowbray, so call'd from the Mowbrays for∣merly Lords of it, is a good Market-town, and the most considerable for Cattle of any in that part of Eng∣land. Thre is little in the Town worth our notice, be∣sides the large and handsom Church. Ashby de la Zouch, so call'd probably from the de la Zouches Lords thereof, is a very pleasant Town, belonging now to the Earls of Huntingdon. Ancient Places. Bennones must be about Cleybrook, both because the ancient Ways cross here (as Antoninus has hinted) and also because of the ancient Coins, and Founda∣tions of Buildings that have been discover'd. Bens∣ford-bridge, not far off, may seem to have something in it of the old Bennones. Ratae has the same evidence to assert it to Leicester, where several pieces of Antiquity have been found; and an old Trench call'd Rawdikes may possibly have some remains of the old name. Verometum must be settl'd upon Burrow-hill, where are the visible marks of an old Fortification; tho' now it is turn'd into arable Ground. Things Remarkable. The Lazers or Lepers had an Hospital in this County, at Burton-Lazers; which is thought to have been built about the beginning of the Normans, when the Leprosie over-spread England. 'Tis a remarkable Epitaph, that is in the Church of S. Martins, in Leicester; whereby we learn that one Mr. Heyrick (who dy'd Apr. 1589. aged 76.) liv'd in one House with Mary his Wife full 52 years, and in all that time never bury'd Man, Woman nor Child, tho' they were sometimes 20 in Family.
RUTLANDSHIRE. RƲtlandshire is the least of all the Counties in England; and, before the Conquest, seems to have been part of Northamptonshire. For till long after the coming in of the Normans, we do not find it nam'd as a distinct County. 'Tis of a form al∣most circular; the Soil is rich, and the situation pleasant. Towns more re∣markable, are Ʋppingham, Okeham. Ʋppingham, in the South-part of the Shire, is a well-frequented Market-town, and has a handsom School. Okeham (situated pleasantly in the middle of the Vale of Catmore, and so call'd from Oaks) belong'd formerly to the Ferrars, and is at present a Market-town of good note. Ancient Places. Margidunum, by its Termination, seems to point out to us some Hill in these parts, where we are to look for it. Market-Overton has certainly the best right; which, as it is seated upon a high Ground, and answers the distances exactly enough, so does it cast up abundance of Coins in testimony of its Anti∣quity; and shews store of Marle, to answer the Mar∣ga in the beginning of the old name. Things Remarkable. At Okeham, was born a Dwarf who was scarce 18 inches high, when a year old, and when 30, only about 3 foot and 9 inches. When the Court came progress that way, he was serv'd up in a cold Pye at the Duke of Buckingham's Table. 'Tis an odd custom at the same Town, That the first time any Baron of the Realm comes through it, he shall give a Horse-shooe to nail upon the Castle-gate: And in case he refuses, the Bayliff has power to stop his Coach, and take one off his Horse's Foot. LINCOLNSHIRE. THE County of Lincoln is very large, and is branch'd into three parts, under three several names, Holland, Kesteven and Lindsey. The first is a soft, marshy Ground, abounding with Rivers and Fens; the second is much better Peopl'd, has a more wholsome Air, and a Soil more fruitful; the third juts out into the Ocean with a large Front, and is bigger than either of the other two. The more considerable Towns, are Lincoln, Stamford, Boston, Grantham. Lincoln (probably so call'd from its watry situa∣ation, Lhin in British implying so much) is the chief Town of this County both in Antiquity and Dignity. For it was fortify'd by the Britains; and Vortimer himself was bury'd in it. Notwithstanding the Cala∣mities which the Danes brought upon it, it still kept up its Head; and, at the Conquest, was in a thriving condition, as we learn from Domesday. About which time, the Bishop's See was transferrd thither from Dorchester; upon a publick Order, that no Bishops should have their Seats in obscure Villages. The Diocess was exceeding large; and notwithstanding Ely was taken out of it by Henry II. and Peterburrow and Oxford by Henry VIII. it is still by much the greatest in England. The Cathedral, as it now stands, is a most stately Pile, and of excellent Workmanship; to which perfection it was brought by several Hands. 'Tis said, there were once 50 Churches in it; but now not above 18. So much has Time spoil'd it of its ancient Grandeur. Stamford, upon the River Welland, is so call'd from the stony ford that was in that place. Before the Conquest, it flourish'd very much; and in the time of Edward III. upon a Contest between the Northern and Southern Students in Oxford, a great number of them retir'd hither, and settl'd an University. But upon an accommodation, they went back again, and a publick Act was pass'd, That no Oxford-man should ever profess at Stamford. In the civil Wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster, it was destroy d with Fire and Sword, and could never after perfectly recover it self; tho' at present it contains some seven Parishes. Boston or Botolph's Town, at the mouth of the Wi∣tham, is built on both sides that River, and join'd with a wooden Bridge. In Edward I.'s time, it was ransack'd and burnt down by a wicked Gang, which could never be discover'd: Only, their Ring-leader confessed the Fact, and was hang'd. But it recover'd it self; especially by the Staple of Wool being settl'd here, which very much enrich'd it. The Inhabi∣tants at present deal mostly in Merchandise and Grazing; and with so good success, that the Town is populous and well-built, and the Market much frequented. Their Church is a beautiful Building, the high Steeple whereof is a good Guide to Ma∣riners. Grantham is a good Market-town; and is much talk'd of upon account of its exceeding high Steeple. Ancient Places. Gausennae may be conveniently enough settl'd at Brig-casterton near Stamford, where the River Gwash or Wash crosses the high-way; which possibly may be some remain of the old Gausennae. Ad Pontem is plainly Paunton, near the head of the River Witham; which may be inferr'd not only from the similitude of Names, but also from the di∣stances and marks of Antiquity, discover'd in that place. Crococalana, tho' it wants the analogy of names to claim a place at Ancaster, is yet sufficiently demon∣strated to belong to it, both by the distances from the Stations on each side, its situation upon the high Way, and the Coins, Vaults, &c. that have been ds∣cover'd there.
Lindum is on all hands agreed to be Lincoln. Things Remarkable. About Belvoir-castle, they find the Astroites or Star-stone, resembling little Stars with five Rays. In Stamford they have the custom, which Littleton calls Burrough-English; whereby the youngest Sons inherit such Lands as their Fathers die possess'd of. Between Stamford and Lincoln, they have many Spaws or Chalybiate-springs: Those which are most used, are Bourne and Walcot, near Folkingham. At Wragby, 8 miles East of Lincoln, a Woman brought forth a Child with two Heads, An. 1676. which liv'd some hours. At Salslelby, near the Sea-coast, one Mr. John Watson was Minister 74 years; in which time he bury'd the Inhabitants three times over, save 3 or 4 Persons. He dy'd Aug. 1693. aged 102. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE. THE County of Nottingham is exceeding well-water'd by the River Trent, and those lesser ones that run into it. The West-part of it is all taken up with the spacious Forest of Shirwood. The Towns more considerable, are Nottingham, Southwell, Newark, Mansfield. Nottingham, the chief Town of the County, is very pleasantly situated; having on one side sweet Meadows; on the other, Hills of an easie ascent. The Town is very beautiful, being adorn'd with a delicate Market-place, neat Churches, and conve∣nient private Buildings. But that which has made it most famous in all Ages, is its strong Castle; built by Peverel base Son to William the Conqueror. In the beginning of the civil Wars, Charles I. set up his Royal Standard here in the year, 1642. but a little after, it came into the Hands of the Parliament, and that War being over, it was order'd to be pull'd down. The Duke of Newcastle hath since erected a splendid Fabrick in the place, begun in the year, 1674. Southwell is famous at this day for its Collegiate Church of Prebendaries, dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Here, the Archbishops of York have a Palace, and 3 Parks. Newark is a pretty Town lying upon the Trent; so call'd as if one should say a new Work from the new Castle built there by Alexander Bishop of Lin∣coln. Our modern Histories mention it pretty much upon account of its being a Garison for King Charles I, which held out to the very last. Mansfield is the chief Town in the Forest of Sher∣wood, and is a plentiful and flourishing Market. Ancient Places. Agelocum or Segelocum is probably at Littleburrow upon Trent, both because the old Way goes along by it; and also because within the marks of an ancient Wall in the neighbouring-Field, the Country-people meet with Roman Coins, which they call Swine-penies. Things Remarkable. Mortimer's hole, and that Vault wherein David II. King of Scotland was kept Prisoner, are Rarities wherewith they entertain Strangers in the Castle of Nottingham. At Workensop, they have Liquorice in great abun∣dance. DERBYSHIRE. THE County of Derby, towards the South-part is hardly six miles broad; but in the North, is thirty. The East and South are well till'd and fruit∣ful enough; but the West, commonly call'd the Peak of Derby, is nothing but Rocks and Mountains: Which yet makes amends for its Barrenness, by the abundance of Lead, Iron, &c. which they dig in those parts. The principal Town of this Shire, is Derby, so call'd from being a shelter for Deer, which implies, that this was formerly a woody Tract. It was pretty famous in the times of the Saxons; but at the Conquest was very much impair'd: Whether by the Danish Tyranny, I know not; only thus much is certain, That the Danes made it a Harbour and Retreat in their Depredations, till they were driven out of it by the victorious Lady Ethelfleda. At present, it is a handsom Town and pretty large, having a reputation for admirable good A L E above its Neighbours. The Trade of the place is a sort of Retail, viz. buying Corn in order to make advantage of it by Sale to the High-land Countries. The Peak (as was observ'd) is a craggy, mountain∣ous Country, yet is not altogether useless; for the Hills feed great numbers of Sheep, and it affords also a mixture of Vales pleasant enough. Under Ground they meet with, 1. Lead, 2. Antimony, 3. Mill-stones, 4. the Fluor, a Stone like Crystal. Remarkable Things. Buxton-wells, in the Peak of Derby, have a good reputation among the Naturalists; and are said to have a Vertue very Soveraign in many Distem∣pers. The Devil's Arse in Peak, is a spacious Hole, with a great many corners, like so many apartments. Elden-hole is remarkable for its deepness: Mr. Cot∣ton plumb'd it to the depth of 800 fathom, but could find no bottom; at least, that he could certainly know to be so. Near Pooles-hole, is a little Brook, consisting of both hot and cold Waters, which are unmixt, and yet so near that you may put the Finger and Thumb, one in hot and the other in cold, both at the same time.
WARWICKSHIRE THE County of Warwick is divided into two parts, the Feldon, and the Woodland; that on the South-side, and this on the North-side of Avon. By this division 'tis certain, that as one was a Cham∣pain, so the other was a woody Country: The first afforded all the Pasture and Corn-grounds, and the second was of little use, besides Fuel. But the Iron∣works in the Counties round, have so consum'd the Wood, that they have long since made way for the Plough; and at present, what by Marle, and other good Contrivances, all this part produces abundance of Corn: So that the Feldon is turn'd, in a great measure, into Pasturage. The chief Towns, are Warwick, Coventry, Bremicham. Stratford upon Avon. Warwick, the principal Town of this Shire, tho' it seems to have been eminent even in the time of the Romans, does yet owe its rise, in a great mea∣sure to the noble Lady Ethelfleda, who rais'd it out of Ashes. And indeed, we cannot wonder why it should be particularly pitch'd upon, in those warlike times, for a Retreat and Sanctuary, since Nature her self seems to have made it for that purpose. The Hill on which it stands, is one entire Rock of free Stone; and the four ways leading into the Town were cut through it. The Castle is exceeding strong, and was of great consequence in times of War; but now 'tis a noble and delightful Seat. On the South of the Town, is a Prospect of a sweet, fruit∣ful Champain; on the North, of Groves and Parks. The two publick Ornaments, are the County-hall and the Market-house. This was the con∣dition of the place, till of late; when a most dread∣ful Fire, enforc'd by a very strong Wind, laid the best part of the Town in ashes: But 'tis hop'd, the Contributions of the Kingdom will be so liberal, the in a few years we shall see it rise out of its Ruins with a fresh Beauty. Coventry, so call'd from a Convent there, had for∣merly the honour of a Bishop's See; which, within a few years, was remov'd back to Lichfield; but upon this Condition, That the Bishop should take his Title from both places. They own Leofrick Earl of Mercia and Godiva his Wife, for their greatest Bene∣factors. The growth and increase of the Town seems to be owing, in a great measure, to the Manu∣facture of Cloathing and Caps, for which they were once very eminent; tho' now they are almost laid aside. That which they value themselves upon, is a stately Cross, built by Sir William Hollies Lord Mayor of London, for Beauty and Workmanship not to be match'd in England. The Walls (which were very strong) were demolisht at the Restoration, by order of King Charles II. Bremicham, is a very populous Town, abounding with handsom Buildings: It seems to be of a late date, and to have risen chiefly by the Iron-works, which are the great Business of the place. Stratford upon Avon is a pretty Market-town; and has a fine Stone-bridge over the Avon, consisting of 14 Arches. Ancient Places. Praesidium, mention'd by the Notitia, is in all pro∣bability the Town of Warwick; than which no situ∣ation can be more proper for a Garison. Manduessedum must be sought for upon Watling-street, and there we meet with Mancester; which as it carries in it some Remains of the old Name, so does it shew its Antiquity by a Fort, which they call Oldbury. Things Remarkable. On the side of Edge-hill, is the shape of a Horse cut in the Ground; and the Trenches that form it, are kept open by a Freehold in the Neighbourhood, who hold Lands by that Service. About Shugbury, they often meet with the Astroites; which being put into Vinegar, keep themselves in motion, as appears by Experiment. In memory of Godiva their great Patroness, the Inhabitants of Coventry have a yearly Cavilcade or solemn Procession, with a naked Figure, represent∣ing her riding naked on Horse-back through the City. The occasion is this: Godiva (as Tradition says) redeem'd the Town from very heavy Taxes, laid upon them by her Husband Leofrick; these he would upon no Terms remit, unless she would con∣sent to ride through the Town naked; which she did, and cover'd her Body with her long dischevel'd Hair. WORCESTERSHIRE. THE County of Worcester is very happy both in its Air and Soil; and is excellently water'd by the River Severn, which runs through the very midst of it. The South-part has also the advantage of the Avon, running out of Warwickshire into the Severn. The more remarkable Towns, are Worcester, Kedderminster, Evesham, Droitwich. Worcester, the chief place in this County, seems to have had its original from the convenience of its situation upon the Severn. For that River being the Boundary between the Britains and Saxons, the fre∣quent Incursions of the former oblig'd the latter to fence and guard it with the utmost diligence. And to go yet higher; it might probably enough be one of those Garisons which the Romans built to keep in awe the Britains in those parts, and to secure them∣seves against Plots and Insurrections. In the year, 680. it was made an Episcopal See, and the Church was fill'd with marry'd Presbyters; till Dunstan turn'd them out and plac'd Monks in their room. But those
too were at last ejected by King Henry VIII. who plac'd there a Dean and Prebendaries. The City it self is large, populous and wealthy, dealing much in the Cloath-trade. 'Tis govern'd by a Mayor and six Aldermen, who are Justices of the Peace and elected out of the 24 capital Citizens. Kedderminster, at a little distance from the Severn, is not remarkable for any Antiquity it can claim; but is, however, a handsom Town, adorn'd with a beautiful Church, and has a Market very well fre∣quented. Evesham, upon the River Avon, was very famous among our Fore-fathers, upon account of the Mona∣stery built there by Egwin, about the year, 700. The Town is seated upon a gentle ascent, and is neat enough; receiving not only great Advantages, but the pleasure also of an open, free Prospect, from the spacious and fruitful Vale of Evesham, which pro∣duces Corn in great abundance. Droitwich, upon the River Salwarp, has got both its Reputation and Riches by the Brine-pits, and the purest kind of Salt which they make. They had a Charter granted them by King James I. and the Burrough is govern'd by two Bailiffs and a certain number of Burgesses. Ancient Places. Branonium, call'd also Branogenium, is undoubt∣edly the City of Worcester, call'd by the Britains at this day Caer Ʋrangen. Things Remarkable. The Brine-pits at Droitwich afford great quantities of fine white Salt; and would yield much more, but that the Proprietors are careful, for their own In∣terest, not to over-stock the Markets. The River Severn, about Holt and the neighbour∣ing Parts, breeds prodigious numbers of River-Lampreys. Washbourn under Bredon-hills, with some other Vil∣lages, are entirely sever'd from the main Body of the County. STAFFORDSHIRE. THE County of Stafford, as to the Figure, is broad in the middle, but narrow towards each end: As to the Soil, 'tis mountainous, and not very fruitful towards the North; but in the middle and South-parts, is very fertil and pleasant. The chief Towns are, Stafford, Lichfield. Stafford, upon the River Sow, requires our mention, more upon account of its giving name to the whole County, than any Beauty, Riches or Populousness of its own. Nor was it very considerable, about the Conquest; for we find by Domesday, That the King had in this place only 18 Burgesses. The Barons of Stafford, owners of Stafford-castle, were exceeding favourable to it, got it erected into a Burrough in the Reign of King John, and procur'd for it very large Privileges and Liberties. Lichfield, upon the River Trent, is a very ancient Town, and seems to have had that name from the dead Bodies of those Christians who are said to have been put to death here, in the time of Dioclesian. Oswy King of Northumberland settl'd a Bishop's See in this place, as early as the year, 606. which also afterwards had its Archbishop for some time; but that lasted not long. The situation of it is low; and the City is handsom and pretty large. Its greatest Ornaments, are, the Cathedral, the Bishop's Palace, and the Houses of the Prebendaries; which make a noble Show. 'Tis divided into two parts by a sort of Lough; which yet have communication by two Causeys. It was first made a Corporation by King Edward VI. who granted to it Bailiffs and Bur∣gesses. Ancient Places. Elocetum will best suit with the course and order of the Itinerary, if it be settl'd at Wall, about a mile South of Lichfield. For the Remains of old Walls and Buildings, plainly shew it to be a place of An∣tiquity; which being gain'd, the agreement of the Distances are a sufficient Argument to prefer this place before any other. Pennocrucium should seem, at first sight, to be Penkridge, upon the River Penk; and the Distances, as well as Sound, would favour such a Conjecture well enough. But there is one Objection against it, That it lies a considerable way from the Old Road, and so cannot well be suppos'd to be one of their Stations, which seldom or never were remov'd from the Way. Stretton, a little lower, carries Antiquity in its very name (as much as if one should say the Street-town) suits the Distances very well, and has the advantage of lying upon the Road, from which it takes the name. Things Remarkable. Below the confluence of the River Tame and the Trent, northward, there is great store of Alabaster. The 3 Stones, erected Spire-wise in the Church∣yard at Checley, with the little Images cut upon two of them, upon what account soever they might be set up, are very remarkable. SHROPSHIRE. SHropshire (as a Frontier-Country between the Welch and English) has more Castles built in it, than any other County in England. Insomuch, that a late Author observes, That it seems to be parted from Wales with a continu'd Wall of Castles: And, 'tis said by another, That no less than 32 Castles have been built within this Shire, besides the fortify'd Towns. The Soil of it is fruitful, and the Country pleasant. The chief Towns are, Shrewsbury, Ludlow. Shrewsbury, the chief Town of the County, tho' it cannot pretend to Roman Antiquity, did yet rise out of the Ruins of an old, neighbouring City, Ʋricon∣dum; and was of very good note among the Saxons. So that, about the Conquest, we find 252 Citizens
reckon'd in it; and Roger de Montgomery, who had it bestow'd upon him by the Conqueror, improv'd it considerably with Building; and fortify'd it with a strong Castle. And indeed, the natural situation of the Town is encouragement enough to pitch upon it particularly for a place of Strength and Sanctuary. The Severn had in a great measure done the work to their Hands, having almost encompass'd it, and made it look like a Peninsula. At present, 'tis well-built, well-inhabited and well-traded. For, standing in the Confines of England and Wales, it is (as it were) the common Mart of both Nations. Of the publick Buildings, the most noted is the School, which is a stately Stone Fabrick, erected and endow'd by Q. Eli∣zabeth, for one Master and three under-Masters. It has likewise a curious Library, which together with the School and Houses for the School-masters, make it look like a College. Ludlow, at the meeting of the Rivers Teond and Corue, ows its original to the Castle built in the place by Roger de Montgomery; which he enclosd with a Wall. The Town is beautiful and in a thriv∣ing condition, notwithstanding all the Misfortunes it has undergone, in the turns of War, by being a Frontier between England and Wales. For which King Henry VIII. made it amends very amply, when he settl'd there the Council of the Marches, consisting of a Lord President, so many Counsellors and other Officers; which does not only add to its Reputation, but also is of considerable consequence to it in point of Interest. Ancient Places. Rutunium discovers it self very distinctly in the present name of Routon, in the West-part of this County, not far from the Severn; which Analogy of Names is of so much the more force, because the Di∣stances agree very well on both sides. Ʋnconium is call'd at this day Wroxeter (at some distance from Shrewsbury); and the ancient Fortifica∣tions and Buildings of the Romans (the Remains whereof are visible) are nam'd The old Works of Wroxeter. Things Remarkable. Where the Rivers Clume and Temd meet, arises the famous Caer-Caradock, a large Hill, which was the Scene of that Action between Ostorius the Roman, and Caratacus the Britain; whereof Tacitus has given us a very distinct Account. The Sweating-sickness in the year 1551. which over-ran the whole Kingdom, was observ'd to begin in Shrewsbury. 'Tis a pretty Device, the Fishermen in those parts have invented, viz. a little Coracle (as they call it) of an Oval Form, made of split Sally-twigs, and next the Water cover'd with an Horse's hide. In this, one Man seats himself; rows with one Hand very swiftly, and with the other can manage his Net, Angle or other Fishing-tackle. CHESHIRE. THE County of Chester is a fruitful Country, and very well water'd. It boasts most of its Pa∣latine Jurisdiction, by virtue whereof its Earl was stil'd Comes Palatinus, and all the Inhabitants held of him as in chief; and were under a Sovereign Alle∣giance to him, as to the King. He held also his Parliaments, where even the Barons were oblig'd to give their Attendance. But when this unlimited Power (which had been granted about the Conquest) came to break in by degrees upon the Regal Autho∣rity it self, and was justly suspected by our Kings. Henry VIII. restrain'd their Sovereignty, and made them dependent upon the Crown. Notwithstanding which, all Pleas of Lands and Tenements, &c. ought to be judicially determin'd within this Shire; no Crime but Treason forcing an Inhabitant of this County to a Trial elsewhere. The more considerable Places are, Chester, Nantwich. Chester, call'd from its westerly situation West-Chester, was (under Agricola Lieutenant of Britain) the Seat of the Legion call'd Vicesima Victrix, settl'd there to curb the Incursions of the Ordovices. And accord∣ingly, the discovery of Roman Coins, Inscriptions, &c. are a sufficient mark, not only of its Antiquity, but likewise of the Eminent Character it bore in those times. A little after the Conquest, it was made a Bishop's See, by Peter Bishop of Lichfield; but did not enjoy that Dignity long. In all the Disturbances between the English and Welch, this City has con∣stantly had its share; being immediately expos'd to their Fury when-ever they met with any favourable prospect of an Incursion. Perhaps, it might be in consideration of their good Services, that King Henry VII. was mov'd to incorporate the Town into a distinct County. But his Successor King Henry VIII. did it the greatest Honour, when, upon the expulsion of the Monks, he erected it into a Bishop's See; a Dignity that it had wanted for many hundred years. The City it self is of a square Form, the Buildings whereof are very neat; and the chief Street is adorn'd with Piazza's on each side. It has eleven Parish-Churches. The Sea is not so kind as it has been formerly; having withdrawn it self, and depriv'd the City of the advantage of an Harbour. Nantwich, lying upon the River Wever, is a Town very well-built, with a handsom Church. It seems to owe its Growth to the Brine-pits, which afford them the whitest Salt, in great abundance. Upon which account, 'tis call'd by the Welch Hellath-wen, that is, White-salt-wich. Ancient Places. Deva, is on all Hands agreed, to be the City of Chester. Bonium seems to have left something of its name in the ancient Banchor, a Monastery of great emi∣nence among our Fore-fathers, lying upon the River Dee; and the Distances, with other Circumstances, do moreover assert it to the same place. Cangi, a People of the Britains, are settl'd in these parts, upon the Authority of an old Inscription, dug up near this Coast. Condatum seems to be Congleton in this County by the sound; but the Distances and Course of the Iti∣nerary do not so well hit with the Conjecture. An old Inscription dug up at Presbrig in the Bishoprick of Durham, would encline us to carry it thither, by its mention of this ancient place.
Things Remarkable. The County is remarkable for making excellent Cheese, which it sends thorow the whole King∣dom. In the Heaths and Bottoms, through which the Wever passes in the South-part of the Shire, they dig up Trees under Ground; a thing indeed not pecu∣liar to the County, but remarkable enough. In this County, they make abundance of Salt. HEREFORDSHIRE. THE County of Hereford is water'd by the plea∣sant Rivers Wye, Lug and Munow, which empty themselves in one Chanel into the Severn. Being a sort of Frontier in the Wars between the English and Welch, it has had greater numbers of Forts and Castles, than most other Counties. Tho' it abounds with good Corn and Pasture-grounds, yet is it most eminent at this day for its vast quantities of Fruit, of which they make so much Cyder, as does not only supply their own Families, but furnish London and other parts of England. Their Red-streak (so call'd from the Apple) is highly valu'd in all parts. The chief Town Hereford, so call'd as if one should say The ford of the Army, is encompass'd with Rivers on all sides, but to the East. 'Tis Daughter to a place of Antiquity at about three miles distance, call'd by the Romans Ariconium, at this day Kenchester. But our Here∣ford seems not to have risen before the Saxon Hep∣tarchy was at its height; nor to owe its Growth to any other cause than the Martyrdom or Ethelbert King of the East-Angles, villanously murther'd by Quindreda Wife to King Offa, while he courted her own Daughter. Whereupon, he was taken into the Catalogue of Martyrs, and had a Church built to his memory in this place; which was not only soon after erected into a Bishop's See, but had signal Re∣spects shew'd it by the West-Saxon and Mercian Kings. The City is pretty large: Before the Civil Wars, it had six Churches; but now it has only four. Ancient Places. Blestium, by the Distances, can be no other than Old Foari (upon the Munow) call'd by the Britains Castle∣hean, a name implying Strength and Antiquity. Ariconium must be Kenchester, near Hereford; which asserts its claim to Antiquity by the old Walls, Chequer-works, Bricks, Coins, &c. observ'd and dis∣cover'd about it. Things Remarkable. A Well, below Richard's-castle, is full of small Fish-bones or Frog-bones; and notwithstanding it be some∣times empty'd, a fresh Supply always succeeds: Whereupon, 'tis call'd Bone-Well. Marcley-hill, near the confluence of Lug and Wye, was in the year 1575. remov'd by an Earthquake to a higher place. In a common Meadow call'd the Wergins, between Sutton and Hereford, two large Stones set on end were remov'd to about twelvescore Paces distance, no Body knew how: This hapn'd about the year, 1652. YORKSHIRE. THE County of York is, by much, the largest in all England, being divided into three Branches; each of which is as large, or indeed larger than any ordinary County. The Divisions are term'd Ridings; a name corrupted from the old Saxon Thrihing, which consisted of several Hundreds or Wapentakes. They are, according to the several Quarters, call'd West-Riding, East-Riding and North-Riding, to which we may add Richmondshire. We will consider each of these under their several Heads; but the West-Riding being the most flourishing part and abounding most with beautiful Towns, requires the first place. WEST-RIDING. West-Riding is for some time bounded by the Ri∣ver Ouse, by Lancashire, and the Southern-limits of the County in general. The more considerable Towns, are York, Leeds, Rippon, Halifax, Wakefield, Pontfract. YORK, the Metropolis of this County, and an Archiepiscopal See, stands upon the River Ʋre or Ouse, which runs quite through it from North to South. At what time precisely it was built, we have no evidence: Thus much is certain, That it was the Residence of the Sixth Legion call'd Victrix, that Severus had his Court here, that Constantius the Em∣peror dy'd in this place, and was immediately suc∣ceeded by his Son Constantine the Great, who receiv'd the last Breath of his dying Father. We need no further Evidence of its Glory under the Romans. Upon the settlement of the Saxons, it was erected into a Metropolitan See by Pope Honorius; and has continu'd so ever since. It suffer'd very much in the Danish Ravages; but recover'd it self, when the Nor∣man Government was establish'd, and the Distur∣bances of that Revolution were blown over. The City is large, pleasant and adorn'd with beautiful Buildings both publick and private. The Bridge over the Foss or Ditch is so throng'd with Buildings, that you would take it for one continu'd Street. The publick Structures of greatest note, are, 1. The Minster, or Cathedral Church, built in the Reign of Edward I. 'Tis a most stately Pile, and particu∣larly remarkable for the fine Carvings in the Quire. 2. The Chapter-house, for its small Pillars and the con∣trivance of the whole Fabrick, is one of the neatest Buildings in England. Leeds, upon the River Are, is of good Antiquity; and the very name implies that it has been all along a populous, thriving Town; for 'tis deriv'd from the Saxon Leed, gens, populus. It has grown strangely
by the advantage of the Cloath-trade especially; and was by King Charles II. honour'd with a Mayor, 12 Aldermen and 24 Assistants. Rippon, situated between the Ʋre and the Skell, was of good note even in the Infancy of the English Church, upon account of the Monastry built there by Wilfrid Archbishop of York. The Town has grown mightily by the Woollen Manufacture, which they have now pretty much laid aside. The Church is a neat and stately Fabrick, with three Spire-Steeples; and was built by Contributions. Halifax, upon the River Calder, is suppos'd to be nam'd from a certain holy Virgin, who had her Head cut off by a lustful Villain, with whose impure De∣sires she would not, by any means, comply. Her Head was hung up on a Tree; and was reputed so sacred, as to be frequently visited in Pilgrimage. Whereupon, the little Village of Horton came by degrees to be a large and noted Town, and took its name from that which had rais'd its Reputation, viz. the sacred Hair of the Virgin's head: For so much Halifax implies. Notwithstanding the Soil hereabouts is very barren, the Inhabitants by their Industry in the Cloath-trade are grown exceeding rich. The Parish is vastly large, having in it twelve Chapels under the Mother-Church of Halifax, two whereof are Parochial. Wakefield, upon the River Calder, is a large Town, neatly built, has a well-frequented Market, and has grown mainly by the Cloathing-trade. Pontfract, so call'd from a broken Bridge, is a Town well-built and admirably situated. It had a most noble large Castle, seated upon a high Hill, which is now demolish'd. Ancient Places. Danum, mention'd by Antoninus and the Notitia, is undoubtedly Doncaster, call'd by Ninius Caer-Daun. Cambodunum belongs to the little Village Almond∣bury, six miles from Halifax; as appears both by the Distances on each hand, and the Ruins of an old Roman Work, with a triple Fortification, still plain∣ly visible. Legcolium cannot be more conveniently seated than at Castleford, near the Confluence of Calder and Are; where they meet with great numbers of Coins, which they call Sarasins Heads. Olicana appears to be Ilkeley, from the affinity of the two names, the remains of Antiquity found about it, and its situation in respect of York. Calcaria, tho' commonly settl'd at Tadcaster, and that upon very plausible Reasons, ought nevertheless to be remov'd to its Neighbour New-ton-kime, where the ancient High-road runs along, crossing the River at S. Helensford, and where they meet with great store of Roman Coins, and other marks of Anti∣quity. Isurium is sufficiently asserted to Aldburrow near Burrow-bridge, both by its nearness to the River Ʋre, the great number of Coins they dig up, and its due distance from the City of York, answering the computation of Antoninus. Eboracum is by all agreed to be the City of York the eminence whereof in the time of the Romans, we have already taken notice of. Things Remarkable. Halifax-law is eminent: By it, they behead any one that's found stealing within such a Liberty, with∣out staying for a legal and ordinary Process. S. Wilfrid's Needle at Rippon was mighty famous. In the Church, they had a little close passage into a Vault, whereby they pretended to try the Chastity of Women: If they were Chast, they pass'd with ease; if not, they were stop'd and holden, without any visible Impediment. The Devil's bolts, near Burrow-bridge, are three huge Stones, set on end in the form of Pyramids: Which have their name from a foolish fancy of the Vulgar, that they were pitch'd there by the Devil; but are by the Learned (according to different Con∣jectures) look'd upon to be either Monuments of some Victory, or British Deities. In the Levels or Marches, they dig up great quan∣tities of Firr and some Oak. EAST-RIDING. The Bounds of the East-Riding are thus: The North and West-sides are limited by the River Der∣went; the South, by the mouth of Humber; and the North, by the German Ocean. In some parts 'tis pretty fruitful, tho' in every respect it falls much short of the West-Riding; the middle of it being no∣thing but Mountains, which they call York-wolds. The chief Towns are, Beverley, Hull. Beverley began to be a Town of note, after John de Beverley Archbishop of York, a Person of great Piety, retir'd hither, and ended his days in it. For King Athelstan having a singular Veneration for him, for his sake endow'd the Town with several Immu∣nities; and others of our Kings have been exceeding kind to it upon the same account. So that now (not∣withstanding its nearness to Hull, which one would think should very much prejudice it) it is above a mile in length; and is adorn'd with two beautiful Churches. The Minster is a very fair Structure. The chief Trade of the place, is Malt, Oat-meal and Tann'd-leather. Hull, or Kingston upon Hull, is so call'd from the River upon which it stands, and King Edward I. its Founder. By the convenience of their Harbour, the advantage of their Iseland-Fish-trade, and the particular Favours of their great Patron Michael de la Pole, the Town is so grown both in Wealth, Build∣ings, Populousness and Commerce, that it infinitely exceeds all its Neighbours. They have 2 Churches, an Exchange for Merchants, and a Trinity-house for the Relief of Seamen and their Wives; besides other Buildings, which are very ornamental and of great use in the management of their Trade, and the administration of their Government. As to the Strength of the place, they have a strong Cittadel be∣gun in the year 1681. But their situation is the best Bulwark against the Enemy: For by advantage of the Leval all about, they can let in the Flood, and lay all under-water for 5 miles round. Ancient Places. Derventio must be seated some-where upon the River Derwent: Auldby is the likest place, both up∣on account of its name, which implies an old Dwel∣ling; and also by reason of the Remains of Anti∣quity still visible about it. Abus can be no other Aestuary than the Humber, which is a very spacious one, and receives a great many considerable Rivers. Delgovitia is probably Wigton, upon the little Ri∣ver Foulness; Degwe in Brittish signifying a Statue or Image of a Heathen God, and it appearing that not far from hence there stood an Idol-temple.
Ocellum Promontorium, is Spurnhead; where Kelln∣sey seems to be a Remain of the old Ocellum. Praetorium discovers it self by the present name Patrington, and by its distance from Delgovitia. Sinus Salutaris is that Bay near Bridlington; in the turn whereof is Sureby, which exactly answers the name, as 'tis translated into Latin, from the Greek . Things Remarkable. The Vipseys or Gipseys (for so they are call'd at present) about Flamborough, are a sort of little Springs which jet out of the Ground, and spout up Water to a great heighth. They never come, but after great Rains, and lasting wet Weather. See Camden's Britannia, English, pag. 748. NORTH-RIDING. The North-Riding is (as it were) the Frontier of the other two; extending in a narrow Tract from East to West, for 60 miles together, and bounded on one side with the River Derwent and the Ouse, on the other by the Tees. The chief Town is Gisburgh, four miles from the mouth of the Tees, formerly famous for the Abbey there; which, by the Ruins, seems to have been equal to some of the best Cathedrals in England. Its Eminence appears, in that it was the common Burial-place for the Nobility in these parts. The pleasant Situation, the goodness of the Air, the neatness of the Inhabitants, and other Advantages, make the place very agreeable and de∣lightful. Ancient Places. Dunus Sinus discovers it self by a little Village seated upon it and call'd Dunesley, hard by Whitby. Things Remarkable. About Whitby, they find the Serpent-stones; which the credulous, common People imagine to be Ser∣pents, turn'd into Stones by the Prayers of S. Hilda. Upon the same Shore, they find the Black-Amber or Geate, which grows within the chink or cliff of a Rock. The Seales (or Sea-veales, call'd also Sea-calves) sleep upon the Rocks near Huntcliff in great Droves, and there Sun themselves. RICHMONDSHIRE. This part of the County lying to the North-west, is almost all Rocks and Montains, which yet in some places afford good Pasture; and under-Ground, great store of Lead, Coal, &c. The chief Town is Richmond, upon the River Swale, so call'd as if one should say a rich Mount; which name it had given it by Alan the first Earl, immediately after the Conquest; who fortify'd it with Walls and a very strong Castle. It has three Gates; and taking in the Suburbs is pretty large and populous; but within the Walls it is but narrow. Ancient Places. Bracchium is to be sought for at the confluence of Baint and Ʋre; where, at a place call'd Burgh, are the Remains of an old Fortification, and where an Inscription was discover'd making express mention of this name. Caturactoninm (so call'd from a Cataract in the River Swale) does plainly discover it self in our pre∣sent Cattarick. Lavatrae, by the course of the ancient High-way and the Distances in Antoninus, must be about Bowes, on the edge of Stanemere; which has had its Anti∣quity attested by ancient Inscriptions. Things Remarkable. Upon the Confines of Lancashire, where the Moun∣tains are rough, wild and steep, there ate little Ri∣vulets hurry along so deep in the Ground, that it creates an Horror in one, to look down to them: Those they call Hell-becks, upon account of their gastliness and depth. Sir Christopher Medcalf, a Gentleman of these parts, when Sheriff of the County, is said to have been at∣tended with 300 Knights, all of his own Family and Name, and all in the same Habit, when he re∣ceiv'd the Judges, and conducted them to York. DURHAM. DƲrham (commonly call'd the Bishoprick of Durham, from the absolute Power which the Bishops here∣of us'd to exercise in this County) is nam'd by our ancient Writers, the Patrimony of S. Cuthbert. This Saint, who liv'd here in the Infancy of the Saxon-Church, was so much respected by our Kings and Nobility for his exemplary Virtue and Piety, that they thought they could never sufficiently express their respect to his Memory, nor heap Lands, Privi∣leges and Immunities enough upon his darling Church. Insomuch, that at length, it was made a County-Palatine; and accordingly the Bishops have their Royalties, being both Spiritual and Temporal Lords. The more considerable Towns are, Durham, Bernard-castle, Stockton. Durham, in Saxon Dun-holm, from its high situa∣tion, ows its original to the miseries and misfortunes of the Monks of Lindisfarne, in the time of the Danes. For being by that barbarous People di∣sturb'd in their own Seats, they were forced to seek Protection for themselves, and a shelter for the Re∣licks of S. Cuthbert, in the most convenient place they should meet with. Here they fix'd; and when that dreadful Storm was blown over, and Religion reviv'd, they flourish'd in great Pomp and Reputa∣tion. In William the Conqueror's time the place was made a Seat of War, by a set of Men in those parts, who could not bear the violation of their an∣cient Rights and Liberties. The Town is defended by the River, on all sides but the North; and be∣sides, is wall'd round. The Cathedral is a noble Pile of Building, and the Church is exceeding rich. Bernard-castle, upon the River Tees, was so call'd from Bernard Baliol (Grandfather to John Baliol King of Scots,) its Founder. 'Tis a good Town; and is eminent in those Northern parts, for the best White∣bread. Stockton, about 3 miles below Yarum (a conside∣rable Market-town) about 30 years ago, had no
Houses but of Clay, and thatch'd. Now, 'tis well built, is a Corporation, and drives a very great Trade in Lead and Butter. Ancient Places. Tuesis, or  in Ptolemy, is plainly the River Tees. Vedra, mention'd by Ptolemy, does likewise belong to this County, and is undoubtedly the River Were, call'd by Bede, Wirus. Vinovium in Antoninus, in Ptolemy, Binovium, seems by the very name to settle it self at Binchester, near the River Were; where appear large Ruins of Walls, and Coins, with other marks of Antiquity, are dug up. Condercum seems to be Chester on the Street, near the River Were; especially, if the Saxon name of the place be Concester: All the Objection is, That the Notitia settles this Station ad Lineam Valli, so that Chester on the Street is perhaps too far remov'd from the Wall to lay claim to this piece of Antiquity. An Altar found at Benwall in Northumberland seems to give it to that place, against which there is not the same Objection. Things Remarkable. The Pits call'd Hell-kettles near Darlington, are much admir'd both by Travellers and the Inhabitants. There are 3 of them, full of Water to the brim; possibly by a communication with the Tees only, the Water in them is said to be of a different kind from that in the River. They look much like old-wrought Coal-pits that are drown'd. LANCASHIRE. THE County of Lancaster, call'd by the northern People Loncaster, where it is level yeilds good store of Barley and Wheat; and in the Valleys, Oats. The Mosses, tho' as to their produce they are of no real value, are yet of considerable advantage both by the Fuel above-Ground, and the old Trees un∣der-Ground. Its greatest Glory is, that 'tis a County-Palatine, as well as its neighbour Cheshire. The more considerable Towns are, Lancaster, Manchester, Wiggin. Leverpoole. Lancaster, (so call'd from the River Lone upon which it stands) gives name to the whole County, and was, accordingly, the most flourishing Town in it. But now 'tis much out-grown by Manchester, having no advantage of Trade, or any other Em∣ployment besides that of Agriculture; to which in∣deed the nature and situation of the place may seem in some measure to have determin'd the Inhabitants. For the Grounds about it are very fit for Cultivation, and 'tis seated in an open free Tract. Manchester, at the Confluence of the Irk and Ir∣well, is the most populous and thriving Town in this County. The Inhabitants may be estimated from the number of Communicants; who in the Town and Parish round it made no less than 20000, sixty years ago; since which time the Inhabitants have encreas'd proportionably to their incredible growth in Trade. They are most famous for the Fustian-Manufacture, commonly known by the name of Manchester-Cottons; tho' they deal also in many other Manufactures, all which are call'd by one general name, Manchester-Wares. They have more publick Buildings than are commonly to be met with in our Country-towns. 1. The Collegiate Church is a very stately Edifice, the Quire whereof is particularly remarkable for its curious carv'd Work. 2. The College (consisting of a Warden, 4 Fellows, 2 Chaplains, 4 Singing-men and 4 Choristers) is a noble Foundation. 3. The Hospital for the maintenance of 60 poor Boys, is much of the same Government and Constitution with that of Christ-Church in London. 4. The Library is furnish'd already with Books, to almost the number of 4000, and will daily encrease by an annual Salary of 116 l. per Ann. settl'd upon it for that purpose, and for the maintenance of a Librarian. 5. The School has three Masters, who have very genteel Sa∣laries. Wiggin, near the rise of the River Dugless, is a handsom, plentiful Town, having the honour of a Mayor and Burgesses. Leverpoole (near the entrance of the River Mersey into the Sea) tho' it can boast of no great Antiquity, is yet a place both of Name and Wealth. The first it derives from the convenience of a passage from hence over into Ireland, which of late years has been much us'd by reason of the Commotions in that King∣dom. The second is owing to its Trade with the West-Indies, and the Manufactures round it: By the advantage whereof the Buildings and Inhabitants are more than doubly increas'd, and the Customs aug∣mented eight or ten-fold, within these 28 years last past. Of late, they have built a Town-house, plac'd upon Pillars; and under it, the Exchange. Ancient Places. Mancunium, is Manchester, which may seem to have taken part of its name from the Roman one. Bellisama must be an Aestuary hereabouts: The latter Syllable of the name of Ribell would induce us to pitch upon the mouth of that River before any other. Ribodunum (if we may change Ptolemy's Rigodunum, into that) need not be sought in any other place but Rible-chester, which produces a variety of Roman Re∣mains; and however inconsiderable at present, gave rise to Preston, a handsom, large and populous Town. Bremetonacum cannot probably be more conveni∣ently seated than at Overburrow (at the confluence of Lac and Lone) which, tho' it has no remains of the old name, does yet carry Antiquity in the latter part of its present one, and has the Tradition of the In∣habitants on its side (who tell you of a spacious City that was formerly there) and the Evidence of Roman Coins, Inscriptions, &c. Longovicum is plainly Lancaster, call'd by the In∣habitants and the northern part, Loncaster; besides which Analogy of Names, they meet now and then with Coins of the Roman Emperors. Things Remarkable. Lancashire-Oxen are famous throughout England, for huge, bulky Bodies and large Horns. Winwick, near the River Mersey, is reckon'd one of the best Parsonages in the Kingdom.
At Hey in this County, we see such a Plantation of Fir-trees (by the industry and contrivance of its pre∣sent Owner Thomas Brotherton, Esq) as perhaps can hardly be met with elsewhere. Lathom-spaw in this County, tho' not much frequent∣ed (by reason of the want of suitable Accommodation) has done very considerable Cures. Burning-well, near Wiggin, if a Candle be put to it, will presently take Fire and burn like Brandy; and in a calm quiet Season will continue for a whole day together, even to that degree, that by the heat of it they can boil Eggs, Meat, &c. WESTMORLAND. THE County of Westmorland is so call'd from its westerly situation; lying West of that great ridge of Mountains which divides these northern Counties. The out-skirts of it on most sides are hilly and mountainous, which feed great Flocks of Sheep, and have a mixture of fruitful Vales; but the heart of it is an open, champain Country, which af∣fords pretty good store of Corn and Wood. The more considerable Towns are, Apleby, Kendal. Apleby claims the first place, both upon account of its Antiquity; and also because 'tis the County-town, where the yearly Assizes are held. Otherwise, 'tis neither rich nor beautiful; only the situation indeed makes it very agreeable, having the advantage of pleasant Fields round it, and being wash'd by the Ri∣ver Eden. Kendal, call'd also Kirby Kendal, has its name from the River Can, and implies as much as a Dale or Valley upon that River. This is much beyond Apleby, whether we respect the Trade, Buildings, Number or Wealth of the Inhabitants. It has two good Streets, which cross each other, and is enrich'd by the In∣dustry of the Towns-men and the Woollen Manufa∣cture, for which they are very eminent, and drive a Trade with it throughout England. Ancient Places. Amboglana, if we follow the Analogy of Names, cannot be plac'd more conveniently than at Ambleside, upon Windermere-water; which may be done with so much the less scruple, because it shews the Ruins of an old City, and other marks of Antiquity. Ituna is undoubtedly the noble River of Eden, which marches through this County, towards the Sea. Verterae must be Brough under Stanemore, for seve∣ral Reasons: The Name imports Antiquity; then, it stands upon a Roman High-way; and lastly, the Di∣stances from Levatrae and Brovonacum agree very exactly. Aballaba is so visible in our present Apelby, and so well answers that situation, that there is no room for dispute. Gallatum is probably Whelp-castle, near Kirby-Thore, where are the Ruins of an old Town, and very considerable Remains of Antiquity. Setantiorum Lacus may well enough be Winder∣mere, upon the edge of Lancashire; one of the largest Lakes in the Kingdom. Things Remarkable. King Arthur's round Table, in the North of this County, is much talk'd of by the Inhabitants and others: But we need go no farther for its original than the Ages wherein Tilting was in vogue; this being a round Entrenchment with a plain piece of Ground in the middle, and very convenient for that purpose. Gold-sike, in the Parish of Orton, is a little Spring which continually casts up small thin pieces, of a substance shining and resembling Gold. In VVindermere-water there is great store of the Fish call'd Charre, which is not to be met withal in the South, and only in very few places of the North. They are bak'd in Pots, and so sent up to London, and other parts, where they are an acceptable Pre∣sent. CUMBERLAND. THE County of Cumberland is the farthest of our English Counties to the North-west, and borders upon Scotland. Whether it fetch the name from the old Britains, call'd Cambri & Cumbri; or, (as a mo∣dern Author imagins) from our Cumber, the Shire be∣ing encumber'd with Lakes and Mountains, and made very difficult to Travellers, I shall not determine. The former Conjecture has this advantage, that some of the Britains posted themselves for a long time in these parts, when the Saxon Conqueror drove them to the out-skirts of the Island, and made them seek for shelter among Hills and Mountains. The remains of British names hereabouts concur to the establish∣ment of the same Opinion. More considerable Towns are, Carlisle, Penrith. Carlisle is very happy in its situation, standing be∣tween the Rivers of Eden, Peteril and the Caude; which, as they make it very agreeable, and furnish it with great plenty of Fish, so do they add considerably to its Strength; a circumstance that in these border∣ing Countries is very valuable. For before the union of the two Crowns, the Scots were continually mak∣ing Incursions upon the Frontiers; which put the Government under a necessity of building Castles, Towers and fortify'd places, for the defence of it self and of the Subject. The City is wall'd round, has a Castle, and a Citadel built by King Henry VIII. Its situation upon the Wall, with the marks of Anti∣quity dug up about it, put it beyond dispute, that it was a place of some note among the Romans. The Danes utterly destroy'd it, and it lay in desolation for about two hundred years; till William Rufus took it into his protection, built here a Castle, and planted
it with a new Colony of Husbandmen, to till the Ground round it. It has had of late, Earls of con∣siderable note; but ows its greatest honour to the Bi∣shop's See, establish'd in it by King Henry I. The Cathedral stands almost in the middle of the City; but the Bishop's Seat is some few miles distant from the City, at Rose-castle. Penrith is a Market-town upon the South-border of the County, of good note in these parts. The Town is well enough built, and the Inhabitants are pretty wealthy; having the advantage of standing al∣most in the middle between 2 Counties. In the Town, they have a handsom Church; and at a little distance, an old Castle. Ancient Places. Morbium seems to have left its name in the present Moresby, upon the Western Coast; where they find great remains of Roman Antiquity. Arbeia also may seem to point out its old situation by the name of a Town at the head of the River Elen, now call'd Jerby. Volantium, if it is not allow'd a place at Elenbur∣row, at the mouth of the River Elne; must remain unsettl'd, till some more lucky discovery fix it in its true place. 'Tis certain, here are all the signs of Antiquity that can be wish'd; great store of Altars, Statues, Inscriptions, &c. and (which is of most mo∣ment) one of the second sort, with this Writing on the back-side, Volantii vivas. Moricambi, signifying in British a crooked Sea, can∣not be settl'd at any winding, more agreeable to the name, than that near Holme Cultram, upon this Coast. Castra Exploratorum, if we respect the Distances on each hand, will fall in well enough with the pre∣sent Old Carlisle, at the head of the little River Wize; a place (by reason of its high situation) fit for the discovery of an Enemy; and where they find such plenty of Roman Remains, as put it beyond all dispute that it was of considerable importance under that People. Blatum-Bulgium discovers its ancient situation by the present name Bul-ness; where are Tracks of Streets and old pieces of Wall. Petrianae seems to be Old Perith (near the, Town of that name) where a broken Altar was dug up, implying that the Ala Petrianae quarter'd there. Congavata is possibly the place we now call Rose∣castle, the Seat of the Bishop of Carlisle. Luguvallum is agreed upon by all to be the present Carlisle, and seems to owe the latter part of the name to its situation upon the Picts-wall. Aesica must be sought for somewhere upon the Ri∣ver Esk. Netherby bids fairest for it, proving its claim by the vast Ruins of an old City; how in∣considerable soever it may be at present. Bremenium should seem to be Brampton in Gilles∣land. Things Remarkable. Pearls are found in great abundance in the little River Irt, being call d Muscle-Pearls. Some Gentle∣men have lately procur'd a Patent for the Pearl-fish∣ing in this River. The Font at Bridekirk, with a fair Runick Inscri∣ption, is a Curiosity that has been long since taken notice of by Antiquaries, but must be clear'd and il∣lustrated by that learned Gentleman Mr. Nicolson, in his Antiquities of the Kingdom of Northumber∣land. The Circle of Stones call'd Long-Megg and her Daughters (at Little Salkeld) have had several Con∣jectures spent upon them; but will be fully illustra∣ted by the same worthy Gentleman. The Picts-wall, so much talk'd of in our Histories and among the common People, begins at Bulness upon the Irish-Sea, so runs by Carlisle; and after∣wards passing the Rivers of Cambec, Irthing and Poltross, enters Northumberland. It was built in the latter end of the Romans, to prevent the Incursions of the Scots and Picts; who (upon calling over the Roman-forces to assist in foreign Wars) took all op∣portunities of making Excursions into the Territories of the poor Britains. At convenient Distances they had Towers and Garisons, that the Enemy should not surprize them, and that they might be in a con∣dition to get together upon the first Motion and Alarm. NORTHUMBERLAND. NOrthumberland was formerly us'd in a much greater latitude and extent, than at present it is; for it denoted all those Counties, which (according to the import and meaning of the Word) laid beyond, or on the North-side of the River Humber. Before the Union of the two Kingdoms, this County was almost continually a Seat of War, and the Inhabitants were daily exercised with the Skirmishes of the neighbour∣ing Scots. This, as it made them a warlike, stout sort of People, so did it fill the Shire with little Forts and Castles, which private Men built for their own defence. In those times, they were rude and unpo∣lish'd, coming pretty near the manners and behaviour of the bordering Scots; but since, they have taken to the English modes of Living, and are as decent and regular as any of their Neighbours. The more considerable Towns are, New-castle, Berwick, Hexam. New-castle is seated conveniently upon the River Tine, which makes a secure Harbour, and carries up Vessels of Burthen. 'Tis of good Antiquity, tho' the name imports it to be only of a modern date; but that it got, when Robert, Son to William the Con∣queror, built a New-castle at it. It is surrounded with good strong Walls, which were begun by a wealthy Citizen, in the Reign of Edward I. The growth of it is owing to the Trade it drives upon the Coasts of Germany, and the plenty of Sea-coal with which it furnishes London, and a good part of Eng∣land; especially, so much as lies upon that Coast. By Henry VI. it was made a County Incorporate; and since that time, has improv'd so considerably in Wealth and Trade, that 'tis now the great Emporium of the North-part of England, and of a good share of Scot∣land. S. Nicholas is the Mother-Church; besides which, there are six other Churches or Chapels. Berwick, seated at the mouth of the River Tweede, is the farthest Town in this Kingdom; and standing between England and Scotland, has ever born the first
Assaults, upon the breaking out of War between the two Nations. By which means it was a sort of con∣tinual Garison, one while in the Hands of the Eng∣lish, and then again in the possession of the Scots; till it was reduc'd to the obedience of Edward IV. and partly by the Union, partly by its great Strength, has ever since continu'd in subjection to our Kings. About a hundred years ago, it was reputed the strong∣est place in the whole Kingdom; but as the appre∣hensions of danger from that Quarter have for many years ceas'd, and so put a stop to the Improvements which would otherwise have been made upon it; so Enemies from other parts have oblig'd us to spend more Pains and Industry upon Hull, Portsmouth, Pli∣mouth, &c. which at present much out-do it in Strength and Fortifications. Hexam was a place of mighty note among the Saxons; and is much talk'd of in our Histories. For here, Egfrid settl'd a Bishop's See; which might have continu'd longer (to the honour and interest of the place) if the Danes had not given them such vio∣lent Disturbances, as put the Monks under a neces∣sity of removing, and seeing out for new Quarters. The Church, which stands still entire (except the West-end) is a very stately Fabrick. Ancient Places. Magna, mention'd by the Notitia, is probably Chester in the Wall; not only because it stands upon the Picts-wall and takes its name from thence, but also because it has shewn us some Altars and Inscri∣ptions, as Evidences of its Antiquity. Hunnum, tho' it has left no Remains of its name in any place in these parts, yet the Wing which re∣sided at it, call'd by the Notitia, Sabiniania, may seem to have given some ground to the present Seavenshale, upon the Wall. Gallana discovers it self in the present Walwick, which probably had this denomination from the old name. Habitancum should seem to be Risingham upon the River Rhead, where are many Remains of Antiquity, and an Inscription was dug up which made express mention of the old name. Cilurnum may very conveniently be plac'd at Sil∣cester near the Wall; which may seem to owe the first Syllable of its name to it. Axelodunum is so manifest in our present Hexam, that the latter seems only to be a contraction of the former; especially, if we consider the various melt∣ings and mouldings of this name under the Saxons. Add to this, that the termination Dunum does very well suit with the high situation of this place. Protolitia seems to be our Prudhow-castle, upon the River Tine. Pons Aelii can be no other, than that which at this day we call Pont-Eland, upon the River Pont. Borcovicus does still preserve the Remains of its name in Borwick, which seems to be a Compound of a Roman Initial and a Saxon Termination. Vindolana, where the fourth Cohort of the Galli kept Garison, may very well be settl'd at Old-Win∣chester. Gabrosentum is Gateshead, a sort of Suburbs to New-castle, where the Wall pass'd. Vindobala, as the Notitia; or, as Antoninus terms it, Vindomora, seems to imply as much as the Wall's end; and then we need not be at a loss for its situ∣ation, since we meet with a Village in these parts of the very same name. Glanoventa (signifying as much as the bank of the River Went) must be plac'd somewhere upon the River call'd at this day Wentsbeck; tho' the Distances seem to hit well enough with Caer-vorran, near which, there is a place still call'd Glen-welt. Alaunus, mention'd by Ptolemy, discovers it self plainly in the present name Alne. Tunnocellum is plainly Tinmouth, call'd formerly Tunnacester, from the old Roman name. Segedunum needs no clearer Guide to its situation, than the affinity it has with our present Seghill, upon the Sea-coast near Tinmouth. Alone may fairly enough be settl'd at Old-town; not only because that place carries Antiquity in the name, but also from its situation upon the River Alon, and the proper Distances from the Stations on each Hand. Corstopitum, is evidently Corbridge; and probably the same with Ptolemy's Curia Ottadinorum. Things Remarkable. At Chillingham-castle, 'tis said a live Toad was found in the middle of a Stone at the sawing of it. One part of the Stone is now a Chimney-piece in the Castle, with a hollow in the middle; and the other also has the like mark, and is put to the same use at Horton-castle. The Improvement in Tillage at Rock by John Salkeld, Esq and in Gardening and Fruitery at Fal∣ladon, by Samuel Salkeld, Gentleman; are Fineries hardly to be met with in these parts: The latter is the more remarkable, because of an Opinion which has prevail'd in the World, That the coldness of the Climate in these Northern parts, will not allow any Fruit to come to its proper perfection and ripe∣ness. Not far from New-castle, there are some Coal-pits on fire, which have burnt for several years: The Flames are visible enough by night, and the burning may be trac'd on the day-time by Brimstone, which lies on the Surface of the Ground.
WALES. THAT the Inhabitants of WALES are the the Off-spring of the ancient Britains, who were possess'd of the greatest part of this Island before the coming over of the Saxons, we have shewn in the general Account of the several Inhabi∣tants. The Severn was their Boundary on this side, for a long time; till the prevailing power of the Saxons, and of the Kings of England after the Con∣quest, oblig'd them to retire further Westward, and to seek shelter among the Mountains. Notwithstand∣ing which, they still enjoy'd their own Laws, liv'd under their own Princes, and maintain'd their own Liberties against all the Designs and Attempts of the English. Till at last, in the year 1282. Llewellin ap Gryffith, Prince of Wales, lost both his Life and Principality to King Edward I. who yet did not think himself safe, notwithstanding his Victory seem'd entire and absolute. For he observ'd the humour of the Welch to be bitterly set against any foreign Prince or Governor, and was very hard put to it to settle himself in the secure possession of his new Conquests, till he enter'd upon this lucky Expedient. His Queen was then big with Child; so he sent for her imme∣diately to come to Carnarvon, and when she was de∣liver'd of a Son, he summon'd a Meeting of the Welch Lords, and proffer'd them the young Child (a Native of their own) for their Lord and Governour. To him they readily swore Obedience; and since that time, the eldest Sons of the Kings of England have commonly been created Princes of Wales. As to the present condition of this Principality; it is divided into South-Wales and North-Wales; from the situation of the several Branches. The Counties of Hereford and Monmouth (which formerly belong'd to it) are now lopp'd off, and reckon'd among those of England. The former of these we have already survey'd: The latter (as being disjointed in a man∣ner by the Aestuary of Severn) we shall reserve to its proper place, in the Survey of these parts. Passing therefore by Herefordshire, the next County to the North-west, is RADNORSHIRE. THE County of Radnor, on the East and South∣parts, is well cultivated and fruitful enough: The rest of it, tho' well water'd, is so very rugged and uneven, that the Plow can have no Employ∣ment there. The chief Town is Radnor, from whence the whole County take its name. Old Radnor (call'd from its high situation Pencraig) was laid in Ashes by Rhys ap Gruffydh in the Reign of King John. The new Town is well-built, for those parts; and was formerly defended with Walls and a Castle. It might have been much more considerable, had it escap'd the fury of the Re∣bellious Owen Glyndwr, who burnt it down. But a more immediate cause of its decay, seems to be the Encouragement that was afforded to its Neighbour Prestean (about 3 miles off) by Martin Lord Bishop of S. Davids; by whose favour it grew up to a con∣siderable Market, and must by consequence draw off the Trade and Resort from Radnor. The ancient Place in this County is Magi, mention'd by Antoninus; which possibly we may soonest find about the place we have been just now describing. I mean, Old Radnor, call'd by the Britains Maesyved hen; for the middle-Age Wri∣ters call the Inhabitants of those parts Magesetae, as much as if one should say the Seat of the Magi; and the Distances on both sides will hit well enough. The Thing most Remarkable, is Offa's-dike, a mighty Work of it self, and much talkt of by our Historians. The name, it has from the Contriver of it, King Offa, who had it cast up as a Boundary between the English and Welch, and a Protection for the former against the Invasions of the latter. It runs through Herefordshire, so over a part of Shropshire into Mongomeryshire; then again into Shropshire, and so through Denbighshire into Flint∣shire; and ends a little below Holywell, where that Water empties it self into the Dee. BRECKNOCKSHIRE. THE County of Brecknock, on the South of Rad∣norshire, is of great extent, but very moun∣tainous; tho' the pleasant and fruitful Vales (whereof they have a good number) make amends for this un∣sightly appearance. The chief Town is Brecknock, upon the River Ʋsk; which as it gives name to the whole County, so is it situated almost in the middle of it. The Roman Coins, which they discover hereabouts, are a Testimony, that it has been of some note among that People. I know not whe∣ther the Town began to flourish when Bernard New∣march (who conquer'd this Country) built a stately Castle at it; which was afterwards repair'd by the Breoses and Bohuns. 'Tis certain, King Henry VIII. added much both to the honour and advantage of the place, when he constituted here a Collegiate-Church of 14 Prebendaries. There are no Ancient Places that can probably be fix'd in this County; nor any Remarkables which properly fall under our Design.
MONMOUTHSHIRE. THE County of Monmouth, among other Advan∣tages is abundantly supply'd with Water; being bounded (as it were) on all sides with Rivers, and parted in the middle by the noble River of Ʋsk. The East-part abounds with Pastures and Woods; the Western-parts are a little Mountainous, but yet fruit∣ful enough. The chief Towns are, Monmouth, Chepstow. Monmouth (situated between the Rivers Mynwy and Wye) is the chief Town of this County, and has been a place of note ever since the Conquest. For the Castle flourish'd in the time of the Conqueror, and seems to have been of great account in the civil Wars which hapn'd afterwards in this Kingdom. Insomuch, that the Town may seem in some measure to owe its growth to it; King Henry III. granting it large Privileges, after he had depriv'd John Baron of Monmouth of his Inheritance, either for espousing himself the Interest of the Barons, or because his Heirs had clos'd with the Earl of Bretagne. It glo∣ries in the Birth of two Persons, very much talk'd of in our Histories; one for his martial Atchievments, the other for his Learning and Knowledge in Anti∣quities. For here King Henry V. the Glory of Eng∣land and Terror of France, had his first Breath; and here also was born the noted Jeffrey (call'd from hence de Monmouth) Author of the famous British History. The latter I am the rather inclin'd to reckon an Ornament to the place of his Nativity, be∣cause the Britains seem to value themselves and their Nation upon the Original he has given them, and are inclin'd to give more credit to his Relations, than their Neighbours are willing to allow them. Chepstow, near the mouth of the River Wye, is of a pure Saxon original; which also intimates that it was a place of Trade and Commerce when that name was given it. The old Venta Silurum is about four miles from it; and some affirm, That it arose out of the Ruins of that ancient City: How truly, I know not. 'Tis at present, a Town of good note, secur'd by Walls of a considerable compass. Ancient Places. Venta Silurum, was the chief City of this People, and a large one it was for those times; the Ruins shewing about a mile in compass. As the Remains of Antiquity point out the place, so is the memory of it preserv'd in the present name of Caer-went, not far from Chepstow. Gobannium is seated at the confluence of the River Wysk and Gavenni; from which confluence 'tis at this day call'd Aber-Gavenni. Isca is plainly the River Ʋsk; and the Station call'd by Antoninus, Isca and Legio secunda is undoubtedly Kaer Lheion, call'd also by the Britains Kaer Lheon ar wysk, intimating as much as The City of the Legion upon the River Usk; from the Legio secunda Augusta which quarter'd there. Burrium is plac'd by Antoninus 12 miles from Go∣bannium: 'Tis call'd at this day Brynbiga for Buren∣begi (where the River Byrdhin falls into the Ʋsk) which name seems to retain something of the more ancient Denomination. The Things most Remarkable in this County, are The Chequer'd Pavements, which were discover'd about the ancient Venta Silurum or Kaer-Went in the year 1689. Upon taking them up, the Cement was dissolv'd; so that nothing but the cubical Stones of which they were compos'd, do now remain. The Stones, whereof these Pavements are made, are of several Colours; and by the Artifice of the Work∣man are form'd into several shapes of Men, Beasts, Cups, &c. or whatever else he pleas'd. GLAMORGANSHIRE. GLamorganshire is by some suppos'd to take that name from a certain Prince call'd Morgan; which is a Conjecture probable enough, considering how common the name is in this Country. But if we respect the situation of the County, we must rather fetch it from its relation to the Sea, or the Aestuary of Severn, upon which it is stretch'd out towards the South; for mor in their Language signifies the Sea. The chief Towns are, Landaffe, Caerdiffe. Landaffe is seated in a bottom upon the River Taf, from which and the Church there it takes the name: For Lhan in British signifies a Church. From this it derives its greatest Ornament and Reputation; being erected into a Bishop's See as early as the suppression of the Pelagian Heresy by Germanus and Lupus, the two Gallick Bishops. Caerdiffe, considering it lies nearer the mouth of the same River, has greater advantage by the Har∣bour; and is a pretty neat Town. Ancient Places. Ratostibius is a corruption of the British Traeth Tav, which signifying the sandy frith of the River Tav, we need not give our selves any further trouble in enquiring after the position of this ancient place. Bovium is Boverton, three miles from Cowbridge, a Market-town. Nidum also points its situation by the present name. Nedh, a Town of good note. Leucarum is Loghor. The Thing most Remarkable in this County, is Caerphyli-castle, the noblest Ruins of ancient Archi∣tecture that we have in this whole Island; being larger than any Castle in England, except only Windsor. This seems to have been the Bullaeum Si∣lurum; which being turn'd into British, is Caer-Vwl, and that must be express'd like Caer-Vyl or Caer-Vyli.
CAERMARTHENSHIRE. THE County of Caermarthen, in British Kaer-Vyrdhin, bears good store of Corn, and abounds pretty much with Cattel: Besides which Advantage of the Soil, it yeilds in several places good plenty of Corn. The chief Place is Caermarthen, seated pleasantly upon the River Towy, among Woods and Meadows, whither Ships of small Burden are carry'd up. But the Sea has been a lit∣tle unkind to it; having well-nigh stopp'd up the mouth of the River with a ridge of Sand. This Town has the honour of being the Birth-place of the famous Merlin, the British Prophet, so much talk'd of in ancient Story. Ancient Places. Tobius is manifestly the River Towy, which crosses this County from North to South, and empties it self into the Ocean a little below Kydweli. Maridunum is very plainly Caermarthen, just now describ'd; especially, if we take the British name of the place, Caer-mardkin. PENBROKESHIRE. THE County of Penbroke (encompass'd with the Sea, except on the North and East-sides) is fer∣til enough in Corn; which is improv'd by the plenty of Marle and other fattening Materials they make use of, to enrich the Ground. They are likewise well stock'd with Cattel, and have good store of Coal for Fuel. The chief Towns are, Penbroke, S. David's, Haverford-west, Tenbigh. Penbroke (translated by Giraldus, The Cape, or Sea-Promontory) is seated in the Eastern-bay of Milford-haven. Arnulph de Montgomery built a Castle here in the time of Henry I. At present, 'tis a Corporation, and receives great Advantages from the Sea. S. David's (seated in the utmost Promontory to the Westward) has its name from Dewi or David, a very religious Bishop, who translated the Archiepiscopal See from Caer-Leon to this place. This Honour it enjoy'd for a long time; till the Plague raging in those parts, the Dignity was translated to Dol in Little Britain, and never restor'd. Its nearness to the Sea has expos'd it very much to Pyrates; from whose barbarous Cruelties it has been a great Sufferer. So that, at present, 'tis but an inconsiderable City; shewing no Buildings of note, besides the Cathedral, the Bishop's Palace, and the Houses belonging to the several Members of the Church. Haverford-west, is a Town of very good account and resort; being handsomly built and well-peopl'd, The uneveness of the Ground upon which it stands is a great Enemy to the beauty and uniformity of the Streets. 'Tis however a Corporation, and a County of it self. Tenbigh, on the South-coast, is a handsom Town and well fortify'd with strong Walls. 'Tis much noted for its plenty of Fish, and is accordingly call'd in British Dinbech y Pyskod: It is also a Corporation. The ancient Place on this Coast, is Octopitarum Promontorium, which is that neck of Land, where S. David's stands, call'd in English S. David's Land. Things Remarkable. Milford-haven, for largeness and security, is per∣haps out-done by no Harbour in Europe. For it has 16 Creeks, 5 Bays and 13 Roads. In that little Tract, lying beyond Milford-haven, the Flemings were settl'd in the Reign of Henry I. Whose Posterity to this day are manifestly distinguish'd from their Neighbour-Welch, in Language and Cu∣stoms, in both which they come so near the English, that the Tract it self is call'd Little England beyond Wales. CARDIGANSHIRE. THE County of Cardigan, on the West and South∣sides, is an even champain Country; but on the North and East is taken up with a continu'd ridge of Mountains, which yet afford good Pasture for Cattel, and have in the Valleys underneath several large Lakes. The chief Towns are, Cardigan, Aber-ystwyth. Cardigan (seated near the mouth of the River Teivi, and therefore call'd by the Britains Aber-Teivi) is the chief Town in this County, from whence the whole is denominated. It was fortify'd by Gilbert Son of Richard Clare; but being afterwards treason∣ably surrender'd, was laid waste by Rhys ap Gryffydh. Aber-ystwyth is seated at the mouth of the River Ystwyth; from which position it has the name. The same Gilbert Clare who fortify'd Cardigan, did also wall this Town; which by Mr. Camden is call'd the most populous Town in the whole County. Whe∣ther the condition of it be chang'd since his time, I know not. Ancient Places. Tuerobius, mention'd by Ptolemy, can be no other than the River Teivi; the old name seeming to have been moulded from the British Dwr Teivi, which is as much as the Water of Teivi.
Stuccia is another River in those parts, to which Ystwyth seems to lay the best claim. Lovantium or Lovantinum may probably be Lhannia in the Parish of Lhan Dhewi Brevi; where they meet with Inscriptions, Coins and other indubitable marks of Antiquity. The most remarkable Thing in this County, is The noble Lead-Mine discover'd in the year, 1690. in the Grounds of Sir Carbury Pryse, Baronet. 'Tis said, the Ore was so nigh the Surface of the Earth, that the Moss and Grass did but just cover it in some places. MONTGOMERYSHIRE. THE County of Montgomery is a mountainons Tract; notwithstanding which, by reason of an agreeable mixture of fruitful Vales, it affords both good Pasture and arable Lands. Giraldus has told us, That 'twas formerly very eminent for Horses, stately and exceeding swift. The Towns more con∣siderable are, Montgomery, Lhan Vyllyn. Montgomery is the chief Town of the County, so call'd from Roger Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury, to whom it belong'd. In the same manner as the Welch call it Tre' Valdwin from that Baldwin (Lieutenant of the Marches in the Conqueror's time,) who built it. In the year 1095. it was destroy'd by the Welch, but rebuilt by Henry III. to whom they owe several Liberties and Immunities. Lhan Vyllyn is a Market-town of considerable note, incorporated in the time of Edward II. It is at pre∣sent govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, to whom King Charles II. (among other Privileges) granted the Honour and Authority of Justices of Peace within the Corporation, during the time of their Office, which lasts for one year. Ancient Places. Maglona seems to have some Remains in the pre∣sent Machynlheth, at the utmost Limit of this County Westward. Mediolanum is, by Dr. Powel and a late judicious Author, suppos'd to be Meirod (about a mile below Mathraval) where several remarkable Monuments have been discover'd. MEIRIONYDSHIRE. MEirionydshire, in Latin Mervinia, is so violently beat upon by the Sea, that some imagine part of it to have been wash'd away by the Violence of the Waves. 'Tis the most mountainous Country in all Wales; which is the reason why the Inhabitants apply themselves wholly to Grazing, and live upon Butter, Cheese, &c. And indeed, 'tis an incredible number of Sheep, &c. that graze upon the Mountains in these parts. This figure of the Country, and their way of Living, may possibly be the reason why they have so few Towns, and none of any great note; unless we may reckon Dol Gelheu, a small Market-town, and Bala, the chief Market of the Mountaineers in the East-part of the County. Things Remarkable. Kader-Idris is one of the highest Mountains in all Britain; and as an Argument of it affords a variety of Alpine Plants. Near the Castle of Harlech, was dug up (An. 1692.) a golden Torques; being a wreath'd bar of Gold, or else 3 or 4 Rods jointly twisted, about 4 foot long. 'Tis now in the Hands of Sir Roger Mastyn, Baronet. In this Country, they have been very much trou∣bled of late with an unaccountable sort of Exhalation, which has fir'd several Ricks of Hay, and has poyson'd the Grass to that degree as to cause a mortality among most sorts of Cattle. A full description is given of it in Mr. Camden's Britannia, English, pag. 659, 660, &c. CAERNARVONSHIRE. TH County of Caernarvon, in the maritime parts, is pretty fruitful and well-inhabited; but more inward, is so encumber'd with vast Mountains and dismal Rocks, that these (if any) may very well claim the name of the British Alps. The chief Towns are, Caernarvon, Bangor, Conwy. Caernarvon, wash'd by the Sea on the North and West-sides, tho' it gives name to the whole County, is yet of no higher Antiquity than the times of K. Edward I. For this Prince they own for their Founder; and value themselves very highly upon giving Birth to his Son Edward II. call'd from thence Edward of Caernarvon, who was the first Prince of Wales of English Extraction. The Buildings are decent enough, and the Inhabitants civil and courteous. Bangor, 7 miles from Caernarvon, was formerly a place so large and considerable, as to merit the name of Bangor vawr: But 'tis now only a small Town, and derives all its Reputation from the Bishop's See, the Cathedral whereof is not very fine, having been burnt down by that profligate Rebel Owen Glendor. Aber-Conwy, i. e. the mouth of the River Conwy, was built out of the Ruins of the ancient Conovium by King Edward II. and by its advantagious situa∣tion and other conveniences, is grown into a hand∣som Town. Ancient Places. Canganum is the Promontory of Lhyn (running out
to the South-west) which would tempt one to ima∣gine that Langanum, as some of Ptolemy's Copies have it, is the true Reading. Segontium is the Mother of the present Caernarvon, and seems to have first taken its name from the Ri∣ver Seiont, which runs that way into the Sea. Conovius, is undoubtedly the River Conwy; as Co∣novium (which had that name from the River) is Aber-Conwy. Dictum is suppos'd to be the ancient City Diganwy, which took that name from the River Conwy; but was consum'd by Lightning many Ages since. Things Remarkable. Snowdon-hills are the highest ridge of that range of Mountains which takes up the inner parts of this County. The name it has from Snow, which you commonly see here about the latter end of June, but not the year round, as some Authors have sug∣gested. Pen-maen-mawr, is a perpendicular Rock, through which the Road lies, not without great difficulty and terror to Travellers. For on one side, you would think the Rocks ready to crush you; on the other the Sea and the Precipice down to it, are so fright∣ful and dangerous withal, that a false Step is of very ill consequence, and to come off safe requires some care. ANGLESEY. THE Isle of Anglesey is separated from the Con∣tinent of Britain by the narrow Frith of Meneu, being about 24 miles in breadth, and in length some few more. By the Ancients it was call'd Mona, the Seat of the Druids; and was first attempted by Sue∣tonius Paulinus, but conquer'd by Julius Agricola; as we learn at large from Tacitus. Many Ages after, the English conquer'd it; whereupon it was call'd Anglesey, i. e. the Isle of the English, or the English Island. The chief Town in it is Beaumaris, built on the East-side; which (among other Towns in these parts) owns King Edward I. for its Founder. It is grown into a place of good Note and Wealth. DANBIGHSHIRE. THE County of Denbigh, according to the seve∣ral parts, has a different Soil: In the West 'tis somewhat barren; in the middle, an exceeding fruit∣ful Vale; and in the East, not quite so fertil; tho' much better towards the River Dee. The chief Town is Denbigh, which is remov'd from the place of its first Foundation. For it was seated upon a steep Rock; from whence the Inhabitants (either because the declivity of the place was inconvenient, or else for want of a due supply of Water) began in after-Ages to remove to the bottom of the Hill; where a handsom large Town is sprung up by degrees. The ancient Town in this County, is Leonis castrum (possibly from the Legio Vicesima Victrix) call'd, as is suppos'd at this day, by the more modern name of Holt, upon the River Dee. FLINTSHIRE. FLintshire is so call'd from Flint-castle, which was begun by Henry II. and finish'd by Edward I. The Form of the County is oblong, and but small. It consists of a mixture of gentle Hills and Plains, which produce Corn in great abundance. The chief Town is S. Asaph (at the confluence of the Cluid and Elwy) so call'd from the Patron of the place, a holy and devout Person. It owes its reputation to Religion; having neither Neatness nor Wealth to recommend it. For about the year 560. Kentigern Bishop of Glascow settl'd here a Bishop's Seat, and a Monastery con∣sisting of 63 Monks. The Bishop of the Diocess has under his Jurisdiction, about 128 Parishes. The ancient Place in this County, is Vais, which Mr. Camden has plac'd in the Con∣fines of Flintshire and Denbighshire, at a place call'd to this day Bd-Vari. Things Remarkable. Holy-well, near Basingwerk, derives its sanctity from the Memory of S. Winifrid, a Christian Virgin: A fabulous Story, which Dr. Powel thinks is owing to the Forgery of the Monks of Basingwerk, who would probably magnify the Vertues of it for their own advantage. A little Brook runs out of the Well with such a violent course, as to be able, immediately al∣most, to turn a Mill. In the Parish of Mold, upon the sinking new Coal∣pits, they have met with Leaves of Plants so exa∣ctly delineated in a sort of black Slat, that 'tis al∣most impossible for any Artist to represent them so compleatly, unless he take the Impression from the Life in some fine Paste or Clay. The Figure and Descriptions of them, are exhibited at large in the new Edition of Camden's Britannia.
The ISLE of MAN. BEtween Britain and Ireland, there is stretch'd out a considerable Island from North to South, about 30 Italian miles in length; but, where widest, not above 15 in breadth. The several an∣cient Writers have given it several names: By Caesar 'tis call'd Mona; by Ptolemy, Monoeda; by Pliny, Monabia: And the same variety appears in such of our modern Authors, as make mention of it. It was first inhabited by the Britains, and then by the Scots. Many years after, the Norwegians got possession of it, and held it for a long time: Till at last, after several Revolutions, it fell into the Hands of the English about the latter end of Edward I. or the beginning of Edward II. and has ever since continu'd under their Jurisdiction. It has had several Lords; such gene∣rally, as had the deepest Interest in our Princes: Till the Grant hereof, together with the Patronage of the Bishoprick, was made to Sir John Stanley and his Heirs by King Henry IV. in which Family it has ever since remain'd. The Soil is very fruitful, and produces such store of Barly, Wheat, Rye and Oats, as does not only furnish the necessary uses of the Island, but likewise gives leave for the Exportation of good quantities. According to the distinction of North and South it is different: In the first, 'tis healthy and gravelly; in the second, they have good Meadow and Pasture-Ground. The Air is very wholsom (the Plague hav∣ing never been known to be in the Island) so that the Inhabitants ordinarily live till fourscore. The People are call'd Manks-men, and their Language Manks. The common People live in little Huts, and are very abstemious in their Diet. The Gentry are but few; those they have, are very civil and courte∣ous, and live in Houses of the English fashion. The Execution of Justice is manag'd with all the speed and easiness imaginable. 'Tis true, their Sheeding-Courts (the same with our Terms) meet but twice a year; but they have a Court of Chancery (wherein the Governor is sole Judge) which he may hold once every Week, if there be occasion. Every Man pleads his owe Cause; without Lawyers, Pro∣ctors or Attornies; and they are dispatch'd (whether they be matters Spiritual or Temporal) without the expence of one Farthing. The great Officers of the Island, are 1. the Go∣vernour, who under the Lord, has the entire Com∣mand of the Island. 2. The two Deemsters, who are their judges in matters Civil and Criminal. 3. The Comptroller, who calls the Receiver General to an Ac∣count. And, 4. The Receiver General, who receives all the Rents (due to the Lord) from the inferiour Collectors. Their way of Trading, is pretty peculiar. They chuse 4 Merchants to buy all their foreign Commo∣dities, for the use of the whole Island; and these are sworn to the true and faithful discharge of their Trust. Whatsoever Bargain they make with the Vessels that come in, the Island is bound to stand to; and the Inhabitants, in Exchange, bring in their na∣tive Commodities, Wool, Hides, Tallow, &c. in lieu whereof they are to have a proportionable share of the imported Wares, They had no Mony before the late Civil Wars; when several of the loyal Party fly∣ing thither, supply'd the Island so abundantly, that the Tenant was able to pay his Rent to Con, which he us'd to do in Sheep, Hogs, &c. As to the Ecclesiastical State: The Bishoprick is under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of York. The Bishop has no voice in the House of Lords; but in the Lower House of Convocation is allow'd to sit upermost. The Clergy are generally Natives, and have a very good Allowance. The Parishes are 17; every Church whereof bears the Name of some Saint or other, to whom it was formerly dedicated. The principal Towns are, Castle-town, Duglas, Peel. Castle-town, so call'd from a Castle and Garison there, is seated on the North-side of the Island; and is call'd otherwise, Russin. Here, within a little Isle, was erected a Bishop's See, which had formerly ju∣risdiction over the Hebrids, but is now limited to the Isle of Man. This is the Metropolis of the whole Island. Duglas has the best Harbour, and is most frequented by the foreign Traders, who bring over their Bay-Salt, and carry back Leather, Wool and Salt-beef. The Houses both here and at Castle-town, are very uniform; and (which is of no great standing in this Island) three Stories high: They are cover'd also with Tiles instead of Thatch. Peel is very eminent for its Castle, being the second Fortress in the whole Island, and the common Pri∣son for all Offenders. 'Tis strongly fortify'd both by the Sea, and also by Walls and Rampires.
SCOTLAND. map of Scotland SCOTLAND HAving survey'd the Kingdom of England and Principality of Wales, we come next to Scot∣land; which, as it is a Branch of the same Continent, so is it united under the same Head and Governour, and makes up a part of the Title of King of Great Britain. Concerning the ancient Inha∣bitants and some other Heads relating to this King∣dom, we have treated in the General Account of England; and shall not here repeat them. Let it be sufficient to observe, That the two Kingdoms were united into one Monarchy in the Person of King James, the first of England, and sixth of Scotland:
By which the English have been freed ever since from those Incursions and Plunderings, wherewith that Nation was us'd continually to harrass and torment them. All that part of the Continent which lies beyond the Counties of Cumberland and Northumberland, be∣longs to Scotland; with great numbers of Islands on all the other sides, which are bounded by the Ocean. On the West it hath the Irish Sea, on the North the Deucaledonian, and on the East the German Ocean. 'Tis in length about 250 miles, and 150 miles broad. In the most Southerly part 'tis 54 deg. 54 min. in Latitude, and in Longitude 15 deg. 40 min. but in the most Northerly, 'tis 58 deg. 32 (or 30 min.) in La∣titude, and 17 deg. 50 min. in Longitude. The longest day is about 18 hours and 2 minutes, and the shortest night 5 hours and 45 minutes. The SOIL, take it in general, comes far short of England in fruitfulness, being much more fit for Pasture than Corn: Not, but in some of the In-land Country, they have good store of Grain; wherewith they Trade to Spain, Holland and Norway. The Skirts of the Country abound with Timber; which is of a vast bigness, especially Firr-trees. The AIR is very temperate, and not half so cold as might be imagin'd in so Northerly a Clime. Which (as in England) is owing to the warm Va∣pours and Breezes that come continually off the Sea; and likewise purify the Air, and keep it in such con∣stant Motion, as generally frees them from all Epide∣mick Distempers. The nature of the Country is hilly and mountainous; the Plains being but very few, and those too but small. They have abundance of Cows and Sheep, tho they are but little; for which defect, the fine taste of their Flesh makes amends. Learning flourishes among them in 4 Universities, S. Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edenburrow, wherein are Professors of most of the Liberal Arts, and those maintain'd with competent Salaries. Christianity seems to have been planted here very early; especially, if those words of Tertullian, Bri∣tannorum inaccessa Romanis loca, Christo vero subdita, may be allow'd to hint to these parts, as in all pro∣bability they do. SCOTLAND, according to difference of Soil Customs, Humours; as also of the Fancies and Ima∣ginations of Men, has several Divisions. 1. The most eminent of them, is into the High-landers and Low-landers: The first are rude, barba∣rous and unciviliz'd, using the Irish Language; the second are civil and courteous, and use the Lan∣guage and Customs of the English. 2. Into the Scots and Picts; this is the more an∣cient Division: The Scots had all the Western-Isles and the Skirts of the Country Westward; the Picts were possess'd of all that lay upon the German Ocean. 3. Tis divided by the Mons Grampius or Grantz∣bain-hills, which run from West to East. 4. The Rivers divide it into three Peninsula's; one to the South, one in the middle, and one to the North. For the Rivers on each side run so far into the Country, as to be hindred from meeting by a small Isthmus only; and if that were remov'd, it would make the main Land of Scotland, three Islands. 5. The Romans branch'd it into several People, according to the following Scheme. Gadeni, Teifidale, Merch, Lauden. Selgovae, Annandale, Nidisdale. Novantes, Galloway, Carrict, Kyle, Cunningham, Glotta. Damnii, Cluydesdale, Lennox, Sterling. Caledonia, Fife, Strathern, Argile, Cantire, Lorn, Braidalbin, Perth-shire, Angus, Mernis, Marr, Buquhan, Murray, Loqhabre, Rosse, Sutherland, Cathnes, Strath-navern. The Roman Wall. 6. 'Tis divided into so many Counties, which are again sub-divided into Sheriffdoms, Stewarties and Baileries, for the more easy Administration of Civil Government. The Counties or Shires, with their particular Extent, are as follows: The Shire of Edenburgh Contains Midlothian. Mers Mers and Lauderdale. Peebles Tweedale. Selkirk Etterick and Forrest. Roxburh Teviotdale, Liddisdale, Esk; dale, and Eusdale. Dumfries Nithisdale and Annandale. Wigton The West-part of Galloway. Aire Kyle, Carrict and Cunning∣ham. Renfrew The Barony of Renfrew. Lanerick Cledsale. Dumbritton Lennox. Bute The Isles of Bute and Arran. Innerara Argile, Lorn, Kintyre; most part of the west Isles, as Ila, Jura, Mul, Wyst, Terif, Coll, Lismore. Perth Menteith, Strathern, Balwhid∣der, Glenurghay, Stormont, Athol, Gource, Glenshee, Strattardill, Braid Albin, Raynock. Striveling Much of the Ground that lyeth close upon both sides of Forth. Linlithgow West-Lothian. Kinros That part of Fife lying be∣tween Lochleven and the Ochill hills. Clackmannan A small part of Fife lying on the River of Forth to∣wards Striveling. Couper The rest of Fife to the East of Lochleven. Forfar Agnus with its Pertinents, Glen-Ila, Glen-Esk, Glen∣prossin. Kinkardin The Mernis. Aberdeen Mar with its Pertinents, as Birs, Glen-Tanner, Glen-Muick, Strath dee, Strath∣don
  Brae of Mar and Cromar, and most part of Buchan, Fourmartin, Gareock, and Strath-Bo∣gie-Land. Bamff A small part of Buchan, Strathdovern, Boyn, Einzie, Strath Awin and Balvenie. Elgin The East part of Murray. Nairn The West part of Murray. Inverness Badenoch, Lochabir, and the South-part of Ross. Cromartie A small part of Ross, lying on the South-side of Cro∣martie-Frith. Tayn The rest of Ross, with the Isles of Sky, Lewis, and Herris. Dornoch Sutherland and Strathnavern. Wike Cathness. Their publick COURTS for the administra∣tion of Justice, are, 1. The Parliament, which is the supreme Court, and has the same Authority as ours has in England. They have 32 Persons (elected out of the several Orders) whom they call Lords of the Articles; and who seem to be much the same thing, as to their Office, with our Committees in England, appointed by the whole House to consider of Matters under Debate: Only theirs are fix'd and certain in all Matters, and are chosen at the beginning of their Meeting; ours are appointed pro re nata, upon any emergent occasion; and when that's over, have no∣thing to do in other Matters, without a particular appointment. 2. The College of Justice, or the Session; wherein the particular Officers appointed for that purpose (con∣sisting of the Clergy and Laity) administer Justice (ac∣cording to the Rules of Equity, and not the Rigour of the Law) from the 1st of November to the 15th of March, and from Trinity-Sunday to the 1st of August, every day except Sunday. 3. The Sheriff's Court in every County; where the Sheriff or his Deputy decides Controversies among the Inhabitants, relating to matters of an in∣ferior concernment. 4. The Commisstariat, wherein are pleaded Actions relating to Wills, Tythes, and other Ecclesiastical Affairs. 5. In Criminal Cases, the King's Chief Justice holds his Courts generally at Edenburrow; besides which, Justices are sometimes appointed by the King's Commission for the Examination of particular Causes. The several Orders or Degrees, are 1. The King; to whom the Constitution allows much the same Power and Authority, as ours here in England. 2. The Prince of Scotland, the King's eldest Son: The rest of the King's Children are stil'd simply Princes. 3. Dukes (who were brought into Scotland about the year 400.) Marquisses, Earls, Vicounts and Barons, as we have in England. 4. Their Knights also are the same; only, pro∣claim'd and created with much more Solemnity. 5. Lairds, which were anciently such only as held Lands of the King in Capite. 6. Gentlemen. 7. Citizens, Merchants, &c. The RELIGION of the Kingdom by Law establish'd, is that which is contain'd in the Confes∣sion of Faith authoriz'd in the first Parliament of King James VI. For the more convenient Regula∣tion of Church-affairs, they have 2 Archbishopricks; under which are contain'd 12 Bishopricks, according to the following Scheme. The Archbishoprick of S. Andrews, un∣der which are, Edenburgh, Dunkel, Aberdeen, Murray, Dumblane, Brechen, Ross, Cathness, Orkney. The Archbishoprick of Glasco, under which are, Galloway, Lismone, The Isles. The Bounds and Extent of the several Diocesses, are as follows: Diocess of S. Andrews Contains Part of Perthshire, and part of Angus and Mernes. Glasgow The Shires of Dunbarton, Ran∣frew, Air, Lanerick, part of the Shires of Roxburgh, Dum∣freis, Peebles and Selkirk. Edinburgh The Shires of Edinburgh, Lin∣lithgow, part of Striveling∣shire, Berwickshire, the Con∣stabularie of Hadington and Bailery of Lauderdale. Dunkeld The most part of Perthshire, part of Angus, and part of West-Lothian. Aberdeen Most part of Bamf-shire, and part of Mernis. Murray The Shires of Elgin, Nairn, and part of Inverness and Bamf-shire. Brichin Part of Angus and Mernis. Dumblane Part of Perth and Striveling∣shires. Ross The Shire of Tain, Cromertie, and the greatest part of In∣verness-shire. Cathness Cathness and Sutherland. Orkney All the Northern Isles of Ork∣ney and Zetland. Galloway The Shire of Wigton, the Stew∣artrie of Kircudbright, the Regality of Glentrurie, and part of Dumfries-shire. Argile Argile, Lorn, Kintyre, and Lo∣haber, with some of the West Isles. The Isles Most of the West Isles. Besides these, for the more close Inspection into the Affairs of the Church, they had a certain num∣ber of Presbyteries, viz. Dunce. Chernside. Kelso. Ersilton. Jedburgh. Melross. Dumbar. Hadington. Dalkeith. Edinburgh. Peebles. Linlithgow. Perth. Dunkeld. Auchterarder. Striveling. Dumblane. Dumfreis. Penpont. Lochmabane. Midlebie. Wigton. Kircudbright. Stranraver. Aire. Irwing. Paselay. Dumbarton. Glasgow. Hamilton. Lanerick. Biggar. Dunnune. Kinloch. Inerary. Kilmore. Sky. S. Andrews. Kirkaldy. Cowper. Dumfermelin. Meegle. Dundee. Arbroth. Forfar. Brichen. Mernis. Aberdeen. Kinkardin. Alfoord. Gareoch. Deir. Turref. Fordyce. Ellon. Strathbogie. Abernethie. Elgin. Forres. Aberlower. Chanrie. Tayn. Dingwell. Dornoch. Week. Thurso. Kirkwal. Scaloway. Colmkill.
Under this Constitution, they had 1. A Session in every Parish (consisting of the wor∣thiest Persons therein) which took cognizance of some Scandals. 2. A Presbyterie, wherein Cases too intricate for the Session were try'd; and particularly such as enter'd into Orders were solemnly examin'd. This consisted of a number of Ministers, between twelve and twenty. 3. The Provincial Synod, who met twice every year. 4. The Convocation; which was the supreme. And now Presbyterie is introduc'd, they retain the same Courts and Governments; with some difference only in the exercise and manner of Proceeding. Having thus far given a short Account of the Soil and Air, the Degrees, Divisions and Government of Scotland; we are, next, to take a particular Survey of this Kingdom. Which might have been done most conveniently by running through the several Counties, and observing the same method as we have done in England; but that the Towns here are very thin in many places, and some Counties afford none of any considerable note. I know not how to give a view of the Kingdom more distinct, and more agree∣able to our Design, than by drawing up a List of the most eminent Cities and Towns, and of the An∣cient Places, in an Alphabetical Order. The most considera∣ble Places are, Aberdeen, Aire, Alloa, S. Andrews, Bamfe, Brechin, Chanonry, Dumblane, Dundee, Dunfreys, Dunkel, Duns, Edenburrow, Glascow, Greenock Hamilton, Innerness, Linlithgow, Paslay, Peebles, Perth, Selkirk. ABERDEEN, in the County of Marr, has its name from the River Done, upon the mouth whereof it stands; Aber in British signifying a mouth, or place where a River empties it self. There are 2 Towns of the name, the Old and New. Old Aberdeen is the Seat of the Bishop, having a large and stately Cathe∣dral, commonly call'd S. Machar's. 'Tis, besides, adorn'd with King's College (so call'd from King James IV. who assum'd the Patronage) wherein is a Principal, with the several Professors of Divinity, Civil Law, Physick, Philosophy, and the Languages. In the Church before mention'd, there is a most state∣ly Monument erected to the memory of Bishop El∣phingston, a great Benefactor to the place. Hard by the Church, they have a Library well furnish'd with good Books. About a mile from hence is New Aberdeen, built upon 3 Hills; but the greatest part of it upon the highest, to which there is an easie ascent from the Plain. 'Tis, by much, the most considerable place in the North of Scotland; whether we respect the Largeness, Trade or Beauty of the Buildings, both publick and private. Of the first sort, the chief is its College, built by George Keith Earl Marshal, in the year, 1693. and from him call'd the Marshallian Academy. But since his time, the City of Aberdeen hath adorn'd and beautify'd it with several additional Buildings. They have a Principal, four Professors of Philosophy, one of Divinity, and one of Mathematicks. Add to this, the School, which has a Head-master and 3 Ushers; the Musick-School, for the more po∣lite Education of the Gentry; S. Nicholas-Church, built of free Stone, and cover'd with Lead; an Alms∣house, and three Hospitals. Nor must we forget the Library, which was founded at the charge of the City, and is supply'd with excellent Books from the Benefactions of several learned Persons; and also well furnish'd with Mathematical Instruments. The private Buildings are very beautiful, commonly four Stories high or more; behind which stand their Gardens and Orchards; so that the City at a distance looks like a Wood. Aire, in Kyle, upon a River of the same name, is the chief Market-town in the West of Scotland. 'Tis situated in a sandy Plain; yet is furnish'd with pleasant fertil Fields, which afford a Prospect very diverting. It has the honour of being the Sheriff's Seat, and contains within its jurisdiction thirty two miles. The more ancient name was S. John's-town; but that is now quite laid aside. Alloa, standing in the Shire of Clackmanan, is a pretty little Town, and very pleasant. It has a Ha∣ven, tho' but small. The greatest Ornament it boasts of is the Castle, the chief Residence of the Earl of Marr. This (with its Neighbour Clackma∣nan) seated upon a rising Ground, and adorn'd with a stately Castle) receives great profit from the adjoin∣ing Coal-pits; which, together with the Salt, furnish out a foreign Trade. S. ANDREWS, above Fif-ness in the Peninsula of Fife, is seated conveniently for a delicate Pro∣spect into the Sea. It seems, the ancient name of it, was Regimund; that is, Regulus's Mount: The pre∣sent name was given it in honour to S. Andrew, (whose Bones are said to have been brought out of Peloponnesus to this place, by Regulus a Monk, in the year, 368.) It is adorn'd with an Archbishop's See, who is stil'd Primate of all Scotland; with the New Church, wherein is a stately Monument of Archbi∣shop Sharp's; and with 3 Colleges. 1. S. Saviour, which has a Library well furnish'd. 2. S. Leonard's, wherein are several Professors, and a good Library. 3. New College, which, besides its two Professors of Divinity, has a Professor of Mathematicks, with an Observatory, and Mathematical Instruments. Bamfe is the chief Burgh in the Shire of Bamfe, and is a Burgh-royal, wherein the Sheriff holds his Courts. 'Tis seated in a very fertil Tract, and re∣ceives great advantages from the Salmon-fishing. Brechin, upon the River Esk, lies in the Shire of Angus, and is a Market-town very considerable for Oxen, Sheep, Horses and Salmon. The Ruins of the Bishop's Palace and the Canon's Houses, are an evidence of its ancient magnificence. Here is a stately Bridge over the River Esk. Chanonry (at Ness-mouth in Ross) has its name from a rich College of Canons, that were there. They had a large Cathedral Church, part whereof still remains. Its greatest Ornament, at present, is a magnificent House of the Earl of Seaforth's, who has considerable Revenues in this Country. Dumblane (seated upon the Bank of the River Allan on the Stewartrie of Strathern) is a pleasant Town, but not large. It still shews the Ruins of the Bishop and Canon's Houses; and part of the Church (a Fabrick of admirable Workmanship) re∣mains entire. Their great Benefactor was Robert Leighton Bishop of the place; a Person of strict Life and Conversation. At his death, he left all his Books to the use of the Diocess of Dumblane, with a cer∣tain Sum of Mony for the erecting of a Library; and his Sister's Son settl'd an annual Salary upon the Library-Keeper.
Dundee (so call'd probably from its situation upon the River Tay) stands in the Shire of Angus, in a pleasant Plain; and is beautify'd with very good Buildings, both publick and private. They have 2 Churches; and the Constable hereof, by a pecu∣liar Privilege, is Standard-bearer to the Kings of Scotland. The Inhabitants are generally rich, by the great Profits which arise from the Harbour; and by their Trade with Strangers, which is very conside∣rable. There is a large Hospital, wherein such as fall to decay by Misfortunes and Losses, are provi∣ded for. Dunfrise, in the Tract call'd Nidisdale, lays near the mouth of Neth, between two Hills; and is a very flourishing Town. The Streets are large, and the Church and Castle very stately. The Tide flows up to the Town, and makes a Harbour; and for the convenience of Trade, they have an Exchange for the Merchants. Here is a fine Bridge over the River, of nine Arches. Dunkel, at the foot of the Grantsbain-hills in the Shire of Perth, is conveniently situated in the midst of pleasant Woods, and upon the River Tay. It is the chief Market-town of the High-lands; to the Ornaments whereof, the Buildings erected of late by the Marquess of Athol, have added very conside∣rably. It still shews the Ruins of a Cathedral Church. Duns (in Mers or March, towards the German Ocean) stands upon a rising Ground in the middle of the Shire. 'Tis a Burrow and Barony, and has every Wednesday a throng Market of Sheep, Horses and Cows. But that which makes it most talk'd of, is, its being urg'd for the birth-place of Duns Scotus, by such as are willing to believe him a Scotch man. EDENBƲRROW, the Metropolis of this King∣dom, built upon an ascent; the Buildings gradually descending from the top to the bottom of the Hll. The original of it seems to have been the erecting of a Fort or Castle (than which no place could be more convenient for the purpose) under the protection whereof, the Neighbours might be possibly encourag'd to fix. At present, 'tis a large beautiful City, a full Scotch-mile in length, and half a one in breadth. Two Streets run along the whole length of the Town; the High-street is built, of late, of hewn Stone; since an Act of the Town-Council pass'd, whereby it is not lawful to build any more of Timber either in City or Suburbs, upon account of the many dreadful Fires that have hapn'd. The City has six Gates, the principal whereof lays to the East, and is adorn'd with Towers on both sides. They are supply'd with Water, from one of the best Springs in the Kingdom; which is about 3 miles distant, and is brought in Leaden-pipes to the several Fountains. This conve∣nience was projected and carried on at the Expence of the City, about 20 years ago. Their principal publick Buildings, are 1. The Palace (whereof his Grace the Duke of Hamilton is hereditary Keeper) bounded on all sides with lovely Gardens. It has four Courts: The Outer, which is as big as all the rest, has four prin∣cipal Entries: The Inner has Piazza's all round, of hewn Stone. The Long Gallery is very entertaining; shewing the Pictures of all the Kings of Scotland, from Fergus I. 2. The College of King James VI. founded in the year, 1580. is a large Building, divided into three Courts. They have their publick Schools, and a com∣mon Hall; with a well-stor'd Library, under which is the King's Printing-house. The Professors and Students are very well accommodated with Lodgings. 3. The Parliament-house stands in a large Court, which is enclos'd on one side with the Exchanges, and with a Set of very stately Buildings. There is a House (perhaps the highest in the World) which mounts seven Stories above the Parliament-Court; for from the bottom to the top, one Stair-case ascends 14 Stories high. 4. The Cathedral, dedicated to S. Giles, is built of hewn Stone, and is so large, as to be divided into 3 Churches, each whereof has its Parish. 5. Heriot's Hospital, so call'd from its Founder George Heriot, Jeweller to King James VI. is more like a Palace than an Hospital. All round the Houses are pleasant Gardens, adorn'd with large Walks and Greens. Here, the Children of the poorer Citizens have their Education, till they be fit for the publick Schools and Colleges. Glascow is situated upon the East-bank of the Ri∣ver Clyde; and is, next Edenburrow, the principal City in the Kingdom; whether we consider the Buildings, Trade or Wealth of the Inhabitants. It is, in a manner, four-square; the four principal Streets crossing each other in the very middle. The principal publick Buildings, are 1. The Cathedral (in the upper part of it) the Pil∣lars and Towers whereof are said to sh w a very exact and curious piece of Architecture. 'Tis, indeed, two Churches; one whereof stands over the other. 2. The Archbishop's Castle, surrounded with a Wall of hewn Stone. 3. The College, parted by an exceeding high Wall from the rest of the Town. 4. The Tolbooth (a stately Building of hewn Stone) which stands at the crossing of the Streets. Greenock, in the Barony of Ranfrew, is a well∣built Town, the most eminent upon all that Coast. 'Tis the chief Seat of the Herring-fishing; and the Royal Company of Fishers have built a publick House at it, for the better convenience of Trade. Hamildon (in Clydsdale) is the Residence of the Dutchess of Hamilton, and the great Ornament of that part of the Kingdom. The Court is on all sides adorn'd with very noble Buildings, has a magnificent Avenue, and a Frontespiece of very excellent Work∣manship. The Park is 6 or 7 miles round, through which the Brook Aven has its course. Innerness, the Head-town of the Sheriffdom of that name, is the Sheriff's Seat, where he keeps his Court. The convenience of its situation upon the River Ness, gives it a free and easie Commerce with the Neigh∣bours. It has a Castle very pleasantly seated upon a Hill, which affords a noble Prospect into the Fields and Town. They have lately built a Bridge over the Ness of hewn Stone, and of 7 Arches. Linlithgow, in the Shire of Linlithgow, is a Royal Burrough, which glories chiefly in its Palace, built almost in the form of an Amphitheatre. In the midst of the Court there is a Fountain, adorn'd with several curious Statues, the Water whereof rises to a good height. The Town is well built, and has a stately Town-house, with a Harbour at Blacknesse. Paslay, in the Barony of Ranfrew, is the most con∣siderable in these parts for ancient grandour and mag∣nificence. It was formerly a famous Monastery, founded by Alexander II. High-steward of Scotland. The Abbey and Church, with fine Gardens and Or∣chards, are all enclos'd with a Stone-wall, about a mile in circuit. Peebles, the Head-burgh of the Shire of that name, has a very pleasant situation, standing in a Plain on the side of the River. It has a noble Church, and a stately Bridge of 5 Arches over the Tweed.
Perth, in the Shire of that name, is call'd S. John's Town, a modern name, taken from a Church founded there in honour of S. John. Mr. Camden tells us, 'tis so divided, that almost every Street is inhabited by a several Trade apart. 'Tis pleasantly seated between 2 Greens, and the River Tay at every Tide, brings up Commodities from the Sea, in light Vessels. Selkirk, in Teifidale, is a Burgh-royal, has the ad∣vantage of a weekly Market and several Fairs, is the head Burgh of the Shire, and the Seat of the Sheriff and Commissary-Courts. Ancient Places in the Kingdom of SCOTLAND. Alauna seems to have some Remarks preserv'd in the River Alon, in the Sheriffdom of Sterling. Abravanus (for Aber-ruanus) is the mouth of the Rian in Galloway. Alectum seems to be the present Dundee, in the Shire of Angus. Banatia, mention'd by Ptolemy, is very probable Bean-castle (in Murray) which may be inferr'd both from the analogy of names, and the discovery of an engrav'd marble Vessel, full of Roman Coins, in the year, 1460. Berubium, a Promontory, is thought to be Ʋrdhead in Strathnavern. Bodotria (for so Tacitus calls it, but Ptolemy Boderia) is agreed on all hands to be Edenburrow-frith. Caledonia is all the part of Britain, which lies North∣ward beyond Graham's-dike, or the Wall built by Antoninus Pius. Cantae, were a People who inhabited the parts about Ross. Catini, mention'd by Ptolemy, (and sometimes writ∣ten Carini) seems by the sound and other circum∣stances, to be Cathness. Castra Alata is agreed upon by all to be Edenburrow. Celnius, a River, now Killian in Ross, upon the Eastern Ocean. Cerones, a People who dwelt anciently where now Assenshire lies. Corbantorigum seems to be Caer-Laverock, anciently a very strong Fort in Nidisdale. Corda, a Town that anciently stood upon the Lake Logh-cure, out of which the River Nid arises. Conia Damniorum seems to be Camelot; where are some remains of an ancient City. It stands between the Duni Pacis and the Temple of the God Terminus, in the Sheriffdom of Sterling. Cornabii, a People who dwelt in the utmost Coast of all Britain towards the North, where now is Strath-navern. 'Tis probable they had that name from the River Nabeus, which Ptolemy places likewise in these parts. Diva (mention'd by Ptolemy) is the River Dee in the County of Mernes. Epidiorum Promontorium (a name possibly taken from the Islands Ebudae over against it) is call'd at this day Can-tyre, i. e. the Lands-head. Glotta is an Island mention'd by Antoninus in the Firth of the River Glotta or Clyde; 'tis call'd at this day Arran, from a Castle of the same name. Grampius is a continu'd range of Hills, reaching as far as Murray; mention'd by Tacitus in his descri∣ption of Agricola's Attempts upon those parts. Horesti seems to imply no more than the High∣landers in general. Ila is a River in Cathness, possibly the same which they now call Wifle. Lelanonius, mention'd by Ptolemy, is the River Le∣vin, which gives name to the Country of Lennox, call'd in Latin Levinia. Leucopibia seems by the sense to be determin'd to Bede's Candida Casa and our Whitern in Galloway; especially, if we may imagine that Ptolemy wrote it , instead of which the Transcribers, by a blunder, have made it Leucopibia. The easiness of the mistake will readily be own'd by such as have opportunity of making their Observations upon the intolerable slips of ignorant Librarians. Lindum is still manifest in our Lenlithquo, describ'd among the more eminent Places. Littus altum seems to be Tarbarth in the County of Ross, where the River rises to a great heighth; enclos'd on one side with the River Killian, on the other with the Haven Cromer. Longus, a River, retains manifest footsteps of the old name in our present Lough-Longas, in the County of Ross, which empties it self into the Western Ocean. Loxa, by Ptolemy, is still evident in our present Losse, in Murray. Nabeus seems to be somewhere in the Country of Strath-navern, which the ancient Cornabii formerly inhabited; a People, that seem to have been origi∣nally call'd from the River. Nodius (mention'd by Polemy, and written in some Copies Nobius) is evidently the River Nid; from which Nidisdale takes the name. Novantum Chersonesus is well known at this day by the name of Mull of Galloway. Orcas (call'd also Tarvedrum and Tarvisium) is at this day nam'd Howburn; a Promontory over against the Isles of the Orcades. Randvara seems to be no other than Ranfrew, which gives name to the Barony of Ranfrew, and is the principal Town in it. Rerigonium is both a Creek and Town, mention'd by Ptolemy. Bargeny in the County of Carrick should be some direction to the old name; especially, con∣sidering that an ancient Copy of Ptolemy reads it Beregonium. Vacomagi, a People that liv'd about Murray. Vararis sinus is that Bay upon which Murray lies; whether that County have any remains of the old name, I dare not determine. Victoria perhaps is Bede's Caer-Guidi, and our Inchkeith-Island in Lothien. Vidogara was, in Ptolemy's time, a place of good note in the Country of Kyle. There is Aire, at pre∣sent a Town pretty considerable, which possibly may have the best title to it. Virvedrum is look'd upon to be the farthest Pro∣montory in all Britain: We call it at this day Du∣cans-bay, and by contraction Dunsby. Upon the Coast of Scotland there lie dispers'd here and there great numbers of Islands; some of them of considerable note and extent, but the greatest part very narrow and of little importance. The Western-Isles, so call'd from their westerly situation, are sup∣pos'd by those that have travell'd them, to be in number 300 or more. They belong to the Crown of Scotland; but the Inhabitants speak the Irish Lan∣guage, and retain the Customs and Modes us'd by the ancient Scots, as the Highlanders in the Continent do. Another cluster of Isles upon this Coast is call'd Orkney, consisting of 26 Islands that are inhabited; and of some more (which they name Holms) used only for Pasturage. Here, the length of the longest day, is 18 hours and some odd minutes. A parti∣cular
account of these Islands (with the Customs of the Inhabitants, the Produce of the Country, and other material Heads) is publish'd in the new Edition of Camden's Britannia, pag. 1073, &c. Ancient Names of Islands upon this Coast. Dumna, possibly Fair-Isle, wherein they call the chief Town Dum, a Remain perhaps of the old name. Epidium should seem by the name not to be far from the Promontory of the Epidii: The situation of Ila, a pretty large Island, agrees very well to that description. Hebudes, call'd by a modern Author Hebrides, are the Western-Isles before mention d. Hebuda is two-fold, Eastern and Western. The first is thought to be Skie, which lies out in a great length; and the second, Lewes, a very craggy and mountainous Island. Maleos, mention'd by Ptolemy, is manifestly the Isle of Mul. Ocetis may be plac'd among the Islands of Orkney, in that we now call Hethy. Orcades are the Isles of Orkney, just now describ'd. Pomona (call'd by Solinus, Pomona Diutina) is Mainland, the chief of the Isles of Orkney, and the Bishop's See. Recine, call'd by Antoninus, Riduna, possibly in∣stead of Ricluna; for there is one of the Western-Isles call'd at this day Racline, which seems to be the very place; and the change of (cl) into (d) is very easie, and might be made by a Copyest, otherwise accurate enough. Thule is a place mightily celebrated among the old Writers, and made use of to express the most remote parts of the habitable World; such at least, as were then known. Sir Robert Sibalds has prov'd it to be the North-east part of Scotland; to whose Dissertation (publish'd in the new Edition of Camden's Britannia, pag. 1089, &c.) I refer the Reader, for the parti∣cular Reasons. IRELAND. LEaving the Continent, we come to a large Isle on the West-side of Britain, call'd by Ptolemy Britannia Parva, and by other ancient Wri∣ters Jerna, Juverna, Iris, &c. but by the Inhabitants Erin, and by the English IRELAND. The length of it, according to the best computations, is about 300 miles, but the breadth scarce 120. The Irish Sea bounds it on the East, the Deucaledonian on the North, the Western Ocean on the West, and the Ver∣givian on the South. The SOIL is very moist and wet, abounding with Bogs and Lakes: Which quality is much lessen'd by the encrease of Inhabitants, who have (with great Industry) drain'd the Low-lands and Marshes. This abundance of Water and Moisture, makes them very inclinable to Fluxes, Rheums, and such like Distem∣pers, against which they find their Ʋskebah the best Remedy. It dries more, but enflames less, than our English Brandy. And as the Husbandry of the Inhabi∣tants is seen in these Drains; so is it also discover'd by the destruction they have made of the Woods, which abounded in this Country. Insomuch, that now they have great plenty of Corn. Who the first INHABITANTS were, cannot be learnt from Records; but must only be trac'd by conjecture and probability. Things at such a distance can receive no light, but what they have by these helps; unless we suffer our selves to be drawn by more modern Writers, into a Set of extravagant and foolish Fancies. In short then, That they were Bri∣tains, we are encourag'd to believe, 1. Because the ancient Writers, some of them, call it Britannia par∣va, and Insula Britannorum. 2. Tacitus has told us, That in his time, their Customs were much the same with the Britains: And Strabo calls them expresly Britains. 3. At the first plantation of the World, 'tis very natural to imagine that this Island was Peopl'd from Britain, from whence the passage into it is short and easie. 4. A great many Words, in the Irish Language, appear to be of British Extraction. That it was ever conquer'd by the Romans, is an Opinion which some have endeavour'd to establish up∣on little hints they have met with in the old Authors, that seem to look that way. But after all, there's no just reason to believe it: Nor can we imagine, but the Pancgyrists would have run out largely upon such a Conquest, if the Romans had ever got footing in the Island. Towards the decay of the Roman Empire, the Scots (a People that are thought to have come out of Scythia into this Island) began to make a mighty figure in these parts; so that the whole Country from them, was call'd Scotia. Some of the Saxon Kings, and the Norwegians also, were very troublesome to them, but could not bring them under an absolute subjection. Nor were they conquer'd, before Henry II. King of England invaded them with a powerful Army (in the year 1172.) brought the States of the Island to an entire submission, and be∣stow'd the Sovereignty upon his Son John. But for all this the Kings of England were only Lords of Ireland; until the more ample Title of King was bestow'd upon Henry VIII. by the States, in Parlia∣ment assembl'd. They are said to have receiv'd CHRISTI∣ANITY very early. What progress had been made in it before the time of S. Patrick, we have no certain account: Probably, not very much. But that Saint (who was a Disciple of S. German) carry'd the Work on with so much success and resolution, as to convert the greatest part of the Island; which gain'd him the character of The Irish Apostle, and mighty commendations from all the Irish Writers. In the next Age, their reputation was so advanc'd upon the account of Religion, that it was term'd Sanctorum
map of Ireland IRELAND Patria; and sent out great numbers of pious and de∣vout Men into other parts of the World. Nor was Religion their only Character; their Learning too is much celebrated by Authors both ancient and mo∣modern, who tell us, That the Saxons (particularly) very commonly sent over their Children hither, for a liberal Education. Thus much of its Ancient Condition. At present, the Inhabitants are in a great measure brought over to the Customs and Fashions of the English: Except in some parts, where they live at a loose, unciviliz'd rate; and are therefore term'd Wild-Irish. They are govern'd by a Vice-Roy (sent over by the King of England) stil'd Lord Deputy or Lord Lieu∣tenant; whose Jurisdiction and Authority is very large and ample. As for their Orders or Degrees, Ireland has the very same, that we have here in England: Their Courts of Justice too, and manners of Proceeding, differ very little. The Parliament is call'd and dissolv'd, at the pleasure of the King of England. They have their 4 Terms; their Chancery also, King's-Bench, Common-Pleas and Exchequer; with their Judges of Assize, and Justices of the Peace in each County. Ireland is divided into five parts, arising from the number of its Governors heretofore. These, with their extent, will best be understood by the follow∣ing Scheme.
1. MƲNSTER contains the Coun∣ties of Kerry, Cork, Waterford, Limerick, Tiperary. 2. LEINSTER contains the Coun∣ties of Kilkenny, Caterlough, Queens-County, Kings-County. Kildare, Weisford, Dublin. 3. CONNAGHT contains the Coun∣ties of Twomund, Galloway, Maio, Slego, Letrim, Roscomon. 4. ƲLSTER contains the Counties of Louth, Cavon, Farmanagh, Monaghan, Armagh, Down, Antrim, Colran, Tir-Oen, Tir-Connel. 5. MEATH contains the Counties of East-Meath, West-Meath, Longford, The CHURCH is govern'd by 4 Archbishops; Armagh, Primate of all Ireland; Dublin, Cassil, Tuam. The particular extent of the Bishopricks has been so alter'd and mangl'd from time to time, that I had rather omit the List, than run the hazard of giving a false Catalogue. In the Survey of the Kingdom, we will use the method observ'd in Scotland; which (for the Reasons laid down, in the beginning of that Kingdom) is here also most convenient and easie. The more considera∣ble Towns are, Armagh, Athlone, Caricfergus, Cassil, Clare, Cork, Down, DƲBLIN, Galway, Kildare, Kilkenny, Kinsale, Limerick, Lismor, London-derry, Waterford, Weisford, Yoghal. Armagh, in the County of Armagh, near the Ri∣ver Kalin, seems to be the same which Bede calls Dearmach; where (as the same Author adds) S. Pa∣trick built a very fine City; only, he subjoins a Ro∣mantick circumstance, That he follow'd the Model which the Angels had drawn for him. But whoever was the Founder, 'tis certain, That in the year, 1142. it was made an Archbishop's See, when Cardinal Papirio was sent over into Ireland to revive the de∣caying discipline of the Church. Nor is it only an Archbishoprick, but the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom; the Archbishop hereof being stil'd Pri∣mate of all Ireland. The City was reduc'd under the power of the English by John de Curcy; but was afterwards utterly destroy'd by John O Neal; so that now nothing remains but a few Cottages, and the Ruins of the ancient Buildings. Athlone, in the County of Roscommon, is a place of good Strength, and has a fair Stone-bridge over the River. 'Tis pretty much talk'd of in our Ac∣counts of the late Wars in this Kingdom. Caricfergus, in the Country of Antrim, is the most considerable Town upon all the Coast; having a very commodious Haven. In the late Wars in Ire∣land, it was much talk'd of. Cassil, upon the River Swire in the County of Tipperary, is only eminent for being an Archbishop's See, establish'd there by Pope Eugenius III. Clare is a Market-town (in the County of that name) standing upon a Creek of the River Shannon. Cork, the Metropolis of the County of that name, is encompass'd with the River on which it stands, and is of an oval form. It has the honour of being an Episcopal See, and is now mostly inhabited by the English; who by their diligence and industry have improv'd to that degree, both in Estates, Trade and Buildings, as to exceed all the Cities in Ireland, except only Dublin. Down (the principal City in the County of Down) is of very great Antiquity; being mention'd almost under the same name (Dunum) in Ptolemy. 'Tis at present a Bishop's See; and the Inhabitants would claim a farther Honour, by making it the Burial∣place of the great S. Patrick. But Armagh in Ire∣land, Glassenbury in England, and Glascow in Scot∣land, do envy them that Happiness, and endeavour to assert that Esteem to themselves upon several Au∣thorities, which seem to countenance the several Opinions. DƲBLIN, the chief City in Ireland, has a very pleasant situation, by reason of Hills to the South, Plains to the West, the Sea to the East, and the River Liffy to the North. The River here makes a safe Harbour; but the heaps of Sand thrown into its Mouth, by the violence of the Winds or else the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, hinders Ships of any great Burthen from coming up, but at high Water. The City is well Wall'd and neatly built: Within these hundred years, it is doubly increas'd in its Build∣ings, Ornaments, &c. Formerly, it was govern'd by a Provost; but King Henry IV. granted them a Mayor and 2 Bailiffs: And the two latter were chang'd into Sheriffs by Edward VI. Its publick Buildings of greatest note, are, 1. The College (which is situated in the same place on which the Monastery of All-hallows stood) dedica∣ted to the Holy Trinity, and endow'd with the Pri∣vileges of an University by Queen Elizabeth. In Edward II.'s time, there was a Foundation laid here for an University, by the Institution of publick Le∣ctures; but the Disturbances which follow'd, broke that Design. 2. The Archbishop's Palace, in the Suburbs of S. Patrick, with a stately Church dedicated to S. Pa∣trick; eminent without for its high Steeple, and within for its Pavements and arch'd Roof. This consists of a Dean, as Chanter, a Chancellor, a Trea∣surer, 2 Arch-deacons and 22 Prebendaries. 3. The King's Castle, well fortify'd with Ditches and Towers, and furnish'd with a good Arsenal. 4. Christ's Church, in the heart of the City; carry'd on and finish'd by Lawrence Archbishop of Dublin, and others. 5. The Town-hall, built of square Stone, and call'd Tolestale. Gallway (the chief place in the County of that name) is a neat Town built of Stone. The conve∣nience of a Harbour has made it well stor'd with Merchants; who, by the advantage of a full Trade both by Sea and Land, are very wealthy. Kildare has the honour of giving name to the County wherein it stands; but yet Naas is the Shire-Town. Its greatest honour is the Bishop's See, stil'd in ancient Writings Episcopatus Dariensis. Kilkenny (the chief place in the County, and the best In-land Town in the Kingdom) is fair-built and very plentiful, standing upon the River Neure. 'Tis divided into the English-town and the Irish-town. The English-town is the newer, said to be built by Ranulph III. Earl of Chester. The Irish-town is like a Suburbs to the other; but yet has the honour of
S. Canic's Church, who gave name to the City, which implies as much as the Cell of S. Canic; a Person very eminent in this Country for an extraordinary piety and strictness of Life. The Bishop of Ossory has his Seat in this City. Kinsale stands at the mouth of the River Bandon, in a fruitful Soil; and receives its greatest interest and reputation from the commodious Harbor it enjoys. Limerick (the head City in the County) is encom∣pass'd by the divided Chanel of the famous River Shanon. 'Tis parted into the Ʋpper and Lower: In the first stands the Cathedral and Castle; the second is guarded with a Wall and Castle. It is a Bishop's See, and a place strongly fortify'd both by Art and Nature; as we may easily guess from the long de∣fence it made, when besieg'd by his present Majesty, in the late Irish Wars. This is the great Emporium of the whole Province of Munster. Lismor (upon the River Broodwater in the County of Waterford) has a considerable name in the Histories and Records of Ireland, upon account of the Bishop's See. But the Revenues thereof being almost quite alienated and lost, it came afterwards to be annex'd to the See of Waterford. London-derry, formerly call'd Derry, is now annex'd to the County of that name; and is famous in our modern Histories and publick Papers, for resisting two memorable Sieges, one in the year, 1649. the other in the year, 1689. Waterford, the chief City in the County of that name, can neither recommend it self by a good Air nor fruitful Soil. Notwithstanding which, by the convenience of the Harbour, it was look'd upon for Wealth and Populousness to be the second City in Ireland; till Cork (as we observ'd before) grew up, and over-topp'd it. Upon account of its eminent Loyalty to the English, our Kings have granted it several Privileges: But in the Rebellion of 1641. it lost its old character of Fidelity, by the tamperings of the Popish Clergy, settl'd there probably to carry on that bloody Design. Weisford, the chief Town of the County, seems to be a place of some Antiquity; tho' that name be modern, and given it by the Germans who settl'd themselves here. The Town is remarkable, for be∣ing the first in this whole Island that surrender'd to the English, and that receiv'd a Colony of that Na∣ton. Which is the cause why all the neighbouring parts do so much abound with English Inhabitants. Yoghall, near the entrance of the River Broodwater into the Sea, stands in the County of Cork, being of an oblong form, and wall'd round. The Town is di∣vided into Ʋpper and Lower. The convenience of the Harbour, with the fruitfulness of the Country round, have made it a place of considerable Resort. Ancient Places in the Kingdom of IRELAND. Argita is a Lake in these parts; perhaps that which empties it self at Swilly in the County of Tirconnel. Ausoba, mention'd by Ptolemy, is a River about Lough-Corbes, in the County of Gallway. Auten, a People in these parts, seem to have for∣merly inhabited that Tract where the County of Gallway is at present: Aterith may well enough be suppos'd to retain something of the old name. Blani were a People, who (along with the Bi∣gantes-Menapii and Cauci) inhabited the Province of Leinster. Boreum Prora, now S. Helen's head in Tconnel-County. Bovinda is the River Bayn, well known by reason of the late Wars. Brigantes or Birgantes have their name from the River Brigus (for so Ptolemy calls our Barrow and inhabited Kilkenny, Ossory and Caterlog, which are all water'd by the Barrow. Cauci seem by the circumstances to have inhabited the County of Wicklow; now full of English Inha∣bitants, and by them improv'd to that degree, as to make a figure among the best Shires in this Kingdom. Concani, a People in those parts, inhabited the South-part of Conaght, viz. Clare, Gallway, the Ter∣ritory of Clan-Richard, with the Barony of Atcrith. 'Tis possible, our present Conaght may have something of the name of this People; especially, if a more suitable Original cannot be found out. Coriondi, a People who dwelt about the County of Cork; to which perhaps it may have left a tin∣cture of the name. Darni (along with the Voluntii, Robogdii and Er∣dini) peopl'd the Province of Ʋlster. Dauron̄a, mention'd by Ptolemy, and by Giraldus call'd Lauranus, is probably the River which runs along by Cork. Dunum is undoubtedly Down; and account whereof we have given in the description of the Towns. Duris seems to be the River which runs by Trailey through the County of Kerry. Etlana is agreed upon all hands to be the City of Dublin. Eblani were a People in those parts. Erdini inhabited part of the Province of Ʋlster, along with the Voluntii and others. Hieron Promontorium may very probably be that neck of Land which shoots out in the County of Weisford; where Banna, a Town's name, implies the same thing as Hieron, namely, sacred or holy. Iberni (call'd in some Copies Ʋterini) seem to have inhabited part of the County of Desmond, along with the Vilabri. Jernus is a River, settl'd by Ptolemy under the Pro∣montory Notium, as emptying it self there into the Sea. Maire (which runs under Drunkeran) bids the fairest for it. Isanium is a Promontory call'd at this day S. John's Foreland in the County of Down. Laberus, mention'd by Ptolemy, seems to be the Castle Kil-lair, in the County of Meth; a name pos∣sibly deriv'd from Ptolemy's old one. Libnius keeps something of its name to this day in the River Liffy, which runs by Dublin. Logia is the Lake Logh-Foyle, in the County of Tir-Connel. Luceni, a People who formerly inhabited West-Munster, along with the Vetabri and the Ʋterini. Macolicum is now Malc, upon the River Shanon, in the County of Longford. Menapii, mention'd in Ptolemy, inhabited the County of Weisford; the chief City whereof, of the same name, seems to be the old Menapia. Medona is a River in these parts, at the mouth whereof stood the ancient Menapia. If the latter be Weisford, the former must on course be the River Slane. Nagnata is plac'd by Ptolemy some where about the present County of Slego; the very spot is not yet discover'd, nor any remains of the old name. Nagnatae must have their Seat in the same Tract, whereof Nagnata may seem to have been the capital City.
Notium is our Missen-head (a Promontory in the County of Desmond) under which he tells us the old River Jernus empties it self into the Sea. Ovoca seems to be that River which empties it self into the Sea, below Wicklow or Arcklow. Ravius is the River Trebis, the northern Bound of the County of Slego. Rheba is still preserv'd entire in the old Rheban, (near the River Barrow in Queen's-County) at present an inconsiderable place. Regia may seem to have been seated about Patrick's Purgatory, in the County of Tirconnel; because the place, in the Life of S. Patrick, is call'd Reglis. Rigia has some Relicks of the old name, in the Lake we call Lough-Regith, in the County of Long∣ford: Which is of more moment, because the situation agrees very well with the account left us of it by Ptolemy. Rhobogdii inhabited all the northern Shore of Ire∣land, about Tircennel, &c. Robogh still preserves the manifest marks of the old name. Robogdium Promontorium must also have been in those parts. Senus (call'd also Sena, Sacana and Flumen Senense) is the noble River of Shanon. Velabri (so call'd from the Friths and Aestuaries among which they dwelt; for so much Aber im∣plies) inhabited part of the County of Desmond. Vidua a River in Tir-connel, now Crodagh. Vinderius is the Bay of Knockfergus in the County of Antrim. Vodiae, a People, who with the Coriondi, inhabited the Counties of Cork, Tipperary, Limerick and Water∣ford. The Territories Idou and Idouth seem to have something of the old name. Vennicnium Promont. now Ram's head in Tir-connel. Volunty, along with the Darni, Robogdii and Erdini, inhabited the Province of Ʋlster. JERSEY and GARNSEY. BEsides the Kingdom of Ireland, and the other Islands which lie round the Continent of Bri∣tain (the most cosiderable whereof are de∣scrib'd in the Counties upon which they border) there are two more, which could not be conveni∣ently drawn into the Body of the Survey, by reason of their distance from the Continent. And yet they are of so great importance to the Crown of England, that in a Description of the three Kingdoms, it would be a gross error wholly to omit them. These are Jersey and Garnsey. JERSEY is that which Antoninus mentions un∣der the name of Caesarea, about 30 miles in compass, and defended with Rocks and Quick-sands. The middle parts are mountainous, but the Valleys are de∣licately water'd with pleasant Brooks, and planted with Fruit-trees; Apple-trees more especially. The Villages are thick-set, and make 12 Parishes; out of which 12 Jurors are chosen by their respective Pa∣rishioners to assist the Bailiff (who is appointed by the Governour to administer Justice) in the management of Causes and Actions, both Civil and Capital. They have no Physicians, nor any Distempers but Fevers; which always come at a certain time of the year. Instead of Fewel, they use a Sea-weed, which they name Ʋraic; and the Sea now and then furnishes them with a good prize of combustible matter. S. Hilary's on the South-side of the Island, is their chief Town, both on account of its Trade, and the Court of Justice settl'd in it. The name, it has from Hilary (Bishop of Poicters) suppos'd to have been bury'd here, in his banishment. GARNSEY (20 miles to the North-west) is by Antoninus call'd Sarnia; inferior to the other upon some accounts: For it contains only 10 Parishes, and is not so fruitful: But 'tis better fortify'd, being en∣compass'd with a continu'd ridge of steep Rocks. This whole Island is Enclosure; but the Inhabitants do not follow Agriculture so closely, as their Neigh∣bours of Jersey. S. Peter's, a Town consisting of a long narrow Street, and seated upon a Bay in form of a Half-Moon, is their capital Place, whether we respect Trade or Strength. For it is well-stor'd with Merchants; and has the Mouth of the Haven de∣fended by a Castle on each side. The Governor of the Island keeps his residence here, and a Garison for the defence of the place. The Government of these Islands, is much the same in both; the Customs of Normandy obtaining in most cases. Their Drink is generally Cyder, by rea∣son of the abundance of Aples; and Fish they have in great plenty. Their Language is the French; and tho' they are generally of the same Extraction, yet they care not much to own their Original, but had rather make out a Relation to the English.
FRANCE. CHAP I. FRANCE, Gallia, in General, map of France FRANCE THE Country of France is very advantagiously situat∣ed, in the midst of the Northern temperate Zone, and extended from the 42d degree of Latitude to the 51st degree; and from the 11th degree of Lon∣gitude, to the 26th degree, reckoning from Teneriffe with the old Maps, but according to Sanson, from the 15th degree to the 29th degree of Longitude: So that it includes the space of 214 French Leagus or
535 English Miles, from the Pyrenean Mountains in the South, to Calis in the North. And from the Point of Conquet in Bretaign in the West, to Alsatia in the East, about 202 Leagues or 505 Miles. On the North east it is contiguous with the Spanish Netherlands, and parted from England by the British Chanel: On the East it is bounded by Germany, Switzerland, Savoy and Piedmont, from the last of which it is separated by the Alps; on the South by the Mediterranean-Sea and the Pyrenean Mountains, which divide it from Spain; and on the West by the Ocean. The AIR is very temperate, and not subject to the great Colds of Germany, Sweden and Moscovy, nor to the excessive Heats of Spain and Italy; but it is more or less hot or cold, according to the different situation of the several Provinces. The SOIL is every where fertil, and produces, besides abundance of Corn and divers sorts of Fruits, a vast quantity of Wine and abundance of Flax; and in Provence and Languedoc, Oil. The Pastures and Meadows feed great Herds of Cattle, and the Forests, which are spacious enough, but not so large as those of Germany, contain much variety of Game. Some Mines of Iron, Lead, Tin, Coperas, &c. are found in France, but of these not many nor very considera∣ble. Great quantity of Salt is made in the Isle of Rhce, about Rochfort, and other parts of France, which yields the King a great Revenue. The most noted MOUNTAINS here, be∣sides the Pyrenean and the Alps, are those of Cevennes, Auvergne, Mont-Jure or S. Claude towards Swisserland, and Mont-Vogesse, or des-Faucilles in the Diocess of Langres. The Chief ISLANDS are, I. In the Medi∣terranean-Sea, those of Hieres, S. Margaret, S. Honora∣tus or of Lerins, &c. II. In the Ocean, Oleron and Ree on the Coasts of Saintonge and Aunis; Noir-Mon∣strier, de Dieu, Bell-Isle, Ouessant, &c. off of Bretaigne; and Aldernay near the Shoar of Normandy. Its chiefest PORTS, in the Ocean, are Calis, Am∣bleteuse, S. Valery, Diepe, Havre de Grace, S. Malo, Brest, Rochel, Rachefort, Bourdeaux, Bayonne, &c. And in the Mediterranean, Marseilles and Toulon. The principal RIVERS of France are, 1. The Seine, which rises in Burgundy near Dijon, passes through Champaign, the Isle of France and Normandy, watering by the way Troyes, Paris and Roan, and receiving in its Course the Yonne, the Oyse, and several smaller Ri∣vers, empties it self into the Sea at Havre de Grace, and makes a very good Haven, whence this Town hath its Name. 2. The Loyre is the largest River in France, and springs in Languedoc, in the Mountains call'd les Severins, passes by Nevers, Orleans, Tours, An∣gors and Nantes, receiving by the way the Aller, the Cher, the Indre, the Vienne, the Sarte, the Ardre and many others, and falls into the Sea about 40 Miles below Nantes, and over-against Bell-Isle. 3. The Garonne rises in the Pyrenean Mountains, runs to Thou∣louse, thence flows westward to Bourdeaux, a little be∣low which the Dourdonne joins it, and both together make it a very wide Haven, which is emptied into the Ocean near the Island of Oleron. 4. The Rhosne hath its source in the Alps, passes through the Lake of Geneva, flows to Lyons, where it receives the Saone, at Valence the Isere falls into it, as does the Durance at Avignon. and quickly after empties it self into the Mediterranean-Sea in six Chanels. Besides these there is a great number of smaller Rivers, which are mentioned in the following Description of the Coun∣try. The particular COMMODITIES of France, which they send abroad into Foreign Countries, are, Wine, Brandy, Canvas, and other Linnen, Paper, Salt, wrought Silks, Druggets and other Stuffs; several wrought Goods, as Gloves, Lace, &c. The PEOPLE of France are a mixture of the Posterity of the ancient Gauls, Romans, Franks, Visi∣goths and Burgundians, but chiefly of the Gauls, whom, though the Romans and Franks successively subdued, they did not however expel, those still remaining, the body of the People, tho' these obtain'd the Govern∣ment of them. Of the TEMPER of the Gauls, Caesar says, They were quick-witted, but rash and unsteady; and their Successors the French are of the same nature. They have generally quick and ready Apprehensions, but too often run away with a superficial Knowledge of things, without having Patience to dive to the bot∣tom: But thô this be their general Character, there have been abundance of Particulars that must be ex∣cepted: France having produc'd very learned and in∣dustrious Men, in all Arts and Sciences, especially in our Age; wherein, besides the vast Improvement they have made of the Art of War, all the parts of Learn∣ing have been industriously studied and improved by the ingenious Virtuosi of France; and even aMadam Dacier, the Daughter of Tanaq. Faber, who published an excellent Edition of Gallymachus the greek Poet, with a Latin Version and critical Notes; also Aurelius Victor, Eutrepius, and L. Florus, with Interpretations and Notes, for the use of the Daupbin; besides which sh hath Trnslated Terence, three Comedies of Plautus, and two of Aristophanes into French, with critical Notes; and hath also perfect d her Husbands Translation of Horace, with admirable Skill and Ingnuity. Woman of that Nation hath been found an excellent Critick in Philological Learning. They abound in Comple∣ments, and are really very civil, especially to Stran∣gers; and have a natural freedom in their Conversa∣tion, which would be very agreeable if it were not over∣acted and mix'd with Levity. Both Men and Women are full of Talk, and as familiar at first sight, as if they had been long acquainted. In their Habit they are somthing phantastical, but have generally an Air of Gentility; especially the Women, who are well∣shaped and fair enough, except in the Southern Pro∣vinces, where they have very swarthy Complexions. The French are much addicted to Ligitiousness; more Law-suits are tried there, than in any Nation in the World, nay some say than in all Europe besides; which encourages all sorts of People to breed up their Chil∣dren to the Law; and if a Father can raise Money enough to purchase his Son an Office, he thinks him well settled: By which means here are swarms of Advocats, Procurers, Registers, Notaries, and other Men of Law. The Gentry scorn Trade, so that the younger Brothers always apply themselves to the Gown or the Sword, which makes the French King's Armies so large and well stockt with Officers. In War they have been always esteem'd furious in attacking, but quick in retreating, not to be brought on a second time, if they obtain'd not their end at the first Onset. Sicut primus impetus eis major quam virorum est, ita sequens minus quam feminarum, says L. Florus of them. But thô this may still be part of their Character, yet, what by strict Dicipline and careful Instruction, their Soldiers will now endure the Fatigues of a Camp and a Siege as well as any in Europe, and in Battles too, they have behaved themselves very bravely.
The Religion of the Gauls was Paganism in its highest degree, even to the offering of human Sacrifi∣ces (saith Solinus) but as they became more civiliz'd this barbarity was laid aside; however, they still re∣mained superstitious Idolaters, till the CHRISTIAN RELIGION was planted among them, by some of St. Peter's Disciples. St. Denis, the Areopagite, is pre∣tended to have been the Apostle of Paris, and many ridiculous Miracles are related of him in their Le∣gends; particularly, that after he was beheaded his Body rose, took up his Head and walk'd with it a Mile: Which is as true, as that this Denis was ever thereDr. Cave in his Life of that Denis hath sufficiently proved that he was never in France, Lives Fath. vol. 1. p. 71. as have also their own Country-men, Launoy, Sirmondus and du Pin. V. du Pin's Hist. Eccles. Writ. vol. 1. p. 31. of the Engl. Edi.. However, it is certain, that Christianity was received here very early, and that the learned and pious Father St. Irenaeus came hither in the mid∣dle of the second Century, and succeeded Ponthinus (who was martyr'd An. Dom. 178.) in the Bishoprick of Lyons. But the Franks being Pagans, when they came it was suppress'd, till Clovis the fifth King be∣ing converted, by the persuasion of his Wife Crotilda, and the instruction of St. Vaast, and St. Remigeus the first Bishop of Rheims, it was again restored. But in the succceding Ages of Ignorance and Su∣perstition, the Errors that crept into the Church in most parts of Christendom, prevail'd here also; and though the Gallican Church was never so servilely subject to the Court of Rome as those of other Nati∣ons, yet the pernicious Doctrines were as generally re∣ceived here as any where. Wherefore when the Re∣formation was set on foot, great numbers of the Peo∣ple of France were convinc'd of the falshood of that Religion, and Calvin's Doctrine was readily receiv'd upon the preaching of Zuinglius. And so numerous did the Protestants or Hugenots (as they were called by the Romanists) grow, that even so early as the year 1560. there are said to have been 1250 of their Churches in France. But they were always persecuted by the Romish party, and even massacred in most barbarous manner several times; particularly at Paris on Saint Bartholomew's day, in the year 1572. where in the middle of the night, more than 10000 of them were murder'd at once, and in other Cities three times as many; though a Peace was just concluded, and for assurance the King of Navarre, the head of the Pro∣testant-party, was that day married to the French King's Sister. King Henry IV. granted them Liberty of Conscience by an Edict made at Nants, and con∣firm'd and register'd in the Parliament of Paris: By which means they again grew very powerful, and no less than 300 wall'd Towns were inhabited almost only by them, of which Rochel was the chief. But Lewis XIII. deprived them of them all, even Rochel it self, after a long and famous Siege. By which their Strength being broken, and the Heads of the Party being brought over, or otherwise reduc'd, the present King, Lewis XIV. resolved utterly to suppress them, which he began by the Revocation of the Edict of Nants in the year, 1685. notwithstanding it had been so firmly ratified, and made a standing Law of the Kingdom; and afterwards caused the Prote∣stants to be most cruelly persecuted by his Soldiers, which continued for two or three years; at the end of which, all those that could not be brought to re∣nounce their Religion, were banished the Kingdom, after they had been long imprisoned, and deprived of all their Goods and Estates. So that at this time, the Romish Religion is only allowed in France. The ancient LANGUAGE of the Gauls was the same with that of our ancient Britains, as the learned Mr. Camden has proved at large; but when the Ro∣mans conquer'd it they introduced the Latin, and by means of the long time they were Masters of the Country, establish'd it so effectually, that the old Gaulish was quite lost; afterwards the Franks, being Germans, introduced their own Language, which was us'd at Court for some Ages; but the German being a more harsh indocile Tongue, and the Latin the contrary, this prevail'd above that; so that though the present French Tongue be compos'd of the Ger∣man and Gothick, as well as of the Latin, the last has much the greater share. It is voluble and elegant, and admir'd for its sweet∣ness; it is true, by means of the liberty they take in the pronunciation (leaving out harsh Terminations and Consonants) it is pliant enough, but not so sweet as the Italian. The Royal Academy at Paris have of late years much improv'd and refin'd it, however it is not yet copious nor at all heroick; so that though in their Translations they have express'd the sense of some ancient Authors aptly enough in Prose, none of their Ingenious have been able to produce Heroick Poems like those in English. But notwithstanding that this Tongue hath nothing of signal Majesty or Manliness in it, and seems rather fit for the Conversation of Women than of Princes and Statesmen, yet what by the greatness of the present King, and their obstinacy in using their own Lan∣guage in the Businesses other Nations have had occa∣sion to transact with them, together with the splen∣dor of the Prince's Court which hath invited Stran∣gers to visit it, the French Tongue is at present us'd in many Courts of Europe, and the most generally understood of any modern one in Christendom. SECT. II. Of the antient State of France. THE want of Literature in the earlier Ages of the World, hath made it extreamly difficult to dis∣cover the origine of Nations; that of France is as obscure as any. The best that can be learnt is, That it was Peopled after the Flood, by the Posterity of Gomar the eldest Son of Noah: These growing nume∣rous, composed many Nations, to whom the Greeks and Romans gave the General name of Galli; for what rea∣son, as it is uncertain, so it is not very material; howe∣ver, under that Name they were known in the time of Tarquinius Priscus the fifth King of Rome, and Pos∣sessed a Country of very large extent, comprising not only all the present France, but part of Italy also, as far as the River Rubicon or Pisatello, which falls into the Adriatick Sea between Ravenna and Rimini; and all that part of Germany and Belgium, that lies within the River Rhine, the Division whereof, according to the Roman accounts, was thus, viz. I. GALLIA CISALPINA or Citerior, with respect to the Romans, afterwards called LON∣GOBARDIA or LOMBARDY from the Bar∣di, a certain Gaulish People, and the Langons, so named
by the reason of their long Javelins, of whom XXII Kings reigned in this Country, from Alboinus or Aldoi∣nus their first Prince, A. C. 568. to Desiderius, whom Charlemaigne defeated, A. D. 773. It was extended from the River Rubicon as far as the Alps. II. GALLIA TRANSALPINA, or Ʋl∣terior, which contained all the present France, and that part of Germany and Belgium westward of the Rhine. The Gauls in general were a very vigorous and warlike People, those of the Cis-Alpina fought and de∣feated a large Army of Romans, march'd up to the City, took and sack'd itA.M. 3562. U. C. 565., laid Siege to the Capitol, and had well nigh taken it: For having observed on one side of the Castle a place of more easie access than the rest, in the dead of Night some of them climb'd up the Rock there, and got to the top with that Si∣lence, that they escaped the Centinels and the Dogs; but disturbed certain Geese that were in the Capitol, which by gagling and clapping their Wings, alarm'd the Soldiers; who presently running to their Arms, drove them back, and by that lucky Accident recovered the Ro∣man State, then reduc'd to its last gasp. At length the Siege was raised by Camillus the Dictator, and in time the Gauls were driven out of the Roman Provinces: But left so dreadful a Name behind them, that Cicero confesses, the Romans were more afraid of them than any other Nation of the World. And Salust says. It was not Honour but Life that was to be disputed with a Gaul. The Romans durst not attempt the Conquest of them, till they had subdued almost all the rest of the then known World. At length, Anno Ʋ. C. 628. Fulvius Flaccus the Consul made War upon them, and five years after Fabius Maximus reduced the Narbon∣nensis into a Roman Province. About 70 years after this, Julius Caesar undertook the Conquest of Gaul, which, after a very bloody War he effected, and to∣tally subjected the whole Country to the Power of Rome, A.M. 3900. Ʋ.C. 703. ante Christ. 48. Caesar at his Arrival found the whole Country divided into three parts, whereof the Celtae or Galli possessed the best and largest, being all the Country that is bounded by the Garonne on the South, the Ocean on the West, the Loire and the Rhine on the East, and by the Seine and Marne on the North; From the Confines of the Gallia Celtica to the British Sea, and along the lower part of the Rhine quite to the German Ocean was in∣habited by the Belgae; The other part, being all from the River Garonne to the Pyrenean Mountains, quite cross from the Ocean in the West to the Mediterranean in the East, belonged to the Aquitains. Of these the Celtae were the most civiliz'd, because of their Neigh∣bourhood and converse with the Romans, and the Belgae the most warlike, by reason of the little converse they had with other Nations, and the frequent Wars that the Germans made upon them. These great Nations were again subdivided into a multitude of smaller, whereof Caesar mentions no less than LXIV. that had different Appellations from the chief City, as the Rhemi of Rheims, the Suessiones of Soissons, Bellovaci of Beauvais, Sessui of Seez, &c. But by him it was di∣vided into these four great parts, viz. 1. Narbonnen∣sis, so called from the City Narbon, containing Langue∣do, Provence, Dauphine, and some part of Savoy; called also Braccata, from a certain Habit worn by the People. 2. Aquitanica, so named from the City of Aquae-angustae, now d' Acqs in Guienne, comprehen∣ding the Provinces of Gascogn, Guienne, Quercu. Xain∣toigne, Poictou, Perigort, Limosin, Auvergne, Bourbon∣nois, and Berry, extending from the Pyrenees to the River Loire. 3. Celtica, call'd so from the valiant Nation of the Celtae, and Comata from the long Hair worn by them, and also Lugdunensis from the City Lyons, extending from the Loire to the British Sea, and com∣prehending the Province of Lyonnois, the Dukedom of Burgundy, Nivernois, &c. part of Champaigne, the Isle of France, the Provinces of Normandy, Bretaigne, Maine, Perche, Beauce, Anjou, and Touraine. 4. Bel∣gica, named from the Belgae a potent Nation, compri∣sed all the Eastern part of Gaul, viz. Picardy, the rest of Champaigne, the Netherlands, and so much of Ger∣many and Belgium, as lyeth on this side the Rhine, with the County of Burgundy or Franche Comte. Afterwards the Emperor Constantine the Great, di∣vided it into seventeen Provinces or Governments; six of which were Consular, and Eleven under certain Presidents sent by the Emperor, who resided in these Cities, viz. 1. Narbonnensis prima. Narbonne in Languedoc. 2. — secunda. Aix in Provence. 3. Viennensis. Vienne in Dauphine. 4. Alpes, Graiae and Pe∣ninae. Monstriers en Tarentaise in Savy. 5. Alpes Maritimae. Ambrun in Dauphine. 6. Lugdunensis prima. Lyons. 7. — secunda. Roan in Normandy. 8. —tertia. Tours. 9. —quarta. Sens in Champaigne. 10. Sequania. Besancon in Franc. Comte. 11. Aquitanica prima. Bourges in Berry. 12. —secunda. Bourdeaux in Guienne. 13. Novempopulania. Aux in Gascoigne. 14. Germania prima. Mentz. 15. — secunda. Colen. 16. Belgica prima. Triers. 17. — secunda. Rheims. He also placed Counts in the Cities, and Dukes in the Frontier-Towns to administer Justice according to the Roman Laws; and A. D. 330. dividing the Office of Praefectus Praeterio, or Lieutenant-General of the Empire, among four Persons; appointed one of them to reside among the Gauls; and under him, three Vicars, who were dispersed in Britain, France, and Spain. Not not long after the death of Constantine, the Goths got footing in Gaul, the Narbonnensis being granted to them by the Emperour Honorius upon their quitting Italy; and afterwards, for Service done the Empire, Aquitain also was given them. And the Burgundians, a great and populous Nation on the Rhine, (at first called in by Stilico Lieutenant of the same Honorius, to defend the Borders against the Franks) possessed themselves of all the South∣east parts and both the Burgundies, from them so called. This was the State of Gaul, when the Franks or French entred it. The FRANKS were a warlike people of Germa∣ny, who possessed all the Country that lies between the Rhine and the Weser, and from the German Ocean in the North to the River Mayne in the South; and con∣sisted of the Nations of Sicambri, Bructeri, Salij, Che∣rusci, &c. They also conquered the Country beyond the Mayne, and making the banks of that River their chief Seat, gave the name of Franconia to the Coun∣try now call'd so.
The Sicambri, from whom some deduce the ori∣ginal of the French, are said to be of Scythian Extracti∣on, and have come down into Germany A. M. 3519. ante J. Chr. 429. in a very great Body, under their Captain Marcomir, and settled themselves in those parts now called East-Friesland, Guelderland, and Hol∣land, They were a rough unciviliz'd People, and of∣ten invaded and plundered their Neighbours. A. M. 3925. their King named Francus, was called by the Saxons to their assistance against the Goths, where he so signaliz'd himself by his Valour, that, as some Au∣thors report, the Nation had from him the Name of Franci; but this seems improbable, since neither Stra∣bo, Ptolemy, Pliny, Caesar, Tacitus, or any ancient Au∣thor have mentioned them under that Name: From whence it is concluded, That they had it not till long after, that they took it up to denote the Freedom they enjoy'd from the Roman Yoak, which the Neighbour∣ing Nations were subject to. The first notice of them in History under this Denomination, is in the Reigns of Valerian and Ga∣lienus, about A. D. 260, after which they are frequent∣ly mentioned on account of the Pillage they made in Gaul, &c. Constantine the Great took their Kings As∣caric and Rhadagaise Prisoners, and exposed them to wild Beasts, for having violated their Faith in war∣ing against him. About A. D. 412 the Armorici, who inhabited the Maritime Provinces of Gaul, as Flanders, Picardy, Nor∣mandy and Bretaign revolted from the Romans, to whom the Franks joyned, and by that means possessed themselves of part of the German and Belgick Provin∣ces of Gaul, which the Romans were forced to grant them. Soon after this it was, that Pharamond was chosen their King; he Reigned ten Years and had his Seat in Gaul, but about the time of his death the Romans beat the Franks out of Gaul again, and took from them the Lands they had given them, which Clodion the Successor of Pharamond endeavour'd to regain, but was beaten back. Meroveus succeeded Clodion, in whose time Attila King of the Hunns invaded Gaul with a vast Army, and having plundered several o∣ther Cities, besieged Orleans; for the relief whereof Meroveus joyned his Forces with those of Aetius the Roman General, and Theodorick King of the Visigoths, who all together set upon Attila, and in Battle kil∣led 200000 of his Men (as Historians report) and drove him out of Gaul. Aetius, who was the great support of the Roman Power in Gaul, was soon after Massacred by Valentinian, and he himself kill'd by Maximus. This put the Roman affairs in such disor∣der, that Meroveus had time to extend his Conquests, which he did over all Picardy, Normandy, and part of the Isle of France; and Childerick his Son took Paris, Orleans, and several other Cities, and established the French Monarchy. Clovis his Successor freed the French wholly from the Roman Power, and gave the name of France to all the Country that reaches from the Rhine to the Loire, After the death of Clovis, the Do∣minions of the Franks was divided into 2 parts, viz. Oosterrich, or the Eastern part called Austrasia, and Westerrich, or the Western part call'd Neustria: The former containing all the old France, and the Coun∣try beyond the Maine which they had conquer'd, to∣gether with Reims, Chalons, Cambray and Laon; which was from that time a separate Kingdom, the Seat whereof was Mets in Lorrain. The latter contained all the Country that lies between the Meuse and the Loire, which was again divided into three Kingdoms, viz. 1. Of France at Paris, 1. of Orleans, and 3. of Soissons: And afterwards, when the French had sub∣dued the Visigoths and Burgundians; two other King∣doms were erected, viz. of Aquitain and Burgundy. These were several times united and divided, as the Royal Family happen'd to be more or less numerous. But the Title of Kings of France, the Historians have given to those only who have ruled in Paris; who are these mentioned in the following Table. SECT III. Of the French Kings. OF these Monarchs there are reckon'd three Races: The first is called Merovignian from Merouee, who puting aside the Children of Clodion, caus'd him∣self to be chosen King; and fix'd the Regal Seat in Gaul, as hath been already shewn. This Race con∣tinued during the Reigns of XXI Kings, and end∣ed in Childerick III. who being a weak Man, was surnamed the Witless, and was degraded by the As∣sembly of the Estates; Pepin, the Son of Charles Mr∣tel, Maire of the Palace, being advanced in his stead, who began the second Race, call'd the Carlian or Carlovinian. The Maire of the Palace was an Office of great Dignity and Power; he was at first chosen by the Nobility and confirmed by the King; and was entrust∣ed with the Management of all Affairs of State: Their Power was very great, which by reason of the Weakness and Supineness of the Kings they encreased as they pleased; so that at last it became hereditary. Of these, Pepin and his Son Charles, surnamed Martel, were in a manner Kings themselves during the Reigns of Dagobert II. Chilperick, Clotaire and Thierry, and after the Death of the last, Charles made himself chief Governour, with the Title of Maire and Duke of the French, in which he was succeeded by his Sons Carloman and Pepin, during an Interregnum of 6 or 7 years; and after the Expulsion of Childerick Pe∣pin obtained the Royal Dignity, as hath been already said. To Pepin succeeded his Son Charles, called le Maigne or the Great; An Epithet the Noble Actions he perform'd, very worthily deserv'd: For it was he that conquer'd the Barbarous Inhabitants of the most Northern parts of Germany, and establish'd Christi∣anity and Civil Government among them, after he had overcome Wittikind the last King of the Saxons, whereof we shall have occasion to speak more parti∣cularly in our description of Germany. He also con∣quer'd the Boii or Bavarians, became King of Ger∣many, and in the Pope's Quarrel carried his Arms in∣to Italy against Desiderius King of Lombardy, who at∣tempted to diminish the Papal Power and make him∣self King of all Italy; him Charles defeated, seized his Kingdom, and was crown'd King of Lombardy. He also conquer'd the Sarazens in Spain; And the Huns, Danes, Normans, &c. that infested his own Coun∣tries: And finally, he was by the Romans chosen Em∣peror, to which he was Crowned on Christmas-day, A. D. 800. thereby erecting anew the Western Em∣pire, and making himself the greatest Prince of the Universe. But this mighty Monarchy was in a little time reduced to its former Limits; for his Son Lewis the Godly parted his Estates among his four Sons, and erected the Kingdoms of Italy, Aquitain, Bavaria and Rhoetia; and tho' some of his Posterity succeded in the Empire, yet his Family degenerating, they not only lost that Title, but Charles surnamed the Simple, the great Grandson of Lewis the Godly, was for some time kept out of the Throne of France also by Lewis
and Carloman, his Bastard-Brothers, and after them by Carolus Crassus Emperor, and Eudes Earl of Anjou; and though he obtained it at last, he was much di∣sturb'd and forc'd to relign it to Rodolph of Burgundy, who having enjoyed it two years, after his Death the Son of Charles the Simple was restored. But his Son and Grandson were disturb'd by Hugh Capet, Earl of Paris and Anjou, and Maire of the Palace, descended from the Eudes abovemention'd, who after the death of Lewis the Sloathful, got to be chosen King by the Assembly of the Estates at Noyon in the Month of May, A. D. 987. And began the third or Capetine Race of the Kings of France, A Chronological Table of the Succession of the Kings of France, according to Mezeray. The First or Morovignian Race. Began to Reign. A. D. Reigned Years 1 Pharomond 418 10 2 Clodion the Hairy 428 20 3 Merouee 448 11 4 Childerick I. 458 23 5 Clovis I. 481 30 6 Childebert I. 511 47 7 Clotaire I. 558 3 8 Cherebert 561 9 9 Chilperic I 570 13 10 Clotaire II. 584 45 11 Dagobert I. 629 16   Whereof 6 with his Father. 12 Clovis II. 638 18 13 Clotaire III. 655 14 14 Childerick II. 670 in Austria & Neustr. 18 15 Thierry I. 674 17 16 Clovis III. 691 4 17 Childebert II. 695 17 18 Dagobert II. the Just 711 5 19 Chilperick II. 716 5 Clotaire, set up by Ch. Martel 721 1 20 Thierry II. 722 17 An Interregnum of 6 or 7 years   21 Childerick III. the Witless. 743 8 She Second or Carlovignian Race. Began to Reign. A. D. Reigned Years 22 Pepin, the short 751 17 23 Charlemaign, or Ch. the Great 768 46 24 Lewis I. the pious 814 27 25 Charles II. the Bald 840 37 26 Lewis II. the Stammerer, 877 19 Months 27 Lewis III. Carloman 879 2 4 22 Charles III. the Gross 884 3 29 Eudes, Crowned King 888 5 30 Charles IV. the Simple 893 29 Robert Crowned King 922 1 31 Rodolph Crowned King 923 13 32 Lewis IV. Transmarine 936 18 33 Lothaire 954 32 34 Lewis V. the Sloathful 986 16 Months The Third or Capetine Race. Began to Reign. A. D. Reigned Years 35 Hugh Capet 987 9 36 Robert, the Devout 996 45   whereof 9 with his Father. Hugh the Great, Crowned, but died before his Fa∣ther. 37 Henry I. 1033 28 38 Philip I. 1060 48 39 Lewis VI. the Gross 1108 29 Philip Crowned, but died before his Father 40 Lewis VII the Young 1137 43 41 Philip II. the August 1180 43 42 Lewis VIII. the Lyon 1223 3 43 S. Lewis IX. 1226 44 44 Philip III. the Hardy 1270 15 45 Philip IV. the Fair 1286 29 46 Lewis X. Hutin 1314 18 Months Regency. John died at 8 days old.     47 Philip V. the Young 1317 5 48 Charles IV, the Fair 1322 6 After whose death Edward III. King of England claimed the Crown of France, as next Heir; however it was given to 49 Philip VI. of Valois, 1328 22 50 John the Good 1350 13 He was taken Prisoner by the Black Prince Son to Edward III. 51 Charles V. the Wise 1364 16 52 Charles VI. well belov'd 1380 42 53 Charles VII. Victorious 1422 39 54 Lewis XI. 1461 22 55 Charles VIII. Courteous 1483 15 56 Lewis XII. the Just 1498 17 57 Francis I. the Great 1515 32 58 Henry II. 1547 13 59 Francis II. 1559 1 5 Mon. 60 Charles IX. 1560 13 61 Henry III. 1574 15 62 Henry IV. of Bourbon, King of Navarre. 1589 21 63 Lewis XIII. 1610 33 64 Lewis XIV. 1643 now reigning. The present King was born Sept. 5th 1638. suc∣ceeded his Father in the Throne, May 14th 1643 and was Crowned at Reims, June 7th 1654 he married Mary of Austria Daughter to Philip iv. King of Spain, June 9th 1660, by whom he hath Issue, the DAƲPHIN, born Nov. 1st. 1661, who married Mary Sister to the present Elector of Bavaria, on the 28th of Jan. 1680, and by her hath Issue three Sons; viz. the Duke of BƲRGƲNDY, born Aug. 6th 1682. The Duke of ANJOƲ, born Dec. 9th 1683. And the Duke of BERRY, born August 31 1686. SECT. IV. Of the Government, Laws, Courts and Officers of Justice and Taxes. GAul, as we have said, was anciently divided into many Nations, each of which was govern'd by a different King; whose Power was limited by Laws agreed between him and the People in a grand Council. But though these Nations were separate Governments, they all maintained a general Alliance, and upon extra∣ordinary Occasions. a general Council of the Chiefs of each Nation was Conven'd; as we find there was to choose Deputies to congratulate Caesar upon his Victory over the Helve∣tians,Caesar de Bel. Gal. Lib. 1. and to crave his assistance against Ariovistus King of the Germans. And like the Gauls, the French also at the beginning
of that Monarchy, established a grand Council for mak∣ing Laws, called the Assembly of the Estates; which was composed of Deputies sent from the Nobility, Clergy, the chief Cities of every Province, and from the Common People. These being assembled before the King, the Peoples Grievances were heard, the Neces∣sities of the Kingdom considered, and Laws were made for Imposing Taxes, Redressing Grievances, and what else was needful for the Publick Good: And the Laws there made obliged the King, as well as the People. The first Assembly of this Council, men∣tioned in History, was A. D. 422. at Salisson or Seltz in Alsatia, which was called (says du Tillet) to Interpret and Reform the Customs of France not yet written, and and in this Council ('tis said) the famous Salique Law was made. Mention is made of many times that Childebert assembled the Estates. Charlemaigne called them twenty times, To receive the Annual Gifts, and confirm the Priviledges of the Nobility, says a late French Author of good Learning; by which it should seem that they had the same Power that our English Par∣liament hath. It is at least certain, that in those days this Assembly had great Authority: Davila says it was an ancient Question, whether the Estates or the King were superior. But at length their Power was much restrained, and latterly they were not assembled in many years together. Lewis XIII. convoked the Assembly of the Estates to Sens, Sept. 10. 1614. thence adjourned them to Paris, where the Sessions began on the 27th of October, and on the 23d of February, 1615, the Result of their Deliberations being written down, were presented to the King, but whether passed into Laws or no I am not inform'd, the Historian leaving it there. Since that time they have never met; and the only Legislative Power in France at present is in the King, whose Edicts (with a Soit, car tel est notre plaisir; So be it, for such is our Pleasure) being regi∣stred in the Parliament of Paris (which too is com∣posed of Persons that are at his Devotion) have the full Force of Laws. The Ancient Civil Law is used in France, besides which there are ancient particular Laws and Customs, and the Edicts of the Kings. The Salique Law and that of Appenages are esteem∣ed Fundamental and unrevocable: The first confines the Succession to the Crown in the Males, excluding the Females, and the Issue of them: What more it contained is not known. Many Conjectures have been made of the reason of this Name Salique; some derive it from the Salii, one of the Nations of the Franks; others from the River Sala, on the Banks whereof it is pretended to be made, &c. But that which seems to be much the most Natural and Pro∣bable is the Judgment of a most ingenious Antiquary of our own Nation, who derives it from the Word SAHL or ZAL, as it is now written, which in the High Dutch (the Language of the Franks) signifies a Hall or Court, so that it is the Law Salique, q. d. the Court-Law, or the Law of the Court, by which the King and the Royal Family were assur'd of their Honour and Prerogative. That of Appenage was made by Charles the Great, and is to hinder the King's younger Sons from having any part of the Knigdom with their Elder Brother; before which France was frequently parcelled out into several Kingdoms. For maintaining the Publick Peace, and the better Administration of Justice, the King appoints one of the prime of the Nobility Governor in every one of the Twelve Governments, and under him Lieutenants and Governours of Towns; whose Offices are the same with the ancient Dukes and Counts, first esta∣blished by the Romans, viz. to keep in Obedience the Provinces and Places given them in Custody, to main∣tain them in Peace and Tranquility, to have Power and command over their Armies, to defend them a∣gainst Enemies and Seditious Attempts, to keep the Places well fortified and provided with what is need∣ful, and to assist the Execution of Justice. The Administration of Justice, both Civil and Cri∣minal belongs to the Parliaments. Anciently the Kings administred Justice themselves, but it being troublesome to them, this Court was establish'd by King Pepin, Anno. Dom. 757. composed of certain Noblemen, whom the King appointed to hear the Complaints, and do Justice to his Subjects. At first it was held where the King resided, and follow'd him in his Journeys: But for the Convenience of the People, Philip the Fair made it sedentary, and gave a part of his Palace at Paris to be the fixt Seat of the Parliament; and because of the multiplicity of Business, and the large Extent of the Country, suc∣ceeding Kings erected new ones in several Parts of the Kingdom, so that at present there are Fifteen Parlia∣ments in France and its Conquests, viz. 1 At Paris. 2 Toulouse. 3 Roan. 4 Grenoble. 5 Bourdeaux. 6 Dijon. 7 Aix. 8 Rennes, now at Van∣nes. 9 At Pau. 10 Mets. 11 Besancon. 12 Tournay. 13 Of Rousillon at Perpig∣nan. 14 Arras. 15 Of Alsace at Brifac. These Parliaments are composed of certain Pre∣sidents, Counsellors, Advocates, &c. and divided into several Chambers, according to the respective Busi∣nesses. That of Paris is called the Court of Peers, because the Dukes and Peers of France, and several great Officers of State are sworn before it, and are there tryed, when accused of any Crime. It is di∣vided into Ten Chambers, viz. The Grand Chamber, which tries great Causes, and judges Noblemen. The Tournelle (so called, because the Counsellors of the Grand Chamber attend in it by turns) Civile, judges of Civil Causes to the Value of 1000 Livres or 50 Livres per Annum. The Tournelle Criminelle, which judges all Appeals of Criminal Matters for the Subordinate Courts, not made by Noblemen. Five Chambers of Inquest. Wherein the Depositions of Witnesses are written down, and Causes judged thereupon, in the nature of our Bill and Answer in Chancery and Exchequer. Two Chambers of Request, which judge the Causes of those that are priviledged. For the Service of these Chambers, there are one Chief President, and seven Presidents au Mortier (so called from a Cap they wear in form like a Mortar) who are all Persons of Quality: Twenty nine Coun∣sellors Clerks, among which the Archbishop of Paris, and the Abbot of S. Denis have place; One hundred eighty and five Counsellors, Laicks; Fourteen Presi∣dents of the Inquest and Request; Two Advocates General; one Procurer General, and Twenty Substi∣tutes to him; Three Registers; with Greiffers, No∣taries, Ushers, &c. and Four hundred Procureurs or Attorneys. Besides the Parliaments, there are two other sorts of Supreme Courts in France, which are the Cham∣bers of Accounts, and the Courts of Aides.
The Chambers of Accounts are Twelve in Num∣ber, and held at these Cities, viz. 1. Paris, 2. Roan, 3. Dijon, 4. Nantes, 5. Montpelier, 6. Grenoble, 7. Aix, 8. Pau, 9. Blois, 10. Lisle, 11. Aire, and 12. Dole. This Court administers the Oath of Fidelity to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, &c. They Examine the Accounts of the Treasury, receive the Homage and Vassalage due from the Royal Feifs, &c. and Re∣gister the Treaties of Peace, and all other Contracts, Grants, and Gifts of the King whatsoever. The Courts of Aides are Eight, and held at these Cities, viz. 1. Paris, 2. Montpelier, 3. Roan, 4. Cler∣mont Mont-ferrand, 5. Bourdeaux, 6. Aix, 7. Grenoble, and 8. of Burgundy at Dijon. This Court judges without Appeal all Causes relating to the Tailles, Aides, Gabes, and all other the Kings Revenues. Under these Supreme Courts there are other for smaller Matters establish'd in all the Cities, and con∣siderable Towns in the Kingdom, viz. Presidial. A Coutt composed of several Judges, who Try Civil Causes (and Appeals from Subaltern Justices in Villages) of Matters of smaller Impor∣tance. Each Presidial is divided under two Chiefs; The first Judges definitively, and without Appeal, to to the Sum of 250 Livres, or 10 Livres per Annum; The second to the Sum of 500 Livres, or 20 Livres per Annum. Generalities. Which are the Treasurers General of France; Of these there are Twenty three, conve∣niently disposed in several parts of the Kingdom: Each Generality is composed of Twenty three Per∣sons, who have the Care of Assessing the Taxes, and Receiving the Kings Revenue, in their respective Districts, which for their ease are divided into several Parts, call'd Elections. When the King, in his Coun∣cil, hath determined what extraordinary Sum must be levied upon the Subjects that Year, the Resolution is sent to the Generalities, who compute the Propor∣tion of it that each of their Districts must raise: And then send their Orders to every Election, to raise so much as their Proportion amounts to, upon the Parishes within their respective Elections; and the Money being Collected, is return'd with the accounts to the Generalities, who remit it to the Exchequer. The same Method is us'd in levying the Tailles, and all Money raised for the King. This is a Court also for judging Matters relating to the Crown-Lands and the Kings Revenue. They have the inspection of all Publick Works, and give out Orders concerning the building and repairing the Royal Houses (except Versailles and the Louvre) pub∣lick Bridges, Causeys, &c. They are Surveyors Ge∣neral of the High-ways, and Judge of the Nuisan∣ces without Appeal. All Letters of Ennobling, Legi∣timation and Donation from the King must be regi∣stred in their Office. The Places that these Gene∣ralities are held in, will be seen in the following Description of the Country. The Election is a subordinate Court to the Gene∣rality. It is composed of several Persons who com∣pute the proportion that every Parish in their Divi∣sion must raise of the Sum demanded by the Generality, and send out their Orders to the Parishes accordingly, where the Inhabitants chuse one, who proportions it exactly among them, and collects it. This Court judges small Causes relating to the Imposts and Taxes. For administring Justice and punishing Criminals, there are certain Officers or Magistrates in every con∣siderable Town (who are commonly Lawyers) ap∣pointed by the King; they have different Titles, be∣ing in some places called Bailiffs, in others Provosts, and in others Seneschals, but their Power and Duty is much the same. The Pursuing and Seizing of Criminals belongs to them: They have Power also to punish them, as the Law directs, which they did formerly definitively, but since so many Parliaments have been instituted, Appeals are admitted to the Parliament from their Sentence. The District over which they have the Care is called a Bailliage, Pro∣voste or Seneschausee. There are also in some Places Officers call'd Inten∣dants; these are Men of the Law, whom the King sends into the Provinces or Generalities to give orders in ex∣traordinary Affairs. There are Intendants de la Justice, Police and Finance. They are also called Commis∣saries of Paris for executing the Kings Orders in such or such a Generality. There are a multitude of other Courts and Offi∣cers in France, too many to describe here; what is said is enough to give the Reader a general Idea of the Government, and to explain the Terms of Ge∣nerality, Election, &c. which often occur in the en∣suing Description of the Kingdom. The TAXES paid by the Common People of France are very large. Those that are constant, be∣sides the extraordinary ones in time of War, are of six sorts, viz. 1. Tailles, a Sum paid yearly by every Housholder, according to his Substance and Family; granted by the Three Estates. 2. Taillons, paid by the same Persons as the Taille, and amounts to about one third of that; This was first imposed by Henry II. 1549. 3. Subsistance-money, a Duty im∣posed by this present King for the Subsistance of the Soldiers in Winter, for which the Subject is excused from Lodging them: It is paid in the same manner as the other two. These Taxes are paid by the Third Estate only, the Nobility and Clergy being exempt. 4. The Customs upon Merchandize Im∣ported and Exported. 5. The Gabell, or Excise upon Salt, which is very high, and the People forc'd to take a certain quantity yearly, proportionate to their Family, and pay the Duty whether they can consume it or no. 6. Smaller Excises, Farms and other De∣mesns of the Crown, to the number of 26; all which raise a vast Sum. The whole Revenue of the King of France in time of Peace hath been computed to amount to more than 150 Millions of Livres, or 11 Millions and 375 thou∣sand Pounds Sterling per Annum. The Accounts in France are kept in Crowns, Li∣vres, Solz and Deniers. 12 Deniers make a Sol or Sou, 20 Solz a Livre or Florin, 3 Livres or 60 Solz make a Crown. A French Crown is of equal Value with Four Shillings and six Pence English; an Eng∣lish Crown yields in France 65 Solz; a Pound Ster∣ling yields 13 Livres, and an English Guinea Piece of Gold 14 Livres. The other Monies of France are a Double, which is two Deniers; a Liard, the fourth part of a Sol, Pieces of 3½ and 5 Solz, the quarter and the half Crown, the two Livre piece. And of Gold, the Crown, value 5 Livres 14 Solz, Lys de Or, value 7 Livres 10 Solz, the half Louis, the whole Louis d'Or, value 11 Livres, double Louis, &c.
SECT. V. The Archbishopricks, Bishopricks, and Univer∣sities of France. FOr the Government of the Church, France is di∣vided into 18 Archbishopricks, and 109 Bisho∣pricks, viz. I. Archbishop of Lyons, Count and Primate of France, hath Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Autun, 2 Langres, 3 Macon, and 4 Challon. II. The Archbishop of Sens, Primate of France and Germany; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Troies, 2 Aux∣erre, and 3 Nevers. III. The Archbishop of Paris, Duke and Peer; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Chartres, 2 Orleans, and 3 Meux, IV. The Archbishop of Reims, Duke and Peer, Le∣gat of the Holy See; Suffragans, The Bishops of 1 Soisons, 2 Laon, 3 Chaalons, 4 Noyon, 5 Beauvais, 6 Amiens, 7 Senlis, and 8 Boulogne. V. The Archbishop of Rouen, Primate of Norman∣dy; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Bayeux, 2 Evreux, 3 Auranches, 4 Seez, 5 Lisieux, 6 Coutances. VI. The Archbishop of Tours; Suffragans, the Bi∣shops of 1 Mans, 2 Angers, 3 Renues, 4 Nantes, 5 Cour∣nuaille, or Quimper, 6 Vannes, 7 St. Malo, 8 S. Brieu, 9 Treguier, 10 S. Pol de Leon, 11 Dol. VII. The Archbishop of Bourges: Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Clermont, 2 Limoges, 3 S. Flour, 4 le Puy, 5 Tulle. VIII. The Archbishop of Alby; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Castres, 2 Mende, 3 Rodez, 4 Caors, 5 Va∣bors. IX. The Archbishop of Bourdeux; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Poictiers, 2 Sainctes, 3 Angoulesme, 4 Pe∣rigueux, 5 Agen, 6 Condom, 7 Sarlat, 8 Rochelle, 9 Lu∣con. X. The Archbishop of Auch; Suffragans; the Bi∣shops of 1 Acqs, 2 Aire, 3 Bazas, 4 Bayonne, 5 Com∣minges, Linges, 6 Conserans, 7 Lectoure, 8 Mescar, 9 Ole∣ron, 10 Tarbes. XI. The Archbishop of Toulouse; Suffragans; the Bishops of 1 Pamieres, 2 Mirepoix, 3 Montauban, 4 La∣vaur, 5 S. Papoul, 6 Lombez, 7 Rieux. XII. The Archbishop of Narbonne; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Carcassone, 2 Alet, 3 Beziers, 4 Agde, 5 Lodeve, 6 Montpellier, 7 Nismes, 8 Ʋsetz, 9 S. Pons, and 10 Perpignan. XIII. The Archbishop of Arles, Prince of Salon, and Mont-Dragon; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Mar∣seilles, 2 Orange, 3 S. Paul des trois Chateaux, 4 & Tou∣lon. XIV. The Archbishop of Aix in Provence; Suffra∣gans, the Bishops of 1 Apt, 2 Riez, 3 Frejus, 4 Gap, 5 Sisteron. XV. The Archbishop of Vienne in Dauphine, Count and Primate; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Valence, 2 Die, 3 Grenoble, 4 Viviers; as also the Bishop of Ge∣neva, and the Bishop of Maurienne in Savoy. XVI. The Archbishop of Bezancon; Suffragans, the Bishop of Belley in Beugey, together with the Bishops of Basil and Lausanne in Switzerland. XVII. The Archbishop of Ambrun; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Digne, 2 Glandve, 3 Vence, 4 Senez, 5 Grace, and the Bishop of Nice in Savoy. XVIII. The Archbishop of Cambray in French-Flan∣ders; Suffragans, the Bishops of 1 Arras, 2 Tournay 3 S. Omar, 4 Namur. In the French Conquests are five other Bishops, who are Suffragans to Archbishops of other Nations, viz. The Bishop of Strasburg to the Archbishop of Mentz. The Bishops of Mets, Toul and Verdun, to the Arch∣bishop of Spires, and the Bishop of Helene in Rousillon, to the Archbishop of Tarragone in Spain. These Prelates enjoy very large Revenues and have under their Care above Thirty thousand Parishes, and a vast number of Monasteries, which are all very richly endowed. For the Propagation of Learning, there are Twen∣ty one Universities established in France, viz. At Paris Toulouze in Languedoc. Bourdeaux in Guienne. Poitiers in in Poictu. Orleans. Bourges in Berry. Anjers in Anjou. Caen in Normandy. Montpellier in Langued. Cahors in Quercy. Nantes in Bretaigne. Reims in Champaigne. Valence in Dauphine. Aix in Provence. At Avignon in the Coun∣ty of Avignon. Pont a Mauson in Lor∣raine. Perpignan in Rousillon. Douay in Flanders. Dole in the County of Burgundy. Friburg in Frisgau. Orange in that Princi∣pality. Arles, an Academy. SECT. VI. Of the Extents of the French Dominions, and the Acquisitions of the present King. GReat part of the present Dominions of this Monar∣chy, were formerly divided among many Princes. Normandy, Aquitain and Anjou, were for some time subject to the Kings of England. Bretaigne was sub∣ject to its own Dukes, till A. D. 1484. The Dukes of Burgundy were powerful Princes for many Ages, and Lords of great part of the Netherlands, besides the Burgundies, till A. D. 1476, Charles the Warlike, being kill'd in Battle by the Switzers, Lewis XI. Seized the Dutchy of Burgundy: But that Family enjoyed the Earldom till the present King took it from the King of Spain, A. D 1668. but being obliged to restore it at the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, he re-took it. A. 1674, and both the Burgundies are now reck∣oned part of France. Many little Principalities and Lordships were made Hereditary to certain Families, by Hugh Capet, which in time fell again to the Crown, as will be seen in the ensuing Description; And when the present King came to the Crown, he was in a manner the only Sovereign, very few of those Princes then remain∣ing, and those that were, in time he found means to deprive of their Royalties, and render himself abso∣lute, and sole Monarch of France. Besides which, he hath Encroached upon his Neigh∣bours on every side, and hath by Purchase and Craft, more than generous Fighting, made himself Master of the Province of Artois, great part of the Provinces of Flanders, Hainault and Luxemburgh, all the Duchies of Lorrain and Bar, and the other Dominions of that Prince, Alsatia, the County of Burgundy abovemen∣tioned, &c. But the Reader may be better informed herein by the following account of the Treaties of the Pyrenees, Aix la Chapelle and Nimeguen, viz.
By the Peace concluded in the Island of Pheasants, near the Pyrenean Mountains, A. D. 1659, these Towns were granted to the French King, viz. In Ar∣tois, Arras, Hesden, Bapaume, Bethune, Lilers, Lens, County of St. Pol, Terouane, and all the Bailiwicks and Castleries of Artois, except St. Omer, Aire, and their Dependencies; also Renty, if in the dependance of Aire, else not. In Flanders; Graveline, Pas, Fort St. Philip, with the Sluce, Hannuin, Bourburg, St. Ʋenant. In Hainault; Landrecy and Quesney, with all their Baili∣wicks and dependencies, Marienburg and Philipville, in Exchange for la Bassee and St. Winoxberg, Avenne. In Luxemburg; Thionville, Montmidy, and Damvilliers, the Provostships of Ivoy, Chavancy, Marville, Rocroy le Chatelet, and Linchamps: So much of the Counties of Rousillon, Conflent and Cardana, as lye on this side the Pyrenean; all the rest of those Counties, together with the Principality of Catalonia, being restored to the Spaniard. The upper and lower Alsatia; Suntgau, the County of Ferette and Brisac, with its Dependencies, were also granted to the French. The Duke of Lorrain by this Treaty was restored to his Dominions, except Mionize. But the French King prevail'd upon him to make a Donation of them to him at his Death; by the pretence whereof, when that Duke died, A. 1675, the French entred upon them, and kept out his Nephew, the late Duke of Lorrain. Afterwards at the Treaty of Nimeguen, at the instance of the Emperor, the Duchy of Lorrain was offer'd to be restored to him, but with condition, that the French King still keep the City of Nancy and its Jurisdiction, and also have four Roads cross his Country, of half a League in breadth from Nancy, viz. Into Alsace; to Vesout in the Franche Comte, to Metz, and to St. Dizier in Champaigne, together with the Sovereignty of all the Boroughs and Villages which lye in the said Roads of half a Leagu's breadth; as also the Provostship of Longui, and its Dependen∣cies, for which he was to exchange another Provost∣ship of like value; by which means the French re∣tain'd half Lorrain, besides all the Duchy of Barr, the County of Clermont, and other Dominions of that Prince. But these Conditions were look'd upon by the young Duke as too hard, especially since the French King had promis'd him his whole Country; so that after much time in endeavouring to obtain better Terms, the Peace was concluded without including him; and the French still possess the whole Country. By the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, or Aken, in the Duchy of Juliers in Germany, A. D. 1668. It was agreed, That the French King should enjoy the Fortress of Charleroy, the Towns of Binch, Aeth, Doway, Tournay, Oudenard, Lisle, Armentiers, Courtray, Bergues and Furnes, and the whole extent of their Territories, with the entire Sovereignty thereof. By the Peace concluded at Nimeguen with the King of Spain, A. 1678. the Franche Comte, or County of Burgundy, with all the Towns and Places thereon de∣pending, was granted to the French King; as also the Towns of Valenciennes and Bouchain, with their dependencies; the Town and County of Cambray, Air, St. Omer, Menin, Conde and Ypres, and their de∣pendencies. Warwick and Warneton on the Lys. Po∣peringhen, Bailleul, Mont Cassel, Bavay and Meubeuge, with their dependencies. And also the Town of Di∣nant. And by the same Treaty the French restored these Towns, viz. Charleroy, Ghent, Oudenard, Courtray, Binch, Aeth, St. Ghislain, Lewe, Limburg, and its Duchy; the Coun∣try of Waes, and all the dependencies of every of them in the Netherlands; and Puicerday in Cerdaigne, on the Frontiers of Catalonia, to the Spaniards. And to the Dutch, Maestricht. And by the Treaty with the Emperor at the same place, A. 1679. The Town and Citadel of Friburg in Brisgaw, with the Villages of Lehn, Mathausen and Kirkzart, and their Liberties, as also a Passage from Brisac to Fri∣burg, were granted to the French; and in return, Philipsburg was restored to the Bishop of Spire. Soon after this Peace, viz. A. 1680. the French took Strasburg, which they still hold, together with the greatest part of its Bishoprick. And A. 1684. they took the City of Luxemburg, and a great part of that Duchy. And now once more hath this Monarch for his Glo∣ry, kindled the flame of War in Europe, which he be∣gan by the Siege of Philipsburg in the Month of Sep∣tember, 1688, and took it on the first of November fol∣lowing. Since when his Armies have most barbarously Ravag'd and destroyed the Palatinate, took and de∣stroy'd the Cities of Hidelberg, Spires, and Wormes. And in the Netherlands they have taken the Cities of Mons and Nausur, and the Fortress of Charleroy: And in Savoy, Nissa, Susa, Montmellian, and Villa Franca. But the Grandeur of this haughty Monarch seems to be now past its Meridian, for many of the Princes of Europe Headed by his Sacred Majesty of Great Bri∣tain, are in Arms against him, by which (as they have hitherto bridled and stopped the furious course his Armies have been used to) it is not to be doubted but they will be able to bring him down, and force him to restore what he hath by Violence and Fraud Ravish'd from his Neighbours. The French have also Dominions in America; as Canada or New-France, upon the Continent; also Colo∣nies, in New-found-land, Martinico, St. Christophers, and other Islands, &c.
The Division of France. THis Kingdom is divided into Twelve Governments, Four of which lye to the North, Four in the middle, and Four to the South, viz. To the North, NORMANDY, PICARDY, he ISLE of FRANCE and CHAMPAIGNE. In the Middle BRETAIGNE, ORLEANNOIS, BURGUNDY and LYONNOIS. To the South, GUIENNE, LANGUEDOC, DAU∣PHINE and PROVENCE. The Sub-divisions whereof are as follows. viz. Nor∣mandy is di∣vided into 7 Dio∣cesses. Diocess of Rou∣en in 4 Counties Vexin-Normand Rouanois Caux Bray. Diocess of Lisieux Bayeux Coutance Auranches. Picar∣dy into nine Coun∣tries. Diocess of Seez Diocess Euvreux Amienois Ponthieu Vimeux Boulonnois Santerre Vermandois Tiarache Pays re-conquis The Isle of France into 10. Isle of France, Properly so calle. Brie Francoise Hurepois Gatinois Myntois Vexin Francois Beauvaisis Valois Soissonois Laonnois Cham∣paigne into 8 Coun∣tries. Champaigne proper Remois Perthois Rethelois Vallage Bassigni Senonois Brie Charpenoise Bre∣tagne into 2 parts. The Ʋpper into 5 bishop∣ricks. Rennes Nantes St. Malo Dol Brieux The Lower into 4. Treguier S. Paul de Leon Quimper corentim Vannes. The Islands of Ouessant Belle Isle. Orlea∣nois in¦to 14 Coun∣tries. Orleanois proper La Beauce Le Blaisois Le Perche Le Maine Anjou Poictou The Country of Aunis Angoumois Touraine Gatinois Berri Nivernois The Islands Bur∣gundy into 2. The Dutchy into 13 Coun∣tries. Dijonnois Autunois Chalonnois Mountainouns C. Auxois Auxerrois Charolois Briennois Macannois Bresse Bagey Bailliage of Gex Princip. of Dombes The County into 3. Bailliage of Milieu Amont Aval. Lionois into 6. Coun∣tries. Lionois proper Forets Beaujolois Bourbonnois Auvergne La Marche Guien∣ne into 18. Guienne proper Bazadois Agenois Condomois Xaintongue Perigord Limosin Quercy Rovergne Gascogne proper, or Armagnac Chalosse The Landes Terre de Labour The lower Navarre Bearn Bigorre Comminge Conserans Lan∣guedoc into 11. Toulousan Albigeois Lauragais County of Foix Rousillon Quarter of Narbonne Besiers Nimes Cevennes in 3. Vivarets Givauden Velay Dau∣phine into 9. Gresivaudan Diois Baronies Gapencois Ambrunois Brianconnois Vinnois Valentinois Tricastin Pro∣vence into 13 Di∣ocesses 1 Prin∣cipali∣ty, 1 County & 4 I∣slands. Diocess of Aix Riez Senez Digne Arles Marseille Toulon Frejus Grace Vence Glandeve Cisteron Apt County of Venaissin Principality of Orange Islands Of Marte∣gue in 4. Martegue prop. Pomegue Paulet Passon Steca∣cades into 5. Ribaudon Ribaudas Titan Porqueyroles Portecros Lerin into 2. S. Margaret S. Honorat. Chateau Dif.
CHAP. II. NORMANDY, Normania. THIS Province was under the Romans, part of the Lugdunensis in Gallia Celtica; and when reduc'd by the French, was part of their Kingdom called Neustria; to which also Picardy, Champaigne, and part of the Belgium belonged. But this part was ravished from them by some of those Northern People, that for many years infested all the Coasts hereabouts, and in the Reign of Charles the Simple, forced him to grant it to them: after which it was called NORMANDY, and Govern'd by its own Dukes descending from Rollo, who were powerful Princes, and often main∣tained Wars with the Kings of France. Of these William, sirnamed the Bastard, invaded England, upon a right he pretended to that Crown after the death of Edward the Confessor; and by his Valour defeated Harold who had Usurped the Crown; and by his prudent management obtained the Government, and Reigned Twenty years King of England. Afterwards this Province was part of the English Dominions for several Ages, the History whereof is too long for this place. At present it is one of the most Important Governments of France, affording a large Revenue to the Prince by reason of its situation on the Sea-coasts, and the fruitfulness of its Soil It is bounded on the North and West by the Bri∣tish Chanel, on the East by the Isle of France, and on the South by Perce and Maine, being extended from East to West for the space of about 160 Miles, viz. from Aumal to the Coasts of Coutantin; and about 70 Miles from South to North. The Country a∣bounds in good Pastures, and is extreamly fertile in Corn and Flax and divers sorts of Fruits, affording great quantities of Canvass, Cyder, and Beer, but little Wine. There are also Mines of Iron, together with some of Copper, and other Metals. Moreover, a considerable Traffick is established in these parts, for Corn, Timber, Coal, Hay, Cattle, and Herbs pro∣per for Dying, as Madder, Woad, &c. Within the Territories of this Government are contained 100 Towns, 150 large Burghs, and 120 Forests; as also, one Archbishoprick, 16 Suffragan Bishopricks, one University, and one Court of Parliament. It is wa∣ter'd with 12 principal Rivers, viz. the Seine, Eure, Bresle, Touque, Dive, Orne, Vire, Selune, See, Soule, Ouve, and Eu. Normandy is usually divided into the Upper and Lower, the former comprehending four Bailliages, viz. those of Rouen, Eureux, Caux, and Gisori. And the lower three, namely, those of Caen, Alensn, and Coutance. But we shall distinguish this Province into the seven Diocesses, which are of Rouen, Lysieux, Bay∣eux, Coutance, Auranches, Seez, and Eureux. The four first are situated on the Coasts of the English Chanel, in passing from East to West; the three other lie to the South of these, and are seen in returning from West to East; according to the order of the ensuing Table. The Diocess of Rouen Arch∣bishoprick divi∣ded into four Countries, viz. those of Vexin Normand on the Banks of the Seine, which contains, Rouen Cap. Gisors, Pont de l'Arche. Roumois. Caux. Bray. The Diocess of Lysieux, Bish. Bayeux, B. Coutance, B. Auranche, B. Seez, B. Eureux, B. ROƲEN or ROAN, Rotomagus aut Rothomagus, the Metropolis of the Province, and Seat of an Arch∣bishop, as also of a Court of Parliament, is seated on the North-side of the River Seine, in a Valley en∣viron'd with Hills and covered with Woods. It is a very considerable City, both on the account of the Wealth of its Inhabitants and its Largeness, being ex∣tended for the space of seven Miles in compass. The Eastern-side is water'd with divers Rivulets, which passing through the Town cleanse the Streets, and after having turn'd a great number of Water-Mills fall in∣to the Seine: Over that River was erected a most stately Stone-bridge consisting of 13 Arches, but it is now ruined, and another of Boats of very artificial Structure, built near it, reaching 270 Paces in length; it rises with the Tide and is paved like a Street. The City is defended with an old Castle on the Seine, but that which stood on the adjacent Hill of St. Ca∣therine, is now utterly ruin'd. It hath also good Walls (in which are 16 Gates) large Ditches, Bulwarks, and Rampiers; It is inlarged with six very fair Sub∣urbs, and hath in it 13 Market-places, 136 Foun∣tains and 35 Parish-Churches, and adorn'd with many noble Piles of Building; and, among others, the Ca∣thedral Church, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, the Quire whereof is lined round about with Copper: It hath three Towers of a vast height, particularly that of Reuve, and that of the Pyramid; the Spire of which Steeple only (being made of Wood and co∣vered with gilt Lead) hath 200 Steps, and the whole Edifice above 600. The great Bell in it, called George d'Amboise, is 13 foot high, and weighs 40000 pounds: On the great Gate is a Triumphal Arch in Honour of King Henry IV. with Emblems of his Conquest over the Holy League: The Body of the Church is supported by 21 Pillars, in which, and in the Chapel, are to be seen the magnificent Tombs of Cardinal d'Amboise, and of the ancient Dukes and Archbishops; as also, the Monument of John Duke of Bedford, who was Regent of France under our King Henry VI. The other remarkable Buildings are, the Convent of the Cordeliers, the Church of the Jesuits, the old Palace or Castle, the Church and Abby of St. Ouen, and the Palace of the Parliament, which are very beautiful Structures, Also, the Archbishop's Palace, called Gaillon, is a fair Building, adorn'd with fine Paintings, and pleasant Gardens. Rouen hath suffered many Calamities and Revolu∣tions, it hath been almost entirely burnt at 13 or 14 several times; was taken by the Normans, A.C. 841. the English made themselves Masters thereof in 1418. and in 1449. it was surrender'd to the French King Charles VII. Afterwards it was storm'd and taken by the French Protestants, and retaken and pillaged under Charles IX. Anno. 1562. Anthony of Bourbon,
King of Navarre, received a mortal Wound before it, but his Son Henry IV. took it in 1594. King Willi∣am I. sirnamed the Conqueror died here. It is di∣stant 28 Miles from Eureux, to the North; 34 from Diepe to the South; near 40 from Beauvois to the West; 55 from Amiens to the South-west, 64 from Paris to the North-west, and 52 from Havre de Grace. Pont de L'arche, Pons Arcos, or Pons Arcuensis, is a strong place seated a little below the confluence of the Rivers Seine and the Eure, and 10 Miles above Rouen to the South toward Eureux. It is strengthened with a Castle, and hath a fair Stone-bridge over the Seine built by King Charles the Bald. This was the first Town that surrender'd it self to Henry IV. after his Accession to the Crown, in 1589. It is a place of Importance, and hath a particular Governor. Gisors, Gisirium, Caesortium, aut Coesorotium, stands on the Banks of the River Este, which divides Nor∣mandy from Picardy, and is fenced with a Fort now half ruin'd; it is the capital of a Bailiage, and is di∣stant 40 Miles from Paris to the North-west, 28 from Rouen, 17 from Mante to the North, and 13 from Beauvais to the South-west. In the Territory of ROƲMOIS are situated some small Towns and Villages, particularly Quille∣beuf, at the Mouth of the River Seine, and 30 Miles from Rouen to the West, and Montfort; but neither of these places are very considerable. The Country of Canx, lies to the North part of the Vexin Normand, taking up the Northern and Western parts of Normandy on the North side of the Seine, and including a Bailliage of Parliament, toge∣ther with these principal Towns, viz. Diepe. Capital. Havre de Grace. Caudebec. St. Valery. Eu. Aumale. DIEPE, Deppa, and Depa, is a noted Sea-port Town on the Shore of the British Sea, at the distance of 35 Miles from Rouen to the North, and 52 from Havre de Grace to the East. It is seated at the foot of the Mountains, and at the Mouth of the River Arques, which falling into the Sea makes the Haven; it is fortified with Bulwarks to the Sea, with a For∣tress at the Suburb called Pollet, and a Castle; which, together with the craggy Mountains that lie on the South make it a place of good strength; and as such it was chosen by King Henry IV. for his Head Quar∣ters when he was opposed by the League at his Ac∣cession to the Crown. The Town is reasonably large and well built, and is Inhabited by Sea-faring Men, who are reckon'd very expert in Maritime Affairs: Mechanicks, that make curious Works in Ivory, and Merchants, who make considerable Traffick to foreign Parts, especially Newfoundland in America. Its Inha∣bitants were mostly Protestants till the late Persecuti∣ons. The Haven is narrow but very long, and will receive Ships of great Burthen; but, by reason of its straitness, is of difficult access. This Town hath been often taken and retaken in the Wars between the French and English. And in the last year 1694. was almost totally destroyed by the Bombs that were shot into it from the English Fleet commanded by the Lord Berkeley HAVRE de GRACE, Portus Gratiae, is a strong Sea-port Town at the Mouth of the Seine between Harfleur and Fescamp, 50 Miles below Rouen to the West, 40 from Caen to the East, and 20 from Lisieux to the North. It is a pleasant and well-built Town, and a place of good Trade, several Merchants inha∣biting here that Trade to Newfoundland and other places. Francis I. and Henry II. fortified this Town to defend it from the Incursions of the English; to which Lewis XIII. added a Citadel, which is flanked with four Royal Bastions. In the Reign of Charles IX. it was seized by the Protestants, and by them deli∣vered over to Queen Elizabeth in 1562. for the Assi∣stance she gave them. But the next year it was vi∣gorously besieged by the French, and as couragiously defended by the English under the Earl of Warwick; but by reason of a Pestilence in the Town, they were forced to surrender on the 17th of July 1563. and return home. This Town also was almost wholly destroyed by the Fire of the English Bombs the same year, 1694. Harfleur, a small Sea-port Town, stands at the mouth of the Seine, five Miles from Havre de Grace to the East. It was once a considerable Port, but Havre de Grace being found more convenient, this is now neglected. Caudebec, Caledobecum, is seated near the Bar or Mouth of the Seine, where that River meets the Sea-water, 24 Miles below Rouen toward Havre de Grace. It is remarkable on the account of its divers sorts of Manufactures, especially Hats, which bear the name of the place, and are much esteem'd in England and elsewhere. EƲ, Auga seu Augum & Eusium, is seated in the midst of pleasant Meadows, and on the banks of the River Brele which separates Normandy from Picardy, between Diepe and S. Valery, at the distance of one League from the Sea, 10 Miles from Diepe to the East, and 20 from Abbeville to the West. It is a∣dorned with a stately Castle, an Abbey and a College of Jesuits; it gives Title to a Count and Peer of France, which hath been enjoy'd by several illustrious Families. S. Valery, Fanum sancti Valeri, stands on the Coasts of the British Sea, between Soreville and Veuleres, 35 Miles from Rouen to the North, and 16 from Diepe to the West. Aumale, Albamala, called Albemarle by the English, stands near the Spring-head of the River Russine in the Lower Normandy, and enjoys the Titles of a County and Dutchy: It is distant 36 Miles from Rouen to the N. E. 20 from Abbeville to the South, and 23 from Beauvais to the North. Near Caudebec stands the Village Yvetot, which hath the Title of a Principality, and as some say, formerly a Kingdom. Longueville 10 Miles South from Diepe, and Estoutville 15 Miles from Longueville give the Ti∣tles of Dukes to two Peers of France, but otherwise not considerable. The County of BRAY is extended on the right side of the River Seine, and contains these Towns, viz. Gournay, Cap. Fleri. La Ferte, &c. GOƲRNAY, Gornacum, is a small Town on the River Epte, distant 12 Miles from Gisors, and three from Neuf-Marche to the North. The Diocess of LYSIEƲX lies between those of Rouen, Eureux, and Seez, and the Ocean. Lisieux, Bish. Cap. Honfleur, Pont-l' Eveque. Bernay, &c. LYSIEƲX, Lexovium, aut Noviomagus Lexovi∣orum, a fair and large City, being the See of a Pre∣late Suffragan to the Archbishop of Rouen, is situated in a very beautiful Country in the Upper Normandy, and on the Banks of the River Lizon, at the distance of 15 Miles from the Coasts of the British Chanel to the South, 46 from Rouen to the West, and 35 from
Caen to the East. The Cathedral Church is dedi∣cated to St. Peter. This See is of ancient Foundation, for Lotharius Bishop of Lysieux is found among the Bishops that assisted at the first Council of Orleans, held A. D. 511 as did also Theobald at the Third Council of Orleans, in A. D. 538. Henfleur, Honflorium, stands on the Coasts of the British Sea, at the Mouth of the River Seine, over-against Harfleur, from whence it is distant 8 miles to the South, as also 8 from Havre de Grace. Pont L'eveque, Pons Episcopi, is Watered by the small River of Lezon, 8 miles below Lysieux to the North, toward Havre de Grace, and 5 from the Sea. This Town is more especially famous for a sort of excellent Cheese made in it. Berna, Bernascum, is built on the side of the Rivu∣let of Carentonne, almost in the midst, between Ev∣reux to the East, and Lisieux to the West, at the di∣stance of 25 miles from both these Towns, and 26 from Caudebec to the South. The Diocess of BAYEƲX, lyes between the Ocean and those of Coutance, Sees and Lisieux, inclu∣ding these chief Towns, viz. Bayeux Bish. Cap. Caen. Vire. Torigni, &c. BAYEƲX Baiocae, Baiocum and Baiocensis Ʋrbs, olim Biducassel, Biducassum and Juliobona, is Seated on the River Aure, which a little below is swallow'd up under Ground. It is distant 17 miles from Caen to the West, 35 from Coutance to the N. E. and but 5 from the Shore of the British Sea to the South. It is a very ancient City dignified with the Title of a County, Bailiage, and Episcopal See; and its Bishop presides in the General Assemblies of the Clergy of the Province, during the Absence of the Arch∣bishop of Rouen. The Cathedral Church Dedica∣ted to the Virgin Mary, is extreamly Magnificent, and Beautiful with two high Spire-Steeples, besides a stately Tower. The City is divided into the Up∣per, and the Lower or the Suburbs of St. John; whereto are joyned those of St, George and St. Patrick. It hath been often Pillag'd and Ruin'd in the X. and XI. Centuries, by the Incursions of the Normans, and other barbarous Nations. CAEN, Cadmus, aut Cadomum, is a large and well built City in the lower Normandy, having re∣ceived its Name (according to the Opinion of some Authors) from Caius Caesar, as the Latin word Ca∣domus, a Cai Domus seems to import, in regard this Emperor resided here for some time, whilst he made preparations to pass into England. It is situated on the River Orne, and divided by its streams into the upper and lower Towns, between which there is a Communication, by the means of the Bridges of St. James and St. Petr, on the latter whereof is erected a stately Town-House, adorn'd with four large Tow∣ers. The upper Town is fenced with a Castle built on a Rock, very well fortified; the lower altoge∣ther incompassed with Water. It is a place of good Trade, Boats of good burden being able to come up from the Sea to the Bridge of St. James, King Charles VII. Founded an University here, A D. 1430, or 1431 which is become Famous; also a Mint-Office about the same time. An Academy of Ingenious Men hath been Establish'd about twenty five years ago. It is believed that the second Council which Maurice Arch∣bishop of Rouen Celebrated, A. D. 1063, was held at Caen, in the Presence of William, Surnamed the Con∣querour, King of England, and Duke of Normandy, who was interr'd in the Abby of St. Stephen in this City, which he had founded. This City is distant 74 Miles from Roan to the West, 30 from Lisieux, and 15 from Bayeux to the East. Vire, Vira, is a very neat Town, Founded on the Banks of a small River of the same Name, about 33 Miles from Caen to the South-West, somewhat less from Coutance to the East, and as many from the Coast of the British Sea to the South. Torigny, Toriniacum, Tauriniacum, is a small Town near the same River of Vire, being distant 15 Miles from that Town to the North, and 33 from Coutance to the East. The Diocess of COƲTANCE lies in the lower Normandy, between Bayeux, Auranches, and the Western Ocean. The Principal Towns whereof are these, viz. Coutance Bish. Cap. S. Lo. Granville. Carentain. Barfleur. Cherbourg. Valogne. COƲTANCE, or Constance, Castra Constantia, aut Casedae, the Metropolis of the Country called from thence Le Contantin, is a Bailiage, a Presidial, and the See of a Bishop Suffragan to Roan, Seated on the River Burd, at the distance of 7 miles from the Sea over against the Isle Jersey to the East; 52 miles from Caen to the West, and 22 from Auranches to the North. The Aqueducts found in the Adjacent Ter∣ritories of this City are a sufficient mark of its An∣tiquity; and the pleasant Meadows watered with a great number of Brooks, with which it is encom∣passed, render its Situation very delightful. It is pretty large and Populous, and adorn'd with many stately Edifices, particularly the Cathedral Church, the Churches of St. Peter and of St. Nicholas, divers Mo∣nasteries, a Colledge Founded by John Michael, a Canon of this Diocess, &c. King Lewis XI. caused the Walls of Coutance to be demolish'd, because the Inhabitants had declared in favour of Prince Charles his Brother; and under the same Reign it was ex∣posed to the Incursions of the Bretons. It suffered much likewise during the English Wars, and was taken by the French Protestants, A. D. 1562. Granville, Grandivilla, aut Magnavilla, a good Sea∣port, stands partly on a Rock, partly in a plain, on the Coasts of the British Chanel, 17 miles S. from from the Island of Jersey; as also 16 from Coutance to the South, 16 from Auranches to N. W, and 13 from Mont St. Michael to the North. Carentan, Carentonium is built in a Marsny Ground on the side of the River Ouve, where it receives the Carentan or Carente, being distant 25 miles from Bay∣eux, to the W. 20 from Coutance to the S. and only 3 from the Sea; insomuch that Vessels of the largest size arrive there at high Tides. It hath large Su∣burbs, a strong Castle, and firm Walls, and environ∣ed with Ditches full of Water. This Town bears the Title of a County, and hath been subject to divers revolutions in the preceeding Age. Cherbourg, Caroburgus, aut Caesaris Burgus, is seated on the Sea-coasts between the Cape La Hogue and Harfleur, and hath a very Capacious Harbour, at the distance of 32 miles from Coutance to the N. and 24 from Carentan to the N. W. In this place was formerly made admirable Glass, which for clear∣ness and beauty even excels that of Venice; but the Work-houses have been lately remov'd for certain reasons of State, to Auxerre in Burgundy, and these Glasses are polish'd in the Fauxbourg St. Antoine at Paris. The Town of Cherburgh was the last of the
Province that remained to the English, and fell into the Hands of the French under Charles VII. in 1453 It is very strong by reason of its Situation, (the Sea flowing almost round it every Tide,) and its Forti∣fications lately erected. Valognes, Valoniae, olim Alaune, is a small Town on the River Ovue, in the Country of Coutantin, being distant 10 miles from the Coasts of the British Sea, 14 from Cherbourg to the East, and 30 from Coutance to the North. Barfleur, a small Town on the Sea-shoar, 10 miles from Valognes to the North. It was former∣ly the Landing-place of our Kings that were Masters of that Province. And hath of late been made known by a very signal Victory the English Fleet, commanded by Admiral Russel, obtained over that of France, Commanded by Tourville, May 1692. LA HOGƲE, a small Sea-Town on the North-west point of Normandy, thence called Cape la Ho∣gue, which hath been made notable to Posterity by the bravery of the English Seamen, who after the above mentioned Victory in 1692, did attack and burn the French Admiral, call'd the Royal Sun, (a very Glo∣rious and large Ship) and twelve more of their best and largest Men of War; which had been run a∣ground here to avoid the English Fleet, and the Can∣on carried a shoar and planted upon the plat-forms for their defence; notwithstanding which, the English un∣der Sir Ralph Delaval, did in their Boats burn them all as abovesaid. This Cape is about 15 miles North from Cherbourg. The Diocess of AƲRANCHES lyes between those of Coutance, Bayeux and Seez, in the most West∣ern and Southern parts of the lower Normandy. Its most remarkable Towns are these. Auranches Bish. Cap. Mont St. Michael. Mortain. Pont Orson. AƲRANCHES, Abrincae, olim Legedia and In∣gena Abrincataurum, stands upon a Hill on the side of the River See, which a little below falls into the Sea, being distant 22 miles from Coutance to the South, 37 from St. Malo to the East, and 47 from Bayeux to the S. W. It is a place of very great Anti∣quity, and (as it is supposed) was inhabited by the Ambiliates, a People mentioned by Caesar in his Com∣mentaries. Its extent is not very large, but it is however a Bailiwick and Vicounty, and hath in it besides the Cathedral, several Parish-Churches and Monasteries. It is well Fortified with a strong Ca∣stle and other Bulwarks. Theodia and Albert, Car∣dinals and Legates of the See of Rome, held a Coun∣cil or Assembly in this City, by the special Order of Pope Alexander III. to take information concern∣ing the Murderes of Thomas a Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury; and Henry II. King of England was there∣upon oblig'd to clear himself by an Oath from the Accusations laid to his charge. The Bishoprick was erected by Clovis the Great, Mont St. Michael, Mons Sancti Michaelis in Periculo Maris, is a large Town, together with a famous Abby, defended by a strong Castle, built at the foot of a Rock, which was heretofore a Mountain en∣compassed with Forests, with the Seat of certain Hermits. This Rock stands in the midst of a large sandy Shoar, or Strand, which is cover'd with the Sea-water at high tide. There goes a Fabulous Sto∣ry, that St. Michael the Arch-Angel appeared A. D. 708 to Albert Bishop of Auranche, admonishing him to cause a Church to be erected on the top of this Rock, and Consecrated to his Name, whose Orders were soon put in execution by the Reverend Prelate, and Augustin Bishop of the same Diocess in the begin∣ing of the VIII. Century, constituted Canons to Of∣ficiate therein; afterward, viz. in 966 Richard I. Duke of Normandy, founded an Abby of the Benedictine Order; and his Son Richard the II. Surnamed the Undaunted, finished the Church in 1026. This place is famous for the frequent resort of Pilgrims, and on the account of the great quantities of Salt extracted out of the Sands that are impregnated with Sea-water. Mortain, Moritanium, is seated near the River Ardee, on the Frontiers of the Province of Maine, being about 7 miles distant from thence, and 14 from Vire to the South. This Town is the seat of a Bai∣liff, and enjoys the title of a County or Earldom, which Henry I. King of England and Duke of Nor∣mandy, granted to his Nephew Stephen of Blois, who obtain'd also that of Bolen, by his Marriage with Maud the Daughter of Eustace Earl of Bolen, and was afterwards King of England. Pont-Orson, Pons Ʋrsonis, Stands on the Fron∣tiers of Bretaigne, near the mouth of the River Covesnon, which a little below dischargeth it self in∣to the Sea, almost in the mid-way between Auranches to the East and Dol to the West, at the distance of about 15 miles from both, and 6 from Mount St. Michael. The Diocess of SEES is extended between those of Auranches, Bayeux and Lisieux; toward the Southern part of Normandy, and contains these principal Towns, viz. Seez Bish. Cap. Alenson. Falaize. Argentan. SEEZ, Sagium, olim Sessui and Vagoricum Sessu∣orum, is seated on the River Orne, near its Source, and but an ordinary built City, although dignified with the title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropo∣litan of Roan, which (as some Authors say) was translated hither from Oximum or Hiesmes, an adja∣cent Town of great Antiquity. Seex is distant 64 miles from Roan to the S. W. 37 from Lisieux to the S. 70 from Auranches to the E. and 12 from the Fron∣tiers of Mayne. Alencon, Alencomium, aut Alentia, is pleasantly seat∣ed on the River Sarte, in a fruitful plain between the Forests of Escours and Perseigne, at the distance of 13 miles from Seez to the S. and 66 from Auranches to the E. It is a very fair and large City, having long since enjoyed the title of an Earldom, which was e∣rected into a Duchy by Charles VI. 1414. and hath been often conferr'd on the Royal Progeny of France. In the principal Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, are to be seen the Tombs of the Dukes of Alenson, and not far from thence a stately Bridge erected over the Sarte, where it intermixeth its Waters with those of the Briane, which forms a small Island in the Town, whereon stands the Convent of St. Claire. This City hath been often taken by different Parties, and suffered much damage during the Civil Wars of France. Falaise, Falesia, aut Falesa, a small Town of the Lower Normandy, took its Name from the Rocks that environ it, and is situated on the little River Anne, at the distance of 18 miles from Caen to the South, and 34 from Seez to the North-West. The first Dukes of Normandy chose it for their Palace in the time of Peace, and Fortress during the Wars. Here is a strong Castle built upon a Rock. It was the last place which the English subdued in this Province,
and was by them exceedingly well fortified; and the last in like manner that surrendred to Charles VII. in 1430. The Suburbs called La Guibray, are fa∣mous for the Fairs that have been held there in the month of August, ever since the Reign of William the Conqueror. The Town is encompassed with large Motes and two Ponds, one of which can never be dried up; and not far from thence stands Mount Arienes, whence Birds of Prey are often taken, and sometimes Eagles. Argentan, Argentomum, Argentanum, Argentomacum, aut Argentomagum, is a very neat Town on the River Orne, distant about 10 miles from Falaise to the S. E. 12 from Seez to N. W. and 20 from Alenson to the North. The Diocess of EƲREƲX lies between those of Seez, Rouen, and Lisieux, towards the Southern and Western parts of Normandy. The most considerable Towns whereof are these, viz. Evreux, Bish. Cap. Beaumont le Roger, Bretueil, Bugles, Vernon. EVREƲX, Ebroicum, olim Ebroicae, and Medio∣lanum, Eburovisum, is seated in a very fertil Plain in the upper Normandy, and on the side of the Rivulet Iton, which a little below falls into the Eure, being distant 30 miles from Roan to the S. 48 from Seez to the E. and 54 from Paris to the W. It is a very ancient City; and an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Rouen, hath been long since establish'd therein; besides a Bailliage and a Court called Presidial. It contains a great number of Churches and Monasteries, more especially the Cathedral, adorned with 12 large Towers, and the Abbies of St. Thurin and St. Saviour. This City hath been formerly subject to the Juris∣diction of its own Counts or Earls, Princes of the Royal Blood, and other Potent Lords, from whom were descended Walter and Robert D'Evreux, Earls of Essex in England, &c. Beaumont Le Roger, Bellomontium Rogerii, stands on a rising-ground, 15 miles from Evreux to the West towards Lysieux, and is water'd by the River Rille. This Town bears the Title of a County or Earl∣dom, and hath been Govern'd by very Noble Lords, of whom Earl Roger gave his name to it, and caus'd it to be enlarged and beautified with a great many fair buildings; since when it hath been well Forti∣fied. Bretueil, Bretolium and Britolium, is extended a∣long the Banks of the River Iton, about 12 miles from Evreux to the South-west. Henry II. King of England, and Duke of Normandy, gave this Town to Robert de Montfort; and his Sister Amicia sold it to the French King Philip the August, A. D. 1210. Afterward it devolv'd as an Inheritance on Charles King of Navarre, who exchang'd it for some other Possessions with Charles VII. in 1416. Vernon, Vernonium, and Verno, is water'd by the River Seyne, over which is erected a Stone-bridge now half demolish'd; distant 26 miles from Roan to the South, and 16 from Evreux to the North-east. For the Government of this Province the King ap∣points a Governor or Commander in general, who is at present the Duke de Montauzier, and under him, two Lieutenant-Generals; besides which, he hath a Lieutenant in every one of the seven Bailiwicks, and particular Governors in all the chief Towns, viz. In Roan, Pont de l'Arche, Diep and the Fort of Pollet, Fecan, Honfleur, Pont-Eveque, Caen, Cherbourg, Caren∣tan and the Bridge Pouvre, Coutance, Granville, Mont St. Michael, Falaise, Argentan, Alencon, Havre de Grace, Montiervillers and Horfleur. A Chronological TABLE, shewing the Suc∣cession of the Dukes of Normandy. Began their Reigns, A. D. reig. Y's. 1 ROllo, called also Robert I. 912 5 2 William, Surnamed Longsword. 917 26 3 Richard I. the Old or void of Fear. 943 53 or 56 4 Richard II. the Ʋndaunted. 996 about 30 5 Richard III. 1026 2 6 Robert II. 1028 7 7 William the Conqueror, K. of Engl. 1035 52 8 Robert III. 1087 20 9 William II. Rufus, King of England, Slain in 1100   10 Henry I. King of England. 1507 28 11 Stephen King of England. 1135   Maud of England, died in 1167   Geoffry V. Earl of Anjou, the Hus∣band of Maud.     12 Henry II. King of England. 1154 38 Henry the younger, Surnamed Courtmantle.     1161   Died before his Father. 1183   13 Richard IV. Sur-named Coeur de Lyon. 1189 10 14 John King of England, who was Dis∣possessed of Normandy by Philip II. King of France, in 1202   And died in 1216   After this, Normandy was United to the Crown of France, and the Title of it was given to 15 John of Valois, afterwards King of France, who held it from 1332 23 And to     16 Charles V. of France in the Life of his Father. 1355   But these enjoy'd the Title only, for it was not alie∣nated till it was regained by the English under our Valiant King Henry V. A. D. 1420, which was 218 years after it was Seized by the French; but the English held it not long, for by reason of our unhappy Divisions at home in the unfortu∣nate Reign of Henry VI. this Province was again taken by the French, 30 years after we had re∣gain'd it. Afterwards the Title of Duke of Normandy, was given to 17 Charles, Son of Charles VII. and Brother to Lewis XI. in Anno 1464   But he parted with it quickly after for that of Guienne; and ever since it hath been no other than a Province of France.
CHAP. III. PICARDY, Picardia. PICARDY, was part of the ancient Gallia Bel∣gica, and Inhabited by Suessiones, &c. But the Ori∣ginal of its present Name although Modern, is diffi∣cult to find out; there is little reason to believe that it was deriv'd from Certain Picards of Bohemia, who were declared Hereticks; nor from a Greek word, the signification whereof is conformable to the hasty and pettish Humour of the Inhabitants. This Province is the most Northern of all France, and is extended along the Banks of the British Cha∣nel from Calis in a narrow tract of Land to the River Brele, which separates it from Normandy; from thence being much wider, it goes directly West for near 110 miles, where it is bounded by the Nor∣thern part of Champaign. Its whole length may be reckon'd 140 miles, for from Calais to Abbeville is about 54 miles, and from thence to the borders of Champaign is about 90 miles, but then the breadth is not answerable, for in the broadest part it is not a∣bove 35 miles, and in the Bolonneis not above 15 miles broad. On the South it is bounded by the Isle of France, and on the North by Artois and Hay∣nault. Picardy is esteem'd one of the most considerable Provinces of the Kingdom, and is remarkable on ac∣count of the most ancient Nobility of the Realm, who derive their Original from thence, besides a great number of valiant Soldiers and experienc'd Commanders; the People are very Generous, Cour∣teous, Civil and Courageous, yet somewhat too much enclined to Anger and Voluptuousness. The Soil is extreamly fertil in Corn and divers sorts of Fruits, which hath given occasion to a saying among the French, that Picardy is the Granary and Magazine of Paris; but this Country affords very little Wine. Its principal River is the Oise, which receives into its Chanel the Streams of the Serre, the Somme, the Au∣thie and the Canche. The two former of these flow toward the East, and the three others towards the West, until they discharge themselves into the British Chan∣nel, near the Territories of Calan. It is observed, that the Waters of the Somme never freez nor diminish, as do those of the other neighbouring Rivers. For the administration of Justice, here are many Bailiages, Presidials, and other Courts of Judicature that depend on the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Paris. The Towns are Govern'd by Mayors and Sheriffs; besides the General Governor, there are 18 particular ones. The Bishopricks in Picardy are Four, which are subject to the Metropolitan See of Rheims. This Province was never alienated from the Demesns of the Crown, and is usually divided into three Parts, viz. The Ʋpper-Picardy, the Middle, and the Lower, according to the following Table. Picardy is divided into 3 Parts. The Ʋpper on the Oise in 3. The Dutchy of Tierache. Laonnois Soissonnois These two last are an∣nexed to the Isle of France. The Middle on the Som∣me, in 3. Vermandois. The Country of Santerre, or Sang∣ters. Amienois. The Lower on the Sea-coasts, in 3. Ponthieu. Boulonnois. The recover'd Countries. The Dutchy of TIERACHE, Tieracseia, is the most Eastern part of Picardy, and lies between Hai∣nault, Champagne, Vermadois and Laonnois, and in∣cludes within its Precincts, these remarkable Towns, viz. Guise, Capital, La Fere, Vervins, Marle, La Capelle. Ribermont, Moncornet, Aubenton. Guise, Guisia, and Guisium Castrum, is situated on the River Oise, towards the Confines of Hainault, it is well Fortified with a Castle and other strong Ram∣parts, and was strong enough to oppose the Spaniards, who besieged it in the year 1650. It is distant 80 miles from Paris, 20 from Laon to the North, 48 from A∣miens to the East, and 25 from Cambray to the South-east. This Town at first bore the Title of an Earldom only, enjoyed by the younger House of Lorrain; till A. 1528. Claude the younger Son of Rene, Duke of Lorrain, was created Duke of Guise, by Francis I. whose Grandson, Henry D. of Guise, made him self Head of the Holy League, which under the pretence of Religion and extirpation of Heresie, as they call'd Protestancy, fomented Sedition, and at length took up Arms and maintained a Rebellion against Henry III. and Henry IV. making France a Scene of War and bloodshed for many years; till at last Henry IV. by his Victorious Arms, brought them to submissions, and restored the Peace of his Country. Fere, Fara, is situated also on the Oise, near the borders of the Isle of France, at the distance of 20 miles from Guise to the South, and 15 from Laon to the West. It is a strong place seated in a marshy Ground, and defended by a strong Castle, which stands between the two Suburbs of St. Firmin and the Virgin Mary, and deep Trenches full of Water, which renders the place almost Inaccessible; by which means it hath been able to resist divers Sieges. How∣ever the Spaniards made themselves Masters of it du∣ring the Civil Wars of France in the end of the XVI Century. But Henry IV. regain'd it in the month of May, 1597.
Vervins, Vervineum, stands on the banks of the Ri∣vulet Serre, in the midst between Capelle to the North, and Marle to the South, at the distance of 8 miles from both these Towns; as many from the Frontiers of Champagne to the West, and 15 miles from Gause to the East. This Town is more especially famous for a Treaty of Peace concluded therein between Henry IV. King of France, and Philip II. King of Spain, on the 2d day of May, 1598. La Capelle, is a Fortress near the Confines of Hay∣nault, and is distant about three miles from the Oise, 15 miles from Landrechies to the South-east, and 15 from Guise to the North-east. It was built in the last Age, on purpose to restrain the Incursions of the Flemings, and hath been often taken and re-taken by the contending Parties. The Countries of Laonnois and Soissnnois, being taken from Picardy, and made part of the Isle of France, an account shall be given of them in the De∣scription of that Province. The Country of VERMANDOIS, Ager Ve∣romanduensis, lies between that of Tierach to the East, Santerre to the West, Cambresis to the North, and the Isle of France to the South, containing these chief Towns, viz. St. Quentin, Cap. Ham, La Castelet, Beaurevoir, Bohaim. St. QƲINTIN, Quintinopolis, aut Fanum Quin∣tini, is seated on the rising Ground, near the Source of the Somme, having the River on one side, and a steep Valley on the other, 15 miles from Guise to the West, 15 from Peronne to the East, 15 from La Fere to the North, and 20 from Cambray to the South. It sprang up out of the Ruins of Augusta Veromanduorum, or Vermand, a small Village near it, and is now a consi∣derable City, being very Populous, and hath divers sorts of Manufactures, especially Linnen Cloth, made in it. The Collegiate Church of St. Quentin, is a noble pile of Building; there are also other fair and well-built Churches, and a great number of Monasteries. This Town being besieged by the Spaniards, in 1557, the Constable Montmorancy came to its Relief, and fought a fatal Battle with the Spaniards, wherein the Constable was taken Prisoner, together with the Dukes of Montpensier and Longueville, the Marshal de St. Andre, 10 Knights of the Order, and 300 Gentle∣men; besides 600 Gentlemen and 3000 private Sol∣diers killed. Upon which the City was taken, but restored two years after at the Peace concluded at Chacean-Cambresis, a Town near the Frontiers of Hay∣nault. Ham, Hamum, is situated in a Plain, having the River on one side of it, and a Marsh on the other, and stands almost in the midst between Peronne to the North, and Noyon to the South, 12 miles from St. Quentin to the West. Here is a Citadel which was built by order of Lewes of Luxemburg, or Con∣stable de St. Paul, A. D. 1470. This Town was taken by the Spaniards in 1595, after the Battle of St. Quen∣tin; but the French took it again by Storm, and put the whole Garison to the Sword. SANTERRE, or Sangers, Ager Saneteriensis, aut Sanguitersa, is extended between Amienois on the West, and Vermandois on the East. The most considerable Towns of this Country are these, Viz. Peronne, Cap. Mont-Didier, Roie, Moreuil, Neste, Breteuil, Chaunel, St. Just. PERONNE, Perona, seated on the River Som∣me, is a very strong Hold, and one of the Keys of the Kingdom of France: The Spaniards have often endeavour'd to surprize it, but the Marshes that en∣compass it, and the Ramparts that defend it rendring it exceeding strong, they have always been repulsed. It is distant 24 miles from Amiens to the East, 20 from Cambray to the South; as many from Arras to the South, and 75 from Paris to the North: Charles IV. King of France, Sur-named the Simple, died therein on the 7th day of October, A. C. 926. MONT-DIDIER, Mons Desiderii, aut Mondi∣dorium, is a large Town, built on an Hill, in the midst between Amiens and Compeigne, at the distance of 20 miles from both; 24 miles from Peronne to the South-east, and 20 from Noyon to the West. It stands upon a small River which falls into the Aurenge, that falls into the Somme at Amiens. It is a strong Town, and has often resisted the Spaniards. Nesle, Nigella, is water'd with the Brook Ignon, which falls into the Somme. It stands 15 miles from Montdidier to the North-east, 7 miles from Ham to the West, and almost in the midst between Noyon to the South, and Peronne to the North. It is a small Town that bears the Title of one of the most ancient Marquisates of the Kingdom. Charles the Warlike, D. of Burgundy, took this Place by Storm, A. D. 1472. when it suffered all sorts of Outrages, by reason that the Inhabitants had killed a Herald at Arms, who had been sent to Summon it, and two of his men, during a Truce which had been granted to them; insomuch that the Altars were not able to protect the miserable People that fled for Refuge into the Churches; and they that escaped the fury of the Soldiers, were either Hang'd, or had their Hands cut off. Chaunes, Celviacum, situated in the midway between Amiens and St. Quintin, and 7 from Peronne to the South-west, is a small Town, nevertheless dignified with the Title of a Dutchy, &c. AMIENOIS, Ager Ambianensis, lies between Artois to the North, Sangters to the East, Beauvaisis to the South, and the Country of Caux to the West. The Towns of chiefest note are these, viz. Amiens, Bish. Cap. Corvie, Dourlans, Pequigne, Conti. AMIENS, Ambienum alias Amviani, and Samarobrina, the Metropolis of Picardy, and the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Rheims, is situated on the River Somme, forming a Triangle with Paris and Roan, being distant 66 miles from Paris, and 55 from Roan, as also 30 from Arras to the South, toward Paris; 24 from Peronne to the West, and 22 from Abbeville to the South-east. It is a place of very great Antiquity, the Inhabitants whereof heretofore fought most resolutely against Julius Caesar, and even took up Arms against those of Rheims, only because they had too easily yielded to the Conqueror. Afterward Caesar erected a Magazine for his Army, and caused a general Assembly of the Gaulish People to be con∣ven'd therein. The Emperor Antoninus Pius enlarg'd it, as also did his Son Marcus Aurelius. The Empe∣rors
Constantin, Constans, Julian, Valentinian, Valens Gratian and Theodosius, chose Amiens for their Royal Seat in Gaul. However, it suffer'd much damage by the Incursions of the Alans, Vandals and Normans, A. C. 925. and was almost intirely burnt, but soon after re∣built. The City affords a very pleasant prospect, by reason of the largeness of the Streets, the beauty of the Houses, and the extent of the publick places, of which there are two, where seven fair Streets meet; the Ramparts have two rows of Trees planted on them, which form a deligtful Walk. The River Somme en∣ters into the City in three different Channels through as many Bridges, and after having water'd several parts of the City, they are united at the other end of the Town, near S. Michael's bridge. The Cathedral Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, is one of the fairest and best adorn'd in France: The Pillars, Quire, Chappels, Tombs and Paintings are admirable, and more especially the Gate flanked with two high Tow∣ers, on which are placed 10000 Statues; several Re∣licks are shewn here. King Philip VI. of Valois first caused the City of Amiens to be fortified, but the Bul∣warks were not sufficiently brought to perfection, un∣til the time of Lewis XI, who much improved them; and Henry IV. built a strong Citadel after he had re∣taken it from the Spaniards, who had seized it by a Stratagem in Anno 1597. Queen Isabel of Bavaria esta∣blish'd a Parliament therein. At present it has a Bai∣liwick, Presidial and Generality, and the Bishop, Vi∣dame and Bailly, are after the King, the three chief Lords. Corbie, Corbia, is likewise seated on the River Som∣me, which there intermixeth its Waters with those of the Otnere, 7 miles above Amiens to the East, and 20 from Peronne to the West. It is a strong place, but was however surpriz'd by the Spaniards in 1636. and was recovered by the French within a little while after. This Town grew up out of an Abbey which S. Be∣thilde Queen of France, the Wife of Clovis II. found∣ed, together with her Son Clotaire III. A. C. 660. It is called Old Corbie, to distinguish it from Corbie or Cor∣wey, a small Town of Westphalia in Germany. Doulens, Dulendium, is a very strong Town divided into the Upper and Lower, and Water'd by the Ri∣ver Authie on the frontiers of Artois, being distant 20 miles from Arras to the West, and 18 from Amiens to the North. It heretofore appertain'd to the Counts or Earls of Ponthieu, but was annexed to the Crown, A. D. 1559. Conty, Contiacum, is a small Burgh on the Rivulet of Celle, about 10 miles from Amiens to the South: It is dignified with the Title of a Principality, which hath given name to a branch of the illustrious House of Bourbon. It was at fitst subject to the Dominion of its own Lords, afterward transferr'd to the family of Mailli, and at length devolved on that of the Prince of Bourbon. The County and Earldom of PONTHIEƲ, Comitatus Pontivenois, was in time past an Inheritance of the younger Sons of France, and is extended along the banks of the River Somme, which renders the Ground every where marshy. The principal Towns are these, viz. Abbeville, Cap. S. Riquier. Pont de Remi. Le Croitoi. Re. Montreuil. Cressy. ABBEVILLE, Abbatis Villa, or Abbevilla, is seated on the River Somme at the distance of 83 miles from Paris to the North. near 40 from Bulln, 25 from Amiens, and 15 from the Coasts of the British Sea to the East. It is supposed to have been found∣ed by S. Riquier or some of the Abbots his Successors, and that Hugh Duke of France built the Castle. How∣ever, it is at present the capital City of the County of Ponthieu, and one of the strongest and most important places of the Kingdom; it hath always enjoyed cer∣tain peculiar Priviledges Here is a presidial Court, a Canonship, 12 Parishes, and many Religious Houses, among which that of S. Ʋlfran is most considerable. This City hath produced many great Men, and in this Age it hath given the World those Learned Geo∣graphers, Nicholas Sanson, William Sanson his Son, Pe∣ter Duval and Philippus Brietius a Jesuit, who died A. D. 1669. S. Riquier, Centula, nunc S. Richarius took its name from a certain Saint who was a Native of this place; it is near the River Cardn, and is distant 5 miles from Abbeville to the East, toward Doulens. Monstreuil, Monstrolium aut Monasteriolum, stands on an Hill, the foot whereof is washed by the River Canche about 6 miles from Estapies, 8 from the Coasts of the British Sea, (from whence Boats of good Bur∣then come up to the Town,) 24 from Abbeville to the North, and 16 from Bolen to the South. Its name is deriv'd from two ancient-Abbeys of the Benedictin Order, viz. one called S. Saviour, for Monks, and the other S. Austreberte, for Nuns. The Town is distin∣guish'd into the Lower, built along the banks of the River, and the Upper, which is separated from the former by a Wall. It is the seat of a Bailly, and was united to the Crown with the County of Pontieu; and is defended by strong Works and a good Cit∣tadel. Cressy, Cressiacum, is a small Town or Burgh on the River Authie on the Frontiers of Artois, and the Bail∣liage of Abbeville, from whence it is distant 12 miles to the South, and as many from Hesden to the North. It was heretofore only a Village, and is more especi∣ally famous on the account of the memorable Battle fought between the English and French in the time of Philip of Valois on the 26th day of August. 1346. when the former, under the conduct of their vali∣ant King Edward III. and his heroick Son called the black Prince, defeaed their Enemies with a very great slaughter, and obtain'd a most signal Victory; for above 80 Standards were taken, 30000 of the French Infantry, and 1200 Horse were slain in the Field, where also John King of Bohemia, Charles Count of Alenson the French Kings Brother, and Lewis Count of Flanders lost their lives, together with 12 other il∣lustrious Counts and Earls, and even the whole flower of the Nobless of France. There is also another Town of Crssy in the same Province of Picardy on the River Somme in the County of Tierache, 8 miles from Laon to the North and as many from Fere to the East, be∣sides a third in Champaigne, within three leagues of Meaux, called Crecy or Cressy in Brie, &c. BOƲLONNOIS. Comitatus Bolonniensis, is ex∣tended between Artois, the County of Ponthieu, the recovered Country, and the strait of Calis, including these principal Towns, &c. viz. Bolon, Cap. Bish. Mont-Hlin. Estaples. Ambleteuse.
BOƲLOGNE or BOLEN, Bolonia, is situ∣ated on the Sea shore at the distance of 20 miles from the Town of Calis to the South, 10 leagues from the nearest Coasts of England, 15 miles from Monstrevil, and 36 from Abbeville to the North. It is divided into the upper and lower Town, the former being well fortified with a strong Citadel, and adorned with di∣vers publick Places and Fountains, as also a Palace wherein Justice is usually administred; a Cathedral Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, a Parochial Church of S. Joseph, an Abbey of S. Vilemar, and some other Monasteries. The lower Town is not in∣habited by so many Persons of Quality as the other, but is larger and more considerable for its Traffick, and extends along the Port of the mouth at the River Liane. The Harbour is not very commodious; in it formerly stood a Watch-Tower, called La Tour de Or∣dre, and by the English, The Old Man, said to be built by Julius Caesar, and repair'd by the Emperour Charles the Great; but being neglected, is now fallen down. The Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Rheims, was established here by Pope Paul IV. after the de∣struction of Therouane. This City, together with the adjacent Territories, was formerly subject to the do∣minion of its own Counts of great Reputation, from whom were descended Godfrey of Bouillon, and his Brother Baldwin, Kings of Jerusalem, but it was uni∣ted to the Crown of France by King Philip II. the Au∣gust, A. D. 1209. Bolen was taken by Henry VIII. King of England, in 1544. and afterward restor'd to the French King, Henry II. according to a Treaty of Peace concluded between those two Princes in the beginning of the year 1550. Mont-Hulin, Mons-Hulini, is a Fortress standing on a Hill near the River Liane; it has a Cittadel which was built against the Spaniards, and is distant 9 Miles from Bolen to the East. Estaples, Stapulae, a large Burgh. is fenced with an old Castle, and stands near the Sea a little above the mouth of the River Canche, 6 miles from Mon∣streuil, and 14 from Bolen to the South. Ambleteuse, Ambletosa, is a Village having a small Port on the coasts of the British Channel heretofore called Amstat; it is distant only 7 miles from Bolen to the North, and about 12 from Calis to the South. The RECOVER'D COUNTRIES, Re∣cuperata Ditio, is a small Tract not above 15 miles over, and lies to the North of Bolen, and contain these Towns, viz. Calis Cap. Guisnes. Ardres, Principality. CALAIS or CALIS, Caletum, is seated in a marshy Plain on the Coasts of the British narrow Sea, called from thence the strait of Calis, at the distance of 9 miles from Gravelin, and the confines of Flanders to the West, 18 from Bolen to the North, and about 8 leagues from Dover, and the nearest shore of England to the South-west. It is reported, That Baldwin IV. sirnamed the Bearded Count of Flanders, first built the Port, and that Philip Count of Bolen caus'd the Town to be encompass'd with Walls, which before was only a simple Burgh. However, it is at present a considerable Mart and a place of strength, its Forti∣fications consisting of 9 royal Bastions, besides those of the Citadel, and many other Out-works, all lined with Stone; being also encompass'd with a very large and deep Ditch, into which falls the River Hames, as well as a great number of other Brooks, after having pass'd through the adjacent Fenns. There is only one passage to the Town over a Causey, commonly called the bridge of Nieullay, and none can en∣ter without the permission of the Garison of Ri∣cheban into the Port, which is divided into two parts; one whereof is named Cap de Grey, the other is larger and shut up within two Moles built of Stone. The Town is extended in form of a Triangle, with a Castle: The most remarkable things in it are two stately Towers; the Altar of the Grand Church is all of wrought Marble, and its Dome extreamly magni∣ficent. In the Marches are to be seen floating Islands and Sluces, by which the Country may be overflow'd within a little space of time. Edward III. King of England, took the Town of Calis from the French, A.D. 1347. but they at length recovered it under the con∣duct of the Duke of Guise in 1558. after the English had possess'd it above 210 years. Afterward Albert Arch-duke of Austria and Vice-roy of the Low-Countries made himself Master of it in 1596. and it was restored two years after to the French King Henry IV. by the Articles of the Peace of Vervins. Guines, Guisnae, is a small Town, yet the chief of a County of the same name, formerly subject to its own Earls, who are celebrated in History: It is seated in a marshy Ground, and is distant 6 miles from the Sea, as many from Calis to the South, and somewhat less from Ardres. Ardres, Ardra and Arda, is a well fortified Town, and bears the Title of a Principality, altho' of a very small extent; it stands on the frontiers of Artois, about 8 miles from Calis to the South, somewhat more from Gravelin, and 14 from S. Omer to the North-west. A famous Interview was celebrated near this place, between Henry VIII. King of England, and Fran∣cis I. King of France, in the Month of June, A. D. 1520. for the ratifying of a Treaty of Peace. The Attendants of these two Princes were most richly cloath'd, and their Court appeared so splendid, that it was termed the Camp of Cloth of Gold. Cardi∣nal Albert of Austria took Ardres in 1596. but was oblig'd to resign it to the French within a little while after The Governor-General of Picardy is at present the Prince d'Elbaeuf, who is also Governor of Artois, and under him are three Lieutenant-Generals. There are also particular Governors in these Towns, viz. Amiens, Abbeville, Boulogn and the Boulonnois, the Town and Castle of Calais, with the Fort Nieullay and the recover'd Country, Dourlans, S. Valery upon the Somme, Guise, S. Quinton, the Bailiage of Vermandois, la Ferre, Peronne and Roye, Montdidier; the Town and Cittadel of Ham, and the Town and Cittadel of Montreuil.
CHAP. IV. CHAMPAGNE, Campania. CHAMPAGNE, is one of the twelve principal Governments of France, and the Province that best furnisheth the Granaries and Cellars of Paris. It is so called (says Gregory of Tours) from the spacious and pleasant Plains which are found therein, more especially near Rheims and Chalons. This name is Mo∣dern, and the first that hath made mention thereof, is the Author of the continuation of the Chronicle of the Count Marcellinus, who is followed by the said Gregory of Tours, and other Writers. The Country of Champiagne and Brie, according to the division of Julius Caesar, lies partly in Celtick and partly in Bel∣gick Gaul, being situated between the 47 degree, 20 Minutes, and the 50 degree of Latitude, and extends from Raviers in Senonnois in the South, to Rocroy in Rhetelois in the North, about 150 miles. From West to South-east; that is to say, from Cressy in Brie near Meaux, as far as Bour∣bon les Bains, near the head of the River Meuse, about 120 miles; but in some places its breadth is not above 60 miles from East to West. It is bounded on the North by Picardy, Heynault and Luxemburg; on the South by Burgundy; on the East by Lorrain, and on the West by the Isle of France. This Province was heretofore famous for the gran∣deur of its Counts or Earls, who possess'd it as abso∣lute Sovereigns, and were so potent that they main∣tained fierce Wars against the Kings of France and Bur∣gundy: They were also so Illustrious by reason of their noble Descent, that those Princes have not disdain'd to make Leagues with them, and even to contract Marriages with their Family. In the division of In∣heritances among the Sons of Clovis I. and Clotaire I. Champaigne, constituted a part of the Kingdom of Mets in Austrasia: and in the time of Segebert King of Mets, A. C. 570. there was a certain Duke of these Territories, named Lupus, who shewed much fidelity in preserving the States of the young King Childebert, against Ʋrsion and Berfroy; Guintrio or Vintrio, whom Brunehaut caus'd to be Assassinated, was afterwards Duke. But this Title denoted then only a kind of Government, and not a perpetual Dignity. The first Hereditary Count was Robert of Vermandois, who made himself Master of the City of Troyes in 953 and left the possession theereof to his Brother Herbert. But in the year 1284, the whole Province was insepa∣rably united to the Crown of France; which Act was confirmed by the Treaty of Laon, in 1317. and by another ratified on the 14 day of May. A. D. 1335. Moreover, King John annexed the Counties of Cham∣pagne and Brie, to the demesns of the Crown in 1361. Among the principal Rivers are reckon'd the Seine, which receives into its Channel the Waters of the Jo∣ny and the Aubre; the Marne, the Aisne and the Veste, besides a great number of other small Rivulets that are very full of Fish. The River Meuse or Maes hath its source in this Province, but it quickly runs out of it into the County of Barr, which it crosseth from South to North, and then returns into this Province and passes by Sedan and Charleville, from whence it runs through the County of Namur, Bishoprick of Liege, and Dutchy of Guelderland into Holland, where it falls into the Sea near the Brie. The Soil although white and chalky, brings forth many sorts of Grains in abundance, particularly Rye. The vast Plains are extreamly fertil in Corn and ex∣cellent Grapes, and yield good Pasture for Cattle. On the Northern side are also large Forests, affording va∣riety of Game, together with Mines of Iron and other Metals. But for a more particular description of this Pro∣vince we will divide it into eight Parts, according to the method of most modern Geographers. Champagne in 8 Parts. Champagne, prop. Troyes Bish. Remois. Rheims Arch-bish. Perthois. St. Dizier. Rhetelois. Rhetel. Velage. Joinville. Bassigny. Langres. Senonnois. Sens. La Brie Champenoise. Provins. In the District of CHAMPAGNE, properly so called, are comprehended these most remarkable Towns, viz. Troyes, Bishop, Cap. Pont sur Seine. Meri. Romeru, or Rameru. Plancy. Chalons, Bish. Epernay. Ai. Dormans, &c. TROYES, Treca, olim Augusto-bona and Tricassis, is seated on the River Seine, at the distance of 80 miles from Paris to the South-east, 64 from Rheims to the South, 70 from Dijon to the North-west, and 65 from the source of the Meuse to the West. It is a City of very great Antiquity, and is reckon'd among the most considerable of the Kingdom for Trade, which consists chiefly in Linnen Cloth. It hath been long since dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, the Jurisdiction whereof is extended over 510 Parishes and depends on the Metropolitan of Se. Nine or ten of its Prelates have have been Canoniz'd for Saints; of these St. Amatre was the first, and S. Lupus the eight, who hindered Attila from ruining the City; which was nevertheless afterward done by the Normans. But Count Robert caused it to be Re-built, and it is at pre∣sent a fair well built City, and adorned with a fine Palace; the Cathedral Dedicated to S. Peter, is a ve∣ry stately Structure, in which 40 Canons Officiate. There are also two Collegiate and ten Parochial Churches, besides the Abby of S. Lupus, a Colledge of the Fathers of the Oratory, and many other Religious Houses. The City is defended with strong Walls, and the Inhabitants are reckoned Couragious and are train'd up in Arms. Here is a fine Palace, and a Bailiage and Presidial.
Pont-Sur Seine, Pons ad Sequanem, a small Town so called from its Situation and Bridge over the River Seine. It stands 22 miles from Troyes to the North-West, and 57 from Paris. Rameru, Ramerucum, stands on the Banks of the Aube almost in the midst between Troyes and Vitry la Francois. Planci is in like manner watered by the same River, and stands 15 miles West from Rameru. Chaalons, Catalaunum, is seated on a most pleasant Plain on the River Marne, over which here are ma∣ny Bridges, distant 50 miles from Troyes to the North, 26 from Reims to the South-East, and 100 miles from Paris to the East. It is a very ancient, large and well Fortified City, and was esteemed one of the Principal of Gallia Belgica in the time of Julian the Apostate. It is encompassed with firm Walls and deep Ditches full of Water. The whole City is divided into three Parts, viz. The City it self; the Island formed in it by the River Marne and the Burrough. The Houses appear very white, being built of Chalky Stone, and the Streets are large, the publick Places are fair and spacious, more especially those in which stand the Town-house and Collegiate Church, consecrated to the Virgin Mary. This City is the Seat of a Bishop Suffragan to the Archbishop of Rheims. The Cathe∣dral Church is Dedicated to St. Stephen, and is re∣markable on the account of its Bishops, Chapter, and its Tower extreamly high and large. There are also 12 Parochial Churches, and 3 Abbeys, together with many other Convents. A considerable Traffick is maintained here, particularly in Linnens, Cloath and Corn; the richest Merchandizes are kept in the Sub∣burbs of Marne, from whence they are with mch convenience transported to Paris. The City of Chaa∣lons was sometime governed by its own Counts, until they resigned their Right to the Bishops, who are di∣gnified with the Title of Counts and Peers of France. It is Recorded in History, that Merouee King of the French, Theodoricus King of the Goths, and Aetius the Roman General, A. C. 453. defeated the Forces of Attila King of the Huns, cutting off above 180000 Men in the adjacent Plains of this City, called Campis Catalaunicis, although others affirm that this memora∣ble Battel was fought in Campis Secalaunicis, that is to say, at, Sologne near Orleans. This City hath a Seat of Justice and a Generality. Espernay, Epernacum is distant 16 miles from Cha∣lons-sur-Marne to the W. as well as dy; the former of these Towns standing on the South side of the Ri∣ver, and the other on the N. over-against one ano∣ther. Dormans, Dormanum stands likewise on the Banks of the Marne, 19 miles from Espernay, and 36 from Chaalons to the W. This Town hath imparted its Name to the Noble Family of Domans, &c. REMOIS, Ager Rhemst lies between Chaalon∣nois, Soisonnois, Rhetelois, &c. Its Principal Towns are these, viz. Rheims, Archb. Cap. Fimes. Mochaut, &c. RHEIMS, Remi, olim Durcortorum and Remo∣rum Caput, is situated in the midst of a Plain, where the River Vesle washeth part of its Walls, which are extended in compass above an Hour's Journey, and enclose a great number of spacious Courts, large Streets well-built Houses, and magnificent Churches; more especially the Cathedral dedicated to the Virgin Mary, which is a vast pile of Building, the Gate thereof be∣ing esteem'd the most stately throughout the whole Kingdom on the account of its admirable Archite∣cture, Images and other curious Ornaments. In this Church the Kings of France are usually Crown'd, and anointed by the Archbishop of Reims, with a sacred Oil preserv'd in a small Vessel commonly call'd La Sainte Ampoule, or the Holy Bottle, which (as they say) was sent from Heaven at the Inauguration of Clouis I. and is kept for that use in the Abby of S. Remi. In the same City are establish'd, besides a Metropolitan See, a Presidial Court, another of the Bailliage, and an University founded by Charles of Lorrain Cardinal of Guise with the permission of King Henry II. The Arch∣bishops of Rheims are stiled the first Dukes and Peers of France; twelve or thirteen of these Prelates have been canoniz'd for Saints; and besides several that have attained the Dignity of Cardinals, four of them have been Popes, viz. Sylvester II. Ʋrban II. Adrian IV. Adrian V. six Princes have possess'd the See, and among others two of France, viz. Arnold the Son of King Lotharius, and Henry the Son of Lewis the Gross, besides four others of the Royal Blood. Here are to be seen some Monuments of Antiquity, as a Fort of Julius Caesar's, &c. but particularly one that was but lately discover'd (in 1677.) which is a Roman Tri∣umphal Arch that is quite entire; it is compos'd of three Arches, adorned with many Figures and Tro∣phies; it is supposed to have been formerly the North Gate of the Town, and called Porta Martia. The City of Rheims is distant 74 miles from Paris to the North-East; 66 from Troyes to the North; 24 from Chalons to the North-West; and 54 from Verdune to the West. Fimes, Fimae, Fismae, is a Burgh on the River Veste in the confines of the Isle of France 15 miles from Rheims to the West. It is more especially remarkable on the account of two Councils held there in the Church of S. Maire the Martyr Finibus apud Sanctam Mairam, and for a certain Stone fixed not far from thence, which serves as a Boundary between the Bi∣shopricks of Rheims, Laon and Soissons. PERTHOIS, Ager Perthensis, is extended on the Frontiers of Lorraine between the Rivers Marne and Ornay, and contains these considerable Towns, viz. S. Dizier, Cap. Sermaise, Vitry le Francois, Harzicourt. S. Dizier, Fanum Sancti Desiderii aut Desideriopolis stands on the Banks of the Marne 30 miles above Chaalons, near the Frontiers of the County of Barr, 14 miles from Vitry le Francois to the E. and 15 from Joinville to the N. It was taken by the Emperor Charles V. A. D 1544. after a very notable Siege, and restored to the French at the Peace concluded at Cressie. Vitry le Francois, Victoriacum Francicum took its Name from King Francis I. the Founder thereof, who caused it to be built in the room of a Neighbouring Town that was burnt, which is at present called Vitry le Bruslé. It is seated on the Confluence of the Marne and the Orne, being distant 18 miles from Chaalons to the S. E. RETELOIS, Rhetelensis Ager, is the Northern Part of the Province of Champagne, and includes these Towns of chiefest Note, viz. Rhetel, Cap. Mezieres, Charleville, Rocroi, Sedan, &c. RETEL, Retelium aut Reiteste is situated near the River Aisne, 24 miles from Rheims to the North; 27 from Sedan to the S. W. and as many from Rr
to the S. in the adjacent Territories of this Town, which bear the Title of a Dutchy. The French ob∣tained a great Victory over the Spanish Troops, and those of the Prince of Conde commanded by the Mar∣shal de Turenne, A. D. 1650. Mazieres, or Masieres, Maderiacum aut Maceriae is a strong Town, and stands in a Peninsule made by the River Meuse, partly on a rising Ground and partly in the Valley, the Citadel being fortified with a double Rampart. It is a place of great importance, being a Passage from Luxemburgh into France. It is distant 23 miles from Rhetel to the North, 15 below Sedan to the West, as many from Rocroy; not above 7 from the Confines of the Dutchy of Luxemburgh, and 46 from Rheims to the N. E. Charleville, Carolopolis is in like manner seated on the Meuse just over against Mazieres, and was hereto∣fore only a Burrough call'd Arches, where Charles de Gonzagua Duke of Nevers and Mantua caused a very pleasant Town to be built, A. D. 1609, and imparted his Name thereto, It hath been since regularly for∣tified, and on the other side of the River is erected the strong Fortress of Mont-Olympe, where is to be seen the Ruins of an old Castle, supposed to have been a Temple of the Pagans. Rocroy, Rupes Regia is a very strong Hold near the Forrest of Ardenne on the Frontiers of Hainault, be∣ing distant 30 miles from Retel to the N. 45 from Meziers and Charleville to the N. W. about as many from Marienburgh to the S. and 15 from Philipville. The French Forces under the Conduct of the Duke of Anguien gained a Battle over the Spaniards, and defeated their General Don Francisco de Melo near this Town on the 19th day of March, A. D. 1643. Sedan, Sedanum stands on the East side of the River Meuse, near the Frontiers of Luxemburgh, at the di∣stance of 15 miles from Charleville to the East, 28 from Retel to the North-East, and 8 from Bouillon to the South. This Town was formerly subject to the Archbishop of Rheims; by whom it was afterwards granted to the King instead of Cormecy. In process of Time the Braquemonts and Marcans became Lords thereof, and at length it devolved on the Princes of the Family of La Tour: But in the Year 1642 it was united to the Crown by a Compact made with Prince Frederic-Maurice de la Tour d' Auvergne, Duke of Bou∣illon and Lord of Sedan. It is a strong Place, being defended with a good Castle and Walls, &c. It was chiefly inhabited by Protestants, who had a famous University here before the late Persecutions. The County of VALAGE lies between those of Perthois, Bassigni Senonnois, and contains these prin∣cipal Towns, viz. Joinville, Cap. Brienne, Vignoris, Br sur-Aube, Clervaux, Abb. &c. Joinville, Jovis Villa, Joanvilla, aut Joville, is a small Town, but dignified with the Title of a Prin∣cipality, seated on the River Marne at the distance of 30 miles to the North from Chaumont, 15 from S. Di∣zier to the South, and 43 from Chaalons to the South-East. This Principality was erected by King Henry II. A. D. 1552. in favour of Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise, to serve as an Inheritance for the younger Sons of that Noble Family, and hath been the Burial-place of divers of these Dukes. But that which hath made this City most noted, is, that the Holy League, which made so much Disturbance in France, was re∣vived and concluded on here in the Year 1584 by the Duke of Guise and his Adherents. Brienne, Castrum Briennium is a Town of a small compass, nevertheless honoured with the Title of a County, and stands on the Banks of the Aube, 25 miles from Joinville to the W. and 21 from Troyes between Bar-sur-Aube and Planei. It was in time past one of the Seven Peerages that were establish'd by the ancient Counts of Champagne, and the Place where the Peers usually held their Assemblies. Bar-Sur-Aube, Barium ad Albulam aut Albam is so called from its Situation on the River Aube at the foot of an Hill in a very pleasant Country about 30 miles from Troyes to the East, and 15 from Chaumont to the West. It is a well-built Town, and famous for its good Wines. It was for some time possess'd by cer∣tain particular Counts, but was at last reunited to the Crown at the same time with the rest of Champagne. Clervaux, or Clairvaux, Claravallis is an Abbey of the Cistercian Order, famous for the Conversation of S. Bernard, by whom (as they say) it was Founded, through the pious Liberality of Thibaut or Theobald III. Count of Campagne, A. D. 1115. It is built in a Valley before call'd, The Vale of Wormwood, 14 miles from the Frontiers of Burgundy, and 5 from Bar-sur-Cube to the S. in the midst between Chaumont to the E. and Ber-sur-Seine to the W. BASSIGNY, Bassiniacus Ager lies between the Spring-heads of the Marne, and the Meuse on the side of Lorraine, containing these most considerable Towns, viz. Langres, Bish. Cap. Chaumont, Lusi, Nogent-le-Roy. LANGRES, Linganes aut Andomainum is very advantagiously Situated on a Hill near the Spring-head of the River Marne, at the distance of 20 miles from the Confines of Burgundy; 50 from Troyes to the S. E. about 45 from Besanson to the N.W. and 34 from Di∣jon towards Chaumont. It is a very ancient, large and well Fortified City, and the See of a Prelate, Suffra∣gan to the Archbishop of Lyon. It was ruined by the Vandals in the beginning of the 4th Century, but after∣ward rebuilt and restor'd to its former Grandeur. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to S. Mammez the Martyr. The Bishops of Langres, who take place a∣mong the six Ecclesiastical Peers of France, bear the Title of Dukes, Marquesses and Barons, as being both Spiritual and Temporal Lords of these Territo∣ries, wherein they constitute Bailiffs, Judges and other Officers of Justice. Five or Six Rivers have their Source in the adjacent Country, which on that ac∣count is supposed to be the highest Ground of the whole Kingdom of France. Chaumont, Calvomontium and Calvus Mons, stands on a Hill near the Marne between Thoinville and Lan∣gres, from whence it is distant 20 miles, and 15 from Bar-sur-Aube to the E. This large Town, which had been before only a Burrough, was lately enlarged, and first encompassed with Walls A. D. 1500. It was govern'd by its own Lords, until it was annex'd to the Jurisdiction of the County of Chamgagne. SENONNOIS, Senonensis Ager, lies on the Southern and Western sides of Picardy, between Cham∣pagne properly so called, Brie and Gastinois. This Country is extended for the space of 16 Leagues in length, and 8 in breadth, and includes these principal Towns, viz. Sens, Archb. Cap. Pont-sur-Yone, Jogni, S. Florenin, Tonnerre, Chabli.
SENS, Senones aut Agendicum Senonum is seated in a verdant Plain on the confluence of the Seine and the Yonne, over which it hath a Stone-bridge; and is distant 53 miles from Paris to the South, 28 from Auxerre to the North, and 30 from Troyes to the West. It is a very fair City, and without doubt one of the most ancient throughout the whole Kingdom of France. For the Galli Senonenses, heretofore extended their Conquests very far into Italy and Greece, took Rome, and (as it is generally believ'd) founded Sienna Seni∣gaglia, and some other Towns, which as yet bear their Name. These Territories, during the Second Race of the French Monarch's, were subject to the Jurisdiction of certain particular Counts, until King Robert made himself Master of Sens, A. D. 1005. This City is large and well-built, and water'd with a great number of Brooks, which run through all its Parts, and serve for the convenience of the Inhabitants. It is the See of an Archbishop, who was formerly Me∣tropolitan of Paris, Orleans and four other Diocesses, but since Paris hath been erected into an Archbishop∣rick, he hath only Troyes, Auxerre, and Nevers for his Suffragans. The Cathedral Church of S. Stephen is admired for its stately Front, adorned with divers Figures and two lofty Towers; as also on the account of its large Body, rich Chapels, ancient Tombs, and the costly Basis of the High Altar, where is to be seen a Table of Gold enrich'd with many curious Stones, representing in Bas-relief the Images of the four Evangelists and S. Stephen. The whole Diocess com∣prehends above 900 Parochial Churches, and 25 Ab∣bies, five of these being included within the City or Suburbs. Divers Councils have been celebrated here, the first of which was convened by Archbishop Sevin, A.C. 980. Pont-sur-Yonne, Pons ad Icaunum aut Pons Syriacus, stands on the Frontiers of Champagne, and the Banks of the River Yonne, about eight miles from Sens to the North toward Paris; as likewise doth Joigni Jognia∣cum aut Juniacum, a small Town at the distance of 15 miles from Sens to the South, and as many from Auxerre to the North. Tonnerre, Tornodorum and Ternodorum ad Hermonti∣onem, is a considerable Town bearing the Title of a County, and built on the side of the River Armanson in the Confines of Champagne and Burgundy, about 35 miles from Sens to the South-east, and 17 from Auxerre to the East, towards Chastillon sur Seine. Chabli, Cabliacum, stands between Tonnerre to the East, and Auxerre to the West. It is a small Town, but remarkable on the account of the excellent Wines that are made therein, and for the bloody Battle which was fought in the adjacent Plain between the Sons of the Emperor Lewis the Debonaire, A.C. 841. The County of BRIE is divided into two Parts, and made part of two Provinces of the Isle of France and Champaigne. BRIE CHAMPENOISE, Brigiensis Saltus, aut Bria, lies between the Rivers Seine and Marne, abounds in Pasture, and is very fruitful in Corn, Fruits, &c. The most considerable Towns in it are these, viz. Meaux, Bish. Cap. Provins Chasteau Thierry Colomiers Sezanne Montereau-Yonne, &c. MEƲX, Meldae, Patinum Meldarum, the Capital City of Brie and the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Archbishop of Paris, is situated on the Marne, at the distance of 25 miles from Paris to the East; 50 from Rheims to the South-west, 60 from Chalons to the West, and 50 from Sens to the North. It is di∣vided by the River into two parts, viz. one called the Town and the other the Market, and surrounded with three Suburbs. The Cathedral is dedicated to St. Stephen, and the Diocess contains 410 Parishes. There is also a Collegiate Church bearing the Name of St. Sainctin first Bishop of Meaux; and some o∣thers that are Parochial, and besides the Abby of St. Faron appertaining to the Benedictine Monks of the Congregation of St. Maur, a great number of Monasteries. This City was for sometime subject to its own Lord, but at length united to the Crown of France: It suffered very much in the year 1358. John King of France, being at that time the Prisoner of our King Edward III. The Dauphine had possess'd himself of this Place, but in his absence the Citizens had plotted with those of Paris to take it from him, but were not able to effect it, for though they let in the Parisians into the Town, the Garison kept the Market and overcame them, cut them to pieces and fir'd and piliag'd the City. It was afterwards taken by the Forces of our valiant King Henry V. after a Siege of three Months. This was the first City of France wherein the Protestants preach'd against the Errors of the Church of Rome, for which many of them suffer'd Martyrdom. In the Civil War, the Protestants got the Possession of this Place, but it was taken from them by Surprize by Claude Gouffier Duke of Rouanez for King Charles IX. It is now a well-built, flourishing and populous City, and is the Seat of a Baily and an Election. Provins, Provinum aut Pruvinum stands on the foot of an Hill and the Banks of the Rivulet Vousie, being distant 12 miles from the Seine to the North; 25 from Meaux to the South; 36 from Troyes to North-West, and 38 from Paris to the South-East. This small Town is famous for an excellent sort of Roses which grow in the adjacent Fields, and bear the same Name. Chateau-Thierry, Castrum Theodoricum, is a very fair Town with a Castle, enjoying the Title of a Dutchy, and seated on the South-side of the Marne, about 20 miles from Meaux to the East; 30 from Reims to the South-west; 40 from Chalons to the West, and 45 from Paris to the East, Colomiers, Colomeriae aut Columbaria, is adorned with the Palace of Longueville, and water'd with the little River of Morin, 12 miles from Meaux to the South, toward Provins, and 30 from Paris to the East. Montereau-Faut-Yonne, Monasteriolum ad Icaunam, Monasteriolum S. Martini in fauibus Icaunae, aut etiam Mons Regalis, takes its Name from a place where the Waters of the Yonne fall and are swallowed up in the Chanel of the Sienne. Thus it is founded on the con∣fluence of these two Rivers, and defended with an Old Castle, being distant 16 miles from Provins to the South-west, 17 from Sens to the North-west, and 40 from Paris to the South-East. The Town it self properly belongs to the Jurisdiction of Gastinois, and the Suburbs on the other side of the River to that of Brie. It was heretofore a Royal Seat, and is beautified with a fair Stone-bridge, on which John Duke of Burgundy was slain, on the 10th Day of Sep∣tember, A.D. 1419. The Governor-General of the Province of Cham∣paign, at present is the Duke of Luxemburg; under whom are four Lieutenant-Generals and two Bailiffs, all Noblemen. And in these following Towns there are particular Governors, viz. Troyes, Chalons, Lan∣gres, Chaumont, Retel, Chateau-Portien, Rocroy, Meziers, Charleville, Sedan, S. Menchould, S. Disier, Vitri, Bur-sur-Aube, Epenay, Fismes, and Brie-Comte-Robert.
A Chronological Table shewing the Succession of the Counts of Champagne and Brie.   Succeeded A. C. govern. Years 1 RObert 958   2 Herbert   died in 993 3 Stephen I. 993 26 4 Eudes I. le Champenois 1019 18 5 Thibauld or Theobald 1037   6 Stephen II. sirnam'd Henry     7 Theobald II. 1101 51 8 Henry I. the Rich 1152 28 9 Henry II. the Younger 1180 17 10 Theobald III. 1197 4 11 Theobald IV. King of Navarre 1201 53 12 Theobald V. the young 1254 16 13 Henry III. 1270 4 14 Joanna Queen of Navarre 1274   This last Princess was styl'd Countess Palatine of Brie and Champagne, and Married to the French King Philip IV. sirnam'd the Fair, A. C. 1284. CHAP. V. THE ISLE OF FRANCE, Insula Franciae. THE Government of the Isle of France, though it be one of the least of extent, is however the most considerable of the whole Kingdom, on account of its fertility and pleasant situation, the great number of stately Palaces, and the Capital City which stands therein; but more especially by being honoured with the presence of the King in his splendid Palaces of Versailles and the Louvre, S. Germains, Fountainbleau, and S. Cloude; all which are seated within the Li∣mits of this Government. The Isle of France, proper∣ly so called, lies between the Rivers Seine, Marne, Oise, and Aisne; for which reason the Name of an Island hath been given it. But to make it a Govern∣ment, some Parts of the Neighbouring Provinces have been added to it; so that at present it is bounded on the East by Champagne, on the West by Normandy, on the North by Picardy, and on the South by Beaus; extending it self between the 48th Degree, and the 49th Degree, 46 Minutes of Latitude; and includes from West to East, that is to say, from Dreux to Liesse, near 120 miles, and from North to South, viz. from Noyon as far as Tourtenay in Gatinois 100 miles. The Soil is very fertile in excellent Wheat, Grapes, and other Fruits: There are also divers verdant Plains and spacious Forests, affording abundance of all sorts of Games. The principal Rivers are the Seine, the Marne, and the Oise. The last of these is en∣larged with the Waters of the Aisne, that passeth to Soissons, and those of Terrain, which conveys its Streams along the Walls of Beauvais, &c. This Go∣vernment is usually divided into 10 small Countries, nine of which are taken out of the Provinces of Cham∣pagne, Beausse, Normandy, and Picardy. The Isle of France into 10 small Countries The Isle of France, prop. Paris, Archb. cap. Brie Francoise Lagni Hurepois Melun Gastinois in part Nmours Mantois Mante Vexin Francois Pontoise Beauvaisis Beauvais, B. Valois Crespy Soissnnoi Soissons, Bish. Laonnois Laon, Bish. In the ISLE OF FRANCE, pro∣perly so called, are contain'd these prin∣cipal Cities and Towns, viz. Paris, Archbish. Capital of the whole Kingdom. The most remarkable Places of the adjacent Country. S. Denis Montmorency. PARIS, Parisii, aut Lutetia Parisiorum, so called from Lutum Dirt, because of its situation in a marshy Soil, and Parisii the ancient Inhabitants of the Neighbouring Country. To omit the several fa∣bulous Accounts of its Origine, it is certain that it is very ancient: Julius Caesar mentions it in his Com∣mentaries; and Eusebius says, It was older than Rome. The Island in the Seine called la Cite, now the middle of Paris was the first City, built in that place by the Parisii (as some say) to avoid the Ravage of War and Pestilence that raged among them. It is the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom of France, and at present one of the largest, most po∣pulous and flourishing Cities of Europe. The River Seine which passeth through it from East to West, is broad but not deep enough to bring up Ships of Bur∣den, whereof none come higher than Roan, and from whence the Goods are brought hither in Lighters; Its stream is divided by two or three Islands, whereof that call'd la Cité above-mentioned is the chief, and is the Center, round which the additions from time to time have been made of that great number of Houses and Palaces whereof Paris now consists. On the North∣side lies that part called la Ville the Town; and on the South the University with the Fauxbourg or Sub∣urbs of S. Germaine, and S. Marcel. The Houses of Paris are mostly built of Stone and Brick, very high and fill'd with People, every Floor often containing a Family, especially in the Old City, where the Strees are narrow, but those later built are spacious and neat, especially les Rues Richelieu, and S. Martin, which are very long, strait, and broad. The whole City, University, and Suburbs of Paris, make an Oval of three English Miles long, and two and a half broad, and consequently take up five and an half square miles of Ground. Concerning the number of Houses and Inhabitants herein contained, French-men talk very largely; but this matter ha∣ving
been Judiciously handled by the Ingenious Sir William Pettye, his computation will be the best ac∣count we can give the Reader, which is as follows; He says, The number of Houses are, 23223, together with 32 Palaces, and 33 Colleges, in which do live 81280 Families, and allowing to each Family 6 Persons, the number will be 487680. To prove this account, he argues from the number of Burials in Paris, which according to a reasonable medium, are, 19887 per Annum, whereof 3506 in the Hotel-Dieu unnecessa∣rily, which being deducted, the number of Burials of the Inhabitants, is communibus annis, 16381, and then allowing one of thirty to die Yearly, the number of Souls in Paris will be 491430. The medium of these two accounts is 488055. Whereas in London the same Author proves the number of Inhabitants to be 695718, and the number of Houses 105315. and that London contains above 100 thousand Inhabitants more than Paris and Rouen together. But to proceed, The places in Paris that most deserve a Stranger's Notice, are the Louvre, the Tuilleries, the Church of Notre-Dame, the University, the Old-Palace, the Town-House, the Place-Royal, the Bastille, Pont-neuf, many stately Palaces of the Nobility, the Htel-Dieu, and other Hospitals. The King's Palace, nam'd the Louvre, is a noble and stately pile of Building; It is one large Squre with a Court in the middle, the Fronts o Ston ly a∣dorn'd with Pillars and Carvings.  built by King Philip the August,  begn to be Rebuilt of large Extent by  in the year 1364. Francis I. began the Swi s ll and the south Porch, which his Son  'd, and built two Stories over it; he so added an order of Corinthian Architecture to the er Front, and adorn'd it with a noble Cornice and curious Carvings. King Henry IV. built a Gallery along by the side of the Ri∣ver quite to the Tuilleries, which is very long, and esteem'd the finest in Europe; Under it is the Royal Printing-house and the Lodgings of many curious Ar∣tists in Painting, Carving, Graving &c. who have Pen∣sions from the King. Lewis XIII. finished the Front to the West, and built a large Pavillon, in form of a Dome, in the middle, over the Gate, which is suppor∣ted by two Ranks of very large Pillars of the Jonick Order; and also adorned the Architrave of the Front to the Court with fine Sculptures. The present King hath bestow'd great cost upon the East-Front, in the middle whereof is the chief Gate of the Palace. Here are forty Columns of the Corinthian Order detachee, which sustain a large Terras, that is to be rail'd with a stately Balustre. The Building is not finished, nor the Lodgings furnished, no body dwelling in it but ome few Officers, except the French Academy, who have a Hall here to hold their Assemblies in. Be∣hind the Louvre is a large piece of Ground design'd for a Garden, but the King never coming here, some Per∣sons have been permitted to build upon it, so that at present it is full of Houses, which are to be all pull'd down when the Building is finished, and the King fan∣cies to Reside here. Behind the Louvre at some distance, stands the Pa∣lace called les Tuilleris, built by Queen Catherine de Medicis, A. D. 1654. and much improved by the pre∣snt King. It is one range of Building with a Pavil∣lon at each end, and a Dome in the middle; before it is a handsome large space which is divided into three Courts; and behind are exceeding pleasant Gardens, the Walks whereof are every Evening fill'd with Peo∣ple of Fashion that come hither to take the Air. When the King lies at Paris, which is very seldom, he Lod∣ges in the Tuilleries. These two Palaces are seated in the west part of the Town by the River side; the Garden of the Tuilleries reaching quite beyond the Houses, and is open to the Fields. The Cathedral Church of Notre-Dame or the Vir∣gin Mary, stands near the middle of the City in the Island which thence hath its Name; it is a Majestick Venerable building of the Gothick order of Archi∣tecture. The Foundation was laid A. D. 522. by King Childerick; and the building was afterwards much beautified and enlarged by King Robert and his Successors, till Philip the August finish'd it as it now ap∣pears. It is in the the form of a Cross, having a small Spire in the middle, and at the west-end two large square Towers of 389 steps high, flat at top, with Ballustres round, which make the Front very spacious and noble. Over the three West Gates is a row of Niches, in which stand the Statues of 28 Kings of France, Predecessors to Philip. The length of this Church is accounted 66 Fathoms, its breadth 24, and its height 17 Fathoms. The Roof is supported by 120 great Pillars and the whole Building adorn'd with the Ornaments usual to this order of Architecture, be∣sides several Statues, curious Paintings, rich Tapestries, silver Candlesticks &c. that make the inside appear very Glorious. The Prelate of this See was formerly Suffragan to the Archbishop of Sens, till A. 1622. when Lewis XIII. by permission of the Pope, erected it in∣to an Archbishoprick; and he present King hath ad∣ded to it the Title of Duke and Per (A. 1674.) in our of the present Archbishop. The University of Paris was first Founded (as 'tis said) by Charlemaign, A D. 791, at the desire of Al∣cuinus an English-man, his Tutor, who was made the first Professor. It is situate on the South-side of the River, and hath been much encreased by Lewis VII. Philip the August, and several other Persons of lower Rank, particularly Robert Sorbon, who (in the time of St. Lewis, A. D. 1252.) Founded the College called by his Name, which being decay'd, was Rebuilt by Car∣dinal Richelieu, and made a very beautiful Place. It is esteem'd the strictest College in Europe, the Degree of Doctor in it being only given to those who hold the Sorbonique Act, which is to answer all Disputants from Sun-rise to Sun-set. The title of Sorbon Doctor is of great Repute. The College of Navarre founded by Jane Queen of Navar, is also a very noble Build∣ing; and that of the four Nations, founded by Car∣dinal Mazarine, is very handsome, spacious, and well adorned. The Buildings of the other Colleges, near 30 in number, are not very stately. The Professors have settled Revenues, but the Colleges are not Endowed, except with Privileges and Collation to several Benefices. It will not be amiss to mention here the Academies for Arts, established in Paris by the favour and encou∣ragement of the present King and his Predecessors. And First, The Academie Fracoise, is a Society of Ingenious Men, the most Polite and curious Criticks of the Nation; first began in the Year 1620, by Messires Godean, Gombaud, Chapelain, Conrard, and several more, who agreed to meet Weekly at one of their Lodgings for Conversation; these being encou∣raged by Cardinal Richelieu, set themselves at work to correct and polish the French Tongue, and in 163, the Academy was Established by the King's Edict, and hath been much Honour'd by the present King, who hath given them a Chamber in the Louvre to hold their Assemblies in. These ingenious Persons have very much improv'd the French Language, and several Members of the Society have published Books that have been very acceptable to the Learned World,
The number of them at present is 40. They give yearly two golden Medals to the best Performers in Eloquence and Poetry. The Royal Academy of Sciences, was Established by Monsieur Colbert, A.D. 1666, and is composed of the best Philosophers and Mathematicians in the Nation, for whose use the King built the Royal Observatory in the Fauxbourg St. Jacques, where they daily make Ex∣periments, and labour in new Discoveries for the im∣provement of Knowledge. The Royal Academy for Painting and Sculpture, was Established by Lewis XIII. and that for Architecture, by the present King in the Year 1671. But to pass on to the other remarkable Things in Paris. The Palace is the place where the Court of Parliament is held. It was at first the King's Palace, but was made the Seat of this Court by King Philip the Fair. The Hall is Arched with Stone, and sup∣ported by Pillars: In it are many Shops for Trades∣men, and beyond it are several Chambers for the re∣spective Courts. The Hotel de Ville, or Guild-Hall, is a fair Stru∣cture; the old one being decayed, this was begun to be built A. D. 1533, but by reason of the Civil War, was not finished till 1610. It is built of Stone, the Front reasonably handsom, but somewhat Gothick; in the middle over the Door there is a Spire, and two Pavillions at the ends; within-side is a spacious Hall and several Chambers. The Palais Cardinal, or Palace Royal, as it is now called, is a handsom Building, composed of two square Courts and fine Gardens; the Apartments in it are beautiful and convenient. This Palace was built by Cardinal Richlieu, and at his Death bequeathed to the King: The Duke of Orleans dwells in it, altho' he hath another very stately one that bears his Name, which was built by the Widow of Henry IV. The Place Royal, is a noble large Square, surround∣ed with Piazza's and very fine Houses. Paris lying on both sides the Water, there is need of many Bridges, of which here are nine of Stone and two of Timber; that named Pont-neuf, or the New Bridge, is the most considerable, being the finest built and the longest; it is all of Stone, begun to be built in 1578, and finished in 1604, by King Henry IV. whose Statue on Horseback of curious Workmanship stands in the middle. Pont au Change was built of Stone in 1629, and hath two rows of Houses on it; this being near the Palace, hath the most Passengers of any. Pont-Mary hath Houses on it also. The other Bridges are less considerable. The Hotel-Dieu is a large Hospital for poor sick People, whereof here are commonly no less than 4000, who are served by the Nuns of St. Augustin: The building is old and not very fine, but the Revenues are very great. There are many other Hospitals; but that which makes the greatest Figure, and is most talk'd of, is, The Invalides, built by this King for the reception and maintenance of old Crippled and Disabled Soldiers, It is a very noble Building, exactly square, with fine Courts in the middle. It stands in the West end of the Fauxburg St. Germains. The Bastile is a Castle built in the Year 1360, for defence of the City, but at present serves for a Prison for State Criminals. It stands at the East end of the Town, in the Fauxburg St. Antoine. There are also two smaller Castles, which were anciently Fortresses, and without doubt stood at the limits of the Town, but are now in the middle of it, and serve to hold the Provost's and other Courts in. The Suburbs of Paris are large and well built; that of St. Germain hath been taken into the City, and en∣joys the same Privileges. For the Civil Government Paris hath a Magistrate call'd the Prevot des Merchands, not unlike our Lord Mayor, ahd 4 Eschevins or Alderman, 26 Counsellors, 10 Serjeants and under Officers; and is divided into 16 Wards. And for administring Justice, there is a Provost, 3 Lieutenants, and the Judge and Consul of Merchants. In the City and Suburbs are 10 Collegiate and 44 Parochial Churches, 4 principal Abbeys, besides many other Religious Houses, 30 Hospitals, great number of publick Fountains, and 17 Gates. This City hath undergone the Fate of most Great Ones; viz. Hath been two or three times Besieged, twice Burn'd, and once much Damaged by an Inun∣dation of the Seine. Our King Henry V. took it, was Crown'd here, and kept his Court at the Louvre in great State and Splendor, A. D. 1422. In the Civil War Paris took part with the Leaguers, and was therefore Besieged in the Year 1589. by King Henry III. who there lost his Life, being Murthered by Jacques Clement a Friar. The next Year it was block'd up by Henry IV. and reduc'd to extream Misery, and to that want of Victuals, that the People made Bread of dead Mens Bones; yet would they not yield, but held out till the Dukes of Parma and Mayenne came to their Relief, and forced the King to raise the Siege. Paris is Situate in the Latitude of 48 Degrees 50 Minutes, and Longitude of 20 Degrees 15 Minutes, reckoning from Teneriffe; but, according to Sanson, 23 Degrees, 30 Minutes; and is distant 130 English miles from Calais to the South, 60 from Roan to the S. E. 300 from Brest to the E. 220 from Lyons to the N. W. 130 from Verdun on the River Meuse, and 230 from Strasburg on the Rhine to the W. 180 from Triers, 155 from Luxemburg, and 140 from Namur to the S. W. The most remarkable Place in the Neighbourhood is the Bois de Vincennes Situated at the very Gates of Paris, where the Citizens often walk to take the Air, and divert themselves with divers kinds of Sports and Exercises. VERSAILLES is a small, but neat Burrough, Situate upon a rising Ground in the midst of a Cham∣pain Country, fit for Hunting, and abounding with Game, at the distance of about 12 miles from Paris to the W. Lewis XIII. built a small Castle here, to serve for a Hunting-Seat; but the present King fancy∣ing the Place, in the Year 1661 began to enlarge it, by the addition of several new Buildings, which he hath encreased from time to time, and hath been at prodigious Expence in adorning it and making the greatest Variety of Water-Works, and most delight∣ful Gardens, that probably are any where to be seen. This beautiful Palace deserves a more particular De∣scription than we have room to make: What follows will be sufficient to give the Reader a general Idea of it. The Passage to it is through four long Rows of tall Elm-trees, which make three Alleys; the middle one of twenty Fathoms, and the side ones of ten Fathoms wide; at the end of these, on each side, fronting the House, are the Stables, which for Symmetry and Con∣venience are thought the finest in Europe; in them are kept near five hundred Horses of the King's. Be∣tween this and the Court is a large void Space, from whence is a fair View of the whole, all the three Courts being open to the Front, and only divided by Iron
Ballustres. The first Court is named the Place-Royal; it is very spacious, being Eighty Fathoms square: In the Front is only a low Wall and Iron Ballustres, which are carried out in a half Moon, and on the Wings are a very handsom Range of Buildings, which are the Lodgings of some of the Nobility that attend the Court. From hence you pass through one large Gate (very finely adorn'd with Trophies in Iron-work gilt) in the middle of a large and high Ballustre of Iron, gilt, into the first or great Court of the Palace, which consists also of two Wings of Building, on each side of a large Court, but so much smaller than the Place-Royal, as that that does not hinder the full sight of this; in the middle is a very large Fountain: The Buildings are of Brick and Stone, very stately, and adorn'd with very fine Carvings, and Pillars of the Corinthian Order, which support Balconies at the top, that go quite round each Wing; on the Ballustre whereof stand several Statues of Stone, representing the Four Elements; these are the Lodgings of the Officers of the Houshold: Behind them are square Courts and other Buildings for Offices. Next is the second or smaller Court of the Palace, which is also open to the Front; the Ground is raised three steps, and paved with black and white Marble: This Court is still smaller than the former, for the same Reason; and here the Sight is terminated by the Building at the end of the Court, which with the two Wings make the Royal Apartment. These Buildings are very magnificent, without side as well as within: The Entrance is by three Doors of Iron, richly wrought and gilt: In the Wings are two vry noble Stair-Cases that lead to the Lodgings, in which ap∣pear all the Pomp and Beauty that the most curious Sculptures and Paintings by the greatest Masters of the Age, together with excessive rich Furniture, can make: Behind this, and fronting the Garden, is a noble Range of Building, adorned with Statues and Car∣vings, and a Piazza of one hundred Yards in length. The Gardens are extream delightful, and surpass all other for pleasant Walks and great number of Foun∣tains, in which the Water is diversified a thousand ways, through a multitude of Marble and Copper Statues, that represent abundance of curious Devices, as the Triumphal Arch, the Water Mountain, the Theatre, the Pyramid, the Basin of Ceres, the Basin of Flora, the Basin of Apollo, the Basin of Saturn, the Basins of the Crown, Mermaid, Dragon, the Water-Bower, the Watter-Alley, many of the Fables of Aesop represented by Figures, which spout Water; together with abundance more too long to mention. Besides these Fountains here is a very large Canal, in which Yachts and Gallies sail and row to and a∣gain: On one side of the Canal stands a fine Summer-house called Trianon, and on the other side is the Menagerie, where are kept all the Outlandish Beasts of greatest Rarity. Every part of this House and Garden is perfectly beautiful, and gives Satisfaction to the most curious Spectators. S. Germain en Laye, is a very fair Town pleasantly seated on an Hill near the River Seine, and the Wood of Laye at the distance of 15 Miles from Paris to the West, and 4 from Poissy. It is adorn'd with two stately Palaces, the Old and the New, in which the French Kings have often resided: The Gardens and Waterworks were formerly much celebrated, but since those of Versailles have been made, they are less regarded. In this Palace were born Henry II. A. D. 1513. Charles IX. in 1550. and Lewis XIV. on the 5th Day of September, 1638. A Peace was concluded here between the said Lewis XIV. the King of Sweden and the Elector of Brandenburgh on the 29th day of June, 1679. About a League from S. Germain, toward Paris, stands The Wood of Treason, le Bois de la Trahison, so called from a Plot there contrived by one Ganelon, against the House of Ardennes, the Peers of France, and the chief Generals of the Emperor Charlemagne, which was afterward put in Execution at the Battle of Roncevaux near the Pyrenean Mountains. This Wood is divided by a large Road or High-way. There are also divers other considerable Towns not far from Pa∣ris particularly those of Ruel, S. Maur S. Cloud, where the King hath another Palace, Meudon, Vanvres, Con∣stans, Gonesse, Montmarte, &c. besides. S. Dennis, Fanum Sancti Dionysii, a small Town water'd with the Streams of a Rivulet, called La Croae, which a little below falls into the Seine, and adorn'd with a most famous Abbey, founded by King ago∣bert I. as also a stately Church, which the same Prince erected, A. C. 636. in hononour of S. Denis, the Pa∣tron or Tutelar Saint of France, whose Body was in∣terred therein. But this Church being in time fallen to decay, Abbot Sugger caused it to be rebuilt in a larger Form, as it now appears, within the space of three Years and three Months, under the Reign of Lewis VII. as it is Recorded in the Acts of the said Sugger. It was finished A. D. 1144. and hath been since very remarkable for its Treasure, and the sump∣tuous Tombs of the French Monarchs. The Town was formerly of larger extent than at present. It is a little way distant from the Seine to the East, and 8 miles from Paris to the North. Montmorency, Mnmorenciacum aut Mons Morentia∣cus, a small Town distant about 12 Miles from Paris to the North West, stands on an Hill, and hath im∣parted its Name to a very pleasant and fruitful Val∣ley; as also to an illustrious Family that Founded the Church of S. Martin. Indeed Montmorency is the principal Barony of the Realm, and the first Terri∣tory dignified with this Title, which was heretofore conferred only on Princes, and whereon (as they say) above 600 Mannors in Fee sometime depended. Af∣terward King Henry II. erected it into a Dutchy, A.D. 1551. in Favour of Anne de Montmorency Constable of France; and when this Family was extinct, Lewis XIII. bestowed the same Title on Henry of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, in 1633. This Town was burnt by the English in 1358. BRIE-FRANCOIS, Bria Francica, lies be∣tween the Rivers Seine and Marne; it is a very fertile Country in Corn, Fruits, &c. The Principal Towns are these, viz. Lagny. Brie Comte Robert. Rosoy. Ville-Neuve St. George. LAGNY, Latiniacum, is a large Town situated on the River Marne, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge 17 Miles from Paris to the East, 4 from Gournay sur Marne, and 12 from Meaux to the South-West. It enjoys the Title of a County; in it is a Famous Monastery of Benedictin Monks Founded by S. Fursi or Fousi, a Scotch Gentleman, in the Eighth Century. This Town was ruin'd by the Normans in the Ninth Century, but Herbert of Vermandois re∣pair'd it, caused the Church to be rebuilt, and was buried therein, A. C. 993. Many other noble Men were likewise Benefactors to the same Abbey, and Ives, Legate of the See of Rome, held a Council in it, A. D. 1142.
Brie-Comte-Robert, Bria-Comitis-Robert, is a Town of small extent, built near the Brook Yerre, in a very Fruitful Country, 15 Miles from Paris to the South-East, wherein is established a Court of Judicature depending on the Castelet of Paris. It is also sup∣posed to have been the Place of Nativity of Pope Martin IV. Rosoy, Rosetum, is seated upon the same Rivulets Yerre above Brie-Comte-Robert, 20 Miles from Meaux to the South, and somewhat more from Paris to the South-East. Ville-Neuve S. George, Villa-Nova Sancti Georgii, is a small Burgh standing near the River Seine, 10 Miles from Paris to the South, and about 8 from Corbeil. HƲREPOIS, Hurepaesium, constitutes part of of the Provostship and Vicounty of Paris, beginning at the Seine under the little Bridge, and extending it self along the side of the River to Corbeil, between Beausse to the West, Brie to the East, and Gatinois to the South. The chief Towns are these, viz. Melun, Cap. Corbeil, La Ferte-Alois, Fontaine-bleau, &c. MELƲN, Melodunum, a very fair, large and populous Town, is seated on the Seine, at the distance of 8 Miles from Corbeil, 33 from Sens to the North-West, and 25 from Paris to the South. It is built on an Island, and on both sides of the River, after the manner of Paris, which gave occasion to the Proverb, Apres Paris Melun. It is without doubt a Place of much Aniquity, and was considerable in the time of Julius Caesar, as is declared by him in his Commen∣taries. It is well Fortified with a Castle, encom∣passed with large Suburbs, and adorned with a great number of beautiful Churches, particularly the Col∣legiate dedicated to the Virgin Mary, the Parochial of S. Stephen. S. Aspar, and S. Ambrose, besides the Ab∣bey of S. Peter and divers other Monasteries. More∣over it bears the Title of a County, and hath given its Name to an Illustrious Family, from whence have sprung many Prelates and Officers of the Crown. The Normans sacked this Town, A. C. 845. the English Forces took it after a Siege of 4 or five Months in 1420. and it suffered much damage during the Civil Wars of France in the XVI Century, but hath since reco∣vered its former Splendor. Corbeil, Crbelium, aut Corvolium, olim Josedum, stands also on the Banks of the Seine, which receives into its Channel the Waters of the Juine, or River of Eampes, being distant 7 Miles from Melun, 15 from Fontaine-bleau to the North, and as many from Paris to the South. It was heretofore a Roman Co∣lony, and took its Name from Corvulo Governor of the Gauls. It was governed by its own Counts since the X and XI Centuries, of whom one named Aimoin founded the Church of S. Spire, and established there∣in a College of 12 Canons in memory of the 12 Apo∣stles; b hath been united to the Crown ever since the time of Lewis the Gross, and hath still the Title of a County: Here is a fair Stone-bride of nine Arches over the Seine. Fontaine-bleau, Fons Bellaqueus, seu Fons Aquae Pul∣chrae, is a very fair Town distant about 3 Miles from the Seine, 18 from Melun, and 30 from Paris to the South: Near this place is situated the Forest of Bicure, containing 26000 Acres of Ground, together with many Herds of Deer and all sorts of Game; in the midst of which large Wood of high Trees stands the Royal Palace of Fontain-bleau, taking its Name from the great number of Springs, of clear Water and Fountains that appear on all sides. A Castle was first erected here by King Lewis VII. A. D. 1169. but Francis I. began to beautifie it with divers sorts of Ornaments, more especially a curious Library which was afterwards transported to Paris, and his Successors continuing in the same design, have since rendered it one of the most magnificent Seats of Europe. About 3 Leagues from Fontaine-bleau, is another stately Man∣sion-House or Palace known by the Name of Fleury. which is remarkable for a large Canal of Spring-water enclosed with Walls on both sides, a large Walk shaded with Trees, that seem to be joined together in an admirable Arbour, &c. The Territory of GATINOIS, Vastinium, lies to the South of Hurepois bordering on Beausse. It de∣rives its Name from the Rocks and Sands which the Inhabitants of the Country call Gastines: Part of this Province belongs to the Government of the Orlean∣nois; that part that belongs to this Government of the Isle of France, contains these principal Towns. viz. Nemours, Cap. Dourdan, Courtenay, Moret, Montheri, Motargis. NEMOƲRS, Nemosium, aut Nemoracum, is Si∣tuated in a Plain on the River Loing, and defended with an old Castle, being distant 10 Miles from Fon∣taine-bleau, 15 from Montargis, and 40 from Paris to the South. The most considerable publick Edifices, are, the Priory of S. John, and the Abbey of Nostro Dame de la Joye, possessed by Nuns of the Cistercian Order. This Town was heretofore subject to the Jurisdiction of certain particular Lords, and after∣ward to that of its Counts; until, at length, Charles VI. caused it to be enclosed with Walls, and erect∣ed the adjacent Territory into a Dutchy, A. D. 1404. Dourdan, Durdanum aut Dardincum, is a small Town seated on the Frontiers of Beausse on the River Orge, 26 Miles from Paris toward Orleans, and 28 from Nemours to the North-West. It at first was part of the Possessions of Hugh Capet, but hath been since often pawn'd and sold, and at last bought by Lewis XIII. It was also very much infested during the Civil Wars, and taken by the Protestants in the Years 1562 and 1567. Courtenay, Curtiniacum and Corteniacum, stands on an Hill on the Banks of the Rivulet Clairy, between Sens to the East, and Montargis to the West, about 56 Miles from Paris to the South. This Town, thô of very small compass, hath nevertheless imparted its Name to divers Princes, whose Actions are celebrated in the the French History, and of whom some have been Emperors of Constantinople. Montargis, Montargium, aut Mons Argi, is a very fair Town built at the Foot of a Hill, watered with the River Loing, and fenced with an old Castle, which was Re-built by Charles V. being distant 25 Leagues from Paris to the South towards Nevers, and 18 from Orleans to the East. It is annexed to the Demesns of the Crown, and bears the Titles of a Balliage, Election and Provostship. It was Built in the Year 1522, and afterward Rebuilt and enlarged. MANTOIS, Meduntanus Ager, is extended from St. Germain to the Frontiers of Normandy, along the sides of the River Seine, and includes within its Ter∣ritories these considerable Towns, viz. Mante, Cap. Poissy, Montfort l' Amry, Meulan, St. Germain en Laye.
MANTE, Medunta, is seated on the South side of the River Seine, which is there cover'd with a Stone Bridge, near the Frontiers of Normandy; from whence it is distant only 6 miles, and also 25 from Evreux to the East, and 30 below Paris to the North-West. In this Town died King Phillip the II. Sur∣named the August, on the 14th day of July, A. D. 1223. Poissy, Pisciacum, is a small Town situated near the Confluence of the Oise and the Seine, at the di∣stance of 15 miles from Paris to the North-east, toward Rouen. It is famous for the Nativity of Lewis IX. King of France, who was born there A. D. 1215, and on the account of a Conference held between the Roman Catholicks and Protestants, un∣der Charles IX. Here are establish'd divers Religi∣ous Houses, and among others a Convent of Nuns of the Dominican Order, founded by Phillip the Fair, &c. Montfort L' Amaury, Montfortium Amalrici, took the name of Amaury from that of its Lords, and stands on an Hill, the foot whereof is watered with the streams of a little River; 27 miles from Paris to the West toward Druex, and 15 from Mante to the South. King Robert caus'd a Castle to be erected here, which is now half ruin'd, and enclos'd the Town with Walls. VEXIN-FRANCOIS, Veximum, aut Velcassi∣num Franciscum, is extended between the Rivers Oise and Depte, including these Towns, within its Juris∣diction. Pontoise Cap. Magny. Chaumont PONTOISE, Pontisara, seu Pons ad Oesiam, is situated on a Hill and the Banks of the Oise, between L'Isle Adam and the confluence of this River, with that of the Seine, 20 miles from Paris to the North-west towards Rouen. It is a place of considerable importance, and adorned with a fair Stone Bridge over the Oise, from whence its name is derived. Magny, Magniacum, stands on the confines of Nor∣mandy, in the midst between Paris and Rouen, at an equal distance of 34 miles from both these Citys. Chaumont, Calvomontium, aut Calvus Mons, is a small Town between Beauvais to the South and Man∣te to the North, being distant 12 miles from the first, and 20 from the last, and 16 from Pontoise to the North. BEAƲVOISIS, Bellovacensis Ager, lies be∣tween the River Oise and the Frontiers of Normandy, to the North of Vexin Francois, containing these Towns, viz. Beauvais Bish. Cap. Clermont. Gerberoy. Merlou. BEAƲVAIS, Bellovacum, aut Coesaromagus, is seated on the River Therin, at the distance of 43 miles from Paris to the North, as many from Rouen to the East, 30 from Compeign, and 15 from the Borders of Picardy. It is a large and well fortified City and Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Rheims, the Bishop whereof is one of the twelve Ec∣clesiastical Peers of the Realm. It is Honourably mentioned by Caesar, who says that the People of this Territory were very powerful and withstood him the longest. This is called the Maiden City having been always faithful and not suffer'd it self to be taken. Our English Forces attempted to surprize it, A. D. 1433, but did not effect it. Nor did Charles the War∣like, Duke of Burgundy, prove more successful when he besieged it in 1472, being forced to raise the Siege 26 days after his Trenches were Open'd. However, violent Commotions often arose in this City on the account of Religion, during the Civil Wars of France in the last Age. It is a place of good Trade, which consists in Stuffs, Cloaths, Earthen Ware, &c. The Bishop was formerly sole Temporal as well as Spiritual Lord of the City and adjacent Country; but since 1539, a Bailiwick and Presidial have been establish'd here. However the Bishop hath still great Power, and is Temporal Lord of the Bo∣rough Gerberoy, and rich in great endowments. Clermont, Cleromontium, or Clermont en Beauvoisis, for Distinction, is built on a rising ground and the sides of the River Breches, 16 miles from Beauvois to the East, 14 from Compeigne to the West, and 10 from Senlis to the North. It hath been dignified with the Title of a County ever since the time of Robert of France, Son of St. Lewis and Count of Clermont, from whom the Royal House of Bourbon is de∣riv'd, Gerberoy, Gerboredum, stands on the Frontiers of Pi∣cardy, 8 miles from Beauvais to the North-West. In the Reign of our Henry VI. A. D. 1435. the Eng∣glish lost a Battle near this Town. Merlou is a Bo∣rough seated on the River Terain, or Therin, 4 or 5 miles from Clermont. The Duchy of VALOIS, Valesium, extends it sel in the Isle of France, between Beauvoisis, Soissonnois and Leonnois containing within its Limits these prin∣cipal Citys and Towns, viz. Crespy. Cap. Senlis Bish. Compeigne. La ferte Milon. Pont Sainte Maixance. Villers Cotterets, &c. CRESPY, Crepiacum, aut Crispeium, formerly a very considerable City, now a Town of a small com∣pass, nevertheless the chief of the Country of Valois, and hath in it a Provostship and Castellany; it is distant 32 miles from Paris to the North-east, 15 from Meaux to the North, and 12 from Compeign to the South. In this Town a memorable Treaty of Peace was concluded between the Emperor Charles V. and King Francis I. on the 18 day of September, A. D. 1544. The ancient Counts of Valois had the Title of Counts of Crespi also, and used to reside here in a Castle said to be built by King Dagobert, which is now almost Ruin'd. Senlis, Sylvanectum, is situated in a very pleasant place on the Brook Nonnette, near the Forest of Rets, which gives occasion to its Latin Name, 25 miles from Paris to the North, 16 from Compeigne to the South, 5 from the River Oise, and 25 from Beauvais to the South-east, It is a considerable City, being the Capital of the County, or Bailiage of Senlis, and the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Archbishop of Rheims. St. Proculus Converted the Inhabitants to the Christian Religion, and was the first Bishop of this Diocess. The Cathedral is Dedicated to the Virgin Mary; here are also 7 Parochial and two Colle∣giate Churches. The City of Senlis was Besieged by the Leaguers in 1679 but they were beaten thence, and a signal Battle fought on that occasion between the Duke of Longueville, who Commanded the King's Forces, and the Duke of Aumale, one of the Principal Heads of the League, wherein the lat∣ter lost 1500 Men. Compeigne, Compendium, stands on the Banks of the River Oise, which a little above falls into the Aime, and near the Forest of Guise, at the distance of 15 miles from Senlis, 40 from Paris 10 the North, 16
from Nayon, 20 from Soissons to the West, 30 from Beauvais to the East. It had a stately Castle, which was the seat of several of the Kings of France; of these Charles II. Surnamed the Bald, Emperor, found∣ed a famous Monastery, and repaired and beautified the whole Town, and call'd it Carolopolis. It is still a considerable Town, and a Place of good Trade, several Manufactures being made in it. The famous Maid of Orleans, Ja of Arcke, was taken Prisoner here by the English, when they besieged it in 1430. Ferte-Milon, Firmitas Milonis, is water'd by the Rivulet Oure, or Oureque, and stands between Meaux Soissons and Senlis, 35 miles from Paris to the North-east, and 40 from Rheims to the West. It was so called, as it were the Force or Fortress of Count Mi∣lon, who built it under the Reign of Lewis the Gross; afterwards it was possessed by Hugh the Great, the Son of King Henry I. Count of Vermondois, Valois, &c. who founded the Priory of Voulgis. It is a good Town, and hath large Suburbs and a strong Castle. It was very much impair'd during the Civil Wars, in the end of the XVI Century. A Provostship and Castleay is establish'd here, from whence Appeals lye to the Presidial Court of Senlis. SOISSONOIS, Sssinensis Ager, lyes between Valois and Laonnois, and hath these chief Towns, viz. Soissons Bish. Cap. Braine. Velly, &c. SOISSONS, Suesses, sive Suessones & Au∣gusta Suessonum, is a very fair, large and well forti∣fied City, seated on the River Asne, at the distance of about 16 miles from the Frontiers of Picardy and Champagne, 24 from Reims to the West, 22 from Compeigne to the East, 30 from Meaux to the North, and 50 from Paris to the North-east. In the time of the first Race of the French Kings, it was the Capi∣tal City of a Kingdom of the same Name; after∣ward it bore the title of a County, and was annex∣ed to the Government of Picardy as well as Laon, although they now depend on that of the Isle of France. It is at present the seat of a presidial Court, and a Generality, as also the See of a Bishop, who is the first Suffragan to the Archbishop of Reims, and in his absence hath a right to Crown the Kings of France. The Country hereabouts is very fruitful in Corn. Braine, Brennacum, aut Brana, is a small Town and Abby on the River Vsle, between Fimes to the East, and Soissons to the West, about 10 miles from each, and 5 from the River Aisne to the South. Veilly stands on the Aisne 10 miles above Soissons, a small Town and not considerable. LAONNOIS, Ladunensis Ager is extended be∣tween part of Champagne, Picardy, Beauvoises and Soissonois, including these principal Cities, Towns, &c. viz. Lan Bish. Cap. y. iesse. Noyon Bish. Chauni. Premontre, &c. LAON, Laodunum, aut Lugdunum, Clavatum, is a large well fortified City, and an Episcopal See un∣der the Metropolitan of Rheims; this Bishop is one of the ancient Ecclesiastical Peers of the Realm, en∣joys the title of a Duke, and hath a right to carry the Sacred Vial la St. Ampole, at the Coronation of the Kings of France. It was at first only a Castle built at the top of an high Hill, and called Laudu∣num, from a Name commonly attributed by the Gauls to all places of such Situation, but in time grew to be a pretty good Town, which King Clovis the Great enlarged and made a City, and St. Remigius or Remi of Reims erected the Bishoprick and founded a Ca∣thedral Church, on which at present depend 84 Canons, of which four are Dignitaries. This City is distant 30 miles from Paris to the North-east, 18 from Soissons, 35 from Compeign to the East, and 30 from Rheims to the North west. Liesse, Laetitia is a small Town on the Frontiers of Picardy and Champagne, about 8 miles from Laon, to the East. It is chiefly famous on the account of the Pilgrims that frequently resort hither from divers parts to pay their Devotions in a Church Dedicated to the Virgin Mary; where even the Kings of France have used to pay their Devotions as soon as they came to the Crown without which they believed they had not the Power to cure the King's Evil. Noyon, Noviodunum Noviomagus, aut Noviomum, is situated on the Rivulet Verte, which a little below falls into the Oise, at the distance of 20 miles from Soissons to the North-west, 25 from Laon to the West, and 55 from Paris to the North. The Archbishop∣rick of Vermandis was translated hither A. C. 520 when Agusta Vermanduorum, or St. Quintin, the Me∣tropolis of that Diocess, was ruin'd by the Barbari∣ans. Noyon is a well-built City adorned with fair Buildings and Magnificent Churches, the chief of which is the Cathedral dedicated to the Virgin Mary, besides a great number of Fountains, and four Suburbs. This Bishop and Jurisdiction over all Flan∣ders before Tournay was erected into a See. He is still Count and Peer of France. It may not be amiss to Note that the famous John Calvin was born here, A. 1509. Chauny, Calniacum, stands on the Banks of the River Oise, about 6 miles from Noyon to the East, and somewhat less from La Fere to the South. It is a Royal Town and a Castleany, although of a small compass. It was annexed to the Crown by Charles V. A. D. 1378. Premontre, Praemnstratum, is a Village distant 8 miles from Laon to the West, about 16 from Noyon to the East, and 15 from Soissons to the North. It took its Name from a Famous Abby of Canons Regu∣lar of St. Augustin, Founded there by St. Norbert, sometime Archbishop of Magdeburg. The Isle of France, with the Soissonnois, Laonnois, Beauvaisis, &c. hath for Governor General, the Duke D' Estrees; of the City, Vicounty and Provostship of Paris, the Duke di Greves, besides which there is a Grand Provost of Paris and the Isle of France, proper∣ly so called; 4 Lieutenant-Generals in Beauvaisis, and Vexin Francois, a Baily of Valois, about 20 Governors of the King's Houses, and particular Governors of Beauvais, Compeign, Marle, Laon, Noyon, and Soissons, Villers, Senlis, Crespi, en Valois, &c.
CHAP. VI. BRETAGNE, Armonica, aut Britannia Minor. THE Province of Bretagne, or the lesser Britain, apparently took its modern Name from those People of Great Britain who, having escaped the fury of the Saxons, arriv'd on these Coasts, where they were courteously entertained by the Inhabitants, and incorporated with them into one Body. They still retain a different Language from the rest of France. This Country was heretofore called Armo∣rica, i. e. ad Mare sita, from its situation on the Sea-shoar, and afterward Llydaw, in the British Tongue in the same sense; as also Letavia in Latin, by the English Writers of the middle Age. It is bounded on the East by the Provinces of Anjou, Maine and part of Normandy, advancing it self in form of a Penisle to the West into the Ocean, with which it is encom∣passed on the three other sides. Its utmost extent from East to West, consists of about 170 English miles; that is to say, from Vitrey to the point of Conquet, and about 100 miles from North to South, viz. From St. Malo to the Borders of Poictou, but in other places it is not above 70 miles broad. It is situa∣ted between the 47th Degree, and almost the 49th of Latitude. Julius Caesar first made himself Master of this Pro∣vince, and it remained under the dominion of the Romans until Maximus having caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor in England, A. C. 382, granted to one of his Lieutenant-Generals named Conan Meridiac, the title of King of Armorica or Bretagne, which Soveraignty continued until the time of Clouis and Chilperick, who oblig'd these Princes to be content with the stile of Counts. But they often Revolted, until Dagobert II. rendred them Tributary; and Charlemagne entirely subdued them A. C. 787. How∣ever they took up Armes against Lewis the Debonnaire and Charles the Bald, and their last King Solomon was slain in Battle. Afterwards the Country was Go∣vern'd by divers Princes until the Year 1213 at which time Aix, the Heiress of Bretagne, Married Peter of Dreux Maucler, whose Successors to the num∣ber of Ten retained the Possession thereof under the title of a Dutchy, until A. D. 1491, when Ann of Bretagne the only Daughter of Francis II. the last Duke was espoused to King Charles VIII. and after∣ward to Lewis XII. who inseparably united this Dut∣chy to the Crown of France, A. D. 1491. The Soil of this Province yields Pasture, Hemp, Wood, Minerals, some Corn but no Wine; and a∣bout Nantes great quantity of Salt is made. The Meadows feed abundance of Cattle, especially Hor∣ses, of which a very good race are bred here. Hemp and Flax grows in great plenty, so that abundance of Canvas and Linnen is made here. The Forests are many and large, and contain great variety of ame. Between Chateau-Briant and Martignes, are found Mines of Iton and Lead, and in other places some of Copper and Tin. This Province is happy in good Havens, having more good Sea-Ports than any other part of France, and many Islands all round it. The Inhabitants are good Fisher-men, which they are encouraged to by the great variety of delicate Fish, daily taken on their Coasts; particularly Sal∣mons, Herrings, Sardines, and a certain Fish of a most delicious taste, called Imperador, or Emperor at Marseille, and Gracieux Seignieur or Gracious Lord in Bretagne; besides Tunnies, Porpesses, Dolphins, Sturgeon, and some others, appropriated to the Royal Fishery. Travelers admire the Jewels of Amber at Belle-Isle, the Aqueducts at Dol, the Vaults between Rieux and Redon, the Subterranean Torrent in the Forest of St. Aubin du Cormier, the singular Properties of the River Ardre, and the Lake of Grand-lieu near Nantes, from whence are taken many Toad-stones and Serpent-Tongues of extraordi∣nary Vertue, The most considerable Rivers of Bretagne are the Loire, the Vilaine, Rance, Blavet, Aufen, Trieux, La∣itta, Oder, Arguenon and Covesnon. Bretagne Divided into its Principal Parts. The Upper towards the East in 5 viz. The Bishoprick of Rennes, Chief Town, Rennes. The Bishoprick of Nantes, Chief Town same Name. The Bishoprick of St. Malo. Idem. The Bishoprick of Dol. Idem. The Bishoprick of St. Brieux. Idem. The Lower toward the West in 4. viz. The Bishoprick of Treguier. Idem. The Bishoprick of St. Paul. De Leon. Idem. The Bishoprick of Quimpercorentin. Idem. The Bishoprick of Vannes. Idem. The Bishoprick of Diocess of RENNES, Episco∣patus Rhedonensis, is situated on the Frontiers of Nor∣mandy, and the Province of Maine, and bounded on the North by the Bishoprick of Dol. The chief Towns are these, viz. Rennes Bish. Cap. Vitrey. Fougueres. Antraim, &c. RENNES, Rhedones aut Conducte Rhedonum, stands on the River Vilaine, which here receives the Lille, and divides the Town into two parts, and at the distance of 54 miles from Nantes to the North, 40 from St. Malo to the South, and 30 from the Bor∣ders of the Province of Maine to the West. It is the Capital of Bretagne, and was heretofore the place of Residence of the Counts or Earls of Bretagne, and hath been for some time the Seat of the Parliament of the whole Province, which was Establish'd there by King Henry II. It is an Episcopal See under the Metro∣politan of Tours. The Diocess contains 450 Parishes, besides two notalbe Abbys, viz. Of St. Magdalen and St. George, built within the Walls of the City, a College of Jesuits, and divers other Houses for Religious Persons. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to St. Peter, besides which there are several Parochial Churches. The Palace where the Parliament Sit, is a fair Building. The Clock of it is admired, as be∣ing one of the largest in France. This City is plea∣santly seaed in a fruitful Country, being environ'd with Pastures and Forests, and hath a good Trade by means of the River.
Vitrey, Vitroeum, Vitriacum, and Victoriacum, is a fair Walled Town, bearing the Title of a Barony, and stands also on the Banks of the Vilaine, 24 Miles above Rennes to the East, and not above 5 from the Borders of Maine. The Protestants had formerly a considerable Church here. Fougeres, Fiticeriae, is seated on the River Covesnon, near the Frontiers of Normandy and Maine, 15 Miles from Vitrey to the North, and near 30 from Rennes to the South; 5 from Vitrey, and as many from Rennes to the North. This Town hath given its Name to a Noble Family, and is noted for the fine Glass made in it. Raouel de Fougers, Fortified it and Bulit the Castle. The Bishoprick of NANTES, Episcopatus Nan∣netensis, lies to the South of Rennes, between the Frontiers of Anjou and Poitou, and the River Vilaine. The most considerable Towns are these, viz. Nantes, Bish. Cap. Ancenis, Chateau-Briant, Guerande, Machecou, Clisson, La Roche-Bernard, &c. NANTES, Nannetes, aut Condivincum, the Ca∣pital City of a County of the same Name, is seated on the Northern Bank of the River Loire, near the confluence of the River Ardre, about 30 Miles from the Sea to the East, 40 from Angers to the West, and 55 from Rennes to the South. It was the Seat of the later Dukes of Bretagne, and gave the Title of a Count to their eldest Sons. It is at present a handsome large City, well Fortified, and hath a strong Castle flanked with Towers and Half-Moons. It is the See of a Bishop, who is Suffragan to the Archbishop of Tours, and is a Councellor in the Parliament of Ren∣nes. Here is a University, a Presidial, Generality and Chamber of Accounts. The Publick Buildings are the Cathedral Dedicated to St. Peter, a fair an∣cient Structure, beautified with two high Towers; in it are to be seen the Tombs of several Dukes of Bretagne; the Collegiate Church of the Virgin Mary, and some Parochial ones; divers Monasteries; the Town-House built after the Modern Architecture; the Palace of the Chamber of Accounts; that of the Presidial Court, with a beautiful Tower and Clock; and a stately Hospital. This City is a great Mart for Trade; vast quantities of all sorts of Merchan∣dizes are brought in by the River Loire, which flows up to its Walls, and brings up very large Boats, and Ships of small Burden: And from hence by the same Rivers Foreign Goods are sent to Anjou, Blois, Orle∣ans, &c. and Native Commodities brought down; an excellent sort of Brandy is Exported hence to Foreign Countries. By reason of this convenience of Traffick, the City has from time to time been largely encreased, and there are now four Suburbs round it, which are well filled with Inhabitants. A famous Edict in Fa∣vour of the Protestants was made here by King Henry IV. A. D. 1598, which was Registred in the Parliament of Paris, and Confirmed and Sworn to by his Successor Lewis XIII. Notwithstanding which the present King hath Repealed it in the Year 1685. and severely Persecuted the Protestants. Ancenis, Ancenissum, and Andenesium, was hereto∣fore the chief Town of the Amnites, stands likewise near the banks of Loire, and is distant 25 Miles from Angers to the West, and 18 from Nantes to the North-East. It was formerly defended with a Castle Built by Aremburg, the Wife of a Breton Count, named Gueree, &c. Chateau-Briant, Castrum Brientii, is a small Town Fenced with an old Castle on the Frontiers of Anjou, about 30 Miles from Nantes to the North. Guerande, Guerada, aut Aula Quiriaca, is between the Mouths of the Vilaine and the Loire, 38 Miles be∣low Nantes to the West, and is remarkable on ac∣count of the adjacent Salt-pits, near the Port of Croisil. Machecou, Machicolium, is the chief Town of a small County, commonly called the Duchy of Retz, and seated on the South side of the Loire, about 10 Miles from it, 20 from Nantes to the South-West, 4 from the Frontiers of Poitou, and about 5 from the Coasts of the Ocean. The Bishoprick or Diocess of St. MALO, Episco∣patus Macloviensis, is situated on the Northern Part of the Province, near that of Dol, and includes these re∣markable Towns, viz. St. Malo, Bishoprick. Dinant, Jocelin, Montfort, &c. St. MALO, Maclovium, or Macloviopolis, one of the chief Towns and Ports of the upper Bretagne, is seated on the Northern Coast, and built on a Rock in the Sea, call'd the Island of St. Aaron, and joined to the Continent by the means of a long Causey, of not above 30 Fathoms broad, the entrance whereof is defended by a strong Castle, flanked with large Towers, and the Town surrounded with Walls, deep Ditches, and a sufficient Garrison; besides which to the Sea it is secured by a shoal of Sand that encom∣passes it, and several Rocks and small Islands, that make a Haven of difficult Access, insomuch, that it is reputed one of the Keys of France. It is conside∣rable for its Traffick and Strength, and the Skill of its Inhabitants in Maritime Affairs, by which means great numbers of Privateers are in time of War from hence fitted out, and much disturb the Trade of these Seas. It was Founded on the Ruins of the ancient Alet, or Guid-Aleth. and derives its Name from that of its first Bishop Maclovius, or Macutus, and is di∣stant 10 Miles from Dol to the North-West, 36 from Rennes, and 90 from Nantes to the North, and 200 Miles West from Paris. St. Malo was at first only an Abbey, until the Bishoprick of Quidalet was transla∣ted thither in the Year 1172. but it hath ever since retained the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Tours. The Cathedral Dedicated to St. Vincent, is one of the most ancient of all France. Jean de la Grille, removed the Episcopal See hither, A. D. 1650. Besides the Cathedral, there are many fair Monasteries, and some other publick Buildings of good Note.
map A PARTICULAR CHART of the Road and Adjacent Coasts of St. MALO as also of the Mouth of the RIVER DINAN as they appear at the Lowest Tides Dinant, Dinantium, stands on the Banks of the River Rance, about 15 Miles from St. Malo to the South. This Town in time past hath been well For∣tified, and hath conferr'd the Title of an Earl on the younger Sons of the Duke of Bretagne. Jocelin, is a small Town on the side of the River Ouste, or Aust, near 40 Miles from Rennes to the West, and as many from St. Brieux to the South. Montfort, a small Town on the River Melin, which falls into the Vilaine, stands 10 Miles from Rennes to the West. The Diocess of DOL, Episcopatus Dolensis, is of small Extent, and adjoins to that of St. Malo; it lies in the North-East Angle of Bretagne, and bounded by the Frontiers of Normandy and the Ocean. The City of Dol, Dola, and Dolensis Ʋrbs, is seated in a Marshy Plain, at the distance only of 6 Miles from the Coasts of the British Sea to the South, 10 from St. Malo to the South-East, and 30 from Rennes. It takes up a very little space of Ground in compass, but is defended with a strong Fort. The Cathedral Church bears the Name of St. Sonson, who was the first Bishop of this Diocess; and some of his Succes∣sors have assum'd to themselves the Title of Metropo∣litans of the Province, which Preeminence neverthe∣less after a long Tryal at Law, was at length granted to the Archbishop of Tours. The Bishoprick or Diocess of St. BRIEƲX, Briacesis Episcopatus, lies between those of St. Malo, Treguier and Vannes, containing these Principal Towns, viz. St. Brieux, Bish. Cap. Pontieux. Quintin. Jagon. Lambale, &c. St. BRIEƲX, Briocum, aut Fanum Sancti Bri∣oci, is situated on the Gulph of Hilion, between the Rivers of Trieu and Arguenon, being distant 25 Miles from Treguier to the East, 36 from St. Malo to the West, and 55 from Rennes. It is well Fortified, and hath a convenient Habour on the Coasts of the Brit∣ish Sea. This City takes its Name from St. Brieux, one of its Prelates. The Episcopal See was first Founded by Neomene Duke of Bretagne. in the time of King Charles II. sirnamed the Bald, A. C. 144. and its Bishop is Suffragan to the Archbishop of Tours. Pontrieux, is a good Town, seated on the River Trieu, from which it takes its Name, at the distance of about 10 Miles from the British Sea, and 20 from St. Brieux to the West. Quintin, Quintinum, is a small Town, and stands about 10 Miles from S. Brieux to the South. Lambale, Lambalium, was heretofore the Chief Town of the Arabiliates, an ancient People mention'd by Caesar (according to the Opinion of la Vigenere and others) and sometime appertained to the Juris∣diction of the House o Clisson; it is distant only 10
or 12 Miles from the British Sea, 12 from S. Brieux to the East, and 45 from Rennes to the North-West. This Place is more especially Famous on the account of the adjacent Pastures, wherein are fed many Herds of Cattle, and for its considerable Trade in Parch∣ment, &c. The Bishoprick of TREGƲIER, Episcopatus Trecoriensis, extends it self on the Northern Coasts of this Province, between S. Brieux and S. Pol de Leon, including these chief Towns, viz. Treguier, Bish. Cap. Morlaix, Guingamp, Lannian, Garlesquin. TREGƲIER or LANTRIGƲET, Tre∣cora aut Trecorium, olim Vorganium, is a very ancient City on the Northern Coasts of Bretagne, and hath been often exposed to the Incursions of the Saxons, Danes and Normans. The Bishop is both Spiritual and Temporal Lord thereof, and assumes the Title of a Count. The Cathedral Church bears the Name of S. Tudgal, who was the first Prelate of this City. It hath a safe Harbour on the Coasts of the British Sea, and is distant 25 Miles from S. Brieux to the West, 23 from S. Pol de Leon to the East, and 80 from Ren∣nes to the North-West. Morlaix, Morlaeum aut Mons Relaxus, situate on the side of a Hill, between two Valleys, near the Sea-Coasts, on a River of the same Name, which a little below falls into a Bay called le Toreau: It is a very large, well-built, and populous wall'd Town; the River is deep, and receives Vessels of 100 Tuns, which come up into the Town; by the Convenience whereof it is a Place of good Trade, which consists in Flax, Canvass, Paper (made here in great quan∣tity) Linnen-Cloth and other Commodities that are exported hence to England, Holland, and other Parts. This hath so encreased the number of the Inhabitants, that two Suburbs have been added to the Town, which are named Venice and S. Matthew. Here are many beautiful Buildings, among which the Palace called l'Hopital is one of the stateliest in the Province, and magnificent Churches, whereof that of the Vir∣gin Mary is the most noted. On the top of the Hill stands the remainder of an old Castle, now almost ruin'd. Morlaix is distant 30 Miles from Treguier, to the South-West, 40 from Brieux to the West, and 12 from S. Pol de Leon to the South-East. The Bishoprick or Diocess of S. POL DE LEON, Episcopatus S. Pauli Leonini, is bounded on the North and West by the Ocean; on the South by the Bishoprick of Quimper-Corentin, and on the East by that of Treguier. The Principal Towns are these, viz. S. Pol de Leon, Bish. Cap. Lesneven, Lanaerneau, Brest, Portal, The Isle of Ouessant, or Ʋshant, &c. S. PAƲL, or POL DE LEON, or LEON∣DOƲL, Leona & Fanum Sancti Pauli Leonini, aut etiam Staviocanus Portus, & Civitas Osismiorum, was a considerable Town even in the Time of Julius Caesar, who in his Commentaries makes mention of Osismii, whose Capital City (according to Ptolemy) was Vorganicum, which is called Vergium in the Roman Itinerary, and Osismii in the Notitia Imperii; it hath been ruined long since, and of its ancient Diocess have been formed these three of S. Pol de Leon, S. Brieux and Treguier. This City is situated on the Sea-Coasts between Lantriguet or Treguier and Brest, and is distant about 30 Miles from each, and 100 from Rennes to the West. It hath a safe Har∣bour, and is defended with a Fortress, wherein some of the Dukes of Bretagne have formerly resided. It is also at present an Episcopal See under the Metro∣politan of Tours, and the Capital City of a small Ter∣ritory called Leonnois; it hath been possessed by its own proper Princes, until about the Year 1254, when John I. Duke of Bretagne, purchased this Principa∣lity. Its first Bishop was named Paul, who died An∣no 600, was Canonized, and from him the City had its Name. The Chapter is composed of a Chanter, 3 Archdeacons, 16 Canons, 7 Prebendaries styled Vicars, &c. The Inhabitants speak the Low British Language more purely and elegantly than the other of the same Country. Landerneau, stands on the Banks of the little River Elorne, which falls into the Bay of Brest; and is di∣stant 24 Miles from S. Pol de Leon to the South-West. It is noted for the Richness of the Soil of its Neigh∣bouring Country. Brest, Brivates Portus, olim Gesocribale & Gesobri∣vatae, is a Famous Sea-Port-Town, seated on the North side of a large commodious Bay or Harbour, which opens to the Ocean in the most extream We∣stern part of the Continent of France. The Entrance of this Harbour called the Goulet, is exceeding diffi∣cult, by reason of certain Rocks, known by the Names of Minons, Filets and Mingant, that lie under Water at high Tide, and is therefore the more se∣cure Retreat for the French King's Ships of War, for which this is the only Port he has on this Side the Mediterranean. Wherefore this Town is one of the Grand Magazines of the Admiralty of France; Toulon in the Mediterranean being the other; and in this Harbour the greatest number of the French Navy, as in that the Ships of greatest Burthen, Win∣ter, and are fitted out. The Naval Stores and Pro∣visions for 70 Sail of Men of War are laid up in this Town, and Ships of 80 and 90 Guns are built here, which makes Brest a populous and rich Place. It is well Fortified after the Modern manner, with strong Walls, and a Castle well sustained with Outworks and Batteries. It is distant 35 Miles from S. Pol de Leon to the South-West, and 15 from the Promontory of Conquet.
map of Brest A CHART OF YE ROAD AND ADJACENT COASTS OF BREST. Conquet, is a small Sea-Town, situate near the Sou∣thern Cape of the Bay of Brest, not considerable, and only mention'd because it gives name to the Road be∣tween it and the Islands of Belinguier, Molines, &c. The Island of OƲESSANT or ƲSHANT, Ʋxen∣tius, Ʋxantis, & Ʋxentissena, called Axantos by Pliny, and Ʋxantissena by Antonius, lies at the distance of 30 Miles Westward from Brest, and is not above 20 Miles in compass; nevertheless it hath obtained the Title of a Marquisate. It is Fortified with a Castle, and contains some rich Towns of Note. The Bishoprick of QƲIMPER-CORENTIN, Episco∣patus Corisopitanus, is bounded on the N. by that of S. Pol de Leon, on the W. and S, by the Ocean, and by the Diocess of Vannes to the E. and takes up the S.W. Corner of the Lower Bretagne, and contains these re∣markable Towns, viz. Quemper-Corentin, B. Cap. Concornean, Quimperlay, Douvarenes, Chatee-Lin, Guirene, &c. QƲIMPER-CORENTIN, Corisopitum, olim Curioso∣tivae, is the Metropolis of a small Territory in the lower Bretagne, named Cornouaille from the County of Cornwall in England, whence the City it self is also sometimes, thô improperly, call'd Cornoualle. Its an∣cient Name is Kemper or Quimper, whereto Corentin was added from that of its first Bishop, who is suppo∣sed to have been ordain'd by S. Martin of Tours, its Episcopal See being as yet subject to that Metropo∣litan. This City was heretofore possessed by its own Counts or Earls; it is of a large Extent, well built, and very considerable for its Traffick, and situated on the Oder, into which a small River falls, that surrounds the Town, and makes it a kind of an Island. The Oder is so deep, that Barks of a large size are convey'd at high Tide to the Port, at the confluence of the two Rivers, where stands the Suburbs term'd, The Duke's-Land, inhabited by many rich Merchants. The Ca∣thedral is a stately Edifice, and of much Antiquity, adorned with two large Towers: The Chapter con∣sists of a Dean, 2 Archdeacons, a Treasurer, a Theo∣logal or Prebendary, and 12 other Canons. There are also divers other Churches, and Monasteries, and the Bishop's Palace, which is a very magnificent Pile of Building. This City stands about 12 Miles from the Southern Shoar of Bretagne, and 30 from Brest, and from Rennes about 120 Miles to the East. Concarneau, Conquerneau or Concorneum, is a well Fortified Town and Castle on the Sea-coast, lying between Blavet and Penmark 15 Miles from Quim∣per Corentin to the South-East. Quimperlay, Quimperlaeum, is a reasonable good Town seated at the Confluence of the two little Rivers, Isotta and Laitta, about 8 Miles from the Sea-coasts, and 30 from Quimper Corentin. Douarnenes, a small Town about 10 Miles N. E. from Quimper Corentin, gives name to a large Bay, ad∣joining to that of Brest. The Bishoprick or Diocess of VANNES, Episco∣patus Venetiensis, is bounded on the S. by the Ocean, on the E. by the Diocess of Nantes, on the N. by that of S. Brieux, and on the W. by that of Quimper Co∣rentin. The chief Towns are these, viz. Vannes, Bish. Cap Port Louis, or Blavet, Hannebon, Auray, Malestroit, &c. and Bell-Isle.
VANNES or VENNES, Venetia aut Dariorigum Venetorum, the Capital City of the Lower Bretagne, stands on an incommodious Bay, being fill'd with little Islands, into which the Sea flows through a Canal named Montalbon, and is distant 55 Miles from Rennes to the S. W. somewhat less from Nantes to the West, and 60 from Quimper Corentin to the East. It is de∣fended with an old Castle call'd l' Hermire, which was formerly a Palace of the Dukes of Bretagne. The Cathedral dedicated to St. Peter, hath a considerable Chapter, and divers other fair Churches contribute much to render it a splendid City, but the Fury of the Civil Wars hath diminish'd part of its ancient Lustre. Port Louis or Blavet, Portus Ludovici at Blavetum, is a small but well Fortified Town on the Mouth of the River Blavet, that takes its rise near the Burgh or Village of Grace in the Diocess of S. Brieux, and dis∣chargeth it self into the Sea at the Port of Blavet; which is a capacious and safe Harbour, and distant 26 Miles from Vannes to the W. and near 40 from Quimper Corentin to the E. Hannebon, Hannebontum, stands on the Banks of the same River Blavet. about 8 Miles from Blavet to the North, and 26 from Vannes to the West. Bell-Isle, Calonesus, a considerable Island on the Sou∣thern Coasts of the Province of Britagne, lies at the di∣stance of about 3 or 4 Leagues from the Continent of France, and is almost encompassed with small Isles or Rocks. Its extent from W. to E. is about 10 Miles, and its greatest breadth about 5 Miles. It hath a fair Haven and some strong Forts over-against Vannes and Auray. The whole Island is at present divided into 4 Parishes, and thô of a small compass, yet affords much good Pasture-Ground, for Cattle. It is also remarkable for its Salt-Pits, and on the account of the frequent Pas∣sage of Vessels along the adjacent Coasts, but especially because it is the usual Rendezvous of the French Fleet, when they put to Sea. Bell-Isle was heretofore possess'd by the Monks of the Abby of S. Croix of Quimper, till King Charles IX. erected it into a Marquisate, and be∣stowed it on the Count of Raic, A.D. 1573. The Abby hath been also endow'd for some time with so plenti∣ful a Revenue, that it was esteem'd a competent Pre∣ferment for Antony of Bourbon, Base Brother to King Henry IV. to be created Lord Abbot thereof. The principal Place bearing the Name of the Town, is a∣dorn'd with a very stately Citadel or Castle, called the Palace, and so well fenced of late with Ramparts and other Works, according to the modern Method of For∣tification, that it seems to be almost impregnable. The Governor General of Bretagne at present is the Duke de Chaunes; under whom are two Lieutenants-General, whereof one hath the Inspection of all the Province except the County of Nantes, under whom are two Lieutenants. The other hath the care of that Country only. There are also particular Governors in these Places, viz. Nantes, Vannes, S. Malo, Dinant, Vitre, Brest, Quimper, Blavet and Bell-Isle. map THE MARQUISATE AND GOVERNMENT OF BELL-ISLE. Devided into it's four Parishes OF THE PALACE BANGOR LOMARIA AND SAUZON
CHAP. VII. L' ORLEANOIS, or the County of Orleans, Aurelatensis Ager. ORLEANOIS is one of the most fruitful and pleasant Countries of France, and its Jurisdiction is one of the largest extent, as comprehending Four∣teen or Fifteen small Provinces, every one of which hath its particular Governor. This Government takes its name from Orleans, its chief City, but Appeals lie from thence to the Parliament of Paris.  it is extended from East to West, that is to say, from the Castle of Chinon in Nivernois as far as the Coasts of the Ocean, the space of about 270 miles; and 190 miles from South to North, viz. from Moubrun in An∣goumois to Nonancourt in Normandy; It is bounded on the North by the Isle of France and Normandy; on the East by Champaigne and Burgundy; on the South by Xaintongue, Perigert, la Marche and Bourbonnois; and on the West by Bretagne and the Sea: and it lies from South to North between the 45th degree 40 Mi∣nutes, and the 48th degree 50 Minutes of Latitude; as also from West to East, between the 14th degree 40 Minutes, to the 21 degree 40 Minutes of Longitude, which ought to be understood of its greatest length and breadth. The Soil is extreamly rich, plentifully bringing forth Corn, Fruits, Wine and every thing necsseary for the support of Human Life, abounding likewise in Verdant Meadows, Pastures and Woods. The great Forest of Orleans is especially remarkable, it contain∣ing 70000 Acres of Land, and double that in the time of Francis I. The principal Rivers are the Loire, into which the Indre, the Cher, and the Vienne, enlarged with the Streams of the Creuse, discharge themselves between Montereau and Langest in Touraine: The Mayne in like manner, being joyn'd to the Sartes a little above Angers falls into the same River Loire about a League below that City. The Aller also falls into the Loire a little below Nevers. Lastly, the Charante takes its rise in Angoumois, passeth through Xaintonge, and runs into the Sea over against the Island of Oleron. Orleans in general divided into Fifteen Coun∣tries or Provinces, viz. 1 Orleanois, properly so call'd, chief City. Orleans. 2 Blasois. Blois. 3 Beause, proper: Chartres. 4 Perche. Nugent le Rotrou. 5 Maine. Mans. 6 Vendomois. Vendome. 7 Anjou. Angers. 8 Poictou. Poitiers. 9 Annis. Rochel. 10 Angoumois. Angoulesme. 11 Touraine. Tours. 12 Berry. Bourgs. 13 Nivernois. Nevers. 14 Part of Gabinois. Montargis. 15 The Islands of Oleron, Ree and Oye, Nermon∣stier and Armot. ORLEANOIS, properly so call'd, Aurelanensis, Ager, lies between Berry Gabinois, Beauce and Blassois. The most considerable Towns of this Country are these, viz. Orleans, Bish. Cap. Beaugency. La Ferte Seneterre, or S. Aubin. Sully. Gergeau. Pluvirs, &c. ORLEANS, Aurelia, Aurelianensis Ʋrbs, olim Genabum, is one of the principal Cities of France; it is situate on the River Loire, on the side of a Hill, and in form of a Bow. It's a very ancient City, and by some said to have been built by the Druids; or ac∣cording to others by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, A. D. 163. who gave it the name. The buildings are fair and beautiful, thô old: The Fortifications are a Terras and a strong Wall, with 40 Towers on it. From the middle of the City there is a bridge over the Loire built of Stone upon 16 Arches, which leads into one of the Suburbs. On this bridge stands a Statue of the Virgin Mary, and on her right, at some distance another of King Charles VII. and on her left one of the famous Virago's Joan d' Arc, all three of Copper. This City was the capital of a separate Kingdom, in the first Ages of the French Monarchy: At present it bears the Title of a Dutchy, which is appropriated to the second Sons of the Kings of France. It is also the See of a Bishop, who is Suffragan to the Archbishop of Pa∣ris, and adorn'd with a famous University, founded by King Philip the Fair The Cathedral is a venera∣ble and sumptuous building; its Chapter consists of 59 Canons and 12 Dignitaries: Besides the Cathedral here are 4 Collegiate and 22 Parochial Churches. A Generality is establish'd here (to which 12 Elections, containing 1148 Parishes resort) and also a Bailiage and Presidial. The Country round it is very fruitful and pleasant, and the River furnishes them with the Commodities of Foreign Nations from Nantes, as well as the Product of their own from the more Southern Provinces. Orleans hath sustain'd divers Sieges; Atti∣la King of the Huns invested it A. D. 450. but it was reliev'd and the Huns totally routed by Aetius the Ro∣man General, assisted by Merovaeus the French King and Theodorick the Goth. In the Year 1423. our En∣glish Forces under the command of Thomas Mauncute Earl of Salisbury, besieged this City, and reduc'd it to great distress, but a certain Maid of 18 years old, call'd Joan of Arc, came to the King of France, and pretending her self sent from God, put on Man's Ha∣bit and Armour, and having got into Orleans, did so animate the besieg'd, that by their frequent Sallies, in which Joan was always the formost, they forc'd the English to raise the Siege, having lost the Earl of Salisbury, the Lord Molines, the Lord Poynings and ma∣ny Soldiers. This Woman was for some time the Director of the French Armies, in which she had great Success, till at length being taken by the English, she was burnt for a Witch. In the civil War the Prote∣stants made themselves Masters of this City; and be∣ing besieged by the Duke of Guise, he was treache∣rously slain by John Poltrot, Feb. 14th 1563. and a Month after a Peace was concluded and the City Sur∣rendred: But in 1567. the Protestants again seiz'd it, and for a long time it was their Head Quarters. Or∣leans is seated, as hath been said, upon the River Loire, and is distant near 70 miles from Paris to the South, 160 from Nantes to the East, 220 from Bour∣deaux to the North-East, 190 from Lyons to the North-west, 130 from the Head of the River Meuse to the West, 60 from Tours, and 30 from Blois to the East, 55 from Bourges to the North, and 70 from Sens to the West. Sully, Sulliacum, & La Ferte-Seneterre or S. Aubin, are two Towns of good Note, both bearing the Title
of Dutchies; the former is seated on the Loire, 28 miles above Orleans to the East, and the other 10 miles from the same City to the South. Gergeau, or Gargeau, Gergotium, stands in like man∣ner on the banks of the Loire, 10 miles above Orleans to the East. Our English Forces gain'd this Town from the French, A. D. 1420. but John II. Duke of Alenson, retook it by Storm in the Year ensuing, BLASOIS, Blesensis Ager, is extended between Berry, Orleanois proper, whereof it is a part, Beausse, Perche, Vandomois and Touraine, The chief Towns of this Country are. Blois, Capital. Chateau Dun. Mer. Remorentin. BLOIS, Blesae, & Blesense Castrum, the Chief Town of a Territory of the same name, is seated on the side of an Hill near the South banks or the River Loire, over which is built a fair Stone Bridge, at the distance of 30 miles from Orleans to the West, and as many from Tours. It is honoured with the Ti∣tle of a County and beautified with a most magnifi∣cent Castle, not long since repair'd by Gaston Duke of Orleans, which (by reason of the pleasantness of the place, and wholsomness of the Air) hath often afforded a Royal Seat to the Kings of France, and wherein one of them, viz. Lewis XII. was born on the 27th day of June, A. D. 1461. Besides that, it hath hereto∣fore afforded Nurture to many young Princes of the Royal Family; not to mention that the first Counts of Blois were descended from Hugh Capet. Moreover the spacious Park and adjacent Garden are much admir'd by Travellers; it may perhaps not be amiss to observe that divers Queens of France have died at Blois, par∣ticularly Ann the Wife of Charles VIII. and Lewis XII. A. D. 1514. Maude the Wife of Francis I. in 1524. and Catharine of Medicis the Wife of Henry II. in 1589. In the Year 1562. this City being possessed by the Pro∣testants, was taken and sackt by the Kings Forces un∣der the Duke of Guise. In 1576, the Assembly of the Estates of the Kingdom were convoked hither by King Henry III. to accomodate the Differences between the Hugenots and the Papists, but broke up in a little time without effecting it. Again, in the Year 1588 they met here upon occasion of the great Disorder th Kingdom was brought into by the Holy League, and the Duke of Guise, the Head of it was here slain in the Castle by the Kings command. Chateau Dun, Castellodonum, called corruptly Chau∣dun, is a neat well built Town on the Loire, and the Capital of the small Country of Dunois. It hath an old Castle, and is distant 25 miles from Blois to the North, and 20 from Vendome to the East; it is seated upon a small River, which rises about 20 miles from hence, and bears the name of the Loire also, and falls into the great Stream at Angers. Remorentin or Rmrentin, Remorentinum, Rmoren∣tinum, & Rivus Moreentino, is a good Town, seated upon a little River, that a little below falls into the Cher, and is distant 25 miles from Blois to the South-east. Those Geographers that call this part the Lower Orleanois, make this Town the Capital of another Di∣vision named Sologne. BEAƲSSE or BEAƲCE, Belsia. lies between the Isle of France, Perche, Blasois and Orleanois; and its most remarkable Towns are, Chartres, Bish. Cap. Ngent le Ry. Deux. Gaillardon. Bonneval. Espernon. CHARTRES, Carnutum, Carnutes, aut Autricum, the Metropolis of the Province of Beausse, and of the Territoy of Chartrain is situated on a Hill, and on the bs of the River Eure, 45 miles from Paris to the South-west, and as many from O leans to the North. It is an Episcopal See, under the Archbishop of Paris. This City and its Territories were sometimes subject to its own Counts, but united to the Crown, in 1528. And Francis I. erected it into a Dutchy, in favour of Madam Renee of France, Dutchess of Ferrara. It is an ancient Ciy, but fair and well built; the Streets are but narrow, but the publick Places are spacious, and the Houses neat; the Churches are magnificent, especially the Cathedral, which is remarkable for its beautiful Quire, Church under Ground and two ve∣ry fine Steples; the Chapter is compos'd of 72 Ca∣nons, and 17 Dignitaries, within the Diocess are con∣tain'd 30 Abbies, 257 Priories, and above 1300 Pa∣rishes. Rollo Duke of Normandy Besieg'd the City of Chartres, A. D. 911, and in 1019. it was almost en∣tirely consum'd by Fire. In 1568. the French Pro∣testants in vain besieg'd it. It adher'd to the League Party, and stood out against Henry IV. who at length took it, and caus'd himself to be Crown'd therein, A. D. 1591. Nogent-le-Roy, Nonigentum, seu Nogentum Rgium, stands on the banks o the River Eure, where it first begins to be Navigable, 12 miles from Chartres to the North, and 8 from Dreux to the South. This Town about five Ages ago, was named Nogent l'Erembert, Nonigentum Erembertium, according to the report of the French Historiagrapher Du Chesne, and is re∣markable for the Death of King Philip of Valois, which happen'd there on the 22d day of April, A. D. 1350. Dreux, Drocum, the chief Town of a County of the same name, is seated on the River, at the foot of a Hill, on which is erected a Castle, formerly well Fortified, but now half ruin'd. It is a very ancient Town, and said to be built by Druis a King of the Gauls. It is distant about 20 miles from Chartres to the North, and 40 from Paris to the West. Robert the Son of Lewis the Gross, obtain'd the Country of Dreux, in 1137. and from him are Descended the Counts of this Name, as also a branch of the Family of the Dukes of Bretagne. This place is famous for a bloody Battle fought near it, between the French Ro∣man Catholicks and Protestants, A. D. 1652. PERCHE, Perticus, is bounded on the North, by Normandy, on the West by Meine, on the South by Ven∣domis, and on the East by Beausse. It is usually divid∣ed into the Upper, or the County and the Lower, or Perche Goet, from the name of one of its ancient Lords. Its chief Towns are, Nogen-le-Retrou, Capital. Migne. Timerois, D. La Pierriere. Au on, &c. NOGENT-LE ROTROƲ, Nnigentum Rotrudum, olim Nvidunum seu Nedunum, is situated on the Ri∣ver Hisne, almost in the midst between Chartres to the East, and Mans to the West, about 35 miles from each. It is the principal Town of the upper Perche, and generally esteem'd the fairest througout the whole Kingdom of France, and is very much enrich'd by di∣vers sorts of Manufactures, particularly of Silks, Lin∣nen-cloath and Leather. The Earl of Salisbury took this Place during the Wars betwixt the English and the French in the XVth Century, and caus'd many of the Inhabitants to be Hang'd; but the French Kig Charles VII recover'd it, A. D. 1449.
Mortaigne, Moritania, stands on a Hill and a Brook, which begins to form the River Huigne, or Huisne, a∣bout 8 mlies from the Frontiers of Normandy, and 40 from Chartres to the West. It is a very pleasant Town, and adorned wth divers fair Churches, a Castle, &c. Timerais, Timerensis Pagus, is a Town on the Con∣fines of Normandy, 30 miles from Nogent, bearing the title of a Principality. Maine, Ager Meduanus, hath Normandy for its Nor∣thern Bounds, Perche, Vendomois, and Beausse on the East, Britagne on the West, and part of Touraine and Anjou on the South. It is usually divided into the Upper and Lower, and contains these chief Towns, viz. Mans, Bish. Capi∣tal. M yenne, D. Laval. La Ferte Bernard. Sable. Beaumont-le-Vicomte. Chateau-du-Loire, &c. MANS, Ceromenum, olim Vindinum, is situate on the Confluence of the Sarte and the Huisne, about 60 miles from Chartres to the East, 25 from the confines of Normandy to the South, and 40 from Tours to the North. It is a very ancient City, but hath been much more considerable than it is at present: For Aimoin assures us, that under Charlemaigne it was one of the most Flourishing of Gallia Belgica; since which time, the Incursions of the Normans, the Wars of the Eng∣lish, and the frequent Conflagrations it hath suffer'd, have so far defac'd its Beauty, that it hath often chang'd its Form. However, a Presidial Court is held there∣in, and it is as yet the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Archbishop of Tours. The Cathedral Church was at first Dedicated to the Virgin Mary, afterward to S. Gervace, and at length to S. Julian, who was the first Bishop of this Diocess. Myenna, Madana, is pleasantly seated on a River of the same name, 15 miles from the Frontiers of N rmandy, and 35 from Mans to the North-west. This Town formerly bore the title of a Marquisate, and was afterwards erected into  Dutchy, and given to the Family of Guise. Laval, or Laval-Guion, Lavallium aut Vallis Guido∣nis, is situated on the River M, about 16 miles below Mayenne, and 15 fro the Confines of Anjou to the North. It apperta  the Noble Family of Trimouille, and is chiefl remarkable for its Manufa∣cture of Linnen cloath. La Ferte-Bernard, Firmitas Bernardi, is a large Town, built on the side of the River Huisne, near the Frontiers of Perche. It is distant 25 miles from Mans to the East. A Court of Justice is held therein at certain times. The Dutchy of ANJOƲ, Ducatus Andegavnsis, borders on Maine to the North, Bretagne to the West, Poitou to the South, and Touraine to the East, inclu∣ding about 30 Leagues in length, and 20 in breadth. It affords vast quanties of excellent Wine, and Quarries of Slate, with which all the Houses are cover'd, and is water'd with 36 Rivers, the chief of which are the Loite, the Sarte, the Loir, the Mayenne, the Dive, the Vienne, the Touay, the Larion, the Eure. and the Gui∣nate, besides so great a number of Lakes, Ponds, Brooks, and Springs, that some Persons are of opinion, that the name of Anjou is deriv'd from Aiguade, signifying Water. This Province was given by Charles the Bald to Robert of Saxony, A. D. 870, with the title of Earl of Anjou, whose Son Eudes was King of France, and his Great Grandson Hugh Capet, began the third Race of those Monarchs. Hugh the Great, Father of Hugh Capet, gave it to Geoffry Grysogonelle, A. D. 926. whose Grandson added to it the Province of Toureine by Conquest, and his Descendant Foulk III. obtained that of Maine also by Marriage, A. D. 1083. Which Foulk was Father to Geoffry the Husband of Maud, Daughter to our King Henry I. who contended with Stephen for the Crown of England, which her Son Henry II. enjoy'd, and added to it these Estates, which continued part of the Demesns of the English Crown till the time of King John, when Philip Augustus, the French King seiz'd it, A, D. 1202. And it is now an Appenage of the second Son of France. It is usually divided into the Upper and Lower, Angiers, being the Capital of the former, and Saumur of the latter. The chief Towns are, Angers, Bish. Ca∣pital. Saumur. La Fleche. La Lude. Brissac. Cruon. Chateau-Gontier. Pont de Ce. Beaufort, &c. ANGERS, Andegavum, olim Juliomagus, is seat∣ed very pleasantly and in a good Air, at the Con∣fluence of the River Marne, Sarte, and the upper stream of the Loire, being distant only one League from the great Stream of the Loire to the North, 20 miles from Saumur to the West, as many from Nantes to the East, and 55 from Mans to the South-west. The greater part of the Town, properly called the City, is built on the side of a pleasant Hill, on which stands the Castle, built on a Rock, flanked with 18 large round Towers and an Half-moon, and encompassed with a broad-flat-bottom'd Ditch, cut out of the same Rock on the side of the River, from whence all necessary Provisions are drawn up with Engines. The City is large, well-built and Populous, and hath a good Trade, which consists chiefly in White-wines, whereof the best in France are made in this Province. The Cathedral Dedicated to St. Maurice, is a beauti∣ful Building, and remarkable for its three high Stee∣ples over the Gate, its Body supported without Pil∣lars, and its exceeding rich Treasure. There are also 15 other Parochial Churches, three Abbies, viz. Those of St. Albin, St. Nicholas, St. Sergius, and a great number of Monasteries, Seminaries, &c. The Episcopal See depends on the Metropolitan of Tours. The Civil Government of the City is administred by the Mayor, and 24 Echivens or Aldermen. The U∣niversity here was founded by Lewis II. Duke of An∣jou, A.D. 1388, and is now in flourishing state, and contains divers Colleges, of which that of the Port de Fer and the Oratory are most Noted. Saumur, Salmurum, aut Salmurium, olim Tuneum, is seated on the River Loire, over which it hath a long Stone-bridge, at the distance of 20 miles from Anjou to the East, 50 from Mans to the South, and 35 from Tours to the East. The situation of the place is very delighful, and on that account very much admir'd by Strangers, The Town is adorned with a stately Castle well Fortified; the Church of Ardil∣liers, wherein the Fathers of the Oratory officiate and have a College, is the most notable in the Town. Here was formerly a Famous Protestant Academy, well fill'd with Students, not only of Natives, but also young Gentlemen out of England, Germany, and Sweeden; but since the Persecution this hath been Destroy'd. La Fleche, Flexia, stands on the Banks of the up∣per stream of the Loire in the Upper Anjou, near the Confines of Maine, being distant 30 miles from Sau∣mur
to the North, 28 from Anjou to the North-East, and about 30 from Mans to the South. In this Town is a magnificent College of Jesuits, founded in the year 1603. by King Henry IV. containing three Courts, and as many Rows of Apartments, capable of entertaining a Prince. Here is also a Castle, in the Chapel whereof is interr'd the Heart of King Henry IV. Brissac, Brissacum, is seated in a fertile Country near the Bridge of Ce over the Loire, about 12 miles from Angers to the South. It is a Town of small com∣pass, nevertheless dignified with the title of a Dutchy, erected in favour of Charles de Cossy Marshal of France. It is also adorned with a fair Castle, a spacious Park, a Pond extending it self from thence almost for the space of a League in length, &c. VENDOMOIS, Vindocinensis Ager, lyes between Perche on the North, Maine on the West, Touraine on the South, and Blaisois on the East. It is a very small Province, not above 20 miles in Extent, and contains not many Towns, the chief are, Vendosme Capital. Montoire. VENDOME, Vindocinum, is situate on the Ri∣ver Loire, 25 miles from Chateau-Dun to the South-west, 30 from Nogent le Rotrou to the South, 20 from Blois to the North, and 30 from Orleans to the West. It is defended with an Old Castle, and bears the title of a Dutchy, whereof Charles of Bourbon, Grand-Fa∣ther to Henry IV. was the first Duke. A College of the Fathers of the Oratory, and some other Religious Houses, are Founded here. Montoire, stands also on the Loire, about 12 miles below Vendosme, and is a good Town, but not of sig∣nal Note. POICTOƲ, Pictavensis Provincia, is bounded on the East by Berry, Limosin, and Touraine; on the North by Anjou and Bretagne, on the West by the Ocean, and on the South by Angoumois and Xaintonge. It is usu∣ally divided into the Upper, to the East, and the Lower to the West, and is a very fruitful Country, supplied also with plenty of Fish from the Neighbour∣ing Sea, and Venison from the Inland Forests. It is also beset with many fair Towns and Villages, the chief of which are these, viz. Poitiers, Bish, Cap. Luson, Bish. Chatelerault. Maiezais. Lusignan. Loudun. Fontenay. Mirabeau. Richelieu. Niort. Rochechouart. Fontevraut. Thouar. Parthaney. St. Maixent, &c. POITIERS, Pictavm, olim Lemanum, one of the most ancient and largest Cities of the Kingdom, but not proportionably Opulent, there being Corn-fields and Meadows within the Walls. It is seated on a rising Ground, between the River Clain, which falls into the Vienne, and another Rivulet that springs out of a large Pond, and is joyned to the former at the Eastern end of the Town, near the Gate of S. Lazarus, where stands an old Castle, together with some re∣mains of an Amphitheatre, and other Roman Monu∣ments. It is an Episcopal See, dependant on the Me∣tropolitan of Bourdeaux. Besides the Cathedral, sup∣pos'd to be Founded by St. Martial, and Dedicated to St. Peter, there are 24 Parochial Churches, five Abbies, and a great number of other Monasteries. Here is is also a University, Founded by King Charles VII. A.D. 1431. Poitiers is a Seneschalcy subordinate to the Parliament of Paris, besides which Court, here is also a Presidial and a Generality. The Civil Govern∣ment is administred by a Mayor, 12 Eschevins or Al∣dermen, and 12 sworn Counsellors: The Mayor bears the title of a Captain and Governor of Poitiers. and the Privilege of Nobilty and many other Ho∣nours and Advantages are granted by the French Kings, to the Person that enjoys this Dignity. The City of Poitiers is distant 28 miles from the River Loire to the South, 100 from Orleans to the South-west, 65 from Angers to the South-east, 90 from the Sea-coast to the East, 70 from Saintes to the North-east, and about 100 from Bourges to the West. Lucon, or Lusson, Luciona, is a City of a very small Compass, and destitute of Walls, situated in a Mar∣shy Ground, near the Confines of the Country of Aunis, at the distance of about six miles from the Ocean, 20 from Maillerais, and 70 from Poitiers to the West. Pope John XXII. established its Episcopal See, changing an Abbey of the Benedictine Order in∣to a Cathedral, A. D. 1317. One Lucius is reported to have founded the Abby and given name to the City. Maillezais, Malleacum, is a small City or Town, built on an Island form'd amidst the Marshes, by the Rivers Savre and Autise, being distant 30 miles from Rochel to the North-east, and 50 from Poitiers to the South-west. It was heretofore the usual Place of Re∣sidence of the Counts of Boitou and Dukes of Guienne, but at present is not much Inhabited by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air. The Abby of Maillezais was also erected into an Episcopal See, under the Me∣tropolitan of Bourdeaux, by Pope John XXII. in the year, 1317. but Innocent X. caused it to be suppress'd, A.D. 1649. and translated it to Rochel. Lusignan, Lusignanum, stands on the Banks of the Vonne, near 20 miles from Poitiers to the South-west, on the Road to Rochel and Bourdeux. This Town is more especially famous for the Valour of its Ilrustri∣ous Lords, who were Kings of Cyprus, Jerusalem, and Armenia. The Castle of Lusignan, sometime esteem'd as Impregnable, was Suprized by M. Troligni, for the French Protestants, A. D. 1569. But the Prince of Montpensier retook it, after a Siege of Eight Months, in 1574, and dismantled its Fortifications. Chatelerault, a good Town on the River Vienne, a∣bout 20 miles from Poitiers to the North, and on the Road to Blois and Paris, hath the title of a Duke∣dom, sometime possess'd by the Hamiltons of Scot∣land, at present by Mademoiselle Montpensier the King's Aunt. Richelieu, Richeleum, aut Ricolocus, formerly a small Village; but this being the place of Birth of that great Minister of State Cardinal Richelieu, he Re∣built it and adorned it with a stately Palace and an Academy, and obtain'd it to be erected into a Duke∣dom and Peerage. It is seated on a little Rivulet that falls into the Vienne, and is distant 16 miles from Chatelerault to the West, and 28 from Poitiirs to the North. Loudun, is a considerable wall'd Town, and gives name to the Country about it: It hath a Castle, which with the Town, hath a particular Governor. Here is a Nunnery of Ʋrseillines, famous not many years ago, for the Imposture the Nuns were guilty of, in pretending themselves Bewitch'd by the Curate of the Parish, whom they barbarously caused to be Execu∣ted. This Town stands about 10 miles from Riche∣lieu to the West, and 20 from Saumur to the South-East.
The small Country of AƲNIS, Alnensis, Alnetensis aut Alniensis Tractus, lies to the South of Poitou, and to the East of Saintonge proper, whereof it is a part, being also bounded on the West by the Ocean, and the Islands of Re and Oleron: Its principal Towns are these, viz. Rochel, Bish. Cap. Rochefort, Marans, Brouage, Chatelaillon, &c. ROCHEL, Rupella, olim Portus Santonum hath been always a very considerable Port and Mart-town; it is distant only two Leagues from the Island of Re, 4 from that of Oleron, 10 miles from the Confines of Poictou to the South, about 30 from Saintes to the North-West, and 70 from Poitiers to the West. This City, being the chief Seat of the Protestants, suffered much during the Civil Wars of France, and was often valiantly defended, and long possessed by that Party, until at length Lewis XIII. after a long and famous Siege made himself Master of it in the year 1628, chiefly by the means of an admirable Rampart or Bank of Earth, which Cardinal Richelieu caus'd to be raised against it on the side of the Ocean: After it was taken, the King caus'd the Walls and Fortifi∣cations to be demolish'd, except only two Towers, which defend the Port. Afterward, in 1649, the Episcopal See of Maillezais was removed thither; the Island of Re, together with many other neighbouring Places, to the number of about 100 Towns and Vil∣lages, being taken from the Diocess of Saintonge and added to this, as appears by the Consistorial Decree made on that occasion. Rochefort, Rupifortium, hath a convenient Harbour at the Mouth of the River Cherante, capable of re∣ceiving Men of War: It was at first only a small Village, but for the sake of its Port hath of late been wall'd round and fortified with strong Bastions and Ramparts, and some of the smaller of the King's Ships of War being laid up here, a Magazine is kept well stored with all sorts of Ammunition for their Service, and an Hospital built for infirm Seamen. This Town is distant about 5 miles from the Sea-coasts, and 15 from Rochel to the South. Brouage, Broagium, formerly call'd Jacquez Ville, Jacobipolis is a small Town and Port, very well for∣tified, and seated in a Marsh, near the Saltworks, be∣ing distant almost 3 Leagues from the Mouth of the Charante to the South, 8 from Rochel, 4 from Royan, and 8 from Saintes to the West. ANGOƲMOIS, Engolismensis Provincia, is bounded on the West by Saintonge, on the South by Perigort, on the East by Limosin and La Marche, and on the North by Poitou, being extended for the space of 50 miles in length, and about 35 in breadth; The chief Towns in it are, Angouleme, Bish. C. Cognac, Rochefoucaut, Jarnac, Bouteville, Rufec, Chateau-Neuf, &c. ANGOƲLEME, Engolisma, aut Inculisma, olim Ratiastum, is seated on the top of a Hill, near the River of Charante, about 50 miles from Poictiers to the S. 30 from Saintes to the E. and 40 from Limoges to the W. It is a very ancient City, adorn'd with the Titles of a Dutchy and Seneschalcy, and hath a Presidial and Election. It is also an Episcopal See un∣der the Metropolitan of Bourdeaux; and is well for∣tified, with a strong Castle and other Bulwarks, so that it is accessible only on one side. In the adjacent Fields is to be seen a Spring, from whence issueth a Tor∣rent of Waters, as it were a River, &c. Rochefoucaut, Rupes Fucaldi & Rupe-Fucaldum, is a small Town and Castle on the Rivulet of Tardovere, about 15 miles from Angouleme to the N. E. It bears the Title of a Dutchy, and hath imparted its Name to one of the most ancient and noble Families of France, from whence have sprung divers Branches, &c. Jarnac, Jarnacum & Jarniacum, stands on the Banks of the Charante, almost in the midst between Angou∣leme to the E. and Saintes to the W. This little Town is famous for a memorable Battle fought between the Duke of Anjou, afterward King Henry III. and the Prince of Conde, on the 15th of May 1569, wherein the latter was slain. Touraine, Turonia lies between Blaisois and Anjou to the N. and W. Poictou and la Marche to the S. and Berry to the E. It bears the Title of a Dutchy, and it's extent is about 60 miles from N. to S. and 50 from E. to W. The fertility of its Soil, especially in Fruit, makes it be call'd the Garden of France. Ma∣ny Rivers pass through it, as the Loyre, the Cher, the Indre, the Vienne, &c. The most remarkable Towns of this Province are, Tours, Archb. Cap. Amboise, Loches, Chinon, &c. TOƲRS, Turones, Turo & Turonica Ʋrbs, olim Caesarodunum, is situate in a fruitful Country on the S. side of the River Loire, over which it hath a very beautiful long Stone-Bridge, at a little distance from the North side of the Cher. It is a large well built City, and the See of an Archbishop. The Publick Places, Streets and Houses are fair, and the Cathedral, dedicated to S. Gratian its first Prelate, deserves well to be viewed by Travellers: The Church of S. Mar∣tin, together with some other Parochial ones, are stately Piles of Building. This City is a Place of very good Trade, and therefore rich and populous, the Silks manufactur'd here being sent into many fo∣reign Parts. A Generality and Presidial Courts are established here. It is seated, as hath been said, on the River Loire, and is distant 30 miles from Vendosme to the S. 50 from Poitiers to the N. 45 from Angers to the E. 30 from Blois, and 60 from Orleans to the S. W. Amboise, Ambaca, Ambasia & Ambaciensis Vicus, is seated also on the Loire, at the distance of 15 miles E. from Tours, and 30 from Blois to the S. W. This Town is likewise adorn'd with a fair Bridge over the Loire, and a large Castle built on a Hill, where the French Monarchs have often retir'd, and in which King Charles VIII. was born in the year 1470, and died in 1498. Loches, Lochia and Locia, stands on the River In∣dre, about 20 miles from Amboise to the S. and 25 from Tours to the S. E. It is a good Town, and hath a Castle, wherein King Charles VII. usually resided. Lewis XI. added divers Apartments to it, and caus'd a Tower to be built, wherein for a long while he kept the Cardinal de Balve Prisoner; and in the same Place Lewis XII. confin'd Lewis Sforza, who died there, and was buried in the Church of the Virgin Mary. A Royal Court depending on the Presidial of Tours is held here. The Territory adjacent was the Patri∣mony of the first Dukes of Anjou. Chinon, Caino & Chinonium, formerly a Village, is at present a neat Town seated on the River Vienne, and hath a Castle built on the top of a Hill, about 30 miles from Tours to the S. W. and 20 from Saumur to the E. Here is a Collegiate Church, dedicated to S. Mesine, the Canons whereof are immediately sub∣ject to the Pope. The French King, Charles VII. re∣tir'd to this Town, when our Kings Henry V. and VI.
had possession of Paris; and it was here that Joan d' Arc, commonly call'd the Maid of Orleans, already mentioned, addressed her self to that King. Our King Henry II. died here A. D. 1189. And if it be worth mentioning, Francis Rbelais was born here. BERRY, Bituricensis Provincia, bears the Title of a Dutchy, and is a Province of larger extent than those we have last mention'd, being 90 miles from N. to S. and 70 from E. to W. It is bounded on the W. by Touraine, on the N. by Blaisois, Orleanois and Gastinois, on the E. by the River Loire, and on the S. by La Marche. The River Cher passes through it, the Indre hath its Source in it, as have also many other smaller ones. The Soil is exceeding fertil, and the Inhabitants are noted Artists in making a certain sort of thick Cloth, which is thence call'd Drap de Berry. Its ancient People, the Bituriges, were famous hereto∣fore for their Conquests, and obstinate Resistance of the Romans. This Province was for some Ages subject to its own Count, but being bought and united to the Crown by King Philip, it hath often since been an Appenage of the Sons of France, as it is at present to the third Son of the Dauphine. The most remark∣able Towns here are, Bourges, Archb. Cap. Chateau-Roux, Issoudan, Le Blanc, Argenton, S. Aignan, Dun le Roi, Sancerre, Henrichmont, Valencay, &c. BOƲRGES, Biturix, Bituriges & Bituricae, olim Avaricum Biturigum, is situated about the middle of France, on the Rivers of Auron and Eure or Yerve, at the distance of 80 miles from Tours to the E. 60 from Orleans to the S. 30 from Nevers to the W. and 50 from the Borders of la Marche to the N. It is a large City, dignified with the Titles of a Metropolitan See and Patriarchate, besides a famous University, a Bail∣liage, a Presidial Court, a Generality, &c. It is also a place of great Antiquity, for it is reputed to have been already founded in the XLVII Olympiad, and A. Ʋ. C. 164. about 590 years before the Nativity of Jesus Christ. Titus Livius assures us, that under the Reign of Tarquinius Priscus King of the Romans, the Monarchy of the Celtae was fix'd in this Metropolis of Berry, whereof Ambigatus was then the Soveraign. Julius Caesar made himself Master of it, A. Ʋ. C. 702. 52 years before the Christian Aera, and of 40000 In∣habitants scarcely saved 800, the rest being put to the Sword. It was afterward the Capital City of the Aquitania Prima, under Augustus. The Visigths pil∣lag'd it in the Fifth Century, and they were subdu'd by King Clovis; then it fell into the Possession of Clo∣domir, and at length of Gontran King of Orleans: Chilperic took it A. C. 583. and caused it to be almost entirely burnt: But it hath been since re-establish'd at several times, more especially under Charlemagne, and it is now a well-built and flourishing City. It was possessed by its own Counts till the time of Phi∣lip King of France, to whom Count Herpin sold it, with the rest of the County. Chateau-Roux, Castrum Rufum aut Castrum Radulphi∣um, is a considerable Town, bearing the Title of a Dutchy, on the River Indre, about 30 miles from Fourges to the S. W. Its Castle was built by one Raoul, whence it is call'd Chateau-Raoul, and corruptly Cha∣teau-Roux. Here are a Collegiate and four Parochial Churches, also a Park, appertaining to Monsieur the Prince. It is a Place of good Trade, many sorts of Manufactures being made in it. Issoudun, Exelodunum, Exolidunum, Exsoldunum, & alias Ernodurus, is water'd by the Rivulet of Thiot or Thee, and seated in the mid-way between Bourges and Chateau-Roux. It is fortified with a strong Castle, firm Walls and deep Ditches; and is remarkable for its Traffick in Wooll and Kid's-leather Gloves. It is adorn'd with divers magnificent Structures, particu∣larly the Royal Palace, the Court of Justice, the Church of S. Stephen, the Convent of Benedictines, &c. This Town was one of the twenty burnt by Caesar in one day. Argenton, Argantomagum & Argentomagum, stands on the Confines of the Province of la Marche and the Banks of the Creuse, 40 miles from Bourges to the S. W. This Town hath for its Defence a fair Castle, flank'd with 10 Towers, one whereof was built by the Emperor Heraclius, and on which is carv'd the Fi∣gure of an Ox with this Device of Caesar; Veni, Vidi, Vici: The rest are less considerable. NIVERNOIS, Ager Nivernensis, is extended along the Banks of the Loire between Burgundy, Bour∣bonnois and Berry, for the space of about 50 miles from N. to S. and 35 from E. to W. including these prin∣cipal Towns, viz. Nevers, Bish. Cap. La Charite, S. Pierre le Moutier, Decise, Donzi, Clamecy, Vizelay, &c. NEVERS, Nivernum, Nivernium & Nivernae olim Noviomagul Vadicascium, is situated on the Loire near its confluence with the Allier, and the Rivulet of Nievre, almost in the midst between Paris, to the N. and Lyon, to the S. about 120 miles from both, as also 30 from Bourges to the E. 30 from the confines of Gastinois to the S. 25 from Bourbon to the N. 30 from the confines of Burgundy to the W. It was heretofore the Capital City of the Vadicasses, and Julius Caesar thought fit to make choice of it for a Magazine for his Army. It bore the Title of a County under the first Race of the French Monarchs, and was erected into a Dutchy by Charles VII. in the year 1457. It is also the See of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Sens, and the Seat of a Chamber of Accounts, to∣gether with a Bailliage under the Jurisdiction of the Presidial Court of S. Pierre le Moutier. The Cathe∣dral Church is dedicated to S. Cyres. There are also 11 Parochial Churches, divers Religious Houses, and a stately Stone-Bridge of 20 Arches, over the River Loire. Nevers is also famous on account of the great quantities of Glass, white Iron, and fine Earthen Ware there made. In this City died John Casimir King of Poland, on the 16th day of December, A. D. 1672. La Charite, Charitas, took its Name from the great Liberality which the Monks of Cluny exercised in time past towards poor People and Pilgrims; it is seated on the side of an Hill near the Loire, over which Ri∣ver here is a fair Stone-Bridge, 15 miles below Nevers to the N. and 25 from Bourges to the E. It is adorn'd with a large Market-place, divers Churches, and a very rich Priory of the Cluniack Order. This Town suffer'd much damage during the English Wars in France, and more in that of the French Protestants, by whom it was often taken and retaken in the year 1562, 1563, &c. Decise, Decetia, is a small Town on the same River Loire, which, with the Rivulet Airon, that falls into it at the East end of the Town, form a sort of an Island. Here is a good Castle belonging to the Duke of Nevers, and a fair Bridge over the River. This Town is distant 20 miles from Nevers to the South-East,
and appertains to the Possessions of the Duke of Nevers. GASTINOIS, Vastinium, & Vastiniensis Pagus, lies between Nivernois, Berry, Orleanois, Beauce, Isle of France, Champagne and Burgundy. It hath its Name from the Rocks and Sandy Places in it, which the In∣habitants call Gastines. The extent of this Province is near 60 miles from N. to S. and 45 from E. to W. in which these Towns are of most note. Montargis, Cap. Estampes, S. Farseau, Gien, Chateau Renard, &c. MONTARGIS, Montargium aut Mons Argi, is a neat Town, pleasantly situated at the Foot of a Hill, and the Banks of the River Loing, at the di∣stance of 55 miles from Paris to the S. and 40 from Orleans to the E. It is fenced with an old Castle, that Charles V. caus'd to be repair'd, and which was be∣sieged by the English Forces, A. D. 1426. The Town was burnt in 1528, and after rebuilt with greater magnificence. Estampes, Stampae, stands on the side of the Ivine, commonly call'd from thence the River Etampes, in a very fruitful Country, near the Confines of the Isle of France, 30 miles from Paris to the S. as many from Chartres to the East, and about 25 from Montargis to the N. W. It is beautified with a Collegiate Church and divers Monasteries, and enjoys the Title of a Dutchy, as appertaining to the ancient Demesns of the Crown. King Robert founded a Castle here; and the Town was formerly fortified, but dismantled by King Henry IV. A. D. 1589. Gien, Genabum, is a small Town on the Loire, over which River it hath a Stone-Bridge below the Canal of Briare. It stands 35 miles above Orleans to the E. and 28 from Montargis to the S. The Principal ISLANDS that lie over-against Orleannois in general, more especially the County of Aunis, are these, viz. Oleron, Re or Oye, Isle-dieu, Nermoutier, Armot, &c. OLERON, Ʋliarius, is an Island situated on the Coast of the Province of Saintonge, over-against the mouth of the River Charante, about 4 Leagues from thence to the W. It is extended from N. to S. for the space of 15 miles, but is not above 4 or 5 miles in breadth, and between 30 and 40 in compass. The Soil is very fruitful, and produces good Corn; abun∣dance of Rabbets are caught here. On the Southern part of the Island is erected a very strong Fortress, call'd the Castle of Oleron, which is di∣stant a League and an half from the mouth of the River Seure to the W. 3 from the Isle of Re to the S. and 6 from the City of Rochel to the S. W. The Island of RE, Rea, olim Reacus, lies before the Coasts of the Country of Aunis, only a Leagues from thence, and 3 from Rochel to the W. containing many Towns or Burghs; the chief of which are those of S. Martin and Oye, call'd the Isle, by reason of a Cha∣nel, over which one must pass to enter into it. The most considerable Fort is that of la Paree, containing 4 Bastions, with Half-Moons and other Outworks, which have been improved and increased since this War began. Here is a high Tower, on which Lights are kept a-nights for the Direction of Ships. The Cannon of this Fort commands the Land over-against it, as well as the Sea all round it. This Island affords great quantities of Wine and Salt, especially the latter, for the making whereof this is the chief place in the whole Kingdom. ISLE-DIEƲ, Insula Dei, lies over-against the Town of S. Giles, in the Province of Poitou, about 3 Leagues from the Coasts of that Province. The Island of NERMOƲTIER lies over-against S. Ʋrbain in Poitou, and is distant two large Leagues from the Continent: On it is founded a rich Convent, &c. Though the Orleannois be call'd one of the Govern∣ments of France, yet it is divided among nine Gover∣nors General, independent of one another, viz. I. The Orleannois proper, Blaisois, Beauce and Vendomois; the present Governor whereof is the Marbuis d' Alluy, un∣der whom are 3 Lieutenant Generals: The same Marquis is also particular Governor of the City of Orleans. II. Poictou hath for Governor General the Marquis de la Vieuville, and two Lieutenant Gene∣rals, and two Seneschals, besides particular Governors in Poitiers, Loudun and Niort. III. Anjou, whereof the Count d' Armagnac is Governor General, and under him are one Lieutenant General, one Seneschal, and particular Governors in Angers and Pont de Ce. IV. The Saumurois, with its Dependances, Richelieu, and Mara∣beau is another Government, at present under the Count de Cominges, who hath one Lieutenant Gene∣ral. V. Touraine also hath a Governor General, who is the Marquis de Dangean, a Lieutenant General, two Bailiffs, and particular Governours of Tours and Am∣boise. VI. The Country of Aunis, Rochelle, Brouage in Saintoigne, the Isles of Re, Oleron, &c. have a Gover∣nor General, the Count de Gace Matignon, a Lieute∣nant General, a Seneschal, and particular Governors of Rochel and Brouage. VII. The Provinces of Maine and Perche have another Governor General, who is the Marquis de Fervaques, a Lieutenant General and a Seneschal. VIII. The Prince de Soubise is Governor General of Berry, under whom are a Lieutenant Ge∣neral and a Seneschal. And lastly, the Nevernois is a Governor under the Duke of Nevers, with a Lieute∣nant General. CHAP. VIII. LA BOURGOGNE, or BURGUNDY, Burgundia. UNder the Name of BƲRGƲNDY is com∣prehended, at present, the Lower or Dutchy of Burgundy, the Ʋpper, or County of Burgundy, Bresse, Bugey. the County of Gex, and the Principality of Dombes, which are bounded on the North by Cham∣paigne and Lorraine, on the South by Lyonnois and Dauphine, on the East by Mount Jura to the Rhosne, and on the West by Nivernois and Bourbonnois.
Burgundy in General divided into these Parts, viz. The Lower Burgundy, or Dutchy in 9 small Provinces 1. Dijonois, Chief Town Dijon, Cap. 2. Autunois, Autun, Bish. 3. Chalonnois, Chalons, Bish. 4. Auxois, Semur, 5. Auxerrois, Auxerre, Bish. 6. Charolois, Charoles, 7. Briennois, Semur, 8. Maconnois, Mason, Bish. 9. The mountainous Coun∣try, Chatillon, The Coun∣ty of Bur∣gundy in 3 Bailiages, viz. 1. The Middle Bailiage, or of Dole. Bezanson, Archb. Cap. 2. The Bailiage of Amont, Vesoul, 3. The Bailiage of Aval Poligny. Bresse, Bourg, Bugey, Belley, Bish. The County of Gex, Gex, The Principality of Dombes. Trevoux. The DUCHY of Burgundy is bounded on the East by the County of Burgundy, on the North by Champaigne, on the West by Bourbonnois and Ni∣vernois, and on the South by Dauphine and Lion∣nois. Its largest extent from South to North con∣sists of about 110 English miles, that is to say, from below Macon as far as Chateau Vilain in Champagne, and of 90 miles from East to West, viz. from be∣yond Auxonne to the Frontiers of Gatinois, lying be∣tween the 46th and 48th degree of Latitude, &c. This Province is very considerable on the account of its Largeness, Situation, and Fertility, being commonly call'd, The Magazine of Corn, Wine, Hay, Wood, &c. affording also many Iron-Mines and Springs of Mine∣ral Waters. And, indeed, it contributes very much to the subsistence of the City of Paris, and almost en∣tirely maintains that of Lyon. It is water'd with a great number of Rivers; the Seine takes its rise here near a Village named Sainte Seine; the Sone passeth through the Eastern part, and receives into its Chanel the streams of the Dehune augmented with those of the Burfure, the Ouche, and the Tille, besides divers other lesser Rivulets and Brooks. On the Western the Loire separates Burgundy from Bourbonnois, and re∣ceives into it the Reconce, the Brevince, the Arroux, &c. The Yonne is there joyn'd to the Cousni or Avalon, the Sezin or Serin, and the Armenson, into whith flow the Brenne, the Oserain and the Oze, all which Rivers have their Source in this Province. The County of DIJONNOIS, Ager, Divionen∣sis, contains these more remarkable Towns, viz. Dijon, Cap. Beaune. Ausconne. S. Jean de-Laune. Citteaux, Abb. &c. DIJON, Divio & Divionum, is seated on the Ri∣vers Ouche, and Suzon in the Diocess of Langres, from which City it is distant 32 miles to the South, 85 from Sens, and 140 from Paris to the South-East, 105 from Lyons to the North, 80 from Nevers to the East, 45 from Bezancon, and 15 from the Saone to the West. This Town is suppos'd to have been first founded a∣bout A.C. 220. It is of a large extent and well-built; the Walls are strong and surrounded with Towers and Bastions, and the Castle flanked with four large Tow∣ers and two Ravelins. The most considerable publick Buildings are, the Church of the Carthusians adorn'd with magnificent Tombs of the Dukes, the Hall of Justice, the Royal Palace, and the Town-house, besides 16 other Churches, two Abbeys and five Hospitals. The States of the Country are usually assembled here every three years. Besides the Court of Parliament held in this Town, here are a Chamber of Accounts, and a Presidial Court. Beaune, Belna & Belnum, is seated on the small Ri∣ver Bourgeose and other Brooks that run through the Town at the distance of 10 miles from the River Saone to the West, 20 from Dijon to the South, and 13 from Challon to the North, and lies on the Road betwixt these two Towns. The Antiquities of this place prove it to have been a Roman Work. It is well built, the Seat of a Bailiage, and the Capital of a small Territory, thence call'd the Country of Beaune, which is very fruitful, especially in an excellent sort of Wine. S. Jean de Laune, Fanum S. Joannis Laudonensis, aut Laudona, is a small Town on the Saone near the Abbey of Cistercians, 15 miles from Dijon to the South East. It was formerly fortified, and is famous for repulsing the Efforts of the Imperial Army commanded by the formidable Galas Charles Duke of Lorrain, the Marquis of Grana, and other Illustrious Generals, A.D. 1636. Citeau, Cistercium aut Cistertium, is distant about six miles from S. Jean de Laune to the West, and 12 from Dijon to the South. 'Tis believ'd that this Village took its name from the great number of Cisterns which were dug there under Ground, and hath acquir'd much re∣putation by its Abbey of Cistercian Monks, which Or∣der was first instituted here; and this Abbey built, A.D. 1098. by Robert Abbot of Molesme, assisted by Otho I. Duke of Burgundy, Walter Bishop of Chalons, and Hugh Bishop of Lyons. It is a Branch of the Be∣nedictine, and hath its name from this Town. The Months quickly grew numerous, and the Order so powerful, that for a long time it had a great share in the Government of Europe, and hath produced four Popes, several Cardinals and Bishops, and a great num∣ber of Writers. The Abbot of this House is a Coun∣sellor of the Parliament of Burgundy, and General of the whole Order, whereof are said to be near 3000 Convents and Nunneries in the World. AƲTƲNOIS, Augustdenensis Tractus, lies on the Frontiers of Nivernois, and includes these two princi∣pal Places, viz. Autun, Bish. Cap. and Bourbon-Lancy. AƲTƲN, Augustodunum olim Bibracte, is situated on the River Arroune in the midst between Lyon to the South, and Sens to the North, 40 miles from Dijon to the South-West, and 50 from Nevers to the East. It is one of the most ancient Cities of the Kingdom, being said to have been founded by Simotheus I. King of the Gauls. It was famous in the time of the Romans, and the Capital of the Republick of the Aedui or Hadui, which comprehended part of the Duchy of Burgundy, the Countries of Bresse, Lionnois, Beaujolois, Dombes, Ni∣vernois, &c. The Ruins found here of the Temple of Janus, now called Le Janvoye or Jenetoye, the Marchaut or Campus Martius, Mont-Dru or the Seat of the Drui∣des, and Mont-Jou or the Hill of Jupiter, besides a great number of Statues, Columns, Pyramids, Aqueducts; Triumphal Arches, &c. do also sufficiently evince its ancient Grandeur. This City is divided into two parts, viz. the Upper Town cover'd by Mount Cenis, at the foot whereof stands a Castle, and the Lower, call'd Marchaut, which is water'd by the River Arroux, dis∣charging it self into the Leire, and affording abundance of good Fish. It is an Episcopal See dependant on the Metropolitan of Lyon, and the whole Diocess, divided into 24 Arch-Priesthoods or principal Cures, contains about 600 Parishes. The Cathedral dedicated to St. Lazarus, is a noble and venerable Structure; besides which, here are many other Churches, divers Abbeys
and Convents, particularly those of S. Martia, S. An∣doche, and S. John. This City is also the Seat of a Bailiage. Bourbon-Lancy, Borbonium Anselmium, is a very well built Town and Castle with a Bailiage, standing on the descent of one of those pleasant and fruitful Hills that surround its Territory, and is distant but two miles from the River Loire, which separates the Dio∣cess of Autun from the Territories of Bourbonnois, and 25 from Autun to the South West. It is a fair Town; the Castle is old, but the Walls are strong and sur∣rounded with a Trench cut out of a Rock, insomuch that it could not be taken during the whole Civil Wars of France, The Mineral Waters of Bourbon were much commended even in the time of the Ro∣mans, and have been no less esteem'd since the Reign of Henry III. who preferr'd them before all the others of his Kingdom. CHAALONNOIS, Cabillonensis Ager, is exten∣ded along the Banks of the Saone in the midst of the Province, and hath these chief Towns, viz. Chaalons, Bish. Cap. Verdun. Belle-garde. CHAALONS, Cabillonum, is seated on the Ri∣ver Soane, at the distance of 20 miles from the fron∣tiers of the County of Burgundy to the West, 25 from Autun to the East, 40 from Dijon and 65 from Lyon to the North. It is a very spacious City, with the Ti∣tle of a County and Bailiage, and of great Antiquity, as appears from divers Statues, Vessels and Inscripti∣ons found therein; not to mention the remains of an Amphitheatre, and of many publick Edifices. The Romans were wont to keep Store-houses of Corn for their Army at Chaalons; afterward the Emperors con∣stituted it the general place of Rendezvous of their Forces, and the Kings of Burgundy took no less de∣light in its situation. However, it was ruin'd by At∣tila, and repaired within a little while after. The Suburbs of S. Laurence are shut up within two Bridges, viz. one of Stone, and the other of Timber, on an Island made by the Saone; and the Citadel is flanked with four Royal Bastions, whereto some new Fortifi∣cations have been lately added. The City it self is di∣vided into the Old and the New, the latter enclosing the other, which consists only of three large Streets, where is to be seen the Palace of the Bailiage, that of the Prince, the Cathedral of S. Vincent, and the Town-House, besides the Parochial Churches of S. George, S. Lawrence, and S. Mary, the Commandery of S. An∣tony, a stately College of Jesuits, &c. Chaalons is an Episcopal See, subject to the Metropolitan of Lyon. This City was taken by the French Protestants, A. D. 1562. Verdun, Virdunum & Verodunum is a small Town near the confluence of the Doux and the Saone, about 12 miles from Chaalons to the North East. There is another Town of this Name in Lorrain, the Capital of a Bailiage. Belle-garde, Belloguardia stands on the left side Banks of the Saone, five Leagues from Chaalons to the North East, and was formerly called Seure, but the Name was changed when King Lwis XIII. erected it into a Duchy in favour of Roger de S. Lari, A. D. 1620. It was also well fortified for some time, but its Bulwarks are now dismantled. The MOUNTAINOUS COUNTRY, Tractus Montanus, lies to the North of Burgundy and the Spring-head of the Seine; its chief Towns are these, Chatillon sur Seine, Cap. Bar-sur-Seine. Aisei-le-duc &c. Chatillon sur Seine, Castelio ad Sequanam, is a fair Town and Abbey extended very far in length along the banks of the Seine, about 40 miles from Dijon to the North, and 30 from Langres to the West. It is divided by the River into two parts, one whereof is call'd The Burgh, and the other Chaumont. Here are to be seen the ruins of an old Castle; as also not far from hence a large Spring, the Waters of which turn many Mills, and are very serviceable to the Inhabi∣tants for the making of divers sorts of Manufactures. This is the Seat of the Baily of this Country. Bar-sur-Seine, Barium super Sequanam, takes its Name in like manner from its situation on the Seine, near the Confines of Champagne, about 18 miles from Chatillon to the North, and 15 from Troys to the South. It is a little Town well built, and stands in the midst of a fruitful Country. AƲXOIS, Alexiensis Tractus, borders on the Frontiers of Nivernois, and includes these principal Towns, viz. Seymeur, Cap. Avalon. Arnay-le-Duc, &c. SEMEƲR, Semurium, is a small Town on a Rivulet which dischargeth it self into that of Arman∣son, being distant 30 miles from Autun to the North, and 35 from Auxerre to the South East. Avalon, Avello, is seated in a Plain on the River Cousin, 30 miles from Auxerre to the South, and about 40 from Autun. It is a small City, and hath a Castle, and is the Seat of the Bailiage. Robert King of France took this Town by Famine after a Siege of three Months, A D. 1003. Arnay-le-duc, Arnaeum ducinum, is a very pleasant Town near the Spring-head of the River Arroux, and one of the Seats of the Baily of Auxois, being distant 35 miles from Avallon to the South East, and 20 from Challon to the Noth west. AƲXERROIS, Altissiodorensis Ager, lies be∣tween Champagne, Gatinois, Auxois, and Nivernois The Places of chiefest Note being these, viz. Auxerre, Bish. Cap. Coutange. Seignelay. Crevant, &c. AƲXERRE, Antissiodorum, is seated on the side of a Hill in a fruitful Country, and on the banks of the River Yonne, where it begins to be na∣vigable, at the distance of 70 miles from Paris to the South, 30 from Sens, and 20 from Avallon to the North-west. It is a very ancient City, 'tis said Ju∣lian the Apostate refreshed his Army here for some time. A, C. 451, it was ruin'd by Attila, and King Robert took it from Landri Count of Nevers, in 1005. Afterward it became subject to certain particular Counts, and at length was united to the Crown of France. It hath been long since erected into an Epis∣copal See under the Metropolitan of Sens, and its Cathedral bearing the Name of St. Stephen, is a very magnificent Structure, having a faire Quire, an ex∣ceeding high Tower, and a Chapter compos'd of 59 Canons, a Dean, a Chanter, a Grand Arch-deacon, a Penitentiary, and 4 Arch-Priests. Here are also other fair Churches, a stone Bridge over the River, divers publick Fountains and large publick Places. It is dignified with the title of a County, Bailige, and hath a Presidial and Election from the South east parts, It stands upon the great Road to Paris, and is therefore much frequented by Travellers. The County of CHAROLOIS, Caroliensis Cmi∣tatus, is situated to the South of that of Burgund, be∣tween Bourbonnois and Masconnois. Its principal Towns are,
Charoles Cap. Paroi-le-Monial. Toulon. Mont S. Vincent, &c. CHAROLES, Caroliae, is seated on the Rivulet of Reconse, 30 miles from Autun to the South, 12 from the River Loire to the E. and 20 from Mascon to the W. It is a very fair Town, beautified with a Col∣legiate Church and some Monasteries. Toulon, or Toulon seu Arroux, Tullonium ad Arrosium, is a small Town through which run the Streams of the River Arroux, seated almost in the midway between Autun and Charoles, and 25 from Challon to the W. BRIENNOIS, Briennensis Tractus, lies between Cha∣rolois and Masconois, near the Frontiers of Beaujolois, and doth not contain within its bounds any Place of good Note, excepting Anoy-le-Duc & Semeur, Semu∣rium, which stands on a Hill scarcely one League from the River Loire to the E. and on the Confines of Beaujolois. MASCONNOIS, Matisconensis Tractus, borders on the Southern part of the Duchy of Burgundy toward Bresse, being about 30 Miles long and 24 broad. The chief Towns are these, viz. Mascon, Bish. Cap. Tornus, Abb. Clugny, Abb. MASCON, Matisco aut Matiscona, is situated on the side of a little Hill on the Bank of the Saon, and near the Confines of the Province of Bresse, almost in the midst between Lyon to the S. and Chaalons to the N. at the distance of about 30 Miles from each. It is a place of much Antiquity, an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Lyon; also a Bailliage and an Ele∣ction. Here is a stately Bridge over the River Saon, which leads to the Suburbs of S. Lawrence, where are two strong Towers. The Cathedral is dedicated to S. Vincent, besides which here is a Collegiate Church, the Canons whereof are all of noble Extraction, the Parochial Church of S. Stephen, many Religious Houses and a College of Jesuits. This City was often ruin'd by the Incursions of the Huns, Burgundians and Franks, but hath been often repair'd by the munificence of divers Kings of France. Tornus, or Tournus, Tinurtium & Trenorchium, is a large Town built on the Banks of the Saon, about 15 Miles from Mascon to the N. and 18 from Chaalons to the S. Albinus Caesar was overcome by the Emperor Severus near this Place; at present it is chiefly remark∣able for its Famous Abbey. Cluny or Clugny, is a Village Founded on a small Ri∣ver called Grosne, 10 Miles from Mascon to the N. W. and 15 from Charoles to the E. It hath in like manner imparted its Name to the renowned Abbey of Cluniack Monks, which is the chief of the whole Order, and was instituted according to the Rule of S. Benedict, A. C. 910. by Bernon Abbot of Gigniac, by the Favour of William I. Duke of Aquitaine and Count of Auvergne. BRESSE, Sebussianus Ager, lies S. E. from Bur∣gundy, and is bounded on the E. Burgundy and Beaujo∣lois, on the W. by the River Dain, which divides it from Bugey, on the N. by Challonois, and on the S. by Lionnois and Dauphine, and is in extent from N. to S. about 40 Miles, and from E. to W. 30 Miles. It is a Fruitful Country, but by reason of some Lakes of standing Water in it, not very wholesom in some Parts. It is divided into the Upper, being the Parts about Bourg; and the Lower, lying towards the Lion∣nois. The chief Towns are, Bourg, Cap. Montluel, a small Town on the S. borders of the Province. Coligny, 15 Miles North from Bourg. Pont des Vaux, near the Saon, and 15 Miles from Coligny to the West, &c. BOƲRG, Burgus, aut Forum Sebusianorum, is situ∣ated in a Marshy Ground on the Rivulet of Reissousse, at the distance of 15 Miles from Mascon to the E. and 30 from Lyon to the N. being environ'd on the E. by Mount St. Claude and the Hills of Vignoble, and on the W. by a spacious Plain extended as far as the River Saon. This Town, together with the whole Province, hath been subject to the Dominion of the French Kings ever since the Year 1601. whereas be∣fore it belonged to the Duke of Savoy, who had built a strong Citadel in it in the Year 1569. which was demolished in 1611. However, it is as yet govern'd as it were in form of a Republick, the Administration of all Civil Affairs being committed to the care of two Syndicks or Sheriffs. Pope Leo X. erected an Episco∣pal Sea at Bourg, A. D. 1515. which was suppressed in the Year ensuing. It was also established in 1521. but Pope Paul III. thought fit to establish it again by his Bull publish'd in 1534. This Town hath a Bail∣liage, a Court of Election, and a Presidial. BƲGEY, Beugesia, Beugia, Bugia, lies between Savoy to the E. and Bresse to the W. from whence it is separated by the River Dein, including these chief Towns, viz. Bellay, Bish. Cap. Lanieu. Seissel. S. Rambert, &c. BELLAY, Bellicum, stands upon a Hill about 2 Miles from the River Rhone, 36 from Bourg to the S. E. and 40 from Grenoble to the N. It is a City of but small compass, nevertheless dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Besan∣con. It was ruined by Fire in the Year 1385, but Amedes VIII. Duke of Savoy, caused it to be rebuilt and enclosed with Walls. The Chapter of the Ca∣thedral Church of St. John Baptist, which had been before regular under the Rule of S. Augustin, was se∣culariz'd in 1579. It is composed of 19 Canons and 4 Dignitaries, viz. the Dean, the Arch-Priest, the Almone and the Chanter. But the Bishop is both Spiritual and Temporal Lord of the City, which was resign'd, together with the adjacent Territories, by the Savoyards, to the French, A. D. 1601. Seissel, Sesselium & Sissum, is a large Town where a Bridge of Boats is laid over the River Rhone, which divides it into two Parts, and now begins to be navi∣gable. It stands on the Foot of the Hills, and the very Frontiers of Savoy, being distant 20 Miles from Bellay to the North, and 15 from Annecy in Savoy to the West. The Bailiage of GEG, Gega aut Gaium, is a small Territory, that lies between the County of Burgundy to the North, and the City of Geneva to the South; the County of Vaud in Suisserland to the East, and Bugey to the West. But it doth not comprehend any very con∣siderable place, except the Town of Gex, Gesium, the Capital and Seat of the Bailiff, which was also grant∣ed by the Duke of Savoy to the French King, by the Peace concluded at Lyons, A. D. 1601. The Principality of DOMBES, Dumbensis Princi∣patus, is a small, but very pleasant Country, lying South-West of Bresse, along the Banks of the Saon, between Masconnois and Lyonnois, and contains 11 Ca∣stellanies, whereof that of Trevoux is the chief; the others are, Beauregard, Montmerle, Toissey, Lans, Cha∣tamon,
Cheteler, S. Trivier, Velleneuve, Ambrica & Lig∣mieu. Trevoux, Trivoltium, a small Town, but the Ca∣pital of this Principality and a Bailiage, is seated at the Foot of a Hill on the Banks of the River Saone, 10. Miles above Lyon to the North, and near 30 from Mascon. The County of BƲRGƲNDY, or the ƲPPER BƲRGƲNDY, also call'd the FRANCHE COMPTE, is the Country of the ancient Sequani, and part of the ancient Burgundia Cisjurana. It is bounded on the E. by Switzerland, on the S. by Bresse, Bugey, and the Bailiage of Gex, on the N. by Lor∣raine, and on the W. by the Duchy of Burgundy and part of Champagne; and is extended from the 46th Deg. 10 Min. to the 48th Deg. including the Space of about 110 Miles; and from the 23d Deg. 15 Min. to the 25th Deg. 10 Min. of Longitude, which a∣mounts to 72 Miles, from the Frontiers of the Bishop∣rick of Basil as far as beyond Gray. This Province affords abundance of Corn, Wine, Timber and Cattel, especially Horses. There are also a great number of Salt-pits, and many Quarries of black Marble, Jaspar of divers colours, and very fair Alabaster, together with some Mines of Iron. The principal Rivers are, the Soane, the Doux, the Lougnon and the Louve, which are full of several sorts of Fish. Moreover, the Wines of Arbois, Poligny and Vesoul, are esteemed beyond those of the other Provinces of France. This County was quietly possessed by the Kings of Spain, and Heirs of the Family of Burgundy, till the time of this present King of France, who, in the Year 1668. by his Army made himself Master of it, but was obliged to surrender it the same Year by the Trea∣ty of Aix la Chapelle: Notwithstanding which, he a∣gain invaded and took it in the Year 1674. and forced the Spaniards to grant it to him in the following Peace of Nimeguen, as we have already elsewhere shewn; It is divided into three Parts, viz. The Bailiage of VESOƲL, or AMONT; or the Upper Bailiage of the County of Burgundy, is extend∣ed toward the Northern Part of this Province, and comprehends these most considerable Towns, viz. Vesoul, Cap. Gray. Beaune les Nonnes. Luxueil. Rey. Jussey. Cromarcy. Rugemont. Lure, Abb. Mont-beliard County. VESOƲL, Vesulum, is situated on a small River that runs into the Saone, at the distance of 28 Miles from Besancon to the N. 20 from the Borders of Lor∣raine to the S. and 30 from Mont-beliard to the W. This Town of late hath been often taken and restored, but was at length resign'd to the French King by the Treaty of Nimeguen, A. D. 1678. Gray, Graium, Greium & Graiacum, stands on the Banks of the Saone, 30 Miles from Vesoul to the S. W. and 20 from Dole to the N. It is a fair Town, thô of small extent, and formerly well Fortified with a Castle. &c. but it was taken by the French, A. D. 1668. and also in 1674, and not long after all its Bulwarks, together with the Fort, were intirely de∣molished. Lure, Ludera, Lurensis Monast. a small Town and famous Monastery, whose Abbot was Lord of the Town, is seated on the River Lougnn, 18 Miles from Vesoul to the E. Mont-beliard, Mons-belligardus, gives Name to a County on the N. E. of the Franche Compte, and bound∣ed on the N. with Lorraine, and on the E. by Sunt∣gaw: It was formerly part of Germany, and belong'd to the Dukes of Wirtemberg, but hath been made part of France by the present King. The Town is seated at the Foot of a Rock, on the top whereof stands the Castle, which was the Seat of a Count of the Family of Wirtemberg: It had, besides, a strong Citadel, now destroy'd. It is but a small Place, having not above two or three Streets; and is water'd by the small Ri∣ver Hall or Alaine, which a little below falls into the Donx. This Town is distant 40 Miles from Besancon to the N. E and 33 from Basil to the W. and not far from the Foot of Vauge. The middle Bailiage, or that of DOLE, Dolensis Tractus, lies in the midst of this Province, from the Frontiers of the Duchy of Burgundy to those of Swit∣zerland, containing in its Limits these prinicpal Towns, viz. Besancon, Arch. Cap. Dole, Ornans, Quingey, Verceil, Loye, Rochefort, &c. BESANCON, Vesontio, Vesontium and Bisuntio, is a very ancient City, and the Capital of Franche Compte, the Sea of an Archbishop, the Seat of the Par∣liament, and a considerable University. It is seated on the River Doux, which almost encompasses it; and is defended with a good Citadel lately Built. This City was formerly Imperial and Free, under the Pro∣tection of the Count of Burgundy, but exempted in the Year 1651, and given to the Spaniards, from whom it was taken by the French, and by the Treaty of Nimeguen granted to them with the rest of the Coun∣ty. It is distant 30 Miles from Vesoul to the South, 54 from Dijon to the East, 30 from the Frontiers of Suisserland to the West, and 60 from Geneva to the North. Dole, Dola, is in like manner seated on the Doux, in a Pleasant and Fertile Country, about 30 Miles from Besancon to the W. and as many from Dijon to the E. It was heretofore the Capital of the Province, but Besancon now enjoys that Privilege. Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, Founded a University here in the Year 1426, which the Duchess Margaret aug∣mented in 1484, and it is now in flourishing State. Here is a Chamber of Accounts and a Bailiage. This City was heretofore well Fortified, but the present French King made himself Master of it in the Month of February, 1668, and Dismantled it before he re∣stored it to the Spaniards, as he was forced to do by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle; by which means he the easier retook it in 1674, and hath ever since pos∣sessed it. The other Towns contain nothing very con∣siderable. The Bailiage of POLIGNY, Polichniensis Tractus, or of AVAL, or of the Lower Bailiage of the Coun∣ty of Burgundy, is situated between Suisserland on the East, Bresse on the South, the Duchy of Burgundy on the West, and the middle Bailiage, or that of Dole, on the North, comprising within its Jurisdiction the following Towns, viz. Poligny, Capital. Leon de Saimier, Salins, Arlay, Chatel-Chalon, S. Claude, Abb. Blaterans, Orgelet, Champignole, Arbois, Pontarlier, Noseroy, Jougne, Arantan, Moutau. Sorlin, Mommorat, Rufey, &c.
POLIGNY, Polichnium, Polenium, and Polnia∣cum, is built near a small River that runs into the Doux, and was formerly well Fortified, and more considerable than at present. Its Suburbs are large, encompass'd with Gardens, Hills and Forests, and the Wines made here are highly esteem'd. It is distant 20 Miles from Dole to the S. E. 36 from Besancon, as many from the Frontiers of Swisserland, and 35 from Geneva to the N. W. Salins, Salinae, and Saliense Castrum, is pleasantly seated in a Valley between two Mountains, on the Rivulet of Forica, at the distance of 12 Miles from Poligny to the N. E. 20 from Besancon to the S. taking its Name from an admirable Spring of Salt-waters, whereof are made vast quantities of pure white Salt, that afford a large Revenue to the Prince. This Town is extended very far in length, and well Fottified, its Walls being flanked with high Towers, besides two Castles that defend it on all sides, and the Citadel on the top of a steep Rock, rendring it almost Impreg∣nable. The Wall, or Store-house, commonly call'd La Grand Saulnerie, (wherein the Salt is boiled and preserved, and the Officers employed in this Opera∣tion have their Lodgings) is a stately Building. S. Claude, Fanum S. Claudii, is in like manner a strong Hold on the Frontiers of Bugey, and the Coun∣try of Gex, about 3 Leagues from the River Rhone, and 5 from Geneva to the West. It was formerly called St. Oyen de Joux, Fanum Sancti Eugendi; and is now chiefly remarkable for its Famous Monastery, in which is preserv'd the Body of St. Claude, Arch∣bishop of Besancon, in the VII Century, whose Name is communicated to this Town and part of Mount Jura in the adjacent Territory. On the East side of the Franche Comte, stands the ridge of Mountains, call'd Mont-Jura, which extends from near Basil on the Rhine in the N. quite as far as the River Rhone and the Province of Bugey, being the whole length of this Country, and divides it from Swisserland; but in several Places they bear different Names: At the South end it divides into two Bran∣ches, whereof one extends to the Rhine, about 12 or 15 Miles below Geneva, and is called the Credo; the other divides the Franche Comte from Beugey, and is named Mnt St. Claude from a little Town near it: About the source of the River Doux, it is called Mont de Joux; in the Neighbourhood of Basil, Pierrepont and Botzberg, and a little more Southward, Schaffmas, and by the Swissers Leerberg. This Government is divided between two Gover∣nours-General, whereof one hath the Duchy of Bur∣gundy, Bresse, Beugey, Valromey and Gex, under his Care; and the other the County of Burgundy, or Franche Comte. Of the Duchy of Burgundy, &c. the Prince of Conde is the Governor-General, and the Count d'Armagnac Hereditary Grand Seneschal; and under them are five Lieutenants Generals, twelve Bai∣liffs, and thirteen Governors of Places, viz. of Dijon, Auxone, Chalon, Bellegarde, Taland, Semeur in Auxois, the Bridge of Mascon, Ausun, Beaune, Bourbon, Lancy, Avalon and Chatillon. In the County of Burgundy, the Duke de Duras is Governor-General, and under him one Lieutenant-General, and eleven Governors of Places in these Towns, viz. Besancon, the Citadel of Besancon; also the Fort of St. Stephen, and the Fort Grifon, in the same City have different Governors; Dole, Salins, the two Forts of St. Andrew, and Belim, the Castle of Joug and Town of Pontarbier, the Castle of Blamont, and the Castle of Montbeliard. The Burgundians, who gave Name to this Country, were once a very Powerful Nation, possessing not only this Ducy and County of Burgundy, but also Alsatia, Swisseand, Wllistand and Savoy, and afterwards Dau∣phine, Linnois and Nivernois also; which great Tract of Country was divided by the Romans into Burgundy Trans, and Cis Jurana, with respect to Mount Jura. They were originally a Tribe of the Vandals, and came from the Parts about Mekienurg and Pomerania, and like the rest of those Northern Nations, a rough unciviliz'd People, living in Tents clap'd up for their present Occasions, which in their Language were cal∣led Burghs, and thence the Men Burgundians: Thus saith Agathias and other Historians. But Isidore de∣rives their Name from Ognius, under which Name they Worshipped Hercules: But this, as all Etymologies, is vey uncertain; the former seems much the more Na∣tural, and is therefore generally follow'd. About the beginning of the Fifth Century they received Chri∣stianity, and began to Inhabit the Towns along the Banks of the Rhine, and by their valiant resistance of the Huns, obtained great Reputation, and for that rea∣son were called into Gaul by Stilico the Roman Ge∣neral to assist him against the Franks, &c. And for their Service had the two Burgundies assigned them; to which they afterwards added Lyonnois, Nivernois and Dauphine, and erected a Kingdom, which continued for 120 Years in an uninterrupted Succession; at the end o which, Childebert and Clotaire, the French Kings of Paris and Soissons, deeated and slew Gundo∣mar the last Burgundian King, by which that King∣dom being broken, the Eastern Parts were seized by others, and the Western made Parts of the French Kigdoms, and remained so for some Ages, till at length Lewis the Godly, Son of Charles the Great, in the Partition that he made of the Kingdom Charlemaign left him (already mentioned) erected Burgundy again into a Kingdom; the chief Seat whereof being Arles, it was sometimes called the Kingdom of Arles. In this state it continued for near 200 Years, till the Death of Rodolph III. 1032, who leaving no Issue, be∣queathed his Estate to Conrad the Emperor who had Married his Sister, or Niece, as others say: After which it was again divided among several Princes; this now called the Duchy of Burgundy, the Ancestors of Hugh Capet enjoy'd, and by his Son King Rbert it ws annex∣ed to the Crown; but by his Successor Hnry I. given in appenage to his Brother Robert, whose Posterity continued Dukes of Burgundy till 1361, when Eudes IV. leaving only one Son, who died young, the Duchy was claimed by John King of France, Charles King of Navarre, and Edward Count of Barr, all three Descen∣ded from the Sisters of Eudes; of these John got the better, and gave it to his younger Son Philip who by Marriage obtained also the Counties of Burgundy and Flanders, and his Successors added almost all the Ne∣therlands; insomuch, that Philip the Good and Charles the Warlike, the two last Kings of Burgundy, were as powerful Princes as any in Europe: But the latter be∣ing killed in his Wars against the Swissers, A. 1476. and leaving no Male Issue, Lewis XI. seized the Duchy as an Escheat to the Crown; and it hath ever since been retained by the Kings of France; but the County of Burgundy with the other Estates of that Prince, de∣scended to Mary, Daughter of Charles, who Marryi g Maximilian of Austria, afterwards Emperor, brought the Netherlands into that Family, and Philip, the Son of Mary and Maximilian, Married Joan, Queen of Castile, and Begat Charles V. who was Emperor of Ger∣many, King of Spain and the Indies, Duke of Burgundy, and Lord of the Netherlands; as will be seen more particularly in our account of Belgium.
CHAP. IX. The Government of LYONNOIS, Lugdunensis Provincia. THE Government call'd LYONNOIS, com∣prehends the ancient Gallia Celtica, or at least the greatest part thereof, being bounded on the North by Berry, Nivernois and Burgundy; on the South by the Mountains of Cevennes, and the Country of Rou∣vergue; on the East by Bresse and Dauphine, and on the West by Quercy, Limousin, Angoumois and Poictou. It lies between the 44 Degree, 26 Minutes, and the 46 Degree, 46 Minutes Lat. in its greatest breadth from South to North, consisting of about 140 English Miles, that is to say, from the Frontiers of Rouvergue to Dun-le-Roy, on the Frontiers of Berry; as also be∣tween the 18th Degree, and 22d Degree, 50 Min. of Longitude. And in its greatest length from W. to E. includes the space of 180 Miles, viz. From beyond the Town of Availle on the River Vienne, near the Confines of Poictou, as far as Lyon. The Soil here is not so Fertile as in other Parts, by reason of the many Mountains that rise up in some of its Parts. The prin∣cipal Rivers are the Loire, the Rhone, the Sone and the Allier. In this Govern∣ment are com∣priz'd six dif∣ferent Coun∣tries, viz. Lionnois, Proper Lyon, Archbish. Forets, Montbrison. Beaujolois, Beaujeu. Bourbonnois, Moulins. Auvergne, Clermont. Marche, Gueret. LIONNOIS, properly so call'd, Lugdunensis A∣ger, is of but small extent. It lies along the Banks of the River Rhone and Saone, and is from North to South about 45 Miles, and from East to West not above 12 or 45 Miles, and is bounded by Dauphine; from whence it is separated by the Rhone and Bresse, and Beaujolois on the North, Forets on the West, and Vivaretz on the South. The Country round about Lyon, produces more Grapes than Corn, and the rest is Fertile enough in both. and yields excellent Fruits. Its most consi∣derable Towns are these, viz. Lyon, Archbish. Neuville, S. Chaumont, Coindrieu, Anse, &c. LYONS, Lugdunum, is large, populous and flou∣rishing, and next Paris may be reckon'd the richest, largest, and most trading City of all France, except Roan be preferred, which she claims; however it be, Lyons is very considerable on account of its great Traf∣fick, which its convenient Situation on the Rivers Rhone and Saone, and on the Road to Italy doth much assist. It is the Sea of an Archbishop, who hath the Title of Primate of Gaul; also a Generality, Election, Seneschalcy, Presidial, and a particular Court for Mer∣chants, call'd the Tribunal of Commerce, and hath also a Famous University, and an Exchange or Course of Money. The Origine of this City is much dispu∣ted; some Authors report it to have been built by one Lugdus a King of the Celtae: Strabo makes Momor a Gaulish Prince its Founder, which is also disputed by others; and concerning its Name, there is the same difference, some deducing it from Rugdus abovemen∣tioned, and the old Gaulish Word Dunum, a Mountain or rising Ground, such a one being near it; others from an old Gaulish Word, intimating a Hill of Crows, from a lucky Omen of these Birds at its Foundation. There are many others too long and trivial to men∣tion here. It is seated at the Foot of the Mountains on the Frontiers of the Provinces of Bresse and Dau∣phine, being separated from the latter only by the River Rhone, which passing by the City, hath a long Stone-Bridge over it, and a little below receives the Soane, over which in like manner are three fair Bridges. The Town is divided into two Parts, the Greater whereof lying between the Rhone and the Soane, is the Quarter of St. Nizier, and the Lesser that of St. John. These two Quarters are sub-divided into 32 Wards, or Precincts, call'd Penonages, and every one of them hath its particular chief Sub-ordinate Officers. The City is likewise surrounded with very large Suburbs, and fenc'd with an old Castle built on an adjacent Rock, named Pierre-Scize, and it is adorn'd with many stately Edifices, among which the Guild-Hall or Town-house is chiefly conspicuous, and esteem'd as a Master-piece of Architecture. Here are likewise to be seen the Remains of some ancient Roman Works, particularly of an Amphitheatre, divers Aqueducts, publick Baths, &c. The City of Lyons having been burnt by Light∣ning in the time of Nero, A. C. 59. was Re-built by the liberality of that Emperor, according to Tacitus; which Conflagration is also mention'd by Seneca, in one of his Epistles to Lucilius. Afterwards Severus pillag'd and burnt it in 198, in Revenge, because the Inhabitants had entertained Albinus his Enemy. It also suffered often by the Incursions of the Germans, Goths and Saracens. The Emperor Claudius was Born in this City; and the Emperor Gratian slain in it by Andragathus, A. D. 383. And two General Councils were Assembled here in the Years 1245 and 1274. Lyons is distant 120 miles from Paris to the S. E. 160 from the Banks of the Mediterranean Sea to the N. 250 from Bourdeaux to the E. 70 from Geneva to the S. W. 110 from Nevers to the S. E. 105 from Dijon to the S. and 40 from the Frontiers of Savoy to the W. FORETZ, Forensis Provincia, is usually divided into two Parts, viz. the Upper and Lower, bounded on the E. by Lyonnois and Beaujolois, on the N. by Burgundy and Bourbonnois, on the S. by Valley and Vi∣varets, and on the W. by the Mountains of Auvergne, comprehending these principal Towns, viz. Montbrison, Cap. St. Etienne. Rouanne. Feurs. S. Germain Laval. S. Garmier, &c. MONTBRISON, Montbrisonium, & Mont-Bru∣sonis, is situated on the Rivulet of Vecize, at the di∣stance of 6 miles from the River Loire, and 30 from Lyons to the W. 30 from the Borders of Bourgogne to the S. and 20 from the Borders of Velay. It was at first only a Castle, but encreased to a Town and enclosed with Walls, A. D. 1428. It is adorn'd with a Colle∣giate Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, divers Mo∣nasteries, a Court of Election and a Provostship.
St. Etienne, or St. Steven de Furens, Furnanium aut Fanum Sancti Stephani, is seated on the foot of a Hill, on the Banks of the Brook Furens, about two Leagues from the River Loire to the E. and 20 from Montbri∣fon to the S. E. The adjacent Country affords good store of Pit-coal, and the Waters of the Brook Fu∣rens are very proper for the tempering of Iron and Steel, which advantage hath induced the Inhabitants to make vast quantities of small Iron-ware, main∣taining a very great Trade in these sorts of Merchan∣dizes, which are transported by them almost into all the Countries of Europe. The Town of St. Stephen suf∣fer'd much damage during the Civil Wars, and was twice taken by the Protestant Party, viz. In 1563, and 1570. Roanne, or Rouanne, Rhodumna, is a large Town, but destitute of Walls, and Founded on the Banks of the River Loire, where it begins to be capable of admitting small Boats at the distance of 20 miles from Montbrison to the S. The adjacent Country is call'd from thence Roannois, and was erected into a Dutchy by King Charles IX. The Town it self be∣ing beautified with a fair College of Jesuits, and di∣vers other Monasteries. Feuers, Forum Segusianorum, the chief Town of the Upper Forets, from whence the whole Country takes its name, stands on the East-side of the Loire, near its Confluence with the Lignon, 25 miles from St. Ste∣phen to the S. as many from Roan to the North, and 20 from Lyon to the W. BAƲJLOIS, Baujoviensis, Bellojoviensis, aut Bellojocensis Tractus, is extended from E. to W. from beyond the River Sone to the Loire, having Lyonnois on the S. the Principality of Dombes, and part of Masconois on the E. Charolois on the N. and Forets on the W. This Country affords abundance of Corn, Wine and Flax, and hath these considerable Towns, viz. Beaujeu, Ville Franche, Cap. Belle-Ville, &c. BEAƲJEƲ, Bajovium, Ballojovium and Belli∣jocum, is a small Town, together with a Castle, on the Rivulet Ardiere, which hath imparted its name to the Territory of Beaujolois, and the Lords of the an∣cient and Illustrious Family of Beaujeu; being distant 25 miles from Lyon to the N. and 5 or 6 from the River Sone. Over the Gate of the principal Church of this Burgh is to be seen a very old piece of Work∣manship in Basso-Relievo, representing a Roman Sa∣crifice of a Hog, a Sheep and an Ox. VILLE-FRANCHE, Francopolis aut Villa Franca, is water'd by the Brook Morgon, which a little below falls into the Sone, and stands upon the Road in the Mid-way between Lyons and Beaujeu, 20 miles from Mascon to the S. It is at present the chief Town of Beaujolois, and remarkable for its Collegiate Church, Academy, Court of Election, Bailliage, and Granary of Salt. BOƲRBONNOIS, Borbonensis Provincia, is divided into the Upper and Lower, and bounded on the E. by the River Loire, which separates it from the Dutchy of Burgundy, on the W. by Berry, on the S. by Auvergne and Forets, and on the N. by Niver∣nois, and part of Berry. It is extended from W. to E. for the space of about 70 miles, and 45 from S. to N. The ancient Inhabitants of Bourbonnois, who were a part of the Boii, sent many Colonies into Germany and Italy, under Ambigatul Prince of the Bi∣turiges, and often maintain'd furious Wars against the Romans. This Province hath also acquir'd Reputa∣tion by its Lords, Barons, Counts and Dukes, from whom the present King of France is Descended. The most remarkable Towns of Bourbonnois are these, viz. Moulins, Cap. Bourbon l' Archam∣baut, Souvigny, S. Amand, Monlusson, Varennes, Vichy, S. Geran. Gannet. MOƲLINS, Mouline, is seated near the River Allier, in a large fruitful Plain, at the distance of 140 miles from Paris, and 20 from Nevers to the S. about 50 from Clermont to the N. and 70 from Challon to the W. It is a Town of very large extent, and was formerly the usual place of Residence of the Princes of Bourbon, who built the Castle, which hath often been the Royal Seat of the French Kings. This Town is also famous on the account of the singular Vertue of the Medicinal Waters, and the Inhabitants for their skill in making divers sorts of Knives, &c. Moulins is usually divided into 4 Quarters, viz. The Old Town, the New, the Suburbs of the Carmelites, and those of the Allier. The most remarkable Build∣ings are the Collegiate Church and two Parochial ones, besides those of the Suburbs, together with di∣vers Monasteries, a Generality and Presidial Courts, and another of Election, and a College of Jesuits. Among the Religious Houses, the chief is that of the Carthusians, and the Church belonging to the Nuns of the Visitation, wherein stands the Sumptuous Tomb of Henry II. Duke of Montmorency, Marshal of France, &c. Bourbon l' Archambaud, Borbonium Archimbeldi, and Boia, is a small Town, which nevertheless hath given name to the whole Province of Bourbonnois, and is di∣stant about 12 miles from Moulins. AƲVERGNE, Aluernia, bearing the Title of a County, is bounded on the East by Forets, on the West by the Upper Limousin, Quercy and Marche, on the North by Bourbonnois, and on the South by Cevennes and Rouergue; its utmost extent from South to N. consisting of about 80 miles, and 60 from W. to E. It is divided into the Upper and Lower Coun∣tries, the former to the S. being very Mountainous, among which one called the Mount of Cantal, is ex∣ceeding high, and the other to the N. extreamly Fruitful, especially in the Quarter of Limagne. This Province was formerly subject to its own Counts, but united to the Crown of France, A. D. 1204, by King Philip the August, to suppress the Rebellion of the last Count named Guy. The principal Towns are enumerated in the following Table. In the Lower, Clermont, B.C. Rion, Thiers, Issoire, Montferand, Brioude, &c. In the Upper, St. Flour, Auarillac, Morat, Viscounty, &c. CLERMONT, Claromons, Clarus-Mons, Claro∣montium, and formerly Arvernum, Arverna, and Augu∣stonemetum, and by some affirm'd to be the ancient Gergovia; is a large well-built City, with the Title of a County, and the Metropolis of the whole Pro∣vince, the See of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Bourges; also the Seat of a Court of Aides
and a Presidial. It is situate upon a little Hill near the Mountain call'd the Puy de Domme, and is Wa∣ter'd by the Rivulet Tiretaine, which riseth in the Mountain, and falls into the Allier; and is distant 50 miles from Bourbon l' Archambaud to the South, and 75 from Lyons to the West. Riom, Ricomagum & Riomum, is seated on a rising ground about 7 or 8 miles from Clermont to the N. and is a fair well-built Town, the Churches being magnificent, the Houses beautiful and the Monasteries fair, and adorn'd with Fountains and pleasant Walks, insomuch that this Town is term'd, The Garden of Limagne. It is the Capital of the Dutchy of Au∣vergne, on which depend all the Fiefs and mean Fiefs of the Province, having been erected in favour of John Duke of Berry, the Son of King John, A. D. 1360. Thiers or Thiern, Thigernum & Thiernum, is a small Town, built on a Hill near the Brook Durolle, in the Frontiers of the Province of Forets, 20 miles from Clermont to the East, toward Lyon. The Inhabitants maintain a considerable Traffick in Knives, Sizzers, and other small Wares of the like Nature. The other Towns are less considerable. MARCHE, Marchia, the most Western Coun∣try of the Government of Lyonnois, is so call'd, as be∣ing a Passage or thorow-fare into the neighbouring Provinces. It is bounded on the North by Berry, on the South by Limousin, on the East by Auvergne, and on the West by Poictou. It is divided into two parts, viz. the Ʋpper, having Gueret for its chief Town, and depending on the Generality of Moulins: And the Lower, which hath Dorat, and resorts to the Generality of Limoges. The Lords of Luzignen were formerly Counts of Marche and Angouleme; but these two Counties were annexed to the Crown of France by King Philip the Fair; afterward it served as an In∣heritance to the younger Sons of the Royal Family, and at length, after many Revolutions, was reunited to the Crown, in 1531. The principal Towns of this large Province are these. In the Ʋpper-Marche, Gueret, Cap. Felevin, Jarnege, Ambusson, Dunaisse, Genovillac, Grammont, Ab. In the Lower, Dorat, Cap. Belac, Maignac, S. Junieu, Consoulans, Lssac, &c. GƲERET, Gueretum, Garactum & Varactum, is the Capital Town of the Province of Marche, si∣tuated near the Spring-head of the River Gartemp, hath a Seneschalcy and a Presidial, and is distant about 50 miles from Clermont to the West, 40 from Limoges to the East, and 65 from Bourges to the South. Aubusson stands on the Frontiers of Auvergne, 20 miles from Gueret to the South-East. It is a very populous Town, and remarkable for its Manufacture of Tapistry. The large Towers of an old demo∣lish'd Castle sufficiently shew the Grandeur of the former Lords of this Place, of whom was descended Peter d' Aubusson, the famous Grand Master of Rhodes. Dorat, Oratorium, a small Town, nevertheless the Chief of the Lower Marche, stands on the small River Seve, which falls into the Garempe, and is distant a∣bout 40 miles from Gueret to the West, not above 5 or 6 from the Frontiers of Poictou, and 25 from Li∣moges to the North. Belac, Belacum is seated on the Brook Vincon in the Lower Marche, about two Leagues from Dorat, and hath a Court of Election under the Generality of Li∣moges, &c. The rest of the Towns are not considerable enough to deserve a particular Description. The Lionnois, Foretz and Beanjolois hath a Govern∣nour General, who is at present the Duke de Villeroy, a Lieutenant General, a Baily and Seneschal of Lyons, a Baily of S. Stephen in Foretz, and another of Beau∣jolois. The Bourbonnois hath a Governour General and a Lieutenant General. Auvergne hath also a Go∣vernour General, two Lieutenants General, and two Seneschals of Rion and Clermont; and Marche hath another Governour, a Lietenant and two Seneschals of Gueret and Dorat. CHAP. X. GUIENNE, Aquitania aut Aremorica. THE Government of GƲIENNE, which is dignified with the Title of a Dutchy, was here∣tofore call'd the Kingdom of Aquitaine, ab Aquis; that is to say, from the great number of Springs of hot Water found therein, and was then of larger ex∣tent than at present: That part of it which lies on the North side of the Garonne is termed Guienne, and the other on the farther side of the same River to the South, bears the Name of Gascony. The whole Country in general is bounded on the North by Poitou, Angoumois and Marche; on the East by Auvergne and Languedoc, on the South by the Pyrenean Mountains, that separate it from Spain, and on the West by the Ocean; lying between the 42d Degree 25 Minutes, and 46th Degree of Latitude; as also between the 14th Degree 20 Minutes, and the 20th Degree and 50 Minutes of Longitude: Which extent comprehends the space of 230 English miles from South to North; that is to say, from Vic de Sos on the Pyrenean Mountains to that of S. Jean de Angely on the Borders of Poitou, and about 250 miles from West to East, viz. from S. Jean de Luz, beyond Bayonne as far as beyond S. Genier in Rovergne, near Gevaudan.
The Air is gentle and every where very healthful, and the Soil fertile in Corn, Grapes and other Fruits, ex∣cepting in the Sandy Grounds on the Sea-coasts and the Pyrenean Mountains, where there are only Heaths and some Pastures. This Province is water'd with a great many considerable Rivers. viz. the Garonne or Gironde, the Lot, the Dardogne, the Adour, the Charente, &c. But the Garonne more especially facilitates the Traffick of the Inhabitants, which consists in Corn, Wine, Oil, Prunes, Wool, &c. Aquitain, in the Roman Division of Gaul, by Au∣gustus, was divided into the Prima and Secunda, and compriz'd all the Country between the Loire and the Pyrenees: Which was by Valentinian III. given to the Goths, as we have elsewhere already said: These were in time conquer'd by the French, and Aquitain made a part of their Kingdom, till Lewis the Godly made it a distinct one, and gave it to his Son Pepin; but Charles the Bald dispossess'd the Sons of Pepin, and be∣stow'd it on Arnulph of Burgundy, A. 844. whose Ne∣phew, William Earl of Auvergne, that succeeded him, bequeathed his Estates to Ebles III. Earl of Poictou, from whom descended Eleanor Wife of our King Hen∣ry II. in whose Right he succeeded in the Dutchy of Aquitain, and his Sons Richard and John successively enjoy'd it after him; but in the time of the latter it was seiz'd by the French King Lewis VIII. A. 1202. which causing great Wars between the two Nations, it was at length agreed between Henry III. King of England, and Lewis IX. King of France, That the En∣glish should quietly possess Guienne, bounded on the North by the River Charante, and on the South by the Pyrenean Mountains, and quit Normandy, Anjou, Tou∣raine and Maine, which they before possessed. And from this Time our Kings were styled only Dukes of Guienne; which Dignity and Country they enjoyed till the time of Henry VI. in whose unfortunate Reign the English lost all their Possessions in France; Since when all Aquitain hath been part of the Kingdom of France. Guienne and Gascoigne at present divided into 19 Provinces, viz. Guienne in 8. Guienne, Proper. Bourdeaux, Arch. C Bazadois. Bazes, Bish. Agenois. Agen, Bish. Quercy. Cahors, Bish. Rovergue. Rhodes, Bish. Limousin. Limoges, Bish. Perigord. Perigueux, Bish. Saintoigne. Saintes. Gascony in 11. Armagnac. Auch, Archb. Cap. Gascoigne or Chalesse. Aire, Bish. Condomois. Condom, Bish. Sandy Grounds. d' Acqs, Bish. Territories of Labord. Bayonne, Bish. Lower Navarre. S. Palais. Vicounty of Soul. Maulcon. Bearn. Pau. Bigorre. Torbe, Bish. Comminge. S. Bertrand. Conserans. S. Lizier, Bish. GƲIENNE properly so call'd, or BOƲR∣DELOIS, Burdigalensis Ager, is bounded on the West by the Ocean, on the South by Gascony and Ba∣zadois, on the East by Agenois, and on the North by Saintonge. This Country is fruitful in Grapes, whereof excellent Wine is made and Transported from Bour∣deaux into Foreign Parts. The Towns of chief Note are these, viz. Bourdeaux, Archbish. Cap. Libourne. Blaye. Losparre. Cadillac, &c. BOƲRDEAƲX, Burdigala, is situated in a ve∣ry fertile and well-manur'd Country on the Banks of the River Garonne, at the distance of about 40 miles from the Coasts of the Ocean to the East, 60 from Saintes to the South, 110 from Limoges to the South-west, and as many from Thoulouse to the North-west. It is the Metropolis of the whole Government of Gui∣enne, and indeed one of the most ancient and fairest Cities of France, and a place of great Traffick: be∣ing resorted to by Merchants from divers parts of Eu∣rope. Its Haven is very capacious and Safe, and is call'd le Port de la Lune, or the Port of the Moon, from its form, being like a Crescent; into which the Tide flows very high, and brings Ships of great Burthen up to the Key. The City it sel in form resembles a Bow, (whereof the River Garonne is the Spring) and is well built, the Palace, Town house, Fair Markets, Publick Fountains, the Key and the Cathedral dedi∣cated to S. Andrew are well worth a Stranger's View; as also the Castle, lately well Fortified, and call'd le Chateau Trompetts. About 18 miles below the City stands a stately Watch-Tower, call'd la Tour Cordouan, built by Lewis de Foix, a famous Ingineer. This Ci∣ty is the See of an Archbishop, the Seat of a Parlia∣ment, a Court of Aides, Generality, Senalchalcy, an Exchange and a Mint. Also a most flourishing Uni∣uersity, which King Charles VII, restor'd to its former Lustre, and Pope Eugenius IV. granted great Privi∣leges to, which were augmented by Lewis XI. Richard II. King of England was born here, A. D, 1367. Libourne, Liburnia, is a small Town, built near the Confluence of the River Dordogne and Ile, almost over-against Fronsac, about 20 miles from Bourdeaux to the East, toward Perigueux. Blaye, Blavia, Blavium or Blavutum, stands on the Frontiers of the Province of Saintonge, on the North side of the Haven of Bourdeaux, where the Gironne intermixeth it Waters with those of the Dardogne, and changeth its own name into that of Gironde, 10 Leagues from the mouth of the same River Gironde, 20 miles from Bourdeaux to the North, and 30 from Saintes. All Vessels that pass up to Bourdeaux are obliged to leave their Guns in this Town. The adjacent Terri∣tory is call'd le Blaiguez, BAZADOIS, Vazatensis Ager, lies between Gui∣enne proper on the North and West, the Landes or Sandy Grounds on the South, and Agenois on the East. It is a Country very fertile in Corn, Wine and Fruits, and comprehends these chief Towns, viz. Bazas, Bish. Cap. La Reole. Gastelgtloux. Nerac. Mont de Marson, &c. BAZAS, Vasatum & Vazatium, olim Cossium aut Cossio, is a small City, seated in a Woody and Sandy Country, on a kind of Rock, the foot of which is wash'd by the Brook of Lavasane, about 10 miles from the Garonne to the South, 30 from Bourdeaux to the South-east, and 35 from Condon to the North west. It is an Episcopal See, depending on the Metropolitan of Auch, and the Cathedral Church is dedicated to S. John the Baptist. AGENOIS, Aginensis Ager, borders on Armagnas to the South, Quercy to the East, Perigord to the North, and Bazadois to the West. It is the most fruitful Coun∣try of all Guienne, and furnishes several Provinces with Corn, Wine and Oil; in it are these Towns, viz. Agen, Bish. Cap. Ville Neuve. Aiguillen. S. Foye, &c.
AGEN, Aginum, Agenum aut Aginum, was here∣tofore the Capital City of the Nitiobriges, who were its Founders. It is a very large and populous City, an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Bourde∣aux; and hath a Seneschalcy and a Presidial: And is situated near the River Garonne, where it receives the Gers, 60 miles from Bourdeaux to the South-east, 50 from Thoulouse to the North-west, and 40 from Bazas to the East. This City had the Honour to be the Birth-place of that Prodigy of Learning, Joseph Scaliger. QƲERCY Cadurcensis Tractus, is bounded on the South by Languedoc, on the East by Rouergue and Au∣vergne, on the North by Limousin, and on the West by Perigord and Agenois. Its utmost extent, from South to North, consists of about 90 miles, and 50 from West to East. It is divided into the Upper and Low∣er; the former call'd Causse, are the Valleys on the side of the River Lot. And the Lower or low Towns lye round about that of Aveirou. This Province was united to the Crown of France in the beginning of the Reign of Philip the Hardy, A. 1306. and contains the ensuing considerable Towns, viz. Cahors, Bish. Cap. Gourdon. Moissac. Frigeac. Montaubon. Lauserte. Souillac. Cadenac, &c. CAHORS, Cadurcum, olim Divina Caducorum is built on a steep Rock, on which formerly stood a Citadel, and encompass'd in form of a Penisle by the River Lot, over which it hath three Stone Bridges; and is distant 40 miles from Agen to the East, 30 from Limoges to the South, and 60 from Thoulouse to the North. It is the See of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Metropolitan of Alby, a Seneschalcy and Election. The Inhabitants make diverse Manufactures, with which they maintain a reasonable good Commerce, by means of the River. The Cathedral bears the Name of S. Stephen. and was consecrated by S. Mar∣tial. Here are also many other Churches and Mona∣steries, together with a Colledge, erected A. D. 1605. Montauban, Mons Albanus, is a good City, well built, all of Brick, the See of a Bishop, and the Seat of an Election, 30 miles from Cahors to the South, on the Road to Thoulouse: It is divided into the Old and New City, and hath a Suburb on the other side of the River, which is joyned to the Town by a fair Stone-Bridge, rebuilt in the Year 1667. by the care of M. Colbert, as appears by the Inscription upon it. Figeao, Figeacum, is a small City, and hath also an Election. It is situate on the River Sale, 30 miles from Cohors to the East, and near the borders of Auvergne. ROƲERGƲE, Rutenensis Provincia, is bounded on the East by Cevennes, on the North by Auvergne, on the West by Quercy, and on the South by Langue∣doc, being divided into three Parts, viz. the County, and the Upper and Lower Marche. It is extended from South to North for the space of 80 miles, and about the same from West to East. Its principal Cities and Towns are, Rhodes, Bishop, Cap. Vetres, Bish. Milhau. Ville Franche. S. Antonin. S. Just, &c. RHODEZ or RODES, Ruteni, Rutena & Se∣godunum Rutenorum, is situated near the River Averiou, at the distance of 55 Miles from Cahors, 40 from Ally to the North, 50 from S. Flur to the South, and about as many from the Mountains of Cevennes. It is a very ancient large and well fortified City, with the Title of a County, Senaschalcy, and an Episcopal See, subject to the Metropolitan of Bourges. The Cathedral is dedicated to the Virgin Mary. There are also many other Churches and Monasteries, besides a stately College of Jesuits. This City was some time subject to its own Counts, who kept their Court in that part nam'd the Burgh, whilst the Bishops possessed the other under the name of the City. Afterwards it escheated to the House of Armagnac, and at length was annexed to the Demeans of the Crown by King Hen∣ry IV. The Adjacent Country abounds in Mines of Copper, Azure and Arsenic: And not far from hence is the Mountains of Cansac, which burns when it Rains; as also a Cavern call'd Tindoul, which is 60 Paces wide and 200 deep, &c. Vabres, Vabrae, is a small City, water'd with the Streams of the Rivulet Dourdan, at the Foot of the Mountains, being distant about 15 Miles from the Confines of Languedoc, and 25 Miles from Rhodez to the South. It was heretofore only an Abbey of Bene∣dictin Monks in the Diocess of Rhodez, until Pope John XXII erected it into an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Bourges, A. D. 1317. Milnau or Millaud, Milieldum aut Amilhanum, the principal Town of the Upper Marche of Rouergue, stands on the Banks of the Tarn near the Frontiers of Languedoc, 20 Miles from Rhodez to the South-East. It was formerly a strong hold, but its Fortifications were dismantled in 1629. Ville Franche, Villa Franca & Francopolis, is a large well but Town on the River Aveirou, and the chief of the ower Marche, being distant 20 Miles from Rhodez to the West, and as many from Cahors to the East. It hath a Seneschalcy and a Presidial. LIMOSIN, Limvicensis Provincia, is bounded on the East by Auvergne, on the North by Marche, on the West by prt of Poitou, Angoumois and Perigord, and on the South by Quercy, extending it self from South-East to North-west, for the space of about 65 Miles, and 50 from West to East. The whole Country is gene∣rally cold, and not very fruitful, scarcely affording any good Wine; however here grows some Wheat, much Rice, Barley and Chesnuts, of which last the Inhabitants often make Bread. The Principal Cities and Towns are these, viz. Limoges, Bish. Cap. Tulle, Bishop. Brive. Turenne. Ʋserche, &c. LIMOGES, Lemovicum, seu Augustoritum Lemo∣vicum, is seated partly on the Top of a Hill and part∣ly in a Valley, on the side of the River Vienne, at the distance of 120 Miles from Orleans to the South, 60 from Poictiers to the South-East, 90 from Cahors to the North, 85 from Clermont to the West, and 110 from Bourdeaux to the North-East. It is a City of large extent, encompassed with strong Walls and deep Ditches, having been founded (as some Authors avouch) by a certain Gaulish Prince, who communicated his Name to it: Julius Caesar mentions it as a very populous Place, in his Time; and it is at present dignified with the See of a Prlate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Bourges. The Cathedral bears the Name of S. Stephen and S. Martial was its first Bishop. There are also three considerable Abbies, viz. those of S. Martial, S. Augustin, and S. Martin, together with divers other Convents for Religious Persons of both Sexes, a Pre∣sidial Court, a Generality and Seneschalcy. The Ci∣ty of Limoges was formerly subject to the Dominion of its own hereditary Vicounts, who were likewise Lords of the whole Province of Limosin; but it hath been ta∣ken at several times by the Goths, French and English,
the Constable de Gueschin dispossessed the latter in the Year 1371. but Edward the Black Prince of Wales retook it soon after by Storm. Tulle, Tutelas, aut Tutella, is water'd by the Rivers Corese and the Soulane, about 37 Miles from Limoges to the South, and 55 from Cahors to the North. It was at first only a Town and Abbey of Benedictine Monks of S. Martin, which Pope John XXII. turned into a Cathedral, A. D. 1318. Arnold de S. Astier having been its last Abbot and first Bishop. These Prelates are Viscounts, and Lords of the City, wherein is also established a Presidial Court, another of Election, &c. PERIGORD, Petricoricensis Provincia, lies be∣tween part of Quercy and Limosin on the East, Angou∣mois on the North, part of Xaintonge and Guienne Pro∣per on the West, and Agenois, together with Part of Quercy on the South: Its utmost extent, from South to North consisting of about 55 miles, and from West to East 65 miles. This Province is divided into the Upper and Lower Parts, the former whereof, called the White, by reason of the Mountains that are exten∣ded along the Banks of the Dardogne and Verzere: And the other, on the River Ille, is term'd the Black, on the account of its Woods. The most considerable Cities and Towns are these, viz. Periguex, Bish. Cap. Sarlat, Bish. Beaumont, Bergerac, Rochechalais. Montignac, &c. PERIGƲEƲX, Petrocorium, olim Petrocorii & Vesana, the Metropolis of the Upper Perigord, is seat∣ed on the River Ille, and distant 65 miles from Bour∣deaux to the South East, 45 from Tulle to the West, and 40 from Limoges to the South. This City is very Ancient, and hath been often laid waste by the Inroads of the barbarous Nations; and near its Walls King Pepin, sirnamed the Short, gained a signal Victo∣ry over Gaiffer Duke of Aquitaine, A. C. 768. Its ancient Grandeur is evident from the Ruins of a Temple of the Goddess Venus, and of an Amphithea∣tre, together with divers Inscriptions, and other mag∣nificent Monuments of venerable Antiquity, that are found here. It is a See of a Bishop, and the Seat of the Seneschal of the Province. SARLAT, Sarlatum, the Capital City of the Lower Perigord, is situated, as it were, in an Island, between the Rivers Dordagne and Vezere, near the Confines of Quercy, 30 miles from Perigueux to the South East, and as many from Cahors to the North, it formerly belonged to the Diocess of Perigueux, but is now it self an Episcopal See, erected out of an Abby by Pope John XXII. in the Year 1317. It is also a Place of considerable Strength, and sustain'd two Sie∣ges during the Civil Wars. SAINTONGE or XAINTONGE, Santonia, hath Angoumois and Perigord on the East, the Country of Aunis and Poictou on the North, the Ocean on the West, and Guienne Proper on the South; compre∣hending from West to East the Space of about 80 Miles, and from South to North about 50 Miles: It is a fruitful Country, and yields Corn, Wine, Saffron, and Salt, whereof very good is made here. The Towns of chiefest note in this Province are, Saintes, Bish. Cap. Pons, S. Jean d' Angeli, Brouage, Barbasieux, Aubeterre, &c. SAINTES or XAINTES, Santones, aut Mediolanum Santonum, is situated on the River Cha∣rante, at the distance of 60 Miles from Bourdeaux to the North, 30 from Rochel to the South East, 35 from Angoulesme to the West. It is a large City, but not every where well built. It is an Episcopal See, un∣der the Metropolitan of Bourdeaux. The Cathedral is dedicated to S. Peter. Here are yet to be seen divers Aqueducts, an Amphitheatre, a Triumphal Arch over the Bridge of the Charante, a great number of In∣scriptions, and other Monuments of the Ancient Ro∣mans. S. Jean d'Angely, Fanum Sancti Joannis Angeriaci, Angeriacum aut Engeriacum, is a fair Town on the Ri∣ver Boutonne, about 5 or six Miles from the Frontiers of Poitou to the South, and 15 from Saintes to the North. It was some time Fortified by the French Protestants, but when Lewis XIII. took it he demo∣lish'd its Fortifications. The Provinces of GASCOIGNE. ARMAGNAC, Armeniacensis Comitatus, is a County in Gascony, lying between Languedoc to the East, Condomois to the North, Gascoigne and Bi∣gorre to the West, and Comminge to the South. It is usually divided into Upper and Lower, and compre∣hends the ensuing Principal Towns, viz. Auch, Archb. Cap. Leytoure, Bish. Vic d' Armagnac, Suse, Jegun, Naugaro, Mirande, Verdun, La Bastide. AƲCH or AƲX, Auschii, Augusta Ausciorum, is seated on the River Gers, in a very fruitful Country, about 55 miles from Bazas to the South East, 20 from Condom, and 35 from Agen to the South, and 40 from Tolouse to the West. This City is the See of an Arch∣bishop, and the Cathedral one of the richest and most magnificent of the Kingdom, its Chapter consisting of 15 Dignitaries and 20 Canons, of whom five being Secular, are the Count of Armagnac, and the four Barons of Montaut, Pardillan, Montesquion, and Ile. Moreover the Archbishop enjoys half the Lordship of the City, which is also adorn'd with many other Churches and Monasteries. Mirande, Miranda, is a small Town, and only con∣siderable because it is the Capital of a County, call'd Astarac, or Estrac, which takes up the Southern part of the Province of Armagnac. The Town stands on the River Boise, at the distance of 10 Miles from Auch to the South West. It was first Founded under the Reign of King Philip the Fair, A.D. 1289. CHALOSSE, Calossia, or GASCONY pro∣perly so called is extended between Armagnac on the East, Bazadois on the North, the Landes or Sandy Grounds on the West, and Bearn on the South. This Country, although of no very large compass is subdivi∣ded into many Territories, viz. those of Turson, Mar∣son, Gavardan, Nebousen, &c. The most considerable Towns are these, viz. Aire, Bish. Cap. S. Sever, Gabaret. Meugrn. Arsac. AIRE, Adura, Atura, Aturum, & Aturus olim Vico-Julius & Atusatum, is seated on the Banks of the River A∣dour, 45 miles from Auch to the West, 60 from Bour∣deaux to the South, and 70 from Bayonne to the East.
The Kings of the Visigoths were wont to keep their Courts in this City, and on the Bank of the River are still to be seen the Ruins of the Palace of Alaric: Since which, the City of Aire hath been often ruin'd by the Saracens, Normans, and other Nations, and suf∣fer'd much damage during the late Civil Wars of France. It is an Episcopal See subject to the Metro∣politan of Auch, and the Civil Government depends on the Courts of Judicature of Bazas, from whence Appeals lie to the Parliament of Bourdeaux. The most remarkable publick Buildings are, the Abbey of S. Quiterne, and the Cathedral of the Virgin Mary. Two Arch-deaconries appertain to the Chapter, and the whole Diocess is divided into six Arch-Priest∣hoods. S. Sever, Fanum S. Severi, aut Severopolis, is a consi∣derable Town built at the foot of the Hills on the Banks of the River Adour, about 20 miles below Aire. CONDOMIS, Condomensis Ager, is a small Ter∣ritory lying between Armagnac and Agenois on the East, Bezadois on the North, the sandy Grounds and Chalosse on the West, and Armagnac on the South: Its chief Towns are these, viz. Condom, Bish. Cap. Caumont. Mont-Real. Mont de Marsan. Demazen, &c. CONDOM, Condomum & Condomus, is situated on the River Blaise, and distant 40 miles from Aire to the East, 20 from Auch to the North, 40 from Bazas to the South East, and 15 from Agen to the South. It is but a small City, however an Episcopal See, erected in the year, 1327. by Pope John XII. who gave to it the Revenue of an Abbey of the Bene∣dictine Order, which is now the Cathedral Church. Reimond Goulard, the last Abbot of this Abbey, was the first Bishop of Condom, and the Canons seculariz'd in 1549. Here are also many other Churches and Monasteries. This City was taken by Sebriel de Mont∣morency, chief of the Protestant Party, A. D. 1569. Mont de Marsan, Mons Martiani, stands on the banks of the River Midou, 46 miles from Condom to the West, and 15 from Aire to the North toward Bourdeaux. It is the chief Town of a Territory of the same name, and was built by Peter Count of Bi∣gomme, A.D. 1141. The LANDES or LANNES, Landaearum Tractus aut Landae Burdiagalensis, is a sandy and barren Country, extended between Labour on the South, Marsan on the East, Guienne on the North, and the Ocean on the West, being divided into the Greater Landes between Bourdeaux and Bayonne, and the Les∣ser between Bazes and Mont-Marsan; its principal Towns are these, viz. Dax, Bish. Cap. Tartas. Albret, &c. DAX or D'ACQS, Aquae Agustae aut Tarbellicae, is situated on the Adour 40 miles below Aire, and 25 above Bayonne, about 60 miles South from Bourdeaux. It is a fair well-built City, and drives a good Trade by means of the River, (which falls into the Ocean but 30 miles below it) and its neighbourhood to Spain. It hath a Castle for its defence, which is flank'd with many large round Towers, wherein a sufficient Gari∣son is maintained. It is also famous for its Baths of hot Water, that were much esteemed even in the time of the Romans. On which account it acquir'd the name of Aquae, from whence also proceeded that of the whole Province of Aquitaine. This City is the See of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Auch; and a Seneschalcy. Tartas is a neat Town on the River Medoure, about 15 miles from Dax to the East. Albrot, Lebretum seu Lebreti Vicus & Abbretum, is built in the midst of a Forest of the same name, 40 miles from Dax to the North East, 30 from Bourdeaux to the South, and 25 from Bazas to the West. The Town and adjacent Country which it gives name to, was dignified with the Title of a Duchy by Henry II, King of France. From the noble Family of Albert were descended two Kings of Navarre. The Country of LABOƲRD or BASQƲE, borders on the Frontiers of Spain, being bounded on the East by Bearne, on the North by the Landes, on the West by the Ocean, and on the South by the Perenean Mountains. The places of chief Note are, Bayonne, Bish. Cap. S. Jean de Luz. Bidache, &c. Bayonne, Lapurdum, aut Bayona, is a large, rich and well Fortified City, at the mouth of the River Adour, near its confluence with the Nive; 15 miles from the Confines of Spain to the South, 25 from d'Acqs to the South West, 100 from Bourdeaux, and 390 from Pa∣ris. Some Authors are of Opinion, That it was the Aquae arbellicae of the Romans; but it is certain, That its ancient name was Lapurdum, on which account its Episcopal See (which depends on the Metropolitan of Auch) was stiled, Episcopatus Lapurdensis, or of La∣bourd, until about the year, 1150. when it began to be call'd Bayonnensis of Bayonne. Also the whole Ter∣ritory lying between S. Sebastian and Fontarabia, was part of the Vicounty or Bayonne, and possessed by the Vicount, A.D. 1177. according to the Report of Roger Hoveden and Peter de Meca, who also, with others, affirm, That the Country belong'd to the Diocess of Bayonne until the time of Philip II. King of Spain, who first obtain'd for it a Vicar-General during the Civil Wars of France, notwithstanding the Remon∣strance of its proper Diocesan the Bishop of Bayonne. The City of Bayonne is one of the Keys of the King∣dom of France on the side of Spain, and hath a very capacious safe and deep Harbour (a great number of Vessels passing even into the midst of the Town) and a strong Castle with a good Garison. The Cathe∣dral bearing the names of the Virgin Mary and S. Leo, is surrounded with many other Churches, and divers Monasteries. Not far from this City stands a high Mountain, from the top whereof one may take a prospect of the three Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Navarre, &c. S. Jean de Luz, or Loizuine, Fanum S. Joannis Lucii & Luisium, is seated on the mouth of the Rivulet Ʋr∣dacuris, not above 10 miles from the Frontiers of Spain, and Fontarabia to the East. Near this Town, in an Island made by the River Bidasson, which parts France and Spain, call'd, The Isle of Conference, were celebrated the Matrimonial Solemnities between the present French King Lewis XIV. and Maria Theresia of Austria, Infanta of Spain, A. D. 1660. The Lower NAVARRE, Navarra Inferior, is joyn'd to the Country of Labourd on the West, and that of Bearne on the East, and the Pyrenees on the S. It is a Mountainous and barren Country, and except Fruit which is delicate here, and some Pasturge, pro∣duces but little. In it are these Towns, S. Palais, Cap. S. Jean de Pied de Port, &c. S. PALAIS, Fanum Sancti Palatii, situated in the Territory of Mixe on the little River of Ri∣douse, 40 miles South East from Bayonne, 8 from the
Confines of Bearn to the West, and about 20 from the Pyrenean Mountains to the North. In this Town were held the Sovereign Courts of Justice and Chan∣cery for the whole Country, before it was united to the Parliament of Pau, A. D. 1620. S. Jean de Pied de Port, Fanum S. Joannis Pede∣portuensis, olim Imum Pyrenaeum, is a well fortified Town built amidst the Mountains on the banks of the River Nive at the distance scarcely of 3 miles from the confines of the Upper Navarre and the Pyrenean Mountains, 20 from S. Palais to the South-West, and 30 from Bayonne to the South-east. The Vicounty of SOƲLE is a small Territory extended along the side of the River Gave de Suson be∣tween Bearn to the East, and the Lower Navarre on the West. It comprehends 50 Parishes and only one considerable Town, viz. That of Mauleon de Soule, which gave Birth to that Learned Prelate Henricus Spondanus, or Henry Sponde Bishop of Pamierr, &c. BEARN, Benarnia, situated at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, is bounded on the East by the County of Bigorne, on the North by Gascogne, on the West by the Provostship of Acqs, the Lower Navarre and the Vicounty of Soule, and on the South by the Mountains of Arragon and Ronsal. Its utmost extent from South to North consists of about 50 miles; and about the same from West to East. This Province is dignified with the Title of a Principality, and was at first possessed by its own Princes. Afterward it became Subject to the Dominion of the Kings of Navarre, and was at length annexed to the Demeans of the Crown under Henry IV. A. D. 1620. The most considerable Cities and Towns of the Country of Bearn are these, viz. Pau Cap. Oleron, Bish. L'Escar Bish. Ortez. Navarreins. Morlas. Sauveterre. Pontac. Laubege. Salies. PAƲ, Palum, is seated on the Gave of Pau, 30 miles from Aire to the South, as many from the frontiers of Spain, 40 from S. Palais, and 60 from Bayonne to the East. It is a large Town, and the Seat of one of the Parliaments of France, and hath a Castle for its defence, wherein on the 13th day of December, 1557. was born Henry IV. sirnamed the Great King of France and Navarre. Oleron, Oloronensis Ʋrbs, Elorona & Iluro, stands on the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, 65 miles South-west from Auch, 12 from Pau to the West, 20 from the Frontiers of Navarre and about as many from those of Aragon to the North. This City is the See of a Bishop subject to the Metropolitan of Auch. It was formerly destroy'd by the Normans, and re∣built by Count Centullus, A. D. 1080. The Gave a River, separates it from the Suburbs of S. Mary, in which stands the Cathedral Church and some other fair buildings. The Protestants made themselves Masters thereof in the Civil War time, and Gererd le Roux or Roussel, was install'd Bishop, by Margaret Queen of Navarre. Lescar or Lascar Lascuris aut Lescar, derives its Name (says Peter de Marca) from the winding reaches of the Brooks (called in the Basque Language Las∣courres) with which it is water'd: It is distant 4 or 5 miles from Pau to the East, and 12 from Oleron to the North, and is also an Episcopal See. This City was founded A. D. 1000, by the care of the Duke of Gascony on the Ruins of the ancient Benearnum, which had been utterly raz'd by the Normans in 845. In the Cathedral Church of the Virgin Mary were the Tombs of the Kings of Navarre, but they were de∣molished by the fury of the Civil Wars. The County of BIGORRE, Bigemensis Comitatus, is bounded on the West by Bearn, on the East by Cominges and Conserans, on the North by Armaignac, and on the South by the Pyrenean Mountains. Its extent from South to North includes about 40 or 50 miles, and from West to East about 20 or 25. This Province is divided into three parts, viz. the Moun∣tains, the Plain and the Territory of Rustan. The Moun∣tains is said to have Mines of Copper, &c. but they are not open. Eneco Arista possessed this Country A. C. 828 before the Kingdom of Navarre was founded, and after many Revolutions King Henry IV. caus'd it to be united to the Crown of France by Virtue of his Edict published in the Month of Octob, A. D. 1607. The Principal Towns, &c. of it are these, viz. Tarbe, Bish. Cap. Vic de Bigorre. Lourdes. Benac. Bardge, famous for its Waters. Baigneres. Campen. Rabasten. Parabere. Antin Marq. &c. TARBE or TARBES, Tarba, is seated on the Banks of the River Adoux in a fertile Country, at the distance of 30 miles from Auch to the South-west, and 25 from Pau to the East. It is a well-built City, but hath only one Street, together with a Castle call'd Bigorne, whence (de Marca says) the whole Province hath its name. The See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Auch, hath been long since established here: as also, a Seneschal Court. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to the Virgin Mary. COMLINGE, Convenensis Ager, lies between Languedoc on the East, Armagnac on the North, the County of Bigorre on the West, and Conserans on the South. This Country was possessed by certain particular Counts, until it escheated to the Crown of France: It is reasonable fruitful in Wine, Fruits and Pasturage. And is divided into the Ʋpper or Cominges, and the Lower or Lombes. Wherein are contained these Towns of chiefest note, viz. Bertrand de Cominge, Bish. Cap. Lombes, Bish. Muret. S. BERTRAND DE COMINGE, Convenae aut Lugdunum Convenarum, & Lugdunum Aquitanicae, is situated on a Hill near the Banks of the River Garonne and the Confines of Conserans, 16 miles from Aque Convenarum or Bugneres, according to the Itine∣rary of Antoninus, 50 miles from Toulouse to the South-west, 40 from Auch to the South, and 30 from Tarbe to the South-east. The ancient City of Con∣venae was raz'd by the French, A. C. 584. and ano∣ther built out of its Ruins in 1100 by S. Bertrand, from whom its modern Name is deriv'd. It is an Episcopal See subject to the Metropolitan of Auch, and its Royal Court of Justice depends on the Parli∣ment of Toulouse. The Bishop hath a Seat in the As∣sembly of the States of Languedoc. Lombes, Lombaria & Lombarium, is a small City on the Rivulet of Save, distant 30 miles from S. Ber∣trand to the South; 20 from Auch to the South-east, 25 from Toulouse to the South-west. Its Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Tolouse, was erected out
of an ancient Abbey of Augustin Monks, A. D. 1317. by Pope John XXII. who nominated one Arnold Roger of Cominges to be the first Bishop of this Dio∣cess. CONSERANS or COSERANS, is a Vi∣county lying to the South of Cominges proper, between Languedoc and the Pyrenean Mountains. It was first possessed (as it is generally believed) by Arnold of Spain, under the Title of a County, then pass'd into the Family of the Counts of Carcessone, and from thence was translated to the House of Navarre, &c. S. Lizier of Conserans, Consorani, aut Fanum S. Li∣cerii, the Capital of Conserans, is a small City seated on the River Salur, which about 10 miles from hence falls into the Garonne, and is distant 30 Miles from Tolouse to the South-West, 46 from Auch to the South-East, and 18 from S. Bertrand to the East. It is the See of a Bishop, and hath a Royal Court of Ju∣stice dependant on the Parliament of Tolouse. The City is divided into two Parts, viz. The City and the Town; the former, properly called Coserans, is adorned with a Cathedral dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and in the other, named S. Lizier, stands ano∣ther Cathedral. The PYRENEAN Mountains, which serve as a Boundary between the two Kingdoms of Spain and France, begin near the Town of S. Jean de Luz on the Ocean, and continue Eastward quite cross the Isthmus that joins Spain to the Continent of Europe, as far as Perpignan on the Mediterranean; the highest of them is that named Mont-Carrigo, between Roussilion and Catalonia towards the County of Conflent, on which Snow lies unmelted the greatest part of the Year. Guienne hath a Governour-General, who is the Count de Tolouse, a Commandant, the Marshal de Lorge, two Lieutenant-Generals, a Seneschal, and 12 particular Governours of Places. Saintogne and An∣goumois have a Governour-General, a Lieutenant-Ge∣neral, two Seneschals, and three particular Gover∣nours of Places. Limosin hath a Governour-General, a Lieutenant-General, and a Seneschal. Perigord hath a Senechal: And Quercy a Seneschal and Lieutenant-General. CHAP. XI. LANGUEDOC, Occivania, aut Volcarum Regio. THE Province of LANGƲEDOC, including the Countries of Cevennes and Roussillion, is boun∣ded on the East by the River Rhone, which divides it from Provence and Dauphine,; on the North by Lyonnois, Auvergne, Rouergue and Quercy; on the West by Armagnac and Cominges; and on the South by the Mediterranean Sea and the Pyrenean Mountains. It is situated between the 41 Deg. 50 Min. and the 44 Deg. 54 Min. of Latitude; and between the 18 Deg. 5 Min. and the 22 Deg. 40 Min. of Longitude. Its extent from South to North is about 120 miles, and from West to East, viz. from Rieux to Ville-Neuf-les-Avignon, 180 miles. In the Roman Division of Gaul, Languedoc went by the Name of the Gallia Narbon∣nensis, and in the declining of the Empire it was pos∣sessed by the Goths, who here Founded the Kingdom of the Visigoths, which hath been entirely extinct ever since the time of Charles Martel. This Province is esteem'd the most Pleasant and Fruitful of any throughout the whole Kingdom of France, the Air being very Temperate and Healthful, and the Soil bringing forth abundance of Corn and excellent Fruits; its chief Commodities are Wine, Oil, Hony, Wax, Saffron, Silk and Salt. The Up∣per Languedoc affords good Pasture to many Herds of Oxen and Cows. Some Mines of rich Metals and Minerals are found here, and Quarries of Marble and Alabaster. Moreover, all sorts of Fishes are caught in the Rivers and on the Sea-coasts, and there are divers Springs of Mineral Waters very efficacious in curing Diseases. But the Country of Cevennes hath not the same ad∣vantages, as being Mountainous, not so much culti∣vated and less delightful in many places. However, it affords Millet, Chesnuts, and some other Fruits. The principal Rivers are the Rhone, the Garonne, the Tarn, the Vistre, the Vidaule, the Barange, the Eraut, the Salazon, the Berre, the Pallas, the Agout, and the Aude, intermixing its Waters with those of the Fres∣quel, which is joined by a Canal with the lesser Lers, that runs into the Garonne. This is that Famous Canal of Languedoc, which hath been lately cut with so vast Expence, to make a Communication between the two Seas, viz. the Ocean and Mediterranean, and not yet altogether brought to Perfection. This Country, which hath been Subject to a great number of Dukes, Vicounts, and divers other Lords, after many Revo∣lutions was united to the Crown by King John, toge∣ther with the Duchies of Normandy and Burgundy, A. D. 1361. The States of Languedoc are very considerable, and their Assemblies are held every three Years by the three Orders, viz. The Clergy, the Nobles, and the third Estate; the First of these is composed of three Archbishops; the Second of twenty two Barons taken out of every Diocess; and the Third of twenty two Consuls of the Capital Cities of every Diocess, &c. The whole Province of Languedoc is usually divided into the Upper to the West, and the Lower to the East, as it more plainly appears from the following Table. The Upper in 5 Parts, viz. Toulousan, Toulouse, Archbish. Capital. Albigeois, Alby, Archbish. Leucegay, Castelnau dary. The County of Foix. Foix. Rousillon, Perpignan, Bish. The Lower in 4 Parts, viz. The Quarter of Narbonne. Archbish. Narbonne. The Quarter of Besiers. Besiers, Bish. The Quarter of Nimes. Nimes, Bish. Ceven∣nes in 3, viz. Gevaudan. Mende, Bish. Vivarais. Viviers. Velay. Puy, Bish. TOƲLOƲSAN, Tolosanus Ager, takes up the more Western part of the Upper Languedoc, along the
Banks of the River Garonne, lying between Gascony on the West, Albigeois on the North, the Territory of Auray on the East, and the Country of Foix on the South. It comprehends these principal Cities and Towns viz. Toouse Arch-Bish. Cap. Lavaur Bish. Castle Sarasin. Villemur. Grisoles. Buset Cerminge. TOƲLOƲSE, THOƲLOƲSE, or TOLOSE Tolsa. is seated on the River Garonne, over which it hath a stately stone-Bridge, commonly call'd Pont-neuf. It is distant 330 miles from Paris, 140 from Limo∣ges, and 55 from Cahors to the South, 60 from the Pyrenees to the North, 150 from Bayon, and 40 from Auch to the East, 170 from the River Rhosne, and 190 from the Mediterranean to the West. It was heretofore the Seat of the ancient Tectosages, (who gain'd so many Conquests in Asia and Greece) and then a Roman Colony: In process of time it became the Metropolis of the Visigoths, afterward of Aqai∣tain, and at length of one of the most considera∣ble Provinces, or Governments of France. Its E∣piscopal See which before depended on the Juris∣diction of the Arch-bishop of Narbonne, was erected into a Metropolitan by Pope John XXII. A. D. 1317. Tolouse is famous for its Traffick, and since a Com∣munication hath been made between the Western Ocean and the Mediterranean, may justly be stil'd the Mart of both Seas. The City is divided into Eight Parts call'd Capitolares, to which a lesser Quar∣ter nam'd the Burgh, on the other side of the Garonne, was added in the Year 1346. The Magnificent Ca∣thedral of St. Stephen, is built on a spacious Ground-plat, adorn'd with a Fountain, over which is erected an Obelisk wrought with curious Workmanship. Another Church Dedicated to St. Sernim or Satur∣nim, the first Bishop of Tolouse, is remarkable for its Treasury of Relicks, as also is that of the Jacobins for the Shrine of Thomas Aquinas. Moreover here are also to be seen many Monuments of Antiquity, par∣cularly a Capitol and an Amphitheatre, together with divers Aqueducts, old Temples, &c. The University of Tolouse, is reputed to be the Second of the Kingdom, and consists of several Col∣leges, among which that of Foix is the most Illu∣strious; and indeed this Place hath been long since the Seat of the Muses, on which account it is called Palladia, or the City of Pallas, by Martial, Ausonius, and Si∣donius Appollinaris. The Town-House is a stately Pile of Building, and hath acquir'd the name of the Capitol; neither perhaps will it be improper to men∣tion the Mills of the Basade and Castle, every one of which hath 16 or 17 Mill-stones for the grinding of Corn, and a great number of Engines for the cur∣rying of Leather. A Soveraign Court of Parliament was began here in the time of King Philip the Fair, and established by Charles VII. Here is also a Senes∣chalcy and Generality. The City of Tolouse after divers Revolutions, remained long in the hands of its own Counts, un il Philip the Hardy seiz'd on it, together with the whole County, A. D. 1271; and King John re-united it to the Crown in 1361. About this City lye those spacious pleasant Fields, call'd by ancient Writers, Campi Catalaunici, in which that famous Battle was fought by Aetius the Roman General, assisted by the Franks, Burgundians and Goths, against Attilla King of the Hunns, whom they utter∣ly Defeated, and kill'd near 200 Thousand of the 500 Thousand ('tis said) he brought into the Field. Others place the Campi Catalaunici about Chalons, in Champaigne, tho with less reason, this place agreeing best with the accounts given of them by the Anci∣ents. Lavaur, L'Avour, or La Vaur, Vaurum, aut Vau∣rium, stands on the Banks of the River Agour in the Upper Languedoc, and on the very confines of Alli∣geois, at the distance of 15 miles from Tolouse to the East. Isarne Bishop of Tolouse, gave the Town of Lavaur, in the year 1098, to Florardy Abbot of St. Pons de Thomieses, on condition that he should Found a Priory in it; where afterward in 1318, Pope John XXII. established an Episcopal See. ALBIGEOIS, Albigiensis Tractus, lyes between the Diocess of Tolouse, Vabres, Luvaur and Rhodez, be∣ing the Country of the ancient Heluseri, mentioned by Caesar. It is divided into two almost equal Parts by the River Tam, and comprehends these chief Cities and Towns, viz. Alby, Arch. Bish Capital. Castres, Bish. Realmont. Gaillac. Rabasteins. Givossens. Valens. Cordes. Florentin, &c. ALBI, Albiga, is situated on the River Tarn, in a very fertile Country, about 35 miles from Tolouse to the North-east, and 30 from Ville Franche in Rou∣ergue to the South. It was formerly a Bishop's See, under the Metropolitan of Bourges, but Pope Innocent XI. erected it into an Archbishoprick, A. D. 1678 The Prelate of this City is also its Temporal Lord, and the King only maintains a Magistrate there, call'd the Viguier for holding the Royal Courts of Judica∣ture. The Cathedral of St. Cicile hath one of the fairest Quires of France. Castre Castrum, aut Castrum Albiensium, is a fair City on the River Argout, distant 20 miles from Albi to the South, and 40 from Tolouse. Its Episcopal See was Founded by Pope John XXII. A. D. 1317, under the Metropolitan of Bourges. but it hath depended on that of Alby ever since the year 1678. The Inhabitants of this Country have been famous in Ecclesiastical History, by the name of Albigenses, for their early dissention from the errors of the Church of Rome. They were a Branch of the Waldenses, who proceeded from Peter Waldo a rich Merchant of Lyns a very Pious and Charitable Man, who touched with the sudden death of a Friend at a Feast, set himself seriously to contemplate upon Eternity, and study the Holy Scripture, which led him to the discovery of the Errors of the Roman Church: And being exceeding Charitable in relieving the wants of the Poor, and doing other good Offices that lay in his Power, obtain'd great Respect, and Attention when he argued against the Supremacy of the Pope, Adoration of Images, Invocation of Saints, &c. His Followers grew numerous, and were call'd in Deri∣sion by the Papists. The pour Men of Lyons, and after¦wards Waldenses, from this Waldo. The first men∣tion of them in History is about the middle of the twelfth Century, when they began to be Persecuted by the Papists, and were forced to fly into Piedmont, where they incorporated with the Vaudi, (who were ancient Christians that had never been subject to the
Pope's Authority) and were afterwards indifferently call'd Vaudois and Waldensis. Another part of them retiring into Languedc, settled in this Province of Albigeois, and encreased exceedingly. At first the Popes endeavoured to convert them by Preaching; to which purpose the Dominican order of Monks was Instituted about the beginning of the thirteenth Cen∣tury: But these not prevailing, and the Albigenses being grown strong by the Patronage of the Counts of Thoulouse, whom they Converted, the Pope raised a Crusade against them, stirred up the Dukes of Austria against the Waldenses, and made our Simon Mount∣fort Earl of Leicester, Captain against the Albigenses, A. C. 1213, who with the Popes Legate, the Duke of Burgundy, and a great Army which was raised for (as they call'd it) this Holy War, were too strong for those poor People, took and plundered their Cities, and Barbarously tormented and murdered their Persons, which caus'd them to fly into Provence and other Parts, and in time settled themselves at Merindol, Chabriers, and thereabouts; where in the year 1545, they were most barbarously Massacred and cruelly tormented by the French Papists. Those that escaped, sent to Zuinglius for Teachers, and incorporated with the Calvinists, who altogether in time grew very numerous and powerful, as we have already shewed in the account of the Religion of France. LAƲRAGAIS, Lauracus and Lauriacensis Ager, taking its Name from the Town of Laureac, is ex∣tended between the Banks of the Rivers Ariege and Agent. It is divided into two parts, viz. The Upper and Lower, and comprehends these principal Cities and Towns viz. Castlenandry, Capital. S. Papul, Bish. Avignonet. Ville-Pinte. Laureac, Faujaux. Ville-Franche. CASTLENAƲDARY, Castellum Arianorum, seu Castolavium Auriacum, and Castellum Novum Arri, stands on a Hill on the Upper Lauragais, 20 miles from Castres to the South, and 30 from Tolouse to the South-east: A Seneschalchy Court and Presidial, have been held in this Town ever since the Year 1553. It is a place of good Trade by the many Manufa∣ctures, especially Woollen Cloths that are made in it. The Mareshal de Schmberg gain'd a memorable Bat∣tle not far from hence, over the Duke Orleans, in which the Count de Moret was Slain, and the Duke Montmorency Wounded and taken Prisoner, A. D. 1632. S. Papoul, Fanum S. Papuli. aut Papulepolis, is a small City on the foot of Mount Noire, near the Ri∣vulets of Rotoure and Lampi being scarcely distant one League from Castlenaudary, and 15 from Carcas∣sonne to the North-west. A certain Monastery was built here about the end of the VIIIth Century, which Convent Pope John XXII. changed into a Cathedral Church, alloting 43 Parishes for its Diocess, A. D. 1317. The County of FOIX, Fuxiensis Comitatus, in the Upper Langued c, is bounded on the South by the Pyrenean Mountains, and Rousillon, on the West by Gas∣cony, on the South by Toulousan and Louragais, and on the East by Narbonne, It contains 16 Castel∣lanies or small Governments, and a great number of considerable Towns. It was subject to its own Counts, whom Descended Henry IV. King of France, and so it was added to the Crown. The principal Towns are, Foix. Mirepoix, Bish. Pamiez, Bish. Rieux, Bish. Aegs. Mazetes. Tarascon. Savardun. Maz d' Azil. Mallellegonde. Hautrieue. Lezat. Le Puech, &c. FOIX, Fuxium, a small Town or Hamlet, formerly well fortified, hath given its name to the whole County, and to an Illustrious Family; it is situated on the Brook Ariage. and the Foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, from which it is Distant 15 miles to the North, and 40 from Tolouse to the South, and is chiefly remarkable for its Abby, Assembly of the States, Seneschalchy, Treasury-Office for the Re∣ceipt of the King's Revenne, &c. Mirepoix, Mirapincum seu Mirapisae, is watered by the River Lers, and stands 10 miles from Foix to the East. This City once belonged to the Diocess of Tolouse, but was erected into an Episcopal See under that Metropolitan by Pope John XXII. A. D. 1318. Pamiez, or Pamiers, Pamiae, aut Apamiae, stands on the side of the River Ariege, and is defended by the Castle of Fredelet, whence the City it self was formerly call'd Fredelas, and is distant 12 miles from Foix to the North, and 30 from Tolouse, Pope Boniface VIII. chang'd the Abby Church Dedicated to S. Antonin, into a Cathedral, in the year 1296. And its Episco∣pal See hath been possessed by divers Illustrious Pre∣lates, particularly S. Lewis of Marseille, a Pope named Benedict XII. four Cardinals, the Learned Henricus Spondanus, and others. Rieux, Rivi, and Rivenae, is a City of small extent, and stands on the River Garonne, near the Confines of Gascony and Cnserans, 25 miles from Tolouse to the South, and 30 from Foix to the North-west. Its Episcopal See depending on the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Tolouse, was likewise established by Pope John XXII. A. D. 1318; and the Cathedral Church is Dedicated to the Virgin Mary. The Abby of Feuillans, is in this Diocess; where are also those of Lezat, Caletz, Salanques, &c. The County of ROƲSILLON, Ruscionensis Co∣mitatus, and CONFLENT is bounded on the North by Languedoc, properly so call'd on the West by Catalonia, on the South by the Pyrenean Moun∣tains, and on the East by the Mediterranean Sea; its utmost extent from West to East consisting of about 70 miles, and 35 from South to North. This Coun∣ty formerly appertain'd to the Spaniards, but the French King Lewis XIII. took it from them, and it was granted to him by the Pyrenean Treaty, A. D. 1659. The most considerable Rivers are the Ter. the Tech, and the Egly; and the principal Towns are these, viz. Perpignan, Bish. Cap. Elne, formerly Bish. Salcas. Couilloure. Ville Franche de Con∣stant. Selio. Riveltes. Stagel. Voto. Bule. Praz de Moll. Mont-Louis. Fort, &c.
PERPIGNAN, Perpinianum, and Papirianum, is situated on the River Ter, and defended by a strong Castle, at the distance of 3 Leagues from the Coast of the Mediterranean Sea to the West, and 30 miles from Narbonne to the South. It was built in the Year, 1680. by Count Isnard, out of the Ruins of old Rousillon, as yet to be seen about half a League from thence, and at first belong'd to the Kings of Spain, till the French found means to make themselves Masters of it, in 1642. ever since which time it hath remain'd in their Possession. This City is adorn'd with an University, founded by Peter King of Aragon, was dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Narbonne, A.D. 1604. and hath a very strong Citadel for its Defence. Elne. Helena, olim Illibaris, stands on a Hill near the Banks of the River Tech, at the distance only of one League from the Gulph of Lion in the Mediter∣ranean, 10 Miles from Perpignan, and as many from Clliouxe. It was an Episcopal See, but that was Translated to Perpignan, by Pope Clement VIII. A. D. 1604. The Town of Elne was subject to the King of Spain, till 1640. at which time it fell into the hands of the French: A little below it are still to be seen the ruins of a Castle, wherein Constans the Son of the Emperor Constantine was slain, during the Commoti∣ons raised by the Tyrant Magnensius. Ville-Franche de Conflent, villa Franca Confluentum, the chief Town of the Territory call'd Conflent, which lies among the Mountains Eastward from Rousillon, is seated at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, about 25 miles from Perpignan to the West. The Quarter of NARBONNE, Narbonensis Tra∣ctus, lies between Louragais and the County of Foix, on the West, Rousillon on the South, the See and the Quarter of Besiers on the East, and Toulouson on the North. The principal Cities and Towns of this Coun∣ty are these, viz. Narbonne, Archb. Cap. Carcassonne, Bish. Alet, Bish. St. Pons de Tormiers, Bish. Limoux. L' Eucate. Lusignan. Capastang, &c. NARBONNE, Narbo, Narbon, and Deucamanorum Colonia, is commodiously seated in a low Country on an Arm of the River Aude. commonly call'd la Robine, which was cut by the Romans, and serves to convey Barks laden with Merchandizes from the Mediterra∣nean Sea, from whence it is distant but 2 Leagues. It is a large well Fortified City, and one of the most an∣cient of the Kingdom, for the Romans establish'd their Colonies therein, as the capital of one of their Divi∣sions of Gaul, which from this City was call'd Gallia Norbonensis; and it was the usual place of Residence of their Pro-consuls, who adorned it with a Capitol, and an Amphitheatre, together with divers Baths, Aqueducts, Municipal Schools, and granted great Pri∣viledges to the City, insomuch that the Inhabitants in gratitude for these favours erected an Altar in Honour of Augustus, as appears from an Inscription found here in the XVIth Century. The City of Narbonne hath been long since the See of an Arbhbishop, ever since the time of Constantine the Great, if we may give cre∣dit to some Writers, who also averred, that the Pro∣consul Paulus Sergius, whom S. Paul had converted, was its first Apostle and Prelate. The Archbishop is President of the States of Languedoc. The Cathedral bears the name of S. Justus and S. Pastor, and is re∣markable for its admirable Organs and curious Paint∣ings, wherein are represented the raising of Lazarus from Dead, the last Judgment, &c. There are also 5 other Parochial Churches, the chief of which is the Collegiate Church of S. Paul, a College of the Fathers of the Doctrine, and divers Monaste∣ries for Religious Persons of both Sexes. This City belong'd to its own Dukes and Lords, till Gastn de Foix exchang'd it with Lewis XIIth King of France, for other Lands, in the year 1507. It is distant 80 miles from Thoulouse to the Est, 35 from Perpignan to the North, 100 from the River Ehosne to the West, and about 80 from Rodez in Ruvergne to the South. Carcassonne, Carcasso, Carcassio and Carcassum, is si∣tuated on the Aude, in the midst between Perpignan and Thoulouse, 20 miles from Alet to the South, and 30 from Narbonne to the West. It is the Capital Ci∣ty of the Territory call'd from thence Carcassez, or the Country of Carcassonne, and is the See of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Narbonne. It is divid∣ed into three Parts, the Upper Town, the Lower where the Burgh formerly stood, and the Castle-Pre∣cinct, and is more especially noted for its Woolen Ma∣nufactures, &c. Alec, Alecta aut Electa, stands in like manner on the Banks of the River Aude, at the foot of the Pyre∣nean Mountains, 20 miles from Carcassonne to the North, 20 from Mirepoix to the East, and 25 from Perpgnan to the North west, This City together with the adjacent Country, was at first included within the Diocess of Narbonne, but was erected into an Episcopal See by Pope John XXII. S. Pons de Tomiers, Fanum S. Pontii Tomeriarum, To∣meriae, and Pontipolis, was at first only an Abby of the Benedictine Order, founded A. C. 936. by Rai∣mond Count of Thoulouse, in Honour of S. Pons, Bishop of Cimele, or Nice, and Martyr; afterward it grew up into a Town, and Pope John XII. established an Episcopal See there, in 1318. but the Monks were not Seculariz'd until A. 1625. The Bishop is Lord of this small City, which stands amidst the Mountains in the Lower Languedoc, about 25 miles from Narbonne to the North, as many from Castres to the East, and 25 from Alby to the North-west. The Quarter of BESIERS, Bliterensis Tractus, is extended between that of Narbonne on the West, Rouvergue on the North, the Quarter of Nimes on the East, and the Sea on the South, comprehending these chief Cities and Towns, viz. Besiers, Bish. Cap. Agde, Bish. Lodeve, Bish. Persenas. Clermont. Montagnac. Port S. Louis, &c. BESIERS or BEZIERS, Biteria, Blitera aut Biterrensis Civitas, is a very ancient City, seated upon a Hill, the Avenues whereof are of difficult ac∣cess, near the small River Orb, which a little below falls into the Mediterranean. It was a considerable Place in the time of the Romans, who built there two Temples, in honour of Julius and Augustus; It was in a very flourishing state in the Fourth Century, when the Goths took and ruin'd it: And when afterwards it had recover'd it self, the Saracens pillag'd it about the Year 736. And to prevent its being again a Seat for those Infidels, Charles Martel quite destroy'd it. How∣ever, in time it was again rebuilt, and became flou∣rishing
and populous as it is, It was formerly a Vi∣county under the Dukes of Septimania, but at length united to the Crown of France. This City is the See of a Bishop, hath still the Title of a Vicounty, Bai∣liage and Presidial, and is distant 2 Leagues from the Coast of the Mediterranean, 15 miles from Narbon to the North-east, and 45 from Montpelier to the West. Agde, Agatha, stands on the Bay of Lyons, a little above the Mouth of the River Eraut, distant one League from the little Island Brescon to the North, 15 miles from Narbonne to the East, 12 from Beziers, and about 40 from Montpelier. This City is remarkable for its Trade, the beauty of its buildings, and is an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Nar∣bonne. Lodeve, Luteva & Lutava Castrum, is built at the foot of the Mountains of Cevennes. on the Frontiers of Rouergue, near the Rivulet of Lergue and Salandre, which fall into the Eraut, and is distant about 30 Miles from Agde and Beziers to the North, 60 from Nismes to the West, and 16 from Ʋzes. It was dig∣nified with an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Narbonne by the favour of Pope John XXII. And the Bishop is its Spiritual and Temporal Lord, having a right to determine all Causes, Criminal and Civil, except High-Treason, and assumes the Title of Count of Montbrun, which is an adjacent Castle: 800 Gen∣tlemen formerly held Tenures in Fee of these Prelates, and the Bishoprick on that account was Styled the No∣ble. This City was expos'd to great Calamities dur∣ing the Wars of the Goths and Albigeois; the French Protestants surpriz'd it in the Year 1573. and it was retaken by the Duke of Montmorency, A. D. 1583. Pezenas, Piscenae, is a fair neat Town, seated on a Hill, on the River Peyne, near the Eraut, 12 or 14 Miles North from Agde, and 20 South from Lodove; in which the States of the Province commonly assemble. The Quarter of NIMES, Nemausensis Tractus, lies between that of Besiers on the West, the Mediter∣ranean Sea on the South, Provence on the East, and Covennes on the North; and contains the ensuing con∣siderable Cities and Towns, viz. Nimes, Bish. Cap. Montpelier, Bish. Beaucaire. Alais. Aigues-Mortes. S. Gilles. Belle-Garde. S. Laurens, Abb. Montferrand. Lunel. Sommieres, &c. NIMES, Nemausus, is most pleasantly seated, near the Spring-head of the River Vistre, as being surround∣ed on one side with Hills, on which grows abundance of Vines, and all sorts of Fruit-Trees, and on the other with a spacious fertile Plain. But it is more es∣pecially famous for its Antiquity, whereof as yet re∣main many illustrious Monuments: The chief of those is an Amphitheatre, built of Free-stone, of an extra∣ordinary length and breadth, the out-side being adorn'd with Columns and their Cornishes, on which are to be seen the Roman Eagles, and the Figures of Romulus and Remus sucking a Wolf, besides the Temple of Di∣ana, without the Town; an admirable Spring, expa∣tiating in form of a Pond, and mentioned by Ausonius &c. And in this City was plac'd a Colony, which the Emperor Augustus brought out of Egypt, after the Con∣quest of that Province, as appeareth from divers an∣cient Medals. Neither s its present Grandeur less considerable, for it is the Seat of a Bishoprick, subject to the Metropolitan Diocess of Narbonne; of a Se∣neschals Jurisdiction, call'd of Beaucaire and Nimes; of a Presidial Court; and of a flourishing University. And is also a Place of very good Trade, which con∣sists chiefly in Wollen Stuffs made here. The City of Nismes was possessed by the Goths until the time of Charles Martel; and by the Protestants during the Civil Wars of France: It is distant not above 10 miles from the River Rhosne to the East, 30 from Montpelier to the North-East, and 35 from the Mediterranean to the North. Montpellier, Mons-Pessulanus, Mont Pussulus & Mons Luellarum, the Capitol City of the Lower Languedoc, the largest and most flourishing of all the Province ex∣cept Thoulouse, is pleasantly seated on the Top of a Hill, near the Rivulet of Lez, at the distance scarcely of one League from the Pool of Maguelonne, 2 from the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, and 60 miles from Narbonne to the East. The Episcopal See of Mague∣lonne, depending on the Metropolitan of Narbonne, was translated hither under the Popedom of Paul III. in the Year 1536. An University for the Study of Phy∣sick, one of the most famous throughout Europe, was founded here (as they say) by the Disciples of Aver∣roes ahd Avicenna, A. D. 1196. and re-established in 1220. Besides a Law Academy, a Colledge of Jesu∣its, a Court of Aides, a Chamber of Aides, a Cham∣ber of Accounts, a Generality and a Chamber of the Treasures of France, a Seneschals Court, a Presidial, a Chamber of the lesser Seal, and a Royal Court of ordinary Justice. This City is also adorn'd with di∣vers stately Edifices, viz. The Hall of Justice or Ses¦sions-house, the Churches of S. Peter and the Virgin Mary; and a strong Citadel, flanked with four Royal Bastions: The King's Physick Garden, without the Town, and other Curiosities, that deserve well to be view'd by Travellers. The Inhabitants are employed in making of Treacle, Verdegrease, white Wax, Silk, and other sorts of Manufactures. James III. the Son of Sanchez, King of Majorca, sold the City of Mont∣pellier to King Philip of Valois, A. D. 1349. for the Sum of 26000 Crowns of Gold. The French Pro∣testants made themselves Masters of it in 1561. but Lewis XIII. took it from them after a vigorous Defence on the 20th Day of October, A. D. 1622. GEVAƲDAN or GIVAƲDAN, Gabalensis, Ager, hath Vivarais and Velay for its Eastern bounds; the Diocesses of Nimes and Ʋsez on the South, Ruer∣gue on the West, and the upper Avergne on the North. This Country hath been some time possessed by certain particular Counts, & is very fruitful, although encompas∣ed with Mountains. The Towns of chiefest note are these Mende, Bish. Cap. Marvejou. Florac. Baignols. La Canourge. Randon, &c. MENDE, Mimatum, seu Mimate Gebalorum, is situated in a Valley, surrounded with the Mountains of Cevennes, near the Source of the River Lot, 70 miles North from Montpellier, 20 from the Borders of Auvergne, and 50 from the River Rhone. Some Au∣thors make this the ancient Anderitum or Gabalum; but the Village Javoux, 4 Leagues hence, seems rather to have been that, and that this grew out of its ruins, having been at first only a Village or Hamlet. It is now a good City, the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of A by. The Bishop hath the Title of
a Count, possesseth the Lordship of the Mannor together with the King, having also enjoy'd in time past a Pri∣vilege of Coining Money. This City is beautified with divers fair Churches, a stately Episcopal Palace, &c. VIVARAIS, Vivariensis Provincia, was the Coun∣try of the ancient Helvii, and is now part of that of Gevennes, lying between Languedoc proper on the South, Givaudan on the West, Forets and Velay on the North, and the River Rhone on the East. It is extended from North to South, the space of about 60 miles, and from East to West about 40 miles, being divided into two Parts, viz. The Upper and Lower, and comprehend∣ing these Principal Cities and Towns, viz. Viviers, Bish. Cap. Tournon. Annonay. Aubenas. Privas. Joyeuse. L'argentiere. Ʋzes, Bish. Pont S. Esprit. Ville-neuve-lez Avignon Ville-neuve de Berg. Seriere. le Bourg, &c. VIVIERS, Vivario seu Vivarium, is seated on a Hill and the Banks of the River Rhone, over-against the Province of Dauphine, about 60 miles North from Montpellier, and 55 miles South from Lyons. It was at first only a Village, and in process of time grew up into a large City, out of the Ruins of Abs or Abba Helviorum, which was destroy'd by Crocus King of the Germans; and that Episcopal See was remov'd thither about A. C. 430. The Bishop is styled Count of Vi∣viers and Prince of Donsere, Chateau-Neuf, &c. Ʋzes, Ʋcetia, is the capitol City of a Country, thence so called, and dignified with the Title of a Dutchy, and an Episcopal See, depending on the Metropolitan of Narbonne. It is distant 12 miles from Nimes to the North, 30 from Viviers to the South, and 20 from Avignon to the West. On the Road between this Ci∣ty and that of Nimes is to be seen the stately Bridge of Guard, built over the River Gardon between two Mountains, that are thereby joyned together; and in∣deed its Structure is admirable, as consisting in three Stories of Arches one above another, the last of which was an Aqueduct. Pont S. Esprit, a small City with a good Castle, and a Stone-Bridge over the Rhone, is seated on the borders of the Vivarais, and at the confluence of the Ardosche with the Rhone, 20 miles from Ʋsez to the North, and 15 from Viviers to the South. VELAY, Velaunia, lies between Vivarais on the East, Forets on the North, Auvergne on the West, and and Givaudan on the South. It is divided into two parts by the Mountains of Mezeres, Pertuis and Meigal, all cover'd with Woods, and comprehends these Town. viz. Puy, Bish. Cap. Mont-Falcon. S. Didier. S. Paulhan. Solignac. Alegre, &c. PƲY, or PƲYEN VELAY, Podium, olim Vellanorum Ʋrbs & Anicium, stands on a Mountain, near the Rivers Loire and Borne, at the distance of 2 Leagues from the ancient Town of Ruesium, now the Village of S. Paulhan, out of the Ruins whereof it took its rise, also 50 miles from Viviers to the North-west, 60 from Lyons to the South-west, and not above 10 from the borders of Auvergne. It is a fair, large, well-built City, and an Episcopal See, which depends immediately on that of Rome, not being subject to the Jurisdiction of any Metropolitan. The Cathedral de∣dicated to the Virgin Mary, is an Ancient and Noble Pile of Building, but more especially famous for the concourse of Pilgrims and other devout Persons, fre∣quently resorting thereto. Here are also divers Pa∣rochial Churches and a great number of Monasteries. The Bishop is Count of Velay, and formerly had a Pri∣vilege to Coin Money: He administers Justice toge∣ther with the Kings Seneschal, who hath his Seat here. Languedoc hath for its Governour General, the Duke du Main, Prince of Dombes; and the Duke of No∣ailles Commander in chief for the King, who hath a Lieutenant General. Here are also 3 Lieutenant Ge∣nerals, 1 for the Upper Languedoc, who resides at Thou∣louse. 2. For the Lower, residing at Montpellier: And 3. for Vivarois at Pont S. Esprit. There are also the Seneschal of Nimes, the Seneschal and Governour of Thoulous and Albigeois, the Seneschal of the Country of Foix, Carcassonne, Besiers and Limoux. A Governor of the Country of Foix, 3 Bailiffs of Velay, Givaudan and Vivarais: and particular Governours in Montpellier, Nimes, Pont S. Esprit, Narbonne, Carcassone, Fort of Brescon, Egde, du Puy, &c. And in Roussilion the Duke Noailles is Governor General. There is also a Lieute∣nant General and particular Governors in Perpignan, and six other Places on the Frontiers.
CHAP. XII. PROVENCE, Provincia. THIS Province, which bears the Title of a County, is bounded on the East by Piedmont, and the River Var; on the South by the Mediterra∣nean Sea, on the West by the River Rhone, that sepa∣rates it from Languedoc, and on the North by Dau∣phine, being extended between the 42 Degree 30 Minutes, and the 44 Degree 6 Minutes of Latitude, as also between the 22 Degree 30 Minutes, and the 25 Degree 40 Minutes of Longitude, which space comprehends 100 English Miles from South to North, that is to say, from the Cape of Cenchiech almost as far as Talard in Dauphine, and from West to East, viz. From the River Rhone to the River Var, 130 Miles. PROVENCE was the first part of Gaul that the Ro∣mans got Footing in, and was therefore called the Province of the Romans. In the Division by Augustus, this was the Gallia Narbonnensis secunda. It was after∣wards possess'd by the Goths: And under the French it was part of the Kingdom of Arles or Burgundy. Afterwards cut off from that, and govern'd by its own Counts for about 400 Years, till the Year 1481, when Charles the last Earl of Provence bequeathed it to Lewis XI. King of France. The Air is somewhat cold in the Upper Provence, by reason of the Mountains, but the Country affords Corn, Wine, Almonds, Apples, Pears, and Fish, as also very good Pasture for Cattle, &c. In the Lower Pro∣vece, along the Sea-Coasts, it is hot, and hath little Winter, except when the North Winds blow. The Soil here is very Fertile, and produces abundance of Corn, Grapes, Olives, Figs, Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Pomegranates, Apricocks, Plums, Almonds, Apples, Pears, &c. Divers sorts of excellent Fish are taken out of the Sea, especially Tunnies. The prin∣cipal Rivers of these Territories are the Rhone, the Durance, the Verdon, the Hubay, the Vrgens, the Var, the Arc, &c. The most considerable Gulphs are those of Marseille, Hyeres, Grimaut and Lerins, between the Crau and the Durance; besides a great number of Lakes and Ponds. Provence is usually divided into the Upper, Middle and Lower; however, its several Parts may be bet∣ter distinguish'd by the Diocesses, as they are placed in the ensuing Table. Provence divided into 18 Parts or Diocesses, viz. The Diocess of Aix, Aix, Archb. Cap. Riez, Riez, Bish. Senez, Senez, Bish. Digne, Digne, Bish. Arles, Arles, Archbish. Marseille, Marseille, Bish. Toulon, Toulon, Bish. Frejus, Frejus, Bish. Grace, Grace, Bish. Vence, Vence, Bish. Gandeve, Glandeve, Bish. Sisteron, Sisteron, Bish. Apt, Apt, Bish. County of Venaissin, Avignon, Archb. Cap. Principality of Orange, Orange. The Islands in 4, viz. of Martegue, Martegue, of Stecades, Ribaudon, of Lerins, S. Margaret, of Chateau-d'If, Chateau-d'If. The Diocess of AIX, Aquensis Diaecesia, is extend∣ed along the Banks of the River Durance, and includes these chief Towns, &c. viz. Aix, Archbish. Cap. S. Maximin, Brignole, Barjols, Peyrols, S. Paul, Alenson, &c. AIX, Aquae-sextiae, the Metropolis of Provence, is seated in a Plain at the Foot of the Hill of S. Eutro∣pius, and near the Rivulet of Arc, 20 miles from Marseille to the North, 50 from the Confines of Dau∣phine to the South, 80 from Monpellier, and about 40 from Arles to the East, and 90 from Nice to the West. It is a large, well built and very ancient City, as de∣riving its Name from the Bagnios that were erected by Caius Sextus, who brought hither a Roman Co∣lony. It was formerly the usual Place of Residence of the Counts of Province, and at present the See of an Archbishop, being also honoured with a Parlia∣ment, a Chamber of Accounts, a Court of Aids, a Generalty, a Treasury-Chamber, the principal Seat of the Grand Seneschal of Provence, and that of the ordinary Judge, and another Magistrate appointed by the King, called the Vignier. This City was here∣tofore sacked by the Lombards, and afterwards by the Saracens; but it hath been since well repaired and much enlarged, so that it may be justly esteemed as one of the Noblest of the Kingdom. The Cathedral bears the Name of S. Saviour, and is adorn'd with a high Tower, built in Form of a Hexagon: The Bap∣tistery is an admirable Structure, being adorn'd with Pillars standing round about the Fonts, which sup∣port a Dome over them. The Chapel of Nostre Dame de Grace is extreamly rich. Here are also two Paro∣chial Churches, viz. of S. Magdalen and the Holy Ghost, several Monasteries, a College of Jesuits, &c. The Diocess of RIEZ, Reiensis Episcopatus, lies toward the Spring-head of the River Verdun, and comprehends these Principal Towns, viz. Riez, Bish. Cap. Valensole, Oreson, La Palu, Montpesat, &c. RIEZ, Reii, Reii Apollinari & Regium, is situ∣ated in a Fruitful Country on the Rivulet of Auvertre, about 35 miles from Aix to the South-East, 45 from Toulon to the North, and as many from the Frontiers of Dauphine to the South. It is a small City, but well built, and hath been very considerable in the Time of the Romans, as appears from divers Inscripti∣tions and other Monuments of Antiquity found here. The Bishop is also Temporal Lord of the Mannor and and Suffragan to the Archbishop of Aix. The Diocess of SENEZ, Saniciensis Diaecesis, lies along the Banks of the Verdun, and contains these Towns, viz.
Senez, Bish. Cap. Castelane. Baremme, Colmars, Mervoiles, &c. SENEZ, Sanitium aut Senecium, is a City be∣low the Mountains, of a very small compass, not much inhabited, and now almost reduc'd to a Village, nevertheless it retains the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Ambrun, although its Bi∣shop generally resides at Castelane, a fair Town on the Rivet Verdun, from whence it is distant 10 miles to the N. 20 from Riez to the N. E. and about 40 from Ambrun to the S. The Cathedral Church bears the Name of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary; and the Chapter, which had been formerly of the Augu∣stine Order, was seculariz'd by Pope Innocent X. A. D. 1647. Colmars, Colmartium, sive Collis Martii, stands on the Banks of the Verdun, near the Alps and the Con∣fines of the County of Nice, and 20 miles from Digne. It is a well Fortified Town, but sustain'd much Da∣mage by a great Fire, which happen'd therein, A. D. 1672. In the Diocess of Digne, Diniensis Diaecesis, which is likewise bounded by the River Verdun, are con∣tained these Towns, viz. Digne, Bish. Cap. Mirabel, Brusquet, Collobrieux, Verdaches, S. Seine, &c. DIGNE, Dinia, is seated at the Foot of the Mountains in the Upper Provence, on the River Bleone, which there receives a Brook of hot Waters, at the distance of 15 miles from Senez to the N. and 25 from the Frontiers of Dauphine to the S. It was heretofore the Capital City of the Sentii, and is at present the Seat of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Ambrun. The Cathedral Church is dedi∣cated to the Virgin Mary, and the Chapter was some∣time Regular of the Augustine Order. The Diocess or Archbishoprick of ARLES, Are∣latensis Diaecesis, is extended along the Sea-coasts, and the Banks of the River Rhone, comprehending these chief Towns, viz. Arles, Archb. Cap. Salon, Les Beaux, Berre, &c. ARLES, Arelate & Arelatum, is situated on the Eastern Bank of the River Rhone, over which it hath a Bridge of Timber, 40 miles from Aix to the West, and as many from Montpellier, and in the mid-way between Avignon to the South and the Mediterranean Sea. The Romans establish'd their Sixth Colony in this City, and caused the General Assemblies of the Six neighbouring Provinces to be held annually here. Many Marks of its ancient Grandeur have been dis∣cover'd, as the Remains of an Amphitheatre, several Statues and Tombs, but especially a Roman Obelisk of Oriental Granate Stone (a piece much admired by the Curious.) It is 52 Foot high and 7 Foot Diame∣ter at the Base, and yet but one Stone. It hath been erected not many Years since, and makes a very a∣greeable shew to Travellers. This was the Capital of the Kingdom of Burgundy, and is at present a very fair and large City, dignified with a Metropolitan See, and a Royal Academy for Languages lately esta∣blished. The Emperors at several times granted great Privileges to it; which though it hath been depri∣ved of by its Princes, yet still hath a Territory of 30 Miles extent, depending on it; which is the Islands made by the three Branches of the Rhone, call'd Ca∣margue, and the Crau or Campi Lapidei of Strabo and Plin, which is a large Country covered with Stones, and reaches from the Rhone to the Mer de Martigne, a small Bay between that and Marseilles. Salon or Salon de Crau, Salona aut Salum, is the chief Town of the Crau abovemention'd, and is situa∣ted 25 Miles from Arles to the East, about 20 from Aix to the West, and 5 or 6 from the Bay of Mar∣tigues to the North. This Town is adorn'd with an old Castle, a Collegiate Church and divers Mona∣steries, and was the Place of the Nativity of the Fa∣mous Michael Nostradamus, who also died there in the year 1566. The Diocess of MARSEILLE, Massiliensis Diaecesis, lies along the Sea-coasts, and hath these con∣siderable Towns, &c. viz. Marseille, Bish. Cap. Aubagne, Sainte Beaume, La Cicutat, Oriol, Cassis, Olliols, &c. MARSEILLE, Massiiia, is seated on a little Hill, and hath a very capacious and safe Harbour on the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, at the distance of 20 miles from Aix to the South, and 40 from Arles to the South-East. This City was built (as it is suppos'd) by the Phenicians, and flourish'd in the time of Julius Caesar, when it was govern'd in Form of a Republick, and had a Famous Academy much frequented by the young Gentlemen of France, and even of Rome it self. The Inhabitants acquir'd much Reputation in former Times on the account of their Learning and Courteousness (according to the Testi∣mony of Cicero) but now they excel chiefly in the knowledge of Maritime Affairs; for many of the Capital Gallies of France ride at Anchor in the Haven of Marseille, and it is the usual place of Rendezvous of their Levantine Ships. The Port, which is de∣fended on one side by a Fortress and the Abbey of S. Victor, is flanked on the other with a Wall above 1300 Paces long, its Mouth being shut up with a Chain lying at a certain distance on three different Pillars of Stone, leaving a space open for the passage only of one large Vessel. The City it self at present enjoys great Privileges, and is one of the largest, fairest and most populous of the Kingdom, more espe∣cially since it hath been enlarg'd by the Order of the present French King Lewis XIV. so that its Citadels, new Streets, publick Places, stately Edifices, magni∣ficent Churches, Monasteries, Colleges, Seminaries, Hospitals, Courts of Judicature, Haven, Arsenel, Gallies, &c. are well worth a Stranger's particular Observation. The Episcopal See of Marseille, formerly subject to the Metropolitan of Vienne, now depends on that of Arles. The Inhabitants heretofore often maintain'd Wars against the Gauls, Ligurians, Carthaginians, and divers other Nations, but their City was taken by Julius Caesar, afterward became a prey to the Goths and other barbarous People, and was likewise sur∣priz'd by Alfonsus King of Arragon, in the year 1423. However, having been afterwards well repair'd, it resisted the Forces of Charles of Bourbon, in 1524. and those of the Emperor Charles V. in 1536. It was for some time subject to the Jurisdiction of cer∣tain particular Viscounts, as also to that of the Counts of Provence, Anno 1243. and at length was united to the Crown of France, together with the whole Coun∣try, in 1481. Aubagne, Aubanca, is a fair Town, wherein the As∣semblies of the States of the Province are often con∣vened.
It is distant only 10 miles from Marseille to the East, and 15 from Aix to the South. The Diocess of TOƲLON, Telonensis Diaecesis, is likewise extended along the Coasts of the Mediterra∣nean Sea, and includes within its bounds these consi∣derable Towns, &c. viz. Toulon, Bish. Cap. Hyeres, Lanary, Sifours, Bormes, Pierre-Fuec, &c. TOƲLON, Telo, aut Telo Martius, Tolonium & Tolemium, is situated in a plain Fruitful Country, and on a Bay which makes a very safe, large and com∣modious Harbour on the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, at the distance of 30 miles East from Marseille by Land, 75 miles from Nice to the West, 90 from the Borders of Dauphine to the South, and 400 miles from Paris. It is a very fair, strong and well-built City, being adorn'd with many stately Churches, Monasteries, and other publick Edifices. King Henry IV. fortified it with strong Walls, and built two large Moles, each whereof is 700 Paces long, enclo∣sing almost the whole Port; near them is also erected an Arsenal furnished with all sorts of Naval Stores, whence the largest Ships of the Royal Fleet of France are usually fitted out. And for their Security the Fortifications have been much encreased by the pre∣sent King. Hieres, Hierrum, Areae & Olbia, is a small Town on the Coasts, about 10 miles from Toulon to the East, and over against the Islands Stechades, to which it hath given their modern Name, on which account only this Town is mentioned, being not otherwise consi∣derable. The Diocess of FREJƲS, Foro-Juliensis Diae∣cesis, lies to the East of that of Toulon, and contains these chief Towns, &c. viz. Frejus, Bish. Cap. S. Tropez, Draguiguan, Aulps, Caillon, &c. FREJƲS, Foro-Julium aut Forum Julii, is seated in a Valley amidst the Marshes near the mouth of the Riuer Argens, and distant only half a League from the Sea-coasts, 40 miles from Toulon to the North-East, and 60 from Aix to the East. This City was heretofore very considerable, and there yet remain therein divers Monuments of Antiquity. It hath also at present a capacious Harbour, and is dignified with an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Aix. S. Tropez, Fanum S. Tropetis, is a small but strong Town on the Gulph of Grimaut, and hath in like manner a large Haven 5 Leagues from Frejus to the S. and 35 miles from Toulon to the E. The Diocess of GRASSE, Grassentis Diaecesis, is situated on the Coasts to the North-East of that of Frejus, comprehending these Towns, &c. viz. Grasse, Bish. Cap. Antibes, Canes, Le Bart, &c. GRASSE, Grassa, is a very populous and rich City seated on a Hill 2 Leagues from the Sea, 20 Miles from Frejus to the North, and 20 from Nice to the East. The Episcopal See of Antibes under the Metropolitan of Ambrun, was removed hither by Pope Innocent IV. A. D. 1250. by the reason of the unwholsomness of the Air of that Place, and the In∣cursions of Pyrates. Besides the Cathedral, there are divers other Churches, and a great number of Mo∣nasteries, &c. Antibes, Antipolis seu Antipolis Julia Augusta, was formerly the Seat of a Prelate, and is at present well Fortified with a Castle, and hath a convenient Har∣bout, about 3 Leagues from Nice to the West, and 20 miles from Frejus to the North-East. The Diocess of VENCE, Vensiensis Diaecesis, lies to the North-East of that of Grasse, and hath these Towns, &c. viz. Vence, Bish. Cap. S. Paul, S. Laurence, Le Bec, &c. VENCE, Vincium, Vintium, Vensiensis Ʋrbs & Vencium, is situated on the maritime Alps at the di∣stance of 5 or 6 miles from the River Var, about 12 miles from Grasse to the N. E. and as many from Nice to the N. W. This City is of a small compass, although very ancient, as having been a Roman Colo∣ny: and its Episcopal See depending on the Metro∣politan of Ambrun, was formerly united to that of Grasse, but hath been lately separated from it. The Cathedral is dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and S. Eu∣sebius was its first Prelate. Moreover, the Civil Ju∣risdiction of the City and Lordship of the Mannor, is divided between the Bishop and the Baron of Vence, viz. The Diocess of GLANDEVE, Glandatensis Diae∣cesis, is extended along the Banks of the River Var, and comprehends these principal Towns, &c. viz. Glandeve, Bish. Cap. Entrevaux, Guilleumes, Annot. Lupene. GLANDEVE, Glandata, Glandate & Glanateve Capillatorum, was built near the Banks of the Var, and formerly bore the Title of a County, as also of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Ambrun; but at present there remains only a Fortress erected on a Hill, the City it self being ruined: For about 800 years ago, the continual overflowing of the Ri∣ver obliged the Inhabitants to settle elsewhere, more-especially at the Town of Entrevaux, where the Bi∣shop now resides. This City hath imparted its name to the Family of the Glandeves, one of the most illu∣strious of Provence, which in the X. Century re-esta∣blished the Bishoprick, after it had been abolished by the Saracens. Entrevaux, Intervallium & Intervalles, is seated on the River Var, at the Foot of the Mountains, on the very Limits of the Dutchy of Savoy and County of Nice, at the distance only of one mile from the Ruins of the City of Glandeve, 16 from Vence to the N. W. and 30 from Digne to the E. The Diocess of SISTERON, Segusterensis Diae∣cesis, lies to the North, and contains these Towns, viz. Sisteron, Bish. Cap. Forcalquier, County, Manosque, Brelhane, &c. SISTERON, Segustero, Segesterorum Ʋrbs & Sistarica, is watered by the River Durance, which there receives the Brook Buech, and stands near the Borders of Dauphine, 50 miles North from Aix, and 40 North-west from Glandeve. It was heretofore dignified with a Title of a County, and is as yet a large well built City, and the See of a Prelate Suf∣fragan to the Metropolitan of Aix. A Seneschal's Court hath been established in this City ever since the year, 1635. Forcalquier, Forcalquerium olim Forum Neronis, the chief Town of a County of the same Name stands on
a Hill, and the side of the Rivulet Laye, in the midst between Sisteron to the N. E. and Apt to the S. W. about 2 Leagues from the River Durance. Manosque, Manuasca, is a small but fair Town on the River Durance, subject to the Jurisdiction of the Knights of Malta, and distant 20 miles from Reis to the W. 25 from Aix to the N. and about 12 from Forcalquier to the S. The Diocess of APT, Aptensis Diaecesis, is situated on the Frontiers of the County of Venaissio, and includes in its bounds these Towns, Apt, Bish. Cap. Saut, S. Sevarnin, Simiane. APT, Apta, seu Apta Julia Vulgantium, is a small City situate on the River Coulon near the Mountains, at the distance of 25 miles from Aix to the N. as many from Avignon to the E. and 40 from Sisteron to the S. W. This City has been heretofore one of the largest and most illustrious of the Celtae, and was the Capital of the Vulgentes in the time of the Ro∣mans. It was likewise enlarged by Julius Caesar, who made it a Colony, and caused it to bear his own Name. The most ancient Prelate of this Diocess was S. Auspicius Marto, and the Bishop at present is the first Suffragan to the Metropolitan of Aix, and stiled Prince of Apt, and his Predecessors have had a Privi∣lege to coin Money. In the Cathedral of S. Anne, and the Church of the Cordeliers, are preserved a great number of Relicks. The County of VENAISSIN, Vindascinus aut Vindauscensis Comitatus, is bounded on the E. by Pro∣vence, on the N. by Dauphine, on the S. by the Ri∣ver Durance, and on the W. by the River Rhone, which divides it from Languedoc, being extended from S. to N. for the space of about 35 miles, and 30 from W. to E. This Country took its Name (as it is be∣lieved) from Venesque, formerly its Capital City, and was granted by Joanna Queen of Naples and Countess of Provence, to Pope Clement VI. A. D. 1348. ever since which time it hath been possessed by his Succes∣sors, together with the adjacent City of Avignon, comprehending an Archbishop, 3 Bishopricks, 4 Baro∣nies, and 78 Towns and Villages; the chief whereof are these, viz. Avignon, Arch. Cap. Carpentras, Bish. Cavaillon, Bish. Vaison, Bish. Miolans, L' Ile. Pont de sorgue, Vencluse, Fontaine, Boulenes. AVIGNON, Avenio, is situated on the River Rhone, over which stands a Stone-bridge now half ruin'd, at the distance of 25 miles from S. Esprit to the South, 20 from Arles to the North, and 45 from Aix to the Nor-West. It is a large and flourishing City, a Place of good Trade, which consists chiefly in Silks manufactur'd here, erected into a Metropo∣litan See under the Pontificate of Sixtus V. in the year 1475. having been before subject to that of Arles. It is also adorn'd with an University, and a Mint-house for the coining of Mony with the Arms of the Popes, of whom seven have successively resided for the space of 70 years; that is to say, from A. D. 1307, to 1377. viz. Clement V. John XXII. Clement VI. who purchased Avignon of Q. Joanna, Innocent VI. Ʋrban V. and Gregory XI. who, through the Persuasion of S. Catharine of Sienna, brought back the Papal See to Rome. Here are divers stately Palaces, and magnificent publick Buildings. The Walls are strong, the Churches stately, and the Avenues of the City very pleasant. The Canons of the Cathedral de∣dicated to the Virgin Mary, wear Scarlet Robes, and the Chaplains others of Violet Colour. As for the Civil Government of Avignon, it is administred by Consuls and their Assisters, who is as it were Chief Justice of the City. The Viguier, an Officer like the Provost of the Merchants of Paris, judges Causes that do not exceed the value of four Ducats of Gold with∣out Appeal. In greater Causes Appeals lie to the Vice-Legate, who commits the Affair to the Court of the Rota, where there are five Auditors; and from thence an Appeal lies to Rome. Carpentras, Carpentoracte, is watered by the River Russe, and seated in a very Fertile Country about 12 miles from Avignon to the N. E. as many from Vaison to the S. and somewhat more from Orange. It is an Episcopal See subject to Avignon. It grew up out of the Ruins of Vindausca or Venasque, and is now the Capital City of the County of Venaissin in its room. It is enclosed with strong Walls, and stands on the Foot of Mount Ventoux, which riseth up from thence 4 Leagues in height. In this City is establish'd a Court of Justice, a Treasury-Office, &c. Cavaillon, Cabellio aut Caballio, is a City of a small compass now seated in a Plain near the River Durance, although it was Founded before on an adjacent Hill, where its Ruins are as yet to be seen. The Prelate of Gavaillon is Suffragan to the Archbishop of Avig∣non, from whence it is distant 12 miles to the S. E. and 15 from Aix to the N. W. Vaison, Vasio, Vasion & Vassionensis Ʋrbs, is built on the side of a Hill on the Banks of the River Lou∣vese, at the distance of 12 miles from Carpentras to the N. as many from Orange to the E. and 24 from Avignon to the N. E. This City was heretofore more considerable than at present, and hath been after ruined by the Goths, Vandals and Saracens. The Church of the Virgin Mary, reported to have been formerly the Cathedral, stands without the City on the Plain, and the other within the Walls, hath a Chapter of Canons, among whom are 4 Dignitaries. The Episcopal See of Vaison is subject to the Metro∣politan of Avignon. The Principality of ORANGE, Arausicanus Prin∣cipatus, is enclosed within the Country of Venaissin on the E. and the River Rhone to the W. being extend∣ed for the space of 20 miles in length. This small Territory of right appertains to the Illustrious House of Nassaw, but hath been unjustly Usurped by the present French King, Lewis XIV. on the Pretensions of the Family of Langueville. It comprehends the Ca∣pital City of Orange, together with about 15 o∣ther Towns and Villages, the chief of which are these, viz. Orange, Bish. Cap. Couriezon, Jonquieres, Bigondas, ORANGE, Aurasio, is situated near the Rivulet of Aiguel and Maine, distant 3 or 4 miles from the River Rhone to the East, 12 from S. Esprit to the South, and 15 from Avignon to the North. It is cal∣led Colonia Secundanonum by Pliny, in regard that the Triumviri, caused the second Roman Legion to be brought hither. This City hath been much larger in time past than at present, as having suffer'd great damage through the Inroads of divers Barbarous Na∣tions: Of which former Grandeur, there are evi∣dent marks in the Remains of a Cirque, very arti∣ficially Built, an Amphitheatre and a Triumphant Arch almost entire, which Caius Marius and Lucta∣tius
Catulus had erected after the Victory obtained of the Cimbrians and Teutones, besides part of a large Tower, which some suppose to have been a Temple of Diana, and divers other remarkable Monuments of Antiquity. The Fortress which Maurice of Nassaw Prince of Orange made so regular in the year 1622, stood on a Hill, and render'd this Place one of the strongest Holds of Europe; but it was Ras'd together with the other Fortifications, in 1660. The City of Orange is the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Arles, and is also adorned with a Universi∣ty, which Raymond V. Founded, A. D. 1365. and a Parliament Established by William of Aralon, 1470; but the French King suppress'd the latter in 1687, and chang'd it into a Viguirie, under the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Aix. The Principality of Orange was convey'd by Marri∣age to John de Chalons of the Illustrious Family of Burgundy, who in the year 1475, became absolute Prince of Orange, and was Succeeded in it by William, John, and Philibert his Descendants, the last of whom left an only Sister, Married to Henry Earl of Nassaw, A. 1515, and had Issue Rene of Nassaw, who was Adopted by Philibert, and Succeeded him in this Estate, from whom is Descended his present Majesty of Great Britain. The Island of MARTEGƲES, or Martigues, Mari∣tima Colonia, is dignified with the title of a Princi∣pality, and call'd by some the Venice of France. It is divided into three Parts, viz. Jonquiers, L'Isle, and Forrieres, having a capacious and safe Harbour at the Mouth of the Gulph, named the Bay of Martigues, the Town being situated on the Lake of Berre, from whence divers deep Chanels have been cut to make a Communication with the Sea, at the distance of a large quarter of a League. Barks of the largest size pass through these Ditches, to the great advantage of Merchants; and the Towns are joyn'd together by Bridges. The Inhabitants are very expert in Sailing on the Mediterranean, and admirable Fisher-men, for they take vast quantities of all sorts Fishes in cer∣tain Huts made for that purpose of Reeds or Sea-rushes, and tearmed Bourdigous. This Town hath been possessed by different Lords, especially the Vis∣counts of Marseille, and Counts of Provence; but at length Frances of Lorrain, Dutchess of Merceux, Estam∣pes, and Ponthieore, as also Princess of Martigues, brought it to the House of Vendome, by her Marri∣age with Caesar, Duke of Vendome, the Natural Son of King Henry IV. &c. The Islands of STOCHAES, or of HYERES, are so called as lying over against the Town of this name, between the Gulph of Grimeur to the E. and Thoulon to the W. Among these there are three prin∣cipal, viz. The Island of Levant, or of Titan, in Latin Hypaea, toward the East; that of Portcros in the midst; and that of Portquerolles to the West: Near to the former are also situated two other small Islands, viz. Ribaudon and Ribaudas, by the Ancients called Stirium and Phenice, on the Coasts between the Promontory or Cape of Hyeres to the North, and the Isle of Port∣cros to the South, besides those of Tele de Can, Langou∣stier, &c. In the time of Cassianus, these Islands were inhabited only by Monks; and there were some of the Cistercian Order under the Popedom of Inno∣cent III. The Islands of LERINS, Insulae Lerinenses, are two in number, and lye over against Cannes, near An∣tibes: The former, call'd in Latin Lero, and com∣monly St. Margaret, from a Chapel dedicated to this Saint, is three quarters of a league long, and one broad, being defended with five Forts and a Citadel, lately Fortified. The other of S. Honoratus Lorina, aut Planatia, is distant about two leagues of Antibes to the South, and five from Frejus to the East, taking its name from that Saint, who Founded a Famous Monastery therein, A.C. 375. and was afterward or∣dained Archbishop of Arles. This Solitary Place hath been for many Ages the Seminary of the Prelates of Provence, and the neighbouring Churches, having brought forth 12 Archbishops, as many Bishops, 10 Abbots, four Monks reckon'd among the Confessors, and 105 Martyrs, together with a great number of other Illustrious Personages. The Spaniards Surpriz'd these Islands in the month of September, A.D. 1635, and cut down the Forest of Pine-Trees, that afforded a delectable Shade during the excessive heat of the Sun, and stood in rows, at the end whereof were built certain Oratories in honour of Abbots and Monks, who had been Canonized for Saints. But those Spanish Forces were entirely expell'd from thence in the Month of May, A. D. 1637. CHATEAƲ-D'IF, Castrum Iphium, is a small Island, rather Rock, encompassed on all sides with the Sea, and defended by a strong Fortress, distant about a quarter of a league from Marseilles, where the very large Vessels ride at Anchor that cannot Sail into the Port for want of a sufficient dpth of Water at its en∣trance. There are also some other Islands at the mouth of the River Rhone, but nothing very conside∣rable is to be found in them. The Governor General of Provence is at present the Duke of Vendosme; here is also one Lieutenant-General, three Grand Seneschals, of Aix, Marseille, and of Arles; and particular Governments in Thoulon, Marseilles, in the Islands of Chateau-d'if, &c. In the Islands of St. Margaret, and Honoratus; in An∣tibe, &c. CHAP. XIII. DAUPHINE, Delphinatus. THIS Province is one of the twelve principal Go∣vernments of France, and bounded on the North by Bresse and Savoy, on the East by Piemont and the Alps, on the South by Provence, and on the West by the Rhone, which separates it from Languedoc and Ly∣onnois. It is situated between the 43d. deg. 50 min. and the 45 deg. 46 min. of Latitude; as also between the 22 deg. 40 min. and the 26 deg. of Longitude, comprehending from South to North, about 100 miles, that is to say, from beyond Buis in the Baronies, as far as Lanieu in Bresse, and 130 from West to East viz. from Valence to Pignerol.
Dauphine was Conquer'd by the Romans, under whom it was at first part of Narbonnensis, and after∣wards upon the Division of Gaul by Constantine, it composed the Viennensis. In the declension of the Roman Empire the Burgundians got Possession of it, who were again beaten out by the French, and by them it was made part of the Kingdom of Arles; and at length became subject to the Emperors of Germany; but during the Differences between the Pope and the Emperor Henry IV. it was Usurped by Guigne the Fat, Earl of Grisinauden, A. 1100, whose Successor gave it the name of Dauphine, either as some say, from the name of his Wife, or as others, from the Dolphin born in his Arms. In this Family the Sovereignty of this Province continued till the time of Imbert, or Hum∣bert II, Count Dauphn of Viennois, who having lost one Son in the Battle of Crecy, and unfortunately let fall his youngest out of a Window, whereof he died; perceiving also that Amedeo Count of Savoy, his irre∣concileable Enemy, insulted over his Calamity, sold his Country to Philip of Valois, King of France, for the Sum of 100000 Florins of Gold, on condition that the eldest Son of the French Monarchs should bear the name of the Dauphine, and that his Arms should be qarter'd with those of Dauphine; which Contract was ratified at Bois de Vincennes, near Paris, on the 23d day of April, A. D. 1343. and Charles V. the Grandson of the said Philip was first stiled the Dauphin, in 1350, and the same Custom hath been ever since observed, and Dauphine continued part of the Kingdom of France. Tho' this Province be full of Mountains and Hills, it is nevertheless very fruitful in Wheat Rye, Oats, and Barley, affording also good Pastuers for the feeding of all sorts of Cattle, and the Forests yield good store of Game, as Stags Fallow-Deer, Roe-Bucks, wild Boars, wild Goats, and Hares, together with Partridges, Pheasants, Heathcocks, Plovers, &c. Some Mines of Iron, Lead, and other Metals are found here. In this Province are to be seen three notable Abbies, being the chief of so many different Orders, namely that of S. An∣tony, that of S. Ruf, and the great Charter-house, as also four Wonders, viz. The inaccessible Mountain, the Tower without Poison, the Pit of Sassenage, which foreshews the Plenty or Dearth of the Year, by a quantity of Water found therein at certain times; and the Fountain or Quick-Spring near Grenoble, that appears covered with Flames and boyling up in great Bubbles, yet never hot: There is also a certain Hole or Cavern near Nions, from whence riseth up a Wind, which can scarcely be felt by those Persons that come near it, and yet blows violently when one stands at the distance of 20 or 30 paces. The principal Ri∣vers of Dauphine, are the Isere, which receives the Drac below Grenoble; the Durance that takes its rise and runs into Provence; the Drore, the Stream where∣of is extreamly rapid and dangerous; the Buelch, the Romance, the Dia, &c. The whole Province is usually divided into the Upper to the East, and the lower to the West, which are again subdivided according to the following Table. Duphin divided into 2 Parts. The Upper in six. Graisivauden. Grenoble, Bish. Cap. Diois. Die, Bish. Capital. The Baronies. Buys. Gapencois. Gap, Bish. Ambrunois. Ambrun, Arch-bish. Brianconnois. Briancon. The Lower in 3. Viennois. Vienne, A. B. Cap. Valentinois. Valence, Bish. Tricastin. S. Paul Trois.     Chateau, B. GRAISIVAƲDAN, Grationopolitanus Ager, is a Valley which was heretofore Inhabited by the Tricollo∣res, and lies between the Rivers of Isere and Drac, being also bounded on the North by Savoy, properly so called, on the East by the Valley of Maurienne and Brianconnois, on the South by Gapencois, and on the West by Diois and Vennois. The places of Note, are these, viz. Grenoble, Bish. Cap. Mens. Lesdiguiers, Duchy. La Chastreuse. Vizile, &c. GRENOBLE, Gracianopolis, olim Acusio and Cular, is situated on the Confluence of the Isere and Drac, and an the foot of the Mountains, being distant 40 miles from Vienne to the East, 55 from Lyons to the South-East, about 80 from Geneva to the South, 110 from Aix to the North, and 100 from Turin to the West. Maximian who was sent into France by Dio∣clesian, Fortified this Place; and being afterward en∣larged by the Emperor Gratian, it took the name of Gratianopolis, which in time melted into that of Greno∣ble. It is a large well-built City, and adorn'd with divers fair Churches. The Episcopal See depends on the Metropolitan of Vienne, and its most ancient Bi∣shop was S. Domninus, who assisted in the Council of Aquitain, AC. 381. His Successors at present assume the Title of Princes of Grenoble, by reason of the Dona∣tions which the Lords of the Country have made to them at several times. King Lewis XI. being as yet only Dauphin of Viennois, erected the Dolphinal Council of this Province into a Parliament, in the year 1453, and Francis Potier was its first President. Moreover an University was formerly established at Grenoble, and at present besides the Parliament a∣bove-mentioned, here is a Chamber of Accompts, a Treasury Office, a Court of Generality, and a Baili∣age. The Grand Charter-house, chief of the Car∣thusian Order, stands three Leagues from this City, on one side; and the boyling Spring is at the like di∣stance on the other. DIOIS, Diensis Ager, lies between Grasivaudan on the North, Valentinois on the West, Provence on the South, and Gapencois on the East, including these Towns, viz. Die, Bish. Cap. Crest. Saillans, &c. DIE, Dia, Dea Vocontiorum, aut Dea Augusta of the Ancients, is seated on the foot of the Moun∣tains and the Banks of the Rivulet Drome, at the distance of 30 miles from Grenoble to the South, 26 from Valence to the East, and 50 from Gap to the West. It was formerly a considerable City with the title of an Earldom, and had five fine Churches, and a good Citadel, but through the Wars of the Lom∣bards formerly, and the Civil Wars lately, they have been almost destroy'd; however it is still the See of a Bishop. The BARONIES of Baroniae, lie on the Frontiers of Provence, and comprehend these princi∣pal Towns, viz. Le Buys, Cap. Nions. Merindel. Piles, &c. BƲIS, or BƲYZ, Buxium, is a small Town standing upon the River Louveze, on the Frontiers of Provence, 30 miles from Dye to the South.
Nions, Neomagus, stands on the Frontiers of Pro∣vence and the side of the River Eygues, about 28 miles from Dye to the South, five or six from the Frontiers of Provence, and 20 from the River Rhone to the East. It had a Castle, but it is destroy'd, and the Town is not very considerable. GAPENCOIS, Vapincensis Tractus, is extend∣ed toward the River Isere, between Gresivaudan on the North, Diois on the West, and Provence on the East and South, comprehending these Towns, VIZ. Gap, Bish. Cap. Arpres. Ventavon, &c. GAP, Vapincum, Vapingum, & Vapinquum, is a large City and well Fortified with a strong Citadel, besides the Fort of Puymore, erected very near it on a rising Ground, scarcely two Leagues from the Ri∣ver Isere, 35 miles from Dye, and 65 from the Rhone to the East, not above 10 from the Frontiers of Pro∣vence, and 45 from Grenoble to the South-East. Its Episcopal See depends on the Metropolitan of Aix. The Cathedral Church is Dedicated to the Virgin Mary; and the chief of its Chapter is the Dean, be∣sides an Arch-Deacon, 10 Canons, &c. the Bishop as∣sumes the title of a Count, and bears in his Coat of Arms a Sword and Cross in Pail. The City of Gap hath been often Taken and Recovered by the Roman Catholick and Protestant Parties during the Civil Wars of France, but the former gain'd the advantage, A.D. 1561. AMBRƲNOIS, Ebrodunensis Tractus, is boun∣ded on the North by Brianconnois, on the West by Gapencois, on the East by Piemont, and on the South by part of Piemont and Provence, comprehending these Towns, viz. Ambrun, Arch∣bish. Cap. Seine. Guillestre, &c. AMBRƲN, or EMBRƲN, Ebrodunum, & Eborudunum, is seated on a steep Rock in the Con∣fines of Province, near the River Durance and the Mountains, 15 miles from Gap to the East, 20 from Briancn, and 30 from the Frontiers of Savoy to the West, 55 from Grenoble, and 110 from Lyons to the South-East. It is a City of small compass, never∣theless well Fortified and honour'd with the title of a Metropolitan See and a Bailiage, the Archbishop sharing its Jurisdiction together with the King. The Judges of the Bailiage are Alternative. This City was honour'd with great Privileges by the Romans; for some time subject to the Counts of Forcalquier, and hath since sustained many Revolutions. The Protestants took it in 1583, and found vast Wealth there. And in this War, viz.  1692, the Duke of Savoy besieged, and in 10 days took it. But quitted it soon after. BRIANCONNOIS, Brigantius Ager, near the Spring-head of the River Durance, between Piedmont on the East, the Valley of Maurienne in Savoy on the North, Graisivaudan on the West, and Ambrunois on the South. Its most remarkable Towns are these, VIZ. Briancn, Capital. Exilles. Pignerol. Perouse. Chateau-Dauphine. BRIANCON, Brigantium, is remarkable for its situation on the highest Ground (as it is supposed) of Europe, being the side of a steep Rock, on which stands a Castle, near the Alps, almost in the midst between Susa, a Town of Piedmont, and Ambrun, at the distance of eight leagues from the former, and seven from the other. It gives name to this Country, and is the seat of a Bailiage. A little below this City two Brooks intermix their Waters, one of which springs out of Mount Genevre, and is called Dure; the other descends from the Valley of Menetrier and Chantemerle, bearing the name of the Ance. These two Rivulets are the Sources of the River Durance, and form its Name. About two Leagues from this Town there is a Passage cut through the middle of a Rock, which as it was a stupenduous Labour, gives occasion to many Conjectures concerning the per∣formance of it. Some impute it to Julius, others to Hannibal, &c. PIGNEROL, Pinarolium, stands on the foot of the Alps, and the very borders of Dauphine, but in the Pricipality of Piedmont, and is Fortified with a very considerable Castle, commanding the adjacent Valleys, being distant 40 miles from Briancon to the East, 12 from Turin to the South-west, and 25 from Susa to the South. This Town was formerly subject to the Dominion of the Dukes of Savoy, and serv'd as an Inheritance for the younger Sons of that Il∣lustrious Family, until it was taken by the French under the Conduct of Armand John du Plessis, Car∣dinal of Richelieu, in the year 1630. Afterward Duke Victor Amedeo sold it, together with the Fort and Val∣ley of Prusa, as also 10 or 12 other Towns and Vil∣lages, to Lewis XIII. for the Sum of 494000 Crowns, and the City and Territory of Alba in the Duchy of Montferrat, which the French resign'd to him; which agreement was made by a private Treaty, and con∣cluded at Chrasco, on the 31st day of March, A. D. 1631. The Citadel of Pignerol, near which runs the River Cluso or Chiso, is built on a Rock, and by its situation and the Works the French have built since they have had it, is become one of the strongest Holds in Europe.
map of Pinerolo PIGNEROL Perouse, Perusa, is Water'd with the Streams of the Rivulet Cluso, and defended by a Fortress, about 3 miles from Pignerol to the North. This Town hath impos'd its Name on the adjacent Valley, and formerly belong'd to the Duke of Savoy, but was granted to the French by the Treaty above-men∣tioned. Chateau-Dauphin, Castrum Delphini, is a Town built at the foot of the Alps, on the very Confines of Piedmont, almost in the midst between Ambrun to the W. and Saluces to the E. It formerly bore the name of Eusebio, Fanum S. Eusebii, and constituted a part of the Marquisate of Saluces, but was granted to the French Kings, A. D. 1375. VIENNOIS, Viennensis Tractus, is the North-west part of Dauphine, and lying between the Rivers Rhone and Isere, was anciently call'd the Island of the Allobroges; it is bounded on the East by Gresivaudan, on the South by Valentinois, on the West by Bugey. This County was sometime Govern'd by its own Princes, under the name of Dauphins of Viennois, but came to the Crown of France with the rest of Dau∣phine. The chief Towns are, Vienne, Archb. C. S. Valier, Romans, S. Antoine, Beaurepaire, Tulins. La Tour du Pin, Pugignan, La Vulpillere, Cremiau, Bourgoin, Saforin, &c. VIENNE, Vienna aut Vienna Allobrogum, is situated at the Foot of a Mountain, on the River Rhone, which there receives the Gere, at the distance of 40 miles from Grenoble to the West, 20 from Lyon to the South, and 35 from Valence to the North. It hath been a very large and famous City, but at pre∣sent is not above the fourth Part of its former extent, and both its ancient Fortresses, nam'd Pipet and Ba∣stees, are now destroy'd. It was founded (as is ge∣nerally believ'd) by the Allobroges, and afterward be∣came a Colony of the Romans, who adorn'd it with a Palace, an Amphitheatre, and divers other magni∣ficent
Works, the Ruins whereof are still to be seen. After the Decay of their Empire, this City was the Capital of the Kingdom of Burgundy, and the usual Place of Residence of those Princes; and since hath been subject to many Masters, and suffer'd much by the Wars. However, it is the See of an Archbishop, who hath the Title of the Grand Primate of the Primates of France, and (as they say) S. Crescens, the Disciple of S. Paul, was its first Prelate. The Cathedral of S. Maurice is a stately Pile of Building, as also are some other Churches and publick Edifices. The Inhabitants are very expert in making divers sorts of Manufactures, particularly Plates of Iron, Steel, Paper, &c. by means of certain Mills and Engines up∣on the River Gere. VALENTINOIS, Valentinensis Ager, lies between Viennis on the North, the River Rhone on the West, Tricastin on the South, and Dicis on the East. This Country at present bears the Title of a Dutchy, and was granted, together with Diois, to Charles VII. then only Dauphin of France by Lewis of Poitou, its last Count or Earl, on the 22d day of June, A. D. 1419. The Principal Towns are these, viz. Valence, Bish. C. S. Marcelin, Montelimar, Chaveuil, Etoile, Livron, &c. VALENCE, Valentia, is seated on the River Rone, a little below its confluence with the Isere, over-against the Province of Vivarais, about 30 miles from Vienne to the S. 60 from Avignon to the N. 25 from Die to the W. and 40 from Grenoble to the S. W. It is a Place of great antiquity, having been some time a Roman Colony; and is at present a fair, reasonable large and well-built City, divided into the City and Town, defended by a strong Citadel, and dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Me∣tropolitan of Vienne, and hath a Presidial Court. The Cathedral Church now having S. Apollinarius, one of its Prelates, for its Patron, was at first dedicated to S. Stephen: The Chapter consists of a Dean, a Provost, an Archdeacon, a Prebend and nine Canons, and the Bishop bears the Title of a Count. There is also another Collegiate Church, and the Abby of S. Ruf the chief of that Order, together with a great num∣ber of other Monasteries and Convents; besides a famous University, in which are 4 Professors of the Civil and Canon Law: It was first founded by King Lewis XI. A. D. 1452. and afterward that of Grenoble was incorporated into it under the Reign of Charles IX. Montelimar, Aemarorum Mons, Mons Ademari, seu Montilium Adomari, a Town formerly well fortified, and sustained divers Sieges during the Civil War; stands on a Hill, at the distance of half a League from the River Rhone, 25 miles from Valence. TRICASTIN, Tricastinus Ager, is extended be∣tween Valentinois on the North, and the County of Avignon on the South, comprehending these Places of chief Note, viz. S. Paul-Trois-Chate∣aux, Bish. Cap. Suse, Pierrelate, Donzere, Grignan, &c. S. PAƲL-TROIS-CHATEAƲX, Au∣gusta Tricastinorum & Fanum S. Pauli Tricastinorum, olim Senomagus, aut Neomagus, the Capital City of the small Territory of Tricastin, took its modern Name from S. Paul, one of its Prelates, and is situated on a rising Ground in the Confines of Provence, scarcely one League from the River Rhone, 12 miles from Montelimar to the South, and as many from Orange to the North. Its Episcopal See was formerly subject to the Metropolitan of Vienne, but now depends on that of Arles, and the Bishop is also styled a Count, sharing the Civil Jurisdiction with the King; so that their respective Judges keep their Courts al∣ternately in the Bailiages. The Protestant Party made themselves Masters of this City during the Civil Wars, and retain'd it in their Power near 50 years. Dauphine hath a Governour General, at present the Duke de Feuillade, a Lieutenant General, a Seneschal, and a Commandant in the Province, three Bailiffs, and particular Governors in Grenoble, Vienne, Am∣brun, Valence, Montelimar, the Castle of Briancn, Pignerol, &c. CHAP. XIV. LORRAINE, Lotheringia. BEsides the 12 Principal Provinces or Governments of France already described, there are other Pro∣vinces and Towns lying on the Frontiers of Italy, Ger∣many and Flanders, made subject to, and reckon'd part of this Kingdom; an account whereof is given in the Description of every particular Country, where they are situated, excepting Lorraine, which although it be not compriz'd within the aforesaid 12 large Govern∣ments, nevertheless constitutes a portion of that Coun∣try which is properly call'd France. The Dutchy of LORRAINE and BAR is bounded on the N. by Luxemburg and the Palatinate, on the E. by Alsatia, on the S. by the County of Bur∣gundy, and on the W. by Champagne, being extended from the 48th Degree to the 49th Degree 50 Minutes of Latitude, and from the 23d Degree 30 Minutes to the 25th Degree 50 Minutes of Longitude; ex∣tending from N. to S. 110 miles, and about the same from E. to W. The whole Country is at present en∣tirely possessed by the French King, and divided into three principal Parts, according to the ensuing Table. Lorraine divided into 3 Parts, viz. The Dutchy of Lorraine, pro∣perly so cal∣led, in 3 Bai∣liages, viz. The Bailiage of Nancy, Chief Town, idem. The Bail. of Vauge, Mirecour, The Bailiage of Vaudrevange, Idem. The Dutchy of Bar-le-Duc. Three Bishopricks not properly within Lorraine. Bishoprick of Mrs, Bishoprick of Toul, Bishoprick of Verdun.
The Bailiage of NANCY, Balliviatus Nanceii, lies in the midst of the Province of Lorraine, and compre∣hends these considerable Towns, &c. viz. Nancy, Cap. S. Nicolas, Vaudemont, Vezelice, S. Diey, Luneville, Gerbervillers, Blanc-Mont, Estival, Marsel, Mayenvic, Sales, Saremburg, Phaltzburg, &c. NANCY, Nanceium, the Capital City of Lorraine, is situated in the midst of a Plain, at the distance of 100 paces from the River Meurte, 155 miles directly E. from Paris, and 20 from the River Meuse, 50 from the Borders of Alsace, and 65 from Strasburgh to the W. 30 from Metz to the S. and 50 from the Confines of Franche Comte to the S. It is divided into the Upper or Old Town, wherein stands the Duke's Palace and Magazine, and the Lower and New Town, which is of larger extent, and contains many very fine Build∣ings, taken into the City in 1587, having been before only a Suburbs. It is also adorned with divers Churches and Monasteries, a College of Jesuits and 3 Gates. A Chamber of Accounts and Seneschal's Court are held here. This Town, or rather this City, hath been often taken, and sustained many Sieges, for Charles the last Duke of Burgundy, took it, A. D. 1475, from Rene Duke of Lorraine; who regained it the next year: At which Charles being enraged, immediately besieged it, but lost both his Life and the Battle on the 5th day of January following. Nancy was extreamly well fortified in 1587, during the Civil Wars: Ne∣vertheless Lewis XIII. made himself Master of it in 1633, and its Fortifications were destroyed by the pre∣sent French King in 1661: But they have been since repaired with great advantage. S. Nicolas, Fanum S. Nicolai, is a Burrough very plea∣santly seated on the River Meurte, two Leagues above Nancy to the S. and famous for the Concourse of Peo∣ple resorting thither to pay their Devotions at the Shrine of S. Nicolas, sometime Bishop of Myra in Ly∣cia, who vigorously oppos'd the Errors of Arius, and assisted in the General Council of Nice, A. C. 325. Vaudemont, Vadanus Mons & Valdemontium, stands on a Hill between the River Meuse and Moselle, 20 miles from Nancy to the S. and about as many from Toul to the S. E. It is a small Town, nevertheless dignified with the Title of a Principality, and fenced with a strong Castle, &c. Marsal, Marsalium, is a small but well fortified Town, built on the Banks of the Brook Selle, amidst the Marshes, at the distance of about 20 miles from Nancy to the East. The Bailiage of VAƲGE, Balliviatus Vogesi aut Vasagi, is extended on the South side of the Province of Lorraine, and comprehends these Principal Towns, viz. Mirecourt, Cap. Neufchatel, Espinal, Remiremont, Charmes, Bruyeres, Dompaire, Plombieres, Fontenay, Darney, &c. MIRECOƲRT, Mirecurtium, the Chief Town of the Bailiage, although of a small compass, is situated near Mount Vauge, from whence the Bailiage hath its Name, on the Rivulet of Maiden, which falls into the Moselle at Chaligny: It is distant 25 miles from Nancy to the S. about as many from Toul, and 15 from the Confines of Champagne to the E. Remiremont, Romaricus Mons, Romarici Mons, & Ro∣maricum Castrum, olim Avendi Castrum, is situated on the River Moselle, at the Foot of Mount Vauge, and remarkable on the account of a famous Abby of Nuns there. It is distant only one League from the Frontiers of the Franche-Comte, and 30 from Mirecourt to the S. E. Fontenay or Voutenay, Fontenaeum, a small Village, seated on the Frontiers of the Franche-Comte, about 25 miles S. from Mirecourt; famous on account of a fierce Battle fought near it, with a very great Slaughter on all sides, between the Emperor Lotharius, Lewis King of Germany, and Charles the Bald, King of France, all three Brothers, A. C. 841. The Bailiage of VAƲDREVANGE, Balliviatus Valderfingae, takes up the N. E. part of Lorraine, and contains these Places of chief note, viz. Sare-Louis, Vaudrevange, Sirk, Dieuse, Saralbe, Putlange, &c. SARE-LOƲIS, Saravum Ludovici, is a very strong Fortress, lately built on the River Sare, about 2 or 3 miles above Vandrevange, and so called in ho∣nour of the present French King Lewis XIV. who built it, and established therein a Presidial Court of a large Jurisdiction. It is distant 12 Leagues from Triers, 4 from Sarbruck, and 7 from Homburg, &c. map of Saarlouis SARLOUIS
VAƲDREVANGE, Veldersinga, the Chief Town of the Bailiage of the same Name, is likewise seated on the Sare, 30 miles from Mets to the E. as ma∣ny from Thionville, and somewhat more from Deux-Ponts. It was almost ruin'd during the last German War, but hath been since well repaired. Sirk or Sircques, Sirca & Sericum, is watered with the Streams of the River Moselle, and defended by a strong Fort, built near it on a Hill, and the very Borders of the Dutchy of Luxemburg, about 20 miles from Mets to the N. 15 from Triers, and as many from Luxemburg to the E. This Town hath been in the Possession of the French King ever since the year 1643. The Dutchy of BAR or BARRAIS, Barentis Ducatus, is extended on both sides the River Meuse, from the Country of Burgundy to the Dutchy of Luxemburg, between the 3 Bishopricks, the Bailiage of Nancy and of Vague on the E. and the Province of Champagne on the W. This Country is divided into 6 Bailiages; the 3 first of which depending on the King are commonly call'd La Mouvance; and the o∣ther 3 are in the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Barrois, and are termed La Non-mouvance. The Bailiage of Bar-le-duc, The Bailiage of Grand-Recours. The Bailiage of Bas∣signe or de-la-Mothe. The Bailiage of S. Michel, or Miche. The Bailiage of Pont-a-Mousson. The Bailiage of Argonne, or Clermont, &c. BAR-LE-DƲC, Barroducum, is built on a rising Ground, near the Banks of the River Ornain, and hath a strong Castle for its Defence, at the distance of a∣bout 40 miles from Nancy to the W. and 5 or 6 from the Borders of Champagne: This Town, being the Ca∣pital of the Dutchy of Bar, is fair and well built, and was formerly subject to the Jurisdiction of the Dukes of Lorraine, &c. S. Michel, Fanum S. Michaelis, is advantageously si∣tuated on the E. side of the River Meuse, almost in the midst between Toul to the S. and Verdun to the N. and 20 miles from Bar-le-duc to the E. It hath been for some time a very considerable Town, and is at present the Seat of the Parliament of Barrois. It was taken by Lewis XIII. in the month of June, A. D. 1632. and afterward resigned to the Duke of Lorrain by the Treaty of Livurdin, nevertheless the same French King made himself Master of it a second time in 1633, when the Inhabitants revolted against his Garison, but were at length constrain'd to surrender on discretion. Pont-a-Mousson, Mussipontum, is seated on both sides of the River Moselle, near the Ruins of the Castle of Mousson, from whence it took its Name, at the distance of 17 or 18 miles from Nancy to the N. toward Mets, and almost as many from S. Michael to the E. It is a very fair Town, but destitute of Walls, dignified with the Title of a Marquisate, and adorn'd with two Ab∣bies, divers stately Churches; and a University found∣ed in the year 1573, by Charles Cardinal of Lorraine, who gave it to the Jesuits for the Teaching of Divi∣nity, Philosophy, and the Learned Languages: After∣ward the Duke of Lorraine establish'd therein certain Professors of Law and Physick, and Pope Gregory XIII. added a Seminary for the Scotch Nation. The THREE BISHOPRICKS, Tres Epis∣copatus, form, as it were, an equilateral Triangle in the Northern and Western part of Lorraine: The most considerable Places of this Country are these, viz. Mets, Bish. Nomeny, Vic, Toul, Liverdun, Verdun, Bish. Tilly, County, &c. METS, Metce & Metensis Ʋrbs, olim Divodurum & Mediomatrices, is remarkable for its advantageous situation on the confluence of the Rivers Seille and Mo∣selle, in a very fruitful Country, at the distance of 30 miles from Nancy to the N. 20 from Thionville to the S. 30 from Verdun to the E. 90 miles W. from the Ri∣ver Rhine, and 150 E. from Paris. It was heretofore the Metropolis of the ancient People named Medio∣matrices, as also afterward of the Kingdom of Austra∣sia, under the first Race of the French Monarchs; and is at present the Capital City of the Country of Mes∣sin, dignified with an Episcopal See, under the Metro∣politan of Trier. The Bishop is styled Prince of the Empire, and the Cathedral, dedicated to S. Stephen, is an ancient and noble Pile of Building, wherein are to be seen many Curiosities, particularly a Font, made of one entire piece of Porphyry, 10 foot long. The whole Diocess is divided into 4 Archdeaconries, com∣prehending 623 Parishes, whereof 16 are included within the Walls of Mets. There are also 7 Abbies for Nuns, divers other Religious Houses, a College of Jesuits, &c. This City hath been for a long time Im∣perial and Free, until it was taken in 1552 by the Constable of Montmorency, General under the French King Henry II. who caused it to be fortified with a Citadel and other Bulwarks; by which it was made so strong, that the Emperor Charles V. having invested it in the same year, was compell'd to raise the Siege. This City is the Seat of a Bailiage, and of a Court of Parliament, established here by Lewis XIII. TOƲL, Tullum, aut Tullum Leucorum, is seated on the River Moselle, in a fertile Soil, as are all the Towns of this Province, at the distance of 30 miles from Mets to to the S. 12 from Nancy to the West, and 27 from Bar-le-duc to the E. It was constituted an Imperial and Free City by the Emperor Henry I. but fell into the Possession of the French Kings, A. D. 1552. It is the Capital of the Country of the same Name, the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Triers, and the Seat of a Bailiwick: Its Diocess is very large, and contains a great number of Abbies, &c. VERDƲN, Verodunum & Virodunum, is a very ancient City, and one of the largest of Lorraine, is seated upon the River Meuse, which there dividing its Stream, forms divers small Islands, which do not a little contribute to its Advantage: It is fortified with a Citadel and other regular Works, and honour'd with an Episcopal See, depending on the Metropolitan of Triers. The Cathedral Church, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, hath a considerable Chapter, from whence have proceeded divers illustrious Prelats, who are usually stiled Counts of Verdun, and Princes of the Sacred Empire. This City hath been formerly Imperial and Free, but was taken by the French, to∣gether with some others, under Henry II. A. D. 1552, and is at present the Capital of a Bailiage. Lorraine and Barr have for Governor General the Marshal de Lorge, who, this present year 1694, suc∣ceeded the Marshal de Bufflers, removed to the French-Flanders, upon the Death of the Marshal Hu∣miers. Here is also a Lieutenant General, and parti∣cular Governors of 9 Towns and Castles.
THE Low Countries: Or, Netherlands. Of the NETHERLANDS in general. map of the Netherlands THE SPANISH NETHER¦LANDS THE ancient Name of these Countries was Belgium, whether from an old Dutch word Balgen to Fight, or from the City Belgium, which some say was Bavay in Hainault. others Beau∣vais in Picardy, is left undecided, several Writers pleading hard for both. It was also reckon'd part of Germany, and call'd Inferior, for the same reason as now Low Countries and Netherlands, viz. from their low
situation: And indeed so very low are the Maritime Provinces, that the Grounds are in many places even lower than the Surface of the neighbouring Sea, which the Inhabitants confine and secure their Lands from, by strong Banks, made with great Labour and Inge∣nuity, and maintained at as great Expence. They were also called Flanders, because that Province for∣merly was the Great Mart of Europe, and resorted to by all Nations for Traffick; and therefore because all these Provinces were subject to the same Lord, the particular name of this chief One, was, by Stran∣gers, made to intimate the Whole; and for the same reason, since the Erection of the Republick of the Confederate Provinces, Holland being the principal of them, its name serves to denote, in general, the Coun∣tries of the Confederate States. Its ancient Bounds were very large, for not only all the present Netherlands, but the parts of France next them, as Picardy, Champaign, &c. and (accord∣ing to some Authors) Lorrain, Berg, Juliers, Cleeve, together with the Bishopricks of Mentz, Colen, and Triers, were all included in the general name of Bel∣gium. The present Limits are the British Ocean on the North, the same Ocean and Picardy on the West, the rest of Picardy with Champaign and Lorrain on the South, and the Bishoprick of Triers, the Duchies of Juliers and Cleeve, the Bishoprick of Munster and the County of Emden or East-Frizeland on the East: The whole Country, according to Guicciardine, is one Thousand Italian miles in Circumference. It is situated between the 49 Deg. 20. Min. and the 53 Deg. 30 Min. of Latitude, and between the 20 Deg. and 24 Deg. 30 Min. of Longitude. The chief RIVERS are these, 1. The Rhine, which rises in the Country of the Grisons, and after it hath passed through Germany, entereth into these Coun∣tries at Schenkenschans on the Borders of Gelderland, at which place it is divided into two Chanels, whereof that which retains its name, runs by Arnhem and Wageninge in Guelderland, and Rheenen in Ʋtrecht to Duester de Wyck, where it meets and mixes with the Leck, a small Chanel only that runs toward Ʋtrecht bearing the name of the Rhine, which passing on from Ʋtrecht runs by Worden and Leyden, not far from which last place it is lost in the Sandhills, the mouth by which it formerly run into the Sea, having been choak'd up. 2. The Leck, which receives the Wa∣ters of the Rhine at Duester de Wyck, runs by Culen∣borch, Viannen, Schoonhoven, and at the Village Crimpen falls into the Meruwe, which falls into the Maes not far above Rorterdam. 3. The Waal, which is the other Branch of the Rhine, beginning at Schenkenschans, flows by Nimmeguen, Tiel, and Bommel, to Worcum, where it is joyn'd with the Maes, and passing by Gor∣cum receives the Lingre, and takes the name of Meruwe, otherwise called the new Mas, which passing by Dort receives the Leck above-mentioned, and the smaller Issel, and flows in a broad Stream to Rotterdam, where it loses all other names and is called the Maes. 4. The Maes, called also Mose and Meuse, rises in Mount Vogesus in Burgundy, and passing by Verdim and Charleville flows to Namur, where it receives the Sam∣bre; thence passes by Liege, Maestricht, Venlo, and Grave, to Worcum, mixes with the Waal as above∣said, and both togethe run to Dort, where the Stream is divided and makes an Island; but are again united a little below Vlaerdigen, and falls into the Ocean at the Briel. 5. The Schelde, called in French l'Escaut, hath its source in Picardy and runs by Cambray, Va∣lenciennes and Oudenarde, to Ghent, whence turning Eastward it passes by Oudenarde, and at Rupelmonde re∣ceives the Demer, besides many other smaller Rivers in its passage, and then flows Northward to Antwerp, where it makes a very capacious Harbour; and a few leagues below divides its self into two large Branches, one whereof call'd the Wester Scheld or the Hont, pas∣ses betwixt Flanders and Zealand, and falls into the Sea at Fushing; the other is called Ooster Scheld, and runs out of the main Stream at Santvliet, passing by Bergen op Zoom, and between Tolen and South Beveland, and thence by the Shoar of the Island Schouwen falls into the Sea with a violent Current. 6. The Issel, from whence the Province lying beyond it is called Ovrissel, springs in Westphalia, and running through phen passes to Doesburgh, where it is exceedingly gmented by a Chanel cut from the Rhine, by the der of Drusus Nero, and thence in a great Stream ows by Deventer to Campeu, parting the Provinces of Gldeland and Overisse and falls into the Zuyder Sea. There is another small River nam'd the Issel, which comes out of the Leck near Vianen, and running to∣wards oterdam falls into the Maes. Many other Rivers water these Countries, as the Sambre, Lys, Aa, Demer, Scarp, Nethe, Dele, Sinne, Dendre, Roer, &c. the course whereof the Reader will discover in the following description of the Country. There can be very little said of the MOUN∣TAINS of these Countries, for except some few rising Grounds in those parts lying towards Germany, there is no Hill to be seen: On the contrary, all those Provinces towards the Sea lie so very low, that large parts of them have been many times overflow'd by the Eruptions of the Sea, notwithstanding the strong Banks that the Inhabitants maintain almost all along the Coasts of Groninghen, Friesland, North Holland, Zealand, &c. These Countries were formerly very desolate, and for want of Cultivating, the Grounds were either turn'd to Marshes or over-run with FOREST; of which last that of Ardenne is mentioned by Caesaer as the lar∣gest in Belgium, and was indeed of vast Extent; for according to Cluverius, it reached from Coblentz in the Bishoprick of Trier, as far as the farthest Borders of Artois, which is 220 miles; and in breadth, to the Sea-shore and the River Waal, near 150 miles. There are still large Remains of it on the Borders of Lux∣emburgh, and in the Bishoprick of Liege, as also about Mentz, Triers, Worms, &c. Many other large Forests are found here, as the Forests and Woods of Soigny and Meerdaie in Brabant; Niep in Flanders; Podsberg, Faigne, Mormaut, and S. Amand in Haynault; with many others which are mentioned by Guicciardin to be very large, but have been retrench'd since his time by the consumption of the Wood for Fuel, and the Industry of the Inhabitants in Cultivating the Land. The AIR is reckon'd wholsome enough, but is subject to very thick Fogs in Winter, through the moistness of the Country, which would be very Noxious if it were not for the dry Easterly Winds, which blowing off a long Continent for two or three Months every Year, clear the Air, and cause very sharp Frosts during the Months of January, February, and March, by which means the Ports, Rivers, and Canals, are almost always shut up with Ice during those Months. The SOIL is generally Fertil; but because dif∣ferent in the several parts, the Reader is referr'd to the particular Accounts of the Productions of
each Province, in the following Description of them. The COMMODITIES of these Countries are their Manufactures, for their Productions are very few: Of these, from the Spanish Netherlands comes Linnen-Cloth, Tapestries, Worsted-Stuffs, Chamlets, wrought Silks, Lace, &c. and from Holland (besides most of the same Manufactures) they export all sorts of East-India Goods, Fish, and the Commodities of Germany, as Rhenish Wines, &c. Concerning the INHABITANTS, Caesar, in the beginning of his Comentaries, says,—Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae, &c. That they were the most Valiant of all the Gauls, partly because they were far distant and unacquainted with the Civility of the Roman Provinces, and very little vi∣sited by Merchants, who import such things as serve to effeminate the minds of Men; but chiefly, be∣cause by their Neighbourhood to the Germans, they were at continual Wars with them. Many other Authors speak of the Martial temper of these People, which their long and obstinate War with the Spani∣ards in the last Age, is a sufficient proof of. But their Industry is more conspicuous by the vast Traf∣fick they have for many Ages past maintain'd with all Nations of Europe, and more remote parts of the World: Their Ingenuity hath also appear'd in the Invention of many useful Arts; such as the making of Tapestry, call'd Arras, from that City where it was invented; the making of Cloth and Worsted-Stuffs, which we learn'd of the Flemings; and the Perfection if not Invention, of the Mariner's Com∣pass, is by many Authors attributed to them: Many other ingenious and curious Arts acknowledge the Netherlanders for their Inenters. To omit that of Printing, which Haerlem puts in a good Claim to, but is oppos'd in it by Mentz in Germany. But not∣withstanding these Inventions and the Ingenuity of many particular Men among them, it must be allow'd in general, That they are Industrious rather than Ingenious. They will persevere and plod on in a Road through many Difficulties, but their Apprehen∣sions are dull, and they are not easily perswaded to leave their old way, tho, a new one be apparently more convenient. They are much addicted to Drun∣kenness, but are not very delicate in their Food. Their Habits and Houses are exceeding Neat and Cleanly, especially the later, to Superstition. The Dutch TONGUE is a Dialect of the German, but with many French and Latin words in∣termix'd: It is a harsh, clownish and unpleasant Speech, and hath nothing that can recommend it to Strangers. In the French Flanders, Hainault and Luxemburg, the French Language is generally under∣stood, and that call'd Walloon, which is a corruption of French with Dutch, is usually spoken there. Per∣sons of the best Rank all over the Netherlands, under∣stand and speak French, as do also many of the com∣mon People. The RELIGION of these Countries in ge∣neral was that of the Roman Church, before the Re∣formation, which prevailing here, the King of Spain, about the year 1566, set up the Inquisition, and gave Orders for the punishing even to Death all those whom the Church of Rome declar'd Hereticks, which gave great discontent to the People, and was the first occasion of the Disturbance and bloody War, which ended in the total alienation of seven of the Provinces: At present the Romish Religion only is profess'd in the Spanish Provinces; and in Holland that of Calvin is predominant, but with Toleration of all others. The convenient situation of Flanders in the mid∣way between France, Spain and Portugal on one side, and Denmark, Sweeden and the Hans Towns on the other, together with Germany behind and England before it, may be esteem'd the chief reason of the vast TRADE that was some Ages since establish'd there; which was so great, that this Province might be accounted the grand Market-place of Europe: For in its City of Bruges the Merchants of all Nations had their Factories, and great Magazines to lodge the native Products of their respective Countries, which they here sold and exchang'd for those of other places. Of these Houses or Colleges there were no less than 17 belonging to these several Na∣tions, viz. England Scotland, France, Castile, Portugal, Navar, Aragon, Catalonia, Biscay, the Hans Tows, the Cities of Venice, Florence, Genoa, Lucca, Milan, &c. In which State the Trade continued at Bruges for many years, till about 1480. it began to decline and re∣move to Antwerp, partly because the Port of Sluys and the River from thence, was narrow and incon∣venient; and partly because of a War that disturb'd the Country hereabouts; whereas, on the contrary the River Schelde which leads to Antwerp, was large and commodious, and many Gentlemen upon occa∣sion of the Wars between the King of France d the Emperor Charles V. having quitted the Vills and smaller Towns, retir'd with their Effects to Antwerp, built fine Houses there, and by their con∣stant Residence, very much improv'd that City; but chiefly, because at Antwerp in 1503. the Portuguese fixed their Staple for the Spices and other Commodi∣ties of the East-Indies, which they brought from their new Conquest of Calicut; These and other Causes, drew the Merchants thither, and made it a place of the greatest Trade of Europe, of which the Reader will find a more particular Account in our descrip∣tion of that City. But it lasted not there above 50 years; for the Civil War causing great Disorders, Antwerp was twice Plunder'd, and almost quite burnt down, and the Dutch Common-wealth being Ma∣sters of Zeeland, were able to stop the Passage of the Schelde, and impose what Duties they pleased upon the Ships passing to Antwerp, by which they made them put into their Ports; and besides the English and Dutch having found the way to the East-Indies, supplanted the Portuguese, and furnish'd Europe with the Commodities of those Countries: By all which means the Current of Trade was quite alter'd, and translated to London and Amsterdam, which are, at present, the two great Empories of Europe. And the Traffick of Flanders is now not considerable, ex∣cept for their own Manufactures, which we have already mention'd. Of the ancient State of the Netherlands in General. THE greatest part of Belgium was Conquer'd by the Romans, and that part of it that lyes toward Gaul, continu'd under their Subjection till the decli∣nation of that Empire; after which the Franks were Masters of it, and in the French Monarchy it was part of their Kingdom of Metz, or Austrasia. The Division of it into so many States, is deriv'd from the Earls of Ardenne, the Origine of whom was from the Sons of Clodion King of France, who being kept out of the Succession to that Kingdom, by Meroveus (as we have already shewn in our Account of the Kings of France) were forc'd, for their Safety to
betake themselves to the most defensible places of the Forest of Ardenne, and the Countries on the Banks of the Moselle, where they founded the two great Earl∣doms from thence denominated. That of Moselle belongs to Germany, and therefore shall not be treated on here: This of Ardenne comprehended part of Flanders and Brabant, all Hainault, Namur, Limburg and Luxemburg, together with the Dukedom of Bouillon, formerly a very large Country, containing the Bishoprick of Liege, &c. These large Estates continu'd peaceably under the Earls of Ardenne for some time, till being grown powerful and great, they became the Envy of their Neighbours, and were there∣fore set upon by Dagobert King of Metz, and Son to Clotair II. King of France, who in Battle overcame and slew Brunulph Earl of Ardenne, and seized his Coun∣try, giving only Hainault to Albert his Son: Dago∣bert succeeding his Father in the Kingdom of France, A. 628. gave away part of this Country; but the gross of it still bore the Title, and remain'd for a long time a very considerable Estate. About 940. Luxemburg and Limburg were parted off, and given to two of the younger Sons of Ricuine Earl of Ardenne; and about 980 Namur was erected into an Earldom. The rest was afterwards carried into the House of Lorrain by a Marriage, and remain∣ed there for a long time. Thus we have shewn the Origine of the Earldoms of Hainault and Namur, and the Dutchies of Luxemburg and Limburg. Part of Brabant, as we have said, was included in the Earldom of Ardenne; the other part being that toward the Sea, was very much infested, and even almost depopulated by the Depredations of the Danes and Normans; wherefore, to guard the Coast and pro∣tect the Inhabitants, a certain Officer was appointed, call'd Lord Warden of the Marches; which Title they continu'd, till Ʋtilo Nephew of Aldiagerius, King of the Boiarians, having shewn great Courage against those Pirates, was honour'd with the Title of Lord Marquis of Antwerp, whose Descendant Ansegistus, was Mayor of the Palace in France, and made Duke of Brabant, and his great Grandson Pepin obtaining the Crown of France, this Dutchy was made a Province of that Kingdom, and afterwards a Member of the Kingdom of Lorrain. About 980, the Cities and Territories of Brussels, Lovaine, Antwerp and Nivelle, were taken out of it and made a new Estate, with the Title of The Marquisate of the Holy Empire, by the Emperor Otho II. and bestowed upon his Aunt, whose Grand-daughter Gerburg succeeding her, convey'd it by Mar∣riage to Lambert Son of Reyner Earl of Hainault, who had the Title of Earl of Lovain, and was suc∣ceeded in it by his Family, of whom Godfrey VII. Earl of Lovain, Conquer'd the rest of the Country, and was created Duke of Brabant. Flanders was a wild, waste Country, the Sea-coasts infested by the Danish Pirates, and the other parts but meanly Cultivated, till it was Conquer'd by the French Kings, who soon after the Establishment of the Monarchy, appointed a certain Officer with the Title of Forester of Flanders, to repress the Rob∣bers that infested the woody Parts and Sea-Coasts, and by Government and Protection civilize the Peo∣ple and encourage them to Industry. This Office continued for several Descents, and was at length changed into the Title of a Count or Earl, about the year 864, by Charles the Bald, Emperor and King of France, in favour of Baldwin the seventh Forester, who had Married his Sister. Artois was included in the Earldom of Flanders till 1234. when Robert the Grandson of Philip Augustus, King of France, and Husband to Isabel Daughter to Baldwin VIII. Earl of Flanders, was made Earl of it. Guelderland was part of the French Kingdom of Austrasia, and with that became part of the Empire of Germany; and, as such, was govern'd by certain Guardians or Protectors, (first instituted in the Reign of Charles the Bald, of whom Otho of Nassaw was the first free Prince. and created Earl by the Emperor Henry V. A. D. 1079. whose Descendant Rainold II. was in 1339, made Duke of Guelderland. Zutphen was a separate Earldom for many years, till united to Guelderland by the Marriage of Sophia, Daughter of Wickman the last Earl, to Otho of Nas∣saw above-mention'd. Holland and Zeeland, a rude unpeopl'd Country, being much disturb'd by the Norman Pyracies, was first made an Earldom by the Emperor Lewis II. about the year 863, and given to Thierry, in whose Line the Succession continu'd till the Death of John about the year 1300, who leaving no Issue, was suc∣ceeded by John of Avesnes Earl of Hainault, Son of Alcide, the Daughter of Florence IV. Earl of Hol∣land. Friezland is but part of the Country of the ancent Frisi, some part of Ʋtrecht and Overysel, as well as East-Friezland in Germany, being Inhabited by those People, who were Govern'd by their own Kings, till the Emperor Charlemaign Conquer'd them and this part; now one of these Provinces became part of the Dutchy of Guelderland, and afterwards a distinct Barony. Overyssel and Groninghen, was part of the Episcopal See of Ʋtrecht, first Founded by Dagobert King of France, in favour of Willibald an English-man, the Converter of these parts to Christianity, whose Suc∣cessors were Temporal as well as Spiritual Lords, for 900 years, and were very powerful Princes, but of∣ten attack'd by the Earls of Holland and Dukes of Guelderland, which last got from them the Lordship of Groninghen; and in the end so distressed Henry Bishop of Ʋtrecht, that by reason of that and civil Dissenti∣tions, he chose to surrender his Temporalities to the Emperor Charles V. A. D. 1527, who divided it in∣to the two Provinces of Ʋtrecht and Overyssel. How these Provinces became Ʋnited in the House of Burgundy, will be seen by this Table. ARTOIS, Robert II. Earl, left Issue one Daugh∣ter named Maud, who was Married to FEANDERS, Lewis de Malaine Earl, Married HAINAULT, John de Avesnes, Earl, Married Aleide, Heiress of the Earl of Holland. HOLLAND, Jaqueline, Daughter and Heiress of William VI. Earl of Hainault, Holland and Zee∣land, surrendred her Estates to Philip the Good.
LIMBURG, Adolph Heir to Henry last Duke, sold it to Henry Duke of Brabant, A. 1293. BRABANT, The Marquisate of the Empire or Territory of Antwerp and the Lordship of Machlin, together with the Dutchy of Limburg being fallen into this House; upon the death of Philip II. with∣out Issue, descended to Philip the Good. 1430. LUXEMBURG, Elizabeth the Niece of Si∣gismund the last Duke, having no Issue, sold this Dutchy to Philip the Good. NAMUR, John VI. sold it to Philip the Good, who was also next Heir to Theodorick, Successor to John, who died without Issue, about 1430. GUELDERLAND, with ZUTPHEN and GRONINGEN, Arnold the Duke, being inhumanly treated by his Son, sold his Estates to Charles the Warlike; notwithstanding which, his Son Adolph got possession of them after the death of Charles the Warlike, A. 1473, and left them to his Son Charles, who maintain'd long War with the Duke of Burgundy to defend his Right, but was at length forced to surrender it to Charles V. to be enjoy'd by him after his decease, which happen'd 1538. and Charles accordingly succeeded. UTRECHT with OVERYSEL, Henry of Bavaria being distressed through War with the Duke of Guelderland and Rebellion of his own Sub∣jects, surrender'd his Temporalities to Charles V. A. 1527. which was confirm'd by the Pope and the Estates of the Country. The Family of Burgundy. Ortheline Earl of Burgundy, who in that Right suc∣ceeded in the Earldom, A. 1302. Margaret the Heiress of Burgundy and Artois, 1361. Margaret Daughter of Lewis de la Malaine, Earl of Flanders, Artois and Burgundy, Married to Philip the Hardy, Son of John King of rance, made also Duke of Burgundy, A. 1363. John without Fear, his Son, A. 1404. Anthony the Proud, his Son, A. 1404. also made Duke of Brabant by his Mother. Philip the Good, their Brother, succeeded John in 1419. and Anthony 1430. and was, in his time, Duke and Earl of Burgundy, Duke of Brabant, Limburg and Luxemburg, Marquis of the Holy Empire, and Earl of Flanders, Haynault, Holland, Zeeland, Artois and Namur. Charles the Warlike his Son, succeeded Anno 1467. and added the Dutchy of Guelderland and Zutphen, He was killed in War against the Switzers, 1475. leaving Issue Mary Heir to Charles, married Maximilian of Austria, Son of the Emperor Frederick III. and afterwards Emperor himself, succeeded Anno 1482. by Philip their Son, who married Joan the Daughter and Heir of Ferdinand and Isabel King and Queen, and first Monarchs of all Spain. Charles the Son of Philip and Joan succeeded in the Estates of Burgundy in the Right of his Father, A. 1506. to which he added Oveysel and Ʋtrecht; and in the Kingdom of Spain in the Right of his Mother, A. 1516. and was also elected Emperor, being the 5th of that Name, A. D. 1519. Charles V. made these Countries a Circle of the Em∣pire, and resigned them, with the Kingdom of Spain, A. 1558. to his Son Philip, IV of Burgundy and II of Spain, in whose time happen'd the defection of the seven Provinces, whereof an Account shall be given when we come to speak of those Estates. 1599. Philip III. surrender'd these Countries to his Daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia, married to Albert Arch-duke of Austria, after whose deah, A. 1621. succeeded Philip IV. King of Spain; whose Successors will be seen in our Description of Spain. The Present State of the Spanish Netherlands. The supream Lord, as hath been said, is the King of Spain, who governs them by a Substitute with the Title of Governour General of the Netherlands, at pre∣sent enjoy'd by he Elector of Bavaria, which, by reason of his Relation to that Crown, his Son being presumptive Heir to it (whereof see an Account in the descript on of Bavaria) was in the year, 1692. made Hereditary to him. The Governour General is assisted by three Coun∣cils. viz. The Council of State; wherein the most weighty Affairs, as Peace and War. eagues and Alliances, treaing with Foreign Ambassadors, &c. are transacted. The Prvy Council; which judges Matters of Right brought before it by Appeal from he other Courts of Judicature; make Laws and Edicts, de∣termine the Bounds of Provinces, the Right of Lord∣ship, &c. And The Council of Finances; which hath the Care and Management of the Royal Revenues and all Taxes, and supervising the Accounts of the Receivers. To this Council also belongs the Care of the Fortifi∣cations, the adjusting and proportioning the Charge of a War, &c. But the levying Mony and enacting of new Laws belong to the Convention of the Estates, which is compos'd of the Nobility, principal Clergy and De∣puties of the Chief Cities; who, being called by the Governor General assemble at Brussels, not in one Body but by Provinces (the several Provinces retaining still most of the particular Privileges they anciently enjoy'd) where the Prince's desires are propos'd to them, in an obliging and endearing manner (the Spa∣niard having by fatal Experience found his Error in treating these People with severity) and if they ap∣pear unwilling to Grant what he Demands, the most winning Arguments, with all the power of Rhetorick, are used in his Behalf; which is the more necessary, because every City hath a negative Voice, and the dissenting but of one of them spoils the Law. The settl'd Revenue of the Crown consists in Customs and Imposts, which by reason of the great Loss of Trade and the Encroachments of the King of France upon the Country, do not, by much, answer the Charge of the Government; but the King is oblig'd to send continual Supplies from Spain. For maintaining the Peace and taking care of the Armies, &c. there is a Governour in every Province appointed by the King, with subjection to the Go∣vernour General. And for administring of Justice, each Province hath a Provost or Bailiff; and over all there is a Grand Provost, who hath great Power in Criminal Mat∣ters. The Bishopricks of the Netherlands, besides those already mention'd under the Archbishoprick of Cam∣bray in the Account of France, are only these, viz. The Archbishoprick of Machlin, with the Bishopricks of Antwerp, Gaunt, Bruges, Ypres, Ruremond and Bois le Duc.
And formerly, the Bishoprick of Ʋtrecht, with the Bishopricks of Haerlem, Derventer, Groningen, Leu∣ardin and Middleburg; which being subject to the States General, have been suppress'd. The Ʋniversities in the Spanish Netherlands. Louvain. In the United Netherlands. Leyden, Utrecht, Franeker, Groeningen, Harderwick. The Accounts in Flanders are kept in Pounds, Schellings and Groots; 12 Groots make a Schelling, 20 Schelling a Pound Flemish. The common Coins are the Negenmannek, which is the eighth part of a Stuyver. An Oortke, the fourth part of a Stuyver. The Stuyver; the Schelling 6 Stuyvers; the Guil∣der 20 Stuyvers. The Patacoon is two Guilders, and the half Pata∣coon one Guilder. The Silver-Crown 2 Guilders and 10 Suyvr, the Rix-Dollar something more. The Ducatoon 3 Guilders or something more. The Ten Spanish Provinces are, The Dutchy of Brabant, Bruxels, Cap. The Dutchy of Luxemburg, Luxemburgh. The County of Artois, Arras. Bish. The County of Flanders, Gaunt, Bish. The County of Hainault, Mns. The Country of Cambresis, Cambry, Arch. The Marquisate of the S. Empire, Antwerp, Bish. The Lordship of Malines, Malines, Arch. The County of Namur, Namur, Bish. The Dutchy of Limburg, Limburg. To which may be added, The Country of Liege. The King of France hath at several tims con∣quered a great part of these Provinces, which by se∣veral Treaties of Peace have been granted to him, whereof we have already given an account in speak∣ing of the Dominions of that King, in the general Account of France. CHAP. I. The County or Province of ARTOIS, Artesia, Arthesia, or Adartesia. THE Province of Artois is bounded on the North by that of Flanders, on the South by Picardy, on the East by the Territories of Cambresis, and on the West by those of Boulen, extending it self from North-west to South-east about 60 miles, and 23 from East to West. This is the Country of those ancient People call'd Atrebates by Caesar, and is at present entirely subject to the French: Wihin its Limits are 850 Towns and 9 Castellanies, together with a great number of rich Abbeys and Monasteries. It bring∣eth forth much Corn, abounds in Pastures, and is watered with divers Rivers; the chief whereof are the Lys, the Scarp and the Aa. Atois was at first subdued by the Romans, and then by the French, un∣der the second Race of whose Monarchs it obtained certain particular Governours or Earls, who in pro∣cess of time render'd themselves proprietary Lords thereof; until, at length, after divers Revolutions, the French made an absolute Conquest of this Pro∣vince, to whom it was granted by the 35 Article of the Pyrenean Treaty of Peace, A. D. 1659. The most consi∣derable Towns, Villages, &c. are these, viz. Arras, Bish. Aire, Pr. S. Omer, Bish. Therouane, run'd. Bapaume. Lens. Hesdin, Avesne le Comte. Bethume, S. Paul. S. Venant. Mont S. Elo, Ab. ARRAS, Atrbatum aut Nemetocerna, & Neme∣tacum, is situated on the River Scarpe, at the distance of 30 miles from Amiens to the N. and 30 from Tournay to the S. W. 47 from Dunkirk to the S. and 18 from Cambray to the W. It is a very ancient and large City, defended by a strong Castle, and very good Bulwarks, Trenches and other Fortifications. It is divided into two Parts, called the City and the Town, separated formerly by a Wall. The former is the smaller, but bst built; in it stands the Cathedral (a beautiful Building, dedicated to the Virgin Mary) wherein are kept some famous Relicks, particularly a Candle pretended to be dropt down from Hea∣ven, and some Manna showred down on S. Jerome. The Town hath fair broad Streets, a spacious Mar∣ket-place and stately Churches; and is inhabited by wealthy Traders and Artificers, who make Sayes and Tapestry Hangings, especially the latter, which Art was invented here, and therefore take their Name from this City. Arras is the See of a Bishop, Suffra∣gan to the Metropolitan of Cambray, who is ac∣counted Lord of the City, as the Secular Prince is of the Town. It was taken by the French Troops un∣der the Command of the Marshal de Chaune, Cha∣tillon and la Melleraye, on the 1th day of August, A. D. 1640. and hath ever since remain'd in their Possession. The Spaniards, to rgain so important a Place, laid Siege to it, but were repulsed with great Loss, on the 25th day of Aug. A. 164. S. Omer, Fanum S. Audomari, au Audomaropolis, stands on the River Aa, in the Cry of the ancient Morini, and is also an Episcopal See; the Bishop whereof hath been a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Cambray ever since the year, 1559. when it succeeded the demolish'd City of Teruanne in thi Dignity, from the Ruins of which it is distant 3 eagues to the Norh, 20 miles from Boulen to the East, 20 from Dunkirk to the South, and 32 from Arras to the North-west. S. Omer, Bishop of Teruanne, sounded a Mo∣nastery here, A. C. 660. whither People resorting, Buildings round it were erected, which in time in∣creased to a good Town: And A. 80. Tonques, Ab∣bot of S. Bertin began to inclose it with Walls, whih were afterward finish'd by Baldwin II. surnam'd the Bald, Earl of Flanders, in 902. Not far from hece is to be seen a large Lake, in which there are divers floating Islands, which are remov'd by Pl and Cords, and inhabited by certain Famils that never depart out of these Islands, and refuse to cotract Alliance with any but those of their own Tribe; In one of these Islands stands a Monastery of the Or∣der
of S. Bernard, and a Church. S. Omers is large and the People rich, by means of their Trade. An English Seminary of Jesuits is establish'd hre; from whence our Nation hath been infested wh Disturbers of the publick Peace. This City is fored both by Nature and Art, as being environ'd on one Side with the River and Marshes, and on the other with an Hill or rising Ground, defended by a strong Castle, di∣vers Bastions and very deep Trenches: However, the Duke of Orleans made himself Master thereof, after having defeated the Spanish Forces at the Battle of Cassal, on the 23d Day of April, A. D. 1677. And it was yielded up to the French King by the Peace con∣cluded at Nimeguen in the Year ensuing. Aire or Arien, Aira, is situate on the River Lys, 10 miles from S. Omer to the South-East, and about 24 from Arras to the Norh-West; and is a very strong well fortified Town, having, besides the Walls, Ba∣stions, Half-Moons, Hrn-Works, Redoubts, Coun∣terscarps and Ditches, a Morass which environs it on three sides, and on the side that is accessible, a Fortress call'd Fort S. James, which hath 5 Bastions, 2 Half-Moons, and a deep Trench. But notwith∣standing its Sreng h, this Town was taken by the French in 1641. and quickly after retaken by the Spaniards: And in the year 1676 the French again took it, and have ever since possssed it. In the midway between S. Omer and Aire, are the Ruins of the once considerable City of Terouanne, which was fas on account of the Siege thereof by our King Heny VIII. in Person, in the year, 1513. at which the Emperor Maximilian assisted, and wore the English dge (S. George's Cross) as a Soldier under King Henry. At this Siege the French attempt∣ing to put Provisions into the Town, were beaten by the English with great Slaughter, and by reason of the haste wherewith the French fled away 'twas call'd the Battle of Spurs; intimating, That those were the chief Weapons they used: Quickly after the City was taken, but dismantled and quitted. Which the French afterwards repairing, it was again taken by the Emperor Charles V. and utterly demo∣lish'd, in the year 1553. and is at prefent a small Village only. Bethune, Bethunia, a fortified Town, and the Ca∣pital of a County, stands on the River Briette, 12 miles from Aire to the East: An excellent sort of Cheese is made here, and sold into all the Neighbour∣ing Countries. It is a Place of Trade, and hath two annual Fairs. Bapaume, Bapalma, another small fortified Town, stands near the Confines of Picardy and Cambray, about 15 miles from Arras to the South-east. Hesdin, on the River Canche, being incommodiously seated for Defence, was demolish'd by the Emperor Charles, and Hisdin-Fort built a little above upon the same River Cnche, where the ernois falls into it; which was well fortified, and made one of the strong∣est Towns in these Countries: But was, however, taken by the French in 1639. It is situated near the Confines of Picardy, 20 miles South from Aire, and about 10 West from S. Paul. S. Paul, Poliniacensis Pagus, a small Town, the Capital of a County, formerly subject to its own Lords, is seated near the Head of the small River Ternois, about 10 miles from Hesdin Fort to the East, 15 from Arras to the West, and as many from Aire to the South. CHAP. II. The County or Earldom of FLANDERS, properly so called, or Vlaenderen in Flemish, Comitatus Flandriae. THIS is the first and most considerable County or Earldom of the Low Countries, and takes its Name from Flandrina the Wife of Liderick II. Prince of Buc, and Grand Forester of Flanders, who go∣vern'd it according to the Orders of the Emperors Charlemagne and Lewis the Debonnaire. Others de∣rive it from that of Fambert, the Nephew of Clodion King of France who, having married Belisinda, the Daughter of Goduerus King of the Ruthenians, ex∣pelled the Romans out of Gallia Belgica. This Pro∣vince is bounded on the North by the German Ocean, and the Mouth of the River Scheld, call'd the Hont, by which it is separted from Zeeland; on the South by Artois and Hainauit, on the East by part of Hai∣nault and Brabant, and on the West by the Ocean and part of Artis. It is extended from North to South for the space of about 60 miles, and 75 from East to West, which must be understood of its largest Di∣mensions. It is a very fruitful Country, especially that part towards the Sea, which is excellent Pastu∣rage for the great number of Horse bought up in the neighbouring Countries and fed here. The rest of the Country affords store of Corn and Fruit. Within its Bounds are comprehended 28 or 30 walled Towns: Many others, very remarkable, and 1154 Villages, besides 48 Abbies and a vast number of Priories, Colleges and Monasteries; insomuch that the Spanish Noblemen, who accompanied Philip II. when he took a Progress into these Regions, declar'd, That Flanders was only one continued City. Here are in∣cluded 5 Vicounties, which are Gaunt, Ypres, Furnes, Winoxberg and Haerlebeck; 3 Principalities, namely those of Steenheusen, Gaure and Espincy; 5 Ports, formerly very considerable, viz. Graveling, Dunkirk. Newport, Ostend and Sluce; and 32 Castellanies. The whole Province is commonly divided into 3 Parts 2 1. Flanders Flemish, where the Vulgar Language of the Country is spoken, and is stretched forth from the Northern Sea to the River Lys: 2. Gallican, where the French Tongue is chiefly predominant, lying to the South of the Flemish, and to the North of Cam∣brsis, having the Scheld to the East and the Lys to the West. 3. Imperial Flanders, situated between the Scheld to the Dender, comprehending the County of Alost, together with a few Offices or Districts, which were heretofore possessed by the Emperor. There is also another Division of the same Territories, viz. into Flanders Teutonick, Walloon, Imperial and Dutch: The first of these is extended between the Sea and the River Lys: The second betwixt the Lys and the Scheld: The third between the two others: And the fourth to the North of the two former. But at
present the County of Flanders is divided, with re∣spect only to the Soveraign Princes who are possessors thereof; so that it is usually distinguish'd into the French, Spanish and Dutch Quarters, according to the ensuing Table. French Flanders, wherein are com∣priz'd these Towns, &c. Lisle, Cap. Ypres, Bish. Tournay, Bish. Dunkirk Port. Graveling, Berg S. Vinoc, Courtray, Douay, Furnes, Mont-Cassel, Orchiers, Bailleul, Roulers. Armentiers, la Basse, l' Ecluse, S. Amand, Lannoy, Warneston, Comines. Warwick, Menin, Estayre, Poperingue, Bourbourg, Mardyck. Spanish Flanders, in which are these Towns, &c. Gaunt, Bish. Cap. Bruges, Bish. Ostend, Port. Newport, Port. Oudenard. Alost. Ninove, Damme, Dixmuyde. Deynse, Gramont, Rupelmond. Dutch Flanders, Sluys, Port. Oestburg, Hulst, Axel, Ardenburg, Biervliet, Ysendick, Sas van Gand, Cassandra, Philippine, Terneuse, Middleburg, Bomhouse, Doel. FRENCH FLANDERS. L'ISLE or RYSSEL Insula & Lila, so call'd by reason of its situation amidst divers Marshes, which have been drained by the Industry of the Inhabitants, is seated on the River Deulle, at the distance of 25 miles from Arras to the South, 30 from Newport to the South-west, 12 from Tournay to the West, 16 from Douay to the North, and 12 from the Confines of Artois. Baldwin IV. call'd the Bearded, Earl of Flanders, founded this City, A. D. 1007. and his Successor, Baldwin V. surnam'd of Lisle, caused it to be encompass'd with Walls. It hath been often taken and sack'd during the Wars of the Low Countries, but is at present extreamly well Fortified according to the modern Method, and hath a Citadel flanked with 5 Royal Bastions, besides many Half-moons and other Out-works raised for its Defence; the Ditches are also double and filled with the Waters of the Deulle. It is a large City and very conside∣rable on account of its Trade, which consists chiefly in Silk Manufactures, and for the conveniency of transporting their Goods, a Canal is cut to the River Lys; and it is the usual place of Residence of the Governor of French Flanders. It was taken by the Army of the present French King, Lewis XIV. in the Year 1667. and hath ever since remain'd in his Possession, having been resign'd to him by the Peace of Aix la Chappelle, A. D. 1668. Tournay or Dornick, Tornacum, the Capital City of a small Country in Gallican Flanders, call'd Tou∣naisis, is seated in the midst of pleasant and fruitful Meadows, on the Banks of the Scheld, at the distance of 30 miles from Camray to the North, 30 from Gaunt to the South, and 11 from Lisle to the East, lying almost in the midst between Douay and Oude∣nard, as also between Valenciennes and Courtray. It is a very considerable City, being large, well-built, a place of good Trade, and very populous. It is divided into 10 Parishes, the Churches whereof are stately, and the Cathedral dedicated to the Virgin Mary, magnificent. The Buildings in general are very handsom; and here are reckon'd 72 Companies of Traders. It is an Episcopal See under the Me∣tropolitan of Cambray, and is well Fortified with Walls, Ditches and regular Out-works, besides the Castle which was built by our King Henry VIII. by whom this City was taken; but restored to the French upon Conditions, A. D. 1518. Afterward the Emperor Charles V. dispossess'd them in 1521. But the present French King regain'd it from the Spaniards in 1667; and it was granted to him by the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle. Ipres, or Ypres, Iprae, hath its name from the small River Yperlee, on which it stands, at the distance of 23 miles from Lisle to the Northwest, and is a rich well-traded City, the Capital of a Territory of large extent, call'd the Castellany of Ipres, which is a very fertil Country. The Trade consists in Says, wrought Silks, &c. Several Fairs are held here, espe∣cially one in Lent, which is very profitable to the Inhabitants. The Buildings are fair and good, but the Fronts of the Houses are of Timber. The pub∣lick Buldings are the Cathedral dedicated to S. Mar∣tin, several other Churches, many Convents, a large Hall or Repository for the Wool, and the Market-place very spacious and handsom. This City is an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Malines. is honour'd with the Title of a Vicountry, and is reckon'd the third of the four that constitute the third Estate of Flanders. It was taken by the French in 1678. and yielded to them at the Treaty of Nime∣guen. Courtray, or Cortryck, Corteriacum, Cortracum, is a very good well-traded Town, seated on the River Lys, 14 miles North from Lisle, and as many East from Ypres. The Inhabitants are excellent Artists in Diapering of Linnen: It was several times taken by the French and Spaniards before 1667. when the French finally took it, and had it granted to them at the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle. It hath a strong Citadel and other Fortifications, which have been much improv'd by the French, and is at present a place of great Importance. Menene is a small Town upon the Lys also, about 5 or 6 above Courtray, with a Ditch and other For∣tifications to resist a sudden Surprize. Armentiers stands also upon the Lys, 12 miles a∣bove Menene, and 8 from Lisle to the West: It is a Town of good Trade and considerable Strength; notwithstanding which, it hath been often taken and re-taken, and is at present in the hands of the French, having been granted to them at the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle. Warwyck, Warneton, and Commene, the Birth-place of the famous Philip de Comines, are all three seated upon the Lys, between Menene and Armentiers, and all subject to the French. Orchies an ancient tho' small Town, is situated 12 miles South-east from Lisle, 10 from Tournay to the South-west, and as many from Douay to the North-east, and water'd with a small Rivulet, which 5 miles below falls into the Scarpe. S. Amand, formerly a place of good Strength, but now dismanl'd by the French, is seated on the River Scarpe, 7 or 8 miles from Orchies to the East, and 10 from Tournay to the South. It is noted for a famous Abby in it, dedicated to the Saint that gives
name to the Town, and formerly for a fine Forest adjoining, of the same name also, which was cut down in 1676, by order of the French King. Doway, Duacum, is seated also on the Scarpe, on the Frontiers of Artois, 16 miles from S. Amand to the East, and as many from Lille to South. It is a very considerable Town, on account of its large Extent, Trade and Strength. Its chief Trade is in making and vending Worsted Camlets, which are brought by all the neighbouring People, especially at the Annual Fair in September. Here is a famous Seminary for English Roman Catholicks, first Founded in 1569 by Philip II. Afterwards removed to Rheims in France, but stayed there only 20 years, in which time they Publish'd an English Version of the Bible. The French Took this Town in 1667, and have ever since pos∣sess'd it. It is well Fortified, and hath, a Fort upon the Scarpe a Canon-shot below the Town which is situated among Marshes, and by Sluces can drown the Country all round. These are all the places of any Note in the East part of French Flanders. The most considerable of the West part are, Winoxberg, Cassel, Furnes Gravel∣ing, Mardyke and Dunkirk. Winoxbergen, or Berg Saint Winox, Berga, or Mons Sancti Wincci, is seated about 18 miles West from Ypres, and 14 East from Graveling, as also 8 or 9 from Dunkirk to the South; it is the Capital of a Castellany, or large Territory, which is very Fruitful and feeds great Herds of Cattle. The Town hath its name from a Monastery erected on a Hill, in Ho∣nour of S. Winox an English-man. Woollen Cloth is made here, but its Trade was formerly much more considerable than at present. Cassel, or Mont Cassel, Castellum, and Castellum Morinorum stands upon the top of a high Hill, at the distance of 10 or 11 miles South from Winoxberg, and 15 West from Ypres: It is an ancient Town, and hath a considerable Jurisdiction, Sub-ordinate to that of Ypres. It was formerly a place of good Strength, but having been several times Taken and almost Ruin'd, it is now not considerable. The French took it in 1677, and have ver since held it. Near this place in the year 1677, was fought a very bloody Battle, between the Dutch Army commanded by the Prince of Orange, and the French, commanded by the Duke of Orleans, wherein the latter obtained the Victory. Furnes, or Vuerne, Vurna, is a neat pleasant Town seated within two Leagues of the Sea, at the distance of about 10 miles from Dunkirk to the East, and 5 from Newport to the West, 20 from Cassel to the North, and about 10 from Winoxberg to the South-east. This Town hath a Territory call'd an Ambacht belonging to it, which is exceeding Fertil. It is digni∣fied with the Title of a Vicounty, and is a place of Trade, which consists in Linnen Manufactures, &c. It was taken by the French in 1667, and granted to them by the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, and since better Fortified, in the year 1692. Our English Forces took it, but the next Winter the French re-gain'd it. Graveling, or Graveline, Gravelinga and Gravelina, is one of the Sea-ports of Flanders, and seated at the mouth of the River Aa, which parts France from Flanders, in the mid-way between Calais and Dun∣kirk, 16 miles North-west from Cassel, and 12 West from Wberg. This being a Frontier of Flanders from Frnc, was Fortified by Charles V. in 1528, and is at present very strong, as well by reason of its situation among low Grounds and Dkes, as by the strong and regular Out-works built all round it. It is but a small Town, ill Built, and thinly Inhabited, and at present subject to the French, being taken by them in 1658, and yielded up at the Pyrenean Trea∣ty. Between Graveling and Dunkirk, about 4 miles from the latter stands what is left of the Fort of Mar∣dyke, formerly a very strong place, but in the year 1645 dismantled, and in 1652 quite Destroyed; so that there remains now only a small woodden Fort, with some few Guns on it. Dunkirk, Dunquerca, is situated on the Shoar of the German Ocean, at the distance only of 20 miles from Calais, and 12 from Graveling to the East, 15 from New-port, and 28 from Ostend to the West, 35 from Tournay to the North-east, 34 from Bruges to the North-west. It takes its name from the Sand-Hils, call'd in Flemish Duynen, that are ranged along the Sea-coasts, and on which a large Church term'd Kirk by those People, is erected; the high Tower thereof appearing very far off to the Mariners as they sail on the Downs. It is a good large Town well-built, with neat large Streets, and very Popu∣lous: It is one of the five Ports of Flanders, and was therefore a place of good Trade in the flourishing time of this Country: Afterwards in the War-time it became a retreat of Pirats and Robbers, who in∣fested the Seas, and very much disturbed Trade. The Emperor Charles V. first Fortified it, which the French Demolish'd when they Took and Sack'd the Town in 1558. The Spaniards Re-took it 1581, and here a great part of the Fleet design'd to Invade England in 1588, was Equipp'd by the Prince of Parma, but by the Vigilance of the Dutch Fleet which lay before the Harbour, were kept in and could not join the rest of their Fleet; which much facilitated their Overthrow. It was afterwards taken and re-taken by the French and Spaniard, before 1658, when it was finally Taken by the joint Forces of England and France, and put into the hands of the English, in whose Possession it remain'd till 1662, when it was deliver'd to the French by (Charles II. upon certain conditions to us unknown) who have ever since held it, and have very much improv'd it, by enlarging the Town, and Building exceeding strong Fortifications, &c. wherein they have bestowed prodigious Expence, having besides the building strong Walls and Ravelins, Half-moons and Counter∣scarps, and a Citadel regularly Fortified: I say, be∣sides these, the French King hath dug a large Basin within the Town, capable of receiving 150 Ships of Burden, and cut a Canal through the Splinter-sands out into the Sea, which is secur'd by a Mole or Gal∣lery on each side, that are carried out into the Sea a mile in length, on which are Forts with Cannon plant∣ed on them, and on one side a strong Fort, call'd the Rice-bank, well secur'd with an hundred Pieces of Cannon that command the Port; a Work of vast La∣bour, Art and Expence, by which he intended to make it a Port for his Ships of War, but was disappointed of his design, for the Sands do so choak up the Harbour, notwithstanding the Mole, that with all the advantage of the highest Tides, they cannot bring in a Ship of 70 Guns, without Un∣lading her.
map of Flanders Spanish FLANDERS. GAƲNT or GHENT, Gande, Gandavum, is water'd with divers Rivers and Chanels, which divide the Town and the adjacent Country into many Islands, being seated almost at an equal distance of 30 miles North from Tournay, East from Ostend, South from Middleburg, and West from Malines, as also 26 from Antwerp, and 28 from Brussels. It is the Capital City of the Province of Flanders, and one of the largest Cities of Europe, being 9 or 10 miles in compass, but then Corn-fields and Meadows are included within the Walls. It was built (as it is reported) by Julius Caesar, in a place extreamly advantagious for Traffick, on the account of its Situation at the con∣fluence of four large Rivers, viz. of the Scheld, which flows hither from the Province of Hainault, the Lys, which runs from that of Artois, the Lien, which pro∣ceeds from the Port of Sluce, and the Moere, which took its rise near the sour Offices, call'd Ambactes. Within the precincts of Gaunt are included 26 small Isles, form'd bp the Waters of the Canals and Rivers, and as many large Bridges, under which pass Barks of good Burden, and a great number of smaller Bridges. The Churches, which are seven in number, are fair and well-built; the Cathedral especially is very stately, and has a Tower of 400 Steps high. The Castle or Prince's Palace, is said to contain 300 Chambers, in one of which the Emperor Charles V. was Born. The other publick Buildings are, the Town-house, a high Tower call'd Belfort, (in which hangs a great Bell, call'd Roland, that weighs 11000 pound weight, many Monasteries and several Hospi∣tals. The private Houses are fair and well-built, and the Streets clean and neat. This City hath a good Trade in Cloaths, Stuffs and wrought Silks made here in great quantities. It is much resorted to from the neighbouring Places on account of the Provincial Council of Flanders, which was establish'd by John Duke of Burgundy, A. D. 1409, and still held in this City. It is also ad Episcopal Sea subject to the Metropolitan of Mecklin, and is fortified wth a Citadel built in 1540, by the Emperor Charles V. a Counterscarp, deep Ditches, Ramparts, and many other Out-works. However, the French King Lewis XIV. took it after a Siege of 9 days, on the 9th. of March, 1678, but was oblig'd to restore it to the Spaniards at the Peace of Nimeguen.
map OOSTEN At the distance of 4 leagues from hence to the North stands a strong Fortress, call'd by the Inhabi∣tants, 'tzas van Ghendt. It was erected by the Spa∣niards, and taken by the Hollanders, A. D. 1644. by whom it hath been strongly fortified, and made almost impregnable. Between Gaunt and Bruges there is a Canal which was cut at great Expence by the Mar∣quis Spinola, when he was Governour of the Nether∣lands, for conveying Goods and Passengers to and from each City; and is call'd by the Inhabitants De niewen Vaert, and by Strangers The Canal of Bruges. BRƲGES, Brugae, so call'd from the multitude of its Bridges, is seated on the Canal of Reye, which is here divided into many navigable Rivulets, run∣ning through divers quarters of the Town, and after∣ward re-uniting in the same Canal that passeth as far as Sluce. But because that Port is in the Hands of the Hollanders, about 40 years ago the Inhabitants made another, which flows to Ostend, and is so deep that Ships of two or three hundred Tuns are brought up to Bruges, which thereby maintains a very good Traffick, but small in comparison of what it hath been: For, before the Wars in Flanders, it was the greatest Mart in Europe; Merchants from all Parts resided here, and had Magazines for the Goods of every Country, which were here Barter'd and Sold; of these Merchants there were no less than 17 Com∣panies, all which remov'd to Antwerp about the year, 1500. by reason of the Wars and Disturbances here∣abouts, except the English, who, upon the loss of Calis, remov'd the Staple for Wool hither in 1558. where it remain'd for a long time to the great Ad∣vantage of the Town. Bruges is esteem'd the second City of Flanders; it is large, well-built, and reason∣ably populous: The Form of it is round, and the Cir∣cumference about 4 miles; there are six principal Streets, which  enter Gates, and center at the Market-place. The publick Buildings are sumptuous, the Houses neat, and the Streets stra and large. Their Trade consists in Spanish Wool, and the Manufactures of the Town, Fustians and other Stuffs, Cloth, Tapistry, &c. This City is an Episcopal See, under the Archbishop of Malines: The Cathedral is dedicated to S. Donat, besides which there are seven Parish, and two Collegiate Churches, three principal Abbies, and a great number of Reli∣gious Houses. The other publick Buildings are, the Castle, the Town-house, and the Water-house of very ingenious Structure. Bruges stands in the North part of Flanders, at the distance of 10 miles from the Sea, somewhat more from Ostend to the East, and as many from Sluce to the South-west, as also 20 from Gaunt to the North-east. Oostende is a small Town, and one of the five Ports of Flanders; it is situate about 10 miles West from Bruges, 9 from Newport to the North, and at the mouth of the small River Guele, in the midst of a moorish Ground, and divers Channels and Dikes: It was at first only a small Village, but by reason of its convenient situation, it was wall'd round and forti∣fied; by the Strength whereof and the advantagious Situation, the Hollanders, with the assistance of an English Garrison, sustain'd a Siege three Years and three Months, viz. from the 5th day of July, A. D. 1601, to the 22d of September, 1604. when it was taken by Ambrosio Spinola, and surrender'd to Albert Arch-Duke of Austria. The Spaniards lost 78124 Soldi∣ers of their Army, and in counting the Officers, together with those that were slain in the Town, the number slain in this Siege is suppos'd to amount to 15000 Men. Since when, it hath been possest by the Spaniard, and is at present exactly and regularly fortified, and one of the strongest Places in the Netherlands. The
Houses are well built, handsom and uniform, and the Streets clean and neat. The Haven is safe, large, well defended by Forts, and deep enough to receive Ships of great Burden. Newport, Novus Portus, heretofore call'd Sandhoft, that is to say, the Head of the Sands, hath in like manner a safe Harbour, altho' scarcely capable, even at the high Tides, of receiving Vessels of any great Burden: It is seated near the Mouth of the River Yperlee, which falling into the Sea, makes a long and secure Haven, at the distance of 15 miles from Dun∣kirk to the East, 9 from Oostend to the West, 18 from Ypres to the North, and 38 from Gaunt to the West. It is a place of good Strength, being well fortified with Walls and several Forts. The Buildings are neat, but low and of Timber: The Inhabitants are maintained by Fishing. From hence the English Pacquet Boat goes weekly to Dover. This Town being invested by the Hollanders in the year, 1600. under the Command of Maurice Prince of Orange, assisted by some English Troops commanded by Sir Francis Vere, the Arch-duke Albert of Austria, then Governour of the Netherlands, came to its Relief with a great Army; whence ensued a notable Battle, fought on the adjoining Sand-hills, wherein Prince Maurice obtained a very signal Victory, and the Arch∣duke was oblig'd to escape by Flight: In which Action the English bore the greatest part. map of Newport NEWPORT With the Haven and Country about it Oudenard, Aldenarda, is seated on the River Scheld, which divides it into two parts: It is a place of good Wealth by means of the Trade, especially in its own Manufactures, Tapestry and Fine Linnen. It is the Capital of a Castellany, which contains 33 Villages, and a place of good Strength, being fortified with a Castle call'd Pamele, join'd to the Town by a Bridge over the River, strong Walls and regular Outwarks but is commanded by a high Hill on the side towards Alost, which takes away from its otherwise advanta∣gious situation. In 1484. this Town was taken by Stratagem by Philip of Cleeves Lord of Ravestein; sur∣priz'd by Blommart in 1567. besieg'd and taken by the Prince of Parma in 1582. and by the French in 1658. but being restored to the Spaniards by the Py∣renean Treaty, they again took it in 1667. and had it yielded to them at the Peace of Aix la Chapelle: But they were oblig'd to restore it by the Treaty of Nimeguen, and hath ever since been in the Hands of the Spaniard. It stands 13 miles from Ghent to the South, 17 from Tournay to the North, and 14 from Courtray to the East. Alost or Aelst is seated on the River Dender near the Confines of Hainault, 13 miles from Ghent to the South-east, as many from Oudenard to the East, and makes almost an exact Triangle, with those 2 places. It is reckon'd the Capital of Imperial Flanders, and of a County formerly subject to its own Lords. It was taken by the Spaniards in 1576. and by the Duke of Anjou in 1582. after which, it came into the Hands of the English, who sold it to the Duke of Parma. In 1667. the French took it, and destroy'd its Fortifications before they restor'd it. The Territories of this Town are large, being be∣sides the County of Alost, the County of Waes and the four Offices of Hulse, Axtel, Bouchout and Aste∣mede, which comprehend above 150 Villages and four Cities.
map of Oudenaarde OUDENARDE Dendermond, seated on the River Dender, where it falls into the Schelde (whence the Town hath its name) 6 or 7 miles North from Alost, and 12 East from Ghent, is a good Town, and considerable for its Manufacture of Fustians and other Stuffs. It is forti∣fied, and was strong enough to resist the Assaults of the French in 1667. Ninove is seated in the Territory of Alost, at the distance of about 8 miles from it to the South, and 12 from Oudenard to the East. It is a small Town, and not considerable. Deynse is seated on the Lys, 8 miles from Ghent to the South-west, and 12 from Oudenard to the South; it is but a small Town, however the Capital of a small Territory in the Castellany of Courtray, and subject to the Spaniard: As is also Harlebee near Courtray, a small Town, and the Capital of another small Territory. Dixmude or Dixmuyde, is seated on the River Yperlee, 20 miles North-west from Courtray, and 10 South-east from Newport; it is a place of some Trade, and hath an Annual Fair in July. It is but small and not very well fortified. Our English Forces took possession of it in 1692. but the French took it soon after, and have since quitted it. DUTCH FLANDERS. SLƲYS or SLƲCE, Sluys, Clausula, another of the Ports of Flanders, is seated in the North part of this Province, about 9 or 10 miles beyond Bruges, 16 from Middleburg in Zeeland to the South, 18 from Ostend to the North-east, and 20 from Gaunt to the West: It belongs to the States of Holland, and is one of their strongest Frontiers. It hath the largest Ha∣ven of all the five, being capable of receiving 500 Ships of Burthen at a time, and was once a place of great Trade and Wealth. This Town having been first as Bruges and Antwerp were, the chief Mart of these Countries at present, it is but poor, and thinly inhabited, but extreamly well fortified, and hath a good Garrison. Oostburg and Ysendrick, small Towns near Sluys, are both guarded by small Forts. Philippine is a pretty strong Fort, seated about 15 miles East from Sluys, and 5 or 6 North from the Sas uan Gaunt.
Axel, the Capital of one of the four Offices, is seated about 6 miles East from Philippine, and 12 North from Ghent. It was surpriz'd by Prince Mau∣rice, assisted by our Sir Philip Sydney, in 1586. and is a place of good Strength. Hulst, the Capital of another of the Offices, stands about 6 miles East from Axel, and in the midst of the Country of Waes. It is a place of good Trade, and tolerably well fortified. These Towns, together with the Hont or Wester, Schelde, and an Arm of the Sea, make a secure Frontier to Zeeland. CHAP. III. The Dutchy of BRABANT, Brabantia. THIS Country lies in form of an Island encom∣passed round about with Rivers, having the Maes to the East and North, the Demer to the South, and the Scheld to the West, together with the Ocean on the side of Breda and Bergen op Zoom; that is to say, it is bounded on the North by Holland, and part of the Dutchy of Guelderland; on the East by part of the same Dutchy, and the Bishoprick of Liege; on the South by Hainault and the County of Namur; and on the West by Flanders and part of Zeeland. Its extent from South to North consists of about 70 miles; from West to East, in its broadest part, near as many. The Air is exceeding tempe∣rate, and the Soil no less fruitful; besides the Rivers Scheld, Maes, Dile, Demer, Aa, Ischer, Domel, the greater and lesser Nephre, and the Mert wherewith it is water'd; many Lakes, Marshes and Pools are found in its Territories; 26 walled and fortified Towns are also comprehended therein, not to men∣tion a great number of others of lesser consequence. In Brabant are compriz'd the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, the Capital City whereof is Antwerp, the Lordship of Malines, the Dutchy of Arschot, the Mar∣quisate of Bergues, the Earldom of Oostreten, the State of Maestricht, formerly of Liege, and 19 Baro∣nies. In fine, the whole Province may be thus di∣vided into four parts, viz. 1. Spanish Bra∣bant, properly so call'd, in which are in∣cluded these principal Ci∣ties and Towns. Bruxells, Cap. Louvain. Arschot. Nivelle. Tillemont. Gemblours. Lire. Diest. Vilvorde. Herentals. Judoigne. Sichem. Leuwe. Landen. Hannuye. Santvliet. Hochstraet. Turnhout. Arendonck. Scerpenhewel. Moll. Walheim. Waure. Genap. Vuernen. Assche. Cantecroy. Perwys. Sombreff. Tilly. Revez. Heverlee. Gnesbeck. Lew. Gesta Virompt. Lummen. 2. The Mar∣quisate of the Holy Empire. Antwerp. 3. The Lordship of Malines, in which are, Malines, Archbish. Heist. 4. Dutch Bra∣bant, in which are, Bois-le-Duc, Cap. Breda. Bergen-op Zoom Grave. Ravenstein. Maestricht. Helmont. S. Ʋtier. Eydenhoven. Lillo. Meghem. Steenbergen. Sevenbergen. Cuyck. Oirschot. Oosterwick. Eersel. Oudenbos. Rosendal. The County of Horne, Horne, Wiert. BRƲSSELLS or BRƲXELLS, is the Ca∣pital City not only of Brabant but of all the Spanish Netherlands; the place of Residence of the Dukes of Burgundy anciently, and now of the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands. It is the richest and most po∣pulous City of these Countries, and tho' not so large as Gaunt and Louvain, is however much more con∣siderable. It is situated in a most pleasant Country on the Banks of the small River Sinne, which is join'd to the Scheld by a Channel six leagues in length, cut with great Labour and the Expence of 500 thousand Crowns by Charles V. and his Son Philip, and finish'd in 1560. by which the Commerce of the Inhabitants with several places, especially Antwerp, was much advanc'd. This City in general is very well built, the Streets large, handsom and convenient, and secured by dou∣ble Walls of Brick, and a Ditch quite round the Town. The publick Buildings are, the Palace, which is seated upon a Hill in the upper Town and is a magnificent and stately Structure, and so large that several Crown'd Heads were at one time Lodged and Entertain'd in it, viz. Charles V. and his Son Philip King of Spain, Maximilian King of Bohemia and his Queen, the Queens of France and Hungary, and an African King. Adjoining to this Palace is a plea∣sant Park, well stor'd with Deers, also fine Gardens, Water-works, Grotto's and pleasant Walks. The Senate-house, a noble Building with a high Tower, whereon stands a large Statue of S. Michael in Brass, and the Church of S. Gudula, which hath 2 Towers of five hundred Steps high. Several other of the Buildings of Brussels deserve particular Descriptions, especially the Gallery which repeats an Eccho 15 times, the magnificent Palaces of divers Noble Men, the Royal Stable which holds 120 Horses, together with the Hospitals and Religious Houses; but for these the Reader must consult Blaeu, Guicciardin, &c. The private Citizens Houses are very fine, and are particularly pleasant by means of the Gardens they are almost all furnished with, which they are extra∣vagantly curious in Cultivating, Flowers being exces∣sively
priz'd here, The whole City is divided into the Upper and Lower, whereof the latter is the more pleasant, and adorn'd with artificial Fountains and Canals, with many fair Bridges. The Residence of the Court, and the pleasantness of the place, makes almost all the Gentry of these Countries dwell here, which very much encreases the Trade of the Town. Here also is kept the Court of Chancery for Brabant, the Assembly of the States of these Provinces, and the Treasury for War. Brussels is distant 64 miles from Newport and 28 from Ghent to the East, 55 from the River Maes to the West, 25 miles from Antwerp to the South, and as many from the River Sambre to the North. A little way from Brussels to the S. begins the pleasant Wood of Soignies, which extends very far. Niville, about 12 or 14 miles South from Brussels, is a good wall'd Town and formerly well fortified, and enjoys great Privileges: Great quantities of very fine Linnen Cloth is made here; the Church of S. Ger∣trude is a fair Building, and the Convent of 42 Nuns, all of noble Extraction, is considerable. Vilvoerden, seated upon the River Sinne about 6 miles North from Brussels, is a wall'd Town, and by its situation reasonably strong: Here is an old Castle, wherein formerly Prisoners of Quality were kept, and also the Records of greatest concern belonging to the Dutchy of Brabant. Senef, a small Village, 2 miles South of Nivelle and near the Borders of Hainault, not at all considerable, but for a memorable Battle fought there in the month of August, 1674. between the Confederate Forces commanded by the Prince of Orange, his present Majesty of Great Britain, and the French commanded by the Prince of Conde. LOƲVAIN or LOEVEN, Louvanium, is a City of a very large Extent, its Walls being 6 miles in compass, but include many Meadows, Corn-fields, Vine-yards and Gardens, besides the Houses of the Inhabitants. It is seated in a pleasant Country, up∣on the Banks of the River Dyle, at the distance of 15 miles from Brussels to the East, and 15 from Mechlin, forming a Triangle with those two Cities; as also 26 miles South from Antwerp, and 24 North from Na∣mur. The private Buildings here are but ordinary. The publick ones are, The Stadt-house or Guild-hall, which is a very handsom, stately Pile. The Castle, which is seated on a high Hill, in the midst of Vine∣yards and Gardens, and in a very wholsome Air, which together with the noble Prospect it affords, make it a most pleasant Seat, and therefore heretofore frequently made the place of Residence of the Dukes and their Children, and particularly the Emperor Charles V. was brought up here. These, as also the Churches, Religious Houses and Hospitals, are worth a Stranger's View. But that which Louvain is chiefly noted for, is the University, which was founded, as some say, in the year, 926. but not confirm'd till 1425. when John IV. Duke of Brabant endowed it. At present it is in a very flourishing State, and Golnitz says, exceeds Colen for number of Students and neat∣ness of Building: It hath 45 Colleges and a vast number of Students, over whom the Rector is chief Governor, and hath great Honour and Respect paid him, even by the highest Magistrate of the Town. In this City are 11 Market-houses, 4 publick Foun∣tains, 12 principal Streets, and above 100 small ones. The Walls are strongly built, being rais'd from the bottom of the Ditch, and upon 'em are several Towers, whereof one is very fine, and was built by the Citizens in 1364. who design'd six more, but by reason of the great Expence were deterr'd; where∣fore this hath got the name of Verloen Kost, or Lost Expence. The Weaving Trade was formerly very great in this City, insomuch, that about the year, 1530. there are said to have been 4000 Weaver's Shops, and in each 30 or 40 Men at Work. And of the exceeding populousness of this place, Lipsius gives us a notable Instance, viz. That when the Bell rung at 11 a Clock at Noon for the Workmen to leave off, the Women in great haste snatch'd their Child∣ren out of the Streets, lest they should be bore down by the great Crowd. But at present the Trade is not very considerable, some Manufactures of Linnens and Stuffs is the chief of it; which, together with the Entertaintment of the Students, afford the Inhabitants a good Support. Aerschot, seated on the River Demer, 10 miles North from Louvain, is a good large wall'd Town, dignified with the Title of a Dukedom by the Em∣peror Charles V. and hath a small Territory depend∣ing on it. Sichem stands about 4 miles from Aerschot to the East: It is a small wall'd Town, but not very strong; however, made a notable Resistance when attack'd by the Prince of Parma in the time of the Low Country War. Diest or Diestheim, is a large neat Town and of good Trade for several Manufactures, especially of Cloth, stands on the River Demer, 3 miles from Sichem to the East. It giveth the Title of a Barony to the Prince of Orange, and hath a large Territory its de∣pendant, It is also wall'd and reasonably strong. As it is also Halem, seated on the River Velpe, hardly 3 miles East from Diest, which tho' a small Town enjoys large Privileges granted to it at several times. Leue, stands about 6 miles South from Halem up∣on the River Geet; is a small Town, but being near the Borders of Liege it is well fortified: It enjoys great Privileges, and the Inhabitants make great profit by a sort of Beer they brew, which is esteem'd and much bought by the neighbouring Towns. Here is a great Priory of the Order of S. Austin, whose Prior is one of the Noblemen of the Province. Tienen or Tilmont, is seated on the River Geet, 6 miles West from Leue, and 8 East from Louvain, and was formerly a very large and well-traded City enjoying great Dignity and Privileges; but having suffer'd much by Wars, was much decay'd before the French destroy'd it in 1675. so that at present it is not very considerable. Landen, though small, is reckoned among the an∣cientest Towns of the Province; it is distant about 3 miles from Tienen to the East, and as many from Leue to the South. Near this Town a Battle was fought on the 29th of July, 1693. between the Con∣federate Forces under the Command of his Majesty of Great Britain, and the French commanded by the Mareshal de Luxemburgh. Hannuye, a small wall'd Town, the Capital of a Mayorie or small Jurisdiction, is seated in a pleasant and rich Country, 5 miles South from Landen. Judoigne or Geldenake, a wall'd Town, larger than Hannuye, and the Capital of a Mayorie also, stands upon the River Geet, in a very pleasant Country, 7 miles West from Hannuye, and about 14 South-east from Louvain, and hath an old Castle, wherein some of the Brabantine Princes have been nurs'd. Gemblours or Giblou, is a good wall'd Town, the Capital of a County, and seated on a steep Hill, en∣viron'd with Precipices, near the small River Lorn,
which 6 miles below falls into the Sambre, and is distant 20 miles from Hannuye to the East, and 15 from Nivelle to the West. Here is a famous Mona∣stery of Benedictines, whose Abbot is Lord of the Town. Near this place was fought a notable Battle, in the year 1578, between the King of Spain's Army and that of the States General, wherein the former obtain'd a very advantageous Victory. ANTWERP, Antwerpia, Andoverpum, in Flemish Antwerpen, in High-Dutch Antort, in French Anvers, is advantagiously situated on the Banks of the Schelde, at the distance of about 60 miles from the Ocean, 26 from Bruxels to the North, 26 from Gaunt to the East, and about 30 from Flackeren, one of the Islands of Zeeland to the South. Its Name (to omit the Fa∣bulous Stories of some Authors) is derived from Werve a Bank or Wharf, as seated aen het Werve, on the Bank of the River. It is the Capital of the Mar∣quisate of the Holy Empire, the Sea of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Mechlin, and a very large, rich and well fortified City, enclosing within its compass 200 Streets, 22 publick Places, a great number of fair Houses, and many stately Churches; among these the Cathedral dedicated to the Virgin Mary, is more especially remarkable. It is in length above 500 foot, and 240 in breadth; within this noble Fabrick are contain'd 66 Chappels, enrich'd with Marble Columns and Statues, all different and, adorn'd with most curious Paintings, as is also the Body of the Church, into which the Entry is through three large Doors of Marble gilt. The Steeple is made very beautiful by its curious Carvings: In it hang 6 or 8 very large Bells, the biggest whereof hath the name of Charles, from the Emperor; these, together with near 30 more, make the most melodious Chimes in the World. The Tower is reckon'd 425 foot high, besides the Cross at top, of 16 more. The Jesuits Church is extreamly magnificent, being paved with Marble, and the Roofs, (which are curi∣ously painted) supported with 56 Pillars of the same Stone, and the Walls all lined with rich Stone, so that nothing is to be seen in the in-side but Marble, Jasper, Porphery and Gold, or excellent Paintings, drawn by by the accurate Hand of the famous Rubens. In this City are also remarkable, the Stadthuyse or Senate-house, which having been destroy'd by Fire; was magnificently rebuilt about the year 1576. and hath 4 several rows of Apartments: The House of the Oosterlings, or Merchants of the Baltick Sea. The Exchange, which is a noble Building, 180 foot long and 140 broad, with covered Walks all round, the Roof whereof is supported by 43 Marble-pillars: And the Citadel or Castle, which is a very strong and regular Fortification, built by the Duke d' Alva, in 1567, It is a Pentagon, or hath five Bastions, together with Ravelins and other Out-works, and is reckon'd among the best Fortifications of Europe. The River Schelde being found a convenient Ha∣ven, was much resorted to by Merchant-ships from all Nations; and therefore upon the Disturbances and Wars in Flanders, the Trade of Bruges and other places thereabouts removed to Antwerp, which increa∣sed to that degree, that in its most flourishing State (about the years 1556, to 68) there were often seen to lye in the River 2500 Ships together, and 3 or 400 Vessels have frequently come up in one Tide; also 200 Waggons came in every day, laden with Passen∣gers from the neighbouring Countries, and near 1000 every Week with Germans, French and other Foreign∣ers; and 10000 Country Carts were continually, em∣ployed in carrying Goods to and from the City. By this means the number of the Houses and Inhabitants grew exceeding great: Guicciardin tells us, That Antwerp contain'd 13500 Houses, and the number of the People was reckon'd no less than 200000. But this Grandeur quickly declin'd, and is now extreamly diminish'd, for the Wars reaching this place also; Antwerp was Sack'd, and 700 of its Inhabitants kill'd by the mutinous Spaniards in the year 1576. and afterwards taken by the Prince of Parma, after a remarkable Siege of no less than 12 Months durance. These Calamities, together with the growing power of the Ʋnited Netherlands, who by the possession of Zeeland, were able to stop the Passage of the Schelde, and oblige the Ships to come into their Ports, did quite break the Trade of Antwerp; which removing to London and Amsterdam, hath left this City empty of Inhabitants; and though it be still as populous and rich as many others in the Netherlands, it is by no means comparable to what it has been. The Houses are all of Brick and uniform, and the Streets large and neat, many particular Houses very stately, and the publick Buildings magnificent. The City is built in form of a Bow on the east side of of the Schelde, which is near 400 yards broad, and 22 foot deep at the lowest Tide, so that Vessels of the greatest Bur∣den can come up and unlade upon the Keyes, which lay al-a-long before 8 of the 13 Gates. From the River there are 8 Canals that run through the Town, which are deep enough for Vessels of good Burden to come up; and over these Canals there are 74 Bridges. In fine, Antwerp is so beautiful a place, that being compar'd to Florence, it hath had the Preference by those that have seen both. About 10 miles from Antwerp to the North, and as many from Bergon op zoom, stands the strong Fortress of Sautvliet. MECHLIN, or Malines, Mechlinia seated on the River Dile, is the Metropolis of the Lordship of the same name, reckon'd one of the XVII Provinces, though of but small extent, being not above 3 Leagues from West to East, and one and an half from South to North. It is the Seat of an Archbishop, whom Pope Paul IV. establish'd there, A. D. 1559, and dig∣nified with the Title of a Primate of the Low Coun∣tries. The Grand Royal Council instituted by Charles Duke of Burgundy in 1473, is held here, as is also the Sovereign Court of all the Spanish Netherlands, establish'd in the year 1503. The City stands in the midst of the Province of Brabant, between Antwerp; Bruxels and Louvain, almost at the equal distance of 13 miles from each of them. It was formerly subject to the Dominion of its proper Lords until the year 1336, when it became Free. Afterward it fell into the possession of the House of Burgundy, and at length escheated to that of Austria, in 1477. The Inhabi∣tants were freed from paying Taxes, for the signal Services they performed to Charles the Hardy, Earl of Flanders, at the Siege of Nuis on the Rhine. It is a large City and very well built, and is even so neat as to have obtained the Epithete of Fair. It is also a strong Place, having besides the Fortifications, a natural Security by the flatness of the Country round about, which by that means is easily laid un∣der Water. The Trade of this Town is pretty con∣siderable, consisting in Linnen, Lace, Tanning, Ca∣sting great Guns, &c. The Tide flows up beyond the Town, by which means Boats come up from Antwerp, and the Commodities of this City are Ex∣ported. Weavers were formerly very numerous here, but upon a Riot by them committed, were deprived of their Privileges, by which the Trade decayed.
The Cathedral Church of S. Rumbald is a beautiful Building, and hath a very high Tower; besides which, here are 7 other Churches belonging to the 7 Parishes that the City is divided into. The Mo∣stery of the Franciscans is a curious and stately Building; and the Nunnery of S. Clara is very fine. A Magazine is kept here that was formerly exceed∣ing well furnish'd. Some particular Companies of the Traders of this City enjoy grat Privileges, especi∣ally the Tanners, who are very numerous. Other things of Mechlin may deserve a Traveller's Obser∣vation, whereof we cannot spare room for a parti∣cular Description. Lire, Liere, is a neat and pleasant Town, seated on the River Nethe, 7 or 8 miles from Mechlin to the North, and 10 from Antwerp to the South-east; it is a good large place and strongly fortified. The Col∣legiate Church of S. Gummanus, is a magnificent Build∣ing, and the Market-place is remarkable for its large∣ness and the curious Buildings that surround the Re∣ligious Houses, especially that of the Carthusians, are very fine. This Town is Inhabited by People of Quality, and rich Merchants retired from Business. Herentals stands 10 miles East from Lire on the River Nethe also; it is a wall'd Town, and the Ca∣pital of a Mayerie. Dutch BRABANT. BOIS-LE-DƲC, or BOLDƲC, Boscum Ducis, aut Sylva Ducis, call'd by the Inhabitants, S. Hertogenbusch, and by abbreviation, the Bosch, is the Capital City of the Dutch Brabant, and the Seat of its supreme Court of Justice, standing on the Banks of the River Dromele, which having there re∣ceiv'd into its Chanel the Waters of the Aade, and then those of the Diese falls into the Maes about 2 Leagues from thence, at the very Place where the Island of Bomel is form'd. It is distant only 5 miles from the River Maes, or Mose, as also from the Con∣fines of Holland and Guelderland, near 30 miles from Antwerp to the North-east, 54 miles from Maestricht to the North, about 40 from the River Rhine, and 20 from the Grave to the East. The Name thereof was taken from a certain Wood, where the Des of Bra∣bant were wont heretofore to divert themselves by Hunting; which being cut down by Duke Henry to facilitate the March of his Army against the Guelder∣landers, in the year 1172. this City was built in its place by Duke Geffry, and wall'd round by Henry his Son, in 1196. Pope Paul IV. erected an Episcopal See, and Franciscus Sonnius was the first Bishop; but when Bois-le-duc was taken by the Hollanders in 1629. these Prelates were oblig'd to remove their Station to Goldorp. It is a good large Town and well Fortified, having strong Walls, wherein are 7 large Bastions, a deep Ditch, with Ravelins, Counterscarp and other excellent Fortifications, and is seated upon a Hill amidst Marshes, which are easily laid under Water, and thereby the Town made Inaccessible, but by ar∣tificial Causeys, which too are all commanded by Forts, so that 'tis in a manner Impregnable. This being an important Frontire, the Hollanders take care always to keep a good Garison in it. It is a place of pretty good Trade for its Manufactures of Woollen and Linnen Cloath, Knives, and other Steel-ware, &c. The Church of S. John which was the Cathedral, is a sumptuous Building. The Market-place, seated at the meeting of 10 Streets, the chief of the Town, is surrounded with very good Buildings: several Ca∣nals run through the Town, which bring in Vessels of good Burthen; over these are 51 Stone-Bridges, besides others of Wood. In the defection of the Netherlanders, the Bosch took part with the Confede∣rates, and in 1579, embrac'd the Union of Ʋtrecht, but was afterwards Taken by the Prince of Parma, and remained under the Spaniard till 1629, when the Prince of Orange Re-took it, after a very difficult Siege. In 1672 it was invested by the French, but they marched off the next Month without Taking it. BREDA, Breda stands in a marshy Ground, which is often overflow'd on the side of the River Merch, in Dutch Brabant, at the distance of 18 miles from Ant∣werp to the North, 8 South from Gertruydenburg, 24 from Bois-le-duc to the West, and 22 from Bergen-op-zoom to the East. It is considerably large, populous and well-built, and is one of the strongest Places of the Low Countries. It is dignified with the Title of a Barony, comprehending 17 Villages under its Juris∣diction, which in the year 1212 belonged to Geffry Lord of Bergues, but descended to the House of Nassaw, in 1404, by the Marriage of Mary, the Daughter and Heir of Philip Lord of Leck and Baron of Breda, with Egbert Earl of Nassaw, in whose De∣scendants it hath ever since continued, except in the time that the Spaniards were Masters of it, viz. from 1581, when it was Surpriz'd by the help of the Ro∣man Catholicks in the Town, to the year 1590, when it was re-gain'd by a notable Stratagem, for a Boat seemingly laden with Turf for Fuel, but indeed with Armed Men, passed into the Castle undiscover'd, and forced the Garison to surrender. And again, from 1625, when the Marquess Spinola took it, after a long Siege and Blockade, till 1637, when Frederick Prince of Orange recover'd it. The Soil of the adjacent Country is very fertile in Corn, Pasture and Copies. An Academy for Education of Youth is hld here un∣der 4 Professors, establish'd by Prince Frederick above∣mention'd. The Prince of Orange hath a Palace and Castle in the Town, where a Treaty was held, and a Peace concluded between his late Majesty King Charles II. and the States General, A. D. 1667. Bergen-op-zoom, Berga ad Zomam, aut Bereizma; by Guicciardin said to have its name from the little River running by it, which he names Zoom, which Blaeu contradicts, and says, the River hath no such name, except from the Town; and that the Town is call'd Bergen from the Hill on which it stands, and opzoom, on the Soam, because seated on the edge of the Province. It is conveniently situated between Brabant, Flanders, Holland and Zealand, within half a League of a branch of the Ooster Schelde, 18 miles from Antwerp to the North, 20 from Breda to the West, and as many from Middleburg to the East. It had the Title of a Marquisate given by the Emperor Charles V. and was formerly a place of good Trade, 'til eclips'd by Antwerp: For the convenience of its Trade a Canal was cut through to the Hont, or Wester Schelde. The Country about it is very low and marshy, by which the Town is much secured, as well as by very strong and well contriv'd Fortifications, which the Dutch have built round it, with Forts upon the Channel, and other convenient places. The Build∣ings are fair, the Church of S. Lambert and the Mar∣quess's Palace especially. Here are 3 spacious Mar∣ket-places and a large Hospital for the Sick, which was formerly a Nunnery. This Town was subject to its own Lords, from 1212, till 1567, when it was delivered into the hands of the Hollanders; from whom the Prince of Parma endeavour'd to recover it in 1588. But they defended themselves so couragiously
that he was forced to raise the Siege. Again, in 1622 Spinola Besieg'd it, but had no better Fortune; for after 70 or 80 days furiously attacking it, he was glad to leave it, upon the approach of the Dutch Forces under Prince Maurice. Grave, Gravia, termed Graeff by the Inhabitants, is situated on the South-side of the Maes, the Waters whereof fill the large Trenches that environ the Bul∣warks, in a Plain on the Frontiers of Guelderland, at the distance of 18 miles from Bolduc to the East, 7 from Nimeguen to the South, and about 50 from Mae∣stricht to the North. It is a small Town, but very neat and pleasant, and esteem'd the strongest and easi∣est to be defended of any in the Netherlands. It is the Capital of the small Earldom of Cuyck which belongs to the Prince of Orange, as doth the Town it self. The Country about it is Meadow, and affords Pasture to a good Body of Horse that are always kept here: The Town is exceeding well fortified with Ravelins, Counterscarp, Palisado, and a very strong Horn-work, and besides, secured by the River on one side, and a Morass on another. It was taken in 1586 by the Prince of Parma, and recover'd in 1602 by Prince Maurice. In 1672 the French took it, and upon their being forced to quit Holland, had made this their grand Magazine, and therefore defended it for a long time, when it was Besieg'd by the Prince of Orange, his present Majesty, to whom, however, they were obliged to Surrender it, with all the Artillery and Ammunition, on the 28th of September, 1674. These four Towns make a very strong Frontier on this side to the Dominions of the States General. Ravestein, a neat but not large Town, is seated on the River Maes, about 5 or 6 miles below the Grave, and 16 North-east from the Bosch; it is de∣fended by a strong Castle, and hath a Jurisdiction of 4 miles broad, and extended about 12 miles South from the Maes, towards Helmont, the Capital of the Country call'd Peel∣land: It is a good walled Town, seated on the little River Aa, that falls into the Maes a little beyond the Bosch, and is distant 17 miles from the Grave to the South. Eindhoven, a good wall'd Town also, and the Ca∣pital of the Country call'd Kempen Land, stands upon the River Dommel, 10 miles West from Helmont, and 14 South from the Bosch. Maestricht, tho' seated in the middle almost of the Bishoprick of Liege, is reckon'd part of this Province of Brabant, because formerly that Duke had one part, as the Bishop of Liege had the other part of the Jurisdiction of it; but since 1633. it hath be∣longed to the States General. It stands on the River Maes, at a place where was always a Ferry or Passage, which the word Trecht in Dutch signifies; it is call'd in Latin, Trajectum ad Mosam & Trajectus inferior, to distinguish it from Ʋtrecht. It stands on the West∣side of the River, but hath a fair Suburb nam'd the Wick, on the other side, which is join'd to the City by a beautiful Stone-bridge of 9 Arches. The old Buildings are but ordinary, but those built since the Hollanders have had the Town, are of Brick and very fair, particularly the Stadt-house; the Streets are large, and Houses cover'd with Slate. Here are three Dutch Churches, and one for the English and French; that of S. Servatius was formerly a Collegiate, and had the honour to have the Duke of Brabant always one of its Canons: It was also a Cathedral, built in honour of that Saint, who planted the Christian Faith here, was the first Bishop, and died A. C. 395. from whom a Succession of 20 Bishops ruled in this City; but upon the Martyrdom of S. Lambert, the See was translated to Liege in the year 713. The City is large, being reckon'd 4 English miles in cir∣cuit, but not very populous. It is very strongly for∣tified, having besides a good Wall and Trench, ma∣ny Out-works of modern Form, well contriv'd to oppose the Advantages Besiegers may have by the nature of the Earth, convenient for Mines and Tren∣ches, and by a Hill a little distant, that would com∣mand the Town if the Bastion to the South-east were not built very high. At the top of that Hill stands an old Castle, and in the Bowels of it is a Quarry of Stone, of which vast quantities are transported to other Countries. This City descended with Brabant to the King of Spain, but in the War-time taking part with the States; it was Besieged by the Prince of Parma in 1579. and though they made a very vigorous defence, were forced to submit, and con∣tinued under the Spaniard till 1633. when the Prince of Orange besiged and took it; and in the succeeding Peace of Munster, it was yielded to the Hollanders. In 1672, the French besieged and took it: They sat down before it on the 11th of June, the King of France himself, with the Dukes of Orleans and Mon∣mouth, commanding the large Army that attacked it with great Fury, till the end of that Month; at which time the Burghers mutinying, and the Garison being much weakned, the Governor was forced to Capitu∣late, and on the 2d. of July the Town was surren∣dred, and continued under the French till by the Peace of Nimeguen it was restored to the States General, who still possess it. On the South-east of Dutch Brabant lyes the Coun∣ty of Horn, which is a Territory of about 20 miles extent, bounded on the East by the River Maes, on the North-west by Peel-land in Brabant, and on the South-west by the Bishoprick of Liege: It was for∣merly subject to its own Earls of the Family of Mont∣morency, of whom Philip and Florent were eminent for their Zeal, in opposing the Tyranny of the Duke d' Alva, and assisting the Prince of Orange in asserting the Liberty of their Country; but had both the misfortune to lose their Lives, by the practices of d'Alva. Horn, that gives Name to the County, is a small Town with a Castle, seated near the Maes, 24 miles South-east from Helmont, 25 North from Maestricht, and 4 or 5 West from Ruremond. Weert, the Chief Town, stands 12 miles West from Horn, 16 South from Helmont, and 25 North from Maestricht.
map of Mastricht MASTRICK CHAP. IV. The County or Earldom of HAINAULT, Hannonia. THis Province derives its name from the River Haine, which passeth through the midst of it, called also Haingow and Hengow by the Germans, and is bounded on the North by Brabant, and part of Flanders, on the South by Cambresis, Picardy and Champagne, on the East by part of Brabant and the County of Namur, and on the West by the River Schelde, that separaets it from Artois and part of Flan∣ders. It is extended from North to South about 50 miles, and about the same from East to West. The Air is exceeding temperate and healthful, and the Soil fertile and water'd with the Scheld, Sambre, Haine, Dender, and divers other Rivers. Here are also found many Lakes and Ponds; Woods, some Mines of Iron and Lead, and Quarries of Marble and Touchstone. Within this Province are comprised 24 Wall'd Towns, 950 Burroughs or Villages, and several Ca∣stles; also 3 Principalities, 10 Earldoms, 12 Peerages, 22 Baronies, and 26 Abbies, not to mention divers hereditary Offices appertaining to that Prince's Court, viz. Those of a Marshal, Seneschal, grand Hunter, Chamberlain, &c. The French at present possess the greater part of Hainault, and the rest remains under the Dominion of the Spaniards, as it is represented in the ensuing Table. Apper∣taining to the French. Valenciennes, Bouchain, Conde, Bavay, Maubeuge, Mons, Capit. le Quesnoy, Avesnes, Landrecy, Philipville, Marienburg. To the Spani∣ards. Aeth, Brain le Comte, S. Ghillain, Enguien, Binche, Halle, Lessines, Roeles, Soigny, Beaumont, &c. MONS, Montel, and Montes Hannoniae, the Capital City of Hainault, call'd Berghen in Flemish, is seated on an Hill of easie Ascent, near the Banks of the River Trull, and a little below falls into that of the Haine, almost in the midst between Namur to the East, and Doway to the West, at the distance of 35 miles from both, as also 16 from Valenciennes to the North-east, 26 from Bruxels to the South-west, and 20 from Tournay to the South-east. It is a large City and well fortified, with a Stone-Wall, firm Ram∣parts, 3 large Trenches and an old Castle. The
map MONS Buildings are beautiful, the Streets large, and the Market-place spacious: The publick Edifices are also very magnificent, and among others the Palace wherein is convened the general Council of the Pro∣vince, and Religions Houses, of which the College of Canonesses, Founded by S. Gualtrude Princess of Lorrain, is more especially remarkable; the whole Society consists only of Ladies of great Quality and high Birth, who are obliged to assist at Mass in the Morning, cloathed in the Habit of Nuns, but have liberty to wear all manner of sumptuous Apparel in the Afternoon, and even to spend the rest of the day in Dancing, Singing, and other Exercises of a free Conversation: And are also permitted to abandon the Abby, or to marry whensoever they please. The Earls of Hainault had formerly the Title of Earls of Mons, and with the possession of the County receiv'd the Investiture of the Dignity of an Abbot, and other Perquisites holden in Fee of the Church, from the hands of the Lady Abbess of the said College. Mons is a place of good Trade for divers Commodi∣ties, especially Woollen Stuffs, whereof they make great quantities. It was surpriz'd in 1572, by Count Lewis of Nassaw by a Stratagem, for 12 Soldiers in Habit of Merchants, obtaining leave to have the Gates opened for them earlier than ordinary, kill'd the Porter, and let in the Count with the Soldier h brought for that purpose, who took possession of the Town without Opposition: But the same year the Duke d' Alva Besieg'd and recover'd it; from which time it quietly remain'd under the Spaniard, till 167. that the French invested and had much distressed it; when the Prince of Orange his present Majesty, came to its Relief, and gain'd a signal Victory over the D. of Luxemburg, upon which the Peace was immedi∣ately concluded. In this present War, viz. the 8th. of April 1691, the French took this Town, and are still Masters of it. Valenciennes, Valenciane, aut Valencenae, is situated on the Confines of the Country of Ostrevant, on the River Scheld, which there receives the Rouel that di∣vides it into two parts, and by several Channels passes through most of its Streets; distant 15 miles from Tournay to the South, and lying also in the middle between Mons to the South-west, and Cambray to the North-east. It was Founded (as is generally. believ'd) by the Roman Emperor Valentinian, and is at present a very large, fair and rich Town, strongly Fortified. The Church of our Lady is an
ancient but stately Building, having Pillars of Mar∣ble and Porphyry to support its Arches of Stone. The Church of S. Peter is very curiously Carved, as is also the Front of the Town-house adjoining. The Hospital for the maintaining and educating of poor Orphans, is well endow'd. Over the Scheld are built 10 Bridges, on which stand many fair and large Houses. The Trade of the Town consists in Linnen-Cloth, Mohairs and Tabbies, to which is now added the Staple for French Wines. It was Besieged by the French King in the year, 1677. and taken by Storm; but upon the Inhabitants agreeing to pay 400 thousand Crowns for the building of a Citadel, it escaped being Sacked. It was granted to the French at the Treaty of Nimeguen, and hath been ever since possessed by them. Bouchain, a small but strong Town, seated on the River Scheld, 10 miles above Valenciennes, and near as many from Cambray to the North: It is of service for the Communication of those two Places in time of War, and therefore Besieg'd by the French in 1676. to whom it was surrender'd after one Assault, tho' an Army was marching to its Relief. Quesnoy, tho' a small Town, hath a good Trade for its Manufacture of Linnens and Stuffs, and is rea∣sonably well fortified. It stands about 15 miles from Bouchain to the East. Landrecy is a very strong Town, seated on the Sambre, near the Borders of Cambray, and not above 6 miles from the Frontiers of Picardy, about 10 from Quesnoy, and 20 from Valenciennes to the North-west. It was formerly subject to the Duke of Areschot, under whom it held out against a long and furious Siege by the Emperor Charles V. in 1543. and the year following was surrender'd to him, together with Avesnes, a small Town 8 or 9 miles East from Landrecy. All these three were taken by the French, and granted to them by the Pyrenean Peace in 1659. Mabeuge stands upon the Sambre, in the mid-way between Avesnes and Mons, about 12 miles from each, and is a place of good Trade for Woollen Cloth. Bavay, call'd Bavay Wallon, to distinguish it from Bavais in Picardy, stands 8 miles West from Mabeuge, and 6 North-east from Quesnoy. It is thought by some to have been formerly a great City, nam'd Belgium, from whence the Country had its Name, but is at present but a small Place. These were both granted to the French by the Nimeguen Treaty. Conde, or Condet, a small Town with a Castle, stands upon the Schelde, about 15 miles North-west from Bavay. Marienburg, founded by Mary of Austria Queen of Hungary, and Governess of the Low Countries, in 1542. and fortified with a very strong Wall and good Out-works, stands on the Borders of the Bishoprick of Liege, about 6 miles from the River Maes to the West, 10 from the Frontiers of Picardy to the North, and 30 from Landrecies to the East. Philipville stands about 4 miles North from Mari∣enburg, and is reckon'd part of the Province of Hainault. It was built soon after Marienburg, and nam'd from Philip II. King of Spain, who fortified it with five Royal Bastions, and other strong Works, these two making a Frontier against France on that side; but they have been both taken by that King, and granted to him by the Pyrenean Treaty. Spanish HAINAULT. AETH, a small Town seated on the River Den∣der, 14 miles North from Mons, as many South from Oudenard, and about 20 South-west from Brussels, is a place of good Trade for Linnen, and by reason of its situation near the Borders of these three Pro∣vinces of Hainault, Flanders and Brabant, hath been at several times well Fortified; especially by the French, after they had taken it in 1667; for being granted to them by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, Vauban was set to work, and great Cost was bestow'd in strengthning this most advanc'd Frontier; but they were oblig'd to restore it at the Peace of Nimeguen, and it still remains subject to the King of Spain. Lessen, or Lessines, is a small Wall'd Town seated also on the Dendre, about 4 miles North from Aeth. Enghien, or Anguien, stands about 4 miles West from Aeth, and hath had the Title of a Dutchy. Halle is seated on the very Borders of this Province, within 8 miles of Brussels, and near 20 from Mons to the North. It stands in a very pleasant Country, and is water'd by the River Sienne. It is not large nor very well built, and is chiefly noted for the famous Chappel of the Virgin Mary, whose Statue in it is cover'd with Gold, and is much resorted to by multitudes of Votaries, who annually make rich Offerings to it. It is Wall'd, but not being strong enough to endure a Siege, was quitted to the French in April, 1690. but since they left it, it hath been made stronger, and well Garison'd for the security of Brussels. Braine le Comte, on the Frontiers of Brabant, about 8 miles South from Halle. Soigny about 3 or 4 miles South-west from it; and Roeles, or Reux, 4 miles from Soigny to the South, are all three Wall'd Towns. On the Borders of Hainault, and Frontiers of Bra∣bant, about 3 miles North-east from Soigny, as many South-west from Halle, and about the like distance from Enghien to the East, stands the Village of Steen∣kirk, upon the Rivulet Senneque; a small place and not at all considerable, but for a Battle fought near it on the 24th of July, 1692. between the Confede∣rates and the French. Binche, stands upon a little Branch of the Haine, 7 or 8 miles South-east from Mons; it was formerly a populous Place, and made a Seat of Pleasure by Mary Queen of Hungary, when she was Governess of these Countries, who had a fine Palace here; but it hath suffer'd much by the Wars, particularly in 1544. it was burnt by the French: And since that the French took it; but finding they must part with it, demolish'd the Fortifications before they surrender'd it, according to the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, in 1668. S. Ghislain stands about 8 miles West from Mons, it is also a wall'd Town, but not remarkably strong. As is also Beaumont, which stands 12 miles South from Binche, and 10 East from Mabeuge. It is a pleasant Town seated upon a Hill, as its name implies, and was anciently an Earldom belonging to the second Son of the Earl of Hainault. It was taken by the French, and granted to them by the Truce in 1684. as was also Chimay 14 miles South from it.
map AETH CHAP. V. The Country of CAMBRESIS, Cameracersis Ager. THIS small Country is bounded on the North and East by the Province of Hainault, on the West by that of Artois, and on the South by Picardy, including about 18 miles from North to South, and 25 from East to West, and is extreamly fertil. Here was concluded a Treaty of Peace at Chateau-Cambre∣sis, in the year 1559. between Philip II. King of Spain, and Henry II. King of France, which was very disadvantagious to the later, 198 considerable places being resign'd up for S. Quentin, Ham and Chatelet; however the present French King Lewis XIV. hath found means to get Possession of the whole Country as well as of Cambray its Capital City, which were granted to him by the Treaty of Nimeguen. The chief Towns are these, viz. Cambray, Arch-bish. and Cap. Chateau Cambresis. Creecoeur. CAMBRAY, Cameracum is seated on the Ri∣ver Scheld, on the Confi o Artois, t the distance of 15 miles from Doway to the South, 20 rom Arras to the East, as many from Perone to the North, 16 from Valenciennes, and 60 from Brussels to the South. It was heretofore an Episcopal See subject to the Arch∣bishop of Rheims, but at length erected into a Me∣tropolitan by Pope Paul IV. A. D. 1559. It was also some time an Imperial and Free City under the pro∣tection of the Count of Alost; but being afterward seiz'd by the Emperor Charles V. and fortified with two Citadels, it fell into the hands of the Spaniard, and was united to the Earldom of Hainault. At length it was storm'd by the Forces of the present French King, on the 18th day of April, 1667. and surrender'd to him be the Articles of the Treaty of Nimeguen, in the year ensuing.
CHAP. VI. The Dutchy of LUXEMBURG, Luxemburgensis Ducatus. THIS Province is seated in the Lower Germany, and is bounded on the North by part of the Bishoprick of Liege and the Dutchy of Limburg, on the South by Loraine, on the East by the River Mo∣selle and the Archbishoprick of Triers, and on the West by the River Maese, that parts it from Cham∣paigne and Namur. Its utmost extent from South to North consists of about 70 miles, and from East to West, 60 miles. It is by Geographers divided into two Parts, whereof that to the North call'd Famenne, is a fertil Soil; yielding store of Corn and some Wine; the other towards France and the Maes, call'd Ardu∣enne, is Wooddy and less Fruitful, but abounds with Venison and Game of all sorts. Here are also some Mountains, in which are found Mines of Iron. The chief Rivers are the Moselle, Else, Semay, and the Ourte. In the extent of this Dutchy are contain'd 20 large Wall'd Towns, and about 1200 Villages. The ancient Earls and Dukes of Luxemburg, were Princes of great Honour and Interest; of these Henry II. obtained the Imperial Dignity, in 1308. John his Son enjoy'd the Crown of Bohemia; Charles the Son of John and Wenceslaus the Son of Charles, were succes∣sively Emperors: And finally Sigismund was Emperor, King of Hungary and Bohemia, as well as Duke of Luxemburg, about the year 1400. Elizabeth the Niece and Successor of Sigismund, having no Issue, sold this Dutchy to Philip the Good, Duke of Bur∣gundy, and so it came to the King of Spain, from whom all the Southern part of it hath been wrested by the King of France. This Province is observed to have more Gentry and Nobility than any of the rest of these Countries. The chief Cities and Towns in it are, Belonging to France. Luxemburg, Cap. Thionville. Montmedy. Damvillers. Yvoix. La Ferte. Astenay. Mrville. Rode Macheren. Konings Macheren. Sirick. Masieres. Belonging to Spain. Durby. La Roche en Ardenne. S. Vit. Viande. Eichternach. Bastoigne. Neufchatel. Virton. LƲXEMBƲRG, Luciburgum, aut Luxembur∣gum, is seated partly on a Rocky Hill, which is al∣most surrounded by the little River Alsitz, or Else, and partly on a Plain at the bottom of the Hill, at the distance of 45 miles from the River Maes to the East, 12 from the Moselle to the West, 70 South-east from Namur, 62 South from Liege, 22 West from Triers, and about 16 or 17 from the Frontiers of Lorrain. It is the old Town that stands in the Plain, which being commanded by the Hill, caused the building the new Town there, in which the Buildings are reasonably fair, and many of the Houses of Stone. It is a very strong Place; for on one side the Hill its very steep and surrounded by the River, which is a good Defence; and on the other it is Fortified with strong Bastions, Counter-guards, Half-moons, Rave∣lins and Ditches, besides two cover'd Ways and several Redoubts. Notwithstanding which, the French took it the 4th of June, 1684. after a Siege of 26 days, and had it granted to them together with its Dependences, in the succeeding Truce concluded the same Year. map of Luxembourg LUXEMBURGH Theonville or Diedenhoven, Theonvilla, aut Theonis∣villa, stands on the Western Bank of the River Moselle, 15 miles South from Luxemburg; it is a good Town, and of old well fortified by the Empe∣ror Charles the Great; but the French having taken it in 1558. when it was restored to the Spaniards, they added to its Fortifications six Bulwarks, four large Horn-works and other Strengths: However, the French found means to take it again, and had it granted to them by the Pyrenean Treaty; as was also
Montmedy, a good strong fortified Town, seated on a Hill near the River Cher, 34 miles from Theon∣ville to the West, and about 10 from the River Maes to the East. Damvillers, which stands 12 miles South from Montmedy, and though a Town of good Strength, was several times Taken by the French, viz. in 1542, 1552 and 1637. and granted to them by the Pyre∣nean Treaty; but afterwards by that of Aix la Cha∣pelle, it was dismantled. Arlon, is seated on the River Semoy, 13 miles from Luxemburg to the East. It was a neat and handsome Town, but hath suffer'd much in the Wars. Neufchastel, or the New Castle, standing about 14 miles from Arlon to the E. was formerly a place of great Strength and Beauty, but now not so considerable. Bastoigne, stands 20 miles North from Arlon, and was heretofore a vast Market for Corn and Cattle. Echternach stands near the Frontiers of Treves, and 25 miles East from Arlon. It is a small Town and not very considerable. Vianden is seated upon the small River Our, 14 miles from Echternach to the North-west. It is an an∣cient Earldom belonging to the Illustrious Family of Orange. S. Vit, 18 miles North from Vianden, is a neat handsome Town, giving Title to an Earldom, and enjoying a Jurisdiction over several Villages. Roche en Ardenne, is seated on the River Ourt, 26 miles from S. Vit to the West, and 12 from Bastoigne to the North. It is a pretty little Town with the Title of an Earldom also, and hath a Territory of several miles extent. Durbuy is another small Town, seated on the same River Ourt, 10 miles North from Roche, and like∣wise hath the Title of an Earldom. CHAP. VII. The Earldom of NAMUR, Namurensis Comitatus. THIS County is bounded on the North by Bra∣bant, on the West by Hainault, on the South by part of Hainault and of Luxemburg, and on the East by part of Luxemburg and the Bishoprick of Liege. It is extended from West to East for the space of about 30 miles, and from North to South about 24 miles. There are found in it divers Mines of Iron and Lead, also many Quarries of Marble, and a sort map of Namur NAMUR
of Stone call'd House, that serves for Fuel. In this Province are reckon'd up 6 or 7 considerable Towns, together with 180 Burghs or Villages, and some fair Abbies, viz. Belonging to the French. Namur, Bish. Cap. Charlemont. Bouvines. Walcourt. Florennes. Charleroy. Belonging to the Spaniards. Tille-chateau. Bonef, Ab. Mal-Roy. NAMƲR, Namurcum, the Capital City of the Province of the same name, is seated at the confluence of the Sambre and the Maes, between 2 small Hills, at the distance of 24 miles from Louvain to the South, 30 from Bruxels to the South-east, 30 above Liege to the West, 18 from Huy, and 35 from Mons to the East. Pope Paul IV. establish'd therein an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Cambray, and the Church of S. Albin, was erected into a Cathedral in the year 1569. The Town is beautified with many other stately Churches, Monasteries and publick Edifices built of Stone. The greatest part of the City lies on the North side the Sambre, and therein stands the Town-house, the Market-place and several Churches, but the chief Parochial Church stands on the other side, as doth the Castle: A fair Stone Bridge over the Sambre joins these 2 parts, and from the latter is a Bridge also of Stone over the Maes. The Fortifications are very strong, having besides the Wall and Ditches, Ravelins and Counterscarps, well built and contriv'd accord∣ing to the modern manner; notwithstanding which the French took it on the 3d of July, 1692. Bouvines or Bovignes, Bovinae, Boviniacum aut Bo∣vinium, is situated on the West-side of the Maes be∣low Dinant, and 10 miles beyond Namur to the South. This little Town was encompass'd with Walls in the year 1173. by the Order of Henry, sir∣nam'd the Blind, Earl of Namur, being a Pass between Luxemburg and Namur; it suffer'd much by the Wars at several times, and was finally taken by the French in 1676. without making the least Resistance. Charlemont, Carolomontium, stands on the top of an high Hill, the foot whereof is water'd by the River Maes, being distant 18 miles from Namur to the South. It is a strong place, and was fortified with divers re∣gular Works, A. D. 1555. by the Emperor Charles V. to whom it was granted by a certain Bishop of Liege, and united to the Earldom of Namur. Walcourt or Valencourt, standing 20 miles South-west from Namur, is a small Town, and not considerable, except for the Battle fought near it in the year, 1689, between the French and Confederate Armies. Charleroy, Carolo-Regium, a strong Fortress, is seated on an Hill near the Sambre on the Frontiers of Hai∣nault, almost in the midst between Namur and Mons, at the distance of 14 miles from the first, and 20 from the latter; as also 24 from Bruxels to the South. The Town was built A. D. 1666. near a small Vil∣lage named Charnoy, by the Marquiss of Castel-Rodrigo map of Charleroi CHARLEROY
on purpose to hinder the Inrodes of the French Gar∣risons betwixt the Sambre and the Maes, and was call'd Charleroy in honour of Charles II. the present King of Spain: However, it was taken by them in the Year ensuing, and resign'd to their King Lewis XIV. by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, on the 2d day of May, 1688. after which they employ'd great Diligence and Cost in repairing the Fortifications and adding new ones, whereby they made it exceeding strong, but were however oblig'd to restore it to the King of Spain at the Conclusion of the Peace of Nimeguen; but now again since this War they besieg'd it with a very numerous Army, and after 27 days Resistance the Garrison was fain to surrender on the 1st of October; 1693. CHAP. VIII. The Dutchy of LIMBURG, Limburgensis Ducatus. THIS Dutchy hath that of Juliers for its Bounds on the North and East, the Bishoprick of Liege on the West, and a small part of Luxemburg on the South. It is extended from South to North for the space of 30 miles, and about 25 from West to East. The Country brings forth good store of Wheat and Barly, and other Corn, also very good Pasture and several Medicinal Herbs. Here are also many Mines of Iron and Lead, and Pits of Coal. The chief Towns are these, viz. Limburg, Cap. Dalem, appertaining to the Hollanders. Rolduc. Franquemont or Valkenberg. LIMBƲRG, Limburgum, is advantagiously situated on the Frontiers of the Bishoprick of Liege, near the Banks of the River Wesdo, being distant 20 miles from Liege to the East, 20 from Maestricht, about 45 from the River Rhine to the West, and as many from the Mselle to the North. It is but a sll Town, having only one Street, and that but ordinarly built; but is considerable on account of its situan on the edge of a high Rock, which to∣gether with the Wall, Trench and other Fortifications made it exceeding strong. It was taken by the Hol∣landers in the year 1633. but the Spaniards recover'd it within a little while after; and in 1675. was be∣sieged by the French, whom the Garrison very coura∣giously resisted, but were forced however to yield and surrender to them, who dismantled it before they re∣stored it at the Treaty of Nimeguen. Dalem, Dalemum, is a small Town with a Castle, water'd by a Rivulet that dischargeth it self into the Maes, and is distant 10 miles from Liege to the North-east, and 15 from Limburg to the North-west. I formerly enjoy'd the Title of an Earldom under its proper Counts or Earls, and had very large Terri∣tories within its Jurisdiction. But Henry H. Duke of Brabant surpriz d this Town, and united it to his Dominions. Afterward it depended on the Dutchy of Limburg, and at present is possess'd by the Hl∣landers, altho' the French took it from them in the year 1672. and ruin'd the Castle, together with the other Fortifications, before they could be made to abandon the place. Rluc or 's Hertegon raidt, is seated on the Borders of the Dutchy of Juliers, about 12 miles East from Valkenberg. It is a neat, little Town, and hath an old Castle for its defence. Valkenberg, call'd by the French Fauquemont, is a large and neat Town belonging to the Dutch, seated on the River Geuse at the distance of 10 mils from Dalem to the North, as many from Mastricht to the East; it was well fort fid, and hd a rog Cale before the French took it in 1672. w dd to its Works and made it much stronger: however, the Dutch  took it soon after, and have sinc dmolisd the Fortifications. CHAP. IX. The Bishoprick of LIEGE, Leodiensis Ditio. THO' the Diocess of Liege be part of the Empire, and of the Circle of Westphalia; yet because of its sitaion in the midst of some of those Provinces, tha are always reckon'd part of the Netherlands, some Geographers have placd its Description here, whose Example we shall follow. This Country is bounded on the North by Bra∣bant, on the Wet by part of Brabant and the County of Namur, on the South by the Dutchy of Luxemburg, and on he East by those of Limburg and Juliers. Its Exten rom South to North consists of about 70 miles, from West to East 25 miles, but in some parts it trehs out in a narrow Tract near 60 miles. The Air is temperate and healthful, and the Soil fer∣til, bringing forth abundance of Grains, Fruits, Cattel and Venison. It also affords divers Mines of Iron and Lead, together ith Quarries of M but more especially g eat quantities of Brimon ad Vitriol. The Bishop is Lord of all thse T, and a Prince of the Empre, bearing also the  of Duke of Bouillon, Marquess of ranchimnt nd Earl of Loots and Hasbain, which are particular Lord∣ships in the Country of Liege. In the Bishopck of Liege are compriz'd 53 Baronies, a great nu of Abbies, 24 walled Towns, and above 15  Vlgs. The most considerable places are these, VIZ. Liege, Bish. Cap. Dinant. Bouillon. Spa. Franchiment, Benkloem. S. Truen. Bilsen. Hasselt. Maesyck, &c.
LIEGE, Leodium aut Leodicum, call'd Luyck by the Inhabitants, and Luttyck by the Germans, is seated on the West-side of the Maes in a pleasant Valley water'd with the Rivers Vese, Ʋte and Ambluar, that discharge themselves into the Maes, a little before it enters into the Town, at the distance of 48 miles East from Bruges, 65 from Colen to the West, and 12 from Maestricht to the South. It is an Imperial and Free City under the Protection of its proper Bi∣shop, whose See was first establish'd at Tongres, then translated to Maestricht, and at last remov'd hither about the year 713. by S. Hubert the Successor of S. Lambert Martyr, before which it was a small Vil∣lage only, but afterwards encreased daily, and in 1007. Bishop Notger caused it to be Wall'd, and at present it is a large and beautiful City; the Streets are spacious and well built, the River Maes runs through the Town in two Arms, and many smaller Streams, which, together with the Legie and the three Rivulets of Ʋte, Vese and Ambluar (that take their Rise in the Forest of Ardenne and fall into the Maes here) Water almost every Street, and have many stately Bridges over them. The publick Buildings are very magni∣ficent, the chief whereof are the Bishop's Palace and 8 Collegiate Churches, together with a great number of Abbies and other Religious Houses, besides the Cathedral Church dedicated to S. Lambert whch is fa∣mous for its Chapter, as being one of the most re∣nowned in Christendom, consisting of Princes, Cardinals and Persons of the highest Quality; neither is any one admitted therein, unless he be descended of a noble Family, or hath merited this favour on the Account of his profound Learning. In S. William's Convent without the Gate, lies buried the famous English Traveller Sir John Mandevil. Here is an Uni∣versity, formerly exceeding famous, for the Persons of great Quality Studens in it. Many King's Sons, besides Dukes and Lords, were frequently found here; nay, in 1131. there were no less than 23 Kings Sons resident in this University at one time, as Mei∣bomius relates. This City is fortified with a Citadel, Bulwarks and several Outworks, as may be seen by this Draught of them, and is judged to be about four miles in compass. Besides the Churches above-men∣tion'd, there are many others even to the number of an hundred in all; which, as also the Convents, are all so stately and well built, that this City is judg'd to outvie any in Germany. Among the Religious Houses there is a College of English Jesuits. In the year 1648. Charles Duke of Burgundy took and sack'd map of Liege LEIGE.
this City, and put the Inhabitants to the Sword, of whom, 'tis said, no less than 100 thousand were de∣stroy'd by him. The French surpriz'd it in 1675. and demolish'd the Citadel, which hath been since repair'd, and new Fortifications added, especially this last year, 1693. upon Apprehensions of the French Designs against them. Tongres, Tungri, aut Aduatica Tungrorum, a very ancient Town, is built on the Banks of the little River Jecker, 10 miles from Liege to the North-west, and as many from Maestricht to the West. It was anciently, even so early as the time of the Romans, a very considerable City, of whose Temples and other Buildings there still remain some Monuments. S. Ma∣ternus, who is said to have been S. Peter's Disciple, planted Christianity here, and erected an Episcopal See. After which it grew so large, that when Attila the Hun sack'd it, he destroy'd an hundred Churches. Of later days it hath not been so very Eminent, for its See was translated to Maestricht, and thence to Liege, as hath been already said, whereby it declin'd, and is at present a good Town only. The French took possession of it in 1672. but quitted it when they had taken Maestricht. Huy or Hoey, Huum, Huyum aut Huyonium, was heretofore a famous and potent City call'd Benefactum, but being afterward ofen ruin'd by the Incursions of the Barbarians, it lost both its Lordship and Name. It stands in the District of Condrotz, at the distance of 15 miles from Liege to the South-west towards Na∣mur on the East-side of the Maes, where the Brook Huy, from whence it takes its denomination, runs into this River, that divides the Town into two parts, and over which is erected a fair Stone-bridge now half demolish'd. It is defended with a very strong Castle, which was founded on a high Hill by Eberard Cardinal of March and Bishop of Liege. The Country adjoining was, for some time, govern'd by certain particular Earls, until they resign'd their Right to the Bishop of Liege. There are many Iron Mines in the Neighbourhood, whence the Inhabitants of Huy have their chief Imployment. The Town was taken by the French Forces, A. D. 1675. and its Fortifications were destroyed in the ensuing Year; but it being afterward restor'd to the Bishop of Liege, he caus'd the Works to be repair'd with much dili∣gence, and render'd it a place of tolerable Strength. However, the French took it last year, but the Con∣federates recover'd it in this Campaign, 1694. Dinant, Dinantium, Dinandium aut Dionantum, is seated on the East-side of the Maes in the Confines of the County of Namur; from the Capital City where∣of it is distant 12 miles to the South, as also 7 from Charlemont to the North, half a league from Bouvines, and 36 miles from Liege to the South-west. This Town is fortified with a strong Castle built on a Rock, cut almost on all sides, but hath been often taken and regain'd during the Wars. The French made themselves Masters of it in 1675. and ras'd the Citta∣del, but have since rebuilt it, and as yet maintain a Garrison in the place. Buillon or Bulloigne, is seated on the River Semoy, 30 miles South from Dinant, not above 8 or 10 from the Borders of Champaign, and about 16 East from the River Maes; it is well guarded with a strong Castle, and with its small Territory adjoining gives the Title of Duke to the Bishop of Liege, which was also claim'd and assum'd by the Barons of Sedan. Of this place was that famous Godfrey Duke, who was so celebrated through all Nations for his Courage and Bravery in the Conquest of Jerusalem, whereof he was the first Christian King. Franchimont, formerly a considerable City before Charles Duke of Burgundy destroy'd it; at present it is a good large Village only, and stands on the River Theu 16 miles from Liege and 8 S. W. from Limburg. This Town, with the adjacent Territory, gives the Title of a Marquiss to the Bishop of Liege. About 5 or 6 miles South from Frauchimont, in a Valley encompass'd with Hills and high Mountains, stands the little wall'd Town named Spa or Spaw, much resorted to for the famous Me∣dicinal Waters that spring in and near the Town. Of these there are four several Springs; the strongest is that call'd Geronster, which rises in a Wood on the South-side of the Town, two other call'd Sauvenir and Tomelet rise on the other side the Town; but the chiefest of all is that nam'd Pohunt, which springs in the Town, and is beautified with a handsom Stone-work over it, built by the Bishop of Liege who is Lord of the Town. From this last Fountain vast quantities of the Water is yearly sent out to all parts of Europe, besides what is drunk here. These Springs have pro∣cur'd the Town a general Protection, so that in the hottest Wars it has always escaped untouch'd. Borch-loen or Loots, the chief Town of the Land of Loon, formerly govern'd by its own Lords, who had the Title of Counts of Diostein, is seated 12 miles from Liege to the North-west; in it stands a famous Collegiate Church dedicated to S. Adulphus. S. Truyen, nam'd from a Monastry of Benedictines, dedicated to S. Trudo, call'd also by corruption S. Tron and Centron, is a good walld Town, distant 5 miles from Berch-loen to the West, and about 3 from Lan∣den and Leewe in Brabant. Bilsen, a small Town, near which stands a Nun∣nery of Ladies of Quality, who do not vow perpetual Chastity, but are allow'd to leave their Cells and mar∣ry; it is 6 miles distant from Maestricht to the West. Hasselt, a well built and populous Town, is seated on the River Demer 8 miles from Bilsen, wherein the Bishop of Liege hoth a noble Palace. Maeseyeck, stands on the Maes, 16 miles North from Maestricht.
Of the Vnited Netherlands. CHAP. X. map of Holland HOLLAND and the Other Provinces of the Vnited Netherlands. OF the Situation, Soil, Rivers, ancient State and History of these Provinces to the Time of their Subjection to the King of Spain, an Account hath been already given in speaking of the Netherlands in general: Wha remains, is to give the Reader some Idea of the Rise and Establishment of this Republick, known by the Name of The States General of the Ʋnited Netherlands, before we proceed
to the Description of the Country. In order to which it is necessary to begin with the first occasions of their Defection from Spain, which were as fol∣low. The People of these Countries enjoyed large Pri∣vileges under the ancient Princes, who were content always to maintain 'em to them, because the small∣ness of their respective Dominions, made their greatest Strengths consist in the Affections of their Subjects: But when, afterwards, all these Provinces became subject to one Prince, who had also large Dominions elsewhere, the People were treated with less indulgence. Charles V. was the first of these, who, as he was King of Spain, and Emperor of Germany, as well as Duke of Burgundy, had different Interests from his Predecessors, and being engaged in a War with France, brought foreign Forces from his other Dominions into the Netherlands, notwithstand∣ing the Laws to the contrary; but being a Native of this Country, of a gentle and generous Nature, re∣siding long in it, and using the Native Nobility in the Government, he was generally belov'd, and his Actions gave no disgust. But his Son Philip being born in Spain, was of the Humour of that Nation, very Austere, and had also so much Affection for his Country-men, that he conferr'd upon them all the Offices of Honour and Authority in these Countries, to the great displea∣sure of the Flemish Nobility; and himself also re∣sided in Spain, governing these States by a Deputy; continu'd the Foreign Forces on foot though the War were at an end; which most of all disquieted the Peo∣ple, and declar'd himself very zealous for the Romish Religion; and therefore the Edicts against Luther that had been made in his Father's time, but by the Indulgence of Charles, had not been executed here, Philip evives, and commands to be strictly executed; wich was very grievous here, because the number f the Protestant Party was large. In the yea 1550, the Dutchess of Parma the King's Sister, was made Governess of the Nether∣lands; she was a Person of great Wisdom and Goodness, but the chief Minister Cardinal Grandvill, whom the King appointed to assist her, was of an intolerable proud and cruel Nature, and though of an obscure men Birth, so insolent to the Nobility, that what with that, and his cruel prosecution of the Inquisition, whch was now set on foot for the sup∣pression of Proestancy, he became universally odi∣ous, and the Nobility refus'd to assist at the Coun∣cils while he at at the Head in them: Wherefore the good Duthess prevail'd upon the King to remove him, and modrate the Edicts about Religion. But the Inuisition was soon after reviv'd, and notwithstanding the Dutchess's good Offices, the King commands all Hereticks to be put to Death, and many wee Executed accordingly; which crea∣ted Horror ad Rage in the minds of the People, and caused them to break out into open Mutinies, to oppose the Executions, and release the Prisoners that were conemned for Religion. Also several of that Nobility confederated together against the Inqui∣sition, and a great number headed by the Lord of Brederode, boldly Petition'd the Governess for abo∣lishing it: To which she gave a calm Answer, and, representing the Matter kindly to the King, prevail'd upon him to grant their request; but the favour be∣ing long dely'd, the People were dissatisfied, and at length broke out into Rebellion, and committed ma∣ny outragious Actions; but were soon pacified by the Dutchess, and the publick Peace once more re∣stor'd. But the King was still resolv'd to suppress this Heresie (as he call'd it) and punish these uti∣nous Subjects; and therefore sent his Favourite the Duke of Alva, in the year 1567, into the Netherlands, with an Army of 10000 Spanish and Italian Soldiers to assist the Dutchess in the execution of his Com∣mands: Upon whose arrival, the People were in general so discontented, that great numbers of the richer sort retir'd our of the Provinces; and the Dutchess foreseeing the Evils that were approaching, desir'd leave of the King to resign the Government; which was soon granted, and that Charge, with greater power than usual, conferr'd on the Duke of Alva: Who immediately set himself to work to quell the Disorders, but by a different method than what had been used by the prudent Dutchess; for whereas she by mildness had pacified the People and brought them to Reason, he resolv'd by Rigor to force them to submit: And first of all, without regard to the Laws of the Land, he erected a new Court of Judi∣cature, for Trying those that had been concerned in the late Insurrections, and many were condemned and executed thereupon. The Inquisition was set to work anew, and executed with greater Rigor than before: And many other things transacted that were contrary to the Liberties of the People, the Privile∣ges of the Towns, and the known Laws of the Country; which though the Nobility and Peope were exceedingly incensed at, the Governor was not at all concern'd, but resolv'd to pursue his own Methods, and break the Strength of the discontent∣ed Party; which he thought he could not effectually do without cutting off their Heads; the chief where∣of were the Prince of Orange, Count Egmont and Count Horn. The Prince of Orange was a Person of great In∣terest, by the large Possessions he was Master of; and by reason of his great Wisdom and Goodness, was belov'd by all, as he had particularly been by the Emperor Charles V. who made him Governor of Holland. Count Egmont was a great Soldier, and had en∣joyed the highest places of Honour and Trust in Flanders, and was also exceedingly belov'd by the People, as was likewise Count Horn, who had a large Estate in Brabant. These three the Duke of Alva was resolv'd take off, and accordingly the two latter were seized and imprisoned, and after some Months time Tryed and Executed for being accessary to the late Insurrection, though they had been highly instrumentall in sup∣pressing it; but the Prince of Orange having in time retir'd into Germany, saved his Life, though with the loss of his Estate, for that was seized as forfitd to the King. These Arbitrary and cruel Proceedings of Alva enraged the People to the hghest degree, and made them resolve Revenge; and in order to it great numbers flock to the Prince of Orge as their Head, who with them and such other Forces as he could raise, invaded he Provinces. But the Spanish Army was too powerful, so that the Prince was forced to return without effecting any thing. And Alva glorying in his good Fortune, insolently caused his own Statue to be erected, with two Fi∣gures, representing the Esates of the Low Cntries, under his Feet; And demnded of the Sts lager Supplies for the Army, than they could grant: Who petition the King thereupon, but without Rdress; and persisting in their refusal, d' Alva publishes a
Edict without their Consent, for Levying the Mony he demanded, and upon the People's refusing to pay it, caused the Soldiers to take it by force, and com∣manded those to be hanged upon the Sign-posts that had refused to pay; but was interrupted in his ca∣reer by the arrival of News from Holland, That the Briel was seized by the Gueses: These were the Protestants, to whom the Papists had given that Name in Contempt, and who to avoid the Rigor of the Inquisition and d'Alva's Government, had fled, some into the Woods and Fastnesses, and others to Sea, where they lived upon Spoil, &c. These being grown strong by the additions of some of the remains of the Prince of Orange's Army, landed in Holland and seized the Briel; which was follow'd by the Revolt of most of the Towns of Holland and Zealand; and the Prince of Orange coming soon after out of Germany with new Forces, became so formidable, that the King found it absolutely necessary to remove the Duke of Alva, whose violent proceedings had raised such a Spirit of Hatred, not only of him, but of the whole Spanish Interest, that without very pru∣dent and cautious management, there was little hopes of ever bringing these Provinces to Obedience. After d' Alva's departure, Requisenes had the Govern∣ment for a little time, but he dying, the Administration fell of course to the Council, till a new Governor came. Don John of Austria was appointed to suc∣ceed; but before he could arrive, the People grew Mutinous, and obliged the Council to assemble the States: Who being met at Ghent in the year 1576. agreed upon the Act, call'd The Pacification of Ghent; the substance whereof was, That all Foreign Soldi∣ers be expell'd, the ancient Forms of Government restor'd, and matters of Religion referr'd to the States of each Province: But the Foreigners refus'd to depart, and were therefore declared Rebels; in revenge whereof they plunder'd several Towns, par∣ticularly Antwerp. And when Don John arrived, the Estates refused to admit him till he had confirm∣ed the Pacification of Ghent; but he shortly after renounced it, and seising the Castle of Namur, gave new occasions for a Breach: And immediately both Parties prepared for war. The Provinces call the Prince of Orange to Brussels, and make him Pro∣tector of Brabant, and the Spaniards draw their Armies together in Namur and Luxemburg; but Don John dying suddenly, and a new Party being risen among the Confederates, little was done till the Union of Ʋtrecht. The UNION of ƲTRECHT, from which the Original of this Common-wealth must be dated, was a firm Alliance agree'd upon in the year 1579, by the Seven Northern Provinces of the Netherlands, and Signed at the City of Ʋtrecht: By which they united themselves, so as never to be divided, reser∣ving however to each Province, all its former Rights, Laws and Customs. All the Provinces bound them∣selves to assist one another against all Enemies what∣soever, to carry on all Wars, and maintain all Fron∣tier Towns at their united Expence; and by a joint Council of the Representatives of all the Provinces, transact all Affairs relating to the Union. But this new-erected State found it self too weak to resist the valiant Duke of Parma, the Successor of Don John, who tho' when he came to the Govern∣ment had only the Provinces of Namur and Luxem∣burg, free from the Confederacy, yet by his own Conduct and Valour, and the Strength of the Army he got together, was powerful enough in a little time to reduce the Confederates to such extream distress, that in the Term of Poor and Distressed States, they implored the assistance of our Queen Elizabeth, offering her the Sovereignty of their State, if she would afford them Protection: The Queen re∣fused the Dominion, but lent them Mony and Sol∣diers, in the year 1585, upon the Security of the Briel, Flushing and Rammekins, which they put into her Hands. And in 1587, sent over more Forces under the Earl of Leicester, whom the States swore Obedience to, and admitted as their Governor: But his Government laed not long, for some differences arising between him and the States, the Queen re∣call'd him, but continu'd her former Assistance to the Dutch, who after Leicester's departure, chose Prince Maurice, (Son to the late Prince William of Orange, who was Assassinated at Delph by a Spaniard) for their Governor, who proved one of the greatest Captains of the Age, in wise Conduct, admiral Dis∣cipline, and excellent manner of Fortifying; which, with the diversion that Queen Elizabeth gave the Spaniards in her famous War with them, did so re∣store the Affairs of this State, that the valiant Duke of Parma dying, King Philip found it necessary to think of Peace, which the States were very little sollicitous of; for not only were their Forces under Prince Maurice successful enough, but their Sub∣jects had found the way to the East-Indies, and be∣gan to supplant the Portugues and make Holland the European Staple for the Commodities of those Coun∣tries; and were powerful enough at Sea to threaten the Spanish Plate Fleets and West-Indian Dominions; so that while the Spaniard, by the management of the Arch-duke Albert, now Governor of the Nether∣lands, carried on the War at great Expence, in hopes of making the States ask a Peace, he found that the underhand Overtures he made them were but coldly receiv'd, and that they refused to grant a Cessation of Arms, or to be treated with upon any other Terms than as a FREE STATE, which he was at last forced to comply with: And, In the yer 1609, a Truce was concluded for 12 Years, by which the Provinces were declared Free; both Parties allowed the full enjoyment of all that they then Possessed, and free Commerce established betwixt them. And thus this War of 48 years continuance, ended with the total Alienation of 7 Provinces from the Spanish Dominions, and the Erection of a State, which though it rose from such poor beginning, and struggl'd with the most Potent Prince of Europe, has grown to be one of the most Powerful, Rich, Well-planted and Populous of Europe. Of the Government of the United Netherlands in general, and of Holland in particular. THE Supream Authority is the Assembly of the Representatives of the Seven Provinces, call'd, The Assembly of the States General; which consists of seven Voices, one for each Province, to whom belongs the power of making War or Peace, receiving and di∣spatching of Ambassadors, tking care of Frontier Towns, and assigning the sums to be Levied for the Defence and Service of the Union. Assistant to these there are the Council of State, and the Council of the Admiralty. The first is composed of 12 Persons, (whereof Guelderland sends two, Holland 3, Zealand 2, Ʋtrecht 2, Friezland 1, Overissel, and Groninghen 1) who previously deliberate the Matters to be
brought before the States General, Form the state of Expence for the succeeding year, and propose the ways of Levying it, &c. Assistant to this Council is the Chamber of Accounts, composed of two Deputies from each Province, who Audit the publick Accounts and dispose the Finances. The Council of the Admi∣ralty, when the States order the fitting out a Fleet, have the care of it, and the ordering of all Marine Affairs; Sub-ordinate to which are the five Colleges in Holland, Zeeland and Friezland, who execute the Orders they receive from this Council. The Resolutions of the States General, when they concern Peace or War, Foreign Alliances, or raising Mony, are never made but by the Agreement of every Province; nor must the Provinces conclude without the Agreement of every City; so that when such a matter comes before the States, they separate, each Member returning to his respective Province, where in the assembly of every Provincial State the Matter is propos'd, with which the Deputies return to their Principals the Cities, for their consent, which makes the Resolutions very tedious and liable to in∣terruption, by the Interest an opposite Party may make in any one of the Cities, which hath sometimes happen'd, particularly in the case of the Relief of Luxemburg, when the City of Amsterdam Dissenting, hinder'd the raising the 16000 Men propos'd to save that Place, which was for want of this Relief, taken by the French in 1684. By which the Reader will see, that though the States General represent the Sovereignty, the Power is diffus'd, and rests indeed in the several Cities that send Deputies to the States of the Province; for eve∣ry Province is a distinct State, as are also all the Ci∣ties, in matters that concern themselves only. As a Specimen of the whole, we shall instance the City of Amsterdam, and the Province of Holland. The Sovereignty of Amsterdam is lodged in the Council or Senate, which is compos'd of 36 Persons, who serve for Life, and upon the death of one the rest chuse another of the Burghers to supply his Place. This Council chuses the Magistrates and Officers, and the Deputy, which represents the City in the Provincial State; (so that the People have no share in Elections) and also make Laws for the Go∣vernment of the City, and Levy the Taxes for the pu∣blick Service of the City in particular, and its Quota for the Union in General: By its Magistrates (which are Burgomasters equal to our Lord Mayor, Schepens or Judges, and Schout or Sheriff) the City exe∣cutes an independent Government, judges all Causes Civil and Criminal, and inflicts punishments even to Death, without the cognizance of any other Power whatsoever. The like Authority is found in all the Cities, but with some little variation, not needful here to be mention'd. The Provincial State of Holland is compos'd of the Deputies of the Nobility and the Cities, which make Nineteen Voices, whereof the Nobles have One, and these Cities, viz. Dort, Harlem, Delft, Ley∣den, Amsterdam, Goude, Rotterdam, Gorcum, Scheidam, Schonehoven, Briel, Alcmaer, Horn, Enchuysen, Edam, Monickdam, Medenblick and Purmeren, one a piece, which make the other 18 Voices; which, as we have already said, must all concur in the making of any new Alliance, declaring War and making Peace, &c. These Assemble at the Hague, as do also the States General and the Council of State. The States of the other Provinces are much the same, only that the Nobility in some of them being more Numerous, have a greater share; and in Ʋtrecht the Deputies of the Clergy have Session; and in Friezland and Groninhen, besides the Towns, the Lands divided into Bailiages, send Deputies to the States. The Prince of Orange is the Person that represents the Dignity of this Stae, by his splendid Court, pu∣blick Guards, &c. He is Captain General and Lord High Admiral, and thereby disposes of all Military Commands. He is Statholder of five of the seven Provinces; (for Prince Cassimer of Nassaw, is Stathol∣der of Friezland and Groninghen) and hath the No∣mination of Magistrates of the Cities out of a double number presented to him: He pardons the penalties of Crimes, and hath Session in the Council of State; and though he doth not sit in the Assembly of State; General, yet do they not resolve any important Mat∣ter without his Advice. He hath also great influ∣ence in several of the Provincial States, by the large portion of Lands he is Owner of, whereby he hath many Voices in Electing the Deputies of the Nobles. He is exceeding Rich, as well by the vast Pao∣nal Estate descended to him f  Ancestors, a∣mong which are many Sovereign Principalities and Lordships, as by the large Revenues belonging to his several Charges and Commands. All which are at present possess'd by his most Excellent Majesty William King of Great Britain &c. Whose Ancestors that have enjoyed the same Dignity in this State, are these, viz. I. William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, who was Governor of Holland and Zeeland, under Charles V. and Philip II. and by his excellent Wisdom, Good∣ness and Courage, acquir'd the greatest Esteem and Authority imaginable among the People, and was therefore the Person to whom they applied themselves for Relief from the oppressions of the Duke of Alva, &c. As we have already shewn. He was Assassinated at Delft in Holland by a Spanish Soldier, in the year 1584. II. Maurice of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, and Son of William, by whose wise Conduct the Confede∣racy, (which he found Poor and Distressed) was rai∣sed to a very powerful State, and acknowledged Free by the King of Spain. He died A. D. 1625. and was Succeeded by his half-Brother III. Henry Frederick, a Prince of great Valour, Prudence and Fortune: He died in the year 1647. IV. William his Son Succeeded, who Married the Princess Mary, eldest Daughter to King Charles I. of England, and died A. 1650, without Issue Born, leaving his Princess then with Child of his present Majesty, which gave the Lovesteyn Faction an oppor∣tunity to endeavour to suppress the Authority and Office of Statholder, and which they did keep vacant till 1674, when the People having suffer'd a thou∣sand Miseries by the hands of the barbarous French, forced the Magistrates to retract that Instrument they had Sworn to, and fondly call'd a Perpetual Edict, whereby the Office of Statholder was to be for ever suppress'd: I say, the People impatient of the Evils they indur'd for want of a Valiant Captain to Head their Armies, oblig'd the Magistrates to restore the Prince to the Dignity of his Ancestors. V. William Henry of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, Son to William and Mary abovemention'd, was Born November 6, 1650, eight days after his Father's Death; lived Privately till the year 1674, when he
was restored to the Stadtholdership of Holland, Zealand, Guelderland and Zutphen, Ʋtrecht and Over∣yssel, which by the States of each of those Provinces was confirmed to him and his Heirs for ever. In 1677, he Married Mary our Late Queen of Blessed Memo∣ry; and in 1688, Succeeded in the Throne of England, and is at present King of Great Britain, France and Ireland. The Seven United Provinces are, GUELDERLAND, with ZUTPHEN. HOLLAND. ZEALAND, UTRECHT. FRIEZLAND. OVERYSSEL. GRONINGEN. Chief Cities. Arnhem, Zutphen. Amsterdam, Middleburg, Ʋtrecht, Franeker, Deventer, Groninghen, CHAP. XI. The Province of HOLLAND and West FRIEZLAND, Hollandia & Westfrisia. THE first Inhabitants of this Province of Holland, were the Batavi, a Branch of the Nation of the Catti, a People of Germany; but how far their Ter∣ritory extended, is Disputed. It is said in general in ancient Authors, that Batavia was included between the Maes and the Rhine; but whether it be to be understood of the old Channel of the Rhine which passes by Ʋtrecht and Leyden, or the Channel of Drusus, which turn'd a great part of that River into the Issel, is the question in Dispute. If the latter, not only this Province, but those of Ʋtrecht and Gelder∣land, must have belonged to them. But however it be, all Parties grant, that at least all the South part of Holland, as far as Leyden, together with the Betuwe, (now part of Geldre) Nimeguen the chief City there∣of being by some said to have been their Metropo∣lis, was the Seat of the ancient and famous Nation of the Batavians, so often mention'd by Tacitus and other ancient Writers. As for the Northern part there is good reason to believe that it was formerly contigu∣ous with Friezland, or at least Inhabited by that Na∣tion. The modern name of Holland was undoubtedly given it by the Danes, who very much infesting these Coasts with their Pyracies in the IXth. Century; had this Province with the Islands lying South of it, given them by Lotharius the third Son of Lewis the Godly, (to whose share this part of the Empire of his Grand-father Charlemaigne was allotted) and by them named Zealand and Holland, from the two parts of their own Country so denominated. 'Tis true, some Etymologists will have it, that the name of Holland was given it q. d. Hollow-land, from the low∣ness of the Country: But since the Story of the Danes planting themselves here is Un-disputed, the former account is much the more rational. The original of its Earldom is already mention'd in the general account before the description of the Spanish Netherlands, together with its falling into the Family of Burgundy, and by Succession to the King of Spain; and of its Revolt from him we have been just speaking; as also of its present State. The present Bounds of his Province (including West Friezland, or North Holland, which in all pub∣lick Acts is mention'd apart, are the German Ocean on the West, the Zuyderzee on the North, the same Sea with the Province of Ʋtrecht and the Betuwe on the East, and Brabant and Zealand on the South. It is seated between the 51st. deg. 40 min. and 53d. deg. of Latitude, and 83d. deg. 10 min. 24th. deg. 20 min. Long. containing in its utmost extent from North to South, 80 English miles, and from East to West about 25, but in some places above 40. The Soil is low and marshy; but by the Industry of the Inhabitants in draining out the Water by their artifi∣cial Channels, it is made to yield very good Pasture and some Corn; but chiefly the former, for Food to their vast Herds of Kine, from which they receive the almost sole product of the Country, Butter and Cheese. The Air is thick and moist by the Fogs arising out of the vast number of Channels and Lakes all over the Country, which make the Inhabitants in many parts of it very subject to Agues, which would be yet much worse if it were not purg'd by the Easterly Winds, which coming over the long dry Continent of Germany, purifie the Air, and cause sharp Frosts during the Months of January and February, by which the Earth is dried, and the Vermin which the moistness of the Land produces in great quantities, Destroyed. The whole Province is divided into two great Parts, North and South, which are again Sub∣divided thus, viz. NORTH, containing North Hol∣land strictly taken, divi∣ded into West Friezland, the chief Towns where∣of are, Horn, Enchuysen, Medenblick. The Islands Texel, Vlie, and Schelling. Waterland. Edam, Munickdam, Purmerent. Kennemerland. Alcmar, Harlem, Beverwyck. Amstelland. Amsterdam, Capital. Goyland. Narden, Muyden, Wesep. Rhynland. Leyden, Woerden, Oudewater. Delsland. Delft, The Hague, Honslaerdyck. Maesland Sluys, Vlardingen, Delfs Haven. Schieland. Rotterdam, Goude.
SOUTH, containing The Bailiwick of Dort, &c. Dordrecht, Guertrueyden-burg, Willemstadt, Klundert, Heusden, Crevecaeur, Lovesteyn, Gercum, Worcum, Schoonhoven, Nieuport, Vianen, Yselstein, Montfort. The Land of Veorn. Briel. The Islands of Goree, Goree. Overflackee. Somerdyke. AMSTERDAM, Amstelodamum, the chief City not only of Holland, but of all the United Netherlands, is seated on a small River named Amstel, that runs through the Town and falls into an Arm of the Sea, call'd the Y, (and by abbreviation of the Dutch Article Het, 'tY) which makes a large Haven, wherein con∣tinually lye vast numbers of Merchants Ships. The City is distant about 40 miles from Rotterdam to the North, 20 from Horn, and 30 from Medenblick to the South, 10 from Harlem, and 15 from the Sea-shoar to the East, and about 25 from Ʋtrecht to the North-west. It is but of modern Structure, being not men∣tion'd in History before the year, 1299. nor then, but as a small Fisher-town only. Dewit hath pu∣blish'd Maps of its several Conditions, whereof the first in 1342, shews it a small Town on the East-side only of Amstel, with one Street in the middle, and 5 or 6 cross ones, which before 1400 was encreas'd to as much more on the other side the River; by 1482 it was again encreas'd on both sides and surrounded with strong Walls; in 1585 being grown populous, and beginning to be the chief Seat of Trade of this new erected State, it was much enlarged, as it was again in 1612: And again a fifth time in the year 1656, a very large space of Ground (great part of which is not yet built) was taken in and the Walls built anew of Brick, and the Gates of Stone, with a large Ditch all round; which new Addition hath made it a large Semi-circle, deriv'd from the River Y. It is an exceeding populous, rich and well-traded City, very well built and very neatly kept; the Streets are very large with Canals of Water in them, over which are a very great number of Stone-bridges. The Houses are all built of Brick or Stone, in good repair, and very beautiful, especially those in the newest part of the Town, where the Streets call'd the Heer, Konings and Keysers Grachten, or Lords, Kings and Emperors Channels, are fill'd with magnificent Hou∣ses, many of them of Free-stone, adorn'd with Co∣lums and Chapters according to the Corinthian Ar∣chitecture. The principal publick Buildings are the Old, the New, the Western and the Southern Churches, the Stadthuyse, the Exchange, the Hospi∣tals, the Magazine of the Navy, that of the East-India Company's Shipping, and the Sluces: All which we cannot omit giving as particular a descrip∣tion of as our room will admit. The old Church is a Majestick Building of Stone according to the Gothick Order, with a fair Steeple of great heighth; the Church was begun to be built in 1360, but the Steeple not finished till 1566. The New Church, so call'd in distinction from the former, was founded about the year, 1414. but being burnt in 1645. was repair'd, and is at present a handsom Structure; a Tower was designed to it of exceeding Heighth, and a Foundation laid accordingly upon 6334 Piles dri∣ven into the Ground for that purpose, which was not however found strong enough, for the Building is not carried up above 30 or 40 foot: In the paint∣ed Windows of this Church is represented the Libe∣rality of this City to the Emperor Maximilian, in presenting him with a large sum of Mony when he needed it, and his Generosity in bestowing an Impe∣rial Crown for a Crest to its Arms. In this Church is to be seen the sumptuous Monument of Admiral de Ruyter, who was kill'd at Messina; a Schreen be∣fore the Chancel of cast Brass; which being kept bright looks very beautifully; and an Organ (sup∣ported by rich Marble Pillars) of extraordinary Work∣manship for its number of Pipes and melodious imi∣tation of Human Voices. The Western Church is a handsom Pile, and hath a beautiful Tower with a large Imperial Crown of Copper on the top of it, which is reckon'd 260 foot from the Ground. The South Church hath also a handsom Steeple of 237 foot high. The other Churches are less remark∣able. The Stadthuyse or Guild-hall, is a very magnifi∣cent Structure, all of Free-stone, adorn'd with Pilla∣sters, Chapters, Cornishes and Carvings, accor∣ding to the Corinthian Architecture; it is a square Building of 282 foot broad, 235 foot deep, and 116 foot high, of which height the Ground-rooms, which are the Offices belonging to the Bank, and the Prisons with some smaller Offices take up about 20 foot, and the first and second Stories about 30 foot each, and over the middle of the Front, (which is somewhat more advanced than the rest of the Work) above the Cornish, rises a Bevel, the Face whereof is of Mar∣ble very curiously Carved, and on the top and each side of it stand three very large Statues of Brass, and just behind a handsom Tower, (being a Pavillion supported with Pillars) wherein hang a great num∣ber of Bells that compose very musical Chimes: The back Face hath also another Bevel with Carvings, on the top whereof stands a very large brazen Statue of Atlas, with a Globe of Copper on his Back. Within the House, the Gallery, and Door-cases of the Offi∣ces, are adorn'd with ingenious Carvings in Marble, and the Chambers with Marble Floors and curious Paintings on the Ceilings and Chimney-pieces: In this House the Senate of the City hold their Assem∣blies, the Burgomasters meet, Causes as well Cri∣minal as Civil are Try'd, the great Bank is kept, and in general all publick Businesses transacted. This Build∣ing was begun in the year 1648, but not finished in many years; indeed not yet entirely, for the Cielings of the Gallery are design'd to be painted, and the Walls faced with Marble. The Exchange is a hand∣some Structure of Brick, with Pillars of Stone all a∣long the Walks, built after the model of our old Royal Exchange, and is at least as Large. The Ho∣spitals here are many and large; above 3000 poor Children are constantly maintain'd with Lodging Diet and Cloaths, taught to Read and Write at the publick Charge, in the Almoesniers-huys, VVeeys-huys, and Diaconis-huys, three large Hospitals, so call'd; besides which, there is a large House, wherein above 300 decrepit old Women are lodg'd and fed; these are all of modern Foundation, and maintained partly by the voluntary Charities collected by the Deacons, and partly by certain little Taxes, such as Penny upon every Person that passes through the Gate after Candle-light, half the Mony received at the Play-house, &c. and the rest supplied out of the
publick Revenue: But another Hospital call'd the old Man's House, wherein 150 old Men and Women are maintained, was formerly a Monastery, the Rents whereof are assign'd for its Support: In this House a poor Traveller may have Lodging and Diet for three days gratis. Here is also an Hospital for the Sick, ano∣ther for Madmen, another for Fools, and a Pest-house. The Magazine is a handsom large Building of Brick, standing on the Water-side, in the North-east part of the Town; it is three Angles of a Square, in the mid∣dle whereof is a Yard for building Ships of War, the Front is 220, and the Wings 200 foot long. In the seve∣ral Chambers of it are laid up the Rigging of the Men of War belonging to this City, with stores of Cord∣age, Arms, &c. all kept in very good order: This Magazine was built in 1655. Not far Eastward from hence is another stately Magazine belonging to the East-India Company; it is one range of Brick Building, behind which is a large Yard with Docks for building Ships, and Shops of Anchor-Smiths, and all other Artists belonging to Ship-building, particu∣larly a very large Rope-yard: This House serves to lay up their Stores of Shipping, and also for Ware-houses for those Goods that they have not room for in their other Ware-houses; which with their House stands in the middle of the City. The Sluces are Works of prodigious Expence and Art, and worth a Travellers notice. Formerly the City was frequently damaged by the overflowing of the Wa∣ter, which upon the blowing of a North-east Wind was driven out of the Zuder Zee and Ye with that vi∣olence into the Canals in the Streets, that the Water overflowing, not only run into their Cellars, but even rose to the first Floor of those Houses that stood in the lower parts of the Town; to prevent which, the Magistrates not many years since, caused these Sluces to be made at the mouth of every one of the four Channels that open to the Ye: These are strong solid Brick-works of 10 or 12 foot thick, rais'd from the bottom of the River to the Surface of the Ground, and built cross the Channels, leaving only convenient places for the passage of Ships, which are again shut up with very Strong Flood-gates, able at all times to resist the force of the Water, and secure the Inhabitants from its injuring them. Here are other publick Buildings worth a Stranger's View, such as the Rasp-house, where Rogues are Imprison'd and kept to hard Labour, as rasping Brazil-wood, &c. for 3, 4, 7, 10 years, or their whole Lives, accord∣ing to the heinousness of the Crime; the Spin-house, where Whores are kept in like manner to Spinning, &c. the East and West-India Company's Houses, the Jews Synagogue, a noble Building indeed; the beau∣tiful Stone-bridge cross the Amstel, where it enters the Town, and the Walls all round the Town which are exceeding neat and well built with Brick, and secure the City from a Surprize, as the marshiness of the Soil all round does from a formal Siege: The Gates which are 5 in number, are all built of Stone, and in the Bridge from each of them over the Ditch are 2 Draw-bridges and a Watch-house wherein, as well as in the Gates, continual Watch is kept by Soldiers maintain'd for that purpose, besides every night a company of the Train Bands of the City. And for their security from the Water-side, there are two rows of Pails all along before the Town, with narrow Gaps only at convenient places, for the passage of Ships, which are every night shut up by a Boom laid cross and lock'd. The Wealth and Trade of this City is exceeding great, the number of Ship∣ping lying before the Pails in the Winter-time, when their East-land and other Fleets are in, is not to be computed, their Masts seeming like a great Forest, so thick they stand. The Ground here is Sand, which the Water here soaks through, and not only hinders from making the Cellars deep, but also obliges the Builders to drive a great number of Piles into the Ground, before they can lay the Foundations of the Houses. Here is no fresh Water but what they save in Cisterns when it Rains; for though the Amstell be good Water, the Ye is a branch of the Sea, and mix∣ing with it makes it brackish for several miles above the Town. The Supream Authority in the City is lodg'd in the Senate, which consists of 36 Persons chosen origi∣nally by the People, but at present by themselves, and continue for Life. These chuse the four Burgomasters, who are the chief Magistrates; and the nine Schepens who are the Judges of Civil and Criminal Causes; and the Scout or Sheriff, who hath the care of bring∣ing Criminals to Justice, and executing the Law. But it is necessary to note, That the Senate have not the absolute choice of the Schepens, for they return a double number to the Stadtholder, who chuse those of them he pleases. The Burgomasters keep the Keys of the Treasury of the City, and of the great Bank lodg∣ed here and kept in the Cellars under the Stadthuys, which without doubt is a vast Mass of Treasure, but whether so great as its Credit, is not to be known, since none are permitted to see it; nor hath there ever been but once an occasion to try its Strength, viz. in 1673. when the French having overrun their Coun∣try, some People distrusted the safety of their Mony, and call'd it out of the Bank, which the Treasurers readily paying, gave satisfaction to the rest, and it hath still remain'd there, tho transfer'd every day from one to another by Bills and Accounts, without ever telling the Mony or any one desiring to see it. The compass of Amsterdam within the Walls, is reck∣on'd about 6 miles, but a large part of it is yet un∣built; the number of Houses is about 25, or as some affirm 28000. The number of Inhabitants may be guess'd at by the Burials, which in the year 1685, 6245. according to the publick Account set up in the Stadthuyse. Amsterdam is seated in the Latitude of 52 deg. 25 min. Longit. 24. 2. HARLEM, Harlemum, stands about 10 miles West from Amsterdam, not above 6 East from the Sea, about 20 North from Leyden, and as many South from Alomar; it is a large, populous and pleasant City; the Buildings are all of Brick, neat, conveni∣ent, and in good repair, the Streets large and even, and in some of them are Canals as at Amsterdam. It is a place of good Trade, which consists in Thread and Tape, Linnen-Cloath and wrought Silks made here; also Bleaching of Linnen, for which the Wa∣ter is so fit, that most of the Inhabitants of Amsterdam and other neighbouring places, bring their Linnen here to be Wash'd, being curious in its whiteness. This City was made a Bishop's See in 1559. but that Dignity was soon after suppress'd. The Cathedral was Dedicated to S. Bavo, but is now only call'd the great Church; it is a strong, spacious and beautiful Building. The Stadthuys is a handsom Structure, a is the Shambles or Flesh-market. The Walls are strong and the Ditch broad, but the Town is com∣manded by the Neighbouring Sand-hills. The Art of PRINTING is said to have been invented here by one Lawrence Coster, who walking in the neigh∣bouring Wood for his diversion, fell to whitling lit∣tle Sticks he took up, and at length form'd a Letter upon one of 'em, which pressing upon his Hand first,
and afterwards with Ink upon Paper found it made a legible Impression; which accidental hint, being an ingenious Man, he improv'd, and had brought the Art to some perfection, when a Roguish Servant that he imploy'd in it, stole his Implements and run away to Mentz, where he set up for the Inventor. They of Mentz deny this, and affirm, That a Citizen of theirs, John Faust by name, was the sole Inventor. The Harlemers have many great and learned Men of their side in this Dispute; however, the first printed Books extant having been publish'd at Mentz, carries over ma∣ny to the other Party: But wheresoever it was In∣vented, this ingenious Art appeared first in the World about the year 1430 or 1440. The Harlemers brag also of great Exploits done by their Townsmen who went to the Holy War with Godfrey of Bolloigne, particularly the cutting of the Chains that shut up the Haven of the City Damiata in Aegypt, which (according to the Tradition among them) was per∣form'd by great Saws fasten'd to the Keels of their Ships, in memory whereof the Boys yearly carry lit∣tle Ships about the Streets; to which purpose they say also are the three Ships that hang up in the great Church. The Siege of this City by the Spaniards in the year 1573, was very remarkable, for it continued 7 Months, during which time the Assaults were as violent, and the resistance as obstinate as has been known, and the Defendants were reduc'd to such a necessity, that they eat Grass, Leather, and such vile things for their Subsistence. They still shew a mark in the great Church where a great Canon Bullet lodg'd. Just without the Walls there is a pleasant Wood wherein the Citizens divert themselves; and a little to the Southward, a great Lake call'd the Harlem Meer, which begins near Amsterdam, and reaches al∣most as far as Leyden. From the small River Sparen which runs through the Town, a Channel was cut in the year 1657 to Leyden, whereby the Passage between these Cities hath been much facilitated. LEYDEN, Lugdunum Batavorum, also Leyda, is esteem'd the pleasantest City in Holland at least; the Buildings being beautiful, the Streets large, the Channels commodious, but chiefly the rows of fine tall Trees in every Street, render them exceedingly agreeable; but then for want of a good Current of Water, the Canals are apt to stink in Summer. This is an ancient City, and tho formerly but small, hath by several Enlargements been made to exceed any in Holland, except Amsterdam and Rotterdam. The principal publick Buildings are, the Church of S. Pe∣ter, a handsom Pile, and had formerly a very high Tower, but it fell down in the year 1512; The Churches of S. Pancratius and S. Mary; and the new Church, of circular form and very beautiful; the Hospitals of S. Katherine and S. Elizabeth, as also those of S. James and S. Barbara, for the Enter∣tainment of decrepid aged and sick People, which are well endow'd and carefully kept. Here is also a large Hospital for the maintenance of poor Or∣phans, whereof there are reckon'd to be no less than 700 in it. The Town-house is a noble large Structure. The Burg, a notable piece of Antiquity, said to have been built by the Romans, for the Defence of the Town, but stands now in the middle of it, and an Ornament only; it is a strong Fortification built of Stone in a round form, very high, the Ascent to it being of 50 Steps, and the Wall about it 21 foot high. In the year 1575, the Prince and States founded an University here, which is become the most famous of these Countries. The Schools is an ancient Build∣ing, ndsome enough, but not exceeding beautiful; adjoining to it is the Physick-Garden, which is well stor'd with rare Plants; near the Garden stands a Gallery in which are kept many Curiosities of Na∣ture; also in the Theatre of Anatomy are to be seen many such Rarities, besides Skeletons and Dissecti∣ons. The Professors have annual Stipends, and make a good profit by their Pupils; but the Students have no Endowments, except some Privileges. They are very numerous, and are a great advantage to the Town; besides which, here is a large Trade maintained by the making of Woollen-Cloaths. The small branch of the Rhine, which retains its name, passes through this City, and is the chief Channel in it. Leyden was Besieg'd by the Spaniards in 1574. and very well defended by the Citizens for five Months, at the end of which it was reliev'd. It is fortified with good Walls besides Ramparts, Bul∣warks and large Ditches, and stands at the distance of 16 miles from Harlem to the South, 22 from Amsterdam to the South-west, 15 from Rotterdam to the North, and 27 from Ʋtrecht to the West. The HAGƲE, call'd in Dutch, 's Gravenhague, (that is, The Grove of the Earl) in Latin Hagae Comi∣tis, is seated about 8 or 9 miles from Leyden to the South-west, about 6 from Delft to the North-east, 1 from Rotterdam to the North-west, and not above 2 miles from the little Sea-Town Schievling. It glo∣ries in being the principal Village of Europe, for it is not wall'd, tho otherwise in all respects a City, being govern'd by its own Magistrates, and enjoying all the other Privileges, except sending Deputies to the States, as any City in Holland does. It is the Seat of the Princes and the Assemblies of the States General, of the Provincial States of Holland, and of the Council of State; as also of the supreme Courts of Judicature; and is in general the place where all the publick Affairs of the Common-wealth are trans∣acted; where all the Foreign Ministers receive their Audience, and commonly reside: All which causes a continual Concourse of People from all Parts, and very much enriches the Town, which is a near built place: The Streets are large and adorn'd with Trees; the Houses are all of Brick and very hand∣som; those that stand near the Court, and in that part of the Town toward the Wood, are very stately, and Inhabited by Persons of Quality. The Palace, containing the Prince's Lodgings, the Cham∣bers of the States General and Provincial, Coun∣cil of State, &c. is a handsom Building, making two Angles of a Square, in the middle whereof stands a fair large Hall, not unlike that of Westmin∣ster in form, and in respect to the Shops in it all round, as also for the Standards taken from the Enemies, hanging up in it, but far short of it in largeness, being scarce so big as the Guild-hall of Lon∣don. Adjoining to the Court stands a very noble House of Stone, built by Prince Maurice of Nassaw, and bears his Name: The whole Court is Moated round, and Guards continually kept at every Gate: On the North-side is a large square Pond call'd the Viver, and on the West the Court opens to a large Plain, that is surrounded with fine Houses. The Town is large and very populous. The great Church is a stately old Building. That of a round Figure, with∣out any Pillars, is a neat beautiful Structure, and not of many years standing: The Town-house is built of Stone, but old and not very remarkable. The Situation of this Town is very pleasant; for on the one side lye lovely Meadows; and on the other a large and pleasant Wood, in the middle whereof stands a House of Pleasure of the Prince's,
having behind it very beautiful Gardens, and in it, besides the stately Lodgings, a very large dancing Room, with a high Roof, rising into a Cupola, and at the Top of it a Lanthorn, in which is a Gallery for Musick: The Walls and Cielings all round, adorned with Paintings of the best Masters, repre∣senting the Actions of Henry Frederick (the Father of his present Majesty) by whose Widow this House was built. On the North-side of the Town lies a Walk, paved all the way with Bricks, and shaded by Lime-Trees, planted on each side, for 2 miles in length, which leads to the little Village Schievling; from whence his late Majesty King Charles took Shipping to his Glorious and Happy Restaura∣tion. About 12 or 14 miles South from the Hague stands Hounslaerdyke, where is a stately Palace of the Prince's, adorn'd with very fine Gardens; to which he often retired, when the Affairs of the State did not require his presence at the Hague. DELFT, Delphi aut Delfium, is pleasantly seated among Meadows, at the distance of 5 or 6 miles from the Hague to the South-east, and about 8 from Rotterdam to the North-west, and is a very neat and well-built City, the Streets large and even, with Ca∣nals and Trees, as have most of the Cities of Holland: It is a silent Town, and inhabited by wealthy Mer∣chants, that have retired from Business. The Trade of the Place is chiefly for a sort of Earthen Ware, in imi∣tation of China: They had formerly a great Trade in Brewing, as also in Weaving Cloth, but that is re∣mov'd. This City being one of the Chambers of the East-India Company, the fine Goods of those Coun∣tries, especially Porcellane or China Earthen Ware, is a main Trade of the Inhabitants. The Old and the New Churches are large and fair Buildings; in the latter is to be seen a noble Monument, erected to the Memory of William I. Prince of Orange, who was barbarously assassinated in this City. The Stadt∣house is a handsom Building. Here is kept the Arsenal of the State, which undoubtedly is well stor'd with all War-like Necessaries: The Magazine of Powder belonging to it, accidentally blew up in 1654. and destroy'd a great part of the Town; be∣sides which, it had been almost totally consumed by Fire in 1536. so that the present Buildings are but of late Structure: It is a good large City, wall'd and moated, and well inhabited. ROTTERDAM, Roterodamum, may be reck∣on'd the second City of Holland for Trade, tho' it be but the seventh in the Convention of the States: It is seated on the North-side of the River Maes (which is there very broad, and makes a good Haven) at the distance of about 7 Leagues from the Sea, and 5 from the Bril to the East, 8 miles from Delft to the South-east, about 40 from Amsterdam to the South, near as many from Ʋtrecht to the South-west, and about 15 from Dort to the West. It is a large, ex∣ceeding Populous and well-traded City: The con∣venience of the Haven is very extraordinary, for by the Canals that run through the Streets, Ships of great Burden can come in and unlade at the Mer∣chants Doors; which, with certain Privileges they enjoy here, hath made it very much encrease, even within 20 or 30 years past. The number of English Ships that use this City is much greater than those that come to Amsterdam, this Port being ex∣ceedingly more convenient for them than that: An Exchange is held here, where every day the Mer∣chants meet; the Structure of it is but ordinary and doth not deserve a Description; but the great Church, dedicated to S. Lawrence, is a stately Build∣ing, and hath a high Tower, wherein hang very me∣lodious Chimes; the Stadthouse is a fair Structure of Stone, and the great Stone-bridge in the Market-place is very spacious and neat; on it stands a stately Statue of Brass, of the famous Desid. Erasmus, a Native of this City, and near the great Church is still to be seen the House wherein he was born, with his Picture, and an Inscription in Latin, Spanish and Dutch, over the Door, intimating so much. The Houses here are of Brick, but seem older than those of the other Towns we have named; the Streets are also broad and well paved, but by reason of the multiplicity of Business (for every Canal is full of Ships) cannot be so neatly kept as at Amsterdam (where the Ships lye without the Town) and other places where less Business is transacted. The Bril is a neat City, well built, reasonably populous, and of some Trade; it is seated on an Island, nam'd The Land of Vorn, and hath a conve∣nient Haven at the Mouth of the Maes, about 5 leagues below Rotterdam, and 20 leagues from Har∣wich in England, whence the Pacquet-boat uses to come weekly hither, but the Port of Helveet being found more convenient, they come not hither now. The Buildings here likewise are of Brick, and tho' old are very neat, and the Streets large and handsom, especially the great one: The great Church is of Stone, and hath a Tower which serves for a direction to Sailers. The Walls are strong, and made very pleasant by Rows of Trees planted on them. This was one of the Cautionary Towns pawn'd to Queen Elizabeth, for the Assistance she gave the Dutch against Spain, and was kept by an English Garrison till King James I. restor'd it, 30 years after. Helvoet Sluce, is a small Sea-Town, with a very convenient Haven, seated on the South-side of the same Island, and not above 3 miles distant from the Bril. The Town is not at all considerable, except for the weekly Arrival of the English Pacquet-boat, and that his present Majesty set Sail from hence, to his happy Expedition into England, in the year, 1688. Not above a League Southward of the Land of Voorn, lies the small Island Goree, so nam'd from goed and Reed, which signifie a good Haven for Ships; its chief Town, of the same Name, was formerly a place of great Trade, but is now not at all consi∣derable. Eastward from Gorce lies the Island of Overslackee, or Overvlackee, which is of much larger extent than that of Goree, being about 15 miles long and 5 miles broad; and hath on it many Villages and good Towns, the chief of which is named Sommers∣dyck. DORT, or Dordrecht, Dordrechta, is a very anci∣ent City, and the first in Dignity of those that com∣pose the States of Holland; also the Capital of a small Country round it, call'd the Bailiwick of Dort, and by some South Holland, is seated upon the River Meruwe (which, as we have said, falls into the Maes) at the di∣stance of 15 or 16 miles from Rotterdam to the South-east, about 20 from Breda to the North, and 35 from Amsterdam to the South. It is strongly situated, being an Island between the Meruwe and Maes on the North, and a large Lake call'd the Bies-Bos on the South and East. The City is large and populous, the Houses of Brick and very high, and the Streets broad and very neat: The chief Church hath a high Steeple, from whence that of Breda may be seen. Our English Merchants enjoy great Privileges
here, as being our Staple for Cloth: This City is also the Staple for Rhenish Wines, whereof the Mer∣chants here have very great Stocks; as also of Corn, Wood and other Commodities, brought down the Rhine and the Maes. Dort boasts of being a Maiden Town, and never taken by an Enemy, tho' often besieg'd, particularly by the Duke of Brabant, in 1304. whom they repulsed and forced to return home. It hath long enjoyed the Privilege of coining Mony. This City is also noted for the famous Synod held in it, in the year 1619. for Reconciling the Points of Religion then in Debate between the Ar∣minians and Calvinists: The Room wherein it was held is still shewn, with the Seats in it, as they then stood. This Bailiwick of Dort was made an Island, in the Year, 1421. when a violent Tempest drove the Waters up the Maes and the Meruwe; with that Vio∣lence that it overflow'd the Banks, and swallowed a great Tract of Land that lay between Dort and Bra∣bant, with seventy two Villages and one hundred thousand Persons. Geertruydenberg, so named from a certain Saint Ger∣trude, who died in 664. is a very strong fortified Town, on the Frontiers of Holland towards Bra∣bant, esteemed of that Consequence formerly, that the Earls of Holland used to be bound by Oath to keep it, as the Dukes of Brabant were to recover it, since the Year, 1213. that the former took it. The supream Jurisdiction of it was conferr'd upon Prince Maurice, by the States, in 1611. since when it hath been part of the Patrimony of the Illustrious House of Orange. It is seated on the South Side of the Lake call'd Bies Bos, where the River Dong falls into it; which, tho' narrow above, is here so increased that it will receive Ships of good Burden; and is distant 10 miles from Dort to the South-east, as many from Breda to the North, and near 20 from the Bosch to the West. This Town is very strongly for∣tified, and hath besides, the Advantage in situation common in this Country, viz. very low and marshy Grounds round it; notwithstanding which, it was taken by the States, in 1573. and by the Spaniards in 1588. and in 1595. retaken by Prince Maurice, and ever since possessed by the States General. About 15 miles Westward from hence stands Klundert or Clundert, a strong Fortification belong∣ing to the Prince of Orange since 1583. It was for∣merly call'd the Nieurwaert, and the Branch of the Roo Vaert, was a good Road for Ships. Five miles from hence stands VVillemstadt, a strong but small Town, built in 1583. by Order of VVilliam Prince of Orange, from whom it had its Name, and on whom the Lordship of it was conferr'd by the States. It is seated upon the Water nam'd the Roo Vaert, hat parts the Island, call'd in general the Land van Voorn, from  Cn∣tinent, and serves to secure the Trade bween Hol∣land and Zealand: It is defended by a Wall with seven Bastions and a double Ditch, besides other Fortifications. Heusden is another well-fortified Frontier of Hol∣land; it stands on a Stream, that running out of the Maes forms a little Island call'd the Hemerder VVaert, at the distance of 12 miles from Gertruydenberg to the East, and about 7 or 8 from the Bosch to the North-west. It is an ancient Town, and was subject to its own Lords for 500 years, by whom sold to the Duke of Brabant, who gave it to the Earl of Holland; but being afterwards claim'd by others, gave occasion to grievous Wars. A lamentable ac∣cident happen'd here in the Year 1680. for the Ma∣gazine of Powder blew up in the Night-time, sup∣pos'd to have been fir'd by Lightning, and destroyed great part of the Castle and the neighbouring Street, shatter'd the whole Town, and kill'd near two hun∣dred People. Creveceur, a little Town strongly fortified, stands upon the Maes, 5 miles from Heusden to the East, and not above 3 from the B sch, and at the most ex∣tream East-part of Holland. The Bosch or Bolduc, Breda and Bergen op Zoom, belongs to the States, but being all seated in Brabant, are already described in our Account of that Pro∣vince. Lovesteine Castle is seated on the most Western part of the Bomeler waert, at the confluence of the VVael and the Maes, and distance of 8 or 9 miles from Clun∣dert to the South: It is a strong place, but chiefly remarkable on account of the Faction against the Prince of Orange (his present Majesty of Great Bri∣tain) who above 30 or 40 years ago using to assem∣ble in it, gave occasion to the whole Party's being commonly call'd by its Name. Worcum, an ancient and strong fortified Town, is seated on the South-side of the Wael, just over against Lovesteyne being parted from it by the Maes, which falls into the VVael betwixt them: It was sometime subject to the Duke of Cleeve, afterwards to the Earl of Hoorne, and in the year 1600. sold to the States by the Widow of the last Count; who was behead∣ed at Brussels by the Duke d' Alva. Gorcum is seated at the mouth of the Ling, and on the North-side of the Wael, not above 2 miles from Worcum, and about 15 East from Dort. It is a neat well-built Town and very strong, as well by reason of its situation as strong Fortifications; and is also a place of good Wealth, having a good Trade by Corn, Cheese, Butter, &c. brought down the Ling to its Market, and by the Inhabitants carried to other places: The Church hath a high Tower, from whence may be seen 22 wall'd Towns, besides a great number of Villages. The Town is reasonably large, and hath a Senate and Magistracy of its own. Vianen is a wall'd Town, formerly subject to its own Lords, seated on the South-side of the River Leck, near the Borders of the Province of Ʋtrecht, about 8 miles North from Gorcum, and as many South from Ʋtrecht: It is pleasantly seated, and a very neat Town, and hath a Castle and a stately high Tower. Schoonhoven, so call'd for its fine Gardens, Schoon in Dutch signifying Fair or Clean, and Hof a Garden-House, stands on the North-side of the Leck, about 12 miles West from Vianen, and 15 East from Rotter∣dam; it was so strong, that it was able to repulse the French, who endeavoured to take it in 1672. since when it hath been also better fortified. It is a very pleasant Town, and hath an old Castle, rebuilt in 1312. Just over against it stands Newport, formerly a rich and populous Town, but now not considerable. Goude, corruptly call'd Ter-Gou, is a fair large City, the sixth in Dignity of those that compose the States of Holland, and seated on the small River Gouwe and the Issel, which about 10 miles below falls into the Maes, at the distance of about 12 miles from Schoonhoven to the North-west, as many from Rot∣terdam to the North-east, and 24 from Amsterdam to the South. It was founded in 1272. but suffer'd much by Fire, about a hundred years after, and by Wars in 120. and again totally consum'd by Fire,
in 1438. but being rebuilt, is now an exceeding neat Place, and more than ordinary clean by means of the Flux of the Tide up the Issel into the Channels in the Streets, which carry away all their Ordure. The Houses are of Brick, and tho' old are very neat, the Market-place is very spacious, on it stands the Stadt∣huys, and near it the great Church; which being burnt by Lightning in 1552. hath been at vast Ex∣pence repaired, and is now a very stately Building; it is especially remarkable for its painted Glass-Win∣dows, which are thought to exceed any others in being. This City enjoys a healthful Air, tho' it be seated upon a moorish Ground, and the Country about is so low that it may be easily overflow'd by open∣ing their Sluces: Besides which it is secur'd by Walls and a broad Ditch, and therefore reckon'd a very strong Post and a Security to that side of the Coun∣try. Naerden, a small City, but very strongly fortified, is seated near the Zuyder-zee, 22 miles from Goude to the North-east, and about 12 from Amsterdam to the East. It stands in low marshy Grounds, and hath of long time been a considerable Post; in 1481. it was taken by the People of Ʋtrecht: But in the same year the Nardeners not only regain'd their City, but obtain'd so signal a Victory over their Enemies, that with the Booty they gained, a Tower was erected to commemorate it. In 1572. Frederick of Toledo, the Spanish General, in revenge for their having sub∣mitted to the Prince of Orange, summoned all the Inhabitants into the Market-place, and caused his Soldiers to cut them in pieces, and burnt down the Town: Which barbarous Action encreased the Ha∣tred of the Hollanders to the Spaniards, and made them hold our their Towns the more vigorously af∣terwards. It was taken by the French in 1672. and regain'd in 1673. And it being a place of great Consequence, as serving to secure Amsterdam, the States have lately bestowed great Cost in Fortifying it, the old Walls being pull'd down and new ones built of Brick, together with Ravelins, Half-Moons, Counterscarps, double Ditches, &c. so that it is now a regular Fortification, and as strong as any. This Town stood formerly more Northward, but was swallowed up by the Encroachment of the Zuyder-zee, whereof some Remains are still to be seen at Low Water. Muyden, a small wall'd Town, seated upon the Vecht, where it falls into the Zuyder-zee, in the Mid∣way between Naerden and Amsterdam, was made a strong Post in the late War, when the French were at Ʋtrecht; as was also Wesep, another small Town on the Vecht, about 2 or 3 miles distant from Muyden to the South. And now having Travell'd round, and brought the Reader back to Amsterdam, we must proceed to North Holland or Waterland, which is divided from Amstelland by the Y, Ye or Ya, call'd a River, but may be more properly esteem'd a Branch of the Zuy∣der-zee or South-Sea, from which it begins at the Pampus, about 3 miles West from Murden, in a Chan∣nel of about half a mile broad; which breadth it continues to Amsterdam, but grows soon after twice so broad, and receives the Sa, out of North-Hl∣land, and the Sporen from Halem, and then passes Northward to Beverwick, &c. North Holland in general, is commonly understood by the Name of West-Friezland, hough but one part of it, viz. That to the North-east (wherein stand Horn, Enchuysen and Medenblick) be the ancient Frizia Occidentalis. In this Country stand 7 of the 18 Cities that have Voices in the Provincial State, viz. Thos three newly mention'd, and Munickdam, Edam, Purmerent and Alckmaer. Munickendam, so named from the small River Monick that passes through it, is seated on a small Bay of the Zuyder-Sea, about 8 miles North from Amsterdam, and 3 South from Edam. It is a small Town of some Antiquity, and defended but by a Rampart, and in some places by a Wall. Saenredam, or Sardam, seated on the Y, at the Mouth of the small River Saen, about 10 miles North-west from Amsterdam; tho' but a Village, deserves mentioning rather than some of their Cities, being so remarkable for Ship-building, that 'tis common∣ly said of this Town, the Shipwrights in it will undertake to build so many Ships of War in a year as there are days in it. By this Trade the place is much enrich'd and encreas'd. The old Town stands below the Dam of the River whence it hath its Name: To which hath been since added a long row of Buildings on both sides the River beyond the Dam, which is call'd the New Town, out of which Ships are hall'd over the Dam upon Rowlers. Edam or Yedam, is seated at a little distance from the Zuyder-zee, to which it has a Channel or Haven, 3 miles from Munickendam to the North, and 10 from Hoorn to the South. It is a small Town, but is Noted for Building of Ships, and making ex∣cellent Cheese. Purmerent, a good neat Town, fortified with a Rampart and Ditch, is seated about 5 miles from Edam to the West, and 12 from Amsterdam to the North, formerly belonging to the Lords of Egmond, who sold it to the States in the year 1590. The Land between Edam and Purmerent, was formerly a great Lake, but by the Industry and Skill of the Inhabitants, it was Drain'd, and is at present a fruitful and pleasant Country, bearing still the name of Purmer: And Southward from Purmerent lyes the Beemster, a great Lake also before the year 1612. when after four years Labour and vast Ex∣pence (the Banks by which the Water that was thrown out by their Mills, having been broken, the Water returned, after the Work was half done) it was made dry Land, and is now so planted with Gardens, Orchards, Rows of Trees and fertil Enclo∣sures, that Sir William Temple says, it is the plea∣santest Summer Landschip he ever saw. Its extent contains 7090 Acres, besides the Highways, and the Dikes that surround it and cross it in several Places. Of the like nature are the Wormer, which lies South of it, the Schermer and the Heer Huygen Waert, to the West of the Beemster, as is also the Zype in the most North part of this Province; which last is de∣fended from the Sea by a vast Mole, built of great Beams of Timber driven into the Ground, and the Distances fill'd with Stones. Alcmaer is seated a little beyond the Schermer, at the distance of 12 miles from Purmerent to the North-west, and about 20 from Haerlem to the North. The Buildings are beautiful and the Streets even and neat, the Houses generally furnished with Gardens, and the Town surrounded with Meadows; all which make this place esteemed one of the pleasantest in these Countries. The Inhabitants are enriched by the great quantity of Butter and Cheese they receive from the vast Herds of Kine fed in the neighbouring Pastures. It is wall'd round, and was strong enough to resist the Spaniards, who endeavour'd to take it in the Netherland War.
Hoorne is a good large, pleasant and rich City, with a convenient Port on the Zuyder-zee, at the di∣stance of 20 miles from Alcmar to the East, 20 from Amsterdam and 10 from Edam to the North; it is sur∣rounded with broad Dykes for its security, large Pasture Grounds for its Profit, and fine Gardens and Walks for its Pleasure. The Trade of this place consists chiefly in Butter and Cheese, whereof they export great quantities into Spain, Portugal and other parts, especially at their annual Fair in the Month of May. Enchuysen is seated also on the Zuyder-zee, in the most Eastern part of the Penisle of West-Friezland, at the distance of 12 miles from Hoorne to the North-east, and as many from Medenblick to the South-east, as also 30 miles from Alcmaer to the East. It is a fair, neat and large City, with a capacious Port, from whence great Fleets yearly sail to the Baltic and other parts, by which, as also by their Herring Fish∣ing, building of Ships and refining of Salt from Brit∣tany in France, the Inhabitants are much Enrich'd. The Buildings are mostly of Brick, for being former∣ly of Wood they suffer'd much by Fire, wherefore of late years no Wooden Houses have been erected. The Steeple of the great Church is remarkably high, considering the Moorishness of the Soil whereon the City stands, which is thereby secur'd, as well as by the Ramparts and other strong Fortifications about it. Medenblick or Medemblick, is one of the most an∣cient Cities of North Holland, and formerly the Me∣tropolis of it, but Enchuysen hath out-stript it in Gran∣deur, for this is but a small City. It is seated on the Zuyder-zee in the North-west part of West-Friezland, 12 miles from Enchusen to the North-west, as many from Hoorne to the North, and about 25 from Alcmaer to the East. It hath a very large and commodious Haven, and a Castle of very ancient Structure. The Banks are here more strong and large than any in this Country, for there being nothing to break the Sea quite from der Schelling and Flielandt Islands to this Shoar, the Waters beat violently upon it when the Northerly Winds blow. The Country about affords good Pasturage. Medenblick had formerly a Terri∣tory depending on it, and govern'd by an Officer call'd Dyck-grave. Cross the Mouth of the Zuyder-zee lye a row of Islands, the first of which named the Texel or Tessel, is disjoined from the North Cape of North-Holland, by but a very narrow Channel; nor are the Distances between the rest much larger. The three named Texel, Flieland and der Schelling, are reckon'd part of North-Holland. Texel is a small Island of not above 4 or 5 miles extent, but very fruitful, affording especially good Pasturage; it is defended from the sury of the Ocean partly by the Sandhills, and partly by strong Banks. Here is a large, fair Town, besides many Villages; and a strong Fort to command the Passage into the Zuyder-zee. Flieland or Ʋlieland, lies North-west from the Texel; it is about 10 miles long but very narrow: It hath only two Villages and is not considerable, but for abundance of Muscles taken there. Schelling lies next to Flieland, and is longer and much broader than that. Here are five Villages, the chief whereof containing near 1000 Houses was burnt, together with above 100 Sail of Merchant Ships, by our English Fleet under the Command of Sir Robert Holmes, on the 7th August, 1666. These Islands, together with some Banks of Sand, break the Assaults of the Ocean, and make two good Harbours denominated from the two first. Southward from the Texel and in the midway be∣tween that and Medenblick, lies another small Iland call'd the VVierings, which hath several good Villages and a rich and fertil Soil. Sir VVilliam Temple is of Opinion, That the Zuyder-zee hath been made by some great Inunda∣tion, there being no mention made of it in ancient Authors; and the great Shoals of flat Sands that are spread almost all over it and the Row of Islands that lie like the broken Remains of a continued Coast, together with the name of VVest-Friezland, do give good reason to believe, that the outward part, at least, was anciently a continued Country from North-Holland to Friezland. CHAP. XII. ZEELAND, Zeelandia. ZEELAND, so call'd from its situation in the Sea, or as others say, so nam'd by the Danes, (who formerly used to infest these Coasts) in memory of their principal Island of the same name, is seated between Holland on the North, Flanders on the South, Brabant on the East, and the German Sea on the West. It is composed of several Islands, which are usually divided into two Districts, call'd the Beoster, [or the Eastern] Schelde, and the Bewester [or Western] Schelde, from the two different Channels by which that River falls into the Sea. Which Division is Po∣litical and made for the more easy Government of them, each District having one grand Magistrate in the nature of a Justiciary, with large Power to pu∣nish Vagabonds and Criminals out of the Jurisdicti∣ons of the Cities; but this Jurisdiction hath been much restrain'd, and therefore this Division less re∣garded: And Geographers now only mention the Islands as they are situate beyond the Ooster-Schelde, or between that and the VVestern. Those beyond or North of the Ooster Schelde, are Schouwen, Duyveland, Tolen and Oresand. Goree and Overflackee (already mention d in Holland) were formerly reckon'd part of Zeeland. Those between the Ooster and the Wester Schelde, are Walcheren, North-Beveland, South-Beveland and Wolferdyke. These Islands were formerly subject to the same Earls with Holland (but with the enjoyment of their own proper Laws and Customs) and with that fell to the House of Burgundy, and afterwards associated with the other Provinces in the Union of Ʋtrecht (as we have already shewn) and have ever since been a con∣siderable part of the Territories of the States General; for by reason of the situation of Zeeland, the Inhabi∣tants are much enriched by Fishery and Navigation: They Trade into all Foreign Parts, especially the VVest-Indies and France. They have few or no Ma∣nufacturies, but have an excellent way of boiling and purifying the Salt they fetch from France.
The Land here lyes extream low, so that they are forced to be at great expence in maintaining the Banks to keep out the Sea. But then the Soil is fertile and produces very good Wheat and excellent Pa∣sture; also Madder for Dying; and Colewort, the Seed whereof yields them good Profit. The Air is not so wholsom as in the neighbouring Countries, for by reason of the noisom Fogs and Vapours ari∣sing from many Pools of standing Waters and the neighbouring Sea, it disposes to Agues and Fevers, and other such Diseases. The extent of Zeeland is not easie to be computed because of the intervening Waters, but reckoning Water and all, from the most Northern Banks of Schowen to the Southern Shoar of Zuyd Beveland, is about 20 miles, and from the most Eastern part of Walcheren to the Town of Tolen, near 30 miles. In this Province are 8 Wall'd Towns, and 102 Villages; the chief whereof are these, viz. In Walcheren the chief Island of Zeeland, situate the most South-west: For Trade, Wealth, number of Inhabitants, and splendor of its Cities and Vil∣lages, much surpassing all the rest. Middleburg, Cap. Ʋlissengen. Arnmuyden. Ter Vere. In Schowen, situate North-east from Walcheren, Zirczee. Browers-haven. Bommene. In Duyveland, situate on the West-part of the same Continent with Schouwen, and divided from that by a small River only. Oostduyveland. In Tolen, situate South from Duy∣veland, and North-east from South-Beveland. Tolen. In North-Beveland, situate South from Schouwen, and East from Walcheren. Cats. In South-Beveland, situate between Walcheren to the South-east, Flanders to the North, Brabant to the West, and Tolen, North-Beveland and Wolferdyck to the North, Tergoes. Romerswall. In Wolfersdyck a small Island, situ∣ate between the 2 Bevelands. Osterlant and 2 or 3 other Villages. MIDDLEBƲRG, the Capital City of Zee∣land, is situate in the Island of Walcheren, at the di∣stance of 40 miles from Rotterdam to the South-west, 42 from Breda to the West, and 25 from Bruges to the North-east, in the Latitude of 51 deg. 35 min. and Long. of 22 deg. 50 min. and is a large well-built and populous City, the Streets large and neat, and the publick Buildings stately, especially the Stad∣thuys, which is adorn'd with curious Statues. The Churches, whereof here are about twenty, are very fine; the highest Tower is exceeding costly and beautiful. Its Haven hath been made very conveni∣ent by a great Channel cut from a little Arm of the Sea, that running out at Armuyden makes a little Island, and falls in again at Rammekins, from the middle of which Branch this Channel is derived and made to bring up Ships into the Streets of the Town, by which means the City hath been exceedingly in∣rich'd by Trade, especially by the Staple of French, Spanish and Portugal Wines settl'd here. In the new Erection of Bishopricks which King Philip II. at∣tempted, this City was made one, and the Abby of S. Nicholas the Seat, but it was soon alter'd and made the place of Assembly of the States of this Province, the College of its admiralty, its Mint, and other pu∣blick Offices. Middleburg is strongly fortified with a good Wall, large and deep Ditches, and a Counterscarp. Arnmuyden, so call'd from the small River Arne that runs from hence to Middleburg, is at present but a small Wall'd Town, seated about 3 miles from Mid∣dleburg to the East, at the Mouth of that little Arm of the Sea above-mention'd, which afforded it for∣merly an extraordinary good Haven, and the Town was exceedingly enrich'd by the many Merchant-Ships that frequented it: But the Sands have so choaked it up, that for many years past Ships cannot enter, and therefore the Trade is now quite decayed, and the present subsistence of the Inhabitants, is by the boil∣ing and Purifying Salt. It was formerly a Lordship, but in the last Century, purchased by the City of Middleburg, and is now a Dependent on that. Rammekins, call'd in Dutch Zeburg, is a strong Fort, seated at the Mouth of the Harbour of Middle∣burg, at the distance of about 3 miles from that City to the South-east, and as many from Flushing to the East. The Creek whereon it stood is a secure Re∣treat for Shipping; and to the Land-side it is sur∣rounded with pleasant Meadows and many Villages. This Fort was one of the Cautionary Towns deliver'd to Queen Elizabeth. Flushing, call'd by the Dutch Ʋlissingen, is seated in the most Southern part of the Island, at the distance of about 3 miles from Middleburg; and tho formerly but a small place at which a Ferry was establish'd to carry Passengers to Flanders, (which is just over against it, at about half a League's distance) is at present a considerable City, well-built, and a place of good Trade by means of its excellent Port, The Build∣ings are not quite so good as those of Middleburg, nor the Streets so broad, but the Stadthuyse is a very stately modern Building. It was first wall'd about 140 years ago, but upon the Erection of this Repu∣blick it was very strongly fortified, as being a place of great consequence. It was formerly subject to its own Lords of the Family of the Borsals, of whom it was purchas'd by the Prince of Orange about the year 1581. who hath still the nomination of their Magistrates. This was also one of the Cautionary Towns deliver'd to Queen Elizabeth in 1585. and restor'd by King James in 1616. Ter Vere is a strong fortified Town with two good Harbours, seated on the North-side of the Island, at the distance of three Miles from Middleburg, and hardly so much from Arnmuyden to the North. I hath been a place of good Trade, especially for the Scotch Trade, the Staple of which was fix'd here, but is not now so considerable. It is govern'd by its own Magistrates, and is (as I have said) well forti∣fied, having three strong Bulwarks and a broad Ditch. The Sea hath often assaulted and threatn'd the Ruin of this Town, as it actually did its Tower that stood on the North-side of the Port, in the year 1630. This Town is also subject to the Prince of Orange. Zirczee, or Zirczee, the chief City of the Island of Schouwen, is seated on the Channel which divides Schouwen from Duyveland, at the distance of about 15 miles from Middleburg to the North-east, and as many from the Briel to the South. It is esteem'd the ancientest City of Zeeland, and is a place of Trade, having a good Haven by means of a Channel from the Sea, by which they receive Salt from France, and export Madder in great quantities; though the Harbour by being somewhat choak'd with Sand, be less convenient than formerly. It is a large place
and hath several good Buildings, especially the great Church called de Monster, which is a very beautiful Structure: The Walls are old, but by reason of the low Grounds about, which are easily laid under Wa∣ter, the place is strong enough, and did actually su∣stain a Siege of the Spaniards in 1575. for 8 Months, and at last obtain'd good Terms. Browershawen, so call'd from the great quantities of Beer brought hither from Delft and other places, and distributed to all the Towns in this Province, is seated on the North-side of the Island over against Gorec, at the distance of 5 miles from Zirczee; and was for∣merly a place of good Trade, and therefore Wall'd, encreas'd in Buildings, and govern'd by its Magi∣strates; but it is now much declin'd, and subsists chiefly by Fishing and Agriculture. Bommenee stands near the Sea about a mile East∣ward of Browershaven, over against Goree and the West-part of Overflackee, and is a very strong Fortress, being encompass'd with a Wall and a deep Ditch, fill'd by the Sea, besides other Fortifications. Oostduyveland, q. d. in the East of Duyveland (so nam'd from the great numbers of Doves and Pigeons found in this Country) is a Village only; as are also Oudekerke, Niewekirk, Vianen, Capelle, Swaneburg, &c. situate also in Duyveland. Tolen or Ter Tolen, the chief City of the Island of the same Name, is seated on the Channel call'd Het Slaeck, which makes Tolen an Island and divides it from Brabant, and is distant about 10 or 12 miles from Zirczee to the South-east, and 3 or 4 from Bergen-op-zoom to the North-west. It was formerly the Seat of one of the Custom-houses of the Earls of Zeeland, whence it had its name, and is at present a well-fortified and strong Place, capable of resisting a powerful Enemy. This Island is but small, and hath no other consi∣derable Town in it. Cats and Colyns Plaet, are the chief Towns of North-Beveland; the first seated on the Eastern Shoar, and the second on the Southern, but neither of them are considerable enough to deserve a particular Descri∣ption. This Island was formerly exceeding pleasant, but by an Inundation in 1532. the greatest part of it was overwhelm'd, and therein the City Cortgeen (at that time a place of note) with many Villages destroy'd. The Inhabitants have recover'd a great deal of the Land, in the North and East part whereon stand the Towns above-mention'd, but cannot regain their an∣cient State, the place being at present not at all con∣siderable. Oresand or Maersand, reckon'd one of the Islands of Zeeland, is a very small Country lying North-west from North-Beveland, and divided from that but by a narrow Channel, hath no Town in it worth de∣scribing. Wolfersdyck, another small Island of about 5 miles long, but not above one mile broad, is situate between North and South Beveland, and contains only 3 or 4 Villages, nam'd Westerland, Oosterland, Hongersdyck &c. South Beveland may be reckon'd the largest of all the Islands of Zeeland, tho' it be at present of less ex∣tent than formerly, the Sea having encroach'd upon it several times, especially in 1532. when the Town and most of the Lordship of Borsales was swallow'd up. The length of this Island is about 24 or 25 mile; but all the Eastern part being overflow'd, it cannot be reckon'd above 15 miles, and its breadth 8 or 9. The Soil of it is in some places Woody, but the rest produces very good Corn and Fruit. The chief Town here is Ter Goes, seated on the South-side of the Island 12 miles East from Middleburg, and 15 West from Bergen-op-Zoom. It is a reasonable large City, neatly built and well inhabited; the chief Church was burnt down in 1618. but was quickly rebuilt, and is now a stately Structure. Here are three Market-places, a Grammar-school and three Hospitals, all fair and well built. This Town was endow'd with large Privi∣leges in 1530. wall'd round about in the year 140. and afterwards strongly fortified by the States in 1585. It hath a Channel to the Sea, by which Vessels of smaller Burden come up to the Town. There are many large and populous Villages, as al∣so several fine Mansion-houses of Gentlemen in South-Beveland; but those containing nothing very remark∣able, we must omit them to speak a little of Romerswael, formerly one of the three chief Towns of this Island, and enjoy'd large Privileges; but by the Misfortunes of six Inundatins and one Conflagration which all happen'd in ten years time; about the middle of the last Century was so re∣duc'd, that though many Attempts were made for its Restoration, the Remains of the whole Town were sold in the year, 1631. for no other than 90 Pounds Flemish or 60 Pounds Sterling. It stands on the Banks of the Ooster-Scheld 10 miles from Ter Gees to the East. CHAP. XIII. UTRECHT, Ʋltrajectina Ditio. THE Province of Ʋtrecht is bounded on the North by Holland and the Zuyder-zee, on the South by part of Holland and part of Guelderland, on the East by Guelderland, and on the West by Holland, containing in extent about 20 miles both in length and breadth. The Land here is higher and therefore fitter for Agriculture, and the Country much plea∣santer than those we have been speaking of: It pro∣duces plenty of good Corn, and is replenished with fine Gardens and Orchards. An account hath already been given of its having been subject to its Bishops for several Ages, and of its Engagement with the other Provinces in the Union made in its Metropo∣lis; since when it hath been always part of these States, but with the same form of Government, the Bishops excepted, as formerly; and tho' the Episco∣pacy be banish'd, the Canonries and Prebendaries having been disposed of to Gentlemen of the Coun∣try, retain the same share in the Government that their Predecessors the Clergy had, and send Eight Dele∣gates to the Provincial States, who, in the name of the Clergy, have Session therein: The rest of the Members of the States being the Deputies of the No∣bles and of the chief Towns, as in the other Pro∣vinces.
This Province was wholly subjected to the French in the years 1672 and 1673, their King keeping his Court in the Metropolis some part of the year 1672, and it remain'd their Head Quarters till the end of 1673. The Chief Towns of this Pro∣vince, are Ʋtrecht, Cap. Amersfort. Duesterde Wyck. Rheenen. ƲTRECHT, Ʋltrajectum, Trajectum Inferius & Trajectum ad Rhenum, so nam'd from an ancient Ferry or Passage over the Rhine, is a fair, large and populous City, seated upon the old Channel of the Rhine, at the distance of 24 miles from Amsterdam to the South-east, 27 from Leyden, and about as many from Rotterdam to the East, 17 from the Zuyder-zee to the South, and 34 from Breda to the North. The Buildings are of Brick, neat and beautiful with, con∣venient deep Cellars, not to be found in Holland. The Streets are large, but not so well adorn'd with Trees, nor the whole City in general quite so cleanly and beautiful as some in Holland are. The Church of S. Martin, call'd the Dome, formerly the Cathedral, was a magnificent Building before a great part of it was destroy'd by Tempest in 1674. but the large square Tower of 460 Steps to the top, is still stand∣ing. The Churches of our Saviour, S. Mary, S. Peter, and S. John, were formerly Collegiate, the Chapter whereof (tho' now compos'd of Laymen, to whom the Revenues have been given) make the States of the Clergy. The other publick Buildings are stately enough, but being ancient are not particularly re∣markable. The chief Excellence of this City is its pleasant Situation (in a serene and wholsome Air, among rich Meadows and Corn-fields, and within a days Journy of at least fifty Wall'd Towns) and its famous University, at first an publick School only, founded by David of Burgundy Bishop of Ʋtrecht in 1459. but erected into a University by the Magi∣strates, and confirm'd by the Provincial States in the year 1636. which is at present in a flourishing State. Besides the Rhine, two artificial Channels call'd de Vaert and de Nieuwe Gracht, run through the Streets, and have 35 arch'd Bridges of Brick over them. The Wall of this City is very high and hath a broad Bank within-side to sustain it (which is planted with Trees and makes a pleasant Walk) but is old and decay'd; and here being pretty large Suburbs, and no Out-works, the place cannot be esteemed fit to resist a powerful Enemy; which was the Reason the Inhabi∣tants gave for their sending the French King the Keys of the City in 1672. But the Hollanders accuse them of Treachery and Cowardize, and say, They had be∣forehand made a Bargain, and therefore refus'd to permit new Fortifications to be rais'd, nor admit the Prince of Orange with the Army into the City, when the French were at Arnheim. But tho' these coura∣gious Citizens sent above 20 miles to seek the Enemy and Present them the Keys, they fared little better than the other Conquests of that King, having been forced to pay no less than One hundred and sixty thousand Pounds Sterling to their new Guests while they tarried with them, which was from the 23d of June, 1672. to the end of November, 1673. besides above Forty thousand Pounds at their departure. Amersfort, Amisfortia, and Amisfurtum, stands up∣on the little River Eems, 12 miles from Ʋtrecht to the North-east, and 7 from the Zuyder-zee to the South. It is a good large Wall'd Town, well Inha∣bited, and pleasantly seated between large Corn-fields to the East and South, and Pasture-Grounds to the North, which afford the Inhabitants a plenti∣ful Subsistence, the chief Trade of the Town being Agriculture and Grazing. The Buildings are neat and handsome; among the publick ones are two Churches, several Hospitals, and a publick School. The Town is Govern'd by its own Magistrates, and is a place of great Antiquity, but hath been much Enlarged, for though it were formerly a small Place, the compass of its Walls at present is near an hours Walk. The Strength of it is not considerable. It is the usual Winter Quarters of several Troops of Horse. At a little distance from Amersfort to the South-west lies a large Tract of Hills, Woods and barren Heaths of near 10 miles long and 4 or 5 miles broad, call'd Amersforder Bergh. Just upon the edge of which stands SOESTDYCK, a pleasant Palace of His Ma∣jesty's, adorn'd with fine Gardens and curious Foun∣tains, delightful Walks shaded with tall Trees, plea∣sant Parks fill'd with Deer, a large Volary and ex∣ceeding fine Stables. Duesterde Wyck, or Wyck te Duesterde, Dorostatum, and Durostadium olim Batavodurum, is seated just in the place where the middle Channel of the Rhine joins with the Leck, and is distant 13 miles from Amersfort to the South, and as many from Ʋtrecht to the South-east. It is a pretty neat wall'd Town, pleasantly situated and indifferently rich. It is a place of Antiquity, being mention'd by Tacitus, and after∣wards ruin'd by the Normans. Rhenen, another Wall'd Town of great Antiquity, is seated on the Rhine 7 miles from Duesterdewyck to the East, and 14 from Amersfort to the South. Montfort is a good neat Town, tolerably well Fortified, and seated about 7 or 8 miles from Ʋtrecht to the West, near the Frontiers of Holland. It is water'd by the small River Issel, and is the Capital of a small Territory adjoining. CHAP. XIV. GELDERLAND and ZUTPHEN, Geldria & Zutphania. GElderland, with Zutphen, which is reckon'd part of it, (both together composing one Province of the Ʋnited Netherlands, is bounded on the North by the Zuyder-zee and Overissel, on the South by Brabant and he Dutchy of Cleeve, on the East by the Bisho∣prick of Munster, and on the West by the Provinces of Ʋtrecht and Holland, containing in extent about 50 miles from North to South, and about 45 from East to West, without reckoning the Spanish Gelder∣land, which is disjoined from the rest by part of the Dutchy of Cleeve. The Air of Gelderland is Clear and Healthy, the Country lying high and In∣land,
and consequently freed from those Fogs that infest the Maritime Provinces. The Soil of it is Fruitful (except in the Veluwe, part of which is Heathy and Barren) producing good Corn and Pasture. Zutphen is somewhat more Level and Moorish, and therefore yields not much Corn, but affords very good Grass. This Province hath in it 25 Cities and Wall'd Towns, besides the Royal Seats of His present Majesty, Deeren and Loo; many Noblemen and Gentlemens Mansion Houses, and a great number of fine Villages, and is usually divided into these four Parts, viz. The Veluwe being the Northern part, and seated between the Zuyder-zee, the Issel and the Rhine, contains these chief Towns, Arnhem. Wageninge. Harderwyke. Elburg. Hattem. The Betuwe lying between the Rhine and the Leck to the South, and the Maes and Merwe to the North, hath these considerable Towns. Nimeguen. Tiel. Schenkenschans. Bommel. Buren. Culenburg. Zutphen, bounded on the North by Over∣issel, on the South by Cleeve, on the West by Munster, and on the East by the Issel, which parts it from the Veluwe; wherein these Towns are most remarkable, Zutphen. Doesburg. Groll. Brevoort &c. The Quarter of Geldre subject to the King of Spain, lies at some di∣stance from the rest of the Pro∣vince, the Western part of the Dutchy of Cleeve intervening. Its extent is about 25 miles from East to West, and 15 from North to South; to which the Quarter of Ruremond is joined on the South, and is extended along the Banks of the Maes for about 15 miles more; in both which these are the Towns of chiefest note, viz. Geldre. Venloo. Stralen. Watchtendonk. Ruremond. Montfort. ARNHEM, Arnhemum, is seated on the South∣ern Banks of the Rhine, at the distance of 60 miles from Ʋtrecht, and 26 from Rhenen to the East, 22 from Amersfort to the South-east, 25 from the Zuy∣der-zee to the South, 10 from Doesberg to the West, and 23 from the Grave to the North. It is a very large, neat and strong City, formerly the Seat of the Dukes of Geldre, and at present of the Supream Coun∣cil of the Province. It is very pleasantly situated, having the River on one side and beyond it the Meadows of the Betuwe; and on the other side Heaths, Woods and Hills of the Veluwe, which afford abund∣ance of all sorts of Game, and an exceeding whol∣som Air, and is therefore Inhabited by many Gen∣tlemen and Persons of Quality. The Buildings are neat and beautiful: The Church of S. Eusebius is a noble Structure, and adorn'd with a stately Tower: The 3 Hospitals, especially that called the Island of God, for the maintenance of decay'd Citizens, are well Endowed. Large Privileges were conferr'd on this City by Otho Earl of Geldre, in the year 1233. when it was first Wall'd about; and in 1443. it was incorporated into the Body of the Hanse Towns of Germany. It is Fortified with a Wall of Brick and strong Ramparts, but is commanded by a Hill on the North-side: However it is esteem'd a place of good Strength, and capable of making a good Defence, although the Inhabitants surrender'd it to the French in 1672. the first day they attack'd it; who remain∣ing there all that, and the following Year, added some new Fortifications, and made it a great Maga∣zine, to which they brought the Canon from Ʋtrecht and other places when they quitted them; till at last being forced also to quit this, they Exacted 170000 Guilders of the Inhabitants, as a Ransom for their City. In the Walls are five Gates, which are very strong; that of S. John's was in 1537. fortified with large Out-works. Near the Gate which opens to the Rhine is a Bridge of Boats over that River to the Betuwe; and on the other side is an exceeding fine large flat bottom'd Ditch lin'd with Freestone, which almosts surrounds the Town, and is fill'd with Water by a Spring arising in the neighbouring Hill. Wageningen is a very ancient Town seated near the Rhine, about 10 miles West from Arnhem: It is Wall'd round, and stands in a Moorish Soil, which makes it a place of some Strength. About 10 miles from Arnhem to the North-east, stands DIEREN, where His Majesty hath a stately Palace, adorned with beautiful Gardens and exceeding pleasant Walks. And about 8 or 9 miles from Arnhem to the North, and 10 from Amersfort to the East, stands LOO, another of His Majesty's Houses, which is seated near the middle of the Veluwe, in a very sweet Air, and a Country abounding with all sorts of Game, and therefore was the Place he used commonly to reside at all the Summer. The Palace is a noble Building, and the Gardens exceeding Pleasant, being adorn'd with curious Knots of Flowers, fine shady Walks and Grotto's, and admirable Fountains, espe∣cially the Basin of Venus, and the two great Cascades or Water-falls, which are incomparably beautiful; the Water in the Cascades falling so easily out of one Basin into another, that it makes a broad Mirror from top to bottom. Harderwyck, Hardervicum, stands on the Banks of the Zuyder-zee, 25 miles from Arnhem to the North, and 22 from Deventer to the West. It is a fair well-built City, adorn'd with an University, which was an∣ciently a publick School only, but rais'd to this Dig∣nity, and Sallaries settled upon the Professors, by the States of this Province in the year 1648. The Houses in general are well built, very high, and have Porches before them. The Cathedral Church of S. Mary is a stately Building, adorn'd with curious Workmanship on the Roof and Arches within-side, and an exceeding high Tower. A Staple of Fish hath of long time been estabish'd here, by which the Inhabitants are Enriched; and the Town is defended by an old Castle, a Wall round, a Rampart on the South-side, and some other Fortifications; but was however, taken by the French in 1672. as were in∣deed all the Towns of this Province, as well as Ʋtrecht, &c. Elburg is seated near the Zuyder-zee, at the distance of 12 miles from Harderwyck to the North-east. It is a small City of an oblong square Form; a small River runs through it and falls into a Creek of the Zuyder-zee, which makes its Port; over this River are built five Stone Bridges. It was surrounded with Walls about A. 1400. and was sometime one of the Hanse-Towns, as was also Harderwyck.
Hattem stands about 10 miles from Elburg to the East, and hardly one from the Issel to the West: It had formerly a very good Castle and other strong For∣tifications, but is at present not very considerable. Nimeguen, or Nieumegen, Noviomagus, famous for the Treaty held in it in the years 1678, and 1679. and at last a Peace concluded between the King of France and the several Princes then at War with him, is seated on the River Waal, at the distance of 10 miles from Arnhem to the South, and 8 from the Grave to the North, 30 from Gorcum to the East, and 10 from Schencksconce to the West. It is a large City, of a semicircular form, and exceeding pleasant, be∣ing built upon five small Hills between the River on one side, and an exceeding pleasant Country, consisting of woody Hills (out of which issue many Springs) Corn-fields and Gardens, on the other. The Houses are of Brick, cover'd with Slate and very neat, and the Streets spacious and handsom. Among its ten Churches, all well-built and adorn'd with Towers, that of S. Stephen is chiefly commendable for its state∣ly Tower and costly Structure, The Stadthuyse is a magnificent Fabrick adorn'd with the Statues of di∣vers Emperors; as is the publick School with those of the Apostles and Doctors of the Church. Here are two Hospitals for the maintenance of poor Orphans, one for old People, and another for the Cure of the Sick. The Walls of the City are of Brick, exceeding high, and guarded by very strong Towers: The Gates are 12 in number, whereof 7 are toward the Water. This City enjoys great Privileges, and was Imperial and Free before the year 1248. at which time it was given to the Earl of Geldre; and with that Province became subject to the States General. Schencksconce or Schencken-schanse, so named from a famous Captain Schenk, by whose direction it was built by the States in 1588. is seated upon the point of the Betuwe, where the Rhine divides into two great Arms, one whereof retains its Name and runs to Duesterde-wick, and the other is call'd the Waal, by which situation it commands both those Rivers, and the Commerce between Germany and the Nether∣lands. It is an exceeding strong place, having be∣sides the Rivers on two sides, very strong Walls, with good Bastions, a large Ditch, Half-moons and other Fortifications; however, it was taken by the Spaniards in 1635. by Surprize, but the same year recover'd by the Prince of Orange; and by the French in 1672. by the Treachery of the Governor. In 1674 the French surrender'd it to the Duke of Brandenburg, who claim'd it as a dependent on Cleve; and in 1679, sold it to the Dutch. It stands about 10 miles East from Nimeguen, and 12 South from Doesburg. About 2 or 3 miles below Schencksonce on the West-side of the Rhine, stands a small Fort call'd the Tolhuys, which was also taken by the French in 1672. Tiel stands upon the South-side of the Waal, about 12 miles East from Nimeguen, and 6 miles South from Rhenen, in a marshy Ground, which together with the narrowness of the Streets, makes the Town som∣what Unhealthy. It is well Fortified, and by rea∣son of the Soil, not attackable but on the North-west side: However was taken by the French in 1672. The Country lying to the West-ward between the Waal and the Ling, depends on it, and is call'd the Tieler Waert. Buren is seated about 7 or 8 m. West from Tiel, on a small Stream that falls into the Ling; it is a wall'd Town and the Capital of a small Lordship, which with the Town belong to the Prince of Orange, as do also the Town and Lordship of Culenburg, seated on the Leck, about 5 or 6 miles from Buren to the North-west, and 12 from Ʋtrecht to the South-east. Commel is seated on the South-side of the Wael, about 12 miles from Tiel to the West, and as many from Gorcum to the East. It is a pleasant, neat and well-built City, govern'd by its own Magistrates, and sends Deputies to the Provincial State. It is sur∣rounded with very good Fortifications, and seated in a low and marshy Country, which renders the place exceeding strong. It was first wall'd and endow'd with Privileges by the Earl of Geldre, in 1229. and in the Low Country War very strongly fortified by the States. When the French took it, in 1672. it was surrounded with a double Ditch and Ramparts, be∣sides the Walls and Bastions; all which they destroy∣ed before they quitted it, in 1673. But it being a place of great consequence, the States speedily repair'd the Fortifications, and put it into a state of Defence. Bommel stands on an Island made by the two Rivers Maes and Wael, which is called the Bommeller Waert; on the West point whereof stands the Castle of Lovestein, already mention'd in the account of Hol∣land, and on the East stand two strong Holds, call'd Fort S. Andrew and Fort Voorn, which command the Passage of these two Rivers. The Earldom of ZƲTPHEN, reckon'd for∣merly one of the Provinces, but now, as we have said, only a part of Gelderland, lyes on the East side of the Issel, between Cleve to the South, and Overissel to the North; and is extended about 30 miles from North to South, and near as many from East to West. The Capital City from which the whole Province hath its Name, is, ZƲTPHEN, Zutphania, seated upon the Issel, over which it hath a Bridge, at the distance of 25 miles from Nimeguen, 12 from Arnhem to the North-east, 42 from Ʋtrecht to the East, and 22 from Hattem to the South. The River Berkel, which rises in the Bishoprick of Munster, after it hath crossed the Pro∣vince, runs through the middle of this City, and falls into the Issel, dividing the Town into two parts, call'd the Old and the New: The chief Church, de∣dicated to S. Peter, is a neat, sumptuous and anci∣ent Structure, the Tower whereof being fired by Lightning, was rebuilt in 1635. in most curious manner: The Brazen Font in this Church is parti∣cularly remarkable for its curious Workmanship; and the publick Library at the East end is a reason∣able good one. Here is a publick School, and seve∣ral Hospitals, which, together with the high Brick Tower, call'd Drogenap's Toorn, are worth a Stran∣ger's View. In this City dwell many Nobles and Gentlemen of Quality, and it is generally reckon'd a place of much Civility. The Buildings are fair and neat, and the Fortifications very strong, at least were so before the French took it in 1672. for then we read, that it had nine Bastions, four Half-moons a double Ditch, and treble Ramparts Nith∣standing which, it was surrendred to them after  very short Siege, on the 26 of June 1672. and kept by them till April 1674. In the Spanish War it was taken and sack'd by d'Alva's Army, and regain'd by the States by this Stratagem: A good number of Soldiers coming in the Habit of Market-women, loyter'd about the Gate till they found an opportunity to seize it, and let in the rest that lay ready to assist them. But this was after a long Siege, wherein that Ornament of our
Nation, Sir Philip Sydney, was unfortunately slain. This City enjoys great Privileges, and was one of the Hanseatick Society; as also had the Royalty of Coinage: But this last they parted with to the States in 1604. for an annual Sum of Mony to be paid them in lieu. Doesburg is seated on the Old Issel, 9 or 10 miles from Zutphen to the South: It is strongly situated between the River on one Side and a great Marsh on the other, and had good Fortifications when the French attacked it in 1672. so that it might have been ex∣pected to have made a very good Defence, but was however quickly surrendered, the French losing only 3 Men in obtaining it, and held it till the April fol∣lowing; when, being oblig'd to quit it, they demo∣lish'd the Fortification. At this place the Channel mention'd by the An∣cients to be cut by Drusus, and therefore call'd Fossa Drusiana, is let into the Issel, being deriv'd from the Rhine a little above Arnhem; by which the Issel is very much enlarged, and may not improperly be reckon'd another Branch of the Rhine. Groll stands on the small River Slinck, which falls into the Berkel, and is distant 18 miles from Zutphen to the East. It was esteemed a very important Pass from Germany, and therefore fortified by the Em∣peror Charles V. which was afterward improv'd by the Spaniards. The Works described by Grotius, in his account of the remarkable Siege of this Place by the States in 1627. being exceeding Strong and Re∣gular, consisted of five Bastions, joined by strong Curtains, a lower Wall or Rampart under the Ba∣stions, in lieu of the modern Ravelins, a broad Ditch fill'd by the River Slinck, and a Rampart or Counterscarp beyond it; yet did this Town make but very little Resistance before it surrendred to the Bishop of Munster, in 1672. Breevoort is a good strong Town, having, besides pretty good Fortifications, a marshy Soil all round; by which it is rendred almost inaccessible: And therefore not taken without great difficulty by Prince Maurice in 1597. It stands 12 miles South from Groll, and 17 East from Doesburg. Spanish Gelderland, or the Quarter of Geldre, con∣tains these chief Towns, &c. GELDRE, Geldria, altho' it hath the Honour to give Name to the whole Province, is but a small City, and not very considerable: It hath an old Castle, and is strongly fortified by the Marshes that surround it, which together with its distance from the rest of the Province, has hindred its falling into the Hands of the States. It is distant 36 miles from Doesburg to the South, and 20 from the Frontiers of Brabant to the East, 32 from Nimeguen to the South-east, and 25 from Duseldorp to the North-west. Venloo, a City of good note, is seated in a flat fenny Country, on the East-side of the Maes, about 8 miles from Geldre to the South-west. It is a Place of great Trade for Corn, Brass, Marble, Free-stone, Coal, &c. brought from the Country of Liege and other parts of Germany, down the River to this City, whither the Hollanders and Brabanders repair to buy 'em. It was endow'd with the Privileges of a City in 1343. and was strong enough in the last Century to oppose Margaret of Austria when she besieged it; and even to keep out Charles V. till he had granted them good Conditions. The States took in in 1532. but lost it again to the Spaniards in 1536. Wachtendonk, a very strong Town, is seated on the small Rivers Niers, 5 miles from Geldre to the South, and 7 from Venloo to the East: It is surround∣ed by low moorish Grounds, which hinder any ac∣cess to it, and makes it one of the strongest Towns in the Province. In 1588. it held out three Months against Count Mansfeil: In 1600. it was surpriz'd by Lodowick of Nassaw upon the Ice; but in 1605. was finally regain'd by the Spaniards. Stralen stands about 2 miles from Wachtendonk, and almost in the mid-way between Venloo and Geldre; it is a Place of some Dignity, having a small Terri∣tory depending on it, but otherwise not very consi∣derable. Roermond stands upon the Maes, where the small River Roer falls into it, and is distant 22 miles from Venloo to the South; it is a rich and populous City, and remarkable for the Neatness of its Buildings, and Strength of its Walls. A Monastery of Carthusians here is much spoken of for its Grandeur and Wealth. The City was taken in 1632. by the States, but was restor'd at the Peace of Munster, and is still subject to the Spaniard. CHAP. XV. The Province of OVERISSEL, Transissalana. OVERISSEL, so nam'd from its situation be∣yond the River Issel, is bounded on the North by Groningen and Friezland, on the South by Zutphen and Gelderland, on the East by the Bishoprick of Munster, and on the West by the Zuyder-zee. Its Extent from North to South is about 60 miles, from East to West about 40 miles; but the Soil is not very Fertile, a great part of it being either Bar∣ren Heaths or Quaggy Marshes; which, together with its Inland situation, unfit for Trade, and its lying exposed to Inroads from Germany, makes this Province less inhabited than any of the others. It is divided into three Parts, viz. I. Iseland, Isaland, and by corru∣ption Salland and Zalland, lies next the Issel, and contains these Chief Towns. Deventer, Cap. Swoll. Campen. Hasselt, &c. II, Twente, lies East of Salland, and to the Frontiers of Munster: In it are these Towns, with ma∣ny others of smaller moment. Oldensael. Otmarsen. Enscheden. III. Drent is the North part of Overissel, and contains these Towns of chiefest note, Coeverden. Meppel, &c. The small Territory of Vollenho∣ven, on the Banks of the Zuyder-zee, is by some Geographers made a separate Part, and not included in the Drent; In it stand Vollenhoven. Steenwyck. Swarte-sluys. Blockzyl.
DEVENTER or Daventer, Daventria, is seated on the Issel, 8 miles from Zutphen to the North, and 17 from Swoll to the South, 30 from Amersfort to the East, and 22 from Arnhem to the North. It is a large and populous City, exceeding neatly built and well fortified: By means of the River it enjoys a good Trade, and was formerly one of the Hanse Towns. It still enjoys great Privileges, particularly the Royalty of Coinage. It is seated in a very fruit∣ful and pleasant Country, and inhabited by many Noblemen and Persons of Quality. The Cathedral Church of S. Lebvin is a spacious ancient Structure, and the Stadthuys is a handsome old Building; here is a publick School, and several Hospitals, which with the remarkable round Tower, 15 foot thick, near the Noremberg-Gate, are worth a Strangers no∣tice. The City is fortified with a double Wall and Ditch, besides several Outworks; notwithstanding which it was surrendred to the Bishop of Munster, after only 5 days Resistance, on the 21st of July, 1672. Swoll or Zwoll is seated in a fruitful Country, be∣tween the two Rivers Issel and Vecht, at about 2 miles distance from the first and 4 from the last, and 18 miles from Deventer to the North; having also another small River, which rising near Deventer, passes through it, and a little beyond falls into the Vecht, and with it runs into the Zuyder-zee. The Buildings are fair and the Streets neat, which makes the City exceeding pleasant. It enjoys a reasonable good Trade, by means of the aforesaid River, through which the Tide flows up to the Town: The Church of S. Michael is a stately Structure, and re∣markable for its fine Organ, Pulpit, harmonious Chimes and exceeding high Steeple. The publick School is considerable both for its great number of Scholars, and its College for the Study of the Sci∣ences. Here are also divers Hospitals, a publick Granary and an Arsenal; the City enjoys great Privileges, particularly the ultimate Determi∣nation of all Causes, the Royalty of a Mint, and the Jurisdiction over 18 large and populous Villages, that stand in its Prefecture. It is sur∣rounded with Walls, on which are 24 Towers, and a Trench; and hath three very strong Gates, which open to so many Suburbs. In 1672. it was surrendred to the Bishop of Munster, as soon as they heard of the taking of Deventer. Campen is seated among pleasant Fields (whence it hath its name) on the South side of the Istel, near the Zuyder-zee, and 8 miles West from Swoll. It is a large, neat and well-built City, and hath a strong wooden Bridge over the Issel, which is secured by a Fortification at the End of it. The Churches here are very capacious, and of a curious Structure, as is also the Stadthuys; but the Custom-house is an ex∣ceeding fine Building and much admired. This was formerly a place of great Trade, but of late years the Mouth of the Issel hath been so choaked up with Sand that Ships of Burthen cannot enter. The Wall is high and thick, and provided with many Towers, after the old manner, but not able to resist the mo∣dern way of Attacking. This City also Capitu∣lated upon the Surrender of Deventer, and was yielded to the Bishop of Munster; who delivering it to the French, thy kept it to the end of the next year, and then being forc'd to quit it, exacted 80000 Gilders of the Inhabtants to save it from Fire. A the Mouth of the Vecht, and on a Bay of the Zuyder-zee, cal'd the Zwollsohe-diep, 7 miles from Zwoll to the North stands the small City Genemuyden, which had formerly a good Castle. Vollenhoven stand pon the Zuyder-zee, 12 miles from Swoll and 7 from Genemuyden to the North; it is a neat and handsom Town, conveniently seated for Trade, and is a great Market for Corn brought from the Baltick Sea and other places. Steenwick stands near the Frontiers of Friesland, 10 miles North from Vollenhoven, and 17 from Swoll: It is a small but very strong Town, having been very well fortified by Prince Maurice after he took it, in 1592. It was taken by the Bishop of Munster in the last War, and obliged to pay 10000 Gilders as a Ransom, when he quitted it in 1673. Blockzil stands on the Zuyder-zee, 3 or 4 miles from Vollenhoven to the North, and 6 from Steem∣ryck to the South-east. It is a strong Town, and besides, considerable for Navigation and Com∣merce. Swartesluys, a Fortress standing upon the Vecht, 2 miles East from Genemuyden, and 7 North from Swoll; being taken from the Munsterians in 1672. was by them made very strong, and able to resist three several Attempts of the Dutch to regain it. Coeverden, the chief Place of the Drente, is seated near the Frontiers of the County of Benthem, and about 12 miles from the Confines of Munster, 30 miles from Swoll, 35 from Campen to the East, and near 46 from Deventer to the North-east. It is a Fortress of very great Strength, having, besides the strong Walls and Outworks, Marshes and impassable Grounds almost all round it. It commands the Passes out of Munster into Friezland and Groningen, and be∣ing therefore a Place of great Importance, hath been often besieged. It was taken by Prince Maurice in 1592. and withstood a Siege of 7 Months by the Spaniards the next year: Yet in July 1672. it sur∣rendred in 4 days to the Bishop of Munster, but was recover'd by surprize by the Dutch in December fol∣lowing: Again, in 1673. the Munsterians blockaded it, but could not take it. Ootmersum or Otmarsen, a Town of great Anti∣quity, and said to be founded by Odomarus King of the Franks, is seated in the Twente, near the Borders of Benthem, and 20 miles South from Coeverden; it was formerly secured by a Rampart and a Ditch round it: But is at present not very considerable. Oldenzyl or Oldensael, stands 8 miles South from Otmersen, and as many West from Benthem: It is a wall'd Town, but not remarkable for Strength or Grandeur; it was often taken and retaken in the Spanish War, and being taken by the Bishop of Mun∣ster in the last War, was regain'd by the Dutch in 1674.
CHAP. XVI. The Porvince of FRIEZLAND, Frisia. COncerning the Country possess'd by the ancient Frizons there is great dispute among the Learn'd, some affirming that they spread over all Holland, Ʋtrecht, part of Gelderland, Zutphen, Overissel and Groninghen, as well as this Friezland, and the other call'd East Friezland, beyond the Ems: Others say, that of Holland, they had the North part only, which is thence call'd West Friezland, whilst others make the old Channel of the Rhine the Southern, and the River Ems the Eastern Bounds of their Country. The pre∣sent Bounds of this Province is the Zuyder-zee to the West, North and South, Groninghen and Overissel to the East and South, containing in extent from North to South about 35 mises, and from East to West about 30 miles. The Land is low and marshy, and frequently overflow'd, however affords good Pasture, and in some parts store of Corn. The Province is divided into three parts, viz. Westergoe, or the West Part, con∣taining these Towns, Franeker, Harlingen, Bolswaert, Sneeck, Worcum, Staveren, &c. Oostergoe, or the East Part, hath these, Leuwarden, Dockum. Seven-Wolden is the South-east part, which being a barren Soil, is but meanly Inhabited, and besides 77 Villages, hath only one Town of note, namely, Sloot. FRANEKER, Franequera, & Franekera, is seated on the Channel cut from Leuwarden to the Zuyder-zee, and is distant 40 miles from Campen to the North, 37 from Groningen to the West, not above 7 from the Shoar of the German Ocean, and in the midway between Leuwarden to the East and Harlin∣gen to the West. It is a fair, neat, well-built City, enjoying a reasonable good Trade by means of its Cannals, and Inhabited by many Persons of Quality: Being also the Seat of an University, which was erected by the States in the year 1585, and good Re∣venues allotted to the Professors out of the Abbey-Lands, confiscated upon the Revolution. The Re∣ctor hath the Power of Judging Civil Causes, and the Students enjoy many immunities. The whole Town hath but one Church, which is a spacious Building, with a tall handsom Steeple: Here is an Hospital for Orphans, and a very good Grammar-School. The Town is surrounded with a good Rampart, and a deep Ditch, and hath a strong Castle built of Brick. LEƲWARDEN, Leovardia, is distant 6 miles from Franeker to the East, 30 from Groningen to the West, and 12 from Dockum to the South; and is the largest, richest, best-built, and most populous City of Friez∣land, being also the Seat of the Sovereign Council and the Residence of the Stadtholder of the Province. It enjoys a good Trade by means of its Channels, whereof that from Dockum brings up large Boats with Goods from Hamburg, Bremen, &c. This Place is commended for the neatness of its Streets and Bridges, the pleasantness of its Gardens, and the splendor of its Buildings; among which the Stadt∣holder's Palace, the Provincial Court, and several Houses of Noble-men, together with the two Ho∣spitals and the Churches are especially remarkable. It is well fortified, being surrounded with a thick and high Rampart, a broad Ditch and 5 Bulwarks. Harlingen stands on the Banks of the Zuyder-zee, in which it hath a good Haven, being distant about 5 miles from Franeker to the West. It was at first a small Village only, but by several Enlargements since 1543. it is become a considerable City, and a place of good Trade, which consists in Corn and the Com∣modities of Norway and the Soun; its Harbour being well frequented by Merchant Ships from those parts. It is well Fortified, which with the flatness of the Country round it (by that means easily Overflow'd) makes it a place of good Strength and Security. Doccum is a neat and well-fortified Town, seated at the head of the Channel, leading to Leuwarden, and upon a River which makes a good Haven of 2 Leagues in length, from a Bay of the German Ocean, call'd Doccumer-diep, and is distant 12 miles from Leu∣warden to the North-east, and about 5 from the Ocean to the South. The Streets and Buildings are remark∣ably neat; the Tower of its Church is high and stately, and the Stadthuys is a handsom Structure. The chief Bridge is of Stone and very large; besides which there are two others over the River, which runs through the Town, and communicates with the Chan∣nel of Leuwarden. The Harbour is secur'd by Piles of large Timber driven into the bottom of the River, and shut up a-nights with a strong Boom: And the Town is fortified with a Rampart, large Ditch, and Bulwarks built by the States in 1582. Bolswaert stands about 7 Miles from Franeker to the South, and 10 from Leuwarden to the South-west. It is a good wall'd Town, formerly one of the Han∣seatick, and maintaining a pretty good Commerce, by means of the Channels leading from it to Frane∣ker, Leuwarden, Worcum, and other Places. Worcum, stands upon the Zuyder-zee, 7 miles South from Bolswaert. It hath a small Haven, but by the Tempests from the North and West is almost choak'd up with Sand; but by the many Channels the Inha∣bitants Trade in small Vessels, and supply the Coun∣try with store of Fish. Sneeck is an ancient populous, neat and well for∣tified Town, 6 miles distant from Bolswaert to the South-east, and as many East from Worcum, seated in a low fenny Country, near a Lake of the same name; which being well stor'd with Fish, afford the Inhabi∣tants a good Support, by furnishing the Neighbour∣ing Parts with that Commodity. Here is a Publick School, which for the number of its Scholars and Sallaries is very considerable. Sloot or Sloten, stands upon a navigable Channel, which comes from a neighbouring Lake, and falls into the Zuyder-zee about a League below the Town, which is distant 8 or 9 miles from Sneck to the South, and by means of this Channel maintains a
Commerce with Holland and other Parts. The Build∣ings are but ordinary, nor the Fortifications very strong. It hath one Church, a handsom Stadthuys, and one of the Gates is very large and stately. Staveren stands on the Zuyder-zee, at the extream South-west Point of Friezland, over against Meden∣blick in North Holland, from which it is distant 4 Leagues to the North-east, as also 12 miles from Sloten to the West. It had formerly a capacious Harbour, and was a famous Empory; the Inhabi∣tants still enjoy particular Privileges in the Sound, which shew the great Trade they formerly had thi∣ther, and was also the third in the Rank of the Hanse Towns: But this Trade is long since decay'd and the Haven choak'd up with Sand, so that at pre∣sent the Town is not considerable, and can only brag of what it hath been; wherein they have much to say, for this was anciently the Metropolis of the Fri∣sens, and the Seat of their Kings. It is recorded also that about 500 years ago, there was a Passage by Land almost quite cross from hence to Enchuysen, in North Holland. CHAP. XVII. The Province of GROENINGEN, Groeningia, with the Omlands. THIS Province is the most North-east part of the Dominions of the States General, and is seated between the German Ocean to the North, Overyssel to the South, Friezland to the East, and the Bay call'd den Dollert, which parts it from the Coun∣ty of Emden or East Friezland, to the West. Its Extent from North to South is about 20 miles, and from East to West about 35. The Soil of it is but poor, except the Parts lying towards the Sea, which afford very good Pasture. The Air is sharp, but whol∣som enough, and the Inhabitants long liv'd. It is divided into Groeningen, containing The Lordship of Gorecht, a narrow Tract in the middle of this Province; in which stands Groeningen, Capit. The Old Ampt, lying East from Gorecht, and ex∣tending to the Bank of the Dollert, the chief Town whereof is Winschoten. The Westerwold, which lies South of the Old Ampt, and runs out, in form of a Wedge, be∣tween the Drente of Overyssel and the North part of Munster. It hath several Villages, but no Town of considerable note. The Omlands, being The West Quarter, or the West Part, lying be∣tween the River Lavica, which parts it from Friezland, and the River or Channel leading to Groeningen. In it are about 25 Villages, but no considerable Town. Hunsingo, which takes up all the North Part of the Province: But hath likewise no Town of note. Five-lingo, which lies between Hunsingo to the North, the Old Ampt to the South, Grecht to the West, and the Mouth of the River Ems to the East: In which District stand several Villages, and the Town of Dam. GRONINGEN or Groeningen, Groninga, is seated upon the Confluence of two small Rivers, cal∣led the Aha and the Hunesus, with several artificial Channels, which lead to all Parts of the Province; and is distant 30 miles from Leuwarden to the East, 32 from Coeverden to the North, 13 from the Sea to the South, and 14 from the Mouth of the Ems to the West. It is a large and populous City, surrounded with strong Walls, in which are 17 large Bastions and other Fortifications, and is the Seat of an Uni∣versity which was founded in the year 1614. and well endow'd with the old Abbey-Lands. Besides several othe Channels, leading from this City, there is one which running Westward falls into a Bay of the German Ocean, and another Eastward that leads to Dam, and thence to the Ems; by these the Inha∣bitants receive Goods from Foreign Parts, and by the other Rivers and Channels convey them to the other Places of the Province, and so maintain a pretty good Trade. The principal Church is that of S. Mar∣tin, and next is that of S. Walburgh, which hath a Tower exceeding high; there are also two other Churches, viz. S. Mary's and the New Church. The Stadthuys is an old Building and not remarkable; but the broad Market, on which it stands, is very large; as is also the Fish-Market: Upon these Markets 17 Streets meet, 6 whereof lead to so many Gates of the City. The City hath been twice enlarged since the year 1600. and may at present be reckon'd 3000 Paces in compass. Most of the Houses are furnish'd wth Gardens, wherein grow many Fruit-Trees, and make the Place exceeding pleasant. It enjoys great Privileges, and was some Ages ago one of the Hanse Towns. In the Low Country War it sided with the Confederates in 1579. but returning to the Spaniard was taken by Prince Maurice in 1594. In 2672. it was besieg'd by the Bishop of Munster, but so bravely de∣fended, that after a Months furious Battering it with great Shot and Bombs, he was forc'd to raise his Siege: For which Valour the Groningers were rewarded with a double Voice in the Council of State. Dam is seated upon the Channel call'd the Damster∣diep, about 3 miles from the Mouth of the Ems to the West, and 12 from Groningen to the East. It has a rich Soil about it, and is beautified with good Buildings, but hath no Walls or Bulwarks. Winschoten is a strong Fortress, which commands the Pass out of East Friezland into this Province, be∣ing seated between the Dollart Bay on one side, and a great Morass on the other, 17 miles from Gronin∣gen to the East, and 13 from Dam to the South. It was fortified by the States in the latter end of the last Century, in whose Hands it continued; but was taken by the Bishop of Munster in 1674. For the better Security of this Pass there is ano∣ther strong Fort about six miles South-east from Winschoten, call'd Billingworder-scence, which tho' it be very well fortified, was taken by the Bishop of Munster in 1672. but soon recovered by the Dutch. The Bourtanger Fort, seated in the middle of a Marsh, on the very Borders of the Westerwold, towards Munster, and 12 miles South from the Dollart, is another very strong place, and a good Defence to the Country.
GERMANY. CHAP. I. map of Germany GERMANY THE Bounds of Germany, as set out by Pto∣lomy and other ancient Writers, were much different from what they are at present; for, according to their Account, it extended Northward as far as the Ocean, whereby Denmark, Norway and Sweden were included; and Southward it was bound∣ed by the Danube, so that Austria, Bavaria, Stiria, Carinthia, Carinola, &c. now reckon'd part of it,
were then excluded; as were also Alsace, part of the Palatinate and the Spiritual Electorates, the Rhine being by them reckon'd the Western Bounds; but these last, together with Lorrain and the neighbouring Countries, were afterwards possessed by Germans; and being Conquer'd by the Romans, were by them nam'd Germania prima & secunda. Germany, as it is at present bounded by the Low Countries on the West; Poland and Hungary on the East; Denmark and the Baltick Sea on the North; and Swisserland, with the Dominions of the State of Venice, on the South; is situated between the 45 D. 12 M. and 54 D. 50 M. of Latitude, and 25 D. and 29 D. 30 M. of Longitude, in form almost square; extending from North to South (that is to say, from Straelsund in Pomerania, to the Frontiers of Carniola and Istria) 150 German leagues, which is 600 English miles; and in breadth from the Town of Spa in the West, to the Confines of Poland in the East, about 150 English miles. The SOIL is exceeding fruitful, especially on the Banks of the Rhine and the Danube, where also the AIR is very Temperate; but in the Northern part it is cold, and the Ground less fruitful. Besides great plenty of Corn, vast quantities of rich Wine is produc'd here and exported to Foreign Nations. The Earth also affords Mines of divers sorts of Met∣tals and Minerals, as Iron, Copper, Tin, Lead, and even Silver in some parts: Alom, Quick-silver, Salt, &c. The chief RIVERS, are, 1. The Danube, call'd by the Natives Thonaw, which rises in Schwaben near a Village call'd Tone Eschingen, whence tending East∣ward, it receives two small Rivulets, and soon after divides and encircles the City Ʋlm, where it begins to be Navigable, and having receiv'd the Iler, Guntz, Minael and Wernitz, passes on through Bavaria, re∣ceiving the Lech at Lechmund, the Altmul at Kelhaim, the Nab, Regen, Isser and Inn, watering by the way the Cities Newburg, Ingolstadt, Ratisbon and Stran∣bingen; thence passes through Austria, where, ha∣ving water'd Lintz, it is encreas'd by the Rivers Fraun, Ens, and others of smaller note, and then runs by the Walls of Vienna, receiving the small River Wien, (whence that City hath its name) and afterwards the Moraw, pursuing its course still East∣ward into Hungary, where it passes by Presburg and Gran; then, tending Southward, it passes by Buda and Belgrade, being exceedingly encreased by the Drave, which it receives at Esseck, and the Save at Belgrade; after which it loses its name and is call'd Ister, and running Eastward between Servia and Wa∣lachia, as also between Moldavia and Bulgaria, falls at last into the Black or Euxine Sea in six Mouths, which part Bulgaria from Bsserabia, after having run above eleven hundred miles an end. It is very broad, runs with a very rapid Current, and hath three great Cataracts, which are 1. The Saw-Russel, or Swine's Snout, near Lintz, so call'd from a pointed Rock hanging over, which hath under it a dangerous Whirlpool 2. Der Strudel near Greinon in Austria, where the falling of the Water makes a horrid noise. And, 3. Der Wurbel, another very dangerous Whirl-pool. 2. The Rhine rises in two Springs in the Alps, which falling into Swisserland, unite near the City Cur or Coir, and soon after dilates it self into into a large Lake, call'd the Boden Sea, or Lake of Constance; whence passing West-ward to Basil, it turns up to the North, and runs between Schwaben and Alsace into the Palatinate, receiving the Neckar at Manheim, and the Maine at Mentz; then runs to Coblentz, where it receives the Moselle; afterwards waters Cologn, and passes on through the Dutchy of Cleeve, receiving the Roer and the Lippe, and other smaller Rivers by the way, and passes into the Netherlands at Schenck∣enschans. Of its Course afterward we have already given an account. It is very broad, even two En∣glish miles (as some say, at Schenckenschans, and its course very swift, but the Navigation of it is inter∣rupted by nine Cataracts; the most remarkable whereof are, two in Swisserland, one near Schafhuy∣sen (where the whole River falls 75 foot) and the other near Lauffenburg. 3. The Elbe rises out of the Mountains near Hirchsburg in Silesia, upon the Con∣fines of Bohemia, in eleven several Springs, which being united, pass Northward between Misnia and Lusatia into Saxony, receiving by the way, the Warlitz, Orlitz, Moldau and Aegra, passes by Mag∣deburg, Lawenburg and Hamburg, and a little below Gluckstadt divides into two Branches, which falls into the German Ocean; it is very large and deep at Hamburg, which is above 70 miles from the Sea; Ships of four or 500 Tun ride at Anchor in it. 3. The Oder springs in Moravia, and after a Cur∣rent of 300 English miles, through Brandenburg and Pomerania, falls into the Baltick Sea. 4. The Weser rises in the Mountains of Thuringen, runs through Hessen and Westphalia, and empties it self into the Ocean below Bremen. Other Rivers of smaller note the Reader will dis∣cover the Course of, in the following Description of the Country; as also an account of the Mineral Wa∣ters, Baths, Mines, Mountains, Forests, Lakes, &c. found in the several Parts of this great Nation. Of the Inhabitants of Germany. Whether Germany was Peopled after the Flood by Ascenas the Grandchild of Japhet, or whether Tuisco, who some say was the Son of that Ascenas, and others the Son of Noah, was the Conductor of the first Colony hither, is uncertain. Cluverius affirms the former, assigning the very year when this Plan∣tation was made, viz. The 136th after the Flood; and Verstegan pleads hard for the latter. However that be, it is certain that Germany was Peopl'd very Early. The ancient Germans had two Deities call'd Teuto or Tuisco, and Maunus his Son, under which Names, by their Songs and Festivals, they honour'd God the Maker of the World, and Adam the Propa∣gator of human Kind. And from the names of the former of these two Deities, had the appellation of the Teutsche Nation, which by the mutation of T for D is now made Duytsche; and the Country Duyts∣chland. Much Dispute hath risen among the Etymologists concerning the derivation of German and Alman, two other Names of this Nation: The most agree'd one is, That Gar signifying all, they were call'd Gar Man, q. d. all Man, demoting their great Manliness and Valour. All signifies the same, and therefore Alman is but a synonminous Term signifying the same thing with German; though others assign the rea∣son of that denomination to be the many Nations of them, and that it was first given 'em in the year 358. when they muster'd up a great Army from all parts, against the Romans; which being a mix∣ture of many sorts of Men, it was call'd an Army of Almanner: Which word afterwards was us'd by the Italians, Spaniards and French, to signifie the whole Nation of Germans. Again, others say, That the name Almain, belong'd to the People of Schwaben,
which they took from Mannus the Son of Tuisco; and that it became not universal, till those Dukes, having obtain'd the Imperial Dignity and kpt it many years, made the name of the Inhabitants of that Region be extended to the whole Country. By what we have said, the Reader will judge, That the TEMPER of the Inhabitants was Mar∣tial; which indeed they were, so far as to oppose the Romans for 210 years, but cannot however be esteem'd to deserve the Character their Name im∣plies; For though they are generally of large Bodies, with big Bones, much Flesh and strong Sinews; they want Spirit to actuate their large Bulk, and Heat to concoct the Phlegmatick Humour where∣with their Bodies are fill'd, and therefore better at guarding a Post than gaining Ground. 'Tis true, in our days they have notably oppos'd the Turks, fought many Battles, and acquir'd great Honour by the glorious Victories they have obtained over those Infidels. They are generally good natur'd, free from Malice and Subtilty, much addicted to both Drunkenness and Gluttony, but not over-much to Venery. The poorer sort are laborious, sincere and honest. The Nobility are Men of great Ho∣nour, and commonly Scholars. All the Sons of a Noble Man inherit their Father's Title, which ex∣ceedingly increases the number of the Nobility, and the more because the German Women are generally good Breeders; and by that means the Estates of the Princes are so often divided for the sake of younger Children, that the Principalities and Sove∣reign Lordships have increased to a vast number. All the Nobility scorn Marriage with a Commoner; wherefore the younger Brothers are often oblig'd to take up Arms, or enter into Orders, whereby they are enabled to keep up the Grandeur of the Family; especially by the latter, because the Ecclesiastical Preferments here are both Numerous and Rich. The Women are of good Complexions, Corpulent, and very Fruitful, as we have said, and more obse∣quions to their Husbands than our Women, many not sitting at Table with them, and none having the upper Place there. The GENIUS of the Germans hath appear'd in the Invention and Improvement of many Mechanical Arts, whereof Clock-work especially is owing to them. In this Art they have exceeded all the World in the contrivance of variety of Motions, to shew not only the Course of the Hours and Minutes, but even of the Sun, Moon and Stars; whereof the Clocks at Strasburg, Prague, and many other places all over Germany, are sufficient Instances. The Emperor Charles V. had a Watch in the Jewel of his Ring; and in the Elector of Saxony's Stable is to be seen a Clock in the Pommel of a Saddle. The Story of Regio Montanus's wooden Eagle that flew an English mile to meet the Emperor Maximilian, and return'd with him to Norimberg; as also of the Iron Fly (made by the same Person) that flew round the Room, and return'd to his Hand, are seriously related be Kecker∣man and Pet. Ramus. The Germans claim the In∣vention of the Art of PRINTING, whereof something hath been already said in our description of Haerlem; but because that Art is so very curious, and hath been so serviceable to the World, we shall a little enlarge in the History of it. We have said already, That Lawrence Coster of Haerlem found out the Art by accident, and had brought it to some perfection, but was robb'd of his Materials by a Ser∣vant who fled with 'em to Germany: This the Dutch men say; but the Germans alledge, That John Gut∣temburg, an Alderman of Strasburg, first Invented it in the year 1440. and remov'd with it to Mentz, printed several Books, in which he made use of Cast Letters of Mettal in the same manner as now used. The Hollanders in answer affirm, that it was Coster's Servant that taught Guttemburg, and that the Ser∣vant's name was John Faust; which name is set in all the first Printed Books, as the Printer of them. Tully's Offices printed in 1465. is to be seen in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, and in many other pla∣ces, with this Inscription at the end: Praesens M. Tulii clarissimum opus. Johannes Faust, Moguntinus Cives, non attramento, plumali, canna ne{que} area. Sed arte qua∣dam perpulera. Petri manu pueri mei feliciter effici finito Anno MCCCCLXV. Angelus Rocca in his Account of the Vatican Library (printed at Rome in 1591.) says, that he had seen Donatus's Grammar, printed upon Vellum with this Inscription at the beginning: Johannes Faustus, Cives Moguntinus, Avus Maternus Jo∣hannis Schoeffer, primus excogitavit imprimendi artem Typis aereis: Quos deinde plumbeas invenit: multaque ad poliendam artem addidit ejus filius Petrus Scheffer: Impressus est autem hic Donatus primum omnium, A. D. MCCCCL. Admonitus certe fuit ex donato Hollandiae prius impresso in tabula incisa. But this he does not say was printed in the Book. In an old Chronicle of Colen, printed in 1496. 'tis said, That the hint of this Art was given from Holland, where an Impression of this Donatus had been made before that of Mentz. So that upon the whole, the Invention may be granted to Holland, but improved and propagated in Germany; whence it was carried again to Holland, and from thence brought to England very early, by Caxton and Tourner, whom king Henry VI. sent at his own Expence to learn it; these prevail'd upon one of the Printer's Men at Haerlem to steal away and come with them to England; where being arri∣ved, they set to Work at Oxford; and having taught other Men, Printing-houses were set up at West∣minster, S. Albans, Worcester, and other places. There is now to be seen at Oxford, S. Jerom upon the Creed with this at the end: Explicit expositio Sancti Jeronimi in simbolo Apostolorum ad Papam Laurentium. Impressa Oxoniae & finita Anno Domini, MCCCCLXVIII. xvii die Decembris. But to return to the Germans, The Invention of Guns is undisputedly theirs, which was also produc'd by an Accident, in this manner: One Barthold Schwartz a Friar, in making Chimical Experiments, had one day mixed some Saltpetre and Brimstone with other Ingredients, and set them upon the Fire in a Crucible; but a Spark getting in, the Pot suddenly broke with great violence and wonder∣ful noise; which unexpected effect surpriz'd him at first, but thinking further on the Matter, he repeated the Experiment, and finding the Effect constant, set himself at work to improve it: To which purpose he caused an Iron-pipe to be made with a small hole at the lower end to fire it at, and putting in some of his new Ingredient together with some small stones, set fire to it, and found it answer'd his expectation in penetrating all before it. This happen'd about the year 1330 and was soon improv'd to the making of great Ordnance, &c. To these Inventions of the Germans, we may add their improvement of the Art of Chimistry; which being brought hither by Albertus Magnus, was very much studied by the Monks, and much time lost by them in the search of the Philosopher's Stone, and the Study of the Rosicrucian Philosophy.
The RELIGION of the ancient Germans was Paganism, which was driven out of several parts of it by the Preaching of S. Clemens, S. Crescens, S. Mark, S. Maternus, S. Eutherius, and other the immediate Successors of the Apostles: So that in the middle of the second Century, Christianity was in a flourishing State in Germany, as is testified by S. Irenaeus. But the remote Northern parts remain'd long in their blind Superstition; the Saxons not being Converted till the time of Charles the Great: As we shall shew more particularly when we come to speak of that Nation. The Corruptions that crept into the Romish Church in the middle Ages, dispers'd themselves hither, and were generally believ'd, before John Huss and Jerom of Prague did, about the year 1407. oppose those Er∣rors, and Preach up the Doctrin of Wiclef; for which they were both burnt at the Council of Constance: But their Followers in Bohemia being numerous, ob∣tained a Tolleration of the Emperor, and conti∣nued administring the Sacraments in both kinds, and in several things acting contrary to the Church of Rome: In which State the Reformation stood when Luther appear'd for it, upon the following occasion. In the year 1517. Pope Leo X. in pursuance of the pretended Power of the Popes in pardoning Sins, sent abroad his Letters and Bulls, promising Pardons to all that would purchase them with Mony: And the Friars were employ'd to Preach up the Doctrin, and Offices establish'd in several parts of Germany, to re∣ceive the Mony that the ignorant People gave for the Indulgences the Collectors were impower'd to give them. These Preachers, continually buzzing in the People's Ears the efficacy of the Popes Pardons, and the mercenary manner of prostituting of them, raised Indignation in many; and therefore Martin Luther was soon favour'd in opposing it. He was a Doctor of Divinity and an Augustine Friar, living at Wittemberg in Saxony: At which place, in the same year, 1517. he began to preach against the Pope's Power of pardoning Sins, and publish'd Theses concern∣ing Purgatory, Penance, &c. which were answer'd by Tetzelius, Eckius, Prierias and others, on the Pope's side. To which Luther reply'd, and being now favour'd by Frederick the Elector of Saxony, pro∣ceeded in time from one Point to another, till he shook the very Foundation of the Roman Church; a publick Disputation being held at Leipsick in 1519. between him and Eckius, wherein the Authority and Primacy of the Pope was the Subject of the Argu∣ment. And in a few years not only the Elector of Saxony, but the Dukes of Brunswick, Mecklenbrrg and Lunenburg, the Marquiss of Brandenburg, the Landgrave of Hesse, together with several other Princes and many Imperial Cities embrac'd his Doctrin. In 1629. a Decree was made against it by the Diet at Spire, against which the Elector of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburg, the Dukes of Lunenburg, the Landgrave, together with the Deputies of Stras∣burg, Norimberg, Ʋlm, Constance, and ten other Im∣perial Cities, entred a publick Protestation; which gave occasion to the name of PROTESTANT, the Lutherans from that time being so call'd. In the next year the Princes above-mentioned, presented the Confession of their Faith to the Emperor, in the Diet at Augsburg; which being rejected, and a Decree made against their Opinions, the Protestant Princes and Cities met at Smalcald, and entred into a Defen∣sive League about the end of the same year, 1630. and not long after a War broke out, between them and the Emperor, which lasted many years, till in the end the Emperor comply'd; and, by the Pacification of Passaw in 1552. agreed, That Matters concerning Religion should be referred to the Diet: Which being assembled at Augsburg in the year 1555. decreed, That neither the Emperor, nor any other Prince or State, should in any manner whatsoever hurt or injure any Man for the Confession of the Augustan (or Prote∣stant) Religion, nor force any of the Princes to for∣sake their Religion, Ceremonies or Laws, which they had already instituted in their Dominions, or which those of the Augustan Confession should thereafter Institute, or that the Emperor or Princes should con∣temn the same, but suffer them freely to Profess this Religion, and quietly enjoy their Goods and Estates; together with much more to that purpose, as may be seen, at large, in Sleidan's Hist. of the Reform. in Germany, lately Translated into English. So that at present the Lutheran Religion is profess'd in the Do∣minions of all those Princes and Cities above∣mentioned, and many others; as the Roman Catho∣lick is in Austria, Bavaria, the Spiritual Electorates, &c. The Germans value themselves extreamly upon speaking a Primitive LANGUAGE, and have obstinately refused to borrow Words of their Neigh∣bours, tho' they are forc'd to make very uncouth Compounds, to be able to express themselves intelli∣gibly. The Radical Words themselves are very harsh and abound with Consonants; and many of these be∣ing put together, fill the Mouth 'tis true and make a thundering Sound, which is call'd Manly; but to a Stranger it seems as untuneable as the Welch, and as difficult to learn. Compounds 'tis granted is an Elegancy, but excess in every thing is ill; and no Language is copious enough of its self to furnish all Words; which themselves begin to be sensible of, and do therefore now admit some few French words, for the better and more intelligibly expressing them∣selves. In short, the High Dutch hath the Reputa∣tion of a manly noble Language, but withal, not tuneable or docible, and is fitter for a General than a Courtier. It extends very far, for not only in Ger∣many, but in Denmark and Sweden, the High Dutch is spoken, with some variation of Dialect, as also in Swisserland; not to mention Holland and Flanders, the Language whereof is of the same original, but varied so much that the Germans disown it, and have given it the Name of Low Dutch for distin∣ction. Concerning the ANCIENT STATE of Germany we can only say, That from the begin∣ning of History it was divided into many Nations, who, tho' they they all spoke the same Language, pre∣serv'd their separate Governments; and though by Invasions of Neighbours and Wars among themselves, several Revolutions have happen'd in almost all the Parts, yet to this day it is divided into a great num∣ber of Principalities, every one of which hath had a different Fate; as the Reader will find in the follow∣ing Description of them. The greatest Monarchy that hath been in Ger∣many was that of Charles the Great, otherwise call'd Charlemaigne, King of France; for he was not only Lord of the Parts upon the Lower Rhine and the Maine, but by his Arms subdued Saxony and Ba∣varia; and acquiring the Honour of Emperor of the Romans, resided with it here; and Germany hath ever since been called, The Sacred Roman Empire.
But to be inform'd how Charles attain'd this titular Honour, it is necessary to look back into the latter State of Italy, and see by what degrees the Roman Monarchy declin'd, and at last expir'd in the Person of Augustulus 300 years before the time of Charles the Great: The beginning whereof must be dated from Constantine the Great; for tho' he was a very wise and excellent Prince, yet by removing the Seat of the Empire to Byzantium (now call'd Constanti∣nople) he left these Western parts naked; and ex∣posed to the Ravages of those swarms of Northern People that soon after invaded them. At his death Constantine dividing the Empire between his Sons, first erected the Eastern and Western Empires, the Seat of one being Constantinople, and the other Rome: But the latter became again united under the Eastern Em∣peror, and continued so till the death of Theodosius, who again divided it for the sake of his two Sons Arcadius and Honorius; these were succeeded for about 80 years by several Eastern and Western Em∣perors; but both the one and the other very sensibly declin'd; especially the Western Empire, by the In∣vasion of the Goths and other barbarous Northern Nations (who seized its Provinces, invaded Italy, and sack'd even Rome it self) was brought very low, and none of the latter Emperors made any considerable figure in the World: The last of them was Augustu∣lus, against: whom Odoacer King of the Heruli waged War, subdued a great part of Italy, took Augustulus Prisoner, and made him resign the Empire, and finally determine that Dignity: This happen'd about the year, 476. The Heruli reign'd but a little while, being conquer'd by the Ostrogoths, and those at last driven out by Justinian, and Italy again made a part of the Eastern Empire; till (the Power of those Em∣perors being much declin'd) the Popes found means to obtain the Temporal as well as Spiritual Jurisdi∣ction over a great part of it; and the Lombards con∣quer'd another large part, and erected a considerable Monarchy; which, at last, the Popes grew uneasy at, and therefore stirred up the French Kings against them; and Pope Adrian I. being besieged in Rome by Desi∣derius King of Lombardy, sent to Charlemaign for assistance; who accordingly invaded Lombardy, over∣came Desiderius, and was himself crowned King: By which he became Lord of a great part of Italy, as he was before of Germany and France. Upon this occasion it was that th Pope, in gratitude for the Service he had done him, and to secure to himself so powerful a Protector, by consent of the People of Rome, declared Charles Emperor, and erected anew the Western Empire. But inasmuch as the Pope was Lord of the Territory about Rome, and Charles in his turn must shew his Gratitude, he left that City to the Pope, and fixed the Seat of the Empire in Germany; which was also more convenient to him, because more in the middle of his Dominions. Thus Germany be∣came the Seat of the Western Empire; which Dignity (though but a shadow of the ancient Roman) it has ever since born, under the Government of these following Princes. A Chronological Table of the Emperors of Germany.     Reg. y. Charles the Great began to reign 800 14. Lewis the Godly, his Son 814 26 Lotharius, Son to Lewis 840 15 Lewis II. Son to Lotharius 855 19 Charles the Bald Son of Lewis I. 875 2 Lewis the Bald Son of Charles 878 1 Charles the Gross his Son 879 9 He was deposed, and     Arnolph Son of Caroloman, Duke of Ca∣rinthia and King of Bavaria, elected Emperor 888 12 Lewis IV. Son of Arnolph, elected 900 12 Conrad Duke of Franconia, elected 912 7 Henry the Fowler, D. of Saxony, elected 919 26 Otho the Son of Henry 936 37 Otho II. succeeded his Father 973 11 Otho III. Son of Otho II. in whose time the manner of choosing the Emp. by the 7 Electors 'tis said was instituted. 984 18 Henry Duke of Bavaria, chosen by the Princes 1002 22 Conrad. Elected 1024 15 Henry the Son of Conrad 1039 17 Henry IV. his Son 1056 50 Henry V. his Son 1106 19 Lotharius Duke of Saxony 1125 13 Conrad Duke of Schawben 1138 14 Frederick Barbarossa Duke of Schawben 1138 31 Henry his Son 1190 8 Philip Brother to Henry, elected, but excommunicated by the Pope 1198 10 Otho Duke of Brunswick, also chosen Emperor.   Otho Son of Henry the Lyon D. of Saxony 1208 4 Frederick II. King of Sicily, Grandson of Frederick Barbarossa 1212 38 Conrad IV. Son of Frederick, against whom six other Princes were elected by the several Facti∣ons now risen in Germany, on account of the Pope's assuming Power over the Emperor. Among these seven, Richard Earl of Cornwall, Brother to our Henry III. was one. After a long Interregnum Rodolph Earl of Hapsburg, was unani∣mously elected 1273 19 Adolph Earl of Nassaw 1292 6 Albert Duke of Austria set up against Adolph, whom he slew, and was crowned 1298 10 Henry Duke of Luxemburg 1308   Poyson'd by a Monk in admini∣string him the Sacrament, after he had reigned 4 Y. 9 M. An Interregnum.     Lewis Duke of Bavaria, elected 1318 28 Charles IV. Son of John K. of Bohemia 1346 32 Wenceslaus Son to Charles 1378 22 Rupert Elector Palatine 1400 10 Jodocus Barbatus Marquess of Moravia 1410 5 M. Sigismund Earl of Luxemburg, Brother of Wenceslaus King of Bohemia and Hungary 1411 27 Albert II. D. of Austria Son of Sigismund 1439 1 Frederick III. Duke of Austria 1440 53 Maximilian Son of Frederick, crowned King of the Romans in his Father's time, and succeeded him 1493 25 Charles V. Son of Philip King of Spain, and Grandson to Maximilian 1519 38 Ferdinand, Brother to Charles 1558 6 Maximilian II. Son of Ferdinand 1564 12 Rodolph, Maximilian's Son 1576 36 Matthias Brother to Rodolph 1612 7 Ferdinand of Gratz, Grands. of Ferdinan. I. 1619 17 Ferdinand III. succeeded his Father 1637 20 LEOPOLD Son of Ferdinand III. elected July 8th 1658     [now reigning.
The present EMPEROR was born Jun. 9. 1640. nominated King of Hungary, Jun. 27. 1655. King of Bohemia, Aug. 2. 1656. elected King of the Romans, Jun. 18. 1658. and crowned Emperor, July 22. He married Margaret of Austria Daughter to Philip IV. King of Spain, and Sister to the late King of France, on the 12th of April, 1663. She died Mar. 20. 1673. leaving Issue one Daughter, who was married to the present Elector of Bavaria. The Emperor married again Oct. 15. 1673. Claudia Daughter to Ferdinand Arch-duke of Inspruch, who died Apr. 8. 1676. leaving no Issue. He married a third time on the 6th Jan. 1677. Mary, eldest Daugh∣ter of Philip Duke of Newburg now Elector Palatine, by whom he has Issue JOSEPHƲS-Jacobus-Ignatius-Joannes-Antonius-Eustachius, born July 16. 1678. He was Crowned King of Hungary in 1688. and chosen King of the Romans, Jan. 24. 1690. CAROLƲS-Franciscus-Josephus, &c. born Oct. 1. 1685. And several Daughters. Of the Power of the Emperor. Having shewn how the King of Germany obtain'd the pompous Title of Romanorum Imperator, and how many Princes have succeeded in that Dignity, it re∣mains that we speak something of the Territories sub∣ject to his Dominions, and of his Power: It is plain by what we have already said, That Charles the Great got nothing but a bare Title by the Pope's sa∣luting him Emperor: Germany and France were already in his possession, Lombardy he had just Con∣quer'd, Spain had been long possess'd by the Goths, and the Popes had a good part of Italy; so that the Citizens of Rome had nothing to bestow upon him but the Honour, when they declared him their Em∣peror. However, That Title his Successors have been careful in preserving, and always write them∣selves Caesar, in memory of Julius, and Augustus from Octavius, in imitation of the Roman Emperors: They also call'd Germany the Sacred Roman Empire, and endeavour in all things to keep up the Grandeur of those ancient Princes. The Dominions of Charle∣maign were soon divided; His Son Lewis the Godly erecting out of 'em many Kingdoms, as we have al∣ready shewn in our account of the Kings of France: Germany with the Imperial Honour he gave to his eldest Son Lotharius, but hs Posterity proving mean degenerate Persons, they soon lost it, and several of the Princes were afterwards elected to that Dignity, Germany in time being divided among several Prin∣ces, whose Powers were exceedingly encreas'd by the Offices and Dignities that the Emperors con∣ferr'd on them, and at several times made Heredi∣tary to their Families. These Offices were Hertogen or Dukes, to whom were committed the Govern∣ment of the larger parts of Germany; Graffen or Earls, who had the care of smaller parts; Pfaltz-graven, Counts Palatine or Praefects of the Court-Royal, who administred Justice in the Verge of the Court; Landgraves, who were Presidents set over Provinces; Marggraves or Marquisses, who were Presidents of the Marches or Borders for repelling the Incursions of Enemies and administring Justice to the Inhabitants; also Burggraves, who were Governors of the Royal Castle or Forts. These Offices being made Hereditary, the Possessors of them in time ob∣tain'd Sovereign Authority in their respective Go∣vernments; which the Emperors, either through their own Liberality, or being prevail'd on by Mony or Service, or oblig'd by some exigency of Affairs, have at several times confirm'd to them: So that at present tho' the Emperor be supream Lord over all Germany, he is not Master of any particular part of it (except some few of the Princes Estates that have return'd to the Crown as Fiefs for want of Heirs) it being all subject to the several Princes. The Power of the Emperor hath been so restrain'd by several Capitularies or Agreements between the Emperors and Princes, that 'tis difficult to say what it is: The best account that can be given of it is, That he exercises Regal Authority over all Germany, excepting in such things that by the Grants of his Predecessors he is restrain'd; the chief whereof are as follows, according to a late Author that collected it out of them. First, the Emperor hath not the Le∣gislative Power. The general Law all over the Empire is the Civil or Roman, mix'd with the Canon, and the old Customs of the Germans; and in the several States the particular Laws made by them, which firmly oblige in their own Dominions. To these are added the Statutes of the Diets, by which alone can any new Law be introduced, or any Law made that will bind all the States; and such Statute or Recess (as it is call'd) of the Diet, obliges the Emperor also. Next, the Emperor cannot levy Taxes. If there be oc∣casion for Mony to be raised for the Service of the Empire in general, it cannot be done without the con∣sent of the Diet. By the Capitulary of the present Em∣peror, he is tyed up from beginning a War, or making Alliance with a Foreigner without the consent of the Electors. By the same it is declar'd, That the Emperor shall not deprive any Prince or State of their Dignity or Dominions. Nor can he impose Re∣ligion on any Prince or State, or punish any Man on that account. But what I have been saying of the limitation of the Emperor's Power, is to be understood of him as he is Emperor; for in his own hereditary Dominions he may act as he pleases with respect to the particular Laws there: Wherefore, the present Emperor be∣ing King of Hungary and Bohemia, Arch-duke of Austria, Duke of Silesia and Marquess of Moravia, Duke of Stiria, Carinthia and Carniola, Earl of Tyrol, Cilley and Gorice, and Lord of many Cities and Ter∣ritories in Schwaben, besides what he has lately gain'd from the Turks, is a very powerful and mighty Prince, and able to carry on a War at his own Expence, though the Diet should happen to disagree with him. The Emperor only can confer Honours, create Princes and affranchize Cities; all the Princes receive Investiture from him; he instituteth Universities. and 'tis he only can give leave to build Cities, He is serv'd by the greatest Princes of Germany, address'd to by the name of Caesar, and semper Augustus, and his Embassadors in Foreign Courts take place of those of all the Kings and States of Europe. Of the King of the Romans, the Electors of the Empire, and the other Princes of Germany. The King of the Romans is a Dignity erected of late Ages, being begun in the time of Charles IV. He is chosen to be the Emperor's Deputy in case of his Absence or Sickness, and upon his Death to suc∣ceed
him without other Election. This was intro∣duced in Policy by the Emperors, that they might in their Lives time secure the Succession to their Family, and procure their Successors better Terms than they might be able to obtain in a vacancy. This Dignity, therefore, is not constantly in being, and hath been only conferr'd when the Emperors have had a Son to succeed, and have had Interest enough to engage the Electors to choose him. The Son of the present Em∣peror was elected to this Honour on the 24th Jan. 1682/90. and crown'd at Augsburg two days after. The Electoral Princes are Nine in number, viz. 1. The Archbishop of Mentz, who is styled Arch-Chancellor of Germany, Dean of the Electoral College, sits on the Emperor's right Hand in the Diet, and had formerly the right of crowning the King of Bo∣hemia. 2. The Archbishop of Trier, who is call'd Arch-Chancellor of France and the Kingdom of Arles, and claims the first Vote in the election of the Empe∣ror; he sits over against the Emperor in the Diet. 3. The Archbishop of Cologn, he has the Title of Arch-Chancellor of Italy, claims the first Vote in chusing the King of the Romans, and of setting the Crown on his Head; he sits next the Emperor on his left Hand. 4. The King of Bohemia, he is Lord Cup-bearer to the Emperor, first of the secular Ele∣ctors, and in publick Processions walks next the Em∣peror or King of the Romans. 5. The Duke of Ba∣varia, who is Lord Sewer, and carrieth the Globe before the Emperor in solemn Processions. 6. The Duke of Saxony, he is Lord High Marshal of the Empire, and carrieth the naked Sword before the Emperor. 7. The Marquess of Brandenburg, he is Lord High Chamberlain, and in Processions carrieth the Scepter before the Emperor. 8. The Count Pa∣latine of the Rhine, who is Lord High Treasurer, and in the Procession at the Coronation scattereth the Medals among the People. 9. The Duke of Bruns∣wick-Lunenburg-Hanover. These have much greater Authority, and en∣joy larger Privileges and Rights than the other Prin∣ces of Germany. They chuse the Emperor and King of the Romans, and pretend a Power of Deposing him. In some Cases they exclude the rest of the States, and consult by themselves Matters of greatest Impor∣tance; the Emperor is oblig'd to ask their Advice when he calls a Diet. In an Interregnum the Elector of Saxony and the Elector Palatine of the Rhine govern the Empire; in which case, the jurisdiction of the former extends over all the Northern part, and the latter governs all the Countries on the Rhine, the Circle of Schawben, &c. but the Duke of Bavaria dis∣putes this Right with the Count Palatine, and at the death of the last Emperor did actually take the Office upon him; which the other protested against, and complain'd of as an Usurpation upon his Right. At what time or by what means these Princes first obtain'd the Electoral Power is not certainly known: The common Opinion is, That the Emperor Otho III. and Pope Gregory V. instituted them; but this is dis∣puted, and many learned Men are of Opinion, That tho' it be true that from the time of Otho, the Empire was elective, yet that the Elections were not made by these seven Princes only, but by the great Officers of the Empire in general, of whom these being the chief and most considerable by their Estates, made a shift to overtop the rest, and assume that Power wholly to themselves; this is dated from the time of Frederick II. and Conrad IV. at the death of the last of which, several Elections were made at the same time, and the Affairs of Germany put into great disorder thereby. But these Princes having Power enough to repeal this Act, made it a Custom, which was at last past into a Law by the Emperor Charles IV. who made that famous Bulla Area (so call'd from the golden Seal affix'd to it) that contains the whole form of the Election and Power of the Electors. The number of these Electors were then but seven, to whom an eighth was added in this Age on the fol∣lowing occasion: Frederick V. Count Palatinate, fal∣ling into difference with the Emperor, and accepting of the Crown of Bohemia in opposition to the pre∣tension of Ferdinand II. was by him proscrib'd; and being defeated at the Battle of Prague in the year, 1620. was depriv'd of his Country and Honours, which the Emperor bestowed upon the Duke of Ba∣varia: But great Contests and Wars ensuing there∣upon, it was at last agreed in the Westphalian Treaty, A. D. 1648. That the Count Palatine should be re∣stor'd to his Electoral Dignity. But because the Duke of Bavaria could not be brought to part with his, an eighth Electorate was erected for him, and part of his Country, viz. the Lower Palatinate, being restor'd he has since had the Title of Elector Palatine of the Rhine, and the eighth Seat in the Electoral College. To this number there has been yet another added very lately, viz. in the year, 1693. and by the Em∣peror's favour conferr'd on Ernestus Augustus Duke of Brunswick-Lunenburg-Hanover. The other Princes are, the Dukes of Lunenburg, Mechlenburg, Wurtemburg, Sax-Lauwenburg, Sax-Naumburg, Sax-Hall, Sax-Gotha, Sax-Mersburg, &c. the Marquisses of Baden, Culembach, &c. the Land∣graves of Hesse, the Princes of East-Friezland, Anhalt, Montbeliard, Birkfield, Nassaw, Furstemburg, Hoen∣zolleren, &c. the Counts of Solm, Dietrichstein, Avers∣burg, with many others. As also, the Archbishop of Saltzburg, the Bishops of Munster, Liege, Wurtzburg, Bamberg, Paderborn, Osnabrug, Aichstadt, Strasburg, Augsburg, Basil, Constans, Hildesheim, Spire, Worms, Passaw and Lubeck, together with some Abbots, and the Great Master of the Teutonick Order, &c. these have Sovereign Authority in their own Estates, and govern their Subjects without cognizance of the Emperor. There is yet another Class of Sovereign States in Germany, viz. The Imperial Cities and Hanse-Towns. The Cities of Germany were, from their beginning, endow'd with large Priviledges, which were given by the Princes that built them to invite the People to inhabit them, and leave the rude manner of Liv∣ing they had been accustom'd to before the Fifth Century after Christ. Accordingly, upon this en∣couragement, they flock'd to the Cities and betook themselves to Manufactures and Trades; by which being in time grown Rich, many of the Cities obtain'd by purchase or otherwise, exemption from the juris∣diction of the Princes in whose Dominion they stood, and by permission of the Emperors at several times, were erected into independent States, to be govern'd by their own Magistrates under the protection of the Emperor, each City paying its proportion in all Taxes levied for the publick Service of the Empire; and these are those Cities that are call'd Imperial and Free, and are very numerous, the Catalogue of them would be too tedious; the Reader will find them noted in the following Description, to which we refer him. These Cities have frequently made
Leagues for their mutual Defence: As also for the sake of Trade, upon which account was form'd the famous Hanseatick Society, which was a League made be∣tween several of the Maritime Cities of Germany, (whereof Hamburg and Lubeck were the Chief) about the end of the 13th. Century, for their mutual assist∣ance in carrying on their Commerce, by which they grew very considerable, and engag'd many Cities in∣to their Society, even to the number of near four∣score; they also obtained large Privileges, and exer∣cised a Jurisdiction among themselves; to which pur∣pose they were divided into four Circles, distinguish'd by the names of the four Principal Cities among them, viz. Lubeck, Cologn, Brunswick and Dantzick where∣in were held their Courts of Judicature. They were call'd Hanse or Anse, q. d. am zee on the Sea, be∣cause the Society at first consisted only of such, tho afterwards many Inland Cities were introduced: 'Tis true, this Etymology is disputed, and many others assign'd; but this seems the most probable, and therefore we shall name no more. The most flourish∣ing time of this Society was from about the year 1400 to 1500. after which it declin'd, and is at pre∣sent not very considerable. Of the Diet of the Empire. The Diet or Parliament of Germany is compos'd of the Electors, the Princes, Spiritual and Temporal, of the Empire; and the Deputies of the Imperial Cities. This general Assembly of all the Estates of the Em∣pire is summoned by the Emperor, by Letters di∣rected to every Member six Months before the Ses∣sion, informing them of the time and place. When they are assembled, the Emperor, or his Commissioner proposes to them the Matters to be transacted, which are things that concern the whole Empire in general, such as raising Mony for a Foreign War, and mak∣ing Laws which oblige all the States. The Diet is divided into three Houses, which are, the Electors, the Princes, and the Cities: In the first the Bishop of Mentz is Speaker; in the second some Prince of the House of Austria and the Bishop of Saltzburg by turns; and in the third, that City in which the Session is held. The Princes are divided into two Benches, the Spiritual and Temporal: The Cities also are di∣vided into two Benches, the Rheinische and the Scwabische; on the former sit the Deputies of the Cities on the Rhine, &c. and on the latter the Cities in Schwaben, Franconia, &c. The Diet was formerly assembled annually, but latterly not so often, except at this time of War; and it is at the Emperor's pleasure to call it; only in case of his omission the Electors may advise him to it; the States judging it conveni∣ent that it be assembled once in three years. The place of its Meeting is also at the Emperors disposal; Mentz was by Charles the Great appointed for it, but it has since been held at several other free Cities: At pre∣sent Ratisbon is the usual place of its meeting. Of the Supream Courts of Judicature. The chief Court for determining great Causes in Germany is the Imperial Chamber: At first the Empe∣rors with their chief Ministers heard and decided all considerable Causes, but those growing numerous, Maximilian I. settl'd a Court at Worms in 1495. which was afterwards removed to Spire, and nam'd the Imperial Chamber, wherein Causes are Tryed by certain Judges call'd Assessors; of these at first there were sixteen, now fifty, whereof the Emperor ap∣points the President and the four chief Officers, the Electors chuse each of them one, and the rest are nam'd by the other Princes and States of the Empire; Disputes between the Princes are brought before this Court, as also other Causes, by Appeal from Inferior Cours. The Seat of it was establish'd at Spires, never to be remov'd without consent of the Diet; but in this present War, the City having been taken and burnt by the French, it is remov'd and and establish'd at Wetstar in Hesse, by consent of the Diet. The Emperor holds another high Court in his Palace, which is call'd the Chamber of Vienna, and is of equal Authority with that of Spire: The Em∣peror by himself, or Deputy, sits as Chief, and is assisted by a certain number of Judges, whereof part are Protestants: This Court decides all great Causes brought by Appeal from subordinate Courts, and claims the same Authority with the Chamber of Spire. The Arch-bishopricks, Bishopricks and Ʋni∣versities in Germany. For the Government of the Church there are seven Arch-bishops, and thirty five Bishops; which are as follow. I. The Arch-bishop of Mentz hath 12 Suffragans, viz. The Bishops of 1. Spire, 2. Worms, 3. Strasburg, 4. Wurtzburg, Aichstat, 6. Verden, 7. Chur, 8. Hildesheim, 9. Paderborn, 10. Constance, 11. Halberstadt, and 12. Bamburg exempt. II. The Arch-bishop of Trier hath 3 Suffragans, viz. The Bishops of Metz, Toul and Verdun. III. The Arch-bishop of Cologn hath 4 Suffragans, viz. The Bishops of Liege, Munster, Minden and Osna∣bruck. IV. The Arch-bishop of Magdeburg, hath 5 Suffragans, viz. The Bishops of Meissen exempt, Maesburg, Naum∣burg, Brandenburg and Havelberg. V. The Arch-bishop of Saltzburg hath 10 Suffragans, viz. The Bishops of 1. Freisenghen, 2. Ratisbon exempt, 3. Passaw, 4. Chiemse, 5. Seckaw, 6. Lavant. 7. Brixen, 8. Gurk, 9. Vienna exempt, and 10. Newstadt. VI. The Arch-bishop of Bremen hath 3 Suffragans, viz. The Bishops of Lubeck, Ratzburg and Scheweirin. VII. The Arch-bishop of Prague hath 3 Suffragans, viz. The Bishops of Olmutz, Leutmeritz and Konings∣gratz.
And, for Propagation of Learning, Universities are establish'd in these following Cities, viz.   Founded A. D. At Vienna, 1365 Prague, 1358 Mentz, 1482 Cologn. 1388 Triers, 1558 Liege, 1129 Heidelberg, 1346 Leipsick, 1408 Erfurt, 1391 Friburg, 1463 Ingolstadt, 1472 Tubingen, 1477 Rostock, 1490 Wittemberg, 1502 Francfort on the Oder, 1506 At Marpurg. 1526 Strasburg, 1538 Gripswald, 1547 Dillinghen, 1549 Jena, 1558 Lewenghen, about 1560 Helmstadt, 1576 Herbron, now Sigen, 1589 Paderborn, 1592 Altorf, 1622 Giessen, 1607 Olmutz in Moravia, Kiel, 1669 Gratz, New. At Hanaw a Schola illu∣stris. The EMPIRE is divided in TEN CIRCLES, which are as follow. The Circle of the ƲPPER SAXONY con∣taining the Dukedom of Pomerania, the Electorate of Brandenburg, and the States of Saxony; the Earl∣doms of Mansfield, Schwartzenburg, Stolberg and Bar∣by, the Landgraviate of Thuringen, the Marquisate of Misnia with the Dutchies of Altemburg, Mersburg, and Naumburg and Voitland; as also the Bishoprick of Havelberg, the Abby of Queidlemberg, &c. The Director of this Circle is the Elector of Saxony. The Circle of the LOWER SAXONY, which contains the Dutchy of Holstein, the Dutchies of Mecklenburg, Lawenburg, Bremen, Perden, Brunswick, Lunenburg, Hanover, and Magdeburg, the Principality of Halberstadt, the Bishopricks of Hildersheim and Lu∣beck. The Directors of this Circle are the Duke of Brandenburg and the Duke of Brunswick by turns. The Circle of WESTPHALIA, containing the County of Emden or East-Friezland, the County of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, the Bishoprick of Mun∣ster, the Principality of Minden, the Counties of Diepholt, Hoya, Benthem, Tecklenburg, Steinfort, Lem∣gow, Lippe, Ravensburg and Spigelburg, the Bishop∣ricks of Osnabruck, Paderborne and Liege, and the Ab∣bey of Corbey; the Dutchy of Westphalia, the Dutchy of Cleeves, the Dutchy of Juliers, the Dutchy of Berg, and the County of Marck. The Directors are the Bishop of Munster and the Duke of Newburg. The Circle of the LOWER RHINE, where∣in are the three Spiritual Electorates and Archbi∣shopricks of Mentz, Triers and Cologn, the Palatinate, and the Electorate of the Rhine, with the Bishoprick of VVorms. The Director is the Arch-bishop of Mentz. The Circle of the ƲPPER RHINE, contains the Landgraviates of Hesse and Darmstadt, the Coun∣ties of Nassaw, Solms, VValdeck, Hanaw, Erpach; the Bishoprick of Spires, the Abbies of Fuld and Hirsch∣feld, the Dutchy of Zweibrukken, and Alsatia. The Elector Palatine and the Bishop of VVorms are the Directors. The Circle of FRANCONIA, wherein are contain'd the Bishoprick of VVurtzburg, Bamberg and Aihhstadt; the Principality of Hemeberg, the Dutchy of Coburg, the Marquisate of Culembach, the Mar∣quisate of Ohnspach, the Burgraviate of Neurenberg, the Estate of the Great Master of the Teutonick Order, the Counties of Reineck, VVertheim, Holach, Papen∣heim, Schwartzenberg, Castel and Sensheim. The Di∣rectors of this Circle are the Bishop of Bamberg and the Marquess of Culembach. The Circle of SCHVVABEN comprehends the Dutchy of VVurtemburg, with the County of Loeben∣stein, and the Principality of Hoen-Zollern, the Mar∣quisate of Baden, the Marquisate of Ortnaw, the Ter∣ritory of Brisgow, the Bishoprick of Constance, the Principality of Furstemburg, and County of Rheinfel∣den, the Bishoprick of Augsburg, the Abbies of Kem∣pten, &c. the Counties of Oeting, Koniseck and Min∣delheim; the Marquisate of Burgaw, the Baronies of Limpurg and Justingen, the Estate of the Fuggers, and the Territory of Ʋlm. The Directors are the Duke of VVurtemburg, and the Bishop of Constance. The Circle of BAVARIA, contains the Dutchy and Electorate of Bavaria, with the Bishopricks of Freisengen, Ratisbon and Passaw; the Palatinate of Bavaria, the Dutchy of Newburg, the County of Sultzback and the Abbey of VValdsassen, the Arch∣bishoprick of Slatzburg, and the Provostship of Berg∣telsgarden. The Directors of this Circle are the Elector of Bavaria and the Arch-bishop of Saltz∣burg. The Circle of AƲSTRIA, wherein are con∣tain'd the Arch-dukedom of Austria, the Dutchies of Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, the County of Tyrol, and the Bishoprick of Trent. The Arch-duke of Austria is Director of this Circle. The other Circle was the 17 Provinces of the Ne∣therlands, which the Emperor Charles V. made a part of the Empire, by the name of the Circle of BƲRGƲNDY, but those have now no Votes in the Diet; and, having been already describ'd, we need not say any more of them. To these must be added the Kingdom of BOHE∣MIA, with the Dutchy of SILESIA and Mar∣quisate of LƲSATIA and MORAVIA, all subject to the House of Austria, and reckon'd part of the Empire. For more particular satisfaction, see the ensuing Table of the division and sub-division of all Germany, viz. In the Circle of the Lower Saxony are comprehended The Duke∣doms of Mecklenburg, divided into the Territo∣ries of Mecklenburg, Schwerin, Gustrow, Rostock, VVeismar. Sax-Lawemburg, and County of Ratzeburg. Part of the Dutchy of Holstein, wherein stands Hamburg, Lubeck. The Duke∣doms of Bremen. Brunswick di∣vided into Brunswick, VVolfembuttel, Hanover. Lunnburg di∣vided into Luenenburg, Zell, Zell, D. Dameberg C. Magdeburg. The Bishoprick of Hildesheim, The Principality of Halberstadt, The Principality of Ferden.
In the Circle of the Ʋpper Saxony, are Pomera∣nia divi∣ded into Royal, subject to the Sweeds, divided in∣to the Territories of Bardt, Gutzkow, Walgost, Stetin. Ducal, under the Elector of Brandenburg, in which are the Terri∣tories of Pomerania, Cassuben, Venden, Butow, Lawenburg. Brandenburg, di∣vided into Altmark. Middlemark di∣vided into Middlemark, Prignitz, Rupen, Ʋkerana. Newmark divi∣ded into Newmark, Sternberg. The Dukedom of Saxony. Principality of Anhalt, divi∣ded into Dessaw, Bruburg, Zerbst, Koten, Plotzka. Earldom of Mansfeld divided into the Branches of Arnstein, Vipran, VVetinf, Querurt. The Counties of Schwartzburg, Hohenstein. Landgraviate of Thuringen. The Territories of Erfurt, Eischfeld. Subject to several Branches of the House of Saxony. The Counties of Hall, Mersburg, Naumburg, VVeimer, Gotha, Eysenach, Altenburg. The Marquisate of Mis∣nia, divided into the Territories of Meissen, Ertzburg, Leypsick. In the Circle of Westphalia. The County of Embden or East Friezland. The County of Oldenburg, with Delmenhorst. The Bishopricks of Munster, divi∣ded into the Upper. Lower. Osnabrug, Paderborn. The County of Benthen. The Principality of Minden, The Counties of Diepholt,, Hoye, Lemgow, Schaumburg. Lippe, Ravensberg. Rheda, Spigelberg, Ritberg, Tecklenberg. The D. of VVestphalia, under the Elector of Cologn. The County of Mark. The Dutchy of Berg, Juliers, Cleeve. The Bishoprick of Liege. Several Imperial Cities. In the Circle of the Lower Rhine. The Archbishop∣ricks and Electo∣rates of MENTZ, TRIERS COLOGNE The Electorate of the Rhine, in which are included. The Palatinate of the Rhine-Sponheim, being the 12 Baili∣wicks of Simmeren, Creuts∣nach, Openheim, &c. The Bishoprick of Worms. In the Circle of the Upper Rhine. Hesse, divided in the Landgravi∣ates of Cassel, Marpurg, Darmstadt. The Abbies of Fuld, Hirschfeld. The County of VValdeck. The VVateraw, con∣taining the Cities of Nassaw, divi∣ded into these Branches. Dillemberg, Dietz, Hadamar, Kerberg, Sigen. Idestein, VVeilburg, VVisbaden. Bielstein. Solms, Hanaw, Eysenberg, Sayn, VVied, VVitgenstein, Hatzfeld, VVesterberg. The County of Erpach. The Bishoprick of Spire. The Dutchy of Zweibruken, or Deuxponts. The County of Catzenelbogen. Landgraviate of Al∣satia divided into Upper. Lower. The Territory of the City of Francfort, In the Circle of Franconia are these States. The Bishopricks of VVurtzberg, Bamberg, Aichstat. The State of the Great Master of the Teutonick Order. The Marquisates of Culembach, Onspach. The Principality of Henneberg. The Dutchy of Coburg. The Burgraviate of Nuremburg. The Counties of Holach, Castel, Schwartzenberg, Rcineck, VVertheim, Holach, Papenheim, Sensheim, Limpurg, Erpach. Several Imperial Cities.
In the Circle of Schwaben are The Dutchy of Wurtemburg, with the Counties of Loebenstein, Hohenberg. And the Principality of Hoenzollern. Baden divided into the Marquisates of Baden, Durlach. Marquisate of Ortnaw. Territory of Brisgow. The Black Forest, wherein are Principality of Furstemburg. The County of Rheinfelden. Territory of Hegow comprizing The Bishoprick of Constance. Landgraviate Nellenburg. The Bishoprick of Augsburg. The Abbies of Kempten, Buchaw, Lindaw. The Marquisate of Burgaw. The County of Oesing, Pappenheim, Koningseck, Hohenrechburg, Mindelheim. The Barony of Walburgh. The Estate of the Family of the Fuggers. The Territory of the City Ʋlm. And many Imperial Cities. The Circle of Bavaria. Nortgow, or the Palatinate of Bavaria, wherein are also included the Landgr. Lenchtenburg County of Chamb. Territory of Amberg. The Dutchy and Electo∣rate of Bavaria divided into the Territories of Munchen, Ingolstadt. Together with the Bishoprick of Freisingen. County of Partenkirk. The Lower Bavaria, di∣vided into the three Territories of Straubing, Landshut, Burkhausen. The Archbishoprick of Saltzburg. The Bishopricks of Ratisbon, Passaw. The Dutchy of Newburg, The Provostship of Bergtelsgarden. In the Circle of Austria, The Arch-Dutchy of Austria, divided into Higher, di∣vided into the Terri∣tories of Muhl, Schartz, Hauss, Traun. Lower, di∣vided into the Terri∣tories of Upper Viennerwald Lower Viennerwald Upper Manhartsberg Lower Manhartsberg. The Dutchy of Styria, with The County of Cilley. The Dutchy of Carniola, with the Marquisate of VVindischmark, and The County of Goritz. The Dutchy of Carinthia. The County of Tirol. The Bishoprick of Brixen. The Bishoprick of Trent. The Kingdom of Bohemia is divided into 16 Circles. The Marquisate of Lusatia, into Higher and Lower. The Dutchy of Silesia, divided into Higher and Lower. The Marquisate of Moravia into Eastern and Western. Also SAVOY and SVVISSERLAND are reckon'd part of the Empire; but these being now distinct States shall be spoken of apart hereafter. CHAP. II. Of the Spiritual ELECTORATES. IN this description of Germany, we shall pursue the same Method as in the other parts, and without regard to the Precedencies of Princes, place the De∣scriptions according to the situations of the Countries, and therefore begin with Cologne rather than Mentz and Triers, because this lyes first in the way from the Netherlands, whence we are last come, omitting Cleeve and Juliers, till we come back to VVestphalia and the Dominions of the Elector of Brandenburg, whereon they depend. From Cologne we shall pass up the Rhine, taking in by the way the Maine and Neckar, together with so much of the Moselle as lyes in Germany: And having viewed all the Countries on both sides of these Rivers, pursue our Journey through Suabia to the Danube and the Estates of the House of Austria; thence through Bohemia and its Dependencies, Coast the Oder, Elbe and VVeser, and at last return through VVestphalia again to the Banks of the Rhine. SECT. I. The Electorate of COLOGNE. The Arch-bishoprick and Electorate of COLOGNE is extended on the Western Bank of the Rhine, be∣tween the Dutchy of Cleeve on the North, and the Electorate of Trier on the South, the Dutchy of Ju∣liers on the West, and that of Berg (parted from it by the Rhine) on the East. It is a fruitful and plea∣sant Country, producing excellent Wine, besides Corn and other Necessaries for Life. Its extent is not large, for though it be about 40 miles in length, it is not above 7 or 8 in breadth; the Arch-bishop is Supream Lord of it, as also of a pretty large Coun∣try in VVestphalia, and is richer and more potent than either of the other two Ecclesiastical Electors; his Annual Revenue being reckon'd to be above 100
Thousand Pounds Sterling. He is dignified with the Title of Arch-Chancellor of the Empire, and Legate in Italy. This See was advanced from Episcopal to Archi-Episcopal in the year 743; to which was added the Dignity of Elector in 1021. The Arch-bishop is chosen by the Chapter, which is the most Illustri∣ous of any in Germany (being composed all of Princes or Noblemen at least (private Gentlemen being ex∣cluded) and are 24 in number. The present Arh∣bishop and Elector of Cologne, is Prince Clement, ro∣ther to the Elector of Bavaria, who was choser July 14. 1688. and Invested, notwithstanding the Petensi∣ons of Cardinal Furstemburg, the Justification o which by the French King, and the Opposition of t by the Emperor, was the occasion of the beginning o this pre∣sent War. The chief Cities and Towns of this Electorate are, Cologne, Cap. Bonne. Mulheim. Rheinberck. Kempen. Keyserswaert. Nuys. Breel. Zons. Aremsbeg. Werle. Geseck. Dorsten. Recklenhausen, &c. COLOGNE, or Colen, call'd Keulen by the Ger∣mans, and in Latin Colonia Agripina, and Colonia Ʋbiorum is seated on the River Rhine, a the distance of 65 miles from Mentll, and 35 from oblentz to the North, 56 from Nimeguen, and 20 from Duseldorp to the South, and 60 from Mastrich to the West. It is one of the largest Cities of Germany, and very considerable on account of its Buildings, number of Inhabitants, and great Trade in Wine and other Com∣modies of Germany, which by the means of the Rhine are brought hither, and Transported to Hol∣land. It is a free City, being Govern'd by its own Senate, which orders and judges all Civil Mat∣ters and Causes; but Criminal are judg'd by the Elector. It is also one of the four chief Hans Towns and is called the Holy City, because of the many Churches and Religious Houses in it; here being be∣sides the Cathedral, 10 Collegiate and 19 Parochial Churches; also 37 Monasteries and many Hospitals. In the Cathedral they shew the Tombs of the Three Wise Men that came to Worship our Saviour, call'd hence the Three Kings of Colen, whose Bones they pretend were removed to Constantinople by Helena the Mother of Constantine; thence they were carried to Milan, by Eustorsius Bishop of that See, and af∣terwards brought hither by Rainold Archbishop of Colen. Three Skulls very richly Enshirned are shewn to Strangers, and affirm'd to have belong'd to their Bodies, and to have great Virtue in Curing, Diseases by Touch, &c. One of the Parish-Churches is dedi∣cated to S. Ʋrsula, who with her 11000 Virgins, they say, were Martyr'd here. An University was long since planted here, which being Declin'd, was Re∣established in 1388. and Endow'd with large Privi∣leges by Pope Ʋrban VI. and is at present in a very flourishing State. The Walls of this City are flanked with 83 Towers, and encompass'd with three deep Ditches; whereof see here the Draught. map of Cologne COLOGNE Clogne was Built, or Repair'd, and Enlarged at least; by the Ʋbii, who possessed the Weteraw and Hassia, and in the time of Augustus obtain'd this Country and Juliers of that Emperor (being disturbed by the Catti their Neighbours) and put themselves under the rotection of Agrippa, from whence some say it had its nae, or as others from Agrippina (Daughter to Germanicu. Wife of Claudius, and Mother to Nero) who was born ere. It was the Metropolis of the Germa∣nia Secunda, and the Seat of the chief Roman Colony. Meroue King of France beat the Romans hence about the year 450. and quickly after Attila the Hunn ruin'd it. Afterwards the Romans Re-built it; and it was again taken by the French, and about the year 500 made part of their Kingdom by Clovis the Great. The Emperor Otho about 950. subjected it to its Prelate, which was opposed by the Citizens; and great Differences at several times have happen'd there∣upon, which were at last composed by the Empe∣ror Maximilian, and the City made Free and Impe∣rial, but oblig'd to pay Homage to the Elector, who is also oblig'd to confirm their Privileges: And they are still so tenacious of Liberty, that though the Ele∣ctor by his Officers exercise Justice in all Crimi∣nal
Causes in the City, they will not permit him in Person to reside long in Town, nor come with a great Train; for which reason he lives always at Bonne. It was in the year 1260. that this City en∣tred into the League of the Hans Towns, and was made the Capital of their Fourth Province. Cologn is seated in the Lat 51 Deg. and Long. 26 Deg. In a Convent of Carmelites not far from hence, a Treaty of Peace was set on foot in 1673 between the Emperor, King of Spain, France, &c. And the several Princes sent their Plenipotentiaries accordingly, but it was interrupted by the Seizure of William Prince of Furstemburg, since made Cardinal, who tho' a German and a Count of the Empire, had espoused the Interest of France, and was made that King's Ambassador at this Treaty, in which he carried Mat∣ters so high, that he defeated the endeavours of the several Ministers for Peace, and made the Emperor cause him to be Seized and carried to Vienna, where he was detain'd close Prisoner till the Treaty of Nimeguen. Bonne, Bonna, Colonia Julia Bonna; also Ara Ʋbi∣orum, from the Altars erected here by the Ʋbii the ancient Inhabitants; is the usual place of Residence of the Archbishop of Colen, who has a magnificent Palace here in the Castle. It stands upon the Rhine 10 miles South from Colen, in a fruitful Country, which produces very good Wine, and the Woods a∣bound with variety of Game. A ridge of Mountains on both sides the Rhine, reach from hence as far as Bingen. It is a small City, but well Inhabited: The Churches are stately, especially the Collegiate De∣dicated to the Holy Martyrs Cassius, Florentius, and Malusius, whose Bodies with several other of the famous Theban Legion are said to be Buried in it, be∣ing brought hither by S. Helena, who Founded this Curch to their Honour. The Town-house is well Bult, and adorn'd with fine Paintings. This was for∣mer an Imperial City, but now subject to the Electr. Frederick of Austria, chosen Emperor in op∣position to Lewis of Bavaria was Crowned here in 1314. It suffer'd much in the Low Country Wars, was Besged by the Duke of Parma, and forc'd by Famine to surrender in 1588. The Fortifications here are regula; the Wall is fac'd with Brick, and the Ditches are very broad and dry, but the Counter∣scarp is not very defensible: See the Draught annext for more particular Information. In 1673. it was taken by the Prince of Orange, our present King, from the French, after a Siege of 9 days. In 1688. Cardinal Furstemburg, in pursuance of his pretended Election above-mention'd, by assistance of the French Troops, got possession of it; but the Germans, under the Command of the Elector of Bran∣denburg, r-gain'd it in 1689. after a Siege of three Months. map of Bonne BONNE. Rhingberg, is a pretty large Town seated on the Rhine, in a small Country of 10 miles extent, belong∣ing to the Archbishop of Colen, though separated from the rest by the small County of Meurs. It is distant 40 miles from Colen to the North, and 10 from Geldre to the East; a small River (or Canal rather, for it seems to be Artificial) passe by it and runs quite cross from the Rhine to the Mae: By means of this convenient situation, it hath a god Trade, and the Burghers are reasonably Rich. Tis Town being near the Borders of Guelderland, hath been claimed by the Hollanders, and is therefore strongly Fortified.
map of Rheinberg RHEINEBERK Kempen, a strong Town and Castle, stands on the Borders of Guelderland and Juliers, 35 miles North∣west from Colen, and 10 miles West from the Rhine. It was remarkable for the gallant Defence it made in 1642. when it was Vigorously Besieg'd by the French, Hessians and Saxons United. Keyserswert stands on the East-side of the Rhine, be∣tween Duysburg and Duseldorp, 12 miles from Kempen to the East, and 25 from Colen to the North-west. It is a small Town and strong Fort, first built, as 'tis said, by one Swibertan an Englishman. Nuys, or Neuss, Nevotium, Nussia, seated on the River Erp and near the Rhine, 20 miles from Colen to the North, and 15 from Kempen to the South, is a large City and well Fortified, having the River on one side, and a double Wall on the other. The Rhine did anciently run by its Walls, but having alter'd its Channel, they have been forc'd to make a Trench from it to the Erp to bring Vessels up to their Gates. The Citizens enjoy great Privileges, which were granted to them by the Emperor Frederick III. in re∣compence for their Service, in holding out a whole year's Siege against the Duke of Burgundy, who op∣pos'd Herman Landgrave of Hesse, chosen Bishop of Colen, in defence of his Brother, chosen also by ano∣ther Faction. Here is a fair Collegiate Church, be∣sides other publick Buildings of good Structure. Broel is a small pleasant Town with a strong Castle, which is the seat of the Elector when he diverts him∣self with Hunting in the Neighbouring Forest. It stands in the mid-way between Colen and Bonne, and 5 miles West from the Rhine. Zons a small Town tolerably well Fortified, stands on the Rhine 8 miles West from Nuys, in a Country producing much Corn, the Sale whereof is the chief Trade of the Town. The Houses are of Brick and make a good shew. Mulheim, a fair and large Town on the Eastern Bank of the Rhine 5 miles below Colen, stands in the Limits of Bergen, but is subject to this Elector. The Inhabitants attempted to Wall it round, and intended to make it an Imperial City, but were oppos'd in it by the Citizens of Colen, and forbid by the Empe∣ror, who caus'd the Marquess Spinola to spoil their Out-works in the year 1614. and the next year the Inhabitants of Colen pull'd down all the new Build∣ings in the Town: Afterwards, during the Wars in Germany they endeavour'd it again, pretending it necessary for their Security; but it was again hinder'd, and it still remains a Dependent on Cologne. On the East-side of the Rhine at about 20 miles distant from it, lyes a Tract of Land of about 20 miles long and 12 broad; bounded on the North by the River Lippe, that parts it from Munster, and on the South by the River Emser, which belongs to the Archbishop of Colen, and contains many large Mannors and Lordships, and these 2 Towns, viz. Recklenhausen, a strong Town in the middle of this Territory, 35 miles North-east from Nuys. Ta∣ken in War from the Duke of Cleeve, by the Elector of Colen's Forces, A. 1343. Mortgaged in 1442. but Redeem'd 150 years after by Archbishop Salen∣tine. Here is a Nunnery, the Abbess whereof hath power of punishing Offenders, even to Death. Dorsten, a place very well Fortified by the Land∣grave of Hesse Cassel in 1639. but taken from him two yeas after by the Elector of Colen's Forces, after a sharp Siege of two Months. It stands on the River Lippe, 10 miles West from Recklenhausen, in the Barony thereof. To this Electorate also belongs a large Tract of Land in Westphalia, wherein are these Towns, viz. Arnesberg, a neat and pleasant City on the River Rihr, 50 miles from Nuys to the East, often ho∣nour'd with the Archbishop's Presence, who comes hither for the diversion of Hunting. It was formerly subject to its own Lords, and by them given to this Elector. Werle, a pleasant Town, between the Rivers Ruhr and Lippe, in which the Elector's chief Judge Official in Westphalia Resides. It is wall'd and for∣tified. Gesek, which stands near the Borders of the Bishop∣rick of Paderborn; it is a fortified Town and came to this Elector in 1501. was taken by the Landgrave of Hesse in 1636. but afterwards restored.
SECT. II. The Arch-bishoprick and Electorate of TRIER. The Electorate of Trier lies between that of Cologne and the Dutchy of Juliers on the North, Lor∣raine and the Palatinate on the South, Luxemburg on the West, and Weteraw on the East. It is a fruit∣ful and pleasant Country seated on both sides the Ri∣ver Moselle and Rhine. Its extent from South to North-east is about 70 miles, and from West to East about 60. It was made a Metropolitan See under Agilulphus, in the year 743. and the Archbishop was made an Elector in 1021. He hath also the Title of Arch-Chancellor of the Empire in France, is Temporal as well as Spiritual Lord of this Country, and hath Precedency of the Elector of Cologne. The Grandeur of this Prince was much greater when the Empire was in the House of France, than it is at present: In this Age the French have Invaded it often, and taken many of the Towns, which they held till the Peace of Munster. And both in the last War of 1675. and in this present one, they have over-run and harras'd it exceedingly. The Revenue of the Elector used to be reckon'd near One hundred thousand Pounds Ster∣ling per Annum, but hath been much diminish'd by the War. The Chapter is compos'd of 16 Capitu∣lary Canons who are all of Noble Extraction, and choose the Bishops always out of themselves. The Chief Towns of this Electo∣rate are, Trier, Cap. Coblentz. Hermanstein. Meyne. Overweissel. Boppart. Engers. Sarburg. Bern-Castle, &c. TRIER, call'd Treves by the French, and in La∣tin Triviri aut Augusta Triviriorum, is seated on the River Moselle, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridge, and is distant 55 miles from Coblentz to the South∣west, 65 from Mentz to the West, and 65 from Cologn to the South. It is a large City and of very great Antiquity, but was often ruin'd by the Huns, Van∣dals, Goths and French. It was afterwards Imperial and Free, but hath been subject to its Archbishop ever since 1568. when it was surpriz'd by the Arch∣bishop James III. A University was establish'd here in 1472. which is in a flourishing State and well fill'd with Students. Here are 4 Collegiate and 5 Parish Churches, 2 principal Abbies and several other Re∣ligious Houses. The City is fortified with strong Walls and Outworks; but was taken by the French in the last War, and recover'd from them in 1675. And in this War they put a Garrison into it in 1688. Of its Fortifications this is an exact Draught. map of Trier TRIER Coblentz, in Latin Confluentia & Confluentes, from its situation on the Confluence of the two Rivers Rhine and Moselle; stands in a pleasant and fruitful Country cover'd with Vines, at the distance of 35 miles from Mentz to the North-west, and about the same distance from Colen to the South-east. It is a large City and built in form of a Triangle, two sides whereof are secur'd by the two Rivers, and the third by strong Fortifications. It has a Bridge over the Moselle, and to guard it a Fort of 3 Bastions on the other side, and another Bridge over the Rhine to Her∣manstein. This, in the time of the Romans, was the station of their first Legion. It was given to the See of Triers about 1000 years ago by King Dagobert, and was afterwards an Imperial City till 1312. when it was separated from the Jurisdiction of the Empire by Henry VII. Its situation has made it exceeding populous and of great Trade, which consists chiefly in Wine, Corn, Wood and Iron. The chief pub∣lick Buildings are, the Elector's Palace, two great Churches and some Monasteries. The private Houses are generally fair and uniform, and better built than the other Cities on the Rhine. It was first encom∣pass'd with Walls by Arnulphus Elector of Trier in
1250. and afterwards regularly Fortified by Gaspar a Petra and other Archbishops, and is now one of the strongest Cities of Germany. Its Strength will be bet∣ter seen by this Draught. map of Coblentz COBLENTZ. On the other side the Rhine just over against this City stands, Hermanstein or Ehrenbreitstein, an impregnable Fort well defended by Out-works on the top of a steep rocky Hill, twice as high as Windsor-Caste, which com∣mands the City and the two Rivers: At the foot of this Fort on the Banks of the Rhine and fronting the River, stands the Elector's Palace, which is a very noble Building. From hence is a passage to Coblentz by a long Bridge of Boats, in the middle whereof two or three are let slip to let any great Vessel pass by, which they easily fasten again. Meyn or Meyen, on the River Nette, is 15 miles distant from Coblentz to the East: It has a Castle built in 1280. by Henry Archbishop of Trier, and the Town was wall'd round by his Successor. It gives Name to a large Territory about it, in which stands Munster a small Town, for distinction call'd Munster Meynfield. Oberwesel stands on the west-side of the Rhine 20 miles from Coblentz to the South, and 25 from Mentz to the West. It was once on Imperial and Free City, but since the year 1312. it has been subject to the Archbishop of Trier. Boppart is a Town and Fort seated on the Rhine, 10 miles South from Coblentz. It was also formerly an Imperial City, but given by the Emperor Henry VII. to Baldwin Archbishop of Trier, who built the Castle to secure it. Engers, a fair Town and Fort of the Rhine, stands between Coblentz and Andernack, and gives Name to a neighbouring Territory. It has a strong Castle and a noble Bridge over the Rhine, founded by Cuno Arch-bishop of Trier, who died in 1388. Bern-Castle is a good Town pleasantly seated up∣on the Moselle, and makes great quantity of Wine, which enriches the Place, and has made it Popu∣lous.
Sarburg on the River Sar, is a Town of good Strength; made so and much beautified by Vestinger their Archbishop. Limburg stands on the River Lohn, betwixt Ide∣stein and the County of Weilburg; it suffer'd much in the Wars between the French King and the Empe∣ror. Montroyal, belonging to the French, stands on the Frontiers of the Electorate, 20 miles from Triers to the North-east, and 30 from Coblentz to the South-west; It is a strong Fortress built in a Penisle made by the Rhine, which with the Citadel and Out-works, render it almost Impregnable. For more particular Information, see the Draught. map MONT ROYAL SECT. III. The Archbishoprick and Electorate of MENTZ. The Archbishoprick of Mentz lyes on the Banks of the River Mayne, between the Electorate of Trier on the West, the Palatinate on South, Franconia on the East, and the VVeteraw on the North. It is in length from North-west to South-east about 50 miles, and about 20 in breadth; but besides this, the Elector hath Dominions in other Provinces. This Prince hath the Precedency of both the other Ecclesiastical Ele∣ctors, is Dean of their College, and stiled Arch-Chan∣cellor of the Empire in Germany. He is Lord of this Country, and maintains in his Court a Marshall or General, and a Chancellor: His annual Revenue is reckon'd above one hundred thousand Pounds. To all which he is Elected by the Chapter of 24 Capitu∣lary Canons, who are all of noble Extraction. This See was formerly Episcopal only and Suffragan to that of VVorms, till 745. it was erected into an Archbi∣shoprick. This is a pleasant fruitful Country, very po∣pulous, and hath in it these Towns of note, viz. Mentz, Capit. Bingen. Aschaffenburg. Koningstein. VVeisbaden. Elfield. Reineck, Coun. Lohr, County. Other Towns subject to this Elector. in Hesse, Fritzlar, Ommenburg. Neustat. in Thuringen Erfurt. Heyligenstadt Duderstadt. MENTZ, call'd by the Germans Mayntz, by the French Mayence, in Latin Moguntia Magontiacum & Mocontiacum, is seated on the Rhine near its Conflu∣ence with the Maine, at the distance of 65 miles from Trier to the East, 32 from Coblentz to the South-east, 20 from Francfort to the West, and 50 from Spire to the North. It is a large City, well fortified and very populous. The private Buildings are not extraor∣dinary, the Houses being old and the Streets narrow: But the publick ones, which are many Churches, the Electoral Palace, the Town-house or Guild-hall, three Castles, and a Bridge of Boats over the Rhine, are stately Structures. Here is an University which was founded in the year 800. and re-establish'd in 1482. This City claims the Invention of the Art of PRINTING, which at least was brought to perfection here by John Faust, or as others, John Guttemburg, about the year 1450. It is a place of very good Strength, which hath been much encreas'd by a Fortress built not many years since on a Hill, (wherein stands the Elector's Palace) and by the re∣gular Fortifications that have been added by the late Archbishop, since the beginning of this present War: Of which see the Draught annex'd. This City is by the Germans pretended to be above 1300 years older than Christianity; but by others 'tis thought to have been built by Drusus, whose Tomb is still shewn here. It was sometime Imperial and Free, but subjected by its Archbishop Adolphus of Nassaw, who took it in the year 1462. and his Successors still retain the Authority. Gustavus Adelphus took it in 1631. and oblig'd the Citizens to pay 80000 Dollars as a Ran∣som for their Lives and Houses. And in this War it was taken by the French in the year 1688. and re∣gain'd by the Duke of Lorrain in 1689.
map of Mainz MAYENCE Bingen is a pleasant Town seated on the Rhine, 15 miles West from Mentz. It was a Fort in the time of the Romans, and thought to be the place where Drusus died. The River Nahe, over which here is a fair Stone Bridge, runs through the Town, and empties it self in∣to the Rhine: Here is also a Castle, which stands on a Hill and over-looks the Town. This was also former∣ly an Imperial City, but is now subject to the Dean and Chapter of Mentz. Between this place and Mentz in an Island in the Rhine, stands the famous Mauss-thurn, an old Watch-Tower, said to have its name from the Mice and Rats which follow'd hither, and devour'd the covetous Archbishop of Mentz, who scoffingly call'd some poor People that begg'd at his Gate, the Rats that eat up the Corn. Elfeld is a strong fortified Town, seated on the North side of the Rhine, 5 miles from Mentz to the West, and adorn'd with a fair Church and a high Steeple. It is the chief Town of a small Territory, extended along the Rhine 20 miles, call'd Rhingaw, a Country richly stor'd with choice Vines; wherein also stands Erbach, a stately Monastery, where lie buried many of the Counts of Nassaw and Rodesheim, a Place noted for the Growth of the best Wines in these parts. Weisbaden stands about five or six miles North from Mentz. Koningstein is 15 miles distant from Mentz to the North-east. Aschaffemburg, Ascaffemburgum aut Asciburgum is a strong Town and Castle, on the Eastern Bank of the Mayn, 40 miles distant from Mentz and 20 from Francfort to the East; it is divided into the Upper and Lower Town, and is beautified with a stately Palace, lately built, wherein the Elector often resides; and hath a fair Stone-Bridge over the Mayn. Reineck, the chief Town of a County of the same name, stands on the River Syn, 35 miles from Aschaf∣femburg to the West, 25 from Fuld to the South, and 8 from the Mayn to the North. This Town and Coun∣ty, together with that of Lohr adjoining to it, and on the Banks of the Mayne, do also belong to this Archbishop. Ommenburg or Amelburg, a strong Town on the River Ohrn, 5 miles distant from Marpurg in Hessen, and 45 from Francfort to the North, is the Capital of a small Territory belonging to this Elector, in which also stands Neustadt. Freitzlar, the chief Town of another small Territory, subject to this Archbishop, is seated on the River Eder, in the Landgraviat of Hesse, about 25 miles from Om∣menburg to the North-east, 10 from Waldeck to the West, and near the mid-way between Marpurg and Cassel. It hath a Castle and good Fortifications, and is esteem'd a place of as good Strength as any in these parts. To this Electorate belongs also a small Country of 20 miles extent, call'd Eichfeld or Eschfeld, lying be∣yond the Weser, between the Dutchy of Brunswick on the North and the Landgraviat of Hesse on the South. In which stand
Heglingenstat, built by King Dagobert; in it is a College of Jesuits, but is not otherwise considerable. Duderstat, a small Hanse-Town, anciently subject to the Duke of Brunswick, by whom it was sold to Gerlacus Archbishop of Mentz. CHAP. III. HESSEN, Hassia. THE Province of Hessen lies on the North Side of the River Main, extending as far as the Weser, comprehending under this Name in general, besides the Landgraviat of the same Name, the Abbies of Fuld and Hirchsfeild, the Weteraw, in which are also compris'd several Principalities and Lord-ships, and the Landgra∣viat of Darmstadt, together with several Imperial Cities. The whole Country is bounded on the North by West∣phalia, on the West by the Dutchy of Berg and Elect∣orate of Trier, on the South by the Electorate of Mentz and Franconia, and on the East by the Dutchies of Wei∣mar and Thuringen. Its utmost Extent from North to South is about 100 English Miles, and from East to West as many. The Air is healthful, the Waters whol∣som, and the Soil fruitful, producing much Corn, and towards the Banks of the Rhine and Lohn Grapes; here are also large Forests, which afford store of Deer and other Game; and Mountains, wherein Mines of Cop∣per and Lead are found. This is judged to have been the Country of the ancient Catti, mention'd by Tacitus and others. It is divided into Hessen and Veteravia, or the Weteraw. In Hessen are The Langraviates of Hesse Cassel, which lies on the Banks of the Rivers Weser, Eder and Lohn, and hath these Towns, viz. Cassel, Rodemberg, Homburg, Witzenhausen, Zeigenheim, Suntra, Geysmar, Eschwege, Smalcald. Hesse Darmstadt, the Terri∣tories whereof are divi∣ded, part lying on the South side of the Main, and part between Hesse Cassel, Waldeck, Solms and the Rhine. Darmstadt, Marpurg, Frankenburg, Alsfeld, Giessen, Catzenelbogen, Schwalbach. The County of Waldeck, lying East from Hesse Cassel. Waldeck, Wildungen, Corback, Eyenberg. The Territories of the Abbies of Fuld, Hirschfeld. Fuld, Hirschfeld. The County of Solms, Solms, Brunsfeld. The Imperial Cities of Wetslar, Fridberg. In the Weteraw The County of Nassaw, Nassaw, Dillemberg, C. Sigen, C. Herborn, Beilstein, C. Dietz, C. Hadamar, P. Wisbaden, C. Weilberg, C. Idstein, C. The County of Hanaw, Isenberg, County Hanaw, Gelnhausen, Imp CASSEL, Cassella, aut Cassilia, olim Castellum Cattorum, & Sterdontium, the Capital City of the lower Hessen, is seated in a pleasant Plain, on the River Fuld near the Confines of the Dutchy of Brunswick, at the distance of 50 miles from Marpurg, and as many from Fuld to the North, and 40 from Paderborn to the South∣east. It is a place of good Trade for Wool and other Merchandizes, and is well fortified with Walls, Ditches, and a strong Citadel: It is the Seat of the Landgrave, whose Palace stands without the Town, and is sur∣rounded by Bulwarks: The Family of Hesse is one of the most ancient of Germany. This House of Cassel is the Elder, and the Landgrave, with his Subjects, are of the Calvinist Religion. Rodemburg, a fair Town, stands on the River Fulda, 30 from Cassel to the South; it is pleasantly seated, and has a Collegiate Church with a Dean and 20 Canons nobly endow'd. Near the Town is a Quarry of white Marble. Suntra stands 12 miles East from Rodemburg. Homburg is 25 miles distant from Cassel to the South, and 12 from Rodemburg to the West. Zeigenheim stands 30 miles South from Cassel. It is a small but fair City, and gives Name to a County. Geysmar, stands 12 miles from Cassel to the North. Witzenhausen is seated on the Weser, 12 miles from Cassel to the East. Eschwege stands also on the Weser, 20 miles above Witzenhausen, a wall'd Town, built by Charles the Great, and repair'd by Henry II. These are all good Towns, but not particularly re∣markable. Smalcald stands in a little Territory on the East side of the River Verra, disjoyn'd from the rest of the Lands of this Prince; it is 50 miles distant from Cassel to the South-east, 30 from Hirschfeld to the East and 20 from Eysenach to the South. It is a Town of good Trade for Iron-ware, many Mines in the Neighbourhood furnishing the Inhabitants with plenty of that Metal, which they work and send abroad to foreign Parts. This place was famous in the last Age, by the assembling of the Protestant Princes here, in the Years 1530, 1531, 1535 and 1537. to make a League for the Defence of the Augsburg Confession, against the Emperor Charles V. and the Popish Prin∣ces of Germany: Which League grew so powerful, that they forced the Emperor to a Treaty, held in 1557. at Passaw, wherein Lutheranism was establish'd in several Parts of the Empire. Marpurg, Marpurgum, Amesia, is seated on the River Lohn, in a pleasant Country, near 50 miles from Cassel to the South-west, and 40 from Francfort to the North. It was some time a free and Imperial City, afterwards subject to its own Lords, now the Chief of the Upper Hesse, and the Seat of the supreme Court of Judicature;
to which Appeals are brought from both Cassal and Darmstadt. It has a strong Castle, which stands on a Hill, and is otherwise well fortified. The great Church is a stately Building, and has in it many noble Monuments, The University here is one of the most considerable in Germany. Frankenburg, on the River Eder, 20 miles North from Marpurg, is a large Town, said to be built by Theodorick King of France, Anno 520. Alsfeld stands 15 miles from Marpurg to the East: It is one of the ancientest Towns of Hessen, and had for∣merly very great Privileges, even Power over Life; but lost their Charter in an accidental Fire many years since, so that now thay have only a Memorial of it, by the chief Magistrates having a Sword born before him. The Town-house is a fair handsom Building. Giessen is a fair Town, seated on the River Lohn, 15 miles from Marpurg to the South, and 28 from Francfurt to the North; the Royalty whereof is divided between the two Landgraves of Cassel and Darmstadt: It is de∣fended with a strong Wall and regular Fortifications, and hath an Armory very well furnished. The Trade of this Town lies in Dressing and Selling of Cloth. WESTLAR, an Imperial City, stands on the Borders of the County of Solms, upon the River Lohn not above 5 miles below Giessen, 18 miles South-west from Marpurg, and 26 North from Francfort. It is an old Town, and has nothing in it worth notice but the great Church. However, it is at present the Seat of the Imperial Chamber, which was removed from Spire hither in the Year 1689, by reason that that City was taken and destroy'd by the French. FRIEDBƲRG, a Rich and Imperial City, stands 14 miles South from Wetslar, and 15 North from Francfort: It is seated at the Foot of a Ridge of Hills, call'd de Hohe, and enjoys large Privileges, granted by the Emperor Frederick II. The Mart, now held at Francfort, was before the Year 1340. held in this Town; at which time it was remov'd, at the desire of the Merchants, and this City, in lieu, hath four annual Fairs. DARMSTADT, Darmstadium, seu Darmosta∣dium, a considerable City, seated on the Banks of a River of the same Name, in the Country of Geraw, other∣wise call'd the Landgraviate of Darmstadt, which lies on the South Side of the Main; it is defended by a strong Castle, which is the Palace of the Landgrave; and for the better Security of the Country, there are two Forts, one on the Rhine, named Markburg, and another on the Main called Russelheim. The Town is distant 10 miles from the Rhine to the East, and 15 from Francfort on the Main to the South. This House of Darmstadt by the failure of the Second House of Marpurg, succeed∣ed to that Lordship, together with those of Giessen and Catzenelbogen, and by that means is become more con∣siderable than the elder House of Cassel. The Land∣grave usually resides at Marpurg; he is of the Lutheran Religion, as are also most of his Subjects. The County of Catzenelbogen lies on the Banks of the Rhine, between that River and Nassaw; the Town which gives Name to the County is but small, and is seated at the distance of 10 miles from Nassaw to the West, and about 22 from Mentz to the North. The Property of this Town and County has been much disputed between the Earls of Nassaw and the Landgraves of Hesse, the former having married the Sister of the last Earl, and the latter pretending a Do∣nation from that Earl: In 1548, the Emperor Charles V. adjudged it to the Count of Nassaw; but that Judgment was revers'd at the Treaty of Passaw, and Count Wil∣liam of Nassaw surrendred it to the Landgrave Philip, who paid him 600000 Crowns for it: However, the Family of Nassaw does still retain the Title of it. In the same County stand Schwalback, famous for many Springs of Medicinal Waters in it, which are of great virtue for curing seve∣ral Distempers. It is distant 10 miles from Catzenelbo∣gen to the South, and 12 from Mentz to the North. The Castle of Rhinfeld, which gives Name to a small County, stands on the East-side of the Rhine, 25 miles East from Catzenelbogen, and 20 South from Coblentz. WALDECK, Valdecum, is the Capital of a small Principality, of about 20 miles extent, situate in the North part of Hesse, beyond the River Eder, and Westward of the Landgraviate of Cassel. The Country is fruitful, affording Wine as well as Corn and Pa∣sture, besides Mines of Copper, Lead, Quicksilver, &c. The chief Town is but small, and not very consi∣derable; it is distant 30 miles from Marpurg to the North, and 20 from Cassel to the South-west. The other Places of Note in this County are Wil∣dungen, a pleasant Town built upon two Hills, in the middle of which lies a very fine Garden. Corbach, formerly a free City, wherein is held a small University. And Eyenberg, a very strong Castle, built upon a Hill near Corback. The Territory of the Abbey of FƲLD, call'd by some Buchem and Fagonia, is a large rich Country, ly∣ing South of Hesse, and North of Hanaw Reineck, &c. extending about 40 miles in length. The chief Town Fuld, stands upon a River of the same name 40 miles East from Marpurg, and 45 North-east from Hanaw: The Monastery is of the Benedictine Order, and one of the noblest in all Europe; it was founded in the Year 744, by S. Boniface, and endowed with great Privi∣leges by several Emperors. The Abbot is Lord of this Town and Country, Primate of all the Abbots in Germany, a Prince of the Empire, and sits in the gene∣ral Diets at the Emperor's Feet. There are many other Towns in this Territory. The Monastery of HIRCHFELD stands on the River Fulda, at the distance of 20 miles from Fuld to the North. It is a very noble Structure, artificially built upon an Arch, supported by 16 Pillars. It was founded by Sturmius Abbot of Fulda, and a Territory of about 12 miles extent, given to it. Alcuinus, who was Tutor to Charles the Great, was Abbot of this Monastery, and lies buried in its Church. The Re∣venues of this Abbey have been in the Hands of the Landgrave of Hesse ever since 1606. The WETERAW, Veteravia, is the general name of the Country, lying between Hesse on the North, the River Main on the South, the River Rhine on the West, and the County of Reineck on the East; wherein are contained the Estates of the Counts of Nas∣saw, Solms and Hanaw, &c. who are constant Confe∣derates for their mutual Defence. NASSAW, as it is now encreas'd by the acces∣sion of the Counties of Weilburg, Idstein, Wisbaden, Dillenberg, Beilstein, Geilberg, Sigen and Hadamar, is bounded on the North by Westphalia, on the East by Hesse and Solms, and on the West by Berg, Trier and the Rhine. This Country is fruitful in Corn and Pasturage, abounds with Cattle and Venison, and hath Mines of Iron, Lead and Copper. It was at first only a County, but was made a Principality by the Emperor Ferdinand II. Anno 1653, and is subject to its own Princes, a very Ancient and Honourable Family; from which descended Adolphus, chosen Emperor A. D.
1292. Engelbert, the Seventh Earl of this Family, ac∣quir'd by Marriage the Barony of Breda, and other Estates in the Netherlands; and Henry, his Great-grand∣son, married Claude de Chalons, Sister and Heir to Phi∣libert Prince of Orange, whose Son Rene, in 1530, succeeded in that Principality; which Honour hath ever since remain'd in this Family. These Princes have in all Ages been celebrated for their Bravery, espe∣cially in the last, when they so zealously defended the Belgic States, and by their Courage and Wisdom re∣scued them from the Spanish Cruelty, and acquired the Dignity of Hereditary Stadtholder, and Captain General of all the Forces of the Ʋnited Netherlands: Which great Honours being possess'd by William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, King Charles I. chose him for a Husband to his eldest Daughter Elizabeth; by whom he had issue William Henry, who married Mary the eldest Niece of Charles II. our late Queen of blessed Memory, and is at present King of Great Britain. NASSAW, Nassovia, that gives name to this Principality, is a small Town and Castle seated on the River Lohn, 8 miles from the Rhine to the East, 12 from Coblentz to the South-east, and 35 from Franc∣fort to the North-west. It was the usual Seat of the first Branch of this Illustrious Family. Dillemberg, stands on the River Dilla, 40 miles from Nassaw to the North-east, and 16 from Marpurg to the West. It is a Town of good Trade, and hath two annual Fairs. Here is a Castle standing on the top of a Hill, which commands the Neighbourhood, and was the Seat of a Branch of the Family of Nassaw, who had the Title of Counts of Dillemberg: In it is a large Armory, very compleatly furnish'd. Sigen, on the River Siega, 18 miles from Dillem∣berg, is seated on the top of a rocky Hill, and defend∣ed with a strong Wall and regular Fortifications, and gives Name to a County. Near the Town is a Mine of Iron. Herborn stands upon the River Dilla, but five miles South from Dillemberg; it is a City of pretty good Trade in Woollen Cloths, and hath an University of good Repute, endow'd with the Lands of some dissol∣ved Monasteries, and hath bred some considerable Scholars; particularly J. Piscator, H. Martinius, G. Passor and H. Alstedius. This City is wall'd round and has a Castle. Beilstein, gives Name to a County, which was the Inheritance of a younger Branch of the Family of Nas∣saw. It is an old Town seated among rocky Hills, at the distance of 10 miles from Herborn to the South, and hath a Castle and a fair Church. Dietz, the Capital of another County, is pleasantly seated upon the River Lohn, 10 miles from Nassaw to the West; it is wall'd, and hath two Towers standing upon two Hills in the Town. Hademar, a small Town, the Capital of a Territo∣ry, which hath the Title of a Principality, stands upon the Lohn, at the distance of 14 miles from Coblentz to the East, and 20 from Mentz to the North. Weilberg, which gives name to another County, stands also on the Lohn, 35 miles from Nassaw to the West. Wisbaden, the Capital of a County also, stands five miles North from Mentz, and 20 South-east from Nassaw; it is an ancient Town, and much frequented by reason of famous Hot Baths in it, which give name to the Place. Idstein, a Town and County, lies next to Wisbaden to the North. The County of Isenburg lies between Solms on the West, Hanaw on the East, the Lands of the Abbey of Fuld on the North, and Nassaw on the South. It is about 20 miles in length, and 8 or 9 in breadth. Budingen, the chief Town of it is about 30 miles North-east from Francfort. And The Castle of Ronenburg, a noble old Fort, a few miles from Gelnhausen, was anciently the place of Re∣sidence of the Counts. SOLMS, the Capital of another County, subject also to its own Lord, and situate on the South of Hesse Marpurg. The Town stands in the most Northern part of the County, at the distance of 15 miles from Mar∣purg to the South-west, and 35 from Francfort to the North. The usual Residence of the Count is in the Ca∣stle of Brunsfeld, which stands 15 miles South from Solms. The County of HANAW is bounded on the North and East by the Territory of Fuld, and on the West by the Estates of Nassaw and the County of Isenberg: It extends from the River Main North-east, about 40 miles, and is subject to its own Earl. The chief Town Hanaw, Hanovia, stands upon the River Kuntz, near the Banks of the Main, 15 miles East from Francfort, 12 from Aschaffemburg to the North-west, and 40 from Marpurg to the South: It is a fair, well-built Town, neat and uniform; and a Place of Trade, and much resorted to by Foreign Merchants; inso∣much that the French and Dutch have Churches here. It is now defended by strong Walls and modern For∣tifications, but was twice taken, viz. in 1631 by the Swedes, and in 1658 by the Germans, after a long Siege, both times, and not without Treachery and Stratagem at last. GELNHAƲSEN, an Imperial City, stands in the Limits of this County, on the River Kintzing, 12 miles North-east from Hanaw, 15 North from Aschaf∣femburg, and 20 East from Friedburg: It is now but a poor City, though very considerable, and inhabited by many Noblemen and Gentlemen before the German Wars. CHAP. IV. FRANCONIA, Franconia. THE Dutchy of Franconia, call'd by the Germans Frankenland, and heretofore Franconia Orientalis, one of the chief of the Ten Circles of the Empire, is bounded on the North by Thuringen and Hessen, on the South by Schwaben, on the East by the Palatinate of Bavaria, and on the West by that of the Rhine; ex∣tending from North to South about 130 miles, and from East to West 140. The Soil of it in some parts mountainous and barren, but in others very fruitful in Corn, Wine, Liquorish, Saffron and Fruits: Here are also several Forests, well stockt with Game, and Rivers abounding in Fish. This Province is suppos'd to have been the ancient Seat of the Franks or French, from whence they set forth under Phara∣mond,
to their Conquest of Gaul; and also that the famous Salique Law was made upon the Banks of the River Sala: Besides which, the chief Rivers here are the Main, the Tauber, the Kednitz, the Pegnitz and the Altmutz. Several Sovereign Princes have the Dominion of this Country, which is the reason that several Religions are predominant in several parts; but the Lutherans are most numerous. Franconia hath these States and Chief Towns, viz. The Bishop∣ricks of Wurtzburg, Wurtzburg, Ochsenfurt, Konigshoven. Bischoffsheim, of Bamberg, Bamberg, Cronach, Weisman, Forcheim, of Aichstat. Aichstat, Ornbaw. The Estate of the Master of the Teutonick Order, Margenthem. The Marqui∣sates of Culembach, Culembach, Weisinstat, Bertrut. Ohnspach, Ohnspach, Kregling. The Coun∣ties of Holach, Cash Schwartzburg, Sensheim, Limpurg, Lewenstein, Wertheim, Erpach, Hennelberg, Coburg. The Imperial Cities of Francfort, Nuremburg, Rotemburg, Schieveinfurt, Weinsheim, Weissemburg. WƲRTZBƲRG, Herbipolis, is the Capital of Franconia, and seated on the Banks of the River Main, at the distance of 80 miles from Mentz, and 60 from Francfurt to the East, 80 from Cassel to the South, 40 from Bamberg to the West, and 30 from Rotemburg to the North. The City is divided into two parts by the River, which are again joyn'd by a fair Bridge; besides the Main several little Brooks run through the Streets, and pleasantly water the Town. It is adorn'd with an University, and one of the richest and most magnificent Hospitals of Europe, And defend∣ed by a strong Castle, built on a Hill, which is joyned to the Town by a Wall, flanked with four Bastions. This was formerly an Imperial City, but has been subjected to the Bishop. To S. Burcard the first Bishop of this See, the Emperor Charlemaign granted the Country of Francia Orientalis, upon which account his Successors assumed the Title of Duke of Franconia. This Prelate is very Potent, being Secular as well as Spiritual Lord of 400 Villages and Towns, and able to raise an Army of 15000 Men. He judges Causes, and Condemns Criminals, in token whereof at Solemn occasions, he hath a naked Sword born before him. FRANCFƲRT, Francofurtum aut Francofordia, being the Foord of the Franks, and heretofore Heleno∣polis: Now commonly for distinction call'd Francofur∣tum ad Maenum. It is seated on both sides the Main, if the Suburb of Saxenhausen on the South∣side of the River be consider'd as part of it, that as well as the City being strongly Fortified with Basti∣ons, large Moats, Counterscarps, and other Out∣works; and also joined to the City by a Bridge, which is a noble Work, being built of Stone, and composed of many Arches. It is a large, populous, rich and well traded City, Imperial and Free, and govern'd by its own Counsels, Senators and Sheriffs, chosen by the Trades-men. In the Church of S. Bar∣tholomew here the Election of the Emperor is made, being expresly so ordained in the Golden Bull, or Grand Charter of Germany, made by the Emperor Charles IV. Which Golden Bull is also it self laid up in the Town-house of this City. Here is also an Imperial Palace, call'd the Braunsfeld, a Mansion-house of the Knights of the Tutonick Order, which with the Port, the Fortress, the Bridge between two Towers, and several Houses of Noblemen, toge∣ther with the Bridge over the Main above-mention'd, are good Ornaments to the Town. The private Houses are of Wood Plaister'd and Painted over. Francfort is conveniently seated for Trade; for the Main receives several smaller Rivers, and it self falls into the Rhine about 20 miles from hence, whereby Goods are easily brought to it, especially at the two great Annual Marts in April and September, when great quantities of all sorts of Commodities, especially Books, brought from all parts of Europe, are Vended here, to the great profit of the Town. The Inhabitants are generally of the Lutheran Religion, and were the first that demanded the free exercise of it; the refusal of which in the year 1525 made them revolt against the Clergy and Senate, and chuse themselves new Magi∣strates: And in 1530, the Ausburg Confession was Esta∣blished; however other Religions are tolerated; and among the rest, the Jews, who are pretty numerous here, but confin'd to live in one Street, which is lock'd up every Night. A Monument is to be seen here of a very Notorious Fact that three of that Nation were guilty of, for which they were tied up in Sacks and thrown in∣to the Main, and a Memorial of there lewd Action painted over one of the Gates. Francfort stands in the Latitude of 50 deg. and in the Longitude of 28 deg. 10 min. Aschaffemburg on the South-side of the Main, with the Counties of Reineck and Lohn, are reckon'd part of this Circle, but belonging to the Arch-bishop of Mentz. They are already spoken of in the account of that Electorate. NƲREMBERG, or NƲRNBERG, Nurember∣ga, aut Noricorum Mons, one of the largest, richest and most populous Cities of Garmany, stands at the bottom of a Hill near the confluence of the Rivers Rednitz and Pegnitz, at the distance of 55 miles from Wurtzburg to the East, 40 from Bamberg to the South, as many from Ingolstadt to the North, and 50 from Ratisbon to the North-west. It is a very considerable place on ac∣count of its two annual Fairs, its Traffick and Manu∣factures; the Clocks and small Wares made here be∣ing especially admired. The Houses are all built of Free-stone and four or five Stories high, the Streets are large, and the publick Places very regular: The Town-house, or Guild-hall is very magnificent: Here are eleven Stone-bridges over the Pegnitz, whereof that of one Arch is most artificially and admirably built. The other publick Works are 12
Fountaines, 26 Wells, and a large Arsenal, contain∣ing 300 pieces of Canon, and Arms for 1500 men, a strong Castle, and 6 Gates, each defended with a large Tower. In this City the Emperor is obliged to hold the first Dyet after his Coronation, and for that purpose, the Regalia or Imperial Ornaments, viz. the Imperial Crown of Charlemaigne, the Dalmatica or Mantle of the same Charles, together with his Cloak, Sword, Belt, Gloves, &c. are here laid up. It was made an Imperial City by the Emperor Fre∣derick Barbarossa, and purchas'd its Liberty of Frederick I. Elector of Brandenburg; and it is now Govern'd by its own Senators. The Inhabitants are of the Lutheran Religion, the Roman Catholicks having only one Church. A Peace was concluded here be∣tween the Princes of Germany in year 1649, The City of Nuremberg hath a Territory belonging to it of about 20 miles extent, wherein about 15 miles to the South stands Altorf, a small Town, but made considerable by an University in it, first established in 1578, but improv'd in 1623, and does now contain at least 200 Students. BAMBERG, Bamberga, aut Babenberga, took its Name from Baba, the Daughter of the Emperor Otho. It stands about 40 miles from Wurtzburg to the East, and 30 from Nuremberg to the North, in a Country abounding with rich Fruits and Plants, and is Water'd by the River Rednitz, which a little below falls into the Main. It was formerly Imperial and Free, but now subject to its Bishop, who depends on no Metropo∣litan but the Pope, and is not only Lord of this See (which is 60 miles in length, and thirty in breadth) but also of divers Mannors in Carinthia, and the Castles of Cronach and Forkheim, besides several Royalties else∣where, whereby he has the Honour to have four of the Electors, viz. The King of Bohemia, and the Electors of Bavaria, Saxony and Brandenburg, his Dependents for some parts of their Estates. The Bishop's Palace here is a splendid Building, and adorn'd with fair Gar∣dens and Orchards: The Cathedral Church has a high Steeple with four Spires, which with the Jesuits Church and the Castle, are worth a Travellers View. MERGENTHEIM, or MARIENDAL, the Capital of the small Territory of the Great Master of the Teutonick Order, and the usual place of his Resi∣dence, is a small Town, and not very considerable. It stands upon the River Golach 20 miles South-west from Wurtzburg. OHNSPACH, or ANSPACH, Onoldium, and Onspachium, is the Capital of a Marquisate of pretty large extent, which belongs to a Prince of the Family of Brandenburgh; it is Fortified, and hath a Castle, situate about 25 miles from Nuremberg to the West, and 20 from Rotemburg to the East, The Bishoprick of AICHSTAT lyes between the Mar∣quisate of Ohnspach and the Burgraviate of Nuremberg on the North, the County of Oeting and Dutchy of Neuburg on the South, and the Palatinate of Bavaria on the East. It extends about 30 miles from East to West and in some parts of it 15 or 16, in others not above 7 or 8 from North to South. The Bishop is Temporal as well as Spiritual Lord of it; and the chief City whence it is nam'd stands upon the River Altmul, 25 miles South from Nuremberg, and 8 or 9 North from the Danube. ROTEMBƲRG, Rotemburgum, a Free Imperial City, seated in the limits of the Marquisate of Ohnspach upon the River Tauber, 20 miles from that Town, 30 from Nuremberg to the West, and 40 from Wurtzburg to the South. It obtained its Freedom of the Emperor Frederick I. in the Year 1163. WINTZHEIM, another small Imperial City, stands also in this Marquisate upon the River Aisch, about 16 miles North from Rotemburg, and 20 North∣west from Ohnspach. The County of HOLACH lies next to Ohnspach to the South-west, The Barony of LIMPƲRG adjoins to Holach on the South. The small County of LEWNSTEIN, lies also South from Holach, and West from Limpurg. The County of WERTHEIM lies on both sides the Main, West from the Bishoprick of Wurtzburg; 'tis of about 20 miles extent, of a square form, and a very fruitful Country, affording besides Corn and Pa∣sture, very good Wines, the making whereof is the Trade of the chief Town, which stands on the Banks of the Main, where it receives the Tauber, and is distant 20 miles from Wurtsburg to the West. ERPACH, the Capital of another County, which lies on the South side of the Main, stands 30 miles South-east from Francfort, and 20 North from Heidel∣berg; it is a place of no great Trade, nor considerable, but for giving Title to a Count of the Empire. SCHWEINFƲRT, an Imperial Free City, is seated on the Main, 30 miles from Wurtsburg to the North, and near as many from Bamberg to the East. This City suffer'd much in the German Wars, having been taken by the Swedes, and afterwards seiz'd by the Marquess of Brandenburg, in 1553, but being besieg'd the next Year, he plunder'd and deserted it. The Marquisate of CƲLEMBƲRG is reckon'd part of this Circle, tho' it be subject to the Duke of Brandenburg. It is a Country of 50 miles in length from North to South, and 30 miles in breadth, lying next the Bishoprick of Bamberg to the East: The chief Town, which gives name to the County, is seated on the Main, 25 miles East from Bamberg. The RIVER MAIN arises in two Springs in Mount Fichtelberg on the East-side of this Marquisate, which unite near the Town of Cullembech, and flow∣ing Westward, receives the Rednitz, Warres, and other Rivers; and in a Serpentine course runs through the middle of Franconia, passing by Schweinfurt, Wurtz∣burg, Wertheim, Aschaffemburg and Francfurt; and falls into the Rhine a little above Mentz, after a course of 110 miles: Its breadth at Francfort is reckon'd by English Travellers about half as much as the Thames at London. CHAP. V. The PALATINATE of the RHINE, Palatinus Rheni, aut Pa∣latinus Inferior; in the German Language, Pfaltz auf Rhein, or Nider Pfaltz. THE Palatinate of the Rhine, called the Lower Palatinate, to distinguish it from that of Bavaria, is bounded on the North by the Bishoprick of Mentz, on the South by Alsatia, on the East by Franconia and Wertemburg, and one the West by Lorrain and the Bishoprick or Triers: It extends from East to
West almost 100 English Mies, and from North to South abut 60. The Air is Healthful, and the Soil Fruitful, the Country abounding in delicious Wine besides Corn and Pasture: Here are also some Mines of Agate and Jasper, and even Gold is found among the Sands of the Rhine, whereof particular Ducats are Coin'd. Besides the Rhine, which by passing through it gives name to this Region, the Necker, a very considerable River, waters the Eastern part of it, and having passed by Heidelberg, falls into the Rhine at Manheim; and several other smaller Rivers are found in several parts of it. The Dominions of this Elector were much larger before Frederick V. (who Married the Daughter of King James I.) was dispossessed of them by the Em∣peror in 1620, and his Estates together with the Electoral Dignity, given to the Duke of Bavaria: Afterwards at the Treaty of Munster in 1648, he obtained this part to be restored, but that of the up∣per Palatinate he could not recover, nor prevail hat the Duke of Bavaria should be divested of the Electo∣ral Dignity; however to make him some amends, he was chosen a-new, and made an Eighth in the Elect∣oral Colledge, with the Title of Elector Palatine of the Rhine. The chief Cities and Towns in this Electorate, are Heidelberg, Capital. Manheim, Frankendal, Openheim, Creutznack, Altzheim, Keiserlauter, Newstadt, Bacharach. HEIDELBERG, Heidelberga aut Edelberga, the Capital of this Palatinate, is seated on the Banks of the River Neckar in a fruitful Plain at the foot of a Mountain near the Frontiers of Schwaben; at the distance of 40 miles from Francfurt to the South, 60 from Wurtzburg to the South-west, 10 from Manheim to the East, and 12 from Spire to the North-east. It is a large and flourishing City (at least was so before the French destroy'd it) populous and rich; it was much enlarged and a Suburb call'd Bergheimb added to it in 1392. It is beautified with a magnificent Castle, wherein the Elector keeps his Court, and ad∣orn'd with an University, planted by Rupert Prince Elector Palatine, in 1387. which hath been happy in the Education of the famous Philologer Janus Gruterus, and other considerable Men. The Church of the Holy Ghost was remarkable for the famous Library kept in it, which in the Wars with Spain was transported to Rome for preservation. The Wine of this place is va∣lued, and the great Tun is much talked of, for it's stupendious Bulk, containing no less then 200 Tun of English measure: It stands (if the French have not de∣stroy'd it) near the Palace. This City was part of the Bishoprick of Worms before the year 1225. at which time Lewis the first Elector Palatine was invested with the Castle and old Town, to which his Successors added the New Suburb, as is already said. It has suffer'd much by Wars, having been laid wast by the Spaniards and others during the German Wars in the last Century; but more so in this present War, for the French have twice taken it, viz. in 1683 and 1692 and most bar∣barously burnt and destroy'd it. Manheim, seated at the confluence of the Rhine and Neckar 10 miles West from Heidelberg, was strongly fortified by Frederick IV. in 1606. but taken and dis∣mantled by the the Spaniards in 1622. afterwards re∣fortified by the last Elector, and had besides the Cita∣del several Outworks and a small Citadel on the Rhine, when the French attack'd and took it in 1688, who being forc'd to abandon it in 1689. destroyed all the Fortifications. map of Manheim MANHEIM
Frankendal is seated on the West-side of the Rhine, 10 miles from Manheim, and 20 from Heidelberg to the West. It was at first a Monastry only, but en∣creased to a fair City, and fortified by Frederick III. Elector Palatine in 1571. afterwards taken by the Spaniards and kept by them till the Westphalian Treaty, when it was restored to the Elector. It hath suffer'd the same Fate as Manheim in this War, having been taken and burnt by the French in 1689. map of Frankenthal FRANKENDAL Altzheim or Altzey, the Capital of one of the Baili∣wicks, or Ampten, and the ancient Seat of the Elector, stands 25 miles North-west from Frankendal: It is a good Town, with a Castle and Walls. Creutznach is a good Town, with a Castle seated upon a high Hill, and nam'd Kansemberg: The Town stands upon the River Nahe, about 18 miles North∣west from Altzheim. The jurisdiction of it is divided between this Elector, the Marquess of Baden and the Prince of Simmeren. The Castle of Eberemberg, remarkable for the Siege it sustain'd in 1692. stands on the Nahe, not above 8 or 9 miles East from Creutznach. Keiser-lautern, call'd Caseloutre by the French, stands upon the Rivre Lautern near the Borders of the Dut∣chy of Zwibrukken, 30 miles South from Creutznach and 35 East from Manheim. It is a small City formerly Im∣perial, but exempted in 1402. and now subject to this Elector. SECT. II. The Bishopricks of SPIRE and WORMS, the Dutchy of ZWEYBRUGGEN, or DEUX PONTS, with the other smaller States that make up the rest of the Circle of the LOWER RHINE. The Bishoprick of Spire lies on both sides the Rhine, in length from East to West about 40 miles, and in breadth about 15; it is surrounded by the Dominions of the Elector Palatine, and lies next to the Bailiwick of Heidelberg to the South. The Bishoprick of Worms lies also on both sides the Rhine, and encompass'd by the Palatinate; it is small, being hardly 20 miles in length, and about 7 or 8 in breadth. It lies North-east from Heidelberg. The Dutchy of Zwibrukken is strecht out from North-east to South-west about 40 miles in length, and in breadth in some places 25, in others not above 8 or 9. It lies next to the Palatinate to the South, and is pos∣sess'd by a Prince of that Family. The other Estates, together with the chief Towns, will be seen in this Table, viz. The Bishopricks of Spire, Spire, Philipsburg, Worms, Worms, Ladenburg. The Du∣tchies of Zwybrukken, Zwybruk, Landsperg. Simmeren, Simmeren, Spanheim. Birckenfeld, Birckenfeld, Lautereck, Lautereck. Belonging to several Branches of the Pa∣latine Fa∣mily. The Counties of Linange, Rheingravestein, Reipoltzkirk. SPIRE, Spira, aut Noviomagus, Nemetum, & Neme∣tas, is a large rich and populous City, seated on the East side of the Rhine, where it receives the small River Sparbach, being almost in the midst between Mentz to the North, and Strasburg to the South, at the distance of about 50 miles from both, and about 12 or 14 from Heidelberg to the South-west. Tho' it be the Seat of the Bishop, it is not subject to him, but Imperial and Free, under the Protection of the Elector Palatine. The Cathedral Church is a very stately Building, and hath in it the Monuments of no less than eight Empe∣rors that have been buried there; but the private Build∣ings
are not very good. In this City the Imperial Chamber or supreme Court of Judicature in Germany, was establish'd in the Year 1530, and was constantly held here till the Year 1689, when it was removed to Wetslar in Hesse, because this place was taken by the French, and most inhumanely burnt and destroy'd. The Chamber was the chief support of the Town; so that at present it must needs be in a very ordinary condition. Philipsburg, Philipoburgum, formerly a small Town call'd Ʋdensheim, which was encompass'd with Walls, by Gelherd Bishop of Spire, in 1343, is now one of the strongest Towns of Germany. In 1615, Philip Chri∣stopher of etern Bishop of Spire and Trier, repair'd and fortified it with seven royal Bastions, and gave it its present name. The Castle was founded in 1513, by George Count Palatine of the Rhine and Bishop of Spire, repair'd in 1570 by Bishop Marquard de Hat∣stein, and is a stately Building. The Town is seated in a Plain inviron'd with Marshes, which adds much to its Strength; however, it was often taken and re∣gain'd in the German Wars, viz. by the Swedes, in 1634 by Famine; by the Austrian Troops the Year after, by Stratagem; and by the French by Storm, in 1644, which last bestowed great Cost in fortifying it, adding many Out-works according to the modern man∣ner, (whereof see the Draught annexed) and kept it till 1676, when the Germans regain'd it after a Siege map of Philipsburg PHILIPSBURG of four Months, and it was granted to them by the Peace of Nimeguen. But they have lost it again in this War, which was began with the Siege of this place by the Dauphin of France, to whom it was sur∣render'd on the first of November, 1688. It stands on the East side of the Rhine, 20 miles from Heidelberg, and 8 or 9 from Spire to the South. WORMS, Vormaciae, olim Borbetomagus, & Van∣giones, is seated on the Western bank of the Rhine, 25 miles North from Spire, and as many South from Mentz. It was formerly a Metropolitan See, but af∣terwards reduc'd to an Episcopal, under the Arch-bi∣shop of Mentz. It was made a free and imperial City by the Emperor Henry II. and is now govern'd by its own Magistrates under the Protection of the Elector Pala∣tine. It was often taken and retaken during the Ger∣man Wars, and was taken and burnt by the barbarous French in the Year, 1689. ZWEIBRƲKKEN, in French DEƲX∣PONTS, lat. Bipontium, so call'd from Bridges over two small Rivers whereon it stands, at the distance of 45 miles from Worms and 50 from Spires to the West, as many from Trier to the East, and 40 from Mentz to the South. It is a small but well built City, for∣merly fenced with a good Fort, which is now demo∣lish'd, the whole Town having suffer'd much during the German War. SIMMEREN, Simmera, the chief Town of the lower County of Sponheim, and the Capital of a Ter∣ritory formerly govern'd by its own Prince, but now subject to the Elector Palatine, with the Title of a Du∣tchy, is seated at the distance of 30 miles from Mentz. to the West, and 25 from Coblentz to the South. BIRKENFELD, Bircofelda, is a small Town, with the Title of a Principality and Dutchy, seated in the upper County of Sponheim and District of Huns∣druck near the River Nab, at the distance of 28 miles from Trier to the South-east, and 30 from Zweibrukken to the North-east. It is wall'd and hath a Castle, wherein died Charles III. Duke of Lorrain, on the 17th Sept. 1675. LAƲTERACH, is seated on the River Lauter, 40 miles West from Worms, and 18 from Zweibrukken. LENINGEN, the Capital of the County of Li∣nage, stands 18 miles North-west from Spire, and about 20 South-west from Worms. RHINGRAVESTEIN, stands between Creutz∣nach and Eberemburg, 35 miles almost North-west from Worms. REIPOLSKIRK is 30 miles West from Worms, and the Capital of another small County.
CHAP. VI. ALSATIA, Alsatia, in High-Dutch Elsalz. ALSATIA is the Country of the ancient Tribo∣ces, and one of the four Landgraviates of the Empire, but is at present intirely subject to the French, having been conquer'd by the present King. It is seat∣ed on the Banks of the Rhine, and bounded on the West by that River, the Dutchy of Wirtemburg, and some other parts of Schwaben; on the East by a Ridge of Mountains that divide it from Lorrain, on the North by the Palatinate, and on the South by Swisserland. Its Extent is from North to South 100 English miles, and from East to West, comprehending Brisgaw, 40 miles, but in the other parts not above 25. The Soil is fruit∣ful in Corn, Pasture, Wine and Fruits; and in the Mountains Mines of Copper and Lead. Alsatia was erected into a Landgraviate by the Emperor Otho III. and sometime possess'd by the House of Austria; but, being conquer'd by the French, was granted to them by the Pyrenean Treaty in 1659. It is divided into the Upper and Lower, to which is usually added Suntgaw, Brisgow and Ortnow. The whole contains 46 Towns and 50 Castles, besides a great many Villages. The chief whereof are these, viz. In the Lower Alsace, Strasburg, Savern or Zabern, Haguenaw, Fort Louis, Weissemburg, Landaw, Roschein, Schlestad. In the Upper Alsace. Colmar, Munster, Murbach. In Suntgaw, Pfirt or Ferette, Mulhausen, Befort, Huningen. In Brisgaw, Brisac, Friburg, To which may be added, The County of Montbeliart. STRASBƲRG, Argentoratum, Argentina, aut etiam Strasburgum, stands upon the Confluence of the two Rivers Ill and Breusch, which a little below falls into the Rhine, and is distant 50 miles for Spire, and 24 from Haguenaw to the South, 30 from Brisac, and 55 from Basil to the North, and about 70 from Nancy in Lorrain to the East. It is seated in the midst of a pleasant Plain, and is a large, populous and rich City; formerly Imperial, and govern'd by its own Magistrates, from the time of its embracing the Reformation, Anno, 1529, till the French took it in 1682, who having al∣ter'd the Government, has much injur'd the Trade of it. It is an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Mentz, and adorn'd with many stately Buildings, among which the Town-house, Arsenal and Cathedral Church, are chiefly remarkable; especially the last, the Tower whereof is built in form of a Pyramid 574 Foot high; and hath in it a Clock exceedingly ad∣mir'd for its curious Workmanship, shewing not only the Hour of the Day, but the course of the Sun, Moon, and all the other Planets. Here is an University, which was founded in the Year, 1538, and a con∣siderable Library. Tho' the French be Masters, the Inhabitants are generally of the Lutheran Religion. The old Wall and Fortifications were formerly of no great Strength; but since the French have had it, they have made it very strong by the addition of many new Works and a Cittadel, with a great Horn-work for its defence on that end of the Town next the Rhine, to∣gether with Forts in some Islands in the Rhine, which secure the Bridge and command the Passage of the Ri∣ver; all which will be better understood by this Draught. map of Strasbourg STRASBURG
Zabern, Saverne or Elsaszabern, is next to Strasburg, the chief Town of the Lower Alsace; it is situate 15 miles Northwest from Strasburg, and defended by a strong Castle at the top of a Rock, wherein formerly the Bishops of Strasburg kept a Court of Judicature. Haguenaw, an Imperial City before the French Wars, is seated between the two Rivers Motter and Sorna, about 6 miles from the Rhine to the West, and 14 from Strasburg to the North, and encompass'd with thick Woods, and at some distance with Corn-fields and fruitful Vineyards. It was formerly the Seat of the supreme Court of Judicature for Alsace, and had in it a fair Palace of the Emperors, built by Frederick Barbarossa, in 1164. It was taken by the French, and granted to them by the Treaty of Munster, and hath been strongly fortified. Fort Louis stands in an Island of the Rhine, almost over against Baden, and about 10 miles East from Haguenaw. It is small but very strong, and was built by the present French King, for the better security of this part of the Country, and the command of the River. The Form of it is fully seen in this Draught. map FORT LOUIS on the RHEINE Weissenburg was also an Imperial City, and much ho∣noured by Dagobert King of France, who presented them with a large Crown of Silver: But now subject to the French. It is situate on the River Lutra, about 10 miles West from the Rhine, 16 North from Hague∣naw, and 25 South-west from Spire. Landaw is seated on the Borders of the Palatinate, 10 miles North from Weissemburg, and 15 South-west from Spire. It was granted to the French by the Trea∣ty of Munster, and is now in their Possession, and very strongly fortified, as may be seen by this Plan of it. In 1688, the French lodged here the Plunder they took out of most of the Towns of the Palatinate, which by accidental Fire was all destroy'd the next Year. map of Landau LANDAW
Roschein stands 12 miles West from Strasburg. Schlestadt, formerly a Free and Imperial City, but taken by the French, and granted to them by the West∣phalian Peace, is seated 20 miles from Strasburg to the South, and 12 from Colmar to the North. The For∣tifications were demolish'd by the Confederates, in 1673, but since rebuilt by the French, and is now a place of good Strength. Colmar, once an Imperial and very populous City, but by the German Civil War and the French Armies almost quite depopulated, stands in a plain, fruitful Country, about 8 miles West of Brisac, and 30 South from Strasburg. Pfirt, called Ferette by the French, is a small City, but the Capital of Suntgow; it stands near the source of the River Ill, 30 miles South from Colmar, and about 10 West from Basil. It was granted to the French by the Treaty of Westphalia, and is now possessed by them. About 10 or 12 miles from hence to the North-east, and not above 2 or 3 from Basil stands Huningen, a very strong Fortress, built not many Years since by the French King; it stands on the West side of the Rhine, about 2 or 3 miles North of Basil, and 20 South of Brisac: It is large enough to hold a Garrison of 4 or 5000 Men, and is compos'd of five Bastions; and hath a Magazine vaulted with Brick so strongly, that it is proof against Bombs; besides the Tenailes, Ravelines, Counterscarp and double Ditch, there are two large Horn-works to the North and South, and a third on the other side of the River; and from the Ramparts there go Vaults to the Horn-works, for con∣veying Men to them. The Plan of these Works we have here added, for the Reader's better Information. map of Huningue HUNINGEN Mulhausen, once an Imperial City, but now subject to the French, stands 12 miles North from Pfirt, and near 20 South form Colmar. Befort or Beford, formerly the Capital of this Coun∣ty, but was almost ruin'd by the Wars, and is now a small City of no great note. It stands 20 miles West from Pfirt, and as many from Mulhausen. Adjoyning to Alsace, and Westward of Suntgaw, lies the County of MONTBELLART, belonging to the Dukes of Wurtemburg: The Capital City is of the same name, seated in a very pleasant and wholsom Air, 40 miles South of Colmar, and 35 from Basil, and about 8 or 9 from Befort to the West. The Streets are large, the Houses well built of Stone, and without the Gates are delicate Gardens. Brisac, the Capital of the Brisgaw, stands on the East side of the Rhine, 30 miles South from Strasburg, 24 North from Basil, and 8 West from Colmar. It stands on the Banks of the River, and is joyn'd to two or three Islands in it, by Bridges, which, as well as the Town, are fortified. It was heretofore an Imperial City, but was subjected to the House of Austria about 1330, and taken by the French in 1638. To whom it was granted by the Westphalian Treaty, and ever since been subject, and is now but a mean poor Town, tho' it be the Seat of their Parliament or supreme Court of Judicature for these parts. It stands upon a Hill, in a plain level Country, and hath a fair Stone-Bridge over the Rhine, and a strong Citadel standing in an Island on the West side of the Town. The Fortifica∣tions are exceeding strong; on the West side are eight Bastions, fill'd with Earth and faced with Brick, and before every Courtine stands a Half-Moon; the Ditch is broad and the Counterscarp, Cover'd Way and Pa∣lisado are well executed. The Fortifications are a League in Circumference, and the Place capable of garrisoning 9 or 10000 Men. This is a Draught of it, exactly taken.
map of Breisach BRISACH Friburg stands 10 miles East from Brisac, in a fertile Plain, at the foot of the Mountains, and on the small River Treisseim, that falls into the Rhine; it is a good City, and the Seat of an University, which was first establish'd by Albert Archduke of Austria, in 1450. It was thrice taken by the Swedes, in 1632, 1634, and 1638. And twice by the French, viz. 1671, and 1677, and finally surrendred to them by the Treaty of Ni∣meguen, and since very strongly fortified, as the Reader may see by this Draught. map of Freiburg im Brisgau FREIBURGH CHAP. VII. SCHWABEN, Suevia. THE Dutchy of Schwaben, or Swabia, in French Sonabe, had its Latin Name Suevia, from some Tribes of the Suevi, that came down from the Nor∣thern parts against Julius Caesar, whose Posterity setling in this and the neighbouring Countries, in time esta∣blished a powerful State, which was govern'd for some Ages by a Duke, who was at first elected by the Peo∣ple, but about the beginning of the XIIth Age 'twas made Hereditary to Frederick the Ancient; in whose Family it continued till about the Year 1268, when Conradine dying without Issue, this Country was divi∣ded between several Princes, Bishops, Free Cities, who
have all Sovereign Power in their respective Dominions, viz. the Bishops of Augsburg and Constance, the Duke of Wirtemberg and the Princes of Hohenzolleren and Fur∣stemburg, 8 Counts, 5 Barons, the Grand Master of Malta, 18 Abbots, the Provost Velenhausen, and 34 Im∣perial Cities. The extent of Schwaben, from North to South is about 110 miles, and from East to West 130, and its bounds are, the Palatinate and Franconia on the North, the County of Tirol and Swisserland on the South, Alsatia on the West, and Bavaria on the East. The Air of it is healthy, and the Soil is generally fruitful; for though some parts be mountainous and woody, yet do the Hills afford Mines of Copper, Silver and other Metals, and the Forests much Pine and Fir-Timber, besides great store of Game: And the other parts of the Coun∣try yield great store of Corn, Wine and Flax. The chief River is the Danube, which hath its Source here, in the Principality of Furstemburg, as hath also the Neckar near the same place. The chief Imployment of the In∣habitants is making of Linnen Cloath, whereof they vend great quantities to other Nations. Schwaben hath these States and chief Towns. The Dutchy of Wurtemburg, wherein these Towns are of the chiefest note. Stutgard, Capit. Tubingen, Imp. Reutling, Imp. Eslingen, Imp. Hohendwil Schorndorf, Loebenstein, County, Ebersteinstein, Count. The Marquisate of Baden, Baden, Marquisate, Durlach, Marquisate. Pfortzheim, Badenweiller. The Bishoprick of Augsburg, Augsburg, Imp. Dillingen, Fuessen. In the Bishoprick of Constance, Constance, Imp. Mersburg. The Abbies and Cities of Kempten, Buchaw, Lindaw, The Principalities of Furstemberg, Hohenzolleren. The County of Oeting. The small Counties of Papenheim, Koningseck, Hohenrichberg, Waldburg. Imperial Cities not mention'd above, Ʋlm, Hailbron, Memminghen, Nordlingen, Rotwell, Ravensburg, Isne, Ʋberlingen, Bibrac, Lentkirk, with near twenty more. Subject to the House of Au∣stria, The Marquisate of Burgaw. The small Coun∣ties of Rhinfelden, Nellenburg. The Counties of Offemburg, Gengenbach, Altorf, Lauffenburg, Guntzburg, Hohenburg, Waldshut, Zeel. The Marquisate of BADEN is extended along the Eastern Banks of the Rhine, over against Alsace, beginning a little below Philipsburg on the North, and passing on in a narrow Tract to the height of Basil in the South, except where it is disjoined by the intervention of Brisgaw. It is an exceeding fertil and populous Province, producing Corn, Wine, Hemp, Fish, Fowl and Venison, in great plenty: It is also so remarkable for Baths and mineral Waters, that the chief Town and the whole Country hath its name from them. The Dominion is divided between two Princes of the same Family, who are distinguished by the Names of the chief Town of the two Marqui∣sates, Baden and Durlach, whereof Baden of Baden is a Roman Catholick, and Baden Durlach a Lutheran. BADEN, Bada, aut Thermes Inferiores, stands over a gainst Haguenaw, a German League or 4 En∣glish miles East from the Rhine, 50 from Brisac to the North, and 40 from Heidelberg to the South, upon a hilly craggy Ground, so that the Streets lie very un∣even. It is famous and exceedingly resorted unto for its hot Baths, whereof there are many spring in the Town, and are reckon'd sovereign Remedies for the Gout, Cramp, &c. These bringing Nobility and Gen∣try from all parts of Germany, create a great Trade to the Town, which would be otherwise not very con∣siderable. The Marquess hath his Palace here; and, for the security of the Town, there is a good Fortress built on an adjacent Hill, DƲRLACH, Durlacum, stands 12 miles North from Baden, 30 South from Heidelberg, and a league East from the Rhine. It is seated on the Banks of the River Pfintz, at the foot of a Mountain, on the top whereof stands a strong Tower. The Streets are strait, and the Buildings fair, and the Marquess's Palace re∣markably Magnificent, far exceeding that of Baden, and even capable of receiving a great Prince's Retinue. Pfortzheim, is a small City seated on the River Ens, where it receives the Nagold, about 12 miles East from Durlach, between pleasant Meadows and Corn-fields on one side, and Mountains and Woods on the other. It was formerly subject to the Duke of Wurtemburg, but now belongs to the Marquess of Durlach. Badenweiller, the chief City of that part of Baden that lies South of Brisgaw, stands about a League from the Rhine, and in the mid-way between Brisac to the North, and Basil to the South, about 15 miles from each. It is famous, and much frequented for its hot Baths, which are of great Virtue, but not quite so valuable as those of Baden above-mentioned. Offenburg, a small imperial City, under the Protection of the Arch-Duke of Austria, is the Capital of the Count∣ry of Ortnaw, and seated on the small River Kintzig, which falls into the Rhine near Strasburg, 20 miles South from Baden, 30 North from Brisac, and 9 or 10 West from Strasburg. Gengenback another small Imperial City, stands on the same River, 5 or 6 miles above Offenburg. The Dutchy of WƲRTEMBƲRG, Wurtembur∣gensis Ducatus, lies next to Baden to the Eastward, be∣tween the Palatinate on the North, the Principality of Furstemburg on the South, extending near 70 miles both in length and breadth. The Country is exceed∣ing Fertil, consisting of pleasant Meadows, Mountains containeing rich Mines, and Forests abounding with variety of Game: A great number of small Rivers water it, which with the Lakes are fill'd with Fish. It is very populous and has no less then 63 Cities, 158 good Towns, and a great number of Villages. It was errected into a Dutchy by the Emperor Maximilian in the year 1495. in favour of Eberhard Count of Ben∣telsbach, in whose Family it hath continued, and is now
possessed by Eberhard Lewis, a powerful and wealthy Prince, and of the Lutheran Religion. STƲTGARD, Stutgartia, the Metropolis of this Dutchy, and the usual place of Residence of this Duke, is seated near the Neckar, 40 miles East from Baden, 50 South from Heidelberg, and as many North from the Danube. It is a fair City, and much resorted to for its famous natural Baths, which cure several Diseases. The Prince's Palace is a stately Castle, and adorn'd with exceeding pleasant Gardens, wherein are rows of Orange-Trees, fine Grotto's and curious Water-works. Tubingen, Tubinga, is a fair and well-built City, water'd by the Neckar, and adorn'd with an University, founded in the year, 1477. by Count Eberhard above∣mention'd. It stands about 20 miles South from Stut∣gard, near 30 North from the Danube, and 50 East from Offenburg, and boasts of having been the Seat of the Emperor Caracalla, who they say had a stately Pa∣lace, and entertain'd the Germans with publick Games in this place. Hohendwill, a strong impregnable Castle, stands on the top of an inaccessible Hill, near the Banks of the Rhine, and belongs to the Duke of Wurtemburg. Retling, or Reutlingen, is an imperial City under the protection of the Duke of Wurtemburg, being seated on the Confines of his Country, 12 miles South-east from Tubingen. It stands in a Plain at the foot of Mount Alchamack, but affords nothing very remark∣able. Eslingen, another small imperial City under the Pro∣tection of this Prince, stands upon the Neckar, 8 or 9 miles East from Stutgard. HAILBRON, Hailbruna Fons Salutis, stands also in the limits of this Dutchy, but is a free impe∣rial City, having been made so by the Emperor Frederick III. in the year 1240. It had its Name from the famous Medicinal Springs found in it, and is a goodly City seated on the Neckar (over which it hath a Stone-Bridge) in a pleasant and fruitful Country, at the di∣stance of 28 miles from Stutgard to the North, and 26 from Heidelburg to the South-east. The Country of OETING lyes next to Wurtem∣burg to the East, betwen the Marquisate of Onspach on the North, and the Danube on the South. The extent of it is about 20 miles. The chief Town, call'd in Latin Oeni pontes, is but small and not very consider∣able; it stands 70 miles East from Stutgard, 20 South from Onspach, and 12 North from the Danube, Nordlingen a small Imperial City, stands in this County, on the small River Eger, 10 miles North from the Danube, 6 or 7 South-west from Oeting, and 35 North-east from Ʋlm. It was made Free in the year 1251, and for its security is in League with the Swit∣zers. Two notable Battles were sought near it between the Sweeds and Germans; the first in 1634, wherein the Sweeds were Defeated, and the latter in 1645, when they and the French were Victors over the Bavarians. The Bishoprick of AƲGSBƲRG lies on the South-side of the Danube, extended in a narrow Tract (of 7 or 8 miles in breadth, a good part of it, and the rest not above 15 or 20) from the banks of that River to the County of Tyrol, above 80 miles, and bounded on the East by the Dutchy of Bavaria. It is a fruitful pleasant Country, and subject to its Bishop, who is a Prince of the Empire. AƲGSBƲRGH or AƲSBƲRGH, call'd in Latin, Augusta Vindelicorum, from Augustus Caesar, who conquer'd these parts and Planted a Roman Colo∣ny here among the Vindelici, stands near the Confines of Bavaria, on the Confluence of the two Rivers Lech and Werdach, which fall into the Danube 25 miles below it; and is distant 8 miles from Stutgard to the East, 35 from Munich to the North-west, and 65 from Ratisbon to the West. It is a very ancient and very considerable City, reckon'd the Capital of Schwaben, made Imperial by the Emperor Frederick I. in 1162, and bought its entire Freedom of Conrad Duke of Schwaben, in 1266. It is large and populous, the Streets broad, the Mar∣ket-places spacious, and the Houses tho' built but with Wood and Clay, are fair and handsome; the Cathedral Church, the Town-hall and the Conduits, are stately and magnificent. Here are two Arsenals well furnish'd with Arms and Ammunition, publick Granaries full of Corn, and Hospitals well maintained. The Inhabi∣tants are much enriched by Trade; and the Works of the Gold-smiths and other Artificers of this Place, are Transported to many parts of Europe. The Noble Fa∣mily of the Fuggers, Lords of the adjacent Country, have fair Palaces here; a great Hospital built by them is the most remarkable part of this City; it contains 106 Houses in four Streets built cross-ways, inhabited by poor People, who have yearly Pensions allow'd them. Augsburg is famous for the many Imperial Diets that have been holden in it, but especially for the Lutheran Confession of Faith, call'd Augustan from its having been first promulgated here, at the Diet held by the Emperor Charles V. on that occasion, in the year 1530. Joseph King of Hungary, Son to his present Imperial Majesty, was here chosen and crown'd King of the Ro∣mans, in January 1689. The Marquisate of BƲRGAW, subject to the House of Austria, lies on the West of Ausburg, and South of the Danube, extended about 30 miles in length and breadth. The chief Town stands 8 or 9 miles South from the Danube, 24 West from Augsburg, and 12 East from Ʋlm. ƲLM, Ʋlma, is a very ancient, large and imperial City standing on the Danube, which here receives the Iler, and begins to be Navigable, 30 miles distant from Ausburg to the West, 50 from Stutgard to the East, and 80 from Wurtzburg to the South It was wall'd in the Year 1300, and made Imperial and Free by Lewis of Bavaria in 1346. Soon after the Citizens purcha∣sed the County of Helfenstein, the County of Albeg, and the Town and Castle of Gieslingen, so that they are Lords of a Country of 20 miles in length and 12 in breadth. The City is govern'd by a Senate of 41, and is strongly fortified. It is a rich and populous Place and hath a good Trade, consisting chiefly in Linnen Cloth. The Cathedral Church is a very noble Building, ex∣ceeding any of Germany, except that of Strasburg; it's said the building of it employ'd a great number of Work∣men for 111 Years; it has five Spires of great heighth, and within it an Organ so very remarkable as to have merited a Description of it in Print by two Learned Men. It was finish'd in the Year 1599, after 35 years Labour, and is 93 Foot high and 28 broad; it has 16 pair of Bellows, and the largest Pipe is 13 Inches dia∣meter. Here are also many other stately Edifices, a∣mong which the Stadt-house is chiefly remarkable. The Reformation was receiv'd here in 1529, and the Inha∣bitants are mostly Lutherans. BIBRACH, an ancient Imperial City, is seated in a pleasant and fruitful Valley surrounded with fair Meadows, but some of 'em boggy and overflow'd in Winter, 20 miles from Ʋlm to the South-west, not above 10 from the Danube, and 40 from Constance to the North-east: It was made Free very long since, even in the Year 800, as 'tis said. Here is a natural Bath, to which great numbers of the neighbouring Gentry re∣sort. BƲCHAW, is also a small Imperial City, but chiefly remarkable for its Monastery, the Abbot where∣of is one of the Sovereign Princes of Schwaben. It stands
about seven miles East from Bibrach, and as many South from the Danube. MEMINGEN, a free imperial City also, stands on the River Iler, 30 miles South from Ʋlm, and 20 North from Kempten: It is a large place and of good Trade, which consists chiefly in making and vending Paper. It is also strong, having the natural Fortifica∣tion of a Marsh on one side, and the artificial one of a good Wall on t'other. LEƲTKIRK, a small Imperial City, stands 12 miles South from Memingen upon the Road to Italy, which makes it pretty much frequented. The Inha∣bitants have a good Trade for Linnen Cloth, which they make in great quantities. RAVENSPƲRG, or GRAVENSPƲRG, was anciently a fair Village, but wall'd and made a City in the Year 1100, and afterwards made Imperial and endow'd with Privileges. It has a fair Town-house, and the Churches are well built. It stands upon a small River that falls into the Lake of Constance, 15 miles West from Lentkirk, and about 20 South from Buchaw. KEMPTEN, Campodunum, Campidona & Dru∣somagus, is one of the ancientest Cities in Germany, and was sometime the Seat of the Dukes of Schwaben, at present famous for its Monastery founded by Hildegard Daughter to the Duke of Schwaben, and Wife to Charles the Great; the Abbot whereof is a Prince of the Em∣pire and Lord of the adjacent Territory, and formerly of this City, till the Inhabitants purchas'd their Li∣berty: The Emperor Frederick III. made it Imperial, and granted the Citizens many Privileges. The Trade of the Place is Weaving and Whitning Linnen Cloth; it lies upon the Road to Italy, by which also the Inhabi∣tants make good advantage. The Reformation was receiv'd here in 1530, and in 1633 the City taken and plunder'd by the Imperialists. It stands upon the River Iler 16 miles East from Leutkirk, 45 from Ʋlm, and 15 from Memingen to the South. Altorf, which stands two miles from Ravenspurg, is an ancient Town, at present belonging to the House of Austria; a Lieutenant or High Commissioner of Suevia resides here, who in the Emperor's name keeps a Court of Judicature to hear and determine all Causes brought from the Imperial Cities in Schwaben. The famous Family of the Guelphs us'd to be buried here. LINDAW, at first a Monastery built in 810, which was in time encreased to a City and subject to the Abbess, and after to the Duke of Schawben, but hath since obtained its Liberty and Privileges from Ru∣dolf I. Frederick III. and Sigismund, and is now an Im∣perial City. It stands on the borders of the County of Ty∣rol 30 miles East from Kempten, and on the North side of the Lake of Constance, part of the City being built on an Island in it, and the other part surrounded with pleasant Meadows and sweet Springs. Isne stands in the midway between Kempten and Lindaw; Wangen 10 miles South from Lindaw, and Buchorn upon the Lake of Constance 12 miles West of Lindaw, are all three Imperial Cities. As is also ƲBERLINGEN, which stands also upon the Lake of Constance 30 miles North-west from Lindaw, 50 South-west from Ʋlm, and 23 from Buchaw, 30 East from Furstemburg, and 10 North from Constance. It is a fair City built on a high Rock, and encompass'd with Vineyards and Orchards, and hath a good Haven, whence are sent out Barges laden with Wine and Fruits, which they carry to Constance, and other Cities upon the Lake; by which the Inhabitants are enriched, be∣ing also very industrious and frugal. Here is an Ho∣spital richly endowed and several good publick Build∣ings; anciently the Dukes Schwaben have resided here. In the neighbouring Vineyards springs a mineral Wa∣ter of great Virtue. CONSTANCE, call'd in High-Dutch COST∣NITZ, or COSTANTZ, Constantia, Constanza, the Metropolis of the Hegow or Lower Schwaben, had its name, as 'tis said, from Constantius Chlorus Father of Constantine the Great, who had his Winter station here. It stands on the South-side of the Lake of Constance or Boden Zee, where the River Rhine issues out of it at the distance of 60 miles from Ʋlm to the South-west, 70 from Basil to the East, and 30 from Appenzel to the North. It was taken by Attila the Hunn, and afterwards possessed by the Kings of France, by whom the Bishoprick of Windisch was removed hi∣ther in the year 594, and the City was enlarged, and so fortified before 938, that it withstood a great Army of Hungarian Savages that then over-run this Country. It is Imperial, but not perfectly Free, for Charles V. subjected it to the Austrian Family for refusing the Terms concerning Religion tendred to them, and the Emperor still maintains a Governor and Garison here, under the Title of Protector. However, the City enjoys many Privileges, and is a populous and rich Place, and hath a considerable Trade by means of the Lake. It is also well built and strongly fortified; the Churches are very magnificent, particularly the Cathedral of St. Stephen; also the Exchange, Town-house, Markets, Bridges, and other publick Buildings are very stately: As is likewise the Bishop's Palace that stands in the Sub∣urb of Petershanfen, which was fortified in 1635, when the Swedes attempted to besiege the City. This City was made memorable by a general Coun∣cil held in it by the procurement of the Emperor Sigis∣mund in the Year 1414, to remove a Schism in the Ro∣mish Church upon Three Popes pretending to the In∣fallibility; all which Three were deposed, and a new one (Martin V.) chosen by this Council. They like∣wise condemned the Doctrines of John Wickliff, John Huss and Jerom of Prague, causing the Bones of Wick∣liff to be digg'd up and burnt; and notwithstanding a safe Conduct granted by the Emperor to John Huss he was condemned and burnt by them, as was also Jerom of Prague. This Council lasted four years, held 45 Sessions, and ended April 12. 1418. during all which time there are said to have been in this City, 4 Patri∣archs, 29 Cardinals, 346 Arch-bishops and Bishops, 564 Abbots and Doctors, and 10000 secular Princes and Noblemen. Also 1600 Barbers, 320 Musicians, and (the Account is very particular) 450 Harlots. The Bishoprick of CONSTANCE, lies along the Banks of the Lake and the Borders of Swisserland, a∣mong the Allies whereof it is commonly reckon'd. The Bishop is a Count of the Empire, Lord of above 1000 Castles and Villages, and is stiled Baron of Richenaw; he was also formerly Soveraign of Constance. The principality of FƲRSTEMBƲRG, Fust∣embergicus Principatus, is extended in a narrow Tract about 70 miles in length, on both sides the Danube, which River hath its Source within its Limits. The chief Town of the same name stands on the South-side of the Danube 30 miles North-east from Constance, 20 North from Schaffhausen on the Rhine, and 35 West from Brisac. It is subject to its own Prince, who is a Count of the Empire, and of an illustrious Family, which hath produc'd divers great Persons; particularly Cardinal William Egon Count of Furstemburg and Bishop of Strasburg, whose pretensions to the Arch-bishoprick of Cologn (already mention'd) gave occasion to the breaking out of this presant War.
The famous Hercynain Wood or Black Forest extend∣ed thus far, wherein stands Tone Eschingen a small Vil∣lage, near which the River Danube hath its first Rise. ROTWEL, a small Imperial City, is seated on the Neckar but 10 miles from the head of that River, and is 15 miles distant from Furstemburg to the North, and 20 from Tubingen to the South, It is the Seat of a Chamber or Court of Justice for the whole Dutchy, first erected in the year 1147. by Conrad III. Duke of Schawben. This City was taken by the French in 1643. but restor'd at the Treaty of Munster. The principality or County HOHENZOLLEREN is a narrow Tract of Land lying East and West about 35 miles in length, tho' not above 5 in breadth, between the Dutchy of Wurtemburg and the River Danube. The chief Town of the same name stands about 20 miles from Rotwel to the North-east, and 12 from Tubingen to the South. The County of KONINGSECK lies on the East of Furstemburg. The Barony of WALDBƲRG is about 30 miles in length, and 10 or 12 in breadth, and lies between the County of Koningseck on the West, the Lands of the Abbots of Buchaw on the North, and Kempten on the West. Hohenrechspurg County lies on the East-side of the Dutchy of Wurtemburg. Rheinfelden, the Capital of a small County, stands on the South-side of the Rhine near the Borders of Swisser∣land, and about 10 miles distant from Basil to the East. CHAP. VIII. The Circle of BAVARIA. THE Circle of Bavaria is bounded on the North by the Marquisate of Culembach and some part of Bohemia, on the South by the County of Tyrol, Bish∣oprick of Brixen and Dutchy of Carinthia, on the East by Bohemia and Austria, and on the West by Schaw∣ben. Its extent from North to South is about 200 miles, and from East to West 120. The Air is heal∣thy; the Soil produces Corn, Wine and Pasture; but the Country is much taken up in Forests and Moun∣tains; the former whereof yield much Venison, and the latter Mines of Copper and some Silver, also Quar∣ries of a sort of Marble. The River Danube runs through it, dividing the Palatinate from the Dutchy of Bavaria; the Leck runs along the West-side of the Dutchy of Bavaria, dividing it from the Bishoprick of Augsburg; and the Inn passes through it, from South-west to North-east and falls into the Danube: These, together with the Amber, the Iler, the Seltz, the Altmul, the Nab and the Regen, are the chief Ri∣vers of this Province. Besides the Dominions of the Elector of Bavaria, there are compris'd in this Circle several Sovereignties, as the Archbishoprick of Saltzburg, the Bishopricks of Ratisbon, Passaw and Freisingen, the Dutchy of New∣burg, the Landgraviate of Leuchtemburg, the Territory of the City of Ratisbon, and several Imperial Cities; which are more particularly set forth in this Table. The Domini∣ons of the Duke of Ba∣varia are di∣vided into The Dutchy of Bava∣ria, which lies on the South-side of the Da∣nube, and hath these Towns of chiefest note, Munich, Ingolstadt, Landschut, Straubingen, Donawert, Burkhansen. Nort-Gow, or the Pa∣latinate, call'd the Upper or Bavarian, to distinguish it from that of the Rhine, in which stand Amberg, Newmarckt, Chamb, Sultzbach, Leuchtenbug, Waltmunchen. The Arch-bishoprick of Saltzburg lies on the South of Bavaria, wherein are these Towns of greatest note, Saltzburg, Lauffen, Windischmatray. Ditmaning. The Bishoprick of Ratisbon lies on the Banks of the Danube, Ratisbon. The Bishoprick of Passaw lies also on the Danube, next the Borders of Austria. Passaw. The Bishoprick of Freisinghen lies in the Dutchy of Bavaria, Freisinghen, Werdenfels. The Dutchy of Neuburg lies partly on the Banks of the Danube, and part between the Palatinate and the Bishoprick of Ratisbon. Neuburg, Laugingen, Hochstat. BAVARIA, call'd Bayern by the Germans, is part of the Rhaetia Vindilicia & Noricum of the An∣cients; and took its name Boiaria (corrupted into Bavaria) from the Boij a warlike People, that came from Gallia Celtica and settled here about 470 years after Christ, being govern'd by their proper Kings at first, and Dukes afterwards, to the time of Charles the Great, who, conquering Tassilo, made himself Master of the Country and erected it into a Kingdom, in which State it lasted for about 100 years, when Lodowick, their King, dying without Issue, the Bavarians chose Arnolph, a Descendent from Charlemaign, to be their Governor; who Contented himself with the Title of Duke, as all the Princes of it have since done; among whom, Maximilian was the first that had the Electoral Dignity, which was conferr'd on him, together with the Lower Palatinate, by the Emperor Fardinand II. A. D. 1623. in reward for the Service he did him in his War against Frederick V. Elector Palatine, chosen King of Bohemia. The present Duke and Elector of Bavaria, Maxi∣milian-Emanuel, is also Governor of the Spanish Ne∣therlands; he was born in 1662. succeeded his Father in 1679. and in 1685 married Anna-Maria-Josepha, the Emperor's Daughter by his first Wife Margaret of Spain, by whom he hath a young Son now living; which Son is next the Issue of the present King, Heir to the Crown of Spain. The Country abounds with Forests, which are fill'd with very large Deer, wild Boars, Bears and other Veni∣son. Great number of Swine are fed here, which the Peasants make their chief Livelihood. The most considerable Cities and Towns are these, MƲNICH, or MƲNCHEN according to the pronunciation of the Inhabitants, call'd in Latin Mo∣nachium, is the Metropolis of Bavaria and the Seat of the Duke: It stands on the River Iler, 70 miles from Ʋlm to the East, 40 from Ingolstadt to the South, 60 from Inspruck to the North, and 100 from Lintz in Au∣stria
to the West, and is esteem'd one of the most plea∣sant, rich and populous Cities of Germany. The Build∣ings are fair and uniform, and the Streets broad and even. The Elector's Palace is a most magnificent Struct∣ure, the Apartments whereof are adorn'd with exceed∣ing rich Furniture, the stately Galleries with curious Painting and Marble Statues, and the Duke's Closet and Library fill'd with curious Rarities and choice Books; and the spacious Gardens are made pleasant by delightful Walks, Fountains and Grotto's. The Jesuits Church and College is a stately Building; it was founded by William Duke of Bavaria about the year 1600. and is the usual burial Place of the Dukes. The great Church Munich, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, is also a very sine Building, and hath two Towers of 333 foot high. Here are also other Churches and publick Buildings worth a Stranger's notice. Two great Fairs held yearly here, contribute much to the enrich∣ing of the Inhabitants. This City was built in 962 and wall'd round in 1156. Gustavus Adolphus took it in 1632. Ingolstadt, Ingolstadium, Aureapolis, stands on the North-side of the Danube, over which it hath a fair Bridge, 40 miles North from Munchen, 12 miles East from Neuburg, and 30 West from Ratisbon. It is a fair well-built Place, seated in a pleasant fruitful Coun∣try, and adorn'd with an University which enjoys great Priviledges, and had the honour to educate the great Cardinal Bellarmine, It was first made a City by the Emperor Lewis IV. and is fortified with a very strong Castle and good Walls, by which means it was able to resist a very notable Siege of the Protestants in 1546. and another of Gustavus Adolphus in 1632. Landshut is seated on the River Iler, 30 miles North∣east from Munchen, and 30 South from Ratisbon: The Duke's Lieutenant in the Lower Bavaria commonly re∣sides here. It is a handsom well-built City, and adorn'd with a stately Palace of the Elector; and a Church which for the heighth of its Tower, is thought to exceed any in Germany. Straubingen stands about 25 or 26 miles North from Landshut on the Bank of the Danube, over which River it hath a Bridge. Amberg, the Metropolis of the Upper Palatinate is seated on the River Wils, 30 miles from Ratisbon to the North, and 40 from Nuremburg to the East. It enjoys great Priviledges, given by the Emperor Robert, and is a place esteem'd most considerable for Strength of any in the higher Germany. The Inhabitants have a good Trade in Iron and other Metals, that are dug out of the neighbouring Mountains. This City was purchas'd of the Duke of Schawben in 1266. by the Elector Palatine, from whom it was taken, together with all this Pala∣tinate, by the Emperor Ferdinand in 1623. as we have already related. Newmarckt is a fair City, standing on the Banks of the River Sultz, 30 miles North from Ingolstadt, and 25 South from Amberg. It has been an Imperial City, but was depriv'd of its Priviledges, and now subject to the Duke of Bavaria. The Country about is pleasant and is call'd the Territory of Neumarckt, tho' but little of it belongs to the City. The Trade of the Place consists chiefly in Iron. Chamb, a small City, seated on the Rivers Champ and Regen, 20 miles from Neumarckt to the East. It was formerly a Marquisate, but now subject to the Duke of Bavaria. Sultzbach, is a small City seated on the top of a Hill, 5 miles from Amberg to the North-west, which with the County of it was formerly govern'd by an Earl of its own, but has, at several times, been subject to the Duke of Bavaria and Duke of Newburg, a Branch of which last Family does still reside in the stately Palace here. Leuchtenberg, a Castle, seated about 20 miles North-east from Amberg, gives name to a small Landgraviate which was formerly subject to its own Lord, but now to the Duke of Bavaria, RATISBON, call'd in Dutch REGENSBƲRG, Lat. Ratisbona, olim Reginum, aut Castra Regina, here∣tofore the Seat of the Kings, and afterwards of the Dukes of Bavaria, is seated on the Danube, where it receives the Regen, which running through the Town, gives it its Dutch name; it is distant 60 miles from Munich to the North, near 70 from Passaw to the West, as many from Augsburg to the North-east and, 25 from Am∣berg to the South. It is a fair large and populous City, the Houses neat, and the Streets large. The Cathe∣dral Church is a fine old Building, as is the Castle wherein the Imperial Diets are commonly held: The Chamber in which they assemble, is a large stately Room hung with Tapestry; the Emperor's Throne is cover'd with Cloth of Gold, the Seats of the Electors with Cloth of Silver, and the rest with Velvet, Sattin, Silks, &c. according to the different Qualities. Here is a Stone-bridge over the Danube, which is a noble Building; it is 1091 foot long, 32 foot broad, has 15 large Arches, supported by Pillars and strengthen'd by Buttresses, and hath 3 Towers built upon it; this Bridge was finish'd in the year, 1156. Ratisbon is an Imperial City, and the See of a Bishop, who is Lord of the adjacent Territory. It is fortified with good Walls, Bulwarks and Trenches. PASSAW, Passavia aut Patavia, olim Batava Castra, stands on both sides of the Danube, where it receives the Inn on one side, and the Iltz on the other at the distance of 65 miles from Ratisbon to the East and not above 10 from the Borders of Austria. It is a large City, Imperial and Free, but under the pro∣tection of its Bishop, who is a Prince of the Empire. The Rivers above-mentioned divide it into three parts, viz. Passaw its self, which stands on the South-side of the Danube, and the West-side of the Inn; Innstadt, on the other side of the Inn; and Ilstadt, on the other side the Danube, and on the Banks of the Iltz. The private Buildings here are of Wood, but the Churches are fair and stately, especially the Ca∣thedral, which is dedicated to S. Stephen. The Bi∣shop's Palace and the Castle on a Mountain near Il∣stadt, are handsom Buildings. This City is very strong, being fenced on all sides with Rocks and Ri∣vers, and hath been made famous by a Peace con∣cluded in it in 1552. between the Emperor Charles V. and the Protestant Princes, by which the Lutherans were granted the free Exercise of their Religion. The Bishop is Lord of a Country of about 20 miles extent, lying on the North-side of the Danube, between the Palatinate and Austria, in which stand two strong Castles nam'd, Obernberg and Ebersberg. NEƲBƲRG, Neoburgum aut Novoburgum, is seated on the South-side of the Danube at the distance of 45 miles from Ratisbon to the West, and 55 from Ʋlm to the East, 25 from Augsburg to the North, and 40 from Nuremburg to the South. It is a place of good Trade for Wines, and well fortified; but chiefly remarkable for being the Capital of a Dutchy, erected about 150 years ago, and given to a Branch of the Bavarian Family, whose Descendent Philip-William succeeded in the Palatinate of the Rhine, A. D. 1685. and hath been signally fortunate in an illustrious Issue; for of his twelve Children, he has married three Daughters to the present Emperor, King of Spain and King of Portugal, and a fourth to the Prince of Po∣land;
his eldest Son, the present Elector Palatine, mar∣ried the Emperor's Daughter; his second Son is Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, his third Son marri∣ed the Princess Radzeville, the Marquess of Branden∣burg's Widow, his fourth Son is Dean of Augsburg and President of the Chapter of Constance, and his fifth Son is Bishop of Breslaw. A stately Palace, built in this City by Otto-Henry its Duke, soon after the Erection of the Dutchy, is the usual Seat of this Prince. The extent of his Country is not large; it runs along the Banks of the Danube about 40 miles, but is very nar∣row. In the extream West part of is stands Laugingen, a strong regular fortified Town belong∣ing to the Duke. It was the Birth place of the famous Albertus Magnus: The great Church is a fine Building, cover'd with Copper, and has a Tower 300 foot high. Here is also a Castle and a Bridge over the Danube. Hochstadt, which stands on the Danube not many miles East from Laugingen, a well fortified Place with a strong Castle, is also under the Duke of Neuburg, but claim'd by the Bishop of Bamberg. Donawert or Thonawert, formerly an Imperial City, stands in the confines of this Dutchy, on the Northern Banks of the Danube, about 15 or 16 miles West from Neuburg; it is on the Road to Augsburg, and therefore pretty much frequented by Travellers; here is a strong Castle, which is nam'd Schellenberg. This City was divested of its Liberty about the beginning of this Age for adhering to the Reformed Religion, and is now sub∣ject to the Duke of Bavaria. FREISINGEN, Frisinga olim Fruxinum, is seat∣ed on the declension of a Hill in a fertil Country, near the Banks of the River Iser about 20 miles North from Munich, as many from Landshut to the South-west, and and 40 from Neuburg to the South-east. It is a very an∣cient City, and was made an Episcopal See in the year 716. the Bishop whereof is Lord of the adjacent Ter∣ritory. This City was taken and almost intirely de∣stroy'd by the Sweeds in 1632. but restor'd in 1639. There is another small Territory lying on the Borders of Bavaria and Tyrol, subject to this Bishop, call'd the County of Werdenfels, from its chief Town, which stands near the River Iser, 45 miles South from Munchen. The Arch-bishoprick of SALTZBƲRG is a Country of pretty large extent, viz. 70 miles from East to West, and 50 from North to South. It is bound∣ed on the East with Styria and the Upper Austria, on the West with the County of Tyrol, on the North with the Dutchy of Bavaria, and on the South with the Dutchy of Carinthia, and Bishoprick of Brixen. The Country abounds with Salt, Mines of Copper and Iron, and some of Silver, also great Quarries of Stone: A Mineral Water here, call'd the Gastein-bath, is famous for its Virtue in curing many Distempers. The Arch-bishop is a Prince of the Empire, by his place Legate to the See of Rome in Germany, and, in the Diet, sits on the first Bench next the Electors. He is one of the richest Prelates of Germany, and Lord of this Country; which hath its name from Saltzburg, Salisburgum, olim Invavia, seated on the River Saltza 50 miles South from Passaw, 70 West from Munich, and 80 from Inspruch to the North-east. It is one of the fairest Cities of Germany, and very well fortified. The Cathedral Church hath been new built in 1628. and is esteem'd one of the most magnificent in Europe. The Arch-bishop's Palace is very stately; it is in a Castle nam'd Mirabel, which stands on a Hill. An University hath been establish'd here not many years since. In the Church of St. Sebastian, lies buried the famous Physician and Chymist, Theophrastus Paracelsus. The whole Town is generally well built, and the In∣habitants have a good Trade, which consists chiefly in the Salt produc'd in the neighbouring Pits. The Archie∣piscopal Dignity was remov'd from the See of Passaw, and conferr'd on this by Pope Leo III. in 798. and the Bishoprick of Chiamsee incorporated with it, to enable the Bishop the better to support the Dignity. This City had the misfortune to be burnt down in the year, 1195 but it was soon rebuilt, and now, as we have said, is in a flourishing State. CHAP. IX. The Circle of AUSTRIA. THE Circle of Austria is seated between Bohemia and Moravia on the North, the Dominions of the Republick of Venice on the South, Hungary on, the East, and Bavaria on the West, and comprehends the Estates of the Family of Austria, viz. Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, Cilley, Goritz, and Tyrol, and the Bishopricks of Trent and Brixen. The extent of the whole is about 300 miles from East to West, and 200 from North to South. The Soil is fertil, producing Corn, Wine, Pastures and Woods. The Danube passes through Austria, the Drave rises in the Mountains of Brixen and runs through Carinthia, the Save hath its source in the Mountains in the North-west Borders of Carniola and passes through that Dutchy; the Muer rises in the Confines of Saltzburg, runs through Styria and falls into the Drave a little above Canisia, besides which, a great number of smaller Rivers water the se∣veral Provinces of this Circle. AƲSTRIA, which is dignified with the Title of an Arch-dutchy, lies on both sides the River Da∣nube for the space of about 60 or 70 miles from North to South, and 160 from East to West. It was the Pannonia Superior of the Ancients; and its present name of Oosterich or Eastern Kingdom, in Latin Austria, was given by the Franks, because situated Eastward from France. It is a very plentiful Country, afford∣ing a great quantity of Wine and Saffron, besides Corn and all other Necessaries for Life in abundance. The Air is not of the wholsomest, the Lower Austria be∣ing subject to Infectious Vapours that cause Agues; to prevent which may be the reason of their much Drinking, which, it seems, they are notable for, their Neigbours calling 'em Paschaller, or Ranters, This Province, after the Roman's time, was part of the Kingdom of Boiarij or Bavarians, afterwards erect∣ed into a separate Marquisat by the Emperor Otho I. and the Austrian Family growing powerful, it was honoured with the Title of Arch-dutchy. This great Family is, by the German Genealogists, pre∣tended to be deriv'd from the ancient Greeks or Roman Hero's. But the first certain Account that is to be found of it, is, That they were Lords of Vindonissa a City of Swisserland, afterwards Counts of Altemberg and Earls of Hapsburg; which Honours they had held from Father to Son for 600 years before Rudolph Earl of Hapsburg was advanc'd to the Imperial Throne in 1273. who, being a very brave Prince, raised his Family exceedingly. In his time Frederick, Duke of Austria dying with out Issue, Ottocarius King of Bohomia seiz∣ed upon it, pretending a Right by his Wife, and ad∣ded to it Carniola and Carinthia, which he bought of Ʋlric the last Prince of those Provinces; but the Em∣peror
claimed it as a Fief-male to return to the Empire, and by Force disposses'd Ottocarius and gave it to his Son Albert, who, by Marriage with Elizabeth Daughter of Meinard Earl of Tyrol, obtain'd that Earldom and se∣veral Estates in Schwaben and with the Alsatians: By all which Accessions he became powerful enough to contend with the Emperor Adolph, whom he slew in Battel, and caused himself to be chosen Emperor; but after he had Reigned 10 Years he was slain. He left behind him six Sons, from whom descended Frederick III. cho∣sen Emperor in 1440. Maximilian, his Son, succeeded him in the Empire, and married Mary Daughter of Charles the Warlike Duke of Burgundy (the richest Heiress of Europe) and thereby acquir'd all Belgium, or the Netherlands. Philip the Son of Maximilian, mar∣ried Joan the Daughter of Ferdinand and Isabel, the first Monarchs of all Spain, and in her Right succeeded in that Kingdom, and began the Spanish Branch of the Austrian Family. Charles succeeded his Father and Grandfather in all their Honours and Estates, so that he was Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain, Na∣ples and Sicily, and Lord of Belgium, besides the Realms of Mexico and Peru in America, with the Dutchy of Milan, which were added to Spain in his time. This mighty Prince, after he had Reigned 42 Years, volun∣tarily resign'd all his Dominions; and after he had gi∣ven his Son Philip his Kingdoms of Spain, Naples, Si∣cily, Mexico, with Belgium, &c. and obtained his Bro∣ther Ferdinand to be chosen Emperor, himself retir'd in∣to a Monastery. Ferdinand was chosen King of Hungary and Bohemia, which, with the Empire, his Successors have ever since enjoy'd. By the means of this Gran∣deur, the Family of Austria hath obtain'd large Privi∣leges: The Arch-duke is the first Councellor of the Empire; he can create Barons and Counts all over the Empire: The Princes of this Family cannot be dissei∣zed of their Estates, even by the Emperor himself. In case of the failure of the Mail-Line, the eldest Daugh∣ter may Inherit, and her Husband enjoy the Dignity and Privileges of Arch-duke, &c. The present Emperor LEOPOLD is the Heir of the German Branch of this Great Family, and Inheri∣tor of all its Honours and Estates. Austria is divided into the Upper and Lower, with respect to the Course of the River Danube, being di∣vided by the River Ens. In the Lower are these chief Towns, Vienna, Capital. Neustat. Krems. Stain. Baden. Tuln. Haynburg. In the Upper, stand Lints. Ens. Everding. Freistat. Steyr. Wels. VIENNA, olim Vindomina & Vindobona, call'd by the Natives WIEN, is the Capital of Austria, and by being the Seat of the Emperor, is esteem'd the Metro∣polis of Germany; it was originally a Fort of the Ro∣mans, and not at all considerable till Henry Prince of ledgestria rebuilt it in 1158. It was enlarg'd, beautified ledge wall'd round in the Year 1192, with the Mony ledge was paid by the English Nation for the Ransom of ledgeard I. detain'd Prisoner by the Marquess of Au∣ledgeria, in his return from the Holy Land. It is now a ledgery rich flourishing City, and exceeding populous; ledgereat numbers of Strangers, besides Natives of other parts of Germany, being brought hither by the Empe∣ror's Court. The Houses are well built of Stone, and very high, commonly six Stories, and besides have Cel∣lars sunk four Stories under one another. The Empe∣ror's Palace is a noble piece of Building, but not very large, it consists of two Courts: Over the entrance are set in Capitals the 5 Vowels, the Exposition of which causes many Conjectures; one that pleases best, is, Austriae Est Imperare Orbi Ʋniverso. The Furniture is very princely. But that which most deserves a Tra∣veller's sight, are, the Repository or Collection of Ra∣rities of Nature and Art, and the Library; in the for∣mer of which are kept a vast number of Curiosities, the bare Catalogue whereof takes up a large Vol. in Fol. Dr. Brown has mention'd several of the most consider∣able, to which we must refer the Reader, it being too long to set down here. The Library consists of eight Chambers, which contain a very valuable and nume∣rous Collection of Printed Books, besides a great number of Manuscripts, and is excell'd by no Library of Europe. This City is the See of a Bishop, who is Suffragan to the Archbhop o Sazburg. The Cathedral Church, dedicated o , is a stately Fabrick; the Win∣dows are of thick pained ls, which makes the Church somewh dark, he fry is xraordinary, being adorn'd with Ss and fine Embellishments; the Steeple res in a Spe to the heighth of 482 Foot, and on the top was set he Turkish Arms, a Star and Crescent, to save it from being destroy'd at the time that Solyman besieg'd this City, which continued there till the Year 163, when after defeating the Turks that year, it was taken down. An University is establish'd here, which is endow'd with many Privileges and a fair Revenue, and has a great number of Students: It was founded, as some say, by the Emperor Frederick II. and enlarg'd and compleated by Albert III. Duke of Au∣stria, who also obtain'd its Privileges to be confirm'd by the Pope. The Jesuits have two Houses here, which together with their College and Church, are fine Build∣ings; as are also the Abbey and Church of S. Gregory. The Roman Catholick Religion only is here pro∣fess'd, which obliges the Protestants to go as far as Pres∣burg to Church. The Jews had formerly a Liberty to Trade here, but of late they have been wholly banish'd. The Fortification of this City consists of a very strong Wall, wherein are 12 large Bastions, two of which are to the Water, and the other to the Land, and deep Ditches: And indeed this Fortification is needful, for it has been besieged no less than four times by the Turks, viz. in the Year 1529, by Solyman the Magnificent, with an Army of 200000 Men, who were repuls'd and forc'd to return, after they had given two general As∣saults to the Town; in the Years 1532 and 1543, and again in our days, viz. A. D. 1683, at which time the City was reduc'd to great extremity, being batter'd by the Enemy's Cannon from the 14th of July to the begin∣ning of September, which they valiantly resisted, under their Couragious Governor Count Staremberg; till John, the present King of Poland, came up with his Army to their Relief, which being join'd with the Im∣perialists, set upon the Turks the 10th of September, and totally routed and destroy'd their Army, which was said to consist of 100000 Men, and took their Cannon, Camp and Baggage, and so rescu'd the City, which was reduc'd to the last extremity. The Suburbs, call'd Leopolstadt, is divided from the Town by a fair Plain of a good breadth, and the River Danube; and before the last Siege was almost as consi∣derable as the Town, being fill'd with the Houses of Nobility and Gentry very magnificently built; but this was quite burnt down in the Siege. The City stands on the South-side of the River Da∣nube, which running through low Grounds, is here di∣vided into several Streams and makes many Islands, one
of which call'd Peters, lies just before the Gates, and is large enough to lodge a considerable Army for their de∣fence; near the Town a small River call'd the Wien falls into the Danube, over which last here is a Bridge. It is distant 26 German Leagues or 104 English miles from Lintz to the East, 6 Leagues from the Confines of Hungary, and 10 from Presburg to the West, and seated in the Lat. of 48. 2. Long. (reckoning from Teneriff ac∣cording to the ol Maps) 36. 10. but according to San∣son, 39. 10. Lintz, Aurelianum, Lyncia or Lyncium, the next consi∣derable City, as being the Metropolis of the Upper Au∣stria, is situate upon the Danube, over which it has a Bridge, 100 miles from Vienna to the West, 30 from Passaw to the East, and 50 from Saltzburg to the North-east; it stands in a very pleasant Country, and there∣fore much resorted to by the Nobility, who have their Houses of Pleasure in its Suburbs on the other side the Danube, and in the Neighbourhood. The Emperor has a Palace here, to which he retir'd during the Siege of Vienna in 1683. Dr. Brown says, This is not a great, but very neat City; the whole Town is built of Stone, the Market-place very large, and not a bad House in it; the Castle stands upon a Hill, is very large and of mo∣dern Building. The Imperial Army rendezvous'd here when the Turks came to Vienna in 1532. Here was for some time a Church and University of Lutherans in so flourishing a condition, that in 20 Years time there were no less than 3000 Counts, Barons and Noblemen had been edcuated in it; but it was put down by the Au∣strian Family when the Emperor Matthias resided here for almost a Year together, A. D. 1614. The Church and the Palace in the City, and the Monastery of the Capucius in the Suburbs, are the things chiefly worth a Travellers sight. There are two Fairs held here year∣ly, which brings great resort of People. Ens, Anasium, Ensium Civitas, a fair strong and well built City, stands on a River of the same name, which 2 miles North of it falls into the Danube, and is distant 15 miles from Lintz to the East; this Town was built in the place where formerly stood the City Laureacum, considerable in the Romans time, having been the Seat of some of their Emperors, and since Christianity, was an Archbishop's See; but that City was destroy'd by the Huns, A. D. 903, and this of Ens built, which was formerly govern'd by its Count, till the Emperor Rodolph I. bought it, and annex'd it to the States of Austria. Steyer, a neat handsom Town at the Conflux of the two small Rivers, the Steyer and the Ens, about 10 miles from Ens to the South. It is inhabited by Smiths, Cutlers, and other Iron-workers, who, by the Danube, furnish the neighbouring parts with their Ware, and much enrich themselves. Wels, a neat Town upon the River Traune, 4 German miles from Lintz to the South, not considerable. Everding or Efferding, about 12 miles from Lintz to the West, and near the banks of the Danube, is a strong fortified Town and defended with two Castles, one within the Walls of the Town and another with∣out, which is call'd Schaumburg, and gave Title to a Count of the Family of Julbach, to whom this Town belong'd; but the Count of Starenberg is now Lord of it, his Ancestor having married the Daughter of the last Count Schaumburg, about A. D. 1560. Freystat, on the North-side the Danube near the bor∣ders of Bohemia, is a well built Town, but not very strong; it stands 25 miles from Lintz to the North. A Fair is held here once a Year which lasts 14 days, and brings great Concourse of People to it. Newstadt, the chief Town next Vienna of the Lower Austria, is seated in a Bog in the middle of a Plain, at the distance of 30 miles from Vienna to the South; it is fortified with two Walls and a Ditch, which makes it so strong that it resisted the main force of the Turks, who were content to retreat if the Town would give them some Trophy to carry to Constantinople, who thereupon sent 'em their Whipping-post. Krembs stands on the North-side of the Danube near a small River of the same name, about 40 miles from Vienna to the West. It is a neat well built wall'd City, and has a good Trade, especially at two yearly Fairs, which last 14 days. Stain is a small City on the North-side of the Da∣nube also, not above two miles from Krembs to the West, and has a Bridge over the Danube. Baden, called so from the natural Baths that rise here in so many Springs as to supply two Baths within the Town, five without the Wall, and two beyond a Ri∣vulet call'd Swechet, the Waters of which are commen∣ded for curing many Distempers, and therefore much re∣sorted to. This Town stands in a Plain about 18 miles from Vienna to the South, and as far from Newstadt to the West. Tuln is an ancient Town about 20 miles Westward from Vienna, upon a small River of the same name, which falls into the Danube about 5 or 6 miles below it. The Country about it is reckon'd the fruitfullest and healthiest part of Austria, but the Town however not very well furnish'd with Provisions for Travellers, Haynburg or Haimburg, Hamburgum Austriae, was an∣ciently the Metropolis of Austria and the Seat of the Dukes, and one of the greatest Mart-Towns in these parts, but decay'd upon Duke Leopold's removing to Vienna about A. D. 1200. It is situate on the South-side of the Danube 30 miles from Vienna, and near the bor∣ders of Hungary, from whence it has been frequently di∣sturb'd by the Rebels of that Country. They have plenty of Wine and Corn, which is now the chief Trade of the Town. There are still to be seen some Remains of strong Walls and Fortifications round the Town. The Dukedom of STYRIA, call'd in High-Dutch Steyrmarck, with the County of CILLEY, lies be∣tween Austria on the North, Carinthia and Carniola on the South, Hungary and Sclavonia on the East, and Saltzburg on the West: Its extent from East to West is about 110 miles, and from North to South in some parts 30, in others 80 miles. The Soil yields Corn, Wine, Fruits, Mines of Iron and Salt-Springs. Some part of the Country is mountainous and barren, but the Vallies afford Pasture for great Herds of Kine. The Air of the Lower Styria is somewhat unwholsom. The Disease mention'd by Travellers to be found among the People that dwell at the foot of the Alps, viz. a strange swelling under the Chin, is very frequent here, which grows incredibly large, occasion'd 'tis judg'd, by drink∣ing the Snow-water that comes off the Mountains, which the poorer People are fain to be content with. Styria is divided, with respect to the course of the River Mur, into the Upper, wherein are, Judenburg. Bruck or Pruck. Lawben. Seckaw. Isenartz. The Lower, whereof the chief Towns are, Gracz, Capital. Rakelsburg. Pettaw. Marksburg. The Earldom of Cilley lies on the South∣side of the River Drave, extending to the Banks of the Save. Cilley. Rain GRACZ, Graecium, the Capital of Styria, is a near well-built City, standing in a pleasant and fruitful Country, on the Banks of the River Mur, 65 miles South from Vienna, 25 from the Drave, and 55 froredge Cilley to the North, and about 30 from the borders oredge
Hungary to the West. It is defended by regular Fortifi∣cations, that render it all most Impregnable, and hath a stately Castle standing on a high Hill, which is a Pa∣lace of the Arch-Duke, and is adorn'd with fine Furni∣ture, particulary a good Library, and a Repository of Rarities. The Jesuits College here is well Endowed, and hath the privilege of Conferring Degrees, which makes it be reckon'd amongst the Universities of Ger∣many, and well fill'd with Students. Judenburg, a handsome and well-built Town, Fa∣mous for two great Fairs for Cattle yearly held in it. The Duke of Styria has a Palace here, in which his De∣puty sometimes Resides: It stands on the River Mur, 50 miles from Gracz to the West, in a very pleasant and fruitful Country. Lawben is also on the Mur, 25 miles North-east from Judenburg: It is a neat pleasant City, and the Capital of a Barony; but was sold to the Duke of Carinthia, in 1246, and fell to the House of Austria with that Dutchy. It was Taken and Plunder'd in 1292, by the Arch-bishop of Saltzburg, then at War with the Duke of Austria. Bruck or Pruck an den Mur, is an old Town, and has nothing considerable in it, only that the Emperor has sometimes assembled here the States of these three Duke∣domes of Styria, Carinthia and Carniola. It stands on the Mur, 25 miles North-west from Gracz. Seckaw, a small Castle on the River Gayl, 40 miles from Gracz to the West, and 60 from Stain to the South, is an Episcopal See, Erected in 1219, under the Arch-bishop of Saltzburg, who has the power of Electing and Investing, and receiving an Oath of Fealty of this Bi∣shop; and he has no Voice in the Diet. Eisenartz, famous for Mines and Forges of Iron, (from whence it has its Name) which employ a vast number of Labouring-men, which therefore live here and supply the Neighbouring parts with this Metal, and all Germany with Steel. They have an annual Fair for Hemp, Leather, Tallow, and all Necessaries. The Mines were discover'd in A. D. 712, and have wrought ever since without any sensible Decay. This Town stands near a little River call'd Saltza, that falls into the Ens, is distant 12 miles from Lawben to the North-west, and 24 from Judenburg to the North-east. Rakelsburg, is a strong Town seated on the Mur, 28 miles from Gracz and 10 from Murck to the East, in a Country plentiful of all sorts of Fruit, especially Grapes. A Custom-house is kept here to receive Tolls upon Merchandize carried to and from Hungary. This Town has been a notable Bulwark against the Turks. Pettaw stands upon the Banks of the Drave, but 10 English miles from the Borders of Sclavonia, 16 from Rakelsburg, as many from Murck to the South, and 30 from Gracz, to the South-east, altho' it be an ancient Ro∣man Town, it is not very large nor considerable, only that it is a Bishop's See, and has been so for 1300 years. Its Bishop is under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Saltzburg. Marksburg, a well-built Town, on the Banks of the Drave, 20 miles West from Pettaw, and as many South from Gracz, formerly the Capital of a Country, till 1240, the last Count dying without Issue. It is now part of the Dominions of the Duke of Austria. Cilley, which gives name to a Territory formerly Govern'd by its own Earls, but now subject to the House of Austria, and united to the Dutchy of Styria, is seated on the Banks of the River Soana, which a little below falls into the Save, at the distance of 8 miles from the Confines of Carniola to the North, 25 from the Drave to the South. It is a noble and ancient City and has been a place of good consideration, as appears by many Roman Monuments daily found here. It is Fortified with two strong Castles, and was strong enough to repulse the Turks, who Attacked it in 1492. The Dukedom of CARINTHIA, call'd in High Dutch Hertzogthum Karnten, is seated between Styria and Saltzburg on the North, Carniola on the South, Styria on the East, and Tyrol on the West. Its extent from East to West is about 100 miles, from North to South about 30. It is a Mountainous Coun∣try, and of a barren Soil, and cold Air. The River Drave runs cross the Country, receiving a great many small Rivers that water several parts: Here are also many Lakes that abound with Fish. Carinthia is divided into the Upper, wherein stand St. Veit. Villach. And the Lower, wherein are these Towns of most remark, Clagenfurt. Gurck. Lavanmund. S. Andrews. Freysac, S. VEIT, Fanum Sancti Viti, the principal Town of the Province of Carinthia, so call'd from a Saint of this name, who propagated Christianity here during the Persecution of Diocn; It is seated at the Confluence of the Rivers Wilitz and Glac, in a fruitful Valley, at the distance of 80 mile from Gracz to the West, and 50 from Ens on the Dane to the South; it was anci∣ently a Bishop's See, but is ow not at all considerable but for its Age. Near it are to be seen the Ruins of the ancient City Saal, destroy'd by Attila in 451, and in a neighbouring Field stands an old Stone-chair, in which the Dukes of Carinthia were wont to be Install'd. Freysack is a good strong Town, seated in a fruitful Soil amidst rows of Hills and Mountains, upon the Ri∣ver Matnitz, 15 miles North from S. Viet, and has a strong Castle built on a Rock: This place is by some reckon'd the eldest Town in this Dukedom; it is under the Jurisdiction of the Arch-bishop of Saltzburg. In the neighbuoring Mountains were formerly found Mines of Gold, but they are now exhausted. Villach is seated near the Drave, where it receives the Geyla, 25 miles from S. Viet to the South-west; here is a large Bridge over the Drave, which brings the Town a great Trade, by the many Passengers that Tra∣vel over it in the way from Germany to Italy. Gurk, a City that is a Bishop's See, instituted by an Arch-bishop of Saltzburg, A. D. 1073, who reserved the right of the Election and Investiture of the Bishop to his Successors; but they have lost part of that Power, for the Emperor has now a right of chusing twice, and the Archbishop the third time, and so by turns, as the See becomes vacant: But this Bishop has no Vote in the Diet. This City stands on a River of the same name, 25 miles from Villach to the North-east, 8 from Freysack to the South, and as many from S. Viet to the North. Lavanmynd, Lavemund, or Lavenmind, stands on the River Lauant, where it falls into the Drave, (whence it has its name) 30 miles West from Clagenfurt, and 10 miles East from the borders of Styria. It is a small City and an Episcopal See also, under the Archbishop of Saltzburg, in a pleasant Valley call'd Lavanthal, in which also stands S. Andrews, a neat Town, and the place of Resi∣dence of the Bishop. The Town and neighbouring Country belongs to the Archbishop of Saltzburg. Clagenfurt, the neatest Town in Carinthia, built in a square Figure, and enclos'd with a Wall; here is a handsom Piazza, in the middle of which stands a no∣ble Fountain, over which is a Dragon and an Hercules before it carv'd in Stone. This Town is distant 10 miles from S. Veit to the North, 20 from Villach to the West, and about 6 from the Save to the South.
The Dutchy of CARNIOLA, in High-Dutch, Hortzogthum Krayn; with WINDISH∣MARCH and the County of GORITIA. This Province is bounded on the North with Carin∣thia and Cilley, on the South by a ridge of Mountains, that part it from the Territories of the State of Venice, on the East by Croatia, and on the West by Carinthia. The length of it from East to West, is about 110 miles, and its breadth 40 miles. It is very Mountainous, but has pleasant Valleys which yield store of Corn and Wine. The River Save hath its source in the Western part, and runs quite thro' it, besides which here are other good Rivers. Carniola, divided into Upper Laubach. Crainburg. Bischoffslach. and Lower; hath these consi∣derable Towns, Oberlabach. Zircknitz. In the Windischmarch, or Mar∣quisate of Windes, which is the South east part of Carniola. Metling. Rudelphsworth. The County of Goritia, on the South-west of Carniola. Goritz. To these may be added part of Istria, wherein stand S. Viet am Flaum. And the Territory of Trieste. LAƲBACH, Labacum, aut Labiana, the Capital of Carniola, stands on the banks of a small River of the same name, which falls into the Save 10 miles below it, and is distant 30 miles from the River Drave to the South, 50 from the Confines of Croatia to the West, and 35 from Trieste upon the Gulph of Venice to the North. It is a well-built City and very populous, the See of a Bishop, and hath a large Castle for its defence, but it is commanded by a Hill, and the Town is not very strong; however endured a Siege in 1440, when Fre∣derick III. being Crown'd at Aken, his Brother Albert and Count Ʋlric attack'd this City, but it held out till the Emperor came to its Relief. Crainburg, seated on the banks of the Save, 20 miles from Lauback North-west, and 24 from Clagenfurt to the South-east, on the top of a Hill, and fortified with a strong Castle. The Town has three Churches in it, and in the Suburbs is a Monastery of Capuchins. It once gave title to a Marquess. Lack, or Bishops-Lack, is a handsom well-built for∣tified City, standing upon a small River, 10 miles South from Crainburg, and 20 East from Laubach. It is subject to the Bishop of Freysing, to whom the Emperor Henry III. gave it, and the Governor of it is his Lieu∣tenant. This Town was plunder'd and burnt in 1451, since when it has been Re-built and better fortified. Zirknitz, a Town of no great bulk, nor considerable but for the Lake near it, to which it gives name. This Lake is very wonderful; it is about 4 German miles in length, and 2 in breadth, and from September to June, is full of Water, but the other six Months is quite dry. In June the Water descends thro' many large Holes in the bottom, (at which time the Country Peo∣ple catch abundance of Fish, by laying Nets over the Holes) leaving the bottom quite dry, so that the neigh∣bouring People sow Corn in it, which they have time to reap, and afterwards to put in their Cattle, and let in the Deer and Hares from the neighbouring Forests, which they Hunt in this Lake, and all before the Wa∣ter returns; for the Earth is exceeding Prolifick: And in September the Water returns, spouting up with great Violence, and to a great height out of these Holes, and soon makes that a Sea, that was before a Field for Corn, Pasture and Hunting; and this happens con∣stantly every Year, and at this certain time. Ober-Laubach, about 16 miles West from the Lau∣bach, already described, and on the same River with that, is considerable by being a Mart for Italian Goods, which are brought hither in great quantities, and sent to all parts of Germany. Metling, Metulum, the chief Town of the Windisch∣mark, stands near the Frontiers of Croatia, 35 miles South from Cilley, 25 East from the Lake of Zirknitz, and 25 North from the Gulph of Venice. It is a place of no great Consideration: The chief Trade of the In∣habitants lies in Swine, which they fatten in two neigh∣bouring Woods of Chesnut-trees and Oaks. In the Year 1431 this Town was surpriz'd by the Turks and the Inhabitants massacred. And again, in 1578, it was plunder'd by 'em. Rudolphworth or Newstat, stands upon the River Gurk 12 miles North-west from Metling: It is a very ancient Town, and honour'd with great Priviledges, which were given them by the Emperor Frederick IV. about the Year 1435. for having oppos'd Albert of Austria and Ʋlric Count of Cilly. This Town is famous for the best Wine in these Parts. Goritia, a small County in Friuli, is subject to the Emperor. The rest of the Province being subject to the Venetians, shall be describ'd with the rest of Italy. The Chief Town is, Gortz or Goritz seated upon the River Lizonzo, 20 miles from the Gulph of Venice and 15 from Aquileia to the North, 50 from Clagenfurt to the South, and as much from Laubach to the West. The Town is old, and by some thought to be the old Roman Norricia or Noreia. Dieterich, King of the Goths vanquish'd Odoa∣cer, King of the Heruli, near this Place. The Sclavo∣nian Tongue, spoken in these Provinces, reaches no far∣ther West than this Town, and here the common Peo∣ple speak a corrupt Italian. It was take by the Vene∣tians in 1608. but regain'd by the Emperor the year after; and in 1616 they attempted to surprize it, but were forced to retreat. Trieste, the Chief Town of the small Province of Kar∣stia, stands on the Adriatique Sea or Gulph of Venice, 30 miles from Aquileia to the East, at the bottom of a Bay, to which it gives Name. It is a small, but strong and populous Place, and a Bishop's See, under the Pa∣triarch of Aquileia; it has a large but unsafe Harbor. The Emperor took this City from the Venetians, A. D. 1507. and has been ever since in possession of it. S. Viet am Flaum, tho' situate in Istria, which is ac∣counted part of Italy, yet being subject to the House of Austria, must be described here. It is a strong Town, having a Castle, besides Walls and Ditches for its De∣fence, and is seated on the Adriatick Sea, 30 miles South from Czernickz, and 40 South-west from Metling, and at the Mouth of the River Flaum. The Italian Tongue is here spoken in its Purity, and therefore the Austrian Gentry send their Children here to be taught it. In the Suburbs stand a Monastery, famous for a Treaty of Peace concluded in it between the Emperor and the Ve∣netians, in the Year 1618. The County of TYREL, with the Bishop∣rick of BRIXEN. TYROL is one of the largest Counties of the Empire, it's extent being 120 miles from East to West, and 60 from North to South. It is bounded by Schwaben and Bavaria on the North, the Grisons and Trent on the South, Carinthia on the East, and Switzerland on the West. The Country is very mountainous, and the Soil barren in many parts; however, the Valleys are very fruitful, and afford good Pasture. Here are divers Springs of mineral and Salt Waters, and Mines of Silver,
Iron and Copper. The chief Rivers are the Eiseck or Laisock, the Inn, which crosseth this Province from South to North-east, and the Adige or Etsch, which takes its rise here, and passes through the Territories of Venice. Tyrol is said to be the Rhaetia inferior of the Romans, and upon the decay of their Power was seized by the Princes of Bavaria, and the Governors of it were ap∣pointed by them with the Titles of Marggraves; this Marggrave was afterwards made hereditary, and a Count of the Empire, by Frederick I. about the Year 1350. The Bishoprick of Trent was added to it by Ludo∣wick, Son to the Duke of Bavaria and Count of Tyrol, who took that Bishop Prisoner. This Ludowick dying without Issue, his Widow settled this County upon the Duke of Austria; in which Family it has ever since continued. It is divided into Tyrol, proper, wherein stands Inspruck, Capit. Ombras, Tyrol, Hall. The Bishoprick of Brixen. Brixen. The Counties of Meran, Pludentz, Bregentz, Feldkirk, Montfort. INSPRƲCH, OEnipons, is seated in a pleasant Valley, at the Foot of the Mountains of Venden, and on the Banks of the River Inn, which separates the City from its large Suburbs. It is 60 miles distance from Munchen to the South, 80 from Saltzburg to the South-west, and 70 from Trent to the North. Though it be not large, it is well built, and adorn'd with curious Fountains, spacious Market-places, and a magnificent, Castle, wherein the Arch-Dukes of Inspruck used to re∣side, and has since been the Seat of its Princes of the House of Austria; it is a noble Palace, furnished with a Cabinet of curious Rarities in Art and Nature, and adorn'd with pleasant Gardens. Inspruck was Wall'd by Otto the Great Count of Meran, about the year 1234, but is now destitute of that Defence. But Ombras, about an English mile distant from it, is a very strong Fort: This was the Summer Seat of the Dukes, being exceed∣ing pleasantly situated. The Armory here is very fine; amongst the Arms and Pictures of several Princes, the Statue of Francis I. on Horse-back, represent∣ing him as he was taken Prisoner at Pavia, is to be seen in it. And in the Duke's Closet of Rarities, there is a Trunk of an Oak with a whole Deer enclos∣ed in it. Hall, call'd Im'thall for distinction, is seated on the River Inn 10 miles from Inspruck to the North-west, and is famous for its Salt-pits, which afford the Inha∣bitants a profitable Trade. The Pits are about 4 miles from the Town, where the Salt is dug up like Copper Oar, then laid to soak in great Trenches fill'd with Water, and afterwards boil'd up in great Pans here in the City, of which they have four made of Iron that are each 48 Foot long, 34 broad, and 3 deep. BRIXEN, Brixino, stands on the bottom of Mount Brenner, upon the River Eysach, 30 miles South-east from Inspruck, and 30 from the Confines of Carinthia. It was formerly an Imperial City, but it is now the See of a Bishop, who is a Count of the Empire, and hath Jurisdiction over it. The City is small and not, very populous; it lies upon the Road to Italy, and is therefore the Station of some Merchants that hand the Commodities of that Country and Germany to and again. Here are mineral Waters of good Fame, especially one call'd the Virgin Well, which is much resorted to. The Diocess of this Bishop is about 40 miles long, and 30 broad. Meran, once the Capital of this County, and gave Title to an Earl, is a small City seated on the River Ersch, 40 miles South of Inspruck. Near it is Tyrol, an ancient Castle, which gave name to the whole County. It is seated in a pleasant Country, but has nothing considerable in it. Pludentz, stands at the foot of the Mountains upon the bank of the River Ill, about 75 miles West from Inspruck. Bergentz stands at the East-end of the Lake of Con∣stance, 80 miles West from Inspruck. Montfort stands about the mid-way between Ber∣gentz to the North, and Pludentz to the South. Felkirk stands upon the Ill, and near the Rhine, about 12 miles West from Pludentz. The Bishoprick of TRENT. This Country is by some Geographers made part of Italy: But the Bishop of it being a Prince of the Em∣pire, the Germans reckon it into the Circle of Austria. It lyes among the Alps, between the County of Tyrol on the North, the Dominions of the State of Venice on the South and East, and the Grisons on the West. The extent of it is about 70 miles from East to West, and 50 from North to South. The River Adige runs thro' it from North to South, and receives several smaller Rivers that rise in the Mountains on each side this Country. The Soil here produces Wine, Oil, Fruit and Pasture, but not much Corn. The Chief Towns are Trent, Pozen. TRENT, Tridentinum, is seated upon the River Adige, in a pleasant Vally, between three very high and steep Mountains 45 miles South-east from Brixen, 35 North from Verona, 30 from the Confines of the Val∣teline to the West, and 70 from Inspruck to the South. It is adorn'd with many stately Palaces, and several beautiful Churches, whereof the Cathedral dedicated to S. Vigil, is reckon'd a fine piece of Architecture: Its Chapter consists of Noblemen, who chuse the Bi∣shop. Here are also a great number of Religious Hou∣ses. The Inhabitants speak both the German and Ita∣lian Tongues very perfect, and are observ'd to be ex∣ceeding Civil to Strangers, whereof a great many pass thro' this place in Travelling into Italy and Germany. It was formerly an Imperial City, but is now subject to its Bishop, on whom the Emperor Conrad II. bestowed the Sovereignty of this Territory, which had before been subject to its own Lord, under the Protection of the Duke of Bavaria. This Donation was ratified by the Emperors Frederick I. and II. and the Count of Tyrol made Protector of it. The Bishop is Suffragan to the Patriarch of Aquileia, and as we have said, a Prince of the Empire. The Council held here in the last Age, hath made this City famous: It began in the Year 1545, but was not ended till 1563, during most of which time there are said to have been in this City 7 Cardi∣nals, 3 Patriarchs, 33 Archbishops, 235 Bishops, 7 Vi∣cars General, and 146 Divines, besides many Ambas∣sadors, who with their Attendants, were provided with Lodging, Victuals, and all Necessaries. This Council was Assembled by Pope Paul III. at the instance of many of the Princes of Europe, for the Reformation of the Discipline of the Church, but by the contrivance of the Pope and Cardinals, so many Italian Bishops were brought to it, that they over-rul'd the Endeavors of the rest, and permitted nothing to be Decreed but what the Pope directed, which was so notorious, that it was a common Jest, That the Holy-Ghost was sent from Rome to Trent in a Cloak-bag. And so little was done of what
was expected during all this long Session, that not only the Protestants, but the Whole German and French Na∣tions refused to receive its Decrees. This Council be∣gan on the 4th of January, 1545, and continu'd all the Reign of that Pope, who dying in 1549, it was resum'd by Pope Julius III. in 1551. He dy'd in 1555, and a War broke out in Germany, which interrupted it till Pius IV. re-assembled it on the 18th of January, 1562; from which time it continu'd till the 3d of December, 1563, when it finally broke up, after having with the utmost Partiality establish'd the Pope's Authority, and ratified the Doctrines of Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Indul∣gences, &c. Pozen, call'd by the Italians Bolzano, is seated on the Adige, 25 miles North from Trent, and near the Con∣fines of Tyrol. It is pleasantly situated, and is a place of good Trade, especially at its four yearly Fairs, that hold 15 days each, to which great numbers of Mer∣chants come from several parts of Germany and Italy; for whose sake great Privileges have been granted to the City. Tho' it be seated in the Diocess, this place is not subject to the Bishop of Trent, having been taken from him by the Earl of Tyrol, in 1295. CHAP. X. The Kingdom of BOHEMIA, with the Dukedom of SILESIA and Marquisate of MORAVIA. UNder the name of Bohemia in general are com∣prehended Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia, which altogether lye in form of a Lozenge, between Branden∣burgh and Lusatia on the North, the Palatinate of Ba∣varia, with part of Saxony on the West, and Poland on the East, and extends 69 German Leagues, or 276 English miles from North to South, and 65 Leagues, or 260 miles from East to West. Although this Kingdom be compriz'd within the compass of Germany, and the King is an Elector of the Empire, it hath several peculiar Constitutions and Cust∣oms, and a Language different from the Germans. The Kingdom is Elective; but the House of Austria, by claiming it as Hereditary, occasion'd bloody Wars in the beginning of this Age, between the Emperor Ferdi∣nand II. and Frederick Count Palatine, who being Elected, had accepted of this Crown. But this Prince being overcome by the Emperor in the famous Battle of Prague, A. D. 1620, the Kingdom hath been ever since entirely subject to that Family. The Reformation of Religion was begun very early here by John Husse and Jerom of Prague, and their Converts were numerous long before Calvin and Luther appear'd, whose Doctrins also being brought hither, prevail'd much, and the number of Protestants were ve∣ry great; before by Persecutions and Wars, they were harrass'd and subjected to the Roman Catholicks, which Religion at present is only predominant in this Kingdom. The ancient History of this Country is very obscure; the best account that remains is, that the People of the more Northern part came hither for a warmer Climate, and at first liv'd in a sociable Community, distributing all things in common, but differences arising, they were forc'd to Elect a Governor, who had at first the Title of a Judge only, afterwards honour'd with that of Duke, and at length King. The Succession of these Princes, as well as can be made from the imperfect Chronicles of this Nation is as follows. A Chronological TABLE, shewing the Succession of the Dukes and Kings of Bohemia. XVIII Dukes. Crocus the first Law-giver of Bohemia. Began to reign. A. C. reigned years. 1 LIbyssa Daughter of Crocus, Married Primislaus, or Primishe, he founded Prague. 652 44 2 Neramislaus. 676 39 3 Mnatha. 715 15 4 Mogenius, or Doricius. 735 28 5 Weneslas, or Wenceslaus. 763 22 6 Crcezonislaus. 785 19 7 Neclan. 804 35 8 Nastritius, or Hortivilius. 823 17 9 Bozivozius, the first Christian Prince of the Bohemians. 86 48 10 Shirignaeus, or Epitisvenus. 904 2 11 Ʋladislaus, 906 10 12 S. Wenceslaus II. Martyr. 916 16 13 Bolislaus I. the Cruel. 932 35 14 Bolislaus II. 967 32 15 Bolislaus III. the Ruddy and the Blind. 999 13 16 Jacomir, Regent. 1012 25 17 Brezetislaus I. the Bohemian Achilles. 1037 18 18 Spigna, or Sbitignaeus. 1055 6 XXXIX Kings. Began to reign A. D. reigned years. 19 Ʋlatislaus, or Ladislaus I. 1061 31 20 Conrad I. 1092 1 21 Brezetislaus II. 1092 7 22 Borzivogius, or Borivorius II. 1100 9 23 Suatopluok. 1109 2 24 Ladislaus II. 1111 16 25 Soleslaus, or Sobeislaus I. 1125 15 26 Ladrislaus III. 1140 35 27 Sobeslaus, or Sobierlaus II. 1174 4 28 Frederick Bedzicher. 1178 12 29 Conrad II. 1190 2 30 Wenceslaus III. 1192 1 31 Berzbeslaus Henricus. 1193 3 32 Laudislaus IV. 1196 5 Mon. 33 Primislaus, or Ottocarus I. 1199 22 34 Wenceslaus IV. the one Ey'd. 1231 24 35 Ottocarus II. 1253 25 36 Wenceslaus V. 1278 27 37 Wenceslaus VI. 1305 1 38 Rodolphus I. 1306 1 39 Henry, Deposed 1307 3 40 John of Luxemburg, 1310 36 41 Charles. 1346 32 42 Wenceslaus VII. the Idle. 1348 40 43 Sigismund. 1418 19 44 Albert. 1437 3 45 Ladislaus V. 1440 18 46 George Paderbrach. 1458 13 47 Ladislaus VI. 1471 45 48 Lewes. 1516 10 49 Ferdinand I. 1526 36 50 Maximilian. 1562 12
51 Rodolphus II. 1571 53 52 Matthias. 1608 11 53 Ferdinand II. 1617 20 54 Frederick Elector Palatine. 1619   55 Ferdinand III. 1637 about 9 56 Ferdinand IV. 1646 about 10 57 Leopoldus Ignatius, now Reigning.     BOHEMIA proper, is bounded on the East by Moravia and Silesia, on the West by Misnia and Bava∣ria, on the North by Lusatia, and on the South by Au∣stria; it is almost entirely encompass'd with Moun∣tains, out of one of which springs the River Elbe. In these Mountains there are Mines of Silver, Copper and Lead, and in them are found certain precious Stones, which the Jews send into foreign parts. The River Mul∣daw rises in the Mountains on the South-side, as the Elbe does in those on the North, both which join a little be∣low Prague, and make a good Navigable Stream. Ma∣ny other small Rivers water this Country. The Soil is good, affording Corn, Pasture and Saffron, and some Wine; as also abundance of Hops, whereof they make Beer that is much esteem'd. The People are generally Strong and Couragious, reckon'd strict observers of their Word, but much addicted to Robbing. MORAVIA, call'd Morawa by the Inhabitants, and Mahern by the Germans, lies between Silesia on the North and East, Austria on the South, and Bohemia on the West. The North and West parts are woody and mountainous, but the rest is fair, champain and good Soil, yielding much Corn, and on the South part Wine. Out of the Earth is dug a sort of Myrrh and Frankin∣cense in great pieces. The Pastures are fill'd with Ox∣en, Horses, Sheep and Goats, and the Woods with Hares, Foxes, Wolves and Bevers. Here are many Pits of standing Waters of a poysonous and pestilential Quality, which hurt the Vines and Fruits, and make the People subject to epidemical Diseases: But there are other Waters which make amends, having the vir∣tue of curing many Distempers. Moravia was anci∣ently the Seat of a Kingdom, including also Bohe∣mia and Silesia, which being conquer'd by the Romans, was parcell'd out into four Dukedoms; this of Moravia was afterwards reduc'd to a Marquisate, which Title it still bears, but is mostly subject to Bohemia. The River Morawa, which rises in the Mountains on the North part, passes thro' the middle and gives name to this Province. SILESIA, or SLISKO, lies between Bohe∣mia on the South-west, and Poland on the North-east: Its utmost length from North-west to South-east, is about 225 miles, and its breadth 65 miles. On the side next Bohemia are many Mountains, but the rest of the Country is good Soil, and produces Corn, some Wine, Madder and Flax. Here are Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead and Iron, and plenty of Saltpetre. The River Oder takes its rise in the Southern bounds of this Pro∣vince, and traverseth it from South to North-west. The Vistulae, which is the chief River of Poland, springs in the South-east Confines of Silesia: Many smaller Ri∣vers rise hee and fall into the Oder, encreasing it to a large Navigable Stream before it passes into Branden∣burg. The Meadows have Cattle, the Forests Venison, and the Rivers Fish in good plenty. Silesia was part of the Kingdom of Poland for many Ages, but revolted under the Reign of Ʋladislaus Lothicus, and is now part of the Kingdom of Bohemia: but several Princes have sovereign Dominion over small parts of it. The chief Cities and Towns of this Kingdom are these, viz. In Bohemia. Prague, Capital. Aegra. Koningratz. Glatz. Pilsen. Czaslaw. Tabor. Elnbogen. Budweis. Letomeritz. Piseck. Bern. Slany. Satz. Tetscen. Tabor. Silesia divided into two parts, viz. In the Lower, Breslaw, Capital. Crossen, Dutchy. Glogaw. Sagan. Lignitz. Wolaw. Oelse. Jawer. Schweidnitz. In the Upper, Oppelen. Grotskaw. Jagensdorf. Troppaw. Ratibor. In Moravia are, Brinn. Olmutz. Iglaw. Znaim. Hradisse. Cremsir. PRAGƲE, Praga, olim Marobundum, Rubienum and Cusurgis, is seated on the River Muldaw, in a very fruitful Country, and is encompass'd with stately Courts and pleasant Places, appearing as it were in the midst of an Amphitheatre; it may be divided into three parts, viz. The Alt Stadt, or Old Town, the Nieue Stadt, or New Town, which is the chief, and where∣in the Royal Palace stands, and the Kleine Seiten, or lesser Town on the other side of the Moldaw: All these together form one of the largest Cities in Germany, wherein Dukes, Princes and Emperors have for a long time kept their Court. In the lesser Town stands the Cathedral Church, dedicated to S. Vair, wherein are magnificent Tombs and a strong Castle. A stately Stone-bridge of 24 Arches over the Moldaw, joins this to the other Town. The Town-house, the College and Church of the Jesuits, and the University, are stately Build∣ings, which together with several other beautiful Edi∣fices, make this so fine a place, that Aen. Sylvius com∣pares it to Florence; but our ingenious Country-man Dr. Brown says, this City is larger and more populous than that; that the River Maldaw is much better than the Arno at Florence, but that the Dukes Palace and the Cathedral at Forence, exceeds any thing in Prague. It is the See of an Archbishop, and the Seat of a flou∣rishing University, Founded by the Emperor Charles VI. in the year 1358. The Bohemians brag much of the great number of Students that have been in this Uni∣versity, and say, that in the year 1409, J. Huss alone had above 20000 Scholars. This City was often ta∣ken during the German Wars; and near its Walls was fought that famous Battle between the Bohemian and German Protestants, under Frederick Prince Palatine, chosen King of Bohemia, and the Forces of the Empe∣ror Ferdinand, on the 8th day of November, 1620, wherein the Emperor obtain'd the Victory, and forced the unfortunate Prince to quit his Royalty. Prague stands in the Latitude of 50 deg. and in the Longitude of 34 deg. 15 min. and at the distance of 100 miles from the Danube to the North, 145 mile from Vienna
to the North-west, 50 from the Confines of Saxony to the East, 180 from the borders of Poland to the West, and about 40 from the bounds of Lusatia to the South. Egra, call'd by the Bohemians Chebbe, is a great City at the borders of Bohemia, towards the Palatinate, 80 miles distant from Prague to the East; it stands upon the River Eger, and is Fortified with a double Wall &c. Koningratz, or Kralouishrades, Gradium Reginae, Re∣ginae Gradecium, is a good City seated upon the River Elbe, at 50 miles distance from Prague to the East, and 35 from Glatz to the West: It is now the See of a Bi∣shop, who is a Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Prague, being lately made so by Pope Alex. VII. in the year 1664. Glatz is a small City, built at the Foot of one of the Hills that part Bohemia from Silesia, and water'd by a small River call'd the Miza. It is the Capital of a very rich and fruitful Country of the same Name (in which are nine great Towns and 100 Villages) is very well fortified, and has a strong Castle which stands on the Top of a Hill: It is distant 85 miles from Prague to the East, and 55 from Olmutz to the North. Elnbogen is a very strong Town upon the River Eger, 16 miles from Egra to the West, and near the Borders of Misnia; it is call'd the Bohemian Key to the German Empire. Pilsen is a large strong and well fortified City, stand∣ing upon the Confluence of the River Meis and Caburz, 40 miles from Prague to the South-west, and 50 from Egra to the South-east, was besieged in vain by the Hus∣sites, but was taken by Count Mansfeld, and was after∣wards the last Town of Bohemia that yielded to the Im∣perialists. The Market-place is spacious, and is seat∣ed at the meeting of 4 or 5 Streets of very good Build∣ing. They have two very fine Churches. Czaslaw, a small City, but the Head of a considerable Prefecture, 40 miles distant from Prague to the East, and 25 from Koning-gratz to the South. This was the Burial-place of John Zisca, the famous General of the Hussites, who, to revenge the Death of John Huss and Jerome of Prague, got an Army together of 40000 Men, with which he obtain'd many Victories over the Papists. At his Death he order'd, That a Drum should be made of his Skin; saying, The Enemy would fly at the Sound of it: Which was done accordingly, and had a strange effect upon the Enemy, who, being raw Soldiers, fan∣cied themselves bewitched by this Drum, and shame∣fully run away without fighting. He flourish'd about the year 1420. And built Tabor, which the Hussites fortified, and made the seat of their War; from whence, for 20 years together, they ravaged the Imperial Countries; and thereupon were call'd Taborites. It stands upon the River Lausnicz, 45 miles from Prague to the South, 35 from Czaslaw. BRIN, call'd BRINO by the Bohemians, Lat. Brinum aut Bruna, is situated at the Confluence of the Rivers Schwarta and Zwitta, at the distance of 50 miles from Vienna to the North, and 120 from Prague to the South-east. It is by some reckon'd the Capital of the Marquisate of Moravia, and is defended by strong Fortifications; by the help whereof it sustain'd a vi∣gorous Siege of the Sweedish Forces, in 1645. Olmutz, Olomutium, is not very large, but a neat and well-built City, and has a good Trade with the Mer∣chants of Bohemia, Poland, Hungary, &c. for which it is conveniently seated upon the River Morawa, which falls into the Danube, 80 miles below it. It is the Metropolis of this Marquisate, and the only Bishop's See in it, of which S. Cyril was the first Bishop, about the year 880. This Bishop was formerly a Suffragan to Mentz, but in the year 1346. was alter'd, and made subject to the Arch-bishop of Prague: It is distant 30 miles from Brinn to the North-east. Iglaw, otherwise Giblawa, is a pretty large well-built and strongly fortified Town, on the Border of Bohemiae on the Road from thence to Hungary, and therefore much frequented by Travellers: It is water'd by a Ri∣ver of the same Name, which springs in Bohemia, about 20 miles from hence, and is distant 50 from Brinn to the West, and about 60 from Prague to the South-east. The chief Trade of the Town is in Beer and course Woollen Cloath. The chiefest Building in it is the Jesuits Colledge, and Gymnasium, which with two Monasteries of Dominicans and Franciscans are worth seeing. In the Hussites Wars this place was obstinate no the Popish Side, but very early receiv'd the Augsburg Confession. In the year 1645. it was surrendred to the Sweeds, who defended it for a whole year against all the Emperor's Forces. Znaim or Znoymo, Znogma, stands upon the River Taya, not above 5 miles from the Borders of Austria, and 20 miles South from Brinn, in a pleasant Soil and wholsom Air, and is well fortified by a strong Castle, but with the inconvenience of being overlook'd by a Mountain, within Cannon-shot. This City is also on the Road to Vienna, which brings a good Trade to it. It was burnt in the year 1145. by Ʋladislaus King of Bo∣hemia but rebuilt by Primislaus Ottacar, about 1222. Hradisse or Hradisch, a City situate upon the River Morawa, 30 miles from Olmutz to the South, and as far from Brinn to the East. Cremsir or Kremsier, and by the Bohemians Kromeritz, on the River Morowa, in the middle between Olmutz and Hradisse, is now become a very fair City, though not many Ages ago a poor Village; which was occasi∣oned by a fine Palace, that Bruno Bishop of Olmutz built here; which drew so many People together that in a little time he wall'd it, and made it a City. BRESLAW, Ʋratislavia, the Metropolis of Sile∣sia, and of a particular Dutchy, to which it gives Name; is seated upon the River Oder, at the distance of 120 miles almost North-east from Prague, 110 North from Brinn, and 35 miles West from the Confines of Poland. It is a very large, well-fortified, and fair City, the See of a Bishop, established in 1033. and the Seat of an Uni∣versity. It is a Free City, being govern'd by a Council of 15 Senators, whereof 11 are Noblemen, and the other 4 chosen out of the Corporations of Drapers, Mer∣cers, Brewers and Butchers. The Citizens are rich, and have a good Trade. In the most North-east part of Silesia is the Dukedom of Crossen, which was anciently part of the great Duke of Silesia's Dominions, but was several times pawn'd to the Marquess of Brandenburg, and redeemed; but in the year 1391. it was deliver'd to John III. Elector of Bran∣denburg, with the Consent of Ʋladislaus, King of Hun∣gary and Bohemia; which was confirm'd, and the sole and entire Possession of it granted to Joachim and John, Mar∣quesses of Brandenburg, by the Emperor Ferdinand I. King of Bohemia, and is still enjoyed by that Elector. Crossen, the chief City of it, is seated upon the River Oder, in a Pleasant Plain, and good Air, and is distatn about 40 miles from the Frontiers of Brandenburg to the South, and as far from Glogaw to the North-west. It is a neat old City; the Dukes Palace, the Town-house, and some Citizens Houses are built with Stone. The neighbouring Hills are covered with Fruit-Trees of many sorts, and the Country yields some Wine, but not very good. Glogaw, call'd the Great, to distinguish it from a small Town of the same Name, is also the Capital of a Dukedom, some time govern'd by its own Lords, but now subject to the Emperor, as King of Bohemia. It was made a City by Conrade its Duke, in the year 1260, at which time the Wall and Cathedral Church were built: It was taken by the Swedes in 1647, but be∣ing restored, is now regularly fortified, and has a strong Castle. It stands on the River Oder, near the
Frontiers of Poland, 40 miles from Crossen to the South-east, 55 from Breslaw to the North-west. Sagan, Zeigan, the chief City of another Dukedom, of a small extent, is seated upon the River Bobor, near the Frontiers of Lusatia, 25 miles South from Crossen, and as many West from Glogaw, it was once one of the most populous and largest Cities of Silesia, but is now much decay'd; having been often taken by the Sweeds, and retaken by the Imperialists in the German Civil Wars. Lignitz, the chief City of a Dukedom also, is a fair City, on the banks of the little River Katsbach, 25 miles from Glogaw to the South, and 36 from Breslaw to the West. About the year 1170, this Town was much enlarg'd and fortified, which was afterwards so improv'd in the year 1532, by Frederick its then Duke, that it became one of the best Fortifications, next Breslaw, in Silesia. The Castle is a very strong and noble Building, and the Hospital and Town-house are worth a Stranger's seeing. The Country of this Duke∣dom yields much Corn. In the year 1675, the last Duke dying without Heirs, it fell to the Emperor. Wolaw, a small inconsiderable City, on the North side of the Oder, 16 miles distant from Lignitz, for∣merly part of the Dukedom of Lignitz, but now gives Title to a Duke of its own. Oelse is a neat uniform well-built City, formerly well strengthen'd with Walls, Gates, Turrets and other Fortifications, but in the year 1648, they were demolish'd by the Swedish General, and not since re∣built; here is a fair Church, College, Town-hall, and Market-place, which is exactly square. This City had also a Duke of its own, till in the year 1492 it was gi∣ven to the Duke of Munsterberg, who is still Lord of it, and some other small Cities its dependences. Oelse is situated about 15 miles from Breslaw to the North-east. Jauer and Schweidnitz, are two small Dukedoms, (both now in the Emperor) extended on the South-side of the Oder between Lignitz on the North, Breslaw on the East, and Munsterberg on the South. The City Jawer stands in a pleasant Valley, and is fortified with high Ramparts, deep Ditches and a Ca∣stle, in which resides the Lieutenant of these two Dukedoms. Schweidnitz stands South-east from Jawer, and South-west from Breslaw, about 20 miles distant from the former, and 30 from the latter. It is fortified with Walls and Ramparts, and beautified with many fair Buildings, so that it may be esteemed one of the finest Cities in Silesia. In the Armory here, is a Gun of an extraordinary size, being able to carry a Bullet of 320 pound weight. Besides these two Cities, there are 22 Towns in these two Dukedoms. Munsterberg, the Capital of another Dukedom, is a small City seated in a fruitful Plain, 30 miles South from Breslaw. It has an old Castle, which, with the Town-hall, is all worth noting in this Town. Five other Towns are in this Dukedom. Oppelen stands on the Northern banks of the River Oder, over which it has a Bridge, 40 miles above Bre∣slaw. It has very thick Walls and strong Gates for its defence. Ever since 1647 it has been subject to the King of Poland, and all the People here and in the neighbouring Villages speak the Polish Language. This is a Dukedom also, and has 13 Towns its dependences. Grotkaw, a small City that stands between Munster∣berg and Oppelen, is the Capital of another Dukedom subject to the King of Bohemia; wherein stands also Neissa a City of good Trade, seated on a River of the same name, and 11 other Towns. Jagensdorf, call'd by the Moravians, Carnowf, stands upon the River Oppa, 35 miles from Oppelen to the South. It is a small City and not considerable, except that it is the Capital of a Dukedom, which with the City, was by Lewis King of Hungary and Bohemia, gi∣ven to George Marquess of Brandenburg, who built a Castle and erected some other Fortifications about it. Troppaw, a small City upon the River Oppa, 15 miles from Ratibor, has nothing very remarkable in it, nor in its Dukedom, which has 8 other Towns in it. Ratibor is a pretty good City, having in it a Ca∣thedral and the Duke's Palace; the Houses are of Wood, as they are generally all over Silesia, but hand∣some enough, and the publick Buildings are of Stone: It stands in a pleasant Plain on the banks of the River Oder, 35 miles above Oppelen. The Dukedom of Ratibor, containing 5 other Towns, fell to the King of Bohemia in the year 1516, at the death of Duke Valentinus its last Prince. CHAP. XI. The Marquisate and Electorate of BRANDENBURG, with MAGDEBURG and HALBERSTADT; and the Dukedom of POMERANIA. THIS Country, included within the Circle of the Upper Saxony, is bounded on the North by Po∣merania and the Dutchy of Mecklenburg, on the South by Silesia and the Upper Saxony, on the East by Po∣land, and on the West by the Lower Saxony. It is extended from North to South for the space of about 100 miles in its greatest breadth, and 50 elsewhere; as also about 200 from East to West. Its principal Rivers are the Elb, the Havel, the Spere, and the Wart. The Northern situation of its Country makes the Air cold, and the Winters continue very long, neverthe∣less the Soil brings forth every thing necessary for Su∣stenance. Here are very good Pastures, wherein great Herds of Cattle are fed, and large Forests abounding with Venison. The first Inhabitants of this Country were the Varini and Naitones, part of the great Nation of the Suevians, after whom some Tribes of the Sclaves possessed it. About the year 920, the Emperor Henry conquer'd these rude People and planted Christianity among them, and bestow'd the Country upon Sigifrede Earl of Rin∣gelheim, with the Title of Margrave, or Lord of the Marches, obliging him to defend it against the Sclaves; which Honour was at first conferr'd on whom the Em∣peror pleas'd, and was not Hereditary till the time of Albert of Anhalt, Successor to Henry the Lyon; to whom the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa gave it, and entail'd it upon his Issue: But this Family failing in the year 1323, several Families succeeded in it, till Anno 1417, the Emperor Sigismund conferr'd it upon
Frederick Burggraf of Noremberg, in whose Family it still remains. The Elector of Brandenburg is Lord of larger Ter∣ritories than any other Prince of Germany, except the Arch-Duke of Austria; for besides this Marquisate, he possesseth many Estates elsewhere, viz. In the Lower Saxony, the Principalities of Magdeburg and Halberstadt, with part of Pomerania. In Westphalia the Principality of Minden, the Dutchy of Cleeves, and the Counties of Mark and Ravenspurg; as also the Lordship of Crossen in Silesia, and part of Prussia in Poland. The Lutheran Religion is predominant, the Princes, Bishops, and most of the People being of th ersuasion; and the rest Calvinists, here being few or no Roman Catholicks. Brandenburg is divided into three Parts, call'd Marcks: The chief Towns whereof are these, viz. In the Middle Marckt, which lies West of the Ri∣ver Oder, extend∣ing to the Harel and Elb. Berlin. Coln. Brandenburg. Francfurt upon the Oder. Spandaw. Orananenburg. Rotenaw. Lebus. The Lordship of Preg∣nitz, wherein are, Havelburg, Bish. Newstat. Wistock. Dalmin. The Lordship of Rupin, Rupin, Premslow. The New Marckt lies to the North-east on the Banks of the Oder and Wart, stretching North∣ward into Pomerania, and hath these Towns of chiefest note, Landsperg. Kustrim. Soldin. Driessen. The Lordship of Stern, Sernberg, Sonneberg. The Old Marckt, lies on the West∣side of the Elb, between that Ri∣ver and Lunenbug. Stendel. Gardeleben. Soltwedel. Werben. Tangermund. Sechausen. Osterburg. To which may be added, being subject to this Elector, The Dutchy of Magdeburg, Magdeburg. Borch. And, The Principality of Halberstadt, Halberstadt. Oosterwike. Gruningen. Of these Towns, those that deserve a particular de∣scription, are these that follow. BERLIN, Berolinum, is pleasantly situated on the River Spere in a very fruitful Country, being en∣viron'd on one side with Vineyards, on another with Marches, and on a third with Woods full of all sorts of Game. It is esteem'd the capital City of the whole Marquisate of Brandenburg, and is the usual place of Residence of the Elector. The River divides it into 2 parts, the larger whereof towards the North, retains the name of Berlin, and the other to the South, is call'd Coln, in which stands the Elector's Palace; the Stateliness whereof, the Grandeur of the Courts, to∣gether with the Largeness of the Streets, and the re∣gular Architecture of the Houses, render this a very noble and magnificent City. It is distant 68 miles from Magdeburg to the North-east, 45 from Franc∣furt on the Oder to the West, and 48 from Wittemberg to the North. It was first built by Albertus Ʋrsus Prince of Anhalt, A. D. 1142. BRANDENBƲRG or BRANDEBƲRG, Brandeburgum, was so called, as it were The Town of Fire, or took its name (according to the opinion of others,) from its Founder Brennus General of the Gauls. It is seated in the midst of a moorish Ground, and on the banks of the River Hamel, which divides it into two parts, viz. the Old or Ʋpper Town, and the New, being distant only 26 miles from Berlin to the West, as many from Havelberg to the South, and 45 from Magdeburg to the North-east, is a very ancient City, and hath given its name to the whole Country, as also a Title to the Elector of Brandenburg. It was also ere∣cted into an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Magdeburg, by the Emperor Otho, sir-nam'd the Great, A. C. 946. Its Bishops have adher'd to the Augsburg Confession of Faith ever since the year 1563. In the great Church are many Monuments of Princes, and in the Market-place a Statua Rolandina, of which an ac∣count is given in the Description of Bremen. Francfurt upon the River Oder, and for distinction sake usually so express'd, is seated in a fruitful Country, at the distance of 44 miles from Berlin to the East, 70 from Stetin to the South, and not above 10 from the borders of Lusatia. It is divided into two parts by the River, over which they have a large Bridge of Wood. It is a place of reasonable good Trade, and hath two Fairs yearly held in it. The Marquesses of Brandenburg have, at several times, granted the Citi∣zens great Privileges. The City was once free and imperial, as also one of the Hanse-Towns, but now exempt and less considerable than it hath been. In the year 1506, Joachim Marquess of Brandenburg founded an University here, which is now considerable. Havelberg is seated on the River Havel, which a little below falls into the Elb, 20 miles from Stendal to the North, and 50 from Berlin to the West. It is the See of a Bishop, who was Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Magdeburg, but since the year 1555, the Bi∣shops have been of the Lutheran Persuasion. Stendal, a Hanse-Town, the Metropolis of the Alt-Marckt, is seated on the River Ʋcht, in a pleasant Plain, and on the side of a large Forest; it is a neat well-built City, and strongly fortified. The Inhabi∣tants have a pretty good Trade in Corn and Linnen Cloth. It lies upon the Road from Magdeburg to Ham∣burg and Lubec, by which the Inhabitants make good profit. The Courts of Civil Judicature for the Old Marckt, are held here. It is distant 32 miles from Brandenburg to the West, and 30 from Magdeburg to the North. Soltwedel, a large Town, 35 miles from Stendal to the North-west, 50 from Zell to the East, and on the Road between Stendal and Lunenburg. It is seated on the River Jetze, and divided into the old and new Town: Its chief Trade is in Beer. This was formerly the Capital of a Marquisate subject to its own Lord, but was long since united to that of Brandenburg. Tangermunde or Angermund, seated on the Elb at the mouth of the Anger or Tanger, 8 miles from Stendal to the South. It was at first a Castle built by the Empe∣ror Charles IV. in the year 1376, but is now a place of pretty good Trade in Corn and other Commodities convey'd by the Elb to other places. Landsperg stands upon the River Warta, 20 miles East from the Oder, and 35 North-east from Francfurt; Its convenient situation makes it a place of good Trade, which consists much in casting Iron Ordnance, &c. This City was often taken and re-taken in the German Wars. Kustrim on the River Oder, near the mouth of the Warta, 50 miles from Berlin to the East, formerly an inconsiderable Village, now a very strong Town, and
esteem'd the Key of the New Marckt, having been walled with Stone, and otherwise strongly fortified in the last Age by John Marquess of Brandenburg, and in 1631, was strong enough to baffle Gustavus Adolphus, who was forced to raise his Siege, and withdraw his Army from before it. The Houses are neatly and well-built, and the Market-place is the handsomest in all the Marquisate. MAGDEBƲRG, a Territory of about 60 miles in length from East to West, and in some part 30, other 6 miles from North to South, situate between Bruns∣wick to the West, Saxony to the East, Brandenburg to the North, and Anhalt to the South, the Elb running through; it was formerly an Arch-bishoprick, being made so by the Pope at the instance of the Emperor Otho I. and its Prelate Primate of all Germany, in which state it continued till the Reformation; when the Canons, having embrac'd the Doctrin of Luther in the year 1566. chose the Son of the Elector of Brandenburg Administrator of their Arch-bishoprick, after which it remained in the Administratorship of a secular Prince; till, at length, in the Treaty of Munster, A. D. 1648. it was agreed, That after the death of the then Admi∣nistrator, the whole Country should devolve on the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg as a secular Estate and a Dukedom, which, together with the Bishoprick of Halberstadt, were given him as an Equivalent for the hither Pom∣merania, by the same Treaty granted to the King of Sweden. It is accordingly now subject to that Elector and is thought to have advanc'd his Annual Revenue at least 600000 Rix Dollars. The City of Magdeburg, Magdeburgum, call'd in old writing Parthenopolis, is seated on the Banks of the Elb 45 miles below Wittenburg, in a pleasant Country a∣bounding with Corn, but wanting Wood; as on the contrary the Land on the other side of the River wants Corn, but has plenty of Wood. It is distant 30 miles from Brandenburg to the South-west, 60 from Bruns∣wick to the East. and as many from Leipsick to the North. It was built, or much enlarged at least, and wall'd round by the Emperor Otho about the year 940. at the desire of his Wife Edgitha. Daughter to our En∣glish-Saxon King Edmund; and being made a City, he endowed it with large Priviledges, made it Imperial, built also the stately Cathedral yet standing, and tran∣slated the Bishoprick of Vallersleben thither, and obtained the Dignity of Primacy to be added to it: By which means it grew exceeding wealthy and powerful, and continued so till the year 1631. that barbarous Count Tilly having taken the City, massacred the Inhabitants in a most bloody manner, and burnt and destroy'd the whole Town, except the Cathedral, and some few inconsiderable Houses; the Slaughter was so great, that of 40000 Citizens, its said not above 400 were left a∣live, which Loss it has never been able to recover; and tho the Electors of Brandenburg have much assisted it, and repair'd the Fortifications which are very strong, yet it still remains far less considerable than it has been. The Cathedral is a very noble Structure, and worth a Sranger's view; in it are forty nine Altars; and in one of the Chappels is the Tomb of the Emperor Otho and his Wife Edgitha, the Foundress of this Church. There are 28 Towns more in this Dukedom, but none of them contain any thing worthy of a particular des∣cription. The Province of HALBERSTADT is a small Country of about 40 miles in length and 25 in breadth, being bounded by the Dutchy of Magdeburg on the East, the Principality of Anhalt on the South, the Bishoprick of Hildesheim on the West, and Brunswick Wolfembuttel on the North. The Soil of it is good and yields plenty of Corn, and the Forests contain store of Venison. The Bishoprick, which was first founded in the year 780. by the Emperor Charles the Great, and planted at Osterwick, a Town in this Province, being in a little time remov'd to Halberstadt, gave name to this Country, which con∣tinued subject to its own Prelate till the Civil Wars of Germany, when the Bishop Leopold William having re∣stor'd Popery, which had been abolish'd in 1591, the Sweeds besieg'd and took Halberstadt, restor'd the Luther∣an Religion, and kept the Town and Country till the Treaty of Munster, by which this Bishoprick was Se∣culariz'd and given to the Elector of Brandenburg, and now bears the title of a Principality, Halberstadt the chief Town, is seated upon the River Hotheim, 32 miles from Magdeburg, to the West. It was heretofore an Imperial City, but afterwards ex∣empted and subjected to its Bishop, and now under the Elector of Brandenburg; it is reasonably well-built, the Streets are even, and the Houses neat and uniform. There is an Inn in this City that is thought the largest, and will accomodate the greatest number of Persons of any in Europe. Osterwick, once call'd Salingstade, in which this Bi∣shoprick was first planted, is seated on the River Ilse, about 12 miles from Halberstadt to the West. Gruninghen, a small Town with a Castle, re-built in 1593, formerly the Seat of the Bishop, stands 10 miles from Halberstadt to the East. There is a remarkable Wine-fat in it of vast bulk, containing near 1000 Hog∣sheads, Queidlingburg is also reckon'd in the Limits of this Principality, but belonging to the House of Sax∣ony, is described with the rest of that Elector's E∣states. SECT. II. The Dutchy of POMERANIA, call'd Pommern in High-Dutch. Pomerania is the most extream North-east part of Germany, being bounded by the Baltick Sea on the North, and Prussia on the East, having also Brandenburg on the South, and Mecklenburg on the West. It is about 80 miles broad, and 250 long: The Air is very cold, but the Soil however yields Corn and Fruits, also good Pa∣sture, which is fill'd with Cattle, and Forests which a∣bound with Venison. The River Oder falls into the Sea, after it has run through the middle of this Coun∣try: Besides which, the Rivers Pen, Rega, Persant, Wiper and the Stolp water this Dutchy. Pomerania was long Govern'd by its own Dukes, of whom Parninrius at his Death in 1277, divided it be∣tween his two Sons; the Seat of the eldest being Wolgast, and of the Younger Stetin; but the House of Stetin failing of Issue in 1464, that part of Pomerania was con∣ferr'd on the Marquess of Brandenburg, by the Emperor. This the Duke of Pomeren Wolgast oppos'd with all his might, and at length forced the Brandenburger to sur∣render it, but with this condition, that if the House of Wolgast should fail, the whole Dukedom should descend to the House of Brandenburg; which happening in the year 1637, when Bugislaus died with out Issue, the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg claim'd the whole Country: But the Sweeds in the mean time had got footing here, being call'd in by Bugislaus to assist him against the Imperia∣lists in the German Civil Wars, and could not be per∣swaded to leave a Province which they esteemed so convenient for them. This caused a War between the King of Sweden and the Elector of Brandenburg, which was ended in 1648, by the Treaty of Osnabrug and Munster, wherein they agreed to share it betwixt them; the Sweed having all on the West-side of the Oder, and the Brandanburger that on the East: And as a compen∣sation
to the Elector, the Dukedom of Magdeburg and the Principality of Halberstadt were assign'd him by the same Treaty; which however did not satisfie him, and therefore when the rest of Europe were in Arms, the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg assumed his for the recovery of this Country, and entring the Swedish Pomerania, took Ste∣tin in 1677 and Straelsund, and other Places soon after: But at the Treaty of St. Germain, what then remain'd in his hands was restor'd, and the Country is still divi∣ded, as we have said above. The Division of will it be seen by this Table. The upper Pomerania, subject to the K. of Sweden, is divided into the Territories of Stetin Stetin Jasenitz Ʋkermond Passewalk Wolgast, Wolgast Gripswald. Hans. Kentzing Anklam Gutskow. Gutskow Treptow Demmin. Bardt. Bardt Straelsund, Imper. Trebesis. Dumgarten. The Islands of Rugen, Ʋsedom, Wollin, Bergen, Ʋsedom, Wollin. The Lordships of Lewemberg, Butow. Subject to the K. of Poland. The Lower Pomerania subject to the Elector of Branden∣burg, is divided into the Territories of Pomerania, Camnin, Bish. Coln, Hans. Hargard, Hans. Cassuben, Colbert, Cap. Regemoald, Bublitz, Startgart. Vendofia, Stolp, Slage, Rugenwold. STETIN, Stetinum, is a very considerable City, the Capital of all Pomerania, and a Hans-Town. It is seated on the River Oder, at the distance of 18 miles from the Frontiers of Brandenburg, 30 from the Coasts of the Baltick Sea, and 70 from Berlin to the North-east. It is a large, strong and well-built City, and a place of great Trade, to which the River Oder much contri∣butes; for it's self flows from Silesia, and the Warta falls into it; about 50 miles above this City and about 30 miles below it, both together fall into the Baltick Sea; so that this is a good Centre for exchanging the Commodities of Germany, Poland and the Baltick. The Palace which was formerly the Seat of the Duke, and is now the place where the Swedish Governor resides, is an old magnificent Building. This City is exceed∣ing populous, and the Inhabitants are noted for Civili∣ty and Valour; an instance of the latter they effectu∣ally gave in the gallant defence they made against the Elector of Brandenburg in 1677, when tho' he brought a great Army before this City, and very vigorously at∣tack'd it from the 7th of July, he was not able to take it before the 26th of December, and then too gave them very honourable Terms: In the succeeding Peace it was restor'd to the Sweed, under whom it still continues. Wolgast is seated near that mouth of the Oder call'd Psin, about 5 miles from the shoar of the Baltick Sea, 50 North-west from Stetin, and 30 South-east from Straelsund. It was formerly, as we have said, the Capital of a Dutchy, but now subject to the Sweed. It is strengthen'd with a noble Castle, and hath the most convenient Haven, except Straelsund, in Pomeren. It was taken by the Swedes in 1630, after by the Brandenbur∣gers in 1675, and restor'd to the Swedes in 1679. Straelsund a Free City, is near the banks of the Sea, over against the Island of Rugen, 80 miles from Stetin to the North, and 40 from Rostock to the East. It is esteem'd the largest and wealthiest City in Pomeren, and enjoys many great Privileges, which the Citizens have maintain'd against several Princes that have endeavour∣ed to subject them, wherein they have been remark∣ably Brave, having at once oppos'd the united Force of the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, and Ten other Princes. It is govern'd by its own Magistrates, who judge all Causes as well Criminal as Civil. The Buildings here are beautiful, the private Houses being of Stone and uniform: It is a place of very great Trade, (particularly for Corn) having an excellent Haven, the Ships coming up into the very Town. This City was Founded or Re-built at least in 1230, and soon grew populous, and was strongly fortified, by the help whereof, in 1629, it oppos'd Count Waldeck, who besieged it: After which, they put themselves under the Protection of Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, whose Successors have ever since held that Title. In 1678 it was besieged and taken by the Elector of Bran∣denburg, but restor'd at the Treaty of S. Germains, in 1679. The Fortifications consist of regular Bulwarks and large Ditches, besides natural Marshes, through which there is no passing but by Causeys that are well fortified. Bardt stands in a fruitful Country 12 miles West from Straelsund, upon a little Arm of the Sea, which would be a good Haven, but that the Water is shal∣low, and so the Town cannot be traded to. It was sometime the Metropolis of the upper Pomeren. CAMNIN, esteem'd the Capital of the Ducal Po∣merania, is seated on the East-side of the mouth of the Oder that is call'd Drawenow, 30 miles North from Stetin, 40 South-east from Wolgast, and 5 South from the Coasts of the Baltick. It was formerly a Bishop's See, but by the Treaty of Munster it was Seculariz'd and given to the Marquess of Brandenburg. Colberg, at the mouth of the small River Persant, and near the banks of the Baltick Sea, is a strong Town with a convenient Haven. It is pretty much resorted to for Salt, which is made in great plenty near it; and being hence Transported, makes the Town rich and considerable. The Three Islands lye in the Baltick Sea, all along before the Coast of the Upper Pomeren. That of RƲ∣GEN is the largest and most considerable; it is 30 miles in length, and as many in breadth, but with several Arms and Creeks of the See within it: It is situate to the North-east over against Wolgast and Straelsund, between which last place and it, the Sea is not above a League broad: The Land of it is exceeding fertile, yielding Corn in great plenty, and very good Grass, whereby great Herds of Cattle are fed. It was formerly go∣vern'd by its own Princes, who assisted by the notable Valour of the People, long defended it against the neighbouring Kings: But the Straelsunders opposing the Authority he pretended over the Strait that leads to their City, occasion'd Prince Wislaus to besiege it; but the City defended it self so well, that not only he could not take it, but in a Salley he was slain, and be∣ing the last of his Family, that Government after∣wards was subjected to the Duke of Pomeren, from whom it descended to the King of Sweden: But the Danes, having some old pretensions, in the War of
1678. Invaded and Took the whole Island; but in 1679, by the Treaty restored it to the Sweed, to whom is still Subject. The chief Town is. Bergen, which is a place of no great Note, being not Fortified nor even Wall'd, though call'd a City. It contains about 400 Houses; and is distant about 25 miles from Straelsund to the East, and as many from it Wolgast to the North, The Island denominated from the Town WOLLIN, call'd anciently Julium, is the Western of the two Islands that make the three Mouths of the Oder. The Town is seated on the mouth of the Oder, call'd Druenow, 28 miles North from Stetin, and 25 South-west from Wol∣gast. It was anciently one of the largest Cities of Europe, and resorted to by Merchants of all Nations, and said to have been so Powerful, as alone to maintain a War a∣gainst Denmark, and three several times took their King Prisoner: But it was partly destroy'd by Lightning, and finally, by the Arms of Woldemar King of Denmark, in 1170 totally Demolish'd. Since when it hath been only a small inconsiderable Town. ƲSEDOM, which gives name to another Island that lies North-west from that of Wollin, and makes the other two mouths of the Oder, one whereof runs between these two Islands, and is call'd Swine, and the other beyond Ʋsedom, which is nam'd Pfin. Upon the Destruction of Wollin, this Town was resorted to by the Danish and Polish Merchants, and became a place of good Trade, but in 1473 it was all burnt down by an accidental Fire, which destroyed its Trade; and it hath since been only a small Sea-port Town, and not con∣siderable. CHAP. XII. SAXONY. SECT. I. A short Account of the History of Saxony in General. THE Saxons were anciently a vast Nation, and Possessed all the Northern Parts of Germany, from Franconia and Bohemia in the South, to the Baltick Sea and Denmark in the North; and from the River Elb on the East, to the Rhine on the West; where∣by not only the Present Upper and Lower Saxony, but also all Westphalia and Holstein were part of their Country: Nay, also Jutland, now reckon'd part of Denmark, was Inhabited by them. Concerning the Etymology of the name Saxon, the Learned differ; some are of opinion, that they were deriv'd fron the Saci, a People of Asia, to which our Learned Country-man Mr. Camden enclines. Others say, they were deriv'd from Saxum a Stone, as being a hardy strong People. Verstegan and others affirm, that they had their name from a Weapon they wore, call'd a Seax, which was a short Sword of different form from those commonly worn, and peculiar to this Nation. They were Men of a large Bulk and great Strength, renown'd Warriers; and so notorious for Piracy, that the Romans were oblig'd to keep Forces all along the Coast of Gaul and Britain to hinder their frequent In∣cursions. It was this Warlike People that King Vortigern invi∣ted to Britain to assist him against the Picts and Scots, who upon the Romans forsaking them, much annoy'd the Britains: But of what part of this great Nation those were that he Invited, is somewhat uncertain; ancient Histories tell us they were Angles and Juts: Jutland is suppos'd to have been the Country of the latter, but from what part the former came is more Disputed: Mr. Camden is of Opinion that they dwelt in Sleswick, which was sometime called Angel; though others affirm they came from Westphalia, and were accompanied by the Frisons. For the Reader's further Satisfaction, he may consult Camdens Britannia, where he will find this Matter most learnedly and ingeniously Discussed. They were Pagans, and Govern'd by Twelve Noble∣men, chosen by the Commons, out of whom in time of War, they chose a King; which Government continued till the time of Charles the Great, who made War upon them, and was long oppos'd under the Conduct of Wittikind their King; but the power of Charles prov'd too strong in time, and Wittikind was oblig'd to submit and receive the Christian Faith, which by the great care of Charles was planted and propagated over the whole Nation, and Wittikind was by him created Duke of Saxony. The Race of Wittikind continued Dukes of Saxony, till Otho III. who being chosen Emperor in 984, gave his Country to Barnard Lord of Lunenburg, whose Grandson Magnus was deprived by the Emperor Henry III. and Henry Guelph, Duke of Bavaria, made Elector of Saxony, whose Son Henry sirnam'd the Lyon, siding with the Pope against the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, about the year 1170, was Proscrib'd, and by the Emperor's Command depriv'd of his Estates by the neigbouring Princes. The Electoral Dignity was Anno 1180, given to Bernard Earl of Anhalt, Son to the Marquess of Brandenburg, and descended from Magnus above-mention'd, who had conquer'd Lawenburg from Henry, to which the Emperor added the City of Wettimburg and all the Country that tyes between the Elb and the Sala North-ward of Misnia, and gave it the name of the Upper Saxony, The Posterity of Bernard enjoyed this with the title of Duke and Elector of Saxony, till 1422, when Albert III. dying without Issue, Frederick Landgrave of Thuringen and Marquess of Misnia, who was the Heir of the Family of Wit∣tikind, by the Emperor's favour, succeeded, in whose Family it still remains. His Successors have been zeal∣ous defenders of the Reformation, especially D. John, who was one of the Princes who protested against the Decree of the Diet at Spire, in 1529, as we have else∣where said, and was the Author of the Smalcalden League: But in the War that ensued thereupon, his Son and Successor Frederick John, had the Misfortune to be taken Prisoner by the Emperor Charles V. and depriv'd of his Honours and Estate, which in 1547 were given to his Cousin Maurice, Grandson to the Land grave Fre∣derick above-mention'd, from whom the present Duke and Elector is Descended. SECT. II. The Ʋpper SAXONY. The upper Saxony is bounded on the North by the Principalities of Magdeburg. Halberstadt, and the Mar∣quisate of Brandenburg, on the South by Franoni and Bohemia, on the East by Silesia and on the West by Hesse and Brunswick. Its Extent is, from North
to South about 130 English miles, and from East to West 200. The Air is cold but healthful, and the Soil fertil, producing much Wheat but very little Wine; here are Mines of Lead, that are very profit∣able, and some of Silver, that yield the Elector above 100 thousand Pounds a year. The chief Ri∣vers are, the Elb, the Sala, the Elster, the Ʋnstruck, the Spree and the Neisse. The Religion of the Inhabitants is generally the Lutheran, though there are also some Calvinists and Roman Catholicks, The Elector of Saxony is the wealthiest Prince of Germany, except the Archduke of Austria, his yearly Income being reckon'd to be 400 thousand Pounds Sterling; which is raised by the Silver Mines above∣mentioned, and by Excise upon Beer, Corn, Wine, Fruit, &c. The Splendor of his Court is very great, being attended by a vast number of Servants, among whom are several Gentlemen of great Quality. 'Tis said of the Elector Christian II. that he had, besides a great number of the Gentry of his own Country, three Dukes, three Earls and five Barons of Foreign Nations his Pensioners at the same Time. The Dominions of this Prince were increased in the year 1620. by the Emperor's Donation of the Marquisate of Lausatia to Duke John George, in reward for the service he did him in the Bohemian War. So that his present Dominions are, the Dukedom of Saxony, and the Marquisates of Misnia and Lusa∣tia, &c. The chief Towns whereof are seen in this Table, together with those of the other States, that compose the rest of the Circle of the Upper Saxony, viz Anhalt, Thuringen, &c. The Dutchy of Saxony is but a small Country, lying between Brandenburg on the North, Misnia on the South, Lusatia on the East, and Anhalt on the West. The chief Towns are, Wittemberg, Torgaw. The Marquisate of Misnia is bounded on the North by Brandenburg and An∣halt, on the South by Bohemia, on the East by Lusatia, and on the West by Mersburg, Naumburg and Altenburg. It's extent from North to South is near 100 miles and from East to West 80. Dresdin, Meissen, Leipzick, Chemnitz, Freyburg, Voigtland, the South part of Mis∣nia. Zwickow, Plawen. The Marquisate of Lusatia lies East∣ward from the Dutchy of Saxony and Misnia, and is bounded on the North by Brandenburg, on the South by Bohemia, and on the East by Si∣lesia. It is in length from North to South about 90 miles, and in breadth about 50 miles; the chief Towns in it are Bautzen, Gorlitz, Cotwis, Guiben, Soraw, Liebaw, Luben. Other smaller States belonging to several Branches of the House of Saxony, and lie Westward of the Countries above mention'd, viz. The Dutchy of Sax-Hall, Hall, Sax-Mersburg. Mersburg. Sax-Naumburg, Naumburg, Sax-Altemburg, Altemburg. The Principality of Anhalt is a long but narrow Tract of Land lying on the North of Misnia. Zerbest, Bernberg, Dessaw. The small County of Barby joyns to Anhalt on the North. THƲRINGEN, formerly a Kingdom, afterwards a County and then a Landgraviate, was govern'd by its own Princes for many Ages, till 1124. when, upon the Death of Herman, it descended to the Marquiss of Misnia, and, with that Country, came afterwards to the Duke of Saxony; but is divided into several Lord∣ships and Sovereigns, according to the following Table. In Thuringen are thess Chief Towns, Erfurt, Cap. subject to the Archbishop of Mentz, Gotha, Dutchy. Eysenach, Dutchy. Weimar, Dutchy. Mansfeld, County, Stolberg, County, Hohensteim, County, Schwartzemburg, County, Mulhausen, Imp. WITTEMBERG, Witemberga aut Vitarum Mons, the Capital City of the Dutchy of Saxony, is seated on the River Elb, 40 miles South from Brandenburg, as many North from Leypzick, 70 East from Halberstadt, and as many West from the River Oder. It is a fair large City, of an oblong Square form, with one great Street in the middle; adorn'd with an University, which was founded by the Elector Frederick III. in 1502. and made famous by the Preaching of Martin Luther: And well fortified both by Nature and Art, having Mar∣shes on the North, and a great Canal to the Elb, also a very deep Ditch, a good Rampart and 5 large Bastions on the Side that is most expos'd. This is the Capital of the Electorate, and was the Seat of the Elector, till that Honour came into the Family of Misnia, when it was removed to Dresden. Torgaw is a fair City, built by John Frederick, the Elector, in 1535. and beautified with a stately Castle. It is seated on the West Side of the Elb, 20 miles South from Wittemberg. DRESDEN, Dresda, is seated on the River Elb, which divides it into two Parts, at the distance of 55 miles from Wittenberg to the South-east, 25 from the Confines of Bohemia to the North, and 50 from Leipzick to the East. It is a large well-built City, and the usual place of Residence of the Elector of Saxony; whose Palace is a strong and magnificent Castle, adorn'd with many Curiosities, especially a Chamber of Rarities, and an Armory extreamly well furnished, as also very fine Gardens and Stables The City, as we have said, is di∣vided by the River into two Parts, that on the South Side is call'd Alt Dresden or the Old Town; to which the New is joyn'd by a Stone-Bridge of 17 Arches, which is reckon'd a curious piece of Workmanship. Meissen, Misnia, once a rich and populous City, and the Metropolis of the Province, but now not con∣siderable, stands on the South Side of the Elb, 12 miles West from Dresdin: It is a Bishop's See, and has a Ter∣ritory belonging to it, which, with the City, was form∣erly subject to its Bishop, but now in the Hands of the E∣lector. Here was a wooden Bridge over the Elb that was much admired, but was destroyed in the German Wars. LEIPZIG or Leipsick, Lipsia, Lupfurdum, is thought to have been built by the Vandals (who were the ancient Inhabitants of this Country) about the year 700. It stands upon the River Plesse, and near the Elster, and is distant 50 miles from Dresden to the East, and 40 from Wittenberg to the South. It is a very large, rich and populous City, the most considerable of any in this Elector's Dominions. It is very full of Houses, and those well-built and very high, many seven, and some nine Stories. S. Nicholas Church is very fine, and esteem'd the best of any Lutheran Church in Ger∣many. The Citizens have a great Trade, especially by reason of three Fairs held yearly, which bring a con∣course of Merchants from all Parts. A high Court of Judicature is held in this City, which hath great Power,
even to summon the Elector himself. Here is also an University, which was establish'd in 1408. by Fre∣derick Marquess of Misnia: It hath four Colleges and 24 Professors, and is well fill'd with Students. The Castle seated on the Plesse, and call'd Plessenburg, is a very strong Fort and well guarded. In 1520. Martin Luther disputed here with Eckius against the Pope's Supremacy, and quickly after this City imbraced the Reformation. It suffer'd much in the Civil Wars of Ger∣many, having been several times besieged and taken. Freyburg is a famous and pleasant Town, 20 Miles from Dresden to the West, very pleasantly situated, near the River Mulda, 16 miles South-west from Dresden. S. Peter's Church here is the usual Burial-place of the Electors, many of whose Monuments are there to be seen; but that of the Elector Maurice is the most magnificent, not only of those but of any in Ger∣many. But that which makes this Town most consider∣able is the famous Mines that are found near it; out of which they dig great Quantities of Silver Oar, be∣sides Copper, Lead, Brimstone, Vitriol, &c. and so much Silver is hereby produced that the Elector's Pro∣fit out of it is esteemed at 130000 l. per annum, clear of all Charges. Plawen or Plaven, a small City, is seated upon the River Eister, 16 miles South-west from Zwickow, a small City, seated upon the River Mul∣daw 40 miles South from Leipzick: It was a Free Im∣perial City till the year 1308. at which Time it was taken by Frederick Marquiss of Misnia. This Country was the chief Seat of the German Civil Wars, and many incampments were made near this City. BAƲTZEN or BAƲDISSEN, Budissina aut Bubesiae, the chief City of the Marquisate of Lusatia or Lausnitz, stands on the River Spree, near the Frontiers of Saxony, 30 miles from Dresden to the East, 20 from Gorlitz to the West, and 70 from Prague to the North. It was formerly an Imperial City, but lost its Privi∣liges. Before the last German Wars it was well built, but in 1634. the Imperialists having got Possession of it, were besieged by the Elector of Saxony, and intend∣ing to drive off the Enemy, set Fire to the Suburbs, which was unhappily driven over into the City, and burnt it to Ashes, and soon after it suffer'd much from the Sweeds; since when it has not been able to recover its former Lustre. Gorlitz, call'd by some, the Capital of this Marqui∣sate, is seated in a Marsh upon the River Neisse, which rises on the Borders of this Country, and after it has run quite cross it falls into the Oder. This is a good City, having many stately Dwelling-houses and seve∣ral neat Churches; it's Trade lies chiefly in Brewing and making Linnen and Woollen Cloth: It is 20 miles distant from Bautzen to the East. Liebaw▪ Lobaw, Liben, or Lubben, is a small Town, seated in a Plain among pleasant Meadows in the mid∣dle between Bautzen, and Gorlitz: It was formerly so rich, that when the Sweeds Plunder'd it, in 1639. they confess'd that they got 70000 Rix Dollars in Mony, besides much rich Booty. Soraw, call'd by some, the Capital of the lower Lu∣satia, is a small City 30 miles North from Gorlitz, and very near the Borders of Silesia. It was often taken and retaken in the German War, but is now subject to the Elector of Saxony, Luben on the River Spree, 50 miles North from Baudzen, and 30 miles West from the River Oder. This is generally esteemed the Capital of the lower Lusatia. The Elector of Saxony has a Palace in it. Guben, a small but well fortified Town, stands in the lower Lusatia, on the River Nisse, 30 miles from Luben to the East, 10 from the Oder to the West, and 45 from Gorlitz, to the North. It was taken by the Imperia∣lists in 1631. and endur'd a Siege of three Weeks by the Sweeds, in 1642. Cotwis or Cotbuss is a fair Town, seated on the small River Havel, where it falls into the Spree, 35 miles North from Baudzen, and 22 miles South from Luben. It is now subject to the Elector of Branden∣burg, as are also Peytze, Somerfeld, and some other Towns of less note in this Marquisate. MERSBƲRG, formerly a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburg, but now possess'd by the Elector, as Administrator of it; and with the Territory belonging to it, serves for the Portion for some of the younger Brothers, who are styl'd Dukes of Sax-Mers∣burg. The Town at present consists of a great number of old-fashion'd ruinous Houses, and hath nothing con∣siderable in it but the Cathedral. NAƲMBƲRG, a City once Imperial, now subject to the House of Saxony, is seated upon the River Sala, where it receives the Ʋnstrut, 25 miles West from Leipsick, and 15 from Mersburg to the South. It is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburg, and has a Territory of about 20 miles Extent, belonging to it, which was formerly govern'd by its Bishop: But it was yielded to the House of Saxony by the Treaty of Passaw, in 1552. one of which Family is Administrator of the Bishoprick. ALTENBƲRG stands upon the River Pleisse, 24 m. from Leipsick to the South, and 46 from Dresde to the West. It was once an Imperial City, but was taken by Frederick Marquiss of Misnia in 1308. and united to that Dutchy. It has a Castle in which the Dukes of Saxony have some time kept their Palace. HALL, call'd Halla Saxonum, for distinction, a considerable Town, on account of the profitable Salt-Pits near it. It was at first a small Village, and call'd Dobredor, but by reason of the Salt-Pits, encreased much, and obtain'd a Charter in 981. from the Em∣peror Otho II. and got at last to be an Imperial City; but it has been long exempted, and subjected to its own Duke, with a Territory belonging to it; since fallen to the Archbishop of Magdeburg, and so subject to the Elector of Brandenburg. This City is seated on the Bank of the River Sala, 24 miles North-west from Leipsick, on the Side of a pleasant Hill, cover'd with Vines: It is neatly built, and the Inhabitants are civil. The Salt Pits yield a Toll to the Administrator of Magdeburg, of 500 or 600 Crowns a Week. The Principality of ANHALT is bounded on the South by the Counties of Hohenstein and Mansfed, and on the North by the Principality of Halberstadt, and Dutchy of Magdeburg, and is extended from East to West the space of 90 miles, tho' but very narrow: It is subject to its own Prince, who is of a very ancient Family, from which sprung both the Houses of Saxony and Brandenburg. The chief Towns in it are Zerbst, on the Eastern Side of the Elbe, about 20 miles from Magdeburg, and 50 from Leipsick to the North; the Place of the Prince's Residence. Bernburg, a fortified Town, seated on the Banks of the Sala about 8 miles from the Elb. This is another Residence of the Prince's; whose Palace is separated from the Town by the River Sala. In 1636, this Town was taken, and the Garrison put to the Sword by the Elector of Saxony. Dessaw, on the Elb, at the Mouth of the Mulda, a strong fortified Town, pleasantly seated, in a fruitful Country, 8 miles from Zerbst to the South, and 20 from Bernburg to the East; in which also the Prince has a Palace. ERFORT, Erford or Erfurdt, lat. Erfordia, aut Erfurtum, the Capital City of Thuringen, is seated on
the Banks of the River Gere, 60 miles West from Lip∣sick, 60 North from Bamberg and 70 South from Hal∣berstadt. It is a considerable Place, both on account of the Wealth of its Inhabitants and the Beauty of its Publick Edifices, especially the Churches and Abbeys, the stately Castle call'd Ciriaxberg, and a famous Uni∣versity. This City hath a large Territory, wherein stand many Villages, all which were subject to the Archbishop of Mentz, but at the Reformation the In∣habitants imbraced the Protestant Religion, and put the City under the Protection of the Elector of Saxony; which occasioned great Contests between those two Princes: At length the Bishop of Mentz, with the Assistance of the French, took it by Force, and oblig'd the Citizens again to receive his Government. How∣ever, by the Treaty of Leipsick, 17 of the Villages, its dependencies, were granted to the Elector of Saxony, and the City, with the rest of the Villages, are still subject to the Elector of Mentz. Mulhausen is an Imperial City, but under the Protecti∣on of the Elector of Saxony. It stands at the foot of a Mountain, upon the River Ʋnstrut, near 30 miles from Erfurt to the North-west, 20 from Eysenack to the North, and 10 from the River Weser to the East. Weimar, a neat, well-built and a very ancient City, stands 12 miles from Erfurt to the East, in which is a stately Palace, where the Landgrave of Thuringen used to reside. This City gives Title to a Branch of the Family of Saxony. Jena is a handsom City, seated on the River Sala, 25 miles from Erfurt to the East. It is famous for an University, founded her by John Frederick Elector of Saxony, to which was granted many Privileges by the Emperors Charles V. and Ferdinand; it is in a flourishing state, and has bred many eminent Men, particularly J. Lipsius the great Philologer. The Town is well fortified, and stands in a pleasant Vale, in which grows plenty of Vines. Gotha, 16 miles West from Erfurt, the Seat of an∣other Branch of the Saxon Family, who is still Duke of Gotha, and is Lord of this Town, and the Counties of Altenburg, Coburg, Honneburg in Franconia, and Osterland in Upper Saxony. It is a large wall'd Town and has a good Trade in the Plant call'd Woad, which is sowed and dressed here, and exported in great Quan∣tities. Eyesenach or Isenach, Isenacum, a small City, stand∣ing on the River Nesa, near the Borders of Hessen, and distant near 30 miles from Erfurt, and 15 from Gotho to the West. It gives Title to a Duke of the Family of Saxony, and hath an University in it, which was founded 1555. The County of SCHWARTSBƲRG is a Tract of Land, of about 40 miles in length and 25 miles in breadth, and is bounded on the South by Thuringen, on the West by Naumburg, Mersberg and Hall; the chief Town is Sunderhausen, of which, as well as Franken-hausen, Hersingen, Kinderbruch and Keula, the best Towns in this County, there is nothing considerable. The small County of HOHENSTEIM lies North of Schwartsburg: Its chief Town is Northausen, an Imperial City, said to be built in 447. by Meroveus King of France. It stands upon the River Zorge, 40 miles from Erfurt to the North, and is under the Protection of the Duke of Saxony. STOLBERG is a very small County, lying North of Schwartsburg, between Hohensteim to the West, and Mansfeldt to the East. Its chief Town is of the same Name. The County of MANSFELDT is bounded on the West by Stolberg, on the East by the River Sala, on the South by Thuringen, on the North by some part of Anhalt, and about 30 miles in length from North to South, and 15 in breadth. This Country abounds with Mines of several sorts, but particularly of a Mineral, call'd Scheifforstein, which yields much Cop∣per and some Silver. It is possess'd by its Counts, but with some acknowledgment of Homage to the Duke of Saxony. This Family is branched out into several Houses, who have divided the Country among them; by which means they are not now so considerable as they have been. The Chief Town is Eisleben, a small City near the Lake call'd Susse See, 40 miles from Weimar to the North, and 55 miles West from Wittenberg. It has its name from the abundance of Iron-Ore found here∣abouts. In this Town Martin Luther was born, A. D. 1483. and died here Anno 1564. Mansfeldt, whence the County has its Name, is an old and ruinous City, about 5 miles from Eisleben to the North-west. It has a strong Castle on the Top of a Hill, which, being much decayed, was repaired and fortified, A. 1547. SECT. III. The Lower SAXONY. The Lower Saxony comprehends, at present, the Dutchies of Brunswick, Lunenburg and Lawenburg, the Diocess of Hildersheim, the Principalities of Mag∣deburg and Halberstadt, the Dutchies of Bremen, Ferden and Mecklenburg, together with that of Holstein, which partly depends on the Jurisdiction of the King of Denmark. Besides these nine principal Parts of the lower Saxony, there are also many other Sovereign States of a lesser extent, viz. the Dutchies of Hanover, Zell, Got∣tingen, Grebenhagen; the Cities of Hamburg, Lubeck, &c. The whole Country is bounded on the North by the German Ocean, Denmark and the Baltick Sea, on the South by Hessen and the upper Saxony, on the East by Pomerania, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and on the West by Westphalia. It is extended from North to South, for the Space of about 200 miles, and from East to West about 220. The most remark∣able Rivers are, the Elb, the Weser, the Aller, the Hamma, the Ilmenon, the Leme, the Ocker, and the Eld. Every Prince is absolute within his Dominions, and generally assumes a Title from thence, excepting the States of the Dutchies of Bremen and Ferden, whereof the King of Sweden is Administrator; those of the Prin∣cipalities of Magdeburg and Halberstadt, which depend on the jurisdiction of the Elector of Brandenburg, and the free Cities of Hamburg and Lubeck. The Lutheran Religion is generally predominant throughout the Lower Saxony, the Princes, Prelates, and even the Abbess of Queidlinburg, professing it, except the Bishop of Hildesheim and some Abbots and Abbesses that pro∣fess the Romish. Tho' the Air be cold, the Land pro∣duces Corn and Pasture. The Lower Saxony, with its Dependencies, hath these chief Cities and Towns, viz. In the Duke∣dom of Brunswick are, Brunswick, Dutchy. Wolfembuttel, D. Hanover, D. Grubenhagen, D. Blackenburg, C. Reinstein, C. Queidlinburg, Ab. Goslar, Imp. Hamelin, Hans. Eimbeck, Hans. Gottingen, &c. In the Dutchy of Lunenburg, Lunenburg, D. Zell, D. Harburg. Ʋltzen. Walstrode.
In the Bishoprick of Hildesheim, Hildesheim, Peina. The Dutchy of Magdeburg and Principality of Hal∣berstadt are already spoken of, with the Dominions of the Elector of Brandenburg. In the Dutchy of Bremen, Bremen, Staden, Buxtede, Bremerfurt, Ottersberg, Rutzenbuttel. The Principality of Ferden, Ferden, Rodemburg. In the Dutchy of Holstein, Hamburg, Lubeck. The rest is reckon'd part of Denmark. The Dutchy of Lawenburg, Lawenburg, Ratzeburg. The Dutchy of Mecklenburg, Swerin, D. Gustrow, D. Rostock. Wismar, Hans. Mecklenburg. Waren. Plawen, &c. BRƲNSWICK, including the Dutchy of Han∣over, Principality of Grubenhagen and Counties of Black∣enburg and Reinstein, is bounded on the South by Hesse-Cassel, on the West by the River Meser, on the North by Lunenburg; and on the East by Magdeburg: The chief Rivers in it are the Leina and the Ocker, besides the Weser which washes its Borders. This Country was anciently part of the Hercynian Forest, and there still remain great Woods and Parks by which the Inha∣bitants are plentifully furnish'd with Timber and Fuel, and great store of Game. The Corn grows extream high, but there is not a great deal of it, nor is the Country very populous. The Inhabitants are of a large size and very robust, feed course and lodge hard; Swine's Flesh, with Wheat or Rye Bread, is their com∣mon Diet, insomuch that they are, by the other Germans, call'd Bacon-guts. Upon the Division of Saxony before-mentioned, this Country and Lunenburg were left to Henry the Lyon, whose Grandson Otho was created Duke of them by the Emperor Frederick II. A. D. 1235. But he leaving two Sons, these Dutchies were divided A. D. 1264. but upon the failure of Issue, again united in the year 1368. in the Person of Duke Magnus; whose Sons, being ambitious, parted it again. In the year 1491. this Dukedom of Brunswick was divided by the two Brothers Henry and Eric into equal Shares, whereof Henry's part was known by the name of Brunswic-Wolfembuttel. In 1584. Eric's Issue failing, the whole Dukedom was united in the House of Wolfembuttel, and remained so till 1634. that Frederick Ʋlrich dying without Issue, this Dukedom of Brunswick fell to Au∣gustus Duke of Lunenburg, and then the Dutchy of Wolfembuttel descended to the younger House of Lu∣nenburg. The present Duke, Ernest Augustus, is de∣scended from the House of Hanover, and has succeeded to all the Estates of that Dutchy, as well as Lunenburg and Brunswick, and has been lately (Anno 1692) honour'd with the Title of an Elector of the Empire. He was born Anno, 1629. and in 1658. married the Lady Sophia, Sister to our Prince Rupert (being a Pro∣testant) by whom he has had three Sons and a Daugh∣ter. This Family is the only Relict of that famous one of the Guelphs, who were sometime Dukes of Bavaria and Saxony; of the original of which there goes a no∣table Story as follows. Jermintrudis, Countess of Altorf, upbraided a Woman with Adultry, and made her be punished because she had 12 Children at a Birth: It happen'd that shortly after, she her self was deliver'd of the same number, all Sons; at which she was much concern'd, as fearing the same scandal; and therefore (her Husband being then absent) commanded her Nurse to kill 11 of them; who, accordingly, carry∣ing them secretly out in her Apron, was met by the old Count, and asked, what she had there? The Nurse replyed Woelpen, Whelps; he not contented with that Answer examin'd farther, and forc'd her to confess the whole Matter: Upon which he enjoyn'd the Woman secresy, and dispos'd of the Children, and six years after produc'd them all together to his Lady and all their Friends, at a Feast he had made for that purpose, and caused them all to be named Whelps, which after alter'd to Guelphs. BRƲNSWICK was first built by Tanguard and Bruno Dukes of Saxony, A. D. 861. since when it has been often enlarged, and is now one of the most con∣siderable of the Hanse-towns. It is divided into five several Corporations, each of which hath its Court of Judicature, but unite in Matters relating to the com∣mon Interest. It is a rich and populous place, and drives a great Trade in Hides, and Mum, which is brewed here by certain Persons who have the sole Power, and exported to several Countries. Brunswick claims to be a free, Imperial City, and has several times disputed with the Duke, who all a long claim'd the Soveraignty; on which account it has endur'd many Sieges, the last of which was in 1671. when it was taken by the present Duke, who has ever since kept a good Guard, and built a Citadel, and otherwise strongly fortified it, tho' to the Injury of the City; for the Merchants be∣ing displeased, have removed to other places. The Houses are well built and the Town-house is very magnificent: The form of the Town is almost square, the River Ocker running through the middle, and is 2 miles in circuit, and surrounded with 2 Walls and 2 Ditches. It is seated in a Plain, near the Northern Bounds of the Country, and is distant 100 miles from Erfurdt, and 40 from Halberstadt to the North, 70 from the River Elb, and 26 from Zell to the South, 60 from the Weser to the East, and 60 from Magdeburg to the West. WOLFENBƲTTEL stands upon the Ocker, but 10 miles from Brswick to the South. It is the ancient Seats of the Dukes of Brunswick. It is divid∣ed into two parts, viz. Arx Guelpica, the Duke's Pa∣lace, and Henrich Stadt, the Town. In the Palace is a Library exceeding well furnished with valuable Books, founded by the late Duke Augustus; in the Town, the new Church is remarkable, being an ad∣mirable piece of Architecture, and in it are buried 21 Dukes and Dutchesses of Brunswick. It is defended with strong and impregnable Fortifications, and secu∣red by marshy Grounds. HANOVER, Hannovora, call'd anciently Lawen∣roda, and Han-over, from a Ferry over the River Leina on which it stands, 35 miles from Brunswick to the West, and 28 from Zell to the South. It is a strong and populous City, once Imperial, but has long been subject to its Prince. The Inhabitants are much En∣riched by four yearly Fairs held here: It is the Capital of the Territory of Culenberg. Gottingen, a City seated on the River Leina near the Confines of Hesse, 10 miles from the Weser, 60 miles from Hanover to the South, and 20 from Cassel to the North-east. Hamelen, seated on the River Weser over which it hath a Bridge at the mouth of the Hamel, is a strong, fortified and well-garison'd Town, being near the Con∣fines
of Brunswick toward Westphalia, and call'd the Key of this Duke's Dominions; it is distant 45 miles from Gottingen to the North, and near 30 from Ha∣nover to the South. There is a Story of a strange Ac∣cident that, they say, happen'd in this Town on the 26th of June, 1284, of a Piper that undertook to rid them of Rats, with which they were very much an∣noy'd, which he did, it seems, by the power of his Musick; for, at the sound of his Tabret and Pipe, all the Rats follow'd him out of the Town to the River, where they were drown'd. When he had done his Work he return'd for his Pay, which the Towns-men refused him, pretending it was too much for so little Work: Upon which he went away in a great Rage; and a Year after came again, and playing as before, all the Children follow'd him into the mouth of a Cave, on the top of a neighbouring Hill, and neither Piper nor Children were ever after heard of. This Story the Towns-men relate with great confidence, and there is still to be seen, near this Cave's mouth, a Monument of Stone, with an Inscription expressing the loss of 130 Children, swallow'd quick in that Cave. Grubenhagen, a Castle near the River Leina, and about 12 miles from Gottingen to the North, has a Territory belonging to it which is a Dukedom, but subject to the Duke of Brunswick; it is very woody, having been part of the Hercynian Forest, and abounds with Pine and Fir-trees. In this Province are rich Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead, and many sorts of Minerals. These Mines were first discover'd in the year 972, as the Germans relate, by a Hunter, who, having ty'd his Horse to a Bush and gone a little from him, at his return found a piece of Ore beat out of the Ground with his Hoof; this Hunter's name was Ramme, whence the Mountain in which this Mine is, was call'd Ramelsberg. In 1045, other Mines were also discovered in the neighbouring Hills; and here are now many Towns inhabited only by Miners. The chief Town of this Dutchy is Eimbeck, seated at the confluence of several small Rivulets, which a little lower fall into the Leina; it is distant 20 miles from Gottingen. Helmstadt, a City built by Charles the Great, Anno 782, seated near the borders of Magdeburg, and 24 miles from Wolfembuttel to the East, wherein is an University founded by Julius Duke of Brunswick-Wol∣fembuttel, A. 1576, which is endow'd with large Privileges; particularly that its Rector should for ever have the Title and Dignity of Count Palatine, and has bred many eminent Men, particularly J. Hor∣stius, Meibomnius, Reineccius, Conringius, &c. Gostar stands upon the River Gosa, which falls into the Ocker near the Confines of Hildesheim, and is 40 miles distant from Gottingen to the North, and 25 from Brunswick to the South; it is a free and imperial City enjoying large Privileges. The Origine of this City was a Palace built by the Emperor Henry I. The Trade of it is in cleansing, tempering and vending all sorts of Metals and Minerals dug in the neighbouring Countries. The Counties of BLACKENBƲRG, REIN∣STEIN and QƲEIDLINBƲRG, (together with Hohenstein, Stolberg and Schwartzburg in the Up∣per Saxony, already described) were formerly one Province, and call'd Hartingow. It is a cold Country, and has Mountains, on which Snow lies till Midsum∣mer; affords little Corn, but the Valleys are fill'd with Cattel and the Forests with Venison. The In∣habitants are thought the longest Livers in Germany, frequently arriving to the Age of 100 or 110 years. They have Mines of Iron in the Bowels of the Moun∣tains, of which one here call'd Brocken or Brocksberg, is esteem'd the highest in Germany. Betwixt Blackenburg and Elbingrode is a remarkable Cave, call'd Buman's Hole, of which none can find the end, tho' many have travell'd very far in it. Large Bones are frequently found in it, and not many years since a Skeleton of a Man of prodigious Bulk was brought out among other Rarities. There goes a Story of a young Fellow, that seeking after his Cattel in this Cave lost his way, and wandering 8 days to∣gether in it, at his return his Hair was chang'd grey, and he told strange Stories of Spirits and Apparitions that he said he had met within it. Here are two great craggy Rocks not far from Blackenburg, which natu∣rally represent two Monks in their proper Habit, as exact as if they were carv'd out. Blackenburg and Reinstein, are two small Counties which lie betwixt Halberstadt and Anhalt. They both receive their names from Castles, of which that of Blackenburg stands 36 miles from Wolfembuttel to the South, and 25 miles from Mansfeld to the North, and is the Hunting-seat of the Duke of Wolfembuttel. That of Reinstein is old and not considerable: Many other Castles hewn out of Rocks are to be found in these Countries, but are not regarded. Queidlinburg, a small City, formerly a Hanse-town, now not considerable but for a Lutheran Nunnery, the Abbess whereof is of the House of Austria, and Lady of the City and a small Territory belonging to it. It is distant 8 miles from Blackenburg to the East, and 10 from Halberstadt to the South. The Bishoprick of HIDELSHEIM lying be∣tween the two Rivers Leina and Ocker, is surrounded with the Territories of the Duke of Brunswick, and therefore much in his power, tho' properly under the Elector of Cologn as Administrator of Hidelsheim, to whom it was restor'd by the Treaty of Brunswick, A. D. 1653, having been for many years before in the hands of the Duke of Brunswick. His Suffragan the Bishop, is the immediate Governor of this Country, and Pro∣tector of the City of Hidelsheim, which is a Hanse-town, and considerable on account of the great Trade in Corn, which they maintain. The Buildings are old and venerable, but neat enough: The Inhabitants are most of them Lutherans, tho' the Bishop be of the Ro∣mish Church, and the only one in Brunswick. It is distant 15 miles from Hanover to the South-east, 50 from Gottingen to the North, 30 from Zell to the South, and 25 from Brunswick to the South-west. Peina, a small City, stands on the River Fuse, a∣bout 12 miles from Brunswick to the West, and has a strong Castle, the Bulwark of this Bishoprick, on a Hill; a remarkable Battel was fought near it in 1553, between Maurice Elector of Saxony and Albert Mar∣quess of Brandenburg, in which the former lost his life. The Dukedom of LUNENBURG. Is bounded on the S. with Brunswick, on the N. with the River Elb, on the E. with Brandenburg, and on the West with the Dutchy of Bremen and County of Hoye; it is full of large Woods and Forests, which abound with Deer and other Game; other parts of the Coun∣try are Heath, barren and desart Lands of vast extent. The Inhabitants are the most rustical of all Germany. The Government of the Dutchy of Lunenburg, as has been already said in the description of Brunswick, hath been all along enjoy'd by the Descendants of Henry the Lyon, and is at present united with that of Brunswick, under the Illustrious Prince Ernest Augustus, Duke and Elector of Hanover, Brunswick and Lunenburg. LƲNENBƲRG or Luneburg, Luneburgum, a Hanse-town, and the principal City of this Sovereign Dutchy, is seated on the River Ilmenow, at the distance
of 8 miles from the Elb, and 35 from Lubeck to the South, 60 from Brunswick to the North, and 30 from Hamburg to the East. It is a fair City, of an oblong Form, and about two miles in Circumference; the Streets are broad, and the Houses well built. The Town-hall is a handsom Building, over against which stands the Duke's Palace; the Bridge over the River is a very stately one. There are famous Salt-springs near the Town, out of which great store of Salt is made, and affords the Inhabitants a considerable Trade. The Castle that stands on an adjacent Mountain, call'd Kalchberg, they say is 124 years older than the City, which was built by Henry the Lyon, in 1190. ZELL, the Capital of a Dutchy possessed by a Branch of the Family of Lunenburg, is seated on the River Aller, where the Fuhse falls into it, 35 miles South from Lunenburg, 28 North from Hanover, and 29 North-east from Brunswick. The Duke's Palace is a square Building, adorn'd with very pleasant Gar∣dens, Orchards and Grotto's. It is moted round, and was built A. D. 1485. In it are held the chief Courts of Judicature. Bardewck, but five miles distant from Lunenburg to the North, was anciently a strong and very populous City, but now a poor Village only. The Cathedral Church is the only one now left of 9 that were for∣merly in this Town, in which is still a College of 8 Residentiary Canons. Harburg is a strong Town upon the Elb, 30 miles West from Lunenburg; it has a Castle, and is the strongest Frontier of this Country: The Town is but thinly inhabited, and not considerable. Ʋltzen a little neat Town, in the midway between Lunenburg and Zell, was formerly call'd Lawenwald, and had this name of Ʋltzen from a Monastery in the neighbourhood call'd Olden Stadt. In the year 1646, it was destroy'd by Fire, but is the greatest part re∣built more splendid than formerly. The Inhabitants pretend, That the English Saxons went from hence, and that a Ship of Tin gilt, that was to be seen in the Market-place before the Fire, was hung up in remem∣brance of it, by some of them that return'd. Walstrode, at first only a Monastery, built by one Walo Prince of Anhalt, A. 986, but now a consider∣able Town, driving a good Trade in Hony, Wax, Wool and Beer; it stands in a pleasant Valley encom∣pass'd with Mountains and Woods, 25 miles from Zell to the East, near the Borders of Ferden, The Counties of Hoey and Diepholt, already de∣scribed, are subject to the Duke of Lunenburg. The Dukedoms of BREMEN and FERDEN. Eastward from Lunenburg, and between the Rivers Elb and Weser, lies the Dutchy of Bremen, which was formerly an Archbishoprick, and the whole Country subject to its Prelate, till about the year 1644, this Country was conquer'd by the Sweed, and by the Treaty of Munster the Archbishoprick of Bremen, with the Bishoprick of Ferden, were granted to that King, and turn'd into a Dukedom: But tho' this is spoken of the Country in general, it is not meant of every part of it; for the City of Bremen is free and has a Territory of its own, the Citizens of Hamburg have the two Forts of Ritzenbuttel and New-Werck, and a part of it belongs to the Dutchy of Sax-Lawenburg; as will be seen more particularly in our Description. The Soil of this Country is in the middle Parts sandy and barren Heath, but the outer part towards the two Rivers is very fertil and abounds with plea∣sant Fields and Meadows. The Inhabitants are reckon'd as good Soldiers as any in Germany; and 'tis said of the Wustlanders, the Inhabitants of that part of the Country that lies to the Sea-side, that they will Fight and Drink with the best Men in Germany. BREMEN, Brema & Bremensis Civitas, which gives name to this Dukedom, is a very considerable, large and well-built City, seated in a fruitful Plain on the Banks of the Weser, 70 miles from Zell to the West, and 60 from Embden to the East, 90 from Munster to the North, and 60 from Hamburg to the South-west. It is very strong, for besides the Walls and Castle the situation affords them a good Defence, the low Grounds about it being easily overflowed from the Weser. It is a free, imperial City, and reckon'd the third of the Hanse-towns. Charles the Great founded the Archbishoprick, and made it the Metropolis of the North. The Emperor Henry V. A. 1111, granted the Citizens great Privileges in reward of their valiant Performances in the Holy War. It receiv'd the Re∣formation in 1552, and zealously defended it against their Archbishop. Upon which account it was besieg∣ed by order of the Emperor Charles V. in the year 1547, but the Citizens so valiantly defended them∣selves, that Goenghen Governor of Zeeland, who com∣manded in chief, was kill'd, and the Duke of Bruns∣wick, who succeeded him, was forc'd at last to raise the Siege, after near a year's labour in vain. It is go∣vern'd by four Burgo-Masters and 24 Common-Coun∣cil-men, who also judge all Law-suits between the Citizens. The River Weser divides it into two parrs, of which that on the North-side is the Old City, and the other is call'd the New; these are join'd again by Wooden Bridges, the biggest of which has a curious Engine on it that raises the Water, and distributes it all over the Town. The Streets of the old Town are large and center in the Market-place, wherein stands an old Image of Gigantick Bulk, call'd Statua Rolan∣dina, on which is an ancient Inscription importing it to be a Testimonial of the Liberty granted by Charles the Great and other Emperors, to this City. These Statues have been set up in many Cities, and by the Germans (tho' with little reason) said to be the Image of a certain General nam'd Roland, employ'd by Charles the Great in the Conquest of these Countries; in whose Honour he order'd these Statues to be set up, and made the condition of their Tenure of certain Privile∣ges. In the old Town stands also the Town-house and the ancient Cathedral Church dedicated to S. John, wherein they shew the Tomb, as they say, of Willi∣bald an English Priest, who was sent over into Germa∣ny by Egbert Archbishop of York, at the request of Charles the Great, to convert these Infidels; who after he had labour'd many years with great success, was made the first Archbishop of this See, and died A. D. 790. In the new Town are the Arsenal and the Gym∣nasium or small University, at first a Free-School, built soon after the Reformation, and endow'd by the Ci∣tizens; which encreasing by degrees, is now a noted University, and has educated several famous Men, particularly Chytraeus, Pezelius, Pierius, Mat. Marti∣nius and Jo. Cocceius. This City, by means of the River, is much frequented with Merchant Ships from Holland and other Nations, by which they export their own Commodities, Corn, Minerals, Wool, Timber, Fish, Leather, &c. and receive those of other Coun∣tries, which they, by the same River, transmit to the other Provinces of Germany. The Territory of this City extends about 8 or 10 miles round. Stade, the next considerable City in this Dukedom, is situated on the River Zwinga near the Elb, in a fruitful Country and wholesom Air, about 50 miles
from Bremen to the North, and 25 from Hamburg to the West. It is a very strong Place, being fortified with vast Ramparts, Bulwarks and a strong Castle: It has a commodious Haven, into which larger Ships can enter than are able to get up to Hamburg. This City hath been endow'd with great Privileges; parti∣cularly it was an Asylum, or place of Refuge for all Offenders, and had a right to demand a Toll of Ships passing up the Elb; besides, it is a Hanse-town: By all which means, no wonder it was once rich and po∣pulous. But it seems Hamburg out-stript it, and this place became so poor that they were forc'd to sell its great Privileges to that City, and put themselves un∣der the Protection of the Archbishop of Bremen, and it is now subject to the King of Sweden. It was anciently the Capital of a County subject to its own Earl, which was annex'd to the Archbishoprick by Philip Duke of Schwaben and Earl of Stade, about the year 1240. After its decay above-mentioned, our English Mer∣chants, upon some Abuse offer'd them at Hamburg, re∣mov'd hither; which reviv'd its Trade, and in a little time made it again rich and populous, and it is at pre∣sent in good condition. The Town is well built, and the Market-place, Town-hall and Churches, are worth a Traveller's sight. Buxtehude, another Hanse-town, is seated on the River Essa near the Elb, in a very fruitful and pleasant Country, 15 miles from Stade to the West, and as many from Hamburg to the East. It is a Granary to Hamburg, that City receiving a great part of its Pro∣visions from this. Bremerfurde, a wall'd Town, on the Road betwixt Bremen and Stade, being distant 25 miles to the North from the first, and 15 to the South from the latter. It was once the Palace of the Archbishop, and has a Ca∣stle, wherein, because it commands the neighbouring Plains, the Sweeds keep a good Garison. The Town is otherwise not considerable, having little or no Trade. Ottersberg, a small fortified Town defended by a strong Castle, which was for sometime the place of Residence of the Archbishop, stands 16 miles from Bre∣men to the East. Rutzenbuttel is a strong Fort at the mouth of the Elb, 32 miles to the North-west from Stade, and not 10 miles from the utmost point of Land of this Coun∣try. It belongs to the Hamburghers, who have also another small Fort near it call'd New-Werck, and a small Territory round them. The Duke of Sax-Lawenburg is Lord of that part of this Country call'd Hadelland, which is the most North-east part of it, but contains nothing considerable e∣nough to deserve a particular Description. The extent of it the Reader may judge by the Map, when he knows that Nuhenbuys on the Elb, and Carlsladt on the Weser, belong to the Sweed. Hadler, which gives name to the Country, and Ottersdorp, are the two best Towns in it. The Principality of FERDEN or VERDEN, formerly a Bishoprick, and now subject to the Sweed, as abovesaid, is situate next to Lunenburg, and bound∣ed on the West by the Weser; it was made a Bishop∣rick by Charles the Great. The chief Town of the same name stands upon the River Aller, which falls into the Weser, and is distant 42 miles from Zell to the West, and 27 from Bremen to the East. It is sup∣plied with all Foreign Commodities by Barges from Bremen: The City has nothing very considerable in it. It has been several times taken, viz. by Count Tilly, in 1626, by the Imperialists, in 1631. In 1676, it was seized by the Duke of Lunenburg, but restor'd to the Sweed, in 1629, to whom it still remains. Rotenberg, a small City on the River Wein, stands in the Bounds of this Principality and near the bor∣ders of it, 15 miles from Ferden to the North. It was at first the Bishop's. Palace, which was fortified in the year 1500, and the small Village near it wall'd in and made a City; which since is considerably encreas'd and grown a place of some Trade and well inhabited. The Cities of HAMBURG and LUBECK. HAMBƲRG, that flourishing rich and popu∣lous City, is seated on the North-side of the River Elb, at the distance of 40 miles from Lubeck to the South-west, and 65 from Bremen to the North-east, 30 from Lunenburg to the North-west, 60 from Zell to the North, and 72 from the mouth of the Elb; which River makes it a most commodious Haven, being so deep that Ships of very great Burden can come up to the very Walls of the Town, and the Tide flows up 16 miles above it. It is the chief Port and hath been long the greatest Mart-town of Germany: The Haven is continually full of Ships, and the Ex∣change daily crowded with Merchants. The Town is divided into two parts, the Old and the New, but both close together and parted only by a Wall, and both well fortified. The Buildings are of Brick, and exceeding high and stately; the chief Church, for∣merly a Cathedral, is dedicated to S. Peter, and was built about 830. Several of the Earls of Holstein and Schawenburg lie buried in it. In S. Catherine's Church is a Pulpit of white Marble curiously carved, and adorn'd with Figures of Alabaster and Ornaments of Gold. The Poor and Sick are extraordinarily well provided for in Hamberg, by the many Hospitals liberally endow'd, of which there are no less than 6, for the maintaining old, decrepit, poor People; for curing the Sick, for educating poor Children, to re∣ceive poor Strangers fallen sick in Travelling, and for the maintenance of maimed Seamen: Besides which, care is taken of the Widows and Children of those that lose their Lives in the service of the Publick. The Trade of the City consists in all manner of Foreign Goods, as well as those of the product of Germany, the former being receiv'd by Ships from all parts of the World, and from hence convey'd up the Elb to the heart of Germany; and the Commodities of the several parts of the Empire return'd by the same River, and transported to other Nations, to the great Profit of the Inhabitants who are the Managers of this vast Traffick. Our English Merchants hav∣ing brought great Profit to this City, are treated with great Civility and Respect, and have the Privilege of trying and deciding Controversies among themselves, before their own Resident; and are permitted the free Exercise of their Religion, which is denied to other Nations, The Inhabitants, being Lutherans, forbid the exercise of the Romish Religion. This rich and powerful City is a free and imperial State, and independent of any Power but the Empe∣ror's, to whom they pay a small Homage. They en∣act Laws, punish Criminals even to death, levy Tax∣es, make League and War as they please, by a Grant of the Emperor Frederick I. and confirm'd by Ferdi∣nand II. The Citizens of Hamburg are exempted from all Tolls and Customs upon the Elb, betwixt their own City and the Ocean; notwithstanding which, the King of Denmark has sometimes compell'd their Ships to pay a Toll at his Castle of Gluckstadt, which occasion'd great Contests. This was made up in the year 1645. and the Hamburgers permitted to re-assume their ancient Privileges, upon the payment of 120000 Rix Dollers to that King. The Government of this City is in its own Magi∣strates, who are 4 Burgomasters, 20 Schepins or Alder∣men,
and 12 Common-council, call'd die Oberalten, or chief Elders. These, upon extraordinary Occasi∣ons call to their Assistance 60 more, eminent Citizens call'd, The Elders of the City; and if it be too difficult a matter for them to determine, the whole Common∣ality of Freemen are assembled. This City is able to arm 15000 Men. It was taken by Woldemar Duke of Sleswick about the year 1200. who gave it Albrecht Earl of Orlimund, of whom the Citizens bought their Liber∣ty, and so became a free State; which was several times confirm'd by the Earls of Holstein and Scha∣wenburg, his Posterity, to the last of that Family, who died A. 1459. after which, the Province of Hol∣stein falling into the Hands of Christian I. King of Denmark, the Hamburgers contracted a League of Friendship with that Prince, whose Successors have often endeavour'd to have the Protection of this City, but could never obtain it. In the year 1510. the City of Hamburg was declared free and Imperial by the Emperor Maximilian in the Diet, and the Duke of Holstein summon'd to make good his Pretensions to it, or renounce them for ever. In fine, the City has to this day preserv'd its Freedom, which it has been the better able to do, by reason of the continual Jea∣lousies between the two Northern Crowns; for the Sweed being Master of the South-side of the Elb, as the Dane is of the North, what mischief this does them from Gluckstadt, will be reveng'd by the other from Stade. However, the Dane has several times fleec'd them; in the year 1679, he got 220000 Rix Dollars of them, to take them again into his Favour, as 'twas term'd in the Treaty; and in the year 1686. he again brought an Army and besieg'd it, but was bought off. LƲBECK, Lubeca & Lubecum, an Imperial City and the Capital of all the Hanse-towns, is con∣veniently seated near the Sea and on the Banks of the Travo, which having receiv'd the Waters of a lesser River into its Channel, form a kind of Marsh round about the Walls, and passing through the City con∣veys Vessels of as large size as any that sail upon the Baltick, up to the Town, which, by that means, is a place of great Traffick. It was heretofore only a small Town, built by Adolphus Count of Holstein, under the Reign of the Emperor Conrad III, from whom it was taken by Henry the Lyon Duke of Sa∣xony, afterwards conquer'd by Waldemar Duke of Sleswick; but being ill treated by the Danes, the Citizens expell'd them, and put themselvs under the Protection of the Emperor Frederick II. who consti∣tuted it an imperial and free City, A. 1209. and it is at present one of the principal ones of Germany. It is distant 10 miles from the Coasts of the Baltick Sea, 37 from Hamburg to the North-east, and as many from Wismer to the West. The Streets are very fair and adorn'd with divers magnificent Buildings, the chief whereof are the Cathedral dedicated to S. John, the Collegiate Churches of the Virgin Mary, S. James. S. Peter, &c. It's Episcopal See under the Me∣tropolitan of Bremen, was translated hither from Ol∣denburg, A. D. 1162. but the Bishops have been Pro∣testants ever since the year 1561. when the Reformed Religion was introduc'd here by Dietlerus of Reventlon, and a Custom hath prevail'd, That the Administration of the Bishoprick of Lubeck should devolve as an Ap∣penage or Inheritance on the younger Sons of the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, the shadow of an Election being on∣ly left to the Chapter, whence they are stiled Dukes of Eutym, from a Town about 4 miles from hence so called, wherein this Prelate usually Resides, and which was annexed to the Episcopal See by Adolphus II. Count of Holstein, when it as yet retain'd the name of Oldenburg. The City is Govern'd by twelve Burgo∣masters, who are Civilians and Gentlemen. The Common-Council are compos'd of Lawyers and Mer∣chants, Mechanicks being excluded. A remarkable Treaty of Peace was concluded at Lubeck, be∣tween the Emperor and the King of Denmark, A. D. 1629. The Dutchy of LAWENBƲRG lyes on the Banks of the Elb, between the Dukedoms of Holstein, Mecklenburg and Lunenburg, and is subject to its own Duke, who is of the Family of the ancient Dukes of Saxony. The chief Town of the same name, is seat∣ed on the River Elb, 25 miles from Lubeck to the South, 35 from Hamburg to the East, and 15 from Lunenburg to the North. It is said to have been built by Henry the Lyon, Duke of Saxony, and thence call'd Leobur∣gum; but in the Wars against that Prince it being much damaged, Bernard of Anhalt who succeeded him, reedified, enlarged and strengthned it, and gave it to John his Second Son, with this Dutchy; from whence the last Duke of Sax-Lawenburg was descend∣ed, who dying in the year 1692, and leaving no Issue Male, the Succession to this Dutchy hath been claim'd by the Elector of Saxony and other Princes. Ratzeburg, seated on a Lake of the same name, 15 miles from Lawenburg to the North, and 12 from Lu∣beck to the South, is the See of a Bishop, under the Archbishop of Bremen, planted by Henry the Lyon, when he conquer'd these parts. It was subject to its Bishop before the Treaty of Westphalia, A. D. 1648, by which the Jurisdiction of it was divided between the Dukes of Mecklenburg and Lawenburg, the Town being given to the former, and the Castle to the latter. This Town receiv'd the Augustan Confession, A. 1566. It is the Capital of a Country of the same name, and the ancient Burial-place of the Dukes. To this Duke, as hath been already said, some part of the Dukedom of Bremen is subject, as are also Frankenhausen, Sassenhausen, and some other Towns on the Elb. The Dukedom of MECKLENBURG. The Dukedom of Mecklenburg is situate between the Dutchies of Holstein and Sax-Lawenburg to the West, the Baltick Sea to the North, Pomerain to the East, and Brandenburg to the South. It is a Country rea∣sonably large, and stor'd with Corn, Fruits, Fish and Fowl, but in an unpleasant Air, being not wholsom in the Summer, and extream Cold in the Winter: The ancient Inhabitants were the Vandals. At present the Country is divided between the two Dukes of Swerin and Gustrow. This Division was made in the year 1592, for the sakes of the two Sons of John III. the Eldest seated in Swerin, and the Youngest Gustrow. Swerin, seated upon a Lake of the same name, is distant 40 miles from the River Elb to the North, 20 from the Baltick Sea to the South, and 35 from Lubeck to the East: It was built by Henry the Lyon, A. D. 1163, who bestow'd it on Guntzel one of his Generals, with the Lordships belonging thereto, and made him Earl of Swerin, but his Family ending in 1355, it was annex'd to Mecklenburg. The Bishop's See which had before been at Mecklenburg, was about the year 1260 remov'd to this City, at the request of Henry, who built the Cathedral and Library and endow'd it, since which time there was a continual Succession till the Treaty of Munster, when the Bishoprick was Secu∣lariz'd. In this City the Duke of Mecklenburg Swerin keeps his usual Residence. Mecklenburg is at present a small inconsiderable Village near Wismar, tho' anciently a large City, and gave name to this Dukedom. There are some little
remains of Ruins to be seen for some miles round. Gustrow, the place of Residence of the Duke of Mecklenburg Gustrow, is a strong well fortified Town, and stands 35 miles from Swerin to the East, and 18 from Rostock to the South. Rostock a Free Imperial City and Hanse-Town, but under the Protection of the Duke of Mecklenburg, is seated on the River Warna, which 8 miles below it falls into the Baltick Sea, and makes it a reasonable good Port, which was well frequented by Merchants Ships, but since the Treaty of Munster the Sweeds have built a Fort at the mouth of the River, and exact a Toll on all Ships that pass by, to the great decay of the Trade of this Town. An University was found∣ed here by the Dukes of Mecklenburg, Anno 1419, which is now one of the most flourishing in Germany. It stands 16 miles from Gustrow to the North, and 36 from Wismar to the East. Wismar, a Hanse-Town, is seated at the bottom of a Bay of the Baltick Sea, 12 miles from Swerin to the North. Henry de Mecklenburg about the year 1266, establish'd the same manner of Government here as was at Lubeck, by which it quickly grew rich, and the Ha∣ven being convenient, it was made the Harbour of the Men of War belonging to the Hanseatick Society, and the Town very strongly fortified. This City was grant∣ed to the Sweed by the Treaty of Munster, and was ta∣ken from him by the Dane in 1675. By the last Treaty of Peace between those two Princes, it was agreed to be deliver'd to the Sweed upon payment of certain sums of Mony, which it seems are not yet paid, for the Town still remains in the hands of the King of Denmark. CHAP. XIII. The Circle of WESTPHALIA. THIS Circle lies on the West-side of the River Weser, from the German Ocean on the North, to the Province of Hessen on the South, and between the Lower Saxony on the East, and the Netherlands on the West. The utmost extent of it may be reckon'd about 200 miles from North to South, and from East to West, in some parts 100, in others 150 miles; which extent comprehends many Sovereignties, viz. The Principality of East Friezland, and Bishopricks of Munster, Osnabrug and Paderborn; the Dutchies of Cleeve and Juliers, with several smaller States, as is more particularly express'd in the Table annex'd. It was anciently inhabited by the Saxons, and by them call'd Westvelden, from its situation on the West∣side of the Weser, as the Country on the other side was call'd Oost-velden: From hence, some affirm, the Saxons came that Invaded England, and many Argu∣ments not altogether improbable, have been made by some Learned Germans to prove it. But since Mr. Camden, who was so indefatigable an Enquirer into and so excellent a Judge of Antiquity, enclines to the common Opinion, that they came from the most Nor∣thern part of Saxony, it is most reasonable to be con∣cluded by him, and reject the Arguments of others, how plausible soever they may seem. When Charles the Great had conquer'd the Saxons, and planted Christianity among them, he erected se∣veral Bishopricks, to which he gave Lands for their support. In the part we are speaking of, we find three very considerable ones, besides that of Liege, who have Sovereign Princes; they were not made altogether so potent in his time, but encreas'd their Dominions at the general Partition that was made of the great Duke∣dom of Saxony, when Henry the Lyon was Proscrib'd; 'twas then that the Bishop of Munster enlarg'd his Country, and that the Archbishop of Cologn obtain'd that part of Westphalia which he still holds, and by that part of it stiles himself Duke of Westphalia. The other Sovereignties are the County of East Friezland, the County of Oldenburg, the Principality of Minden, the Counties of Hoye, Lippe, Ravensberg, &c. together with the Dutchy of Cleeve Juliers and Berg, all which have been erected at several times, upon several occasions, which we have not room here particularly to shew. The Air, especially in the Northern part is very Cold, and great part of the Ground is Marshy, or Bar∣ren; however Corn and Pasture is produc'd in plenty; but the Fruit is very ordinary, and serves chiefly to feed the Hogs, whereof this Country hath good store, and of an excellent Kind; so that the Bacon which they send abroad, is very much esteem'd. The chief Rivers are the Weser, the Eems, the Lippe, the Roer, the Aa, &c. The Accommodations a Traveller may meet with here, is prettily enough express'd in this Distick, very common in Germany, viz. Hospitium Vile Groof Broot, dun Bier, lange Milen Sunt in Westphalia: Qui non vult credere Loop daer. That is, Who Travels in Westphalia's sure to find, Long Miles, small Beer, course Bread and Lodging vile. The Circle of Westphalia is thus divided, The Bishoprick of Munster, wherein the chief Towns are Munster, Kloppenberg, Vecht, Meppen, Tilligt, Koesfeldt, The Dutchy of Westphalia, subject to the Elector of Cologn. See the Division of it in the account of the Dominions of that Prince. The Bishoprick of Osna∣brug. Osnabrug, Iburg. The Bishoprick of Paderborn, Paderborn, Lippesburg, Warburgh. The Abbey of Corbey, Hoxter. County of East Friezland, Embden, Norden, Aurich, Esens, Jever. The County of Oldenburg, Oldenburg. The Principality of Min∣den, Minden, Petershagen, C. The County of Bentham, Bentham.
The Dukedom of Cleeve, Cleeve, Embrick, Rees, Wesel, Genep, Duysburg, &c. Orsoy, Caliar, Santen, Meurs, C. The Dutchy of Juliers, Juliers, or Gulick, Aken, or Aix la Chapelle, Duren. The Dutchy of Berg, Duseldorp. The County of Mark, Dortmund, Ʋnna, Ham, Soest. The County of Lippe, Lippe, Dithmold, Horn, Lemgow. The County of Ravensburg, Ravensburg, Hervoden, Bilevelt. The County of Schaumberg, Schaumberg, Saxenhagen, Buckenburg, Oldendorp. The Counties of Hoye, Diepholt, Lingen, Delmenhorst, Tecklenburg, Steinfurt, Ravestein. The BISHOPRICK of MƲNSTER is stretched out on both sides the River Eems, from the Borders of the County of Emden on the North. to the Dutchy of Cleeve, County of Mark and Dutchy of Westphalia on the South, being in length near 100 miles. On the East is bounded by the Counties of Delmenhorst, & Diepholt, the Bishopricks of Osnabrug and Paderborn, and the Counties of Ravensburg and Lippe. On the West it hath the Province of Overissel, the County of Benthem, and the County of Zutphen,, containing in breadth in some parts 60, in others 40, and in some parts not above 20 miles. This Province is entirely subject to the Bishop, who is a Count of the Empire, and a powerful Prince, being able to maintain an Army of 15000 Men. The chief Cities and Towns in his Dominions are these, viz. MƲNSTER, Monasterium, olim Miningroda, which is reckon'd the Capital of the Circle of West∣phalia, takes its name from a Monastery built here by Charles the Great. It is pleasantly situated in a large Plain, on the Banks of the River Aa, which falls into the Eems, a little below the Town. This was an Im∣perial City and Hans-Town, but hath been subject to the Bishop since 1661, It is adorn'd with a stately Cathedral, a Colledge belonging to the Jesuits, and other fair Buildings; and is Fortified with a strong Castle and regular Out-works. An Insurrection of the Anabaptists here in the last Age was very remrak∣able, for these furious Enthusiasticks under the Con∣duct of a Sanctified Taylor, call'd John of Leyden, seized the City, turn'd out the Magistrates, and Lorded it at pleasure for a Year's time: But at last their doughty Prince was taken Prisoner, and duly re∣warded with a publick Execution, whereby the pub∣lick Peace was restor'd in the Year 1534. And in this Age, this City hath been made famous by a memor∣able Treaty in it held, and a Peace concluded between the Emperor and Princes of Germany, which put an end to the Civil War first began between the Emperor and the Elector Palatine, but had at last engag'd most of the Princes, and miserably harras'd all Germany, from about the year 1618, till 1648. in which year this Westphalian Peace was made. Munster stands 90 miles South from the German Ocean, 60 miles West from the River Weser, as many East from the Rhine, and 120 North from the Maine, in the Lat. of 52 deg and Longit. 27 deg. Kloppenburg stands at the head of the little River Soeste, near the borders of the County of Oldenburg, 65 miles North from Munster. It is a strong Forti∣fied Town, but was taken by the Sweeds in 1635, and recover'd soon after by the Bishop, to whom it is still subject. Vecht, the Capital of a small Barony, formerly go∣vern'd by its own Lord, stands near the borders of the County of Deipholt, 15 miles South-east from Klop∣penburg. Meppen, a strong fortified Town, stands on the River Hase, where it falls into the Embs, 25 miles South-east from Kloppenburg. It was taken by the Dutch in 1587, but regain'd, and since together with Kloppen∣burg, and another Fort call'd Haselunnen, made over to the Bishop of Munster, by the Counts of Tecklenburg, to whom they then belonged. Tilligt, which stands near the Embs, 10 miles West from Munster, was made famous by a Convention of the States of Muste, held in it, in 1532. Koelsfeldt  all Hanse-Town on the River Ber∣kel, 20 miles  from Munster. The Count of Embden, Emmerlandt, or EAST-FRIESLAND, is bounded on the North and East by the German Ocean, on the West by the County of Oldenburg, and on the South by the Bishoprick of Mun∣ster. This was part of the Kingdom of the ancient Fri∣sons; but this part was made a Province of Germany by Charles the Great, and in 1453, Ʋlrick the Gover∣nor of it was made Count, and his Family have since been Princes of it to the present Count Christian Everard. EMBDEN, Embda, Amasia aut Amisia, the Ca∣pital of East Friezland, is seated near the mouth of the River Embs, and on the Bay call'd Dollaert, at the distance of 25 miles from Groningen to the East, 60 from Bremen to the West, and 100 from Munster to the North. It hath a very convenient and deep Haven, and the People are of an industrious nature, it is there∣fore a place of good Trade, and much resorted to by Merchants Ships from Foreign parts: Our Merchants upon their removal from Antwerp, brought hither the Staple, or chief Ware-house for English Cloth, but be∣ing ill-us'd, remov'd it to Hamburg. The Houses here are generally well-built, and the Stadthuys, or Town-hall, is very Magnificent. This City was formerly subject to the Count of Friezland, but it hath thrown off his Authority, and is now a Free-State, under the Protection of the Hollanders. It is defended by two strong Castles, a Wall with Bastions and regular Bul∣warks, and a double Ditch round about. Norden, a pleasant Port-Town, about 15 miles North from Embden, is well-built, but not fortified. The Harbour is not deed enough to receive Ships of any great Burden. Aurich in the middle between Embden and Norden, is the place where the Supream Court of Judicature for this County is held. Here is a Castle belonging to the Count, and a slight Wall round the Town. Esens 12 miles North from Norden, is defended by a strong Castle.
Witmund is a good large Town, about 7 or 8 miles West from Esens, both formerly Baronies, but devol∣ved on the Count of Friezland. This was once a place of good Trade, but now much declined. Jever, about 10 miles West from Esens, is a fair Town, and gives Title to a Baron. It has a good strong Castle, and by means of the River Hoeck which falls into the Ocean 10 miles below, it hath acquir'd a pretty good Trade. This Barony is now subject to the Count of Oldenburg. On the West of Embden lyes the County of OLDENBƲRG, a poor barren Country, extend∣ed along the Banks of the Weser, near 50 miles in length, and 25 in breadth. Its chief Town of the same name is seated on the River Hunte, at the distance of 35 miles from Embden to the West, and as many from Bremen to the East. It is well For∣tified with Walls and Ditches, and a strong well-built Castle, which is the Seat of its Earl. The Houses are very mean, but the place hath a pretty good Trade by the means of the River, which fal∣ling into the Weser, Ships of Burden can come up into the Town. DELMENHORST, the Capital of a small County, lying next to Oldenburg on the South-east, is a strong fortified Town, but otherwise not conside∣rable. It stands upon the River Dilma, 16 miles West from Oldenburg, and 10 East from Bremen. DIEPHLOT, a small County, lyes on the South of Delmenhorst, and between Munster on the West, and Hoye on the East. It is now subject to the Duke of Lunenburg. The chief Town of the same name is seated near the Lake call'd Dummor, out of which the River Hunte arises, and passes by this Town, which is distant 40 miles from Oldenburg to the South, and 35 from the Weser to the West. HOYE, a County on the Banks of the Weser, East of Diepholt, and South of Bremen, was Govern'd by its own Lords, till 1582, when the last Count dy∣ing, it was parted among several Princes. Hoye, the chief Town, (a small place, but well Fortified) with Nieuburg, Lavenaw, and Bruchausen, became subject to the Duke of Lunenbrug: The Forts of Soltzenow, Ezenburg and 5 more Towns to the House of Bruns∣wick; and Freudenburg and Ʋcht to the Landgrave of Hesse. MINDEN, the Capital of a small Principality: is a large rich Hans-Town, standing on the Weser, 55 miles from Bremen to the South, and 35 from Os∣nabrug to the East. This Principality was given to the Elector of Brandenburg at the Treaty of Munster. It is a good Country, and produces plenty of Corn; the extent of it is about 25 miles in length, and 20 in breadth. The Bishoprick of OSNABRƲCK lyes be∣tween Minden on the East, and Munster on the West, Diepholt on the North, and Ravensburg on the South, and in the middle between the two Rivers Weser and Embs. Its extent from North to South, is 45 miles, and from East to West 25 miles. It is a fruitful Country, and subject to its Bishop, who is a Count of the Empire. Osnabruck, Osenburg, Osnabrugum, aut Osnabrucum, the Capital, is subject to the Bishop, though call'd a Hans Town. It stands upon the River Hase in a fruit∣ful Valley, 30 miles from Munster to the North-east, and 60 from Oldenburg to the South; it has a Fort for its defence call'd S. Peter's Castle. This City was Honour'd with a Treaty of Peace between the Emperor and the King of Sweden, in the year 1648, wherein an agreement was made concerning all the Affairs of the Protestants, and the Bishopricks made alternative, between the Roman Catholicks and Lu∣therans, in favour of the House of Brunswick. Iburg, stands about 12 miles South from the City, and is the place where the Bishop resides. TECKLENBOƲRG, a strong Castle and Fort, stands about 10 miles West from Osnabrug, and is the Capital of a small County, formerly under its own Counts; now subject to that of Benthem. SCAƲMBERG, or Schaumburg, an old Castle on the top of a Hill on the North-side of the Weser, 45 miles from Hoye to the South, and 50 from Osnabrug, and 16 from Minden to the East, gives name to a County of 25 miles extent from North to South, and 18 from East to West, which lies on the East of Min∣den, and South of Hoye; the River Weser passes cross it; besides which it is water'd with the Rivers Hannel, Awe, Caspaw and Exter; these yield the Inhabitants abundance of Fish, and the Country plenty of Corn, Hay, Timber and Venison: Here are also Quarries of Stone, which they send abroad, and some Mines of Al∣lum, Coal, &c. This County is subject to the house of Lippe. Saxenhagen, or Sassenhagen, a Fort and Town in the most Northern part of this County. Buckenburg, the Seat of the second Branch of the House of Lippe, who are thence stil'd Counts of Lippe Buckenburg. Oldenburg, on the banks of the Weser, a small but strong Town, 5 miles from Schaumberg; it repell'd the Imperial Forces in 1633, but was taken by them in 1639. The Counts of Lippe have a Custom-house here to receive Duty paid by all Vessels that pass this way. LIPPE, or Liepstadt, is a very strong and well fortified Town, seated on the River Lippe, 45 miles from Osnabrug to the South, and 35 from Munster to the East. This place was besieg'd by the French in the War of 1674, but defended it self so well that they were forc'd to raise the Siege. It is the Capital of a County which lies between Ravensburg to the North, and Paderborn to the South, a narrow Tract of Land, in length from East to West about 50 miles, and in breadth 15 or 20. Its Counts are of a very ancient Fa∣mily, and are not only Lords of this Country, but of several other places in the Neighbourhood. Diethmold, or Dietmelle, as 'tis writ in the Maps, 30 miles from Lippe to the North-east, and 25 from Minden to the South, is the place of Residence of the Eldest House of Lippe, but not considerable on any other account. Horn, an old Town near Diethmold, once subject to Counts of its own, now to the Count of Lippe. Lemgow, a rich and neat Hanse-Town on the River Pega, 7 miles North from Dietmelle, once subject to the Bishop of Paderborn, by whom made over to the Counts of Lippe, on whom it hath still some depen∣dence, but hath obtained many Privileges. The Bishoprick of PADERBORN is bounded on the North with Lippe, on the South with Hesse Cassel and Waldeck, and on the West with Munster and Westphalia, and contains in it 24 Market-Towns, 20 Castles, 54 Parishes, and 16 Monasteries, which are all subject to the Bishop. PADERBORN, Paderborna, aut Padrabranna, stands near the source of the River Lippe, from whence it is distant only 16 miles to the South, 30 from Corway, 45 from Cassel to the North-west, and 50 from Mun∣ster to the South-east, and is handsomly built and well fortified. The Emperor Charlemagne made it an Epis∣copal See, under the Metropolitan of Mentz, and held a Convention or Parliament there, A. C. 777. It was a free City, and one of the Hanseatick Society; but the Bishop hath been Temporal as well as Spiritual
Lord of it and of the whole Diocess, every since the year 1604. Theodore of Furstemburg, Bishop of Pader∣born, built the adjacent Castle of Neuhause or Nienhus near the confluence of the Lippe and the Alme, A. D. 1590, which serves as an Episcopal Palace; he also founded an University in the City, in 1592. Lippesburg, about 5 miles from Paderbrn, standing on the edge of a great Heath call'd die Senne, has a stately Castle belonging to the Dean and Chapter of Paderborn, who are Lords of the Town. The River Lippe springs near this Castle. Warburg, a Hanse-Town, is seated in a fruitful Country on the River Dymel, 25 miles South-east from Paderborn. Some neighbouring Mines of Iron and Lead afford this Town a good Trade. Between the Bishoprick of Paderborn and the River Weser, lies the Territory of the Abbey of CORBEY, founded by the Emperor Lewis I. It is about 15 or 16 miles in length, and in it, besides other Towns, stands Hoxter, a fair City on the Weser, 25 miles North from Cassel, and directly West from Paderborn, which by the means of the River, is a place of good Trade. Besides this Territory, the Island of Rugen in Pomera∣nia was given to this Abbey by the Emperor Lotharius, A. 844. And now having survey'd all the Countries on the East of Westphalia, we must cross Munster, and before we come to Cleeve and its Dependencies, view The Earldom of BENTHEM, which lies on the West-side of the Bishoprick of Munster, stretching out into the Province of Overissel, wherewith it is surroun∣ded on all the other sides. It is in length near 40 miles and in breadth about 15. The chief Town Benthem, stands near the South-border of the Coun∣ty, 30 miles North-east from Munster, 36 East from Osnabrug, and 40 West from Deventer. It is fortified and has a Castle, but is a place of no Trade, being seated in a Wood and far from a River. LINGEN, a strong Town on the River Embs, 40 miles North from Munster, is subject to the Prince of Orange; tho' the County, of which its Capital, be under the Bishop of Munster. STEINFƲRT or Borchstenford, is also a small County, lying South of Benthem, to whose Earl it is now subject, tho' formerly it had Lords of its own. The chief Town stands 20 miles North from Munster. The Dutchies of CLEEVE and JƲLIERS, with their dependencies the Counties of MARCK, BERG, RAVENSPERG and RAVENSTEIN, lie most∣ly on the banks of the Rhine, but are so intermixt with other Countries, that it is difficult to give the par∣ticular Limits. In general, they are bounded on the North by Guelderland and Munster, on the South by the Archbishoprick of Trier, on the East by Hesse and West∣phalia, and on the West by Brabant, Liege and Limburg. The principal Rivers here are the Rhine, the Roer and the Lippe; which two latter fall into the Rhine, the first at Duisburg, and the last at Wesel. The Air is cold, but the Soil is fruitful in Corn, and yields some Pasture. The Right of succeeding to these Territories upon the death of John-William the last Duke, without Issue, in 1609. gave occasion to great Commotions in Germa∣ny; for the Elector of Brandenburg, the Duke of Neu∣burg, the Duke of Deux-ponts, the Duke of Saxony and the Marquess of Burgaw, having all married Sisters or Daughters of the Sisters of John-William, all claim'd to succeed. But the Elector of Brandenburg and the Duke of Neuburg only, maintain'd their Claim by Force of Arms; the former, by the Assistance of the Hollanders, and the latter by that of the Spaniards. Until, at length, an Agreement was made, That Juliers and Berg, with the small Territory of Ravenstin should be granted to the Duke of Neuburg, and that the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg should for ever enjoy the Dutchy of Cleeve, and the Counties of Marck and Ravensperg; under which Princes they at present remain. The Dutchy of Cleeve is a Country generally woody and hilly, but however produces divers sorts of Grain. It lies on both sides of the Rhine, between Munster on the East, Guelderland on the West, Zutphen on the North, and Juliers on the South, extending about 40 miles from North to South, and 25 from East to West. The City CLEEVE, call'd Cleef by the Germans, and Clivia aut Clivis in Lat. which gives name to the Country, (a very ancient Place, and supposed to have been founded by the Romans) stands on a Hill, among craggy Cliffs, between the Rhine and the Maes, about 12 miles South-east from Nimeguen, 70 West from Munster, and 60 North-west from Cologn. It is small, but well Peopled; near it are seen an old square Tow∣er and other remains of Buildings, which shew it to have been formerly much larger. The Castle is old and not very strong, but pleasantly seated, and affords a delightful Prospect from the top of Swan-tower. The private Houses are but mean, and the chief publick ones are the great Church and two Monasteries. On the West-side of the Town is a very pleasant Park call'd Prince Maurice's, wherein are many Ponds and Water-works, above which is the high Hill call'd Steen∣berg, from whence Ʋtrecht with 4 more Cities, and seve∣ral great Towns may be seen, through 12 Visto's or strait Walks cut through the Wood. On the East of the Town stands the Prince's House, in which are ma∣ny Rarities and Monuments of Antiquity. Embrick, on the Eastern banks of the Rhine, 8 miles from Cleeve to the East, and Rees, on the banks of the same River, about 10 miles higher, are both well fortified. Gennep, at the mouth of the Nierse, where it falls in∣to the Maes, near the borders of Guelderland, 10 miles South-west from Cleeve, was anciently a large and po∣pulous City, and well fortified; but in the late Wars its Fortifications were demolished, and the Town is much decreas'd and now of small moment, tho' conve∣niently seated for Trade. Goch on the Nierse, 6 or 7 miles above Gennep, a small Town of no great Strength nor Traffick. All these four, tho' seated in the Dutchy of Cleeve, have been taken from it at several times by the Dutch, and are now subject to them. Calcar, a place of great Strength, and built by the Dukes of Cleeve for a Refuge against any sudden ap∣proach of an Enemy, is seated near the Western bank of the Rhine over against Rees, about 10 miles distant from Cleeves to the South-east. It quickly grew po∣pulous and rich by a Linnen-trade which they manag∣ed, and since they have been noted for making Malt, which is now a great Trade in this Town. The Town-house, S. Nicholas Church and the Monastery of the Dominicans, are stately Buildings. Santen, on the Western Bank of the Rhine, is a Town of very great Antiquity, but not considerable on any other account; it is said to be the place where the Theban Legion suffer'd Martyrdom under the Em∣peror Maximianus, and therefore call'd Santen, Holy. Wesel, call'd Nether-Wesel for distinction, seated in a fair Plain on the Eastern Bank of the Rhine near the mouth of the River Lippe, 25 miles distant from Cleeve to the South-west, and near 10 from Santen to the West, is a strong, populous and well-built City, reckon'd the largest and best in this Dutchy. It is a Hanse-town and was Imperial, but exempted by the Dukes of Cleeve, of whose Dukedom it was
always a Member. It was taken and plunder'd by the French in the late War, and the Burghers, being rich, they exacted intolerable Contributions from them. Here is an Hospital for decrepit, old People; founded by H. Oliver Baers, and nobly endow'd by him and his Son. Duisburg, a small City on the Roer, which a little lower falls into the Rhine, and on the Confines of Cleeve and Bergen, 15 miles above Wesel, 35 South-west from Cleeve, 15 from Duseldorp, and 35 from Cologn to the North-east. It was once an Imperial City, but now subject to the Elector of Brandenburg, as Duke of Cleeve, tho' the Burghers still claim their former Liberty. Here were formerly Fairs held yearly, which brought great Trade to the Town. An University is establish'd here by the D. of Brandenburg, which was open'd Oct. 14. 1655. Meurs, a small City, the Capital of an Earldom, ly∣ing between the Dutchy of Cleeves and the Archbishop∣rick of Cologn, belongs to the Prince of Orange, to whom it was given in 1600, by the last Countess; but is claimed by the Duke of Brandenburg, as part of the Dutchy of Cleeve. In this Earldom stands also Orsoy, a small but strong Town, taken from the Dutch in 1634, by the Prince of Orange, and by the French in 1672, but abandon'd by them in 1674. The Dukedom of JƲLIERS lies between the Rivers Maes and Rhine, bounded on the North by the Spanish Gueldre and Cleeve, on the South by Luxem∣burg and Trier, on the East by the Bishoprick of Co∣logn, and on the West by Liege and Limburg, extending about 60 miles in length and 30 in breadth. The Country is fruitful in Corn, Hay and Wood, and yields also Woad for Dying, whereof the Inhabitants make great profit; and an excellent Breed of Horses. JƲLIERS, or GƲLICK, as the Inhabitants call it, Juliacum, the Capital of this Dutchy, is an ancient City seated on the River Roer, at the distance of 50 miles from Cleeve to the South, 25 from Cologn to the West, and 25 from Maestricht to the East. It is a small place, but neatly built, the Houses are of Brick, and the Streets broad and even: The Citadel is large, and render'd as strong as the best Ingeneers of Germany could make it: Notwithstanding which, it has been often taken in the present Age, but at last restor'd to the Duke of Neuburg, according to the Articles of the Pyrenean Treaty. Aken or Aquisgranum, call'd AIX LA CHAP∣PELLE by the French, anciently a very consider∣able Place, having been the Seat of the Emperor Char∣lemaigne, stands near the borders of this Dutchy of Juliers and that of Limburg; it is distant 15 miles from Juliers to the South-west, 16 from Maestricht to the East, and 36 from Cologn to the West. It is an imperial and free City, and a very large beautiful Place; and by reason of the hot Baths in it which cause a great Resort thither, very populous and rich. The chief publick Buildings are, the Collegiat Church and the Senate-house, the former was built by Charles the Great, who was buried in it, and is a very curious piece of Architecture of the Gothick Order: At the West-end stands a high Steeple with several Pyramids, and in the middle a Cupola, the inside whereof is a∣dorn'd with a great number of Pillars of white Mar∣ble and of Brass gilt; also many gilded Statues, Brass-doors and Partitions; and the Roof is beautified with Mosaick Work. In this Church are kept many Re∣licks, which are visited by zealous Pilgrims. The Senate-house is a very stately Fabrick, built A.D. 1533, and adorn'd with the Statues of all the Emperors; the upper Story of it is only one Room of 162 foot in length and 60 in breadth, wherein the Emperors used to re∣ceive their first Crown of Iron, and entertain the Ele∣ctors and others that attended at their Coronations, The Baths are much esteem'd for their Virtue in cu∣ring Chronical Distempers. It is said they were first found out by Serenius Granius, Lieutenant General of Gallia Belgica, about the year of Christ, 53, who beau∣tified them and built a Palace near 'em. But the Place being afterwards destroy'd by Attila, the Baths lay buried till the time of Charles the Great, whose Horse (as he was Hunting here) accidentally strook his Foot into one of them, which the Emperor observing, caused them to be search'd out and rebuilt, and being much taken with the pleasure of the place, built a Royal Palace and a large Town. Of these Baths there are Three, the chief of which is the very same that Charles the Great used often with his Sons and Attendants, to swim in; it is now divided into many Apartments: These Waters rise so hot, that they cool them in 12 Houses before they are used. There are also others in the other part of the Town, but not so hot. Near the Town are many Mines of Lead, Sulphur, Vitriol and Iron, &c. In 1656 a great Fire happen'd in this City, which burnt down 20 Churches and 5000 Dwellings, (by which the bigness of this Town may be guess'd at) which were quickly rebuilt, and it is now more large and beautiful. In 1668, a Treaty was held here, and Peace concluded betwixt the Kings of France and Spain. In the Village Borsel or Porsetum, about a Furlong South from Aken, are many other hot Springs, which are by Pipes convey'd into 28 Baths; these Waters are even hotter than those at Aken. Duren on the River Roer, 15 miles East from Aix la Chappelle, and 10 South from Juliers, is a small City, the Building neat and uniform, with a clear Stream of Water running in the middle. It was made Imperial by Charles IV. and burnt by Charles V. but being re∣built, is now subject to the Duke of Neuburg. This place pretends to great Antiquity, and according to Cluverius, it was the ancient Marcodurum. DƲSELDORP, Dusseldorpium, is a very plea∣sant and well fortified City on the banks of the Rhine, 5 miles below Cologn to the North, and as many from Juliers to the North-east. It is the Metropolis of the Dukedom of BERG, which is extended along the banks of the Rhine, about 50 miles in length, and in breadth about 20, being craggy and mountainous, and therefore not very full of Inhabitants. The City is pleasantly seated upon the Rhine, and adorn'd with some publick Buildings, which make a delicate shew to the River, especially the Palace of the Duke of Neu∣burg who commonly resides here. It was anciently an Imperial City, and a place of much Traffick, and the yearly Fairs, since remov'd to Francfurt, were kept in it. DORTMOND, Tremonia aut Dormania, is seat∣ed on the River Empser, almost in the midst between those of the Lippe and the Roer, scarcely distant 6 miles from both, as also from the Territories of the Bishop∣rick of Munster to the South; 30 from the City of Mun∣ster, 26 from Soest to the West, and 35 from Duseldorp to the North-east. It is a free Imperial City, and one of the Hanse-Towns under the Protection of the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg; and is a small, but rich and po∣pulous Place. It is the Metropolis of the County of MARK, a Country of about 40 miles in length and 20 in breadth, bounded on the North by the Rivers Empser and Lippe, which part it from Munster, on the West and South by the Dutchy of Bergen, and on the East by Westphalia. The Soil is like that of Westpha∣lia, not very fruitful. Ʋnna, a poor Hanse-Town, but formerly a place of good Trade, till the War between the Dukes of Brandenburg and Neuburg for the Right of these Coun∣tries,
disturb'd and spoil'd it, stands 10 miles from Dortmund to the East. Ham, another poor Hanse-Town, stands 10 miles from Ʋnna to the North, on the Road between Hol∣land and Brandenburg. The Country about it yields store of Corn, Hemp and Flax. Soest, a large and populous City, seated in the neck of Land belonging to this County that shoots into West∣phalia, 30 miles from Dortmund to the East, and as many from Munster to the South. It is esteem'd the largest City in Westphalia, except Munster, fortified with a double Wall, whereon are 30 Watch-Towers, and a large deep Ditch. In it are 10 Parishes and many Churches, one of which is a Collegiate, and under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Cologn. This City has many Privileges and a Court of Judicature within it self, but under the Protection of the Elector of Brandenburg, to whom this County is subject. RAVENSBƲRG, Ravensberga, a small Town, the Principal of a County, lying between Osnabug, Minden, Munster and Lippe, stands on a Hill at the distance of 16 miles from Osnabrug to the South, about 25 from Paderborn to the North-west, and 30 from Munster to the East toward Minden. RAVESTEIN, Ravasteinum, is a small Town seated on the River Maes, 20 miles West from Cleeve, 20 North-east from Bolduc, and 15 South-west from Nimeguen; the Capital of a small Territory bearing the Title of a Lordship, appertaining to the Jurisdiction of the D. of Neuburg, but is at present possess'd by the Hollanders. The Bishoprick of Liege is usually reckon'd part of this Circle, but being spoken of already in the Description of the Netherlands, it must be omitted here. SWITZERLAND. CHAP. I. SWITZERLAND, Helvetia, or the Swiss-Cantons; Together with their Allies and Subjects, in general. THIS Country at first appertain'd to the Juris∣diction of the Gauls, and was afterward en∣clos'd within the Limits of Germany, taking its modern name from Schwitz, one of the three first Cantons that took up Arms to shake off the intolerable Yoke which had been impos'd on them by the House of Austria. Whereupon the Emperor Albert perceiving the Revolt of these People, sent considerable Forces into their Territories to reduce them to his O∣bedience, a little before he was Assassinated by his Ne∣phew; then his Sons lead thither an Army consisting of 20000 Men, who were defeated by a Band of 50 Men of the Canton of Schwitz in the Battel of Morgarten, A. D. 1315, insomuch that the Austrians hearing only the word Schweitz, Schweitz, proclaim'd aloud, call'd by this name all those that adher'd to their Religion. SWITZERLAND, in comprehending the Ter∣ritories of its Allies and Subjects, is bounded on the North by Alsatia and Schwaben, on the South by Lom∣bardy and the Lake of Geneva, on the East by the Coun∣ty of Tyrol, and on the West by that of Burgundy. It is extended from South to North for the space of about 45 Leagues from the Bailiage of Mendrisi, to the Fron∣tiers of Schwaben, and 70 from West to East, viz. from the County of Bormio as far as Mount S. Claude. A great number of Rivers take their rise in Switzerland, particularly the Rhine, the Aar, the Russ, the Inn, the Tesin, &c. which shews that this Country, tho' beset with many Lakes, is the highest in Europe: Of these Rivers the Russ and the Tesin are very serviceable for conveying of Merchandizes into Italy and Germany. The principal Lakes are those of Geneva, Constantz, Zell, Neufchatel, Biel, Morat, Thun, Brients, Lucern, Zurich, Zug, Ocarn and Riva. The Air is subtil and healthful but the Soil is very uneven and full of Mountains, more especially toward the South; nevertheless so well cultivated, that it brings forth all things necessary for the support of human Life, except Wine, which is found only in certain particular places where the White-wine is generally excellent. The tops of the Mountains afford much Grass, the Valleys rich Pastures, and the Forests good store of Game, viz. Stags, Deer, Cha∣mois, Hairs, Wild-boars and Partridges. Moreover the Inhabitants make vast quantities of Butter and Cheese which are transported into divers Countries; and many Herds of Heifers and Oxen are here fed, be∣sides Horses of an admirable breed. The Switzers are generally robust and of a strong Constitution, but somewhat heavy; they sometimes think it convenient to correct the moisture of the Air with plentiful Entertainments: They are also great Lovers of Liberty, Maintainers of impartial Justice, and no less noted for their extraordinary Valour, inso∣much that formerly most Princes were wont to esteem them as the greatest security of their Persons and Ar∣mies; but their Reputation in process of time began to decline by reason of their mercenary Temper, and more particularly their Treachery in betraying Luigi Sforza Duke of Milan, who had put himself under their Protection; however, Swiss-Guards are still retain'd in several Courts of Europe, and more especially in that of France. These People having been first subdu'd by the Romans, were constrain'd to submit to the Arms of the Burgundians and Germans under Honorius and Va∣lentinian II. Afterward they became subject to the Em∣perors of Germany and the Dukes of Zeringhen, and their whole Country was divided into many Lordships, among which the House of Hapsburg, from whence sprang that of Austria, endeavour'd to render it self chiefly predominant; insomuch that the Lieutenants that were sent to preside here, treated the Inhabitants so rudely, that three of them, viz. one of Ʋri, another of Schwitz, and a third of Ʋnderwald, excited these three Cantons to raise a Commotion in the year 1307 1308, being chiefly animated thereto by these Rea∣sons, viz. 1. The Insolence of the Governor of the Canton of Ʋnderwald, who had unjustly deprived a certain old Man of his Estate and Goods. 2. In regard
that he had attempted to ravish the Wife of one Conrade of Bomgarten. 3. On the account that the Governour of Ʋri, nam'd Grifler, caus'd a Hat or Cap to be set on the top of a long Pole in the Market-place of Altorf, commanding, at the same time, that all Passengers should fall down on their Knees before it and remain uncover'd, as it were in his presence: Whereupon, William Tell neglecting to obey this Order, was im∣mediately condemn'd to death, but escaped the punish∣ment by performing the condition mention'd in the Sen∣tence of Condemnation, which was, to shoot an Apple off from his Son's head, with an Arrow, at a consider∣able distance. Then the other Cantons following their Example, enter'd into mutal Leagues at several times, viz. Lucern, in 1332. Zurich, in 1351. Zug and Glaris, in 1352, Bern, in 1353. Friburg and Soloturn in 1481. Basil and Schaffhausen. in 1501. and Appenzel, in 1513. And, indeed, they are all united together for the con∣servation of their Liberty, and are govern'd in form of a Republick, altho' they have different Laws, and do not in any wise depend one on another; the People being, for the most part absolute, that is to say, it is a State or Common-wealth purely Democratical. The Christian Religion was first propagated in Switzerland, A. C. 177. and the Reformation was be∣gun here by Zwinglius; so that the Cantons of Zurich, Basil, Bern and Schaffhausen, embrac'd his Doctrin, and conven'd a Synod at Basil for the establishing thereof, A. D. 1530. However the Animosities between the Papists and Protestants soon broke forth into an open War; the latter being defeated at the first Onset, and Zwinglius, their famous Reformer slain in Battel. But the Protestants took up Arms again, and entirely rout∣ed the Forces of the Roman Catholicks, until, at length, both Parties came to an Accommodation, and have ever since enter'd into a mutual League and Confederacy for the defence of the Republick, being oblig'd to assist one another whensoever there shall be occasion to defend their common Liberty and Interest. The Political Go∣vernment of both these sorts is likewise (as it has been already intimated) that of a Common-wealth, altho' various, some Cantons being entirely Democratical, as those of Glaris and Appenzel, and the others some more, some less, yet not absolutely Aristocratical; for in Ba∣sil the Gentry are not admitted to any share in the Go∣vernment; but their Authority prevails most in Zu∣rich, Soloturne and Bern; but it ought to be observ'd, that every one of the Cantons are altogether absolute within their respective Jurisdictions. The Country in general, tho' beset with Mountains, has nevertheless many fruitful Valleys, but being far remote from the Sea, is the cause the Inhabitants have no setled Trade. However it is the thorough-fare of Merchants and Travellers, and the most considerable Advantages of this State arise from hiring out their Sol∣diers to Foreign Princes and Republicks; their Linnen-Manufactures at S. Gall; the two great yearly Marts at Zurzeaken, the University at Basil, and divers other Colleges. Their military Forces consist altogether in Foot, in regard that the Mountains and uneven situa∣tion of the Country, renders Horse unserviceable. The Switzers and their Allies are able to levy an Army of above 80000 Men, or even 120000, if we may give credit to the Report of Boterus; but perhaps the inten∣tion of this Author was to express the number of all Persons capable of bearing Arms within these Territo∣ries. Indeed the whole State is dispos'd for War, eve∣ry Man keeping good Arms in his House, and know∣ing his proper station; the Lists are likewise so order'd, that every one knows where to appear on the first, se∣cond or general Summons. But experienc'd Comman∣ders are generally wanting, so that altho' they may well make Head against a sudden Invasion, yet they seem not to be able to endure the fatigue of a tedious War, more especially since the Soil requires so much Cultivation, that a sufficient number of Men cannot long be spar'd for the defence of their Country. In the end of the XV Century the Switzers signaliz'd their Valour in Battel against Charles, sirnam'd the Rash, Duke of Burgundy; and divers Sovereign Prin∣ces have thought fit to maintain an Alliance and ami∣cable Correspondence with them. Their Religion is of two sorts, viz. the Roman Catholick and the Pro∣testant; for 7 Cantons adhere to the former, namely, those of Ʋri, Schwitz, Ʋnderwald, Lucern, Zug, Friburg and Soloturn; and 4 embrace the latter, that is to say, those of Zurich, Bern, Basil and Schaffhausen. Lastly, 2 of them, viz. Glaris and Appenzel, admit both Religi∣ons with equal Liberty of Conscience. However the 4 Evangelical Cantons, tho' inferior in number, are much more potent than the others. The Conventions of the Catholicks are held at Lucern, those of the Protestants at Araw, and the general Assemblies at Baden. These 13 Cantons are distinguish'd in the ensuing Table, ac∣cording to their Precedency in the general Diets; as also afterward their Allies and the Countries that are subject to their Jurisdiction either by mutual Compact, or the right of Conquest. Switzerland divided into three parts. 13 Cantons, 1. Zurich, Prot. 2. Bern, Prot. 3. Lucern, Cath. 4. Uri, Cath. 5. Schwitz, Cath. 6. Underwald, Cath. 7. Zug, Cath. 8. Glaris, Cath. and Prot. 9. Basil, Prot. 10. Friburg, Cath. 11. Soloturn, Cath. 12. Schaffhausen, Prot. 13. Appenzel, Cath. and Prot. 13 Allies, 1. The Grison League. 2. Cazdee or Gotthes∣punt. 3. The 10 Commonalties. 4. The Valteline. 5. The County of Chi∣avenna. 6. The County of Bormio. 7. The Republick and Abbey of S. Gall. 8. The Bishoprick of Constantz. 9. The Bishoprick of Ba∣sil. 10. The County of Valais or Wallerslandt. 11. The Provostship and County of Neuchatel. 12. In Alsatia. 13. In Schwaben. Switzers. Subjects of 1. The County of Baden. 2. The free Provinces. 3. The Bailiage of Mel∣lingen. 4. Turgow. 5. Rheinthal. 6. The 4 Governments of Italy. SWITZERLAND in particular. I. The Canton of ZƲRICH, Tigurinus Pagus, being the first of all the Thirteen, according to the general As∣semblies, is bounded on the North by that of Schaffhau∣sen, on the West by the County of Baden, the Bailiage of Millengen, and the free Governments; on the South by the Cantons of Zug and Schwitz, and on the East by Turgow. Its extent from North to South consists of about 15 Leagues, and 12 from West to East. And indeed it is a very potent Province on the account of its Largeness, Wealth and Multitude of Inhabitants. It ought also to be observ'd that Zurich, as well as the other Cantons and their Allies are govern'd in form of a Common-wealth, by their Magistrates which they call Burgoma∣sters, Advoyers or Landames; besides these there are o∣ther inferior Officers, viz. Aldermen or Masters of seve∣ral Wards, whose Employment is to take care of Mi∣litary Affairs, Treasurers that are appointed to receive the Publick Revenues and Imposts, and Mace-bearers. However their Ordinances are every where different and independent one of another, but by reason these People have obtain'd the Government of many Provin∣ces,
and some Laws almost alike, together with a very strict Union, the Title of a Republick, or that of States of the League, is often attributed to them. Nevertheless every Canton is permitted to engage in the Interest of any Party at their pleasure, and they frequently enjoy a profound Peace, whilst divers other Nations of Europe are embroil'd in Wars. Julius Caesar makes mention of the Inhabitants of Zurich, and they were heretofore uni∣ted in a League with the Cimbrians, whom Marius de∣feated. This Canton is much less than Bern, yet the Publick Bank is much richer, and 'tis reported that 50000 Men may be rais'd here upon an occasion with∣in the space of 24 hours. It is divided into 9 large Bail∣liages, and 21 Castellaneries. The most considerable Towns and Villages are, Zurich, Cap. Kiburg, Count. Gruenningen. Laufen. Rufy, Wedischwil. Andefingen. Grisensec. Ktingenew. Eglifow. Regenspurg. Stafen. ZƲRICH, Tigurum, is pleasantly seated at the end of the Lake of the same name, from whence the River Limat or Limmack springing forth, divides the Town into two parts, lying in the midst between Schaffhausen to the North, and Lucern to the South, at the distance of 25 miles from each; as also 11 from the River Rhine to the South, and 45 from Soloturn to the East. It was heretofore an Imperial City, made free by the Emperor Frederick II. A. D. 1218, and at last separated from the Empire in 1351. It is adorn'd with two very ancient Churches and three fair Bridges: But it is prohibited to ride on Horseback over that near the Tower of Villen∣berg, under penalty of losing the Beast. The Emperor Charlemaign or Charles the Great caus'd the grand Church to be built, and his Statue is as yet to be seen therein. The publick Library is very noble, and the Hall contai∣ning it, is a large and well-contriv'd Structure, where also is to be seen a fine Cabinet of Medals. The Go∣vernment is almost the same as at Bern, and the chief Magistrate, who in that place bears the name of Advoyer, is here simply call'd the Burgomaster. The Arsenal is likewise much better furnish'd, and the Fortifications are more regular. The Lake of Zurich is 24 miles long, and about 2 or 3 broad, supplying the Inhabitants with Pro∣visions, as the River serves to carry their Manufactures, the chief of which is a very good sort of Crape, to the Rhine, from whence they may be convey'd at pleasure. The Dean and Chapter are still continu'd as an Ecclesi∣astical Corporation, and enjoy the same Revenues they had before the Reformation. This City was formerly laid waste & burnt by the Germans, A.C. 300, but afterward rebuilt by the Emperor Dioclesian. The Citizens in time past discomfited the Roman Forces, and the Consul Cras∣sus, who commanded them, was here slain in Battel. KIBƲRG stands on the banks of the River Toss, 2 Leagues East from Zurich, and was sometime subject to the Jurisdiction of its Counts of great Reputation. II. The Canton of BERN, Bernensis Pagus, hath that of Soloturn for its Northern Bounds, the County of Va∣lois for the Southern; the Provinces of Ʋri, Ʋnderwald and Lucern for the Eastern, and that of Friburg, the Lake of Biel, the Territories of Vaux and part of the Lake of Geneva on the West. Its extent from South-west to North-east comprehends about 43 Leagues in length, and 33 from West to East. It is divided into 72 Baili∣ages, and every one of the Bailiffs is nominated by the Council of 200. They must also be Citizens of Bern, and Members of the same Counsel of 200, whereto no Man can be elected (as Bishop Burnet observes) until he is marry'd. This Canton alone is able to raise 20000 Men (as 120000 may be levied throughout the whole Continent of Switzerland) and the principal Towns thereof are these, viz. Bern, Cap. Lausanna, Bish. Theim. Arberg. Vangen. Lansburg, Coun. Erlach. La Serre. Bruk, Nion. Sana. Aubone. Brientz. Walen. Yverdon. BERN, Berna, is seated on the Banks of the Ri∣ver Aar, between Soloturn to the North and Friug to South, and communicates its Name to the whole Canton, as Zurich has done to that whereof it is the Capital. Indeed it is a fair and rich City, but not very large, and takes its denomination from the word Bern, which in the Swiss Language signifies a Bear, Berthold IV. Duke of Zeringhen having kill'd one of these wild Feasts as he was laying its foundation in the year, 1175. so that a Bear was also given for its Coat of Arms; but Berthold V. his Son finish'd the Buildings in 1191. The City stands in a Plain in form of a Peninsula, encompass'd with the Streams of the Aar that wash it on three several sides, the fourth being fortify'd with four great Bastions and deep Trenches continually supply'd with Water by a neigh∣bouring Torrent. An adjacent Hill that commands the Town is in like manner defended by divers strong Out-works. The Streets are very neat, water'd with clear Brooks running through the midst of them, and adorn'd on each side with Porticoes, Arches and Pillars of free Stone, affording at all times a convenient sheltet to Passengers, altho' these Porches are somewhat too narrow. It is well worth the while to take a view of the principal Church, which is a very noble Structure, and has a Bell of a prodigious size; as also of the Town-house that was formerly the Church of S. Vin∣cent, the Court of Chancery, the Arsenal and the pub∣lick Library, together with an Inscription shewing the Reasons why the Town was built: But the Forti∣fications are not as yet finish'd nor reduced to any re∣gular form. In one of the Apartments of the Arsnal, which is well furnish'd with Arms for 40000 Men, is to be seen the Statue of William Tell the famous Burger of Schwitz, who was compell'd by the Governor Gri∣fler to strike off an Appel from his Child's head with an Arrow, which cruel Injunction, and some other Grie∣vances, excited the Switzers to take up Armes and vin∣dicate their Liberty. In the Church which formerly belong'd to the Domi∣nican Friers, still remain certain Marks of one of the most notorious Cheats that 'ere was known in the World, and which happen'd about 20 years before the Reformation was establish'd in Bern, having not a little contributed (as it is probable) to that change. Wherefore, it may not be improper here to subjoin a brief Account of the matter of fact. After violent Contests which arose at that time between the Francis∣cans and Dominicans about the Conception of the Vir∣gin (Mary whom the latter affirm'd to be exempt from original Sin) four Jacobins of Bern, nam'd John Vetter, Stephen Boltzhorst, Francis Ʋlchi and Henry Steniker, complotted together, at the sollicitation of many others of the same Order, to prove their Thesis by a Miracle. For the better management of their Project, having met with a fit Tool for that purpose, viz. one John Jetzer, a silly Novice, who had lately taken the habit of a Lay-brother on Lady-day, A. D. 1507. they counter∣feited several Apparitions in the Night, and persona∣ted the Virgin with great Address, to declare, That she was conceiv'd in Sin. The Device took effect so far, that the poor Novice being deluded made report of his Vision; all the People in the Town throng'd to visit
him as a Saint or great Prophet, and the opinion of the immaculate Conception was generally decry'd; until at length the Monks over-acting their part, Jet∣zer perceiv'd the Juggle. Whereupon they us'd all possible means by Entreaties, fair Promises and even Threats, to engage him to carry on the Cheat; and when nothing could prevail, attempted at several times to poison him. However, the Novice found means to escape out of the Convent, and discover'd their Plot to the Magistrates. Insomuch that two Bishops, and the Provincial of the Dominicans being deputed by the Pope to take cognizance of the Affair, the four Monks, whose Intrigue had involv'd them in a complication of the most enormous Crimes, were put to the Wrack, and confess'd the whole matter laid to their Charge; so that being afterward condemn'd they were deliver'd up to the secular Power, degraded and publickly burnt in the Market-place, A. D. 1509. All the Circumstances of this Story are related, at large, by Bishop Burnet in his Letters, pag. 27, &c. It is reported, that Berthold V. having some cause to complain of the Proceedings of the Inhabitants of his new Town of Bern, render'd it subject to the Em∣pire under Fredreick II. who committed the Govern∣ment thereof to Otho of Ravenspurg; but the Bernians behav'd themselvs so well, that in process of time they recover'd their Liberty. However, when a certain Count of Kiburg, afterwards endeavour'd to enslave them, under pretence that they had presum'd to build a Bridge ovet the River Aar, without sufficient Au∣thority, they were oblig'd to have recourse to Peter Earl of Savoy, to disengage them from this vexatious Suit, and frustrate the Designs of their Enemy. As an Ac∣knowledgment of which signal Favour, the Citizens of Bern unanimously chose the same Prince for their Protector, and ratify'd their Election by a Treaty on the 25th day of November A. D. 1266. Whereupon the said Earl caus'd the Town to be much enlarg'd, and merited the Title of its Defender, Father and se∣cond Founder in 1268. Moreover, this Alliance re-establish'd the Liberty of Bern, which was very near being lost in 1286, and 1287, by reason of the War which Rodolph of Hapsburg elected Emperor in 1272. maintain'd against them. At length, in 1353. the Inhabitants enter'd into a League with the other Swiss Cantons, and in 1527. embrac'd the Protestant Do∣ctrin preach'd by their famous Divine Huldricus Zwin∣glius, through whose Persuasion they publish'd certain Ordinances concerning their Religion, and entirely a∣bolish'd the Pope's Authority. LAƲSANNA, Lausonium aut Lausanna, the chief Town of the Country of Vaud, is so call'd (ac∣cording to the report of the Inhabitants) from its situa∣tion between the Brooks Laus and Anna, at the dist∣ance scarcely of half an hours Journy from the North∣ern Coasts of the Lake Lemen, which is often call'd from thence the Lake of Lausanna; as also 8 Ger∣man miles from Geneva to the North-east, 16 from Bern to the South-west, 7 from Friburg, 5 from Yver∣don to the South, and 18 from Lucern to the West. It is founded on three Hills, having every where a steep ascent and descent, more especially on that side where the Church stands, which is a noble Edifice. This odd situation of the Town was occasion'd by a Legend of Miracles, suppos'd to have been wrought near the Church, so that the contiguous Buildings were added to the old Town, which is seated on the other Hill near the Road from the Lake into Switzerland, and whereto the chief Privileges, particularly the Judica∣ture of Life and Death are as yet annex'd. Lausanna was formerly dignified, in the room of Wiflispurg, with an Episcopal See, subject to the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Bezanson, which, after that the Pro∣testants had made themselves Masters of the Town, A. D. 1535. was translated to Friburg. This Prelate had also a Right to consecrate the said Archbishop of Bezanson his Metropolitan. III. The Canton of LƲCERN, Lucernensis Pagus, is bounded on the North-west and South by that of Bern, and on the East by those of Schwitz, Zug and the Free Provinces; being extended from South to North for the space of about 12 leagues, and 8 from West to East. It hath been united to the other free and confederate Provinces ever since the year, 1332. and its most re∣markable Towns are these, viz. Lucern, Cap. Sempach. Sursee. Rot. Sualhusen. Viklen. Villisow. Hosburg. LƲCERN, Luceria, aut Lucerna, call'd Lutzern by the Inhabitants, derives its Name (as it is report∣ed) from a certain Lanthorn, in Latin Lucerna, which was set on the top of a Tower to direct the course of the Boats, on the Lake of the same name, during the night; and stands in a Plain environ'd on the left Hand, and behind with high Mountains that support its Walls and Towers, being also bounded before with the Lake and divers deep Ditches full of Water on the right; the Ri∣ver Russ running from thence divides the Town into two unequal parts, which was heretofore only an Ab∣by, and hath been since much enrich'd by Traffick. It is at present the first in order of the Roman Catholick Cantons, and the usual place of Residence of the Pope's Nuncio, being distant 9 German m. from Bern to the East, 7 from Schwitz, and 6 from Altorf to the North-west toward Basil. The grand Church is adorned with two large Steeples, an high Alter beautified with Marble Columns, an excellent pair of Organs and a fair Cloyster. In the spacious Market-place is erected a Fountain and a stately Town-house, besides a College of Jesuits, and two Bridges very much admir'd for their length, consisting of about 500 paces, and in regard that they are cover'd with a great quantity of curious Paintings. This was at first a free and Imperial City, but was united to the other Cantons of Switzerland, A. D. 1332. From hence one may pass on the Lake to the Cantons of Schwitz, Ʋri and Ʋnderwald, and through the Road, in traversing the Mountain of S. Godard, into Italy. Moreover, Merchandizes are frequently trans∣ported from Friburg over the neighbouring Mountains, and from thence to Italy, on Mules. One may also de∣scend through the Lakes and the River Russ into the Rhine, and through this last River into the main Ocean. This Lake spreads it self 24 m. from East to West, and is oft call'd Waldtstattenzee, from four Towns that surround it, viz. Lucern, Altorf, Switz and Stantz. SƲRSEE is built on the Banks of the Lake of Sempach, about 5 leagues from Lucern to the North-west; and the Town of Sempach stands on the Western side of the same Lake. IV. The Canton of ƲRI, Pagus Ʋranius, aut Ʋriensis, lies between the Mountains of Crispaltberg and S. Goth∣ard, and the River Russ; having the Canton of Schwitz to the North, those of Ʋnderwald and Bern on the West, the Valley of Verzasco on the South, and the Grison League, together with the Canton of Glaris on the East. Its utmost extent from South to North com∣prehends about 16 leagues, and 5 from West to East. All the Inhabitants of this Country profess the Roman Catholick Religion, and retain these Towns, or Bur∣roughs, under their Jurisdiction, viz.
Altorf, Cap. Attinghusen. Jornike. Ariola. Gessinen. ALTORF or ALTDORF, Altorfium, that is to say, the old Village, is seated in a Plain near the Ri∣ver Russ at the foot of the Alps, about 4 Swiss miles from Lucern to the South-east, and 7 from Schwitz to the South. The Houses being generally painted are so fair and the Streets so well paved, that it seems to be a beautiful City, encompass'd with Gardens and Country-houses, affording a very delightful Prospect. The Courts of Justice for the whole Canton are also held in this Town, but the access thereto is extreamly difficult, by reason that it stands at the bottom of the dangerous Precipices of the Mountain S. Godard or Gothard, near which four considerable Rivers have their source, viz. the Russ to the North, the Tesin to the South, the Rhine to the East, and the Rhone to the West. V. The Canton of SCHWITZ, Suitiensis Pagus, is bounded on the North by those of Zurich and Zug, on the West by those of Lucern and Ʋnderwald, on the South by that of Ʋri and part of that of Glaris, and on the East by the same Canton of Glaris, and the Baili∣ages of Gasteren and Ʋlzenach. It is extended from North to South for the space of about 7 leagues, and 9 from East to West, being divided into six parts, con∣sisting only of a great number of little Burghs and Villages, and surrounded on all sides with high Moun∣tains. The whole Country of Switzerland hath taken its name from that of this Canton, in regard that it was the first Theatre on which these People began to raise those Wars that were maintain'd by them for the gain∣ing of their Liberty. The chief Towns are these, viz. Schwitz, Cap. Kusnach, Einselden, Wag. Grinew. Euachen. SCHWITZ, Suitia, is situated on the Banks of the River Muse, in a Valley encompass'd with Moun∣tains, wnich are always cover'd with Snow, at the di∣stance of 2 miles from the Lake of Lucern, 10 from the Town of the same name, to the East, and as many from Glaris. This large Village is compos'd only of a spacious open Court, round which are erected five or six Houses, well-built and curiously painted. The principal Church stands in the midst of the Church-yard, and is adorn'd with a stately Tower. VI. The Canton of ƲNDERWALD, Sylvania, aut Sylvadiensis Pagus, lies between Schwitz and Lucern to the North; between part of the Provinces of Lucern and Bern to the West and South, and that of Ʋri to the East. Its extent from South to North includes 8 leagues, and 6 from West to East. Within these Territories are found five Lakes, comprising part of that of Lucern, and two Rivers that traverse them with their Streems from North to South. This Canton takes its name from a Forest of Oaks, which is extended through the midst thereof; for the Term Ʋnderwalden in the Switzer's Language, signifies sub Sylva, or Ʋnder the Wood. How∣ever, Leopold Duke of Austria invaded this Country in 1386. but was defeated; nevertheless, he march'd again the next year with an Army of 15000 Men as far as Na∣valia, endeavouring to force that narrow Passage, where he was so warmly receiv'd by 350 of the Inhabitants of Glaris and 30 Switzers, that he was constrain'd to leave the Field to that small Band of Men, after having lost a¦bove 3000 of his own Soldiers, besides those that were drown'd in the Lake Rivarius; by which memorable Victory the Inhabitants wholly recover'd their Liberty, and retain it to this day. The most considerable Towns are these, viz. Stantz, Cap. Krientz. Sarnen. Engelberg Liungeren. Bekenriet. Hansstadt. STANTZ, Stantia, is a large Village built in a Plain on the foot of the Mountains, at the distance of 4 leagues from Lucern to the South-east, near the Lake of that name. VII. The Canton of ZƲG, Tugiensis Pagus, is bound∣ed on the North by those of Zurich and Lucern, the latter serving likwise in part for its Southern Limits, together with that of Schwitz, and on the East by the same Canton of Schwitz, extending it self from South to North about 3 leagues, and as many from West to East. This Country enter'd into the league with the other Confederate Provinces, A. D. 1352. that is to say, 44 years after those of Schwitz, Ʋri and Ʋnder∣wald, had shaken off the Yoke of Albert Arch-duke of Austria. The chief Towns are these viz. Zug, Cap. Cham. Bar. Egen. Rischt. Oberwil. ZƲG, Tugium, is a fair Burgh standing on the Coasts of a Lake of the same name, very full of Fish, and on the foot of an Hill that brings forth good store of Grapes and affords rich Pasture for Cattle, some part of it being also cover'd with a large Wood, wherein are to be found all sorts of Game both for Hound and Hawk. However, this little Town consists only of one open and wide Plot of Ground, environ'd with stately Houses, divers Churches and a Town-house. It is distant only one mile from the Lake of Lucern to the East, and altogether inhabited by Roman Catholicks. VIII. The Canton of GLARIS, Glaronensis Pagus, is partly inhabited by that of those Roman Catholick, and partly by those of the Reformed Religion, being stret∣ched out between the River Limat, the Country of the Grisons and that of Schwitz, and bounded on the North by the same Canton, and the Bailiage of Gasteren; as also on the West, by those of Schwitz and Ʋri, on the South by the Grison League, and on the East by the Sargans, Riva and the Bailiage of Gasteren. As for the extent thereof, it includes about 8 leagues from South to North, and 7 from West to East. These Territo∣ries are almost entirely shut up within the Mountains, and were compriz'd in the general League of the States of Switzerland, A. D. 1352. It obtain'd its Freedom about the year, 1260. and enter'd into the general League of Switzerland in 1307. The principal Towns are these, viz, Glaris, Cap. Wesen, Ʋrnen. Nestel. Elm. Quart, GLARIS, Glarona, aut Clarona, is remarkable on the account of its situation amidst extreamly high Mountains call'd Glarnischberg, in a Valley of the same name, and on the River of Sarneff. The Inhabitants are generally esteem'd the most sagacious throughout Switzerland. This little Burrough or Town, the chief of the whole Canton, is distant 18 miles from Altdorf to the North-east, as many from Schwitz to the South-east, and 30 from Chur or Coire. IX. The Canton of BASIL, Basileensis Pagus, is bound- on the North by Brisgaw, on the West by Alsatia, on the South by the Canton of Soloturn, and on the East by part of the Black Forest. This is at present one of the most potent Cantons, and altogether adheres to the Protestant Religion, comprehending within its Juris∣diction the ensuing Towns, viz.
Basil, Bish. Cap. Dugst. Dornach. Augst. Leichstall. Munchstein. Hamburg. Veltemburg. Grolingen. Dirmenach. Betingen. Vildestein. Ramstein. BASIL, Basilea Rauracorum, is divided by the Ri∣ver Rhine into two parts, the greater whereof toward the Frontiers of France, is situated on the side of an Hill, in form of an Amphitheatre; and the lesser extended in a a very fruitful Plain, but they are both join'd together by fair Stone Bridge. The Channel of the Rhine here receives two Rivulets, viz. Byrs and Wics, the Waters of which serve to cleanse the Streets, and to drive divers Mills. Indeed Basil is the fairest and richest City of the whole Continent of Switzerland, and the Capital of the Canton of the same name; the original whereof is unknown, altho' some derive it from Basiliana, Mother to Julian the Apostate. This City is distant 6 German miles from Friburg, 18 from Constantz to the West, 12 from Zurich, 38 from Augsburg, and 14 from Strasburg to the South. It hath also acquir'd much Fame by reason of its Large∣ness and Traffick, more especially in vending Toys and small Wares. It was heretofore an Episcopal See under the Metrapolitan of Bezanson, but the Bishop, who is a Prince of the Empire, being afterward expell'd by the Pro∣testants, took up his habitation at Porentrus, and the Cha∣pter at Friburg in Brisgaw. The most remarkable Pub∣lick Edifices of this City are, the Cathedral dedicated to the Virgin Mary, built by the Emperor Henry Augustus, a venerable Gothick Building; the two stately Towers of S. Martin and S. George; the Arsenal, the lower A∣partments whereof serve to keep the Artillery, and the higher as a publick Magazine; and the Palace, where∣in the principal Citizens usually hold their Conventi∣ons, which is properly a Town-house or Guild-hall; be∣sides the curious Painting of the ancient Cloister of the Dominicans, and the University founded, A. D. 1459, that hath afforded liberal Education to many renowned Personages who have been the singular Ornaments of their Age, and well vers'd in all sorts of human Litera∣ture, particularly Des. Erasmus, Amerbachius, Joh. Bux∣torsius, &c. Moreover, at Basil are to be seen many con∣siderable Libraries, and some Cabinets of Curiosities, particularly that of Mr. Sebastian Fisch, wherein is con∣tain'd a great number of Paintings and rare Medals, not to be found elsewhere. The Repository of Erasmus and Amerbachius belong to the University, in which, among other Rarities, are preserv'd 20 original Draughts of the famous Painter Holben, a Native of this City; particu∣larly a Picture of Christ dead, for which a certain Person offer'd to give a 1000 Ducats. The Dance of Death, drawn by the same Holben is likewise much admir'd, and is affix'd on the Wall of the Church-yard of S. Fran∣cis. In the publick Library is kept a very rare Manu∣script Copy of Virgil, and another of the Alcoran, written on China Paper. The Art of making ordinary Paper was invented here by Antony and Michael Galicion, A.D. 1417, and Bernard Richel first began to exercise that of Printing in 1478. The Reformation was promoted by Oecolam∣padius in 1522, and 12 Wagon Loads of Images were publickly burnt in 1529. The City of Basil is likewise noted for affording a Burying-place to that geat advan∣cer of Learning Desiderius Erasmus of Roterdam, who dy'd here on the 11th of July; A.D. 1536, aged 70 years; as also on the account of its Fortifications, as having a strong Wall with Bastions, and a Ditch quite round it, as you may see in the Draught here subjoin'd. map of Basel BASEL X. The Canton of FRIBƲRG, Friburgensis Pagus, lies between the Bailiage of Morat to the North, that of Orbe and the Lake of Neuchatel to the West, and the Canton of Bern to the South and East. The Inhabi∣tants generally make Profession of the Roman Catho∣lick Religion, and possess the ensuing Towns, viz. Friburg, Cap. Romont, Coun. Favernach. Bersisch. Joun. Corbers. Griers, Count. Rut. Plafey. Peterlingen. Montenach. FRIBƲRG, Friburgum, that is to say, a free Town, is seated on the Banks of the Sane, and the side of a Mountain, one part of the foot thereof is wash'd by the said River, and the other adorn'd with very large Sub∣urbs. The Inhabitants began to form their Government
into a Republick in the year 1481, but could never be perswaded to embrace the Reformed Religion, as yet affording a place Residence to the Bishop of Lausanna. It is distant about 7 German m. from Soloturn to the S. 6 from Lausanna, and 3 from Bern to the South-west. Its Fortifications are very irregular; nevertheless Nature has well supplied this defect of Art, the Ramparts ha∣ving the Rocks and Mountains for their Foundation. The City is divided into four parts, after the same man∣ner as that of Bern; the first of which is call'd the Burgh, the second the Isle or Meadow, the third the Town, and the fourth the Hospital. It is also famous for its magnificent Piazza's and publick Buildings, the chief of which are the Cathedral, with its grand Altar, the high Tower, the Town-house and the Fountain, toge∣ther with its large Basin and Foot, besides divers other Churches and Convents; a Commandery of Malta and a noble College of Jesuits, founded by Petrus Canisius, who died in it, A. D. 1597. Here are solemniz'd every year 2 great Festivals, viz. one on the 2d of May, and the on the 22d of June, in memory of two signal Battels gain'd in time past over Charles Duke of Burgundy, the former at Granson, and the other at Morat. The City of Friburg was first sold by one of its Counts to the Em∣peror Rodolph I. and afterward was subject to the House of Austria for 200 years; but being much op∣press'd by the Nobility, it enter'd into a League with Bern, yet still continu'd under the Jurisdiction of the same House of Austria, until it was admitted into the general League of the Swiss Cantons in 1481. But it ought to be observ'd, That this Town is situated in the Country of Nuitlandt, and is different from another commonly call'd Friburg in Brisgaw, which was taken by the French Forces, A. D. 1677, and granted to their King by vertue of the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1679. XI. The Canton of SOLOTƲRN, Salodorusensis, aut Saladorius Pagus, is bounded on the North by that of Basil and part of Alsatia, on the West by the Franche Mountains or the Bishoprick of Basil, and on the South and East by the Canton of Bern, being extended from South to North for the space of about 12 Leagues, and 9 from West to East. The most considerable Towns and Villages are these, viz. Soloturn, Cap. Osten. Threistein, Coun. Leingen, Humenthal. Balstein. SOLOTƲRN, Solothurum, aut Salodorum, call'd Soleurre by the French, stands in a fruitful Valley on the banks of the River Aar, and in the midst between Basil to the North, and Friburg to the South, almost at an equal distance of 7 German miles from both, as also 5 from Ben to the North. It is a Town of very great Antiquity (as is evident from divers old Inscriptions still extant) and claims the prerogative of being Sister to Rome and Triers. It is mention'd in the Itinerary of Antoninus under the name of Solothurum, by reason of a Tower (as some say) which was erected in honour of the Sun. It suffer'd much damage in time past by the Incursions of the Germans, Huns and Franks, but was repair'd by the later, who kept it in their Possession un∣til the time of Hugh Capet. It became subject to the Emperors of Germany, A. C. 921, yet enjoy'd certain pe∣culiar Privileges and Immunities. In 1441, after 20 years War with the House of Austria, during which Duke Leopold was slain, the Inhabitants concluded a Treaty of Peace on the same Terms as the other Confe∣derates then did, and were admitted into the number of the Leagu'd Cantons in 1481. They were also in∣clin'd to embrace the Reformed Religion in 1531, but a popular Commotion arising on that account, Mass was re-establish'd in 1533. And indeed, they have been ever since very superstitious, in regard they had a Cru∣cifix dress'd up after the Swiss fashion, and their Images (as Bishop Burnet observes) are still extreamly gross; one of them in the grand Church, representing God the Father as an old Man with a great black Beard, having our Saviour on his Knees and a Dove over his Head. Soloturn is at present one of the most considerable Towns of Switzerland, and usually affords entertain∣ment to the French Embassador. It is divided by a Bridge into the greater and lesser Quarters, the Houses being fair and the Streets large, adorn'd with a great number of Fountains, besides a stately Church and a sumptuous College of Jesuits, for the building the Front whereof the present French King Lewis XIV. gave 10000 Livres. But the Fortifications of this Town are more especially remarkable, having cost near two Mil∣lions of Livres. The Wall is finish'd on that side to∣ward the River, and fac'd with a kind of course white Marble, every quarter of Stone being ten foot long, and two in breadth and thickness: The Counterscarp and Glacis are likewise finish'd, and a Fortress on the other side of the River is to be built after the same manner; so that this vast Expence has caus'd the In∣habitants to repent of their Undertaking. XII. The Canton of SCHAFFHAƲSEN, Scaphu∣sianus Pagus, hath Schwaben for its Northern Bounds, the Black-Forest for its Western, the Canton of Zurich for its Southern, and Turgaw for its Eastern. Its usual extent from South to North consists only of 3 Leagues and an half, and about 8 from West to East. The chief Towns are these, viz. Schaffhausen, Cap. Herblingen. Neuwkilch. Halaw. SCHAFFHAƲSEN, Scaphusia, aut Probatopolis, is remarkable for its situation on the Rhine, and so call∣ed as it were Schitfhauss, from the Skiffs or Boats, since the Channel of the River being very much straitned near this place, it runs with a great noise and impetu∣ous Torrent over the Rocks, insomuch that the Barks not being able to pass through, are unladen and carried below the Town, where they receive their freight again and continue their course on a more gentle Stream. This Town is distant 4 miles from Constance to the West, 2 from the Lake of Zell, 6 from Basil, and 4 from Zurich to the North. The Streets are very broad, and the most part of the Houses painted on the out-side according to the custom of many other places in Switzerland. In the upper Quarter of the Town is erected a large Tower, which nevertheless serves rather for its Ornament than Defence. However a great number of Cannons are mounted on it, and the French King is oblig'd to send thither the Sum of 800 Livres every year to keep it in repair, conformably to a Treaty of Alliance concluded with the Switzers. The Bridge of Schaffhausen is one of the most stately of those that are built over the Rhine. This Town had its rise from an Abbey of Benedi∣ctin Monks, founded by Eberard Count of Nelemburg, A. D. 1052, and was sold by Lewis Duke of Bavaria to Frederick Duke of Austria, 1330. The Citizens were very serviceable in many signal Battels to the House of Austria, and continued under their Protection 85 years. In 1424 they entred into a League with those of Zu∣rich and S. Gall, as also into another in 1454 with Zu∣rich, Bern, Lucern, Schwitz, and some other Cantons, and at last were united together with those of Basil in the general and perpetual Confederacy of the Switzers, A. D. 1501. The Reformation was carry'd on here by Jacobus Riegius, Erasmus Ritterus and Nicholas Hoffmei∣ster, and an Idol, formerly call'd the great God of Schaffhausen, was burnt in 1529. The Government is administer'd by a great Council of 86 Senators, and a
lesser of 26, the principal Publick Revenues arising from an Impost laid upon Salt. The Town gives for its Arms a Sheep, which is likewise stampt on the Coin, and whence it is sometimes nam'd Probatapolis. XIII. The Canton of APPENZEL, Abbatiscellensis Pagus, encompassed with very high Mountains, is bounded on the North by the Abbey of S. Gall, on the West by the Republick of Liecthensteg, and on the South and East by the Country of Rhinthal and the Ri∣ver Rhine, being extended from S. W. to N. E. for the space of about 8 Leagues, and 6 from W. to E. This is the last Canton of Switzerland, where both the Ro∣man Catholick and Protestant Religions are tolerated, as in that of Glaris; and takes its name from its Capi∣tal Town. It heretofore depended on the Abbey of S. Gall, enter'd into the General League with the other Provinces, A. D. 1513, and at present is united to that of Zurich. The whole Canton is divided into 12 Parts, 6 of which bearing the name of the Inner Appenzel, are inhabited by Papists, but the Protestants have taken Possession of the other 6, called the Outter Appenzel, being partly free and partly govern'd by the Nobility. The Chief Towns are these, viz. Appenzel, Cap. Gonten, Ʋrnaschen. APPENZEL, Abbatiscella, is a large, rich and populous Town, situated near the Source of the small River Sintra, at the distance of 12 French Leagues from Chur, almost as many from Constance, and four from S. Gall to the South. CHAP. II. The ALLIES of the SWITZERS. THE GRISONS Rhoeti, are the most potent Allies of the Switzers, and were so call'd by rea∣son that all the Inhabitants that were ingag'd in their first League were wont to wear grey Scarffs. Their Country is bounded on the North by part of the Coun∣ty of Tyrol, that of Sargans and the Canton of Glaris; on the East by the same Province of Tyrol, on the South by the Territories of Milan, and the State of Venice, and on the West by the Canton of Ʋri. It is extend∣ed from North to South, for the space of 20 Leagues, and about 22 from East to West. Within these Limits are comprehended the Bishoprick of Chur, the Grison League, that of the 10 Commonalties, that of Gotthe∣spunt or Casdee, the Valteline and the Counties of Chia∣venna and Bormio, which are the 7 usual Divisions of the State of the Grisons, who concluded a mutual League among themselves, in the year 1471, and af∣terward another with the Switzers, in 1491. Their Country, which is the ancient Rhoetia, lies amidst in∣accessible Mountains and dangerous Precipices, the principal Towns and Villages whereof are specified in the ensuing Table. The Bishoprick of Chur wherein are included these Towns, Chur, Bishoprick and Cap. Zitxers. Haldentein. The Grison League, in which are compris'd these Towns, Ilantz, Capital. Tront, Splagen, Flintz, Dissentis. In the Ten Commonal∣ties, Davos, Cap. Alsenow, Majenfeld, S. Pieter. In Gotthespunt or Caz∣dee, Casaccia, Cap. Vesprum, Tenesone, Tufoncastel, Bergon. In the Valteline, Tirano, Cap. Morbegno, Teglio, Sondrio. In the County of Chia∣venna, Chiavenna, Cap. Pleurs, swallow'd up by an Earthquake, Riva. The County of Bormio. Bormio, Cap. Valdelevin, Cepina. CHƲR, Curia, call'd Coire by the French, and Coira by the Italians, being the Capital City of the Grisons, and the usual place of their general Assemblies, is adventagiously seated at the Foot of two Mountains, and on the banks of the Rivulet Plessur. The Rhine begins to be Navigable a little above the Town, and causeth it to be much enrich'd by Traffick. It is distant 7 German miles from Chaivenna to the North, and 11 from Altorf to the East, as also 13 Italian miles from Majenfeld, about 10 hours Journey from Feldkirk, and 16 from Bregentz to the South. It was some time an Imperial and Free City, but afterward exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Empire, A.D. 1498. It is also the See of a Prelate, who acknowledges the Archbishop of Mentz in Germany as his Metropolitan, yet is himself a Prince of the Empire, and has a Seat in the College of these Princes, altho' his Revenues amount only to about 15000 Crowns. However, the Inhabitants have gene∣rally embrac'd the Doctrin of Zwinglius, except the said Bishop, Chapter and some few Lay-men, that profess the Roman Catholick Religion, and are confin'd within the Precinct of the Cathedral Church, where they live se∣curely and enjoy all manner of Liberty. ILANTZ, Ilantium aut Lepontii, is a small Town, situated in like manner on the Rhine, at the distance of about 15 m. from Chur to the S. W. wherein is held the Convention of the States of 3 Leagues, namely the Grison or upper Leaguc, that of Gotthespunt or Cazdee, and that of the 10 Commonalties. The first of these, whereof Ilantz is the Chief Town, hath the Canton of Glaris for its Northern Bounds, that of Ʋri for its We∣stern, the 4 Governments of Italy on the South, and the 10 Commonalties on the North. The Ten Commonalties or Jurisdictions, call'd by the French les Droitures, and in Latin Foedus decem Judicio∣rum aut Jurisdictionum, lie between the County of Tyrol on the North, part of Cazdee, along the banks of the River Inn on the East, part of the same League of Cazdee on the South, and that of the Grisons on the West. Their principal Towns is Davos, Davium, built near a Lake, about 5 or 6 Leagues from Chur to the N. E. The League of Cazdee or Cadee, as it is termed in French, but call'd Gotthespunt by the Germans and Inha∣bitants, that is to say, The House of God, Foedus domus Dei, is bounded on the North by the Commonalties,
and the Province of Tyrol, on the West by the Grison League, on the South by the County of Chiavenna and the Valteline, and on the East by that of Bormio. The most considerable Town of this Country is Casaccia near the River Pregel. The VALTELINE, Vallis Tellina, lies between Caz∣dee on the N. the County of Chiavenna on the W. the Dominions of the State of Venice on the South, and the County of Bormio on the East. It is part of the ancient Rhoetia, and takes its name from the Fort or Village of Tell, in Latin Tellina Vallis or Valturena. These Terri∣tories are situated on the foot of the Alps, and were heretofore inhabited by the Vemnonetes. The Valteline is usually divided into three Parts, call'd Terzero di sopra, Terziro di Mezzo and Terzero di sotto. The Spa∣niards some time ago expell'd the Gisons from thence; but the French, at the Sollicitation of Pope Ʋrban VIII. dispossessed them, and restor'd the Country to its anci∣ent Masters. TIRANO, Tiranum, the Metropolis of this Pro∣vince, is seated on the River Adda, at the distance of 6 miles from the Frontiers of Italy and the Territories of Venice, 30 from Chiavenna, and as many from the Lake of Como to the East. SONDRIO, Sondrium aut Sondrisium, another con∣siderable Town and Fort, stands in like manner on the banks of the same River Adda, where it receives the Brook Maler, almost in the midst between Tirano to the East and Moregno to the West, being distant 37 m. from Bergamo to the North, and as many from Chur. It is the strngest Hold in all the Valteline, and its Governor takes upon him the defence of the whole Country, act∣ing as General in time of War. He likewise substi∣tutes a Vicar to determine all Causes, both Civil and Criminal; but an Appeal lies from his Court of Ju∣dicature to that of the Grisons. The County of CHIAVENNA, Comitatus Claven∣s is bounded on the North and West by the Grison-ague▪ on the South by the 4 Governments of Italy, and on the East by the Vateline. It derives its name from its Capital Town of Chiavenna, Clavena, termed also Cla∣ven in the German Tongue, which is situated at the foot of the Alps and Mount Adula, on the Brook Meira, the Waters whereof are not far off intermixt with those of the Adda, and discharged together with them into the Lake of Como, from whence this Town is distant 40 m. to the N. as also 30 from Chur, 15 from the River Rhine, and only 5 from the Lake of Chiavenna. The County of BORMIO, Comitatus Bormiensis, hath Cazdee for its Northern and Western Bounds, be∣ing also limited on the S. by the Valteline, and on the E. by the Dominions of the State of Venice. The chief Town of this Lordship is likewise call'd Bormio or Vorms, and seated on the Adda 3 m. below its Spring-head, near the Entrance of the Valteline, and the Source of the River Oglio, being distant 38 m. from Morbegno to the E. 40 from Chiavanna, 65 from Como to the N. E. The Republick and Abbey of S. GALL, Respub∣lica Sancti Galli, is bounded on the N. by the Terri∣tory of Turgow; on the West by the County of Gaste∣ren, on the S. by the Canton of Appenzel, and on the E. by the Lake of Constantz, taking its name from that of its chief Lown, according to the Custom observed in many other Places of Switzerland. The principal Towns are these, viz. S. Gall, Archb. Cap. Liecthenstes, Gofcou, Viss. S. GALL, Fanum Sancti Galli, is seated between 2 Hills, on a rising Ground, near the banks of a small Ri∣ver, between Appenzel and the Lake of Constantz, being distant only one German m. from the said Lake, and 4 from Lindaw to the W. It was first founded above 800 Years ago, and encompass'd with a Wall, in the time of the Emperor Arnold, owing its original to an adjoyn∣ing Abbey of the same name: For it is reported that one S. Gall, a Scot, or (as others say) an Irishman, arri∣ving in France, accompany'd with S. Columba, in the XVII Century, continu'd his Travels as far as Switzer∣land, where he propagated the Christian Religion in di∣vers parrs, more especially the adjacent Territory of Turgow, and having refused to accept the Bishoprick of Constantz, offer'd to him by Gonzom D. of the Almans, retired to a Desert Place, where this famous Abbey was afterward built, and called by his name. The num∣ber of his Disciples, being, in process of time much en∣creased, they ollow'd the Rule of S. Benedict, and one Omer a Piest rst obtain'd the Title of Abbot, by the special Favour of Pen, Son to Charles Martel, bout 80 Years after he death of S. Gall. Neither were Charles Martel and Pepin the only Benefactors, but also Cha∣lemagne, and many other Kings of France, as also some Emperors of Gemany, who bestow'd great Privilegs and Revenues on these Abbots, insomuch they were extreamly enrich'd, and assumed the quality of Princes of the Emre ever since the time of Conradus, who was elected to  Dignity in the Year 1226. Thus his Successors became very potent Lords, and even at this Day are Masters of a Territor, in which they can raise 6000 Men, their Grandeur being chiefly sup∣ported by the Alliance made with the Cantons Zurich, Lucern, Schwitz and Glaris. However, the Abbot at present usually resides at Viel, by reason that the Citi∣zens, who are zealous Calvinists, now enjoy a Sove∣reignty altogether independent from that of the Abbey, which has a sparate inclosure, yet between these is a common Gate, lock'd on both Sides, the Keys where∣of are kept both by the Abbot and Citizens. The Town it self is not very large, but fair and well-built, its chief Trade consisting in a curious Manufacture of fine Linnen. This Corporation is divided into 6 Companies, out of every one of which are chosen 12 Persons, who constitute the greater and lesser Councils. The Ma∣gistrates are elected every Year, and the Inhabitants have maintained an Alliance with 7 of the Swiss Can∣tons, Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Ʋri, Schwitz, Zug and Glaris, ever since A. D. 1454. The Bishoprick of CONSTANTZ, Episcopatus Constantiensis, is bounded on the North by part of Schwaben, on the West by the Canton of Zurich, on the South by the Country of Turgow, and on the East by part of Germany, comprehending within its Juris∣diction the ensuing considerable Towns, viz. Constantz, Bish. and Cap. Menaw, Abb. Merspurg. Zell, Ʋberlingen, Richanau. The City of CONSTANTZ we have already spoken of in our account of Schwaben in Germany, to which the Reader is referred; and the other Towns do not deserve particular Descriptions. The Bishoprick of BASIL, Episcopatus Basiliensis, cal∣led also the Franche Mountains, lies to the W. of the Canton of Soloturn, to the S. of Alsatia, to the E. f the County of Burgundy, and to the N. of Neuchatel. The most considerable Towns are these, viz. Porentru, Capit. Franquemont, Delsperg, Pagsfelden, Liesperg. PORENTRƲ, or Bruntrut, according to the Pronunciation of the Inhabitants, Brundusia aut Brun∣trutum, seated on a small River, hath appertain'd to the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Basil, ever since the Protestants took possession of that Episcopal City.
This City is built on the very Confines of Suntgow and the Upper Alsatia, at the distance of 3 German miles from Pfirt, and 6 from Basil toward Montbeliard. It is defended with an old Castle on a Hill, and enclo∣sed within the Destrict of the County of Eligaw. But we must take Care not to confound this Porentru with Porentrui, another little Town, situated to the South of the same Bishoprick of Basil. The County of VALAIS, Vallesia, called Wal∣lisserland by the Germans, is bounded on the North by the Cantons of Bern and Ʋri, on the East, by the same Canton of Ʋri, and the 4 Governments of Italy; on the South by the Dutchy of Milan, and on the West by that of Savoy, extending it self from the Source of the River Rhine, as far as the Lake of Geneva. This Coun∣try was heretofore inhabited by the ancient People of Gallia Narbonensis, called Veragi & Soduni. It is a plea∣sant fruitful Valley, encompass'd on all Sides with steep craggy Rocks and inaccessible Mountains, where∣to there is only one single Passage, defended by 2 Gates and a Castle. But within these rude Ramparts are en∣closed many rich Pastures and Meadows, abounding with Saffron, Corn, Grapes and other Fruits, together with Mines and Springs of Mineral Waters. Here are also bred several sorts of Wild-Beasts, affording much variety of Game, the utmost extent of the whole Coun∣try from East to West includes almost 100 miles, and its breadth between 15 and 30. The Inhabitants are generally Roman Catholicks, and entred into a mutual League with the Switzers in the Year 1533. The most considerable Towns are these, viz. Sion, Bish. and Cap. Martinach. Visp. Leuch. Natters. S. Moritz. SION, Sedunum, call'd Sitten by the Germans, is situated in a delightful Plain, over which hangs only one single Mountain of a moderate heighth, rising up toward the East, as it were with 2 Tops; and serving as a Foundation to 3 Forts; in the first whereof stands the Episcopal Palace called the Majorian: The second, bearing the name of the Valerian, is built over against it on the other Top of the Mountain: And the third Tower, named Turbilion, is erected on the Top of the Majorian, being the highest and principal Fortress ap∣pertaining to the Bishop, to whose Jurisdiction the Town it self is subject, and who hath concluded a firm League with the 7 Catholick Cantons of Switzer∣land. This Prelate, who is elected out of the Body of the Chapter, assumes the Title of Count of Walli∣send and Prince of the Empire, having a Right to Coin Mony, as also to nominate his own Officers, and enjoying divers other Privileges, that were granted by the Emperor Charlemagne to Thedotus, A. C. 82. A∣mog other publick Edifices of this City the Cathedral Chrh is more especially remarkable, as being a very ancient and stately Pile of Building. The Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Moutiers in Tarentaise, was formerly establish'd at Octodurum or Martignac, in Chablais, and after the Ruin of that Town remov'd to Sion. The Provostship and County of NEƲWCHATEL. Neufchastel or Neuvemburg, Neocomensis Comitatus, lies between the Bishoprick of Basil to the North, the Coun∣ty of Burgundy to the West, the Territories of Vaux to the South, and the Canton of Friburg. Joanna of Hochberg translated this County to the Family of the Dukes of Longueville, through her Marriage with Lewes of Orleans, the first of that name, A. D. 1504. The principal Towns are these, viz. Neuwchatel, Cap. Biel, Repub. Vallangin. Munster. Engolen. Geneva, Repub. NEƲWCHATEL, or Neufchastel, Neccomum, is seated on a Lake of the same name, and so call'd from a Castle built on an Hill, that commands the Town, being distant. 8 German miles from Lausanna to the North, almost 7 from Bern to the West toward Besan∣con, and 8 from Soloturn to the S. W. Biel or Bienne, Bienna, is a small Town, built on the banks of the River of Pierre Port, and the princi∣pal of the Republick of Biel, lying in the midst between Neufchastel to the South, and Soloturn to the East, at the distance only of half a League from a Lake of the same name, which is full of Fish, and more especially contains good store of a sort call'd Heulings; It hs also some Islands, whereof that of S. Peter is very pleasantly situated, the rest being often overlow'd, and the Banks are every where planted with Vines. The Inhabitants of Biel were at first subject to the Ju∣risdiction of the Bishop of Basil, but afterward became free States, having embrac'd the Reformed Religion, and made a League with the Switzers, A. D. 1547. GENEVA, Geneva aut Genevensium Civitas, is a rich, fair and very ancient City, sounded long since in the Country of the ancient Allobroges on the Frontiers of Savoy and the banks of the River Rhone, at one end of the Lake Leman, often call'd from thence the Lake of Geneva. And indeed, its situation is admirable, the greater part thereof being built on a Hill, that rises with a gentle ascent, and the other in the Plain, and a small Island made by the Rhone, which flowing out of the Lake surrounds the Eastern Side of the Town, and separats it from the Suburbs of S. Gervase, that properly dpend on the Country of Gex. The same River here receives the Arve, the Channel whereof serves as it were for a Trench on the Southern Side, as the Nothern is defend∣ed by the Lake. All these Sides are likewise guardd with considerable Fortifications; Nevertheless, the chief∣est Strength of this City undoubtedly consists in that firm Alliance which has been maintain'd so long be∣tween it and the Cantons of Bern and Zurich; indeed the Ramparts may well secure it from a sudden Surprize or Scalado, but are not sufficient for its defence against the Assaults of a numerous Army. However, the Arse∣nal (as Bishop Burnet assures us) in proportion to the State▪ is the greatest in the World, containing Arms for more Men than are in the whole Republick, together with many pieces of Artillery. Here are also kept the famous Scaling-Ladders, that were set up against the Walls by the Savoyads, when they attempted to surprize the Place, A. D. 1602, and the Petard with which they endeavour'd to break down the New Gate, as Memo∣rials of so signal a Deliverance. The principal Church, dedicated to S. Peter, is built on an Hill, and in it is to be seen the Tomb of Henry II. Duke of Rohan. There is also a Dutch and an Italian Church, and formerly one was set apart for the Use of the English Nation. The Town-House is a very fair Building, and has a Stair∣case of singular Workmanship. The Streets are large and beautiful, and the Walks extream pleasant, especi∣ally along the Side of the Lake; those call'd La Riviere, making 3 different Streets, for in the middle is a Pas∣sage for Coaches and Horses, and on each Side stands a Row of Shops, facing the Houses, with large Portico's, supported by Pillars, under which one may walk at all times secure from the Injury of the Weather. The Em∣peror Charles IV. founded an University here, A. D. 1368. which is still supplied with very able Pro∣fessors, and in the Publick Library are preserved a great number of Books and rare Manuscripts, par∣ticularly a very Ancient MS. Bible of S. Jerom's Translation, &c. The City of Geneva hath been for a long Time overn'd by its nwo particular Counts since the IXth
Century, first of whom was named Ratbert, and flour∣ished A. C. 880. Thus, in process of Time it devolved on Humbert de Villers, who dying without Issue, left it to his Heir Odo de Villers, and this last Count granted the whole Territory of Geneva to Amedeo VIII. Duke of Savoy, by vertue of a Treaty concluded at Pa∣ris on the 5th day of August, A. D. 1401. However, the Bishop, who acknowledged the Arch-bishop of Vienne in Dauphine as his Metropolitan, obtained the Govern∣ment of the City, and his Successors have even styled themselves Princes thereof, ever since the Emperor Fre∣derick Barberossa gave it to Bishop Arducius, in 1162. But at last the Reformed Religion having prevail'd among the Inhabitants, they found means, y the Assist∣ance of those of Ber to expel the Rom Cholicks, to∣gether with their Prelate Peter de l , in 1534 and 1535. Whereupon they abolished the Mass, and sta∣blished a popular Form of Government; whch Revo∣lution was carried on chiefly through the Industry of their famous Reformers William el, Jn Calvin and Theodore Beza, the two latter o whom dyed and wre buried in the same City; but th titular Bishop thereof now resides at Annecy, the Constitution of the Govern∣ment here is very near the same as in most of the Can∣tons of Switzerland; for the Sovereignty lies in the Great Council of 200, and out of that Number 25 Per∣sons are chosen to make up the Lesser Council; both these are for Life, and serve as Checks one to another, the Soveraignty residing in one and the Magistracy in the other: The Syndick is the Chief Magistrate of the Common-wealth, and is elected by the whole Body of the Burgesses, on the first Sunday of the Year. there is this difference between the Burgesses and Citizens, that is to say, the former degree of Honour may be purchas∣ed or bestowed on Foreigners, so that they may be ad∣mitted into the Council of 200, but none is reputed a Citizen but he that is the Son of a Burgess, and born within the Town. The Publick Justice is regularly administred, although the private Dealings of the Tradesmen are not so exact. The Magistrates and Con∣sistory of Divines take great care to suppress Vice and no publick Debauchery is any were tolerated, so that such Disorders are manag'd with great Address and Privacy; neither are the Inhabitants much addicted to drinking, notwithstanding their Neighbourhood to the Switzers. Their Vulgar Tongue is the Savoyard; but all those of any considerable Quality speak French, which if it be not the best, is at least as pure as that of the greater Part of the Provinces of France. The Re∣venues of this little State may amount to about 10000 Crowns, and the City stands 7 eagues from Anny, 15 North of Chambery, 24 North-east of Bern, and as many from Lyons. The Lake of Geneva extends it self about 9 German miles in length, and 2 in its greatest breadth; but its depth in some Places could never be found, as exceeding 500 Fathom. It is well stock'd with excellent Fish, but the Trouts are the most remarkable, many of them weighing 50 pounds apiece, and some being larger by a third part. However, the Numbers of Fish sensibly de∣crease, and one sort is quite lost, which diminution is at∣tributed to the ravenousness of the Pikes and another kind of Fish call'd Moutils, which never appear'd in the Lake until 6 or 7 years ago, and were probably con∣vyed thither through certain subterraneous Channels. The Water of this Lake is extremely clear and fresh, yet is soetimes disturbed by the Winds, and rages as it were a little Sea. It is not only a great Pond made by the Ri∣ver Rhone runnng in to it (which does not pass through unmixt, as some Authrs, both ancient and modern, have vainly imagin'd) but is also enlarged by many Springs flowing (as it is believed) from some vast Caverns in the adjacent Mountains, being, as it were, huge Cisterns that scharge themselves into the Valleys, which in thee Prts e covered all over with Lakes. MƲLHAƲSEN or MƲLNHAƲSEN, Mul∣husia, so call'd, as it were the Mill-house, an Imperial and Free City in the Upper Alsatia, is seated on the Ri∣ver Elle, into the Channel whereof that of the Hall, discharges its Waters a little below, being distant 3 leagues from Pfirt to the North, as also from Basil to the N. W. and from Newburg to the W. The Inhabi∣tants enter'd into a League with the Switzers, in the Year 1515. But we must distinguish this City from an∣other of the same Name in Thuringen, that stands on the Foot of the Mountains, near the Rivulet Ʋnstrt, and remains under the Protection of the Elector of Saxony. ROTWEL, Rotevilla, is in like manner an Impe∣rial City of Schawben, and one of the Allies of Switzer∣land. It stands on the Side of the River Necker, near the Mountains of Albenow, at the distance of 10 German m. from Brisach to the East, and 6 from Schaffenhausen to the North. A Soveraign Court of Judicature for the whold Province of Schawben was erected here by Duke Conrade III. A. D. 1147. and Monsieur de Guebriant Marshal of France being mortally wounded in besieg∣ing this City, died therein, after it was taken by the French Forces, on the 17th Day of Novemb. A.D. 1643. CHAP. III. The Subjects of the SWITZERS, who may be distinguished into Twelve several Societies or Corporations, viz. 1, The County of Baden, to the S. of Schawben, subject to the 8 ancient Cantons, in which are comprised these Chief Towns. Baden, Cap. Zurzach. Keyserstal, Kelingenaw. 2. The Free Provinces dispersed throughout divers Places apper∣taining to 5 Cantons Maiemberg, To the East of Lucern. Kichenzee, To the East of Lucern. Mutt, To the East of Lucern. Vilvergen. To the East of Lucern. Rapers Viller, a County. On the Lake of Zurich to the 4 Canton Ergaw, On the Lake of Zurich to the 4 Canton 3. The Bailiages of Bremgarten and Mellengen to the South of the Coun∣to of Baden to 8 Cantons. Bremgarten, Mellengen. 4. The County of Thurgow to the West of the Lake of Constance, to 7 Cantons. Fravenfeld, Cap. Viscofzel, Pfin, Arbon, Fravensee, Reinow, Burglen, Vinfelden. 5. The Territories of Rhinthal lying between that of Tyrol, the Lake of Constance and Appenzel to 8 Cantons Alsteten, Cap. Reinech, Oberied
6. The Barony of Altsax to the South of Rhinthal, subject to Zurich. Altsax, Fonsteg, Gains. 7. The County of Verdemberg to Glaris Verdemberg. 8. The County of Sargans to the North of the Grison League to 7 Cantons. Sargans, Cap. Riva, Ragartz. 9. The Bailiages of Gasterne, Ʋlz∣nach and Quart, to the East of Schwitz and Glaris depending on these 2 Cantons. Gasteren, Cap. Ʋlznach, Quart, Schenis, Wesen. 10 Four Bailiages bordering on the Canton of Friburg, and appertain∣ing to Bern and Friburg. Granson, Morat, Orbe. Schwartzemburg. 11. The 3 Bailiages of Bellinzona to the South of the Grison League to 3 Cantons. Bellinzona Cap. Poleza. 12. The 4 Governments of Italy to the North of the Dutchy of Milan depending on 3 Cantons. Logan, Locarno, Mendrisi, Valmedia. Within the Precincts of these Four Governments and the adjacent Places are com∣prised Five several Valleys and Four Lakes. Cento Valli, Valley of Ossernon, Valley of Media, Valley of Lanza Valley of Verzasco, Lake Major, Lake of Locarna, Lake of Logan, Lake of Como. BADEN, Castellum Thermarum, aut Aquarum olim Aquae, is seated on the River Limat, which a little below the Town falls into the Aar, at the distance of about 8 miles from the Rhine to the South, 12 from Zurich to the North-west, and 35 from Basil to the South-east. It is the usual place where the General Diets or Assemblies of the Cantons are held for the trans∣acting of their publick Affairs, and where the Am∣bassadors of Foreign Countries are entertain'd. It is also the Capital of a County, taking its name from thence, and one of the Free Towns of Switzerland; for altho' the eight ancient Cantons retain a Sovereign Ju∣risdicton over it; nevertheless their Bailiff, who usually Resides there, has no power to act in the Government, since the Burgers chuse their own Magistrates and have certain peculiar Laws. The lesser Council consists of 12 Persons, to whom is committed the management of publick Affairs, together with the Administration of Justice. But the great Council is compos'd of 40, comprehending the 12 of the lesser; and the Head of them is nam'd the Advoyer. The Town of Baden is famous for the Conference held there A. D. 1526, about matters of Religion, and the mutual League made by the Cantons in the same Year; as also for the late General Diet Conven'd in 1690, wherein they resolv'd on a Neutrality with respect to the War be∣tween the Confederates and France. This Town is call'd Ober Baden, or the Upper Baden, to distinguish it from another of the same name in the Province of Schawben, which is distinguish'd with the Tittle of a Marquisate: But both these Towns are famous for ex∣cellent Baths of hot Water, and each of them is de∣fended by a Castle built on an Hill. MAJEMBERG, is a small Village or Burrough, within the Territories of the Free Provinces, distant about four Leagues from Lucern to the North. BREMGARTEN, Bremocartum, is a little Town, which bears the Title of a Bailiage, and ap∣pertains to the eight old Cantons, being seated on the banks of the River Russ, and distant only two or three Leagues from Mellingen, which is in like manner a Bailiage; as also 15 miles from Baden toward Lu∣cern, 2 large miles from Zug to the North, and 2 short miles according to the Standard of Switzerland, from Zurich to the West. FRAVENFELD, is a small Town, water'd by a Rivulet in the County of Turgow, within 5 or 6 Leagues of the City of Constance. ALSTETEN is the principal Town of the Di∣strict of Rhincthal, from whence one may pass within the space of three Hours to Appenzel. ALTZAX is the chief Town of the Barony of the same name, and stands at the distance of 2 or 3 Leagues from Appenzel to the South, as also does, GAINS, only at that of one large League from the same place. VERDEMBERG, the Metropolis of the Coun∣ty, that takes its name from thence, is distant only 6 Leagues from Chur. SARGANS is the Capital Town of the County that bears the same name, and is subject to the Jurisdiction of 7 ancient Cantons. This County was heretofore Inhabited by the Sa∣runetes, a People of whom Pliny makes mention, and in process of time fell into the possession of the Counts of Wertenburg, but they Mortgag'd it to the House of Austria; and when redeem'd in 1483, George Count of Wertenburg, sold it to the Swiss Cantons, who send a Governor thither every Year: Nevertheless, the Town still enjoys divers peculiar Privileges, and has a right to chuse its own Magistrates, GASTEBEN, is the most considerable Burrough of the Bailiage, so call'd, lying between the Canton of Zurich and that of Bern. GRANSON, Gransonium, is a little Burrough or Ham∣let, with the Title of a Bailiage, near the Lake of Neufchastel, depending on the Cantons of Bern and Fri∣burg, and being distant one mile from the Town Neuf∣chastel to the South, and 3 from Friburg to the West. It is famous for the first Battel which the Switzers gain'd here over Charles, Sur-named the last Duke of Burgundy, on the 2d day of May, A. D. 1476. MORAT, MƲRAT, MOƲRAT, Moratum aut Muratum; call'd also Murten by the Germans, is situat∣ed in the County of Romont, on the Lake of the same name, made by the River Mourena. This little Town is no less Renowned than the former, on the account of a signal Victory which the Switzers obtain'd over the Forces of the same Charls the Hardy, on the 23d. of June, A. D. 1476; for they slew above 18000 Men, and laid the Bones of their Enemies in a Chapel erect∣ed on the side of the Lake. This War broke forth on the occasion of a Waggon-load of Sheep-Skins, which a Switzer convey'd to Geneva, by reason that they were taken from him in the Country of Vaux, which then appertain'd to the Possessions of James of Savoy, Count of Romont, with whom the Switzers were at va∣riance, and the Duke of Burgundy declar'd on his be∣half. Morat is distant about 2 Leagues from Friburg to the North, and 3 from Bern to the West. LODARNO, Lodarnum, nam'd Lugaris by the Ger∣mans, is a considerable Town and Bailiage of Italy, lying near the Lake Verbanus, or Maggiore, at the dist∣ance of 30 miles from Como to the North-east, and 40 from Novana; but only 5 from the Confines of the Dutchy of Milan. And indeed it heretofore depended on the Dominions of those Dukes, But the Switzers made themselvs Masters thereof, A. D. 1512. Thus it appears, that the Cantons of Switzerland, together with those of their Allies and Subjects, form a potent Com∣mon-wealth; and that an Alliance with them may be very advantagious to the Interest of some States of Christendom.
SAVOY. CHAP. IV. SAVOY, Sabaudia. THE Province of Savoy is one of the most Illu∣strious Sovereign Dutchies of Europe, being bounded on the North by the Lake of Geneva, Switzerland and the County of Burgundy, on the West by the Province of Dauphine, on the South by part of Dauphine and of Piedmont, and on the East by the same Principality of Piedmont. It is extended from South-east to North-west, for the space of about 34 Leagues, and 24 from West to East. This Province was heretofore inhabited by divers People, viz. The Centrones, Brannovicii, Antuates, or Nan∣tuales, Latobriges, Alobroges & Savoyards, constituting part of Gallia Narbonnensis, and of Gallia Celtica, or Lugdunen∣sis. Afterward it was subject to the Romans, until the de∣clining of that Empire, under the Reign of Honorius, it became a Prey to many Barbarous Nations. Some time after it was incorporated into the Kingdom of Burgundy, and from thence pass'd under the Dominion of those Princes, that are the present Possessors thereof. Berold, or Bertold, who lived in the beginning of the XIth Century, is the Stock from whence sprang this most Noble Family. Howsoever different the Opinions of Historians may seem to be with respect to these Cir∣cumstances, we ought to adhere to that of Guichenon, con∣firm'd and authoriz'd by above 80 other Authors of the German, Italian, French and Savoisian Nations. They unanimously agree, that this Berold was descended from Wittikind, the great Duke of Saxony and Angria, the Father of Wittibert Duke of Angria, who begat Bruno and Valpert. This last in like manner Duke of Angria and Count of Ringolbert, left Immed Duke of Eugern, to whom Hinna Countess of Chiren, brought forth Hugh Marquess of Italy, the Father of the said Berald, Count or Earl of Savoy and Maurienne, after whom succeeded Humbert, sir-nam'd White-hands. Their Successors ad∣ded divers Demeans to their former Possessions, and the Emperor Sigismund erected them into a Dutchy, A. D. 1416, in favour of Amedeo VIII. The Dukes of Savoy, who derive the original of their Extraction from the House of Saxony, are at present stiled Kings of Cyprus, ever since Lewis of Savoy married the only Daughter of John King of that Island. They also bear the Title of Vicars of the Empire since the time of Amedeo the Great. Some Writers, particularly Mr. Chorier and Du Bouchet affirm, that there never was any such Per∣son as the above-mention'd Berold of Saxony; and that Humbert was the Grand-son of the Emperor Lewes the Son of Boson. The Air of this Country is cool by reason of the great number of Mountains that are always cover'd with Snow; nevertheless the Hills and Valleys are fruitful in Corn and Grapes: The Mountains serve only for Pasture, feeding many Herds of Cattle, and affording much varie∣ty of Game; for here is found good store of Stags, Fal∣low-Deer, Roe-Bucks, Wild-Boars, Bears, Marmotes, White-Hares and others; red, white and gray Par∣tridgs, Wood-hens and Pheasants. The Lakes, in like manner supply the Inhabitants with divers sorts of Fish, more epecially Trouts, Pikes and Carps: Neither are there wanting Wall-nut and Chess-nut Trees, besides Forests full of other kind of Timber Trees. The most considerable Rivers are the Isere, Arche and Arve; and the principal Lakes are those of Bourget and Annecy. The Savoyards are an indu∣strious People, courteous, and of a gentle Disposition. The Persons of Quality retain somewhat of a Noble and Majestick Meen, and they all profess the Roman Catholick Religion. The chief Trading of these Parts consists in Paper, Fustians, raw Silks, Hides, Cloths, Linnen, Thread, Iron-work, Fir-Trees for Masts of Ships, and other valuable Commodities. The Territories of Savoy are divided into eight Parts or Provinces. Three toward the South. Savoy, properly so call'd, The Valley of Maurienne. The Valley of Tarantaise. Chambery, Cap. S. John of Maurienne, B. Montiers, Arch∣bish. Three toward the North. The County of Geneva. The County of Fossigny. The County of Chablais. Annecy. Bonneville. Ecluse. Thonon. Two toward the East. The Dutchy of Aoste. The County of Cenaveis, or Valley of Sallasses. Aoste, Bish. Rivarol. In Bugey, S. Gens de Hoste. Champagne. Yenne. In the Dutchy of Savoy, properly so call'd, are compris'd the chief Towns, viz. Chambery, Cap. Montmeillan, Beaufort, Aix, Rumilly, Les Eschelles, Vigne, Constans, Aignebele, Miolans, Chatelar, La Rochete. CHAMBERY, Cameriacum, aut Camerium, is situa∣ted at the Confluence of the Rivulets of Laisse and Al∣bans, or Orbane, in a Plain, at the distance of 2 Leagues from Montmeillan to the South, as many from the Lake Bourget to the North, 27 from Grenoble in France to the North-east, 44 from Geneva to the South, 55 from Ly∣ons to the West, 100 from Turin to the North-west, and 270 from Paris to the South-east. This Town is the Capital of the Dutchy of Savoy, and formerly the usual place of Residence of the Dukes. It is not very large, yet well-built, the greater part of the Houses forming Galleries that hang over the Streets, so that one may pass thro' them at all times shelter'd from the extream heat of the Sun, and the Storms of Rain. The publick Buildings are in like manner very beautiful, particularly an ancient Caste; the principal Church dedicated to S. Leger, together with some others, many Monasteries, and a College of Jesuits. Here are also several Springs, which take their rise out of S. Martin's Hill, and spread
map of Savoy and Piedmont SAVOY and PIEDMONT
abroad their Streams through different quarters of the Town; besides which conveniency, there are divers Channels of the River Orbane. On the Eastern-side stand the Suburbs of Montmeillan, and on the Western those of Machee Vernay. On both sides are very pleasant Walks, among which the Mail is chiefly frequented. At Chambery is establish'd a Parliament or Senate, con∣sisting of 4 Presidents and a certain number of Senators; as also a Chamber of Accounts, a Court of Treasury, and a Bailiage; but as to its Ecclesiastical Government, it depends on the Bishoprick of Grenoble. The Emperor Sigismund erected the County of Savoy into a Dutchy, in the same Town of Chambery, on the 19th day of Fe∣bruary, A. D. 1416. But it was seized by the French King in 1690. MONTMEILLAN, Monsmelianus, built on the right-side bank of the River Isere, is distant 8 miles from Chambery to the South-east. It is a very strong, though small Town, and hath a Fortress, or kind of Citadel, founded on a Rock that commands a very narrow Pas∣sage between the Mountains: In the same Rock is also cut a large Well, which supplies the whole Garrison of the Fort with Water; nevertheless Henry IV. King of France, found means to make himself Master thereof, A. D. 1600. It was also besieg'd by the French Forces in 1691, and Taken, after having made a most vigo∣rous Resistance. AIX, Aquae Gratianae, is seated on the Foot of the Mountains between Chambery, Annecy, and Rumilly. It is an ancient Town, tho' of a very small compass, and ill-built, being dignified with the Title of a Mar∣quisate. It is also famous for its Baths and Mineral Waters, impregnated with Alom and Sulphur, and on that account much frequented. The County or Valley of MAƲRIENNE, Mauriana, extends from the Alps to the River Isere on one side; and from the Valley of Tarentaise, as far as the Province of Dauphine in France, the other, is believ'd to be the Coun∣try of the ancient Brannovices mention'd by Caesar, al∣tho' M. Sanson seems to be of another opinion, in his Re∣marks on the ancient Gaul. The Village of Braman at the Foot of Mount Cenis, was then the Capital City, but S. John of Maurienne, hath since gain'd that advantage. The other Towns of chief Note are these, viz. S. John of Maurienne, Bish. and Cap. La Chambre, Marq. S. Michael, S. Julian, S. Andrew, Modane, Ʋsse, Braman, Lamburg. S. JOHN of MAƲRIENNE, Fanum S. Joannis Mauriani, is situated in a pleasant Valley, on the Con∣fines of Dauphine, and the banks of the Rivulet Arche, 16 Leagues from Grenoble to the East. It is a fair City tho' not wall'd, and an Episcopal See, subject to the Me∣tropolitan of Vienne in France. In the Cathedral dedi∣cated to S. John, are to be seen the Tombs of many Dukes of Savoy. The Valley of TARANTAISE, Tarantasia, lies be∣tween the County of Fossigny to the North, the Alps and the Dutchy of Aoste to the East, the Valley of Maurienne to the South, and the Dutchy of Savoy pro∣perly so call'd, to the West. The most considerable Towns are these, viz. Monstiers, Archb. and Cap. S. James, S. Maurice, Brianson, Constans, La Bourg. MONSTIERS, Monasterium; olim Forum Neronis, stands amidst the Mountains, and is water'd by the Streams of the Isere, near the Confluence of this River and the Brook Doere, being distant 16 Miles from S. John of Maurienne to the East, 28 from Montmeil∣lan, and 64 from Turin to the North-west. It was dignified with the Title of a Metropolitan See in the VIIIth Century, having been before that time subject to the Visitation of the Archbishop of Vienne, and retains under its Jurisdiction the Suffragan Bi∣shoprick of Sion and Aoste. BRIANCON, or FORT BRIANCONNET, is a Castle built on a Rock, on the banks of the River Isere, about a League below Monstiers. Some Au∣thors are of opinion, that this Fortress gave its name to the Noble Family of Briancon in Dauphine, that hath produc'd many Illustrious Personages. The Territories of GENEVA, Genevensis Ager, are bounded on the North and West by the River Rhone, on the East by the Countries of Chablais and Fossigny, and on the South by that of Savoy, properly so call'd, The Chief Cities and Towns are these, viz. Geneva, formerly a Bishop's See. Annecy, Cap. Albi, La Roche, Tonnes. Faverge, Manigo, Talloire, Clairmont, Mont Saint Martin. As for the City of Geneva, an account thereof has been already given in the Description of Switzerland and its Allies. ANNECY, Annecium, aut Anneciacum, is seated on the Lake of the same name, at the foot of the Mountains, and water'd with divers Channels that proceed from the said Lake, and form a kind of River nam'd Tioud, which situation renders the Town Delectable, and ad∣vantageous to the Mechanical Artificers, being distant 22 miles from Geneva to the South, 26 from Chambery to the North, and near as many from Bellay to the East. The Lake is altogether destitute of Fish, and the bottom thereof cannot be sounded, extending it self for the space of above 4 Leagues in Length, and about one and a half in breadth. This City is large and of very great Anti∣quity, having afforded a Seat to the Titular Bishop of Geneva, ever since the year 1535, when Pierre de la Beaume, exercis'd the Episcopal Functions. The Canons officiate in the Church of the Cordeliers, as also do the Monks of that Order in their turn. There are also two other Collegiate Churches, viz. one dedicated to the Vir∣gin Mary, and another to S. Maurice, besides a Semina∣ry of Priests of S. Lazarus, a College of Barnabites, a very ancient Convent of Dominicans, a Monastery of Capuchins, another of S. Clare, a third of Benedictines, and two of the Visitation; one of which last being the first of the Order, is very Magnificent, and built on the side of the Lake, wherein is preserv'd the Corps of S. Francis de Shales, Bishop of Geneva: The Houses are generally erected on Arches, insomuch that one may walk almost every where under shelter. ALBI, Alba, is a small Town standing between Annecy and Aix, on the side of a Mountain, the foot whereof is water'd with a very impetuous Torrent. The Province of FOSSIGNY, FOƲCIGNI, or FAƲS∣SIGNI, Fociniacum, aut Fociniacensis Tractus, lies betwixt that of Geneva and le Valais, in a mountainous Country, and was heretofore inhabited by the Focunates, or Fo∣cuates: In time past it was govern'd by certain particular Lords, and as yet enjoys the Title of a Barony. The chief Towns are these, viz. Bonneville, Cap. Cluse, S. Gervaise, Taninge, Salanche. BONNEVILLE, Bonnopolis, is situated on the foot of the Mountains, and the right side of the River Arva, 2 Leagues below Cluse, 4 from Annecy to the East, and
about as many from Geneva. It is defended with an old Castle, and only considerable on the account of the Illustrious Families that sprang from thence, particu∣larly those of S. Alban de Miller, Cheles, &c. The Province of CHABLAIS, Caballicus Ducatus; is bounded on the North by the Lake of Geneva, on the East by the County of Valais, on the South by that of Fossigny, and on the West by that of Geneva, It compre∣hends the Bailiages of Tarnier and Gaillard, together with the Territories of S. Victor, and those of the Chap∣ter. In the preceeding Age, most of the inhabitants of this Destrict had embrac'd the Reformed Religion, but afterwatd Apostatiz'd to the Roman Catholick, through the instigation of Francis de Sales, late Prelate of Ge∣neva, who thereupon obtain'd the Title of the Apostle of Chablais among the Zealots of his Party. The principal Towns are these, viz. Tonnon, Cap. Ripaille, Evian, Armoy, S, John of Aux, or of Aost. TONNON, THONON or TOƲNON, Tunonium, is a small Town, built near the Lake Leman, or of Geneva, at the distance of 7 Leagues from that Protestant City to the East, 6 from Annecy to the North, and 5 from Lausanna to the South. The Dutchy of Aoste, Ducatus Augstanus, is situated on the foot of the Alps, between the Territories of Va∣lais, Verceil, and Piedmont, and was the Country of the ancient Salassi, including within its Jurisdiction six large Valleys, besides that from whence it takes its name, through the midst whereof the River Doere, con∣veys its Streams. It is believ'd that this Dutchy was united to Savoy, through the Marriage of Count Odo the Son of Humbert I. with Adelaide of Susa, the Re∣lict of Herman Duke of Schawben, in the year 1030, or 1031. Moreover, it hath been possess'd at several times by the Lombards, French and Burgundians. The most considerable Towns of the same Dutchy and Val∣ley are these, viz. Aoste, Bish. and Cap. La Sale, Morges, Issogne, Villeneuve, Montjouet, Valete, S. Martin, Chambiane, Chatillon, Chalon, County. Fenis. Lower Fortress, S. Vincent. Verres, Quere, Quester-Argent, S. Peter of Donas, La Tuyl, or the Fort of Castle S. Bernard. S. Marcel-Cour, Majeur, or the Curia Major of the Romans. AOSTE, or AOƲSTE, Augusta Salassorum, aut Au∣gusta Praetoria, is the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Tarantaise, seated in a mountainous but fertil Country, at the foot of the Grand S. Bernard, on the Banks of the River Dorea, where it receives into its Channel the waters of another Rivulet nam'd Bauteg∣gio, at the distance of 25 miles from Jrrea to the North; as also 50 from Turin, and 36 from Monstier. It is re∣puted to have been one of the Colonies of the Emperor Augustus, who impos'd on it this Name: And indeed a Triumphal Arch of the same Augustus is as yet to be seen here almost entire, together with a Colossus, and many other ancient Monuments of the Roman Gran∣deur. This City is also remarkable for giving Birth to the famous S. Anselm, Arch-bishop of Canterbury. A Table shewing the Chronological Succession of the Forty Earls or Dukes of Savoy. XXIV. COUNTS or EARLS. Elected A. D. Reign'd years. 1 BErold I. Earl of Savoy. 1000 22 or 23 2 Humbert I. Sur-named White-Hands. 1023 25 3 Amedeo I. Surnamed The Tail.     4 Odo. 1048 12 5 Amedeo II. 1061 34 6 Humbert II. The Re-inforc'd. 1095 8 7 Amedeo. III. 1103 46 8 Humbert III. The Saint. 1149 39 9 Thomas I. Created Vicar Ge∣neral of the Empire in Lom∣bardy and Piedmont. 1188 35 10 Amedeo IV. 1233 5 11 Boniface Roland. 1238 25 12 Peter, the little Charlemagne. 1263 5 13 Philip I. 1268 17 An Inter-reign. The Four following were only Lords of Piedmont. 14 Philip II. 1282 23 15 James. 1326 38 16 Amedeo. 1366 36 17 Lewes. 1402 16 18 Thomas II. 1285 10 19 Thomas III. 1295 15 20 Amedeo V. the Great, made Prince of the Empire. 1310 13 21 Edward, the Liberal. 1323 6 22 Aimon, the Pacifick. 1329 14 23 Amedeo VI. the Green. 1342 40 24 Amedeo VII. the Red. 1383 9 XVI DUKES. 25 Amedeo VIII. the First Duke of Savoy since the Year 1416, and afterward Pope. 1392 43 26 Lewes I. 1434 31 27 Lewes II. King of Cyprus. 1465 17 28 Amedeo IX. the Fortunate. 1482 7 29 Philipbert I. the Hunter.     30 Charles I. the Warrior.     31 Charles-John I. 1489 7 32 Philip. 1496 1 33 Philibert II. the Fair. 1497 7 34 Charles III. the Good. 1504 49 35 Emanuel-Philibert, Iron-pate. 1553 27 36 Charles-Emanuel I. the Great. 1580 50 37 Victor-Amedeo. 1630 7 38 Francis-Hyacinth. 1637 1 39 Charles-Emanuel II. 1638 37 40 Victor-Amedeo-Francesco, now Reigning. 1675  
ITALY. map of Italy ITALY. IT is certain, that different Names have been, at several times, impos'd on the Country of Italy: for it was heretofore known by that of Saturnia, from Saturn, who reign'd in this Region; as well as by those of Ausonia, Latium, Oenotria, and Hes∣peria, from three Princes that had caus'd divers Co∣lonies to be here establish'd; although it be true in∣deed, that the last of these Names was rather attri∣buted
thereto by the Grecians, after the same man∣ner as to Spain, on the account of its Westy situati∣on, with respect to their Continent; and hat to di∣stinguish those Two Countries, they terme the for∣mer Hesperia-Major. But as for the Demination of Italy, the Original thereof is not very cettain; since some Authors affirm, That it was taken from a King named Italus, and others derive it from the Oxen, or Calves, called  in the Greek Tongue, which were bred within these Territories in great abundance, and generally grew up to an extraordinary large size. But these several Names were us'd for ancient Italy, which was but one half as large as the modern Italy, containing only that Country which lay on the East and South-East of the Rivers Arno and Rubicon, which now makes the Kingdom of Naples, and the greatest part of the Popedom, and Dukedom of Toscany. All that lay on the other side of the Arno and Rubicon, went by the Name of Gaul, and, to distinguish it, Gallia Cis-Alpina and Togata. The modern Italy is call'd by the Germans, Welschlandt, or Walleschlandt; by the Danes, Walland; by the Turks, Vallia; by the Poles, Wolskasemia; by the Sclavonians, Wolska; and by the Dalmatians, and Croatians, Latinisca-Zemlya, and Zemglia. The Figure or Shape of this Country is very Re∣markable, and may be well compar'd to that of a Man's Leg, the End whereof seems as it were to kick the Island of Sicily into the Sea; the Toes appear to∣ward the Faro, or Watch-Tower of Messia, round Reggio, and the Cape of Spartivento; the Heel toward Otranto; the Soal toward Mount St. Angelo; the Calf toward Ancona; the Ham about Ravenna; the Knee toward Piombino, and the Port of Leghorn; and the Thigh toward the Alps. Italy is stretched forth toward the South, as it were a Peninsule, in form of a Boot, into the Mediterra∣nean-Sea, (which receives from thence different Names, according to the several Coasts that it washes,) and in the midst of the Northern Temperate Zone; being bounded on the North by the Alps, which separate it from the Dominions of the House of Austria in Ger∣many and Switzerland; on the West, by the same Mountains, and the River Var, whereby it is divided from France and Savoy; on the North-East by the Gulf of Venice, or Adriatick-Sea; and on the South-West by the Toscan and Ionian Seas, which are so many parts of the Mediterranean. It is extended from the 25th. Degree 4 Minutes, to the 40th. Degree 40 Minutes of Longitude, and from the 37th. Degree 36 Minutes, to the 46th. Degree 25 Minutes of Latitude. It is in length from Geneva, the most North-Western Part of Savoy, to Otranto the most Eastern Part in Naples, 760 English Miles. In breadth in the widest Place from Nice, the most South-Western Part in Piedmont, to Trieste nigh the most Eastern Part in Venice, 380 Miles: In the middle Parts, from Anco∣na to Civita-Vecchia, both in the Popedom, 134 Miles: But in the more narrow Parts, from Policastro to Bar∣letta, but 75 Miles. The AIR is generally healthful and temperate, ex∣cepting in those Territories that appertain to the Juris∣diction of the Ecclesiastical State, where it is very thick and unwholsom, more-especially to Strangers. The SOIL, which is every where water'd with a great Number of Rivers, plentifully brings forth all Things necessary for the sustenance of human Life; particu∣larly Corn, an excellent sort of Grapes, (of which they make Thirty sorts of Wines;) and other most de∣licious Fruits: the Chief of which are Oranges, Ci∣trons, Lemons, Pomgranates, and Olives, that afford vast quantities of Oil. The Kingdom of Naples abounds in Sugar, Nutmegs, Almonds, and Raisins of a delicate Flavour, which are transported even into Bary; besides good store of Mulberry-Trees, that reder this Country famous for its silken Manufactures. Here are also large Meaows, serving as Pasture-ground for Bushes, and many other sorts of Cattle; together with some spacious Forests, almost always green, that are full of wild Beasts, and all manner of variety of Game: Moreover, here are found divers Rocks of A∣labaster, and a most rich kind of Jasper; not to men∣tion the Mines of Iron, Alum, Sulphur, Gold, and Silver; insomuch that many Authors have made no dif∣ficulty to call Italy, The Garden of Europe. Perhaps no Country in the World is more richly stored by Na∣ture than this; but partly from the decay of the Silk Trade, but more especially from the severity of the Government in most Parts, whole Provinces do, in a great measure, lye wast, and are little cultivated: so that of late Years, the greatest part of Italy, especially the Popedom, seems in a declining Condition, not to say worse. Among the most considerable RIVERS we may reckon the PO, Padus, or Eridanus, which takes its rise at Monviso in Piedmont, and having travers'd this Province, together with the Marquisate of Mont∣ferrat, and the Dutchies of Milan, Mantua, and Fer∣rara; having also pass'd by the Cities of Turin, Trin, Casal, Valentia, Placentia, Cremona, and Ferrara, at length falls through divers Mouths into the Gulf of Venice. The ADIGE, Athesis, springing out of the Country of Tirol, waters the Lands of the Bishop∣rick and City of Trent, as also those of the State of Venice; then passing to Verona and Rovigo, conveys its Stream into the same Gulf. The ADDA, Addua, riseth out of the County of Chiavenna, continueth its course throughout the Lake of Como, as far as Lodi, and intermixeth its Waters with those of the Po, be∣tween Cremona and Placentia. The TESIN, Te∣sinus, hath its Spring-head on the Mountain St. Go∣thard, in the Canton of Ʋri, flows throughout the Lake Maggiore by Padua, and afterward runs into the same River. The ARNO, Arnus, springs out of the Frontiers of Toscany and Perusino, crosseth the Do∣minions of the Grand Duke; and having washed the Walls of the Cities of Florence, and Pisa, disembogues it self into the Toscan-Sea. The TYBER, Tyberis, takes its rise in Mount Falterona, near Monte-Carvaio in the Apennine, between the Territories of the State of Florence and Romandiola; then receiving into its Bed the several Streams of the Chiana, Nera and Te∣veron, it flows to Rome, and at last dischargeth its Waters through Two Mouths, into the Toscan-Sea. We may also here observe the course of the Doera or Dora, the Sessia, the Oglio that falls into the Lake of Isco, and the Menzo which runs throughout that of Garda. These Rivers proceed from the Alps, and al∣most all of them enter into the Chanel of the Po: Some others arise out of the Mount Apnnine, and have the like Passage, viz. the Tenaro, the Trebia, the Taro, and the Reno. Besides the above-mention'd Rivers, there are divers others of good Note, viz. the Gargli∣ano, the Voltorno, the Silaro, &c. The Principal MOUNTAINS are, 1. The Alps, which separate Italy from France, Germany, and Switzerland; 2. The Apennine, that runs with a con∣tinued ridge of Hills throughout the whole lngth of the Country; 3. Mount Masso, near Sussea; 4. Mount Barbaro, between Boia and Porruolo; 5. Mount Vesu∣vius, or Monto di Somma, between Naples and Nola; 6. Mount St. Angelo, or Gerguno, in Apulia. There are also 15 or 16 Chief LAKES, viz. 1. That of Como, heretofore call'd Larius; 2. That
of Isco; 3. of Lugano; 4. of Garda in Lombardy; 5. The Lake Trasimenus, or of Perugia, famous for the Defeat of the Romans by Hannibal; 6. The Lake of Vulsin; 7. That of Braciano in Toscany; 8. The Lake Fusinas; 9. That of Fundi; 10. That of Alba∣nus, or Lago di Castello Gendalpho, in the Campaign of Rome; 11. That of Celano, the farther Abruzzo; 12. of Andora; 13. of Varam; 14. of Lesina, in the Capitanato; 15. That of Bolsona in the Patrimony of St. Peter. The Italians are generally an ingenious People, ap∣prehensive of any thing, and quick-witted; and there is scarce any thing so difficult, but they are capable of conquering: they are Patient and Assiduous in any thing they set about, or desire to learn, never giving over till they master it, and attain the Perfection of it: they are still, quiet People, as being naturally Me∣lancholy; of a middle temper, between the fastuous Gravity of the Spaniards, and the unquiet Levity of the French, agreeing, in a great measure, with the Eng∣lish: they are very Faithful and Loving to those that are really their Friends, mindful of a Courtesie re∣ceiv'd; and, if it lies in their power, for one good Turn they will do you two; great Lovers they are of their Brothers, and near Kindred; and if any of them lie fair for Advancement, all the rest of the Relations will lend him their Purses, as well as their Shoulders to help him up, though he be but a younger Brother: they are ambitious of Honours, remembring that they are the Successors of the Masters of the World, the old Romans; and to put the World still in mind of it, they take to themselves the glorious Names of Camillo, Scipione, Julio, Mario, Pompeio, &c. Notwithstanding their native Gravity, they are apish enough in Carnival-time, and upon the Stages, no Country in the World being more famous for Buffoons, Mimicks, Scha∣ramouches, &c. than this: but this is no longer than the Vizard is on; that being off, they are too wise to play the Fool in their own Names: they are not easily provok'd, but will bear long with one another, and longer with Strangers: they are also very careful to avoid all Occasions of Quarrel; not to say, or do any thing that may offend any Person, especially not to abuse any one by Jesting or Drollery; which they can by no means away with: most of 'em, even of the or∣dinary sort of People, will discourse intelligently a∣bout Politick Affairs, and the Government and Inte∣rest of their own Country; being much delighted with such sort of Studies: and they are so very cove∣tous of Liberty, especially such Cities as were former∣ly Commonwealths, that in many Places, Discourses, as well as Books, about former Revolutions, are pro∣hibited. The Italian Gentry live, for the most part, in the Cities; whence it is that the Cities are so splendid and well built, so populous, and so rich: the Nobility, and great Persons, choosing rather to spend their Re∣venues in building fine Palaces, and adorning them with Pictures and Statues, in making stately and spa∣cious Orchards, Gardens and Walks, in keeping Coaches and Horses, and a great Retinue of Servants and Staf∣fiers, than in keeping great Houses, and plentiful Ta∣bles; giving Board-wages to their Servants and Atten∣dants. As for Paintings and Statues, they are great admirers of them, as they are of Musick; and they are so intemperately fond of these Things, that they will give any Rate for a choice Picture, or Statue: they are great lovers of publick Sights, and the infe∣rior Gentry affect to appear in publick with as much Splendour as they can, and will deny themselves many Satisfactions at home, that they may be able to keep a Coach, and therein make the Tour-a-la-mode about the Streets of their City every Evening. Of the Gentry, especially in Venice, if there be many Brothers of one House, only one usually marries, and that the Eldest, if he pleases; if he be not dispos'd, then any other, as they can agree among themselves: the rest do what they can to Greaten him that is marry'd, to uphold the Family. The Brothers that marry not, keep Concu∣bines, or Whores; which, though never so sinful, yet their Confessors can easily absolve 'em. In many of their Cities are Hospitals, where Pilgrims, and poor Travellers are entertain'd, having their Diet and Lodg∣ing Three Days gratis, besides a piece of Money when they go away: but modern Travellers say, this Charity is much abus'd. There are also Hospitals to receive all exposed Children that shall be brought and put in at a Grate on purpose, whither upon ringing a Bell, an Officer comes presently, and receives the Child, on∣ly asking the Party that brought it, Whether it has been Baptiz'd, then carries it to a Nurse to give it suck; and there it is maintain'd till it be grown up. This is to prevent People's Murthering their Children to con∣ceal their Shame. No People in Europe are more scrupulous and ex∣act in observing all the Punctilio's of Civility and good Breeding: there is a greater excess in their civil Ex∣pressions, than in the French; for they usually say, Schiavo di V. Sigria; that is, I am your Slave, instead of your Servant: and the Word Vosignoria, Your Lord∣ship, is ordinary with them; or the Title of Molto Magnifico, given to Mechanicks and common Trades∣men; and a Stranger with them is presently Signiore Conte, or Barone; or at least Signiore Cavaliere. They are never puzled when they hear a Great Man is co∣ming to visit them; for there is not a Man of 'em, but he knows how to entertain Men of all Conditions: that is, how far to meet, how to place them, how to stile and treat them, how to re-conduct them, and how far. They are excellent at Nunciatures, Embas∣sies, and State-Employments, being Men of good Be∣haviour, Looks, Temper, and Discretion, and never out-running their Business. In their Visits they are very careful, never going to see any Person of Note, without first sending to them; nor are they less exact in their Walkings, and publick Meetings. The Right-hand is always with them the upper-hand, whether it be next the Wall, or not: but when Three walk toge∣ther, the middle is the most Honourable. Hence it is, that when they walk backwards and forwards, they are very careful to let every one take his turn in the middle. As for their Conversation, it's not very easie to be had by Strangers; but when it is, it will be found sweet, civil, and obliging, very circumspect not to give Offence to any one in the Company, or any else that has relation to it, ever respectful one to another: the greatest Familiarity does not make 'em recede from a courteous Carriage. As to Strangers, they are ex∣treamly civil, always avoiding any thing that may give 'em the least disgust, though they give never so much occasion; and for that Reason, they never ask them what Religion they are of, carefully avoiding all unnecessary Disputes about that Subject, which are apt to engender Quarrels. Whenever they are in Compa∣ny, they do not only give every Man his turn of speak∣ing, but also attend till he has done, accounting it a piece of ill Breeding to interrupt any Man in his Dis∣course, as hating to be interrupted themselves. As careful they are not to whisper privately one to another when in Company, or talk in another Language, which all the Company understands not; and Backbiting is look'd upon by 'em, as an unpardonable Affront.
As for their peculiar Customs: They count not the Hours of the Day as we do, from Twelve to Twelve; but they begin their Reckoning from Sun-set: and the first Hour after Sun-set is One a Clock, and so they count on till Four and twenty; that is, till the next Sun-set again. It is a general Custom over all Italy to sleep an Hour or two after Dinner in Summer-time; so that from Two a Clock till Four in the Afternoon, you shall scarce see any Body stirring about the Streets of the Cities. It is troublesome to travel with Fire-Arms in Italy, you being forc'd, in most Cities, to leave 'em at the Gate with the Guard, till you leave the Place: This is to prevent Assaults and Murthers, which are so frequent there. And when any Man de∣parts from any City, he must be sure to take a Bill of Health; without which, he can hardly get admittance into another City. As to Marriages, here they marry by their Ears oftner than by their Eyes; and scarce speak with one another till they meet before the Priest. They ever make Children go bare-headed, till they are Four or Five Years old, hardening them against Rheums and Catarrhs when they come to be old; and 'tis an usual thing for the Women to go Bare-headed in their Houses all Winter long. Women here also wash their Heads Weekly in a Wash made on purpose, and dry them against the Sun to make their Hair yellow, a Colour much in vogue among the Ladies. The Men throw off their Hats, Cuffs, and Bands, as well as their Cloaks, at their return home from Visits, or Business, and put on a grey Coat, and a little Cap, without which they cannot Dine or Sup; and many times when a Stranger dines with 'em, they help him to a grey Coat and a Cap to dine in. At Dinner they serve in the best Meats first, and eat backwards; that is, they begin with the second Course, and end with the boiled Meat and Pottage; and they never present any Man with Salt, or Brains, lest they should seem to reproach him with want of Wit. They bring you Drink upon a silver Stand, with Three or Four Glasses upon it, Two or Three of which are strait-neck'd Glas∣ses full of several sorts of Wine, or Water, and one empty Drinking-glass, into which you may pour what quantity of Wine and Water you please, and never stand to the Discretion of Waiters, as they do in other Countries. At great Feasts, no Man cuts for himself, but several Carvers cut up all the Meat at a side Table, the Waiters carrying to the Guests; and every one has the very same part of Meat carried to him, suppose a Wing and a Leg of wild Fowl, &c. lest any one take Exceptions that others were better us'd than he. The Italians, when they call any one at a distance, they make a Sign with their Fingers downward, moving them gently; for to do it with their Fingers upwards, as we do, wou'd be an Affront. A strange way they have to retort Affronts upon others, which is, by break∣ing a Bottle of Ink upon one, especially Women, or else over the Door of the House, so that it remains spotted with it, which is the greatest Note of Infamy that can be laid upon any one. As to the DIET of the Italians, their Flesh∣meat is not only naturally more lean and dry than ours, but they roast it also till it be ready to fall from the Bones, and there be little Juice left in it; and they do it generally with Coals underneath the Spit, that the Fat may drop upon 'em, and give the Meat a Tincture. They scrape Cheese upon all their Dishes, even of Flesh, reckoning it gives the Meat a good Relish. Snails boil'd, and serv'd up with Oil and Pepper put into their Shells, is very common, and in good esteem with them. Frogs is another great Dish with 'em; they usually fry 'em, and serve 'em up with Oil: but at Venice they eat only the Loins and hind Legs; as also at Florence, and that upon Fish-days. They eat all manner of small Birds, as well as the Germans, viz. Wrens, Stares, Titmice, Butcher-Birds, &c. and se∣veral other great Ones, which we touch not in England, as Magpies, Jays, Woodpeckers, Jackdaws, &c. And in Rome, its frequent to see Kites and Hawks lying on Poulterers Stalls. They have many excellent Fruits, many of which come to a greater Perfection than ours. Chesnuts roasted, and the Kernels served up with Juice of Lemon and Sugar, are much esteem'd; and roasted Chesnuts are a great part of the Diet of the poor Pea∣sants in Italy. In their Second Courses, they common∣ly serve up Pine-Kernels, and, at time of Year, green Almonds; also a kind of Sweet-meat, or Confection, made up of Mustard and Sugar, which they call Ita∣lian-Mustard, to cool and refresh themselves. They often use Water-Melons; and for their Wines, they use Snow, or Ice, which they keep in Conservatories all Summer. They that are much used to this way, will not willingly drink without Snow in this Country, no not in Winter. The Principal MORAL VERTUES of the Italians, setting aside some Excellencies I men∣tion'd before, are I. Sobriety, both as to Eating and Drinking; and as to the latter, it is one of the greatest Affronts he can receive to be call d Imbriaco, or Drun∣kard; and it is a great Rarity to see any one Drunk in Italy, though they have such great variety of excel∣lent Wines to tempt 'em. II. Frugality, which they have almost to excess; for it's an usual thing for Prin∣ces, and Cardinals, when they receive a Present of Sweet-meats, Fowls, or the like, to sell 'em to the Confectioners, Poulterers, &c. which wou'd be look'd upon here as the Effect of a covetous and miserable Temper. III. Civility to all Strangers, which they have to that degree, that a Stranger shall never be af∣fronted by 'em, let his Garb, or his Actions be never so ridiculous. Their Chief VICES are I. Revenge, which they have to the most extravagant Degree in the World, never forgiving an Injury, most secret and treacherous in the performance of their Revenge, and shewing no Signs of Anger till they find an opportunity; and then they're so implacable, that by no means they are to be trusted when they say they Pardon. And they pro∣phanely say, That Vengeance is so sweet a Thing, that God will reserve it to himself, because he will have no Man share with him in so great a Good. II. Lust, both natural and unnatural, which rages in 'em in an extra∣ordinary manner; but some think this proceeds rather from the Country than the Men. III. Jealousie, which strangely possesses these People, which is mostly the Effect of the last Vice; and this makes many of the Womens Lives very miserable. IV. Swearig, which is so common, that the Priests and Monks themselves can scarce abstain from it. For their CLOATHS, most of the Italians, of any Fashion wear Black, or dark-colour'd Cloaths, and for the Fashion of them follow the French, but not too hastily; excepting those Countries that are under the King of Spain, where they use the Spanish Habit. I spoke before of the Women's yellowing their Hair, to which I may add their Painting, than which nothing is more common among 'em; and for all sorts of Ornaments and Decorations, they use as much as their Husbands, or Friends, will permit 'em. There goes a Saying of 'em, That they are Magpies at the Door, Saints in the Church, Goats in the Garden, De∣vils in the House, Angels in the Streets, and Syrens in the Windows. The RELIGION of this Country is the Ro∣man-Catholick, which is every where profess'd; and
the Inquisition is kept up with that Severity in most Places, that it is very dangerous to be of any other: only some Jews are tolerated, upon the account of Trade. However, in the Valleys of Piedmont, there are many Protestants call'd Vaudois, about 15000 Souls in number, which have maintain'd the Purity of their Religion this 1200 Years; though they have been of∣ten Persecuted by the Dukes of Savoy, yet lately they have once more regain'd their Liberty. No Country in the World ever produc'd more Learn∣ed Men and Heroes than this. Here flourish'd the fam'd Philosophers, Pliny, Cato, and Seneca; the great Orators, Cicero, Hortesius, and Antonius; the re∣nown'd Historians, Livy, Tacitur, and Sallust; the memorable Poets, Virgil, Lucretius, Ovid, Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius; the notable Comedi∣ans, Plautus, and Terence; the famous Satyrists, Horace, Juvenal, and Persius; with a vast Number of others. In latter Times they have had for Divines, Thomas Aquinus, Bellarmine, and Baronius; for Hu∣manity, Rodolphus Volaterranus, and Picus Mirandula; for Philosophy, Ficinus, and Cardan; for Oratory, Panigarola, and Loredano; for History, Guicciardine, Bentivoglia, Davila, and Strada; for Poetry, Tasso, Ariosto, Petrarch, and Guarini; for Architecture, Bru∣nelleschi, Palladio, and Fontana; for Painting, Raphael, Michael Angelo, Titian, and Sarto. But at present, Learning among the Italians seems to be in a decay, and the Monks and Jesuits more ignorant than former∣ly: And as for Languages, the Latin is much neg∣lected by 'em of late, principally upon the Account of the love and fondness of their own Tongue; and as for the Greek, few or none have any tolerable Skill in it, as a modern Traveller observes. I might have spoke of the famous Warriors and Captains of this Nation; but there hath been such a vast number of 'em, especially the old Romans, that the very naming of 'em wou'd too much trouble the Reader. The Italian LANGUAGE is derived from the Latin, which the Goths, Vandals, Lombards, and ma∣ny other Nations have corrupted with their different Jargons. The most polite manner of Expression is used chiefly in Toscany; but this Dialect ought to be pronounc'd by a Roman, who sets it of with a most delicate Accent; which gave occasion to a common Proverb among these People, Lingua Toscana, in Bocca Romana. Indeed the Italian is a very elegant Language, and deserves well to be studied by an inge∣nious Linguist. It is reckon'd the most harmonious, and most sonorous of all modern Languages, and the fittest for Songs. It is not spoken in all Italy; for in Savoy, and Piedmont, the French is most us'd. There is not any Country to be seen throughout the World, in which the Cities are so magnificent, and well built, on which account it will be requisite to give a more particular Account of them, according to the situation of every Province; in the mean while, we may take notice of certain Epithets commonly at∣tributed to some Places, such as these, viz. Rome the Sacred, Naples the Noble, Florence the Fair, Venice the Rich, Genoa the Stately, Milan the Great, Ravenna the Ancient, Padua the Learned, Bononia the Fat—, Leghorn the Merchandizing, Verona the Charming, Luc∣ca the Jolly, Casal the Strong, &c. Moreover, it ought to be observ'd, that there are Twelve Principal Cities, every one of which is adorn'd with an University, viz. 1. Padua; 2. Venice; 3. Turin; 4. Pavia; 5. Sienna; 6. Bononia; 7. Rome; 8. Ferrara; 9. Macerata; 10. Fermo; 11. Naples; 12. Salerno. ITALY hath been govern'd by divers Kings, and afterward became subject to certain Republicks, until at length it fell under the Dominion of the Roman Empire, which hath render'd it so famous. As for the Kings of Rome, they possess'd only a small part of the Country: The Consuls who succeeded them, subdued the neighbouring Nations only by degrees; and even the Roman Empire was not entirely Establish'd until the Reign of Augustus. Its Grandeur began to decline in the V. Century, when the Goths, Lombards, French, Normans, Saracenes, Germans, Spaniards, and many other People in their turns, reveng'd the Injuries that had been offer'd to them, and settl'd themselves in Italy at several times. But the Emperor Justinian ex∣pel'd the greater Part of these Barbarians in the VI. Century, through the means of his Generals Be∣lisarius, and Narses, and erected an Exarchate in the City of Ravenna. However, the Lombards made them∣selves Masters thereof, and Founded the Kingdom of Lombardy, A. D. 508. in Gallia Cisalpina; which con∣tinu'd about 204 Years, and was utterly ruin'd by Charlemaign 774. Whereupon this Potent Monarch gave very considerable Territories to the See of Rome; as it shall be shew'd more at large in the Description of the Ecclesiastical State, or Patrimony of St. Peter. In the IX. X. and XI. Centuries, the Saracens made Incursions into Italy, and took Possession of the Island of Sicily; but were driven out from thence by the Nor∣mans, A. D. 1058 Afterward the French and Spani∣ards obtain'd the Government at different times. But at present all the Princes that possess Lands in Italy act at their Pleasure, and conformably to their particular Interests, depending either on the Pope, or the Em∣peror of Germany. The Division of this Region hath been often alter'd from time to time, accordingly as the foreign Nations have fixed their Colonies therein; or as the Power of the Natives hath encreas'd, either through their Con∣quests, or Alliances. The Gauls having seiz'd on that Part of Italy, which is extended from the Alps, and the Apennine, to the River of Jesi that falls into the Gulph of Venice, near Ancona, the Romans attributed thereto the Name of Gallia Italica, Citerior or Cisal∣pina, and afterward added those of Circumpadana and Togata, to denote that it lay on the hither side of the Banks of the River Po, and that the Inhabitants wore long Robes in imitation of the Romans. In ancient Italy were reckon'd up 15 Provinces; and it is repor∣ted, That this Division was made in the time of Au∣gustus, viz. 1. Latium; 2. Campania; 3. Apulia; 4. Messapia; 5. Lucania; 6. Brutium; 7. Samnium; 8. Picenum; 9. Ʋmbria; 10. Etruria; 11. Gallia Cis-alpina; 12. Liguria; 13. The Country of the Vene∣tians; 14. Istria, and Gallia Transpadana. After∣ward the Emperor Adrian divided the whole Conti∣nent of Italy into 17 Provinces, comprehending the Islands; which Account was also confirm'd in the Time of Constantine the Great. Some of these Pro∣vinces, as being most Fertile, were termed Annonariae; and others situated near the City of Rome, bore the Name of Suburbicariae. Under the Reign of the Lom∣bards, 18 were enroll'd in the publick Register. Pto∣lomy hath taken notice of 45 different sorts of People, and Strabo of Eight Regions. Leandro Alberti hath in like manner enumerated 19 distinct Counties: But Italy may at present be divided according to the several Lordships, and the different Sovereigns that have Do∣minions therein. However, to the end that the Geo∣graphical Order may be more exactly observ'd, we shall distinguish it into Three Parts, as they are repre∣sented in the ensuing Table.
ITALY in PARTICULAR. 1. The Ʋp∣per, or Ancient Lombardy in Nine. The Principality of PIED∣MONT Turin, Archb. The Coasts of Genoa Genoa, Archb. The Marquisate of Mont∣ferrat Casal, Bish. The Dutchy of Milan Milan, Ar. The Dutchy of Parma Parma. The Dutchy of Mantua Mantua. The State of Venice Venice. Bishoprick and Principality of Trent Trent. 2. The Mid∣dle in Four. The Republick of Lucca Lucca. The State of Toscany Florence. The Ecclesiastical State Rome. The Republick of St. Marino St. Marino. 3. The Low∣er in Two. The Kingdom of Naples in Twelve Provinces, On the Medi∣terra∣nean Six. The Land of Lavoro Naples, Ar. The farther Principality Benevento, A. The hither Principality Salerno, A. The Land of Basilicata Cirenza, A. The hither Calabria Cosenza, A. The farther Calabria Reggio, A. On the Gulf of Ve∣nice Six. The hither Abruzzo Chieti, A. The farther Abruzzo Penna, B. The Capitanato Menfredonia, Archb. The County of Molisi Molisi. The Land of Bari Bari, A. The Land of Otranto Otranto, A. The I∣slands in Six prin∣cipal Parts. Sicily Palermo, Ar Sardinia Caglieri, A. Corsica Batio, Bish. Capa di Logudori Sessari, A. Lipari Liperi, B. The Islands round about Sar∣dinia Santo Pietro. CHAP. II. PIEDMONT, Pedemontium, in Italian Piémonte. THE Principality of PIEDMONT, which appertains to the Jurisdicton of the Duke of Savoy, was heretofore compris'd within the Li∣mits of Gallia Subalpina, and afterward in those of Lombardy. But at present it is bounded on the North by the Wallisland in Switzerland; on the West, by the Dutchy of Savoy, and the Province of Dauphinè; on the South, by the Republick of Genoa, and the County of Nice, which is generally reckon'd a part of Pied∣mont; and on the East, by the Dutchy of Milan, and the Marquisate of Montferrat. Its utmost extent from South to North consists of about 140 Miles from Ville Franche as far as the Alps, and 100 from West to East, from the hither side of Lauset to the Frontiers of Mont∣ferrat. This Province comprehends in particular the Principality of Piedmont, properly so call'd; the Dut∣chy of Aoste; the Marquisate of Ivrea, Susa, Seva, and Saluces; the County of Asti, the Lordship of Vercelli, and the Country of Canavese, together with that Part of Piedmont, subject to the Dominion of the French King, wherein are included Pignerol, Peru∣sia, Lucern, and Briqueras. The Duke of Savoy as yet retains the Possession of some litttle part of the Country of Nice, and part of Montferrat, as we shall shew in its proper Place. The Country is very con∣siderable on the account of its Fruitfulness, the clear∣ness of its Air, and the Riches of the Inhabitants. The eldest Son of the Duke of Savoy, bears the Title of Prince of Piedmont. All Provisions are Plentiful and Cheap here, the Country being very Rich and Fertil. It is esteem'd in∣feriour to no part of Italy for Pleasantness and Plenty of Corn, Cattel, Wine, Fruit, Hemp, Flax, Metals, and almost every thing necessary for Human Life; and withal is so populous, that the Italians us'd to say, That the Duke of Savoy has only one City in Italy of 300 Miles in Compass. The Inhabitants are so gi∣ven to Husbandry, that no Country is better cultivated than Piedmont: which may be conveniently divided into these Ten Parts, viz. Piedmont Proper Turin, Cap. French Piedmont Pignerol The Lordship of Verceil Verceil The Principality of Masseran Masseran The Marquisate of Ivrea Ivrea The County of Asti Asti The Marquisate of Susa Susa The Marquisate of Saluces Saluces The Valleys of the Vaudois The County and Principality of Boglio Boglio. Proper PIEDMONT, Pedemontium proprie sic dictum. PIEDMONT, properly so call'd, lies between the Territories of Montferrat, on the East; those of the Republick of Genoa on the South; the Marqui∣sate of Saluces on the West; as also, the Marqisate of Susa, and part of Montferrat, on the North. Its Principal Cities and Towns are these, viz. Aoste Dutchy. Turin Aoste Dutchy Fossano, Bish. Mondovi, Bish. Ceva, Marquisate Rivoli Carignan Princip. Vigon Savillano Coni Cherasco Chieri Moncalier Orbassan TƲRIN, Taurinum or Augusta Taurinorum, is seated in a fruitful Plain, having the River Po on its right side, and the Duria on the left, at the distance
of 20 Miles nigh East of Pignerol, 78 almost West of Genoa and Milan, 100 almost East of Grenoble and Chambery, 120 South-east of Geneva, 154 almost South-east of Lyons, 250 West of Venice, 360 South-east of Paris, and 340 North-west of Rome. It is a very fair City, and much enlarged of late Years, through the Magnificence of the Dukes, Victor Amadeo, and Charles Emanuel, being ennobl'd with a Senate, a Chamber of Accompts, the Seat of an Archbishop, and an University founded under the Popedom of Benedict XIII. A. D. 1405. This University boasts of being the first that brought Printing into Italy. The Palace of his Royal Highness, who usually keeps his Court here, is very Ancient, and extremely Magnificent, wherein is admir'd a Gallery enrich'd with variety of curious Paintings, Statues, Arms, Ma∣nuscripts, and many other singular Rarities; particu∣larly the Genealogy of the Dukes of Savoy, the Celestial Signs artificially represented, and 30000 Volumes in the Library. The Town has about 8500 Houses, and is also adorn'd with large Streets, spacious Market-Places, well built Houses, and stately Churches; more-especially the Cathedral of St. John, call'd the Dome, where a great number of Reliques are shewn; and among others, the Handkerchief, on which an Impression is made of the Face, and some part of the Body of Jesus Christ. There are also divers other magnificent Palaces in the Town, and a great number of Noblemen, of whom the Duke's Court is compos'd, as being one of the most Polite in Europe. Moreover, the Citadel of Turin, built by Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, in 1565, is a very strong and beautiful For∣tification: for it is flank'd with five Royal Bastions, and erected according to the Model of that of Ant∣werp; nevertheless, the French Troops, under the Command of Count Harcourt, found means to sur∣prize it, together with the Town, A. D. 1640. It generally contains Arms for 40000 Men. The Courts of Justice for this Province are held here. [As for the Dutchy of Aoste, we have given an Account thereof in the Description of Savoy.] Fossano, Fossanum, is so call'd as it were Fons sanus, from the most wholsom Springs of clear Water that plentifully flow abroad in the neighbouring Fields, and was built in the Year 1236. It is seated on the Banks of the River Stura, having a Fortress between Saluces to the West, and Mondovi to the South-east, about 8 Miles North of Coni, 24 South of Turin, and 27 South-east of Pignerol. Pope Gregory XIII. not long since, founded an Episcopal See here, and ren∣der'd it subject to the Visitation of the Archbishop of Milan. The French Forces have often surpriz'd this City, during the Wars of Italy. Mondovi, Mondevi, or Mondevis, Mons Vici, or Mons Regalis, is pleasantly situated, partly on the side, and partly on the foot of Mount Apennine, to∣wards the Coasts of Genoa, and the Dutchy of Mont∣ferrat, being scarcely distant 2 miles from the River Tanaro, 13 East of Coni, 26 North-west of Final, and 27 South of Turin. It heretofore appertain'd to the Jurisdiction of Montferrat, in the time of Theodore II. Marquis of that Province, at whose Solli∣citation it was erected into a Bishop's See, under the Metropolitan of Turin, A. D. 1388. Pope Pius V. some time exercis'd the Episcopal Function here, and bore the Name of Cardinal Michael Gislerio. Indeed, Mondovi is a large City, and the most Populous of Piedmont, after Turin, and is divided into Three Parts. A sort of White Marble is commonly dug out of an Hill, on which stands the Citadel built by Philibert Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, A. D. 1573; and a mira∣culous Image of the Virgin Mary is (as they say) pre∣serv'd in a stately Church founded by Emanuel I. Moreover this City was formerly adorn'd with an Uni∣versity, which hath been since translated to Turin. Ceva, a small Town guarded with a Castle, 8 Miles South-east of Mondovi. It is the Capital of the Coun∣trey of the Langhes, a Name appropriated to certain little Hills that make the beginning of Mount Apen∣nine, and dignify'd with the Title of a Marquisate. The adjacent Countrey, chiefly toward Tende and Montferrat, affords much variety of Game, more-especially Pheasants and Partridges. Carignan, a considerable Town, bearing the Title of a Principality, stands on the Banks of the River Po, over which is erected a fair Bridge 8 Miles South of Turin. It is defended by a strong Castle, and its Soil abounds with Mulberry-Trees for Silk-worms. Tho∣mas Francis of Savoy, Fifth Son of Charles Emanuel I. Duke of Savoy, and Catherine Michelle of Austria, was honour'd with the Titles of Prince of Carignan, and Great Master of France, and died A. D. 1656. In 1625, he took to Wife Mary of Bourbon, Daughter of Charles of Bourbon, and begat Joseph Emanuel, John Eugenius Mauritius Count of Soissons; Amadaeus, Ferdinand, Charlotte Christina, and Louise Christina, who was marry'd to Ferdinand Maximilian. The Town of Carignan was taken by the French, in the Year 1691; and re-gain'd in the same Year by the Duke of Savoy. Savillano, or Savigliano, Savilianum, a large Town on the River Magra, between Fossano to the East, and Saluces to the West, 6 Miles from either, and 22 South of Turin. It is the Capital of a Territory of the same Name, and remarkable for its advantageous Si∣tuation between two Rivers, rendring it capable of being very well fortify'd; insomuch that Philibert Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, intended to make it the Metropolis of his Dominions. CONI, Cuneum, is a strong Town and Castle built on an Hill at the Confluence of the Rivers Stura and Ges, 35 Miles South of Turin. It held out against Francis I. King of France; but was taken by the Count de Harcourt, under Lewis XIII. A. D. 1641. But Lewis XIV. not having been so successful, in 1691, was obliged to raise the Siege.
map CONI in Piedmont. Cherasco, or Quieras (according to the French pro∣nunciation) is a small but strong Town on a Hill, near the River Tanare, 30 Miles South-east of Turin. It is chiefly noted for a memorable Treaty of Peace concluded there between the Emperor, the French King, the King of Spain, and the Dukes of Savoy and Modena. Chieri, or Quiers, is a Town of considerable strength, ledgend was formerly a fair City govern'd by its own Re∣publick. It is now famous for the Fustian Manufac∣ture, and certain Seeds that are us'd by Dyers. The Count of Harcourt gain'd a Battle over the Spaniards, near this Place, which is distant 7 Miles from Turin almost to the East. French PIEDMONT, Pedemontium Gallicum. That Part of Piedmont, which is now possess'd by the French, lies between Piedmont Proper, and the Valleys of the Vaudois, containing these Places of chief Note, Viz. PIGNEROL. Perusa. Briqueras. PIGNEROL, Pinarolium, call'd Pinarolo by the Italians, is a well fortify'd Town, and a Place of very great importance, as situated at the foot of the Alpes, near the River Cluso, or Chiso, on the very Borders of the Province of Dauphiné, and secur'd with a strong Castle on a Hill that commands all the adja∣cent Valleys; 20 Miles almost South-west of Turin, 43 almost East Ambrun, 68 North of Nice, 57 nigh West of Casal, 94 almost East of Grenoble, and 350 South-east of Paris. Within its Walls are enclos'd divers fair Churches, and Religious Houses. The Ci∣tadel is as well naturally fortify'd as by Art, being built on a Rock; and its other Bulwarks are very regular. This Town formerly depended on the Do∣minions of the Duke of Savoy, and serv'd as an Inhe∣ritance for the Younger Sons of that Illustrious Family, until it was taken by the French Forces under the Con∣duct of Armand John du Plessis, Cardinal of Richlieu, A. D. 1630. Afterward Duke Victor Amadeo sold it, together with the Fort and Valley of Perusa, wherein stood ten or twelve other Towns and Villages, viz. Riva, Baudenasco, Bunasco, &c. to Lewis XIII. for the Summ of 494000 Crowns, to remain for ever under the Pro∣priety and Sovereignty of the Kings of France: Whilst this Monarch, on the other hand, besides the said Summ of Money resign'd to the Duke the City of Alba, in the Dutchy of Montferrat, together with the adjacent Ter∣ritories, conformably to the Articles of a Private Treaty, which was concluded by the subtil Artifices of Cardinal Richlieu at Cherasco, on the 31st. day of March, in the Year 1631.
There is a Fort call'd St. Brigide, which has Com∣munication with the Citadel, by a cover'd way, and certain subterraneous Passages. The present Duke of Savoy, at the Head of the Confederate Forces, took it, in the Year 1693; and soon after demolish'd it, for want of Success: For His Royal Highness, instead of vigorously carrying on the Siege of the Town and Ci∣tadel, thought fit to engage Catinat, the French Ge∣neral, who lay encampt with 12 or 14000 Men be∣tween the Mountains of Fenestrelle and Bossa, 7 or 8 Leagues North-west of Pignerol: but having march'd so far, they perceiv'd they could not come at him; so that after much time lost, they went back and open'd the Trenches before Pignerol, in September. In the mean while, Catinat's Army being re-inforc'd with several Detachments out of Germany and Catalonia, the Confederates rais'd the Siege, blew up the Fortress of St. Brigide, and set forward to meet him near the Village Orbessan, in the Plain of Marseillane. The Battle was fought on the 4th. of October, 1693, with great Courage and Resolution on both sides: but at last, the Left Wing of the Confederate Army being over-power'd by the numerous Forces of the French, His Royal Highness commanded a Retreat, which was accordingly executed in very good Order. The French indeed gain'd the Victory, yet was their Loss greater than that of the Confederates; for their Army, which, before the Battle, consisted of 36000 Men, was, by their own Confession, reduc'd to 30000. That of the Duke of Savoy's amounted to 22000, of whom 5500 were only wanting, viz. 1500 of the Emperor's Troops, as many of His Majesty's of Great-Britain and His Royal Highness's Forces, and 2500 of the Spaniard's. Briqueras, or Briquerasco, Briquerascum, is a con∣siderable Borough, with a good Castle, about 4 or 5 Leagues from Pignerol, famous for the Sieges it sustain'd towards the end of the last Century, M. de Lesdiguieres, since Constable of France, took it, about the Year 1592, and caus'd it to be well fortify'd. Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, at first, in vain, at∣tempted to recover it, but afterward found means to get it into his possession: For having made Prepara∣tions, during a Truce agreed upon, he besieg'd the Place, at the expiration of it, in 1694, with an Army of 10000 Men, and 18 Pieces of Artillery. The Bur∣rough was taken by Assault; and the Castle having en∣dur'd 8000 Cannon-shot, that made 5 Breaches, sur∣render'd on Composition, Octob. the 24th. Briqueras hath been likewise noted, during the Wars of Pied∣mont, in 1629. 1630, and 1631, and is at present possess'd by the French. The Lordship of VERCEIL, Vercel∣lensis Ditio. This Lordship lies between the Countries of Mont∣ferrat, Ivree, and Milancse, being extremely fertile, and well peopled. The more remarkable Places are these: Viz. VERCEIL, Bish. Biela. Sautia, &c. VERCEIL, or Vercelli, Vercellae, is water'd with the Streams of the River Sessia, on the very Confines of the Dutchy of Milan, whereto it formerly apper∣tain'd, being situated between Milan to the East, and Turin to the West, at an equal distance of 40 Miles from each, as also 12 from Casal to the North, and as many from Novara to the West. It is a large Place, and at present retains the Title of a Lordship, afford∣ing a Seat to a Prelate, whose Metropolitan is the Arch∣bishop of Milan. Moreover, it is well fortify'd with a Castle, Citadel, and other regular Works, and adorn'd with divers fair Churches, besides a famous Hospital. Pope Leo IX. conven'd here a Council against Beren∣garius, Archdeacon of Angers; who was cited, but did not appear. The Spaniards made themselves Masters of the Town of Verceil, A. D. 1638; yet it was re∣stor'd again to the Duke of Savoy, by virtue of the Pyrenaean Treaty of Peace. Biela, or Biella, Bugella, Gaumellum, and Laumel∣lum, is a rich and populous Town, beautify'd with several Churches, being the Capital of a small Coun∣trey thence call'd Bielese. It stands on a Hill 8 Miles West of Masseran, and 32 North of Turin. Francis II. Duke of Modena, died here, A. D. 1658. The Principality of MASSERAN, Prin∣cipatus Masseranensis. This small Territory, dignify'd with the Title of a Principality, lies within the Lordship of Verceil, toward Milanese, and takes its Name from the chief Town: Viz. MASSERAN, seated on a Hill near the Borders of the Countrey of Bielese, 18 Miles North-east of Ivrea, 22 North-west of Vercelli, and 37 almost North-east of Turin. The Prince thereof is descended from the House of Ferrara, and holds his Lands in Vassalage of the Pope. The Marquisate of IVREA, Marchio∣natus Eporediensis. This Marquisate is extended between the Lordship of Verceil to the East, the Dutchy of Aoste to the North, the Marquisate of Susa to the West, and part of Montferrat to the South. The only Place of Note here, is, IVREA, Eporedia, standing between two Hills, on the Banks of the River Dorea Baltea, over which is erected a fair Stone Bridge, in the Country of the An∣cient Salassii. It was built (as some Authors avouch) 100 Years before our Saviour's Nativity, and is distant 22 Miles from Turin to the North, 29 from Susa, and 32 from Vercelli to the West, enjoying the Title of an Episcopal See, the Prelate whereof is Suffragran to the Archbishop of Turin. It hath also given its Name to the Marquisate which was so famous in the time of Berengarius, who contended for the Empire with the French Princes descended of the Kings of Arles. This City is of great Importance to the Duke of Savoy, into whose Hands it came, A. D. 870, having for its Defence a Citadel, and an old Castle. It hath been for a long time Imperial and Free; but the Emperor Frederick II. and William Count of Holland, gave it to Thomas II. of Savoy, A. D. 1242. And in 1349, John, Marquess of Montferrat, granted to Amadei VI. part of his Right to the same Place; which was also taken by the French in 1554, and restor'd some time after to its proper Lords. Between the City of Ivrea and the River Po, lies the Countrey of Canavese, which was formerly part of Montferrat, but now belongs to Piedmont, since it was left to the Duke of Savoy, by the Treaty of Cherasco, in 1631. In some Villages of this Territory excellent Cheeses are made; and the River Arche conveys thither its golden Sands. Pepper-Trees are likewise found growing in the small Hamlet of Ponto. The County of ASTI, Comitatus Astensis. This County is enclos'd in Montferrat, and contains only two remarkable Places, viz. Asti and Verua.
Asti, Asta, or Pompeia, is situated on the River Ta∣naro, on the Borders of Montferrat, and honour'd with the Titles of a County and Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Milan, being distant 15 Miles from Alba to the North-east; 16 from Casal, the Metropolis of Montferrat, to the South-west; and 26 from Turin to the East. It was at first a potent Republick; never∣theless, in process of time, it fell into the Hands of the Viscounts, and thus became part of the Dutchy of Milan: But being afterward separated from thence, it was at last granted by the Emperor Charles V. to Charles III. Duke of Savoy, A. D. 1531, and is at pre∣sent divided into many Parts, viz. the City, Burrough, Citadel, Fort and Castle of St. Peter; all which are well fortify'd. The Town now seems to be in a decaying Condition, though the Fortifications are still new and good: nevertheless, the adjacent Fields are fertile, and bring forth excellent Fruits, more-especially a sort of Melons that are very much esteem'd. Verua is water'd with the Streams of the River Po, and stands on a Rising-ground on the Frontiers of Montferrat, 16 Miles North-east of Turin, toward Casal. The Spaniards laid Siege to this Town, in 1625; but were oblig'd to decamp, without accomplishing their Design. The Marquisate of SUSA, Marchio∣natus Susensis. This Marquisate is bounded on the North by the County of Maurienne, in Savoy; as also on the East and South, by Piedmont Properly so called; and on the West, by Mount Genevre. SƲSA, the Capital Town of the Marquisate of the same Name, is situated on the River Doria, at the foot of the Alpes Cottiae, or Mount Cenis; and Mount Genevre, that separate Piedmont from Dauphiné, being distant only 1 League from the Frontiers of France; 24 Miles from Turin to the North-west; as many from Brianson; and 19 from Pignerol to the North. It is guarded with a strong Fort built on a Hill, command∣ing all the Passage between the two Mountains, and hath long since enjoy'd the Title of a Marquisate. Here is still to be seen a Triumphal Arch which was erected in Honour of Augustus, in the 740th Year after the Foun∣dation of the City of Rome: And some learned Men take this to be the Town where that Emperor set up his Trophy, fourteen Years before the Nativity of Jesus Christ; although others will have it fix'd at the foot of the Maritime Alpes, near a Place call'd Tourbie, by a corruption of the word Trophy; endeavouring to establish their Conjecture by a piece of Stone, on which are seen part of the letters composing these words, Sentes Alpinae Devictae, with the Names of some other Nations. Others affirm, That Augustus caus'd the same Trophy to be erected in two several Places, and by that means would reconcile both Opinions. More∣over, at Susa was found the Sepulchre of Cottus, from whom the Cottian Alpes took their Name. The ad∣jacent Countrey is very fruitful, and abounds more-especially with Wine and Honey. The French took this Town, in 1630, and caus'd it to be strongly for∣tify'd; but it was afterward restor'd to the Duke of Savoy. However, it was again surpriz'd by them, in 1690, at the beginning of the late War between France and Savoy. The Marquisate of SALUCES, Marchio∣natus Salutiensis. This Marquisate, lying at the foot of the Alpes, is bounded on the East by Piedmont Proper; on the West, by Dauphiné; on the North, by the Valleys of the Vau∣dois; and on the South, by the County of Nice. It was formerly possess'd by the French Kings, until Henry IV. gave it to Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, in exchange for Bresse, Bugey, and some other Places on the hither side of the Alpes, A. D. 1600. The River Po takes its Rise in this Countrey, from the Mountain Viso, which is esteem'd the highest of the Alpes: and the Marquesses of Saluces have caus'd a famous Vault to be hew'd here out of a Rock, four Miles long, and in which the Mules may easily pass that transport Mer∣chandizes from Italy to France. The Family of these Noble Marquesses (as it is reported) deriv'd its Original from one William, an Italian Count, who flourish'd in 910. This Marquisate contains above 50 Castles, besides the Towns, whereof the most considerable are these: SALƲCES, Bish. Cap. Carmagnola. Staffarda. Revel. Droner. Cental. Roquespariero. Bergues. SALƲCES, Augustae Vagiennorum, or Salutiae, commonly call'd Saluzzo by the Inhabitants, is noted for its pleasant Situation on a Hill at the foot of the Alpes, scarcely 1 Mile from the River Po, 12 nigh South of Pignerol, and 22 South-west of Turin. It is the Ca∣pital City of the Marquisate of the same Name, and an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Turin; never∣theless, exempted from its Jurisdiction. The Cathedral Church is extremely Magnificent and Rich; and the Castle, built on a Hill, of no less Note, on account of its Regular Fortifications. This Place was both taken by the French, and recover'd out of their hands, A.D. 1691. Carmagnola is a Place of great Importance, defended by a strong Fortress: It was taken, A. D. 1588, during the Civil Wars of France, by Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, wo in like manner subdu'd the whole Marquisate of Saluces, and had it afterwards left to him by a Treaty of Peace concluded in 1600. The French recover'd this Town in 1691, but lost it again the same Year. It stands 2 Miles from the River Po, and 9 South of Turin. Staffarda is a small Town about 4 Miles North of Sa∣luces, remarkable only for the Victory which the French obtain'd there over the present Duke of Savoy, in the Month of August, A. D. 1690. Indeed, this was the first Battle that His Royal Highness was ever present at: ne∣vertheless, he shew'd therein many notable Proofs both of his Conduct and Valour; but his Forces being raw and undisciplin'd, were over-match'd. The Loss of the Confe∣derates was about 800 Men kill'd, and as many wounded; that of the French not amounting to above 500. The Valleys of the VAUDOIS, Valles Waldensium. The VAƲDOIS have render'd themselves so Fa∣mous in the late War, by vigorously attacking and de∣feating considerable Parties of the French, in divers Ren∣counters, that it may not be improper to give some Ac∣count of their Original and Countrey. The Name of Vaudois was first impos'd on those poor People of Lyons, in France, the Followers of Peter Valdo, or Vaud, a rich Merchant of that City, about the Year 1160, who seeing a Friend of his die suddenly, began to enter into a serious Consideration about a Future State, and from that time diligently apply'd himself to the Study of the Holy Scriptures. Whereupon, having discover'd the Errors of the Church of Rome, he divulg'd them to his Friends, and instructed the Poor, distributing Benevolences a∣mong them with great Bounty and Charity; but had no thought of setting himself up for the Chief of a Sect or Party, until the Clergy Excommucating him, and per∣secuting some of his Disciples, they retir'd into the Val∣leys of Piedmont, and found there some ancient Chri∣stians that were also call'd Vaudes.
The Valleys of the Vaudois lie between French Pied∣mont on the West and North, Piedmont Proper on the East, and the Marquisate of Saluces on the South, being usually divided into Five remarkable Valleys: Viz. The Valley of 1. Pragelas, or Cluson. 2. Perouse. 3. St. Martyn. 4. Angrogne. 5. Lucerne. In the Year 1688, the Duke of Savoy was incited by the French King to persecute the poor Inhabitants of these Valleys; who having, in vain, endeavour'd to preserve their Religion and Liberties, were at last taken Prisoners, and cast into a noisom Goal, where a great number of them perish'd; the rest, at the Solicitation of the Reformed Cantons of Switzerland, being per∣mitted to go wheresoever they thought fit, retir'd for the most part, into the Territories of the Elector of Brandenburgh; who entertain'd them with great Ge∣nerosity and Charity, giving them certain Lands to cul∣tivate. But in 1690, His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, on the Mediation of King William, graciously re∣call'd these Refugees to their native Country, and restor'd them to all their former Privileges and Immunties, &c. The County of Boglio; or Bueil (according to the French Pronunciation;) Boleanus Tractus; lies between that of Nice, where it is united, and Provence, taking its Name from its chief Town, which was heretofore go∣vern'd by its proper Counts, and is built amidst the Mountains, at the distance of 3 Leagues from Entre∣vaux to the East. Divers other Towns are also in∣cluded within its Jurisdiction; viz. those of Lauset, Chateau-Neuf, St. Dames, Pojet, &c. To these may be added Oneglia and Tenda. Oneglia, Onelia, or Ʋnelia, is seated on the Coasts of Genoa, in a most delightful and fertile Valley, abound∣ing with Grapes, Olives, and other sorts of Fruit. It is dignify'd with the Title of a Principality, or Marqui∣sate, and was formerly govern'd by its own proper Princes or Lords, until one of them, nam'd Hieronymo Doria, sold it to the Duke of Savoy, A.D. 1576. This Place, which is wash'd by the Mediterranean Sea, almost 36 Miles South of Coni, and 42 East of Nice, was bom∣barded by the French, A. D. 1692. Tenda is a small Town with a strong Castle, in the County of Nice, and the Capital of a Territory of that Name. It stands on the Banks of the River Rodia, in the Apennine, 25 Miles North-east of Nice, and 19 South of Coni. In fine, the whole Principality of Piedmont con∣tains about 50 Counties, 15 Marquisates, 52 Earldoms, 160 Walled Towns, and 20 Abbeys, besides a great number of Lordships. The Dukes ordinary Revenue is, by most, agreed to be 1800000 Crowns, of which Piedmont alone yields 1400000. He is able to bring into the Field 30000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, and yet leave enough at Home to guard his Country, (says Leti.) He may travel almost the space of 200 Miles through his own Dominions, from Evian on the Lake of Geneva, as far as Nice on the Mediterranean Sea. CHAP. III. The Coasts of GENOA, Ora Genuensis. THE Coasts of GENOA are extended from the River Var, that separates Provence, in France, from Italy, as far as the Magra, containing in Length, from East to West (setting aside Nice) about 155 Miles; in Breadth, from North to South, in the widest part, 30 Miles, and in many Places not above 10 Miles; and bounds them on the Eastern and Western sides, as the Dutchies of Montferrat, Milan and Parma serve as their Limits on the North, and the Sea on the South. On these wide Coasts are built many Towns subject to the Jurisdiction of divers Sovereigns, and others that appertain to the Republick of Genoa. The Country an∣swers, in part, to that of the Ancient Ligurians, who dispersed themselves in Colonies as far as the Rivers Po and Arno: But at present, the Territories of this State are divided into the Eastern and Western Rivers, of which the City of Genoa, seated in the midst, is the pro∣per Boundary. The Western Coasts bring forth abun∣dance of Orange, Citron, Palm and Cedar Trees, toge∣ther with excellent Vines: The Eastern is not so fruit∣ful; and the Middle of the Country is rugged, full of Hills, and affords little Profit. But the Division thereof may be more distinctly perceiv'd by the ensuing Table. The Coasts of GENOA 1. Part of the Coasts of Ge∣noa, subject to divers So∣vereigns, NICE, Coun. and Bish. appertaining to the Duke of Savoy. Ville-Francha, Port, appertaining to the Duke of Savoy. Donas, Vil. appertaining to the Duke of Savoy. Maro, Marq. appertaining to the Duke of Savoy. Monaco, Princ. to the Prince of Monaco. Final, Marq. to the King of Spain. 2. The Western Coasts, St. Remo, Port. Vintimiglia, Bish. Albenga, Bish. Noli, Bish. Savona, Bish. GENOA, Archb. Cap. Port. 3. The Eastern Coasts, Sarzana, Bish. Brugneto, Bish. Rapallo. La Vegna. La Spezza. Torreglia. NICE, Nicaea, or Nicia, Ital. Nizza, is situated in a very fruitful Plain at the foot of the Alpes, and on the Sea-shore, at the distance only of 2 Miles from the mouth of the River Var, 68 South of Pignerol, 78 al∣most South of Turin, 72 East of Ambrun, 100 East of Aix, and as many West of Genoa. It sprang up out of the Ruins of Cemeleneum, or Cimella, and was built by the Inhabitants of Marselle, taking its Name, which signifies Victory, from the Conquest which those People, who had establish'd divers Colonies in those Parts, gain'd over the Ligurians. The Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Ambrun, was in like manner tran∣slated from Cimella to Nice, which is also the Metro∣polis of a County of the same Name. This City is great, splendid and populous, having a Cathedral, three Parishes, one College, and several Religious Houses, and much enrich'd by Traffick, being adorn'd with a capacious Harbour, and defended with one of the strongest Castles throughout Europe. Moreover, the Amphitheatre, Inscriptions, and other remarkable Monuments as yet to be seen therein, are a sufficient Testimony of its Antiquity. Pope Paul III. came thi∣ther,
A. D. 1558. and an Interview was held in the same Place by His Holiness, the Emperor Charles V. and Fran∣cis I. King of France; whereupon a Teaty of Truce for 10 Years was concluded between these Two Princes. The City of Nice was heretofore subject to the Kings of Burgundy, and afterward to the Counts of Provence, whence it was commonly call'd Nice de la Provence; but at length it fell into the Hands of the Dukes of Savoy, about A. D. 1365. and hath ever since remain'd in their Possession, together with the adjacent Province, or County, which is usually divided into 4 Vicariates, viz. those of Nice, Barcelona, Sospello, and Puerino. The Counties of Boglio and Tenda, do likewise depend on its Jurisdiction. The Place was taken by the French, from the Duke of Savoy, in the Year 1691. Ville-Franca, Villa-Franca, or Olivula, had its station within the Limits of the County of Nice, in the midst, between Monaco to the East, and the City of Nice to the West, being 3 Miles East of Nice, and above 5 West of Monaco. This Sea-Port Town was built, A. D. 1295. at the special Command of Charles II. of Anjou, King of Sicily, and Count of Provence; and afterward a very strong Fort was added thereto, by the Order of Ema∣nuel Philibert, Due of Savoy, who left it as an Inheri∣tance to his Successors. The Place was taken by the French, in 1691. at the same time that Nice was. Monaco, Monaecium, or Herculis Monaeci portus, cor∣ruptly call'd Mourgues by the Provencians, is a small Principality lying between the County of Nice and the Dominions of the State of Genoa, consisting only of 3 Places of no large Extent, viz. Monaco the Capital, Roc∣cabruna, and Menton. The Town of Monaco is distant above 5 Miles from Nice, toward Albenga, and remains under the Government of its proper Princes, of the Fa∣mily of Grimaldi, who having expell'd the Spaniards, A. D. 1641. were oblig'd to seek for the Protection of the French King, and constantly to entertain a Garrison of his Soldiers. The House of Grimaldi is one of the most Illu∣strious of Italy, and is divided into many Branches, that have obtain'd the Principalities of Salerno, Gieraci, and St. Catherine, together with the Dutchies of Euboli and Terranova. Indeed, Monaco is a small Town, but almost inaccessible, having a safe Harbour, and being defended with a strong old Castle founded on a Rock, and wa∣shed by the Waves of the Sea. Final, Finalium, or Finarium, stands in the midst be∣tween Savona to the East, and Albenga to the West, on the Coasts of Genoa, and is dignified with the Title of a Marquisate, which is extended along the Sea-shore only for the space of 2 Leagues, where it hath two Points of Rocks for its Bounds The Town is Walled, and hath for its Defence a strong Castle, flank'd with 4 Towers, and erected on the top of a Mountain, the Avenues whereof are guarded with 2 Forts. At the distance of 1 Mile from hence is situated a Burrough call'd La Marina di Finale, which is in like manner fenced with 2 high Fortresses. This Sovereignty hath for a long time appertain'd to the House of Caneto, but the Spaniards surpriz'd the Town in 1602. and caus'd the last Marquis of that Family to be put to Death, to secure their Possession. It stands 37 Miles South-East of Coni, 40 nigh West of Genoa, and 60 almost South of Turin and Casal. Maro, Marium, is a Town of a Marquisate and Val∣ley of the same Name, on the Coasts of Genoa, apper∣taining to the Jurisdiction of the Duke of Savoy. S. Remo, Fanum S. Remul, or Remigli, a considera∣ble Town and Port, is seated on the Coasts of Genoa, being distant about 11 or 12 Leagues from Nice, and 5 from Monaco to the East, between Vintimiglia and Oniglia. The adjacent Country is extremely fruitful of Oranges, Citrons and Olives. Vintimiglia, Vintemelium, Albium Intimelium, or Al∣bintemelium, is in like manner situated on the Sea-shore, on the Frontiers of the Dutchy of Savoy, and the County of Nice, at the distance of 17 Miles East of Nice, 40 South of Coni, and 48 nigh West of Genoa. It is the Seat of a Prelate suffragan to the Archbishop of Milan, and hath been subject to the Dominion of the Genoeses ever since the Year 1238. The Town is but of a small Compass; nevertheless, it is fortified with a strong Castle standing on a Hill, the foot whereof is water'd with the Streams of the little River La Rotta, which here dischargeth it self into the Sea. Albenga, Albingannum, is an ancient and large City, but not very populous, by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air, being distant 10 Miles North-East of Oneglio, and almost 52 West of Genoa. It was erected into an Episco∣pal See, under the Metropolitan of Genoa, by Pope Alex∣ander III. A.D. 1179. and hath a very commodious Haven. Over-against this Place lies a small Island, or rather a Rock, commonly call'd l Isoletta di Albenga, and was heretofore known by the Name of Gallineria. Noli, Naulum, or Naulium, is built in a verdant Plain, on the Western Coasts of Genoa, but destiute of an Har∣bour; between Savona to the North-East, and Alben∣ga to the South-West; being about 1 Mile East of Final, and 35 West of Genoa. This small City, the Episcopal See whereof is subject to the Metropolitan of Genoa, was, in time past, the Capital of a peculiar Lordship, but at pre∣sent is united to the Dominions of that Republick. Savona, or Savo, stands on the Mediterranean, almost 15 Miles East of Final, 24 West of Genoa, and 22 from Acqui to the South. A Bishop's See, under the Metro∣politan of Milan, hath been long since establish'd in this City, which is the Second of the State of Genoa, whereto it hath formerly given some cause of Jealousie, when fa∣vour'd by Francis I. King of France; insomuch that the Genoeses stopt up the Harbour, altho' it was one of the most commodious of these Coasts: It was a very popu∣lous City; and here are also to be seen divers stately Churches, 5 Gates, 2 Fortresses, and a Citadel. More∣over, Savona hath been the Place of Nativity of Three several Popes, viz. Gregory VII. Julius II. and Sixtus IV. GENOA, Genua, Ital. Genoua, the Metropolis of the Republick, situated on the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, is the most famous City of Italy for Traffick; and the Seat of an Archbishop, erected by Innocent II. A. D. 1132. It is extended in compass for the space of 2 Leagues, ri∣sing up on an ill with a gentle Ascent, in form of a Theatre. Its tall Streets, rising by degrees from the Sea, make the noblest Prospect in the World. It has about 17200 Houses, and is well fortify'd with firm Ramparts, strong Walls, and 5 Gates toward the Land, on which are planted divers pieces of Artillery. The Port is no lon∣ger dangerous, since it hath been shut up with a large Mole 600 Paces in length, over against which, a Pro∣montory runs out, whereto is join'd another Mole of 500 Paces, which scarce is to be parallel'd, and a Watch-Tower of curious Workmanship, commonly call'd La Lanterna, where a very strong Castle formerly stood, but is now demolish'd. Here are a great Num∣ber of stately Edifices, among which, the Palace of Doria is more-especially remarkable, reaching from the Sea-shore to the top of a Mountain; the Apartments thereof are very regular and spacious, the Furniture ve∣ry rich, and every thing therein appears extremely mag∣nificent. Moreover, the Palace of the Signiory, where the Doge keeps his Court, that of the Casa del Imperial, the Arsenal, the Dome, or Cathedral Church of St. Law∣rence, in which is to be seen a Plate made of a single Emerald; the Annunciado, the Church of the Jesuits, dedicated to St. Ambrose; and that of St. Cyrus, apper∣taining to the Theatines, are very much admir'd by Travellers. The old Streets in the midst of the Town
are narrow and dark; but the others lately built are very broad and fair, especially that call'd the New-Street, which consists altogether of Palaces, and noble Piles of Building; insomuch, that it is not to be ad∣mir'd that Genoa hath acquir'd the Title of The Proud. The Inhabitants are skilful in Maritim Affairs, and have signaliz'd their Valour on divers Occasions. They are very much addicted to Merchandizing, and Persons of Quality are allowed to drive an Wholesale Trade without any derogation to their Honour, as well as throughout all the other Provinces of Italy. It is repor∣ted, That there are above 20000 Families in this City, that gain a competent Livelyhood by making Stuffs, and Silk-Stockings. The State maintains a great number of Vessells and Galleys; and private Citizens are permit∣ted to set many out to Sea for their own proper Advan∣tage. Here are two sorts of Noblemen, viz. Some de∣scended of an ancient Stock, and others newly created: the first of these are distinguished in 28 Families, where∣of 4 are the principal; that is to say, those of Grimaldi, Fiesque, Doria, and Spinola: Among these there are several Lords so Rich and Potent, that 'tis dangerous to admit them to a share in the Government, lest they should tyrannically usurp it. This City must be very populous; for in one Plague they lost 80000 Souls: but in the Year 1684. the Bombarding this Place did a great deal of Mischief; this being the first City that had the Maidenhead of Bombs. This City is of very great Antiquity, mention having been made of it in Hi∣story above 1800 Years agoe: The Romans subdued it among many other considerable Places, afterward the Lombards made themselves Masters thereof; and the Emperors of Germany have for some time since retain'd it in their Possession. Nevertheless, we do not find any memorable Transactions of its State recorded until the Year 1099. The French have found means to seize on the City of Genoa 7 several times; and it is proba∣ble, that so many Revolutions have not happen'd in any other Place throughout the World. And indeed, it hath been observ'd, that from the Year 1494. unto 1528. 12 different sorts of Governments have been esta∣blish'd therein: For the supreme Magistrates were 1. Counts or Earls; 2. Consuls; 3. Podesta's; 4. Cap∣tains; 5. Governours; 6 Lieutenants; 7. Rectors of the People; 8. Abbots of the People; 9. Reformers; 10. Noble Dukes; 11. Popular Dukes; and 12. Aristo∣cratical States, whose Authority as yet continues; and the Chief of whom is called the Doge or Duke, who exerciseth the Functions of his Offices only for the space of Two Years. However, the Genoeses have contributed much to the maintaining of the Wars against the Infidels, and have taken from them the Kingdoms of Corsica, Sar∣dignia, and Cyprus, together with the Isles of Metelin and Chio, and the Towns of Caffa and Pera. The City of Genoa hath also brought forth divers Illustrious Per∣sonages, particularly 3 or 4 Popes, and that renowned Navigator Christophorus Columbus or Coloo. It is true indeed, that one cannot well rely on the Fidelity of these People, and that the Italians have not made those Proverbs concerning them without a Cause, viz. Gente Senza fede, Mare senza pesce, Monte senza legno, and Donne senza vergogna; that is, Men without Faith, Sea without Fish, Mountains without Wood, and Women with∣out Shame. At present the City is govern d by a Doge, during Two Years, (as it hath been already intimated) who is assisted with 8 Senators called Governours, cer∣tain Procurators, and a Grand Council consisting of 4002 Noblemen, which is usually termed the Signiory. The Publick Revenue is said to be 120000 Crowns Yearly, and yet scarce sufficient to defray the publick Expences. The Inhabitants have heretofore acquir'd much Reputation, by Reason of their notable Exploits; and Genoa hath of late recover'd its Liberty through the Valour, and prudent Conduct of Andrea Doria, who deriv'd his Extraction from the ancient Race of No∣blemen of this famous City, which is distant 65 Miles South of Milan, 78 almost South-East of Turin, 80 nigh West of Parma, 140 almost North-West of Flo∣rence, and 260 North-West of Rome. Sarzana, Serezana or Sergianum and Luna Nova, is defended with a very strong Castle on the very Confines of Tuscany, and dignified with the Title of an Episco∣pal See, under the Metropolitan of Pisa, although ex∣empted from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of that Province. It sprang up out of the Ruins of the neighbouring City of Luna, and Pope Nicolas V. a Native of the same Place, caus'd the Bishoprick to be translated thither, A. D. 1450. It stands in the midst be∣tween Massa and Spetoia to the West, about 34 Miles from Lucca to the North-West, and 18 from Brugneto. Brugneto, Brugnetum or Brunictum, is seated at the foot of the Apennine, and on the Banks of the River Verra, at the distance of 9 Miles from Pontremoli to the West; as many from Spezia to the North, and 44 from Genoa to the East. It is a City of a small compass, and ill built, yet honour'd with the Title of an Episcopal See, subject to the Metropolitan of Genoa. Rapallo, Rapallum, is built on the Eastern Coasts of Genoa, and hath a safe Harbour, being distant only 3 Miles from Portofino, and about 23 from Genoa to the East toward Spezia, from whence a small adjacent Bay is called Il Golfo di Rapallo. But we must distinguish this Town from the Bishoprick of Rapallo, in the Pro∣vince of Basilicata, in the Kingdom of Naples. Lavagna, Lavania or Lebonia, is a small Town on the Sea-shore, near the Mouth of a River of the same Name, which was formerly, and even as yet, sometime called Entella, between Chiavari to the West, and Sestri di Levante to the East. The Counts of Fiesque, so much celebrated in History, deriv'd their Original from this Place, which still remains in the Possessions of their Family. La Spetia, La Spezia, Spedia stands on the side of a Mountain, in a very delightful and fertil Country, which hath induc'd the Genoeses to build divers Houses of Pleasure therein. It is also defended with strong Fortresses, for the safety of those Vessels that ride in the Bay, called from thence Il Golfo della Spetia. This Town, being an ancient Patrimony of the House of Fiesque, is distant 7 Miles from Sarzana, and the Ru∣ins of Luna, as also 4 from Porto Venere to the North, and 11 from Brugneto. CHAP. IV. MONTFERRAT, Monsferratus, or Monsferranus. THe Territories of MONTFERRAT lie between those of Piedmont to the North and West, the State of Genoa to the South, and the Dutchy of Milan to the East. Its Extent from North to South consists of about 62 Miles, and 48 from East to West. It is a very fruitful Country, including within its limits almost
200 Towns, Boroughs, and Castles, and enjoys the Title of a Marquisate and Dutchy. The Hills bring forth Corn plentifully, and Grapes, whereof are made excellent Wines, more-especially Muscadines. More∣over, in the Campaign of Alba and Acqui, is found good store of Patridges and Pheasants. This Country hath remain'd under the Dominion of its proper Lords ever since the beginning of the X. Century, until, by virtue of a Treaty concluded at Cherasco, A. D. 1631. it was divided between Two Soveraigns: for that Part thereof, which is extended on the hither side of the River Po, and beyond the Tanaro, was granted to Victor Amadeo, Duke of Savoy; and the rest of the Province appertains to the Jurisdiction of the Duke of Mantua, excepting Casal, which the present French King, Lew∣is XIV. purchas'd of the latter, A. D. 1682. as it ap∣pears more plainly in the ensuing Table: Appertaining to The D. of Savoy, The D. of Mantua, The French. Alba, Bish. Acqui, Bish. Cap. CASAL, Bish. & Fort. Turin Ripalia Legorn Occimiano   Bianza Belzola   Salugio     Verolongo     CASAL, Casale, or Bodincomagus, situated on the River Po, is the Metropolis of Montferrat, and one of the strongest Holds of Italy. Pope Sixtus IV. ere∣cted it into an Episcopal See, A. D. 1474. at the Request of Gulielmus Palaeologus, Marquis of Montferrat; who having abandoned his Seat at Occimiano, began to reside in this City, which is distant 38 Miles East of Turin, 42 West of Milan, and 56 almost North-West of Ge∣noa. It is commonly call'd in Italian, Casale di St. Vaso for St. Evasio, from St. Evasius, the Patron thereof, to distinguish it from some other Towns of the same Name. It is defended on one side by a strong Citadel compos'd of 6 Bastions, with deep Ditches, firm Walls, Ramparts, and Half-Moons; and on the other side, by a Castle flanked with 4 large Towers, and as many lined Half-Moons that cover the Flanks, together with a wide Trench, a Counterscarp, and a Corridor. The Town is very pleasant, as being adorn'd with divers well-built Churches, and other fair Structures, but not much frequented, by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air. More-over, Casal is Famous on the ac∣count of the Sieges which it hath of late sustain'd, and for the Slaughter of the Spaniards; to whom it hath prov'd, as it were, a Stumbling-block: For their For∣ces, under the Command of Gonzales, besieg'd it in the beginning of the Year 1629. but were oblig'd to retire in the Night on the approach of the Army of the French King Lewis XIII. In the Year ensuing, they be∣leager'd it a second time under the Conduct of Ambro∣sio Spinola; but it was vigorously defended by the Mar∣quis de Toiras. In 1640. the Spaniards being conducted by the Marquis de Leganez, appear'd again before Ca∣sal; but the Count de Harcourt put them to flight on the 29th. of April, and seiz'd on their Standards, Artil∣lery, and Baggage, after having slain 2000 Men, and taken as many Prisoners. However, they were more Fortunate in 1652. during the Commotions of France, and made themselves absolute Masters of this City, which was afterward surrender'd to the Duke of Man∣tua, who kept a Garrison therein for some time, and at length sold it to the present French King, Lewis XIV. on the 30th. of September, 1681. In this late War, the Duke of Savoy block'd it up from March to Octo∣ber, 1693. although he wanted Troops to recruit his Army after the Battel of Marseillene. map CASAL
Alba, Alba Pompeia, is water'd with the Streams of the River Tanaro, and affords a Seat to a Prelate suf∣fragan to the Archbishop of Milan. It hath been often fortify'd, but is always commanded by the adjacent Hills, as well as Turin; insomuch that it hath lately suffer'd considerable Damage, and at present is inha∣bited by very few People. This Town is distant 15 Miles South-west of Asti, 23 South-east of Turin, and 24 West of Acqui. Acqui, Aquae Statellae, or Statiellae, seated on the Banks of the River Bromia, near the Apennine, is in like man∣ner an Episcopal See, subject to the Metropolitan of Milan, being distant 22 Miles South-east of Asti, 30 North-west of Genoa, and 27 South of Casal. It hath been much impair'd during the last Italian War, and began to decline ever since the Foundation of Alexan∣dria della Paglia, which depended on its Jurisdiction. However, this Town is famous for its Baths of Hot Waters impregnated with Sulphur, whereto many Persons resort from divers Places, in the Months of May and September. The Dutchy of MILAN, Mediola∣nensis Ducatus. The MILANESE, or State of MILAN, is bounded on the West by the Principality of Pied∣mont, and the Marquisate of Montferrat: On the North, by the Country of Wallistand, the Bailiages of Logan, Locerno and Meadrisi, the County of Chiavenna, and part of the Valteline: On the East, by the State of Ve∣nice, and the Dutchies of Mantua and Parma: And on the South, by the Republick of Genoa. It is extended from East to almost West 155 Miles; and from North to South 115; which ought to be understood with re∣spect to its greatest Length and Breadth. This Dutchy, bing one of the most Illustrious of Europe, appertains to the Dominions of the King of Spain, who holds it in Fee of the Emperor, as well as the Town of Final. The Governor bears the Title of Lieutenant, and Cap∣tain-General to His Most Catholick Majesty, and acts with very great Authority: which hath given occasion to a common Saying, That the King of Spain reigns in Sicily by Gentleness; in the Kingdom of Naples, by Subtilty; and in the Territories of Milan, by Arbitrary Power. It is also said of these Three Governments, That the First only Knows; The Second Eats; And the Third De∣vours. His Catholick Majesty draws from hence, every Year, the Summ of 3000000 Livres; besides a Million which the Inhabitants are oblig'd to pay to him during the time of the War; without reckoning the Gover∣nor's Revenue, and that which he extorts otherwise, which amounts to little less. It is certain, that almost all the Vice-Roys of Spain are petty Tyrants; and that no Government is more pernicious both to the Sove∣reign, and his Subjects, than the Triennial. Mr. Lassels says, This State, for a need, can raise 50000 Men. In this Province are contain'd a great number of Lakes, Rivers, and fruitful Fields, that plentifully bring forth divers sorts of Grains and Fruit, more-especially Rice, and Grapes of a most delicious Taste. Cremona, in particular, affords vast quantities of Corn, Wine, Honey, Flax and Fruits. In the verdant Meadows round about Lodi, good store of Cattle are fed, more-especially large Oxen; and all kinds of Grains and Fruits are generally found there. The Country of Pavia is commoly call'd the Garden of Milan, yield∣ing much variety of Game, both for Hound and Hawk, together with abundance of Domestick Fowls and Fishes. Como enjoys great Plenty of all Provisions, being well stor'd with many sorts of Merchandizes that are transported hither out of divers Provinces. In fine, Lodi is famous for excellent Cheeses, which are made there in great quantities. It is spoken proverbially in this Country, That the Women of Milan are very Honest and Generous; Those of Lodi, Superstitious; Those of Pavia, Covetous; And those of Cremona, Magnificent. The Romans, after having subdued the Gauls, for a long time possess'd these Territories; and several Em∣perors have chosen Milan for the usual Place of their Residence. This Province hath been often expos'd to the Incursions of the Goths, and many other Barbarous Nations; and was subject to the Dominion of the Lom∣bards, until the time of Charlemaign, who abolish'd the Kingdom of Lombardy. It was afterwards possess'd by divers Lords and Dukes, the Chief of whom were those of the Families of Visconti and Sforza. The Kings of France have pretended to have a Right of succeeding the former, by virtue of the Marriage of Valentina, the Daughter of G. Galeaceo Visconte, the First Duke of Milan, with Lewis of France, Duke of Orleans, and Second Son of King Charles V. which hath been the cause of many violent Wars: insomuch that the Em∣peror Charles V. to put an end to these Feuds, after the Death of Francisco Sforza, the Last Duke of Milan, in 1535, amus'd the French King, Francis I. for a long while, with the hopes of Installing one of his Sons in the Dutchy: But notwithstanding so fair a Promise offer'd even to the Electors of the Empire, he took care that the Investiture should be made in favour of his own Son Philip II. The earnest Desire of getting the Pos∣session of this Country, hath caus'd a great number of Sieges to be laid, and many Battels to be fought▪ eight of which are more-especially remarkable, viz. 1st. The Battle of Caravaggio, Agnaldel, or Rivalta, gain'd by the French, in the Year 1509. 2d. That of Novara, in 1512. 3d. That of Marignan, in 1515, wherein the French, in like manner had the Advantage. 4th. That of Bicoque, in 1521. 5th. That of Pavia, in 1524. 6th. That of Ladriano, in 1528. 7th. That of Tesino, in 1636. And the 8th. That of Cremona, in 1648, where the French remain'd Masters of the Field. It hath been also observ'd, That the Capital City of this Dutchy hath been Besieged forty times, and Taken two and twenty. The most considerable Cities and Towns of the State of Milan are these: Viz. MILAN, Archb. Capital. Pavia, Bish. Como, Bish. Novara, Bish. Lodi, Bish. Bobbio, Bish. Alexandria della Pa∣glia, Bish. Cremona, Bish. Vigevano, Bish. Tortona, Bish. Mortara. Lecco. Caravaggio. Marignan. Ʋgogna. Casal Maggiore. Voghera. Anghiera. MILAN, Mediolanum, is one of the four Principal Cities of Italy; the other three being Rome, Venice and Na∣ples: It is situated in a verdant Plain, between the River Addua and Tesino, from which two Chanels are deriv'd, of very great use for the conveying of Merchandizes into the City, which is distant 43 Miles almost East of Casal, 65 North of Genoa, 72 North-west of Parma, 84 almost East of Turin, 84 West of Mantua, 106 al∣most North-west of Modena, 158 North-west of Flo∣rence, 168 West of Venice, and 192 North-west of Rome. It is the See of an Archbishop, and the Metropolis of the Dutchy whereto it hath communicated its Name, being govern'd by the Lieutenant of the King of Spain, and a Senate compos'd of a President and twelve Senators, three of whom are generally Spaniards by Birth.
This City (as it is believ'd) was built by the Gauls, who, under the Conduct of Bellovesus, settl'd them∣selves in Italy, about A. D. 170, and hath been often ruin'd by the Barbarous Nations. Bellisarius took it from the Ostrogoths, at the Solicitation of Dacius the Archbishop: But Vitiges King of the same Ostrogoths regain'd it, A. D. 539, when 300000 Persons perish'd by the Sword, or through Hunger. After the Reign of Charles sirnam'd the Great, or Charlemaign, MILAN, together with the adjacent Territories, was united to the Empire, and became so Rich and Potent, that it injuriously treated the other Towns with great Scorn and Contempt; insomuch that the Arrogance of the Inhabitants oblig'd the Emperor Frederick I. sirnam'd Barbarossa, to make Preparations for War, and to im∣pose divers Tributes on them, after having defeated, their Forces, A. D. 1160. In a second Expedition which the said Emperor undertook into Italy, he made himself Master of their City, utterly ruin'd it, and caus'd Salt to be sowed therein, sparing only some few Churches. However, those Citizens who had escp'd the Slaughter, found means to re-build it, under the Protection of Pope Alezander III. and through the Assistance of their Neighbours. Afterward it fell into the Possession of several Lords, who were succeeded by the Dukes. The Churches and Publick Buildings of Milan are extremely Magnificent, more-especially the Palaces of the Borromeo's, Visconti's, Sforza's, Trivulcio's and Ma∣rini's. Here are also reckon'd up 22 Gates, 230 Churches, 96 Parishes, 40 Monasteries of Monks, 50 Convents of Nuns, 100 Fraternities, and 10 Hospitals wherein are maintain'd 9000 indigent and sick Persons at the Ex∣pence of the State, above 4000 being reliev'd in the Grand Hospital alone. The City being of a round form, extends it self in compass for the space of about 10 Miles, and contains about 18500 Houses, and the Inhabitants are by some reckon'd 300000 Souls. The Artificers, lodged in several Quarters and Streets, are very expert in divers sorts of Mechanical Handycrafts, particularly in the casting of Cannons, and Hilts for Swords, and in making of Laces, Embroideries, &c. Indeed, the Shops of the Workers in Crystal which is brought thither from the Alpes, deserves to be view'd by Strangers, where they will meet with many Curiosi∣ties, as well as in those of the Enamellers of Gold and Silver. The Ambrosian Library is one of the most re∣markable throughout the whole Country of Italy: It was dedicated to St. Ambrose, by its Founder Cardinal Frederick Borromeo, and contains about 40000 Volumes. A stately Gallery of Paintings is joyn'd to the same Fabrick, where are to be seen the Original Draughts of the most famous Masters of that Art. Moreover, the Library of the Dominicans is very considerable; as also the Gallery of the Canon Mantredo Settali, fill'd with all manner of Rarities both of Art and Nature. But that which surpasseth all the Wonders in this City, is, the Cathedral of St. Ambrose, commonly call'd the Dome, cover'd all over, both on the Inside and Outside, with White Marble; and environ'd with 600 Statues of the same Stone, every one whereof cost above a Thousand Crowns: Besides 160 Pillars of so great thickness, that three Men can scarcely grasp the Shanks of one of them with their Arms extended; they are esteem'd to be worth above Ten thousand Crowns a-piece. Among the Statues, that of Adam, and St. Bartholomow Flea'd, are chiefly admir'd. The Roof is of a prodigious height, more-especially over the middle of the Church, which is not at all inferiour to that of St. Peter at Rome, al∣though a sixth part lesser, or to that of St. Sophia at Con∣stantinople. It is enrich'd with a vast quantity of Re∣liques, and among others, the Bodies of St. Ambrose, St. Charles Borromeo, St. Gervace, and St. Prochasius. It is in like manner worth the while to take an exact view of the Chapel wherein St. Augustine was Baptiz'd; and of the Tombs of the Emperor Lewis, and Pepin King of Italy, both the Sons of Charlemaign; as also of the High Altar, together with its rich Crosses, valu'd at 200000 Crowns; and 14000 Marble Figures, all arti∣ficially Carv'd from the Life. The Foundation of this noble Structure was laid by Gio Galeaceo Visconti, the First Duke of Milan, on the 13th. of June, A. D. 1386; and the Building hath been since carry'd on above 300 Years: nevertheless, only some Parts of the Church are absolutely brought to Perfection; so that 'tis probable, the Design of the Chapter is never to finish the whole work, since it is not their Interest so to do; for the Le∣gacies, and other Donations continually made for that purpose, bring them in vast Summs of Money, which they know how to apply to several Uses. The Pave∣ment of this same Cathedral is firmer and more solid than that of St. Peter's at Rome; for the latter consists only of Leaves of Marble, which begin to crack already, and some time or other will be worn to pie; whereas here the Squares are much thicker. Indeed this Pave∣ment is not yet finish'd; and (as they say) will cost 66290 Crowns, without comprehending that of the Quire, in the laying whereof 5250 Crowns have been already disburs'd. The Masons cut Stone, and the Women sow and spin, or sell Fruit in the midst of the Church; which, together with its obscurity, and considering that many things are still left imperfect, render the Prospect of the Inside not very delectable to the Eye. The Fortifications of this City are no less admirable; and it must be acknowledg'd, that there is not any where to be found a stronger or more beautiful Castle than that of Milan; before which Fortress lies a spa∣cious Plat of Ground, where almost all the Persons of Quality are wont to walk, as well as in the Street of the Court. The Counterscarp, which first offers it self to our sight, is very high, and well flank'd with a large Corrider or Covert-way on the side of the Town; to∣gether with several Trenches full of running Water, continually supply'd by three Rivulets; and six Royal Bastions lined with Brick; the principal Gate being defended by two Towers built after the ancient Method and Architecture, with Stones of a prodigious size. Afterward, we enter into a second Quarter, enclos'd with a Brick Wall of a great thickness, and rais'd very high; together some old Towers, and a deep Moat: round about this Wall runs a large Gallery cover'd and supported with Pillars of Brick, on which the Cannons are planted, at the distance of three Paces one from another, to the number of 200 Pieces of Artillery. There are also some Cavaliers erected that command the adjacent Country; and the Apartments underneath afford Lodgings to the Soldiers. From thence we pass to the Palace of the ancient Dukes of Milan, built of Brick, after a very magnificent manner, which serves as the Donjon, where are preserved in a large Hall many sorts of excellent Arms of great Value, and with which 10 or 12 thousand Persons may be well accoutred. The Court-Yard, an open Place, is so spacious, that a Body of 5 or 6 thousand Men may be easily drawn up in Battalia therein: and here are divers Mills for the grinding of Corn, from whence the Water that drives them cannot be taken away or dreined, by reason that the Spring riseth within the Castle it self. The Gar∣rison consists altogether of Spaniards, who do not suffer any one to enter, more-especially French-men, without the Permission of the Governor; which is seldom granted. This Fortress takes up the space of a League and a half in compass, and maintains within its Bounds
all sorts of Artificers. Lastly, the Suburbs form, as it were, one Body with the City, being in like man∣ner encompass'd with Bastions, Ditches, Out-works, and other regular Fortifications: insomuch, that al∣though Milan hath sustain'd many terrible Assaults, both of Plague and War, as having been 40 times Be∣sieg'd, and Taken 22. Nevertheless, its Grandeur is so well re-establish'd, that it may be now reckon'd among the fairest and most flourishing Cities of Europe. Pavia, Ticinum or Papia, and Papia Flavia, the Capital City of the Country of Pavese, and the S∣cond in the Dukedom of Milan, is advantagiously seated on the Banks of the River Tesino within the Ter∣ritories of Milan, from whence it is distant 15 Miles to the South; 32 West of Piacenza, 42 East of Ca∣sal, and 46 North of Genoa. It is adorn'd with an University, and an Episcopal See, depending imme∣diately on the Jurisdiction of that of Rome. It hath been sometime well Fortify'd; and, among other Bul∣warks, defended with a Castle in which the Kings of Lombardy kept their Court: Nature and Art then seeming to conspire to render it one of the strongest Holds of Europe. Some Authors affirm, that it was built by the Levi and Marici before Milan, and others are of Opinion, that the Gauls were the Founders thereof within a little while after. However, it was subdued by the Romans, sackt by Attala in the V. Cen∣tury, and at length ruin'd by Odoacer, who besieg'd Orestes therein. The Lombards made themselves Ma∣sters of the Town, under the Conduct of their King Alboinus, who took it after a tedious Siege, and con∣stituted it the Metropolis of his Dominions. The Emperor Charlemaign, or Charles the Great, storm'd it A. D. 774. and carried away Captive from thence Didier the last King of the Lombards. Afterward it fell into the Possession of the Kings of Italy, until the Emperor Otho I. seiz'd on it in 951. expelling at the same time Berenger and his Son. In the Year 100. it was almost entirely burnt by a casual Fire; and in 1059. its Inhabitants wag'd a cruel War with those of Milan. Ever since which time it hath been subject to divers Tyrants, until the Dukes of Milan, of the Family of Visconti, annex'd it to their Territories. Francis I. King of France, having surpriz'd Milan, laid Siege to Pavia, and was there taken Prisoner, his Army being routed, A. D. 1525. But Odet de Lau∣trec, General of the French Forces, regain'd it in 1527. It was taken again and recover'd in the ensu∣ing Year, until at last the Spaniards remain'd the ab∣solute Lords thereof. The University was founded by Charlemaign, A. D. 791. and re-establish'd by the Em∣peror Charles IV. A. D. 1361. in the time of Galeaceo Visconti. Moreover, here were erected divers Colleges of the Pope, Cardinal Borromeo, the Grisons, the Ma∣rianos, and the Jesuits; together with a great Num∣ber of magnificent Churches, particularly that of St. Peter, belonging to the Augustin Fryers; wherein lies the Body of their Founder, St. Augustin: Besides a Stone-Bridge, built over the River Tesin, which hath a very rapid course, and is the largest of all those that fall into the Po. But this small City of Pavia hath entirely lost its ancient Lustre; so that after having taken a view hereof, one would not, in the least, imagine it to have been the Place of Residence of 20 Kings, and the Capital of their Kingdom. The Ca∣stle is an old heap of Stones, as it were abandon'd; and the Fortifications of the Town are in a very ill Condition. The University, in like manner, seems to be much decay'd, but still consists of 5 Colleges; a∣mong which, that of Borromeo is chiefly remarkable for the Beauty of its Structure. The Students walk about the City in their Robes; and those of every College wear different Gowns. Over-against the Ca∣thedral, which is an old, low, and obscure Building, stands a brazen Statue on Horseback, suspected to be that of the Emperor Antoninus Pius. It is common∣ly call'd the Regisol, but the Original of the Name is unknown, although it hath been retain'd ever since the time of Platina; who declares his Opinion, That it was brought from Ravenna, when that City was taken and sackt by King Lairprandus. The same Prince (as it is reported) brought from Sardinia to Pavia the Body of St. Augustin, and caus'd it to be buried in St. Peter's Church: but the certain Place where it was laid could never be found, and the sumptuous Marble Mo∣nument in the Chapel, on the side of the Church, is on∣ly an honorary Tomb erected by the Monks of that Order. Como, Comum, or Novocomum, stands on the side of a Lake of the same Name, at the distance of 25 Miles almost East of Burgamo, 38 North of Milan, and 84 North-East of Turin. It hath communicated its Name to the adjacent Country of Comasco, and enjoys the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Milan, and the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Aquileia. We are inform'd by Justin the Historian, That it was built by the Gauls, during their Expedi∣tion into Italy, under the Command of their General Brennus. In the Year 1123. the Archbishop of Mi∣lan, nam'd Anselmo di Postorula, took this City, and caus'd great Alteration to be made in its State. It also suffer'd much Damage in the beginning of the XVI. Century, during the Wars of Italy. Moreover, the Emperor Charles V. subdued it in 1520. and his Troops committed many Outrages therein, by reason that the Inhabitants had admitted a Garrison of French Soldiers. The Lake of Como, Larius Lacus, is extended for the space of 34 Leagues in compass, and surrounded with a great Number of Towns. The River Addua crosseth it from the North-East to the South-West; and on that side where it enters, is erected the Fort of Fuentes. The City of Cmo is Rich, and very Po∣pulous, having given birth to many illustrious Person∣ages; particularly to Pliny the Younger, Paulus Jo∣vius, and of late, to Pope Innocent XI. descended of the Family of Odescalchi. Novara, Novaria, is situated on a rising Ground in a very fruitful Country, call'd from thence Il Nova∣rese, and well Fortified, being distant 13 Miles East of Verceil in Piedmont, 18 North-East of Casal, and 28 West of Milan. It is a City of much Antiquity, as it appears from many Inscriptions on Marble found there, and at present the Seat of a Prelate, suffragan to the Archbiship of Milan: Which Episcopal See was sometime possess'd by Benedict Odescalchi, after∣ward advanc'd to the Papal Dignity, under the Name of Innocent XI. It was also the Place of Nativity of the famous Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, who was usually stiled The Master of Sentences. This City hath been often the Theatre of War: for the French took Lewis Sforza, Duke of Milan before it, A. D. 1500. In 1513. the Forces of the same Nation attempted to besiege it, but were defeated by the Switzers that at∣tackt them during the Night. However, in 1515. the French put them to flight, and in 1522. they made themselves Masters of the Place a second time, under the Conduct of one Philip Torniel, a bar∣barous Wretch, and formidable for his Cruelty, who was afterward hang'd. Lodi, Laus Pompeia or Laus Nova Pompeia, stands on the Banks of th River Aadua, amidst very fruit∣ful Pastures, between Milan and Cremona, 24 Miles from each, and 8 South-West of Crema. It was built by the Emperor Frederick I. sirnam'd Barbarossa. 46 Years after that the ancient Town of Laus Pompeia,
which is as yet a large well-frequented Village, and retains the Name of Lodi Vecchio, and by Contraction Lodive, had been ruin'd by the Milaneses, A. D. 1158. This old Borough, where many notable Footsteps of Antiquity are still to be seen, was so call'd from Pom∣peius Strabo, the Father of Pompey the Great, who re∣establish'd a Colony therein, and is seated on the Ri∣vulet of Silaro, at the distance only of 5 Miles to the West toward Pavia, from the new City of Lodi, which is very large, well Fortified, and erected into an Episcopal See, subject to the Metropolitan of Milan. Here also are preserv'd the Relicks of Saint Basian, who was Bishop of this Diocess in the time of St. Ambrose. Bobbio, Bobio or Bobi; Bobium is a City of a small compass, seated on the River Trebia, in a Plain be∣tween the Mountains, on the very Borders of the Dutchy of Parma, near the Confines of the State of Genoa, whereto it formerly appertain'd, and its Epis∣copal See, as yet, depends on the Metropolitan of that Province; being distant 35 Miles from Tortona to the South-East, as many from Genoa; about 25 from Placentia to the North, 35 from Padua, and 16 or 17 Leagues from Milan to the South-East. A small Abbey was heretofore erected in this Place by S Columbanus, through the Liberality of Theodo∣linda, Queen of the Lombards, which afterward grew up to a Town, (whilst the Monastery still remain'd in it's proper Station;) and, in process of time, be∣came the Capital City of a Country call'd from thence Il Bobiese, having been the inheritance of the noble Families of the Malespini, Vermi, and some others. Alexandria, or Alessandria Della Paglia, Alexan∣dria Statiellorum, is divided into two Parts by the Streams of the River Tanaro, standing almost in the midst between Genoa to the South, and Turin to the West, at the distance of 44 Miles from each, as al∣so 52 from Milan to the South-West, according to the computation of that able Geographer Philippus Ferrarius, a Native of the same Place; which the Inhabitants of Cremona, Milan and Placentia, that adher'd to the Party of Pope Alexander III. against the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, caus'd to be built, A. D. 1178. It was at first called Caesarea, and after∣ward Alexandria, in Honour of this Pope; but the Emperor, by way of Railery and Contempt, termed it Alexandria della Paglia, in regard that its Walls then consisted only of Straw and Wood cover'd with Earth. However, it vigorously sustain'd the Assaults of the Imperial Forces, during 6 Months, and at length oblig'd them to raise the Siege. The same Pope establish'd an Episcopal See in this City, under the Metropolitan of Milan, and made it the Capital of the adjacent Territories. Some rime after, it fell into the Hands of the Visconti's and Sforza's, Dukes of Milan, and was likewise possess'd by the French and Spaniards. It hath been much harrass d during the Wars in the preceding Age; but at present is well Fortified and furnish'd with all manner of necessary Provisions. Cremona; Cremona is situated on the left side of the River Po, and joined thereto by the Channel of Oglio that fills its Ditches with Water. It is extended in compass, for the space of a League and an half on the Frontiers of the Dutchy of Parma, 15 Miles North-East of Piacenza, 25 North-West of Parma, 28 South of Brescia, 38 almost West of Mantua, and 45 nigh East of Milan. It is a very large City, but meaner and less inhabited then Placentia; yet two Things are very much cry'd up there, that is to say, the Tower and the Castle: A Tower built up the highest of any that are to be seen, and on that account reckon'd among the Wonders of Europe— A Rock the most Stu∣pendous, Strong, and Formidable of any that are found in Italy. This is the Language of one of their Au∣thors: So that People, who are not acquainted with the Italian Rodomantado's, would be very much start∣led, after having read of these Wonders, to find no such Thing upon their Arrival at Cremona. Indeed the Castle is an old rude Building half ruin'd, which could never be compar'd with a well built Fort, but might perhaps have gain'd some Reputation in the time of the Archers. As for the Tower, it is neither Fair nor High; and there are Thousands surpassing it, that were never mention'd in the World. It is repor∣ted, That the Emperor Sigismond, and Pope John XXIII. stood once together on the top of this Tower, attended by a certain Lord of Cremona, nam'd Gabrino Fondulio; and that the same Lord often declar'd after∣ward, That he repented he had not thrown them down headlong from top to bottom, for the Rarity of the Fact. This Report perhaps has given Occasion to the Remarks concerning the height of the Tower. However, the Streets are somewhat large and strait, and the Houses beautiful: There are also divers fair Churches and Market-Places. The Gate of the Cathe∣dral stands on Columns of Marble; and the Work∣manship of the High Altar is very curious. This City was first founded An. Dom. 445. some time after be∣came a Colony of the Romans, and hath been since sub∣ject to many great Revolutions. For Hannibal pillag'd it in passing into Italy: the Goths committed horrible Outrages therein; and it was entirely ruin'd by the Sclavonians and Lombards, in 630. but was re-built in 1284. at the special Command of the Emperor Fre∣drick Barbarossa; who likewise caus'd the said high Tower to be erected. Afterward Cremona, which hath been dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Milan, was govern'd by its own Viscounts, until the French, Venetians, Dukes of Milan, and Spaniards, at several times made them∣selves Masters thereof; and it as yet remains under the Dominion of the King of Spain. Viglevano, Viglebanum or Vergeminum, stands in the County of the same Name, on the Banks of the River Tesino, and is the Seat of a Prelate subject to the Archbishop of Milan, from whence it is distant 18 Miles almost to the West, and 12 almost South-East of Novara. The Dukes of Milan have formerly taken much delight in residing in this small City, al∣though the adjacent Country is very barren; and the Town first took its denomination from thence, as it were Vilis Gleba, according to the Report of Gauden∣tius Merula. Tortona, Dertona or Terdona, is the Capital City of a small Territory, called from thence Il Tortonese, and an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Milan; being distant 8 Miles from the Confines of the Sta e of Genoa to the North, and as many from the River Po; 26 Miles South-East of Casal, 32 almost South-West of Milan, and 35 North of Genoa. It was ruin'd by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and re-built by the Milaneses; but never recovered its ancient Grandeur. Afterward the French made themselves Masters thereof, A. D. 1642. but the Spaniards re-gain'd it in the Year ensuing. The Town is well Fortified, and de∣fended with a strong Citadel, which was founded A. D. 1654. Mortara was formerly call'd Bella Sylva in Latin, and afterward Mortaria or Martuarium, from the Slaughter of the Lombards made by the Army of Charlemain, when this Prince took their King Didier Prisoner, and put an end to their Monarchy. It is
the chief Town of the Country Lumellina, and built on the right side of the River Gogna, 9 Miles South of Navara, and 30 West of Pavia and Milan. It was taken by the French Forces, under the Command of Francis I. Duke of Modena, A. D. 1658; and restor'd to the Spaniards by virtue of the Pyrenean Treaty of Peace concluded in 1660. Marignan, Merinianum, or Melignanum, is a little Town water'd by the Streams of the River Lambro, running through the midst thereof, at the distance of 8 Miles East from Milan, and as many from Lodi, being famous for the Victory which Francis I. King of France, gain'd over the Switzers, on the 14th. day of September, A. D. 1515. The Dutchy of PARMA, Parmensis Ducatus. THe PARMERAN, or Country of PARMA, which the Italians commonly call Il Parmegiano, or Lo Stato del Duca di Parma, lies between the Ter∣ritories of Milan on the North and West side; those of Modena on the East; and those of the Republick of Genoa on the South: It is in Length, from East to West, about 65 Miles; in Breadth, from North to South, about 45, being somewhat of an Oval shape. This Region, besides the Dutchy of Parma, comprehends that of Placentia, and the Countries of Boseto and Vel di Taro, together with the Dutchies of Castro and Bonerglione; which two last are at present possess'd by the Pope. Divers Revolutions have happen'd in the State of Parma, since the declining of the Roman Empire, until at length it was incorporated into the Ecclesia∣stical, or Patrimony of St. Peter. Pope Paul III. be∣fore named Alexander Farnese, created his Son Pedro Luigi Farnese, Duke of Parma, A. D. 1545; who was slain within two Years after by the Pallavicins, and some others, at the Solicitation of Charles V. Octavio Farnese, the Son of the former, was in like manner molested, and obliged to sue for the Protection of the French: But at last his Title was establish'd by his Marriage with Margaret the Natural Daughter of the same Emperor. This Sovereign Prince is a Vassal of the See of Rome, and pays thereto the Summ of 10000 Crowns, as an Ackowledgment of Homage. His Re∣venues (according to Lassels) is said to be 600000 Crowns Yearly; others say 400000, which is most probable: And he can raise in his Territories about 28000 Men upon case of necessity, but generally keeps 5000 in pay. The most considerable Cities and Towns of his Do∣minions are these: Viz. PARMA, Bish. Cap. D. Placentia, Bish. D. Borgo S. Donino, Bish. B. Val di Taro. Chiesi di Taro. Zavatarella. Bosseto. Bossana. Fiorenzuola. Corigliano. Colornoro. S. Secondo. Soragno. S. Stephano. Masso, Dutchy. Carrara, Princ. Malespino, Marq. Fordiniovo, Marq. Filaterra. Gragnuola. PARMA; Parma is situated on the River of the same Name, which divides the Town into two Parts, joined together by as many Bridges; being di∣stant 26 Miles South-east of Cremona, 34 South-west of Mantua, as many almost West of Modena, 72 al∣most South-east of Milan, 86 North-west of Florence, 220 the same of Rome, 17 from the Bridge of Ensa, and 35 from Placentia. This City may be seen afar off, through a large and strait Road leading thither, from whence one may take a fair Prospect of the highest Steeples: The Avenues are very pleasant, as also the Town it self. On one of the Gates are plac'd the Arms of Pope Paul III. who created Lewis, his Natural Son, Duke of Parma and Placentia. The City of Parma hath been long since dignify'd with an Epis∣copal See, heretofore subject to the Metropolitan of Ravenna, and at present to that of Bononia; together with an University, founded A. D. 1599; and an Aca∣demy of ingenious Persons, call'd Gl' Innominati. It is also the usual Place of Residence of the Duke; and his Courts of Justice are kept therein. The most remar∣kable Things in Parma, which is extended for the space of three Miles in compass, are the Ducal Palace, al∣though it is not very considerable; but a new one is a building, which will be much more large and re∣gular: the Gardens, the Cathedral-Church, and the Citadel, built according to the Model of that of Ant∣werp, being flank'd with 5 Bastions, and defended with a great number of Cannons, 50 of which are planted on two Galleries; besides 8 distinct Apartments for the Soldiers, and Military Ammunition and Arms for 6000 Men. The Moats on both sides are dry, although a Channel runs through the midst of them, in form of a little Trench, filled with Water; and all the other Works are rais'd according to the exact method of Re∣gular Fortifications. The Dome of the Cathedral is painted by the famous Coregio, a Native of Parma, as well as the Church of St. John, in one of the Chapels whereof are to be seen two Paintings drawn by the same curious Hand, that cannot be sufficiently valued, viz. a Picture of Jesus Christ taken down from the Cross, and another representing the Martyrdom of two Saints. The Grand Theatre is a rare Piece of Architec∣ture, the like not being found either in Venice or Paris. It is of an extraordinary largeness; nevertheless, one may be heard every where, though speaking never so low. Instead of distinct Boxes, there are Benches rais'd like an Amphitheatre round about the level Ground-plat, which is much larger than the usual Di∣mensions, and may be fill'd with Water to the heighth of above three Foot; so that many gilded Gondolo's or Barges are sometimes launch'd into this little Lake, which affords a very delectable Sight to the Spectators. Besides the ordinary Schools of the University, there is a fair and spacious Building, commonly call'd the College of the Nobles, wherein Students of all Nations may be admitted, in case they are capable of the Disci∣pline of the Knights of Malta. For here are to be learn'd all sorts of Exercises, as well as Sciences; so that the Salaries are different, according to the several Arts whereto the Scholars have a mind to apply their Study. These Students sit together at Table in the Re∣fectory, and their number at present amounts to Two hundred and thirty. Many Illustrious Families reside in the City, which contains within its Walls above 30000 Souls, and is of very great Antiquity; for since the declining of the Roman Empire, it hath been possess'd by divers Lords: but the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa was constrain'd to retreat from before it, after a Siege of two whole Years. Moreover, it may not be amiss to observe, that the Bodies of Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, one of the most renowned Generals of his Time; and that of Mary of Portugal, his Wife, are interr'd in the Church of the Capucins. The Soil of the adjacent Territory is extremely fer∣tile, bringing forth abundance of all sorts of Fruits, more-especially Grapes and Olives, of which are made excellent Wines and Oils; besides great quantities of
Cheese, very much esteem'd throughout all the Coun∣tries of Europe. Placentia, Ital. Piacenza, is seated in a fruitful Plain, and enjoys the Title of a Dutchy, and of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Bononia, being distant only 5 or 6000 Paces from the River Po, 14 Miles South-west of Cremona, 34 nigh West of Parma, 22 South of Crema, 38 South-east of Milan, and 20 from Cremona. Perhaps it might take its Name from the Pleasantness of its Situation, or the Beauty of its Churches, publick Buildings, Market-places, Streets and Fountains. Indeed, it is a very fair City, larger than Parma, though not very populous; the Houses being low, and for the most part built of Brick. The High-Street, call'd Le Stradone, is extended in a strait Line, and the Breadth of it all along equal: on each side there is a row of 300 Posts that maintain the Foot-passage near the Houses, after the same manner as at London, and these Posts are fix'd exactly ten Foot one from another. The Statue of Alexander Farnese, Governor of the Spanish Netherlands; and that of Ranucius I. his Son, are erected in the largest publick Place. There are some Paintings of Annibal Carache in the Cathedral; and one of the Virgin Mary, drawn by Raphael Angelo, in the Church dedicated to St. Six∣tus. Placentia is a very ancient City, and hath been heretofore a Colony of the Romans. It was burnt and pillag'd by the Carthaginians, under the Conduct of their General Hamilcar (as Livy informs us,) and afterward became famous for the long Siege laid thereto by Totila, King of the Goths. But at present, the Dukes of Parma, descended of the Family of Far∣nese, retain it in their Possession, and have caus'd it to be very well fortify'd with large Ditches, Ramparts lined with Brick, and divers other Out-works; besides a regular Citadel flank'd with Bastions, and an old Castle. The Hall of Justice stands in a fair open Court; and the Duke's Palace hath 4 rows of Apartments, every one of which is six Story high. This City is like∣wise adorn'd with an University, and contains within its several Precincts almost 30000 Inhabitants, of whom 2000 are Monks, Nuns, and other Religious Persons. Among the Noble Families, those of the Scotti, Landi and Auguscioli are chiefly conspicuous. Perhaps it may not be amiss to observe, That the Coins, Weights and Measures at Placentia are different from those of Parma; and that many of the Gentry hereabouts use Coaches drawn with a couple of Oxen, instead of Horses. The Cheeses of Placentia are much admir'd, as well as the Parmizan, and some of them exceed 200 Pound weight. The Pomerium, or Ter∣ritory round about it, is bounded with Ports, and no Building allow'd to be erected there: which Custom is also observ'd at Ligorne. Borgo San-Donino, Fidentia, or Julia, or Burgus St. Donini, is a small dismantl'd City on the Frontiers of the State of Busseto, and the Dutchy of Placentia, from whence it is distant 18 Miles, and 15 from Parma to the West. Its Episcopal See, which had for a long time been interrupted, was restor'd by Pope Clement VIII. A. D. 1601. The Dutchy of MODENA, Mutinensis Ducatus. THE Dominions of the Duke of MODENA are bounded on the West by the Dutchy of Parma; on the North, by those of Mantua and Mirandola; on the East, by the Territories of Bononia, and part of the Dutchy of Ferrara; and on the South, by part of Toscany, and the Republick of Lucca. It is in Length, from North to South, about 84 Miles; and in Breadth, from East to West, about 46, being taken in the ut∣most Extent. This Country was erected into a Dutchy by the Emperor Frederick III. A. D. 1452, in favour of Borto of Esté, and is extremely fertile in Corn, Fruits and Cattel. It hath also given Birth to many famous Men, and among others, to Cardinal Sadolet, Segenius and Fallopius. In the Territories of the same State are comprehended 100 Towns or Boroughs, and a very great number of Castles. The Duke hath a Revenue of 350000 Crowns per Annum, his Ordinary Expences not exceeding 180000: He can levy Forces within the extent of his own Dominions, to the num∣ber of 20000 Foot, and 6000 Horse. The Cities, Towns and Villages of chiefest Note are these: Viz. MODENA, Bish. Cap. Regio, Bish. D. Corregio, Princ. Carpi, Princ. Bish. Finale. Concordia. Gaya. Roli, County. Sassuolo. Spilimborgo. Carpeneto. Ferrazano. Vignola. Scandiano. Sestola. St. Andrea. Bersello. Montechio. Canossa. Castelnuovo di Car∣fagnano. Gualtieri. Frignano. Mirandola, a parti∣cular Dutchy. MODENA, Mutina, in the Latit. of 43 deg. 52 min. and the Longit. of 33 deg. 15 min. is situated on the Aemilian Road, between the Rivers of Sechia and Panaro, and distant 35 Miles almost East of Parma, 44 almost South-east of Mantua, 58 North-west of Florence, 95 South-west of Venice, 106 South-east of Milan, and 200 North-west of Rome. It is a Place of much Antiquity, and was one of the twelve Colonies of the Etrurians or Toscans beyond the Apen∣nine. Its Episcopal See heretofore depended on the Metropolitan of Ravenna, and is at present subject to that of Bononia. The Houses here are handsomly built with Brick, but not very high. Here are many Portico's and Arches to be seen, together with a great number of Fountains, and fair Mansion-Houses; but the Streets are very narrow and dirty. Neither are the Duke's Palace & Cathedral very magnificent Structures. But the new Palace, begun partly on the Foundation of the former, is much more regular; and when fi∣nish'd, will appear a very stately Pile of Building. This City, which was raz'd under the Reign of the Goths and Vandals, and re-built by the Posterity of the Emperor Charlemagne, is now become extremely Po∣pulous, as containing within its Bounds about 40000 Inhabitants. It is also defended by a strong Citadel, and encompass'd with firm Walls, deep Ditches, and other regular Fortifications, in which there is said to be Arms for 40000 Men. Regio, Regium Lepidi, and Regium Lepidium, is the Capital City of the Dutchy of the same Name; and in like manner an Episcopal See under the Metropo∣litan of Bononia, standing 15 Miles East of Parma, 18 almost West of Modena, and 34 South of Mantua. It is somewhat less than Modena, but of equal Strength, and makes a finer Show. It was at first a Colony of the Toscans, and then of Lepidus; but owes its Re∣stauration to the Magnificence of Charlemagne, after having been often ruin'd through the Incursions of the Goths, and many other Barbarous Nations. It is now inhabited by about 22000 Persons, and hath a strong Citadel for its Defence, being also beautify'd with divers publick Edifices, more stately than those of Modena, particularly the Cathedral Church, the Roof
whereof is painted by the most famous Masters of that Art, as well as the Chapel of the Fraternity della Motta. The adjacent Territories of this City are very fruitful in all sorts of Commodities, and a considerable Traffick is establish'd therein for Silk. The Inhabitants endea∣vour to acquire some Reputation by their Manufactures of Bone and Spurs▪ as well as those of Modena, by making Masques and Vizards. Poor Shifts to render a Place Famous! The Bone-works of Regio are little sorry Rings sold for Six-pence a Dozen; Chess-men, Shrines, Agnus Dei's, or Crosses, and all these cut out with a small Bill or Hatchet. Corregio, Corregium, Corrigium, is a very fair and large Town, distant 12 Miles North-east of Regio, and 14 North-west of Modena. It is fenced with a well built Castle, and dignify'd with the Title of a Prin∣cipality, having been heretofore govern'd by its own proper Lords of the same Name; but at last be∣came subject to the Dukes of Modena, ever since the Year 1635. Carpi, Carpum, is remarkable for its Foundation on a Channel of the River Sechia, and on the account of its Title of a Principality and Bishoprick; being distant 14 Miles almost North of Modena, 15 North-east of Regio, and 15 South-west of Mirandula, having a very large Territory. Indeed, it is a small City; neverthe∣less, well fortify'd with a Castle, strong Walls, and Moats full of Water. The Collegiate Church here was first founded by King Aictulphus; and afterward more magnificently re-built, through the Liberality of Albertus Pius, then Prince. It doth not depend on any Diocess, but is exempted from the Pretensions of the neighbour∣ing Bishops, through the means of a singular Privilege granted by divers Popes, more-especially Julius II. and Leo X. The Family of the Pio's possess'd this Princi∣pality, from the Year 1319, until almost A. D. 1550, when it fell into the Hands of the Dukes of Modena. Finale, or Final di Modena, to distinguish it from another Town of the like Name within the Dominions of the State of Genoa, stands on the Banks of the River Panaro, and in the Confines of the Dutchy of Ferrara, from the Capital City whereof it is distant 18 Miles to the West, and about 15 from Modena to the North-east, being chiefly remarkable by reason of its regular Fortifications. Mirandola, Mirandula, so call'd from its principal Town, is a Sovereign Dutchy lying between those of Ferrara, Modena and Mantua, and the County of Concordia that appertains to the same Jurisdiction. The City of Mirandola, seated in the Lower-Lombardy, at the distance of 23 Miles North of Modena, 26 South-east of Mantua, 28 West of Ferrara, and 30 North-west of Bologna, is fortify'd with seven Royal Bastions, as also a strong Citadel and a Fort named Bocca. The Family of Pici have retain'd the Possession of Miran∣dola for the space of about 5 or 600 Years; and this Prince hath a Right to Coin Money, which nevertheless is only current throughout his own Dominions. His Revenue is reckon'd 80000 Crowns Yearly. The Foun∣dation of the City (as it is generally believ'd) was laid in the time of the Emperor Constans, the Son of Con∣stantine the Great. The Dutchy of MANTUA, Mantuanus Ducatus. THE State of MANTƲA comprehends within its Bounds many others of a lesser extent; which the Duke holds in Fee of the Emperor, from whom he receives the Investiture. It is bounded on the North by the Country of Verona, depending on the Republick of Venice; on the West, by that of Bressano, and part of the Milanez; on the South, by the Dutchy of Modena; and on the East, by the Ecclesiastical State. It is in Length, from East to West, about 68 Miles; and in Breadth, from North to South, about 44 Miles. This Prince is descended of the House of Gonzagua, and hath possess'd these Territories ever since the Year 1327, or 1328. Luigi, or Lues, of Gonzagua, having put to Death Passerino Bonacolsa, Tyrant of the Country, first obtain'd the Lordship thereof, in Quality of Vicar of the Empire. Afterward, his Po∣sterity often assum'd the Title of Captains, until the time of John Francis Gonzagua, whom the Emperor Sigismund created Marquis, A. D. 1433. At length, Charles V. erected it into a Dutchy; and the Dukes have been frequently assisted in maintaining their Right by the French Forces, more-especially under the Reign of Lewis XIII. in 1629, both before and after the con∣cluding of the Treaty of Peace at Cherasco. This Coun∣try is extremely fertile, and yields a Revenue of a∣bout 400000 Crowns Yearly, but of late it is grown much poorer: It compriseth some Places os the Dutchy of Montferrat, which are likewise united to its Dominions. The State of Mantua is divided into two Prin∣cipal Parts. 1. In the Dut∣chy of Man∣tua are in∣cluded these Principal Towns, &c. Viz. MANTƲA, Bish. and Cap. Castiglione della Stivere, Princip. Bozzolo, Dutchy. Sabioneto, Princip. Guastallo, Dutchy. Goito. Solfarino. Ostiano. St. Martino. Rodigo, County. Serinido. Luzzaro, Lordsh. Gonzagua, Marq. Borgo, Fortr. Vadano, Marq. Nuolare. Dozolo, Marq. Castel-Giofrido, Lordship. 2. Part of Mont∣ferrat, where∣in are these Towns, Viz. These Places have been al∣ready descri∣bed. CASAL, Bish. now in the Posses. of the French. Occimiano. Balzola. Acqui, Bish. Ripalta. MANTƲA, in the Latit. 44 deg. 30. min. and the Longit. of 33 deg. 10 min. is built on the side of a Lake, or rather a Pool made by the River Mincio, which flowing out of the Lake of Guarda, and meet∣ing with low Grounds, enlarges it self to form a kind of Marsh, which is twelve or fifteen times longer than broad; insomuch that one cannot approach near the Town Walls, without passing over two Bridges erected on the same Marsh, one whereof is 600 Paces long. In coming hither from Cremona, you pass over a Causeway reaching only 2 or 300 Paces in length; but on the other side, as one goes to Verona, the Marsh, or Lake (if you please) is much larger. There are some Places where these Waters always run; but in others they stand, and so far infect the Air of Mantua, that during the excessive Heats of the Summer-season, all those Inhabitants that are able, depart out of the Place. The Situation of Mantua is not unlike that of Verona; but there is this difference, that the latter, besides its Marsh, is de∣fended by a strong Fortification; whereas Mantua is
only encompass'd with a simple Wall, although indeed the Citadel is a considerable Defence thereto. This City, which is moderately large, taking up almost 4 Miles in compass, was first founded (as it is generally believed) 430 Years before that of Rome, and is at pre∣sent dignified with an Episcopal See, depending only on the Jurisdiction of the Pope, although it former∣ly appertain'd to that of the Patriarch of Aquileia, until A. D. 1453. It formerly bore the Title of a Marquisate, which was erected into a Dutchy by the Emperor Charles V. in 1530. It stands 34 Miles North-East of Turin, 23 almost South of Verona, 42 North-West of Modena, 84 almost West of Venice, 100 North-West of Florence, and 234 North-West of Rome, being adorn'd with 8 Gates, and including within its several Precincts 18 Parishes, 40 Monasteries for Religious Persons of both Sexes, and nigh 50000 Souls, which is scarce answerable to the Bigness, being rather in a declining Condition. There are some Streets very large and streight, but the Houses are mean, and of an unequal height, ex∣cepting a very small number. The most remarkable publick Buildings are the Dome, or Cathedral, the Roof whereof is all Overlaid with Gold, and Pain∣ted; the Church of St. Dominick; the Duke's Pa∣lace, formerly very Famous for its costly Furniture and Riches, and the Town House; besides a great num∣ber of Mills and Magazines, in which are made consi∣derable quantities of Silk, and other Manufactures. The City of Mantua was taken, on the 18th. day of July, A D. 1630. by Colalto, General of the Imperial Forces, when the Soldiers ruin'd all the incomparable Works, and entirely pillag'd the Prince's Palace, where∣in were contain'd many things of an inestimable Va∣lue, viz. curious Paintings, Statues, Cabinets, Vessels of Gold and Silver, &c. Among these Rarities, there were also an Unicorn, and a pair of Organs of Ala∣baster; and six Tables, every one of which was three Foot long; the first was made altogether of Emralds, the second of Turquoises, the third of Jacinths, the fourth of Saphires, the fifth of Amber, and the sixth of Jasper. The Duke of Mantua hath seven or eight Houses of Pleasure without the Walls, the chief of which are nam'd Favoria, Goto, Virgiliana, and Marmirolo. The last of these is situated at the end of a spacious Road, over-shadow'd on both sides with very high Trees, and distant about a large League and a half from Mantua. This most delectable Seat is adorn'd with a Rivulet as clear as Crystal, a pleasant Wood, and many Gardens, Orchards, Orange-Houses, Aviaries and Fountains: The several Apartments being in like manner well fur∣nish'd with variety of Paintings, Antick Figures, and divers other Rarities. One cannot well leave Mantua, without calling to mind that Virgil, the Prince of Latin Poets, was born in the Village of Andes, near this City; which hath also given Birth to the Fa∣mous Italian Poet Tasso, and many other Illustrious Personages. Castiglione delle Stivere, Castilio Stiverorum, is the chief Town of a small Territory of the same Name, bearing the Title of a Principality, and stands on the Frontiers of the Dutchy of Mantua, almost in the midst between this City and that of Brescia, at the distance of 6 or 7 Leagues; as also about 12 Miles from Peschiera. It is defended with a strong Fort, and govern'd by its proper Princes of the Family of Gonzagua. Bozzolo is a small Town environ'd with a sort of Fortification, and appertains, together with a Ter∣ritory of 4 or 5 Miles in extent, to a Duke, who takes his Title from thence, and is Lord of the Manour. The State or Republick of VENICE, Ditio Veneta. THe State of VENICE comprehends all those Territories which are possess'd by the Republick in Italy, and compose part of the Lower Lombardy, being bounded on the North by the County of Ty∣rol; on the West, by the Bishoprick of Trent, and Dutchy of Milan; on the South, by part of the same Dutchy, that of Mantua, and the Ecclesiastical State; and on the East by the Gulph of Venice, and the Province of Carniola. Its extent from East to West, that is, from Leceo, on the Frontires of Ber∣gamasco, to Trieste, about 240 Miles; and from North to South 114 Miles. This State hath been governed ever since the Year of our Lord 697. by a supreme Ma∣gistrate, commonly call'd the Doge, or Duke, whose Office is perpetual, unless he be depos'd by the Senate; which Authority is very seldom excercis'd: Neverthe∣less, a President thereof hath not been wanting; as it happen'd to Francesco Foscari, to whom they de∣nied the Satisfaction of dying invested with the Ducal Ornaments, although he had attain'd to the 84th. Year of his Age, and had render'd very signal Services to the Commonwealth. However, at present the Doge cannot abdicate his Office, although some have done it in former times. He is chosen by the Suffrages of the Noblemen assembled with very great precaution, and certain particular Circumstances. The Election is per∣form'd by Lot, without Fraud, and none dare presume to act otherwise. Immediately after, divers Medals are stamped with the Effigy of the new Duke. Then he is conducted from the Palace through the Streets, with general Applause, and joyful Acclamations, until his Arrival at the Court of St. Mark; where he enters into the Church, and takes the usual Oath, having first receiv'd the Ducal Crown and Vest∣ments. The Government of this Republick in the begin∣ning was Democratical, under Consuls and Tribunes; but the Doges succeeded these last, of whom 34 or 36 were absolute Soveraigns. In the Year 1173. it return'd to a Democracy, until A. D. 1298. ever since which time an Aristocracy hath always prevail'd; that is to say, the whole Soveraignty is committed to a certain number of Families enrolled in the Golden Book, or Register of the Venetian Nobles. As for the Authority of the Doge, it is like to that with which the Prince of the Senate at Rome was heretofore in∣vested, having only the Precedency above the other Magistrates. It is true indeed, the sumptuous Apparel with which he is clad, during the Celebration of pub∣lick Ceremonies, seems to make a kind of Majestick Show. In this State are establish'd Five principal Councils; the 1st. of these is termed the Grand Coun∣cil, as comprehending the whole Body of the Noble Men: These elect almost all the Magistrates, and enact whatsoever Laws they judge to be necessary for the be∣nefit of the Common-wealth. The 2d. nam'd Pregadi, determine all Matters relating to Peace or War, Al∣liances and Leagues, which we commonly call The Senate of Venice. The 3d. is the College, compos'd of 26 Lords that give Audience to Embassadors, and report their Demands to the Senate; which alone hath power to return Answers. The 4th. stiled the Council of Ten, decide all Criminal Matters, and is a most formidable Tribunal; for the 10 Noble Men, of whom it consists, are severe and inflexible Judges. This Court of Judicature is renewed Yearly, and 3 Inquisitors of State are chosen every Month from a∣mong these 10 Noblemen, every one of them execu∣ting
the same Office in their turn. To which Trium∣virate, so great Authority is assign'd, that they can take away the Life even of the Doge himself▪ as well as that of the meanest Mechanical Artificer of Venice, without giving any Account of their Proceedings to the Senate, provided that the Three Voices are unani∣mous; otherwise, all the 10 Judges must be con∣cern'd to condemn him to Death. All Prelates and Ec∣clesiastical Persons, are for ever excluded from entring into the Councils, and bearing any Offices in the State; insomuch that it is impossible for the Court of Rome to form any correspondence capable of penetrating into the Secrets of the Senate. The 5th. is the Spiritual Council, in which presides the Patriarch of Venice, who is also Primate of Dalmatia, and Metropolitan of the Archbishops of Candia and Corfu, and of the Bishops of Chiozza and Torcello: but the Church of St. Mark doth not depend on his Jurisdiction, because it is, as it were, the See of a particular Bishop, called Pomocrise; who officiates with a Mitre, Cross and Ring, gives the Benediction to the People, and confers the Tonsure, together with the Four inferiour Orders. The Patriarch is nominated by the Senate, and the Primate of St. Mark by the Doge: They are both noble Vene∣tians, as well as the Prelates of Candia, Corfu, Treviso, Padua, Vicenza, Verona, Brescia and Bergomo. As for the other Bishopricks, the Pope bestows them on Citizens, Country-Gentlemen and Monks. The Se∣nate had, heretofore, a Right to the Nomination of all the Bishopricks and Abbeys of their Dominions, both by Sea and Land; but they renounc'd it in the Treaty of Peace, concluded An. Dom. 1510. with Poge Ju∣lius II. to disengage him from the League of Cambray: The prudent Senators judging that it was not the In∣terest of the Republick to interpose in the Collation of Bishopricks, in favour of the Noblemen, who might, by this Means; be induc'd to neglect the Service of the State. The Dominions of the Venetians are of two sorts, viz. one in Lombardy called the State of the Continent; and the other on the Sea, or adjacent Territories, which is termed the Maritim State: The first of these comprehends many distinct Countries and Towns, namely those of La Marca Trevisane, Padouano, Vi∣centino, Veronese, Bergamasco, Cremonese, Bresciane, Polesino, or the County of Rovigo and Friuli. The Maritim State contains the Province of Venice or Il Do∣gado, part of Istria, Dalmatia, and Albania; the Islands of Corfu, Zante, Cephalonia, and Lerigo; some Places in Candia, and almost the whole Peninsule of the Morea, together with the Adriatick-Sea, or Gulph of Venice, which Andrea Morosini, a noble Venetian, calls Reipublicae Dominium. The annual Ceremony of espousing the Sea in the Presence of the Ambassdors of crowned Heads, is perform'd on Ascension-Day in the Port of Lido; where the Doge goes on board the Bu∣centaur, which is a very stately Vessel, or Barge, and casts a Ring into the Sea, after having pronounc'd these Words, Desponsamus te, Mare, in signum veri & perpetui Dominii; i. e. We Wed thee, O Sea, in token of a true and Perpetual Dominion; which is done in Memory of a notable Victory that the Venetians had gained over the Sclavonians, Normans, Pisans, and Genoeses, rather than as an acknowledgement of the fabulous Donation made to them by Pope Alexander III. When the Solemnity is finish'd, the Ring, ty'd to the end of a String, is drawn up again. Which oblig'd Hieronimo Donato, Ambassador at Rome, to return this Answer to Pope Julius II. who requir'd him, by way of Railery, to shew what Authentick Records the Republick had to prove their Right of Soveraignty over the Gulph. If your Holiness, said he, vouchsafe to search into the Original Draught of the Donation made by the Emperor Constantine to Pope Sylvester, you will find the Concession of the Adriatick Sea to the Venetians, indorsed on the back side of it. The Gene∣ral, or Governour of the Gulph, is the most ancient Marine Officer of the State: maintaining on that ac∣count, one of the principal Posts or Stations in the Sea-fights; together with this Privilege, That when the Generalissimo, or High-Admiral of the Fleet happens to dye, or to fall sick, he supplies his Place until the Senate hath nominated another. Moreover, his Of∣fice is perpetual; whereas that of the Generalissimo continues only during the Wars. The ordinary Reve∣nues of this Republick amount to 5320000 Venetian Ducats Yearly, beside what they have from the Con∣quests. The Republick of VENICE divided into Three States. 1. The State of the Conti∣nent, in Nine principal Parts or Countries, Of BERGAMOSCO, Bergomo, Bish. Of Cremasco, Crema, Bish. Of Bresciano, Brescia, Bish. Of Polesino, Rovigo, Bish. Of Veronese, Verona, Bish. Of Padouano, Padua, Bish. Of Vicentino, Vicenza, Bish. Of Trevisano, Treviso, Bish. Of Friuli, Aquileia, a Pa∣triar. ruin'd. Ʋdina, Patr. 2. The Mari∣time State, in five principal Parts, The Province of VENICE, or Il Dogada, Venice, Patr. Cap. Part of Istria, Capo d' Istria, B. Part of Dalmatia, Zara, Archb. Divers Islands, Corfu, Bish. Part of Candia, Spina Longa. 3. The Con∣quer'd Ter∣ritories, Almost the whole Peninsule of the Morea, Patras. The Country of Athens, Athens. The Country of BERGAMASCO, Bergo∣mensis Ager, lies between the Valteline on the North, the Dutchy of Milan on the West, the Territories of Cremasco on the South, and those of Bressano on the East; comprehending from North to South, the space of about 46 Miles, and 32 from East to West. This Province or Territory, as well as that of Milanois, is water'd with many Rivulets that descend from the Alps, and which the Inhabitants divide into small Brooks throughout the whole Country, as occasion serves; insomuch, that by this means, the Inconveni∣ences of two great Droughts are prevented, and the Soil is render'd wonderfully fruitful. The Chief Towns are these, Viz. Bergamo, Bish Cap. Martinengo. Romano. Clusono. Calepio. Bergamo, Bergomon, the Metropolis of Bergomasco, in the Latit. of 45 Deg. and the Longit. of 31 Deg. 30 Min. is seated on the side of a Mountain, the foot whereof is cover'd with very large Suburbs, between the River of Serio to the East, and that of Brembo, to
the West, at the distance of 30 Miles North-Eeast of Milan, 34 almost West of Brescia, and 44 North-West of Cremona. It was first founded by the Oro∣bii, an ancient People, together with Como and La Pieve d Incino, and is at present the Seat of a Prelate Suffragan to the Archbishop of Milan. It is well built, and very strong, as well by reason of its advan∣tageous Situation, as on the account of its Walls, and the Castle call'd Capella, with other Bulwarks. The Streets are narrow, but the Houses fair. Upon the top of a Hill above the City stands the Castle, which, tho' it be but a small Place, is strongly situated, and com∣mands the Town. In the Cathedral is shewn the Tomb of the Valiant Bartholomeo Cogtione, who was General of the Venetian Forces against the Milanese, and the first that brought a Train of Artillery into the Field. In the Quire of the same Church, the Stalls and Benches of In-laid Work are more-especially re∣markable; which were made after the same manner, and by the same Hand as those of the Dominican's Church at Bononia. The Dialect or Jargon of the In∣habitants of Bergamo, is esteem'd so ridiculous, that all the Buffoons of Italy affect to imitate their Speech. But there is another thing among those People no less disagreable: For half of them have their Throats bloated up with an ill-favour'd Swelling that very much disfigures their Faces; but it is so natural to them, that they make it a doubtful Question, which ought to be reputed the greatest Defect, To have one of these Swellings, or to be free from it? The City of Bergamo hath been possess d by different Lords, and at length became subject to Philip Duke of Milan, about the Year 1419. After whose Death, the Inha∣bitants submitted to the Government of the Venetians. But Lewis XII. King of France, having defeated the Forces of the Republick, A. D. 1509, in the memo∣rable Battle of Aignadel, took Bergamo: nevertheless, in 1516, the Place was restor'd to the Venetians, who have ever since retain'd it in their Possessions. The Country of Cremasco, Cremasco Ager, is of a small extent, 16 Miles long, and 10 broad, lying to the South of Bergomasco, including within its Bounds only one considerable City, viz. that of Crema, which standing on the Banks of the River Serio, the Waters thereof fall into the Channel of the Addua, at their entrance into the Territories of Milan. An Episcopal See was erected therein by Pope Gregory IX. A.D. 1579, and render'd subject to the Metropolitan of Bononia. The Palace, Castle and Fortifications render it a Place of considerable strength; but it hath, at several times, remain'd under the Dominion of the Emperors, Viscounts of Cremona and Placentia, and Dukes of Milan, until at last it fell into the Hands of the Vene∣tians. It is distant 23 Miles North of Piacenza, 18 North-west of Cremona, 25 South-west of Brescia, and 30 East of Milan; and is famous for fine Thread made here by the Nuns, and little Brushes made of the Roots of a kind of Grass call'd Capriole. The Country of Bresciano, Brixianus Ager, hath the Bishoprick of Trent, and the Valteline, for its Northern Bounds; the Territories of Bergamasco on the West; those of Milan on the South; and those of Verona, and part of the Principality of Trent, on the East; being extended from South to North for the space of about 70 Miles, and 35 from West to East. The most remarkable Towns are these: BRESCIA, Bish. Cap. Asala. Montchiaro. Salo. Isseo. Roca d' Anso. Ponte Vigo. Orzi Nuovi. Orchi Vecchi. BRESCIA, Brixia, in the Latit. of 44 deg. 50 min. and the Longit. of 31 deg. 30 min. is situated in a Plain on the River Gotro, near that of the Mela, and enjoys the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Milan, being distant 34 Miles almost East of Ber∣gamo, 28 North of Cremona, 45 almost North of Parma, 35 North-west of Mantua, and 110 East of Venice. It is a fair and populous City, with large Streets, through which run divers Brooks of clear Water, and is famous for Guns and Iron Works, the Fire-Arms made there being esteem'd the best in Italy. It is also fortify'd with a very strong Citadel founded on an adjacent Hill, which is as it were, the first Step of the Alps; as also, with certain Ramparts, though not very con∣siderable, and an Arsenal. The Hall of Justice is a large and beautiful Edifice, built with a sort of Pietra Dura, or hard Stone resembling Marble, on the front whereof is this Inscription, Fidelis Brixia Fidei & Justiciae consecravit. Over-against this Palace stands a Portico 500 Paces long, and almost entirely fill'd with Armourers Shops. Lastly, the Neigbourhood of the Alps supplies the Town with a great Number of good Springs, and a Rivulet affording no small Ad∣vantage thereto. This City suffer'd much Damage through the Factions of the Guelphs and Gibelines. The Dukes of Milan made themselves Masters thereof, until it was subdued by the Venetians, and afterwards taken by the French King, Lewis XII. A. D. 1509. But Francis. I. resign'd it to the Republick of Venice, and it, as yet, remains in their Possession. The Country of Veronese, Veronensis, Ager, which is very fruitful, more-especially of excellent Olives, lies between the Bishoprick of Trent on the North, Bresciano on the West; the Dutchy of Mantua on the South; and the Provinces of Vicentino and Padouano on the East. It is extended from South to North for the space of about 56 Miles, and of 35 Miles from West to East, and contains the ensuing Towns, &c. Viz. VERONA, Bish. Cap. Garda. Paschiera. Sirmione. Legnano. St. Bonifacio. Chiuse. Maliesano. VERONA, Verona, in the Latit. of 45 deg. 50 min. and the Longit. of 33 deg. 20 min. is seated on the Banks of the River Adige, which divides the whole Town into two Parts, joyn'd together by 4 state∣ly Stone-Bridges, at the distance of 24 Miles almost North of Mantua, 35 South of Trent, 40 East of Brescia, and 68 West of Venice. It is a fair City, 7 Miles in compass, excluding the Suburbs, which are very large too, and thought to contain 70000 Souls. It is strong by Situation, and extraordinary well fortify'd with Walls, Bastions, Towers, Bulwarks, and deep Ditches, and strengthned with 3 Castles, so that it is look'd upon as almost impregnable. But the Fortifications have been of late much neglected, and for the most part are not very regular. The Castle of St. Felix stands behind that of St. Peter, and both together com∣mand the Town, on one side whereof are large waste Grounds, the Grass growing in the very Streets, which are there unpav'd, and almost all of them are narrow and dirty. Indeed, there are some fair Buildings, but the Houses are generally low, and of unequal height, most of them having wooden Balconies, over-loaded so extremely with little Gardens in Boxes, and Flower-Pots, that it is not safe to pass under them. In a word, when one walks in this ity, it is not very de∣lectable; nevertheless, it is extraordinary large, its Situation being also wonderfully pleasant, and the Air round about it very healthful.
The Episcopal See of Verona is subject to the Patriar∣chate of Aquileia; and the Cathedral bears the Name of St. Zeno, one of its Prelates. It is a small dark Church, adorn'd with some Tombs, particularly that of Pope Lu∣cius III. on which is engrav'd only this Epitaph, Ossa Lucii III. Româ pulsus invidiâ. But the Amphitheatre may well surprize those that have not been accustom'd to behold Works of the like nature. Indeed; the out∣ward Wall of it is entirely ruin'd; but Care has been taken to repair the Benches or Seats, as they have fallen to decay, and they are 44 in number; the uppermost is 530 Paces in compass, and the lowermost 250; every Step is a Foot and an half high, and near 26 Inches wide: which distances could not be less, that those Spectators who sat behind might not offend the others with their Feet. At each end of the Amphitheatre, be∣tween the Seats, is a Gate 25 Foot high, for an entrance into it out of the Street; and over each Gate, a kind of Plat-form, 20 Foot long, and 10 broad, enclos'd be∣fore, and on the sides, with rows of Marble Ballisters. It is commonly reported, That this Work was founded by Augustus; but others attribute it to the Emperour Maximilian. There is also to be seen here a Triumphant Arch, and lome other ruins of ancient Monuments. A∣mong other Curiosities, the Cabinet of Count Mascardo deserves well to be view'd by Travellers. It consists of a Gallery, and 6 Chambers, all fill'd with most wonder∣ful Rareties, both of Art and Nature. The City of Ve∣rona hath been possess'd by the Venetians ever since the Year 1403. from whom it was taken by the Emperour Maximilian, A. D. 1509. but surrender'd to them again in 1516. Chiusa is a very considerable Fort, the Situation there∣of being like to another of that Name on the Rhone, be∣tween Geneva and Lions. It stands on the foot of a high Rock, and the Passage leading to it is cut out of the steep surface of the same Rock; on the other side is a Precipice, at the bottom whereof, the River Adige runs with a gentle stream. The small Territory of Polesino, Rhodigena Penincula, is bounded on the North by the River Adige, and the Territories of Padouano; on the South, by the Dutchy of Ferrara; and on the East, by the Gulf of Venice; be∣ing extended only for the space of 60 Miles in length from South-West to North-East, and about 18 in breadth. The chief Towns are these: Viz. Rovigo, Bish. Cap. Adria. Labadia. Lendavara. ROVIGO, Rhodigium, is water'd with the River Adige, that encompasseth almost all its Territories, and is distant 22 Miles South of Padua, 24 almost North of Ferrara, and 33 South-West of Venice. This small Town hath been, for some time, the usual Place of Residence of the Bishop of Adria, and was heretofore subject to the Dukes of Ferrara; but at present is united to the Dominions of the State of Venice. Adria, Hadria or Atria, is situated on the Sea-Coasts, and the side of the little River Tartaro, being distant 50 Miles from Ravenna to the North, 30 from Ferrara to the North-East, and 25 from Venice to the South; but scarcely 5 from the Confines of the Ecclesiastical State, and the Dutchy of Ferrara. It is a place of great Anti∣quity, as having impos'd its Name on the Adriatick-Sea, or Gulf of Venice, and is at present dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Ravenna. But in regard that the Town is now half ru∣in'd, and very much impair'd, through the violence of the Waves continually beating on it, the Bishop hath thought fit to remove his Palace from thence, and re∣side, for the most part, at Rovigo. The Country of Padovano, Patavinus Ager, lies be∣tween that of Trevisano on the North, that of Vicentino on the West, that of Polesino on the South, and the Gulf of Venice on the East. Its utmost extent from South to North, consists of about 36 Miles; and of 46 from West to East. The Towns, Villages, &c. of chiefest Note, being these: Viz. Padua, Bish. Cap. Este. Campo S. Pietro. Pieve di Sacco. Mirano. Orago. Citadella. Montagnana. Castelbanco. Monseace. PADƲA, Patavium; in Italian, Padoua, in the Lat. of 45 deg. 10 min. and the Longit. of 34 deg. 20 min. is advantageously situated in a very fertile Country, near the Streams of the Rivers Brenta and Bachiglione, which fills its Trenches with Water, and render it the Bulwark of Venice, on the side of Lombardy; being distant 17 Miles almost East of Vicenza; 20 South-West of Trevigio, 22 North of Rovigo, 24 West of Venice, and 46 East of Verona. It is commonly reported, That this City is more ancient than Rome and Venice, and that its foundation was laid by Antenor, whose Tomb is erected in the Street of S. Law∣rence. However, Padua is at present adorn'd with a Bishop's See, under the Patriarchate of Aquileia, and a famous University. It is a very large City, being 8 Miles in com∣pass; but has much wast Grounds, and is in a decaying Condition, Houses being very cheap. It contains 8550 Houses, and about 38000 Souls. Which Mr. Ray thinks exceeds the just Sum, by at least 10000. It is usually di∣vided into the old and new Town; the former, as yet, retaining its ancient Castles, Towns, Walls, and Moats. The Palace, wherein the Courts of Justice are kept, is a noble Pile of Building, and its Out-works are extream∣ly magnificent; within the Apartments thereof, is con∣tain'd the most curious Library of Padua. Here is also to be seen a spacious Hall, called Il Palagio di Ragione, which extends its self in length 256 Feet, and in breadth 86, according to the Report of Schottus, and Angelo Por∣tenari, and is not supported by any Pillars: It is open on 4 sides, and on every one of its Gates is plac'd the Statue of some Illustrious Personage of the State. The old Town is likewise beautified with the Cathedral Church, and the Colleges of the University. Moreo∣ver, the Houses are flanked with Portico's, so that one may securely walk under them, without being exposed to the injury of the Weather, although the Streets are thereby made narrow and dark. In the new Town stand the Church and Abbey of St. Justin, and that of St. An∣thony of Lisbon, commonly call'd of Padua, because he dy'd, and was bury'd there. This last Church is very large, and fill'd with great variety of admirable Sculp∣tures and Paintings, besides a great number of magnifi∣cent Tombs; and among others, that of Alexander Con∣tarini, Admiral of the Republick of Venice, and Procu∣rator of St. Mark; as also that of Count Horatio Sicco, who was slain during the last Siege of Vienna. Neither is there any where to be seen a more curious Piece of Painting in Fresco, than that of the Chapel of St. Felix, drawn by the famous Giotto, an excellent Artist in that sort of Work. But that which is most Remarkable in this Church, is the Chapel of the above-mention'd St. Anthony, the great Protector of Padua, styled, by way of Excellency, Il Santo, or the Saint; whose Body lies interr'd under the high Altar. The whole Chapel is lin'd with white Marble, wrought in Basso Relievo; where are represented the principal Miracles of the said St. Anthony, not to mention 36 large Silver Lamps, that burn Night and Day round the Altar. There are also divers Monasteries, and other well-built publick Edifices. The University (as 'tis believ'd) was founded by
the Emperour Charlemaign, and re-establish'd in the Years 1179, and 1222, since which time, its Reputation hath been so far encreas'd, that it is every where highly esteem'd, and frequented by the most learned Professors through∣out Europe. Here are also establish'd two Academies of ingenious Persons, Intituled, Gli recouverati, and Gli inflammati. In fine, the City of Padua, which hereto∣fore gave birth to that renowned Roman Historian, Ti∣tus Livius, hath, in like manner, lately brought forth a great number of excellent Personages, particularly Paulus and Albertus, Paduenses, Petrus Appo, Speron, Spe∣roni, Zabarella, &c. This City is very dangerous to such as walk in the Night-time, by reason of the Inso∣lence of the Scholars, and others, who go about all Night, Arm'd with Pistols and Carbines. It fell into the Possession of the Venetians, A. D. 1406. and in 1519, all the Suburbs were demolish'd, in which were compre∣hended 10 Monasteries, 6 Churches, 7 Hospitals, and about 3000 Houses. The Amphitheatre of Padua was larger than that of Verona; but there remain only the miserable Ruins of its ancient Grandeur. The Country of Vicentino, Vicentinus Ager, is bound∣ed on the North by that of Trevisano, on the West by the Arch-bishoprick of Trent, on the South by the Ter∣ritories of Verona, and part of those of Padouano, and on the East by the same Province of Padouano. Its ex∣tent comprehends about 44 Miles from South to North, and 32 from West to East. It is a very pleasant Coun∣try, and usually stiled, The Garden of Venice, more espe∣cially the Fields round about the City of Vicentia. But the Inhabitants are accused of being too revengeful, and frequently branded with the odious Name of The Assas∣sines of Vicentia. The most considerable Towns are these: Viz. Vicenza, Bish. and Cap. Morostica, or Marostico. Lonigo. Orgnano. VICENTIA, or Vicenza, Vicentia, or Vi∣cetia, is very advantageously situated near the conflu∣ence of 2 Rivers, viz. the Bachiglione, and Borone, in a verdant Plain, at the distance of 18 Miles almost West of Padua, 32 almost East of Verona, and 44 West of Venice: It is about 4 Miles in circuit, but considerably populous, containing 30 or 40000 Inhabitants; and it is encompass'd with a Brick-Wall, but not very strong. It is full of Nobility and Gentry, being said to have 200 Families worth 15000 Crowns per Annum each, and bet∣ter. The Inhabitants drive a great Trade in breeding and feeding of Silk-worms; and in winding, twisting, and dying of Silk. Three or four small Rivers run by the Town, but none of them are Navigable. There are some good Paintings in the Cathedral, dedicated to St. Vincent; and a much-commended Work of in-laid Stones. The Church, that bears the Name of Corona∣ta, is well Pav'd and Wainscotted; and that of the Nuns of St. Catharine is admir'd for its Three beautiful Altars. The Town-house is no extraordinary fair build∣ing, and yet cry'd up by the Inhabitants, (according to the Italian custom) for a rare Piece of Architecture, There are some Ruins of an ancient Amphitheatre at Vicenza, but the greater part of them (as they say) lie hid under the New-Buildings. But the Theatre in the Academy, call'd, of the Olympicks, was built by the famous Architect, Andrea Palladio: however, the Fa∣brick is none of the largest, and is us'd onely upon cer∣tain Occasions that seldom happen. The Triumphal Arch without the Gates, at the entrance of the Plain nam'd Campus Martius, is an imitation of the ancient manner perform'd by the same Palladio; besides a spaci∣ous Court-Yard for Tournaments, adorn'd with Portico's. The City of Vicenza has the Title of a Bishop's See, under the Metropolitan of Aquileia; and after divers Re∣volutions, became subject to the Jurisdiction of the Ve∣netians: But it was taken from them by the Emperour Maximilian I. Anno Dom. 1509. and at length restor'd, by virtue of a Treaty of Peace concluded in 1516. The Country of Trevisano, or la Marca Trevigiana, Marchia Tarvisma, lies between that of Friuli on the North; the Bishoprick of Trent, and the Province of Vicentino on the West; that of Padoua on the South; and the Dogado, and part of Friuli on the East. Its ut∣most Extent, from North to South, includes about 68 Miles; and 48 from East to West. In this County are comprised the Territories of Trevisano, Bellunese, Feltri∣no, and Cenedra. The Air is extremely temperate; and the Soil fertile, producing great store of Grain, Fruit and Cattle. The most considerable Cities and Towns are these: Viz. Treviso, Bish. Cap. Belluna, Bish. Feltri, Bish. Ceneda, Bish. Cadora. Conegliano. Orderzo. La Mota. Saravalle. TREVISO, or Trevisi, Tarvisium, the Metropolis of La Marca Trevigiana, in the Latit. of 45 deg. 40 min. and the Longit. of 34 deg. 30 min. is seated on the Banks of the little River Sile, at the distance of 17 Mile North-West of Venice, and 20 North-East of Padua. An Epi∣scopal See hath been a long time established here, under the Patriarchate of Aquileia. The Fortifications of the City of Treviso are considerable; and its Situation in a Marshy Ground renders it almost impregnable. How∣ever, the Emperour Maximilian I. took it from the Ve∣netians, A. D. 1509. but was oblig'd to resign it to them within a little while after. Belluna, or Cividad di Belluno, Bellunum, or Belunum, is a small City water'd by the River Pieve, 10 Miles North-west of Trevigio, and 15 South-East of Feltri, and dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Aquileia. Feltri, or Feltria, stands on the Foot of a Mountain, and the Banks of the Brook Aso, which a little below falls into the Piave, at the distance of 13 Miles from the Frontiers of the County of Tyrol to the East, 25 Miles North-West of Trevigio, 35 North of Padua, and 44 North-West of Venice. It hath remain'd under the Dominion of the Venetians ever since the Year 1404. Ceneda, Ceneta, or Ceneda Agathrae, a small but well-built City, is in like manner situated on the foot of the Mountains, near the Spring-head of the Brook Motega∣no, between the River Pieve to the West, and that of Livenza to the East, at the distance of 10 Miles from each; as also 17 Miles North-west of Trevigio, and 13 almost South of Belluno, and as many from Oderzo: The Episcopal See of which last Place, subject to the Metro∣politan of Aquileia, was translated hither; but the Bi∣shop usually resides at Serravelle, a neighbouring Town about 2 Miles from thence. The Province of FRIƲLI, Forojulium, or Provincia Forojuliensis, is bounded on the North by that of Carin∣thia; on the West, by the Alps, that separate it from the Bishoprick of Trent; on the South, by the Marca Trevi∣giana, and the Adriatick Sea; and on the East, by Istria. It is extended from North to South for the space of a∣bout 55 Miles, and 85 from East to West. This Coun∣try heretofore bore the Title of a Dutchy, and was of a much larger compass than it is at present. It is report∣ed, that Julius Caesar impos'd his Name on it, by reason that he maintain'd certain Legions therein. Indeed, the Province of Friuli hath always serv'd as a Passage to the Barbarous Nations that at several times laid waste Italy, and hath been subject to the Dominion of a great number of Masters; until at length, after many Revo∣lutions,
Luigi, or Leves Techio, its last proper Lord, entirely lost it, A. D. 1420. by rashly engaging in a War against the Republick of Venice. The most remarkable Towns, &c. are these: Viz. AQƲILEIA, ruin'd Patr. Ʋdino, Patr. Venzona. Marono. Palma Nuovo. Cividat di Friuli. AQƲILEIA, in the Latit. of 45 deg. 42 min. and Longit. of 35 deg. 50 min. is situated between the Streams of the River Isonzo to the East, and those of the Ansa to the West, almost at equal distance of 32 Miles West of Trieste, and 52 North-east of Venice. It hath been long since dignified with the Tile of a Patriarchate, the See whereof is removed to Ʋdino. This City is now almost entirely ruin'd, although in time past so famous, that it was call'd the Second Rome: For it took up the space of four Leagues in compass, and serv'd as a Ram∣part to defend Italy from the Incursions of the Barbari∣ans. Nevertheless, Attila King of the Huns storm'd and raz'd it, after a Siege of Three Years, A. D. 452. Then it was repair'd by Narses; but sackt again and burnt by the Lombards, in 590. Afterward it was built by Papo the Patriarch, and fell into the hands of the Emperor Charlemagne. Then the Kings of Italy, Dukes of Fri∣uli, Patriarchs and Venetians, were successively Lords thereof. However, the Walls of the same noble City are now demolish'd, and it lies, in a manner desolate, by reason of its Ruins, and the unwholsomness of the Air; for scarcely Five and Thirty Houses remain entire together, with very few Inhabitants that reside therein, during the Winter-Season, excepting a certain Compa∣ny of Fisher-Men. Ʋdina, Ʋtinum, seated near the River Torre, is at present the Metropolis of Friuli, since the Patriarchal See of Aquileia hath been translated hither; being distant about 23 Miles West of Gorice, and 50 North-east of Venice. This City (as some Authors avouch) was foun∣ded by the Huns, and hath remained in the Possession of the Venetians, ever since the Year 1420. It is about 5 Miles in Compass, and contains 15000 Inhabitants. The Province of VENICE, or the DOGADO, Duca∣tus Venetus, is a little Canton lying round about the City of Venice, from the Mouth of the River Lisonzo, as far as the Adige, which appears in form of a Crescent round the Gulf, and is of a small extent, being about 34 Miles long, and only 7 or 8 broad, comprehending within its Bounds the ensuing remarkable Towns: Viz. VENICE, Patr. and Cap. Chiozza. Torcello. Grado. Castel-Nuovo. Cahorle, or Caorle. Loredo. Lio. Rebba. Murano. Malamoco, or the Port of Venice: VENICE, Venetiae, Ital. Venetia and Vinegia, in the Latit. of 45. deg. 10. min. and the Longit. of 34. deg. 50. min. the Metropolis of this State, is situated in the Gulf, or Lake, of the same Name, and founded (ac∣cording to the common Report) on 72 Islands, which are extended 7 or 8 Miles in Compass, at the distance of 84 Miles almost East of Mantua, 95 North-east of Modena, 126 North of Florence, 168 East of Milan, 220 almost North of Rome, and 230 South West of Vi∣enna in Germany. Its Foundation was begun A. C. 421. when Attila King of the Huns, after having ruin'd Aqui∣leia, march'd forward with a numerous Army to ravage Italy; insomuch that the Paduans, and some other neigh∣bouring People, dreading the approach of the Barbari∣ans, retir'd into the Fens and Marshes of the Adriatick Sea, where they at first built some few Houses on the Isle of Rialto, afterward on 60 other adjacent Islands, and at length on 12 others; all which united together, form one of the strongest, most regular, richest and most flourishing Cities of Europe; which is likewise styl'd the Virgin-City, it not having been ravish'd or at∣tempted by any Enemy for 1200 Years at least. But the Dukes had not as yet establish'd their Seat there, until A. C. 810. for some time after, a palace was e∣rected for them, and another for the Bishop. How∣ever, these 72 Islands were separated one from another during 300 Years, and govern'd by certain particular Tribunes, whom every Isle elected yearly, according to their respective Customs; that is to say, this State was then only a Confederacy of many neighbouring I∣slands, which the common Interest had united for their mutual Defence against the Incursions of their Ene∣mies; and forasmuch as every one of them had a Spi∣ritual Pastor, as well as a Tribune, there were also 72 distinct Parishes. But a lateMaximil. Mil∣ton Voyage d' Ita∣lie. Author professes not to understand where these several Islands were, and affirms that this Hypothesis gives us a false Idea of the Plan and Situation of the City: For (says he) one would ima∣gine, to hear talk of 72 Island, that there were as many little Plots of Ground rais'd above the Surface of the Lake; all which being inhabited, became, in process of time, one entire Common-wealth: Which does not appear to have so happen'd, in regard that the whole City of Venice lies on a level, and is alto∣gether built on Piles, the Water washing the Foun∣dations of almost all the Houses, to the height of 4 or 5 Feet, and the breadth of the Channels being al∣ways equal. It is true, indeed, that many Spaces of a considerable largeness have been improved; which may induce us to believe, that there was heretofore some firm Land, but not 72 Islands. Furthermore (continues he) if all the Divisions made by the Chan∣nels should be counted for Islands, we shall find near 200, instead of 72. It ought also to be observed, That the number of these Islands might be encreas'd ad infinitum, by making new ones wheresoever the Inhabitants shall have a mind to fix Piles, and to build Houses on them. There are 18 or 20 of the like nature dispers'd in the Marsh or Lake of Venice, without reck∣oning Palestrina, Malamoco, and 8 or 10 others, that have a Bottom of solid Earth, and are real Islands. Thus far our Author; who assures us, that Venice is seated in a Marshy Ground, which had been overflow'd by the Sea some time before its Foundation; and that this extent of Waters is on that account call'd Lacuna by the Venetians: neither are they, generally speaking, of any great depth, although Vessels of the largest size may sail in some Places, and those of 200 Tuns, come up to the very Keys. Therefore Care hath been taken to turn the Mouths of the Brenta, and some other Ri∣vers, another way, that this Lake might not be choak'd up with Mud or Sand; and that the Earth might not again prevail above the Waters, which would be very prejudi∣cial to the City, since its whole Strength and Security depends on its Situation: neither would it be altoge∣ther advantageous thereto, that the same Waters should be every where very deep; because in the state they remain at present, it is almost impossible to approach Venice in a Hostile manner, either by Sea or Land, as some have in Vain attempted. For when King Pepin had for a long time endeavour'd to drive out their Duke Maurice, and his own Son, who had taken part with him, he departed from Ravenna with his Fleet, imagi∣ning that he might easily pass every where with full Sails: But Maurice's Vessels, which were conducted through the Navagable Passages, were not dispers'd;
whereas those of Pepin founder'd on all Sides in the Mud, so that he was extreamly harrass'd, and con∣strain'd to betake himself to flight, with the remainder of his Fleet. Somewhat above 300 Years ago, the Ge∣noeses met with the like rude Entertainment. Indeed, it must be acknowledg'd as a very surprising Object, to see so large a City, without any Walls or Ramparts, continually assaulted with the Waves on all sides, and yet standing firm on its Piles, as it were a Rock, the Streets being every where water'd with Channels, on the sides whereof are erected many magnificent Palaces, and stately Houses. But the whole City is divided af∣ter such a manner by these Channels and Streets, that there is scarcely a House whereto one cannot go either by Land or Water: not that every Channel has a dou∣ble Key, as in Holland, for the convenience of those that walk on foot; 'tis true, there are some, but the Channel very often takes up the whole space, reaching from one row of Houses to another. The Streets, which are narrow, run through the small Isles made by the Channels: and there are about 430 Bridges rais'd in divers Places, over all these Channels; so that all the small Passages and Turnings that must necessarily be made to find out the Bridges, render Venice a real Labyrinth. St. Theodore was the first Patron of Venice, until the Body of St. Mark being transported thither from Alex∣andria in Egypt, in the beginning of the IXth. Cen∣tury, this Evangelist was chosen for its principal Protector. The Patriarchal Church is dedicated to St. Peter; and that of St. Mark, notwithstanding its Riches, is only the Doge's Chapel. However, the Primicerio, or Dean of the Canons, wears a Bishop's Mitre and Robe, and does not depend on the Patriarch. He is always a Noble Venetian, and his Yearly Reve∣nues amount to near 1000 Pound Sterling. The Church of St. Mark was first founded A.C. 829. and contains above 500 Pillars of Marble. It is a Greek Structure, almost Square, built in form of a Cross, and beautify'd with many Gothick Ornaments: Its Roof consists of several Domes cover'd with Lead, whereof that in the middle is the largest; and the whole Pavement is made of Jas∣par and Porphyry, wrought in Mosaick-work. The High Altar, supported by four Columns, represents in Relief the History of the Old and New Testament. The Chapel of the Holy Sacrament is erected on four Pillars of Alabaster, which (as they say) had serv'd in the Temple of Solomon. In this place is preserv'd the Body of St. Mark; and that famous Treasure of Relicks, enrich'd with Pearls, Diamonds, and other Precious-Stones of an inestimable Value. This stately Church is like∣wise adorn'd with five Gates of Cast Metal; over the principal of which stand four Horses of Copper Gilt, of the same Workmanship, and of equal Bigness; which (according to the Opinion of some Antiquaries) are the very same that are joyn'd to a Chariot of the Sun, that serv'd as an Ornament to the Triumphal Arch which the Senate of Rome set up in Honour of Nero, after his Victory over the Parthians. For they assure us, That Constantine the Great transported these Horses from Rome to Constantinople, where they were placed in the Hippodrome, and that as last the Venetians having made themselves Masters of this City, brought them hither a∣mong other rich Spoils. Of a great number of Statues with which the out-side of the Church is inviron'd, there are only two very considerable, viz. those of Adam and Eve, which were made by Riccio, and are to be seen in going down the great Stair-case of the Palace. The Grand Place or Court of St. Mark being 280 Paces long, and 110 broad, is bounded at the end by the same noble Pile of Building; and on both sides, by the stately Palaces built with a kind of Marble, and known by the name of the Procuracies, where the ex∣act Symmetry of the Building, the Height of the Pila∣sters, the Largeness of the Portico's, and Richness of the Statues, are justly admir'd; besides a Clock of most curious Workmanship. In turning to the Right-hand from the Church of St. Mark, you enter into another magnificent publick Place, commonly call'd the Broglio, leading to the Port of Ma∣lamoco, and affording a most Delightful Prospect. It is 250 Paces long, and 80 broad; the Procuraries being continu'd on one side of it, and the Duke's Palace fa∣cing it on the other. Near the Sea-shore are erected two stately Columns, which were brought from Con∣stantinople in the time of Sebastian Ziani; the Statue of St. Theodore is set on the top of one of them; and on the other, the Lion of St. Mark. The Tower of St. Mark stands near the Angle of the Square on the In-side, and takes off somewhat from the Symmetry of the Place: It is 316 Foot high, in comprehending the Angle, which serves as a Vane, or Weather-cock. The whole Tower was formerly Gilt; so that when the Sun shone, it was discern'd above 30 Miles off at Sea; but the Gilding is now worn out, and scarcely any thing of it remains. The Broglio is the usual place of Rendezvous of the Venetian Nobility, where they pay Visits one to another, and transact divers Affairs; so that none is per∣mitted to enter among them into that side where they walk, but the other side is left free to all Passengers. This Place is likewise so peculiarly appropriated to their Use, that when a young Noble-man has attain'd to the Age requisite to be admitted into the Council, and to wear the Robe, the first Day that he takes it, he is in∣troduc'd here by four other Nobles, his Friends, with much Ceremony: And when any Person is banish'd from the Council, the Entrance into the Broglio is at the same time forbidden him. The Palace of St. Mark, joyning to the Church, is a large Pile of Building after the Gothick fashion, and ve∣ry magnificent: It hath been burnt four or five times, and its divers Reparations are the cause that the Structure is not uniform. That side of it toward the Channel is built with a certain hard Stone brought from Istria, the Design of it being much esteem'd: And indeed, if the other parts of this Fabrick were conformable thereto, it would be a very rare piece of Architecture. The Doge lodges in the same Palace; and there are assembl'd all the Councils of State, and Courts of Judicature. The several Apartments are large, high, and very well wainscoted, but somewhat dark, in comparison of the light which is now requi∣red: The Stair-case is made of Marble; and the Por∣tico, supported by a winged Lyon; and the Statue of the Doge Foscari; besides two Colossus's of Mars and Neptune. The College-Hall, where the Affairs of State are transacted, is extremely Large, and adorn'd with curious Paintings; particularly the Portraictures of the Doges, the History of the Council of Constantinople, that of Pope Alexander III. and the Emperour Frede∣rick Barbarossa, &c. But the publick Library is kept in the Procuracies, over against the Palace, on the other side of the Broglio. There are abundance of Greek Manuscripts, which were given by Cardinal Bessarion, who was of that Nation. But there is scarcely any very rare, excepting another Manuscript entituled de Consideratione Dei, and attributed to St. Augustine. How∣ever, if this Library is none of the best, or most nume∣rous; yet by way of recompence, divers Paintings of Titian, and some other famous Masters, are found there∣in, which are infinitely valu'd: Besides a great number of Greek Statues of extraordinary Beauty, particularly those of Ganymedes, Venus, Apollo, two Gladiators, &c.
At one end of the City, on the Sea-shore, stands the Arsenal, and extends its self above 2 Miles in compass: It is reputed to be one of the fairest and largest in Eu∣rope, and generally acknowledg'd to be very considera∣ble: but it ought to be consider'd, that the Venetians have no other in Italy; and that not half of what is com∣monly said of it, is true. They that shew it, would willingly make us believe that there are 2500 Pieces of Artillery, good Arms for 100000 Foot, and compleat Equipage for 25000 Horse. The words, indeed, are soon pronounc'd, but not so easily prov'd. We must al∣so take notice, that within the Enclosure of this Arsenal, are contain'd all sorts of Naval Stores and Tackle, For∣ges, Casting-houses, Rope-yards, sheds for the Bucen∣taur, Galleys and Galleasses; Havens and Docks for the Building, Careening and Refitting of Vessels; so that a very large space of Ground must needs be taken up for these Uses. The Venetians have some Men of War, the greatest of which is Nam'd the Redeemer, carrying (as they say) 80 Pieces of Cannon, and 14 Pedereroes. The Galeasses generally have three Batteries in the fore-part, and two in the stern. The Bucentaur is a sort of large Galeasse, very richly adorn'd with Gilding and Sculp∣tures, which serves only to carry the Doge, accompany'd with the Senate, and many other Noblemen, when they go on board every year, on Ascension-day, with great Solemnity to Espouse the Sea. This Ceremony was first Instituted by Pope Alexander III. to confirm to the Vene∣tians the Soveraignty they before pretended to have over the Gulf: the Vessel then us'd on that occasion was cal∣led the Bucentaur, and the same Name hath been ever since retain'd: The Captain of this Galeasse takes an Oath, and engages upon his life to bring it back safe and sound into Harbour, although never so great Hur∣ricanes or Storms at Sea should happen to arise. A great part of the Arsenal was burnt in the Year 1565; and the crackling of the Fire (as they say) was heard 40 Miles off. The Government of the Place is commit∣ted to three Noblemen▪ The Galeasses are likewise Commanded by Persons of Quality; and indeed, all considerable Employments every where pass through their Hands. The City of Venice is divided into six Quarters, or Wards, call'd Sestiori; wherein are compris'd 54 Con∣vents of Monks, 26 Nunneries, 17 Hospitals, 18 Cha∣pels, or Stations for the 6 Grand Fraternities; 56 Tri∣bunals, or Courts of Justice; and a great number of Market-places: besides 165 Marble Statues; 25 of Cop∣per; and 8000 Gondola's, or little Boats, for the con∣veying of Persons and Merchandizes through the Chan∣nels. Over the chiefest of these, call'd the Grand Chan∣nel, being 1300 Foot long, and 40 broad, stands the fa∣mous Bridge of Realto, of one single Arch, adorn'd on both sides with Marble Ballisters. It is indeed general∣ly very much cry'd up, and esteem'd the finest in the World: But this Admiration is the Effect of Prejudice, and the whole Wonder consists in the Dimensions of the Arch, which is somewhat larger than ordinary. The Cen∣try of the Arch makes exactly the third part of a Circle; and there is 80 Foot distance from one end of it, lying even with the level of the Chanel, to the other; Whence it may be inferr'd, that the Arch is near 24 Foot high. This Bridge is very firmly built with large Squares of a kind of White Marble; and there are two rows of Shops, that divide it into three several Passages; the lar∣gest in the Middle; and the two lesser, between the Rails and the Back-side of the Shops. It is reported, that 300000 Inhabitants, either Natives or Foreigners, reside at Venice: But Mr. Ray proves, that there cannot be above 200000; as also, that the Republick re∣ceives from thence a Revenue of 1400000 Ducats year∣ly, not comprehending that which ariseth from the Im∣posts laid on Salt. The City is about as large as Am∣sterdam, and the number of Houses reckon'd 24870. A∣mong the Magnificent Churches, besides the above∣mention'd of St. Mark, those of St. Dominick, St. Za∣chary, St. George, and St. Saviour, are more especially re∣markable. Chiozza, or Chioggia, Clodia Fossa, is a small City, and the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Patriarch of Venice, situated in a little Island of the Adriatick Sea, and ha∣ving a safe Harbour near Brondolo, at the distance of 15 Miles from Venice to the South, toward Loredo. It was heretofore famous for the Victory of the Genoeses, who made themselves Masters thereof, A. D. 1380. But it is now subject to the Dominions of the State of Venice, whereto it affords a very considerable Revenue, by th making of great quantities of Salt. Torcello, Torcellum, is a very small Town, and not much frequented, by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air, being distant only 5 Miles from Venice to the North, near the Ruins of Altino, from whence the Episcopal See was translated hither, after the ancient City had been utterly raz'd by the Huns, A. C. 635. Grado, Gradus, or Nova Aquileia, is seated on the Mar∣shes of the Gulf of Venice, and owes its Foundation to the Inhabitants of Aquileia, who were setled here soon after their City was ruin'd by Attila. It was also, for a long time, the Seat of the Patriarch; and Pope Alexander IV. added divers new Privileges, A. D. 1256, to those which had been already granted to him by Leo IX. in 1050. But at length the Patriarchate was remov'd to Venice by Ni∣cholas V. in 1455; and Lorenzo Giastiarani was the first that attain'd to this Dignity. The City of Grado is of a small compass, but well-built on a little Island of the same Name, next the Continent, at the distance of 12 Miles from Aquileia to the South, and 52 from Venice to the East. It heretofore depended on the Province of Friuli, but is now subject to the Jurisdiction of the Ve∣netians. The Province of Istria, or Histria; in High-Dutch I∣stareich; is stretched out in form of a Peninsle, between the Gulfs of Trieste and Quarnero; the Alps, or I Monti della Vena, and the Territories of Friuli, being about 56 Miles long from North to South, and 40 broad from East to West. The Air is not very healthful, more especially along the Sea-coasts: nevertheless, this Country brings forth abundance of excellent Grapes, Olives, Timber, and Marble. The Republick of Venice maintains a Go∣vernour in the same Province, and receives from thence a considerable Revenue. The Chief Cities are these: Capo d' Istria, Bish. Cap. Cita Nuova, Bish. Parenzo, Bish. Pola, Bish. CAPO D' ISTRIA, Justinopolis, or Caput Istriae, in the Latit. of 45 Deg. 30 Min. and the Longit. of 36 Deg. 20 Min. is a very small City on the Coasts of the Adriatick-Gulf, and the Bay of Trieste, yet dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Patriarchate of Aquileia; being distant 28 Miles almost South of Trieste, and 78 East of Venice, on the other side of the Gulf. It is built in an Island, within Three Arrows shot of the Continent, whereto there is a Passage over certain Draw-Bridges, that may be hoisted-up at pleasure. Moreover an old Fort stands in the middle, which is likewise joyned to the Town by a Bridge; and on the account of the Strength of the Place, is called, The Lion's Castle. Cita Nuova, Aemonia, or Civitas Nova Istriae, is a small City, which sprang out of the Ruins of ancient Aemonia, from the Ruins whereof it is distant only 3 Miles, scarcely one from the Coasts of the Adriatick-Sea, and the Mouth of the River Quieto, with which it is water'd; as also,
22 Miles almost South of Capo d' Istria, and 70 East of Venice, cross the Gulf. It hath been for some time erect∣ed into an Episcopal See, under the Patriarchate of Aqui∣leia, and subject to the Jurisdiction of the State of Ve∣nice, ever since the Year 1270. However, at present, it is inhabited only by a few Fisher-men, by reason of its un∣healthful Air, and that too, during the Summer season; for in Winter it is altogether abandon'd, and left desolate. Pola; Julia Pietas, or Pola, was Founded by the Col∣chi, and hath a very capacious Harbour on the Coasts of the Adriatick-Sea, being also the Seat of a Prelate, who is a Suffragan to the Patriarch of Aquileia. It is distant 6 Miles from the Promontory, call'd from thence Il Capo di Pola, to the North-West, 46 Miles almost South of Cabo d' Istria, and 80 North of Ancona. It hath for its defence a small Citadel, which is not very strong; and the Venetian Governour commands therein under the Title of a Count. The Province of Dalmatia; Dalmatia being extended along the Coasts of the Venetian Gulf, is bounded on the West by Istria, on the North by Croatia, on the East by Albania, and on the South by the Adriatick-Sea; being in length about 240 Miles, and in breadth about 60 in the widest place. These Territories are possess'd part∣ly by the Turks, and partly by the Venetians. The small Republick of the Regusa, which is the Epidaurus of the Ancients, is likewise establish'd therein. The Dalmatians speak the Sclavonian-Tongue, profess the Roman-Catho∣lick Religion, and are well-vers'd in Military Affairs. This Country, in time past, bore the Title of a King∣dom; but the Venetians are now Masters of the ensuing Cities and Town, viz. Zara, Archb. Cap. Spalatro, Archb. Nona, Bish. Badua, Bish. Cataro, Bish. Scardona, Bish. St. Nicolo. Sebenico, Bish. Clossa. Salona. Almissa. Aagrigrado. Veicchio. ZARA, Jadera; in the Sclavonian Tongue Zadar, in the Latit. of 44 Deg. 30 Min. and the Longit. of 30 Deg. 10 Min. is a Port of the Adriatick-Sea, and the Metro∣polis of Dalmatia, enjoying the Title of an Arch-bishop∣rick. 'Tis encompass'd on all sides with the Sea, and joyn'd only to the Continent by a Draw-bridge; being distant 80 Miles South-West of Jaicza, 116 North-East of Ancona, 165 North-West of Raguri, and 184 almost South-East of Venice. It is also fenced with 6 Bastions, and the adjacent Countrey is commonly called from thence, Il Contado di Zara. Ladislaus, King of Naples, (who had purchas'd this City for the Sum of 100000 Ducats, as we are inform'd by Johannes Lucius, a Lear∣ned Citizen of Trau,) sold it; together with Novigrad, and some other places appertaining to its Jurisdiction, to the Republick of Venice; and it, as yet, remains in their possession. Spalatro, or Spalato; Spalatum, or Salonae Novae, is a large and well-fortified City on the Coasts of the Adria∣tick-Sea, where heretofore stood a Palace of the Roman Emperour Dioclesian; from whence it took its Name, and grew up out of the Ruins of Solana, which had been rais'd by the Sclavonians, and was distant from it only 4 Miles to the North. It was also erected into a Metro∣politan See, in the room of the former, and presides o∣ver the Suffragan Bishopricks of Lesina, or Huar, Trau, Sebenico, Tine, and Almissa. The City of Spalato is a∣dorn'd with a capacious and safe Harbour, and hath re∣main'd under the Dominion of the Venetians ever since the Year 1420. although the Turks have often, in vain, attempted to make themselves Masters thereof. It is di∣stant 30 Miles South-East of Sebenico, 32 South of Bag∣nialuck, 74 South-East of Zara, and 92 North-West of Ragori. This place is remarkable for the Ruins of Dio∣clesian's Palace. Nona, or Nin, according to the pronunciation of the Sclavonians; in Latin, Aenone, or Enonae, a small, but strong City, is environ'd, for almost altogether, with the Adriatick-Sea, over against the Island of Pago, from whence it is separated with a Streight 4 Miles broad to the West, being also distant 13 from Zara to the North, and about 35 from Segna. It hath, in like manner, a convenient Port, and is the Seat of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Zara. Budoa, Butua, or Bulva, is situated on the Coasts of Albania, at the distance of 10 Miles from Antivari to the North-West, and 30 from Scutari, or Scodar to the West, between Castel Nuovo, or Lattaro, to the North, and Dolcigno to the South. It is an Episcopal See, un∣der the Metropolitan of Antivari, which was taken by the Turks, A. D. 1571. and hath been, in like manner, infested through the Inroads of those Infidels. It is also regularly Fortify'd; but hath suffer'd much Damage through the violence of an Earthquake that happen'd A. D. 1667. Cataro, Caterum, or Cattara; seated on a Gulf of the same Name, is defended with a strong Castle, built on an Hill, and distant 30 Miles North-West of Scutari, and 50 South-East of Raguri; its Episcopal See having formerly depended on the Metropolitan of the same Ci∣ty; but is, at present, subject to that of Bari. The Ci∣ty of Cattaro, together with 17 Villages, appertaining to its Jurisdiction, hath been possess'd by the Venetians ever since the Year 1420. Scardona; Scardona, or Scordona, is a ruin'd City, seated near the Lake of Prochlian, on an adjacent Moun∣tain, at the distance of 9 Miles from Sebenico to the North, and 35 from Zara to the East, having an Epi∣scopal See subject to the Metropolitan of Spalatro. It was sold, A. D. 1411. together with Ostrovice, for the sum of 5000 Ducats of Gold, by Sandaglius Waywood of Bosnia, to the Venetians, by whom it was also taken and raz'd in 1570. Sebenico; Sebenicum, or Sibenicum, a well-fortified Ci∣ty, on the Coasts of the Adriatick-Sea, hath remain'd un∣der the Jurisdiction of the State of Venice, ever since the Year 1412. whereas it was before only a Sea-Port Town of Croatia, until Pope Boniface VIII. erected it into an Episcopal See; under the Metropolitan of Spala∣tro. It is defended with a Castle built on an Hill, to∣gether with the strong Cittadel of St. Nicolas, and hath often repuls'd the Turkish Forces, that, in vain, endea∣vour'd to make themselves Masters thereof. It is di∣stant 30 Miles North-West of Spalatro, and 44 South-East of Zara. Moreover, the Venetians possess many o∣ther Places on the Coasts of Albania, and among others, Butrinto, or Butrotum, over against the Island of Corfu; as also, a great Number of Islands in the Gulf and Ar∣chipelago, on the Western Coasts of Greece; the Chief of which are these, viz. Corfu, Arch. Cap. Cefalonia, Bish. Zante, Bish. Currola, Bish. Ossero, Bish. Vegia, Bish. Alba, Bish. La Grande. Incorronada. Salta. La Brazza. Torta. Cherso. Pago. The Island of CORFƲ; Corcyra, in the Longit. of 44 and 45 Deg. and the Latit. of 49. Deg. 40 Min. is si∣tuated in the Ionian Sea, to the West of the Continent of Greece, at the distance of 2 Leagues from the Coasts of Epirus; extending it self in length, from South to North-West, about 20 Leagues; 7 or 8 in breadth from West to East; and 46 in compass. It is divided in∣to 4 Baronies, or Bailiages. The Air is extreamly health∣ful,
and the Soil brings forth many Vines, Olive-Trees, Orange-Trees, Citron-Trees, &c. which grow there in great abundance; together with divers sorts of very rare Plants. The Metropolis of this Island bears the same Name, and the Title of an Arch-bishoprick. The Inhabitants thereof are Christians, partly of the Greek, and partly of the Latin Church. It hath a commodi∣ous Harbour, and a well stored Arsenal; being also fortifyed with two strong Castles erected on a Moun∣tain, wherein is maintain'd a considerable Garrison. This City fell into the Hands of the Venetians, A. D. 1382. and was in Vain besieged by the Turks, in 1537. The Island of Cefalonia, Cephalenia, between the 37 Deg. 15 Min. and the 47 Deg. 45 Min. of Latit. and in 45 Deg. of Longit. lies in like manner in the Io∣nian Sea, between that of Lucada to the North, and Zante to the South: It includes about 20 Leagues from South to North-east, 14 from West to East, and 51 in compass. The Capital City of the same Name is foun∣ded on an Hill, and very well fortifyed, being also dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, Suffragan to that of Corfu. The other places, which were here∣tofore Cities, are at present only Boroughs and Villa∣ges. On the Southern Side of the Isle, toward that of Zante, is situated a very capacious and safe Harbour, called The Port of Argostoli. The Inhabitants generally observe the Rites of the Greek Church. Zante, Zacynthus, is distant 18 Miles from Il Capo Tornese, a Promontory of the Morea to the West, and 12 from the Island of Cefalonia to the South. It is usually divided into Three Parts, termed La Montagna, Il Piedimonte, and La Pianura, in which are contained 48 Towns; the Principal whereof is likewise named Zante, and hath been, for some time, the Seat of a Prelate, suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Corfu. Here also stands a Fortress, in which the Venetians maintain a strong Garrison; and the Natives drive a very great Trade in Currans. The Island of Corzola; Corcyra Melaena or Nigra, in the Latit. of 43 Deg. and the Longit. of 41 Deg. 30 Min. is extended in length for the space of 25 Miles on the Coasts of Dalmatia, near the Frontiers of the Republick of Ragusa, to the Jurisdiction whereof it was heretofore subject. Five Towns or Villages are inclu∣ded within its compass, the chief of which bears the same Name as the Island, and therein is established an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Ragusa. Ossero; Absorus, Apsorrus or Absyrtium, between the 44 and 45 Deg. of Latit. is an Island of a very small Compass, lying at the Distance of 6 Miles from that of La Vogio to the South, and 30 from Segna, a City of Croatia. It is extended from the South to North-West, for the space of about 10 or 11 Leagues, and 4 from West to East. Vegia or Veglia, Curicum, Curictum and egin, call'd Kirk by the Sclavonians, is situated on the Coasts of the Adriatick-Sea, and stretched out for the space of 30 Miles from South-East to North-West. The principal Town of this Island, of the same Name, seated on the Western Part thereof, was formerly subject to the Counts of Frangipani, and fell into the possession of the Venetians, Anno Dom. 1430. It also hath been, long since, erected into an Episcopal See, under the Metro∣politan of Zara. Arbe, Arba or Arbum, named Rab in the Sclavonian Tongue, is distant 13 Miles from Segna to the South, and extends its self only for the space of 15 Miles from East to West. Its principal Town is known by the same Name, and affords a Seat to a Prelate, suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Zara. In sailing from hence to∣ward the South-East, we meet with the Isles of Pago, Malaral, Grande, L'Incoronado, St. Archangelo, Sotta, Lesina, La Brazza, Lissa, St. Andrea, Malisola, Cu∣ra, &c. As for the Island of Candia, the Peninsle of the Morea, the Territories of Athens, and the Archi∣pelago, where the Venetians possess some Places, a particu∣lar Account shall be given of them in the Description of the respective Countries, whereto at present they appertain. The ECCLESIASTICAL STATE, Ecclesia∣stica or Pontificia Ditio. THat Territory which commonly bears the Title of the ECCLESIASTICAL STATE, or Patrimony of the Church, is an extent of Lands depending on the Jurisdiction of the See of Rome, and is so much the more Remarkable, in regard that the Pope is both Spi∣ritual and Temporal Sovereign thereof, who is usually styled by the Roman Catholicks, The Chief of all Chri∣stendom; the Patriarch of Rome and the West; the Primate and Supreme Governour of Italy; the Metro∣politan of the Bishops, suffragan to the See of Rome, and the Bishop of St. John of Lateran. This Country was heretofore, as it were, the Centre of the Roman Empire, which far surpass'd in Grandeur and Power all the other States of the Universe: Its extent was then bounded on the West by the Atlantick Ocean, on the East by Arme∣nia and Persia, on the North by the Seas of Ireland, Scotland, Germany, and the Baltick; and on the South by Aethiopia. It was absolutely predominant over the whole Mediterranean See, and an almost infinite num∣ber of Islands, the greater part whereof form as many Kingdoms. But the Dominions, at present appropria∣ted to the Pope, are of a small Compass, being limited on the North, by the Territories and Gulph of Venice, on the West by the Dutchies of Mantua, Modena, and Toscany, on the South by part of Toscany, and the Me∣diterranean Sea; and on the South-East, by the King∣dom of Naples, and part of the Gulph of Venice. They are extended in Length, from South to North-West, for the space of about 240 Miles, viz. from Terracina, as far as the Frontiers of Polesino, on the Banks of the Gulf; and 134 Miles in Breadth, from South-West to North-East, viz. from Civita Vecchia to Ancona: In one place (particularly in the province of Romagnia) they are not above 20 Miles broad. The Air is thick in many places, and unhealthy round about the City of Rome, by reason of the Fenns, pools of standing Wa∣ter, and Marshy Grounds; (but much more by the Se∣verity of the Government, which has almost dis-peo∣pl'd many Parts, and gives People no Incouragement for Care and Tillage) which, nevertheless, afford good Pastures, and are very fertile in all sorts of Grain, Grapes, and other Fruits. The whole Principality is commonly divided into the 12 ensuing Provinces: Viz. 1. The Campaign of Rome, Rome, Patr. Cap. 2. The Patrim. of St. Peter, Viterbo. 3. The Dutchy of Castro. Castro. 4. The Countr. of Orvietano, Orvieto, Bish. 5. The Country of Perugino, Perusia. 6. Ombria, Spoleto, D. 7. La Sabina, Narni. 8. La Marca d' Ancona, Ancona. 9. The Dutchy of Ʋrbin, Urbino, Arch-b. 10. Romagnia, Ravenna. 11. The Countr. of Ferrarese, Ferrara, D. 12. The Countr. of Bolognese, Bolognia, Arch-b. The Campaign of ROME, Latium, or the Country of the Latins, is bounded on the North by Terra Sabi∣na; on the South by the Mediterranean-Sea; on the East by the Kingdom of Naples; and on the West by the Patrimony of St. Peter. Its utmost extent from North to South consisting of about 40 Miles, and 60 from East to West.
The principal Cities and Towns of this Province, are these, viz. Rome, Patr. Cap. Trivoli, Bish. Frescari, Bish. Ostia, Bish. Palestrina, Bish. Terracina, Bish. Veletri, Bish. Segni, Bish. Anagni, Bish. Albano, Bish. ROME, Roma, in the Latit. of 41 D. 33. Min. and the Long. of 36 D. 30 M. the Metropolis of the whole Country of Italy, is seated on the Banks of the River Tyber, at the distance of 12 Miles from its Mouth, and the Coast of the Toscan Sea to the North; as also, 104 Miles North-West of Naples, 132 South-East of Flo∣rence, 220 almost South of Venice, 260 South-East of Genoa, 290 of Milan, 400 South of Vienna, 560 al∣most South of Cracow, 680 South-East of Paris, 756 from Amsterdam, 840 from London, 900 West of Con∣stantinople, and 960 East of Madrid. This most fa∣mous City was founded, (as it is generally believ'd) by Romulus and Remus, about A. M. 3301. in the 4th. Year of the VII. Olympiad, and 754 before the Nativity of Jesus Christ, according to Petavius's Computation. It was built in a somewhat square form, and comprehen∣ded only the Mount Palatin, whereto six others were afterward added, viz. The Capitoline, the Aventine, the Coelius, the Esquiline, the Viminel, and the Quirinal or Mons Caballus, now well known by the name of Il Monte Cavallo, on which account it was usually termed Ʋrbs Septicollis, or The City on Seven Hills; although Five other have been since taken in, viz. Janiculus, Pin∣cius, the Vatican, Citorio and Giordano. However, you must not imagine these to be so many high Moun∣tains, but only Hills, with an easie, and almost insen∣sible, ascent. Thus Rome, though very small and in∣considerable in the beginning, encreas'd by Degrees more and more, untill at last it became the largest City that ever was in the whole World, either before or since, both for Number of Houses, Inhabitants, and Extent of Ground, it being sometime near 50 Miles in Circuit, and the Capital of the Roman Empire. It is also, at present, the Seat of the Popes, having been subject to them for many Ages, and as yet extends its self 13 Miles in Compass. Its Walls are flanked with 360 Turrets, the number whereof, in the time of the First Emperors, amounted to 740, although many of them are now de∣cayed and fallen to ruin. Indeed those Walls are lar∣ger than those of any City in Europe, but they take in a great deal of waste Ground; so that not above a Third part of their whole Extent is inhabited; the Two o∣ther Thirds, on the Eastern and Southern Sides, con∣sisting only of Gardens and Ruins: Nevertheless, there are 31200 Houses; which are considerably more than in any other place in Italy, or Europe, (except London, and Paris; or perhaps Moscow and Constantinople;) but the City is not so populous as either Venice, Milan, or Naples, there being reckon'd about 120000 Souls, be∣sides Strangers, who are here very numerous. The Ty∣ber divides it into Two unequal Parts; of which, that on the right side, commonly called Trastevere, is at least five or six times less than the other. This River runs from North to South, and makes a small Island; which was heretofore suppos'd to take its Original from a Shock of Corn thrown into the channel, by the Order of Tarquinius Superbus. The greater part of the Hou∣ses are built with Brick, plaster'd over, and whiten'd on the out-side; they have generally Arched Roofs, but the Angles of the Rafters are very obtuse. There were, at the first, only 3 or 4 Gates at Rome, but their Number afterwards encreas'd to 16, being all built large and Stately, besides several other of lesser note; of these 20 now remain, and 5 Bridges over the Tyber, one of which is partly demolish'd. The whole City is divided into 14 Quarters or Wards, commonly call'd Li Rioni; and the Suburbs are very large, enclos'd with Walls, and Fortify'd by Pope Ʋrban VIII. The High-ways that led to this great City, were made at the publick Expence, with incredible Labour and Charge, and pav'd with large square Stones, 3 or 4 Foot long, reaching a great many Miles in the Coun∣try, a particular Stone being set up for a Mark at the end of every Mile; so that no Cost was spar'd that might contribute to their Lastingness, or the Conveni∣ence of Travellers, though it were sometimes necessary for that purpose, to level Mountains or fill up Valleys. Of these, the Appian Road was most noble, extending it self from the Gate Cupena, to Capua, and so to Brun∣dusium, about 350 Miles; and some of their Remain∣ders are still to be seen in divers Places. The Buildings were, in like manner, the most noble in the World, as having been built by the most able Architects that Greece or Asia could afford: and as for the publick Edi∣fices, they did; undoubtedly, surpass all other Parts, as it plainly appears from the august Ruins of the Amphi∣theatre, the Circus Maximus, the Baths, Vaults, trium∣phal Arches, Pillars, Obelisks, Aqueducts, Statues, and other rare Monuments of Antiquity. And indeed, one cannot walk 50 Paces, either within the Walls of the City, or the adjacent Territory, without meeting with some Remains of its ancient Grandure. There are about 300 Churches within the several Precincts of Rome, for the most part very magnificent Structures; and among others, that famous ancient Temple call'd the Pantheon, in time past, and now La Rotonda, by the common People, from its round form. Boniface IV. dedicated it to the Virgin Mary, and all the Martyrs, under the Name of S. Maria ad Martyres; and afterwards, another Pope thought fit, that all the Saints in general should be comprehended with the Mar∣tyrs. It was built by Agrippa, in the time of Augustus, and consecrated (as is suppos'd) to Jupiter, and all the other Heathen Gods; which gave occasion to the Name of Pantheon, or perhaps only to Jupiter and Cy∣bele, the Mother of the Gods; since (according to the Testimony of Varro) above 30000 Deities were ador'd at Rome. Indeed this Temple, although much defac'd is one of the fairest and most entire ancient Edifices in Italy, being in breadth 144 Foot, and as many in heighth, cas'd with Brass, and beautify'd with many noble Sta∣tues. In the Castle of St. Angelo is shewn a Cannon that carries a Ball of 70 Pounds weight, and was cast as well as the 4 Columns of the High-Altar in St. Peter's Church, only of the Copper Nails, with which the co∣vering of the Portico was fasten'd. The Pillars of this Porch are of the Corinthian Order, and of one entire Piece, but not altogether of an equal thickness, there being some inches difference, more or less. They are 15 Foot in compass, according to the English measure; and the square of Stone, out of which the entrance of the great Gate is cut, is likewise of a considerable large∣ness; that is to say, 40 Foot high, and 20 Foot broad. The Two Lyons of Porphyry, under the same Portico, serv'd before as an Ornament to the Front of the Tem∣ple of Isis. Raphael Ʋrbin, the Renowned Italian Painter, lies buried in this Church. But the Cathedral of St. Peter, is justly esteem'd the most stately Pile of Building throughout the whole World, either with respect to its largeness, or the ex∣act symmetry and proportion observ'd in all its Parts; insomuch that the oftner one views it, the greater Admi∣ration will be continually excited. It was first built by the Emperor Constantine the Great, until, when fallen to decay by the Injury of Time, Pope Julius II. began to re-edifie it from the very Foundation: afterward, his Successors carried on the Work; and at length it was
brought to Perfection by Paul. V. Thus was it help'd forward by 23 Popes, having cost 40000000 of Crowns; and there is still a Revenue of 20000 Pounds a Year for the repairing of it. The Cupolo is of that marvellous height and bigness, (the Diameter thereof being 144 Foot, equal to the Pantheon) sustaining on the top a vast stone Lanthorn, with huge stone Pillars about it, that it may well be counted the boldest Piece of Archi∣tecture the World e'er saw. Brumante under Julius II. and Michael Angelo under Paul III. were the principal Architects of this most noble Fabrick, which is entirely built with Free-stone, hewen out of the Quarries of Trivoli, &c. and beautify'd with all manner of most sumptuous Ornaments. It may not perhaps be amiss to subjoin its exact Di∣mensions as they were taken on the Place, by a late In∣genious Author.   Feet. The length of the Church on the out-side, comprehending the wideness of the Portico, and the thickness of the Walls 722 The length of the in-side of the Church with∣out including the Porch, or the thickness of the Walls 594 The length of the Cross of the Church on the out-side 490 The length of the Cross on the inside 438 The breadth of the Body of the Church 86 The perpendicular hight of the same Body 144 The bigness or circumference of the Dome on the out-side 620 The Diameter of the Dome on the in-side 143 The breadth of the Front of the Church 400 The entire height of the Church from the Ground to the top of the Cross above the Ball 432 The Diameter of the Ball 8 The height of the Statues, which are plac'd on the Cornish of the second Order of the Front 18 In the in-side of this admirable Structure, scarcely any thing is to be seen but▪ rich Gilding, rare Paintings, cu∣rious Figures in Basso Relievo, Statues of Copper and Marble; and all these dispos'd in so exact and regular Order, that the abundance of them does not cause Con∣fusion. The in-side of the Cupolo consists altogether in Mosaick Work; the Roof of the Body and Quire is compos'd of Stuck, having Compartments in Relievo gilt; the Pavement is made of Marble, inlaid with di∣vers Figures; and 'tis design'd to case the Pilasters, as well as all the other Parts of the in-side of the Church with the same sort of Stone. The Pulpit of St. Peter, supported by the Four Doctors of the Church, whose Statues are of Copper gilt. The Tombs of Pope Ʋrban VIII. Paul III. Alexander VII. and the Countess Matil∣da, or Mawd, thePene Co mes indi∣vidua. Lamb Ab. bot of Hirtzaw. inseparable Companion of Gregory VII. are Works of extraordinary Beau∣ty and Magnificence. On the Monument of Paul III. are two Marble Statues, so curiously wrought to the Life, that it became necessary to cover them with a Brazen Drapery, to take away an occasion of Scandal, given some time since by two Spaniards, who had fallen in love with them. The High-Altar stands exactly under the Dome, in the middle of the Cross, and is a kind of Pavilion, or Canopy, sustained by four Columns of wreathed Brass, adorned with branched Work, and sprinkled with Bees, which were the Arms of P. Ʋrban VIII. A∣bove every Column appears an Angel of Copper gilt, 17 Foot high, and Boys playing and walking over the Cornish. This Altar-piece is infinitely valu'd, and the heighth of the whole is 90 Foot. From hence we des∣scended by a Stair-case, to come to the Chappel, where (as they say) lies the Body of St. Peter, and to visit the other Holy Places in divers Quarters throughout the Vaults of this spacious Church. The double row of Pillars composing the Cloister of the open Place that lies before, and leads to the same Church, through a double Portico, on each side, is a rare and surprizing Ornament. Here are also two magnificent Fountains, that cast forth Water at a great Distance. The Obe∣lisk in the middle, consisting of one entire piece of Marble, weighs 956148. Pounds; and is 78 Foot high, without comprehending either the Pedestal, on the Cross which Pope Sixtus V. caus'd to be fix'd on the top of it, when he rais'd up again this ancient Monu∣ment, A. D. 1586. It is commonly reported, that the Brazen Ball which formerly belong'd thereto, contain'd the Ashes of the Emperour Augustus: But it is a Mi∣stake; for Dominico Fontana, an able Architect, em∣ploy'd by the same Pope Sixtus V. having examin'd this Globe, found that it was not capable of serving for such an use, and that it was only a simple Ornament; although indeed, the Obelisk was consecrated to Au∣gustus and Tiberius, as it appears from an Inscription as yet to be read distinctly on it. Divo Caesari, Divi Julli F. Augusti. Tiberio Caesari, D. Aug. F. Augusto Sacrum. The Palace of the Vatican, so call'd from certain Vaticinia, i. e. Oracles that were some time deliver'd there, joyns to the Cathedral of St. Peter, and is well seated for the Pope's Convenience; otherwise, the too near neighbourhood of this Palace occasions a disagree∣able Confusion: for if the Church stood clear by its self, and the Fields lay open on all sides, its Situation would be much more advantageous, especially since the Pope resides, for a great part of the Year, in the Pa∣lace of Mount Quirinal, or Monte Cavallo. The Vati∣can is not a very regular Building, as being compos'd only of divers fair Apartments ill united together: how∣ever (as they say) above 12500 Halls, Chambers and Closets are contain'd in it; as one may easily discern in the wooden Model which is there shewn to Stran∣gers. The excellent paintings of Raphael Ʋrbin, Mi∣chael Angelo, Julius Romanus, Pinturicchio, Polydore, John of Ʋdina, Daniel of Volaterra, and many other renowned Masters, are generally as much admir'd here, as the other Beauties and Rareties of this Palace. The Belvedere is an Apartment of the Vatican, so nam'd, by reason of the delightful Prospect discover'd from thence, and beautify'd with most pleasant Gardens, and great variety of curious Statues; among which, that of Lao∣coon, as also the Trunks of Antinous, Apollo, and Cleo∣patra, are chiefly remarkable. The famous Library of the Vatican is not only enlarg'd with that of Heidelburg, but also with that of the Duke of Ʋrbin. The princi¦pal Paintings with which it is enrich'd, represent the Sciences, the Councils, the Inventers of Arts, the most considerable Libraries, and some passages of the Life of Pope Sixtus V. from hence one may pass to the Ar∣senal, where (according to the Common Report) are kept Arms for 20000 Horse, and 40000 Foot: But it is well if half of what is said on that Account prove true; and besides, all these Arms are in an ill Condition; neither indeed are they the principal Thunders of the Vatican. As the Pope on one side, can descend out of this Pa∣lace to St. Peter's Church; so, on the other, he may easily retire incognito into the Castle of St. Angelo, A∣lexander VI. having made a Gallery of Communication for that purpose; and really a Person of so ill Repute as this Pope was, had some reason thus to provide for his own Safety. Ʋrban VIII. fortify'd the Castle with four Bastions, and impos'd on them the Names of the four Evangelists. In the Chappel is to
be seen a Picture, wherein Pope Gregory I. is represen∣ted prostrating himself with his Triple-Crown, before an Angel that appear'd to him on the Top of the Ram∣part, or Tomb of the Emperor Adrian, and seem'd to put up a Sword into his Scabbard: which was (as the Story goes) to intimate to that Pope, that the City of Rome was about to be deliver'd from the Pestilence which had a long time raged there. Thus this noble Monument took the name of the Castle of St. Angelo. In the same Castle is preserv'd the Papal Mitre, or Tri∣ple-Crown: and in a small Arsenal, or Guard-Cham∣ber adjoyning, is shewn an Armory fill'd altogether with prohibited Arms, almost all the owners of which are Condemn'd to Death, and accordingly Executed; particularly the Pocket-pistols of the young Prince, Ra∣nucio Farnese, Son and Heir of Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, and Governour of the Low-Countries, who found means to escape from hence with much difficulty. The Church of St. John of Lateran is very large and magnificent, and assumes the glorious Title of The Head and Mother of all the Churches. It is the Seat of the Patriarchate, and was in part repair'd by Pope Inno∣cent X. The name of the Place came from Plancius La∣teranus, a Roman Lord, whose Gardens were situated thereabout. He was the same Person who had been nominated Consul, and was slain by the Order of Ne∣ro. Near this Church is the Sancta-Scala, i. e. the Holy Stair-Case; being an Apartment whereto have been transported 28 Steps of White Marble very much worn, and on which (as they say) Jesus Christ went up to Pontius Pilate. At present, no Persons are allow'd to ascend on them, otherwise than on their Knees: but as an ample Recompence for their Trouble, they gain three Years Indulgencies, and as many Quarantines, for every step: nevertheless, on each side there are two lesser Stair-cases, where one may go up at pleasure. The Chapel on the top of this Stair-case is call'd Sancta Sanctorum, or the Holy of Holies, by reason of an Image of our Saviour, which is pretended to have been made by Angels, and there most religiously preserv'd; neither are Women permitted to enter into it; but this Statue is deform'd, and very ill made. The Church of St. Mary Maggiore is a vast and stately Edifice, first foun∣ded by Pope Liberius, and a certain Roman Lord, A.C. 355. The Chapels of Sixtus V. and Paul V. are in like manner very noble Structures: The former was built by the Architect Dominico Fontana, and (as it is reported) cost 700000 Roman Crowns. In the latter is kept the Manger of Bethlehem; and an Image of the Virgin-Mary, made by St. Luke. Not far from thence stands the little Church of St. Antony, on whose Festival all the Horses of the Town go to receive a Benediction at the Gate of this Church. The Gardens of the Pope's Palace on Monte Cavallo are well situated, but their Order is irregular, and e∣very thing seems to be very much neglected. The two Horses of Marble that are plac'd before this Palace, and which Pope Sixtus V. caus'd to be transported thither from the Baths of Constantine, have always pass'd for the Works of Phidias and Praxiteles, the names of those famous Carvers being engrav'd on them. It is also re∣ported, and many have written, that these Horses are two different Statues of the Bucephalus, or noted Horse of Alexander the Great, which those two excellent Ar∣tists carv'd on purpose to out-vie one the other. But there must needs be some mistake in the matter; for since Alexander lived 50 Years after Praxiteles, and Praxiteles a whole Age after Phidias, if the Statues be∣long to them, they were not made for the Bucephalus; or otherwise, if they were made for this Horse, they are not the Workmanship either of Phidias or Praxiteles. The two other Marble Horses to be seen in the Capitol, were taken out of the Theatre of Pompey. But the Brazen Statue on Horse-back, in the same place, was fix'd there by Pope Paul III. and is suppos'd to be that of the Emperour Marcus Aurelius. The Capitol, which heretofore carry'd the greatest Name of any other Hea∣then Temple in Rome, was chiefly dedicated to Jupiter, having been begun by Tarquinius Priscus, and finish'd by Tarquinius Superbus. It was founded on a high Rock of Mount Capitoline, and richly adorn'd with the Spoils of the conquer'd Nations. But the present Capitol is a Mo∣dern Building rais'd on its Ruins, and even partly on its Foundations, which in some places are manifestly appa∣rent. Indeed, every Corner is full of remarkable Pieces of Antiquity, a particular Description whereof would even require a whole Volume; among the chief of these may be reckon'd the CopperWolf giving suck to the IllustriousRomulus and Remus. Twins; on which may be observed the Thunder-stroke mention'd byOrat. 2. cont. Catil. Cicero. The four large Pieces of Basso Relievo, where many Passages of the History of Marcus Au∣relius are represented. The Columna Ro∣strata of Consul Duillius, who was the first in Rome that obtain'd the Honour of a Naval Triumph. The Courier that drew a Thorn out of his Foot, after having brought good Tydings to the Senate, chusing rather to endure Pain in his Journey, than to retard the Publick joy. The half Statues of Cicero and Virgil. The four ancient Measures, viz. one for Oil, two for Wine, and the other for Corn. Nero's Nurse, holding that little Monster by the Hand. The Goddess of Silence. The God Pan. The Three Furies. The Statue of Caesar in Harness. Those of Castor and Pollux. The remainder of the Colosses of Apollo, Domitian, and Commodus. The Lyon that devour'd a Horse. Certain Trophies, which some at∣tribute to Trajan, and others to Marius, &c. The Pain∣tings in Fresco, of the Grand-Hall, were drawn by Cavalier Gioseppi, and seem to express the first Battle between the Romans and Sabines. Here is also shewn a Pillar call'd Milliarium, being of white Marble, eight foot and a half high. The Figure [1] is mark'd on its Capital, on the top whereof is fix'd a Brazen Globe about two Foot in Diameter. It is commonly reported, that this Column stood in the midst of the City, and that from thence distances were computed, which were divided at the end of every Mile by other Stones set up in all the Roads of Italy. A vast number of remainders of ancient Buildings are dispers'd on all sides behind the Capitol; and among others, the Arch erected for Titus, after the taking of Jerusalem, its remarkable for its Ornaments in Basso Relievo, representing the Candlesticks, Table, Trum∣pets of the Grand Jubilee, and some Vessels brought out of the Temple. The Arch of Constantine is almost entire, excepting that the Heads of some Statues have been taken away; whereof Lorenzo de Medicis is accus'd, who (as they say) caus'd them to be remov'd to Flo∣rence. The more skilful Antiquaries likewise observe, That the Basso Relievo's of this Monument are not of an equal Beauty; which causes a Suspicion, that the best Pieces were par'd off when it was plac'd here. The Prodigious Amphitheatre, commonly call'd the Colosseo, from a Colossus, or huge Statue, that was fix'd before it, is of a round form without, although the Ground-plot in the in-side is Oval. It contain'd 85000 Specta∣tors; that is to say, four times more than the Amphi∣theatre of Verona, without reckoning those termed Ex∣cuneati that stood upright in the Passages, and the num∣ber of whom amounted to 20000. The Pillars of Trajan and Antoninus are most famous and magnificent Monuments, both adorn'd with Figures in Basso Re∣lievo, ascending in Spiral Lines from the Bais to
the Capitals. The first of these admirable Columns was erected by the Senate of Rome, in Honour of the Emperour Trajan, and serv'd also for his Tomb, his Ashes having been set upon it in a Golden Urn; in the room of which, Pope Sixtus V. introduc'd a Statue of St. Peter, made of Copper gilt. This Pillar (according to Boissard) is compos'd of 24 Stones, every one of them containing 8 Steps: Its in-side is 128 Roman Feet high, which come near to 124 of England; and the Stair-case hath 123 Steps. The second Pillar, consist∣ing of 28 Stones, was in like manner rais'd by the Se∣nate for Antoninus Pius. The Statue of this Emperor was set up on the Top; but at present, the Image of St. Paul takes its place, being also made of Copper gilt, as well as that of St. Peter. The Stair-case contains 206 Steps; and the Body of the Column is 160 Ro∣man Feet high, which are equivalent to 155 of our English Measure. The stately Obelisks that were heretofore transported from Egypt to Rome, may well be reckon'd among the chiefest Ornaments▪ of this City. They are all of a Square Form, and end in a sharp Point, resembling, as it were, the Beams of the Sun, that grand Deity which the Egyptians likewise ador'd, under the name of Osiris, and wherein they plac'd the Genius's, or Souls of the Universe. The Four Angles of these Obelisks fac'd the four Quarters of the World, and signify'd the Four Elements: They are all made of Granite, which is a kind of Marble extremely hard, and very lasting; nay, some Naturalists affirm, that it is capable of re∣sisting the force of Fire for a long time; so that it is not to be doubted, but that the firmness of these Mate∣rials, was the cause of their choice for such purposes. For the Obelisk of St. John of Lateran hath subsisted a∣bove 3000 Years; and that of St. Peter is 900 Years older. But the former being the largest of all, weighs (as the Report goes) 956148 Pounds; and is 108 Foot high, without comprehending the Pedestal and Cross. The Tomb of Cestius is in like manner a very beauti∣ful and rare Monument: it is a square Pyramid, and ends in a sharp point at the Top; its Height consisting of 26 Feet; and its Breadth, in the Basis, of 94 Feet. The whole Mass of this Monument is made of Brick, but lin'd with squares of White Marble. It was re∣pair'd by Pope Alexander VII. in the Year 1673, and appears almost in its former Beauty. One may per∣ceive by the Inscriptions which are well preserv'd, that it was erected for Caius Cestius, one of those Seven Officers, who had the Charge of preparing the Feasts of the Gods. The entrance into the same Tomb lies through a low and narrow Passage, which crosseth its thickness into the middle, where is a little vaulted Room 19 Foot long, and 13 broad, and 14 high: The Roof of this Chamber is cover'd with a white and well polish'd Stuck, or Mortar, on which remain many Fi∣gures of Women, several sorts of Vessels, and other Ornaments. At the distance of 200 Paces from the Pyramid of Ce∣stius stands the Hill commonly call'd Il Dolioto, or Il Monte Testaceo, that is to say, the Mount of broken Pots, reaching about half a Mile in Compass, and 150 Foot in perpendicular height: But whence so vast a Heap of shatter'd Earthen Vessels came, cannot easily be determin'd; the general Opinion is, That the Hill being situated near the River Tyber, the Potters wrought hereabouts, as well for the convenience of Water us'd in their Works, as for the more easie Transportation of those Wares; and that they were wont to cast the bro∣ken pieces on one particular place. It may not perhaps be improper here to give some Account of the two famous Images of Pasquin and Mar∣forio, so much talk'd of among Travellers. The former is a Statue altogether mutilated and disfigured, which (as some say) was made for a Roman Soldier, and stands in a corner of one of the most considerable Cross-ways of the City, leaning against the side of a House. Indeed, Pasquin was the Name of a certain Taylor, who dwelt in that Neighbourhood, and whose Shop was the ordi∣nary Rendezvous for News-mongers: This Taylor was a Man of a sharp Wit, and jolly Humour; inso∣much, that his Satyrical Jests were styl'd Pasquinado's; and all the Sarcasms, or Lampoons of the Town, were generally attributed to him. Moreover, to perswade the World, that these Gibes proceeded from the same stamp, they were usually fasten'd to the present Statue, which was set before his Door; and thus the Statue, by degrees, assum'd the Name of Pasquin. Marforio is in like manner a maimed Figure, lying along in one of the Courts of the Capitol, which (according to the Opinion of some Persons) was heretofore a Statue of Ju∣piter; although others affirm it to have been that of the River Rhin, or the Nera, that runs to Turni. All this is uncertain, as well as the Etymology of the Names of these two Censors. However, it is very probable, that the Pasquinado's were formerly affix'd to the Trunk of Pasquin; but this Practice is no longer in use, all Saty∣rical Libels being now undoubtedly ascrib'd to the same Pasquin, who is suppos'd to Answer to the Inter∣rogatories of his Comrade Marforio. Among the Modern Palaces of Rome, the most consi∣derable are those of Giustiniani, Chigi, Farnese, Altieri, Barberino, Colonna, &c. besides an ancient Academy, and a great number of Colleges. The Palace of Giustiniani is full of innumerable Rarities; and that of Cardinal Chigi, one of the finest in the whole City, all the Open∣ings of the Gates being cas'd with green Marble; the most noted Statues therein are the two Venuci, Marsyas flea'd, and the Gladiator expiring. Michael Angelo was the chief Architect of the Palace Farnese, which was be∣gun by Antonio de S. Gallo. The Front of this beautiful Building is 180 Foot wide, and 90 high; the Gates, Cross-works, Corners, Cornishes, and all the principal Stones, are the Spoils of the Colosseo, or Amphitheatre; so that we may observe by the way, that a great part of this wonderful Monument has been of set-purpose de∣stroy'd on such occasions: For almost the whole Palace of the Chancery was in like manner built of it, as well as the Church of St. Lawrence; nay, the Town-walls, in some places, have been repair'd with the same Materials. Thus, instead of restoring and preserving those precious Remainders of Antiquity, as Pope Sixtus V. hath done, to whose care Rome owes the greater part of her Beauty, some disaffected Persons have endeavour'd utterly to de∣face and ruine them. Innocent VIII. broke in pieces the Gordian-Arch to build a Church: Alexander VI. de∣molish'd the fair Pyramid of Scipio, to pave the Streets with its Stones; and many other venerable Monuments have met with the like rude usage. The Library of the Palace of Altieri is full of many fair Volumes, and choice Manuscripts; the Stair-case is stately; and the several Apartments are spacious, richly furnish'd, and adorn'd with rare Paintings. The Palace Barberino, in Palestrina, is (as they say) the largest in Rome after the Vatican; and among the chief Pieces of Antiquity, worthy to be view'd there, we mav reckon a little Image of Diana, made of Oriental Alabaster; another of Talisa, the Daughter of Servius Tullius, and Wife of Tarquinius Superbus; and a third of the God Osiris, with his Hawk's Head on a Human Body. This last Statue was found, together with the Obelisk of Minerva, under the ruins of the Temple of Isis. In the other Palace, Barberino, near Tre Fontane, is contain'd a vast Treasure of Rareties, and the Library is thought to consist of 40000 Volumes. In the outermost Courts of the Palace Colnna are to be
seen the Portraitures of 2 Popes, 19 Cardinals; and 54 Generals, or Commanders of Armies, all descended from that Ancient and Noble Family. In the same Palace are 9 large Apartments, 8000 Original Pictures, or Paintings, a little Magazine of Statues, ancient Works in Basso Re∣lievo, and other Curiosities, a great quantity of rich Fur∣niture, &c. Before we leave Rome, it would be requisite to take some notice of the famous Catacombs, or Caverns under Ground, which turn, go sloping and cross one another, as it were so many Streets of a Town, on all sides, under the whole extent of the Suburbs; whereas those of Na∣ples are onely in one particular place. But these last are cut out of a Rock, and extended very far on all sides: Every Cave is usually 15 or 18 Foot large, and the height of the Vault is from 12 to 15. On every side, in the Walls, are certain Niches, or hollow Cabins, of all sorts of Dimensions, standing in rows one above another; so that the dead Bodies may lie exactly in them, without any Coffins. Afterward, these little Grotto's were clos'd up with flat Stones, or very large Tiles, cemented with Chalk and Sand, as it plainly appears in some places. The principal Catacombs in Rome are those of St. Seba∣stian and St. Agnes: The Vaults are as high as those of Naples; but the Wideness of the Caves is only about two Foot and a half, because they are supported only with Sand, and the former are made out of the solid Rock. It is very probable, that these vast subterraneous Caverns were the Puteculi, or Publick Burying-places of the Ancient Romans, where the Slaves, and ordinary sort of people were usually interr'd. But the Roman Ca∣tholicks stiffly maintain, without any just grounds, that the Christians themselves dug all the said Caverns; That they were wont to celebrate Divine-Service in them, in the Primitive Ages of the Church; That these Places serv'd them onely for Sepulchres, and were never us'd by the Pagans; that a great number of Saints and Mar∣tyrs were buried therein; and consequently, that a vast Treasure of Relicks is to be found there, which is the main end and scope of all their Pretensions. Neither can any Argument be reasonably drawn in favour of their Opinion, from the several sorts of Paintings and Altars found there; since the later Popes, having always look'd upon their Catacombs as a Source and Magazine of Relicks extremely conducing to their Advantage, have from time to time made such Alterations as they thought fit, on purpose to enhance the Reputation of them, and the better to perswade Pilgrims, that come from all parts, to visit those Holy Places. The City of Rome, as it hath been for a long time the Mistriss of the whole World, and triumph'd over many People; so it has often fallen as a Prey to different Nations: For it was taken, First, By the Galli Senones, Commanded by their General Brennus, A. C. 362. in the Third Year of the XCVIIth Olympiad. Secondly, By the Goths, under the Conduct of their K. Alaricus, A. C. 410. Thirdly, By the Vandals, under Gensericus, in 455. Fourthly, By Odoacer, King of the Heruli, in 467. Fifthly, By the Ostrogoths, in 487. Sixthly, By Totila, King of the Goths, about 12 years after. Lastly, It was Storm'd, and miserably laid waste by he Spanish For∣ces, under the command of the Emperour Charles Vth, on the 6th day of May, A. D. 1527. The Seven KINGS of ROME. ABout A. M. 3301. in the 4th Year of the 6th Olym∣piad, 96. of the Julian Period. 431. since the ta∣king of the City of Troy; and 753. before the Christian Account of Time.   Years. 1 Romulus Reigned 38 A M. 3339. A. U. 39. an Interreign 1 2 Numa Pompilius, A. M. 3340. A. U. 40. 43 3 Tullus Hostilius, A. M. 3383. A. U. 83. 32 4 Ancus Martius, A. M. 3414. A. U. 114. 24 5 Tarquinius Priscus, A. M. 3439. A. U. 139. 38 6 Servius Tullius, A. M. 3477. A. U. 177. 44 7 Tarquinius Superbus, A. M. 3521. A. U. 221. 24 Afterward, the Two first Consuls, Brutus and Collatinus Govern'd the State. A. Ʋ. 245. after having Expell'd the Kings on the 24th Day of February. Of the Emperours of Rome, from Julius Caesar, to Augustulus. 1 JULIUS CAESAR began to Reign A. Ʋ. 705, or, A. M. 4005, and was Assassinated March the 5th, A. Ʋ. 710. 2 Augustus began his Reign, A. Ʋ. 711. possess'd the Em∣pire 57 Years, the MONARCHY 43; and Died A. C. 14.   A. C. Y. M. D. 3 Tiberius 14 22 06 00 4 Caligula 37 3 10 8 5 Claudius I. 41 13 8 10 6 Nero 54 13 7 28 7 Galba 68   6 7 8 Otho 69   3 5 9 Vitellius 69   8 5 10 Vespasianus 69 10 wanting 5 Days. 11 Titus 79 2 2 20 12 Domitianus 81 25   25 The Title of Caesar is usually attributed to the Twelve First Emperours. 13 Nerva 96 1 4 11 14 Trajan 98 19 6 15 15 Adrian 117 10 11   16 Antoninus Pius 138 22 6   17 Marcus Aurelius Antoni∣nus 161 19   10 18 Lucius Verus 161 9     19 Commodus 180 12 9 4 20 Hebrius Pertinax 193   2 26 21 Didius Julianus 193   2 5 22 Septimius Severus 193 17 8 3 23 Antoninus Caracalla 211 6 2 5 24 Opilius Macrinus, and his Son 217 1 2   25 Antoninus Heliogabalus 218 3 9 4 26 Alexander Severus 222 13   9 27 Maximinus, and his Son 235 2, and some Months. 28 Pupienus and Balbinus 238   10, or 11 Months. 29 Gordiani 238 5 or 6 Years. 30 Philippus, and his Son 444 5, and some Months. 31 Decius and his Son 249 about 03 00 00
32 Gallus, and his Son Volusia∣nus 251 2 4   33 Valerianus 254 6 or 7 Years. 34 Galienus 259 about 8 0 0 35 Claudius II. 268 about 2 0 0 36 Aurelianus 270 5 or 6 Years 37 Tacitus 275   6 6 38 Probus 276 6 4   39 Carus 282 1     40 Carinus 282 slain, about 1     41 Numerianus 282 slain, about 2     42 Dioclesianus 284 20     43 Maximianus Herculeus 285 18     44 Constantius Chlorus 304 2 3 25 45 Maximianus Armentarius 304       46 Constantine the Great 306 30 9 27 47 Constantius, together with his Brothers Constantine and Constans 337 25 5 13 48 Julian the Apostate 361 1 7 27 49 Jovianus 363   7 22 50 Valentinianus the Great 364   8 22 51 Gratianus 375 7 9 12 52 Valentinianus II. 383 8 8 21 53 Theodosius the Great 392 2 5   54 Honorius 395 28 7   55 Constantius 421   7   56 Valentinianus III. 425 about 30     57 Maximus 455   2 17 58 Avitus 455 about 1     59 Majorianus 457 4 4 2 60 Severus 461 3 8 27 An Interreign of about 2 Years. 61 Anthemius 467 4 11 0 62 Olybrius 472   6 or 7 Months. 63 Glycerius 473 about 1 0 0 64 Nepos 474 about 1 3 0 65 Augustulus 475 about 1 0 0 [The Succession of the Emperors of the West, shall be explained in the Description of Germany; and that of the Eastern, under the Article of Constantinople: it being sufficient here only to intimate, That all the 65 Emperors above-mentioned Reign'd at Rome.] A Table of the Succession of the POPES.   A. C. Reigned Y. M. D. 1 S. PETER 43 Jan. 18. 24 5 10 2 S. Linus 67 Jun. 30. 11 2 23 3 S. Cletus 78 12 7 2 4 S. Clement I. 91 9 6 6 5 Anacletus 101 Apr. 23. 9 3 10 6 S. Euaristus 110 Apr. 26. 9 3   7 S. Alexander I. 119 Nov. 23 10 5 20 8 S. Sixtus I. 130 9 10 8 9 S. Telesphorus 140 Apr. 8. 11 9   10 S. Hyginus 152 Jan. 13. 3 0 28 11 S. Pius I. 156 Jan. 15. 9 5 24 12 S. Anicetus 165 Jul. 25. 7 8 24 13 S. Soter 173 May 14. 3 11 21 14 S. Eleutherius 177 in May. 15 0 23 15 S. Victor I. 192 Jun. 1. 9 1 28 16 St. Zephyrinus 201 Aug. 8. 18 8   17 S. Callistus I. 219 Sept. 5 1 12 18 S. Urban I. 224 Octob. 21. 6 7 4 19 S. Pontianus 231 Jan. 4 6 0 20 S. Anterus 235 Dec.   1   21 S. Fabianus 236 Jan. 15. 25 6   22 S. Cornelius 251 Apr. 2 4 17 23 S. Lucius I. 253 Oct. 21. 1 4   24 S. Stephen I. 255 Apr. 9. 2 3 22 25 S. Sixtus II. 257 Apr. 2. 1 1 13 26 S. Denys. 258 Sept. 12 3 22 27 S. Felix I. 270 Dec. 31. 4 4 29 28 S. Eutychianus 275 June 4. 8 6 4 29 S. Caius 283 Sept. 17. 12 4 5 30 S. Marcellinus 296 May 13. 7 11 26 31 S. Marcellus I. 304 Nov. 4 1 25 32 S. Eusebius 309 Feb. 5. 2 8 21 33 S. Melchiada 311 Octob. 3. 2 5 17 34 S. Sylvester 314 Feb. 1. 2 11 0 35 S. Marcus 316 Jan. 16.   8 12 36 S. Julius I. 336 Octob. 27. 15 5 17 37 S. Liberius 35 May 8. 15 4 2 38 S. Felix II. 361 1 3 3 39 S. Damasus I. 367 Sept. 15. 17 2 28 40 S. Syricius 385 Jan. 12. 13 1 14 41 S. Anastasius I. 398 March 14. 4 1 13 42 S. Innocent I. 402 May 18. 15 2 10 43 S. Zosimus 417 Aug. 19. 1 4 7 44 S. Bonifacius 418 Dec. 28. 4 9 28 45 S. Caelestin I. 423 Nov. 3. 8 5 3 46 S. Sixtus III. 432 Apr. 26. 7 11   47 S. Leo. I. sirnam'd The Great 440 May 10 20 1   48 S. Hilarius 461 Nov. 12. 5 9 19 49 S. Simplicius 467 Sept. 20. 15 5 10 50 S. Felix III. 483 March 8. 8 11 22 51 S. Gelasius I. 492 March 4 8 19 52 S. Anastasius II. 496 Nov. 28. 1 11 23 53 S. Symmachus 498 Dec. 2. 15 7 27 54 S. Hormisdas 514 Jul. 26. 9 10   55 S. John I. 523 Aug. 13. 2 9 14 56 S. Felix IV. 526 in Jul. 4 2 18 57 S. Boniface II. 530 Oct. 15. 2 2   58 S. John II. 532 in Jan. 2 6   59 S. Agapetus I. 535 in Jul.   10 18 60 S. Sylverius 536 Jun. 20. 4     61 S. Vigilius 540 15 6   62 S. Pelagius I. 555 Apr. 16. 3 10 18 63 S. John III. 559 Jul. 27. 12 11 16 64 S. Benedict 573 May 16 4 2 15 65 Pelagius II. 577 Nov. 10. 12 1 27 66 S. Gregory I. sir∣nam'd The Great 590 Sept. 3. 13 3 10 67 Sabinianus 604 Sept. 1.   5 19 68 Boniface III. 606 Feb. 15.   8 23 69 Boniface IV. 607 Sept. 18. 6 8 13 70 Deodatus I. 614 Nov. 13. 2 11 26 71 Boniface V. 617 Dec. 24. 7 10 1 72 Honorius I. 626 May 14. 1 4 27 73 Severinus 639 Aug. 2.   2 4 74 S. John IV. 639 Dec. 31. 1 9 6 75 Theodorus 641 Nov. 25. 7 5 20 76 S. Martin I. 649 July 1. 5 4 12 77 Eugenius I. 655   6 23 78 Vitalianus 655 July 1. 13 4 17 79 Deodatus II. 669 April 9. 7 2 17 80 Domnus 676 Nov. 1. 1 5 10 81 S. Agatho 678 June 16. 3 6 26 82 S. Leo II. 683 Aug. 15.   10 14 83 S. Benedict II. 684 Aug. 20.   8 17 84 S. John V. 685 July 22. 1 11   85 Conon 686 Octo. 20.   11 23 86 S. Sergius I. 687 Dec. 26. 13 8 14
87 S. John VI. 701 Octob. 30. 3 2 12 88 S. John VII. 705 March 1. 2 7 17 89 Sisinius 708 Jan. 18.     20 90 Constantine 708 March 7. 6 1 2 91 Gregory II. 714 May 20. 16 8 20 92 Gregory III. 731 Feb. 16. 10 9 12 93 S. Zachary 741 Dec. 6. 10 3 10 94 Stephen II. 752 March 20.     4 95 Stephen III. 752 May 30. 5 10 20 96 Paul I. 757 May 28. 1 10   97 Stephen IV. 758 Aug. 3. 3 5 17 98 Adrian I. 762 Feb 9. 23 10 17 99 Leo III. 795 Dec. 16. 20 5 17 100 Stepen V. 816 June 20. 1 7 3 101 Paschal I. 817 Jan. 27. 7 3 16 102 Eugenius II. 824 May 19. 3 2 23 103 Valentin 827 in Aug.     4 104 Gregory IV. 827 Sept. 24. 15 4   105 Sergius II. 844 Feb. 10. 3 2 1 106 Leo IV. 847 April 10. 8 3 5 107 Benedict III. 855 July 21. 2 6 10 108 Nicholas V. sir∣nam'd The Great 858 April 24. 9 6 10 109 Adrian II. 867 Dec. 14. 4 10 17 110 John VIII. 872 Dec. 14. 10 1   111 Martin II. 882 Dec. 28. 2   20 112 Adrian III. 884 Jan. 20. 1 3 29 113 Stephen VI. 885 in May 6 some D. 114 Formosus 891 May 31. 6 6   115 Stephen VII. 897 Jan. 8. 3     116 Theodorus II. 901 0 0 20 117 John IX. 901 3 11 0 118 Benedict IV. 905 some M.   119 Leo V. 906     40 120 Christopher 906   7   121 Sergius III. 907 3 4   122 Anastasius III. 910 2   20 123 Landon 912   4 28 124 John X. 913 Jan. 24. 15     125 Leo VI. 928   6 15 126 Stephen VIII. 929 2 1 15 127 John XI. 931 4 10   128 Leo VII. 936 3 6   129 Stephen IX. 939 3 4 5 130 Martin III. 943 6 4 13 131 Agapetus II. 946 9 7 10 132 John XII. 955 9 10   133 Leo VIII. 962 in Nov. 3     134 Benedict V. 964 1     135 John XIII. 965 6 11 50 136 Domnus II. 972 Sept. 20.   3   137 Benedict VI. 972 Dec. 20. 1 3 & some Days. 138 Benedict VII. 975 9     139 John XIV. 984 1 and some Months. 140 John XV. 985 10 4 12 141 Gregory V. 996 Jun. 13. 2 8 6 142 S. Sylvester II. 999 4 2 3 143 John XVI. 1003   5   144 John XVII. 1003 Nov. 20 5 7 28 145 Sergius IV. 1009 Aug. 31. 2 8 13 146 Benedict VIII. 1012 Feb. 27. 12     147 John XVIII. 1024 9     148 Benedict IX. 1034 10     149 Gregory VI. 1044 in April 2 8   150 Clement II. 1046 in Dec.   9   151 Damasus II. 1048     23 152 S. Leo IX. 1049 in Feb. 5 2 7 153 Victor II. 1054 2 6   154 Stephen X. 1057 Aug. 2.   8   155 Nicolas II. 1059 2 6   156 Alexander II. 1061 Octob. 1. 11 6 22 157 Gregory VII. 1073 April 22. 12 1 3 158 Victor III. 1086 May 24.   10   159 Urban II. 1087 Mar. 2. 11 4 18 160 Paschal II. 1099 Aug. 12. 18 5 4 161 Galesius II. 1118 Jan. 25. 1 4   162 Callistus II. 1119 in Feb. 5 10 13 163 Honorius II. 1124 Dec. 21. 5 1 17 164 Innocent II. 1130 Feb. 14. 13 7 10 165 Celestin II. 1143 Sept. 25.   5 13 166 Lucius II. 1144 March 9.   11 14 167 Eugenius III. 1145 Feb. 25. 8 4 13 168 Anastasius IV. 1153 July 9. 1 4 24 169 Adrian IV. 1154 Dec. 3. 4 8 29 170 Alexander III. 1159 Sept. 6. 21 11 21 171 Lucius III. 1181 Aug. 29. 4 2 18 172 Gregory VIII. 1187   2   173 Clement III. 1188 Jan. 6. 5 2 10 174 Celestin III. 1191 April 12. 6 8 28 175 Innocent III. 1199 Jan. 8. 18 6 9 176 Honorius III. 1216 July 17. 10 8   177 Gregory IX. 1227 March 20. 14 5 3 178 Celestin IV. 1241 Sept. 22.     18 179 Innocent IV. 1243 June 24. 11 5 14 180 Alexander IV. 1254 Dec. 21. 6 5 4 181 Urban IV. 1261 Aug. 29. 3 1 4 182 Clement IV. 1265 Feb. 5. 3 9 15 183 Gregory X. 1271 Sept. 1. 4 4 10 184 Innocent V. 1276 Feb. 22.   9 5 185 John XIX. 1276 July 12.   8 8 186 Nicolas III. 1277 Nov. 25. 2 9 2 187 Martin IV. 1281 Feb. 22. 4 1 7 188 Honorius IV. 1285 April 2. 2   1 189 Nicolas IV. 1287 Feb. 22. 4 1 14 190 Celestin V. 1294 July 5.   5 1 191 Boniface VIII. 1295 April 24. 8 9 18 192 Benedict XI. 1303 Octob. 22.   8 17 Seven Popes who resided successively at Avignon, during Seventy Two Years. 193 Clement V. 1305 June 5. 8 10 6 194 John XXII. 1316 Sept. 5 or 8. 18 3 18 195 Benedict XII. 1334 Dec. 20. 7 4 6 196 Clement VI. 1342 May 7. 10 6 19 197 Innocent IX. 1352 Dec. 18. 2 8 20 198 Urban V. 1362 Octo. 28. 8 1 23 199 Gregory XI. 1376 Dec. 29. 7 2 24 The See Re-establish'd at Rome. 200 Urban VI. 1378 April 7. 11 6 6 201 Clement VII. 1388 Sept. 21. dyed in 1394.       202 Boniface IX. 1389 Nov. 2. 14 11   203 Innocent VII. 1404 Oct. 17. 2   22 204 Gregory XII. 1406 Nov. 23. 2 6 14 205 Alexander V. 1409 June 26.   18 8 206 John XXIII. 1410 May 17. 5   15 207 Martin V. 1417 Nov. 11. 13 3 10 208 Eugenius IV. 1431 March 3. 15 11 20 209 Nicolas V. 1447 March 6. 8   19 210 Callistus III. 1455 April 8. 3 5 19 211 Pius II. 1458 Aug. 19. 5 11 27 212 Paul II. 1464 Aug. 29. 6 10 26 213 Sixtus IV. 1471 Aug. 29. 13   5 214 Innocent VIII. 1484 Aug. 9. 7 10 27 215 Alexander VI. 1492 Aug. 11. 11   8 216 Pius III. 1503 Sept. 22.     26 217 Julius II. 1503 Octo. 30. 9 3 21 218 Leo X. 1513 March 11. 8 8 20 219 Adrian VI. 1522 Jan. 9. 1 8 6 220 Clement VII. 1523 Nov. 19. 10 10 7 221 Paul III. 1534 Oct. 13. 15   28 222 Julius III. 1550 Feb. 8. 5 11 16 223 Marcellus II. 1555 April 9.     21 224 Paul IV. 1555 May 23. 4 2 24 225 Pius IV. 1559 Dec. 26. 5 11 15 226 Pius V. 1566 Jan. 7. 6 3 24 227 Gregory XIII. 1572 May 13. 12 10 29 228 Sixtus V. 1585 April 24. 5 4 3 229 Urban VII. 1590 Sept. 15.     13
230 Gregory XIV. 1590 Dec. 5.   10 10 231 Innocent IX. 1591 Octob. 29.   2   232 Clement VIII. 1592 Jan 30. 13 1 3 233 Leo XI. 1605 April 1.     27 234 Paul V. 1605 May 17. 15 8 12 235 Gregory XV. 1621 Feb. 9. 2 5   236 Urban VIII. 1623 Aug. 6. 20 11 22 237 Innocent X. 1644 Sept. 15. 10 4 22 238 Alexander VII. 1655 April 6. 12 1 16 239 Clement IX. 1667 June 20. 2 5 19 240 Clement X. 1670 April 29. 6 2 23 241 Innocent XI. 1676 Sept. 21. 13 10   242 Alexander VIII. 1689 Octob. 6.       243 Innocent XII. 1691 now reigning.       Thirty One Anti-Popes.   A. D. 1 Novatian, an Arch-Heretick 251 2 Ursicinus, or Ursimus 367 3 Eulalius, an Arch-Deacon 418 4 Laurentius, an Arch-Deacon 498 5 Dioscorus 530 6 Peter and Theodorus 686 7 Theodorus and Paschal 687 8 Theophylactus, an Arch-Priest 757 9 Constantine 768 10 Zinzimus 824 11 John, a Deacon 844 12 Sergius, and Boniface VI. 890 13 Romanus Gallesinus 897 14 Leo VIII. 962 15 John XVI. 990 16 Gregory 1013 17 Sylvester III. and John XX. 1043 18 John Mincius, sirnam'd Benedict 1059 19 Cadolus, call'd Honorius II. 1065 20 Guibert, nam'd Clement III. 1080 21 Maurice Burdin, nam'd Gregory VIII. 1118 22 Theobald, nam'd Callistus III. 1124 23 Peter of Leon, nam'd Anacletus II. 1130 24 Gregory, sirnam'd Victor 1138 25 Octavian, call'd Victor IV. 1159 26 Guy of Crema, nam'd Paschal III. 1164 27 Joh, Abbot of Struma, nam'd Callistus III. 1170 28 Clement VII. suppos'd to be an Anti-Pope. 1378 29 Peter de la Luna, nam'd Benedict XIII. 1394 30 Giles, nam'd Clement VIII. 1424 31 Amadeo VIII. Duke of Savoy, nam'd Felix V. 1439 Tivoli, Tibur, is pleasantly situated on a Hill near the Cataracts of the River Teverone, at the distance of 18 Miles from Rome to the East, 12 from Frescati to the North, and as many from Palestrino. The Anti∣quities of this Place are very much to be admir'd, par∣ticularly the curious Paintings, Fountains and Gardens: together with the Duke of Modena's Country-House, commonly call'd the Palace of Cardinal D'Este; be∣cause it is appropriated to the Use of the Cardinals of this Family, when there are any. It seems to be a large and very noble Building, but the Apartments and Fur∣niture are not very considerable. The Three Cham∣bers painted in Eresco by Raphael Ʋrbin, and some an∣cient Statues, are its chiefest Ornament. The Garden is not very spacious, but pleasantly divided by Ter∣rass-Walls. The Water-Engines very much surpass those of Frescati, and are even reported to be the best in all Italy; nevertheless, at present they are but in an ill Condition, the greater part of the Channels being stopt up. The Cascade of the Teverone is the most re∣markable thing in this small City; and indeed, that River makes a fine Work, but the Fall is not very high. The Montain of Tivoli hath, time out of Mind, furnish'd the greater part of the Stone us'd in Building at Rome, and is corruptly call'd Travertin, instead of Tybutin. The whole Amphitheatre was lin'd, and the Front of St. Peter's Church built with the same sort of Stone, which wears well, but is yellowish and porous; so that this Quarry is inferiour to those of Portland, Pa¦ris, and Caen. The City of Tivoli is dignify'd with the Til of a Metropolitan See, under the Patriarchate of Rome, and gave Birth to Pope John IX. but Eugenius III. died there, A. D. 1153. Frascati, or Frescati, Tusculum, or Frascata, is seated in a fertile Country on the side of a Hill near the anci∣ent Tusculum of Cicero, and distant only 12 Miles East from Rome, whereto its Episcopal See is subject, which was establish'd by Pope Paul III, A. D. 1537. the Bishop being always one of the six Eldest Cardinals. In∣deed, the City is not very fair, nor much inhabited; but the Palaces, Gardens, and great number of Houses of Pleasure, deserve well to be view'd by Travellers: Among these, the Palace of Aldobrandini, commonly call'd La Belvedere de Frascati, belonging to Prince Pamphilo; that of Monte Dracone, to Princess Borghesi; and that of Villa Ludovisia, to the Dutchess of Guadag∣nola, Sister to the Constable Colonna, are the Three principal. The Cascades of the first and last are very fine, but the Furniture of all these Three Houses is not very considerable. Ostia is a very ancient Town, built by Ancus Mar∣tius, King of the Romans, on the Coasts of the Toscan Sea, at the Mouth of the River Tyber; but was ras'd by the Saracens, and at present lies in Ruins, being peopl'd only with some few Inhabitants, by reason of the unhealthiness of the Air. However, it is the See of a Prelate who is always Dean of the College of Cardinals. St. Monica, the Mother of St. Augustine, died in this Place, which is distant 8 Miles from Rome to the South, and scarcely 2 from Porto to the East. Palestrina, Praeneste or Polystephano, another Town of great Antiquity, near the small River Osa, stands at the distance of 24 Miles from Rome to the East; 12 from Tivoli to the South-east, 8 from Segni, and 16 from Anagni. It was heretofore founded both on the top of a Mountain, where an old Castle is yet to be seen; and on the foot of the same Mount, where many Monuments of decayed Vaults and Walls still remain under the Temple of Fortune, which was erected here after a very magnificent manner. But Boniface VIII. caus'd this ancient City to be demolish'd, and rebuilt it in the Plain. It is also dignify'd with the Title of a Principality, appertaining to the Family of Barbari∣ni, and an Episcopal See, which is usually conferr'd on one of the six Senior Cardinals. Terracena, or Tarracena, or Anxur, is in like man∣ner a Bishop's See, built on the foot of a Mountain, on the top whereof stands an old Castle, or Fort, known by the Name of La Rocca di St. Angelo: not far from whence the River Il Portatore dischargeth it self into the Toscan Sea. This City was formerly adorn'd with a capacious Harbour, which Antoninus Pius caus'd to be cleansed and repaired, (as we are inform'd by Spar∣tianus in the Life of the same Emperor;) but at present, few Inhabitants reside there, in regard that the Air is very unhealthy, by reason of the Adjacent Marshes of Pontine. It is distant only 2 Miles from the Confines of the Kingdom of Naples to the West; 15 from Ca∣jeta; 9 from Fondi; and about 48 from Rome. Velitri, Velitrae, is a very ancient and fair City, but at present of little Note, its Episcopal See being united to that of Ostia. It is distant 5 or 6 Miles from Alba∣no
and Ariccia; as also 18 from Rome to the East; 17 from Anagni; and 14 from Segni. It stands on a well cutivated Hill, and is encompass'd with a Wall. The Inhabitants give it out, That their Town was honour∣ed with the Birth of Augustus; but are much mista∣ken: For Suetonius expresly declares, that this Empe∣ror was born at Rome, in the Quarter or Ward of the Palace. It is true, indeed, that his Family, viz. that of the Octavii, deriv'd its Original from Velitri, and that he was put to Nurse in the Neighbourhood of this little City, in the midst of the Market-place whereof is erected a fair Copper Statue of Pope Ʋrban VIII. Segni, Signia, is seated on a Mountain of the same Name, at the distance of 28 Miles from Rome to the East; 6 from Anagni; 12 from Palestrina to the South; 5 from Paliano; 12 from Sermoneta; 18 from Alatri; 20 from Nettuno; 18 from Subiaco; and 14 from Veli∣tri. This City enjoys the Title both of a Bishoprick and a Dutchy, appropriated to the Noble Family of Sforza. It is also famous for giving Birth to Pope Vi∣talianus, and on the account of the invention of those Organs and Musical Notes that are used in the Church of Rome. Anagni, Anagnia, hath been heretofore a very con∣siderable City, although now almost ruin'd, and of a small extent, being situated on a Hill, and distant 32 Miles from Rome to the East; 10 from Ferentino; 14 from Alatri; 22 from Sora; 12 from Palestrina; as ma∣ny from Frosilone; 20 from Piperno; 20 from Terraci∣na; 18 from Subiaco; and about 17 from Velitri. Mar∣cus Antonius having divorc'd Octavia, the Sister of Au∣gustus, took Cleopatra to Wife in this Place: which hath also brought forth divers Popes, viz. Innocent III. Gregory IX. Alexander IV. and Boniface VIII. More∣over, Adrian IV. dyed here, A. D. 1159. Albano, Albanum, a small City of Campania, was at first call'd Villa Pompeia; and afterward erected into an Epi∣scopal See, which is always allotted to one of the 6 Seni∣or Cardinals by Option (as they term it,) and is only sub∣ject to the See of Rome, from whence it is distant 12 Miles to the East, towards Velitri; and only 1 from Castel Gandolfe. It is more especially remarkable for a sort of excellent Wine made therein, and bears the Title of a Principality appertaining to the Family of Sabello. The famous City of Alba once took up this space of Ground, and extended it self (according to the common Opini∣on) from the Lake of Castel Gandolfa to new Albano, where is to be seen a kind of an old decayed Tower, sup∣pos'd to be the Tomb of Ascanius. Not far from hence are the Ruins of an Amphitheatre, on which grow ma∣ny large Trees, the Roots of which are interwoven af∣ter a wonderful manner between the best cemented Stones and Bricks; so that they have cleft the very Walls, and their Branches are enlarg'd, notwithstan∣ding all Obstacles. The adjacent Territory of Alba∣no and Gensana is very sertile in divers sorts of good Fruits, and the Inhabitants still retain their ancient Cu∣stom of planting Garlick and Onions. The Patrimony of St. Peter, Provincia Patrimonii, or Patrimonium Sancti Petri; in Ital. La Provincia del Patrimonio, hath those of Ombria and Orvietano for its Northern Bounds; the Mediterranean Sea on the South; the Campaign of Rome and Terra Sabina on the East; and the Dutchy of Castro on the West. This Pro∣vince is about 48 Miles long, and 34 Broad. The Principal Cities and Towns are these: Viz. VITERBO, Bish. Cap. Civita Vecchia, Bish. and Port. Montefiascone. Bolsena. Orta. Nepi. Sutri, Bish. Bracciano, a Dutchy. Corneto. VITERBO, Viterbium, in the Latit. of 42 deg. and the Longit. of 35 deg. 40 min. is situated on the foot of a Mountain, and water'd with a great number of clear Brooks and Springs, at the distance of 14 Miles South-east of Orvieto, and 28 North-west of Rome. It is one of the fairest Cities of the Ecclesiastical State, built altogether with Stone, encompass'd with a Wall, and adorn'd with divers most stately Palaces. Besides the Steeples of the Churches, eight or ten high square Tow∣ers are discern'd afar off, and make a very odd show. These Forts, and places of Retreat, were erected by the Citizens, close to their Houses, during the Rava∣ges that the Factions of the Guelfs and Gibelins com∣mitted in Italy. This City contains 620 Houses, and its Episcopal See depends immediate on that of Rome. Pope Alexander IV. died here, A. D. 1261. and Clement IV. in 1268. Civita Vecchia, Centum Cellae, or Trajanus Portus, is a Sea-Port Town, lately well fortify'd by the Popes, more especially Ʋrban VIII. and Innocent XI. and di∣stant 38 Miles almost West of Rome, and 24 South-east of Castro. It was in former times an Episcopal See, and hath as yet a convenient Harbour, defended by an old Castle, but is not much inhabited, on the account of the unhealthiness of the Air. Montefiascone, Mons Falisca, or Mons Flascnis, is built on an High Hill, near the Banks of the Lake of Bolsena, being distant 8 Miles South of Orvieto, 9 al∣most West of Viterbo, and 42 North-west of Rome. It is a City of a small Compass, and ill built: However, Pope Ʋrban V. erected it into an Episcopal See, tran∣slating that of Corneto, a maritime and unhealthy Town hither, A. D. 1369. neither is it subject to any Me∣tropolitan. This place is also famous for the making of Muscadine Wines, which are every where much admir'd. Bolsena is now only a poor little Village, its Episco∣pal See being translated to Orvieto. Behind this Place, on a Rising-Ground, appear the Ruins of the ancient Town of Volsinium, which (according to the Report of Pliny) was burnt to Ashes by Lightning. The Lake of Bolsena is of an Oval Figure, and (as they say) 40 Miles in Compass. Its two Islands are nam'd Martana and Passentina; in the former whereof, Amalatonta, the Daughter of Theodorick King of the Goths, was ba∣nish'd and put to Death by the Order of the Ungrate∣ful Theodatus her Cousin, whom she had associated to the Government. Orta, Hortanum, is seated on an Hill near the Con∣fluence of the Rivers Tyber and Nera, on the very Con∣fines of Ombria, near Otricoli; 26 Miles from Rome to the North, toward Todi; and 16 from Viterbo to the East. It is, indeed, an Episcopal See; but hath been always united to that of Citta di Castello, ever since the Year 1437. according to the Order of Pope Eugenius IV. Nepi, Nepet, or Nepita, stands near the side of the River Pozzolo, almost in the midst between Rome and Viterbo, at the distance of 8 Miles from Sutri to the East; 5 from Monterosi; and 14 from Rome to the North-west. Its Bishoprick was annexed to that of Su∣tri, by Pope Eugenius IV. A. D. 1436. and exempted from the Jurisdiction of all other Episcopal Sees. Sutri, Sutrium, or Colonia Julia Sutrina, is a small City seated on the River Pozzolo, and encompass'd on all sides with Rocks, being distant 3 Miles South-east of Romigliane, and 18 North-west of Rome. It hath been, for a long time, a Bishop's See, depending im∣mediately on that of Rome. Bracciano, Braccianum, or Arcenum, is built on the side of a Lake of the same Name, about 8 Miles o the Sea. and 18 West of Rome. It is a Town of a
small extent, yet well built, and dignify'd with the Title of a Dutchy, appropriated to the Family of Ʋr∣sini. The Dutchy of Castro, Castrensis Ducatus, lies be∣tween the Province of Orvietan on the North, the State of Toscany on the West, the Mediterranean Sea on the South, and the Patrimony of St. Peter on the East; ex∣tending it self from North to South for the space of a∣bout 30 Miles, and 22 from East to West. Pope Paul II. conferr'd the Territories of Parma and Placentia on his Son Peter Lewis Farnese, Duke of Castro. Afterward, Inoncent X. caus'd the City of Castro to be ruin'd; but in the Year 1649, made an Agreement with the Duke of Parma, that this Dutchy should be restor'd to him, on Condition that he should pay a very considerable Sum of Money: Nevertheless, upon default of Pay∣ment, it was incorporated into the Apostolical Chamber. However, by Virtue of a Treaty concluded A. D. 1664. between Pope Alexander VII. and the French King, Lewis, XIV. it was agreed, That His Holiness should revoke the Alienation granting the term of 8 Years to the Duke of Parma, for the payment of a certain Sum; which (as it is believ'd) was accordingly disburs'd. Castro, Castrum, sprang up out of the Ruins of the ancient Town of Volciae, and stands on the Borders of Toscany, 13 Miles off the Sea, 30 South-west of Or∣vieto, and 54 almost West of Rome. Its Episcopal See formerly depended immediately on that of Rome, but was translated to Aquapenden, e, A. D. 1649. by reason that the Inhabitants had slain Christophero Giarda, a Bi∣shop deputed to them by Pope Innocent X. The adja∣cent Country is termed Lo Stato di Castro, and in∣cludes some other Towns within its Jurisdiction, particularly those of Farnese, Ronciglione, and Piti∣gliano. Orvietano, Ʋrbevetanus, or Orvietanus Ager, a Pro∣vince of a small compass, 34 Miles long, and 18 broad, is extended between those of Ombria, Perugino, the Territories of Siena, the Dutchy of Castro, and the Patrimony of S. Peter. The Chief Towns are these: Viz. ORVIETO, Bish. Cap. Aquapendente, Bish. Bagnarea. ORVIETO, Oropitum, Herbanum, Ʋrbeventum, Ʋr∣bevetanum, or Orvietum, is advantageously situated on a Mountain near the River Paglio, which a little a∣bove receives the Waters of the Chiana into its Chan∣nel, and 3 Miles below falls into the Tyber. It is also fenced on all sides with steep Rocks and Precipices, at the distance of 27 Miles South of Perugia, 38 almost West of Spoleto, and 45 North-west of Rome; scarcely 15 from the Frontiers of the Dominions of the Grand Duke of Toscany, and the Country of Siena, to the East. Aquapendente, Acula, or Aquula, is built on a rising Ground, and takes its Names from the Springs of Wa∣ter that flow from thence in great abundance. It is a very large Town, but not well inhabited, being distant 12 Miles South-west of Orvieto, and 54 North-west of Rome. It was erected into an Episcopal See, after the demolishing of the City of Castro by Pope Innocent X. A. D. 1650. The Province of Perugino, Perusinus Ager, lies on the North of that of Orvietano, and is 35 Miles long, and 27 broad, deriving its name from that of the Ca∣pital City of this Country. The Principal Towns are: Viz. PERƲSIA, Bish. Cap. La Frata. Piene. PERƲSIA, in Ital. Perugia, a large well-built City, is paved with Bricks, and fortify'd with divers Basti∣ons, and a strong Citadel, which was erected on a Hill, by the Order of Pope Paul III. It was one of the twelve first Colonies of the Toscans, and is distant 27 Miles North of Orvieto, 34 almost North-West of Spoleto, 38 South of Ʋrbine, and 61 almost North-West of Rome. It was heretofore famous for the Siege which Lucius Antonius, the Brother of the Triumvir, sustained a∣gainst the Forces of Augustus; but he was at length compell'd to surrender, through Famine. The Town was afterward burnt by the Soldiers. Moreover, its University and Colleges are at present much esteem'd in Italy, being also an Episcopal See, and the usual place of Residence of one of the Pope's Legates. Ombria, Ʋmbria, is extended on the hither side of the Apennine, and call'd also the Dutchy of Spoleto. This Province was formerly much larger than it is at present, being bounded on the North by La Marca d' Ancona, and the Dutchy of Ʋrbin; on the West by the Territories of Perugino and Orvietan; on the South, by the Patrimony of St. Peter and La Terra Sabina, and on the East, by the Kingdom of Naples. Its ut∣most Extent, from North to South, consists of about 38 Miles; and 68 from East to West. The most considerable Cities and Towns are these: SPOLETO, Bish. Cap. D. Rieti, Bish. Faligno, Bish. Todi, Bish. Nocera, Bish. Terni, Bish. Assisi, Bish. Amelia, Bish. SPOLETO, Spoletium, or Spoletum, in the Latit. of 42 deg. 20 min. and the Long. of 36 deg. 30 min. is situated on the side of a craggy Hill, and the Banks of the River Moragia, enjoying the Title of a Bishoprick and Dutchy, at the distance of 7 Miles from Pesignano, 34 South-East of Perugia, 38 nigh East of Orvieto, 42 North of Rome. It is a mean City, ill built, and not very populous. It is defended with a Castle; and has a fair Cathedral dedicated, to the Virgin Mary, the Pavement of which is curiously wrought with In-laid Marble, much after the same manner as that of St. Mark's Church at Venice; and the whole Front of the Gate is adorn'd with fine Mosaick Work, on a Ground of Gold. About 500 Paces beyond the Town stands a Temple heretofore consecrated to the Goddess Con∣cord, and at present call'd the Chappel of the Holy Crucifix. Here are also to be seen a Triumphal Arch half ruin'd, the Remainder of an Amphitheatre, divers Marble Stones, and some other ancient Fragments. The Bishop's See was translated hither from Spello, and Cardinal Mapheo Barberino some time exercis'd the E∣piscopal Functions there, until at length he was ad∣vanced to the Papal Dignity, under the name of Ʋr∣ban VIII. Rieti, Reate, stands on the Frontiers of the King∣dom of Naples, and the farther Abruzzo, almost in the midst between Aquileia to the East, and Narni to the West; at the distance of about 28 Miles from both; as also 26 almost East of Spoleto, and 37 North-east of Rome. It is water'd with the Streams of the River
Velino, well built, and dignify'd with the Title of an Episcopal See, depending immediately on that of Rome; but the Air is somewhat unhealthy, by reason of the adjacent Marshes. Foligno is only remarkable for its advantageous Situ∣ation in a most delightful Plain, which is environ'd with rich Hills, water'd with many clear Rivulets, be∣set with pleasant Houses, and extremely well cultiva∣ted. However, this Town, though otherwise inconsi∣derable, has (as they say) a somewhat greater Trade than most others of the Ecclesiastical State: For here are divers Manufacturies of Cloth, Gold and Silver Lace, &c. besides some Traffick in Silk and Spice. But the Goths having often ravag'd these Parts, there does not remain any Monument of Antiquity. Assisi, Assisium, or Aesisium, is seated on a Hill 4 Miles from the River Asius, or Chiasco, from whence it takes its Name; as also 12 East of Perugia, 24 North-west of Spoleto, and 60 North of Rome. It hath been long since the Seat of a Prelate, who is not sub∣ject to the Jurisdiction of any Metropolitan. This Place is more especially remarkable for giving Birth to St. Francis, the famous Patriarch of the Franciscan Fry∣ars; and to St. Clara. The Relicks of the former are kept under the High Altar of the Cathedral, but no Soul living is permitted to see them. It is reported, That a certain Bishop of the Island of Corsica, assuming a greater Privilege than others, was immediately struck dead on the place; although indeed, through the Inter∣cessions that were made in his Behalf to the Saint, he reviv'd within a little while after. The Province of Sabina, Terra Sabina, lies between that of Ombria on the North, the Patrimony on the West, the Campaign of Rome on the South, and the Kingdom of Naples on the East; including the space of 40 Miles from North to South, and 25 from East to West. The Chief Towns are these: Viz. MAGLIANO, Bish. Cap. Narni, Bish. Otricoli, Bish. Vasecovia. MAGLIANO, Maglianum or Massa Manliana, hath its Foundation on an Hill near the River Tyber, and is distant 20 Miles from Rome to the North, and 4 above Civita Casteliana to the North-East. Its Episcopal See is always possess'd by one of the Six Senior Cardinals; and its Cathedral Church was remov'd hither out of a Plain, by the Order of Pope Alexander VI. A. D. 1495. Narni, Narna or Narnia, stands on the foot of a Mountain, and the Banks of the River Nera, toward the Confines of Sabina, being in the Province of Ombria about 7 Miles from Terni, 14 South-West of Spoleto, and 28 North of Rome. This was one of the 12 Towns that refus'd to send any Supplies to the Romans against Hannibal, and the place of the Nativity of the Empe∣ror Nerva. It seems to promise somewhat extraordina∣ry at a distance, by reason of the pleasant Hills round about on that side toward Terni; but having once en∣ter'd the Gate, you'll be much surprized to find the Streets dirty and narrow, and the Ground so uneven, that one can scarce advance three Steps without ascen∣ding or descending: neither is any thing to be seen in the Windows, but pieces of torn Paper; which seems to argue the mean Condition of the Inhabitants, and that the Houses are as it were abandon'd. However, there are 2 very fine Fountains of Copper; and not far from the Town appear the Ruins of a stately Bridge, suppos'd to have been erected in the time of Augustus. The large quarters of Marble, with which it was built, are joyn'd together dry, without Cement, or Cramp-irons. Indeed it is of a great height, and formerly u∣nited the Mountain of Spoleto to another adjacent Hill, leading to the Road of Perugia. Of 4 Arches one a∣lone remains entire, and the largest is broken in its cen∣try. This Arch (according to the Report of credible Persons) is 170 Foot wide; and on that Account goes far beyond that of the famous Bridge of Rialto at Ve∣nice. La Marca d' Ancona, Marchia Anconitana, is bounded on the North by the Adriatick-Sea, on the West by the Dutchy of Ʋrbin, on the South by Ombria, and on the East by the farther Abruzzo, from whence it is separated by the River Tronto. It is a very fruitful Country, and of a large extent, comprehending part of the ancient Picenum, and enclosing the space of a∣bout 55 Miles from North to South, and 80 from East to West. The most Remarkable Cities and Towns are these: ANCONA, Bi. Cap. Fermo, Arch-b. Loretto, Bish. Recanati, Bish. Ascoli, Bish. Macerata, Bish. Osimo, Bish. Jesi, Bish. S. Severino, Bish. Tolentino, Bish. Acoli, Bish. Montalto, Bish. Camerino, Bish. Ripatransone, Bish. ANCONA; Ancona, in the Latit. of 43 Deg. 25 Min. and the Longit. of 37 Deg. is situated on two Hills, at the end of a Promontory, over the Gulf of Venice, and has an Harbour extremely commodious for the main∣taining of Traffick, with the Inhabitants of Sclavonia, Dalmatia, and Greece; where is a Mole reaching 200 Paces into the Sea; But this Port is not very safe for the Anchoring of Vessels. However, Trade which was sometime very considerable in these Parts, is now extreamly decay'd. The Streets of Ancona are narrow, and consequently dark; neither are the Houses, Chur∣ches, or publick places very beautiful. The Cittadel com∣mands the Town and Port; and on a Hill that makes the point of the Cape, stands the Church of St. Cyriacus, the Front whereof is indeed cas'd with fair Marble, but without any regular Order of Architecture or Or∣nament. At the entrance of the Mole is a triumphal Arch of very fine white Marble, erected for Trajan, by Order of the Senate of Rome, as it appears from the Inscription; which is as yet preserv'd very perfect, and shews that it was done by way of Acknowledg∣ment, because this Prince had repair'd and improv'd the Harbour at his own proper Charge. The Exchange where the Merchants meet, is as it were a Portico of a reasonable largeness; and at the four corners of its Arch stood as many Statues, representing Faith, Hope, Charity and Religion: but an Earthquake which hap∣pen'd some Years ago, shook them, and caus'd that of Religion to fall. It is a place of great Antiquity, as having been first founded by the Syracusans that fled to avoid the Oppression of the Tyrant Dionysius; and is at present a Bishop's See, subject to the Metropolitan of Fermo, from whence it is distant 30 Miles to the North, and 60 East of Ʋrbin, and 105 almost North of Rome. Pope Pius II. dyed here, A. D. 1464. Fermo, Fermum or Fermium, a very fair City, is sea∣ted on a Hill, at the distance only of 20 Miles East of Macerata, 23 North of Ascoli, 30 South-east of An∣cona, and 92 almost North of Rome. It was erected into an Arch-bishoprick, A. D. 1589. by Pope Sixtus V. who had before exercis'd the Episcopal Functions
therein, and includes within its Jurisdiction 60 Ma∣nours or Castles. Loretto, Lauretum, is a Town of very small extent, although dignify'd with the Title of a City and an E∣piscopal See, establish'd by Pope Sixtus V. A. D. 1586. whereto that of Recanati was united in 1591. It stands at the distance only of 3 Miles from the Coasts of the Adriatick-Sea, 15 almost South-east of Ancona, 16 North-west of Fermo, and 95 almost North-east of Rome, being well fortify'd against the Incursions of the Turks, or other Enemies, and adorn'd with a magnifi∣cent Palace and Church. In the chief publick Place is to be seen a very curious Marble-Fountain, enrich'd with brazen Statues; and among others, that of Sixtus V. which the Inhabitants erected in his Honour, as an Acknowledgment for divers Privileges he had granted to them. But the most remarkable thing in Loretto, is the famous Chapel of our Lady, commonly call'd La Sancta Casa; or, The Holy House; which the Roma∣nists avouch to be the very same wherein the Virgin-Mary was born, where she was betrothed and marryed to Joseph, and where the Annunciation of the Angel was made, as also the Incarnation of the Son of God. This House (as they endeavour to perswade the World to believe) was at first transported by Angels from Nazareth to Dalmatia, and set on a little Moun∣tain, call'd Tersatto, on the 10th. of May, An. Dom. 1291. It remained there only during 3 Years and 7 Months; at the end of which Term, the Angels took it up again, and carry'd it into the middle of a Forest, in the Territory of Recanati, in the Marshes of Ancona; where the neighbouring Inhabitants being alarm'd with the celestial Melody, ran from all Parts, and saw the Miracle, by the means of a great Light that shone round about the little House. Then (as they add) Nature her Self leap'd for joy, and the very Trees of the Forest bow'd their Tops by way of Homage, wanting only the Voice of those of Dodona. Thus the House having continu'd 3 whole Months in this Place, the frequent Robberies committed in the Neighbour∣hood began to be so offensive, that it was remov'd a third time, about a Mile from thence, to the very same Hill where it now stands. But immediately after its arrival, there arose a great Contest between two Bro∣thers, to whom the Land appertain'd, each of them striving to have the House for his share; insomuch that within 4 Months after, the Angels lifted it up once more, and fixt it a few Paces off, in the midst of a High-way; from whence it hath never stir'd since that time. Moreover, to prevent the Inconvenience of ano∣ther Movement, a stately Church was built in the same Place, in the midst whereof this House stands secure from any future Danger: Besides that 4 Walls have been since rais'd, which encompass and shut it up as it were in a Box or Case, nevertheless without touching it, lest the two separate Walls being united, in process of time might be confounded one with another; although some Persons affirm, That the Stones themselves flew backward with violence, and wounded the Masons that endeavour'd to joyn them to this sacred Building. However, all the most able Architects of the last Age were employ'd in contriving and beautifying this Work, which is of the Corinthian Order, made alto∣gether of White Marble of Carraro, with Figures in Basso-Relievo, representing the whole History of the Virgin. There are also Two rows of Niches one above another between the double Columns; the Statues of the 10 Prophets being plac'd in the lower, and those of the Ten Sibyls in the upper. Within these Walls is enclos'd the Santa-Casa, consisting only of one single Chamber, or rather Hall, 32 Foot long in the in-side, 13 Broad, and about 17 high; the out-side of it can∣not be seen, and consequently its Dimensions are un∣known. The Stone-work lies almost every where open; but there still remain some fragments of Paint∣ed Plaster, by which one may judge the whole Structure to have been formerly cover'd with the like Materials; the Image of the Virgin holding the lit∣tle Child Jesus in her Arms, appearing in five or six Pla∣ces on the remainder of these Paintings. This Sacred Tabernacle is situated from East to West, the Chimney of the little Chamber being placed at the Eastern end; and above, in a Niche, the Grand Lady of Loretto: The Statue (according to the common report) is made of Cedar; and an infinite Number of Revelations dis∣cover it to have been the Workmanship of St. Luke: It is about Four Foot high, and the Ornaments, with which it is laden, are of an infinite value; for you must observe, that our Lady has many Changes of Gar∣ments, and Seven different Mourning Habits us'd in the Holy Week: But whensoever she is dress'd, or undress'd, it is always done with very great Ceremo∣nies. Her Triple Crown is cover'd all over with pre∣cious Jewels, and was presented by the French King, Lewis XIII. On each side of the Niche are 2 Presses full of the Ancient Ornaments of the Statue; and in a little Cup∣board made in the Wall, on the Southern-side, are kept certain Earthen-Dishes, which (as they say) serv'd the Holy Family. Over against our Lady's Image, at the Western end of the Room, is the Window through which the Angel enter'd, being about Three Foot high, and somewhat less broad. It is not now known what became of the Old Roof, nor the Little Belfry ob∣serv'd in the Ancient Paintings, that shew the seve∣ral parts of this House; for the present Roof is of a later Fabrick: As for the Bells they are still re∣tain'd, and their use should be, by Ringing, to allay all manner of Hurricanes or Storms; but they are no longer us'd, for fear of wearing them out. There are also two other Remarkable Things suppos'd to have been transported at the same time with the House, viz. The Altar made by the very Hands of the Apostles, and the Stone on which St. Peter celebrated his first Mass, which is cas'd with Silver, and preserv'd a∣mong the Relicks under the common Altar. The Pave∣ment consists in squares of White and Red Marble; but it is not the Ancient: for it is reported, that the Angels left that at Nazareth. The entrance into this Sacred Place is through Three Doors, two whereof are toward the Eastern end, affording a Passage from North to South, and through these the Pilgrims are ge∣nerally introduc'd; the other Door is likewise on the South-side, but toward the East, and leads into the Sanctuary; that is to say, the space between the Al∣tar, and the end of the Chamber, wherein is fix'd the Image of the Blessed Virgin. It would be too tedious and difficult to give a par∣ticular Account of the Riches contain'd in this Place; so that it may be sufficient only to declare in general, that the eyes of the Beholders are every where dazled with the sight of so vast a number of precious Stones, with which the Mantle of the Statue is beset all over; neither is any thing to be seen round about, but Lamps, Statues, and other Figures of Gold and Silver, not to mention the Candlesticks of Silver and Vermilion, being 28 in Number; there are also Twelve of Massive Gold, and Two of them weigh 37 pound each. The great resort of Pilgrims hither, is at Easter, and about the time of the Virgin's Nativity, which is assign'd to the Month of September. And indeed, one can scarcely be perswaded to give Credit to that, which is nevertheless averr'd to be certainly
true, viz. That in the Years of the greatest concourse, above 200000 Pilgrims have been reckon'd up during these Two Festivals. But all the Wealth of the House is nothing in comparison with that of the Treasury-Chamber, which is a spacious Room, the Wall thereof being lin'd with 17 large Presses, ha∣ving double folding Doors; the Roof made of Stuke is divided into several gilded Compartments, and en∣rich'd with fine Paintings. These Presses are fill'd al∣together with pure Gold, Precious Stones, or Vessels and Ornaments more precious than Gold; neither is any Silver Plate now thought worthy to be admitted, but confusedly scatter'd up and down in several Pla∣ces. Among the Jewels, a Pearl in form of a Gondola is very much esteem'd, on which (as they say) the Image of the Blessed Virgin is naturally imprinted. If enqui∣ry be made, by what means these immense Riches were heap'd up togethet, it ought only to be consider'd, that all the People, Soveraign Princes and States, who acknowledge the Pope's Authority, have incessantly contributed thereto for 400 Years, and even still strive to out-strip one another. The pretended Miracle of the Transportation of the House happen'd in the time of Pope Boniface the VIII. a Person represented in History as the most Sub∣til, most Ambitious, and most Covetous of all Men that ever liv'd in the World; who, after having counterfeited Angels, that terrified Celestine his Prede∣cessor, and oblig'd him to return to his Hermitage, made use of the same Angels (as it is very probable) for the Expedition of Loretto. The principal Traf∣fick of which little City, has ever since consisted in Medals, Rosaries, Beads, Images, Agnus-Dei's, Mea∣sures of the height of the Blessed Virgin; and other Merchandizes of the like nature. The Dutchy of Ʋrbin, Ducatus Ʋrbinus, is bounded on the North by Romandiola, and the Adriatick-Sea, on the South by Perugino and Ombria, on the East by La Marca d' Ancona, and on the West by Toscany: It is 70 Miles long from East to West, and 56 broad from North to South. This Province comprehends the Dutchy of Ʋrbin, properly so call'd, the County of Monteseltro, the Territory of Gubio, the Lordship of Pezaro, and the Vicariate of Senigaglia. The Coun∣try is extreamly fertil, and contains many fair Towns, besides Five Ports, Eight Fortresses, and about 350 Burghs or Villages. The Dutchy of Ʋrbin hath been for some time possess'd by the House of Ravero, until this Family being extinct, it at length devolv'd on the See of Rome, under the Pontificate of Pope Ʋr∣ban the VIII. The Principal Cities and Towns are these, viz. Ʋrbin, Archb. Cap. Bezaro, Bish. Fossombrone. S. Leone, Bish. Cagli, Bish. Senigaglia, Bish. Citta di Castello, B. St. Angelo, Bish. Rimini, Bish. St. Marino, Rep. B. ƲRBINO, Ʋrbinum, in the Latit. of 41 Deg. 20 Min. and the Longit. of 35 Deg. 40 Min. is situated al∣most in the midst of the Province, near the source of the River Foglia, at the distance of 25 Miles nigh South of Rimino, 58 West of Ancona, 78 East of Vo∣reme, and 92 North of Rome. It is a considerable Ci∣ty, and one of the most Ancient in Italy, built in the Fashion of a Mitre, and is the Birth-place of Polydore Virgil, as also of Raphael d' Ʋrbin, the famous Italian Painter. Pesaro, Pisaurum, is seated near the Sea, in a Plain water'd by the River Foglio, and surrounded with plea∣sant Hills, abounding in Pastures, Vineyard-Plats, and Orchards. Indeed it is a fine and Populous City, reasonably well fortified with Bulwarks, though some∣what old fashion'd, and a strong Castle, which formerly serv'd as a Mansion-House to the Dukes of Ʋrbin, and at present to the Pope's Legate. The Houses are gene∣rally very fair; and there is a curious Fountain in the Publick Place, together with a Statue of Ʋrban the VIII. under whose Popedom this Town, and the whole Dutchy of Ʋrbin, was re-united to the Ecclesiastical State. The Fruits of Pesaro are excellent, more-especi∣ally the Olives; but the Figs are most delicious, and esteem'd the best in Italy. The Sea and Rivers supply the Inhabitants with all sorts of choice Fish, and all manner of Provisions are extreamly cheap, Meat being commonly sold here for less than a Half-penny a pound. This City is distant Eighteen Miles North-East of Ʋr∣bin, 48 nigh East of Ancona, and 108 North of Rome. Senigaglia is encompass'd with firm Walls, and de∣fended by some Bastions; but all its Fortifications are very irregular. It hath been heretofore a Town of good Note, although there are not now left any Foot∣steps of its Antiquity. St. Marino stands at the distance of Ten or Twelve Miles from the Villages of Catholica, toward the Apen∣nine, on the top of a Mountain, at the Foot whereof are the limits of the Republick of the same Name. Indeed this State, as it were a little swarm of Bees, hath sup∣ported it self for many Ages, and still continues to flourish, as being out of the reach of Envy, or Jealou∣sie. Romagna, or Romandiola, Romandiola Ecclesiastica, is bounded on the North by the Territories of Ferra∣resi, on the South by Toscany, on the East by the Dut∣chy of Ʋrbin and the Adriatick-Sea, and on the West by the Country of Bolognese: It is extended from North to South for the space of 38 Miles, and about 66 from East to West. In this Province is comprehended the greater part of the ancient Aemilia, and Flami∣nia. The most considerable Cities and Towns are these, viz. Ravenna, Archb. C. Frenza, Bish. Sarsina, Bish. Rimini, Bish. Cesena, Bish. Imola, Bish. Forli, Bish. Bolognese, Bish. Berfruero, Bish. RAVENNA; Ravenna, in the Latit. of 44 Deg. and the Longit. of 35 Deg. Ten Min. is represented by the Ancient Geographers, as situated much after the same manner as Venice, and built upon Piles in the midst of the Waters. It is also well known to have been the principal Sea-port Town the Romans had on the Adriatick-Gulf; and the Seat of certain Governours call'd Exarchae, whom the Emperours of Constantino∣ple nominated to preside over these Territories; until it was taken by the Lombards, Anno Dom. 744. But its capacious Harbour is now altogether choak'd up with Sands; and the Sea retires Three Miles from the Coasts. The adjacent Marshes are likewise dri∣ed up; and this Country, which lay so long under Water uncultivated, is now become one of the most fruitful in Italy. But the City has been so often laid wast by frequent Wars, that few Marks are left of its former Antiquity and Splendour. Indeed it is at present very meanly built, and extreamly depopu∣lated, as well as Ferrara; nevertheless it is dignified with the Title of a Metropolitan See, and a Tra∣veller may still find therein many things very Remark∣able.
Without the Walls, near the old Port, is to be seen a Tomb, which the Princess Amalasonta erected for her Father Theodoricus, King of the Ostrogoths, who usually kept his Court here. But this Building is now chang'd into a little Church nam'd the Rotondo, and that which deserves chiefly to be observ'd in it, is a Stone cut in form of a Cup or Bowl, turn'd with the brim downward, being 38 Foot in Diameter, and 15 thick; the Tomb of Theodorick was fix'd on the top, and in the middle of this little Dome, amidst the Statues of the Twelve Apostles, that were plac'd round about. These Statues were broken when Lewis XII. King of France, took Ravenna, A. D. 1512. And the Tomb made of Porphyry was in like manner over∣thrown. But it is now set in the Wall of an old Pa∣lace in the Town, and there expos'd to publick view. The Cathedral is an ancient Church, the Body whereof is supported by 56 Marble Pillars, making a double row on each side. The Roof of the Quire is adorn'd with fine Mosaick Work; and one of the Stones with which St. Stephen was put to death, is kept there with great Veneration. The great Gate of this Church is made with Vine-Planks, some whereof are Twelve Foot high, and Fourteen or Fifteen Inches broad. Indeed, the Soil hereabouts is so proper for the growth of these Trees, that even in the Places that were formerly over∣flow'd by the Sea, they spread out to a prodigious size. To this purpose, Olearius, in his Travels, informs us, That near the Caspian-Sea he sound some Trunks of Vines as thick as the Body of a Man. There are very fine Pieces of Marble and Porphyry in the Churches of St. Vitalis, St. Apollinarius, St. Ro∣mualdus, and St. Andrew: These were all brought out of Greece, and apparently belong to the time of the Exarchate. The Tomb of Galla Placidia, Sister to the Emperours Arcadius and Honorius, stands in the Church of St. Celsus, between those of the same Honorius and Valentinian. Moreover, in the Cloister of the Franciscans, one may see the Sepulchral Monument of the famous Poet, Dante Alighieri, a Person of Quality and great Merit, who dy'd in Exile at Ravenna, in the 56 Year of his Age, A. D. 1321. In the grand Mar∣ket-place is a very curious Copper Image of Pope Alex∣ander the VII. And in the other end of the same place, two Pillars, on which were set the Effigies of the Ancient Protector; and the Arms of Venice, when Ravenna was subject to this State, according to their usual Custom of erecting the like Columns in all the Towns of their Dominions. But the Pope hath set on these Pillars the Statues of St. Victor and St. Apollinarius, who are the Patrons of this City. Not far from hence, under a Portico, lie certain Brazen Gates, and some other Spoils that the Citizens of Ravenna carry'd away from Pavia, and which they keep as a Memorial of that suc∣cessful Expedition. At the distance of about an hours Journey from the City is a Forest of Pine-Trees, from whence the Pine-Apple Kernels (as they say) are distri∣buted throughout the whole Countrey of Italy. Ra∣venna is situated 44 Miles South-East of Ferrara, 46 East of Bononia, 51 North-East of Ʋrbin, 64 North-east of Florence, and 148 almost North-west of Rome. Rimini is a small Town, and very poor, though seat∣ed in a rich and well cultivated Country. It was for∣merly fortify'd by Sigismondo Pandolpho Malatesta, but at present is only encompass'd with a ruinous Wall. The Marble Bridge which the Emperours Augustus and Ti∣berius caus'd to be built (as it is evident from two In∣scriptions very well preserv'd) and the Triumphal-Arch erected for Augustus, are the two principal Ancient Mo∣numents of this Town. There are also to be seen the Ruins of an Amphitheatre behind the Gardens of the Capuchins: And about 500 Paces farther, without the Walls, a Brick-Tower, which was the Pharus of the Old Port; but the Sea hath since retir'd a Mile and a half from the Place, and the Watch-Tower is now en∣viron'd with Gardens. Moreover, P. Malatesta ruin'd the Works of the Port, that was once esteem'd one of the finest in Italy, to build the Church of St. Francis with the pieces of Marble taken from thence. Indeed, this Church might well pass for a fair Building, if it were finish'd, and is more-especially remarkable for an Image of the Virgin-Mary there kept, which serves onely to procure Rain, or cause it to cease, when there happens either too little, or too much; neither are any Petitions preferr'd to this Lady, but on these two Occasions. The Library of the Count de Gambalonga is extremely nu∣merous, but does not contain any very considerable Ra∣rities. In the Middle of the Market-place one may observe a kind of Marble Pedestal, on which are en∣grav'd these words; Caius Caesar Dict. Rubicone supera∣to civili bel. Commiit. suos hic in foro Ar. allocutus. The Brazen Statue of Pope Paul the V. appears in another publick Place; and very near it a Marble Fountain, the Workmanship whereof is highly esteem'd. The Province of Ferrarese, Ferrariensis Ducatus, is bounded on the North by that of Polisino; on the West, by the Dutchy of Mantua; on the South, by Bolognese and Romagnia; and on the East, by the Gulf of Venice. Its Extent, from North to South, consists of about 42 Miles; and 70 from East to West: The River Po traverseth the whole Country, which is one of the finest in Lombardy, and stands in need only of good Tillage. The Chief Cities and Towns are these: Viz. FERRARA, Dut. Cento. Buondeno Comacchio. Lagoscure. Francolino. FERRARA, Ferraria, in the Latit. of 44 deg. 10 min. and the Longit. of 34 deg. 20 min. is seated in a Plain on the least Arm of the River Po, commonly called Po-Morto (from whence a Channel is cut for the space of 6 Miles, as far as Francolino) near the Frontiers of the State of Venice, in the midst between Comacchio to the East, and Mirandola to the West; 26 almost North-east of Bologna, 44 North-West of Ravenna, 12 North of Florence, and 190 North-west of Rome. It is a very large Place, being 7 Miles in compass, and advantage∣ously situated in a Fenny Level. Some say it was call'd Ferrara, quasi fere aurea, by reason of the Rich∣ness of its Traffick; but at present, it is poor enough, and lamentably desolate; insomuch, that one may stand in a Cross-way, where four Streets meet, for a conside∣rable time, without seeing any Person on one side or o∣ther, there being a greater number of Houses than Inha∣bitants. This Town is fenc'd with Walls, and a strong Citadel, flank'd with 6 Bastions, built by Pope Cle∣ment the VIII. which is still kept in good Order, but the other Fortifications are altogether neglected. Albert, Marquess of Ferrara, founded an University here, A.D. 1590, but it is now reduc'd to a sorry College of Jesu∣its. And indeed, the whole Town soon fell to decay, after it was alienated from its proper Prince; having been subject to the Popes Jurisdiction, together with the whole Dutchy, ever since the Year 1598. We are also inform'd by Sohraderus, That in 1570, it endur'd 160 shocks of an Earthquake, within the space of 40 Hours, and was almost entirely ruin'd. Near the Cathedral are some brazen Statues on Horse-back, one whereof (as they say) was made for Duke Bozolo: And over against the Palace of the Nobles is likewise to be seen that of Duke Hercules II.
On the Pedestal of this last is Engrav'd an Ordinance granting a Sanctuary to Criminals, 20 Paces round a∣bout. Besides the Cathedral, there are many other con∣siderable Churches, Convents, and Fair Buildings, not to mention the Ducal Palace, and a Mansion-House of the Marquess de Villa; together with the Tomb of the Poet Ariosto, which hath been lately repair'd, in the Church of the Benedictines. The Province of Bolognese, Bononiensis Ager, is bound∣ed on the North by that of Ferrarese; on the South, by Toscany; on the East, by Romagna; and on the West, by the Dutchy of Modena: being extended from North to South, for the space of 60 Miles; and about 42 from East to West. It is a Country extreamly fruitful in all sorts of Grains and Fruits. The Chief Cities are these: Viz. BONONIA, Archbish. Cap. Bentivoglio, Bish. St. Pietro, Bish. Vergate, Bish. BONONIA, Ital. Bologna, in the Latit. of 43 deg. 50 min. and the Longit. of 34 deg. 10 min. is very plea∣santly situated on the foot of the Apennine, at the very entrance of a Plain, which is the most fruitful of any in the whole Continent of Italy, whence the French took an occasion to call this Place Bologne la Grassa, being distant 25 Miles from Modena to the East, 26 almost South-west of Ferrara, 48 almost West of Ravenna, 50 North of Florence, and 170 North-west of Rome. It is a large, very rich and populous City, and the second in the Papacy, extending it self 7 or 8 Miles in com∣pass, and containing 12400 Houses; together with a∣bout 80000 Inhabitants, whose Trade consists chiefly in the Silk Manufacture, there being 400 Silk-Mills in the Town. They also deal in Wax, Canvass, Flax, Ga∣mons of Bacon, Sausages, Savonet, Tabacco, Perfumes, &c. Bononia was erected into a Metropolitan See, in the Year 1582, by Pope Gregory XIII. and its Arch∣bishop usually assumes the Title of a Prince of the Em∣pire. But it is surrounded only with a single Wall, and wants a Citadel. The Houses generally consist of Brick and Stone mix'd together, and are Plaster'd all over: Some of them are also built with Free-stone, but almost all have Portico's, after the same manner as at Padua; but these Porches are much more large and high, resembling those of Covent-Garden, in the Sub∣urbs of London. The Streets are likewise very fair and streight. The Palace of General Caprara is one of the finest in the City, and contains many rich Spoils taken from the Turks by that valiant Commander. The Cardinal-Legate, and the Gonfalonnier, or Governour, have their several Apartments in the publick Palace, over the Gate whereof is set a Brazen Statue of Pope Gregory XIII. and on the Side, that of Boniface VIII. Here are also two fine Closets of Curiosities, viz. one of the famous Ʋlysses Aldrovandus, and another of the Marquiss de Cospi adjoyning thereto. But the most surprising Ob∣ject among all the Rarities of these Cabinets, is, to see in a Chamber on one side of them, 187 Volumes in Folio, all Written by Aldrovandus his own Hand; toge∣ther with above 200 Sacks, of several sizes, all full of torn Leaves; although, indeed, the Margins are large, and the Lines at a considerable distance one from ano∣ther. The large and beautiful Fountain over-against the Palace, is the Work of the renowned John of Bo∣nonia, a Flemish Architect and Carver. The Grand Church of Bononia is dedicated to St. Petronius; where one may observe the Meridian-Line of the noted Astro∣nomer Cassini, which is engrav'd on a Copper-Plate let into the Pavement, and is 222 Foot long, being so contriv'd, that a Sun-beam darting thorough a Hole made on the top of the Body of the Church, marks the Solstices and Equinoxes on the said Line. In the Church of Corpus Domini is shewn an Embalmed Corps, which, (as they say) is that of a She-Saint, nam'd Catha∣rine Vigri, who still continues to work many Miracles. She sits in an Elbow-Chair, dress'd in divers sorts of Attire, and has many Rings on her Fingers: Her Nails and Hair (as it is commonly given out) grow, as when she was alive, and from hence, probably, the Opinion of her Sanctity first proceeded; but her Aspect is so Ghastly, that it strikes Terror into the Beholders. The Church of the Dominican Fryars is more especi∣ally remarkable for its Magnificent Chapel, and the Tomb of their Patron St. Dominick, the Stalls of the Quire being made of Wood, with In-laid Work, which is very much esteem'd, and was done by Fryar Damian, of Bergamo. In the same Church is erected the Tomb of Hentius, otherwise call'd Enzelin, King of Sardinia and Corsica, and Natural Son to the Emperour Frede∣rick II. who liv'd here 22 Years, 9 Months, and 16 Days in Captivity, but maintain'd like a Prince, at the charge of the Republick; and died in the Month of March, A. D. 1272. Near the great Tower Assinelli stands another, which leans on one side, as that of Pisa, and was nam'd Garisenda. The former was made by Gerard Asinelli, A. D. 1109. and is 376 Foot high. The other, being 130 Foot high, and bowing forward 9, was Rais'd by Otho, and Phil. Garisendi, in 1110. This last is built with square Bricks, and joynted as those of Sienna and Viterbo. The general Opinion is, that it was so contriv'd on purpose: On which account, the Inhabi∣tants admire le grand Ingegno del Arthitecto; i. e. the ex∣traordinary Ingenuity of the Architect; and deride the simplicity of certain Monks, who had abandon'd their Convent, because it stood under the stooping side of this Tower. The shining Stones, known by the Name of Bononia Stones, are taken up within 3 Miles of this City; and Signior Bartholomeo Zanicholi is the onely Person that has the Secret of Preparing them. In Tra∣velling not far from hence, you'll also meet with swarms of shining Flyes, that stick on the Hedges in vast num∣bers, and render them, as it were, so many burning Bu∣shes; the Ground and Trees are no less cover'd with them, and the Air seems to shine as if it Rain'd Stars. These small Insects are like May-Buggs in shape, and their shining part is under the Belly, consisting in little tufted Hairs, of a Citron Colour, that spread at every motion of the Wing, and at the same time cast forth a fiery Ray very sparkling. The Famous University of Bononia was founded A.C. 425, by the Emperour Theodosius the Younger, but did not attain to the Meridian of its Glory, until the time of Charlemagne; on which account, the Current Coin here is stampt with this Inscription, Bononia Docet. The City, after divers Revolutions, became subject to Pope Julius the II. who had been before Bishop of the same Diocess, and expell'd thence the Noblemen of the Family of Bentivoglio, the proper Lords of the Man∣nour. Perhaps it may not be amiss to observe, that this was the Place of Nativity of Honorius the II. Lucius the II. Gregory the XIII. Innocent the IX. and Gregory the XV. And, that Alexander the V. died there, A. D. 1410. Bentivoglio, Bentivolium, is a small Town, distant 18 Miles North of Bologna, and 16 South of Ferrara. It hath been formerly much more considerable than it is at present, having imparted its Name to one of the most Illustrious Families of Italy, that hath for a long time held the Principality of Bononia.
TOSCANY, Tuscia or Hetruria. THE Dominions of the Grand Duke of Toscany have the Ecclesiastical State for their Northern and East∣ern Bounds, the Mediterranean Sea on the South, and the Republick of Lucca, and the Dutchy of Modena on the West. Their utmost extent from North-West to South-East, is about 170 Miles; and 120 from North-East to South-West. Toscany was heretofore of a much larger compass, and known by the names of Etruria, Thuscia, and Tyrrhenia: Indeed it is a very fruitful Country, water'd with a great number of Rivers; once extreamly populous, but now much dis-peopl'd, and in a decaying Condition, by reason of the severity of the Government. The House of Medicis acquir'd the Lordship of Florence, A. D. 1531. wherein are compre∣hended the Territories of Florence, properly so call'd, together with those of Pisano and Sienese, which were govern'd in form of Republicks, before the time of Cosmo de Medicis, whom the Emperour Charles V. crea∣ted Duke of Toscany under the Popedom of Pius V. and his Successors have always retain'd the same Ti∣tle. This Soveraign Prince is the richest and most pow∣erful in Italy, being able to raise 40000 Foot, and 3000 Horse; and can put to Sea, upon occasion, 12 Gal∣leys, 2 Galleasses, and 20 Ships of War. His ordi∣nary Revenue amounts to 1500000 Crowns, some say 2000000; then his Expences being small, and his Mer∣chandize large, he is thought to have in his Treasury 20000000 Pies of Gold, besides his Jewels and move∣able Goods of an extraordinary Value. Moreover, there are mineral Waters in many Places of these Do∣minions, and natural Baths, proper for the curing of several sorts of Diseases: The Country in like manner affords abundance of Olives, Citrons, Oranges, Flax, Woad, and Saffron; there are also made divers kinds of Manufactures, viz. Serges, Woolen-Cloaths, Silks, Tapestries, Linsey-woolsey, gilded Leather, and very curious earthen Vessels. The Principal Rivers of TOSCANY are the Arno, the Serchio, the Cecinna, and the Ombrone. TOSCANY divided into Three Parts. 1. The Ter∣ritories of Flo∣rence, wherein are included these Cities and Towns, viz. FLORENCE, Archb. Cap. Pistoia, Bish. Prato, Bish. Cortono, Bish. Scarparia. Borgo S. Sepolchro, Bish. Empoli, Bish. Arezzo, Bish. Fiesoli, Bish. 2. Pisano, in which are Pisa, Archb. Leghorn, Port. Volterra, Bish. Campiglia, Bish. 3. Sienese, in which are Siena, Archb. Pienza, Bish. Mont Alcino, Bish. Piombino, Port. Bish. Orbitello, Bish. appertaining to the Spa∣niards. Massa, Bish. Grosseto, Bish. Porto Her∣cole, appertaining to the Spa∣niards. FLORENCE, Florentia, call'd Fiorenza and Firenze, by the Italians, in the Latit. of 43 Deg. and the Longit. of 34 Deg. 20 Min. the Metropolis of Tos∣cany, and the usual place of Residence of the grand Duke of this Name, is situated on the River Arno, as it were in the middle of the Ground-plat of an Amphitheatre, being environ'd for the space of Four or Five Miles, except on the side of Pistoia, with very fruitful Hills that rise up insensibly, and are joyn'd to the high Mountains. The great number of Hou∣ses with which these Hills are cover'd, as well as the Plain, afford a most delightful Prospect to the Eye, and in taking a view from the top of one of the Towers, of this vast Level beset with Villages and Houses of Pleasure, one would imagine it to be only one continued Suburbs. And indeed, it may well be affirm'd, that this rich and delicate Valley is one of the best peopl'd Places in the World. The City is built in a round form, and extends it self about 6 Miles in compass, but includes much wast Ground, the River dividing it in two unequal Parts, over which are erected 4 Stately Stone-Bridges. Within the Walls are contain'd (as it is credibly reported) 8800 Houses, and 60000 Souls, as also 22 Hospitals, 90 Convents, 84 Religious Societies, 152 Churches, 18 Halls or Merchants Houses, 72 Courts of Justice, 17 publick Places, 6 Pillars, 2 Pyramids, 4 Bridges, 7 Fountains, and 160 Statues, besides a famous Uni∣versity. The Pavement of the Streets altogether consists in very large Squares of a greyish Stone, com∣monly call'd Pietra-forte, and hew'n out of the neigh∣bouring Quarries. A considerable part of the Houses are rais'd with the same sort of Stone, many of them being of an extraordinary largeness and Beauty. In fine, some Persons avouch the Palaces of Florence to be the best built in Italy; so that it seems they had good reason to impose on this City the Epithet of The Fair. The Palace Pitti, where the grand Duke resides; is a magnificent Building, and cry'd up by the Inha∣bitants even beyond measure; but the Court-yard seems to be much too little in proportion to the large∣ness of the Structure. Near the Gate of this Palace lyes a huge Load-stone, which has been spoil'd by Fire, and (according to the report of Monsieur Spon) weighs 5000 Pounds. Over-against the old Ducal Palace, wherein all those Rareties are preserv'd that are so much talkt of in the World, stand divers Statues of admirable Workmanship; and among others, that of Cosmus I. made by John of Bononia: The 3 pieces of Basso-Relievo, on the Pedestal of this Statue, re∣present the said Cosmus kneeling before the Pope, of whom he receiv'd the Title of Grand-Duke; the same Prince likewise making his publick Entry at Florence in a kind of triumphal Chariot, and the Senate per∣forming certain Ceremonies when they invested him with the Sovereign Authority. The great Gallery of this Palace is near 400 Foot long, the Cieling is paint∣ed, and there is a fine Walk between two rows of Sta∣tues, which are almost all Ancient: Higher against the Wall on one side, are plac'd the Images of the an∣cient Philosophers; and on the other, those of the renowned Generals of Armies. From this Gallery we pass into many Chambers all full of Rarities: In the first of these; one may observe a branched Candlestick made with great pieces of Amber, a fine Column of oriental Alabaster, a Rhinoceros's-Horn of an extraordinary large size, a vast Number of Works in Basso Relievo, and other ancient Sculptures; as also, of Medals, Idols, Sepulchral Lamps, Stones, Minerals, and other natural Curiosities: In the second are only
contain'd abundance of fine Pictures: The Third is call'd The Mathematical Chamber; where, among o∣ther Things, are Globes and Spheres of 7 Foot in Diameter: The Fourth is furnish'd with more choice Paintings than those of the Second; there is also the Ebony Cabinet, with its Ornaments of Amber, Ivo∣ry and precious Stones; the large rough Emeral fix'd in its Rock; the Table of Lapis Lazuli, on which is describ'd the Plan of Leghorn; and the Portraictures of Illustrious Personages of the present Age, are the principal Ornaments of the Fifth Chamber. Among the Generals and renowned Commanders, are three of the English Nation, viz. Oliver Cromwell, General, Monk, and the late Earl of Ossory. In the Sixth Cham∣ber are 137 Portraictures of the most famous Painters, done by their own Hands. The Seventh is adorn'd with Vessels of Porcelain; and the Five following are all fill'd with great variety of all manner of Curio∣sities. But the most precious Utensils are kept in the octo∣gonal Hall, which is 20 Foot in Diameter, and has a Dome for its Roof; the Pavement consisting of dif∣ferent Marble-Stones very artificially inlaid: The Walls are hung with Crimson-Velvet, and beautify'd with many rare Ornaments: The Windows are of Crystal, and the inside of the Dome lin'd with Mother of Pearl; neither is any thing laid up in this Place that is not of a very great Value, and of exquisite Beauty. Among the Diamonds is to be seen here, that which is described by Monsieur Tavernier, weighing 139 Ca∣racts and an half, may deservedly be plac'd in the first Rank. There are also many other Rarities, particu∣larly an Ancient Head of Julius Caesar, made of one Torquoise as big as an Egg: A Press fill'd with Ves∣sels of Agate, Lapis Lazuli, Rock-Crystal, and Cor∣nelian: A large Table and Cabinet of inlaid Work, entirely compos'd of oriental Jaspar, Chalcedonies, Rubies, Topazes, and other precious Stones curiously wrought▪ A Collection of very rare Medals: A vast Number of little pieces of ancient Sculptures and Gravings extreamly well preserv'd. Many choice Paintings, or rather Master-pieces of the most excel∣lent Artists: Six Greek Statues, the beauty of which exceeds imagination: Two Men a Wrestling: The Country-man that whetted his Bill or Hatchet when he heard of Catiline's Conspiracy: The Images of Faunus and Cupid sleeping: One of Venus 6 Foot high, and another of the same Goddess, less by one Foot; but both made of white Marble. From hence one may pass through a little Gallery of Communi∣cation to the old Palace of the Republick, where is the Wardrobe, and a rich Coach that serv'd at the nuptial Solemnities of the Grand Duke. The great Hall of this Palace is 172 Foot long, and 74 Broad. The Cathedral of Florence is a very large and no∣ble Pile of Building, although the Architecture, in many of its Parts, is according to the Gothick Fa∣shion, being cas'd both on the out-side and in-side, and pav'd all over with polish'd Marble of different Co∣lours: Its length consists of 490 Feet, and its heighth from the end of the Cross on the Globe of 180. A∣mong the Statues in this Church, the most considera∣ble are that of St. James (carv'd by Sansevino) leaning against one of the Pillars which support the Dome; and of Adam and Eve (by Bandinello) behind the high Altar; as also those of St. Peter and Christ dead, plac'd on the same Altar, and made by the same Artificer. The Paintings of the Dome represent the Resurrection, and are the Workmanship of Fre∣derick Zucchero. This Cupolo was the first Model of all the rest in Italy, and is the largest, except that of St. Peter's at Rome. The Steeple is a square Tow∣er 180 Foot high, cas'd all over with Squares of red, black and white Marble, and adorn'd with a great number of Statues. The Church of St. Laurence is, in like manner, a very large and sumptuous Stru∣cture; and it may be truly affirm'd, That the fa∣mous Chapel, which has been so long in Building, will be the most magnificent in the World: It is of a very considerable largeness and heighth; in the mid∣dle of every Front of its Hexagon is erected a dou∣ble row of Jaspar Pilasters, with double Capitals of Cast-Copper gilt; the Cornish and whole Entablature consisting of the same Materials: On the Pedestal of every Pilaster are divers devices in precious Stones, inlaid with all the Art imaginable: In the six An∣gles or Corners are as many stately Tombs of Porphy∣ry, and of the most rich sort of Marble: On the top of every Tomb is fix'd a large Jaspa Pillow or Cushion enrich'd with precious Stones of all sorts, and on every Cushion a Crown of much greater value: The Pedestal or Base that supports these Monuments, is lin'd with Porphyry and Chalcedony, and the Epi∣taphs of those Princes for whom they are design'd, will be added; their Statues of Brass Gilt, twice big∣ger than the Life, will be also plac'd in the niches of black Marble, prepar'd for that purpose, in the Wall above the same Tombs: The Ceiling of the Dome will be of pure Lapis Lazuii, with Roses; and some other gilt Ornaments: All the rest of the Walls are divided into Compartments of fine Agates, Marbles, Onyx-stones, &c. every Pannel being set off with Squares, and other Embellishments of Copper gilt; besides the Altar, which will surpass all the other Parts in abundance of costly Furniture. Moreover, the Library of St. Laurence is remarkable for its rare Manuscripts, and the Church of the Holy Cross for the Tomb of Michael Angelo; which, nevertheless, seems not to be altogether worthy of so great a Per∣sonage. The City of Florence was first founded by the Sol∣diers of Sylla, A. U. 645. and a Colony was esta∣blish'd there by the Triumvirs, Augustus, Marcus Antonius, and Lepidus. Afterward it was raz'd by Totila, but repair'd by Charlemagne, and very much enlarg'd by the ruins of Fesulae, or Fiesoli, a neigh∣bouring Town. It is defended by the Arsenal and Ci∣tadel of St. John Baptist, which are very strong and in good Condition; but the two Forts of Belvedere, and St. Miniato are as it were abandoned. Florence has given birth to many Popes, particularly to Leo X. Clement VII. Clement VIII. Leo XI. and Ʋrban VIII. but Victor II. dy'd there. A. D. 1057. and Stephen X. in 1058. Here was also held a famous Council con∣ven'd by Eugenius IV. wherein John Palaeologus, Em∣peror of Constantinople, was present, A. D. 1439. This noble City stands 50 Miles South of Bononia, 60 South-East of Modena, 90 of Parma, 104 of Mantua, 126 almost South of Venice, and 132 North-West of Rome. Pistoia, Pistoria or Pistorium, is seated in a Plain at the foot of Mount Apennine, and on the Banks of the little River Stella, at the distance of 14 Miles from the Ecclesiastical State, and the Province of Bolognese to the South, 20 from Lucca, and as many from Flo∣rence to the West; its Episcopal See being subject to the Metropolitan of this last City. It was also the Place of Nativity of Pope Clement IX. but its Trade is very inconsiderable; so that it subsists altogether on the fruitfulness of the adjacent Country, which is well cultivated, yet not sufficient to enrich it. And
indeed, one shall scarce meet with a poorer or more deserted Town, especially since it has lost its Liberty. However, it is larger than Lucca, the Streets being lso broad and straight; and one may perceive that it has been formerly a flourishing City. The Inhabi∣tants of Pistoia have a particular Veneration for Saint James, by Reason of some Relief they had obtain'd from him, and because they have a great many of his Relicks. In the Chappel dedicated to this Saint, in the Cathedral Church, is engrav'd a Prayer, wherein he is styled the First of the Apostles. The Altar is cover'd with Silver, and Surrounded with Lamps of a great value. Prato Pratum, is water'd with the River Bisentio, and well built in a pleasant Country, in the midst, between Florence to the East, and Pistoia to the West; whereto its Episcopal See is always uni∣ted. Cortona, Corto, Cortona or Cyrtonium, a small but fair City, is founded on the top of an high Mountain, on the Confines of the Ecclesiastical State, and the Province of Ombria, 5 Miles from the Lake of Peru∣sia to the North, 14 from Arezzo, and 8 from the Marshes of China. Pope John XX. establish'd a Bi∣shop's See in this place, under the Metropolitan of Florence, A. D. 1325. whereas before it was part of the Diocess of Arezzo; but it now depends only on that of Rome. Brgo-San-Sepolchro, Biturgia or Burgum Sancti Se∣pulchri, hath its Situation near the River Tyber, and the Frontiers of the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, where∣to it formerly appertain'd; but it was pawn'd by Pope Eugenius IV. to the Florentines, and remains at present in the possession of the Grand Duke of Tosca∣ny. It is distant 50 Miles from Florence to the East, as also 10 from Citta di Castella to the North, and was erected into an Episcopal See by Pope Leo X. A. D. 1515. Empoli, Emporium or Empolice, a small Town on the River Arno, nevertheless dignify'd with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Flo∣rence; from whence it is distant about 20 Miles to the South-West, and 32 from Pisa. Arezzo, Aretium, stands on the side of a Moun∣tain, in the midst of a fertile Plain, scarcely 3 Miles distant from the Fenn of Chiana, which a little be∣low dischargeth it self into the River Arno, as also 28 Miles from Siena to the East, 30 from Perusia to the North-west, 40 from Florence, and 16 from Citta di Castello to the West. It owes its Foundation (as they say) to Aretas, the Son of Janus; and was one of the 12 first Colonies of the Toscans: It is also the Seat of a Prelate, suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Florence, but free from his Jurisdiction. Fessole or Fiezzoli, Fesulae or Fesula, was in like manner one of the first Colonies establish'd by the Toscans in these Territories, and was ruin'd by the Goths. It was also taken through a Stratagem by the Florentines, A. D. 1010. and utterly demolish'd: Whereupon the Inhabitants were commanded to re∣pair to Florence, from whence it is distant about 2 Leagues to the North-East; insomuch that there as yet remains only the Cathedral Church, together with some few Houses and a Monastery erected on an Hill. PISA, Pisae or Pisa, in the Latit. of 42 Deg. 30 Min. and the Longit. of 33 Deg. 10 Min. is seated in a spacious Plain that brings forth abundance of Corn and excellent Grapes, and on the Banks of the River Arno, over which stand 3 fair Bridges, a∣bout 4 Miles from the Sea-coasts, 14 North of Le∣gorn, 8 almost South-West of Lucca, 53 West of Florence, and 170 North-West of Rome. It was heretofore a free City, and a potent Republick▪ which took the Island of Sardinia from the Sara∣cenes, subdu'd Carthage and the Isles of Majorca, and was very serviceable to the Eastern Christians. Af∣terward Pisa was storm'd by the Florentines, and was restor'd to its former Liberty by Charles VIII. King of France. But it fell again into the Possession of the Florentines, and so at last became subject to the Grand Duke. It is at present a very large City, the Second of Toscany, and the usual Place of Residence of the Knights of the Order of St. Stephen, whom Cosmus I. instituted in the Year 1561. on purpose to defend the Coasts of the Toscan Sea against the Incur∣sions of the Foreign Enemies: These Knights wear a red Cross on a black Mantle, with a Fire-colour'd Girdle, and their Church is fill'd with Flags, Lant∣horns, and other Spoils taken from the Turks: The Statue of the same Grand Duke Cosmus is erected in the Court yard over against this Church. The Streets of Pisa are broad, straight, and pav'd with large Stones, and the Houses are generally well built. The River Arno being Navigable, and twice as broad as the Ty∣ber at Rome, divides the Town into two Parts, which are not very unequal: but they are extreamly decay'd and forsaken, yet contain at present about 2290 Houses, although Grass grows in the midst of the Streets in divers Places. This desolate Condition is without Doubt the effect of the last War with the Florentines, who sack'd, and almost ruin'd the City, when they had made themselves Masters thereof; nei∣ther can it be deny'd, but that the Town of Le∣gorn, which was founded within these few Years on the Port of Pisa, has drawn away many of its Inhabi∣tants. However, here still remain some stately Edifices, particularly the Palace, Town-House, Citadel and Cathedral Church, which is supported with 26 Mar∣ble Pillars, and built much after the same manner as that of Siena; but it is larger, and its situation in the middle of a spacious Court-yard is much more advan∣tageous. The Baptistery, and famous bowing Tower, are likewise very remarkable Buildings, which may be seen at one view with the Church, and stand only at the distance of 30 or 40 Paces in the same Pub∣lick Place, as also on the same Level on each side, be∣ing altogether cas'd with fine Marble, and of an Uni∣form Architecture. The Baptistery, is of a round form, about 180 Paces in compass, and has a Cupolo on the top, as the Dome of St. Peter's Church at Rome: There is also an Echo, which very much aug∣ments any sound; so that if one strikes a Blow, or cries out, it lasts as long as that which proceeds from the chiming of a large Bell. As for the Tower, some say it was built stooping of set purpose by the Archi∣tect; others, that it does not really stoop, but only seems so to do, deceiving the sight by a new and se∣cret Device of Architecture; others again avouch, that it seems to lean on all sides according to the sta∣tion of the Beholders: but all these Persons are much mistaken, and seek for a Mystery where never any was; for the bowing of the Tower happen'd only ac∣cidentally, its Foundation being sunk on one side, as it will plainly appear to any one that examines the Mat∣ter. The heighth of this Tower is 188 Feet, and its Shape is exactly that of a Cylinder: The Platform or Terrass on the top is encompass'd with Ballisters, and the Stair-case consists of 193 Steps. The Church-yard call'd Campo Santo, by reason of certain heaps of Earth which the Pisans caus'd to be
brought thither out of the Palestine, A. D. 1228. when they sent supplies to the Emperour Frederick Barba∣rossa who took Jerusalem, is a kind of Cloister, 190 Paces long, and 66 broad, in comprehending the wideness of the Portico's, where are erected a great number of Tombs; and one may observe an ancient Inscription, set in a Wall of one of the Porches; it is a Decree of the City of Pisa, whereby it was or∣dain'd, Nunciata morte Caesaris, &c. That is, The Death of the Emperor being declar'd, That the People should wear a mourning Habit, during a whole Year, and abstain from all manner of publick Divertise∣ments. This City was dignified with the Title of a Metropolitan See, through the special Favour of Pope Ʋrban II. A. D. 1092. and an University was founded there by Lorenzo de Medicis, in 1472. Legorn, in Ital. Livorno, Ligurnus or Liburnus Por∣tus, is a famous Sea-port Town, situated in a Flat Country, on the Coasts of the Toscan-Sea, at the di∣stance of 12 Miles from the Mouth of the River Ar∣no, 24 almost South of Lucca, 56 almost South-West of Florence, and 160 almost North-West of Rome: It formerly appertain'd to the Jurisdiction of the Re∣publick of Genoa, but was granted in the preceeding Age to the Grand Duke of Toscany, in exchange for the City of Serzana, which then remain'd in his Pos∣session. Indeed, that of Legorn, as it hath been late∣ly re-built, is a very considerable Place, on the ac∣count of its Traffick and great resort of foreign Mer∣chants; for before it was only a small and unhealthy Town, by reason of the standing Waters and adja∣cent Marshes. It contains about 3560 Houses, and is well fortify'd with Walls, Bastions, and a deep Trench round, except on the Sea-side. It is likewise defended with 3 Fortresses, and hath a very capacious and safe Harbour, which is divided into two Ports, viz. the Greater and the Lesser; the former hath been render'd extreamly commodious, through the means of a large Mole, and the other having a very strait entrance, serves to receive the Gallies. The Streets are very broad, all running parallel in a straight line, and the Houses generally of an equal height, al∣most all painted on the out-side: The Ducal Palace, and Arsenal, are likewise very fair Buildings. Here is also erected a House, or kind of Hospital, on pur∣pose for the Galley Slaves, wherein they lie; which Custom is not observ'd any where else. Volterra, Volaterrae, is a place of very great Anti∣quity, and one of the 12 first Colonies of the Toscans, standing on a Mountain in a very fruitful Country, a∣bout 34 Miles from Florence to the South, and 37 from Legorn to the East: It is more especially remarkable for its Springs of Medicinal Water, and hath been long since dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, un∣der the Metropolitan of Florence. Siena, Senae or Sena, in the Latit. of 42 Deg. 30 Min. and the Longit. of 34 Deg. 40 Min. is seated in the midst of divers Hills, and on a kind of Platform, being distant 28 Miles nigh South of Florence, 64 East of Legorn and Pisa, and 104 North-West of Rome: It is almost 4 Miles in Compass, including much wast Ground, and contains 1820 Houses, be∣ing a fair and great City, well fortify'd with a Cita∣del, built in form of a Pentagon, and 15 or 16 Square Towers like those of Viterbo: It is also adorn'd with an University, and a Metropolitan See establish'd by Pope Pius II. A. D. 1459. The publick Edifices, Pa∣laces and Churches, are very magnificent, more especially the Cathedral, which is almost entirely cas'd, both in the inside and outside, with Marble; the Ornaments of the Architecture being the finest in their kind: The Pavement of the Quire consists like∣wise of black and white Marble, wrought in Mosaick Work, and enrich'd with curious Figures, represent∣ing divers Histories of the Old and New-Testament. This Work was begun by Duceio, and finish'd by Dominico Beccafumi: but that part next the Quire is best preserv'd, shewing the Sacrifice of Abraham, and the Passage of the Red-Sea; the Roof is Azure, set with Golden-Stars, and supported with two rows of Pillars. The Hospitals, the Monasteries of the Dominicans, and Cordeliers, and some other pub∣lick Buildings, are likewise very remarkable. The Situation of the great Market-Place is somewhat deep, so that it may be fill'd with Water, sufficient for the extinguishing of any Fire that happens in the Town. Siena was, in time past, a Free-City, and during some Ages, the Capital of the Republick; but, at length, being taken by the Spaniards, A. D. 1554. it was resign'd to the Duke of Toscany, who, as yet, possesseth it, together with all the adjacent Territories. Piombino, Plumbinum, is a well-fortified and large Town on the Coasts of the Toscan-Sea, lying almost in the midst between Orbitello to the South-East, and Legorn to the North-West, at the distance of 50 Miles from both, and somewhat more from Siena, and 14 from the Island of Elba, which is subject to its Jurisdiction: It sprang up out of the Ruins of Populonia, an ancient ruin'd Town in the Neighbour∣hood, and is Govern'd by its own proper Prince, of the Family of Lodovici, although defended by a Garrison of Spaniards. Orbitello, Orbitellum and Ʋrbatellum, is seated near the Sea-shore, at the Foot of Mount Argentaro, 40 Miles from Civita-Vecchia to the West, and 50 from the Isle of Elba to the East. This Town formerly de∣pended on the Dominions of the Republick of Sie∣na, since the Year 1451. but when the latter fell into the Hands of the Grand-Duke of Toscany, the Spa∣niards retain'd the Possession thereof, together with some other small Towns, viz. those of Telamone, Porto Hercole, Porto Stephano, and Mount Argentaro, fortify∣ing them with Garrisons and Castles; whence the ad∣jacent Country is call'd by the Inhabitants Lo Stato del∣le Presidii. Massa, Massa, a very small and ill-built City, is Founded on an Hill, and distant 3 Miles off the Sea, 13 South-East of Sarsana, 24 North-west of Pisa and Luc∣ca, and 66 West of Florence. However, it hath been the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Si∣ena, ever since the decay of Populonium, and in∣cludes within its Diocess the Islands of Elba and Caprara. The Republick of LUCCA, Lucensis Ager, or Respublica Lucensis. THE Territories of the Lordship or Republick of LƲCCA, are enclos'd within those of the Grand Duke of Toscany: Their utmost extent being 34 Miles long, and 28 broad. And indeed, these Do∣minions, although of a small compass, are never∣theless very populous, and the Inhabitants acknow∣ledge the Emperour for their Protector, although their Government be Aristocratical. The Coun∣try affords great quantities of Wine and Oil, but brings forth little Corn. The Chief Magistrate, termed Gonfalonnier, is elected from among the No∣bles every Two Months, and assisted by Six El∣ders, who are chang'd as he is, six times every Year.
The Grand Council is compos'd of 120 Burgesses. The Publick Revenue is about 100000 Crowns a Year; and upon Occasion, they can raise 30000 Men in a short time. The Chief Towns are these: LƲCCA, Bish. Cap. Comasore. Montignose. Minuxiano. Castiglione. Viareggio. LƲCCA, Luca, in the Latit. of 42 deg. 50 min. and the Longit. of 33 deg. 20 min. stands on a Branch of the River Serchio, in the midst of a fruitful Plain, which is extended every way 15 or 20 Miles, and bounded with rich and well inhabited Hills. Its first Foundation (as it is suppos'd) was laid by the Tos∣cans, A. M. 1469. and it is at present a Free City, govern'd with excellent Laws in form of a Common-wealth, together with some other adjacent Places. It is only 3 Miles in compass, containing nigh 1800 Hou∣ses, but is very populous, having about 30 or 40 thou∣sand Inhabitants, and this number daily encreases. It is also well-fortify'd with 11 regular Bastions, and their Curtains, all lin'd with Brick, and environ'd with very deep Trenches; the Ramparts being adorn'd with several rows of Poplar-Trees set close together. There are also many stately publick Buildings, and among others, the Cathedral dedicated to St. Martin, the Church of St. Fredian, and that of our Lady delle Miracole; besides a great number of Palaces, and Houses of Pleasure round about the City, rich∣ly furnish'd, together with their Gardens, and various Apartments; not to mention the Arsenal, which contains Arms kept in good order, and a sufficient quantity of them for so small a Repub∣lick. But the Cathedral is more especially remarkable for the famous Chapel of Volto Santo, which was built on this Occasion: It is reported, That Ni∣codemus having undertaken to paint a Crucifix, and not being able to perform it, certain Angels that saw him at Work, took the Pencil out of his Hand, and finish'd the Picture. Indeed, it is not well known how this Crucifix was first brought into the Church of St. Fredian; but it is certain (as they say) that it was transported from thence to the Cathedral of St. Martin, and stood in the Air, over the very same Place where it is now to be seen, until an Altar was built for it, on which it immediately a∣lighted, and took up a setled abode. Whereupon a Magnificent Chapel was soon after erected, and the Altar plac'd in the middle of it. This Image does not work so many Miracles as some others, yet eve∣ry thing done by it is most surprising; and it is the great Object of Devotion among the Luccheses, be∣ing stampt on their Coin, with the Arms of the Re∣publick. In the Church of St. Fredian is shewn a Marble Table 17 Foot long, almost 6 and a half broad, and 14 Inches thick, the History whereof is compris'd in the following Inscription; Whosoever thou art, O Rea∣der, thou art thy self a Stone, unless this Stone excite thee to the Admiration and Worship of St. Fredian, who having got this huge Mass out of the Mountains, four Miles off, for the building of this Church; and being destitute of Strength, but fervent in Spirit, with won∣derful facility heav'd it with his own hands and Shoul∣ders, and those of the Canons, into a Cart, to be drawn by a yoke of untam'd Heifers. Afterward, he caus'd the sacred Monument to be plac'd in this Church, in the VIth Century. In the middle of the same Church stands a flat Tomb, on which these words are Engrav'd, Hic jacet Corpus Sancto Riccardi Rega Angliae; i. e. Here lies the Body of St. Richard, King of England: But it is hard to determine who this Prince should be, since Richard the I. Sirnam'd aeul de Lion, died of a wound in France, after his Voyage to Jerusalem, and was In∣terr'd in the Abbey of Fontevraut. Richard the II. Depos'd by the Duke of Lancaster, was Stabb'd at Pontefract, brought to St. Paul's Church in Langley, and at last to Westminster-Abbey, where his Tomb is to be seen, Richard the III. was slain in Battel at Bosworth, in Leicestershire, and buried in the Town of Leicester. Neither does it appear that there ever was any King in England nam'd Richard, before the Uni∣ting of the Saxon Heptarchy. The Inhabitants of Lucca are very much enrich'd by their Trade in Silks, whereof they make divers sorts of Manufactures; and the Government of the City is purely Aristocratical, the Sovereign Authority residing in a Council of 240 Noblemen; but they are divided into Two Bodies, and succeed every half year; having a Gonfalonnier for their Head, who lodges in the Publick Palace, together with his Nine Counsellors, nam'd Anziani. These usually partake of the same Bed and Board there, although their Wives and Families remain in their private Houses. The Office of the Gonfalonnier, or Supreme Magi∣strate of the Republick, is very like that of the Dge's of Venice, or Genoa, excepting that it continues only for Two Months, and the Person invested with this Dignity, receives no other Profit from thence than that of his Table. However, he wears the Barretto and Stole, with the Robe of Crimson-Velvet, and the Name of Prince is attributed to him; But he is congratulated only with the Style of Excellency. After an Interval of Six years he may be Elected again, and a Band of 60 Switzers serves for his Or∣dinary Guard. The City of Lucca stands Eight Miles North-East of Pisa, 24 almost North of Le∣gorn, 46 West of Florence, and 168 North-West of Rome. Viareggio, Viaregium, is seated on the Coasts of the Toscan-Sea, and defended with a Tower, having also a very small Haven; and indeed it is the only Port of the Republick of Lucca, being distant about 15 Miles from this Metropolis to the West. The Kingdom of NAPLES, Regnum Neopolitanum. THE Kingdom of NAPLES, being the largest of all the States of Italy, is bounded on the North by the Gulf of Venice; on the South, by the Toscan-Sea; on the East, by the Mouth of the Gulf of Venice, and the Ionian-Sea; and on the West, by the Territories of the Ecclesiastical-State. It is extended, from South-East to North-West, for the space of about 340 Miles, viz. from the Mouth of the River Tronto as far as Cape del Armi; and 120 from South-west to North-east, from Massa to Rodia, in the Province of Capitanato. The Air is always gentle, temperate, and very healthful, although in∣deed the Heats in some places are excessive. The Soil brings forth all manner of Commodities that can be desir'd, and the Country enjoys, as it were, a per∣petual Spring: For here are gather'd vast quantities of Almonds, Small-Nuts of an excellent Taste, Olives, Figs, Citrons, Oranges, Grapes, Corn, Hemp, Line, Pulse, Anise-seed, Coriander-seed, and other sorts of Fruit. These Territories depend on the See of
Rome, and can devolve only on the Male and Legiti∣mate Issue of the King of Spain, who causeth a White Horse, together with 9000 Ducats, to be pre∣sented every Year to the Pope, as an Acknowledg∣ment of the Homage which he is obliged to doe to His Holiness. The whole Revenue of this Prince, in the Kingdom of Naples, amounts Yearly to the Sum of nigh 000000 Ducats. It can raise (accor∣ding to Mr. Lassels) 150000 Foot, and 100000 Horse; and its ordinary Squadron of Galleys are but 20. Here are 148 Cities, 20 Arch-bishopricks, 128 Bisho∣pricks, 87 Princes, 122 Dukes, 159 Marquesses, and 7 Earls. It is a noble Country, but the poor People are miserably oppress'd. In the IXth and Xth Cen∣turies, the Saracens, although they were often repuls'd, render'd themselves very potent throughout those Do∣minions, until the Normans entirely expell'd them, in the XIth Century. Afterward, the Inhabitants of Schwaben, the French, Arragonians and Spaniards Go∣vern'd successively, and have always holden them of the Pope, as a Fee of the Church of Rome. His most Catholick Majesty sends thither every year a Vice-Roy, who is usually a Grandee of Spain. A Chronological TABLE of the Succession of the Kings of Naples and Sicily, according to the several Families that have Reign'd in those Dominions. The IX Norman Kings of Naples and Sicily. 1 RObert Guichard, Duke of A∣pulia and Calabria, died A. D. 1085     2 Roger I. and Boemond, the Sons of Robert Guichard   Years 3 Robert, sirnam'd The Crooked 1085 Reigned 17 4 Roger II. 1102 27 5 Roger III. 1129 24 6 William I. the Red 1152 14 7 William II. the Good 1166 23 8 Tancred the Bastard 1189 3 9 William III. 1192 2 Constantia. The IV Kings of the House of Schwaben, through the Marriage of the Princess Constantia with the Em∣perour Henry VI. 10 The Emperour Henry VI. 1194 3 11 The Emperor Frederick II. 1197 52 12 Conrad 1250 7 13 Manfred the Bastard 1257 8 In the Year 1265. Pope Clement IV. gave the Investi∣ture of these Two Kingdoms to Charles of France, Count of Anjou and Provence, who was Crown'd in 1266. The IV Kings of the House of France, of the First Branch of Anjou. 14 Charles I. 1266 19 15 Charles II. the Lame 1282 25 16 Robert the Wise 1309 34 17 Q. Joanna I. 1343 39 Queen Joanna I. adopted, by her Last Will and Te∣stament, made on the 29th of June, A. D. 1380, or 1381, Lewis of France, Duke of Anjou, the Son of King John, who form'd the Second Branch of Anjou; nevertheless, Charles of Duras, the Cousin of Queen Joanna, Ʋsurp'd the Throne, which caus'd a War to break forth. 18 Charles III. the Little 1382 4 19 Ladislaus the Victorious 1386 28 20 Q. Joanna II. or Januetta 1414 20 Q. Joanna II. adopted King René, which gave him a double Right to the Crown. The V. Kings of Naples and Sicily, of the Second Branch of Anjou. 21 Lewis I. of France 1382 2 22 Lewis II. 1384 23 23 Lewis III. 1417 17 24 René the Good 1434 46 25 Charles III. 1480 1 It ought to be observ'd here, That Peter III. King of Arragon, Marry'd Constantia, the Daughter of the Ba∣stard Manfred, A. D. 1262; and caus'd all the French in Sicily to be Massacred in 1282, to Establish himself on the Throne: but he died Excommunicated, within 4 Years after this execrable Action, which is commonly call'd, The Sicilian Vespers. The IX. Kings of Naples and Sicily, of the House of Arragon. 26 Peter I. of Arragon 1282 4 27 James I. 1286 41 28 Frederick 1327 1 29 Peter II. 1328 1 30 Lewis 1342 12 31 Frederick the Simple 135 13 32 Mary, the Wife of Martin 1368 34 33 Martin, the Widower of Mary 1402 7 34 Martin II. 1409 1 35 Blanche, the Relict of Martin 1410 2 36 Ferdinand of Castile, The Just 1412 4 37 Joanna II. Queen of Naples 1420   This last Princess adopted Alphonsus King of Arragon, but disinherited him within three Years after, by reason of his Ingratitude. The XIII. last Kings of Naples and Sicily. 38 Alphonsus V. King of Arragon 1420 38 39 Ferdinand I. the Spurious 1458 36 40 Alphonsus II. 1494 1 41 Charles VIII. King of France 1495 some Months. 42 Ferdinand II. 1495 10 43 Frederick, dispossess'd 1496 5 44 Lewis XII. King of France 1501 2 45 Ferdinand V. King of Aragon 1503 13 46 Charles V. Emperour 1516 42 47 Philip II. King of Spain 1558 40 48 Philip III. 1598 23 49 Philip IV. 1621 44 50 Charles II. 1666 now Reigning.
The Kingdom of Naples is usually divided into Twelve small Provinces: Viz. Six on the Medi∣terranean Sea, 1 The Province of Lavoro, Naples, Archbish. Cap. 2 The Farther Principality, Benevento, Archbish. 3 The Hither Principality, Salerno, Archbish. 4 Basilicata, Acerensa, Archbish. 5 The Hither Calabria, Cosenza, Archbish. 6 The Farther Calabria, Regio, Archbish. Six on the Gulf of Venice. 7 The Farther Abruzzo, Aquila, Bish. 8 The Hither Abruzzo, Chieti, Archbish. 9 The County of Molise, Molise. 10 The Province of Capitanato, Manfredonia, Arch∣bish. 11 The Province of Bari, Bari, Archbish. 12 The Province of Otranto, Otranto, Archbish. The Province of LAVORO, Campania Felix, is bounded on the North by that of Abruzzo; on the South, by the Hither Principality; on the East, by the County of Molise, and the Farther Principa∣lity; and on the West, by the Toscan Sea, and the Campagne of Rome. It is extended in length, from North-west to South-east, for the space of 74 Miles; and 40 in breadth. It is a Country very proper for Tillage, and takes its Name from thence. It was also call'd Campania Felix by the Romans, by reason of the Fruitfulness of its Soil. Capua was heretofore the Metropolis thereof; but Naples hath now ob∣tain'd that Advantage: About 8 Miles from whence stands the Mountain Vesuvius, or di Somna, which casts forth Flames, after the same manner as Mount Aetna, or Gibel, in the Island of Sicily. The most Considerable Cities and Towns are these: NAPLES, Arch∣bish. Capua, Archbish. Sorrento, Archbish. Pozzuolo, Bish. Mola, Bish. Cuma, Bish. Massa, Bish. Aversa. Gaeta. Vico, Bish. Aquino, Bish. County. Sora, Bish. Monte Cassino, Bish. Venafri. Cajazzo. Alifi. Calvi. Tiano. NAPLES, Neapolis, Ital. Napoli, in the Latit. of 40 deg. 45 min. and the Longit. of 38 deg. 20 min. was ruin'd (as it is recorded in History) and after∣ward re-built by the Cumans, who gave it the Name of , or The New City; to distinguish it from the remains of the Upper Town, which was nam'd, or became at the same time, , or The Old City: But both had been formerly call'd Parthenope, by reason that Ʋlysses and his Companions having escap'd the In∣chantments of the Siren Parthenope, that Sea-Nymph threw her self down headlong from the top of a Rock, and was bury'd at Palaeopolis: Although others affirm, That one Parthenope, the Daughter of Eumelus King of Thessaly, and Grand-Daughter of Admetus and Alceste, brought a Colony thither, and impos'd her own Name on the City, which before bore another, at present unknown. However (as it is evident from these Greek Names) Naples was built by the Graecians, and is situated at the distance of 104 Miles South-east of Rome; 225 South-west of Ragusa, in Dalmatia; 230 almost North-east of Pa∣lermo, in Sicily; 234 South-east of Florence; and 300 almost South-east of Venice, on a small Gulf of these Coasts, having a very capacious and safe Harbour. And indeed, it is one of the largest, strongest, and most beautiful Cities of Italy, surpas∣sing all other in the multitude of Inhabitants. It lies on the Sea-side, under Hills, in form of a Theatre; its figure and station much like Genoa, but bigger▪ and much more populous: It is above 7 Miles in com∣pass within the Walls; besides, it has large Suburbs, having above 300000 Inhabitants: It is said to be one of the noblest Cities in Europe; and if it is not above half as big as Paris, or London, yet it has much more beauty than either of them. It is also the See of an Archbishop, and the usual Place of Residence of the Nobility of the whole Kingdom. It is bounded on one side with a fertile Plain, pleasant Hills, most de∣lightful Gardens, and magnificent Palaces; and on the other, hath a fair Prospect into the Sea. In fine, It is fortify'd with firm Walls, regular Bastions, large Towers, deep Moats, and many Castles or For∣tresses, viz. 1. That named Il Castello di Sant Elmo, founded on a steep Rock that commands the adjacent Places, by the Order of the Emperor Charles V. 2. The New Castle, Il Castello Nuovo, which was built of Free-stone, in form of a Square, by Charles I. Duke of Anjou, and enlarg'd by Ferdinand of Aragon: This Fort is likewise defended with 4 Bastions, strong Ramparts, a double Ditch of a vast depth, fill'd with the Sea Water, and 5 large Towers. 3. Il Castello del Ovo, or The Castle of the Egg, so call d from its Oval form, which is erected on a Rock in the Sea, and ows its Foundation to William III. Duke of Nor∣mandy: Here is to be seen a Cannon of Cast Metal, nam'd Magdalen, which carries a Ball of 26 Pound, and weighs it self 21000 Pounds. 4. The Tower of St. Vincent. 5. That of the Carmelites, or Il Tor∣rione del Carmine, seated on a Place fortify'd during the last Commotions, A. D. 1648. 6. Il Castello Ca∣pouano, or the Capuan Castle, wherein are held the Assemblies of the Citizens, and the Courts of Justice. 7. The Castle of St. Erasmus. 8. The Vice-Roy's Palace, a most noble Fabrick, built by the famous Signior Fontana, and andorn'd with three Orders of Architecture, being almost 400 English Foot long. 9. The Arsenal, standing along the Banks of the Sea, and presenting it self to the view of Sailers at a great distance. 10. The Port, together with its stately Mole, extended for the space of a quarter of a Mile into the Sea; and a Watch-Tower at the end, in which issues forth a Spring of fresh Water. Not to mention the stately Mansion-Houses of the Dukes of Matalona, Gravina, Airola, della Forre; those of the Princes of St. Agatha, Mont-milet, Botera, and Cellamara; together with a great number of Con∣vents, Hospitals, Magazines for Naval Stores, &c. The whole City is divided into 29 Precincts, term'd Ottine; and hath 7 large Suburbs. The Churches are extremely magnificent, and amount to the num∣ber of 300, of which 40 are Parochial. The Cathe∣dral is dedicated to St. Januarius, one of the twelve Patrons of this Place; and the Church of the Jesuits,
more-especially remarkable for its admirable Structure, being beautify'd on all sides with most sumptuous Ornaments; as also are those of Santa Maria del Annonciada, Santa Maria la Nuova, St. Severino, St. Paul, St. Dominick, &c. The Streets are, for the most part, even and broad; but the chiefest of these is that of La Strada di Toledo, pav'd with Free-stone, and adorn'd with a great number of Palaces, and fair Buildings. The greater part of the Houses are high and uniform, cover'd with Platforms, on which the Inhabitants are wont to walk in the Evening, besides divers spacious Courts, where the Noblemen fre∣quently take the Air, which are all encompass'd with Iron Ballisters, and curiously painted on the in-side. Here are also establish'd three Academies of Ingenious Persons, known by the Name of Gl' Ardenti, Gl' O∣tiosi, Studi Nuovi; as also an Universiry founded by the Emperor Frederick II. wherein the States of the Realm hold their five Sessions, call'd I Seggi di Na∣poli. Lastly, it may not be amiss to observe, that Naples hath furnish'd the See of Rome with several Popes, particularly Boniface V. Ʋrban VI. Boniface IX. John XXIII. Paul IV. &c. But this noble City hath been so often pillag'd, and fallen into the Possession of so many Masters, that the greatest part of its An∣tiquities lie bury'd under its Ruins. However, the Front of the Church of St. Paul major is that of an ancient Temple of Apollo; which was afterward de∣dicated to Castor and Pollux, by one Tiberius Ju∣lius Tarsus, a Free-man of Augustus, as it appears from his Name, as yet to be read very distinctly on one of the Frizes of the said Front. And indeed, the Portico is supported with eight channeled Pillars of the Corinthian Order; and on the Front appear cer∣tain Figures in Basso-Relievo, representing the Heathen Deities. The Columns of the Church of St. Restituta (as they say) were in like manner taken out of a Temple of Neptune. There are also to be seen some Ruins of an Amphitheatre; an ancient Statue of the River Nile, leaning on a Crocodile; the Head and entire Neck of a Brazen Horse, here∣tofore erected in one of the Market-places; and a great quantity of old Ruins on the side of St. Cosmo and St. Damian, where the Palaeopolis, or Old Town, is usually placed by Antiquaries. Capua is seated on the River Valtorno, in a very fruitful Plain, and defended with a strong Castle, being distant only 2 Miles from the Ruins of Ancient Capua to the West, very near the Mountains; as also 14 from Naples to the North; 17 from Sessa to the South-east; and 12 from the Coasts of the Toscan-Sea. It is now but a mean Place, though formerly of great fame, and was erected into a Metropolitan See by Pope John XIII. A. C. 968. Nevertheless, a great number of Inscriptions, and Monuments of Antiquity, are to be seen there, that have been brought from Old Capua; out of the Ruins of which some time most stately City the Town of St. Mary was almost entirely built, where as yet remain divers small Temples, an old Castle, some part of two Amphi∣theaters, one of the Gates of the City, together with many broken Pillars, and other fragments of Archi∣tecture. Sorrento, or Sorriento (according to the Pronun∣ciation of the Neapolitans,) is in like manner the Seat of an Archbishop, and stands in a very fruitful Country, on the Confines of the Hither Principality, about 24 Miles from Naples to the South, and 6 from Il Capo Campanella to the North-east. The adjacent Hills, mention'd by Columella, are from thence com∣monly call'd La Montagna di Sorrento. Pozzuolo, Puteoli, was heretofore a famous City; and still enjoys the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Naples, being situated on a Hill near a Bay of the same Name, where were built di∣vers noble Seats of the Roman Emperors: But the fury of Wars, Earthquakes, Inundations of the Sea, and even Time it self, which consumes every thing, hath almost entirely destroy'd this noted Place, al∣though a great number of august Ruins, as yet re∣maining, are a sufficient Testimony of its ancient Grandeur and Magnificence. Almost adjoyning to the Church of St. James, are to be seen those of an Amphitheatre, which was built of Free-stone, and stood in the midst of the Old City. A Tradition goes current, That St. Januarius, together with six other Christians, were there expos'd to wild Beasts, and that they were ador'd, instead of being devour'd by them. However, some time after, these Seven Champions were Beheaded near Solfatara, in a Place where, at present, stands a Church dedicated to St. Ja∣nuarius. The Cathedral, bearing the Name of St. Proculus Martyr is built on the Ruins of a Temple of Jupiter, and, in part, of the proper Materials of the same Temple, more-especially the Front, on which is read an ancient Inscription shewing that it was founded by Calfurnius Luc. Fil. Between the Town and the Amphitheatre lie the Ruins of a Tem∣ple of Diana; and near the Cloisters of the Domini∣cans, of Jesu-Maria. The tempestuous Sea often casts up new marks of the former magnificence of these publick Buildings, among which are usually found divers sorts of Precious-stones, viz. Cornelians, Agats, Jaspars, Amethysts, &c. Moreover, the Arches of a famous Bridge, or Causway, 3900 Paces long, are still apparent: Which Work is suppos'd to have been rais'd by the Emperor Caligula, and reach'd as far as Baia, from whence this small City is distant 3 Miles, and as many from Miseno. In travelling from the Suburbs of Naples toward Pozzuolo, we meet with the Hill Pausilypus, re∣markable for a Cavern commonly call'd the Grotta of Pozzuoli, being partly cut out of the Rock, and partly through the Sand. It is almost a Mile long, from 30 to 40 Foot high, and about 18 broad; so that two Chariots may easily pass one by another. There is no Light admitted but only at the two ends, and through a small Hole in the middle, above an Oratory wrought on one side in the Rock, by some∣what enlarging the Road on that side. But this Light is very inconsiderable; and the clouds of fine Dust that arise at every step, are ready to put out the Eyes of Passengers; insomuch that it is neces∣sary either to wrap up the Head, or cover the Face with a Handkerchief, if one would avoid the sucking in of Earth, instead of Air. Moreover, one can discern so little in this Dungeon, that when a Man hears afar off those that are coming to meet him, he must cry out to them to keep to the right or left, that they may take the opposite side, and prevent the falling foul one on another. This ancient Work is attributed to one Cocceius, and mention'd by Se∣neca, who in like manner complains of the Darkness and Dust. A little beyond Mount Pausilypus the Lake of Ag∣nano spreads it self between the Hills, being almost round, and only a good Mile in compass: The Water is very clear, and hath no ill Taste; it is seen to boil and bubble every where, without perceiving any Heat; nevertheless, abundance of Tenches and Eels are bred therein. On the side of this Lake are two very considerable things; that is to say, the Caves
commonly call'd The Bagnio's of St. German, and The Dog's Grotto. In descending three or four steps into these Baths, one feels a Heat which hath a sul∣phurous smell, and immediately causeth the whole Body to sweat; so that Persons afflicted with the Gout, and other Distempers, resort thither from all Parts, and (as they say) receive much Benefit. The Dog s Grotto is a little Cavern at the bottom of a Hill, from nine to ten Foot long, four and a half broad, and five high: Here arises a subtil and penetrating Exhalation out of the Earth, without any Smoak, which stops the Breath, and suffocates in an instant: For if a Dog be let down to the bottom, the poor Creature is soon seiz'd with Convulsions, rolls his Eyes about, stretches himself out without crying, grows stiff, and is taken out of the Cavern as dead: but if he be immediately thrown into the Lake di∣stant only twenty Paces from thence, he recovers his spirits in less than a minute, swims out of the Water, runs about, and cries, as it were, for Joy. The like Experiment hath been some times made on Men, and all sorts of Animals, and the same thing hath happen'd. There is nothing to be fear'd within two Foot of the Ground, and even nearer, the Vapours being rarify'd and dispers'd; but the lower one stoops, the greater is the danger, by reason that these subtile and violent Vapours break forth impetuously in great abundance. Nola is a well built City, and the See of a Pre∣late suffragan to the Archbishop of Nples, being distant from thence 14 Miles to the East, 8 from Sarno, and 6 from Acerra. Many Monuments of Antiquity are as yet in this Place, which is more-especially remarkable for the Death of Augustus Cae∣sar, who expir'd here, or in the adjacent Territories; and for giving Birth to its renowned Bishop St. Pau∣linus. Cuma, Cumae, was at first founded by the Euboeans, and at length utterly raz'd by the Saracens, A. D. 1207. Its Ruins are now call'd Cuma distruttae, lying betwen Linternum and Miseno, two demolish'd Towns. It hath been, for some time, an Episcopal See, which was afterward united to that of Aversa. Nor far from hence stood the Village of Cumanum, mention'd by Cicero; and the Den of the famous Cuman Sibyl. Massa, Massa Lubrensis, or Massa di Sorriento, to distinguish it from some other Towns of this Name, was built after the decay of Old Massa, in a certain adjacent Place named Lubra, and on that account may be more truly termed New Massa. It is seated on a rising Ground, well fortify'd by Nature, and distant 4 Miles from Surriento to the South-west; as also as many from Cape Campanella, and the Isle of Caprea; and 20 from Naples to the South. Aversa, or Adversa, was built by Robert Guichard, Duke of Normandy, on the Ruins of Atella; and an Episcopal See of the same Town was translated thither by Pope Leo IX. Charles I. King of both Sicilies, caus'd this small City to be raz'd; but it was after∣ward repair'd, and hath its station at present in a most verdant Plain, in the midst between Capua to the North, and Naples to the South. Gaeta, Cajeta, or Cajetta, is remarkable for its Situation in a Peninsula on the side of a Rock, the foot whereof is wash'd by the Waves of the Toscan-Sea, at the distance of 55 Miles from Rome, 14 from the Frontiers of the Ecclesiastical State, and only 4 from Naples. It is one of the strongest Holds of this Kingdom, defended by two Forts, wherein are maintain'd considerable Garrisons of Spanish Soldiers. It has also a very commodious Harbour, and is dig∣nify'd with an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Capua, although exempted from its Jurisdiction, whereto those of Mola and Minturni have been for some time annexed. In the Cathedral, among other things, is a pretended Pillar of Solomon's Temple; as there are also four others of the like nature that sup∣port the High-Altar of St. Marks Chapel in Venice. But the ancient Vessel of white Marble, which serves as a Font in the Baptistery of this Cathedral, is a most accurate piece of Work, and very well preserv'd. It is made in form of a Bell, being about four foot high, and its Ornaments in Basso-Relievo are much ad∣mir'd. The little Bacchus just issuing out of Jupiter's Thigh, is there deliver'd into the Hands of Ino; and round about the Vessel are represented Satyrs, and Bacchantes or Revellers, together with Fauns play∣ing on two Flutes at once. Near the Garden of the Franciscans Zoccolanti is a Bush of Thorns, which (as they say) grow almost all without Points, ever since the Seraphick St. Francis roll'd himself on them, to allay the Heat of his Youthful Passion: And near the Place call'd della Foglia is shewn a Bank on which he preach'd to Fishes. In going up through the lesser Gate of the Bishop's Palace, over-against the Altar of the Holy Sacra∣ment, you'll meet with a Marble Statue of an Old Man setting his Feet on a little Dog; under the Dog is a Block, a Serpent with its Tail lying on the same Dog, twisted between the Legs of the Old Man, and leaning on his Head; and an Eagle standing on that of the Serpent's. There are many different Opi∣nions concerning this Figure; but the most generally receiv'd, is, That the Old Man represents Aesculapius, with his Serpent; That the Dog signifies Watchful∣ness and Diligence, requisite in a Physician; That the Eagle denotes the Dominion of the Deity over Men, or perhaps, of the God of Physick in particular: And, That the Block is an Emblem of Humane Na∣ture, subject to the same Deity. The Complication of Figures is four Palms high. Here is also to be seen the Tombs of Charles of Bourbon, Constable of France, slain in the sacking of Rome; and the ancient Mau∣soleum of Munàtius Plancus, by whose Advice (as we are inform'd by Suetonius) Octavius Caesar pre∣ferr'd the Name of Augustus before that of Romulus, which some Persons would have persuaded him to assume, as the Restorer of the City of Rome. This ancient Monument is commonly call'd Roland's Tower. It is also worth the while to take a view of the Cleft Mountain, which at present bears the Name of la Speccata, being a huge Rock, separated even from its highest top to its bottom in the Sea. The distance of this Separation is from four to five Foot at the Place where one enters, but is somewhat wider toward the Top. One may also discern from the concave and convex part of the Rock, that it has really open'd it self. It is reported, that this was one of the Prodigies that happen'd when our Saviour gave up the Ghost; so that Steps are made to descend between the Clefts of this double Rock; and a little Chapel hath been for some time cut out of its fore∣part, which is dedicated to the Holy Trinity. Indeed, it is a famous Pilgrimage; all the Barques, Galleys, and other Vessels that pass by, never failing to pay Devotion to the Holy Mountain. Vico, or Vico di Sorrento, Vicus Aequeasis, stands on a Hill on the Bay of Naples, and was founded A. D. 1300, by King Charles II. near the Ruins of the Town of Aequa, in the midst between Castel' à Mare di Stabia & Sorrento, at an equal distance of
4 Miles from both; as also 18 from Naples to the South, and 10 from Amalfi to the West. It is the See of a Prelate suffragan to the Archbishop of Sor∣rento. Aquino, Aquinum, is water'd with the Streams of the Brook Melfo, not far from the River Garigliano, and only 5 Miles distant from the Confines of the Ecclesiastical State. It was ruin'd by the Emperor Conrad, insomuch that it hath retain'd very few Inha∣bitants, and scarcely includes 35 Houses within its Walls. However, it bears the Title of a County appertaining to the Duke of Sora, and of an Epis∣copal See subject to the Metropolitan of Capua, but its Bishop resides in the neighbouring Town of Ponte-Corvo. Moreover, this small City gave Birth to the Poet Juvenal, and to the famous Casuist Thomas A∣quinas. Sora is a well built City, seated on the Banks of the River Garigliano, about 16 Miles from Monte-Cassino to the North-west, 6 from Arpino, and 10 from the Lake of Celano to the South; as also 55 from Rome to the East, 22 from Anagni, and 13 from Alatri. It is dignify'd with the Title of an Episcopal See, independent on any other; and the Title of a Dutchy, appropriated to the Family of Boncompagno. It was also the Place of Nativity of the Learned Car∣dinal Baronius. Monte Cassino, Cassinum, Casinum, or Mons Cas∣sinus, an ancient City, hath now given Place to the Town of St. Germano, which sprang up out of its Ruins, where an old Theatre, and many other foot∣steps of its Grandeur still remain, being distant 5 Miles from the River Garigliano to the North, 6 from Aquino to the North-east, and 12 from the Frontiers of the Ecclesiastical State. Not far from hence stands the famous Abby of Mount Cassin, founded by St. Benedict: The Abbot of the same Place for∣merly exercised the Episcopal Functions, through the special Order of Pope John XXII. but this Bishop∣rick was suppress'd 40 Years after, by Ʋrban V. Mount Vesuvius, Mons Vesuvius, call'd Il Monte di Smma by the Italians, from a neighbouring Vil∣lage of the same Name, is distant about 8 Miles from Naples to the East, that is to say, from this City to the top of the Mountain, which was heretofore very pleasant, the greater part thereof being beset with Vines, but hath been for a long time altogether barren, by reason of its frequent Conflagrations, the chief of which have been observ'd at twelve several times, since the Nativity of Jesus Christ, and always caus'd very great Devastations: But the Flames broke forth so impetuously, on the 16th. of Decemb. A. D. 1631. and continu'd so outragious for the space of some Days, that they seem'd to threaten the utter Destruction of the City of Naples. The like Acci∣dent hath often happen'd since, but with less Vio∣lence. In travelling from Naples, through the four first Miles we meet with many fair Villages seated along the Sea-Coasts. Indeed, these Parts are well culti∣vated, and do not seem to have been ever expos'd to the ravages of the Mountain, although it hath often so happen'd; only some huge Stones lie in divers places, that have been roll'd thither. When one hath pass'd through the last Village, call'd Resina, the Road lies open to the left, and the Ascent begins. One may also travel on Horse-back for two large Miles, or two ordinary Miles and an half farther, yet always in the midst of loose Rocks, and heaps of parch'd Earth thrown up by the Eruption of the Mountain: but as you advance forward, you'll find the Ground more and more hollow, dry, burnt, and cover'd with several sorts of calcin'd Stones, which are so many Testimonials of the Vehemence of the Conflagration. Moreover, one may observe the Beds through which the Torrents of Sulphur and Bitumen have often flow'd from this Mountain. Thus, after divers little Rests, which must of necessity be made, you at length arrive, as it were, at the first Stage that makes a Circle round about the Mouth of the ancient Gulf, and is near a Mile in Diameter. One may also descend, in some Places, about 100 Paces below this steep Circumference on the side of the Mountain, which constitutes the whole depth of the ancient Opening. But this vast Abyss hath been almost fill d, by an extraordinary Eruption, with a mixture of Sulphur, Bitumen, Alum, Salt∣petre, and melted or vitrify'd Earth; so that all these Matters ceasing to boil together, form'd a kind of thick hard Crust, which hath caus'd a Level in the Gulf 100 Paces below its sides. Afterward, a violent shaking of the Mountain hath broken the said Crust, or harden'd Matter, and thrown the pieces one upon another, much after the same manner as when Ice in a Pond hath been broken, a sharp Frost soon fastens the pieces together. This rugged Surface is every where beset with burning Holes, from whence a per∣petual Smoke exhales; so that in some places the Heat may be felt through one's Shoes, only in passing over them. Moreover, exactly in the middle of this Extent, which is almost round, a furious Eruption hath open'd a Passage, and cast up a new Mountain, which is likewise round, and a quarter of a Mile high, being full of smoaking Clefts. In divers Places is to be seen Sulphur almost entirely pure, and as it were a kind of Sal Armoniack, of a Citron colour. In others is found a reddish and porous Matter, like the Dross of Iron taken out of a Smith's Forge; but there are some of all manner of colours, shapes and Sizes. The Top of the lesser Mountain hath its Open∣ing as well as the greater, and there is at present the Mouth of the dreadful Abyss, which may be about 100 Paces wide, from whence issues forth a torrent of Smoak that almost fills the whole circumference; which being blown by the Wind, sometimes on one side, and sometimes on another, gives an opportunity clearly to discover the Top of the Opening. The swift Eruption of the Flames is not much to be fear'd; but the Shaking of the Mountain precedes the most violent Outrages, and almost always happens on a sudden, so that many have been surpriz'd, and pay'd dear for their too nice Curiosity; as Pliny, the fa∣mous Naturalist, was soon overtaken, though at a great distance, and unfortunately lost his Life amidst those horrible Torrents of Fire and Brimstone. Monte Nuovo, or Di Cencre, Mons Novus, is a certain Mountain which was brought forth by the Earth in the Night between the 19th. and 20th. Day of September, A. D. 1538. and hath ever since been known by the Name of the New Mountain. They that have taken its Dimensions affirm, that it rises up 400 Fathom in perpendicular height, and extends it self for the space of 3000 Paces in compass. Naturalists have observ'd several different ways whereby some Mountains have been produc'd, viz. sometimes by Earthquakes, sometimes by violent Winds or Hurricanes; and at other times by subterraneous Eruptions, much after the same manner as when a Mole thrusts forth the Earth, and raises those small Hillocks which are com∣monly call'd Mole-hills. Thus, by this last means, Monte Nuovo was form'd, as well as the other New Mountain in the midst of the ancient Cavern of
Mount Vesuvius. Monte Nuovo (as they say) hath in like manner a Gulf of 50 Paces diameter in the middle of its top, which sufficiently proves its Ori∣ginal from an Eruption, but it does not cast forth either Flame or Smoke; neither hath it committed any Outrage, since those that were caus'd by so pro∣digious a travel of the Earth, which then shook vio∣lently: whilst the Sea at the same time retir'd back, the Lake Lucrinus was almost fill d, the Churches and Houses were set on fire and swallowed up, and a great number of Men, together with abundance of of Cattle, miserably perish d during that terrible Overthrow. On the other side of the Lake Lucrinus stands ano∣ther noted Mountain, nam'd Il Monte di Christo, on this Occasion: The Tradition goes, That the Earth having been heretofore toss'd with an extraordinary shock, was mov'd even from its Foundation, and a Cleft made, reaching even from its Surface to the Limbus Patrum: Whereupon, Jesus Christ descending into these dark Recesses, where the Souls of those Persons who had been predestinated to Celestial Hap∣piness, so long waited for his Coming, brought them in Triumph through this Passage under Ground, and carry'd them up into Heaven from the top of the Mountain, where the Mouth of the Cavern is shewn, as a Proof of this pretended History. The FARTHER PRINCIPALITY, Principatus Ʋlterior, hath the County of Molise, and the Province of Lavoro, for its Northern Bounds; the Hither Principality on the South; the Capitanato on the East; and the Toscan Sea on the West. It is ex∣tended from North-west to South-east for the space of about 54 Miles, and 34 from East to West. The Principal Cities and Towns are these: Viz. BENEVENTO, Archbish. Cap. Conza, Archbish. Artuno, Bish. St. Agatha, Bish. Trevico, Bish. Avellino, Bish. Bisaccia, Bish. and Dutchy. Cedogna, Bish. Monte Marano, Bish. Monte Verde, Bish. Nuseo, Bish. BENEVENTO, Beneventum, heretofore call'd Maleventum (according to the report of Pliny,) in the Latit. of 41 deg. and the Longit. of 39 deg. is situated on the Confluence of the Rivers Sabato and Calore, in a very fertile Country, at the distance of 28 Miles from Capua to the East, as many from Salerno to the North, and 32 from Naples to the North-east. It was built by Diomedes, together with Arpi in Apulia, and erected into a Dutchy by the Lombards. It hath also been, for a long while, the See of an Archbishop, and was granted to Pope Leo IX. by the Emperor Henry III. sirnam'd The Black, A. D. 1053. depending ever since that time on the Jurisdiction of the See of Rome. Moreover, this City hath given Birth to Pope Victor III. and Gregory VIII. and is famous for the slaughter of Man∣fred King of both Sicilies, who was overcome here by Charles Duke of Anjou, A. D. 1266. Conza, Compsa, or Consa, is seated on the foot of Mount Apennine, near the Source of the River L'Ofanto, and the Confines of the Hither Principality, being distant 18 Miles from Melfi to the West, 56 from Naples, 28 from Salerno, and 25 from Bene∣vento to the South-east. It is a City of a very small compass, scarcely containing within its Precinct 70 Houses, and 120 Persons; insomuch, that it seems to be almost reduc'd to a Hamlet, and nevertheless re∣tains the Title of a Metropolitan See. Ariano, Arianum, stands on a steep Hill near the foot of the Apennine, and is distant 12 miles from Benevento to the East, toward Trevico; and 25 from Nocera to the South, toward Avellino. It is subject to the Dominion of the Duke of Bovino, who is Count of this Place; and its Episcopal See depends on the Metropolitan of Benevento. St. Agatha, or Sant' Agatha de Goti, Agathopolis, or Fanum S. Agathae Gothorum, is a small City on the Frontiers of the Province of Lavoro, almost in the midst between Benevento to the East, and Capua to the West, at the distance of 14 Miles from both, and 9 from Telese. It is the See of a Prelate suffragan to the Archbishop of Benevento. Trevico, Trevicum, is distant 18 Miles from Conza to the North; and an Episcopal See, in like manner subject to the Metropolitan of Benevento. Avellino, Abellinum, is built in the midst between Benevento to the North, and Salerno to the South, 16 Miles from each of these Cities; as also 30 from Naples; 4 from Monte Vergene, and only 1 from the River Sabato. It is dignify'd with the Title of a Principality appertaining to the Noble Family of Caraccioli, and of a Bishop's See under the Metro∣politan of Benevento, which nevertheless is united to that of Fricenti. Bisaccia, Bisacium, is a small Town enjoying the Title of a Dutchy, and of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Conza. It is distant only 3 miles from Cedogna, and 7 from Monte Verde. Cedogna, Laquedonia, or Alcidonia, stands in a Plain on the foot of the Apennine, about 12 miles from Melfi to the South-west, and 9 from Conza. It is partly demolish'd, and possess'd by very few Inhabitants: However, it is an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Conza, although its Diocess comprehehends only one Place besides the City it self, which was heretofore call'd Aquilonia in Hir∣pinis, (as it is prov d by Celsus Citadinus, and Lu∣cas Holstenius.) Monte Marano, Mons Maranus, is a very small Town on the Banks of the River Calone, near Vultu∣rara, about 10 miles from Avellino to the East, and 6 from Nusca; nevertheless, it is the See of a Prelate suffragan to the Archbishop of Benevento. Monte Verde, Mons Viridis, another City of a small extent, is seated on the River L'Ofanto, on the Fron∣tiers of the Province of Capitanato and Basilicata, between Melfi and Cedagna, 13 miles from Conza to the East, and 23 from Acerenza to the North-west. It is an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Conza, although always annex'd to that of Na∣zareth. Nusco, Nuscum, hath its Foundation on the foot of the Apennine, between Monte Marano and St. An∣gelo, at the distance of 18 Miles from Benevento to the South-east, 10 from Conza, and 23 from Salerno to the North-east. The Episcopal See of this small City depends on the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Salerno.
The HITHER PRINCIPALITY, Principatus Citerior; in Italian Il Principato Citro, hath the Farther Principality for its Northern Li∣mits, together with part of Campania Felix; the Toscan Sea on the West and South; and the Pro∣vince of Basilicata on the East; extending it self from North-west to South-east for the space of about 78 Miles, and 38 from East to West. It is the Coun∣try of the ancient Picentini, and part of Lucania. The Chief Cities, &c. of this Province are these: Viz. SALERNO, Archb. Cap. Amalfi, Archb. Acerno, Bish. Campagna, Bish. Scala, Bish. Policastro, Bish. Nocera, Bish. Minuri, Bish. Capaccia, Bish. Caggiana, Bish. SALERNO, Salernum, in the Latit. of 40 deg. 30 min. Longit. 38 deg. 45 min. is advantageously situa∣ted on the Sea-shore, in a small Plain environ'd with Hills that are the most pleasant and fruitful of all throughout the whole Country. Its Harbour was also very considerable, before that of Naples was so much frequented, from whence it is distant 28 Miles to the South-east, as many from Cape Campanella to the East, and 30 from Benevento to the South. Pope Boniface VII. establish'd an Episcopal See in this City, A. D. 974, and therein (as they say) is pre∣serv'd the Body of St. Matthew the Apostle. It was, in time past, successively govern'd by 19 of its own proper Princes; and at present it is remarkable on the account of its famous School of Physick. Amalfi, Amalphis, is in like manner seated on the Sea-coasts, at the distance of 2 Miles from Scala to the West, 6 from Ravello to the East, 12 from Sa∣lerno to the South-west, and 24 from Naples to the South-east. It appertain'd, at first, to the House of St. Severino; afterward, it became a Royal City; and in the present Age, it hath been erected into a Dutchy, in favour of Octavio Picolomini, one of the most renowned Generals of his Time. It likewise enjoys the Title of a Metropolitan Sea, although it be only of a small extent, and ill built. It is repor∣ted, that the Body of St. Andrew the Apostle is here entomb'd; and, that the Mariner's Compass was first invented by one Grovanni, or Flavio Giaia, a Native of this Place. Acerno, Acernum, is a small Town standing on the foot of the Mountains, and bearing the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Salerno, from whence it is distant 15 Miles to the North-east toward Conza, and 8 from Volturara to the South. Campagna, Campania, hath its Station on the Con∣fluence of the Rivers Atro and Tenza, about 16 Miles from Salerno to the East, and 11 from the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea. The Title of a Marquisate is appropriated to this Place, together with that of a Bishop's See annexed to that of Sutrianum, and subject to the Metropolitan of Conza. It formerly depended on the Jurisdiction of the Prince of Mo∣naco. Scala, Scalae, or Camae, is founded on a Hill about 2 Miles from Amalfi to the East, and its Episcopal See is possess'd by a Prelate suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of this Metropolis. It was some time a large City, as it plainly appears from its Ruins; but at present is of a very small compass, scarcely containing 150 Houses, and seems daily to decay. Policastro, Policastrum, or Palaeocastrum, is a small Town almost deserted, and reduc'd to the form of a Village, on the Coasts of the Toscan Sea; together with a Bay of the same Name; about 8 miles from the Confines of the Province of Basilicata, 17 from the Promontory of Palinuro to the East, and 55 from Salerno to the South-east; nevertheless, it still retains the Title of an Episcopal See, under the same Me∣tropolitan of Salerno. Nocera, Nuceria, Ital. Nocera di Pagani, is in like manner dignify'd with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Salerno; and that of a Dutchy, appertaining to the Family of Barberino, being situated between Sarno and Cava, at the di∣stance of 10 miles from Amalfi to the North, 8 from Salerno to the North-east, and 22 from Naples. Minori, or Minuri, Minora, is founded on the Gulf of Salerno, about 8 miles from this City to the West, 3 from Amalfi, and 22 from Naples to the South. It is a Place, at present, of little Note, yet affords a See to a Prelate suffragan to the Archbishop of Amalfi. Capaccia, or Capaccio, Caput Aqueum, hath been lately rebuilt in a Plain, whereas it stood on an ad∣jacent Hill; together with a strong Fort, before it was raz'd by the Emperor Frederick I. sirnam'd Bar∣barossa, A. D. 1249. the Ruins whereof still bear the Name of Capaccio Vecchio. Its Episcopal See depends on the Metropolitan of Salerno, from whence it is distant 22 Miles to the South. The Province of BASILICATA is bounded on the North by that of Capitanato, and part of that of Bari; on the South, by Calabria; on the East, by the Gulf of Tarento; and on the West, by the two Principalities; being extended from North to South for the space of 82 miles, and 60 from East to West. It comprehends the greater part of the ancient Luca∣nia, but is not very fruitful, nor well inhabited. The Principal Cities, &c. are these: Viz. ACERENZA, Archb. Cap. Melfi, Bish. Rapolla, Bish. Muro, Bish. Lavello, Bish. Venosae, Bish. Tricarico, Bish. ACERENZA, or Cerenza, in the Latit. of 40 deg. 40 min. and the Longit. of 40 deg. is seated on the foot of Mount Apennine, where it is divided into two Parts near the River Bradano. Its Metro∣politan See hath been always united to that of Ma∣tera, in the Province of Otranto, from whence it is distant 28 miles to the West, and 10 from Venosa to the South-east. Melfi, Melphis, or Melfia, is situated on the Banks of the River la Molpa, on the Frontiers of Capitanato, and the Farther Principality, near Rapolla, and Monte Verde; 15 miles from Conza to the East, 65 from Naples, and 30 from Tarento. It is a large and well built City, defended by an old Castle built on a Rock. Its Episcopal See depends on the Metropolitan of Acerenza, but is altogether free from its Jurisdiction. Rapollo, or Rapello, Rapellum, is a small Town near Mount Apennine, and the Borders of the Farther Principality, being distant only 1 mile from Melfi to the South-east, 5 from Venosa, and 20 from Conza to the East. Here hath been, long since, establish'd an Episcopal See, subject to the Visitation of the Arch∣bishop of Siponto; but it was annex'd to that of Melfi by Pope Clement VII. A. D. 1528.
The HITHER CALABRIA, Calabria Ci∣terior, lies to the South of Basilicata, and to the North of the Farther Calabria; its utmost Extent consisting of the space of about 90 miles from North to South, and 64 from East to West. The most Considerable Cities and Towns are these: COSENZA, Archb. Cap. Rossano, Archb. Cassano, Bish. and Princip. Bisignano, Bish. and Princip. Strongoli, Bish. Pr. St. Marco, Bish. Mont-Alto, Bish. Amantea, Bish. Martotano, Bish. Cariati, Bish. Ʋmbriatico, Bish. Tarlia, Princip. Cyrisano, Princip. Catiglione, Princip. Pablo. COSENZA, Cosentia, in the Latit. of 39 deg. 5 min. and the Longit. of 40 deg. 40 min. is situated in a Plain near the Confluence of the Rivers Grati and Vasento, at the distance of 12 miles from the Coasts of the Toscan Sea to the East, 40 from the Ionian, and 30 from Rossano to the South. It is one of the principal Cities of the Kingdom of Naples, and the See of an Archbishop, being fortify'd with a a Castle built on an Hill, wherein Isabel of Arragon, the Wife of Philip the Hardy, King of France, died A. D. 1270. Rossano, Rossianum, or Ruscianum, stands on a stony Ground, environ'd on all sides with Rocks, and is scarcely distant 3 miles from the Gulf of Ta∣ranto, 16 from Bisignano to the East, 35 from Co∣senza to the North-east, and 12 from the Ruins of Thurium to the South. It enjoys the Title of a Me∣tropolitan See, and is famous for giving Birth to Pope John VII. Cassano, Cassanum, Cosanum, and Cosae, is a small Town near the Rivulet of Lyone, about 10 miles from Mount Apennine, as many from the Gulf of Taranto, and 20 from Rossano to the North, toward the Con∣fines of Basilicata. It hath been erected into an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Cosenza, and also bears the Title of a Principality, but at pre∣sent is a Place of little Note. The FARTHER CALABRIA, Cala∣bria Ʋlterior, lies to the South of the Hither, and forms, as it were, the Toe of Italy; including, from North to South, the space of about 105 Miles; and 54 from East to West. Its Soil is not equally fruitful in all Places, no more than that of the other Ca∣labria. The most remarkable Cities and Towns are these: REGIO, Archb. and Cap. S. Severino, Archb. Cotrone, Bish. Isola, Bish. Belcastro, Bish. Taverno, Bish. Nicastro, Bish. Monte Leone, Bish. Roccella, Prin. Seiglio, Prin. S. Agatha, Prin. Squillaci, Bish. Melito, Bish. & Pr. Oppido, Bish. Girace, Bish. Bova, Bish. Nicotera, Bish. Mida, Prin. Sarriona, Prin. Seminara, Gioia. REGIO, Regium Julium, or Rhegium, in the Latit. of 37 deg. 48 min. and the Longit. of 40 deg. 10 min. is situated in a Plain over-against the Island of Sicily, at the distance of 10 miles from Messina to the South-east; 28 from the Promontory call'd Il Capo Bianco, or Il Capo Bursone; and about 90 from Cosenza to the South. It was first founded by the Chalcedonians, and hath been long since erected into a Metropolitan See, being as yet a very fair City, although it hath been often storm'd and pillag'd by the Turks. S. Severino, San Severinum, stands on the Frontiers of the Hither Calabria, and is likewise dignify'd with the Title of a Metropolitan See, being distant about 87 miles from Regio to the North-east. The Province of the FARTHER ABRƲZZO, Abrutium Ʋlterius, is bounded on the North by the Gulf of Venice; on the South, by that of Sabina; and the Campaign of Rome; on the East, by the Hither Abruzzo; and on the West, by L' Marca d' Ancona, and Ombria. It is extended from North to South for the space of about 68 miles; and 46 from East to West. It was heretofore the greater part of the Region of Samnium, and a portion of that of Picenum. The Air is temperate; and the Soil every where extremely fertile, abounding in all sorts of Fruits, more-especially Saffron, insomuch that (as it is reported) the Inhabitants of the Territories round about Aquila raise every Year, through the planting of this Drug, the Summ of 40000 Ducats of Gold. The chief Cities, &c. are these: Viz. AQƲILA, Bish. Cap. Civita di Pena, Bish. Teramo, Bish. Atri, Bish. Campli, Bish. AQƲILA, in the Latit. of 42 deg. 10 min. and the Longit of 37 deg. 20 min. is seated on the side of a Mountain near the River Pescara, being distant 60 miles from Rome to the South-east, 70 from Ancona to the South, and about 90 from Naples. It was built, or enlarg'd, by the Lombards, out of the Ruins of Amiternum and Forconia, two demo∣lish'd Towns in the Neighbourhood; and its Epis∣copal See, under the Metropolitan of Civita Chieti, although free from its Jurisdiction, was translated hither from Forconia, by Pope Alexander IV. in the Year 1257. Civita di Pena, or Pinna, is distant 10 miles from Civita di Chieti to the West, and 8 from Atri. Its Episcopal See depends on the Metropolitan of Chieti, although exempted from its Jurisdiction; and that of Atri was united thereto by Pope Innocent IV. A. D. 1252. This City also appertains to the Do∣minions of the Duke of Parma. Teramo, Interamia, is in like manner an Episcopal See subject to the Metropolitan of Civita di Chieti, near the River Trontino, about 15 Miles from Ascoli to the South-west, 24 from Chieti, and 14 from the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea to the West. The HITHER ABRƲZZO hath the Gulph of Venice for its Northern Bounds; the Pro∣vince of Lavoro on the South; the County of Mo∣lise on the East; and the Farther Abruzzo on the West. Its Extent is 60 miles long, and about 42 broad.
The Principal Cities are these: CIVITA di CHIETI, Archb. Cap. Lanciano, Archb. Sulmone, Bish. Pr. Ortona, Bish. Cazoli, Pr. CIVITA di CHIETI, Teatea, or Teate, in the Latit. of 40 deg. 57 min. and the Longit. of 38 deg. 50 min. is situated on an Hill near the River Pescara, on the Frontiers of the Farther Abruzzo, almost in the midst between Lanciano to the South-east, and Atri to the North-west, at the distance of 14 miles from both; as also 8 from Pescara to the South-west, and the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea. It is the usual Place of Residence of the Governor of the Province, and was erected into an Archbishoprick by Pope Clement VI. Hence certain Regular Monks are call'd Theatines, in regard that Gio Pedro Caraffa, one of the Founders of their Order, was then Bishop of Chieti, and afterward andvanc'd to the Papal Dig∣nity, by the Name of Paul IV. Lanciano, Anxanum, and Lancianum, is seated on the Rivulet of Feltrino, near the Coasts of the Adria∣tick Sea, from whence it is distant 5 miles; as also 7 from Ortona to the South; about 15 from Il Guasto to the East; and as many from Cita di Chieti to the West. It is a very large City, and well frequented, by reason of the Fairs that are kept there in the Months of May and August. It hath also been the Sea of an Archbishop, ever since the Year 1562. Sulmone, Sulmo, is a fair City, remarkable for its Situation in a verdant Plain encompass'd with Moun∣tains, between two Rivers that spring out of the Apennine, at the distance of 8 miles from the Fron∣tiers of the Farther Abruzzo to the East, 30 from Venafro to the North, and 26 from Aquila to the South-east. It grew up out of the Ruins of Corfinium, or Pntina, an adjacent Village, and hath been for a long time the See of a Prelate suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Chieti, united many Ages ago to that of Valva. It is also dignify'd with the Title of a Princi∣pality appertaining to the Family of Borghesi. More∣over, this City is famous for giving Birth to the Poet Ovid, and to Pope Innocent VII. The County of MOLISE lies between the Gulf of Venice on the North-east; the Province of Lavoro on the South; that of Capitanato on the East; and the Hither Abruzzo on the West; en∣closing the space of about 36 miles from North to South, and 43 from East to West. The Chief Towns are these: BOIANO, Bish. Cap. Molise, Trivento, Bish. Isernia. BOIANO, Boianum, or Bovianum, in the Latit. of 41 deg. 25 min. and the Longit. of 38 deg. 40 min. is seated on the River Biferno, at the foot of Mount Apennine, in the Confines of the Province of Lavoro, being distant 23 miles from Capua to the North, 18 from Trivento, and 13 from Isernia to the East. It is a City of a very small extent, and not well built; nevertheless, it enjoys the Title of an Epis∣copal See, under the Metropolitan of Benevento. Molise, Molisia, is a small Town which hath im∣pos'd its Name on the whole Province, and is distant 10 miles from Iserna to the East, and as many from Boiano to the North. Trivento, Triventinum, or Treventinum, and Tri∣ventum, hath its Foundation on a Mountain, and is water'd by the R ver Trigno, about 17 miles from Boiano to the North, and 20 from the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea. The Episcopal See of this City de∣pends on the Metropolitan of Benevento. CAPITANATO, Apulia Daunia, is bounded on the North and East by the Adriatick Sea; on the South, by the Territories of Bari, together with those of Basilicata, and the Farther Principality; and on the West, by the County of Molise. This Province is extremely fruitful, and one of the most conside∣rable of the Kingdom of Naples. It is 76 miles from East to West, and 64 from North to South. The Principal Cities, &c. are these: MANFREDONIA, Archb. Cap. Monte S. Angelo, Archb. Troia, Bish. Ascoli, Bish. Lucera, Bish. Vieste, Bish. Forenzuola, Bish. Volturata, Bish. MANFREDONIA, Sipontum Novum, in the Latit. of 41 deg. 30 min. and the Longit. of 40 deg. was so call'd from Manfred King of Naples, the Son of the Emperor Frederick II. who founded it about the Year 1256. Not far from hence, within the space of 2 miles, at the foot of Mount Gargano, appear the Ruins of Ancient Sipontum, the Metropolitan See whereof was translated hither. The City of Manfre∣donia hath a very capacious Harbour, and is defended with a strong Fortress on the Coasts of the Gulf of Venice, at the distance of 12 miles from the Mouth of the River L'Ofanto to the North, and 25 from Lucera to the East. It was formerly taken by the Turks, and miserably ruin'd; but it hath been since repair'd, and remains in the Possession of the Spa∣niards. Monte S. Angelo, Mons S. Michaelis, stands on Mount Gargano, about 7 or 8 miles from Manfre∣donia, and is so named from the Apparition of St. Michael in that Place. Here is to be seen an admirable Grotto, cut out in the Rock; and the Devotion of the People hath given Occasion to the Building of a great number of Churches in the City, which is the Sea of the Archbishop of Sipontum, and united to that of Manfredonia. The Province of BARI hath the Adriatick Sea for its Northern and Eastern Limits; that of Capi∣tanato on the West; and those of Basilicata and Otranto on the South. It is extended from North to South for the space of about 26 miles, and 80 from East to West. The Chief Cities, &c. are these: BARI, Archb. Cap. Trani, Archb. Andria, Bish. Juvenazzo, Bish. Ruvo, Bish. Bitonto, Bish. Conversano, Bish. Monopoli, Bish. Polignano, Bish. Molfeta, Bish. BARI, Barium, Baris, Bario, and Barietum, in the Latit. of 41 deg. and the Longit. of 42 deg. hath a very convenient Haven on the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea, and is well fortify'd, being distant 20 miles from Polignano to the East, about as many from Trani to the West, 24 from Barletta to the East, 27 from Matara to the North, and 120 from Naples. It is a very ancient City, and took its Name
(according to the Testimony of Festus) from a small Island near Brundusium, or Brindesi, the Inhabitants of which Place were the Founders thereof. How∣ever, it is dignify'd with the Title of a Metropolitan See, and (as they say) the Body of St. Nicholas, Bishop of Myra, in Lycia, was brought thither when that Country was ravag d by the Barbarians, in the Year 1087. Trani, Tranium, or Tranum, is seated in a very fruitful Country, and heretofore had a commodious Harbour on the Coasts of the Adriatick See, which is now almost entirely stopt up with Sand. It is scarcely distant 6 miles from Andria, and 24 from Bari. The Inhabitants affirm from an old Tradition, That their City was founded by Trajan the Roman Emperor; and even some time call'd Trajana, from his Name. Indeed, it is defended with a Castle built by the Emperor Frderick II. and hath been long since erected into an Archbishoprick. The Province of OTRANTO, Hydruntina Pro∣vincia, is a Peninsula environ'd with the Adriatick and Ionian Seas, and by the Territories of Bari and Basi∣licata, extending it self for the space of 105 leagues from East to West, and only 28 from North to South. It is reported, that this Country is very ob∣noxious to the Devastation of the Grashoppers, which are usually driven away by certain peculiar Birds of these Regions. The Turks have often made Descents on this Province, and it hath been no less frequently pillag'd through the Incursions of Pirates. The most Remarkable Cities and Towns are these: OTRANTO, Archb. Cap. Brindesi, Archb. Tarento, Archb. Lecce, Bish. Matera, Bish. Gallipoli, Bish. Matola, Bish. St. Maria di Leuca, Bish. OTRANTO, Hydruntum, in the Latit. of 40 deg. 6 min. and the Longit. of 42 deg. 20 min. is situated on the Sea-coasts, near the mouth of the Gulf of Venice, at the distance of 45 miles from Brindesi to the South, 20 from Lecce, and 24 from Gallipoli to the East; as also about 60 from the nearest Coasts of Epirus, and 19 from the Promon∣tory of St. Maria di Leuca to the North. This City bears the Title of a Metropolitan See, and is well fortify'd with a very strong Castle built on a Rock. However, Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks, storm'd it, after an outragious manner, A. D. 1480. but the Christians as valiantly recover'd it some time after; and it is as yet subject to the Dominion of the King of Spain, together with the adjacent Province of the same Name, whereof it was formerly the Metropolis, but at present it falls very much to decay. Brindesi, Brundusium, is in like manner the See of an Archbishop, and was first founded by the Aeto∣lians who accompany'd Diomedes, (as we are inform'd by St. Isidorus.) It is distant 36 miles from Tarento to the East, 15 from Oria, 45 from Brindesi to the North, 20 from Lecce, and 64 from Bari to the East. This City hath a very safe and capacious Harbour, which is defended by a strong Castle built in the Sea, and by some other small Forts. Tarento, Tarentum, is seated on a Bay of the same Name, and had in time past a very large Harbour, which is now so far choak'd up with huge Stones, that it is only capable of receiving Vessels of a small size. This City, which hath been erected into a Metropolitan See and Dutchy, is distant about 32 miles from Brindesi to the West; 35 from Matola to the East; 20 from Metapontum, a demolish'd Town; and 90 from the Promontory of St. Maria di Leuca. It was built by the Spartans, and heretofore the Ca∣pital of a Republick that rais d a War against the Romans, A. U. 472. but became one of their Co∣lonies, in 631. (as it is related in the History of Vel∣leius Paterculus.) Indeed, it is of a small compass; nevertheless, well built, and fenced with a conside∣rable Fort, wherein is maintain'd a strong Garrison of Spaniards. This Place hath imparted its Name to certain little Animals commonly call'd Tarantula's, the Biting of which, is only cur'd through the Sound of Musical Instruments. Lecce, Aletium, or Litium, is a large and well built City, and at present the Capital of the Province of Otranto, surpassing all the others, even throughout the whole Kingdom, in the Number of Inhabitants, excepting that of Naples alone. It is also an Epis∣copal See under the Metropolitan of Otranto, from whence it is distant 20 miles to the South, about as many from Brindesi to the North, 7 from the Coasts of the Adriatick See to the West, 15 from Nardo, and almost 50 from Tarento the East. CHAP. V. The Islands situated on the Coasts of Italy. THE Islands that depend on the Jurisdiction of the Continent of Italy, by reason of their Neighbourhood, or the Conformity of Lan∣guage and Manners, are very Considerable, some of them bearing the Title of a Kingdom: On which account it will be requisite here to subjoyn a De∣scription of the Chiefest of them: SICILY, Palermo, Archb. Sardinia, Cagliari, Archb. Corsica, La Batia. The Isles of Lipari, Lipari. The Islands round a∣bout Sardinia, S. Pietro. The Isle of Elbe, and others adjacent, Cosmopoli, Bish. Capri, Ischia, Ponza,
The Island of SICILY, Sicilia. SICILY is situated in the Mediterranean Sea, between 35 deg. 30 min. and the 38 deg. 40 min. of Latitude; as also between the 36 deg. 10 min. and the 40 deg. of Longitude; stretching it self out from West to North-east, viz. from Masala as far as Cape Faro, for the space of 200 Miles; 180 from West to East, from Trapano to St. Alexis; and 550 in Coasts or Compass in a straight Line, that is to say, without reckoning the Extent of the Cavity of the Gulfs. Indeed, it is the largest Island of the Mediterra∣nean, dignify'd with the Title of a Kingdom, and (as they say) was at first joined to the Continent of Italy, but afterward separated from thence through the vio∣lence of the Waves. It was heretofore call d Trinacria, by reason of its Triangular form▪ and with respect to its Three Capes, viz. 1st. That of I Cap di Faro, or Pe∣lorum Promtorium, to th North east, toward Italy. 2d. Il Capo ssaro, or Pum Promontorium, to the South-east▪ toward Gree. And the 3d. Il Capo di Coco, or Lilybaem Promontorium, to the West, to∣ward Africa. The Air is very healthful, and the Soil fertile in all sorts of Fruits and Grains, affording abundance of Wax, Honey, Sugar, Oil, Wine, Saffron, and Silk. Here are also to be seen many Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and other Metals and Minerals; besides Salt, Agates, Emeralds, Jaspar, Porphyry, and divers other kinds of Precious-stones. Moreover, there are Forests, and verdant Pastures, that yield much va∣riety of Game. Lastly, On the Coasts, more-espe∣cially toward Trapano, the Inhabitants find good store of most excellent Coral. Among the Mountains, that of Aetna, or Mount Gibel, is chiefly remarkable, being of an extreme height, insomuch that Snow al∣ways lies on its Top; but Flames continually pro∣ceed from an horrible Gulf in the midst thereof, which casts forth into the Air vast heaps of Cinders, with so great violence, that the adjacent Country, for the space of 3 Leagues round, is cover'd with them. This Torrent of Flames hath often burnt the Town of Catania, although the Cinders, when they fall in less quantities serve to dung and enrich the Ground. This Island receiv'd vast Damages by an Earthquake a Year or two ago. The Kingdom of Sicily hath pass'd under the Do∣minion of the King of Spain, and is govern'd by his Vice-Roy; although the Kings of France have not forborn to lay Claim thereto, as the Heirs of the Counts of Provence: But His Most Catholick Majesty receives from thence, every Year, a Revenue amount∣ing to the Summ of Four Millions of Crowns. The Rivers of Salso, Dataino, and part of that of Termini, together with some Mountains, divide the whole Island into Three several Districts, commonly call'd Valleys, as it appears from the ensuing Table: Sicily divided into Three Provinces: 1. Valley of Mazara, containing these Cities, &c. viz. PALERMO, Archb. Cap. Mont-Real, Archb. Mazara, Bish. Gergenti, Bish. Palymita. Marsalla. Castel a Mare. Calatasimi. St. Vito. Trapano. Xacca. Castel Veterano. Rivona. Miranda. Salemi. lley of Demoni, in which are these Towns, &c. viz. MESSINA, Archb. Catania, Bish. Cefaledi, Bish. Pati, Bish. Bish. Metazzo. Termini. Polizzi. Capizzi. Ali. Troina. Centorvi. Nicosia. Randazzo. Schizone. 3. Valley of Noto, in which are these Cities, &c. viz. NOTO, Cap. Syracuse, Bish. Motya. Augusta. Leontini. Jarratana. Castrogio Vanni. Calata Sibeta. Modica. Xielli. Butera. Camarana. Terra Nuova. Alicata. Calata-Girone. Plutio-Nuovo. Ragusa. Mazarino. PALERMO, Panormus, in the Latit. of 37 deg. 20 min. and the Longit. of 36 deg. 45 min. the Ca∣pital City of the Island, is pleasantly situated on its Northern Coasts, in the Province or Valley of Mazara, at the distance of 4 miles from Mont-Reale to the North; 60 from the Cape of Coco to the North-east; 140 from Messina to the West; and almost 150 from the Cape of Faro; 228 almost South of Naples; and 270 South of Rome. It was built by the Phenicians, about the time of the arrival of the Grecians in this Island, and erected into a Metropolis by Roger Count of Sicily, being adorn'd with divers fair Buildings, a stately Palace and a strong Fort which defends the Mole. It was formerly the Seat of the Kings of Sicily, and is at this day that of the Vice-Roys, and of an Archbishop. Moreover, Pa∣lermo is a very considerable Place, on the account of
its Traffick, the Grandeur of the Noblemen, and Riches of its Inhabitants. Mont-Reale is a small City seated on a Hill near Panormo, from whence it is distant only 4 miles to the East. William II. King of Sicily, caus'd a most magnificent Cathedral-Church to be built here, and endowed it with large Revenues. The Metropolitan-See was also re-establish'd, through the Solicitation of the same Prince, by Pope Lucius III. in the Year 1182. Mazara stands in the Valley, and at the mouth of a small River of the same Name, almost in the midst between Termini to the East, and the Cape of Coco to the West; about 24 miles from Trapano to the South-east, and 55 from Gergenti to the West. It is well fortify'd, and hath a very convenient Port, together with an Episcopal See subject to the Metropolitan of Palermo. Gergenti or Agrigente, Agrigentum and Agragas, was heretofore the largest of the Cities of Sicily, ex∣tending it self for the space of 10 miles in compass; but is now much decay'd, yet bears the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Palermo. It is built on an Hill, and defended on the Northern side with a Castle, being distant 3 miles from the African See, 54 from Palermo to the South, 64 from the Cape of Coco to the East, and 72 from that of Passaro. Messina, Messana, is remarkable for its Situation on the Eastern Coasts of the Island, in the Province or Valley of Demona; and hath a very deep and safe Port 4 miles in compass, the Entrance whereof is secured by three Castles, and a great number of Bastions. It is a very fair City, and the most famous Mart of the whole Mediterranean, having four large Suburbs extended on the Coasts, as it were so many Villages. It is also fortify'd with four Citadels, and fourteen Bastions, erected by the Emperor Charles V. A. D. 1555. The publick Buildings are every where very magnificent, more-especially the Royal Palace, and the Arsenal, which is furnish'd with all manner of Ammunitions. The first Foundation of this City was laid by the Messenians, a People of Peloponnesus, under the Conduct of Anaxilaus Tyrant of Rhegium; and was recover'd from the Saracens by Roger Duke of Normandy, A. D. 1060. Afterward, it became subject to the Kings of Sicily; but hath always en∣joy'd very great Privileges, together with the Title of a Metropolitan See, and is at present govern'd by a certain Lieutenant, commonly call d Il Stradigo. The Emperor Henry VI. died here, A. D. 1198. and Frederick III. King of Sicily, in 1377. Messina is scarcely distant 6 miles from the Coasts of the Far∣ther Calabria to the West, 12 from Regio, about 150 from Palermo, 12 from Cape Faro to the South, and 60 from Catania. Catania, Catana, or Catina, is seated on a Gulf whereto it hath imparted its Name, at the mouth of the River Judicello, about 40 miles from Syracuse to the North, and 50 from Messina. It was built by the Chalcedonians, (according to the report of Euse∣bius;) but the Emperor Charles V. caus'd it to be encompass'd with Walls and Fortifications. It is a Place of considerable Traffick, and the See of a Pre∣late suffragan to the Archbishop of Mont-Reale: But the neighbourhood of Mount Aetna, or Gibel, is very prejudicial thereto; for it was miserably laid waste, A. D. 1669. and a great number of Vil∣lages within its Territories have been utterly over∣thrown, through the violence of those fiery Tor∣rents. Cefaledi, or Cefalu, Cephaledis, Cephalaedis, Cepha∣ledium, and Cephalodium, is extended on the Nor∣thern Coasts of the Isle into the Toscan Sea, as it were in form of a Promontory, and hath a very capacious Harbour defended by a Castle built on an Hill, being distant 32 Miles from Palermo to the East, 50 from Patti, and 84 from Messina. Patti, Pactae, or Pacta, is a well built City about 48 miles from Messina to the West, toward Palermo; and scarcely 500 Paces from the Sea-coasts on the Northern-side of the Island. It was built near the Ruins of Tyndaro, a demolish'd Town, by Count Roger, after the expulsion of the Saracens, and e∣rected into an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Messina, by Pope Eugenius III. Noto, Netum, or Neetum, the Capital of a Valley or Province of the same Name, is a very fair and large City standing on a high Mountain, and en∣viron'd on all sides with steep Rocks and Valleys; on the Southern-side of the Isle, at the distance of 8 miles from the Sea-coasts, 15 from Cape Passaro to the North-west, and 25 from Syracuse to the South. It was the Place of Nativity of Ducel King of the Sicilians, who built this Town before the time of the Romans. Syracuse, Syracusae; or Saragossa (according to the Pronunciation of the Spaniards) was heretofore the Metropolis of the whole Island of Sicily, but is now almost ruin'd through divers Revolutions. It hath also been for some time the See of an Archbishop, and as yet retains that of a Prelate suffragan to the Metropolitan of Mont-Reale. It is situated at present in a Peninsule of pure Rock, and defended by a Castle which is in like manner erected on a Rock, and sepa∣rated from the Town by a large Moat. The Cathe∣dral-Church, dedicated to St. Lucius, was in time past the Temple of Diana. There are also divers other Churches, and stately Edifices, together with a very commodious Harbour. We are inform'd by Dionysius Halicarnasseus, that Syracuse was founded by a Person descended from Hercules, and nam'd Ar∣chias, who came from Corinth. However, it is cer∣tain that at first it was divided into Four Parts, or rather so many Towns, viz. those of Neapolis, Achradina, Tycha, and Ortygia; and in process of Time became one of the fairest and largest Cities of the World. It is distant 40 miles from Catania to the South, 38 from Cape Passaro, and 60 from Castro Jounna to the South-east. The Island of SARDINIA. SARDINIA lies between the 37 deg. 10 min. and the 39 deg. 50 min. of Latitude; as also be∣tween the 31 deg. 10 min. and the 35 deg. 15 min. of Longitude. Insomuch that it is extended from North to South for the space of about 160 miles; 94 from East to West; and 450 in compass. The Air is ex∣tremely unhealthy; but the Country, although Mountainous, is very fruitful, affording abundance of Corn, excellent White-wines and Oil. There are also found divers Mines of Silver, Sulphur and Alum, and very great quantities of Salt are made in those Territories. The Forests, in like manner, are full of Deer; and in the Pastures are fed many Herds of Cattle. And indeed, this Island would not be at all inferiour to that of Sicily, in case its Soil were as well cultivated. Pope Boniface VIII. having granted a Permission to the Kings of Arragon, to conquer the same Island, it fell into the Possession of
the Spaniards, and it is at present govern'd by a Vice-Roy of the King of Spain. It is usually divided into Two Parts or Provinces, viz. one toward the South, call'd Capo di Cagliari; and the other to the North, nam'd Capo di Lugodori. 1. Capo di Ca∣gliari, in which are these Cities, &c. viz. CAGLIARI, Archb. Cap. Oristagni, Archb. Villa d' Iglesia, Bish. Monte-Reale. Lode. Galtello. S. Pietro Toralba. 2. Capo di Lu∣godori, in which are these Cities, &c. viz. GASSARI, Archb. Castel-Aragoneie, Bish. Bosa, Bish. Algheri, Bish. Sarda. Carignano. Terra-Nuova. CAGLIARI, Calaris, or Carallis, the Metro∣polis of the whole Island, in the Latit. of 37 deg. 25 min. and the Longit. of 32 deg. 30. min. is situated on an Hill on the Southern Coasts thereof, and hath three very large Suburbs, viz. those of Estampache, Villa-Nova, and la Marina, at the distance of 30 Miles from Oristagni to the East; 100 from Tarre, a demolish'd Town, to the South; and about 130 from the nearest Coasts of Africa. It is the usual Place of Residence of the Vice-Roy, and of the Noblemen of the Isle, and the See of an Archbishop; being adorn'd with an University, a Castle, and a capacious Har∣bour on the Bay of the same name. This City was ruin'd by the Arabians, and re-built by the Inhabi∣tants of Pisa. It was taken by James II. King of Aragon, A. D. 1330. and hath ever since been subject to the Dominion of the Spaniards, together with the whole Island. Moreover, it gave Birth to St. Hilary, Bishop of Rome: And Martin King of Sicily died therein, A. D. 1409. Oristagni, Arborea, is in like manner the See of an Archbishop, on the Western-side of the Isle, distant only 6 Miles from the Gulf of the same name, and the Mouth of a River call'd also Il Rio d'Oristagno; 45 from Cagliari to the North-west; 30 from Bosa; and 60 from Sassari. It is not much inhabited, by reason of the unhealthiness of the Air; and was taken by the French Forces, under the Command of General Harcourt, A. D. 1677. Sassari, Sassaris, or Turris Libyssonis Nova, stands in a delightful Plain near a small River in the Pro∣vince of Capo di Lugodori, about 18 miles from Algheri, and 12 from the Ruins of Turris Libyssonis, or Torra, from whence the Metropolitan See was removed hither by Pope Eugenius IV. A. D. 1441. This City is large, but not well fortified. Castel-Aragonese, Castrum Aragonense, or Emporiae Novae, is seated on the River Termo, or Termi, and hath a convenient Harbour at the mouth of that of Coquinas, being distant about 100 miles from Cagliari to the North, 80 from Oristagni, and 20 from Sassari. This City is well fortify'd with a strong Citadel, and other considerable Works; but the Aragonians impos'd on it the Name of Arago∣, by reason that it was the first Place that they subdued in the Island of Sardinia. Its Episcopal See, under the Mtropolitan of Sassari, was translated hithr from  by Pope Alexander VI. in 1503. and is always united to that of Terra Nuova. Bosa is a Town of great Antiquity, and at present the See of a Prelate suffragan to the Archbishop of Sassari, from whence it is distant 35 miles, and 30 from Oristagni to the North. It is built on the Western-side of the Island, near the mouth of a small River, being fenced with a Fort call'd Sarra∣velle, and having a very capacious Harbour. Algheri, Corax Algaria, er Alguerium, stands on the Northern Coasts of the Island, in the Province of Lugodori, and sprang up out of the Ruins of Tilium, or Argentera, a neighbouring Town. This City, though of a small extent, is nevertheless well built, and very populous, being distant 16 miles from Sassari to the South, and as many from Bosa. Its Episcopal See is subject to the Visitation of the Archbishop of Sassari; and was establish'd here in∣stead of that of Othana, by Pope Julius II. in the Year 1504. The Island of CORSICA. THE Island of CORSICA lies to the North of that of Sardinia, and is separated from it only by a Streight 1 League broad, being situated between the 40 and 42 deg. of Latit. as also between the 31 deg. 30 min. and the 32 deg. 40 min. of Longit. (that is to say) it is extended from North to South for the space of about 115 Leagues 55 from East to West; and 270 in Compass. The Air is not very healthful; and the Ground is, for the most part, stony, full of Woods, and untilled: Nevertheless, the Valleys bring forth Corn; and the Hills afford most delicious Grapes, and other Fruits, more-espe∣cially Figs, Almonds, and Chesnuts. Iron and Oil are transported from hence into Italy. The Forests are well stored with Pheasants and Stags, and the Pastures with Bushes, and all sorts of Cattel; but the Horses are extremely restive and unruly. More∣over, great quantities of excellent Fishes and Coral are taken on the Coasts near Cape Boasfacro. How∣ever, by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air, the Island is not well peopled. In the midst thereof stands Mount Gradaccio, together with the two ad∣jacent Lakes of Crena and Ino. The Rivers of Liamone and Tavignano spring from the former; one of which runs toward the East, and the other toward the West. That of Golo ariseth out of the Lake of Igno, and waters the County of Mariana: These are the most considerable Rivers of this Island. In the VIIIth. Century the Saracens took Posses∣sion of Corsica, and were expell'd from thence some time after. The Genoeses, and Inhabitants of Pisa, contended for it a long while; until at length the former found means to make themselves Masters thereof, and have possess'd it above 600 Years: They send thither a Governour every two Years, who is assisted by a Lieutenant, and divers Commissaries. The Natives of Corsica are good Soldiers, but very revengeful, cruel and rude; insomuch that 'tis be∣liev'd that their Robberies have given occasion to the Name of Corsairs, which is usually appropriated to Pyrates and Rovers on the Sea. The whole Island is divided into Four Parts, or Provinces, according to the Four Cardinal Points of the World; viz. 1. Banda di Dentre, or the Eastern: 2. Banda di Fuora, or Northern: 3. Banda di quà da Monti, or the Western: and 4. Banda di là da Monti, or the Southern.
The Principal Cities and Towns are these: Viz. BASTIA, Cap. Nebbio, Bish. Mariana, ruin'd Bish. Alteria, ruin'd Bish. Sagona, ruin'd Bish. Ajazzo, Bish. Bonifacio, Port. St. Fiorenzo. Calvi. Accia, ruin'd. Corse. St. Pietro. Sarteni. La BASTIA, Mantinum, in the Latit. of 41 deg. 30 min. and the Longit. of 32 deg. 30 min. is situated in the Northern part of the Island, on the Sea-shore, toward the West, at the distance of 7 Miles from St. Fiorenzo to the East; 22 from Cape Corso to the South; and 15 from Mariana. The Genoese Governour usually resides in this City, toge∣ther with the Bishop of Mariana. It is defended by a Fortress, and hath a commodious Harbour. The Inhabitants are expert in Maritime Affairs, but very much addicted to Piracy. Nebbio, Nebbium, is a ruin'd City near the Vil∣lage of Rosoli, and was heretofore an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Genoua; but its Bishop now hath a Palace at St. Fiorenzo, from whence it is distant only half a mile toward Mariana, one from the Sea-shore to the South, and nine from Bastia to the South-west. It scarcely contains within its Pre∣cincts fifteen Houses, and seventy Persons. Mariana was in time past a Colony of the Ro∣mans, so named from the Consul Marius, and a very fair City on the Banks of the River Eolus, which di∣vided it into two Parts, whereof the Northern was termed Mariana, and the Southern Casinea: It was also adorn'd with a Colossus, and other magnificent Structures. However, it now lies altogether waste, and its Ruins are as yet call'd Le Couine di Mariana, the Cathedral Church only remaining, together with some other Buildings without Roofs, about 20 miles from Aleria to the North; and 15 from Bastia, where its Bishop hath resided ever since the Year 1575. The Episcopal See of Mariana is subject to the Metropolitan of Genoua, and is united to that of Accia. Aleria is in like manner a ruin'd City, call'd Aleria destrutta, and scarcely comprehending ten Houses: but the Bishop thereof, who is suffragan to the Archbishop of Pisa, hath a Seat at Cervioni, a Town situated in the midst of the Island. Sagona was seated in a Plain on the Western-side of the Isle, but is now altogether demolish'd, so that its Ruins scarcely appear, between Calvi to the North, and Ajazzo to the South, at the distance of 20 miles from both, and 5 from the mouth of the River Liamone. However, its Episcopal see remains under the Metropolitan of Pisa; and the Bishop hath a Place of Residence in a neighbouring Village, where is also erected a Cathedral Church. Ajazzo, or Ajaccio, Ʋrsinium, or Adjacium, hath its Station on a small Bay of the same Name in the Western Coasts, about 42 miles from Bonifacio to the North-west, and 40 from Calvi to the South. It was heretofore the Capital City of the Island, and as yet retains the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Pisa. Divers other Islands. THE Islands of LIPARI, Lipareae Insulae, heretofore call'd Aeoliae and Vulcaniae, are si∣tuated to the North of that of Sicily. The Poets feign'd them to be the Country of Vulcan, and Aeolus King of the Winds. They are Nine in number: Viz. 1. LIPARI, Bish. Cap. 2. Palmaria, or Felicur. 3. Volcano. 4. Stromboli. 5. Alcudi, or Alicar. 6. Ʋstica. 7. Salino. 8. Panaria. 9. Parc-Roto. The Island of LIPARI, Meligunis, or Lipara, is extended for the space of 18 miles in compass, and hath a small yet fair City of the same name, which is built on a steep Rock, at the distance of 40 miles from the Northern Coasts of Sicily to the North, and 50 from those of the Farther Calabria to the West. It is defended by a very considerable Fortress nam'd La Pignatara; and was nevertheless runin'd by Barbarossa, Commander of the Turkish Fleet, A. D. 1544. but hath been since very well repair'd. Its Episcopal See was first establish'd by Pope Eugenius III. A. D. 1151. and was exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Metropolitan of Messina, under the Pontificate of Ʋrban VIII. in the Year 1627. Among the Islands that lie round about that of Sar∣dinia, the Six ensuing are chiefly remarkable: Viz. 1. St. Pietro. 2. St. Antiocha. 3. Di Vacca. 4. Di Toro. 5. Tavolato. 6. Asinaria. The Isle of St. Peter, or St. Pietro, Insula S. Petri, lies to the South of Sardinia, and is distant about 2 or 3 Leagues from its Coasts. Moreover, along those of Italy, from the Islands of Lipari as far as Genoa, are situated many others: The Chief of which are these: Viz. CAPRI, or Capra, Bish. Ischia, Bish. Ponza. Gianuti. Giglio. Elba. Monte-Christo. Formiche. Pianosa. Capraia. Maloria. Gorgona. The Island of CAPRI, Capreae, is seated al∣most over-against Cape Campanella, in the Hither Principality, and the City of Massa, from whence it is separated by a narrow Streight only 3 miles broad, call'd Le Boche di Capri. It is extended in compass for the space of 12 miles; and on the Southern Coasts thereof stands a small City of the same Name, dig∣nify'd with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Amalfi. But the Bishop's Revenue consists altogether in Quails and Partridges that are taken here twice every Year in great abundance; whence this Island is facetiously termed, by some
Persons, Il Vescovato delle Quaglie, or, The Bishoprick of Quails. The Emperor Tiberius took much De∣light in this Place, and caus'd a magnificent Palace to be built therein, the Ruins of which are as yet to be seen. The City of Capri is fenced with a strong Fortress founded on a steep Rock, and is distant 25 miles from Naples to the South, and 8 from Sorrento to the North-east. The Island of Ischia, Pithecusa, or Aenaria, is very remarkable, on the account of its Situation, as being encompass'd with inaccessible Rocks, except∣ing on one side, where few Men being advanta∣geously posted, may easily defend it against the At∣tacks of a whole Army. It is extended for the space of 20 miles in compass, over-against the Town of Cuma, in the Province of Lavoro, only 3 miles from the Coasts of Cape Miseno; as also 18 from Naples to the West. The Marquiss of Guasto was some time Lord thereof, and caus'd it to be adorn'd with a stately Palace. This Island is full of Sulphur, which took fire within the Bowels of the Earth, in the time of Charles II. King of Naples, and burnt throughout the Country after an horrible manner, as far as Ischia, the Capital City, for the space of about half a League, which Place is called Cremata, and altogether barren. The City of Ischia, enjoying the Title of an Episcopal See, is defended by a strong Citadel erected on a Rock in the Sea, and joyn'd thereto by a Bridge, which serv'd as a Place of Refuge to Ferdinand King of Naples, when Charles VIII. King of France, had sub∣dued all his Dominions, A. D. 1495. The Island of Ponza, Pontia, lies in like manner on the Coasts of the Kingdom of Naples, over-against Gaeta, at the distance of 13 miles from the Circean Promontory, or Il Monte Circello, to the South; 6 from the Isle of Palmaruolo; 8 from that of Par∣dataria a Santa Maria to the West; and 20 from Terracina. It was heretofore desart and uninhabited, being famous for the Banishments of the Roman Citizens; but a Town and Tower were built therein, A. D. 1583. and it hath ever since remain'd in the Possession of the Dukes of Parma. The Isle of Elba, Aethalia, or Ilva, is situated on the Coasts of Toscany, over-against Piambino, from whence it is distant only 10 miles, and extending it self for the space of 40 Italian miles in compass. It formerly appertain'd to the Jurisdiction of the In∣habitants of Sienna, but at present is subject to the Prince of Piombino: nevertheless, it is under the Pro∣tection of the Spaniards, who are Masters of Porto∣longone, a strong Fortress built on an Hill; while the Grand Duke of Toscany retains only the Possession of the Harbour and Town of Porto Ferraro, which is, as it were, the Capital City. The Island is divided into five or six Parishes, and abounds in Mines of excel∣lent Iron.
SPAIN. map of Spain the KINGDOME of SPAIN. CHAP. I. SPAIN, Hispania, in General. THIS Kingdom is the most Western of Europe; comprehending Portugal, which heretofore was only a Province thereof, but at present composeth a separated State. And indeed it was call'd Hesperia by the Grecians, on the account of its Westerly Situation. But the Ro∣mans term'd it at first Iberia, from Iberus, or Ebro, one of its principal Rivers. And others derive its Latin NAME Hispania, from the City of His∣palis, or Sevil. The Continent of Spain lies in form of a large Peninsula, resembling an Oxe-Hide extended on
the Ground, the Neck of which is joyn'd to France; bounded on the North by the Cantabrian Ocean, or Sea of Biscay; on the South, by the Streights of Gibraltar, and the Mediterranean Sea; on the East, by the same Sea, and the Pyrenaean Mountains; and on the West, by the Atlantick or Western Ocean. It is situated between the 7th. deg. and 22d. min. of Longitude, and between the 36th. and 40th. deg. of Latitude; stretching it self forth from East to West for the space of about 630 Miles; that is to say, from Cape Creus in Catalonia, to Cape Finis-Terrae in Gallicia: As also about 480 Miles in Breadth, from Gibraltar at the Streights-mouth in Andalusia, to Cape Penna's in Asturia. The Air is generally clear, though somewhat hot; and very healthful, by reason of gentle Breezes that come from the Sea-coasts. Neither are the Inhabi∣tants annoy'd with Bogs, or Marshy Grounds. How∣ever, the Temperature of the Air is not every where the same; for it is much colder toward the North, and other Parts expos d to the Ocean. The excessive Heats in many Places render the Soil dry and barren; which nevertheless would be much more fertile, if it were duly cultivated. The In∣land Provinces are, for the most part, destitute of Water, beset with Woods, Forests, Rocks and Desarts; but the Southern being water'd with many Rivers, and rising up here and there with Hills, affords good store of Provisions. Indeed, Corn and other Grains are wanting; but as a recompense for that defect, divers sorts of excellent Fruits are ga∣ther'd, more-especially Grapes and Olives, of which are made Wines and Oils of a most delicious Taste. There are also many Mines of Copper, Quicksilver, Tin, Iron, Lead, Vermillion, Gold and Silver; but the two last sorts have been spar'd since the Discovery of America. Moreover, this Country abounds in Cattle, chiefly good Horses: And the Tunny-Fishery affords a considerable Revenue; for one single Draught (as they say) sometimes amounts to the Summ of Thirty five or Forty Millions of Crowns. On the Coasts of Biscay are likewise taken Whales of an extraordinary bigness. The principal Mountains are, 1. The Pyrenaean, which run 15 Miles in length, and bear different Names in divers Places. 2. The Mountains of Occa, formerly call'd Idubeda, that descend to the Mediter∣ranean Sea toward Ttosa. 3. Oroxpeda, nam'd by the Inhabitants La Penna de los Enamorados, or The Lovers Rock. 4. Mount Culpe, or Ceuta, where Her∣cules's Pillars were heretofore erected, at the mouth of the same Streight. 5. Mount Ivi, near Barcelona, so nam d as it were the Mountain of the Jews, whose Sepulchres and Monuments are still to be seen there. The Romans heretofore extracted vast Summs of Money out of the Mines of Asturia, Gallicia and Portugal, and immense Riches have been of late transported from the West-Indies into Spain; for it is reported, that it was computed, in the Year 1618, that those Regions, since they were descried unto that time, had yielded 1536 Millions of Gold; although the first Expence, defrayed for the carrying on of such an Enterprize, amounted only to 1200 Ducats, which were disburs d by a Secretary of State. Never∣theless, the Necessity whereby the Inhabitants of Spain are oblig'd to purchase foreign Merchandizes, exhausts the most part of their Gold and Silver; which caus'd Henry IV. King of France, to say, That the Pistoles of the Spaniards shewed their Wealth at home, and were a mark of their Poverty when carry'd any where else. It is usually avouch'd in Spain, That the Wines of Valencia are most excellent; the Citrons, Oranges, and other Fruits of Castille; the Wool and Cattle of Estromadura and Aragon: and, That the Horses of Andalusia are the most beautiful and lively; those of Asturia the strongest; and those of Portugal the swiftest. Thus the Whales of the Coasts of Biscay are chiefly commended; the Tunnies of the Streights of Gibraltar; the rich Silver Mines of Villagutierra and Almadouar; the Copper and Iron of Alava, Biscay and Guipuscoa; the Quicksilver of Almadino; the Marble, Alabaster and Precious stones of the Moun∣tains, and the Coral of the neighbouring Seas. And Of the Cities, is commonly said, Mdrid the Royal; Svil the Merchandizing; Grenda the Great; Valencia the air; Bacelona the Rich; Saragossa the Content; Vallidlia the Genteel; Toledo the Ancient; Compostello the Devout; and Salamanca the Learned. The most remarkable Rivers of Spain are, 1. The Ebro, Iberus, which hath its Source in the Mountains of Old Castille, near Asturia; passeth through a Corner of Navarr; crosseth Aragon, and Sarragossa the Capital City of this Province, as also Tortosa in Catalonia; and at length dischargeth it self into the Mediterranean Sea. 2. The Guadalquivir; that is to say, the Great River, call d in Latin Boetis, ariseth from the Mountains of Murcia, runs through Crd and Sevil, and after having cross d Andalusia, falls into the Ocean, and the Bay of Cadiz, near the Fort of St. Lucar. 3. The Guadiano Anas, springs forth from the Mountains of New Castille, passeth almost through the whole Country, and having se∣parated the little Kingdom of Algarva from the Pro∣vince of Andalusia, disembogues it self into the Ocean. 4. The Tajo, Tagus, takes its rise in New Castille, on the Confines of Aragon, watereth the City of Toledo, traverseth Portugal, and falls into the Ocean beyond Lisbon. 5. The Durio, Durius, hath its Head in Old Castille, and runs through the King∣dom; together with those of Leon and Portugal. 6. The Minho, Minius, crosseth Gallicia from the North to the South-west, and at last, having divided the same Province from the Kingdom of Portugal, dischargeth it self into the Atlantick Ocean, five Leagues below the City of Tuy, near the Town of Caminha. 7. Arga, Aragus, the most remote River of Spain, riseth out of the Pyrenaean Mountains, in the Frontiers of Gascogne, ten Leagues from Bajona to the South; then flowing through Navarr, watereth the City of Pampeluna; and at length having receiv d the River Aragon in the Kingdom of the same Name, mixeth its Waters with those of the Ebro. The River Ebro is in like manner styl d the most Famous; and the Tjo the most Considerable, by ra∣son of its Golden Sands. The Guadiana runs under Ground for the space of a League. The Guadalquivir is the deepest: And the Ducro hath the greatest quantity of Fishes. Spain is in general but very thinly Peopl d; for by the Discovery of the West-Indies, whither great numbers of its Inhabitants were sent, and the Ex∣pulsion of the Moors afterwards, a vast number of the Breeders were transplanted; and the Tyranny of the Inquisition, ever since, having deterr d those of other Nations to come and supply their Places, there must necessarily follow a great want of Pro∣creation. To which may be added the Necessity they have been under of sending great numbers of Soldiers to Flanders, and other of this King's Do∣minions, by reason of the Wars he has been en∣gag'd in.
The Soil is Mountainous and Barren in many Parts; and the Spaniards are so excessively Lazy, that they take no Pains to Improve it; so that except near the Towns, all is wild Country, and nothing but Rose∣mary, Juniper, Lavender, &c. is to be seen in the Fields. The Temper of the People is very particular: They have generally great Capacities; but by a strange ex∣cess of Pride and Haughtiness, they are so swallow'd up in a Contempt of performing all Offices which they call mean, that their Talents lie hid, being through this Pride, and their natural Laziness, very seldom made use of. And this Pride is not confined to the Gentry only, but like an Epidemical Disease is spread through all: And even a Beggar had the Va∣nity to answer an Embassador that was willing to take her Son to be his Servant, I will not (said she) undervalue my Son so much; for who knows but he may one day be King of Spain. And a Cobler, upon his Death-bed, exhorted his Children, To take heed they did nothing to Disparage their Quality, or Dishonour their Family. The Mechanicks scorn to work, but upon meer Necessity; and never appear abroad but in their Cloaks and Swords; so that a foreign Minister mistook a Glasier that came to his Lodgings to mend his Windows, for a Grandée that came a Visiting: For these Fellows are careful to Ape the Gravity of the Gentry, and a Shoe-maker accosts a Man with as much State as a Lord does. The Menial Servile Offices all over Spain are perform'd by the French that come to live there, and make a shift to make good Fortunes out of the others Folly. The Spaniards are in general very Temperate: Gluttony and Drunkenness they abhorr to that de∣gree, that a Man that has been once drunk, is not allow'd to be a Witness. In Love and Hate they are most immoderate: They will run any hazard to ob∣tain a Mistress, and never pardon a Man that has injur'd 'em: And even whole Families are com∣monly engag'd, and twenty Lives lost in a Quarrel that happen'd perhaps upon a slight Occasion; for, in Honour, the Son must hate his Father's Enemy, and the Nephew revenge his Uncle's Death, and so on from Generation to Generation. They are constantly Jealous of their Wives, and therefore restrain them extremely; insomuch that the poor Women never stir abroad, but with a close Veil over 'em, and an Old Woman to watch them: But notwithstanding this, they find ways to deceive their Husbands, and in spight of all his Caution, enjoy their Lovers; for the Women are exceeding witty in managing an Intreague, and the Men impe∣tuous in the pursuit of it: And because it is almost as difficult to Speak to a Woman, as to enjoy her, the Lovers have a very artful way of discoursing by Signs, so that the Matter shall be quite agreed on before they come together. The Gentry are Men of great Honour, Courage and Civility; but by reason of their Pride and Laziness, perform but little. The Nobility have very large Estates, which however they never look after, but leave the management to their Steward, and by that means often run out: They maintain vast numbers of Servants, and have prodigious quantities of Plate in their Houses; and though they do not feast largely, 'tis common for 'em to have an hundred or an hundred and fifty Dishes, and eighty or an hundred dozen of Plates, with other Vessels in pro∣portion, all of the finest Silver. Their Politick at Court is chiefly employ'd to gain a Government, whereof the King hath a great many in his disposal, and wherein they always make a Fortune; the Vice-Royalties, and other Posts that the Grandees are placed in, being exceeding profitable. The Learning of the Spaniards cannot be praised, their Laziness does not permit 'em to read much; and by the Power of the Ecclesiasticks, they are not al∣low'd to read what they will; so that School-Divinity, Canon-Law, and the Old Philosophy, is the only Learning to be found in Spain. The chief Recrea∣tion of the young Gentry, is the Bull-fighting; which is perform'd at Madrid, Valencia, and other Places, very frequently: Where the young Hero, in the pre∣sence of his Mistress, and a vast number of Spectators, (even the King himself, once or twice a Year) enters the Lists, on Horse-back, attended by his Pages in great state; and having paid his Respects to the King, if present, next to his Mistress, and then to the rest of the noble Spectators, places himself to receive a wild Bull that is let out from a Stable, whereof the King himself has the Key, and delivers it in great state to some Nobleman to open the Door; and as soon as the Bull comes out, though he be already wild, he is enrag'd by little Darts thrown into his Skin by the Boys, and all in a fury immediately makes at the Knight; who, if he be dextrous or for∣tunate enough to conquer the Beast, is applauded; or if wounded, provided he have behav d himself couragiously, is carry'd off with much pity, and vi∣sited by the greatest Quality. Many of these Gen∣tlemen do thus shew their Courage, and many Bulls are kill'd before the Sport ends, which is commonly three or four Days. In Habits the Spaniards are constant to the same Fashion, which are a Doublet, a short Coat or Vest, with a short Cloak, straight Breeches, and a long Sword: The Colour of their Cloaths is commonly Black, as being grave; and for that same reason they wear Spectacles upon their Noses, even in the Streets; and young Folks too, to comply with the Humour, wear 'em. The Religion of Spain is that of the Roman Church in its utmost Bigottry; which is supported by the rigid Court of Inquisition, wherein certain Priests and Monks Judge and Condemn to the Flames all Per∣sons whatsoever that by any Act or Word oppugn the Doctrine of their Church. The Celtae were the first People that were predo∣minant in this Region, and from thence was deriv'd the Name of Celtiberians; as if one should say, Celtae, dwelling near the River Iberus. Afterward, the Phoenicians and Carthaginians seiz d on the most Southern Parts; but were expell'd by the Romans, who possess'd Spain ever since the taking of the City of Carthage. Upon the declining of their Empire, the Goths, Vandals, Suevians, Alanes and Silingians took up their Habitation in this Country, and shar'd it among them; until after many Revolutions, the Goths remain'd the absolute Masters thereof. Vallia their King first fixed his Abode here, A. C. 476. and under the Reign of Roderic, the Moors were sent for by Count Julian, whose Daughter had been deflowr'd by this Prince. At that time the Africans gain'd many Victories, slew the unfortunate Roderic in battel, in 713, and compell'd the Goths to retire to the Mountains of Leon, Asturia and Gallicia. However, Don Pelagius founded a Kingdom there, in 717. Charles Martel defeated these Barbarians, A. C. 732, in France; and Charlemagne discomfited them in Spain, in 778. Insomuch that the Goths, inspir'd with new Courage, were excited to descend from the Mountains, and incessantly to attack these
potent Africans, who for the space of seven or eight Centuries resisted the force of divers Nations. Du∣ring this time, fourteen Kingdoms were form'd in Spain; which at length were reduc d to three, under the Names of those of Aragon, Castille and Portugal: But the two former were united, A. D. 1474. through the Marriage of Ferdinand of Aragon with Isabel the Heiress of Castille. These Princes, who were styl d the Kings, and drave the Moors out of Grenada, oblig'd Joanna, one of their Daughters, to marry Philip of Austria, Duke of Burgundy: So that Charles begotten  this Marriage inherited these Kingdoms; and after the death of Ferdinand his Grand-Father, in 1516, succeeded to that of Ar∣ragon. Moreover, Philip II. the Son of this last, made himself Master of Portugal, after the decease of Don Sebastian, in 1578. And his Successor enjoy'd the same Title during fifty two Years, until the States of Portugal chose John IV. of the House of Braganza, for their King, in 1640. Thus the whole Continent of Spain, excepting Portugal, is govern'd at this day by one King. Besides this Kingdom, which is almost as large as that of France, the same Monarch possesseth in Italy those of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia; the Dutchy of Milan; the Marquisate of Finch and Orbitello: He hath also the Protection of Piombino and Portolongone, in the Isle of Elba: He is Lord of part of the Low-Countries, and of the Island Pantalarea; together with the Places Oran, Ceuta, Marsalquivir, Melilla, Penon de Velez, Mahmora, and Larache, on the Coasts of Barbary. Moreover, the greater part of America depends on his Jurisdiction; as also the Canaries, to the West of Biledulgerid; and the Philippine Islands of Asia, toward the East: Insomuch that some of the Kings of Spain have been told, That the Sun never sets in their Dominions, by reason that they had Ter∣ritories throughout all the Regions of the World. The Roman Catholick Religion alone hath been predominant in Spain since the taking of Grenada from the Moors; on which account Pope Alex∣ander VI. conferr'd the Sirname of Catholick on Ferdinand V. whose Successors have always retain'd this specious Title, and erected a severe Court of Inquisition here, against those that are call'd He∣reticks. There are reckon'd up in this Kingdom eight Arch∣bishopricks, and forty five or forty eight Bishops; or (if we include Portugal) eleven Archbishopricks, and fifty six Bishopricks: twenty five thousand Pa∣rishes; eighty seven Houses of Jesuits under four Provinces, and about two thousand one hundred and seventy three Monks; fifteen famous Universities; and twenty four Dutchies. There are also seven Military Orders, viz. The 1st. Of Malta. The 2d. Of St. James. The 3d. Of Alcantara. The 4th. Of Calatrava. The 5th. Of Jesus Christ. The 6th. Of St. James of Portugal. The 7th. Of Avis, whereto is allotted a Revenue of two millions of Crowns. About eight millions of Souls may be found at present in Spain: And fifteen several Coun∣cils are there distinguish'd, viz. 1. The Council of State: 2. That of War: 3. The Royal, or that of Castille: 4. That of Arragon: 5. That of Italy: 6. That of the Indies: 7. That of the Orders: 8. That of the Chamber: 9. That of the Trea∣sury: 10. That of the Discharges: 11. That of the Crosade: 12. That of the Inquisition: 13. That of Navarre: 14. That of Policy: 15. That of Conscience. And two Courts of Chancery. Of the KINGS that have Reign'd in Spain. THE Visigoth Kings have Reign'd in this Country from the Year of our Lord 412, The Suevish Monarchs have been Masters of Ga and some other Provinces, from A. C. 409, until 585. There have also been Kings of Arragon, Ca∣stille, Leon, Navarre, and Portugal. All the Provinces of Spain were re-united under the Reign of Ferdinand V. King of Arragon, who uc∣ceeded John II. A. D. 1479, and took to Wife Isabel Queen of Leon and Castille. One of their Daughters, nam'd Joanna, was marry'd to Philip of Austria. A Chronological Succession of the KINGS of SPAIN. This Chronology consists in marking the Visigoth Princes who have borne Sway in these Countries, from A. C. 412, until 713; and in distinguishing them from the Suevian Kings that were Lords of Gallicia, and some other Pro∣vinces, from A. C. 409, until 585. The other Monarchs are recited under the Name of those of Arragon, Ca∣stille, Leon, Navarre, and Portugal; and thus they may be All divided into Three Principal Branches, and are as follows:
The First Branch. The Visigoth Kings.   Elected A. C. Reigned Y. 1 ATaulphus 412 3 2 Sigeric 415 7 Months. 3 Vallia 416 13 4 Theodoric I. 429 22 5 Thorismund 451 2 6 Theodoric II. 453 13 7 Evaric 466 18 8 Alaric 484 23 9 Gasalick 507 4 10 Theodorick 511 15 11 Amalarick 526 5 12 Theudis, or Theudas 531 17 13 Teudisclus, or Theodisilus 548 1 14 Agila, or Aquilanus 549 5 15 Athanagild 554 13 16 Lewa, or Lieuba I. 567 1 17 Lewigild 568 10 18 Recaredus I. 586 15 19 Lewa, or Lieuba II. 601 2 20 Vileric 603 7 21 Gondomer 610 2 22 Sisibut 612 9 23 Recaredus II. 621 3 Months. 24 Suintilla I. 621 10 25 Sisenanda 631 5 26 Suintilla II. 636 4 27 Tulca, or Tulgus 640 2 28 Clinidas Vintrius 642 7 29 Richesuindus 649 23 30 Vamba 672 8 31 Ervigus 680 7 32 Egica, or Egega 687 14 33 Vitiza 701 9 34 Roderic (Slain in 713) 3 The Second Branch. The Suevian Kings.   Elected A. C. Reigned Y. 1 Ormeric 409 32 2 Rechila 440 7 3 Rechiarius 447 9 4 Maldras 456 4 5 Frumarius 460 3 6 Kemis-Mund 463 3 7 Theodemirus, or Ariamirus 558 11 8 Miron 569 12 9 Eburic 581 2 10 AndecaThis Tyrant was subdued by Lewigild King of the Visigoths, A. C. 585. 583 2 The Third Branch. The last Kings of Spain.   Elected A. C. Reigned Y. 1 Ferdinand V. and Isabel, 1474 30 2 Philip I. Archduke of Austria 1504 12 3 Charles I. and the V. of this Name, Emperor of Germany 1516 39 4 Philip II. 1555 43 5 Philip III. 1598 23 6 Philip IV. 1621 44 7 Charles II. now Reigning.     SPAIN in Particular. THE first Division of Spain was made by the Romans into Hispania Citerior, or the Hither∣most; and Ʋlterior, or the more Remote, with re∣spect to the City of Rome. But afterward they con∣stituted Three Provinces, viz. Boetica, Tarroconensis, and Lusitanica: The second of these was the largest, and comprehended the Kingdoms of Navarre, Castille, and Arragon. The whole Continent is at present di∣vided into Fifteen Principal Provinces, almost all of which have borne the Title of a Kingdom; as it may be observ'd in the ensuing Table.
SPAIN divided into Fifteen Provinces, Five on the O∣cean, Biscay in Three, Biscay, properly so call'd, BILBOA, the Capital City. Guipuscoa, St. Sebastian. Alava, Victoria. Asturia, Oviedo. Gallicia, St. James of Compostello, Archb. Portugal, Lisbon, Arch Andalusia, Sevil, Arch. Five on the Me∣diterra∣nean, Grenado, Grenado, Ar. Murcia, Murcia. Valencia, Valencia, Ar. Catalonia, Barcelona, Bish. Islands in four prin∣cipal Majorca, Majorca. Minorca, Porto Maon. Yvisa, Yvisa. Formon∣tera, Navarre, Pampeluna, or Pamplo∣na, Bish. Arragon, Sarragossa. Old Ca∣stille, Burgos; Ar. New Ca∣stille, in Two, Castille, properly so call'd, Madrid, the Capital of the King∣dom. Estrama∣dura, Badajox. BISCAY, or La Vizcaia. THIS Province is bounded on the North by the Cantabrian Ocean, call'd from thence the Sea of Biscay; on the South, by Old Castille; on the East, by Navarre, French Biscay, or Gascogne, and the Country of Bearn; and on the West, by Asturia. It also resembleth the Figure of a Rhomb, or Quarry of Glass; the two acute Angles being in length, from East to West, about 120 miles; and 74 from North to South. The Air is extremely temperate, by reason of the adjacent Mountains; but the Soil rough and stony, neither producing Corn nor Grapes, yet a great quantity of Apples, of which is made an excellent sort of Cyder. A very considerable Traffick is here establish'd for Iron and Steel digg'd out of the Mines of this Country; insomuch that 'tis reported that a Hundred thousand Quintals, or Hundred Pound weight of that Metal are forg'd there every Year, either in Arms, Nails, Iron Instruments for Vessels, or Barrs, and transported throughout all the Coasts of Europe. Moreover, the Forests abound with Grapes, and afford much variety of Game. Lastly, The Province is water'd by two Rivers, viz. that of the Nervia, which traverseth it from South to North; and that of Bidassoa, famous for the Isle of Pheasants, where a Treaty of Peace was concluded between Spain and France, A. D. 1659. BILBOA, Cap. in Biscay properly so called. Durango, in Biscay properly so called. S. Andero, in Biscay properly so called. Laredo, in Biscay properly so called. VICTORIA, Cap. in Alava. Salvatierra, in Alava. St. SEBASTIANO, Cap. in Guipuscoa. Fontarabia, in Guipuscoa. Placentia, in Guipuscoa. Tolosa, in Guipuscoa. BILBOA, Flaviobriga, in the Latit. of 43 deg. 24 min. and the Longit. of 16 deg. 30 min. is seated on the River Nervio, or Ybay-Cabal, at the distance of 2 Leagues from the Sea. It is considerable on the account of its Merchandizes, and well built in a fertile Country. It is situated among Hills, and is a large and rich Place: very famous it is for all sort of Ar∣mour and Weapons, the Bilboa Blades being noted all over Europe. This Place stands 48 Miles West of St. Sebastian; and 200 almost North of Madrid, the Metropolis of this Kingdom. The City of St. SEBASTIANO is a noted Port of Guipuscoa, distant about 48 Miles from Bilboa to the East. VICTORIA, the Metropolis of the little Country of Alava, was founded A. D. 1180, and stands on a small Hill at the distance of 40 Miles from Bilboa to the South; as also 65 from Burgos to the North-east. About 8 or 10 Miles East of St. Sebastian stands Fontarabia, a very strong Place, upon the Frontiers of France: It is so seated by the Sea, that at Low-water it is easily enter'd; but at High-water surrounded with the Sea; and so fortify'd, that a few Men may defend it against a great Army; so that it is the Key to that side of Spain. ASTURIA or LAS ASTURIAS, Asturae or Asturiae. THIS Province is situated on the Cantabrian Ocean, between Gallicia to the West, Leon to the South, and Biscay and Castille to the East. Its Extent is about 135 miles long from East to West, and 60 from North to South. It is a Principality of the Kingdom of Castille; but the Country is not very fruitful, as being cover'd with Mountains, and not much inhabited. In the VIIIth. Century, the Chri∣stians, persecuted by the Saracens, fled for refuge to the Forests of Asturia, and chose Don Pelagius for their King, who defeated those Infidels, in the Year 717. There are found here generous Wines: many Mines of Gold, Azure and Vermilion; and excellent Horses. The whole Province is usually divided into Two Parts, viz. Asturia of Oviedo toward the West, and Asturia of Santillana toward the East. We here meet with these Cities and Towns: OVIEDO, Bish. and Cap. Sant-Illana. Aviles. Villa Viciosa. Kibadesella. Llanes. The City of OVIEDO, Ovietum, in the Latit. of 43 deg. and the Longit. of 23 deg. 18 min. stands be∣tween the Mountains on the little River of Deva,
with an University and Episcpal See suffragan to that of Compostella. It ought also to be observ'd, That the City and Port of St. Andrew, or St. Andero, which heretofore appertain'd to the Jurisdiction of Biscay, is now united to that of the Asturia of Santillana, toge∣ther with the Town of Llanes. This Place stands 124 miles North-west of Burgos, 128 East of Com∣postello, 48 North-west of Leon, and 210 almost North-west of Madrid. GALLICIA or Galizia, Gallaecia. THE Province of Gallicia hath the Atlantick-Ocean for its Northern and Western Bounds, lying between Asturia and Leon to the East, and Por∣tugal to the South. The utmost Length thereof, from the Northwest to the South-east, includes 170 miles; and its utmost Breadth is about 140 miles. This Country heretofore extended it self much far∣ther, under the Name of a Kingdom; but at present comprehends only 6 Episcopal Cities, and 41 Ports. The Air is extremely temperate and moist, but not very healthful, by reason of a great number of Springs of hot Water that arises in many Places. The Soil, which consists partly of Mountains, and partly of Valleys, doth not bring forth Corn nor Olives, never∣theless abounds in delicate Vineyards and Woods. There are also found Mines of Gold, Copper, Lead, Iron and Vermilion. Moreover, the River of Cilinca hath golden Sands; and the adjacent Countries afford numerous herds of small Cattle, more-especially Horses and Mules that run with incredible swiftness; which gave occasion to the Ancients to say, That they were engender'd of the Wind, as those of Portugal. The principal Rivers of Gallicia are the Minho, the Avia, the Silla, the Cilinca, the Mi∣randa, the Tambra or Tamara, and the Ʋllae. On the Northern Coasts of the Province lies Corunna, the most renowned Port of Spain; and the Cape of Finis Terrae, or the Lands-end, on the Western. The most Considerable Cities and Towns are these: COMPOSTELLA, Archb. and Cap. Lugo, Bish. Mondonedo, Bish. La Corunna, Port and Bish. Tuy, Bish. Orense, Bish. Serreal. Bayona. Finis-Terrae. Mongia. Elpadron. Viana. Monterei. COMPOSTELLA, call'd in Latin Brigantium, or Janasum; and by the Spaniards, St. Jago de Com∣postella, together with its University and Metropo∣litan See, in the Latit. of 42 deg. 36 min. and the Longit. of 10 deg. 48 min. is situated between the Rivers of Ʋlla and Tambra, or Tamara. It is reported that the Archbishop hath a Revenue of Fifty thou∣sand Crowns, and his Chapter as much. Here is erected a most famous Hospital for Pilgrims; and the Church of St. James, the most renowned of the whole Kingdom, which was founded by Alfonsus sirnam'd the Chaste, A. C. 815, in the same place where the Relicks of this Apostle were found by Bi∣shop Theodomirus, the Image of St. James set up on the High-Altar being always illuminated with fifty Tapers of white Virgin-wax, and three Silver Lamps. Pope Calixtus II. who had a particular Veneration for the same Saint, translated the Right of a Metro∣polis hither, A. D. 1124. from Merida, which had before enjoy'd this Privilege, and Ordain'd eleven Suffragan Bishops, without reckoning that of Pla∣centia, which hath been since added. Here is a small Castle, and an University; the City standing 78 miles North of Bruga, 155 West of Leon, 256 North of Lisbon, and 285 North-west of Madrid. The City of Lugo, Lucus Augusti, Turris Augusti, or Arae Sextianae, stands on the left-side of Minho, and is endow'd with an Episcopal See under the Me∣tropolitan of Compostella. It is very ancient, and was taken by the Moors; but King Alfonsus recover'd it out of their Hands, A. C. 753. There are found here certain Fountains of hot and boiling Water. This Place stands about 32 miles almost South of Mondonedo, 58 almost West of Oviedo, and 72 East of Compostella. Orense, Auria, Amphilochia, or Aquae Calidae, is in like manner seated on the left-side of Minho. It hath also obtain'd the Title of a Bishoprick subject to the Jurisdiction of a Metropolitan See of the Province, and is very famous on the account of its hot Waters, which are endued with a soveraign virtue for the curing of divers sorts of Diseases, and are very useful to Tanners, and other Artificers. It stands about 47 miles almost South-west of Lugo, and 54 South-east of Compostella. Mondonedo, Mindon, Mindonia, or Glandomirum, stands between the Mountains on a small River, and is a suffragan Bishoprick to that of Compostella. It is a small Town, and not well peopled: It stands about 70 miles almost West of Oviedo, and 72 North-east of Compostella. La Corunna, Coronium, or Adrobicum, is a re∣nowned Sea-Port situated in a Gulf in the Northern Coasts, and the Seat of a Bishop who depends on the Archbishop of Compostella. This Place we call the Groyne, being strong, rich, and full of People. It stands upon a Peninsula, and is almost surrounded by the Sea; being about 14 miles West of Betancos, and 34 North of Compostella. Tuy is a City built near the right-side of the Minho, and dignify'd with an Episcopal See subject to the Metropolitan of Compostella, from whence it is distant about 48 miles to the South. ANDALUSIA, Vandalusia. THIS Province comprehends almost the whole ancient Boetica, and is bounded with Grenado on the East; Portugal on the West, where the River Guadiana separates it from Algarve; Estramadura and New Castille on the North; and by the Ocean and Mediterranean Sea on the South. The River of Guadalquivir divides it into two parts through its course from East to West as far as Sevil; and flow∣ing from thence to the South-west, at length falls into the Ocean. Its greatest length may amount to 286 miles; and its greatest breadth to 140: the Sea-coasts being extended for the space of 15 miles on the Ocean, 30 on the Streight, and 30 on the Mediter∣ranean Sea. Indeed, Andalusia is the most fertile Province of Spain, and on that account is commonly call'd the Granary and Store-house of the Kingdom: Its Name is deriv'd from the Vandals, who setled themselves in the Vth. Century. Afterwards, the Moors in like manner took Possession of this Country, and founded therein the two Kingdoms of Cordoua and Sevil: But Ferdinand III. joyn'd them to Castille, after having taken the former in the Year 1236, and
the other in 1248. The Horses of Andalusia are much esteem'd, by reason of their beauty, and ex∣treme swiftness. In the neighbouring Territories of Sevil are entire Forests of Olive-Trees, from whence are extracted every Year 60000 Quintals of Oil: they also afford good store of Venison, Fowl, Honey, Wax, Sugar, Silk, Cotten, Canvass, and all sorts of Fruits. Moreover, there are found Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead, Quicksilver, Vermilion, Antimony; and near Moron, one of Loadstone: besides great quantities of excellent Salt, which are here made. The Tunny-Fishery on the Coasts of Cadiz yields every Year to the Duke of Medina Sidonia the Summ of 100000 Crowns, and both these last Commodities are transported into England and Italy. However, Water is wanting in many Places, together with Pro∣visions, insomuch that Travellers are often met with in the Roads dead of hunger and thirst. The prin∣cipal Rivers are the Guadalquivir, the Xenil, the Gua∣dalete, the Tinto, and the Odiel. The most considerable Cities and Towns are these: SEVIL, Archb. & Cap. Cordoua, Bish. Cadiz, Bish. Jaen, Bish. Medina Sidonia, a Dutchy. St. Lucar. Gibraltar, a Fortr. Xeres de la Fron∣tera. Eciza, a City. Monte-major. Anduxar. Baeza. Arcos, a Dutchy. Ascala Niebla, a Dutchy. SEVIL, Hispalis ad Boetim, or Hispal, in the Latit. of 37 deg. and the Longit. of 13 deg. 8 min. situated on the River Guadalquivir, is the Largest City of Spain, after Madrid the most Rich, and the See of an Archbishop. It is almost of a round figure, enclos'd with a great number of magnificent Palaces, stately Churches, and spacious Courts, every one of which hath Fountains whereto the Waters are con∣vey'd through an Aqueduct 5 or 6 Leagues distant from the Town. The Cathedral Church is extremely large, the length thereof consisting of 160 Paces, and the breadth of 100, being environ'd round about with Chapels, and having a fair Quire, together with a very rich Vestry. The Archbishop hath a Revenue of 100000 Crowns, and the Chapter another of 120000. Here is also erected an University, a Court of Inquisition; and the Golden Tower, that is to say, the Office of the Mint. And indeed, this and Segoria are the only Cities of Spain where Gold and Silver Coins are stampt. Moreover, all the Riches of Ame∣rica are transported hither, and part of those of the East-Indies: For it is reported, that in the Treasury of the Indies, call'd by the Spaniards La Caza de la Centratacion de las Indias, the Accompt amounts Yearly to above 30 Millions: which gave occasion to the common Proverb throughout Spain, Qui en no ha vista Sevilla, no ha vista Maravilla; He that hath not seen Sevil, hath not seen a Place full of won∣derful Rarities. This City, though one of the finest in Spain, is of late much decayed, and still decays more and more, the Trading being most remov'd to Cadiz; the reason whereof is, because they pay about 27 per Cent. for all Merchandizes here, and but 4 or 5 per Cent. at Cadiz. This City stands about 56 miles off the Sea, 100 North of the Streight-mouth, 130 West of Granada, 175 almost South-east of Lisbon, and 210 South-west of Madrid. Cordoua, Corduba, in the Latit. of 37 deg. 18 min. and the Longit. of 14 deg. 42 min. is in like manner seated on the Guadalquivir, in a Plain at the distance of 68 miles from Sevil to the East, and dignify'd with an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Toledo. It was heretofore the Capital City of a Kingdom of the same Name establish d by the Moors, who built there a very magnificent Mosque, which is at present the Cathedral-Church, to the Bishop whereof is allotted a Revenue of 40000 Crowns. This City is also famous for the Birth of the two Seneca's, the Philosopher and Poet; and for that of the Poet Lucan: having also of late produc'd the valiant Captain Gonzales, Juan de Mena the Spanish Poet, and Ambrosia Morales the Historian. More∣over, those renowned Physicians Avicenna and Aver∣roes were for some time Professors of that Science here, and the adjacent Countries are extremely fruitful. CADIZ or Cales, Gaditanus Sinus, in the Latit. of 36 deg. and the Longit. of 12 deg. 42 min. was founded by the Tyrians on the Western part of the Island of the same Name, and is at present the Seat of a Bishop subject to the Metropolitan of Sevil, from whence it is distant about 66 miles to the South, as also 15 from the mouth of the River Quadalquivir and 52 from Gibraltar to the North-west, having a most capacious Harbour very convenient for the reception of all sorts of Vessels that arrive therein from all the Regions of the World. A very conside∣rable Fishery for Tunnies is here establish'd, from the 1st. day of May, until the 15th. of June. Here are also as yet to be seen the Pillars of Hercules, which the Ancients believ'd to have been erected in the most remote Western part of the World. This City, situated in a spacious Plain, abounding with excellent Wines, and divers sorts of Fruits, is well fortify'd with firm Walls, strong Bastions, a suffi∣cient quantity of Artillery, and four or five Forts commanding the Sea; nevertheless, it was taken and sackt in one Day by the English Fleet, under the Conduct of Charles Lord Effingham, Robert Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Raleigh, A. D. 1596.
map of Cadiz the Island City & Port of CADIS. A scale of a Mile Gibraltar, Calpe, a small, but fortify'd Town of Andalusia, is seated at the foot of a Mountain of the same Name, call'd in Arabick, Gibel Tarick, that is to say, Mount Tarick, and hath a capacious Harbour on the Mediterranean-Sea, from thence termed the Streight of Gibraltar, where (as it was believ'd by the Ancients) stood one of the famous Pillars of Her∣cules; the other being erected over-against it, on Abyla, or Alybe, a Mountain of Mauritania, at pre∣sent nam'd by the Spaniards La Sierra de las Monas, from which it is distant 15 Miles, or 4 Spanish Leagues, to the North; 33 Miles from Tangier; 52 from Cadiz to the South-east; and 4 Miles from the Ruins of Heraclea, or Gibraltar Veijo. Lastly, this Town is defended with a very strong Tower; and near it died Alphonsus XI. King of Castille, A. D. 1350. It is built upon a Rock in a Peninsula, and the Castle stands on the highest part of the Rock. Jaen, Gennium, or Gienna, stands on the River of Frio, and is 18 Miles South-west of Baeza▪ 22 almost North of Granada, 120 East of Seville, and 150 South of Madrid. This City was heretofore the Metro∣polis of a Kingdom, as well as those of Sevil and Cordoua, and as yet enjoys an Episcopal See under the Archbishoprick of Sevil. Here also died Ferdinand IV. King of Castille, A. D. 1312. The Kingdom of GRANADA, Regnum Granatense. THIS Country, so call'd from its Capital City, is a part of the ancient Province of Boetica, being bounded on the South by the Mediterranean; on the West and North, by Andalusia, and part of Old Castille; and on the East, by the Kingdom of Murcia, and the same Mediterranean Sea. Its utmost extent, from West to East, consists of about 220 Miles; as also from North to South, of 70; and the Sea-coasts, without comprehending the little Gulfs, include 280. The Air is serene and temperate; and the Soil is not so full of Hills, nor so dry as other Places of Spain, but brings forth delicious Fruits, particularly excellent Melons, Figs, Raisins, and other good Commodities, viz. Honey, Wax, Sugar, Silk, &c. Great quantity of Confits and Syrups are made here, and many Jacynths, Granates, and other Precious-stones found. Lastly, A vast number of Sardins are caught on these Coasts, whilst the Springs and Brooks afford Waters endued with a singular virtue for the curing of divers Maladies: The prin∣cipal Rivers are, the Xenil, the Darro that passeth to Granada, the Grevo which yields Gold, and the Gua∣dalentin.
The chief Cities and Towns are these: GRANADA, Archb. and Cap. Guadix, Bish. Almeria, Bish. Malaga, Bish. Santafe, City. Loxa, City. Xonda, City. Baza, City. Alhama. Adra. Anteguera. Salobrenna. GRANADA, Granatum, or Granata, in the Latit. of 37 deg. and the Longit. of 16 deg. extends it self along the Banks of the River Darro, partly on Hills, and partly in a Plain, at the distance of 84 Miles North-east of Malaga, 125 almost West of Murcia, 130 East of Seville, and 180 South of Madrid. It is reported to be the largest City of Spain, and the most commodious during the Summer, by reason of the purity of the Air, and the great number of Fountains therein included. It is also adorned with many stately Edifices, the Walls taking up 4 Leagues in compass, and being flank'd with 1030 Towers, together with their Battlements, 12 Gates, and above 2000 Springs. The City is usually divided into Four Parts; viz. 1. Granada: 2. Alhambra: 3. Albaizin: 4. Antiquerula. In the first and most delightful of those Quarters reside a considerable number of Noblemen, Ecclesiastical Persons, and rich Merchants, whose Houses are all extremely magnificent, and environ'd with spacious Gardens. Here also is erected the Cathedral Church, and the rich Chapel wherein lie interr'd the Bodies of Ferdi∣nand and Isabel, who recover'd this City from the Moors: Near to which is an ancient Temple or Mosque of those African Infidels, and the Palace of the Chancery. The second Quarter, or the Alhambra, is situated on the top of an Hill, on which stands the sumptuous Palace of the Moorish Kings: Indeed, it resembles a large Town, is encompass'd with Walls fortify'd with 30 Towers, and may easily entertain 40000 Men for its defence. The In-side of the Palace is beautify'd with Jaspar and Porphyry, the Timber and Walls being gilt with divers Arabick and Mosaick Inscriptions: At the Entrance appears a curious Foun∣tain, the Basin whereof, made of White Marble, is supported by twelve Lions: The Water, which spouts up very high, falling down again into the same Basin, runs through 365 Canals or Pipes, and forms as many Ponds, where the Kings and Queens of Granada were wont to refresh themselves during the excessive Heats of Summer. Moreover, here are to be seen the Royal Palace built by Philip II. which is in like manner a stately Pile of Building, and the Chapel of the Martyrs. The third Quarter is seated on two Hills full of Houses, and was formerly the usual Place of Residence of the Moors. The fourth and last Quarter is inhabited b Silk-Weavers. In the time of King Buliagis this City consisted of 70000 Houses, and contain'd 200000 Persons; but at present it is not very populous, especially since the Expulsion of the Moors under the Reign of King Philip III. It was first taken from those Barbarians by Ferdinand V. A. D. 1492; and not long after dignify'd with an Archiepiscopal See, by Pope Alexander VI. A famous University was likewise founded therein by King Fer∣dinand. Guadix, Guadicium, or Acci, is situated at the Head of the River Guadalentin: It was once a famous, but is now a declining City, standing 27 Miles East of Granada, and 43 North-west of Almeria. It is the Seat of a Bishop subject to the Metropolitan of Granada, and was conquer'd from the Moors by Fer∣dinand and Isabel, A. D. 1489. Almeria, or Portus Magnus, lies near the Cape of Gates, on the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, in a fertile Country, having a capacious Harbour; and was so call'd from Almericus King of the Goths, who reign'd in Spain, A. C. 515, and was slain there (according to the Opinion of Mariana and Tarapha. This City is dignify'd with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Granada, from whence it is distant 65 Miles to the South-east, 36 almost East of Adra, and 48 South of Huesca. In the time of the Saracens it was the Royal Seat of a King nam'd Aben-Hut; and was taken from the Moors by Alphonsus King of Arragon, A. D. 1147. Malaga, Malaca, another Sea-Port City, stands near the small River of Guadalquivirejo, at the di∣stance of 62 Miles South of Cordoua, 70 North-east of Gibraltar, 84 South-east of Sevil, 90 East of Cadiz by Land, and 235 South of Madrid. It is defended with two strong Fortresses built on a Hill call'd El Alcazaba, and Gibralfaro by the Spaniards, and hath a Magazine well furnish'd with all sorts of Mi∣litary Amunition; insomuch that for a long time it resisted the Forces of Ferdinand and Isabel, King and Queen of Arragon and Castille; but at length, after a tedious Siege, was constrain'd to submit to the Arms of those victorious Princes, A. D. 1487. An Episcopal See is also here establsh'd under the Metro∣politan of Granada. But this City is more especially remarkable on the account of its famous Mart, and the adjacent Territories, for producing that excellent sort of generous Wine well known to us by the name of Malaga Sack. The Kingdom of MURCIA, Murcianum Regnum. THIS Province, deriving its Name from that of the Capital City thereof, as well as those of Gra∣nada, Valencia, and Leon, almost resembleth the form of a Lozenge, or Rhomb: so that it is bounded on the North-east by the Kingdom of Valencia; on the South-east by the Mediterranean Sea; on the South-west by the Kingdom of Granada; and on the North-west by New Castille. It is extended from North-west to South-east about 96 Miles, and from North-east to South-west 70 Miles. The Air is healthful; nevertheless, the Soil is not fruitful in Corn nor Wine: However, to make amends for this defect, it bringeth forth abundance of excellent Fruits, viz. Le∣mons, Citrons, Oranges, Olives, Almonds, Rice, Pears, Lentils, Broom, Sugar-canes, Honey, Silk, &c. Many Rocks of Alum, Amethysts and Cassidony are also found therein. This Kingdom was first founded and possess'd by the Moors, and fell under the Do∣minion of the King of Castille in the XIIIth. Cen∣tury. The principal Rivers are the Segura; and the Guadalentin, that traverseth the Country from West to South-east. It seldom rains there, which often causeth a scarcity of Water. The most remarkable Cities and Towns are these: MƲRCIA, Cap. Cartagena, Bish. Lorca. Caraveca. Almacaren.
The City of MƲRCIA, in the Latit. of 37 deg. 18 min. and the Longit. of 18 deg. 25 min. is seated in a verdant Plain on the River Segura, being distant 44 Miles South-west of Alicant, 86 almost South of Valencia, 125 East of Granada, and 194 South-east of Madrid. It was recover'd from the Moors by Al∣fonsus X. King of Castille, A. D. 1265. and is the usual Seat of the Bishop of Cartagena. Among other remarkable things, the Fabrick of the Steeple of the Cathedral dedicated to the Virgin Mary is much to be admir'd; for it is built after such a manner, that a Chariot may easily ascend to the Top thereof: And this Church contains above 400 Chapels. The City, which is divided into 7 Parishes, abounds in all sorts of delicate Fruits, and hath the fairest Gardens of the whole Continent of Spain. Carthagena, Carthago Nova, and Spartaria, is situated in a pleasant Country, at the distance of 20 Miles from Murcia to the South, as many from the Promontory call'd El Cabo de Palos to the West, and 100 from Valencia to the South-west. Four things are chiefly to be observ'd here; viz. 1. The most famous and safe Harbour of the whole King∣dom of Spain: 2. The fishing for Mackerels, which is perform'd in a small Island over-against the Port: 3. The abundance of Rushes, or a sort of Spanish Broom, whereof Baskets and Hampers are made: 4. The Mines of Precious-stones. This City is very much enrich'd by Traffick, and defended with a strong Fort. Scipio Africanus heretofore made himself Master thereof, after a long Siege, during which, above 50000 Men were slain. It was also laid waste by the Vandals and Goths, about 600 Years after its first foundation; and lay in Ruins until King Philip II. caus'd it to be re-built, in 1570. Moreover, it is an Episcopal See under the Metro∣politan of Toledo, but the Bishop thereof hath resided at Murcia ever since the Year of our Lord 1291. Caravaca, Crux de Caravaca, is a Village seated amidst the Mountains, toward the Frontiers of New Castille, near the River Segura. Here is pre∣serv'd a miraculous Wooden Cross, which (as it is commonly reported) was brought by an Angel to a certain Priest who was about to Officiate in the presence of a Moorish King, on the 3d. day of May, A. D. 1231. The Kingdom of VALENCIA, Valentiae Regnum. THE Country of Valencia, so nam'd from the Metropolis thereof, is bounded on the North by Arragon; on the South by Murcia, and the Me∣diterranean; on the East, by Catalonia, and the same Sea; and on the West, by New Castille. The Extent thereof, from South to North, includes 178 Miles, and 70 in its greatest Breadth from East to West. The Air is gentle and temperate at all times; however, this Region doth not afford much Corn, but abounds in Wine, Rice, Olives, Citrons, Oranges, Sugar, Silk, Flax, Canvass, and all sorts of Fruit-Trees laden with Flowers and Fruits throughout the whole Year, flourishing as it were in a continual Spring. There are also found several Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Alum and Alabaster in the Mountains; and great quantities of Fishes on the Sea-coasts, more-especially Tunnies, Shads, Eels, and Water-Fowls of divers sorts: A vast num∣ber of those Fishes are taken between Valencia and the Mouth of the River Xucar, in a kind of Gulf which is form'd by the Sea, and call'd Albufero. The most considerable Rivers are the Xucar, the Mor∣viedro, the Segura, and the Millas. In Valencia the King of Spain can never impose Taxes, raise Sol∣diers, &c. without the Consent of the Three Estates; viz. 1. The Clergy: 2. The Nobility: And, 3. The Cities and Villages: And if any one of these refuse to consent, nothing can be done. The chief Cities and Towns are these: VALENCIA, Archb. and Cap. Segorve, Bish. Origuella, Bish. Villa Hermosa, a Dutchy. Elche. St. Matheo. Benicardo. Alzira. Biar. Xativa. Alicante. Montesa. Marvidro. The City of VALENCIA, Valentia Con∣testanorum, in the Latit. of 38 deg. 33 min. and the Longit. of 19 deg. 10 min. is of a round figure, and situated on the River Guadalaviar, within a Mile of the Sea, at the distance of 86 Miles North of Murcia, 130 South of Saragosa, 168 almost South-west of Barcelona, and 150 South of Madrid. It was founded by Junius Brutus, A. U. 616. and after∣ward call'd Julia Valentia. Pope Alexander VI. erected it into a Metropolitan See, A. D. 1492. whereas it was before only an Episcopal, subject to the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Toledo. Here is also establish'd an University, and the Court of the Vice-Roy and Noblemen of the Country. The Town-House; the Palace de la Ciuta, that of the Vice-Roy; the Monastery of St. Jerom, and divers Colleges, well deserve to be viewed by Strangers: But the Streets are very much clogg'd with Dirt during the Winter, and with Dust in the Summer, by reason that they are ill pav'd. The Kingdom of Valencia was founded by the Moors; but the famous Rodriguez Diaz, sirnam'd El Cid, took this Capital City from them in the XIth. Century, A. D. 1025. Nevertheless, those Infidels found means to surprize it again, not long after his Death; until James I. King of Arragon, recover'd it out of their Hands, together with the whole Country, in 1236, and caus'd it to be inhabited by divers Families of Chri∣stians. Moreover, the Traffick of Valencia is consi∣derable: And the same City hath furnish'd the See of Rome with two Popes, viz. Calixtus III. nam'd Borgia; and Alexander VI. Lewcolio, call'd also Borgia. Segorve, Segorvia, or Segobriga, seated on a River, is distant 27 Miles from Valencia to the North, and 7 from the Sea. It is a very little City, and ill built, yet dignify'd with the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Valencia. Origuella, Orcelis, another small City, is in like manner the Seat of a Prelate, and subject to the Ju∣risdiction of the Archbishop of Valencia, from whence it is distant 78 Miles to the South, and 14 from Murcia, standing in a pleasant Valley on the Confines of the Kingdom of that Name. Alicante, Alone, is a Sea-port Town, wherein a very great Commerce is maintain'd for Wine, and all other kinds of Fruits which the Country affords. It stands on the Foot of a Mountain, on which a strong Castle is erected, at the distance of 42 Miles
North-east of Murcia, and 60 South of Valen∣cia. The Road is extremely convenient for all sorts of small Vessels, in regard that this Haven not being very deep, cannot receive those of a larger size. CATALUNNA, Catalonia, or Catalaunia. THE Principality of CATALƲNNA, or Catalonia, which takes its Name from the Goths and Alans that setled themselves therein, is bounded on the North by the Pyrenaean Mountains, and the Provinces of Gascogne, Languedoc and Roussillon in France; on the South and East, by the Mediter∣ranean Sea; and on the West, by the Kingdoms of Arragon and Valencia. It extends in Length, from East to West, about 180 Miles; and in Breadth, from North to South, about 130. The Air is gentle, healthful and agreeable: The Soil uneven and moun∣tainous; nevertheless, very fruitful in Grains, Wine, Oil, Flax and Fruits. Many Cork-trees, Chesnut, and other Timber-trees fit for Building, grow there∣in; but no Sugar-Canes, nor Broom. Here also is found the Herb Escorzonera, of admirable Virtue for expelling Poyson, and curing the Distempers of the Eyes. Besides these, there are divers Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Vitriol and Salt; one of which, near Cardonna, is shadow'd after the manner of the Rain∣bow. Moreover, Amethysts, Onyx-stones, Ala∣baster, Azure, Crystal and Jasper are often dug out of the Mountains; and Coral out of the Rocks ly∣ing on the most Eastern-Coasts. The principal Rivers are the Ebro, the Segre, the Cinga, into which runs the Noguera Kibagorzana; the Noguera Palloresa, that proceeds from the Pyrenaean Mountains, and flows into the Segre; the Lobregat, which dischargeth it self into the Sea at the distance of 6 Miles from Barcelona; the Ter which passeth to Gironna, and the Ter to Perpignan. Under Catalonia are com∣prehended the Dutchies of Cardonna and Roussillon; the latter whereof appertains to the Jurisdiction of France; together with the Monastery of Monserrat, famous for the great number of Pilgrims that re∣sort thither from all Parts. Charles Martel hereto∣fore sent Succours to the Catalonians, against the Moors; and Lewis sirnam'd the Debonaire, Em∣peror and King of France, took Barcelona from those Infidels. This Province was formerly govern'd by certain particular Princes, nam'd Counts of Barcelona, until it was united to the Kingdom of Arragon, A. D. 1137. The Catalonians put themselves under the Protection of the French King, in 1640, chiefly through the Instigation of Joseph Margueric, a Gentleman of the Country: But by the 42 and 43 Articles of the Treaty of Peace concluded be∣tween Spain and France, in 1659, it was declar'd, That the Pyrenaean Mountains should be esteem'd as the Boundaries of the two Kingdoms. The most remarkable Cities and Towns are these: BARCELONA, Bish. and Cap. Tarragona, Archb. Tortosa, Bish. Lerida, Bish. Solsona, Bish. Vich, Bish. Girona, Bish. La Ceu d' Ʋrgel, Bish. Cardona, Dutchy. Cervera. Balaguer, Puicerda, BARCELONA, Barcilona, or Barcino, in the Latit. of 40 deg. 6 min. and the Longit. of 22 deg. was founded (as it is believ'd) by Hamilcar sirnam'd Barcas, the renowned Carthaginian General, on the Sea-shore, in a Plain, at the foot of the Mountain commonly call'd Manjuric, betwixt the mouth of the River Elbesos to the East, and that of Lobregat to the West, at the distance of 82 Miles East of Tarragon, 60 North of the Isle of Majorca, 134 almost South of Narbone, and 300 East of Madrid. It is a very ancient, rich and splendid City, dignify'd with the Titles of a County, and an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Tarragona, besides an University, a Sovereign Court, a Court of Inquisition, &c. The Streets are paved with very large Stones, which ren∣ders them fair and neat. Barcelona is divided into the Old and New Town, that are separated by Walls and Gates: Both these Quarters are well fortify'd with a second Wall, as also with divers flat-bottom'd Ditches, high Ramparts, Towers and Bastions. A considerable Mart is here establish'd, more-especially for Cloths, and a sort of Coverlets known by the name of Castelognes. Moreover, it is worth the while to observe, That several Kings of Arragon died in this City, particularly James II. A. D. 1327; Alphonsus IV. in 1336; and John II. in 1479. Tarragona, Tarraco, in like manner situated on the Sea-shore, was built and fortify'd by the Scipio's. It is distant 44 Miles East of Tortosa, 52 West of Barcelona, and 112 North-west of Majorca; and was heretofore a famous City, but at present is not very considerable: nevertheless, it as yet retains the Dig∣nity of a Metropolitan See, and hath been often be∣sieg'd of late Years. Here are also to be seen the Ruins of an ancient Cirque in the Fountain-street, commonly call'd La Placa de la Fuente; and an Uni∣versity founded by Cardinal Gaspar de Cervantes, Archbishop of this Diocess, under the Reign of King Philip II. Tortosa, Dertusa, or Dertossa, is seated on the River Ebro, at the distance of 3 or 4 Leagues from the Sea; as also 12 Miles from the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Valencia to the East, and 94 off Bar∣celona to the West. It is well fortify'd with a strong Citadel erected on a Hill, and a Bridge over the Ebro. However, the French Forces made themselves Masters thereof, A. D. 1649; but it was regain'd by the Spaniards in the ensuing Year. This City hath also been erected into an Episcopal See, and de∣pends on the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Tarragona. Lerida, Ilerda, stands on a small Hill which by degrees terminates in a Valley, on the Banks of the River Segre, about 18 Miles South-west of Balaguer, 60 almost North of Tarragona, and 100 North-west of Barcelona. It was recover'd from the Moors, A. D. 1143, and hath since obtain'd the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Tarragona. Not far from hence Julius Caesar gain'd a Victory over the Forces of Afranius and Petreius, who had taken part with Pompey. This City is in like manner famous on the account of the Sieges which it hath sustain'd against the most experienc'd French Generals, during the late Wars which were maintain'd between France and Spain; as also for the memorable Battels fought before its Walls, in 1644, and 1646, and 1647. Moreover, an University was here establish'd, A. D. 1300, that was heretofore of great repute, and wherein Pope Calixtus III. and St. Vincent Ferrier took the Degree of Doctors.
Solsona, or Celsona, is seated on the small River of Cardoner, at the foot of the Mountains, and fortify d with a Castle built on a Rock. It is distant 56 Miles almost North of Tarragon, and 86 almost North of Barcelona; as many from La Ceu d' Ʋrgel to the South, and scarcely 3 from Cardona. This City was erected into an Episcopal See, under the Archbishoprick of Tarragona, by Pope Clement VIII. A. D. 1593. Vich, Vique, Ausa-Nova, Corbio, Vicus, and Aquae Voconiae, is a small City, yet dignify'd with an Epis∣copal See subordinate to the Metropolitan of Tar∣ragona. It is situated near the River Ter, 26 Miles almost West of Girone, and 42 North of Barcelona; and succeeded the demolish'd Town of Ausa, from whence it is some times call'd Vich d Ossona. Girona, Gerunda, is an ancient City well fortfy'd, and dignify'd with the Title of a Dutchy, being distant 20 miles of the Mediterranean Sea, 50 South of Perpignan, and 58 North-east of Barcelona. The greater part of Girona is seated on a Plain, and ano∣ther part on a rising-ground, and adorn'd with two Stone Bridges over the Rivers Oignar and Ter; the former whereof divides the City, and the other washeth it on the Northern-side. This is also an Episcopal See subject to the Jurisdiction of the Arch∣bishop of Tarragona. This Place was taken by the French, in 1694. La Ceu d' Ʋrgel, Orgecum, Orgia, Orgella, and Ʋrgella, is water'd by the River Segre, and stands on the foot of the Pyrenaean Mountains, at the distance of 42 miles South of Frix in France, and 96 North of Barcelona. This City heretofore gave a Title of Honour to divers renowned Counts or Earls, whilst the Second Race of the Kings of Arragon flourish'd; and the Country between Lerida, Cervera and Selsoa is from thence call'd the Plain of Ʋrgel. Lastly, The Episcopal Seat of a Prelate is here establish'd, who is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Tarra∣gona. Cardona is a Town built amidst the Mountains on a River of the same Name, and enjoys the Privi∣leges of a Dutchy: It is distant 4 Leagues from Sol∣sona to the South, 6 from Mantesa to the North, and 7 from Montserrat. This Town is famous on the account of its Salt-Pits, and for conferring the Titles of Dukes on the Ancient and Illustrious Fa∣mily of Folch. About 25 miles almost North of Girona stands Roses, a strong Port-Town, with a good Harbour, on the Mediterranean; taken by the French, in 1693. About 32 miles South of Roses stands Palamos, another little Port-Town, taken by the French, in 1694. ARRAGON, Tarraconensis Hispania, or Antigones. THE Name of this Province, which compre∣hends the Territories of the ancient Celtiberi and Jacetani, is deriv'd from the River Arragon, that takes its Rise in the Pyrenaean Mountains. It as yet contains the ancient Kingdoms of Sobrarbe and Ri∣bagorza, situated to the East of Cinga; being bounded on the North by the Pyrenaean Mountains, and France; on the South, by the Kingdom of Valencia; on the East, by Catalonia; and on the West, by Navarre, and the two Castille's. Its Extent, from North to South, consists of bout 180 miles; and from East to West, of 120. The Air is very health∣ful; but the Soil is extremely dry, mountainous, and in many places nitrous: Nevertheless, the Val∣leys bring forth Corn and Grapes. Here are found divers Mines of Gold, and excellent Iron; whilst in the Forests and on the Mountains are bred many Does, Roe-bucks, Stags, Bores, and other Wild Beasts. However, this Country is very ill cultivated, and not much inhabited. The most remarkable Rivers thereof, are, the Ebro, which traverseth it from North to South-east; the Cinga, that springs out of the Mountain of Bielsa, and passeth to Fraga; the Gallego, which ariseth from Mount Gavas, near Bigorra; the Arragon, whose Head appears not far from thence; the Guerva, that runs to Sarragossa; and the Xalon, which flows to Calatajud. But it ought to be observ'd, that all these Rivers disembogue themselves into the Ebro. The most considerable Cities and Towns are these: SARAGOSSA, Archbish. & Cap. Tarazona, Bish. Huesca, Bish. Jacca, Bish. Balbartro, Bish. Terver, Bish. Albarazin, Bish. Venasco. Moncon. Fuentes. Boria. Calatajud. SARAGOSSA, Caesaraugustae, in the Latit. of 41 deg. 6 min. and the Longit. of 19 deg. is situated in a most delightful Country, on the Banks of the River Ebro, over which a fair bridge is built near the confluence of the Guerva and the Gallego. It is distant 88 miles South-east of Pampalane, 135 North of Valencia, 160 almost East of Burgos and Madrid, 164 South-west of Tholouse in France, 174 almost West of Barcelona. This City is very ancient, and may well be reckond among the chief of Spain, but is not at present so considerable as it hath been for∣merly. It was regain'd from the Moors by the Chri∣stians, A. D. 1118; and erected into a Metropo∣litan See by Pope John XXII. in 1318. Here is also establish'd an University, a Court of Parliament, and another for the Inquisition. The Hospital of this City is one of the richest throughout Christendom; and the Revenues of the Archbishoprick amount to 40000 Crowns per annum. One of the Churches, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and commonly call'd Of Our Lady of Pilar, De Nostra Sennora del Pilar, is very much frequented by Pilgrims. NAVARRE, Navarra, or Cantabria. THE Province of NAVARRE assumes its Denomination from the Spanish word Navas; that is to say, a Plain: and Erria, or Earth, in the Basquish Language; that is to say, a Plain Land. Nevertheless, the Country is rugged, and full of Hills; neither is this Etymology very conformable thereto. But the ensuing Description ought to be restrain'd only to the Ʋpper Navarre, (having spoken already of the Lower in the Chapter of France.) It is bounded on the North by the Pyrenaean Mountains that separate it from France, and the Catabrian-Ocean; on the North-west, by Biscay, from which it is likewise limited by Mountains; on the South and South-east, by Arragon; and on the South-west,
by Old Castille. It is extended from North to South about 96 miles, and 88 from East to West. The Air is very temperate and healthful; so that some Places afford considerable quantities of Corn and Grapes, whilst others are only fit for Pasture, abounding with all sorts of Game and wild Beasts. The principal Rivers are, the Ebro, the Arragon, the Arga, and the Egla; these three last discharge their Waters into the Ebro. This Kingdom was hereto∣fore distinguish'd into five Regions or Merindades, viz. the Merindade of Pamplona; that of Olite; that of Sanguessa; that of Estella; and that of Tudela: but at present it is only divided into the Upper and Lower Navarre. The most Remarkable Cities and Towns are these: PAMPLONA, Bish. and Cap. Sauguessa. Lerin, County. Tudela. Estella. Olite. PAMPLONA, Pampilona, Pompelo, or Pom∣peopolis, founded or re-built (as it is generally be∣liev'd) by Pompey the Great, was heretofore the Me∣tropolis of the Gascons, and is seated on the River Arga, at the distance of 52 miles South of Bajonne in France, 80 South-east of Bilboa, 88 North-west of Saragossa, and 180 North-east of Madrid. In the vulgar language of the Navarran Gascons it is com∣monly call'd Iruna; that is to say, the Good City; and stands in a pleasant Valley environ'd on all sides with very high Mountains, (according to the report of Arnaldus Oihenartus.) It hath been subject to the Dominion of the Spaniards ever since the Year 1512, when Navarre was seiz'd by Ferdinand King of Ar∣ragon: And Philip II. caus'd a Fortress to be built therein. It is also at present well fortify'd with firm Bastions, and defended with two strong Castles. Between this City, and the Town of St. Jean de Pied de Port in the Lower Navarre, is situated the Valley of Roncevaux, where (as they say) the Army of Charlemaigne was defeated by the Saracens, who had surpriz'd them in an Ambuscade, through the Trea∣chery of Gavilon. Moreover, the same Emperor took the City of Pamplona, A. C. 778, and com∣manded that the Walls thereof should be demo∣lish'd. Old CASTILLE, Castilia Vetus, or Celtiberia. THIS Province was so nam'd from a Castle built there against the Moors, and was the first which the Christians recover'd out of the Hands of those In∣fidels. It is bounded on the North by Biscay and Asturia; on the South, by New Castille; on the East, by Navarre and Arragon; and on the West, by the Kingdom of Leon, and part of Portugal; lying in the Latit. of 40 and 42 deg. 54 min. and be∣tween the 14th. and 17th. deg. of Longit. which includes from North to South about 190 miles, and 145 from East to West. The Air is less healthful than that of New Castille; neither is the Soil so fruitful in Grain and Grapes: Indeed, its chiefest fertility consists in the Pastures affording Fodder to vast quantities of Cattle; but more-especially in the Meadows near Segovia are found many Sheep, whose Wool is extremely fine, and of very great value. The most emarkable Rivers are, the Ebro and the Duero, which take their Source in this Country; as also do the Puiserga and the Tormes. Castille at first bore the Title of a County, or Earl∣dom, until Garica, the last Count, dying without Issue, in the Year 1029, left it to his Sister Nunna, Wife to Sanchar, or Sanchez, King of Navarre, by whom these Territories were erected into a Kingdom: But Ferdinand III. King of Leon, Heir to his Nephew Henry I. King of Castille, united them to his Do∣minions; about the Year 1217. The Kingdom of Castille was in like manner incorporated with that of Arragon, under Ferdinand d V. and Isabella, in 1574, if we reckon from the Death of Henry IV. King of Castille; or in 1479, to begin from the time that Jane the supposed Daughter of the said Henry took a Veil in the Monastery of Coimbra, after having observ'd that the Portugueses, from whom she ex∣pected Succour, had come to an Agreement with Ferdinand and Isabel. The chief Cities and Towns are these: BƲRGOS, Archb. and Cap. Valladolid, Bish. Calahorra, Bish. Placentia, Bish. Coria, Bish. Avila, Bish. Osma, Bish. Segovia, Bish. Lerma, Dutchy. Frias, Dutchy. Soria. BƲRGOS, Burgi, Marburgi, and Bravum, in the Latit. of 22 deg. and the Longit. of 15 deg. 36 min. is situated on the River Arlanza, by the side of an Hill, on the top whereof stands a strong Castle, 80 miles nigh East of Leon, 86 almost South of Bilboa, and 115 North of Madrid. This City, being the Capital of the Province, is large, and maintains a considerable Traffick: but it is ill built, and the Streets are generally narrow, except those that end at the Places of Lana, Huerte, del Rey, and some others. It sprang out of the Ruins of Auca, an ancient neighbouring Town; was erected into an Episcopal See, A. D. 1075, at the Sollicitation of Philip II. King of Spain; and advanc'd to the Dig∣nity of a Metropolitan by Pope Gregory XIII. in 1571. The Cathedral Church is extremely magnificent; and the Abbey of Las Huelgas, without the Town, no less remarkable, wherein were always entertain'd 150 Nuns, all Daughters of Princes, or Noble Lords: The Abbess is Lady of 14 Towns, and of 50 Boroughs or Villages, having a Right to elect the Governors and Magistrates of them, and to dispose of 12 Com∣manderies at her Pleasure. Here is also founded a Royal Hospital, the Yearly Revenues whereof amount to the Summ of 80000 Livres: besides a College of Jesuits; the noted Monastery of the Crucifix, belong∣ing to the Augustine Fryars; another of the Domi∣nicans, &c. The City is likewise adorn'd with a great number of Fountains, and stately Palaces, the chief of which are those of the Archbishop and Con∣stable. Two Kings of Castille, viz. Henry III. and Peter sirnam'd the Cruel, were born at Burgos; and a third, namely, Philip I. of Austria, died there, A. D. 1506. Valladolid, Vallis-Oletum, or Pintia, is seated in a most delightful Plain, on the Banks of the River Puiserga, and in the utmost Confines of the King∣dom of Leon, to the Jurisdiction whereof it formerly appertain'd; being distant 45 miles South-west of Burgos, 68 North-east of Salamanca, 70 South-east of Leon, and 92 almost North of Madrid. It is
beautify'd with a fair long Bridge over the River, suppos'd to have been founded by the Goths, A.C. 625; and was erected into a Bishop's See, under the Metro∣politan of Toledo, by Pope Clement VIII. on the 25th. day of November, in the Year 1595. It hath been also, for some time, the Royal Seat of the Kings of Spain, particularly of Philip IV. who caus'd a stately Palace to be built therein, together with spacious Gardens. At present, the Sovereign Court of Castille, and of the adjacent Countries, is held here; besides an University of much repute. The Churches are well built, particularly that of the Dominican Fryars, who have also a College here, besides some others, whereto King Philip II. by the Persuasion of Father Prsons, an English Jesuit, added a Seminary for this Nation, in the Year 1589. In this City died, on Thursday the 20th. day of May, A. D. 1506, Christopher Colon, or Columbus, that most renowned Navigator, who first discover'd the Western Indies, or America, in 1492; and his Corps was afterward transported to St. Domingo, in Hispa∣niola, according to a particular Order in his Last Will and Testament. Calahorra is water'd by the River Ebro, near its confluence with that of Cidacos de Castiglia. Quin∣tilian the Orator, and Prudentius the Poet, were both Natives of this City: And the ancient Inhabitants were famous for sustaining a Siege against Pompey, with so great obstinacy, that at last being reduc'd to the utmost extremity, they kill d their Wives and Children; and having salted their Limbs, as it were Pork, eat them for want of Provisions. The Bishop∣rick of Calahorra is suffragan to Burgos; and that of Calzado, or St. Domingo de Calzado, was united thereto, A. D. 1236. Placentia stands on a rising-ground amidst the Mountains, and is defended by a strong Castle. It is also dignify'd with an Episcopal See subject to the Metropolitan of Toledo. Coria, Caurie, or Caurium, lies upon the River Arragon, which about 6 or 7 Leagues above inter∣mixeth its Waters with those of the Tagus, or Tajo; as also at the distance of 4 or 5 Leagues from the Confines of Portugal. The Episcopal See of this City is suffragan of Compostella, and formerly de∣pended on that of Madrid. Avila is a Place of great Antiquity, on the River Adaia, and the foot of the Mountains call'd from thence Sierras d' Avila. It has been long since erected into a Bishop's See under the Metropolitan of Compostella; and is noted for giving a Title to a Noble Family from whence H. Catherino Davila, Author of the History f the Civil Wars of France, deriv'd his Original, who retir d thither, after the Turks had taken the Island of Cyprus, where his Pre∣decessors had been Constables of State. Segovia, Segubia, or Ʋrbs Arevacorum, is distant about 20 Spanish Leagues from Toledo to the North, its Episcopal See depending on that Metropolitan. It is a very populous City, much enrich'd by the Cloth-Manufactures; and remarkable for its Situation in a delectable Plain, at the foot of a very high Mountain, near the Banks of a small River nam'd Erosnia. It is adorn'd with a spacious Market-place, a strong Castle, and a Mint-house. Here are also to be seen the remains of a noble Aqueduct which was built by the Emperor Trajan, and is supported by 177 Arches in double rows, reching from one Hill to another. New CASTILLE, Castilia Nova. THIS Province, which formerly bore the Name of the Kingdom of Toledo or Castille, and com∣prehends Estramadura that constitutes the Western-part thereof, is the largest of Spain, water'd chiefly with the Streams of the River Tajo and Guadiana; and being bounded on the North by Old Castille; on the South, by the Provinces of Murcia, Granada, and Andalusia; on the East, by those of Arragon and Valencia; and on the West, by the Kingdom of Portugal. It lies between the 37th. deg. 24 min. and the 40th deg. 48 min. of Latitude; as also be∣tween the 12th. deg. and the 18th. deg. 24 min. of Longitude. This Province is almost round, being in length, from East to West, about 230 Miles; and in breadth, from North to South, 220, without comprising Estremadura. The Air is clear; but it very seldom rains here, which causeth a scarcity of Water. The Valleys are extremely fruitful in Corn, Grapes, Hemp, Saffron, and several sorts of Fruits, affording fat Pasture to a great quantity of Cattle. There are also found divers Salt-Pits; but the Fish of the Guadiana are not eaten, as being unwholsom. The most considerable Rivers are, the Tajo, the Guadiana, the Guadalquivir, the Xucar, the Tayuna, the Xamara, and the Guadrama. This Province is usually divided into Four little Countries or Shires, viz. 1st. Algastia, on the North-side of Tajo: 2d. La Mancha, to the South of the same River: 3d. La Sierra, toward the East; and 4th. Estra∣madura, to the West, which was before separated from it. The most remarkable Cities and Towns are these: MADRID, the Capit. and Royal Seat. Toledo, Archb. Cuenza, Bish. Ciudad Reale, Bish. Siguenza, Bish. Huesca, Dutchy. Alcala de Henares, City. Calatrava. MADRID, Madritum, Matritum, or Ma∣dridium in Carpetanis, in the Latit. of 40 deg. and the Longit. of 16 deg. is situated on the small River of Manzanares, over which a fair Bridge, call'd the Segovian is erected; 3 Miles from the Old Town of Mantua Carpetanorum, at present nam'd Villa Mantua; by the Ruins whereof it was much augmented, until at length King Philip II. and his Successors, having chosen it for the Place of their Ordinary Residence, it became the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom. This City is extremely large, but not very uniform, founded on a rising and an uneven Ground. It contains 18 Parishes; 14 Streets, of which the chief is very fair and broad; about 70000 Inhabitants; and 57 Convents of both Sexes. The most remarkable publick Edifices are, the Royal Palace, Palasso del Rey; Nostra Senora del Al∣madena; the Church of St. Sebastian; the Town-House; the Palace which bears the Name of Il Con∣sistorio; and the Court wherein the Tournaments and Baiting of Bulls are celebrated on solemn Festivals. The City is also well built with good Brick Houses; the Streets long and straight, but most extremely dirty, and ill pav'd. The Houses have many of 'em Glass Windows; which is the
more remarkable, because there are few in all Spain. The Royal Palace, though not great, is very beau∣tiful and magnificent. There is one very fair Piazza, or Market-place, encomposs'd round with tall and uniform Houses, having five rows of Balconies one above another; and underneath, Portico's or Cloy∣sters quite round. Madrid stands almost in the midst of all Spain; 210 Miles almost North-east of Seville, 290 almost North of the Streights Mouth: as many almost East of Lisbon; 670 South-west of Paris; and 960 West of Rome. Roderick Legate of Pope Paul II. conven'd a Council in this City, against the Ignorance, Simony, and corrupt Man∣ners of the Clergy, A. D. 1473. TOLEDO, Toletum in Carpetanis, in the Latit. of 34 deg. 12 min. and the Longit. of 15 deg. 24 min. is advantageously seated on a steep Rock separated from high Mountains, and naturally fortify'd on all sides with a Valley, and the River Tajo, as it were with Ramparts, Towers and Trenches; the Top is a kind of Platform, on which stand the Church, the Castle, and the Market-place: All the rest of the Rock is cover'd with Houses; of these Buildings, the Cathedral, the Bishop's Palace, and that which the Emperor Charles V. caus'd to be built, are the most magnificent. Here also remains an admirable Aqueduct contriv'd by Joannellus Turrianus, a French∣man, according to the Order of King Philip II. which, through the means of an artificial Engine, drives the Waters of the River Tajo through certain Pipes up to the top of the Rock and Tower, where being receiv'd into one large Cistern, they are di∣stributed through divers Canals, for the use of the Fortress and City. Moreover, the Ruins of an an∣cient large Theatre are as yet to be seen without the Walls, toward the North. Toledo is distant 40 Miles almost South of Madrid, 140 North of Granada, and 174 North-east of Seville. This City was heretofore the Capital of the Carpetani; and afterwards of the Goths, whose Kings always re∣sided therein, at what time it first embrac'd the Christian Faith, through the Ministery of St. Euge∣nius Martyr; and 19 Cities were subject to its Juris∣diction: But being taken by the Saracens, A. C. 705, it became likewise the Royal Seat of the Moorish Princes, until it was recover'd by Alphonsus VI. sir∣nam'd the Valiant, A. D. 1085, those Infidels being entirely expell d; and within a little while after, the Metropolitan See was restor d thereto by Pope Ʋrban II. It is divided into 23 Precincts or Wards, commonly call d Barrio's; and contains 27 Parishes; together with 38 Monasteries for the maintaining Religious Persons of both Sexes; besides a famous University, and the Sovereign Court of the whole Pro∣vince. But it declines daily, and at present is scarcely suppplied with 8000 Inhabitants. However, its Dio∣cess is extremely large, comprehending 800 Paro∣chial Churches; and the Archbishop (who is styl'd Primate of all Spain) is Lord of 17 Towns or con∣siderable Boroughs, and of a great number of Vil∣lages, from whence he collects every Year the Summ of 260000 Crowns: The Chapter in like manner enjoys a Revenue of 240000. Lastly, Toledo is fa∣mous for giving Birth to Alphonsus VIII. King of Castille, A. D. 1106; and Alphosus X. in 1221. But some others died there, viz. Alphonsus IX. A. D. 1108; Sanchez IV. in 1295; and Henry III. in 1407: As also Sanchez II. King of Portgal, in 1246. Alcala, Complutum, water'd by the River Henare, which runs along the Walls thereof; insomuch that it is sometimes call'd Alcala de Henarez, is situated on a Plain, and hath a fair Street adorn d on every side with Piazza's; together with an University founded by Francesco Ximenez, Cardinal and Arch∣bishop of Toledo, A. D. 1517. It stands 10 miles South-west of Guadalaxara, and 14 East of Madrid. Whilst the Empire of the Gothick Princes continu'd, Alcala was an Episcopal See, but now appertains to the Diocess of the Archbishop of Toledo. In the time of King Alphonsus, sirnam'd the Wise, it was call'd Alcala S. Justi, by reason that this Saint suf∣fer'd Martyrdom without its Suburbs. John I. King of Castille, died there, A. D. 1390: And the Em∣peror Ferdinand I. was born in the same City, in 1503. The Kingdom of LEON, Legionense Regnum. THIS Province is bounded on the North by Asturia; on the South, by that part of New Castille which bears the Name of Estramadur; on the East, by the Castilles; and on the West, by Gallicia and Portugal. It is extended from the 39th. deg. 6 min. to the 42d. deg. 42 min. of Lati¦tude; and from the 13th. deg. of Longitude, to the 15th. deg. 12 min. including from North to South about 165 miles, and 110 from East to West. The Country is full of Mountains, but the Air clear and temperate. The Soil is more apt to bring forth Corn than Grapes; and many Turquoises, a sort of Precious-stones, are found near Zamora. Neither is there any River throughout the whole Continent of Spain that affords a greater quantity of Trouts than that of the Torto, which runs through these Territories. There is also a Spring of Hot Water near Salamanca, endued with a singular Virtue for the curing of the Scab, itch, and many other Diseases. The principal Rivers are, the Duero, Torto, Puiserga, and Torme; the first of which divide the whole Province almost into Two equal Parts, viz. the Northern and the Southern. Augustus Caesar was the first that subdued these Parts, which were subject to the Dominion of the Romans about 500 Years, until they were dis∣possess'd by the Goths, who were in like manner ex∣pell'd 400 Years after, by the Saracens and Mors. But Pelagius, a young Prince of Gothick Extraction, recover'd the whole Province from them, in 722, and left it to his Successors. Thus it continu'd for a long time a separate Kingdom, and was at last united to that of Castille by Ferdinand III. in the Year 1228.
The most considerable Cities and Towns are these: LEON, Bish. and Cap. Ciudad Rodrigo. Salamanca, Bish. Toro, Bish. Benavento. Astorga, Bish. Palencia, Bish. Zamora, Bish. Alva. Medina del Campo. Tordesillas. LEON, egio Grmanica, in the Latit. of 42 deg. 20 min. and the Longit. of 14 deg. was built (accord∣ing to the Opinion of some Authors) under the Reign of the Emperor Nerva, and is seated on a rising-ground at the Foot of the Mountains of Asturia, near the Head of the River Esla, at the distance of 50 Miles South of Oviedo, 68 almost West of Burgos, 156 East of Compostella, and 156 North-west of Madrid. This City hath been esteem'd as the Ca∣pital of the Province ever since A. C. 658, and is at present an Episcopal See under the Archbishoprick of Compostella: nevertheless, so far exempted from its Jurisdiction, that the Prelate of Leon acknow∣ledges no other Metropolitan but the Pope; the Cathedral Church being esteem'd the fairest of all Spain. Pelagius regain'd it, together with the whole Province, from the Moors, in 722; and his Succes∣sors were styl'd Kings of Oviedo, until the time of Orduno II. who assum'd the Title of King of Leon, and died in 923. Moreover (if we may give Credit to the Testimony of Rodericus Sylva) Ferdinand I. King of Castille, expir'd here, A. D. 1067. Salamanca, Salmantica, stands on three little Hills, and is water'd by the River Tormes, its Situation being very uneven; 34 miles South-east of Miranda, 94 South of Leon, and 108 North-west of Madrid. This City is of a considerable compass, but the Houses are generally ill built and ruinous; except the Churches, Colleges, Monasteries and Fountains, which are very fine Structures. It hath been for some time the Seat of a Prelate who is Suffragan to the Arch∣bishop of Compostella, and of one of the most noted Universities of the whole Kingdom of Spain, founded by Alphonsus IX. King of Leon, A. D. 1200, in which are divers Professors of Divinity, some of whom have a yearly Pension of 1000 Crowns a-piece, and others only an Allowance of 500 Crowns, reading their Lectures at different Hours; one Chair being ap∣pointed for the Doctrine of Durandus, and another for that of Scotus. Besides these, there are other Professors that have no Stipend from the University, yet Read in hopes of bing preferr'd upon the next Vacancy: these are commonly call d Paetendientes; and the former, Cathedrtico's. The same thing is observ'd with respect to the other Faculties, as the Civil and Canon-Law, Philosophy, and the Mathe∣maticks. There are also many Professors of Physick, and several Languages: So that above 80 of them read daily in this famous University. Lastly, Alphonsus XI. King of Castille, was born here, in the Year 1311. Ciudad Rodrigo, Rdricopolis, or Civitas Roderici, derives its Name from Count Roderick, by whom it was built, under the Reign of Ferdinand King of Leon, A. D. 1170. It is also an Episcopal See sub∣ject to the Jurisdiction of the Metropolitan of Com∣postella, and situated on the River Agueda, in a fruit∣ful Country, at the dist nce of 8 Miles from the Con∣fines of Portugal to the Et, 40 from Covia to the North, and 64 from Mirada. Astorga, Asturica Augusta, lies in a Plain on the side of the River Torto, not being very much inha∣bited, yet well fortify'd, and adorn'd with divers Towers, a large Market-place, and a Cathedral-Church at the end of the Town. Its Episcopal See formerly depended on the Metropolitan of Braga, but is now under the Archbishop of Com∣postella. Palencia, Palentia, and Palancia, was heretofore a Place of great strength, but at present not so con∣siderable, being distant 25 miles from Valadolid to the North: However, it is still the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Archbishop of Burgos. A National Synod was conven'd at Valadolid, in this Diocess, by the Bishop of Sabina, in Quality of Legate to Pope John XXIII. A. D. 1322: and another was held at Palencia, in 1388, by Peter de Luna, who then exercis'd the same Office by a Commission from Clement VIII. and afterward became an Anti-Pope. The ISLANDS of SPAIN, Insulae Hispaniae. THE Islands which heretofore bore the Name of Baleares, together with the Title of a Kingdom, at present depend on the Crown of Spain, and are situated to the East of the Kingdom of Valencia. They are Four in number: Viz. MAJORCA, Majorca, Bish. Alcudra. Sogri. Minorca, Port Maon. Citadella. Yviza, Yviza. Fromentera. MAJORCA, Majorica, commonly call'd Mallorca by the Inhabitants, is the largest of all these Isles, lying between Minorca and Yviza, as aso between the 22 deg. and the 23 deg. 18 min. of Longitude, and to the 38 deg. 48 min. of Lati∣tude. It is extended from West to East about 22 Leagues, from North to South 16, and almost 60 in compass. This Island abounds in Wealth, almost all the Reals of Spain being coin'd therein, and is environ'd with Mountains toward the Sea-coasts: The Vice-Roy usually resides in the Capital City of the same Name, the Natives whereof are very much addicted to Piracy. These People possess the Dominions of the Cimmacii and Baleares of the Ancients, and at present form a Kingdom appertain∣ing to that of the Spanish Monarch, as King of Ar∣ragon, by reason that James, Prince of this Country, overcame and expell d the Moors out of these Islands, on the 23d. day of February, A. D. 1230. Moreover, Majorca hath brought forth divers learned Men, and valiant Commanders, particularly that famous Phi∣losopher
Raymundus Lullius, who was slain by the Moors in 1301; the Marshal d' Ornano; and two Grand Masters of Malta, of the Illustrious Family of Cotoner. The City of Majorca is seated on the South-west part of the Isle, which (according to the Testimony of Paulus Ferragultus, a renowned Citizen thereof) contains 34 Towns or Villages, besides that of Al∣cudia, in the Eastern Quarter, and hath a very con∣venient Harbour, enjoying also the Title of an Epis∣copal See under the Metropolitan of Tarragona. To the South of the Island appears that of Cabrera; and another, nam'd Dragonera, to the North-west. Minorca, Minorica, call'd in Spanish Menorca, is situated to the East of Majorca, under the 38th. or 39th. deg. of Longitude; and the 23d. or 24th. of Latitude. Its Extent, from South-east to North-west, includes about 15 Leagues; 8 from South-west to North-east; and 36 in Compass. This Island is well stored with Woods, large Cattle and Mules. The chief Town thereof, nam'd Citadella, is built on its Western-part, where those of Jamna and Mago heretofore stood: And about 15 miles to the South-east lieth Porto Mahon, the most capacious Harbour of the Isle; together with the adjacent Village, and the Fort of St. Philip. Yviza, Ebusus, is seated under the 21 deg. of Lon∣gitude, and the 38 of Latitude, to the East of Cape Martin in the Kingdom of Valencia, from whence it is distant 14 or 15 Spanish Leagues, extending it self from East to West for the space of about 13; as also 10 from North to South; and 30 in Circum∣ference. It is extremely fertile in Corn, Wine, and divers sorts of Fruits, furnishing part of Spain, Italy and Piedmont with great quantities of Salt. the whole Island is almost entirely cover'd with Groves, and doth not bring forth any noxious Animals. The principal Town is likewise call'd Yviza, and stands on the Southern-shore; together with a very safe Harbour, the Fort of St. Hilario Magno, &c. But the Sea-coasts are render'd formidable to Mariners, through a multitude of small Isles with which they are encompass'd: The chief of these are, the Black Island, La Isleta Nigra; La Isleta de los Aborcados; La Isla de la Esponia, near the Key where the Salt is exported; La Isla de los Ratones, near the Fort St. George; La Isla del Escollo Negro, near the Town of Yviza, &c. As for the Island of Fromentera, or Formentera, which some believe to be the Ophiusa of the Gre∣cians, it is of a very small compass, lying to the South of that of Yviza, scarcely at the distance of 4 miles, and not inhabited, by reason of the Serpents, with which it is altogether infested.
CHAP. II. PORTUGAL, Lusitania. THIS Kingdom, which comprehends part of the Ancient Lusitania, and of the Coun∣trey of Callaici Bracari, is situated on the Western-side of Spain, whereof it was heretofore a Province, being so call'd (according to the report of Antonius Vasconcellus) from Portus Gallorum; that is to say, The Haven of the French-men; in regard that the Fleet of this Nation frequently resorted to the City of O Porto, whilst all the other Sea-Port Towns of Spain remain'd in the Possession of the Moors. The Territories of Portugal are bounded on the North by Gallicia; on the West and South, by the Atlantick Ocean; and on the East, by the Kingdom of Leon, the Two Castille's, and Andalusia; extending from the 36 deg. 36 min. to the 42 deg. of Latitude; and from the 9 deg. 18 min. to the 13 deg. of Longitude. Its utmost Length, from North to South, is about 360 Miles: Its Breath, from East to West, about 135 Miles; and in some Places it is not above 80 and 60 Miles broad. The Air is gentle, healthful and temperate, more-especially toward the Coasts, by reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and the Westerly Winds, that often blow fresh on them. The Soil is full of Mountains, and doth not yield much Corn, but plentifully bring forth Grapes, and other Fruits, viz. Oranges, Citrons, Pomgranates, Almonds, and Olives: Besides a great number of Silk-worms and Bees bread in this Countrey, from whence arise very considerable Revenues. The Hams of Bacon of Portugal are highly esteem'd, as being more delicate than those of Bayonne, Mentz and Westphalia. There are also found divers Mines of Gold, Silver, Lead, Iron, Tin and Alum; as also Rocks of very clear Crystal, certain sorts of Rubies, Emeralds, Jacinths, together with Quarries of White Marble and Jaspar. Numerous Herds of Cattle are likewise found in the Mountains, Heaths and Forests, particularly Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, Goats and Kids which are extremely swift. There is also abundance of Hares, Partridges, and of other sorts of Game both for Hound and Hawk. On the Coasts Salt is made, and a considerable Fishery establish'd for Tunnies. The Rivers are well stor'd with Trouts, Eel-powts, Shads, Lampreys and Eels of a most delicious Taste. Of these Rivers, the most remar∣kable are, the Tajo, the Guadiana, the Lusinna, the Mondego, and the Cadavo. Near Reja is situated a famous Lake out of which are usually taken certain Fishes call'd Turtures, of an excellent Relish. It has been often observ'd, That a little while before a Storm ariseth, on the same Lake, a rumbling Noise proceeds from thence, as it were the roaring of a Bull, and is sometimes heard at the distance of 5 or 6 Leagues. The Portugueses are very zealous in maintaing the Honour and Grandeur of their King, preferring him before all the Monarchs of the Universe; being ex∣tremely haughty and presumptuous, and shewing much contempt of Strangers: Nevertheless, they are sober, thrifty, neat, and do not want either Cou∣rage or prudent Conduct when Occasion requires, as they have made it appear by many Conquests in the Indies, where they were formerly much more powerful, especially on the Coasts of Asia and Africa, than at present, both on the account that they have render'd themselves odious throughout these Coun∣tries, and in regard that the Hollanders have taken from them their Places of greatest importance, such are Malaca, Cochin, Negapatan, and some others. Indeed, strange Revolutions have happen'd in this State since the Death of King Sebastian, who was slain or lost in Africa, A. D. 1578: For Cardinal Henry, his great Uncle, was Crown'd in a decrepit Old Age, and Died in 1580. Then Antonio, Prior of Crato, was proclaim'd King in the same Year. Some time after, Philip II. King of Spain, drave him out of Portugal, and seiz'd on this Kingdom, by an unjust Usurpation, from the Dukes of Braganza, who were the lawful Heirs thereto; until at length, in 1640, the Portugueses not being any longer able to endure the Tyrannical Dominion of the Spaniards, shook of the Yoke, and oblig'd John VI. Duke of Braganza, as it were by force, to accept of the Crown, notwithstanding the utmost Efforts of Philip IV. King of Spain; which Enterprize they brought to Per∣fection with greater facility, through the Assistance of the French Forces that were sent into this Coun∣trey. However, the King of Portugal is as yet a puissant Prince both on Sea and Land; for besides this Kingdom, he retains the Possession of Brazil in America, and of the Islands of Cap-vert, Madera and Azores in the Western Ocean: In Africa he possesseth Mazagan on the Coasts of Barbary; as also the Fortresses of Mina, Arquin, and some others on those of Guinea; together with some strong Holds on those of the Kingdom of Congo, Lovango and An∣gola; the Forts of Sosola, Mosambique, Melinda, Quiloa and Monbazo on the Coasts of Zanguebar: In Asia he is Master of Goa, Diu, Daman and Chaul near Surat. Lastly, Macao on the Coasts of the East-Indies, the Island of Timor on those of China, and some others to the South of the Isles of the Sound, appertain to the Jurisdiction of the same Monarch.
A Chronolical Table, shewing the Succession of the Kings of Portugal.   A. C. Reigned Y. 1 HEnry of Burgundy 1089 23 2 Alfonso Henriquez 1139 46 3 Sanchez I. 1185 27 4 Alfonso II. 1212 21 5 Sanchez II. Capel 1233 13 6 Alfonso III. 1246 33 7 Dionysius, sirnam'd The Fa∣ther of his Countrey 1279 46 8 Alfonso IV. the Haughty 1325 32 9 Peter the Justiciary 1357 10 10 Ferdinand 1367 18 11 John I. Father of the Country 1385 48 12 Edward 1433 5 13 Alfonso V. sirnam'd The African 1438 45 14 John II. the Great 1483 12 15 Emanuel the Great 1495 26 16 John III. 1521 35 6 Months. 17 Sebastian 1557 21 18 Henry Cardinal 1578 1 5 Months. 19 Philip II. King of Spain 1580 18 20 Philip III. 1598 23 21 Philip IV. King of Spain 1621 19 22 John IV. Duke of Braganza, sirnam'd The Fortunate 1640 16 23 Alfonsus Henricus 1656 5 24 Peter II. before Regent. 1661   The Territories of PORTƲGAL are at pre∣sent divided into Six little Provinces, comprehend∣ing the small Kingdom of Algarve: As it appears from the ensuing Table: Portugal divided into Six Provinces 1. Estrema∣dura, wherein are compriz'd these Cities and Towns, viz. LISBON, Archb. Cap. & Royal Seat. Leiria, S. Bish. Torres Novas, Dutchy. Almada. Setuval. Tomar. Pencla, Abrantes, Assarcellas. Santarem, Ca∣mora. 2. Tra los Montes, in∣cluding these Cities, &c. BRAGANZA, Dutchy and Cap. Miranda, Bish. Villa Real, a Dutchy. Castel Rodrigo. Mont Alegre. Chaves. Cunha. 3. El Eatro Douro & Minho, in which are found these Cities, &c. BRAGA, Archb. and Cap. O Porto, Bish. & Port. Viava. Caminha. 4. La Beira, containing these chief Cities and Towns, viz. COIMBRA, Bish. Cap. Lamego, Bish. Viseu, Bish. Aveiro, Dutchy. Afeita, Linheres. Guarda, Salva∣terra, Castel∣branca. Mella, Sabugal, Monsante. 5. Alentejo, wherein are comprehen∣ded these principal Ci∣ties, &c. EVORA, Archb. & Cap. Elvas, Bish. Portalegre, Bish. Beja, Dutchy. Olivenza, City. Villa Viziora. 6. The King∣dom of Al∣garve, com∣prising these chief Cities and Towns, viz. FARO, Bish. & Port. Silves, City. Castromarino. Sagres. Taviha. Lagos.
LISBON, Olisippo, or Ʋlysippo, and in Spanish Lisboa, the Metropolis of the Portugueses, and the Royal Seat of their Kings, in the Latit. of 38 deg. 36 min. and the Longit. of 9 deg. 42 min. is situated on seven Hills, after the same manner as Rome, on the Banks of the River Tajo, formerly Tagus, at the distance of 6 Miles from the Mouth thereof; as also 20 from the Promontory call'd El Cabo de la Roca; as many from that of El Cabo de Espichel to the North; 175 North-west of Seville; 255 South of Compostella; and 290 almost West of Madrid. The Tydes rise here to the height of two Fathoms, and the Harbour is extended for the space of a large League, insomuch that Vessels of the biggest size may safely ride therein, and are secur'd from the violence of the Winds by the high Mountains ranged along the side of the Tajo. The City it self appears in form of an Amphitheatre, and is adorn'd with stately Edifices, and large Squares: A very strong Castle is erected on the top of a Rock, and many Towers round the Port, which defend its Entrance from the assault of Enemies. The King's Palace, seated on the River, is an extremely magnificent Pile of Building; as also are that of the Corpo Santo, the Exchange, the Arsenal, the Indian-House, the Custom-Houses, the New Street, and the grand Market-place. About half a League from hence stands a Town call'd Bethlem, noted for the sumptuous Tombs of the Kings of Portugal there interr'd. In fine, Lisbon is one of the richest and most populous Cities of Europe, and is continually frequented by a great number of Merchants of all Nations; which gave occasion to the common Proverb of the Country, Qui no ha visto Lisboa, no ha visto cosa bona: He that has not seen Lisbon, has seen nothing that is good.— Alfonsus I. King of Portugal, took this City, and expell'd the Moors from thence, A. D. 1147. It was heretofore an Episcopal See under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Merida; and afterward advanc'd to the Dignity of a Metro∣politan by Pope Boniface IX. A. D. 1390. This was the Place of the Nativity of Pope John XXI. as also of John III. and Sebastian, Kings of Portugal; the former of these Princes being born there, A. D. 1502; and the other in 1554. In the Year 1531, a terrible Earthquake happen'd here, which overthrew two hundred Houses, besides Churches and Monasteries, and miserably shatter'd six hundred; whilst a thou∣sand Inhabitants perish'd in the Ruins, and the rest sav'd themselves by flight into the adjacent Fields. BRAGANZA, Brigantia, or Brigantium, in the Latit. of 41 deg. 32 min. and the Longit. of 12 deg. enjoyeth the Title of a Dutchy, and is seated on the small River of Sabor, in the Province of Tra-los-Montes, on the Frontiers of Gallicia, and of the ancient Kingdom of Lobia, being distant 55 miles North-west of Salamanca, and 90 almost East of Braga. Almost fifty Towns or Boroughs depend on the Jurisdiction of this Dutchy; and in the adjacent Countrey are found divers Mines of Silver. The Dukes of Braganza, descended of the Kings of Portugal, usually resided at Villa Viziosa, and had a Privilege, to the exclusion of the other Grandees of Spain, to sit under the Canopy of His Catholick Majesty; but they have retain'd the Possession of the Crown of Portugal ever since the Year of Our Lord 1640. EVORA, Ebora, Ebura, or Liberalitas Julia, the Capital City of the Province of Aientejo, and even reputed the Second City of the Kingdom, stands amidst divers Hills, at the distance of 65 Miles al∣most East of Lisbon, and 112 almost North-west of Seville. It is reported, that the Gauls of Embrun were the first Founders of this City; and that Ser∣torius caus'd the Walls thereof to be built, as a Re∣compence for the signal Services which the Inhabi∣tants had perform'd on his behalf against the Bis∣cayans, or Basques. It was heretofore an Episcopal See, subject to the Archbishop of Merida; after∣ward translated to the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Compostella; and at length erected into a Metro∣politan by Pope Paul III. at the Request of John III. King of Portugal, in 1540. An University was founded there by Cardinal Henry, who obtain'd the Crown of Portugal in a decrepid Old Age, and was the Successor of King Sebastian, in 1580; the most stately Church of St. Anthony; four Convents of Monks, and seven of Nuns, built after a magnificent manner; as also a great number of other Noble Seats within the ex∣tent of 3 large Leagues, together with many curious Fountains, and 10 Gates, contribute very much to the Beauty of Evora, the whole compass whereof includes 3452 Paces. It was storm'd by Don John of Austria, in the Year 1563; and as valiantly recover'd by the Portuguese Forces within a few Days after. BRAGA, Bracara, is situated on the River Cavado, a little above its Mouth, at the distance only of 16 miles from the Sea, in the Province of Entre Douro e Minho, 75 miles of South of Com∣postella, and 180 North of Lisbon. It hath been the Royal Seat of the Suevian Kings, during about 170 Years, and one of the most Ancient Cities of Spain. And indeed, Ausonius reckons it among the Four Principal, and assures us, that it was the First of all the Metropolitans of this Kingdom; the Suffragans to its Archbishop being the Bishops of O Porto, Viseu, Miranda and Coimbra; besides that, those of Tuy, Orense, Padron, Lugo, Bretagna, Astorga and Leon were subject to his Visitation. The same Prelate is at present both Spiritual and Temporal Lord of the City, and hath a Right both to hold a Cross in his Hand, and to wear a Sword by his Side. The Air round about is healthful, and the Soil brings forth all sorts of Fruits. This City was taken from the Moors by Alfonsus I. A. D. 1240. COIMBRA, Conimbrica, or Aeminium, is seated in the Province of Beira on a Rock, and on the Banks of the River Mondego, which divides it into two Parts, being distant 24 miles from its Mouth, 20 from the Coasts of the Atlantick Ocean, 54 South of Braga, 62 of O Porto, and 102 almost North-east of Lisbon. It arose out of the Ruins of an old Town now call'd Condexa la Veija, situated 2 Leagues from thence, and is at present dignify'd with the Titles of a Dutchy and an Episcopal See, under the Me∣tropolitan of Braga. Here was also establish'd an University by King Dionysius, A. D. 1290; which being afterward remov'd to Lisbon, was at length brought back hither by John III. in 1550. The Sons of the Kings of Portugal usually bear the Title of Dukes of Coimbra; which City gave Birth to divers of those Monarchs, particularly to Sanchez I. Alfonso II. Sanchez II. Alfonso III. Alfonso IV. Peter, and Ferdinand. Moreover, Alfonso-Henriquez, the First
King of the Portuguese Race, died therein, A. D. 1185; as also did his two Successors Sanchez I. in 1212; and Alfonso II. in 1223, (as we are inform'd by Rode∣rigo Mendez Sylva.) At the distance of 8 Leagues from this City is as yet to be seen an admirable Fountain, that draws in and swallows whatsoever gutoucheth its Waters, an Experiment of which sin∣lar Propriety hath been often tried with the Trunks of several Trees. FARO, Cuneus Ager, or Pharus, is the Ca∣pital City of the small Kingdom of Algarve, and hath a convenient Harbour to the South, being also erected into an Episcopal See, under the Metropo∣litan of Evora, ever since the Year 1590, when that of Sylves was translated thither. It is distant 34 miles from the Mouth of the River Guadiana to the West, 17 West of Paritra, 33 East from Lagos, and 95 South of Eura. The excellent Wines call'd Dry Bastard and Roman, and made here, are very much esteem'd; and the adjacent Countries on the Sea-coasts are extremely fertile in Olives, Figs, Raisins and Cork. This Kingdom took its Name from the Moors and Arabians, the word Algarve signifying an happy and fruitful Soil, which affords every thing necessary for the Support of Humane Life.
Scandinavia, or Scandia, COMPREHENDING The Three Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway and Sweden. map of Scandinavia SCANDINAVIA or the Kingdoms of DENMARK, SUE∣DEN, NORWAY & LAPLAND. THe name of Scandinavia, mention'd by Pliny and Solinus, is not at present very much us'd; but that of Scandia being more modern, is probably taken from the small Province of Scania or Schonen, which is situated on the Baltick Sea and forms part of Sweden, or (according to the opinion of others) from the ancient Inhabitants, who styl'd them∣selves Schaanau or Shane, altho' Junius would willingly derive its Original from the old Dutch Word Schans, signifying a Fortress; the situation of the Country being naturally well fenc'd. However, it is a large Peninsula, and comprehends the Kingdoms call'd the Northern in general, extending it self from the 55. D. to the 72. D. of Northern Latitude, and from the 25. D. to the 65. of Longitude; for the space of about 330 Leagues from South to North, that is to say, from the Coasts of Prussia as far as the Northern Cape, and 352 in length, viz. from the most Western shores of Norway, to the Frontiers of Onega and Karapol. It is bounded on the North and West by the vast Ocean, on the South by the Baltick Sea, and on the East by part of Moscovy and the Bay of Finland. This Peninsula was hereto∣fore inhabited by divers sorts of People, viz. the Suco∣nes or Sueci, Rueni, Northmanni, &c. having produ∣ced above 30 potent Nations, that in process of time settled their Colonies almost throughout all the Regi∣ons of the habitable World. Indeed its Situation partly in the Temperate Zone, and partly in the Fro∣zen, renders the Air cold for a long while, so that the Soil brings forth very little Corn, neither does it ripen
kindly in these Parts, more especially beyond the Po∣lar Circle; to which Barrenness the great number of Lakes, Forests and Mountains, do very much contri∣bute; the greatest Fertility consisting in Woods, Pa∣stures, and Copper-Mines, besides some of Gold and Silver, but these last have not long continu'd. This whole vast Continent is at present divided in∣to three Kingdoms, viz. of Denmark, Norway and Sweden; the first of these is separated by the Sea, but the two others, which are likewise parted by a long Chain of Mountains stretch'd forth from South to North, and many small Lakes, lie between the great Lake Vener and the River Glama. The King of Swe∣den possesses the middle of the Country, and the East∣ern part on the Coasts of the Baltick Sea, together with the Gulphs of Bothnia and Finland. The King of Den∣mark is in like manner Sovereign Lord of the more Western and Northern parts, that is to say, of Den∣mark and Norway. CHAP. VIII. DENMARK, Dania. DENMARK, so call'd, as it were the Country of the Danes, is a large and populous Kingdom; but from whence these Danes had their Original, is not sufficiently known to themselves; for some deduce it from one Dan, the Son of Humblus, a Prince of these Parts, who flourish'd many years before the Nativity of Jesus Christ; and others give it out that they pro∣ceeded from the Dahi, a certain People of Asia, altho' Dudo de St. Quintin, an ancient Writer (as we are inform'd by the Learned Mr. Camden) affirms that they came out of Scandia, and took Possession of the old Seats of the Cimbri; not to mention that some Persons absurd∣ly derive the names of Dane and Denmark from Dan the Son of Jacob, and others from the Danai in Greece. But one may probably conjecture, that the Danes or Dansche took their denomination from the great opini∣on they had of their own Integrity, since the word Danneman is commonly apply'd by them, even at this day, to signifie an Ʋpright or Honest Man: It having been an usual Custom among the Northern Nations to appropriate Names to themselves, as well from their Piety and Civil Virtues, as from their Valour and Skill in Martial Discipline. This Kingdom consists chiefly in the Peninsula of Jutland, encompass'd with the Islands of Seeland, Fu∣nen, Laland, Falster, and some others of less note; to which may be added the Provinces of Schonen, Hal∣land and Bleking, on the other side of the Baltick Sea, that formerly appertain'd to the Jurisdiction of the Danes, but were entirely annex'd to the Crown of Swe∣den by vertue of a Treaty of Peace concluded at Roschild, between Frederick III. King of Denmark, and Charles Gustavus King of Swedeland A. D. 1658. which Treaty was confirm'd by another and ratified at Copenhagen in 1660. So that Denmark is at present bounded on all sides by the Sea, except one small Neck of Land where it joins to Holstein, the German Ocean washing it on the West and North-West; the entrance into the Bal∣tick Sea, call'd the Categate on the North and North-East; the Baltick on the East, and the River Eyder on the South. Thus the utmost extent of the whole Kingdom from South to North contains about 74 Leagues from the 55 deg. to the 59 deg. 45 min. of Northern Latitude, and 53 Leagues from the 28 deg. 15 min. to the 34 deg. 30 min. of Longitude, viz. from the Western Coasts of Ripen to Copenhagen. The King of Denmark in like manner possesses some other Territories, viz. the Counties of Oldenburg and Del∣menhorst in Germany; the Isles of Feroe and Iseland in the Northern Ocean; the Fort of Christiansburg on the Coasts of Guinea, another nam'd Tranquebar in the East-Indies, and St. Thomas one of the Caribbee Islands in the West-Indies, not to mention a Toll at Elfleet on the River Weser. The Air, though very cold, is not so sharp as in some places of Germany, that are situated much more to the South, nor so excessive hot in Summer; so that this moderate Temperature may perhaps be chiefly at∣tributed to the Sea flowing round about, which (as in England) refreshes the Inhabitants with gentle Breezes during the Summer Season, and keeps them warm in Winter. The Soil, tho' in most places na∣turally barren, and beset with Woods and Mountains, hath been of late much improv'd by the Industry of the Husband-man, and even render'd very fruitful, inso¦much that it brings forth a great deal of Corn and Hay, and abounds in rich Pastures, wherein are fed many Herds of excellent Horses, and so vast a Mul∣titude of Kine, that (if we may give credit to Olden∣burgh's report) some Years 40000, others 100000 Cows and Oxen are transported hence into the Low-Countries. Stags, Elks and Swine, are also very common here, together with variety of other sorts of Game. Indeed the Rivers are not very considerable, but there is a spacious Lake in North-Jutland, and the Coasts round about yield great quantities of Fish, more especially Herrings, Plaice, Whiting, Cod, &c. The Groves and Meadows afford a most delightful Prospect, and the Forests are well stockt with all sorts of Venison; so that every Hunting Season, which usually happens in the Month of August, above 1600 Bucks are brought into the Royal Palaces, besides an infinite number of Hares, Conies, Wild-Boars, &c. But among many other kinds of Fowl, no other Na∣tion in Europe has such plenty of Woodcocks, which were esteemed by the ancient Romans as a great Ra∣rity. It is certain, that the Danes were heretofore a very Warlike People, and that most of the Northern Na∣tions have been constrain'd at some time or other to submit to the force of their Arms; not to mention that the Cimbrians, the ancient Inhabitants of Denmark, often resolutely attack'd the Roman Troops, and that the Galli-Senones, who (as it is very probable) came out of the same Country to storm the City of Rome it self, and besieg'd the Citizens in the Capitol. Indeed we find it recorded in History, that the Danes sub∣du'd Ireland eight several times, that the English were ten times defeated by them, and for many Years sub∣ject to their Kings, and that Scotland became Tribu∣tary
to them for a while; Saxony in like manner paid to Frotho, Siward, and other Danish Monarchs, and the Swedes were more than once compell'd to bear the same Yoke, until at last they found means to shake it off. Some are of opinion, that the Danes from their large size obtain'd the peculiar name of Geats, which was afterwards corrupted into Getae, Jutae, &c. how∣ever, altho' their Stature be now much diminish'd by the Luxury of later Ages, nevertheless they seem still to be more robust and long-liv'd, than most of their Neighbours: They are also very Industrious, Frugal and Courteous to Strangers, entertaining them with all manner of Civility; but they are naturally some∣what Haughty, Self-conceited and ready to pick a Quarrel on the least apprehension of an Affront. The ancient Drink of the Country was Oel, i. e. Ale or Beer made of Malt and Water, and still continues in ordinary use among the Inhabitants; but when the Juice of the Grape was recommended to them by their Neighbours the Germans, they soon learnt to Carouse, and imitated their Teachers in large Draughts and plentiful Meals. As for the ordinary Danish LANGUAGE, it is no other than a corrupted Dutch, and without doubt proceeds from the same Source as the Swedish, Norwe∣gian, German, Flandrian, and English, all which ought to be esteem'd as so many distinct Dialects of one and the same Mother-Tongue, that is to say, the old Teu∣tonick, as it will plainly appear to any Man that shall take the pains to peruse and compare the Lord's Prayer in all these Languages; altho' indeed no account can be given of the several Jargons spoken in Lapland, Finland, and some other Countries lying to the North-East of Sweden and Denmark, the Gibberish of these People being as unintelligible to the civiliz'd Danes, as Chaldaick, Arabick, or any other Oriental Lan∣guage. However the High-Dutch, or German-Tongue will perhaps within a little while become familiar to all the Danes, since it is already ordinarily spoken, not only in Copenhagen, but also in most of the chief trading Cities of Denmark. The Roman Catholick RELIGION has been predominant for a long time in Denmark, until the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, growing intole∣rable in this as well as the other Northern Coun∣tries, Frederick I. Duke of Holstein, being elected King after the deposing of Christian II. his Nephew, began to introduce the Augsburg Confession into all the Churches of his Dominions, and made a League with the Protestant Princes of Germany. Afterward this Reformation was carry'd on by his Son Christian III. who granted a Permission to the English and Hol∣landers to build divers Churches. His Successors have likewise ever since caus'd the Lutheran Doctrine to be every where establish'd throughout the whole King∣dom, so that scarce any other Religion is profess'd here at this day, except that of the Calvinists, who have a French Church at Copenhagen set up by the Queen, be∣sides a Popish Chappel at Gluckstadt, permitted about Ten Years ago to a few Roman Catholick Families in those parts; Together with certain Chappels built for Calvinists. Independants, Anabaptists, &c. at Al∣tena near Hamburg. The Kingdom of Denmark was at first Elective, yet so that the King's eldest Son was usually chosen by the Senators, and from that time styl'd the Prince; the other younger Sons enjoying the Titles of Dukes and Heirs of Norway. This Ceremony was heretofore perform'd after a very solemn manner; for the Sena∣tors being assembled in some convenient Place in the Fields, seated themselves in a Circle on so many great Stones, (to denote as it were the firmness of the Ele∣ction) and there gave their Votes; whereupon the new elected Prince was plac'd in the middle on a Stone of a larger size than the rest, and immediately saluted King with joyful Acclamations. Indeed such a row of Stones still remains in Sealand, and is well known by the name of Kongstolen, or the King's Seat. There are also some Monuments in England of the like nature, particularly that of Biscow-Woun near St. Burien's in Cornwall, which the Learned Mr. Camden imagines to have been some Trophy erected by the Romans under the later Emperors, or else by Athelstan the Saxon, when he subdu'd these parts. But Wor∣mius (perhaps with greater probability) conjectures that some Danish or Saxon Monarch was elected in this place by his Attendants. However the Danes of later years have follow'd the Customs of other Countries in their Elections, until they made the Suc∣cession to the Crown of Denmark Hereditary. A. D. 1660, in favour of the Family of Frederick III. who vigorously repulsed the Swedish Forces that had be∣sieg'd Copenhagen; insomuch that the Monarchy is now become altogether absolute, altho' the Noble∣men as yet retain a very great Authority. Thus the present King Christian V. was proclaim'd the very same Night his Father dy'd, without any previous Election or Consultation held by the Nobility. The Rites of Coronation are usually celebrated at Copen∣hagen in St. Mary's Church, and the King is Anointed by the Bishop of Roschild. The Administration of JUSTICE is perform'd in four different Tribunals; the first of these is the Byfoght's Court in Cities and Towns, whereto answers that of the Herredsfougdt in the Country; from whence lies an Appeal to the Landstag, or general Head-Court of the Province. But the fourth and Supreme Court call'd the High-right, where the King himself some∣times sits in Person, is held at Copenhagen; and always consists of the principal Nobility of the Kingdom. In matters relating to the Royal Revenue, there is also establish'd a Rent-Chamber, which somewhat resem∣bles our Court of Exchequer, besides the Court of Chancery, and that of the Admiralty for Maritime Affairs. But it is very remarkable, that altho' some Causes should happen to pass thro' all these Courts, nevertheless they may be soon try'd and determin'd, no Suit of whatsoever Importance remaining in su∣spence longer than a Year and a Month; since the Danes are altogether averse from unprofitable Forma∣lities. They have their peculiar Statutes, or forms of Law, which are grounded upon Equity, and con∣tain'd in one entire Quarto Volume, Written in the Vulgar-Tongue of the Country, with so much Plain∣ness and Perspicuity, that any Man may easily un∣derstand his own Cause, and even plead it too (if he thinks fit) without the assistance of Council, Attor∣neys or Advocates. The Judges of the two first Courts are constituted by the King's Letters Patents, durante beneplacito, and their Salaries, which are not very great, do not consist in Fees, but are paid out of the Exchequer: They are also punishable for any Misdemeanor committed, so that whensoever one of them acts in any wise unjustly, or wilfully deviates from the positive Law, he forfeits one Moiety of his Estate, part whereof is adjudged to the King's Ex∣chequer, and part to the use of the injur'd Party. The King of Denmark has a considerable REVE∣NUE arising from a Toll impos'd on all Merchants Ships, excepting those of the Swedes, that daily pass through the Straight of the Sound, which before the last War with Sweden came to 143000 Rix Dollars per
Annum, but of late Years has not amounted to much more than 65000, besides a Revenue of 800000 Rix-Dollars from Norway; the Taxes and Impositions of his Subjects, and the Rents of his own Estate, Crown-Lands, Confiscations, &c. All the Danish Nobility derive their Pedigrees from a long Series of Ance∣stors, and every Family has for many Ages retain'd a single Coat of Arms, as judging it derogatory from its Antiquity to change or quarter it with any other, neither are they distinguish'd by the Titles of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, or Barons, as in other Countries of Europe. There are some Noble Families even at this day, particularly that of Wren, whose Prede∣cessors were present at the concluding of a Treaty of Peace between the Emperor Charles the Great, and Hemming King of Denmark on the River Eydor. All the Goods and Chattels of a Noble-man, upon his Decease, are equally divided among his Sons, and Daughters likewise by a peculiar Privilege are ad∣mitted to a third part of the Inheritance, but the Castles and Fortresses always devolve on the Male-Heirs. It is also ordain'd by the Laws of the Realm, that the King shall not buy any immoveable Goods be∣longing to the Nobility, to prevent Dissensions that may arise between them, altho' they may make an Exchange one with another. Neither are the Noble∣men allow'd to purchase any Crown Lands or Estates appertaining to the King's Tenants. Altho' the Nobility of Denmark in general do not accept of any distinct honourable Titles, neverthe∣less many of them are created Knights upon some notable piece of Service done their King or Coun∣try. These Knights are commonly call'd Ridders, i. e. Riders, (Equites) and their Off-spring have the Title of Ridders Men's Men. The most noble Or∣der of Knighthood in these parts, is that of the Ele∣phant, and this Honour has been most commonly con∣ferr'd by the Kings, on the day of their Coronation, upon the Nobles, Senators, and other Illustrious Personages of the Kingdom. It is not certainly known when this Order was instituted, altho' Avo Bilde Bishop of Arhusen, sometime Chancellor to King John, in his Letter written A. D. 1537. to John Fris Chancellor to King Christian III. declares that Pope Sixtus IV. among other Honours, first invested King Christian I. with the same Order, in memory of our Saviour's Passion; but others affirm the Badge to be purely Military, and that it was given long be∣fore as an Incitement to the Danish Princes, who un∣dertook to defend the Christian Religion against the Moors, Africans, and other Infidels. The Knights formerly wore a Collar of Gold emboss'd with Ele∣phants and Crosses; at which hung the Picture of the Virgin Mary to the middle, holding Christ in her Arms, and surrounded with a Glory of Sun-Beams, but at present they only wear a blew Ribbon, at which hangs an Elephant enamell'd white, and adorn'd with five large Diamonds set in the middle. There is also another Order of Knighthood, com∣monly call'd the Danebroge, which was founded by Waldemar I. in memory of a signal Victory he had obtain'd over the Lieflanders, by the means (as it is suppos'd) of a Standard that fell from Heaven dis∣playing a White Cross in a Bloody Flag, and inspir'd new Courage in his Army after they had lost the Royal Banner, and began to give ground. The pre∣sent King Christian V. reviv'd this antiquated Order in the Year 1672, and enjoyn'd the Knights to bear a White enamell'd Cross edg'd round with Red, and hung in a String of the same Colour reaching from the right Shoulder to the left Side. Thomas Bartho∣linus has given a large Account of its first Original, Progress, Restauration, &c. The whole Kingdom of Denmark may be divided into the Territories of the Continent, and those that are encompass'd with the Sea: The former contain the Peninsula of Jutland, which was heretofore call'd Chersonesus Cimbrica, and is distinguish'd into the Southern and Northern Provinces. South-Jutland, or the Dutchy of Sleswick, extends it self from the River of Schorburg, which separates it from North-Jutland to the Dutchy of Holstein. This Country affords good Pasture, and brings forth abundance of Corn: North-Jutland is stretch'd forth from the banks of the same River of Schorburg, as far as Cape Scagen, yielding Fodder to innumerable Herds of Oxen and Horses, and consisting in four Diocesses, viz. Those of Ripen, Arhusen, Wiburg and Alburg: Within the Maritime Territories are comprehended many Islands, the chief whereof are Sealand, Funen, Alsen, Arr, Toiling, Langeland, Laland, Falster, Mon and Born∣holm. South-Jutland divided into Two Parts. The Dutchy of Holstein divided into four Ter∣ritories, viz. 1. Holstein, properly so call'd, wherein are these Towns, viz. Kiel, Cap. Wilster, Nieumunster, Rensburg. 2. Ditmarsh, in which are; Meldorp, Londen, Heyden, Westinburgen, 3. Stormar, in which are; Gluckstadt, Kremp, Bramsted, Pinnemberg. Bredenberg, 4. Wagerland, in which are; Segeberg, Ploen, Oldeslo, Lutkemburg, Oldenburg, The Dutchy of Sleswick divided into six∣teen Parts, viz. 13. Bailliages. Sleswick, Bish. Cap. 1. Hadersleben, 2. Tonderen, 3. Appenrade, 4. Flensburg, 5. Sonderburg, 6. Nordburg, 7. Glucksburg, or Ruthkloster, 8. Sundewit, 9. Gottorp, 10. Husem, 11. Huten, 12. Witensee, 13. Merkier, Ekelford, Frederickstadt, 3. Territories. 1. The Destrict of Ey∣derstede. 2. The Territory of Chri∣sti, or Preys. 3. The Cloyster of Lhom.
North-Jutland divided into four Diocesses. 1. The Diocess of Ripen. Ripen, Bish. Cap. Kolding, Weel. Rincoping, Henneberg, Lemwick, 2. The Diocess of Ar∣husen. Arhusen, Bish. Cap. Hobro, Ebelto, Horsen, Grinna, Ʋnderup, Mariacker, 3. The Diocess of Wiburg. Wiburg, Bish. Cap. Leby, Lembick, Wegerby, Holstebro, 4. The Diocess of Al∣burg, in which are these Towns, viz. Alburg, Bish. Cap. Hals, Gistadt, Hirring, Scawen, Nicoping, 5. The Territory of Wensyssel. Wensyssel, Scagen, Huggerby, The Maritime Territories; Or Seventeen principal Islands. 1. Sealand, in which are these chief Towns, viz. Copenhagen, Bish. Cap. Roschild, Elsenore, Fredericksburg, Ringstede, Kallenburg, Sor, Koge, Prestoe, Warburg, Korsoer, 2. Amaga. Drakoer, 3. Funen. Odensee, Nyburg, Middelfare, Swynburg, Woburg, Bowens, 4. Langeland. Rudcoping, Traneker, 5. Laland. Naskaw, Newstadt, Mariebo, Saskoping, 6. Falster. NICOPING, Stabecoping, Falsterby, 7. Monen. Stekoe, 8. Alsen. Sunderburg, Norburg, 9. Femeren. Burg, Tassing, Ketrop, 10. Bornholm. Rotemby, Nex, 11. Artoe. Koeping, 12. Ween. Ʋraniburg, 13. Samsoe. Samsoe, 14. Endelo. Endelo, 15. Leslo. Hais, 16. Sylt. Syredrop, 17. Norstand. Pelworm, 2 Territories in Germany. Oldenburg, and Delmenhorst. Oldenburg. HOLSTEIN, Holsatia is bounded on the East by the Dutchy of Lawemburg, and the Baltick Sea; on the West by the German Ocean, on the North by the Dukedom of Sleswick, and on the South by the River Elb, which separates it from those of Bremen and Lunenburg. These Territories in comprehending Ditmarsh, Stormar and Wagerland, were formerly known by the name of Nordablingia, or the Country lying beyond the Elb Northward, the more modern name of Holstein, (as we are inform'd by Adam Bre∣mensis) being derived from Holts-geseten, i. e. its Si∣tuation in a Wood or Forest. It was at first y a Province of the Grand Dutchy of Saxony, but wa be∣stow'd by Duke Lotharius, afterward Emperor of Ger∣many, upon Adolph Earl of Schouwenburg or Schaumburg, about the Year 1114, and at last chang'd into a Duke∣dom by the Emperor Frederick III. A. D. 1474, in fa∣vour of Christian the Twelfth Earl, who had also ob∣tain'd the Crown of Denmark; Thus the Dutchy of Holstein became part of that Kingdom, and the Danish Monarchs are on that account reckon'd among the Princes of the Empire, altho' not oblig'd to repair to any Diet. Afterward the Title of Duke of Holstein, together with a considerable part of the Country was given to Adolph the Brother of King Christian III. whom Queen Elizabeth admitted to be a Knight-Com∣panion of the most noble Order of the Garter, in 1562. After the decease of this Duke, and the failure of his Issue Male, the same Title was conferr'd upon Ʋlrick, Brother to King Christian IV. but at present there are several Houses of the Dukes of Holstein, viz. Sunder∣burg, Norburg, Gluckburg, Arnsbeck, Gottorp, Ploen, and Ottingen, among whom the Duke of Holstein Got∣torp nam'd Christian Albert is the chief, and lays claim to the same Authority and Privileges that were granted to the aforesaid Duke Adolph, the Brother of Christian III. However Christian V. the present King of Den∣mark, having seiz'd on his Person and principal Offi∣cers, in 1675, at Rendsburg, under colour of a Treaty, detain'd him Prisoner there, and compell'd him to re∣nounce his Right to the Countries of Holstein and Sles∣wick, until the Duke found means to escape, protested against those Violences, and at length thro' the Me∣diation of divers Princes, more especially of William III. King of Great Britain, was restor'd to the greater part of his Territories in 1689, yet without any Re∣paration of past Damages; the rest being possess'd by the King of Denmark. The Country of Holstein is well watered with Ri∣vulets, and its chief Trade consists in the Fishery and selling of Hogs; insomuch that the convenience of Trafficking in the Baltick and British Seas, and the Industry of the Inhabitants, has render'd it the richest plot of Ground within the King of Denmark's Domini∣ons. The Holsteiners are for the most part of a strong Constitution and undaunted Courage. They are also Sincere, Just in their Dealings, and very punctual in the observing of Oaths and Promises; So that Holstein glaub, or the Fidelity of an Holsteiner has even pass'd into a Proverb.
KIEL, Chilonium, is a well frequented Mart-Town, and the Capital of Holstein, so call'd (accord∣ing to the opinion of some Authors) from its Situation on the Baltick Sea in a corner of Land, enclos'd be∣tween the Mouths of two Rivers; the German Word Kiel, properly signifying a Wedge. It stands almost in the midst between Flensburg to the North, and Lubeck to the South, and about four German Miles East of Rensburg, being defended by a strong Castle or Cita∣del, on the top of a Hill that commands both the Town and Haven, its Foundation having been laid by Adolph of Schaumburg the first Earl of Holstein. The Town is also adorn'd with a stately Palace, and many other fair Buildings; particularly a Monastery of Franciscan Minorites, which was founded by Earl Adolph IV. and when the Reformation prevail'd in these parts, was chang'd into an Hospital, besides a College erected by the present Duke of Holstein, and an University esta∣blish'd A. D. 1665. The Harbour is very large and commodious, being continually throng'd with Mer∣chant Ships from Germany, Sweden, Liefland, and all the Isles on the Baltick Sea. Moreover in this Town the States of Holstein are usually conven'd every Year, to consult about the most important Affairs of the Dukedom, and especially those relating to the Mint, and Valuation of the Publick Coin. WILSTER is a neat and well built Town, on a River of the same name, which not far from thence falls into the Stoer. RENSBURG, or REINOLSBURG, the best fortified Town in the whole Dutchy, is almost encompass'd on all sides with the River Eyder, and de∣fended by a strong Castle, which owes its Foundation to Gerhard II. sirnam'd the Great, Earl of Holstein. But the Town takes its name from one Reinold a Prince of the Blood, or Noble-man of great Authority and Reputation. DITMARSEN, or DITMARSH, is bound∣ed on the North by the River Eyder, and the Duke∣dom of Sleswick; on the South by the Elb and part of Stormar; on the East by the German Ocean, and on West by Holstein properly so call'd. Some write the Word Deutschmarsh or Teutschmarsh, i. e. the German or Dutch Marsh, because the Inhabitants of this Pro∣vince are the Off-spring of the ancient German Sax∣ons, and still retain much of their Valour and Warlike Temper; for they could not be forc'd to submit to the Earls of Holstein, as their Neighbours the Storma∣rians and Wagrians had done, until that whole Earl∣dom was united to the Crown of Denmark; nay, they soon threw off the Yoke, altho' the Emperor Frederick III. had given their Territories to Christian Earl of Ol∣denburg and Holstein the first Danish Monarch of that House, and refus'd to do Homage to him or his Suc∣cessors. But at last they were entirely subdu'd, in 1559, by Frederick II. assisted in this Expedition by his Co∣sins John and Adolph Dukes of Holstein; whereupon Ditmarsh was divided into two Parts, and shar'd be∣ween the King and the said Dukes. MELDORP, the chief Town of the Province of Ditmarsh, it stands on the Coasts of the German Ocean, and is a Place of considerable Trade. LƲNDEN is situated over against Tonningen, near the Mouth of the River Eyder. HEYDEN is a Town of a large extent, altho' of no great note, being seated on the Borders of the desert of barren Sands, that spreads it self into the middle of this Country. STORMAR, STORMARS, or STORMARSH, Stormaria, according to the signification of its name, is a Morass or Marshy Ground, lying along the banks of the River Stoer. It has Wagerland and Lawenburg for its bounds on the East, Holstein proper on the North; and the Dutchies of Bremen and Lunenburg on the West and South. Indeed it is worth the while to observe that the several Territories of the Dukedom of Holstein are distinguish'd by names taken from the nature of the Soil, which here, as also in Ditmarsh, is rich, and in most places resembles that of Holland, as well in its Fruitfulness, as the manner of Improvement and Cultivation; so that the swelling Ocean often over∣flows great part of the lower Grounds, notwithstanding the Dikes and Banks that are rais'd by the Industry of the Inhabitants to keep it out, who nevertheless have considerable Advantages from the Neighbourhood of the River Elb, and the City of Hamburgh, which stands in this Provence, altho' one of the Hanse Towns, go∣vern'd by its own peculiar Laws and Magstrates: therefore we refer the Reader to its Description in Ger∣many. The other chief Cities and Towns are these, viz. GLƲCKSTADT is a small City seated on the right-side bank of the River Elb, near its Confluence with the Rhin. It was built and well fortified A. D. 1629, by Christian IV. King of Denmark, (who took great delight in its pleasant Situation) and afterward much enlarg'd by his Successors. And indeed a suffi∣cient Proof of its Strength was made manifest soon af∣ter the first building of it; for it sustain'd a Siege of almost two Years continuance, and at last vigorously repell'd the Forces of the Emperor Ferdinand II. This strong Hold Commands the Passage of the Elb, and serves as a Curb to the Hamburgers, so that any At∣tempt made by them against the Danes would prove ineffectual, until they can make themselves Masters of so important a Fort, and by that means secure an open Road for their Vessels and Men of War. KREMP, or CREMPEN, Crempa is situa∣ted on a Rivulet of the same name, which a little below empties it self into the Stoer, and in like man∣ner owes its chiefest Strength to King Christian IV. who caus'd it to be encompass'd with a firm Wall and deep Ditches. This Town is esteem'd one of the Keys of the Kingdom of Denmark, and became famous for the gallant defence it made for thirteen Months toge∣ther, in the Years 1627 and 1628, against the furious Attacks of Count Wallenstein, the Fortunate General of the Imperial Army, altho' at last it was constrain'd to Surrender upon honourable Terms. BREDENBERG is one of the fairest little Towns in all the Territories of Denmark, and the ancient Seat of the noble Family of the Rantzow's. It is also no less Remarkable for the stout Opposition Count Wallenstein met with before it, who neverthe∣less at length took it by Storm, and put the whole Garrison to the Sword. WAGEREN, or WAGERLAND, Wagria is almost encompass'd round about with the Baltick Sea, and the two Rivers Trave, or Travenna, and Suentin, extending it self in length from Oldeslo, as far as the Village Grotenbro near 48 English Miles, and about 20 in breadth. This Country takes its name from the Wagrii, a People of Sclavonia, who subdu'd these parts, and has for a long time given a Bull-head for its Coat of Arms, altho' it is not quar∣ter'd with those of the other Provinces in the Escocheon of the Dukes of Holstein, perhaps because the Arms of Oldenburg are thought sufficient for the whole Pro∣vince, which includes a Hanse Town within its li∣mits as well as that of Stormar, namely Lubeck, seat∣ed at the Confluence of the Rivers Trave and Billew. But this City being a Branch of the Empire of Ger∣many, is described at large among those of the Lower Saxony. The other principal Towns of Wagerland are these, viz.
SEGEBERG stands on the banks of the Ri∣ver Trave, at the distance of about 16 English Miles from Lubeck to the North-East, and was heretofore call'd Aelberg, which name was chang'd upon the building of a Castle on the top of the adjacent craggy Mountain. For the Emperor Lotharius (as the story is related by Helmoldus) having made choice of this Hill, in the Year 1134, for the erecting of a consider∣able Fortress to give a check to the growing Power of the Sclavonians; one of their Princes spake these words to his Attendants, Seest thou the Fortifications on the Top of those Mountains? Let me tell thee, it will in a short time prove the Yoke of the whole Land, &c. Whence (say the Danes) the Place still retains the name of Segeberg, signifying in the German Tongue, Behold the Mountains. PLOEN is a Town of good Antiquity on the side of a Lake of the same name, with which it is well fortified, as also a Castle built not long since after the Italian manner of Architecture, by Joachim Ernestus Duke of Holstein. This Place at present affords a Title to the Valiant Duke of Holstein Ploen, who has signaliz'd his Valour on divers occasions during the present Wars. OLDESLO, or ODELSO, is a fair Town watered by the River Trave, and situated in the mid∣dle between Segeberg and Lubeck. It was purchas'd in the Year 1338, by John Earl of Wagerland, for the Sum of 10000 Marks of Silver, and continu'd for a long time in a very flourishing Condition; but hav∣ing suffer'd much Damage in the Wars between Eric of Pomeren, and the Dukes of Sleswick and Holstein, it could never as yet recover its former Beauty and Grandeur. OLDENBƲRG is situated near the Baltick Sea, about 30 Miles from Lubeck to the North, and (as it is recorded in the Danish History) was anciently the Metropolis of the Wagrians and Venedi, two Warlike Nations that subdu'd the greatest part of Mecklenburg, as also some time a Bishop's See, which was founded by the Emperor Otho the Great, after he had over∣come the Venedi, but was afterward translated to Lu∣beck, and bestow'd on Marcus his Chancellor. It was formerly a Town of considerable Trade, and very po∣pulous, having been adorn'd with four Churches, three Monasteries and five Gates, but it has insensibly fall'n to decay ever since the Harbour was stopt up, by the special Command of Margaret Queen of Denmark. The Dutchy of SLESWICK, Ducatus Slesvi∣censis, or Southern Jutland, is bounded on the North by Northern Jutland, on the South by Holstein, on the East by the Baltick Sea, and on the West by the German Ocean; being extended in length from Kold∣ing, and the River Leewens Aa, as far as Dannewick, about 18 German Miles, and not above six, or in some places eight, in its greatest breadth. This Dutchy was first granted by Christopher I. King of Denmark, about A. D. 1253, by way of Appenage to the Chil∣dren of King Abel, on Condition that the Duke of Pome∣ren, and some other petty Princes of Vandalia, should always pay Homage to the Danish Monarch, and quit all claim to the Crown. In process of time it became the Inheritance of King Christian I. of Oldenburg, who annexed it to the Royal Demeasns, a part of which it has continu'd ever since; altho' indeed it has been of∣ten assign'd as a Portion to the younger Princes of the Blood, and is at present divided between the King of Denmark and the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. The most remarkable Cities and Towns of this Dukedom, are these, viz. SLESWICK, or SLEYSWICK, Slesvi∣cum, the Metropolis of the whole Province so call'd from thence, and a See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Lunden, takes its name from its Situa∣tion on a River, or rather a small Arm of the Sea, nam'd by the Inhabitants De Slye, so that Sleswick is no more than a Town upon the Sley; Wic in the old Saxon Tongue signifying a Village or Fort, as Vicus in Latin, and Wiick even at this day among the Hol∣landers. But the Danes (according to Pontanus) im∣pos'd on it the name of Haithaby, i. e. the Habitation of Hetha, a certain Queen of that Nation. However it was without doubt, heretofore a Place of very great Trade, much frequented by Merchants from Great Britain, France, Spain, Flanders, and other parts of Europe: And indeed Adam Bremensis, who flourish'd about A. D. 1100, calls it Civitatem Opulen∣tissimam ac Populosissimam, i. e. an extremely Rich and populous City. King Eric Barn founded the great Church in the Ninth Century, with the assistance of St. Anschar Arch-Bishop of Hamburgh, who had con∣verted the Inhabitants to Christianity. Not long af∣ter, viz. in 1064, the Sclavonians invaded these Parts, ruin'd the Church, and re-establish'd the Heathenish Superstitions: But within a while the Danes shook off the Yoke, and entirely expell'd these Foreigners, where∣upon Paganism was again extirpated, the Christian Religion restor'd, and the Cathedral re-edify'd. After∣ward the Angles who maintain'd a considerable Trade in Sleswick, built a Church dedicated to the Holy-Ghost, near the Market-place, together with the ad∣joyning Hospital. This City stands between Flensburg to the North, and Rensburg to the South, only four German Miles West of the Baltick Sea, 11 from Hadersleben, and 16 North of Lubeck. Within a few Miles from Sleswick to the South, are yet to be seen in many places, the ruins of the famous Wall and Trench which was built about, A. C. 809, in the time of the Emperor Charle∣magne, by Gotricus then King of Denmark, to hinder the Incursions of the Saxons, and somewhat resembles the Picts Wall erected by the Romans in Great Britain. This ancient Rampart is commonly call'd Danewark by the Inhabitants, and the report goes that it sometime reach'd (as well as that in England) from one Sea to the other. HADERSLEBEN, or HADERSLEVE, a noted Sea-port Town, is situated near the Baltick Sea, over against the Island of Funen, at the distance of seven German Miles from Flensburg, and 40 from Sleswick to the North. Waldemar Duke of Jutland, confirm'd its Charter about the Year 1292, and it for∣merly had for its defence a strong Castle founded on the Top of a Hill that commands the Town. But John Earl of Holstein, eldest Son of King Christian I. caused this Fortress to be demolished, and began to build a new one call'd from his name Hansburg, or John's Castle, (Hans in the German and Danish Tongues signifying the same with John) which was not brought to Perfection until the time of King Frederick II. The Streets in Hadersleben are generally fair, broad, and Me∣very uniform. In the great Church is to be seen a stately Monument erected by King Eric VIII. to the mory of Rombold Duke of Silesia, who was sent hither in quality of Ambassador from the Emperor Sigismund, to accommodate the differences between the said King and the Earls of Holstein, about their Pretensions to the Dutchy of Sleswick, but dy'd before the Negotia∣tion was finished. This Town and Castle were twice taken by the Swedes during their Wars with the Danes, but restor'd to the later by virtue of a Treaty of Peace
concluded between both Crowns, A. D. 1658. It is also remarkable for giving Birth to Frederick III. King of Denmark, in 1609, who was the first that render'd that Crown Hereditary. TƲNDERENS, two Port-Towns, viz. the Greater and Lesser, stand on the Western shore or Coasts of the German Ocean, and are both Places of no small Traffick. APPENRADE is built on a small Bay of the Baltick Sea, over against the Isle of Alsen, and much frequented by the Danish Fisher-men. FLENSBƲRG, Flensburgum, is so call'd from the Bay of Flen upon which it is seated, altho' others derive its name from one Fleno a Danish Noble-man, who was Lord of the Mannor, and had the Custom of the Fishing-trade hereabouts; but Mhier would have it written Ʋlensburg from Ʋlens, which in the Language of the Natives denotes the ebbing and flowing of the Sea. The Town is remarkable for its Situation in a low and pleasant Vally encompass'd with divers high Hills, and consists chiefly in one continu'd Street of fair Buildings, reaching near two English Miles in length, the Ships riding so commodi∣ously in the Haven, that the Burgers load and unload them even at their very doors. The Suburbs are guarded with a Castle that stands on the Top of a Hill and commands both the Town and Harbour; between which and Sleswick lies a Territory, in time past in∣habited by the ancient Angles, the Ancestors and first Founders of our English Nation in Great Britain, as it appears both from the Testimony of the famous Hi∣storian Ethelwerd, and a small Village in this Tract, still retaining the name of Anglen. GOTTORP, Gottorpium, the ancient Palace of the Earls and Dukes of Holstein near Sleswick, is in∣deed one of the finest Seats in all these Northern parts of Europe, being extreamly well fortified, and stand∣ing in an Island, environed with a large Lake made by the River Sley, the Waters whereof are clear and full of Fish, carrying Vessels of small burden to and from the Baltick Sea. The Gardens belonging to these Appartments are large, cut out of a steep Hill on the other side of the Lake, and beautify'd with curious Fountains, Parterres, Walks and Water-works; be∣sides a noble and spacious Park, or rather Forest ad∣joyning, well stockt with Deer, Wild-Boars, and o∣ther sorts of Game. Among the chief Rarities of this Place, we may reckon the Library, which is a Store∣house of choice Books and Manuscripts that have been collected with much diligence and precaution by di∣vers Dukes of Holstein. Here also is to be seen an admirable Globe, which one of the Dukes caused to be made of Copper, being 10 Foot and an half in Dia∣meter; on it is represented the figure of the Sun, which moves in the Eccliptick-Line Rising and Setting re∣gularly. And indeed the Motion of this whole Globe exactly follows that of the Heavens, by the means of certain Wheels which are turn'd about by Water con∣vey'd from an adjacent Mountain. At Gottorp is esta∣blish'd a Tol-booth, or Custom-house, where Toll is paid every Year for 50000 head of Cattel, transpor∣ted out of Jutland into Germany. EKELFORDT, or EKELENFORDT, Ekelenfordia lies between Sleswick and Kiel, and had its name from the abundance of Squirrels in the neighbouring Woods, as it is evident from the Arms of the Town, which is much enrich'd by Traffick, and the convenience of its Harbour, as being one of the safest on the Coasts of the Baltick Sea. FRIDERICKSTADT, Fridericostadium is a little Town on the banks of the River Eyder, which owes its Foundation to Frederick Duke of Holstein and Sleswick, who endeavoured to settle the Silk-Trade there, and to that purpose, in the Year 1633, sent a famous Embassy into Persia and Moscovy; an Account whereof has been publish'd by the Secretary Adam Olearius. The Diocess of RIPEN, Dioecesis Ripensis, bor∣dering on Southern Jutland, contains 30 several Lord∣ships, 282 Parishes, 10 Castles, 100 Noble-mens Houses, and 7 Cities or large Towns, the chief of which are these, viz. RIPEN, Ripa, is situated in a very pleasant Coun∣try on the clear River Nipsaa, which parting it self into three streams, divides the Town into as many parts, and gave occasion to its Arms, which are three Lions. It has been long since dignified with a Bishops See, Suffragan of Lunden, and has a Commodious Har∣bour, together with astrong Fort. The Cathedral is a Magnificent Structure of hewn Stone, adorn'd with a Tower or Steeple of a vast height, built with Marble and Brick, which serves as a Land-mark to those that Sail along these dangerous Coasts. This Church was first founded on the Top of a Hill, by Eric, sir-nam'd Barn, or the Child, King of Denmark; whom St. An∣schar converted to Christianity about A. C. 848. But it was not made a Cathedral, nor the Episcopal See settled there until near 150 Years after, when Idola∣try which had prevail'd again in the Kingdom under some Foreign Princes was abolish'd, and the Christian Religion re-establish'd. There is also founded here a kind of University, but it is much inferiour to that of Copenhagen. The City of Ripen was taken by the Swedes, A. D. 1645, and recover'd within a little while after. It is distant 55 Miles from Sleswick to the North-West, and 67 from Wiburg to the South. KOLDING is water'd on the South side by a River, which separates the Northern Jutland from the Southern, and soon after discharges it self into the Baltick Sea. King Eric Glipping, having laid the first Foundation of this City about A. D. 1268, in the place of an old Castle of the same name, caused it to be fortified with strong Walls and deep Ditches, so as it might be able to defend the Frontiers of the Danish Do∣minions, which at that time were extended no farther Southward. But Christian III. took so great delight in its Situation and the Pleasantness of the adjacent Country, that he repair'd the Castle Arnsburg, that hangs over the Town, remov'd his Court thither, and dy'd in the same place. The Bridge over the River brings a great Treasure every Year into the King of Denmark's Exchequer, since for every Ox or Horse that passes it toward Holstein, or any of the Hanse Towns, the Owners pay a Rix-dollar, i. e. almost a Crown in Eng∣lish Mony, besides the Imposts laid upon all other kinds of Merchandizes; so that considering the nu∣merous Herds of Cattle convey'd yearly out of North Jutland this way, the Toll must needs amount to a vast Revenue. LEMWICK stands on the side of the Bay of Limford, whence its name is deriv'd, and is the ut∣most boundary of the Diocess of Ripen. The Diocess of Arhusen lies along the Coasts of the Baltick Sea, and within its limits are enclos'd 31 Courts of Judicature, 7 Cities or Wall'd Towns, 304 Parishes, and 5 Forts, the strongest whereof is Schanderborch or Schonderborch, i. e. the fair Castle built on the River Gudden. ARHƲSEN, Arhusium, is a neat and pleasant City on the Baltick shore, two Miles West of the Isle of Funen, 10 South of Alburg, and 26 North of Lu∣beck. It is so call'd (accroding to most Etymologists)
as it were Aar-hus, that is to say, the House of Oars; altho' Pontanus, with much less probability, would willingly deduce the word Arhusen from Ptolomy's Harudes. Some are of opinion that Poppo was or∣dain'd the first Bishop of this Diocess A. C. 992, but the greater part of the Danish Historiographers assure us, that the Episcopal See was not founded until the Year 1014. The Cathedral Church is a curious piece of Architecture, beautified with divers rich Mo∣numents of Prelates, Noble-men, &c. But the Bi∣shop's Palace has lain for a long time in its Ruins, yet shews some marks of its ancient Magnificence and Grandeur. The City of Arhusen was taken and al∣most destroy'd by the Swedes, A. D. 1644. THE Diocess of WIBƲRG is situated in the very middle of North-Jutland, and its most memo∣rable Bays are Sallingsundt, Vicksundt, Hualpsundt, Sebersundt, and Otthesundt, the last of which is so call∣ed from the Emperor Otho. I. sir-nam'd the Great, who made an Inroad into Jutland about the Year 948, and penetrated even as far as these parts, where (as it is reported) having cast a Javelin into this Bay, he gave it the name it still retains. But the most considerable quarter of this Diocess is Salling, a fruitful Peninsula in the Lymford, where are bred the best Horses in the whole Kingdom of Denmark. WIBƲRG stands in the heart of the Promontory of North-Jutland, at an equal distance from the Ger∣man and Baltick Sea, eight Miles from Alburg to the South-East; and is indeed a Place of a very great con∣course of People, who resort to the high Court of Ju∣dicature held here, from whence lies no Appeal, except to the King himself. It was formerly called Cim∣mersberg, as being the chief City of the ancient Cim∣brians; but it is not well known whence came the more modern name of Wiburg: For some are of opi∣nion that it was taken from Wiglet, a certain Prince who united the petty Principalities of the Cimbrians. And Elnot in the Life of St. Canutus intimates, that it came from Wig an Idol worship'd in this place, but it is very probable, that it was the Seat of the Danish Pirates, anciently termed Wigs or Wikenger, as the Inhabitants of Glocester-shire, Worcester-shire, &c. (ac∣cording to Mr. Camden's Conjecture) were heretofore called Wiccii from the Sea-Robberies, continually com∣mitted by them on the Mouth of the River Severn. The Episcopal See of Wiburg was founded by King Sueno Esthrith, A. D. 1065, and Herebert was installed the first Bishop. THE Diocess of ALBƲRG lies North of that of Wiburg, and comprehends 13 High-Courts of Judi∣cature, 180 Parishes, 6 principal Towns, and 100 Noble-mens Seats. The most fruitful part of it is seated between the German Ocean and Lymford Bay, which extends it self along a great part of the Penin∣sula of Jutland, and compehends a large Island nam'd Mors. The chief Town of this Tract is Tysted, where Christian III. founded a Free-School, which is now improved to a kind of University. ALBƲRG is seated on the Lymford, scarce three Miles West of the Baltick Sea, and owes its name to the vast quantities of Eels taken in that part of the Bay, having been before called Burgle, whence the Bishoprick is often named in Latin Episcopatus Burgla∣viensis, or Burglumiensis. This Bishoprick was first erected by King Sueno Esthrith, the Son of Ʋlf an Eng∣lish Earl, A. D. 1065, at the same time with that of Wiburg, so that there has been for some Years a Contest between the Prelates of these Diocesses about Prece∣dency, each pretending his Bishoprick the most anci∣ent. But the Bishops of Alburg usually resided at Bor∣lum, a small Village not far from this City, until up∣on the Establishing of the Reformation throughout the Kingdom of Denmark, Stigot the last Popish Bishop was enjoyn'd to abdicate all Episcopal Jurisdiction, and to retire into the Monastery of Borlum. This happened A. D. 1536, and the Lutheran Prelates ever since have had their Palace at Alburg. The Territory of WENSYSSEL extended to∣ward the farthest Promontory of North-Jutland, is known by the Latin names of Venulia and Vandalia, and supposed to have been the Seat of the ancient Van∣dals. The chief Town in this Tract is likewise call'd Wensyssel from the Province, and the Inhabitants are the most robust of any throughout the whole Kingdom of Denmark. SCHAGEN stands on the very point of the Cape or Promontory and is washed both by the Nor∣wegian and Baltick Seas. It is much more frequented by Merchants from all parts of Europe, than any other Town in Jutland, and its Trade would be far more considerable if the adjacent Coasts were not so dange∣rous. SEELAND, or ZEALAND, the largest and most fruitful Island in the Baltick Sea, lies to the East of Funen, and is separated from thence by the Streight of the Belt, as also on the other side from the Continent of Schonen by a small Frith, which the In∣habitants call Oresundt, or the Sound, thro' which pass all Merchant-Ships that Trade into the Baltick. This Island, which extends it self about 80 English Miles in length, and 240 in compass, is undoubtedly the an∣cient Codononia, mention'd by Pomponius Mela, which signifies the same thing as the more modern words of Dania or Denmark. It is named Seeland, (according to the opinion of most Danish Authors) as it were Soedland or Seedland, from the plenty of Corn that grows therein; but others more probably affirm that the word denotes only an Island or Plot of Ground encompass'd with the Sea. The Soil is very fertile bringing forth Wheat in some places, Barley almost every where in abundance, together with a great quantity of Rye and Oats. The Grass is generally short and sweet, growing on the borders of the Corn∣fields, or in some Moorish Grounds. There is also a great number of Lakes well stor'd with Fish, and Forests yielding much variety of Game, viz. Stags, Wild-Boars, Ro-Bucks, &c. Indeed the Country is in most places very pleasant, as being beset with little Hills, Woods, chiefly of Beech-Trees, Rivulets and Lakes, that afford a delicate Prospect to the Eye, by their agreeable diversity. COPENHAGEN, Hafnia aut Haunia, the Me∣tropolis of the Isle of Seeland, as also of the whole Kingdom of Denmark, and the Royal Seat of the Da∣nish Monarchs, is seated in a Plain on the Streight of the Sound, only three Danish Miles from the Coasts of Schonen, four East of Roschild, as many South of Kronenburg, 30 likewise South of Gotheburg, 45 West of Calmar, and 70 South-West of Stockholm. It is commonly call'd Kiobenhaun by the Inhabitants, and Copenhaven by the Germans, corruptly for Kiobmans∣haven, i. e. Portus Mercatorum, or the Merchants Ha∣ven; altho' Meierus, a learned Writer, with little or no Grounds, derives the Etymology of its name from Coppen, signifying James in the Frisian Language, that is to say, St. James's Haven. However it is no very ancient City, as having taken its rise from a Fortress which Axel, Huydo, or Wide sir-named Snare, (whom Saxo Grammaticus calls Absolon) Arch-Bishop of Lunden, erected in this Place about the Year 1168, to restrain the Incursions of Pirates. The Fort was then known
by the name of Axel-huys, and proved a good De∣fence to the whole Island, insomuch that it was soon surrounded with divers Cabbins of Fisher-men, and Magazines or Ware-houses of Merchants and other Traders, that continually resorted hither to furnish their Vessels with such Provisions and Commodities, as the Country afforded. Thus Traffick daily encreased more and more, and the first Foundations were laid of a Hamlet, which in process of time grew up to as flourishing a City as most in Europe; James Ecland, Bishop of Roschild, was its first Patron, and granted many Privileges thereto, A. D. 1254. These were confirmed by his Successor Ignatius, and considerably enlarged by King Waldemar, in 1341, as also by Eric of Pomerania, in 1371. Afterward Christopher of Ba∣varia endow'd it with the same Immunities, as the other Cities of Denmark, in 1443; And all these Concessions were ratified by the large Charters of Christian III. and Frederick II. Indeed the Situation of Copenhagan is extreamly ad∣vantagious, being encompassed on the Land side with a very pleasant Country, and on the Sea-side with one of the finest Harbours in the World, capa∣cious enough to hold 500 Sail; the Road without is likewise very safe, and fenc'd from the Violence of the Waves, by a large Bank of Sand. The entrance of the Port is so narrow, that but one Ship can pass at once, and is shut up every Night with a strong Boom, the Mouth of it being commanded on one side by the Citadel, and on the other by a Block-house, well fur∣nished with Cannon. The City it self is environed with deep Ditches, and high Ramparts of Earth rais'd according to the Rules of Modern Fortification, and joyned on the Eastern side by a Timber-Bridge, to the little Isle of Amager. The Streets are broad, clean and neat, having Lights constantly kept therein du∣ring the Night. The Houses amounting to the num∣ber of 9000, are for the most part well built with Timber, but the Intervals are filled up with Brick∣work. The principal Churches are those dedicated to the Holy-Ghost and St. Nicolas, but the Cathedral, in which the Kings are usually Crown'd, bears the name of St. Mary, and is adorned with a stately Cop∣per Spire, built at the proper cost and charge of Chri∣stian IV. the present King's Grandfather, who was the Founder of divers other noble Structures. The University of Copenhagen was founded by Christian I. in 1478, or 1479, and this Prince procured for it of Pope Sixtus IV. the same Privileges with those of Bo∣nonia in Italy. Not many Years ago an Academy was in like manner established here, for the Teaching of all sorts of Martial Exercises, as Dancing, Vaulting, Riding the Great Horse, &c. besides Foreign Lan∣guages, and the Mathematical Sciences. His present Danish Majesty has much improved this College, and endow'd it with considerable Revenues and Privileges. Among the other Publick Buildings, the chief are the Citadel, the Observatory, called Runde Taarn, or the Round Tower; the Royal Palace, with the adjoyning Gardens and Banqueting-house of Rosenburg; the Ex∣change, and the Arsenal, which is undoubtedly one of the best in Europe, and much celebrated for that won∣derful Celestial Globe, of six Foot Diameter, made by Tycho Brahe, the renowned Danish Astronomer. The Market-place is extreamly spacious, and no small Or∣nament to the City, which is governed by four Bur∣go-Masters, one of whom enjoys the Title of Regent, or President, during his Life. It 1658, the Swedish Forces under the Conduct of their Valiant King Charles Gustavus, marched ove the Ice from the Country of Holstein, to the Island of Funen, and having harrassed these Territories, com∣pelled the King of Denmark to accept of a Peace on very disadvantageous Terms. In the next Year the same Prince returned with his Army, and formally invested the City of Copenhagen, but was at last forc'd to raise the Siege. ROSCHILD, or ROSKILL, Roschildia takes its name from a River with which it is watered, and that drives seven Mills, Roe in the ancient Danish Language signifying a King, and Kille a Stream of Water or Brook. It was formerly the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, and once contained (as we are informed by Lyscander) no less than Twenty seven fair Churches. An Episcopal See was also erected there by Sueno or Suenotho King of England, Denmark, Sweden and Norway, about the year 1012. and one Ge∣rebrard a Monk was ordain'd the first Bishop, whose Successours had the honour of Crowning the Kings of Denmark; but this Bishoprick has been since united to that of Copenhagen. Afterward Sueno Gratenhede cau∣sed the Town to be fortify'd with a Ditch, Wall and other Ramparts. The old Cathedral Church is fa∣mous for the Tombs of many Danish Monarchs, some whereof are very sumptuous and magnificent; among these stands a fair Marble Pillar, on which Margaret Queen of Denmark hung the Whet-stone she had re∣ceiv'd from Albert King of Sweden, to sharpen her Needles. But this unfortunate Prince paid dear for his Jest; for being defeated by the Queen in a bloody Battle, he was detained seven Years in Prison, and compell'd to renounce all his Right to the Kingdom of Sweden. Moreover the Town of Roschild is noted for a Treaty of Peace concluded between the Swedes and Danes, Anno 1658. ELSENEƲR, ELSENORE, HEL∣SCHENOER, HELSINGOR, or HAL∣SINGOR, is so nam'd as it were Halsen-Ore, i. e. an Ear in the Neck, as being at first only a Watch-Tower (built on the Neck or streight of the Sea, com∣monly call'd the Sound, or Oresound; it is also pro∣bable that the Castle of Helsingburg on the opposite Shore of Schonen derives its name from the same Ori∣ginal. Between these two Forts pass all Vessels that Trade into the Baltick, so that this Streight next that of Gibraltar may well be esteem'd the most frequented and considerable of any in Europe. The Town of El∣senore is defended by the Royal and Impregnable Castle of Croneburg, which commands this side of the Sound, as Helsingburg secures the other. It owes its foundation to Frederick II. who built it at his own proper Charges with Free-stone brought thither out of Gothland, and Cover'd it with Copper. This Fortress has been for many Years the Seat of the Danish Mo∣narchs, and at present every Ship that passeth through the Streight is oblig'd to strike Sail thereto. After∣ward the Master is to come to a Composition in the Town for Custom, under a penalty of the Confiscati∣on of his Vessel and all its Cargo. FREDERICKSBƲRG, Fredericoburgum, the chief Country Palace of the Kings of Denmark, stands about Twenty English Miles from Copenhagen to the North-west in the midst of a Lake, the Founda∣tions of it being laid in the Water, and the Passages leading thereto over several Draw-bridges. It was formerly only a Monastery call'd Ebelholt, and dedica∣ted to the Holy Ghost, of which Joannes' Parisiensis who was Canoniz'd for a Saint, is said to have been Abbot about the Year 1201. The lower part of the House is built with Free-stone, and the upper with Brick, having been first begun by one Harlef a Danish Nobleman, who sold it to King Frederick II. After∣ward
his Son Christian IV. laid out vast Sums of Mo∣ney in inlarging this Royal Palace, and beautifyed it with the richest Statues, Pictures, Hangings and other sorts of Furniture that Europe could afford, but it was not entirely finished until the time of Frede∣rick III. The adjoyning Park was first Stockt with Fallow-Deer, transported thither out of England, in the 24th. Year of Queen Elizabeths Reign, and adorn'd with large Ponds, abundance of high Trees, a fair Bathing House and other Embellishments. RINGSTEDE is seated in the very center of Seeland, being a Town of the greatest Antiquity of any in Denmark, except Roschild. Many of the Da∣nish Kings were interr'd therein, particularly King Waldemar I. and Eric the Pious. KALLENBƲRG, Callunda aut Callundebur∣gum, was at first a small Village, known by the name of Herwig, and inhabited only by Fishermen. But Esbern Brother to Axel or Absolon Huyd Arch-Bishop of Lunden, rais'd it to the dignity of a City about A. D. 1158. or (according to the opinion of others) in 1171. and Beautify'd it with a Castle, Church, and divers other publick Edifices. It is also at present a place of a considerable Trade, and has a very safe and commodi∣ous Harbour. SOR, SOOR or SOER, Sora, is remarkable for its Situation in a pleasant Woody Country, be∣tween Slagen and Ringstede. The abovementioned Absolon Huyd Arch-Bishop of Lunden and Bishop of Roschild first founded a fair Monastery here, about the middle of the XII. Century, and endowed it with large Revenues for the Maintenance of divers learned Men, among whom was Saxo Grammaticus the Fa∣mous Author of the Danish History. Afterward Es∣bern the said Arch-Bishops Brother enlarg'd it, and augmented the Revenues by the addition of fourteen Villages. King Frederick II. in like manner having remov'd the School which he had established at Fre∣dericksburg for the Education of the young Nobility in this place, made a further Augmentation of the In∣come: Insomuch, that of a rich Popish Monastery it became one of the Noblest Free-Schools in the re∣formed part of Christendom, which was turned into a small University by Christian IV. who appointed Sal∣laries for a certain Number of Professors, and at the same time constituted an Academy furnished with able Masters for the Instructing of young Gentlemen in all sorts of Martial Exercises and Acts of Chivalry. Thus in process of time the University of Sora grew to be the most famous in the whole Kingdom of Den∣mark. In the Year 1621. the Lands of the demolished Nunnery of Mariebo in Laland were given thereto; but at present these and all the other large Territories formerly belonging to this University are possest by the King; who sometimes talks of reestablishing it, but perhaps a stop has been put to his design, chiefly through the dissuasion of the Professors at Copenhagen, whose Interest it is to hinder the Establishing of ano∣ther University in their Neighbourhood. KOGE, Coagium, is a small but very populous Town, distant about 16 Miles from Copenhagen to the South. It is much enricht by Traffick, and more especially throng'd with Corn-Merchants and Fish∣mongers. AMAGA, or AMAGER, Amagria, the least Island of the Danish Seas, lies on the East of Copenha∣gen, about six English Miles in length, four in breadth, and fifteen or sixteen in compass, being well stockt with all sorts of Fowl and Venison. It likewise brings forth much Corn, and furnishes the Markets of Copen∣hagen every Week with variety of Provisions, viz: Meat, Milk, Butter, Cheese, Hares, Domestick Fowls, all sorts of Herbs, &c. whence it is commonly call'd the Nurse of this City, and (as some think) took its name; for Amaga in the old Teutonick Tongue signi∣fies a Granary or Store-house: We may also refer thereto the Etymology of divers Towns in Germany and elsewhere ending in Magum, viz. Drusomagum, Borbe∣tomagum, Duromagum, Neomagum, &c. In this Island are two Parish Churches, viz. one called Hollander Byes Kirck, i. e. the Dutch Church set apart for the use of a Colony of that Nation, above 150 Years ago by King Christian II. and the other Torne Byes Kirck, which belongs to the Natives. The Swedish Forces made a Descent on this Island, on the 9th. of October Anno 1658. and the next day burnt all the Villages in it; but on the 10th of December following, their King Charles Gustavus, and General Wrangel were forced to leave their Army engag'd in Battle, and to escape by flight in a Fisher-mans Boat. FƲNEN, Fionia is situated between Seeland and Jutland, being separated from the former by the Beltis-Sundt, or great Belt, and from the later by the lesser Belt or Middelfarsundt. Its name (according to the conjecture of Stephanius) is derived from the word Fion, which in the old Runick Monuments denotes a Neck of Land rent from the Continent. It is the largest Island next to Seeland, of any in the Dominions of the King of Denmark, reaching about 10 German Miles in length from East to West, as also 8 in Breadth, and 190 English Miles in Compass. It contains above 250 fair Villages, and 264 Parish Churches. This Island abounds with all manner of Grain, especially Wheat, Rye, and Barley: So that great Quantities thereof are transported thence Yearly into other Countries. Here are also numerous Herds of Cattle, and very good breeds of Horses; not to mention that the Woods which overspread almost the whole Island, are ex∣treamly well Stor'd with Deer, Hares, Foxes and other sorts of Game. ODENSEE or OTTENSEE, Ottonia, took its Name (as some say) from Woden, otherwise called Othin or Odin, the great Idol of the ancient Danes, and others with greater probability give it out that it was first founded by Otho I. Emperor of Ger∣many, who invaded a great part of the Danish Terri∣tories, and left his name in several Places. But Pon∣tanus makes King Harold its Founder, who to testify his gratitude to the said Emperor, through whose persuasion he had embrac'd the Christian Religion, named the Town Ottensche, and his Son Suenotho. This City stands in the very heart of the Island 14 Miles North of Sleswick, and 18 West of Copenhagen, and is on that account a fit place for the Sessions of the Nobility and Magistracy yearly held here, as were likewise the General Conventions of the States of the Realm before the Year 1660. It is also Dignifi∣ed with a Bishops See, under the Metropolitan of Lun∣den, which was erected A. C. 950. The Houses are generally well Built, and the Streets very uniform. Among other publick Buildings are two fair Churches, viz. one Dedicated to St. Francis, and the other to St. Cnute; not far from the latter of these stands a stately Town-house, on a very spacious Market-place, where the ancient League between the Crown of Den∣mark, and the Dukes of Holstein and Sleswick was re∣newed by King Frederick II. A. D. 1575. St. Canutus King of Denmark was Murder'd in St. Albans Church in the same City A. D. 1077. or 1078. but the Work∣men as they were repairing the Quire of the Church which now bears his Name, found in a Vault his Body laid in a Copper Coffin Guilt and adorn'd with preci∣ous
Stones, together with an Inscription in old Latin Gothick Characters. NYBƲRG is seated over against Corsaer in See∣land, and has a capacious and safe Port, capable of Harbouring a great number of Vessels, even of the lar∣gest size. It is one of the principal Towns in the Isle of Funen, and the usual passage from thence into See∣land, having been first Fortified with a Moat and Ram∣parts by King Christian III. It is also famous for the memorable Battle Fought by the Confederate Forces of the Empire, Brandenburg, Poland and the Low Coun∣tries against the Swedes, in the Year 1659. who were defeated in that Engagement, and totally routed out of Funen. MIDDELFARE lyes on the common passage from this Isle to Kolding in Jutland; and is noted for the Expedition of Charles Gustavus King of Sweden, who having led his Army over the Ice to this place on the 10th day of January A. D. 1658. put the Danes to flight, and made himself absolute Master of the whole Island of Funen. SWYNBƲRG stands over against the Island of Langeland, and is in like manner celebrated for the passage of the Swedish Forces over the Ice into Seeland in the same Year 1658. LANGELAND is a narrow Island so call'd from its oblong form, and extended between Funen, Seeland and Laland, about 28 Miles in Length, and only 8 in Breadth. The principal Town is RƲD∣KOPING, which the Danish Writers call a City, tho' it is a very mean one, and not at all considerable for its Traffick. In this Island are likewise contain'd 16 Parish Churches, and many Noblemens Seats, be∣sides the strong Fort of Traneker, which is well furni∣shed with all manner of Military Ammunition. LALAND or LAWLAND, Lalandia is se∣parated from Seeland by the narrow streight of Grone∣sound or Goldersond (as it is written in some Maps) and from Falster by a much narrower Bay. This Island takes its name from its low Situation, and reaches about 32 English miles in Length, and 20 in Breadth, containing (according to the computation of Lyscander) four several Herrits or Lordships, [Gentes] and as many Cities or large Towns. It is also extreamly Fruitful, affording abundance of Corn and good store of rich Pasturage. NASKAW or NACHSCOW is the chief Town of Laland, and its Fortifications are consi∣derable; nevertheless it was storm'd and burnt, toge∣ther with the adjoyning Monastery by the Lubeckers, in the Year 1510. but made a long resistance against the Swedish Forces in 1659. NEWSTADT was once famous for a noble Monastery founded there A.D. 1286. and the Nunne∣ry of MARIEBO mentioned in the Description of Sor was sometime as remarkable a place as any in the whole Isle of Laland. FALSTER, Falstria lies Southwest from Mo∣nen, and is not above 16 English Miles in length, but is much celebrated for its Fruitfulness and plenty of Provisions, supplying not only its own Inhabitants with Corn, but also a great part of the Dutchy of Mecklenburg, and divers other Territories of Germany. NICOPING is one of the most pleasant and best built Towns in the whole Kingdom, and on that account it is stiled by Dr. Heylyn the Naples of Den∣mark. It is distant 11 miles from Copenhagen to the South. STABECOPING is a place of some Trade, chiefly caus'd by the Passengers that continually resort hither between Seeland and Germany. MON, MEƲN, or MONEN is a Chalky Island lying to the North-East of Falster, about 30 English Miles in circuit, and serving for a good Land∣mark to the German Vessels that frequent those Seas. It was formerly annexed (as Lyscander informs us) to the personal Estate of the Danish Admirals, as a place thought to be most convenient of any within the whole Kingdom of Denmark for the residence of such an Of∣ficer. Indeed it defended it self better in the Year 1659. against the Attacks of the Swedes, than any of the larger Islands, as STEKOE its capital Town long before gallantly withstood the Lubeckers in 1510. and at last compell'd them to retreat. ALSEN, Alsena a small Island lies over against the Bay of Flensburg, and is separated only by a narrow Frith or Arm of the Sea from the Country of Sleswick. It is extremely fruitful, pleasant and populous, contain∣ing 4 Towns and 13 Parishes, so that several thou∣sands of stout Soldiers may be rais'd there upon occasi∣on in a very short time. The places of greatest impor∣tance in this Isle are the Forts of SƲNDERBƲRG and NORBƲRG which have given Titles to two Dukes of the House of Holstein; the former of these was anciently the usual Seat of the Dukes of Sleswick, and is as yet one of the strongest Holds in the Territories of Denmark, having not long since resolutely sustained the Attacks of Wrangel the Swedish General, and even forced him at last to quit the whole Island. The Island of FEMEREN, Femera aut Femeria is situated on the Coasts of Wagerland, and parted from thence by a very small Channel. Indeed this little Plot of Ground has been ever esteemed one of the Keys of Denmark on the side of Germany, and on that account King Christian IV. in the Year 1628. caus'd the most considerable places in it, more especially BƲRG, to be secured with strong Garrisons, and fortified the old Castles which had been slighted by some of his Predecessors. The Island of BORNHOLM lies in the Baltick Sea, near the Continent of Schonen, and includes some small Towns that have often suffered Damage during the Wars with the Swedes, to whom it was surrende∣red by vertue of the Treaty of Roschild concluded between the two Northern Crowns, A. D. 1658. But the Danes have since redeemed it by the exchange of several Lands in Schonen. WEEN is a small Island, situated in the streight of the Sound, between Seeland and Schonen, and was formerly famous for the Castle or Tower of Ʋraniburg, in which that Noble Danish Baron named Tycho Brahe frequently made Astronomical Observations, but it is now demolish'd and lyes Buried in its ruins. The same renowned Mathematician in like manner built a Dun∣geon call'd Stelliburg, beset with Looking-Glasses, and Chrystals, where he was wont to sit and observe the Stars in all Seasons. SAMSOE, Samsoa aut Samos Danica, lies be∣tween Seeland and Jutland, almost over against the Ci∣ty of Arhusen to the East. It is an Island of a very small extent, yet has been lately erected into a County by Christian V. the present King of Denmark, in favour of Madam Mote Countess of Samsoe a Citizens Daugh∣ter of Copenhaguen, on whom this Prince has begot two Natural Sons. OLDENBƲRG and DELMENHORST are two Counties in Germany that lye together, but are separated from all the rest of the King of Denmark's Do∣minions; the two Rivers, Elb and Weser, and the Dutchy of Bremen interposing between them and Hol∣stein to the North-East; they are also bounded on the West by East-Friesland and the County of Embden;
on the South by part of the Bishoprick of Munster; and on the North by the German Ocean. These Ter∣ritories are enclos'd within the Circle of Westphalia, and extended about 35 English miles in Diameter. The Country of Oldenburg is for the most part flat and Moorish, much expos'd to the Inundations of the Sea; nevertheless abounds in rich Pastures for Cattle, and more especially affords Fodder to an excellent Breed of Horses introduced some Years ago by Antony Hunter, the last Count descended from Wittekind the first Duke of Saxony, whose Line entirely failing in the Year 1676. this County fell into the possession of the King of Denmark, who derives his Extraction from the Eldest Branch of the Counts of Oldenburg. Delmenhorst is situated on a higher ground, and be∣set with Woods. But the Nature of these Countries is shewn more at large in the Description of Germany. A Chronological TABLE, shewing the Succession of the Kings of Denmark, since the year of our Lord 930. The first Christian Monarch of this Kingdom.   A. D. Years. 1. Harald VI. 930 Reigned 50 2. Suen, or Sueno II. 980 34 3. Canut, or Knute II. Sir∣nam'd the Great. 1014 21 4. Canut III. 1036 9 5. Magnus the Norwegian. 1045 4 6. Sueno III. 1049 27 7. Harold VII. the Idle. 1074 2 8. Canut IV. 1076 9 9. Olaus 1085 10 10. Eric III. 1095 7 11. Harold VIII. or Nicolas. 1102 33 12. Eric IV. 1135 4 13. Eric V. 1139 8 14. Canut V. 1147 8 15. Sueno IV. 1155 2 16. Waldemar I. 1157 28 17. Canut VI. 1185 18 18. Waldemar II. 1202 40 19. Eric VI. 1241 8 20. Abel 1250 2 21. Christopher I. 1252 7 22. Eric VII. the Old 1259 27 23. Eric VIII. the Young. 1286 35 24. Christopher II. 1321 12 25. Waldemar III. 1333 42 26. Margaret and Haquin. 1376 37 27. Eric IX. 1412 about 26 An Interreign of Six Years. 28. Christopher III. 1445 3 29. Christiern or Christian I. 1448 34 30. John 1482 32 31. Christian II. deposed 1513 10 32. Frederick I. the Pacifick. 1523 11 33. Christian III. 1534 24 34. Frederick II. 1559 29 35. Christian IV. 1588 60 Christian Elected. 36. Frederick III. 1648 22 37. Christian V. 1670 Reigning CHAP. IX. NORWAY, Norwegia. ALTHO' some Mythological Writers derive the Name of this Country from Nor, the Son of the Idol Thor and Grand-child of Woden, vainly supposed to have been the first great Captain of the Norwegians; Nevertheless it is certain that Norway or Norwegen (as the Germans write the Word) signifies no more than the Northern Way or Road. And indeed in the Vulgar Tongue of the Natives, as also of the Danes and Swedes, it is commonly call'd Norrick, and by contraction Norck, i. e. The Northern Kingdom. Thus all the Cimbrian Kingdoms were anciently na∣med Regna Norica, and these People are styl'd Nord∣liudi by Helmoldus, Nordliod or Nordeleut in the Nor∣thern Languages, denoting the People of the North. The Kingdom of Norway is bounded on the North, West and South by the Ocean, and on the East by many small Lakes, and a long Chain of Mountains which separate it from Sweden, being extended from the 59th. Degree to the 71. of Latitude, and from the 23th. Degree of Longitude to the 52. so that the whole Continent takes up 1300 English Miles in Length, that is to say, from the entrance of the Bal∣tick Sea almost to the North Cape, and 250 in its greatest Breadth. The Air is so extreme cold, more especially towards the North, that the Soil brings forth little Fruit. The Eastern side of the Country is full of Sands, craggy Rocks and inaccessible Moun∣tains, as the Western is beset with large Gulphs and some Rivers, yet scarce any of them are Navigable, except that of Glama; insomuch that those parts are very thin Peopled, but in the Southern are greater store of Inhabitants who dwell in pleasant Valleys en∣viron'd with barren and Rocky Hills, the Air being much more temperate there, as also all along the We∣stern Coasts. The rest of the Country is overspread with Woods and Forests, abounding more especially in Fir Trees, furnishing a very considerable part of Europe with Deal-boards for the Building of Houses, and huge Masts for Ships. On the Northern and Western Coasts lye a great number of Islands, the most re∣markable whereof are these, viz. Maghero, Suro, Sa∣men, Trommes, Stegen, Lofoten, Hiteren, &c. Magi∣nus
makes mention of a certain Lake near Drontheim, the Waters of which are never Frozen, notwithstan∣ding the excessive coldness of the Season; and near the Isle of Hiteren is a dangerous Whirl-pool, well known by the name of the Maelstroome, wherein Vessels are often swallowed up with their whole Cargo. Some other Islands depend in like manner on this Kingdom, as Iseland, Groenland, Spitsberg, Fero and Orkney; but the King of Denmark's pretensions to the two last have been relinquished, and his whole Right resign'd to James VI. King of Scotland, and afterward of the whole Island of Great Britain. The ancient Inhabitants of Norway were very for∣midable, and notorious Pirats. For they made fre∣quent Descents on the low Countries, Britain and France, and having subdu'd Neustria, a Province in the last Kingdom, impos'd on it the name of Normandy, insomuch that this Supplication was inserted in all the Litanies of those times, A furore Normannorum libera nos Domine; From the fury of the Normans Good Lord deliver us. It is also recorded in the History of the same Nation, that they over-ran Apulia, Sicily, Prus∣sia, Hemi-Gallia and Carelsia, and settled Colonies in those several Countries; besides that it is generally be∣liev'd that they Peopled Iseland after they had with∣drawn themselves from the Dominions of Harald Har∣fager. However at this day the Seas are scarce any where so secure as on the Coasts of Norway, and the present Norwegians are naturally endu'd with much simplicity and integrity, entertaining Strangers with a great deal of Courtesie. They are also hardy, labo∣rious and just in their Dealings, esteeming themselves much Superiour to the Danes, whom they ignomini∣ously term Jutes, altho' constrain'd to submit to their Yoak: For the King of Denmark treats them rigo∣rously enough, allowing them little or no Shipping, and seldom or never making use of any of this Nation in his Wars as being loth to trust them with Arms. The Christian Religion was first introduc'd into those parts by Olaus the Son of King Trigon, A. D. 955. and propagated by Harold in 1018. The Inhabitants of Norway now profess the same Religion as the Danes, as likewise do those of the Bordering Territories of Lapland, except some who adore the Sun, Fire, Fo∣rests, Serpents, &c. Indeed Lapland is the only place in Europe wherein are found any Idolaters. The Revenues of his Danish Majesty in Norway amounting yearly to 800000 Rix-Dollars, proceed chiefly from the profit of the Fishing Trade, of which he receives a tenth part, as also from the Exportation of Timber of all kinds, Masts, Pitch and Tarr taken out of their Forests, by divers Nations, especially the English and Hollanders, between whom and this Prince several particular Treaties have been ratify'd on that account. Furthermore, the Mountains afford some Mines of Silver, Copper and Iron, which ne∣vertheless are not very considerable: But the Valleys yield good store of Barley and Fodder to numerous Herds of Cattle, insomuch that great quantities of Hides, Tallow, Butter and Cheese are Exported thence every Year. Besides these Commodities there is a Staple Trade for Iron, Stock-fish, and Train-Oyl, which is vended throughout all the Coun∣tries of Europe. The whole Kingdom of Norway is commonly divided into two large Provinces, viz. the Norehern and Southern, and Govern'd by a Vice-Roy, or as they call him, Stadt-holder, sent thither by the Court of Denmark, who acts as it were an ab∣solute Soveraign, and disposes of all things at his Pleasure. This Dignity is now enjoy'd by his high Excellency Count Guldenlieu, Natural Brother to the present King Christian V. There are also five other General Governours or Magistrates who preside over five several Provinces, and are assisted by many other inferiour Officers: The first of these is of Aggerhus, the second of Bergen, the third of Drontheim, the fourth of Wardhuys and the fifth of Bahus, altho this last place is now in the Possession of the Swedes. NORWAY Divided into two Parts. 1. The Continent wherein are Five Governments. 1. Aggerhus, in which are contain'd these Towns, &c. viz. Anslo, Opslo, or Christiana Bish. Cap. Scheen. Moss. Hollen. Tolen. Dosre. Friderickstadt. Gustal. Hammar. Tronsberg. 2. Berghen, in which are Berghen Bish. C. Haluo. Soyden. Eiden. Lund. Jelso. Hemeland. Northolm. Arnedal. Staffanger, Bish. 3. Drontheim, in which are these Towns, &c. viz. Drontheim, Archbish. C. Wisk. Ostraford. Malager. Alenby. Schordael. Opdael. Store. Olsfeuk. Melus. Mellung. Wardal. Evene. 4. Wardhus, in which are Wardhus, Cap. Hoop. Tannebay. Warangar. Wesick. 5. Bahus, in which are Bahus, Cap. Maelstrand. Oddevalla. Berg. Feet. Aremark. Esberg. 2. The Principal Islands on the Western Coasts. Maghero. Suro. Samin. Trommes. Stegen. Loffoten. Hitoren. AGGERHƲS, Aggerhusia is a Castle situated on the Gulph of Anslo, within a League of the Town of that name. It has also given its name to the whole Province, and is memorable for the brave resi∣stance it made against the Swedish Forces, in the Year
1567, that were shamefully beat back after they had laid Siege thereto 18 Weeks together. The Province of Aggerhus being 240 Miles long, affords a consider∣able Revenue in Fish and Timber to the King of Den∣mark. It is bounded on the North by Drontheim, on the South by the Sound, on the East by Bergen, on the West by the Territories of Sweden. ANSLO, or OPSLO, Ansloa, Ansloga aut Christiania, is the Metropolis of the Government of Aggerhus, and the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Drentheim, from whence it is distant about 300 Miles, as also 60 North of Frederickstadt, 120 East of Berghen, 140 off Bahus, and only 35 from the Baltick Sea. This City owes its Foundation to King Harold, Contemporary with Sueno Esthrith King of Denmark, who frequently kept his Court there; but was miserably laid wast by a dreadful Fire which happen'd in the time of Christian IV. King of Denmark and Norway, who rebuilt it A. D. 1614, and gave it the name of Christiania, which is as yet retain'd among the Danes and others. Not long before, in the same Town, were celebrated the Nuptial Solemnities be∣tween James VI. King of Scotland, as also afterward of England, and Ann the Daughter of Frederick II. King of Denmark, on the 23d. day of November, A. D. 1589. In the City of Anslo is held the chief Court of Judicature for the whole Kingdom of Norway, all Causes and Suits at Law being there heard and deter∣min'd before the Vice-Roy. The Cathedral is dedi∣cated to St. Alward, and in it is shewn the Sword of Haquin, one of their most ancient Monarchs, the Hilt whereof is made with Crystal, wrought and polish'd with most curious Workmanship. HOLLEN is distant only half a Mile from Scheen, being a Parish very remarkable for a Burying-place on the Top of a Church dedicated to St. Michael, which is cut out of a high Rock, commonly call'd Vear, by the neighbouring Inhabitants, and situated on the Lake Nordsee. Olaus Wormius is of opinion that it was formerly an Heathenish Temple, but us'd by the Christians even upon the first planting of the true Re∣ligion in this Realm. HAMMAR, or HAMMER, Hammaria stands about 20 German Miles Northward of Anslo, or Opslo, and was formerly dignified with a Bishop's See, which is now united to that of the same City of Anslo. Near this Town is the Island Moos, where (if we may give credit to the report of Olaus Magnus,) a monstrous Serpent always appears before any nota∣ble Revolution or Alteration in the State or Govern∣ment of the Kingdom of Norway. The Government or Diocess of BERGHEN, to the North of that of Aggerhuse, is the most fruitful and pleasantest part of the whole Continent of Norway, lying as it were in its heart or center. Its name being deriv'd from the noble Mart-Town of Berghen, or else from the strong Fort of Bergenhuse, or Palace of the Vice-Roy, at a small distance from Berghen North∣ward. BERGHEN, Berga, the Capital Town of the Province of the same Denomination, is surrounded al∣most on all sides with high Mountains, whence it has its name, and seated on the winding Bay of Jeita Fioerd, about 60 German Miles by Land, and 100 by Sea North-West of Bahus; as many South-West of Drontheim; 70 West of Stockholm; almost 80 North-West of Cape Schagen, the outmost Promontory of Jutland; 30 East from the nearest Coasts of Scotland, and 220 from Wardhus, the most remote Northern Fortress of Norway. It is indeed the largest, most beautiful and populous City of the whole Kingdom, having obtain'd divers Privileges of the Kings of Den∣mark; so that it is become very famous for the resort of a great number of Merchants of different Nations, and more especially for its Traffick with the English, Hollanders, and Hanse-Towns of Germany, being de∣fended by a strong Castle, built on the Western side of the Harbour, which is extremely commodious, and capable of containing Vessels of above 200 Tuns. It is also the usual place of residence of the Vice-Roy of Norway, and the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Drontheim. The Buildings not long ago were very mean and contemptible, consisting for the most part in Timber-work, and Thatch'd only on the Top with Turf, until of late the Hamburgers, Lu∣beckers, Hollanders, and other Traders in these Parts, caus'd the Town to be beautified with an Exchange, and a great number of fair private Houses. The pe∣culiar Trade of this City lies in Stock-Fish, thence usually call'd by the Norway Merchants Berghen-visch, which are taken on these Coasts in the Month of Janu∣ary, and dry'd during the Winter-Season in the cold and sharp Air; besides that, divers sorts of Skins and Furs, together with vast quantities of Hides, Tallow, Butter, &c. are convey'd hither from all parts of Nor∣way to be transported thence into other Countries; so that Berghen may well be esteem'd the Magazine and principal Mart-Town of the whole Kingdom. In the Year 1665, a Squadron of English Ships enter'd into the Port, and falling upon the Dutch East-India Fleet, would have certainly destroy'd it, had not the Winds been contrary; so that the Hollanders found means to draw their Cannon ashore for their defence. STAFFANGER, Stafangria aut Stavangria, is situated in a Peninsula upon a spacious Bay of the German Ocean, full of small Islands, and guarded by the strong Fortress of Doeswick, about two English Miles from the Town, which is distant 90 Miles from Berghen to the South, and 60 from the Coasts of the Baltick Sea. The Harbour is very large and safe, and the Town, tho' of a small extent, is dignified with an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Drontheim. In Civil Affairs it is subject to the Go∣vernour of Bergenhuse, and in Ecclesiastical to its own Bishop, who constantly resides therein. The whole Bishoprick is divided into several Destricts, viz. those of Stavangersleen, Dalarne, Jaren, Listerleen, Mandal∣sleen, Nedelesleen, and Abygdelag. The third Government and Castle in the Kingdom of Norway is that of the City of DRONTHEIM, or TRONTHEIM, Nidrosia, which stands on the Coasts of the Northern Ocean, and at the Mouth of the River Nider, from whence its Latin name is deri∣ved; yet small Vessels can only pass into its Port, by reason of the Rocks that obstruct the entrance of the Barr. It is distant 75 German Miles from Berghen to the North, as also 120 from Stockholm, and has en∣joy'd the Title of a Metropolitan Arch-Bishoprick ever since the time of Pope Eugenius III. It was heretofore a large City, and the Royal Seat of the ancient Kings of Norway, but its Grandeur is now very much im∣pair'd, insomuch that lying every where open, and being destitute of Walls, Bulwarks and Trenches, it resembles a Village rather than a Town. It has also suffer'd much damage thro' many Conflagrations, par∣ticularly in 1522, and its stately Cathedral, dedicated to St. Olaus, which surpass'd in beauty all the Church∣es of the Northern Countries, was thereby reduc'd to Ashes, the Royal Palace being likewise decay'd, even below the meanness of an English Cottage. The City of Drontheim, together with the whole Government of the same name, was granted to the Swedes in the
Treaty of Roschild, A. D. 1658, but the Danes expel'd them within a few Months after, and it has hitherto remain'd in the Possession of the King of Denmark, conformably to the Articles of another Treaty of Peace concluded at Copenhagen, in 1660. WARDHƲS, Vardhusium, the Seat of the Fourth general Governour of Norway, is a Castle erected in the Island of Warda, lying on the Northern Coasts of Norway, about 120 Miles from the North-Cape, or most Northern Point of the Continent of Eu∣rope to the South-East, and scarcely 30 from the Confines of Moscovitish Lapland. It is of a small compass, not being fortified with any considerable Works, and at present almost ruin'd, whereto adjoyns a Street, consisting only in the Cottages of Fisher∣men. The Island of Warda lies about two German Miles from the Continent of Finmark, and is extended near 12 English Miles in Circumference. The Inhabi∣tants of this and some other adjacent Isles live toge∣ther upon Stock-Fish dry'd in the Frost, having no manner of Bread nor Drink, but what is brought from other places. FINMARCK, or Norwegian Lapland, Finmar∣chia, being a large Province of the Government of Wardhus, was perhaps the ancient Habitation of the Finni, mention'd by Tacitus, and is at present a spa∣cious Desert without any Towns or Villages. The greater part of the Inhabitants are Idolaters and Adore a certain peculiar Deity, to whom they Sacrifice Cows and Sheep. During the Winter-Season, a Man would take them for wild Beasts, by reason that their Bo∣dies are altogether cover'd with Skins, except that a small opening is left for their Eyes. They live in Tents, and some of them feed the Cattel whilst others are employ'd in Hunting, to the end, that they may sell their Skins and Furs to the Swedes. The Lan∣guage, Manners, and Habit of these People, are the same as in Swedish Lapland, of which an Account is given in the Description of that Country. BAHƲS, Bahusium, is a strong Fortress built on a small Island, made by the River Trolhetta, about two Danish Miles from Gotheburg to the North, three from the Coasts of the Ocean to the East, and 24 from Anslo to the South-East. The Foundation of it was first laid on a Rock by Haquin IV. King of Nor∣way, about the Year 1309, and formerly appertain'd to the Jurisdiction of the King of Denmark, but has been possess'd by that of Sweden, together with the whole Government of the same name ever since the Year 1658, altho' the Danish Forces in vain attemp∣ted to re-take it, in 1678. MAELSTRAND, or MAESTERLAND, Mal∣strandia aut Masterlandia, is the only remarkable Town of the Provinces of Wycksiden, within the li∣mits of the Government of Bahus, and stands on a rocky Peninsusa almost encompass'd by the Sea, be∣ing also defended by a strong Castle built at the Mouth of the River Wener, which not far from thence falls into the Catgate. This Town was storm'd by the Danish Forces, A. D. 1676, and afterward resto∣red to the Swedes, by virtue of a Treaty of Peace, ra∣tified at Fountainbleau near Paris, in 1679. The ad∣jacent Territory is noted for its great Trade in Her∣rings and other sorts of Sea-Fish. There are some other Countries that depend on the Dominions of Norway, viz. Island, Groenland, and Spitsberg, together with the Isles of Schetland, Fero, and Orkney, whereof we shall treat in the Description of the Polar Lands. A Chronological TABLE, shewing the Succession of the Kings of Norway.   A. D. Years. 1. Arold, Harold, or Arand I.   Reigned 2. Sueno, or Suein. 998 13 3. St. Olaus. 1011 20 4. Sueno. 1031 8 5. Magnus I. 1039 16 6. Herola, or Ervold. 1055 15 7. Magnus II. 1070 40 8. Magnus III. expell'd. 1110 28 9. Harold II. 1138 10 10. Magnus III. re-establish'd. 1148 10 11. Ingo, sir-nam'd Gibbus. 1158 18 12. An Interreign of Four Years, 1176.   13. Magnus IV. 1180 Reigned 52 14. Haquin, a Tyrant. 1232 31 15. Olaus, sir-nam'd Ango∣sanus. 1263 17 16. Eric I. 1280 20 17. Haquin II. 1300 15 18. Magnus V. King of Sweden. 1315 11 19. Haquin III. 1326 2 20. Magnus VI. 1328 31 21. Haquin IV. 1359 16 22. Olaus III. 1375 13 23. Haquin and Margaret. 1389 about 23 The Kingdom of NORWAY was incorporated into that of Denmark, by the Marriage of Haquin and Margaret the Daughter of Waldemar III. the Da∣nish Monarch, A. D. 1387. So that these two King∣doms were thus united, and the Successors of Haquin have ever since born the Title (as he had done) of Kings of Denmark and Norway.
CHAP. X. SWEDEN, Suecia. SWEDEN, or SWEDELAND, call'd by the Inhabitants Swerie, Sweriesrick, and Sweden∣rick, is a Kingdom of a vast extent, but very little inhabited, bordering on Moscovy, Poland and Norway, being a Marshy Country, water'd with many Rivers, and almost every where beset with Lakes, Woods and Mountains. It is bounded on the North by the Da∣nish and Moscovitish Lapland; on the South by part of Moscovy, Poland and the Baltick Sea; on the East likewise by Moscovy, and on the West by the Sea which separates it from Denmark; the River of Glama and a Ridge of Mountains, nam'd the Doffrin, serv∣ing for the limits between the Territories of this State and those of Norway. Its utmost extent from the 55 deg. 30 min. to the 68 deg. 30 min. of Latitude, as also from the 31 deg. to the 62 deg. 30 min. of Longi∣tude contains 1000 Italian Miles in length, that is to say, from Stockholm to the Confines of Lapland, and the space of 20 days Journey on Horseback in breadth, so that the whole Continent with all its dependences, is suppos'd to be 900 Miles larger than France and Italy put together. The Air is every where so free from Vapours, pure and healthful, (except in those places that lie near the Seas, Lakes and Marshes) that notwithstanding its excessive Coldness, the Inhabitants frequently live 120 or 130 Years, and some of them have been known to attain even to the Age of 200, unless the term of their Lives be shortned by Intem∣perance, or any unfortunate Accident. The SOIL of the Country in most parts of Sweden is generally more fruitful than that of the other Nor∣thern Kingdoms, affording good store of Wheat, Rye, Barly, Oats, &c. In the Woods, Forests and Pa∣stures, are bred all sorts of Beasts, as Horses, Elks, Bears, wild Bulls, Beavers, Sables, Ermins, Mar∣trons, &c. besides Sheep and Oxen, not only suffi∣cient for the Natives, but also for Transportation, particularly out of Finland, Schonen, &c. into other foreign Nations. But the manner of cultivating the Earth in most places is extraordinary; for the use of the Plough is unknown to these Husband-men, and there are scarce any Champion Grounds to be Tilled, Fire alone being capable to render the Rocks and Mountains fertile. Thus having burnt whole Fo∣rests, they sow Seed-Corn mingled with Earth on the Ashes, and without any more pains reap a plentiful Crop within the space of two Years. In the Southern parts of Westrogothia, the Land is so rich, that Bar∣ley is reap'd 36 days after it has been sown. Honey abounds very much in these parts, not only preserv'd in Gardens, but ordinarily to be found in the Woods. There are also many Mines of Copper, Iron, Lead, and some few of Silver. Between Jenecoping and Elsimburg, in passing thro' Almstadt, we meet with an admirable Forest, stretch'd forth 30 Leagues in length, where the Trees in the midst almost of a con∣tinual Frost grow up to a prodigious height, and retain their Verdure throughout the whole Year, not∣withstanding the intolerable Sharpness of the Winter-Season. The most remarkable LAKES, which are nu∣merous and very large, are 1. Meller in Ʋpland, well stockt with Salmon, Pike, and other sorts of Fish, and so hard frozen in Winter, that Markets and Fairs are often kept upon it: 2. Hielmar in Nericia: 3. Sitian in Dalecarlia: 4. Vener in Westrogothia, which is 130 English Miles long and 40 broad, con∣taining a great number of Islands, and receiving the Waters of 24 Rivers, that take their rise from the Norwegian Mountains, and discharge themselves into this Gulph; but they have onl one common passage out, which is commonly call'd Tralhetta, i. e. the Devil's-Cap, and lies towards the South: 5. Veter, in the same Province, the Waters whereof are so calm and transparent, that one may discern the bot∣tom at a very great depth. On the banks of this Lake were heretofore founded the Monasteries of St. Bridget, the Patroness of this Kingdom, and of St. Catharine her Daughter, together with several other noble Structures: 6. Ʋlatraesch in Cajania: 7. Pe∣jenda in Tavastia: 8. Ladoga: 9. Onega. The two last are situated on the Frontiers of Moscovy, and the Czar or Grand Duke has yeilded up the greater part of them by a Treaty of Peace to the Crown of Sweden. From these Lakes spring many Rivers, among which the most Navigable is, 1. Dalecarle, whose Head is in the Dofrine Mountains, from whence it runs into Dalecarlia, receives several Rivulets at Torsang, and having separated the Provinces of Ʋp∣land and Gestricia, at last falls into the Bothnick Bay. 2. Saga or Sawe, which divides Ʋpland from Westmannia. 3. Angermany, that waters the Pro∣vince of the same name, and is famous for abundance of Salmon; besides five considerable Rivers in Lapland, and others of lesser note. The Swedes, who may justly be reckon'd among the most polite and civiliz'd People of the Northern Countries; as to the Constitution of their Bodies, are generally tall, robust, of a comely Presence and gentile Carriage. They are also free in Conversation, Upright and Just in their Dealings, Affable to Stran∣gers, ingenious and skilful in divers sorts of Arts, as well Military as Civil. The Gentry in their Youth apply themselves to the study of Liberal Sciences, more especially the Languages, and frequently travel into foreign Countries; and in their riper years are employ'd either in the affairs of State or War. The Common People are industrious, so that a Beggar is scarce to be seen among them, and prove very good Soldiers, ready to signalize their Valour on all occa∣ons; but their Hospitality among other Virtues is chiefly Conspicuous, having been anciently accu∣stomed to treat Strangers, Travellers and Passengers, with the same civility as Friends, for they often sup∣ply'd them with Victuals and other Necessaries gratis, and took care to provide Horses for their Journey. Indeed the Priests and Curates in the Country are still oblig'd to observe the like Custom. On the contrary, Churlishness and Inhospitality was accounted so hei∣nous a Crime, that King Charles II. who is said to have reign'd sometime before our Saviour's Nativity, was wont to send Officers to set fire on the Houses of those Persons that had thrice deny'd Lodging to any Stranger. The Swedish Women are in like manner
of a tall Stature, Beautiful, Modest, Chaste, and en∣dow'd with other Qualifications commendable in their Sex. Adultery is very seldom committed by them, and prohibited by the Laws under severe Penalties. The Citizens Wives especially affect to go neat, and to dwell in fair Houses. The Common People wear course Woollen Cloath, but the Nobility and Gentry have divers sorts of Apparel, according to the Modern Modes of France, and other European Countries. Their Language differs only in Dialect from the Da∣nish and High-Dutch, being rougher and less capable of Improvement than either of these, so that the Swedes seldom write any thing in their own Vulgar Tongue. The Kingdom of Sweden was heretofore Elective, until Gustavus I. after having expell'd the Danes, made it Hereditary in his Family, A. D. 1544, and at the same time abolish'd the Roman Catholick Reli∣gion, introducing the Lutheran throughout his Domi∣nions. Afterward Sigismund I. elected also King of Poland, the Grand-Son of the same Gustavus, was de∣pos'd for adhering to the Interest of the Romanists, and his Uncle Charles Duke of Sudermania took Possession of the Throne. He was succeeded by his Son that most Valiant and Renowned Prince Gustavus Adolphus, who undertaking an Expedition into Germany, to as∣sist the Protestants, over-run a great part of the Em∣pire, and was at last slain in the Battel of Lutzen, leaving the Crown to his only Daughter Christina; but this Princess having turn'd Roman Catholick, re∣sign'd it to her Cosin Charles Gustavus Duke of Deux-Ponts, the Father of Charles XI. the present Monarch, a Warlike and Vertuous Prince, who is usually styl'd, King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandals, Grand Prince of Finland, Duke of Estonia and Carelia, Lord of Ingria, &c. being also Sovereign of many other large Territories: For by virtue of a Treaty of Peace con∣cluded at Bromsbroo, A. D. 1645, the King of Den∣mark was oblig'd to restore to Sweden, Jempterland and Heendal, and to surrender the Isles of Gothland and Oesel for ever, together with the Province of Halland, during the term of 30 Years. By another Treaty at Roschild, in 1658, the same King entirely renounc'd his Right to Halland, Schonen, Bleking, the Island of Bornholm, the Fortress of Bahus, and the Bail∣liage of Drontheim. By that of Munster, Sweden, ob∣tain'd the hither Pomerania; and in the farther, Stetin, Gartz, Dam, and Golnaw, the Island and Principality of Rugen; the Isles and Mouths of the River Oder; the Town, Lordship and Port of Wismar; the Dutchies of Bremen and Ferden, together with Wildhusen in Westphalia; as also the Reversion of the rest of Pome∣rania, and the new Marquisate of Brandenburg. By the Treaty of Oliva ratify'd with Poland, in 1660. Livonia became Hereditary to the Crown of Sweden, which ought to be understood of that part only that lies to the North of the River Duina. By a Treaty made with the Moscovites, all the Conquests of the Grand Duke in Livonia, were resign'd to the King of Sweden. Moreover this Prince lays claim to the Dutchies of Cleves and Juliers, by a Title deriv'd from his Great Grand-father John Duke of Deux-Ponts, who had marry'd Magdalen III. the Sister of Duke William. The REVENUES of the King of Sweden con∣sist chiefly in the Crown-Lands, as Chaces, Forests, &c. which he takes an Oath at his Coronation not to imbe∣zil or alienate; besides those that arise from the Mines of Copper, Silver, Lead, &c. from the Sea-Customs; from the Imposition upon Oxen transported out of Schonen, Fin∣land, &c. the value of five Shillings Sterling being paid for every Head; from the several Companies of Merchants who remit yearly considerable Sums to the Crown; from an Impost on the Exportation of Guns; from the Fines of those Persons that are cast in Law, a third part whereof is paid to the King; and from many other ways of raising Mony, by which means the Royal Exchequer is very much enlarged, so that the ordinary Income, in the Year 1578, (as they say) amounted to six or seven Tuns of Gold of 100000 Dollars apiece, all Charges of the Crown being first deducted. The States, or distinct Orders in this Realm, are six in number, viz. the Princes of the Blood Royal, Nobility, Clergy, Soldiery, Merchan∣try and Commonalty. The King's eldest Son is Heir apparent to the Crown, and the younger are com∣monly created Dukes, being invested with the Go∣vernment of Provinces, and having a Right to succeed in the Throne if the elder dye without issue. The Nobility are distinguish'd with the Title of Dukes, Earls and Barons, enjoying very great Privileges and Immunities. Ecclesiastical Affairs are transacted here as in England, by Bishops, Priests and Deacons, but these Prelates have not so large Revenues, nor so great authority over the inferiour Clergy. However the Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsal is reputed the chief Person next the King himself, and accordingly takes place of all the Temporal Lords, having under him seven Suffra∣gans, viz. the Bishops of Lyncopen, Scaren, Stergnes, Westeras, Wexio, Aboa and Riga, and divers Super∣intendents, who exercise Episcopal Functions, viz. those of Calmar, Gottemburg, Marienstadt, Revel, &c. All these constitute an Ecclesiastical College, call'd the Supreme Consistory of the Kingdom, wherein the Arch-Bishop always presides. The Land Forces are provided and exercis'd much after the same manner as our Trained-Bands, in the several Provinces, con∣sisting in all of 32 Regiments, every one of which contains 700 Men; neither are the Sea Forces less considerable, for there are commonly in a Readiness 50 Men of War, many of which carry 50 Guns, un∣der the Command of one High-Admiral, and some∣times above 300 Ships lie at Anchor in the Port of Stockholm. Indeed the Soldiery is much encouraged, and have divers great Privileges, for a Soldier as soon as listed has all his Lands Tax-free, besides his ordi∣nary Pay; if his Horse be kill'd in Battel, the King furnishes him with another; if any are taken Prisoners by the Enemy, they are redeem'd at his Majesty's pro∣per Charges, &c. The Merchants, in whose hands is kept the greatest part of the Riches of the Kingdom, have in like manner their peculiar Immunities, every Maritime City and Mart-Town, being govern'd by par∣ticular Municipal Laws. The last and lowest State is the Commonalty call'd Bond or Beond, of these there are two sorts, viz. the Scatbonders, who possess Heredita∣ry Lands, and are bound in time of War to provide a Horse and Man for the King's Service, and the Bergs∣men that labour in the Mines, and are no less profita∣ble to the Common-wealth than the former. These also may purchase Estates and Fishery of their own, and as the Commons of England, send their Represen∣tatives to the Senate or Publick Council of the King∣dom, which is conven'd for the same Reasons, and in the same manner as our Parliament. But every Or∣der sits in a distinct House, and every House has a Chair-man or Speaker, viz. for the Nobility the Grand Marshal, for the Clergy the Arch-Bishop, for the Burgesses of Cities, one of the Consuls of Stock∣holm, or the Master of the Ordnance, and for those of the Country, one chosen out of their own Body.
The Administration of JUSTICE in Sweden, is perform'd in five several Courts, where Cognizance is taken of all Affairs both Civil and Criminal. The first of these is the King's Chamber, in which all Ca∣ses are decided between one Senator and another, or between Noble-men and publick Officers; as also all Actions brought thither from Inferiour Courts. 2. The Court Martial, wherein all matters are determin'd that relate to War, the Grand Marshal of the Army be∣ing always President, and having two Assessors Se∣nators of the Kingdom, or Officers of the State. 3. The Court of Chancery, where all Mandates, Edicts, Commissions, &c. are made in the King's Name. The Chancellor of the Kingdom presides in this Court, assisted by four Senators Assessors, and the two Se∣cretaries of State. 4. The Court of Admiralty for the transacting of all Business relating to Maritime Affairs. Here the High-Admiral presides, attended with four Vice-Admirals, as many Senators and se∣veral Captains Assessors. 5. The Court of the Ex∣chequer, wherein all matters are dispatch'd belonging to the King's Revenue, and Suits are determin'd in which the Crown is any way concern'd. The Grand Treasurer sits here as Supreme Judge, and has four Assessors, viz. two Senators and two Noble-men. Besides these, there are other inferiour Tribunals, which Gustavus Adolphus first erected in some of the chief Critics, in the Years 1614 and 1615. The whole Kingdom is usually divided into seven princi∣pal parts, viz. Sweden strictly so called, Gothland, Lapland, Finland, Livonia, or Liefland, Ingria, or Ingermeland, and Pomerania, which last has been al∣ready describ'd among the Territories of Germany. SWEDEN, Suecia aut Sueonia, properly so call∣ed, lies to the North of Gothland, and to the South of Swedish Lapland, between Norway to the West, and the Gulph of Bothnia to the East. This Country (which, according to the opinion of Joannes Magnus, takes its name from Swenno the Son of Magog, and Grand-child of Noah) comprehends 11 Provinces, and is extended from North to South, about 100 Leagues, and 90 from East to West. It is fruitful in Corn, which is sow'd in the beginning of May, and reap'd about the end of August; but some parts are Mountainous and Woo∣dy, abounding with rich Mines, and affording much variety of Game. There is also good store of Fish, and all sorts of necessary Provisions. The Christian Religion was first planted in these parts, A. C. 780, by Herebertus sir-nam'd Belga, whom the Emperor Charles the Great had sent thither at the request of Bero or Biorno III. King of Sweden. It was also propagated by Ansgar a Monk of Corbey, afterward Bishop of Bremen, whom the Emperor Lewis the Godly depu∣ted among others for that purpose, but it was not establish'd until about A. C. 955, when Ethelred King of England dispatch'd over Sigfrid Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, with divers other pious Priests, upon the Sol∣licitation of Olaus Scotkonung, who was baptiz'd himself, and caus'd Christian Churches to be built in every Province of his Dominions. Sweden properly so call'd, divided into Eleven Provinces. 1. Upland, in which are these Towns, &c. viz. Stockholm, Cap. Ʋpsal, Arch-Bish. Sigtun. Encoping. Ore-grund. 2. Sudermania, wherein are, Nicoping, Cap. Strergnes, Bish. Torsilia. Telga. Trosa. 3. Westmania, in which are, Westeras, Bish. Cap. Kaeping. Arboga. Bisberg. Bolshit. 4. Nericia, in which are, Gevalia, Cap. Folker. Hamarang. Shogskirk. Coperberg. 5. Gestricia, in which are, Oerebro, Cap. Karelskog. Linnesberg. 6. Helsingia, in which are, Dilsbo, Cap. Alta. Jersso. 7. Dalecarlia, in which are, Idra, Cap. Ventan. Ierna. Lima. 8. Angermania, in which are, Nortmaling, Cap. Nore. Torsaker. Arnes. 9. Medelpadia, in which are, Indel, Cap. Essund. Tuna. Selangar, 10. Bothnia, wherein are, Torn, Cap. Kimi. Lula. Pitha. Ʋma. 11. Jemptia, in which are, Kessund, Cap. Lidh. The Province of ƲPLAND is so call'd from its Situation, or (as some say) from King Ʋbbo, who reign'd hereabouts, being bounded on the East by the Baltick Sea, on the West and North by the Rivers Save and Dalecarle, and on the South by the Lake Meller. It affords great plenty of Corn, and has some Mines of Lead, Iron and Silver. It may be per∣haps worth the while to observe, that this Province only (as the Counties in England) is divided into se∣veral Hundreds, as Erling Hundrat, &c. whereas the Divisions of all the others are termed Harodh, Har sig∣nifying an Army, and Odh a Possession. STOCKHOLM, Holmia aut Stocholmia, the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom of Sweden, is seat∣ed in the Province of Ʋpland, on the Frontiers of Su∣dermania, in the Latitude of 59 deg. 15 min. and the Longitude of 40 deg. 12 min. and encompass'd on all sides, especially that toward the Sea, with steep craggy Rocks call'd Scheren, as also with high Mountains and Lakes, which render its Prospect somewhat odd. It was heretofore a place of little note, first founded by King Birgerus, A. D. 1261, and took its name from the great quantity of Timber us'd in the building of it, Stock denoting Wood, and Holm an Island. In 1407 it was consum'd by Lightning, and some thousands of People perish'd in the Conflagration. In 1529, di∣vers principal Burghers and Merchants of other Towns were invited to dwell here by King Gustavus I. most of the Inhabitants having been expell'd from hence by
the tyrannical Oppression of Christian II. King of Den∣mark. In 1552, a Fire happen'd, and by reason of the Wooden Houses, burnt down the greater part of the Town. But it was soon re-built by the King's special Command, upon Piles, partly with Stone and partly with Brick, so that it has been for two Ages the Royal Seat of the Swedish Monarchs, and a very famous Mart. Its Haven, at the Mouth of the Lake Meller, is one of the most commodious in Europe, in regard that Vessels of the largest size may lie safe there∣in, even close to the Walls of the private Houses, and remain secure without the help of Anchors or Cables from any violent Tempests, or the attacks of Enemies, its Entrance being defended by strong Forts. Indeed this is the most considerable place of Trade in the whole Nation, from whence are exported great quan∣tities of Deal-boards, Copper, Iron, Steel, Lead, and many Manufactures made with those Materials. This City consists of six small Islands and two Su∣burbs, viz. the Northern and Southern; the Isles are Stockholm, Riddersholm, Konungsholm, Heglande∣sholm, Schipsholm and Ladduggarsland. These Islands are joyn'd together by several large Bridges, and in the first of them, which is properly call'd the City, stands the Palace of Kiddarchuset, where the General Assemblies of the States are conven'd in a Hall, adorn∣ed with the Coats of Arms of the Provinces and No∣bility of the whole Kingdom. The Streets were for∣merly narrow and full of Windings, but have been much enlarg'd and improv'd since the Year 1641. In the same Isle of Stockholm is the grand Market-place, and the Citadel or Castle, which is divided into three parts by so many spacious Courts, including the Roy∣al Palace, in some parts eight or nine Stories high; a magnificent Church dedicated to St. Nicholas, which owes its Foundation to King John, being erected up∣on Marble Pillars and cover'd with Copper; and the King's private Chappel, which is in like manner very large, and has 40 Windows on each side, where at the High-Altar (as they say) is to be seen an Image of our Saviour in full Proportion, consisting entirely of Massive Silver. There are also many other stately Apartments in the Castle, besides those of the King and Queen, as the Senate-House, the Court of Chan∣cery, the College of Execution, the round Tower call∣ed Trekronor, from the three Crowns of Copper gilt set on the Top of it, representing the Arms of Sweden, and a famous Library enrich'd with a great number of choice Manuscripts and Figures to the waste of Hea∣then Gods, Emperors, Kings, &c. Riddersholm, or the Knights-Isle, is beautified with many pleasant Gar∣dens, and the Church that bears the name of the Clo∣sterkirk, which formerly belong'd to the Cordeliers, and wherein are interr'd the two last Kings of Sweden, viz. Gustavus Adolphus, sir-nam'd the Great, and Ca∣rolus Gustavus, sir-nam'd Augustus. Heglandesholm, or Holy-Land-Isle, is inhabited chiefly by Artificers and Handicrafts-men, being united by a Wooden Bridge to the Isle of Stockholm, and by another to the North Suburbs. Schipsholm, or the Isle of Ships, is more especially remarkable for the Court of Admiralty, Arsenal, and other Magazines of Naval Stores. Lad∣duggarsland, or the Land of Country-Houses and Farms, is so named as being the station of the King's Dairy, Aviaries and Warren; besides a great number of Gar∣dens, Walks and Houses of Pleasure, that serve for the diversion of the common People. The North Su∣burbs adjoyn thereto by the Communication of a Tim∣ber-Bridge, and are beset with the Royal Gardens, and Houses of Mechanick Tradesmen. In the South∣ern Suburbs the Merchants drive a great Trade in Commodities brought out of Moscovy, a stately Ex∣change having been lately built there for their Con∣venience, and indeed the City of Stockholm receives very great Advantages from its Situation near the Bal∣tick Sea, from whence it is distant only seven Swedish Miles to the West, as also nine South of Ʋpsal, 55 North of Calmar, 66 East of Gotheburg, 70 North-East of Copenhagen, 75 of Dantzick, and about 120 South-East of Drontheim. ƲPSAL, Ʋpsalia aut Ʋpsala, stands in like man∣ner in the Province of Ʋpland, and on the banks of the River Sall or Sale, from whence its name is deri∣ved, or (according to the opinion of others) from Ʋbbo King of Sweden, who founded it about the Year 240, after the Universal Deluge, being distant 30 Miles, or seven Swedish Leagues from Stockholm to the North, and six of the like measure from Arosen or Westeras. It was heretofore the Capital City of the Kingdom of the Goths, and the usual place of Residence of their Princes, as also some time of the Swedish Mo∣narchs, who were at first styl'd Kings of Ʋpsal. It is also the only Metropolitan See of Sweden, establish'd by Pope Eugenius III. A. D. 1148, and includes seven Suffragan Bishopricks within its Jurisdiction. The Cathedral Church (as are most of the chief Buildings in these parts) is cover'd with Copper and adorn'd with a Clock of admirable Workmanship. Ericus, sir-nam'd the Saint, is said to lye bury'd here in a Gol∣den Coffin. A sumptuous Tomb is likewise erected in the same Church for Gustavus Adolphus with the History of his Life engrav'd in large Golden Chara∣cters, besides divers magnificent Monuments of some other Princes. Here is also the only University of the whole Kingdom, begun at first (as some say) under Ericus XI. by a College of four Professors, or as Loc∣cenius informs us, in 1306, under one Andreas Presi∣dent of the said College, who entertain'd at his Table a certain number of Choristers and poor Scholars to assist him in the celebrating of Divine Service. How∣ever, in 1476, in the time of Steno Sture, senior, Pope Sixtus IV. confer'd on it the same Privileges with Bo∣nonia in Italy, and it was afterward endow'd with se∣veral Immunities and large Revenues by Charles IX. and his Son Gustavus Adolphus. The City is de∣fended only by one Castle, built after the modern method of Fortification, on a Hill not far distant, which overlooks and commands the whole Town. In the Royal Palace of the same City Queen Christina Abdicated the Crown of Sweden, and recommend∣ed it to her Cosin Charles Gustavus, A. D. 1654. CALMAR, Calmaria, was so called (as it is reported) by the Germans from the Coldness of the Air that comes off the Baltick Sea, and has a very convenient Harbour, much frequented by Merchants of divers Nations, giving its name to the Channel of Calmarsund that lies between it and the Isle of Got∣land. It is regularly fortify'd, and the Citadel much esteem'd in these Northern parts. It was also some∣time dignify'd with a Bishop's See; for in the Year 1230, Eric King of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, instituted 13 Prebendaries, and ordain'd that the Ca∣thedral Church should have the Privileges of an Ec∣clesiastical College. But it is now govern'd by a Su∣perintendent, who with the Bishops has a place in the Publick Consistory of the Kingdom. Calmar was heretofore in the Possession of John King of Den∣mark, and of Christian II. his Successor, but not long after recover'd by the Swedes. In 1611, Christian IV. King of Denmark, storm'd the same place, putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword; but two Years after it was restor'd to the Swedish Monarchs, by vertue
of a Treaty of Peace ratify'd between the two North∣ern Crowns. In 1647, it was almost entirely burnt down, not above 60 Houses being left standing; but it has been since well re-built, and is at present a Town of a considerable Trade, as also the usual place from whence the Swedes embark for Germany. LƲNDEN, Lundis aut Londinum Scanorum, the Metropolis of the Province of Schonen, stands eight German Miles from Copenhagen to the East, and six from Landskroon to the South-West. Ever since the Year 1109 it has been the See of an Arch-Bishop, who had six Suffragan Bishops under his Jurisdiction, and a Vote in the General Diets of the Empire. But the Swedes took Possession of this City in 1658, and open'd an University there Ten Years after; so that at present it is only an Episcopal See, the Arch-Bi∣shoprick having been translated to Copenhagen, in 1660. There are (as they say) 22 Churches within the Walls; but the Cathedral dedicated to St. Laurence, is a magnificent Structure, very remarkable for its high Steeple, serving as a Land-mark to direct the Course of Sailers, and its large Vault under the Quire; as also for the Dial, which shews the Year, Month, Day, and Hour of the Day, at the same time; toge∣ther with all Festivals fixt and moveable, the Mo∣tion of the Sun and Moon, and their Progress thro' the Zodiack. This Clock, suppos'd to be the Work of Caspar Bartholinus the famous Mathematician, is so order'd by artificial Engines, that upon its Move∣ment two Horse-men come forth and Encounter each other, giving just so many blows as the Hammer is to strike upon the Bell; then a Door opening, the Virgin Mary appears sitting on a Throne with Christ in her Arms, the Magi or Wise Men doing him Re∣verence, and two Trumpeters sounding all the while. The Altar of the same Church is likewise an admi∣rable piece of Workmanship, adorn'd on the fore-part with the Images of King Frederick II. and Queen Sophia, and upon the Table-stone with those of our Saviour and the Twelve Apostles at his last Supper. GOTHLAND, Gothia, that is to say the Country of the Goths, who by their Valour in the Fourth Century, first broke the force of the Ro∣man Empire; is bounded on the North by Sweden, strictly so called; on the West by Norway, and on the South and East by the Baltick Sea; extending it self from North to South for the space of about 100 Leagues, and 60 from East to West. It is divided into three parts by the Lake of Veter or Wetter, viz. Sudgothland, Ostrogothland, and Westrogothland, i. e. Southern, Eastern and Western Gothland. South-Gothland comprehends four small Countries, viz. Halland, Bleking, Schonen and Smaland, which are discover'd in Sailing from North to South-East on the Coasts of the Baltick Sea. Afterward returning to the North-West we meet with Westrogothland, wherein are contain'd three Districts, viz. Westro∣gothland properly so called, Dalia and Wermeland, situated between the Sea, Halland and the Lakes of Veter and Vener. Lastly, Ostrogothland lies be∣tween the Sea and the Lake Wetter, as it may be more distinctly perceiv'd in the following Table, to∣gether with the principal Towns of every Province. Gothland divided into Three Parts, viz. 1. South-Gothland, in which are included four small Provinces. 1. Halland, in which are these Towns, viz. Halmstadt, Cap. Limberg. Laaholm. Falkemburg. Waersburg. 2. Smaland, wherein are, Calmar, Cap. Wexioe, Bish. Alem. Ekesioe. Jenekaeping. Westerbiik. 3. Bleking, in which are, Christianstadt, Cap. Rotemby. Ʋstel. Christianopel. Selsburg. Trelburg. Eleholm. 4. Schonen, in which are, Lunden, Bish. Cap. Malmoe. Engelholm. Landskron. Elsimburg. 2. Westrogothia, in Three. 1. Westrogothland, properly so called, in which are these Towns, Gothburg, or Gottenburg, Cap. Falekaeping. Hio. Bogesund. Scaren, Bish. Mariestadt. Bret. Fidekaeping. 2. Dalia, in which are, Daleburg. Cap. Twosa. Milleswick. Holm. Killen. 3. Wermeland, in which are, Carolstadt, Cap. Kila. Rada. Liswick. Kallen. 4. Ostrogothia, in which are these Towns, viz. Nortkaeping. Norby. Wadstein. Schening. Lindkaeping, Bish. Sunderkaeping. SWEDISH LAPLAND, Lapponia Suecica; the most Northern Province of this Kingdom, is bounded on the North by Norwegian Lapland, on the South by Jempterland, Angermenia, Bothnia and Finland, on the East by Moscovitish Lapland, and on the West by the Mountains of Daarefield, which se∣parate it from Norway. Its utmost extent from North to South consists of about 60 Leagues, and 164 from East to West. The Inhabitants being for the most Idolaters, are of a very small Stature, yet very nim∣ble and robust, but withal cowardly, mean spirited, revengeful and desperate. They are extremely ad∣dicted to Witchcraft and Magical Arts, which are exercis'd by them after several manners, as by a kind of Drum, Knots, Javelins, Imprecations, Spells, &c. They
are accustomed to the enduring of Cold by walking naked, and their Cloths consist only of the Skins of Wild-Beasts that are taken by them. They carry their Huts along with them, which resemble the Tents of a Camp, and have very few inclosed Towns. It is also reported that they are almost altogether de∣stitute of Wool, Corn, Fruits, and domestick Cattel; the Elks serving them for Food, Cloaths and Horses, which Beasts are a kind of Stags that run with ex∣treme swiftness. The chief Employment of these Lap∣landers is Hunting, to which purpose they make use of divers sorts of Instruments, as Spears headed with Fish-bones, Nets, and of late, Guns. They are very expert in sliding on the Snow and Ice in their Skaits, call'd Skider, or Skidh, so that they can travel even 150 English Miles in a Day, and the Women are no less nimble footed, tho' never allow'd to go a Hunt∣ing. They have also certain Sledges made in form of a small Boat, which are drawn by Elks or Rain-Dear, and easily pass over the deepest Snows. Their Ingenuity likewise appears in contriving their Boats, the Boards whereof are not joyn'd with Boards, but fasten'd together with Ropes made of the pliant Roots of Trees, or the Sinews of the Rain-Deer dry'd in the Wind or Sun. These Barks are row'd with two or four Oars, and driven along the most rapid Rivers; neither is their Art of Wiredrawing much us'd among them for adorning of their Boots and Coats less curi∣ous, and that of making Baskets or Hampers, which are wrought so close as to hold Water like solid Vessels. The Christian Religion was first planted in Finland by Eric the Saint, King of Sweden, and so made known to the Inhabitants of Lapland; but it has been much farther propagated by the pious Care of later Princes, more especially of Charles IX. Gustavus Adolphus, and Queen Christina, who founded many Publick Schools and caus'd divers Churches to be built in these parts, allotting competent Salaries to a great number of Pa∣stors for the instructing of those ignorant People in the Principles of Christianity, who nevertheless are very apt to adhere to their former Superstitions, and often joyn the Adoration of Thor, Storjunckare, Baire, and other Idols with the Worship of the true God. At Nafafill, in the District of Pilhalapmark, is a Mine of Silver, and another of Iron in that of Tornelap∣mark, near Iwerswend, which is reduc'd to Ingots in the Forge of Rejuger. The whole Country is cover'd with Woods, and abounds in all sorts of Game, as Wild-Bears, Rain-Deer, Wolves, Foxes, Martins, Sables, Beavers, Otters, Ermins, Hares, &c. besides Wild-Fowl and Fish. It was heretofore govern'd by certain Kings, who were subdu'd by the Swedes, and is at present divided into five Parts or Quarters, un∣der the name of Marks, as it appears from the ensuing Table. Lapland divided into Five Parts, viz. 1. Uma-Lapmark. Loisby. Semasiersi. 2. Pilha-Lapmark. Sitovoma. Lochtarii. Anierfui. Suchsijok. 3. Lula-Lapmark. Torpajor. Strchflucht. Jokomuka. 4. Torne-Lapmark. Segwra. Tingwara. Ronnela. Luvowara. Podiersi. Teneby. Kiilaby. Encraby. Ʋrziiaki. 5. Kimi-Lapmark. Somby. Kimbi. FINLAND, Finnia aut Finnonia, was first so call'd by the Swedes, as it were Fine-Land from the Pleasantness of the Country, or (as others say) q. Fiende-Land, i. e. the Land of Fiends or Enemies, by reason that the Finlanders were wont to make frequent inrodes into Sweden, before they were entirely sub∣du'd by that Nation. But the Natives impose the name of Somi or Soma on the whole Country, from the great number of Lakes that are in it, according to the Signification of the word Soma. The Province of Fin∣land hath been sometimes the Inheritance of the Bro∣thers of the Kings of Sweden, and is stretch'd forth from the Baltick Sea to the Gulph of the same name, and that of Bothnia, as far as the Territories of Mos∣covy, from whence it is separated in part by the Lake of Onega; being bounded on the North by Lapland, on the South by the Gulph of Finland, on the East by the Province of Onega, and on the West by the Bay of Bothnia. Its extent from North to South comprehends the space of about 132 Leagues, and 150 from East to West. This Principality is divided into seven small Provinces, viz. Cajania and Finland properly so call'd, which are situated on the Gulph of Bothnia, Nyland and Carelia, on that of Finland; Kexholm on the Lakes of Ladoga and Onega, Savolaxia and Tavasthia, or Ta∣vastland, in the midst of the Country: The Soil is ve∣ry fruitful in many places, and there are found Mines of divers Metals within the Territories of Finland strictly so termed, as also some of Loadstone near Raseburg. Finland divided into Seven small Pro∣vinces, viz. 1. Cajania, in which are, Cajeneburg, Cap. Jo. Ʋla. Wassa. Liminga. 2. Finland proper, wherein are, Bierneburg, Cap. Abo, Bish. Kaumo. Wesilax. Nystadt. Raseburg. 3. Nyland, in which are, Helsingfors. Borgo. Elima. Perno. 4. Carelia, in which are, Wiburg, Bish. Cap. Mala. Wehelax. 5. Kexholm, in which are, Kexholm, Cap. Lexa. Porensa. Talpal.
6. Savolaxia, in which are, Nislot, Cap. Rumala. Pexama. Roxolax. 7. Tavasthia, in which are, Tavasthus, Cap. Pirkala. Jemse. LIVONIA, Livonia, or Liefland, in the Lan∣guage of the Country, is bounded on the North by the Gulph of Finland, on the West by that of Livonia or Riga, on the South by Curland, and on the East by the Dutchy of Pleskow and Ingria: It is extended from North to South, for the space of about 66 Leagues, and 50 from East to West. This Country hath been the Theatre of War between the Kings of Sweden and Poland, and the Grand Duke of Moscovy: The Po∣landers resign'd it to the Swedes in a Treaty of Peace, ratified A. D. 1650, and it hath since become Heredi∣tary to the Crown of Sweden. The Soil is very fruit∣ful in Corn, and affords good Pasture for Cattel. Li∣vonia is usually divided into two parts, viz. the Nor∣thern called Estonia. or Este, and the Southern, which bears the name of Litlandia, or Letten. Livonia divided into Two Parts, viz. 1. Estonia, in which are these Towns, viz. Narva, Cap. Revel. Derpt. Pernaw. Hapsel. 2. Litlandia, in which are, Riga, Arch-Bish. Cap. Crutsburg. Mariemburg. Dunemund. NARVA, Narva is seated on a River of the same name, which separates Livonia from Pleskow, at the distance of 30 Swedish Miles from Revel to the East, 15 from Derpt to the North-East, and scarcely one from the Bay of Finland. It is one of the strongest Places of the whole Country, and defended by a Ca∣stle named Jvannowgorod, which stands on a steep Rock, on the other side of the River in the Province of Ingria, and was taken by Gustavus Adolphus, in the Year 1617. Below this Fort is another Town call'd the Russian Narva, and inhabited by Moscovites; ne∣vertheless subject to the Dominion of the King of Swe∣den. The River Narva runs with a very swift Course, and has a notable Cataract about half a League above the City, where the Water falling into a Precipice, with a roaring noise, dashes against the Rocks, and is dispers'd as it were into a Vapour, which filling the Air, often seems to represent a kind of Rain-bow, especially in the Morning. The Town of Narva owes its Foundation to Waldemar II. King of Denmark, A. D. 1223, and was taken by the Moscovites in 1558. But the Swedes recover'd it in 1581, and it was con∣firm'd to them by a Treaty of Peace, in 1599. REVEL, Revalia is situated on the Gulph of Fin∣land, and hath a commodious Harbour, about 33 German Miles West of Narva, and 37 North of Riga. It is one of the most famous Marts of these Territories, and included within the League of the Hanse-Towns. It was formerly dignify'd with an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Riga; but since the Reform'd Re∣ligion prevail'd in these Parts, that Title has been discontinu'd, and all Ecclesiastical Affairs are manag'd by Superintendents. The chief Church is dedicated to St. Olaus, and a Gymnasium, or kind of University is here establish'd for the instructing of young Gentle∣men in the liberal Arts and Sciences. This City was founded by Waldemar II. King of Denmark, about A. D. 1230. But Waldemar III. sold it in 1374, to the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order. Afterward it became subject to the Polanders, but having put it self under the Protection of the Kings of Sweden, in 1561, has ever since remain'd in their Possession, being defended by a Castle built on a Rock, which is steep and craggy on all sides except that which faces the Town. RIGA, Riga called Riig by the Inhabitants, and Rigen by the Germans, stands on the Frontiers of Cur∣land, on the banks of the River Dwina, which a little below falls into the Bay of the same name, and the Baltick Sea, being distant seven Swedish Miles from Mittaw to the North, 29 from Revel to the South, 25 below Dunenburg to the West, 45 from Konigsberg to the North-East, and 48 Polish Miles from Wilna. It was heretofore the Seat of the Knights of Espadon, as also afterward of the Grand Masters of the Teutonick Order, and is as yet the Metropolis of Litland, having long since enjoy'd the Title of an Arch-Bishoprick, first founded by Pope Innocent III. in 1215. This City was built by Albert III. Bishop of Livonia, in 1196, or (as others say) 10 Years before by Bishop Ber∣told. It is well fortify'd with a firm Wall, Rampart and Ditches, on that side toward Moscovy, and with a strong Castle next the River, which is the Residence of the General Governor of Livonia. The Houses are all built either with Stone or Brick. But the City of Riga is more especially famous for its Traffick into all parts of the Baltick Sea, its Harbour being also much frequented by English, Dutch, and German Merchants, who arrive here in the Summer time, and are furnish∣ed with Hemp, Flax, Wax, Pitch, Tar, Planks rea∣dy saw'd for Building, Skins and Furs of all sorts, &c. all which are brought thither over the Ice and Snow upon Sledges out of Moscovy and Poland, during the Winter Season: The Inhabitants in like manner drive a constant Trade with the Curlanders through∣out the whole Year; They commonly speak either Swedish, High-Dutch, Curlandish or Livonian, but their Divine Service reform'd according to the Augustan Confession, is usually celebrated in the German Tongue, and the Magistrates cause all publick Deeds to be en∣gross'd in the same Language. They have been for some time subject to the Kings of Poland, but Charles IX. King of Sweden, twice in vain attempted, viz. in 1605 and 1609, to make himself Master of their City; however it was afterwands taken by his Son Gustavus Adolphus, A. D. 1621. It hath been also since beleaguer'd by the Moscovites, who were repulsed after they had maintain'd the Siege for some Months, with much Shame, and a very great Slaughter. INGRIA, or INGERMELAND, Ingria, is a fertile and pleasant Province, bounded on the North by the Lake Ladoga, on the South by Pleskow, on the East by part of Moscovy, and on the West by the Gulph of Finland. It is extended from North to South about 40 Leagues, and 46 from East to West; and formerly appertain'd to the Dominions of the Mos∣covites, but the Swedes having afterward taken Pos∣session thereof, the Czar, Michael Federowitz, entirely resign'd it to Gustavus Adolphus, conformably to the Articles of the Treaty of Stockholm, A. D. 1618. Ingria, wherein are contain'd these Towns, viz. Notteburg, Cap. Jvannowgorod. Jamagorod. Caporia.
NOTTEBƲRG, Noteburgum, call'd Oreska by the Russians, that is to say the Nut, from its Compact∣ness and Strength, is built on a small Island of the Lake Ladoga, where the River Nieva flows toward the Confines of Russia. It is the chief Town of the Province of Ingria; and well fortified, but was taken by Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, A. D. 1614. There are many Islands depending on the States of the King of Sweden, the most remarkable whereof are specified in the ensuing Table, together with their principal Towns. The Islands of Sweden. Gotland, in which are, Wisby, Cap. Norwick. Oeland, wherein are, Borkholm, Cap. Ostemby. Rugen, in which are, Berghen, Cap. Newschans. Oesel, in which are, Arensburg, Cap. Sonneburg. Aland, Castelholm, Cap. Dagho, or Dachden, Dagheroart. Usedom. Vollin. The Isle of GOTHLAND, or GƲTLAND, Gothlandia and Gothia, is situated in the Baltick Sea, at the distance of 15 German Miles from the Coasts of Ostrogothland to the East, 20 from Curland, 30 from Dant∣zick, 50 from Bornholm, and 80 from Rostock. It is stretch'd forth in length from North to South, for the space of above 18 Miles of the like measure, and five or six in breadth from East to West. It was undoubtedly first inha∣bited by the Goths, who gave it their name, and affords good Pasture for Cattel, more especially Oxen and Hories. This Island formerly depended on the Juris∣diction of the King of Denmark, to whom it was sold A. D. 1408, by the Russian Knights, for the Sum of 9000 Crowns; afterward it was granted to the King of Sweden in the Treaty of Bromsbroo, in 1645. How∣ever the Danes took it again in 1677, but were oblig'd to restore it to the Swedes, by vertue of a Treaty of Peace concluded at Fontainbleau near Pais in France, A. D. 1679. WISBY, or VISBƲRG, the chief Town of the Isle of Gothland, and the Seat of its Governor, was heretofore a large City and a famous Mart, enclosing within its Bounds Ten Churches and Four Monasteries, but it is now gone very much to decay, and retains few Inhabitants. It is reported, that Hydrographical Tables and Sea-Charts were first Printed here, and certain Rules prescribed for Navigation and Com∣merce throughout the whole Ocean, as far as the Scy∣thian Sea, and Hercules-Pillars. OELAND, Oelandia aut Olandia, is a pleasant and fruitful Isle, separated from the Province of Sma∣land, by a narrow Streight called Calmar-sund. Its utmost extent from North to South consists of 69 Miles, but its greatest breadth scarcely includes 20. Many Herds of Oxen, Horses, and Fallow-Deer, are bred in this Island, the sides whereof are rais'd and fortifi∣ed with a great number of Castles, particularly the Fort of Barkholm, or Bornholm. It was taken by Fre∣derick III. King of Denmark, A. D. 1536, but soon after regain'd by Gustavus I. King of Sweden. In 1613 it fell into the hands of Gustavus Adolphus, and has been subject ever since to the Swedish Monarchs. OESEL, Osilia lies at the entrance of the Gulph of Livonia, containing about 15 Miles in length, six or seven in breadth, and 80 in compass. It is distant 16 German Miles from Riga to the North-West, 11 from Pernaw, 10 from Windaw to the North, 80 from Copenhagen, and 100 from Lubeck. This Island where∣in are comprehended nine or ten Parishes, is defended with two Fortresses, viz. those of Arensburg and Son∣neburg, and separated from that of DAGHO, or DACHDEN, Daghoa, only by a very narrow Bay or Channel. The later of these Islands is not so large as the other, but on its Southern Coasts are erected two small Castles, named Padem and Dagheroart. ALAND, Alandia, is an Island in the Baltick Sea environ'd with many others of little note, and lying between Finland to the East, and Ʋpland to the West, from whence it is distant 25 Miles. It abounds in Fish and divers sorts of Beasts; nevertheless there are not found any Wolves nor Deer within its Terri∣tories. A Chronological TABLE, shewing the Succession of 109 Kings of Sweden.   A. M. Years. 1. Eric I. After the Deluge. 2014 liv'd 2 or 300 2. Ʋddo, Alo, or Olhen.     3. Charles I. Diorneghetar.     4. Gyluvius, or Gyrpho.     5. Judices.     6. Odin.   Reigned 7. Humble. 2673 about 39 8. Sigtrugius. 2712   9. Suirdager. 2831 60 10. Asmund. 2891 48 11. Ʋsfo. 2939 44 12. Hunding. 2983 48 13. Regner. 3031 29 14. Hothebrod. 3060 60 15. Attilus I. 3120 54 16. Hother. 3174 78 17. Hotaric Slingebanch. 3252 84 18. Attilus II. 3336   An Interruption of five or six Hundred Years. 19. Alaricus. 3916 13 20. Eric II. or III. sir-nam'd the Wise. 3929     A. C. Years. 21. Haldan. 43 Reign'd 57 22. Sivard. 100 69 23. Eric IV. 169 12 24. Haldan II. Bergsam. 181 13 25. Ʋnguin. 194 9 26. Ragnald. 203 17 27. Amund. 220 6 28. Haquin. 226 14 29. Osten. 240 22 30. Halver. 262 16 31. Ingo. 278   32. Fielmo.     33. Ingel.     34. Jerunder, or Germond. 382 5
35. Haquin Ringo. 387 Reign'd 2 36. Egillus Vendelkraka. 389 16 37. Gothar. 405 about 28 38. Adel. 433 4 39. Osten II. 437 16 40. Ingemar, or Canut. 453 2 41. Halstan. 455   Here are reckon'd up 14 Kings, according to the report of Joannes Magnus, which make an In∣terruption of 3 or 400 Years, viz. 1 Ragual. 2 Suvartan. 3 Jordon. 4 Rodolphus. 5 Gostagus. 6 Arthum. 7 Haquin. 8 Charles IV. 9 Charles V. 10 Birger. 11 Eric V. 12 Torillus. 13 Biorn. 14 Alaricus. 56. Biorn, or Bern II. 800 34 57. Herot. 834 22 58. Charles VI. 856 12 59. Biorn III. 868 23 60. Ingel. 885 6 61. Olaus I. 891 9 62. Ingo II. 900 7 63. Eric VI. Bederhat. 907 10 64. Eric VII. the Victorious. 917 63 65. Eric VIII. 949, or 980 32 66. Olaus II. 1012 5 67. Amand the Collier. 1019 16 68. Emond I. 1035 6 69. Haquin III. the Ruddy. 1041 12 70. Stenchil. 1059   71. Ingo III. 1059   72. Halstan, the Brother of Ingo. 1064 5 73. Philip, the Son of Halstan. 1080 16 74. Ingo IV. the Son of Philip. 1110 30 75. Raynald. 1129 19 76. Suercher II. 1140 21 He first assum'd the Title of King of Sweden, the others were styl'd Kings of Ʋpsal. 77. Eric IX. the Saint. 1160 20 78. Charles VII. 1162 2 79, Olaus II.   Reign'd 80. Canut, the Son of St. Eric. 1168 24 81. Suercher III. 1192 19 82. Eric X. 1211 8 83. John I. 1219 4 84. Eric XI. the Stammerer. 1223 28 85. Waldemar. 1251 26 86. Magnus I. the Adult. 1277 14 87. Birgher, the Son of Magnus. 1291 28 88. Magnus II. Smet. 1319 41 89. Eric XII. poison'd by his Mother Blanche. 1360 16 He spake thus to his Nephew Eric XIII. Sweden shall Nourish you, Norway shall Cloath you, and Den∣mark shall Defend you. 90. Albertus Megalopolitanus. 1376 20 91. Margaret the Dane.     92. Eric XIII. King of 3 Kingdoms. 1396 45 93. Christopher the Bavarian. 1441 4 94. Charles VIII. the Canut. 1445 12 95. Christian I. 1457 14 96. Stenosturus, the old Ad∣ministrator of the King∣dom. 1471 26 97. John II. 1497 7 98. Stenosturus, Regent. 1504   99. Suantosurus, Regent. 1504 16 100. Christian II. the Tyrant. 1520 3 101. Gustavus II. 1523 37 102. Eric XIV. 1560 8 103. John III. 1568 26 104. Sigismund I. 1594 6 105. Charles IX. Duke of Sudermania. 1600 11 106. Gustavus Adolphus III. the Great. 1611 21 107. Christina. 1632 22 108. Charles Gustavus X. 1654 6 109. Charles XI. 1660 Reigning. CHAP. XI. POLAND, Polonia. POLAND, or POLZKA, as it is call'd by the Natives, derives its name (according to the most probable conjecture) from Pole and Polu, which words in the Sclavonian Tongue signifie a Champain-Ground or Place convenient for Hunting, by reason that the Country consists for the most part of vast Plains and spacious Forests; altho' others suppose the Denomi∣nation to have been taken from Lechus or Lachus, the first Captain of these People, who are nam'd Po-lachi, i. e. the Posterity of Lachus, and by Corruption Polani, or Poloni. Indeed it is urg'd by the maintainers of this Opinion, that the Polanders still call themselves Polacci, and that they are termed Polacchi by the Ita∣lians, as also Lachi and Lechite, by the Russians, Greeks and Tartars. Poland is bounded on the North by Moscovy, Swedish Livonia, and the Baltick Sea; on the South by Moldavia, Transylvania and Hungary; on the East by part of Moscovy, and the lesser Tartary, and on the West by Germany. Its utmost extent from South to North comprehends about 200 Leagues, viz. from the Mountains of Transylvania, as far as the Gulph of Riga, from the 45 deg. 36 min. to the 55 deg. 29 min. of Latitude, as also of 300 Leagues from West to East, that is to say, from the Frontiers of Brandenburg, to those of the lesser Tartary, and from the 46 deg. to the 60th of Longitude.
map of Poland THE KINGDOME OF POLAND WITH ITS CONFINES. The Air of this Country is as different as its Soil, but generally so piercing Cold, that Trees are often parch'd to the very Roots, and Water freezes ere it falls to the Ground. The Lakes and Rivers are like∣wise frozen five or six Months together, and so hard that Coaches and loaded Carts pass over them, even at the end of March; which vehement Sharpness of the Air may perhaps be imputed to the largeness of the Continent, or thickness of the Woods. The Soil on the Western side brings forth all sorts of Corn and Fruits in so great abundance, that considerable quan∣tities of them are transported into foreign Nations. Toward the North are delightful Plains. In the Sou∣thern parts almost nothing is to be seen but Hills or rugged Mountains, in which are found some Mines of Silver, Lead, Copper, Iron, divers sorts of Mine∣rals and Salt, which is commonly taken out in huge Masses, after the same manner as Stones out of a Quarry. On the Eastern side the Country is full of Forests, Woods, Marshes, Lakes and Rivers, the Wa∣ters whereof are not wholsome to drink, neither can the Corn be here brought to maturity; insomuch that Travellers meet with so many inconveniences, that they are oblig'd to stay until the Winter-Season draws near, and then proceed in their Journey with much more ease by the help of the Ice. The most remarkable RIVERS of Poland are, 1. The Weissel, mention'd by several Authors under the different names of Vistula, Istula, Visula, Justilla and Vandalus, which taking its rise in the Dutchy of Teschen in Silesia, out of Mount Carpathus, now call'd Crapack, runs by Cracow, Sandomir, Warsaw, Ʋladis∣law, Thorn, Colm and Dantzick. This River ancient∣ly separated Europaean Sarmatia from Germany, and having continu'd its course above 100 Polish Miles, at the Island Grosswerder; is divided into two Streams, emptying it self by one into the Bay Frisch-Haff, and by the other into the Baltick Sea. 2. The Wart, which after having water'd Siradia, Posna, Olstin, &c. falls into the Oder near Costrin. 3. The Dwina, which springs in the Moscovian Russia, passes to Vi∣lespez, Poloscz, and at last, after a Course 130 Leagues through Russia, Lithuania and Livonia, throws it self into the Gulph of Riga. 4. The Nieper, heretofore call'd Boristhenes, which waters Smolensko, traverses part of Lithuania, runs to Kiow, crosses the Ʋkraine, and at length rolls into the Black Sea. 5. The Niester, which having past to Caminieck, in like manner dis∣charges its Waters into the Black or Euxine Sea. 6. The Bog or Hypanis of the Greeks, which takes its origine from a Lake on the Frontiers of Podolia, and falls into the Nieper. 7. The Bug, which rising in
Red-Russia near Olesco, enters the Narva. In the greater Poland, Cujavia and the Territory of Lublin, are divers considerable Lakes abounding with all sorts of fresh Fish, the chief whereof are Goplo, five Miles long and half a Mile broad, and Briale, or the White-Lake, so nam'd by an Antiphrasis, in regard that in the Months of April and May it dies the Skins of those that wash in it with a kind of swarthy Tincture. The Polanders are generally of a good Complexion and Tall Stature, corpulent and robust; being also Valiant, expert in Military Affairs, and resolute; yet very courteous to Strangers, and lovers of Magnifi∣cence and Good-cheer: But they are somewhat re∣vengful, and treat their Peasants as Slaves; more especially in Lithuania. The Noble-men are Rich, and often attended with a Troop of stout Horse-men; so that with this Equipage they sometimes commit very great Outrages among the Common People, and even Gen∣tlemen that are inferiour to them in Power, and make Incursions into the Territories of their Neighbors; ha∣ving also the power of Life and Death over their own domestick Servants. All the Persons of Quality in general are very desirous of liberty and independency, and to maintain the right of Electing their King. The Gentry take much delight in keeping Horses and Arms, so that 200000 of them may soon be rais∣ed, and appear well accoutred on any emergent Oc∣casion, being very dextrous in managing their Wea∣pons abroad, and no less skilful in the Liberal Arts at home. The Women are beautiful, of a free and generous Disposition, neither arrogant nor obstinate, sooner appeas'd than provok'd to Anger, and much inclin'd to Civility and Hospitality, especially to Strangers, whose Customs and Manners they are apt to imitate. In fine, they are candid, open-hearted, and very tractable, if manag'd with gentleness and discretion. As for the Education of their Youth, they at first cause them to be well instructed in the Latin-Tongue, so that in no part of Italy, nor in even in Rome it self, are to be found so many Persons able to speak it so readily as here, even the Daughters of the Nobility and wealthy Citizens, being taught either at home or in the Monasteries to write and read the Latin, as well as their Native Language, but they are not prmitted to learn Greek lest they should also imbibe the Religion of that Nation. The young Women, whn grown up to years of maturity, are put to learn Good-Hwifry, and accustom'd to Spinning, Weav∣ing, Sowing, and all other Employments becoming their Sx; whilst the Men are addicted to Husbandry, Merchandizing, or the management of the Affairs of Church or State. The Polish LANGUAGE is a Dialect of the Smin, but not very copious, neither can one easily attain to write and read it by reason of the mul∣titude of Consonants; yet its harshness is much abated in discoure, by pronouncing them as if intermixt with Vowels. Indeed most of the Terms of Art for Mechancal Trades and Instruments are borrow'd from the Germans, of which Nation many Artificers and Merchants reside in Poland; nay the High-Dutch is chiefly us'd in some Towns and Villages, besides the Latin, which is almost every where spoken even among the very Peasants. It is certain that the Kingdom of Poland is one of the most considerable in Europe, on the account of its situation, extent, fertility and strength. The Country, which is very spacious in many places, affords very good Pastur for Cattel, abounding with Honey, Wax, Corn, and divers sorts of Fruits. The Ponds and Lakes are full of variety of Fish, and the Forests yield Fodder to many Herds of Deer, Owres or Wild-Oxen, Buffles, Elks, Horses and Wild-Asses, besides Bears, Wolves, Foxes, Martins, Squirrils, Hares, Rabbets, &c. The Christian Faith was first receiv'd in these parts according to the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, A. C. 965, under King Micislaus, in the time of Pope John XIII. which tho' it be still the most pro∣fess'd and predominant RELIGION, nevertheless some others have got no small footing in several quar∣ters of the Kingdom, especially toward the Palatinate of Cracow. The Provinces of Masovia and Cujavia are almost entirely inhabited by Roman Catholicks, and the Lutheran Doctrin has prevail'd very much through∣out Prussia: But a great number of Jews, Grecians, Arians and Socinians reside in Lithuania. Russia af∣fords a place of Habitation to many Armenians that resort to Leopol; whilst Podolia and the Ʋkraine are possess'd by the Ruthenians who adhere to the Belief and Ceremonies of the Greek Church, under the Arch-Bishop of Kiow, whose Jurisdiction is subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople. The Reformation began in Poland in the Year 1535, but was never generally embrac'd; and the Antitrinitarians first appear'd in 1560, by the Instigation of certain runnagado Italians, particularly Paulus Alciatus a Milanese, Valentinus Gen∣tilis, Bernardinus Ochinus, Paulus Orsacius, Franciscus Lismaninus, &c. who were all at first profess'd Prote∣stants, but some of them fell off to Arianism, Photini∣anism, Anabaptism, Judaism and Mahometanism, and others endeavour'd to set up new Sects of their own. Their Errors were first countenanc'd by Georgius Blan∣drata a Physician, Nicolaus Adreus, Petrus Statovius, and some other Persons of Quality, and afterward pro∣pagated in 1579, by Faustus Socinus, who indeed gave name to the Sect of Socinians, but had learnt his Opi∣nions from his Uncle Lelius Socinus, the first reviver of those pernicious Doctrines in that Age. Socinus was succeeded by some Persons of more eminent Learning, as Joannes Crellius, Jonas Slichtingius, &c. by whose Authority the Party was kept united, and settled at Racovia under the Protection of Sienjenius, where they erected a Church, School and Printing-Press, which were taken from them in 1638, their Pastors being al∣so banish'd at the same time by an Order of the Diet, upon a complaint made of the Insolence of their Scho∣lars, some of whom had presum'd to throw down a Cross near their Seat at Racovia; whereupon Sienjeni∣us their Patron dy'd of grief, and their Disciples were likewise banish'd by King John Casimire, A. D. 1660. Two Metropolitan Sees have been long since establish∣ed in this Kingdom, viz. that of the Arch-Bishop of Gnesna, who is Primate or first Prince of the Realm, Legate of the See of Rome, and perpetual President of the Diet; and that of the Arch-Bishop of Leopol; to∣gether with 16 Suffragan Bishopricks. There are also two noted Universities, viz. of Cracow and Konigs∣berg, besides 35 Palatinates, and 80 Castellanies. The GOVERNMENT of Poland, if we exa∣mine well the Authority of the King, Senators and Noble-men; will appear to be a mixture of Monarchy and Aristocracy, but partakes more of the later, altho' to these some add a Democracy, in comprehending the Citizens and Kmetones or Husband-men, but they be∣ing never admitted to Publick Offices, or any share in the Government, ought not to be reckon'd among the Orders and States of the Kingdom, which was at first Successive, as is evident from the Testimony of all the Historians of this Nation, until in process of time the custom of choosing their Monarchs, (for default of Issue of the true Royal Family) having by little and little encroach'd upon the Scepter, at last render'd it
altogether Elective; so that from the Death of one Prince to the Election of another, there are frequent∣ly too long Interregna; during which the Arch-Bishop of Gnesna takes upon him the sole Administration of Publick Affairs, acting as an absolute Sovereign, save that he is not Crown'd with the Royal Diadem. Such an Interreign may not only happen upon the decease, but also by the Deposition or Resignation of the Kings, (altho' the Examples of deposing them are not now so frequent as formerly) and the same Prelate exercises the like Office during the King's absence or residence in another Country, as when Henry Valois withdrew himself into France, and Sigismund III. undertook an Expedition into Sweden. If there be no Arch-Bishop of Gnesna, then this Dignity devolves on the Bishop of Cujavia, or in case that See be in like manner vacant, on the Bishop of Posnania. The King acts only con∣formably to the Laws and Constitutions of the Realm, and cannot make any new ones until they are subscri∣bed by a certain number of Senators and Noble-men, yet he is reputed the Interpreter of them, so that an Appeal may be made to him from all the Magistrates of the Provinces. However the Nobility create the chief Judge or Marshal, with his Assistants, nor does the King sit alone upon Causes that are brought before him by way of Appeal; neither can he Coin Mony, or undertake an offensive War, or encrease the number of the standing Militia, or enter into any new Leagues without the consent of the States General; only anci∣ent Alliances may be renew'd by him with the Advice of the Senators resident at Court. He is not permitted to possess any Hereditary Lands in his own Kingdom, nor to go beyond its Frontiers, except the Senate agree thereto. He is also oblig'd to consult them be∣fore he contract a Marriage for himself, and after∣ward to take care that the Queen do not meddle with State-Affairs: Indeed his Majesty disposes of all the Royal Revenues, and of all Offices Ecclesiastical and Civil, having a Right to nominate to Bishopricks, and all Consistorial Dignities; nevertheless he is bound to supply such as are vacant, by a time limited, and restrained from conferring a Plurality of high Digni∣ties upon one Person, or even the Offices of a Bishop, a Palatine, Castellan, &c. on any of his own Kindred of the Royal Family; as also from seeking his own Advantage in the Advancement of any Man; neither can he degrade the same Persons, tho' ill deserving, without the consent of the States. The Kings of Po∣land take a solemn Oath to observe all these Articles, and some others, before their Coronation, which is usually perform'd at Cracow, where the Crown is kept in the chief Treasury, the Person that officiates at the Ceremony being always the Arch-Bishop of Gnesna, if not hinder'd by Sickness. The Revenues of the King's Houshould arise out of his Lands and Salt-pits, and are computed to amount to above three Millions of Florens per Annum, besides the Sum of 100000 Livres allow'd to the Queen for the keeping of her Court. But the State provides Money for the maintaining of Wars, and defraying all other extraordinary Expences. The Polanders are good Soldiers, but the chiefest Strength of the Nation consists in the Cavalry, which is very numerous and readily rais'd, in regard that the Nobility are oblig'd by the Laws of the Land to attend the King in all Expeditions, for the Safety of the Kingdom, under the penalty of the Confiscation of their Goods. They all serve on Horse-back, and are enroll'd, (as it has been already intimated) to the number of above 200000. Nevertheless since there are very few fortify'd Places on the Frontiers of Poland, above 100000 can scarce be drawn together without leaving the Provinces too naked and expos'd to the fu∣ry of Invaders. Every one of the Polish Horse-men is generally arm'd with a Carbine, two Pistols, a Hat∣chet and a Fauchion, besides a Quiver full of Arrows and a Bow hanging behind his Back, whereof he makes use after having discharg'd his Fire-Arms, when the Enemy begins to betake himself to flight. How∣ever these Troops of Noble-men, when assembled, serve only for the defence of their Country, and can∣not be compell'd to march above five Leagues beyond its limits; so that whensoever it is requisite to lead an Army farther, stipendiary Soldiers are levy'd by the Decree of the Senate. The Polish Infantry is of little repute, and on that account altho' every City is bound to set forth a certain number, yet the King often chu∣ses a Sum of Mony sufficient for the Charges, and provides foreign Forces, hir'd chiefly out of Hungary and Germany. The Administration of JUSTICE is perform'd according to the Statutes or the Realm, which Sigis∣mund Augustus caus'd to be reduc'd into one Body, A. D. 1520. And the Courts of Judicature in respect of their Division are the same as in other Countries, i. e. either Ecclesiastical or Secular, both for Civil and Criminal Causes; but it would be too tedious here to give a particular account of the several Judges and manners of Proceedings therein. The chief of these are, 1. The Court of Land Judicature, that is pecu∣liar to the Nobles, and in which all Suits relating to their Lands are determin'd. 2. The Captains Juris∣diction, or Court-Military, call'd Sudy Grodskie, the chief Judge whereof is a Captain, who sits alone and takes cognizance of Robberies on the High-way, Burglary, Rapes, and other Misdemeanors of the like nature. 3. The Commissorial Courts, and that of the Sub-Chamberlain for the limiting of the Bounds of Noble-mens Estates. 4. The Tribunal Courts, where the Judges being as well Spiritual as Secular, examine all Causes brought before them by way of Appeal from inferiour Courts, and sit only in two places of the Kingdom, viz. at Petricow and Lublin. 5. The Courts of the General Conventions, which are either Criminal or Civil; the former being erected to make Inquisition into Publick Crimes, as High-Treason, Violation of the Privileges of the Diet, debasing or counterfeiting the King's Coin, &c. as also into pri∣vate, as Murder, Adultery, Incest, Poisoning, and such like hainous Offences. To the Civil Conventional Courts belong all Causes concerning the Estate of the King's Houshold, negligence of Magistrates, extorti∣on of Customs, &c. The Judges of this Court are the King and Senators. 7. The Court of the Exchequer usually held at Radom, and therefore call'd Tribunal Radomiense. 8. The Commission for the payment of Soldiers Wages, where are try'd such Soldiers as have not appear'd after the receipt of their Pay, or that have committed any Outrages upon the Subjects. 10. The Captural Courts, both General and Particular, which are constituted to prevent disorders during an Interreg∣num, and have absolute power of Life and Death. These Courts cease three Weeks before the Assemblies for Elections are conven'd, and sit again when the Ele∣ction is finish'd, until the Coronation of the new King. 11. The Assessorial Court, where all Causes remov'd from the City Courts are heard, the Chancellor sitting as Supreme Judge, assisted by the Masters of Requests, and the principal Secretaries of State. 12. The Court of Relations, where the King himself is Judge, and takes cognizance of all Matters brought hither by Ap∣peal out of the Assessorial Court; but no Appeal lies from hence save only to the General Diet or Parlia∣ment.
Among the Spiritual Courts, that of the Nun∣ciature is chiefly remarkable, which belongs to the Ju∣risdiction of the Pope's Nuncio, who for that purpose always resides in Poland, but before he enters upon his Office, is oblig'd to present to the King and the prin∣cipal Ministers of State, the Apostolical Brief of his Nunciature, and to acknowledge the King as Supreme within his Dominions. The Councils or Parliaments of Poland are of two sorts, viz. Civil or Military; the later are only held in the time of an Interreign, and the Counsellors ap∣pear in a Military habit. But they come in their Gowns or Robes to the former, which are frequently call'd, and are either 1. Ordinary, which are summon'd (ac∣cording to the Laws) once in two Years; or 2. Extraor∣dinary, which are conven'd upon some emergent Oc∣casion, as the necessity of Affairs requires. Every Pro∣vince sends its Delegates, (almost in the same manner as the Counties or Shires in England, except that they are not chosen by the People) and their whole num∣ber amounts to about 300. The principal Officers of the Kingdom, and Dutchy of Lithuania, are the Grand Marshals, Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors, and High Treasurers of both these States, and the Under-Marshals, or simply the Marshal for the Court of of the Kingdom, and that for the Court of the Duke∣dom; to these may be added the principal Secretaries, Masters of Requests, Captains General, &c. Thus the whole State is divided into two principal parts, viz. the Kingdom of Poland, and the Grand Dutchy of Lithuania, each whereof is subdivided into divers Provinces and Palatinates, which are plac'd in their Order in the following Tables. SECT. I. UPPER POLAND, Polonia Superior. The UPPER or LESSER POLAND, is bounded on the North and East by the Lower Poland, on the South by Hungary, and on the West by Silesia. It comprehends 3 Palatinates, viz. of Cracovia, Sandomir and Lublin. In the first of these are included 4 Castella∣nies, 3 Dutchies and one County, as also Eight Ca∣stellanies in the Second. This Province (as all the others formerly have been) is overspread with Woods, and was heretofore very much infested by Robbers. The Upper Poland divided into Three Palatinates, viz. 1. Cracovia, wherein are contain'd these Towns, viz. Cracow, Bish. Cap. R. Lelow. Sandeez. Osvieczin. Zator. Severia. Scepuz, County. Wounitz. 2. Sandomir, in which are Sandomir, Cap. Steziicza. Corzin. Opoczno. Radom. Visticz. Chencin. Pilsno. Malogsch. Sechow. 3. Lublin, in which are Lublin. Casimier. Zakaw. Parkow. Wisendow. CRACOW, Cracovia, the Capital City of the Province of the same name, and of the whole King∣dom of Poland, is seated on a rocky Bank of the Vi∣stula or Weissel, at the end of a vast Plain, 9 Polish Miles East of the Frontiers of Silesia, 11 from those of the Upper Hungary, 23 from Sendomir, 30 from Olmutz, 35 South-East of Ʋratislaw, 40 from Vienna, and about 50 from Buda. It had its name (as its sup∣pos'd) from one Cracus, Gracus or Gracchus, a Person of great Reputation, and as the Bohemians give it out, one of their Princes, whom the Polanders with much Sollicitation perswaded to take upon him the entire Adminstration of the Government, after they grew weary of the Twelve Palatines or Waiwodes, that succeeded King Lechus I. Others affirm it to be the Cawdanum of Ptolomy, corrupted into Cracow. How∣ever it is the largest and best built of any Town in Poland, being divided into four quarters, viz. Cracow properly so call'd, Casimiria, Stradomia and Cleparia; the first is encompass'd with a Ditch and Wall flank'd with round Brick Towers, but its chiefest Ornament is the Castle founded on a Rock, and taking up the space of a Mile in compass. It is a large Stone Build∣ing, consisting of two Wings round a square Court, having Galleries supported with Pillars and pav'd with black and white Marble. The King's Apartments, with some others, are adorn'd with divers curious Paintings and Statues, and the Country round about affords one of the finest Prospects in Europe. The quar∣ter of Casimiria is join'd to the others by a fair Timber Bridge erected over the Weissel, and Stradomia lies between Cracow and the same Bridge. The Houses are for the most part of Free-stone, and four or five Stories high, but cover'd on the Top with Boards in∣stead of Slates and Tiles. The Cathedral of St. Sta∣nislaus is noted for its Chapter and Treasury, and there are above 50 other Churches in the Town, among which that dedicated to the Virgin Mary stand∣ing in the great Place fronts 10 large Streets, and is surrounded with four Rows of magnificent Structures. An University was first begun here by King Casimir the Great, finished A. D. 1401, by Ʋladislaus Jagello, conformably to the last Will and Testament of his Queen Heduiges, and had its Privileges confirm'd by Pope Ʋrban VI. However the Scholars abandon'd it in 1549, by reason that the Magistrates had re∣fus'd to execute Justice on the Servants of Andrew Czarnkowski, who in a Quarrel had slain a great num∣ber of Students. Afterward they were dispers'd into several parts of Germany, but at last returning Prote∣stants, spread the Lutheran Doctrin throughout Poland and gain'd many Proselytes. The City of Cracow was erected into a Metropolitan See even upon the first planting of the Christian Religion in the Kingdom, under Micceslaus I. who began to Reign, A. C. 964; but within 100 Years after it degenerated into a sim∣ple Bishoprick, under the Arch-Bishop of Gnesna, in regard that Lampert Zula could not be perswaded to receive his Pall from the Pope of Rome, as his Prede∣cessors had done; nevertheless a contest arising between Ivo Prelate of this Diocess, and the Bishop of Ʋratislaw about Precedency, the former upon his submissive Appeal to the See of Rome, was restor'd to the dignity of an Arch-Bishop, altho' it continu'd only during his Life. The Swedes made themselves Masters of this City in 1655, after a Siege of five Months, when the quarter of Stra∣domia was almost ruin'd, and the Inhabitants compell'd to pay 300000 Rix-Dollars to be exempted from being plunder'd. SANDOMIR, or SENDOMIR, a very pleasant Town, and the chief of the Palatinate, that
takes its name from thence, is situated on a rising Ground near the Confluence of the Rivers Weissel and San, 28 Polish Miles East of Cracow, and 32 South of Warsaw. It is fortify'd with Walls, a strong Fortress, and some other regular Works, rais'd by Casimir the Great. Among the publick Buildings the Monastery of Domi∣nican Friars founded by Ivo Arch-Bishop of Cracow, is chiefly remarkable. A Synod was conven'd here a∣gainst the Heresie of Stancarus, in the Year 1570, and another wherein the Confession of Augsburg, Bohemia and Switzerland were approv'd. This Town was Sackt by the Tartars, A. D. 1240, and taken by the Swedes in 1655, but restor'd to the Polanders in the year ensuing. LƲBLIN, Lublinum, stands on the foot of a Hill water'd by the River Vstricza, and is defended by an adjacent Castle, which owes its Foundation to the Russians. It is not a very large, but well built Town, and much frequented by Turkish, Armenian, Moscovi∣tish and German Merchants, especially during the 3 great Marts that are kept there every Year. It is en∣compass'd on all sides with Marshes, and was wall'd round by Casimir the Great. The principal Church was erected by Lescus, sir-nam'd the Black, upon a sig∣nal Victory gain'd in the neighbourhood over the Li∣thuanians, and dedicated to St. Michael, who had pro∣mis'd him good Success the night before the Battel was fought. There are also divers magnificent Monaste∣ries, and among others, one founded by Ʋladislaus Ja∣gello. This Town is noted for one of the two High-Courts of Judicature held therein, from whence no Ap∣peal lies except to the Parliament of Poland, being di∣stant about five Miles from the Confines of Red-Russia, 12 West of Chelm, 14 from Sendomir, 24 South of War∣saw, and 36 North-East of Cracow. SECT. II. LOWER POLAND, Polonia Inferior. The LOWER POLAND is bounded on the North by Pomerania and Prussia, on the South by the Upper Poland, on the East by Lithuania, and on the West by Silesia, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg. It comprehends three Parts, viz. the Greater Poland pro∣perly so call'd, Cujavia and Masovia, together with 10 Palatinates and 32 Castellanies. It is for the most part a level Champain Country, abounding with Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, and well stockt with all sorts of Fish and Fowl. Indeed some parts of Cujavia are Moun∣tainous, yet the Hills feed many Flocks of Sheep that yield good store of Wool, and the Vallies afford plen∣ty of Corn. Lower Poland divided into Three Provinces. 1. The Lower Poland proper in five Palatinates. 1. Of Posna, or Posna∣nia, in which are these Towns, viz. Posna, Bish. Cap. Castellany, Primen. Ragosno. Zandok. Mezaritz. Srzodo. 2. Of Kalisch, in which are Gnesna, Arch-Bish. Cap. Kalisch. Kamin. Lauda. Pisdri. Nakel. 3. Of Siradia, in which are Sirad, Cap. Skadow. Radomsko. Petrikow. Vielun. Rizepice. 4. Of Rava, in which are Rava, Cap. Gostinin. Sohaczow. Lowicz. 5. Of Lanschet, in which are Lanschet, Cap. Ʋnenow. Bresini. Inoulocz. 2. Cujavia, two Palatinates. 1. Of Bresty, in which are Bresty, Cap. Kruswick. Coval. Predek. Voisinow. 2. Of Dinowlocz, in which are Ʋladislaw, Cap. Bobrunitz. Bidgots. Biechow. 1. Masovia, in which are Warsaw, Cap. Ciokanow. Wissegrod. Makow. Rozan. Lombzc. Zembow. Wisna. Nur. Liw. Cerne. Zacrol. Norodnor. Camieniec. Czerk. Slubow. 2. Ploczkow, in which are Ploczkow, Bish. Cap. Zuveren. Mlaw. Stene. Plunskow. Stepez. Rasuntz. 3. Polachia, in which are Biesk, Cap. Bragiczin. Miolnick. Bransk. Suras. Gradek. Losicza. Augustow. Wassistow. Tikeczin. Knissia. POSNA, Posnania, called Poznan by the Inhabi∣tants, and Posen by the Germans, is situated in the midst of divers Hills, and on the banks of the River Warta, at the distance of 7 Polish Miles from Gnesna to the West toward Francfurt on the Oder, 20 German Miles from Ʋratislaw to the North, and 50 from Cra∣cow. It is a City of a small compass, nevertheless well built and adorn'd with a stately Castle, enjoying also the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Gnesna. John Lubransko, some time Bishop of this Diocess, founded a Gymnasium or petty University, in the Suburbs of Posna, which Structure has been since very much beautify'd by Adam Canar, one of his Suc∣cessors; nevertheless the Jesuits College and Monastery are very sumptuous Buildings. The greater part of the Inhabitants are Roman Catholicks, although numerous swarms of Jews reside among them, and even enjoy more Privileges than the Citizens themselves, who are generally very courteous and gentile, wearing richer
Apparel than is ordinary in any other place except Cracow. The Town is govern'd by a Burgo-Master chosen yearly (as a Mayor in our Cities) out of the Court of Schipins or Aldermen, and during his Go∣vernment is dignify'd with the Title of General of Great Poland. GNESNA, Gnesna called Gnisen by the Germans, was heretofore the Metropolis of Poland, as also the Royal Seat of the King, and yet retains the Title of an Arch-Bishoprick, being distant 3 Polish Miles from the River Warta to the North, 7 from Kalisch, as many from Posna to the East, about 13 from Toren, 30 from Dantzick, and 33 from Warsaw to the North-West. It was built (as it is generally reported) by Lechus or Leschus I. the Founder of this Kingdom, and call'd Gnesna from Gnesiad, which in the Polish Language sig∣nifies an Eagles-Nest, by reason that a Nest of those Birds was thn discover'd in an adjacent Field, whence even at this day the Polish Princes give a Spread-Eagle for their Coat of Arms. The whole City was almost entirely ruin'd by a terrible Conflagration, which hap∣pen'd therein, A. D. 1613, and is at present con∣siderable only as being the usual place of Residence of its Arch-Bishop, who as yet enjoys very great Privileges, for (as it has been elsewhere declared) he is Legate of the See of Rome in Poland, as also Primate and Re∣gent of the Kingdom after the King's death, giving Audience to Ambassadors except at the time of an Ele∣ction: He convenes the Senate, appoints a certain day for the chusing of a new King, propounds all matters necessary to be debated, Crowns the Kings and Queens, and takes care of their Funeral Obsequies. In fine, the same Prelate bears the title of the first Prince of the Realm, and refuseth even to give place to a Cardinal, so that none of that College at Rome is ambitious to be sent into Poland. In the Cathedral is kept an inestim∣able Treasure of Gold, Silver, and enamell'd Vessel's, given by divers Princes of Poland, and Prelates of the See, which was much augmented by the Legacies of Henry Firley, late Arch-Bishop, who besides a great num∣ber of Vessels and rich Vestments, left his own Mitre, valu'd at 24000 Polish Guilders, or about 2300 l. Sterling. The Gates opening a Passage to the same Church, which are made of Corinthian Brass, curiously wrought, were first taken out of the Monastery of Cor∣suna in the Taurick Chersonese, afterward remov'd to Kiow, and brought from thence hither by the order of King Boleslaus II. WARSAW, Varsavia, the Capital City of the Pro∣vince of Msevia, is divided into 4 parts, viz. the Su∣burb of Cracw, viz. and the Prag, the old and new Town, being situated on the Vistula, in the very heart or cen∣ter of the Kingdom, at an equal distance from all the Provinces, on which account the States of the Realm always assemble therein. It is also adorn'd with di∣vers stately Piles of Building, particularly a spacious Palace founded by Sigismund III. and much improv'd by his Successors, where the Kings of Poland generally keep their Court. Over against it on the other side of the River (over which is erected a stately Timber-Bridge) stands another Royal Palace in the midst of delightful Groves and Gardens, and commonly call'd Viasdow, where the Grand States or Parliament of Po∣land usually sit and debate about the most important Af∣fairs of the Kingdom. The other Publick Edifices are ledgeo less remarkable, viz. the Church of St. John Baptist, ledge which Secular Canons officiate, the Arsenal, Castle, Market-place, &c. Divers sorts of Merchandises are con∣vey'd hither along a River out of the neighbouring Provinces, and afterward from thence as far as Dant∣zick, to be transported into foreign Countries. In the Suburbs of Cracow is a small Chappel built on purpose for the burial of Joannes Demetrius Suiscius, Grand Duke of Moscovy, who died a Prisoner in the Castle of Gosty∣nen, together with his two Brothers. This City was taken by the Swedes A. D. 1655, and is scarce distant 3 Polish Miles from the Frontiers of the lesser Poland, as also 24 from Lanschet, as many North-East of Lub∣lin, 29 South-East of Thorn, 30 North of Sendomir, 33 West of Gnesna, 40 of Posna, and as many North East of Cracow. PLOCZKO, or PLOSKO, Plauoum, the Me∣tropolis of the Palatinate of that name, stands on a high Bank of the River Vistula or Weissel, from whence one may take a fair Prospect of a pleasant and fruitful Country. The City is very populous, and has been long dignify'd with a Bishops See. Besides the Cathe∣dral, there are divers other Churches and Monasteries well endow'd, especially the Abby of Benedictine Monks in the Suburbs, where among other Relicks is kept the Head of St. Sigismund in Gold, which was given by King Sigismund III. SECT. III. PRUSSIA, Prussia aut Borussia. PRƲSSIA depends in part on the Jurisdiction of the Crown of Poland, being bounded on the North by the Baltick Sea, on the South by the Provinces of Cujavia and Masovia, on the East by that of Samogitia, and on the West by Pomerania. These Territories were at first subject to certain Sovereign Dukes, until the Knights of the Teutonick-Order, got the Possession of them in the XIII. Century after a tedious War. In 1454, the Western part was subdu'd by the Polanders, and Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, the 34th and last Master of that Order, having shaken off the Polish Yoke, obtain'd the Eastern part under the title of a Dutchy, about A. D. 1520. So that Prussia has been divided ever since that time into Royal and Ducal. The same Albert embrac'd the Doctrin of Luther, perswaded most of the Teutonick Knights to marry, and introduc'd the Reform'd Religion into this Country, which is fruitful, but over-spread with Woods. It is also water'd with a great number of Rivers, the chief of which are the Weissel, Cronon, or Niemen, Nogat, Elbing, Weser, & Passar, besides some Lakes, 7 Polish Miles in compass, and many Bays and safe Harbours on the Sea-Coasts. The anci∣ent Inhabitants have been long since extirpated, and the Prussians at this day are a kind of mixt People that sprang from the Colonies of the Swedes, Polanders, Ger∣mans, and other neighbouring Nations. Prussia divided into Two Parts, viz. 1. Royal in Two Palatinates. 1. Of Pomerania, in which are these Towns, viz. Dantzick, Cap. Derseaw. Suece. Tichel. Glukow. Mirachow. Slokow. Putsk. 2. Of Marienburg, in which are, Marienburg, Cap. Mewa. Dirschaw. 3. Of Elbing, in which are, Elbing, Cap. Fraussemberg, Bish. Brounsberg. Heilsperg. 4. Of Culmigeria, wherein are, Culm, Bish. Cap. Thorn. Colmensee, Bish. Golaw. Graudents.
2. Ducal, in which are, viz. Konigsberg, Cap. Pilaw. Memel. Welaw. Tilsa. Marienwerder. Johanburg. Brondeburg. DANTZICK, Dantiscum aut Gedanum, in the Lat. of 54 deg. and the Long. of 41. deg. 30 min. the Capital City of the Palatinate of Pomerania, hath a ve∣ry capacious and safe Harbour, near the Mouth of the River Vistula or Weissel, which falls about one German Mile below it into the Bay of the same name, and the Baltick Sea, being distant 6 Polish Miles from Marien∣burg to the North-West, 8 from Elbing to the West, 24 from Konigsberg, 44 from Stetio, 22 from Thorn to the North, 30 from Gnesna and 50 from Warsaw. The Town it self is water'd by the Rivulets of Rodawn and Motlaw, and divided into two parts, viz. the Old and New: It is surrounded on the Southern and Western sides with high Mountains, and was well fortified with Bulwarks against the Incursions of the Swedes, A. D. 1656. It had been heretofore only a small Village, but was afterward erected into a City, by King Primislaus, in 1295, and enclos'd with Walls in 1343, but its chief part nam'd Die rechte Stadt, was built by Conrad Wal∣lenrodt, Master of the Teutonick-Order, about A. D. 1390. Indeed some Authors are of opinion, that its first Foun∣dation was laid by the Danes, and that it was on that account call'd Dansvick i. e. Danes-Town; but it is more probable that to the word Dan, Cdan, or Gdan, the Scla∣vonian Termination Scke being added, made Danscke, or Gdanscke, from whence came the Latin name Geda∣num, and the Vulgar Dantzick. However it is at pre∣sent a famous Mart, and one of the principal Hanse-Towns, being govern'd by its own Laws, under the Protection of the Kings of Poland. The greater part of the Inhabitants have adher'd to the Augsburg Confession of Faith, ever since the Year 1525, and the Lutherans alone are admitted to a share in the Government, altho' other Parties are tolerated and allow'd the free exercise of their Religion. The Churches are fair and well built, more especially St. Peter's; and St. Mary's, which is the stateliest Fabrick in Prussia, having 48 Altars, and 3722 Windows; the Font in it was made at Antwerp, and cost 24000 Rix-dollars, or 5400 l. The other remark∣able Buildings are the Town-house, the Arsenal, the Exchange, the Place of St Dominick, a College of Je∣suits, &c. Sabislaus, Grand-Son to Suantiborus, took this City from the Danes about 1186, and it was seiz'd by the Polanders some time after. The Knights of the Teu∣tonick-Order made themselves Masters thereof in 1305, and wall'd it about in 1343. Casimir III. King of Po∣land, regain'd it in 1454, and granted very great Privi∣leges to the Citizens; who afterward having declar'd for the Augsburg Confession, sided with Maximilian of Austria against Stephen Bathori, insomuch that the later proscrib'd and even besieg'd them in 1577, but by the Mediation of other Princes, they were restor'd to their Religion and Liberties in 1597. In 1656 they vigo∣rously repuls'd the Swedes, and adher'd to the Interest of John Casimir King of Poland. Indeed they now make one of the Members of this State, and were admitted to a Suffrage in the Election of the Polish Monarchs, in 1632. MARIENBƲRG, Mariaeburgum, call'd also Mar∣gemburg by the Inhabitants, and Malbork by the Polan∣ders, is seated on the Nogat, a branch of the Weissel, at the distance of 6 German Miles from Dantzick to the South-east, almost 4 from Elbing to the South-west, and 11 from Thorn to the North. It was in time past the chief Seat of the Knights of the Teutonick-Order▪ having been founded by the Cross-bearers of that Fraternity, and took its name (as they say) from a miraculous Image of the Virgin Mary. The Castle which was for∣merly very strong, began to be built before the Town, A. D. 1281, and was almost utterly ruin'd in 1644, neither is the Town it self in a much better condition, the Houses being generally built with Wood, and the Inhabitants very Poor, yet the best Mead in Prussia is made hereabouts. Casimir IV. King of Poland, made himself Master of this Town, A. D. 1460, and it was taken by the Swedes in 1625, as also again in 1655, but it was afterward restor'd to the Polanders, and as yet remains in their Possession. CƲLM, Culmia, an ancient and famous City, stands on an Hill the foot whereof is water'd by the Vistula a∣bout 4 German Miles from Thorn to the North, and 15 from Dantzick. It was built by the Cross-bearers of the Teutonick-Order, A. D. 1223, the Knights caus'd it to be well fortified against the Irruptions of the Heathen Prussians, and Herman de Salza, Master of the same Or∣der, gave Laws and Constitutions for its Government, entituled, Die Kulmsche Hanveste, a Specimen whereof was publish'd by Lambecius out of an old Dutch Manu∣script in the Emperors Library at Vienna. This City has suffer'd much damage during the Swedish Wars, and is almost destitute of Inhabitants, insomuch that its Episcopal See, subject to the Metropolitan of Gnesna, or at least the Bishop's Residence, hath been for some time removed to the neighbouring Town of Colmensee. THORN, Torunum is divided into two parts by the Vistula, and defended with a strong Castle being distant 4 Polish miles from Culm to the South, 13 from Mari∣enburg, 22 from Dantzick, 15 from Lanschet, and 29 from Warsaw. It was heretofore an Imperial and free City, but was afterward exempted from the Jurisdicti∣on of the Empire, and as yet enjoys many Privileges. Its name seems to have been deriv'd from the German word Thor, signifying a Gate, because built by the Teu∣tonick-Order, as it were a Gate to let Forces into Prussi whensoever an occasion serv'd; whence the Arms of the Town were taken, viz. a Castle and Gate half open, but it does not stand in the same place as formerly, Old Thorn having been seated a Mile Westward from the New, where the ruins of an ancient Castle and other Monuments are yet to be seen. However this Town is at present the fairest and best built of any in Royal Prussia, the Streets being much broader, and the Houses more stately than at Dantzick. It was very much beau∣tified by one of its Burgo-masters, nam'd Henry Stwnd, who dy'd A.D. 1609, for he establish'd a Gymnasium or kind of University here, and endow'd it with a cons∣derable Revenue. He was likewise the Founder of te Hospital, Publick Library, and Town-house, whicredge perhaps may be esteem'd the most noble of its kind in Europe, excepting the Stadt-house of Amsterdam. The Inhabitants revolted from the Knights of the Teutonick-Order. A. D. 1454, and put themselves under the Pro∣tection of the Polanders. This City gave Birth to Nich∣laus Copernicus, a most famous Astronomer, and Jon Albert King of Poland dy'd therein A. D. 1501. It was taken by the Swedish Forces, A. D. 1655, and re-gain'd by the Polanders in 1658. The Swedes recover'd it af∣terward, and the Poles surpriz'd it again in 1665. COLMENSEE, or CƲLMSEE, Colmensium is only remarkable on the account of the Episcopal Se of Culm, which was translated thither and united to that of Pomesania. It is distant 9 miles from Torn to the North, 19 from Gaudentz, and 12 from Cum o the South-East.
SECT. IV. RED RUSSIA, Russia Rubra. This Province is extended from the Frontiers of Li∣thuania, as far as the Mouth of the Nieper in the Black Sea; which River separates it from Moscovy on the East, as likewise do the Mountains of Krempach from Hungary on the West. The Country is extremely fruit∣ful in Corn, and is divided into 7 parts, viz. the Palati∣nates of Red-Russia, Podolia, Volhinia, Bracklaw, Kiow, (these two last form the Ʋkraine) Belsko and Chelm. Red-Russia, divided into 7 Parts or Palatinates. 1. The Palatinate of Russia, properly so call'd, in which are these Towns, viz. Leopol, Arch-B. Cap. Premislaw, Bish. Halitz. Sanoch. Busch. Olesko. Brodi. Zborow, Dutchy. Zamoski. Grabowick. Lubazow. Jarassaw. Przoworsk. Zidaczow. Clomei. Snyatin. 2. The Palatinate of Podolia, in which are, Camieniec, Bish. Trembowla. Latiiczow. Zvanieck. Oliczo. Tarnapol. Zbaras, Dutchy. Bar. Kalius. Ʋsiatin. Chmielnki. 3. The Palatinate of Volhinia, in which are, Lutzko or Luzuk, Bish. Woldzimiers. Kyzemieniec. Beresteko. Constantinow. Zaslaw, Dutchies. Ostrog, Dutchies. Alexandria. Derdikzow. Zitomierz. Baronowka. 4. The Palatinate of Braclaw, or the Lower Podolia, in which are. Braclaw. Brailow. Vinnicza. Kalnick. Rascow. Orthow. Komecpol. Human. Targowic. Chriekiesmi. 5. The Palatinate of Kiovia, in which are, Kiow, C. Bish. to the Moscovites, Bialogrodko. Radomisl. Czernobel. Owrucho. Louvogrod. Pereslaw. Kaniow. Dassain. Bialacerkiow. 6. The Palatinate of Belsko, in which are. Belsko, Cap. Busc. Grodlow. Grabow. Zamoski, Princ. Sozal. Mosfy. Magierow. Tysowec. 7. The Palatinate of Chelm, in which are, Chelm, Cap. Kranostaw, Bish. Winnic. Ratno. Lubomlo. Turisk. Dubna. LEOPOL, Leopolis called Lwow, or Luwow by the Polanders, and Lemburg or Russe-Lemburg by the Ger∣mans, is the Metropolis of Red-Russia, and stands amidst the Hills on the banks of the River Peltaw, at the di∣stance of 15 Polish Miles from Mount-Krempak to the North, and as many from Premiflaw to the East, as also 30 from Caminiec, 40 from Cracow, and about 50 from Warsaw to the South-East. It is a large City well forti∣fied with two Castles, viz. one erected within the Walls, and the other without, on a rising Ground that com∣mands the Town, which was first founded by Leo Duke of Russia, who flourish'd about A. D. 1280. The Me∣tropolitan See of Halitz was translated hither, and the Arch-Bishop is both Spiritual and Temporal Lord of the Diocess. The Armenian Roman Catholicks are likewise govern'd by a Primate of their Church. They have in∣habited here for a long time, and enjoy very great Pri∣vileges on the account of the considerable Commerce, which they maintain with the Persians and other Eastern People. A Russian Bishop depending on the Patriarch of Constantinople, resides in like manner in this City, and Michael Wisnowiski King of Poland died here A.D. 1673. The Cossacks under the Conduct of their General Chil∣nieck, laid Siege to Leopol, A. D. 1648, to no purpose, and the Turks made themselves Masters thereof in 1672, but it was soon after recover'd out of their hands. CAMIENIECK, Camenecia, Camenecium aut Came∣necum, is situated in the Confines of Valachia, on the Top of a Mountain, and is almost emcompass'd with the Smotrzick, which a little below falls into the Niester. The Citadel is likewise built on an adjacent Rock, and Commands the Town; its Avenue being cover'd with a Horn-work, which is separated from the Body of the Place by a deep Moat. It is distant 15 Polish Miles from Bar to the West, 30 from Leopol, or Lemburg, 36 from Jassy, 70 from Kiow, 80 from Warsaw, and about 170 from Constantinople. This strong City, which is the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Leopol, was very much ruin'd by a Fire which broke forth therein, A. D. 1669, and hath been often in vain attackt by the Turks and Tartars, until at length it fell into the hands of the former in 1672, and is still possess'd by those In∣fidels. It was blockt up by Motula, General of the Cos∣sacks, in the Month of April 1687, and the Polanders made Preparations to join his Troops in September, but they were both oblig'd to retire upon the approach of the Ottoman Forces. Afterward another Blockade was form'd by the Polish Army in 1688, the next year they actually invested the Place, and began a formal Attack on the 20th Day of August, but the Siege was rais'd in September following. LƲTZKO, Luceoria, the Metropolis of the Pala∣tinate of Volhinia, stands on the banks of the River Ster, near a Lake which covers part of the Castle, scarcely 7 Polish Miles from the Frontiers of Red-Russia to th East, and 25 from Leopol to the North-east. It is a large City, and bears the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Me∣tropolitan of Gnesna, but is chiefly inhabited by Jews, Armenians, and other Eastern People that Traffick throughout these Countries. BRACLAW, Braclavia is seated on the River Bog, 110 Miles from Camieniec to the East, 55 from Bar, and 50 from the Confines of Valachia to the North to∣ward Kiow. It was taken and miserably laid waste by the Turks, A. D. 1672. KIOW, Kijovia, Chiovia aut Kisovia, or Kiouf, ac∣cording to the Pronunciation of the Inhabitants, is wa∣ter'd by the Boristhenes or Nieper, and fortified with a Castle, Trench, and some other regular Works. But old Kiow was situated upon a Hill a little beyond the Ri∣ver, where are still to be seen the ruins of many Arhes▪ high Walls, Churches and burying places of divers Kings with Greek Inscriptions. Of the Churches, two remain in tolerable good Condition, viz. those of St. So∣phia and St. Michael. The Walls of the former are li∣ned
with curious Mosaick-work, the Vault consisting of Earthen-pots well cemented and fill'd with Mortar, but St. Michaels's Church is chiefly remarkable for its gild∣ed Roof. Indeed Kiow was heretofore a very large mag∣nificent City, as it appears from the ruins of the Walls which are extended almost 8 Miles in compass, and a stately Church appertaining at present to a Grecian Arch-Bishop. It was at first founded by a certain Russian Prince, named Kius, A.C. 861. and constituted the Me∣tropolis of Tauro-Scythia: Then it became the Seat of the Russian Empire, and was afterward govern'd by its own Princes. It was storm'd and pillag'd by the Tartars, A.D. 1615, and has ever since declin'd from its ancient Grandeur. It hath been also often taken and re-gain'd within the space of 30 Years, but now remains in the Possession of the Grand Duke of Moscovy, to whom it was lately pawn'd by the Cossacks. The Episcopal See of Kiow is subject to the Metropolitan of Leopol, and the City is distant 40 Polish Miles from the Frontiers of Moscovy to the West, 70 from Camieniec, and about 100 from Warsaw. About half a League from hence in the Village of Piecharre, stands a noble Monastery, the Re∣sidence of the Patriarch, and under the adjacent Moun∣tain are divers Grotto's or Caverns dug like Mines, wherein are preserv'd a great number of Human Bodies still entire, that were buried very many years ago, being neither so black nor hard as Mummies; among these, two Princes in the same Habit they wore when living, are shewn to Travellers by the Russian Monks. The place where these Sepulchres are made, is a sandy Stone very dry, and seems to be of the same nature as the Cata∣combs at Rome. BELZKO, Belzium, the principal Town of the Palatinate of the same name, is built altogether of Tim∣ber in the midst of the Marshes between Leopol and Za∣moski, about 5 Miles from the River Bog. CHELM, Chelma is a small Town defended with a Castle, the Out-works whereof are made of Wood, about 10 Miles from Lublin to the East, 24 from Pre∣mislaw to the North, and 12 from Belzko. It hath been sackt and burnt by the Moscovites and Tartars during the late Wars, and its Episcopal See under the Metro∣politan of Leopol is translated to Cranostaw, a pleasant Town distant only 5 Miles from hence, and seated on the River Wiprecz; nevertheless an Oriental Bishop as yet resides at Chelm. SECT. V. The Grand Dutchy of LITHUANIA, Ducatus Lithuaniae. LITHƲANIA, call'd Litwa by the Inhabitants, and Litewski by the Polanders, lies between Moscovy on the East, Livonia and the Baltick Sea on the North, Masovia and Poland proper on the West, and Podolia on the South, being extended 260 German Miles in length, that is to say, from the River Polota in the Confines of Livonia and Moscovy, as far as the Town of Dassow to∣ward the Euxine Sea, and 80 in breadth, between the River Niemen or Memel and the Nieper. It is a flat Country beset with a great number of Woods, Forests and Marshes, that afford great quantities of Honey, Pitch, Tar and Timber, with good store of Fish; but the Air is unhealthly, which renders many places little inhabited and almost desert. This large Province hath been possess'd at several times by different Princes and Dukes, and after divers Revolutions was inseparably united to the Kingdom of Poland, under the Reign of Sigismund Augustus, by a Diet held at Lublin, A.D. 1569. However it retains its own peculiar Laws and Privi∣leges, and constitutes a part of the Common-wealth, so that no important Affairs can be transcted without the concurrence of these States, which are usually divided into two large parts, viz. Those of Lithuania properly so called, and those of Lithuanick Russia. Within these two Provinces, are also compris'd many Palatinates, as it appears from the ensuing Table. Lithuania, divided into 2 Provinces, viz 1. Lithuania proper, in 3 Palatinates. 1. Of Vilna, in which are, Vilna, Bish. Cap. Wilkomitoz, Dusiasy. Osmiana, 2. Of Troki, in which are, Troki, Cap. Couno, Grodno, Mereck. Lida, 3. Of Briescia, or Polesia, in which are, Briescia, Pinsko, Caminiec, Koden, Zunia, Dubruvica, Kolno, Tarow, Davidow, Horodach. Motol, Pohost, 2. Lithuanick Russia, in 7 Palatinates. 1. Of Novogrodek, in which are, Novogrodek, Cap. Slonim, Miss, Lacowisk. Wolkowiska, 2. Of Minski, in which are, Minski, Cap. Zuislocs. Boriisow, 3. Of Poloco, or Poloczk, in which are, Poloco, Cap. Wielisk, Drissa, Drina, Cosian. Ʋsalza, 4. Of Witebsko, in which are, Witebsko, Cap. Surass, Sussa, Kzanislaw, Woronocz. Ʋla, 5. Of Mscislaw, in which are, Mscislaw, Cap. Modzic, Mehilow, Mazy, Bichow, Rzeczica, Roaczow. Orssa, Bobroisko. 6. Of Zlucz, in which are. Zlucz, Cap. Petrilow, Krodano. Laban, 7. Of Braslaw, in which are, Braslaw, Cap. Miadzial. Nawcz, VILNA, Vilna, called also Vilenski by the Inhabi∣tants, and Wildaw, or Die Wilde by the Germans, is si∣tuated near the Confluence of the Rivers Wilia & Wiln, from whence its name is deriv'd, at the distance of 130 Polish Miles from Cracow to the North-east, 48 from Riga to the South, 70 from Warsaw, and 100 from Smolensko to the West. It is a large and very populous City, and was founded by Gediminus, Grand Duke of Lithuania, A.D. 1305, but the Houses are generally low and mean, all built of Wood, excepting the Palace and Castle. How∣ever the greater part of the Churches are of Stone, as are also some of the foreign Merchants Houses, particularly a neat Structure ercted by the Moscovian Company, for a Repositoy of Furs, Ermins, and other rich Merchandise brought from Moscow. In the Grand Duke's Palace is a Guard-Chamber, furnisht with all sorts of Arms, and a∣bout two English Miles from Vilna stands another Du∣cal
Palace, call'd from its Situation Wersupa, i. e. near the Water. It is entirely built with Wood, and beauti∣fy'd with a Park, pleasant Gardens, Orchards, &c. Vilna is dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of Gnesna, and an University founded by King Stephen, in 1579. The Moscovites found means to make themselves Masters of this City, A. D. 1655, but it was afterward recover'd by the Polanders, and is as yet subject to their dominion. TROKI, Troccum aut Trocum, is seated on a point of Land that shoots forth into a Lake about four Miles from Vilna to the West, being encompass'd on one side with the River Brazala, & defended on the other with a strong Fortress, erected in the midst of the Lake. Ge∣diminus, Grand Duke of Lithuania, laid the Foundation of this Town, and kept his Court there for some time; but it was storm'd, pillag'd, and set on fire by the Mos∣covites, in 1655. BRIESCIE, Brescium aut Brescia, a small Town, nevertheless the Capital of Polesia, stands on the banks of the River Bug, and is guarded with a Castle built on the Top of a steep Rock, being distant 25 Miles from Lublin, and 30 from Warsaw to the East. SECT. VI. SAMOGITIA, Samogitia, and CUR∣LAND, Curlandia. SAMOGITIA takes its name from its Situation, which is low and wet, Samogitz in the Language of the Inhabitants denoting a marshy Ground, whence it is call'd Samozkasemla by the Moscovites. It is bounded on the North by Curland, on the South by Ducal Prussia on the East by Lithuania, and on the West by the Baltick Sea. This Province is beset with Woods, Lakes, and inac∣cessible Mountains, yet affords great quantities of Ho∣ney, purer than any either in Lithuania or Liefland, and breeds Horses that are much admir'd for their Swift∣ness. It is divided into three Governments, which take their names from the like number of principal Towns, viz: 1. Rosienia on the River Dubiss, 2. Mednick, on the Wirwitz. 3. Ponieviess. Here is also establish'd the See of a Prelate, who is Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Gnesna, and resides for the most part at Mednick, or Wo∣miz; nevertheless many of the Inhabitants, who differ little in Manners, Habit or Language from the Lithua∣nians, are much addicted to Idolatrous Superstitions, especially in the desert parts of this Country, where they worship a four-footed Serpent, about three Hands long, under the name of Givosit; and you'll scarce find a Fa∣mily without one of these Lares or Houshold Gods; nay even at this day in many Villages, both of Lithua∣nia and Prussia, the poor Peasants, altho' profest Chri∣stians, keep Adders in their Houses, whereto they pay a more than Ordinary Veneration, imagining that some great Mishief will befal them if these domestick Idols should take any harm. The Dutchy of CURLAND has the Gulph of Riga for its Northen Bounds, Samogitia on the South, Semi∣gallia on the East, and the Baltick Sea on the West. SEMIGALLIA is a Territory depending on the Dutchy of Curland, from whence it is separated to the East by the River Musza. The Duke of Curland is not so absolute a Sovereign in his Dominions, as the Princes of the Empire; for the Noble-men in like manner enjoy many Privileges that render them very potent. The Pro∣vinces of Curland and Semigallia, are under the Dire∣ction of the Council of State, consisting of a Governor, a Burgrave, a Chancellor and a Marshal, who are the Prince's chief Officers. The Administration of Justice is perform'd in divers Courts, from which an Appeal lies to the Duke's Council, as also from thence to that of the King of Poland, as supreme Lord of the Fee. Samogitia divided into Three Parts, viz. 1. Samogitia, in which are these Towns, viz. Rosienia, Cap. Mednick, Bish. Vielona, Villeja, Fragola, Patagen, Kroze, Brisa, Dutchy. Sarlat, Swieta, Schwndon, Kieydani, Ponieviess. 2. Curland, in which are, Goldingen, Cap. Liba, Erwalen, Window, Bish. Piltin, Angermund. 3. Semigallia, in which are, Mitaw, Cap. Doblin, Ratziwiliski, Selburg, Bauske. ROSIENIA, Rosienia is a small and ill built Town, altho' the chief of the Province of Samogitia, being seat∣ed on the Dubiss, at the distance of 12 Polish Miles from Cowno to the North, 30 from Riga, and 27 from Vilna to the West. GOLDINGEN, Goldinga stands on the banks of the River Wete, about 7 German Miles from Windaw to the West, and 15 from Mittaw. MITTAW, Mittavia aut Muttovia, the principal Town of Semigallia, and the usual place of residence of the Dukes of Curland, is water'd by the River Musza, and adorn'd with a stately well fortified Castle, being distant 6 Polish Miles from Riga to the South, and only 4 from the Frontiers of Samogitia. It hath been twice taken of late by the Swedes, but was afterward re-gain'd, and is as yet subject to the Jurisdiction of the Duke of the Family of Ketler A TABLE, shewing the Chronological Succession of the Dukes, Princes and Kings of Poland. XV. Dukes or Princes of Poland.   A. C.   1. Leschus I. 550 died without issue. 2. Cracus 700   3. Lechus slain by his Brother.     4. Cracus II.   Years. 5. Venda daughter of Cracus. 750 Reigned 10 6. Lechus II. 760 44 7. Lechus III. 804 6 8. Lechus or Leschus IV. 810 5 9. Popiel I. 815 8 10. Popiel I. sir-nam'd Bald-head. 823 Reigned 1 11. Piastus. 842 19 12. Zremovitus. 861 32 13. Leschus. V. 892 21 14. Zremonislus, or Ziemo∣vislaus. 913 51 13. Micislaus, or Miesko, first Christian Prince of Poland. 994 35
Kings of Poland.   A. C.   Years. 16. Bolislaus, sir-nam'd Choribius 999 Reign'd 25 17. Micislaus II. 1025   9 18. Casimir I. 1034   25 19. Boleslaus II. the Hardy and the Cruel. 1059   22 20. Ladislaus, or Ʋladislaus I. 1082   20 21. Bolislaus III, the Wry-lipt. 1102   57 22. Ʋladislaus II. 1139   7 23. Boleslaus IV, the Frisled. 1146   27 24. Micislaus III, the Old. 1173   4 25. Casimir II, the Just. 1177   17 26. Leschus V, White. 1149   8 27. Ladislaus III, Gross-legs. 1202   4 28. Leschus VI, re-establish'd. 1206   20 29. Boleslaus V, the Chaste. 1226   53 30. Leschus VI, the Black. 1279   10 31. Boleslaus Duke of Massovia.   2 Regents. 48 32. Henry Duke of Ʋratislavia.   33. Primislaus King. 1295 8 Months.   34. Ladislaus III. 1296   4 35. Wenceslaus King of Bohe∣mia. 1300   5 36. Ladislaus III, re-establish'd 1305 Reign'd 28 37. Casimir III, the Great. 1333   37 38. Lewes King of Hungary. 1370   12 39. Hedwigia married to Jage∣lon Duke of Lithuania, or Ladislaus IV. 1382   4 40. Ladislaus IV. 1386   48 41. Ladislaus V. K. of Hungary 1434   10 42. Casimir IV. 1444   48 43. John Albert. 1492   9 44. Alexander. 1501   5 45. Sigismund I. 1506   42 46. Sigismund II, Augustus. 1548   24 47. Henry of France Duke of Anjou. 1573 5 Months.   48. Stephen Bathori, Prince of Transylvania. 1575   11 49. Maximilian of Austria, elected by some Polanders, and afterward defeated. 1587     50. Sigismund III. K. of Sweden. 1587   45 51. Ladislaus Sigismund. 1632   15 52. John Casimir. 1648   20 53. Michael Koribut Wiesnowiski 1669   4 54. John Sobieski. 1674 Reigning.   CHAP. XII. MOSCOVY or White RUSSIA, Moscovia aut Alba Russia. MOSCOVY, otherwise call'd White RƲSSIA, or Great RƲSSIA, is a part of ancient European Sarmatia, and takes its name from the River Moska, or the principal City of Moscow, altho' some make no difficulty to deduce its original from Mesech or Mo∣soc the Son of Japhet, suppos'd to have first peopled this large Country, which is bounded on the North by the frozen Sea or Northern Ocean, on the South by the Les∣ser Tartary, and the River Tanais or Don, on the East by Great Tartary, and on the West by the Dominions of the Kings of Poland and Sweden. It is extended from the 46th to the 66 deg. of Lat. about 1260 English Miles, that is say, from Astracan to the Streight of Waygatz, and from the 55 to the 80 deg. of Long. near 1500 of the same Miles, from the River Boristhenes or Nieper to the Volga, altho' some other parts of the Grand Czar's Empire lie more South, and others more North, so that of necessity there must be a very great difference as to the length of days, heat and cold, and consequently no less variety of Seasons, Soil, Fruits, &c. according to the several Climates under which the particular quarters of this vast Continent are situated. But the Air is general∣ly excessive Cold, more especially toward the North, in∣somuch that Snow and Ice are seen in many places du∣ring 9 or 10 Months of the year, where the Water free∣zes in falling, and the Earth often chops, (as sometime with us in the most vehement drought of Summer) even into clefts above 20 Fathoms long, & a Foot broad, the Frosts commonly beginning in November, and not break∣ing up till April. But it has been often observ'd by Stran∣gers, that almost as soon as the Snow is gone the Fields become green, and Plants spring much faster than in o∣ther places, where their natural force and vigour has not been so long restrain'd by the coldness of the Season. The small quantity of Seed sown in this Country seldom or never comes to perfect Maturity, neither do any Vines grow therein; yet toward Poland the Soil is less unfruit∣ful, and brings forth good store of Corn, which is sown in May and June, and reap'd in July and August. And indeed, little time can be allow'd for Tillage by reason of the shortness of the Summer, the Heats whereof are here as intense and violent, for about a Month and half, as the Colds of the Winter, in regard that the Soil be∣ing for the most part Sandy, easily receives and strongly retains the Influence of the Sun-beams, that remain a long while above the Horizon, and are reflected by the whiteness of the Mountains. As for their Fruits, hey have of most sorts, as Apples, Pears, Plums, Chr∣ries, &c. but these are not so kindly, nor can be so long preserv'd as in other Countries where they grow and ripen slower; nevertheless all sorts of Berries, Herbs, Gourds, and other things of speedy growth, are very good and exceeding large, some Melons weighing near 40 pounds, among these most Authors make mention of a species call'd Boranetz, i. e. the little Lamb, by the Na∣tives, and by others Zoophyton, or the Animal Plant, which in shape resembles a Lamb, and with its extra∣ordinary heat consumes, and as it were eats up all the Grass round about within its reach; as the Fruit grows ripe its stalk or stump withers, and is cover'd with a downy or woolly skin, which being dress'd makes a good Fur-lining. These rare Plants are found near Sa∣mara, Astracan and Casan, and (as they say) are often devour'd by Wolves. The Plains are full of Mountains, and beset with Lakes, spacious Forests and Woods, which consist most of Firs and Birch-trees, that delight in sandy Ground; vast quantities of Honey are found in these Fo∣rests as well as variety of Game, as being well stockt with divers sorts of Beasts, viz. Elks, wild Bulls, Boars, Bears of a prodigious size, both white and black, Wolves, Horses, which tho' small, are strong, couragious, and very serviceable, Cows, Goats, Sheep, Fallow-Deer, and Ro∣bucks; besides these many others are hunted only for their Skins, as Wolverines or Wood-dogs, Beavers, Ounces, Ly∣serns,
map of Muscovy THE EMPIRE OF MOSCOVY Sables, Martrons, black, dun, red and white Foxes, Gurnstals, Lasets or Minevers, Water-rats, which smell like Musk, that in Winter change their colour into white as the Squirrils do into gray; insomuch that the Wealth of the Russians seems to consist chiefly in Furs, which are indeed the richest of any throughout the whole Continent of Europe, and make the greatest Traffick, since the yearly income arising from the Sale of them to Strangers a∣mounts to a Million of Rubbles, besides what is given to the Grand Czar by way of Tribute. There is also so great abundance of Fowl, that the People scarce think it worth their pains to catch the smaller sorts, as Thrushes, Starlings, Fieldfares, &c. The Birds of prey are excellent of divers kinds, among which Gerfalcons are e∣steem'd the best; some of these are white, being much valu'd for their rarity, & reputed fit Presents for Princes. The most remarkable LAKES of this Country are 1. Ivanosera, i. e. John's Lake, which is situated in the great Forest of Epiphanow, in the Province of Resan, 8 Leagues from Tula, and extends it self near 500 Versts or Italian Miles in length. 2. Bieleiosera, 16 Leagues long, 12 broad, and 44 in compass. 3. Ilmin or Ilmen, which is 12 Leagues long, as many broad, and ends about two Miles above Novogrod Veliki. 4. Ladoga, or La∣duga, about 100 Leagues long and 60 broad, being full of Islands and well stor'd with Fish. 5. Onega, which takes up 48 Leagues in length, 16 in breadth, & 100 in circuit. These 2 last Lakes lie toward the West on the confines of Finland. The principal Rivers, which for the most part take their original from Lakes, are these, &c. 1. The Volga or Wolga, one of the largest Rivers in Europe springs out of the Lake of Fornow in the Forest of Volkowski, and about 2 Miles farther runs into that of Volga, from whence its name its name is deriv'd, having been anciently call'd Rha, and at present Edel by the Tartars; then flowing from West to East, as far as the Kingdom of Cazan, and traversing those of Bulgar and Astracan it divides it self into many Arms, and forms divers Islands before its fall into the Caspian Sea. 2. The Don heretofore well known by the name of Tandis, 3. The Dwina, i. e. Twain or Two, ac∣cording to the Signification of its name, is so call'd as be∣ing the Confluence of 2 Rivers, viz. Jug and Sachona, or Suchona, 4. The Oby, which crosseth the Deserts of Tar∣tary from South to North-west, having serv'd as a boun∣dary between that Country and Moscovy, at last empties it self into the Tartarian or frozen Sea. The Moscovites are generally of a strong vigorous and healthful Constitution, content with little Food, and all, except Persons of great quality, have no other Beds than Benches rais'd a little above the ground. But their Manners (if we may give credit to the relations of most Writers) are very immoral and irregular; for they are censur'd as ignorant, mistrustful, treacherous, cruel, much addicted to excess in Drinking, and often transported with brutish Passion. Fraud and Deceit in the way of dealing is among them esteem'd a mark of Ingenuity; yet Robbery is most severely punisht as an enormous Crime. They are educated only to write, read, and cast
account, and those that are ordain'd for the Clergy to Sing. But they do not apply themselves to the study of other useful Arts and Sciences, neither do they by Books learn the Histories of other Nations, or former Times. However, no doubt, among the Gentry are very many Persons endu'd with Courage, Generosity, Prudence, and other good Qualifications; but it is difficult to come to the knowledge of their disposition, since they are not per∣mitted to converse or keep company with Foreigners, no not so much as with the Ambassadors of other States. A∣mong other Customs peculiar to this Nation, it has been observ'd, that the Boiars or Noble-men affect to appear with gross Bellies, and such an habit of body seems to be esteem'd by them as it were an essential Character of No∣bility. Their LANGUAGE is deriv'd from the Sclavo∣nian, and comes so near the Polish, Lithuanian, Cassubian, Vandalian, as also those of Bohemia, Dalmatia, Bulgaria and Croatia, that the People of all these Nations can find means to undrstand and converse one with another. The Christian Religion was planted early among the Russians or Moscovites, and (as they say) by St. Andrew, but afterward entirely abolisht, or at least much supprest by the Invasion of the Tartars, until it was restor'd as some say A.C. 960, others in 987, or 989. However it is generally believ'd they were Christians in the time of Volodomir; their first grand Duke; & that they follow'd the Greek Church, as they still do, in most of their opinions and Ex∣clesiastical Rites, without acknowledging any dependence on the Patriarch of Constantinople, since they have esta∣blisht one of their own Sect at Moscow, to whose Jurisdi∣ction 4 Arch-bishops are subject; the first usually resides at Novgrad-Veliki, the 2 at Rostow, the 3 at Cazan, and the 4th in the Castle of Moscow. This last is the Patriarch's Deputy or Coadjutor, when he is hindred from officia∣ting by Sickness, infirmity of old Age, or some other good cause. Besides these Metropolitans there are 7 other Arch∣bishops whose Sees are Wologda, Rezan, Susdal, Trúere, To∣bolsk, Astraean and Pleskow, together with one single Bi∣shop of Comenskoy and Cassieskoy, residing at Columna. St. Nicholas is the chief Patron of the Country, but of all the Festivals, that of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary is here celebrated with greatest solemnity. The Russians are zealous maintainers of their Doctrins and Ceremo∣nies, accounting many things and persons unclean, even Christians of another Persuasion; bear a great aversion to Roman Catholicks, yet tolerate Lutherans and Calvinists; but toward the Frontiers of Tartary the Inhabitants are Idolaters or Mahometans. There is a great number of Monasteries in these Territories, and some very rich, but all of one Order, that is, of St. Basil; some of their Gover∣nors have the Title of Archi-Mandritae, or Abbots, but most that of Igumeni, or Priors. The State of Moscovy is entirely Monarchical, go∣vern'd by a Prince who is usually styl'd Czar, that is to say, Emperor and Grand Duke or King, as is exprest in the Russ Language. The Monarchy is absolute and He∣reditary, so that whensoever the Gr. Duke dies without issue, his nearest Kinsman is plac'd on the Throne. His Coat of Arms is an Eagle with two Heads, bearing 3 Crowns. This Monarch has an uncontrollable power of life and death over his Subjects, and to him alone seems to appertain a right of knowing every thing; on which account to hinder all Persons from penetrating into his secret Councils, he has banisht the liberal Sciences out of his dominions, & prohibits the study of them under severe penalties. The Noble-men are not permitted to retire from Court without his leave, nor at any time to depart out of the limits of the Empire, lest they should become too polite by their Conversation with foreign Gentry. However the Czar does not transact any important Af∣fairs without assistance of his great Council, which is compos'd of the principal Lords of the Court, call'd Dum∣noy Boyaren (altho' indeed he gives the honorary Title of Councellors to many who never come to consult) some Gentlemen of his Bed-chamber, other Officers of State▪ & 3 Grand Chancellors chosen from among the Burghers. In this Council are dispatch'd all Negociations both Do∣mestick and Foreign. The Czar has likewise (as most o∣ther Princes) a Cabinet Council, with whom he first ad∣viseth, and prepares business for the great Council, who for the most part assemble rather to consent and ratify the Resolves, than to debate, give their opinion or posi∣tively determine any Affairs. Besides these there are many other Chambers, Courts of Judicature or Councils (as they are call'd in some Kingdoms) but the chief are 6, to every one whereof their several businesses are appro∣priated. The first is for Ambassadors and foreign Nego∣ciations. The 2 for Military Affas▪ The 3 for the De∣means and Revenues of the Crown. The 4th for Trade and Merchandise. The 5th for determination of Civil Causes. The 6th for criminal matters. Every Court has its President, Councellors, Secretaries, &c. as it is in usual other Countries, but all the Records are written on large Rolls, after the ancient manner, sometimes 30 or 40 Ells long, whereof vast heaps are orderly laid up in the respe∣ctive Offices. The Emperor's Revenues are doubtless very great, tho' no Nation in the World is so averse from dis∣covering their publick Treasure. The Crown-lands which contain 36 Towns with their Territories bring in a con∣siderable yearly Income. The Customs upon Commodities in all principal Towns are farm'd out, & those of Arch∣angel (as some say) have amounted to 600000 Rubbles per Annum, besides the Tagla or Imposition on every measure of Grain that grows within the Empire, and the Podat or Tax of Money on every Town and Precinct that yields one year with another 400000 Rubbles. There are other great Revenues which arise from Merchandises. For the profits arising from the Sale of Caviare and Isinglass, wholly belongs to the Czar, as also all Sables, the best Trade of the Nation, appertain to him, either as Tribute, or at a low set rate. But as the Re∣venues of this Monarch amount to a vast Sum, so his Expences are in like manner very considerable; his Houshold consisting at least of 1000 Persons maintain'd by him, besides his Guards at Moscow, 16000 Musque∣teers, and about 3000 Horse, his Garisons on the Frontiers, charges defray'd in making Peace with the Tartars, pay∣ing the Salleries of Magistrates and Officers, entertaining Ambassadors, dispatching Posts, Messengrs, Carriages, &c. As for the Strength of this Nation, an Army of 300000 Men may be levy'd within a little space of time, but they are for the most part only a raw kind of Militia, without Discipline or Order; the Grand Duke always maintains one of 40000 for his Guard, call'd Strelitz, whereof near half attend on his Person, and the rest are sent to the Frontiers. The command of these Forces is given to Persons of quality, without any respect to merit, insomuch that the Generals are often unexperienc'd in Military Affairs, and act with ill success; all the subal∣ternate Officers are Foreigners, but these are often re∣mov'd to different stations. The Moscovites are acknow∣ledg'd to be much better at maintaining their Post, ei∣ther in Towns or Forts, that at fighting a pitch'd Battel in open field, to the enduring of which Fatigues they are dispos'd by their frequent fasting, slender diet, and being inur'd to hardship from their very youth. The Czar takes care to establish an Alliance with the neighboring Princes, as it seems, to be most for his advantage; For he adheres to the King of Persia against the Turks their commmon Enemy, preserves an amicable Correspon∣dence with the Swedes, and enters into new Leagues with the Polanders, when it is requisite to denounce War against the Tartars. Moscovy is divided into 3 Regions or large Provinces, viz. the Nrothern toward the River Dwina, the Southern toward the Wolga, and the Eastern in Asiatick Tartary. The first of these is likewise subdivided into two parts,
one of which borders on Sweden, and the other on Tar∣tary; the second includes many Provinces, and in the third are compris'd 3 Kingdoms, some Provinces, and divers sorts of People, as it may be more distinctly ob∣serv'd in the ensuing Table. 1. Northern Moscovy bordering on Sweden, divided into 7 parts, viz. 1. Moscovitish Lapland into Pr. Moureman∣kois, Kola, Cap. Swanehel, Pr. Terskoi, Jokena, Cap. Polin-osero, Pr. Bellamo∣resko. Kandulaz, Cap. Ombay, Kemi. 2. Dwina, in wch. are these Towns, viz. S. Mich. Archan∣gel, Arch-b. C. S. Nicolas. Dwina, Korela, Candenos Isle. Lapas, 3. Pleskow. Pleskow, Cap. Opolsko. Ostrow, 4. Kargapol. Kargapol. 5. Wologda. Wologda, Cap. Strelitz. Socsoa, 6. Novogorod Veliki. Novogorod Veli∣ki, Cap. Ladoga. St. Nicholas, 7. Bieleia-osera Stara Russo, Bieleia-osera, C. Glebowa, Grodsesko. 2. Northern Moscovy bordering on Tartary, divided into 19 parts, viz. 1. Candora. Wergaturia, C. Recounitza, Ouswina, Seregovia. 2. Juhora, or Juhorski. Juhora, Cap. Kolgoy, Island. 3. New—Hol∣land over a∣gainst the Streight of Nassaw, or Weiguten. 4. Petzora. Petzora, Cap. Papinowgorod. 5. Obdora. Pohem, Cap. Olscoigorod. Padaritza, 6. Ustioug. Ʋstioug, Cap. Dobrina. Kollas, 7. Perniski. Pernieveliki, Soilcomza. Ousgi, 8. Wialka. Wialka, Cap. Slawoda. Orlof-Chlinef, 9. Wachines. Cameni, Fort, Cap. Perwolog, Fort. 11. Bielski D. Bielka, or Bielski. 12. Smolensko D Smolensko, Cap. Niewielz. Drogobusc, 13. Severia, D. or Novogorod, Sewierski. Novogorod-Sew, Cap. Bransko, Czerentshaw. 14. Part of the Palatinate of Kiow. Kiow, Bish. Kaniow. 15. Kraina, D. Jalatz, Cap. Brasowa. 16. Pole. Bretoek. Boegoenar. 17. Czeremissi, Logowai. Zochloma. Three different sorts of People. 18. Czeremissi, Nagornow. Arbachim. Three different sorts of People. 19. Morduates. Adima. Three different sorts of People. Southern Moscovy in 10 Provinces, 1. Moscovy proper. Moskow, Patr. Cap. Mosaiski, Preski. Columna, Bish. 2. Werotin D. Werotin, Cap. Aroel. Croom, 3. Rezan D. Rezan, Arch-b. Cap. Domkagorod, Kereslaw. 4. Wolodi. D. Wolodimer, Cap Cassimogorod. Murom, 5. Nisi-Novo∣gorod. Nisi-Novogorod, Cap. Wesiligorod, Balagna. 6. Jaroslaw D. Jaroslaw, Cap. Nova-Roma. Ribiena, 7. Sasdel D. Sasdel, Arch-b. Cap. Jorgowitz, Castromow. 8. Rostow D. Rostow, Metrop. Cap. Ʋglitz, Pereslaw. 9. Twere D. Twere, Arch-b. Cap. Mitrow, Tersach. 10. Reskow D. Reskow, Woloczk. Moscovitish Tartary, in 9 parts. 1. Astracan Kingdom. Astracan, Arch-b. Cap. Ichkebre, Sarasof, Poloy, Fort. Zaniza, 2. Bulgar Kingdom. Bulgar, Cap. Samara, Simber Kogora. 3. Cazan Kingdom. Cazan, Metr. C. Sara, Belater, Malmisch, Keschkaga. Allatur. 4. Siberia. Tobolsk, Arch-b. Cap. Japharin, Peyassa, Narinskoya, Bereswa. Tume, Pollin, 5. Lucomoria. Comgoscoia, Cap. Solscoigorod. 6. Loppia. Bosovia, Cap. Zergolta, Tasofcoigorod. Tooma, 7. Pegahorda. Pascarti, Cap. 8. Zavalha∣hordo. Veliki-Permia, Cap. 9. Eight several sorts of Peo∣ple. Samoyades Tingoeses, Justiouski, Calami, Hugrurski, Tartares-Cornuti. Vogulici, Scibanski, ARCHANGEL, or S. MICHAEL ARCHANGEL, Archangelopolis, aut Fanum S. Archangeli, stands on the East side of the bank of the River Dwina, which divi∣ded into branches, forms the Island of Podesemskie, and afterward dischargeth its Waters into the Northern O∣cean, or White Sea, at the distance of 6 German Miles from thence. This City is the See of an Arch-Bishop, and very famous for its Traffick, as being the Staple of the whole Continent of Moscovy, by reason of its capa∣cious and safe Harbor. The English first began to esta∣blish a Commerce in these parts, in 1553. For Sir Hugh Willoughby, having receiv'd a Commission about that
time to discover the North-East Passage to China, Rich∣ard Chancellor, Master of one of the Ships, was separa∣ted from the Fleet, and accidentally fell into the Bay of St. Nicolas, where he was very well receiv'd, and sent for thence to the Court of the Emperor, Jvan Vasilowich, or John Basilides, who entertain'd him with all imagin∣able kindness, and gave the English free liberty to Trade in his Dominions, insomuch that in 1555, a Company of Merchants was settled there, under Mr. George Killing∣worth, and divers Privileges were granted to them, in 1655, which were from time to time renew'd and aug∣mented, or sometimes ebb'd and flow'd according to the Interest or Capricio of the Grand Czar. The Moscovian Trade was heretofore maintain'd, by passing thro' the Sound to Narva, but this Road is now altogether aban∣don'd, as inconvenient on the account of the great num∣ber of Impositions there exacted. In the Port of Arch∣angel sometimes are to be seen 300 or 400 Vessels of a large size, laden with all sorts of Merchandises, that ar∣rive from Sweden, Denmark, Holland & England. It is also reported that the Custom arising from the Importation and Exportation of Goods, amounts every Year to the Sum of 600000 Crowns. Indeed the City is not very large, yet extremely populous by reason of the concourse of People that resort thither to Trade with the English and Hollanders; but it was burnt and almost reduc'd to Ashes, A. D. 1663. The Castle was built in 1506, and the Town became a Mart about 1591; the road for Ships being at St. Nicolas in Rose-Island, at the Staple at Colmogro, which was the ancient name of this place. MOSCOW, Moscha, aut Moscua, the Capital City of Moscovy, and the usual place of residence of the Gr. Duke or Czar, is water'd with the Streams of the Mosk∣wa, Neglina, and some other Rivers, being distant 170 Miles from the Frontiers of Lithuania to the East, as al∣so 54 Polish Miles from Smolensko, 250 from Belgrade to the North-east, 280 from Nisi-Novogorod to the South-west, and 370 from Novogorod-Veliki to the South-east. It is built almost in a round form, extending it self 3 German Miles in compass, and divided into four parts, every one of which is encompass'd with a Wall: The innermost, or middle part, is call'd Cataygorod, or Mid-City, because seated amidst the others, but it is sepa∣rated from them by a Brick Wall: In this quarter stands the Royal Castle, which bears the name of Krem∣lenagorod, and is fortified with three strong Walls and a deep Ditch, being also adorn'd with two Towers, in one whereof hangs a Bell weighing 33600 pounds. Within the same precinct are likewise enclos'd the Court of Exchequer, and Magazine of Powder, two Pa∣laces of the Grand Dukes, viz. one of Stone, another of Timber, two fair Monasteries, 5 Churches and Chap∣pels all built with Free-stone. In that of St. Michael are the Sepulchres and Tombs of the Grand Czars or Em∣perors of Moscovy, & at the Castle-gate is another Church call'd Jerusalem, which seem'd to be so magnificent to John Basilides, that the Architect's Eyes were put out by his order, that he might never perform the like Un∣dertaking. Before the Castle is a spacious Market-place where every Trade has a separate Station. The second quarter that environs the others, as it were a Semi-circle on the Eastern, Northern and Western sides, is term'd Czargorod, that is to say, the Imperial Town, and wall'd round about with Stone. Here is the Arsenal and the Apartments of the Work-men in Metal, as Bell-foun∣ders, Casters of Cannon, &c. The third quarter is the Skorodom, on the North-west side of the other; the Ri∣ver Jagasa runs thro' it, and here is the Market for Horses, Timber, &c. The fourth quarter is the Strelitza Slaboda, defended with a wooden Wall or Rampart, be∣ing properly the station of the Strelitz, or Soldiers of the Prince's Guard. The Houses here, as also generally throughout the whole Empire of Moscovy, are built with Fir-Timber, not above two, or at most three sto∣ries high, but the Streets are broad, tho' very dirty, and adorn'd with Gardens. There are also divers Palaces, and a great number of Churches and Chappels, even to the number of 2000, together with two Forts erected by certain Italian Ingineers, according to the Model of that of Milan. Moreover Moscow, which seems rather to be an heap of several Towns, than a City, hereto∣fore included above 40000 Houses within its Walls, but its largeness hath been much diminish'd by divers Accidents: For it was taken and almost intirely burnt by the Precopian-Tartars, A. D. 1572. The Polanders found means to make themselves Masters thereof, in 1611, and it suffer'd very great damage by a terrible Conflagration that happen'd there A. D. 1660. But it hath been since well repair'd, and its Grandeur is daily augmented. A great number of Grecians, Persians, and especially Tartars, have their Habitation here as well as the Natives, but the Greeks are chiefly caress'd as most agreeing with the Russes in matters of Religion. The Lutherans also and other Protestants are well re∣ceiv'd, and have liberty publickly to exercise their Re∣ligion, which is not allow'd to the Roman Catholick; neither are any Jews suffer'd to reside in the City. COLƲMNA, Columna is a very fair City in the Province of Moscovy, properly so call'd, encompass'd with a Wall, and dignified with the Title of an Epis∣copal See, being seated on the Moska, one League above the Confluence of this River, and that of the Occa, as also 26 from the City of Moskow to the East, according to the report of Adam Olearius, who lately survey d those parts. A Chronological-Table, shewing the Succession of the Grand Dukes or Czars of MOSCOVY.   A. C. 1. Wolodomir-Basil I. the Son of Steslaus, converted to the Christian Faith, in 998 2. Joreslaus.   3. Wzewold▪   4. Wolodomir II.   5. Wzewold II.   An Interruption of 7 other Princes, whose names are unknown to us. 13. George I.   14. Demetrius I.   15. George II. slain by Batus, King of Tartars, in 1237 16. Iroslaus the Brother of George II.   17. Alexander.   18. Daniel.   19. John I. sir-nam'd Caleta.   20. Simeon.   21. John II.   22. Demetrius II. Liv'd in 1400 23. George III.   24. Basil, III.   25. John Basilides I. the Great.   26. Basil IV. died in 1533 27. John Basilides II. Died in 1584 28. Theodorus, Died in 1598 29. Borius, or Boritz-Hodrinus.   30. Basil John Swiski, was taken Prisoner by the Polanders, in 1600 31. Ladislaus, a Polander, expell'd.   32. Michael Federowitz, Died in 164 33. Alexis Michael, or Michalouk, Died in 1676 34. Alexis II. Now Reigning.
HUNGARY, Hungaria. map of Hungary HUNGARY THIS Kingdom, being part of the an∣cient Pannonia, is bounded on the North by Poland and Russia, on the South by Servia and Bosnia, on the East by Tran∣sylvania, and on the West by Austria, Moravia and Stiria. Its utmost extent from South to North, consists of 76 Leagues, from the 44th De∣gree 50 Minutes to the 49th Degree of Latitude, and about 100 from West to East, from the 39th Degree to the 47th of Longitude. The Air is not very healthful, and the Waters are cor∣rupted, except those of the Danaw; nevertheless, the Soil
is very fruitful in Corn and Fruits, affording very good Pastues. The Country abounds extremely in horn'd Beasts, Fallow-Deer, and variety of all sorts of Game: There are also many Herds of Horses, of an excellent kind, and so great quantities of Fish are every where caught, that the Inhabitants are some times oblig'd to cast them to the Hogs, more especi∣ally the River Teisse, leaves the Ground covered with Fishes, when after having overflowed the adjacent Fields it retires into its usual Channel. Moreover on the Mountains are found divers Mines of Gold, Sil∣ver, Copper, Iron, Quick-Silver, Antimony and Salt, besides many Springs of Hot Waters. The principal Rivers are, the Danube or Danaw the Drave, the Save, the Teiss or Tibisc, the Marisch, the Raab, which forms an Island of the same name, the Vag, the Gran, and the Sarvithze, that springs forth out of the Lake of Balaton. There are also two other Lakes, viz. those of Nerodsiler and Becz∣kerk. The Inhabitants of this Kingdom are Hardy, Va∣liant and War-like, delighting much in riding on Horses; but they are likewise Cruel, Savage, Re∣vengeful, and often Eat and Drink to Excess. How∣ever, the Persons of Quality shew much Magnificence and cannot endure to be subject to a Foreign Domi∣nion. The Kingdom of Hungary hath been the Theatre of War during almost three Ages, and at length be∣came a Prey to the Turks, more especially in the Time of Amurath and Solyman. It is at present Ele∣ctive, and almost entirely depends on the Jurisdiction of the Emperor, who is styled King thereof. All the Territories which the Turks had subdued have been recovered by the Imperial Forces, within the space of four Years, and a very little Portion of them as yet remains in the Possession of those Infidels. The State consists of four distinct Bodies, viz. the Clergy, the Barons, the Noblemen and the Free Cities. They are usually convened every three Years, according to the Constitutions of the Realm; and this Assembly hath a Right to elect a Palatine, who ought to be an Hungarian by Birth, and to whom appertains the management of military Affairs, toge∣ther with the Administration of Justice. Croatia be∣ing a Dependance of Hungary, hath in like manner its Vice-Roy, who is invested with the same Authority as the Palatine. In this Kingdom are founded two Archbishopricks, viz. those of Gran and Colonitz, together with 16. subordinate Bishopricks, five of which are subject to the Metropolitan See of Gran, eight are Suffragan to that of Colonitz, and three appertain to the Archbi∣shoprick of Spalatro in Dalmatia. The Roman Ca∣tholick Religion hath prevailed among some Ancient Noble Families, and since the late Conquests of the Emperor, is become predominant; nevertheless a great number of Persons of quality as yet adhere to the Doctrine of Calvin, and the common People have generally embraced that of Luther. In many Places are also found divers Arians, Socinians, Anabaptists, Jews and Mahometans. The Hungarians owe their first Conversion to Christianity, to Gisle, Sister of S. Henry, who was married to their King S. Stephen, about A. D. 1000. Hungary is divided into the Ʋpper and Lower, the first of these Provinces lying beyond the Danaw to∣ward Poland and Transylvania, and the other on the hither Side of this River. Hungary in Two Parts, viz. I. The Upper into 4. 1. Government of Presburg, in which are these Towns, &c. viz. Presburg, Cap. Neytracht, Bish. Tirnaw, Schintz, Holits, Watzenew, Freistad, Lednich, Transchin, Orowa, Leutsch, Eperies, Scharos, Ʋnghwar, Zemblin, Bathnor, Namin, Zolnock, Zatmar, Segedin, Debreczen, Nagkhalo, Echied, Agria, Bish. Cheghe, Nadwar. 2. Bergstet. Schemnitz, Cap. Bistricz, Muoran, Filleck, Altsol, Chremnitz, Newsol, Puggantz, Koningsburg, Tillen, Libeten, Hern-Grundt, Glasshitten, Gomer, S. Creus, Eisenbach. 3. Government of Newhausel. Newhausel, Cap. Serschin, Holock, Burack, Tregel, Bars, Leiva, Etzelburg. 4. Government of Cassovia, or Caschaw. Cassovia, or Cas∣chaw, Cap. Tornaw, Budnock, Borsania, Tockay, Zawar, Temeswar, Colocza, Archb. Pest, Novigrad, Montgatz. II. The Lower into 3. 1. The Government of Buda, wherein are these Towns, &c. Buda, Cap. Gran, Archb. Prim. Alba Regalis, or Stuhl-weissemburg Komara, Altemburg, Sawar, Newsidl, Guncs, Five-Churches, Bish. Sabarca, Baraniwar. 2. Government of Javarin. Raab, or Javarin, Bish. Cap. M. S. Martin, Gesthes, Withan, Meriges, Pappa, Vesprin, Bish. Escheneck, Sigeth. 3. Government of Ca∣nisia, in part. Canisia, Kirment, Georjewar▪ Fort of Serin, Zelewar, Mohatz, Sirmich, Peter Waradin, Esseck. A Chronological Table, shewing the Succession of XLVIII. Kings of Hungary, from about the Year of our Lord 1000.   A. D. reig. y. 1 STephen I. in 1000. or 1020. died in the Year 1038.   2 Peter the German, expelled 1038 4 3 Ovon or Aban 1042 2 4 Peter the German re-established 1044 2 5 Andrew I. 1046 15 6 Bela I. 1061 2 7 Salomon 1063 11 8 Geiza or Geycza I. 1074 3 9 Ladislaus I. 1077 7
10 Coloman or Colan 1095 19 11 Stephen II. 1114 18 12 Bela II. 1132 9 13 Geiza II. 1141 20 14 Stephen III. 1161 11 15 Ladislaus, an Usurper 1172 6 m. 16 Stephen IV. 1172 5 m. 17 Bela III. 1173 23 18 Emerycus 1195 8 19 Ladislaus II. 1204 6 20 Andrew II. of Jerusalem 1205 30 21 Bela IV. 1235 25 22 Stephen V. 1260 12 23 Ladislaus III. 1272 18 24 Andrew III. the Venetian Charles I. Martel 1290 11 25 Veneslaus 1301   26 Otho 1305   27 Charles II. Robert, or Charobert 1310 32 28 Lewes I. 1342 40 29 Mary 1382   30 Charles III. the Little 1383 3 31 Sigismund 1387 51 32 Albert of Austria 1438 2 33 Ladislaus IV. 1440 4 34 Joan. Corvinus Huniades 1445 8 35 Ladislaus V. 1452 6 36 Matthias Corvinus 1458 2 37 Ladislaus VI. 1460 25 38 Lewes II. the Younger 1486 11 39 John of Zapol 1526   40 John Stephen, or Sigismund 1540   41 Ferdinand I. 1527 37 42 Maximilian I. 1564 12 43 Rodolph 1576 36 44 Matthias 1612 7 45 Ferdinand II. 1629 18 46 Ferdinand III. 1637 20 47 Ferdinand-Francis, elected in 1657   48 Leopoldus-Ignatius, now reigning 1657   49 Joseph, his Son, elected in 1687   PRESBƲRG, or POSON (as it is term'd by the Inhabitants) Posonium aut Pisonium, the Chief City of the Upper Hungary, is pleasantly seated on the left-Side-Bank of the River Danaw or Danube, and fortified with a stately Castle, built altogether of white Stone, on the Top of a Hill, having 4 Towers, in the strongest whereof is very carefully kept the Royal Crown of Hungary, so much talkt of, and said to have been presented by an Angel to the first King S. Stephen, being of a Figure very different from other Imperial Crowns and Diadems. The General Conventions of the States have been held for a consi∣derable Time in this Place, after the Loss of Strigo∣nium or Gran, the Metropolitan See of the Realm; and it hath communicated its Name to a County or small Province, lying between Moravia to the North, Austria to the West, the River Danube to the South, and the Counties of Transchyn and Neytracht to the East. A fair Church was erected here, A. D. 1638. for the use of the Lutherans; but the Jesuits have obtained part of the Dome or Cathedral, in which lies interr'd the Body of S. Joannes Eleemosynarius, sometime Bishop of Alexandria. In the former are also used some Ceremonies, scarcely observed any where else by any of the Augsburg Confession; for on every Holyday and Sunday they cause Wax Ta∣pers to be burnt at the Altar, sing the Lord's Prayer after the manner of Cathedral Service, &c. Among other Curiosities, worthy to be viewed by Travellers, the Archbishop's Palace, in the Suburbs, beautified with fair Gardens, Walks, Grotto's, Labyrinths and Fountains is more especially remarkable, not to men∣tion the Statue of Jeronymo, and a famous Repository of Drugs, and divers sorts of Rarities belonging to the Society of Jesuits. The City of Presburg is di∣stant 8 German miles from Vienna to the East, 7 from Raab, 8 from Komora to the North-west, as many Neuhausel, and only one from the Frontiers of the Upper Austria. Tyrnaw, Tyrn or Dyrn, is a small Town on a River of the same Name, in the County of Transchyn, about 6. German miles from Presburg, and hath been chiefly made famous by the Residence of the Arch∣bishop and Chapter of Gran, whilst that City conti∣nued in the Possession of the Turks. In the Year 1414. a barbarous Murder was committed here on a Christian-Child, by 12 Jews and 2 Women, who having entic'd him into their House, open'd his Veins, drank some of his Blood, laying the rest up for some other uses, cut the Body in Pieces and bu∣ried it in a Cellar. But these Miscreants, notwith∣standing their Precaution, were discovered, appre∣hended, and, after conviction, condemned to be burnt alive: A Punishment justly due to their inhu∣man Cruelty. Transchin, a very fair Town on the River Waag, and the Capital of a County so call d, is situated on the Top of a Rock, not far from the Confines of Moravia, and defended by a very strong Castle, which renders it almost impregnable; and by reason of its height appears to view, even at the distance of 20 miles from the Town; about an English mile from whence are two hot Bagnio's, much frequented by Strangers: And indeed the Country everywhere abounds with Springs of Mineral Water, insomuch that here, as well as in many other Places on the Banks of the Danube, the Inhabitants often dig Pits, wherein they bath themselves, some of which are so near the River Waag, that you may easily extend your Arm into the cold Water, whilst the rest of your Body is Sweating in the Pit. Leutsch, the Metropolis of the County of Zips, stands on the Top of a high Hill, affording a delicate Prospect over the circumjacent Country. It is a fair Town, of a large extent, and remarkable for a great Fair kept therein every Year. The Inhabitants being for the most part Germans, nevertheless talk Hunga∣rian for the Convenience of Traffick with the neigh∣bouring People: They generally adhere to the Augs∣burg Confession, and are extremely courteous in their Behaviour; neither are they less sincere in their pro∣fessing of Friendship, and fair in their Dealings. The Magistrates, whensoever they meet in the Town-Hall, are accustomed to wear a German Mantle over their ordinary Hungarian Habit. EPERIES, Eperiae, is a strong Town on the River Tarkzel or Tarocoza, and the Capital of the County of Sero, being very famous for its Fairs and Salt-mines. Not far from thence spring two deadly Fountains, the Waters whereof immediately kill either Birds or Beasts that taste them; for which reason they are always kept covered, and walled round about, lest any should come near or suffer Damage by them. Near these are the Salt-Pits, that afford employment to a great number of poor People, and bring in a considerable yearly Revenue to the Town. Ʋngwar, or Ʋnghuar, is much more remarkable for its Strength and commodious Situation than any other Advantage, as being built at the Foot of Mount
Crapach, and encompassed with the River Ʋngh, on the Frontiers of Red Russia. It is also the Chief Town of a County of the same Name, and (if we may give credit to the assertion of the Hungarian Hi∣storians) this Place or River gave its Name to the whole Kingdom. Count Teckeley kept his Treasures, and the best of his Goods for some time at Ʋngwar, as judging it to be an impregnable Fortress; but the Imperialists found means to make themselves Masters of it, A. D. 1685. ZOLNOCK, Zolnochium, the Capital Town of a County, bearing its Name, stands very advanta∣giously on the Mouth of the River Zagywa, with which and the Teisse it is encompassed round, at the distance of 44 miles from Colocza to the North-east, between Buda and Great Waradin, within 56 miles of each. It is a place of that convenience for a Gar∣rison, that an Army of 4000 Men have found good Accommodation therein. Nevertheless, this strong Hold was shamefully quitted in the Year 1552. by 200 Hungarian Horse, 300 Germans, 100 Bohemians 200 Heydukes and 50 Spaniards, who left it to Maho∣met Bassa, returning from the Siege of Temeswar; for after having sustained a sharp Siege of 3 days, without the least Apprehension of Damage or Dan∣ger, the German Soldiers were suddenly seized with such a panick Fear, that they raised a Mutiny in the Garrison against the Governour, a Person of great Courage and Conduct, who had resolved to defend the Place to the last Extremity; insomuch that they soon betook themselves to a general Flight over the Teisse: However, the Governour being taken alone in the Castle, was very honourably treated by the Bassa. But the Turks soon overtook the greater Part of the Garrison in Pursuit, and put them to the Sword, according to the express Order of their Ge∣neral. Those Infidels have continued Masters of so important a Fortress for a long Time, until at length it was taken by the Imperial Forces in the Month of Octb. A. D. 1685. Zatmar, a small but well fortified Town in the Mountains of Upper Hungary, is water'd with the Streams of the River Samosch, about 25 miles from Mongatz to the South. It stands on the Fontiers of Transylvania, and is the Chief of a Territory, not long ago erected into a County, appertaining to the Emperor's Jurisdiction. Count Teckeley took osses∣sion thereof A. D. 1680. but hath been since con∣strained to abandon it to the Imperialists. SEGEDIN or Seged Segodunum, is the Principal Town of the Country of Bodrock on the River Tibesse or Teisse, near its confluence with the Merish, being distant 55 miles from Colocza to the East, 64 from Waradin to the South-west, and 104 from Buda to the South-east. It was surpriz'd by the Turks, A. D. 1552. and recovered by the Imperial and Confede∣rate Army, without much Resistance, after the taking of Buda, in 1686. AGRIA, Agria, named also Eger by the Germans, and Erlaw by the Inhabitants, is situated in the midst of Upper Hungary; near the Confines of the Austrian Territories, on the Side of a Rivulet of the same Name, which about 3 leagues farther falls into the Teisse, being distant 5 German miles from Filleck to the East, 7 from Tockay, 17 from Buda to the North-east, and 15 from Debrczyn to the North-west. It is guarded with a Castle, call'd Erla, standing on a Hill, and reputed to be the strongest Hold through∣out the whole Kingdom of Hungary, both on the account of its advantagious Situation and regular Bul∣warks. It is also the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Gran. When Solyman II. Emperor of the Turks, besieged this City. A. D. 1552. with 70000 Men, it was not as yet strengthned with any considerable Fortifications, either natural or artificial, nevertheless the undaunted Courage of the Inhabi∣tants proved a sufficient Defence for the Place, after they had bound themselves by an Oath, to undergo the utmost Extremity rather than surreder, hanging out a Coffin on the Battlements, in token of that Reso∣lution: For altho the Turks battered the Walls 40 days together with 50 Pieces of Cannon, and made three Assaults in one Day, yet were they incessantly re∣pulsed with the loss of 8000 Men: The instances of Female Valour, during the several Attacks, being almost incredible; insomuch that the Inidels terrified with such unexpected Prodigies of resolute Obstinacy in both Sexes, were compelled to raise the Siege, and the Garrison immediately sallying out, cut off a great number of them, taking all their Bag∣gage. However, the Citizens were not afterward so successful in withstanding the furious Assaults of Mahomet III. in 1596. when he had defeated the Troops sent to their Relief, who caused the Garrison to be put to the Sword, contrary to the Articles of Capitulation. Immediately after the Surrender of this Place the Christian Forces were so extremely har∣rass'd by the same Mahomet, that (had he pursued his Victory) 'tis believed he might even at that one On∣set have entirely finished the absolute Conquest of Hun∣gary. Altho', on the contrary the Turks were so far routed and disordered at first (Mahomet and most of his Generals flying out of the Field) that had the Christians followed close on the Backs of their Ene∣mies, and not too hastily betook themselves to the Spoil of the Camp, 'tis very probable they would have for ever freed that Kingdom from the Tur∣kish Yoke; under which Agria hath ever since groaned, until it was at last happily redeemed by the Imperial Forces, after they had blockt it up for 3 Years; in which space of time above 10000 Turks perished, either through Hunger or Diseases. 4000 Inhabitants then marched out with the Garrison, 300 staid and demanded Baptism, and many Christian Slaves were set at Liberty. The Infidels left behind 150 Pieces of Artillery and 7 Mortars, besides good store of Provisions, and all the adjacent Territories were brought under the Imperial Jurisdiction. Schemnitz, the fairest of all the 7 Berg or Mine-Towns in Hungary, is well built on a rocky Hill (which renders the Streets very uneven) adorn'd with 3 beautiful Churches, and defended by as many strong Castles, one of which is erected on a high Peak, and continual Watch kept there, to discover the Approach of the Turks, whereof notice is soon given by the discharging of a Culverin. The Air is not very healthful, but some Recompence is made for that Inconvenience by the adjacent Baths. The greater part of the Inhabitants are Lutherans, and maintain a good Garrison ready upon any suddain Enterprize of the Turks. Most of their Provisions, viz. Bread, Wine, Flesh, &c. are brought thither from other Places, by reason that the Country round about is generally rocky and barren, insomuch that the Rates are very much enhanced, more especially to Strangers sojourning in thse Parts. Here are se∣veral Silver-Mines very remarkable, the chief of which are commonly call'd the Trinity and Wind∣schacht, the former of these is 70 Fathoms deep, propt up and kept open with Under-works, at a vast Expence, much of it being in an earthy Soil. The Ore here gathered is highly esteemed, and frequently
of a black Colour, cover'd over with a whitish kind of Clay. The Windschacht Mine is considerably deeper than the other, and in some Places so excessive hot that the Miners are not able to labour in it above 8 Hours together: The blackish Ore is here reputed the best, much of it being intermixt with a shining yellow Substance or Marchasite. Not far from Schem∣nitz, where the old Town was formerly built, is a Rock extended perpendicularly to a great height, part of which, from the Bottom to the Top hath a fair shining blue Tincture, together with some Spots of Green and Yellow; not unlike whereto (as they say) there is another near the Silver-Mines in Peru. Filleck is a very considerable Fortress by reason of its advantagious situation on the Top of a rugged Hill, so inaccessible that there is only one Way up to it, and that too so very narrow that only one Person at once can pass through it. This Town stands on the Road leading from the City of Presburg to those in the Mountains on the Borders of the Turkish Do∣minions, about 5 Leagues from Agria to the North, and as many from Caschaw to the West. It was also formerly fortified with a Castle and strong Walls. However, the Turks made themselves Masters there∣of, A. D. 1560. and the Imperialists recover'd it in 1593. Afterward the Bassa of Waradin laid siege thereto, and took in again in 1682. But there arising some Differences between him and Count Teckeley's Party, he caused it to be dismantled and deserted. A famous Cavern or Hole in a Rock at Filleck de∣serves well to be view'd by the Inquisitive Travellers, wherein the Water dropping from the Roof or Arch, at the Top, petrifies at the bottom into a fair white Stone, frequently used by the Painters of this Coun∣try to make the purest and most clear White Colour in Limning. Chremnitz is reckon'd the first among the Berg or Mine-Towns (which Honour is paid to its Antiquity rather than Grandeur) being of a small extent, yet environed with large Suburbs, and having a strong Castle for its Defence, supposed to stand on the highest Ground in Hungary. But it is more especially famous for its Gold-Mine, which hath been wrought above 90 Years, and is carried about 9 or 10 miles in length; the entrance into it lying through one Cuniculus or Horizontal Passage, commonly called the Erbstal, and extending itself 800 Fathoms in a streight Line. Some of the Ore is white, another sort black, a third Red and a fourth yellow; but that with black Spots on white is esteem∣ed the best, and that as the most precious which lies nearest the Veins. Some small parcels of Virgin Gold have likewise been found (though very rarely) in the same Mine, divers Specimens whereof are to be seen in the Emperor's Treasury at Vienna, and the Elector of Saxony's Repository at Dresdn. Moreover the common yellow Earth of the adjacent Territories (chiefly on the Western Hills) affords a considerable quantity of Gold▪ which is sometimes washed and wrought in the same manner with the pounded Ore, turning to a very good account. Several Passages in the Mine, cut through the Rock, and long disused, are since grown up again, and a great number of the Walks in most Places are scarcely passable. There is also found a kind of Substance, termed Antimony of Gold, of a shining purple Colour, consisting of cer∣tain Particles, pointed like Needles, together with Chrystals among the Ore, and some tinctured yellow. Not far from the Gold-mine at Chremnitz there is another of Vitriol, about 80 Fathoms deep, the Earth whereof is reddish and sometimes green, which being purified and reduced to a Calx, becomes very ser∣viceable in the making of Aqua Fortis. In the Town is establish'd a Mint-house, where are coyn'd Ducats, Rix-dollars, and other lesser Pieces of Mony, besides a Printing-house, for the Conenience of some few Gentlemen and others in these Parts, that apply them∣selves to the study of the Liberal Sciences. Newsol, the third in number of the Berg-Towns, is well built on the Banks of the River Gran, and at the foot of a Hill, on which stands the Castle and great Church, cover'd with Copper. Near this Town are the most considerable Copper-mines in Hungary, wherein the Metal is very firmly incorporated with its Stone-Bed, and the Separation of it not to be per∣formed without much Pains and difficulty, so that the Ore is often burnt and melted 14 times, before it can be made fit for use, or brought to a tolerable per∣fection. The Inhabitants are Lutherans, and gene∣rally speak the German, Hungarian and Wendish Tongues. They keep a good Market here every Week, and have good store of Provisions both for themselves and Strangers. At Mismils, a small Village, not far from Newsols, divers Furnaces are set up for the Melting of Metals, and Silver is sometimes ex∣tracted there out of Copper. Puggantz was heretofore a fair Town, and still retains a fourth Place in the Order of the Berg-Towns, but hath been so often burnt and laid waste by the frequent Incursions of the Turks, that the Miners are no longer able to continue their Works in this Place, until the Tranquility of the State of Hungary shall be more firmly establish'd. Konigsberg, the fifth Berg-Town, doth not much go beyond Puggantz in Note and Dignity at this Day, since the Miners have for the most part retired from thence to Chremnitz and Schemnitz, where they meet with much better Employment: However, Konigs∣berg is as yet famous for a Spring of sowre Mineral Waters, that have been efficacious in the working of some notable Cures. Tillen is in like manner a Berg-Town of great Antiquity, but of late Years altogether fallen to de∣cay and deserted, by reason of the Failure of those Metallick Veins that were found in the neighbouring Territory, and caused this Place to be much fre∣quented. Libeten, the last of the seven Berg-Towns, was likewise formerly much more noted than it is at pre∣sent. Altho' some small Quantities of Copper, toge∣ther with a little Silver, are still dug out of the adjacent Mines, but so very inconsiderable, as scarcely af∣fords the Inhabitants a sorry Maintenance. Besides these there are several other Towns re∣markable for Mines, altho' their Names are not as yet registred among the former, viz. Hernn-grundt, distant about an Hungarian mile, or almost 7 English from Newsol; where lies a Cop∣per Mine in the Rocks, the Ore of which is extreme∣ly rich, being usually either of a yellow or black Colour, the former for the most part yielding the better Metal, tho' in the latter is contained a Mixture of Silver. There are also several sorts of Vitriol sound in this Mine, viz. white, green, blue and a clear transparent red, besides a green Earth or waterish Sediment, call'd Berg-grun, of singular use in Paint∣ing. Moreover here are two Springs of Vitriolate Water, that speedily turn Iron into Copper, and bear the Names of the Old and New Ziment. These Fountains are highly esteemed, in regard that the worst of old Iron is thereby converted into the purest Copper, having this admirable Quality, that it is
more ductile and malleable than any other whatso∣ever, and may be easily melted down without the Addition of any other Substance. Glasshitten, a Town situated at the Distance of one Hungarian mile from Schemnitz, was sometime noted for a rich Gold-Mine, which hath been lost ever since Bethlem Gabor, Prince of Transylvania over-ran this Country, and constrained the Inhabitants to quit their Houses. Travellers frequently resort hi∣ther on the account of five natural hot Baths; the Springs whereof are very clear, the Sediment red and green, and the wooden Seats under Water in∣crustated with a stony Substance. Among these the hot Springs of that which is called the Sweating-Bath, drain through a Hill and fall into a Bagnio, built on purpose to receive them. At one End of it is erected a noble Stove, heated by the Steams of those Wa∣ters, and so contrived, that by chusing a higher or lower Seat ones Sweating may be regulated, and any degree of Heat may be obtain'd at pleasure. NEWHAƲSEL, Neoselium, call'd Owar by the Hun∣garians, stands on the Banks of the Rivulet Neutra or Nitrach, and altho' a Place of a small extent, is ne∣vertheless the Capital of a large Country, and the chief Bulwark against the Turks in the Upper Hunga∣ry, enlarg'd by a new Fort call'd Leopolstadt, from the present Emperor of Germany, its Founder. It is built on a moorish Plain, but hard at the Bottom and every where passable. Its Fortifications appear in Form of a Star, with six Raies, every Point being defended by a high-raised Bastion. They are also encompassed with a Ditch full of Water, of a Rod and a half deep, and 18 in breadth. An Entrance lies open into the Town, only through two Gates, each of which is guarded with a Half-Moon, without any other Outworks, excepting a Cover'd Way. In the Year 1663. this Fortress was taken by the Turks, who lost two Bassa's during the Siege, together with many other chief Commanders, and above 300000 common Soldiers. But Prince Charles of Lorraine, having taken a Resolution to attack it, defeated the Serasquier, who marched to its Relief, on the 16th Day of August, A. D. 1685. seizing at the same Time on 20 Pieces of Cannon, divers Mortars and Bombs, and 4 Standards, so that the Town was soon carried by Assault, after a Siege of 40 Days, and the whole Garrison put to the Sword. About 100 Brass Cannons were then found there, as also a great quantity of Plate and other Booty, amounting to the value of above two Millions. Newhausel is distant 36 miles from Presburg to the East, 12 from Komora to the North, and 64 from Buda to the North-west. CASCHAW, Cassovia, is seated on the Rivulet Tareza, that falls into the Teisse, being one of the Royal Free Towns, and the Capital of the County of Abam∣wivar. It is very well fortified, and immediately governed by the Emperor's Deputy, which brings a great Resort of Persons of Quality thither, and hath rendered it one of the best built Towns in the King∣dom. Its Arsenal is also the most considerable in Hun∣gary, and the Grand Church is supplied by an Hun∣garian and a German Minister, who officiate by turns in their own Languages, both which are well under∣stood and ordinarily spoken at Caschaw, from whence the Turkish Territories are distant only 6 German miles, insomuch that the Citizens are in a manner continually alarm'd and oblig'd to keep a constant Watch and Ward. The Air is as pestilential and unhealthy as in any part of Hungary, which renders Strangers more subject to Distempers here than in any of the neighbouring Places. Another Caue of Diseases more rife here than elswhere may be imputed to the badness of their Wine, that hath a strong taste of Chalk or Lime, and is often observed to breed the Gou and Lameness in the Fingers and other Joynts. However, the greatest Trade of the Inhabitants con∣sis in the Vending of this Liquor, which tho' very noxious in these Parts, is yet drunk at some distance, without Danger, after having been well clarified and refined. The Polanders, who resort weekly to their Market, transport these Wines from thence in great Quantities, and by their constant Traffick gave occa∣sion to the Citizens of Caschaw to learn the Polish Tongue as well as the High-Dutch and Hungarian, tho' it is not so frequently spoken by them. The Town of Caschaw was regained by the Imperialists, A. D. 1685. and stands 86 miles from Buda to the North-east. TOCKAY, Tockavium, is a strong Town and Citadel on the Banks of the Teisse, at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Tockayg, from whence it took its Name. It is also the Principal of the County of Semlin, and was seized by Count Teckeley, A. D. 1683. but the Im∣perial Forces retook it in 1685. Near this Place is to be found a sort of Earth, called Bolus Tockaviensis, known to have as good effect in Medicinal Prepara∣tions as either Bolus Armenus or Terra Silesiaca, and on that account much commended by Experience in that Country. Temeswar is a large and strong Town on the River Temes (whence its Name is derived) towards the Confines of Transylvania, about 54 mi from Bel∣grade to the North-eat, 75 from Gret Waradin to the South, and 160 from Buda to the South-east. In the Year 1552, Stephen de Lozonzo, a Spanish Com∣mander shewed great Courage in resolutely defending this Fortress with a Garrison of his own Countrymen, until at length two Renegado Spaniards treacher∣ously discovered their Strength and Policy to the Turks, so that they were constrained to capitulate, nevertheless on very honourable Terms. But as soon as the Place was surrender'd, the Infidels (contrary to the Articles of Agreement, mutually sign'd) cut off the greater part of the Garrison, and took the rest Prisoners: During the Slaughter, one valiant Spaniard, well mounted and armed, cleared his Pas∣sage through the Body of an Army of 4000 Turks, and made up to the Castle of Lippa, another Impe∣rial Garrison, which he would have certainly reco∣vered had not his Horse unfortunately leapt into a Bog, where a Party of 500 Turks overtook him, and cutting off his Head carried it back to Mahomet their General. Ever since that Time Temeswar hath been the Seat of a Bassa, and the Metropolis of a Beglerbegtick or Government, somewhat resembling that of a County, bounded on the North by Chau∣nad and Transylvania, on the West by the River Teisse, on the South by the Danube, and on the East by Moldavia. The Turks have caused this Town to be well fortified, and esteem it impregnable; and in∣deed it is the strongest Hold now remaing in their Possession. COLOCZA, Colocia, Coloza, & ad Statuas Colossas, is an ancient City on the Danube, and the Capital of the County of Bath. It was formerly dignified with the Title of an Archbishop's See, but for some Ages last past over-run with Mahomenatism, being distant 54 miles from Buda to the South-east, and 44 from Zolnock to the South-west. This Place was recover'd from the Turks by the Imperialists, A. D. 1686.
Pest, Pestum, a large Town, stands on the Eastern Bank of the Danube, over-against Buda, from whence you pass thither over a fine Bridge of Boats, reach∣ing about half an English mile in length. It is built in a quadrangular Form, and by reason of its fair Walls, and the Towers of the Turkish Mosks, af∣fords a delightful Prospect at a distance. This Place hath been often taken and re taken both by the Turks and Christians, but was assured to the Empe∣ror of Germany on the Conquest of Buda, A. D. 1686. Novigrad is a small but very strong Town in the County of the same Name, being defended by a Castle founded on a Rock, and encompassed with a Moat 34 Feet deep, cut out in the same Rock, which renders it almost impregnable. In the Year 1594. the Germans took it from the Turks, who retook it in 1663: But is now again subject to the Imperial Jurisdiction, situated at the distance of 16 miles from Gran almost to the East, and 22 from Buda to the North. Montgatz or Munkatz, a Fortress of much impor∣tance in the County of Pereczas, is built on a steep Rock, with a Borough at the foot of it; being well enclosed with a Ditch full of Water, and surrounded with a large Morass, so that the Fort seems to have been first designed, even by Nature it self: Three Castles are contained therein, one above another, the first and highest commanding the second, and the se∣cond the third, but all three are encompassed with a Trench, wrought out of the Rock, and three Bridg∣es afford a Passage from one to another. This Place was for a long time defended by the Princess Ragot∣sky, wife to Count Teckeley, against very considerable Forces, that were constrained to raise the Siege. But at last, after a Blockade of some Years, not being able to maintain her Troops, she came to a Capitu∣lation, A. D. 1688. and surrendred the Town to the Emperor. Whereupon she was conducted to Vienna with her Children, and enjoyn'd to live peaceably there, without holding any Correspondence for the future with her Husband. Mongatz is distant 126 Miles from Buda to the East, in the Lat. of 48 Deg. 28 Min. and the Long. of 43 Deg. 8 Min. WARADIN, or Great Waradin, is seated on the River Kerez, in the Confines of Transylvania, to which Principality it appertained of later Times, bearing the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Colocza. It is well fortified, with a strong Castle on the East-side, and firm Ramparts, beside 5 Royal Bastions and a regular Ditch, that may be supplyed on occasion with the River-water. Within appears another Enclosure, consisting of some Bastions and a high Wall, to serve, as it were, in∣stead of a Citadel. In the Year 1290. Ladislaus King of Hungary built the Cathedral Church, and the City was taken by the Crim Tartars in 1642. who quitted it soon after: In 1662. it submitted to the Turkish Arms, but was recovered by the Imperialists, after a memorable Siege and Blockade, in 1692. BƲDA, Buda aut Aquincum, call'd also Offen by the Germans, and Buden by the Turks, anciently and still reckoned the Capital City of the whole Kingdom of Hungary, took its Name probably from Buda, King Attila's Brother, its Restorer, or (ac∣cording to the Opinion of others) from the Budini a Scythian People mention'd by Herodotus. It is of a very large compass, rich and well fortified, being advantagiously seated on a Mountain, and the Right-side Bank of the River Danube, over-against the Town of Pest, whereto it is joyn'd with a large Bridge of Boats, at the distance of 35 German miles from Bel∣grad o the North, 32 from Vienna to the West, 11 from Gran, as many from Alba Regalis or Stul. Wessem∣burg (with which two last Places it forms a Triangle) and 40 from Cracow. It is guarded with a strong Castle, and was heretofore the Royal Seat of the Kings of Hungary, as also afterward of he Turkish Lieute∣nants or Vice-Roys. It was very much enlarged and adorned with stately publick Edifices by the Libera∣lity of Sigismund King of Hungary, who was crown'd in the Year 1387. and afterward elected Emperor. The same Prince, in like manner erected the Fortress or Castle, wherein his Successors usually kept their Court, and a magnificent Hall or Palace, after the Italian Mode. Some noble remains of these Fabricks, were to be seen in the Time of Bubequius, and in∣deed this City hath been justly esteem'd as the fairest in the Kingdom, before it fell into the possession of the Turks, who (according to their accustomed Neg∣ligence) suffer the most sumptuous Buildings to fall to decay and utter Ruin. The lower part of the City call'd Wasserstadt, or Town of Jews, extends it self, as it were a Suburbs, from the Upper to the River Danube, and the Upper is built on the declivity of the Mountain, being encompassed with strong Walls, on which are erected several Towers, at cer∣tain Distances, after the ancient manner of Fortifica∣tion. The Castle stands on a Hill, commanding the greater part of the Town, and hath for its Deence a very deep Ditch, divers old Towers and some mo∣dern Ramparts. The Baths of Buda are reported to be the noblest in Europe, not only on the account of the plentiful and hot Springs, but also for the Magnificence of their Build∣ings. They are 8 in number, being appointed for Men in the Morning and Women in the Afternoon; the chiefest of these is that of Velebey, having a strong Sulphurous Smell and Petrifying Juice; but it is so intensely hot, that to make it tolerable a mixture of cold Water is usually thrown into it. This famous City was taken by Solyman II. Emperor of the Turks, A. D. 1526. who was forced to surrender it in the ensuing Year to Ferdinand Archduke of Austria. In 1529. the same Solyman made himself Master thereof a second Time (the Garrison having sustained 11 Assaults) and restored it to the Vayvode of Transyl∣vania, who had lost it before. However, it was attack'd again by Ferdinand in 1540, and 1541. when Solyman marching a third Time to its Relief, raised the Siege, and surpriz'd the Place by Stratagem, on the 2d Day of September. The Archduke Matthias attempted to besiege it in 1598, and 1601. but both these Enterprizes proved ineffectual. At length the late most valiant Prince Charles Duke of Lorrain, hav∣ing in vain beleaguer'd the City in 1684. reinvested it with the Imperial and auxillary Forces, on the 15th Day of June 1686. and wrested it out of the Hands of the Infidels, after a Siege of about 2 Months and an half. GRAN, Strigonium, the Chief City of a Coun∣ty of the same Name, and the See of an Archbishop, is situated in the Lower Hungary, on the South-Side of the Danube, near its confluence with the River Gran, over-against the Town of Barchan, which is properly one of its Suburbs. The City it self is di∣vided into 2 Parts, viz. the Upper, standing on the foot of a Hill, and the Lower, extended along the Banks of the Danube, and fenced with a strong Fort, built on the Hill of S. Thomas. So that an Enemy has in a manner 3 distinct Towns to take ere he can
become Master of Gran. This City was heretofore the Seat of the ancient Kings of Hungary, and s as yet beautified with many magnificent Buildings, par∣ticularly the Castle, the Cathedral Church dedicated to S. Stephen, and the Palace of the Archbishop, who is usually styled Primate, Chancellor and President of the Royal Council. Here are also to be seen two large Towers, viz. one towards Thonesberg, and the other facing the River over-against Barcan: These are joyned together by a Wall, fortified with divers Redouts and a Ditch, flanked with hewn Stone, be∣sides a Terrass, environed with strong Pallisadoes and 4 great Points instead of Ravelins. The adjacent Country is extremely fruitful, affording considerable quantities of generous Wines; to say nothing of the Advantage the Inhabitants receive from several Tem∣perate Baths within the Town. The City of Gran was taken by Solyman II. in the Year 1543. and in vain besieged with 50000 Men by Matthias Arch∣duke of Austria, in 1574. However, the Imperia∣lists, under the Conduct of Count Mansfield, belea∣guered it again in 1595. and routed 14000 Turks, altho' their General dyed soon after. But the Arch-Duke Matthias continued the Siege with great Vigor, until the Infidels were compelled to surrender on cer∣tain Conditions. At that Time Sir Thomas Arundel of Wardour Castle in Wiltshire, signalized his Valour with so much Bravery, that he stormed the Water-Tower, and took from thence the Turkish Banner, with his own Hands: Whereupon the Emperor Ro∣dolphus, to make him some Recompence for this no∣table Piece of Service, created him a Count of the Empire, and King James I. not long after, advanc'd him to the Style and Dignity of Lord Arundel of Wardour; both which honourable Titles are retain'd by his Successors at this Day. Mahomet III. laid Siege to the same Place in 1606. and reduced it to his Obedience. But the Imperial Forces retook it in 1683. after they had forced the Turkish Camp before Vienna, and with the Assistance of the Polanders had discomfited the remainder of their Army near the Vil∣lage of Barcan. Lastly, the Turks having invested it again in 1685. were repulsed with great Loss, and at length entirely defeated by the Duke of Lorraine and the Elector of Bavaria. S. Stephen, the first Christian King of Hungary, was born at Gran, Stephen III. dyed there, and the Emperor Albert likewise expir'd in the neighbouring Territory, A. D. 1440. Stuhl-Weissemburg, or Alba Regalis, call'd Stolni Biograd by the Sclavonians, and Ekekeis Feierwa by the Hungarians, is remarkable for its situation in the midst of an inaccessible Marsh or Fen, on the Banks of the River Sarwitze, near the Lake Calaton, between the Danube and the Drave, about 40 miles from Buda to the South-west, 110 from Vienna to the South-east, and 180 from Belgrade to the North-west. This Town is well fortified with 3 Bastions and 2 other Works on one Side, the other being sufficiently cover'd by the Morass, and joyned to the firm Land by 3 broad Causeys. It hath been heretofore famous both for the usual Coronation and Interment of the Kings of Hungary, but was taken by the Turks A. D. 1543. and recovered out of their Hands by the Duke of Merceur, in 1601. However, those Infidels made themselves Masters thereof again in the Year ensu∣ing, and caused 40 of the Inhabitants to be impal'd, for a Design to have betrayed it to the Christians. On the 18th Day of May, A. D. 1688. it surren∣dred to the Imperialists, and one of the Gates was put into their Hands till the Emperor ratified the Treaty under the great Seal of the Empire. Thus having spent 3 Days in making Provision for their Departure, they marched out on the 20th of May, about 4000 Persons, but not above 700 bearing Arms. At that Time 34 Pieces of Cannon were found in the Town, besides great quantities of Arms and Ammu∣nition, but very little of Provisions. Kmara, Komora, or Komorra, Comorra, a very strong and populous Town, is seated on the southern Corner of the Island Schutt, almost encompassed with the Rivers Danube and Waag, and a deep Lake to∣ward the West, in a Champion and Fertile Country, so that from the Top of its highest Towers one may take a view of many Turkish Forts in the Neighbour∣hood. It was well fortified by Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary, A. D. 1472. and became the chiefest Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks, after the loss of Gran, in 1543. And indeed the Emperor hath always maintained there a good Garrison, under the Command of a faithful Gover∣nour; one of whom in the last Age, styled the Baron Braon, more especially signalized his Valour and Fi∣delity; for when after the taking of Raab or Javarin, in 1591. Sinan Bassa besieg'd Comora with 60 Vessels and a vast multitude of Turks and Tartars, endea∣vouring also at the same Time to corrupt him, he beheaded 4 of the 5 Turks dispatched to him on that Errand, and sent back the 5th to carry the sad News to their Master, and to certifie him, That Traytors were no longer to be bought for Mony; insomuch that at length, after a great Slaughter of the Tartars, the Turkish Bassa was forced shamefully to raise the Siege and retreat. Since that Time the Town hath been enlarged and better strengthned with a regular Fort, call'd the Tortoise, and four Bastions, erected on a Line, drawn from the Southern to the Nor∣thern Branch of the Danube. It is distant 12 miles from Newhausel to the South, 15 from Javarin to the North-east, 38 from Presburg almost to the East, 54 from Buda to the North-west, and 74 from Vienna almost to the East. ALTENBƲRG, Ovaria, a very strong Town and Fortress on the Danube, near its confluence with the River Leytha, in the County of Muzon, about 18 miles from Presburg almost to the South, and 50 from Vien∣na to the East. It is commonly call'd Owar by the Hungarians, who esteem it the best Fence the Austri∣ans have against the Turks, and the most considerable Out-work to the City of Vienna. Five-Churches, or Funff-Kirken (according to the German dialect,) Quinque Ecclesiae, takes its Name from 5 fair Christian Churches, which, (as many others in this Kingdom) have been turn'd into Turkish Mosques. Count Serini burnt this Town in his Re∣turn from Esseck, and destroyed therein 9 stately Turkish Temples cover'd with Lead. Some Antiqua∣ries affirm it to be the Teutoburgium mention'd by An∣toninus, altho' others with greater probability, fix that old Roman Fort at Erdwdy, a Hamlet on the Mouth of the Drave. The Town of Five-Churches is a Place of no very great Strength, watered with the Streams of the River Keoritz, at the distance of 12 miles from those of the Drave, as also 32 from Zigeth to the North-east, and 49 almost to the North of Posega. RAAB or Javarin, Arrhabo aut Javarinum, a small City of the Lower Hungary, dignified with the Title of an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Gran, is situated on the Right-side Branch of the River Danube, where it receives into its Channel the Waters of the Raab, about 5 Hungarian miles from Komora to the West, 8 from Gran, 10 from Presburg,
14 from Stuhl-Weissemburg to the North, and 16 from Vienna to the South-east. It is a strong Frontier Bul∣wark against the Turks, fortified with 7 large Bastions and 4 Cavaliers, or high Mounts over-looking them. The Country round about it is Champagne, and no∣thing seems to command it excepting a small Hill, at some distance, which is undermined, and may be blown up at Pleasure. Somewhat further stands a Watch-Tower, in the open Fields, from whence the Approach of an Enemy may be easily discover'd. Sinan Bassa besieg'd this City, and at one Attack lost 12000 Men before it; but at last it fell into the Hands of the Turks, A. D. 1591. through the Trea∣chery of Count Hardeck its Governour, who was af∣terward beheaded at Vienna for the same Fact. How∣ever, in 1606. Count Swartzenburg, then Governour of Komora, surpriz'd it by a notable Stratagem; altho' the French Historians attribute the whole Glory of that Exploit to Monsieur de Vaubecourt or Vandre∣court, one of their Countrymen; since which Time it hath remain'd in the Emperor's Possession. The City of Raab hath been not long since honour'd with the government of the famous General Montecuculi, who usually resided there, when he had any Leisure from his Military Expeditions. George Drascovitz, Bishop of this Diocess, convened a Synod at Raab, A. D. 1579. and the Decrees of it have been since pub∣lished. Vesprin or Weisbrun in High-Dutch, is the Metro∣polis of a considerable County of the same Name, and the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Strigonium or Gran. It is built near the Banks of the River Sarwitza, and distant 13 miles from Alba Regalis to the West, as also 53 from Buda. This Ci∣ty was taken by the Turks in the Year 1593. But the Imperialists have since made themselves Masters thereof, and it is still subject to the Emperour's Ju∣risdiction. SIGETH or Zygeth, Salina, a strong Town situated in a Morass, near the River Alme, 44 miles from Alba Regalis to the South, 64 from Canisa to the East, and 74 from Buda to the South-west. It is fortifed with a well-built Castle, besides 3 Ditches and as many Walls. Solyman II. Emperor of the Turks died before this Place in the Year 1566. on the 4th Day of Sep∣tember, being the 2d Month of the Siege, and it was ta∣ken 3 Days after, notwithstanding the brave Defence against the Turkish Army, made by Nicolas Esdrin, Count of Serini, its Valiant Governour, who perish'd with his Guard of 200 Men, resolutely encountring the whole Body of the Ottoman Forces. Whereupon his Head was exposed to publick View for one Day in their Camp, and afterward sent in derision to the Emperor Maximilian. But the Imperialists recovered this important Fortress on the 15th Day of January, 1688. and found therein 85 Pieces of Cannon. There is also another Town of the same Name in Transyl∣vania, near the Spring-head of the River Tibiscus or Teisse. CANISA or Canischa, Canisia, is one of the strongest Holds of these Parts, being advantagiously seated on the River Sala, between the Lake Balaton and the River Drave, at the distance scarcely of 1 mile from the Frontiers of Stiria to the East, 68 from Alba-Re∣galis to the South-west, 94 from Vienna and 106 from Buda. It fell into the Hands of the Turks, A. D. 1600. altho' the Imperialists used all possible means for its Defence. In the ensuing Year it was invested by the Archduke of Austria, from the beginning of September to the end of October, but his Attempts were frustrated. In 1604 Count Serini laid Siege to the same Place, and had certainly carried it if timely Succours had been sent to him. But on the 30th day of June, A. D. 1688. the Count de Budiani set down before it with a Body of 6000 Hungarians and 2000 Heydukes, so that the Blockade continued till April 13th 1690. when, conformably to a Capitulation rati∣fied by the Emperor, the Keys of the Gates, hanging on a Golden Chain, were delivered to the said Count by a Turkish Officer, with these Words, I herewith consign into your Hands the strongest Fortress in the Ottoman Empire. The Imperialists found therein great store of large Artillery, taken heretofore from the Christians, and some with old German Inscri∣ptions. Mohatz, a small Town between Colocza and the Confluence of the Drave and the Danube, 4 German miles from either, and 6 from Esseck to the North-west. It is chiefly noted for 2 memorable Battels fought near it, viz. the first between Solyman the Magnificent, Emperor of the Turks, and Lewes or Lu∣dowic II. King of Hungary, during which (the later young Prince having boldly adventured to engage 300000 Turks, with a Body of 20000 Men, on the 29th Day of October, A. D. 1526.) a vast number of his Nobility, with many Archbishops and Bishops, were slain in the Field. The King endeavouring to make his Escape by Flight, over the Brook Curass, rode into a Bog; where being over-loaded with Ar∣mour, he unfortunately perish'd, in the 20th Year of his Age; but his Body being found about 2 Months after, was honourably inter'd at Stuhl-Weissemburg. After this Defeat Solyman took and slew 200000 Hungarians, and got such Footing in their Country, that neither he nor his Successors could ever as yet be entirely expelled. The second Engagement here may well be supposed in some measure to compensate the Loss and Disgrace of the former; for on the 29th Day of July 1687. the Prime Visier, having passed the Drave at Esseck, with a design to attack the Chri∣stian Army under the command of the Duke of Lor∣raine, on August 12th there followed a bloody Battle, werein the Turks lost on the spot about 8000 men, together with 100 Pieces of Cannon, 12 Mortars, all their Ammunition, Provisions, Tents, Baggage and Treasure, besides those drown'd in the River, the certain number of whom could never be known. Sirmisch or Zirmach, Sirmium, call'd Szreim by the Hungarians, was heretofore the Metropolis of Panno∣nia Inferior, and afterward dignified with a Bishop's See; but is now reduced by the Turks to a poor Vil∣lage, being distant 14 German miles from Belgrade to the West, 2 from the River Save to the North, and as many from Esseck. This City was sometime the Seat of the Praefectus Praetorio Illyrii, before the Di∣vision of the Roman Empire, and hath been often ho∣noured with the personal Residence of many of the Emperors, by which means it was made the Stage of many memorable Actions. Here Vetranio or Betra∣nio assumed the Imperial Diadem, and was proclaim∣ed Emperor by the Illyrian Soldiers, but being after∣ward deserted by his Promoters, was obliged to sub∣mit to Constantius the Son of Constantine the Great. Moreover Sirmisch gave Birth to the Emperor Gratian Son of Valentinian II. and a Council was there held against Photius Bishop of this Diocess, who renewed the Errors of Sabellius, derogatory to the Divine Na∣ture of Jesus Christ, which Tenents being as well repugnant to the Doctrine of the Arian, as Orthodox Prelates, were condemned by both Parties, A. C. 356. Constantius himself being then present. After∣ward another Synod was convened in the same Place
by the Arians, where they published a Confession of Faith, omitting the Word Consubstantialis, in 357. PETER-WARADIN, or Petro-Waradin, Acuminium aut Petro Varadinum, is situated on the Southern Banks of the Danube, between the Save and the Drave in the Country of ancient Sirmium or Sirmisch, and hath been very famous during the present War. The Turks made it their common Passage into the Upper Hungary, after the taking of Buda by the Imperial Forces, and for that end kept a Bridge of Boats near this Town, over the Danube. Here also happen'd a violent Uproar and Revolt against the Grand Visier, after the Battle of Mohatz, so that he was constrained to make his Escape to Belgrade, and thence to Constantinople. It hath been since ta∣ken and regained by both Parties. The Imperialists dismantled its Fortifications in the Year 1688. and the Town it self was burnt down a little after by the Turks. But the Emperor gave Orders in 1691. for the re-fortifying thereof, and intends to make it a Place of great Strength. It is distant 32 miles from Belgrade to the North-west, and 36 from Esseck to the South-east. Esseck is a Place of much Antiquity, and suppos'd to be the same with the old Roman Mursa; which Conjecture seems to receive some Confirmation from part of an ancient Latin Inscription, as yet to be seen on one Side of the Gate, wherein is read the Em∣peror AElian's Name in fair Characters, and a Man's Head in Stone set up on the other. It is a large and populous Town, by reason of its Traffick, pro∣ceeding from the Convenience of the Passage; never∣theless its Situation is low, and the Streets are gene∣rally plank'd with Trees, according to the Observa∣tion of the learned Dr. Brown; neither is it very strong, altho' the Turks have taken much Pains and laid out no small Expences in repairing its Fortifica∣tions, so that it hath been of great Note in the Pre∣sent War between them and the Imperialists. In the Neighbourhood of this Place Magnentius the Usurper and Murderer of Constantine II. was defeated by Constantius, A. C. 359. and Lewes II. the young King of Hungary, in like manner routed by Solyman II. in 1526. But that which is now chiefly remarkable here is the famous Wooden Bridge, 8585 Geometri∣cal Paces long and 17 broad, running partly over the Drave and partly over a spacious Marsh and the Ri∣ver-Fens, from hence to the Foot of Darda. It was erected by Solyman the Magnificent in 1521. after he had taken Belgrade, and is extended (as it hath been already observed) about 5 English miles in length, and its breadth is so great that 4 Wagons may pass over it abreast; being also curiously rail'd in on both Sides, and adorn'd with fair Watch-Towers at every quarter of a mile, so that on a view of its whole Fabrick, the Wooden-Towers, Rails and Floor, together with their numerous Supporters, one cannot but admire that the Country should af∣ford Oaken Timber sufficient either to Build or maintain it. By this Bridge the Turkish Forces were wont to march between Hungary and Constantinople, but Count Nicolas Serini burnt part thereof, A. D. 1664. to hinder fresh Supplies from coming to the Grand Visiers Army, insomuch that the Turks were afterward oblig'd to rebuild it a little nearer the Danube, because the remainder of the Timber that was preserv'd in the Water could not be pluck'd up without great Charges and Difficulty. Count Lesly set Fire thereto a second Time, in 1685. and took Possession of the Town of Esseck, but the Castle holding out, he blew up their Magazines, and having pillaged the Town, decamped from those Parts. In 1686. the Turks began to repair the Bridge after another manner, viz. by driving Rows of Trees and Stakes into the Ground, and filling up the void Spaces with Earth. However, the Duke of Lorraine destroyed it the next Year, drove the Ottoman Troops over the Drave, and in a few Days entirely demo∣lish'd those Works, that 8000 Men had been many Months in raising. After the unfortunate taking of Belgrade by the Turks, in October 1690. they sat down with an Army of 15000 Men before this Place, but were constrained to retire without ac∣complishing their Design. It is distant 65 miles from Belgrade to the North-west, and 100 from Buda to the South-east.
TURKY in Europe. CHAP. I. TURKY in EUROPE, Turcica Ditio in Europa. map of Ottoman Empire TURKY IN EUROPE. THE Turkish Empire was founded by Otto∣man or Osman I. about the Year of our Lord 1298. or 1300. according to the Opi∣nion of others, and its Seat was at first established at Prusa or Beruss in Bithynia, which in process of Time, after that those Infidels had made divers In∣cursions into Europe, was translated to Adrianople, and at length to Constantinople. It is probable that the Turks are descended of the Scythians, who in∣habited the Circassian Mountains between the Euxine
and Caspian Seas, being a Vagabond sort of People, and for the most part Shepherds, until they invaded Asia the Less, and carried their victorious Arms very far, throughout that Country. However, within this vast Empire are now comprehended many King∣doms and Provinces in Europe, Asia and Africa, for the Emperor of the Turks is Soveraign Lord of a Continent, extended from Aden, the Capital City of Arabia the Happy, as far as above the Palus Moeotis for the space of about 700 Leagues from South to North, and 800 from West to East, viz. from the Western Limits of the Kingdom of Alger, which is Tributary to him, as far as Balsora on the Persian Gulph, wherein are included 25 Governments in Europe, 17 in Asia and 1 in Africa: But I shall here only give an account of the Possessions of this potent Monarch in Europe, and Treat of the two other Parts in the Description of Africa. Turky in Europe is bounded on the North by Po∣land and Hungary, on the South by the Mediterranean-Sea, on the East by that of Zaback or Palus Maeotis, the Euxine or Black-Sea, the Sea of Marmora and the Archipelago. It is extended from South to North for the Space of about 300 Leagues, viz. from Cape Matapan on the Southern Coasts of the Morea as far as the Frontiers of Northern Hungary, toward the Vistula, and from the 35th Degree to the 50 of La∣titude, as also about 440 Leagues from West to East, that is to say, from Canisa in Hungary to the utmost Limits of Eastern Tartary, from the 40th Degree to the 75th of Longitude. But the greater part of Hungary and the Morea hath been recovered by the Christians during the late Wars, which hath much diminished the Extent of the Turkish Domi∣nions. The Air is Gentle and Temperate, more or less according to the Situation of the several Coun∣tries, and the Soil in like manner fruitful, with re∣spect to the different Places of this Empire, as it shall be shewn in the Description of every particular Province. The most remarkable Rivers are, 1. The Danube, that separates Valachia and Moldavia from Servia and Bulgaria; and afterward flowing in 2 or 3 distinct Streams, dischargeth it self into the Black Sea. 2. The Teisse or Tibisc, which taking its Rise, and continuing its entire Course through Hungary; at length falls into the Danube, which likewise receives into its Channel the Waters 3. of the Drave, and 4. of the Save, the former dividing Sclavonia from Hungary, and the other serving as the Boundary be∣tween the same Country and that of Bosnia. 5. The Mariza, the Source and Streams whereof water Ro∣mania, where it runs into the Archipelago, after having passed through the Cities of Philippoli, Adria∣nople and Trajanple: But the Rivers on the Southern Side are not so considerable. There are also divers large Gulphs, viz. those of Contessa, Caridia, Monte∣santo, Ajomana, Saloniki, Aumiro, Angia, Napoli, Coron, Arcadia and Lepanto, famous for the memo∣rable Battle which the Christians gain'd over the Turks, A. D. 1571. The Turks are naturally Ambitious, yet Clownish, Slothful and addicted to Gluttony: However, they are Courteous to Strangers and Travellers, and not∣withstanding their rude Behaviour, readily expose themselves to Dangers; altho indeed they are only reputed to be valiant Soldiers, and endeavour to ter∣rifie their Enemies with hideous Outcries. They cause Hospitals to be built for the Entertaining of Travellers, and even bequeath Legacies to their Horses and Dogs, to the End that they may subsist without Labour. The Use of Wine is prohibited by their Law, nevertheless they make no Difficulty to quaff it off to Excess, during the Night or in Private, but when convicted of such a Crime, are severely punished. The Liquors that serve for their ordinary Drink are, Sherbet, Coffee, Hassap and Poscet. In fine, they are permitted to marry as many Wives as they can conveniently maintain, and are usually at∣tended with Eunuchs. The Subjects, Tributaries and Allies of the Grand Signior are of different Religions; for the greater part of them adhere to that of the Greek Church, some profess the Roman Catholick, others the reform'd, being either Lutherans or Calvinists, others embrace the Doctrine of Mahomet, and lastly others that of the Jews, who are dispersed through divers Places of the Empire. The principal Points of the Alcoran or Turkish Faith consist in adoring one God, in ac∣knowleding Mahomet as his chief Prophet, in esteem∣ing Jesus Christ as a great Prophet, in Circumcising Persons in the 12th Year of their Age, in observing every Year a Fast for the Space of a Month; in pro∣hibiting the Use of Wine, as also the eating of the Flesh of Swine and some other Animals, in praying 5 times in a Day, at several Hours, in obliging the Musulmans or Believers to travel in Pilgrimage once at least during the time of their Lives, or to send Deputies to Mecca, and in believing that the Impu∣rities of the Body defile the Soul. The Soveraign of this State is commonly called, the Great Turk or Grand Signior, and assumes the Title of his Highness. In the most parts of the Provinces of his Empire are established Beglierbegs or General Governours, on whom depend the Sangiacs, Bassa's, and divers other inferior Officers. Within the Territories of Turky in Europe preside 8 Beglierbegs, the first of whom was that of Buda in Hungary, but at present the chief is that of Greece, the second of Gallipoli, who is styled Ge∣neralissimo or Admiral of the Sea; the third of Ro∣melia, the fourth, fifth and sixth are those of Canisia, Agria (which now remains in the Possession of the Emperor) and Temeswar in Hungary, the seventh of Bosnia, who resides at Bagnaluca, and the eighth of Caffa in the Lesser Tartary. Turky in Europe is divided into the Continent and adjacent Islands, that is to say, into three Parts, viz. the Countries of the Grand Signior's proper Sub∣jects, Tributaries and Allies, every one of these three Parts comprehending divers Provinces, as it is more plainly represented in the ensuing Table.
The Continent of European Turky divided into Three Parts, viz. I. The Countries pro∣perly subject to the Dominion of the Grand Signior into 11. viz. 1. Croatia in part, containing these Towns, &c. viz. Vilitz, or Wihitz, Cap. Constanovitz, Ʋdun, Lira, Dublicza, Obroacza, Suenigrad, Sternizza, Kamengrad, Dobranin, Dublicza, Nowogrodek, Petrinia, Carlstadt, Segna. 2. Sclavonia in part. Posega, Bish. Cap. Sopia, Viwar, Kouvatz, Gradiska, Dowahacz, Brodt, Zagrabia, Sisaken. 3. Bosnia, in part. Bosna-saray, Zucnik, Jadra, Quernik, Vranduk, Bagnaluca, Ternovitza, Warbosaum, Tinima, Debitza or Do∣bicza, Jassenovitz, Jaycza, Cernizza, Zelinaza, 4. Dalmatia, in part. Scardona, Bish. Cap. Sdrigna, La Vrana, Trebigna, Antivari, Archb. Narenza, Bish. Mestar, Sfigna, Castel-nuovo, Cattaro. Bish. Budoa, Bish. Dolcigno, Bish. 5. Servia, in part. Belgrade, Cap. Sabatz, Orach, Belina, Zenobiz, Fochia, Janisabar, Pristina, Nice or Nissa, Stratoria, Siabrino, Novobardo, Precopia, Cratovo, Yagodnas, Colubas, Semendria, Fesilan, Perot, Vidina, Bercovitza, Chiprovax, Scopia, 6. Bulgaria, in part. Sophia, Cap. Dragoman, Ktiman, Biltz, Silistria, Nigebali or Nicopolis Ternova, Rossi, Rosgrad, Pasargia, Axiopoli, Dorostero, Tutracan, Provas, Dionisiopoli, Varna, Crosona, Drimago, Tomi or Trosmi, Cavarno, Mesembria, or Me∣sevira, Mangalia, Chinstenge, Giustandil, Pantaleo, Ternovo, Hasgrad, Prounda or Prosta∣visa. 7. Romania, in which are, Constantinople, Patr. Cap. Galata, Selivrea, Chiourli, Bargas, Philippopoli, Nicopoli, Bra, Zarnis, Maximianopoli, Enos, Abdera, Margna, Bistogna, Sestos, Garidia, Gallipoli, Trajanopoli, Sisopoli, Stragnara, Malatia, Adrianople, Rudisto, Mechaonva, Pera, Scutari, Chalcedon, 8. Greece in 6 Provinces, in which are, 1. Macedonia, in which are, Saloniki, Ca. Zucaria, Emboli, Sibanova, Cavalla, Philipi, Berrea, Asomama, Siderocapsa. 2. Albania, in which are, Alessio, Cap. Lavalona, Croya, Scutari, Antivari, Lodrino, Albanopoli, Drivasto, Durazzo. 3. Thessaly, in which are, Larissa, Cap. Armiro, Coniga, Pharsalia, Tricala, Demetriada, Volo, Scotusa. 4. Epirus, in which are, Larta, Preveza, to the Venet. Panormo, Bastia, Elatria, Orchimo, Chimera, 5. Livadia, or Achaia in part, Athens or A∣thini, pos∣sess'd by th' Venetians, Thebes, Aulis, Marathon, Megara, Lepanto, Delphos, Galato, Eleusis. 6. Morea, almost entirely subject to the Venetians. Patras, Chiarenza, Caminitza, Bish. Castel-Tor∣nesi, Modon, Belvedere, Coron, Navarin, Malvasia, Misitra, Zarnata, Chielefa, Pussava, Napoli di Ro∣mania, Arc. Argos, Arch. Corinth, Arc. 9. In Bessarabia are, Tekin, Cap. Orihow, Smail, Brailha, Kilianova, Bialogorod, Moncastro, Oczakow, 10. Part of Podolia, Camienieck, Cap. Tremboula, Zbarass, Bar, 11. Part of Hungary. Canisia, Beg. Temeswar, Beg. Waradin, Bish. Giula. II. The Countries tribu∣tary to the Turks in four, viz. 1. Transylvania, in which are, Harmanstadt, or Zeben, Cap. Neustadt, Albesule, Bish. Brassaw or Cron∣stadt, Bistricz, or Nosen∣stadt, Megiez, or Med∣wesch, Humad, Segeswar, or Sches∣burg, Wasserhely, Millembors, o ∣sebes, Coloswar or C∣burg. 2. Moldavia, in which are, Zockzow, Cap. Nicmicz, Targorod, Jassy, Choczin, Czarnoucz, Weissemburg, Thorda, Deva, Enguedine, Newmark, Agnabat. 3. Wallachia, in which are, Tergowick, Cap. Olten, Braskow, Brailaw, Orsavo, Arcin, Jalonicza, Dembronitza.
4. In Ragusa are, Ragusa, Archb. Cap. Stagno, Sabioncello. III. The Allies of the Turks, in two, 1. Lesser Tartary, in which are, Aloph, Cap. Manitz, Monaster, Stokolak, Ostam-Kirmen, Korkuby, Sterknitza. 2. In Crimsky are, Crim, Cap. Percop, Caffa-Beg, Kerey, Macop, Bacca-Saraya, C. Balaclava. The Islands in three, 1. In th' Isle of Negro∣pont are, Negropont, Protamo, Caristo, Geresto. 2. Isles of the Archipelago, Tasso, Scyro, Dronia, Andro, Naxia, Faro, Zia, Standia, Milo, Sifano, Fermenia. 3. In the Isle of Candia are, Candia, Cap. Canea, Retimo, Sitia, Tuda, Spinalonga, Schino, Palaio-Castrio. CHAP. II. Four Provinces, viz. CROATIA, Croatia, SCLAVONIA, Sclavonia, BOSNIA, Bosnia, & DALMATIA, Dal∣matia. THESE Four Provinces were heretofore com∣prehended under the Name of Illyricum or Illy∣ria, and afterward called Sclavonia. They are ex∣tended from the Frontiers of Carniola to Bulgaria and Albania, viz. from the 38th Degree, 20 Minutes to the 44th Degree 40th Minute of Longitude; as also from the Gulph of Venice, as far as Hungary from the 42d Degree 30 Minutes, to the 46th De∣gree of Latitude, including about the Space of 70 Leagues from East to West, and 60 from North to South. The Air is very Gentle and Temperate, and the Soil, notwithstanding the great number of Moun∣tains, extremely fertile in Corn, Grapes, Olives and other Fruits. The Country, in like manner, affords good Pastures, besides divers Mines of Gold, Silver and other Metals. Moreover, on the Coasts of Dal∣matia are taken vast quantities of a sort of Fish call'd Sardines, wherein the Wealth of the whole Province chiefly consists. The principal Rivers are, the Drave, the Save, the Drin, the Bossena or Bosna, the Ʋnna, and the Kulp. All the Inhabitants of these Terri∣tories, being almost of the same Inclination, naturally take delight in War, and are much addicted to Drunkenness, Theft and Fraud. The Roman Ca∣tholick Religion is generally predominant, altho' there are many Professors of that of the Greek Church, and some Mahometans; but Liberty of Conscience is every where allow'd. CROATIA. The Country of CROATIA in particular, call'd Crabaten by the Germans, is suppos'd to be the same with that which was heretofore known by the name of Liburnia, and was made a Roman Province un∣der the Emperor Nicetus, being bounded on the North by Sclavnia, on the South by Morlachia, on the East by Bosnia, and on the West by Windisch-March. The Emperor of Germany, among many other Titles, assumes that of King of Croatia; and, indeed, it was anciently a puissant Monarchy, but in the latter Ages hath been extreamly depopulated by the frequent Inrodes of the Turks, and the greatest part of it is at this day subject to the Grand Seignior's Dominion. The Croatians or Croates, are a valiant, hardy People, and good Soldiers, especially their Horsemen, so that they are entertain'd in most of the Courts of the German Princes as their Horse-Guards; some of them are also very swift, particu∣larly the Ʋskokes running up and down Mountains like Bucks, with Shoes made of Cord for that pur∣pose. As for their Manners and Customs, they par∣take of those of the Germans, Hungarians and Scla∣vonians, insomuch that their Gentlemen are said to share with the first in their Drunkenness, to imitate the second in their haughty Humour, and to be alto∣gether as importunate as the last. WIHITZ or BIGIHON, Vihitza, the Capi∣tal Town of Croatia, stands on one side of a small Lake made by the River Wana, at the distance of 45 miles from Segna to the East, as many from Zara to the North, and 84 nigh West of Posega. It was taken by Hassan Bassa of Bosnia, after an obstinate Defence, and the Garrison basely murder'd, contrary to the Articles of Capitulation in the year, 1592. having been for the space of 150 years the great Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks; so that this Conquest gave the Ottoman Family the first sure footing in these parts, and open'd them a passage in∣to Sclavonia, the greater part of which was soon after forc'd to submit to their victorious Arms. CASTANOVITZ, is a strong Castle, con∣sisting of 3 Towers and a Wall, according to the ancient manner of Fortification, near the River Wana or Ʋnna and the Frontiers of Bosnia, 34 miles from Gradisca to the West. It formerly appertain'd to the Turks, but was taken by Prince Lewis of Baden, and submitted to the Emperor's Jurisdiction, A. D. 1688. PETRINIA, Petrinia, is seated on a River of the same name, near its fall into the Kulp, about 8 miles from Zagarab or Agram in Sclavonia. It was made a regular Fort in imitation of Wihitz, not long after the Turks had subdu'd that place. But about three years after its Foundation it was recover'd out of the Grand Seignior's Hands by
the Imperialists, who as yet retain it in their Posses∣sion. CARLSTADT, on the mouth of the River Maresnitza, took its name from Charles Arch-duke of Austria, who first caus'd the place to be fortify'd, A. D. 1579. The Garrison is maintain'd and fur∣nish'd with all sorts of Ammunition by the Carnio∣lians, that esteem it the securet Bulwark of their Country; neither are any Persons allow'd to reside there excepting Soldiers, who receive Victuals and other necessary Provisions from Doboretz or Dabritz, a neigbouring Market-town. SEGNA or ZENG, is situated on the Bay heretofore call'd Flanaticum, now of Quarnaw or Carnaro, over against the Island of Veglia, at the di∣stance of 46 m. from Carlstadt almost to the South, as many from Zara to the North-west, and 52 from Wihitz to the West. It is the Metropolis of the Principality of Morlachia, and an Episcopal See un∣der the Metropolitan of Spalatro. It is also well for∣tify'd both by Art and Nature, vast Woods and Mountains lying behind it toward the Land, so that an Army can scarcely come near, neither is its Har∣bour capacious enough for a considerable Fleet. This place being about 1539. in the possession of the Count de Frangipani, was claim'd by Solyman II. as a dependance of Hungary, a great part of which he had then subdu'd. Insomuch that the Emperor Fer∣dinand was oblig'd to take it under his peculiar Pro∣tection, and entertain'd therein for its defence the Ʋscokes, a Gang of Robbers like our Bucaniers. And indeed the adjacent Coasts are full of small Islands, Rocks and Creeks, and have been a Receptacle for Pyrates. These Bucaniers in process of time were en∣creas'd to the number of five or six hundred, and did much Damage to the Turks and Christian Merchants: Whereupon the former, to revenge those Injuries, rais'd a War against the Austrian Family in the year, 1592. which continu'd until 1602. and wherein were lost the Troops of Agria and Canisa in Hungary. We are inform'd by Father Paul, in his Continuation of the History of the Ʋschochi, That the Town of Segna was inhabited in 1613. by three sorts of Peo∣ple, viz. the Stipiendiarii or listed Men, being 200. under four Captains; the Casalini or Citizens, con∣sisting of about 100 Families; and the Venturini, who were Renegadoes out of Turky, Dalmatia and Apulia, their whole number not amounting to above 2000. However this small Body of Men often plagu'd the State of Venice from 1537 to 1616. against whom the Arch-duke of Austria declar'd a War in 1615. on their account; but the Dutch having taken part with the Venetians, the Arch-duke was constrain'd the next year to suppress this Nest of Pirates, who were never heard of since. SCLAVONIA. SCLAVONIA, strictly so call'd, comprehends only that part of ancient Pannonia which is bounded on the North by the Drave, on the South by the Save, on the East by Rascia, and on the West by Germany, being extended for the space of 32 German miles in length and 12 in breadth. This Province took its name (as it is generally believ'd) from the Slavi, an ancient People who came from Scythia about the time of the Emperor Justinian, and hav∣ing over-run Istria and all Greece, founded the King∣dom of Poland under Lechus, as also that of Moravia under Zechus, A. C. 550. but they were driven out of Greece by Constantine. They infested Canute and Sueno Kings of the Danes in the Xth Century, but were overcome by Walduner in the year, 1161. In 1200. Canute the Dane worsted the Marquess of Brandenburg who had taken possession of Sclavonia, and afterward the Country became tributary to the Hungarians. In 1504. it was subdu'd by Solyman the Magnificent; but in 1687. after the defeat of the Ottoman Forces at Mohatz they mutiny'd against the Grand Visier, and the Turks deserting it, the whole Territory, (excepting the Town of Gradiska) sub∣mitted to the Emperor. The Inhabitants are for the most part robust and of a strong Constitution, so that the Venetians, after they had conquer'd these parts, observing the Natives sit for all manner of Drudgery, caus'd them to work at the Oars of their Gallies, and put them on other toilsom Employments of the like nature. Thus they took occasion to name all their inferior Attendants and Bond-servants Sclaves, which Word afterward grew in use throughout the more Western parts of Europe. The Professions of the Roman and Greek Churches are tolerated in the County of Zagrabia and other parts of Sclavonia, where the People were first con∣verted to Christianity by the preaching of one Me∣thodius. But the Romanists here enjoy this peculiar Privilege, That Mass is allow'd to be read among them in their Mother Tongue, a Favour no where else granted to the Commonalty under the Papal Ju∣risdiction. Gesner assures us, That there are no less than 60 distinct Nations that speak Sclavonian; and indeed if we consider the many large Empires and Kingdoms in which this Language is us'd, the Ac∣count will scarcely seem to fall short; since some Dialect thereof is generally spoken in the vat Em∣pire of Russia, in Livonia, Poland, Silesia, Bohemia, Moravia, a considerable part of Hungary, Istria, Dacia, Epirus, Georgia, Mengrelia, Bosnia, Prussia, Scandi∣navia, &c. POSEGA, the Metropolis of a County of the same name, lying between the Drave and the Save, as also of the whole Province of Sclavonia, is situated on the River Oriana, at the distance only of 2 miles from the Confines of Bosnia, 8 from the River Save to the North, 30 from Gradisk to the East, 120 from Buda to the South, 126 from Belgrade to the West, and 185 from Vienna to the South-east. It is indif∣ferently strong, and contains about 1000 Houses within its Walls, but more especially remarkable for its Traffick, almost 400 Villages depending on its Jurisdiction. The circumjacent Country is extreamly fertil, and brings forth Fruits of an unusual size. The Turks made themselves Masters of this Town under Solyman the Magnificent about A. D. 1544. together with Walpo and Five Churches. But the Im∣perial Forces regain'd it on the 12 day of Octob. 1687. when the Bey or Turkish Governor at first made some shew of Resistance by discharging some Canons, but afterward deserted the place, whilst part of the Garrison retir'd to the Mountains, and the rest into different Holds on the Save. The Ger∣mans found there a great quantity of Ammunition and Provision, together with 5 Pieces of Ordinance. GRADISCA or Gradisk, Gradisca, a strong Town, stands on the Banks of the River Save, toward the Frontiers of Croatia, about 30 miles from Posega, almost to the West. It was taken from the Turks by the Imperial Troops, under the Command of the Duke of Croy, A. D. 1691. Brodt is a small Town, distant 15 miles from Po∣sega to the South, and remarkable for a Victory there
gain'd over the Turks by Prince Lewes of Baden, A. D. 1688. ZAGRAB, Zagrabia, the Chief City of a County, so nam'd, and dignified with an Episcopal See, lying about a Musket Shot from the Banks of the River Save, and divided by a small Brook into two Parts; one of which more especially bears the Name of Zagrab, Zagram or Agram, and the other is commonly call'd das Capital, or the Chapter, by reason of the Bishop's Palace there built, and a fair Cathedral Church dedicated to S. Stephen, the first Christian King of Hungary. It is a place of great Strength and well Peopled, being distant 45 miles from Wihitz to the North, 15 from Gradisca to the West, and 11 from Cilly to the South-east. Sisaken, mention'd by Pliny and Antoninus under the Name of Sisia, is seated on the Southern Bank of the Save, over-against Zagrab, and famous for the stout Resistance there made against the Turks, in the Year 1593. For hoping by the Conquest of these Territories to open a free Passage into the German Empire, they resolutely stormed this Town with a puissant Army, but were as gallantly received, and beat off by the Inhabitants, till some Dutch Regi∣ments came to their Assistance; who slew above 8000 of the Enemies in the Field, whilst the greater Part of those that escaped the Slaughter were drowned in the River Save, where they were pursued by the Germans. Petrowina is remarkable for its situation at the bottom of the Ridge of Hills that divide the County of Zagrabia from Hungary, and hath given good Proof of its Strength in opposing the Turkish Forces, A. D. 1596. BOSNIA. BOSNIA, derives its Name from the River Bosna, that runs through it, lying between the Ʋnna, the Save and the Drina, as also bordering on Servia to the East, Croatia on the West, Sclavonia and Ras∣cia on the North, and Dalmatia on the South. It was heretofore a free independent Kingdom, but in the Year 1310. became tributary to Charles Robert King of Hungary, who changed its Royal Style into that of a Dukedom. In the Year 1415. the Bosnians threw off the Hungarian Yoke, and betook them∣selves to the Grand Signior's Protection. Then King Sigismund invaded their Country, and reduc'd them to their Allegiance: Nevertheless they soon revolted again, and were a second Time subdued by Matthias Corvinus. But Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks, took Jaycza, the then Metropolis of these Ter∣ritories, in 1472. and made himself absolute Lord of them, after having caused Stephen, the last Duke to be flead alive: So that since that Time it hath been reckon'd a Province of the Turkish Empire, and govern'd by a Bassa, who usually resided at Bag∣naluca, till at last the victorious Prince Lewis of Baden, with a strong Detachment of Germans and Hungarians reconquer'd it, A. D. 1688. BOSNA-SARAY, Bosna-Saraium, is wa∣tered with the Streams of the River Miglazza, and now reputed the principal City of Bosnia; which Ad∣vantage was some time peculiar to Jaycza, and after∣ward to Wanbosaum. It is distant 50 miles from Peter Waradin to the South-west, and 175 from Buda to the South. Jaycza, Gieza or Gaitia, formerly the Metropolis of Bosnia, is defended by a Castle and other strong Fortifications, and situated on the River Plena, at the distance of 42 miles from Wihitz to the East, 60 from Bagnaluca almost to the North, 82 from Zara to the North-east, and 154 from Buda to the South. The King of Hungary recover'd this Town, A. D. 1463. out of the Hands of the Turks, who in vain attempted to retake it the same Year, but they afterward accomplish'd their Design, and made it the Seat of a Sangiack. DALMATIA. DALMATIA, Dalmatia, was heretofore a very large Province, but is now more contracted, having Bosnia and Croatia for its Northern Bounds, the Adriatick Sea or Gulph of Venice on the South, a Corner of Bosnia on the East, and Istria on the West. It was also for some Time a populous and flourishing Kingdom, first subdued by the Romans, under the Conduct of Publius Cornelius Nasica, a lit∣tle before the third Carthagenian War. Afterward it recovered its former Liberty, and was govern'd for several Ages by certain Princes, who assum'd the Style and Dignity of Kings of Dalmatia. For the Pope having conven'd a Council, by two of his Legates, caus'd Duke Demetrius to be invested with a Sword, Scepter and Crown, A. D. 1076. Upon the Failure of their Line it devolv'd, together with the Croatian Monarchy, on the Kings of Hungary, in 1310. as a Member of which Kingdom it is still claim'd by the Emperor of Germany, although the Venetians are at present the chief Proprietors of the Country; and another Part is possessed by the Turks. The Language of the Dalmatians is the Scla∣vonick, and their Religion for the most part the Roman Catholick. SCARDONA, Scardona, call'd Skardin by the Sclavonians, is a Place of great Antiquity, and was formerly the Metropolis of Dalmatia, the Episcopal See of Belgrade having been translated thither, A. D. 1120. It is situated on the River Kerka, and di∣stant about 30 miles from Sebenico almost to the North, as also 7 miles from the Adriatick Sea. In the Year 1683. it was taken from the Turks by the Mor∣lacks of Croatia, and General Valier put a sufficient Garrison into it for the Venetians. ANTIVARI, Antibarum, a Town of Dal∣matia, although joyned to Albania by the Turks, since it fell into their Possession, stands on a rising Ground, and the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea, about 18 miles from Dolcigno to the North-west, and 60 from Ragusa to the South-east. Pope Alexander II. of an Episcopal See erected it into a Metropolitan, and allotted thereto ten Suffragans, A. D. 1062. NARENZA, Naro, is in like manner seated on the Gulph of Venice, 44 miles from Ragusa to the North, and appertains to the Turkish Jurisdi∣ction. It was anciently a very considerable Town, and the Capital of Dalmatia, having been also for some Time the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Ragusa, but at present it is in a man∣ner entirely ruined. The States of Venice made them∣selves Masters thereof, A. C. 987. and the Turks re-gain'd it in 1479. Castel-Nuovo, a Town of the Dutchy of S. Saba, or the Province of Herzegovine, is advantagiously situated on the Canal of Cattaro, 3 leagues from its Mouth, over-against the Eastern Sea, being defended on the North Side by the Castle of Salimanega, which is built on a very rocky Ground, and commanded
by the neighbouring Mountain of S. Veneranda, whence the Tower of Fastagick, founded partly on the Rock and partly on the adjacent Level, may be also battered. The Turks usually kept a Magazine of Powder in this large Tower. But the high For∣tress of Goringral stands 650 Paces from the Town, and is liable to suffer Dammage from a Battery placed on the Top of Mount Slichi. This Town was attackt and taken in the Year 1538. by the Con∣federate Forces of the Pope, the Emperor and the State of Venice, when it was garrison'd with Spani∣ards, and three sorts of Standards were set up there∣in, viz. one for his Holiness, another for his Impe∣rial Majesty, and a third for the Republick. How∣ever, they did not long enjoy their strong Hold, for the very next Year Barberossa the Turkish Commander arrived in the Channel with 90 Galleys and 30 Fustees, and having landed 80 Pieces of Cannon, together with some Soldiers, that were joyned by the Sanjac of the Province, he battered the Place, and carried it by Storm. The Venetians made an Attempt to retake Castel-Nuovo, in 1572. but were obliged to desist from their Enterprize: Neverthe∣less, at length, by the Assistance of the Pope's Troops and those of the Order of Maltha, they found means to get it in their possession, A. D. 1687. CATTARO, or Catarro, Catharum aut Cathara, is taken by some Authors for the Ascrivium of Pto∣lomey and Pliny, and communicates its Name to the Gulph on which it lies, about 50 miles from Ragusa to the South-east. It is fenced with a Castle, built on a Hill, and dignified with a Bishop's See, under the Metropolitan of Ragusa. The Turks have often attempted to surprize this City, to no purpose, and it is still subject to the Dominion of the State of Venice. BƲDOA, mention'd by Pliny, Ptoemey and Ste∣phanus of Byzantium, under the Names of Butua, Bulua and Buthaer, is situated on the Sea-coasts be∣tween the Gulph of Cataro and the Town of Dol∣cigno, 8 miles from Antivari to the North-west, its Episcopal See depending on that Metropolitan. Alexandro Donato having yielded the same City to the Turks, through Cowardize, Augustin Pasqualigo, in like manner surrendred Budoa, of which he was Governour, but was not blamed by reason of the Weakness of the Place. But Zacharias Salomoni, who had obtained the Government of Cattaro, reco∣vered it a little while after with the Land-Soldiers and Marine Regiments under his Command: Whereupon the Republick of Venice caused it to be regularly fortified. It suffered much Damage by an Earthquake in 1667. but extrordinary Care was taken to repair the Breaches and Ruins made by that Accident. DOLCIGNO or Dulcigno, is an Episcopal City near the Adriatick Sea, under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Antivari, from whence it is distant 18 miles to the South East, and 27 from Scu∣tari to the South-west. CHAP III. SERVIA, Servia aut Maesia superior, & BULGARIA, Bulgaria THE ancient Maesia contained these two Pro∣vinces, excepting that its Limits were not so far extended toward the East, but at present this Coun∣try advanceth as far as the Black Sea, by reason that the Territories of the Dobrussian Tartars have been joyned to those of Bulgaria. They are bounded on the North by the Danube, on the South by the Moun∣tains, that separate them from Greece and Romania, on the East by the Coasts of the Black Sea and Roma∣nia, and on the West by the River Drin and Bosnia. Their extent from East to West, that is to say, from Bosnia on the same Sea, consists of about 150 leagues and 60 in their largest breadth from North to South, viz. from Walachia to Albania. They are situated between the 42d Degree 40th Minute, and the 45th Degree 20 Minutes of Latitude; as also between the 43d Degree and the 45th of Longitude, so that the Air is very temperate and healthful, and the Soil no less fertile, altho' the greater part thereof is untill'd, by reason that the Turks deprive the Peasants of al∣most the whole Fruit of their Labour. Cattle and most sorts of Fowl are here sold at a dear rate; nei∣ther is the Bread good, as being baked in many places under Ashes: The chief Rivers are the Save, which receives into its Channel the Streams of the Drin and the Morave, which in like manner intermixeth its Waters with those of Nissava, but at length, after a long course falls into the Danube. The Inhabitants of these Provinces are Cruel, very much inclin'd to Robbery and Drunkenness, more especially the Servians, who carry away Children on purpose to sell them to the Turks for infamous Uses. The Bulgarians are not so inhuman, being some∣what more civilized. However, both these Sorts of People are famous on the account of their great Cou∣rage and Magnanimity. These Provinces were at first goern'd by certain particular Kings and Princes until Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks, subdued them, and they depend at this Day on the Jurisdiction of the Beglierbeg of Rumelia. About 30 or 40000 Roman Catholicks reside in these Territories, and are very poor: The Grecians inhabit the Towns, and are more numerous; the Mahometans dwell in the Burghs and Villages: But the Jews engross to themselves almost the whole Traffick, and have many Syna∣gogues. SERVIA. BELGRADE, or Grischish-Weissemburg, Alba Graeca, aut Alba Bulgaria, the Metropolis of Servia, is seated on a Hill in the Country of Rascia, a little below the Place where the Save and the Danube inter∣mix their Waters, at the distance of 160 miles from Hermanstadt to the South-west, 165 from from Buda to the South-east, 230 from Sofia to the North-west, 280 from Vienna to the South-east, and 540 almost West of Constantinople. It is well fortified with a Castle and divers other regular Works, and was erected into
an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Antivari by Pope Innocent X. Some Authors believe it to be the same with the Taurinum of the Ancients; but since this Town was more remote from the Confluence of the Save and Danube, it is more probable that Bel∣grade only sprang up out of its Ruins, not far from that old Station. Amurath II. Emperor of the Turks, was here de∣feated, in the Year 1439. And his Son, Mahomet II. lost an Army consisting of 250000 Men before the same Place, in 1456. which formidable Forces were broken and entirely ruin'd by a Stratagem of tha renowed General John Corvinus Huniades; for hav∣ing suffer'd a Party of Turks to enter the Town, whilst they were plundering, he made a Sally, suddenly seized on their Cannon, and turned them against the main Body of the Enemies, of whom 40000 were slain on the Spot, and the rest betook themselves to Flight, leaving all their Baggage and Ammunition behind. In 1521. Solyman, surnam'd the Magnificent, made himself Master of Belgrade, after a Siege of 2 Months, Lewes the young King of Hungary having then scarcely attain'd to the 15th Year of his Age, and the other Christian Princes being hotly engaged in mutual Broils. The Turks slighted it for many Years after, but in 1686 began to repair its Fortifica∣tions, after the loss of Buda. In 1688. the Duke of Bavaria, having received Orders from the Emperor, passed the Save with a puissant Army, discomfited 6000 of the Flower of the Turkish Troops, and on the 10th Day of August continued his March toward Belgrade. Whereupon the Infidels setting Fire to the lower Town abandon'd it, and left an old Bassa to command the upper Town and Castle, which were thrice successively storm'd by the Imperialists on the 6th of September, insomuch that at the 3d Assault they carryed the Place, and at first put all they met to the Sword, until about 7000 being cut off and thrown into the River Save, the Bassa and 3000 others obtained quarter, by reason that they had set 200 Christian Slaves bound with Fetters between themselves and the Imperial Troops, of whom about 4000 were kill'd and wounded during the Siege. They found there 70 Pieces of Ordnance, besides great store of Plunder, altho' the Burghers had been for a long Time removing their Effects, and 1000 Boats were conveyed down the River the Day before the Lower Town was burnt. In 1690. the Imperial Forces being attackt by the French King on the Rhine, the Grand Visier took an Opportunity to invest Belgrade, October 3d, with 60000 Men, the Garrison, then consisting of 6000 Germans, well furnished with necessary Provisions, who made a resolute defence, and slew a great num∣ber of Turks; but on the 8th a Bomb falling into the Magazine, blew it up, together with 1700 Sol∣diers, just ready to mount the Guard; soon after the other Store-houses were likewise fir'd, part of the Walls blown up, and the Trenches filled with the Rubbish, so that the Enemies easily rushed in by whole Squadrons, sparing none that stood in their Way. Thus was the Town and Castle destroy'd by the Fire, and the Governour, only with 300 of his Soldiers found Means to escape, with much difficulty. The Turks have since refortified the City, and as yet retain it in their Possession. Nissa, a Town of very great Importance on the River Nichawa, near its fall into the Morava, distant 140 miles from Belgrade to the South-east, as also 15 German miles from Scopia to the North, 12 from Giustandel to the West, and 42 from Thessalonica to the North-west. The Imperial Forces, under the Conduct of Prince Lewes of Baden, gained a me∣morable Victory here, over the Turks, on the 24th Day of September, A. D. 1689. so that the Town surrendred the next day, and the whole Provinces of Servia and Albania submitted to the Emperor. But it was retaken by the Turks in 1690. after a Siege of 3 Weeks. It is naturally strong, by reason of its advantagious situation, and capable of being much improv'd by Art, being also adorn'd with 5 Tur∣kish Mosques, and environ'd with a very fruitful Country. SEMENDRIA, Semenbria or Senderow, was heretofore the Capital City of Servia, and sometime a Bishop's See, but is now almost ruin'd. It stands on the Banks of the Danube, 24 miles from Belgrade to the East, and was taken from the Imperialists by the Turks, A. D. 1690. SCOPIA or Ʋscopia, is situated partly on a Hill and partly on a pleasant Plain, at the Foot of Mount Orbelus near the Banks of the River Varata∣zar, and the Confines of Macedonia. It was first a Bishop's See, and afterward erected into a Metro∣politan. It is also at present a populous and Trading City, adorn'd with many fair Houses and Mosques, besides some neat Sepulchral Monuments. The most considerable Houses are furnished with Carpets to tread on, curiously painted and embroider'd. The Avenues are also set off with Trees, Hills and Valleys, affording a very delightful Prospect. The Inhabi∣tants not long since were chiefly Asiaticks, plac'd there by Mahomet I. and according to the Report of the Germans 60000 in number, besides 400 Jews. For this City, in the Year 1689. being abandon'd by the Turkish Bassa and the Citizens, was taken by Gene∣ral Picolomini for the Emperor of Germany. But in regard it was only walled, and fell into the Hands of the Imperialists, when the Summer-Season was far advanc'd, they pillaged it, and set it on Fire. It is distant 60 miles from Nissa to the South, 66 from Sofia almost to the West, and 200 from Belgrade to the South-east. BULGARIA. SOPHIA, Sofia, or Sophia the Capital City of Bulgaria, is seated on the River Ichar in a spacious Plain, near Mount Haemus, at an equal distance from the Confines of Thrace or Romania to the East, Ma∣cedonia to the South, and Servia to the West; as also 60 miles from Nicopolis or Nigeboli, 90 from Philip∣popoli, 100 from Thessalonica to the North, 110 from Nissa, about 250 from Belgrade to the South, and 300 from Constantinople to the West. It anciently bore the Name of Sardica, and appertained to the Lower Maesia, having been founded (as it is generally be∣lieved) by the Emperor Justinian, in Honour of his Wife Sophia. It is as yet a large, populous and well-built City, tho' not enclosed with Walls, and for sometime the See of an Archbishop. It is also at present the usual Place of Residence of the Beglerbeg or chief Governour of Rumelia, and commonly call'd Triadizza by the Turks, to whom it hath been subject ever since the Time of their Emperor Amurath II. who subdued it, together with all the adjacent Ter∣ritories. But the City of Sophia is more especially famous for one of the greatest General Councils, con∣vened A. C. 307: wherein that of Nice was con∣demn'd, through the Artifices of the Emperor Con∣stantius.
SILISTRIA is the second Town of Note, esteemed also by some Persons, as the Chief in Bul∣garia, and the Seat of a Turkish Sanjack. It is di∣stant 18 miles from Nicopolis to the South, and 70 from Sophia to the North. In the Road leading from this Place to Tomi or Trosmi, a Place noted for the Confinement of the Poet Ovid, are to be seen the Remains of a Wall built by the Emperors of Constan∣tinople against the Inroads of the barbarous Nations. NICOPOLIS or Nigeboli, is in like man∣ner the principal Town of a Sangiack-Government, and watered by the River Danube, about 74 miles from Sophia, almost to the North. It is famous for the Victory which Bajazet I. Emperor of the Turks gained over the Christians in the Time of Sigismund King of Hungary, A. D. 1396. CHAP. IV. ROMANIA, Romania, aut Thracia. WHEN the Eastern Emperors had establish'd their Seat in the Kingdom of Thrace, they gave the Name of Romania to this Province, and that of New Rome to the City of Constantinople, which was as so called from its Founder Constantine the Great. Romania is bounded on the North by Mount Balkan or Haemus, that separates it from Bulgaria, on the South by the Archipelago, on the East by the Black Sea, the Thracian Bosphorus and the Sea of Marmora, and on the West by Macedonia, being ex∣tended from the 41st Degree to the 44th Degree 30 Minutes of Latitude, for the space of about 70 Leagues and 110 from the 49th Degree 30 Minutes to the 57 Degree of Longitude. The ancient Thracians at first had their particular Kings, then became Tributary to the Macedonians, and were made subject to the Romans by the Pro∣consul Caius Scribonius Curio. Afterward they were compelled to submit to the Destiny of the rest of Greece, and fell under the Tyranny of the Turks, who are now the only absolute Masters of all their Country since the taking of Constantinople by Maho∣met II. A. D. 1453. The Winds that blow from the Coasts of the Black-Sea, often render the Air cold, which nevertheless doth not hinder the Plague from being very frequent in these Parts. The Country brings forth much Corn and Fruit, and even affords Wine in some Places, together with Mines of Silver, Lead and Alum in the Mountains, and golden Sands in the Channel of the Mariza. Great quantities of Fish are caught on the Coasts, and more especially of Oisters. The Mariza is the only River of Note, and takes its rise at the foot of Mount Rhodope in Macedonia. Moreover, at the distance of 4 or 5 Leagues from the Coasts lies the Lake of Bastogna, which expatiates about 24 Leagues in compass. The Government of this Province, at present, ap∣pertains to the Beglierbeg of Rumelia, and the Grand Signior maintains therein certain Cadies or Judges to administer Justice in the principal Cities. The Reli∣gion of the Greek Church is generally embrac'd here, notwithstanding the Persecution of the Mahometans. The Jews, in like manner profess theirs with much Liberty, besides some Roman Catholicks. CONSTANTINOPLE, Constantinopolis, heretofore call'd Byzantium, and at present Stamboul by the Turks, is the Metropolis of Romania, and the chief Seat of the Grand Signior or Ottoman Empe∣ror, as it hath been before of the Eastern or Grecian, being most advantagiously situated on the Thracian Bosphorus, as it were for an universal Empire, over∣looking both Europe and Asia, and commanding the Euxine or Black-Sea, and the Propontis or that of Marmora. Its Harbour is likewise so deep and capa∣cious that the Turks name it by way of Excellency The Port of the World. And indeed the great Bassin lying between Constantinople and Galata, makes the finest Haven in the Universe, round which one may take a View of the City itself to the S. the 2 Boroughs Fondukli and Tophana to the North, the Town of Scu∣tari to the East, and Galata to the West, affording the most magnificent Object that can be seen or ima∣gined; for the Buildings, extended in Form of an Amphitheatre, so as to be discerned all at once, the Mixture of Cypress-trees, the Houses of painted Wood, and the Domes of the Mosques, erected on the highest Ground, contribute much to the Beauty of this admirable Prospect. This famous City was first founded by Pausanias, a Lacedaemonian General, about 660 Years before the Nativity of Jesus Christ, afterward sackt and ruined by the Roman Emperor Severus, and at length re-edi∣fied, A. C. 313, by Constantine the Great, the Son of Helena, who caused it to be beautified with a Ca∣pitol, a Cirque and an Amphitheatre, together with many spacious Courts, Portico's and other stately Edifices, according to the Model of old Rome. Moreover he established a Senate therein, built divers magnificent Churches, endowing them with conside∣rable Revenues, founded a College, drew thither the Greatest and most Learned Men of all Parts of the World, by Largesses and liberal Stipends allowed to them, and begun a Royal Library, furnished with a great Number of Volumes; which were increased by his Successors to 120000. before it was burnt, un∣der the Consulship of Basiliscus. The City of Con∣stantinople is built in a triangular Figure, almost in Form of a Peninsula, and its Walls are washed on 3 Sides by the Sea, as being bounded on the North by the Bay formerly called Cornu or Chrysoceras, on the East by the very Mouth of the Strait or Bosphorus, on the South by the Propontis, and only on the West by the Continent of Thrace. The first of these Angles lies toward the East, at the End of the Promontory of the Bosphorus, called The Point of the Seraglio; the second to the South on the Propontis, at the extremity of the Walls, that are double toward the Land, and forti∣fied with strong Towers; the third is the lower End of the Port turning from West to North, on that part of the Gulph, which bears the Name of the Blaquer∣nies: This was a Suburb, where formerly stood a stately Palace and a Church, erected by the Empress Pulcheria in Honour of the Virgin Mary. Two Winds are here only predominant, viz. the North and South; for when the former blows nothing can come
from the Sea of Marmora; but the Ships sailing from the Black-Sea, have a very fair Gale: On the contrary, when a southerly Wind reigns, none can come from the Black, whilst there is a free Current from the Sea of Marmora or the White-Sea. Insomuch that these Winds are, as it were, the two Keys of Constantinople, that open and shut the Passage for Vessels, and when both cease, small Pinnaces are row'd with Oars. In fine, Constantinople stands on 7 Hills, raised by its Founder in imitation of ancient Rome, and is extended for the space of 14 miles in compass, affording an Habitation to almost seven hundred thousand Persons of both Sexes. It was also adorn'd, fortified and enlarged by other Emperors; for in the VIIIth Century the double Walls toward the main Land were almost 2 Leagues round, those next the Propontis somewhat more, and those on the Side of the Gulph and Port little less. The Emperor Ana∣stasius enclos'd the Suburbs (every one of which might be justly esteemed a Town) and all the Houses within 20 Leagues of the City, with a prodigious Wall, 20 foot broad, which began at Pont-Euxin, and reached to the Propontis. Furthermore, Constan∣tine divided his New Rome into 14 Quarters, resem∣bling those of the Old, every one whereof was beau∣tified with sumptous Buildings, viz. the Acropolis or Fortress that commanded the Entrance of the Har∣bour, where the Seraglio now stands; the Pharos or Watch-Tower, the Gallery of Justinian; the Bag∣nio's of Arcadius, Zeusippus, Constantine and Anasta∣sius, the Senate-House; the Hippodrome or great Cirque; the Churches of S. Euphemia, Anastasius and S. Acacius Martyr; the Arsenal; the Palaces of Constantine, Theodosius, Eudoxia and Arcadius; the Imperial Place, encompassed with a double Rank of Galleries, supported by fair Pillars; the grand Obe∣lisk of Thebes in Egypt; that of Constantine the Great, with the Pillar of Porphyry, on which was erected his own Statue, made of a Colossus of Apollo, brought from Athens; the Theodosian Basilica and Pillar; the Statue of Arcadius on Mount Xerolophus; the Court of the Capitol; the golden mile, whence all Ways begun; the Temple of the Apostles founded by Con∣stantine, and rebuilt by Justinian, wherein were the Emperor's Tombs, and on the Ruins of which Ma∣homet II. raised the stately Mosque still bearing his Name; the Town of Justinian, &c. besides the fa∣mous Church dedicated to S. Sophia, that is to say, the Divine Wisdom, one of the Master-pieces of Ar∣chitecture, which was exactly described by Procopius, and deserves a more particular Narration. But the Ornaments of Constantinople are altogether ruin'd and defaced, since it unhappily fell into the Turks Hands, so that the Footsteps of Constantine's City scarcely remain in the place on which it stood; for the Streets are narrow and uneven, and the Houses so low that they may more rightly be termed Cabbins, so that very little of their ancient Grandeur is retain'd, excepting the Seraglio or Royal Palace of the Grand Signior; those of some Noblemen, some Turkish Mosques, publick Bagnioes, Hospitals and Carvan∣sera's, which are indeed magnificent Piles of Build∣ing, together with the remainder of the Porphyry Pillar, the Ruins of the Palace of Blaquernes, and about 2 or 3 more, besides the Church of S. Sophia; which noble Fabrick was first erected by Constantine the Great, but being consum'd with Fire, A.C. 530. it was rebuilt and much enlarged by the Emperor Justinian, within the space of 6 Years. It is envi∣roned with Pillars of curious Workmanship and beau∣tiful Galleries, the Roof being adorn'd with Mosaick Painting, and the Sides and Floor lined with an ex∣cellent sort of Marble. Its length (as they say) from East to West, at first consisted of 260 Feet, and its heighth of 180, so that it was capabe of containing 36000 Persons at once; but this largeness hath ben much diminished since the Turks kept it in their Pos∣session, by whom it is turned into a Mosque, and scarcely any other Part of it remains than that which is properly called the Chancel. It would be too te∣dious here to exhibit a Narrative of all the Acci∣dents and Revolutions that happen'd in this Noble City since its Foundation by Constantine, to the Time it was taken by the Turks, there being never an Age that it was not afflicted with a Plague, Earth-quake, Fire, Civil Wars, Inroads of barbarous Nations, and many other Calamities. For in the Year 446. it was oppressed both with Plague and Famine, the Grand Church was burnt, and a great number of People were slain in an Uproar in the Cirque. In the next Year it was shaken by a terrible Earth-quake, which continued 6 Months, and overthrew divers Houses, Under the Reign of Leo, surnamed the Old, and the Consulship of Basiliscus, in 465. a very considerable part of the Town was almost destroyed by Fire, which brake forth violently for the space of 5 Furlongs in length and 14 in breadth, consuming all the Tem∣ples, Palaces, Houses and Statues that stood in its Way. When Justinian govern'd the Empire, about A. C. 557. a furious Earthquake had like to have prov'd its utter Ruin; at which Time strange subter∣raneous Noises were heard, and when they ceased the Air was agitated with horrible Whirl-winds, that made a hideous rumbling, and quite overturned se∣veral Churches: Which gave occasion to Justinian to re-edifie them more magnificent than they were be∣fore. Constantinople hath also been often besieged by the Saracens and other Barbarians, and no less fre∣quently taken, more especially by Constantinus Copro∣nymus, in 744. and by the French in 1204. who re∣tained it in their Hands, under Emperors of their own Nation, during 58 Years, until Michael Palaeo∣logus found means to surprize the Town, in 1261. when it still had its particular Embellishments, which have been long ago quite spoiled; nevertheless it is at present one of the richest, most populous and larg∣est Cities of Europe. Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks made himself absolute Master thereof, on Tues∣day the 27th of May, A. D. 1453. after having slain Constantine, the XVth of that Name, and last Em∣peror of the Grecians, who perished, together with the Flower of their Nobility, in most couragiously defending that renowned Metropolis, which was built by the first Constantine to be a second Rome. As for the Ecclesiastical State of Constantinople, its Bishoprick (according to the Opinion of most Histo∣riographers) was at first Suffragan to that of Heraclea, but afterward this Place being made the Seat of the Eastern Empire, its Church in process of time, be∣came the Metropolitan to that on which it before de∣pended, and the Prelates of Heraclea had the Privi∣lege to consecrate those of Constantinople, as the Bi∣shops of Ostia did those of Rome. Moreover the Bishops of Constantinople assume the Title of Patri∣archs, and the IIId Canon of the IId Council held therein allows them the first Place of Dignity after those of Rome, as being the second Rome; not to mention, That John, surnam'd the Younger, having exercised an encroached Authority over the Eastern Patriarch, first styled himself the Oecumenick or Uni∣versal Pope; but was stifly opposed on this account
by Gelasius and S. Gregory, Bishops of Rome, the for∣mer of whom termed it A new Ʋsurpation, and the other more passionately call'd it, A proud Name, full of Blasphemy, Error and Venom: Which Dissention happen'd A. C. 595. Divers Councils have been likewise assembled at Constantinople, the first whereof, or second General, was held A. C. 381. by 150 Bi∣shops, under the Pontificate of Damasus, and the Reign of Theodosius the Great; the main Design of this Convention being to maintain the Doctrine of the Council of Nice, which had been impugned in seve∣ral false Synods, to condemn the Errors of Macedo∣nius, and to re-establish orthodox Prelates in the See. The second Council of Constantinople, which is the fifth General, was convened in 553. under Pope Vigilius and the Emperor Justinian, on purpose to quiet the Commotions in the Church, raised about the Affair of the 3 Chapters and the Books of Origen. The third of Constantinople, or the sixth General Council was call'd by Pope Agathus, in the Time of Constantine Pogonatus, against the Heresie of the Monothelites, who acknowleding two Natures in Je∣sus Christ, yet asserted that there was but one Ope∣ration and one Will: They were condemned in this Council, held in the Chappel of the Royal Palace, called Trullum. It began on the 7th Day of Novem∣ber, A. C. 680. and ended on the 16th of September, in the Year ensuing. The fourth Council of Constan∣tinople, or the eighth General one, was assembled in 869. against the Patriarch Photius, under Pope Adrian II. the Emperor Basil the Macedonian in the East, and Lewes Son of Lotharius in the West. In∣deed the Greeks do not admit this Council, but ano∣ther that the same Photius, being replaced on the See of Constantinople, after the Death of Ignatius, sum∣moned in 879. and presided therein (as they say) over 383 Bishops. Besides these General, there were several particular Synods, more especially one conven'd by Constantine Copronymus, in 754. against the Ado∣ration of Images, which consisted of 330 Bishops, and continued from the 10th of February to the 8th of August. Another was held in 842. under the Em∣peror Michael Porphyrogenneta, where Image-Worship was re-establish'd. GALLATA is remarkable for its situation on the South-Side of a steep Hill, jetting out into a Promontory on the North-Side of the Harbour. It may well be esteemed a large City, in comprehend∣ing the Suburbs that lie to the East, West and North, altho' the compass of its Walls takes up no great space of Ground. It is also very populous, being inhabited more by Christians and Jews than by Turks, the Houses are thick and the Streets narrow. On the Top of the Hill stands a round Tower, adorn'd with high Spires, and cover'd with Lead. In this Place is established a common Mart for Merchants, who have a fair Caravan Serai, or Store-house, leaded and beautified with Cupaloes; wherein are exposed to sale certain Woollen-Cloaths called Londros, and di∣vers other sorts of Merchandize. On the North-Side of Galata are the Suburbs named PERA by the Grecians, that is to say, beyond, by which Name they sometimes comprehend Gallata and all the adja∣cent Habitations beyond the Harbour from Constanti∣nople. It consists of one large Street, that runs north∣ward, and is crossed by several others, affording a Seat to the Foreign Ambassadors, Envoys and Resi∣dents. SCƲTARI, or Scudaret, is seated over-against the Haven, between two Promontories of the Serag∣lio and Gallata, being a very large Town, and suppo∣sed to be the Chrysopolis and Dianae Forum of the Ancients, altho' there do not now remain any Monu∣ments of Antiquity. It is beautified with a Royal Mosque, built and endowed by the Sultaness-Mo∣ther, as also a House of Pleasure, or Palace of the Grand Signior: And not far from hence, on the Brow of a Hill, one may take a very fair Prospect toward Constantinople, Gallata, the Propontis and the Bos∣phorus. CHALCEDON, Chalcedon was built by the Megarians (according to the Report of Strabo and Eusebius) in the XIIIth Olympiad, A.Ʋ. 69. A.C. 685. and some Years before Byzantium. Indeed it was once a very considerable City, and dignified with the Title of a Metropolitan See. Theramenes the Athenian found means to surprize it at the same time whilst Alcibiades took Byzantium, AƲ. 345. After∣ward Mithridates, King of Pontus, having subdued Bithynia, besieged Cottas in this Place A. Ʋ. 680. but was repulsed by the Roman Consul Lucius Lucullus. In the IVth Century, viz. A. C. 363. Precopius, who pretended to derive his Original from Julian the Apostate, made himself Master thereof, and having entred privately into Constantinople, usurped the whole Empire, until Valens caused him to be put to Death, and gave Orders to demolish the Walls of Chalcedon, which hath since degenerated into a small obscure Town, called Cadiqui by the Turks, altho' it is still known among the modern Greeks by the Name of Chalcedona: Neither is it now famous for any thing but some ancient Sepulchral Monuments, and the Me∣mory of two considerable Councils, the first of which was held there in the 20th Year of the Reign of Con∣stantine the Great, A. C. 327. and the other conven'd on the 8th Day of October, 451. wherein 630 Bi∣shops were present, who condemned the Errors of Eutyches, deposed Dioscorus Patriarch of Constanti∣nople, and erected Chalcedon into an Archbishop's See. ABDERA, or Asperosa, lies on the Shore of the Aegean-Sea, between the Mouths of the Rivers Nessus and Hebrus, about 15 miles from the Bistonian Lake to the East. It was built by Abderus the Son of Diomedes, and had been for some Time a Colony of the Tejans; altho' others affirm that its Name was taken from Abderus, one of the Companions of Her∣cules, torn in Pieces by Diomedes's Horses. The Clazomenians raised it to so high a degree of Gran∣deur, that it was proverbially termed Abdera the Beautiful; nevertheless, the Inhabitants are accused of Stupidity by Cicero, and the Horses that fed in the adjacent Meadows often ran mad, which gave occasion to the Proverb, Abderitica Mens, to denote a Lunatick Person. Some Authors have observed, That the Frenzy with which these People were seiz'd, was usually the effect of a preceeding Fever, and that they were wont to walk about the Streets singing Verses and acting Stage-plays. Moreover their Ter∣ritories were so much infested by Rats and Mice, that they were at length obliged to depart thence, and transplant themselves into Macedonia. GALLIPOLI, Gallipolis stands at the Mouth of the Propontis, in the Thracian Chersonese, on a Strait of the same Name, otherwise call'd S. George's Arm, and the Straits of the Dardinels, but formerly the Hellespont, 110 miles from Constantinople to the South. It is a large Town, extended 5 or 6 miles in compass. This Place was heretofore much more considerable than it is at present, and very little remains of its an∣cient Splendor. It hath two Bays on the North and South, convenient for Galleys and Boats; but the
Southern seems to be more safe and capable of con∣taining Ships of greater Burden: On the Shore are also some dry Stations for Vessels. The Town ap∣pears more advantagiously from without than within, as does most of those in Turkey. For the Mosques or Churches, and Bezestans or places of Traffick be∣ing adorn'd with Cupalo's cover'd with Lead, and Minarets or high slender Steeples, together with the Groves of tall Cypress Trees afford a very pleasant Prospect: But the Houses are low built generally of Wood and Earth, the Streets narrow, and often co∣ver'd with Wood to keep off the Sun. This place is not populous with respect to its bigness, yet the number of Inhabitants is reputed to amount to 12000 Turks, four or five Thousand Greeks, and as many Jews. TRAJANOPOLI, Trajanopolis a Town of Thrace, bearing the Title of an Arch-Bishoprick, was at first call'd Zernis, and afterward receiv'd its Mo∣dern Name from the Emperor Trajan. It is distant 58 miles from Maximianopoli to the West, 23 from Aprio to the East, and 86 from Adrianople to the South-East. ADRIANOPLE or ANDERNOPOLI, Adrianopolis, aut Hadrianopolis took its Name from the Emperor Adrian, by whom it was repair'd, A. C. 122. and is seated on three low Hills near the Con∣fluence of the Rivers Darda, Tomagia and Mariza, at the distances of 140 miles from Constantinople to the West; 165 from Sofia, 390 from Belgrada, 550 from Bua, 75 from Philippopoli, and 80 from the Coasts of the Archipelago to the North. It hereto∣fore bore the name of Oresta, from that of Orestes, the Son of Agamemnon, its supposed Founder, and is at present called Endrem by the Turks, who made themselves Masters thereof under Amurath I. A. D. 1362. since which time it continued to be the Royal Seat of their Princes, until Mahomet II. Sirnamed the Great took Constantinople from Constantine Paloeolo∣gus, the last of the Eastern Emperors, 91 years after. The Grand Signior as yet often resides in this City, (which is very fair and large, and well built,) by rea∣son of the Plague that frequently rageth at Constan∣tinople. CHAP. V. GREECE, Grecia. THIS large Country is now called RƲME∣LIA by the Turks, and heretofore abounded more than any other throughout the whole Universe, in Learned Men, Prudent Law-givers, and valiant Generals, but at present affords only an Habitation to unfortunate Slaves; where Ignorance is altogether predominant, as having been establish'd in those parts by the Great Turk, through a Maxim of State. Di∣vers Territories are comprehended under this Name, which was first imposed only on two small Provinces, that is to say, Greece proper, and Thessaly. After∣ward the same Name was appropriated to Epirus, Macedonia, and to all the Islands round about the Continent: Moreover Sicily, and part of the lower Italy was termed Magna Graecia, and the adjacent Territories of Asia, receiv'd the Denomination of Asiatick Greece. In Hellas or Greece proper, were compriz'd Aetolia, Doris, Phocis, Attica, Megaria, Baeotia, and the Country of the Locrians; but now Greece may be distinguish'd into seven principal parts, which in time past, constituted many Kingdoms; that is to say, 1. Macedonia, 2. Thessaly situated on the Archipelago, 3. Albania on the Gulph of Venice, 4. Epirus on the Ionian See, 5. Achaia to the South of Epirus and Thessaly, 6. Peloponnesus or the Morea, to the South of Achaia, separated from thence by the Gulphs of Lepanto and Engia, 7. the Islands of the Archipelago. The ancient Grecians were the Inventers as well as ingenious Improvers of many Arts and Sciences; being the first Nation that submitted to Laws, and found out the best Method of Political Govern∣ment: They were also so Renowned for their Valour in the Field, and Civil Prudence at home, that di∣vers People were wont to resort to them from all parts of the World, either to be instructed in the liberal Sciences, or train'd up in the Art of War. The most Eminent Law-givers among them were Cecrops, Draco and Solon at Athens, Lycurgus at La∣cedaemon, Nicodora at Mantinea, Zeleucus at Locri, and Minos in Crete, who all acquir'd a very great Repu∣tation, insomuch that the Romans could not forbear boasting that their best Laws were receiv'd from them; for to that very purpose they sent Spurius Posthumus, Aulus Manlius, and Publius Sulpitius into Greece, to be inform'd of the several Constitutions, Customs and Manners of that Country. As for their Military Atchievements, they set up the third Universal Monarchy under Alexander the Great, and extended their Arms into several remote Parts of the World. But alas! how much are the present Greeks degenerated from their Noble Ancestors? How is their former Valour exchang'd for Pusilanimity; and their sagacious Wit turn'd into supine Stupidity? Indeed, both their Priests and Common People are now so far Cow'd by the Turks, and so miserably ignorant, that to get a little more ease than ordinary, they often renounce the Christian Religion to em∣brace Mahometism, being ready to apostatize even in every small Calamity and Discontent that happens a∣mong them. GREECE is bounded on the North by a long Chain of Mountains; on the South by the Mediter∣ranean Sea; and the East by the Archipelago or White Sea; and on the West by the Jonian and A∣driatick. Its utmost extent from the 35 Deg. to the 44 Deg. 30 Min. of Latitude consists of 190 Leagues, and of about 150 from the 44 Deg. 30 Min. to the 57 Deg. of Longitude, which ought to be understood of its greatest length and breadth. The Air is ex∣treamly Temperate and Healthful: The Soil in like manner affords good store of Corn, excellent Grapes, and other most delicious Fruits, and breeds many Herds of Cattel, together with variety of Game. MACEDONIA, a vast Province of Greece formerly a famous Kingdom, took its Name from
one Macedon the Son of Osiris, or of Jupiter, (ac∣cording to the Report of Stephanus and Solinus,) and was known by the various Names of Aemonia, Myg∣donia, Paeonia, Edonia, Pieria and Aemathia is bounded on the North by Dalmatia, and the Moun∣tains of Moesia; on the South by Epirus, on the East by the Aegean Sea, and on the West by the Jonian or Adriatick, being at present divided into four parts, viz. Macedonia properly so call'd, Jamboli, Comeno∣litari and Janna. Caranius descended from Hercules, is reputed to have first founded this Monarchy about A. M. 3240. which flourish'd chiefly under King Philip, and his Son Alexander the Great, and con∣tinu'd nigh 500 Years, till the Reign of Persius A. Ʋ. 586. when the Romans subdu'd the whole Kingdom, and reduc'd it into the form of a Province, 256. Years after the Death of Alexander the Great, and after a Succession of 41 Kings. Indeed the ancient Macedonians being a very Warlike People, through the prudent Conduct of their Princes, advanc'd them∣selves from small beginnings to that height of Gran∣deur, that they became Lords of 150 different Na∣tions, and are also very much commended for their Generosity, in severely punishing the Crime of In∣gratitude. In these Territories are found divers Mines of Gold, and the famous Mount Athos or Monte Santo; which takes up about 90 Miles in compass, and is advanced as it were a Peninsula into the Sea. It is also of so prodigious an height, that Pomponius Mela an ancient Geographer affirms that it ascends even beyond the lower Region of the Air, where the Clouds are form'd; and Pliny declares that its sha∣dow reacheth as far as the Isle of Lemnos, which is distant 45 Miles from thence to the East: Moreover on this Mountain stand 24 Monasteries of Caloyers, or Grecian Monks of the Order of St. Basil, who are employ'd in Cultivating the Earth, and gain a live∣lihood through their own labour. The chief of these Convents, viz. those of Garopedos, and Agias-laura, contain 600 Religious Persons, and the others 5000. The greater part of them are fortified against the incursions of Pirates, and all the Bishops under the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople, are chosen out of the same Colleges. And indeed the Students are here well instructed in the know∣ledge of the Holy Scriptures, and the Sacred Rites of the Greek Church, on which account it is termed by the Grecians,  or the Holy Mountain ac∣cording to the report of Bellonius, who hath accu∣rately describ'd this place. SALONICHI, or Saloniki, Thessalonica the Metropolis of Macedonia, is seated on a small River at the foot of an Hill, and hath a very commodious Harbour on the Bay of the same Name, being distant 220 Miles from Durazzo or Drazzi to the East; 350 from Constantinople, 120 from Sostia to the South, and only 38 hours Journey from Larizza. It is yet a famous large Mart Town, and bears the Title of a Metropolitan See, being well fenc'd with a Citadel on a Hill, and encompass'd with its old Walls built after the ancient Method of Archi∣tecture, with Turrets or Towers at certain distances, and extended about four Leagues in compass. It is also defended by two other Forts, the least of which stands at the Landing-place farthest from the Walls mounted with 20 pieces of Cannon. The Grand Citadel not unlike that of Constantinople, and common∣ly call'd by the same Name, viz. The seven Towers, commands the whole Town from the top of the Hill, at the foot whereof there is a large Suburb having its particular enclosure. William, King of Sicily seiz'd on this City, A. D. 1180. but it was afterward re∣duc'd to the Obedience of the Constantinopolitan Princes until Andronicus Palaeologus Brother to the last Christian Emperor of the East, sold it to the Re∣publick of Venice in 1313. by reason that the Grci∣ans were no longer able to secure it against the in∣roads of the Turkish Forces; neverthless Sultan A∣murath II. laid Siege thereto, and at length after many Assaults took it from the Venetians. So that the Turks have been ever since Masters of the place. However the Greek Christians as yet retain 30 Chur∣ches there, the chief of which is the Arch-Bishops See dedicated to St. Demetrius. This Cathedral hath three several Bodies supported by fair Pillars, and (as they say) was sometimes honour'd with the Preaching of St. Paul. There are also five Convents of the Order of St. Basilicus, every one of them maintaining about 100 young Virgins, who may (if they think fit) lay aside their Religious Habit and Marry. The Churches of St. Sophia, Gabriel, St. Demetrius, and the Virgin Mary are now the most Magnificent Turkish Mosques; the last of these hav∣ing been Converted to that use by Mahomet IV. who was depos'd in 1687. This Noble Structure is invi∣ron'd on each side with 12 Pillars of Jasper Stone; as many Crosses being set up on their Chapters, which the Turks have not as yet defac'd. Moreover the Jews have 36 Synagogues here, especially those of Castille, Portugal and Italy, besides two Colleges that contain about 10000 Students. who arrive there from all parts of the Ottoman Empire. Of all the stately pieces of Architecture with which Thessalonica was was heretofore beautify'd, there remains at present nothing so remarkable as a Triumphal Arch of Brick-Work, supported by two Marble Pillars, beset with Trophies, and many other curious Pictures: But this ancient Monument is now half demolish'd, and so much shatter'd through the injury of time, that it is difficult to guess on what occasion it might be erected. The City is for the most part inhabited by Jews, and well frequented by reason of the Traffick there establish'd for Silk, Wool, all sorts of Leather, Cotton, Grain, Powder, Iron, &c. As for its Govern∣ment, it hath a Mufti to manage all Affairs relating to Religion, a Mousselin for its chief Civil Magistrate, and a Molla to Administer Justice. AMPHIPOLI, Amphipolis, call'd Emboli by the Turks, is water'd on every side with the streams of the River Strymon on the frontiers of Thrace; a∣bout 60 Miles from Salonichi to the East, being a place of much Antiquity, and the See of an Arch-Bishop. Suffragan to the Patriarch of Constantinople. It was heretofore known by the Names of Ʋrbs Mar∣tis, and Novem Vie, according to the report of Sui∣das, and the Modern Greeks have impos'd on it that of Christopoli. Indeed this City is much celebrated in the ancient History of Greece; for Aristagoras the Milesian, escaping by flight from Darius, would have settled here in the LXIX. Olympiad, but was hin∣der'd by the Edonians; and the Athenians afterward sent thither 10000 Inhabitants, who were all cut off by the Thracians. However Aginon the Son of Ni∣cias, found means to establish a new Colony there, after having expell'd the Edonians. In process of time, those People by taking part with the Lacede∣monians against the Athenians, caus'd the War to be renew'd in the Reign of King Philip of Macedon. Lastly, Amphipolis was taken by Perdiceas, in the LXXXIX. Olympiad.
SIDEROCAPSA, is a small Town noted only for the Gold Mines in the adjacent Territories; which formerly afforded King Philip the Father of Alexander the Great no less a Summ than 1000 Ta∣lents of Gold every year; so that the same Prince after Crenidas had discover'd them, gave Orders for the Stamping a new Coin call'd Golden Philips. These Mines stil yield the Grand Signior a Revenue of 9 or 10000 Ducats per Month, and there are about five or six Hundred Furnaces for the Melting and Refining of Gold in the Mountains near this place. ALBANIA, Albania called Arnaut by the Turks, formerly depended on the Province of Mace∣donia, by which it is bounded on the East; as also on the West by the Adriatick and Ionian Seas; on the North by Servia and Dalmatia, and on the South by Livadia. It is extended from North to South for the space of about 200 Miles, and hath been en∣tirely subject, during two Ages to the Dominion of the Turks, excepting Corcyra and two other smaller Islands on the Sea-Coasts. This was the Native Country of the valiant George Castriot, Sirnamed Scanderberg, who gain'd 22 Battles over those Infi∣dels. And was at last wrested out of the Hands of his Successors by Mahomet II. But at present the Inhabi∣tants, who are about 70000 in number, being for the most part Christians or Renegadoes, shew a great Disposition to shake off the Turkish Yoke, and to put themselves under the protection of the State of Ve∣nice. Neither is it unlikely that such an Enter∣prize may hereafter take effect; since these People were ever famous for their Valour, more especi∣ally the swiftness and dexterity of their Cavalry, to whom the Turks themselves have been beholden for their Victory. ALESSIO, ALESSO or ALESO, Li∣sias aut Lssus, te Capital City of Albania, is situated on an high Hill near the mouth of the River Drin, which there dischargeth its Waters into the Bay, call∣ed from thence the Gulph of Drin; at the distance of 20 miles from the Promontory of Monte Santo to the East, 25 from Croia to the North, and 35 from Durazzo toward Scodar, almost in the midst between Epidaurus or Ragusi Vecchio, a Town of Dalmatia, to the North, and Aulona, or Valona, a∣nother of Macedonia, to the South. It is fenc'd with a Castle, and its Episcopal See was formerly subject to the Metropolitan of Durazzo. This Town is particularly famous for the Tomb of that Renowned Warriour Scanderbeg, who died there, A. D. 1467. and for whose Memory the Turks have so great a Veneration, that they esteem them∣selves very fortunate, when they can get an oppor∣tunity to come near his Monument, and to carry a∣way a small portion of the Earth, or a piece of the Sepulchre, which they tie to their Elbows as a preci∣ous Relick, a kind of Charm of great Efficacy to a∣nimate their Courage in Battel. CROYA or CRƲA, is a strong Hold of con∣siderable importance, on the River Lizane, and was formerly the See of a Prelate Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Durazzo; being distant 52 miles from Scu∣tari, almost to the South. It hath been for a long time the usual place of Residence, of the above-men∣tion'd George Castriot, Sirnamed Scanderbeg, Prince of Alania; but after his Death Mahomet II. Empe∣ror of the Turks, made himself Master thereof, A D. 1477. DƲRAZZO or DRAZZI, Dyrrhachium, a Celebrated Sea-Port Town at the mouth of the River Argentaro, ow'd its first foundation to the Cor∣sicars, or People of Corfu, A. Ʋ. 130. and was for∣merly an Arch-Bishop's See under the Patriarch of Constantinople: Its ancient Name of Epidamnus was chang'd into that of Dyrrhachium by the Romans, when they settled a Colony there, and it is more especially famous for affording kind Entertainment to Cicero during his Exile, until he was recall'd by a Decree of the Roman Senate. This City be∣ing besieg'd, A. Ʋ. 315 by a company of Out-Laws and Banditto's, the Citizens sent to imploy the Assi∣stance of the Corinthians, whose Auxiliary Troops were defeated by the Corsicans: Whereupon the A∣thenians espousing the Interest of the latter, a small quarrel gave occasion to the Corinthian War, and became as it were the leaven of the Great Peloponne∣sian so famous in the Greek History. Sultan Bajazet II. took the same place from the Venetians in the XV. Century; but it is not much Inhabited, by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air, altho' the Harbour be very commodious, being distant 58 miles from Scu∣rari to the South, 18 from Croya to the South-West, and 220 from Brundsium or Brindisi in Italy. ALBANOPOLI, Albanopolis is a Town of a small extent, yet formerly reputed to be the Ca∣pital of the whole Province of Albania. It is di∣stant 60 miles from Dyrrhachium or Durazzo to the East. As for the Cities of Antivari and Scutari, see the Description of them in Dalmatia, to which Province they more properly belong. THESSALY, Thessalia, a very pleasant Coun∣try, is bounded on the North by Macedonia, on the South by Achaia, on the East by the Archipelago, and on the West by Epirus, being encompass'd with divers noted Mountains, viz. Olympus or Elbos, Pin∣dus or Mezzovo, Ossa or Cassovo, Oeta or Bunina, &c. It was heretofore known by various Names, particu∣larly those of Aemonia, Dryopis, Hestiaeotis, Estiotis, Pelasgia,, Argos Pelasgicum, &c. but is at present call'd JANNA, from a Town of that Denomination. It is also divided by Strabo into four Provinces, viz. Thessaliotis, Phthiotis, Pelasgiotis, and Hestiotis. The Air is very healthful, and the Soil extreamly fertile, bringing forth abundance of most delicious Figs, Water-Melons, Pomegranates, Oranges, Lemons, Ci∣trons, Grapes, Almonds, Olives, Onyons, and all sorts of Grain. The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were ge∣nerally well bred and courteous, but somewhat glut∣tonous, which gave occasion to the Proverb, Thessala Bucca, to signifie a Dainty bit. They were very much addicted to Magick, having been instructed in those Arts by the Sorceress Medea, and very dextrous in forging Counterfeit Coin. They were also the first that tam'd Horses, and set forth Ships to Sea. The Modern Thessalians being for the most part Chri∣stians, are a warlike People, and remarkable for their comliness, having Black Hair and Eyes, and their Faces of a beautiful sanguine fresh Colour. The Province of Thessaly was for a long time govern'd by its particular Princes, but was afterward subdu'd by the Macedonians and Romans, and at length became sub∣ject to the dominion of the Turks since the time of Sultan Amurath. Deucalion was one of the most an∣cient Kings, in whose time happen'd a Deluge by the inundation of the River Peneus, so much cele∣brated in the Writings of the Poets. He reign'd in the same Age with Cecrops the first King of Athens, 349 years before the destruction of Troy. Hellen his
Son gave name to a considerable part of Greece, and Dorus his second Son impos'd his on the Dorians near Mount Parnassus. Xuthius the third begat Aehaeus, Founder of the Peloponnesian Achaeans, and Ion his second Son was chief of the Inhabitants of At∣tica. LARISSA, Larissa nam'd Asababa by the Turks, is pleasantly seated on the Banks of the River Peneus or Salampria, on a rising ground at the distance of 28 miles from the Gulph of Salonichi to the West, 25 from Pharsalus or Farsa to the North, as many from Diurn or Stadia, 160 from Athens to the North-West, and 380 from Constantinople to the South-West. It is dignify'd with the Title of a Metropolitan See, and is one of the most flourishing Cities of Greece, by reason that the late Grand Signior kept his Court there almost 20 years together. His Palace stands in the upper part of the Town, the Northern side being environ'd with the famous Mountain Olympus, and the Southern with a Plain inhabited by Chri∣stians, Turks and Jews. There is also to be seen a fair Stone-Bridge over the River, consisting of nine Arches. This City was founded by Acrisius, A. M. 2745. and hath been heretofore remarkable for the Birth of Achilles. It was taken from the Empire by Samuel King of Bulgaria, A. C. 981. ARMIRO, Eretria a considerable Sea-Port Town lying on the Sinus Pelasgicus, now call'd from thence the Gulph of Armiro, about 17 English miles from Larissa to the South. It is mention'd by Stra∣bo, Thucydides, Polybius, Stephanus, Livy, and other ancient Writers, by some of whom we are inform'd, that the Argonauts set Sail out of this Bay, when they were bound for Colchis to fetch the Golden Fleece; and that their Ship nam'd Argo, was built at Pagase, a Neighbouring place situated in the same Bay. It hath been also observ'd, that the Royal Na∣vy of Xerxes King of Persia was here sorely shat∣ter'd by a Tempest, and the whole Country of Greece by that means deliver'd from his invasion. VOLO, Pagasa aut Pagasae, formerly communi∣cated its name to Pagasicus Sinus a Gulph of Thessaly, to the North of Negropont, and was guarded by strong Towers, built after the ancient method of Fortification. This Fortress hath as yet a conve∣nient and spacious Harbour, and was not long since a considerable Magazine of the Turks, wherein were kept the Provisions which they had gather'd in the circumjacent fruitful Provinces, until it was storm'd by Signior Morosini the Venetian General, A. D. 1683. who found there above four millions of pounds weight of Bisket, together with other Victuals, and 27 Pieces of Cannon, which when he had convey'd thence in Vessels, he set fire to the Magazines, Hou∣ses and Mosques, and caus'd all the Walls of the Town to be entirely demolish'd. PHARSALƲS, now call'd FARSA, is chiefly famous for that memorable defeat of Pmpey's Forces, by Caesar, in the Neighbouring Plain call'd Pharsalia, A. Ʋ. 607. This place was first made an Episcopal See, subject to the Jurisdiction of the Arch-Bishop of Larissa, and afterward erected in∣to a Metropolitan under the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople. SCOTƲSA is a small City, and the See of a Prelate, Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Larissa; from whence it is distant 18 miles to the West. But we must not confound it with another Town of the same name in Macedonia. EPIRƲS, Epirus at first call'd Molossia, and afterward Chaonia, from Chaon, the Brother of Hele∣nus, was heretofore a distinct Kingdom; but in pro∣cess of time united to that of Macedonia, by which it is bounded on the North, as also on the East by Thessaly; on the South by Achaia or Livadia, and on the West by the Ionian Sea. This Coun ry in time past fed many Herds of excellent Oxen and Horses, and was very populous, being every where beset with a great number of Towns: But the Ro∣mans so often harras'd it after divers Revolts of the Inhabitants, that it was at length almost reduc'd to a Desert. The Turks rendred themselves absolute Masters thereof in the XIV. Century, excepting the Island of Corfu, which remain'd in the Hands of the Venetians, who have Conquer'd some places during the late War. LARTA or AMBRACHIA, Ambracia and Arta, took its ancient name from Arbraceus, the Son of Thesprotus, being remarkable on the account of its situation on a Gulph of the same name, and for having sometimes afforded a Royal Seat to the Kings of Epirus; as JANNINA or JOANNINA, now doth to a Sangiack or Turkish Governor. Larta is distant 24 miles from Preveza to the North-East, and still subject to the Dominion of the Ottoman Port. PREVEZA stands at the mouth of the Gulph of Larta, and sprung up out of the Ruins of that ancient City Nicopolis, which was founded by the Emperor Augustus, in Memory of the famous Battel of Actium; that he had gain'd from Mark Antony. It is at present a Fortress of considerable strength, seated at the distance of 90 miles from Lepanto to the North-West, and 150 from Larissa to the South-West. In the year 1539. Marco Grimani Patriarch of A∣quileia, and Admiral of the Popes Gallies, accompa∣nied with Andrea Doria General of the League, en∣deavour'd to surprize this place, but their design did not take effect. However Captain General Mor∣sini reduc'd it to the Obedience of the State of Ve∣nice, in 1684. CHIMERA is a very strong Town built on a Rock near the Sea-Coasts, 30 miles from the Island of Corfu to the North. It is the Capital of a Terri∣tory of the same name, and as yet remains in the possession of the Turks. ACHAIA, Achaia call'd also LIVADIA by Modern Authors, whereto in time past, the name of Greece was more particularly appropriated, com∣priz'd on the Eastern side, the Countries of Baeotia, Megaris, and Attica, or the Duchy of Athens; in the midst those of Doris and Phocis, where stood the re∣nowned Oracle of Delphos, together with the Moun∣tains of Helicon and Parnassus, so much celebrated in the Writings of the Poets. On the Western-side lye the Territories of Aetolia and Locris. This Province hath Thessaly for its Northern limits, being also bounded on the East by the Aegean Sea; on the South by the Gulph of Egina, or Engia the Isth∣mus of Corinth, and the Gulph of Lepanto; and on the West by the Ionian Sea, and part of Epirus. But the name of Achaia is sometimes appropriated to a small part of Peloponnesus, or the Morea, which was termed Achaia propria by Ptolemey, to distinguish it from the former, and is now nam'd Romania Alta, and the Duchy of Clarentia. Lastly, Achaia is some∣times taken for the whole Peninsula of the Morea. We are inform'd by Pausanias, that those Persons that wash'd their Bodies with the Waters of Slemnos, a Ri∣ver of Achaia, were wont to forget their Amorous Intrigues; and Pliny tells us, that the Wine of the same Country caus'd Women to Miscarry. It is sup∣pos'd
that St. Andrew the Apostle suffer'd Martyr∣dom here, and some Authors have writ the History of his Passion, whereof they pretend to have been Witnesses. ATHENS, Athenae, or ATHINI, according to the pronunciation of the Modern Grecians, took its name from the Goddess Minerva, call'd  in Greek, who was there chiefly ador'd, and is situated almost in the middle of a large Plain, between the Rivers Ciphisus and Ilissus, at the distance scarcely of one mile from the Gulph of Aegina or Engia, 44 from Corinth to the East, 24 from Megara, 50 from Thebes to the South-East, 120 from Lacedemon almost to the North, 160 from Larissa to the South-East, and 420 from Constantinople to the South-West. It was heretofore the Metropolis of Greece, more par∣ticularly of the Province of Attica, and one of the most famous and flourishing Cities of the Universe, whether you consider its Antiquity, Power, Grandeur of its Republick, Senate and Academy, or any other advantage that can render a place illustrious and re∣nowned in the World: Neither hath any other Town had a larger share in both good and bad fortunes than Athens. It hath been for a long time as it were the Seat of the Muses, and the Nursery of all Arts and Sciences: But now alas! the Scene is quite chang'd, and it hath been thrown down, though not utterly ruin'd by the Fury of the Destroyer, together with all the other Noble Cities of the East. And indeed there are few in Turky that have escap'd so well as this, or that have enjoy'd greater priviledges under the Ottoman Tyranny; being as yet the Ca∣pital of a Duchy of the same name, and the See of an Arch-Bishop. As for its Original, it was founded (as the most judicious Historians agree) by Cecrops, after he had reduc'd the Inhabitants of Attica, the Offspring of the Carians and Ionians, under a political Government, and at the same time advanc'd himself to the Throne, imposing the name of Cecropia on the whole Territory, which happen'd (as 'tis suppos'd) not long after Deuclions Flood, 830. years before the building of Rome, and about 1580. before the Nati∣vity of Jesus Christ. Cecrops enacted many excellent Laws and Constitutions, and divided his new King∣dom into Twelve Principal Cities, every one of which had Courts of Judicature, and its peculiar Magistrates, and were so little subject to their Prin∣ces his Successors, that they seldom or never con∣sulted them, excepting only in Cases of some immi∣nent or publick Danger: But still Cecropia was the chief Seat of their Empire, and daily increas'd in Wealth, Grandeur, and Strength; until Ericthonius the fourth King of Attica being admonish'd by the Oracle, that Neptune and Minerva strove who should have the Honour of giving a new Name to his Ci∣ty, conven'd a General Assembly of the People, wherein both Sexes having their free Voices, Mi∣nerva carry'd it, and had the Victory by one Vote: Whereupon ever since that time the City was call'd Ahenae, or Athens, from Athene, the Greek Name of that Goddess, in Memory whereof the Attick Games term'd Panathenaea, were publickly Celebrated. Thus Athens continu'd a Monarchy about 550. years, until the Death of Codrus the Son of Melan∣thus, the seventeenth and last King, a Prince less for∣tunate than magnanimous; who being inform'd by the Oracle during the Invasion of the Dorians, that They should be Conquerors whose King was slain, pre∣ferr'd his Country's safety before his own Life; for having put himself into a disguise, he rush'd in a∣mong the thickest of his Enemies, and bravely died to save his Subjects; which Fact was no sooner known, but the Dorians gave ground, and retreated without performing any notable Enterprize. Inso∣much that the Athenians in reverence to Codrus, would never be perswaded to admit any Governor by the name or title of King, but were govern'd by Magistrates call'd Archontes for 600 years after, who were at first chosen for their whole Lives, then chang'd every ten years, and afterwards every year; under whom they most valiantly defended their Li∣berty and Territories for the space of 534 years, until the Tyrant Pisistratus seiz'd upon the Gover∣ment. Afterward they encounter'd the Persians, and with inconsiderable Forces in proportion to their E∣nemies, defeated the numerous Armies of Darius and Xerxes, chiefly through the Courage and pru∣dent Conduct of their valiant Generals Miltiades and Themistocles. The most noted of these Victories were that of Marathon, obtain'd at Land, against a Million of Men, of whom (as they say) 50000 scarce∣ly escap'd; and the memorable Sea-fight at Salamis against Xerxes's Navy. They also maintain'd War a∣gainst divers other Nations with various success, more especially against the Lacedaemonians, with whom they often contended for the Soveraignty of Greece: However the latter took Athens, and impos'd on the Citizens 30 Tyrants for their Governours. But they were soon deliver'd from this slavery by the Policy and Valour of Thrasybulus, and at last through the assistance of the Thebans, under that re∣nowned General Epaminondas, they entirely subdu'd the Spartans their Enemies at the Battel of Leuctra. Insomuch that the Athenians became absolute Masters of the Aegean Sea, and of the greater part of the Islands therein, carry'd their Conquests even to the Frontiers of Egypt, and (according to the report of Aristophanes,) had no less than 1000 Cities under their Dominion. But in process of time, having a∣bandon'd themselves altogether to Luxury and Idle∣ness, they degenerated so far, that the Macedonians under King Philip and his Son Alexander the Great took an opportunity to advance their Monarchy, and extended it by little and little over the whole Conti∣nent of Greece. After the Death of Alexander, the Athenians in vain endeavoured to recover their Liberty; yet in some measure enjoy'd it under the Protection of the Romans, until they ruined themselves by siding with Mithridates King of Pontus in his unsuccessful Wars; for Sylla, to revenge the Injury, plundered the City, set Fire to the Pyraeum and Munichia, sparing nei∣ther Sacred nor Profane Places in his Fury, put the most part of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and would have destroyed all, had not the Night favour'd the escape of some. They were in like manner un∣fortunate afterward, in taking the weaker Side in the Wars between Caesar and Pompey. But Caesar, a no less merciful than valiant Conqueror (to use his own Expression) pardoned the Living for the sake of the Dead; altho' after his Death they shewed themselves ungrateful to his Memory, in erecting Statues to his Murderer Brutus; on which account, Augustus suc∣ceeding in the Empire, took from them the Isle of Aegina. In the Time of Claudius Caesar S. Paul ar∣rived at Athens, and having in his Way observ'd an Altar dedicated to the unknown God, took an occasion to preach to them the true God, the Creator of all things, whom, till then, they had worshipped in Ig∣norance. At this Sermon, among many others, Dio∣nysius a Senator of the chief Court Areopagus, em∣brac'd the Christian Faith, and was deservedly or∣dain'd
by the Apostle to be the first Bishop of Athens, so that this Church became very considerable; for a great number of Athenians, animated by the Example of their Bishop Publius, suffered Martyrdom under the Emperor Adrian, A. C. 123. Among the Chri∣stian Emperors, Constantine the Great was their pecu∣liar Patron and Benefactor, honouring their Govern∣ours with the Title of Archduke; and through the Bounty of Constantine II. they obtain'd several Isles in the Archipelago. But under Arcadias they were obliged to submit to the common Fate of the rest of Greece; as also all Italy, being miserably harrass'd and pillag'd by Alaricus King of the Goths. The City of ATHENS is encompassed on the North with the Mountain Parnes, now call'd Chasha and Nozea, on the North-east by that of Pentelicus or Pendely 6 miles off, that of Hymettus or Telo-bouni from East to South about 5 miles distant; and the Hills Coridalia, now Daphni-bouni, reaching from West to almost North, at 6 or 7 miles distance. Nearer to the Town stands a little pointed Rock, call'd from a Chappel ercted on its Top, S. George's Mountain, which is probably the Anchesmus of Pausanias, and lies about a mile off the Town. The Stream of the River Ilissus flows by it South-east, and turneth round it South and South-west by the Hill hereto∣fore nam'd Musaeum, whence it falls into the Channel of the Cephisus; which taking its rise from several Springs on Mount Parnes and Pentelicus, runs by the City North-east, about 3 miles distant from it, and waters in its Passage a Wood of Olive Trees, at least 6 miles long, and 1 or 2 broad, which is now the greatest Wealth and Ornament of the Athenian Plain. The City itself, standing North of the Citadel, and so covered by it that it hardly appears on that Side toward the Sea, is extended for the space of a mile and an half in length, in breadth somewhat above a mile, and 4 in compass, but is destitute of Walls, insomuch that it hath been frequently surpriz'd by Pirates, until some Years ago all the Avenues were secured by Gates, and the utmost Houses were made to serve instead of Walls; which are shut up every Night, and reasonably well defended against the In∣roads of those roaving Corsairs. The Houses are built close together, and the Streets very narrow, the whole City being divided into 8 several Quarters or Parishes, commonly call'd Platoma, besides the Castle. The Harbour, formerly known by the Name of Portus Phalereus, and now by that of Il Porto, which is distant 2 miles from thence, and was some∣times joyn'd by a long Wall, hath been by degrees so stopt up with Sand, that it is now scarcely cap∣able of containing Vessels of a small Size. There are many notable Monuments of Antiquity yet remaining at Athens, which may well be pre∣ferred before those of any other Place in the World, Rome only excepted: The chief of these is the Acropolis or Citadel, being the most ancient and eminent part of the City, that had at first no other Inhabitants but such as dwelt within those Walls; afterwards, in times of its greatest Prosperity, it serv'd as a Castle, situated in the middle of the Town, and is even still applied to that use, altho' it now stands some∣what above to the South-west; the other Buildings, that anciently encompassed it, being utterly destroyed. This famous Fortress is built on a long Rock, with inaccessible Precipices on every Side, but the North-west End, where you mount by a steep Ascent to the Entrance, and which is better fortified than the rest with high thick Walls: The whole Rock, of an Oval Form, stretcheth it self forth about 1200 or∣dinary Paces in circumference, and is surrounded with Walls of a very ancient Workmansip, making an Area, twice as long as broad. About 200 Paces lower, yet not altogether at the Bottom of the Hill, are distinctly to be seen the Foundations of other Walls, encompassing the first almost quite round, which may well be suppos'd to be those erected by Theseus, who first enlarged the City. The other noble Monuments are, The Temple of Minerva, the chief Goddess of the Athenians (which is not only still the chief Ornament of the Citadel, but both for Matter and Art the most beautiful Piece of Anti∣quity now extant in the World) the Theatre of Bacchus, under the Southern Side of the Castle; the Panagia Spiliotissa, or Church of our Lady of te Grotto; the most magnificent Pillars, Gate and Aque∣duct of the Emperor Adrian; the Stadium, or Place where anciently the Citizens ran Races, fought wild Beasts, and celebrated the Games call'd Panathe∣naea; the Hill Musaeum, so called from the Poet Musaeus, the Disciple of Orpheus, who was wont there to recite his Verses; the Ruins of the Areopagus; the Odeum or Musick Theatre; the Temples of Theseus, Augustus and Jupiter Olympius, the Tower of Andronicus Cyrrhastes, or Temple of the eight Winds; and the Phanari or Lanthorn of Demosthenes: All which are accurately descrbed by our ingenious Countryman Sir George Wheler, in his Journey into Greece. The present Revenue of the Archbishoprick of Athens amounts to 4000 Dollers per annum, and 200 Churches are counted in and about the City, besides several Convents for Monks, and Nuns naed Calo∣grega's: But only 52 of these Churches have their particular Priests, who officiate therein, and ordina∣rily read their Liturgies; the rest being, as it were, so many Oratories and small Chappels, are seldom us'd but on certaim Times and Days of the Foun∣ders and Benefactors. The Catholicon (as they term the Cathedral) is founded on the North Side of the Town, between S. John's Pillars and the Basarstreet: It is no stately Structure, as surpassing very few of our ordinary Parish Churches in Magnificence, yet kept in Repair and indifferently well adorn'd, ac∣cording to the Mode of the Country. The Inhabitants of Athens are about 10000 in number, whereof three Parts are Christian Greeks and the rest Turks, but they would never admit any Jews among them, altho' it hath been often attempted. They are naturally endued with much sbtilty or sharpness of Wit, which they shew in Buying, Selling and Managing all their Domestick Affairs. Their Healthiness is also extraordinary, which may be at∣tributed to the Serenity of the Air, in regard that when the Pestilence rageth round about them, viz. at Thebes, Negropont, Napoli, Corinth, &c. it seldom or very rarely comes thither. The Turks lately had 5 Mosques here, viz. 4 in the Town and one in the Castle; the finest of these is the Mosque of the Ba∣zar, and that in the Citadel, transformed from the abovementioned stately Temple of Minerva, besides a Convent for Votaries in the Turkish Superstitions. The Consuls of England and France have likewise their particular Chappels, not to mention 4 publick Bagnio's, much us'd here, as in most other eminent Towns in Turky. Moreover, Athens is well watered by Channels under Ground, brought from the Sources of Elissus and Cephisus on Mount Hymettus, which are convey'd into several publick Fountains and private Houses; of these, that in the Basarstreet is the Principal, and bears the Name of Ʋssin Chelibi. The Soil of the adjacent Territory is very fruitful in Olives, especi∣ally
one sort of them commonly call'd Colybades, be∣ing almost as big as the Spanish Olives, yet not of quite so Oval a Figure, rather resembling that of a Jujuba. These are so well esteemed, that they are often pickled green and carried to the Grand Signior's Court as a great Rarity. Neither are other Sorts of Provisions wanting here, whether Corn, Wine, Oyl, Beef, Mutton, Goats-Flesh, Fish or Fowl, together with abundance of Partridges and Hares. In the XIIIth Century Theodsius Lascaris, Emperor of Con∣stantinople, besieged the City of Athens, but was repulsed; afterward it was governed by one Delves, of the House of Aragon: But he dying, the Turks, under the Conduct of Bajazet, then Emperor, took it, together with the Province of Boeotia, but were within a while dispossessed of it again by that vali∣ant Christian Commander Reinerius Acciaiolo, who reduced it to the Obedience of the Venetians, from whom it was not long after retaken by Antony, a Natural Son of Reinerius, one of whose Posterity, named Francus, lost it for want of Succour, which the Greeks in vain desired of the Latins, that obsti∣nately refused to assist them on any other Terms than their Conformity in Religion, and renouncing those Points wherein they differed from their Church; so that Mahomet II. soon made himself absolute Master of the Place, in the Year 1455. and his Successors have for a long time retained it in their Possession, until, at length, it was happily regained by the Ve∣netians, in 1687. THEBES, Thebae, as yet call'd  by the Modern Greeks, which they pronounce Thiva, not Stiva or Stives, according to the common Maps, is seated on a rising Ground, not far from the River Aspo, between 2 little Streams, one on the West-Side and the other on the East, which may well be those of Ismenus and Dirce, at the distance of 50 m. from Athens to the North-west. 16 from Chalcis to the West, and 40 from Megara to the North. Cad∣mus the Son of Agener (as the Story goes) after he had a long Time in vain sought for his Sister Europa, stoln away by Jupiter, not daring to return to his Father, stayed here by the command of the Oracle, and erected a strong Castle on a small Hill, about A. M. 2620. Afterward Amphion (as the Po∣ets fegn) walled about the same Fortress by the Sound of his Harp, making the Stones to come and lay themselves in due Order for the Building. It was indeed heretofore reputed the Capital City of Baeotia, yet the Inhabitants were never much cele∣brated in History, either for their Wit, Learning or Martial Exploits, only they once behaved themslves gallantly against the Lacedaemonians, and entirely de∣feated them, at the Battle of Leuctra, under the con∣duct of Epaminondas their General, a Theban by Birth, and one of the most renowned Captains of Greece; which made Justin say, That the Glory of the Thebans was orn and buried with Epaminon∣das. We also find it recorded, That they defended themselves against the Confederate For∣ces of Polynices, the Son of OEdipus and Jocasta, who took up Arms againsts his Brother Eteocles, and besieged Thebes, together with Adrastus King of Argos and some others, 37 Years before the Destruction of Troy. This War, generally call'd the Enterprize of the 7 noble Generals against Thebes, proved fruitless; but their Posterity carried the Town 10 Years after, A. M. 2843. Philip King of Macedn having subdued the Thebans, put the Garrison to the Sword, cutting all off against whom he bore a Grudge or suspected, expelled the rest, and recall'd those of his Faction, whom they had banised, giving them Offices and considerable Places. Insomuch that the Citizens bearing this heavy Yoke with much Reluctancy, on the Report of Alex∣ander's Death, actually revolted, and sollicited their Neighbours to do the like; but the Town was taken a second Time and utterly ruined, not one House being left standing but that of the famous Poet Pindar, who was a native of this Place, as Hercules and the God Bacchus were likewise supposed to have been born there. This Calamity happen'd in the CXIth Olympiad, and the 419th Year since the Foundation of Rome. However, Cassander, the Son of Antipater, re∣built the City, 20 Years after; and in process of time it was dignified with the Title of a Metropolitan See. But it is now reduc'd to a small Town or Bur∣rough, and (as Sir George Wheler observes) seems to be in the same condition it was in Pausanias's Time; that is to say, only inhabited in that part which was the Castle, and anciently bore the Name of Cadmea, from Cadmus its Founder. The Walls that now remain (as the same Author assures us) ap∣pear very ancient, having some square Towers, the Stones well hewn, and laid in exact Order, accord∣ing to the Rules of Architecture. The Town is esteemed to reach 3 miles in compass, and to contain 3 or 4000 Souls. The Turks, who are the least part of the Inhabitants, have 2 Mosques, and the Chri∣stians several Churches. The Cathedral is named Panagia Chrysphoritia, but hath nothing remarkable about it, only some Fragments of ancient Inscripti∣ons, among the Stones of the Pavement: Such as these are also found in some other parts of this Town, and are its only Remains of Antiquity now ex∣tant. At a little distance from hence, toward the Road to Negrpont, stands a Hill, where the Inhabitants dig a kind of Stone, whereof they make Bowls for Tobacco-pipes. The Stone, when first taken out of a deep Pit, is of the Colour of New Cheese, and al∣most as soft, being in lumps usually as big as a Man's two Fists. This Stuff is brought to the Town and very curiously wrought into Bowls of Pipes; which as soon as dry groweth very hard, as white as Snow and shining. The best and least apt to break are the heaviest, and sold for 10 Aspers a piece, but the worser sort may be bought for 5 Aspers. AƲLIS, Aulis is a Town of Boeotia, on the Straits of Negropont; famous for its Harbour, where a Fleet of King Agamemnon, and the rest of the Gre∣cian Princes, consisting of about 100 Ships, rode at Anchor before they set Sail for Troy. MARATHON, called at this Day Marathona & Marason, is now a pitiful ruin'd Village of Attica, distant about 10 miles from Athens, not far from Rhamnus; altho' it was heretofore so famous for the Death of King Icarius; the Valour of Theseus, who having tamed a wild Bull there, dragg'd it through the Town, and sacrificed it to Apollo of Delphs; but more especially for that memorable Victory which 10000 Athenians, together with 1000 Plataeans their Allies, under the command of Miltiades, abtained over the Persian Army, consisting of 600000 Men, A. Ʋ. 264. in the 3d Year of the LXXII. Olym∣piad, on the 6th Day of the Month Boedromion, which falls toward the end of our September. The Lake of Marathon is covered all over with Rushes and Weeds, after the manner of a Morass or marshy Ground, and (as they say) at certain Times is almost dry. Great quantities of very large Eels are bred here, which are often caught by the Monks of the
Convent of Pendoly, who have a Meoci or Farm thereabouts, where some of the Caliros live and keep Buffalos, that delight extremely to feed and wal∣low in the Mire of this Lake. MEGARA, formerly the chief Town of a Territory named Megaris, hath still preserved its an∣cient Name, and is situated in a Valley, between the Mountain Kerata to the North, that hath a Ridg running North-westward to joyn with Mount Cithae∣ron, at the bottom of a Bay of the Corinthian Gulph, now call'd Livadostro. The whole Mountain is known by the vulgar Name of Mcriplai, or the Long Mountain, the Plain being bounded westwardly toward Corinth by that of Palaio-bouni, or the Old Mountain, anciently Gerania, on the South-east by the Gulph of Engia or the Saronick, and on the North-west by the Bay Livadostro. This Country, call'd in times past Megaris, extends itself for the space of 20 miles in compass, and is not unfruitful, producing great variety of Plants and bulbous Roots. The City was built on 2 little Rocks, stretched out South south-east and West north-west, about 2 miles from the Shore of the Saronick Gulph, having the Island Aegina in sight, South by East, and that of Coleuri South-East. The ancient Bounds of it yet appearing comprehend those 2 Rocks, and some part of the Plain Southward; but now it is only founded on one of the Rocks, consisting of pitiful Cottages, the broken Stones of its Ruins serving sometimes instead of Walls, or Clay dryed in the Sun, covered only with Faggots, and those again plaistered over with Earth above them: These Huts standing close toge∣ther, are only of one Story high, and may be about 3 or 400 in number. They are also much incom∣moded with Smoak, that hath no other Passage to go out than either at the Door or at a Hole made in the Top of the Room, Chimneys not being in fashion in these Parts. In the middle of the Town, on the highest Point of the Rock, stands a Tower, where a Veyvode some∣time resided, until the Corsairs came and carried him away: Which Accident hath ver since so ex∣tremely terrified the Turks that they durst no longer dwell there, insomuch that the Town is now alto∣gether rid of those Infidels; but the remaining Christians are so much afraid of the Pyrates, that on the first Sight of a Boat in the Day-time, and but hearing their Dogs bark in the Night, they imme∣diately fall to packing up their few Goods, which they hide as well as they can, and run away. These few Inhabitants get a Livelihood by manuring the Ground, for which they have one Moiety of the Crop, the other belonging to the Turks, as their Land-lords under the Grand Signior. They also make Pitch, and saw Planks and Boards out of the Pines and Firs that grow in great abundance on the neighbouring Moun∣tains. Here are as yet to be seen many curious In∣scriptions and other Monuments of Antiquity. As you pass from hence by the streight Way to the Har∣bour, on a Rock, by the Sea-side, appear the Ruins of Old Walls, perhaps of some Fortress appertain∣ing to the ancient City Nicaea, which probably was there founded by Nisus one of the four Sons of Pan∣dion; who at his Death divided his Kingdom of Attica into four Parts, and gave Megaris to the same Nisus. Somewhat lower are the Remains of 12 little old Churches, and on that account the Place is commonly call'd Dodeca Ecclesia, i. e. the Twelve Churches. But now there is not so much as one Church left entire, nor any People, Priests or Dwel∣ling-Houses. This was without doubt the Port-Town of the Megarians, and the 2 Rocks that make the Harbour, were heretofore call'd Minoa. However, notwithstanding the present mean Con∣dition of the City of Megara, it was at first the Metropolis of a Monarchy, under 12 Kings, then a considerable Republick, which maintained divers Wars against the Athenians and other People, and established a Colony in the Island of Sicily. It is also remakable for giving Birth to Euclid the great Mathematician and the Poet Thegnis. It is distant about 2 miles from the Gulph of Aegina, 26 from Athens to the West, and as many from Corinth to the North-east. LEPANTO, Naupactus aut Naupactum, now call'd Epactos by the modern Greeks, as also Einebachri by the Turks, is the chief City of the Gulph, whereto it hath of late communicated its Name, and reckoned by Ptolemey among those of Lcris Ozelorum, extend∣ing it self on the Side of a very steep Hill, at the distance of 100 miles from Preveza to the South-east, 140 from Athens to the West, and 480 from Constan∣tinople to the South-west. The Mountain behind is joyned to the Town by two other little Hills, that command it: Altho', in times past, before the Invn∣tion of Gunpowder, it was so strong that it gave much Disturbance to the Romans, affording a Place of Refuge to the rebellious Aetolians. It is built from the Sea-shore up to the highest Point of the Hill, which is fortified with a small Castle, in the mount∣ing whereof one must pass no less than 4 Ranges of Walls, one above another, that make the Prospect of the Place at a distance somewhat resemble the Papal Mitre. Between these Walls the Inhabitants have their Houses, and by them the City is divided into 4 Quarters. The little oval Harbour is no small Ornament thereto, being commodiously situated in the middle of the South Side, and defended by a little Tower at each Side of the Entrance, on which are planted some small Brass-Guns. But the Mouth is so narrow that it may be easily secured by a Chain of 50 feet long, and is too shallow for any Vessels besides Barques and small Gallies, neither can the last enter the Port but at High Water, for there is a Tide in the Gulph, the Water coming in by the Castles in the Morning and going out in the Evening. Moreover, this Harbour is lined round about on the inside with good Walls, and the Workmanship of them appears to be ancient. All Traders passing out of the Gulph are oblig'd to pay 3 per cent Custom to the Emir, who returns 6000 Crowns a Year Rent for his Office, neither are any large Ships of the Franks permitted to come within the Castles, but stay at Patras and send in their Barks. On each Side of the Town, under the Mountain (which perhaps is the same with Mount Corax) fruitful Valleys are stretch'd forth toward the Sea; that West∣ward is well planted with Olive-Trees, Vineyards and Corn, and that to the East no less well set, being divided into Gardens of Oranges, Citrons and Limons without Seeds. It is also watered with many fresh Streams, springing out of the rocky Mountain above it, and in the Summer shaded with abundance of large Plane-Trees. There were not many Christians in this Place before it lately fell into the Hands of the Venetians, the greatest part of its Inhabitants were Turks and Jews, and it hath been for a long time a noted Harbour for Pyrates. The Turks had 5 or 6 Mosques there, and the Greeks 2 Churches, viz. 1 in each Suburb, tho' but very small; but they were so few in Number and so ill treated, that their Archbi∣shop usually kept his Residence at Arta. The Jews,
in like manner were allowed 3 Synagogues for their Publick Oratories. The Trade of Lepanto consists chiefly in Turky-Leather, Oil, Tobacco, Rice, Bar∣ley, and Furrs; the Wine is also the best in Greece, but the Vessels being pitched, as they generally are throughout the Morea and Athens, renders the Taste somewhat unpleasant to Strangers. In the Year 1408. this City was subject to the Grecian Empire, but the Emperor Emanuel assigned it to the State of Venice, who caused it to be well for∣tified. In 1475. it was in vain besieged by Mahomet the Great, the same that took Constantinople, who sat down before it with an Army of 30000 Men, but in 1498. Bajazet II. attackt it with 150000, and made himself Master of the Place, through the Treachery of the Venetian Governour, whom he had corrupted with Mony. In 1687. after the Venetians in the pre∣ceeding Years had almost driven the Turks out of the Morea, their General Morisini landed on July 22d near Patras, which Town he took, together wi h the Dardanel Castle on that Side, notwithstanding the utmost Efforts made by the Serasquier to oppose his Design, who was defeated on the 24th instant. Af∣terward the General crossed over to Lepanto, which was soon abandoned by the Turks, so that he took Possession of the Place without so much as striking a Blow; and found therein 120 Pieces of Brass-Can∣non. At the Entrance of the Gulph of Lepanto, about 13 or 14 miles distant from the Town to the South-west are 2 Capes: One of these, united to the Peninsula of the Morea, was anciently call'd An∣tirrhium Promontorium, as also at present Cape An∣tirio, and is defended by a small Fortress, named the Castle of the Morea, or of Patras. The other, that joyns to the Continent of Achaia, is termed by Strabo, Rhium Promontorium, and commonly Rio, hav∣ing, in like manner for its defence a little Fort, cal∣led the Castle of Rumelia: These 2 Castles are like∣wise named the Dardanels of Lepanto, in allusion to those of the Helespont. They are of a square form, encompassed with strong Walls, on which are mounted divers Pieces of Artillery. The Emperor Augustus defeated Mark Antony not far from hence, and near the same Gulph of Lepanto, happened a memorable Sea-Fight between the Chri∣stians and Turks, Octob. 2. 1571. so that it is diffi∣cult to determine which of these was the most glo∣rious Victory: For in this last Engagement the Turks lost above 30000 Men, bing the most fatal Over∣throw they ever met with since the first Foundation of their Empire. Besides the Slaughter, the Christians took 5000 Prisoners, and, among others, the 2 Sons of Hali Bassa, General of the Ottoman Fleet, which consisted of 200 Galleys, together with 70 Frigats and Brigantines. Of those 130 Galleys were taken, above 90 were stranded, burnt or sunk, and al∣most 20000 Christian Slaves at the same Time set at Liberty: Neither was the Booty less considerable, since all the adjacent Isles were pillaged, and a great number of Vessels, laden with Merchandizes were carried off. The chief Admiral of the Christians, in this signal Combat (which continued from about 6 of the Clock in the Morning till Evening) was Don John of Austria, natural Brother to Philip II. King of Spain; and their Fleet was composed of 210 Gal∣leys, 28 great Transport Ships, and 6 Galleasses, furnished with heavy Artillery: They lost about 8000 Men, the most noted of whom was Barbarigo, Commander of the left Wing, who having forc'd the Right-wing of the Enemy, received the Shot of an Arrow in his Right-Eye, whereof he died not long fter. DELPHOS or CASTRI, a Town of Pho∣cis, heretofore famous for the Temple of Apollo, where the Oracles wre pronounc'd and consulted for many Ages. It is seated on the South-side of Mount Par∣nassus, somewhat inclining to the West, neither on the top, nor at the foot of the Hill, as being a great way distant from the Plains of Crissa below, and much farther from the Rocks above it. The high Cliffs appearing above the Town seem to end in two points, which probably gave occasion to the old name of Biceps Parnassus, altho' it hath many more tops, and those too much higher than these, for it is a very large Mountain. But those two tops seen from Delphos hide all the ret between which, the Water falls in great abundance after Rain or Snow, and hath even worn them almost asunder. There is also a Spring with a very plentful Source of Water continully issuing out from among those Rocks, just under the Cleft or Separaion; which may well be supposed the famous F untain Castalia that so inspi'd the ancient Poes, by reason of the Marble-Steps on its Dscent, and th Niches wrought in the Rock for Statues above it. The Stream of this Spring glding down a very deep and narrow Precipice to he South, soon joyns with the River Pleistos, and separates Mount Cirphis from Parnassus, from whence it runs by Crissa, and empties it self into the Bay of Salna. In the Rock above the Fountain is a kind of little Chappel, dedicated to S. Jon, and above that hree Niches for Statues, viz. one great one in the mddle, and two lesser on each Side. Moreover, in the cleft about 8 or 10 Yards high, one may dscern a Hle, with some Stairs on the R ght-hand leading up there∣to, but very much broken: This perhaps may be the Antrum Corycium or Grotto of the Nymphs so named by the Poets, and it must needs make a very fine Cascade, when there is Water enough falling from the Mountains. The Town of CASTRI, that sprang up out of the Ruins of DELPHOS, consists only of about 200 Houses, and those too ill built. The Turks, who are not above 12 in number, have one Mosque, but the Greeks have 5 or 6 Churches, and, tho' poor, are nevertheless very Civil, Honest People. The little Trade they maintain is in Cotton and Tobacco; their Wine is also exceeding good. In descending yet farther, you come to a Monastery call'd Panagia, the Church whereof is dedicated to the Virgin Mary: It is situated on the Brink of the Mountain, on Ground supported by old strong Walls, of hewn Stone, where are o be seen divers Capitals and Fasts of Corinthi∣an Pillars, Inscriptions and other Monuments of An∣tiquity. The Lordship of Castri belongs to a Tamer or Turkish Nobleman, call'd Abd-Haga, who resides at Salona. Timarlicks are a kind of Fee-Farms de∣pending on the Demesns of the Grand Signior, and they that hold them of him are oblig'd to serve in the Wars, according to their Revenue. ELEƲSIS▪ now call'd Lepsina or Lephsina, was heretofore one of the most famous Cities of Greece, and at first vied even with Athens for Empire, until it was reduc'd by Theseus: Nevertheless, in the most flourishing Times of the Athenians it was reckned a∣mong their principal Towns, chiefly by reason of the Temple of Ceres, call'd Elcusine, dedicated to the Sacred Rites and Mysteries of that Goddess, for which the ancient Grecians had a very high Venera∣tion, more especially the Athenians; insomuch that when reduced to the utmost Extremity, the Enjoy∣ment of those Mysteries was ever one of the Articles they would capitulate for. The Original of these
Ceremonies proceded from Celeus, King of Eleusis and Father of Triptolemus, whom the Goddess Ceres instructed in the Art of Husbandry, as a Recompence for his kind Hospitality, in entertaining her when she was in search of her Daughter Proserpina, carried away by Pluto. However, the Town of Eleusis is now utterly ruin'd, having been worse treated by the Christian Pyrates than the very Turks themselves, so that it is now deserted by all its Inhabitants. The Place is seated on a long Hill, extended toward the Sea South-east and North-west, not far from the Foot of the Mountain Gerata. The whole Hill seems to have been built upon, but chiefly toward the Sea, where we first meet with the august Ruins of the state∣ly Temple of Ceres, lying together in a confused heap, the magnificent Pillars being buried in the Rub∣bish of its ruined Roof and Walls, and its curious polished Cornishes treated with no more respect than the most ordinary Stones of the Pavement; so that it is impossible to judge of the ancient Form of this Noble Structure; only it seems to have been built of a most beautiful white Marble, with no less ad∣mirable Workmanship, as appears from the Chapters and many Pillars of the Ionick Order, divers carv'd Stones and Statues, and other Fragments, as yet remaining. PELOPONNESƲS, or the MOREA, the most noble Peninsula of the whole Continent of Eu∣rope, is separated on the North from Achaia by the Gulph of Lepanto, and from the Country of Megaris by the Corinthian Isthmus or Neck of Land about 6 miles broad; through which runs the River Styx, the Waters whereof are deadly, through their excessive Coldness, so that the Poets took occasion from thence to feign it to be one of the Infernal Rivers. On the other Sides the Morea is bounded by several Parts of the Mediterranean, viz. by the Ionian-Sea on the West, that of Sapienza or Candia on the South, and the Aegean on the East. It lies between the 34th De∣gree 40 Minutes, and the 37th Degree 30 Minutes of Northern Latitude, and between the 44th Degree 50 Minutes, and the 48th Degree 30 Minutes of Lon∣gitude, extending it self in compass for the space of 550 miles, as also about 160 in breadth, from Co∣rinth on the North to Cape Matapan on the South, and 170 in length, from Cape Scilli on the East, as far as Cape Tornese to the West. It is likewise distant 380 miles from the Island of Sicily to the East, and 70 from the Western Coasts of Candia to the North-West. This Country hath been known in several Ages by different Names; for it was at first call'd Argos, or Argos Achaicum, to distinguish it from Argos Pelasgicum or Thessaly; afterward Aegialia▪ from Aegialus a King of the Sicyonians; then Apia, from Apis the third King of Argos; and at length Peloponnesus, from Pelops the Son of Tantalus, who brought a Colony thither out of Phrygia, and reigned there for some time. As for its modern Denomination Authors differ much about its Original; for some imagine that its Form resembling the Leaf of a Mulberry-tree, call'd in Latin Morus, and in Greek , induced the Emperors of Con∣stantinople to impose on it this Name of the Morea: And indeed the Ancients were wont to compare its Shape to that of Plane-tree-leaf. Others would willingly derive it from the Word Romea, which by a Transposition of Letters was changed into Morea; It being certain that as long as Constantinople remain∣ed in the Possession of the Roman Emperors, that City was styled New Rome, and the Inhabitants of those Territories Romeans, that is to say, Romans. But Doglioni is of another Opinion, believing that the Moors, when they made Incursions into these Parts, left their Name there. However, this Peninsula is one of the finest Coun∣tries in Europe; for the Air is Clear, Healthful and Temperate, and the Soil everywhere fertile, abound∣ing with Corn, Wine, Oil and all manner of most delicious Fruits; the Mountains full of Game and Medicinal Plants have been long since celebrated by the ancient Greek and Latin Poets; the most remark∣able of these are, 1. Mount Cyllene in Arcadia, on which Maia brought forth Mercury. 2. Maenalus, conse∣crated to the God Pan, so named from Maenalus the Son of Lycaon. 3. Minthe, now Oline. 4. Nonacris, where the River Styx takes its Rise. 5. Taigetus, &c. The principal Rivers are these, viz. 1 Carbon or Or∣fea, heretofore well known by the Name of Alpheus, and famous for its Vertue in taking away the Spots and blemishes of the Skin. The Poets attribute a miraculous Course to this River, through the Ionian-Sea, till it intermixeth its Waters with those of the Fountain Arethusa in Sicily, because it is often swal∣lowed up under Ground, and riseth again with great∣er Strength. But it really takes its first Rise out of the Mountain Stymphalus, runs through the Countries of Arcadia and Elis, receives into its Channels the Rivers Celadon and Amarynthe, together with 140 other Torrents or lesser Brooks, and at last falls into the Gulph of Castel di Tornesi. 2. Eurotas or Vasali Potamos, which rising in Arcadia continues its Course through Laconia, and empties it self into the Gulph of Pastel Rampani. 3. Planizza, formerly called Inachus and Haliacmon. 4. Pamissus or Spirnazza, that dischargeth its Waters into the Gulph of Coron, near Calamata. Besides the abovemention'd River Styx, those of Lynceus, Asteria or Stella, Erasin, &c. The Inhabitants of the Morea are esteem'd Ingeni∣ous and Warlike; in some measure imitating the Va∣lour of their Ancestors, who maintained a War against the Athenians, during 27 Years, viz. from A. Ʋ. 323 in the LXXXVIIth Olympiad, to A. Ʋ. 350. when the City of Athens was taken. This War was commonly call'd the Peloponnesian, and is elegantly de∣scribed by Thucydides and Xenophon. The same Pe∣ninsula of the Morea, after many Revolutions, fell into the Hands of Emanuel a Greek Emperor, about A. D. 1150. who divided the Empire at his Death among his 7 Sons, and by that means was the Cause of its Ruin. These Princes were Styled Despotes, that is to say, Lords or Governours, and depended on the Emperor, both as to their Government and Election; altho' they were otherwise in a manner absolute, and almost hereditary Lords in their re∣spective Jurisdictions; for the Emperor seldom no∣minated a Successor to a late Despote, but his Son, Brother or near Relation. Constantine, surnamed Drasares, Brother of Theodosius II. enjoyed this Dig∣nity when Sultan Amurath invaded the Morea; but the Greek Emperor put a stop to his Fury by a Promise of a yearly Tribute. Afterward Constantine Palaeo∣logus being crowned Emperor at Constantinople shar'd the Morea between his 2 Brothers, Demetrius and Tho∣mas. Whereupon the Turks commanded by their Em∣peror Mahomet II. under colour of assisting Demetrius against his Brother, took an opportunity amidst those Dissentions to usurp their Estates, and seiz'd on the places possess'd by the Venetians without much re∣sistance, after the Death of General Bertoldo D'Este, whom the Republick had sent to oppose their designs. Since that time the Ottoman Port hath maintain'd a Governor here, with the Title of Sangiack or Mora∣begi, i. e. Lord of the Morea, under the Beglierbeg of Greece; and Modon was his usual place of Residence, until he was expell'd thence by General Morosini,
who re-conquer'd the greatest part of these Territories in the year 1685. and 1686. and reduc'd it to the Obedience of the State of Venice, having caus'd all the Churches that were Mosques before, to be Conse∣crated again; insomuch that many Greek Families have left Achaia, to settle in the Morea, and about 12000 Inhabitants have already transported their ef∣fects thither. This Peninsula hath had various Divisions at seve∣ral times; for in that of Pausanias, it contain'd only three distinct Countries, viz. those of the Arcadians, Achaians, and Dorians. Afterward Ptolemey, and o∣thers divided it into eight parts, viz. Achaia proper, Arcadia, Argia, Corinthia, Elis, Elea or Cauconia, La∣conia, Messenia, and Sicyonia. But it is now gene∣rally distinguish'd by our Modern Geographers into four Provinces, viz. I. The Dutchy of Chiarenza, Patras, Arch-Bish. II. Belvedere, Modon, Bish. III. Zachonia or Braccio di Mana, Malvasia, Arch-B. IV. Saccania or Romania, Minor, Napoli di Romania, Arch-Bish. The Dutchy of CHIARENZA. This Dutchy is bounded on the North by the Gulph of Lepanto; on the South by the Provinces of Zaconia and Belvedere, on the East by that of Saccania, and on the West by the Ionian Sea; con∣taining the old Destricts of Achaia proper, Sieyonia and Corinthia. The most remarkable Towns are these, viz. Patras, Arch-Bish. Cap. Chiarenza. Caminitza, Bish. Castel-Tornese. PATRAS is seated on a Hill not above half a mile from the Sea, and about 5 from the Gulph that bears its name; at the foot of a high Mountain for∣merly nam'd Cerynea, with a Valley between, being also distant 18 miles from Lepanto almost to the South, and 120 from Misitra or Lacedaemon to the North-West. It was first founded (according to the report of Pausanias) by one Eumelus, a Native of the Country, who having receiv'd instructions in the Arts both of Architecture and Husbandry from Trip∣tolemus, together with necessary Materials, call'd the place he built from his tilling the Ground Arva. Afterward when the Ionians were expell'd out of the Peloponnesian Achaia, another Benefactor nam'd Patreus, very much enlarg'd it, insomuch that Arva and its Walls were contain'd within his new Walls, and the Town was from thenceforth call'd Patras by his Name. However it was ruin'd some time after by reason that the Citizens sent succour to the Aetolians against the Gauls; for the Aetolians being defeated by them in divers Battels, the rest that escaped the slaughter, dispers'd themselves into seve∣ral places thereabout, until the Reign of Augustus Cae∣sar, who being mov'd either with the conveniency of the adjacent Harbour of Panormus, which had af∣forded a safe retreat to his Navy; or some other private reason, invited the People of many Towns round about Patras, to come and settle there; on which account he adorn'd the place with all the Pri∣viledges and Immunities of a Roman Colony; call∣ing it Calonia, Augusta, Arva, Patrensis. This City notwithstanding the various Changes and Revolutions it hath undergone, still retains its ancient Name, and is very well Peopled, especially with Jews, who maintain a considerable Trade with the Grecians of the Neighbouring Islands, and the English and French Merchants. It is defended by a strong Castle built on the highest point of the Hills, from whence there is a descent every way into a fruitful Valley well planted with Oranges, Lemons, and Citrons, much esteem'd for their most delicious taste. In these Gardens, besides a great number of tall Cedars, is a very famous Cypress Tree, perhaps the oldest and biggest in the World, its Stock being 18 foot round, and its Branches stretching forth 20 foot in Diameter. The Goddess Diana was in time past worshipped here, under the name of Diana Latria, to whom a Beautiful young Man and Maid were sacrific'd eve∣ry year; which cruel Superstition continu'd (as they say) till Eurypiles arriv'd at Patras, and was Convert∣ed by St. Andrew the Apostle, who suffer'd Martyr∣dom in the same City; having (as the Tradition goes) resided there a great while before, and pre∣vail'd with a certain King of the Morea, to embrace the Christian Religion, meaning perhaps no more than some Roman Governor of that Province. How∣ever Patras hath been for a long time the See of an Arch-Bishop, who in ancient times was wont to have the second place in the Councils or General As∣sembles of the Church, and at present hath about 1000 Churches under his Jurisdiction, which extends it self over all the Western parts of the Morea, as far as Corone, the three other Metropolitan Sees being those of Napoli di Romania, Corinth, and Malvasia. The Turks had lately four Mosques in the Town, and the Jews that made up a third part of it, had as many Synagogues; the number of all the Inhabi∣tants in general amounting to four or five Thousand. In the time of the Despotes of the Morea, it enjoy'd the Title of a Dutchy, and was sold by the last of those Princes to the State of Venice, A. D. 1408. from whom the Turks took it in 1463. The Venetians recover'd it in 1533 under the Conduct of the fa∣mous Andrea Doria, who made himself Master of the place without much opposition; the Fortifications being then out of order; and a little after secur'd his Conquest by reducing the Fort, which was forc'd to surrender, though formerly it obstinately held out a whole year against the Greek Emperor Constantine Pa∣aeologus. However the Turks return'd the next year with a formidable Army and drave out the Veneti∣ans: But General Morosini having routed the Otto∣man Forces in the Neighbourhood, and cut off 2000 of them, on the 20th. day of July, A. D. 1687. the Garrison of Patras march'd out, and carried away with them, all their Artillery and Ammunition. Whereupon Mahomet Bassa, who commanded 6000 Men near the Castle of Romelia, fled in like manner together with that Garrison; Guisuelderem Mahomet, who was encamp'd near the Castle of the Morea, did the same, and the strong City of Lepanto immediate∣ly surrender'd without any resistance. CHIARENZA stands on the right-side Bank of the River Inachus, call'd by Ptolomey, Penaeus Fluvius, on a Hill near the Gulph of Patras, about 25 miles from thence to the South-West. This City which is suppos'd to be the ancient Cyllene, was some∣times of great Note, and the Capital of the Dutchy of the same name under its own Princes. When the Venetians first reduc'd it to their Obedience, it re∣main'd in a pretty good condition. But the Scene is now so far chang'd, that there is scarcely any thing
to be seen besides its Ditches, and some small Foot-steps of its former beauty. Moreover its Harbour which was not capable of containing many large Ves∣sels is now choak'd up with Sand. CASTEL-TORNESE, call'd Clemontzi by the Turks, is a small Town near the Cape of Tor∣nese, in the Dutchy of Chiarenza, altho' others place it in the Province of Belvedere. It is built on an eminence that overlooks a spacious Country round a∣bout, between the Gulph of Chiarenza, and that of Arcadia, before known by the name of Chelonates, at the distance of three miles from the Sea-Coasts. General Morosini having summon'd this place after the taking of Ratras, in 1687. it was soon surren∣der'd by the Aga, or Turkish Officer. BELVEDERE. This Province is extended between the River Car∣bon or Orfea on the North, which separates it from Chiarenza and Zaconia, or Braccio di Maina on the East; being also bounded by the Sea of Sapienza on the South, and that of Ionia on the West, it compre∣hends the old Provinces of Elis and Messenia. The places of chiefest Note are these, viz. Modon, Bish. Cap. Belvedere. Coron. Calamata. Navarin. MODON, anciently call'd Methone, and now Maitune, or Mutum by the Turks; is advantagiously seated on a Cape of the Sea of Sapienza, and hath at the foot thereof a very fair and commodious Har∣bour; being distant 15 miles from Coron to the South-West, and 70 from Cape Matapan almost to the West. It is a strong rich and trading City, dig∣nify'd with a Bishop's; See under the Metropolitan of Patras, and was lately the usual place of Resi∣dence of the Turkish Sangiack, or Governor of the Morea. It sustain'd much damage in the time of the Emperor Trajan, by the inroads of the Illyri∣ans, who surpriz'd and slew many Inhabitants: But the munificence of that generous Prince made amends for those losses; for he granted it many considerable Priviledges which were likewise confirm'd by Con∣stantine the Great. In 1124. the Venetians made themselves Masters of Modon, under their Doge, Do∣menico Michiole, but it was retaken the next year by the Emperor of Constantinople. In 1204. on the Division of the Empire, it fell again to the lot of the Venetians, out of whose hands it was wrested in 1208. by Leo Veteran a famous Genoese Pirate: But the Usurper did not long enjoy his new Possessions, for being seiz'd in the Hellespont, he was convey'd to Corfu, and there put to an ignominious Death, whereupon his Party was so extreamly terrify'd and discourag'd, that the Captains Dandalo and Promalino soon found means to reduce Modon without any resi∣stance. In 1498. Sultan Bajazet II. besieg'd the same place with an Army of 150000 Men, and surpriz'd it after a stout Defence and a sharp Encounter with the Forces that came to its Relief. In 1659. Gene∣ral Morosini took it from the Turks, who regain'd it in the end of the Candian War. However in 1686. the Arms of the State of Venice prevail'd again to rescue this Noble City from the Ottoman Tyranny, and the Conquerors then found in it about 90 pieces of Or∣dinance. BELVEDERE is the Elis of the Ancients, and stands on the Banks of the River Peneius, 15 miles from the Coasts of the Ionian Sea to the East, and 24 from Chiarenza to the South. This Town gives its name to the whole Province, which now comprehends both the Territories of Elis and Mes∣sene, of which the former were heretofore famous, for producing abundance of Horses of an excellent kind. CORON, Corona is one of the most important places in the Morea, by reason of its strong and com∣modious situation on the left side of Cape Gallo, or the Acritas Promontorium of Ptolomey. It was anci∣ently esteem'd a Colony of the Thebans, call'd Peda∣sus by the Poets, Epea by Pausanias, and Corona by Strabo and Pliny, which last name (as they say) was taken from a Brass Coronet in Greek,  found in digging its foundation: The Town lies on a tongue of Land, in form of an irregular Triangle, and one of the Angles is guarded with a large Tower built by the Venetians for a Magazine, A. D. 1463. Between the two other sides that front the Land, there is a space wide enough to go round the Fortress, which hath for its defence an old Wall of an unequal thickness Flank'd with strong Towers. Somewhat farther toward the East, is a Suburb con∣taining about 500 Houses. Nevertheless the Town hath no Port excepting the Gulph that bears its Name, wherein a great number of Vessels may safely ride at Anchor. The Counry affords good store of all sorts of Fruits and Grain, as well as excellent Oils and Silks, with which many Ships are laden thence every year. Baudrand is of opinion that this Town that hath often chang'd its Masters, was first resign'd to the State of Venice, by the Despotes or Princes of the Morea; but Verdrizotti assures us that they never had it before the Division of the Eastern Empire. How∣ever Leo Veteran the Genoese Corsair surpriz'd it in 1204. But after he had been executed at Corfu it re∣turn'd to the Venetians, its rightful-Owners, from whom it was taken by the numerous Army of Baja∣zet II. in 1498. The Spaniards, under the Conduct of Andrea Doria, Admral of the Emperor Charles V's Fleet, recover'd this Place from the Turks in 1532. but were soon after obliged to leave it. In 1685. Ge∣neral Francisco Morosini reduced it to the Obedience of the Republick, notwithstanding the obstinate De∣fence of the Besieged, and the Succours that came to their Relief, putting the whole Garrison to the Sword. Divers Persons of considerable Quality lost their Lives during this Siege, which continued 49 Days, among whom were the Commander La Tour, General of the Land-Forces of Maltha, the Prince of Bruns∣wick the Prince of Savoy, Captain Ravagnin, &c. Calamata is an unwall'd Town or Borough, ex∣tending itself in a Champain Country, on the Left-side of the River Pamissus or Spirnazza. It is indif∣ferently well inhabited, and had a Castle of a regu∣lar Fabrick, built on a neighbouring Hill. Signior Morisini surpriz'd it by a Stratagem, A. D. 1659. and left it, after having set Fire thereto, and pillaged the Country round about. The same General retook this Fort in 1685. and caused it to be entirely demo∣molished. NAVARINO, Navarinum aut Pylus Messeniaca, one of the most ancient Towns of the Morea, is di∣stant 13 miles from Modon to the North and 28 from Coron almost to the West, being divided into 2 Parts, viz. the Old and the New, the former is founded on
a steep Rock that stretcheth itself into the Sea, which makes its Natural Situation very strong, besides its Artificial Fortifications. On the Left-Side stands the New Town, on the Side of a Hill, defended by strong Walls and a Citadel, with 6 Bastions, erected by the Turks A. D. 1572. at the bottom whereof lies a Harbour, the best and most capacious in all the Morea, its Entrance being commanded by the Can∣non of old Navarino. Sultan Ibrahim chose this Ha∣ven, A. D. 1644. for the Rendezvous of his Fleet, consisting of 200 Sail, and designed against the Island of Candia; the Turks having been Masters of the Town ever since the Year 1498. until 1686. when General Morosini appearing before Old Navarin with 200 Ships, under the command of General Conings∣mark, forced the Garrison to come to a Capitulation. But the New Town made a resolute Defence, in Hopes of being relieved by the Serasquier of the Mo∣rea, then on his March. However, General Conings∣mark, leaving the Management of the Siege to Sig∣nior Mocenago, defeated the Serasquier, and soon con∣strained the Town to surrender. ZACONIA, or BRACCIO DI MAINA. The Province of ZACONIA, otherwise called Braccio di Maina, i the largest of the 4 into which the Peninsula of the Morea is usually divided, com∣prizing the ancient Countries of Arcadia and Laconia. It is situated between Chiarenza on the North, Sacca∣nia on the East, the Sea of Sapienza or of Candia on the South, and Belvedere on the West. There are here many vast Rocks, Caves and Precipices, that render these Territories subject to frequent Earth∣quakes. The principal Towns are these, viz. Malvasia, Archb. Cap. Misitra or Lacedaemon, Bish. Zarnata, Chielefa, Passava, Maina, &c. MALVASIA, or Napoli di Malvasia, here∣tofore well known by the Name of Epidaurus, is founded on a Rock, near the farthest South-eastern Promontory, commonly called Cape Malao, affording a very pleasant Prospect from thence into the Sea and the adjacent Country. It is also encompassed on all Sides with the Sea, and joyned to the Continent by a fair Timber Bridge; nevertheless, it is supplyed with Springs of fresh Water sufficient both for the use of the Town and Gardens round about. Nei∣ther is the Place less remarkable for its Strength, since one can approach thereto only on the North-Side, and there it is guarded by a triple Wall. Next to this Wall is a Suburb, containing a great number of Houses, and enclosed within a strong Rampart. The Convenience of its Harbour, defended by the For∣tress, is likewise no small Advantage to the Inhabi∣tants. The neighbouring Fields yield as much Corn as serves to maintain 60 Persons; which Complement of Men, considering the natural Strength of the Place, may be enough for the Garrison: Moreover, the Soil brings forth abundance of Grapes, whereof are made the most excellent sort of Wine in the whole Country of Greece, commonly call'd Malmsey by the English. This ancient City, dignified with a Me∣tropolitan See, ows its Foundation to a Colony of Argos, and was, in times past, much frequented on the account of the famous Temple of Aesculapius. Altho' the Fortress of Malvasia seems almost impreg∣nable, yet the French and Venetians, under the com∣mand of Baldwin Count of Flanders, afterward Em∣peror of Constantinople, took it from the Grecian Emperor; and it was retaken from William, a French Baron, to whom it had been given by the said Bald∣win. Whereupon he resigned his Right to the Vene∣tians; who having subdued it with a powerful Fleet, kept it in their Possession till 1537. when they deli∣vered it up to Sultan Solyman to purchase a Peace. In the Candian War they stormed, plundered and burnt the same City, putting most of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and carried away all the Artillery. However, the Turks rebuilt it, and have ever since maintained a good Garrison there. In 1689. it was be∣sieged again by the Venetians, under the Conduct of their Doge Morisini, who being recalled home by the Senate, on September 14th, left the Place blockt up by 3 Forts and a Squadron of light Frigats, so that on the 10th of August 1690. it was actually surren∣dred to the State of Venice, having been the last Place that stood out against their Forces. It is distant 50 miles from Misitra or Lacedaemon almost to the East, and 100 from Athens to the South. MISITRA is situated (according to the Report of Mr. Vernon and Sir George Wheeler) about 4 miles from the old Ruins of Lacedaemon, as also 30 miles from Megalopolis or Leondari to the South-west, 20 from the Gulph of Castel-Rampani, 85 from Corinth, 120 from Athens to the South, 150 from Lepanto to the South-east, and 526 from Constantinople to the South-west. This City being one of the most ancient and famous of Greece, was at first call'd Lelegia from Lelex its first King (who was contemporary with Ccrops I. King of Athens) afterward Lacedaemon, from the Name of his Successor, and Sparta from Queen Sparta, the Daughter of Lacedaemon by Europa, or (according to the Opinion of others) from Spartus the Son of Phoroneus, King of the Argives, its Founder. Some Authors affirm, That it was built A. M. 2997. in the Time of the Patriarch Jacob, 983 Years before Rome, and 1763 before the Nativity of Jesus Christ. We are informed by Polybius that it was of a round Figure, and extended 48 Greek Stadia or Furlongs, that is to say about 6 English miles in compass. And indeed there never was any other City in the World that flourished so much in military Glory, as having had a great share in those notable Atchievements which rendred that Nation so illustrious, for they often con∣tended for the Mastery with the Athenians, and sub∣dued almost the whole Continent of Greece. They were also governed by Kings for a much longer time than any of their Neighbours, for the Kingdom of Lacedaemon was first founded by Lelex, about A. M. 2570. when Sthenelus IX. and last King of the Family of Inachus began to reign at Argos. The first Dynasty continued 181 Years, viz. from Lelex to Tisamenes, the Son of Orestes, the 13th and last King of that Race, who was expelled A. M. 2951. by the Hera∣clidae, who were also call'd Eurysthenidae and Agidae. Under these the second Dynasty was begun by Procles and Eurysthenes, the Sons of Aristodemus of Argia, who became the Heads of two Royal Families, where∣of the one named Eurythenidae, was the more renown'd of the two, and furnish'd 31 Kings, the last of them being Agesipolis III. The other Family was that of the Proclidae or Eurypontidae, wherein are reckon'd only 24 Kings, and this Dynasty lasted 895 Years. The Lacedaemonians were first civilized by their famous Law-giver Lycurgus, who being constituted Guardian to Charillas, the posthumous Son of his Brother Poly∣dectes,
not only preserved the Crown for him till he came to Age, but by his admirable Laws and prudent conduct extremely augmented the Lustre of that King∣dom. The same Lycurgus erected a Senate, on the one Hand to moderate the Sovereign Power, and on the other to curb the Insolence of the common People: This Senate consisted of 32 Persons, invest∣ed with equal Authority, the Prince himself being one of its Members. But King Theopompus establish'd the Ephori, a sort of Officers who had much the same Power with the Tribunes of the People at Rome, to counterbalance the Power of the King and Senate, taking warning by the Ruin of the Government of the Messenians and Argives, caused by the too absolute Dominion of their Monarchs. At Misitra are now only to be seen the miserable Ruins of the ancient Grandeur of Lacedaemon; never∣theless it still retains the Title of a Bishop's See, un∣der the Metropolitan of Corinth. The City is di∣vided into 4 different Quarters, sever'd one from an∣other, viz. the Castle, the Town, and 2 large Sub∣urbs, one of which is call'd Mesochorion or the Mid∣dle-borough, and the other Hexochorion, or the Out-borough. The Castle, City and Mesochorion are sepa∣rated from the Hexochorion by the River Eurotas or Vaseli-potamos. Within the Castle formerly stood the Temples of Diana Lipathria, and of Minerva Pana∣chaida, or Prtectress of all Achaia, besides the Monu∣ment of Eurypilus, Son of Euaemon, who was present at the Taking of Troy. Moreover this Castle or Ci∣tadel, now bearing the Name of To Castron, is en∣vironed with firm Walls, and stands so advantagi∣ously on the Top of Mount Taygetus, that some Hi∣storians make no Scruple to avouch it was never ta∣ken by open Force either by the Turks or Venetians. The City, lying at the Foot of the Castle, that co∣vers it toward the North, consists of 2 spacious Streets and several other crossing them. The Old Market-place, call'd Agora by the Greeks, is beautified with a curious Fountain, and hath a Church near it erected from the Ruins of the Temple of Minerva. Here are also the Remains of 4 Marble Buildings, which are the most considerable Antiquities of Misitra, viz. the Persian Portico or Gallery, built by the Lacedae∣monians in Memory of a signal Victory obtain'd by them over a formidable Army of Persians, at the Bat∣tle of Plataea; the Temple of Helena; as also that of Hercules and Venus Armata. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and nam'd Panagia, i. e. All-holy, having seven Domes. All its Pillars are of very fair Marble, and the Pavement a Piece of curious Msaick Work. Not far from the Church is the Bishop's Palace, together with an Apartment for 10 or 12 Caloyers or Greek Monks, who are the Dig∣nitaries of the Panagia. In passing somewhat farther we meet with the famous Monastery of the Pandanessis, belonging to the Order of S. Basil, the Church where∣of is more magnificent than the Metropolitan, tho' not so large. In the Mesochorion is another Church, dedicated likewise to the Virgin Mary, under the Name of Panagia, and far more sumptuous than the other 2; but the stateliest Mosque the Turks had in Misitra, stood in the same Quarter, in the Building and Adorning of which Structure, they had made use of all the rich Remains of the Lacedaemonian Anti∣quities. Without the Walls of the City are still to be seen the Dromos and the Platanon; the former was anciently a Place where the Spartans were wont to perform their Exercises of Wrestling, Racing and other Publick Sports. The Platanon was a pleasant Grove of Plain-trees, the Shade whereof is very re∣freshing and delightful. The Emperors of Constantinople formerly made this City the Appenage or Inheritance of their eldest Sons, who were usually styled Despotes or Lords of Sparta; but it was seized by Mahomet II. surnamed the Great, about A. D. 1460. 7 Years after the taking of Constantinople, and 5 after that of Athens. In 1463. the Italians, under Sigismund Malatesta, stormed Misitra, but not being able to master the Ci∣tadel on Mount Taygetus, they raised the Siege, after having burnt and almost entirely ruin'd the Town, which was also taken by the Venetians in 1473. under the Conduct of their General Benedetto Colleone, but his Death intervening hindred them from subduing the Castle. However, they were both surrendred to General Morosini, together with divers other impor∣tant Places in the Morea, A. D. 1687. ZARNATA, a Hold of considerable Strength, seated on a pleasant Rising Ground, and defended by several Towers and other Fortifications, about 25 miles from Misitra almost to the West. It was at∣tack'd by the Venetians A. D. 1685. when the Cap∣tain Bassa being posted not above 5 miles off, with a good Army, nevertheless durst not attempt to relieve the Place, insomuch that upon his Retreat the Turkish Garrison, consisting of 600 Men, surrendred, and according to the Articles of Capitulation were con∣ducted to some other Town. But the Aga fearing the Loss of his Head, retir'd to Venice, and Gene∣ral Morosini left 250 Men in Garrison at Zarnata, under Colonel Prastini. CHIELEFA, a strong Town, extending it∣self a mile in Compass, at the distance of 2 miles from the Sea, and 17 from Cape Matapan to the North, not far from the place where Vitulo, a Trad∣ing City of good note formerly stood, which commu∣nicated its Name to Port Vitulo, a Haven now little frequented, as not being either Commodious or Safe. Chielefa is of a square Figure, founded on a steep Rock, and having for its defence very firm Walls, flanked with 5 large Towers. General Morosini took this Fortress on Composition, A. D. 1685. and found there above 50 Pieces of Cannon. The Turks en∣deavour'd to regain it the next Year, but were routed by the Venetians, and lost all their rich Camp. SACCANIA or ROMANIA, MINOR. This Province, which comprehends the Territories of Argia, Sicyonia and Corinth, is bounded on the North by the Gulph of Lepanto, the Isthmus of Co∣rinth and the Gulph of Engia, on the East by the Aegean Sea, on the South by Zaconia and the Gulph of Napoli di Romania, and on the West by part of the same Province of Zaconia and that of Chiarenza In the Country formerly call'd Argia is the Lake Ler∣na, famous for the Hydra or monstrous Water-Snake kill'd there by Hercules. The Cities of Note here are, Napoli di Romania, Archb. Cap. Argos, Bish. Corinth, Archb. NAPOLI DI ROMANIA, Nauplia cal∣led Anaplia by the modern Greeks, took its Name from Nauplius the Son of Neptune, and as yet retains some Marks of its former Grandeur. It's a strong and fair City, built in the farthest part of the Gulph, now nam'd from thence Napoli, but anciently Argolicus Sinus, on the Top of a small Promontory
or Cape, which is divided into two Parts, one Side whereof shoots forth into the Sea, making a safe and spacious Harbour, and the other toward the Land, renders the Passage to the Town almost inaccessible, for one can come to it only through a narrow and sto∣ny Way, between the Mountain Palamida and the Sea-shore. The Entrance of the Haven is likewise so strait, that a single Galley can only pass at once, but the Inside of it is capable of containing a considera∣ble Fleet. Moreover, besides the natural Strength of the Place, it is defended by a Citadel, erected on a Rock in the Sea, and distant about 100 Yards from the City, which is now the Capital of the Morea, and the See of an Archbishop, having been sometime only that of a Bishop, Suffragan to the Metropolitan of Corinth. It was also lately the usual Place of Re∣sidence of the Turkish Sangiack or Governour, and contained above 60000 Greeks, besides a great num∣ber of Inhabitants of other Nations. Napoli is di∣stant 78 miles from Athens to the South-west, and 60 from Misitra to the North. This City, as well as many others, hath under∣gone many Revolutions and Changes of Government; for in 1205. the French and Venetian Forces seiz'd on it, and in 1388. it was stormed by King Giovanissa. who put the whole Garrison to the Sword and blew up the Town. Afterward Napoli fell into the Hands of Maria Erigana, or Anguien by Corruption, the Relict of Peter, Son to Frederick Cornaro Piscopia: But this Princess not being any longer able to maintain it against so potent an Enemy as Bajazet the Ottoman Emperor, sold it to the Republick of Venice, A. D. 1383. The Venetians defended it bravely against the Attacks of Mahomet II. in 1460. and in like manner forced Solyman II. to raise the Siege he had laid thereto in 1537. nevertheless they were obliged to resign it to him two Years after to procure a Peace. In 1686. General Morosini having ordered General Coningsmark to take Possession of Mount Palamida, within Mus∣quet-Shot of the Town, defeated the Serasquier that came to its Relief, and took Argos, the Fleet at the same time taking Ternis: However, on the 29th Day of August the Serasquier advancing again with a Body of 10000 Men, attacked the Venetians in their Trenches: The Battle remained dubious for 3 hours, but at last the Turks were entirely routed. Where∣upon the Garrison of Napoli came to a Capitulation, on the usual Terms, and was conducted to Te∣nedos. ARGOS or Argo, Argos aut Argos Peloponne∣siacum, was heretofore the Metropolis of the Domi∣nions of King Agamemnon, and of the Country of Argia, being seated on the Inachus or Planizza, 7 m. from Napoli di Romania almost to the West, 10 from the Ruins of Old Mycenae, 25 from Corinth to the South, and 60 from Misitra or Lacedaemon. But this Noble City hath little now left excepting the bare Name, as a Memorial of its ancient Splendor, its magnificent publick Buildings being reduced to some paltry Houses and Cottages, besides the Citadel. However, its Episcopal See, under the Archbishop of Corinth, hath been for some Time erected into a Me∣tropolitan. But we must distinguish this Argos from some other Towns in Greece of the same Name, par∣ticularly Argos Amphilochium in Epirus, Argos Pelasgi∣cum in Thessaly, Argos Hippium in Achaia, so nam'd from the numerous Herds of excellent Horses there bred, &c. Argos in the Morea was purchased of Mary Erigana or Anguien, in 1388. by the Venetians, in whose Hands it remain'd till the Time of Ma∣homet II. Afterward they took it from the Vene∣tians in 1463. but it was recover'd by General Mo∣rosini in 1686. CORINTH, Corinthus, hath as yet almost preserved its old Name, being now commonly call'd Corintho or Coranto, and more contractedly Co∣ritho, being situated almost in the midst of the Isthmus, that takes its Name from thence, at the distance of about 2 Miles from the Gulph of Corinth or Lepanto, and 6 or 7 from the Saronick Gulph, as also 85 miles from Patras to the East, 54 from Athens to the South-west, 25 from Argos, and 85 from Misitra or Lace∣daemon to the North. Notwithstanding its former Grandeur and the Title of a Metropolitan See, it is not now large enough to deserve the Denomination of a City, yet may well pass for a considerable Coun∣try Town. It is defended by a Castle, formerly well known by the Name of Acro-Corinthus, and the lower Town lies pleasantly on an easie Descent of Ground toward the Gulph of Lepanto. The Build∣ings are not contiguous, but in Parcels of 10, 12, and sometimes 20 together, adorn'd with Gardens of Orange, Limon, Citron and Cypress-Trees. There is also so much Space between every one of these Knots of Buildings, as that they have Corn-Fields between them. The biggest of these Quarters is that near the Bazar or Market-place, consisting of about 80 or 100 Houses. Here are also 2 Turkish Mosques and one small Church called Panagia, which is the See of the Archbishop, tho' a mean Place for such an Ecclesiastical Dignity. The adjacent Plain toward Sicyon or Basilico is watered with 2 Rivulets, as also well cultivated and planted with Olive-yards and Vineyards, being beset with many small Villages, scattered up and down, that afford a most delightful Prospect, so that it is difficult to determine whether this Plain is more beautiful to the Beholders or more profitable to the Inhabitants, for it yields great Quan∣tities of excellent Oil and generous Wines; but Corn grows so plentifully there as to make amends for the the Barrenness of its Neighbouring Countries. The Castle or Aero-Corinthus stands on a very high Rock, having a great Precipice round about, but not so steep at the Entrance on the South-west Side, from whence runs out a Ridge of the Hills 2 or 3 miles Southward in the Morea. And indeed this is the only open Place from whence Mahomet II. made his Assault when he took the Castle from the Venetians after a Siege of 14 Months. This Side of the Rock is well cover'd with Houses; for the most part of the Inhabitants that dwell below in the Town have also Houses in the Castle, where their best Goods are secured from the frequent Incursions of the Cor∣sairs. There are also abundance of Cisterns for Wa∣ter hewn in the Rock, and some Springs, particu∣larly one toward the Southern Side of the Hill, which was heretofore called Pyrene, being the Place where (as they say) Bellerophon took the winged Horse Pegasus as he was there drinking. The City of Corinth, in time past, brought forth the most able Architects, Painters and Carvers of Greece, and had 2 remarkable Havens, viz. that of Lechaeum on the Bay of Lepanto, and that of Cenchreae or Chenchri, on the Gulph of Engia, whence the Poets named it by a peculiar Epithet, Bimaris Corinthus. It was built (as it is supposed) by Sisyphus the Son of Aeolus, about A. M. 2616. and was called Ephyre, until being de∣molished and rebuilt by one Corinthus, the Son of Marothon, or (according to the Opinion of others) of Pelops, it assumed the Name of its second Foun∣der. Thus, in process of Time, it became the most renowned of all the Cities of Greece, and by reason
of the convenience of its Scituation, rose up to so great a height of Grandeur that the Citizens vyed even with those of Rome, and forbore not con∣tumeliously to treat their Ambassadors, besmearing them with Dirt and Filth, according to the Report of Strabo; insomuch that the Roman Senate highly re∣senting these Indignities, and having before suspected their growing Power, determined to denounce War against them. Whereupon Lucius Mummius was sent with an Army into Greece, who took Corinth, set it on Fire, and laid it level with the Ground. Du∣ring which terrible Conflagration, many rich Statues of Copper, Gold and Silver being melted down, pro∣duced that most precious Mixture of Metals thence call'd Corinthian Brass. But the City was re-edified and Peopled anew, through the Liberality of Julius Caesar. S. Paul preached and resided there for some time, and afterward wrote his 2 Epistles to the Co∣rinthians. This City in later Times was granted by its Lords to the Venetians, until the Turks, under Ma∣homet II. took it from them, together with the adja∣cent Country: But they recovered it out of the Hands of those Infidels, A. D. 1687. The Isthmus of Corinth, Isthmus Peloponnesiacus & Corinthiacus, is a Neck of Land extended about 6 or 7 miles in breadth, between the Gulph of Lepanto and that of Engia, which joyns the Peninsula of the Morea to the Continent of Achaia. It was anciently famous for the Isthmian Games, first instituted by Theseus, and there celebrated on a Hill, being part of the Mountain Oneius; as also for the Forest of Pine-trees, the Leaves of which served to crown the Con∣querors, the Theatre, Stadium, Temple of Neptune and other Monuments of Antiquity, the Ruins of which are as yet to be seen, together with those of the Town, old Walls, Temples, &c. Divers Princes and other great Personages, viz. Alexander the great, Pitias, Demetrius, Julius Caesar, Caligula, Nero and Herodes Atticus, have at different Times attempted to cut a Channel through the Isthmus, and to make a communication between the two Seas, being incited thereto either through a desire to advance Naviga∣tion and Commerce, or merely to raise a Monument to their own Fame: However none of them were able to accomplish their Design, whether iterrupted with other more important Affairs, or wearied out with the tediousness of the Work, which gave occa∣sion to the Proverb, Isthmum fodere, against those that presum'd to undertake things beyond their Abi∣lity. Moreover, a Wall was built on the same Neck of Land, and call'd Hexamillion, because it reached 6 miles in length, which is the whole breadth of that part of the Isthmus. This Wall was Ruined by Amurath II. But the Venetians caused it to be Rebuilt and Fortified, until it was demolished a second time by Mahomet II. in 1443. CHAP VI. BESSARABIA, Bessarabia, together with part of PODO∣LIA and HUNGARY. BESSARABIA is a very large Province of Europe, lying between Podolia, Moldavia and the Mouth of the River Danube, along the Coasts of the Black-Sea, to the North of Bulgaria. It is a Marshy Country, and inhabited chiefly by the Dobrussian Tar∣tars. Its Principal Towns are these, viz. TEKIN or Tigina, a large City and the Ca∣pital of the whole Province of Bessarabia, seated on the River Niester toward the Frontiers of Podolia, at the distance of 100 miles from Jazy to the North east. KILIA-NOVA, a strong Town on the Danube, about 60 miles from Bialogrod to the South-west and 230 from Constantinople to the North. BIALOGROD, or Akierman, a considerable Fortress on the Niester, and the chief Town of the Principality of Budziack, 42 miles from Ockzakow to the South-west, and 270 from Constantinople to the North. OCZAKOW or Ockziakow, Axiace, is situ∣ated at the Fall of the River Borysthenes or Niester into the Euxine-Sea, 44 miles from Bialogrod to the North-east, and 290 fron Constantinople to the North. It is a Town of much Strength, having a Castle for its defence, which is garrisoned by the Turks, altho the Inhabitants are Precopensian Tartars. It was founded by Vitolaus Duke of Lithuania, and first peopled by his Subjects, giving its Name to the Neighbouring Tartars, who very much infest Podolia, Lithuania and Poland, insomuch that the King hath been sometimes obliged to pay them Tribute, to prevent their Incursions: Nevertheless the Po∣landers gave them a fatal Overthrow, A. D. 1644. The Grand Signior, in like manner, still retains in his Possession some Places in Podolia, a Province in Poland, particularly, CAMINIECK or Kaminieck Clepidava, Ca∣minecia aut Camienicum, a very strong Town of the Ʋkraine, and the Capital of Podolia, being distant 72 miles from Zockzow to the North-west, 116 from Lemburg almost to the South-east, 280 from Cracow to the East, and 290 from Warsaw. It is a Bishop's See, subject to the Metropolitan of Lemburg, and re∣markable for its advantagious Scituation on a steep Rock, near the Banks of the River Smortzyck, which a little lower falls into the Niester. The Turks made several Attempts in vain on this strong Hold, but hav∣ing sustained much Damage by Fire, A. D. 1669. and afterward by a sharp Siege, in 1672. it was at last forced to submit to the Ottoman Yoke, the Polanders being then engaged in a Civil War among them∣selves, and the Town in an ill condition of Defence. It was blockt up by the Cossacks, under their General Motula, in the Month of April 1687. and the Polan∣ders made Preparations to attack it in September fol∣lowing; but on the Approach of a numerous Army of Turks and Tartars, they were both oblig'd to Re∣tire. Again, the Polish Forces encamping in the Neighbourhood made a kind of Blockado in 1688. and in 1689. having received fresh Recruits from Li∣thuania, invested the Place, and began a formal Attack on August 20th, but their Enterprize proving
likewise unsuccessful, they raised the Siege in Sep∣tember next ensuing. BAR, a Town of very great Strength on the River Row, in the Palatinate of Caminieck. It is as yet subject to the Dominion of the Turks, and stands on a Hill amidst the Marshes, about 70 miles from Caminieck to the North East, and 54 from Bra∣slaw to the North-west. As for those Towns in HƲNGARY that were not long-a-go possessed by the Turks, and have been lately reduced to the Empe∣ror's Obedience; The Reader may find a Particular Account of them in the Description of that Kingdom. CHAP. VII. COUNTRIES that are TRIBUTARY to the TURKS. TRANSYLVANIA, Transylvania, called Erdely by the Hungarians, and Siebenburgen by the Germans, derives both its Latin and Hungarian Names from Woods and Forests, with which it is encompassed, almost on all Sides; but the High-Dutch Denomination hath a different Original of much later Date, taken from the 7 chief Towns in this Princi∣pality, and alluding to the manner of Living of the ancient Pannonians, who having fixed their Tents in those Parts, for the more ready suppressing of any Insurrection that might be raised against them by the Natives, were wont to keep in distinct Bodies, and accordingly divided themselves into 7 Bands or Re∣giments, every one of which contain'd 3857 able Sol∣diers. Thus being encamped in several quarters of Transylvania, they made Entrenchments round about, and for their better Security built a Fortress or Castle at every Camp, which first occasioned the alteration of the Name of this Country; Siebenburgen in the German Tongue, properly denoting 7 Forts or Towns. It was heretofore added to the Roman Empire under the Name of Dacia, by the Emperor Trajan, and con∣tained in compass about 1000 Italian miles, according to the Report of Eutropius and Jornandes; but at present nothing more is comprehended under the Name of Transylvania than only a part of the Old Walachia, lying in Form of a Rhomb or Lozenge, and being bounded on the North by Poland, on the South by Walachia proper, and part of Hungary, on the East by Moldavia, and part of the same Walachia, and on the West by the Upper Hungary: It's extent from North to South, consisting of about 50 Leagues and 68 from East to West. The Air is altogether as temperate here as in any part of Hungary, and not so much corrupted with Infectious Vapors, altho' the Waters are Unwholsom, by reason that they pass through Mines of Alum and Mercury. The Coun∣try (as the Name imports) is every where environ'd with Forests, growing for the most Part on the Sides of high Hills and Mountains. The chief of these is Mount Carpathus, nam'd Crapack by the Transylva∣nians, and Biescid by the Russians, which runs along the South of the whole Principality, dividing it from the Russian Empire; and indeed the Inlands are al∣most as mountainous as the outermost Limits of these Territories, insomuch that one can hard hardly travel from one great Town to another, but by a Road, leading through a Wood, and over some rocky Hill. The highest inland Mountain stands near Fogaras, on the River Alt, its Top being inaccessible and always covered with Snow: However the Soil brings forth abundance of Corn, Pulse and delicious Fruits; affording likewise good Grapes, Hony and Wax, together with several Mines of Gold, Silver, Lead, Quick-silver and other Minerals. The chief Mines are at Sculatti and Rimili Dominurdtz, in the latter whereof the Miners have sometimes found large Lumps of Virgin-Gold, and sent them to the Mint without any further Purifying. The best Silver Mines are near Offera and Radna, where they have also good store of Copper, and accidentally light on a Vein of Gold. In the Copper-Mines they usually meet with Brimstone and Ising-Glass, as also plenty of Steel at Cyck, and of Iron at Thorosch and Huniad. Lastly, the County of Maromarus affords vast quan∣tities of Stone-Salt, even so far as to supply the grea∣ter part of the neighbouring Nations with that Mine∣ral. The Pasture Grounds yield Fodder to innume∣rable Herds of Cattle, more especially large Oxen, with which the Transylvanians, in Time of Peace, are so over-stock'd, that a fat Ox may be then bought there for 12 or 14 Shillings, and sold again for 50 or 60 Rix-Dollars in Austria. They have also a good Breed of stout and swift Horses, that are very much esteemed in Foreign Countries. The Forests abound with Buffles, Elks, Stags, and a sort of wild Horses that run incredibly swift, and have large Mains hang∣ing down to the Ground, wild Boars, Foxes, Mar∣tins and other sorts of Game. The Hares are much larger here than in the Western Parts of Europe, and their Skins carry a far purer Furr. The Wolves and Bears in Altland, and other adjacent Counties, run often in Droves, viz. 30 or 40 together, and do much Mischief, during the Winter, among the Hor∣ses and other Cattle. There is no Nation in the World where Wheat grows more plentifully than in Transyl∣vania, so that even the Peasants feed on no other sort of Bread, the Blade of this Grain being here usually as thick as an ordinary Reed, and shooting up to a great height. Their Wines are reckon'd much more noble than those of Walachia, the Windich Marqui∣sate, Austria and Moravia, but far inferior to the Rhenish and Hungarian, having commonly a Tincture of Chalk or Sulphur; for which Reason it is reput'd a mighty promoter of the Gout and such like Distem∣pers. The most remarkable Rivers are, the Marisk, the Alt, the Samos and the Chrysa: The 2 former of these spring forth out of the Scythian Carpethus; the Alt falls into the Danube, but the Marisch and Samos intermix their Waters with those of the Teisse. The Principality of Transilvania is Inhabited by three sorts of People, that have different Laws and Customs, viz. The Ciculi, or Siculi, the Saxons and the Hungarians. Of these, the first lay claim to the greatest Antiquity, and are still govern'd by their old Laws and Constitutions, being really a branch of the ancient Scythians, who were driven out of Pannonia, by Attila and his Huns. They divide themselves in∣to
seven Cantons, every one of which is Absolute within it self: Tho all of them are united with the Transylvanians, and one with another for the defence of their Country against the Common Enemy. As for the Saxons (according to the Opinion of Toppel∣tine) they are the true Relicts of the ancient Daci; calling themselves even at this day Decen Desen, or Detschen, which is an easie Corruption of the Daci or Deci. The German Writers, especially those of the best Repute, acknowledge the whole German Nation (and consequently their Saxons) to be the Off-spring of the ancient Transylvanians. But whence soever their Original is deriv'd, they are certainly near of Kin to the Inhabitants of the Lower Saxony, and use the same Dialect, although the corruption of their Tongue, by a mixture with the Hungarian, renders the High-Dutch more difficult to be understood among them. Those Saxons possess the Province call'd the Seven Towns: The Siculi dwell on the Banks of the River Marisch; and the Hungarians retain to them∣selves the Frontiers of Walachia; the two latter are for the most part Calvinists, and the Saxons almost generally embrace the Doctrine of Luther, but none will allow any Pictures or Images to be set up in their Churches. There are also among them some Roman Catholicks, Greeks, Trinitarians, Photinians and Anabaptists, though their Party is not so consi∣derable. However, these three distinct Nations are govern'd by one Sovereign, stiled the Waywood, or Prince of Transylvania, whom the Grand Signior often caus'd to be Elected and Depos'd at his pleasure. But the power of the Turks hath of late been much diminish'd: The two Noble Families of Bathori and Ragotski, have supplied this Country with many Princes, who were oblig'd to send a certain Tribute to the Port, until Michael Abafti the 23d. Prince from John Huniades, who succeeded John Kermant, A. D. 1661, with the consent of the States of Transilvania, resign'd the whole Country to the Emperor of Germany and King of Hungary for ever, as it appears from the Act bearing Date at Harmanstadt, May 9th. 1688. Whereupon Imperial Garisons were accordingly re∣ceiv'd into all the principal Places. Afterward, the said Prince dying in 1690, the States in a general Assembly, resolv'd to adhere to the Interests of the Emperor and the young Prince Son to the Deceased, who was confirm'd by his Imperial Majesty against all the pretentions of Count Teckely and the Ottoman Port. Thus the Principality of Transylvania remains entirely Incorporated with the Crown of Hungary, under the Imperial Protection. Its chief Revenues arise from the sale of Salt, very great quantities whereof are made at Tarda, and convey'd from thence on the River Marisch, into Hungary. HERMANSTADT, Hermanopolis, aut Cibini∣um, call'd ZEBEN by the Inhabitants, the Metro∣polis of Transylvania, and the Royal Seat of the Prince, stands in the middle of a large Plain, on the side of the Rivulet Ciben, which a little below falls into the Alt, being distant 15 German Miles from Coloswar or Clausenbug to the East, and 8 from Gula Feiruar, or Weissemburg, toward the Frontiers of Moldavia; as also 160 from Belgrade to the North∣east, and 235 from Buda almost to the East. It is a large and Fair City, bearing the title of an Episco∣pal See, under the Metropolitan of Colocza in Hun∣gary, although at present destitute of a Bishop; nei∣ther is its Strength less considerable, the great num∣ber of Fish-ponds and Pools of Water rendring it in∣accessible, besides its firm Walls and Ramparts. The Houses within the Gates are generally well-built and for the most part cover'd with Slate, which is esteem'd an extraordinary piece of Magnificence in the appartments of a Transylvanian Citizen. There are also many good Springs; and the River-water is convey'd by small Channels through every Street; nevertheless the Air is thought to be very Unhealthy and to cause the Gout, the epidemical Distemper of the Burghers, insomuch, that many of the best Hou∣ses want Inhabitants. Here are usually held the ge∣neral Conventions and Courts of Judicature of the other six chief Towns of the Saxons, all Actions at Law being brought thither to Tryal. The princi∣pal Trade of the place consists in Cloath and Mead, both which are here made in great quantities and sent into the neighbouring Territories. The Princes of Transylvania were wont formerly to put themselves under the protection of the Grand Signior; but Prince Abafti at the sollicitation of the late Duke of Lorraine adher'd to the Emperor's Interest, and was prevail'd with to receive an Imperial Garison of 3000 Men into this City, A. D. 1687. Having travelled about a German mile from Her∣manstadt, we meet with Saltzburg, or Wizagna, that takes its name from the Salt-pits, which (as it hath been already intimated) bring yearly a very conside∣rable Revenue into the Prince's Exchequer. Not far from hence appears Michelberg, a strong Fortress erected on the top of a Hill, wherein are laid up all the Arms and Military Amunition of the whole Ter∣ritory of Hermanstadt: Two miles from this place stands Roche-Thurn, or the Red-Tower, so nam'd from the colour of the Free-stone with which it is built, where the Inhabitants are forc'd to keep a continual Watch and Ward, for fear of some sudden Invasion by the Turks, out of whose Dominions there lyes only a very narrow Road this way into Transylvania. CRONSTADT or BRASSAW, Corona aut Stephanopolis and Brassovia, is pleasantly situated in the midst of fair and rich Vineyards, about 65 miles from Hermanstadt, almost to the North-east, near the Confines of Moldavia and the Carpathian Mountains. It is also taken by some Authors for the Praetoria Augusta of Ptolemy. However it is a Bishops See, and a place of some strength, as being tolerably well Fortified with Walls and Ramparts of Earth. The Houses are high and well-built, but generally cover'd with Laths instead of Slate. The Citizens are all Saxons, without the least mixture of Hungarians or Walachians; so that their peculiar Language is here spoken in its greatest Purity. A good School hath been Founded here for some time, besides a Library, that goes beyond any throughout the whole Kingdom of Hungary. The Country round about Cronstadt, bears the name of Burzia, or Burzland, and is the outmost boundary of the Principality of Transylvania; which gave oc∣casion to the Hungarian Proverb, That Burzia says Amen to the High-Dutch Paternoster: Meaning, that this Country is the last wherein the German Tongue is understood, the Sclavonian entring on the Fron∣tiers of Walachia. Moreover, it may not be impro∣per to observe here, that the Road from Altland and other parts of Transylvania, leads directly to Zeiden∣wald, a Forest extending for the space of three long Hungarian miles in length; during which unpleasant Passage, Travellers are carried over a continued Bridge or Causey of Planks, the Soil being for the most part Marshy and full of Boggs, BISTRICZ, BESTERCZA, or BESTERIZA, Bistricia; sometimes also call'd NOSENSTADT
by the Germans, is remarkable for its situation in a spacious Plain, on the Banks of a River of its own name. It is a Town of small extent, but very neat, and of so good Note, that many of the Hungarian Historiographers allow it the third place in the Cata∣logue of the Saxon Cities, giving it the preceedency to Segeswar and Megiez. The Burghers (as it is ge∣nerally reported) speak as good Dutch here or better than at Cronstadt. But the Air and Water of the ad∣jacent Country are both reputed very Unwholsome; so that the Inhabitants, especially the meaner sort, that drink Water, are very apt to be Deaf, Dumb, and altogether Unactive, This Town is distant a∣bout 80 miles from Hermanstadt to the North-west, as also 5 German miles from Burgles, and 15 from Weissemburg to the North-west. MEGIEZ or MEDWESCH is seated in the very heart of Transylvania, on the Banks of the same River with Segeswar, in a Country well furnish'd with Wine and other rich Merchandizes. Indeed it is not very large, yet indifferently well fortify'd with a deep Ditch and an old Wall. But its greatest Srength lies in the Church founded on the top of a Hill, ac∣cording to the usual custom of the Inhabitants of those parts, who built their Churches Castle-wise, to avoid being put to a double Charge. SCHESBƲRG, or SEGESWAR (as it is nam'd by the Hungarians) Segethusa, extends it self along the side of a Hill and the Banks of the River Cochel, at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains, about 10 miles from Hermanstadt to the North, and 14 from Cronstadt to the West. As to its form, it very much resembles Buda, but falls far short of that City in its largeness and number of Inhabitants. It is di∣vided into 2 parts, viz. the Upper and Lower, the former being built on a Hill and a place of great Strength; but the latter is not well defended, tho' more populous by reason of the convenience of Water for the use of the Burghers in carrying on their several Manufactures; more especially that of dressing their Cloth, whereas the other part of the Town is desti∣tute of any Brook or Spring. MILLEMBACH, or ZAASSEBES ac∣cording to the Hungarian denomination, Zabesus aut Sabescus, is a Town of much Antiquity, but other∣wise scarcely considerable, lying in a very hollow Valley, and Westward tolerably well secur'd with Bogs and moorish Grounds. But it may be easily attack'd on the other side, and is by no means a place of Strength. CLAƲSENBƲRG, Claudiopolis, is situated on the Rivulet Samos near the foot of the Mountains towards the Borders of Hungary, at the distance of 9 German miles from Weissemburg to the North, as many from Bestercza or Bistricz, and 15 from Wa∣radin to the East. It is a large populous Town, and the principal of a County of the same name, being fortify'd with an old Castle and other Bulwarks, so as to be capable of enduring a smart Siege. It is also a place of great Traffick and well frequented by reason that all the Conventions of the States of Tran∣sylvania and Provincial Courts of Justice are held therein by the Prince. It heretofore perhaps bore the name of Patruissa, but is at present call'd Coloswar by the Hungarians. However, the greatest part of the Towns-men are Arians and Photinians, insomuch that the other six Towns (where Lutheranism is gene∣rally profess'd) took an occasion to exclude Clausen∣burg out of the number of the seven States of Tran∣slvanian-Saxons, and to admit Bross or Zasuaras into its room. Moreover, the Hungarians may be made free of this Town, and are allow'd to bear Offices therein; a Privilege never granted them in any other Saxon City. There are divers other small Towns and Burghs in Transylvania entirely inhabited by the Saxons, but all of them by some means or other, depend on the seven preceeding. The chief Towns in Transylvania inhabited by the Hungarians, Walachians, Siculi, &c. WEISSEMBƲRG, Alba Julia, call'd by the Hungarians Giula Fejerwar, is conveniently situated on a rising Ground, from whence, almost 2 English miles round about, one may take a most delightful Prospect of a champian and fruitful Country. It is water'd with the gentle Streams of the River Marisch, and was in time past much larger than it is at pre∣sent; as may still be discern'd from its old Bounda∣ries without the Walls, containing 5 German miles in compass. And indeed it continu'd for a long time the Metropolis of Dacia, being honour'd with the royal Palace and constant Residence of the Monarchs of that Kingdom. It was also formerly a Bishop's See under the Metropolitan of Colocza, but that Dig∣nity was transferr'd elsewhere by Queen Isabel, the Relict of John I. King of Hungary. In this City are often found many Roman Medals, Coins and Inscri∣ptions, manifest Signs of its Antiquity; being distant 34 miles from Hermanstadt to the West, 68 from Temeswar to the North-east, 90 from Waradin to the East, and 196 from Buda. THORDA is suppos'd to stand in or near the same place with the Salinae of Ptolemy, which Town took its name from the great number of Salt-pits in the adjacent Territory. DEVA, a Town chiefly noted for affording a sort of excellent Wine and guarding the Passage through the Eysenthor, into the Turkish Dominions. It was taken after a small Resistance by Michael Abafti late Prince of Transylvania, during the Wars maintain'd by him against his Competitor Kemeni Janos, A. D. 1662. ENGƲEDINE, call'd Annium by the Romans, from a Causey leading towards it, which one Annius a Captain of one of their Cohorts had caus'd to be rais'd. Some Fragments of this ancient military way are as yet to be seen, besides other Monuments of Antiquity often found in and about this Town. NEWMARK, Nova Marchia, or WASER∣HELY according to the Hungarian denomination, is seated on the River Marisch at the foot of the Carpa∣thian Mountains, 36 miles from Clausemburg or Colos∣war to the North-east. In this Town the general Assemblies of the Siculi, are usually conven'd at cer∣tain appointed times. AGNABAT or AGNETLIN, is one of the chief Towns of Transylvania, tho' of little Strength, and water'd by the River Herbach, 25 miles from Hermanstadt almost to the North. Queen Isabel as∣sembled a Diet there for the preservation of her Son, but Marvinsius caus'd it to be dissolv'd, and levy'd War against his Sovereign Prince, the end of which prov'd fatal to both.
MOLDAVIA. MOLDAVIA, Moldavia, so call'd from the River Moldaw, hath Podolia and the Niester for its Northern Bounds, Transylvania and Valachia on the West, the Danube and the Sereth on the South, and the same River Danube, together with the Province of Bessabaria on the East. Its utmost Extent from North to South consists of about 60 leagues, and 80 from East to West. The Air is very healthful, and the Country extreamly fertil, affording the fairest and best Horses throughout the whole Continent of Eu∣rope. It is variously beset with Plains, Mountains, Valleys and Rivers, the chief whereof are the Moldaw, the Pruth, the Sereth or Missovo, which intermixeth its Waters with those of Bardalach, and at length dis∣chargeth them, as likewise doth the Pruth, into the Channel of the Danube. This Province is govern'd by a Waywood, who is Tributary to the Grand Seignior, and enjoys a yearly Revenue of about two hundred thousand Crowns, arising only from the Tithes of Hony and Wax. Among 20 Waywoods that have presided in these Territories, scarcely two of them have succeeded their Fathers. The Sultan invests with this Dignity, him that engageth to pay the largest Tribute, which usually amounts to the Sum of 180000 Livres. The Moldavians adhere to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Greek Church as well as the Valachians, and are divided into many different Sects. In the year, 1686. the Polanders over-ran the whole Country, and took the principal Towns, insomuch, that the Inhabitants relinquish'd the Interest of the Ottoman Port, and voluntarily put themselves under the protection of the Emperor of Germany in 1688. ZOCKZOW or CZƲKAW, Soczova aut Sucidava, is a large and strong City, being the Capi∣tal of the Principality, and the ordinary Seat of the Prince or Vaywood, who assumes the Title of Lord of Moldavia. It stands on the Banks of the River Sereth, 54 miles from Cronstadt to the North-east, and 74 from Caminieck almost to the South. TASSY or TAZY, a great and populous Town on the River Pruth, about 60 miles distant from Zockzow to the East. The Polanders took it A. D. 1686. and abandon'd it soon after, so that its now subject to its own Princes, under the Emperor's protection. WALACHIA. VALACHIA, Valachia, aut Dacia Alpestris, is bounded on the North by Moldavia, on the South and East by the River Danube, and on the West by Transylvania, extending it self in form of a Triangle for the space of about 52 leagues from North to South, and 90 from East to West. The Air is temperate, and the Soil brings forth Corn, Grapes and other Fruits in great abundance. In the Pastures are bred Horses of an excellent kind, Oxen and numerous Flocks of Sheep; insomuch, that a very considera∣ble Traffick for Leather is here maintain'd with the Polanders and Muscovites. But this Principality hath been always more espe∣cially famous for Horses, insomuch that the Waywood hath sometimes maintain'd 3000 Horse-guards; and, at a short Warning hath been able to bring an Army of 6000 Horse-men into the Field. But the Forests in like manner afford much variety of Game, besides Mines of divers sorts of Metals. The principal Rivers are the Aluta or Olt, the Telsch, the Jalonicza and the Missovio, which run almost in a parallel course and fall into the Danube. This Pro∣vince hath a Waywood for its Governour, who is elected or approved by the Grand Seignior: He is sometimes styled Hospodar, that is to say, Chief Ge∣neral of the Militia, and pays every year to the Turks a Tribute of 70000 Ducats, altho' he is sometimes oblig'd to disburse 100000. to maintain himself in his Principality. The Valachians observe the Rites of the Greek Church, and acknowledge the Patriarch of Constantinople as their Metropolitan. The Inhabitants fancy themselves to be the true Offspring of the Romans; and their Assertion seems to be confirm'd by the Idiom of their Language▪ which in many Words and Phrases comes nearer the ancient Latin than the modern Italian, altho' of late it hath been much corrupted with Russian, Dalmatian, Croatian and Turkish Expressions. As for the Go∣vernment of the Country, its own Princes or Way∣woods have always exercis'd the Soveraign Authority, who as long as the Kingdom of Hungary continu'd in a prosperous State, were wont to put themselves un∣der the protection of that Monarch. In the year, 1391. the Turks first invaded Walachia, and at length in 1415. compell'd the People, that had gallantly de∣fended themselves in several Rencounters, to submit to the Ottoman Yoke, which the Waywood attempted to throw off about 10 years after; but being soon reduc'd to extremity, was again oblig'd to swear Al∣legiance to the Grand Seignior, and to promise to assist the Turkish Forces in all their Expeditions against the Christians. Walachia continu'd in the same state till the year, 1595. when Sigismund Bathar Prince of Transylvania secur'd both this Principality and his own from their accustomed Bondage; how∣ever, the Inhabitants were not long able to maintain their Liberty, and therefore have ever since content∣edly paid their Homage, without attempting another Revolt. TERGOWISCH or TERWISCH▪ TAR∣VIS, Tergovistus, Triphulum, Tiriscum aut Taros, the capital City of Valachia, wherein the Waywood usually keeps his Court, is seated on the River Lau∣niza amidst the Marshes, towards the Confines of that part of Bulgaria which lies beyond the Danube, and was heretofore subject, together with the adjacent Territories, to the Dominion of the Kings of Hungary, being distant 60 miles from Nicopolis or Nigeboli to the North, somewhat more from Brassaw or Cron∣stadt, a Town of Transylvania, 94 from Herman∣stadt to the South-east, 140 from Jassy to the South∣west, and 200 from Belgrade to the East. BRASCOW, BRACSLOW or BRAS∣GOW, is a considerable City toward the Northern-part of Valachia, being dignified with an Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Colocza, and distant 47 miles from Targovisch to the North. The State of the Republick of RAGƲSA, Ragu∣sina Ditio, is situated in Dalmatia, on the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea or Gulph of Venice, and extended in its greatest length from North-west to South-east for the space of 100 miles, but its breadth scarcely includes 25. This Country is not very considerable, as comprehending within its Jurisdiction only the City of the same name, the Town of Stagno, and two or three Burghs, together with the Peninsula of Hyllis or Sabioncello about 30 miles in compass, the Island of Melita or Melada, and some others. The Town
of Stagno and Peninsula of Sabioncello, were granted to the Ragusians by Stephen King of Bosnia, A. D. 1333. as we are informed by Joannes Lucius a learned Writer. RAGƲSA or RAGƲSI, Ragusium, named also Dubrounich by the Sclavonians, the Metropolis of the Republick and the See of an Archbishop, is well built, and enclosed on one side with a steep Rock; on the other it is advanced on a small point of Land into the Adriatick Sea. Some Authors believe it to be the Epidaurus of the Ancients; but others affirm, with greater probability, That it was founded by the Epidaurians after the destruction of their City, the Ruins whereof are yet to be seen at the distance of 6 miles from thence to the East, and commonly called Ragusi Vacchio or old Ragusa. However, the City of Ragusa is at present very populous, and one of the chiefest Marts of Dalmatia, altho' extended only one mile in compass. It is well fortified with a strong Castle and other Bulwarks, and environ'd with large Suburbs. It hath also a safe Harbour near the Island of Lacroma, about half a mile from the Town, and another very capacious bearing the name of Santa Croce, not far from thence to the East. The Government of this Republick is almost like to that of Venice, and the Inhabitants are so tenaci∣ous of their Liberty, that they change their Doge, or supream Magistrate, every Month, and enjoyn the military Officers to maintain their Post only six Weeks. On which account the Gentlemen are not permitted to wear a Sword, nor to live out of their Houses, without giving notice thereof to the Senate. Moreover Strangers, and chiefly the Turks, are lockt up at night, within their several Apartments. Neither are the Gates of the City ever open, but for three or four hours by day in Summer-time, and not above an hour and half in Winter. The Senate is compo∣sed of 60 Senators, who cannot transact any Affair, unless 40 of them at least are present in Council. Actions or Suits at Law at their first Commencement are usually brought before six Members of the Senate, from whom there is an Appeal to the College of 30. who are no Senators; but if the Decree be for Sums exceeding 500 Crowns, the Appeals are finally de∣termin'd by the Senate. As for Criminal Matters, they are judg'd by a Magistrate or Officer, from whom lies an Appeal to a Court consisting of six Se∣nators; so that in case a Sentence or Decree be con∣firm'd there, the Trial is terminated; but if it hap∣pen otherwise, the Cause falls under the proper cog∣nizance of the Senate. Lastly, Political Affairs of lesser moment are decided by the Governor, together with six Assessors of the Senate; and these 6 Senators execute the Office only for a year. The Judicial Proceedings of this Republick are drawn up in Latin, but the Lawyers plead in Italian, or the vulgar Lan∣guage of the Country. The State causeth 12500 Hungars to be paid yearly to the Grand Seignior, on condition, That the Citizens may be exempted from all manner of Taxes and Imposts whatsoever through∣out the whole Turkish Empire, wherein they have likewise ten Colonies, viz. in Servia, Bulgaria and Thrace, and enjoy the free exercise of the Roman Ca∣tholick Religion. Besides the said Tribute, which the Ragusians are constrain'd through fear to render to the Turks, they are oblig'd to allow a certain Revenue or Stipend to the Venetians, the Pope, Emperor and King of Spain, by vertue of a mutual Stipulation or Compact ratified between these States. Ragusa is very obnoxious to violent Earthquakes, and hath often suffer'd much damage thereby, more especially in the years 1614 and 1667. when the greater part of the City was overthrown; but it hath been since well rebuilt, and its Grandeur daily encreaseth. STAGNO, Stagnum, is a small City of Dalmatia, yet dignified with a Bishop's See under the Metropo∣litan of Ragusa, from whence it is distant 30 miles to the North, being situated on the Coasts of the Adriatick Sea or Gulph of Venice, where it hath a commodious and safe Harbour. CHAP. VIII. The Allies of the TƲRKS, or Inhabitants of the LESSER TARTARY. THE LESSER TARTARY, Tartaria Minor, aut Precopensis, so call'd to distinguish it from the Greater in Asia, is the ancient Lesser Scythia, being bounded on the North by the River Doniec or Lesser Don, which separates it from Moscovy; on the South by the Tanais or greater Don, the Sea of Zabach and the Euxine or Black Sea, on the West by the Nieper and Mountains that divide it from Poland. It is ex∣tended, in comprehending the Peninsula of Crimski, from the 46 deg. 20 min. to the 53 deg. 30 min. of Latitude, for the space of 145 leagues, and about 202 from South-west to North-east, from the 59th deg. to the 75th deg. of Longitude. The name of Tartaria Precopensis or Precopian Tartary, is taken from a Ditch dug in the Isthmus or neck of Land about half a league or 1200 paces wide, for its greater Strength and Security. The Air of this Country is temperate, but not very healthful, neither is the Soil every where alike; for in some places it brings forth Corn, Millet, Grapes, and several sorts of Fruits; in others appear only Marshes and Pastures, wherein are fed many Herds of Cattel. In fine, some Grounds are alto∣gether sandy. But Timber is generally scarce throughout these Territories, excepting in the Peninsula, where are found spacious Forests full of Deer, and affording all sorts of Game. The Mountains yield Mines of Gold, Silver and Iron; and the Rivers abound in delicate Fishes, altho' the Water is bitter and very unwholsom to drink. The most considera∣ble of these Rivers are the Nieper or Borysthenes, the greater and lesser Don, &c. The Inhabitants are robust and indefatigable, so that their Courage cannot be abated through the extre∣mity of Labour, Hunger, Thirst, Heat or Cold. They are very just in dealing one with another, but shew little or no courtesie to strangers▪ being much addict∣ed to Robbing and Pillaging; Jealousie and Lascivi∣ousness often exciting them to commit enormous Outrages. These Barbarians commonly feed on the
Flesh of Horses half sodden, which is sometimes cut by them into Collops, and laid under their Saddles; then they cause their Nags to run on full speed, until the Sweat exhales all over their Bodies. After∣ward having left the raw Flesh covered with Foam for some time, they take it out and greedily devour it. Moreover they delight very much in drinking the Blood of their Horses, and the Milk of their Cattel. The most part of those Tartars embrace the Maho∣metan Doctrine, altho' there are also among them many Roman Catholicks, Greeks and Armenians. Al∣most all the Roman Catholicks derive their Original from the Italians, and enjoy the free exercise of their Religion. This Country is govern'd by a Prince styl'd the Cham of Tartary, under the protection of the Empe∣ror of the Turks; of whom he receives a Standard as a mark of his Soveraignty. The Grand Signior detains as an Hostage, the person that ought to suc∣ceed him, who is usually his Son or Brother. More∣over the Sultan himself possesseth part of Crimski, and even maintains a Beglierbeg in the Town of CAFFA, a strong Hold of this Peninsula. He is also Master of the Town of AZOPHOƲ-TA∣NA situated in an Island made by the River Don near its mouth, and of that of THAMAN in A∣sia, on the Streights of Caffa. These two last are places of very great importance, and each of them affords a seat to a Sangiack depending on the Begli∣erbeg of Caffa. CRIM or KRIM, Crimcea, which hath impart∣ed its name to the Peninsula, wherein it is situated, at the distance of 25 miles from Caffa to the East, is the principal Town of the lesser Tartary, and the u∣sual Seat of the Great Cham, who sometimes resides at BACCA-SARAIO, Baccasara which stands on the Banks of the River Kabarta, in the midst of Crimski, and is distant 55 miles from Caffa to the North-West toward Perecop. The Peninsula of Crimski, heretofore call'd Cher∣sonesus Taurica, is more frequently inhabited, better cultivated, and contains a greater number of Towns than the lesser Tartary that lies to the North, and is almost desert; since the Nogaiski Tartars only dwell therein under Tents or Hutts, which they fix in the most convenient places. CHAP. IX. The Islands depending on TURKY. THE Island of NEGROPONT, heretofore call'd Eubaea, and now Egripos by the Grecians, is suppos'd to have been joyn'd at first to the Conti∣nent of Achaia, by an Isthmus or neck of Land, which was broken by the violence of the Tides, or according to the Opinion of others by an Earth∣quake. It is situated between the 38 deg. and the 39 deg. 30 min. of Latitude, as also between the 49th deg. and the 52 of Longitude, its extent from South-East to North-West, consisting of about 44 Leagues, its length of 10 or 12, and its compass of 120. The whole Island is extremely fruitful in Corn and Grapes, but very much subject to Earth-quakes; being also well furnished with all manner of Provi∣sions at extraordinary low rates; for Mutton is scarcely worth One Penny a Pound, the like quanti∣ties of Kids, and Goats-Flesh yielding not above a Half-penny; one may also buy Fish for One Far∣thing a pound, and Wine for Two-pence the Cron∣diry, i. e. about an English Wine-Gallon. Moreo∣ver Sweet-Meats are here made of divers sorts of Fruits; viz. Quinces, Pears, Plums, Nuts, Wal∣nuts, Almonds, &c. but those Confectioners instead of Sugar use Wine boyl'd to a Syrup, that renders them grateful enough to the taste. The Mountain of Caristo is famous for its excellent Marble and the Stone Amianthos or Asbestos, whereas the ancient Natives made a kind of incombustible Cloath that was cleans'd by burning it in the Fire. The Mo∣dern Inhabitants, who observ'd the Customs of the other Grecians at first, partly adhere to the Rites of the Greek Church, and partly to those of the Roman Catholicks; but since the Turks took possession of these Coasts, the Greeks are only admitted among the Infidels, paying a certain Tribute for the Exer∣cise of their Religion. As for the Government of this Island, the Eastern Emperors kept it in their pos∣session for a long time, and afterward Duke Raba∣nius Carcerius resign'd it to the State of Venice, who constituted Pietro Zanco its first Governour. But it was taken by the Turks, under the Conduct of their Emperor Mahomet II. who made his attacks with a Fleet of 300 Sail, and an Army of 120000 Men, in∣somuch that the besieged were at last forc'd to sur∣render after a gallant defence. Whereupon the in∣sulting Tyrant caus'd the unfortunate Proveditor of the Family of Erizzo, to be most cruelly put to Death by sawing his Body asunder, and cut off the Head of the Lady Ann, the Beautiful Daughter of the same Governour, with his own Hands, because she had generously disdain'd his foul Embraces; so that her Memory is still sacred among the Venetians, and deservedly enrolled in the Kalendar of Mar∣tyrs. NEGROPONT or EGRIPOS, the Ca∣pital City of the Island of the same name, was some∣times an Episcopal See under the Metropolitan of A∣thens, and afterward erected into an Arch-Bi∣shopricks being built on, or hard by the place where Cholcis formerly stood; that is to say, on a Peninsula of the same Isle, anciently call'd Eubaea; where it is separated from Boeotia by the narrow streight of Euripus, remarkable for the various and uncertain changes of its Tides, and on that account justly ad∣mir'd in all Ages as one of the great wonders of the World; for these Tides are one while regular and at another time altogether irregular, according to the different course of the Moon: On the days it is ir∣regular, it ebbs and flows 11, 12, 13 and even 14 times within the space of 24 or 25 hours; but on those days that it is regular it observes the same Rules according to the Moon, with the Ocean and Venetian Gulph. Over this famous Arm of the Sea is erected a small Stone Bridge of four or five Arches, leading to a Tower, built by the Venetians, in the midst of the Channel, whereto is joyn'd a Draw-Bridge
no larger than to let a Gally pass through. The Walls reach about two miles in compass, but in the Suburbs of the Christians beyond them, are contain'd more Building and People than in the City which is inhabited only by Turks and Jews. The Turks have two Mosques within, and two without, one of which was formerly the Cathedral dedicated to St. Mark: The Christians have in like manner some Churches in the Suburbs; from whence the City it felf is sever'd by a deep Ditch, and the Inhabitants of both may probably amount to fourteen or fifteen thousand Persons. This is the chief Seat of the Captain Bassa, or Admiral of the Turkish Navy, who is Governour of the Island and City of Negropont, as also of A∣chaia, and other adjacent parts of Greece, having a Keiah or Deputy under him. His Palace stands on the Sea-Coasts without the Town, bearing North-East of the Bridge, and is fortifi'd only by the Gal∣leys fasten'd to the Shore about it, altho' he hath another Palace in the Town, where the Proveditor of the Venetians kept his Court, whilst the Island remain'd in their possession. A considerable Fleet of Galleys constantly Rides in the Harbour, which is very safe and capacious, to be ready on all occasi∣ons to go out against the Pirates, and those of Mal∣ta. The City of Negropont is distant 16 miles from Thebes to the East, near the ruin'd Town and Port of Aulis, 45 from Athens to the North, 130 from Larissa to the South-East, and 380 from Constanti∣nople to the South-West. In 1688. the Venetians laid a formal Siege to Negropont, with an Army of 24000 Men and storm'd it twice, but were oblig'd to retreat without success. TASSO, Thasso aut Thalassia, an Island of the Archipelago, lies only at the distance of one League from the Continent of Romania, and is extended se∣ven or eight in compass. The Ground is uneven, being partly plain and partly rising up to Hills of a great height: In the Mountains of the Southern side are found Quarries of good Marble, and some Vineyards bearing excellent Grapes. There are al∣so abundance of Pine and Firr-Trees, and certain heaps of the refuse of Metal remaining as the evident marks of those rich Mines that formerly yielded to King Philip of Macedon, and his Son Alexander the Great, 80 Talents every year. The Town was first founded by a Colony of Phaenicians, and is at pre∣sent well inhabited, altho' it hath lost much of its an∣cient splendor. Before their arrival it was call'd Chryse, from its Gold, and Thas in the Phoenician Tongue signifies A thin Plate of Gold, from whence the whole Island took its name. NAXIA, Naxos, one of the Islands call'd Cycla∣des, heretofore afforded a Royal Seat to the Dukes that commanded in those parts, and is yet esteem'd the fairest in the Archipelago. It contains about 84 miles in Circuit, and yields good store of Marble, together with generous Wines; on which account the Ancients Consecrated it to Bacchus, who there enter∣tain'd Ariadne, when forsaken by Theseus. Here are to be seen the Ruins of a Temple dedicated to the same Bacchus, which stood on a Rock encompassed with the Sea, and was joyned to the Island by a Draw-Bridge; besides two other of Apollo, one whereof bears the name of St. Salvador. The Inha∣bitants who are about 5000 in number, partly ad∣here to the profession of the Greek Church, and part∣ly to that of the Latin, but most of those of the chief Town on the North-West side of the Island are Ro∣man Catholicks: They are obliged to pay a Tribute of 6000. Piasters to the Grand Seignior ever since they were subdued by the Turks, unde Solyman the Mag∣nificent, A. D. 1537. SIFANO, Siphanos aut Siphnos, is an Island of the Archipelago situated toward the Coasts of Eu∣rope: It was anciently famous for its Gold and Sil∣ver Mines, the Tithe whereof was sent to the Tem∣ple of Apollo at Delphos. Its principal Town is named Schinusa, and stands on a high Hill: The In∣habitants are divided in matter of Religion, some of them being of the Romish persuasion, and others following the Discipline of the Eastern or Greek Church. They give it out that they still have a Mine of Gold in the Island, but that they conceal it for fear of the Turks. The Island of CANDIA, Creta, lies between the 34 deg. and the 35 of Latitude, each space con∣tains 20 Leagues; as also between the 50 deg. and the 55 of Longitude, including 68 Leagues; and its compass consists of about 140. It is distant 570 miles from Sicily to the East, 360 from Cyprus, 69 from Cape Maleo a Promontory of the Morea, and 140 from the nearest Coasts of Cyrene or Cairoan, a Town of Africa to the North, being very Mountai∣nous, more especially on the Eastern side, where its breadth is more contracted. The Air is very healthful and temperate, but the Southern Winds are sometimes incommodious on the Coasts that are exposed to their Fury. The Soil is extremely fertile in Grain, Grapes, and divers other sorts of Fruits, affording also very good Pastures, in∣somuch that Corn might be reap'd twice every year, if the Inhabitants were not so sloathful, who are also gluttonous, rude, and addicted to many Vi∣ces. The Corn, Wine, and Oyl, are more especially excellent, besides Citrons of a prodigious largeness: Moreover Orange, Pomegranate, Cypress, and Myrtle Trees grow every where in great abun∣dance; but no Stags, Wolves, Foxes, Wild-Boars, Hedge-Hogs, nor any Venomous Creatures are bred here, excepting a kind of Spider termed Phalan∣gium, the Sting whereof is mortal. Neither are the Meadows water'd with any Navigable River, but on∣ly with large Brooks, particularly the Armino and Istonia; along the Banks of this last Rivulet grows the Tree Leandro, the Wood whereof and Leaves are Poisonous, and render the Waters very no∣xious during the Summer. The most remarka∣ble Mountain is Psiloriti or Mount Ida, which was heretofore noted for the Corybantes or Idaei-Dactyli, the Priests of Cybele, that took care to nourish Jupiter in his Infancy, and continually beat their Kettle-Drums, lest Saturn, who had made an agreement with his Brother Titan to destroy all his Male Off-spring, should happen to hear the Child cry. Near the head of the Brook Lene to the North, of the same Mount Ida, is a Grotto, wrought in a Rock, supposed to be the Labyrinth of King Minos, made according to Daedalus's directions. The Inha∣bitants of this Island were the first that rendred them∣selves formidable at Sea by Navigation, and on Land by the use of Arrows. Moreover, besides their Ex∣perience in Maritim Affairs, they invented Musick, and were the first People that recorded their Laws: Nevertheless they were always reputed Grand Lyers, Debauchees and Prirates. The Lacedaemonians subdued Crete or Candia, in the name of Darius King of Persia, A. Ʋ. 422. and L. Caelius Metellus, the Roman Consul made himself Master of it in 686. Afterward this noble Island be∣came subject to the Emperors of Rome, and those of
Constantinople, until A. C. 823. when the Saracens surpris'd it, and built the Twn of Candia, which in process of time gave its name to the whole Island. However Nicephocas Phocas rook it in 962, and at last Boniface Marquess of Montferrat, who had re∣ceived it from Bloin Earl of Flanders, sold it to the State of Venice for a vast sum of Money, A. D. 1194. The Venetians caus'd it to be well fortify'd in some places, to curb the insolence of the Natives that were very apt to rebel, and in 1364. had actu∣ally formed a design to introduce the Genoeses, yet were prevented by the sagacious Politicks of the Re∣publick: However the Turks under colour of besieg∣ing Malta in 1645. to be reveng'd for the great Prize taken the preceeding year by the Knights com∣manded by Bis-Baudran, fell into Candia, where they continued the War 24 years; for having taken Canea in 1645. they laid close Siege to the City of Candia; which notwithstanding the utmost efforts of many brave Commanders and Soldiers of divers Na∣tions who came voluntarily to its relief, was at length constrained to submit to the Ottoman Yoke on Hono∣rable Conditions in 1669. After the taking of this important place, the Turks over-ran the greatest part of the Island, and have since kept their hold: The Venetians scarcely retaining in their possession three Forts built on the Sea Shore, viz. those of Crabusa Suda, and Spina-Longa. CANDIA, Candia aut Maium, the Capital City of the Island which took its Modern name from thence, was formerly dignified with the Title of a Metropolitan See, under which were nine Suf∣fragans, and is at present the usual place of residence of a Turkish Sangiack or Governour. It is situated in a Plain on the foot of the Mountains on the Northern Coasts, and hath a commodious Harbour at the distance of 35 miles from Rhitymna to the East, and about 40 from Spinalonga to the West. It is a very large City divided into two parts, viz. the old Town which is of a small compass, and the new be∣ing larger and more beautiful: It hath been hereto∣fore a famous Mart, but now lies almost altogether desolate and little inhabited. This City whilst it re∣mained in the possession of the Christians, was also well fortified with a Castle and other regular Bul∣warks, besides an Arsenal furnished with all manner of Military Ammunition; that it obstinately resisted the assaults of the numerous Turkish Forces during some years, until at length it was taken by them on the 27th day of September, A. D. 1669. The Turks laid Siege to this City in the year 1645. after the Battle of Carvaca, but were oblig'd to raise it after having lost the Flower of their Army. How∣ever they left it blockt up very close until 1667. and then vigorously renewing the Siege, took it by com∣position in 1669. It is generally believed that the Ottoman Forces were sore shattered by the loss of 5 or 600000 Men, at that memorable Siege, which exposed their Government to Rebellion and Dome∣stick Uproar often raised at Constantinople. In 1692. the Venetians made an attempt to besiege Candia, but were repulsed with considerable loss. CANEA, Cydon was formerly styl'd the Mother of Towns by the Grecians, and hath for some time enjoyed the Title of an Episcopal See under the Me∣tropolitan of Caradia. It was taken by the Turks, A. D. 1695. RETTIMO, Rhitymna is another small City, and a Bishop's See, but is now subject to the Domi∣nion of the Ottoman Emperor, SITTIA is the Capital Town of a Territory of the same name, situated on the Northern Shore of the Island of Candia. A Chronological Table shewing the succession of the Emperors of Constantinople, or of the East, from Constantine the Great, to Constantine Palaeologus, dposed by the Turks, inclusively. A. C. Reigned Years, 1. Constantine the Great 306 31 2. Constantius 337 25 3. Gallus, 351 3 4. Julian the Apostate 361 2 5. Jovian 363 1 6. Valentinian 364   7. Valens 364   8. Procopius 364   9. Theodosius the Great 370   10. Acadius 383 died in 408 11. Rufinus 395   12. Gainas 401   13. Theodosius the Younger 408 42 14. Marcianus 450 7 15. Leo the Elder Asper & Patricius 457 17 16. Zeno the Isaurian 474 17 17. Basilicus, 475   18. Marcianus and Procopius 479   19. Leontius 487   20. Anastasius Longinus 491 27 21. Justin the Elder 518 8 22. Justinian 527 39 23. Justin the Younger 566 12 24. Tiberius 578   25. Mauritius 582   26. Phocas 602   27. Heraclius 610 31 28. Constantin II. 641 3 Months 29. Heracleonas 641 6 Months 30. Constans 641 27 31. Constantinus Pagonatus, the Younger, 668 16 32. Justinian the Younger, Rhi∣notmetus 685 10 33. Leontius 695 3 34. Tiberius Apsimames 698 7 35. Justinian, Rhinotmetus re-esta∣blished 705 6 36. Philippicus Bardanes 711 2 37. Artemius or Anastasius II. 713 2 38. Theodosius of Adrametum 715 2 39. Leo the Isaurian 717 24 40. Constantine Copronymus 741 34 41. Leo Chazarius 773 5 42. Constantine the Son of Irene 780 17 43. Irene 797 5 44. Nicephorus Stauracius 802 9 45. Michael Rhangabes 811 2 46. Leo V. 813 7 47. Michael the Stammerer 820 8 48. Theophilus 829 12 49. Michael the Drinker 842 15
Bordas. 50. Basilius the Macedonian. 866 19 51. Leo the Philosopher 886 25 52. Alexander the Son of Basilius 911 1 53. Constantine Porphyrogenneta 912 48 Romanus, Lecaperius, Christophanes, Constantinus, and Stephanus. 54. Romanus the younger 959 4 55. Nicephorus Phocas 963 6 56. John Zimisces 969 6 57. Basilius II. the Conqueror of the Bulgarians 975 50 58. Constantine the younger 1025 53 59. Romanus Agryropilus 1028 6 60. Michael the Paphlagonian 1034 7 60. Michael Calephates 1041 4 Months. 62. Constantine Monomachus 1042 12 63. Zoe and Theodorus 1054   64. Michael the old 1056 1 65. Isaac Comnenus 1057 2 66. Constantine Ducas 1059 8 67. Romanus Diogenes 1068 3 68. Michael Parapinaceus 1071 7 69. Nicephorus Botoniates 1078 3 Michael Ducas, and Constantine. 70. Alexis Comnenus 1081 37 71. John Comnenus or Calo Johan∣nes 1118 25 72. Manuel Comnenus 1143 37 73. Alexis Comnenus the younger 1180 3 74. Andronicus Comnenus 1183 2 75. Isaacius Angelus 1185 10 76. Alexis Angelus the Tyrant 1195 8 77. Alexis the younger 1203 1 78. Alexis Ducas Murzofle 1204   79. Baldwin I. 1204 5 French Emperors of Constan∣tinople. 4 10 3 1 80. Henry 1206 81. Peter de Courtency 1217 82. Robert de Courtency 1224 83. Baldwin II. who lost Constanti∣nople in 1261. 1234 The other Grecian Emperors. 84. Theodorus Laparis 1204 18 85. John Ducas 1222 33 86. Theodorus the younger 1255 4 87. John the Blind 1258 1 88. Michael Palaeologus 1259 24 89. Andronicus Paloeologus the elder 1283 44 Michael. 90. Andronicus Palaeologus the younger 1327 15 91. John Cantacuzenus 1341 15 92. John Palaeologus I. 1355 27 93. Manuel Palaeologus 1384 36 94. John Palaeologus II. 1419 29 95. Constantine Palaeologus Dracoses 1438 5 The City of Constantinople was taken by Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks. A. D. 1453. The Succession of the other Eastern Emperors under the name of Ottoman Princes.   A. D. Reigned Years 1. Mahomet II. 1450 32 2. Bajazet II. 1481 30 3. Selim 1512 9 4. Solyman II. 1520 47 5. Selim II. 1566 8 6. Amurath II. 1574 20 7. Mahomet III. 1595 8 8. Achmet 1604 14 9. Osman 1617 4 10. Mustapha 1622 1 11. Amurath IV. 1623 17 12. Ibrahim 1640 8 13. Mahomet IV. 1648 Deposed 1687. 14. Solyman III. 1687   15. 1694 Now Reigning.
A General and Particular DESCRIPTION OF ASIA. map of Asia ASIA ASIA is the largest and richest part of the Old Continent, lying on the East of Europe. Some Authors derive the Name from Asia the Nymph, the Daughter of Oceanus, and The∣tis the Wife of Japetus. Others from Asius the Son of Manaeus the Lydian. This part of the World is bounded on the North with the Scythian Ocean, on the West with the Red Sea, the Isthmus of Suiz, the Grecian Archipelago, the Sea of Marmara, the Euxine-Sea, the Sea of Za∣bache, or the Palus Meotis, a part of the River Don or Tanais, a Line being drawn from the most Eastern
winding of that River to the Mouth of the River Obi∣um, by the Streights of Veigats, in the Frozen-Sea. On the South with the Indian and Arabian Seas. On the East with the Ocean of China, and of the Kaimachites. It is extended from the first to the 80th Degree of Latitude, not including the Isles lying beyond the Aequator as far as the 11th Degree of Southern Lati∣tude, which makes 5400 Mile; and from the 54th Degree of Longitude about the Streights of the Dar∣danelli to the 154th, as far as the Streights of Jesso, or Isles of Japan, which contains about 6900 Miles. So that Asia takes up a great part of the Torrid, all the Northern Temperate, and reaches Six or Seven De∣grees into the Frigid Zone. Asia hath had many Pre-eminencies above any other part of the World. The Lord of Nature made choice of it for the Creation of Man; there he deli∣ver'd his Laws by Moses, and his Oracles by many Prophets. It was the Native Soil of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles; yea, of Jesus Christ himself. The rest of the World was peopled by Colonies translated from thence. It was the Seat of the most ancient and powerful Monarchies, viz. the Assyrian, which began in Nimrod or Belus, in 1879. and ended in Sardanapa∣lus, in 3178. 2. The Median. 3. The Persian, founded by Cyrus in 3494. and concluding in Darius Codomannus in 3724. from whom the Empire passed to the Greeks, Alexander the Great having conquer'd him in Three Battles. In after-Ages the Parthians rai∣sed a powerful Monarchy, which continued 477, or 478 Years, holding out the Eastern Empire a long time against the Romans. From the Parthians it was removed again to the Persians, with whom it conti∣nued, till 'twas almost overthrown by the Turks and Sarazens. But it was recover'd again about the Year 1515. by Ishmael Sophi. There are still in Asia these remarkable and mighty Kingdoms, viz. of the Great Mogul, the Great Cham of Tartary, the Kings or Em∣perours of Persia, China and Japan, with many con∣siderable Princes, which rule in the other parts of the Continent and adjoining Isles. Not only many whol∣som Laws, good Customs, useful Arts and Sciences, had their Original in this Tract of the World; but also several Religions, as Paganism from the Assyrians, Judaism among the Hebrews, Christianity in the Holy Land by the Nativity of our Saviour, about the Year 3947. and Mahometanism in Arabia, by Mahomet the False Prophet, about the Year of Grace 620. The Air is generally healthful and temperate, ac∣cording to the different Situations of it. In the Tor∣rid Zone some places enjoy a continual Spring, with∣out such Inconveniencies of immoderate Heat, as are met with in other places in that Zone. It is true, the Air is cold Northward, and in Arabia 'tis something hot; but in the highest Degree very tolerable. Both the Earth and Water produce a great abun∣dance of all things necessary for Humane Life. They have all sorts of Grain, Wine, Fruits, Spices, Herbs, Physical Drugs, Tame Creatures, Wild Beasts and Fish: Silks, Cottons, Tapestry and Purple Cloaths are made by the Persians; yea, they have a thousand Colours which never fade, which we have none of. Mines of all sorts of Metals, but especially of Silver and Gold, are common among them, which are found in such plenty among the Sands of their Rivers, that they need not be at the pains to dig deep into the Earth for them. They have Diamonds, White and Red Pearl, Rubies, Eastern Carbuncles, and a great many other sorts of Precious Stones. Quarreys of Marble, Jasper, Porphiry, Alabaster, Agates, &c. are very numerous among them. Their Seas, Lakes and Ri∣vers abound with all sorts of Fish; and on the Sea∣shore in several places they find considerable quantities of Ambergrease. Pearl-fishing is used in several places, but chiefly about the Isles Baharen in the Persian Sea, the Isle Manar upon the Indian Coasts, and at Ainan near China: And these sort of Pearls are much valued, as well as those of Japan, which are some of them red. But more particularly the Diamonds of Narsinga, the Pepper and Ginger of Malabar, the Persian Tapestry, Stuffs of Bangall, the Rubies and Lacca of Pegu, the Toys, the Wood of the Aigle r Aloes, and Earthen Ware of China, Tea of Japan, Gilliflowers of the Moluccos, Nutmegs of Banda, Saunders of Timor, the Gold of Sumatra, the Camphire of Borneo, Sables of Tartary, Cedar of Mount Libanon, the Coco-Trees of the Maldives, and the Channel of Ceilan are not to parallel'd elsewhere. The most remarkable Seas of Asia, about the mid∣land, are, 1. The Caspian Sea, which bears several other Names from the Cities and Countries it bor∣ders upon, and which hath the same Fish in it as the Fresh Water, tho' the Water of it is Salt. 2. The Persian Gulf. 3. Mare Mortuum, or the Dead Sea, which is more Famous than Great. As to the Seas that encompass it, they have different Names, accord∣ing to the Names of the adjoyning Countries. The principal Rivers also and Mountains I have set them down in the Tables of the first Tome. The People of Asia have always been great Lovers of Pleasure and Ease, except some that dwell in the Mountains, and the Tartars. They are not usually so vigorous and active as the People of Europe or A∣frica. The Four Principal Religions which are professed among them, are, Judaism, Mahometanism and Pa∣ganism, which are much more numerous than Chri∣stianity. The Dutch, where-ever they come, propagate the Doctrines of Calvin at the Expence of the other Nations of Europe, neither regarding Honesty or Ju∣stice to promote their Trade and Commerce. Maho∣metanism is embraced by the Turks, Persians, Arabians, Tartars, the Mogul's Subjects, and many other Nati∣ons on the Continent, and in some Islands. The Greeks also have their Patriarchs, viz. of Antioch and Jeru∣salem. There are also several other Schismaticks, as, Jacobites, Nestorians, Copthi, Georgians, Syrians, Ar∣menians, and Maronites. These Diversities of Re∣ligion do not hinder, but that almost one half of Asia still live in Pagan Darkness and Superstition. Asia may be divided several ways. Most of the Ancients do ordinarily divide it into the Greater and Lesser Asia. The Greater Asia contains Sarmatia, Scy∣thia Asiatica, Gedrosia, Drongiana, Arachosia, Sogdi∣ana, Hyrcania, Margiana, Parthia, Persia, Susiana, Media, Albania, Iberia, Coletris, Armenia, Mesopo∣tamia, Assyria, Arabia, Syria, Palestine, Phoenicia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Galatia, Pontus, Lycia, Pamphi∣lia, &c. The Lesser Asia, or Asia Minor, contains Phrygia, Paphlagonia, Lydia, Caria, Aeolis, Ionia, Doris, a part of Galatia, Bithinia, Caramania, Ama∣sia, Adulca, or Armenia the Less. But the Division which seems to me most natural, and suitable to so vast a Region, is that which some Modern Geogra∣phers use, which is into, 1. The Continent. 2. The Isles, according to these following Tables.
ASIA divided in a Geographical Order. Asia hath two Parts. 1. Con∣tinent. 1. In the West Turkey. Georgia. Arabia. 2. In the Middle, Persia. 3. In the North, Tartary. 4. On the East, China. 5. On the South, the Empire of the Mogul. And Penin∣sula's. 2. Isles 1. In the Ocean Southward, Japan. Philippines. 2. In the Ocean Eastward, The Molucco's. Sindae. Ceilan, Maldives. 3. In the Mediter∣ranean Sea, Cyprus. Rhodes. Metelene. CHAP. I. A Description of TURKY in ASIA. TƲRKY in Asia contains all that part of the World which the Romans were once Masters of, with Armenia and Assyria. It is bounded on the North with the Euxine-Sea and Georgia; on the West with the Isthmus of Suez, the Mediterranean and Aegean Seas, and the Sea of Marmara; on the South with Arabia and the Persian Gulph; on the East with the States of the King of Persia. The Breadth of it from South to North is 630 Miles from the 29th Degree 30 min. to the 45th Degree of Latitude; and in Length about 1500 Miles from West to East, from the 55th Degree to the 95th, and from the Hellespont to the farthest Frontiers. The Air is almost of the same Temperature in all parts of it, except in a little Tract of Arabia, which belongs to Turky, where it is very cold; but in other places it is very temperate. The Soil produces eve∣ry thing necessary for Man's Life; it yields an abun∣dance of Wheat, Barley, Wine, Fruits, Saffron. It hath excellent Pastures, wherein they feed great num∣bers of Horses and White Goats, which have Hair as fine as Silk. They have Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Allum, Christal, Arsenick, and Load∣stone, from which the City Magnesia takes its Name. They have great plenty of Citrons, Oranges and Figs in many places, as also Palms, Honey, Bees-wax, Cas∣sia, Cinnamon, Incense, Myrrhe, and several other Spices. Their Horses are beautiful, and very good; their Weathers very fat, whose Tail weighs 25 pound. All sorts of Wild Beasts and Fish are common there. On the Sea-Coasts are their Places for Traffick, where they maintain a great Trade of Merchandises from the Levant, which consists of Skins, Tapestry, Cotton, Camelots, Silks and Spice. And for this end there are resident in those places Consuls from all Nations of Europe. The most remarkable Rivers are Tigris and Eu∣phrates, which rise in the Mountains of Ararat and Mingol in Armenia. It's Course is from East to West; and having passed through the City Erzirum, it runs Southward, separating Natolia from Armenia and Sy∣ria-Diarbecke. Afterwards it joins with Tigris at Gor∣no, 44 Leagues below Bagdat; and after it hath born the Name of Skhat-el-Arab for 15 Leagues, it empties it self into the Gulph of Balsora, about Twen∣ty Leagues below the City of that Name; which be∣ing about a League and half distant from it, hath a Channel cut out of it, which will carry Vessels of 150 Tunn. Tigris fills many Lakes, and sometimes runs under Ground. The Country, which is wa∣tered by these two Rivers, is so beautiful and fruit∣ful, that it seems a Terrestrial Paradise. The Bridges over the Tiger are not made of Stone, but of Boats usually, because of the great Floods and fierce Stream of that River. The Asian Turks, who dwell in the Northern parts, are generally very ignorant and sloathful, delighting in Feasting, and all sorts of sensual Pleasures. They are very jealous of their Wives, and cruel to their Slaves. In the South and Arabia they are more inge∣nious, industrious, and subtile, good Husbandmen, and feed much Cattle. They are great Thieves; so that Travellers are forced to go in Troops to secure themselves from their Robberies. They follow the Errors of Mahomet for the most part; but there are Jews, and several Sects of the Greeks, the chief of which are the Melchites, Nestorians, Dioscorians, Armenians, Jacobites, and Maronites. The three first have each of them their Patriarch, besides the Patriarch of Constantinople, viz. of Alexandria, Antioch, who resides at Damascus, and Bethlehem. The Armenians have two, the one of which hath his Residence in the Monastery of Ecmeasin in Georgia, and the other at Sis in Aladulia. The Jacobites have one, whose Seat is at Caramit in Diarbeck, or Meso∣potamia. The Christians pay a certain Tribute to the Turks, called Carage. The richer sort pay about 150 Piasters an Head, the poorer Four. Women and Girls, Priests, Monks and Rabbi's, are exempted from it. This Country is ruled by Beglerbegs, i. e. Chief Governours sent by the Grand Seignior, who have under them Sanziacks and Timariots. Some Princes in Georgia pay Tribute to him, but others maintain their Freedom against his great Power. Turkey in Asia is divided into Seven Principal Parts, which are Anatolia, Syria or Soristan, Armenia or Turky, Diarbeck or Mesopotamia, part of Georgia, part of Arabia, and the Isles, which I will shew more plainly in the following Tables and Sections.
TURKY in Asia hath VII. Principal Parts. I. Anatolia, in which are, Anatolia. Caramania. Amasia. Aladulia. II. Syria, in which are, Syria. Phoenice. Palestine. III. Turky, in which are, Turky. Part of Syria. Diarbeck. IV. Diarbeck. Diarbeck. Yerach, or Chaldea. V. Georgia. Imireta, a Kingdom. Mingrelia. Province of Guriel. Abacassia. Circassia Nigra. VI. Part of Arabia. VII. The Isles Cyprus. Rhodes. Metelene. Part of the Aegean. Anatolia, or Asia Minor. ANatolia, anciently called Asia Minor, is a large Peninsula, which reaches as far as the Aegean Sea, and Sea of Marmara, between the Mediterra∣nean and Euxine Seas. It was divided of old into several Provinces or Kingdoms, as, Cappadocia, Ga∣latia, Lycaonia, and Pisidia in the Midland; Bithinia, Paphlagonia, Pontus, towards the Euxine Sea; Ar∣menia Minor, on the West side of the Euphrates; Cili∣cia, Pamphilia, Carbalia, Isauria, and Lycia toward the Mediterranean; Caria, Doris, Lydia, Iolia, Aeolis, the Greater and Lesser Phrygia, and Mysia, and Troas up∣on the Aegean-Sea. At present it is divided into Four Chief Parts only, viz. Anatolia Propria, Caramania, Amasia, and Aladulia, as in the following Table. 1. Anatolia Propria. Chiutaye. Nice. Ephesus. Smyrna. Halicarnassus. 2. Caramania. Antioch. Tarsus, &c. 3. Amasia. Amasia. Trabisond. Sival, &c. 4. Aladulia. Maras. Sis. Adereus. Anatolia Propria. THIS Country, which is properly called Ana∣tolia, contains near half that Region, which the Ancients called Asia Minor. It reaches from the Ri∣ver Casilmach along by the Euxine Sea, Sea of Mar∣mara, the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas, as far as the Coasts over against the Isle of Rhodes, having Cara∣mania and Amasia on the East. The most remarka∣ble Rivers are, the Meander, now called Madre, Ay∣ala, heretofore Sangarius, and Otmagiath, or Hallis. The Chief City of this Province is Chiutaye, or Co∣tyaeum, situate upon the River Ayala, the Seat of the Beglerbeg, about 30 Leagues from Byrsa, towards the North-East; which was heretofore the Chief City of Bithynia, and the Residence of the Turkish Empe∣rors before Constantinople was taken. 'Tis yet a very considerable Place. Nicaea, Nice, now Isnich, was of old the Metro∣polis of Bithynia. It is famous for Two General Councils, the One in 325. in the time of Pope Syl∣vester and Constantine the Great about the Heresie of Arius, the other in 787. against the Iconoclasts, or Breakers down of Images. The City of Ancyra, now Angoure, or Angouri, is famous for the Victory of Tamerlan over Bajazet Em∣perour of the Turks, and of Pompey over Methri∣dates. Bolli, Aboni Teichos, is 20 Leagues from Angouri Northward, upon a small River, which runs into the Euxine Sea. The City of Chiangare, or Pessinus, is towards the Frontiers of Caramania, upon a small River. Ephesus, or Figena, is in Ionia, situate upon the Ar∣chipelago, or Aegean Sea. It hath a commodious Ha∣ven, a strong Castle. It was famous of old for the Temple of Diana, the Third General Council, assem∣bled in 431. against the Errors of Nestorius. Smyrna, or Smirne, is in the Province of Ionia, si∣tuate upon the Aegean Sea. It hath a convenient Ha∣ven: The Turks call it Smyr. The Air is temperate and healthful, and the Soil very fruitful. It was heretofore an Archbishop's See; but now 'tis remark∣able for nothing, but for the continual Residence of French, and other Merchants of Europe. Halicarnassus, or Halicarnasse, is a City in the small Province of Caria, upon the Gulph of Ceramis. Artimesia here erected an admirable Monument, to perpetuate the Memory of her Husband Mausolus King of the Carians. Troy, or Troie, was a City in Phrygia: 'Tis thought that Dardanus, who came out of Candia, or Italy, was the Founder, and first King of it, about the Year of the World 2574. and had for his Successors Eric∣thonius, Tros, Ilus, Laomedon and Priamus. In this Kings Reign this City was burnt by the Greeks, after Ten Years Siege, in 2870. Alexander the Great built another City not many Furlongs from it, which he called New Troy, or Troas Alexandri, which was the Seat of the Suffragan Bishop of Cyzicum. The Turks call it Ezkistamboul. Pergamus, or Pergame, is a City of Troas, or Phry∣gia, upon the River Caicus, now Maiti, the Seat heretofore of the Suffragan Bishop of Ephesus. Sardes, Sardo, or Sardis, was a City of Lydia; now 'tis only a small Village near the Mountain Tmo∣lus. 'Twas one of the chief Cities converted by St. John, and afterwards made a Metropolis. Sinabe, Sinopi, or Sinope, is a City in Paphlagonia, lying near the Euxine Sea. It hath an Haven, and is the Seat of the Suffragan Bishop of Amasia. The Mi∣lesians built it in the 125th Year of Rome. Near it are found Brass Mines, which are rare in Asia. Chalcedon, or Calcedoine, now Scutari, is a City of Bithynia, and hath the Title of an Archbishoprick. It lies upon the Thracian Bosphorus, which is a Chanel
of the Euxine Sea, over against Constantinople. The Fourth General Council was assembled here in 451. Avido, or Abydos, lying upon the Hellespont, or Streights of Gallipolis, is one of the Castles, which are now called the Dardanells. Phocoea, or Foja, is a City of Ionia, seated on the Aegean Sea. It is a Port, and is called Fochia-Vechia, to distinguish it from another City, called Fochia Nova, a lesser City. Miletus, or Milet, Melaxo and Melasso, was of Old one of the greatest Cities of Ionia, and had a good Haven in the Archipelago. It is seated on the River Meander, and on the Frontiers of Caria. Caramania. THIS Province had anciently the Title of a King∣dom; it borders upon the Mediterranean Sea as far as Anatolia on the West, Aladulia on the East, and Amasia on the North. It is divided into the Greater and Lesser Caramania. It hath these Rivers, Sattalia, Cydnus, and Xanthus, in the South; Cogni in the mid∣land, which runs into a Lake; Genlu in the North, which runs out of this Province into Aladulia. It is ordinarily divided into the Greater and Lesser Cara∣mania. In the first these are the Chief Cities, Cogni, Acsarat, Caola, Tyanea. In the other Chiolsac, Patera, Satalia, Scalameure. Cogni, or Iconium, was an eminent City of Lycaonia, an Archiepiscopal See under the Patriarch of Constanti∣nople: Now 'tis the Residence of the Beglerbeg. 'Tis situated in the middle of the Country, upon the River of the same Name. Tyana, or Tigna, was a City of Cappadocia, at the Foot of Mount Taurus. An Archbishoprick. Sattalia, or Attalia, gives Name to the Gulph ad∣joining, which hath a Port. Tarsus, or Tarso, is a City of Cilicia, called now Terassa, or Terus, situate on the Bank of the River Cydnus. 'Twas once an Archbishoprick. Amasia. AMasia is a part of the ancient Cappadocia, between the Euxine Sea on the North, Anatolia Propria on the West, Caramania on the South, and Turkey on the East. It contains those Countries which were hereto∣fore called Armenia Minor, a part of Cilicia, the Moun∣tain Antitaurus, which parts Aladulia and Caramania. Besides Euphrates, which parts it from Turky, it hath the Rivers Casilmach and Pormon. Amasia, or as the Turks call it, Amnasan, is situate upon the Iris, heretofore an Archbishop's See. 'Tis now the Seat of the Beglerbeg, or Turkish Governour in Anatolia. The City of Zela is very near Amasia. It is famous for the Victory of Caesar over Pharnaces King of Pon∣tus. The City of Tocat, or Tocata, is upon the River Casilmach, in a very fine Country. Trabezond, Trapezus, or Terra Bozan, stands on the Euxine Sea. It was the Seat of the Emperours, and of an Archbishop; but it lasted not long. Isaac, or Alexius Comnenus, who fled from Constantinople, found∣ed it in 1204. Mahomet II. dissolved it in 1460. after he had taken that City. So that it continued an Im∣perial Seat but 256 Years. This Kingdom contained Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Pontus, and some other Pro∣vinces. It had on the West the City Cerasonte, or Ce∣rasus. Aladulia, or Aladuli. THIS Province is placed between Amasia on the North, Caramania on the West, the Mediterra∣nean on the South, Syria and Turky on the East. It hath remakable in it Maronias, Maras, or Marat, which lieth upon the River Euphrates, and is the chief City of that Pro∣vince, the Seat of the Beglerbeg. Issus, or Aiazzo, lying at the Foot of the Mountain Amana, and the Gulph called Sinus Issicus. Here Alexander the Great obtain'd a famous Victory over Darius. The first Battle gotten by Alexander over the Persians, was at the River Granicus, which is near the Hellespont. Pactolus, a River near Sardis, is known for its Golden Sand, which so much enriched the Kings of Lydia. Maeander, now called Madre, is re∣markable for its Waters, and many Windings. Cydnus is terrible for its cold Waters, which were the Death of the Emperour Frederick Barberossa, who washed himself in it; and had likely to have been as fatal to Alexander the Great. The most observable Mountains in this Country are, Taurus, which is a Ridge of Hills dividing all Asia into two Parts; and its Heighth is proportionable to the Length. Mount Caucasus and Imaus are Branches of it. Ida by Troy is celebrated by the Poets for the Judgment of Paris. Syria, or Sourie, Souristan. SYria, or Sourie, is situate on the Mediterranean Sea, which bounds it on the West. On the South it hath Arabia Petrea, on the East Arabia Deserta, and on the North Euphrates, which separates it from Mesopo∣tamia, or Diarbeck. Its Length from South-East to North-East is about 180 Leagues, or 540 Miles; and the Breadth from East to West 90 Leagues, or 270 Miles. The Air is good, Soil fruitful, unless about the Bor∣ders of Arabia. It produces Wheat, Barley, Wine, abundance of Olives, Palms, Fig-trees, Citrons, O∣ranges, and several sorts of Spices. The Melons are extraordinary good. They have a sort of Canes, out of which they press Honey; yea, the Ground would bear any thing that is necessary for the Life of Man, if it were well tilled and manured. It hath many famous Rivers. Jordan is better known for its mention in Holy Scripture, than for its Great∣ness. It rises in the Mountains of Galilee, and empties it self into the Caspian Sea. The Orontes, or Farfar, runs through the middle of the Country, and passing by Antioch, falls into the Mediterranean Sea, over against Cyprus. This Province had anciently Kings of its own, and was made a Province by the Romans, after they had con∣quer'd it. It hath been inhabited since by several Na∣tions. The Sarazens, the Christians under Godfrey of Bullen. The Sultans of Aegypt have been Masters of it successively. Selim I. conquer'd it in 1516. and his Successors have kept it ever since. The Grand Seig∣nior hath set over it Three Beglerbegs, or Bassa's; the first resides at Aleppo, the chief City of this Province; the second at Damascus in Phoenice, the third at Tri∣poli. The Inhabitants are very inconstant, and almost all very miserable, since they have lived under the Ty∣ranny of the Turk. Their Arms are a Bow and Qui∣vers, and a great Cimetar by their Sides. The most part are Mahometans, Turks or Moors. There are also Jews and Christians of several sorts. They have a
very good Trade by the Sea-Coast; but the Tribute imposed upon them by the Grand Seignior and his Beglerbegs is intolerable. It is divided into Three parts. 1. Syria Propria on the North. 2. Phoenice on the South-East. 3. And Palestine and Judea in the South. Syria, specially so called: Or, Syria Propria. THIS Province is bounded on the South-East with Euphrates, on the South with Aladulia, on the East with the Mediterranean and Phoenicia, on the North with Arabia Deserta. It's twice as large a Country as the two former. Alep, Aleppo, or Barrhoea, was an Archbishoprick under the Patriarch of Antioch. It is one of the richest and greatest trading Cities of the Levant, being, as it were, the Center of Commerce maintain'd between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indies, by a Passage through the Gulph of Ormus and Euphrates, till they come just over against Aleppo, from whence they carry their Goods to Alexandretta upon the Mediterranean. The Persians, Arabians, Armenians, and other Eastern Peo∣ple, bring their Silks, Spices, Drugs, Jewels, and o∣ther Merchandises thither; and from the West the French, English, Dutch, Venetians, Genoeses, &c. carry thither their Cloaths, Silks, Skarlet, Lead and Furrs. Before the Portugueses opened the Way of Commerce by the Cape of Good-Hope, there was no other way of Traffick between the Eastern and Western People, but at Aleppo, or by the Red Sea and Aegypt. The Greeks have an Archbishop, the Armenians and Jacobites a Bishop each, the one resident at Tripoli, the other at Damascus in Phoenicia. They have many Mosques, Seven of which are very stately, and most of them are covered with Lead. They have one Hospital richly endowed, and several Exchanges full of Merchants and Tradesmen's Shops. Their Streets are paved with Marble. They have a Castle of great Antiquity, en∣compassed with a Ditch, full of Water at all times, where the Turkish Bassa or Governour dwells: It is a∣bout Two Miles from the City. Antioch, now Antachia, is situated upon the River Orontes, a Seat of a Patriarch. It was anciently the Metropolis of Syria. In this City the Disciples of Christ being assembled, had the Name of Christians first giv∣en them in 41. It was graced with the Title of the Patriarchate of St. Peter, who founded a Church there in 38. The Ancients called the Bishop of Antioch the Patriarch of the East. The Remainders of this City stand like separate Villages, and groan under the Tur∣kish Slavery. About the end of the Thirteenth Age this City was taken by the Mahometans. Alexandria, or Alexandretta, is seated upon the Me∣diterranean, having a Port convenient for the Merchan∣dise of Aleppo, from which it is distant about 17 Leagues. The Turks call it Scandarone. It is but lit∣tle inhabited, because of the Badness of the Air; and would be wholly deserted, were it not for the great Trade from that Port. Samosata, now Semsat, was once a famous City, and the Seat of the Suffragan Bishop of Edissa. It is situated on the right side of Euphrates. Laodicea, or Laudichia, stands at the foot of Mount Libanus, near the Mediterranean. 'Tis now all Ruins, save that there are Four Marble Theatres to be seen. Phoenicia, or Phoenice. THIS Province is placed between Syria on the East and North, the Mediterranean on the West, Palestine and Arabia Deserta on the South. The Phoe∣nicians are thought by some to have invented Letters, Writing and Books. Damascus, called by the Turks Scham, is the chief City of Phoenicia. It is one of the greatest and richest Cities of the Levant, and hath been under the Domi∣nion of the Turks for the last 200 Years. St. Paul was here baptized by Ananias, and first preached the Gospel. It is situated in a fruitful Country, at the Foot of Mount Libanus, incompassed with little Hills, in the form of a Bow, watered with a River, ancient∣ly called Chrysorrhoas, and with many fine Fountains. It is famous in all parts of the World almost for its de∣licious Wines, excellent Fruits, Wool, Silk, Plumbs, Grapes, Sweet Waters, and Blades. It is a great place of Trade; but the Jews are the chief Merchants there. All the Sects of Eastern Christians have Entertain∣ment there. There are some Catholicks. The Fran∣ciscans, Capuchins and Jesuits have here their Col∣ledges. In the middle of the City is a very fine Ca∣stle, which hath been often taken and retaken, demo∣lished and rebuilt. The Turks are now Masters of it. Tripolis of Phoenicia, or Tripolis Syriae, is a City and Port upon the Mediterranean; it belongs to the Turks. There are other Cities of the same Name, viz. Tripo∣lis upon the Euxine Sea in Natolia, Tripolis of Barbary in Africa. Sidon, or Said, is a Sea-port Town of Phoenicia. It is fallen into the Power of the Turks, who have held it for 150 Years, or more. Several French and Eu∣ropean Merchants go thither for the Conveniency of the Haven, which makes it a place of Trade. Tyre, or Sur, is at present only a small Village in Phoenicia, upon the Mediterranean. It was a famous Metropolis under the Patriarch of Antioch, and since of Jerusalem. The Tyrians were for a long time Masters of the Mediterranean, and so were famous. Alexander the Great took this City, and demolished it. The Em∣perour Adrian rebuilt it. Berytus, or Berith, is situated upon the Mediterra∣nean. It was the Seat of an Archbishop under the Pa∣triarch of Antioch heretofore. It was taken by Bald∣win I. King of Jerusalem, in 1110. It is now in the possession of the Infidels, and is upheld by a little Trade. It stands between Tripolis and Sidon. Ptolemais, now Acon, Acre, S. John of Acre, is a City and Port, the Suffragan Bishoprick of Tyre. It is well situated, and watered with several Rivers, which come down from the neighbouring Mountains. Palestine, or Judaea. THIS Province hath many Names, being called the Land of Promise, the Land of Canaan, and the Holy Land; besides the forementioned. It contains in general the Twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel. The Length of it from South to North, from Mount Libanon and the Fountains of Jordan to the Borders of Aegypt, is about 70 Leagues; and from West to East about 42, from the Mediterranean to the Confines of Phoenicia and Arabia Petrea. It is between Phoenicia on the North, the Mediterranean on the West, Arabia Petrea on the South, part of Arabia and Phoenicia on the East. The Country is very fruitful, the Inhabi∣tants are Syrians and Jews mixed together. It was di∣vided in the time of our Saviour Jesus Christ into Six
Parts, viz. Galilee, Samaria, Judaea, Trachonitis, Itu∣raea or Peraea, and Idumaea. Now 'tis divided into two chief parts by e River Jordan. The one is between that River and the Mediterranean Sea, and contains Four Parts. 1. The Jurisdiction of the Sanziack of Jerusalem. 2. The Principality of the Hemir of Ca∣sair, about the middle of the Sea-coast. 3. The Ju∣risdiction of Naples, anciently called Samaria. 4. The Hemit of Saida, or Galilee, who resides in the Castle of Sephet, and governs the whole Country about it. The other part is on the other side of Jordan, and makes part of the Kingdom of Arabia, which is subdivided into Six others. 1. Southward toward the Caspian Sea is the Country of the Arabians, called Pastores, hereto∣fore the Country of the Moabites or Nomades. 2. In the Midland is the Country of Arabians, called Beduins, anciently Peraea, the Habitation of the Ammonites. 3. The Province of Bathar, heretofore Trachonitis. 4. The Province of Bathanan, of old Batanaea, or Ba∣san. The 5. Northward is the Province of Auron, next to which is the 6. Ituraea. The River Jordan is worth our special Remark, because 'tis so famous in Holy Scripture. This River runs from North to South through the Lake of Samachonitis, the Lake of Genesareth, and lastly, empties it self into the Dead Sea, or Lake of Sodom; in which this City, and four other, being burnt with Fire from Heaven, are swal∣lowed up, for the Punishment of the Enormous Crimes of the Inhabitants. 'Tis said, that this Sea will nou∣rish no living Creature; yea, that the very Birds that fly over it are often suffocated with the Vapours that ascend from it. No Fish will live in it. The Water of it is very clear, and extreamly salt. It is 33 Leagues in length, and 8 or 9 over: The Land about it is bar∣ren for 2 or 3 Leagues from it. 'Tis said, that the Trees which grow about it bear no sound Fruit. They seem like fair Apples in appearance, but are nothing but Dust and Ashes within. The last Kings which Reigned in Palestine or Syria were called Kings of Jerusalem only. Godfrey of Bou∣illon was the first that bore that Title, after he had ta∣ken that City from the Sarazens in 1099. His Suc∣cessors kept it till about the Year 1317. The Chronological Succession of the Kings of Jerusalem. Their Names. Years of Christ. Years of their Reign. 1. Godfrey of Bouillon. 1099 1 Year. 2. Baldwin I. his Brother. 1100 18 Years. 3. Baldwin II. called Bruges. 1118 13 Years. 4. Fulk Earl of Anjou. 1131 11 Years. 5. Baldwin III. 1142 21 Years. 6. Almerick. 1163 11 Years. 7. Baldwin IV. called the Leper. 1174 12 Years. 8. Baldwin V. 1186 1 Year. 9. Guy of Lusignan and Sibill. 1186 8 Years. 10. Almerick II. 1194 11 Years. The most Considerable Cities at this Day are, Jerusalem. Samaria. Naples. Jafa. Gaza. Tiberias. Bethsan. Ramah. Cana. Nazareth. Bethlehem. Jerusalem, called by the Turks Elkodi, and by the Christians the Holy City, because it was honoured with the Presence of Jesus Christ. St. Peter here established the first Church in the World, notwithstanding the Church of Antioch had the Primacy. It had hereto∣fore Kings and Patriarchs, and is now the Seat of a Sanziack, under the Power of the Turks. David took it in 2986. after whom Solomon beautified it with ma∣ny Buildings, but chiefly with a magnificent Temple. Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon besieged it with a pu∣issant Army, and having taken it in 3446. he burnt it, destroyed the Inhabitants, demolished the Temple, and laid it utterly waste. About 70 years after, in 3516. Cyrus sent the Jews again into Judea, and they built Jerusalem and the Temple. Titus besieged, took, burnt and destroyed it: And the Prophesie was ful∣filled, which our Saviour spake concerning it, That one Stone should not be left upon another that should not be cast down. In the Year of Christ 132. the Em∣perour Adrian began to rebuild this City, and changed the Name of Jerusalem into Aelia. The Emperour Constantine made farther Additions, and raised many fine Buildings in it, after S. Helena his Mother had found our Saviour's Cross there. In the Year 614. under the Emperour Heraclius, this City was invaded by Chosroes II. King of the Persians. In the Seventh and Eighth Ages it was made a Prey to the Sarazens, with the rest of the Holy-Land. The French Princes undertook the Conquest of this Country about the end of the Eighth Age under Godfry of Bouillon, and made themselves Masters of Jerusalem in 1099. which gave an Original to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, of which Godfry himself was the first King, and had divers Suc∣cessors. Saladin King of Syria and Aegypt won several Victories of the Christians, and at length drove them out of this City. About the Year 1187. this Country became subject to the Califs, or Princes of Aegypt, till 1517. when Selim I. Emperour of the Turks conquered it. This City, which now groans under the Tyranny of the Turks, is almost deserted. Some Romans hold our Saviour's House, and a Dwelling in the Holy Se∣pulchre. We may compare this Village for its great∣ness to Blois; the Streets of it are strait, the Houses very plain, and without Ornament. The Tomb of Godfrey of Bouillon still remains to be seen near Mount Calvary with his Brother Baldwin's, cut out of a Rock. On the West stands a Church, wherein is the Sepulchre of our Saviour Jesus Christ in a Rock, and not far from thence is Mount Calvary, where our Saviour was Cru∣cified. There is a little Chappel, but well adorned and beautified. Samaria, or Sebasta, was anciently the Capital City of the Kingdom of Israel, and gives Name to the whole Province, which is situated between Judaea properly so called, and Galilee. There is nothing now left of this famous City but the Ruins of it. Naples, Naplouse, Neapolis, or Sichem, is equally distant from the Mediterranean Sea and the River Jor∣dan. Jafa, or Joppa, is a Sea-Town, but now so much ruinated, that there is nothing but the Haven and a few
Houses. The Pilgrims, which come to see Jerusalem, have their Abode here. Gaza, now Gazara, is a City well peopled, not far from the Sea. Now it hath a particular Governour under the Grand Seignior. The Country about it is very fruitful in Pomegranates, Fig-trees, Olives, Vines, and excellent Mushrooms. The Wine is much esteemed. Tiberias, or Genesareth, is a City in Galilee. Herod gave it this Name in respect to the Emperour Ti∣berius. Rama, Dispolis, or Lydda, is an ancient City, very famous for the Prophesie of Jeremy; it is 4 Leagues from Joppa. There are now nothing but Ruins, Vaults, and Cisterns, as at Alexandria in Aegypt. Cana, or Chana, is a little City in Galilee, in the Tribe of Zabulon, where the Son of God did his first Miracle, in changing the Water into Wine at a Mar∣riage Feast there. Nazareth is a City of Galilee in the Tribe of Zabu∣lun, famous for the Incarnation of the Son of God. The Chamber of the Holy Virgin was removed from hence into Italy, as some Authors relate, whom now they call Our Lady of Loretto. The Franciscans have a Monastery and a Church within this City, which the Pilgrims do also usually visit. Bethlehem is very famous for the Birth of our Savi∣our. 'Tis but a Town, situate upon a small Ascent, very pleasant, where live some poor Christians, whose Trade it is to make Crosses and Rosaries, which they sell to the Pilgrims. At the Foot of the Hill is the Stable, where the Son of God was born. S. Helena built a Chappel there. Here is also a famous Mona∣stery, which is at this Day common to the Romans, Greeks and Armenians. Turcomania, or Armenia Turcica. THIS Province contains almost all the ancient Armenia, and a part of the Country of the Cur∣denes. It is on the East of Euphrates, between Meso∣potamia on the South, Persia on the East, and Georgia on the North. The Extent of it from West to East is about 160 Leagues from the Borders of Natolia to the Confines of Persia; and almost as much from South to North, from Curdistan in Persia in the South, to Geor∣gia. This large Country is between the Mountains and Euphrates. It hath some parts of the ancient Ar∣menia towards the Caspian Sea, between Albania and Media; others toward the Euxine Sea, between Asia Minor and Colchis. The Air is very pleasant and healthful, tho' it be cold by reason of the Mountains. The Soil pro∣duces plenty of Fruits and Grain, but little Wine. They have Honey, Silk, and some Silver Mines: Their Pastures are excellent good, especially for Hor∣ses, of which they have very beautiful and fine ones. After the Flood the Ark rested upon the Mountains of Ararat in Armenia. Some hold that Paradise was about these Mountains, because of the Four Rivers which rise out of them, viz. Euphrates, Tigris, A∣raxes and Phasis. The Armenians are plain and right down-Dealers, affecting no Ceremonies; they are content with little. They are naturally industrious, and addicted to Trade; upon which Account they are often seen in most parts of the World, where there is any Commerce. The Apostle Bartholomew preached the Gospel first in Armenia; and they have preserved Christianity, but with some Alterations. They have two Patriarchs; one for the Greater, the other for the Lesser Armenia. The one hath his Residence in a Monastery near Ervan, the other at Sis near Tarsus in Cilicia. Their Creed hath received several Alterations. They believe, tha the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father only. They deny Purgatory, though they pray fo the Dead. They give the Communion to Infants. They do not mingle Water with their Wine in the Consecration of the Sa∣crament. They believe the Real Presence. They have a great Veneration for the Mass, and Sacrament of the Altar. Their Priests marry, but their Monks do not. They hate the Protestants, and admire Missio∣nary Priests for their clear and strong Reasonings against the Mahometans. They keep two or three very strict Lents. The Armenians have submitted themselves to the Emperours of Constantinople, the Saracens, and other Princes; and at length were made entirely subject to Selim, Emperour of the Turks, in 1515. Nevertheless there are in this Country several Kings or Princes, who are not afraid of the Grand Seignior, nor King of Persia, because they keep all the Passes of the Mountains. The most remarkable Cities are, 1. In Turkie, Erzerum Cap. Kars. Sumischach. Manuscut. Majufarikin. Roczan. 2. In Curdistan, Van. Bitlis. Schelat. Albach. Cutiolar. The City of Erzerum, Arziris, or Aziris, is the chief City of Turkie, situated on the Bank of the River Euphrates, and the Seat of a Beglerbeg. Kars or Chiger or Carse, is near the Spring of Eu∣phrates, and Borders of Georgia. It is so considerable a place, that the Grand Seignior assumes the Title of Lord of Cars. Van, heretofore Arethusa, or Arcissa, is a great Lake, part in Turkie, and part in Curdestan, upon which stands the City of Van. Artemita, whose In∣habitants are for the most part Christians. Bithlis, Bi∣thias, or Tigranocerta, is between Van and Caraemit. Diarbeck, or Mesopotamia. THIS Province contains all the ancient Assyria, the greatest part of which, that lies between Euphrates and Tigris, was called Mesopotamia; the other part, which is now called Yerach, was Chaldea or Babylon. The third part, which is called Assyria, or Arzerum, or the Turkish Curdistan, we have spoken of in Turkie. The Length of it from South-East to North-East is 200 Leagues, and the Breadth in the widest place 80. comprehending in it Diarbeck properly so called, and Yerach or Chaldea. The Principal Rivers, besides Euphrates and Tigris, are, Ach-abur, and the Greater and Lesser Zab. In this Province began the first Empire of the World un∣der Nimrod, or Belus, the Father of Ninus or Assur, from whom came the Name of Assyria. Nimrod built Babylon, which some confound with Bagdat, but erro∣neously; for the first was situate on Euphrates, and the other stands upon the Bank of Tigris. Bagdat, the chief City of Chaldea, or Yerach, is the Seat of a Beglerbeg. There was one also at Balsora, a great City for Trade, situate near the River Schat and Arab, about 20 Miles from their Fall into the Persian Gulph; but now an Arabian Prince is become Master of it, who sends eve∣ry Year only some small Presents to the Grand-Seig∣nior.
The most remarkable Cities, 1. In Diabeck, are Cara-emid. Orfa. Bir. Harran. Samosat. Alchabur. Nisibin. Merdin. Amed. And Mosul. 2. In Yerach. Bagdad. Zab. Vaset. Cusa. Gorno. Balsora. And Felougi. Caraemid, or Amida, is a large City, seated up the River Tigris, now the Seat of a Beglerbeg, fortified with strong Walls, in which are 360 Towers. Mosul, Ninus, New-Ninive, Seleucia and Mausilium, built on the Tigris, is a City famous for Merchandise; for they have a great Trade for Stuffs, Silks and Gold. The Patriarch of the Nesorians hath his Residence here. It is raised out of the Ruins of the ancient Ni∣nive, to which the Prophet Jonas was sent. The Re∣pentance of its Inhabitants, the voluntary Death of Sar∣danapalus, and his vast Expensiveness, have made it famous both in Sacred and Prophane History. Bagdad, or Bagded, Bagdadum, is seated on the Ti∣gris, in the Province of Hierac, or Yerach, in the place of the ancient Seleucca. It is built out of the Ruins of Babylon, of which there are still some Remainders to be seen about a days Journey from Bagdad, which hath about 20000 Houses. The Turks are Masters of it, and have a Beglerbeg there. Balsora, or Teredon, in the Province of Yerach, is also built upon the Tigris, or Tigis. 'Tis a populous rich City. At High Tide Ships may Sail to it, which makes it full of Trade. It is much frequented by the European Merchants. The Inhabitants having expelled the Turks, are governed by a Republick. The Grand Seignior hath a part of the Western Geor∣gia under his Command, as the Persian receives Tri∣bute of some part of the Eastern. CHAP. II. GEORGIA: Or, GEORGIE. THIS Chapter contains an Account of Georgia, properly so called, anciently Iberia, Mingrelia, heretofore Colchis, Zuiria or Guriel, Abassia, Car∣cassia Nigra, the Free People of Mount Caucasus, and the Tartars of Daghestan. This Country is situated between the Euxine Sea and the Sea of Zabache on the West, Poland on the North, the Kingdom of Astracan and the Caspian Sea on the East, and Turky on the South. The Length of it from South to Nor is about 210 Leagues, contain∣ing in it Abassia and Circassia. The Breadth from West to East 280 Leagues, including the Free People of Mount Caucasus, and the Tartars of Daghestan: Most of which Provinces were known by the Name of Cau∣casus, the Mountain so famous for the Fable of Pro∣mheus. The Air is very temperate, considering the situation of the Country, which is between the 40th and 50th De∣gree of Latitude. This Soil produces an abundance of Corn, Fruits and Pasture; the Wine is good, the Pears and Apples excellent. They have great plenty of Swine, and export Wax and Honey, Pitch, and some Cloaths and Silks. The Inhabitants are said to be Cheaters, Usurers, Thieves, Drunkards, and given to all sorts of Vices. The Priests are as ignorant as the Laity. Parents usu∣ally sell their Children. Their Women are very beau∣tiful, but their Carriage shews them to have little Mo∣desty and Fidelity. It is certain, that the most beauti∣ful Sultanesses which are kept in the Grand Seigniour's Seraglio, as well as in that of the King of Persia, are Georgian Women. Some of the People of Georgia are free, others have their own Princes, and some are subject either to the Turk or Persian, as the necessity of their Affairs re∣quires. The King of Persia is Master of some part of the Eastern Georgia and Armenia, and chooseth them a Prince, which bears the Name of the King of Georgia. The Turk at present hath only a Bassa, or Beglerbeg, in the Castle of Alkazike, and a Commander of the Carrison of Cotatis. The City of Derbent, so often disputed for by the Turks and Persians, stands in the Pass, called the Iron Gate, which is a part of the Ga∣spian Passes, which are to be seen upon Mount Bar∣mc. The Principal Provinces in Geredge MIngrelia, Mengrelia, or Colchis is on the East of the Euxine Sea, upon the Mouth of the River Faze. It is called Imereti, and Bosciaciveh. The Mountains of Caucasus part it from the East of Gurgi∣stan, properly so called, having Armenia on the South, and Circassia Nigra on the North. This Province hath been famous for the Love of Medea and Jason, and the landing of the Argonauts to take the Golden Fleece. Some think, that this rich Fleece signified the Mines of Gold, or Merchandize of Furrs, which brought so much Profit. This Province is more of it free, than subject. It hath several Castles in it, of which, that which is called Zugdidi is the best. The Chief Cities are Savatopoli, Fazzo, Ruchi, Anarghie. The greatest Mountains, Caucasus, and Coxar. Rivers are Phasis, or Gazzo, and Ciano. It produces divers Simples, as Senna, Scammony, black Hellebore in abundance; as also white Bears, and Pheasants, which take the Name from Phasis. Savatopoli, or Sebastopolis, is almost de∣molished by the Inundations of the Rivers. Georgia propria, or Georgia specially so called, which the Turks call Gurgistan, or the Country of the Georgi∣ans, from St. George, whom they suppose their Patron, and which was called anciently Iberia, is among the Mountains, and divided into Tree Parts; 1. Zacheti, or Gagheti and Gagnetia, with the City Zagan towards the Caspian Sea. 2. Carduel, Carduelia towards the middle, with the City Feflis and Lori, or Goroden. 3. Baratralu, towards Armenia, with the City Cars. This last is under the Turk: The other defend their Liberty against the Persians. Zurie, heretofore Albania, is very temperate: It lies on the East of Georgia propria: It is watered with se∣veral Rivers, which empty themselves into the Caspian Sea, which is on the East of this Province, with the Cities of Chipicke, Stranu or Albaida, Tarki, which last belongs to the Duke of Muscovy. Circassia nigra, Circassi is on the North of the Eux∣ine Sea, and Mount Caucasus, which separate it from Georgia propria; on the East of the Palus Moeotis, by the Streight of Coffa, on the South of the River Dn,
or Tanais, on the West of the Caspian Sea, and the Mouth of Volga. This Country hath divers Princes, almost all of them subject to the Great Czar, or Duke of Muscovy, who hath fortified the City of Teiki. The other Part of this Country hath no Cities, and very few Inhabitants. Most of the Circassians dwell in the Woods, to secure themselves from the Inrodes of the Tartars, who seek them out for Slaves, being a People very well esteem'd of; for they are good Natured, In∣genious, and very Faithful in all Businesses: Their Principal Commodities for Traffick, are Slaves, Honey, Wax, Ox, Stag and Tigers Hides. They were for∣merly good Christians, but for want of Instruction, are, several of them, fallen into Mahometanism. The Turks have the City Azof, or Azac, at the Mouth of Don, in the Palus Maeotis; a very considerable Place for Merchandize; and can by this means preserve an Al∣liance with the lesser Tartars, and break the Designs of the Duke of Muscovy in these Places. Abascia hath Circassia, or the Ancient Gommania on the North and West; on the South, the Euxine Sea; and on the East, Mingrelia. Dagestan, or Daghestan, Deghestania, or Albania, is between the Caspian Sea on the East, and Mount Caucasus on the West, the Kingdom of Astracan on the North, and on the South lies Sircian, a Persian Pro∣vince: This Country is inhabited by the Tartars; their Trade is to make Slaves by a continual War; they feed some Cattle; their Mountains, which are almost impossible to be ascended, secure them from the Persi∣ans and Muscovites; they have several Lords, but one is Chief of them, who is made by Election; they have some Towns, of which Tarcu is the Chief, stand∣ing upon a Mountain among the Rocks near the Sea. The Division of Georgia. Georgia, as it hath been described, may be divided into these Six Parts. 1. Mingrelia, or Colchis, in which are Cotatis. Faze. Savatopoli. Ruchs-che. Anarghie. Chicaris. Scander. Scalingia. Varthiet. Cultiche. Alabzike-ch. Ozurgheti. Gonte Port. 2. Georgia Propria, or Iberia, in which, Festis. Cap. Cori, or Goredon. 3. Zurie, or Albania. Chipiche. Stranu. Tarki. 4. Circassia Nigra, in wich are Temrok. Tomum. Terki. Asz, or Azac. Moscou. 5. Abassia, in which are Dandars. Baladagg. 6. Daghestan, in which is [Tarku. The City of Cotatis is the chief City of the Coun∣try of Imeriti in Mingrelia, upon the Faze, or Phasis, with a good Castle at the Foot of a Rock and a Mountain. The City of Faze, Phasis is at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Faze, upon the Euxine Sea; it is now almost quite ruined and demolished. Feslis, heretofore Artaxata, is the Chief City of the Principality of Carduel in Georgia Propria, upon the Bank of the River Cur, or Chiur, or Cyrus: It hath now but few Inhabitants in it; with a Castle upon an Hill under the Rule of the Persians. Cori, Ghori, or Goridis stands upon the Chiur, or Chur: It is the Chief City of the Country of Bartratu in Georgia. Cipiche, Media is a City of Zuria or Albania, upon the River Torka, on the Borders of Circassia: Stranu, heretofore Albaida, stands upon the Caspian Sea, at the Mouth of Torka. CHAP. III. ARABIA. ARabia, which the Eastern People call Arabistan, is a Country adjoyning to Africa, and lyes on the South of Turkie in Asia; it is so encompassed with the Red Sea, Ocean, and Persian Gulf, that it hath the form of an Island almost; having on the North, Syria, Diarbeck, and Euphrates: On the South, the Arabian, or Indian Sea: And on the West, the Red Sea, or Sea of Mecca. The length of this large Region, from West to East, from the Streights of Suez to the Cape of Rakalgate, is 600. Leagues; and breadth, from South to North, 430. Leagues from the City of Aden, to the City of Karkirse in Mesopotamia, near Euphrates. This Coun∣try was the Habitation of Ishmael the Son of Abra∣ham and his Maid Hagar, from whom came the Ara∣bian. The most remarkable Rivers, are Chiabar, which runs by Mecca; Negeran, which passes by the Walls of Dhafar; Prim, which runs by Alibinali, Maffa; Astan, whose Course is by Jamama; and that which waters the City Almacharan. Besides the Beglerbegs, which the Grand Signior keeps in this Country, they have Xerifs, or Princes, and some free People, who have maintain'd their Li∣berty against the Turks; especially about the middle, where it is very hard to come, by reason of the Moun∣tains. The most considerable Kings or Sultans, are those of Fartach, Amanzirisdin, and Maffa. The Xe∣rif of Mecca is the most Honourable of all the Xe∣rifs or Governours, because he is of the Posterity of Mahomet. The Bengebres and Beduins are the most
potent of all the Free People. They dwell in Tents under the Mountains, and in the Forests, and spend their time in robbing, as the Tartars. The Beduins are always in great Troops about Mecca, to surprize the Pilgrims that go thither; who for that reason send great Presents to the Xerif of Mecca, that he may send his Guards to fight them, and prevent all Disorders. Arabia is the Original of several sorts of People, chief∣ly of Saracens, Arabians, Moors, and Turks, who have at several times made great Conquests in Asia, Africa, and Europe. They have been proficients in the Sciences, especially Mathematicks, in which they have furnished us with the Arabian Characters in Arithmetick. But for the more clear Knowledge of this Country we will consider it in Three Parts, Arabia Petraea, Arabia De∣serta, and Arabia Foelix. Arabia Petraea. ARabia Petraea hath it's Name from the City Petra, now called Herat, or Arach, i. e. a Rock; because 'tis built on a Rock. This Province hath Palestine and Syria on the North, Aegypt and the Red Sea on the West, a Ridge of Mountains, which part it from Ara∣bia Foelix, on the South, and Arabia Deserta on the East. 'Tis a barren Country, and hath nothing re∣markable in it but Mount Sinai. The Israelites remain∣ed 40 Years in this Country, after their coming out of Aegypt. It was anciently the Country of the Moa∣bites, Amalekites, Midianites, and Idumeans. This part of Arabia is governed by some Princes of their own in those places where there are not so many De∣serts. There are several People, who have no Gover∣nours, nor any setled place of Abode. They are al∣most all Mahometans, and were the first that received the Doctrine of the Alcoran. They pay Tribute to the Bassa of Grand Kair. Their chief Cities are He∣rac or Petra, Madian, Bilan, and Havana. Herac or Crac, Petra or Montrial, is between the Dead Sea and Suez. Madian is near Palestine. It hath a Desert of the same Name, which took its Name from Median the Son of Abraham and Keturah. Moab is about the Confines of the Holy Land. It hath it's Name from Moab the Son of Lot's Eldest Daughter by the incestuous Approach of her Father. For, or Elfor, or Eilan, Elano, or Eila, is a Port upon the Red Sea, with a little Stone Castle. It is the Receptacle of their Sciffs and Boats. The Israelites being persued by Pharaoh, passed through this City on dry foot under the Conduct of Moses. Arabia Deserta. ARabia Deserta, called by the Hebrews Kedar, is at this Day known in Asia by the Name of Arden, Beriara, or Berii-Arabistan. It is situate between Eu∣phrates and Arabia Foelix on the North and South, Chal∣dea on the East, Syria and Arabia Petraea on the West. It is more united than Petraea, but less inhabited, be∣cause of the many Sands and Deserts. It hath scarce any fruitful Land, but what lies along the Banks of Euphrates. The Inhabitants are almost all Shepherds. They have several Sovereign Princes, but all Tribu∣taries to the Grand Seigniour. Nevertheless, they are forced to pass over the vast Plains of Sand by the help of the Mariners Needle, and put themselves in Glass Chests upon Camels, which will go 12 Days Journey together. They have nothing but Pits, of which the Water is ill-tasted. It is subject to some Princes of their own, who are suffered to Rule, because an Army can't be conducted against them through their vast De∣serts. Their most remarkable Towns are, Anna. Tangia. Mexatocem. Ali. Thaalabia. Balca. Rahabath. Sumiscasac. Anna is the Head City of Arabia Deserta, standing upon Euphrates. It hath about 4000 Houses in it; but by the last Wars with the Turks it is impoverished, and not so full of Trade as before. The City of Ali is near the Lake of Lamach. Arabia Foelix. THIS Province, which the Turks call Hiaman, is three times as big as the two former put together. It is in the fashion of an Isle almost, between the Red Sea on the West, the Indian or Arabian Ocean on the South, the Gulph of Persia or Babylon on the East, and the two other Arabia's on the North. It is a Country very plentiful in Balm, Myrrh, Incense, Gums, Cassia, Manna, and several other Drugs and Spices. They have also excellent Fruits, divers Metals, several kinds of Beasts. Their Camels and Horses, as also Coral, Pearl, Onyx-stones, which they fish out of the neigh∣bouring Seas, are much valued. The Air is very health∣ful, though it be very cold. It rains not above twice or thrice in a Year in some places; but the Dews that fall in the Night do wet almost as much as Rain, which clarifies the Air, and makes the Soil fruitful. The Arabians, which pretend themselves to be the Po∣sterity of Ishmael, are almost all lean and sawny. They are superstitious, melancholy, thoughtful and grave. Their Language is one of the finest, and most ancient, and most common in Asia, because of the Alcoran, which was written originally in Arabick. The Xerif or Schek of Mecca is one of the most puissant Princes of this Country. It is in Breadth between Forty and Fifty Leagues from Arabia Petraea to Zibit; and more than 260 in Length. The People, which have pre∣served their Liberty, are governed by Schecks, or Princes, or in Form of a Republick. All the Inhabi∣tants are almost Mahometans, and were the first of that Sect. There are some few Christians and Schisma∣ticks. Their chief Cities are these: Mecca. Medina. Aden. Saada. Sanaa. Zibith. Fortach. Caxem. Gulielhaman Albinali. Massa. Lassac. Elcalif. Jamania. Jamen. Bahrem. Maschute. Sohar. Amanzerifdin. Mascalat. Meque, or Mecca, stands on the Bank of Betius, or Chaibar, a Days Journey from the Red Sea. It is a large, well-pav'd, and famous City among the Turks, because Mahomet lived a long time in it, and was born there▪ Men come in Caravans from three parts of the World to pay their Devotion here. The Country about Mecca produces great quantity of Coffee.
Medina, Tetnabi, or Jesrab, or Arx-thymna, Talna∣bia, is upon the River Leakic, three Days Journey from the Red Sea. The Body of Mahomet is Interr'd here. Aden, Adenum, is a fine City, inclosed with Walls next the Sea-side, with a commodious Haven, and Mountains on the other side, on which there are seve∣ral Castles. It hath 6000 Houses. It's Situation is in a Peninsula, with a Port. The Vessels lie between two Towers and a Bastion, where there are Guns plant∣ed. Near it is a little Isle called Cira, well fortify'd. Behind the City, at the Foot of a Mountain, is the Haven of Ʋguf, which is free from all sorts of Winds. It is a rich City, and of great Trade, which the Ara∣bians hold with Strangers. The Merchants meet by Night to avoid the great Heat. Fortach, Caxem, Galielhaman, Albinali, Amanzirif∣den, Masfa, Mascalat, and Jamen, are so many King∣doms. Sohar in the Eastern parts had all the Trade heretofore to Ormus and Gombru. Mocha upon the Red Sea is an open Country, with fine Houses, a small Castle on the North side, and a good Haven, where Vessels from all parts of the East-Indies come. Here also the Pilgrims to Mecca land. It is also filled with Vessels which come from Suez to Aden, which take Land here, to avoid the dangerous Passage of Babel-mandel. CHAP. IV. PERSIA. PERSIA, tho' a very spacious Kingdom, is but a part of that large Empire, which the Kings of Per∣sia, the Predecessors of Darius, did anciently enjoy in Asia. Persia is bounded on the North with the River Ge∣hun or Oxus, which parts it from the Greater Tartary, and by the Caspian Sea, on the West with the Territo∣ries of the Grand Seignior, by the Gulph of Balsora and Persian Sea on the South; and on the East by the States of the Great Mogul, and a part of Tartary. It's Extent from South to North is about 370 Leagues in its greatest place, from the 25th Degree to the 43d Degree 30 min. of Latitude; and from West to East 510 Leagues, from the 80th Degree to the 111th of Longitude. The Air is very temperate towards the North on this side Mount Taurus; toward the South, on the same Mountain, 'tis something colder: For this Mountain divides this Kingdom into two equal parts almost. The Soil produces almost all sorts of Grain, except Rye; it affords much Cotton, Silk, Raisons, and most excel∣lent Fruit. It hath Melons that weigh between 40 and 50 Pounds. It feeds an abundance of Camels and Horses, which are met in Companies of 5 or 6000 at a time. The King is at the Charge of keeping many Mares to breed Horses for his Guard. Northward there are Forests of Mulberry-Trees, and other sorts of Wood. They have some Venison. In the Mountains are found Mines of Gold and Silver, Tarkish, Iron, and Salt; also several Springs of Naptha. They fish for Pearls in the Gulph of Balsora. They ordinarily eat Rice, Wheat, Barley, Millete, Lentiles, Pease, Beans: They have no Oats, and hate Rye. Their tame Creatures are Camels, Horses, Mules, Asses, Sheep, Goats, Cows, Oxen and Buffles. Their Drink, which they call Duschab, is pleasant enough; it is made of sweet Wine boiled with a little Water and Vi∣negar to a Sixth part. They dare not drink Wine, because their Law forbids it. The best Revenue of the Country is a great quantity of Silk, which is made there. The Soil is sandy in the Plains, mixed with little red Stone and great Coals, which they burn in the places where they have no Wood. The Rivers will bear nothing but Flat-bottom'd Boats, but yet furnish the Inhabitants with Chanels to water the Ground with; which makes the Ground a∣bout the Caspian Sea and the Sea of Elcalif very fruit∣ful; whereas the inward part of the Country is sub∣ject to great Driness, by reason of the great Desarts and Mountains, where it very seldom rains. The Ri∣vers of Persia have neither Eels nor Pikes. The most remarkable are the Tiviini and the Sizt in the Province of Chusistan; Bindimir or Chur in Farlistan; Bassiri in Kirman; the little Ilmen we meet in Makheran. Pu∣limalon, which empties it self into the Lake of Burgian in Chorosan; Abissirvi, which runs to Ghilan; Araxes, which crosses Scirvan and Georgia. The Lake of Mar∣rage is in the Province of Aderabejan, which is 50 Leagues in compass. The Persians at this day are the most civil, gentile People of Asia, not inferiour in Ingenuity and Wit to most parts of Europe. They have great Love for their Kindred; and the Younger Brother never fails to re∣spect the Elder. They give great Honour to their Nobility and Men of Worth. They are proud, and prone to Revenge. They are very passionate in their Amours, and have very handsom Wives, of which they are apt to be jealous. They are subject to very shameful and abominable Vices. They are naturally very Civil to Strangers, honest, sociable, complaisant, and great Complimenters. They are couragious, good Soldiers, and will venture upon dangerous Attempts without Fear or Regret. Their Houses are very tall and convenient, especially in their Kitchins. They eat ordinarily Rice, Mutton, and some Birds. The Drink of the ordinary People is Water, which they sometimes mingle with a little Duschab. The less scru∣pulous drink some Wine. The Use of Opium and Tobacco is very common, as also of Coffee and Tea. Their Stature of Body is middle. The Language of the Persians is mingled much with Arabick, which is a Learned Language. Their Cha∣racters are Arabick. They have their Colledges and Universities. They have a great Love for Arithme∣tick, Geometry, Astrology, Astronomy, Moral Philo∣sophy, Physick, Law, Oratory, Natural Philosophy and Poetry. Cyras began the Kingdom of the Persians about 560 Years before the Nativity of Christ. He took Babylon, and founded the first Monarchy of the Persians, which lasted 229 Years under 13 Kings, of whom Darius Codomannus was the last. Then the Per∣sians became subject to the Greeks, Romans, and Par∣thians, till the 227th or 228th Years after Christ, when Artaxerxes the Persian rebelled against Artaban the King of the Parthians. He established the Fourth Monarchy of the Persians, which continued to the Year of Christ 632. when King Isdegerdes, or Hormisda II. was slain by Aumer King of the Saracens. Ismael, des∣cended
of the Daughter of Ʋssan-Cassan, raised himself to the Throne by his Courage and Conduct. He be∣gan his Reign in the beginning of the XVI. Age, and from him comes the beginning of the Sophi's. Schab-Abas much augmented it in the same Age. The King∣dom is Hereditary both to Legitimate and Natural Sons, who are preferr'd before other Relations. The Government is Monarchical, and so absolute, that the King is Master of the Lives and Estates of all his Sub∣jects. The Kings Revenue consists in a Property to a considerable part of the Lands of his Kingdom, in the Silk-Trade, and the Tribute which he receives of the Armenians, in farming of the Fishery, Pass-ports, Cu∣stoms, &c. The Governours of Provinces are obliged to quarter a certain number of Soldiers to serve him upon occasions. Their Soldiery is made up chiefly of Horse, which is the best of all the East. The Name of Sultan signifies in the Turkish Language King, and in the Persian Governour of a City or Province. The King of Persia hath great Wars with the Turks, Can of Zagathay, and Great Mogul. He is able to send out 200000 Horse. Persia yields the finest Silks, cu∣rious Tapestry, richest Gold Thread, Turquois, Be∣sor, Manna, and Rhubarb. The ancient Persians worshiped the Sun, the Moon, Fire, and several other false Pagan Gods. The present Persians follow the Errors of Mahomet, as the Turks do; yet with this difference; They do not interpret the Al∣coran the same way; They call Hali the Assistant or Deputy of God. There are Greeks, Armenians, and Catholicks, which profess the Christian Religion in se∣veral places. In the City of Ispahan there are Carme∣lites, Augustin-Monks, Capuchins, and other Religious Orders. They have Houses and Churches, and are often sent in Embassies by the Christian Princes under the Government of the King of Persia. Persia contain'd in ancient times Media, Hyrcania, Mergiana, part of Assyria, Susiana, Parthia, Aria, Pa∣rapnisus, Chaldea, Persia Propria, Caramania, Dran∣giana, Arachosia and Gedrosia. Now 'tis divided into 23 Provinces: Six on the West of the Caspian Sea. 1. Seirvan. 2. Erivan, or Karasbag. 3. Aderbejan, or Aderbelgian, which made up the ancient Media. 4. A part of Georgia. 5. A part of Armenia. 6. A part of Daghestan, from the Caspian Sea to the Gulph of Balsora. 7. Kilan or Ghilan. 8. Tabristan, or Taba∣restan, anciently Hyrcania. 9. Herakag-emis, or Yerach, heretofore Parthia. 10. Curdistan. 11. Chusistan, of old Susiana. 12. Farsistan, or Persia Propria. 13. La∣ristan, which are Six Provinces from Turquistan to the Gulph of Ormus, lying on the East of the former. 14. E∣starabat, or Masendaran, heretofore Margiana. 15. Cho∣rosan, of old Aria. 16. Kirman, anciently Carama∣nia. 17. Laristad. 18. Jasques. 19. Makran, or Makeran, of old Gedrosia, four Provinces lying Eastward. 20. Candahar. 21. Sablustan, before Darapamisus. 22. Segistan, anciently Drangiana. 23. Send, of old Arachosia. All which may be distinguished better, as in the following Table. Persia is divided into Twenty Three Provinces or Parts. 1. Servan, or Scrivan, in which are Barbent. Bachu. Zakan. Bakera. Schamachi. 2. Erivan, wherein are Erivan. Karasbah. Bilangan. Chincar. 3. Aderbejan, which hath Tauris. Nackschivareg. Ardevis. Ʋruna. Sultania. Muran. 4. Part of Georgia, which are, Testis. Gori, or Cori. Grimmi. Caket. Surham. 5. Part of Armenia. [Testis and Dervent. 6. Part of Daghestan, in which are [Tarku, Andre. 7. Kilan, or Ghilan, which hath, Reschel. Kesken. Layon. Mosun. Fimschuc. 8. Tabristan, or Ma∣senderan, wherein are Ferhabat. Osbun. Funkabun. Gorgian. Sakhambat. Eseref-Rijar. Sarisjaki. 9. Yerach, or Hera∣raxagemi, in which are Ispahan. Casbin. Com. Hamadan. Sawa. Yesd. Kaschan. Cassian. Kulpajan. 10. Part of Curdistan. 11. Chusistan, which hath Schouster, or Sus. Ram-Ormus. Hawecz. Siapour. Saurac. Heir-mokran. 12. Farsistan, in which are Schiras. Kasaron. Astahar. Stahar, or Astakar. Firusabat. Bennarou. 13. Laristan, which contains Lahr. Barder-Gom∣ron. Ormus, an Island. 14. Estarabat. [Estarabat. 15. Chorosan, in which are Herat. Mesched. Maruve. Tursitus. Nisabar. Sarachas. Burgian. Marwarrand. 16. Kirman, which hath Keirman. Bermasir. Bendasir. Salein. Chabis. Jardesir. Mokestan. 17. Jasques. [Jasques. 18. Mahran. Makeran. Firhk. Kembile. Bilguri. Rasec. Guadel. Darci. 19. Candahar. Candahar. Grees. Curvan. Cusheanna. Schawa. 20. Sablustan. Bust. Servan. Sarents. Memend. Raber-Emir. Becsabath. 21. Sigiestan, or Si∣stan, which hath Sigistan, or Sistan. Chalak. Huma. Araba. Masmich. Fardan. Mazurgian. Sirun. Corra. Arra.
22. Send, which hath Almansura. Kosdar. Sadusan. Albirun. Ahnultan. 23. Divers Islands, viz. Baharent. Guexexumi, or Lecha. Carge. Tassiane. Corgne. Goga. Ormus. The Six Provinces situated on the West of the Caspian-Sea. SCirvan, Servania, or Media Cocomitreve, is the most Northern and Western part of Persia, between the Caspian-Sea on the East, Georgia on the North, and Erivan or Karasbay on the South. It is a very fruitful Country. The City Derbent, Portae Caucasiae, or Pilae Iberiae, stands here upon the Steep of an Hill, with a Castle above it, on the Bank of the Caspian-Sea. It is a great Passage out of Persia, and most of the Southern Provinces of Asia, into Muscovy, and other Northern Kingdoms. The way lies between Mount Caucasus, called by the Inhabitants Elbours, and the Caspian-Sea. Bachu, or Barvic, or Backia, is upon the Caspian-Sea, a City famous for Trade. Near this City there is a Spring under Ground, which sends forth Black Oyl, used almost in all Persia for burning. It gives the Name of the Black-Sea to the Caspian-Sea, which is between Muscovia, Tartary, and Persia, into which many Rivers discharge themselves; as the Volga, Jaick, Jaicubi, Chesei, Albianu or Gehon, and Araxes. The Province of Erivan or Karasbag is between Ser∣van or Scirvan on the North, Georgia and Armenia on the West, Aderbeigan on the South and East. Artaxata or Erivanum is the Capital City of this Province, standing on the Frontiers of Georgia, and on the Banks of Araxes or Arasse. The Province of Aderbeigian, Daretis, or Media Tropateria, is between Erivan on the North, Curdistan on the West, Hierach or Herarag-emi on the South, Ci∣ion or Gilan and the Caspian Sea on the East. These three Provinces contain that Country, which was here∣tofore called Media. Tauris, Tauresium, or Tabresium, or Ebotan, is the chief City, which is very rich, and full of Trade, and stands in a fertile Soil, in a pleasant and healthful Climate, and in a place very convenient for the passage of the Caravans, which come hither from all parts. It hath often been the Seat of War between the Turks and Persians. Georgia I have already described in a Chapter by it self, wherein also I have spoken of Daghestan, where the Tartars have a Prince of their own, whom they call Sckemeall. He pays Tribute to the Persian King, and hath his Residence at the City of Andre. Part of Armenia; tho' but a small Portion of Land is under the Dominion of a Persian; as also some Cities of several Names in the other adjoining Provinces. Seven Provinces, which lie between the Ca∣spian-Sea and the Gulph of Balsora. THE Province of Kilan, Gilan, Kilania or Aropa∣tia, or Media Antropatena. It is between the Caspian-Sea on the North, Aderbeigian on the West, Yerach on the South, Tabristan on the East. The City Reskh, or Rescha, is the chief City of the Province, two Leagues from the Caspian-Sea. Tabristan, or Taberestian, is a Province situate be∣tween the Caspian-Sea on the North, Kilan on the West, Yerach and Esterabat on the South and East. It is part of the ancient Hyrcania, as also Kilan or Gilan. The City Ferabad, which stands on the Caspian-Sea, is the Head City of it. The Province of Yerach, or Herarag-emi. Assyria Propria is situate between Tabeistan, Keilan, and Ader∣beigian on the North, Curdistan on the West, Farsistan and Kirman on the South, and Chorosan on the East. It was the ancient Parthia. Ipsaham is the Metropolis of all the Kingdom; it is situate upon a pleasant Plain, surrounded with Mountains. It is 7 or 8 Leagues round, taking in the Suburbs. It is very rich, and full of Trade. The King's Palace is a pretty strong Fortress, having 36 great Culverins, and several other Cannon. It is much set off with the Mosks, Houses of the great Lords of the Court, Publick Baths, Markets and Gardens. Casbin or Caswin, Arsacia or Casbinum, is at the foot of the Mountains as you go from Ispaham to the Caspian-Sea. It is very large, and well peopled. It hath a beautiful Palace, many Mosques, several Ba∣zars or Streets overspread and filled with all sorts of Trades. 'Tis thought to be the ancient Ecbatan. The Kings of Media had their Residence here. The City of Com, Comum or Bommum, Choania and Chaono, is be∣tween Ispaham and Casbin, near Kars, Kiara, and Kas∣sian. It stands in a plentiful Country. The City of Cassian, or Cassianum, is in a Plain, three days Journey from Ispaham towards the North. It hath excellent Fruits, fine Gardens, stately Houses, and a great Trade for Silks; but wants good Water; and the Inhabi∣tants are much infested with Scorpions, whose Sting is very dangerous, &c. Kurdistan, or Kurdi, Armenia Major, is not all un∣der the Persian, but only about 30 Leagues from South to North, and 20 or 25 from East to West. It is a ve∣ry fruitful Country. The People are Mahometans, and great Horsemen. They live upon the Banks of Ti∣gris, and generally are subject to the stronger side; but have a greater Inclination for the Persians than Turks; and have therefore put themselves under the Protection of the former. Chasistan, Susiana, or Chusistania, is bounded on the North with a part of Curdistan, and with the Gulph of Balsora, which also bounds it on the South; on the East with Tarsistan. This Province is very plentiful▪ Susa, Sus, or Schouster, is the biggest City. It stands at the entrance of a great Plain upon the River Eulaeus, or Choaspes. The Province of Farsistan, or Farsi, Persia, is be∣tween Yerach on the North, Chusistan on the West, the Gulph of Balsora on the South, Laristan and Kirman on the East. It is a good Country, plentiful in all things. Siras, or Xyras, or Schiras. Schirasium is the chief City, and stands on the River Bendimis, built upon the Ruins of the ancient Persepolis, which was the Metropolis of the East. The Government of this City is the most considerable of all Persia. It is sup∣plied with excellent Fruits and most delicate Wine. Laristan, Provincia-Laurensis, is between the Con∣fines of Kirman and Farsistan on the North, Farsistan on the West, the Gulph of Balsora on the South, and Kirman on the East. It is a small Kingdom, depend∣ing on the Province of Farsistan. Lar, or Lara, is the chief City, situate near the River Tisindon. Five Provinces from Turquestan to the Gulph of Ormus, which lie on the East of the pre∣ceding Provinces. ESterabat hath Turquestan on the North, the Caspian-Sea and Tabarastan on the West▪ Chorosan on the
South and East. It was the ancient Margiana. Este∣rabat is the chief City of it, lying on the Confines of Taberestan towards the South. Chorosan, or Corossan, Chorosania, or Arsia Propria and Parthia, is between Zagathay on the North, Esta∣rabat on the West, Kirman on the South, Sablestan and Turquestan on the East. It was the ancient Aria. The most remarkable City of it is Herat, a considera∣ble City upon a small River towards the East and South, and Thus or Meschet towards the North on the Borders of Chorosan. Kirman, Perses is between Chorosan and Yerach on the North, Faristan and Laristan on the West, the Gulph of Ormus and Jasques on the South, Sigistan and Makran on the East. It was the ancient Caramania, Cherman, or Keirman: Kermania is the chief City of it upon the River Bussiri. This Province is very barren towards the North, where was Caramania De∣serta. There are some fruitful Valleys towards the middle of the Country, where there are great quantities of Fruits and Flowers, particularly Roses; precious Stones, as Turqueises and Tufies. Jasques is a small Province upon the Gulph of Or∣mus, belonging to Makeran, with a City of the same Name adjoining to the Sea. Makran, or Makeran, Macrania, heretofore called Gedrosia, is between Sigistan on the North, Kizman on the West, the Persian-Sea on the South, and Send on the East. Makeran is the chief City of it, lying on the Borders of Kizman. Tits is a Sea-port as well as Guadel. Four Eastern Provinces adjoining to the Em∣pire of the Mogul. CAndahar, Candaharia, is a Province of Persia, be∣tween the little Thibet and Zagathay on the North and West, Sablestan on the South, Cabul, a Province of the Great Mogul on the East. This Country is fruitful enough Southward, but the Water in most places of it either salt, or stinking. The Patans, Avans, and Cou∣lis, which are Thieves, do often make their Inroads to set upon the Caravans which come from India into Per∣sia. The chief City of it, Candahar, is made conside∣rable by the Customs which are paid there for Mer∣chandises. It is strong, and situated very advantage∣ously. It is the Seat of War between the Persian and the Mogul. Sablestan, or Sablustan, Sablustania, or Aria, is be∣tween Candahar and Zagathay on the North, Chorosan on the West, Sigistan on the South, the Country of the Mogul on the East. Bust is the chief City of it: It hath a strong Castle, which is the best fortify'd of any in Persia. Sigistan, Sigistania, or Drangiana, is between Sa∣blestan on the North, Chorosan and Kiman on the West, Send on the South, and the States of the Mogul on the East. This Province is situate among the Mountains. The City Sigistan is the chief City of it. Send, Sindia is between Sigistan on the North, Ma∣kran on the West, the Persian-Sea on the South, and the States of the Mogul on the East. Almansura, and other Cities are remarkable in it. The Principal Islands about Persia. BAharem, Ichara, or Tylus, is in the Gulph of Persia or Balsora, about 3 or 4 Leagues from Ormus. It abounds with all sorts of Fruits, but especially Dates. It hath plenty of Water, but much more salt than fresh. The Wells of Naniah, which are in the middle of the Isle, are good Water. Lecha, or Guexum, is about 18 Leagues distant from Baharem, over against the Cape of Bacido. It is large and pleasant. It is about 3 Leagues from Ormus. It is 24 Leagues long, and 3 Leagues over. Carge or Carae, Icarium, is an Isle in the Gulph of Balsora, well peopled, and rich: Foreign Embassadors generally land here. It is 24 Leagues long, and 6 broad. The People of this Isle have a great Trade for Rough-Diamonds and fine Pearl. Tassiana hath a convenient Haven on the North, but is not above 6 Leagues round. It produces plenty of Cotton, Lemmons, Citrons and Oranges, and several other Fruits. Gorgue is not above 4 or 5 Leagues in compass, but is rich in Cattel. Goga is situate at the Mouth of the River Indus. It is 9 or 10 Leagues in Circuit. Ormus, Armusia, or Ormuzium, or Organa, is also in the Persian Gulph, and hath the Title of a Kingdom. It is but 4 Leagues in compass. It is well situated, but it hath no Sweet Waters, Herbs nor Fruit; yet all things are plentiful there, being imported from Arabia, Persia, and other places; and it is very well peopled, by reason of the Confluence of Merchants of all Nati∣ons thither. The City is one of the most famous for Merchandize in the World, and hath one of the best Ports in Asia for Trade; upon which account it is, that the Indians, Europeans, and all the People thereabouts, come thither. It is true, that since the Persians have taken it from the Portugueze by the Assistance of the English, the Trade is nothing so considerable, because 'tis removed to another Haven called Comoran. In this Isle the Sun is so hot in Summer, that the Inhabitants are forced to keep in Tubs of Water up to the Neck. The People are white, of a good Stature. There is a Mountain near the City, which yields a great Revenue to it by Salt and Brimstone which it produceth. There is plenty of Hares and Roe-Bucks. The City hath 3000 Houses, in which are about 40000 Inhabitants. CHAP. V. TARTARY, TARTARIA. THIS vast Country is not sufficiently known, to give an exact Relation of it; except it be of those parts which border upon Muscovy, Persia, the Em∣pire of the Mogul, and the Northern parts of China. And the Cause why it hath not been as fully discover'd as other Nations, is the great Difficulty of getting into it, because of the great number of High Mountains, horrible Deserts which encompass it, Rocks and Banks which run all along the Eastern Coasts, and the continual Ice which is upon the Shores in the North. Tartary, which is more than a third part of Asia, takes its Name from Tartar, or Tatar, a River in the Northern Parts. It is called the Great, to distinguish it from the Less, which is in Europe, and joins to Tur∣kie. The Ancients called a great part of it Scythia Asiatica.
This large Country is bounded on the North with the Frozen Sea, on the West with the Caspian Sea and the Country of the Great Duke of Muscovia, on the South with Persia, the Indies and China on the East, with the Sea of the Kaimachites, and Streights of Jesso or Ʋriez. The Extent of it from South to North is about 640 Leagues, from the Confines of Sablestan and Chorosan near Mount Taurus, to the Cape's End, towards Nova Zembla in the Country of the Samoiedes, between the 34th Degree and 71st Degree of Latitude, and from East to West about 2000 Leagues, from the Streights of Casa to that of Jesso, between the 68th and 197th Degrees of Longitude, comprehending that part which is under the Muscovite, and in its largest Extent. The Air of this Country is different, according to the several parts of it, which are vastly distant one from another. It is so very rough in the Northern parts, that the violent Winds which sometimes blow there beat down Men, overturn Walls and Trees, and the Seas are all over Ice. The Land also is very barren there, and full of Marshes and Rocky Mountains. The South parts are of a clear different Nature, producing Rice, Hemp, and Rhubarb in abundance; as also, Wool, Silk, Cotton and Musk. It feeds also many Horses and Camels; and towards the North there are White Bears, Black Foxes, Ermins, and Sables, which are the principal Merchandize of the Country. They have great Numbers of Pheasants, and several other kinds of Birds. The great number of Mountains, Fo∣rests, Marshes, and Desarts full of Sand, make a great part of the Country not habitable, and unfit for Til∣lage. The most remarkable Rivers of Tartary, are, 1. The Oby, which riseth in Ostiaski, and passeth cross Gru∣stinski, the Country of the Samoiedes, and empties it self into the Northern Ocean, having received into it the River Irtiske, a little below the City Toboul, which comes out of Taista Kalmuck on the South-East of the City Bulagan, where it crosses the little Lake Kisubas, and then goes through the Prince-dome of Ablay, and through Sibary. It's whole Course is about 1000 Leagues from East to West, and then from North to South. It receives on the right side the Rivers Bes∣cha on the Confines of the Princedoms of Kol and Ablay, Henkutia below the City Loukaragay. On the left it receives the River Toboul, a little below the City of the same Name; and several other smaller Rivers on each side. 2. Tongusi hath its Original in the Southern Tar∣taria Moscovitica; it's Course from South-East to North-East is more than 800 Leagues. Near the City Ilimsk it receives the River Ilima, which divides it self into two parts in the Country of Jacuti, of which the Northern part keeps its Name to the Sea; but the other is called Len. Tongusi receives the River Jenica on the Left side, and then empties it self into the Frozen-Sea. 3. Amor rises in the Country of Daouri; the Course of it from North-East to South-East is about 500 Leagues. It receives the River Skilka on the right side, a little below Albasin, and then falls into the Sea of Japon. 4. Two Rivers, that lose themselves in the Lake Baikala: One, which comes from the Confines of Brast-ka and Jacuti, runs from North-East to South-East above 300 Leagues; and the other, which riseth within 9 or 10 Leagues of the City Jaranava, runs from South to the North-East about 250 Lagues. 5. Jox∣artes rises in Ʋspech Giagatay in the East, and runs from East to West into the Sea of Kulsum, or Caspian-Sea; but in the way receives Alsogd, Ardock, and Oxus on the left side: It's Course is 500 Leagues. 6. Rudha joyns it self with the River Yem, and having passed the two Countries of Kolmak, run both into the Caspian Sea at the Gulph of Mingus or Jav. 7. Ʋppa riseth out of Pascatir, and crossing Casan, empties it self into the Volga. There are several other Rivers of less note in this Country. The principal Lakes are, 1. The Lake of Marsan in the Country of Kolmak toward the West. 2. Kisul∣bas in the South in the Princedom of Kol. 3. Thama. 4. Parvan in Tongugi. 5. Baikala in Daouri. 6. Chi∣amai in the Kingdom of Lassa, out of which rise four or five great Rivers, which run into the Indian-Sea. 7. Taus, in the Country of the Samoiedae. There are also long Ridges of Mountains, viz. of Hithay, Cocaya, Bengiar, Farvan, Saina, Magoa, Cau∣casus, Thibet, and Centava. The Tartars are naturally savage, treacherous and cruel, especially in War, in which they often devour their Enemies, drinking their Blood, and eating their Flesh, to make their Hatred irreconcilable. Their or∣dinary Food is Rice and Milk. When their Cham dies, they kill and interr with him many of his Chief Officers, that they may attend upon him in the other World, and give him enough to maintain him accord∣ing to his Greatness and Quality. Two third parts of this vast Region are Idolaters, especially towards the North; there are many Maho∣metans in the South. Some Countries there are in the Northern parts, where the People have no manner of Religion. Near the Caspian-Sea there are some ancient Jews and some Nestorians. There are very few or no Catholicks among them. The Language of the Tartars is understood in most parts of the North, and in some of the East. It is something like the Turkish Language. Soldiers are there innumerable, and the Lords of the Tartars send their Emperours in times of War an 100000 Horse. Their Forces consist in the multitude of Soldiers, who are always ready for any Service, to pass Rivers in obe∣dience to their Commanders, to endure any Labour in marching towards their Enemy, or retreating from them, as occasion requires. They will shoot their Ar∣rows very exactly at their Enemies, while they seem to fly from them; and all on a suddain will face about upon them to give a Charge, without Disorder. They will compass their Enemies in on all sides, and not mingle with them. Their Women only buy and sell for the most part, the Men being employed in Hunting and Fighting. They have the best Hawks and Hounds in the World. They live for the most part in the open Field, as the Arabians do, in Tents, in which also they keep thei Cattel with them. They are almost all Horsemen. When the Summer begins to approach, they go into the Northern parts, where there is more Cold; and when the Cold becomes great, they retire into the South into some hotter Country. They conduct their Familiss by small Journies, and carry their Houses in Carts co∣vered with Skins, wherein they put their Wives and Children, and their Houshold-Stuff. They provide themselves in several places Ox and Horse-dung, and a sort of Stones for firing. Their Thunder is very dread∣ful, and Winds very violent, which take their Soldiers off from their Horses, and pluck Trees up by the Roots, be they never so deep in the Ground. The Great Cham hath the Tenth part of the Wool, Silk, Hemp, and all other Commodities of his Empire. Every one of his Subjects is also obliged to work one Day in the Week for him, or do him some other Ser∣vice, according to his Quality. He hath two Coun∣cils, made up of 12 of the wisest and experienced Men, of which one always attends upon the Affairs of State, and the other of War. Their Riches consist chiefly in Cattel, Horses, Furrs, Honey, and Wax, of which they have prodigious Quantities. This vast Country is governed by several Princes, Kings and People, be∣sides
the Emperor, who is called their Great Cham, to whom several Kings are Tributary. The Lives and Estates of all his Subjects are in his power to dispose of them as he pleaseth. No man may speak to him but upon his Knees, giving him a kind of Adoration, which is likewise observed by all Embassadors, who speak to him only by an Interpreter. This Emperour at this day rules over almost one half of Asia, espeially since he hath made himself Master of China, and several other States. Some divide the Great Tartary into five parts, which are, 1. Tartaria Propria. 2. Tartaria Deserta. 3. Ze∣gathay. 4. Cathay, and 5. Lurquestan. But this Divisi∣on gives us a very confused and imperfect Idea, or ap∣prehension of it. The best Division, and most confor∣mable to the Relations of our late Travellerss thither, is into 25 Parts, as in the Table. These Countries some call the Muscovian Tartary, or Tartaria Muscovitica. 1. Part of the Kingdom of Casan, in which are Casan, Kibena. 2. Part of the Kingdom of Bolgar, which hath Bolgar, and Samara. 3. Part of the Kingdom of Astracan, Astracan. Batrach. 4. Pascatir, or Besegeret. 5. Siberie, in which is Toboul. 6. Samoiedae, a People who have Kakinscoya. Pohem. 7. Grussirisri, which contains Clarem. Jurgue: 8. Ostiaki, a People who have Makouski. Choroda. 9. Tongusi, or Tingoeses, a People, among which are Jenisca. Ilimsko. 10. Bratskra, a People which have Bratskra. 11. Jakuti, a People which have Jukustanke. 12. Daouri, a People which have Albasin. Naroniskie, Talembi. 13. The Principality of Ablay, in which are Ablay. Belouvioday. Loukaragay. 14. Calmona, or Kolmak, or Kalmonque, Buchares, hath Marsan. Rudha, &c. 15. Turquestan, of old Sogdiana, contains Belek. Selixur. 16. Ʋsbech-Giaga∣thia, or Mawa∣ralnara, hath these three parts, Samarkant Tar∣tars, in which is Samar∣chand, &c. Bochar, a Kingdom, which hath Bochard, &c. Belch, a Kingdom, in which is Belch, &c. 17. The little Thibet a Kingdom, or the Country of Ancheran, Thibet, or Tahamet. Garada. 18. Raia Nupal, which hath Nupal, 19. The Great Thibet, which are, The Kingdom of Necball Necball. Cadmeudu. The Kingdom of Assen, Cammerouf. The Kingdom of Lassa, or Baravantola, Lassa. Cuthi. The Kingdom of Belor, Selink. The Country of Lotoch, Centaba. The Kingdom of Tanchut, Tanchut. Xamori. Mongulsk, or Prestrejan, Athamuth. 20. The Desert of Xamo, Calmax, or Karacathay, and Lop, Gucio, &c. 21. The Chinese-Tartars, Kokotam. Camal. 22. The Chinese-Tartars, among whom are, The Tartars of Kin, or Lor. Kirum, The Kingdom Mache, Ʋla. Targakrinsk, a People. Bodoiski, a People. Jupi, a People. who have Port-Loud. 23. The Kingdom of Chalza, or Cesar, in which are Hiarcham. Ciarcinor. 24. The Principality of Kol, where is Kol. Kol. 25. Tartaria Propria, which are The Country of Egregia. The Province of Jagoy. The Country of Magog. The Country of Fritsa of the Mogol. The Country of Traitza Irdekulu. Traitsa Kalmuch, Bulugan. Traitsa Sudbiligenia Mogol. Traitsa Sem Mogol. Traitsa Dobro Mogol. Tartaria Muscovitica, or the Muscovian Tartary. THIS new Division will appear strange to those who have seen the ordinary Geographical Maps only, who content themselves with some bare Relati∣ons without searching farther into that vast Region, wherein are made new Discoveries almost every day. It is evident that the Great Duke or Emperour of Muscovy possesses a great Breadth of Land in the We∣stern and Northern parts of Tartary, as is to be seen in the foregoing Table. The most remarkable Cities, be∣sides those which I have spoken of in the Chapter of Muscovy, in Europe are these: Toboul, Tobolium is the chief City of Siberia, upon the River of the same Name, in the place where it joyns to the River Iris, towards the 64 Degree of Latitude, and 67 Degree of Longitude. The City or Borough of Kakinscoia, is upon the right Bank of the River Oby in the Country of the Sa∣moiedae in the 67 Degree of Latitude.
The Cities of Surgut, and Klarem are upon the Right side of the Oby in the 01 Degree of Latitude, and distant the one from the other about 20 Leagues in the Province of Grustinski. Maskouskichoroda is the chief City of Ostiaski upon the right side of the River Kieta, about the 59 Degree of Latitude, and the 119 Degree of Longitude. The City Bratska is the Metropolis of the People called Bratska, upon the left hand of the River Angara in the 58 Degree of Latitude, and 143 Degree of Longitude. The City Jukustanke is upon the right side of a lit∣tle River, which runs into the River Len in the 60 Degree of Latitude, and the 143 Degree of Longitude 15 Min. The City Albasin is the Metropolis of the People call∣ed Daouri, upon the left hand of the River Amor, in the 51 Degree 30 Minutes Latitude, and the 168 in Lon∣gitude. The Principal Cities of the Rest of Tartary. THE Rest of Great Tartary is Possessed by several Princes, Kings and People, of which the Great Cham hath the most part, and hath made almost all the other Princes, who enjoy any Soveraignty, either his Tributaries, or Vassals. Cambalu, Cambalum, which some call Issedon, or Muoncheu, is the Head-City of the Empire of the Great Cham of the Tartars. Marcus Paulus the Venetian says, 'tis Eight Leagues in Circuit. The City Thibet is the chief City of the Country of the same Name; it is called also Tanhamet, situated in the 39 Degree of Latitude, and 110 of Longitude. In the lesser Thibet at the foot of the Mountain so called. Thibet contains several other States. It is extream Cold for six or seven Months, because it lyes by the side of a Ridg of Mountains that run from East to West. And for this reason 'tis that they provide Salt Meats for all that time. The Kingdom of Tanchut, or Tangut is in the Ea∣stern part of Great Thibet. It is also called Tanin, and Campion by some Geographers. It takes its name from the Head-City of it, which is situate in the 43 Deg. of Latitude, and 135 of Longitude, on the Borders of Mogol. The City of Samarchamb in Ʋsbech Giagathay, or Mawaralnara, is in the 43 Deg. of Latitude, and 105 of Longitude: 'Tis nothing so considerable as it hath been. It was the Native place of the Famous Emperor of the Tartars, Tamerlane. CHAP. VI. CHINA, or the Kingdom of the Sinae. CHINA is bounded on the North, and part of the West with a Wall, which is 500 Leagues long, 45 Foot high, and 18 or 20 Foot, which parts the King∣doms of Tanchut, or Tanguth, and Niuche, on the other part of the West with great Thibet, and the Kingdoms of Tipra and Ava; on the South with the Kingdom of Tunquin, and the Sea of China, which also parts it from Japon on the East. The Length of it from South to North-East is about 600 Leagues, from the 22. Degr. of Latitude to the 42. and from North-west to South-west it is in breadth 520 Leagues, from the 140. Degr. to the 161 of Longitude, not reckoning that part of Great Tartary, which is un∣der the Emperour of China.—The large Extent of this Country causes the Air to be of different Tempe∣ratures, viz. Cold, Northward, because of the Neigh∣bouring Mountains, which are almost always covered with Snow, and yet so healthy and sound, that the In∣habitants do ordinarily live there above an 100 years, and are never troubled with the Plague. But they are often troubled with violent Earthquakes, which shake down many of their Cities: Southward the Air is more temperate and wholsome. The Soil is very fat and plentiful in all manner of Fruits, except Olives and Almonds, of which they have none, yet they make very good Oyl of a Pulse called Sesamum, and by the Portuguess, Gerselin, and of seve∣ral other things. They have abundance of Corn, Wine, Barley, Turkie-Wheat, and of all sorts of Excellent Fruits, good Pastures, full of Beasts, and Forests, which have plenty of Venison of several kinds. Their Rivers and Seas yield them great quantities of good Fish. Thy have store of Rubies, Topazes, Load∣stones, and other precious Stones; also much Pearl, Earthen Ware, Silk, Cotten, Linen, and other Cloaths, which are made there, are the chief Revenue of this Country. They want not Salt, Sugar, Musk, Am∣bergrease, and all sorts of Quarreys, which is very con∣siderable. Most of their Mountains have Mines of Gold and Silver; but by the Laws of the Kingdom it is forbidden, under pain of Death, to meddle with any of them; for their Rivers furnish them with sufficient quantities of Gold and Silver Sand, which scarce any want. Tea is their ordinary Drink. They have a very unusual sort of Gum. Their Varnish is as admi∣rable as their Earthen Ware, which they make of a certain Clay, which they fetch out of the Province of Quiansi, or Kiamsi. In one of their high Mountains they have a very sweet smelling Wood, which they call Wood of Aigl, or Aloes. The most remarkable Rivers are, 1. Quiam or Ki∣ang, whih rises in the Province of Xensi, in the 35th Degr of Latitude. It's Course is from North to South, and then from West to East; so that it makes very great Windings, and discharges its self into the Eastern Sea of China, at the Gulph of Nanquin, having received several other Rivers ino it, and passed through the Province of Xensi, Saen, Huquam, Nanquin or Kiar. 2. Hoan, or Hang,  te Yellow Saffron-colour'd River, which some Maps falsly call Caramoran, rises out of the Lake Kokonar in the Country of the Gueys, and in the Consines of this Kingdom, and that of Las∣sa. 'Tis the greatest River of China. It's course at first is from South to North for 70 Leagues, and then it turns to the Westward for 40 Leagues; then it runs from South-West to North-West 200 Leagues, and passes by the great Wall before mentioned for 50 Leagues, going through it again and again; and having run 70 Leagues in Tartary, it crosses the Wall a third time, and passing through the Province of ekin, empties it self into the Gulph of the same Name, after a course of 120 Leagues from the Wall to the Sea, in which it re∣ceives several Rivers into it. So that the whole course from the Spring of it to the Sea is about 600 Leagues,
measuring all it's Windings and Turnings. 3. The Roy∣al Channel reaches from the River Zantung to that of Hoan, and conveys the Waters out of the one into the other. The People of China have a very large Face, small Eyes, flat Noses; their Pace strait and fierce; they are comely, civil, brisk, politick, industrious, covetous, and very jealous: They have a great Love for Arts and Sciences. They say, that they had the use of Guns and Printing long before us. Their Dress appears by the fine Stuffs that come from thence. It may be said without Hyperbole, that all Arts and Sciences have their Perfection in China: For there are excellent Geometers, Arithmeticians and Astronomers. The Chineses are Heathens. The last Relations, which the Jesuits and other Travellers give us, assure us, that there are 120000 Christians, and that they increase daily. There are a great number of Priests, both Se∣cular and Regular. Such as are skilful in Mathema∣ticks, are much favoured by the Emperour, because he loves those sorts of Sciences. There are at present Ma∣hometans, Jews, and some Protestants, Hollanders; as also Monks and Religious Persons, as well as among us. The great Wall, which parts China from Tartary, doth not keep the Cham of Tartary from invading that rich and plentiful Country; insomuch that his Succes∣sors have been quiet Possessors of it ever since 1650. It is true, our last Rebellions assure us, that the Chineses have joined together to oppose the Tartars, and that some Provinces have freed themselves from his Tyran∣ny; and believe, that by this time the Chineses are perfectly Masters of it. The true China-Ware is made in the Town of Sinktesimo in the Province of Nankin. China is generally reckoned to have 17 Provinces, and 149 chief Cities. The Emperour hath all the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, which pay him Tribute, at his Dispose; yet he cannot dispose of his Revenue with∣out the Consent of his Treasurer, and other Officers which manage his Revenue. The Cities are generally built with Stone, and compassed with High Walls of Brick or Stone, fortify'd with a great Bank of Earth, great Ditches, and high strong Towers. In most of their Cities and great Towns we may see Triumphal Arches of carved Stone and Marble, admirably well wrought, and erected in Honour of such as either have done some signal Service to the State, or for their Knowledge have deserved the Title of Doctor. This excellent Country hath been governed a long time by a King or Emperour, whom his Subjects call the Lord of the Universe, and Son of Heaven. His Residence is at Nanquin, and sometimes at Pekin. The Government is not much changed, although it be at present subject to the Great Cham of the Tartars. China is divided into 18 Provinces, very considerable in all things. By the Gulph of Nanquin are Three. 1. Nanquin. 2. Kiamnan. 3. Zantung. Southward on the Sea-Coasts are Three more. 4. Chekiang. 5. Fo∣kien. And 6. Kuantung, or Quantung. In the mid∣dle are Six or Seven more. 7. Kiangsi, or Kansi, 8. Quangsi. 9. Gueichou. 10. Huquang. 11. Honan. And 12. Xansi. On the West side are Three others. 13. Xensi. 14. Suchuen. 15. Junnan, or Yunnan. The 16. is Laotung, or Ledotum. 17. The Peninsula of Corea, which lies upon the Ocean. 18. The Isles belonging to China, and adjoining to it. Some of the Principal Cities of China. THE City of Pequin, Pequinum, is at present the chief City of China, and the Seat of the Empe∣rour; a great and strong City, standing about 30 Leagues distant from the Wall, in a barren Country. It is famous for the King's Palace, it's lofty Buildings, large Extent, and great number of Inhabitants. Ac∣cording to the Relation of our Geographers, there is no City in the World so big as Pekin, or Pequinum; it is inclosed with a double Wall of Carved Stone, in which are 360 Gates, every one of which is a Castle fortify'd with two High Towers. It is said to be 30 Leagues in Compass without the Suburbs, which are almost as large as the City. The Emperour's Palace is above a League about, defended by 2 or 3 Walls, with Banks and Ditches, and guarded with 10000 chosen Men. The City of Nanquin, Nanquinum, is the second Ci∣ty in China; it stands upon the River Kiam, upon a Mountain, in the 32d Degree, 30. min. of Latitude, and 164. of Longitude. It is 10 or 11 Leagues about. The Houses are no more than two Story high, and made of Wood, except those of the Mandarins, which are built of Earth, or cut Stone, inclosed with Walls and Ditches. The great Lords, who are Governours of Provinces, have High Towers in their Houses, with Bells, all guilt, in which they have their Magazins, Wardrobes, Treasuries, Silks, rich China Ware, which they value highly, and never send out of the Kingdom, unless to the Kings of Persia. Within the Walls of this City are reckoned 200000 Houses, besides the Suburbs, and of those 24000 belong to the Mandarins. As for the Emperour's Palace, there are many incrcdible things spoke of it. It is almost like that at Pekin. It hath in it the King's Council, the same Magistrates, Dignities and Priviledges as Pekin. It stands in a very rich and fruitful Plain, which is watered all along by the River Kiang, drawn out into a great number of artificial Channels, which will carry large Vessels, and over which are many Stone Bridges. Besides Pequin, there is no City so large and stately as this in all things. The Palace, the Streets, the stately Towers, the large Hou∣ses of 28 Paces wide, well paved and uniform. Quamcheu, or Canton, Quamcheum, is the in 24th Degree of Latitude, and 152 of Longitude, and stands on the Sea-shore, very large and well built; and though it be well peopled, yet 'tis wonderful to see as great a mul∣titude upon the Water as the Land: For there are or∣dinarily 20000 Ships and other Vessels. This City is built on the right side of the River Ta, which is very wide at that place, and able to contain a vast number of Vessels, which makes it very rich, full of Traffick, and popu∣lous. It is 5 Leagues in compass, Suburbs and all. Macao, or Amacao, Macaum, is a City in the Posses∣sion of the Portuguese, belonging to China, and one of the richest places which they have in the Indies. It is built in an Isle, upon Rocks, and they fetch all their Provision out of China; so that they are forc'd to main∣tain a good Correspondence with the Chineses, that they may be able to live. The Catholick Religion is exer∣cised here. The other Cities, which are very nume∣rous, are near of the same Magnificence and Great∣ness. The Island Formosa, or the Fair Island, is 25 Leagues distant from the Province of Foquien, Eastward, be∣tween the 21st Degree 40 min. and 26th Degree of La∣titude, and under the 167th Degree of Longitude. It is from South to North 60 Leagues, and from West to East 20. The Dutch call it New Zeland. In it they have a Fort of Four Bastions, built of hewn Stone, up∣on a sandy Hill, a small League within the Isle. From the Fort there goes a Chanel to the Haven, which co∣vers the Ships from all Winds. On the side of it is built a Redoubt, well fortify'd, where there is a Garrison to defend the Entrance of the Chanel. This Island is well peopled, the Rivers have a great number of Fish, it's Fields and Meadows are well stocked with Cattle, and their Forests have all sorts of Venison. They have a sort of Horses with Horns, living in the Woods like a
Stag, the Flesh of which is very delicate. The Soil produces an abundance of Sugar, Ginger, Cinnamon, and other such like things, as also Grain, Mines of Gold and Silver. The Inhabitants are very civil to Strangers, although they seem barbarous, and as big as Giants. CHAP. VII. The Empire of the GREAT MOGUL. THE People, who dwell upon the Continent, un∣der the Government of the Great Mogul, are called Mogols, or Moguls. The Country is usually called In∣dia, or Indostan, and contains about 40 Kingdoms, all subject to this Emperour. This Empire is bounded on the North with Tartary. on the West with Persia, on the South with the River Guenga, and certain Mountains, which part it from the Peninsula beyond the River Ganges, and on the East with the Great Thibet, and the Kingdom of Tipra and Aracan. The Extent of it from South to North is 380 Leagues, from the Southern Borders of the Peninsula of Decan to the Confines of the Province of Kakare, or Kakake, between the 20th and 30th Degree of Lati∣tude; and from West to East 520 Leagues, from the Borders of the Province or Government of Maltan to the Confines of the Province of Randuana, between the 107th and 136th Degree of Longitude. The Air is of a different Temperature, according to the Distinction of the parts of this Empire; yet is in all places temperate enough, being only a little colder in the North than in the South. The Soil is not so fruitful in the North as in the middle and South. It is most plentiful in Cotton, Rice, Millet, Citrons, Oran∣ges, Silk, Pomegranats, Figs, Indian or Coco-Nuts. The Tree which bears this last Fruit, furnishes the In∣dians with almost all things necessary. It is like a Palm-tree. They use the Juice of it for Drink and Vinegar; they make Bread and Oyl of the Fruit. The Shell they use for Barrels, Platters, Bottles, Tubs, and other sorts of Vessels; they make Thred and Stuffs of a little Film, which lies under the Bark: the Body and Boughs are fit to build Houses and Ships withal. The Leaves sowed together make good Sails, and asunder make Tiles of Houses. They have every where almost Mines of Copper, Lead, Iron, and Dia∣monds at Somelpour in the Province of Bangal, and of∣ten fish them out of the River Gouel. They have also an abundance of Elephants, Dromedaries, Horses, Cat∣tle, and Apes, which do much hurt to the People of the Country, because they drink Palm-juice, which they put into Vessels. There are also an abundance of Parrots, green and red; and Birds of several other Colours. They have a multitude of long Walks of Trees in their great Roads, which are a gallant Shel∣ter for Passengers; and particularly, there is one that reaches from Bram-pour as far as Agra, which is about 150 Leagues in length. The chief Rivers of the Empire of the Mogul, are, Ganges and Indus, which rise both of them out of Mount Caucasus, and cross the Country from North to South. The First receives into it in its Course the Rivers Kan∣da, Perseli, Semena, and Tziotza; and then empties it self into the Gulph of Bengal at Four Mouths, ma∣king so many Isles. The Second, which the Inhabitants call Sind, is increased by the Waters of Nilab, Behat, Kavee, Chanab, Caul, Vial, and runs into the Gulph of the same Name at 5 large Mouths. There are also 4 other Rivers in the South. 1. Guenga. 2. Padder. 3. Tapte. 4. Lepra, or Parver. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are ignorant and dull; they do not work themselves, bet leave all their Business to their Slaves. In some places, when the Husband dies, and his Body is burnt according to the Custom of the Country, his Wife, to preserve her self from Disgrace, is obliged to burn her self with him; which the Servants also voluntarily do, especially if it be any Great Person. Women never marry twice. Their Cloathing differs but litttle from the Turks. The greatest part of the Inhabitants of the two Peninsulae are naked, except from the Girdle to the Knees, which they cover with a Cloath made of Cotton. They eat Fruits, Pulse, Rice, Flesh, and several other sorts of Meat. Some of these People are Mahometans, of the Sect of Hali; others are addicted to Pagan Superstitions; except some Christians, who live there upon the ac∣count of Traffick, or have been converted by the Po∣pish Emissaries. There are also some Jews. The Great Mogul allows Liberty of Conscience. They make Vows with great exactness, and go in Pilgrimage in great Companies, some always holding their Hands clasped together upon their Heads, others having them stretched out in the Air; many also use a thousand ex∣travagant Postures in observing their Vows, which they have made to continue so all their Life after, and during their Pilgrimage; and their Limbs very often are bent so much, that they never recover their natural Position again. The Bannians profess not to kill any living Creature, and pardon all sorts of Injuries; they believe a Metempsycosis, and have more Hospitals for Beasts than Men. The Persees are the Posterity of the ancient Persians, who retreated into these parts: they worship Fire. The Inhabitants say, that the Wa∣ter of Ganges sanctifies them, by dipping themselves in it; and therefore come thither in Pilgrimage in such numbers, that sometimes there are 4 or 5 thousand in the season upon the Banks of it, who cast Silver and Gold into it. They dip themselves in Pits or Ci∣sterns, because there are Sea-dogs which devour Men. The Gymnosophists heretofore were in greatest Request for their Wisdom, but the Brachmans are now. The former of these cause their old and sick Men to be slain out of pity, to deliver them out of the Miseries of this Life; and the other perform such Fastings and Morti∣fications, as far exceed the Pennances of the most se∣vere Monks and Hermits. The most remarkable Languages of the Eastern In∣dians, are, 1. Arabick, which they use in all their Religious Offices and Books of Learning, as we do Latin. 2. The Carabine, used about Goa. 3. That of Malabar, in the Country so called. 4. The Gaza∣rate, in the Kingdoms of Cambay, Coromandel, Bis∣nagar, and Bengal. 5. The Malaye about Malaca, Su∣matra, Java, and the Molucco's. The Isles of the Mal∣dives have a Language of their own. The Emperour hath the absolute Disposal of the Lives and Estates of all his Subjects, and determines all Con∣troversies between them as he pleaseth. Besides this Sovereign Command, he hath a great number of Petty
Kings, which pay him Tribute; as, the King of Ra∣nas between Chitor and Bando, the Kings of Mug and Rodorou. There are also some free People, as the Ras∣butes, who live only by Robberies. The Portuguese possess Diu, Daman, and Bacami, Cities and Ports standing upon the Coasts of the Gulph of Cambay, as also the Castles of Manora and Asserim. The Great Mogul, who is a Mahometan, holds a great Corre∣spondence with the Turk, to secure himself against the Persian. The great number of his Subjects, his vast Riches, and the large extent of his Kingdom, makes him so proud, that he calls himself the greatest Monarch of the World. He hath usually in his Court 20 Kings his Vassals. This vast Empire may be divided into several Pro∣vinces or Governments, which are so many Kingdoms. I will begin with the Western Parts, and consider those that reach from North to South, from Tartary to the Gulph of India or Cambay, all along by the River Indus. Then I will go on to those that lie between In∣dus and Ganges, which is the middle of the Country. And Lastly, will describe the Eastern Parts from Ganges to the Great Thibet, and the Peninsula on the other side of it: And so will divide the whole Empire of the Great Mogul into 3 large Parts, and 41 or 42 Governments or Kingdoms, as is most plainly to be seen in this fol∣lowing Table. The Empire of the Great Mogul hath 3 principal Parts, and 42 Governments or Kingdoms in it, viz. I. In the West 15. Quexmer, or Cassimere. Cassimere. Parvan. 2. Cabul R. Cabul. Ciaracar. 3. Attock. Attock. Puckow. 4. Multan R. Multan. 5. Pengab. Lahor. Bember. 6. Haiacan. Chutzan, Vehe. 7. Hendown Pr. Hendown. Mearta. 8. Buckar. Bucharhucon. Sukay. 9. Tarta, or Sindi. Tarta. 10. Soret. Jannagar. Pacho. 11. Jesselmere. Jeselmeere. Kadinpore. 12. Asmere Ban∣do. Asmere. Bando. 13. in 3. Mirda. Mirda. Ralua Rana. Rana. Rahia Bargant. Bargant. 14. in 2. Guzarate R. Resbuti. Cambay, Diu, Patan, Su∣ratz, Amed Abad▪ Bacam, Jaquette. 15. De∣can. in 2. Aureng-abad. Daltabu Talen-gand. Bider. II. In the Midland 16. 1. Kakares. Purhola. Dankaler. 2. Naugracur. Naugracur. Calamaka. 3. Siba. Hordware. 4. Jamba. Jamba. Mansa. Serenegar. Decamperga. 5. Jenupar. Jenupar. Temmeri. 6. Delly. Delly. Gehanabad. 7. Bacar. Bikanar. 8. Sambal. Sambal. Menepore. 9. Narvar Labas. Gehud. Elebas. 10. Agra. Agra. Anadipore. 11. Gualeor. Gualeor. 12. Chitor. Chitor. Chitipore. 13. Malvay. Rantipore. Ougle. 14. Candis. Brampor. Mandou. Partaspa. 15. Berar. Schapor. 16. Bengala. Patna. Patna. Prurop. Gofry. Raga Rodas. Rodas. Bengala propria. Daca. Philipatum. Cathigan. III. In the East 11. 1. Gor-arada. Gor. 2. Rodorou, Camolo. 3. Pitan. Pitan. 4. Rahia Mug. Mug. 5. Kanduana. Kanduana. 6. Patna. Patna. 7. Ʋdessa or Voez. Jehanack. 8. Jesualna. Raiapore. 9. Meoat. Narval. 10. Marangas. Hadouda. Mutgari. 11. Galconda. Ramana. Oriza. Var, &c. Some Chief Cities of the Mogul's Empire. THE City Agra is situate in the 38th Degree, 30 min. Latitude, and 121 Longitude. It is the Me∣tropolis of the Empire, and the ordinary Residence of the Mogul, standing in the middle of his Kingdom, up∣on the River Gemini, or Semana, which runs into Gan∣ges below the City Elebes, in the Government of Nar∣vare Labas. This City is so big, that a Man on Horse∣back can hardly ride round it in a Day. It is encom∣passed with a good Wall of carved Red Stone, and a Ditch 30 Ells wide, The Streets are wide and spa∣cious:
It hath Cloysters a quarter of a League long. The Emperour's Palace is a stately Building, and well fortify'd, standing on the Bank of Gemini. It is 3 or 4 Leagues about. He is vastly rich. The Mogul's Cham∣ber hath the Imperial Throne standing with a Row of Pillars or Ballisters; 'tis all of Massie Gold, set richly with Diamonds, Pearls, and other Precious Stones. Above the Throne is a Gallery, where the Emperour presents himself every Day to hear the Complaints of his Subjects. In his Seraglio are 1000, or 1200 Wo∣men. He hath a very strong Tower, covered with Plates of Gold, wherein the Great Mogul's Treasures are kept in 8 large Vaults, full of Gold and Silver, and all sorts of Precious Stones. The City Delli, Delliton, is situated in a large Plain, upon the Bank of the River Gemini, on the North-East of Agra. The old City Delli is now only the Suburbs of a new City called Chahichan-Abat or Ichan-Abad. It was anciently the Seat of the Great Mogul before Agra. Lahor, Lahorum, or Bucephara, is the Abode of the Caravans. The ancient City Bucephala is the chief Ci∣ty of the Kingdom of Pengab upon the River Ravee. It is said to be 20 Leagues in Compass, having a fine Ca∣stle in it. Surat, Surata, and Sirastra, is situate upon the River Tapta, near the Gulph of Cambay, which is strongly built on the Land-side with a Castle. Their Houses are low, as the Persians are, and have generally good Gar∣dens to them. It is two Leagues from the Haven, where it hath one of the finest Ports of all the East, full of Merchants from all parts of the World. Diu, Dium, is an Isle and City in the Kingdom of Guzurate: The Isle is a League long, and a quarter of a League wide, a little distant from the Continent, standing at the Mouth of the Gulph of Cambaya. It be∣longs to the Portuguese, who conquered it under the Kings of Guzurate, and have built a strong Cittadel in it. It is a large City, and an excellent Port. It is very rich, because of the great Concourse of Merchants thi∣ther. It is as it were the Store-house for all the Ships that come from Cambay, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulph, and that of Ormus, and several other places of the Indies, because of the abundance of Provision sold at the Market there. Some Remarks upon the Empire of the Mogul. THE Kingdom of Guzurate is very considerable; the Merchants of it are counted the richest of all the Indians. The most remarkable Cities in it are, Armadabat, Cambay, and Surat, tho' it hath 30 others very considerable. The English account the first of them, which is the greatest, near as big and good as London. It hath a strong Castle of hewn Stone. It is about 7 Leagues round, taking in the Suburbs: The Streets of it are very wide, the Houses stately, especially the Mosques, and the Governour's Palace. The Inhabitants make great quantities of Silks, Cotton, Sattin, and Velvets of all Colours. The Merchants pay no Custom, either at their going in or coming out. But the English have a great Trade at Surat for Goods from the East-Indies. The French have built an Exchange there for that end. The Portu∣guese have had several Combats with the Kings and Governours of that Country for the Fortification of Diu, which is parted from the Continent by so nar∣row a Channel, that it is passed over by a Stone-Bridge. They lock up their Haven with an Iron Chain, into which they enter under the Canon of two Castles. The City of Cambay is much decayed from what it was heretofore. There is a Mine of Agates at Beroche. Cabul is fruitful in Mirabolans. The Province of Bengal is famous for the pleasant∣ness of the Air, Fruitfulness of the Soil, plenty of Rice, fine Canes, Silks. The Inhabitants are industrious and handsom, but their Servants are wicked and base. Their chief City is Satagam, or Caihigan. The Castle of Syr, or Syra, is the strongest and big∣gest of all the Mogul's Empire. It stands upon the top of a Mountain, which is 5 Leagues about, and com∣passed about on all sides with a Triple Wall, and forti∣fied with above 3000 Pieces of Ordinance. There are a great number of Rhinoceros's in the Provinces of Bengal and Cambaya. This furious Crea∣ture is as big as an Elephant, with which it maintains a continual War, especially so long as the Female hath her Young ones with her. It hath a Head like a Hog, the Skin fortify'd naturally with yellow Scales, the Thighs and Legs very thick, a Horn upon the Nose, which gives it the Name of the Rhinoceros. This Horn is made like a Sword, and hard like Iron: Iredge whets it against a Rock, when it fights with the Ele∣phant, whom it always strikes upon the Belly, because that is the place most easie to be pierced. The Skin of it is so hard, that an Arrow will not enter it. CHAP. VIII. The Peninsula of INDIA within GANGES. THIS Peninsula is divided almost into two equal parts by the Mountains called Gate, which reach from North to South, having several fine Plains on the top of them, where they have variety of Seasons at the same time. It is bounded on the North by the River Guenga and Gulph of Cambay, which parts it from the States of the Mogul. On the West, South and East by the Indian Ocean, between the 7th Degree 30 min. and 22d Degree of Latitude; which shews it to be from South to North 290 Leagues; and between the 112th Degree and 126th Degree of Longitude: So that it is 240 Leagues from West to East. The Air is very hot, unless it be on the tops of the Mountains. The greatest part of the People go almost naked. The Soil is very fertile of all things necessary for Humane Life. It abounds with Mines of Dia∣monds, especially in the Kingdom of Golconde. They also fish for Pearl, but chiefly about the Streights of Manar. The Inhabitants are very dull, lazy and ignorant; none but Slaves work. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are Mahometans, as well as their Princes; but principally upon the Coasts. They that dwell on the Mountains are Idola∣ters. Others of them are Catholicks or Protestants,
as the Nations of Europe are, that are allowed to dwell and trade with them. The Jews live here in great numbers, using the Trade of Brokers and Merchants, as they do in the other parts of the World. This Peninsula is divided into two Parts, as we have said, by a Ridge of Mountains which run from North to South; so that we may consider it in Two Parts or Peninsuloe. 1. The Western. And, 2. The Eastern; wherein I shall observe the Kings and People which possess it, as is more plainly to be seen in this follow∣ing Table. The Peninsula within Ganges hath Two Parts. 1. The Western in which are, 1. Decan. Visapor, Solapur, Rasiapur, Debul, Danda, Bacaim, Centapur, Caria∣patan, Goa, Bardes, an Isle. 2. Canata. Onor, Mangalor, Barcilor, Baricala. 3. Carnatica. Kanticota, Tripiti. 4. The Coasts of Malabar. 1. Calicut. Calicut, Canamor, Manigale, Grungamer. 2. Cochin. Cochin, Porca, Calecculan, Coulan, Angamale. 3. Madura. Madura, Tutucori, Mamancor, Jacancori. 4. Mesul. Mesul. 2. The Eastern, in which are, 1. Coasts of Co∣romondel. 1. Tanajor. Tanajor, Nagapatan, Frangabar. 2. Gingi. Gingi, Coloran, Candabaran. 3. Bisnagar. Bisnagar, Narsingue, Pentapouli, Geldua, Senepgond, Melour. 2. Golconde, a Kingdom. Golconde, Orixa, Candavara, Guadavart, Masulpatan, Nasingapatam, Cantapoli, &c. The City of Goa is the most considerable of this Peninsula, the chief City of that part of the East-In∣dies, which the Portuguese possess, and the Seat of the Vice-Roy, giving also the Title to an Archbishop. It stands in the Kingdom of Decan, in an Isle, which the Rivers Mandoua and Guari make at their Fall into the Sea. Alphonsus Alberquerque took it for the Portu∣guese in 1510. who have here a Council for the Go∣vernment of the East-Indies, besides their Trade, Riches, and Government of the City. Here is one of the finest Hospitals in the World. The Churches are very magnificent. This City is fullest of Trade of the East, being filled with a vast number of Merchants from all places. The Kingdom of Decan produces all things in abun∣dance. Something more than a League distant from the City of Decan, is a Mountain, where the People find great quantities of Diamonds, which is therefore en∣compassed with an high Wall, and a continual Guard kept there. These Diamonds are the best and finest in the World. They also Trade in Rubies, Emeralds, Topazes, and other precious Stones. The Portugese have built in this Country two or three Forts to maintain their Trade in Pepper, which they gather there in abundance. They have good Masts for Ships, of which they have such plenty, that they furnish their Neighbouring Country with them. Here is also Sugar, Ginger, Cassia, Amber-grease, store of Jacinth, Pomegranats, Saphires and Rubies about the City Cananor. This Country also produces Lions, Tigers, Panthers, Elephants, Buffles, Parrets, Indian Cocks, and several other Birds. In their Ponds and Lakes they have much Fish, and great Lizards like Crocodiles, whose back is covered with Scales, impe∣netrable with any Weapon. They kill Men, and their Breath smells as sweet as Amber-grease. On the other side there are a sort of Serpents which kill Men with their breath only. The City Cananor is very large, but without Walls, under the Command of a King of its own, who is very potent, and chosen out of the Princes of the Blood: He can upon occasion furnish out an 100000 Men for War. Here is Ebony, Areca, Palms, and other sorts of Fruits in abundance, and several Christians have their Habitation in this City. From Cananor to Calicut is counted four Leagues. The King hath a Palace about a Mile and half from this City, which is a Mile round. Calicut was here∣tofore the most famous City of the Indies, the Metro∣polis of Malabar, and the Imperial Seat of the Samo∣rin, or Emperor, but it is much decayed since the Por∣tugese have possessed Goa, and other places. Cochin also is inhabited by the Portuguese, and by their means is grown so great, that the King of it is become more potent than the Emperor himself. It is about 26 Leagues distant from Calicut, and about an 100 from Goa. The City of Visapor, or Visapur, is five Leagues a∣bout, encompassed with High Walls, with a great Ditch, and several Batteries, wherein are mounted above a 1000 Pieces of Canon of all sorts and sizes, both of Brass and Iron. The King's Palace is in the middle of the City, from which it is parted by a dou∣ble Ditch; it is a large League about. This City has five large Suburbs, in which the greatest part of the Merchants dwell, especially one that's called Scham∣pour, were the greatest part of the Jewellers dwell; it is the chief City of Decan, and the Residence of the Idalcan, or King of Decan. The City of Bisnagar. Bisnagaria is six or seven Leagues round, and encompassed with three Walls, standing on the side of an Hill, and in the midst of the Kingdom of the same Name. Here are two or three Mountains, whence they dig the clearest and best Dia∣monds, a great number of Amethysts, white Saphires, which the Rivers bring down from the Rocks, which are broken by the force of their Waters. The King of it is rich in Gold, Silver, and Quarries of Stones, and very strong in Men; he is said to have carried an Army against his Enemy Idalcan, consisting of 40000 Horse, 300000 Foot, and 700 Elephants. Narsingue, or Narsinga, is the Head of the Kingdom so called, well built, standing on a Mountain, and three Leagues round. It is encompassed on the one side with the Sea, and on the other with a great River. The King hath a magnificent Palace in it, so well fortified, that it is very formidable to his Neighbours, and no Man can dwell there without his permission. It is very safe and happy dwelling there, paying the ordinary Customs, because of the exact administration of Justice there used, and the regular Government which is exercised in it. The Country of the Naique of Gingi, pays Tribute to the King of Bisnagar, and is near the City of Pech∣rie. The chief City of the Kingdom is Gingi: Gingis, a very large City, having a Castle in the midst of it,
like a City it self, encompassed with high Walls of hewn Stone, and a Ditch full of Water. In the Castle is an high Rock, and almost impossible to be ascended, where they have formed their Bastions and Towers for defence. The King hath two fine Palaces in it fortified with several Towers. This Peninsula is governed by more than fifty Kings, and divers sorts of People, the more potent subduing the other. The Portuguese, Dutch and English have their Factories on the Coasts for the maintenance of their Trade there, which consists in Spice, Pearl, several sorts of Stones, Cotten-wool, and other Mer∣chandize. The Kings themselves love to converse with the Christians to encourage their Trade, and to secure their assistance in times of War. The Coast of Malabar is a very low Country, inha∣bited by Pirates, for whom 'tis very convenient. The Portuguese Landed at Calicut first, but with less success than at Cochin, where they got leave to build them a Castle, but lost it by the Dutch in 1662. Besides the King of Calicut, there are upon these Coasts the Kings of Cananor, Tanor, Cranganor, Cochin, Couhan, Tra∣vancor, and ten or twelve more, less considerable. In Onor there is a very weighty sort of Pepper, and black Rice, which is better than the white. Next to the Coast of Malabar is that of Manar, or the Fishing-Coast, where they fish for Pearl in April and September for three Weeks together. This is all the profit that they make in thirty little Cities of that Country; for which they have a Fair at Tuticorin. The Dutch are Masters of the King's Isle, where they have built a Fort, by which they command all the pas∣sage of the Streights of Manar, where they get Am∣ber-grease. There is a prodigious quantity of Rice upon the Coasts of Coromandel, or Corobander, and the best in the Indies. Here stands Meliapour, or St. Thomas, where this Apostle is said to have done many Miracles. This City stands upon a small River, which hath six Arms at the Entrance of it into the Sea; all lying within the reach of the Canon of the City, which causes the smaller Vessels to put in at Pallacate, and the greater at Negapatan. The King of Narsinga calls himself the King of Kings, and hath a thousand Wives. Upon the same Coasts are the Naiques, or Princes of Gingi, Madure and Tanior. These three little States have risen from the destruction of that of Narsinga. The Kingdom of Messar is near that of Madure; the People of Marara, which are not far distant, are accounted good Warri∣ers. The Country of Pirates is sixteen Leagues about, with its Cities. The Kingdom Golconde and Orifia, or Orixa, are Mahometans, of the Sect of the Persians; it pays Tribute to the Great Mogul, because it can't free it self from him. In this State there is a Mine of Diamonds about two Leagues from Golconde at the foot of a Mountain; it is so large an one that the King enclosed it in 1662, for fear by yielding too great Quantities, they should become too common, or that the Great Mogul might not desire to get it. The King reserves to himself all the Diamonds that weigh above ten Carats; and there are some that weigh thirty or forty; of others they have taken out above three Millions. The City of Golconde is two Leagues about, divided into three Ci∣ties, viz. Badnagner, or Hidrabant, in which stands the Kings Palace. 2. Golconda, in which is the Castle. 3. Emanpour, which is on the River which parts it from the first. The King's Palace is a very Stately one, having Gold in all places instead of Iron. The City Masulpatan which is subject to this Kingdom is situated among the Fens, and hath a Bridge 1500 Pa∣ces long: The Haven or Harbour is about half a League from the City, and is very convenient for all sorts of Vessels; most of the Merchants of Europe have their Factors here: In this City are made the finest Painted Cloaths of all the East. The Castle of Candapoli hath six Fortifications, one above another. In this Province there are also sixty other considerable places. CHAP. IX. The Peninsula of INDIA, beyond GANGES, or Zirbad. THIS Peninsula is bounded on the North with China, and great Thibet on the West, on the South and East by the Indian Ocean: The Extent of it from South to North is 460 Leagues, from the 1. Degr. to the 24. of Lat. and from West to East 332. from the 133. Degr. to the 150. of Long. which must be understood in the largest extent of it. The Air and Soil is different according to the differ∣ent Situation of it, as the Description of each particu∣lar will shew, as well as their Religion, Manners and Government. This Peninsula is divided into three Parts: 1. The Northern, from the States of the Great Mogul to the Kingdom of Siam: 2. The Southern from the King∣dom of Pegu, and Cochin-China to the Sea: 3. The Eastern which contains the Kingdoms of Tunquin, and Cochin-China, of which more particularly in the Table. The Peninsula of India beyond Ganges hath Three Parts. 1. The Northern in Seven Parts, or Kingdoms. 1. Tipra. Tipra, Azo. 2. Ava. Ava, Prom, Totay, Tolema, Melintay, Boldia, Transiana. 3. Brema. Brema, or Brama, and Barma, Coromoria. 4. Aracan. Aracan Sandar, Sore, Cadouascan. 5. Pegu. Pegu, Ladoa, Taqualla, Ambuaro, Chubode, Tangu, Manar, Siarion, an Isle. 6. Martaban. Martan, Tuguala, Macaon, Macaria del Rei, 7. The Coast of Asem. Asem.
2. The Southern in three States. 1. The States of the King of Siam in Nine Kingdoms: 2. Camboya, or Cambodia. Cam∣boya, Racol, Lavech, Taruano. 1. Siam, properly so called, Odia, or India Juropisan. Bankok, Sacatacy. 2. Tenasserim. Tenasserim, Ligor. 3. Juncalaon. Juncalaon, Bordelong. 4. Patana. Patana. 5. Queda. Queda. 6. Pahan. Pahan. 7. Pera. Pera. 8. Malaca. Malaca. 9. Jhor. Jhor. 3. Siampaa. Siampaa, Pulocac∣cim. 3. The Eastern in two Kingdoms. 1. Cochin-China. Cacciam, Bochin, Neghon, Tinhga, Caubanch, which is St. Joseph's Port. Cuaceva, where is the Queen's Harbour, Faifo, Bedaya. 2. Tunquin. Tunquin, Korcio, Cuaday, or Codem, Kebach, Ketra, Ciucham, Tan∣dang, a Tower of Tunquin. The Peninsula of India beyond Ganges. The Northern Part. THE King of Ava is a Potent Monarch, having besides the Kingdom of Ava, the States of Pegu, Aracan, Asem, & Tipra subject to him. The Ancient Kingdom of Brama, or the Brachmans pay him Tri∣bute, as do also divers other People which live on the West parts of China, as the Layes, Gueyes, Timocoues, and Ciocangaes: So that his Kingdom from South to North reaches about 300 Leagues; and from East to West about 200. The Country of Great Tartary is on the North, the Gulf of Bengal on the West, and the States of the King of Siam on the South, and China on the East. The Air s very temperate, the Soil produces plenty of Wheat, Grapes, Millet and Fruits, as also divers kind of W ld and Tame Beasts, as Elephants, Camels, Horses, Sheep, Civet-cats, Sables, and Ermins. It hath also Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead and Cop∣per, a great quantity of Rubies, the best of all the East, Saphires, Emeralds, Turquies, and other Precious Stones. They have also Musk, Bezoar, Benjamin, Lacca of the Aigle, Wood Calemba, and Aloes-Trees, and Canes as big as great Trees. The Chief Rivers that Water this Country are Six, of which four rise out of the Lake Chiamay in Great Tibet, and run cross the Country from North to South. The first and most Eastern is Menan, which empties it self into the Gulf of Siam near the City Bankok. The 2. Pegu, or Caypumo, which runs into the Ocean near the City Amburo. 3. Cosmin, which runs through the Borders of the Kingdoms of Tipra, Aracan, and Bengal, and falls into the Sea of Bengal. 4. Caor, which runs into the same Gulf through one of the Branches of Ganges. 'Tis true, this last is not in the Kingdom of Ava. 5. Cabares is a Branch of the Ri∣ver Pegu, which runs between the said River and Cos∣min. It is a great River, and falls into the Gulf of Bengal, a little below the City Aracan. 6. There is an∣other River on the East of the River Menan, which crosses the Countries of this King from North to South, and runs into the Sea below Camboya. The City of Ava is the Chief City of all the States of this Monarch: It is his Seat: It stands upon the River of the same Name, which runs into the River Pegu. The Inhabitants are for the most part Idolaters, and worship the Sun. There are but few Christians or Jews. The City of Pegu, Pegicum, or Triglinton, stands up∣on the River of the same Name, and is the Head-city of the Kingdom of Pegu, it is divided into two parts: 1. The Old. 2. The New. The King and his Court dwell in the New, and the Merchants and Traders in the Old. The most part of the Houses are built of Canes. Their Store-houses are Vaults to keep their Goods from Fires. The New City hath Bastions and Ditches full of Water, wherein they nourish Croco∣diles to hinder Men from passing them to surprize the City. They bring their Elephants to drink at them, because they are not afraid of them. Casubi is a Kingdom which takes its Name from the Chief City, which is large fine, and full of Trade. Transiana is subject to the Kingdom of Pegu: It is a Country very temperate, but excessive hot in Summer. It hath one considerable Mine of Diamonds, as also Gold and Silver, abundance of Corn, Fruit, and seve∣ral sorts of Palm-Wine. The Inhabitants are white. In times of War the King hath 1000 Elephants, 50000 Horse, and a vast Number of Foot. He goes to Hunt∣ing with Lions and white Wolves, which are made tame, and fit to catch their Fellows. In the Country of Brama there are many Quarries of Stone, Benjamin and Lacca. The Kingdom and the Head-city bear the same Name. The Kingdom of Aracan, and the chief City of it, which bears the same Name, is situate on the South of Java. The City stands upon the Bank of the River Chabeus, about 15 Leagues distant from the Sea, with a very strong Castle. This Prince is very potent in Men, Horse, Elephants and Money. The Coast and Kingdom of Martaban is so plenti∣ful a Country, that they ordinarily have three Harvests, and send every year 15 or 16 Ships to Cochin laden with Rice, and as much to Malaca. Martaban is the chief Port of this Kingdom. The City is very fine and well Peopled. In this Kingdom are plenty of Mines of Gold, Silver, Lead, Steel, Copper and Rubies. Here is the finest Lacca in the World, and whole Mountains of Fire-stone. The Southern part of the Peninsula of India beyond Ganges. THE States of the King of Siam take up almost all that part; they are Bounded on the North with the Kingdoms of Pegu, and Cochin-China; on the West, South and East with the Indian Ocean. The Ex∣tent of it from South to North is 340 Leagues, and from West to East about 180 in the widest place. The Air is very temperate, altho all this Country be in the Torrid Zone, which arises, as some think, from the narrowness of the Country, being refreshed by the Winds and Dews, which make the Ground fat, and plentiful in Rice, Barley, and other Grains and Fruits. They have much Pepper, Aloes, Benjamin and Musk, also Mines of Gold, Silver, Tin, Copper, and other Metals, as also a great Number of Horses, and Ele∣phants. In the Coasts of Cochin-China there are great Forests, which are an Harbour for Tigers, Lions, and other Wild Beasts.
The People of Siam believe a Metempsycosis, and Worship the four Elements. The City of Malaca is the only place free from Tri∣bute: It stands on the narrow passage of the Sea of the same Name, over against the Isle Sumatra. It is well Peopled, and hath a good Trade, altho the Air of it be unwholsome. The Dutch in 1641, took it away from the Portuguese, who had been Masters of it 130 years. The City of Odia is the Metropolis of this King∣dom: It is Fortified with Walls made of Brick and Morter, and hath 600000 People, without Reckoning the Suburbs. This City stands upon the Banks of the River Menan, which makes it an Isle. It hath many fine Streets, and Channels made very exactly. For the River passes through the City in several places, so that there is scarce an House but may take Water in a Boat at their own Door. There are in it near 300 fine Mosques. every one having a Bell, and a Steeple Gilt over, and a great number of Pagods, with Idols of all sorts of Me∣tal. The King's Palace is a Castle almost impregnable. This City stands upon the Water like Venice, insomuch that they say there are 200000 Boats, and 30000 Moors Houses. It can send out 50000 fighting Men in time of War. This King is so powerful, that he doth often send out into the Field 250000 Foot, and 20000 Horse; and yet for all this great strength he is subject to the King of China, to whom he sends every year an Embassage to pay him a kind of Homage. Juncalaon, or Jangoma, abounds with Gold, Silver, Copper, Musk, Cotten, Pepper, and every thing ne∣cessary for Man's Life. The Country of Paana is plentiful in all things: They have New Fruits every Month, their Ducks and Geese lay Eggs twice a day, their Woods are full of Wild Beasts and Birds, and their Seas have abundance of Fish, which differ from ours in shape and taste. Malaca is the chief City of the Kingdom of the same Name: It stands upon a River that ebbs and flows as the other Rivers do, which are near the Sea; it hath a very spacious Bridge. In 1640, or 41, the Dutch took it from the Portuguese, by which the Catholick Reli∣gion was banished out of it. The Air is very unwhol∣some. This City is famous for Trade, the greatest Mart of all the East; and the Dutch know very well how to advance and improve it. Ihor, or Johor is the farthest Country of this Penin∣sula, called Laurea Chersonesus by the Ancients. The chief City which hath the same Name, stands upon the River Ihor, which divides it into two parts; the Hou∣ses in it are built upon Piles, which raise them nine or ten Foot above Ground, because the City stands so low, that the High-tide flows it twice a day. It may be easi∣ly made a very strong place, by means of the River. The whole Country belongs to the King, who gives any leave to manage and till it, who desire it of him. The Soil brings forth plentifully Lemmons, Banana's, Potato's, Anana's, and Citrons as big as a Man's Head, and other Excellent Fruits. When the Portuguese took Ihor, it had 1500 Brass Cannon. Camboya, Cambodia is a Kingdom in the most Sou∣thern parts of this Peninsula, between the Gulf of Siam and Cochin-China. It is a very Fruitful Country. The Inhabitants are very simple. They have no dealings with the Mahometans, which makes them not very backward to receive Christianity, so that many of them are become Catholicks. The chief City of it is Camboya, or Rebecca, standing upon the more Eastern Branch of Mecon, near the mouth of it, upon a kind of Lake. This great River divides the City in two parts. Chiampa, or Tsiompa, is a Kingdom situated between Cochin-China, the Kingdom of Camboya and the Indian Sea. This Country produces all sorts of Food, and also the true Calamba, a sweet Wood of as great worth as the Lignum Aloes, which is prized at its weight in Silver. The Eastern Part of the Peninsula be∣yond Ganges. COchin-China is a Kingdom adjoyning to the Gulf of the same Name. The Inhabitants call it Cachu, or Kachokiu, i. e. the Western China. It hath five or six Provinces, every one of which hath its Governour, a particular administration of Justice, and about fifty Sea-Ports. Caccia is the chief City. The King's Residence is there, and his Court is very Magnificent. The chief Trade they have is for Gold, Silver, Calambe, Por∣cellane-Earth, Wood of the Aigle, Silk, Cotten, and Rice. The Romish Priests have had good success in con∣verting them, notwithstanding the Persecution which the latter Kings have inflicted upon the Christians. They employ a great number of Ships. During the Months of September, October, and November, all the Kingdom is overflowed every 15 days, and that for three days to∣gether, by which the Air is cooled, and the Ground enriched so that it brings forth abundance of Rice, the common food of the Country. The People of Cochin-China are much given to the Sciences, and Arms. The King hath above 200 Ships at all times Equipped. Tunquin, which is on the North of Cochin-China, hath a King of its own, as well as Cochin-China, Cambodia, and Tsiompa. It is near the Borders of China, and of the Peninsula, inhabited by a certain People called Maug, Tomocoves and Otteyes. The Country of Tunquin i very wet, because it lyes among several Rivers, which make the Air very foggy and unhealthy. It hath above 20000 Towns or Villages, besides small Hamlets, and six Pro∣vinces, wherein there are about 200000 Christians. It is a very strong Kingdom for the number of Inhabitants, Riches, Trade, and Fruitfulness of the Soil, abundance of all things necessary for humane Life, the Magnificence of the King's Court, and great Armies, which the King maintains both by Land and Sea. They have such great numbers of Pools, and Fish-Ponds, that every House hath one or more belonging to it. It hath 35 Rivers, which have all their several Channels. Their Forests are furnished with several sorts of odoriferous and lasting Trees, that will not rot, as Ebony, Cinnamon, Calamba, and Calambuco, which are there common, and stored with great num∣bers of Tigers, Wild Boars, Elephants, Rhinoceros's, Bears, Wolves, Deer, and Goats. They have also several sorts of excellent Fruits, as Citrons, Oranges, and Apples; great quantities of Cotten, Silk, Flax, Rice; nor do they want Mines of Gold and Silver in several places. The Men and Women have a Custom to black their Teeth. The King hath always 300000 well disciplin'd Soldiers, which are ready to march whi∣ther he pleases upon his first Order, except 50 or 60000 of them, which are always kept about his Person to guard him, and ordinarily wait about his Palace. The Kingdom of Lao extends it self from the 14th Degree to the 22th Degree, 30 min. of Latitude; but is not of so large an Extent from West to East. It is a Country very fruitful, compact and delicious: It hath the Best Rice and whitest Salt in all the East, and that in greatest abundance, which is made after a miraculous manner After the gathering of the Rice, there ariseth a South Wind, which lasts till their Rains are over, which produceth a kind of Foam, with which a great part of the Country is covered; the Sun hardens it, and turns it into Salt, in such great quantities, that it sup∣plies
not only the Kingdom, but the neighbouring Coun∣tries. Their Benjamin, Honey, Wax, and Cotten, are excellent good. They have several Mines of Iron, Lead and Tin. They labour continually, and gather Gold and Silver enough out of their Rivers by certain Iron Nets. They trade much in Musk and Red Am∣ber. Oxen and Buffles are very common there; and their Rivers supply them with several sorts of Fish. Their chief City called Langione, stands in the middle of the Kingdom, upon the Banks of the River Lao. The King's Palace is in it. It is of a prodigious big∣ness. Of the first Voyages from EUROPE to the EAST-INDIES. THE Coasts of the East-Indies were first discover'd by Vasco de Gama, whom Emanuel King of Por∣tugal sent for that purpose, and whose Father Stephen had been before nominated by King John for the like Employment. This valiant and prudent Commander set Sail from Lisbon, on the 9th Day of July, A. D. 1497. with Four great Ships (one whereof only carried Provisions) and 160 Men; doubled the Cape of Good Hope about the latter end of November following; pass'd beyond the Equinoctial Line, and came to an Anchor at the distance of two Miles from Calcut, on the 20th of May, 1498. where he spent some time in treating with the King of that Country, cruised about the ad∣jacent Coasts, and at last return'd to the Port of Lisbon, having finished his Voyage in somewhat more than two years time, to the great Advantage of the Portuguese Nation, who have been very powerful ever since in those parts. In the next Year another Fleet was set out by King Emanuel's special Command, consisting of 13 Ships, and 1500 Soldiers, besides Mariners, under the Con∣duct of Pedro Alvarez de Cabrale, not so much to make a Discovery, as to establish a Trade in the Indies; where being arriv'd, he batter'd the Town of Calecut with his Cannon, to revenge an Outrage committed there on some of his Men by the Saracens and Arabians, but enter'd into an amicable Treaty with the Kings of Cochin, Coulam and Cananor, and came back to Lisbon on the 2d of August, 1501. In the mean while John de Novo being sent with a small Fleet of Four Ships to recruit the said Alvarez, was attack'd by a Navy of above 80 Men of War, belonging to the Zamorin or Emperour of Calicut; but he vigorously repuls'd them, sunk five of the larger Vessels, as also nine of the les∣ser, and kill'd above 400 Men. Whereupon he con∣tinued his Course to Cochin, left a Factory at Conanor, and return'd to Portugal on the 11th of September, Anno 1502. About that time the King of Portugal assum'd the glorious Title of Lord of the Navigation, Conquest and Commerce of Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India: And Vasco de Gama was deputed to undertake a Second Expedition into the Indies in quality of Admiral, with a greater Fleet then had ever as yet been equipp'd on the like occasions; insomuch that he made the King of Quiloa Tributary to the King of Portugal, took a huge Ship of the Saracens richly laden, and bound for Mecca; and continuing his Course to Conanor and Cochin, re∣new'd the League with the Princes of those Territories. Thus having dispatch'd his Affairs, he sail'd from thence, but was met with in the way by 20 stout Ships from Ca∣lecut; nevertheless he order'd two of his Vessels, that were not so much laden as the rest, to engage the fore∣most of the Enemy, and struck such a Terror into their whole Navy, that many leap'd over-board, and above 300 were destroy'd in the Water before they could reach their Boats. At the same time Gama took two of their Ships with a considerable Booty, and leaving Vincent Sodra on those Coasts, with Six Ships under his Com∣mand, to hinder the Intercourse of the Arabians and Saracens, return'd to Portugal. Thus the Portugueses got footing by degrees in the Indies, and still retain in their possession divers rich Cities and Places of conside∣rable Importance; particularly on the Western Coasts, Damaon, the Forts of St. John, Kielme, Matri; Taram∣por and Bandera, sometimes called Manora, besides Dio, Basaim, Tana Asterim, Chaul, Morra, Caranga and Messagan, together with the Islands of Coran and Di∣var, Ougueli upon the River Ganges, and Larantoca in the Isle of Solor. But Goa is the Metropolis of their Em∣pire, and the Seat of the Governour of these Plantati∣ons, styl'd a Vice-Roy, the first of whom was Francis de Almeida, advanc'd to that Dignity A. D. 1505. The Portugueses in like manner maintain a Traffick at Agra Amanadabar, Cambaya, Baroche Bengala, Galconda, Surat, Aracam Pegu, Tanacerim, Ligor Odia, and other places in Siam, Camboya, and the Island Timor. How∣ever, the Gain of what is now exported by them has very much declin'd of late Years, by reason that the English and Hollanders furnish most parts of Europe with those Commodities that were wont to make their richest Return; as, Indian Cloaths, Calicoes, divers sorts of Drugs, &c. Nay, their Trade has been so far impaired, that whereas their Fleets have formerly brought in Merchandizes to the value of 200000 Pie∣ces of Gold, the whole Cargo of them scarce amount∣ed to 3000 Crusadoes in the Year 1646. and probably has been much more diminish'd since that time. The first Discovery of the East-Indies by the Portu∣gueses, happen'd in the time of Henry VII. King of England, &c. yet none of our Neighbours made any Voyage thither, until that of Queen Elizabeth, who having prosperously settled Affairs at home, had leisure to promote Trade abroad, and to defend her Kingdom against Foreign Enemies, more especially the Spaniards, with whom she was often at variance; on which ac∣count she readily granted Commissions to single Ships, or to two or three under one Commander in chief, o infest the Spaniards on the Indian Coasts, and to make Free Prize of as many of their Vessels as fell into their Hands. Among these brave Adventurers were Sir Fran∣cis Drake and Thomas Candish Esq both famous for en∣compassing the whole Globe of the Earth. After∣ward, in the Year 1600. the East-India Company was erected, and endowed with many Priviledges; inso∣much that a Fond was soon rais'd, and their first Fleet fitted out, the Command whereof was given, together with a Commission of Martial Law, to Sir James Lan∣caster, who arriv'd at Sumatra on the 5th Day of June, A. D. 1602. and obtain'd Leave of the Prince of the Country to Trade with the Natives. Then having got a sufficient Cargo for two of his Ships, he sent them back to England, but set Sail with the other two re∣maining for Bantam, and settled a Factory there. In the year 1608. a Factory was likewise establish'd at Surat, within the Dominions of the Great Mogul, and divers Priviledges were granted thereto upon the Ne∣gotiation of Captain Hawkins, who resided many Years in that Court, as Ambassador from the King of Great Britain. Thus in process of Time the English Mer∣chants promoted Traffick throughout most part of the Indies, and have obtain'd an absolute Soveraignty at Madraspatam, a place situated on the Sea-Coasts, not above a Mile and an half from Meliapur or St. Thomas; so that this Town has in a manner lost it's own Name, for that of the Castle, commonly call'd St. George's Fort, which is indeed the strongest Hold we have in the Indies, and wherein constantly resides a Gover∣nour,
authoriz'd by the King's Commission; as also a General Factory for all the Affairs of the East-India Com∣pany beyond Cape Comori, on the Continent of Golcon∣da, Bengala, and Pegu. A great number of the Inhabi∣tants are Portugueses, who abandon'd St. Thomas, and have a Church here, enjoying the free Exercise of their Reli∣gion. The Island Bombaya has been in like manner possess'd by the English ever since the Year 1662. or 1663. when the Portugueses put it into their Hands, conformably to the Articles of Marriage between King Charles II. and Donna Catherina Infanta of Portugal, the present Queen Dowager of England. Indeed it has the Advantage of the best River and Haven in all the Indian Coasts, as being capable of holding Ships of the lar∣gest Bulk, altogether free from those Shelves and Beds of Sand which obstruct the others; save that toward the North a Bank extends it self about half a League in length, which may be easily shun'd by Sailers. The River at it's Entrance is two Leagues Broad, after∣ward growing somewhat straighter, but not much, du∣ring its whole Course through the Island. The Town, while it remain'd in the possession of the Portugueses, was very small, and the Houses scatter'd here and there, scarce contain'd above Eleven Families of that Nation, together with about 70 Negroes. But it is now well fortify'd, and adorn'd with a most magnificent Palace. It is certain that the English might easily have made themselves Masters of divers other Places, as the Por∣tugueses and Hollanders have done, but that they always chose rather to carry on a peaceable and quiet Com∣merce with the Inhabitants, than by violating the Laws of Nations, to enslave and rob them at the same time both of their Wealth and Liberty. On which account they have been every where kndly entertain'd, and preserv'd an unspotted Repation, having settled di∣vers considerable Factories on the Continent, viz. at Surat, Agra Amadabat, Cambaya Brodra, Baroche, Da∣bul Pettapoli Mtsulipaan, Balasor Ougueli, Dacca, Pat∣tana and Cassambazar; as also in Siam, Camboya and Tunquin; besides those in the Island Sumatra, Priaman, Achem, Tycho and Jamke; in Java, Bantam, Celebes, Macasser, the Isle of Formosa, Borneo, Succodana, Ban∣dermassin, &c. The States of Holland having been formerly very desirous to share with the other European Nations in the Advantages that arose from their Traffick to the Indies, as also more especially to annoy the Spaniards, at that time their Enemies, or at least to disturb their Trade in those Parts, at first endeavour'd to find out a new and nearer Passage thither by the North, along the Coasts of Norway, Lapland, Nova Zembla and Tartary; but their Attempts at several times proving unsuccessful, in the Year 1595. they fitted out Four Ships, under the Com∣mand of Cornelius Houtman, who having been before employ'd in the Service of the Portugueses, not only learnt the Method of Sailing to those Coasts, but was also well vers'd in the manner of Trafficking. Thus he set Sail the common way to the Cape of Good Hope, con∣tinuing his Course to Madagascar, Sancta Maria and Antongil, and came to Sumatra on the 12th of June, 1596. Afterward he pass'd to Bantam and Tuba in Ja∣va Major; as also to the Islands of Madura and Bally; and loosing from thence, after a tedious and difficult Voyage, arriv'd in Holland in the Month of August, 1597. without making a Return of Profit answerable to the Expectation of the Merchants. However, they were not at all discourag'd from the like Adventures, but rather animated thereto by a Prospect of Gain; in∣somuch that the next Year, 1598. no less than 80 Ships Sail'd out of the Ports of Holland and Zealand, either for the East or West Indies, of which Five were sent out by the Authority of the States General, under the Con∣duct of Balthasar Musseron. Divers considerable Voy∣ages were likewise made by Oliver Nordt, George Spit∣berg, and James Van Neck, besides other of lesser note, undertaken at the Expences of Private Persons, or petty Companies of Merchants of Amsterdam, Roter∣dam, Zealand, Brabant, &c. until the States thought fit to unite all the Adventurers into one Society, to Trade upon a common Stock; freely permitting any Persons to come in at first, but prohibiting all others to Traffick, or repair to any Harbour from the Cape of Good-Hope to the Coast of China for 21 Years, to com∣mence from the 20th of March, 1602. Whereupon, within a little while was rais'd a Fond of 700000 Pounds Sterling, which in Six Years time was aug∣mented to near five times as much, i. e. 3500000, be∣sides a yearly Dividend of 30 or 40, and seldm so low as 20 per Cent. Thus the Hollanders, having in pro∣cess of time settled themselves in the most remarkable Places of the East Indies, and engross'd almost the whole Spice-Trade, began to found a Commonwealth in those parts, govern'd by a Stadt-Holder, as potent as the other in the Netherlands; although his Office, which was formerly for Life, now continues only during three Years,; nevertheless in State and Grandeur he ex∣ceeds not only the Stadt-Holder of the Ʋnited Provinces, but even most Princes in Europe. Indeed, the Strength and Greatness of the Hollanders are at present come to so high a pitch, as to dare to contend with the most pow∣erful Monarchs of the Levant, being able to put to Sea a Fleet of 40 or 50 Men of War, and at the same time to maintain an Army of 30000 Men on Land. For in the Province of Malabar they possess Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochin, Coulam: In that about Coromandel, Tuticorin, Negapatam, Karkalle and Paleacate, which they commonly call Gueldria. In the Peninsula, Malacca. In the Island of Ceylon, Ne∣gumbo, Columbo, Galla, Baticala Trinquilimala, and Jaffiapatam. A Fortress in the Isle of Manar. In Java, Batavia, anciently known by the Name of Jac∣caea. In Borneo, Celebes, and divers other places, be∣sides the entire Islands of Bima, Amboyna and Banda, several Forts of the Molucca's, &c. They likewise keep Factories in almost all the Trading Towns throughout the whole Continent of India, endeavouring, if it were possible to get into their Hands the Monopoly of all manner of Commodities, even sometimes without ha∣ving respect to the known Laws of Nature and Nati∣ons, or the common Principles of Justice. The Danes and French, in emulation to other Euro∣pean Kingdoms, have likewise sought for a Share in the Traffick in the East Indies. The former indeed have establish'd a considerable Trade in the Bay of Bengala, and on the Coasts of Pegu; as also in some little Islands toward the South, being Masters only of two Places whereto they repair, both lying on the Coast of Coro∣mandel, viz. Krankebar and Dansburgh. The French in the Year 1664. erected a Company for the Commerce of the East Indies, which having sixt their chief Resi∣dence and Factory in the Isle of Madagascar, on the Coast of Africa, should from thence traffick into Persia, India, China, Japan, &c. But they have not been as yet able to carry on their Design with Success, accord∣ing to their Expectations, although they still continue earnestly to prosecute it, and have lately got some Inte∣rest in the Court of the King of Siam.
CHAP. X. The ISLANDS belonging to Asia. THE Islands belonging to Asia are either in the Ocean, or Mediterranean Sea, or in the Grae∣cian Archipelago. Some of them are subject to the several Kingdoms upon the Continent, others have Kings of their own; as you will find them distin∣guished in the following Heads. JAPON. Japonia. THE Isles of Japon lye on the East of China, on the South of the Tartars of Yupi, between the 30 and 40 D. of Latitude, and the 174 and 188 of Longitude; they are surrounded with the Eastern Ocean, and Sea of Japon. The Air is very temperate and sound. The Soil, as well as the Mountains, yields plenty of Rice, Millet, Barley, Wheat, and several sorts of Fruit; but they have but little Wine. Gold is so very plentiful, that one would think all their Land al∣most, is made of Gold. The Pearls, which are caught here are very big and red, and very different from others. They have many Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Steel, Lead, and several Mineral Waters; Horses, Elephants, Camels, and other Beasts, are common among them; but they have few horned Beasts. These Islands are divided by Rivers and Channels, they have several Gulphs, some Lakes, and good Havens, which promote the great Trade, which is made hither. The People of Japon take their original from China; they are so distrustful and fearful, that they will not go aboard any strange Ship, except the Hollanders, which they venture into to promote their Trade. When any Holland Vessel goes into any of their Ports, the Commissioners first come to them, and ask all those they meet in the Ship, severally, what News they have in their Country. Lyars are punished most severely. Then they take out all their Merchandizes, and Guns, and Ammuni∣tion; and having enquired the price of the Goods imported, at their leisure, they lade the Vessel with Gold, or Silver, as they please, of as great a value, without giving the Merchants leave to chuse what Metal they desire; and they must be gone upon order, without asking the reason of their departure. Tis true, they are very true and just in their Dealings and Commerce, and never cheat, or deceive; but yet the Nation is proud, ambitious, cruel, and disdainful to Strangers. The People of Japon are governed by several Princes, or Petty-Lords, or Tunes, whose Domi∣nion usually extends no farther than one City, and who acknowledge the Emperor of Japon for their Soveraign. Their Government is very arbitrary and rigorous: There is no Prince, or Lord, but hath a power of Life and Death over all his Subjects. These Islanders have been always Idolaters, and have among them a great number of Men and Women consecrated to the Service of their Idols, who profess, in a manner, a Monk's Life, whom thy ll Bonzes. In 1542 the Portugueze disco∣vered these Islands; and Xaverius, the Jesuit, went thither in 1549. where he preached the Gospel, and converted many Souls; but the state of affairs is much altered since that time, and no man dare profess Christianity but in private. Japon is an heap of Islands, of which these are the most remarkable; 1. Japon, properly so called, or Niphon, which is much bigger than the two fol∣lowing. It is 200 leagues from West to East, and 90 from South to North in the widest places, and 440 in compass. 2. Ximo, called also Bungo and Saycock, which is about 80 leagues from South-West to North-West; and 20 from West by South to East by North. 3. Xicocu, or Tokaesi, and Tonsa, which is situate between Niphon and Ximo, and is about 48 leagues from West to East, and 20 from South to North. The other Islands which lye there∣abouts are not considerable. As to the Isle of Ni∣phon 'tis ordinrily divided nto 5 Regions, which are; 1. Jamaisoit, or Jayisero. 2. Jsengo. 3. Jetsegen. 4. Guanto. 5. Cio; of which the chief Cities are in the Table. The Isles of Japon have 4 parts. 1. Niphon, in 5 Pro∣vinces, 1. Jamaisoit, or Jamaistero, Nungato. 2. Jetsengo, Miaco, or Meaco. 3. Jetsegen, Finda. 4. Guanto. Micava. 5. Chio, Yendo, or Jedo. 2. Ximo, or Bungo, Bungo, Vasumi. Fingen, or Fisen. Naugasaki, Arima. Cicugo, Satcuma. Cangoxuma. 3. Xicoco, or Tansa, Xicoco, Ava. Tonsa, or Tosa. Samuchi, Hyo. 4. The Isles be∣longing to Japon 1. About Niphon, Tondoxi∣ma, Sando, or Sado, Oqui. North∣ward, Maycuxi∣ma. Toy, Yxo∣noxima. Princes Isle, Eastward. 2. About Ximo, Tanegaxima, ogo. Queso Pequin, &c. 3. Isles at some distance, Hermanos, Mal, Abrigo. Amsterdam, Rays, Ma∣gos, &c. The City of Meaco stands about the middle of the Island of Niphon, towards the South. The Dairo, who is the nigh-Priest of Japon, hath his residence here. The new Emperor's Palace is at Jedo, for which reason it is, that that City is ac∣counted the chief City of Japon: It stands by the Sea, on the South side of Japon, and upon the bank of the River Tonkavu, or Touchon, near a large Gulf, but not very deep, because of the several shelves of Sand in it: Insomuch that only small Barks can sail in it. It yields plenty of Soles, Smelts,
Eels, and Oysters. Their Houses, which are co∣vered with Slate, are lined with Boards to make them less moist. The Palaces of the Emperor and his great Lords, are very numerous and state∣ly. They are covered with Plates of Gold. The City of Meaco, or as the people of Japon call it, Camicoma, contains in it above 100000 Houses, the greatest part of which are built of Wood, that they may be less shaken by the Earthquakes, whlch are common there. This City is sheltered on the West side with the Mountains of Dubojamma, and divided into two unequal parts by a small River, the one is high, the other low; in the former is built the stately Palace of the Dairo, with many other lofty Houses. The Tradesmens Houses are but one story high. Japon is the richest Country in the world for Gold. They gather their Rice in September, and their Corn in May. Their Waters are wonderful good. Cedars are common, and of that height and thickness, that they make Masts for their biggest Ships of them, and Pillars for their Temples. The Arms of Japon are an Har∣quebuss, Cimiter, a Bow, Arrows, and Speer, a∣dorned with Gold, or Silver; and a Pike more slender and longer than ours. They live very long. The Isles of Thieves, or The Isles of VELAS. THE Isles of the Thieves. which the Spaniards call the Isles of Velas, are situate at the farthest Eastern point of the Old Continent, between the 7 and 21 D. of Northern Latitude, and between the 184 and 188 D. of Longitude. They reach from South to North, and make an Archipelagus, called that of S. Lazarus, which separates the Eastern Ocean from the South, or Pacifick Sea. The Spaniards, which inhabit the Philippine Islands, have called them lately the Islands of Mary and Ann, in honor to their Queen. The famous Ma∣gellanus discovered them in 1519, or 1520, and gave them the Name of the Isles of Thieves, to shew the inclination of those Islanders. Some Travel∣lers count 50, others not above 15, or 20 of them, who say, that they are barren, and the Inhabitants of them poor. The PHILIPPINE Islands. THese Islands called Philippinae, take their Name from Philip II. King of Spain, in whose time they began to be inhabited; altho they were dis∣covered in 1520, or 1521, by Magellan, a Gen∣tleman of Portugal. The Indians call them the Isles of Lusson, from the biggest of them; and the Portugueze call them the Manilles, from the chief City of the Isle of Lusson The lye between China on the North, the Penin∣sula of India beyond Ganges on the West, the Isles of Sindae and Molucco's on the South. They ex∣tend from the 4 to the 20 D. of Northern Latitude, and lye between the 151 D. and 168 of Longitude. They are so many, that they can't be counted; some Travellers say there are 1100 of them. The Air is not extraordinarily hot, altho their situation be in the Torrid Zone, which proceeds from the length of their Nights, and certain Winds which blow every Day. The Soil is very fruitful in all things, chiefly in Rice, Wheat, Barley, Millet, excellent Grape, and Palm Wine. They have plenty of Cinnamon, Pepper, Ginger, Saf∣fron, Sugar, Honey, Wax; and several sorts of Fruit. They want not Min of Gold and Iron. They fish for Pearls upon the Coasts; and feed all sorts of Beasts and Fowls; and their Woods pro∣duce Venison, and several sorts of Wild Beasts. They have Crocodiles, and Tortoises, the best in all the East for Beauty of their Shells; and diverse sorts of Fish along the Co, so that they have plnty of Provisions in their Market. The People of these Islands are less savage, and more tractable, than those of Japon. They trade with the Merchants of Europe and China without any shew of that ridiculous distrust, which is so inconvenient to Strangers: It is true, they have an Aversion for the Spaniards, upon the account of the Ill Usage they have had from them. They are valiant, and have beaten the Moors out of their Country. As to their Religion, they are almost all Catholicks, in all the places that belong to the King of Spain; and in other places, where the Natives are not converted, they are Pagans, and worship Idols. They are white and good natured. These Islands are the only places in the possession of the Castilians in Asia. The Portugueze have often claim'd them to be theis; but the greatest put of these Isles belong  the King of Spain. His Ca∣tholick Majesty kep a Vice-Roy in the Isle of Lusson, ever since 154, en Lopes Legaspi, a Spanish Captain, conquered them in his Name, and took them from the Chineses. There are about 40 of them under the Dominin of the Spaniard; the chief of which are, Lusson, Mindora, Tndaye, Chehu, &c. Mindanao, Paragoya, and several o∣thers are possessed by Kings, or Princes of their own, which pay Tribute to other Kings more potent than themselves. The Isle of Lusson, Luconia, lyes between the 13 D. 40 m. and 19 D. 30 m. Latitude, and between the 156 D. 30 m. and 162 Longitude. The whole extent of it from South to North-West is 130 leagues, and from West to East about 67; and about 60 leagues distant from China. In this Isle, and most of the rest, there are Bears, Tygers, Li∣ons, and other wild and savage Beasts; particu∣larly here are some of the Beasts from which Musk is taken, called by the Inhabitants Agalias; as also plenty of Civet-cats and Crocodes. In this Country are also many Birds of Prey, viz. Eagles, Falkons, Tasiels, and Parrots. Manilla is the Head City of this Isle, and stands upon the declining shore of the Gulf, upon a little Neck of Land, it is washed by the Sea on the one side, and on the other sid with a River, over which they pass by a Wooden Bridge into it, and which carries Vessels of a considerable Bulk. This City is not very big, but very convenient, and well built. The Houses are made of Stone. It is the Seat of an Archbishop, whose Revenue is 3000 Ducats, or a 1000 l. a year; and of the Gover∣nor, or Vice-roy. He is, as it were, Lord Chief Justice, and Lord General. The Arms of the In∣habitants are a Launce, Arrows, a Compilan, or Cimiter, a Cris, or Dagger, Zompites, or Shoot∣ing-Trunks, with which they shoot small poisoned Arrows, and their Fire-Arms, which they use ve∣ry dexterously. The Isle of Mindano, Mindanoa, and in their own Language Mignidano is situate between the
5 and 9 D. of Northern Latitude, and between the 159 and 166 D. of Longitude. The extent of it from West to East is about 150 leagues, and from South to North 65. It is well peopled, be∣cause it is furnished with great abundance of all things, and a place of great Trade. The Inhabi∣tants love War and Hunting, for which they have plenty of Deer, Swine, Buffles, and other Wild Beasts. The chief City of this Isle bears the same Name, Mindano, or Tabouc, where is the King's Palace. The Isle of Paragoya, Paragoa, or Puloan, or Calamianes, is about 80 leagues from South-West to North-East, and 20 from South-East to North-West, and about 200 in compass; it lyes between the 8 D. 30 m. and 11 D. of Northern Latitude, and between the 151 and 155 D. 30 m. of Longi∣tude. This Isle lyes most Western of all the Phi∣lippines, and is not so well peopled, or fruitful as the rest. It is about 15 leagues from Borneo, which lyes on the South of it. Tandaya, or Tandaia, or Philippina propria, is about 10 or 12 leagues from Lusson towards the South-East, between the 163 and 165 D. of Lon∣gitude, and between the 11 D. 30 m. and 13 D. 40 m. The extent of it from South-East to North-West is 50 leagues, and from South to North 40. Magellan first landed upon this Isle. It is accounted the most fertile of them. The Isle Mindora lyes on the South of Lusson, under the 158 D. of Longitude, and 13 of Lati∣tude. It is in length from South-East to North-West 50 leagues, and in breadth about 30 from South to North. It takes its Name from the chief City Mindora, which hath a good Port; 'tis sub∣ject to the Spaniards. The Isle of Zebu, Cebus, or Zebus; or as the Spaniard call it, the Isle of Pintados, because the Inhabitants painted their faces with diverse colours, when they were discovered. The Spaniards have built on the East side of it, the City of Jesus, which hath a convenient Port. There are several other small and inconsiderable Islands, that lye about these. The MOLƲCCO's. THese Isles which the Spaniards call the Molucas, do very improperly bear that Name; for only the Isles of Teruate, Tedor, Motir, Machian, and Bachian, are named the Molucco's. But however that be, they are situated on the South of the Philippines, and East of Borneo. They are from the 3 D. of Northern Latitude, to the 10 of Southern; and from the 152 D. to the 177 of Longitude, taking in the Land of Papos. The Air here is hotter than in the Philippines, and unwholsome for Strangers, by reason of the stinking Vapors, which rise out of diverse Chan∣nels. The Soil is very fruitful; they have no Grain almost but Rice, of which they make their Bread and Wine. The chief Harvest of these Isles are their Spices, viz. Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Mace, Lign-Aloes, plenty of Banana's, Coco's, Citrons, and of certain other Trees, called by the Portugueze, Sagu; and by the People of the Mo∣lucco's, Ladanum; of which they make Bread. Clove-gilliflowers, which grow there in abundance, especially in the true Molucco's. In some of them there are Mines of Gold, plenty of Cotton, and Sandal-wood. The Isle of Ceiran is most fruitful, and produceth Wheat and Barley. The Land of Papos is not well known, it breeds Birds of Paradice, Pigeons of an unusual bigness, and plenty of Poultry are common in several of these Islands. The greatest part of these Inhabitants are bar∣barous and inhumane, chiefly such as dwell in the Mid-land, who have no Commerce with the Eu∣ropeans. Those that dwell upon the Coasts are more civil. They are courageous, and very arti∣ficial in making their Boats. They use no Money, but deal all by Exchange. Their Arms are Buck∣lers, Swords, and Guns. These Islands were governed by several Princes of their own, before Magellanus discovered them for the Spaniards. The Portugueze cast them out in 1520, and had almost been ejected themselves by the Natives, by the assistance of the Hollanders, who helped these poor Barbarians to shake off the power of the Portugueze; for no other reason, but that they might make themselves Masters, more easily, of their Ports and Trade. There is yet a King in Ternate, who is very powerful, and rules over all the Islands between the Celebes, Gilolo, and the Land of Papos. The Coast of these three Isles pay him tribute, or are subject to him. The Dutch are so cunning in managing the other Kings, and have gotten Machian, Tidor, and some other of these Isles, which produces the greatest plenty of Gilliflowers, so much into their power, that they have all the Trade in them. Most of the Na∣tives of these Islands are Idolaters, or Mahometans; the rest are of the same Religion with the Portu∣gueze, or Dutch, which endeavors to get the Pre∣heminence. The Isle of Celebes is the biggest, and lyes most Westerly of the Molucco's, and is under the Aequa∣tor, which parts it almost in the middle, between the 156 D. and 168 D. of Longitude. The ex∣tent of it from South-West to North-East is about 200 leagues, and from West to East 68, in the longest and widest places of it. It had, not long since, 6 Kingdoms in it; but hath at present but two Principalities, of which the most flourishing, and chief, is that of the Celebes, the other is that of Macassar; the Soil of it is very fruitful, prin∣cipally in Rice. The Isle of Gilolo lyes also under the Aequator, as well as the former; between the 164 and 168 D. 20 m. Longitude; it is of a very irregular fi∣gure, but may be reckoned from South to North 80 leagues, and as much from West to East. It is very fruitful in Rice, and yields Tortoises of an extraordinary bigness. The Capital City is of the same Name. Ceiran, or Ceram, lyes South of Gilolo, in the same D. of Longitude, and 3 D. of Southern La∣titude. The extent of it from West to East is 90 leagues, and from South to North 20. It is very fruitful, as well as the Isle of Banda, which lyes on the South of it, and yields an abundance of Nutmegs. Timor is the most Southern of all these Islands, between the 158 D. and 163 D. of Longitude, and under the 10 D. of Southern Latitude. The extent of it from South-West to North-West is 90 leagues, and the breadth twenty. It hath plenty
of Pepper, Sandal-trees, and Mines of Gold. The Isles of Flores, Amboina, &e. have the same Qua∣lities. Some of them have Kings of their own; others are under the Government of the Portugueze or Dutch. The Isle of Flores produces Flowers of an admirable Smell and Beauty. Amboina stinks of the Dutch Cruelty to the English, in 1618. The Isle of Baly is the most Western of all these Isles, very near Java, in the 8 D. of Southern La∣titude, and under the 152 D. of Longitude. It is about 20 leagues from South to North, and 9 or 10 from West to East. The Inhabitants live chiefly upon Rice, Coco's, Fish and Fruits. They have Cotton, Oxen, Bustles, Goats, Hogs, Horses, but very small and weak. The King of this Isle is very rich. It is said, that these Islands yield an∣nually 6000 Barrs of Gilli-flowers, which is about 1650 Tun, every Barr weighing 550 l. The Isle of Tidor produces White Sandal, which is the best in all India. Of the Isles called SYNDAE, or Sunda. THE Streights of Sunda, or Sindae, which are near the Port of Bantam, give the name of Sunda, or Sindae, to the Isles of Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and the other adjacent Isles. They are the common passage of such Ships, as come from China, and the most Eastern Countries. They lye West of the Molucco's, and very near the Peninsula of India, beyond Ganges, between the 8 D. of Northern Latitude, and the 9 D. of Southern, and between the 130 and 154 of Lon∣gitude. The Air is very temperate, considering that it is situate in the middle of the Torrid Zone; yet it is not very healthful, for the People of Europe. The Earth is very fruitful in Metals and Spicery, but produceth nothing almost proper for the Food of Man. The Inhabitants have a black Complexion, and go naked, except their Privities. They are war∣like and courageous, especially the People of Su∣matra, who are so furious upon their Enemies, that they eat all they take. They are every one of them different in Manners and Customs. The People of these Islands are of the same Re∣ligion that their Kings are of, or those that go∣vern them. The Inhabitants of the middle parts of them are Idolaters; and by the Sea-coasts Ma∣hometans. There are Christians in those places, that are possessed by the Europeans. Upon which account it is, that some places are more civilized than others, according as they are more or less frequented by Strangers. These Islands are governed by divers Kings or Princes, or by Foreigners. The Dutch are Masters of several places upon the Coasts, and have almost all the Trade, except what the Portugueze have; who are the only Merchants that traffick there be∣sides them. The Isle of Borneo, Borneum, lyes under the Aequator, which parteth it unequally, between the 7 D. 20 m. of Northern Latitude, and 4 of Southern; and between the 145 D. and 154 of Longitude. The extent of it from South to North is about 225 leagues, and 190 from West to East: It is the largest Isle that belongs to Asia, it pro∣duceth plenty of Mirabolans, and the best Cam∣phire of India. It hath several good Harbours, but few Cities considerable. Their Mountains yield them Mines of Gold, Tin, and Iron; their Fo∣rests Honey, Cotton and Venison: They have also Bezoar. In the South and West are 4 principal Rivers, which are Borulo, Catia, Lave, and Sou∣cadane; in the two last of which are found very fine Diamonds. The Air, tho it be temperate, is unwholsome, upon the account of the noisome Vapours, which rise from the Marshes. The Government of this Isle is managed by se∣veral Kings, of whom the King of Borneo is the most potent: he is a Mahometan, tho the greatest part of his Subjects be Idolaters. The Dutch en∣joy several places, having driven out the Portu∣gueze. The head City of this Isle bears the same name, and stands upon the bank of a little Gulph toward the North-West: The Kings residence is ordinarily in it. The Merchandizes of it are Mer∣cury, Vermillion, Glass, Stuffs, Linnen-cloath, and Iron, which is much valued. They have an abundance of Wild-Hogs, Goats, Deer, Horses, Bears, Elephants; as also Cinnamon, Ginger, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Sugar, and Melons. Java, Jabadii insula, is parted from the Isle of Sumatra by the Streights of Sunda, or Syndae, which gives name to all the Islands thereabouts. It is about 15 leagues broad, and lyes between the 140 D. 40 min. and 151 D. of Longitude, and 6 and 9 of Southern Latitude. The Extent of it from West to East is about 210 leagues, and frm North to South 40. The Air is as temperate as at Sumatra, and less hurtful than at Borneo. The Country is very fruitful, especially in Pepper, Benjamin, Nutmegs, Sugar, and Rice, which the people of this Isle eat instead of Bread, and make Wine of it; it affords also some Mines of Gold and Brass, Calamba-wood; Reeds so big as to build with them; Salt near Jortan, and Oysters, of which they catch some that weigh 300 l. There is also a Sulphureous Mountain, which now and then burns out. Some years since it cast Stones into the City Panarucan, and darkened the Sky with its thick Smoke. In their Woods they gather Silk, which the Silk-worms there make of them∣selves. They find also Diamonds. The Inhabi∣tants, who derive their Original from China, are for the most part Mahometans, and the rest Ido∣laters. In the places inhabited by the People of Europe, they follow the Christian Religion. They are much addicted to Piracy; they eat ordinarily Weasels, Rats, Serpents, and other Insects; not∣withstanding which, they live to 140 years. This Isle is subject to several Princes, being divided into 9 Kingdoms, which they call Bantam, Jacatra, Japara, Tuban, Jortan, Pasarvan, Panarucan, Ba∣lambuan, and Materam; the chief Cities of which are of the same name. At present there are but two Kingdoms, Bantam, and Materam. The Dutch have made themselves Masters of the great∣est part of this Isle, thro the help of their Forts and Shipping. Altho the City of Materam, which lyes on the South side of the Isle, be the Head City of the most powerful Monarch of the Isle, yet tis cer∣tain, that Bantam is much more considerable for its Beauty, and the Conveniency of the Haven; which makes the Dutch and English to maintain a great Trade there.
Batavia, which the Dutch have built on the North side of the Isle, over against six small Islands, is well fortified: It is the Residence of the chief Consul, and General of the Dutch for the Indies, ever since the year 1619. They have built a Castle in the place where the City Jacatra stood hereto∣fore, and made of it the Cittadel of Batavia, which hath 4 Bastions. The English joyned with the Natives to drive them from this Port, but all their endeavours proved in vain. The City Jortan is still a good Port, and much frequented. The Isle of Sumatra is one of the most famous Islands of the East for its Greatness and Riches. It is 300 leagues in length from South-west to North-west, and 70 in breadth; distant about 10 leagues from the Continent; lying under the Aequator, which parts it into two equal parts almost, be∣tween the 6 D. of Northern, and 6 D. of Southern Latitude; it is parted from Malaca by a Streight of the same name. Altho it be under the Line, the Air is not very hot, because of the equality of the nights and days, and cold winds which blow upon it from all parts. It bears great quantities of long and common Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, White Saunders, Rice, of which the Natives make Bread; Sugar, and Benjamin, which they use up∣on all occasions. They have ll kinds of Beasts, an abundance of Citrons, Banana's, several Mines of Gold, Silver, Lead, Iron, and Brimstone, in the Mountains; of which they have one, that casts out Fire like Mount Aetna in Sicily. The Pepper of this Isle is excellent. Diamonds and other Precious Stones are found here, as also Gold in Grains, and small Crumbs. It affords the biggest and most furious Elephants of all the Indies, and Rhinoceros's; as also a considerable number of Cosna-trees. The Inhabitants about the Coasts are for the most part Mahometans, or Idolaters; but there are some Christians. They that dwell in the middle of the Isle and upon the Mountains are independant, and very barbarous, eating their Enemies raw, without any scruple. There are se∣veral Kingdoms in it, the chief are, Achem-Cam∣pea, Jambi, Menam-Cabo, Pcem, Palamban, and Pedir. The Kingdom of Achem is the biggest and most Northern of them. The Dutch have made themselves powerful, by means of 4, or 5 places which they have upon the Coasts: They are ma∣sters of the Mines, in which they labour night and day. The Coast adjoyning to Java pay tribute to the King of Bantam. Achem, the chief City of this Isle, stands in the most Northern point of it, in a large Plain, upon the bank of a River, which carries only small Vessels. The Houses are built upon Spiles, and covered with the leaves of Coco: It hath of each side it spacious Forests, which are full of Apes, Herons, and other Creatures. It hath a Castle well fortified and flanked, so that the Guns command all the Entrances into, and Streets of the City. The Isle of CEILON, Ceylanum, or Taprobana. THis Island, which hath the figure of a Pearl, or a Pear, is the Taprobane of the Antients; it lyes in the Sea of India, within Ganges, near the Cape of Comori, and upon the Streights of Manar, or Quiloa, between the 120 D. and the 122 D. 40 min. Longitude, and 5 D. and 9 D. 40 min. of Northern Latitude. The extent of it from South to North is 90 leagues, and from West to East 50. The Air is very temperate, altho it be in the Torrid Zone: It is a continual Spring there. This Isle is very fruitful in all things, and produces an abundance of Rice, Nutmegs, Cassia, of which they have whole Forests; and several other sorts of Spicery: Citrons, Oranges, Pepper, Ginger; very excellent Fruits; admirable Plants and Flow∣ers, which perfume all the Country with their Smell. It hath Mines of Gold and Silver, Honey, Wax, and Butter, are there common, which they extract from their Cassia, which is the best in the world. Their Oyl is of a fragrant Smell, and of great use among the Natives. They have 5 sorts of Palm-trees. They fish a great quantity of Pearls out of the Streights near Manar, and Ru∣bies, Saphires, and Toparez, out of one of their Rivers. They have a sort of Stones which they call Cats-eyes, of great esteem, and of which they make a great Traffick. They have the finest and most teachable Elephants of the Indies. The greatest part of the Inhabitants addict them∣selves to the Husbandry of Cassia. They are strait, and of a good stature; but black and ugly. They are of several Religions. The King, and one part of the People are Mahometans; several of them are Idolaters; and the Dutch use their own Reli∣gion in several Forts which they have built there. In this Isle there are 8 or 9 Kingdoms, of which the chief are Candea, or Candi, Jala, Batacala, Cayaravaca, Colombo, Taffanapatan, Chilao, Trin∣quilemalo, and G ao. The Dutch have possessed themselves of all the Sea Towns almost, having driven out the Portugueze: They will suffer no Ships to come thither, but their own, that they may have all the Trade of this Isle. The King of Ceylon resides at Candea, the chief City of his Kingdom, which stands about the middle of the Isle, upon the River Trinquemalo, it is very large and well built, the other Cities are set down in the following Table. Ceylon hath these chief Cities, Candea. Colombo. Trinquemalo. Chilao. Tanadare. Baticala. Taffanapatan. Jaba, Pontedigallo. Ceitavaca, Altenga, Manar, an Island. The MALDIVES. Maldivae Insulae. THese Islands, which are in number 12000, ac∣cording to the Relations of several Travellers, and Geographers, take their name from the chief City of them, Maldiva; which in the Arabian Tongue signifies an Island. Their situation is in the Torrid Zone on the West, and South of the Peninsula of India, within Ganges; lying in a strait line from South-East to North-west, be∣tween the 3 D. of Southern Latitude, and 7 D. 30 min. Northern; and between the 109 D. and 116 of Longitude; their extent from South to North being about 240 leagues, and from West to East 20. Altho these Islands are in the Torrid Zone, the Air is not very hot, because of the length of the Nights, and diverse Currents by which they are
divided. The Soil is very fruitful in several sorts of Fruits, as Citrons, Oranges, Pomgranates, Figs, and Banana's. Their most useful Fruit is the Co∣co, or Indian Nut, which grows here in greater abundance than any other part of the World. The Tree that bears this Fruit is a kind of Palm, very common in the Indies. The People of these Islands extract from it all things that are necessary for Life; they make of it Honey, Sugar, Milk, Beer, Wine and Bread. From these Isles are brought Corals, Ambegrease, Ink, and the finest Tortoise-shell of the Indies. There is such abundance of Roots, Beasts, Birds and Fishes, that Men may live there almost for nothing. The Tortoises are so big, that one Shell will hold 10 or 12 men sit∣ting down in it, and several of the small Islands are inhabited by none but these Creatures. There is a smaller sort of them, whose Shell is not above 3 or 4 foot diameter, and of a blackish and reddish colour; it is so very bright, and so well wrought, that it is sought for by all the great Princes of the Indies. It is found only in these and the Philippine Isles. To get the Tortoise out of the Shell they carry it to the fire, and after it is come cut, put it into the Sea again, where it will breed it self ano∣ther Shell. They eat here the best Fish in the world. The Isles which are not inhabited have no sweet Water; in the rest you can't dig 3 foot deep, but you'll find fresh Water, tho it be not above 4 foot from the Sea. Their Waters are very cold. These Islands have a King, whose best Revenue arise; from the Shipwrack of the Vessels lost there∣abouts, insomuch that the Pilots of the Maldives are not to be trusted to, for they will commonly strike the Vessels, that they are hired to guide, against the Rocks, on purpose to encrease the Revenue of their Prince. The Inhabitants are of small stature, of a yellow colour, and subject to sharp Diseases, especially Fevers, which are caused by the great heat. Most of our Geographers divide these Isles into 13 parts, or Cantons, which they call Atollons. They are parted from each other by Currents, or Streights, except these that lye more Southward, which are separated by a small Channel about 20 leagues wide, the rest are not above 3, 6, or 10. All these Cantons, or Heaps of Islands, are en∣compassed with Rocks, which defend them from Tempests, and preserve them from being over∣flown with the Sea. The biggest Canton is not above 50 leagues in circumference, and the largest of them is not above 2 leagues over. The passage from one to another is thro 4 Channels, or narrow Passes, wich Vesels of convenient bigness. The biggest of these Islands is Male, which lyes in the 6 Canton, as you go from North-west to South-west, called Male Atollo, i. e. the Canton of Male, it is the Residence of the King of these Islands. They may be distinguished better according to these Tables. The MALDIVES, in 13 Atollons, or Cantons. 1. Tilladou-Matis. 2. Milladou. 3. Padipola. 4. Malos-Madou. 5. Ari-Atollon. 6. Male-Atollon. 7. Poulesdou. 8. Moluco. 9. Nilladoux. 10. Callomadoux. 11. Adoumatis. 12. Sonadou. 13. Pou-Molucco. On the North of the Maldives, lye these Islands, Divandurum. Sundel. Malicut. On the South West of the Maldives are these, Digamo. Cainda. De Diego Rois. Every one of these Islands have four Ports, or Entrances, just over against one another, for the going out of each Canton, or Atollon, that the Inhabitants may have Communication one with another, otherwise the Ships would be carried by the violence of the Currents a great way from these Isles. These furious Currents run 6 months Eastward, and as many Westward; sometimes more, and sometimes less. The best for sailing are those of Malos-Madou, Adou, and Sonadou; which last is 20 leagues wide, and yields the largest Lobsters. As to the Islands that lye in the Red Sea, I shall speak of them in treating of Africa, to which they do belong; and shall conclude this part with the Islands that lye in the Mediterranean Sea. The ISLES lying in the Mediterranean Sea. THE Principal Islands of the Mediterranean, which belong to Asia, are Cyprus and Rhodes. The Isle of Cyprus is one of the biggest Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, lying between the 64 D. and 67 D. 30 min. Longitude, and 35 D. of Northern Latitude. The extent of it from South to North is about 20 leagues, and from West to East 50. It was consecrated to Venus, which the Poets say was born in this Isle. The Air is un∣wholsome, because of the abundance of Lakes which send forth noisome Vapours. The Soil is fruitful in all sorts of Grain, delicious Fruits, and excellent Wines; and produces an abundance of Lemons, Citrons, Oranges, Pomgranates, Figs, Honey, Sugar, Oyl, Silk, Cotton, Saffron, Rhu∣barb, Colliquintida, Scammony, Turpentine, black and white Allum, Rosin, Bay, and Mineral Salt, Agates, Emeralds, Crystal, White and Red Coral. It feeds abundance of Beasts; Snipes and Linnets are there common. They have excel∣lent Gammons of Bacon. The Vitriol and Brass of Cyprus are highly valued. The Inhabitants are clownish and rustical; they are Mahometans, or Protestants. After the Fall of the Roman Em∣pire, this Isle came under the Dominion of the Greeks, and after it was governed by the Posterity of Guy of Lusignan, whose Daughter Charlotte, the last of his Line, married Lewis Duke of Savoy; whose Posterity having the Inheritance of it by that means, assumed the Title of the King of Cy∣prus. James, the Natural Son of John the 2d, last King of Cyprus, invaded it by the help of the Sul∣tan of Aegypt, and got it into his Power; he mar∣ried Katherine, the Daughter of Marcus Cornaro the Venetian, who being left a Widow, brought forth a Son, who lived but two years. After which she put it into the Protection of the Senate of Venice; Charlotte claimed it as her Right, but all in vain. Selim 2d, Emperor of the Turks, con∣quered it in 1571, and put in a Beglerbeg to go∣vern it, who ordinarily resides at Nicosia, and sometimes at Famagusta, where there is a very good Port. The Knights of Malta have made their Residence at Limosa; they have a Greek Arch∣bishop,
whose Seat is without the City Nicosia; and 3 Bishops, of which the first hath his See at Paphos, the 2d at Cerines, and the third at Lar∣eca. The City Nicosia, or Leucosia, stands almost in the midst of the Isle, in the large Plain of Massera, th 11 Bastions, and very wide Ditches about it. Famagusta is famous for the Siege it maintain'd against the Turks in 1570. The Port is large and convenient, encompassed with Rocks; the Walls are built with hewn-stone, 28 foot thick, and ledgenked with Bastions all round, with a large Ditch ledget thro a Rock. The Isle of Rhodes, Rhodus, is situate on the South side of Lycia, in 58 D. of Longitude, and 36 of Northern Latitude. It is in length from South to North 15 leagues, and about 7 from West to East. The chief City of it bears the same Name, and hath the Title of a Metropolis. The Air is very temperate and wholsome. The Soil produces several sorts of Grain and Fruit. It hath very fine Meadows, and all things necessary for Mans Life; and some Mines of Gold. It is fa∣mous for the Brazen Colossus, which is looked upon as one of the 7 Wonders of the World: it was a Statue of the Sun, 70 Cubits high; the Ships could pass with full Sails between the Legs of it. Mahu∣ias, Sultan of Aegypt, loaded about 900 Camels with it, after it was shaken down by an Earth∣quake. The Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, after they had lost Jerusalem and Acon, took this Isle from the Sarazens, who had deprived the Empe∣rors of Constantinople of it. They kept it till the year 1522, when Soliman took it from them. The chief City of it hath a fine Haven, and is the Seat of the Turkish Governor, who is subject to the Beg∣lerbeg of Cyprus. The ISLANDS of the Archipelago, or Aegean Sea. IN the Aegean Sea there are some of the most considerable Islands, which belong to Asia, of which our Method engages us to speak in this place. The Isle Metelino, antiently called Lesbos, and in Latin Mitylene; is in the Graecian Archipelago, situate in the 55 D. of Longitude, and 70 of La∣titude. It is in compass about 45 leagues; it be∣longs to Troas. It takes its Name from the chief City. It hath two considerable Ports, Geramia, and Caloni. The Venetians had it under their Go∣vernment heretofore; but ever since Mahomet 2d, the Turks are Masters of it. The Revenue of this Island consists in Grain, Fruits, and Cheese. The Wines are very excellent. It hath Marble and A∣gates in it. Scio, Chios, lyes on the South of Mitylene, and North of Nicaria. It is parted from Natolia by the Streight of White-Cape. It is about 30 leagues round, and produces abundance of Mastick. It hath plenty of Springs, and some Rivers, which make it fruitful in all things, but especially in Citrons, and Oranges; Oyl is very plentiful there, as well as Turpentine, which they gather by cut∣ting certain Trees, as they do also Mastick. They have also a great number of Quails and Partridges. The Isle of Samos lyes South East of Scio, in cir∣cuit about 20 leagues. The Samians, as Aulus Gellius reports, found out Pot-earth, which is mi∣raculous. This Isle is fruitful in all things, except Wine. On the South of the Isle of Samos, lyes the Isle of Cos, or Lango; Coos, containing about 30 leagues in circuit; it is famous for the Temple of Aesculapius, and the Birth of Hippocrates and A∣pelles. It affords fine Cypresses, Firrs, and large Oaks; plenty of Rivers and Fountains, which make up the River Sofodine. The chief City of it is Arangio, on the Levant side. The Isle of Pathmos, at present called Palmosa, is not so big as the former, but yet not less famous for the Banishment of S. John the Evangelist, who wrote his Revelation there. In it there is a fine Monastery, built in honor of this Evangelist. It abounds in Pulse, Corn, Fruits, Pasture, seve∣ral Physical Simples, especially Lawrel. There are also several Veins of Metals. Nicaria, antiently called Icaria, from Icarus the Son of Daedalus; is about 15 leagues in compass. It can't be approached by any Ships, because it hath no Haven. The Soil is barren, and the Inhabitants build their Houses upon Rocks; which are about 3000, all poor and ill cloathed. They are em∣ployed in swimming, and drawing Sponge out of the Sea. Tenedos is about two leagues from the antient Troy, and near the famous Promontory of Sigaeum, which is now called Cap de Janizari. The Turks took it from the Venetians; they have excellent Muskadine, and plenty of Melons, which keep all the Winter. The Isle Calamo, Claros, is one of the Cyclades, the highest of them; it was antiently well peo∣pled, as we may know from the Marbles, Pillars, and other Ruines near the Castle of Calamos. The Isle of Delos, now Sdille, is one of the Cy∣clades, and famous for the Birth of Apollo and Diana; the first of which hath a very beautiful Temple dedicated to him there. There is now but one City of Note, which is Sdilles, now but little inhabited. Paros, or Pario, is one of the Cyclades, famous for its White Marble, veined. The Venetians had it a great while, but the Turks took it from them with the Negropont, in 1470. There are several remarkable Antiquities in it.
BOOK III. The General and Particular Description of AFRICA. map of Africa AFRICA CHAP. I. Of AFRICA in general. AFrica is the greatest Peninsula in the World, and the most Southern part of the old Continent. Several Authors allot it divers figures, the most common and ea∣sie resemblances are to an Heart, a Tri∣angle, and a Pyramis. The Greeks call it Lybia, from the Daughter of Epaphus, the Son of Jupiter, who was called by the same name. It was called Africa, from After, the Son or Companion of Hercules the Lybian. Jose∣phus tells us, that it was so called from Afer, the Grand-son of Abraham. Several other opinions
there are about the original of the name, but none of them certain. The Peopl of Africa at thi day give it also several names. Africa is boundd on the North with th Medi∣terranean Sea, on the West with the Atlantick Oce∣an, on the South with the Aethiopian Sea, and on the East with the Red Sea, and Isthme of Suez, so that it is wholly encompassed with Seas, unless on the side next Asia, where it is parted by a little Neck of Land of about 25 leagues in length. The Situation of it is between the 35 D. of Northern Latitude, and 35 D. of Southern Latitude, so that the Aequator divides it into two equal parts, and between the 3 D. and 86 D. of longitude; so that it is about 1800 leagues in length, from the Cape of Good Hope to the Streights of Gibralter; and 1600 leagues in breadth from Cape Verde to Cape Guardafai. So that it is accounted more than 5000 leagues round the Coasts of it. The Situation of this Country shews plainly, that the Air is very hot, besides the greatest part of it is full of hot Sand, which reflecting the Rays of the Sun, cause an intolerable heat, and make these Countries to be unfit for dwelling, barren, and without Water; whence it comes to pass that it abounds with wild Beasts and Monsters. The Soil in general is barren; nevertheless, Africa affords plenty of Fruits, Corn, Spice, Silk, Wine, Oyl, Grapes, and Plants wonderful both for Nourishment and Wholsomness. Here are also noxious Herbs, as Addad, a drachm of whose water will kill a man in an hours time. In several places of it there are also Mines of Gold, Silver and Salt. It hath all sorts of Beasts, Lions, Leo∣pards, Panthers, Elephants, Rhinoceros's, Uni∣corns, Camels, Dromedaries, Tigers, Apes, Horses, Wild Asses, Oxen, Sea-Horses, Croco∣diles, and Serpents of an extraordinary bigness: The Beasts are very fat, and their Flesh very deli∣cate, especially their Mutton, Pork and Beef. It hath also all sorts of Birds and Fish: In some places of it they catch Mermaids. I have already spoken of the chief Rivers of this Country in the first part of this History, in treating of the World in general; and have there given an account of the rise and original of Nilus, Niger, and of their courses. It is certain, that the rise of Nilus hath been hitherto not known to the people of Europe, but is now discovered to be in the Western part of the Kingdom of Goyam, in the Country of the Abyssines, about the 12 degree of Southern la∣titude: So that this great River crosses the Coun∣try of the Abyssines, Nubia, Aegypt from South to North, and discharges it self into the Mediterra∣nean Sea at 5 or 6 mouths. As to the River Niger, it is evident that it rises out of a Lake of the same Name in the Kingdom of Damut; it runs from South to North between the Country of the Abys∣sines and Congo; after having passed the Kingdom of Bono, it enters into the Lake Boro, after which it crosses Nigritia from East to West, making an Island, which the Arabians call Nh, between Gongaa, Zanfara, and the L  Guada in the Kingdom of the Agades: afterwards it parts it self into several branches, the chief of which are Rio the great, towards the South, Gaonvea in the mid∣dle, and Senega towards the Noth; all of which discharge themselves into the Western, or Atlan∣tick Ocean, near Cape Verde. The Inhabitants of this Country are a mixture of atural Africas and Arabians, they are ordina∣rly fiere, cruel, roast and dull; of which some dwell i Towns, othrs in the Desarts in Tents, and some there are that are always wandring: They fight usually on Horseback with Lances. The Arabians are the most laborious and accustomed to labour, which makes them formidable to all their Neighbours. The Africans have diverse Religions, according to the Countries they inhabit. Many of them are Mahometans, Idolaters, Cafri, i. e. People of no Religion or Laws; some are Jews, and Christians, which are of three sorts; 1. Such as adhere to the Greek Church, as the Abyssines, and other Aethi∣opians. 2. Such as are subject to the Kings of Spain and Portugal, who are Catholicks. 3. Such as have been conquered by the Dutch, who are Calvinists. Africa hath not been well known above 200 years, the Ancients speak of it only by guess, except of Aegypt, Barbary, and some Countries adjoyning to the Sea-coasts; for they thought that the Tor∣rid Zone was not habitable, because of the ex∣treme heat of the Sun, but now we are satisfied that it is every where inhabited, unless in some sandy and barren Desarts, tho the midland part of it is not as yet throughly known. In the Reign of Honorius, when the Roman Empire began to decay, the Arabians and Sarazens possessed themselves of one part of Africa. After the Turks conquered some Provinces, of which some are subject to them, others pay hem tribute. The greater part of it have Kings and Princes of their own, or are governed in the form of a Com∣monwealth. The Spaniards, Portugueze, and Dutch, are Masters of some places on the Coasts. The most convenient Division of Africk, I think to be into the Continent and Islands. On the Continent I take especial notice of four great Countries, which I term the Countries of the Whites, which are Aegypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid, or Numidia; and Zaara, or the Desart. And then I observe 3 others, which I call the Countries of the Blacks, which are Nubia, Nigritia, and Gui∣nea. Lastly, under the name of Aethiopia, which I divide into the Lower and Higher, I compre∣hend eight; the Coast of Abex, Abyssinae, Congo, Cafroric, Monomotapa, Monoemugi, Zanguebar, and the Coast of Aian. These 5 general parts are divided into several others of different names. The Isles I divide into 3 parts. 1. Those in the Medi∣terranean. 2. Such as are in the Ocean; and 3. Such as are in the Red Sea belonging to Africa, which are better distinguished in the Table. The Continent of Africa hath these several Kingdoms. Aegypt. Caire. In the Country of the Whites. Barbary. Fez. In the Country of the Whites. Biledulgerid, or Numidia. Tesset. In the Country of the Whites. Zaara. Zanagha. In the Country of the Whites. Nubia. Nubia. In the Country of the Blacks. Nigritia. Tombut. In the Country of the Blacks. Guinea. Accara. In the Country of the Blacks. S. George de Mina. In the Country of the Blacks.
Aethiopia in 2 parts, The Higher or Superior Abyssinae, Amara. The Lower or Inferior Loango, Loango. Ansico, — Cacongo, Cacongo. Congo, S. Savador. Cafrerie, Soffola. Monomotapa, Monomotapa, Zimbaoes. Monoemugi, Agag, Banda. Zanguebar, Melinde, Megadoxe. Coast of Abex, Degilbedera. Isles in the Red Sea Suagen. Mazua. S. Pietro. Babelmandel. Zocotora. Isles in the Mediter∣ranean Sea, Malta. Gozo. Lampadouze Limosa. Gerves. Isles in the Ocean, Madera 5. The Terceres, or Azoris 9. The Canaries 16 The Isles of Cape∣verd. The Isles about Cafroric. Madagascar. Isles about Mada∣gascar, The Isles of Comorra, about Zan∣guebar in the Eastern Ocean. The Isles of Gui∣nea. CHAP. II. Of the Country of the Whites. UNder the name of the Country of the Whites, I comprehend these four Countries, viz. Aegypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid, or Numi∣dia, and Zaara, or the Desart; altho the people of them have a yellow complexion, by reason of the great heat of the Sun; yet I give them the name of Whites, to distinguish them from the Africans that inhabit Nigritia, Guinea, Nubia, &c. who are quite Black, and shall follow this Distin∣ction in the following part of this Book. AEGYPT. AEGYPT is bounded on the North with the Mediterranean Sea, on the West with Bar∣bary, and the Desart of Barca; on the South with Nubia, and the Country of the Abys∣sines; on the East with the Red Sea, and Isthmus of Suez. The extent of it from South to North is about 170 leagues, from the 23 D. to the 31 D. 40 M. of Northern latitude; and from West to East 106 leagues, from the 60 D. to the 66 of longitude. The Air of it is unwholsome, by reason of the great Heats, and filthy Mud of Nilus; especially in those places where the Waters hang a long time after the flowing of that River. The Soil of it is naturally barren, being in most places nothing but Sand, but by the overflowing of Nilus 'tis made one of the most fruitful Countries in the World; so that it produces vast quantities of Corn, of which they export much; as also Rice, Sugar, Dates, Cotton, Senna, Cassia, Balm, Skins, Cloaths, Linnen, Barley and Pulse. They have plenty of Poultry, Sheep and Oxen, Camels, Horse, and other Beasts. As also several sorts of Insects, which the standing Waters which are left by the flowing of Nile, produce. It yeilds also excellent Simples, curious Plants and divers Fruits. The Beasts are very fruitful there; Sheep bring forth twice a year, and several Lambs at each time. The Trees are always full of Fruit, when the Nile doth not flow. There is a Famine in Aegypt; when it rises not so much as 16 foot, they have a scarcity of Corn, because some part of the Country is not flowed; and when it rises more than 24 foot, they have a great want of all things, because the Water remaining too long a time up∣on the Earth hinders them from Sowing, and the Land produces but a small Crop, because 'tis too much enriched by the long flood. The Nile is the only River of this Kingdom, and one of the most famous Rivers of the World. I have spoken of the Original of it, in treating up∣on Africa in general. This River abounds in Fish and Crocodiles. After a course of 400 leagues and more from South to North, it empties it self into the Mediterranean Sea at seven mouths. On the left hand of Nile lyes the Lake Maeris, which is 60 leagues in compass; and a little lower there is another Lake called Areotis, or Antacon, which is about 20 leagues in circuit. Several Kings of Aegypt have often taken up a design, but to no purpose, of joyning the Red-Sea and Mediterra∣nean together, by cutting thro the Isthmus of Suez, which is in the narrowest place, about 25 leagues in length. About 3 or 4 leagues from the City Cairo, and on the left hand of Nile are the famous Pyramids, which were of old counted one of the seven won∣ders of the World, and about 3 leagues distant from these Pyramids are the Pits of Mummy, near the Ruins of the antient Memphis; they are embalmed bodies, hardned by lying several ages. The Moors have the disposal of them and sell them to Travellers. They have been kept in those Vaults under ground 2 or 3000 Years. The In∣vention of Physick, Geometry, Astrology, Arith∣metick, and several other Sciences is attributed to the Aegyptians. The Country-men have a par∣ticular way of hatching their Poultry in certain Furnaces, by giving their Eggs such a degree of Heat as is suitable for their production. The great∣est part of the Aegyptians are Mahometans, but there are many Jews, some Christians, called Coph∣ti, and some Latins, but corrupted and different from the Roman Catholicks. The Romans possessed Aegypt, till Aumar the second Caliph of the Successor of Mahomet. The Sultans succeeded the Caliphs, Saladin settled the Empire of the Marmalucks, which remain∣ed till the year 1516, when Selim the Emperour of the Turks, brought it into subjection to his Arms, having slain the last Sultan: Ever since it
hath groaned under the Tyranny of these Infidels, and is governed by a Bassa or Beglerbeg, who re∣sides at Grand-Cairo and hath under him at pre∣sent, no less than 15 Governments. He hath a good Militia, the most considerable of all the Ottoman Empire. 'Tis also the most honourable Government of all that belong to the Port. The most famous City of Aegypt is at present GRAND-CAIRO, Cairus, it is the cheif City of this Kingdom, and the Seat of the Beglerbeg or Bassa, standing about a league distance from the River Nile on the East side, over against the Ruins of the Antient Memphis, which was on the other side of the River It is as big as Paris, not taking in the Old Cairo, and the Town of Boulac; where the Haven is, about a mile from it. It is about 70 leagues in compass, and full of Peo∣ple of all Nations, which come thither upon the Account of Trade. The greatest part of the In∣habitants are Moors, Turks, Jews, Cophti, Greeks, and Armenians. It hath 18000 Streets, which are locked up every night to prevent disorders; they are built very narrow to keep them from the great Heat: The Inhabitants make the fine Tapestry, which is called Turky Tapestry. The Castle com∣mands all the City: It is built upon a Rock, in which they have cut a commodious Ascent to it; it is very great, and flanked with several Towers of very Ancient Work. The Water of Nile is car∣ried to it thro a Conduit of 1550 Arches. There come every year to this City 12 or 15000 and sometimes 40000 Pilgrims to go to Mecca and Medena, to visit the Tomb of the false Prophet Mahomet. The City Girgio, or Gergio, Girgium, is the Re∣sidence of a Bassa; it was the Antient Thebes, cal∣led Thebae Hecatompylae, or Thebes with 100 Gates. Alexandria is situate on the bank of the Mediterranean Sea, upon a Sandy ground near the Canopick mouth of Nile; it is 7 or 800 paces from the Haven, which hath 2 Rocks at the entrance of it. The City is built in the form of a Cross, divided into the Old and New, and is about 2 leagues in compass. The Walls of it have stood ever since Alexanders time, who was the Founder of it. It is fortifyed with many great Towers; some say 400, every Tower hath 4 Sto∣ries, and will hold 100 Souldiers well: It was heretofore the finest City of Africa except Carthage. The Tower of Pharos, one of the 7 wonders of the World, is quite ruined and gone; the City is now nothing but a heap of Ruinate Houses, but still maintains some Trade by reason of the two Ports: It is the seat of the Patriarch of A∣lexandria. Damiata is accounted the Key of the Country, by reason of its situation and Port upon the Mediterranean, which made the King S. Lewis to resolve to be Master of it. Rosetta, Metelis, or Bolbitina is built upon the most Navigable branch of Nile, which makes it the resort of ma∣ny Ships, full of Trade and Populous. The City of Suez, Arsinoi, or Posidium, is situate upon the Banks of the Red-Sea, and hath not a∣bove 2 or 300 Houses. 'Tis the Turks Arsenal in this Sea, and hath an Haven, but 'tis shallow and not very convenient. The Governour of it main∣tains two small Gallies, and some Ships. The Eastern Merchandizes were heretofore brought hi∣ther to be carryed into Europe, but 'tis now laid aside since the Europeans have settled themselves in the Indies. BARBARY. Barbaria. BARBARY is that Tract of Land, which lies all along by the Mediterranean Sea, from Ae∣gypt to the Atlantick Ocean; it is the best Coun∣try, and best peopled of all Africa, by reason of the Trade into it. It contains Mauritania, Afri∣ca propria, and some part of the Antient Lybia. It is bounded on the East with Aegypt, on the North with the Mediterranean Sea, on the West with the Atlantick-Ocean, on the South with Biledulgerid or Numidia. The extent of it from South to North is about 130 leagues, in some places from the 27 D. to the 35 D. 30 min. of the Northern Latitude, and almost 900 leagues by the Coasts from West to East from the 9 D. to the 60 D. of Longitude. The Air is very temperate, being situated in the Southern part of the temperate Zone, neither too far from, nor too near the Aequator. The Mountains near the Mediterranean Sea, incline more to Cold than Heat. The Soil is more or less fruitful according to the places; it affords an abundance of Daes, Oranges, Citrons, Olives, and Figs; Corn, good Wine, excellent Melons, and other sorts of Fruit; and produces a multitude of Camels, Lyons, Dra∣gons, Leopards, Panthers, Tygers, Elephants, Buffles, Apes, and other Beasts, which Europe hath none of: The Sheep have very great Tails; their Horses, which they call Barbs, are wonderful, especially about Fez, with which they maintain a great Trade, as they also do with Coats-skins. The Inhabitants are generally barbarous, cruel and covetous; if they had good education, they would be learned and ingenious men; they are marvellously acute, and very industrious. They are all Mahometans, except such of them as are subject to the Kings of Spain, Portugal, and other European Princes and States. After the Romans, the Vandals, Saracens, Ara∣bians, Moors, and Turks, have successively reign∣ed over Barbary: at present the Grand Seignior rules over the greatest part of it, or hath it under his protection. The Kings of Fez and Morocco reign over the Western parts of it; the Spaniards and Portugueze have some places upon the Coasts; the French hold the Bastion of France, and the Ge∣noeses the Isle of Taberca, for the convenience of fetching Horses, Corn, Goats-skins, and Coral, which is of three sorts, Red, White, and Black, from thence. There are in the Mountains three States, viz. Suasaou, Couco, and Tabes, which keep their Liberty. Salle, Tetuan, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripolis, are the Cities of the Corsairs, or Py∣rates; the three last of which are under the pro∣tection of the Grand Seignior, who hath his Bassa there, but he can do nothing without the Coun∣cil of the Pyrates. Barbary is at present divided into six Kingdoms, known by the names of Barca, Tripolis, Tunis, Al∣giers, Fez, and Morocco; which all lye one by another, from East to West, upon the Coasts of the Mediterranean, except the Kingdom of Mo∣rocco, which lyes on the South West of Fez, and is subject to the same Soveraign or Prince.
Barbary hath 6 King∣doms, Barca, Barca. Tripolis Tripolis Tunis, Tunis. Algiers, Algiers. Fez, Fez. Morocco, Morocco. The Kingdom of BARCA. BARCA lyes between Aegypt and Lybia the Great, which is called the Desarts of Bar∣bary. The extent of it from South to North is about 40 leagues in some places, and in others more or less; from East to West more than 200 leagues, from Aegypt to the mouth of the River Salines, which is near 300 leagues by the Coasts. The Air is very temperate, the Soil barren, be∣cause 'tis full of Rocks. The most remarkable Ri∣vers are Nache, Doero, and Melelo, or Medela: These three Rivers rise out of the Mountain Meyes, in the desart of Barca, and run into the Mediter∣ranean. This Kingdom is subject to the Grand Seignior, who hath a Judge there under the Bassa of Tripolis in the City of Barca, which is the chief City in the 30 D. of Latitude, and gives the name to this Kingdom. This Country hath but a small revenue, being very little cultivated or tilled, and but thinly inhabited; it affords nothing but a lit∣tle Corn, and a few Dates. The Cities and chief places in it are Barca, Cai∣raon, of old called Cyrene, and the head City of a Kingdom, the Cape of Raxaltin, called by Ptolo∣my the great Chersonesus; the Port of Trabucho, heretofore Batrachus, the Cape of Luco or Promon∣tory of Catyomus; the Port of Mesulomer, the Ha∣ven of Salonefaut; the Port of Panorn, Carte, or Catabatmus, which is a great Valley; the Port of Alberton, or Soudan, Laguxi, or Trisachi, the Ha∣ven and Cape of Raxa or Parefonium. The Inhabitants are ugly and lean, especially the Arabians. Their poverty makes them High∣way-men, so that the Caravans are forced to a∣void them. Those that dwell by the Sea-side are very little civiller, than those who dwell in the midst of the Country, save that these last have neither Temples, nor Religion, but the former are Mahometans. The King∣dom of Barca hath these Cities, Barca. Caraon. Raxaltin. Trabucho. Mesulomar. Salonef. Carte, Alberton, a Port. Laguxi. Raxa, a Cape and Ha∣ven. The Kingdom of TRIPOLIS. Regnum Tripolitanum. THis Kingdom is situated between Barca and Tunis; it reaches from South to North about 60 leagues, and from East to West 200 from the mouth of the River Salines to the River Capes. The Air is much of the same temperature with the Kingdom of Barca, the Soil of it is very bar∣ren in most places, bearing nothing but Dates. Sanuhy says, that it produces plenty of Lotus, whose fruit is much sweeter than Dates, and the Inhabitants make excellent Wine of it. They have also Citions, Lemons, Oranges and Figs, especially about the City of Tripolis; as also a cer∣tain Fruit which the Arabians call Abhosis, it is about the bigness of a Bean, and hath a tast like Almonds; they make nothing but Sugar of it. The people of Tripolis maintain themselves by their Trade and making of Stuffs; they that live about the River Capes, use Husbandry and Fish∣ing. They are much burthened with Taxes by the Arabians, and Bassa of Tripolis. The people of Zaora live by selling Chalk and Clay to their neighbouring Cities, and they of Ethamma live by Theft and Robbery. The most remarkable Rivers are Salines, Mes∣cata, Mascar and Capes. Upon the Coast of Tri∣polis, these are two dangerous banks of Sand; the biggest lies over against the Province of Essab in the 29 D. of Latitude, and 48 of Longitude; the lesser is about the Isle of Querquenes in the 32 D. of Latitude, and 43 of Longitude. This King∣dom is governed by a Bassa, who is honoured with the title of a Beglerbeg. The most considerable Cities of the Province of Tripolis properly so called, are 1. Tripolis, which stands upon the Mediterranean, and hath a very convenient Port in the 30 D. of Latitude. It is called Tripolis in Barbary, to distinguish it from Tripolis in Syria. There is the new and the old, the new is built near the old in a Sandy ground; this City is not very big, but well peopled, inclo∣sed with Walls, and flanked with several Towers, with Ramparts, and two Forts, the one on the South side, and the other on the North; it is the chief City of the Kingdom, and seat of the Bassa: It is a kind of a Commonwealth under the pro∣tection of the Grand Seignior, and an harbour for many Pyrates. Capes, or Caps, anciently Tacape, is a very anci∣ent City, built near the Gulph of the same name, encompassed with Walls, and defended by a Castle. Machres, or Mahara, is a Village standing on the mouth of the Gulph of Capes; the Inhabitants have lately built them a Cittadel. Ethamma is a City built by the Romans, not far from Capes. Zaora is built upon the same Coasts, as is also Casarnacar. In the Province of Essab there is but little Corn, but plenty of Dates, Olives, and Saffron, the best in the World; which is sold always for a third part more than that which comes from other places. In the Province of Mesrata, or Cyrene, the City Corone, or Cyrene, is most remarkable: 'Tis almost all a Desart: The Pyrates rob their Coasts, and the Arabians their In-land, yet the In∣habitants of Mesrata are rich by reason of their trade, which they have with the people of Europe and Negro's. They are entirely subject to the Turks. The Land bears plenty of Corn and Dates. The Peasants called Bereberes dwell in Booths or Hutts made of Palm-branches. As to the Islands, there is none worth our notice, except that of Gerbes, or Zerbi. It lyes near the mouth of the Gulph of Capes, about 200 paces from the little Syrtes, or banks of Sand, in the 31 Deg. and 30 min. Latitude. It is about 4 or 5 leagues round. It hath only some small Villages on the North side, defended by a Castle, where the Turks have a Gar∣rison. The Soil is very Sandy and bears no Corn, but a little Barley: It produces plenty of Figs, Olives, and Grapes, which they dry and make merchandize of.
The Kingdom of TƲNIS. Regnum Tunetanum. THis Kingdom is situate between the lesser Syr∣tes and the Kingdom of Algiers. It is in breadth from South to North about 70 leagues, and in length from East to West about 100. The Air is of much the same temperature with the rest of Barbary. The Soil in the East parts is barren, because it wants Water; in the South the Mountains and Valleys bear great plenty of Fruits; in the Western Coasts the Land is much more fruitful in those places, that lye near the Rivers. The Country about the City of Tunis is very bar∣ren, which makes Corn always dear there. The Incursions of the Arabians force the Inhabitants to sow their Barley and Rye in the Suburbs, and to inclose their Fields and Gardens with strong Walls, where they also produce an abundance of Oranges, Citrons, Lemons, Dates, and other sorts of Fruit. They have also Olive-trees, Rose∣bushes, and other sorts of Odoriferous Plants. The Mountains of Zaogan, Benitefren, and Nufrese yeild some small quantities of Barley and Honey. In most of the Mountains of this Kingdom, there are an abundance of Lyons, Wild-Oxen, Ostriches, Apes, Camelions, Goats, Hares, Pheasants, Par∣tridges, and other sorts of Red Beasts, and Venison. The Camels and Horses of it are ready mer∣chandize and cheap. The most remarkable Ri∣vers are Guadibbarbar, Magrida, Megerada, and Caps, or Capes. The first of them hath so many windings, that they who come from Tunis to Bone are forced to wade over 26 times, for there is neither Bridge nor Ferry; it runs into the Sea near Tabarca. The second is but a branch of the former, which having passed the Country of Cho∣ros, falls into the Sea near Marsa. The 3d rises in a Mountain upon the borders of the Country of Zab, runs thro Tebessa, and falls into the Sea near Garelmelech. The 4th passes thro a Sandy desart near Mount Vassalat on the South side, and empties it self into the Sea near a City of the same name; the Water of it is so hot, that it can't be drank, unless it be set a cooling an hour before. The Inhabitants of Tunis are Moors, Turks, Jews, and Slaves of divers Nations. The Inha∣bitants of the Mountains of Zagoan dwell in Tents, and live upon the profit they gain by their Bees. They that dwell on the Mountains of Tunis South∣ward, joyn themselves in 2 or 300 of a Troop to make a kind of a movable Town, when they change the pastures for their flock. The Government of this Kingdom is at present managed by the Turk. The authority of the Bas∣sa sent hither by the Grand-Seignior from the Port is much greater, than that of the other Bassa's of Africk. Yet the Inhabitants have a power to choose a Governour or Captain whom they call the Dey, who governs the Kingdom, makes Cadi's or Judges, and passes sentence in all af∣fairs civil and criminal. The Divan, or Council is made up of an Aga or Chara, 12 Odabachi's, 24 Boulouchachi's, 2 Secretaries, and 4 Chiaou's. They judge all manner of matters after they have taken the judgment of the Dey, who rejects or approves their Resolutions as he thinks fit. The Revenue of the Bassa of Tunis, is thought to be 200000 Ducats a year. The chief Trade of it consists in Oyl, Olives, Soap, Horses, and Ostrich-Feathers. This Kingdom is divided into 8 Provinces, Seigniories, or Governments, of which five lye by the Sea Coasts, viz. Tunis properly so called, the Seigniory of Goulette, the Seigniory of Bisert, the Province of Sousa or Susa, the Government of the City Acafrique, or Mehedie. The other 3 Pro∣vinces lye in the middle of the Country, viz. The Government of Cairoan or Carvan, the Govern∣ment of Ʋrbs, the Government of Beggie, and a part of Numidia, or Lybia. All these Govern∣ments are subject to the Governour of Tunis, which is the chief of them. The City of Tunis, Tunetum, stands upon the corner of the Gulph of Goulette, in the 32 D. of Latitude and 34 of Longitude, about 3 or 4 leagues from the Antient Carthage; it is but one league in compass, the Walls of it are 40 cubits high, and flanked with several Towers, with a Cittadel built upon an hill on the West side of it. They have neither Pit, nor River, nor Spring of sweet Water, but only Cisterns. There is but one Pit of Water tollerably sweet, which is preserved for the use of the Bassa. Goulette is a Fort built upon an Hill with two Redoubts, a good Port, Magazines, a Custom-house, a Prison for Christian-Slaves, and two Mosques. Marsa, which signifies in Arabick a Port, is built in the same place old Carthage stood. Napoly in Barbary, or Nbel, Neapolis, lies near the Mediterranean, about 3 leagues distant from Tunis Eastward, inhabited now only by a few Gardeners and Peasants. In the Seigniory of Biserte, the most remakable place is Biserte, a small Village about 20 leagues from Tunis; it is the old Ʋica famous for the Death of Cato. The Lake adjoyning to it affords Dolphins of 5 or 6 pound weight, and abundance ofA little Fish, Enemy to the Tuny. Aloses. From the end of October to the end of May. In the Country of Choros there are Olive-trees of a great height. Ʋrbs stands in a fine plain, about 20 or 25 leagues from Tunis Southward, with a Castle and a River. Beggie is built upon the side of a hill, about 3 leagues from the Sea, and 10 from Tunis, in the great Road. Casba is almost without Inhabitants, because of the Incursions of the Arabians. The Soil of these two Governments is very fruiful in Corn. In the Province of Susa, the most remarkable City is of the same name, built by the Romans up∣on a Rock near the Sea, over against the Isle Pan∣thalaraea. It hath a good Port, in which the Py∣rates of Tunis bring their Ships to Anchor. The Isles of Camiliers, Querquence, and Gamaleri, are subject to this City. The ground is very fruitful in Barley, Figs, Olives, Pasture and Fruits. Susa is the seat of the Governour, whose Revenue is 1200 Ducats. The City of Africk is built on the side of it, in the form of a Tongue, fortified with Walls, and flanked with Towers with a fine Port. Cairoad stands about 7 miles from the Sea, the Country about it is Sandy Barren.
The Kingdom of ALGIERS. Regnum Algeri∣anum, aut Mauritania Caesariensis. THe Kingdom of Algiers, which takes its name from the chief City of it, lies between the Kingdoms of Tunis and Fez, along the Sea Coasts of the Mediterranean. The extent of it from East to West is 240 leagues, and from South to North 70 in the largest places. It is very full of Moun∣tains, especially in the Southern parts of it, where it is bounded with Mount Atlas. The Air is so temperate, that the heat of the Summer doth not dry the leaves of the Trees, nor the Winter make them fall. The greatest part of the Countries of this Kingdom are dry and barren. On the North of Tremesen near the Mediterranean the Soil is very fruitful in pastures. The Moun∣tains on the West of Tenes, Bugie, and Algiers, produce abundance of Corn, Meadows, and Fruits, especially in the Valleys. In the Desarts are Ly∣ons, Ostriches, Wild-Boars, Porcupines, Deer, Camelions, Hedg-Hogs, Apes, and all sorts of Venison. This Kingdom hath but few Cities and those not well peopled, except Algiers. In this Kingdom we meet with divers Nations, Turks, Janisaries, whose poverty or hopes of raising their Fortunes, hath brought thither from the Levan; Azuagues, who come from the Moun∣tains of Couco and Labez; many Jews, and Moors, who have been banished out of Spain; Grenadins, Andalusians, and Tagacins, who have been driven out of Arragon and Catalonia; and a great num∣ber of Slaves, which the Pyrates bring from Sea. Here are also Larbrusses, which are Arabians, liv∣ing by the Rivers and in the Desarts in great num∣bers, who labour to maintain their Liberty against the Algierines. They are very valiant, and dwell in the Province of Tremesen. These Arabians rule over the Bereberes, who are the Inhabitants of the Mountains, and Natives of the Country. The most remarkable Rivers are the Ziz, whose Waters are very clear and full of Fish; it runs cross the Desart of Angued upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Fez, and discharges itself in the Mediterranean, having received Hued Habra into it. 2. Tesne, or Siga, now called Haretgol, rises out of Mount Atlas, passes thro the Desarts of Angued, and falls into the Sea about 5 leagues from Oran. 3. Mina, or Chytimath, crosses the plains of Bar∣thaba, and empties itself into the Sea near the Ci∣ty of Arzeo. 4. Zilif, rises out of Mount Guanc∣cexis, and crossing the Desart plains, runs into the Sea on the East side of Mostogon, upon the con∣fines of Tremesen. On the Banks of this River dwell certain Arabians, very rich and valiant. 5. Ce∣lef, or Cinalaf, near the Sea called Safran, emp∣ties itself into the Sea 3 or 4 leagues from Algiers. 6. Soffage, or Ceffage, or Save, waters the Coun∣try of Matigia, and falls into the Sea on the East of Algiers, near the Cape of Metasus. 7. The two Brooks of Hued-el-Harrar, and Hued-el-Hamith have a full current in Summer, but little or no stream in Winter. They run into the Sea between Algiers and Ceffay. 8. Hued-Icer, or Serbere, springs out of Mount Atlas, and falls into the Sea on the East of Metafuz. 9. Hued-el-quiver, or Zin∣ganor, or Nazabats, rises out of Mount Atlas near Zeb, and mingles with the Sea near Bugie, 10. Suf-gemar, or Ampsago, rises at the foot of Mount Auras in the Province of Bugie, passes near Con∣stantina, receives the River Marzoc, and then pours itself into the Sea. 11. Yedoch, or Ladoch, springs from Mount Atlas, near Constantina, and runs into the Sea on the East of Bone. All these Rivers of Algiers run from South to North. The Kingdom and City of Algiers are govern'd as the former, in the form of a Commonwelth, under the Protection of the Grand Seignior, but the Soul∣diery is most absolute. The Bassa is Vice-Roy in ap∣pearance, but the Government is subject to the Mili∣tia. The Bassa himself is not allowed to go into the Divan, unless he be called and invited by the Council. The Council of State is made up of the Officers of the Janizaries. The Aga of the Janiza∣ries is president of it. The Turks at this day di∣vide the Kingdom into 18 Provinces, as they ap∣pear in the following Table. The Kingdom of Algiers hath 18 Pro∣vinces from East to West. 1. The Province of Bone, Bone, or Hippone. Bedernac. Mele, or Mile. Tabarca. Bastion of France. 2. The Province of Constantine, Constantine, or Cirta of Nu∣midia. Chollo, or Culla, now Ascol. Succaida. 3. The Province of Gigeri, or Gigel, Gigeri. 4. The Province of Bugie, Bugie, or Bigeya. Micile, or Mesile. Stefe, or Dissefe, or Tezzeza. Necaux, or Vaga. 5. The Province of Algiers, Algiers. Metafuz. Teddelez. Sasa. Le Col de Medujare. 6. The Province of Sargel, Sargel, or Canuceis. Blescar, or Bersac. 7. The Province of Mostogan, Mostogan, Masagran, Ports. 8. The Province of Horan, a Mar∣quisate, Horan, or Auran, or Guisa, or Buisa. 9. The Province of Haresgol. Haresgol. 10. The Province of Humanhar, Humanhar, Hunaim, or Siga. Tebecrit, or Thudaca. Ned-Roma, or New-Rome. 11. The Province of Tebessa, Tebessa, or Thabuna. 12. The Province of Tenez, Tenez, or Lagantum, or Tripasa. Meduca, or Mac 13. The Province of Labez, Tessi, Calaa, Bors, three Fortresses. 14. The Province of Couco, or Cinaba, Couco, a Fort. 15. The Province of Miliane, Miliane, or Magnane, and Manliane. Mezane, Tassare.
16. The Province of Beni-Araxid. Beni-Arar. Calaa, or Atoa. Aelmo-hascar. Batha, or Bunhora. 17. The Province of Angad-Aben, or Angued, Guagida, Lanigare. Tensegts. 18. The Province of Tremesen, or Telensin, Tremesen, or Telensin, Hu∣bet, Tefezare, Tezela. Bone, Hippone, and Hippo-regius, in the 33 D. of Latitude, and 23 D. 30 min. of Longitude, near the Mediterranean Sea, was the Country of S. Au∣stin. The Soil is fruitful in Corn, Jujubes, Figs, Melons, Apples, Pears, and other Fruits, in good pastures, which are filled with Oxen, Cows, and Sheep. The Vandals and Sarazens have taken it so often, that there is but little of the antient splen∣dor to be seen in it. The City of Constantine, Cirta, Tiburnica, and Constantina, is on the East of Bone, and on the South of a Mountain near the River Sufigemar, with a Cittadel on the North side; it hath about 1000 Houses. Gigeri, Igilgili, is a great Town near the Sea with a Castle, which commands all the Country about it be∣tween Algier, and Bugie, in the 33 D. 30 min. Latitude, and 27 D. of Longitude. The Soil yeilds Barley, Flax, and Hemp. Bugie is situated near the Sea upon the side of a Mountain on the East of Algiers. It hath fair Streets, several Mosques, Colleges, Cloisters, Inns, Taverns, Hospitals, a good Market, and a strong Cittadel. The Soil is not good for Corn, but bears excellent Fruits. The Mountains yield plen∣ty of Barley, some Bread-corn, Flax, Hemp, a great number of Horses, Oxen, Goats; and the Forrests are full of Leopards, Monkeys, and Ve∣nison. Algier, Rusuculum Algercum, stands upon the Sea-shore in the 33 D. of Latitude, and 24 D. 40 min. Longitude. This City is governed in the form of a Commonwealth, as Tunis and Tripoli, under the protection of the Grand Seignior: It is the retreat of the greatest Pyrates of Barbary. The famous Pyrate Barbarossa made it very formidable. It is 4 square, built on the side of a Hill, in the form of a Theatre; the Walls are 12 foot thick, and 30 or 40 in height in some places, they are flanked with 4 square Towers, fortified with seve∣ral Castles, and a great Ditch. The Soil of this Province is very plentiful in Fruits, the plain of Metigie brings forth 2 or 3 Crops of Barley, Oats, Bread-Corn, and several other grains every year. It also affords all sorts of Venison, Melons of an admirable Taste, of which some are ripe in Sum∣mer, others in Winter, bunches of Grapes a cubit long. In the Forrests are an abundance of Leo∣pards, Tygers, Wild Boars, Hedg-Hogs, Oxen, Partridge. They have plenty of Fish, Fowl, and Venison. The Kingdom of FEZ. THis Kingdom is a part of the antient Maurita∣nia Tingitana, lying between Algiers and the Ocean. On the East, the River Mulvia parts it from the Kingdom of Algiers. On the South-West the River Ommiraby divides it from Moroc∣co, and on the South Mount Atlas comes between it and Segelmesse. The extent of it from South to North is about 90 leagues, and almost as much from West to East. The Air is good and very temperate. This Country is the best inhabited and most fertile of all Barbary. It produces an abundance of all sorts of Grain, Fruits and Beasts, especially Almonds, Figs, Olives, Grapes of an extraordinary bigness; Oxen, Sheep, Hares, Goats, Frogs, and the best and most beautiful Horses of all Barbary. They need take no pains to till the ground, which re∣quires only to be watered in May. They have a great abundance of Fish, both in the Sea and in their Rivers. They have neither Apples, nor Pears, nor Nuts, nor Cherries; but instead of them, Oranges, Citrons, Peach, Figs, Dates, white Honey, Sugar, and Pidgeons. In their Forrests are the most cruel Lyons of all Africk. The Soil of Mechnesse brings forth excellent Fruits, particularly Quinces, Pomegranates, Plumbs, Figs, Grapes, Olives, and Flax. The Mountain Zalag is covered with Vines on the North side, and that of Zarhon is planted with Olives. The Forrests belonging to the City of Tefelselt have terrible Ly∣ons: The Plains of Aseis and Adhasen produces such tame and fearful ones, that a Woman may put them to flight with a Staff. This Kingdom, and that of Morocco, make up the Government of the Xeriffes, who invaded it under the pretence of the Musulman, or Ma∣hometan Religion. These two Kingdoms make up the Ancient Mauritania Tingitana. The King of Tasilet hath re-united them in this last age, and upon that account takes upon him the Title of Emperour of Africa, King of Morocco, Fez, Sus, Tasilet, &c. The King of Spain retains some places on the Coasts, as Jeute, Penon de Velez. The Por∣tugueze possess Cazar-Ezaghir. The English have left and razed Tangier ever since 1685. This Kingdom is divided into 7 chief Cities, which are Garet and Errif upon the Mediterranean; Etbabat or Nabat by the Streights; Tesmesne, Asgar, and Fez, by the Ocean; Cus or Chaux in the mid∣dle of the Country. The City of Fez stands in the middle of the Kingdom, upon the little River Perles, or Fez, between Suba and Bunazar, in the 32 D. of Latitude, and 15 D. of Longitude. It is at present the glory of all Africk, and one of the finest Cities in the World; the figure of it is a long square or oblong, of which the middle is in a Plain, the ends on an Hill, with several Suburbs. It hath 12 principal Quarters, 62 large Market-places, more than 200 fine, large, strait Streets, besides a great number of small ones; 700 Mosques or Temples, and several Colledges. The City of Salle, Sala, is the Commonwealth of the Pyrates, some time since made subject to the King of Fez and Morocco, standing on the right side of the small River Burregred, and by the Western, or Atlantick Ocean. The Kingdom of MOROCCO. THis Kingdom, which is another part of Mau∣ritania Tingitana, is bounded on the North and West by the Ocean, and Gulph of Yaguas, on the South and East with Biledulgerid, and on the
North-East with the Kingdom of Fez. The Ex∣tent of it from South-West to North-East is about 100 leagues from the Cape of Non to the borders of Segeimesse and Fez, and from North-West to South-East 56 from Mazagon to Dara. The Air is very good, the Soil very fruitful in Bread-corn, Fruits, Barley, Oyl, Sugar and Grapes; it hath also Mines of Gold, Silver, and Copper; abundance of Palm-trees; it breeds also plenty of wild and tame Beasts, several sorts of Fowl and Venison. The chief Rivers are Ommirabi, Tensif, Sus, Guadelhabi, which runs into Ommirabi; and Asifnual, Niftis, Euffemel, which are lost in Tensif. The Teceubin, or Twin-Rivers, Hued-la-habin, or the River of Negro's. The people of Morocco are usually strong, and of healthy body, of nimble, and quick wits; they addict themselves to Business, Merchandize, Hus∣bandry, War, and Learning. Out of this Kingdom are carried into Europe, Hides, Blue, Stone, Wood, Sugar, Oyl, Wax and Gold. The French, English and Dutch have Con∣suls at Salle, Zagfi, and other places. This Kingdom is divided into 7 Provinces, ly∣ing by each other from East to West: 1. Gezule, or Gezula, or part of Getulia. 2. Tedle. 3. Ascore, or scure. 4. Ducale, or Duquelle. 5. Sus, or Susa, 6. Hea. 7. Morocco, specially so called. Morocco, Marochium, stands between the Rivers Nafres and Agmet, in the 30 D. 40 min. of Northern Lat. and 12 D. 30 min Long. in a large Plain 6 or 7 leagues from Mount Atlas: It was heretofore the seat of the ancient Xeriffes, whose Kingdom was Mauri∣tania Tingitana, which contained the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, with all their Territories. Now it is inlsed with a very high Wall of whitish Sn, frtiied with Towers, some Bulwarks, and great Des; the third part of the City is un∣peopld, th ruptions and pillagings of the Ara∣bians hid the people from illing the ground, so that it  nothing but Vines, Palms, and some other Fuit-trees. It hath three Temples or Mosques of a prodigious bigness. The Kings Pa∣lace is very remarkable, being like a little City for the largness of it. BILEDƲLGERID, or NƲMIDIA. Biledulgeridia, or Numidia. THis Country is called Biledulgerid in Arabick because of the great number of Dates it pro∣duceth, which the name signifies. 'Twas the an∣cient Numidia. Biledulgerid, taking in the Desart of Barca, is bounded on the North with Barbary, on the West with the Ocean, on the South with Zaara, or the Desart; on the East with Aegypt. The Extent of it from South to North is about 100 leagues, more or less, taking one place with another, between the 22 and 32 D. of Northern Latitude; and from West to East about 1000 leagues, between the 5 D. 30 min. and 61 D. of Longitude. The Air is very wholsome, altho it be very hot. The Soil is dry and sandy, and so produces but little Wheat, but Barley enough; but the dear∣ness of Corn is recompenced with an abundance of Dates, which the people exchange for Corn. They have great plenty of Ostriches, Camels, Goats, and Horses; an infinite number of Serpents and Scorpions, which do a great deal of mischief. A most violent East-wind blows there, which covers the Travellers with dust, and spoils the sight of the Inhabitants. Men live here above 100 years. The most remarkable Rivers, are the Darha, which rises out of Mount Atlas, upon the bordrs of the Province of Hascora: It gives name to the Province and Desart it passes through, and at last falls into a Lake. 2. Zis springs out of a Moun∣tain of Atlas of the same name, crosses the Coun∣try of Sagelmesse, and there runs into a Lake sur∣rounded with Sand: 3. Ghir comes also out of Mount Atlas, runs Southward, cross the Wood-Lands of Tagorarin and Kingdom of Sagra in Zaa∣ra, where it falls also into a Lake. 4. Rio-blanco. 5. Buzeder. 6. The Dry River, Bict. 7. Himiffin, 8. Farcala. 9. Togda. 10. The Hot River. 11. Techort▪ 12. Teusart, and some other less considerable. The Inhabitants are generally Vicious, Wicked, Brutish, Traytors, Thieves, and awkward. Their or∣dinary food is the flesh of Camels, or Ostriches; and their drink, Camels Milk, or Boil'd Water. The Arabians of Numidia, are lean and meagre; they have a brown complexion, and frightful look; they love to hunt Birds, and willingly pursue Ostriches: The Arabians enjoy the richest parts of it, having driven out the Bereberes, which are the true Africans, who are fled into the neighbouring Countries of the Negro's. This Country is governed partly by some petty Kings or Lords, who pay Tribute, or joyn with the King of Fez and Morocco, or the Turks of Al∣giers, Tuni and Tripolis, partly by Commonwealths. In some places the people live without Laws or Government, as the Arabians, who live in the De∣sarts, and which dwell in several Cities; others wander in the Fields in companies, being under no Governour or Master. All their Princes, and the greatest part of the people, are of the Mahometan Religion, the rest are Jews. In all thr Cities almost there are Syna∣gogues, and the Jews have all the trade, which yet hinders not but that every Country hath its particular Customes. Biledulgerid is divided into 14 parts, which lye beside one another from West to East. 1. The Pro∣vince of Sus, and Country of Ydausquerit. 2. The Kingdom of Tesset. 3. The Kingdom or Province of Darha. 4. The Kingdom of Tafelet, and Pro∣vince of Ytata. 5. The Province of Segelmesse. 6. The Province of Queney, or Quenena. 7. The Province of Matagaxa and Retel. 8. The Province of Togda. 9. The Province of Tegorarin, or Tagu∣riri. 10. The Province of Techort or Tecurt. 11. The Province of Zeb. 12. The Desart of Guergola. 13. Biledulgerid properly so called, or the Country of Dates. 14. The Desart of Barca. ZAARA, or The Desart. Zaara, seu Desertum. THe Arabians call this Country Zaara, i. e. a De∣sart, because 'tis but little inhabited, and very barren: It is a part of the Ancient Lybia, the Country of the Getuli and Garamantes. This Region is bounded on the North with Bile∣dulgerid, on the West with the Ocean, on the South with Nigritia, and on the East with Nubia. The
Extent of it from South to North, in some places more, and in some less, from 60 to 150 leagues, between the 12 D. and 25 D. 30 min. Northern Latitude, and from West to East 900 leagues from 4 D. 40 min. to 56 D. 20 min. Longitude. The Air is healthful, tho very hot, and the Country so destitute of Water, that in their Jour∣neys they are forced to carry it along with them upon Camels. The Soil in general is very barren, the Moun∣tains rough and steep, bearing nothing but Thorns and Briars. There are some Countries or Habita∣tions, which produce Barley and Dates; you may go 100 leagues together, and not meet with one drop of Water, unless it be some Pits of Salt Water; for which they have ordinarily no o∣ther help but Camels, whose Milk they drink, and eat their Flesh. They live also in some places of the flesh of Ostriches, and in others, they eat a sort of Sheep called Adimmains. But the greatest misery of this Country is, that they are so much troubled with Serpents, and Locusts, which fly cross their Desarts like Clouds, and devour all the Green Herbs in the Desart of Zenega. There is neither Wods, nor Mountain, nor River, nor House, to know the Country by; but they Travel by the Winds, Stars, and flying of Birds. The most re∣markable Rivers are these, 1. Gaoya, 2. Borno, 3. Nubia, 4. Ghir. The Inhabitants are either for the most part A∣rabian Shepherds, who wander continually in the Fields, and do nothing but rob, kill, and hunt; or Bereberes, who have their settled dwellings. These are more humane, civil, and just in their Commerce, and very kind to strangers. The peo∣ple are very lean and short-lived; altho the Air is so healthful, that the people of Barbary send their Sick hither to take the Air. The Arabian Shepherds go all Naked, others wrap their Bodies up in a piece of thick Cloath, and the Richer sort wear a Blue Cotton Garment with wide Sleeves. Some of them are free, who have neither Religi∣on, nor Laws. Others follow Mahometism with∣out examination: Their Language is rude and barbarous, having a touch of the African. Zaara is divided into 8 principal parts, lying together from East to West. 1. The Kingdom, or Desart of Gaoga. 2. The Kingdom, or Dsart of Berdon. 3. The Kingdom, or Desart of Borno. 4. The Kingdom of Lempta, Suma, or Iquidi. 5. The Kingdom of Sagra, Hair, or Terga. 6. The Kingdom Zuenziga, and Desarts of Cogden, and Gir. 7. The Kingdom of Tegaza, or Tegassa, 8. The Kingdom or Zanagha. CHAP. III. The Countries of the Negro's or Blacks. UNder the name of the Negro's or Blacks, I com∣prehend Nbia, Nigritia, and Guinea, which contain in them many Regions, Kingdoms, and Provinces, about a 3d part of Africa, as is to be seen in these following Heads. NƲBIA. THis Kingdom is bounned on the North with the Desart of Brca, and Aegypt; on the West with the Desarts of Gaoga, and Borno. On the South with the Desart of Gorham. And on the East with the Abyssines Country. The extent of it from South-West, and North-East, is about 320 leagues from the 11 D. to the 23 D. 30 min. Nor∣thern Latitude, and the breadth of it 180 from the 47 D. 30 min. to the 63 D. 30 of Longitude. The Air is extremely hot every where, the Soil more or less fruitful according to the places,. A∣bout the River Nile it abounds with all things, because of the flowing of that River. It produ∣ceth plenty of Sugar-Canes, but they have not the way to clarify it, and so use it black; they have good Pastures, and Corn, as also Gold, Musk, Ci∣vet, Saunders, and Ivory. In the other part of it it is barren, and desart: It is not well known, no more than several other places of Africa. These people Trade more especially with the Aegyptians. The most remarkable Rivers are the Nile, Nu∣bia, and Sira, which comes hither to empty it∣self. The Nubia, which is as full of Water as the other, runs into Nilus a little below Asna in Ae∣gypt; its Channel is nigh as deep as that of Nile, and the Waters thereof are so disagreeable to the Crocadiles, that they burst within 5 or 6 days af∣ter they go into it. You may Travel sometimes 100 leagues, and not meet with a River or Spring, o that Travellers often dye in their Jour∣ney fo hirst. Th Inhabitants are very black, heatlthy, cou∣rageous, and cunning. They have great numbers of Lyons, Tigers, Crocodiles, fine Horses, and ex∣cellent Camels; but no Monsters, because of their good Waters. The people of Nubia are subject to a King, who keeps ordinarily several Armies upon the confines of his Kingdom. It can't be said, that they profess any Religion at present; but 'tis certain, that they were once Christians, since there are 150 Churches, wherein Jesus Christ, the Virgin, and several Saints stand Carved. Their Ceremonies are a mixture of Christianity, Judaism and Mahometamism. They were subject heretofore to the Patriarch of Alexandria, and celebrated their Divine Service in the Coptick Tongue. Nubia hath these remark∣able Cities in it, Nubia, or Nuaba. Danga, or Tenupsis. Cusa, Ghaloa. Dancala. Jalac. Demba. Damoclea. Zigide. Desarts. Jadie, Angini. Darga, or Dogra. Saloux, or Salene. Sabaha, Mathan, Sala. Arane. Ghoram. Zou. NIGRITIA. Terra Nigritarum. THis large Region which we call at this day, the Country of the Blacks, or Nigritia, is so called from the colour of the Inhabitants, or Ri∣ver
Niger, which runs cross it from East to West. The Romans who never were beyond the Garamo∣nites, knew nothing of this Country, being discou∣raged from entring into it, either by the horror of the vast desarts, or excessive heat of the Climate, so that we are beholding to modern discoveries, for the greatest part of what is known of it. NIGRITIA is bounded on the East and North with Zaara; on the West with the Atlan∣tick Ocean; on the South with Guinea, and Con∣go. The extent of it from South to North, is a∣bout 100 leagues in the widest place, between the 9 D. and 24 D. 25 min. of Northern Latitude, and from East to West, about 550 leagues from the 2 D. to the 44 of Longitude. It is very hard to give an exact Account in gene∣ral of the Country, Manners, and Customs of these Negro's, because there are so many Nations of them. Nevertheless this is certain, that the Air is very healthful, altho it be very hot, that the Niger and all the Branches of it do flow the Coun∣try, as the River Nile doth Aegypt, which makes the adjoyning Country very fruitful in all sorts of Grain, especially Millet, Rice, Flax, Cotton, Honey; variety of Fruits, Palms, of which the Inhabitants make Wine. It hath Mines of Gold, Copper, and Amber-grease. The Country that lies along the side of this River, is mixed with Mountains and Forrests, which are full of Wild-Beasts, and Venison. Nigritia in many places is but little inhabited, by reason of the extreme heat, and want of Wa∣ter. There is no considerable River, but the Ri∣ver Niger, whose course is 8 or 900 leagues from South to North, and after from East to West: It divides itself into seven branches, at the fall of it into the Ocean; the chief of which have several Names, viz. 1. The River Senega, which runs directly Westward. 2. Gambea, or Rio-Gambia. 3. This divides it self into two other Rivers which are called, 4. S. Domingo, and the other, 5. Rio-Grande, which hath two branches, whose names are Guinata, and Biguba, of the name of the two Kingdoms they pass thro; and Genata which runs into the Gulph of Auguin, and another called Pedra de Gallo, which runs into the Gulph of S. Cyprian. The Negro's have all their Hair black, and Teeth white: Those that have the flattest Noses, are accounted the greatest Beauties; they are not so fierce, and cruel, as the Inhabitants of Barbary and Biledulgerid, and Hospitable to strangers. They Trade in Slaves: Some of them sell their Wives, and Children to the Spaniards and Portu∣guese, to work in the Mines, or Sugar-Mills in the Canaries, America, and elsewhere. Among these people some live free in the form of a Commonwealth, others wander and are wild, and some are subject to Kings; of whom the King of Tombut is the most Potent, and after him the Kings of Madinga, or Songo, Gago, Cano, and Gangara. At the mouth of the River S. Domin∣go, the Portuguese have the Fort of S. Phillip. The French also have a Factory under the Government of the Company of Senegail. Their principal Trade consists in Gold, Elephants-Teeth, and Negro-Slaves. The King of Tombut hath plenty of Ingots, or Bars of Gold. The Inhabitants of Se∣nega, sell their Gold in the Dust, Hides, Gums, Civet, and Slaves, which are the strongest and dearest of all the Negro's. It is said, that if men will be well served by a Negro, he must give him plenty of Meat, Work, and Cudgelling. The Portuguese have resigned up some Forts, about the mouth of the Niger to the English, by which means they have a Trade there as well as the Dutch. These people are almost all Mahometans, or I∣dolaters, and great Enemis to the Jews. Those that Inhabit the Desarts, have neither Religion, nor Laws. In some places there are old Christians, but much corrupted. Nigritia contains a great number of Kingdoms, and Provinces; we will divide it into 25 Coun∣tries, or Kingdoms, according to the distinction to be seen in the following Table. Nigritia hath 25 parts: 1. The King∣dom of Ge∣nata, or Gua∣lata, Gandia. Fulli. Hoden. The Castle of Arquin. 2. The Kingdom of Guinea, or Genehoa, Genehoa, or Magura. Braa. Taren, &c. 3. The King∣dom of Sene∣ga, or Jaloffi, Tahacca, or Tabacatum. People, Barberins. Tucorons. Saragales. Beganes, Mosse. Mansinga. Kings subject to the Great Jaloff, Of Baool, Cayor, Ivala, and Ale. 4. Common-wealths, Arriareos. Falupes. Buramos, or Papis. 5. The Kingdom of Gambea, Gambea. 6. The Kingdom of Cassan, Cassan. 7. The Kingdom of Cantor, Canor. 8. The Kingdom of Volly, Volly. 9. The Kingdom of Borsalo, Borsalo. 10. The Kingdom of Casa∣mansa, or Casangos, Casamansa. 11. The Kingdom of Guinala, or Bia, Fars, or Melli, Guinala, and a Haven. 12. The Kingdom of Biguba, Biguba, a Haven. Balola. 13. The Kingdom of Man∣dinga, or Mani-Inga, Songo, or Tazitha. Tocrur. 14. The Kingdom of Bena, or Souses, Bena. 15. The Kingdom of Bejagos, Catcheo. 16. The Kingdom of Melli, Melli. Beria. 17. The King∣dom of Tom∣but, or Tongu-Batha, Tombut, or Nigira, Cabra, Gossali. Juegreve, Caragoli. The Pits of Araon. The Pits of Azagad. The Country of Meiza. 18. The Kingdom of the Agades, Agades, or Malacath. Mura, Daghir, Mayma. Catambo, The Country of Pharaan. 19. The Kingdom of Gago, Gago, or Gaoga. Tomby, Dau, Satuse. 20. The Kingdom of Guber, Guber, or Caphe. Taspa, Malol.
21. The Kingdom and Desart of Cano, Cano, or Thamon, or Da∣cana, Germa. Pum, Tasara. 22. The Kingdom of Cassena, Cassna, or Tagana. Tirca, Nbrina. 23. The Kingdom of Gangara, Gangara, or Banagra, Morasa. Tirque. 24. The Kingdom of Zezag, Zezag, or Zezeg, or Ville∣gia, Chavara. 25. The Kingdom and Desart of Zan∣fara, Zanfara, or Dudum, Reghebil, The Desart of Seth. GƲINEA. THe Word Guinea signifies hot and dry. The Portuguese have divided Guinea into the upper and lower. The 1. contains all that Region, which lies between the River Senega, and the Kingdom of Congo; the 2. all the lower Aethiopia, but I understand by it, nothing but the Coasts of Guinea from the Cape of Sarrelione, or Sierra Liona, and the Mountain of Lyons, to the River of Camerones; and so tho it be a Country of lesser extent than Nigritia, yet it is better inhabited a great deal, be∣cause it lies altogether upon the Coasts of the At∣lanic Ocean. Guinea is bounded on the North with Nigritia, on the West and South with the Sea of Guinea, with the Cape of Lopez Gonsalvez. The extent of it from South to North is about 250 leagues, from the 1 D. of Southern Latitude, to the 13 D. of Northern Latitude, and from West to East about 180 leagues from the 7 D. 30 min. to the 49 D. of Longitude. The Air is extreme hot and unhealthy, by rea∣son of the frequent Rains, which is the cause that few strangers can dwell there without much Sick∣ness. The Soil produceth Sugar, Cotton, Rice, Millet, Barley, and several other grains, with Va∣riety of Fruits, especially in those places, where the people of Europe have settled their Factories. It hath Mines of Gold, a great number of Elephants, Peacocks, Parrots, Apes, Tigers, Leopards, and several other sorts of Beasts. They catch excel∣lent Fish on their Coasts; particularly the Golde∣ny, Porpoise, and Bonice. They maintain a great Trade with Ivory, Monkeys, Skins, Wax, Slaves, Ambergrease, Salt, which is very white, Gold, which they exchange for Cloaths, Stuffs, Iron, Arms, Glass, which is brought out of Europe to them. Mountains of greatest note are those, which the Portuguese call Montes Claros, which in the West they call Sierra Liona, or the Mountains of Lyons. The biggest Rivers are Sierre-Lyone, Sueiro da Cost∣amaneu, Lavolta, Benin, Carmo Rio del Rey, Descama∣rones, Rio das Gavilias, or De Poules Maguvira, or Rio Novo, Mavach, Plezoge, Menoch, or Rio A∣guado. The Inhabitants of this Country are extremely black; they are ingenious, complaisant, and very understanding in Trade, especially those that dwell along the Coasts; but are proud, thieves, lyars and do often surprize the Europeans Ships. They go all Naked without shame, with a Knife in their hands, to be always ready to revenge themselves of their Enemies. They remember every thing well without writing or reading. Almost all these people are Idolaters: The last Relations of them say, that there are some Christi∣ans, and that some of their Kings are Catholicks. The Government of this Country is in the hand of several Kings, and Princes, who have many o∣ther petty Kings under them, that pay them tri∣bute, or depend on them. There are some free people, who live in a kind of Commonwealth, and others, who are almost wild, and live without any Laws. The Dutch hold S. George de la Mina, with the Fort of Nassau, or Moreh, Cormantin, Axime, Battou. The English have made them∣selves masters of Cape de Sierra-Liona, of the Is∣land Madrebousa, Commendo, or Tacorari, Tabo∣corso, Entarhen, or Naschange. The Danes possess Frederisburg, and Christiansburg. These 3 Pro∣testant Nations have driven out the Portuguese from the Coasts, who are retired more into the Country, and have made an Alliance with the Natives of the Country which are most considerable. The most potent Monarchs of this Country, are the Kings of Cagia, Berion, Sierra-Liona, Arder or Ardres, Ʋlcuma, and the Great Commendo. This Country is usually divided into 4 general parts, which are, the Kingdom of Sierre-Liona; the Province, or Coast of Malaguete, or Mani∣guate; Guinea propria, and the Kingdom of Benin. CHAP. IV. AETHIOPIA. AEThiopia contains almost one half of Africa; it is divided into two parts; 1. Aethiopia Superior, or Interior; the Upper, or In∣ward Aethiopia, or Abyssinia. 2. Aethiopia Infe∣rior, or Exterior; the Lower, or Outward Aethi∣opia. The 1. contains several Kingdoms: The 2. comprehends the Regions of Loango, Cakonga, Congo, Angola, Monomotopa, Monoemugi, the Coasts of Cafrorie, Zanguebar, Ajan, and Abex; which are more exactly distinguished under the following Heads. AETHIOPIA Superior, or Abyssinia, Abasse∣nia, or Abissinia. THis Country hath many Names; Marmol calls it the Kingdom of the Abixins. The Word Abissinia is taken from the inhabitants, whom the Arabians call Abassi, or Habaschi, or as well Abse∣nians, who after they had inhabited Arabia Faelix for some ages, passed over the Red Sea into Africa. This Empire was of far greater extent heretofore,
than now it is. The Turks, Arabians, Gauls, and other people near adjoyning, have made such en∣croachments upon it, that the present Emperour of the Abissines, doth not govern above half the Countries, which his Predecessors possessed be∣fore him. The Antient Abyssinia was bounded on the North with part of Nubia, the Red Sea, and Aegypt. On the West with part of Nubia, Nigritia, and Con∣go. On the South by the Kingdom of Monoemugi. And on the East by Zanguebar. The extent of it is from the 13 D. 30 min. of Southern Latitude, to the 22 D. 30 min. of Northern Latitude, which makes about 720 of the great French leagues; and much about the same proportion from West to East. It contains 26 Kingdoms, and 14 princi∣pal Provinces. Abyssinia at present reaches no farther, than from the end of the 7 D. to the 16 D. 9 min. of North∣ern Latitude. From South to North, which is a∣bout 420 leagues, and from West to East from the 62 D. 50 min. to the 73 D. 40 min. of Lon∣gitude, which contains little less than 200 leagues. The Air is very temperate upon the Mountains and in the Plains; but it is extremely hot in the Valleys. The Soil is of different natures, accord∣ing to the Countries: In some places there are nothing but Rocks, and deep Caverns; on the contrary, it is very fruitful by the Rivers, and in the Plains. Some Provinces produce Rice, Millet, Barley, Maze, Agousta, and Machella, Bread-Corn, and Rai∣sins. They have abundance of Ginger, Sugar, Honey, Wax, Cotton, and Flax. There are almost every where Mines of Gold, Silver, Tin, Copper, Lead, Iron, and Brimstone; all sorts of Tame and Wild Crea∣tures; as Sheep, Goats, Cows, Oxen, Horses, Camels, Elephants, Hares, Does, Stags, Wild-Boars, Monkeys, Tigers, Lyons, Panthers, Rhi∣noceros, Wolves, Apes, and several sorts of Fowl and Venison. Their Rivers affords Crocodiles, and Sea Hoses. At sometimes there are such a∣bundance of Locust, that the Air is darkened with them, and their Harvest and Plants suffer much da∣mage by them. They have whole mountains of Pit Salt, especially in the borders of Tegre and Angot, and there is one Mountain of Red Salt, ve∣ry useful for several Medicines. They have excel∣lent Antimony, which is very much used by them for Physick; they sow and gather in their Har∣vest at the same time. In some places they have 3 Harvests in a year; besides all the grains that we have in Europe, they have another grain, which they call Tef, of which they make excellent Bread. They depend so much upon the fruitfulness of the Earth, that they make no other Provision. The Abyssines have great plenty of Food, as also of Honey; their ground brings forth all sorts of Pot, Sweet, and Physical Herbs: Pears and Apples, seldom come to maturity there, because of the vi∣olent storms which happen in their Season. They have Cittron, Orange, and Pomegranate Trees, many Fish Ponds also. Their Oxen are of a pro∣digious bigness: They have a great number of ve∣ry brisk Horses, but they never shooe them; their Sheep have tails so big, that some weigh 50 pound. Elephants often appear by hundreds in a Troop, who do a great deal of mischief in their Fields, breaking down the Trees, and treading down their Corn. Nevertheless they'll run away at the sight of men, if they do not beat them. The Ca∣meleopard is not so big bodied, or limb'd, as the Elephant, but it is a great deal higher, insomuch that a man on Horseback may ride under his bel∣ly. Here are Unicorns which have the Horn in the middle of the forehead; it is like a Goat, and goes very swift. The Hippo-potamos, or River Horse, hath an Head like an Horse, but the rest of his Body is very unlike, it is twice as big as an Ox, and are often seen in the Lake of Tzanie, and Bambea; they often turn over Boats, to devour the men, and feed also upon the Herbs of the Field; they fly away at the sight of Fire. Their flesh is good to eat, and therefore the people often go to fish for this Amphibious Animal. In the River Tabaze, there are abundance of Crocodiles, more than in any other River, because it runs into the Nile. They have Water-Lizards, about the big∣ness of a Cat; they have a tail so strong and sharp, that at one blow they will cut off a mans leg. In the Lake and Rivers of Abyssinia, are also Cramp∣fish, which cause a numbness, and extraordinary trembling in those that touch them. Neverthe∣less they use it against the tertian an quartan Ague, by tying the sick person to a Plank, and applying this fish to him, which causes a violent pain in all his body, but the fit never returns again. They have a great number of Ostriches, which will run very swift, but can't fly. This Country produceth abundance of Serpents, of which the biggest, which we call Dragons, are not dangerous, unless in biting. The most venemous are a certain Am∣phibious Serpent, of a pale red colour, of the length and bigness of a mans Arm, the breath of them kills all that comes within the scent of it. They have abundance of Bees, especially the little black ones, they keep in the ground, and make excellent Honey, and their Wax is extra∣ordinarily white; they have no sting, and hide their nests so close under ground, that it is much trouble to come at them. They have also great Ants, who march together like an Army ordered for Battle, they devour all they find, and bite men very violently, they do not make provision for Winter, as other Ants do. The Abyssines are neither cruel nor bloody, they seldom quarrel one with another. The Abyssines of Nezea much excel all the rest, in ingenuity, justice, courage, and other vertues. They make the best Servants in the World, for they will do any thing you'll have them: Those of Tigre are in∣constant, treacherous, and revengeful. These people are better shaped than the Negro's, and have not so very flat Noses, nor such thick Lips. They are of a yellowish swarthy complexion, their bodies are reddish, but very active, and al∣most indefatigable in getting up the Rocks. They live a long time. Besides those Abyssines that are Christians, there are many of them Jews, Maho∣metans, and Pagans. Lastly, They are very kind to Strangers, and very civil to all the World. They are lazy, and take no care for the future. They read the Scriptures much, and have a great veneration for the Sacrament, and Church, into which they never enter but bare-footed. It is said that the Abyssines received the Christian Faith by the means of Queen Candace, whose Eu∣nuch S. Philip baptized; and that they were after∣wards instructed by S. Thomas, S. Matthew, and
S. Bartholomew, and have ever since preserved the name and profession of Christians, but have been seduced into the Heresies of Eutyches, and Diosco∣rus. Their Patriarch is inferior to the Patriarch of the Copthti, whose See is at Alexandria, and who ought to confirm him: Nevertheless, the Aethiopians prove by their History, that Candace was Queen only of the Isle of Meroe, and that they have been converted to the Christian Faith, no longer than the days of Athanasius: They cir∣cumcise their Children, and after Baptize them. For this 50 years the Catholick Religion hath lost ground much. The Schismaticks celebrate Divine Service there after the usage of the Greeks. Aethiopia Superior, or the Higher Aethiopia, is govern'd by a Prince, whom the Inhabitants call Negus, but some call him very improperly Prestre-John, for it was an Emperor of Tartary which was called by this name heretofore. The Persians call him Prester-Cham, i. e. The Prince of the Wor∣shippers; or Prestegiani and Apostolici, because he was a Christian: In Aethiopia he is called nothing but Negusch, i. e. King. This Monarch hath no settled Residence, but he hath 6000 Tents carried along with him, for himself and Retinue; his Children are brought up in the City of Amara, where there is a University, till they take out one of them to succeed after the death of his Father. The Kings, Princes, and Lords of this Empire are all Tributary. Marmol says, that there are 3 Kings in the Isle of Guequere, or Meroe, who are at Wars continually one with another; the one is an Idolater, the other a Mahometan, and the third a Christian, and subject to the Emperor of the Abyssines. The greatest part of the Coast of Abex is in the Dominion of the Grand Seignior. The Emperor of the Abyssines marches in great state, few people can speak to him or see him: His Face is always covered. His ordinary Guard is 12000 Souldiers, his Council is made up of 120 persons. His common Army is 40000 Horse, and 60000 Foot. They are allowed to make Wine of their Grapes only for the Emperor and Patriarch; their usual drink is Cyder or Metheglin, which hath the taste and effect of Malmsey. The Nile is the most remarkable River in Abys∣sinia and Africa, which receives into it on the right side of it, the Rivers Gema, Gamara, Obea, Croix, and Takaze, which last is filled with the Waters of Mareb; on the left side of it, Choloy, Brenty, Baxilo, Checan, and Maleg, which is united with the River Angila. There are also other Rivers, that is to say, Zebe, which comes out of the Kingdom of Nerea; Marhe, which rises out of the Lake of Zoai, in the King∣dom of Doge, and which, after it hath received the River Hoaxe into it, runs from West to East. As to the Nile, the source of it hath been unknown in all the former ages, but in this last age it hath been discovered by the European Travellers to be in the Kingdom of Goiame. The first fall of Nilus, or Cataract is 33 fathom high, and lyes near the City Depcan, or Depecan.. The second fall, or Cataract is about 100 fathom; after this fall, it makes such a roaring, that it may be heard three leagues; the cause of which is, that it runs be∣tween seven Rocks in so narrow a passage, that it can't be seen. After the third fall, which is in the confines of Nubia and Aegypt, near the Mountain Gianadel, it receives the River Nubia into it. As to the overflowing of this River, I do not doubt, but that the Rains, which begin to fall in Abyssinia about the first of June, which is the Winter of that Country, are the chief cause of it. The Emperor of Abyssinia hath at present only the following Pro∣vinces and Kingdoms under his Government. Abyssinia is divided into these seve∣ral parts. 1. Part of Tigre, Tigre, or Ausen. Caxumo, Amba. Fremone, or Malgoa. Geileiter, Zabalam. Sartoera, 5 Forts. Bisa, or Vision. Dabarva, or Barva. 2. Bagamedri, Bagamedri. Dar-fogor. Atsana. Acata, Caga. 3. Dambea, Dencas, Sena. The Old Gorgone. Ganeta de Jesu. Depsan, Goga. New Gorgone. Mercoreca. 4. Goiame, Tavia, Nobesse. Colete, Sarca. 2. People, Agoat, Gafates. 5. Amara, Amara. Azel. 6. Nerea, Gavi. Cangaro. 7. Holeca, Holeca. 8. Part of Xaoa, Xaoa. 9. Angot, Dofarzo. Corcora. 10. Damot, Damot. Gabra. 11. Dankali, Agedale, a Fort. Bailarium, a Fort and Haven. 12. Fatagar, Montague du Lac. 13. Adel, or Zeilan, Avea Gurule. Zailad, a Port. Tuca. 14. Balli. 15. Zirigero. 16. Rosanegus. 17. Roxa, or Boxa. 18. Zeth. 19. Kuncho. 20. Mahala. 21. Bisame. 22. Fasculon. 12 other Provinces, Magaza; Salaoi; Olkais, or Old Marabet; Ogara; Abargele; Holkent; Se∣guede; Cemen, or Samen; Salatraoa; Okeka; Dobas, or Doba. The Galas, or Galles, the Turks, and some other neighbouring people have taken away from the Emperour of Abyssinia good part of his States, as the Kingdom of Dankali, Angot, Damet, Ario, Fategar, Zingero, Rosanegus, Roxa, Zeth, Kuncho, Mahala, &c. So that Abyssinia is not what it once was.
AETHIOPIA Inferior, or the Lower Aethiopia. The Kingdom of LOANGO. Loangum. THe Kingdom of Loango, or Lovango, called of old the Country of the Bramas, begins below the Cape of S. Catherine, and reaches from North to South, to the little River Lovango, Louise, or Comby, which parts it from the Kingdom of Ca∣kongo; having on the East the Anzicans, and the Region of Pombo, and on the West the Aethio∣pick Ocean. The extent of it from South to North, is 54 leagues from the 2 D. to the 3 D. 40 min. of Southern Latitude, and the length of it from West to East, is 120 from the 35 degree to the 41 D. 20 min. Longitude. The principal parts or Provinces of this Kingdom are, Lonangi∣ri, Lacrugo-mongo, Cylongo, and Pyri; to which these neighbouring Countries are joyned, Majum∣ba, Dingi, Cylongotiamacango, Sefe, and Coby. The Air is very healthful, altho it be very hot: The Region of Lovango produces several sorts of Plants and Fruits. They have abundance of Pot-Herbs, Goards, Sugar-Canes, Tobacco, Anana's, &c. They have plenty of Beasts; as Hogs, Cows, Goats, Fowl, all sorts of Venison, which is little accounted of. Their Trade is chiefly in Slaves, Ivory, Copper, Tin, Lead and Ion, which they fetch from the Mines of Sondi, which are at a great distance from them; Cotton, and several sorts of Beasts. The Inhabitants are very strong, good shaped, jealous, active, vigilant, but much given to plea∣sures, very suspicious of Strangers. Their habits are made of Palm-leaves woven together, adorn∣ed with the Feathers of Parrots, and other Birds. Their Women are made Slaves to their Husbands, they never speak to them almost but upon their knees; and make all things necessary for life, un∣less drink, which is the only business of the men. When any one of them dye, his Relations do nothing but cry and howl, lay his Body in the open streets, and stand about it in throngs, and ask it what is the matter that it dyed, whether it wanted food: They bury all the goods of the dead, and all that is valuable, with his Body. This Kingdom was heretofore divided into ma∣ny Soveraignties, and inhabited by several sorts of people, which were at continual War with one another a long time, and eat one another, as they do still at Jagos. After several Revolutions, all these several Countries fell under the Dominion of the King of Lovango; who now reigns with great authority over his Subjects: This King hath seve∣ral Ministers of State, who are at this time Gover∣nours of Provinces. Their Religion consists, as well as the peoples of Cakengo and Goy, in foolish Superstitions: They have but a very obscure knowledge of a God: They invoke Domestick and Field Daemons. The King of Lovango is an extraordinary Prince in all things: He hath 7000 Women, which he sets at work in a Seraglio, and makes choice of some of them only for his pleasure: When any of the Kings Wives are with Child, if she be suspect∣ed of falshood to his Bed, they make her ink the Cup of Freedom, or Proof to the Man that hath debauch'd het; the poor woman is condemned to be burnt, and the pretended or real Adulterer is put to the same punishment. The Council of State chuse the most aged of the Royal Family, and give her the Name of the Macenda, that is, the Kings Mother, or Queen Regent, and the King is obliged to give her as much respect as his own Mother; he must not undertake any thing with∣out first consulting her, and may not deny her any thing without running a great hazard. It is not good to marry this Regent, no more than the Kings Mother or Sisters, for they may lye with as many men as they will, and not be accused of any crime for it. The Kings Children do not succeed him in his Government, but his Brothers in their order. The Kings Garments and Robes are made of Stuffs brought out of Europe. His Gentlemen carry upon their Left Arm a Wild Cats Skin, as his other Subjects have one upon their Girdles. The King makes but two Meals, for which he hath two Houses set apart on purpose: In the one he eats, in the other he drinks: No man may see him eat or drink upon pain of Death: They sound a Bell to give notice when the Kings Dinner is set on to the Table. He never comes out of his Pa∣lace, unless it be upon some great Festivals, or about some affair of very great importance. The Kingdom of Loango is divided into 4 Pro∣vinces, which belong to it, and into such as ad∣joyn to it, as you see them set down in the follow∣ing Table, with the most considerable Cities. The Kingdom of Loango in two parts. 1. The 4 Provinces of Loango, Lovangiri, Lovango, Salasi. Lovango, Kaie, Boeke. Longo. Makonde. Cylongo, Cylongo. Hamba, Senie. Katoe, Genno. Piri, Kango. 2. The Neighbour∣ing Countries, Majumba, Majumba. Dingi, Dingi. Cylongotia. Mocango. Sefe. Coby. The Kingdom of ANSICO and JAGOS. Regnum Ansicanum. THis Kingdom is bounded on the North with the People called Mosonles, on the West with the Country of the Amboes, which joyns to Lo∣vango; on the South with the Provinces of Songo and Sondo, which are subject to the Kingdom of Congo, and on the East with the River Ʋmber, which runs into the River Zaire, and the Kingdom of Lovango. The Air and Soil are of the same nature with Loango; it hath red and white Sanders, Mines of Copper, Rhinoceros's, which come from Congo, many Lyons, and other wild Beasts, Cattel, and Venison. The Inhabitants, commonly called Ansecams, or Ansicos, and Jagos, are very vigorous and brisk; they climb up into Mountains and Rocks, and va∣lue
not their lives, which makes them not fear their Enemies: They are not at all deceitful, al∣tho they be very inhumane; they eat mans Flesh, and have publick Butcheries for it: The Father eats without any trouble or regret the flesh of his Son, and the Son of the Father, and so Brothers and Sisters eat one another, and assoon as their breath is out of their body they eat them. The Women are handsome: The common people go naked from the Girdle upwards, and without Shooes: People of noe wear Bonnets made of Red or Black Velvet, brought from Portugal. They have as many Wives as they please, without any trouble to bring up their Children: Some Mothers are so cruel, that they will eat them as soon as they are born. They have neither Lands, nor Inheritances, nor fixed abi∣tations: They wander from one place to another like the Arabians, and live only by Theft, and kil∣ling men. Their Money, or Symbos, is a kind of Shell, which they catch at Lovando, in the King∣dom of Angola; whither they go to get Salt, Glasses, Knives, Silk, and other Merchandizes, which they exchange for Slaves. The Sun is their God, which they represent un∣der the figure of a Man, and the Moon of a W∣man: They adore also a great number of fsredge Gods; every one hath his own, which they consult in all their undertakings. Their Arms are a Bow and Arrow, which they will draw with a great deal of nibleness and skill. The King of Ansico commands 13 Kingdoms, and is accounted a very powerful Monarch. The Jagos are the most cel of all the Athropo-phgi, or Men-eaters. The Kingdom of CACONGO. Cacongum. THe Kingdom of Cacongo is bounded on the North by the River of Lovango Louise, on the West with the Ocean, on the South with the Kingdom of Goy, and River Sombo. The principal Cities are go the Metropolis, the Great Cascais, Malembas, the Little Cascais, Cabinde, which is a Bay. The Soil is not very fruitful, because 'tis not well tilled: Here is a great trade for certain pieces of Stuff, which the D h call Kussen-bladen; Black Bonnets, Iron Blades, Pearls, Axes, and other Iron Tools, Tobacco, Powder of Red Wood, Linnen Cloaths, and other foreign Merchandizes. These people have the same Manners, Religion, and Government with those of Longo. The King by force of a Law dares not touch any Merchan∣dize that comes out of Europe. The Kingdom of GOY. Goium. THis little Kingdom is bounded on the North and East with the Kingdom of Cacongo, on the South with the River Zaire, and on the West with the Ocean: The chief City is of the same name upon the Coasts, well peopled, and very pleasant, next to the Gulph of Cabinde. The Por∣tugueze have a Magazine there. It is a good Country, and affords plenty of Mil∣let, Beans, several sorts of Fruit, Plants and raps; the Sea and Rivers have great store of Fish. In the year 1631 the Earl of Songo entred with an Army into the Country of Goy, conquered the King of it, deposed him from his Throne, and set up his own Son: Ever since that time this Earl and the Kings of Loango and Goy live at peace. The King of Congo assumes to himself the Sove∣raignty of Cacongo and Goy, but the Princes which rule in each of them, oppose it vigorously, and act each of thm as Kings in their Realm. The Kingdom of CONGO. Regnum Congum. GEographers do not agree about the Limits of this Kingdom; some bound it on the North with Lovango and Ansico, on the West with the Aiopick Ocean, on the South with Angola and Malemba, on the East with the Mountains; where there is pnty of Cr al, Silver, Salt-petre; the River Verbele, and Gioquas, a People. The Air is very ht, especially four hours in the midst of the day; they feel no cold, unless during the Rains, and a e in the night. Their Winter begins about thi March, and their Summer in September. That which they call Winter, would be here one of our hottest Summers, only it is a very y season: For 5 months, viz. April, June, Jly, May and August, it commonly rains; in September and October the Rains are not so frequent; after which they have not one drop of Rain to the end of March. The flowing of the Rivers in the rainy seasons, makes the Country produce plentifully all manner of Grains, Fruits, Plants and Provisions. The Province of Dembo hath fine Meadows, Orchards, a grain called Luco, about the bigness of our Mu∣stard, Millet, Turkey-Wheat; it yields also Rice, Lemons, Oranges, Citrons, Banano's, Dates, Co∣co-nuts, Melons, Gards, Cucumbers, Palm-wine▪ The Tree called Cola, which bears the most fra∣grant Fruit, of which the people eat continually; plenty of Ozegues, which i a sort of Plumb of an excellent taste. The banks of the River Lecunde are planted with Ced, as far as S. Salvador: They make Boars of tm and burn them. The Hollanders bring from thence Caa and Tama∣rinds: They have an abundance of Beans and Poultry in the Sea-Towns of the Dutchy of Bamba, an along the River Onza and Mandihora, Sugar-Cans, large and small Catle, especially Goats, which bring forth young 3 or 4 times a year: In∣dian Cocks, Hens, Ducks and Geese multiply strangely here: Their Elephants are of a prodigious bigness, their Teeth or Tusks weigh every one two hundred pounds: They have also Tygers, Buffles, and a sort of Wild-Horse, whose skin is spotted with white, black, red and blue; Empalanga's which are like an Elke or Ox, and have Horns like a Stag; Macoco's, or great Beasts, which have very long Legs, and slender, as well as their Neck; the skin of it is grizled, and streaked with white; they have two Horns very large, and sharp at the top; their Dung is like Sheeps, but smells like Musk or Civit: They have Wolves also, which they call Quembego's, bigger than our Foxes, Stags, Wild-Goats, Coneys, aes in abundance, Apes, Monkeys, Wild-Brs, whose Tushes are an ex∣cellent Medicine against the Fevers and Person, by taking of the filings of it in Water; a sort of Deer, which they call Galungo's, Squirrels, Bears, Wild-Cats,
Serpents, Vipers, Peacocks, Partridges wild and tame, Pheasants, Pidgeons, Turtles, Ea∣gles, Falcons, Vultures, Hawks, Pelicans, Green-Parrots, Owls, Bees, 4 sorts of Ants, and a mul∣titude of Flyes about the Rivers: One sort of Birds is very admirable among them, called Entiengie, it always keeps upon the Trees or in the Air, for if it touches the ground, it dyes: It is spotted with divers Colours; it hath always about it certain black Birds, called Embas, which are as it were its guard; 6 go before it, and 10 behind it. As soon as the van-guard is defeated, or faln into the Hunters-nets, the Rear-guard flyes, and so the Entiengie is taken. The skin of it is so very preci∣ous, that none but the King of Congo is allowed to wear it, or such Princes and great Lords as he shall give special permission to. The River Zaire pro∣duces abundance of Crocodiles, River-Horses and Water-Hogs. They have Mines of Copper, Iron and Silver, Quarries of Marble, Jaspers, Porphyry, and several other precious Stones. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are Black, some few are Brown and Tawny; they are of a middle stature, and well-shaped in comparison of the other Negro's: They are fierce, and proud to their Neighbours, civil and courteous to Strangers, apt to drink too much Spanish Wine, and Aqua∣vitae; they are brisk and courageous, and express themselves well enough, nevertheless 20 men of Europe would put 2000 people of Congo to flight. The people of Bamba are accounted the most cou∣rageous and valiant, some of them are so strong, that they will cleave a Slave in two at one blow with an Ax, cut off a Bulls Head, and lift an Hogshead of Wine that weighs 325 l. with one hand, and hold it up till it all runs out. Theft is not punished, and therefore they are most of them Thieves, of which the most dangerous are the Highway-men. The Inhabitants, before the Portugueze entred into their Country, were Idolaters, every one worshipped what he pleased for his God, insomuch that some adored Dragons, Vipers, Serpents, Ty∣gers, Herbs and Trees: They fall down flat on their faces before their Idols: The Portugueze planted Christianity there in 1484, but they were never good Christians, they are real Hypocrites. The King of Congo is an absolute Prince over all his Subjects: His Revenue consists in a yearly Tri∣bute, which his Vassals pay him in Millet, Simbos, and Cattle. His Kingdom is divided into 6 Provinces, as is to be seen in this Table. The Kingdom of Congo in 6 Provinces. 1. Damba, Panga. Diverse Lordships. 2. Songo, or Sontio, Songo. Pinde. 3. Sundo, Sundo. 4. Pango, Pango. 5. Bata, Bata. 6. Pembo, or Condo-Ecango, S. Salender, or Benza, or Ambascongo. he Provinces of BOKEMEALE, OCONGO and CONDE. THe Province of Boke-meale, or Bouke-meyall, lyes North East of Lovango about 160 leagues from the Coast; the Inhabitants are Jagosites; they sell much Ivory to the people of Lovango; to whose King they pay Tribute, and are obliged to follow him in the Wars. There is a Forrest of 5 or 6 days Journey between Lovango and Boke-meale. The Province of Ocango lyes on the East of Con∣go; their trade is in white Cloaths and Stuffs, made of the Bark of a Tree; the Inhabitants are too lazy to make Slaves of, which makes them not regarded; if they are put to any labour, they dye presently. Conde, or Pembo-Ocango, is above 200 leagues from the Dutchy of Beta towards the North; it lyes along the Banks of the River Coango, which runs into the River Zaire. The Kingdoms of FƲNGENO, MACOCO and GIRIBƲMA. THe Kingdom of Fungeno, or Fungendo, lyes be∣tween the Rivers Zaire and Coango, on the East of Conde: The Portugueze buy Slaves there, and Stuffs made of the Bark of Matombe, which is made up of long strings like our Flax: These Stuffs are ready Money in Lovando and Angola: They also trade with the Inhabitants of Nimea∣maye, which is a Kingdom that lyes South-East of Macoco. The Kingdom of Macoco is a large Country on the North of Zaire, behind Congo, running for 2 or 300 leagues together upon the Coasts of Lovan∣go and Congo: The Inhabitants call themselves Monsoles or Meticas: They are Anthropo-phagi, as well as the Jagosites. The King is looked upon as a very potent one, having 10 or 12 Kingdoms for his Vassals, and commanding a great breadth of Land; so that there are killed every day in his Pa∣lace 200 men, of which part are Criminals, the other part Slaves sent him for a Tribute. The flesh of these poor Creatures is dressed for the Dinner of the King and his Courtezans, as if it were Beef or Mutton, notwithstanding they have plenty of pro∣vision, and all kind of Beasts. The Portugueze send their Slaves, or Pombero's, to Monsol, the head Ci∣ty of this Kingdom, to trade for them; for they are of so great fidelity, that they trust all manner of businesses to them, after they have taught them to read, write, and cipher. The Riches of this King consists in Slaves, Simbos, or Indian Shells, and in small pieces of Stuff. His great Enemy is the King of Majuco, who is a mighty Prince. The Kingdom of Giribuma, or Giringhomba, is on the North of Macoco: This King is very power∣ful, having 15 other Kings for his Vassals: He is Confederate with the Great Macoco, and their Sub∣jects agree very much in the same Humours, Cu∣stoms, and Superstitions.
The Province of POMBO, and Dutchy of AMBƲILA. THis Province is about 160 leagues from the Ci∣ty of Lovango, near the Country of the Abys∣sines; it is tributary to the Great Macoco. The Negro's which inhabit the Coasts of Cafrerie seem to have taken their Laws and Customs from the people of Pombo; from whence it is that the Slaves, which are so faithful to the Portugueze, and which, being first taught to do all manner of business for them, are called Pombero's. An European could never endure the hunger, thirst, and toil, which they are forced to endure in going thither, which is the reason they are trusted. The Dutchy of Ambuila, or Amboile, is 6 days journey in extent every way, having on the North and North-East the River Loze, which parts it from the Province of Oande; on the West Congo properly so called, on the South Cavangombe, and on the East the Country of Quingengo. This Coun∣try is very fruitful, and well husbanded: It feeds abundance of Cattel and Bears, great quantities of Fruit-trees: It hath 15 Seigniories in it, of which the 5 principal are, Matuy-Nungo-pingen, Hoiquoi, Ambole, Ambuilo propria and Lovando. They trade in Slaves, as they do at Pombo. Here is a Table of Congo in general. Congo in general contains: Congo, a Kingdom. Bokemeale, a Province. Ocango, a Province. Conde, a Province. Fungendo, a Kingdom. Macoco, a Kingdom. Giribuma, a Kingdom. Majuco, a Kingdom. Nimeamaye, a Kingdom. Pombo, a Province. Ambuila, a Dutchy. Oando, a Province. Cavangombo, a Province. Quingendo, a Country. The Kingdom of ANGOLA. ANgola contains six principal parts: 1. The King∣dom of Angola specially so called. 2. The Isle of Lovendo. 3. The Kingdom of Quisama or Quis∣sima. 4. The Province of Libolo. 5. The Coun∣try of Benguela. 6. The Kingdom of Mataman, or Glimbabi. The Kingdom of Angola, or Bonde, or Dongo, lies between the Rivers Danda, and Coansa, or Quanza; it is bounded on the North by the Kingd. of Congo; on the West with the Ocean; on the South with Mataman; and on the East with the Kingdom of Mejamba, or Malemba. This Kingdom hath a∣bout 30 leagues of Coasts, and in the Country it is about 50 leagues from South to North, and al∣most as much from West to East. It is watered with several-Rivers, as Danda, Benga, Quansa, Lucala, Calucala, &c. The Soil is naturally very dry and barren, but those places which lye by the River Dengo, bears plenty of Mandnoca, Millet, Beans; several sorts of Herbs, and Fruit Trees. In the years 1629, and 1630. Ferdinando Desousa, Governour of Lo∣vando for the Portugueze, commanded all the in∣habitants to till each of them a piece of Land. The breaking up of the ground seemed very strange to the people of Angolo, but when they saw what ad∣vantage they gained by it, they betook themselves diligently to Husbandry. The Country affords Beans, Oranges, Lemons, Dates, Anana's, Ba∣nano's, Patato's, Acosses, Coco-nuts, Anones, Guavo's, Gegoes, White-pepper; several sorts of Plants, as the Tree called Pao-del-cebra, or Ser∣pent Wood, Mofrislasoucho, which is an excel∣lent Medicine to expel Poison; Mondicoha, of the Root of which they make bread; Almesiga, which is a kind of Gum; Oron de Bitios, which is a kind of Mallows; Mofuma, which is a Tree, whose Wood is very slender; Alicondes, which is a great Tree, which is 12 or 15 Ells thick: Sugar Canes. They have several sorts of Beasts, especi∣ally at Enseca, as Tigers, Leopards, Buffles, E∣lephants, great Apes. Several Serpents of prodi∣gious bigness; there are also diverse Lakes as Qui∣haeite, and Angolone; and in the River Quasa there is a Water Monster, which the Negro's call Ambisianga∣lo, and Pesiengoni, the Portugueze Pezzemouber, and the French Pilots a Siren. There are males and females of them, about 8 foot long, and 4 wide: They have the shape of a man in several parts of the Body, they live as well by Land as Waters, and cry out as men that have receive a mortal Wound with a Dart or other Weapon. Their flesh hath the smell, taste, and figure of Swines. In their Lakes also there are Crocodiles, River-Horses, Oysters, Soles, Pilchards, Mackerels, Guilt-heads, some Whales, Bonito's, Roncadores, Cor∣vines, Halicores, &c. The Negro's about Lovendo S. Paulo, are wholly Idle; they are distinguished into 4 conditions. 1. Gentlemen, or Mocata's. 2. Artisans, or La∣bourers. 3. Quesico's, or the Slaves of the Coun∣try. 4. Slaves bought or taken in Wars. The Men marry as many Wives as they are able to keep, the chief of them hath some advantage above the rest. The Women that give their Children Suck, come not near their Husband, till their Children have Teeth; then the Relations being met toge∣ther, one of them takes the Child, which is dres∣sed accordingly, and being accompanied with the Friends, and whole Family, they go from one House to another, to beg something for the Child, which hath newly gotten its first Teeth. There are reckoned eight principal Provinces in this Kingdom, every one of which is divided into several Lordships, as you may see in the follow∣ing Table. 1. Lovando into 39. Lovando, S. Paulo. 2. Sinso. 3. Hamba 42. 4. Ocollo. 5. Enseia. 6. Mas∣singan 12. 7. Cambamba 60. 8. Embaco 60. The Isle of LOVANDO, and Provinces of QƲI∣SAMA, or Quissamba, and LIBOLO. THe Isle of Lovando lyes just over against the Ci∣ty of Lovando S. Paulo in the 8 D. 40 min. of Southern Latitude; it is 10 leagues in length, and one in breadth; it hath 7 Towns in it, the chief of which is called, The Holy Spirit; it produces Oranges, Citrons, Lemons, Pomegranates, Figs, Bonano's, Coco-nuts and Grapes: They have Beasts and Monkeys, and find the finest Shells, espe∣cially Simbos, which they use for Money. The Province of Quisana reaches from the mouth of Coanza above 30 leagues into the Continent: It is divided into several principalities, the chief of which are called Motchima, Zuozubi, Gango, Zuatatsa, Molunica, Cataiahaio, Zuino. It pro∣duces
abundance of Millet, Mandicoha, Aliconds, and the Tree called Qualunberez, which is about the thickness of a man. This Tree by cutting the Bark sends forth a poysonous juice, a drop of which, if it be put into the Eyes, destroys the sight; and if it be taken inwardly, kills in a short time: The Fish likewise in any place of the River, where it falls, dye presently. The Soil feeds large and small Cattel, and Wild Beasts. It hath also Mines of Salt and Iron. The Province of Libolo is on the South of Qui∣sama, West of Monomotapa, North of Rio Longo and the States of Benguela: It contains several Lordships, whose names are not yet come to our knowledge. They have the same sorts of Beasts, Plants and Fruits as are in the Kingdom of Angola: The greatest part of it is subject to the King of Portugal. The Inhabitants are yet in their Pagan Errors, but may easily be converted. We have Ivory, Civet, and Slaves, from thence. The Kingdoms of BENGƲELA, and MATA∣MAN, or Climbere. THe Kingdom of Benguela reaches from the Ri∣ver Quansa to Cabo Negro, where the King∣dom of Mataman begins. In it is the Gulph of Maiseti, Cabo Ledo, C. falso, Cabo S. Bras, the Bay of Poultrey. This extent of Land is called Benguela Viella. Within 8 leagues of Rio-longo stands the Town of Mankicongo, at the foot of a Mountain: The Portugueze have a Magazine there. After is the Bay of Benguela, and La bonne Bay. There are eight large Towns about Benguela, which are subject to it, which are called, Malonde, Pe∣tinga, Manikisomba, Maninomma, Pikene, Mavi∣kibinde, Mondombes, or Mardendes. In this Coun∣try, among many other kinds of Wild Beasts, there is one called the Abada, which is about the bigness of a Colt of 2 years old: It hath a Horn in the Forehead, and another in the Nape of the Neck: These two Horns are very excellent and certain Remedies against several distempers. The Kingdom of Mataman or Climbere is on the South of Angola, on the West of the River Baga∣madiri, which parts it from Monomotapa; on the North with the River Bravagul, and the Moun∣tains of the Moon; on the East with the Aethiopick Ocean: So that the extent of it from Cabo Ne∣gro to the Mouth of the River Bravagul is about 70 leagues: The Mountains here are covered some of them with Snow, others with Crystal and Silver. Along the Coasts there are the Cape of Ruipez, Golso Prio, Backo de Bazado, where they catch Sea-mews. The Air of this Country is very tem∣perate, and the Soil produces all sorts of provisions. The Kingdom is subject to a Prince who is very arbitrary, tho on the Coasts there are several Princes which assume the Title of Kings. CAFRERIA, or the Coast of Caftares. Cafria, aut Carorum Regia. CAfreria reaches from the Kingdom of Mataman as far as the Cape of Good Hope, and then ascends again Northward as far as the Coasts of Zanguebar, so encompassing the Empires of Mono∣motapa and Monocmugi, except on the North side of them: So that it hath on the West, South, and East, the Sea of Caftares. The Mountains which part it from Monomotapa have at their bottoms rich Valleys, and several Rivers, which water the Plains, and divide the Country into many pretty Regions and parts. The Air of this Country, especially about the Cape of Good Hope, is pure, clear, and serene; it is neither too hot nor too cold, except it be in the months of June and July, which is a time of cold mists, Snow, and violent Tempests, which come from the tops of the Mountains, and out of the Clouds, and seem to force the Sea out of its bounds, and overflow the Earth: It is not good then to dwell on those Coasts. The Winter there is in May, June and July; it rains violently for the two first months. The Soil is fit to bear all manner of Fruits; it is fat and slimy in most places, rocky and sandy in some others. The Dutch have behind their Fort Fields planted with Coleworts, Tobacco, Corn, &c. They have abundance of Fruits, Flowers, Trees and Beasts, both great and small Cattel, Oxen of an extraordinary bigness, Sheep which have very long Legs, and very great Tails: The Forests are full of Stags, Deer, Boars, Goats, Roe-Bucks, Coneys, Hares, Wolves, Tygers, Leopards, Lyons, Elephants and Rhinoceros's, of which there is one kind that hath two Horns upon the Nose. In the adjoyning Ocean there are several Sea-monsters, which live by Land, as well as Wa∣ter, as Sea-Coneys and Dogs, Sea-Horses, Hogs, Cats, Bears, and Wolves, Sea-Oxen and Hobgob∣lins, &c. which you may see feeding in the Mea∣dows at a distance from the Sea: They have also Birds that live both by Land and Water, which never go far from the Coasts. The people of Cafrerie, or Hotentots, especially those that dwell about the Cape, are lean, ill-fa∣vour'd, and of a large stature; they are of a yel∣low and tawny complexion, as the Mulato's, and people of Japon. The people that dwell about Ʋlasbay are smaller, and of a brown and reddish colour, having short frizled hair, large wrinkled foreheads, good Eyes, black and sparkling, flat-nosed, thick lips, white teeth, narrow shoulders, too big arms, slender wrists, well made hands, long fingers, suffering their nails to grow to a great length; they have lank bellies, and their po∣steriors very fat, small legs and feet; they are so swift in running, and so well breathed withal, that they will catch a Bull by chase. These peo∣ple live in great ignorance, but begin a little to grow more understanding, by their commerce with the Europeans. Nevertheless we may observe some remainders of Natural Light amongst them; their love to each other, their fidelity, and con∣tempt of riches, may make Christians ashamed; they are very cauteous of losing the honour of car∣rying themselves well, and seldom or never are guilty of any extravagancy or theft, unless they are drunk with eating the Root of Dacha, or are reduced to extreme poverty. It is true, that they are ill habited; their Arms are a Bow, Arrow and Pikes. Their ordinary food is certain round Roots, which their Women gather, and cook for them ei∣ther in Water, or upon the Coals. They do not kill their Beasts, unless they be old or sick; they eat the Fish which they find dead upon the shores,
and dead carcasses without any dressing. Their chief trade consists in making Iron heads for their Arrows and Pikes, and making bulrush Mats for their Cabbins. The greatest part of them go a fish∣ing, or a hunting of Wild Beasts. Their Marriages and Funerals are very odd and fantastical, as is al∣so their administration of Justice. Their Language is so confused, that it is more like the sound of Bells than a distinct voice; they are very hardly understood, but they learn the language of Foreign∣ers very easily; they buy nothing in their trade, but Instruments of Iron, and what is just necessa∣ry. As for their Religion, they acknowledge a supreme power, which governs the Winds, Rain, seasons, heat and cold, but do not think them∣selves obliged to worship him. It is true, they seem to give some worship to the Moon; and some part of the Eastern Coasts towards Sofola are Mahometans, there are also some Christians, which the Portu∣gueze and Dutch have converted since they have sttled there. Cafrerie is some part of it subject to the Empe∣rour of Monomotapa; the King of Mataman also hath another part of it towards the North and West; the King of Sofola commnds that part of it which is toward the Coasts of Zangubar. As for the people which live in the South parts, some obey Princes and Lords, which they have chosen to govern them, others live without King, Faith, or Law, as it is said ordinarily of the people of Cafrerie. The Dutch have a Fort with a Colony near the Cape of Good Hope. Besides the Kingdom of Mtaman, which is not reckoned in Cafrerie, and Sofola, which is triu∣tary to the Portugueze, this Country may be divi∣ded into several people, who have each of them Governours of their own, whose names this Table will give you a Catalogue of. Cafrerie hath these parts: 1. The Kingdom of Sofola, where are, Sofola, the chief City, &c. 2. Diverse peo∣ple, who have no Cities, Goinghos. Goras. Corinquas. Cochoquas. The Great Gari∣griquas. The lesser Gariguriquas, Hasaas, Colonas, Chai∣nonquas, Sonquas, Namaquas, Heusquas, Bri∣gondis, Hancumquas, The Isles of Lapini, Daimi, and the French Islands. The Empire of MONOMOTAPA. Mono∣motapa Imperium. MOnomotapa, or Benomotapa, or Benomotaxa, is bounded with the Kingdom of Sofola, and Empire of Monocnugi on the North East; on the North with the Mountains of the Moon; on the West, South and East with the Coast of Cfrerie. The Extent of it from South to North is about 300 leagues, and from West to East 240 between the 13 D. and 31 of Southern Latitude, and be∣tween the 44 and 57 D. 30 min. of Longitude. The Air is temperare, the Soil fruitful in Pastu∣rage, Grains, Plants, Fruits and Metals, but chief∣ly in Sugar-Canes, which spring up there without any labour or art. This Country is not peopled evey where. The Inhabitants are rich in great Cattel, which they eem more thn Gold. They have Ostriches as big as Oxen. They have many Mines of Gold, and their Rivers bring down a great deal of it in their Sand. The Inhabitants are Negro's well fashioned, hail, strong, and of a good stature; they are very lively and vigorous, and love War. Their common food are Cakes of Rice, Millet, and the Root of Ignamez, Salt Beef; their drink sowr Milk, and the Oyl of Susiman. The King drinks nothing but Palm-wine, or Metheglin, perfum'd with Musk and Am∣ber; they spend two pounds of Gold to perfume him every day, and never burn any thing before him but perfumed Torches. The Prince never goes out of his Palace unless they kill a Beast, that the Priests by inspecting the Entrails may foretel the event of his Journey. The Kings never change their fashions: Their Habit is a long Silk Robe of Stuff made in their Country: They will never endure to wear any foreign Stuffs for fear of Poison. It is allowed them to have as many Wives as they can keep; the first is the Mistress, and the other are accounted but as Servants. The King hath abve 1000, which are the Daughters of his Vassals; the first is the Queen, and the eldest of her Children is Successor to the Crown. Most of the People go naked from the Girdle upwards. They honour the dead so much, that every one preserves the Bnes of the eads of his Family, and of his Friends. Altho they pay no Tribute, yet they never come before the King, nor his great Lords, unless they make them some rich Presents; especially the Merchants. The Portugueze have obtained of this Monarch by their Petition, a large Province, where there are many Mines of Gold. Their Arms are a Bow and Arrows, Darts, Cuttela's, Poniards and Cimetres. The King has an Army of Foot, for they have no Horse in their Country: His Guard is ordinarily some Regiments of Women, who burn off their Right Breasts, as the antient Amazons did, to draw their Bows more easily; they shoot their Enemies backward, m∣ing as if they would fly, and when their Enemy is nar they turn them, and slay all that oppose their passage. He hath also for his Guards a Pacae, or Company of two hundred Mastifs, or great Dogs. The Emperor of Monomotapa, or Mane-Motapa, exacts an abundance of Reverence of his Subjects; all the World speak to him on their Knees, except the Portugueze, and his most beloved Favourites. To keep the Tributary Princes of his Kingdom in their Duty, and oblige them to espouse his Inte∣rests, he causeth all the Princes their Successors, to be brought up in his Court, that by his kind usage of them, he may engage them to be faithful to him. He sends his Embassadors every year to all his Great Men, that depend upon him, to give them Fire; and every one of them, quenches out their own, to come and take some of the Emperors. They execute Justice exactly in the Realm. The Judges give sentence without any delay, or any stay, assoon as they have heard the Parties and their Witnesses; but the King confirms and disanuls their sentence, as the Case requires. As to their Religion they are most of them Ido∣laters; they call the supreme God, Mazia, or Auno, and believe him the Creator of the World. They make a Feast on the first day they see the New Moon, and upon the Emperors Nativity. They
honour a Virgin, whom they call Peru, very much, and have Convents of Women. The Portugueze have converted a great number of these People; the Emperor, his Mother, and above 300 Gentle∣men, were baptized in 1560, by Gonsalvo the Jesu∣it; but after being perswaded by 4 Turks, that the Jesuit was a Conjurer, he cut off his Head; yet repenting not long after of the fact, he punished the Musulmans with the same punishment for their Calumnits. Monomotapa is divided into 6 principal parts, which are Monomotapa propria. The Kingdoms of Agag and Baro. The Province of Toraca. The Kingdoms of Inhambane and Inhamior, with all their dependants, which are very considerable; and are better distinguished in the following Table, with the chief Cities. 1. Monomotapa propria, Monomotapa. Zimbaoes, a Fort. Tete, Sena, Zedeia. Mogar, Degma, Juros. Mosata, Samot, Cuggi. Tialso, Lotaia. Garma, Calbaras. Quitiqui, Agrasede. Hagala, Vigisimagna. 2. The Kingdom of Baro, Baro, or Bara. Gallila, Zet. Doldel, Carma. Armeta, Matafuna. 3. The Kingdom of Agag, Agag. Gamba. 4. The Kingdom of Inhambane, Tonge, or Tongue. 5. The Kingdom of Inhamior, ..... ..... 6. The Province of Toraca, or Butca, Butica, or Faluca. Amara. Zenebra. The Emperor of Monomotapa hath his Residence in the City of Monomotapa, which stands upon the River of the H. Spirit, in the 26 D. of Southern Latitude, and 11 of Longitude. The City of Zimbaoes is the place of this Emperors Delight and Pleasure; it is situated about the middle of his Kingdom, in the 25 Degree of Southern Latitude, on the North East of Monomotapa: It is accounted the Miracle of this Kingdom, being built of great hewen Free-stone, whereas all the other Cities are built of Wood. The Kingdoms of Agag and Baro are ruled by Kings tributary to the Emperor of Monomotapa; they lye on the West of the Negro's Country. The Province of Toraca, or Totoa and Batua, lyes be∣tween the Mountains of the Moon, and the Cape of Corrientes, and the River Magnice towards the North, and River of Bravagul on the West. The ground of this Province, near the Coasts, is chiefly Meadows without Trees. They have many Ele∣phants and fine Salt Pits. In the City Tatua, or thereabouts, are Mines of Gold, Silver, and several sorts of Stone Quarries. In Baro and Quitia, are also two Mines of Gold. The Kingdom of Inhambane is over against the Cape of Good Hope, the chief City of it is Tongue: The Portugueze can hardly dwell there because of the great heat. As to the Kingdom of Inhamier, it is also subject to Monomopotapa, and lyes near the River Cuama. The Kings residence is near the Village Sena, where many Portugueze have their abode for main∣taining their trade. The Empire of MONOEMƲGI, or Nimca-Maye. Imperium Monoemugium. THe Empire of Monoemugi is on the South of Abyssinia, and the Great Macoco's Country; on the North of Monomotapa and Sofola; on the West of Mozambigue, and on the East of the Kingdom of Malemba, which is tributary to this Empire. The Extent of it from South to North is about 180 leagues from the 11 D. 15 min. to the 21 D. of Southern Latitude, and from West to East 240 leagues, from the 29 D. to the 62 D. of Longi∣tude. The Air is so unwholsome in most places of it, that the Emperors dare not travel through them; and because the Jagosites, which is the most cruel of all the Anthropo-phagi, beset the Roads, and have no respect of any person: These Barbari∣ans are much like the people of Ansica. The Country, which lyes between Ocango, and a great Lake, which some call Zaire, out of which arise several Rivers, and in which are many Islands, is very fruitful and pleasant; it hath abundance of good Fountains, several sorts of Birds, and Beasts of many kinds: Palms, of which they make Wine and Oyl, and such an abundance of Honey, that they can't spend a quarter of it. They have many Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, and a great number of Elephants. The Inhabitants are white, and of a great sta∣ture, they cloath themselves with Silk and Cotton, which they buy of foreign Merchants. They have Neck-laces of Grains of Amber, as transparent as Crystal. These grains are brought them from Cam∣baye, and they use them for Money, because Gold is so common that 'tis of little esteem. These people are Idolaters at present, our Missio∣naries have as yet settled the Faith there but little. The Country is subject to a Monarch which they call the Monoemugi, to whom several other petty Kings and Princes are subject, or pay him tribute. By the last Relations we have, we are informed that the Kings of Malemba, and some of the Guia∣ques, are under his Dominion. This Emperor endeavours much to live in peace with the Kings of Quiloa, Molinde, and Mombaze, that their Trade may thrive. The Kingdom of Secumbe, and Chicova, are included in his Kingdom, and pay him tribute. Under the States of the Emperor of Monoemugi, are contained the Empire of Monoemugi, the Kingdoms of Secumbe, Chicova, Malemba, and part of the Guiaques, as in the Table with the chief Villages. Monoemugi hath these parts: 1. Monoemugi propria, Zembre. Bagametre. Bonda. 2. Secumbe, a Kingd. Empago ..... 3. Chicova, a Kingd. Chicova. Zemba. 4. Malemba, a Kingd. Malemba. Depsen. Meti. 5. Part of the Guiaques.
ZANGƲEBAR. Znguebaria. THe Coast of Zanguebar reaches from the Aequa∣tor, to the 17 D. 30 min. of Southern Lati∣tude, which contains 350 leagues, and the breadth of it from East to West, is about 160 leagues from the 61 D. to the 67 D. 40 min. of Longitude. This Country is bounded on the North, with the Coast of Ajan; on the West, with Abyssinia; on the South, with the Kingdom of Sofola; and on the East, with the Ocean, or Sea of Zanguebar. The Air in general is unhealthful, especially in the Kingdom of Quiloa; the Land is low and marshy, it produces little Provision, but yields plenty of Gold, and Ivory; by the Trade of which the inhabitants are maintained. Nevertheless, they have Oranges, Citrons, Pulse, Rice, and Millet; they feed also Oxen, Goats, Mutton, and Horses, which are much esteemd, especially those of Me∣linda: They have an abundance of Elephants, Venison, Wild-Fowl; several Mines of Gold, Sil∣ver, and other Metals. The most remarkable Rivers are Quilmanci, which parts this Country from the Coasts of Ajan, Melinda, Mombaze, Quiloa, Gado, Mozambique, and Cuama, which parts Zanguear from Sofola. The Inhabitants of it are more civil than the peple of Gafrarie, because of the frequent con∣course of Europeans thither. They are black, and naked as far as their Girdles. Their food is the flesh of Wild Beasts, Milk, Pulse, and Wild Fruits. The Natives are Idolaters, or Mahometans, fol∣lowing the Doctrine of one Zaid, the Nephew of Haly. There are sme Christians who have settled themselves in some Forts built near the Sea by the Portugueze, which have made several petty Kings tri∣butary to them, and which maintain a great Trade. The Coasts of Zanguebar is divided into several Kingdoms, and sme Isles adjoyning which depend on it, which are better distinguished in the follow∣ing Table. Zagubar contains in it: The Isles of Quirimba. Oibo, &c. Mogallo, a Kingd. Mongal∣lo. Angos, or Angoche, a Kingd. Ango∣che. Mosambique, a Kingd. Mosam∣bique. Quiloa, a Kgd. Quiloa. Mombaze, a Kgd. Mombaze. Melinda, a Kgd. Melinda. Lamon, a Kgd. Lamon. Pata, a Kingd. Pata. Siam, a Kingd. Siam. Ampaza, a Kgd. Ampaza. Chelicieta, a Kgd. Chelecie. Pemba, a Kingdom, Pemba. The more remarkable things of these places are, 1. That the Isles of Quirimba lye along this Coast, as far as Cape Del-Gado, for the space of 25 or 30 leagues. They are very fruitful in Plants, Grains, Fruits, Herbs, and Beasts. 2. The King∣dom of Mongallo is a small Principality, near the mouth of Cuamo, peopled by Arabians, Mahome∣tans, who have a King of the same Religion: They Trade only in Gold. 3. The Kingdom of Angos stands upon a branch of Guama, some adjoyning Isles are subject to it. The King is a Mahometan, and his Subjects are partly Arabian Merchants; the other inhabitants are Negro's of a small Stature, and differing in Manners, and Language. 4. The King∣dom of Mosambique, lyes on the North of Angos, it commands 3 Islands, which are Mosambique, S. George, and S. James, which lye at the mouth of the Ri∣ver Mgincate. This Country is very fruitful in Rce, Millet, Pulse, Oranges, and Citrons; they have many Elephants, Cattle, and Wild-Beasts, Venison, Wild Poultry; Mines of Gold, and Silver. The Inhabitants are Negro's and go naked: Some of them are Pagans, other Mahome∣tans with their King, and others profess no Religi∣on at all. 5. The Kingdom of Quiloa bears the name of an Isle, it lies in the 8 D. 50 min. of South∣ern Latitude. It is a very good Country, it bears several sorts of Grain, Fruits, and Maze, Rice, O∣ranges, Citrons, and Cattle. The King at present is Tributary to the Emperor of Moncmugi; they are cloathed after the Arabian or Turkish manner: The greatest part of them are Zealous Mahometans, and the other Pagans. The Portugueze had taken this Country, but left it again because the Air was unwholsome. The King is a Mahometan, and re∣sides in the Isle of Quiloa, the chief City of which of the same name, was taken by the Portugueze, and again forsaken, but the King still pays them yearly a tribute of 1500 marks of Gold. 6. The Kingdom of Mombaze, is between Quiloa on the South, and Melinda on the North. It is of a great extent: The King is very much feared by his Sub∣jects: He thinks to make himself Lord of the whole World, notwithstanding which the Portu∣gueze have defeated all their Armies, with a small body of Men. The Portugueze are Masters of the Isle of the same name, where the chief City of the Kingdom is called Mombaze. They have a Castle there which makes them Masters of all the Coun∣try. This King is a Mahometan, and a great Ene∣my of the Christians; his Subjects are all Mahome∣tans, or Idolaters. 7. The Kingdom of Melinda is divided by the Aequator, and reaches from the Kingdom of Mombaze, as far as the River Quil∣monci towards the North, and as far as Chelecie, and Abyssinia in the Continent, towards the West. Melinda is the Chief City, standing in a very plea∣sant Plain; it is well built, and encompassed with Gardens. The ground is very fruitful in all things. The Inhabitants are Negro's, Tawny, or White. They fight with a Bow, Arrows, Targets, and Darts. They are good Souldiers. Their Religion is partly Idolatry, Mahometanism, and Christiani∣ty. There are 17 Churches in Melinda, for the Catholick Portugueze. The King is very much re∣verenced by his Subjects, when he goes our, the chief Gentlemen carry him upon their Shoulders, and the Ladies sing his praises before him, carrying Vessels fuil of perfumes, and make a kind of har∣mony. He allows the same honors to be given to a∣ny great Lord, or Prince, which comes to see him. This Prince renders impartial Justice to all the World, without respect of Persons: He is a great friend to the Portugueze, with whom his Subjects have a great Trade. These Foriegners have built a Fortress near Melinda, which commands the Port. As to the other lesser Kings, viz. of Lamon, Siam, Pata, Ampaza, Chelicie, Pemba, and many other Islands upon those Coasts, they are Slaves or tributary to the Portugueze; who beheaded the King of Pata, and quartered the King of Chelicie, for some suspicion; but their too severe manage∣ment, have made them to be driven out of several places. The Dutch know how to make use of them
for their own advantage. These petty Princes are on the North or West of the Kingdom of Malinde; they are Mahometans, and subject to the Portugueze. The Coasts of Ajan, and Abex. THis Country is bounded on the South with the River Quilmanci, and the little Kingdoms we have spoken of, on the West by the Mountain, from whence Quilmanci comes; on the North with the Streight of Balilmandel, and the Gulph of Ara∣bia; and on the East with the Ocean. This Coast contains the Commonwealth of Brava, the King∣doms of Megadoxo, Adea, and Adel, and yields all necessaries for humane life, especially good Horses. The Inhabitants are white for the most part: Up the Country there are Negro's. They are all Mahometans, except the Bedwins, which are of the Sect of the Emofaids, who run up and down the Fields, live without Laws, and steal all they can light of. The Commonwealth of Brava lies between the two Arms of the River Quilmanca, and between Barraboa, and Megadoxo. The City of the same name is inhabited by very rich Merchants, which deal in Gold, Silver, and Silk: They pay the Portugueze 4000 livres of Gold for protecting them. The Chief Families of them are Mahome∣tans, their Government is Aristocratical. Upon the Coast over against this City, they find a pro∣digious quantity of Amber-grease. The next is the Kingdom of Megadoxo, the chief City of which of the same name, is the place of resort for the Mer∣chants of Cambay, and Aden. They change Stuffs, Drugs, and Spices, for Gold, Silver, Ivory, and Wax. The King is a Mahometan, and they speak Arabick altogether, altho some of his Subjects are Whites, Negro's, and others of an Olive-colour. They poison their Arrows when they go to War. This Country yields plenty of Fruits, Barley Cat∣tle, and good Horses. The Kingdom of Adea is on the North of Megadoxo, on the East of Oyia, which is part of Abyssinia, on the South of Adel, and West of the Ocean. Barraboa is the most con∣siderable City of it; it is upon the Sea-shore, whee also stands the City Quilmanca, which gives name to the River that runs by it, which is called higher Oby. The principality of Granzeo, is the lowest part of the Country towards the West, and upon the Confines of the Kingdoms of Oyia, Xoa, and Gorage; in which the King and all their Subjects are Mahometans, and tributary to the Abyssines, but Granzeo is peopled with Christians and Idolaters. The Inhabitants are rich in great Cattle. The Soil is fruitful in Fruits, Grains, Pastures, and Beasts. They have Cows as big as Camels without Horns, with lank Ears, and Hair as white as Snow. The Kingdom of Adel, or Zeila, is bounded on the North with the Government of Suaquen, and the Streight of Babel-mandel, on the West with the Kingdom of Fatagarni, Abyssinia, on the South with Adea, and on the East with the Ocean, which makes an Angle Northward and Eastward of that Kingdom, and unites again at the Cape of Guarda∣fui; the largest extent of the Coast from the City Zeile to the Cape, is 120 leagues, and the short∣est from the Cape, to the Confines of Adea, is 72. The Chief is Adel, where the King hath his Resi∣dence, in the 9 D. of Northern Latitude. It hath no high Mountains, and never rains, yet the Country is fruitful by reason of the Rivers. It produces great abundance of Bread-corn, Millet, Barley, Oyl, and Sesamum; they have white and black Sheep with great Tails, black Cows, with Horns like a Stag, as also red ones which have one Horn in their Fore-head, which bends upward towards their Backs. They Trade in Gold, Ivory, Incense, Pepper, and Slaves, of which the Coun∣try hath plenty. The King and his Subjects are Mahometans, and are often at War with the Abys∣sines. Nevertheless the Grand Seignior hath made himself master of the Cape of Guardafui, Bar∣bameth, and almost all the Countries of Barnagas, and Barazan, which belong to the King of Adel, and of all the Cities and Ports in the Arabian Gulph, which belong to the Emperor of Abyssinia; so that it is very hard now to go into the Country of the great Negus, without passing thro the Turks Dominions. The Inhabitants are White, or Tawny, and some are black towards the North-west parts. Modern Geographers are much divided about the bounds and extent of the Coasts of Abex. Some call them New Arabia, and comprehend in it a part of Aegypt, viz. part of the ancient Trogloditis. At this time it reaches from the Streights of Babel∣mandel, as far as the Mountains, which part it from Aegypt, so that it contains about 350 leagues of Coast upon the Red-Sea, and about 45 in the greatest breadth. 'Tis a Country all Desarts al∣most and barren, by reason of the great heat, and want of Water, yet the Air is very foggie, and un∣wholsome when the Sun is down. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are Turks, and Arabians. The North part is under the Government of the Grand Seignior, who keeps a Beglerbeg in the Ci∣ty of Suaquen, which stands upon the Red-Sea. The Southern part contains the Kingdom of Dan∣cali, which is not so barren as the other. There are several very considerable Isles, which I shall speak of in the Chapter about the Isles of Africa; after I have given a Table of these two Coasts, as follows. The two Coasts of 1. Ajan contains The Commonwealth of Brava, Brava. The Kingdom of Megadoxo, Megadoxo. Kingdom of Adea, Barraboa, Quilmanca, Corgabra, Barraboa, Zachet, The Monks Isle. Kingdom of Adel, Adel, Ara, Bali, Mau∣tra, Doara, Comiza∣ra, Novocara, Socele, Asum or Afion, Salir, Zeila, Dalaca. 2. Abex con∣tains The Kingdom of Doncali towards the South, Degibeldara. Malaca. Guardafui. Vella. Degibelcora. Places under the Turk in the North, Suaquen. Ercocco. Mazua, &c.
CHAP. V. The Principal ISLANDS of Africa. THe Islands which stand about Africa, are in 3 several Seas. 1. The Red-Sea. 2. The Ocean. 3. The Mediterranean, under which distinction I shall treat of them in the 3 following Heads and Tabls. The Isles in the Red-Sea, or thereabouts. IN the Red-Sea, there are 9 principal Islands, which are Mazua, Dalcaca, S. Pietro, Babel∣mandel, Suachen, Barbora, Primeira, Maget, and Zocotoa, which last lies near the Red-Sea, in the Ocean, on the North-East of Cape Guardafui. The Isle of Mazuan, or Mazua, is a small Isle over a∣gainst Arquico in the 15 D. 40 min. of Northern Latitude. The Turks took it from the Abyssines, in 1527. The landing of it is dangerous, especially when the South Wind blows. The Soil is very fruitful. The Inhabitants are counted good Soul∣diers, and most of them are Mahometans. Dalaquacara, or Dalaca lies about 6 or 7 leagues from the Continent, on the South of Mazuan, from which it is about 18 or 20 leagues distant. It is about 27 leagues in circuit. Their Air is very wholsome, and Water good, which is a rare thing in these parts: They find Pearls about the Shores. The Inhabitants are Negro's, professed Enemies to the Turks, and uncivil to strangers. They practice Pyracy, and go naked from the Girdle upwards. They have a Prince who commands some of the adjacent Isles. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are Christians, and the other Mahometans, of the Sect of Hali. Babel-mandel, lies in the midst of a passage into the Red-Sea, at an equal distance from the Asian, and African Continent, over against the Cape of Zeila, in the 12 D. 40 min. of Northern Latitude. It hath neither Fruits nor Grass. The Portugueze have utterly ruined it. The Isle of Suaken is not far distant from the former, on the West side of the Red-Sea; it is a∣bout 16 leagues in compass. The chief City, which is of the same name, hath very good Buildings. Barbora lies over against the Kingdom of Adel. Zocotora, or Sicuthera, lies under the 12 D. 40 min. of Northern Latitude, and 20 leagues from the Coasts of Adel, Cape Guardasui, and the Ara∣bian Gulph. It is about 25 leagues in length, and 19 in breadth, and about 60 in compass. The Sea about it is safe for Anchoring, it hath 2 good Ha∣vens, Cora, and Benin. The chief City of the same Name is the Residence of the Cheque. The Air is very hot. The Rains endure not long. The high Rocks of this Isle, the tops of which are al∣ways covered with Snow, touch the Clouds, and having condensed them, dissolve them into sweet dews. They have some Rivers which never dry, and some Pits which the Arabians have digged up∣on the Coasts. The Soil is very barren and bears nothing but Dates, Citrons, and some Simples, which is recompenced with plenty of Cows, Goats, Hogs, and in their Woods they have Wild Horses and Asses, Partridges, and Turtles. The best Aloes in the World comes from this Isle, which they call Aloe Zocotorina; they also have Dragons∣blood, which is a Gum of the Tree called by the Indians Ber, and they gather much Amber-grease upon their Shore. The Inhabitants are either Na∣tives, or Arabians; which last call the other Bedu∣ines, i. e. Beggars and Blockheads. They are of 2 sorts, Semi-Beduines, which are born of a Mother a Beduine, and an Arabian Father. They live upon the Coasts. They that dwell within the Land are true Beduines, and are white. They do not con∣cern themselves with the Arabians, or Negro's; and are better made than the others. They are a thievish, lewd, and idle people; they suffer themselves to be commanded by a small party of Arabians, altho they are much stronger. They spend their time in Fishing, and feeding their Cattle. The Beduines have some appearance of Christianity, but the true Zocotorians are Idolaters, and worship the Moon, which they believe the Queen of all things. Their Caciz, or Hodamos, judge of all sorts of matters, but they continue in their Office but one year. Their Judgment is without Appeal, and the Badge of their Dignity is a Staff in the form of a Cross, which no man may touch but under the Punishment of losing his hand. They marry as many Wives as they can keep, and divorce or change them as they please. They provide also for the bringing up their Chil∣dren, by giving notice when their Women are with Child, and will bring forth on such a day, that they give the Infant to such an one; for which end they light a fire of green Wood in the Cave's mouth, whi∣ther they retreat, and cry out that they make a pre∣sent of a Child, that shall be born, to such an one. They call these sort of Children, Children of the Smoke. As for their Funerals, they stay not till the sick person is quite dead before they bury him, for they make no difference between a dying per∣son, and one that's dead; they prevent Death like∣wise by a violent Poison, which is a white liquor that distils out of a Tree; they drink it themselves when they are in any distemper, or in danger of being slain by their Enemies. Their Habit is a long Robe of Camlot, which is a Stuff made of Goats Hair. Some of the Beduines go naked, unless it be in those parts which all cover. The Isles of the Red Sea are, Mazuan, Dalaca, S. Pietro, Babel-mandel, Suachen, Barbora, Zoco∣tora, and Primeira. Isles belonging to Africa, which lye in the Ocean. AS to the Isles about Africa, which are in the Ocean, I shall take notice of those only, that are set down in the following Table. The Islands of Africa lying in the Ocean: 1. The Isles of Comorra, Angizesia. Molalia. Angouvan. Mayata. 2. Madagascar, or S Laurence. 3. Towards the Coasts of Zan∣guebar, Pemba, Zanguebar. S. Roch, Monsia. Quiloa, Cabras, S. Jago. 4. About the Ea∣stern Cafrerie, Bazarutos. Ilha Doynaque. 5. Towards the Cape of Good Hope, S. Elizabeth. Comelius, or Roben. Dassen Eilant. 6. About the West∣ern Cafrerie, S. M. d' Agosta. St. Trinidad, 5 small Isles. Sancta Helena. Nova Sancta Helena. S. Martin de Vaz. Dos Picos.
7. About Congo and Guinea, The Ascension. S. Matthew. Annobon, Prince. S. Thomas, Fernando-Port. 8. The Isles of Cape Verd, about Nigri∣tia, Mago, Bona, Vessa, Sal, Bralla, Fulgo, S. Anthony, S. Lucia, S. Vin∣cent, S. Jago, S. Nicolas, and 2 others. 9. The Canaries, on the North of the Isles of Cape Verd, about Bi∣ledulgerid, Canaria, Arginogi. Ferro, Gadler, Gumera. Tenerifa, Palma, Lancerot. Fort Ventura, S. Crosse. Laguna, Porto de Naos. Porto de Cavalos, Alegria, Two Salvages. 10. The Teneres, or Azores, on the North West of the Madera's, Tenere, Angra. S. Maria, St. Michael. S. George, Pico, Corvo. Flores, Fayal. Graciosa. 11. Over against the Gulph of Salle and Barbary, Madera, Porto Sancto. Agado, Insula, Deserta. 12. The Isle of Borondon, or Blandon, which is thought to be a Fiction. There are several Islands on the North and East of Madagascar; some of which belong to Princes of their own, others are possessed by the Europeans, and some have no Inhabitants. The Soil is for the most part fruitful, and if it were well cultivated and tilled, would bear any thing we could hope for. It is observable, that in the Isle of Mascaregue, or Bourbon, there is every necessary for Life, and con∣tinual Health. The Isles of S. Maurice and Apol∣lonia are very pleasant Habitations. The Isles of Gomorra lye between Madagascar and the Continent of Mozambique, with several o∣thers; they yield Rice, Banano's, Coco's, Oranges, Sugar, Citrons, and Ginger. They have Cows, Sheep, Goats, Hens, and Pigeons. The Inhabitants trade with the Portugueze of Mozambique. They go almost naked. Every Isle has its King, whom they are obliged to present, when they come into his presence. The greatest part are Mahometans, the rest are Idolaters; they live without Faith or Law. Some of these Perty Kings pay Tribute to the Portugueze. The Isle of Madagascar, or the Isle of the Moon, is one of the biggest Islands in the world. The French call it the Isle of the Dauphine, or S. Laurence, because they discovered it upon S. Laurence's day. The situ∣ation of it is between Zanguebar and Cafrerie. It ex∣tends from the 11 D. 50 min. to the 23 D. 30 min. of Southern Latitude, and from the 71 D. 30 min. to the 79 D. of Longitude; so that it is from South-West to North-East 300 leagues, from the Cape of S. Mary to Capnatal. The Air is very temperate and sound, unless it be in some places, where they suffer the Water to corrupt with the Leaves of the Trees. The Soil produces all sorts of Fruits, Roots, Plants, and Living Creatures. They have abundance of Rice, Cotton, Sugar, Silk, Honey, Pulse, Oranges, Citrons, Melons very large, Saffron, Ginger, seve∣ral sorts of excellent Roots, and some of prodigi∣ous bigness. They have Mines of Gold and Silver, but they keep them secret from Strangers; Ebony, Sanders, red, yellow, and white Redwood; 4 or 5 sorts of Palms; Sheep, Cows, and Oxen of 3 or 4 sorts are there common; several sorts of Apes, of which the biggest are dangerous: Many Parrots, Turtles, and other kinds of Birds. This Isle is divi∣ded into several parts, diverse Mountains, Forrests, Plains, Rivers, and some Lakes; where there are plenty of Venison, Wild Beasts; and of all sorts of Fish. The most of the Inhabitants are Idolaters; the rest follow a kind of Mahometism: Some of them are white, which derive their Pedigree from the Arabians; others are Negro's, which are sub∣ject to the other. They that live upon the Coasts are more civil and courteous, than those that dwell in the middle of the Isle. As for the Government of Madagascar, it depends upon several great Lords, which rule diverse Countries. It is true the Negro's have quarrels often with them, and make a separate Body. For the better knowledge of the Isle, we must divide it into 28 Principal Provinces, accord∣ing to the following Table. The Twenty Eight Provinces of Madagascar are: 1. Anossi, or Carcaussi. 2. Monothengha, or Ma∣nampan. 3. The Valley of Amboule. 4. The Country of Vo∣hitsban. 5. Stomampo. 6. Icondre. 7. Vatemanahon. 8. Anachimoussi. 9. Cringdranat. 10. Vobits-Anghombi. 11. Manacarongha. 12. Matatane. 13. Antavare. 14. Ghallemboulo. 15. Tametavi. 16. Sahaveh. 17. Voulovilou. 18. Andovouche. 19. Manghabei. 20. Adcimou. 21. Mandrerei. 22. Ampatre. 23. Caremboule. 24. Mahafalle. 25. Houlouve. 26. Sivh. 27. Ivoronheoc. 28. Machicore. Between the Cape of Bonne Sprance and the Ae∣quator, there lye several Islands, which are of great use to the Merchants that come out of Europe, into the Indies, or return from thence, to refresh and rest themselves, as they go along, in that so tedious a Voyage, especially the Isle of S. Helena, which lyes in the 16 D. of Southern Latitude; and S. Mat∣thew, which lyes in the 2 D. of Southern Latitude; Annobon in the same D. S. Thomas under the Aequa∣tor. Princes Isle in the 2d D. of Northern Latitude. In every of which they find something to refresh them. The Isles of Cape-Verd, which lye over against the mouth of the biggest branch of the River Niger, are very considerable in themselves, and likewise to help our commerce with the Indies, and Southern Countries. They were called antiently, the Hespe∣rides, there are 20 of them in all, but 12 only are of note; they reach from the 14 D. to the 18 D. of Northern Latitude. The Air is generally hot, and unhealthy in some places. They were discovered in 1440 by the Genoeses. The Portugueze have settled a Vice-Roy there, who hath his Residence at S. Jago. They are all peopled. The Inhabitants are Catholicks, except some Negro's that have nei∣ther Faith nor Law. On the West of Biledulgerid lye the Isles of the Canaries, or Insulae Fortunatae; they extend from the 26 D. to the 28 D. 30 min. of Northern Lati∣tude, and between the 1 and 7 D. of Longitude. The Air is very hot, but healthful; the Soil very fruitful in all things, but especially in Wheat, Bar∣ley, Millet, excellent Wines, delicious Fruits, Sugar, Dragon-trees, Palms, Papers, Fig-trees, Pome∣granates, Citrons, Oranges; Wood which is very useful for Dyers. They have plenty of Goats, and Wild Asses. The Inhabitants are almost all Spani∣ards. The Natives are very active, but great Eaters. The King of Spain hath a Deputy in the City Ca∣naria, a Regal Audience, with a Bishoprick and Inquisition. They are all Catholicks, except some Slaves, who live like Beasts, and are taken no care of. The Isles of Terceres, or Azores, are so called from the abundance of Birds of Prey, which are in them. They are numbred among the Isls of Africa, tho
they are at a great distance from it. They are situ∣ated between the 36 D. 30 min. and 40 D. 30 min. of Northern Latitude, and between the 348 D. and 356 of Longitude, so that the Dutch make their first Meridian to pass thro the Isle Tercere, which is the most considerable of them. The Air is very healthful, the Soil very fruitful in Grain, Wine, and Fruit; they afford also plenty of Wood Canary Birds; excellent Oxen, Iwl, and other sorts of living Creatures. There are Fountains of hot Water, and one that turns Wood into Stone. The Portugueze began to inhabit them about the year 1449, and they are yet under their Domini∣on. The Inhabitants follow the Catholick Religion. The Isle of Madera, or as the Portugueze call it Madeira, i. e. Wood, because it was nothing but Forrests, when the Portugueze first discovered it. Niger thinks it one of the Isles of Juno, of the An∣cients. It lies in the 1 D. 30 min. of Longitude, and under the 32 D. 30 min. of Northern Latitude. It is about 20 leagues in length, and about 7 or 8 in breadth, between the Streight of Gibraltar, and the Canaries. The Air is very temperate and health∣ful, there is never any great Cold. The Country is full of Fountains, water'd with 7 or 8 small Rivers. The Soil is fruitful in all sorts of Fruit, especially, excellent Wine, which will keep a long time both by Sea and Land. They have plenty of Corn, Pulse, and Sugar-Canes. This Isle is a very sweet Country. It hath abundance of Tame Creatures, Boars, Par∣tridges, Ring-Doves, Quails; Honey and Wax. The King of Portugal keeps a Deputy in it, who resides at Punzal, or Funchals, which is the Suffra∣gan Bishoprick to Lisbon. They profess nothing but the Catholick Religion. On the North-East of Madera, is the Isle of Porto-Sancto, or Holy-Port, which is about 8 leagues in compass. It is subject to the Governour of Ma∣dera; the Soil is as fruitful; it yields Honey, which is accounted the best, and most delicate in the world; and every thing that is necessary for man's life. There are also several other Islands thereabouts. The Islands belonging to Africa, lying in the Mediterranean Sea. THere are few Islands of any Note in the Medi∣terranean Sea, that belong to Africa, except it be Malta, which is famous for nothing else, but for the habitation of the Knights of S. John of Jerusa∣lem, the most illustrious Order of Europe. As for the other Isles, I shall content my self only to give a Table of them, and describe that more at large. The ISLES in the Mediterra∣nean Sea, that belong to Afri∣ca, are these four; Malta, Valeta. Lampadousa. Limosa, & Gerbes. The Isle of Malta, Melita, belongs to Africa, contrary to the opinion of Daviti, and some other Geographers. Cluverius says, that it is the Hiperia, of which Homer speaks, the antient Habitation of the Phaeaci, and the famous Ogygia; where the Nymph Calipso, the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, entertained Ʋlysses, when he had escaped from the Shipwrack, of which he was in great danger about that Island; but whither it were so or no it is un∣certain. It lyes in the 35 D. 10 min. of Northern Latitude, and in 39 D. of Longitude. It is about 6 or 7 leagues long from East to West, and 3 or 4 wide. It is provided of very good Havens, and diverse Castles, to secure it self from the Infidels. It is between Sicily on the North, Tripolis, and the lesser Africa on the South; on the West it hath the Isles of Pantalaraea, Limosa, and Lampadousa. It conins 4 walled Cities, besides a great number of Villages, viz. 1. Cita Valette, or the City of Valette, the chief City of the Isle. 2. Cita Vechia, or the Old Malta. 3. Bargo de S. Angelo, or the City of the H. Angle, or Cita Victoriosa. 4. The City of S. Michael. The City of Valeta, which the Italians call Terra Nuova, and French the New City, takes its name from John de Valete, alias Parisot, the Great Master of the Order, who built it after the famous Siege, after the Turks had taken the Castle of S. Hermes. It is built upon an High Rock, which parts the Port of Marezamusseto from the great Port of Marza, in a Peninsula, washed with the Waves in 3 places; upon the top of the Rock is the Temple of S. Hermes built: 'Tis compassed about with Ditches cut out of the Rock, defended with good Bastions. and several other modern Fortifi∣cations. The chief streets are, Strata Reale, or the great Street; Strata Mercanti, or the Merchants Street. The Houses are high, built of Free-stone, which are about 2000, whose Roofs are built ac∣cording to the fashion of the East Countreys. The Cathedral Church is S. John's, the others are S. Au∣stin's, S. Dominick's, S. Mary the Mother of Jesus, S. Paul, Madoa de Carmine, Jesus-Colledge, Ma∣dona de Victoria, and several Convents. There are 7 Courts or Palaces, call'd Alberges, for 7 Languages, or Nations, each having their Governors or Comman∣dants, which are, as it were, the Pillars of the Order. These Alberges are, 1. The Alberge of Provence, 2. of Auvergne, 3. of France, 4. of Italy, 5. of Arragon. 6. of Germany, 7. of Castile. There was anciently one for England, but 'tis now abolisht. The number of the In∣habitants is reckoned about 40000 in all the Island, reckoning the Knights, Men, Women and Children. Davidi says there are 60 Villages, or Casals as the Italians call them, and Adhamet as the Arabi∣ans, but Bosio counts but 40, and others 46. The Soil is very dry and barren, being almost nothing but Rocks, unless it be about the old City, or Boscheto, where there are some profitable Lands fit for tillage, and many good Gardens. If the rest of the Isle was like this, the order would excel all their Neighbours in Provisions. Yet they have some Wheat, Barley, Cumminseed, Cotton, Grapes; se∣veral sorts of Flowers, and very delicate Fruits; as also Sheep, Goats, Swine, Asses, Mules; Poultry of an excellent taste; 4 or 500 Horses; many Co∣neys, Hares, Partridges, Hawks, and several sorts of Birds, which come thither from diverse places, es∣pecially in March and October. They have no Ser∣pents, nor any other venemous Beasts. This advan∣tage and happiness they attribute to the Blessing of St. Paul; nevertheless Crucius says, that they have Serpents and Scorpions, but they have done no mischief ever since that Apostles time. The Inhabitants are very civil, they cloath them∣selves after the Mode of the Sicilians, for the most part, and speak a corrupt Arabick. The Citizens un∣derstand ordinary Italian and French, they are not very rich by reason of the barrenness of their Coun∣try. Their Arms are long Spears, great Daggers, Pikes, or Javelins, Spears with two points, Muskets, Har∣quebusses; they have 300 pieces of Cannon. These Islanders are good Soldiers. This Island was anciently under the Government of Carthage, afterwards it became subject to the Romans, from the time they got Sicily into their power. The Mahometans invaded it in 828, and were driven out of it in 1090, by Roger the Norman, Earl of Sicily. After that it continued in the power of the Kings of Sicily, till Charles V. took it with Naples and Sicily, who made a Present of it to the Order of the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem.
A General and Particular Description OF AMERICA. map of the Americas AMERICA AMERICA, which is also called the New World, and the West Indies, in re∣spect of us, was discovered in 1492. by Christopher Columbus, a Genoese; and in 1497. by Americus Vesputius, a Flo∣rentine, from whom it takes the Name. 'Tis thought that this part of the Universe was not al∣together unknown to the Antients. The Phaenicians, and Carthaginians had some knowledge of the Country we now call America, but the hazard of the Seas, and the small skill they had in Naviga∣tion, made them forsake, or neglect all commerce with it. Seneca, speaking of the design of the Peo∣ple of Asia and Africa, foretels the Discoveries that have been made in these two last ages. Plato in his Timaeus, brings in the Aegyptian Priests, telling Solon, that there was heretofore beyond Hercules's Pillars, an Island called Atlantis, larger than all Asia and Africa, which was overflowed by an horrible Earthquake, and extraordinary Rain. They relate the Kings that ruled there, their power and their Conquests. Crator, Origen, Proclus, Porphyry, and Marcellus Fianus confirm this Story. Aristotle, speaking of the Wonders of the World, says, that certain Pilots of Carthage having discovered a large Country, fruitful in all things, beyond Hercules's Pillars, several Families of that Commonwealth went thither to dwell, which made the Cartha∣ginian
Magistrates to forbid their Inhabitants sailing thither any more upon pain of Death. Upon which account it was, that all Traffick being hin∣dered thither, it was unknown till 1492. or 3. when Christopher Columbus, the Genoese, discovered it for Ferdinand King of Arragon; he made two Voyages thither, and did not land till the second. Americus, 5 years after, ventured thither, upon the Discoveries of Columbus, being sent by Emanuel King of Portugal. He gave his Name to this large Continent. America is bounded on the North by the Sea of Greenland, Hudsons Streights, and the Christian Sea; on the West by the Pacifick, or Southern Ocean; on the South by the Streights of Magellan; and on the East by the Atlantick Ocean, or North Sea, which divides it from the old Continent, from which it is distant about 1000, or 1200 leagues, more or less, in several places; the extent of it from South to North is from the 54 D. 20 min. of Southern Latitude from the Strights of Magellan, to the 63 D. of Northern Latitude to Hudsons Strieghts, is about 2347 leagues; and from West to East from the 241 D. about Augubela del Gato, to the 348 D. about the point of Rio Grand in Brasil. The breadth of it is different in several places, inso∣much that 'tis next to impossible to determine the exact extent of it. This Continent lies in 3 Zones, so that the Air must needs be very different, according to the dif∣ferent Climates; and in like manner the Soil, that is to say, that it is either hot or cold, and the Land is more or less fruitful, according to the situation of each Country. It yeilds all sorts of Fruits, Plants, Grains, Trees, Creatures, and Metals, which we have in Europe, and several other things, which are unknown to us. They have so much Gold, Silver, and other great Rarities, that almost all Europe long after them, and is drawn thither by the bait of an enriching Trade. It is very hard to give a true discription of this Country, which is not as yet fully discovered. Some doubt whether it be joyned to the Artick Countries or no: The Ice and almost continual Tempests, hinder men from mak∣ing any new discoveries. The Americans are generally cruel, lazy, and malicious, except in Peru, and some other places. There are divers of them, Anthropophagi, or men-eaters, especially in Canada, about the River of the Amazons, in Caribune and elsewhere. The Pa∣tagons, who are 10 or 11 foot high, are said to drink a Bucket of Wine, and eat a Calf at a meal, to wear Skins for Cloaths, and be armed with Clubs, Bows, and Arrows. 'Tis true, the com∣merce of the Europeans with them, hath made them more civil and sociable. They are very skilful in swimming, and nimble at running. The Guayazis are a sort of dwarfs, which dwell by the River of the Amazons. There are 4 sorts of people most remarkable among them. 1 The Europeans which are settled there. 2. The Metis or Crioles, which are born of Europeans, and Indians, or Americans. 3. Negro's which came out of Africa, or Asia. 4 Wild-men, or the Natives, which live upon hunt∣ing, or on Maze, or Indian Wheat, and wander in the open fields, without any settled abode, govern∣ment, or laws. Yet some there are of these wild men, who have a Character of innocence, and some good sentiments of the Divine Essence, by a secret instinct of Nature. Before the people of Europe had discovered A∣merica, the Inhabitants lived without any Religi∣on, especially those of Brasil, and some other Coun∣tries. Others were Idolaters, as the People of Mexico, who worshipped their Idols, and sacrificed men to them by pulling out their Hearts. The People of Peru adored the Sun, which they called Pachacame, and believe him to have a Father, and Soveraign. Some worshipped the Devil, that he should not hurt them. Since the Nations of Eu∣rope have sent several Colonies thither, Christiani∣ty hath flourished in several places; so that there is 6 Arch-bishopricks, and 34 Bishopricks: The People generally follow the Religion, that the King they are subject to, professes. It is true, that the most part of those men, who have been the instructers of these poor blind Souls, have been carried away so much with the love of their Inte∣rests, that they have neglected to discover to them the pure truths of the Gospels; but through want of a sincere Charity, have taught them what seemed to make most for their own Interests, without consi∣dering either what conduces to the Glory of God, or the good of their Neighbour. America had se∣veral Kings before the people of Europe had posses∣sed themselves of the greatest part of it, as we un∣derstand by several Relations, which have been made of it, viz. The Kings of Mexico, Caluacan, Az∣capusalco, Tescuco, &c. The Ingas of Peru, the Caci∣ques or Captains of Brasil, and of several other places, are known to us from History. Several Miracles are reported to be done, by Motecuma the last King of Mexico, which nevertheless did not keep the Spaniards from cutting his throat to get his Treasure. The Wisdom of some of the Incos of Peru, is not less wonderful, than the cruelty, which the Spaniards exercised in their places. The King of Spain hath the possession of the great∣est part of it, but raises little or no revenue to himself by it. He hath two Vice-Roys, the one at Mexico for the Northern part, the other at Lima for the Southern. He erected in the beginning of the last Age, three Chambers of Accounts, or Roy∣al Councils, whose power extended over all the West Indies, by Sea and Land: The former ruled Mexico, or New Spain, the second hath all the Continent under its jurisdiction, and the third go∣verns Peru, and all that belongs to it. The Most Christian King is supream governour of the greatest part of Canada, or New France. He hath a Vice-Roy in the City of Quebec, with a Bi∣shop. The Kings of England, Portugal, Denmark, and the Dutch, have each of them a portion of it. The further parts of this vast Country, are still in the power of the Natives, of which some choose them a Governour out of themselves, to make them Laws and rule them, others live confusedly, with∣out Governours or Laws. America may be divided several ways, but the most natural and easy division of it, is in my opi∣nion this. America hath two general parts, or Pe∣ninsula's, joyned together by the Isthmus of Pava∣ma, which is about 15 leagues over, which are commonly called America Mexicana, or the Nor∣thern America, and America Peruana, or the South∣ern America. Each of them contains several Re∣gions, Kingdoms, Provinces, and divers People, as we may see more particularly, in the heads of the two Chapters following.
CHAP. II. Of the Northern AMERICA. THe Northern America, which is called Mexica∣na, from the City Mexico, is parted from the Southern, by the Streight of Pavama, between the 7 D. 30 min. and 55 of Latitude, and between the 235 D. and 328 of Longitude, so that it is from South to North about 960 leagues, and about as much from West to East, in the widest place. It contains several Regions and many people, of which I shall give a Catalogue in the following Tables, as also of the Islands, Mountains, Rivers, and Lakes. Northern America hath Canada, or New France, Quebac, a Bish. Virginia, Pomejoc. Florida, S. Austin. New Mexico, or New Granada, S. Fe. Mexico, or New Spain. Mexico. Several Islands, S. Domingo, &c. Diverse people, ....... Mountains, Rivers, and Lakes, ..... CANADA, or New France. Canada, aut Nova Franca. CAnada in general is a great extent of Land, which was called New France by John Verazzan the Florentine, because Francis I. sent him thither to take possession of it in his Name in 1525. Some English Marriners discovered it 19 years after, in 1504, after the death of John Verazzen, who was eaten by the wild men. James Cartier of S. Ma∣loes, subdued the same Countrys in 1534, upon the occasion of Florida. The French made several Voyages thither under Charles IX. and in the time of Henry IV. in 1604. Since which time the Co∣lonies have been much increased, and their Missio∣nary Priests have made great progresses in con∣verting the Natives to the Catholick Religion. The Extent of it from South to North is about 440 leagues from the 30 D. to the 54 of Northern Latitude, and from West to East 680, from the 268 D. to the 329. It is bounded on the North, by Estotiland, or New Brittain, or Terra Labrador, and New Gallia, or New South Wales; on the West by New Mexico, or new Granata; on the South, by New Spain, or Florida; on the East, by Virginia, and the Sea of Canada. The situation of Canada, in the middle of the tem∣perate Northern Zone, doth not hinder, but that the Air is cold, because of the high Mountains, Forests, and great number of Lakes, which are in it, and which make their Eastern part of it cold, for one half of the year, and cause Tempests, Rains, and Snow there, from November to April. Never∣theless the Soil is very fruitful in fine Meadows, Pastures, Grains, Vines, Maze, Fruits, Herbs, Mines of Silver and other Metals: They have seve∣ral sorts of Beasts, as Stags, Deer, Elks, Bevers, Otters, Martins, Wild Cats, and Bears: They al∣so catch divers sort of Fish out of the Sea, and fresh Water; particularly, Sea Wolfs, Whales, Dog-Fish, Salmons, Porpoises, Oysters, Pikes, Carp, Eels, Lampreys, Crey-Fish, Urchins, Cockles, Cods in abundance, since all Europe have had their provision there. The Inhabitants have a good Wit and Memory; they live in great peace with one another, without ambition, envy, or contentions. They live some∣times 10 or 12 Families in one House, and do not trouble themselves in the least, with any care for the future. They make themselves very courage∣ous, tho they be not really so, because they esteem all true Nobility to consist in courage: Their Bo∣dies are very well proportioned. They are natu∣rally very White, but with the Oyls they anoint themselves withal, they are made of an Olive co∣lour. Their greatest pleasures are to Dance, Feast, and smoak Tobacco; Hunting also and Fishing. They do not like the smells of Musk, or Amber∣grease, and they eat with pleasure, lumps of Moul∣dy-grease. Their ordinary Medicine when they are sick, is to let themselves Blood in the Belly, and they use certain Herbs, whose Virtue they know by experience. They cloath themselves with seve∣ral sorts of skins, wear Bracelets, and Collars; prick their flesh in many places, and paint their faces with divers colours; when they come into any House, their hands must be looked to. The Iro∣quois, and Armouchiquois, are naturally deceitful, Traytors, and cruel to their Enemies. The Europeans have introduced Religion in seve∣ral places, so that many Americans are Catholicks, especially in the Country that belong to the French. The Natives which are not instructed in the Gos∣pel precepts, are Idolaters, but seem to have some notion of God, whom they call Atahocan, or the Author of all things. The People of Canada in general, are governed by their Sagamo's, or Captains, whom they choose with great solemnity, out of the eldest Sons of their most illustrious Families, and give them the name of their immediate Predecessors, to revive them, as they say, in their persons. The younger sort eat at the Sagamo's Table, and are always at hand to go along with him to Hunting, or to War. Whatso∣ever they get belongs to him, but married men are obliged to give him only a part. In their ge∣neral Assemblies, the Sagamo, and some old Aut∣moins, or Priests, have a decisive voice. These last are also their Physicians, altho indeed they are no better than ridiculous Sorcerers. The Europeans have divers places, where they inhabit in this Country. They are subject to the Orders of their Governors, as the French in Saguenay, Canada pro∣pria, Arcadia, Norembega; the English in New-England, and New-York, the Swedes in New Swedeland. Canada is divided into several parts, of which the following Table will shew the chief of them, with the Cities, Towns, Mountains, Rivers, and Lakes, which are most considerable.
Canada hath these principal parts: 1. The Pro∣vince of Sa∣guenays, Guebec. Champlain. Silleri, a Fort. S. Pauls Bay. S. Ann. Tadoussac. New Port. Repentigni. Chigontimi. S. Nicholas's Port. Cartiers Port, &c. 2. The Province of Canada, Mont Royal, I. The three Rivers. S. John, I. Abitibus, a Fort. Gaspe, Miscou, I. Richelieu, a Fort. Le Conti, a Fort. Frontenac, a Fort. S. Francis, S. Alexis. S. Lewis, a Fort. N. D. of the Angels. 3. The Province of Acadea, Port Royal. P. Rassignol. La Here. Martingo. Paspay. Touquechet. 4. Norumbega, Pentegoet. Magara. Ghamby. S. Savior. 5. New-England, London. Boston. Plimouth. 6. New-York, Manhatti. Ambois. Delorbec. Orange-Fort. 7. New-Jersey, Shrewbury. Middle-town. Bgin. 8. Pensylvania, Philadelphia. Chster. Newcastle. 9. Maryland, S. Mary. Calvorton. Herrington. Harveytown. 11. Divers Peo∣ple in Canada, and Lousiana, Esquimaus. Oupapin Chovua. Bersiamites, Hrons. Ounioque, Iroquois. Cacouchaqui, Tadusa. Quiochuhia, Toumika. Aiquameches, Ilinors. Amouchiquois. Kinepisa, Chikacha. Mascoueusau. Nationdefeu. Nantmomagans. Nadonessii. Assimipoualaes. Kilissinons. Nations de Tracy. Chongasketon. Oudebathon. Gens de Terres. Nations de Nadenessions. Tinhona Issatis. 12. Lakes of Canada, De Traci. Des Ilinois. Crie. Des Huroni. De Frontena c. Champlain. Duad, or Isati. Nadouvessons. 13. Rivers of Canada, Canada, or S. Laurence, which re∣ceives Outoavac into it on the left side; Les trois Rivieres, Saque∣nay, S. Margaret, and on the right side of it S. John, Massipi, Mescha∣sipi, or Colbert, in Louisana, which receives Olio, or the Good River, in∣to it on the left side; Ouabache, Sag∣nilay, Donis, Conting, Des Baeufi, De Madeleine, S. Francis, Hudson, Louvara, &c. 1. New England was first discovered by Sebastian Cabot a Portugueze in 1497, but was not inhabited by any Christians, till Sr. Philip Amadas, and Mr. A. Barlow, having taken possession of it for Queen Elizabeth in 1584, a Colony of English was sent thither next year under the Government of Mr. Ralph Lane, nd tho King James in 1606, gave all encouragement to another Colony, sent thither to plant, and advance it for the benefit of the Crown, yet it turned to no Account, till about the year 1620, when New Plimouth being built, it became a place of good Trade, and one of the best plantations of the English, as it remains to this day. It is situate between the 41 and 44 D. of North∣ern Latitude, in the temperate Zone, in an equal distance from the Arctick Circle and Tropick of Cancer. It is bounded on the East with the Atlan∣tick Ocean, on the North and West with Cana∣da, and New France, on the South with New York. The Air is sound, very healthful, and agreea∣ble to the temper of the English. The Soil is not only fruitful of such things as the Country natural∣ly yields, but of all sorts of Grains, that are brought from England thither, which it as kindly cherishes, as if it were the natural Mother. Their Woods are full of Wild-Beasts, as Lyons, Bears, Foxes, Rackoons, Mooses, Musquashes, Otters, Be∣vers, Deers, Hares, Coneys, &c. They have also store of Tame Beasts, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Swine, and Horses. Their Woods produce Oak, Cyprus, Elm, Pine, Cedar, Walnut, Firs, Birch, Sassaphras, Sumach, &c. and their Fields and Orchards have several Fruit Trees; as Apples, Pears, and Plumbs, with several other sorts. These Countries also af∣fords rich Furs, Flax, Linnen, Amber, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Cables, and several sorts of Grain, with which they maintain a considerable Trade to Bar∣badoes, and other English Plantations in America, which want them. The Natives are of a treatable temper, and have for the most part kept a fair correspondence with the English, making leagues, and maintaining a Trade with them, but 'tis rather out of fear than love, as their breaches of their contracts at several times do evidently shew. They cloath themselves with loose Mantles, of Deer skins, and Aprons of the same about their middle. They paint themselves
and their Children, and think him most gallant who is most deformed. They are very incon∣stant, crafty, and timerous, yet ingenious and of a quick apprehension, soon angry, and so malicious, that they seldom ever forget an injury; all of them Cannibals, and Man-eaters. The English, which are very numerous and potent, are conformable to the manners of their ancestors in Old England. The Natives are all Idolaters, and worship the Devil, whom they call Okee; they have conference with him, and fashion themselves into his shape. Besides him whom they account their chief God, they worship also every thing that they fear will hurt them, as Fire, Lightning, Thunder, &c. The English are generally Presbyterians, or Independents. The Natives have their Kings, Sachams, and Sa∣gamores, who command them with a soveraign, and absolute Authority; but have no Laws but what they receive from the mouths of their Govern∣ors. The English are governed by Laws of their own making, having Courts of Judicature, where they Assemble once a month to make Laws, or re∣peal them, determine causes, and elect a Governor and inferior Officers. Their Government, both Ci∣vil and Ecclesiastical, is in the hands of Presbyteri∣ans, and Independents. They have several fine Towns. 1. Boston, a large and spacious City, very populous, and full of fair Houses, which are inhabited by Merchants, and Trades-men, who maintain a great commerce to the English Plantations in America, and Old Eng∣land. It is a place of good strength, having 2 or 3 Hills about it; where they have raisd fortificati∣ons, 2. Dorchester; where they have good a Church. 3. Cambridge, which is their University, being beau∣tified with two Colleges, besides divers well-built Houses, 4. S. George's Fort. 5. New Plimouth; with many other Towns, seated commodiously for traf∣fick, either upon the Sea Shore, or on Navigable Rivers, and well inhabited. The Country is well watered with Rivers, the chief of which are Agamentico, Conecticut, Kinebe∣quy, Merrimicke, Mishum, Mistick, Neragansat, Pascataway, Pemnaquid, Tacho-bacco, &c. out of which, together with the adjoyning Sea, are taken excellent Fish; as Cod, Thorn-back, Sturgeon, Porpoises, Hadducks, Salmons, Mackerel, Oy∣sters, Smelts, Eels, Sharks, Grampus, and Whales, with many other Fish of less note. 2. New York, is an English Colony, lately settled n America, and takes its name from the late King James, when Duke of York. It was first discovered by Mr. Hudson, and by him sold to the Dutch, with∣out Authority from his master King Charles, then King of England in 1608. The Dutch gave it the name of New Netherland, and kept possession of it till 1664. when they were totally routed by the Forces, sent to reduce it by K. Charles the 2d, un∣der the Command of Sr. Robert Carr, and the En∣glish settled there, under the Command of Col. Ni∣cols Governor, who still enjoy it. It is bounded on the North-East, by New England; on the South-West, by Virginia; on the East, by the great Sea; and on the West by Pensilvania. It lies between the 41 D. 30 min. and 43 D. 15. min. of Northern Lat. It is of a very good temperature of Air, the Soil very rich and fertile, and is reported, to have pro∣duced 100 bushels of Wheat, out of one bushel brought out of Europe, and sown there; for be∣sides the Fruits, which it yields naturally, Wild-Grapes, Nuts, and plenty of Herbage, and Plants; it also abounds with Corn, and Fruits, which in Europe are best accounted of; as Apricocks, Peaches, Grapes, Chess-nuts, Olives, &c. It affods also Tobacco, Hemp, Flax, Wood, Hops, Rape-seed, Madder, Fur, Elk-skins, which they have from their traffick with the Indians. Their Woods are stored with Deer; and most sots of Wild-Beasts, and Fowl: Their Pastures with Tame Cat∣tel, as the adjoyning Plantations, belnging to the English, are. The old inhabitants are several sorts of Is, not much unlike the Indians of Virginia; warthy, black-haired, but well proportioned, of quick ap∣prehension, and very tractable. They live chiefly upon Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing; and are very dexterous at their Bows and Arrows, their Wives planting their Corn, and tilling their Ground. Their food is Fish, Fowl, Venison, Pole-cats, Tur∣tles, Racoons, &c. They are very serviceable and courteous to the English settled there, and have never given them any disquiet, since their first arri∣val. They inhabit in moveable Tents, which they ge∣nerally fix where their Corn grows. Their re∣creations are Foot-ball, and Cards, at which they'll play away all they have, except a flap to cover their Privities. They love strong drink, but unless they have enough to be drunk with, will not drink at all; and therefore never drink in greater Com∣panies, than they have drink enough to fuddle them: In their drinking bouts, they drink all a∣like, and if any be fuddled first, they pour his sre down his throat: In these debauches, they muder one another often. Their Money is Periwinkle-shells, strung like Beads. Their cloathing is a Mantle of Broad-Cloath, of which also they have about half a yard put between their Legs, and fastened at two of the corners to their Girdle behind and before. They worship the Devil, with magical rites and ceremonies, who appears often to them, in the shape of a Fowl, Beast, or Man; they call him by the name of Monetto. Their Priests are so many Conjurers, and by their pawawing or incantations bring him. They will not endure the English to to be present at their Religious Solemnities, be∣cause they say, their God will not come, till they depart. They bury the dead, sitting upon a Seat, with a Gun, Money and Goods to furnish him in the other World. They marry many Wives, but upon the least dislike turn them away: It is lawful for their Virgins to lye with any man for money; and the same is allowed to Wives, if they can get their Husbands leave. They are extreamly chari∣table, and impart freely to their friends, what they can spare, and what they take in hunting. They are governed by a King, or Sachem, who in all affairs of State, takes the advice of a Council, but passes the definitive Sentence himself, which the people usually accept, with great shouting and applause. They rarely put any to Death but for Incest, or Murder, of which if any are found guil∣ty, the King and his People pursue them, (for they have no Prison) and shoot them to Death. The English are governed by a Deputy, appointed and sent to them, by the King of England. The chief Rivers are, 1. Hudsons River, about 2 leagues broad, very commodious for shipping. 2. Raritan River, and 3. Delaware Bay.
The most considerable Towns, are 1. New York, formerly called New Amsterdam, a place well seat∣ed for Trade, security and pleasure, in a small Isle called Menahatan; it contains above 500 Houses, built with Dutch brick, walled, and fortified at the entrance of the River by S. James's Fort. It is governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace, and inhabited by the English and Dutch. 2. Albany. 3. Arasapha, which hath a good Fort belonging to it. 4. Long-Island, which is parted from the Continent by Hudsons River, a place well inhabited, and exceeding plentiful in all English grain. The Fruits, Trees, and Herbs of it are very good. In May the Fields and Woods are so bedecked with Roses, and other delightful Flowers, that it all seems a pleasant Garden. 3. New Jersey is part of the Province of New Albion, and lyes between the 39 and 41 D. of Northern Latitude, having on the South East the main Sea, on the East Hudsons River, which parts it from New York, on the West Pensilania, from which it is parted by the River Delware, and on the North, the main Land. It is divided into two parts, East Jersey, and West Jersey, by the reason of the diffrent Proprietors, for the greatest part of the former belongs to William Pen, Robert West, &c. and the latter is the Possession of Mr. Edward Bil∣ling, or his Assigns. The Air is wholsome and good. The Soil varies in goodness, and richness, but is generally fruit∣ful, and brings forth plentiful Crops of all sorts of English Corn, besides Indian Wheat, which increa∣ses here vastly, and is found wholsome, and good. It produces also good Flax and Hemp; plenty of Oak, Timber, fit for shipping, Cedar, Ash, Fur, &c. as also great Variety of delicious fruits, as Grapes, Plumbs, Mulburries, Peaches, Pears, Ap∣ples, Quinces, &c. The Tobacco is excellent by the River Delaware. Their Woods afford Deers, Conies, and Wild Fowl, of several sorts, as Tur∣keys, Partridges, Swans, Geese, Ducks, &c. and their Pastures feed plenty of Horses, Cows, Hogs, and some Sheep. The Indian Natives are but few, in comparison of what are in the adjacent Colonies, and those that are there, are very serviceable and advantage∣ous to the English, not only in hunting, and tak∣ing Deer, and Wild Beasts, and catching Fish and Fowl for them, but in killing and destroying Bears, and Wolves, whose skins they bring and sell to the English for small matters. Liberty is here allowed for all sorts of professi∣ons of Religion, by which means this Colony hath much increased, by the coming of the adjoyn∣ing plntations to them. In the government, which was settled by the Lord Barclay, and Sr. George Carteret, there is so great provision for property in Estates, and order∣ly living, that men are happy in it. It is plentifully supplyed with lovely Springs, Rivulets; In-land Rivers and Creeks, which not only afford many convenient harbours for ship∣ping, but plenty of excellent Fish, both for mer∣chandize and food, as Whales, Codfish, Mackarel, Sturgeon, Great-basse, Eels, Oysters, &c. They export Whale Oyl, and Whalefins, Bever, Mon∣key, Ratoon, and Martin skins, for England; and Beef, Pork, Corn, Butter and Cheese, to the ad∣acent Isles. They have considerable Towns, Shrewsbury, Middle-town, Burgin, New-wark, E∣lizabeth-town, Woodbridge, and Piscataway; Bur∣lington is lately added. 4. Pensylvania, so called from the first Proprietor of that Tract of Land, William Pen, Esq to whom K. C. II. in consideration of his Fathers, and his own suffer∣ings, for their Loyalty, gave it by Patent, March 4th, 1680. It is bounded on the North by Canada, on the East by Delaware River and Bay, on the the South with Maryland, and on the Wet with New France. It lyes between the 39 D. and 40 D. 15 min. of Northern Latitude, and 297 D. of Long. The Air is sweet and clear, the Heavens serene like the South part of France, rarely over-cast. The Soil is some rich, and others poor, but gene∣rally taken, yields great plenty, as the natural product of the Country proves. For besides plen∣ty of Wood, there are sound abundance of Fruits in their Woods; as white and black Mulberries, Chess-nuts, Walnuts, Plumbs, Strawberries, Cran∣berries, Hurtleberries, and Grapes of several sorts, little inferior to Frontiniacks, and Muskadel Grapes in England. By art the Earth also produces all sorts of Corn, Herbs, and Roots, which we have in England; as also Squashes, Pumpkins, and Wa∣ter Melons. They have also divers sorts of Beasts, both for food and profit; as Elks, Deer, Bever, Racoon, Rabbets, Bs, Squirrels, &c. as also Land Fowl, as Turkeys of 40 or 50 pound weght, Pheasants, Partridges, Pidgeons, and Heath birds in abundance. The Natives are black, and swarthy, not natu∣rally, but by design, generally tall, and well pro∣portioned. Their Language is lofty and very sig∣nificative. They bring up their Children to fishing till 15 years old, and then send them a hunting in the Woods, and when by their skill in Arche∣ry, they can make a good return of skins, they marry, which is usually about 18 years old for the man, and 14 the woman. Their houses are made of Poles, covered with bark of Trees and Mats. Their diet is Maize, or Indian wheat, dressed diverse ways. They are very civil to strangers, and look for respect themselves. Nothing is too good for their friend: They eat twice a day, and sit on the ground at meals. They love strong Liquors, es∣pecially Rum, and drink of it, till they fall asleep. In sickness they are very impatient for cure, especi∣ally of their Children, for which they will part with any thing. The Natives believe a God, and the immortality of the Soul, for they say, there is a great King that made them, who dwells in a glorious Coun∣try Southward, and that the Soul of the good shall go thither, where they shall live again. Their worship is made up of Sacrifices, and Cantico. Their Sacrifices are the first fruits of their hunt∣ting, which they burn with much ceremony. Their Cantico is performed with a mournful ditty over their Sacrifices, with Dances, Songs, and Shouts. They bury their dead, both men and women, in their apparel, and their Kindred fling in some pre∣cious things into the Graves, as a token of their love. They mourn by blacking their faces, and preserve their Graves, which are heaps of Earth neatly made, by plucking off the grass from their Graves. The English are of different perswasions, but many of them Quakers, who went over with their Governor, William Pen.
The Government of the Natives is by Kings or Sochenia's, and those by Succession, but always by the Mother's Side; but no Woman inherits. The King hath always a Council of 200 of the oldest and wisest Men of his Nation; without whose Ad∣vice they do nothing of moment. Their Kings are Powerful, in Administration of Justice they are exact, but their Mulcts are generally Pecuniary, even for Murther itself; in which Case they pay as much again for a Woman as a Man, because they say they breed Children. The English Government is accord∣ing to the Grant, as near as conveniently may be: In general, aiming at Duty to the King, Preserva∣tion of Right to all, the Suppression of Vice, and the Encouragement of Vertue and Arts; for which they have Courts of Justice in every County. This Country hath the Advantage of many Creeks and Rivers, of which the chief are: 1. The River of Delaware, which is common to them and New Jersey. 2. Christina. 3. Brandywine. 4. Philpot. And 5. Skulkil. The English are settled about the Rivers chiefly, because the Land about them is good, and the Air sweet and delightful. The Chiefest Cities and Towns in this Colony are, 1. Philadelphia, the Metropolis, situate upon the River Delaware, on the one side, and the River Skulkil on the other, both Navigable, with convenient Ports for Ships: It is well-built, popular and large, and furnished with all useful Trades. 2. Newcaste. 3. Chester. 4. Chichester, &c. They have Six Counties. VI. MARYLAND, so call'd in Honour of Queen Mary, Wife to Charles I. who gave it that Name in the Patent granted to the Lord Baltimore, for the Planting of it, as his own Propriety. It is bounded on the North with Pensylvania, New Eng∣land and New York, on the East with the Atlantick-Ocean and Delaware-Bay, on the South by Virginia, from which it is parted by the River Patow-meck. It lies between the 37th Deg. 50 Min. and the 40th Deg. of Northern Latitude. The Air, since the felling of the Woods, is very Halthful, and agreeable to the English Constituti∣ons, few now dying, at their first coming, of the Country Disease, call'd Seasoning. The Heat in Sum∣mer, and Cold in Winter are both very tolerable. The Soil is Rich and Fertile, and produces the same Commodities, Beasts, Plants and Herbs as New York. The chief Trade of Maryland is in Tobacco, which finds better Vent in Foreign Markets than Virginia. The Natives have much the same Customs with those of New York, being also of several different Tribes or Sorts. The English Colony retain their English Customs. The Natives have many strange Rites in their Wor∣ship: They believe there are several Gods, but ac∣knowledge one absolute God from all Eternity, who created the inferior Gods to minister to him, in the Works of Creation and Providence, of which they reckon the Sun, Moon and Stars. They believe that in a further Life the Soul shall be disposed of accord∣ing to its Works here; either to the Habitation of the Gods, to enjoy perpetual Happiness, or to Popo∣gusso, i. e. a Pit of Unquenchable Fire, there to burn continually. They worship Idols, the chief of which is called Kiwasa. The English are of all the different Sects of Christianity, but nothing else is tolerated. The Indians are governed by their Kings, and the English by a Model of good and wholesome Laws, made by the Lord Baltimore, with the Advice of a General Assembly, for the Good of the Inhabitants, for the Executon of which they have Sheriffs and Justices in every County. The Bay of Chespeak gives entrance for Ships into this Country, passing through the Heart of this Pro∣vince; into which fall several considerable Rivers, as Paturmeck, Patuxent, Ann-Arundel alias Severn, Chptanks, Nantcoke, Promacke, and many others, to the great Improvement of the Soil and Beauty of the Country. The Principal Town is S. Mary's, seated on S. Gege's River, and beautified with many well-built Houses. It is the chief place for Trade, and all the General Assemblies and Provincial Courts meet there. 2. Caverton. 3. Herrington. 4. Harvey-town The Provnce is divided into 10 Counties. The River Canada is remarkable for the length of its Curse, which is 6 or 700 Leagues; for the Wide∣ness of its Mouth, which is 25 or 30 Leagues, and its Deph about Quebec, which is about 200 Fathom, Some think that through the Lakes, through which it passes, a way might be found into the East Indies. which hath been so long sought. SECT. II. VIRGINIA, FLORIDA and NEW MEXICO or NEW GRENATA, Virginia, Florida & Nova Mexicana. VIRGINIA, so call'd in Honour of Queen Elizabeth, that Virgin Princess, was first discover'd by John Veruzzan, under the Name of Apelchen, and afterward by Sir Walter Raleigh, A. D. 1584. by whose Direction Queen Elizabeth sent a Colony thi∣ther, under Mr. Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlow, who took possession of it for her Majesty, and chang'd its Name into Virginia. This Country, lying be∣tween the 33d Degree 40 Minutes, and the 42d Degree of Northern Latitude, is bounded on the North by Maryland, on the East by the Atlantick Ocean, on the South by Carolina, and on the West by the Eriechronons, an Indian Nation. The extent of it from South to North is about 150 Leagues, and 80 from East to West, being distant 1000 Leagues from the Coasts of England. The Air and Temperature of the Seasons is much govern'd by the Winds, as to Heat and Cold, or Driness and Moisture. The North and North-west Winds are very cold and piercing, and bring very sharp Frosts, which freeze over the biggest Rivers, from 3 to 9 miles wide, tho' they are not of long Continuance, as neither the somewhat deep Snows that come along with them: The South and South-east Winds bring Heat in the Summer Months; and cease in July and August, when the Air grows extremely Hot and troublesome. The Weather breaks suddain∣ly in September, and turns into great Rains, which causeth an epidemical Sickness among the People commonly call'd Seasoning, with Cachexies, Fluxes, Gripes, Scorbutick Dropsies and the like. The Thun∣der is often attended with Fatal Circumstances, kil∣ling many Persons and overthrowing their Houses: One thing is very observable, That it generally does most hurt nearest the Fire, and often come down the Chimneys, especially if they have any Fire in them. It beats down great Trees, and twists others like a Withe, leaving a Sulphurous Smell in the Air when 'tis over. There are also frequent little sorts of Whirl-Winds,
map of plantations in the Americas A Map of the ENGLISH PLANTATIONS in AMERICA which whisking round in a Circle, carry up the Leaves into the Air, that fall again in calm days, some time after, in great Showers. The Country lies low, and has but few Stones, the Earth in some Places being mixt for several miles together with Oister-Shels, so thick that they are equal to the other Mold, and so continue for some Yards under Ground. These Oyster-Shells in some Places lye in Mines, united as hard as Rocks, 3 or 4 Yards thick, and the Inhabitants make Lime of them. In the loose Banks of Shells have been found Teeth 2 or 3 Inches long, together with the Back and Ribs of a Whale. The Country is also overspread with Woods, and seems to be, as it were, one entire Forest, con∣sisting of large Trees of several sorts of Oak, Hickery, Poplar, Pine, Cedar, Dogwood, Elm, &c. yet free from Thickets or Underwood, the small Shrubs growing only on Lands that have been clear'd, or Swamps; and thus it is for several hundreds of miles. The Soil is generally sandy, and even more fertile for Corn than England, yielding for the most part between 25 and 30 fold. There are few or no Mea∣dows, by reason that the Natives have not learn'd the manner of Drayning their boggy Marshes or Swamps, which would make excellent Pasture-ground; so that they are extremely put to it for Fodder for their Cattle in the Winter, and lose many. The Uplands are weak, and will not bear above 3 Years good Tobacco, because they have no way to mend them, but folding Cows therein as we do Sheep in England, though they have good Marle and Stitch, the use of which is unknown to them. They have likewise Clay very good for Pipes and Pots; Talk, of which they make a delicate White-wash, and Black Lead, besides some Mines of Iron-Oar. As for Fruits, there are abundance of divers sorts, as Apples, Pears, Quinces, Apricocks, Plums, Pears, Mulberries, Cherries, Vines, Chesnuts, Walnuts, Chinco-Pines, and all kinds of Garden-Herbs; with many Physical Plants, as Radix Serpentaria, Dittany, Turbith,
Mechoachan, Ague-root, &c. Among these grows a certain Herb call'd Silk-grass, of which Silk is made, it having a thin fibrous Bark. Before the coming of the English, there was nei∣ther Horse, Bull, Cow, nor Swine, whereof they have now much plenty, except Sheep, which they are discourag'd from keeping, because the Wolves devour them so fast. In the Woods are many Elks, red Deer, Rackoons, (which are a species of Monkies) Hairs, Squirrels, Musk-rats, so call'd from their sweet smell like Musk, Wild-cats, Pole-cats, Bears, Wolves and Foxes, besides great store of land and water Tortoises, Frogs of several sorts, of which one is eight or ten times as big as any in England, and make a noise like the bellowing of a Bull, Liz∣ards, and several kinds of Snakes, of which the most remarkable are, 1. The Rattle-snake, that have a Rattle in their Tails, made of Bones enclos'd in a dry Husk; their Bite is deadly, yet they never med∣dle with any thing unless provoked. 2. The Blow∣ing-snake, a kind of Viper so nam'd, in regard that it blows and swells the Head very much e'er it bites, which is accompanied with fatal Consequences. Moreover, the bite of the Red-snake and Horn-snake is Mortal; but the Black, Corn and Water-snakes are not so Venomous. Virginia affords great variety of Birds, as three sorts of Eagles, viz. The Gray, Bald and Black; the last of which is usually very destru∣ctive to young Lambs, Pigs, &c. Some species of Hawks, as the Fishing-hawk, Goss-hawk, Falcon and Stannel. There is an Owl as big as a Goose, that kills the Poultry in the Night, a delicate fea∣ther'd Bird milk-white, and tipp'd with a Punctal of Jet black. The Wood-peckers are many of them lovely to behold, being variegated with Green, Yel∣low, Black and White, and having a large scarlet Tuft on their Crown. The Turkeys are here very large, some weighing between 50 and 60 Pounds. There are also Cocks and Hens without Tails or Rumps, Partridges, Turtle-Doves, Thrushes; the Mocking-bird, which imitates the notes of all Birds it hears, and is accounted the finest Singing-bird in the World: The Virginia Nightingale, of a pure scar∣let Colour, with a Tuft on the Head; Black-birds very voracious of Corn; Larks, Swallows, Martins, Blew-birds of a curious azure Colour; Gold-finches that are very beautiful, with red, orange and yellow Feathers; Sparrows, Snow-birds, Humming-birds, Herons, of which there is one kind Milk white; Bitterns, Curlews, Sandippers, Snipes, Tewits, Swans, Wild-geese, Wild-ducks, Teal, &c. No Country is better Water'd with many large and swift Rivers, the chief of which are York River, Rapahanock, Potomack, Potaxen and Choptauk, that all run into the Chesopeak, which divides the Coun∣try into two unequal Parts, and gives entrance for Shipping into it, being 6 or 7 Leagues wide, and as many Fathom deep. James River is Navigable for 50 leagues up the Continent. York River is likewise large, and carries Vessels 20 leagues. Rapahanock will allow a passage for Ships 40 leagues; but Poto∣mach is the biggest River, being 9 miles over in many places. They all Ebb and Flow; but when the Wind is at North-west, their course is scarce di∣scernable; at other times they rise at high Tide a∣bout two Foot. These Rivers abound with variety of Fish, as Sturgeon, Perch, Crokers, Taylers, Eels, Oysters, Cockles, Sheep-heads, Drums, Sting-rays, &c. Besides the Rivers, in Virginia are found many Springs of good Water, and among others, one call'd Green-Spring, so very cold, that it is dangerous drinking there in Summer-time, it having prov'd Mortal to several Persons. Some of the Spring-wa∣ters are of a Petrifying nature, and others partake of Alum and Vitriol. It is also reported that there are poysonous Waters in those parts about Potomack. The Native Indians are somewhat Tall, yet not Corpulent, their Hair black and Skin tawny. They wear Deer-skins for Cloathing and Shoes, paint their Faces, and suffer their Hair to grow to an extraor∣dinary length. They dwell in Cabbins made of Poles cover'd with the Barks of Trees, lying on Matts and sitting on banks of Earth, their Food being Venison, Turkies, Fish, &c. Their Women are very agreeable, only they have small Eyes, broad Noses and wide Mouths: They sit on the Ground to eat their Meals, the Women on one side and the Men on the other, and burn the Bodies of the Dead. Their Traffick consists in the skins of Deer, Bevers and other Wild-beasts; which they exchange with the English for Guns, Powder, Shot, small Iron-tools and Brandy: Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, and Clubs with two Knobs at the end: They fight only upon Surprize, but are very Revengeful, and will vindicate the death of a Person upon the Family of the Murderer two or three Generations after. These Indians are Idolaters, believing that there are several Gods of different Orders, who are subject to one eternal Being. They hold, that the Sun, Moon and Stars, are Demi-Gods, calling their Temples Machi∣comuk; their Priests Viroances; the chief of their Gods Keuras, and their inferior, Keurasavoeh: But they have a particular veneration for a certain God call'd Okee, who (as they say) often appears to them and discovers his Will, answering Questions put to them about Hunting, Journeying, or the like. They offer to him the first Fruits of all things every year, maintaining they can't expect good luck without so doing. They account the God of the English better than theirs, because he often Beats them. Their Priests are generally thought Conjurers, for in the time of a Drought, they will by their Pawawing bring abund∣ance of Rain. But the English by the direction and encouragement of their Governors, keep themselves to the forms of divine Worship which are establish'd in the Church of England. The Indians have a King almost to every Town, and wear certain Marks on their Backs, shewing to what Kings or Lords they belong, whom they call Weraans; but there are no Courts of Judicature, nor any Justice done among them, but what particular Persons do themselves, by revenging their own or their Friends Quarrels. They live in continual Wars one with another, and by that means are in a great measure Consum'd. The supreme Magistrate of the English Colonies, is a Deputy sent over by the King of Great Britain, who governs the Country with Laws agreeable to those of England, for the decision of all Causes both Civil and Criminal, which are made by the Governor with the consent of the General Assembly, consisting of his Council and Burgesses chosen by the Free-holders. These Laws are put in Execution by the Sheriffs and Ju∣stices in every County; and Causes are decided by the Monthly Courts, from whence there may be an Appeal to the Quarter-Court of James Town. The English have divided that part of the Country which they possess into 19 Counties, for the better conve∣nience of Governing it. Besides the Indian Towns, which are but little knots of Hurts and Cabbins, not worthy of that name, the English have built some considerable
Towns since their Settlement, which are for the most part seated upon or near the Rivers, both for the advantage of Trade, and the goodness of the Soil. The chief of these are 1. James Town, or rather James City; so nam'd by James I. and commodi∣ously situatd on James River, on the South-side of the Bay of Chesopeak. It was first Founded in the Year 1606. but has been since fortified with some Bulwarks, and adorn'd with many fair Brick Houses. It is the capital Town of the Country; so that the Courts of Judiature and publick Offices are kept therein. 2. Elizabeth-Town, a well-built Town on the same River. 3. Henry's-Town; so call'd in ho∣nour of Prince Henry, eldest Son of King James I. by whom its Foundation was laid in a convenient part of the Country, about 18 miles from James-Town. 4. Dale's-Gift, built and Planted by Sir Thomas Dale, A. D. 1610. 5. Bermuda. 6. Wico∣meco. 7. Ketonghtan, a Sea-port Town, much fre∣quented by the English, on the Bay of Chesopeak, &c. Florida, is not so big as the Spaniards make it, by attributing to it Virginia and New France; it reaches but from the 28th. degree to Virginia: Sebastian Cabet discover'd it in 1496. upon the account of Henry VII. King of England, but staid not thee, having a design to find out a Passage that way into the East. John Ponce of Leon, was there in 1512, from the Kng of Castile, but was driven out by the Inhabitants in 1520. Luke Vasquez D' Aillon, went in 1524 with some other Spaniards, to Subdue these People, and to bring them to the Mines in the Spanish Islands to work there. Pamphilius Narraez crossed it in 1528. Fer∣dinand Soto after the Conquest of Peru, Invaded it in 1538, May 24. and died there of Grief, because he could not accomplish his Designs, having given it the name of Florida, either because he arrived there on Palm-Sunday, which they call Pascha Florida, or because he found the Country cover'd with Flowers. Charles V. Emperor, and the Consul of the Indies sent some Priests thither in 1540, but they were destroy∣ed by the Natives. In the year 1562, Francis Ribault under Charles IX. made a League with the Inhabi∣tants, and built Charles's Fort. In 1564, Rinatus Laudonniere was there and built the Caroline Fort. It was about that time that the Spaniards jealous of the prosperous Success of the French, did under the pretence of visiting them and maintaining a familiar Correspondence with them, Surprize them in the night, and like base Villains, Hang'd the Soldiers, Flea'd Ribault, as Escarbot relates. In 1627 Domi∣nicus Gurges a Gascoigne, fitted out a Vessel at his own Charge, went into Florida, re-took the Caroline Fort and another Fort which the Spaniards had built, hanged the Spaniards upon the same Trees that they had Executed the French; and after this, return'd into France, where he met with no kind reception for this great piece of Service. The Air is very pure and temperate, and the Soil made very fruitful by the Dews. They make their Bread of Maze, and have Grapes and divers Fruits, but the Country hath the ill fortune not be well Tilled. It affords Lyons, Wolves, Deer, Wild-dogs and Cats, Hares, Wild-Poultrey, tame Cats, and se∣veral other Creatures. They catch Pearls out of their Rivers, and gather Gold-Sand out of them. The Inhabitants are naturally white, but by anoin∣ting themselves with Ointments made on purpose, they become of an Olive colour; they are of a good Stature, especially those that dwell in the Plains; they love War and obey their Captains, whom they call Paroustis. They have Mines of Gold, but they are little regarded by the Inhabitants. They cloath themselves with Skins, The Spaniards have built two Forts, viz. St. Matthews and St. Austins. The English have settl'd themselves at Carolina, which the French built. They have a great Veneration for the Sun and Moon, and pay much respect to their Priests, whom they call Joanas, who are also their Physicians and Surgeons. They are thought to be Sorcerers. The Spaniards and English follow their own Religion. Carolina, so call'd from the King of Great Britain, Charles II. is a part of Florida, and Peopl'd with an English Colony by the Proprietors, the Earl of Cla∣rendon, George Duke of Albemarl, &c. in the year 1670. It lyes betwen the 29th and 36th Degree of Northern Latitude, having Virginia on the North, the Atlantick Ocean on the East, and the Pacifick Sea on the West, and Tegesta on the South. The Air of it is wholsom and temperate, neither troublesome in Winter or Summer. The Soil is ge∣nerally vry Fruitful, and produces besides what is proper to the Climate, good Wheat, Barley and all other English Corn; as also Turnips, Carrots, Pars∣nips, Potatoes, and twenty sorts of Pulse, which we have not in England. In their Woods they have not only all Trees useful for Timber, but many sweet smelling Trees and Shrubs, as Cedar, Cypress and Mirtles; among which there harbour Hares, Squirrels, Racoons, Coneys, and plenty of fat Deer; as also store of wild Turkies, Partridges, Paroquets, Doves, Cranes, and divers other Birds, whose Flesh is deli∣cate. They have also plenty of Hogs and Sheep, which encrease there wonderfully. Here are also met with some strange and Monstrous Creatures, as Rattle-snakes of two Yards and an half long, Wild-cats bigger than a Fox; as also Otters, Bears, Le∣pards and Wolves; but no Lyons. They export also several sorts of Wine, Oil, Olives, Cotton, Indico, Silks, Ginger, Tobacco, Sassaparilla, Turmerick, Sassafras and Snakes-root, which arise from their Tillage and Manufacture. The Natives have a perfect Friendship with the English, and are ready upon all occasions to serve them. They are generally of a good Meaning and Honest, no ways addicted to Vice, moderate in their Diet and Apparel, addicted to Mirth, admi∣rers of Valour and Courage, and therefore continu∣ally in War, so that they are almost Destroyed. They Worship one God as the Creator of all things, whom they call Okee, and their High Priests Offer Sacrifice to him; but they believe that he minds not human affairs himself, but committs the Government of them to lesser Deities. They believe the Transmigration of Souls, and Happiness after Death. They Bury their Dead in four several Bu∣rying-places, according to their four several Tribes. The English enjoy a liberty of Conscience by the Constitution of their Government, so that they are of different Judgments. The Natives are govern'd by Kings, whose Will is their Law. The English, by the Laws of England and such By-laws as their Governors find ne∣cessary for that Province. No Mony can be raised nor Laws made without the consent of the People or their Representatives in a general Assembly. They have Magistrates to execute their Laws. This Country hath many great Rivers, and some of them Navigable; Ashley River is the biggest. They have several Towns, but Charles-Town is the Principal.
New MEXICO is not as yet sufficiently known: It was the Country of the ancient Nivatelias, who came from Mexico and settl'd themselves there. Antony Epjo, who discover'd it in 1583, gave it the name of New Mexico. The situation of it according to the newest Maps, is between the 243 Degree, and 270 of Latitude; and between the 30 Degree and the of Northern Latitude; for the extent and bounds of it on the North-side ae not well known. On the West it is bounded with the Sea of Vermio; called herefore the Red-Se, which parts it from Cali∣fornia; on the South by New-Spain, and on the East with Canada and Florid The Air is sweet and healthy. The Soil thogh Mountainous, is very fruitful in good Pasturage, Maize, Melons, Goards and Pulse. They have Mines of Silver, Turkish Jewels, Emeralds, Crystal and Pearl; plenty of tame and wild Beasts; Fish in their Lakes and the Sea of Vermino; great Forests of Pines and Cedars, which afford Horses, Cows, and very large Sheep, Deer, Goats and Hares. The Inhabitants are very sociable and gentle, they live upon Hunting and Tillage. They are Govern'd by their Captains, whom they call Caeique, whom they chuse themselves. The Spaniards are settl'd in some places, and have a Go∣vernor at St. Faith. There is a People in this Coun∣try which live without Religion, and others that Worship the Sun. Some of them carry Meat for their Idols to eat, which they have set in little Chap∣pels. The Spaniards follow their own Religion, and have Converted some of the Natives with great ease, for they are naturally good and tractable. The Division of these three Countries. 1. Virginia hath, Painejoc, or Tragabigzanda, Martland, Powhatan, Pensilvania, Secotan. 2. Florida hath two Parts. Apalaches. Melilot Edekano Omitaqua. Tegeste. S. Austin S. Matthew Aqueca Mucoco. 3. New Mexico hath, Nova Gallia, Savern. Anien, Quivira, Civola. Tejago, Cahamo, or Camaca. New Mexico Propria. Apaches, Compana de Bonaquia. Sumanes, Tobores Passaquates and Gonches. Mountains. Tegujo in New Mexico. Apalta, or in Florida. Palaria in Florida. Rivers. Sasquahanoughk in Virgina Lakes. May, &c. in Florida. Delnord, James, in Virgina Lakes. May, &c. in Florida. Cedres, May, in Florida. Prifac Sancto, in Florida. Delnord and Brava, in New Mexico. SECT. III. MEXICO, or NEW SPAIN: Mexicanum, Regnum. This Country bears the name of the chief City of it, and hath been called New Spain only since the Spaniards settl'd there. It lyes between the Mexican-Sea and the South-Sea, called commonly Mare Del Zur. The extent of it from South-west to North∣west, is about 600 Leagues from the River Chiagri∣ni the Isthmus of Panama, to the Mouth of the Ri∣ver North, or S. Francis in the Sea of Vermio, between the 7th. Degree 30 Minutes, and 33 of Northern Latitude, and between the 254 and 293 of Longi∣tude: The breadth of it is very irregular, and comes nothing near the length of it. It is bounded on the Norh with New Mexico, Florida, and the Gulph of Mexico: on th West and South by the South-Sea, on the East with the Sea of Mexico and the Streight of Panama, which parts it from the Continent. The Air is very temperate and sound, the Soil is very fruitful in Wheat, Maze, Pastures, excellent Fruits, tame Beasts, as Cows, Horses, and Sheep, which bring forth Lambs twice a Year. They have an ad∣mirable Tree, called Maquey, or Mayguey, which yields them Wine, Vinegar, Hony, Thread, Needles, Suffs, and Wood for Building: They have also Cot∣ton, Wool, Silk, Furs, Balm, Sugar, Salt, Coco-nuts, which is kind of Almond, used to make Chocolet of; also fine Horses, whose Breed was brought out of Spain, and such an abundance of Beasts, that they are forced to kill them for their Skins only. Birds of several sorts are very plentiful among them. There is a Bird called Cincon, which is no bigger than a Beetle, which hath a wonderful sort of Feathers, and lives upon the Dew and the smell of Flowers, it gets into the hollow of a Tree, and sleeps there to the Month of April. Gold and Silver are common in a∣bundance of Mines, and in the bottoms of the Ri∣vers. The Inhabitants are Civil, Teachable and Courte∣ous to Srangers, very sincere and good Friends, but will not Pardon those that deceive them or use them ill: They are a little Lazy, but very Disinterested: They have a very great inclination to Musick, Painting and making Pictures with the Feathers of certain little Birds call'd Cincons. They make excellent Works in Gold and Silver, where the Gold is so excellently set upon the Silver, and the Silver upon the Gold, that nothing can be more ingeniously and artificially done. The Spaniards that Inhabit this Province are very proud in their Habit and Ornaments. Diamonds and Pearls are common to them all. They use continu∣ally Chocolat. As to the Governmnt, this rich Country was an∣ciently Govern'd by Kings of their own, who were able to send out 30 or 40000 lighting Men. The last Kings were Motecuma II. and Quicurtemoc. Fer∣dinand Cortez Conquer'd this Kingdom in the name of the King of Spain, in less than four years, notwith∣standing their great Armies, viz. From 1518, to 1521. Their Oracles had foretold this Conquest of their Country, sometime before telling them that a Strange Nation should Conquer their Country, which accordingly came to pass at this time. This King∣dom is still under the Government of the Spaniard, who hath his Vice-Roy in the City of Mexico, who presides over all the rest of the Governments of those Provinces which his Catholick Majesty possesses in Northern America. The Chatholick Religion is professed throughout all this Kingdom almost, the Natives themselves in appearance conforming to it. Notwithstanding it is true, that Thomas Gage a Dominican reports, that most of the Spanish Priests are abominable Hypocrites and extreamly Covetous: And as a demonstration of their want of Charity, we may take notice of two sorts of Religious Persons of the same Order and in the same House, the natural Spaniards which are
sent from Spain from time to time in the quality of Mis∣sionaries to fill the Benefices and strengthen the Spa∣nish Faction, and the Circles or religious Persons de∣scended of the Spanish Race, which seldom come to any Preferment or are trusted with any Office, be∣cause the former keep them under, and give them no∣thing but the most inconsiderable Employments, be∣cause they think that they will make the Natives re∣volt from the Spanish Government, which their Ty∣ranny renders so odious. The Mexicans divided their Country heretofore into 1. The Hot. 2. The cold Countries, according to their dwellings either in the Mountains or Plains: But now Mexico is divided into 3 principal Praefectures or Audiences. 1. Mexico Propria in the middle of the Country, which contains 7 small Provinces. 2. Of Guadalajara, which also contains 7 small Provinces. And 3 of Guitimala, which contains 8 small Provinces, which are set down more distinctly in the following Table, with the chief Cities. Mexico divided into 3 Audiences or Parliaments, and into 22 Provinces Geographically. 1. The Audi∣ence of Gua∣dalajara, in 7 Provinces. 1. Guadalajara, or New Gallicea, Guadalajara. 2. Zacatecai, S. Lewis. 3. Nuova-biscaya. 4. Cinaloa, S. Philip, S. Jago. 5. Culiacan, Culiacan. 6. Chiametlan, S. Sebastian. 7. Kalisco, The Purification. 2. The Audi∣ence of Me∣xico in 7 Provinces. 8. Mexico Propria, Mexico. 9. Mechoacan, Mechoacan. 10. Panuco, Panuco. 11. Tlascala, Angelos. 12. Guaxaca, Antequern. 13. Tabasco, N. S. Delavitaria. 14. Jucatan, Merida. 3. The Audi∣ence of Gua∣timala in 8 Provinces. 15. Guatimala, S. John of Guatimala. 16. Soconusco, Gnevetlan. So much of Virgi∣nia, Flo∣rida and New Me∣xico, as belng to the Spa∣niard. 17. Chiapa, Cindadreale. 18. Honduras, Vallodolid, 19. Verapaz, Verapaz. 20. Nicaragua, Leon. 21. Costa-rica, Carthago. 22. Veragua, The Conception. Mountains, Vulcano. Papacate-Pec. Mount Quantimala. Mount Nicaraqua. Rivers, York. Salt. S. Paul. S. Peter. Panino. Los Yopes. Lakes of Mexico. Nicaragna. This Countty enjoys a perpetual Spring, not only because of the goodness of the Air and fruitfulness of the Soil, but because 'tis in the Torrid Zone, which gives the name of Mexicana to all the Northern Ame∣rica. They are not at so much pains to get at their Gold in the Mines, as in Peru, and the Silver they find is accounted the best in the World. The Magpies at Guadalajara are not bigger than Sparrows, who make a great distruction of their Grains, and the Bees have no sting. The City of Mexico hath more than 4000 Spaniards, and about 30000 Indians. It stands by a Salt Lake about 25 or 30 leagues in compass. Chus∣sala, before the arrival of the Spaniards had 20000 In∣habitants, and 365 Temples, in which they sacrificed every year 5 or 6000 of their Children to their Idols. Queretario hath a Fountain that runs 4 years together, and then ceases for 4 years more. Arapulco is an ad∣mirable Bay, with a Fort of 5 Bastions. Near Ta∣basco, Ferdinando Cortez obtain'd a great Victory over Motekuma II. the last King of Mexico, with the loss of 300000 Mexicans. Micaragua is call'd the Paradise of Mahomet, because of its fruitfulness and plenty of Gold; near it is a Lake 120 leagues in length, which ebbs and flows and empties it self into the North Sea. SECT. IV. The Islands lying about the Northern America. I will not pretend to give a perfect Description of all the Islands about the Northern America, because 'twould be inconsistent with the nature of an Abridg∣ment; I shall therefore content my self only to distin∣guish them in Tables, where I will remark, 1. The Isles about Canada. 2. The Burmudas. 3. California. 4. The Anhilae, in 4 parts: 1. The Lucayos, which are 10 chief Isles. 2. The Archipelago of Mexico, in 7 chief Isles. 3. The Isles Du Vent in 27. 4. The Isles Sous le Vant in 10, and will conclude with the Islands of the Gulf of Paria. Islands belonging to the Northern America. 1. The most re∣markable Isles about Canada, are, 1. Terra Nova. Plaisance. 2. Anacosta, or the Assumption. 3. Cape Britton. 4. S. Johns. 5. Quatenis. 6. Isle of Orleans. 7. The States Island. 2. Bermudas. 3. California. 4. The An∣tillae in 4 parts. 1. The Lucayos, Lucayoneque. Bahama. Abacoa. Cicatero. Triangula. Curateo. Saniana. S. Salvador, or Guanahami, Yumeto. 2. Isle of the Archie∣pelago, in 8. Cuba, or Havana, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Porto-Rico, Caomangrande, Pinos, Caiman, Baccias. 3. The Isles Barcovent, or Caribby Isles, in 27. 1. S. Christophers. 2. S. Crosse. 3. Boique. 4. Saba. 5. S. Eustace. 6. Nieves. 7. Rotondo. 8. Monfer∣rat. 9. The Saints. 10. Basse-terre. 11. Domi∣nico. 12. Barbadia. 13. Martinica. 14. Mari∣galanti. 15. Guadalupa. 16. Antego. 17. De∣siderade. 18. Barboudas. 19. S. Bartholomew. 20. Martin. 21. Anguilla, 22. Chapeau. 23. Ameya de Desert. 24. Tobago. 25. S. Alaasia. 26. S. Vincent. 27. Granada. 4. The Isles call'd Sota∣vent, in 10. 1. Trinadad. 2. Margarita. 3. Blanca. 4. Tertuga. 5. Orchilla. 6. Rocca. 7. d' Aves. 8. Bonarre. 9. Curacao. 10. Oraba. 5. Isles of the Gulph of Paria.
I. TERRA NOVA or New-found-Land, is an Island of equal Extent with England. It was first discovered in the year, 1494. by Sebastian Cabot the Portuegeze, for Henry VII. King of England, and was after reviewed by Mr. Thorn and Elliot in 1530. in order to a better knowledge of it; but no Trade was managed thither many years after, by the English, only the Normans, Portugal and Britains of France resorted thither, and settled there, changing the names of the Bays and Promontories, which the English had given them. The English notwithstanding did not quit their Claim, but in the year 1583. Sir Humphry Gilbert was sent to take possession of it for Queen Elizabeth, who had a design to send a Colony thither; but his misfortune in suffering Shipwrack as he return'd, quash'd that purpose, so that no Colony was sent till 1611 when Mr. Guy, a Merchant of Bristol, under∣took it, and got safe thither in 23 days. This Colony thrived; which gave encouragement to Sir George Calvert, Lord Baltimore, to get a Patent to setle a Plantation there in the Province of Avalon, and built himself a stately House and Fort at Ferryland, where he lived a whe and managed the Government him∣self, and after by a Deputy: His Posterity are Propri∣etors of it still. This Isle is situated between the 46 and 53 degrees of Northern Latitude, parted from the Continent of America by a narrow Channel, call'd S. George's Channel. The Air is very wholsome and good, but some∣thing cold in Winter and hot in Summer, tho' never very extream. The Soil in most places very fertil, naturally beautified with Roses, planted with stately Trees, and producing Pease, Filberds and other Fruits necessary for Life and Delight, and by Culture hath yielded to the English good Wheat, Rye, Tur∣neps and Coleworts. Their Woods are stored with plenty of Deer, Bears, Otters, Sables, Musk-cats, Musk-rats and Foxes. And by the Sea they catch and kill many Marse, or Sea-Oxen, which is an Am∣phibious Creature living both by Land and Sea, as big as an Ox, tho' in shape more like a Lion: They have Teeth like, and as big as Elephants, and as good Ivory. Of their Bellies they make Train-Oil, and their Skins are as thick again as an Oxes or Bulls, and short-hair'd like Seals. Of these they have many, and they make good Merchandize of. The Natives are of a reasonable Stature, beardless and broad-faced, colouring their Faces with Oker. Some of them go naked all but their Privities. Their Houses are nothing but Poles set round like one of our Arbours, and covered with Skins of Deer, and an Hearth or Fire-place in the middle. They make Canoes of Bark of Birch, strengthened with little wooden Hoops. Ten or twelve Families live in a Cabbin together, lying upon Skins, and their Dogs with them. They make Feasts often, and dance and sing at them. They believe in one God the Creator of all things, but have many whimsical Notions and ridiculous Opinions about him. They acknowledge the Immortality of the Soul; and when any one is buried, they put all his Goods into his Grave with him, to furnish him in the other World. They con∣sult an Oracle, which is the Devil, when they go a Hunting, to know, where they shall find Game, and often speed; but they do not worship him. They have many Conjurers among them, whom they use for Phy∣sicians and Priests, to consult their Oracle. They have a form of Government, but 'tis not known; but 'tis certain they are ruled by a Segamore or King; as the English by their Governour. The middle of this Isle is not inhabited by Europeans, but they content themselves to live about the Ports, which are very convenient, and where they maintain a great Trade with Cod-fish, Whale-oyl and other Fish. The English inhabit the Promontory of Avalon, and have these convenient Ports belonging to them. 1. Conception-bay, a large Bay, 5 miles broad in the narrowest place; yet safe, and of very good Anchorage. 2. Trinity-bay. 3. The Bay de Trespasrez. The French enjoy the Port of Plasance. About 70 miles from this Island over against Cape Raze, lies a bank or ridge of Ground, which is co∣vered with Water, when the Sea is high, and unco∣vered and dry at the ebb, about 300 miles in length and 75 in breadth; the Sea is 200 fathom deep all round it, and the Sand so moveable, that Ships of a considerable Burden may ride over it: Its called Ba∣calaos, from the multitude of Cod-fish and Stock-fish catched about it; for every Summer 3 or 400 Sail of Ships from England, France and Holland, come to this Isle, where they are sure of sufficient freight of those Fish: This Cod-fishing continues from April to Sep∣tember. With the Livers of the Cods, which are im∣mediately disbowelled and salted, the Mariners bait certain Hooks, and catch a large sort of Bird, called by them Tauquets and Happefoyes, which serve them for Food in this Voyage. II. JAMAICA is situate in the 18 deg. of Northern Latitude, standing in the Sea call'd Mare de Nort, about 15 leagues from the Island of Cuba, which lies on the North of it, and 20 from Hispaniola on the East, and about 150 leagues from the main Continent of America. It is about 170 miles in length, and 70 in breadth. It was first discovered by Columbus the Spaniard in his second Voyage to Ame∣rica, and brought into the possession of the English by Pnn and Venables, in the me of O. Cromwell's usurpation. The Air is very serene and calm, and more tem∣perate than many of the other adjoining Isles, the fresh Breezes, which continually blow Eatwardly, much qualifying the Heat. It is not subject to those de∣structive Hurricans and Earthquakes, which the Ca∣ribbies and other places are so much troubled with. Upon which account the late terrible Earthquake in 1693. ought to be looked upon, by the Inhabitants, as a special Judgment from God for their great sins. The Soil is wonderfully fruitful, and enjoys a con∣tinual Spring, being refreshed with frequent fattening showers of Rain and great Dews. It produces not only luxuriant Pasturage, in which they feed great numbers of tame and wild Beasts, as Horses, Cows, Asnegroes or Mules, Sheep, Goats, Hoggs and Rab∣bits; but also by their labour in Tillage and Hus∣bandry of their Trees and Plants, it affords great quantities of Sugar, Chocolate, Indico, Cotton, To∣bacco, Corn, Potatoes, Pease, Beans, and all sorts of Garden-herbs, and some Cochaneil. It also yields Ginger, Cod-pepper, Piemento or Jamaica-pepper, Salt, Tortoise-shells, Hides, divers sorts of Physical Druggs and Gums, as Guaicum, Sarsaparilla, Cassia-Fistula, Tamarinds, Vinello's, Aloes, Benjamin, Sumach, Acacia, and divers others, whose virtue and names are not yet known; as also, variety of useful Woods both for Dyers and Artists, as Fustick, Redwood, Cedar, Brasilletto, Lignum Vitae, Ebony, of which great quantities are exported, and much advantage made of them. They have Allegators, Manchonels, Snakes, Guiana's, but they do little hurt.
The Rivers of this Island are none of them fair or Navigable up the Country; yet towards the Sea it bounds with great Plenty of good Bays, Roads and Harbours; the principal of which are, Port-Royal, Old Harbour, Port-Morant, Negril and Antonio. The Rivers, Bays, Roads and Creeks afford plenty of ex∣cellent Fish and especially Tortoises, as also of Wild-Fowl, viz. Ducks, Teal, Plover, Flemingo's, Snipes, Paraketoes, &c. to which their Tame-Fowls, as Hens, Turkeys, Geese and Ducks, are not much inferior. The Religion and Laws of Jamaica are as near as the different Circumstances of the Places will admit, assimulated to those of England. They have ther se∣veral Courts, Magistrates and Officers for executing their Laws, hearing and determining all Causes and Controversies between Party and Party. Their Wor∣ship in their Parish-Churches, of which they have 14, is according to the Form and Ceremonies of the present establish'd Church of England, and under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. This Island hath but few considerable Towns: The chief of them are, 1. S. Jago de la Vega, which stands on the Banks of the River Pro-de-Cabre, and is the Metropolis of ths Isle, the Seat of the Governour and place for all the Courts of Justice. It hath about 4000 Houses, fair and convenient, and 2 Churches, and is very well filled with Inhabitants. 2. Port-Roy∣al, a large and populous Town, with an Harbour, exceeding safe and commodious, about 3 Leagues broad in most Places, and so deep that before the late Earthquake a Ship of a 1000 Tun might have laid her Side to the Shore, and load and unload at Plea∣sure. This City is the seat of all the Trade in the Isle, being inhabited by Merchants, and frequented by Traders of all sorts. 3. Passage, so call'd because it is the common Passage to S. Jago, and other Plan∣tations thereabouts, a Town not very large, but of note for Storage and Conveniencies for Passengers into the Country. 4. Other Villages there are well stor'd with plenty of all thngs, in which the English dwell in great Numbers, and have their large and rich Plan∣tations, as S. Katherines, S. John's, S. Andrews, S. David's, S. Thmas, Clarendon, S. George's, S. Mary's, S. Ann, S. James and S. Elizabeth. III. S. CHRISTOPHERS, called so from Christopher Clumbus the first discoverer: It is situate in the 17th Degree 25 Minutes of Northern Latitude, in circuit about 75 miles. This Isle was taken possession of by the English and French at the same time, and divided into equal Parts by Agreement, the English having two, and the French two Cantons of it, who, to prevent Difference, keep continual Guard upon their several Divisions. The Air is pleasant enough, and the Soil being light and sandy, is apt to produce all sorts of Fruits, Pro∣visions and Commodities natural to these Countries, as Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, with several other sorts of Fruits and Provisions. In it are several Mountains, dreadful Rocks, Springs of sulphurous and hot Waters, with thick Woods, and one Salt-pit by the Sea. This Country breeds some Creatures admirable, as, 1. The Rocket, a fourfooted Beast, whose Skin is of the Colour of a faded Leaf, marked with yellow or blewish Spots; they leap up and down perpetually, and love to look upon Men. 2. The Eagle of Orinoca, a Bird in shape much like an other Eagle, but his Feathers marked with black Spots, and the Ends of his Wings and Tail, yellow: He lives on Prey, but is of that Generosity that he never sets upon weaker Birds, but such as have crook∣ed Beaks and sharp Talons, like himself, and that never but in the Air. 3. The Craw-fowl, about the bigness of a great Duck, the Feathers very hideous to the Eye, and under his Neck is a Bag that will contain 2 Gallons of Water: they live by Fishing, and will discern a Fish above a Fathom under Water. 4. Pintados, a kind of Pheasants, so full of Colours as if they were painted. 5. The Colibus or Hum∣ming Bird, because in its Flight it makes a Noise like a Whirl-Wind, tho' 'tis no bigger than a large Fly. The Colour of its Feathers are admirable, like the Rain-Bow, it lives on Dew, and the Smell is as odoriferous as Musk or Amber. The Natives are either destroyed or fled out of the Isle. The French, besides the several Habitations di∣spersed up and down their Quarters, have a Town of a good bigness, call'd Baffe-Terre, built of Brick and Free-stone, well inhabited by Merchants: Here is a large Church, fair Hospital, their Court of Judi∣cature and a stately Castle, also 4 Forts. The En∣glish are more numerous than the French, and have 5 Churches, 2 Forts, and 3 Towns, in Sandy-Point, Palm-Tree and Cayune, with fair Structures. Their part is better watered than the French, and the French more fit for Tillage. Their Religion and Govern∣ment is according to the Temper of the 2 Nations, to which they belong. IV. NEVIS or MEVIS, lies not far from S. Christophers, in the 17th Degree 19 Minutes of Northern Latitude, a small Isle, not above 18 miles in compass. The English planted themselves here in 1628. and are still possess'd of it, driving a very hand∣some Trade in such things as they have occasion for by exchange of their Natural product, for their Con∣veniences. The Air is very temperate, not too hot, because of the constant Breizes, nor do they ever see Ice. The Soil is indifferent fruitful in Sugar, Cotten, Ginger, Tobacco, &c. and they have Mountains and Woods, replenished with store of Deer. Here are diverse Springs of fresh Water, and one of hot mineral Wa∣ters, of which they have made several Baths, by Experience found useful for many Distempers. This, as the rest of the Caribbies, is troubled with Muschetoes, Chegoes, Murigoins and Lizards. This Country breeds some strange Creatures, 1. The Annolis, a∣bout the bigness of a Lizzard, of a yellowish Skin; In the Day-time it is continually prouling about the Cottages for Food, and in the Night-time lies under Ground, making a great Noise. 2. A Land-Pike, which is like the Fish so call'd, but hath Legs instead of Fins, by which it moves upon the Ground, tho' very strangely; they lurk about the Rocks and are sel∣dom seen but towards Night: They make a Noise more sharp and grating than Toads, 3. The Flying Tyger, spotted like the Land-Tyger; he hath six Wings and as many Legs; he lives on Flies and other small Animals, and spends the Night in Singing upon a Tree. 4. The Horn-Fly, which hath 2 Snouts like an Elephant, painted all over by Nature with admirable variety of Colours. 5. The Snail called a Soldier, which having no Shell of its own, harbours in that of the Periwinkle: They have a Foot like a Crab's Claws. 6. A monstrous Spider, with 10 Feet, which have every one 4 Joynts and horny at the Ends: When she walks she spreads them as wide as a Man's Hand; she hath 2 solid sharp black Tushes, big enough for Tooth-Pickers, for which they are often used. She feeds on Flies and such Vermine: Their Webs are so strong that a little Bird can hardly
break through them. 7. The Fly-Catcher, a small Animal with 4 Legs, and of a great variety of Co∣lours naturally, but seems to convert it self into the Colour of the Thing it is in; for about a Palm-Tree 'tis Green, and about Orange-Trees yellow: It doth no Mischief, but clears all Places of Flies and such kind of Vermine. They are very familiar and tame, and will come upon the Tables to pursue their Game. 8. The Palm-Worm, remarkable for its infinite num∣ber of Feet; it is half a Foot long, and very swift in its Motion. It hath two Claws at Head and Tail, with which it wounds and Poisons Men so that for 24 Hours it puts them to very great Pain. Of all the Caribby Islands none is so well govern'd as this, Justice being administred with that Imparti∣ality, and all Debaucheries and Immoralities severely punished, by a Council of the most eminent and an∣cient Inhabitants. There are 3 Churches for the Ser∣vice of God; and, for its farther Security, it hath a Fort, wherein are mounted several great Guns, which command at a great Distance, for the Security of Ships in the Road or Harbour, and in which all Commodities imported for the Use of the Inhabi∣tants, are laid up to be distributed to them, as occa∣sion shall serve. V. BERMƲDAZ, or the Summer-Islands, so called from the first Discoverer John Bermudaz a Spa∣niard, and from Sir George Sommers, who was Ship∣wrack'd upon that Coast. These Isles lie East of Vir∣ginia and Carolina, at the distance of 300 Leagues, in the 32d Degree 30 Minutes of Northern Latitude. They are a great Cluster of Islands, some say 400 at least, the biggest of which is S. George's Isle, which is about 18 Miles long, but not above 3 broad, all the rest are much less. The Sky is almost continually serene and clear, and the Air so exceeding Temperate and Healthy that few dye but of old Age. The Sky is sometimes very tem∣pestuous for 48 Hours together, with Thunder and Lightning. The North and West Winds cause a sort of Winter in December, January and February, which is yet so moderate that there appears signs of a Spring in the growth of Plants and breeding of Birds. The Soil is exceeding fertile, yielding 2 Crops every Year, which they generally gather about the Months of July and December. They have several sorts of excellent Fruits, as Oranges, Dates, Mulberries, which harbour abundance of Silkworms, Palmito's and Tobacco. Our English Corn and Plants thrive well there. These Islands are well furnish'd also with Hogs, Fowls and Birds, chiefly Cranes, and a sort of Wild fowl, which nest in the Holes of the Rocks like Rabbits. No Venomous Creatures are found there, nor will live if brought thither; their Spiders are large, but not poisonous. Their Cedars are much different from those in other Places, but very sweet. In fine, they have but one great Inconveni∣ence, which is want of fresh Water. The English, who are the sole Proprieters of them, have divided the whole Isle of Bermudaz into Tribes or Cantreds, in every of which is a Borough-Town, which is ordered and regulated by the Magistrates, ac∣cording to the Government of England both in Church and State. It is exceeding strong by Nature, being fenced about with Rocks, but the English with their Block-houses and Forts have made it impregnable. VI. MONSERRAT, is an Island of small ex∣tent, not above 10 miles long, and 9 wide; it was so called from a Mountain in it, which the Spaniards, when they first discovered it, imagined to be like to Monserrat near Barcelona in Spain. It lies in the 17th Degree of Northern Latitude. 'Tis very mountain∣ous, and the Hills produce Cedar and many useful sorts of Trees, the Valleys and Plains being very Pleasant and fruitful. It is chiefly inhabited by the Irish, mixed with some English, and has a very fair Church, with neat Seats framed by great Art out of the most precious sweet-sented Woods. About this Island are taken out of the Sea several strange Crea∣tures. 1. The Sea-Devil, so called because of his terrible Aspect and black Horns like a Ram, growing above his Eyes: It is a strange kind of Monster, on the Head it hath a bunch like an Hedg-hog, Tushes like a Boar, a forked Tail, and the Flesh is of a poi∣sonous quality. 2. The Sea-Unicorn, a Fish 18 Foot long, with Scales as big as a Crown-piece, 6 large Fins like the End of a Galley-Oar, a Head like a Horse, and a Horn coming out of the Forehead 9 Foot long, so sharp that it will pierce the hardest Bo∣dies; but delicate Meat. 3. The Lamantine, Manaty or Sea-Cow, a Fish 18 foot long, having an Head like a Cow: It hath no Fins, but 2 short Feet, with which it creeps about the Rocks and Shallows for Meat; It is delicate Food. 4. The Flying-Fish, which hath Wings like Bats, and will sometimes, to avoid being made a Prey by the greater Fish, fly 20 Foot above Water, and 100 Paces in length, and then fall again into the Sea: They are like Herrings, and thought good Meat by hungry Sea-men 5. The Sword-Fish, which hath at the End of the Upper Jaw a Weapon like a Sword, with Teeth on each Side of it, 5 foot long and 6 Inches broad near the Jaw: It hath Vents near the Eyes to spout out Water, 7 Fins, and is at perpetual Enmity with the Whale, which is often wounded to Death by it. VII. DOMINICA is an Isle seated on the North of Martineco, in the 15th Degree 30 Minutes of Nor∣thern Latitude. It is very mountainous in the midst, and harbours Dragons; Vipers and other most venom∣ous and dreadful Creatures, yet are there many fer∣tile Villages producing several Commodities, but chiefly Tobacco. The English have some Plantations there of Tobacco, but are hindred from settling there by the Natives, which are Canibals, and inhabit here in great Numbers: For tho' they are very friend∣ly to the French, yet they hate the English upon the account of a former Grudge, and will not be recon∣ciled to them. They are for the most part of a Tra∣ctable Disposition, and such Enemies to Severity, that they'll dye with Grief, if they meet with any hard Usage from the Europeans or other Nations. They despise Riches, and often reproach the Europe∣ans for their Avarice; for they say, The Earth will find sufficiency for all Men with their Labor to manure it. They live free from Ambition and Thoughtful∣ness for future Events. They are great Enemies to Thieving, and live without Distrust of each other, frequently leaving their Houses and Plantations with∣out any to guard them: They love each other ex∣treamly, and never almost fall out: They reverence the Aged much, and were very chaste, both Men and Wo∣men, till the Europeans corrupted them by their ill Ex∣ample, and made them more loose. They are very neat. VIII. BARBADA, or Barbuda, is a small Isle, in 17 Degrees 30 Minutes of Northern Latitude, 15 miles in length, and not so much over. The Air is like the rest of the Caribbees, temperate and pleasant, and the Soil fertile, well stored with Sheep and other
Cattle, and might produce several good Commodities were it well managed by the Inhabitants, who are only the English, besides the Natives, who are such Enemies one to another, that as the latter will not, so the former dare not make chargable Improvements, be∣cause of the frequent interruption of the Natives, who once or twice a Year break in upon them, de∣stroying all with Fire and Sword, except Women and Children, and portable Spoil. Naturally it bears many excellent Fruits, viz. Oranges, Pomegranates, Citrons, Raisons, Indian-Figs and Coco-Nuts, whose Shell supplies them with Dishes, Barrels and Tubs, and Kernel with a Meat, in taste like an Almond, and Drink better than Florence-Wine; as also divers rare Trees and Woods, as Cassia, Cinnamon, Cotten, Pepper, Tobacco, Indico, Ginger, Potatoes, Pine-Apples, Sugar-Canes, Ebeny, Brasil, and the like. But the most admirable Plant here is the Sensible, or as some call it, the Chaste Plant, because if it be touched, the Leaves fall and run together as if they were withered and dead; but when the Hand is remov'd, opens it self, and thrives again. They have several sorts of Serpents, very large, and some of them not venomous, but serviceable to the Inhabitants by kil∣ling Rats, Toads and Frogs; others so poisonous that the Wound made by their Teeth, if it be let alone 2 Hours, is incurable. The Natives are handsom and well-proportioned, black-ey'd and hair'd, never lame or crooked. The Scars they get in War they account Badges of Honour. The Men pluck up their Beards, and count them De∣formities to the Europeans. Both Men and Women go stark naked, but will allow none to touch their Privy Parts. They die their Skins with a red Ointment, and when they would appear gallant, they draw black Circles about their Eyes with the Juice of Juniper Apples, wear a Crown of Feathers, and hang their Ears, No∣ses and Lips with Rings, Fish-Bones and other Toys, made of Gold, Silver or Tin, and put on Necklaces of Coral, Chrystal or Amber. IX. ANTEGO, Antigoa or Antigna, is another of the Caribby-Islands, seated in the 16th Degree 11 Minutes of Northern Latitude, in length 6 or 7 Leagues, and about as much in breadth. The English have settled themselves in it, and having found some fresh Springs, for want of which it was before thought inhabitable, do now live well in it, by the Help of Ponds and Cisterns for preserving Rain-Water. It is very hard of access by Ships, by reason of the Rocks which surround it. The Soil is fruitful enough in Su∣gar, Indico, Ginger and Tobacco. They have large Woods and Fens, which supply them with most sorts of Wild-Fowl and Venison, and feed store of tame Cattle. Some of their Birds and Fowl are un∣usual and admirable. 1. The Canades, which some count the most beautiful Bird in the World for its cu∣rious variety of Colours: Its Eyes are red like a Ru∣by, and it hath on the Head a Cap of Feathers, of Vermilion, sparkling like a live Coal; it is about the bigness of a Pheasant, very kind to Friends, but severe to its Enemies. 2. The Flamet, a large and beautiful Bird, as big as a Wild Goose, his Legs and Neck very long, his Smell and Sight so quick that he is hard to be shot; and when they are taken, the Gunner takes the Wind of them and creeps in an Ox-Hide till he is within Gun-shot. They have plenty of all sorts of Fish, and some of them are very remark∣able: As 1. The Shark-Fish, which is a kind of a Sea-Wolf, or Sea-Dog, the most ravenous of all Fish, and of a vast length and bigness: Swimmers are in great Danger from them, for they will bite a Man in two at a Bite, their devouring Jaws being set with 3 or 4 Rows of sharp broad Teeth. Their Flesh is not good, but the Brains are found a good Medicine against the Stone and Gravel. 2. The Beam, a Sea-Monster in shape like a Pike, 7 or 8 foot long, a dreadful Enemy to Mankind, whom he seizes like a Blood-Hound, and will never let him go, if he can get fast hold; his Teeth are so venomous that the least touch of them is mortal, unless a sovereign Antidote be immediately applied. There are a sort of these Fishes that have a Beak 4 Foot long, like a Wood-Cock's Bill, a large Pme under his Belly, like a Cock's Comb, and 2 Horns under his Throat of about a Foot and an half long, which he can sheath in an hollow Place under his Belly. 3. The Sea-Urchin or Sea-Hedge-Hog, because it is round and full of Prickles, like an Hedge-Hog rowled up: They are sent as Presents to the Curious, to hang in Closets. 4. The Sea-Parrot, which hath very spark∣ling and beautiful Eyes, of which the Ball is as clear as Chrystal; no Teeth, but Jaws so solid that it can crush Oysters, Muscles and other Shell-Fish to pieces, to get out the Fish; they are excellent Meat, and some weigh 20 pounds. 5. The Dorados, Sea-Bream or Amber-Fish, which is very swift in Swim∣ming, and very hardly taken. The Head in the Water is green, and the Body as yellow as Gold: It is as good Meat as a Trout or Salmon, and is caught only with a Piece of white Linnen fastened to an Hook. X. BARBADOS is the most considerable of the Caribby-Islands, which the English possess. It is situate in the 13th Degree 20 Minutes of Northern Latitude, about 8 Leagues in length and 5 in breadth, of great Strength, and very populous. It was disco∣vered first by Sir William Curteen in the Reign of James I. but had no Inhabitants, being all over-run with Wood, which had no Beast in them but Swine, put into them by the Portugese. The English were at great Pains to clear it, and suffered great Hardships before they could make any Advantage to themselves by Planting Tobacco, Indico, Cotten-Wool and Fustick-wood; but at last they mastered all Difficul∣ty, and became a flourishing Colony, as they still re∣main to this Day. The Air is very hot for 8 Months, but is made tole∣rable by the constant Briezes of the North-east Wind, which rises with the Sun, and blows brisker as that ascends. Their Days and Nights are almost of an equal length throughout the Year, the Sun rising and setting at 6 always, with little Variance. The Soil is exceeding fertile, bearing Crops all the Year round, and the Trees being in a perpetual Verdure. It pro∣duces abundance of all sorts of Fruits, as Dates, Oranges, Pomegranates, Limes, Limons, Grapes, Macows, Momins, Mombains, Cherries, Coco's, Guavars, Indian Figs, Melons, &c. As also divers sorts of English Herbs and Roots, as Rosemary, Ma∣joram, Sage, Purslan, Turnips, Carrots, &c. but the profitable Commodities, which make the Merchan∣dize of this Isle, are, Sugar, Indico, Cotten-Wool, Logwood, Ginger, Fustick and Lignum Vitae, with which they freight 200 Ships yearly. They have no Beasts and Cattle but what are Tame and brought them from other Countries, as Camels, Horses, Asne∣groes, Oxen, Bulls, Cows, Sheep, Goats and Hogs, which are plentiful in every Plantation. They have variety of Trees for Building and other uses, as Lo∣cust, Mastick, Red-Wood, Iron-Wood and Cedar,
Cassia, Fistula, Coloquintida, Tamarind, Cassary, Poyson-tree, Physick-Nut, Calabashes, of whose Shells they make Dishes, Mangrass, Raccou, of whose Bark they make Flax and Ropes, Lignum Vitae and Palmeto's. They have great variety of Fowl and small Birds. The Snakes, Scorpions and Lizzards are very harmless, but the Musketoes, Cockroches, and Merry-wings are very troublesome in the Nights. They have Land-Crabs and plenty of Fish in the Sea, tho' they have few or none in their Ponds and Brooks. Their Drink is Mobby, made of Potatoes soak'd in Water, and Prino, made of Cassary Root, which is poisonous of it self, but by Art made wholesom Drink; as also Crippo, Kill-Devil, Punch, &c. Their Food is generally Pork or Fish: The Negroes eat little but Potatoes, Cassanden Bread and such like Diet; but the Masters have daintier Fare, Beef, Mutton, Kid, Sturgeon, Neat's-Tongues, and other good Dishes, and drink Wine, Brandy and English Bear, and live in great Plenty. The poor Negroes are al∣lowed too little, but the English, especially the better sort, are exceeding profuse and costly. This Island is divided into 11 Precincts or Parishes, where they have 14 Churches and Chappels for the Service of God; and tho' the English set apart Sun∣day themselves for Divine Worship, yet they do not la∣bour to convince the Negroes of the Necessity they lye under of serving their Creator, but they are left to spend that Day either in Labour or Sports. The Government is by Laws agreeable to those in England, for which they have Courts of Judicature, Justices of Peace, Constables, Church-Wardens, &c. They have also a standing Militia for the Defence of the Isle. The Chief Towns of this Island are, 1. S. Micha∣el's or Bridg-town, a convenient, well-built and po∣pulous Town, the Residence of the Governor, the the Place of Judicature and Seale of Trade. It hath 2 strong Forts for its Security, and the Defence of the Ships in the Road: It stands low, and is not ve∣ry healthy. 2. Little Bristol, hath also a commodi∣ous Road for Ships, and full of Trade; it is also de∣fended by 2 Forts. 3. S. James, a place of conside∣rable Trade, and a good Road for Ships: In it are kept the Monthly Courts for the Precinct. 4. Charles-Town, where are good Markets weekly, and monthly Courts for the Precinct. 5. This Isle hath also several other good Bays, as Fowl-Bay, Austin's-Bay, Maxwel's-Bay, Black-Rock, The Hole, Spikes-Bay, Balises-Bay, Long-Bay, Charles-Bay and Constance-Bay, all of them well fortified against Inva∣sions of Enemies. Some things are miraculous in this Isle. 1. Their large Caves, big enough to contain 500 Men, suppo∣sed to have been the Habitation of the Inhabitants anciently, and now only the Harbour of Fugitive Slaves, who run from their Masters, and lurk here a great while before they are discovered. 2. The Rock-Fish, taken about this Isle, which is red, mixt with seve∣ral other Colours, very delightful to the Eye. 3. The Cucuyos, a great Fly, which gives such a Light in the Night, that Men may not only travel by it, but write and read by the Light of it: The Indians go a Hunting in the Night by their Light, fastning them to their Feet and Hands. 4. The River Tuigh, from the top of whose Water they gather Oil for their Lamps. XI. ANGƲILLA, or Snakes-Island, so call'd from the shape of it, which is long like a Snake; for it is 10 Leagues long, and but 3 Wide. It lies in the 18th Degree 21 Minutes of Northern Latitude. The English are in possession of it, and raise much To∣bacco there, which is highly esteemed by the Judicious in the Art of Smoaking. They have great plenty of Horses, Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Goats and some Hogs; but they were put on it by Sailers since the Discovery, and have much increased, but naturally it bred no such Creatures. Yet some Creatures there were in these Islands of a very strange Nature: As 1. The Opassum, about the Bigness of a Cat: It hath a Bag or Purse under the Belly, which it can open and shut at pleasure, and carries the young ones in it, the he and she by turns. 2. The Javaris, a sort of Swine, with their Navels on their Backs, good Meat but hardly taken, because it is indefatigable almost in running, and so furious, that when it it is forced, it tears every thing to pieces with its Tushes. 3. The Tatous, a Beast about the bigness of a Fox, cloath'd with Scales-like Armour; it can wrap it self up so artificially in them, that it is secured from all the at∣tempts of the Huntsmen or Dogs, and can rowl it self down a Precipice like a Bowl, without Harm. 4. The Agouty, a Beast about the bigness of a Rab∣bit, and much of the same shape; it feeds it self like a Squirrel, and hath only 2 Teeth in each Jaw; they are fierce, and, when angry, stamp with their Hind-Feet, and set their Hair perfectly upright. 5. Musk-Rats, which live in Burroughs like Rabbits, and smell like Musk; by which they are easily disco∣vered: Their Smell causes Melancholy. 6. The Alegator, a Creature that keeps both in the Water and on the Land; they grow as long as they live, and are sometimes 18 Foot long, and as big as an Hogs∣head: They move their Upper-Jaw only, but can open it so wide as to swallow a Man: They smell like Musk, so strongly that they scent the Air for an 100 Paces about them, and the Water where they are. They are like a great Tree, and will Coun∣terfeit it so well that both Beasts and Men are often surprized by them and devour'd, not suspecting any Danger. XII. TOBAGO is situated in the 11th Degree 30 Min. of Northen Latitude. Its Extent is not above 32 miles in length and about 11 in breadth. It is a Country very happy in a good and tempe∣rate Air, notwithstanding it is so near a Neighbour to the Equinoctial Line; for the Briezes so moderate the Heat, that they have no inconvenience by it, but enjoy a perpetual Spring. The Soil naturally produces Indian-Corn, but no English-Grain will grow here, except Pease and Beans; yet they have store of Gui∣nea-Corn, Bonevis, the French-Pea and Bean, the Kidney and Pigeon-Pea. They have also excellent Fruits, as the Cushion-Apple, Bonano, Spanish-Figs, Oranges, Limons, Prickle-Apples, Pomegranates, Grapes of divers sorts, Apples of divers kinds, Plums, Cherries: But above all the Coco-nut-tree, and the Fruit of it, is that which the Indians admire, because it is Meat, Drink and Cloath, and therefore call it God's Tree. The Maccaw-Nut, Physick-Nut, Melons, Penguins, Cucumbers and Pumkins. There are also several sorts of Roots, as Potatoes, Eddyes, Yanis, Carrots and other English Roots, Tea, To∣bacco, Cinnamon, Long Cod-Bell, Round and Ja∣maica Pepper, as also plenty of Wild Beasts, as wild-Hogs, Pickeries (which is a Beast like an Hog) Ar∣madilla's, Guano's, Coneys, Aposta's (which is a Beast so much in love with Mankind, that it follows them and loves to gaze on them) Horses, Cows, Assene∣groes, Sheep, Deer, Hogs, Goats, Land-Tortoises and Crabbs. Here is also store of excellent Fish, as the Gropers, Porgo's of 2 sorts, Cavallus and Mul∣let,
the Manasy, or Sea-Cow, Turtles, &c. They have great plenty of Birds, and among them the Bill-bird is something admirable, because his Bill is as big as his Body: As also of Trees, as Cedar, Box, Brasil, Yellow-saunders, Lignum-Vitae, Ebony and many others. Vendible Commodities are Sugar, To∣bacco, Indico, Ginger, Sarsaparilla, Balsam, Balm, Silk-grass, Tar, &c. They allow liberty of Con∣science to all without interruption, except Roman-Catholicks: They are ruled by a Governor, Depu∣ty Governor and Assembly, chosen by the Free-hold∣ers, to make good and Wholsom Laws for the good of the Island; and all Controversies are decided by the majority of Votes. S. VINCENTS lyes in the Latitude of 16 deg. North, about 24 miles in length, and 18 in breadth. It hath many Mountains, but fruitful Plains among them, yielding good store of Sugar-Canes, without the labour of Planting. It is well water'd with Rivers, and hath very convenient Harbours for Shipping. The English have some settlement, but the Caribbee-Indians are most powerful, and have many pleasant Villages. These poor Souls have no notion of a God, so that they have no Worship among them; yet they have Priests, by whom they invocate their false Gods, 1. To revenge them of their Enemes. 2. To heal them of their Diseases. 3. To know the event of their Wars. 4. To protect them from their great Devil Mobaya; for it is certain this evil Spirit does beat and torment them cruelly, when they are not so forward upon War as he would have them, and that in a visible Form. They devour the Flesh of their Enemies, not so much our of love of such Food, as for the pleasure they take in Revenge: They will eat no Swines Flesh, lest they should have small Eyes, which they judge a great Deformity; nor Turtles, lest they should partake of their Laziness. They are very peaceable, and give the English no Disturbance at all, but blame them often for coming so far to gratifie their covetous Minds, and that through so many Dangers. CALIFORNIA lyes on the West of New-Mexico, in the South-sea: It is one of the greatest Islands in the World, between the 24 and 46 deg. of Latitude, which makes about 450 Leagues, and it hath about 140 Leagues in the widest place. The Air is sound and cold, according to its situation; the Soil Fruitful. As for their Manners, Religion and Government, they are none of them as yet so well settl'd as to speak any thing certain of them. There are some Isles along the Coasts, as S. Clement, Parares, Ceintas, S. Martin, Carre, S. Mark, S. Cata∣line; and in the Sea of Vermio, there are the Isles of S. Crosse, Gyants, &c. The Antillae, so call'd, be∣cause they lye before the Shore of the Northern America, are very considerable for their situation and fruitfulness in all things; they would deserve a parti∣cular description of them. It is sufficient to say here, that these Isles have enough to satisfie the Covetous∣ness of the Europeans, and enrich them that Trade thither. CHAP. III. AMERICA PERUANA, or Southern America. THE Southern America is parted from the Nor∣thern by the Streights of Panama, from which it is extended as far as the Streights of Magellan in the form, both of a Point and Peninsula, having on the North New Spain, on the West the South-sea, on the South Terra Australis, and on the East the North-sea, between the 12 deg. 20 min. of Northern Lat. and between 293 deg. and 348 of Longitude, which makes it to be from North to South, 1420 Leagues, and from West to East about 1200. This great Pe∣ninsula is divided into 8 principal Parts, which are sub-divided into many others, as may be seen in the following Table, with the most remarkable Cities. Southern America hath Eight principal Parts. 1. Terra Firma. Panama, Bish. 2. Peru. Lima, Arch-bish. 3. Chili. S. Jago, Bish. 4. Magellanica. S. Philip. 5. Rio de Plata. S. Salvador. 6. Brasil. S. Salvador. 7. Country of Amazons. Corupa 8. Several Islands. SECT. I. TERRA FIRMA. Terra Firma reaches from the Confines of Veragua to Cape Nord, or Cape Race in Carabona, about 640 Leagues from West to East, and from South to North about 200, from the Borders of Paria and Amazonia, as far as Cape Lavela. It is the most Northern Region of this great Peninsula. It is fruit∣ful in all things. It hath in it 12 Provinces, as they are set down in the following Table, with the chief Cities in each of them. TERRA FIRMA in XV. Parts. 1. The Au∣dience of Panama. Panama, Porto-Belo, Nombre de Dios 2. Popayan, a Govern∣ment. S. Fe de. Ante-quera. 3. Cartage∣na, a Go∣vernment. Cartagena. 4. S. Mar∣tha a Go∣vernment. S. Martha. 5. Rio de la Hacha, a Go∣vernment. Rio de la Hacha, 6. Venezuola, a Govern∣ment. Venezuola, or Cono. 7. Granada a King∣dom. S. Fede Bogota. 8. Paria Propri∣a, a Govern∣ment. Tamara, Macureguare. 9. New Anda∣lousia. Comana, or Corouba. 10. Ca∣riba∣na. Di∣vers Forts. 11. Guy∣ana. Dorodo or Monoa
12. The Isle of Cayan∣na. Cayene. 13. Peo∣ple. Caribes, Araotes, Arricari, Ʋrraba, Cataparara, Stinagotes, Paezes, Pixos, Manipos, &c. 14. Lakes. Parim, Guyana, Cassipa, Macambe. 15. Ri∣vers. Darien, S. Martha, Paria, or Orineque, Essekebe, Maron, Pixos, Paezes, Manipos The Air is very cold and healthful, except on the Coasts of the Isthmus of Panama, where there are many Marshes. The Soil produces abundance of Maze, but little Wheat. It hath much Pasture, and divers Fruits that we have, and some that we have not, but not in every place alke. They have many Odoriferous Trees, and others that yield them Gums. Their Forests afford Tigers and other Beass, their Rivers Crocodiles, and other very troublesme and mischievous Insects. They have Mines of Gl, Silver, Copper, Azure, Emeralds, and some other precious Stones. Panama is a Bshop's See and Royal Audience. Morgan, the famous Backaneer▪ burnt it in 1670; but the Spaniards have built it again a lit∣tle more West-ward. It is the Treasury o the Goredge and Silver of Peru, which is carried from thence to Porto Belo upon the North-Sea, which is within 18 or 20 Leagues. This Port is much augmented by the People of Nombre de Dios, which the bad Air hath made to be utterly forsaken. In the way they make use of the River Chiagre; so that they go not above 5 Leagues by Land. By this Port also they bring Merchandizes from Spain to Peru. Cartagena is sto∣red with Balm, Rosin, and several sorts of Gums; the City of the same name, is the Port for the Vessels that come from Cadiz, by Terra Firma. S. Martha pro∣duces all sorts of Fruits. Here the Mountains called the Andes, begin, which run towards the South. Venezuela is the Granary of the Neighbouring Provinces. The City of Comana hath Salt-pits to supply the adjoin∣ing Countries. The Paezes, Pixos, Manips, and o∣ther People, are not yet fully Subdued. Granada is furnish'd with Silver, Copper, and Emeralds. Gua∣na, or the Aequinoctial-France, is a good Air, and is more or less Fruitful according to the places and Na∣tions which live in it. The French are Masters of the Isle of Cayenne, the Forts of Gorous, Cinamari, Caonama, Concaribo, Cape Conde, along the Coasts of Caribana. The English are at Surinam and Marone. The Dutch at Esquib, Barbice, Boron, and Aperuvaque. The Isle of Cayenne, which is 15 or 16 Leagues in Compass, is very considerable in all things. The French have there divers Towns and Forts; it pro∣duceth abundance of all things that are necessary for the life of Man. SECT. II. PERU, PERUA, or Peruense Regnum. This Region is so considerable, that it gives name to the Southern America. It belonged anciently to the Incas, but now the Spaniards have it. The situation of it is in the Torrid Zone, between the 1 and 6 Deg. of Northen Latitude, and between the 1 and 27 Degree of Southern, which makes it in length 660 Leagues, and between the 288 and 315 Degree of Latitude▪ so that the breadth of it in the widest place, in the Province of Charcas is about 224 Leagues. It is bounded on the North by Terra Firma; on the West by the Sea of Peru; on the South by Chili and Plata, and on the East by Rio de la Plata and Amazonia. PERƲ may be considered as the different Coun∣tries, the Plain, the Mountains, and the Andes, where the Air is different and indeed unwholsom. The Plains which joyn to the Sea are sandy, and have sel∣dom or never any Rains fall upon them. The Moun∣tains consist of Valleys, Skirts and Tops, where it is very cold. The Andes are very high Mountains, very Fruitful and Populous, and they have often Rain there. This Region is the richest Treasure upon Earth, and the bet Flower in the Cown of Spain. This Country was first Discover'd by Francis Pizaro a Spaniard in 1525, and he made hims lf Master of it by the cos nt of two Brothers, who contended for th Crown: He also rangled one King, called the King o Aapa, contrary to the promise he had made o hm. The insatiable desire which he had for Gold▪ mae him commit infinite Barbarities and Ms upon the poor Indians, under the pretence of Rion Pizaro was justly punished for it. Earth∣ledge are there frequent and dangerous. In the year ledge there happen'd so violent an one, that the City ledgelo was swallow'd up. By the Rivers sides the So prduces an abundance of Corn, Maiz, Sugar∣canes, Cotton. excellent Wine, and that admirable Plant called Coca, whose Leaf being put into the Mouth. nourisheth and preserves from Thirst and Hun∣ger. They have a great number of Ostriches, and Sheep so large, that they use hem for Drawing and Carriage; also springs of hot Water. Some of their Ri∣vers and Lakes have Salt at the bottom though the Water of them be fresh. Besides their Mines of Mercury, Synoper, or Vermilion, they have such an abundance of Gold and Silver every where, that they cannot tell how to dig it when they have found it; so that when Pizaro came there, their Kichin-Vessels were all of Gold, and their Houses covered with Plates of it. It is certain that the King of Spain hath had out of the Mine at Potosi in less than 50 years, for his fifth part above 111 Millions weight at 3 Royals and a quarter the weight, as Lincst, Herrara, Acosta, Gar∣celassor and Bartholomeo de Cassa relate. It is so safe Travelling upon their ways, that they often carry the value of 400000 Ducats with 4 Musqueteers. They have a great number of Horses and other Beasts, Tigers, Bears, Corigons, which have under their Belly a skin like a sack, where they carry their young ones till they are able to Travel; and a Plant called Copariboy, a sovereign Medicine for all Wounds, and a special Antidote against Poyson. The Natives are very simple, inconstant, and re∣gardless of their Words. The People of the Moun∣tains are great Dissemblers, and more Ingenious: The Women are very modest, and most faithful to their Husbands of all the Americans. These People are whiter than the Spaniards. They worshipped the Sun in former times, but be∣lieved there was a God more Powerful, whom they call Pachacamac. The Subjects of the King of Spain follow the Catholick Religion. The Christians there are looked upon by those that are not yet Converted, as Monsters for Malice and Barbarity, because of the strange Cruelties they have exercised upon them; which is the reason that the Manatians and other People that live upon the Mountains, kill as many of them as they can meet.
The Incas Reigned sufficiently there for more than 300 years before the coming of the Spaniards. Pisaro and Almagro, Captains for Charles V. have almost extinguished that Royal Family in favour of the Crown of Spain. The People of the Mountains al∣ways oppose the Spaniard: They chuse a Captain or Cauque from among themselves for their Governor. The Incas or Ingas, had made two common Roads, one through the Plains, another through the Moun∣tains, each 500 Leagues in length, and placed Hou∣ses at such a distance upon them to lodge and sup∣ply Strangers, that they might Travel quite through them without Charge. It is said that their Govern∣ment had some resemblance to that of the Greeks and Romans; that it was very easie and commodious to all the World; that they divided the World into Three parts, The Superior Inferior and Subterranean; which signifie Heaven, Earth, and Hell. Atabalipa, one of their Kings said one day to a Spaniard, That the Pope of that time was no wise Man, for giving them that which did not belong to him. This un∣happy Prince being taken by the Spaniards, offer'd for his Liberty as much Gold as a Room 27 Foot long, 17 Foot wide, and of an height proportionable, would hold: But this would not save his Life, but he was cruelly put to Death. Several Authors re∣port, that the Incas had all manner of Beasts and Plants which they could imagine, formed in Gold, according to the full bigness and shape of every one of them; and that they had several Temples, in which they had many Statues of pure Gold, with in∣finite quanties of Precious Stones. Peru is divided into three Audiences, and divers Provinces, as is visible in the following Table, with the chief Cities in each of them. Peru hath three Audiences, or Parliaments. 1. Of Quito in 4 Pro∣vinces. 1. Part of Popegan. Popegan, Madrigal. 2. Quito Propria, Quito Porteniejo. 3. Lesquixos, Balsa, Avila. Valadolid S. John of Salines. 4. Pacamores and Chanele. 2. Of Reyos, or Lima. Lima, Cusco, Guemanga, Truxillo, Ariquipa. 3. Of Char∣chas, or Plata. Plata, Lapaz, S. Cruz, de la Sierra, Potosi, Ponso. People. Tomependa, Viticos, Atavillos, Trama, Guanias, Tambopala, Manatiens. Mountains. The Andes. Lakes. Liguna-fridissima, Chincacocha, Tiquicaca, Paria, Laguna, the Great. Rivers. Xauxo, or, Maraguan. Which far∣ther is called Amazone. SECT. III. CHILI, & MAGELLANICA, Chile, aut Cile & Magellanica. CHILI takes the name from one of its Vallies; or according to some Geographers, from the Cold which is in the Mountains, with which it is encom∣passed on the North and East-side. Almagro Con∣quer'd it in 1554, in the name of the King of Spain. The situation of it is between the 26 and 49 degree of Southern Latitude, which makes it 450 Leagues in length; and between the 297 and 305 degree of Longitude, which contains about 120 Leagues in the widest place; and about 80 one place with another. It is bounded on the North with Peru, on the West with the Sea of Chili, on the South with Magellanica, and on the East with Magellanica and Plata. It is very Cold, especially towards the South, although there are several Mountains that belch out Fire. The Coasts are very fruitful. It affords Mines of Copper, and of the purest Gold in the World, of which it hath an infinite number. They have plenty of Corn and Maiz, which bears an Ear 15 or 18 Fingers long, upon a Stalk 7 or 8 Foot high. The Wine is not so good as in France. The Fruits of this Coun∣try and of Europe spring up much alike. The Sheep are almost as big as Camels, and are used to carry Burdens. This Region abounds with Ostriches. The Rivers freez in the night, and thaw in the day, but they have no considerable ones. The Inhabitants endure Labour easily, as also Hun∣ger and Thirst: They have Ambition and Courage, and are accounted Valiant, especially the Arauques, which the Spaniards have not yet Conquer'd. They wear Beasts Skins ordinarily for Cloathing. This Province is subject partly to the Vice-Roy of Peru, but under the Rule of a Governor of its own, and partly is Govern'd by the Savages. As for their Religion, some of the Natives are Catholicks, as the Spaniards, but for the greatest part are Idolaters, and worship the Devil, whom they call Eponamon, i. e. the Powerful, that he may do them no Mischief. MAGELLANICA takes its name from Fer∣dinand Magellan, who first Discover'd it in 1519. The Natives call it Chika; others term it the Coun∣try of the Patagons. It is the most Southern part of the American Continent, and hath the form of a Point between the 36 degree 30 min. and 54 of Sou∣thern Latitude; which shews it to be about 360 Leagues in length, and between 293 and 324 deg. of Latitude, which makes the extent of it from East to West to be about 336 Leagues. It is bounded on the North with Rio de Plata, and a part of Chili; on the West, South and East with the rest of Chili and the Magellanick Sea. The Air is very cold, and the Soil as Fruitful as any other parts, except in Pa∣stures and Forests. The Inhabitants use a Root cal∣led Capar for their Bread. They have Foxes, Coneys, Goats, Ostriches and other Creatures. They catch out of the Rivers and Seas, Sea-wolves, Pilchards, Giltheads, Bonito's, Oysters, Albacores. S. Phelippe. and the Nombre de Jesus, which the Spaniards had built upon the Streights, are almost Ruin'd. Our Re∣lations tell us, that the Patagons are 10 or 12 Foot high, and are Couragious, Strong and swift at Run∣ing. They love Dancing and Hunting; they are jealous of their Wives; they live without any care for the future; they eat Man's Flesh raw, they Paint their Faces, cut off their Hair, and Cloath themselves with Beasts Skins. They are Idolaters, and fear the Devil, whom they call Setebos; they dwell in Caves. It is said, that one of these Semi-Giants will carry a Tun of Wine; that three or four of them will row a Vessel at Sea; that they-will run as swift as a Stag; and that 50 Spaniards can hardly bind one of them. Nevertheless, the English who have since made a Descent thither, are not altogether of that Opinion.
In these two Regions, the most remarkable Places and Things are in the following Table. 1. Chili hath 3. Provin∣ces. 1. Chili Propria. S. Jago, Rupel. 2. Cuao, or Chicuito. S. John de Frontera. Mendoza, &c. 3. Imperial. Valdivia, La Conception. Chilue, an Isle. People. Araugues. Rivers, Valdivia, Maule, Toltin, Tungoy, Chupa, Tunguiviba. Lakes. Laguna, de Gana∣guaches. 2. Magella∣nica hath People, Patagons, Pulches. Ri∣vers, Seguadere, Camerones, Jo. Serrano, Crux, &c. Lakes, Seguadere, &c. It seems to be requisite here to take some notice of the principal Navigators that made Discoveries toward the Southern parts of the Globe, both South-east and South-west. The first of these was Ferdi∣nand Magalianes, or Magellanus, a Portuguese Gentle∣man; who not being (as he thought) sufficiently en∣courag'd by his Master King Emanuel, apply'd him∣self to the Court of Castile, and obtain'd of the Em∣peror Charles V. five Ships well furnish'd with ne∣cessary Provisions, and 250 Men. These set Sail from Sevil, Aug. 10, A. D. 1519. And at first en∣deavouring to find a Passage through the great River Plata, were oblig'd to Winter in Port S. Julian, but afterward they happily sail'd through that famous Streight call'd the Magellanick, from the Inventer's Name, and so pass'd from the Atlantick into the Pacifick Ocean, as far as the Islands de los Ladrones, or of Thieves, where Magellanus himself was Poy∣son'd; although others affirm that he perish'd in an Engagement at Maran, one of the Philippine Islands, after he had subdued that of Cebu, in 1520. How∣ever, one of his Ships having sail'd round the Globe, came by the Molucco's and Cape of good Hope, and at length arriv'd safe at Sevil, Sept. 8. 1522. In the year 1525, Garcias de Loyasa, a Spaniard, entred into the same Streight, giving names to seve∣ral Places; and was follow'd by Simon de Alcazova, in 1534. Afterward three Ships were equipp'd by the order of the Bishop of Placentia, in 1539, and one of them got through the Streight to Arica, a Port of Peru. On the 13th. of November, 1577, Sir Francis Drake with five Ships, and 164 Seamen, set out from Pli∣mouth, and having sent back two of them as impedi∣ments, cross'd the Magellan Streights only with three, and enter'd into the Pacifick Sea, where these Ships were dispers'd by a violent storm, and one of them was never hear'd of since; nevertheless, Drake continu'd sailing along the Coasts of Peru, New Spain, Mexico, California, and other parts of America, and took se∣veral Spanish Vessels richly Laden during this famous Voyage round the World, which he finished within the space of three years, returning by the East Indies and Cape of good Hope to the Coasts of England, where he arriv'd on November 3d. 1580. In the mean while Captain John Winter having been separated from Sir Francis, upon their entrance into the South-sea, was driven back again into the Streight of Ma∣gellan, which he repass'd, and was the first that sail'd through this passage from the Pacifick into the Atlan∣tick Ocean. The third Compasser of the World was Thomas Candish Esq who set out in 1586, and very fortu∣nately finish'd that Course in two years and two Months; in the carrying on of which, both Magella∣nus and Sir Francis Drake had spent three whole years. The same renowned Navigator pass'd the Magella∣nick Streights a second time in 1591, but died in this last Voyage. In 1593. Sir Richard Hawkins sail'd for a long while in sight of Terra Australis, in the Latitude of 50 degrees, run through the Streights of Magellan the next year, and was at last taken by the Spaniards, after a sharp Fight, on the Coasts of Peru. The fourth Circum-navigation of the Globe, was perform'd by Oliver Noort, or Nordt, a Hollander, his chief Pilot being Captain Melis an English-man, who had accompanied Mr. Candish in his Voyage This Noort steer'd much the same Course with Ma∣gellan, Drake, and Candish, and spent three years in encompassing the Earth. About the same time also, the Dutch Fleet under Sir James Mahe, Simon de Cordes, Sebalt de Wert, &c. wherein William Adams was chief Pilot, suffer'd great inconveniencies in these Streights. They discover'd Sebaldi Isles, and a Gulph call'd by them Green Bay, in 54 deg. Lat. In 1614, George Spilberg, Commander in chief of another Dutch Fleet of six Ships, sail'd through the Streights of Magellan, and the South-sea, to the East-Indies, and came back from thence by the Cape of good Hope, to the Texel, after having been out near three years, and finish'd the fifth Circum-navigation of the World. In 1609 and 1610, Pedro Fernandez Giros, a Por∣tuguese, and Ferdinand de Quir a Spaniard, (as they both affirm) sail'd at several times about 800 Leagues together on the Coasts of a Southern Continent, to the height of 15 deg. south Lat. where they met with a very fruitful, pleasant and populous Country. This vast tract of Land may be perhaps some part of Jansen Tasmen's Land, Van Diemen's Land, New Zealand, New Holland, New Carpentaria and New Guiney, which were coasted and descry'd by the Dutch, who gave names to many Bays, Rivers and Capes hereabouts, in the years 1619, 1622, 1627, 1628, 1642 and 1644, from the Equinoctial Line, as far as the 44th. deg. of south Lat. And indeed the Hollanders have made the greatest Discoveries toward the south Terra incognita, but have publish'd very little concerning their Expeditions in those parts. In 1615, William Cornelius Schouten of Horn, and Jacob le Maire of Amsterdam, encompass'd the Globe a sixth time, discovering a new Entrance southward from the Streights of Magellan into the South-sea, by Cape Horn, in the 57 deg of south Lat.; which Pas∣sage has been ever since known by the name of Le Maire's Streight. Here they impos'd Names on se∣veral Islands and Countries; and having spent 2 years and 18 days in this Voyage, return'd by the East-Indies to Holland. Afterward, in 1618, a Spanish Fleet under the Conduct of Bartolomeo Garcias de Nodal, sail'd through Le Maire's Streight. And in 1623, part of Prince Maurice's Fleet steer'd the same Course, discovering some small Islands in their Pas∣sage. In 1642, Abel Jansen Tasman a Hollander, made a very remarkable Voyage toward the south Terra Incognita. And in 1643, Captain Brewer or Brower, found out a new way into the South-sea, by a Passage
call'd after his own Name, lying East of Le Maire's Streight. But in 1669, that famous Navigator and valiant Commander Sir John Narborough, having re∣ceiv'd a Commission from King Charles II. to make a better discovery of these Parts, more especially of the Country of Chili, set out with two Ships, viz. the Sweep-stakes and Batchelour Pink; the former of 300 Tuns burthen, and the other of 70, and return'd in 1671, after having spent above two years in pas∣sing and re-passing the Streight of Magellan, and sail∣ing along the Coasts of Patagonia and Chili, so that his Observations and Draughts are the most judici∣ous and accurate of any hitherto extant. In 1680 and 1681, Captain Sharp rambl'd over the South-sea, steering one while near 800 Leagues to the Eastward, and at another time as many to the Westward; and beating about many Islands and Coasts: But in his return not being able to recover the Streights of Magellan, or those of Le Maire or Brewer, he was constrain'd to seek for a new Passage further South than by Cape Horn, and sail'd to the 60 degree of South Latitude, where in departing from a small place call'd by him the Duke of York's Island, he met with abundance of Ice, Snow, Frost, and Whales, and saw no Land for three Months to∣gether, till his arrival at the Island of Barbadoes. Since these attempts, divers English Ships have pass'd on several occasions into the South-sea, both by the Magellanick Streights and by the South of Cape Horn; but we have no particular Relations of their respective Adventures. SECT. IV. RIO de la PLATA, Argentea Regio. This Country, which some call Paragay, Paragu, is also call'd by Heriera, by the name of the River Plata, and is about 700 Leagues long, and about 40 wide about tht Mouth of it, which runs from North to South: The situation of it is between the 11 deg. of southern Latitude, and the 37 degree, which makes it about 520 Leagues from North to South; and be∣tween the 302 and 338 degree of Longitude, which contains the space of about 670 Leagues. It is bound∣ed on the North by the Country of the Amazons and Brasil, on the West with Peru and Chili, on the South with Magellanica and the Sea of Paragay, and on the East with the same Sea and Brasil. The Air is very temperate and sound, and the Soil very fruitful in all things. It yields abundance of Fruits, Corn, Cotten; Meadows and Pastures a∣long the Rivers, which are there very numerous. The Marshes are full of Sugar-Canes, with which they maintain a good Trade. They have several Mines of Gold, Siver, Iron and Copper. The Ri∣ver of Plata, or Silver, furnishes them with a great deal of Metal. The Plant Coparubas, whose Juice is an excellent Balm, is there very common. The Beast which are bitten with Serpents, or wounded by Hunting, go to it as a sovereign Medicine, by the instinct of Nature. Horses, Cows, Sheep, and other Beasts, Bears, Tigers, Cerigons, &c. are very Plen∣tiful. The Inhabitants are of a large Stature, almost as big as the Patagons, and have the same Humours, disposition of Body, and speak the same Language. Their chief Arms are a Bow, Arrows and Sling. They are distinguish'd by different Names and Ha∣bitations. They dwell 18 or 20 Families under one Roof, which is supported by the Trees. The Ore∣chons are remarkable for the bigness of their Ears. In Plata Propria the People are more Humane and Civil, and more ready to learn Arts and Religi∣on. They have preserved among them by Tradition, some knowledge of S. Thomas, whom they call S. Sume. In Parana there are some Falls of Water, or Cata∣racts, above 20 Cubits high. The greatest part of the Inhabitants make their Boats of one piece, which they call Zains. The People of Tucman are very docible and averse to War. They have several Cau∣ques, and their Riches consist in Cattle. The Quiran∣dies are not like them, but resemble the Scythians, and have moving Tents, being always well Armed against the Spaniards. Their common abode is in the southern part of Tucman. The Natives which are not yet brought into Subjection, are Idolaters, and acknowledge no God; they fear the Devil, and paint him with great Horns. The Subjects of the King of Spain follow the Catholick Religion with the Spaniards. The King of Spain is Sovereign Lord of the great∣est part of this Country: Some are his Subjects, o∣thers pay him Tribute. He hath a Governor here under the Vice-Roy of Peru. His ordinary Resi∣dence is in the City of the Assumption, which stands by the River Plata, or Paragay. There is a Bishop∣rick and Royal Audience. Buenes Airs is also a Bi∣shoprick; both are Suffragans to the Arch-bishop of Plata. At S. Jago de Lestero, in Tuckman, there is another Governor. This also lyes by the River Plata, and hath the Title of a Bishoprick. Rio de la Plata, is divided into 7 principal Regions, or Provinces, which are set down in the follow∣ing Table, with the Cities, People, Rivers and Lakes, which belong to them. RIO de la PLATA hath these principal Parts. 1. Tucman S. Jago de Eisero, S. Miguel, New Cordoua. 2. Chaco The Concepti∣on. 3. Paragay S. Fe, Villa Rico, Maracaju. 4. Plata Propria. Assumption, Buenos-Aires, S. Fe, Coriantes. 5. Paria or Parana, S. Ignatio, S. Miguel, Iguazu. 6. Oliveros, or Guayra. Ciudad Rea S. Miguel, Guara. 7. Ʋrvaig, or Ʋrugnay, Assumption S. Salvador, People. Guirandies, in Tuc∣man. Juries in Tuc∣man. Antiosac. in Tuc∣man. Chirignanas, Palmos, Macolis, Matatatas, Trintonus, Avipones, Guamalans, Payagas, Tamacons, Moconios, Zapatalaguars, Gorgelocques, Varois. S. Anna, S. Xavier.
Rivers. Rio de la Plata Seregipe, Meari, Paranai, Ʋragay, Negro Vermao, S. Jago, &c. Lakes. Salados, Lago de los Cu∣racaros, Laguna de los Xarayes, Laguna de los Gualaches. People In Caco, Orechons, Xarayes, Payzronoes, Tapapacques, Papagazu, Chanesses, Japagua, Guachicos, Xaquesses, Xacones, Guaxavasses. In Paraguay. Gualaches. In Ʋraguay, Guarro, Guanananas, Los Patos, Chaavas. SECT. V. BRASIL, Brasilia. This Region was call'd the Country of the H. Cross, when Aloarez Cabrail discover'd it in 1501, in the Name of the King of Portugal. He was carried thither by a Tempest, wherein he had like to have lost his Life. 'Tis the most Eastern part of all Ame∣rica lying between the 1 and 24 of southern Latitude, wh ch makes 460 Leagues; and between the 324 and 328 degree of Longitude; so that it hath 490 Leagues in length. It is bounded on the North and East by the Ocenn, or Sea of Brasil, on the South by Guaia, on the West by Paraguay and Country of the Amaznes. The Air is healthful and pleasant, although it be very hot. The Soil is very fruitful in Pasture and several sorts of fruit. It bears some Millet and Maize, several sorts of Roots, as Ananas, Acajous, Araticous, Potatoes, Marrioc, or Mandio∣che, and Aypi, of which two last they make boyled Meat and Bread. Tobacco and Brasil-wood is very plentiful, as also Sugar-canes. They have several sorts of Creatures, which are unknown to us, be∣sides came Beasts, and such as we have knowledge of; the most remarkable is the Tatusie, which is cover'd with Scales. The Pigritia, or slow-beast, of the bigness of a Fox, which moves so slowly upon the Belly▪ although it hath Paws, that it goes not above 100 Paces in 12 or 1 days. The Lizards, Serpents and Toads are not Venomous, but the In∣habitants eat them. It is commonly said, that the Mountains of Brasil are for Wood, the Valleys for Tobacco, and the Fields for Sugar, and the Coasts for Flying-Fish, which rise in great Flocks above the Sea, as Starlings upon the Land, and have Wings like a Bat, and are of the bigness of a large Herring. They catch also several other excellent Fish, and a∣mong others, Albacores, Cod-fish and Bonitoes. The Inhabitants of Brasil, who live sometimes 150 years by reason of the goodness of the Air and Wa∣ter, are naturally Thievish, Revengeful and Cruel, which hinders not but that they are able to endure Labour, and will live three days together without eating. Their Courage engages them in many rash Attempts. They that dwell in the Mid-land, are Fierce, Cruel, Man-eaters, and always at War with their Neighbours. The greatest part of them are counted Sercerers. Those that dwell upon the Coasts are more Civiliz'd by reason of their Commerce with the People of Europe. They sleep in Hammocks made of Sheets of Coton, hang'd up in the Air. They follow the Catholick Religion in the places which are subject to the Portuguese, but elsewhere the Natives have neither Temple nor form of Reli∣gion, except some of them, who believe that there is a God who makes the Thunder, and evil Spirits who come to torment them. The King of Portugal hath a Governor in every Division, who is accountable to his Vice-Roy, who hath his Residence usually at S. Salvador, the chief City of this Country, an Arch-bishop's See, and the Seat of Judgment. This City is situate in the Bay of All-Saints, upon the Eastern Coast. As to the Government of the Salvages who possess the Mid∣land, some of them are Govern'd by an Head, which they chuse out of the most considerable of them, as the Topinambous, Margajas, Ourtacates, Pa∣raibas, Tapouges, &c. Others live without any Law or Ruler, as the Miramonins, Cariges. &c. The Por∣tuguese possess the Coasts, and 60 or 70 Leagues up the Land. It is to be observed, that Pope Alexander the VI invested Ferdinand King of Aragon, and Isabella Queen of Castile, with all the Land they could dis∣cover on the West of an imaginary Line, drawn from one Pole to the other, an 100 Leagues on the fur∣ther side of the Isles of the Azores, and what should be discover'd on the East of the said Line, should belong to the King of Portugal, which made great Quarrels between these two Crowns, about the place where this Line ought to be placed, and about the Bounds of Brasil; the Portuguese made it reach from the River Moranhon, to the River of Plata; and the Spaniards bounded it at the Captainry of S. Vincent. The Coasts of Brasil are at present divided into 14 Captainries, or Governments; Eleven upon the Eastern Coasts, and three upon the Northern, which are ranked in the following Table. BRASIL hath XIV Governments. 1 S. Vincent S. Vincent. 2 Rio Janeiro, S. Sebastian. 3 Spiritu Santo Spiritu Santo 4 Porto Seguro Porto Seguro 5 Ilheos, Ilheos. 6 All Saints Bay, S. Salvador. 7 Seregipe, Seregipe. 8 Pernambuco, Olinda. 9 Tamara, Tamaraia. 10 Parayba, Parayba. 11 Rio Grande, Natal. On the Eastern Coasts. On the South Coasts, Siara, Siara. Maraguan, Marag▪ Para, Para Comuta. People. Tapiguirs, Quirigay, Annaejugi, Garacativi, Cicuis, Guax. Tiguares. Miramonins, Cariges, Margayas, Ovacates. Rivers, Meari, or Miari, S. Francis, or Parapintingua, Parachas, &c. Lakes, Tapiguiry.
SECT. VI. AMAZONIA, or the Country of the AMAZONS, Amazonum Regio. We call those Countries Amazonia at this day not on∣ly which the Ancients call'd Guiana, but all those Re∣gions which lye along by the River of the Amazons, which excels all the Rivers in the World in length and breadth. This vast Country is not throughly known by us, no more than above half America. It reaches from the 1 deg. of Northern' Latitude, to the 16 deg. of Southern, which make 340 Leagues; And from the 300 degree to the 328 of Longitude, which contains 570 Leagues in the greatest length. It is bounded on the North with Terra Firma, on the West with Peru, on the South with part of Peru, and Rio de la Plata, and on the East with Brasil. The Air is extream hot, the Soil fruitfl in all things, particularly in Meadows, by the River-side. Some think the Soil to be of the same nature with that of Brasil, because they have the same kinds of Fruits and Creatures, besides those that are tran∣sported out of Europe into America. This Country is Water'd with several Rivers, particularly that of the Amazons, which rises in the Mountains near Quito in Peru, and runs from West to East 1000 Leagues, making several Islands in its Course; and among others, those where the Hamagues, Topinambous, and several others dwell, especially about the mouth of it, which is 50 or 60 Leagues over. On the right-side it receives into it several other Rivers chiefly, those of Maragnon, Amarumage, Cusignares, Gayane, Topay∣sa, Paranayba. The River Para, or Orincque, parts Terra Firma and Amazonia. The Inhabitants are much like the Brasilians, Fierce, Cruel, Robust, and Anthropophagi. They have neither Shame nor Pity; they go all Naked both Men and Women, painting their Bodies with divers colours, and their Faces chequer'd with several sorts of Stones, which were set in their Skin in their Childhood. They sleep in Sheets of Cotton hang'd up in the Air between two Trees, to avoid the Wild-Beasts, which Custom they use in most parts of Ame∣rica, where the Air is either Hot, or Temperate. It is said they are without Ruler or Governor, every one living as he pleaseth. They acknowledge neither God nor Religion; some People there have only the shape of a Man, without any sort of Humanity. Time will discover this Country better to us, as well as many others, of which we have as yet nothing but the Names; Of which the following Table will give you some. The Country of the Amazones hath, Villages, or, Estierro Coropa. People, Paranaiba, Tapacos, Aquayras, Canizuaris, Whose Feet are turned backward. Guayazis, which are Dwarfs. Ʋrubutigas, Zupugaias, Cayanas, Curares, Cuari∣numos, Abacares, Orengienagues, Curianes, Ctses, Cusignares, Yorunanes, Zurina, Machioparo, Tagurcis, Guanares, Parianes, Aparia, Tecunes, Curina, Corosi∣rares, Curis, Yorunes, Ozoanes, Narones, Canomones, Marianes, Topinambous. Lakes, Carosirares, a Lake and People. Rivers, Amazones, Pacaza, Orinque, &c. SECT. VII. The principal Isles in Southern America. I shall here give you a bare Enumeration of the principal Isles which lye about the Southern America, without laying down a particular description of them, and that only to shew the situation of them. The following Table will discover them more distinctly, according to the places they adjoin to. The Isles about the Southern America. 1. About Peru, Zabaco, Gorgone, Gallo de Cocos, or S. Crux. Galopegos, Plata, Pana, S. Clara, Lobos, Lobos Marinos, Lobi, Xuli, Guana. 2. About Chili. Tortoras, Maxillones, Paxares, La Tierra Fuera, or Ilhas, John Fernando, S. Maria, Quiviqueyna, Mocha, Chiloe, Chonos, Gada, Madre de Dios, S. Croix. 3. About Ma∣gellanica Saballa, Sybald de Vords, 3 Isles. S. Dionisius los Reios, S. Gabriel, Los Riores, Maldonade, Los Lobos, Los Pargs, 2 Isles. Castillos, Repa∣ro, Avoredo, S. Cataline, a barren Isle. Galle, Tacutiara, Queimados. 4. Isles about Brasil. S. Sebastian, Dos Porcs, Marambaia, Janeiro, S. Anna, des Franceses, Ascension, or Acomsaon, The Trinity, 5 Isles. S. Catharina, Achrolo, Tamaraen Del Fuego, Ferdinando Noronha or Lorinhe, Penedo de S. Pedro and S. Paulo, Abrhola. 5. About Ca∣ribana and the North. Several Islands at the mouth of the River Paria, Basses, Wethalti, Des Lapins, Caene, The Devil's Isle, Fonseca, a fabulous Island.
Countries about the Poles, Lately Discovered. CHAP. I. The Countries about the Poles, in general. BY the Countries about the Poles I understand not only the Countries that lye about the Poles, but the Islands and Peninsulae which lye over against the old and new Continent, which have been lately dis∣covered, which I shall divide into the Artick or Northern, and Antarctick or Southern, as they are more distinctly set down in the following Table. 1. Artick or Northern. Island, Schalliot, Hola, Hancfiord, Keplawick. Estotiland, Hope-advancet. Groenland, Bearfort, Erichs-haven. Nova-Zembla, Delsche-haven. Spitsberg, Wybe-haven, Groen-haven. Terra de Jesso, Matzumai. New-Denmark. New North-Wales. Isles of Cumberland, Raleg Mont. 2. Antarctick or Southern. N. Guinea, Puerto Primerio. Isles of Solomon, S. Isable, S. Jorge. Isles, Horn, Cocos, Monches, Sansfond, Prince William, Good-hope, Traitors, Midelberg. Eleven thousand Virgins. Terre de Fua or Fuoga. Stoteland. Hrmite's Isle. Diego Ramires I. Kings-Isle. Terra Australis incognita. 1. Carpentery. 2. The Country of Diemens. 3. New-Zeland, Port S. Philip, Port S. James. 4. Quiri. 5. The Country of Browers. 6. The Country of Parrokeets. 7. The Country of Parrots. 8. The Kingdom of Beach. 9. The Kingdom of Lucat. 10. The Kingdom of Maletur. New Holland, in 6 parts. 1. Country of Leuvin. 2. Country of Edels. 3. Country of Nuits. 4. Country of Concord. 5. Du Wit's Land. 6. Country of Arnent. SECT. I. The Artick or Northern Countries. I call by the name of the Artick Countries all those Regions, which lye toward the Northern or Artick Pole, which are newly discovered. Their situation is almost all in the Frigid or Cold Zone. The Ex∣tent of them is so irregular, that I know not how to write any thing of them. 'Tis enough, That they are discovered, and to set down the Names by which the Natives call them, as we have them from divers Travellers thither. Nevertheless we may describe their Bounds which part them in our Upper Hemi∣sphere, from Muscovy and Tartary by the Frozen-sea, and in the other Hemisphere by the South-sea, Christian-sea and Hudson's-streights, which separate them from the Northern America. According to our last Relations, the Air is extream∣ly cold; the Sun appears but little in several places for above the greatest parts in the year; but in some places more, some less, according to their distance from the Equator. In general it may be said of them, They have much Pasture, large Meadows, many Fo∣rests, where the Inhabitants maintain a great num∣ber of Beasts; That they live in some of the Coun∣tries upon Hunting and Fishing; That they have no Corn nor Wine. All the Country is Islands and Pe∣ninsulae. They have divers sorts of Beasts, especially Bears, Foxes and Deer. Hudson, Davis and Frobisher's Streights are in this Lower Hemisphere, so called, because Gavot, Willoughby, Frobisher, Davis, Hudson and some other Englishmen, endeavoured to find a Passage that way into the East-Indies, as the Dutch did, by the Streights of Weigats or Nassau, which are on the North of our Continent, but both to no pur∣pose, because of the continual Ice which hindred their Sailing, which prevents the Sailers of Europe that they can't go beyond the 80 degree of Latitude. Nevertheless some say. That some Dutch Pilots went to the 88 degree, and found a Passage towards China; but that Passage is unknown to the other Nations of Europe, who make ordinarily but three several Voy∣ages towards the North; 1. To Arch-angel in Russia, for Furrs. 2. To Spitsberg in Greenland, for Whale-fishing. 3. To Norway, for Wood and Herrings.
However, it may not be improper here to give a brief Account of the several Navigations and Disco∣veries made toward the North-east and North-west, viz. Nova Zembla, North-east Greenland or Spitsberg, and North-west Greenland, commonly call'd Groen∣land and Engroneland. In the year 1380. Nicholas and Antony Zani, two Brothers and rich Citizens of Venice, having set Sail from the Streight of Gibralter for Flanders and England, were accidentally driven Northwards by violent Storms even as far as Frise∣land, Iceland and Groenland; but in 1497. John Ca∣bot and Sebastian his Son of the same Nation receiv'd a Commission from our King Henry VII. to under∣take the like Voyage, who made a Draught and De∣scription of some North-west parts of America, and brought along with them 4 of the Natives. Sir Hugh Willoughby was the first that attempted to discover a North-east Passage into the Indies; and to that purpose set out with three sail of Ships in the year, 1553. It is very probable that he landed on Nova Zembla and Greenland; but we have no Me∣moirs of this Voyage, except certain imperfect and short Notes that were taken off from his Table after his death, wherein it is express'd, That the Fleet un∣der his Command parted from Seynam, which lies in 70 deg. North Latitude, on the 2d day of August; That on the 14th they were above 160 leagues from the same place to the North-east, and continu'd sail∣ing until Septemb. 14. when they came ashore on a high, rocky and desert Country, from whence the Cold and Ice forc'd them to return more Southerly, which they did till they reach'd a River in Lapland call'd Arzina, where, by the continuance of foul Weather they were shut up in the Harbour, and the next Spring were all found frozen to death in their Ship. A few years after this misfortune, viz. about 1556. one Captain Stephen Burroughs, sometime Comptroller of the Navy to Queen Elizabeth, prosecuting the same Design, pass'd the North Cape, and sailing farther Eastward discover'd the Waygats, or Streight that runs between the South part of Nova Zembla and the Country of the Samoieds; thus, continuing his Course, he arriv'd in 112 deg. 25 min. of Longitude, and 76 of Northern Latitude. Afterward he sail'd to 80 deg. 11 min. Latitude, and return'd thence to Nova Zembla, having cruis'd (as it is most probable) on the Coasts of Greenland, since he makes mention of the desolate Country, the blew Ice, and great numbers of various Fowl thereabouts. The first Person whose name we find celebrated in History for endeavouring to search out a North-west Passage into China, was Sir Martin Frobisher, who, in three several Voyages, made divers new Discoveries of large Bays, Streights, Islands, Capes, &c. and impos'd on them different names. For in the year, 1576. arriving with two Barks at the height of 62 deg. N. Latit. he descry'd a great Inlet, call'd Frobisher's Streights, and sail'd into it 60 leagues with main Land on each side. He met with Inhabitants along the Coast, whose Canoes or little Boats were made of Seal-skins, but had wooden Keels. The Ships Company exchang'd Toys with these Natives for Salmon and other Fish, and brought home cer∣tain Marcasites which were taken for Gold Oar; but after they had made a more exact search the next year, with a design to carry away a quantity there∣of, it prov'd to be nothing but black Lead. At the same time they found a Silver-mine, which neverthe∣less lay so deep within the Rocks that it could not be dug; as also, a dead Fish about 12 foot long, somewhat resembling a Porpois in shape. It had a Horn growing out of its Snout (of the same nature as those commonly call'd Unicorn's Horns) which is still preserv'd in a Repository at Windsor, and reaches 6 foot in length. In 1578. the same Sir Martin undertook his third Voyage, wherein, having pass'd as far as it seem'd convenient to him, he took posses∣sion of the Land in the name of Queen Elizabeth, and call'd it Meta incognita. In the year 1580. Arthur Pett and Charles Jack∣man having receiv'd a Commission from Queen Eli∣zabeth to follow the Track of Stephen Burroughs, rambled over the Northern Seas, and in all likeli∣hood landed in Greenland; but there is nothing par∣ticularly known concerning their Voyage, except that they pass'd the Streights of Waygats and launch'd into the Ocean to the Eastward, where, meeting with vast heaps of Ice, they were constrain'd to re∣turn with great peril and labour; insomuch, that they lost one another by reason of the foul Weather, and Pett was never heard of since. In 1583. Sir Humphry Gilbert, by the direction of Sir Francis Walsingham, principal Secretary of State, sail'd, upon the same design, to Newfoundland and the great River of S. Lawrence in Canada, took possession of the Country in the name of Queen Elizabeth, and settled a Fishing-trade there. This Voyage was made upon suggestion of a certain Greek Mariner, who po∣sitively avouch'd to some English Gentlemen, That himself had pass'd through a great Streight to the North of Virginia from the North-west Ocean, and offer'd to be Pilot for the discovery, but died before he came into England. In 1585. Mr. John Davis having undertaken with two Barks to search out the North-west Coasts, made farther Discoveries in those parts, and nam'd the first Land he came to Cape Desolation, being a part of Groenland, where he found many pieces of Furr and Wool like Beaver, and exchang'd some Commodities with the Natives, who often repair'd to him in their Canoes bringing Stag-skins, white Hairs, small Cod, Muscles, &c. Afterward he arriv'd in the Latitude of 64 deg. 15 min. where was found a great quan∣tity of such Oar as Frobisher had before brought into England, and steer'd thence to 66 deg. 40 min. as far as Mount Raleigh, Totness-sound, &c. In 1586. he made a second Voyage to the same Coasts, search∣ing out many places toward the West; and the next year, in a third Voyage, came to 72 deg. 12 min. the Compass varying to 82 deg. Westward. Then he gave the name of London Coast to the Land, and the Streight being 40 leagues wide, was from him call'd Fretum Davis. Thus the English Nation alone, for a long time, frequented those Northern Seas till 1578. that a Dutch Ship came to Cola, and a year or two after another to S. Nicholas, by the instigation of an Eng∣lish Man who set himself against the Company of Russian Merchants; whereupon the Hollanders crept in more and more, and in 1594. sent William Barents, a skilful Navigator, and some others, to find out a Passage from thence to the Indies. In 1596. the same William Barents, accompanied with two other Dutch Pilots, viz. Jacob Heemskirk and John Corne∣lis Ryp, first discovered Bear or Cherry Island, and pass'd from thence to Greenland; but Barents being separated from them, sail'd along the Coasts of Nova Zembla to the 76 deg. of Latitude, until at length his Ship was driven ashore, and broke in pieces by the Ice, so that all the Mariners were compell'd to Winter there, and endur'd the utmost extremity of Cold. Afterward, with much difficulty, in 2 Boats,
they got to Cola in Lapland; but William Barentz dy'd before their Arrival, to the great grief of the whole Company. In 1603. Stephen Bennet was employ'd, but went no farther than Cherry Island, and brought from thence a certain quantity of Lead Oar. In 1608. that fa∣mous Navigator Mr. Henry Hudson, was sent forth to discover the North Pole, and sail'd even to the 82 degree of North Latitude; but being satisfy'd that there was no North-east-passage, he was appointed to make the like trial in the North-west Seas. There∣fore in 1610. he set Sail again, and proceeded 100 leagues farther than any had done before, giving several Denominations to certain places, as Desire provokes, Isle of God's Mercies, Prince Henry's Cape, King James's Cape, Queen Ann's Cape, &c. besides the Streight and Bay that still bear his name. But the Ice hinder'd him from continuing his course far∣ther, and the Sedition of his Men from returning home. In 1611. Sir Thomas Button, Servant to Henry Prince of Wales, eldest Son of King James I. being enjoyn'd by that renown d young Prince to pursue the North-west Discoveries, pass'd through Hudson's Streight; and sailing above 200 leagues to the South-westward over a Sea above 80 Fathom deep, descry'd a large Continent, call'd by him New Wales. Afterward, having endur'd great Fatigues in his wintering at Port Nelson, notwithstanding the loss of many of his Men, he search'd out the whole Bay, which is now known by his name, even back again almost to Digge's Island, and found out the large Tract of Land which he nam'd Cary's Swans Nest. Moreover in the years 1612, 1615, 1616. James Hall and William Baffin, proceeded much farther in the North-west parts, and impos'd names on divers places discover'd by them, besides that the English Merchants perceiving these Northern Voyages to be so very profitable, encreas'd the number of their Shipping to 13 or 14 yearly, un∣der the Conduct of Poole, Fotherby, Edge, Hely, and other skilful Pilots, from whom several Sounds, Bays, Promon∣tories, Princes, &c. have receiv'd their respective names. In the mean while the King of Denmark observ∣ing the progress of the neighbouring Nations in these Northern Seas, began to consider that the Traffick of his own might be much advanc'd by the like Dis∣coveries, being also desirous to renew his ancient pre∣tensions to those Countries in case any thing should be found out worth the claiming. Therefore he caus'd two Ships and a Pinnace to be sitted out in the year, 160. Of these, Captain John Cunningham, a Scot, was Admiral; Godsk Lindenaw a Danish Nobleman was Vice-Admiral, and the chief Pilots were James Hall and John Knight, Englishmen. Godske arriving on some part of the Country, barter'd some small Wares with the Natives, took 2 of them, and return'd to Denmark. The other two Vessels came to Cape Fare∣well, sail'd from thence to Frobisher's Streights, gave Danish names to certain places, seiz'd on three of the Inhabitants, and at Cunningham's Ford met with a kind of Silver Mine, which was afterward try'd by the English, and found to be of no value. In 1606. 4 Ships and a Pinnace were sent thither under the same Godske, Lindenaw Admiral, and James Hall Pilo-General, who brought away five of the Natives. In 1607. James Hall receiv'd a new Commission; but the Sea-men mutining as soon as they made the Coast, brought the Ship back again into Denmark, without effecting any thing. However, his Danish Majesty set out two other Ships mann'd with Norwegian and Iselandish Mariners, and commanded by Christian Richardson a Holsteiner; but these return'd before they came in view of the Shore. The rest of their Expe∣ditions are unknown until An. 1619. when John Munck was sent out with two Ships, which arriv'd safe at Cape Farewell, from thence this Pilot steer'd to 63 deg. 20 min. (as it is probable near Digg's Island) and winter'd there, caling the place Munck's Winter Harbour, and the Continent New Denmark. The South-part of Hudson's Bay he lkewise nam'd Mare novum, and hat part toward Groenand, Mre Chri∣stianum. But of all h s Company, which consisted of 46 in a Ship, and 16 in a Pinnace, scarce so many were left alive, as were able to bring the Pinnace through extream danger to their own Country. How∣ever, in the year 1653. Frederick III. King of Den∣mark, determining to advance the Northern Tracts and Dscoveries, caus'd three Ships to be fitted out with skilful Mariners, enjoining them to take a most exact account of all the Coasts and Places where they arriv'd. These, having pass'd the Streight of Waygats, met with some Inhabitants of Nova Zem∣bla in their Canoes or little Fishing-boats, and steer'd from thence to Greenland. These particular Adven∣tures are contain'd in the French Relations of the Danish Voyages publish'd at Paris by M. Peyrere and Martiniere. We do not read of any more Voyages from Eng∣land to find out the North-west Passage since the last Expedition of William Baffin in 1616. until the Reign of King Charles I. when Captain Luke Fox was sent upon the same design in 1630. in his Ma∣jesty's Pinnace nam'd the Charles, victualled for 18 Months. He traced Frobisher, Hudson, Davis, But∣ton and Baffin, meeting with Whales, much Ice and Fowls, and built a Pinnace in Port Nelson, where he found several Remains left by Sir Thomas Button, but no Natives or Inhabitants, though in other parts of those Seas he saw some Savages. About the same time, viz. in 1631. Captain Thomas James being em∣ploy'd by the Merchants of Bristol for the like pur∣pose, sail'd from Cape Farewell by the Islands of Re∣solution to Milli and Nottingham Isles, as also that of Mansfield, from whence he steer'd over a large Bay to the Westward near Port Nelson, and nam'd the Land New South Wales. Hereabouts meeting with Captain Fox, they congratuled one another, but were soon separated by foul Weather; so that Captain James still continu'd roving up and down, and giving name to divers places, as Cape Henrietta Maria, Lord We∣ston's Island, The Earl of Bristol's Island, Sir Thomas Roe's Island, Earl of Danby's Island, Charlton Island, &c. In this last he winter'd in the Latitude of 52 deg. 3 min. and having built a little Pinnace out of his Ship, pass'd over to Cary's Swan's Nest, whence he return'd by Cape Charles and Salisbury Isle, and ar∣riv'd on the Coasts of England in 1632. The Voyage of this most skilful Navigator was publish'd in 1633. by the special Command of King Charles I. contain∣ing a very accurate and judicious Account of the Hardships he endur'd; as also of the Streights, Capes, Bays, Tides, Soundings, Variations of the Compass, Natural Rarities, &c. The last Voyage, in order to make a more per∣fect Discovery (if it were possible) of the North-east Seas, for a Passage to the East Indies, was under∣taken in the year 1676. by the ingenious Captain John Wood. Having receiv'd a Commission from King Charles II. he arriv'd in the 76 degree of North Latitude, but unfortunately lost his Ship nam'd the Speedwell on the Coast of Nova Zembla, and re∣turn'd home in the Prosperous Pink that accompanied him under the Command of Captain Flawes. His
Opinion is, That it is impossible to Sail this way to China, Japan, &c. conformably to that maintain'd by Captain James with respect to the North-west Pas∣sage, being both induc'd thereto by the situation of the Land, the reversion and uncertainty of half Tides, the motion of the Ice, &c. Besides, that the Fogs, Snow, Froste, vast Islands of the Ice, and the tempe∣stuousness of the Weather, are altogether insupe∣rable. ISLAND is an Isle that belongs to the King of Denmark, and which some Geographers take for the Thule of the Ancients, tho' with little probability, according to Procopius, who says, That it had three Kingdoms: The name is taken from the extream Cold there. The situation of it is under the first Meridian and Artick Circle, both of which part it into two equal parts almost, the one from West to East, the other from North to South. It is about 65 leagues wide and 140 long. The Air is extraordinarily cold, but very healthy. They have large Meadows, where they feed Horses, Cows, Oxen and other Beasts: They have white Bears and Hares. They catch on their Coast Whales, and so great a quantity of other Fish, that they dry a part of them to give their Cat∣tel, when they want Hay. The Sholes of Ice that come down from the North upon it, carry away with them their Trees, and many Beasts. There are three Mountains which are always covered with Snow, that nevertheless cast out Fire; the most remarkable of which is call'd Heela, to which no Man can come nearer than two leagues, without danger. At the foot of this Mountain are several Mines of Brimstone. The two chief Towns are Hola and Scaholt. Their Houses are made of Wood, covered with the Bark of Trees, Skins or Turfs. There are other Villages upon the Coasts and along the Rivers, which remove their Houses. The Havens of Hancfroid and Kep∣laurch are very populous, because of the Commerce there from Hamburg, Denmark, Lubec and England, who supply the Inhabitants with whatever they have need of, and receive in exchange for it Tallow, Hides, Butter, Whale-Oil, dry'd Fish and Sea-horse Teeth, which are esteemed as good as Ivory. The Inhabi∣tants live a long time, yet have neither Physicians nor Apothecaries. They are very strong and faith∣ful; their Cloathing is ordinarily of Beasts Skins. Lutheranism is followed there in most places; the rest are Idolaters. The People of this Island are the best, and make the faithfullest Servants in the World. Their greatest Delicates are Meat half rotten and full of Worms. Estoitland is on the North of America, and is di∣vided from it by Hudson's Streight. Antonius Zomi the Venetian, is said to have discovered it in 1390. or thereabouts; and John Scolve, a Polonian, found it out again in 1477. He was lost in the Sea, as well as Michael Corterealis. This Country is very fruit∣ful, especially in Gold. The Inhabitants are very industrious. The English possess on the Coast Terra Labrador or New Britain, or Terra Cortereales, but they know nothing but the Coast. GROENLAND, Groenlandia, call'd also Groin∣land, and more anciently Engroenland, lies (according to the report of the Islanders) like a half Moon about the North of their Country, at the distance of 4 days sailing. Cape Farewell, its most Southern Promon∣tory, is situated in the Latitude of 60 deg. 30. min. but how far the Continent may extend it self North∣ward is altogether unknown. The Eastern and West∣ern sides are encompass'd with two vast Oceans, but at what degrees of Longitude is not as yet discover'd. This Land is suppos'd to have been first descry'd by a Norwegian Gentleman nam'd Eric Rotcop or Read∣head, who having committed a Murder in Island, to save his Life attempted to makean escape into an ano∣ther Country, whereof he had only heard some obscure flying Reports. This Gentleman was so fortunate as to get safe to the Harbour of Sandsbasm, lying be∣tween two mountainous Promontories, one on an Isle over against Groenland, which he call'd Huidserken or White Shirt, by reason of its being covered with Snow, the other on the Continent bearing the name of Huarf Eric. He winter'd in the Island, and after∣ward passing into the Continent, impos'd on it the name of Groenland or Greenland, from its flourishing Verdeur. His Son being sent to Olaus Trugger King of Norway to procure a Pardon, easily obtain'd it up∣on Information of the new Discovery. Thus, in pro∣cess of time, a Plantation was settled there, and two Cities were built, viz. Garde and Albe; the latter was honoured with a Bishop's See and the Residence of the Norwegian Vice-Roy, the Cathedral Church being dedicated to S. Antony. However, these new Inhabitants having been long since destroy'd, either by the Natives, the Rage of an epidemical Disease call'd the black Plague, or otherwise, very little In∣telligence concerning Groenland has come to us since the year 349. Nevertheless in 1389. (as they say) the King of Denmark determining to re-establish his Dominion in those parts, sent a Fleet thither, which having suffer'd Shipwrack, he was discourag'd from any farther Enterprize, until of late that Navigation was somewhat renew'd by Christian IV. who was wont to call this Country his Philosopher's Stone, in regard that it could not often be found when his Ships undertook a Voyage thereto, and because a cer∣tain Dane in 1626. brought some Sand from thence which was of the same colour and weight with Gold. The Air in Greenland is so excessive cold that the Danes cannot dwell there, neither does the Soil pro∣duce any thing but Moss, with some few Bushes and Plants, the Country consisting for the most part in High-lands and Mountains continually cover'd with Snow, but the Southern parts more than the North∣ern, which by reason of the terrible Ice and Cold are very little known. Among the Beasts, the chief are Bears, Foxes, Rain-deer and Dogs; there is also great plenty and variety of Fish, as Whales, Seals, Dog-fish, &c. But on these Coasts are caught the greatest quantities of Sea-Unicorns, whose Horns are so much esteem'd, and kept as Rarities even in the Cabinets of Princes. All the Navigators that ar∣rive here often observe a wonderful Meteor call'd a North-light, which usually appears about the time of the New Moon, and tho' only in the North, yet enlightens the whole Country; perhaps it may be the same which is sometimes seen in England, especi∣ally in the Northern Parts, and commonly termed Streaming. It is said to resemble a great Pillar or Beam of Fire, darting out Rays and Streams every where. It also moves from one place to another, leaving behind it a kind of Mist and Cloud, and con∣tinues till hid by the Sun-beams. The Groenlanders are generally of a low Stature, of a ripe Olive Colour, and some of them quite Black, having black Hair, flat Noses, broad Faces and Lips turned up. The Women frequently stain their Faces in blew and sometimes black Streaks, letting the Colour into their very Skin by pricking it with a sharp Bone, so that it can never be worn out. These Natives are not unlike the Somoyeids and Lap∣landers,
being very healthy, active and strong. They are also couragious, and sometimes desperate, often choosing rather to throw themselves down the Rocks than stand to be taken. But they are true Barbarians, extreamly thievish, treacherous and revengeful, not to be won by any kindness or fair dealing. They live altogether by Hunting and Fishing, make Bread of Fish-bones ground to Meal, and drink the Sea-water without receiving any prejudice by it. They ordinarily go a Fishing with Darts, which are strong∣ly barbed and have Bladders fasten'd to them at the other end, that the Fish, when struck, may spend its strength in strugling to get under Water, yet can't do it, and so is easily taken. Their Cloaths are either made of Bird-skins with the Feathers and Down up∣on them, or of those of Seals, Dog-fish, &c. They wear the hairy sides of them outward in Summer, and inward in Winter, and in vehement cold Wea∣ther carry two or more Suits one upon another. They also dress their Skins very well, and sow them ex∣ceeding strong with Sinews of Beasts and Needles made of Fish-bones. But their Ingenuity appears in nothing so much as in their Canoes or Boats, which are made of Whale-bone about an Inch thick and broad, stich'd close together with strong Sinews and cover'd with Seal-skins. These Boats are wrought sharp at both ends in form of a Weaver's Shuttle, so as they may be row'd either way, being from 10 to 20 foot long, and 2 broad; they have a Deck of the same Materials fasten'd to the sides, in the midst whereof is a round hole as big as the waist of a Man, so that when he goes to Sea he sets himself in that hole stretching out his Feet forward into the hollow of the Vessel, which is row'd only with one Oar about 6 foot long, having a Paddle six Inches broad at each end, serving both to balance and move the Boat, which is done with incredible swiftness, inso∣much that one of our Skiffs with 10 Oars is not able to accompany them. Indeed we are inform'd by the Danish Relations, That the Groenlanders row'd so swift that they even dazzl'd the Eyes of the Specta∣tors, and tho' they often crossed, yet never interfer'd or fell foul one upon another. As for their Religion they are Idolaters, and seem to have a great venera∣tion for the Sun. They have also been seen lying flat on the Earth, and muttering certain Prayers or Charms to the Devil, whose proper habitation they believe to be under Ground. John Munck and di∣vers others that have travell'd farther into the Country, found many Images, such as we commonly make of Demons and hellish Fiends with Horns, Beaks, Claws and cloven Feet, near which lay quantities of Bones of Beasts, as of Deer, Foxes, Dogs, &c. suppos'd to have been offer'd to them in Sacrifice. NOVAZEMBLA, was so call'd by the Russi∣ans, the Word in their Language signifying New Land, but was known to the Ancients (as it is probable) under the Name of Carambria. It lies on the North of Moscovy, separated from thence by the Straits of Waygats or Nassaw; but whether it be an Island or joyn'd to the Continent of Tartary is not certainly known. It was discovered by Stephen Burroughs, in the Year 1556. and since visited by several Persons both of the English and Dutch Nation, who have in vain attempted to find out a Passage that way into the Tartarian Sea, and so farther to Cathay, China, Japan, &c. This Country (according to the Information of Captain John Wood, who lost his Ship there) is for the most part perpetually cover'd with Snow, neither can one walk on the few bare Plats of Ground, by reason that they are boggy, upon the Surface whereof grows a kind of Moss, bearing a small blew and yellow Flower, under which Green-Sod, in digging about 2 Foot deep, appears a firm Body of Ice. The same ingenious Pilot assures us, That the Snow lies here, contrary to what it does in any other Coun∣try, since in all other Climates it melts soonest away near the Shore, but here the Sea beats against the snowy Cliffs, that in some Places are as high as either of the Forelands in Kent; the Sea having wash'd un∣derneath the Snow a prodigious way, and the Snow hanging over, most fearful to behold: But there are many Rivulets of very good Water, melted from the Snow, which run down every quarter of a Mile from the Hills into the Sea. On the Hills are found abundance of Slate-stone, and on the Shore very good black Marble with white Veins. The Dutch, who wintered in Nova Zembla, mention no other Beast than Bears. Foxes and such others as live upon Prey, for that (say they) there is neither Leaves nor Grass to afford any Fodder for tame Cattle; nevertheless Captain Wood found the Track of many large Deer, and saw a small Creature much like a Coney, but not so big as a Rat, together with some few little Birds like Larks. Moreover some English Merchants that re∣sided in Russia, have affirm'd that there is a spacious Lake upon Nova Zembla, wherein are bred a great number of Swans and Geese, which molt their Fea∣thers about S. Peter's Day; and that at that Time the Russians pass over thither to gather these Feathers and kill the Fowls, which they dry and bring into their own Country for Winter-Provision. SPITSBERG, Montes Acuti, aut Spitsberga, otherwise call'd North-east GREENLAND, took its Dutch Name from the sharp-pointed Rock and Mountains, with which it is environ'd, Spitz in that Language signifying pointed, and Berg a Hill or Mount. It reaches from the 76th Degree of North-Latitude to the 82d, but how much farther, as also whether Island or Continent, is not as yet discovered. Indeed our Mariners generally take it for an Island, and the Dutch only conjecture that the Land is ex∣tended more North, because the Ice stands firm and does not float as in the open Sea. The South Parts look toward the Promontories of Finland, Lapland, the North-Cape, &c. The next Land on the East is Nova Zembla, and the large Territories of Greenland or Engraenland on the West, but these at so vast a distance that they cannot be reckoned as its Confines. The principal Harbours are, 1. South-haven, which is capable of containing above 40 Ships at one time, and wherein faulty Vessels are often repair'd. 2. Mau∣ritius-Bay, so call'd by the Hollanders, where some have winter'd; and near it stand a few Cottages, which they built for the trying up their Oil, with a Piece of Ordnance for their Defence. These Houses they termed Schmearemberg, from Schmer, signifying Grease, and the Harlem-Cookery, but all other Nati∣ons usually burn theirs before their Departure. 3. The Northern-Bay, where is an Island the Dutch name Vogel-Sang, from the great Noise the Fowl make there in taking their Flight. 4. Monyer's-Bay, the farthest North of the Western-part of Greenland. 5. Muscle-Haven, lying at the Mouth of the Straits of Waygats. 6. Walter Thymen's Ford, which the En∣lish commonly call Alderman Freeman's Inlet, and is a large Mouth of a River, as yet undiscover'd. The whole Country is so encompassed with Ice that it is very difficult to come near the hores, Sand
and the Air is so extreme cold that the Europeans cann't dwell there with safety of their Lives; as neither in Groenland nor Nova Zembla. The Soil, as much as hath been hitherto discovered, is nothing but Rocks or Heaps of vast Stones, so steep that they seem ready to tumble down; and indeed many great Pieces often break off from the Tops with a terrible Noise. The greatest part of the Mountains are of Red Earth, and communicate that Tolour to the Snow upon them▪ which often appears marbled, and resembles as it were the Boughs and Branches of Trees, giving a bright Lustre to the Air or Skies, as if the Sun shone. There are also 7 bright blue Mountains in a Line, which tinge the Snow and Ice with the same colour, and betwixt them many sharp-pointed Rocks, the Holes whereof afford Nests to an infinite multitude of Fowls, whose Dung being mixt with the Moss, washed down by the melted Snow, makes Mould in the Clefts and Valleys, which lying open to the Sun-beams, when the Ice is dissolv'd, produceth some few Plants, as a kind of Cabbage-Lettice, Scurvy-Grass, Sorrel, Snakeweed, Mous-ear, a kind of wild Strawberry, divers sorts of Ranunculus's semper vives, &c. The Beasts of this Country are only these, viz. Foxes white, grey, tawny and black; Rain-Deer, which grow extreme fat by feeding upon yellow Moss; white Bears of a prodigious Size, some of them being 6 Foot high, and their Skins 14 long; Water Bears, that live by what they catch in the Sea, where they have been seen swimming 12 miles from any Shore, Seals or Sea-Dogs and Morses. Very few Land-fowl breed here, of which the most re∣markable is the Snite or Strand-Runner, of the big∣ness of a Lark, with a four-square Bill resembling a Rasp, that feeds on Worms and does not taste fishy: But of Water-Fowl there is great variety, as Snow-Birds and Ice-Birds, so call'd from their running up∣on the Ice; Mountain-Ducks, Willocks, Red-Geese, Stints, Gulls, Noddies, Sea-Pigeons, Sea-Parrets, Kirmews, Mallemucks, Pigeon-divers, Lumbs, Rath∣shers or Aldermen, Burgermeisters or Mayors, Rot∣ger-Divers, Srunt-Jagers or Dung-Hunters, &c. Most of these Birds, except the Strunt-Jager, Kir∣mew and Mountain-Ducks, make their Nests upon the high Rocks, to be secured from the Bears and Foxes. They fit in so numerous Flocks, especially at the time when their young ones are hatch'd, about the latter End of June and beginning of July, that at their taking Flight they shade the Ground from the Sun-Beams, as it were a Cloud and make such a Noise that one can hardly hear another speak. There are also great quantities of Fish in these Seas, as Seals or Sea-Dogs, Morses or Sea-Horses, Hays, Dragon-Fish, But's Head, Unicorns, Sword-Fish, Mackarel, Lobsters, Garnels, Shrimps, Star-Fish, &c. But the chiefest Profit that draws Men to those desert and disconsolate Places, ariseth from the Whale-Fishing, of which perhaps it may not be impertertinent here to give a particular Description. As to the natural History of Whales, the Writings of Authors are confused, some reckoning 10 several Species, and others, as Wermius and Bartholinus, making them up 22. giving them various Names from their Difference in Colours, Fins, Teeth, Whale-bone, Oyl, Sperma Coeti, &c. But the Fish properly call'd the Whale, for the catching of which our Ships chiefly undertake the Voyage to Spitsberg and Green∣land, differs from other Whales in his Fins and Mouth, that is altogether destitute of Teeth, in∣stead whereof there are long, black, somewhat broad and horny Flakes, all jagg'd like Hairs. The Head is commonly the third part of the whole Fish, yet some have bigger than ohers. Their Lips are plain, smooth and black, somewhat bended, like the Letter S, and end underneath the Eyes, before the 2 Fins, being lock'd one into another when drawn together. Within, on the uppermost Lip, lies that which we call Whale-bone, of a brown, black and yellow Co∣lour, with Streaks of several Colours, others being of a blue and light blue Tincture, are reputed to come from young Whales; the smallest Whale-bone is before, in the Mouth, and behind toward the Throat, but the middlemost is the largest and longest, reach∣ing sometimes about the length of 2 or 3 Men: these are covered all over with long Hairs, like Horse-Hair, hanging down on both Sides round about the Tongue; on one Side, all in a Row, are 250 pieces of Whale-bone, and as many on the other, besides some others so small that they cannot be conveniently cut out, which is a peculiar Trade, abundance of Iron-Tools belonging thereto. The lower part of the Whale's Mouth is generally white, and the Tongue, lying amidst the Whale-bones, is very close ty'd to the undermost Chap or Lip; it is large and white, with black Spots at the Edges, consisting of a soft spongy Fat, so hard to be cut that it is often flung away, tho' otherwise it would yield 6 or 7 Bar∣rels of Train-Oil. On the Head stands a Hovel or Bump, and at the Top of it, on each Side is a Spout-hole, bended like an S, or the Hole of a Violin, out of which the Whale blows the Water, especially when wounded, so fiercely that it roars like a hollow Wind, or the Waves of the Sea in a Storm; which Noise may be heard at a League's Distance. The Eyes lye very low, almost at the End of the Upper-Lip, and are not much bigger than those of a Bullock, with Eye-Lids and Hair like those of a Man; the Chrystal of the Eye is not much bgger than a Pea, clear, white and transparent, the Colour of some is yellowish, and of others pure white. The Shape of the whole Fish is not unlike that of a Shoe-Maker's-Last, if you look upon it from beneath; their Belly and Back are generally reddish, but underdeath the Belly they are white, yet some of them are Coal-black, some of them are also curiously marbl'd on their Fins, Back and Tail. The young ones are bigger than a Hogshead, when first brought forth. At the Sides of the Pudendum, of the Female, stand out two Breasts, with Teats on them like those of Cows, which nevertheless are, as it were, sheath'd within till the young one comes to suck; some of these Breasts are all over white, others speckled with black and blue Spots, like a Lapwing's Egg, the Milk that issues from them being white and sweet, but of a somewhat fishy Taste. The Bones of the Whale are hard, as those of large four-footed Beasts, but porous as a Sponge, and filled with Marrow. Hs Flesh, which appears course and hard, like that of a Bull, is alone by it self, and the Fat lying at the Top, between the Flesh and Skin, is about 6 Inches thick on the Back and Belly, as also a Foot thick upon the Fins, proportionable to the Size of the Fish, but the Fat of the Under-Lip is often thicker than 2 Foot. The Tail does not stand up as those of most other Fishes, but lies horizontal, as that of the Fin-Fish, But's-Head, Dolphin, &c. being three, three and an half, and sometimes four Fathom broad; with this the Whale winds himself about as a Vssl is turned by the Rudder, and his Fins serve instead of Oars, so that he rows along as swiftly as a Bird flies, and makes a long Track in the Sea, which re∣mains
divided for a while as that of a huge Ship un∣der Sail. As for the Food of the Whale, the Ancents thought that he liv'd upon the Froth of the Sea, churn'd with his violent beating on the Water: others say, he is nourish'd with such Weeds and Plants as the Sea affords, since good store of them have been some∣times found in his Stomach: But it is most probable that his chefest Meat are a certain sort of small Crabs, otherwise call'd Sea-Beetles or Sea-Spiders, with which the Bays of Greenland are so cover'd that they seem all over black; these frequently hang thick on his Fins and Hairs, and are afterward suck'd into his Moth. Indeed not only the Crabs themselves, but also great quantities of little Stones, call'd Oculi Cancrorum, have been taken out of hi Stomach. The Whales, as well as other Beasts, have ther pe∣culiar Distempers and divers Enemies; of these last the chief are, 1. A kind of owse or Insect, having many Feet and a Head like an Acorn, with 4 Horns, which eats through the Skin to devour the Fat. 2, The Saw-Fish or Sword-Fish, which has a long Bone on the End of his Snout, set on each side wih Teeth like a Saw; he seldom gives ovr encounring the Whale till he has kill d hm, yet eats p nothing but his Tongue. 3. The Hay, a long round and thin Fish, yet very voracious, whose Mouth, shap'd as that of the Sword-Fish, is full of sharp Teeth, 3 up∣per and 3 under Rows one by another; with these he bites great Pieces from the Whale, as if dug out with a Spade, and ofen devours all his Fat. These Fishes are also very eager after the Flesh of Men, and assault many that go to swim or wash in the Sea; they are usually taken with a Bait of Flesh fasten'd to a Hook with a strong Iron-Chain, for they would soon sheer a Rope asunder with their Teeth. The manner of Catching Whales is thus; When any are seen or discover'd by their Blowing or Spout∣ing up of Water, which may be discern'd at a great distance, upon notice given, all the Mariners get into the Long-Boats, which hold about 6 or 7 Men a piece. These row till they come very near the Whale, and then the Harpoonier, who always sits before in the Boat, takes an Opportunity to throw out his Harpoon; which is an Iron shap'd at the Point like an Arrow, and fix'd at the End of a Stick or Pole, having two Beards, sharp at the Edge and blunt on the backs, otherwise it would tear out and all the Labour would be lost. The best Harping-Irons are made of clean and fine Steel, not too much hardn'd, so that they may be bended without snapping, for 20 Pounds (a middling Whale being valued at so much) are often lost for want of suh a well-temper'd Instru∣ment, which is light behind and heavy toward the Point, so that fling it which way you will it always falls upon the Point: To the End or Handle of the Harpoon is fastned a Rope 5 or 7 sathom long, and about an Inch thick, being more plyable than the other Cords that are afterward tyed thereto (for it is made of the finest and softest Hemp, not daub'd with Tar, so that it swells and grows hard in the Water). In every one of the Sloops a whole Heap of Lines lye between the Sat, divided into 3, 4, or 5 parts, and each of them is of 80, 9 or 100 Fathom long. The first of them is tyed to the Fore-runner or small Line, and as the Whale dives they tie more and more Line to it. These Ropes are thicker than the Fore-runner, wrought with strong and tough Hemp, and tarr'd over; but the Line-Fur∣nisher or person whose business it is to look after the Ropes, a also the other Men in the Long-boa, must take great Care that they be not entangled, or that they may not run toward the Side of the Boat, lest it should be thereby overset, but they must run out just before in the middle, commonly call'd the Stave by the Sea-men. The Harpoer darts the Harpoon with his Right-Hand just behind the Spout-Hole of the Whale (if he can conveniently) or in the thick Fat of his Back, for he dies sooner if wunded thereabout than if he were launch'd into the Belly or through the Guts; but about the Head the Harpon can do him little Hurt, bcause the Fat is very thin there upon the Bones, so that it breaks out more easily, and the Whale finds means to escape. However, for the most part the Seamen do not much mind where hey launce or push them, doing it as well as they can, since there is no Time to take great Deliberation. The Beast, as soon as wounded, runs away with the Long-Boat as swift a Wind, and diving underneath draws the Rope very hard, so that geat Care must be taken to give him Rope enough lest the Boat be overset. In the mean while all the other Sloops row out before, and take notice which way the Line stands, for if it is stiff and heavy, the Whale still draws it with main Strength; but if it hangs loose, so that the Boat both before and behind is equally high out of the Water, then the Men hale in the Rope, laying it in good order, that if the Whale should draw on again, it may be given him without being entangled. It is also to be observ'd, That if the Whale runs upon the Level, too much Rope must not be allow'd, lest in turning much and often about he should wind it about a Rock or heavy Stone, so that the Harping-Iron would be loosen'd and tear out, which has of∣ten happen'd. Whensoever the Whale rolls upon the Ground, the Long-boat lying still, the Lines are drawn in again by degrees, and the Rope-Master lays them down in their proper Places. If he runs underneath a great Ice-field, and the Rope is not long enough to follow him, they draw it in as much as is possible, and cut it off, losing the piece of Rope and the Whale; and indeed they frequently run away with the Lines belonging to 5 or more Sloops. Where great quantities of small Ice are crouded toge∣ther it is very dangerous and difficult to pursue the Whale, for he is so cunning as to retire thither im∣mediately, and the Long-Boats are very often dash'd to pieces against the Rocks of Ice. But when he rises they fling one or two more Harping-Irons into him, accordingly as they perceive him more or less tir'd, and then he dives under Water again, some swim eaven all-a-long, playing with their Tail and Fins, so that great Care must be taken not to come too near them, for they can beat a Long-Boat to pieces at a Blow. Thus the Seamen wait till the Whale is pretty well tir'd, and then kill him outright with Launces nevertheless not without great Danger, for the first that Dart the Harpoon are drawn along at a good distance from him; but they that endeavour to di∣spatch him with Launces, are as well upon his Body as at his Sides, and receive many severe Blows, all the other Men in the Sloops rowing diligently, some∣times forward and sometimes backward, whilst the Whale lifts himself up and often beats so violently with his Tail and Fins that the Water dashes up into the Air like Dust. The Launces are fixt to a wood∣en Pole above 2 Fathom long, or somewhat shorter than a Pike-staff; the other part of the Launce being commonly a Fathom long and pointed before, as that of a Pike, is made of Steel or tough Iron, so as to bend without breaking: For the Harpooniers, having made a deep Hole in the Whale's Back or Sides with
their Launces, continue thrusting them first one way then another; but if one or more are got out of their Hands they soon take another, every Sloop being furnished with at least 5, 6 or 7; yet sometimes the Whale has them all out of 3, 4 or more Boats sticking in his Body. After he is struck he spouts Water or Blood with all his force, so that the Noise thereof may be heard as far as the Report of a Cannon; but when he is quite wearied it comes out only by Drops, for he has not Strength enough to force it upward; some Whales blow Blood to the very last, dashing the Men most filthily, and dying their Sloops as deep as if they were painted with Vermilion, nay the very Sea is ringed red along wheresoever they swim, the Male∣mucks commonly flocking thither in great Numbers. Those Whales that are mortally wounded, heat them∣selves so excessively that they reek, so that the Birds sit on them and eat their Flesh whilst yet alive. They are surest struck with a Harpoon, as they spout Wa∣ter, and so do not mind the striking of the Oars, for when they lie still they listen, and are sometimes above and sometimes under Water; but it is very dangerous to assault the Females, especially when big with young, for they defend themselves very long and are harder to be dispatch'd than the Males. The Long-Boats often waste 6 or 7 hours, nay even a whole Day before one is seen; but when he is thus kill'd they convey him to the Ship's Side, fast∣ning that part where the Tail is cut off to the Fore-Castle, and the Head toward the Stern: Then 2 Sloops hold at each End of the Fish, whilst the Har∣pooniers stand in them before or upon the Whale, clad with a leathern Suit. These 2 Men, who have their peculiar Wages, viz. about 4 or 5 Crowns apiece, slice his Sides with long Knives, raising the Blubber or Fat from the Flesh, which the more it is loosen'd, as the Hide is flea'd from an Ox, the higher it must be hal'd up with the Pulleys, that it may be more easily cut. Afterward the Fat is cut into small pieces in the Ship, and kept in Vessels or Cardels (as they call them) until they try it up into Train-Oil. The Blubber of some Whales is White, others Yellow, and of some Red: The White, being full of small Sinews, does not yield so much Oil as the Yellow; the Red and watery Fat comes from dead Whales, taking its Colour from the Settling of the Blood, and affords the worst and least Oil, but the Yellow Fat, which looks like Butter, is the best. The Fat being thus chopt into small Pieces, and slic'd thin, is boyl'd in Cauldrons or Coppers: Afterward the Liquor is laded out into a Vessel, half full of Water, that it may be cool'd, and that the Dirt, Blood and other Dregs may fall to the bottom; then it is put into Troughs, to be more cool'd, and conveyed thence into the Cardels or Hogsheads, which generally hold 64 Gallons. It is reported that one Housson, a Diep∣man, in the Year 1634. got 26 Hogsheads (Cados) out of the Tongue of one Whale, and 120 out of its Body. The Train-Oil is us'd by divers Trades∣men, as Frize-makers, Curriers, Cloath-Workers and Soap-Boilers. The Greenland Ships, of the largest size, carry 30 or 40 Men, and sometimes more, hav∣ing 6 Sloops to tend them, and hold from 800 to a 1000 Cardels of Fat: The lesser Ships contain fewer Cardels, viz. from 400 to 700, and have commonly 5 Sloops or Boats belonging to them. There also go some Galliots to Spitsburg to catch Whales, which have only 3 or 4 Sloops. The Hollanders attribute the first discovery of Green∣land or Spitsberg to three of their own Pilots, viz. Jacob Heemskerk, William Barents and John Corne∣lius Ryp, imposing Names on the several Creeks and Promontories, according to their Fancy. But it is certain that they only follow'd our Steps, and that had our Men been as diligent in that particular from time to time, as also no less careful in making of Sea-Charts on such occasions, divers Discoveries would have been unquestionably asserted to this Nation, which are now almost disputed from us. Indeed it is not to be doubted but that Sir Hugh Willoughby, in the Year 1553. and Stephen Burroughs in 1556. landed in this Country long before the arrival of the Dutch Fleet, under the above-mention d Commanders; therefore the later had no other way to derogate from Sir Hugh's Honour, but by conferring on him an imaginary Title of an Island, which they call Willoughby's Land, a Place near Nova Zembla: However, in 1610. the Russia Company of English Merchants, sent a Ship, nam'd the Amity, under the command of Jonas Pool, for Whale-Fishing, who fell upon the Country for∣merly descryed, tho' then not much regarded, and call'd it Greenland, either by reason of the green Moss, with which it was cover'd, or perhaps mistaking it for Greenland, a large Northern Continent before dis∣cover'd. He also gave Names to many of the princi∣pal Places on the western Side, as Horn-sound (because an Unicon's Horn was there found) Ice-Point, Bell-Point, Black-Point, Knotty-Point, Lowness Island, Cape-Cold, Ice-Sound, Fowl-Sound, Deer-Sound, &c. This was the first Time that any Benefit was made by the Fishing in these Seas. In 1611. the Company hir'd 6 Basques, expert Fishermen, and furnish'd them with 2 Ships to fish for Whales; the first that was ta∣ken by them yielded 12 Tuns of Oil, and they like∣wise kill'd 500 Morsses. In 1622. 2 other Ships were sent, which caught 17 Whales, together with some Morsses, and made 180 Tuns of Oil. The Hollanders came thither the same Year with one Ship, conducted by Andrew Swallows an Englishman, whilst another English Pilot likewise brought a Spanish Ves∣sel. Afterward many other Voyages were underta∣ken on the Company's account, and these Coasts were frequented by the English, Dutch, Danes and other Nations; nevertheless we find little worth relating of Greenland till the Year 1630. when some English, commanded by Captain William Goodler, were forc'd to wander up and down the Country, and to winter there, a large Relation whereof has been publish'd by Dr. W. Watts, to which we shall refer the Rea∣der. Some English, in like manner, winter'd in Green∣land, A. D. 1633. and another Company in 1634. but the latter all perish'd there. The last that has brought us any considerable News from this Coun∣try is Frederick Martens a Hamburger, who set sail from the River Elbe, April 15th 1671. and return'd thither on the 21st of August. He set forth a large and very accurate Description of the Land, and all things therein, as Mountains, Plants, Beasts, Fowls, &c. chiefly upon a desire to satistie the Curiosity of some Gentlemen of the Royal Society. This Work was first written in High-Dutch, and has been lately printed in English. In these Countries there is a continu'd Day for 4 or 5 Months in a Year, and a perpetual Night for 3 Months, so that for the most part there is either all Light or all Darkness. The English that winter'd in Greenland, in the year 1630. entirely lost the Light of the Sun, Octob. 14. and saw it not again till Feb. 3. It is reported by those that staid there in 1633. that Octob. 5. was the last Day they beheld the Sun, tho' they could see to read in the Twi-light, which con∣tinu'd till the 17th: That on the 22d the Stars plain∣ly
appear'd all the 24 Hours, and were visible during the whole Winter. That on Jan. 15. they perceiv'd for 6 or 7 Hours about Noon, so much Light as they could make a shift to read by it: And that on Febr. 12th they discerned the Sun-Beams upon the Tops of the Mountains, and the next Day his whole Body. Our Men that remain'd in Greenland in 1634. and all perish'd there, left in Writing before their Death, That the Sun disappear'd October 10th, and was seen again Febr. 14. The Hollanders that winter'd in Nova Zembla, A. D. 1596. on November 2d, new Style, or Octob. 23. old Style (according to Purchas) saw the Sun not fully above the Earth; when it rose South-south-east and set South-south-west. After Novemb. 4th, N. S. or Octob. 2d, O. S. the Sun was no longer seen, but the Moon appear'd Day and Night as long as she continu'd in the highest Degrees. On Jan. 24th they perceived the Edge of the Sun above the Horizon, and on the 27th he came totally in View, being in the 5th Degree 25 Minutes of Aquarius. It is difficult to assign a Reason of these various Appea∣rances, unless they proceed from the difference of La∣titude, wherein the English and Dutch took up their Winter-Quarters: But the Cold in Nova Zembla was more intense than that in Greenland. The English that were constrain'd to winter in this Country lived upon Venison, as Rain-Dear, Bears, Foxes, Morsses, &c. The Bear's-Flesh was tolerably pleasant and wholesome, but the Liver caus'd their Skins to peel off; which was also observ'd by the Hollanders, that abode in Nova Zembla. As the Sun and Day began to appear, the Fowls and Foxes crept abroad, for which they set many Traps and Gins, insomuch that a vast number of Birds were taken, and at several times above 50 Foxes: These last prov'd very good Meat, and the Dutch in Nova Zembla were like∣wise much reliev'd by them in their Scurvies. After∣ward, in going abroad to seek Provisions they found great quantities of Willock's Eggs, that afforded no small Refreshment: But the effects of the Cold upon their Bodies were wonderful, raising Blisters on their Fesh as if they had been burnt: Iron stuck to their Fingers when touch'd, and their Stockings were all over sing'd as they sat by a great Fire, yet their Feet felt no Warmth, and their Backs were frozen. However, our Men either had not altogether endur'd so much hardship, or at least were not so ready to complain as William Barents's Company in Nova Zembla; for the Cold was so excessive sharp in those parts, That (as it was related by them at their return) their Shoes froze as hard as Horn to their Feet, their Sack and other strong Liquors were likewise frozen, and a Barrel of Water became perfect Ice in one Night. They also add, That their Carpenter taking a Nail out of his Mouth the Skin and Flesh follow'd glu'd to it with Ice. That in their Huts they were wont to apply Sones heated at the Fire to their Feet, and other Parts of their Body, to keep them from freezing: And that they suffer'd many other Cala∣mities, the particular Circumstances whereof it would be too tedious to recite. The Land of Jess, Terra Esonis, is altogether unknown, unless that it is a great extent of Land, except some Coasts of it, which lie in the 4d Degree of Latitude. The Situation of it is between Asia and America, by which it is parted by 2 great Arms of the Sea, which are the Straits of Josis or Tessay, which separate it from Great Tartary, and joyn the Northern-Ocean to the Sea of China, and the Straits of Anian Eastward, which part it from America. The Nature of the Soil and Air is not known; 'tis thought that they are like Canada, and that the Country is fruitful in all Things. The Inhabitants, so far as we know of them, live upon Fishing and Hunting, and they are cloath'd with the Skins of Beasts. Their Canoos, or little Galleys, are fastned together with Cords, made of the Bark of Cocos, which never rots in the Water. They trade with the People of Japan, and are subject to the Emperor of Japan, paying him Tribute: Upon which ac∣count it is that this Emperor forbids all Strangers, which trade to his Kingdom, to have any Commerce in the Land of Jesso. The Natives are Idolaters. As for New Denmark, New North-Wales, the Isles of Comberland and Raley, we know nothing of them but the Names and some Coasts, so that all we have to say of them is, That these Countries lye on the North of America, toward Hudson's-Sea, that they are very cold, and that we have little account of them. SECT. II. The ANTARTIC or Southern Countries. These Countries are call'd Antartick from the Pole of that Name, near which they lye: They are also nam'd Southern, because the South-Wind blows from those Parts. Our Relations assure us, That they are not less than America, and as fruitful and well-peopled as Europe. They reach not farther than the 60th Degree of Southern Latitude; Magellan, who discover'd them first, gave them the Name of Magellanicans. They are situated in three several Zones. The Air is very different, according to the several Regions of it; but it may be said, That the Soil is generally fruitful in all sorts of Fruit, wild and tame Beasts, some of which are unknown to us. Fernando Quiri, the Spaniard, Mayre, Browers and Schouten, Dutchmen, observ'd several Mouths of Rivers, but durst not venture upon the Land; they only only en∣tred some Gulphs and commodious Havens. The Streight of Magellan, discover'd in 1520. is 200 Leagues in length, and in some Places 2 or 3, in other 6 or 10 Leagues wide. Mayre's Streights, disco∣vered in 1615. is 10 Leagues long, and as many wide. It is more convenient and less dangerous than the former. Browers Steight, found out in 1643. is much like Mayre's. The English and Dutch go that way often to the East-Indies. It is evident that the Southern Regions have more than 4000 Leagues on the Coast in the Torrid, Temperate and Frigid Zones. NEW GƲINEE, Nova Guinea, is near the Aequinoctial Line: It is one of the biggest Isles in the World. It is so call'd because it seems to be dia∣metrically opposite to Guinee in Africa, and because 'tis part of the West-Indies: It is separated from the Continent by a Streight or Current of the Sea of the Land of Papos; which is a very considerable Island on the East of Gilolo. It is a good Country, but little frequented by the Europeans.
The ISLES of SOLOMON are in the Pacifick-Sea, on the East of New Guinee, and in the 10th or 12th Degree of Southern Latitude; the Spa∣niards gave them that Name to persuade us, That So∣lomon fetch'd his Gold from thence. On the East and South of these Isles lye many others, of which we know little more than their Names. TERRA de FƲOGO is on the South of Ame∣rica: It consists of several Islands, call'd the Magel∣lanick, the Streights of Magellan and the Fires (which they observ'd there, gave Name to the Place.) The Air and Soil are very good. The STATES ISLAND lyes South-East of it, and hath almost the same Nature and Air. The Southern unknown Region, or TERRA AƲSTRALIS INCOGNITA, is a vast tract of Land, as we judge by the Coasts. I have di∣stinguish'd the Parts of it by the several Names gi∣ven it by Pilots and Captains, who have sail'd by them, which are to be seen in the foregoing Table. The Inhabitants are white, of a large Stature, strong, industrious and couragious: It is very sad to fall into their Hands, as some Europeans have found by unhappy Experience. Some modern Relations tell us, That in all that vast Country they have neither King nor Prince, all the People are only combin'd together in several Factions, in the Form of a Com∣monwealth. They chuse Governours only to make the lazy work, punish Offenders, and render Justice to every Man. They are Idolaters, and have Ora∣tories to pray to their Idols in: They observe cer∣tain Fasts, and wash their Bodies on certain Days every Year. The Country of NEW ZEALAND is Anti∣podes to France: The Dutch were used cruelly there. They found Men there of an extraordinary Stature. Fernando Quir, who spent 14 Years in these Voyages, discover'd it before those Republicans. He was 14 Mon hs at the Court of the King of Spain to per∣swade his Catholick Majesty by 8 several Petitions, to send Colonies thither. He represented a thousand Advantages that would arise to them by the Extent of it, Fruitfulness, People, and Conveniency of the Ports, but was not regarded. The Dutch set an high Esteem upon this Country, which they call NEW HOLLAND, and have made particular Maps of it, which carry it as far as New Zealand. The other Parts of Terra Australis are not well re∣presented in our Relations and Maps: Time, we hope, will bring us to a more exact and per∣fect Knowledge of, and Acquaintance with these vast Regions. FINIS. Some Books lately Printed for, and to be sold by Abel Swall and T. Child, at the Unicorn in S. Paul's Church-Yard. CAmden's Britannia, newly translated into English with large Additions and Improvements: Publish'd by Edmund Gibson, of Queen's College in Oxford, Folio, Price 45 s. A New Volume of the Ecclesiastical History writ∣ten in French by Monsieur L. E. Du Pin, made En∣glish: Being a Continuation of that Work; and contains an Account of the Controversies in Religion, the Lives and an Abridgment of the Writings of Ec∣clesiastical Authors, and all Affairs, transacted in the Church during the Ninth Century. Folio. Titi Lucretii Cari de rerum natura, libri sex, quibus interpretationem & notas addidit Thomas Creech, Om. An. Soc. Cui subjicitur Index Vcabulor omnium. Octavo. Medulla Histor. Anglicanae: Being a Comprehensive History of the Lives and Reigns of the Monarchs of England, from the Time of Julius Caesar to the Reign of their Majesties K. William and Q. Mary. The fourth Edition; in which is added, A Table of the Kings, and an Alphabetical Index of the principal Matters. Octavo. The History of Britain, that part especially now call'd England, from its first Traditional Beginning, to the Norman Conquest. Collected out of the ancient∣est and best Authors, by John Milton. Boks in the Press. Ovidii Metamorphsem, lib. xv. cum interpretatione & notis; ne non Indice vocaulrum omnium: Ad me∣thodum editionis ad usum Delphini, at multo correct▪ & emendat. The Antiquities of Rome: Or, a Description of the City, Religion, Government, Magistrates, Laws, Customs, Military Discipline, Arms, Triumphs, Magnificent Buildings, Sport, Exercises, &c. of the ancient Romans: To which is premis'd, a short Ab∣stract of the History of the Original, Growth and Decay of that Commonwealth: Written by Basil Kennet of Corp. Christ. Col. Oxon. Illustrated with many Sculptures, engraven in Copper. Octavo. P. Virgilii Mris opra, interpretatione & notis il∣lustravit Carolus R, soc. Jesu, jussu Christianis. Regis, ad usum serenis. Dlphini, Octavo, juxta edit. Parisiens. is now reprinting on a very fine Paper and fair Character, and will be publish'd in a few Weeks.
An Index of the Names of Places Described in this BOOK. A. ABacoa Isl. 484 Abassia 420 Abbeville 63 Abdera 383 Aberdeen 46 Aber-Ystwith 42 Abex 469 Abington 14 Ablay 427 Abruzzo Prov. 293 Abydos or Avido 415 Abyssinia 458 Acadea 476 Acafrique 452 Account of Whale-fishing 502 Acerenza 292 Acerno 292 Achaia 387 Acbem 443 Acon or Acre 416 Acqui 251 Adea 469 Adel 460, 469 Aden 422 Aderbejan 424 Adoumatis Isl. 444 Adria 255 Adrianople 384 Aegypt 449 Aeirschot 133 Aeth 139 Aethiopia 458 Africa 447 Agades 457 Agado Isl. 471 Agag 467 St. Agatha 291 Agde 106 Agen 98 Agenois 97 Aggerbus 336 Agnabat 402 Agra 431 Agria or Eger 366 Ajan 469 Ajazzo or Adiazzo 299 Ajazzo, see Issus Aichstat 180 Ailsbury 20 Aire 46 Aire in France 99 Aire in the Netherlands 125 Aix in France 104 Aix in Savoy 232 Aken 219 Aladulia 415 Aland Isle 346 St. Alausia Isle 484 Alba 251 Albania 386 Albano 270 Albanapoli 386 Alba Regalis 370 St. Albans 21 Albasin 428 Albe in Groenland 500 Alberga 248 Albi 232 Albi in France 103 Albigeois ib. Albinali 422 Albret 100 Alburg 331 Alcala 316 Alcmaer 151 Alenson 59 Aleppo 416 Aleria 299 Alessio 386 Aleth or Alet 105 Alexandria in Aegypt 450 Alexandria or Alessandria del∣la Paglia 254 Alexandria or Alexandretta 416 Algher or Algeri 298 Algiers 453, 454 Alicant 311 Alloa 46 All-Saints-Bay 495 Almeria 310 Alost or Aelst 130 Alsatia 184 Alsen Isl. 334 Alsfeld 177 Alsteten 230 Altenburg in Germany 208 Altenburg, see Owar in Hung. Altonga 443 Altorf in Franconia 180 Altorf in Schwaben 190 Altorf in Switzerland 223 Altsax 230 Altzheim 182 Amaga Isl. 333 Amalfi 292 St. Amand 126 Amanzerifden 422 Amara 460 Amasia 415 Amazonia 496 Amazons Riv. 17, 496 Amberg 192 Ambleteuse 64 Ambois 86 Ambrachia 387 Ambrun or Embrun 114 Ambrunois 114 Ambuila 464 America 473 Amersfort 153 Amienois 62 Amiens 62 Amont 92 Ampaza 468 Amphipoli 385 Amsterdam 148 Anagni 270 Anatolia 414 Ancenis 77 Ancona 272 Ancyra 414 Andalusia 307 Andalusia Nueva 490 Andes Mount 491 Andover 13 St. Andrews in Germ. 196 St. Andrews in Scotl. 46 Angad-Aeben 454 Angermania 341 Angers 84 Anglesey Isl. 43 Angola 464 Angos 468 Angot 460 Angoulesme 86 Angoumois 86 Anguien 139 Anguilla Isl. 489 Anna 421 Annecy 232 Annobon Isl. 471 Anhalt Princ. 207 Anjou 84 Ansico 461 Anslo or Opslow 337 Antarctick Countries 505 Antego 488 Antibes 110 Antillae 490 Antioch 416 Antivari 378 Antwerp 134 Aoste 233 Apalaches 483 Apalia 423 Apenrade 330 Appenzel 226 Apte 111 Aquapendente 271 Aquino 290 Aquila 293 Aquileja 257 Aquitaine 97 Arabia Deserta 41 Arabia Petraea ibid Arabia Faelix ibid Aracan 435 Arangio 445 Arane Desert 456 Ararat Mount. 418 Araxes Riv. Arba Isl. 261 Archangel 361 Arctick Countries 497 Arder 458 Ardres 64 Areotis Lake 449 Arezzo 279 Argentan 60 Argenton 87 Argos 398 Arhusen 330 Arien or Aire 291 Ari-Atollon Isl. 444 Arles 109 Arlon or Arlan 142 Armagh 48 Armagnac 99 Armenia 418 Armeniers 126 Armiro 387 Armorici 53 Arnay-le-Duc 90 Arnheim 153 Arnmuyden 152 Arnesberg 171 Arragon 313 Arras or Atrecht 124 Artois 122, 124 Arundel 15 St. Asaph 43 Aschaffemburg 175, 179 Ascore 455 Asem 434 Ascencion Isl. 496 Assar 454 Ashby de la Zouch 27 Asia 411 Asia Minor 414 Asmere 431 Assen 427 Assisi 272 Assumption 494 Asti 245 Astorga 317 Astracan 361, 427 Asturia F. 306 Ath 149 Athlone 48 Athens 388, 389 Attock 431 Ava 434 Aval 92 Avalon 90 Aubagnie 109 Aubusson 96 Audenard, see Oudenard Avellino 291 Aversa 289 Augsburg 189 Avignon 111 Avila 315
Aulis 390 Aumarle or Albemarle 57 Aunis 86 Avranches 59 Aurich 216 Austria A. D. 193 Antun 89 Autunois ib. Auvergne 95 Aux or Auch 99 Auxerre 90 Auxerrois ib. Auxois ib. Axel 132 Axime 458 Azores Isl. 471 B. BAbelmandel Isl. 470 Bacar 431 Bacca-Saraio 407 Bachu 470 Baden Princ. 188 Baden in Swiss. 230 Baden in Austria 195 Baden-Weiller 188 Baffe-Terre 484 Bagdad 419 Bagemedri 460 Bahama Isl. 484 Baharem Isl. 425 Bahus 338 Baionne or Bayonne 100 Balambuan 442 Balli 460 Balsora 419 Baly Isl. 442 Bamberg 180 Bamfe 46 Banbury Bangor 43 Bannians 430 Bantam 442 Bapaume 125 Bar 118 Bar-le-Duc ib. Bar in Podolia 400 Bar-sur-Aube 67 Bar-sur-Seine 90 Barazan 469 Barbada or Barbuda Isl. 487 Barbadoes Isl. 488 Barbary 450 Barbice 491 Barborn Isl. 470 Barby 207 Barca Kingd. 451 Barca Desert 455 Barcelona 312 Barcovent Isles 484 Bardewck 212 Bardt 205 Barfleur 59 Bari 294 Barkshire 14 Barleduc 116 Barnagas 469 Baro 467 Barraboa 469 Basil 23, 227 Basilicata 292 Bastingstoke 13 Basque 100 Bassigny 76 Bastia 299 Bastoigne or Bestonack 142 Bata 463 Batavia 443 Bathanan 417 Bathar ib. Bathe 11 Baticala 443 Battou 458 Bavaria 191 Bavay 139 Beaujeu 95 Beaujolois ib. Bautzen 288 Bayeux 58 Bayonne 100 Bazadois 97 Bazarutos Isl. 474 Bazas 97 Bearn 101 Beaujeu 103 Beaune 89 Beaumont 139 Beaumont-le-Roger 60 Beausse 83 Beauvais 74 Beauvoisis 74 Bedford 20 Beemster 151 Befort 186 Beggia 452 Bejagos 457 Beilstein 178 Belac 96 Belch 427 Belgium 119 Belgrade 379 Bellay 91 Bellegarde 90 Bell-Isle 81 Bellinzona 230 Belluna 256 Belor 427 Belvedere 395 Belzko 355 Bena 457 Benevento 291 Bengala 432 Benguela 465 Beni-Araxid 454 Benin 458 Benn Castle 205 Benthem 218 Bentivoglio 276 Berar 431 Berdon 456 Bergamasco 259 Bergamo ib. Bergen in Norway 337 Bergen in the Isle of Rugen 206 Bergen in the Low Countries, see Mons Bergen-op-Zoom 135 Bergentz 198 Berion 458 Berlin 203 Bermuda in Virgin. 482, 487. Bermudaz Isles 487 Bern Castle 173 Bern in Swiss. 222 Bern in Bohemia 258 Berna 58 Bernard Castle 35 Bernburg 208 Berry Dutchy 87 Bernstable 9 St. Bertrand de Cominge 101 Berytus or Beryth 416 Besanson 92 Befiers 105 Bessarabia 399 Bethlehem 418 Bethune 125 Betuwe 153 Beveland Isles 152 Beverly 34 Berwick 38 Bialogrod 399 Biel 228 Bieleia-Osera 364 Biela 245 Bielski 361 Bigorre 101 Biguba 457 Bilbo or Bilboa 306 Biledulgerid 455 Billingworder-sconce 157 Bilsen 145 Binche 139 Bingen 175 Birkenfeld 183 Bisaccia 291 Bisama 460 Biscay Prov. 306 Biscaya Nueva 484 Bisert 452 Bisnager 433 Bistricz 401 Bithlis 418 Blackenburg 211 Blandford 10 Blasois 83 Blavet 81 Blaye 97 Bleking 343 Blois 83 Blockzill 155 Bobbio 254 Bochar 427 Bodoiski ib. Boglio 247 Bohemia Kingd. 199 Bojno 294 Boii 191 Bois-le-Duc 135 Bois de Vincennes 71 Bohemeale 463 Bolgar 361, 427 Bolli 414 Bologna, see Bononia Bolognese 276 Bolsena 270 Bolswaert 156 Bombaya Isl. 438 Bommel 154 Bommenee 152 Bone or Hippone 454 Bonn 170 Bonneville 232 Bononia 276 Boppart 173 Borch-loen or Lootz 145 Borgo-San-Sepolcro 279 Bormio 227 Borneo Isl. 442 Bornholm Isl. 334 Borno Desert 456 Borsalo 457 Borsel 219 Bosa 298 Bosnay-Saray 378 Bosnia ib. Boston 28 Boston in New Engl. 477 Bothnia 341 Bouchain 139 Bouillon, see Buillon Boulogne or Bolen 64 Boullonnois 63 Bourbon-l' Archambault 95 Bourbon-lancy 96 Bourbonnois 95 Bourdeaux 97 Bourg-en-Bresse 91 Bourges 87 Bourdelois 97 Bourranger-Fort 157 Bouvines or Bovignes 143 Bozzolo 258 Braccano 270 Brabant 122, 132 Brabant, Dutch 135 Braclaw 355 Brava 321 Braganza 321 Braine 75 Brain-le-Comte 139 Brandenburg 203 Brascow 403 Brasil 495 Braslaw 356 Bratskra 428 Brassaw 401 Brara 469 Bray County 57 Brechin 46 Brecknock 40 Breda 135 Bredenberg 328 Breevoort 154 Brema 435 Bremen 212 Bremerfurde 213 Bremgarten 230 Bremichem 30 Brescia 260 Bresciano ibid Breslaw 201 Bresse 91 Brest 79 Bresty 352 Bretagne 76 Bretueil 60 Brianson 114 Brianson in Savoy 232 Bridge Town in Barbad. 489 Bridgwater 11 Brie 68 Brie-Comte-Robert 73 Brie-Francois 72 Brienne 67 Briennois 91 Briescia 357 St. Brieux 78 Bril 150 Brin 201 Brindisi 295 Briqueras 245 Brisac in Alsatia 186 Bristol 11, 489 Brissac in France 85 Britain 1 Britain-New 500 Brixen 198 Brodt 377 Broel 171 Brouage 86 Browearshawen 152 Bruck 196 Bruges 129 Brugneto 249 Brunswick 210 Bruntrut 228 Brussels 132
Buchaw 189 Buckar 431 Buckenburg 217 Buckingham 20 Buda 369 Budingen 178 Budoa 260, 379 Buenos-Aires 494 Bugey 91 Bugia 454 Buillon or Bulloigne 145 Buis 113 Bulgaria 380 Bullen: See Boulogne Bungo 439 Burgaw, Marquis. 189 Buren 154 Burg 334 Burgos 314 Burgundy 88 Burgundy County: See Franche County Bury 24 Butrinto 260 Buxtehude 213 C. CAbul 431 Caccian 436 Cacongo 462 Cadiz 308 Caen 58 Caerdiffe 41 Caermarthen 42 Caernarvon 43 Caffa 407 Cafreria 465 Cagia 458 Cagliuri 298 Cajania 344 Cahors 98 Cainda Isle 444 Cairo or Grand Cairo 450 Cairvan 452 Calabria 293 Calaborra 315 Calais 64 Calamata 395 Calamo Isle 445 Cacar 218 Cales: See Cadiz Calis: See Calais Calicus 433 California Isle 490 Callomadoux Isle 444 Calmar 342 Calmona 427 Cambalu 428 Cambaya 432 Camboya 436 Cambramba 464 Cambray or Camerick 140 Cambresis 140 Cambridge 25 Cambridge in New Engl. 477 Caminiec 355, 399 Camnin 205 Campagna 292 Campaigne of Rome 261 Campen 155 Campo Santo 279 Cana 418 Canada 475 Canada Riv. 479 Cananos 433 Canary-Islands 471 Canaria 471 Canata 433 Canea 49 Canavese 245 Candea or Candi 443 Candia 408 Candabar 424 Candis 431 Candora 361 Cangoxuma 439 Canisa 371 Cano 458 Canterbury 16 Cantis 431 Cantor 457 Capaccia 292 La Capelle 62 Capes or Caps 451 Capitinato 294 Capo-d'Istria 259 Capri 299 Capua 288 Caramania 415 Caraemid 419 Caraon 451 Caravaca 311 Carcassonne 105 Cardigan 42 Cardona 313 Carelia 344 Carentan 58 Caresbrook 13 Carge Isle 425 Caribana 490 Caribbee-Islands 484 Caricfergus 48 Carignan 243 Carinthia D. 196 Carlisle 37 Carmagnola 246 Carnatica 433 Carniola D. 197 Carolina 482 Carlstadt 377 Carpentery 490 Carpentras 111 Carpi 257 Cartagena in Spain 311 Cartagena in America 491 Casal or Casal de St. Vas. 250 Casamansa 457 Casan 361, 427 Casba 452 Casbin 424 Cascais 462 Caschaw 368 Cassan 457 Cassano 293 Cassel in Germany 176 Cassel in Flanders 127 Cassena 458 Cassian 424 Cassil 48 Castanovitz 376 Castel Tornese 395 Castel Aragonese 298 Castelnaudary 104 Castel-Nuovo 378 Castiglione delle Stivere 258 Castille Old 314 Castille New 315 Castle-Town 44 Castres 103 Castri 392 Castro 271 Casubi 435 Catalonia Princ. 312 Catana 297 Cataro 260 Cataro or Catarro 379 Cats 152 Catzenelobogen 177 Cavailon 111 Cavangombo 464 Caudebec 57 Cayanna Isle 494 Caux 57 Cayaravaca 443 Cayraon 451 Cazar-Ezhagir 454 Cazdee 226 Cedogna 291 Cefaledi 297 Ceilon Isl. 443 Ceiran or Ceram Isl. 441 Celebes Isl. ibid Ceneda 256 Centron 145 Cephalonia Isl. 261 Ceva 243 Chaalonnois 90 Chaalons sur Marne 66 Chaalons sur Soane 90 Chablais 232 Chabli 68 Chaco 494 Chalcedon 383, 414 Chaldaea, see Yerach Chalosse 99 Chalza 427 Chamb 192 Chambery 231 Champagne 65 Chanourp 46 Charcas 492 La Charite 87 Charlemont 143 Charleroy ibid Charles-Town in Barbad. 489 Charles-Town in Carolina 482 Charleville 67 Charoles 91 Charolois 90 Chartres 83 Chateau-Briant 77 Chateau-Cambresis 140 Chateau Dauphin 115 Chateau-Dun or Chaudun 83 Chateau d' If 112 Chateau-Thierry 68 Chateau-Roux 87 Chateleraut 85 Chatham 17 Chatillon Sur Seine 90 Chaumont 67, 74 Chaunes 62 Chauny 75 Chicklang 429 Chelicia 468 Chelm 355 Chelmsford 23 Chelsey 22 Chepstow 41 Cherasco 244 Cherbourg 58 Chester 32 Chiametlan 484 Chiampa 436 Chiangara 414 Chiapa 484 Chiarenza 394 Chiavenna 227 Chichester 15 Chicova 467 Chielefa 397 Chieri 244 Chilao 443 Chili 492 Chimera 387 China 428 Chinon 86 Chio 439 Chipiche 420 Chiozzo or Chioggio 259 Chitor 431 Chiusa 255 Chiutaye 414 Chorosan 424 Chremnitz 367 Christiansbug 458 St. Christopher's Isle 486 Chur 226 Chusistan 424 Cicugo 439 Cilley 195 Cinaloa 484 Cinque Ports 17 Cirencester 18 Circassia Nigra 419 Circles of the Empire 166 Circum-Navigations of the Globe 493 Cita Nuova 259 Citeau 89 Ciudad Rodrigo 317 Civita-di-Chieti 294 Civita de Pena 293 Civita Vecchia 270 Clagenfurt 196 Clare in Suffolk 24 Clare in Ireland 48 St. Claude 93 Clausenburg 402 Clermont in Auvergne 95 Clermont in Beauvoisis 74 Clervaux 67 Cleve 218 Cluny or Clugny 91 Coblentz 172 Coby 461 Cochin 433 Cochin China 435 Couverden 155 Cogden Desert 456 Cogni or Iconium 415 Coimbra 321 Colberg 205 Colchester 32 Colen 169 Colmar 186 Colmars 109 Colmensee 354 Coln 203 Colloumadoux 444 Colocza 368 Cologn see Colen Colomiers 68 Colombo 443 Coloswar, see Clausenburg St. Columbs 8 Columna 362 Colyns Plaet 151 Comana 491 Commedo 458 Commene 126 Cominge 101 Como 253 Comorra Isles 471 Compiegne 74 Compostella 307 Conanor 433 Concarneau 80
Conda 463 Conde 139 Candom 100 Condomois ibid Conecticut Riv. 477 Conflent 104 Congo 462 Coni 243 Conquet 80 Conserans 102 Constance 190 Constantine in Algiers 454 Constantinople 381 Constaniz 227 Conty 63 Conza 291 Conway 43 Copenhagen 331 Corbach 177 Corbeil 73 Corbie in Picardie 163 Corbie in Westphalia 218 Corduba or Cordova 308 Corea 429 Corfu Isle 200 Cori 420 Coria 315 Corinth 398 Cork 48 Cormantin 458 Cornwall 8 Coromandel 433 Coron 395 Corone or Cyrene 451 Corregio 257 Corsica 298 Cortrick see Courtray Cortona 279 La Corunna 307 Corzola 261 Cos Isle 445 Cosenza 293 Costa-Rica 484 Cotatis 420 Cotwits 208 Couco 453 Courtenay 73 Courtray or Cortrick 126 Coutances 58 Coventrey 30 Cracow 351 Crainburg 197 Crau 109 Crema 260 Cremasco 260 Cremona 254 Cremsir 201 Crespy or Crepy 74 Cressy 63 Crevecoeur 150 Creutznach 182 Crim 407 Crimski 407 Croatia 36 Cronstdt 401 Croya 36 Crossen 201 Cuao 493 Cuba 484 Culembach 212 Culemburg 180 Culm 354 Culmigeria 353 Cuma 289 Cumberland 37 Cumberland Isles 55 Curdistan 424 Curland 357 Cus or Chaux 454 Cusco 492 Custrin 238 Cylongo 461 Cylongotia 461 Cyprus 444 Czaslaw 201 D. Dagka Isle 346 Daghestan 420, 424 Dalaca Isle 470 Dalem 144 Dalecarlia 341 Dalia 343 Dalmatia 260, 378 Dam 157 Damascus 416 Damba 463 Dambea 460 Damiata 450 Damoclea 456 Damot 460 Damvillera 142 Danga 456 Dankali 460 Dantry 27 Dantzick 354 Danube Riv. 17, 159, 374 Daouri 427 Darga 456 Darha 455 Darien Riv. Darmstadt 177 Dassen-Eylant 470 Daventer See Deventer St. David's 42 Dauphine 112 Dax Acqs or Acque 100 Decan 431, 433 Decamperga 431 Decise 87 Degibeldara 469 De Diego Roys Isle 444 Delawere Riv. 477 Delft 150 Delly 432 Delmenhorst 217, 234 Delos or Sdelle Isle 445 Delphos or Castri 392 Denbigh 3 Dembo 462 Dendermond 131 St. Denis 72 Denmark 324 Denmark-New 505 Deptford 17 Derbent 424 Derre See London-Derry Dessaw 208 Deva 402 Deventer 155 Devils Isle 496 Devises 12 Devonshire 9 Deux-Pont 216 Deynse 131 Diarbeck 418 Dinse 141 Die or Dye 113 Diemen's Country 497 Diepholt 217 Dieppe 57 Dieren 153 Diest 133 Diet of the Empire 165 Diethmold 217 Dietz 178 Digamo Isle 444 Digne 109 Dijon 89 Dijonnois ibid. Dillemberg 178 Dinant in France 78 Dinant in the Netherlands 145 Dingi 461 Dinowlocz 352 Dinse 141 Diois 113 Discoveries of the North-East and North-West Countries 498 Ditmarsh 328 Diu 432 Divandurum Isle 444 Dixmude or Dixmuyd 131 St. Dizier 66 Doera 469 Dockum 156 Doelsburgh 154 Dol in the Franche Comte 92 Dol in Bretagne 78 Dolcigno or Dulcigno 379 Dombes Brinc. 91 St. Domingo 475 Dominica Isle 487 Donawert 193 Dorado Dorat 96 Dorchester in Dorsetshire 10 Dorchester in Oxfordshire 18 Dorchester in New-Engl. 477 Dordrecht See Dort Dormans 66 Dornick See Tournay Dorsetshire 10 Dorsten 203 Dort 150 Dortmund 219 Dos Picos Isle 470 Dos Porcos Isle 496 Douarnenes 80 Dover 16 Doulens 63 Dourdan 73 Doway 127 Down 48 Drent 154 Dresden 207 Dreux 83 Droitwich 30 Drontheim 337 Ducale 455 Dublin 48 Duderstadt 176 Duersterde Wyck 153 Duglas 44 Duisburg 219 Dunblain 46 Dundee 46 Dune 46 Dunfrise 46 Dunkel 46 Dunkirk 127 Dunstable 20 Durazzo 386 Durbuy 142 Duren 219 Durham 35 Durlach 188 Dusseldorp 219 Du-Witzland 497 Duyveland Isle 152 Dwina 361 E. EBeremberg Castle 182 Ebernberg Castle 192 Echternach 142 Ecclesiastical State 261 Edam 151 Edenburg 46 Egra 201 Egregia 427 Eichfeld 175 Eimbeck 211 Eindloven 136 Eisenach 244 Eisenartz 196 Eisleben 209 Ekelford 330 Elba 300 Elbing 353 Elburg 153 Electorate of Cologne 168 Electorate of Mentz 174 Electorate of Brandenberg 202 Electorate of Trier 172 Eleusis 392 Elfeld 175 St. Elizabeth Isle 470 Elizabeth-Town in Virgin 482 Elne 105 Elnbogen 201 Elsenore 332 Ely 25 Embaco 464 Embden 216 Embrick 218 Empoli 279 Enchuysen 151 England New 476 Engers 173 Enghien 139 Enguedine 402 Ens 195 Enseca 464 Entarhen 458 Entervaux 110 Eperies 365 Epernay 73 Ephesus 414 Epirus 387 Erfort 208 Erivan 424 Erpach 180 Etrif 454 Erzerum 418 Eschingen 191 Eschwege 176 Esens 216 Eslingen 189 Espernay 66 Esquib 491 Essab 451 Essck 372 Essex 23 Estampes 88 Estaples 64 Esterabat 424 St. Estienne 95 Estoitland 500 Estonia 345 Etbahat 454 Ethamma 451 Eu 57 Evesham 30 Everding 195 Evora 321 Euphrates Riv. 413 Eureux 60
Europe 1 St Eustace 484 Exeter 9 Eyenberg 177 Esenach or Isenach 209 F FAlaise 59 Falmouth 8 Falster Isl. 334 Famagusta Isl. 445 Farewell Cape. 500 Faro 322 Farsa 387 387 Farsistan 424 Fasculon 460 Fatagar ibid Fawey 8 Faza 420 St Fe de Antequara 490 St Fe de Bogota ibid Feflis 420 Feldk rk 198 Feltrii 256 Fmeren Isl. 334 Ferdene 213 Fere 61 Fermo 272 Ferrara 275 Ferrarese 275 La Ferté Bernard 84 La Fercé Milon 75 La Ferté Seneterre 82 Fessollet 279 Feures 95 Fez 454 Figeac 98 Filleck 367 Fimes 66 Final 248, 257 Fingen 439 Finland 344 Finmarck 338 Five Churches 370 Five Lingo 157 Flanders 122, 125 Flanders-French 126 Flanders-Spanish 128 Flanders-Dutch 131 La Fleche 84 Flensburg 350 Flieland Isl. 151 Flintshire 43 Florence 277 Florida 482 Flushng 152 Foja 415 Foix 104 Fokien 429 Foligno 272 Fontainbleau 73 Fontenay 117 For or Elfr 421 Forcalquier 110 Foretz 94 Fort-Louis 185 Formosa Isl. 429 Fortach 422 Fort St George: See St George Fort Fossano 243 Fossigny 232 Fougeres 77 France 51 France New 475 Franche Compte 92 Franchemon 145 Frankfort on the Main 179 Frankfort on the Oder 203 Frankendal 182 Franks 52 Francnia 178 Franker 156 Frankenburg 177 Frascati 269 Fravenfeld 230 Fredricksburgh 332 Frederisburgh in Guinea 458 Free Provinees 229 Freisingen 193 Freitzlar 175 Frejus 110 Freyburg 208 Freysack 196 Freystadt 159 Friburg in Swiss 224 Friburg in Germany 187 Friedburg 177 Friderickstadt 330 Friezland 122, 156 Friezland West 151 Fritsa 427 Friuli Prov. 256 Fuld 177 Fulham 22 Funen Isle 333 Fungeno 463 Furnos 127 Furstemberg 190 G GAeta 289 Gago 459 Gans 230 Galacz 268 Galata 383 Galconda 431 Galilee 417 St Gall 227 Gallia Nova 483 Gallia Cisalpina 52 Gallia Transalpina Ibid Gallicia 307 Gallipoli 383 Gallway 48 Gambea 457 Gangara 458 Ganges Riv. 17; 430 Gao 443 Gaoga 456 Gap 114 Gapencois Ibd Garet 454 Garnsey Isl. 50 Gascoigne 99 Gastren 230 Gatinois 73, 88 Gauls 52 Gaunt, Gant or Ghent 128 Gaza 418 Geg Baill 91 Gelderland 153 Geldre 154 Gelnhausen 178 Gemblours 133 Genata 457 Genehoa Ibid Genemuyden 155 Geneva 228, 232 Gngenback 188 Gennep 218 Genoa 247 St George de la Mina 458 St George Isl. 487 St George Fort in New England 477 St George Fort in the East In∣dies 437 Georgia 419 Gerberoy 74 Gerbes Isl. 451, 472 Gergeau 83 Gergency 297 St Germain en Laye 72 Germany 158 Gertruydenberg 140 Gesek 171 Gestricia 341 Gevaudan 106 Gex 91, 100 Geysmar 176 Gezula 455 Ghent: See Gaunt Ghir Desert 456 St Ghislan 139 Ghoram Dsert 456 Gibralter 369 Gien 88 Giessen 177 Gigeri 454 Gilolo 441 Gingi 433 Girgio 450 Giribuma 463 Girona 313 Gisburgh 35 Gisors 57 Gittengen 210 Glamorganshire 41 Glandeve 110 Glaris 223 Glaso 46 Glshittn 368 Gat 201 Gloster 18 Glogaw 201 Gluckstadt 328 Gnesne 353 Goa 433 Goch 218 Goga Isl. 425 Goiama 460 Golconda 433, 434 Goldingen 357 Gemorra or Comorra 470 Goodmanchester 26 Gor-arada 431 Gorcum 150 Gorecht 157 Goree Isl. 150 Gorgue Isl. 425 Goritia 197 Gorlitz 208 Gortz or Goritz 197 Goslar 211 Gotha 209 Gothland 343 Gothland Isl. 346 Gottingen 246 Gottorp 330 Goude 150 Gouletta 452 Gournay 57 Goy 462 Gracz 195 Gradisca 377 Grado 259 Graisivaudan 113 Gran 369 Granada in Spain 310 Granada in America 491 Granson 230 Grantham 28 Granville 58 Granzeo 469 Grasse 110 Grave 136 Graveling 127 Gray 92 Greece 384 Greenland 501 Green ock 46 Greenwich 17 Grenoble 113 Grison League 226 Groeningen 157 Groenland 500 Groll 154 Grotkaw 202 Grubenhagen 211 Gruninghen 264 Grussinri 427 Guadalajara 484 Guadix 310 Gualeor 431 Guanto 439 Guatimala 484 Guaxaca 484 Guben 208 Guber 457 Guebec 476 Guiechou 429 Guelderland 122 Guerande 77 Guergola Desert 455 Guet 96 Guaques 467 Guinne 96 Guilford 15 Giala 457 Guina 458 Guinea New 505 Guines 64 Guise 61 Gulielhaman 422 Gurgistan 420 Gurk 196 Gustrow 215 Guyana 491 Guzrat 432 H HAdeland 213 Hademar 178 Hadrslben 329 Haerlem 164 Haguenaw 185 Hague 149 Haaan 431 Hailbrun 189 Hainault 137 Hainault Spanish 139 Halberstadt 204 Halem 133 Halicarnassus 414 Halifax 34 Hall in Tyrol 198 Hall in Saxony 208 Halland 343 Halle 139 Ham in France 62 Ham in Germany 220 Hamba 464 Hamburg 213
Hamelen 210 Hamiltown 46 Hammar 337 Hampton-Court 22 Hampshire 13 Hamsted 22 Hanaw 178 Hannebon 81 Hannover 210 Hannuye 133 Hanseatick Society 165 Harburg 212 Harderwick 153 Haresgol 453 Harfleur 57 Harlebeck 131 Harlem 149 Harlem Meer Ibid Harlingen 156 Harwich 23 Hasselt 145 Hatfield 21 Hattem 154 Havelburg 203 Haverford-west 42 Havre de Grace 57 Haymburg 195 Hea 455 Hecla Mount 500 Heglingenstadt 176 Heidelburg 181 St. Helena Isle 471 Helmont 136 Helmstadt 211 Helsingia 341 Hedlvoet-sluce 150 Hemerder-Waert Isle Ibid Hendowni 431 Henly 19 Henry Town in Virgin. 482 Herat 425 Herborn 178 Hercynian Wood 191 Hereford 33 Herentals 14 Hermanos 439 Hermanstadt 401 Hermanstein 173 Hernn-Grundt 367 Hertford 21 Heldin 125 Hessen 176 Heusden 150 Hexham 39 Heyden 328 Hidelsheim 211 Hieres 110 Hirchfeld 177 Hispaniola 484 Hochstadt 193 La Hogue 59 Hohendwill Castle 189 Hohensteim 209 Hohenrechspurg 191 Hohenzolleren Ibid Hola 500 Holach 180 Holeca 460 Holland and Zealand 122 Holland and W. Friesland 148 Holland New 506 Hollen 337 Holstein 327 Hemburg 176 Honan 429 Honduras 484 Honfleur 58 Hoorn 15 Horan 453 Horn County 136 Horn in Germany 217 Hunslaerdyke 150 Hoxter 218 Hoye 217 Hradische 201 Hudsons River 477 Hull 34 Hulst 132 Humanhar 453 Hungary 363 Hungerford 14 Huningen 186 Hunsingo 157 Huntingdon 26 Huquang 145 Hurepoix 73 Huy 156 Hyeres Isles 112 I JAcatra 442 Jaen 309 Jaffa or Joppa 417 Jagendorf 202 St Jago de la Vega 487 Jagos 461 Jagoy 427 Jakuti Ibid Jala 443 Jaloffi 457 Jamaica 485 Jamaisoit 439 Jamba 431 Jambi 443 Jamen 422 St James in Barbadoes 489 James Town in Virginia 482 James River 483 Japatra 442 Japon 439 Jarnac 86 Jaroslaw 361 Jasque 425 Java 442 Jawer 202 Jayeza 378 Iburg 217 Jdstein or Idenstein 178 Idumaea 417 St. Jean de Angely 99 St. Jean de Laune 89 St. Jean de Luz 100 St. Jean Pied de Port 101 St. Jean Maurienne 232 Jemptia 341 Jena 209 Jenupar 431 Jersey Isl. 50 Jersey New 476 Jerusalem 417 Jesselmere 431 Jesso-Land 505 Jesualna 431 Jetsegen 439 Jetsenge ibid Jever 217 Jeute 454 Iglaw 201 Ihor 436 Ilantz 226 Ilha Doynaque 470 Ilheos 495 India or Indostan 430 Indus or Sinde Riv. ibid Ingolstadt 192 Inhambana 467 Inhamior ibid Innernesse 46 Ingria 345 Inspruck 198 Jocelin 78 St John Maurienne 232 Joinville 67 Jordan Riv 415, 417 Jortan 442 Joselin or Gosselin 85 Ipres 126 Ipswich 24 Ireland 47 Ischia 300 Isenburg 178 Island 500 Islands of Asia 439, 444 Islands of the Archipelago 445 Islands of Africa 470 Islands of America 484, 496 Islands of Turkey 407 Isle Dieu 88 Isle of France 69 Isleben: See Eisleben Isne 190 Isphaham 424 Issoudun 87 Issus 415 Isthmus of Corinth 399 Istria 259 Italy 238 Ituraea 417 Ivanosera Lake 359 Jucatan 484 Judaea: See Palestine Judenburg 196 Judoigne 133 St. Ives 26 Juhora 361 Jukustanke 428 Juliers 219 Juncalaon 436 Jupia 427 Ivrea 245 Jutland 326 K KAkares 431 Kakinscoia 427 Kalisch 352 Kalisco 484 Kallenburg 335 Kanduana 431 Kargapol 361 Kars 418 Karstia 197 Kedderminster 31 Kempen 171 Kempten 190 Kendal 37 Kent 16 Ketonghtan 482 Kexholm 344 Keyserswers 171 Keyser-lautern 182 Kiamnan 429 Kiangsi Ibid Kiburgh 222 Kiel 328 Kilan 244 Kildare 48 Kilia Nova 399 Kilkenny 48 Kimbolton 20 Kin Tartars 427 Kiovia Prov. 355, 361 Kiow 355 Kirman 425 Klarem 428 Kloppenburg 216 Klundert 150 Koelsfeldt 216 Koge 333 Kol 427 Kolding 330 Komara 370 Koningsberg 367 Koning-gratz 201 Koninsberg 354 Koningseck 191 Koningstein 175 Krana 361 Kremp 328 Krembs 195 Krim or Crem 407 Kromoritz 202 Kuncho 460 Kustrin 203 L LAbez 453 Labourd 100 Lacedemon: See Misitra Lack or Bishops Lack 197 Lucrumongo 461 Ladoga Lake 359 Lagny 70 Lahor 432 Laland Island 334 Lambale 78 Lambeth 15 Lamon 468 Lampadousa Isle 472 Lancaster 36 Lanciano 294 Landaffe 41 Landaw 185 Landen 133 Landerneau 79 Landes 100 Landrecie 139 Landshut 192 Landsperg 203 Langeland Island 334 Langione 436 Langres 67 Languedoc 102 Lanschet 352 Lao 436 Laodicea or Laudichia 416 Laon 75 Laonnois Ibid Laotung 429 Lapins Isles 466, 496 Lapland 343 Larissa 387 Laristan 424 Larta Ibid Lassa 427 Lavagna 249 Laval 84 Lavamnynd 196 Lavaur 103 Laubach 197 Laugingen 193 Launston 8 Lavoro Prov. 287 Lauragais 104 Lausanna 221
Lauterach 283 Lawben 196 Lawenburg 214 St Laurence Riv. 75 Leccia 295 Lecha Isl. 425 Leeds 33 Leghorn 280 Leicester 27 Lemberg, see Leopol Lemgow 217 Lempta 456 Lemwick 330 Leningen 183 Leon 317 Leopol 355 Leopolstadt 194 Lepanto 391, 392 Lirida 312 Lerins Islands 112 Lescar 101 Lessins 139 Leverpool 36 Leutchtenberg 19 Leutkirk 190 Leutsch 365 Leuwarden 156 Leuwe 133 Lewenstein 180 Lewes 16 Leyden 149 Leypsick 207 Lhan Vyllyn 43 Libeten 367 Libolo 465 Libourne 97 Libya 447 Lima 492 Lichfield 31 Liebaw 208 Lieg or Luyck 144 Liesse 75 Lignitz 22 Limburg Nether. 122, 144 Limbug Germ. 206 Limerick 49 Limoges 98 Limosa Isle 472 Limosin 98 Limpurg 180 Lincoln 28 Lindaw 190 Lingen 218 Linlithgow 46 Lintz 195 Lions, see Lyons Lipari 299 Lippe or Liepstadt 217 Lippesburg 218 Lipsick, see Leypsick Lire 135 Lisben 221 Lisieux, see Lysicux Lisle 126 Lismor 49 Lithuania 356 Litlandia 345 Livadia 387 Livonia 345 St. Lizier of Conscrans 102 Loang 461 Locarn 230 Loches 86 Lodeve 106 Lodi 253 Lhon 179 Lohr 175 Lombes 101 London 21 London-Derry 49 Longueville 57 Long-Island 478 Longo 461 Loo 153 Lootz 145 Loppia 361 Loretto 273 Lorraine 116 Lotoch 427 Loudun 85 Lovando Island 464 Lovando St Paulo 464 Lovangiri 461 Lovango ibid Lovestein Castle 150 Louvain 133 Low-Countries 119 Loyre Riv. 51 Lubeck 214 Luben 208 Lublin 352 Lucayos Isles 484 Lucca 280 Lucern 222 Lucomoria 361 Lucon or Lusson 85 Lugo 307 Lulenburgh 154 Lunden in Denm. 328 Lunden in Swed. 343 Lunenburgh 211 Lure 92 Lusatia 207 Lusignan 85 Lusson Island 440 Lutzk 355 Luxmburg 122, 141 Luyck, see Liege Lydda 418 Lyme 10 Lynne 25 Lyonnois 94 Lyons or Lins 94 Lysieux 57 M MAbeuge 139 Macaeo 429 Macedonia 384 Mache 427 Machecou 77 Machres 437 Macoco 463 Madagascar Isle 471 Madera Isle 472 Madian 421 Madraspatam 437 Madrebousa Isl. 458 Madrid 315 Madura 433 Maesia 379 Maelstrand 338 Maeris Lake 449 Maesyck 145 Maestricht 136 Magdeburg 204 Magellanica 492 Maget Isle 470 Magliano 272 Magny 74 Mago Isle 471 Magog 427 Maidenhead 14 Maidston 17 Majemberg 230 Majorca 317 Majuco 464 Majumba 461 Makeran 425 Maillezais 85 Main Riv. 180 Maine Prov. 84 Malabar 433 Malaca in India 436 Malaca in Africa 469 Malaga 310 Malaguce 458 Maldive Isles 443 Maldon 23 Male-Atollon Isle 444 Molemba 467 Malembas 462 Malicut Isle 444 Malmsbury 12 St. Malo 77 Malos-Madou Isl. 444 Malta Isl. 472 Malvasia 396 Malvay 431 Man Isle 44 Manar 434 Manchester 36 Mandinga 457 Manfredonia 294 Manheim 181 Manilla Isl. 440 Manosque 111 Mans 84 Mansa 431 Mansfeldt 209 Mansfeild, Eng. Notting. 29 Mat 74 Mantois 73 Manua 257 Maraguan 45 Maras 43 Mras, or Maonias Marathon 39 Marca d'Ancona 272 Marche 96 Mardike 127 Mariana 299 Marienburg in the Nether∣lands 139 Marienburg in Poland 354 Mariendal 180 Marignan 255 St Marino 278 Marksburg 196 Marlborough 12 Maro 248 Marone 491 Marpurg 176 Marsa 452 Marsal 117 Marseille 109 Martaban 435 St Martha in America 491 Martegues Isl 112 Martinico Isle 484 Martland 483 Mary-land 479 St Maries ibid Mascalat 422 Mascaregne Isle 471 Masconnois 91 Mascon ibid Masfa 422 Maskouskichoroda 428 Masovia 352 Massa 280, 289 Massern 245 Massingan 464 Masulipatan 433 Matagaxa 455 Mataman 465 Materam 442 St Matthew Isl 471 St Maurice Isl ibid Maurienne 232 Mauss-thurn 175 Mayauxima 439 Mayenne 84 Mazara 297 Mazieres 67 Mazua Isle 470 Mislaw 356 Meaco 439 Meaux 68 Mecca 421 Mechlin or Malines 134 Mechoacan 484 Medelpadia 341 Mecklnburg 214 Medina 422 Medenblick 151 Megara 391 Megadoxo 469 Megiez 402 Me ssen 207 Meldorp 328 Meifi 292 Meliapur 437 Melinda 468 Melii 457 Mlon-Mowbray 27 Melun 73 Memingen 190 M nde 106 Mnene 126 Mentz 174 Mecat 431 Meppen 216 Meran 198 Mergentheim 180 Mertoneth 43 Mermoutier 96 Mersburg 208 Mesal 433 Mesopotomia: See Diarbeck Mesrata 451 Messina 297 Metelino 445 Metling 197 Mets 118 Meurs 219 Mexico, 483 Mexico, New Ibid. Meyn or Meyen 173 St. Michaels Mount 59 St. Michael in Lorrain. 118 St. Michael in Barbados 489 Middelfare 334 Middleburg. 152 Middlesex 21 Milan 251 Miletus 415
Miliane 453 Milladou Isle 444 Millaud 107 Millembach 402 Milnau 98 Mindano Isl. 440 Minden 217 Mindra Isl. 441 Mingrelia or Colchis 419 Miorca 318 Minori 292 Minski 356 Mirande 99 Mirandola 257 Mirda 431 Mirecourt 117 Mirepoix 104 Msitra 396 Misnia 207 Mittaw 357 Moab 421 Mocango 461 Mocha 422 Modena 256 Modon 395 Mogul's Empire 430 Mohatz 371 Moluco Isle 444 Moldavia 403 Molise 294 Moluccos 441 Mombaza 468 Mon Isl. 334 Monaco 248 Mondonedo 307 Mondovi 243 Mongallo 468 Mongatz 369 Mongulk 427 Monoemugi 467 Monomtapa Emp. 466 Monmouth 41 Mons 137 Monserrat 487 Monsterberg 202 Monstiers or Monstiers 232 Monstreull 63 Mont S. Angelo 294 Mont Jura 93 Mont St Michael 59 Montargis 73, 88 Montaubon 106 Montbeliard 92, 186 Montbrisn 94 Mont-Didier 62 Monte-Cassino 290 Montefiasone 270 Montelimar 116 Montereau Faut Yenne 68 Montferrat 249 Montfort in Bretagne 78 Monfort l' Amaury 74 Mntfort in Tyrol 198 Montfort in Holland 153 Montgomery 43 Mont-Hulin 64 Mont-Marano 271 Mont de Marsan 100 Montmedy 142 Montmeillan 232 Montmorency 72 Montoire 85 Montpellier 106 Montreal 279 Mont-Royal 206 Mont Verde 291 Morat 230 Moravia 200 Morea 393, 394 Morlaix 79 Morocco 454, 455 Mortaigne 84 Mortain 59 Mortaa 254 Mosambique 468 Moscovy 358 Moscow 362 Mostogan 453 Mosul 419 Moulins 95 Mouremanskois 361 Mucisiaw 356 Mulhausen in Alsatia 186 Mulhausen in Anhalt 209 Mulhausen in Switz. 229 Mulheim 171 Multan 431 Munich or Munchen 191 Munickendam 151 Munster 276 Munsterberg 202 Murcia 310 Muydn 168 N NAerden 151 Namur 142 Nancy 117 Nanquin 419 Nantes 77 Nantwich 32 Naples in Italy 281, 287 Naples or Sichem in Palestine 417 Napoli di Romania 397, 398 Napoli in Barbary 452 Narbonne 105 Narenza 378 Narni 272 Narsingar 433 Narva 343 Narvalabas 435 Naskaw 334 Nassaw 177 Nassaw-Fort in Guinea 458 Navarin 395, 396 Navarre 313 Navarre Lower 100 Navigations round the World 493 Navigations to the North-East and North West 498 Naugasac 439 Naugracur 431 Naumburg 208 Naxia Isle 408 Nazareth 418 Nabbio 299 Ncbal 427 Negropout 407 Ngros Countries 456 Nemours 73 Nepi 270 Nerea 460 Nericia 341 Nermoutier Isle 88 Nesle 62 Netherlands 119 Netherlands-United 146 Neuburg 192 Nevers 87 Neuf-Chastel 142 Newis a Mevis Isle 486 Neuwchatel 228 New Andalusia 490 New Britain 500 Newark 29 Newbury 14 Newcastle 38 New Denmark 505 New England 476 New-found-land 485 New France: See Canada New Guinea 505 Newhausel 268 Now Holland 506 New Jersey 478 Newmark 402 Newmarket 24 Neumarckt 192 Newport in Netherl. 130 New North-Wales 505 Newsol 367 Newstadt in Austria 195 Newstadt in Denm. 334 New York 477 New Zealand 506 Nicarague 484 Nicaria Isle 445 Nice in Italy 247 Nice in Bithrnia 414 St Nicholas in Lorrain 117 Nicosia 445 Nicopolis 381 Nicoping 334 Niger Riv. 17, 457 Nigritia 456 Nile Riv. 17, 448, 449 Nileadoux 444 Nimeamaye 464 Nimes 106 Nimeguen 154 Ninove 131 Nions 114 Niphon 439 Nissa 380 Nivernois 87 Niville 133 Nocera 292 Nogent le Rotrou 83 Nogent le Roy Ibid Nola 289 Noli 248 Nombre de Dios 491 Nombre de Jesus 492 Nona 260 Norburg Fort 334 Norden 216 Norfolk 24 Nordlingen 189 Normandy 56 Northampton 26 Northumberland 38 North Wales New 505 Norumbega 476 Norway 335 Norwich 24 Noto 297 Notteburg 346 Nottingham 29 Novara 253 Nova Zembla 501 Novigrad 369 Novogorod Veliki 361 Novogorod Nisi Ibid Novogrodek 356 Noyon 75 Nubia 456 Nueva Biscaya 484 Numidia, see Biledulgerids Nuremberg 179 Nusco 291 Nuys 171 Nyburg 334 Nyland 344 O OAndo 464 Ohdora 361 Obenberg Castle 192 Ober-Laubach 197 Ober-Wesel 173 Oby Riv. 17, 359, 426 Ocango 463 Occollo 464 Ockzakow 399 Odensee 333 Odia 436 Oeland Island 346 Oelse 202 Oesel Isl. 346 Oeting 189 Offenburg 188 Ogara 460 Ohnspach 180 Oibo Isle 468 Okeham 28 Okehampton 9 Old Ampt 157 Oldenburgh in Germ. 217, 334 Oldenburg in Denmark 329 Oldenzil 155 Oldeslo 329 Oleron 101 Oleron Isl. 88 Oliveros 494 Olkars 460 Olmutz 201 Ombria 271 St Omer 124 Omlands 157 Ommenburg 175 Onega Lake 359 Oneglia 247 Oostburgh 132 Oostduyveland 152 Oostende 129 Oostmersum 155 Oppelen 202 Orange Princ. 111 Orbitello 280 Orchies 126 Orente 307 Oresand Isle 152 Origuella 311 Orinoque Riv. 491, 496 Oristagni 298 Orleannois 82 Orleans Ibid Orleans Isl. 484 Ormus Isl. 425 Orsoy 219 Orta 270 Oruba 484 Orvieto 271 Orvietano Ibid Osnabruck 217 Ossero Isle 261 Ostergoe 156 Osterwick 204 Ostia 269 Ostiacks 427 Ostrogothia 343 Otranto 295 Ottersberg 213 Ottersdorp Ibid
Oudenard 130 Overflackee Isl. 150 Overissel 122, 154 Ouessant, see Ushant Oviedo 306 Owar 370 Oxford 18 P PAcem 443 Paderborn 217 Padipola Isle 444 Padouano 255 Padua 255 Pahan 435 St Palais 100 Palamban 443 Palatinate of the Rhine 180 Palencia 317 Palermo 296 Palestine 416 Palestrina 269, 273 Pamijor 483 Pamiers 104 Pampeluna 314 Panama 491 Panarucan 442 Pango 463 Panuco 484 Papaume 135 St Papoul 104 Papos 441 Para 495 Paragay 494 Paragoya Isle 441 Parayba 495 Paria 490, 494 Paris 69 Paros or Pario 445 Parma 255 Partaspa 431 Pasarvan 442 Pascatir 427 Paslay 46 Passaw 192 Pata 468 Patagons 492 Patana 436 Pathmos or Palmosa Isl. 445 Patna 431 Patras 394 Patti 297 Pau 101 St Paul in Artois 101 St Paul de Leon 79 St Paul-troix-Chateaux 116 Paria 248, 253 Peables 46 Peel 44 Pegahorda 361 Pegu 435 Peina 211 Pekin 429 Peloponnesus, see Morea Pelsen 201 Pemba 468 Pembo 463 Pembrook 42 Pengab 431 Peninsula within Ganges 432 Peninsula without Ganges 434 Penon de Velez 454 Penrith 38 Pensilvania 478 Pentegoet 476 Pera 435 Perche 83 Pergamus 414 Perigueux 99 Perigord ibid Pernambuco 495 Perniski 361 Peronne 62 Perouse 115 Perpignan 105 Persees 430 Persia 422 Perth 47 Perthois 66 Peru 491 Perugino 271 Perusia ibid Pesaro 274 Pest 369 Peterborough 27 Petershanfen 190 Peter-Waradin 372 St Peters Patrimony 270 Petrinia 376 Petrowina 378 Pettaw 196 Petzora 361 Pezenas 106 Pfirt 186 Pfortzheim 188 Pharsalus 387 Philadelphia in Pensilv. 479 Philippe-Ville 139 Philippine Fort 131 Philippine Islands 440 Philipsburg 183 Phocaea, see Foja Phoenicia 416 Pico Isl. 471 Picardy 61 Piedmont 242 St Pietro Isle 470 Pignerol 114, 244 Piombino 280 Piri 461 Pisa 279 Piscataway 478 Pistoia 278 Pitan 431 Placentia in Italy 250 Placentia in Spain 315 Plawen 208 Plescow 361 Plimouth 9 Plimouth New 477 Ploen 329 Ploczkow 353 Pludentz 198 Po River 17, 238 Podolia 355 Poictou 85 Poitiers 85 Poissy 74 Pola 260 Polachia 352 Polar Countries 497 Poland 347 Polesia 356 Polesino 255 Policastro 292 Poligny 92 Poloczk 356 Pombo 464 Pomerania 204 St. Pons de Tomiers 105 Pont-a-Mouson 118 Pont-de-l' Arche 57 Pont-de-Esprit 107 Pontfract 34 Pont l' Evesque 58 Ponthieu 63 Pontoise 74 Pont-Orson 59 Pont-Rieux 78 Pont-sur-Seine 66 Pont-sur-Yonne 68 Ponzio 300 Popayan 490 Porentru 228 Port-Louis 81 Port-Royal 476 Porto Belo 490 Porto Rico Isle 484 Porto Seguro 495 Porto Sancto Isle 472 Portsmouth 13 Portugal 319 Posega 377 Posna 352 Posnania ibid Poulisdou Isle 444 Pou Molucco Isle Ibid Powhatan 483 Pozen 199 Pozzuolo 288 Prague 200 Prato 279 Premontre 75 Presburg 365 Preveza 387 Primeira Isle 470 Princes Isl. 471 Provence 108 Provins 68 Prurop 431 Prussia 353 Ptolemais 416 Puggantz 367 Purmerent 151 Puy 107 Pyrenaean Mountains 102 Pyri 461 Pyramids of Aegypt 449 Q QUamcheu 429 Quangsi Ibid Quantimala Mount 484 Quantung 429 Quatenis Isl. 484 Quebec 475 Queda 435 Queidlinburg 204, 211 Queimados Isl. 496 Queney 455 St. Quentin 69 Quercy 98 Querquence Isl. 452 Quesnoy 139 Queso 439 Quexmer 431 Quiam Riv. 428 Quilmanca 469 Quilmanci Riv. 468 Quiloa 468 Quimper, or Quimper Corentin 80 Quimperlay Ibid. Quingendo 464 Quinque Ecclesiae, or Funff∣kirken 370 Quintin 78 St Quintin 62 Quiviqueyna Isle 496 Quirimba Islands 468 Quisama 464 Quito 491 R RAab 370 Radnor 40 Raga Rodas 431 Ragusa 403, 404 Rahia Bargant 431 Rahia Mug Ibid. Rahia Rana Ibid. Raia Nupal 427 Rakelsburg 196 Rama 418 Rammekins 152 Rapallo 249 Rapollo 292 Ratibor 202 Ratisbone 192 Ratezburg 214 Rava 352 Ravenna 274 Ravensberg in Westphal 220 Ravenspurg in Swabia 190 Ravestein in the Netherl. 136 Ravestein in Westphal. 220 Raxaltin 451 Re Island 88 Reading 14 Recklenhausen 171 Rees 218 Regio 256 Reineck 175, 179 Reinstein 211 Reipolskirk 183 Remirimont 117 St. Remo 248 Remois 66 Remorentin 83 Rennes 76 Rensburg 328 Resbuti 431 Reskow 361 Retel in France 66 Retel Prov. in Africa 455 Retelois 66 Retling 189 Rettimo 409 Rezan 361 Rheims 66 Rhenen 153 Revel 345 Reyos 429 Rheinfelden 191 Rhinberg 170 Rhinfeld Castle 177 Rhine Riv 17, 120, 159 Rhingravestein 183 Rhinthal 229 Rhodes Island 445 Rhosne Riv. 17, 51 Richelieu 85 Richmond in Surrey 15 Richmond in Yorksh 35 Rieti 271 Rieux 104 Riez 108 Riga 345 Rimini 275 Ringstede 333 Rio Grande 495 Rio Janerro ibid Rio de la Hacha 490 Rio de la Plata 17, 494 Riom 96 Ripen 330 Ripon 34 St Riquier 63
Roanno 95 St. Roche Island 470 Roche en Ardenne 142 Rochel 86 Rochefort Ibid. Rochefoucaut 86 Rochester 16 Rocroy 67 Rodemberg 176 Rodes or Rhodez 98 Rodorou 431 Roeles or Reux 139 Roermond 154 Rolduc 144 Romagna or Romandila 274 Romania 381 Romania Minor 397 Rome 262 Romerswael 152 Romney 17 Ronenburg-Castle 178 Rosanegus 460 Rosetta 450 Roschein 186 Roschild 332 Rosienia 357 Rosoy 73 Rossano 293 Rostock 215 Rostow 361 Rotemburg 180 Rotenburg 213, 248 Rotenburg in the Diocess of Spire Roterdam 255 Rotwel in Germ. 191 Rotwel in Switz. 229 Rouen or Roan 56 Rouergue 98 Rovigo 255 Roumois 57 Roussillon 104 Roxa 460 Royston 21 Rudolphsworth 197 Rugen Islands 205, 218 Rumelia 384 Russia-Red 355 Russia White: See Moscovy Rutlandshire 28 Rutzenbuttel 213 Rye 16 Ryssel: See Lisle S SAbella Isle 496 Sabina 272 Sablustan 425 Saccania 397 Sanredam 151 Sagan 202 Sagona 299 Sagra 456 Saguenay 476 Sintes 99 Santonge Ibid. Salamanca 317 Salerno 292 Salins 93 Salique Law 54, 179 Salisbury 12 Sland 154 Salle 454 Saon 109 Salonichi 385 Saltash 8 Saltzburg 193 St. Salvador 484, 495 Saluces 246 Samarchand 427 Samaria 417 Sambal 431 Samogitia 357 Samoiedia 361, 427 Samos Isle 445 Samosata or Schemsat 416 Samsoe Island 334 Samuchi 439 Sandomir 351 Santen 218 Santerre 62 Saragossa 313 Sarburg 174 Sardes 414 Sardinia 297 Sare-Louis 117 Sargans 230 Sargel 453 Sarlat 99 Sarzana 249 Sasdel 361 Sasquahanougk Riv. 488 Sassari 298 Sattalia 415 Savigliano 243 Saumur 84 Savolaxia 345 Savona 248 Savoy 231 Saxenhagen 217 Saxony Upper 206 Saxony Lower 209 Saxony 206 Scala 292 Scandaron: see Alexandria Scandinavia 323 Scardona 260, 378 Scaumburg 217 Schaffhausen 224 Schagen 331 Scham: See Damascus Sauevliet Fort 134 Schemnitz 366 Schenken-Scans 154 Scellenburg Castle 193 Schelling Isle 151 Schermer Ibid. Schesburg 402 Schieuling 150 Schiras 424 Schlestadt 186 Schonen 343 Schoonhoven 150 Schouwen Island 152 Schwaben 187 Schwalback 177 Schwartzburg 209 Schweidnitz 203 Schweinfurt 180 Schwitz 223 Sco Island 445 Sclavonia 377 Scopia 380 Scotland 45 Scotusa 387 Scutari 383 St. S bastian 306 St. Sebastian Isle 496 Sebnico 260 Seckaw 196 Secotan 483 Secumba 467 Sedan 67 Seeland or Zeeland 331 Seez 59 Sefe 461 Segeberg 329 Segedin 366 Segelmesse 455 Segna 377 Segni 270 Segorve 311 Segovia 315 Seissel 91 Selkirk 47 Semendria 380 Semeur 90 Semigallia 357 Send 425 Sendomir: See Sandomir Senef 133 Senega 457 Senez 108 Senigaglia 274 Senlis 74 Senonnois 67 Sens 68 Seregipe 495 Servan or Scrivan 424 Servia 379 Seven-Wolden 156 St. Sever 100 Severia 361 St. Severino 293 Sevil 308 Shaftsbury 10 Shirburn ibid. Shrewsbury 31 Shrewsbury in New Jersey 478 Shropshire 31 Siam in Africa 468 Siam Kingd. in the Indies 435 Siampaa ibid. Siara 495 Siba 431 Siberia 361, 427 Sicambri 53 Sicily 296 Sichem 133 Siderocapsa 386 Sidon or Saide 416 Sienna 280 Sierra Liona 458 Sifano Isle 408 Sigen 178 Sigeth 371 Sigistan 425 Silesia 200 Silistria 381 Simmeren 183 Sinabe 414 Sinae 428 Sinai Mount 421 Sinso 464 Sion 228 Siradia 352 Sirk 118 Sirmisch 371 Sisaken 378 Sisteron 110 Sittia 409 Sleswick 329 Sloot 156 Sluys or Sluce 131 Smaland 343 Smalcald 176 Smolensko 361 Smyrna 414 Sneeck 156 Soconusco 484 Soest 220 Soestdyck 153 Sofola 466 Sohar 422 Soigny 139 Soissonnois 57 Soissons 75 Solms 178 Solomon's Isles 506 Soloturn 225 Solsona 313 Soltwedel 203 Somersetshire 11 Somerton Ibid Sommersdyck 150 Sonodou Isle 444 Sondri 227 Songo 463 Sphia 380 Sor or Soer 333 Sora 290 Soraw 208 Soret 431 Sorrento 288 Sotavento Islands 484 Souadou 444 Soule 101 Sousa or Susa 452 Southampton 13 Southwark 15 Southwell 29 Spa or Spaw 145 Spain 301 Spalatro 260 La Spetia 249 Spire 182 Spiritu Sancto 495 Spitzberg or Greenland 501 Spoleto 271 Stabecoping 334 Stade 212 Staffanger 337 Staffarda 246 Stafford 31 Stagno 404 Stain 195 Stamford 28 Stantz 223 States Island 484, 506 Staveren 157 Steenkirk 139 Steenwick 155 Steinfurt 218 Stendal 203 Stetin 205 Steyer 195 Stochaes Isles 112 Stockholm 341 Stocton 35 Stolberg 209 Stormar 328 Stortford 21 Stralen 154 Straelsund 205 Strasburg 184 Stratford 30 Stratford-Stony 20 Straubingen 192 Stutgard 189 Stuhl-Weissenburg 370 Suachom 470 Suchuen 429
Styria Dutchy 195 Sudermania 341 Suez 450 Sully 82 Sulmona 294 Sultzbach 192 Sumatra Isl. 443 Sunda or Sindae Isles Ibid Sundel Isl. 444 Sunderburg Fort 334 Sundo 463 Suntra 176 Surinam 491 Surat 432 Surgut 428 Surrey 15 Sursee 222 Sus in Biledulgerid 455 Sus in Morocco ibid Susa in Italy 246 Susa in Barbary 454 Susa or Sus in Persia 422 Susdal 361 Sussex 15 Sutri 270 Swartesluce 155 Sweden or Swedeland 339 Swedish Lapland 343 Sweren 214 Switzerland 220 Swoll 155 Swynburgh 334 Sybald de Vord. Isles 496 Syr Castle 432 Syracuse 297 Syria 415, 416 T TAban 442 Tabor 201 Tabasco 484 Tabocorso 458 Tabristan 424 Tacoravi 458 Tafelet 455 Taffanapatan 443 Tamara 495 Tanajor 433 Tanchut 428 Tandaya Isle 441 Tangermund 203 Tangier 454 Tarentaise 232 Tarbe 101 Tarento 295 Targakrinsk 427 Tarragon 312 Tarsus 415 Tarta 431 Tartary Great 425 Tartary Lesser 404 Tartary Moscovian 427 Tartas 100 Tassiana Isle 425 Tasso Isl. 408 Tassy 403 Tavasthia 345 Tavestock 9 Taunton 11 Taxegaxima 439 Tebesca 453 Techort 455 Tecklenburg 217 Tedla 455 Tegaza 456 Tegorarin 455 Tegeste 483 Tejago Ibid Tekin 399 Temeswaer 368 Tnassrim 435 Tenbigh 42 Ten-Commonalties 226 Tenda 247 Tenedos Islands 445 Teneriff Islands 471 Tenez 453 Terceras Isles 471 Ter-Goes 152 Tergowisch 403 Toroannes 125 Terra Australis incognita 506 Terra Labrador 500 Terra di Jesso 505 Terra de Fuogo 506 Terra Firma 490 Terracena 269 Terra Nova 485 Terskogi 361 Ter-Vere 152 Tesmesne 454 Tesset 455 Tewksbury 18 Texel Isl. 151 Thebes 390 Thessaly 386 Theeves Island 440 Tbeonville 141 Thiers 96 Thibet 427, 428 St. Thomas Isl. 471 Thorda 402 Thorn 354 Thurgow 229 Thuringen 207 Tiberias 418 Tiel 154 Tienen or Tilmnt 133 Tierache 61 Tigre 460 Tigris Riv. 413 Tilladou-Matis 444 Tillen 367 Tilligt 216 Timerais 84 Timor Isl. 441 Tipra 434 Tirano 227 Tiverton 9 Tivoli 269 Tlasala 484 Tobago Isl. 489 Toboul 427 Tocat 415 Tockay 368 Togda 455 Toledo 316 Tolen 152 Tombut 457 Tonga 467 Tongres 145 Tongusi 427 Tonnerre 68 Tonnon 233 Tonsa 439 Topesham 9 Toraca 467 Torbay 9 Torcello 259 Torgaw 207 Torigni 58 Tornus or Tournus 91 Tortona 254 Tortora Isl. 496 Tortosa 312 Tortuga 484 Toscany 277 Totness 9 Toul 118 Toulon or Thoulon 110 Toulon sur Arroux 91 Touraine 86 Tournay or Dornick 126 Tours 86 Trabezond 415 Trajanopoli 384 Traitsa Dobro 427 Traitsa Irdekula Ibid Traitsa Kalmuch Ibid Traitsa Sem Ibid Traitsa Sudbiligenia Ibid Trani 295 Transchin 365 Transiana 435 Transilvania 400 Treguier 79 Tremesen 454 Trent 198 Trevico 292 Trevisano 256 Treviso 256 Trevoux 92 Triangulo Isl. 484 Tricastin 116 Triers 172 Trieste 197 Trinquemalo 443 Tripolis in Barbary 451 Tripolis in Natolia 416 Tripolis in Phoenicia Ibid Tristan Isl. 471 Trivento 294 Troki 357 Tropez 110 Troppaw 202 Troy 414 Troyes 65 Truro 8 Truxillo 491 St. Truyen 145 Tsiompa 436 Tuban 442 Tucman 494 Tubingen 189 Tulle 99 Tuln 195 Tunderens 330 Tunis 452 Tunquin Kingd. 436 Turin 242 Turcomania 418 Turkey in Asia 413 Turkey in Europe 373 Turquestan 427 Touy 307 Twere 361 Twente 154 Tyana 415 Tyre or Sur 416 Tyrnaw 365 Tyrol County 197 Tzas van Ghendt 129 V VAbres 98 Vaison 111 Valachia 403 Valage County 67 Valais 228 Valenciennes 138 Valencia 311 St. Valery 57 Valeta 472 Valkenberg 144 Valladolid 314 Valognes 59 Valois Dutchy 74 Valteline 227 Van 418 Vannes 80 Vaudemont 117 Vaudois 248 Vaudrevange 117, 118 Vauge Bal Ibid Uberlingen 190 Udessa 431 Udino 257 Vecht 216 Vegia Isl. 261 Veilly 75 St. Veit 196 Velas Isles 440 Velay 107 Velitri 269 Veluwe 153 Venaissin 111 Vence 110 Vendome 85 Vendomois Ibid Venezuola 491 Venice 258, 257 Venloo 154 Veragua 484 Verapaz Ibid Verceil 245 Verd Cape Isle 471 Verdemberg 230 Verdun in Chaalonnois 90 Verdun in Lorrain 118 Vermandois 62 Vernon 60 Verona 260 Veronese Ibid Versailles 71 Verua 246 Vervins 62 Vesoul 92 Vesprin or Weisbrun 371 Vesuvius Mount 290 Vexin-Francois 74 Vianden 142 Vianen 150 Viareggio 281 Vicentino 256 Vicenza Ibid Vich 313 Vico 289 Victoria 306 Vienna in Austria 194 Vienne in Dauph. 115 Viennois Ibd Viglevano 254 Villach 196 Villa-Franca 248 Ville-Franche 95, 98 Ville-Franche de Conflnt 105 Ville-Franche de Rovergue 107 Ville-Neuve St. George 73 Vilna 356 Vilvoerden 133
St Vincent in Brasil 495 St. Vincent Isle 490 Vintimiglia 248 Vire 58 Virginia 479 Visapor 433 St. Vit 142 Viterbo 270 Vitrey 77 Vitrey-le-Francois 66 Vivarais 107 Viviers 107 Ulcuma 458 Ulm 189 Ultzen 212 Underwald 223 Ungwar 365 Unna 219 Voigtland 207 Volga Riv. 359 Volhinia 155, 355 Voltonhoven 154 Volly 457 Vollin Isl 346 Volo 387 Volterra 280 Voyages from Europe to the East-Indies 437 Voyages to the Southern parts of the Globe 493 Voyages to find the North-East and North-Wst passages 498 Uppingham 28 Upland 341 Upsal 342 Urbino 274 Urbs 452 Urgel or La Ceu d'Urgel 313 Urvaig 494 Uri 222 Usbech-Giagathia 427 Usedom 206 Ushant Isl 80 Ustiong 361 Utrecht 152 Uxbridge 22 Uzes 107 W. WAchines 361 Wachtendonk 153 Wadebridge 8 Wageningen 153 Wagerland 328 Walachia 403 Walcourt 143 Walchren Isl 152 Waldburg 191 Waldeck 177 Wales 40 Wallingford 14 Wallisserland 228 Walsingham 24 Walstrode 212 Waradin Great 369 Warburg 218 Warda Isl. 338 Wardhus ibid Ware 21 Warneton 126 Warsaw 353 Warwick in England 30 Warwych in Flanders 126 Waterford 49 Waterland 151 Ween Isl 334 Weert 136 Weilberg 178 Weimar 209 Weisbaden 175 Weisford 49 Weissel Riv. 348 Weissemburg 402 Weissemburg, See Stuhl. Weis∣semburg Weissenburg 185 Weisbaden 175 Weisbrun, See Vesprin Wells 11 Wels 195 Wensyssel 331 Werle 171 Wermeland 343 Werotin 361 Wertheim 180 Wesel 218 Wesep 151 Westergoe 156 Westlar 177 Westmania 341 Westminster 22 Westmorland 37 Westphalia 15 Westrogothland 43 Wetcraw 177 Whales, their Natural Histo∣ry 502 —the manner of catching them 503 Whites Country 449 Wialka 361 W burg 331 Wickham 20 Wiering Isle 151 Wigan 36 Wight Isl 13 Wihitz 376 Wildungen 177 Willemstadt 150 Wilna, See Vilna Wilster 328 Wilton 12 Wiltshire Ib. Winchester 13 Windburn 10 Windishmarch 197 Windsor 14 Winoxberg 127 Winschoten 157 Wintcheim 180 Wisbaden 175, 178 Wisby 346 Wismar 215 Witebsko 356 Witmund 217 Wittemburg 207 Witzen-hausen 176 Wolaw 202 Wolfenbuttel 210 Wolfersdyke Isl 152 Wolgast 240 Wollin 206 Wolodi 361 Wologdo Ibid Worcester 30 Worcum 150, 156 Wormer 151 Worms 182, 183 Woodstock 19 Wurtenburg 188 Wurtzburg 179 X. XAlisco 484 Xamo 427 Xaintonge, see Saintonge Xantung 429 Xansi Ibid Xanthus Riv. 415 Xaoa 460 Xensi 429 Xeriffes 454, 455 Xicoco 439 Ximo 439 Xoa Kingd. 469 Xyras, see Schiras Y. YAguas Gulph 434 Yarmouth in Norfolk 24 Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight (13 Ydausquerit 455 Yedoch Riv. 453 Yerach 419 Ynmeto Isle 484 Yoghal 49 Los Yopes Riv. 484 York 33 York New 477 York Riv. 481 Ypres 126 Yatata 455 Ysendriek 131 Yvetot 57 Yviza 318 Yunnan 429 Z. ZAara 455 Zaassebes 402 Zab Riv. 418 Zabaco Isle 496 Zabern 185 Zacatecai 484 Waradin Peter 372 Zachet 469 Zachonia 396 Zacotecas 484 Zagrab 378 Zalagh Mount 454 Zanagha Kingd. 456 Zanega Desert 456 Zanfara Kingd. 458 Zanguebar 468 Zante Isle 261 Zaogan Mount 452 Zaora 451 Zara 260 Zarhon Mount 454 Zarnata 397 Zatmar 366 Zavalhahordo 361 Zealand 132 Zeb 455 Zebe 460 Zeben 401 Zebu Isle 441 Zedeia 467 Zeeland 151, 169 Zeeland New 506 Zeigenheim 176 Zeilla 469 Zela 415 Zell 212 Zembro 467 Zeng 377 Zerbi Isl 451 Zerbst 208 Zeth 460 Zezag Kingd. 458 Zigida 456 Zimbaoes 467 Zemba 467 Zimbavel 467 Zirbad 434 Zirknitz 197 Zirczee 152 Zirig ro 460 Ziz. Riv. 453 Zilucz 356 Zlucz 356 Znaim 201 Zocci Lake 460 Zockzow 403 Zocotora Isle 470 Zolnock 366 Zons 171 Zou Desert 456 Zuenziga Kingd. Ibid Zug 223 Zuria 419 Zurich 221 Zutphen 122, 13, 154 Zuyderzee 151 Zweybrucken Or Deux-Ponts, 182, 183 Zwickow 208 Zwoll or Swoll 155 Zygoth 371 Zype 151
A TABLE of COINS with their Common Value in English Money, reckoning Sterling Silver at 5 s. 2 d. the Ounce. French Money.   Sterling lb. Sh. P. THE Crown containing 60 Solz 0 4 6 The Livre, or Florin containing 20 Solz 0 1 6 The Pistol, or Lewis d'Or, containing 12 Livres 0 17 6 The Lewis d'Or value 7 Livres 10 Solz 0 11 0 The Crown of Gold, value 5 Livres 14 Solz 0 8 6 Of Flanders and the other Spanish Provinces of the Netherlands. The Pound Flemish contains 20 Schellings, whereof 38 to 40 were formerly allowed to the Pound Sterling. The Schelling contains 12 Groots, 2 Groots make 1 Stuyver, and 20 Stuyvers 1 Guilder, which is in Value about 0 1 10 The Patacoon is two Guilders 0 3 8 The Ducatoon is three Guilders, but usually valued at 0 5 9 The Schelling, value six Stuyvers 0 0 6 ⅔ Of Holland and the other Provinces of the States. The Ducatoon three Guilders three Stuyvers 0 5 9 The Piece of three Guilders 0 5 6 The Rix Dollar contains fifty Stuyvers 0 4 7 The Dollar contains thirty Stuyvers 0 2 9 The Guilder contains twenty Stuyvers 0 1 10 The Schelling is six Stuyvers 0 0 6 ⅔ This is reckon'd at the usual Course of Exchange formerly, but at this present it is so alter'd, that the Guilder comes to two Shillings and two Pence Sterling. The Chief Coins of Germany, Italy, Spain, &c. The Florin of Francfort 0 4 11 ½ The Dollar of Hamburg 0 3 2 The Dollar of Lunenburg 0 4 2 The Polish Guilder of sixty Creutzners 0 4 2 The Dollar of Riga 0 4 8 The sixty Creutzner Piece of Basil 0 4 2 The Dollar of Brisgan 0 4 2 The Teaston of Bern, Friburg and Lucerne 0 1 4 The Teaston of Mantua, Ferrara, Milan, Savoy and Castile 0 1 4 The Teaston of Portugal, Lorrain, Geneva and Montferrat 0 1 6 The Teaston of Spain and Navarre 0 1 8 The Spanish Ryall 0 0 7 The Italian Ryal 0 0 7 The Pieces of Eight Ryals of Spain 0 4 8 The Pieces of Eight made at Mexico 0 4 8 The Milree of Portugal 0 6 0 The Chequeen of Venice 0 9 6 The Spanish Ducat 0 4 6 The Ducat of Valentia 0 4 10 —Of Saragossa 0 4 11 —Of Barcelona 0 5 4 —Of Lisbon 0 4 6 The Portugueze Cruzate 0 4 0 The Venetian Ducat 0 4 6 The Ducat at Rome 0 5 6 The Ducat of Messina 0 4 9 The Ducat of Polermo 0 4 10 The Ducat of Naples 0 4 2 The Crown of Gold at Genoua 0 5 5 The Crown of Gold at Milan 0 5 5 The Crown at Florence 0 5 1 The Piece of Eight at Leghorn 0 4 10 The Ducatoon of Lucca 0 4 6
BOOKS lately Printed for, and to be Sold by ABELL SWAL and T. CHILD, at the Unicorn in St. Paul's Church-Yard. CAMDEN's BRITTANIA, newly Translated into English, with large Ad∣ditions and Improvements. Published by Edmund Gibson of Queen's Colledge in Ox∣ford. Folio. A New History of Ecclesiastical Writers, containing an Account of the Lives and Writings of the Primi∣tive Fathers; a judicious Abridgment of their Works; the various Editions and Censures determining the Genuine and Spurious; together with a Judgment up∣on their Style and Doctrine. Also a Compendious History of the Councils. Six small Volumes in Folio, containing the Authors that Flourish'd in the Eight first Centuries of Christianity; and a Dissertation con∣cerning the Authors of the Books of the Old and New Testament. ☞ The Seventh Volume of Monsieur du Pin's Eccle∣siastical History, containing an Account of the Contro∣versies in Religion; an Abridgment of the Writings of Ecclesiastical Authors, and a History of all Affairs Transacted in the Church during the Ninth Century; carefully Translated from the Original Printed at Paris. Is now Published in English. Folio. Theatrum Scotioe: A Description of the Principal Cities and Towns, Castles, Palaces and Colleges, as also of the Remains of many ancient Places in the Kingdom of Scotland; with Prospects of every Place curiously Engraven in Copper as large as the Sheet. By John Sleezer, Surveyor of their Majesty's Stores and Magazines. Folio. Titi Lucretii Cari de Rerum Natura Libri sex, quibus interpretationem & Notas addidit Thomas Creech, Colleg. Omn. Anim. Oxon. Socius. Accessit etiam Index Vocabulorum omnium. Octavo. C. Julii Caesaris quae Extant, Interpretatione & notis illustravit Joan. Goduinus in usum Delphini. Octavo. Juxa Edit. Parisiens. Graecae Grammatieae Institutio Compendiaria. In usum. Scholarum. Written by Dr. Wettenhall now Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross. Octavo. Medulla Historiae Anglicanae: Being a Comprehensive History of the Lives and Reigns of the Monarchs of England, from the Time of Julius Caesar to the Reign of Their Majesties King William and Queen Mary. The Fourth Edition; wherein is added a Table of the Kings, and an Alphabetical Index of the Principal Matters. Octavo. The History of Britain, that Part especially now called England; From its first Traditional Beginning, to the Norman Conquest. Collected out of the ancientest and best Authors by John Milton. Octavo. De Quatuor Summis Imperiis: An Historical Account of the Four Chief Monarchies or Empires of the World, viz. The Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman, continued down to the Reign of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. Being a short Relation of the most conside∣rable Occurrences that have happened in the World from Noah's Flood to the Year of our Lord 1620. Written in Latin by John Sleidan; newly English'd. Octavo. The Evangelical History: Or the Life of our Blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, comprehensively and plainly re∣lated, with practical Inferences and Discourses there∣upon. Adorn'd with with Copper Cutts. Octavo. The Courtiers Oracle, or the Art of Prudence; Written in Spanish by Baltazar Gracian, and now done into English. Octavo. Terence's Comedies made English, with his Life and some Remarks; by several Hands. Octavo. BOOKS now in the Press. P. Ovidii Metamorphosen, Lib. XV. Interpreta∣tione & Notis illustrat. etiam{que} Indice vocabu∣lor. omnium accommodat. ad methodum Editionis in usum Delphini, at multo Correct. & Emendat. Octavo. P. Virgilii Maronis Opera, Notis & Interpretatione illustravit Carol. Ruaeus jussu Regis ad usum Del∣phini. (Juxta Editionem Parisiens.) Lond. Octavo. Printed on a very fair Character and fine Paper, will be Publish'd in a few Weeks. Antiquities of Rome: Or a Description of the City, Religion, Government, Magistrates, Laws, Customs, Military Discipline, Arms, Triumphs, Magnificent Buildings, Sports, Exercises, &c. of the ancient Romans. To which is premised a short Abstract of the History of the Original, Growth and Decay of that Common∣wealth: Written by Basil Kennet, of Corp. Christi Coll. Oxon. Illustrated with many Sculptures En∣graven in Copper. Octavo. A Compleat History of England: Or the Lives of all the Kings to his Present Majesty. Containing a Faith∣ful Relation of all Affairs of State, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, with Observations, antient Inscriptions, Coins and Medals, for Illustration thereof; collected from the most Authentick Authors and Original Pa∣pers, by several Hands. Two Volumes in Folio. Pro∣posed for Subscription at Forty Shillings. Dr. Henry Hammond's Paraphrase on the Psalms and Proverbs. Folio. An Universal English Dictionary, explaining all difficult English Words, Antient and Modern: And the Terms used in all Sciences and Arts; together with the Etymology of Words, and the Invention of Things. Collected from the most Esteemed Authors Antient and Modern, and made much more compleat and exact than any hitherto Extant. By several Per∣sons particularly Learned in the Sciencs they under∣take to speak of. The whole digested into Alphabe∣tical Order, will be contained in one Volume in Folio, which will be Published in Michaelmas Term. THE END.
