u76 99827506 31926
An universal prayer for all which regards Salvation. I Beleive in you, O my God, streng∣then my belief; I hope in you, secure my hope; I love you, encrease my love: I repent that I have sinn'd against you, augment my repen∣tance. I adore you as my first principle, I desire you as my last end; I thank you as my perpetual benefactor, & I invoke you as my Soveraign pro∣tector. Uouchsafe O my God, to regulate me by your wisdom, to bridle me by your Justice, to comfort me by your compassion, and to protect me by your power. I consecrate to you my thoughts my words, my actions, and my suf∣ferings; that for the future I may think of you, may speak of you,
may act by you, and may suffer for you. Make my will, O Lord conform∣able always, and in every thing, to your most holy will. I beg that you may illuminate my understanding, may enflame my will, may purify my body, and may sanctify my Soul. Animate me, O my God, to ex∣piate my past offences, to overcome my future temptations, to correct my predominant Passion, and to practise vertues proper to my state. Fill my heart with affection for your goodness, with aversion to my Imperfections, with zeal for my neighbour, and with contempt for the world. Put me in mind, O Lord, to be submissive to my Superiors, chari∣table to my Inferiors, faithfull to my friends, and indulgēt to my enemys. Assist me to subdue sensuality by mortification, covetousness by alms,
anger by mildness, and tepidity by fervour. Render me prudent, O Lord, in undertakings, constant in dangers, patient in adversity, and humble in prosperity. Let me never forget to Joyn at∣tention to my prayers, temperance to my meals, exactness to my em∣ployments, and steadiness to my re∣solutions. Inspire in me, O Lord, the care of keeping always an upright consci∣ence, a modest behaviour, an edifi∣ing conversation, and a regular con∣duct. That I may incessantly apply my self to overcome nature, to second grace, to observe the Law, and to merit Salvation. Discover to me, O Lord, the meanness of the world, and the greatness of Heaven, the shortness of Time, and the length of Eternity. Make me prepare for Death, fear
your Judgment, avoid Hell, and lastly gain Heaven. Thro' the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. St. GERMAIN Printed and Sold by William Weston, Printer, and Stationerto, the King's most Excel∣ent Majesty, for his Houshold and Chappel.
