v389 12619925 64495
A RELATION OF THE Great Success THE KING OF PORTUGAL'S Army had upon the Spaniards, the 29th of May (Engl. stile) 1663. By Authority. LONDON, Printed by Alice Warren, for William Garret, 1663.
A Copy of a LETTER Which the Conde de Ville Flor Ge∣neral of the Portugues Army wrote to his Majesty of Portugal, giving him an account of the Success in the Battel, immediately after the gaining it. BY a Letter of this instant, I gave account no your Majesty how the Enemy rose from their Camp, retiring themselves, and I endeavoured to follow them, with an in∣tent
to give them Battel, putting my self be∣fore them: I directed my march to Estre∣mos, where I overtook them the 8th current; the Enemie had possessed a much higher Post, which is called the Canal, a League from the Town: I resolved to set upon them, gaining the Post which they posses∣sed; and disposing my self to this, I gave the command of the Vangard to Alphonso Turtoda de Mendoza, who was also assisted by the General of the Artillery, Dn. Luis de Meses, and the second line to the Conde de la Torre; in the right wing of which, he was assisted by the General of the Horse, Denis de Mello de Castro, accompanied with the Maestro de campo General, Pedro Jacques de Megellanez; and the Leiutenant Generals, Dn. Juan de Silva, Dn. Manoel de Atayde, and Luis de Acosta, and the Commis∣saries General Juan de Ocrato, Mattias de A∣cunia, and Duarte Fernandez Lobo. In the left wing of the Horse, the General of it, Mael Freire de Andrada, with his Leiutenant Ge∣neral, Dn. Martin de Ribera, and the Com∣missaries General Gomes Freire, and Dn
Antonio Maldonado. And drawing from the first line of the Vangard the Regi∣ment of the Maestro de Camp Juan Turtado de Mendosa, and a Regiment of English (who in the whole occasion did wonders) supported by some squadrons of Horse, I commanded to attaque the Posts of the Enemie, keeping the men in the same order of Battle. The Enemie easily extended their Posts, and resolved to possess others higher and harder to come to; and because when the first were taken, it was very hot, and the men much wearied with their March, it appeared conveni∣ent not to go forward, without taking some rest, so I made a halt; and seeing that the Enemy began to retire at the same time, I resolved that the Generals of the Horse Denis de Mello, and Manoel Freire should set upon the Reregard, which was in a plain, and that the lines of the Army should march in favour of the Horse, and do that which the occasion should suggest to them. The General of Horse Denis de Mello ordered the attaque with all the
Horse, leaving only on the left wing five Squadrons to the disposition of the Com∣missary General Matitas de Acunia, the Ground being very rough, and the Ene∣mies Horse making a stand on the other side. Marching so towards the Enemy▪ there began a fight of much dispute, re∣ceiving and giving of each side very hot charges. Our Word was Our Lady of the Conception, who assisted us in all parts; for at the same time that the Generals of the Horse assaulted the Enemy by the left wing, Al∣phonso Tuntado de Mendosa with the first line of the Vangard, accompanied with the General of the Artillery Dn Luis de Mendeses, got up by the most difficult part of the Mountain, to assault the Re∣giments of Foot that were upon it, and with obstinate charges, drove them off from both the heights. After which came forward the Conde de la Torre with the five Battaillons; that were under the Com∣missary Mattias de Acunia, and all of them driving at the dislodging the Enemy, did, (as was to be hoped of such persons)
The Superiour and Inferiour Officers doing wonders never seen before; and in the same manner the Souldiers, who with admirable constancy persevered in the ut∣termost danger, till they had got the bet∣ter. In all that the Foot did, the Maestro de Campo General, the Conte de Shomberg did assist with great application and care, dis∣posing of what was necessaire with the Serjeant Major di Battaglia Juan de Silva de Sosa, and with the Lieutenaut Generals Ant. Tavares de Pina, Pedro Cravero de Cam∣pos, and Fernand Martines de Saicas (who died upon the place) applying present re∣medies to all that was necessarie. Our small number of Horse fought ob∣stinately with great numbers of the Ene∣mies, which the General Denis de Mello endeavoured to break with much valour & address, under the protection, of a Reserve which was commanded by the Lieutenant General Dn. Manoel de Atoide, who with the Commissary Juan de Acrato did won∣ders, by the firmness with which he stood, with a great loss of men on both
sides, as could not but be in so hot an oc∣casion. In fine, after many hours of con∣tinued fighting, the Lines advancing, and now there being no more Foot to help them, but the Regiment of the Maestro de Camp Bernardo de Miranda Henriques, whom I kept for the last remedie, our Horse be∣ing in great danger, and much shattered by the many wounded, after so many hours fight, and some Souldiers having retired themselves weary of it, I sent to succour them by the said Regiment, who with the Serjeant Major De Battaglia, Diego Gomes de Figuiredo, whom I had kept by me to apply the succour where there was most need of it; so that arriving and beginning to give the charge, the Enemie quickly began to be undeceived, after to retire themselves, and presently to flye, extending themselves by that part of the Campagne (as I had done in the rest) which they had possessed with their Foot and Artillery, with which the Victorie presently declared it self on your Majesties side, our Officers and Soldi∣ers having performed in this occasion most
valiant actions, and never seen be∣fore. Here came off hurt on our side, the Ge∣neral Manoel Freire de Andrada, after he had killed many Castilians, the Mrs. de Cam∣po Simon de Sosa, Manoel de Sosa de Castro, Diego de Suares de Almeira was killed. All the Souldiers, and some Officers which were made Prisoners at the Sur∣render of Euora, and which the Enemy was carrying away in their Armie, got their li∣bertie. The loss of the Enemie is such, as your Majesty may see by the list of the Prisoners of greatest account, which goes along with this. The number is incredi∣ble, which for the brevitie of this time, I cannot yet know; and besides the loss of their Men and Horse, there were gained also 3000. Carts, 8000. Beasts loaden with Munition, 12 pieces of Canon, and 2 other Pieces, 16000 Oxen, 13 Coaches, many Ovens of Bread; Dn Juan's Standard, his Secretaria, and all the Furniture of his Chamber, so that he, and the D. de. Sn Ger∣man, hardly escaped with their persons.
Your Majesty ought to command that thanks be given to all the Officers of the Army, for their valour shewed in this oc∣casion, which was greater than can be re∣presented to your Majesty, or that ordina∣rily happens; and let not your Majestie think this expression an hyperbole, for it is a pure truth, for having overcome an Army, with it's total rout, disposed into Posts, which were every one a Fortifica∣tion. Of which Victory I give your Majesty the Parabien, at whose feet I hope to see quickly the Monarchie of Castille surren∣dred up. El Conde de Villa Flor.
The List of the Prisoners of Note which have hitherto been discovered. THe Marquis de Eliche Conde Duque de St. Lucar. The Maestre de Campo Dn. Juan Henriques. The Maestre de Campo Conde Fiasco. The Maestre de Campe Dn. Angelo de Gusman, Son to the Duke de Medina de las Torres. The Coronel Conde de Bull. The Maestre de Campo Don Esteuan de An∣gulo. The Maestre de Campo Conde de Escalante. The Coronel Conde de Ferezit. Phelippe de Laguet, Captain of Horse. The General Gaspe Martines. The Conde Ludovico Trosqui, Captain of the Guards. Don Antonio Montenegro, Commissary Ge∣neral of the Horse. Don Juan de Novales, Commissary Gene∣ral of the Forces of Milan. The Commissary General Valador.
Don Garcia Sarmiento, Captain of Horse, and Secretary to the Duke de St. German. The Serjeant Major Don Felippe Roxe Don Alvaro de Guinones. Don Francisco de Escouar, Captain of the Regiment of Portugal Don Thomas Puccino. Don Angelo Carafa. Don Ascanio Dodino. Don Gustaccio Gramaccio. Don Alvaro Montilo. Don Algelo Cosinano. 13. Captains of Foot. 9. More reformed. 15. Engines. 8. More Reformed. 20. Ser∣jeants. 7. Quartermasters. 3000. Com∣mon Souldiers. 2500. More, hurt. And there are many more, but for the hast with which the Courior parts, they cannot be specified; and of the other particulars, there will be a more ample Relation. FINIS.
