14926 99844902 9756
THE Education of children in learning: Declared by the Dignitie, Vtilitie, and Method thereof. Meete to be knowne, and practi∣sed aswell of Parents as Schoolemaisters. Teach a childe in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart from it. Prou. 22 6. Fathers prouoke not your children to wrath, but bring them vp in learning and infor∣mation of the Lord. Ephes. 6. 4. The rod and correction giue wisedome, but a child set at libertie maketh his mother ashamed. Prou▪ 29. 15. Foolishnes is tied in the heart of a child, but the rod of discipline shall driue it away. Prou. 22. 15. Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Iohn Porter and Thomas Gubbin. 1588.
To the right Worshipfull Maister VVilliam Hawkins Esquier, Maior of the Towne of Plimmouth, and to the worship∣full companie his Brethren the Maisters of the Towne. W. K. wisheth pro∣speritie in this life, and euerlasting ioy in the life to come. ALthough it bee a matter of it selfe most euident, that the dis∣cipline and vertuous bringing vp of children in good learning is the very foundation and groundworke of all good in e∣uery estate aswell priuate as publike: yet such is the corruption and iniquitie of our time, that most men are found very carelesse and slacke to do their duetie therein; yea there want not those that in flat termes affirme it to bee superfluous, insomuch that they can do well enough (in their owne iudgement) without it. For what parents in these daies haue not more care to prouide wealth for their children, than wisedome? More care to leaue thē lands and liuings in this world,
than to bequeath them that knowledge whereby they may enioy the right vse and fruites of these temporall blessings, & be directed the right way to that glorious inheritance layd vp for Gods children in heauen? The common practise of ma∣ny parents proueth this complaynt to bee true, and the priuate talke of some defendeth this pra∣ctise to be good. VVherefore hauing regard of my duetie in this behalfe, and being assured of your VVorships courtesie in accepting my good will, to withdraw my neighbours and countrie men from this prophane opinion and pernicious custome, and to allure them vnto a better and more godly consideration, I haue thought good in your VVorships name to set before them, first (as it were) in a Preface the excellent dignitie of this Discipline, then the vtilitie, and afterwards in the rest of the booke a Treatise of the easiest and playnest way to be vsed therein. Your Worships euer to commaund in the Lord, W.K.
¶ To the Gentle Reader. I Haue sent you, deere friend, a little pamphlet, of the education of Children in learning, which is no phantasticall nor idle toy, but a verie profitable matter, and most necessarie to be vrged in this se∣cure and licentious generation. Wherein I confesse, that many learned men haue alreadie bestowed verie exquisit and commendable labours: yet for that we haue endeuoured not only to fill vp the emptie roome with such members as wanted, and to sepatate that which seemed superflu∣ous; but also to new cast the whole in another mould, and to bring it to another forme, breefe, and easie: I suppose that it will seeme altogether a strange and a new Booke. Furthermore, where as the charge of teaching apperteineth but onely to a fewe of the lear∣neder sort, namely, to Scholemaysters, we to make the argument more popular, haue prefixed a necessarie ex∣hortation for all other sort of people, setting foorth the dignitie and vtilitie of the matter, with such holie and ancient Histories, with such plaine and sensible reasons, as may teach the vnlearned with some de∣light, and not be tedious to those that are learned. Agayne, to satisfye in some part the expectation of the learned, we haue handled the method more me∣thodically, and adorned the whole worke with some
wittie, Greeke, and Latin sentences, englishing the same neuertheles in the Margent for the behoofe of the vnlearned. And as generally both sorts may per∣aduenture thinke that the reading of it will be worth the labour, so almost euery one of each sort in parti∣cular, may finde somewhat for his purpose. For who is it of what state or degree soeuer, vpon whom God hath not cast the care and charge, either of teaching, or of learning, or else of causing o∣thers to be taught and learned? Farewell, VV. K.
¶ Io. Sw. In Authorem ogdoastichon. STurmius, & Ramus, Freigius, Manutius, Ascham, Quicquid ad hoc spectans explicuere genus: Kempus id omne tenet, bene collocat, edocet Anglos, Sedulitate simul, cum pietate pari. Lectio, sedulitas, labor, hac placuere peritis, Nec dabit inuidia tam pia cura locum. Sin tamen immerito Theonino dente petare, Perfer, ab hijs melius te meruisse memor. Abrahami Wislaki de libri argumento Epigramma. QVantus honos, Parnasse, tuus, reuerentia quanta, Quos, Helicon, fructus, praemia quanta feras, Fronte canit prima modulato pectine musa, Doctisoni reserans limina trina fori. Tùm quid amor patrius peragat doctus{que} magister Depingit, Satyros & procul esse iubet. Quo mandat puer ore cibos, quae mansa remandat, Quas tenero primas deligat vngue rosas: Et quî firmato procurrat poplite tandem, Perfacili rectum tramite, pandit, iter. Vel tibi, Thersites mordax, quod carpere possis, Hîc nihilest, nihilest hic tibi liuor iners. Semper enim Charites sequitur (licet obstrepat vsque Stentorio Momus gutture) verus honos.
VLtimus & victor, telum contorsit Acestes, Vltimaque & victrix, vestra Thalia canit. Namque exsors tibi restat honos: rex magno Olympi Sic vult, inuidit nec bonus Eurytion. Hen. Whit. in operis & Authoris laudem. QVe spinosa diu & rigidis fuit horrida saxis, Plana fit ad musas, te duce, Kempe, Via.
AA ❧ The Dignitie of Schooling. IT is common with heathen men, when they will commend their Nobilitie, to deriue their pedegree from their Gods, giuing vs to vnderstand thereby, that if there were any excellencie in them, it came not of themselues, but God was the author thereof. Therefore O most noble discipline, from whence doest thou fetch thy pedegree▪ What parentage hast thou▪ Who is the author of thine ex∣cellencie▪ Who should it be els but the father of lights, euenIam. 1. 17. the author of euery good and perfect gift▪ He at the beginning created man in perfect righteousnesse and holinesse, & beauti∣fied him with all singular knowledge. He also after the fall of man gaue his only Sonne to restore him agayne, and or∣dayned meanes and wayes, by the which not onely his ser∣uants might be made partakers of this restauration, but ge∣nerally all men might leade an honest and ciuill life here in this present world; the doore and enterance wherevnto is this discipline and schooling which I speake of. But what are the men vpon whom this gift was first bestowed▪ Who enter∣tayned it▪ Who hath been a practiser and furtherer thereof▪ Surely if wee search the Schooles of all ages and all places, we shall finde that from time to time they were men of great renowne, great honour and vertue. Therefore, that we may the more orderly view their traces throughout these schooles, first let vs enter into the olde schoole of Gods people, which3. Schooles. we will call the schoole of the Hebrewes: secondly, let vs step aside into the schoole of the Gentiles, which wee may call the
schoole of humanitie: thirdly, we will come néere to our owne schoole, comprehending in it the schoole of Christianitie. In the first schoole therefore, though Adam be conteyned,1 The schoole of the He∣brewes. who no doubt did his duetie in teaching his children: yet for that we finde no euidence thereof in writing, wee will passe by him and come to his sonne Seth, a very godly and learned schoolemaister, as I may terme him. For besides that it is re∣corded, that in his daies men began to worship God, and toGen. 4. 26. Lib. 1. cap. 3. call vpon his name, Iosephus witnesseth that he was a sin∣gular man, giuen to the studie of wisedome, and taught the same to his Nephewes, and they agayne to their posteritie, in ye which was Enoch that walked with God, prophecying and teaching the old world, as appeareth by the testimonie of Iude, and at length was taken vp into heauen aliue. Moreo∣uer,Iude. vers. 14. the same Iosephus writeth, that when they vnderstoode that the world should bee twice destroyed, once with water, and agayne with fire, they engraued their learning in two pillers; the one of bricke, the other of stone, that if the bricke piller should be dasht in peeces with the flood, the stone piller might remayne; and if the stone piller should bee consumed with the fire, the bricke piller might remayne to teach men this ancient knowledge. Then both before and likewise after the flood, Noe is chronicled for a famous Doctor of righte∣ousnesse1. Pet. 4. 19. 20 2. Pet. 2. 5. and godly knowledge, not only by the holy Ghost, but also by prophane men. For whereas Socrates affirmeth,Plato in Phi∣lebo. that learning being the gift of the Gods, was by Prome∣theus the repayrer of mankind after the flood fet out of hea∣uen and brought vnto men, in very trueth it must bee vnder∣stood of Noe, who was the author of this reparation. Ano∣therGen. 18. 19. most reuerend teacher in this schoole was Abraham, of whom GOD himselfe testifieth, that he taught his children and familie the way of the Lord. Who also, is both for lear∣ning and teaching commended by Iosephus and Berosus.Lib. 1. 8. The like is to be vnderstood of Abrahams posteritie, as Isa∣ack, Iacob, and the rest, which wee will passe ouer together with Melchisedec that auncient Priest, seeing there is no
mention made of their teaching. Thus wee haue in this schoole, Seth, Enoch, Noe, and Abraham, foure most aun∣cient Patriarkes of blessed memorie, celebrated by name to be Doctors and maisters, besides many others vnnamed. But what? Some will say, touching their bookes wee heare yet nothing, nothing of writing, nothing of reading. No doubt these ages were adorned with such heroicall spi∣rits and golden wittes, that they did conceiue and keepe in minde without the helpe of letters a great deale better than the ages following could do: so that their letterlesse and vn∣written doctrine did bring that fruite and commoditie, which ours doth now being written. Howbeit, by Iosephus report, we see that they had the vse of letters euen before the flood, wherewith these two pillers were engrauen, as two famous bookes set forth to all the world. But behold, the next renow∣med Doctor in this schoole commeth forth with his pen and inke, and writeth the lawes and precepts of the liuing God, with diuers histories full of noble examples, conteyning the doctrine of all diuine and humane matters. I meane Moses, who also propounded and interpreted this doctrine to a great multitude of people, and by the commaundement of God ordeyned a continuall order of Priestes, and promised a succession of Prophets that should bee teachers and expoun∣ders of the same, charging withall, all parents and houshol∣dersDeut. 67. to do the like to their children and housholders, as (we see) the Patriarkes before time had done. This Doctor be∣ing brought vp in the King of Egypts Court was euen fromAct. 7. 22. the cradle instructed in learning and wisedome, as also by al likelihood was Aaron the eloquent Priest, his sonnes andExod. 4. 16. & 7. 1. others of the Israelites, though not brought vp in the Court, yet instructed in learning: for that if they had been vnlette∣red, they could not haue serued in that calling, neither had it been to any purpose to write these lawes vnto them. Next was Iosua, an actiue Captaine, and a teacher of the people, who made vnto them many pithie Orations, and di∣uided to euery man the portion of his inheritance: which
thing also required knowledge in the Mathematicall Artes. After him succéeded many Judges and Prophets beautified with learning, as appeareth otherwise, and also by the lear∣ned and Poeticall Song of Debora in the time of the Jud∣ges.Iud. 5. Furthermore we reade, that the holie woman Anna hauing dedicated her child Samuel to the seruice of the Lord,1. Sam. 1. 24. & 2. 18. & 3. 1 so soone as he was wained, committed him to Elie the Judge and Preest to be trained vp in learning: wherefore let Elie be added to the former maisters of teaching. Hitherto we haue had worthy examples of Patriarks, Prophets, Préests, and Judges, that taught Children priuatly at home, and all sorts of persons publikely in the congregation. Now Scho∣lers increase, and Parents being either otherwise busied, or else not sufficiently for this purpose furnished, send their Children to the common Schoole, which, as we reade, was1. Sam. 19. 18. 19. 20. first instituted in Naioth, whereof Samuel the Lords Judge and Prophet was moderator and Maister. Such an hono∣rable man was the first publike Schoolemaister in this Schoole, whose Schollers then, as the Schollers a long time after him were called the Sonnes of the Prophets, be∣cause the benefit of their good instruction, which they recei∣ued of the Prophet their Maister, was estéemed at no lesse price, then the benefit of their begetting and birth which they had of their Parents. Immediatly heerevpon learning be∣gan to flourish, by reason that there were store of Prophets and Preests to teach the same. Of the Prophets two were famous Kings, Dauid, and Salomon, two Diamonds of art and gratious eloquence, which they haue plentifully ex∣pressed in the Psalmes, Prouerbs, Ecclesiastes, and other their workes, but because their hands were occupied with the royall Scepter, they could not also be publike Schoole∣maisters to youth: howbeit, they instructed not onely their housholds priuatly, as Salomon sayth, that he was taughtProu. 4. 1. 2. 3. of his Father, but also the assembly publikely, and therefore Salomon calleth himselfe the Preacher. The other Pro∣phetsEccle. 12. 9. in those dayes were Gad, Nathan, Heman, Elcana,
Ahias, and Iedo: after in the dayes of Roboam, Abias,1. Chr. 29. 29. 1. Chro. 15. 5. 2. Chr. 9. 29. & 13. 22. & 15. 1. 1. King. 16. 1. Asa, and Iehosaphat Kings of Iuda, were Semias, Iddo, Azarias, and Iehu: all the which, besides that they were Maisters of the Schooles and Colledges, wrote also seuerall Bookes (excepting one or two) as is mentioned in the Scrip∣ture. Next vnto these followed Elias and Eliseus Prophets, Iehoiada the Préest, and his Sonne Zacharias a Prophet.Iam. 5. 17. Elias was subiect to such worldly affections as we are, yet by the spirit of God he so subdued them, that he triumphed ouer them in a glorious Chariot ascending, like Enoch, to heauen aliue: but knowing thereof before, he went from place to place with his successor Eliseus, and visited the2. King. 2. 1. 2. 3. &c. Schooles of Gilgal, Bethel, Iericho, and another place beyond Iordan, of the which place, there are fiftie Schol∣lers mentioned. And concerning Eliseus, there is mention2. King. 4. 38. &c. made of an hundred Schollers that were vnder him in Gil∣gal, and of the poore diet wherewith they were susteined. Further, how studious he himselfe was, we may perceiue, in that the Sunamit built a chamber, and furnished it with necessaries of purpose for the Prophet, that he might lodge2. King. 4. 10. &c. and studie there when he trauailed that way, so that he did not intermit his studie, no not in his iourney. Iehoiada be∣sides other Schollers, taught also verie diligently Ioash the2. Chr. 22. 11. 12. & 23. 1. King, euen from his infancie, and holp him to his king∣dome. Which King notwithstanding after the death of Ie∣hoiada, fell to Idolatrie so diuelishly, that for the defense thereof, he murthered Zacharias the Prophet, being the2. Chr. 24. 18. sonne of his great friend and godly Schoolemasster Iehoia∣da. Which I note by the way, partly that parents may see, how good Schoolemaisters haue now and then lewde and vnthriftie Schollers, and partly that Schoolemaisters me∣ditating aforehand with what vnthankefulnes, yea with what malitious crueltie their diligence and good will shall be sometime requited, may the more strongly arme themselues with patience to indure it. From the dayes of this Zacha∣rias, vnto Malachi, we haue sixteene Prophets, verie fa∣mous
for their paines in teaching all sorts of people, both yong and old, by their liuely voyce, whilest they liued, and also by their writing continually, sithence their death, of whome nine, to wit, Ionas, Osee, Esaias, Obadias, Amos, Micheas, Naum, Ioel, and Habacuck, were before the Babylonicall captiuitie: foure, Ieremias, Zophanias, E∣zechiel, and Daniel, in and about the captiuitie. This cap∣tiuitie lasted seauentie yeeres, in the which, as vpon the o∣uerthrowe of the estates both ecclestasticall and ciuill, of ne∣cessitie followed the ruine of the Schooles and Colledges: so doubtlesse the Schooles were repaired againe together with the repairing of the policie and Priesthood. In which renewed estate, God stirred vp the three other Prophets, Haggeus, Zacharias the latter, and Malachi, to occupie the Doctors chaire in ye congregation, and also in the Schooles. To these adde Ezra, beth a Priest, and an excellent Doctor of the Lawe, that obteined great fauour for his nation ofEzra. 7. 1. 2. &c. Nehem. 8. 2. 3. Artaxerxes the King, and by whose industrie the old Testa∣ment was worthely augmented and preserued in writing for all nations: in his time also was Nehemias, a noble Cour∣tier, of great learning and holynes, and a passing good mem∣ber in furthering the seruice of God, and the welfare of his Countrey. And thus the race of the Prophets is come to an ende, which thing brought an end also to the goodliest beawtie of this Hebrewe Schoole. For the Priests and Leuites, ney∣ther in this point, nor in doing their duetie otherwise, were so diligent, but that they are reprehended by the Prophets many times for their slack and corrupt behauiour. Neither were the Schollers euer called the children of the Priests, but the children of the Prophets, because the Prophets were their best maisters: and yet in those dayes God sent some other good maisters that were Priests and learned men, as Ioachim the Priest, who, as Philo saith, wrote the histories of Iudith and Hester: and the seauentie learned Doctors, whome Eleazar the Priest sent to Ptolome Philadelphus
King of Egypt, to translate the Hebrewe Bible into the Greeke tongue, by which meanes the word of God came in∣to the Kings Librarie at Alexandria, and so was set open to the Gentiles also. With these may Iesus the some of Syrach be sorted, and his grandfather likewise, men of great reading and learning, as their doctrine in the booke called Ecclesia∣sticus doth witnesse. All this while, the Judges and Captaines, by whom the Iewes were gouerned after their captiuitie, were of the stock of Dauid, in which order Ianna Hyrcanus was the last. In whose dayes the itch of ambition and couetousnesse had so infected the Priesthood, that whereas it should go by succes∣sion to the posteritie of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron, now it was, who might buy it for money of the Kings of Syria, which then held them in miserable subiection. Iason was the first that attempted this way to get the Priesthood; who to shoulder out his brother Onias, gaue for it to Antio∣chus2. Macha. 4. King of Syria three hundred and sixtie talents, and a rent of eightie talents: moreouer he gaue an hundred and fif∣tie talents for libertie to erect a Colledge, wherein he might exercise the schollers after the prophane fashion of the Gen∣tiles. Thus the ciuill pollicie being sore defaced, and the Priesthood wholly corrupted, the Schooles likewise dege∣nerated from their ancient integritie, bringing forth not the true children of the Prophets, but the bastards of very wic∣ked and heathenish Sophisters. Hereof it came to passe, that within fortie yeeres there sprang vp the sects of the Phari∣sies, of the Essenes, and of the Saduces; which corrupted the sinceritie of Gods word, and broched very detestable and wic∣ked opinions. Notwithstanding, they had their Sinagogues and Colledges abroad in diuers cities and townes, but chief∣ly in Ierusalem. And of the Pharisies was one GamalielAct. 6. 9. Act. 5. 34. a Doctor of great estimation, at whose feete and in whose discipline was nourished vp the Apostle Saint Paule, after∣wardsAct. 22. 3. a singular instrument in the Church of God. But to redresse the foresayd corruption, was sent the holy man of
God Iohn Baptist, replenisht with the spirit of Elias, who taught publikely both the congregation, and also many Schollers that continually attended vpon him. Let vs ac∣knowledge therefore this man to be a visiter and a reformer of the Colledges, and also the last Doctor in this Schoole of the Hebrewes. So now for the dignitie of Schooling in this first Schoole we haue verie worthie examples of tea∣chers, first the Patriarks that taught their housholds, then the Prophets and Priests that taught not only their hous∣holds priuatly, but also the congregation of the people, and companies of Schollers publikly: and for amplifying the honor and estimation of these offices, it pleased God that sometimes Kings and Princes should partly serue the turne therein. But héere some will obiect, that all this teaching was for2. The Schoole of the Gen∣tiles. Diuinitie, and therefore necessarie but for a few now, séeing that most men neither will nor may make their children Di∣uines. Were none then trained vp in learning, but such as were Prophets or Priests▪ none but ecclesiasticall persons▪ yes, no doubt, Kings, Judges, Captaines, and all Magi∣strates, haue néede of the same education. Yea, though all men can not be learned Doctors, yet learning is necessarie for all sorts and all degrées of men, whether they be high or lowe, rich or poore, rulers or subiects, ecclesiasticall or ciuill. For what haue others done héerein which knewe not this diuinitie▪ which rightly embraced but humanitie▪ haue they had no teachers▪ no Schoole at all▪ yes verely, and that of great antiquitie: for as we haue shewed afore, Socrates. vttering the opinion of the Gentiles, affirmeth that Prome∣theus fet learning▪ out of heauen, and brought it vnto men. And the Egyptians, ere they had the vse of letters, expressing their sentences with the images of beasts and figures of o∣ther things, did vse ye figure of a deawing heauen, to signifie discipline and learning: so that aswell the Panims as the Hebrewes did acknowledge God to be the author of lear∣ning, and that it was the deaw of heauen: but this dewe a∣mong
the Gentiles did fall in diuers Countrey and vp∣pon diuers people, which we will recite in order one after another. Berosus writeth, that about the time of the death of Noe, King Sarron amongst the Frenchmen ordeined publike Schooles of learning, to represit the outragious behauiour of naughtie men: and that King Ingenon for the like cause did the like among the Thuyscones, a people of Germany. Of which thing also Cornelius Tacitus maketh mention in his booke of the Germane manners. Although we haue heere no Scholemaisters named, yet let vs place in these examples a noble foundation of the Schoole of humanitie, séeing we haue two vetie auntient Kings, that erected Schooles for the expelling of barbaritie and intollerable manners. Also the same Berosus recordeth, that in the daies of Abrahams pilgrimage, there reigned amongst the Frenchmen one Druyus, a man of great knowledge and learning, of whome the Philosophers of Fraunce, and the Countreys thereabout taking their learning, were a long time afterward called Druides, according to the name ofCesar. 6. Tacit. 14▪ Plini. their patrone and first maister: these were men of great e∣stimation and authoritie, for they did determine all causes and controuersies, and as it were excommunicate him that would not  and to their determination: they were free from warres, from paying of customes, or any other dueues: which preferments and rewards brought them a great num∣ber of Schollers, which they reteined twentie yeares in the Schoole of their Philosophie, which was chiefely of the po∣wer of the Gods, of the immortalitie of the Soule, of the course of nature, as the Starres and their mouing, the bignes of the world and the earth. Iulius Caesar addeth, that this discipline came out of England into Fraunce, and those which would learne the same more exactly, came hither for it: which argueth, that either the first founder Druyus him∣selfe was a Doctor heere in England, or else some of his successors within a whiles brought hither their discipline,
where it was so well entertained, that the fountaine thereof was esteemed to be heere. But in Egypt were noble Students of Philosophy and wisedome neere about the same time, with whome, as wri∣tethBooke. 1. 9. Gen. 47. Iosephus, Abraham disputed, and in many things in∣structed them better. These are they that were mainteined by the Kings of Egypt, so that in the dayes of Amasis the King, when all other people were through penurie enforced to sell their lands to Ioseph to the Kings vse, they liuing by the Kings ordinarie, kept their lands for themselues and their heires. Of the three other Kings, two, namely Sarron and Ingon, caused their subiects to exercise themselues in learning▪ the third was a teacher and patron thereof▪ but what liberalitie any of them exhibited towards Stu∣dents, we knowe not: wherefore let this Pharao Amasis be registred for the first benefactor in this Schoole towards learning, whonie his sucossors did diligently imitate therein, whereby it came to passe that Egypt was a nourse∣rie of learning for other Countreys▪ for out of this Schoole came Atlas the learned Astronomer, that inhabited in Mau∣ritania. Out of this Schoole came Osiris, who when he had trauailed about all the world▪ set vp a piller engraued. with the experiments of his iourney▪ Out of the same Schoole came Moses, as I haue shewed afore, a faithfull Prophet, valiant Captaine, and prudent Judge of the Lords people. And about his time there florished in this Schoole Mercu∣rie Trismegist, the wonder of Philosophie, whose writings yet in some part remaining, declare the same, Heerehence came Cecrops King of the Athenians, who was skilfull in the toongs. Heere flourished King Protheus with his di∣uine and Propheticall learning. Nouit tam{que} omnia vates,Virg. geor. 4. For, things past, present, and to come, this Prophet knowes them all. Quae sint, quae fuerint, qu mox ventura trahantur, Phoenix and Cadmus from hence caried the vse of letters into Phoe∣nice, and thence Cadmus carted the same to Thebes in Greece, which Citie he builded and ruled as King. His let∣ters were but sixteene, to the which Palamedes in the warre
of Troy added foure: to wit, , , , . Finally, many famous learned men of Greece and other Countries from time to time afterward, for the bettering of their learning, resorted into Egypt, as to the head and spring thereof. In which nom∣ber are Thales, Pythagoras, and Plato: of whom wee shall speake anone. Now, when learning had taken a little roote in Greece, it spred foorth with farre and wide very wonderfully. Here then a litle before the time of Debora, Phemonoe common∣ly called Sybilla, inuented the arte of Poetrie, and wrote her Oracles in hexameter verse; whereof some peeces remayne to this day. Then florished Orpheus the Thracian, and Li∣nus a Thebane, two Poets, that for their arte and passing wit, were reputed to be the issue of the Gods: which VirgilsVirg. Eclo. 4. words do import, making a supposed comparison of himselfe with thē, as with the greatest that he could finde.Orpheus no Line shall me surpasse in making verse aright, Non me carminib{us} vincet, nec Thracius Orpheus,Though parents to thē both diuine lend all their helpe and might, Nec Linus: huic mater quamuis, at{que} huic pater adsit:To Orpheus muse, Calliope: to Line Apollo bright. Orphei Calliopea Lino formosus Apollo. Orpheus with his cunning harmonie, as Poets fayne, taed wilde beastes, and made stones to moue at his pleasure: that is in very déede, with his swéet eloquence and wisedome, he mollisted the fierce manners of vnreasona∣ble men, and mooued their stonie hearts to embrace vertue. Whose scholler Museus was, a princely Poet also,For he in∣closed is in throng with numbers great and tall, And they their heads in∣cline to him. brest high a∣boue them all. Me∣dium nam plurima turba, Hunc habet atque humeris extan∣tem suscipit altis. Linus wrote much of naturall Philosophie, aswell touching celestiall as terrestriall creatures, and had two noble Schollers, Thamaras that wrote three thousand verses of their Diuinitie; and Hercules, who enterprised and atchiued such incomparable exploytes for the common pro∣fite of mankinde, that he was taken for a God on earth. Af∣ter all these, in the dayes of Elie, Homer the prince of all Poets wrote his excellent workes, by the which all good Schooles haue been much furthered euen vnto this day. For all those that excelled in learning, all those that were sage Lawmakers, discreet rulers, either at home or abroad, either
in pee or in warre, fet their precepts and examples of in∣struction out of Homers workes. His workes therefore made Lycurgus and Solon good Lawmakers: the one to the Athenians, the other to the Lacedemonians. His works made Hesiodus, Cynethon, Cumelus, Archimus, Archi∣locus, Sappho, Alceus, Tyrteus and Thespis, cunning Po∣ets. To the which adde Stesichorus, that found great libera∣litie at the hand of Phalaris the tyrant, and Epimenides, out of whom Saint Paule alleageth this verse, .Tit. 1. 12. To lye, to hurt as tigers wilde, to slouth and bellie ease, The men of Creeare al∣waies bent, such vices do them please. His workes made Thales Milesius, Anaximander his scholler, Pherecides, Simonides and Pythagoras, wise Philosophers. Thales was the father of the Mathematicall artes in this schoole: for some inuentions wherof he so reioyced and was so thank∣full, that he offered an Oxe to the Gods. Simonides inuen∣ted foure letters more, namely, , so that now we haue the foure and twentie Greeke letters with their authors, Pythagoras was the scholler of Pherecides, and liued about the ende of the Babylonicall captiuitie: who for singular learning, order of studie, and dexteritie in teaching, was such a primrose of all Schoolemaisters, that a long time after there were many famous schollers of his sect called Pytha∣goreans, yea almost all students would be called Philoso∣phers, because Pythagoras first fantfied that title: who al∣so for some singular inuentions in the Mathematicals, offe∣red to the Muses an Oxe, like as Thales had done. Then there followed a plentifull haruest of learned men, and tea∣chers of schooles: as Hellanicus, Democritus, Anaxago∣ras, Aristagoras, Philosophers: Pindarus, Esthylus, So∣phocles, and Euripides Poets. Democritus, to vnwrappe himselfe of all occasions that might hinder his studie, gaue his ample possessions and riches to the common weale, and laughed to scorne the foolish toyling of his Citizens, that be∣stowed both wet and drie to purchase wealth and promotion: the continuance whereof was vncerteyne, and vnable to make them one iot the better. Towards Euripides was
Archilaus the King of Macedonia very bountifull, and so was Artaxerxes the King of Persia towards Hippocrates the father of Phisitions. In the dayes of Nehemias, Socra∣tes (the ornament of schooling) kept a great schoole of Phi∣sosophers; for order and discipline very excellent, and a most perfect looking glasse, wherein wee may beholde the imageXeno. booke. 1. of Socra. and state of a good schoole. For first he taught how necessa∣rie learning was for all sorts of people: then who was fit to learne, and what things were to be learned. Further, he ope∣nedPlato in Phaedro. the method and way of bringing the precepts into the forme of arte, for the more easie teaching and learning of the same. Finally, though he admitted into his schoole all those that were willing, yet of none did he exact wages for teach∣ing, the people neuerthelesse contending of their owne accord who should bestowe greatest giftes vpon him, , insomuch that he reckoned it for a great wonder, if any scholler should bee found not to ex∣ceede in thankfulnesse. Do ye marueile how this came to passe? Surely for that in old time, as Plutarch recordeth, men taught either their kinsfolke, as children, nephewes and brethren, or their deere friends: which without constraint of promise were sufficiently bound by naturall affection and the bands of friendship, with all the dueties of thankfulnesse to recompence their teacher. Howbeit, there were some ni∣gardly and vnthankfull persons in those dayes, as there are now, which refusing this way of recompensing freely, com∣mended by Socrates, would needes haue hired teachers for wages; which teachers very aptly he termeth , sellers of themselues for saues: and in deede they were not esteemed better, but rather worse then slaues of those that hired them. For when one of these money min∣ded parents came to Aristippus, asking him what he should giue to haue his sonne taught: and Aristippus had answered a thousand drachmes: he replyed that it was too much, seeing17. Pounde 10. shillings. he might buy a slaue with that money. Yea, quoth Aristip∣pus, so thou mayst, and if thou like better of slaues then of
learning, by that meanes thou shalt haue two slaues, both him that thou buyest and also thy sonne. This so slauish aPlutar. educat. of child. minde of parents caused Crates to go vp into the highest place of the citie, and crye out: O ye citizens, what meane ye to bestowe all your care for the getting of riches, and almost no care on your children, to whom ye must leaue these riches: But at length, whether it were through this slauish coue∣tousnesse of parents, or els through the enuious stomackes of vile persons, this good man Socrates was put to death by the sentence of the Judges pronounced vpon the false testi∣monie of suborned accusers. Notwithstanding, this ranckled enemie did not so preuayle agaynst the innocencie and good deedes of the man, but that the authors of his death shortly after came to a shamefull ende, and the fruit of his doctrine brought him perpetuall honor and renowne. For out of his Schoole proceeded many noble Philosophers and learned men, whose authoritie among their schollers while they lued was great, but farre greater among all students euer since their death, of whome, the diuine Philosopher Plato being chiefe, kept a Schoole in Academia, a place by his meanes so famous, that thereof not onely the Students a long time after were called Academikes, but also our Universities at this day are called Academiae. Dionysius, otherwise a cru∣ell and wicked King, hauing heard of the fame of this Plato, conceiued such a reuerent estimation of him, that with many gifts and promotions he inuited him to come into his king∣dome of Sicilie, and caused fires and sacrifices to be made throughout his Realme at his comming therein, as if some God had entered: which King moreouer leauing his king∣dome and kingly dignitie, honored learning so farre, that he refused not in his owne person to execute the office of a Schoolemaister in the Citie of Corinth. Next to Plato was Aristotle, a man surpassing no lesse in eloquence, and all the liberall Artes, then in multitude of Schollers, among whome, was Alexander the Great, a King that for magnanimitie and amplitude of dominions,
had neuer his peere, for ardent affection towards learning made his Bookes his pillow to sleepe on, and for loue to his maister Aristotle, restored his Countrey Stagira, which he had wasted: imitating in these things his Father King Phillip, another mightie piller of learning also. Many o∣ther notable Schollers had Socrates, as Xenocrates, Xe∣nophon, Eudoxus, Euclide, and Isocrates. Euclide being a Citizen of Megara, vpon paine of death might not come to Athens to heare Socrates, by reason of publike hostilitie betweene the two Cities, yet he longed so greedely for lear∣ning, that to attaine it, he hazarded his life, comming and going to his maister in disguised apparell, Isocrates was moderator of a Rhetorike Schoole, from whence issued foorth troupes of noble Schollers, which for the most part were not onely eloquent Orators, but also wise Counsel∣lers, valiant Captaines, yea famous Kings and Princes. This Maister, to animate his Schollers, and giue them a sharper edge to learning, wrate ouer his Schoolehouse dore this sentence in golden letters, , If thou loue learning, thou shalt attaine to much learning: which counsell, his Scholler Demosthenes embraced so earnestly, that he shaued the one side of his head, to impose vpon himselfe a necessitie of staying within dores, and so spent more Oyle in studying by candle light, then wine in drinking: by which diligence, it came to passe that the cunning of his mind did surmount the mightie ar∣mour of King Phillip of Macedonia: wherefore the Athe∣nians gaue him this Epigramme, agreeing with the word ofEccle 7. 21. & 9. God, . Robora simenti Demosthenis aequa fuissent, Non Macedûm Graias Mars populâsset opes. If strength equall to will and wit Dmosthenes had had, The Macedonian Mars with spoiles of Greeks had not bin clad. After these and a great many other renowined Orators not farre differing in time, was Menander the Poet, whome
the Kings of Egypt held in so high estimation, that they sent vnto him Ambassadours with many giftes, inuiting him to come vnto them, and whom S. Paule reuerenced so farre,1. Cor. 15. 33. that he hath registred in the holy Bible that verse of his: . Many other famousStaynde and destroyd are maners good by naughtie foolish talke. Doctors were there, some Philosophers: as Spesippus, Theophrastus, Theodorus, Demetrius, Zeno, Cleanthes, and Eratosthenes. Zeno for his passing learning was adōr∣ned by the Athenians with a Crowne of gold. Agayn, some Poets, as Metasthenes, Erasistratus, and Aratus, whose sentence , is sanctified also by SaintAct. 17. 2. 8. For we Gods race and issue are. Paule: which diligence of the Apostle in reading these au∣thors, wee haue noted now three times. In those daies, being about three hundred yeres before the birth of Christ, reigned Polomie Philadelphus King of Egypt; who with great cost procured a Librarie in Alexandria to bee furnished with all stots of bookes, gathered out of all Countries, in the which he had, as wee haue shewed afore, the holy Bible, that this schoole of humanitie might bee amended by the former schoole of Diuinitie. Besides that, this King mainteyned a great many learned men very liberally, and tooke great plea∣sure and delight in their learning. Now, as this schoole of humanitie was well frequented in Egypt and Greece, so in the meane time was it not neglected in Chaldea. For in that Countrie long agoe liued Berosus a skilfull Astrono∣mer and a diligent Historiographer, of whose workes some part is yet to be seene. Yea in Chaldea, Daniel and his thrée fellowes were by the Kings stipend and prouision maintey∣ned at schoole, to learne both the language and Philosophie of the Chaldeans. And to be breefe, these learned men which trauayled into Egypt for the bettering of their learning, did for the same cause trauayle into Chaldea also, because there was another great welspring of learning. But as the schoole of humanitie was brought out of Egypt into Greece, so at length some braunches thereof were transported ouer into Italie, and there husbanded and trimmed with all diligence
and industrie. For to ouerpasse Pythagoras, who hauing left Greeoe▪ taughe in Italie a schoole of sixe hundred schollers, and by whose precepts Numa the second King of the Ro∣manes,Ouid Met. 15. being instructed, set the common wealth in good or∣der; there florished first. Liuius Andronicus: then Ennius and Plautus, old Latin Poets, neere about two hundred and sixtie yeeres before the comming of Christ. Plautus, being a seruant, was so conetous of learning, that he attended vpon his maisters businesse by day, and wrote his cloquent Co∣medies by night. Next were Neuius, Statius, Pacuuius, Accius, and diuers others, among whom was Terence, by whose Comedies the learned men then, and our Schooles now haue great helpe for puritie and elegancie of the Latine tongue. Then there began a schoole of Rhetorike in Rome, which was first taught by Plotius Gallus. At length there were aboue twentie Schooles at once, so that learning a∣bounded plentifully, and that chiefly in the Nobilitie. Of the which Maister Varro, a noble Prince of his Countrie, wrateAcadem. Quaest. & Phillip. 2. most exquisitly of all parts of Philosophie, of the mysteries of religion, of the common wealth, of the lawes and disci∣pline both for warres and peace, of the arte of Grammar, and certeyne histories. Iulius Caesar the first and greatest Empe∣rour that euer liued, with a most pure stile set foorth the hi∣stories of his times, and certeyne bookes of Grammar, and such like doctrine. Pompey a grand seniour and actiue Cap∣taine, after he had subdued many Kingdomes and Coun∣tries, both in the East, and in the West, when he came to the house of Posidonius a schoolemaister, caused the maiesticall Mace, borne before him, to bee layd downe at the doore, and so humbled that authoritie to the learning of this schoolemaister, to the which authoritie almost all the world East and West had submitted it selfe. What great Magistrates in the common wealth were Cato, Marcus Antonius, and Bru∣tus? Yet from them flowed the examples and rules of elo∣quence. But of all other, for arietie in learning and payn∣fulnesse to set it foorth in writing, Marcus Cicero a worthie
Prince also hat̄h deserued most prayse. Whose bookes, as also the histories of Iulius Caesar, Terences Comedies, to∣gether with the bookes of the three Poets Virgil, Ouid and Horace, and also of Quintilian the Rhetorician, and the on∣ly Latin schoolemaisters to all good students euen at this day. Of Virgil it is reported, that when he did reade some part of his booke in the assemblie, the people did no lesse re∣uerence vnto him, then if it had been to the Emperour him∣selfe. And that for the making of sixe and twentie verses he was rewarded by Octauia the Emperours sister with no lesse than 1137. pound, to wit, aboue thrée and fortie poundsTen Sestertia for euery verse. for euery verse. Both he and Horace for their learning and passing wit were the only darlings to Augustus the Empe∣rour, and to Mecenas a noble man, two mightie supporters of learned men, but especially the latter, insomuch that all mainteyners of learning are called by his name Mecenates. Ouids learning, like Orpheus musicke, perswaded euen the Getes, a wilde and barbarous people, to vse great humani∣tie towards him while he liued, and afterwards to burie him with great pompe. Quintilian was the first that receiued the honor of a publike stipend for teaching of a publike schoole in Rome. To these may be added Callidius, Caluus, Cor∣nificius, Salust, Sceneca, T. Liuius, Persius, Lucan, and ma∣ny more worthie to be named: which if I should do, IcariaI should but striue Sea drops to tell. numerum dicere coner aquae. Generally therefore let vs re∣member how this second Schoole hath béene erected and mainteyned by the liberalitie of Kings, Princes, grand cap∣taines, and other noble men; and then frequented and exerci∣sed by men of great estimation and wisedome, in France, in England, in Germanie, in Egypt, in Chaldea, in all the Countries of Greece, and last of all in Italie. But what? Must we fetch examples of schooling either of3 The schoole of the Chri∣stians. the Hebrewes, that liued so long ago, or els of the Heathen, which besides that they liue long ago, were also of a con∣trarie religion? Are there no examples thereof to be found in these latter ages, and in our owne religion? Yes verely, such
examples, as one of them is enough to counterpise, yea, to weigh downe the heauiest examples of the two former, though he lay them all together. For in the former Schooles God was acknowledged to be the author of discipline and learning, but man was the instru∣ment and messenger, by whose seruice God did put it in practise: but this latter Schoole was not onely instituted by the authoritie of our gratious God, but also the first Doctor therein was his only déere Sonne our Sauiour Jesus Christ, and therefore of him is called the Schoole of Chri∣stianitie. He, as the Prophets had done before, taught pub∣likely both the people in the congregation, and also was al∣wayes furnishing of his Disciples and Schollers with store of treasure, that out of the same afterwards they might be able, like good housholders, to bring foorth vnto their au∣dienceMath. 13. 52. things both new and old. The noble actes and pra∣ctises of which Schollers, are in the new Testament set foorth to the viewe of all men, so that it is néedlesse to say any thing thereof: only I note briefely that they forsooke all their wealth and worldly promotions, that they bare many times much trouble and bitter affliction, to the end that they might become good Schollers in this Schoole. These Schollers at length being Doctors, to wit, Apostles, Euan∣gelists, Prophets, and Ministers, walked in the steps of Christ their maister, and of the old Prophets their predeces∣sors, not only teaching the multitude in the congregation, but also making their Schollers learned, and fit for some function in preaching the Gospell. As to passe by all the rest, S. Paule instructed Timothy, Titus, Erastus, Archippus, Epaphroditus, Denis, Stephana, and Tychicus, with o∣thers. At Ephesus he taught dayly for the space of two yeares in the Schoole of one Tyrannus. And what a diligentActs. 9. 19. Student he was himselfe, it may appeare, in that he sent from Rome to Troas aboue a thousand miles, for his pa∣pers2. Tim. 4. 13. and bookes, the instruments of studie. After the Apostles time, was a famous Schoole of Diuini∣tie
institut at Alexandria in Aegypt, in the which, Pante∣us was the first teacher▪ then Clemens, then Origen, a Doctor of no lesse learning then fame. And about this time flourished Cyprian the Bishop of Carthage. Now the Em∣perout Constantine the Great, being the sonne of Helene, a woman borne and brought vp in this land, in all the coun∣tries and prouinces of his large Empire, set vp Schooles of all good Artes, but especially of Diuinitie, not only with liberall stipends mainteining them, but also with honorable priuiledges and exemptions defending them. So ther be∣gan to arise the great starres of Christianitie, as Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Gregorie Nazianzene, Chryso∣stome Bishop of Constantinople, Basile the great, Bishop of Cesarea, whome his Father instructed multá{que} insignemAnd albedeckt with noble artes. reddidit arte, S. Hierome the eloquent Doctor, Ambrose Bishop of Milan, and Austin his Scholler Bishop of Hip∣po, with many others, of the which, some were brought vp in the Schoole of humanitie, and afterwards conuerted to Christianitie, and some from their infancie were trained vp in the Schoole of Christ. But what should I sta in re∣hearsing the names of a few men, of a two or three Coun∣tries, when as in euery parish of innumerable Countries and Kingdomes throughout all the world, not only learned men are ordeined to preach the Gospell, and haue seuerall stipends publikly allowed for their maintenance: but also Schooles, Colledges, Uniuersities, and other places of studie, are euery where erected for the increasing and nouri∣shing of learned men to furnish these vocations: as to name some, the Colledges and Uniuersities at Paris, in the dayes of Charles he Great, at Bononia, and Pauie in Italy, at Brges, by Charles King of Bohemia, at Craconia, Colen, Erford in Thuringia, at Lipsia, at Vienna in Austria, at Friburge, Basile, Ingolstade, Tubinga, Wittemberge, Franc∣ford, Marpurge, S. Andrewes in Scotland, and at Maguntia by Ditherus the Bishop, where the Arte of Printing, the preserger of all Artes, was inuented, in the yeare of our
Lord 1466. But if any man will be rather moued with home examples of his Ancesters, then with forraine ex∣amples of Strangers, this our Countrey of England, aswell for embracing Christianitie and all godly learning, as also for liberalitie emploied to mainteine the same, Tantum alias inter caput extulit vrbes, Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.Virg. Eclo. 1. Her head so high doth mount aboue all other king∣domes wide▪ As doth the cypres long and tall aboue the shrubs excide. For as the Schoole of humanitie was heere planted when it was yet tender and young, so was the Schoole of Chri∣stianitie, insomuch that our Countreyman Gyldas writeth, that the Gospell was receiued heere euen from the comming of Christ, in the dayes of Tiberius, by the preaching of Io∣seph of Arimathea (as others declare) whome Phillip the Apostle sent hither out of Fraunce. Then in the time of the valiant King Arthur, the exercise and studie of learning was diligently applied in Southwales. The like is recorded to be done an hundred and twenty yeares after in the dayes of Sigebert King of the Eastangles, who set vp Schooles of the Gréeke and Latin toong. And Egbert King of Kent for∣tie yeares after followed the same steps of his predecessors. King Ethelstane was not only a founder of Schooles for learning, but also a profound learned Astronomer himselfe. Yet of all our auncient Kings, none may be preferred, no nor compared to that most vertuous King Alfred, either for knowledge in the Artes and all good letters, or for loue and diligence to aduance the same. For besides that he transla∣ted diuers bookes into the vulgar toong, and wrote many new of his owne, he also instructed all his Children, Sonnes, and Daughters, in the liberall Artes, and did shut the dore of climing to any dignitie in the Court against such as wanted the furniture of learning. Furthermore, he procured with great charges learned men, some to be his Counsellers, as the godly Diuine Iohn Scot, afterwards martired by his Schollers at Malmesburie, some to teach the Schooles and Colledges, whereof he ordeined diuers in Oxford. Therefore now we haue the blessed founder of that famous
Uniuersitie of Oxford, founded aboue seauen hundred yeres agone, whether before or after the founding of the Uniuer∣sitie of Cambridge it is not materiall, but in either of them at this day are sixteene goodly Colledges: and moreouer in Oxford eight Haules builded by Kings, Queens, Prin∣ces, Bishops, and other good men, and enriched with lands, reuenewes, stipends, as also established and fortified with lawes, ample priuiledges, and immunities for the mainte∣nance and commoditie of Students and learned men. These are two bright fountaines of learning, whose whole∣some streames runne plentifully abroade, watering not only this Realme, but also forraine Countries, to the great be∣nefit of the Church of God. Also by the like good Authors, after the same manner, and for the same cause, were institu∣ted many other houses of learning, Colledges, and free Schooles, as partly we see in this Towne, and more amply may knowe and see in the Cities, Townes and Uillages throughout the Realme, which I will surcease to pursue any farther in perticular for that it would be an endlesse la∣bour. Now then we haue verie hastely in respect of so co∣pious a matter, trauailed through these three Schooles of the Hebrewes, of the Gentiles, and of the Christians, wherein traching the dignitie of learning and Schooling, whether ye consider the setters foorth and supporters there∣of, or the teachers, or else the Schollers, we haue noted out vnto you of all three sorts, besides God the principall Au∣thor, Kings, Princes, wise Counsellers, men of great esti∣mation, vertue, & godlynes, generally in all these Schooles, and perticularly also we haue obserued how euery one doth excell in his peculiar prayse, namely, the Schoole of the Hebrewes hath the chiefe praise of most auncient and true godlines: the Schoole of the Gentiles, of framing an arti∣ficiall way and method to attaine learning by: the Schoole of the Christians, of manifesting the true practise of all lear∣ning, referring it to the right end. Now if by any meanes all these so honorable and godly persona∣ges
should rise out of their graues, and with their maiesticall presence appeare vnto vs that liue in this age, and in this Countrey, and with their sage and eloquent toongs declare vnto vs, some, what paines and charges they haue employ∣ed: somewhat diligence and studie they haue vsed in plan∣ting and watering, in nourishing and cherishing of know∣ledge and learning, I suppose that many parents would hang downe their heads for shame of their negligence, and many children and youth would lament their miserable estate and condition for want of good education. ❧ The Vtilitie of Schooling. BUT peraduenture at length some Father here a∣mong the rest will rubbe his forehead and bee so hardie as to aske those godly men, why they would spend their goodes and possessions about that which cannot feede the belly, nor clothe the backe, nor yet helpe a man in time of aduersitie. If Dauid, Salomon, Paule, or any other of these good men should answer thee, he would say that the riches, which thou bestowest to get lear∣ning, is but drosse and dung, in comparison of the pure gold and precious pearle that is attayned by learning, and so would decipher the singuler vse and fruites of learning, with such forcible and sound reasons, with such gracious and hea∣uenly eloquence, that it would passe the skill of any man now aliue to expresse it. Wherefore let vs request some other to take this part in hand: and among all, now I suppose may please our phantasie more, than blessed Alfred, who was out countrie man, our King, and a principall patrone of learning in our countrie. And albeit he can handle the cause nothing so well as any of the other, which were Prophets and Apo∣stles: yet surely he will do it sufficiently for thine instruction, and therefore hearken what he sayth.
Knowest thou not what profite and commoditie learning bringeth to the children of Adam? Looke vpon the barba∣rous nations, which are without it: compare their estate with ours, and thou shalt see what it is to be learned, and what to be vnlearned. They for want of learning can haue no lawes, no ciuill pollicie, no honest meanes to liue by, no knowledge of Gods mercie and fauour, and consequently no saluation nor hope of comfort. Wee by the meanes of learning haue and may haue all these things. Therefore in that thou doest enioy thy lands and liuings, in that thou mayst procure such things as thou wantest, it is the benefite of learning. In that thou sleepest quietly in thy bed, in that thou trauaylest safely on the way, in that theeues and enemies do not spoyle thine house and houshold, kill thy children, take away thy life; it is the benefite of learning. Nay, go further. In that thou thy selfe runnest not to the like excesse of iniquitie; art no theefe, no murderer, no adulterer; it is the benefite of learning. Doest thou not see here what a plentifull haruest of all good fruites learning bringeth forth? Yet what is all this in re∣spect of the fauour and loue of God, in respect of eternall sal∣uation, which is offered vnto thee, and which thou receiuest by the hand of learning? To haue peace and attonement with God, to be assured that he will protect and defend thee against all thine aduersaries, to be assured that he will deli∣uer thee out of all dangers and troubles, that he will pre∣serue and keepe thee both in prosperitie and aduersitie, is a most excellent and comfortable benefit, it is the benefit of learning, to be deliuered from death and damnation, from e∣uerlasting punishment of hell fire, to be an heire of the glo∣rious kingdome of heauen, and to heare this good tidings reported by faithfull messengers, is so happie, so blessed and so excellent a benefite, as no tongue can vtter, nor heart con∣ceiue; yet learning is the instrument whereby thou doest at∣teyne it. Wherefore did the Patriarkes, Prophetes, Kings, Judges, Apostles, and all the men of God sweat so much af∣ter learning, vnlesse it were that they themselues and others
also might enioy all these great blessings? But to this per∣aduenture thou wile obiect, that thy childe hath a good natu∣rall wit, whereby he knoweth how to serue GOD and his Prince, & to get his liuing, so that he may be blessed though be be vnlearned, especially considering that we haue alreadie learned men enough otherwise. But the great multitudes that are blind and ignorant, shewe what want there is yet of learned men to be teachers; and the naturall wit of thy child will be confirmed and bettered a great deale by learning. For , Learning dou∣blethMenand. the quicknes of the sight: to wit, the sight of theOuid Met. 15. minde, as the Poet sayth of Pythagoras:And though his person were from Skye farre wide, yet Gods in mind Is{que} licèt caeli regione remotus,He toucht, and by the sight of heart did seeke and out did find, Mente deos adijt, & quae natura negabat,Those things where∣in our fleshly eyes are starke by nature blind. Uisibus humanis, oculis ea pectoris hausit. Besides this, what can the childe do with his vnlettered wit, be it neuer so passing? Can he aspire to heauenly blessings therwith? No, they are fet out of Gods worde, and that onely by learning. Can he then winne worldly felicitie with it? Nay, Socrates will tell thee, that as a good and a couragious Colt, if he bee broken while he is young, will be tractable and fit to do good seruice, but being set runne till he be old, will be fierce and vnprofitable: euen so a boy endued with the gifts of nature, if he bee well instructed by discipline, will proue a good man: but if he bee not instructed in his youth with good precepts, will waxe very intollerable. Who was armed with better naturall qualities than Catiline? Yet for that he wanted good education, and was pampered vp in the vicious schoole of his lewd maister Scylla, he became a most pernicious and wicked member in the common weale, abusing this armour to the destruction thereof. Contrarywise, Socrates was a man of singular and rare vertues: yet he confessed of himselfe that he should haue been so bad as any other, if he had not been a learned Philosopher. This caused Solon and Lycur∣gus, auncient Lawinakers: this caused Plato and Aristotle, noble Philosophers, to lay the foundation of their common wealthes in the good education of youth. Yea this, and all the
former considerations made me to seeke for learning more earnestly than euer treasure was sought for, to studie both night and day, by reading, writing and translating, to instruct those that apperteyne vnto me: to fee learned men, and to in∣stitute Schooles for the instruction of my people and sub∣iects, that so learning being deliuered from hand to hand ma∣ny hundred yeeres after my death in the dayes of my succes∣sors, the people of this land might knowe how to worship God aright, how to auoyde the pestilent errors arising out of the puddle of ignorance, how to obey their Prince, to walk honestly in this present life, and by laying sure handfast on the mercies of GOD, at length to inherit life euerlasting. Wherefore if thou looke for any fauour or preferment in our Court, ay if thou looke for any seate or resting place in the Court of heauen, seeke for it by learning; loue them that professe it; helpe and further it to the best of thy power. Let thy children be nourtured vp in all good knowledge, accor∣ding to their capacitie. Thou seest that the Schoole doores are open, teachers giue attēdance, that there want no bookes, nor any other commoditie necessarie to make a good scholler, neither canst thou leaue thy children any possession or patri∣monie, either for value, or for certeyntie, comparable vnto learning: Omit not therefore the good oportunitie that God offereth thee. So shalt thou thy selfe, which doest helpe for∣ward learning, with thy children and all those that shall be learned by thy meanes, bee enriched with many blessings in this world, and most blessed with all riches in the world to come. Thus would that Kingly patrone of learning say to him that seeth not how necessarie learning is. Dauid, Salo∣mon, Paule, and all the Colledge of those godly men would verifie the same; and reproue most sharply that prophane per∣son which maketh so small account of instructing his chil∣dren: yea Solon would make a lawe agaynst him, which should forbid euen those his owne children to giue him any releefe in his old age. But what need haue we to fetch them out of their graues, whose bodies are layd vp in peace, and
whose soules enioy a blessed rest▪ Do not wee see their pre∣sence most liuely, and beare their voyce most plainly in their examples, in their sayings and doings, which are left vnto vs as noble monuments for our instruction▪ Let vs therefore diligently looke vpon their deedes, and hearken vnto their words, expressing withall the same in our liues and conuer∣sation, seeing we can followe no examples that may aduance vs to so great honor, or bring vnto vs so great profite. And concerning your selues in particular, right worship∣full, when your godly wisedome doth consider how many and how great blessings our gracious God hath bestowed vpon your Towne and the Inhabitants thereof, commodi∣ties by sea, commodities by land, great wealth, plentie of all necessaries, no want of Dainties. Agayne, schooling for your youth, the exercise of religion, and continual preaching of the Gospell, the grace to receiue it, and the prayse of forwardnes therein, euen from the dayes of the last King Henry: when you do call to minde, I say, that our bountifull father hath in all these things opened his hand of liberalitie wider to you than to other countries, yea than to many townes of our own countrie; how can you but be feruently moued with heart and will and all the veynes of your bodie, to shewe your selues thankfull to the giuer of these so vnspeakable benefites, both in vsing them according to his holy will and commaunde∣ment, and also in praysing and magnifying his glorious name for them. Now, to vse them aright, is not to stay in consuming them priuatly vpon our owne bodies, but to em∣ploy them to the profite of the Common wealth, and to the furtherance of our owne saluation, that God thereby may be glorified. And forasmuch as your children that proue skilfull Marchants, expert Mariners, and Maisters in the arte of Nauigation, would in like manner (a great many of them) be discreet, and wise Councellers, yea, Judges, Justices and Rulers in the Common wealth, and (that which most is) learned and eloquent Preachers in the Church of Christ, if they were brought vp in the discipline and sciences of these
functions: the more of them you so bring vp, the more heauen∣ly fruites will your labours bring foorth, and the more per∣sons shall be partakers of the same. For then do Common wealthes flourish most, and are most happie when they are gouerned and ordered by learned and vertuous men, sayth Plato. What, only Plato the Philosopher? Nay, SalomonEccle. 10. 17. Psal. 2. 10. our diuine Plato sayth asmuch, and that more spiritually. O therefore that this Towne might now bring foorth some young impes and buds of learning, whose fruite would bee sweeter than all banquetting dishes to feede the Common wealth and Church of God, both here and in other places. For what great good would it do, not onely to your selues and to this Westerne part of our countrie, but also to stran∣gers of other Nations, which resort hither for earthly gayne, when by this meanes they shall carie away heauenly trea∣sures▪ When they shall finde, euen in Marchants shops, learning more plentiful than wares, sufficient to refute their errors, and to instruct them in the trueth and way to salua∣tion▪ How would the glorie of God heereby spreade it selfe and shine euery where▪ What a perpetuitie or perpetuall stay of the manifold blessings of God would this holy and right vsing of them bring vnto vs▪ In what estimation therefore ye hold the glorie of God, what account ye make of the saluation of your soules, of the felicitie of your Coun∣trey, at that price must ye estéeme the planting of learning, and so great care must you haue of the good education of your children. Wherefore it remaineth, that considering how much I am in debt to God, to my Countrey, and namely, to this Towne, for the discharge of my conscience towards God, and the testifying of my thankefull mind towards you, I do most earnestly exhort you, and pray you, first, that you will fill your hearts and mouths with the praises of our louing God, and songs of thanksgiuing to his holy name, aswell for all these benefits, as also for giuing vnto vs so gracious  Prince, our Souereigne Lady Elizabeth, in whose safetie
is folded vp our safetie, and by whose happy gouernment, we enioy all these so many commodities: next, that you would bow the knées of your hearts, and become faithfull suters to the throane of grace, both for her Maiesties preser∣uation and deliuerance from all conspiracies and mischiefes intended against her, that she may long reigne a blessed Mother in Israel: also for your owne direction and assistance by the Spirit of God, that with these talents which he hath lent you, to wit, with your fauour, authoritie, industrie and wealth, you may promote and further all good learning and knowledge, whereby God may be glorified, sinne and ido∣latrie ouerthrowne, the truth aduanced, the Church of God beawtified, and the state of your Countrey with all good blessings amplifyed: so peace and mercie be vpon you, and vpon the Israel that is of God. ❧ The Method of Schooling. IN that which is gone before, we haue decla∣red what a worthy worke it is to bring vp Children vertuously in good learning, and what singular fruit it bringeth to all kind of people, to all estates and degrées: whereby we would prouoke all those that haue interest therein, be they Parents, Gouernours or Maisters, to do the best they can for the accomplishing of this so excellent a worke. Now because our life heere is but a short florishing floure, and our vnderstanding in our Childhood verie slender and feeble, such as shall be perswaded to follow this counsell, would knowe also the bréefest and easiest way to be vsed in this discipline, which by the helpe of God we will indeuour to search out, if first we consider what children are fit for the same. For as in tillage there is required not only a skilfull husbandman, and good séede, but also a good soile to sowe it in: so in tea∣ching,
ching, there is required not only a learned Maister and good doctrine, but also a Scholler both apt and willing to receiue the seede of this good doctrine. Socrates, as Xenophon writeth, would haue his Schol∣lersXen. booke. 1. of Socrat. to be quick of vnderstanding, sure of memorie, and desi∣rous of good learning, so that albeit, he was a Prince of Schoolemaisters, yet would he not vndertake to make a good Scholer of a dulhead, nor of a foole, nor yet of an vn∣willing mind. Unreasonable therefore is the request of ma∣ny parents in these dayes, which when as their children haue one of these three faults, and sometimes all, do looke neuer∣thelesse that their Maister should make them profound clarks: but yet, as negligence and rudenesse doth marre the gifts of nature, so learning doth amend the imperfections of the same, if the partie will at any hand admit it, as HoraceEpist. 1. 1. There is no man so wild nor fierce, but that he may be tamd. If patiently he will abide with precepts to be framd. Odyss. 8. Like gifts to all the Gods giue not. teacheth, Nemo adeò ferus est vt non mitescere possit, Si modo culturae patientem commodet aurem. Now, forasmuch as God bestoweth not on all like gifts (sayth Homers Vlysses) , neither do al excel in quicknes, or in dulnes of wit, but the most part are of a meane condition, we will frame our discipline to a meane nature, and distinguish it according to the increase of yeares in a meane Scholler, which the varietie of all circumstances being obserued, may be with little alteration applied to a better or a worse also. Children therefore are vertuously trained vp in good learning, partly by the helpe of the Parents, and partly by the diligence of the teacher. The Parents first care is, assoone as his child beginneth to speake, to prouide that he vse none other companie, then such as are both honest and ciuill, aswell in behauiour, as in language. He shall therefore seclude from his Child barbarous nursses, clownish playing mates, and all rusticall persons: neither shall he himselfe speake in the hearing of his Child either wantonly, or otherwise, any rude or barbarous speach, much lesse shall he teach him any leawde or vnhonest talke, as many do, or suffer him to be in
the companie of vnthriftie and vnhonest persons. For a Child like an emptie new vessell being voide of all learning, is most apt to receiue that which is first taught, and that which is first taught, sticketh déepest in memorie, whether it be good or bad. Timothy was nourished vp in Godlines by2. Tim. 1. 5. & 3. 15. his Mother and Grandmother, godly nursses, therefore he followed the doctrine of godlines continually. Againe, as1. Tim. 4. 6. Cornelia the mother and nursse of Tiberius and Caius Gracchus, was an eloquent woman, so none in Rome were more eloquent then they. So Hortensia excéeded other wo∣men in eloquence, for that from her infancie she was accusto∣med to heare her Father Hortensius, a most excellent Ora∣tor. And to leaue other particular examples vntouched, there liue héere amongst vs sundrie men borne in sundrie Coun∣treys, some in Fraunce, some in Spayne, some in Italy, some in Germany, and some in Ireland, and euery of these euen against his will retaineth partly the pronounciation, and partly the phrase proper to the language that he first lear∣ned, and contrarie to the propertie of the language that he now vseth. Nay, the small diuersitie of speach euen in one and the same countrey being admitted at the first, will hardly afterwards euer waxe out of vse. Whereof it commeth to passe, that together in one towne, yea, in one house, we heare one speake Northernly, another Westernly, another Kentishly, Adeò a teneris consuescere multum est. FinallyAn vse in ten∣der yeeres be∣gan and kept hath so great force. we see, that soft Waxe will receiue any print, that young plants may be bowed any way, that the bodies of infants may be fashioned as ye list: but neither the Waxe being hardned, nor the plant being waxt a tree, nor the infant being growne vp, can easily change the fashion which it first recei∣ued. Seeing therefore that vertue and vice, eloquence andPhocylides. In young and tender yeeres betime thy child good things must learne. barbarousnes haue most easie entrance, and vnremoueable continuance, if they come first, , verely it behoueth fathers, that would haue vertuous and learned Children, to enter them first of all in honest actions and ciuill language, which care
must not be omitted at any time afterward. And as it must be had generally concerning all the companie that the child vseth at the first, so especially concerning his first Schoole∣maister. Therefore when the child is about fiue yeares old, the Father for the causes before alleadged, shall commit him to some Phoenix ,Hom. Iliad. 9. that can teach him all things, framing him to eloquence in talke, and verte in deedes. Our Teacher then must be both learned and dis∣créet, considering that the foundation of the learning follo∣wing which the first Teacher layeth, requireth an artificer as prudent and as cunning in that behalfe, as doth any of the rest require. Those Fathers then do vnaduisedly, which care not to what Teacher they commit the prime of their Chil∣dren, so that he be better learned than the Children, although he be not his crafts maister, nor haue any iudgement nor dex∣teritie in teaching, whereby it happeneth now and then, that the first maister being misliked, another is sought for, then the third, and likewise the fourth, and perhaps the fifth, sixth, or more, which change and diuersitie of Maisters must néedes be troublesome to the Scholler, and a great hinde∣rance to his learning. Some heere do counsell the Father to seeke out a priuat Schoolemaister for his child, and we see that those which would be most exquisit heerein, do follow their counsell, because a priuate teacher hath leisure to vse more diligence, and the learner vnder him is safer from ta∣king hurt by infection of bad companie: but forasmuch as the correcting of a fault in one is the commending of vertue in another, the praise of vertue in one, is the reproouing of vice in another, and both correction and commendation are profitable examples to all sorts, we haue greater cause to preferre a publike Schoolemaister, then others had to pre∣ferre a priuat, especially seeing that the more persons he hath in charge, and the more fruit he seeth to come of his la∣bours, the more diligence and better courage will be vse in perfourming the same. That I speake nothing what helpe
commeth to the Schollers by teaching one another, what by emulation and striuing who may do best: for, Tum beneThen stately steed doth course it braue when some to leaue behind, Or some be∣fore to pursue hard in race he may still find. fortis equus reserato carcere currit, Cùm quos praetereat, quósue sequatur habet. And this is the Fathers first care, that his Child take the beginning of his behauiour and speach of ho∣nest and ciuill parents, nursses, playing fellowes, and other companie: likewise, the beginning of his learning, of an ho∣nest and learned Teacher, and the same publike, rather then priuat. His second care is to keepe his Child being now a Schol∣ler, in good order at home, and there to exercise him in such things as he learneth, or hath learned in the Schoole. Nei∣ther may he neglect the ordering of his child, because he hath put him in the hands of a Maister, for Schollers are many houres, and some whole dayes out of their Maisters sight, whereas they haue alwayes néede of the presence of a Go∣uernour, Ineuntis enim tatis inscitia senum constituenda &Cic. Off. 1. regenda prudentia est, For the vnskilfulnes and folly of youth must be ordered and guided by the wisedome of old men, because youth is forgetfull, not greatly moued with regard of things past, or things to come, but wholy caried away with that which is before their face. Semper e∣nimHom. Ili. 3. For alwayes youth incon∣stancie doth tosse now here now there. iuuenes leuis inconstantia versat. The Father therefore must kéepe his fatherly authoritie ouer his Child, and ioynt∣ly with the Maister prescribe vnto him a good order for manners and behauiour, for repairing home, for attendance, for diet, for apparell, for exercise in learning, that his beha∣uiour be godly and honest, in seruing God, in keeping his Church, in huitie towards his superiors, in humanitie towards all men: that he repaire home aswell from Schoole as from play in time conuenient: that he giue attendance to do seruice either at the Table, or any other way: that he be sober and temperate in his diet, well mannered in taking the same: that he be cleanly and frugall in his apparell: that he employ the vacant time in reading, in writing, in all good exercises for the gaine of learning. These and such like con∣ditions
all Parents will require in their children: but yet many giuing their Children the bridle to runne whether they list, thinke it sufficient when they offend, to say vnto them, Your Maister shall heare of it. But what Parents are those that will haue their children to stand more in awe of their maister being absent, then of themselues being present▪ Uerely, the scholler that is thus threatned, may suppose that either his father shall want oportunitie to complayne to his maister, or els that his minde will chaunge when his anger is cooled, or els that he may altogether forget it, or at least∣wise that he himselfe by some colourable excuse, may per∣swade his maister, who knoweth not certainly all circum∣stances of the matter. And finding it to prooue so diuers times, at length will make small account of these peeuish and inconstant threates. Wherevpon the father most com∣monly conceiueth an ill opinion of the maister, imagining that he causeth not his schollers to obserue any good order, or that he is too remisse and full of lenitie. But inasmuch as it is the propertie of youth to be moued more with one stripe giuen, then with ten promised, and to feare more the presence of a father, than the remembrance of a maister, With sharp rebuke some∣time him chide, some∣time the rod let walke. Corripe nunc verbis duris, nunc vtere virga. The fathers discipline, I say, here ioyned with the maisters, will be a singular helpe to the good education of the scholler, and at once redresse and cure the foresayd maladie. And thus I conclude the duetie of the father, which is not only to prouide by good companie, good teachers, and good examples of himselfe, that his child be first exercised in such things as sauour of vertue and lear∣ning; but also to keepe him continually in this good order euen when he is vnder a Schoolemaister. But that which is here spoken of parents, must after a sort bee extended to euery one that hath the like charge or oportunitie, be he tu∣tor, gouernour, schoolemaister or host, though they cannot, especially the last cannot do asmuch herein as the father may. Now followeth the duetie of the Schoolemaister, which
is to vse the best way and order both in teaching and also in gouerning. Touching the former, all knowledge is taught generally both by precepts of arte, and also by practise of the same precepts. They are practised partly by obseruing ex∣amples of them in other mens workes, and partly by ma∣king somewhat of our owne; and that first-by imitation, and at length without imitation. So that the perfection of the arte is not gotten at the first, but Per numeros veniunt ist aThese things come in but one by one in order and de∣gree. gradusque suos. Wherefore first the scholler shall learne the precepts: secondly, he shall learne to note the examples of the precepts in vnfoulding other mens workes: thirdly, to i∣mitate the examples in some worke of his owne: fourthly and lastly, to make somewhat alone without an example. Now, all these kindes of teaching are seene in euery speciall sort of the things taught, be it Grammar, Logike, Rheto∣rike, Arithmetike, Geometrie, or any other Arte. The Grammar which handleth diuers languages, as English, Latine, Greeke, Hebrewe, and such others: needeth not to be wholly taught in our owne language. For by a naturall vse we learne the inflexion of words together, with the varie∣tie of their accidentall significations: as father, fathers, fa∣therhod, fatherles, fatherly, fatherlines. So likewise by the same vse is learned the framing of words together in speach, as he is a father, they are fathers. But yet by this vse wee haue not the perefect skill neither to make, nor to vnmake a word by his parts and parcels. Which facultie is called Prosodia, in pronouncing of letters, syllables, and words with the mouth: and Orthographia in writing of them with the hand, wherein I place the first degree of teaching. Therefore the artificiall precepts in this facultie, are the fo∣wer and twenty letters, and the table of the syllables. These the scholler shall learne perfectly, namely, to knowe the let∣ters by their figures, to sound them aright by their proper names, and to ioyne them together, the vowels with vowels in diphthongs, & the consonants with vowels in other sylla∣bles. Next he shall proceede to practise the same in spelling
and reading other mens workes, as the Catechisme and Pri∣mer. Wherein let him not learne by rote, spelling one silla∣ble of a worde, and shufling vp the rest without distinct spel∣ling. As if he had to learne this word mercifulnes, suffer him not, as some would, to go on thus: m-e-r, mer, c-i-f-u-l-n-e-s, mercifulnes. But according to the letters and syllables, which are as precepts in this behalfe, let him learne it by reason thus: m-e-r, mer: c-i, ci, merci: f-u-l, f, merciful: n-e-s, nes, mercifulnes. For if he repeate the former sylla∣bles with euery other added vnto them, he shall haue all in perfect memorie when he commeth to the ende: whereas o∣therwise he may erre or forget. But because in the table of syllables commonly there are set forth no syllables that haue aboue two letters a peece, whereas they may haue three, fo∣wer, fiue, sixe, seauen, or eight a peece: if he knowe not the force of many letters in a syllable, he shal first learne the force of two alone, whereof one must be a vowell, then of the same two and the third added to them, and so the fourth: as in thē foresayd word, the first syllable is of three letters m, e, r▪ if he know not what m-e-r maketh, aske him first for m-e, he will answere me, as his table teacheth him: then for m-e-r, no doubt he will answere mer. The like is to be done in the two last syllables ful and nes. So strength a sillable of eight let∣ters, being too hard for a childe to learne all at once, he may learne letter by letter thus: r-e, re; t-r-e, tre; s-t-r-e, stre; s-t-r-e-n, stren; s-t-r-e-n-g-t-h, strength. The like prac∣tise is it, when the maister nameth the letters and the scholler giueth their signification. And this is the readiest way to in∣duce the true meaning of the letters and syllables, and conse∣quently the pronouncing of euery word into the phantasie of the childe. For as Cato euen in his tender yeeres by search∣ing the reason of those things that were taught him, did pro∣fite wonderfully aboue his fellowes: so surely one word by reason thus exactly learned, will bring more fruit then twen∣tie words rawlie passed ouer.
Hesiod. For though thou adde but grayne to grayne, yet shalt thou quickly make A heape full big, if often∣times to adde regard thou take. But here the scholler shall finde one hinderance and stum∣bling blocke, in that the practise both not alwaies agree with the precepts. For whereas he learned in his table t-i, ti, g-i, gi; he shall sometime in practise say t-i, i, g-i, ghi. As in these words saluation, giuen. And so in diuers other syllables, the letters haue otherwhiles a variable sound: otherwhiles no sound at all. Which difficultie, seeing it is not reformed by them that are learned, the childe must ouercome by continu∣all obseruation and custome. Yet the Printers might easely redresse that barbarous kind of printing ye for the, yt for that, &c. Where y very absurdly doth represent th, and tha, when as it farre differeth from the force and fashion of any of these letters. And therefore the childe in learning will eftsoone re∣pugne agaynst this barbarisme, and say: yt, ye: yt, yt. These and such like difficulties are as rough ground in the way of the learner: which he cannot ouerstride, vnlesse the Maister do leade him as it were by the hand, supporting him agayne and agayne least he fall: which must needes bee tedious to them both for a while. Now, the scholler in learning euery word shall pronounce him with his true accent: as he may not say maiéstie but máiestie. Also after that he hath spelled his lesson, he shall reade the same, obseruing therein the poynts and distinctions of the sentence. Now followeth the like practise in making words, first by imitation: as the scholler hauing learned that band is spelled with b-a-n-d, so he shall imitate to spell bond with b-o-n-d: as bold with b-o-l-d, so told with t-o-l-d: as seem with s-e-e-m, so seen with s-e-e-n. Lastly without imitation: as if ye aske him how he will spell this word or that word. Thus if he bee exercised in spelling and reading his lessons, and in spelling other words propounded vnto him, sometime by his teacher, sometime by his fellowes, when he shall haue ended his first booke the Catechisme, he wil be able to passe through the Primer commendably without spelling; some harde
words here and there excepted. About the end of this Booke, for the better confirming of all these things in memorie by Orthographie, let him learne to write. For Orthographie, which teacheth with what let∣ters euery syllable and word must be written, and with what points the sentence and parts thereof must be distinguished, is a practise of the same knowledge, but expressed by the hand, as the former is by the toong. Which expressing and skill of the hand, belongeth properly to the Arte of Pain∣ting, and not vnto Grammar, so that the best Grammarian is not alwayes the fairest penman. Neuerthelesse, séeing it hath singular vse and commoditie in the exercise of Gram∣mar, the Maister shall teach his Schollar to write by pre∣cepts of holding the Pen, of forming the letters in due pro∣portion, of ioyning them aptly togethers: by practise, of drawing the Pen vpon the figures of shadowed letters, then of writing without shadowed letters by imitating a Copie, lastly, of writing without a Copie. In this exercise of writing, the Schollar shall spend but two or three houres in a day at the most, employing the rest of the time in rea∣ding, vntill he be about seauen yeares old. At which time, he shall procéede to the second degree of Schooling, which consisteth in learning the Grammar, and knowledge of other languages, and in this degrée are certaine fourmes, euery one whereof may occupie a yéere. The first fourme therefore, shall begin to learne the Grammar in the Latin toong. As for reading, though the Schollar haue it alreadie, yet for that there is some diffe∣rence betwéene the reading of English and Latin, first let him reade ouer the rudiments of the Latin toong, and then learne by hart the parts of speach with their properties, as the derition and composition of words: the forming of Nombers, Cases, and Genders, in euery declension of Nounes: the forming of diminitiues in Substantiues, of comparisons in Adiectiues: so the forming of Nombers, Persons, Tenses and Moobes, in euery Coiugation of all
sorts of Uerbes: whereof he shall rehearse afterwards some part ordinarily euery day, illustrating the same with ex∣amples of diuers Nounes and Uerbes. And so hauing lear∣ned the concordances of speach, made plaine vnto him by the examples there added, and being about eight yeeres old, let him moue foorth into the second fourme, to practise the pre∣cepts of Grammar, in expounding and vnfolding the works of Latin Authors: whereof the easiest shall be chosen first, the middle sort next, and the hardest last. Now, because Children learne first to talke familiarly with their fellowes or others, Dialogs are most easie for their capacitie, as are the Dialogs of Corderius and Castalion. The Maister shall first reade sensibly a competent Lecture, then declare the argument and scope of the Author, afterward english it either word for word, or phrase for phrase, as the propertie of both languages will permit. Last of all teach, or cause another to teach the diuers sorts of the words, their proper∣ties and syntaxes of speach. And about three or foure houres after, the Schollar shall be diligently in euery point exami∣ned, and tryed how he can referre the examples of his Lec∣ture to the rules of Art. This exercise of the artificiall ex∣pounding of other mens works, I neede not to set foorth by examples, for that it is common and manifest, as is also the last exercise of making somewhat without imitation: only imitation therefore remaineth to be declared by examples. For the which in this place the Maister shall propound a like sentence in English, which the Schollar shall expresse by like phrase in Latin. As if the Schollar haue learned and rende∣red this short Lecture, Pater bonus diligit filium probum, A good father loueth an honest sonne, the Maister may propound the like sentence with diuersitie, first of Nombers, then of Genders, thirdly of Persons, fourthly of Tenses, fifthly of the forme of the Uerbe, and lastly of the words. For the variation of nombers, he may vse this English, Good fathers loue honest sonnes, which peraduenture may be hard for a beginner to make in Latin all at once: but
liue fit quod bene fortur onu. Wherefore as in reading heGood skill in bearing is the thing that makes the burden light. learned letter by letter, syllable by syllable, so héere let him learne word by word, phrase by phrase, vntill he haue all the partes, which are equall to the whole, as may be expres∣sed in this manner of talke betwéene the Maister and the Schollar▪ Ma▪ a father. Sch▪ pater. M. fathers. S. patres. M. a good father. S. pater bonus. M. good fathers. S. pa∣tres boni M. a good father loueth. S. pater bonus diligit. M. good fathers loue. S. patres boni diligunt. M. a good father loueth a sonne. S. pater bonus diligit filium. M. good fathers loue sonnes. S. patres boni diligunt filios. M. a good father loueth an honest sonne. S. pater bonus diligit filium probum. M. good fathers loue honest sonnes. S. patres boni diligunt filios probos▪ thus the teacher, as a painefull nursse, omnia minima mansa infantibus pucris in os inserit,Cice. 2. Ora. cheweth it all to small peeces, and thrusteth it into the childs mouth, wherein peraduenture he may spend more words, and repeate more often not only the English, but sometime the Latin also of all that went before. Secondly, followeth the variation of Genders, as, a good mother loueth an honest daughter. Mater bona diligit filiam pro∣bam. And againe, good mothers loue honest daughters, matres bonae diligunt filias probas. Thirdly of Persons, thou louest an honest child, in diligis filium probum. Fourthly of Tenses, he hath loued an honest child, ille dilexit filium probum. Fifthly of the forme of a Uerbe, an honest child is loued of a good father, filius probus a patre bono diligitur. Sixtly of the words, a skilfull Maister teacheth a diligent Schollar, praeceptor peritus docet disci∣pulum sedulum. Besides this, euery one of the foure former sorts of varieties, may receiue also all the three other varie∣ties, and the fift againe is capable of all the varieties going before, and the sixth likewise of all the rest, so that many wayes may the imitation of this one sentence be fashioned and expressed. Now after that the Schollar hath bin a fewe dayes enured to this imitation, he shall three or foure times
euery wéeke, meditate alone to make the like in writing also. This kind of exercise will both leade him to vnderstand the congruitie and syntaxes of speach, and also make him expert in forming of Nounes and Uerbes. And so hauing ended his yeare, let him march forward into the third fourme, the which besides the harder Dialogs, shall reade also Tullyes Epistles collected by Sturmius, learning them in such man∣ner as is shewed afore, and noting moreouer the principall phrases in a note booke. And heere the exercise of writing Latin by imitation, shall be a translating of the same speach into another like sentence, but altered with many varieties at oce, and chiefely with the last varietie of the words, as if the schollar haue this first Epistle of the first booke for his lesson. Marcus Tullius Cicero Terentiae Vxori salutem. SI vales bene est, ego vales. Nos quotidie tabellarios vestros expectamus, qui si venerint, fortasse erimus certiores quid no∣bis facierdum sit, faciems{que} te statim certiorem. Valetudinem tuam cura diligenter. Vale. Calendis Septembris. When he hath learned this lesson, let him haue an Epistle in English of the like sentence, which he shall expresse in Latin with Ciceroes phrase. To make the sentence like the matter must be followed with like reasons: Cicero writeth to his wife, let vs imagin the Father to write to his Sonnes: he wri∣teth of her messengers, of certaintie what to do, of care for her health: let the father write of their letters, of certaintie what to looke for, of care for their learning, in this wise: Peter Cole to Iohn and Charles his sonnes, sendeth greeting. IF ye be in good health, it is well. I my selfe am in good health. Oftentimes I finde lack of your let∣ters, the which being brought, verely I shall be more certayne what I am to looke for, and will certifie you thereof foorthwith. Apply your Studye diligently. Farewell. The Ides of December. The Schollar may easily by imitating his Author, translate it after this fashion. Petrus Colus Ioanni & Carolo filijs salutem. Si valetis bene est, ego valeo. Ego saepe literas vestras desidero, quae si allatae erunt,
profectò ero certior, quid mihi expectandum sit, faciam{que} vos statim certiores, studia vestra colite diligenter. Valete. Idibus Decembris. Now the Schollar by these meanes hauing gotten some footing in the Latin toong, shall begin to practise without an example of imitation, both in speaking, and also in writing. His exercise of speaking Latin shall be first in common and easie matters, as of his lesson, of orders in the Schoole, of dinner and supper &c. Afterwards in all matters, heed being taken that he be reformed when he vseth barbarous words, or trippeth in his speach, his exercise of writing without imi∣tation shall be a translating of the same sentence into another speach, of latin into english, and of english into latin. For the turning of english into latin, some would haue the Maister to translate into english the sentence out of some place of Tully vnknowne to the Schollar, and then giue him the english to translate againe into latin, which being done, to shewe him Tullyes latin, wherewith he shall conferre his owne, and correct it: this counsell is good, and may be vsed when opportunitie and leisure will serue. And this is the method and exercise of teaching and lear∣ning fit for the third fourme, which must be continued also in the other fourmes following, but with some augmenta∣tion of length, and hardnes of the same, according to the a∣bilitie of the learner. Yea, the same bookes of Dialogs and Epistles may serue for the fourth fourme also, so that the hardest of both sorts be chosen. Then to the fifth fourme shall be read Terences Come∣dies, Tullyes treatises of friendship and of old age, which are a more artificiall and harder kind of Dialogs, where∣vnto, let Ouid de Tristibus, or some such within a while be added for Poetrie. Now for writing heere by imitation, let vs take this example, being the words of Laelius, as Ci∣cero bringeth him in speaking. Haecigitur prima lex in ami∣citia sanciatur, vt ne{que} rogemus res turpes, nec faciamus roga∣ti. Turpis enim excusatio est & minimè accipienda, cùm in ca∣teris
peccatis, tum siquit contra rempub. se amici eausa fecisse fateatur. Etenim eo loco, Fanni & Scaeuola, locati sumus, vt nos longè prospicere oporteat futuros casus reipub. deflexir enim iam aliquantum de spacio curriculo{que} consuetudo maiorum. Tiberius Gracchus regnum occupare conatus est; vel regnauit is quidem paucos menses. Nunquid simile populus Romanus audierat aut viderat? hunc etiam post mortem secuti amici & propinqui quid in Publium Scipionem Nasicam effecerint, sine lachrymis non queo dicere. Nam Carbonem quo{que} quem modò posuimus, propter recentem poenam Tib. Gracchi susti∣nuimus. De C. Gracchi tribunatu, quid expectem non libet au∣gurari. Laelius heere speaketh concerning friendship, let vs speake concerning religion, and prosecute our matter with the same arguments disposed after the same fashion, that the same syntaxes may serue to expresse them. This law in religion ought first to be established, that thou intice no man to false doctrine, nor embrace it when thou art inticed of other. For the excuse is shame∣full and in no wise to be allowed, neither in other faults, nor in this, if we confesse that we haue vsed any doctrine agaynst the Church of God, for mans authoritie sake. For thou art placed, deare brother, in that place, that thou oughtest to see long before, the chaunces that may befall the Church of God. For the custome of the Pa∣triarkes, Prophets, Apostles, and godly men is alreadie farre declined from his trade and course. The Bishop of Rome hath gone about to occupie the throne of Christ, or rather he hath occupied it now many yeeres. Did the people of God euer heare or see the like before? Yea the Kings and Princes following his counsell, what they haue done agaynst the professors of the trueth, I cannot think without great griefe. For the true Christians haue susteyned most bitter torments for the testifying of a good conscience. And touching the issue of these pre∣sent troubles, I list not to diuine what is to bee looked for. Which words, a scholler of this fourme by imitation,
thus turned into Latine. Hc prima lex in religione sanci∣tur, vt neminem solicites ad falsam doctrinam, nec amplectaris solicitatus. Turpis enim excusatio est & minimè accipienda cùm in caeteris peccatis, tùm si contra ecclesiam dei humanae au∣thoritatis causa nos vlla doctrina vss esse fateamur. Etenim eo loco, chare frater, locatus es, vt te longè prospicere oporteat fu∣turos casus ecclesiae dei. Deflexit enim iam multum de spacio curriculóqùe consuetudo Patriarcharum, Prophetarum, Apo∣stolorum, & piorum hominum. Pontifex Romanus Christi thronum occupare conatus est, vel occupauit is quidem multos iam annos. Num quid simile populus dei audierat aut viderat? Eius etiam consilium secuti reges & principes quid in professo∣res veritatis effecerunt, sine magno dolore non queo cogitare. Nam veri Christiani acerbissimos cruciatus propter bonae con∣scientiae testificationem sustinuerunt. De praesentium vero ma∣lorum exitu quid expectem, non libet augurari. Herewithall shall be vsed now and then the other translating, without imi∣tating an example, as before. But if the scholler shall be a Graecian, let him learne the Greeke Grammar while he is yet in this fourme, and proceede therein after the same order that he did in the Latine, bestowing that way the fourth part of his time; and like wise another fourth part in the Hebrewe, if he will be an Hebrician. And so I conclude the second de∣gree of schooling with the ende both of this fifth fourme, and the twelfth yeere of the schollers age. Then shall followe the third degree for Logike and Rhe∣torike, and the more perfect vnderstanding of the Grammar and knowledge of the tongues. First the scholler shal learne the precepts concerning the diuers sorts of arguments in the first part of Logike, (for that without them Rhetorike cannot be well vnderstood) then shall followe the tropes and figures in the first part of Rhetorike, wherein he shall employ the sixth part of his studie, and all the rest in learning and handling good authors: as are Tullies Offices, his Orations, Caesars Commentaries, Virgils Aeneis, Ouids Metamor∣phosis, and Horace. In whom for his first exercise of vnfol∣ding
the Arte, he shall obserue the examples of the hardest poynts in Grammar, of the arguments in Logike, of the tropes and figures in Rhetorike, referring euery example to his proper rule, as before. Then he shall learne the two latter parts also both of Logike and Rhetorike▪ And as of his Grammar rules he rehearsed sme part euery day; so let him now do the like in Logike, afterwards in Rhetorike, and then in Grammar agayne, that he forget not the precepts of arte, before continual vse haue ripened his vnderstanding in them. And by this time he must obserue in authors all the vse f the Artes, as not only the words and phrases, not only the exam∣ples of the arguments; but also the axime, wherein euery argument is disposed; the syllogisme; whereby it is conclu∣ded; the method of the whole treatise, and the passages, wher∣by the parts are ioyned together. Agayne, he shall obserue not only euery trope, euery figure, aswell of words as of sen∣tences; but also the Rhetoricall pronounciation and gestur fit for euery word, sentence▪ and affection. And so let him take in hand the exercise of all these three Artes at once in making somewhat of his owne, first by imi∣tation; as when he hath considered the propertie of speach in the Grammaticall etymologie and syntaxis: the enesse of speach in the Rhetoricall ornaments▪ as comely tropes, plea∣sant figures, fit pronounciation and gesture: the reason and pith of the matter in the Logicall wright of arguments, in the certeyntie of the axiomes, in the due fourme of syllo∣gismes, and in the easie and playne method: then let him haue a like theam to prosecute with the same artificiall in∣struments, that he findeth in his author. As admit that he hath learned and noted all the arte of this short example in Cicero agaynst ambition. In ambitionem. Miserrima est omnino ambitio, honorum{que} contentio, de qua praeclarè est apud eundē Platonem, similiter facere eos, qui inter se contenderent vter potius rempub. administraret, vt si
nauta certarent quis eorum potissimùm gubernaret. Idemque praecepit, vt eos aduersarios existimemus, qui arma contràfe∣rant, non eos qui suo iudicio tueri remp. velint. Qualis fuit in∣ter P. Africanum & Q. Metellum sine acerbitate dissensio. Now let the scholler haue a theame against some like vice, as agaynst couetousnesse, and prosecute it step by step, like vnto this agaynst ambition. In auaritiam. Teterrima est omnino auaritia diuitiarum{que} cupiditas. De qua praeclarè est apud Ciceronem, similiter facere eos, qui multis incommodis conflictarentur propter pecuniam adipiscendam, vt si qui liberi homines certarent propter eum dominum, qui eo∣rum etiam mentes teneret obstrictas, eásque nullo tempore re∣spirare permitteret. Idemque praecepit vt eos auaros existime∣mus, qui ea qua habent tùm perpetua libidine augendi crucien∣tur sunt pari amittendi metu; non eos qui honesta ratione rem familiarem amplificent, atque ad largiendum sint pro modo fa∣cultatum parati. Qualis fuit in maioribus nostris sine auiditate frugalitas & diligentia. Here though in some place we haue swarued a little from our example, as neede requireth, yet for the most part wee haue expressed phrase for phrase, trope for trope, figure for fi∣gure, argument for argument, and so of therest. But let vs adde a more copious example of the same exercise. Magnanimi est rebus secundis non insolescere. At{que} etiam in rebus prosperis & ad voluntatem nostram fluentibus, superbiam, fastidium, arrogantiam magnopere fu∣giamus. Nam vt aduersas res, sic secundas immoderatè ferre le∣uitatis est: praeclará{que} est aequalitas in omni vita, & idem sem∣per vultus eadém{que} frons, vt de Socrate, item de C. Laelio acce∣pimus. Philippum quidem Macedonum regem rebus gestis & gloria superatum à filio, facilitate verò & humanitate vi∣deo superiorem fuisse. Itaque alter semper magnus, alter saepe tur∣pissimus fuit. Vt rectè praecipere videantur, qui monent, vt quan∣tò superiores simus, tantò nos summissius geramus. Panaetius
quidem auditorem Africanum & familiarem suum solitum ait dicere, sicut equos propter crebras contentiones praeliorum fe∣rocitate exultantes, domitoribus tradere soleant, vt his facilio∣ribus possint vti; sic homines secundis rebus effrenatos sibique praefidentes tanquam in gyrum rationis & doctrin duci opor∣tere, vt perspicerent rerum humanarum imbecillitatem varie∣tatem{que} fortunae. Atque etiam in secundissimis rebus maximè est vtendum consilio amicorum, his{que} maior etiam quàm antè tribuenda est authoritas: ijsdem{que} temporibus cauendum est, ne assentatoribus patefaciamus aures, nec adulari nos sinamus, in quo falli facile est. Tales enim nos esse putamus vt iure laude∣mur, ex quo nascuntur innumerabilia peccata, cùm homines in∣flati opinionibus turpiter irridentur, & in maximis versantur erroribus. sed haec quidem hactenus. Frugi est bona non effundere. In rerum copia, diuitiarum{que} abundatia, luxuriam, effusi∣onem, inconsultam{que} largitionem magnopere fugiamus. Nam vt tenaciter & sordidè, sic luxuriosè & prodigè viuere turpe est. Praeclará{que} est mediocritas in omni vita, & temperatus semper victus cultús{que}, temperata item largitio, vt de Lacedae∣monijs, item de priscis Romanis accepimus. Cn. quidem Octa∣uium opibus & diuitijs superatum a filio, parsimonia verò & moderatione videmus superiorem fuisse: ita{que} alter in suam do∣mum consulatum primus intulit, alter clarissimi viri filius in domum multiplicatam retulit ignominiam & calamitatem: vt rectè praecipere videantur qui monent, vt quantò ampliores fortunas habeamus, tantò maiorem diligentiam in illis admi∣nistrandis adhibeamus. Cleopen enim Aegypti regem insano sumptu eò redactum inopiae legimus, vt etiam filiam ad mere∣tricium quaestum exponeret venalem. Quare, sicut vitem luxu∣riantem (quod inquit Cato) & multiplici lapsu errantem, ferro amputans coercet ars agricolarum, ne nimia fusa syluescat, fi∣at{que} sterilis: sic homines omnibus copijs circumfluentes, mul∣ta{que} luxuria diffluentes, tanquam ferro rationis & doctrin amputantis coerceri oportet, vt fernt vitae fructus parcè, con∣tinenter
& prudenter actae. Atque etiam in amplissimis fortu∣nis maxime est vtendum consilio sacrarum literaru, hisque plus etiam quàm aliâs temporis impertiendum. Ijsdém{que} tempo∣ribus cauēdum est ne appetitibus proprijs assensum praebeamus, nec nostris desiderijs nimis indulgeamus; in quo falli facile est. Id enim rectū esse putamus, quicquid ad libidinem nostram fin∣gimus. Ex quo nascuntur innumerabilia peccata, cùm homines prauis▪ opinionibus caecati iurpiter se gerunt, & in maximis versantur erroribus. Dixi. By the way, the scholler must in imitation obserue foure things. First, that if the author whom he imitateth, haue ge∣nerall sentences, sometime he may reteyue the very same: as because there ensueth much mischiefe aswell of other errors, as of hearkening vnto flatterers, therefore that sentence Ex quo nascuntur, &.c. is common and may bee applyed to our cause. Secondly, that he may leaue out the imitation of some sentences or arguments. As Tullie setteth forth the simili∣tude by the authoritie of African, and the relation of Panae∣tius: whereas only the protasis or first part of our similitude is attributed but to Cato, for want of a like similitude gar∣nished with like authoritie. Thirdly, he may adde more than his author hath: as here the example of Cleope is added to recompence that which wanteth in the similitude. Fourthly, he may in some part alter the method, forme of syllogtimes, axiomes, arguments, figures, tropes, phrases and words. All which must bee done wisely and to good purpose, according to the circumstances of the matter. Moreouer, touching matter and method, this imitation may bee exercised in verse likewise: but the forme of argu∣mentation or syllogisines; the words and phrases, the verse will not suffer to be imitated, saue only in some places. As we see Virgil to haue imitated Homer in method: to wit, in beginning with the middest of the matter, in reciting of things past by occasion, and in concluding with a notable is∣sue, euen as Homer had disposed his Ilias: then in generall matter, namely, in setting forth Aeneas like to Vlysses, and
sometime like Achilles: in particular matter & arguments, as the comming of Aeneas to Carthage and Dido, like to the comming of Vlysses to Alcinous and Calypso, Aeneas going to hell, like to Vlysses going to hell, Aeneas games of rowing, running, whorlebatting, shooting, and skirmishing on horsebacke at the graue of Anchises his father, like to A∣chilles games of riding, whorlebatting, running, sword playing, hurling the stone, shooting and casting the darte at the Tombe of Patroclus his deare friend: the harnesse of Ae∣neas, made by Vulcan, like to the harnesse of Achilles made by him also. And in diuers places, but not euery where, he doth imitate Homers descriptions, similitudes, phrases and words, as Manutius, and other learned men haue both noted and quoted. Now, when the Scholler hath been a while exercised in this kinde of imitation, sometime in prose, sometime in verse, let him assay otherwhiles, without an example of imitation, what he can do alone by his owne skill alreadie gotten by the precepts and the two former sorts of practise. After a three yeeres exercise in this degree of studie, he may atend to the fourth degree, of Arithmetike and Geo∣metrie. And according to the same manner, easely passe through these Artes in halfe a yeere, and so before the full age of sixteene yeeres be made fit to wade without a schoole∣maister, through deeper mysteries of learning, to set forth the glorie of God, and to benefite his Countrie. And thus the maisters duetie of orderly teaching by precepts and by prac∣tise of them, not only in vnfolding other mens workes, but also in making somewhat of a mans owne, and that either by imitation of examples, or without imitation wee haue breefly declared. His duetie of gouerning, is to prescribe a good order both for manners and learning, and to cause the same to bee kept. These good orders therefore spoken of in the fathers duetie, aswell concerning godlinesse, as of daylie praying, of resor∣ting to the Church, of reuerent attentiuenes there, of lear∣ning the doctrine of Christian religion: as also concerning
Christian honestie, that is, of obedience to parents and go∣uernours, reuerence to superiours, courteous manners to∣wards all men, ciuill behauiour in all words and deedes, the maister shall efsoone repeate vnto his schollers, sowing in their tender mindes the seedes of Christian holinesse. Fur∣ther, he shall appoynt vnto them the time of comming to schoole and going thence: how and wherein they shall spend euery houre there, when they shall repeate precepts of Arte, when they shall meditate and learne their lesson, and renter an account thereof to their maister, when they shall exercise themselues in translating, writing of theames, verses, and such like studies. These and all other good orders that may further vertue & learning, the Maister shall plainly declare, & straitly enioine vnto his Schollers, causing them with all carefulnes to ob∣serue the same, by encouraging the good, and reforming the bad: for considering that the hope of honour and the feare of punishment are elementa virtutis, wisely did Solon place theThe principles of vertue. preseruation of the common wealth, and consequently of the Schoole in prmio & poena.In reward and punishment. The good then he shall encourage, first with words, praising them for their well doing, declaring what great commoditie ensueth thereof, and exhorting them to go forward. This praise of it selfe alone is such a bait to drawe men to vertue, that the Apostles Peter and Paule toke it generally for all1. Pet. 2. 14. Rom. 13. 3. rewards of well doing: and Simonides saith, that for the de∣sire of glorie, men will take any paine. Then he shall encou∣rageVirg. AEe. 5. them with rewards, for a good Schoolemaister is like a good Captaine With gifts slack mindes prouoketh, and sets be∣fore them pri∣ses meet. Inuitat pratijs animos & praemia ponit, as sometimes to giue trifles and gay things to such as shewe any token of forwardnes, diligence, and wittines, and to such as are victors in vertue, according to Horaces saying, Cakebread and figs on schollers yong the maister doth bestowe, Pueris dant crustula blandi Doctores, elementa velint vt dis∣cereSer. 1. Sat. 1. prima, sometime to reward their painefull studie with libertie to recreate thēselues by rest, honest disport, and wal∣king abroade: for otherwise, as a bowe alwayes bent, at length will lose his strength, so the mind alwaies occupied in
studie, will waxe dull, and not be able to endure. WhereforeThat they their lessons perfectly to learne should not be slowe. What so hath not his rest by turne, it can no while endure, Rest strength renues, rest wearied lims with pleasant ease doth cure. AEne. 5. Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est, Haec reparat. vires, fessa{que} membra iuuat. Lo héere such praises, such re∣wards are propounded vnto thée, if thou be a good Schollar, consider them well, So goodly gifts with triall none to loose is it no griefe? Tantáne tam patiens nullo certamine Dona sines? Shall they not encourage thée▪ Shall they not make thee willing and diligent▪ at leastwise, though thou be so retchles, that thou carest not for these rewards, yet blush at that which followeth, No man is so barbarous, but that though he re∣gard not ho∣nestie for it selfe, yet re∣proach and shame will en∣force him vnto it. Nemo est tam agrestis, quem si non ipsa honestas, contumelia tamen & dedecus magnopere moueat. Let the vnthriftie then, and those that do amisse, be reformed and corrected by admonition, rebuking and puni∣shing, acording to ye qualitie of the fault, for One medi∣cine is good for one disease and another for another. . First therefore let him be admoni∣shed, then rebuked: herein the cause shall be throughly sifted, paciently heard, by equitie iudged, and last of all soundly re∣proued, that the conscience of the offender may be touched for the fault: if this will not serue, for One ancker cannot fast alone the flee∣ting vessell hold. Non satis vna tenet ceratas anchor a puppes, a also punishment, sometime with the rod, which according to Salomons saying, driueth away foolishnes, that is tied to the childs hart, and maketh him wise and learned: sometime punishment, by restraining that liber∣tie of recreation, which otherwise should haue bin graunted, and sometime by seruice of drudgerie, as may be the swée∣ping of the Schoole, &c. Generally of all these corrections, none may be differred when it is fit time, nor executed before due time, As  the time so phisick workes, wine drnke in time doth ease: Agayne wine vsed out of time, doth hurt much and displease. Hom. Ili. 1. 4. Temporibus medicina valet, data tēpora prosunt, Et data non apto tempore vina nocent. But if the Maister at any time for some iust cause do omit the deserued correction, he shall threaten a greater, and perfourme it also, when the next fault shall require ye same, His linge∣ring blow must pay sue home. Ouid Met. 1. Et semper lentū pensabit a∣cerbo. These are the meanes to allure Schollars to vertue, and to driue them from vice, which, as Plutarch counselleth, must be vsed by turne, sometime the one, and sometime the other, after the fashion of a louing nursse, who when she hath made her child weepe for his fault, giueth him the teat to still* Pro. 22. 15. & 29. 15. him againe: which resembleth also the discretion of the cun∣ning
Physician, that tempereth his bitter medicines with sweete and pleasant drinke. But if any be so incorrigible, that neither the sweete rewards of vertue can leade him, nor the bitter correction of vice draw him to amend, let him be cut off from the Schoole,Least that he should in∣fect the sound. Ne pars syncera traatur, for he that dwelleth with a Creple, will learne to halt, and doubtlesse, many haue perished with this poison. Now we see all the parts & properties of this most noble and profitable discipline as it were portraied out before our face, which to some peraduenture may yet séeme too hard, for that it is so manifold, the parts so diuers, & respect so diuers persons. But what then? should this make vs shrinke at the matter? what good thing can be obteined without paineful∣nes & great diligēce:For labour, God selleth vs euery good thing. Dij nobis laboribus omnia vendūt bo∣na, For as Hesiodus saith of food, , and as Virgill saith of tillage, Pater ipse colendi haud facilē esse viam voluit: so againe doth Hesiodus say of vertue, , yea euen so Salomon saith of knowledge, that God had(m) Mans food the gods away haue hid. Before thou mayst vertue attaine▪ giuen to the childrē of Adam great trauaile in searching out wisedome, to humble their vaine minds, and to exercise them, Curis acuēs mortalia corda, Nec torpere graui passus sua regna veterno, and yet in seeking for food & bodely reliefe, the ma∣nifold labours & toiles do not daunt our courage, but rather(n) God wils thy browes to drop againe. Eccl. 1. 13. & 3. 10. sharpen our minds, & make vs more earnest & skilfull: and will not this varietie of labour emploied about learning and vertue bring forth the same, or rather more godly & plentifull fruit? To keep the mind therefore from sluggishnes the mo∣ther(o) Sifting mēs wits with la∣bours great, & heapes of gri∣ping cares, No suffering soyle through drousie slouth to bring forth noysome ares. of all vice, to make it expert in wisedome & vertue by cō∣tinuall exercise, to beate downe the pride thereof in manife∣sting by experience that it is not able to attaine to the full per∣fection of knowledge, God hath ordeined for man such a pa∣radise of labours, which as they be many and diuers, so will they be pleasant and fruitfull, if they be aptly disposed, and wisely susteined. Laus Deo.
