16979.7 99836858 1149
An expo¦sicion vpon the songe of the blessed virgine Mary, called Magnificat. Where vnto are▪ added the songes of Salue regina, Benedictus and Nūc dimittis. ¶Translated out of la∣tine into Englysh by Ihon Hollybush. 1538.
To the renow∣ned and moost noble prince & lorde Ihon Frederyke, duke of Saxony, county of Durynge and marques of Mysen my gracious lorde and defender. I Haue (moost doughty prince) receaued your graces letters at the last, the whych (accor∣dynge to my deutye) I haue humbly taken in my han∣des, and chearefully and wyth entyer consyderacyon thoughte vpon theyr argument and meanynge. But seynge I haue lōge sence promysed vnto your hygh∣nesse the declaracion of the virgins songe of prayse called Magnificat, (frō yt whych pur∣pose of myne, the wycked enterpryses of ma¦ny myne aduersaryes haue ofte wythdrawē me,) I haue thought now at the laste to an∣swer your hyghnesse letters wyth this trea∣tyse, (fearynge lest the farther delaye therof myght be to my reprofe, and that farther ex∣usaciō shulde be of no value) that your hygh¦nesses noble yonge corage were steared to the loue of scripture, & by farther exercyse
in the same myght be more feruenter & sta∣blyshed, to the whyche thynge I praye God to sende his grace & to helpe, for it is greatly necessary: seynge that in the persone of so great a prince, the whych beynge wythdraw¦en frō himselfe, is gouerned by Gods grace, ye saluacion of many one cōsysteth: & agayne ye perdiciō and damnacion of many one yf he beynge permitted to hymselfe, is gyded with out grace. For though it be sayd of al mens hartes: that the kynges harte is in ye hande of God, whych can wende it where it plea∣seth hym: yet is it not for nought sayd of kyn¦ges and prynces▪ Where by God wyll beate hys feare in the superiours, that so they may learne and be sure, that they can not once thynke ought in theyr mynde, wythout God do geue it seuerally in theyr myndes. The dede of other men doth ether hurte or profit only them, or a fewe besyde: but princes and superiours only be set in that rowme, that they ether profyte or hynder so many more, as theyr dominion doth reach farther. For the whych cause doth scripture call the godly and fearynge God princes, angels of God, yee goddes also, as in the .vii. chap. of Exo: I haue made the a God ouer Pharao. And in the .xxii. Chapter: Thou shalte not speake e∣uell
of the Goddes. And agayne, ye wycked & vngodly princes she calleth Lions, Draggōs and furious beastes: whom God also calleth one of hys .iiii. plages whan he rehearseth them, namely: pestilence, derth, warre and furious beastes. Because then that the hart of man, beynge naturall, fleshe and bloude doth presume euery thynge lyghtely, & coue∣teth therby dominion, ryches & honoure, he is steared out of reason by suche occasion to a rash tranquillite and reste, so that he for∣getteth God, and careth nothynge for hys subiectes, and vsynge the brydle to hys plea∣sure in synnynge, he becōmeth a wodde & fu¦rious beaste. It chaunceth also, that a prince takynge hys pleasure only, and vsynge hys affecciōs, by name he is a lorde, but in dede he is a beaste, so that it was well sayde of Bias one of the seuen sages of Grece: Magistratus uirum ostendit, that is: Autho¦rite or rule of a cōmunalte declareth what a man is. For dominion doth vtter a man what he is, seynge also that the commune people darre not wythstande for feare of punyshment the cōmaundementes of theyr heades, though they were wycked and vn∣godlye. For thys cause ought the superiours greatly to drede God, seynge they nede to
feare men so lytle, and to knowe hym & hys workes perfectly, and wyth greate care and diligence to walke and exercyse hymselfe therin, as Paul doth exhorte in the .xii. chap¦ter to the Romaynes, sayenge: Let hym that ruleth, be diligent. Moreouer ther is nothynge in all the scripture that doth so greatly concerne the superiorite, as thys moost holy songe of the blessed virgyne & mother of God, the which ought to be well learned and exercysed of all them that wyll rule well and be good go¦uernours. For the mother of God syngeth here moost pleasauntly of the feare of God, what LORDE our God be, & what hys wor¦kes be in hygh and lowe estates. Let other geue ear to theyr paramours, syngyng some wanton worldly songe: but vnto thys so ma∣nered virgine becōmeth a prince & lorde to geue eare, yt whych syngeth a spiritual, chast and wholsome songe. Nother is it a costume reprouable, that in all churches thys songe is dayly songe at euensonge, & that wyth a sundery & honest tune (yf ye vnderstandynge therof were also so earnestly declared) Now wolde God ye sprete of the same beawtyfull mother of God were geuen me, whych may so pythfully & profytably declare hyr songe,
that your princely grace, & all we may sucke therout a healthfull vnderstandynge, a law∣dable lyfe, & after this lyfe, to synge the euer∣lastyng Magnificat in the lyfe to come. Amē ¶The songe of Mary called Magnificat. My soule magnifyeth the LORDE. And my sprete reioyceth in God my Sa¦ueoure. For he hath loked vpon the lovve de∣gre of hys handmayden. Beholde, from hence forth shal al gene¦racions call me blessed. For he that is myghty hath done great thynges vnto me, and Holy is hys name. And hys mercy endureth thorovv out all generaciōs, vpon them that feare him. He shevveth strength vvyth hys arme, and scattereth them that be proude in the imaginacion of theyr harte. He putteth dovvne the myghty frō the seate, and exalteth them of lovve degre. He fylleth the hungry vvith good thin¦ges, and letteth the rych go empty. He remēbreth mercy, and helpeth vp hys seruaunt Israel. Euen as he promysed vnto our fathers, Abraham, and to hys sede for euer.
¶The prologe. THat we maye the better vn∣derstāde thys songe of prayse, it is to be marked that ye lau∣dable virgine Mary speaketh by hyr owne experiēce, where by she is taughte & illumined of the holy goost. For no man may perfectly vnderstande the worde of God, wythout he haue it of the holy goost wythout ony mea∣nes. And no mā cā haue it of the holy goost, wythout he proue and searche it: and in the same tryenge and searchynge doth the holy goost teach, as in hys scoole. Wythout the whyche ther is nought taughte saue onely a shadowe, wordes and multiplyenge of wor∣des. Euen so lykewyse (whan the blessed vir∣gine had proued by herselfe that God hadde wrought so great thynges in her, whych not wythstandynge was vyle, poore and despy∣sed,) dyd the holy goost teach her thys ryche doctrine and wysedome, namely: that God is such a LORDE whych hath nought to do saue to exalte it that is lowe, to depresse & to put downe that is exalted, to breake it that is made, and to make it that is broken. For as in the begynnynge of all creatures
God dyd create the worlde of nought: (wher¦of he is called a creatoure and almyghtye) euē so abydeth the same nature in hym styll vnchaunged. And all hys workes haue ben, & shalbe done so vnto the worldes ende, that he shal make of ye whych is nothyng, vyle, de¦spysed, small, myserable and dead in compa∣rison, some specyall, costly, honorable, health¦full and lyuynge thynge. And agayne al that is sōwhat, costly, honorable, lyuely, to make it nought, small despysed, myserable, mortall and transitory. After whych fashion and ma∣ner no creature can nor maye worke, that is, of nought to make ought, so that hys eyen are toward the depth, and not to the heyght as the .iii. chyldren sayde, Daniel the thyrde Chapter. Blessed be thou that lokest tho∣rowe the depe, and syttest vpon the Cheru∣bins. And also Dauid Psalm. C.xxxvii. Thoughe the LORDE be hyghe, yet hath he respecte vnto the lowly: as for the proude he beholdeth hym afarre of. Item Psalm. C.xi. Who is lyke vnto the LORDE our God, that hath hys dwellynge so hyghe, whyche humbleth hymselfe to beholde that is in heauen and earth? For seynge he is the supreme and moost hyghest of all, and nothynge aboue hym, therfore maye he
not loke aboue hym: nother maye he loke be¦sydes hym, seynge none is to be cōpared wt hym. Thus must he nedes behold hymself, & loke vnder hym. And euē so ye deper a mā lo∣keth vnder hym, ye better he seyeth hymselfe. But the worlde & mans eyen do the con∣trary, they loke only aboue themselues, they wyll mount on hygh as Salomon sayeth: Pro. xxx. Ther are people which haue hygh lokes, & cast vp theyr eyelyddes. Thus we se dayly that euery one loketh only vpward to ryches, honoure, authorite, science, easy lyfe and to all that is greate and hygh in thys worlde. And where such are, to thē doth eue∣ry man cleue, to thē runneth euery man, thē is euery mā glad to please and to serue, with them wyll euery man ioyne hymselfe and be partaker of theyr exaltacion & hygh estate: so that it is not sayde for nought in ye scripture that few kynges and princes haue ben good and vertuous. Agayne nomā wyl loke downward, where are pouerte, despysyng, anguysh, mysery and sorow, frō thence doth euery man wende his eyen. And where suche people is, frō thence doth euery man runne, they be shuned, no∣ther doth ony man assyste nor helpe thē, and prouyde so for thē, that they maye be able al∣so:
but must abyde styll in the depth and low estate. For ther wyll noman be such a crea∣toure amōge men, that wyl make ony thyng of that nothynge, accordynge to ye lesson of S. Paule Ro. xii. sayenge: Be of one mynde amonge youre selues. Be not proude in your owne conceates, but make your selues equall with them of the lowe sorte. And for thys cause doth ye syght of God cō¦tinue of one fashiō, which beholdeth ye depth, nede, and mysery, & is neare vnto all such as are in that depth & anguysh, and (as sayeth S. Peter) wythstandeth the hyghmynded, but geueth mercy vnto the lowly. Out of thys grounde now spryngeth loue and ye prayse of God: for nomā cā thanke and prayse God, without he fyrst loue hym: no∣ther may ony mā loue hym without he con∣fesse & knowlege hym in the best & syncerest maner he can. Nother maye he so be cōfessed and vttered, saue by hys worke, which is re∣membred, felte & tryed in vs. Wherfore now whan he proueth & knoweth God to be such one which loketh towarde the depth, and hel¦peth only the poore, despysed, wretched, my∣serable, forsaken & them that are nothynge, than is he so inflamed in loue, that his hart euen floweth ouer in ioye, leapeth and
for delyte that he hath gotten in God. And euen there is than the holy goost that tea∣cheth such vnspeakeable connynge and lust at the twynklynge of an eye, whan a man is so tryed. For thys cause also hath God charged vs all with death, and the crosse of Christe, and with innumerable paynes and sufferynges, charged hys ryght welbeloued chylderen the Christians, sufferynge them somtyme to fall in synne, that he maye se so much the deper, that he maye helpe many, worke muche, she∣wynge hymselfe a true creatoure thereby, that he maye knowe hymselfe thereby, and maye cause hymselfe to be louynge and mooste laudable. Where contrary wyse the worlde (God amende it) wyth his hygh and ouerseynge eyes is alwaye repynynge wythoute ceassynge, and letteth the syghte, workes, helpe, knowlege, loue and prayse of God, robbynge it selfe of such honoure, frute, ioye and saluacion. After thys maner hath he also throwen his only beloued sonne Iesu Christe in the depth of all myserye, and euydently declared hys seynge, worke, helpe, nature, counsell and wyll, that it myghte  to what intent he suffereth it to . Therfore remayneth in Christe
suche notable prouynge, full knowlege, loue and prayse of God foreuer, as sayeth the .xv. Psalme: Thou shalt make me full of ioye wyth thy countenaunce. (that is,) That he seyth and knowlegeth the. Of thys speaketh Dauid also in the .xliiii. Psalme, sayenge: that all sayntes shall do nothynge but prayse God in heauē, for lokynge vpon thē in theyr depth, and hath made thē thankfull, louynge and praysynge in the same. Lykewyse also doth here the beloued mo∣ther of Christe, which wyth the ensample of hyr prouynge, and wyth hyr wordes, tea∣cheth vs how we shulde knowlege, loue and prayse God. For seynge she reioyceth and thanketh God here wyth a ioyfull and lea∣pynge sprete, that he hath loked vpon her, though she were lowlye and nothynge in hyr owne and mens syghte: therfore is it to be beleued that she hath had symple frendes poore, and rather of the lowest sorte. And thys wyll we now so saye, because of them that be symple and of the lowest sorte them∣selues. At Ierusalem doutlesse were the doughters of the hyghe prestes, and of the counsellers, fayre, yonge and bewtyfull vir∣gines taught and brought vp after ye mooste honest maner before all the contry, as nowe
are also the doughters of many kynges prin∣ces and other noble and rych mē. Notherse∣meth she to haue ben the doughter of the chefe ruler of Nazareth hyr natyfe cōtry, but rather of a meane poore cytesins, where vn∣to was not geuen greate hede or force. Yee she was rekened amōge hir neghboures and theyr chyldren for none other saue a seruyng mayde, vnto whome the charge of houswy∣fery and the cattel was committed: as poore maydens do, whome lyke charge is cōmitte to be faythfully executed. For thus prophecyed Esaye in hys .xi. chapter: Ther shall a rodde come forth of ye kynred of Iesse, and a blossome out of hys rodde, and the sprete of the LORD shal lyght vpon it. The stocke and roote of the kynred of Iesse or Dauid is the virgine Mary, the rodde and blossome is Christe. Now lyke as it is not sene, yee incredible that out of a seere and rottē stocke or roote shulde growe a fayre rodde or blossome: euen so was it not to be loked for nor lykely, that Mary the vir¦gine shulde be ye mother of such a chylde. For I thynke Mary was not called a stocke and a roote therfore only, because that aboue na¦ture & vnstayned flore of hyr maydenheade she became a mother, as it is also aboue na∣ture
ye a rodde shuld springe of a dead blocke: But also because that she was of a kynglye stocke and of Dauids kynred, which was sō∣tyme buddynge, florysshyng, honorable, puys¦saunte, rych and happy, both in hys and Sa∣lomons tyme, and a thynge greatly set by a∣monge men. But at the laste, whan Christe shulde come, dyd the hygh prestes vsurpe and take to themselues that dignite, hauyng the rule alone, and the kyngly progeny or kynred was fallē to extreme prouerte, and despysed as a deade blocke, so that ther was no hope nor lokynge for more, that ony kyng of great worshyp and renowne shulde sprynge of it. And whā it was in thys state, and euē come to ye lowest, thā doth Christe come of a small stocke, borne of a symple and poore virgine, and so the rodde and blossome of such a per∣sone, as the doughters of my lorde Annas & Caiphas wolde not haue wytesafe to haue done the vylest seruice of theyr handmaydē. Thus go the workes of God and hys syghte in the depthes, and the workes and lokes of men only in the heyghte. And thys is the cause of hyr loude songe of prayse, which we wyll now heare from verse to verse.
My soule magnifieth the LORDE. That worde brusteth out of a vehemente heate and ouerflowynge ioye, wherewyth hyr mynde and conuersacion heaue it selfe wholy in sprite inwardly: Wherfore she sayeth not: I do magnifye the LORDE, but my soule. As yf she wolde saye: My lyfe and all my thoughtes dryue, compelle and ouer∣flowe in the loue and prayse of God and ex∣ceadynge gladnesse, so that I (euen besydes my selues) ame rather heaued than do heaue to prayse God. Euen as it chaunceth also vnto them that be endued wyth godly swete¦nesse and sprete: so that they fele more, than they can vtter and expresse wyth wordes. For it not mans worke to geue thankes vn∣to God wyth ioye. It is rather a ioyfull mynde, and the only worke of God, the whiche is not perceaued by vtteraunce, but by experience, as sayeth Dauid in the .xxxiii. Psalme: Tayste and se how good the LORDE is, happy is the mā that trusteth in hym. He sayeth fyrste: Tayste, and than se, because he can not be knowen wyth∣out a mans owne experience: wher vnto neuerthelesse noman commeth, wythoute he do wholye and fullye truste in God, whan he is into the depthe and anguyshe:
and for thys cause doth he adde continently and sayeth: Happy is the man that trusteth in hym. For such one shall perceaue ye worke of God in hymselfe, and by thys waye he shall come to the perceaueable swetenesse, and therby come to all vnderstandynge, and knowlege. Now let vs marke & weye euery worde in order: The fyrst is, My soule. Scripture dealeth man in thre partes, as Paule the fyrst to the Tessalonians the last Chapter sayeth: The very God of peace, sanctifye you thorow out. And I praye God that your whole sprete, soule and body be kepte blame¦lesse vnto the commynge of our LORDE. And euery one of these thre, wyth al the mā, is agayne dealte another waye in two, na∣mely: the fleshe, and the sprete. The whyche particion is not of the nature, but of the be∣ynge or propernesse. That is to say: Nature path .iii. partes, namely: the sprete, the soule, and the body, and all thre maye altogether, be ether good or bad, and is than called the sprete and the fleshe, wherof we wyll not speake at thys tyme. The fyrst part (that is) the sprete, is the moost excellente, the depest and the mooste noblest parte of man, wherewyth he is apte
to vnderstande incomprehensible, inuisible and eternall thynges: and to be shorte, it is the house wherin fayth and ye worde of God are conteyned, wherof Dauid speaketh in ye L. psalme sayenge: LORDE renewe a ryght sprete in myne intrayles, that is, a strayght and not bowed fayth. And agayn in ye .lxxvii. psal. speakyng of the vnfaythful, he sayeth: A frowarde & ouerthwart generaciō, a genera¦cion that set not theyr harte aryght, & whose sprete was not true towarde God. The seconde part, the soule; is euen the same sprete after the nature, but after ano∣ther operaciō. Namely, in that it quyckeneth the body and worketh by the same, and is of∣tentymes taken in scripture for lyfe. For the sprete maye lyue well ynough wythout the body, but so maye not the body. Thys parte se we also that euen as we slepe it doth lyue and worke wythout ony ceassynge. And hys cōdicion or properte is not to perceaue thin¦ges that be incomprehensible, but suche, as reason can haue knowlege of and measure: And reason is the chefe lyght in thys house. Yee wythout the sprete beynge lyghtened wyth fayth, or a greater lyght do rule & gyde thys lyght of reason, it can not be wythoute errour: for it is to vyle, to beare ony swynge
in godly busynesse. Vnto these two partes doth scripture attribute much: but chefelye wysedome and knowlege: wysedome vnto ye sprete, and knowlege vnto the soule. Besy∣des these attributeth it also, hate, loue, plea¦sure, lothsomnes, and such lyke. The thyrde is the body wyth hys mem¦bres, whose workes are mere exercyse & vse of such thynges as the soule knoweth, and ye sprete doth beleue. And to confirme thys by a wytnesse of the scripture: Moses made a Tabernacle with a threfolde and seuerall mansion: The fyrst was called Sanctū san∣ctorum, in the which God dwelled, and this had no lyght. The second was called Sanc∣tum, wherin was the candelsticke wyth the seuen shaftes and lampes. The thyrde was called the forecourte, whych was vnder the open skye, and bare to the Sonne beames. In thys fygure is euery Christen man feat∣ly described: For hys sprete is ye Sanctū sāc∣torū, ye is, the moost holy, ye dwellyng of God in a secrete & (as a mā myght say) in a darke fayth: for he beleueth it yt he cā not perceaue with his eyesyght, nother feleth, nor yet doth comprehende. The Soule is the Sanctum, (that is ye holy) there be the .vii. lampes, that is, all maner of vnderstandynge, ye differēce and knowlege of corporal & visible thynges.
The bodye is the forecourte, whych is bare to euery man, so that they maye se what he doth, and how he lyueth. Therfore now prayeth Paule & sayeth: The very God of peace sanctifye you tho∣rowout. Not only in one parte; but thorowe out, that the sprete, soule, bodye, and altoge∣ther be holy. Here were many thynges to be spoken, of the cause of thys prayer, but I wyl brefely rehearse some of them: Yf the sprete be not holy, ther shall nothynge els be holy. Than is the moost ieoperdy and busynesse in the holynesse of the sprete, whych consys∣teth only in a pure fayth: that is, yf ye sprete be not combred wyth comprehensible thyn∣ges, as it is sayd. In the meane tyme than come false teachers, whych entyse the sprete forth of it, whan the one seketh to be ryghte∣ous by these workes, another by that waye and maner. Yf the sprete be not here wel pro¦uyded and wyse, then falleth it out and fol∣loweth, and cōmeth to leane vpon outward workes & costumes, whereby it imagineth to be saued. Lo so soone is fayth lost, & the sprete dead before God. Vpon thys grewe sectes and orders, so that ye one becōmeth a Charterhouse mōke, another a Grayfrere: the one endeuoureth
to be saued wyth fastyng, ye other wyth pray¦enge, & another by this maner & fashiō: one by this & another by ye worke procure to flye euerlastynge damnacion. And yet are they all euen but mēs inuēcions, euē such as one mans chosynge hath foūded. Reade therof ye treatyse of orders & sectes. Nother are they commaunded by God, but inuented by mē: aboute the whych the vayne ianglers haue no respecte of fayth, but teach alwaye the cō¦fidence of workes, so longe tyll they be at va¦riaunce wythin themselues: Euery mā wyl be nearest the marke, & despyse the other, as our obseruaūtes do nowe a dayes swell and heaue thēselues. Agaynst these workers and good men in syght, or rather hypocrites doth Paule praye, sayeng: that God is ye God of peace, of whom these varienge hypocrites, & haters of peace are not partakers, nor ha∣uynge hym, can holde ye same, wythout they byd farewell theyr statutes, rules & ceremo∣nies, & be all one mynded in fayth & sprete, knowlegynge that workes cause variaunce, synne & dissencion, & onely fayth maketh ho∣nest, one mynded & peaceable mē, as wytnes¦seth the .lxvii. Psal, sayenge: He is the God yt maketh mē to be of one mynde in ye house. And agayne in ye .C.xxxii. Psalme: Beholde
Euen so sheweth Mary wherof hyr songe of prayse shall synge and treate, namely: of the renowmed & excellent workes of God, the comforte of our fayth, to cōforte ye lowly and to fraye all the hyghest of the earth. And to these thre vses or cōmodities is it necessa¦rye for me to directe thys virgyns songe of prayse, that she haue not songe it only to her¦selfe, but to vs all, that we shulde coūterfayt her. Nother is it possible that ony man ether shulde be afrayed, or receaue consolaciō out of so great workes of God, wythout he not onely beleue that God can & knoweth to do great thynges, but also he must beleue that he wyl do them, and hath pleasure in doynge them. Nother is it ynough to beleue yt God wyll do great thynges wyth other, and not wyth you, and by thys meanes to auoyde your selues from the workes of God. Euen as they do, whych beynge in prosperite or set in authorite, feare not God: and they that be feblemynded tremble and be abashed of hym in theyr aduersyte. For such fayth is no thynge and euen dead, lyke vnto an opinion cōceaued of some tale. But ye must set hys wyl surely & stedfastly afore your eyes, thyn¦kyng wythin your mynde yt he both wyl now & hereafter also do great thynges wyth you.
Thys fayth is lyuely, growynge, pearsynge through and chaungynge a man, and ma∣kynge hym euen a newe creature: and cō∣pelleth hym to feare, yf he be hygh: and con∣ceaue consolacion, yf he be lowly. Yee the hygher he is, the more ought he to feare: and the lower he is, to haue the more con∣solacion, the whiche none other fayth doth. But what must he do in extreme necessite, or daunger of death? Surely than muste he not onlye beleue that God can, and knoweth how to helpe hym, but also that he wyl helpe hym: where a straunge and an vn¦speakeable thynge must be done, namelye, that he delyuered from the death euerla∣stynge, do becōme the chylde of saluacion, & the sonne and heyre of God. Thys fayth (as wytnesseth Christe hymselfe) is able to do all thynges. Thys fayth doth abyde, and cōmeth to the knowlege of the godly wor∣kes, from thence into the loue of God, and forthe from thence into the praysynge and thankynge of God: so that a man doth than make much of God, and conceaue a good opinion of hym. For God in his nature is not magni∣fyed of vs, seynge he is immutable, but in oure knowlege and mynde: that is, yf we
holde muche of hym, or set muche by hym, specially for hys godnesse and mercy. For thys cause doth not the blessed mother say: My voyce, my mouthe, myne handes, my thoughtes, nor my reason and wyll do mag¦nifye the LORDE, (for ther are manye one, that prayse God wyth loude voyce, praysynge and preachynge hym with preci∣ouse and godlye wordes, speakynge, dispu∣tynge, wrytynge and payntynge muche of hym, and also many that haue greate medi∣tacions, and by the gyde of reason haue greate searchynges of hym: fynally ther are some that wyth fayned religion and in¦tente make muche of hym.) but she sayeth of thys wyse: My soule magnifyeth God, (that is) my whole lyfe, senses, and powers haue a greate opinion of God: so that as though she were rauyshed vp to hym, she felte some raysynge and rauyshynge in hys goodnesse, the whiche the verse followynge doth declare. Of thys wyse se we also, that yf ony man doth vs good, that euen all our wyttes be moued and bended to hym, so that we saye Oh how greate and good opi∣nion do I conceaue of thys man? And euen thys is the verye sygnifycacion of the sayenge: My soule magnifyeth the Lorde.
Howe muche more shall suche lyuelye stea∣rynge be caused, what tyme as we perceaue the goodnesse of God, the whyche is verye greate in hys workes, so that euen wor∣des and thoughtes shal fayle, and the whole lyfe and soule shall be necessarelye stea∣red, and euen as though all that is quycke and lyuely in vs wolde synge and prayse God. Now are ther two false spretes, whiche can not synge the Magnificat aryght: The fyrste that prayse not God before he haue fyrste done them good, as Dauid sayeth: They shall prayse the whan than hast done good vnto them. These seme to prayse God very earnestly, but seynge they neuer wyll suffre the depth, the makynge lowe,, and sub¦duynge, they can neuer fele and perceaue ye ryght wayes of the LORDE, and so conse∣quently nother loue nor prayse God truly. Hereby commeth it that the worlde now a dayes is full of diuine seruices (as they call them) and laudes, wyth syngynge, prea∣chynge, playenge on the organes and other instrumentes of musike: Yee and this songe of prayse called Magnificat also. But thys is to be pytyed, namely, that so precious a songe is handled so vnfrutefully & wythoute pyth
of vs, the which we do not synge, wythoute all thynges go well wyth vs: for yf ony mys¦chaunce do happen vnto vs, than hath oure syngynge an ende, nother is ther ony re∣garde or estimacion more of God, thyn∣kynge that nother he can nor wyll worke wyth vs, and therfore haue both syngynge, and the Magnificat also done wyth vs. The other be yet more peryllous, which leane to the other syde, the which be proude of the gyftes of God, and do not thanke the pure wyll of God for it, wyllyng parte both of the prayse and hygh estimacion to be as∣cribed vnto themselues. Such wyll be sene aboue other, and beholdyng the great good that God hathe done wyth them, stomble thereat, vsynge it as theyr owne, auaūcyng and heauynge themselues aboue suche as haue not those gyftes, as though they were some straunge or peculiare thynge. Thys veryly is a brykle and yeoperdous hauen for shyppes, it is a daungerous estate. The gyftes of God be suche that they make men proude & to stande in theyr owne conceate and opinion: and therfore it is requyred that the laste worde be consydered, namely, the Lorde. For Mary sayethe not: My soule magnifyeth herselfe, or setteth greate
pryce by hersefe, yee she wold haue nothyng to be holden of her: but she doth exalte and lyfte vp God only, vnto hym she geueth glory, robbynge herselfe thereof, and ascri∣beth and referreth all thynges vnto hym. And though she perceaued the moost plen∣teous workes of God in herselfe, yet was she of that mynde and abode therin, that she dyd not exalte herselfe aboue the moost vy∣lest and pooreste man on earth: and yf she had done so, than hadde she fallen wyth Lucifer into the lowest bottome of hell. Nother hath she thought otherwyse than yf suche goodnesse of God hadde hap∣pened vnto another handmayden, she wold haue ben euen as wel content, & wysh it her so well, as herselfe: yee she hath coūted her∣selfe vnworthy, & al other worthy of such ho∣noure, nother wold she finally haue ben mis¦content yf God takynge agayn frō her such gyftes, had geuen them vnto another in hyr presence. So lytell dyd she drawe all thys to herselfe, and left Gods gyftes fre, whole and proper to hymselfe, vsynge herselfe as a glad hospitall and a gladde oostesse of suche a geste: and therfore hath she also kepte it foreuer. Lo thys is sayde to magnifye God, of thys wyse to haue a great opinion and
hyghe estimacion of hym, and of vs no∣thynge. Hereby now is it euident in what greate yeopardy of fallynge and synnynge she was, so that it is no lesse maruayll how she dyd so refrayne herselfe that she dyd not pryde and swell for the exceadynge plentye of goodes, nother dyd ascribe ought to her∣selfe: than that she dyd receaue them. Thyn¦kest thou not that to be a wonderous harte? She seyeth herselfe a mother of God, ex∣cited farre aboue all men: yet neuerthe∣lesse doth she remayne in that lowlynesse, simplicite, vpryghtnesse and courteousy that she hath not counted the leest handmay¦den to be vnder her. O we moost wretches, whome yf a fewe goodes, a lytle authorite or honoure, or a lytle more bewty than ano∣ther do befall can not counte vs equal with them of the lower sorte: nother cā we make an ende of suche opinion and standynge in oure owne conceate: what wolde we do yf we had great and hygh gyftes? Wherfore God letteth vs remayne styll in pouerte and wantynge, because we kepe not hys bewtyfull goodes vndefyled, & can vse vs as we dyd before we dyd receaue them. But we let oure myndes increase
or decrease, as the goodes ether growe or minysh. But the harte of the virgine Mary remayneth euer stedfaste in one mynde and equalite, she letteth God worke in her ac∣cordynge to hys wyll and pleasure, takynge therby nomore saue an earnest consolacion, ioye and truste to Godwarde, and euen so ought we to do also: for that were truely to synge the Magnificat. And my sprete reioyceth in God my Sa∣ueoure. What the sprete be, haue we shewed a lytle before, namely, it that perceaueth thyn¦ges incomprehensible by fayth. And ther∣fore she calleth God hyr Saueoure or sa∣uynge health, the whiche fayth she had con∣ceaued by the worke that God declared to her. And verely she begynneth after a com∣ly order in that she calleth God fyrste hyr LORDE, and than hyr Saueoure, and fyrste hyr Saueoure before she rehearse his workes. Where wyth she teacheth vs, howe after a ryghte order we oughte to loue and to thanke God onlye and purely, nother seke ought of oure owne. Nowe doth he loue and thanke God purely, syncerelye and truely, whyche prayseth hym for none
other cause, saue that he is good: ether be∣holdeth noughte in hym, but only hys bare goodnesse, and in the same only he hath hys ioye and delyte. And thys is the hyghest and moost fayrest maner to loue & prayse God, which agreeth very well vnto such an excel¦lente and demure sprete, as the holy vir∣gins is. The vncleane and frowarde louers, which are nothynge but vsurers, sekynge in God that is theyr owne, suche nother loue nor prayse hys bare goodnesse. For they do beholde themselues, countynge only howe good God be to them, that is, howe muche he doth declare hys goodnesse towarde thē and doth well by them, euē that they do fele it: the whiche do also conceaue greate and hyghe thynges in theyr myndes of hym, and ioyfully do synge of hym and prayse hym, as longe as they fele the benefites of God. But whan God doth hyde hymselfe, or withdraweth a lytle the beames of his good¦nesse, so that they seme bare and banyshed, than hath the loue and prayse an ende, no∣ther can they loue or prayse the bare and vn¦feleable goodnesse hydde in God: whereby they declare, yt theyr sprete dyd not reioyce in God theyr Saueoure, & that there was
no true loue, no prayse of the bare goodnesse of God, but that they delyted more in the sa¦uynge health, than in the Saueoure, in the gyftes thā in the geuer, in ye creatures more then in the creatoure. Nother can they re∣mayne of one mynde in plentyfulnesse and in scarsenesse, in abundaunce of goodes and in wantynge the same, in ryches and pouer∣te: contrary to saynt Paule, whych sayde to the Philippians the .iiii. Chapter: I haue learned in whatsoeuer estate I am, therwith to be contente. I can be lowe and I can be hygh. Euery where and in all thynges I am mete, both to be full, & to be hungry: to haue plenty, and to suffre nede. I can do al thyn∣ges thorow Christ, whych strengtheth me. Of thys thynge speaketh the .xlviii. Psalme on thys wyse: He shall speake good of the, so longe as thou doest hym good. As though he wolde saye: He seketh his, and not thyne. Yf they had receaued pleasure and riches of thyne hande, thou shuldest be lytle set by of them, they wold make lytle of the. As Christ also sayd Ioh. vi. vnto them that sought hym Verely, verely I saye vnto you: Ye seke me not because ye sawe the tokens, but because ye dyd eate of the loaues and were fylled. Suche vncleane false spretes stayne and de¦fyle
all Gods gyftes, lettynge hym to geue more, and to worke more luckelye wyth them. Wherof let vs heare a proper en∣sample: A certayne honest woman and fearyng God dyd se .iii. virgins syttyng by an altare, and at massynge tyme, a goodly boye lepte from the altare vnto ye fyrst virgyne, vsynge her very frendly, claspynge her aboute the necke, and smylynge vpon her. After that wente he to the seconde, but he dyd not be∣haue hymselfe so familiarly to her, neuerthe∣lesse he lyfte vp hyr vayle, and smyled vpon her. Vnto the thyrde he shewed no sygne of loue at al, but bet her on the face, haled her by the heere, trode her wyth hys fete, & vsed her very vncourteously: and sodenly lepte a¦gayne vpon the altare, & vanyshed awaye. Then was the interpretacion of that syght shewed vnto the woman. The fyrste virgyne signifieth the vnclenly spretes, se∣kynge theyr owne, vnto whome God muste geue many good thynges, and rather accom¦plysh theyr mynde and wyll, then hys owne, whyche wyll wante nothynge, and euer haue comforte and pleasure of God, not be∣ynge suffised wyth the goodnesse of God. The second sygnifieth those spretes, whych
haue begonne to serue God, and can suffre some scarcenesse, yet neuerthelesse are not wythout loue of themselues and theyr pro∣fyte. Vnto them muste he sometyme shewe a smylynge countenaunce, lettynge them as¦saye hys goodnesse, that thereby they myght learne to loue hys bare goodnesse, and hygh¦ly to prayse it. The thyrde virgine, poore, wretched and cleane forsaken hath nothyng but mysery & smarte, she seketh no profyt she is content therwyth yt God is good, though she shulde neuer assaye it (the whych neuer∣thelesse can not be) the same abydeth of one fashion and of both the sydes, ether to loue or to prayse ye goodnesse of God, as wel whā it is felt, as whā it is not felt: nother doth she fal vpon ye goodes whā they fal to her, nor fal¦leth frō thē whā they fayle. And this is ye true spouse of Christe, whych sayeth to hym: I wyll not it that thyne is, but thyselfe: I loue the no better whyle all thynges go prospe∣rously, than I do hate the whyle it goeth cō¦trary wyth me. Wyth such maner of spretes is it fulfyl∣led that is wrytten: Thou shalte not turne from the ryghte waye of God, nother to the ryght, nor to the left hande. That is, Ye shal loue & prayse god aryght & straightly, nother
bended to your selues, nor youre profytes. Suche sprete had Dauid, whan he beynge dryuen from Ierusalem by hys sonne Absa∣lon, was of that mynde▪ that he beynge cast awaye for euer, wolde neuer loke for to come agayne, nother in the kyngdome, nor in the fauoure of God, so that he sayde (as it is wrytten in the seconde boke of Samuel the fyftenth Chapter:) Yf I shal fynde grace before the LORDE, he shall fetch me a∣gayne, and let me se it (meanynge the Arke) and the house of it. But yf he saye thus: I haue no pleasure to the, beholde, here am I, let hym do wyth me as it pleaseth hym. O what a pure sprete was that, whych dyd not ceasse to loue, prayse and to obey the plea∣sure of God, no not in extreme necessite. Suche sprete also doth the holy mother and virgine Marye shewe, whan she ebbynge and flowynge in the myddest of al ouerflow¦ynge and excellent goodes dyd not stomble nor fall at them, nother seketh hyr owne, but kepeth hyr sprete pure and wythout blame in the loue and prayse of the mere goodnesse of God, glad and wyllynge to take in good worth, yf God wyll spoyle her of the same a∣gayne, and leaue her a poore, naked and fay¦lynge sprete.
Moreouer as it is more ieopardous to refrayne hymselfe in wealth, ryches & great worships, than in pouerte, shame and wret∣chednesse, seynge ryches mynistre great oc∣casion to wyckednesse: euen so is thys pure and wonderfull sprete of Mary so muche more to be allowed, that she beynge endued wyth so exceadyng hygh honoures, doth not for all them set vp hyr combe, behauyng her selfe as though she sawe it not, remaynynge strayght & ryght in the hygh waye, leanynge to the goodnesse of God only, the whych she nother feleth nor seyth, settynge lytle store by such goodes as she feleth, nor taking plea¦sure in them, nother sekynge it that is hyr owne, so that out of a true and ryght funda∣ment she doth synge: My sprete reioyceth in God my Saueour. It is truly a spret that spryngeth of fayth only, and reioyceth not for the goods of God whych the blessed vir∣gine dyd fele, but for God onely, whom she felte not, and is glad of hyr saluacion, whych she now knewe by fayth. These lo are the true, lowly, empty, and hungry spretes, of ye whych we shall shortly speake. By thys now maye we knowe & iudge how ful thys present worlde is of false prea∣chers, and sayntes, whych do beate in much
of good workes vnto the symple people. And though ther be fewe that preach earnestlye the very thynge, namely, how good workes ought to be done, (for many one do preache mans tradicions and workes, that they thē∣selues haue inuented & set vp) yet are many of thē (& that alas of ye best of them) so farre wyde out of the strayght and ryghte waye, that they dryue the commune people alway vpon the ryght hande. For they teach good workes and the wholsome lyuynge, not for the mere goodnesse of God, but for theyr a∣uauntage. For yf ther were no heauen nor no hell, and yf they loked for no grace of the goodnesse of God, they shulde soone leaue the goodes of God vnloued and vnpraysed. Those are sekers of themselues, hyrelinges, bondmen, straungers and not heyres, which make an Idoll of themselues, and aske loue and prayse of God, wyllyng God to do that vnto them, that they necessarylye shulde do vnto hym. They haue no sprete. Nother is God theyr Saueoure, but Gods gyftes saue them, where wyth he muste serue them as a seruaunte. They be the chylderen of Israell, vnto whom it suffised not to be fedde wyth heauenly Manna, but lusted also after fleshe, onyons and garlyke: and as they pery¦shed,
and attayned not the londe of promyse, so shall such false spretes do also. Now (God amende it) is all the worlde, all cloysters and temples full of suche kynde of men, whyche all throughe false, wycked and croked spretes do walke, driue, chase and heaue good workes so hygh, that finally they imagyn to deserue heauen by them: where before all thynges the goodnesse of God shulde haue bene declared. And it became vs to knowe, that lyke as God saued vs and made vs happye, wythout ony of oure me∣ryte or workynge: so lykewyse shulde we seke to worke wythout respecte of all pro∣fyte or rewarde, workynge good onely for the goodnesse of God, sekynge nothinge but that is pleasynge to hym: not hauynge an eye to the rewarde, whyche of hys owne swynge shall befall vnto vs, though we do not seke nor loke for it. For it can not be but the rewarde muste followe vs yf we do worke of pure and vpryghte sprete, wythout lokynge for rewarde or profyte. God refu∣seth a sprete that seketh hys owne profyte, nother wyll he euer geue hym ony re∣warde. Moreouer, as a chylde serueth hys father gladly and frely as an heyre, only for ye fathers wyl: (for yf he serueth him only
for the goodes and heretage, he is vnkynde, and worthye to be dishereted:) euen so muste they do that knowlege Christe to be theyr father and brother. For he hath loked vpon the lovve de∣gre of hys handmayden. Beholde, from hence forth shall all generacions call me blessed. The worde lowe degre haue some dra∣wen to humilite, as though the holy virgine had referred ought to herselfe, of hyr honest behaueoure, iustice and worke, and dyd re∣ioyce therin: Whereby it is come that some prelates, and specially the Antichristes do call themselues humiles or lowly, whych is farre wyde from the truth. For in the syghte of God can no mā boast of ony good thynge wythout synne and damnacion. Before him must a man reioyce only of hys pure good∣nesse and grace shewed vnto vs vnworthy, that not oures, but Gods loue and prayse re¦mayne in vs, & kepe vs: whych thynge Salo¦mon doth also teach Pro. xxv. sayenge: Put not forth thyselfe in ye presence of ye kynge, & preasse not in the place of great mē. Better it is that it be sayde vnto the: Come vp he∣ther, thā thou to be set downe in the presēce
of the prynce. How shulde than such boast & presumpcion be ascribed vnto thys chaste virgine, that she shulde auaunce hyr humy∣lite in the syght of God, which is the moost worthyest of all vertue? Nother doth onye man thynke or boaste hymselfe to be lowly, wythout he be the mooste proudest. Only God doth knowe, iudge and open the lowe degre or lowlynesse, so that mā neuer know¦eth lesse of it, than whan he is moost lowly. The vse of scripture is to call Humili∣are to cast downe, to preasse downe and to brynge to nought: wherfore Christen men also in some place of the scripture are cal∣led poore, vyle and brought lowe, as in the .C.xiiii. Psalme: I was brought downe, & he helped me. Humilite than is nothynge saue a despysed, vyle, depressed or cast down thynge or estate: of the which kynde are the nedy, sycke, hongry, thyrsty, presoners, trou¦bled & dyenge creatures: as Iob whā he was proued, Dauid as he was chaced & dryuen out of hys realme, and Christe wyth all the true Christians in theyr nede. And thys is the depth, whereof we haue spoken before, namely: that the eyes of the LORDE be∣holde the depthes, but mans eyen loke only in the heyghte: that is, the outwarde appea∣raunce
and shynynge estate or condicion. And for this cause is Ierusalem called a citie where vpon Gods eyen do beholde. After thys maner lyeth the Christen congregaciō or church in the depth, and is of no reputa∣tion before the worlde: wherfore God doth loke vpon it, and wendeth hys syghte alway vpon the same, as Dauid wytnesseth in the xxxi. Psalme, speakynge in the persone of God: I wyll enfourme the and shew the the waye wherein thou shalt go, I wyll fasten myn eyes vpon the. Of lyke fashion speaketh. Paule .i. Corin. i. sayenge: That folysh is before the worlde hath God chosen, that he myght con¦founde the wyse: and that weake is before ye worlde hath God chosen, that he myght con¦founde the myghty: and the vyle and despy∣sed before the worlde hath God chosen, yee and that which is nothynge, that he myghte destroy that, whiche is ought, that no fleshe shulde reioyce in hys presēce. By thys mea∣nes maketh God the worlde folysh, with all hys wysedome and strengthe, and geueth another wysedome and power. Seyng than that thys is the mynd of God, to loke down¦warde, and to the thynges that are nothyng therfore haue I englyshed ye word Humilitas
for a thynge of no price or regarde, so that thys be the mynde of Mary: God hath wen¦ded his eyen vpon me that ame a poore, vyle and a mayden of no regarde, which myghte easyly haue founde ryche, renowned, noble quenes and of great lynage, ether myght he haue chosen ye doughters of prynces & great estates, yee he myght haue chosen ye dough∣ters of Annas or Cayphas rulers of thys cō¦try: But he hath fastened vpon me the eyes of hys mere goodnesse, and vsed me that ame so vyle and despysed an handmayden, because none shulde boaste herselfe to haue ben worthy of such an office: & I also muste nedes graunte that it is only of pure grace and goodnesse that such doth happē vnto me and not for my merites or worthynesse, wherof I ame bare. Thus haue we now sufficiently shewed here aboue, how ye holy virgine vnloked for is come to thys honoure, out of a despysed estate: and how God hath so graciously lo∣ked vpon her. And for thys chaunce she doth not boast & auaunce hyr worthynesse or vn∣worthynes: but only she reioyceth of ye syght of God, which is so bounteous & gracious, yt he hath loked vpō so slender a maydē, & that so greatly, honorously and worshypfully.
Wherfore they that saye she dyd not auaūce hyr virginite, but hyr lowlynesse, do her in¦iury. For she nother dyd auaunce hyr virgi∣nite, nor lowlynesse, but the only, the godly and gracious syghte of God. Wherfore ther is no pyth or wayghte in the worde lovve degre, but in the worde he hath lo∣ked. For hyr surrendrynge is not to be pray¦sed and commended, but the lokyng of God vpon her. Euen as yf a noble prince shulde reach hys hande vnto a wretched begger, ye beggers hande is not to be alowed ther∣fore, but the prynces gentlynesse and fa∣miliarite. But that the wronge opinion maye be auoyded, and the true lowlynesse maye be knowen from the fayned, we wyll make a lytle digression, and treate of humilite or lowlynesse: for many one haue erred not a lytle therin. Humilite do we cal communely a wyl to smal and despysed thynges. Now are ther many that brynge water to the wel, namely they, that alwaye cōbre theyr myndes wyth vyle clothyng, persons outwarde gestures, townes, wordes and places, vpon them do they thynke, in them is theyr conuersacion, but to that intente, that by thesame they
myght be counted and estimed greate, rych, learned, holy, yee also God, as such that loue to be conuersaunte in lowly thynges. But yf they knewe, mē dyd not set thereby, they wolde ryght soone leaue them. Thys is a fayned lowlynesse, for theyr wycked eye be∣holdeth nought saue the rewarde, auayle and prayse of humilite. Nother beholde they the vyle thynges, not lokynge for rewarde and profite, nomore than a kooke doth to roost meate that doth not droppe: wherfore whan the rewarde and prayse do nomore appeare, than hath humilite done with thē. Such haue no affection to the vylenesse, be¦cause they be not of one harte and mynde in vyle thynges, they haue only the though¦tes, handes, mouth, clothynge and outward behaueoure in vylenesse, but theyr harte loketh to hygh thynges, to the which they do imagine to come: and such are they that counte themselues lowly holy sayntes. They that be lowly in dede, turne not theyr eyen to the rewarde and prayse of hu∣milite, but wt a simpel hart do they beholde the vyle thynges, beynge glad to be occupi∣ed in thesame, nother do they at ony tyme perceaue theyr lowlynesse. Here spryngeth the water out of the fountayne, here follow¦eth
it of hys owne swynge, wherfore they do vse vyle vestures, gestures, wordes, places and persones, though they do euery where shone gorgious and hyghe thynges: which thynge Dauid also wytnesseth in the .C.xxix. Psal. sayenge: LORDE I ame not hygh myn∣ded, I haue no proude lokes. &c. And Iob in the .xxii. chapter: Whoso humbleth hym∣selfe, shalbe set vp: and whoso loketh mekely, shalbe healed. Hereby commeth that vnto such doth honoure befal vnwares, and theyr heauynge vp wythoute foreknowlege or de∣liberacion. For they were content wyth theyr lowe estate and simple condicion, no∣ther thought they once vpon hygh thynges. But ye fayned lowly maruayle greatly that theyr exaltacion & honoure taryeth so longe, nother is theyr false and fayned pryde con∣tente with theyr vyle condicion, but secretly cōsydereth hygher estates in theyr myndes. Therfore dyd I saye that true humilite or lowlynes doth not at ony tyme perceaue that she is lowly, (for yf she dyd knowe it, she wolde be proude wyth the syghte of so greate a vertue) but wyth harte, mynde and all hyr wyttes is she pyght vpon sleghte and lowly thynges, whiche alwaye presente themselues to hyr syghte. These are hyr
images, wherein she hath hyr conuersacion and pastyme: and as lōge as she hath them in syghte, so longe can not she beholde herselfe nor be combred with herselfe: much lesse be rauyshed and haue pleasure in the contem∣placion and syghte of hygh and greate thyn∣ges, or geue hyr mynde therto. For thys cause than must the honoure and dignite be fall vnto her vnwares, & fynde her in though¦tes cleue contrary to honoures and digni∣tyes: for after thys maner doth Luke saye, that the Angels gretynge was straunge vn∣to the virgine, for it came sodenly and vn∣loked for. Yf thesame gretynge hadde chaun∣ced vnto Cayphas doughter, she wolde not haue thought: What maner of gretynge is thys, but wolde soone haue accepted it, and wolde haue sayde wythin herselfe: Ah howe well and happely doth thys befall? And agayne fayned lowlynesse doth ne∣uer know that she is proud: for yf she dyd, she shulde quickely be refrayned wyth the syght of the haynous faute, but she fasteneth hyr harte, mynde and thoughte vpon hyghe thynges, the whyche she hath in syght wyth∣oute ceassynge. These are hyr ymages, wherewyth she is alwaye combred, and as longe as she setteth hyr mynde on thē, she cā
nother beholde nor consydre herselfe. Wher¦fore the honoure commeth nother vnwares nor vnthought vpon, for it fyndeth though∣tes therto agreynge: but shame and enpo∣ueryshynge come vnloked for vnto such: for they were mynded to sayle with another & more luckelyer wynde. For thys cause is it not good to learne lowlynesse after thys maner, that he haue in syghte and imagine vyle and despysed thynges or persons. Nother contrarywyse waxeth ony man proude because he seyeth hygh and greate thynges. The images are not to be auoyded, but the eyē▪ must be wee¦ned therefrom. As longe as we lyue vpon earth, we must lyue both wyth the hygh and lowe thynges or estates: but (as Christ say∣eth) the eye must be put out. Genesis the .iii chapter sayeth not Moses, that Adam and Eue sawe other thynges after the preuari∣cacion, thā they dyd se before it, but yt theyr eyen were opened, that they myght se theyr nakednesse, where as they were naked be∣fore also, and yet dyd not consyder it. The quene Hester dyd weare a verye costlye crowne vpon hyr heade, yet dyd it seme but a stayned cloth in hyr syght. Here were not the hygh images taken away from her, but
rather were set before her, as vnto a mooste puissaunt quene, and no sleyght or vyle thyn¦ges were before her: but the syght was wen¦ded therfrom, and hyr harte and mynde dyd not beholde the hye thynges and gloriouse: Wherfore God wroughte also straungely wyth her. After thys fashion must not ye out¦warde thynges be altered, but we must be al¦tered in our mynde and wyttes: for thā shal we easely learne to despyse and flye hyghe thynges, to set much by and to seke sleyght & lowly thynges. For there is humilite or low¦lynesse founde and stedfast for all chaūces, & yet neuer are ware of it. This is done with delyte and the harte remayneth alwaye one and of one fashion, howsoeuer other thynges do befall or chaunge, ether to the heyghte or depth. But (LORDE God) what pryde skoul∣keth vnder the vylenesse of clothynge, wor∣des and behaueoure? wherof the world now a dayes is full. The whych visures and dis∣semblers do so submytte themselues, yt they wyll be despysed of no man: they do so flye honours, that they notwithstandynge wyll be chaced therwyth: they do so shone hyghe thynges, yt neuerthelesse they be not mysprai¦sed, nor theyr possessions mynished, ye whych
they couet alwayes to haue of the best and pycked out. But thys virgine vttereth no∣thynge but hyr vylenesse, wherin she lyued & abode wyllynglye, she neuer coueted nor thought vpon honoure and heyght, nother dyd she consyder and behold hyr lowlynesse. This humilite is so fayre and precious, that she can not abyde hyr owne countenaunce but that image is reserued vnto the face of God, as wytnesseth the .C.xii. Psalme, say∣enge: Who is lyke vnto the LORDE oure God that hath hys dwellynge so hygh, which humbleth hymselfe to beholde that is heauē and earth. For he that can beholde hys low∣lynesse, the same can iudge hymselfe worthy of eternal blesse, & so were Gods iudgement at an ende, seyng we know surely that God doth saue the lowlyones. Therfore muste God reserue and kepe the same for hymselfe to knowe and to iudge, and hyde them from vs wyth the fence of exercyse in lowly thyn∣ges, by beholdynge of the whych we also do forget ourselues. To thys now serue many persecucions, deathes & al kynde of trouble on earth, in ye which is trauayle & payne, ye wt thēwe may put out ye false & deceatful eye. Thus is it euidēt vnto vs by thys word humilite or lowlynesse, that Mary the vir∣gyne
was a despysed, vyle, and a mayden of no estimacion, & in thys lowe degre to haue serued God, and not to haue knowen, that hyr low estate was much worth before God Whereby we are taught and cōforted, that though we ought wyllyngly be despysed and brought low, yet shuld we not despayre ther¦fore, as though God dyd hate vs: but rather trust that he shalbe mercyful vnto vs. Only thys shal we beware, lest we be not wyllyng ynough in thys subduyng & castyng downe, lest oure wicked eye be to much open, and so deceaue vs wyth preuy lokynge vpon hyghe thynges, or searchynge out of our pleasures, wherwyth the humilite or lowlynesse do pe∣rysh. For what helpeth it ye dāned to be cast downe to the nedermost & lowest, seyng they do not suffre ye aduersite gladly and wyth a good wyll? And agayne what hurteth it the angels to be hyghly exalted, seyng they con∣ceaue no false lust and presumpcion therby? Finally, to be shorte, thys verse doth teach vs to know God truly, seynge it wyt∣nesseth that God doth behold lowly thynges and persons. And he knoweth God aryghte, that knoweth yt he bēdeth hys eyen to ye low∣ly, as we haue sufficiently declared: & of the same knowlege followeth the loue & trust to
Godwarde, so that a man do yelde hymselfe and followe hym wyllyngly. Of thys haue we a goodly place in the .ix. Chapter of Iere¦my, sayeng: Let not the wyseman reioyce in hys wysedome, nor the stronge man in hys strength, nother the rych man in hys riches: But who so wyll reioyce, let hym reioyce in thys, that he knoweth and vnderstādeth me. Thys doth Paule confirme in the .ii. epistle to the Corinthians the .xi. Chapter, sayeng: Let hym that reioyceth, reioyce in ye LORD After than that the mother of God had in such wyse praysed hir God and Saueour wyth a bare pure sprete, & ascribed none of the goodes to herselfe, and therfore had sōge truly vnto hym of hys goodnesse: now dothe she fynally and orderlye go to the prayse of hys workes & goodes. For (as we haue sayd before) we ought not to rūne headlynges to ye goodes of God, nother ought we to ascribe and drawe them to vs: but by thē as by step∣pes we muste pearse vnto the author & cause of all goodnesse, we must cleue vnto hym onely, and make much of hym. And after that prayse and thanke hym in hys workes, wherin he hath shewed vs suche goodnesse, that we maye truste, loue and prayse hym: so that hys workes are nothyng saue a great
occasion to loue and to thanke ye mere good∣nesse that raygneth ouer vs. She begynneth fyrst wyth her selfe, and syngeth what God hath done for her, wherin she teacheth vs two thynges: Fyrst, muste euery man marke diligently what God wor¦keth wyth hym, more than all the workes yt he doth wyth other. For thy blesse consysteth not in that he worketh wyth other, but wyth the. As (Ihon the .xxi. Chapter) whan Peter sayd of S. Ihon: LORDE, but what shall he do? Christ sayd vnto hym: Yf I wyll that he tary tyll I come, what is that to the? Fol∣lowe thou me. As thoughe he wolde saye: Ihons workes shall not auayle ye, thou must go to thy selfe, and take hede what I wyl do wyth the. Neuerthlesse a great mysuse of sel¦lynge good workes doth raygne in ye worlde now a dayes. For some presumptuous spre∣tes wyl helpe other, chefely such as lyue and dye wythout Gods owne workynge: euē as though they had to many good workes. Where Paul .i. Corin. iii. sayeth: that euery mā shalbe rewarded accordynge to his wor∣kes: ergo not after another mans workes. It myght be suffred yf they dyd pray for other, or brought theyr workes as meanes & intercessiōs to god. But seyng they come to
God therwyth, as wyth some gyfte or presēt it is a wycked and haynous intent. And (that moost abominable is) they deale and geue theyr workes vnto other, the whych neuer∣thelesse they knowe not howe acceptable they be vnto God. For God doth not be∣holde the workes, but the harte and fayth, by the whych he worketh wyth vs. Whereof they do not force, leanynge vpon ye workes only, wyth the whych they do deceaue them∣selues and other also. And so farre is ye mat∣ter come, that they perswade men that be at the poynte of death, to put on a freres ray∣ment, sayenge: that yf ony mā dye in so holy an habyte, al his synnes shalbe forgeuē hym, and get eternall blesse. Thus do they not on¦ly saue men wyth straūge good workes, but also wyth straunge garmentes. I thynke (yf ther were no hede taken therto) that the de∣uell wolde brynge such men so farre, yt they wolde thynke to brynge the people to heauē wyth religious meates, dwellynge, and bu∣ryenge. Good LORDE how feleable is thys darknesse, namely: that a coole or religious abyte may iustify and saue a man? for what nedeth fayth than? Let vs thā become al fre∣res, let vs all dye in frerely abites: & by that meanes shall cloth wante to make freres.
Beware, bewar of wolues, walkyng in such shepes clothyng, for they do begyle the & tear the, & thynke that God doth worke with the, & thy saluacion, & that by the worke yt he wor¦keth in the: nother put thy trust in ony other as thou seyst ye holy virgine Mary do here. And though thou doest vse to thys the inter∣cession of other, thou doest not euell: for we all ought to praye the one for the other. And no man shall trust vnto other mēs workes, wythout the owne & proper workes of God: but wyth great diligēce take hede to thyselfe & Gods workes, euen as though God & thou were one in heauē & earth, and though God dyd worke wyth noman but wyth the, and so forth loke vpon other mens workes also. The secōd that Mary teacheth, is, that euery mā wyl be ye fyrst in the praysynge of God, & to recyte the workes done to hym, & after ye yrayse hym also in other workes. Af∣ter thys maner do we reade ye Paule & Bar¦nabas dyd shewe vnto the apostles the actes that God wrought by thē: & agayne ye apost∣les shewed thē what God had wroughte by thē also. Lyke vnto this dyd they (in the last Chap. of Luke) shewyng ech other of ye resur∣recciō of ye LORD & appearyng to thē. Euen there doth finally begyn a cōmune ioye and
prayse of God, wher euery one prayseth the grace of another, and his moost of al, though he be vyler than another: nother doth he co∣uete to be the chefe in the goodes, but in the loue and prayse of God. For euery mā hath ynough of God, & hys mere goodnesse, how slender that euer hys gyfte be, so symple an harte hath he. But the hypocrites, sekynge theyr owne auayle loke a squynte and playe the luskes: whych whan they se they be not the chefest nor best in the goodes, they mur∣mure in steade of prayse, and saye: that they be ether lyke or vnder other, lyke as they dyd wherof we reade Math. xx. that murmured agaynst the husbandman, not that he dyd thē wronge, but that he coūted the last lyke wor¦thy of the dayes hyre wyth them. After thys maner are ther many foūde that do not prayse the goodnesse of God, yf they se that they haue not receaued so much as Peter, or ony of the other sayntes, ether thys or that holy man alyue on earth: thyn∣kynge that yf God had geuen them so many good gyftes also as he hath geuen to other, they wolde prayse and laude hym lykewyse, settynge it lyght to be endued of God wyth such goodes, as they do not perceaue, as be: the body, lyfe, reason, substaunce, honoures,
frendes, the seruice of the Sonne, wyth al o∣ther creatures. The which persons, yf they had all the goodes that Mary had, yet wolde not they knowlege nor prayse God in them, For as sayeth Christe Luke .xvi. He that is faythfull in ye leest, is faythful also in much: and he that is vnryghteous in the leest, is vnryghteous also in muche. Therfore are not they worthy of the greate and much, be¦cause they despyse the small or lytle. Yf they dyd prayse God in the leest, they shuld haue abundauntly the greate: wherof the cause is they haue theyr syghte aboue them, and not vnder them. For yf they had theyr syght bowed downwarde, they shulde se some, which perchaunce haue not halfe so manye goodes and gyftes, and yet be at rest and cō¦tente, praysynge God. A byrde hoppeth for ioye and syngeth yf it can, beynge contente wyth it that it possesseth, and murmureth not because it can not speake. A dogge lea∣peth and waggeth hys tayle, shewynge a ioyfull countenaunce, nother is he myscon∣tente that he wanteth reason. All maner of beastes are contente wyth theyr goodes, & serue God wyth theyr endeuoure & prayse. But the onlye wycked and louynge it selfe eye of man is vnsatiable, nother doth it en∣deuoure
itselfe to be saciate by reasō of hys vnkyndnesse and pryde, seynge it coueteth euer to be the chefest & best, preferred aboue other: nother wyll it prayse and glorify God but rather loke for honoure of hym. Of thys maner do we reade that in the tyme of the councell holden at Constaunce in Germany, two Cardinals rydynge vpon costlye mules ouer the feldes by the waye, dyd se a shepeherde stāde wepyng. The one of them a more meker mā and moued wyth pytie, wold not passe by hym that was so so∣rowfull, approched to comforte hym, and as∣ked fyrst what hym ayled. The shepeherde after he had wepte bytterly, and holden hys peace a greate whyle, so that the Cardinall was greued and sorowfull also. At the laste he shewed hym a tode and sayde: For thys cause do I wepe, namely, that God hath sha¦pen and created me so fayre a creature, and not lyke thys euell fauoured worme, and that I dyd neuer consydre thys by myselfe, nor thanked hym therfore. Of thys was the Cardinall so abashed, that he fell from hys mule, and was boren in the councell house, where he cryed and sayde: O Austine howe truely was it sayde of the: The vnlearned ryse vp and take in the kyngdome of heauē,
but we wyth oure learnynge do wander in flesh and bloude. Now do I thynke that the shepeherd was not so rych nor fayre, yet dyd he so hyghly & earnestly consyder the gyftes of God in hym, and rendre thankes ther∣fore, that he dyd fynde more in hymselfe, thā he coulde well attayne & perceaue with hys syghte. The fyrste worke of God towarde the holy virgine doth she confesse to be the lo∣kynge vpon her, the which also is the che∣fest, of the which al the reste hange & flowe. For yf it be come so farre that God wende hys syght to ony man to beholde hym, that is nothynge but grace and mercy, and there must nedes followe all gyftes and workes. As we reade Gene. iiii. that God dyd loke vpon Abell and hys gyftes, and not so vpon Cayn nor hys offerynge. Of thys come the prayers cōmunely in the psalter, that God wyll lyghten hys countenaunce vpon vs, and not hyde hys syghte, but directe it vpon vs, and such lyke. And that she doth thynke thys to be the chefest, she doth sufficientlye shewe, sayeng: Lo, for thys beholdyng of me shall al chyldes chyldren call me blessed. Marke the wordes, she sayeth not ye hyr prayses shall be spred abrode, ye hyr vertues
shalbe commended, that hyr virginite or hu¦milite shalbe extolled, or that hyr excellente dedes shalbe songe and vttered wyth some songe or ballade, but she doth only often re∣pete and saye: that God hath loked vpō her, and that thereby she shalbe called blessed. And that is to geue the honoure and prayse to God so holyly and purely, that ther is no thynge more holy nor pure. And therefore poyntynge vpon the beholdynge or lokynge vpon of God, as wyth a fynger she sayeth: Beholde from hēce forth novv shall they call me blessed. That is, from the tyme that God hathe beholden my vylenesse, I shalbe called happy. Wherein not she, but ye grace of God in her is praysed: yee she is made lytle, and maketh herselfe lytle, whan she sayeth that hyr vylenesse is loked vpon of God. And for thys cause doth she fyrste auaūce hyr saluacion, before she recyte the workes of God declared toward her, and at¦tributeth the lokynge vpon hyr vylenesse al together vnto the syght of God. By thys now is it euident, & we maye gesse by thys whyche be the true honoure, wherewyth she must be honoured, yf she per chaunce hath nede of it. But howe shall we saye to her▪ Loke vpon hir wordes, and they
shall teache the to saye thus: O thou blessed virgine and mother of God, howe vyle and despysed werest thou? yet not wythstan∣dynge God dyd wende so mercyfullye and rychely hys syghte towarde the, and hathe wrought great thynges in the, wherof thou werest neuer one worthy: and the ouerflo∣wynge grace of God in the is farre aboue thy deseruynges. Happy arte thou & blessed arte thou from that tyme forth for euer, the which hast founde such a God. Nother ne∣deth ony man to thynke that she wyl not be pleased, yf she be sayde to be vnworthy of so greate fauoure: veryly she fayled not, whan she graunted of hyr owne mynde yt she was vyle and vnworthy, that God dyd loke vpon her for none of hyr merites or deseruynge, but of hys mere and only grace. She hath no delyte to heare such vayne ianglers, as both preach and wryte manye thynges of hyr merytes, wherewyth they crake and auaunce theyr greate learnynge: not consyderyng how greatly they derogate the Magnificat accuse the mother of God of lyenge, and minysh the grace of God. For so much worthy merite as is geuen vn¦to Mary, so much is the grace of God rob∣bed of, and the virginis songe is robbed of
truth. The angell dyd only grete her on the grace of Gods behalfe, and that the LORD was wyth her, wherfore she is blessed a∣monge wemen. Wherfore they that attri∣bute her so many prayses and honoures, and let them so styck and cleue vpon her, they be not farre from makynge an idol of her: euē as though she ought be worthely worshyp∣ped and trusted vnto, where as she doth re∣iecte and render all vnto God, & wyll haue God to be praysed in her, labourynge and endeuourynge fynally to cause euery man to haue truste and confidence in Gods fa∣uoure by hyr ensample. Whosoeuer therfore wyll honoure the virgine Mary aryght, thesame must not set her nexte hys harte, and by God, but farre beneth hym, makynge her bare and naked, and so (as she sayeth herselfe) behold hyr na¦kednesse. After that must he maruayle of the vnspeakeable and abundaunte grace of God, whyche so rychely and bountyfully both loke vpon, loue, and blesse so vyle, vn∣worthy and despysed a persone: that so be∣holdynge he be moued to prayse & loue God in lyke gyftes, and so he be occasioned euer to trust & to hope some greate goodnesse of God, and that of such a God, as doth not des¦pyse
the poore, despysed & vyle, but wyteth them safe of hys owne syghte, that so hys harte be stablyshed in fayth, hope and cha∣rite. What more acceptable thynge suppose ye can befall vnto her, than that ye come to God by her after this maner, and learne to truste and hope in God by hyr ensample, whan ye lykewyse are despysed and set at nought, what maner of waye that euer it be, ether in lyfe or death: She wyll not haue the to come to her, but by her to God. Agayne, that ye learne to eschue al hygh easte and condicion, the which euery man enuyronneth to obtayne, seynge that God nother fande nor dyd wyll thesame in hys mother. But those paynters and counterfay¦ters, the whych do so paynte and set out the blessed virgine vnto vs, that ther be no vyle thynge sene in her, but all excellente thyn∣ges, what do they els but teach vs to set our syght on the mother of God, & not her in the syght of God: Whereby they do fraye vs, & nearehāde do cause vs to despayre, & darken vnto vs the ymage full of consolacion, euen as they do stoppe the sayntes in Lente. For seyng she is drawen aboue all ensāples & pa¦trones, ther is nothynge lefte whereof we maye
take ony coosolacion or cmnforte, where she ought and wyth a good wyl wolde be a prin¦cipall ensample of grace, to steare all the world to the grace, loue and prayse of God, that the hartes of all men myght conceaue such an opinion of her towarde God, which with all confidence myghte saye: Ah blessed virgine and mother of God, what greate comforte dyd God geue vs by the, because he dyd wyth so gracious a coūtenaunce be∣holde thyn vnworthynesse and lowe degre, whereby we are admonyshed henceforth to trust, that after thyn ensample he wyll also loke vpon vs wretches. Thynkest thou not that yf Dauid, S. Peter, Paule, Mary Magdalene and such lyke for the greate grace that they vnwor∣thely dyd obtayne, are become ensamples to comfirme the Godly fayth and hope, that ye blessed mother of God doth not couet lyke∣wyse gladly and worthely to be an ensam∣ple and patrone vnto all the worlde? But now can not that be for the superfluous blo¦wers out of hyr prayse and vayne ianglers, which do not declare by thys verse how the abundaunte ryches of God were vnyed and made one wyth hyr slender pouerte, ye godly worshyppe wyth hyr humilite, the Godly
worthynesse with hyr vylenesse, the Godly power wyth hyr feblenesse, the Godly good∣nesse, wyth hyr merite of no value, the God¦ly fauoure wyth hyr vnworthynesse: where of lust, delyte and loue towarde God wyth all confydence do growe. To the whych in∣tent the lyues and sayenges of all sayntes be wrytten also. But ther are now a dayes some that seke helpe and comforte at her, as at some God, so that I feare me ther raygne more Idolatry in the worlde in oure dayes, than euer dyd. Let thys suffise at this tyme. These two wordes: All generacions do signifye as much as: Chyldes chylderen, and it is so darkly spoken, and so profoundly, that some haue busely combred themselues, thynkynge whych waye thys shulde be true, seynge that the Iewes, Turkes, Saracens, and other Heythen, besyde no small nombre of false Christians do not only refuse to cal her blessed, but despyse and curse her. The cause of thys is that they vnderstande the worde Generacions of the congregacion of men, wher as it stretcheth farther in this place. As namelye: the degrees or membres of the naturall yssue, where the one euer fol¦loweth or succedeth another: the father, the sonne, the cosyn, and so forth, whereof euery
membre is called a Generacyon. So that the mynde of the holy virgine, whā se sayeth that hyr prayse shall laste from generaciō to generaciō, is, that ther shalbe no tyme, wher¦in hyr prayses shall not be publyshed. And that doth she meane whan she sayeth: Lo from henceforth shal all generacions, that is, it begynneth now and shall endure in all generacions or kynreds that shall succede hereafter. Moreouer ye worde to call blessed hath a larger sygnificacion in the Greke thā that it can so be expressed. For it sygnifyeth also to make happy or blessed, so that it is not done with tunge only, or wordes, or makyng courtesy, or bowynge of the heade, or vay∣lynge of the bonet, or settynge vp of ymages or pictures, wyth buyldynge of temples or chappels, the which wycked men can do al∣so: but wyth all thy strengthe, truly and har¦tely. And that is done, whan the harte (as it sayde before) with beholdynge of hyr lowly∣nesse, and lokynge of the Godly grace vpon her doth conceaue an inwarde ioye and de∣lyte towarde God, and saye or thynke thus from the very entrayles and bottome of the harte: O how happy is thys virgine? Such blessynge is hyr true honour and wor∣shyppe,
as we haue sayde before. For he that is Myghty hath done greate thynges vnto me, and Holy is his name. Here doth the blessed virgine synge a∣tonce and in a semely order all the workes that God hath wrought in her. In the laste verse hath she songe of the lokynge graci∣ously of God and hys bounteous and mercy¦full wyll towarde her: the which is the chefe and principall parte of mercy and grace (as is sayde:) and here she syngeth of gyftes and workes. For God though he geue many one greate gyftes, and strowe hys goodes in cō∣mune, yet doth not he therfore strayght way loke vpon and beholde them. The worldly and temporall goodes are good: but the grace, fauoure and syghte of God, are the heretage that doth last euer: as sayth Paule Ro. vi. The gyfte of God is euerlastynge lyfe in oure LORDE Iesu Christe. In the goodes geueth he that is hys, but in the syght and grace doth he geue hymselfe. In the goodes is hys hande receaued, but in the syght of grace vpon ye harte, hys sprete, mynd and wyll are receaued there in. Wherfore the holy virgine doth geue the mooste than∣kes vnto the syghte of God. Nother sayeth she fyrste: All chyldes chyldren shall call me
blessed, because he hath done so great thyn∣ges vnto me, wherof thys verse maketh mē¦cion: But because he hath loked vpon me that am vyle and of no reputacion, and to my lowe degre, wherof the fyrst verse doth specifye. Where a gracious beholdynge is, there are gyftes also, but not contrary wyse is there a gracious syght, where gyftes are. For thys cause doth thys verse or parte of this songe duely follow the fyrst verse. After thys maner do we reade Genesis .xxv. that Abraham gaue gyftes vnto the chylderen of the concubines, but vnto Isaac hys true and lawfull sonne by Sara hys lawfull wyfe, he gaue the whole heretage. After thys ma∣ner is it the mynde of God, that hys chyldrē take no consolacion of the gyftes, ether spi∣rituall or temporall, be they neuer so great, but of hym and hys goodes, yet not despy∣synge the gyftes. Nother doth ye mother of God rehearse ony goodnesse seuerally, but wyth one word doth she comprehende them all, sayenge: He hath done great thynges vnto me, that is, all that he hath done vnto me is greate. Whereby she teacheth vs, that the hygher the contemplaciō in sprete be, the lesse wor∣des ought we to make. For she feleth well
ynough that she can not vtter wyth wordes the thynge, that she thynketh in hyr mynde, and wolde fayne expresse. Wherfore such fewe wordes of the sprete are sometyme so weyghtye and profounde, that no man can vnderstāde them, wythout he somdeale fele the same sprete. But vnto them that be voyd of the spret do such wordes seme very sleght and clene wythout swetnesse or tayst, which dispatch theyr taxe wyth many wordes and greate noyse. Christe in the .vi. Chapter of Mathew, teacheth vs to eschue the multiplyenge of wordes in oure prayer, se∣ynge the Heythen men do euen the same, whyche therby do thynke to be herde. As now a dayes also in many churches ther is plenty of ryngynge of bels, playenge on or∣ganes and other instrumentes of musyke, of syngynge, cryenge, and readinge: but scar¦cenesse of praysynge of God, the whyche is to worship God in sprete and truth. Ioh. iiii. Salomō sayth in the .xxvii. chap. of ye Pro. He that is to haysty to prayse his neghboure aboue measure, shalbe taken as one that ge∣ueth hym an euell reporte. For he causeth ye matter to be suspect, so that euery man doth thynke it a fayned matter, whych he busyeth so earnestlye to stuffe with hys gorgious
prayses, and maketh neuerthelesse the mat∣ter worse therewyth. And contrarywyse he that lacketh hys neghboure, and ryseth ear∣ly, (that is, is not slack, and spedely doth ryd the matter) thesame is to be taken for a pray¦ser. For men do thynke: it is not as he doth saye, and he doth it of an hatynge and euel∣wyllynge harte, so that he doth make hys cause worse, and hys neghboures better. On thys wyse do they that endeuoure to prayse God with multiplyenge of wordes, with cry¦enge and ianglynge. They do as though he were deafe, or knewe nothynge, and that we must wake or teach hym. Such opinion of God is rather a dispraysynge of hym, than a praysynge. But he that thynketh vpon the workes of God aryght euen from the bottō of hys harte, and beholdeth thesame wyth wonderyng and geuynge of thankes, so that for very feruentnesse he bruste out, and sygh rather thā speake, and the wordes that flowe by themselues, not fayned nor connynglye deuysed do so rolle oute, that euen the sprete do also comme oute: Yee that the wordes haue euen handes, fete and lyfe, so that final¦ly the whole bodye, the whole lyfe and all the members do longe to speake, that is, to prayse God truly in sprete and verite. There
are the wordes very fyre, lyghte and lyfe, as wytnesseth Dauid in the .C.xviii. Psalme, sayenge: LORDE thy wordes are fyry. And agayne: My lyppes shall set forth thy prayse: euen as water in a sethynge potte runneth ouer and fometh, so that it can not retayne it selfe therein, for the vehemente heate in the potte. Of thys kynde be all the wordes of the virgine Mary in thys songe, the whiche be fewe, yet both greate and hygh. Such praysers of God doth saynt Paule vnto the Romaynes the .xii. chapter call: Feruente of sprete, the whych chafe and burne in sprete, teachynge vs to be of the∣same sorte: and such were ye fyry tunges, that the holy gooste descēded in vpō the disciples. The greate thynges be nothynge els saue that she is become the mother of God, by the whyche thynge so greate goodes and so excellent are geuen vnto her, that passe all the vnderstondynge of ony man. For frō hence floweth all honoure and blesse, so that amonge all mankynde she be euen one per∣sone, excedynge all other and perelesse: be∣cause she hath only the heauenly father with the sonne cōmune with her. And hereby com¦meth that she herselfe can not name these greate thynges, for the abundaūte excellēcy
of them: but must rest there, and breste oute in praysynge wyth a feruent affeccion, say∣enge: He that is myghty, hath done great thynges vnto me. For thys cause is all hyr honoure comprehended in one worde, name¦ly yf she be called the mother of God: for no man can saye greater thynges by her, nor to her, though he had as many tunges, as the earth hath herbes and floures, the skye hath starres, or the see sondes. Moreouer it must be cōsydered wyth a depe harte, what it mea¦neth to be the mother of God. She doth also featly ascrybe and attry∣bute thys thynge vnto the grace of God, and not hyr merite. For thoughe she was wyth∣out synne, yet was that grace so greate, that she was in no wyse worthy of it. For howe coulde a creature be worthye to be the mo∣ther of God? Although some vayne iāglers, and not wryters, do bable very much of hyr worthynesse and deseruynge of thys office. But I geue more credence vnto the blessed virgine, than vnto those vayne wryters and bablers. She sayeth that hyr lowe degre was loked vpon, and that God hath not rewarded her therfore, but that he hath done greate and myghty thynges vnto her. He hath done greate thynges vnto me (say∣eth
she) not for my deseruynges: For suche a thynge dyd the holy virgine neuer thynke vpon, muche lesse than dyd she prepare her∣selfe to it, that she myght be the mother of God. The message came sodenly and vn∣wars vnto her, (as sayeth Luke the euange∣liste.) As for a deseruyng abydeth and loketh not for the rewarde to come sodenly, but of a redynesse and set purpose. Now it that is in the songe called, Re∣gina coeli letare. &c. (namely: Vvhome thou deseruedest to beare. And in another songe: Vvhome thou vverest vvorthy to beare) is nothynge to purpose. For ye same wordes are also songe of the holy crosse, the whiche not wythstandynge was a tre, and coulde deserue nothynge. And euen so is thys also to be vnderstande. Yf it than of necessite must haue ben the mother of God it was requyred agayne, that it shulde haue ben a woman kynne, a virgine, of the tribe or kynred of Iuda, and to beleue the message of the angell, that iudged her apte to thesame, as the scripture had wytnessed of her. The preciousnesse or worthynesse of the woode was none other, saue that it was mete to be a crosse, & was ordyned of God to thesame vse: Euē so had the holy virgine
none other worthynesse to be the mother of God, saue that she was comly and ordyned therto: that so it myght be a mere grace and no deseruynge or duety, that in no case it were preiudiciall and mynysshynge ether the fauoure or the glorye of God. It is more semely to abayte to much from her, than frō the glory of God. Yee ther cā not be abayted to much frō her, seynge that she (as all other creatures) is created of nought. But vnto the grace of God is to much derogated, the which is daungerous, nother is the mother well apayed therewyth. It is nedefull also, that we passe not the markes that Gods glo¦ry doth admitte, in vsurpyng of callyng her: as whan we grete her a quene of heauen, yet is she not an idoll thereby, that ether she maye geue or helpe, as they do, which call vpon her, desyre her to be gracious, and final¦ly flye vnto her rather than vnto ye rych trea¦sures of God. She geueth nothynge, onlye God geueth all as it followeth: He that is myghty, wherwt she robbeth all creatures of theyr strēgth & power. O what greate hardy¦nesse is thys, and what spoyles of so tender and yonge mayden? whiche can make desti∣stute all myghtye and stronge men of theyre strengthe, al puyssaunt men of theyr power,
all wyse men of theyr wytte, and all boa∣stynge and glorious men can she brynge to shame, attributyng al strength, noble actes, wysedome and glory vnto God only. For the sayenge: He that is myghty, is so much to saye, as ther is noman that can do ought, saue only God, as wytnesseth S. Paule say¦enge in the .i. chapter to the Ephesians: that God worketh all thynges after the counsell of hys owne wyll, and that the workes of all creatures, are the workes of God: the which thynge we also acknowlege in oure Crede, sayenge that we beleue in God almyghtye. He is so Almyghty, that in all thynges, by all thynges, and aboue all thynges, nothyng doth worke, saue only hys strength and puys¦saunce. After thys maner sayde Anna the mother of Samuel, in the .i. boke of Regum, the .ii. chapter: Ther is noman that can do ought of hys owne power. And Paule sayth also in the .ii. Epistle to the Corinth. the .iii. chapter: Such trust haue we thorow Christ to Godwarde, not that we are able of oure selues to thynke ony thyng, as of ourselues, but oure ablenesse cōmeth of God. Thys is an hygh & worthy artycle, cōteynynge very much, alayenge atōce al pryde, curiosite, pre¦sūpciō, rashnes, boastyng, false cōfidēce, & ex∣alteth
only God: yee and sheweth the cause also why he oughte to be exalted, euen because he worketh all thynges. It is easy to be spo∣ken, but to refourme and redresse oure lyfe accordynge to it, that is laborious, and full of payne. For they that leade theyr lyfe in such thynges, are louers of peace, geuen to God, and simple men, attributyng nothyng to themselues, certifyed that God hath all thynges, and they nothynge. Thys is than the meanynge of Gods mother in these wordes: Of all these greate goodes is nothynge myne, but he that wor∣keth all thynges alone, and whose power a∣lone worketh in all thynges, he it is that hath done so greate thynges vnto me. For the worde Myghty sygnifyeth not a worke∣lesse, ydle, and restynge power, (as we saye of a worldly kynge that he is myghty, which neuerthelesse is styll, and worketh not) but a workyng power and continually doynge, which without intermission doth procede & worke. For God doth not holde vp, but pro∣cedeth in workynge, as wytnesseth Christe Ioh. v. My father worketh hetherto, and I worke also. Of thys wyse also sayeth Paule Ephes. iii. that God is able to do exceadyng abundauntly, aboue all that we axe or vn∣derstonde
accordyng to the power that wor¦keth in vs. That is: He euer geueth greater thynges than we requyre, as hys nature is to do, so doth hys power worke. For thys cause dyd I saye, that Mary wolde be no I¦doll, and that God doth all, & she nothynge. For thys cause doth she adde and saye: And holy is hys name. That is: As I do not take the worke to me, euen so do not I ascribe the honour thereof vnto me nother. For he only ought to haue ye prayse & name, that fulfylleth ye worke. It is vnsemely ye one shall do the worke, and another shall drawe the name and prayse thereof vnto hymselfe. As for me, I ame the workehouse only, wher in he worketh, and therfore is no prayse nor honoure due vnto me, that I ame the mo∣ther of God, but God and hys excellent worke are to be praysed and honoured in me. It is ynough for me that I reioyce with hym, and saye: Happy ame I, that God hath separate me, in whome it hath plased him to accomplysh such hys workes. Lo how purely doth she wende all to Godwarde, how wholye doth she drawe no honoure, no worke, no glory to herselfe, and behaueth herselfe as before whan no suche thynge had happened vnto her, settynge no∣more
are, or makyng more searche for ho∣noure, than she dyd before: nother doth she swell, auaunce, or crye out that she is be∣come the mother of God: nother doth she fynally requyre ony worshyp therfore, but goeth hyr waye, and doeth hyr busynesse as before, mylketh the kyen, dyghteth the meat, washeth the dyshes, swepeth the house, and doeth all that a handmayden or huswyfe be∣cōmeth to do in such vyle workes, as though such plenteous gyftes of grace dyd not per∣tayne vnto her Amonge women & hyr negh¦bures was she estymed no greater, than she was afore, she requyred nomore nother, and remayned a poore cytesin amonge the com∣mune people. O what a simple & poore hart is that? O what wonderfull virgine? what greate thynges are hyd vnder a lowly beha∣ueoure? How many haue felte her, spoken to her, eaten and dronken wyth her, whych per¦chaunce haue counted her to be despysed, of the commune sorte, a poore and simple cyte∣sin, whych wolde haue be nabasshed and mar¦uayled, yf they had ben aware of suche in estimable gyftes in her: and that is hys name to be holy. For holy is it called, that is sundered and appropriate to God, whych noman maye touch nor defyle, but worshyp
it. And name is called a good fame or re∣nowne, glory, prayse and worshyppe. Nowe muste euerye man than abstayne from the name of God, so that he nother touch it, nor drawe it to hymselfe, the which is also ment Exod. xxx: where Moses was commaunded by God to make precious oyntmēt, & it was straytelye forbydden onye man to anoynte hys bodye therewyth. That is: Noman shall be so hardye as to appropriate the name of God to hymselfe, for that is sayd to vnhalow and to despyse it, yf we reioyce in ouresel∣ues, or take onye honoure vpon vs, ether haue pleasure in oureselues, or auaunce oure goodes or workes, as the worlde dothe vnhalowe and defyle the name of God with out ceassynge. For as the workes are onlye Gods, so is the name lefte hym onlye also. Moreouer as many as hallowe so his name makynge themselues voyde of prayse and honoure, worshyppe it aryght, wherfore they also be halowed of it: whiche the precious oyntment that is spoken of in the thyrtyeth chapter of Exodus doth signify wt the which all that was touched, was clensed. Thys oyntment is ye worde of God, halowed of vs. For whā we do attribut vnto vs no workes, no oastynge, nor loue of ourselues thereof,
thā is it honoured aryghte, thā doth it touch and hallow vs. For thys cause ought we to beware, seynge that we can not be on earth without the goodes, name and honoure of God, that yf we be praysed of ony man, or get a name, that than we vse thys example of the mo∣ther of God, beynge ready to answer them wyth thys verse, vsynge the honour & prayse aryghte, confessynge openly, or at the leaste thynkynge thus in oure mynde: LORDE God, it is thy worke that is praysed & auaū∣ced, I beseke the let it be thyne name also. Not I LORDE, but thou hast wrought it, which workest all thynges myghtely, and holy is thy name. After this maner oughte noman to refuse the prayse and honoure as wronge, nor to disprayse them as nothynge worth: but he ought not to ascribe it to hym selfe, as a thynge to percious and noble, re∣ferrynge them to hym, whose they be truly in heauen. Thys lo teacheth thys noble verse, wherewith he is answered also that demaundeth, whether one do not owe reue∣rence vnto another. Yee Paule sayeth, Ro. xii. In geuyng honour let one go before ano¦ther. Neuertheles nomā shal take ye honour vpon him, as though it dyd befall vnto hym:
nother shall he suffre it to remayne vpō hym selfe. But he shall hallowe and restore it vn∣to God, vnto whome it belongeth, wyth all the good and worke, from whence ye honoure floweth. Nother shall ony man leade an vn∣honest lyfe. Yf he lyue honestly, than muste honoure be there. But as an honeste lyfe is the gyfte and worke of God, so let his name also be holye and vndefyled from delytynge and hauynge delectacion in hymselfe. This do we also desyre in ye pater noster, whan we saye: Hallovved be thy name▪ And hys mercy endureth thorovvout al generacions, vpon them that feare hym. It is nedefull for vs to knowe the ma∣ner of the scripture, whiche calleth the natu∣rall linage or yssue a progeny or generacion by the whych one man is euer successiuelye borne of another. Wherfore thys englyshe worde generacion or progeny doth not suf∣fyse to expresse the meanynge thereof, yet do I knowe none better than it. For a pro∣geny do we call the company that belongeth vnto vs, ether by reason of bloude or mari∣age. But in thys place it signifyeth the na∣turall yssue and succession from father, tyll chyldes chylde, and euery membre of the∣same
is called a progeny, and I thynke it be not wronge Englyshed of thys fasshion: na∣mely, and hys mercy endureth from chylde to chylde vpon them that feare hym. And thys phrase of the scripture is very ryfe, ha∣uynge hys begynnynge and originall of the wordes that God spake vnto Moses and all the people vpon mount Syna, sayenge Exo. xx. I the LORDE thy God ame a gelous God, visitynge the synne of the fathers vpō the chyldren, vnto the thyrde and fourth ge∣neracion, of them that hate me: and do mer¦cy vpon many thousandes, that loue me, and kepe my commaundementes. After that Mary the mother of God had fynished the prayse of God, and of hys goodnesse towarde her, she wandreth nowe al amonge the workes, whych God worketh generally in all men, and syngeth of them al¦so, teachyng vs featly to knowe the workes, kynde, nature and wyll of God. Many inge¦nious and wytty philosophers haue attēpted the same also, that they myght knowe what God were, wrytynge much of the same, the one thus, another so. But they were all blynde in that behalfe, and coulde not per∣ceaue the true shynynge. And verely ye grea¦test thynge, both in heauen and earth, is to
knowe God aryghte, yf it do befall vnto ony man. And that doth the blessed virgine teach very properly by hyr owne ensample, as is shewed aboue. But how can he be knowen more easyer or better than by hys workes? for he that perceaueth thys duely, the same must nedes knowe hys nature, wyll, harte & mynde: Wherfore it is connynge to knowe hys workes. And that we myghte marke it the better, she rehearseth orderlye in these foure verses syxe godly workes in syxe kyn∣des of men, and parteth the worlde in two, settynge on ech syde thre maner of workes, and thre kyndes of men so, that a continuall debate doth remayne amonge ye partyes, by reason of the feate opposition one agaynst ye other: wherby she doth descrybe hym so good¦ly, as can not be amended. Moreouer, thys particion is duely and orderly comprehended in sundery places of the scripture, as namely Ieremye the nynth Chapter, where he sayeth: Let not ye wyse man reioyce in hys wysedome, nor ye strōge man in hys strength, nother the ryche man in hys ryches: But who so wyll reioyce, let hym reioyce in thys, that he vnderstandeth and knoweth me: for I am the LORDE whych do mercy, equite and ryghteousnesse
vpon earth: Therfore haue I pleasure in such thynges, sayeth the LORDE. Thys is a noble texte, and agreable to thys songe of the blessed virgine. By thys place also do we se that the spirite of the prophet dealeth the worlde in thre, as namely: in Vvysedom Povver and Ryches, the which he doth o∣uerthrowe whan he sayeth that nomā shuld reioyce in them: for God is not founde in them, nother can he haue pleasure in them. Moreouer he setteth thre other agaynste these, namely: Mercy, Iudgemente and Ryghteousnesse. In these is myne ende∣uoure (sayeth he,) ye I myselfe do all these. So neare ame I, that I do these thynges, not in heauen, but vpon earth, there ame I founde. He that knoweth me of thys maner, thesame maye reioyce truely and make hys boaste boldely therof. For yf he be not wyse, but poore spreted, than is my mercye wyth hym: Yf he be not myghty, but vyle & lowlye, than is my iudgement ready for hym: Yf he be not ryche, but poore and nedy, than is my ryghteousnesse so much the more raygnyng wyth hym. By wysedome he vnderstandeth al hygh spirituall goodes, whereby man maye get a delyte, reioycynge and a good opinion, (as
the verse followynge doth specifye,) as be: vn¦derstandynge, reason, prudence, knowlege, vertuousnesse, an honest conuersacion: final¦ly, all that is called in the soule holy or spiri∣tuall, how greate gyftes that euer they be, so that none of them be God hymselfe. By power he vnderstandeth all power, noblynesse of byrth, frendes, dignityes, wor∣shyppe, whether they concerne temporall or spiritual goodes or men (though in scripture ther be no spirituall superiorite, but onlye a seruice and occupyenge of a lowe rowme) wyth all hys ryghte, lyberte and priuilege. &c By ryches are te health, bewtye, pleasure and all that maye chaunce vnto the body outwardly. Agaynste these are thre o∣ther set of the prophete, namely: the poore∣spreted, the oppressed, and the nedy. But we wyll loke orderly vpon the syxe workes and partes. The fyrst worke of God is Mercy. Of thys worke speaketh thys presente verse, sayenge: Hys mercy endureth from chylde to chyldes chylde, or frō progeny to progeny vpon them that feare hym. She begynneth at the greatest, namely, at the spirituall or inwarde goodes, whyche
make men here vpon earth the moost prou∣dest, hyghmynded and hardnecked. Ther is no rych man, no myghtye lorde so proude or hygh mynded, that is not ouercome of such a wyse man: the whych perceaueth and dou¦teth not at all that he doth pleate or de∣fende a iuste cause, vnderstande the matter well, and that he is wyser than other folke. Specially, whan it is come so farre yt ether he must auoyde, or els knowlege hys cause to be vniust, than becommeth he so rash and voyde of the feare of God, that he wyll not be ashamed to boast and say, that he can not erre, that God is wyth hym, and other be ac¦cursed, yee he is not ashamed to call the iud¦gement and daye of dome to wytnesse: and yf occasion be ioyned to hys power, than breaketh he forthe wyth hys malepartnesse where it pleaseth hym, he persueth, iudgeth, vexeth, slayeth, dryueth away and waisteth all them that wythstande hym, and thys af∣firmeth he to be done to the prayse, glorye and seruice of God. And is so sure of a great deseruynge and plenteous grace by God, that the angels of heauen be scarce so sure. O what a great burble is this? O how much doth ye scripture treate of such kynde of mē? how dredfull thynges doth she threaten thē?
but they fele it lesse than the anuylt doth the hammer strokes. And thys thynge is ryfe and plenteous of matter. Of suche speaketh Christ in the .xvi. of Ihon, sayenge: The tyme cōmeth, that who so euer putteth you to death, shal thinke that he hath done seruyce to God. And Dauid sayeth lykewyse of such on thys wyse: He doth preuayle agaynst all hys enemyes, say∣enge: Ther shall no euell aproche me. As though he wolde saye: I defende a ryght qua¦rell, I do well, God shall rewarde me hyghly Such do Esay in the .xvi. Chapter, and Ie∣remye in the .xlvii. say that the Moabites were, wrytynge on thys wyse: As for Mo∣abs pryde, we haue herde of it, she is verye hygh mynded. I know hyr stoutnesse, hyr boa¦stynge, hir arrogancy, and the pryde of hyr stomacke, sayeth the LORDE. For hyr furi∣ousnesse maye nother vpholde her wyth strength, nor dede. We se such mē take thyn∣ges vpon them passynge theyr power, for the great pryde. Such were the Iewes agaynst Christe and hys apostles. Suche were Iobs frendes, whyche reasoned aboue measure wysely agaynste hym, and commended and praysed God vehemētly. But such kynde of men heare no man, they can be persuaded
of no man, nother can onye man brynge them therto, that yf theyr cause be wronge, they wyll graunte it, or to geue place, but styck to it that they haue begonne and pro∣cede therein, though the world shulde perysh therfore. Nother can the scripture sufficient¦ly reprehende such naughty packes, callynge them sometyme an adder, stoppynge hys eare, lest he heare the charmers voyce, som∣tyme a roarynge lyon, somtyme an vnmo∣ueable rocke, somtyme a draggon, & so forth other names. But thys kynde of men is no where better set forthe in hys colours, than in the .xl. and .xli. chapters of Iob, where they be called Behemoth. Nowe Behema in He∣brue is as much to saye as a beaste, and Be∣hemoth the plurall nombre sygnifyeth bea∣stes, that is: a vmbremente or multitude of men, leadynge a beastly lyfe, and not per∣mittynge themselues to be guyded by the sprete of God. Thys kynde doth God in the same place saye to haue eyen lyke the mor∣nynge shyne: for ther is no ende of hys wys∣dome. Hys skynne also is so harde, that no wapen can pearse thorowe it, ether shot or stycked at, that is: yf the worde of God be preached agaynst thē to theyr reprofe, they
laugh it to scorne: for they iudge theyr mat∣ter sure ynough: The skales also do shycke so faste together, that the leest ayre can not entre, that is: they agre so, and be so one mynded, that they wyll not admitte the leeste breth of Gods sprete. As for hys harte (sayethe God) is hardened lyke an anuylte. It is the Deuels body, and ther∣fore doth he in thys place attribute it all vn¦to thesame. Suche a people aboue all other is the Byshoppe of Rome, wyth all his vm∣bremente, and hath ben a greate season. For they do lykewyse, and that of such a fa∣shion, as is euidente that neuer was sene: they heare no body, ther is no redressynge and amendynge of lyfe: No persuadynge, no prayenge, no threatenynge wyll helpe. Shortelye, they nother saye nor synge, saue: We defende a good quarell, thus must it be, auaunte they whome thys doth not please, yee though it were the whole worlde. Here myght some body saye: How shall thys agre? shal we not kepe the lawes? shall we let go the truthe? Is it not commaūded vs euen to dye in the truthes quarell & rygh¦teousnesse? haue not the holy martyres of God suffred much for ye Gospel? Wolde not Christ himselfe haue ryght? For it chaūceth
oftymes, that such men defende a iuste qua¦rell, (yee and before God also, as they do boaste,) and that they handle themselues ryghteously and truely. I Answere: Here is it due to haue the eyes opened, and also ne∣cessary, here is the knot: It resteth only in that, that a man haue the true learnynge in the lawe. It is true veryly that we must suf∣fre much for the truthe and ryghteousnesse, & not to denye thesame, howe slender soeuer she be. Moreouer, it maye be that the other parte haue ryght, but they do amysse in that they execute the lawe vniustely, and handle not the matter with feare, nother haue they God before theyre eyen, but thynke it to be ynough that the matter is ryghte, and ther∣fore he both wyll and must procede by hys power, and make an ende of the game: wher by they make of theyr ryght, wronge, though it were true in dede and vnblameable. But it is mooste perrillous, whan they thynke themselues to be in the ryght waye, and yet be not sure what oughte to be done in mat∣ters that concerne God and hys iudgemen∣tes. But we wyll fyrst speake grosly and set forth a commune and blonte ensample: Are not mony, goodes, the body, honoure, a wyfe, chylderen, frendes and suche lyke
good creatures, created and geuen of God▪ Now that they are the gyftes of God, and not thyne, and God wyll proue the, whether thou canste fynde in thyne harte to lose thē to auaunce hys glory, and hange more vpon hym only, than vpon these creatures: and therfore shulde rayse one that ether shulde take parte of them from the, or altogether, ether hurte the or by bodylye death wolde cause the to lose them: Thynkes thou not here were a iuste cause to be wytlesse, to rage, to recouer thesame agayne by force and stronge hande, or to be vnpaciente vn∣tyll thou haddest recouered thē agayne, lay∣enge for the that they be good creatures of god? And because yt all the scripture iudgeth the thynges to be good, therfore thou also wylt kepe the worde of God, and defende or requyre agayne thesame goodes both wyth body and lyfe, orels to forbeare them or let them go agaynste thy wyll: Were not thys a ioly visure? Yf thou wylt therfore do well in thys behalfe, thou mayest not runne head¦lynges after thyne owne brayne. But howe shall I do than? ye shall feare God, and saye on thys wyse: LORD they be good thynges and thy gyftes, as thyne owne worde and ye scripture do wytnesse. Neuerthelesse I doue
whether thou doest enuye me them. Yf I knewe I shulde not vse them, I wolde not bestowe one heare vpon the hauynge agayn of them: but yf I knewe thou woldest them to be in my power, I wolde (obeynge thy wyll) bestowe both body and goodes to haue them agayne. But seynge nowe I stande in doute of ether of these thy wylles, and I se what now is don, namely, that thou suffrest them to be taken from me, I commytte the matter vnto the, and wyll wayte vpon thy pleasure in thys behalfe, redy ether to kepe them, or to forgo them. Thys (lo) is a faythfull soule, and fea∣rynge God, by whome is mercy, as the mo∣ther of God syngeth of. And here by maye it be euident, of what fundament and sprete Abraham, Dauid, and all Israel dyd warre and slaye so many in tymes past. For they toke the matter in hande at the commaun∣dement and wyll of God, and wyth feare: not fyghtynge for ryches, but because God dyd requyre it of them, shewynge otherwhy¦les the commaundement of God in that be∣halfe, as the holy scripture maketh mencion somtyme. Now maye ye se that the truth is not denyed, whych sayeth yt these be good creatures: Yee the same truth also doth saye
and teach that thou do forsake, and ready at all tyme to forgo the same goodes, yf it please God, and so hange onely vpon God, The truth doth not compell the to requyre the goodes agayne, in that she sayeth they be good: nother doth she constrayne the to saye they be not good, but renouncynge the same saye that they be not euell. Lykewyse must be done wyth the lawe, and all maner of goodes ether of wytte or reason. Iustice is a good thynge, geuen of God, who douteth therin? Gods worde it selfe doth confesse that the lawe is good. No¦ther maye ony man saye that hys ryghteous cause is euell, but shall rather dye the death, and forgo al that is not God. For that were to denye God and hys worde, the whych te∣stifyeth that the lawe is not euell, but good. Wylte thou therfore crye out, rage, playe ye madde man, and kyll all the worlde, because suche ryghte or lawe is taken from the? As some do whyche lyfte vp theyre voyce vntyll heauen, causynge great mysery, way∣styng people and contryes, fyllynge ye world wyth warre and bloudsheddynge. What kno¦west thou whether God wyl leaue those gyf¦tes and ryghte to thy gouernaunce? they be hys, he can take them from the, ether to day
or to morowe, he cā depriue the of them, and restore the to thesame agayne whan it shall please hym by frendes or enemyes, euen as it pleaseth him. He doth proue, whether thou wylte lose thy ryghte for hys loue, suffre wronge and iniurye, suffre rebuke for hys name, and cleue only to hym. Yf thou than arte dredynge God, and sayeste thus within the: LORDE, it is thyne, I wyll not haue it in my power & subiection, wythout I know that thou do wysh it me, than shal this verse haue rowme: And hys mercy endureth tho¦rovv out all generacions, vpon them that feare hym, which wyll worke nought, but it be accordynge to hys wylle. Here (lo) is the worde of God kepte on both partes: fyrste, that thou grauntest thy ryght, reason, vnderstandynge, wysdom, and all thyne opinion to be good and iuste, the which euen the worde of God doth also say. Secondlye, that thou arte contente to for∣beare such gyfte for the loue of God, to be wrongefully condemned, yee to be a moc∣kage and a gasynge stocke to the worlde, the which Gods worde also doth teache. Ther be .ii. thynges: to confesse the thynge that is iuste and good, and to obtayne or ouer∣come. It is ynough for the to knowlege and
confesse that thou hast a good cause. Yf thou canste not ouercome, committe the matter vnto God. It is thy parte to knowlege, to o∣uercome hath God reserued vnto hymselfe. Yf he wyll haue the to ouercome, he shall do it, ether shall he so brynge the thynge to pas, wythout thy counsell or thoughte, that thou muste nedes take the matter in hande and ouercome, and that after such fashiō, as thou neuer woldeste haue thought or desyred. Yf he wyll not, let hys mercy suffyse the. Yf the victory of thy ryghteousnesse be taken from the, yet can not the knowlegynge of the∣same be taken from the. Lo, here muste we stande backe, not from the goodes of God, but from the wycked and euell geuynge of to muche mynde to thesame, that we can ryght well both vse and forgo them, so that in all chaunces that befall, we cleue on¦ly to God. Wolde God all princes and po∣wers (as theyr duety is) were not ignoraūte of thys, whiche be not contente to confesse that they haue ryghte, but wyll nedes ouer∣come and wynne, settynge asyde all feare of God, and fyllynge the worlde wyth bloude and mysery thynkynge they do ryght therin seynge they haue a ryghtfull cause, a true matter and a ryghteous quarell, or at the
leest suppose it to be so. What is that els saue the proude and hyghmynded Moab? whiche counteth and maketh hymselfe wor∣thy of the noble and bewtyfull possession of Gods gyfte, namely, the Law: where as he (yf he beholde hymselfe well in the syghte of God) is not worthy that the grounde do beare hym, and that he do eate the crustes of breade, because of the vnclēnesse of hys synnes. O blyndnesse, blyndnesse, who is worthy of the leeste creature of God? yet wyll we not only haue the chefe creatures, as iustice and wysedome and theyr honour, but also wyth outragious sheddyng of bloud and wyth all misfortune do procure & ende∣uoure to kepe the same: and forthwyth we go praye, faste heare masse, founde churches, wyth so bloudy and ragynge mynde, that it were no wonder though the stones shulde leape in oure faces. Her ryseth now agayne a question, na¦mely: Shall not a prince than defende hys lande and people from iniury? Shall he syt∣tynge styll and restynge, suffre all thynges be taken from hym? What shulde become in the worlde of thys at the laste? Here vpon wyll I brefely shew my mynde: The power of the swearde or superiorite must & nedeth
to defende hys subiectes, as I haue oftymes sayd. For that cause beareth he the swearde, that suche as receaue the worde and admo∣nicion of God, and do not obey the same, be retayned in feare, that so they maye let o∣ther be in rest and peace. And here in ought he not to seke hys owne auaūtage, but of o∣ther, and the honoure of God, beynge con∣tente to be at rest, and to lay vp the sweard, had not God ordined the same to the puny∣shynge of the wycked, and defence of ye good: so that suche proteccyon and defence be not done wyth farther dammage, as namely, for takyng vp a spowne, a platter be broken. It is but a slender proteccion, yf an whole cy∣tie be brought in daunger for one persone: or yf for one vyllage or castell, all the pro∣uince be disquieted: wythout God doth com¦maunde it seuerally, as sometyme he was was wont to do. A souldyer doth robbe some cytesyn, and for to auēge the same, thou ray¦sest an hoost, and gatherest a taxe of ye whole contry: who hath the moost harme, the lorde or the souldyer? Dauid dyd wynke oftymes, whan he coulde not punysh wythout ye great dammage and harme of other. Euē so must all powers order themselues, and agayn the indweller must forbeare and suffre somwhat
for ye cōmunite, & not wysh, that for hys sake, all other suffre great losse and hurte. Equa∣lite can not be had alwaye. Christ wold not that the taxes shulde be plucked vp, leste the wheate were plucked vp also. Yf men shulde warre for euery assaulte, and wynke at no∣thyng, ther shuld neuer be peace, but cōtinu¦all waistyng. Therfore is ryghteousnesse or vnryghteousnesse neuer a sufficient cause to punysh or to warre wythout discreciō: ne¦uertheresse it is cause sufficient to punyshe in season, wythout the vndoynge of another For a lorde or prynce must specially se what is expedient rather vnto a cōmunalte, than vnto one or other. To speake of warre is here no conuenient tyme. Of thys wyse must be done in godly mat¦ters, namely: Fayth and the Gospell, which are ye best goodes, nother may ony mā leaue them. But ye ryghteousnesse, fauoure, and ho¦noure befallyng & belōgynge to ye same must be weyed, & cōmytted to God. The care is to be taken not for ye victory, but for ye cōfes∣synge & knowlegynge, & to suffre wyllyngly though a mā were reuyled as a wycked de∣ceauer, an heretyke, an erronious or rash fel¦lowe, though a man were persecuted, dryuē away, burnt or kylled, or ony other meanes: for the mercy of God is nye vnto such. For
the fayth and truth can not be takē frō hym, though he be depriued of hys lyfe. Yet neuer¦thelesse ought nomā to rūne of hys owne ac¦corde, & to brynge or kepe such ryghte of the gospell by force or vnlawful meanes: but to submytte hymselfe in ye syght of God, as one ye perchaūce is vnworthy, ye such exceadynge goodnesse shulde happē thorow hym, & wyth complaynynge and prayenge to commende the matter vnto hys mercy. Beholde thys is ye fyrst worke of God, na∣mely: yt he is mercyfull vnto thē, yt wt a good wyl forgo theyr intent, ryghteousnesse, wyse¦dom & what soeuer spiritual goodes ther be & gladly remayne poore of sprete. Those are ye true fearers of God, that iudge thēselues worthy of nothynge, be it neuer so lytle, & be naked wt a good wyll both before God & mē. And ye goodes, whych they haue vnworthely receaued of ye pure grace, do they vse wyth prayse, thākesgeuyng & feare, euē as thoughe they were other folkes godes, not sekynge theyr own wyl, pleasure, prayse, or glory but hys whose they be. Wherof ye blessed virgin taketh occasiō to shewe howe God delyteth more in exercisyng this hys bewtyful work, namely mercy, thā strength: whā she sayeth, that thys worke of God shal last cōtinually, from chylde to chyldes chylde, vpon thē that
feare hym, where as the other worke lasteth only vntyl the thyrde or fourth generacion, and in thys verse followynge is nother stent nor tyme set. The seconde spirituall worke, is to subdue the proude. He shevveth strēgth vvyth hys arme and scattereth them that are proud in the ymaginacion of theyr harte. Let no mā be moued wyth thys my true translacion, in that I haue translated aboue vvorketh myghtely, but here I say: he she¦vveth strength. For the cause why I so do, is that the wordes myght be the playner & easyer to vnderstande, whych oughte not to be bounde ether to tyme or place: but that ye nature and workes maye be more frelyer vt¦tered, the whych he alwaye hath done, doth, and shall do, so that it is as much as though I had sayd: God doth so playe the LORDE, that hys workes prospere so myghtely, that he scattereth the proude, and geueth mercye vnto them that feare hym. The arme of God is taken in scripture for hys owne power, by ye whych he worketh wythout ony meane of the creatures: the whyche is done priuelye and vnloked for, so
that noman is ware of it, before it be dispat∣ched: and that no man can knowe the same arme or power, saue onely by fayth. Wher∣fore, few do geue fayth therevnto, as Esaye doth cōplayne in the .liii. Chapter, sayenge: Who geueth credence vnto our preachyng? Or to whō is the arme of the LORD know∣en? Al thys is done (as it followeth in ye same place) because ye al thinges ar wrought pryue¦ly vnder an vnequall appearaūce of such po∣wer. Abac. the prophet sayeth also in hys .iii. Chapter that God hath hornes in hys han∣des, meanynge thereby hys great strength: yet notwythstandynge doth he saye that the same power is hyd. But how is thys done? namely after thys maner: Whan God worketh by the meane of creatures, than is it euidentlye sene where strength or feblenesse is: wherof is rysē this prouerbe: God doth ayde the stronger part. Whatso euer prynce therfore vanquysheth the other, the same is he, thorow whom God doth stryke the other. Yf a wolfe teare ony man, or he get ony dāmage otherwyse, that same is done by ye creatures. Of thys wyse doth God make or destroye one creature by another. He that ouercōmeth, ouercōmeth: he that abydeth, abydeth. But where as he
hymselfe worketh wyth hys arme, there go∣eth it otherwyse to worke: for there is ye mat¦ter destroyed or made agayne, contrary to our opinion, no man perceauynge it. Thys kynde of workynge doth he vse in two sortes of men, namely good and wycked: for ye good he suffreth to be so feble, strengthlesse and op¦pressed, that euery man wold thynke it were all done wyth them, and that they were at theyr latter meace, & at the very same tyme is he strongly by them, and that so secretly, that they themselues that suffre can not tell therof, but beleue it. There is ye ful strength and arme of God. For whan the strength of man fayleth, than cōmeth the power of God in: yf fayth only be there, waytynge for the same. Now whan the trouble is come to an ende, then doth it appeare what strength lay hyd vnder the feblenesse. Of thys wyse (lo) was Christ destitute of strength on ye crosse and euen than wrought he exceadyng great thynges, vanquyssyng synne, death, ye world, hell and all euell. After thys maner were all martyres stronge and ouercame: and after thys maner do all such as be troubled nowe a dayes ouercōme. For the which cause Ioel sayeth in the .iii. Chap. Let the weake man saye, I am strōge, but in fayth, not in felyng,
vntyll it be nearehande come to an ende. Agayne, the other parte suffreth God to heaue and exalte it selfe, wythdrawynge hys power from them, and letteth them be puft vp by reason of theyr owne strength. For whan mans power cōmeth in, than go∣eth the power of God out. But whan the bladder is full, & euery mā thynketh to haue the better hande, then commeth God soden¦ly, and prycketh the bladder, whereby all is dashed. Those fooles knowe not, that euen whan they ryse and prospere, they are forsa∣ken of God, & that Gods arme is not wyth them. Therfore doth theyr endeuoure laste an appoynted season, and after that doth it sayde and vanysh, lyke a burble, and becom∣meth as though it neuer hadde ben, wherof Dauid (maruaylynge in the .lxxvii. Psalme how it happened that the wycked and vngod¦ly became so rych, carelesse and myghtye) at the last doth say: I coulde not know this, vn∣tyl I wēte into ye Sāctuary of God, & consy¦dred ye ende of these mē, namely: how yu hast set thē in a slyppery place, that thou mayest cast them downe headlynges, & destroye thē O how sodenly do they cōsume, perysh, and come to a fearfull ende? Yee euen as a drea¦me whan one awaketh, so makest thou theyr
ymage to vanysh out of ye cytie. And agayne in the .xxxvi. Psal. he sayeth: I my selfe haue sene ye vngodly in great power, & floryshyng lyke a grene Baye tre: but whā I went by, lo, he was gone: I sought hym, but he coulde no where be founde. Lacke of fayth is only the cause that we can not also abyde a lytle, or els shulde we se seatly how the mercy of God is wyth them that feare hym, and the arme of God also a∣gaynst the proude wyth all force & strength. We faythlesse grope blyndfeld with our fyst after the mercy of God and hys arme. The whych yf we do not continently fele, thā do we euen thynke all be lost of our parte, and oure enemyes to haue gotten the felde: as thoughe both Gods mercy and grace were wythdrawen from vs, and hys arme to be a∣gaynst vs. And that cōmeth therby, because we knowe not hys workes, wherfore we know not hym, hys mercy, nor hys arme. It is necessary, and he wyl be knowen by fayth Therfore must ye wytte & reason be shut vp, theyr eye offendeth vs, we muste therfore plucke it out, and cast it awaye. Lo these are the two workes of God re∣pugnaūt ech to other, wherin we are taught that to be the mynde of God, that he be
farre from the wyse and prudente, but be neare vnto the foolysh, whiche muste suffre wronge. Thys maketh God to be loued and praysed, and conforteth the soule, body and all powers. Now consydre the wordes: He scatte∣reth them that are proude in the imagi∣nacion of theyr harte. Thys scatterynge or waystynge is done (as it is sayde) whan they are wyseste of all, and mooste fullest of theyr owne wysedome, for than surely is the wys∣dome of God gone. But what waye can he scatter them better, than wyth depriuynge them of hys eternall wysedome? and by per¦mittynge them to be fylled wyth worldly & transitory wysedome. It is pythy that she sayeth: them that are proude in the ima∣ginacion of theyr harte, that is, suche as theyr owne mynde, vnderstandynge (the which not God, but theyr harte doth mini∣stre) doth greatly playse, as though they on∣ly were the moost iustest, wysest and beste: whereby they auaunce themselues aboue such as feare God, myspraysynge theyr opi∣nion and ryghte, reuylynge & persecutynge them to the vtermooste, so that theyr cause only must be iuste and abyde. The which whan they haue optayned, they heaue them
selues vnto the cloudes, as the Iewes , that wythstode Christe, and yet perceaued not that theyr matter came to nought there¦by, and was despysed, and Christ contrary∣wyse to be exalted and set vp vnto an excea¦dynge glory. Thus do we se than that thys verse speaketh of spirituall goodes, and tea∣cheth by what meanes the workes of God are knowen on both partes, and teacheth vs also to embrace wyllyngly the pouerte of sprete, and to suffre iniury, to permitte vnto oure aduersaryes theyr request, for they shal not longe reioyce. Herein is a stronge and sure promyse that the proude shal not escape Gods arme, they muste be throwen downe, though they heaue themselues neuer so sore, yf we at the leest be fully so persuaded. For where such fayth is not, there doth God not worke such greate workes, but leauynge thē he worketh openly by creatures as is decla∣red before. But these are not true workes whereby he maye be knowē, for the powers of the creatures are ioyned to them also: No¦ther are they the bare workes of God, which ought be to such, as he worketh alone, wtout ony foren helpe, which is done whan we are oppressed for oure opinion and ryghte, and suffre ye power of God to vse hyr wyll in vs.
These are hys noble workes. Moreouer, Mary doth connyngly checke the vngodly hypocrites here, and loketh no∣ther to theyr handes nor eyen, but to the harte, and sayeth: them that are proude in the imaginacion of theyr harte, where wyth she doth specially meane the enemyes of the truth, euen as the Iewes were some∣tyme agaynste Christ, and as some are now a dayes lyke vnto them. For suche holy and learned men are not proude in clothynge and behaueoure, they praye, faste, preache, study, saye masse oft, they go doukynge with theyr heades, and thynke nomā to be a grea¦ter enemy vnto pryde, couetousnesse, or hy∣pocrisy than themselues, and that noman be a greater frende of God than they themsel∣ues. How coulde they hynder and hurte the truth, were not they so holy, honeste & lear∣ned mē? For such theyr vtter apperaūce, gly¦stereth, shyneth and bleareth the eyes of the cōmune people. Good LORD how wel are they persuaded, callynge vpō God, and take pytie vpon poore Iesus that doth so euell, is proude, and finally not lyke vnto thē in rygh¦teousnesse & honesty▪ Of them sayeth Christ in the .xi. of Mathew: that wysedome is iu∣stifyed of hir chyldren, that is, they are wyser
and more ryghteous than I myselfe, whyche ame the godly wysedome. Whatsoeuer I do that is nought, and must be checked and cor∣recte of them. These are the moost wycked and poyso∣nest men on earth, whose pryde of harte is so depe and deuellysh, that she can brouke no medecyne nor wholsome counsell. For they heare not what is sayde, yee they reken it not to be spoken vnto them, but vnto the wretched synner, which hath nede of it, they nede it not. Ihon baptiste doth call them the generacion of vipers Mathew .iii. and Luke the thyrde: and euen so doth Christe also Mathew the .xii. and .xvi. These are they that do not truely feare God, do & serue to be destroyed of God wyth theyre pryde and arrogācy. But seynge ther is noman that so persueth ye truth & ryghteousnes as these do, (though they thynke it be ongods behalfe as we haue sayde before) therfore amonge the thre enemyes of God muste they go before and beare the standarde, the seconde & leest are the rych, whome the greate men and ru¦lers, the thyrde enemyes do passe in execu∣tynge power. But these learned men excell ether of the other farre beyonde the nocke, for they do hurte on both partyes with theyr
bloudy entysynge. The rych men quenche ye truthe by themselues only: The men of au∣thorite chace her from other: But these lear¦ned men quenche her cleane out in themsel∣ues, & in steade thereof they brynge forth ye imaginacion of theyr owne harte, so that she can neuer ryse agayne. Now as the truth is better in herselfe than men, in whome she hath hyr dwellynge, so much are the learned men worse than the greate men, or rych mē. O how doth God abhorre and hate such, as they be worthy? The thyrde worke is to subdue the proude. He putteth dovvne the myghty from the seate. Thys worke wyth the other followynge maye easely be perceaued by the two wor∣kes aboue rehearsed. For lyke as he destroy¦eth the wyse and suttyll in theyr imaginaci∣ons and good meanynges: (where vnto they sticke, and vse theyr pryde agaynste suche as feare God, whiche must suffre wronge, and theyr wytte and ryghteousnesse must be cō∣demned, the whiche all is chefely done for ye loue of Gods worde.) Euen so he destroyeth
and putteth downe the myghty & great men wyth all theyr power and dominion, where vpon they leanynge, vsed theyr crueltye and pryde vpon theyre inferiours, and on the good lowlyones, the whiche must suffre pu∣nyshmente, death and all euell of them. And as he comforteth thē that must suffre wrōge and shame for ryghteousnesse, the truth, and hys wordes sake, euen so strengtheth he thē, that suffre hurte and wronge: but the more he cōforteth those that must suffre wronge, so much the more frayeth he the other. But thys all muste be perceaued and loked for in fayth. For he destroyeth not the myghty, as soone as they haue deserued it, sufferyng them sometyme vntyl theyr power or autho¦rite be fynisshed: for than doth God kepe thē nomore, nother can they kepe themselues, but do vanyshe & fayde of theyr owne swyng wythout ony rumoure or sedicion: and than such as are oppressed comeforth and reioyce without ony vprour or noyse. For the power of God is in them, which only abydeth. Marke that she sayeth not, he destoyeth the syes or trones, but he putteth the myghty dovvne out of the seates: nother sayeth she, that he leaueth the oppressed vn∣der foote, but setteth them vp. For as longe
as thys worlde doth endure, so longe muste Superiorite, Rule, Power & the Trones continue. But that they are euell vsed, con∣trary to the wyll of God, in doynge iniurye and wronge vnto such as are good, and that they do also delyte therin, and exalte them∣selues therein, and vse it not with the feare of God, to his prayse, and defence of iustice: that can he not suffre longe. As experience here of maye be sene in all storyes, how that God setteth vp one kyngdome and putteth downe another: howe he rayseth one pro∣uince, and putteth downe another howe he multiplyeth one nacion, and destroyeth ano∣ther: as maye be sene in the Assyrians, Ba∣bylonians, Perses, Grekes and Romanes, which neuerthelesse imagined theyr rayg∣nes to endure euer. Euen so lykewyse doth he not destroye reason, wysedome and law∣es, for they muste be had, yf ye worlde shalbe mayntayned: but pryde, & the hyghmynded, which serue themselues wt these gyftes, feare not God, persecute ye good and gods lawe, & abuse such bewtyful giftes of god against hī. Gods busynesse is in that case now, that the wyse and proude meaners, (yf I maye so call them) do mooste communely ioyne themselues with mē of authorite, and steare
them agaynst the truthe, as Dauid wytnes∣seth in the .ii. Psalme, sayenge: The kynges of the earth stande vp, & the rulers are come together, agaynst the LORDE and agaynst hys anoynted. Because the lawe and ryght haue alwaye the wyse, myghty and ryche a∣gaynste them, that is: the worlde, wyth hys greate and valeaunt powers: therfore doth the holy gooste conforte them by the mouth of hys mother, that they be not abasshed nor doute, but let these wyse, myghty and ryche alone, seynge they shall not longe endure. Yf the holyones and learned, takynge to thē the myghty, wyse, rulers, gouernours and ye rych shulde all not stande agaynst the truth, but be of hyr syde, where shulde vnryghte∣ousnes remayne? who shuld suffre wrōge or euel? Not so. For the holyones, myghty, supe¦rious, the ryche and the beste of the worlde, muste fyghte agaynst God and hys ryghte∣ousnesse, and be the Deuels darlynges, as wytnesseth the prophet Abacuc in the fyrste chapter, sayenge: Hys meate is pycked and deynty. That is: the wycked sprete hath a denty touth, he loueth to eate of the swetest, moost deyntyeste and costlyest dyshes, as ye Beer also doth hony. Therfore are the lear¦ned, the holy pharises, the Herodes and the
rych euen the deuels deynties. Agayn what so euer the worlde doth refuse, as the poore, lowly, symple, vyle, and despysed, that dothe God chose, (as wytnesseth S. Paule .i. Cor. i.) that he maye suffre the vylest of ye worlde to be myshādled of the best of the same: that so it be euidently knowen, that our saluaciō doth not stande in mans power, but only in the power & handes of God, as Paule doth also testify. Hereof cōmeth that these by wor¦des are cōmunely vsed: They that be lear∣ned, are peruerted. And a ruler is venyson in heauen. And here rych, there poore. For the learned alaye not theyr hartes pryde: the myghty theyr oppressynge: nother do the rych despyse theyr pleasures, and fynally is it done that maye be done. The fourth worke, is to exalte thē of lowe degre. And exalteth them of lovve degre. They of lovve degre are not to be ta∣ken here for those that be lowly, but such as be vnderlynges, and of no reputacyon befor the worlde. For it is euen the same worde ye she ment, whan she sayd: For he hath loked vpon the lowe degre of hys handmayden. Neuerthelesse, they that of theyr fre wyl are
nought & abiecte of harte, not sekyng hyghe thynges, they are lowly in dede. Moreouer thys exaltynge is not to be vnderstande, as that he shulde set them in the thrones & pla∣ces of them that be putte downe, as he doth not set them that feare hym in the rowme of the learned that is proude, another whā he sheweth mercy vpon them: but he geueth thē such gyftes as do farre passe those, name¦ly: yt they beyng exalted in God spiritually, are set as iudges aboue all thrones, powers and knowlege, both here in thys worlde, and in the worlde to come: for they are better learned than al the learned and rulers. But how thys commeth to passe haue I shewed aboue in the fyrst worke of God, nother ne∣deth it to be rehearsed here. But it is al said to the comforte of them that suffre, and to ye frayenge of the tyraūtes, yf we had so much fayth as to consyder it well. The fyft and syxte workes. He fylleth the hongry vvyth good thyn∣ges, and letteth the rych go empty. It is sayd aboue that they of lovve de∣gre are not to be called those that are of a vyle & lowly estate, but such as are contente to be so taken, specially whan they are com∣pelled
therto for mayntaynynge the worde, ryght, & law of God. Euen so ought to be cal¦led hongry, not they that haue lytle or no meate, but they that wyllyngly do wante it, specially yf they be cōpelled therto of other for Gods or hys truthes sake. What is more abiecte, vyle, vayne or myserable then the de¦uel, them that be damned, or them ye be rac∣ked, famyshed & hanged for theyr mysdedes, or what so euer they be ye are brought lowe agaynst theyr wyll? Yet doth not God helpe them, but rather augmenteth theyr mysery. Of such doth not the mother of God speak, but of them that agre wyth God, which are one wyth God, & God is one wyth them. Agayne, what hyndered Abrahā, Isaac & Iacob ye they were ryche? What hyndered Dauid hys kyngly seate? ether Daniel ye po¦wer of Babilō? or who soeuer was or is in hygh degre & wealth, yf theyr harte doth not set store by thē, or standeth in hys owne con¦ceate? Salomō sayeth in ye .xvi. Chap. of the Prouerbes: It is the LORD that weyeth ye spretes or myndes, that is: he iudgeth not af¦ter ye vtter appearaūce, whether he be rych, poore, in authorite or abiecte: but after the sprete and hys behaueoure in the aforesayd estates. The difference of states, maners &
persones must remayne in earthe, as longe as we lyue: but the harte may not cleue vn∣to nor flye: not cleue vnto them of hygh es∣tate and rych, nor flye the abiecte▪ despysed and nedy. After thys maner sayeth Dauid also in the .vii. psalme: Maynteyne the iuste thou ryghteous God, that tryest ye very har¦tes and the reynes. But mē iudge after the vtter appearaunce, wherfore they erre ofte. And these workes are wrought secretly also (as is sayde aboue of other) so yt no man feleth them vntyll they be ended. The rych man doth not perceaue hys vanite & mysery before he dye, or perysh otherwyse, as testify¦eth the .lxxv. psal. on thys wyse: The proude shalbe robbed & slepe theyr slepe, & the mygh¦ty shalbe able to do nothyng wt theyr hādes. Contrarywyse yt hongry can not tel how ful they be, before they come vnto ye ende of hon¦ger, for thā do they fynde the word of Christ in ye .vi. of Luke: Blessed are ye yt hōger here for ye shalbe satisfyed, & thys cōfortable pro∣myse of Gods mother: He fylleth the hon¦gry vvyth good thynges. It is so impossi∣ble that God shulde suffre ony hongry man to perysh by famine whych trusteth in hym, that euen ye angels must come & fede hym. Helias the prophet dyd a rauen fede, & wyth
so muche meele as coulde be holden in one hande was he sustayned a great whyle by ye wedowe of Sarepta. For he can not forsake them that put theyr trust in hym, as wytnes¦seth Dauid in the .xxxvi. psal. sayeng: I was yonge, & now am olde: yet sawe I neuer the ryghteous forsakē, nor hys sede to seke theyr breade. Who so trusteth in God, is ryghte∣ous. And in the .xxxiii. psal. sayeth Dauid al¦so: The rych shall wante and suffre honger: but they whych seke the LORDE, shal want no maner of thynge that is good. Lykewyse also sayde Anna the mother of the prophete Samuel. i. Reg. ii. They that were fylled a∣fore, are solde for bread: and they that were hongry, are satisfyed. But the cursed infidelite doth alwaye wythstand & let, yt God can not worke these thynges in vs, & that we can not perceaue & haue experience of it. We wyl be ful & haue plenty of al, before honger & necessite do cō∣strayne vs, prouydynge vs aforehande, yt we be not greued wt the nede & pouerte to come that so we nede none of Gods workes or grace. What fayth is yt wherby thou tru∣stest in God, whan yu felest & knowest stoare ynough, wherwyth yu mayest helpe thyselfe? Infidelite is ye cause yt we se ye word of God,
the truth, & ryght to lye vnder, and iniury to haue ye vpperhāde, & yt in the meane seasō we kepe our peace, punyshe nothynge, saye no∣thynge to it, nor forbyd ought: but let euery man haue ye brydel & rūne at large, suffryng hym to do as it pleaseth hym. But what is the cause: Euen because we feare to be atta¦ched also, & brought to pouerte, & so finally dye for hōger, & remayne euer an vnderlyng And yt is sayd to set more by tēporal goodes, then by ye feare of God, & to worship thē as Idols in his steade: whereby we are vnwor¦thy to heare or to vnderstande this promyse of God, full of cōforte, namely: that he exal¦teth the oppressed and of lovve degre, and putteth dovvne the proude: that he fylleth the poore vvyth good thynges, and letteth the rych go empty. And so come neuer to yt knowlege of hys workes, wythout ye whyche neuerthelesse ther is no blesse, but must be dāned for euer, as ye .xxvii psal. doth testifye, sayenge: For they regarde not ye workes of ye LORD, nor ye operaciō of hys hādes: therfore shal he breake thē down, & not buyld thē vp. And yt ryghtfully, for they beleue not hys so many promyses, coūtynge hym a lyght & faylyng God, vpō whose word they darre begynne nought: so lytle felynge
haue they of hys truth. Ye must aduenture & put your selues in hasarde vpon hys worde. For he sayeth not: He hath fylled the ful, and set vp the hygh: but he hath fylled the hōgry, & hath exalted the lowly & vnderlynges. Ye muste fyrste come by honger in the myddes of nede, & know what hōger & nede do mea∣ne, so yt ye haue nought to trust vnto, or yt ye may vse hereafter, or whereby ye may be hol¦pen hereafter, nother by yourselfe, nor of o∣ther, but only of God: so that the worke yt is impossible vnto other, be only Gods. Thus must ye not only thynke & speake of lowly∣nesse, but also come therto, sticke fast therin, be helpelesse & destitute and forsaken of eue¦ry man, that God onely maye worke there: or at the leest to desyre suche and not shoe it yf we can attayne it wyth the dede. And for thys cause are we called Christians, and haue the Gospell (whyche the deuel and mē can not beare) that thereby we beynge come to anguyshe and lowlynesse, God maye en∣tre in to hys workes. Thynke ye by your sel¦ues, yf he shuld fyl you, before ye were hōgry or exalte you before ye were brought lowe, he shuld be fayne to playe the iuggler, not be¦ynge able to fulfyl his promyse, & so shuld his worke be nothyng saue a mockage, whā the
neuerthelesse doth say in the .C.x. Psalme▪ The workes of hys handes are verite and iudgement, al hys cōmaundemētes are true Yf he shuld be fayne to helpe you at the in∣traūce of your anguysh & lowlynesse, ether in euery smal suppression & nede, than shuld hys workes be slenderer thā becōmeth hys maieste: Where as it is sayd in ye same psal. that the workes of the LORDE are greate, sought out of al them ye haue pleasure therin Let vs now loke vpon ye contrary parte also. Yf he shuld destroy and put downe the hygh & rych before they became hygh & rych how shuld he behaue hymselfe therin? They must fyrst come so hygh & so passynge in ry∣ches, that euery mā, & they themselues also must be persuaded, (yee & yt it be so in dede) that no mā cā destroy, wtstande, or roote thē out, & be so sure of theyr cause, ye they say it ye Esaye dyd prophecy in his .xlvii. chap. of the Babilonians, sayeng: Heare now therfore thou wylfyl, that syttest so carelesse, & spea∣kest thus in thyn hart: I am alone, and with out me is ther none: I shal neuer be wedow nor desolate agayne, (that is wythoute strength and ayde.) And yet both these thyn¦ges shall come vnto the in one daye, in the the twynckelynge of an eye. &c.
There hath God than an occasion to worke hys worke. Of thys wyse dyd he suffre Pha∣rao to heaue hymselfe aboue the chyldren of Israell, and to opprese them, as God doth testifye of hym in the .ix. chapter of Exodus, sayenge: I haue ered the vp for thys cause, euen to shew my power vpon the, and that my name myght be declared in all landes. Of suche ensamples is the Bible euen full, which teach nothynge els saue God wores and workes, and refuse both the workes and doctrines of men. Beholde now thys stronge cōforte, that is, that not man, but God hymselfe, geueth not only somewhat, but fylleth and satisfy∣eth. And in that she addeth vvithgood thyn¦ges, she signifyeth that such fyllyng shal not be hurtefull, but profytable and wholesome, so that it shall do good both to body & soule. By this is shewed moreouer that they were empty, and full of all nede. For (as is sayde before) by ryches are vnderstāde all faydyng and transitory thynges, that concerne the body, wherewyth the soule is also reioyced. Euen so also by honger ought to be vnder∣stande in this place, not only wāte of meate but of all transitory thynges: for somtyme maye a mā forbeare al thynges saue meate
so that for the moost parte all transitory go¦des and occupyenges are for thesame. With oute meate can noman lyue, thoughe they maye lyue without clothynge, house, mony goodes and men, therfore doth scripture here comprehende the temporall goodes for the moost necessaryest, profitablest and mooste vsuallest, that can leest be forborē, insomuch that she calleth couetous mē and them that be so gredy vpon the vnstable ryches, belly seruaūtes, and Paule doth call ye belly theyr God. How coulde than ony body entyce vs so earnestly and with more comforte to wyl full honger and pouerte, than these vehemēt wordes of Gods mother, namely that God wyl fede euery hongry soule with good thyn¦ges? Whome such comfortable wordes, such honoure and prayse of pouerte doth not per∣suade and entyce therto, he is surely wyth∣out fayth and confidence as an Heythen. Agayne, how can ony man blame ryches more, and fraye the rych more, than wt thys one clause, that God letteth the rych go empty? O what greate and plentifull thyn∣ges are these both: the fyllynge of God and the lettyng go empty? how lytle cā ony crea¦ture helpe or geue counsell therein? A man is abasshed whan he heareth hys fathers de¦fiaunce,
or his maysters displeasure, and we hygh & rych are not dismade whan God doth defy vs. And not only proclameth warre, but threateneth also destruccion, abiection and rootynge out: Contrary wyse is it a ioye whan the father is meke, and the mayster mylde, so that many aduenture theyr lyfe & al that they haue there vpō. And we hauyng such promyse, and such stronge cōsolacion, cā¦not vse and brooke it, we can not geue than∣kes for it, nor yet reioyce therein. O thou la¦mentable vnbelefe, whiche passest the sere∣nesse of a blocke, and the hardnes of a stone, that thou cāst not perceaue such great thyn¦ges. Let thys now be sufficiently spokē of the syxe workes of God. He remēbreth mercy, and helpeth vp hys seruaunte Israell. After the rehearsynge of Gods workes both in her and in other, doth Mary nowe come agayne to the begynnynge and fyrste, and closeth the Magnificat wyth ye greatest and chefe of all the godly workes, which is ye incarnacion of the sonne of God, and con∣fesseth here frely that she is a handmaydē & seruaunte of all the worlde, seyng the worke is accōplyshed in her, the which is profitable not only to her, but vnto all Israell. Yet dea¦leth
she Israell in two, and bryngeth that parte only that serueth God. Nother doth ony mā serue God, saue he that letteth hym be hys God, and suffreth hym to worke hys worke in hym wherof we haue spoken before: Al∣though that worde Gods seruice (alas for pytie) is brought into so straunge vnderstan¦dynge and vse, that whoso heareth it, doth thynke nothynge, vpon such workes, but ra∣ther vpon ryngynge, vpon the stone worke and tymber of the temple, vpō the censoure, vpon the burnynge of the lyghtes, vpon the blarynge, the golde, the syluer, the whyte clothes, the pearles, the vestimentes and surplyses, the chalice, the pyre, the organes & tables, the procession and stations, and that moost of all is, vpon the bablyng and talyng wyth God vpon beede stones. Foo (alas) Gods seruyce is come hetherto, whereof he knoweth nothynge. And we also know none other saue thys. We synge the Magnificat dayly, and ye with great solemnite and lowd, and yet kepe secrete the true vnderstādynge thereof more and more. But yet doth thys text stonde styfly: Yf we do not learne these workes of God, and suffre them in vs, than shall ther be no Gods seruice, no Israell, no grace, no mercye, nor no God, though we
crye out in temples, and rynge tyll we brust and gaue therto all the goodes of ye worlde. For God hath geuen no commaundemente concernynge that, & therfore doutelesse can he haue no pleasure therein. The incarnacion therfore of Christe doth auayle vnto suche an Israell, that ser∣ueth God. Such one is hys owne and belo∣ued people, for whose sake also he is become man, to delyuer them from the thraldome of the Deuell, synne, death and hell, and to brynge them vnto ryghteousnesse and euer∣lastynge lyfe and blysse: that is the helpyng vp that she syngeth of here. And Paule doth also proclame thys, sayenge in the .ii. chapter vnto Titus, that Christe gaue hymselfe for vs, to redeme vs from all vnryghteousnesse & to purge vs, to be a peculiar people vnto hymselfe. And Peter also in hys fyrst epistle the .ii. chapter, sayeth: Ye are that chosen ge∣neracion, that kyngly prestholde, that holy nacion, that peculiar people. &c. These are the godly ryches, and the greate mercyes of God, the whych we haue optayned by none of oure deseruynge, but of the only mercy and grace. Wherfore she sayeth also: He re∣membreth mercy. She sayeth not: He reme¦breth oure merite and worthynesse, for we
were in necessite and vnworthy. Of this thā doth hys prayse and honoure springe, & oure boaste and presumptiō is suaged. He had no∣thynge at whose syghte he myght be moued, saue only hys owne mercy, the whiche also was therfore to be shewed on all nacions. But wherfore sayeth she more: He re∣membreth mercy, than he loked vpō hys mercy? Euen because he had promysed the∣same, as the verse followynge doth declare. Moreouer, he wytheld ye same mercy so lōge, that he semed nearehande to haue forgotten it: (euen as all hys workes do seme to haue no care for vs) neuerthelesse whā he came, it was euidently knowen that he had not for∣gotten vs, but that he was euer mynded to fulfyll hys promyses. Truth it is, that by Israell the Iewes on∣ly are ment, and not the Gentiles: but seyng they refused hym, he chose a few of them, and satisfyed the name of Israell therewith, and made a spirituall Israell. Thys is figu∣red Gen. xxxvii. by the patriarke Iacob wra¦stlynge wyth the angel, whose thygh the an∣gell touched, and made hym to halte. For therby was signifyed that the chylderen of Israell shulde not from thenceforth boaste theyr carnall byrth, (as the Iewes do) where
he also obtayned the name Israell, that he thenceforth shulde so be called, as a Patri∣arke, which were not only Iacob, the father of carnall chyldren, but also Israel the father of spirituall chylderen. To thys doth agre also the name Israel, the which is as muche to saye, as, the LORDE of God. That is surely a very holy & hygh name, cōteynynge in it selfe that great mirakle, that a man by the Godly fauour, hath in a maner brought God in his power, so that God do accōplysh all mans requestes: as we se also that the church is made one wt God thorow Christe, euē as a bryde vnto the brydegrome, which hath power of hyr brydegromes body and all that he hath. All this is done by fayth, where¦by a man obeyeth the wyll of God, and God agayne agreeth vnto mans wyll, so that Is∣rael be so conformable to God, and of suche power ouer hym, yt in God, wt God & by God he do all thynges, & be able to do all thynges Thys (lo) signifyeth Israell. For Schar in Hebrue is as muche to saye, as a lorde or a prince, and El signifyeth God, & ioynynge them together, maketh Israel. Such an Isra¦ell wyll God haue, wherfore whan Iacob hadde wrestled wyth the angell & ouercome him, ye angel sayd: Thou shalt nomore be cal¦led
Iacob, but Israell: for thou hast stryuē wyth God and with men, & hast preuayled. Many thynges more were to be sayde hereof, for Is¦raell is a hygh mystery. Euen as he promysed vnto oure fathers, Abraham and to hys sede for euer. Here are all merites and presumpcion ouerthrowen, and the grace and mercy of God are lyfte vp. For God hath not holpen vp Israell for hys owne merites, but for hys owne promyse. Of only and mere grace hath he promysed, and of mere grace also hath he fulfilled it. Therfore sayeth Paule in the .iii. chapter to the Galathians that God dyd bynde hymselfe to Abraham foure hundreth yeare before he gaue the lawe by Moses, lest ony man myghte saye or boast that he had deserued or obtayned so greate grace and promyse by the lawe or the wor∣kes of thesame: Thys same promyse doth the mother of God laude and prayse aboue all thynges, attributynge the mooste cleare worke of the incarnacion vnto the pure, vn∣deserued, godly and fre promyse made vnto Abraham. Thys promyse of God vnto Abraham is specially wrytten in the .xii. and .xxii. chap¦ters of Genesis, and diuerse other plades,
soundynge on thys maner: In thy sede shall all the naciōs of the earth be blessed. The which wordes of God, S. Paull and al Pro¦phetes (as they be worthy) lyfte vp vnto the cloudes, for in those wordes both Abra∣ham and all hys posterite are saued, because that Christe is comprehended in thesame, and promysed to be the Saueoure of all the worlde. Moreouer thys is Abrahams bo∣some, wherein all they that were saued be∣fore Christes natiuite, dyd remayne. Nother was ony man euer saued without these wor¦des, though he had done all the good dedes that euer were done, the which we wyl loke vpon continently. Fyrst doth it fellowe by these wordes, that all the worlde, excepte Christe, was in thraldome and daunger of synne, damna∣cion and curse wyth all hys workes and con¦nynge. For whan he sayeth, that not some, but all nacions shalbe blessed in Abrahams sede, it is manifeste, that wythout thesame sede; ther shalbe no blesse. What neded God to promyse the blesse wyth so earneste, so greate and so preciouse, an oth, yf the blesse and not rather the curse had ben in the worlde? Out of thys place haue the Pro∣phetes sucked and concluded many thynges
as namely: that all men are euell, vayne, ly∣ars, fayners, blynde and brefely Godlesse or wythout Godlynesse: so that it be no wor∣shyppe in scripture to be called a man. For that name is nomore worth by God, than yf a man were called before the worlde a lyar or periured. So wholy dyd he perysh by A∣dams fall, yt the curse beynge borne wt hym, was nearehāde become one nature wt hym. Secondely it followeth, that that sede of Abraham neded not to be borne by natu∣rall sede of man and wyfe: For suche byrth is cursed, and bringeth forth cursed frutes, as is sayde euen now. Yf now all the worlde was to be delyuered from thys curse by A∣brahams sede and to be blessed, it was requy¦red that ye sede were blessed before, and vn∣touched or vndefyled of suche a curse, and to be a mere blesse, full of grace and truthe. Agayne, yf God that is no lyar doth pro∣myse (and that wyth an oth) a naturall sede vnto Abraham, that is a naturall and lawfull chylde, whyche shalbe borne of hys flesh and bloude: it was necessary that such one shulde be a true naturall man, borne of the fleshe and bloude of Abraham. Now do these two thynges stryue together: To be the naturall fleshe and bloude of Abra∣ham,
and yet not to be borne by man and wyfe after the course of nature. And ther∣fore vseth he thys worde, thy sede, and not thy chylde or thy sonne: that so it were clere and euident, that it must be hys naturall fleshe and bloude, as it is also hys sede. Who wyll now here attayne a meane, that the worde and oth of God be true, wher¦in thynges so contrary do mete? That shall God surely do, whiche can accomplysh that he hath promysed, though noman couet it before it be done. Therfore do hys wordes and dedes requyre no naturall wytte, but a fre and pure fayth. Lo how he hath vnyed these two thynges: He geueth vnto Abrahā a naturall sede, of one of hys doughters, the pure and chaste virgine Mary, by the holy gooste, wythout the workynge of man. There was not the naturall concepciō and generacion wyth hyr curse, nother coulde it stayne the sede: and yet neuerthelesse is thys the naturall sede of Abraham as well, as all other Abrahams yssue. Beholde than, thys is the blessed sede of Abra∣ham, whereby all the worlde is delyuered of hys curse. For from hym that beleueth on thys sede, calleth vpon it, confesseth it,
and cleueth there vnto, is the curse taken a∣waye and forgeuen as a cryme, and al blesse is geuen him, for the sounde of the word and oth of God, namely: In thy sede shall all nacions be blessed. That is, Loke what is to be blessed, that shal be blessed, by thys sede and none other. Lo thys is ye sede of Abrahā, the which is borne of none of hys chylderen, (as the Iewes haue alwaye loked for to haue ben) but of hys only doughter the virgine Mary. That same meaneth here the bewtyful mother of God whan she sayeth that God hath taken vp Israell, accordynge to the pro∣myse made vnto Abraham: vnto Abrahā (I saye) and all hys sede. Veryly she sawe that the promyse was than fulfylled in her, and therfore sayd she: It is now fulfylled, he hath now taken hym vp, he hath accōplyshed hys worde by the only callynge to mynde hys mercy. Here do we beholde the fundamente of the gospell, wherfore all doctrines & prea∣chynges of hym do dryue vnto Christes fayth and Abrahams bosome. For ther is no coun¦sell, nor helpe yf thys fayth is wantynge, whereby ye blessed sede maye be vnderstand. And veryly ❧ all the scripture hangeth vpon thys oth. For all that is wrytten in ye whole
Bible, doth behold and concerne Christ. Be∣sydes thys do we se that al the fathers of the olde testamente, and all Prophetes also had thesame fayth, and thesame gospell that we haue, as Paule doth testifye .i. Corinth. x. For in thys testamente of God & Abrahās bosome dyd they all remayne by stedfaste fayth, and therfore are saued: sauynge that they beleued in the sede that was promysed and for to come, but we beleue in ye sede that hath appeared and is geuen. Neuerthelesse the truth of the promyse remayneth on both partes, it is all one fayth, one sprete, one Christ, one LORDE that was at that tyme and is now, and shall be for euer, as the .xiii. chapter to the Hebrues doth beare witnesse. But that the Iewes had a lawe geuen them afterwarde, that is not lyke vnto thys promyse, for it was done therfore, that by ye lyght of the lawe they myghte knowe theyr cursed nature, and that they shulde more fer¦uently and wyth more whoter desyre sygh and longe for thys promysed sede of blessyng in the whiche they had a prerogatiue before all nacions on earth. But they haue turned the prerogatiue into hurte and dammage, & haue thought to accomplysh and fulfyll the lawe by theyr owne strength, and therfore
haue not they sene theyr wretched mysery. And after thys maner haue they shut ye dore to themselues, so that ye sede promysed muste nedes go by them, in ye which opiniō they re¦mayne yet, God geue it be not longe. Amē. Thys hath ben the debate that all the Pro∣phetes haue had wyth them, for seynge the Prophetes knew wel ynough the meanyng of the lawe, namely: that thereby the wyc∣kednesse of our nature shulde be knowē, and to learne how Christe shulde be called vpon, therfore refused they all the workes & lyues of the Iewes, that wente not in that waye: for the whych cause the Iewes cōceaued an anger agaynst thē, & slew thē, as those that refused ye gods seruice, good workes, and the good lyuyng, as ye hypocrytes and graceles sayntes d sometyme. Of whome ther were not a lytle to be spoken. That she sayth: and to hys sede foreuer, is to be vnderstāde, ye such grace shall laste in Abrahams bloud (which are ye Iewes) frō that tyme forth, thorow all tymes, vntyll the laste daye. For though ye moost parte be har∣dened, yet are ther somtyme parte of them (though but a fewe) that turne vnto Christ, & beleue in hym, seynge thys promyse of God both not fayle, namely: ye the promyse was
made vnto Abraham & hys sede, not for one, nor for a thousande yeares, but for euer, that is: from one mās tyme vntyll another with∣out ceassynge. And for thys cause ought not we to intreate ye Iewes so vncourteously, for amonge thē are yet some that shalbe Christi¦ans and dayly do some of thē turn to Christ. Moreouer, they only, and not we Gentiles haue the promyse made vnto thē, that ther shalbe euer some Christiās in ye sede of Abra∣ham, that shall knowlege ye blessed sede. Our matter is founded vpō the mere grace with out the promyse of God, who knoweth how and whan? Yf we lyued godly & Christenly, and with mekenesse brought them to Christ, that veryly were the beste maner and way. Who wolde become a Christian, whā he seyeth Christen men deale so cruelly wt mē? Not so ye welbeloued Christiās. Let ye truth be shewed them after a good maner, ye which yf they refuse, leaue thē alone. Howe many Christiās are ther now adayes, that regard not Christ, nother heare hys worde? beynge worse thā ye Gentiles or Iewes, whome ne∣uerthelesse they do let be in reste, yee do thē reuerēce, makyng nearehand an Idol of thē. Here wyll we rest at thys tyme, prayng god for ye true vnderstādyng of thys virgins sōg of prayse called Magnificat, ye which not only
do shyne and speake, but also inflame & lyue in the body and soule: the which oure Saue∣oure Christe graunte vs. Amen. Now do I returne vnto you moost boū∣teous prince, desyrynge youre hyghnesse to take my boldenesse in worth. Though I know that your goodnesses youth hath ma∣ny instructers and dayly admonicions, yet coulde I not represse the care of my subiec∣tion and due faythfulnesse, and besydes this the charge of my conscience, and the exhor∣tacion of your hyghnesse. Seynge we all do hope, that in tymes to come, the rule of the commune welth (the which oure mercyfull god geue to prosper) shall come to your hygh¦nesse handes: the which is a greate thyng, yf it do well befal: and agayne a peryllous and myserable thynge, yf it do befall otherwyse. But vnto vs it becōmeth to loke and praye for the beste, neuerthelesse carefully to feare is the worst of all. Let your hyghnesse call thys to mynde, namely: That God neuer suffred one Gen∣tile kynge or prince in all the scripture to be cōmended, no not sence ye worlde was crea∣ted, but caused them alwaye to be rebuked: the whiche is a dredefull ensample vnto all superiorites. Nother dyd he fynde moreouer
ony laudable and blamelesse kyng amonge hys peculyare people of Israel. Besydes all thys among the Iewes, whych were ye chefe and heade of all mankynde, lyfted vp and be¦loued aboue all creatures, were but a fewe, nother aboue syxe kynges praysed. Finally that deare part and precious prince Dauid, whych left none nother behynde nor by him that was lyke hym in worldly polycye: the whych though he beynge full of the feare & wysedome of God, dyd rule and iudge all thynges by the only cōmaūdement of God, and not by hys reason, yet neuerthelesse stō¦bled sometyme. So ye scripture also, because she coulde not blame hys gouernaunce, and yet must recyte ye hurte of the people, where by Dauid was cloyde, dyd not impute it vn¦to Dauid, but vnto ye people, sayenge: That God was wroth wyth ye people, and suffred Dauid the holy man to be steared of Sathā, whyche gaue hym in hys mynde to nōbre ye people, for the whych dede .lxx. thousand mē dyd dye of the pestilence. All thys hath God so brought to passe to fraye the superiorite, to retayne thē in feare and to admonysh them of theyr daungers. For great ryches, great honours, great po∣wer, greate fauoure, and besyde thys many
flatterers, (from whom no lorde is fre) do so of all partes besege and assaulte the hart of a prynce, and dryue hym so to pryde, to the forgetfulnesse of God, to not carynge ether for the people or commune wealth, to plea∣sure, to rashnesse, to curiosite, to ydelnesse: brefely to all vnryghteous thynges and vy∣ces, that no cytie nor stronge holde can so be beseged & assaulted. Now he that beyng war¦ned by the aforesayd ensamples wyll not a∣noyde, and vse the feare of God for a banke or fence, where (I pray you) shall he become? For yf ony lorde or superioure do not loue his people, & do not apply therto his mynde, not how he lyue deyntely, but how by hys ensample hys subiectes maye be steared to goodnesse, all is done wyth hym, and ye state of hys dominion shall thence forth be onely to the losse of hys soule: nother shall it a∣uayle him that he doth foūde great moneth-means, trentals, diriges, and yeare tydes, buylde great monasteryes, altares, or thys or that. God shall requyre of hym an accōpt of hys estate and offyce, nother shall he care for ony thynge els. Wherfore moost boūteous lorde and prince I commende thys Magnificat vnto your hyghnesse, but specially ye fyfte & syxte
verses, aboute ye whych I haue cōprehended it, prayenge & requyrynge your hyghnesse to drede nothynge so sore all your lyfe tyme on earth, (no not hell) as it that ye blessed mo∣ther of God callth here the imaginacyō of the mynde. For ye same is ye greatest, ye fear∣cest, the myghtyest and the most hurtfullest enemye of all kynde of men, specially of su∣periours. Hys names are: Reason, good opi∣nion or intent, wherof must come all coun∣sels and gouernaunces. Nother can youre hyghnesse be in sauegarde, yf ye haue not thys alwaye suspecte, and wyth the feare of God followe not only the reasons, not only of your peres and senatours, but also of all them that be of your hyghnesse counsell. No mans coūsel is to be despysed, nother agayne is it only to be trusted vnto. But what must be done than? Thys ve¦rely: that your hyghnesse do not sende away your prayer in cloysters vnder monkes, cha¦nons and freres cooles, ether vnder chalices as it is a wycked maner now a dayes to do, to buyld vpon other mēs prayers & to truste therin, & to set lytle store by theyr own. But your hyghnes must take a fre, hardy & a me∣ry corage, & settynge asyde ye feble mynde cal vpon God, ether in your harte or els where
secretlye, layenge at hys fete the keyes, and constraynynge hym wyth hys owne ordy∣naunce, on thys wyse: Behold my God and father, thys is thy worke, thys is thyne ordi¦naunce that I shulde be borne and gendred to rule in thys state, the whych noman wyll denye, and thou thyselfe knowest whether I be worthy or vnworthy of it, neuerthelesse here am I ready as thou seyst, and as euery man knoweth. Graunt therfore my father and LORDE, that I maye rule thys peo∣ple to thy prayse and theyr wealth: and I be∣seke the suffre me not to stāde in myne own conceate and to myne owne reason, but be thou my reason and appoynted marke. Let hym begyn vpon lyke sentence and procede in what thynge so euer he haue in hande, cōmēdyng it to God. Moreouer, how well God be appayed wt suche a prayer and mynde, doth Salomō, (yt in lyke maner dyd praye) declare: yt whyche prayer I haue also ioyned hereto, the your hyghnesse maye be steared gladly to trust in the grace of God, that both hys feare & mercy maye byde with you. And herwyth I cōmende me vnto your hyghnesse, the whych I praye God to preserue vnto a lucky go∣uernaunce. Amen.
The prayer that kynge Salomon prayed, a patron for all princes, ta∣ken out of the .iii. chapter of the iii. boke of the kynges. THe LORDE appeared vnto Salomon at Gibeon in a dreame of the nyght, & God sayd: Are what I shall geue the. Salomon sayde: Thou hast done greate mercy vnto my father Dauid thy seruaunte, so that he walked before the in faythfulnesse & ryghte∣ousnesse, and in a true harte wyth the, and thys mercy hast thou layed vp for hym, and geuen hym a sonne to syt vpon hys seate, as it is now come to passe. Now LORDE my God, thou haste made thy seruaunt kynge in my father Da∣uids steade: As for me, I am but a smal yōge man, knowynge nother myne outgoyng nor ingoynge. And thy seruaunt is amonge the people whome thou hast chosen, whych is so great, that no man can nombre them nor de¦scribe thē for multytude. Geue thy seruaūte therfore an obediente harte, that he maye iudge thy people, and vnderstande that
what is good or bad: for who is able to iudge thys thy myghty people? Thys pleased the LORDE well, that Salomon axed such a peticion. And God sayd vnto Salomon: For so muche as thou axest thys, and desyrest not lōge lyfe, nother ryches, nother the soules of thyne enemyes, but vnderstandynge to heare iudgement, be¦holde therfore haue I done accordyng to thy wordes. Beholde I haue geuen the an harte of wysedome and vnderstandynge, so yt suche one as thou, hath not ben before the, nother shal ryse vp after the. Yee and that thou hast not prayed for, haue I geuen the also, name¦ly: ryches and honoure, so that amonge the kynges of thy tyme ther is not such one as thou. And yf thou wylt walke in my wayes, so that thou kepe myne ordinaunces and lawes, as Dauid thy father hath walked, than wyll I geue the a longe lyfe. FINIS.
¶A confutaciō of the songe called Salue Regina, prouyng by scriptures layed therto, that it is rather Idolatry, than lawfull to be songe of true Christen men. ¶Grace, mercy and strength of sprete that commeth of God the father and our LORD Iesu Christ do I wysh vnto the gentle reader. SEynge welbeloued brethren and systers that nowe by the boūteous goodnesse & mercy of God, the moost clere and shyninge lyght of the Gospel is declared vnto vs agayne in thys presēt world, therfore may we ryght well thanke & prayse God that he hath wyt∣safe vs to come vnto the ryghte vnderstan∣dynge & knowlege by ye power of hys lyuyng worde: Namely, that we knowe perfectlye now how and after what fashiō we ought to prayse and to thanke God, & how to vtter &
declare thankfully our fayth, (whych nother can, nor ought be sloggysh) not only inward¦ly, but also outwardly, (as Dauid ye prophete dyd) thankynge and praysynge the LORDE Iesus wyth songes and melody: as Paul ex∣horteth hys Coll. iii. to do. For yf a man be∣leue from the harte, he shalbe made ryghte∣ous: and yf a mā knowlege wyth the mouth, he shalbe saued. Rom. x. By thys is it lykely that the songes whiche are nowe vsed in churches euery where were fyrst institute of the fathers for thys intēt: namely, so to declare & boldlye to exercyse openly the inwarde fayth. For it is manifest that we haue no commaundemēt concernynge thys in all the new testament. And for thys cause ought we Christians to haue such songes and ballades now also, wherewyth the name of God be auaunced and magnifyed, and not dishonoured nor blasphemed. But alas thys costume is not only come to such mysuse, that Christes honoure is not vttered therin, but also that Lucifer ye prince of thys worlde hath thereby confirmed and fortifyed hys kyngdome: so yt ther is noughte vsed therin now saue only the byshop of Ro¦mes fayres: and the thynge wherein the ser∣uice
and honoure of God was supposed to haue consysted, haue ben occupyed wyth no∣thynge saue byenge and sellynge, choppynge and chaungynge, yee playne vsury. Euen as Esay doth featly prophecy of them, speakyng in the persone of almyghtye God on thys wyse: It is ye that haue burnte vp my vyne∣yard, the robbery of ye poore is in your house &c. vpon whom Christ also geueth a fearfull sentēce ful of dredful curses, sayenge: Wo vnto you scrybes & pharises, ye hypocrites, that deuoure wedowes houses, and that vn∣der the coloure of prayenge longe prayers: therfore shall ye receaue the greater damna¦cyon. As though he wolde saye: wyth youre great howlynge do ye deceaue the poore in∣nocentes, of whose sweate and bloude ye fyll your paunches, so ful that one wolde thynke ye had eaten euen the poore innocentes hou¦ses also. But seynge they study nothynge so earnestly as to serue theyr God ye belly, ther¦fore do not they care for ye worde of God, but do ruffle it vpon an heape: yee & sell Christe and hys worde, as it may be wel perceaued of them that take diligent hede vnto it. But what nede more wordes hereof, seyng we se dayly one bayte▪ after the other put at the an¦gle to catch and to seduce the symple people
the more, whyche now is partely delyuered from the Babilonicall captiuite. For the pardōs (where by they were wonte to scrape a good summe of pens) that once were refu∣sed begynne now to preasse in agayne in an other hue & vysoure, namely that they shall be had frely. Neuerthelesse the ende wyll declare to what intente thys be insti∣tute. I counsell therfore euery Christen bro∣ther and syster, that desyreth to be a membre of Christe, to abyde by theyr heade Iesus Christe lokynge for the true pardons of his merites, suckynge the pardonynge and for∣geuynge of theyr synnes out of hys passion & woūdes only. I wyll passe ouer to speake of thys matter at thys tyme, for it is not now myne ntent so to do, lest I go to farre fro my purpose: that is, ye I wolde haue eue∣ry man to geue diligent hede vnto the son∣ges that be vsually songe in our churches or temples, and specially of one, the whyche by the inspiracyon of the deuel is so ryfe and so corrupped, ye God is therby depryued of his honoure, (contrary to the fyrst commaunde¦ment) and it is geuen vnto a creature. This maye be proued in the songe of prayse that is songe to the blessed virgine Mary the mo¦ther
of Christ, wherin we imagine to do her hygh seruice and worship, whyche notwyth∣standynge is pytefully dishonoured & moc∣ked therewyth: for therin is great ydolatry, so that no greater spyte can be done to her, than to synge such songes of prayse vnto her, wherin hyr sonne Iesus Christe, by whome she receaued all mercy▪ grace, vertue, good∣nesse and holynesse, accordyng to hyr owne confession Luke in the fyrst chapter, sayeng▪ My soule magnifyeth the LORDE. And my sprete reioyceth in God my Sa¦ueoure. For he hath loked vpon the lovve de∣gre of hys handmayden. Beholde, from hence forth shal al gene¦racions call me blessed. For he that is myghty hath done great thynges vnto me, and Holy is hys name.&c. In the whych wordes she confesseth God to be hyr Saueoure, whych must saue vs all also, or els we shall be damned for euer. We ought therfore to go to hym askynge mercy and grace of hym, for he is our hope, aduo∣cate and saluacion. Wyll ye therfore worshippe Mary a∣ryght, worship her in Iesu Christ hir sonne, thankynge and praysynge him for workynge
so wonderfull power (whyche he tofore had promysed vnto the fathers) in that vessell. Now yf thy contemplacion or inwarde de∣uocion doth chaūce vpon the maydē, (which thorowe hyr constaunte fayth dyd brynge forth our Saueoure the sonne of God, with out ony spot of nature, only by the ouersha∣dowynge of the holy goost, remaynyng pure virgyn & mother as the scripture doth playn¦ly beare wytnesse) than may ye salute her with the same salutacion, that the angel Ga¦briel saluted her: but ye shall worshyp God only in the trine of persons, namely ye father ye sōne and holy goost. Thys doynge, ye shal do the hyghest worshippe vnto Mary yt can be done, accordynge to the iudgement of the scripture. And that we maye be the more assured and certifyed of thys, we wyll conferre this songe of Salue regina wyth the scripture, & se how they accorde. But yf it doth not agre wyth Gods worde, I requyre you for the ho¦noure of God to leaue it, and cleue vnto the worde of God: & so doynge ye shalbe the bre¦thren and systers of Christe, accordynge to hys owne wytnesse. Luke .viii. And what so euer is not hys, that is agaynst hym, and ve¦nyme of the soule, for the whyche we oughte
earnestly to beware, lest after thys transito¦ry lyfe we be robbed of the eternal glory, the which God omnipotent raygnynge for euer graunt vs all. Amen. ¶A refutacion of the songe called Salue regina. BLessed be God and the father of our LORDE, Iesus Christ, which accordynge to hys greate mercye hath begotten vs agayne vnto a lyuely hope, by the rysynge agayne of Iesus Christ from the dead vnto an vncorruptible and vndefyled enheritaunce, whyche neuer shall fayde awaye. &c. Thus wryteth Peter in hys fyrst canonicall epistle the fyrst chap¦ter, wyllynge vs to thanke, prayse and blesse God alwaye, for delyuerynge vs from death euerlastynge thorowe hys only sonne Iesus Christe. Thys hygh and moost laudable be∣nefyte as no tunge can expresse it, so can no tunge also prayse it ynough. And therfore doth Paule exhorte & warne vs of the abuse of thys benefite, sayenge .i. Corin. vii. Ye are dearly bought (namely, wyth the bloude of Iesus Christ) be not ye seruaūtes of mē. &c. Now to synge, cense, praye and to do lyke re¦uerence
vnto a creature, or an ymage of wood or stone, and vnto that ymage to attri¦bute such prayse, thanke and worship as be∣lōgeth vnto God only, what is that els saue a seruice of men, whereby God & his worde are blasphemed, denyed and set at nought? as it shalbe brefely declared hereafter. ¶Fyrst we synge Salue regina misericor∣diae, that is to saye: Hayle quene of mercy. Here is fyrst denyed the sayeng of Esay recyted of S. Paule Rom. xiiii. As truly as I lyue (sayeth the LORDE) all knees shall bowe vnto me, and al tunges shal knowlege vnto God. And agayne the sayenge of Mo∣ses Deuteronomy the .vi. Chapter. Heare O Israell, the LORDE our God is one LOR∣DE only. And thou shalte loue the LORDE thy God wyth all thyne harte, wyth all thy soule, wyth all thy myght. The sayenge also of the prophete Esaye in the .xlii. Chapter is here denyed, where God sayeth: I my selfe, whose name is the LORDE, whych geue my power to none other, nother myne ho∣noure to the goddes. &c. Marke now earnestly how featly & wel
these sayenges agre wt thys salutaciō or gre¦tyng of Mary: verely as wel as day & nyght Marke how our carnall deuocion and good meanyng accordeth with God & hys worde: euen so wel, that God sayeth by the prophet Esay in the .lv. chapter: My thoughtes are not youre thoughtes, and youre wayes are not my wayes: But as farre as the heauēs are hygher than the earth, so farre do my wayes excede youres, & my thoughtes, you∣res. Hereby maye it be sene what thys salua¦cion is, namely that God doth not geue hys honoure to none of the goddes. Now consy∣steth hys honoure in nothynge so greatly, as in thankefulnesse and praysynge hym for hys infinite mercy & goodnesse shewed vnto vs in suffrynge for vs that were in thraldom and the deuels daunger, and so delyuered vs therout: whyche nother the blessed virgine Mary, Peter, nor Paule, nor none of al the sayntes hath done. It followeth than that she is not the quene of mercy. ¶Secondarely we synge: Vita, dulcedo et spes nostra salue▪ that is: Haye our lyfe, our swetnesse and our hope. The cōtrary to thys wytnesseth Christ hymselfe Ioh. xiiii. sayeng: I am ye waye, the
truth and the lyfe. &c. And Esaye sayeth lyke wyse in the .xlv. Chapter in the persone of God: Turne you vnto me all ye endes of ye worlde, and ye shalbe saued: for I am God, and ther is els none. To thys agreeth also Paule .i. Cor. iii. sayenge: Other foundamēt can no man laye, than that whyche is layed already, whych is Christ Iesu. These confor¦table wordes do we nother kepe nor beleue, seynge we confesse wyth our mouthes, and wyth the dede seke another lyfe or saluacion thā the true and only lyfe and saluacion, na∣mely Iesus Christe. Yee thus doynge we make not God true in hys promyse, that he ether can not or wyll not do for vs as he say¦eth euery where in the scripture: or els do not we beleue ye sayenge of ye boke of wyse∣dome the .xv. Chapter, where it is thus writ¦ten: Thou (our God) arte swete, longe suffe¦rynge, & true, & in mercy ordrest thou al thin¦ges, & so forth. And Christ speakynge of hym selfe Ioh. vi. sayeth: Who so cōmeth vnto me, hym wyll not I cast out. And agayne in the x. chapter he sayeth: My shepe heare my voyce, and I knowe them, and they followe me, and I geue them euerlastyng lyfe, & they shal neuer perysh. Where is ony such worde of comforte, lyfe, hope or swetnesse spoken of
in the scriptures of God of the blessed vir∣gine Mary or ony creature? and yf ther be not, what madnesse is it of vs ether to cal or to take them for our hope and refuge, which do so lowly alway submitte themselues both to God and hys creatures? Yf we wolde a lytle ponder these wordes of the salutation of Mary, conferrynge them with the sayeng of Dauid Psalm. C.ii. where he sayeth: Lyke as a father pytyeth hys owne chylderen, euē so is the LORDE mercyfull vnto them that feare hym: we shulde easyly se howe farre & abtrunnynge we be both from God and his true worde. We se than welbeloued brethrē and systers, that yf we beleued these foresayd wordes aryghte, we shulde nede none other saluacion, hope nor lyue saue only Christe, which is geuen vs of the father to be a me∣diatour betwene him & vs, as ye shal heare hereafter. But alas it is come to ye poynte wyth vs, that we aske lyfe of them, that do not lyue themselues, as Salomon sayeth in hys boke called the boke of Wysedome, the .xiii. Chap∣ter.
God sayeth in the .li. chapter of Esay: I ame he that in al thynges geueth you consolatiō. What arte thou than that feareste a mortall man, the chylde of man, which goeth awaye as doth the flore? and forgettest the LORD that made the? In the boke of wysedome the xvi. chapter it is thus written: It is thou O LORDE that haste the power of lyfe and death, thou leadeste vnto deathes dore, and bryngest vp agayne. This is he in whome only ye ought to hope, & to haue confidence, hym only shall ye feare, to hym only muste ye sygh & sobbe: for ther is but one only that is mooste hyghest creatoure of all thynges, moost puyssaūt and myghty, that is greatly to be feared and dradde, as Iesus Sirak ex∣horteth vs to do, in the fyrst chapter of Ec∣clesiasticus, sayenge: Ther is one, euen the Hyghest, the maker of all thynges, the Al∣myghty, the kynge of power (of whome men ought to stande greatly in awe,) whiche syt∣teth vpon hys trone, beynge a God of domi∣nion, and so forth. Thanke therfore & prayse hym only, feare and drede hym, and thā shall not ye be deceaued. For yf ye trust in men, or ony creature, callynge vpon them, than veryly shal ye be deceaued, vnhappy & accur¦sed as testifye both Ieremy in the .xvii. chap.
and Dauid in the .C.xiii. Psalme sayenge: Cursed be the man, that putteth hys trust in man. Let therfore thē that feare the LORD, put theyr truste in hym: for he is theyr suc∣coure and defence, and thynke, yee be assu∣red, thys kynde of worshyp to be nought but a deuyce and imaginacion of men only, the which are ydle and vayne as sayeth Ieremy in the .x. chapter. And Christe also sayeth Mathe. xv. that he is worshypped in vayne, whyle they teach suche doctrines as are no∣thynge but the commaundementes of men. Though they approche neare vnto me with the Pater noster, callynge me father, LOR∣DE and God: yet do they runne to other fa∣thers, gods and saueoures in thys vale of teares. Drawe therfore backegood brethren and systers your strayenge steppes & wende them in the wayes of the LORDE, yeldyng you rather to hym and hys worde: for ye haue more assuraunce to be herde when ye call to hym, yf ye so do, than ye haue of fol∣lowynge mans voyce. Dauid sayeth Psalm. xlix. in the persone of God: Call vpon me in the tyme of trouble, so wyll I heare the, that thou shalt thanke me. Where is ther ony such promyse or comfortable worde in all ye scripture of the blessed virgine, or ony other
name, he shall geue it you. Yf ye therfore be∣leue these wordes stedfastlye, than nede ye none other meane. Or thynk ye that he wyl lye ether for you, or for youre synnes, whych only is the truth hymselfe, and hath taken a waye the synnes of the worlde, as Esaye doth expressely wryte of hym in the .liii. chap¦ter, and Ihon baptiste doth by mouth? ¶Syxtly it followeth in the songe Et Iesum benedictum fructum uentris tui no∣bis post hoc exilium ostende. that is: And shewe vs Iesu ye blessed frute of thy wombe after thys exilyng & ban¦nyshynge. Yf you wyll haue her to shewe you Ie∣sus, than must ye fyrste let hym shewe you her in thys mysery and heare what she sayd Luke in the fyrst chapter, where it is wryttē: He remembreth mercy, and helpeth vp hys seruaunte Israel. Euen as he promysed vnto oure fathers, Abraham and to hys sede for euer. Here sayeth Mary that vnto Abraham and hys sede was promysed salua∣cion thorowe Christe Iesu, which thynge is
playnly declared in Genesis the .xxii. Chap. where God sayd to Abraham: In thy sede shall all nacions be blessed: and Abraham be¦leuynge thys was saued thereby. And Gene¦sis. xvii. was Isaac promysed vnto Abraham and Abraham beleuynge the same lykewyse was saued thereby. Vnto Dauid was lyke promyse made .ii. Regum the .vii. chapter on thys wyse: Whan the tyme is fulfylled that thou shalte slepe wt thy fathers, I wyll rayse thy sede after the. I wyll be hys father, and he shalbe my sonne, and wyll stablysh ye seate of hys kyngdome for euer. This dyd Dauid beleue, and was also saued. Beholde, thus hath now Abraham receaued hys chylde say¦eth Mary, as it was promysed vnto Abrahā and hys posterite. Wyll ye now therfore be also saued, then must ye let Iesus be shewed vnto you, as Mary doth shewe hym here in the Magnificat: namely that he is the bles∣synge of all nacyons, and so to beleue & fayth¦fully to trust in Iesu Christ only: for by thys fayth only shall ye be saued. Yee must haue thys fayth only in hym in thys vayle of tea∣res, and so se hym here: and not let hym be shewed vnto you by other meanes after this myserable exilynge, as it is sunge in thys songe of prayse. Thus must we haue hym
shewed vnto vs in thys vayle of teares, as he was shewed vnto ye patriarkes, and prophe∣tes, that we maye knowe hym in thys mor∣tall lyfe & beleue in hym, as they haue done: and than surely shall he shewe hymselfe wel ynough after thys exilynge and banyshmēt. Yf els hys wordes be true that he hath spo∣ken. Ioh. xi. I am the resurreccion and ye lyfe. He that beleueth on me, shall lyue, thoughe he were dead already. And Ioh. iii. He that beleueth on me shal not be condēned. Thus must thou than knowe Iesu Christe as one that taketh awaye thy synnes, dyenge ye byt∣ter death for them. But yf ye know hym not here, than maye he not be shewed you after thys partynge of bodye and soule, nother of Mary, nor of ony body els. ¶Seuenthly we synge in thys songe, O cle¦mens, O pia, O dulcis uirgo Maria, that is: O bounteous, O good, O swete vir∣gine Mary. These wordes were wonte to be cryed out loude, but Baals prestes cryed out lou∣der, whereof it is wrytten in the thyrd boke of the kynges the .xviii. Chapter of thys ma∣ner: And they cryed loude and prouoked thē
selues wyth knyues and otkens (as theyr maner was) tyll the bloude followed, but no answere was herde. Wherfore the prophete Elias mockyng them sayd: Crye loude. For he is a God, peraduēture he is musynge, or hath sōwhat to do, or is gone some iourney, or happly he slepeth, so that he wolde be wa∣ked vp. &c. They cryed farther yet: yee that euen theyr throte semed to haue brasten asū¦der, but what they optayned thereby, that maye ye reade there. And much lesse shal ye optayne wyth your loude blaryng. For God geueth no eare to loude cryenge, but to loue and mercy. Besydes thys ascrybest thou swe¦tenesse, goodnesse, and ryghteousnesse vn∣to a creature whyche is to be referred vnto none but vnto God onely. Of thys swe∣tenesse sayeth scripture in the boke of wyse∣dome the .xii. Chap. on thys wyse: O LOR∣DE how gracious and swete is thy sprete in all thynges. And Ioel in the .ii. Chapter: Turne you vnto the LORDE youre God, for he is gracious and mercyfull longe suffe¦rynge and of great compassion, and ready to pardon wyckednesse and to forgeue syn∣nes. &c. Dauid doth lykewyse exhorte vs in the .xxxiii. Psalme, sayeng: Tayste and se howe frendely the LORDE is, happye is
the man that trusteth in hym. Marke well now that ye must seke and loke for all good∣nesse, swetenesse, mercy and vertue at hym only, yf ye shall optayne ought, and that ye can do nought wythout hym. Thys con∣firmeth the prayer of Anna the wyfe of Hel¦cana in the fyrste doke of the kynges, the se∣conde chapter, where she sayeth: Ther is no man holy as the LORDE, for wythout the is nothyng and ther is no comforte lyke vnto oure God. And euen so noman can, nor maye be holy or come to the father, but thorowe the sonne Christ Iesu as he wytnes¦seth hymselfe. To conclude good brethren and systers I beseke you for the vnspeakeable mercy of God to remembre and to thynke that God is wyser than ye: and so doynge geue youre wytte and wysedom captiue vnto the worde of God, and than shal happen vnto you both health and saluacion. But alas it is happe¦ned vnto vs (God amende it) that is spoken of in the .xiiii. Chapter of the boke of wyse∣dome, namely that thorowe the bewty of the worke, the commune people was deceaued, insomuche, that they toke hym now for God whyche a lytle afore was but honoured as man. Lyke vnto thys maye ye reade Deute∣ronomy
the .vi. Baruch the laste, and in the boke of wysedom the .xiii. and .xiiii. chapters besides other places innumerable mo in the bible. Yf ye loke vpon these places, ye shall easely se what Idolatrye is vsed daylye in Christendome before the paynted blockes & stockes. Whych I truste shall once be redres¦sed by the power of the word of God, though to some it seme to be vnpossible by the reasō of the depe rootynge of it in some superstici∣ous hartes. But let suche call to mynde the power of God specifyed in these wordes of God by hys prophete Esaye in the .l. chapter Why wolde no man receaue me whan I came? and whan I called, no man gaue an∣swere. Was my hande clene smytten of, that it myght not helpe? Or had I not power to delyuer? Sende therfore the pure & playne vnderstādynge of thy Godly worde into oure hartes, that the lyght of the clere vnderstandynge of thy worde maye dryue out the darkenesse of Idolatry and so thyne honoure be restored vnto the agayne. AMEN.
¶The true Salue Regina, groun∣ded vpon the scripture. HAyle Iesu Christ kynge of mercy, oure lyfe, our swetenesse and oure hope, hayle. Vnto the do we call the wretched chyldren of Eua: vn¦to the do we call and syghe, wepynge & way¦lynge in thys valley of teares. Turne ther∣fore thy mercyfull eyen to vs warde thou spechman and aduocate of oures, and shewe vs the visage of thy blessed father in the e∣uerlastynge glory, as thou hast promy∣sed vs, O gracious, O swete Christe and sonne of the virgine Mary.
¶The songe of Zachary called Benedictus, vsual∣ly songe at Mattins, brefely declared. Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, for he hath redemed and visited hys people. And hath set vp an horne of saluacyon in the house of hys seruaunt Dauid. Euen as he promysed afore tyme by the mouth of hys holy prophetes. That he vvolde delyuer vs from oure enemyes, and from the hande of all such as hate vs. And that he vvolde shevve mercy vn∣to our fathers, and thinke vpon his holy conuenaunte. Euen the oth that he svvare vnto oure father Abraham, for to geue vs. That vve delyuered out of the hande of oure enemyes, myght serue him vvith∣out feare all the dayes of oure lyfe, in suche holynesse and ryghteousnesse as is accepte before hym.
And thou chylde shalte be called a pro¦phete of the hyghest: for thou shalt go be¦fore the LORDE to prepare hys vvayes. And to geue knovvlege of saluaciō vn¦to hys people, for the remissiō of synnes. Thorovv the tender mercy of our God vvhereby the daye sprynge frō on hygh hath visited vs. That he myght geue lyght vnto them that syt in darkenesse and shadovve of death, & to gyde our fete in to the vvaye of peace. THys songe of Zacharye the pro∣phete, the father of Ihon baptiste washe occasioned to syng for ioy that he was restored agayne to hys speche, the whych he lost, because he dyd not beleue the angell shewynge hym of hys sonne Ihon baptiste that shulde be borne of hym: so that (as the angell sayde vnto hym) the token whereby he shulde be assured ther of was, that he shulde be domme, vntyll the tyme of the chyldes natiuite. Wherfore at hys natiuite beynge restored agayne vn¦to hys speche, he is forthwyth fylled also wyth the holy gooste, and prophecyeth: not that he was not fylled afore wyth the
sprete of Gods chyldren, wherby he walked vnblameably in the commaūdementes and ryghteousnesses of God: but that than he was euē rauyshed and specially fylled with the sprete, so that Luke the Euangelist (who doth describe these wordes in his .i. chapter) sayeth: that he was fylled with ye holy gooste and prophecyed. Now is to prophecy, to vt∣ter thynges, ether to come, or that he paste already, or els to open the scriptures and pro¦phecyes, the whiche all thys songe doth con∣teyne, and is diuided in .xii. verses and two partes. In the fyrste doth Zachary cōmende and prayse the truth of Gods promyses, that God doth kepe & fulfyll those thynges, which he dyd promyse by hys prophetes of Christe. In the seconde doth he declare the office and seruice of Ihon baptiste. Let vs therfore kepe and handle thys songe of Zachary, not only as a rehearsall and abrygmente of all suche promyses as are spoken of Christe, but also as a large commentary and vtteraunce of ye gospell of Iesu Christe. But alas thys songe is haynously abused, euen as is also ye songe of prayse that Mary the blessed virgine dyd syng, called Magnificat, seynge it is roared out dayly rather than songe wythout faythe or deuocion. God auenge hys worde from
the blasphemyes of the wycked. Now let vs go to the songe: Blessed be the LORDE God of Israel. Zachary doth blesse and thanke God, which (accordynge to the promyse made vn∣to the holy mē in olde tyme) dyd send Christ the Saueoure of Israel, whereby he doth al∣so strenghten the weaklynges in fayth and feble harted. And with thys syngynge & opē∣ly confessynge of his name is he wellapayed yf the harte and mouth do accorde. Though he do call God the God of Israel, it is not therfore to be vnderstande that he is not the God of the Gētyles, but he is so called, fyrst because of the promyse made vnto Abraham in the .xvii. chapter of Genesis, where God sayde vnto hym: I wyll make wy cōuenaunt betwene me and the, and thy sede after the, thorowe out theyr posterites, that it may be an euerlastynge conuenaunte, so that I wyl be the God of ye, and of thy sede after the. &c. Secondly, because he gaue them, Patriar∣kes, Prophetes, the lawe, the Gods seruice, and the promyses of Christe that was to∣come. Thyrdly, because that of thys people shulde Christe be borne after the flesh: But after that Christe was come, he was no∣more
called Israell truely, that was borne of that kynred, and of the flesh of Israel: but he that is borne by the fayth of Iesu Christe. Wherfore, though the LORDE by hys po¦wer and rule be the LORDE of all nacions yet is he properly called the God of thē that beleue in Iesus Christe, because that them only be knowlegeth for ye heyres of hys kyng∣dome. Blessed is than the God of Israel. But wherfore? Euē because he hath visited and redimed hys people. And hath set vp an horne of saluaciō in the house of hys seruaunte Dauid. Euen as he promysed afore tyme by the mouth of hys holy prophetes. Thys pertayneth vnto the fyrste parte of the songe, wherin God is commended for hys faythfulnesse and fulfyllynge of hys pro¦myse. He hath visited and redimed hys people, sayeth Zachary, the whiche be both one thynge, and be as much to saye as: he is come vnto vs, to brynge and to set afore vs the wholsome worde, whereby we are saued For to visite is, to be myndefull, to care for, or to make an ende of trauyll and thraldom, as God dyd whā he delyuered ye chyldrē of Is¦rael out of Egipte, though it be sōtyme takē for
euell, as to punysh or to chastise. Now is ther is no visitacion to be cōpared vnto thys that Zachary speaketh of here. For by it he hath redemed vs from the daunger of ye De¦uell, Death and Hell, and made vs fre Israe¦lites and a peculiare people to hymselfe and hath set vp an horne of saluacion in the house of hys seruaunte Dauid. A horne in scripture is taken for vic∣tory, doughtynesse, a rodde, a kyngdome, greatnesse, power, maiestye or excellencye, ether because that fourefooted beastes haue theyr chefe strength in theyr hornes, orels be cause that kynges beynge consecrate in olde tyme were anoynted wyth the oyle that the prophetes had in hornes, as we reade of Sa¦muel .i. Reg. xvi. Therfore sayeth Zachary, that God hath raysed and set vp an horne, that is, a sauynge power, namely by Iesus Christe, the Saueoure of all thē that beleue in hym, vnto whome is geuen power of all thynges, both in heauē and earth. Yf I shulde brynge sorth the scriptures bearynge wyt∣nesse of thys, I feare me to be cloyde with ye abundaunce of thesame. The horne than is set vp in the house of Dauid, for Christe is borne of the posterite of Dauid, not only af∣ter the sprete, (as the swaruynge spretes of
the Anabaptistes do saye) but also after the flesh, the which he toke of the virgine Mary. Yf thys Dauid (of whose flesh and bloude Christe was borne after the manhode) had ben no man, than had not Zachary mēt him whan he sayde: In the house of Dauid hys seruaunte. For Christe is equall wyth hys father after the Godheade, and the sede or posterite of Dauid after ye manheade which he toke of the virgine Mary, that was of Da¦uids kynred, & that by the ouershadowynge of the holy goost. Yf they therfore wyl swage theyr rashnesse and malepartnesse, and con¦fesse the truth accordynge to the scriptures, than surely shall they se, that scripture vseth somtyme to speake mystically of hym, and so is he the true Salomon, that is: the kynge of peace, whose dominion shalbe augmented, and ther shalbe no ende of hys peace. Esa. ix. And sometyme after the flesh, as we maye se in the .lii. and .liii. chapters of Esay. More ouer, Yf they wyl vnderstande the prophecy of Ieremy in hys .xxii. chapter, where he pro¦myseth to rayse vp the ryghteous braūche of Dauid only spritualy, than must they denye the article of oure belefe that we cōfesse in, that he is borne of the virgine Mary, and a∣gayne that hys manhode glorifyed is not in
heauen, the whiche God forsende ony man shulde beleue, seynge the whole scripture is contrary to it, though all the worlde dyd affirme it. Thys is than the very Christe God and mā, (of whome the prophetes and the euangelystes haue spoken) that Zachary or the holy gooste in hym meaneth whan he calleth hym the horne of saluacion in the house of Dauid hys seruaunte. How bewty¦full are these fete of Zachary, bryngynge so good tydynge, preachyng so peaceable Christ by whose horne of saluacion all they that sat in ye region of Deathes shadowe were de¦lyuered. But though Zachary in the thre fyrste verses dyd comprehende the summe of those promyses that were fulfylled in Christ Iesu, yet is he not contente to haue brefely runne ouer them, but of a feruent sprete he doth now dilate and declare them more lar∣gelyer in the other fore verses followynge, and sayeth: That he vvolde delyuer vs from oure enemyes and from the hande of all suche as hate vs. And that he vvolde shevv mercy vn∣to oure fathers, and thynke vpon hys ho∣ly conuenaunte. Euen the oth that he svvare vnto our
father Abraham, for to geue vs. That vve delyuered out of the hande of oure enemyes, myght serue hym vvyth oute feare all the dayes of oure lyfe, in such holynesse and ryghteousnesse as is ac¦cepte before hym. What tyme as the chylderen of Israell were come into the lande of promyse, & had taken possession of it, they had no kynges, but were ruled by rulers. Now as they for∣soke the LORDE theyr God, and fell to Idolatry God dyd punyshe them, and sente straunge nacions vpon them, the which vex¦ed them: wherfore they called vpō God, and he delyuered them, sendynge them a ruler or captayne that discōfited the enemyes, as the boke of iudges doth specyfy. On lyke maner prophecyeth here Zachary that God will do, in sendynge hys sonne Iesus Christe, of the sede of Dauid, to delyuer the true Israelites and to rydde them frō the hande of such ene∣myes, as oppressed them. Lo (sayeth he) howe true is God, and how well abydeth he by his promyses. For he kepeth not only these pro∣myses that he made by the prophetes, but also the testamentes and cōuenauntes that he made vnto the Patriarkes, namelye:
Abraham and Dauid, ye which he dyd bynde wyth an oth. The oth that he made wyth A∣braham is thys: I wyll blesse thē that blesse the, and curse them that curse the: and in the shall all generacions of the earth be blessed. And agayne: Thy sede shall possesse the ga∣tes of hys enemyes, and in thy sede shall all nacions on earth be blessed. Gene. xxii. And of Dauid is wrytten in the .lxxxviii. psalme: I haue sworne once by my holynesse, that I wyll not fayle Dauid. Hys sede shall endure for euer, and hys seate also lyke as the Sōne before me. &c. These and such lyke promyses made vnto Abraham and Dauid of the vic∣tory of theyr enemyes, of the surenesse and quyetnesse of theyr lyfe, of the cōtinuance of theyr happy kyngdome, sounde to be spoken only of outwarde blessynges, and shulde be fulfylled after the meanynge of thys worlde: But by thys songe of Zachary, whiche is an vtteraunce of the promyses made vnto Abra¦ham and Dauid, it is euidente, that these blessynges concerne moost chefely the spiri∣tuall blessynges. For he sayeth that the pro∣myses made vnto the Patriarkes, and con∣firmed wyth an oth concernyng the victory of theyr enemyes, of ye peceablenesse of lyfe, of the happy state of the kyngdome, are to
be vnderstande of these enemyes, whych are vanquyshed by Iesus Christe, and of ye tran∣quillite, of that happy and peaceable lyfe, ye whych is purchased for vs by Christ. Christ hath not subdued or ouercome the Egipci∣ans, or Babiloniās, or ye Romanes, (though the Iewes had ben partely oppressed, & par∣tely were yet so oppressed of them, that they coulde not quietly vse the seruice of God cō¦maunded in the lawe in theyr owne lande, although they shulde not haue obtayned the true health nor ryghteousnesse thereby, had they ben delyuered of theyr enemyes,) but he ouercame and delyuered hys people frō these enemyes, wherof Paul speaketh Eph. vi. sayenge: We wrestle not agaynst fleshe & bloude, but agaynst rule, agaynst power, na∣mely: agaynst the rulers of the world, of the darknesse of thys worlde, agaynst the spretes of wyckednesse vnder ye heauē. Amōge these enemyes is the chefest of al Satan, ye which as he is a murthurer▪ euē so goeth he euer a¦boute roarynge lyke a Lion, sekynge whom he maye deuoure. The seconde is Synne, wherin Adam, by the enticynge of the deuel dyd fall, the whych is cropen in al mākynde from Adam, whereby also they be prouoked vnto all maner of wyckednesse. The thyrde
enemye are: Affliccions, Death, and Hell. These are the mooste haynouse enemyes yt can be. Nother is it to be thought that these enemyes although they do enuy mē in dede, yet are they farre from them, but it is to be marked that these enemyes haue mē wholy in theyr clawes. For naturally are we the chyldren of wrath, that is, the deuels owne, borne in synne, and by reason of synne, we be in daunger of troubles of thys worlde, bo¦dyly death & also hell. These enemyes hath Christ so ouercome (though they somtime do repyne and gnash, threatnynge men many thynges) that they can in no wyse hurt them that beleue in Christe Iesu. Moreouer Christe hath not restored hys people vnto such surenesse and tranquillite, wherin they myght vse at Ierusalem theyr seruyce, pre∣scribed vnto them in the thyrde boke of Mo∣ses called Leuiticus, (for that seruyce, as it was to be obserued and kept for a season on∣ly, as the lawe wytnesseth: euen so was it on¦ly an introduccion and ciuile holynesse to Christwarde,) but he forgaue them theyr sin¦nes. By the which knowlege, the conscience is so quieted by fayth, that she nowe feareth nother the deuell, death, nor hel. And because that the holy goost is geuen by faythe, ther∣fore,
whosoeuer hath the forgeuenesse of syn¦nes by fayth, the same serueth the LORDE quyetly at all tymes in suche holynesse and ryghteousnesse as he can, wythout ony fear of the cruell enemyes death or hell. Wher∣fore as the promyses made vnto Abraham and Dauid are to be vnderstande of the spi∣rituall enemyes, and of the true and spiritu∣all holynesse, the whych we haue by Christ: euen so is thys songe of Zachary also to be vnderstande spiritually, and of the inwarde victory by the fayth of Iesus Christe oure LORDE. For to possesse the gates of the enemyes, is, to be lorde of all thynges wyth Christ, the whych shall begyn by fayth, & shal finysh whan Christes kyngdome shall ende, the whych shal neuer be, for seynge Christes kyngdome is euerlastynge, and he eternall, therfore shall we raygne and reioyce euerla¦styngly wyth hym in hys kyngdome. That God than dyd promyse vnto Abra¦ham and Dauid, that he dyd confirme & sta∣blyshe wyth an oth, namely: to remēbre hys cōuenaūt, to shewe ye mercy promysed vnto the fathers, ye we shulde be delyuered of our enemyes, & from the hāde of all such as hate vs, & so we delyuered from the hādes of our enemyes, maye serue hym wythout feare:
that sayeth Zachary that God hath done ve¦ry wel, whan he sent Christ hys sonne in the flesh. The whych as he shall clense vs from all our synnes, and reconcyle vs agayne to God the father, euē so shall he also cōmaūde that we do becomme holy and ryghteous be¦fore God by the fayth in hym, and be endued wyth the holy goost, that so we do obeye hys callynge by fayth, wyth great rest and peace of conscience. Holynesse signifyeth the clennesse from al synne, ryghteousnesse, a cōlynesse of all ye lyfe, & a seruiable loue vnto all men. Wyth these is God truly serued, so doynge, we do him an hygh pleasure, representyng hys ima¦ge & lykenesse, the whyche is moost cleanest from all euell, and the moost beneficial and weldoynge vnto all thynges. Thys seruice & worship only doeth he alowe, therfore say¦eth he: As is accept before hym. For he dyd requyre it of hys people, whā he brought thē out of Egipte: sayenge: Be ye holy, for I am holy. Moreouer, because it is not truly good that taketh an ende, therfore sayeth he al∣so: All the dayes of our lyfe. For it is no godlynesse ye hath an ende. God is eternall & is not chaunged, whom who so knoweth tru¦ly can neuer be drawen from hys seruice:
for he shall fynde nothynge better than him. Thys is now the fyrste parte of the songe, wherin the truth of God is cōmended, wher¦by the promyses of Christe are kepte, where by also we be admonished of those benefytes that are happened vnto vs by Christ. Now followeth the other parte: And thou chylde shalt be called a pro∣phete of the Hyghest: for thou shalte go before the LORD to prepare hys vvayes And to geue knovvlege of saluacion vnto hys people, for the remissiō of theyr synnes. Thorovv the tēder mercy of our God, vvherby the daye sprynge from on hygh hath visited vs. That he myght geue lyght vnto them that sytte in darkenesse and shadovve of death, and to gyde our fete in to the vvay of peace. In thys other parte of the songe is decla¦red and set forth the offyce of Ihon baptiste. Nother is it declared wyth vayne dreames, but wyth the wordes that the prophete Ma¦lachy, and the angell that appeared vnto Za¦chary dyd testifye of hym. Thou (sayeth he) chylde shalte be called a prophete of the Hyghest? That is, thou shalte be the chefe
preacher in Gods church or congregacion, for of the hath Malachy prophecyed on this wyse: Beholde, I sende my messaunger be∣fore thy face, whych shall prepare thy waye before the. And agayne: He shall turne ye har¦tes of the fathers vnto the chyldren, and the harte of the chyldren vnto the fathers: & for thys cause shalt thou go before the LOR∣DE, that is, before that Christ do openly be∣gyn hys offyce, thou shalte do thyne appoin¦ted busynesse. For what intent? Fyrst, that thou prepare the waye vnto Christ. Nowe hath Ihon prepared the waye vnto Christe, as is sayd aboue, not only in that he rebuked the people of theyr synnes, but rather be∣cause he declared opēly that thys is the true Christe, and sente hys disciples vnto the same Christe, sayenge: Beholde the lambe of God, whych taketh awaye the synnes of the worlde. Secondely, that thou geue knovvlege of saluacion vnto hys people, for the remission of theyr synnes. That is, that thou wyth thy doctrine shewe vnto the people the true waye and maner, where by they maye obtayne saluacion, the whych consysteth not in the delyueraunce from the tyranny of the Romanes, nother in the feli∣cite or happynesse of thys worlde, but in the
remyssion of synnes. Though thou warest rydde of all tyrauntes and enemyes in this worlde, and hast obtayned all the felicite of thys worlde: yet arte thou in the deuels daū¦ger, an enemye moost cruell, and not onely hys, but also of Death and Hell, whyche are vtter destructions: Thou arte in daun∣ger of them by reason of synne, for Paule sayeth vnto the Romaynes the .v. Chapter: that by one man synne entred in to ye world and death by the meanes of synne: euen so wente death also ouer all men, in so muche as they all haue synned. Wherfore, that we maye be delyuered from the cruelte of the deuel, and from the power of death and hel, it is requyred that we be delyuered fyrste of all from synne. Ihon was the fyrst that preached Iesus Christe, that we for hym onely haue the forgeuenesse of synnes, by the fayth in hym. Nother is there ony o∣ther waye to obtayne the true saluacion, thā by the fayth in Christe Iesu, nor yet also is ther geuen vnto men ony other name, wher in we be saued. Actu. iiii. For the glory of God is to saue as many as are ordined ther to, and that glory geueth he to none other Seynge than Ihon dyd opē, shewe, & declare Iesus Christ, the doer away of our synnes▪
he is ryghtfully sayd to haue geuē or to haue taught the people suche knowlege, whereby they obtayne the remission of theyr synnes, that is, ryghteousnesse and lyfe euerlastyng. But for what deseruynges or merites sake hath ye people obtayned such benefites, that they shulde learne the waye of saluacion, & get the remission of theyr synnes? Veryly, not for the circumcision, nor sacrifices, nor ciuile honesty, the whych though they haue a worthynesse in theyr kynde, yet were they not such thynges before God, that therfore he shulde bestowe on vs the benefyte of for∣geuenesse of synne. What are then the thyn¦ges wherfore we haue such benefyte bestow¦ed on vs? Thorovv the the tender mercy (sayeth he) of our God. He sayeth not onely by the mercy▪ but by the tender mercy, that is thorowe the great and vnsearcheable mer¦cy: for thorow the same, and for none of mās merites dyd the daye sprynge frō on hygh visite vs. For as the remissiō of synnes hap¦pened vnto vs for none of our merites, but only of the mere grace and tender mercy of God, euen so doth thys fayth also. The day sprynge doth Zachary call here Christe, as thoughe he were buddynge and spryngynge, lyke a braunch of a tre, alludynge to the say∣enge
of Ieremy in hys .xxiii. chap. sayenge: I wyll rayse vp the ryghteous braunch of Da∣uid, which shall beare rule, & discusse mat∣ters with wysedom, & shal set vp equite and ryghteousnesse agayne in the earth. And also to the prophecy of Zachary in hys .vi. chap. sayenge: Beholde, the man whose name is ye braunch, and he that shall sprynge after him, shall buylde vp the temple of the LORDE. Thys braunch than or daye sprynge is ry¦sen from aboue, and hath visited vs, whā Ie¦sus Christ came into thys world, & sente Ihō baptiste before, to beare opē wytnes of him. To what intente? That he myght geue lyghte vnto thē that syt in darknesse, and shadovve of death, and to gyde oure fete into the vvaye of peace. These wordes of Zachary concerne the prophecy of Esaye in his .ix. chap. sayenge. The people that haue dwelte in darknesse, shall se a great lyght: & to thē that dwell in the lande of the shadowe of death, to thē shall the lyght shyne. And a∣gayne in ye .lx. chap. And therfore get ye vp by tymes, for thy lyght cōmeth, and the glory of the LORD shall ryse vpon ye. In the darknes and shadovv of death do they syt, whiche are so wrapped in wretchednesses, yt they se nought saue euē euerlastyng dānaciō. That
is done whan the synnes are vttered, and ye conscience knoweth the iudgement of synne. Therfore whan Ihon dyd shew Christe ta∣kynge awaye the synnes of the worlde, sure∣ly he shewed vs such a lyghte, whereby we maye not only auoyde the darkenesse of in∣felicite or wretchednesse and the shadowe of death, but also to gyde our fete into ye way of peace, so to obtayne ye true saluaciō & felicite For ther is none other way of peace or feli∣cite, saue Iesus Christ our LORD, by whose faythe we beynge iustifyed haue peace to Godwarde. A foote in scripture is takē oftymes for ye affection, desyre & wyll of the harte, as in ye .xxxv. Psal. Let not the foote of pryde ouer∣take me. That is, the affections & thoughtes of pryde, lest I conceaue a proude opinion of meselfe in my mynde, of my ryghteousnesse, wysdom, strength & wyll: lest I coūte meselfe somewhat, where I ame nothynge, seynge I fynde no good thynge in my flesh. The clause wherwith Zachary doth ende hys songe is veryly a pythy one, namely: in∣to the vvay of peace. For yf we walke not in the wayes of God, in hys commaundemē¦tes, in the lyfe that is blessed and happy be∣cause of the assuraunce of Gods goodnesse,
wherby such tranquillite & rest of conscience is procured, yt we take all thynges in worth, and (as neare as we can) haue peace wyth al men: than veryly do we wander in darknes goynge astraye as shepe hauyng no sheperd. He doth worthely cal the ignoraunce of god the shadowe of death, wherwith are holdē all those, into whose hartes Christe the true Sonne of ryghteousnesse hath not spred hys beames, seynge ye true knowlege of God is lyfe euerlastynge. What tunge cā expresse ye misery of thē that want ye knowlege of God? For in thys lyfe they haue a cōscience capti∣uate, restlesse & marked wyth a whote yron, sekynge now thys waye to be saued, thā put∣tynge ye body to such payne to deserue heauē so yt it can nomore reste, thā Euripus the ry∣uer, which ebbeth and floweth .vii. tymes in a daye and nyghte. And agayne what tunge can vtter the felicite & happinesse of such as haue thys knowlege, that Ihon is come to geue? for they beynge suffysed ye God is theyr God, that he careth for thē, that he forgeueth thē theyr synnes thorow the tēder mercy of theyr God, wherewyth the daye sprynge [or braūch] frō on hygh hath visited vs, they kepe an euerlastyng Sabbat, cōmyttyng al ye care ether of lyuelode, of clothyng, or of ryddaūce and
delyuerynge frō al theyr enemyes, both body¦ly and goostly, to hym only that hath created and gouerneth all thynges, trustyng in him, that as he is only good, so cā not he do other wyse but good vnto them. Thys veryly is a peace passynge the peace of ye worlde. Thys peace maye be felte inwardly, but can be vt¦tered sufficiently with no tunge outwardly: Yee noman can synge nother thys nor lyke songes worthely & frutefully, wythout he be contrite of harte, & endued wt the holy goost. Therfore is it a haynous iniury vnto God, to synge thys & lyke wholsome songes only for auauntage, wythout ony consyderaciō of the benefites that God hath shewed vs, as it testifyeth. God graunte that abuses may be redressed by the breth of hys holy worde. ¶Thys is the songe of prayse that Zachary dyd synge at hys chyldes natiuite, whereby (seynge the truth & mercy of God and the be¦nefites, which we haue gottē thorow Christ whome Ihon by by hys preachyng & testimo∣ny doth auaūce, are chefely praysed,) let vs stablysh our fayth, & declare our thankfulnes towarde God, that we maye kepe & retayne with thankfulnesse ye godly benefites, which of liberalite we haue receaued by Iesus Christe. AMEN.
¶The songe of the aunciente father Simeon, cal∣led: Nunc dimittis, the whyche he dyd synge whan Mary was puryfyed. LORDE, novv lettest thou thy ser∣uaunte departe in peace, accordynge to thy promyse. For myne eyes haue sene thy Saue∣oure, vvhome thou hast prepared before all people. A lyght for the lyghtenynge of the Heythen, and for the prayse of the peo∣ple of Israel. THis songe hath .iii. verses, & it was songe what tyme Christ was borne, to the consolaciō of Mary and Ioseph, wyth diuerse other electe. More∣ouer, lyke as Zachary and Mary, and before them Moses, Debora, An¦na the mother of Samuel, Dauid & diuerse other dyd vtter theyr thankefulnes towarde
God wyth songes, nor coulde fynde more pleasynge thynge to thanke hym for hys be∣nefites, than such open prayses, wherein the glory of Gods name is recyted: Euē so doth here Simeon by the holy goost bruste out in a songe, wherewyth he declareth hys thanke full mynde towarde the goodnes of God. He setteth forth Christe in thys songe, & decketh hym with great prayses goodly tytels. He teacheth also by hys owne ensample wherof the true peace of conscience doh cōme, and whereby it cōmeth that we loke readely and gladly for death, yee euen ouercōme death. Novv (sayeth he) LORD lettest thou thy ser¦uaūt departe in peace, accordynge to thy promyse. That is, I haue nought in me, wherof I may boast at thy iudgemēt, saue on¦ly thys, that thou arte my LORD, & I thy ser¦uaunte: not suche one that haue done all thy wyl, but such one, as seynge I haue not done thy wyll, & ought therfore worthely to haue ben condemned, yet neuerthelesse am graci∣ously saued of the. It was veryly a feruent prayer and desyre that the ryghteous & dre∣dynge God sage Simeon praysed God with as he sawe the LORDE in the temple, and toke hym in hys armes. The harte of ye aged man reioyced so sore at that tyme, yt he could
kepe the prayse of God no longer hyd in hys harte: yee yf it had ben possible, ye harte wold haue brusten for ioye, sayeng: LORD, novv lettest thy seruaunt departe in peace accor¦dynge to thy promyse. As though he wolde saye: Let me now departe, I ame now glad to dye, death shalbe now acceptable vnto me for it is fulfylled, yt was promysed vnto me. It myght also be vnderstāde, yt Simeons de∣syre was not only to be delyuered of ye body∣ly death, but also frō all pynyng and vnquiet¦nesse of conscience, the which can be apea∣ced with no workes, before we haue sene the anoynted of the LORDE, that is: before that our conscience knoweth Christ aryght. For thā waxeth a man fyrst mery, thā dyeth a man gladly, and than dryueth ye holy goost awaye all grefe of conscience also, whyche maketh a man restlesse. God geueth some men a greate peace inwardly at the fyrste, as Mary brought forth hir sonne with great ioye But such must suffre greatly afterward as Mary dyd also afterward. Some suffreth God to haue grefe and pynyng of consciēce vntyll theyr bodely death, as he dyd thys Si∣meon, but than are they contented with a∣uauntage for all that they dyd forgo so lōge: ye which is a paynful lyfe, but very precious.
Nother were it possible for a man to endure (yf Gods worde dyd not sustayne hym, wher¦vpon he wayteth) vntyll that tyme, that God hath chosen to thesame. Now whan God ve∣ryfyeth the promyse, than is it aboue mea∣sure swete vnto man, and so thanketh & pray¦seth God for it. For he learneth than by true experience, that God doth veryfy hys pro, myses, howe longe so euer he differreth it. Than is the goodnesse of the LORDE, (yee the LORDE hymselfe) very swete, and he hymselfe is very wyllynge to dye. In that Simeon calleth hymselfe the seruaunte of the LORDE, he fyrste prayseth ye goodnesse of God, that seyng he myght haue destroyed hym for his wyckednesses, yet hath he wyte safe to spare hym mercyfully. Secondly he confesseth hys extreme vilenesse and lowly∣nesse, so that he haue nought in hymself that is ought worth in the syght of God, but that God hath all power ouer hym, ether to slay or saue, and that he be vnworthy to be coun∣ted for a man before God. Ther is nothyng more stronger to steare God to mercy, than so to knowlege before God, and to submitte thēselues to hym, callyng vpō hym by fayth. Wherfore Dauid stearynge God to shewe mercy, doth so ofte repete the name seruaūt:
as though he wolde saye: Lyke as he that is taken in battayll or in tyme of warre, and so beynge solde is a bondman and seruaunt vn¦to hym, that bought hym: Euen so I also be∣ynge redymed by thy precious bloude from the daūger of the deuel, death and hell, am e∣uen altogether thyne owne, thy seruaūt, thy bondman, hauynge no ryght to my selfe. Moreouer that Simeon sayeth: accor¦dynge to thy promyse, therein doth he prayse and commende the truth of Gods pro¦myses. For the worde or promyse made vnto Simeon was, that he shulde not se death, be¦fore he had sene the LORDES Christ. Now though ther appeared many thynges contra¦ry to thys worde or promyse, and though it semed to haue ben a vayne and fayned tayle neuerthelesse, seynge all men are lyars, but thou LORDE my God arte true, thou ful∣fyllest it at the fullest that thou hast promy∣sed, and lettest me now go in peace. Hether to haue I carefully abyden thy commynge, and that thys many yeares, and what mys∣trustynge dyd not the fleshe in the meane season steare me vnto? What infidelite dyd not Satan inspire me wyth? And because thou dyddest differre thy promyse of seynge Christ, therfore was I nearehande caused to
thynke that all thy promyses were vayne. And (good LORDE) what rumoure or vp¦roure dyd than ryse in my conscience? With what engins dyd Satā assaulte my mynde? layenge now my synnes before me, than she wynge me an hougle image of death, som∣tyme kyndlynge the horrible fyre of hell in myne entrayles, wherewyth I was so dis∣made, that I was nearhāde in despayre. But nowe thou makeste me an happye aged man LORDE, and lettest thy seruaunt departe in peace, accordynge to thy promyse. Now doest thou set my consciēce at rest, now shall I carelesse wayte for the bodyly death, I wil now dye gladly. But what is happened vnto the good fa∣ther, that thou arte so sodenly chaunged, and where afore thou werest so sorowfull, that thou arte now euē filled with so great ioye? For what cause doest thou now so leape for ioye, as though thou werest reuyued, which afore semedest to haue ben more than dead? Surely hys ioye is not for nought. Let vs therfore heare hymselfe. For thys sayeth he to be the cause of hys myrth, and gladnesse, namely: For myne eyen haue sene thy Sa¦ueoure, vvhome thou hast prepared be∣fore all people.
Thys is the treasure ye reioyceth me & ma¦keth death acceptable to me, namely: That I se hym yt was vnder the law, & knowe hym for such one as helpeth me, it can not be, but I must reioyce and not be afeared for death Behold now what is hyd in the harte of the olde grayheaded father, that he wyll nowe dye, and wyll departe in peace. To departe wyth ioye or dye in peace is a goodly worde in ye eares of hym that can so do. But where of hath he such a pleasaunt death? Euen of the chylde. Who hath euer sene suche lyke death? But all they that put theyr truste in ony other saue in thys chylde the Saueoure whan they shall dye, they tremble and quake and are very sorowfull at the harte, & chaūge theyr coloure, theyr wytte, reason, vnderstā∣dynge and all theyr strength faydeth euen awaye, death ouercōmeth them: Yee though all the kynges, princes & powers of ye world were by wyth theyr horses & armes to helpe them, and the feare of death came vpon thē, they shulde stande as styffe as a stake before death. But the good Simeon reioyceth yt he wyll departe in peace, as though ther were no death. He calleth not ye passynge a death, he disdayneth to honoure it so much. He say¦eth: LORD novv lettest thou thy seruaūt
departe in peace, & not, thou lettest me dye. He calleth the passynge a swete & easy slepe. From whence hath he the connyng that he feareth not death, but counteth it a swete slepe, for the whych not wythstandynge all the worlde is afrayed? Euen frō thence that synne, the law and death were banyshed out of hys harte, he dyd not regarde them. For where the lawe is, there is also a conscience of synne: but where she is not, there is no∣thynge saue ryghteousnesse, and Moses is exiled, and so wholy out of syghte, that hys se¦pulture is not sene nor knowen where it is. Where Moses is gone, frō thence is synne taken awaye also, and so becommeth death a louely slepe. But whereby getteth he that? Veryly not by hys deseruynges & workes, but onely by the beholdynge of the saueoure. For he sayeth: Myne eyen haue sene thy Saueour He maketh no mencion, nor is once thyn∣kynge that he hath done or procured it wyth hys handes, but hath sene it wyth hys eyen, though the outwarde syght wythout the in∣warde do auayle so lytle as the handes. They are two poyntes, to se and the Sa∣ueoure. To se Christ perteyneth vnto a qui¦ete and peaceable death. Yf we se hym, than
can we dye merely: but yf we se hym not, thā is he there in vayne vnto vs. Many haue sene hym in the temple, but not aryght. Io∣seph, Marye, Anna, and Simeon haue sene hym aryghte, but all the other that behelde hym not lykewyse, they haue not sene Christ nor the Saueoure. Caiphas, Annas, Pilate & Herode, dyd beholde hym in dede, but they sawe not that he was the Saueoure. But where in is the faute, that they can not se hym? In the eyen of the harte, they must be cleare, that they may beholde ye yonge LOR∣DE that is entred in to the wynepresse for vs, and hath suffred wronge for vs, settynge vs at lyberte, not for our merytes or deser∣uynges, but for hys truth and loues sake. Who so beholdeth him after thys maner, the same hath ouercome the law, synne, & death, despysynge all theyr assaultes. The true seynge consisteth not in the bodely eyen, for many haue sene hym after that maner, which were neuer the better for it: but in fayth in the harte. It maye well be that they haue sene hym wyth bodyly eyen, but yet not beleued that he was the Saue∣oure, thynkynge on thys wyse: Shulde thys chylde be he? it is scarce syxe wekes olde, no¦ther can it lyfte vp the heade. The true Sa∣ueoure
(thought they) shal come wyth an ar∣mye, wyth horses and al maner of weapens. But the good Simeon hath sene hym other wyse. He was warned in hys hart & a worde was geuen hym, sayenge: The same is he▪ He had another lyght and another syghte. Euen so muste we also not onely heare at Christes mouth, but also beleue in the harte thorowe the holy goost, and so must ye harte be illumined by the holy goost: for it is natu¦rally stony, hardened and darkened so sore, that it can not knowlege such saluacyon and se such lyghte. Nother is it ynough that Ma¦ry, Ioseph, Simeō and other haue sene hym, I muste se hym also, I muste knowlege hym also, I muste knowe also that he is the true Messias. Simeon myght wyth few wordes haue vttered the cause of hys ioy, and sayd: Ther¦fore lettest thou me depart in peace, because I haue sene Christe. But that he myght de∣clare the maiesty of Christe more clearelye, he leaueth the name of Christ, and in steade therof he setteth thre tytles, wherewyth Christ is set forth moost playnly, and his vse is shewed moost manyfestly. The fyrst tytle that Christ is declared wyth, is, Saueoure, sayenge: Myne eyen haue sene thy Saue∣oure,
vvhome thou hast prepared before all people. Thys sayenge semeth Simeon to haue taken out of the .lii. Chapter of E∣saye where he sayeth: The LORDE wyll make bare hys holy arme, & shewe it forth in the syght of all the Gentyles, and all the endes of the earth shall se the sauynge health of oure God. That Esaye doth prophecy for to come, that sayeth Simeon to be now ful∣fyllynge. That is, that our LORDE Christ whych as the true Saueoure is shewed in ye fleshe, and set vp therfore, that he myghte be shewed vnto al nacions, both the Iewes and Gentyles. Yf the synnes do racke oure con∣sciences, and cast them to the euerlastynge damnacyon, than is Christ oure Saueoure, the wholsome playster, whyche layed to the sores of our synnes, doth so drye vp, clense & heale the etter of them, that although he fele hymselfe greued wyth synnes, and yet do be¦leue in Christe, yeldynge hymselfe wholy to hys cure, yet is he for all that rekened clene from all synne, ryghteous and holy. And yf Christe be wholsome to clense and heale syn¦nes, it followeth also that he is wholsome in al aduersites, troubles, grefes and paynes of death and hell. For yf ony man be pay∣ned, or greued, than is Christe wholsome
vnto hym. For in forgeuynge synnes, he ma¦keth the same grefe to be no instrumēt or ac∣casion of misery vnto hym. Yf ony mā be cast before death and hell in hys cōscience, Christ is a Seueoure vnto hym, the whych seynge he hath satisfyed hys father for our sinnes, he chaungeth the feare of death and hell in a waye, not vnto perditiō, but vnto lyfe & euer lastynge saluacion. Let vs therfore embrace thys Saueoure of God, the whych Simeon dyd beare in hys armes, and let vs lykewyse beare hym by fayth, that we maye be letten go in peace lykewyse. The seconde tytle that Simeō decketh Christ wyth, is, the lyght. For he sayeth: A lyght for the lyghtenynge of the Heythē, he shall not onely be a Saueoure, but also a lyghte to lyghten the Heythen, that is: He is a lyght that shall not only shyne amonge the Iewes, but also, amonge the Gentyles, and lyghten them, that they also maye come to the eternall blesse oute of the darkenesse of death and hel. Thys part of ye songe semeth to be taken out of the .xlii. Chapter of Esay, where he prophecieth of Christ on thys wyse I wyll geue the for a conuenaunt of the peo¦ple, and to be the lyght of the Gentyles, that thou mayest open the eyes of the blynde,
and let out the presoners, and them that syt in darkenesse out of the doungeon house. And Christe sayeth thus of hymselfe, in the viii. chapter of Ihon: I ame the lyght of the worlde, He that followeth me, shal not walke in darknesse, but shall haue the lyght of lyfe. What are than those darknesses that Christ the lyght doth dryue out? The darkenesse are fyrst all mans power, wysdom, and rygh¦teousnesse, the whiche, though they glyster and shyne before men, yet to optayne the grace of God thereby, to apeace gods wrath to make satisfaccion for oure synnes, and to get the true blesse wyth them, they are but euen darknesse. Secondly are the darknesse all doctrines of philosophers, all lawes, e∣ther of the Heythen, or of Moses. For those though they be profitable, and be necessarye to redresse maners by them, and to represse the wycked, yet to put awaye synne with thē and to get the true ryghteousnesse before God, they are euen darknesse. Only Christ is the lyghte, because that whoso beleueth hys gospell, hath the clensynge and remissiō of synnes thorowe hym, the whiche is oure ryghteousnesse, consistynge in the iudgemēt of God. Finally are oure synnes, death and hell darknesse, but Christe is the true lyght,
For yf God hath not spared the naturall braūches, let vs beware, lest he spare not vs also. God refused the Iewes for theyr wyc∣kednesse, howe muche more shall he refuse vs Gentiles, yf we be lyke vnto thē in wyc∣kednesse? He refused the Iewes, not because they crucifyed Christe, but because they be∣leued not in hym whō they crucifyed, nother repented at the preachynge of the gospell of Iesu Christe: Euen so shall not God refuse vs, because we haue synned, (orels had we ben longe sence refused,) but we shalbe refu∣sed, because we wyll not beleue hys Gospel agaynste whome we haue synned, nother haue done penaunce by fayth, but partly per¦secute the gospel wyth tyranny, partly with despysynge and lothsomnesse. Therfore let vs be diligent by obedience vnto the gospel, that the same glory of Christe that is come and translated vnto vs, do abyde with vs for euer, and not be sklaundered by oure misbe∣haueoure and vngodly lyuynge. For better were it that a milstone were hanged a∣boute oure neckes and we caste in∣to the see, than ony sklaunder vn∣to God and hys holy worde shulde come by vs.
¶Here is now (good reader) the songe of the sage grayheaded Simeon, the whiche he beynge full of the holy goost dyd synge, to de¦clare hys mynde to Godwarde. Wherein fyrst by his owne ensample he sheweth wher by the true peace and tranquillite of consci∣ence doth come, and whereby we become wyllynge to dye, namely thereby, that we knowe Christe to be the ouercommer and vanquisher of synne and Death. For yf we do beholde the Death in vs and in herselfe, ther is nothynge more haynous or dredeful. But yf we take Christe in oure armes of sayth, and beholde the death in hym, than do we so lytle despayre wyth beholdynge the death, that we rather do saye, ether wyth Si¦meon: LORDE, Novv lettest thou thy seruaunte departe in peace, accordynge to thy vvorde: Orels wyth Paule: I desyre to be lowsed and to be wyth Christe. Moreouer doth Simeon sette forth Christe with thre goodly titles, callyng hym the Saueoure of all people, the lyght of the Gentyles, and the glory of Israel: that with these titles he myght so set forth the maiesty of Christe, that ether he myght prouoke the vnbeleuynge to the fayth, or stablyshe the weake in fayth, or kepe them that be stronge
