E109_16 12271925 155995
THE Truest Intelligence from the Province of Munster, in the Kingdome of IRELAND. EXTRACTED Out of severall Letters of very serious importance lately sent from Mr. Tristram Whitcombe Soveraigne of Kinsale, and divers other worthy Gentlemen of good repute, ranke and quality. NEWLY Written, published and really averred by one Mr. I. P. who was somtime a Minister amongst them, having lately escaped from thence, and sustained great losses by the insolency of those bold, bloody and barbarous Rebels. Wherein is contained The miraculous mercies of Almighty GOD towards the Protestants of that Kingdome in generall, and to that Province in speciall; manifested by the cutting off of above 2000. of the Rebels by 900. of our Forces, and the late surprisall of many more of them by Policie at Sea. LONDON, Printed by John Hammond, and Math: Rhodes. 1642.
The truest INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND: IRELAND, for this present last Yeare, hath beene the bloody Stage whereon the horrid and never the like heard of Trage∣dies have been really to the life (or rather to the death) acted. The Romish Rebels have beene so im∣pious in their crueltie, and so cruell in their immanitie, that they have not spar'd Men, Women nor Children: the very Turkes and Mahu∣metans were never so sanguinean as those Tygers have beene. They haue ravished Matrons, vitiated Wives, destoured Vir∣gins, fired Cities, and (which was the ground of all their in∣solencies) they are damnablly periur'd; as having falsified their Oathes both to God and man. Their Attempts, Plots, and Conspiracies have beene so hainous and facinorous, that my tongue is not able to relate them, much lesse my Pen to
expresse them; (yet I hope by Gods assistance they will bee ere long written in their owne blood.) Quis talia fande Temperet à lachrimis? Who now sorbeares Relating such things to shed brinish teares. What hideous and most barbarous Massacres, they have perpetrated and committed contrary to the Rules of Religion to God, loyalty to the King, and charity to their neighbours, the History of these times doth sufficiently testifie. Audax omnia perpeti Geas, Hyberne, ruit per vetitum nefas. Bold Ireland rushes on To act all mischiefe she leaves none undone. But to come to the Subiect matter of this ensuing It pleased Almighty God on the 10th. day of Iuly last month that the Forees lately sent out of England under the Com∣mand of the Lord Forbes were safely arrived at the Towne of Kinsale; in the County of Corke, and Province of Munster; seven hundred of them, and a hundred Sea-men forthwith marched with some Conducters of the said, Towne towards the famous Towne of Bandonbridge, with a reliefe sent by the Honourable Houses of Parliament of Armes for 500. Men, 50. Bartels of Powder for Bandon, and hundred and fifty pounds in money for the poore of the said Towne, which the aforesaid Forces did faithfully and happily deliver, accor∣ding to the Order of the Honourable Court of Parliament: and having further instructions for the relieving of Raph∣barry Castle neere Resse in the said Countie, about ten miles from the aforesaid Towne, they marched from Bandon with neere about a hundred horse and foot of the Towne Souldiers, together with their owne eight hundred; in which march,
they met with a booty of 500. Cowes and abundance of Sheep; for the guarding of which, they left behind them 300. Men, who upon the departure of the major part of the said men, ad∣vaincing towards Raph-barry Castle for the reliefe thereof; were set upon by Mecharty Reach, Tiego O downy and other Arch-Rebels of those parts of Munster, who were in number about 5000. lying close in by-nookes and corners, untill the greater part of our Forces were cut of fight and hearing of playing off the Enemies Musquets) who tell so hot upon our 300. Men, having the advantage of above ten to one against them, that they much endangered the lives of the 300. Men. But that GOD that shews himselfe most gracious when his Servants are most necessitated, was pleased to put such cou∣rage and Power into the hearts and hands of our English, that they held our so stoutly, that with the losse of Captaine Wel∣dn and hi Company, (save onely the Leivtent, and thirty men of Bandon-bridge souldiers, they cut off the Enemy above five hundred, and continued the fight ill the remainder of the forces which went up to releive Raph-barry Castle were re∣turned unto them. Then recovering new spirits, the surviving Souldiers fell on the Enemy so eagerly and undtinedly with the assistance of their fellow-forces, that they slow at the least twelve hundred: For having surrounded and encompas them the Enemies could hardly betake themselves to their heels, as they usually doe and have formerly done, after the first or se∣cond shot (unlesse they should expose themselves to the mer∣cy of the water somwhat neere the place of their sight as they intended for the recovering of a certaine Island to avyd the ury of our Forces) Many of the Rebels were constrained af∣ter the violent and revengfull pursuit of our Army to trust to the courtesie of the meecilesse waters wherein there could not be lesse then five hundred swallowed and overwhelmed (like
proud Pharoah and his hoasts) in an ingurgitative neck of that none sparing Ocean. Thus by this true Relation you may evidently perceive Gods great mercy to his servants, and his iust lugment towards his, and their Enemyes; of which we ought all to take speciall no∣tice, and to render him due thankes, to whom the honour be∣longs; saying as that renowned and victorious King Henry the fist sometimes said at his triumph after his Battaile at A∣gincourt over the French, who were more then ten to one a∣gainst him, commanding all his Soldirs to acknowledge up∣on their knees those words of the Psalmist, Non nois Domine non uobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam; Not unto us Lord, not unto us; but unto thy Name give the glory. Another remarkable Passage concerning the happy Proceedings of our last Forces by SEA, as followeth. ONe of our Ships lately sent forth to the Coasts of Ire∣land, ventured upon this ensuing Stratagem into the harbour of Baltemore. They put up the Dunkirkers Colours, as if they had come with Ammunition and Armes for the Rebels; which the Rebels being very proud of and confident that they were (as our men pretended to be) both by their Coulers, and the Irish-language which some of them spake, were drawne on Ship-board, in particular Durmod Glack, Florence Macharty, Arch-Rebels with divers other the princi∣pall of which they saved alive, the other they hanged vp pre∣sently.
Thus we see that by the divine providence, our policy and weake meanes doe prosper to the astonishment and destructi∣on of our Enemies, and to the perpetuall exultation and ob∣ligation of all true Protestants; who ought not for all this to tempt GOD by neglecting meanes in due time of sending over sufficient Ammunition, mony and men to sucour our distressed friends in Ireland, and suppresse their Enemies who (with GODS blessing on these meane) may be quickly extirpated, or reduced to their obedience to the Crowne of England. The Authors Animadversion and Conclusion. MY humble Ace is, Sav melior judcto; That  there must needs be fighting at home (which God in his infinite merey∣vert) that we would shot the Dore, which is the Kingdome of Ire∣land instanced after the old Prover. Hee that will for England , Mustin Jreland first ground hope. Lest fighting amongst our selves the Dore being open, the Jish or some forraigne Enemy, or both invade and subvert us. For the pre∣venting whereof, it is necessary to send with all expedition (for, Ite postest occasio calva. Occasions lock is just before, Which being past gives no hold more) onderible Army of faithfull resolute Souldiers, very well accou∣tred and ovided and no losse experienced in those parts whither they are sent to recover the Corne and Cattle into our Forces hands for their Winter support, and to make impregnable Fortifications upon the severall harbours of that Kingdome where there are none, before the raging  and tempestuous stormes of that frigid Santon appeare, when Ships cannot play upon that dangerous Coast, to prevent a future supply from these Rebels Adherents, and then (by the helpe of the Lord of Hosts whose Spirit will set up his Standard against his and their Enemies  the malice and might of the Di∣vell
the Pope and all their cursed complices, and maintaine this owne cause) VVee neede not doubt of a speedy and happy Conquest of that rebellious and Unfortunate Kingdome. But happly it will be obiected that Englands necessity cals for charity first at home. To this I answer, First by the Rule of Piety the way to gaine a pacification with God and then with the King and so peace among our selves, is by Repen∣tance, Fasting, Prayer, and the practise of Mercy in releasing the op∣pressed in reeving the distressed, Jsay 58. from the 6th. verse to to the end. Secondly by the Rule of Policie, trading now being de, and the  part of this Kingdome living upon manuall labour, it is more then probable that (wanting imployment heere to maintaine themselves and their great charge, as many of them undergoe, they will take unlawfull wayes of subsisting, and so endanger the Kingdom; and therefore may well be spared hence, and bee better maintained in the opportune regaining of Ireland, which is the preserving of En∣gland, then suffered to be their owne carvers here it distractions con∣tinue, (which God forbid) to the hazard of this Kingdome, Thirdly, the Men that are or shall be sent over with expedition into Jreland (the now miserable seat of warre) they being a considerable strength, will be able to effect the Conquest sooner and at much less charge to to this Kingdome then otherwise; and upon occasion of foriaigne In∣vasion which we may justly scare, the urke, having got all that he hath in Europe by Civill Dissentions and differences betweene the Christian Princes, the men sent over into Jreland (being trained up in the Schoole of warre, and flesht with the blood of their enemies) shall by their skill, courage and experience doe twice so much bene∣ficiall Service as raw unexperienc'd and fresh-water Soldiers: so that the present rending over of a considerable number of men well ap∣pointed for Jreland, can be no prejudice, but rather an extraord  advantage to this Kingdome. Ordered, that this be printed and published. Iohn Browne, Cler. Parl. D. Covs. FINIS.
