D1637A E180_25 99871264 123670
THE DISCOVERY Of a Swarme of Seperatists, OR, A Leathersellers SERMON. Being a most true and exact Relation of the tumultuous combustion in Fleet-street last Sabboth day being the 29. of Decem. truly describing how Burboon a Letherseller had a Conventicle of Brownists met at his house that day about the number of an hundred and fifty, who preached there himselfe about five houres in the afternoone. Shewing likewise how they were discove∣red, and what meanes, as also how the Constable scattered their Nest, and of the great tumult in the Street. With another Relation of a Sermon, that Prophet Hunt prea∣ched in St. Pulchers Church the same day aforesaid, making another combustion in the said Parish, with a description of that Sermon, which he preached in Westminster-hall not long since, with a Relation also of that, which he would have preached in the Old Exchange. LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 161.
A Nest of Brownists discovered. THe various Factions, which the Brow∣nists doe daily induce among us, and the distracted divisions, which they intruce against the glorious sincerity of our Christian Church are so numerous, that I need not to relate each particu∣lar herein, least J should overload your patience with too long Battologismes. Wherefore J will in no regard digresse from my intended Subject, but proceed with all celerity herein. At the lower end of Fleetstreet neere Fetterlane, one Burboone a Letherseller entertained a whole swarme of Brownists in his house (as by credible information a∣bout the number of an hundred and fifty) who last Sab∣both day being the 19. of December preached himselfe (I suppose) as the Spirit moved him to his Brownisti∣call Congregation. But he yelped so loud with an hor∣rid exclamation, that divers men passing by gave some audience thereunto, and immediatly conceiving that they were some Nest of Schismaticks, they stayed lon∣ger, and longer, in expectation to heare some of his too-erroneous Doctrine (as was afterward declared to suffi∣cient men) and as they still waited in anticular capta∣tion, so their number increased, and at length they came to a full head. And being impatient of the aforesaid
Leather-Sellers Sermons, which was full of Hereticall opinions, they began to make a combustion therabouts and on a suddaine broke downe all the glasse windowe, and withall striving to breake downe the doore: thus they continued in this diffusive hurly-burly from five of the clocke in the afternoone, untill past seven, then the Constable of that Ward commanded the doore of the sayd Conventicle house to be opened, while they sent them all away, there was a tumultuous clamour among the Popular conflux of the vulgar, and some of the said Brownists being obstinate, and despe∣rate, were committed some to Bridewell, and others to to the Counters, yet notwithstanding there was still an acclamation among the Apprentices and others, who would have pulled downe the house, had not the Con∣stable come againe, and mitigated them with his guard: yet still their raging fury could not be abated in a per∣fect tranquillity, and pacification, but they broke the signe of the said Leather-Sellers house, having a various distraction, and great mutiny among them. The sayd, Burboone preached very nigh five houre, crying divers times, as was audibly heard, Hell and Damnation, telling them they were all damned, he did speake likewise much against the Booke of Com∣mon Prayer, against the Bishops and many others, but the flexibility of his voice was so various, that we could heare no perfect sentence of his Sermon, but only some fragments thereof, sometimes casting an aspersion on the Bishops, and sometimes detraction on the Booke of com∣mon Prayer. O horrid Blasphemy! That Booke which the pious, undaunted and religious Martyrs sealed with their blood, and when as they came to the stake, they held it,
their chiefest ambition to die with this divine service Book Seal'd to their breasts, intimating that their whole hearts was therin: and therfore dyed in the maintenance therof, I say this Book is now despicable and contemn'd of these Amsterdam whelpes and tubbish of the world. Oh that we had a Cicero alive, to crye out, O tempora, O mores, or rather the Boonerges or Sons of thunder, to tell them of their aspiring Heresie. But it is in vaine to speake to stones, or such flinty-hearted men, whose obstinacy is grown to so high a degree, that they will neither heare, nor admit of any that shall either confute them by apparent reason, or contradict them by the exemplary word of God, and his holy Gospell: yea rather then they will have any opposers, they say those are all damned, that speake against them; Thus the a∣forementioned Letherseller houled out his new-coined Doctrine to his new-minted Auditors, who of late have all surreptitiously crept in among us. There was as ma∣ny women as men, and if the Constable had not came seasonably, as he did, there had been great murther a∣mong them, for the Apprentices were fully resolved to breake open the doores immediately, therefore in the debate that there was, many o the said Brownists crauled over the Tyles, and houses, escaping some one way, and some another. But at length they catcht one of them alone, but they kickt him so vehemently, as if they meant to beate him into a jelly: Jt is ambiguous whither they have kil'd him or no: but for a certainty they did knocke him, as if they meant to pull him in pieces. J confesse, it had beene no matter, if they had beaten their whole Tribe in the like manner.
But to omit these superliminary circumstances, J will describe the breaking up of their Conventicle: For whereas they supposed they should be taken either by the Constable, or the said confluxe of the people, they did breake downe the backe-walles, and some escaped that way, and others crawled over the houses, till at length the Constable entred, and took many of them, who were apprehended, and the Letherseller with his whole swarme answered last Munday for these trouble∣some distractions, & cōfused disturbances in the street. A Relation of Prophet Hunts Sermon, Preached at St. Pulchers Church the 19. of Decem. THe Sermon being ended at St. Pulchers Church, this Hunt a Prophet, who have been very trou∣blesome in this City heretofore, and once be∣fore committed to the Counter for a Sermon, which he preached at Christs-Church before, have beene dehor∣ted divers times: Yet notwithstanding his sick-brain'd obstinacy would not be retracted, but rather extended farther; For (as it appeareth) he raised a combustion at this Parish, and standing up cryed with a full voice, Mon and Brethren J pray give eare unto my text, which is taken out of the 7 chap. of the Revel. v. 3. then he began to bawle so loud, concerning fire and water with such peremptory confidence, that there did arise a great tumultuous murmur among the Parishioners, and without much prolixity of words he was pulled downe by the Constables and others: Yet he was very confi∣dent of himselfe, for hee said, that hee was sent a messenger from God, and therefore without their con∣tradiction
he would deliver his Message: but immedi∣ately they haled him before the Lord Maior, a great multitude of People following him: who yet was very peremptorie before his Honnour, wher-upon the Lord Maior perceiving his arrogant protervitie, propounded many interrogations unto him, asking him whether he had the Spirit or no, or how he dare presume to preach having no warrant for the Ministeriall function, his re∣plie was that he had sufficient warrant from God, for he knew that he was his Messenger, and as for the Spirit he was confident that he had that, which he sayd they ap∣parently might conceive by the fruites thereof But for my part I doe verilye beleive, that if he has any Spirit it is the Spirit of error, rather then the Spirit of truth. Yet it would be to tedious for us to describe each cir∣cumstance, that the Lord Maior had with him, whe ∣fore he at length perspicuosly perceiving his erroneous & Schismaticall obstinacie, he committed him to the Counter, where I will leave him, and all his consederates. This Prophet Hunt preached a Sermon once in Westminster Hall, but his Auditors then seing the weake madnesse of his giddy-braine, derided and abus'd him there extreamely. Another time he preached in the old Exchange, but he was there almost pull'd in peices, hee have likewise divers times put himselfe forward in ma∣ny Churches, for which he had great rebuke. Yet with∣standing he proceeded daily in his former errors, so long as he was at liberty, and I fuppose he expected better successe in this Church, then he have had heretofore in other, but I wish, that his whole Sect may find no bet∣ter, then he had in his last enterprize. FINIS.
