A2016A 99900201 137621
The Woman's Almanack, For the YEAR 1694: Calculated for the Meridian of City and Country. Containing many choice, useful, pleasant, and most necessary Observations, adapted to the Capacity of the Female Sex, and not to be found in other Almanacks: As, portrait The Good House-wife's Calendar. A Table of Ex∣pence. The Critical Days of the Year. Observations on New-Year's Day. Of Dog-Days, and Ʋnfortu∣nate to the Female Sex. How to know the Hour by the Moon. Observations on Moles. From to know whe∣ther a young Woman be a Maid or not, by a new Way of Astrology. To know tell which shall die first a Man or his Wife. How to make Love powder. Choice a∣is, dising to both Wives, and young ucksom Widows, their Fortune by the Stars, to, whether Rich or Poor, long life, Marry or no  Husbands, whether Marry the Person they desire, and whe∣ther rich or poor in their married State: What , are Fortunate. Also excellent Cosmeticks to beautifie the Comple∣xion of old Ladies, making one of sixty six serve as well as a young Girl of sixteen. How to procure a new Set of Teeth to grow in an old Woman's Mouth. To Cure a Red-face. Like∣wise what time of the Moon 'tis best to get Children. By Dorothy Patridge, Midwife, Stie in Astrology. London: Printed for J. S. in the Great , 1694.
The Woman's Almanack, &c. Monthly Observations in Goodhousewifrey, for the Year 1694. JANUARY. OPen Bee-hives, uncover Roots of Trees, cut Vines in one of the twelve days; take a∣way superfluous Branches from Fruit-trees. Fruits in prime, Winter-musk (bakes well) Winter∣norwich (excellently baked) Kentish-pepin, Russet-pepin, Holland-pepin. Set up your Traps for Ver∣min; especially in your Nurseries and Flower-gar∣dens. A lusty squab fat Bedfellow very good Phy∣sick at this Season. FEBRUARY. KItchen-garden-herbs may be planted. Half o∣pen your passges for the Bees. Now also plant out your Colly-flowers to have early; and begin to make your Hot-bed for the first Melons and Cu∣cumbers. Continue Vemine-traps, &c. A good Sea∣son to get Children in. MARCH. SLip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Thyme, &c. By this time your Bees sit; keep them close Night and Morning. If Weather prove ill, plant and graft Fruit-trees, carry out Mannure; sow all eeds, whose roots are round, as Onyons, &c.
APRIL. PRune Fruit-trees; plant and sow strange Flowers; plant Artichock-slips, set French-beans. This Month Venus is very rampant; get a lusty Husband, least worse befal ye. MAY. SEt Gilly-flowers close in Bed, repair Hedges. Now set your Bees at full liberty, look out of∣ten, and expect Swarms, &c. Ply the Laboratory, and distil Plants for Waters, Spirits, &c. JUNE. PLant, graft, or set tender Herbs or Flowers. Also fold in Sheep, and make them bear off the Dew with their feet in the morning before they feed. Sow Parsneps, Pumbions, Cucumbers, Melons, and Gourds, in a hot fair Day. JULY. GAther Flowers and Preserve. Replant such Herbs as you would not have Seed off. Sow Cabbage or Lettice in the old Moon. AUGUST. ABstane from the Feats of Venus, the Learned hold it very bad to use it this Month. Now cut down Wood for Winter-fire. Geld Lambs, &c. SEPTEMBER. SLip Garden-flowers, and re-plant them; and cast up Drains to keep the Land dry in Winter.
OCTOBER. SEt Pears, Plums, and Apples, remove Trees that bear Kernels. NOVEMBER. ROugh, hew, and fashion Plough-timber, and lay it up to Season; the Ash is good, the Elm better. DECEMBER. KIll-Swine; open Dreins to prevent Inundations; now use Venus. Critical Observations on New-year's Day. SOme observe that New-year's Day being red, por∣tends great Tempest, and War: If it falls up∣on Sunday, then a pleasant Winter followeth; and a tempestious Spring, a dry Summer, a plen∣tiful Vintage, Cattle grow, Honey aboundeth, and Women dye, Plenty and Peace. If upon Monday, a various Winter, a good Spring, Sum∣mer dry, hard Vintage, and Mens Health change∣ae, Bees dye, and Wonders shall be seen. If up∣on Tuesday, a Winter cloudy, a wet and tem∣pestuous Spring, a dry Summer, a small Vintage, though at first hopeful, Women shall dye. If upon Wednesday, the Winter will be sharp and cold, the Spring hard and boysterous. If upon Thursday, a pleasant quiet Winter, a troublesome Spring. If upon Friday, a changeable Winter, a good Spring. Summer dry, a great Plenty of Corn, Sheep shall dye. If upon Saturday, a fearful Winter, for vio∣lent Gusts of Wind, a turbulent Spring, and Corn nought, with a rot of Sheep, old Women shall dye, and much burning abound.
Of Ʋnfortunate Days, and Dog-days. THe Dog-days are so called, because of the influ∣ance of those Stars called the Dog, and they continue in force so long as the Sun by his nearness co-operateth with them, beginning about the 20th day of July, and ending the 17th of August. Diophantes would have us observe the rising of the Dog-Star, in what Sign the Moon is in that time: for if she be found in Aris, there useth to be small store of Grain, but in Gemini great abundance, and so likewise in Taurus; in Virgo, corruption of Grain; in Sagitary abundance, and so in Capricorn; in Aquarius, scarcity; in Piscibus, Plenty; in Libra abundance of Fruits, with shells of Nuts, &c. Moreover, some do reckon 33 Unfortunate Days (as they call them) in a Year, In January, the 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 15, 17, and 19. In February, the 8, 10, and 17. In March, the 15, 16, 19, and 28. In April, the 16, and 21. In May, the 7, 17, and 20. In June, the 4, and 7. In July, the 15, and 20. In September, the 6, and 7. In Octo∣ber, the 6. In November, the 15, and 25. In De∣cember, the 6, 7, and 9. Others also say that there are in the Year six most Unfortunate Days to be let Blood or to be Born: January the 3. July the 1. October the 2. April the 3. August the 1, and 31. And amongst many the 28 Day of Decmber, called Childer∣mass-day, Cross-day, and Innocents-day, is taken for a very evil Day. But it becometh Christian People not to subject themselves unto Hours and Days, as did Pa∣gans of old. Observations on the Weather. THe Judgment of the Weather is very various and uncertain, especially in an Island, such as is Eng∣land,
Scotland, and Ireland, wherein one day the Season changes so often, as that the Morning may be cold like Winter, and the middle of the Day hot like Summer, and again the Night cold as Winter; and sometimes contrari∣wise it is hot in Winter, &c. But the mixture or confusi∣on as it were of Sea and Land, with the often and sudden change of the Wind, are no little causes hereof. Where∣fore frequent Observations and Experience in each parti∣cular Place, is very Necessary: Without which a learned Person may Err more grossely than he that hath no more Knowledge then Observation alone, as we see ordinarily in Shepherds and plain Husband-men that are much abroad by Day, and by Night. Whereas an Artist must observe the rising, culminating, and setting of the greatest Stars, the Ingress of the Sun into the four Cardinal Points, E∣clipses, the Aspect of the Planets, but especially the Moon, and her Mansions and Lunations, &c. Which are here too Obscure, and too Tedious to Treat of, as they ought. Wherefore we will speak most of such ordinary Signs as Husband-men and Good Housewifes do observe. Signs of fair Weather. IF it doth Lighten the day being clear, or if it Rain pre∣sently after a great Wind; when the Crow or Raven gapeth against the Sun in Summer; also the gaping of Dawes in the Morning, the swarming of Bees, the flying of Humble-Bees, roanes, or Bettles about the Doors in the Evening, the howling of the Owl in rainy Weather, and Ants removing of their Eggs; all these are signs of fair Weather. Signs of foul Weather. RObin Red-breast singeth under Hedges before Rain, but upon the tops of Trees before fair Weather. Hens lay abroad if it rain long, but under a Roof if it rain not long. The Herb Tidfolly looketh rough against a Tempest, and the Leaves stand staring; Hens resort to, the Pearch or Roof covered with dust: Also the alteration of the Cock's crowing, the pruning and washing of Birds in Win∣ter, the wallowing of Dogs, the ample working of the Spin∣ner
in the Air, the Ant busied with her Eggs, the Bees in fair Weather not going far, Rain suddenly dried up, the heaviness of Head and Eyes, the falling of Scot from Chim∣neys, the biting of Fleas, Flies and Gnats, the pissing often of Dogs, when Cattel eat greedily, and lick their Hoofs, if they suddenly run here and there, making a noise, and breathing into the Air with open Nostrils, also the croking of Frogs, Moles tairs up the Ground, the unaccustomed noise of Poultry or Swine, the caying of Crows twice or thrice quick calling, are signs of tempestuous Weather to follow. Little Rain in Winter, is sign of a wet Spring to follow; and a hot dry Summer, is sign of a wet Winter: When it beginneth to freeze with an East-wind, cold Wea-Weather is like to continue. How to judge of Weather by the Clouds. BLack Clouds flying from the East, is Rain at Night, from the West, is Rain the next Day; if they fly low and appear to settle on the tops of Hills, it is cold Weather; if they be full charged, and appear whole like Towers, it Hails at hand: If white Clouds appear in Winter two or three days together at Sun-rising, it is Cold and Snow, but black Clouds are Rain. A red Sky in the Evening and a gray Morning, is a fair Day. Mists falling in the Morning in Spring or Harvest, also Mists over Ponds or Waters in the Morning, shew Rain. If Smoke ride swiftly in the Air, it is Wind from thence, especially from North to South. If Mists descend from Hills, and settle in the Valleys, it is fair hot Weather next day. If the Summer be moist, wet and cloudy, it is bad for Corn and Fruit, &c. Of the Critical Days in the Year. IN feaverish Diseases, and such like, the Physicians do ob∣serve Critical Days, that is to say, Days upon which there is a great alteration of Sickness, either towards Health or Death in the Patient: Such are reckoned to be the first day of the Sickness, the 14 day, the 20, and the 27. Indeed the Moon altereth those times somewhat by the swiftness or slowness of her motion. They have also days whereupon they do pass judgment of the Critical Time that cometh after, such are the 4 day of the Sickness, the 11, the 17,
and the 2. So likewise in Astrology, according to the Weather, (for the other is according to the temperament of the Body) there are some days, or rather seasons, see∣ing we look not altogether upon only one day, which are critical in regard of the Weather, and so consequently of Dearth, and Epidemical or Raging Diseases, all which are to be understood to fall out so often, or for the most part, but not always. Nay, some are of opinion, that it is caned many days back in our times, but Experience and Obser∣vation can best satisfie in all these: Thus if the 22d day of January be clear without Clouds, it is a sign of a good Year for Wines If on Candlemas-day the Sun shine, it is a sign of more Winter to be remaining than is already past. So if upon the 22d of February, it freeze or be cold, it will continue a Fortnight. Also the 24th day of February, altereth the Weather from Frost to Thaw, or from haw to Frost. So many Mists in March, so many hoary Frosts after Easter. If the Frogs be heard before the 24th day of April, so many days after are they silent. A dry March, a moist April, and a cold May is thought to be a good Spring. If the Sun shine the 25th day of May, Wines prosper. And if it rain the 24th of June▪ Nuts do not prosper. If the 24th if June be wet, it is a sign of a bad Harvest. If it rain the 2d of July, there will much Rain follow. If the Wind do not change the 24th day of June, the Night following it is held good. If it rain the 5th day of July, it lasteth so four Weeks. The 8th day of July, if fair, the Vintage shall be good, but if dark, bad. If the 25th day of July be fair, it is a sign of a good Harvest. So if the Leaves do not fall betimes in Harvest, it is a sign of a sharp Winter. If the 24th day of August be fair, it is a sign of a good Harvest. If it rain on the 1st day of September, it is a sign of a dry Harvest to come.
The 14th day of September. If the Deer on Rood-day lye down, and rise up dry, Then forty days fair follow usually. So many days old the Moon is the 29th day, so many Floods that Winter. If the 17th day of November be clou∣dy, it sheweth a wet Winter; if dry, a sharp Winter. And as is the 11th so is the Winter. From the 6th day of September, to the 21st, are called Halcien-days, because no Winds use to blow near to the shortest day of the Year. If the 25th day of December come is the new Moon, it is a token of a good Year: And the nea∣rer to the new Moon the better: The contrary in the de∣crease. If the Sun shine the 12th day, or 6th of January, shall be much Wind: Such is Solstice or 11th day of De∣cember, such is the Winter. How many days the first Snow is, before new Moon, so many Snows are to come. Thunder on Shrove-Tuesday, foretelleth Wind, store of Fruit, and Plen∣ty, the Sun-beams being early abroad: Others affirm, So much it shineth that day, the like it shineth every day of Lent. If it rain on Ascension-day, it be tokeneth scarcity of Food for Cattel; but if it be fair; plenty. How to know what of the Clock by the Moon. LOok upon any Sun-dial, and see what of the Clock it is by the shadow of the Moon, as you do by the Sun, observing how much it wanteth, or is past 12, for so much it wanteth, or is past the hour of her coming to the South; and knowing the Age of the Moon at that time, you shall find the time of her coming to the South, by the Table of the length of Moon shining, which is aforesaid. As for ex∣ample, Let the shadow of the Moon point at  of the Dial, and if it be the 10th day of the Moon, she cometh to the South, or shineth by the Table 8 hours; then substract 1 from 8, and there remaineth 7 of the Clock, for the Hour of the said time.
The good House-wife's Table of Expencēs. One Week. One Month. One Year. Expences for one Day.   Shillings Pence Farthings   Shillings Pence Farthings   Pounds Shillings Pence Farthings A Farthing     1 3     7       7 7 1 A half-peny     3 2   1 2       1 2 2 A Penny     7 0           1 10 5   Two pence   1 2     2 4     3 00 10 0 Three pence is for 1 9   is for 4 8   is for 4 11 3 0 A Groat   2 4     9 4     5 14   0 Five pence   2 11     1 0 0   7 12 1 0 Six pence   3 6 0   14 0 0   9 2 6 0 A Shillings   7     1 l. 8       18 5 0 0 Here are four several Tables, one for a Day, the second for a Week, the third for a Month, the fourth for a Year. As to know what the expence of one Farthing a Day is for one Week together, to wit, one Penny three Farthings a Day is for one Week together, to wit, one Penny three Farthings; for a Month, seven Pence; and for a Year, seven Shillings, seven Pence, and one Farthing. And this is to be observed That so many Pence by the Day, make by the Year just so many Pounds, half Pounds and Groats, as seven Pence a day is by the Year, seven Pounds, seven-half Pounds, and seven Groats. Of Riches and Poverty. The Letter A in the Root of the Fore-finger, promises much Riches and Gain; likewise many Lines from the Root of the Thumb, between the Thumb and Line of Life, pointing toward the Ring-finger, promises great Riches. A Mark like a Ladder on the Mount of the Fore-finger, sig∣nifies a poor Woman, subject to great losses.
Of Husbands. Lines reaching from the Mount of the Thumb, over the Mount, (towards the Line of Life) shew the Number of Husbands; therefore observe how many there be; and she shall have so many Husbands, or at least a Bolus to keep her from the Green-Sickness; I mean, a Friend in the corner. Of short Life. The Line of Life, if it be short, it shews a short Life, and by how much the more it inclines to brevity, so much the more it is feared Of Buck-somness and Lust. The Sister of the Line of Life, on the Mount of the Thumb, long and redish in the Hand of a Woman; also the Mount or ring of the Thumb big, and elevated with many cross disor∣dered Lines, with Lines chequerwise near the Wrist of the Hand; all these denotes and intimates the Woman will kiss in a Corner, or beat her Puff-past with her Neighbour's Rowling-pin; one that cannot fix her Humours to a con∣stant Diet. How to make Hair as red as a Foot, a lovely Brown. Take of Lead calcined with Sulphur one part and another part of quick Lime, mix them with Water, then let it dry, then wash it very clean with Soap and Water, and it will be a very natural Brown: the longer it lieth the better it groweth. To Cure a Lady's Red Face. Take Lily-roots four Ounces, boil them in two Pints of Water until half be consumed; then take it off, strain it out, and keep it for your use. To make an old Woman's Teeth white, recover a new Set, beau∣tifie the Face, and take out the furrow'd Rinkles as smooth as a Girl of Sixteen. Take Loaf-sugar 1 Pound, Allom 3 Ounces, the flower of Beans, Fumitory, and Water-lillies, a handful of each, 4. Limons sliced, the Crumb of 2 white Loaves, Goats-milk and White-wine, of each 2 Pints; bruise what is to be bruised; then mix them together in a Glass Alembick, di∣stil them in Balne Mariae: Keep the Water as most excel∣lent for the abovementioned uses.
Of Moles, how to know whether any Person hath them. A Mole on the Nose of a Man, or Lip of a Woman, de∣notes another on the Privy Parts: A Mole on the Nape of the Neck, another on the Buttocks; and if it be on the Check, another on the Belly; a Mole on the Forehead, ano∣ther on the Breast; a Mole under the Eye-brow, another on the Navel: And this very seldom fails. How to know whether a Woman be a Maid or no. Take a spoonful of the Spirit of Seagreen, House-leek, the Powder of Crabs-teeth, one dram; half an Ounce of Jamaica Pepper beaten very small, and mixt together, and presented in a Glass of Wine, Beer, or roasted Apple; if the party do not sneeze in half an Hour after, you may suspect her Virginity; if she do, be confident she is virtuous. How to know which shall die first, the Husband or Wife Note, That there are seven Letters in the Cross-now that stand for Numbers, as C for 100, D for 500, L for 50. M for 1000, V for 5, X for 10. Therefore to know which Party shall die first, write down the Man's Christian and Sirname, and then the Woman's Maiden-name also, and count which of their Names by those Letters can make the greatest Number, and that Party shall over live the other. How to make a Philtre, or Love-powder. Take a Swallow's Nest, young ones and all, and digging a hole in the Earth, put them in, and cover it up; let them e there 48 hours, then, opening the place, take the young swallows out, and dry them to Powder very small; and this, some say, hath strange effects: O hers, the breath∣ing, the Basilick Veins, and distilling it after, is the best Love-powder. Licensed according to Order.
