a1857ba 45504685 171579
A NEW ALMANACK, OR PROGNOSTICATION, For the Year of Christ 1671. Being the third after Bissextile, or Leap-year. Wherein are contained the moveable Feasts, the Eclip∣ses, a description of the four quarters of the year, the Changes of the Moon, her full and quarters, with the dayly disposition of the weather. Together with notes of Husbandry & gardening, and Physical observations: the dismal dayes, with the whole Fairs of Scotland. Calculated for the Meridian of the honorable City of GLASGOW, where the Pole is elevated 55 deg. 55 min. Set forth in Aberdene by M. D. L. Professor of Mathematicks. GLASGOW, Printed by ROBERT SANDERS, and are to be sold in his Shop.
A TRUE CHRONOLOGY OF Memorable things to this present Year of God 1671. SInce the Creation of the World 5620 Since the general Deludge 3964 Since Fergus the first King of Scotland 2000 Since the building of Solomons Temple 2688 Since Rome was built by Romulus 2423 Since the Scots entered Albion 2089 Since the building of Edinburgh Castle 2001 Since the last destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespa∣sian 1602 Since the Christian Faith was received in Scotland 1461 Since the building of the high Church of Glasgow 473 Since the Bible first divided into Chapters 476 Since the first invention of Guns 291 Since the rare invention of Printing 231 Since the Colledge of Glasgow was built 216 Since the appearing of the new star in Cassiopeia 98 Since the Gun-powder Treason, November 5. 66 Since the birth of King CHARLES the second 40 Since the great Fire in Glasgow 19 Since the last great Plague in London 5 Since the great Fire in London 4 Common or vulgar Notes for this Year 1671. THe Golden Number, or Cycle of the Moon is 19 The Cycle of the Sun 28 Dominical Letter A The Epact 29 Fastens-even March 7 Easter, or Pasch April 23 Ascension day June 1 Whitsunday June 11
Of the Eclipses this Year 1671. THere is only one Eclipse to be seen by us this Year, and that of the Moon the 8. of September: the beginning will be at 4. hours 41. min. after noon: the middle at 6. hours, 33. min. the end at 8 hours, 22. min. The beginning of which cannot be seen in the Horizon of Glasgow; for the Sun sets at six a clock, and 12. min. at which time the Sun riseth totally darkned in the East Horizon: so that the middle and the end thereof (if clouds hinder not) will only be visible in our Horizon. Of the Year, and four Quarters. HAving erected figures for the ingress of the Sun in the four cardinal signs, and to the times of the lunations preceeding and succeeding the Suns ingress in the same signs, I find Venus La∣dy of the Year, and partners Sol with Mars: she being in the re∣volution well placed, doth signifie the Year to be well disposed, fortunate and successful: people shal delight themselves in sports and recreations, shal feast and make marriages, and women shal delight in the society of their husbands, and shal be fruitful, and the like. Haec Haly lib. 8. cap. 6. dejud. astron. Of the Spring. THe Spring this Year beginneth upon the 10 day of March, at 48 min. past 10 hours in the fore-none: The Sun entring into Aries, maketh the day and night of equal length through the world, beginning to have North declination increasing. The Lord of this Quarter is the Sun, partners Mars and Jupiter, doth signifie a good and warm Spring. Of Summer. SUmmer Quarter beginneth when the Sun entreth the first minute of the Tropical sign Cancer, which hapneth the 11 of June, at 1 h. 34 m. after-noon, when the dayes are at longest, having North declination decreasing. Ladies of this Quarter are Venus and Luna, and sharer with them Mars. Of Harvest. AUtumn, or Harvest Quarter beginneth when the Sun en∣treth the Equinoctial sign Libra, which falleth this Year on the 13 day of September, 44 m. past 4 h. in the morning: at which time the dayes and nights are equal, the Sun beginning to
have South declination increasing. The Lady of this Quarter is Venus, partners Mercure, and the Moon. Of Winter. WInter Quarter beginneth the 11 day of December, at 4 h. 30 m. after-noon: at which time the Sun entreth the Tropical sign Capricorn, making the shortest day and longest night: at which time South declination beginneth to decrease to∣wards the Vernal Equinox. The Lady of this Quarter is Venus, and sharers Saturn and Mars. More might had been performed in this matter, but being forced to abridge, I leave the rest to the Astrologers judgement. THE EXACT DAY, HOUR, AND MINUT of the New Moon, her Full and Quarters: with the rising and setting of the Sun, for the first day of every Moneth: and the dayly disposition of the weather. xxxi. Ianuary begins on Sunday. Sun riseth 34 min. before 9, sets 34 min. after 3. First quarter on saturday 7 day, 11 h. 20 m. at night. Full Moon on Sunday 15 day, at 1 h. 45 m. in the morning. Last quarter on munday 23 day, at 3 h. in the morning. Change on munday 30 day, 45 m. past 2 afternoon. The first four dayes cold winds: thence to the 9 frost, the 10.11. inclining to frost, to the 15 tempe∣rate, the 16 and 20 snow: thence to the end of the moneth kindly weather. The first Fair in the Year is S. Naughlans, at the Kirk of Bethelny, in Gerry, upon the 7. day. S. Mungo in Glasgow the 13. day a fair: and at Dunkel and Kilwinning the 12. day. In this moneth cut down timber (and it shal not cleave, nor be eaten with worms) in the last quarter of the Moon: set or sow rnels and bay-trees, primet and box: set quicksets, rose-trees, peaches, philbird, and plum-trees, if the frost be not hard, prune and lop them before full Moon: sow and set beans and pease, and ung land. In the last quarter geld cattel, & fallow land for wheat and rye: trench gardens with dung, and remove bees. And for
your own health, keep your body warm: let good and wholsome dyet be your Physician, &c. Old Janus bids thee keep thy body warm: With Kitchin-physick thy diseases charm. xxviij. February begins on Wednesday. Sun riseth 34 min. before 8, sets 34 min. after 4. First quarter on munday 6 day, 37 m. past 7 in morning. Full Moon on munday 13 day, at 6 hours at night. Last quarter on tuesday 21 day, 26. m. past 10 at night. The 1.2.3 and 4 dayes frost: thence to the 9 very temperate: from the 10 to the 15 gloomy dark wea∣ther: the 16.17 and 18 rain: the 19.20.21 high winds: thence to the end good weather. The first day at Abernethy & Forres in Murrayland, called S. Brides day. On Candlemass day in Bamff, Dunkel, Dingwal, Dowglas, the 2. day. Valentins day in Linlithgow the 14. day. & For far the 15 holding eight days. Ashwedensday fair begins on Fastens-even, at Lanerk the same day, Valley-field the 24. day. Sow all sorts of pease, and other pulse: sow mustard seed, cast up dykes, set and plant vines, hops, goose-berries, and any fruits that grows upon bushes: prune & trim all sorts of fruit trees from moss, canker, and all superfluous branches: graft on the latter end of the month: sow onions in cold stiff land. Take heed of cold, forbear phlegmatick meats, &c. Of cold beware: with venison and fish, Do not in any case maintain thy dish. xxxj. March begins on Wednesday. Sun riseth 39 min. before 7, sets 39 min. after 5. Change on wednesday 1 day, 36 m. past 1 after midnight. First quarter on tuesday 7 day, 52 m. past 4 after noon. Full Moon on wednesday 15 day, at 11 h. before noon. Last quarter on thursday 23 day, 24 m. past 2 after noon. Change on thursday 30 day, 32 m. past 10 in the morning. From the first to the 6 fair; from the 8 to the 11 windy; thence to the 15 now and then rain: the 16 to the 25 pleasant weather, and all the rest of the mo∣neth shaking his tail with dry winds.
S. Monence in Aberdene, Dumfermling, Abercherder & S. Marnoch Kirk the first day: at Pettenween the 3. S. Duthos in Tane of Ross the 9▪ in Auchtertueil and Innerness the 10. S. Causnan the 12. day: S. Patrick in Dumbartan, & at the Kirk of Strageeth and at Kircadie a fair of horse, neat and sheep, &c. the 16 day: in S. Johnstoun the 19: Cuthbert in Langton of the Mers the 20. day: Lady day in Westweems, Bamff, Authter∣muchti the 25. Midlentron fair at Banchrie, on thursday before Midlentron sunday: Palmsunday at the Kirk of Forrig, and in S. Johnstoun: and Skierthursday fair is upon thursday before Good-friday at Cowper of Angus, otherwise Monks Cowper, a fair in Forres, called S. Marks fair the first tuesday after Ea∣ster yearly, which will be custom free till 1669. In the new of the Moon graft pears, wardens, apple trees: begin to sow oats, barley, parsnips, onions, carrots, cucumbers, and all kind of pot-herbs: slip artichoks & sage, geld lambs: let blood according to strength & necessity, the sign & weather being fit: but above all, see that your Physician be skilled in the stars, or else he may assoon kill as cure; for remember, what cannot be cured in the Spring by fit Medicines, must be endured all the year long. More health is gotten by observing dyet, Then pleasure taken by excess and ryot. xxx. April begins on Saturday. Sun riseth 42 min. before 6 sets 42 min after 6. First quarter on thursday 6 day, 33 m. after 3 the morning. Full Moon on friday 14 day, at 4 in the morning. Last quarter on saturday 22 day, 23 m. past 2 the morning. Change on friday 28 day, 21 m. past 6 at night. The first to the 7 fair; and from the 8 to the 14 pleasant springing showrs: thence to the 17 low∣ring: from the 18 to 25 windy: the rest of the mo∣neth more seasonable. S. Oles fair at the Kirk of Cruden the first tuesday: at Leslie on tuesday before Easter: in Corstorphine the first tuesday after Easter a fair. S. Donald fair at the Kirk of Auchterless the 17 in Old Aberdene on Skirethursday. S. Mark Evangelist in Dysert the 23. Beltan day the first the 26, a fair at Rugland the
28. continuing four days: Leaven the 29. day, and in Kilreni the 30. day, at Borrowstouness the first Tuesday after Pasch. Whiles in March, and whiles in April. Skirethursday before Pasch in Old-Aberdene, Glasgow, Dumbartan, Cowper of Angus, Elgin of Murray▪ Pasch∣munday in Cowper of Fise, Lanerk and Irwing. Low-sunday after Pasch in Killimure, and all the week after at the Senzie of S. Andrews. Sow barly, hemp and flax: pole hops, set and sow all kind of garden herbs: open hives, and let bees labor for their living: let Tanners now provide themselves with bark, & all good Huswives look to their Dairies: bleed and purge with advice: those that are troubled with aches, or the gout, let them go to the bath. It is now good to hunt, to ride, to run, So that extreams therein thou ever shun. xxxj. May begins on Munday. Sun ryseth 56 min. before 5, sets 56 min after 7. First quarter on friday 5 day, at 4 after noon. Full Moon on saturday 13 day, 41 m. past 7 at night. Last quarter on Sunday 21 day, at 11 before noon. Change on Sunday 28 day, at 2 in the morning. Fair weather to the 9 day: from the 10 to the 15 May showrs: then to the 20 fair growing weather: & to the end of the month pleasant and agreeable. The first day, called S. Philip, a fair in the Grange within the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow. Holy-Cross day the second Beltan in Monross, Kinrocher: Rude fair in Ellen, & in Peebles the 3. at Ranfrew of horse, neat, sheep, custom free for three years the 9 day: at Carlouk the 10. at Bamff, and at Kirkadie a fair of neat and sheep, &c. the 16. day: in Leslie on thursday before Whitsunday: Sterling fair ten dayes before Whitsunday: in Stonehive upon tuesday before Whitsunday, with a weeklie mercat everic thursdai. Whiles in May, & whiles in June. Whit sunmonday in Glasgow Dumbartan, Lanerk & Jed∣burgh and Borrowstouness. Whitsuntuesday, called Pardon day, in the Chanri of Ross, Peterhead, & at the Kirk of Ninians a∣bove Kirkady. Trinity munday in Edinburgh & Brichin eight
daies: in S. Andrews one day, in Burntiland one day. A fair in the Brugh of Linlithgow the first thursday after Whit∣sunday. Trinitie tuesday in Rugland lasting two dayes. Tri∣nitie thursday in Faulkland. Sow barley in all light lands, and bearing grounds; and likewise hemp and flax, and all manner of fine seeds and herbs. Take lambs from their dams, leave lopping of trees, rise early, walk the fields, especially by running streams. Sage and butter is now an excellent breakfast: sage and clarified whay, as also scurvy-grass ale, & worm∣wood beer, are wholsome drink to be drunk fasting. Be bold to use such physical intentions, As are preseriv'd by Artists true inventions. xxx. Iune begins on Thursday. Sun riseth 38 min before 4, sets 38 m. after 8. First quarter on Sunday 4 day, 26 m. past 6 in the morning. Full Moon on munday 12 day, 41 m past 9 afore noon. Last quarter on munday 19 day, 6 m. past 5 after noon. Change on munday 26 day, 12 m. past 10 afore noon. Fair and pleasant weather to the 12 day: from thence to the 17 warm winds, with disting showrs: and from thence to the 26 dry and hot: the rest of the moneth fair and warm. A fair in Kinross the first tuesday of June. Bernard fair the secōd tuesday: in Stramiglio, Aberdour & Ennerkeithing the 6. A weekly mercat in Forfar, beginning the 8 of June, of neat, sheep, horse, &c. continuing till the first of Octob. A fair in For∣goudeny the 10. S. Barnabie in Lawder and Dysert, Dowglas, s. Laurence in Grinock the 11 day. s. Margaret in Abernethy: Ceres in Fife the 13. Midsummer on s. Johns day in s. Johnston five dayes in Air four dayes: in Wigton, Bamff, and Athel∣ston the 14. in Auchtertueil and Clackmanan the 15. S. Mar∣garet in Dumfermling, & at Moffat the 18 day; in which place there is a weekly mercat every friday. Earlstoun the 19. Methil the 22. day. Midsummer day in Hawick in the South, hard by the river of Teviot, for horse sheep, oxen, and neat, &c. on the 24. day, together with a weekly mercat day alwayes upon the phursday, Also in Forres, Townyetam on the border the 24. day,
of horse neat & sheep, &c. the 24. with a weekly mercat. In A∣lathy in Angus, called S. Emagola the 25. S. Peters day at For ar the 26. holding four dayes. As also in Falkland Burnt∣iland, Bamff & Kelso the 26. Gallashiels the 27. In Peehles the 29. S. Seriff fair the last tuesday of this month. S. John Baptist day a fair in Frazerburgh the 24. day. There is also a fair called S. Margarets fair on the third tuesday of this moneth upon the Mains of Keith-hall, sometimes called Caskiben, continuing the whole week, and to be custom free for two years. Shear sheep, bring home fewel, weed corn, and gardens, set rose∣mary, coronations and gilly-flowers: sow lettice and radish seed, three or four days after the full; for then they will not run to seed: Make hay, carry sand, lime, male, and manure of what kind so∣ever benefiting your land: t neither hedge nor tree. In this and the two next moneths, beware of great thirst: use thin and light dyet, moderate exercise, and chaste thoughts. The careful Husband which intends to thrive, Now like the Bee, brings honey to the hive. xxxi Iuly begins on Saturday. Sun riseth 29. min. before 4, sets 29 min. after 8. First quarter on munday 3 day, at 11 at night. Full Moon on tuesday 11 day, at 10 at night. Last quarter on tuesday 18 day, 8 m. past 10 at night. Change on tuesday 25 day, 6 m. past 8 at night. Fair and hot to toe 10 day: from thence to the 15 dark weather with thunder: forwards to the 20 wind and ruin: thence to the 27 fair and pleasant weather, but to the moneths end inclining to rain. Culross the first day Abernethy & Auchtermuchty the 2 day. S. Martin of Bulzeon the 4 day. Peter fair in Peterhead, and S. Thomas the 5 day: S. Palladius in Forden of the Merns the 6. S. Andrew in Glasgow the 7. S. Laurence at Grinock the 11. Kilwinning the 12. S. Margaret in Frendraught, & Aiky fair in Old Deer, both on the second tuesday. S. Margaret in Killi∣mure the 13 six days at the Kirk of Forrig: in Tarves the third tuesday: in Moffat & Kirkady a fair of horse, neat, sheep, &c. the 18. Stirling the 20. Mary Magdalen in Linlithgow, Pet∣tenweem
and Pathhead the 22. in Airth the 24. S. James in Forfar, Cowper of Fie, Lanrk, Roxburgh, Kinghorn, Elgin in Murray, & in Musselburgh the 25. Pollinar fair in Inverury and Lambmas fair in Turreff both on the last tuesday. The last thursday of July a fair in Lesly & at Whitehorn two days. S. Christina in Corstorphine a fair on the 24 day. Make your hay and house it while it is fair weather: pull hemp that is ripe, gather garden beans, get rew and wormwood, and gaul to strow on your flowers, to destroy moths and fleas, fence corpses: use moderat dyet, take heed of great thirst, take no Physick, bleed not upon violent occasions; and when ye do intend to let blood, bid your Doctor fortifie your ascēdant well (by electing a fit time) that no malevolēt be there, &c. or else stand to your hazard if you do it. Now meddle not with wine, nor Venus toyes, Lest thou deprive thy self of future joyes. xxxj August begins on Tuesday. Sun ryseth 37 min. before 5. sets 37 min. after 7. First quarter on wednesday 2 day, 36 m past 4 after noon. Full Moon on thursday 10 day, 45 m past 8 the morning. Last quarter on thursday 17 day, 24 m. past 3 morning. Change on thursday 24 day, 12 m past 8 in the morning. The first six days temperate, thence to the 9 East winds with showrs: the 10 to the 13 very pleasant: from thence to the 17 various: the 18.19.20 and 21 pleasant harvest weather to the 25 some wind, and to the moneths end fair weather. Lambmas day in Atturf three days long and in Melrois, Ennerkiething, S. Andrews, and in Dumbartan the first day. Laurence fair in the first tuesday, & tuesday after in Falkland Martimas fair the second tuesday. S. Laurence in Selkirk, Auchtermuchty, Forres and Carnwath the 10. In Rain two days before Kilmahug, and at the burn of Campsie. Lady day in Dundie, Bamff, Merns & Vallyfield: Marimas in Innerness, and Marie day the first at Monymusk the 15: at Rugland the 20 lasting four days. Bartholomew Apostle in Linlithgow, Kin∣karn of Neil, Clackmanan and Peebles the 24. S. Zepherinus in Corstorphine the 26. day a fair. Semarevis day in Forres and
Keith the 27 day. S. Johns day in S. Johnstoun the 29. day. La∣nerk a fair the last friday of this month. Follow closs your own corn harvest, sow winter herbs the new of the Moon, gather garden seeds, cut down barley and oats, gather Summer fruits▪ refrain from sleeping in the day time, especially after meat: avoid ryot and excess. Use slender dyet, cooling drinks embrace, If long on earth thou meanest to have place. xxx. September begins on Friday. Sun riseth 28 min. before 6. sets 28 min. after 6. First quarter on friday 1 day, 33 m. past 10 before noon. Full Moon on friday 8 day, 30 m. past 6 at night. Last quarter on friday 15 day, 8 m. past 10 in the morning. Change on friday 22 day, 17 m. past 11 at night. The first six days pleasant: from thence to the 12 some rains, and to the 16 fair: the rest of the moneth there is West and North-west winds. So many days old the Moon is on Michaelmass day, so many floods will happen that Winter. S. Giles in Elgin the first day, in Moffat the 2 in Skirlin the 4. Latter Lady day in Stirling, Dundie, Bamff, Monymusk and Inverury the 8. in Auchtertueil and Salane the 11. in Innerness the 14: in Forfar a fair the 15. holding eight days. A fair at Kirkadi, of horse, neat & sheep, &c. the 20. Matthew Apostle in Linlithgow the 21. Rude fair in Caril, Jedburgh, Dum∣fermling, Dumfries and Athelston the 24. at Leven the 27. S. Michel in Frendraught, Haddington, Lesly, Air, S. An∣drews, Crief, Kirkubright, Galashiels, and at the kirk of For∣rig, and at Ranfrew, of horse, neat and sheep, custom free for three years, the 29. S Jerome in Bamff the last day. In the beginning of this month, and end of the former, gather hops when they wax brown, the weather being fair, and no dew on the ground: kill Bees, make vernice, set all slips of flowers between the two Lady dayes, put swine to mast: remove trees every new Moon, from September till February, especially in the new of the Moon, the weather fair and warm, wind South or West. Use Phy∣sick moderatly: forbear fruits too pleasant, or rotten: shun ryot and excess of dyets.
If thou intend to live another year, Cheer up thy self, but naughty fruits forbear. xxxj. October begins on Sunday. Sun ryseth 18 min. before 7. sets 18 min. after 5. First quarter on Sunday 1 day, 30 m. past 3 in the morning Full Moon on Sunday 8 day, 4 m. past 8 in the morning. Last quarter on saturday 14 day, 43 m. past 7 at night. Change on Sunday 22 day, 51 m. past 4 after noon. First quarter on munday 30 day, 8 m. past 7 at night. This moneth begins with some frost to the 4 day the 5 to the 10 more warm: the 11 to the 15 more temperate: thence to the 19 some rains. From 20 to 26 fair: the rest inclining to wind. The 1.2.3. a fair in Salt Preston, S Francis in Abernethy & Vallyfield the 4. Dionyse in Peebles, Earlston, Kirkintilloch, Aiton, Auchtermuchti, Ceres in Fife, Killimure and Moffat the 9. Dalkeith and Tillibol the 10. at Innerkeithing the 12 day. Fenduc at Dunning the 13. in Forgondeny the 15 at Musselburgh the 16. S. Luke in Lawder, Kinross, Rugland & Borrowstō∣ness the 18. Townyetan on the border the 20. of horse, neat, sheep, and a weekly market. S. Irena in Corstorphine & at the kirk of Carlouk the 20. with a weeklie market every wednesday: and at Linton in Tweddal, of horse, neat & sheep, & other merchan∣dise, with a weekly market every wednesday for all time coming, of all sorts of goods & gear, the 20. Mary Salamine in Stirling and Kelso the 22, a fair at Forfar and in Linlithgow the 24. in Kilreny and Stramiglio the 25. Fowls fair in Pasley and Fal∣kirk the 26. Simon and Jude in Dysert, Falkirk, Cokani, Kirk∣liston and Hawick the 28. in Alloway the 29. The last thurs∣day of this month, a fair in Whithorn holding two days. Sow wheat and rye, the sooner the better, for fear of rain: set accorns and nuts: gather winter fruit, the weather dry, in the after noon, and in the wane of the Moon. Refuse not a needful Physick from the learned; but especially from these who can tell you what your disease is, and that only by viewing the face of heaven, of which you will be assured both in the kind, cause and cure: but of such Physicians there are few to be found.
With good advice such Physick mayst thou take, As can thy body sound and healthful make. xxx. November begins on Wednesday. Sun ryseth 13 min. before 8. sets 13 min. after 4. Full Moon on munday 6 day, at 2 hours after noon. Last quarter on munday 13 day, 53 m past 8 the morning. Change on tuesday 21 day, 55 m. past 11 before noon. First quarter on wednesday 29 day, 14 m. past 8 morning. The first thrée dayes frost: the 4 to the 9 thaw: the 10.11 inclining to snow: the 12.13 & 14 some showrs of rain: thence to the 21 fair: the 22 to 24 boisterous winds: the rest raw frost. Hallowday in Edinburgh 8 days, in Falkland, Dumblane, Fordice the first day: in Alathy the 2. in Kilwinning the 3 day. S. Leonard in Lanerk, Forres the 6. s. Martin in Dumbar, Melrois, Martinskirk, Strabogy, Cowper of Fife, Hamilton, Culross, Kilmahug the 11. S. Clement in Dundie the 13. s. Helens at Grinock the 15. Margaretmas fair in Dumfermling the 16. at Bryak and Peterhead the tuesday thereafter: at Borrowstonness the 18. s. Macharmuch in Tane and Auchtertueil the 22. Burntiland the 23. Maiden fair the 24. Andermas fair in Stradown, and in Frazerburgh the 29. s. Andrew in s. John∣ston, Peebles and Chirnside the 30 day. Make malt, kill hogs, trench gardens with dung, set crab-tree stocks, sow wheat and rye in exceeding hot sandy grounds: cut timber for ploughs, carts, & other imployments for husbandry: use wholsome meat & drink, with good exercise to preserve health. New Wine is now good for old men esteem'd, And meats well spiced, worthy dyet deem'd. xxxj. December begins on Friday. Sunriseth 24 min. befort 9. sets at 24 min. after 3. Full Moon on tuesday 5 day, 14 m. past 12 at midnight. Last quarter on wednesday 13 day, 50 m. past 1 morning, Change on thursday 21 day, 50 min. past 6 the morning. First quarter on thursday 28 day, 52 m. past 6 at night. The first four days rain and flabby: to the 8 mo∣derate: thence to the 15 cold winds: 16, 17.18.19
and 20 strong frost: the 21.22. and 23 sléet and snow, with a thaw wind; the remaining days kind∣ly winter weather. Farewell till we meet again. At Ranfrew the 6. s Nicolas in Aberdene the 7 Belly fair, and Lady day in Westweems the 8. s. Dunstane in Bamff at the kirk of Dier and Rothemay the 14. s. Cuthbert in the Grange, within the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow the 17 s. Thomas in Glas∣gow the 15, and Innerness the 20. s. Johns day in Bamff and Forres and Levenmouth the 27 day. In this and the next moneth, cut down timber. In the last quar∣ter of the Moon, uncover the roots of fruit trees: set beans & pease. Cover all the best flowers and herbs from frosts, with old rotten horse dung. Look well to your cattel: water and keep moist your meadows: let horses blood, and drink good wine and strong drink: Keep thy body warm clad, thy house warm and dry: cast all care from you, and relieve that are in want with thy charity. Thus I have ended these Observations, which are set down for thine ad∣vantage; make good use of them, and give God the glory. Warm cloaths, good fare, prepare ye must, But use ye not excess in lust. Erra Paters Observations for this Year 1671. IN the Year that Ianuary shal enter on the Sunday, the Winter shal be cold and moist, the Summer shal be hot and rainy, with great abundance of Corn, of Wines, and other grains, and of all garden fruits and herbs: there shal be little oyl, abundance shal be of all manner of flesh: some great news shal men hear spoken of Kings and Prelats of the Church, and also of great Princes: great wars and robberies shal be made, and many young people shal die. The Dismal or perillous days of the year. MAsters of Astronomy and Physick that these Arts first found, tell the most perillous and dangerous dayes in he Dear, in which if any man or woman be let blood of wound or vein, they shal die within 21 days following. Or whoso falleth into sickness on any of these days, they shal never escape it till they be dead. And whoso taketh any great journey in any of these days to go from home, he shal be in danger to die ere he come home again. And whoso weddeth a wife in any of these days, they shal soon be parted, or else they shal live toge∣ther
ther with much sorrow. And whose beginneth in any of these days any great work, it shal never come to good end: and these are the days following. In Ianuary are eighth days, that is to say, the first, the 2. the 4.5.10.15.17. and 19. In February three days, the 8.10. and 17. In March are three days, the 15.16. and 21. In April are two dayes, the 15. and 21. In May are three days, the 7.15. and 20. In Iune are two days, the 4. and 7. In Iuly are two days, the 15. and 20. In Au∣gust are two dayes, the 19. and 20. In September are two days, the 6. and 7. In Octover is one, the 6. In November are two, the 5. and 19. In December are three, the 6.7. and 11. and others say, the 15. and 16. And whoso will learn the Canicular or Dog days, which are days of great danger and peril, may know they begin the 19. day of Iuly, and continue to the 28. day of August: which season is very perillous to take sickness: and it is also perillous to take drinks and medicines, or to let blood: But if it be great need, then it must be before the midst of the day. Hark yet a few words, and sing if you please. ONe came to wooe a Wench that was precise, And by the spirit did the flesh despise, Moving a secret march between them two. But she in sooth and sadness would not do. He did teply, so sweet a fair as she, (Made of such stuff as all fair women be) Ought by the Law of Nature to be kind, And thow her self to bear a womans mind. Well, Sir, quoth she, you men do much prevail With cunning speeches, and a pleasant tale: 'Tis but a folly to be over nice: You shal, but twenty shillings is my price: A brace of Angels if you will bestow, Come such a time, and I am for you so. Well, he took leave, and with her hus band mes, Told him, by bond be was to pay a debt: Intreating him to do so good a deed, As lend him twenty shillings at his need: Which (very kind) he present did extend. And th'other willing on his wife did spend. So taking leave of her, he goes his wayes, Meeting his Creditor within few dayes, And told him, Sir, I was at home to pay The twenty shillings which you lent last day, And with your wife, because you were not there, I left it: pray, with my boldness bear. 'Tis well, quoth he, I'm glad I did you pleasure. So coming home, questions his wife at leasure. I pray, sweet heart, was such a man with thee,
And did he leave twenty shillings for me? She blusht, and said, He hath been here indeed: But you do ill to lend, Husband, take heed: The falshood of the world you do not spy: It is not good to trust before you try. Pray, lend no more, for it may breed much strife, To have such knaves come home to pay your wife, Of courtesie, you must and shal read this. A Shepherd that a careful eye did keep, Vnto the safety of his grazing sheep, Perceiv'd a Wolf thorow the hedge did pry. Sirrah, quoth he, pray, what make you so nigh? Why, saith the Wolf, thou seest I do no ill, Thy flock is far enough upon the hill. What Iustice now-a-days these people lacks? The Crows ride boldly on the cattels backs, And not a word thou sayst to them at all, Yet but for looking on, with me dost brawl. The Proverb's true: for now I sind it well, Which once I heard an ancient old Wolf tell: He that upon a bad ill name doth light, Is even half hang'd, as good be hang'd out-right: And I my self by proof can now alledge, Some better steal, then some look o're the hedge. Pray, stay a little, and read before you go. A Crew of Foxes were on thieving set Together at a Countrey hen-roost met, Where the poor Poultry went to grievous wrack▪ For there they feasted till their guts did crack. Having well supp'd, ready to go away, Without demanding what they had to pay; Sayes one unto the rest, Friends, hark to me, Let's point where our next meeting place shal be. With a good will, saith one above the rest, At such a Farmers house, his Lambs be best. Nay, quoth another, I do know a Clown, Hath even the fattest Geese in all the Town. Well, Masters, said a grave and ancient Fox, Had been the death of many Hens and Cocks, The surest place to meet that I can tell, Will be the Skinners shop, and so farewell.
