A3636 E434_20 99865407 117647
ARGUMENTS AGAINST All Accommodation and Treaties, Betweene the Citie of London, AND The Ingaged Grandees OF THE Parliament & Army. Written by one that honours God, and loveth his King and Countrey. Printed in the Yeere 1648.
Arguments against all Accommodation and Treaties betweene the City, and the ingaged Grandees of the Parlia∣ment and Army. 1 IT will neither be safe nor honourable, for so great a City to accommodate and joyne interest with a conspiring Party, that by frequent violations of their faith and duty, have inslaved King, Parliament, City and Kingdome, and broken the Faith of this Nation given to the Scotts in the large Trea∣ties, and in the Nationall Covenant. 2 By accommodating with them, you make all their crimes your owne, their sub∣tilty being to involve you to joyn with them in defence of their crimes. 3 The Scottish Quarrell is not against the English Nation, but against the trecherous and hypocriticall Grandees, who by perju∣ring themselves, and satisfying their ingage∣ments both unto Kingdome and Army, kee∣ping
the Souldiers by false suggestions from disbanding, and totally obstructing Irelands relief; and also a conspiring party in Parlia∣ment, who keep them up to make good the aforesaid crimes, forcing what Votes they please to passe, by over-awing the Parliament: witnesse Cromwells laying his hand upon his sword, and forcing the House to passe those traiterous Votes against the King, con∣trary to their owne consciences, Allegiance, Protestations, Vow and Covenant, and to raise Taxes upon the people, which they share amongst themselves. This warre is not likely to be of any continuance, consi∣dering there being in the Army many consci∣entious men, who have had such ample ex∣periment of the falshood of their Grand Of∣ficers, that they are not like to hazard their lives againe under the command of such grand Impostors as they are; also knowing the generall hatred of the Kingdome to them under whose insupportable burdens and op∣pressions it groaneth. Nor have wee any way to break the power of the said Grandees of this Army but by the Scots, whereby the
just Rights and Interests of all three King∣domes may be setled, and Ireland relieved: all which the Scots have declared in their former Papers delivered to both Houses of Parliament. 4 If you accommodate with this Facti∣on, you must have the same friends and foes with them, as well as the same sinnes and quarrells; and then it will grow to a Natio∣nall Quarrell between England & Scotland, which will be of long continuance and mi∣sery: and the Interest of the King and his Children, and of all Princes of Christendome concerned in the example, will be carried on in the Kingdome of Scotland against you, if you joyn with those beggerly Grandees who have inriched themselves and their fellow-Impostors by the ruines of the Kingdome. You will lose your credit and interest with your friends and Brethren of Scotland; the onely feare and terror of whose coming into England kept this Faction (which all men know is never satisfied with money & bloud) from taking many of your innocent heads from off your shoulders: and confiscating
your estates to pay the arreares of the Army: witnesse their often speeches to this purpose in the House of Commons, and their illegall and violent proceedings against you: you will likewise lose all the people of England. I have shewed you your losses; let mee shew you your gaines by this accommodati∣on; that by comparing one with the other, you may cast up your accompt, whether you shall be gainers or losers by it. 1 They offer you the Tower of London, and your Militia to be restored (things of no great consideration) and your Aldermen and Citizens to be set at liberty: they do not of∣fer to disband their Armie, which makes them Lord it over you, and over-power both Tower and Militia; and when they have divided you from all your friends, and destroyed your reputa∣tion, and are secure from the Scots, the same violence which at first took your Tower, your Militia, and your most honest Citizens from you, can deprive you of them all againe at pleasure, when you shall have none to stick by you: your obligations to them shall be of steele, theirs to you but of straw: he that gives mee that he can deprive me of at pleasure, gives me no∣thing. 2 Cromwell and his Party know your City to be the
entire strength of England. In Rich. 2. daies, (when it was not halfe for great and populnus as now) it slew Wat Tyler and routed his rabble, six times as many in number as the Army. They therefore feare you, and consequently hate you, and labour nothing more then to divide and weaken you, which is their proper in∣terest: for which purpose (to divide the City in it selfe) they caused the Parliament to change your Mi∣litia into other hands: they cut off Westminister, South∣wark, and the Hamlets from your Militia, to weaken it, they have divided you from the Parliament, they have endeavoured to divide the Country from you; Ut dividendo singula, imperent universis. Wherefore the Army in their Remonstrance 7. Decemb. 1647. inso∣lently demand Reparations from the City to the Country adjacent, for above 100000. l. losse sustained through the Armies attendance on the Cities defaults; which was a device only to make the Country quarrell with the City, and to make the Army Vmpiers. 3 Consider, you shall joyne with them that never keepe Faith longer then they may gaine by it, where∣of you have many examples. Any honest man may be deceived once, but he is a foole that will be deceived twice by one man. 4 Nay you cannot treat with these men, nor give them a Common Councell, or Hall, without losse and danger: They have alwaies made lies their re∣fuge, and built their designes upon the sandy founda∣tions of Rumors and Tables. Cromwell and Glover already give out, that they and you are as good as agreed, that you differ only upon a puntilio of honor, which will soon be reconciled: what is the meaning of this? but that they (have∣ing
creatures of their owne, Commissioners in Scot∣land) they have advertisment to spread the same re∣ports there, thereby to take off the edge of your friends affections; to lay an imputation of inconstancy upon you, and make you inconsiderable in the judgements of your best friends, and retard all indeavours for your succour. In the meane time, this party hath blocked up all passages to Scotland, that truth can have no accesse to you, and you have only such newes as Darby-house doth please to impart to you. These men have commited those crimes that cannot be safe without commiting greater: they must on headlong: goe not with them for company; they desire to bestow their plague-sores upon others. Let it not trouble you, that the Parliament hath approved their subscription of the Ingagement with the Army; it was a Vote extorted in a thin house, many Members having beene driven away by threats of the Army before; and there were many dissenting Members. A little patience and constancy will settle you in a lasting peace. To petition the Houses to repeale their foure Votes against the King, is to save their reputation, that seeke to destroy yours. FINIS.
