b1291 38875712 152198
The Judgment of Mr. BAXTER, concerning Ceremonies and Con∣formity in the Points in Difference betwixt the Church of England, and the Dissenters. Novv Published in Vindication of the Moderate and Learned Part of the Presbyteri∣ans, to let the VVorld see that they are not so irreconcilable to the Discipline of the Church of England, as some People vvould have us believe. Licensed and Entered according to Order The Judgment of Mr. Baxter, concerning Ceremonies and Conformity. Disp. 4 p. 361. THose Modes or Circumstances of Worship, which are necessary in genere, but left undetermined by God in specie, are left by God to human pruden∣tial Determination; (else an Impossibility would be necessary) But many such there are, that are necessary in genere, but left undetermined of God in specie; therefore many such are left to human prudential Determination. Disp 5. p. 400. Sect. 5. Yet it is in the power of man to determine of such Modes and Circumstances as are necessary to the performance of that Wor∣ship which God hath instituted in his Word; and therefore lawful Gover∣nors may in such cases bind us by their Command. P. 400.1. It is left to human Determination, what Places the Pub∣lick Assemblies shall be held in. P. 401.2. It is left to man to determine of the Time of Holy Duty, except only where God hath determined to the contrary. Ibid. 3 It is left to the determination of human Prudence, what Uten∣sils to employ about the Publick Worship of God. Here therefore vve must conclude. P. 423.1. That every misordering of such great Affairs is the sin of them that do it. 2. But yet that the Subject is not exempted from Obedience, by every such mistake of the Governour, but by some he is. Ibid. Sect. 67. If the mischusing some Circumstances by Church Go∣vernours, be but an inconvenience, and do destroy the ordinance it self, or frustrate the ends of it, we are to obey. 1. He is the Judge of his own work, not we. 2. The thing is not sinful, tho' inconveni∣ent. 3. Obedience is commanded to our Lawful Governours.
P. 424. We must obey in all things Lawful. And when we do obey in case of miscommanding, it is not a doing of evil, that good may come of it, as some do misconceive; but it is only a submitting to that which is ill commanded, but no evil in him that doth submit; it is the determiner that is the cause of the inconve∣nience, and not the obeyer: Nor is it inconvenient for to obey, tho' it be worse perhaps to him that commandeth. While he sinneth in com∣manding, he may make it my duty to obey. P. 396 Sect. 6. dist, 4. We must distinguish between Ceremonies imposed by a Lawful Magistrate or Church-Governours, and such as are imposed by Usurpers, or men without Authority. P. 398. Sect. 25. prop. 12. It may be very sinful to command some Ceremonies, which may lawfully, yea, must in duty be used by the Subject, when they are commanded. Sect. 27. prop 14. Yet certain things which are commonly called Ceremonies, may lawfully be used in the Church, upon human Im∣position; and when it is not against the Law of God, no person should disobey the commands of their Lawful Governours in such things. Of set forms, and the Book of Common-Prayer. Disp, 4. p. 358, Prop, 1. A stinted Liturgy is in it self Lawful. A stinted Liturgy in some parts of publick Holy Service, is or∣dinarly necessary. 3. In the parts where it is not of necessity, it may not only be submit∣ted unto, but desired, when the peace of the Church requires, P. 359. Prop 7. The safest way of composing such a publick form, is to take it all, for matter and words, out of the Holy Scripture. 8. Yet is not this of such necessity, but that we may joine in it, or use it, if the form of words be not from Scripture. Prop 1. A stinted Liturgy is in it self Lawful; and it is thus proved. Arg. 1, That which is not directly, nor consequentially forbidden by God, remaineth lawful; a stintd Liturgie, is not directly, or consequen∣tially forbidden of God, therefore it remaineth Lawful. The major is undoubted, because nothing but a prohibition can make a thing unlawful: Sin is the transgression of a Lavv; vvhen there is no Lavv, there is no Transgression. And yet I have heard very reverend Men answer this, That it is enough that it is not commanded though not forbidden which is plainly to deny both Scripture and Civil Principles. P. 361. Now for the minor, That a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, we need no other proof than that no prohibition can be produced. P: 364. Arg. 6 If it be lawful for the People to use a stinted form of words, in publick Prayer, then is it in it self lawful for the Pastors; but it is Lawful for the People; for the Pastor's Prayer (which
they must pray over with him, and not only hear it) is a stinted Form to them, even as much as if he had learnt it out of a Book; they are to follow him in his method and words, as if it were a Book-Prayer. Arg. 7. It is lawful to use a Form in Preaching, therefore a stin∣ted Liturgy is lawful. 1. Because Preaching is a part of that Liturgy. 2. Because the Reason is the same for Prayer as for that, in the main. Argument 8. That which hath been the Practice of the Church in Scripture-times, and down to this day, and is yet the practice of al∣most all the Churches of Christ on Earth, is not like to be unlavvful but such is the use of some stinted Forms of Publick Service. There fore &c. That It vvas so in the Jevvs Church, and approved by Christ I have shevved; That it hath been of ancient use in the Church since Christ, as it is at this day in use in Affrick, Asia, Europe; Even among the Reformed Churches in France, Hòlland, Geneva, and is so vvell knovvn, that I think I need not stand to prove it: yea those fevv that seem to disuse it, do yet use it, in Psalms and other parts of Worship. P. 421. As for the Common-Prayer it self, I never rejected it because it was a forme we thought simply unlawful, because it was such a form; but have made use of it, and would do again in the like case. Of Ceremonies. The Ceremonies controverted amongst us, vvere, specially the Sur∣plice, the Gesture of Kneeling in receiving the Lords Supper, the Ring in Marriage, Laying the hand upon a Book in taking an Oath, the Organs; and Church-Musick, Holi-days, Altars Rails, and the Cross in Baptism. Of the Surplice. P. 409 Some decent Habit is necessary; either the Magistrate, or the Minister himself, or the Associated Pastors must determine vvhat; I think neither Magistrate nor Synod should do any more then hinder undecen∣cy; but yet if they do more, and tye all to one habit (and suppose it vvere an undecent habit) yet this is but an imprudent use of power; it is a thing vvithin the Magistrates reach, he doth not an aliene work, but his ovvn vvork amiss; therefore the thing in it self being lavvful, I vvould obey him, and use that Garment, if I could not be dispensed vvith, yea though, secondarily, vvhiteness be to signify Purity and so it be made a teaching sign, yet vvould I obey. Of kneeling at the Sacrament. P. 411. But yet as sinful as this Gesture vvas imposed, for my part I did obey the imposers, and vvould do, if it vvere to be done again: rather than disturb the peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion; for God having made some Gesture necessary, and confin∣ed me to none, but left it to human determination, I shall submit to Magistrates in their proper work, even vvhen they miss it in the manner;
I am not sure that Christ intended the example of himself, and his A∣postles, as obligatory to us that shall succed; I am sure it proves sitting lavvful, but I am not sure that it proves it necessary, (tho' very con∣venient) but I am sure he hath commanded me obedience and peace. Of the Ring in Marriage. P. 401. As for the Ring in Marriage, I see no reason to scruple the lawfulness of it, for tho' the Papists make a-Sacrament of Marriage. yet we have no reason to take it for an Ordinance of Divine Worship, any more than the solemnising of a Contract between a Prince and People; all things are sanctified and pure to the pure. Of Organs and Church Musick. P. 412. As for Organs, or other Instruments of Musick in God's Worship, they being a help partly Natural, and partly Artificial, to the exhilerating of the Spirits, for the praise of God, I know no Argument to prove them simply unlawful, but what would prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, or the tune and Meeter, and Melody of sing∣ing, unlawful. Of Holy-dayes. P. 412.413. Nor for my part do I make any scruple to keep a day in Remembrance of any Eminent Servant of Christ, or Martyr, to praise God for their Doctrine, or Honour their Memorial. But the hardest part of the Question is, Whether it be lawful to keep days in Ce∣lebrating the Memorial of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting, Transfiguration, Ascension, and such like. P. 416. And yet for all this, I am resolved, If I live where such Holy-Days as these are observed, to censure no man for observing them. nor would I deny them Liber∣ty to follow their Judgment, if I had the power of their Liberties, provided they use not reproach and violence to others, and seek not to deprive them of their Liberties, P. 417. Yea more, I would not only give men their Liberty in this, but if I lived under a Government that peremptorily commanded it, I would observe the outward rest of such a Holy-day, and I would preach on it; and join with the Assemblies in God's VVorship on it: Yea, I would thus observe the day, rather than offend a weak Brother, or hinder any man's Salvation, much more rather than I would make any Division in the Church. Of Altars and Rails. Ibid. As for the next Ceremony, the Name and Form of an Altar; no doubt but it is a thing indifferent, whether the Table stand this way or that way; and the Pri∣mitive Churches commonly used the Names or Sacrifice, and Altar, and Priest, and I think lawfully; for my part I shall not be he that shall condemn them. Ibid. I conceive that the dislike of these things in England (the Form and Name of an Altar and Rails about it) was not as if they were simply evil. P. 401, 402. VVhether we shall receive the Lords Supper at a Table, or in our Seats; or whether the Table shall be of VVood or Stone; whether it shall be Round, Long, or Square; whether it shall stand in the East or VVest end of the Temple, or in the middle; whether it shall have Rails or no Rails, all these are left to humane Pru∣dence. Of the Cross in Baptism. P. 417. But of all our Ceremonies, there is none that I have more suspected to be simply unlawful, than the Cross in Baptism. P. 418. Yet I dare not peremptorily say, That it is unlawful, nor will I condemn either Ancients or Moderns that use it; nor will I make any disturbance in the Church about it, more than my own forbearance vvill make. I presume not to censure them that judge it lavvful, but only give the Reasons that make me doubt, and rather think it to be unlavvful, tho' still with a suspicion of my own Understanding, and a love and honour to Dissenters. Printed at London, and Re-printed at Edinburgh, 1689.
