B1132 E119_11 99860163 112272
A DECLARATION MADE By the right Honourable the Earle of BATH, one of his Majesties Com∣missioners of Array, to the whole Country of DEVONSHIRE, With their answer thereunto annexed; ALSO The manner how the said Earle of BATH endeavoured to put the Commis∣sion of Array in Execution, at South∣moulton in Devonshire, and how his men were driven out of the Town by the Inhabi∣tants thereof. Whereunto is added, A true Relation of the great Battle betweene Prince ROBERT and the Parlia∣ments Forces at Worcester; with their happy Victory over his Cavaliers. Septemb. 29. London Printed for John Wright.
A DECLARATION Of the Earle of BATH. AS there are disturbances in some part of this Kingdome, so I understand this Coun∣ty of Devon, in many places to be falsly possessed of some arbitrary and Tirannicall government pretended to be set up by the King, and put in practice (among others by my selfe) Wherefore out of my great affection to you and my Country, being now immediately ready to receive the blessed Sacrament, I doe solemnly in the presence of Almighty God professe and declare that I have under∣taken nothing contrary to the Lawes of this Kingdome, nor preiudiciall or hurtfull to any that shall observe it: and  doe further professe that I have no authority nei∣ther will I take the value of sixpence from any man, but to my utmost power to protect you all, that every one may enioy their owne. The Answer. THe disturbances that are in this Kingdome have growne through the interferring of the Commission of Array with the Militia ordained by Parliament. The Officers in the Militia are the same for the most part that were before in the Lievtenancy, the men ap∣proved by His Majesty; the Array invades the Militia,
and hath beene the onely meanes of breaking the peace. So in Sommerset Captaine Preston was assayled and his Ensigne slaine in the execution of the ordinance of Parliament. And for that cause the authors and fau∣tors of that crime are prosecuted in Sherbourne. That many places of this County are possessed with the doubt of an arbitrary government intended is true, That the fault therof is layd to the Kings charge is false, That the Commissioners of Array doe for the extent of that Commission put in practice an arbitrary and Tiran∣nicall government is true for these reasons. First that which is but against the being of Parliaments is intended for an arbitrary government, but the Com∣missioners of Array doe bend themselves and the power of their Commissions against the being of Parliaments. That the suppression of this Parliament, or the drawing of the members of it to other judicature, is against the be∣ing of Parliaments, is so apparant as it needs no more proofe. Secondly That the Commission it selfe is illegall hath beene declared by an authority not to be contradicted. And to put an illegall Commission in execution as to draw his Majesties government into the censure of Ty∣ranny, Thirdly the Commission of Array is most partiall and in that respect Tyrannicall. By the Declaration justifying and explaining it, it is affirmed that a man of able body and estate serving in person shall find armes but for his person, but a man weake in body not serving shal find arms according to the proportion of his estate, so that by this rule a man of 40 li. per. an. and impotent shall find a mans arms & a man to weare it; and a potent man of 100. 500. or 1000. per. an. shal find no more. A
man that is potent in boby owes that ability to the Com∣mon-Wealth as the rich of his substance, why else is the poore able man bound to weare the impotent rich mans armes? It is most unreasonable then and consequently most illegall, that the bodily strength of a rich man which is his great advantage should be the reason to ease his estate, and the weakenesse of his equall draw upon him a grosse inequallity of burthen. This Declaration averreth peremptorily, that this Commission (which is the thing undertaken) is lawfull, that it is not prejudiciall, that there is no authority to take sixpence, and thereupon the holy Sacrament is so∣lemnly received. For the lawfulnesse a single Iudgment is opposed to the Parliament and the conscience bound without reser∣vation as surely for the truth of it. That's much in respect of the antiquity oft his law, the variety of others since made the difference of opini∣on. But that it is not prejudiciall, let the before recited partiallity answer. And for the authority to take sixpence see the power to imprison the refusers. With the will of any man Charity forbids to have to doe, because his purposes are hid. But the consequences of their actions are apparant to provident men. The Array doth apparently oppose the Parliament, and intrudes uppon those offices which have beene and are now possest by others for the peace and defence of the Kingdome. The Militia defends the Parliament, and therein strives to maintaine the King and his posterity in the ancient and rightfull government of this Realme by 3 estates.
In this there is true loyalty and constant peace. In the other flattery and the seed of perpetuall War. The Militia protects Religion and propriety of goods, and for the Common interest in both craves the benefit or Parliament and Church assemblyes. The Array prevaling will not faile to bring both in∣to single power at least into the danger that both were lately in. But that's forgotten, neither is it seene that the Array must embroyle this Kingdome, that the rebellion may prevaile in Ireland. A Copy of Letter sent to a worthy Gentleman in LONDON. Honourable Sir, ACcording to my bonden duty I cannot chuse but acquaint your worship with the newes at Southmoulton, I my selfe be∣ing present at it. On Saturday last, the Earl of Bath sent one of his servants unto the Maior of the Towne to know whether he should have a peacea∣ble entrance into his Town the Tuesday folloing, for he was min∣ded to come there, to meet some Gentlemen upon some occasions; the Maior answered the messenger, that if his intent were for peace, he should come, after better consideration, which the Ma∣or had, he was blamed by some of his friends, for tha he had not taken respite to give his answer, but that advice came too late. The Tuesday being the day appoynted, there came the Eatle of Bath, my Lord Chichester, Baronet Pollard, Sir Popham Southcot, Sir Ralph Sidneham, Master Basset, Master John Acland, Master Iohn Gifford, Captaine Newcond with their followers, and diverse o∣thers which I cannot name. A Banquet being provided at Henry Hearders house the Inne-keeper, where the Earle sent store of Ve∣nison,
and his owne Cooke for to dresse it, the common sort of the Towne fell in a great rage with the Maior and his company, for giving licence that they should enter, and swor that if they did attempt any thing there, or read their Commission of Array, they would beate them all downe and kill them, if they were all hanged for it; and thereupon betooke themselves to Armes, both men, wo∣men, and children, about the Crosse in the Market place, I doe ver¦rily eleeve they were in number at least 1000. some with Mus∣quets loaden, some with Halberts and blacke Bills, some with Clubs, some with Pikes, some with dunge Evells, some with great Poles, one I saw which had heat the calke of a Sive, and beat him out right, and set him into a long staffe, the women had filled all the steps of the crosse with great stones & got up & sate on them, swea∣ring if they did come there they would braine them. One thing which is worth the noting, a woman which is a Butchers wife, came running with her lapfull of Rams-hornes for to throw at them, some of the Gentlemen were comming towards the Crosse, it was thought to publish the Array, presently the people gave a shoute, and did cry, they be come, at which they were all ready to stand against them, the Gentlemen seeing that, betooke them∣selves every one to house, and after that not one of them nor their servants, durst show themselves in the street; it is thought of many, that if the Towne had not risen against them, they would not so soone have departed, surely whatsoever collor they put upon it, their intent was ill, for their men gave very dange∣rous speeches, but God is able with his smalest creatures to daunt the hearts of Kings, as with Lice and Frogs and such like: so a∣mongst this crew there were both men and women with Clubs and Staves, which doe daily beg from doore to doore, and when the Earl rod forth of Town, they did throw stones after him and his men. I shall desire your Worships to excuse my boldnesse in writing so large, but if you had seene it, you would have thought this Relation to be too little. Thus with my humble service unto you and my young Master, I commend you both with the whole Family unto the divine protection, and ever rest South-moulton the 15 of September, 1642.
From the Rendevouz in Worcester, Septem. 24. 1642. SJR, THe nseasonablenesse of the weather in our march with  Artillery, extreamly retarded our comming to Worcester which prevented us of taking the Cavaliers, though not of the Ci∣ty of Worcester, which our Horse obtained with much Honour though with great difficulty, and disadvantage; for (as I have  from my comrade that was in the fight) Prince Robert with  Troopes came to Worcester, and joyned with Sir Iohn Byron: we had about 10 Troopes neere the City, though not in a body, Prince Robert sallies out of the City, and puts his Horse in Battal on the faire Meddow, and seemd to challenge the Encounter; Co∣lonell Saudis, with his Regiment of Horse, Captaine Wingate, and Captaine Hales, were about halfe a quarter of a mile, and had n passage to the Enemy, but in a lane, where they could not march five a brest: yet so keene Colonell Sandis was, that he adventured to march up, and charged the Prince, which he did so effectually that eleven of them quickly fell, Prince Robert, or Prince Mauri being sure wounded in the head, or on his hand: commissary VVilm t he comes and relieves Prince Robert, and Colonell Sand and he had a single encounter, Colonell Sandis received a so wound, but we hope not mortall, and run his sword up to the hi in commisary VVilmots body, as it is reported, then Captaine VVingates Troop came on, & did most desperate service, & after him came Captaine Fines, and Captaine Hale, then came up Cap∣taine Austins Troop, who could not all this while get out of the Lane, and gave a most desperate charge, which the enemy being sensible of, aad seeing more troopes comming, retreated into the City of VVorcester, and Captain Austin followed them into the City, and did execution on them, and tooke 26 Prisoners, Ser∣ieant Maior Dowglas was slaine on our side, we lost no man of note else, the number slaine on both sides are much alike, not excee∣ding thirty on each side: the Lord Generall is now in the City of VVorcester, and the Maior hath bin twice on his knees to the Lord Generall for his pardon in betraying the City into the hands of the Cavaliers, but cannot obtaine it. FINIS.
