B1827 E665_15 99865952 118209
JESUS CHRIST THE MYSTICALL OR GOSPELL SUN, Sometimes seemingly eclipsed, yet never going down from his PEOPLE: OR ECLIPSES Spiritualized. Opened in a SERMON at Paul's before the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, &c. March 28. 1652. The day before the late SOLAR ECLIPSE. BY FULK BELLERS, Master of Arts, and Preacher of the Gospel in the City of LONDON. London, Printed by T. Maxey for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Pauls Church-yard. MDCLII.
To the Right Honourable JOHN KENDRICK, LORD MAYOR, and The Right Worshipfull, the Aldermen and She∣riffs of the Honourable City of LONDON. Right Honourable, and Right Worshipfull, HAd there been any reall danger in firmamentary Eclipses, our God doubtlesse would have left it upon record in the Scrip∣ture: Since we are sure, Amos 3.7. See also Jer. 18.7, 8. the Lord God will doe no∣thing, (viz. in a way of judgment) but he first reveals his secret (intendment) to his ser∣vants, the Prophets. Now how silent the word is in this, I leave it to the judgment of all, that are any way versed in the Book of God. That which startleth many at the beholding of them, is that which scared divers heretofore, viz. either 1. The Rarity of them: Solis exortus, cursus, occasus nemo admira∣tur, proptereà quòd quotidiè fiunt: at eclip∣ses Solis miran∣tur, quia rarò accidunt; & Solis eclipses magis miran∣tur, quàm Lu∣nae, quoniam hae crebriores sunt. Auctor ad Herenni∣um, lib. 3o. mihi, p. 38. G. No man wondreth at the rising, the quick-moving, the setting of the Sun, because these things are ob∣served daily: But Solar Eclipses, (because they come seldome) are wondred at even far more then Lunar, (which are more frequent) as was well observed by that heathen long ago.
2. Men's unacquaintednesse with the naturall causes of them; As we find in those Indians in Jamaica, who refusing to furnish Columbus, that Genoese, (the first discove∣rer of the new American world) with provi∣sions, seeing the people idolatrously devoted unto the Moone, and fore-seeing her eclipse, (by his Ephemerides) Purchas's pil∣grimage 8. book, cap. 2. pag. 731. mihi he told the Islanders that if they did not bring him in provision, the divine anger would consume them, a signe whereof they should see in the dark∣ned face of the Moone within two dayes. The Indians being ignorant of the cause, were so terrified at the beholding of this eclipse, that they came to beg pardon of him, and bring him in provision in abundance, whereby Colum∣bus (making use of their ignorance,) Henric. Sal∣muth Comment. in Panciroll. lib. 2. tit. 1. de orbe novo. supplied his own necessities, and engaged the people much unto him. 3. Those remainders and dregs of super∣stition and idolatry, that are to be found in all. This is the cause why many heathens of old did look upon the In hoc unum omnium propè populorum sen∣tentiae primùm convenerant; ut—superna cor∣pora, Solem, Lunam, reli∣quaque astra, Deos appellave∣rint, & esse crediderint. Natalis Co∣mes, Mytholog. lib. 1. pag. 10. Sun as their God, and the Moon as their Goddesse; therefore seeing either of them to be robbed, or bereaved of light, they were exceedingly Putabant so∣lem & lunam eclipsin patien∣tia moeore affi∣ci, tanquam reges irâ com∣motos, & in∣dignatione; i∣deoque ab hu∣jusmodi signis metuebant, & reges suos pla∣care sacrificiis studebant, &c. Pet. à Figuerio. amazed. The remainders of this superstition and idolatry wee may observe in those Aposta∣tes, who Ezek. 8.16. worshipped the Sun towards
the east, and 2 Kin. 23.5. burned incense to Baal, to the Sun, and to the Moon, to the Planets, and all the Host of heaven; yea, the very dregs of these are to be found in the souls of all, because Prov. 27.19. as face in the water, (or in the glass) answereth unto face, so doth the heart of man unto man. Their idola∣tries and superstitions acquaint all, what seeds are to be found in their souls. 4. The want of that principle of grace, & that filial fear of the Lord, that should be in men. Were this fear present, it would eat up all carnal fear touching eclip∣ses, as it did of earthquakes, thundrings, & lightnings, in the primitive Christians. Or as Exod. 7.2. Aaron's rod did swal∣low up the rods of the wise men, sorcerers, magicians, inchanters, in the presence of Pharaoh; Pondering up∣on this, that it is as naturall for the Sun, or Moon to be eclipsed in their seasons, as daily to rise and set in the world. But especially considering that positive injunction, Jer. 10.2. Ita ut ex a∣stris coelique fi∣deribus pendea∣tis, atque ex illis ventura divene∣tis, ita ut signa illa coelestia terrori vobis sint; atque for∣midini quemad∣modum ipsis sint Gentibus, &c. Tossarii Peraphr. in loc. Learn ye not the way of the heathen, neither be dismayed at the signes of heaven, and that upon this account, because the heathen are dis∣mayed at them. A text fully against allcarnall fears touching eclipses; yea, against judicial Astrologie it self, by the vote of Hic locus in∣signis est contra Astrologos, im∣postores omnium maximos. Oe∣colampad. Oecolampadius, Bullinger, Parae∣us, Vatablus, Pellicanus, Calvin, yea of à La∣pide also, who do abundantly justifie the last lear∣ned English Annotations upon that place, which are worthy the perusall of all.
But however there be little danger in firmamen∣tary, yet there are many discomforts in spirituall E∣clipses: And this made me, upon a sudden call to preach before your Honour, (observing many to be amused with perplexing fears) to compare spirituall with firmamentary eclipses, and to demonstrate, that there is no cause of dreading any of the pretended direful operations of the later, when the causes of the former are removed out of the way. How far the ensu∣ing discourse was then looked upon as a word in sea∣son, I need not now relate. It now comes abroad upon importunity, and all that I shall adde, is my earnest desire, that the blessing of the Lord may go along with it; that all those clouds of sin between us, and our God, may be dispell'd, and that Jesus Christ, the true mysticall Sun, may still go on to shine into our souls. And that his blessing may be with you all, in your Persons, Relations, Families, and in your Go∣vernment, that this renowned City may flourish in Religion, Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity, which shal be the daily prayer of May the 12. 1652. The most unworthy Ser∣vant of Christ in the Mini∣stry of his Gospel, FULK BELLERS.
JESUS CHRIST the Mysticall SUN. ISAIAH 60.20. Thy Sun shall no more go down. THe Text that I have read (Right Ho∣nourable) may seem a Paradox to ma∣ny: and that upon a double account. viz. to hear of a Sun, 1. Monopolized, to some sort of people; when as the ordinary Sun shineth both upon the just, and unjust; yet this is confined unto the elect of God, in that possessive affix, thy. 2. That will not set, nor go down from the Horizon where it is: whereas the Sun in the firmament, riseth and setteth every day: But however, it may seeme improbable to flesh and blood, and to the remainders of carnall reason, that are to be found within us. And albeit, it may wrap every one into admiration, to hear of such a Sun, so con∣fined; and that knowes no way to go down: yet to a man with a spirituall eye, it seems neither impossible, nor yet improbable; because the mouth of truth, that can∣not lie, hath spoken it. There are indeed in Scripture many Paradoxes to men that have onely the glimering light of nature within them; as that 1 Matth. 1. A virgin should bring forth a Son. 2 2 Tim. 1.10. That Christs death should be a means to bring life and immorta∣lity to light by the Gospel. 3 Heb. 11.3. That all things that are now made, should be made out of things that did not appear, i. e.
out of a flat meer nothing, 4. That our bodies when they shall be mouldred into dust, shall yet be reunited to our soules in the day of the second appearing of Jesus Christ: 5. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. That God should call into the state of grace, not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble: But make choice of the foolish, weake, despised, yea, base ones of the world, when he passeth by the Grandees of the earth; to make (I say) them heirs of heaven: And among others I may reckon up my Text, which is indeed , but not ; beyond the opinion of many, but not beyond the common truth of God, nor beyond the reason of a renewed Christian: And in these passages (especially in this) that seem so repugnant, yea absurd many times to a carnall judgment, we are always to put into the scale (that we may poize down reason, and advance faith) 1 The Power of our God, which is not as the power of man: Mans power is but a limited, finite kind of pow∣er; His ell or measure is too short to measure the infinite, incomprehensible omnipotence of our God; He that was able to make the Sun to go back in Isai. 38.8. Hezekiah's time, in a way of retrograde motion, ten degrees: And he that was able to make the Sun to stand still in the midst of heaven, so that it hasted not to go down about a whole day, in Jos. 10.12, 13. Joshuah's time: is equally able to make this Sun (whereof he now speaketh) not to go down at all unto his people. 2 The Truth and will of God manifested in his promi∣ses: Hath he spoken it, and shall he not do it? Hath he said it, and shall he not bring it to passe? We may rest sa∣tisfied in this, that the mouth of the Lord hath uttered, that Thy Sun shall no more go down. 3 The Subject whereof all these Paradoxes speak, which is here the term Sun, not naturall, but supernaturall. Now that I may briefly lead you to the full meaning of these words, You may observe the dependance of these upon those fore-going, to stand thus: The whole former part of this Chapter is taken up in discovering the happy e∣state of the Church of Christ, under the time of the Gospel, in regard of all her spirituall enjoyments; whereof two
are peculiarly enumerated or reckon'd up; To which we shall reduce the rest: viz. 1 The Promulgation of the everlasting Gospel, whereby when darknesse covers the earth, and grosse darknesse all the unregenerate people on it; The Lord wil then arise with light, and bring in unexpected glory unto them: And this shall be a meanes to bring in abundance out of improbable places; such as were Ver. 2. Midian, Epha, Ver. 6. Sheba, Ver. 7.9. Kedar and Tarshish: yea from unlikely persons; viz. Ver. 3.13, 16. Kings, and earthly Potentates, shadowed out unto us by the trees of Lebanon. Where by the way, we might observe. Doct. That where Satan hath places under his own com∣mand, God there is able not onely to cull, but to call out a people for himselfe, and bring them in as Doves flock∣ing to their windowes, flying with speed as the clouds: And all to come near at his appointment. 2 The collation or the bestowing of greater mercies spi∣rituall, then on men in former times, upon point of 1 Gifts Ver. 17.; For brasse I will bring gold, for iron silver, and for wood brasse, and for stones iron: i. e. I will confer surpassing gifts upon them, that shall as far surpass what they have received formerly, as iron doth ordinary stones, or as silver doth iron, or as gold brass. 2 Governours Ver. 17.: I will make thy officers peace, and thy exactours righteousnesse: which was verified in the first fruits, in Ezra and Nehemiah, and other good Governours times: But the full harvest is reserved for Gospel seasons, as is plain to all; wherein Ma∣gistrates are promised to be stirred up, that should be peaceable procurers of their peoples welfare: And I am sure it is a badge of a mans belonging unto Babylon, not Jerusalem, to be an oppressour of the people of God. 3 Priviledges. 1 Violence shall not be heard in thee: Which words are not a promise of absolute immunity from the cross; But a comparative comfort; that however
the Church may meet with many pressures, yet it shall never totally be overwhelmed: God will preserve and protect it, maugre all the violent at∣tempts against it; Violence may be attempted, yet violence shall never be heard in thy land to prevail finally over my people in it. 2 The breaking in of light amongst them; so that they should need neither Sun, nor Moon; whereby is imported, not that the Saints should be deprived of those common mercies, attending upon their wel-being in this world. But because they should not now any longer fix their happinesse in the enjoyment of these, or any earthly, low, worldly object, but should be mounted up above, and collocate all their happinesse in the enjoyment of God; and hence here is promised a better mercy: That the Lord shall be to thee an everlasting light, and thy God shall be thy glory: and this is amplified in the words of the Text, to shew the perpetuity of this light unto them, Thy Sun shall no more go down. The words are an absolute promise, held forth in a Ca∣tegoricall negative Proposition; which if I should go about to resolve logically into the subject (thy Sun,) the predicate (going down,) the Copula or the bond whereby they are knit together (shall not,) the modality (any more,) I should e∣difie but little: I shall therefore strive Theologically, (i. e, plainly) to divide these words, and then you may observe these two things. 1 The parties to whom this Priviledge doth belong, im∣plicitely held forth unto us in that possessive particle thy. 2 The Priviledge belonging to these persons: viz. That this Sun shall no more go down unto them. Something here needeth unfolding. Q. 1 What is meant by this Sun? Q. 2 What by the going down of the Sun? Q. 3 Who are meant by the persons involved in the affix, thy? Q. 4 What by going down any more?
Q. 5. When is the whole of this promise to be ve∣rified? I shall satisfie these succinctly. By Sun in this place, we are not to understand 1. The firmamentary sun, which is the greater light destinated by God to rule the day, and which daily riseth and setteth, as is obvious to experience. But we are to understand 2 A metaphoricall Sun, not the creature sun, but the Crea∣tor Sun, twice stiled Jehovah, is here onely aimed at, even Jesus Christ, who is the mysticall Mal. 4.2. Alsted. Para∣titla. Calv. Deus erit Sol tuus. Quod Pro∣pheta loquatur de Christo, cer∣tissimum est, &c Heshusius. Brē∣tius in locum. Christus est lux aeterna fidelium. Bullinger. Sun of righteousnesse. I know some understand by Sun 1 The streams of the grace of God, and his favour in the comfortable influences and offers of it. 2 But others look to the fountain of all this favour, viz. Jesus Christ. And therefore most do unani∣mously expound it of him: And he it is that is ap∣pointed by his Father, to rise in a spirituall way to his people, and never to set more upon them. The Verbum  i.e. venit, Cum de Sole dicitur, Hebraicè idem quodoccidereest: ut Gen. 26. quia ingressus erat Sol. Tunc enim videtur ingredi Terras vel Oceanum, ut loquuntur Po∣ëtae. Forerius in locum. going down of the Sun in the proper notion of it, is nothing else but the departing of it out of our Horizon. And here the going down of Jesus Christ (if pos∣sible) should be his finall departure away from his people: Christ will never so set; but however he may be eclipsed, yet he will still continue in their Hemisphere, i. e. He will abide with them for ever. The persons related unto by the particle (thy) are expressed in the verse after the Text; Thy people shall be all righteous, by profession at least, and by separation at the last; when it shall be wholly purged, and only the righteous shall dwell in it. Jesus Christ hath been about this purging work, even from the dayes of his coming into the flesh; yea some way, from the beginning of the world, in separating the tares from the corn, Matth. 3.12. the chaffe from the wheat; and he stil goes on to purge his floor, and will go on to the day of harvest. To those that have righteousness imputed or imparted, this promise doth actually belong, while they are here: of which more anon. By going down any more: There might indeed seemingly be the going down of Christ, when he went into
the lower parts of the earth. But that was meerly in regard of his humanity; For Heb. 9.28. Christ was once only offered to bear the sins of many. He went down once and no more, not a second time. But in regard of his Deity; by his Spirit once arising in our souls, he will never any more go down to us. . This Promise, in regard of the inchoation of it, is to be begun here; where our God freeth his peo∣ple many times from mourning; and gives unto them beauty for ashes; the garment of joy for the spirit of heavinesse. Where Saints are truly stiled, Isa. 61.3. trees of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified; where they have the spirituall Luke 17.21. kingdome of Christ begun within them. But For the perfect consummation of it, that is reserved for heaven hereafter; yet the first fruits we do enjoy here. Saints, they have in the Church Militant this promise begun to them, onely the full complement of it is reserved for them in the Church triumphant. It is now to the beginnings of Christ here, that I shall labour in my ensuing discourse, to apply this promise, which being thus expounded, doth resolve it self into these two Observations. 1 Doct. That Jesus Christ is the same to Believers, as the Sun is to the world. 2 Doct. Quamvis ob∣nubiletur, &c. Oeculampa∣dius. That however Jesus Christ, the supercelestiall Sun, may be eclipsed, or beclouded, yet he will never go down from his people. Thy Sun shall no more go down; i. e. however it may have a curtain drawn between thee and him, as the firmamentary Sun hath by clouds, or by the Moon in its eclipse, yet go down, i.e. depart, he will not. Now for the profitable prose∣cution of these observations, I shall follow this method: 1 I shall demonstrate the grounds why Christ is shadow∣ed out under this notion of the Sun. 2 I shall cleare Christ to be the same to beleevers, as the Sun is to the world. Both these in reference to the former proposition. And then, 3 That however this mysticall Sun may sometimes be
eclipsed, yet he will never go down from his people. 4 I shall give the improvement of all. For the first. There are few that haesitate about the appli∣cation of this metaphoricall title to Jesus Christ, that are not utterly unacquainted with the word of God; because we read, that Psal. 84.11. Jehovah. the Lord God is a Sun to his people, the giver both of grace, and glory to them. And the Prophet Mal. 4.2. Malachi is very plain, that he is the Sun of righteousnesse, that doth arise with healing in his wings; Placaei Di∣sputat. p. 175. this Sun being twice stiled Jehovah in this Chapter. If any doubt be, it is touching the accommodation of this to Jesus Christ. And for the resol∣ving of that, I shal lay down these two things, viz. that he may be justly so stiled in a way of 1 Opposition, 2 Allusion. 1 If you look upon him in a way of opposition to 1 Leviticall shadows, or ceremonies, which yet were typicall prefigurations of him: Christ was as the Sun, in respect of those candles, torches, stars, or lesser lights at most. He did as far surpasse them in regard of splendor, as the firmamentary Sun, doth the signe of the Sun painted upon any Table. They are indeed but dull Heb. 10.1. Colos. 2.17. shadows of him, that was the glory to come. 2 That innate or naturall darknesse, that is to be found in all men by nature. For by nature . Eph. 5.8. we were not onely darke, but darknesse; not in the con∣crete, but in the abstract, which carrieth abundance of emphasis in it. And when Jesus Christ comes, he fills us with light, as the Sun doth the body of the hemisphere, overrun with darknesse. And thus he becomes John 1.9. the light of every one that comes into this world; viz. that is spiritually illuminated by him. Thus we see he is as the Sun, in respect of umbrages, and as the Sun, to dispel all that intrin∣secall darknesse to be found within us. 2 By way of allusion. Allusions may be many; but those that are naturall, and obvious to all, (because I do desire to
profit all) I shall make use of. He is as the Sun, 1 By way of beauty or excellency. The Sun is deservedly looked upon, as the Lord of all elementary vertues, the foun∣tain of all aëriall light. By some as the heart of heaven. For as the heart is in the body naturall, so is the Sun in the firma∣mentary body. Some look upon it, as the sparkling eye of heaven, that carrieth beauty in it; yea some of the Philoso∣phers fancied, that in the sun was the soul of the world, which filling that fiery globe (which we ordinarily see) thence dif∣fuseth his rayes, as so many spirits, whereby he distributeth life, sense, and motion to all sublunary creatures. It must needs be granted by all, that it is the most glorious, beauti∣full, and the fairest among all the stars. Which how far it may be accommodated to Jesus Christ, I shall briefly make out unto you. Psal. 45.2.  Est verbum ge∣minatum, au∣gendae significa∣tionis gratiâ. Rivet. Jesus Christ is said to be fairer then the children of men. Personall beauty is a great or∣nament, when seconded with morall vertues, how much more when with divine graces? as in Gen. 39.6. Joseph and 1 Sam. 16.13. David. But when attended with the Colos. 1.19. fulnesse of grace, which was to be found in Christ alone, what abundance of lustre must it needs adde unto him? What that outward form, or feature of Jesus Christ was, is utterly unknown, though that Jesuite durst take upon him to describe it. God, I conceive, hath dealt by that, as by the body of Moses, hiding of it, lest any finding it, Vavasor. de formâ Christi. should idolize or adore it, in a distinct way from his Deity. But though we neither know the outward form, or feature of Jesus Christ; yet the Scripture holds him forth as very faire and beautifull, as altogether lovely to the eye of faith. Cant. 5.16.  Not onely beautifull in one part, but in all parts; and two things that the word makes out to us, do a∣bundantly demonstrate it. 1 That Jesus Christ was without Heb. 9.14. spot, , 1 Pet. 1.19. blemish, or defor∣mity. Christ he was without any blemish in respect of sin. Deformities in body, alwaies speak the presence of some sin in the soul Jesus Christ was in all things like to us, yet with∣out sin. For such an high Priest became us, that was holy, harmlesse, and undefiled, separate from sinners. Jesus Christ he was
1 Holy. , He had holinesse to the Lord engraven upon his heart, Exod. 28.36. as the high Priest had it upon his holy crown of pure gold, like to the engravings of a signet. 2 Harmlesse or innocent. . Devoid of all naturall pravity or sinfulnesse, unto which both Priest and People were obnoxious in the Levitical Law. 3 Ʋndefiled, unpolluted; . not contaminated with any sin. 2 Cor. 5 21. He knew no sin, by his own commission, though he felt much for it by imputation. 4 Separated from sinners. He was obnoxious, . as to no sin, so to no guilt of sin in and of himself. Separated he was from sinners, as the high Priest when he entred into the holy of holies, was from the common peo∣ple, which causes him to challenge the Jews, John 8.46. Which of you convinceth me of sin? 2. He was the brightnesse of his Fathers glory, . Heb. 1.3. or that re∣splendent lustre or effulgency arising from the light of his Fa∣ther. He was not onely the reflection of the Father, as of the Sun in the Rainbow in a watery cloud; or as the Sun in the water or glasse, at the rebound onely. But as the Son is many times the reflection of the Father, being his own lively Picture and Image; as having all these glorious excellencies of wisdome, knowledge, purity, that are to be found in his Father. Hence it is that we are said [feelingly] to 2 Cor. 4.6. know the glory of God in the face of Christ. Because in Christ we may see all those glorious excellencies that are to be found in the Father, when as the veile that is upon our minds by nature, is done away. Now if Jesus Christ were sinlesse, and the glit∣tering refulgency of his Fathers glory, he must needs surpasse the Sun in beauty, when it shineth in its fullest strength. 2 In regard of the seat and influences of it, Psal. 19.5. God hath placed a Tabernacle for the Sun in the heavens: There it keep∣eth it's residence. And hence Astronomers (clapping him in∣to circles) allot unto him various Orbs; As the Eccentrique wherein the body of it remains; and a couple of orbs, the . one to carry the part that is remoter from the earth, and . another to carry the lowest part of it. And a late Copernicus. Astro∣nomer hath found out one more, Eccentrum Eccentri; but
all in heaven. Jesus Christ we know, not only as God, but as man, is now in heaven; and Acts 3.21. the Heavens must containe his bodily presence till times of the restitution of all things: Rev 3.21. And that he is set down in his Fathers Throne, on the high∣est Seat of all glory and excellency. Sol agit in in∣feriora, motu, lumine, & in∣fluentiis. By however, the Sun's residence be in heaven, yet his light and influences are here below on earth. And he may be said to dwell among us in regard of his rayes and beams: Jesus Christ, we know dwelleth in the highest Heavens, but by his rayes and beams of grace, Isai. 57.15. he dwels with them that are of a contrite heart, to revive the spi∣rit of the humble, Rev. 2.1. and the heart of the contrite ones. By them he walketh in the midst of the golden candlesticks; and as the Sun doth daily visit the earth with his influences, so doth Jesus Christ, the day spring from on high, visit his Saints with the imbreathings and revivings of his graces and com∣forts. 3 In regard of his magnitude and greatnesse: The Sun, of all the Planets, is deservedly looked upon as the greatest, both Quantitate molis & virtu∣tis. in bulk and vertue. The greatnesse of it Astronomers did heretofore gather especially by Alsted. in Cy∣clopaed. lib. 11. cap. 4. de  Solis Reg. 2. eclipses: And they make it out by demonstrations, that it is 166 times bigger then the earth: How much greater then is the Creatour of the Sun, then that firmamentary sun it selfe. We know, that by the Word (i. e. Jesus Christ) John 1.3. all things, (even the Sun it selfe) were made. We finde the Prophet crying out, Isai. 53.8. Who may declare his generation! And I may say, Who can declare his greatnesse! no creature (I am sure) is able to demonstrate it, Psal. 145.3. because there is no end of his greatnesse, it is unsearchable. The heavens do contain the firmamentary sun, but the Heaven of heavens cannot contain this mysti∣call Sun in regard of his Deity. 4. His Forme and Oneness. 1 The form of the Sun is of an orbicular round figure, a Pierius lib. 39 de Cireulo. clear embleme of eternity; for in a circle there is neither beginning nor ending. We read of Heb. 7.3. Melchisedek, that he was without beginning of dayes, or end of life, viz. as recorded in the history of Moses: And in that he was a lively type
of Jesus Christ, who as God, is the first and the last, God bles∣sed for ever. 2. For Oneness. We know that there are many stars, Sol quòd solus esset, solus lu∣ceret, & reli∣quis stellis lu∣cem impcrtiret. Cicer. 2. de Natura deo∣rum. but one Sun that gives light to the world. There are many Saints that receive of Christs light continually, as the stars from the body of the Sun. In Arabia there is (as they say) to be found but one Phoenix; And in the body certainly there is but one heart: In the firmament but one Sun, and in the Church but 1 Tim. 2.5. one Mediatour between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. 5. In regard of motion. The Sun, we know, is very quick; and that in twenty four hours it doth encircle the whole world. David representeth him Psal. 19.5, 6. to run, like a giant, the race that is set before him: that is, 1 Very swiftly, infinitely faster then a man of the largest sieze, or the longest breath. David's illustration, though some way expressive, doth fall short of the Sun in the quickness of its motion. A bird upon the wing, an arrow shot out of the bow, cannot possibly reach the sun upon point of speed. How many thousand miles doth he run within an hour? Bellarmin. de Ascens. mentis in Deum gradu 7o, mihi, pag. 146. It was a curious observation of that Cardinall, when hee had the full prospect of the body of the Sun, ready to go down, to try a conclusion of the quicknesse of the motion of it, took the Psalmes into hand: Before (saith he) that I had twice read the 51 Psalm, the whole sun was set. Whereby he doth conclude, that the sun runs in the eighth part of an hour 7000 miles: Though the Cardinals compute (as well as his doctrine in matters Polemicall, or of contro∣versie) doth very much fall short of truth; yet his experi∣ment in this, gives some proof of the quicknesse of the sun's motion: For the quicknesse of Christs motion; how quick∣ly did he come from heaven to earth, when he did assume our nature, and vailed himselfe under our humanity? How quickly comes hee to the reliefe of his Church in distresse? And is he not as quick as the lightning upon point of mo∣tion, when he comes to enlighten the world with his truth? 2 Indefatigably, unweariedly: How constant was Jesus Christ in doing the will of his Father, and to finish the work,
that he sent him about: How doth he professe, that it was his meat to do it. Never was there any hungry man labouring so constantly for, or delighting in his appointed food, as Jesus Christ did constantly in doing the will of his Fa∣ther. 6. It's obedience to the Command of God. There is an obedientiall power, whereby the firmamentary Sun standeth at Gods appointment; that made it to stand still in Joshu∣ah's time: and to run back upon the diall of Ahaz, for a signe to Hezekiah. And how was it with Jesus Christ? what an obedientiall yeilding was there of himselfe to the will of his Father? He declares unto all, that he came up∣on this errand, that he might fulfill his Fathers will, and finish the work that he had sent him to do; and that he did do all things that pleased him alwayes: When he findeth it in the volume of the book to be written of him, that he should do his will, Psal. 40.7, 8. How doth his heart eccho? Lo, I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my heart. And when he was to compleat the great work of our Redemption by his agony, his bloody sweat, and finall passion; How doth he discover a will melted into the will of his Father, when resigningly he gives up himselfe in the midst of all that soul-anguish that was upon him, which extorted, Father, if it bee possible, let this cup passe from me. Yet mark how willingly he doth surrender up himself to his Father; Yet not my will, but thine by done. So that in these six respects the firmamentary Sun is a live∣ly embleme of that super-celestiall Sun Jesus Christ. viz. both in regard of 1 Beauty and excellency. 2 Seat and influences. 3 Magnitude or greatness. 4 Form, and one-nesse. 5 Motion, and 6 Obedience. No wonder therefore that this name is accommoda∣ted to him in Scripture. And yet to make it out a little fuller: Do but consider with me the next thing that we are to speak to for the clea∣ring of the first point, viz. 2 That Christ is the same to believers, as the Sun is to
the world. Thence it is that he is held forth to us by this notion in this place, and the places fore-cited; that I will not trouble you with the repetition of: Onely for the de∣monstration of it, consider with me, what benefit the world, receiveth by the Sun, the like shall we find believers to re∣ceive from Christ. Now among other things that the world receiveth from the firmamentary sun, I shall insist on these six: viz. 1 Light. 2 Life. 3 Heat. 4 Fruitfulnesse. 5 Comfort. 6 Purity. All which Saints receive from Jesus Christ, and therefore to every individuall, the promise may be repeated; Thy Sun shall no-more go down. 1. The firmamentary Sun is very operative to produce light, and dispell darknesse. It is seated as it were in the center, navell, or heart of heaven, that it might impart its light to the stars that are above and below it, yea, and unto all the earth besides. How quickly doth it in his approaches near unto our Horizon, much more at his coming up into it, drive out darknesse out of the air; and ferret it out of our houses; It is the Steward of light. Now as aëriall light flowes from the sun, so all spirituall light flowes from Jesus Christ. It is he that filleth 1 Gospel Ordinances with light, and Psal. 19.8. maketh his word to be an enlightning word to the [mentall] eyes of his people. 2 He it is that filleth the souls of his elect with light, not onely with the light of naturall reason, where∣withall John 1.9. He fils all that come into this world: But with the light of grace; He that did command light to shine out of darknesse, 2 Cor. 4.6. 'Tis he that shineth into our souls: He sets up a light there, viz. the light of saving knowledge, and justifying faith; yea, and the John 8.12. light of life too in the beginnings or it. The Sun naturall is as the Father of light naturall, and the Sun spirituall of light spirituall. Where∣fore he saith, Ephes. 5.14. A wake thou that sleepest, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Isai. 60.2. Placaei disp. 17. Pag. 179. A passage cited out of this Chapter of Isaiah; The Lord shall rise upon thee,
and his glory shal be seen upon thee. The Apostle changeth on∣ly the title Jehovah into Christ. 2 It produceth heat. Hence the Psalmist tels us, that Psal. 195. there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. It is the heat of the sun that warms the seeds, and roots of flowers, and ma∣ny herbs in spring, that are in the womb of the earth, and draweth them out by his shinings: It's his heat that doth produce Minerals within, as well as vegetables upon the surface of the earth: Now what the Sun is in the King∣dom of nature, that is Christ in the Kingdome of grace: It is he that by his word warmes the hearts within, of his people. 1 Sometimes making them to yeild: As the hard Adamant by soking of it in the warm blood of a Goat; which (as some say) is rendred thereby apt to be worked upon; so the hard heart of a sinner steeped in the warme blood of Christ, Zach. 12.10. fals presently relenting that it may be wrought upon. 2 Sometimes to melt as wax before the fire: As David found by experience, Psal. 22.14. My heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels. It is this that turneth an heart of stone into an heart of flesh: according to that Ezek. 36.26. covenant∣promise, I will take from them an heart of stone, and I will give unto them an heart of flesh: A melting heart by reason of fear, is a great judgement, as we see in the Exod. 15.15. Josh. 2.11. Canaanites, and Isai. 19.1. Egyptians. But to have an heart melted by reason of sin, seen through the glasse of the Gospel, and the piercings of Jesus Christ, is a transcendent mercy; As we see in 2 Kin. 22.19. Josiah: Of whom we read, that his heart was tender, and therfore peniten∣tially he humbleth himself before the Lord. It is the heat under the Limbeck, that maketh the water drop out of the head of the Limbeck: and it is the inward heat which we find from Jesus Christ, that makes many times tears trickle down our eyes, because men keep not God's laws. It was this that made David wash his bed, and water his couch with tears. 3 Sometimes it inflames them, and setteth their hearts a burning within them; That warmth that Christ put into his word did so far transcendently warm Jeremiah's heart,
that he professeth, Jer. 20.9. his word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones; and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. Fire will out. It was that which made the hearts of those Disciples so hot within them, that they brake out; Did not our hearts burn within us, Luke 24.32. while he spake unto us by the way, and opened unto us the Scriptures? It is Christ that filleth us so with the fire of love, that all the waters of affliction cannot quench it. 3 Sometimes it causeth life. How doth it draw out that plasticall or formative power, which is to be found in seeds, making them to sprout while they are under the clod, and thereby enquickning them? How doth it, as it were, every Spring call back roots and trees, out of their swoone or seeming deadnesse, in which they lay all Winter long? The Sun by his beams carrieth down life unto them; yea, to us also in some respect: It is the sun that concurreth as an u∣niversall cause to the generation of man, Sol & homo generant homi∣nem. and to his suppor∣ting in the estate of nature: Did not the Sun so qualifie the aire with it's beams, it would be utterly unfit to generate or maintaine the vitall spirits in us: We owe indeed the life of nature, some way to the sun in nature: But sure I am, we owe the life of grace totally unto Jesus Christ, this spiri∣tuall Sun; Jesus Christ is our Col. 34. life, as well as our light; It is he that is a 1 Cor. 15.45. quickning Spirit. As no creature can possi∣bly live without the benefit of the sun; so neither can any Christian live the life of grace without Jesus Christ. 4 It makes the earth very fruitful, it is the sun that makes the trees to sprout, and the grasse to spring, corne to grow, and (in a word) that crowneth the earth with fruitful∣nesse. Our God gives Acts 14.17. fruitfull seasons in their season, fil∣ling our hearts with food and gladnesse; chiefly, though not onely by the Suns means; whereby he doth renew the face of the earth, and bringeth precious things out of it. And is there any thing that makes a Christian more Philip. 1.11. fruit∣full in the fruits of righteousnesse then Jesus Christ? Without Christ, it is certain, we can do nothing, Philip. 2.13. till he worketh in us both the will and the deed of his own good pleasure. But when his blessing comes to our soules, the command of Christ
is operative as in the creation, when he said, Gen. 1.22. Be fruitfull: And it is he that by commanding, maketh us to be Col. 1.10. fruitfull in every good work; and doth increase the fruits of righte∣ousnesse in us: As all our wel-springs are in Christ, so all our fruitfulnesse is from him. 5 It bringeth comfort: How doth the sight of the Sun in the open air cheer and revive the heart of a man newly drawn out of a dungeon; or that hath been a long time con∣fined to his bed of sickness? How Eccles. 11.7. pleasant then is it to be∣hold the light of the Sun? Its light, and warmth, and all its influences are refreshing unto us. It is not the promises, though never so cordiall, that can bring in comfort to our souls, unless they do receive a command from Jesus Christ for this end and purpose: It is he that comforteth them that are cast down. It is he that is the Luk. 2.25. consolation of Israel: and he comes furnished with a commission from his Father, and was anointed by the Spirit, to bind up the broken heart, to proclaim liberty to the captives, Isa. 61.1, 2. the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and to comfort all that mourn. It is he that gives com∣mission to his Ambassadors to go about comforting work; Comfort ye, Isa. 40.1, 2. comfort ye my people, (saith the Lord;) speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and preach, saying, Her warfare is accomplished, and her iniquities are pardoned, &c. We may say of all other comforters, (if this Sun be absent) as Job of his friends, Miserable comforters are ye all. But if Christ be present, and all worldly comforts be absent, we may then say as Jacob, I have enough; I have all. He is able to make our hearts to be brimfull and run over, by the comforting influ∣ence of his own Spirit, Mr Ro. Glover. as he did the heart of that Martyr, being full of comfort upon the sight of the stake. He is come (Augustine) he is come, he is come. 6 It bringeth purity and healing. We see by ordinary ex∣perience, how the Sun will as it were purge and heal the aire, that was infected with pestilentiall breathings; and how it clarifieth it, that was overrun with fogs and mists (things that are unwholsom to the body of man.) And is there any thing that will so purge the heart, as Jesus Christ
will? When he is as Refiners fire, and Fullers Sope; when he sitteth to purifie the hearts of the house of Levi, whom he doth intend to make spirituall Priests unto his Father. How doth he cry to his Spirit, as Hezekiah in another case, 2 Chron. 29.5. have out the filthinesse out of the holy place. When once he begins to sprinkle clean Covenant-water upon us, Ezek. 36.26. from all our filthinesse he will cleanse us. Isa. 1.25. It is he that is able to purge away all our drosse, and take away all our tin, and to purifie us to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. When this Sun of righteousnesse doth arise, Mal. 4.2. he doth arise with heal∣ing in his wings. Whereby he regenerateth us, and reneweth us after the Image of God, and beginneth here the cure of our corruptions, though the perfecting of the cure be reser∣ved for heaven. Thus we see, the mysticall Sun, Jesus Christ, to be the same to beleevers, as the Sun in the firmament to the world, upon point of benefit; giving to them, 1 Light. 2 Heat. 3 Life. 4 Fruitfulnesse. 5 Comfort. 6 Healing. But how may I know whether I have a right of pro∣priety in this Sun or not; that so I may be able to judge, whether this cordiall passage doth belong unto me or not? Thy Sun shall no more go down. For answer hereof, I shall onely offer to your consi∣derations, some hints from these six properties, whereby you may be able to judge of your interest in this Sun. And let conscience briefly answer to these interrogations: viz. Hath Christ, 1 Come in with enlightening influence to my soul? There was a time, when I sate in the region of the valley of the sha∣dow of death, when I was in another Egypt for darknesse; but light is now risen unto me, and I am removed into ano∣ther Goshen; Col. 1.13. He hath brought me out of the kingdome of dark∣nesse, and translated me into the kingdome of his dear Son. He hath communicated of those treasures of wisdome and know∣ledge unto me; Col. 2.3. whereby though he have not made me poli∣tickly, craftily, cunningly, worldly wise, in the things of this
life, to over-reach or circumvent others, or to enrich my self by indirect ways; yet he hath made me savingly wise, or wise unto salvation. He hath discovered himself in the face of Jesus Christ unto me. Yea, he hath shewen me my self in the glasse of his Word, how miserable I was by nature; how happy by my interest in Jesus Christ. And all this light filleth me with love to Jesus Christ, and maketh me more humble in mine own eyes, because the little that I know, is not the thousand part of what I know not. He hath made me, with Mary, thus wise, as to choose the better part, that one thing necessary; and with Moses, deliberately to choose to suffer afflictions with the people of God, rather then to en∣joy the pleasures of sin for a season. And with David, to take his word to be a lamp to my feet, Psal. 119. and a light to my paths. I can now say experimentally, Whereas I was born blinde, now I see. 2 Warmed my heart with divinest love, which like the fire of the Sanctuary, is alwaies burning within me, break∣ing forth in flames of piety towards God in Christ, and of humanity, courtesie, kindnesse towards men, especially to∣ward Saints? Exod. 2. Do I finde it to be as the fire in the bush, that consumed it not, though it continued burning? Yea, that all the waters of affliction or persecution cannotslack, much lesse extinguish my love unto Jesus Christ? He hath so shed abroad his love in my soul, Acts 21 13. that makes me willing to do and dye for Christ. Now how your pulses beat this way as Christians, let conscience judg And for you (Right Hon.) that are intrusted with the government of this great city, there is expected from you, not onely warmth of love, but a peculiar fire of zeal to promote the glory of God, Psal. 69.9. as you see in David, The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up. When observing the Ordi∣nances to be contemned, the Name of God blasphemed, Sabbaths profaned, Religion trampled under feet; zeale then inforceth him, yea even consumeth him, for the pro∣moting of the glory of God. You that are the Magistrates in this renowned City, consult your own consciences in this particular. 3 Come in with life? 'Twas my condition when I was in
my naturall estate, as it was with Lazarus some way, when buried. I did once lie in the grave of my sins, as he in the grave of the earth. Hath Christ enlivened and enquickned me to newnesse of life? Can I say truly as Paul, I live, yet not I, Gal. 2.20. but Christ liveth in me; and the life that I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, that hath given himself for me? Doth this life from Christ make me lively in all duties for Christ; that so I may serve God in my generation, either in a way of Magistracy, Ministry, or in a private orbe or station? 4 Made me any way fruitfull? Doth the spring of grace come as fast forward in my soul, as the spring of nature now on the earth? doth he make me fruitfull, as a good 1 Magistrate: Exod. 18.21. to bring forth the fruits of the feare of my God, of truth, righteousnesse, of courage and judgement; cau∣sing me to hate covetuousnesse, and reject bribes, Exod. 23.8. which do blinde the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous? Hath he begot in me desires to see the sanctifying of the Lords sab∣bath; to countenance Religion; and to be a terrour to them that do evil, and an encourager of them that do wel? 2 Minister. Hath he begot in me unfeigned desires to propagate the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and faithfully to feed the flock, over which the Lord hath set me; rightly dividing the word unto them, without respect of persons; and that by my life and conversation, I may be a pattern to the flock, in Faith, Doctrine, and Purity; lest otherwise I should prove like one of the Carpenters that built Noah's Ark, who build∣ing it for anothers safety, were themselves drowned? 3 Private Christian. Ephes. 6.4. Labouring as a Father to traine up my children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; As a Husband, 1 Pet. 3.7 to dwell with my yoke-fellow as a man of knowledge; and as a Master, Col. 4.1. to do that which is equall and just for my servants, having care for their souls, whose bodies labour daily for me. And above all, watching over mine own wayes, and walking with my God continually, bring∣ing forth all those Gospel fruits, Gal. 5.22 even the fruits of the Spi∣rit, as love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, good∣nesse,
faith, Gal. 5.23. Non est lex, nempe damna∣toria. Paraeus. meeknesse, temperance, against which there is no law, viz. to condemn them. 5 Brought in solid Gospel-comforts and reviving influen∣ces to my soul? when my spirit hath been overwhelmed, then the comforts of my God have rejoyced my heart. Have we found, 2 Cor. 5. that as our sufferings have abounded for Christ, so our consolation also hath abounded by Christ? Have we found, the hotter the day, the greater the dew at night; the hotter the time of trouble, the greater the dews of refresh∣ing from our God? Ask what experience this way, and let conscience give answer. 6 Hath Christ arisen with healing in his wings to thy soul or no; healing thee of thy pride, passions, infidelity, impe∣nitency, worldlinesse, hardnesse of heart, prejudice? In a word, hath he given a deaths-wound to all thy corruptions? and doth he begin to purifie and cleanse thy heart by faith every day more and more? Acts 15.9. If conscience, rightly principled, can but assure thee, that thou hast received Gospe-light, heat, life, comfort, healing, and art rendered Gospelly fruitfull in all the fruits of renewed obedience; thou mayest as∣sure thy self, that the truth of this promise will be made good unto thee, that thy Sun shall never go down any more. Which leadeth me now to the second Observation. Doct. 2. That however Jesus Christ, this true mysticall Sun, may sometimes be eclipsed from, yet he will never go down any more to his people. It cannot be denied, but that Jesus Christ, this Sun, may be eclipsed in respect of us. Astronomers tell us, that eclip∣ses do properly belong to the Moon, because that only totally may be deprived of light, viz. when it cometh into the sha∣dow of the earth; which yet never ascendeth so high as any other Planet, to eclipse it wholly. I shall yet make use of this non-scripturall term, in respect of the notion of it, for want of a better. Eclipses are nothing but the occultation, or hiding of any Star from our aspect; caused either by interposition of the Moon between us and the Sun, as in Solar; and of the earth between the Sun and the Moon, in all Lunar Eclipses. There
may many things intervene between us and Jesus Christ, that may hinder his beams from flowing in upon us: In defectu, Sol ipse nihil pati∣tur, sed noster fraudatur aspe∣ctus, Macrob. Now Christ may seem to be offuscated, in respect, 1 Of himselfe, when his glory, power, or truth are eclipsed. 2 Of us, when as our graces and comforts are be∣clouded. 1 In respect of himselfe, Christ may seeme to suffer an eclipse in reference to his own. 1 Glory: thus, when he came abroad into the world at the first, John 11.11. He came to his own, but his own recei∣ved him not; and that mainely upon this account, because his glory was veiled and hidden from them: Isai. 53.2. They could see no beauty in him, why they should desire him. The Prophet giveth there the sense of the people: They looked upon him, as a poor, despised, meer man, and that had nothing of worth in him. Indeed, to believers, Christ is alwayes precious; 1 Pet. 2.7. they have an eye open to see his glory, and admire his excellen∣cy. As a Painter may have an eye open to see the worth of a piece, that another may lightly esteem; not because there is not excellency in it, but because an injudicious man in that art wanteth eyes for to discern it. Jesus Cant. 5.10.16 Christ is to believers altogether lovely, the standard-bearer among ten thousands. Yet it must be confessed, the glory of Christ was mightily eclipsed, when his Deity was veiled under the frail fabrick of mans humanity. 2 Power; when he seemingly suffered, 1 Himselfe to be over-powred on earth; to be appre∣hended, buffeted, scourged, and crucified; to see him that was the Creatour of nature, to suffer death by his sinfull crea∣tures; this was that which brought that Luke 24.21. disciples faith to a low ebbe; when he thus spake, We hoped that it had been he that should have redeemed Israel, viz. by his power. He looked for a temporall saviour from the Romane yoke. But seeing the Power of Christ to be eclipsed, he scarce knoweh what to say or hope for. 2 When Christ suffereth his own people to be as they were in Davids time.
1 Driven back, or Psal. 44.10. routed in the day of their encoun∣ter with their enemies, being smitten with Panick fear, and not able to stand under it. 2ly, Pillaged and plundered, given up to the will and lust of their enemies. 3ly, Scattered up and down among the heathen; driven out of their own habitations: made a reproaah to their neighbours, Psal. 44.13, 14. a proverb and a hissing to all that are about them: Yea 4ly, Rom. 8.36. All the day long to be killed, and appointed as sheep for the slaughter. When Saints are massacred, and persecutours no more troubled, then butchers at the killing of sheep: Jesus Christ in all these seemeth to be under an Eclipse, in regard of his own power, at least in our apprehension; which maketh the Church to cry out, Psal. 44.23, 24. Awake, thou that sleepest, O Lord, arise, wherefore dost thou cast us off for ever? where∣fore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction, and oppression? Psal. 142.4. When we look upon the right hand, and there is none to save; and on the left hand, and there is none to deliver, and refuge faileth from our souls. The power of Jesus Christ seemeth to be in the eclipse in respect of his people, when he rescueth not in tentations, and in outward troubles he doth not deliver them. 3 Truth: The truth of Christ may be much obnubilated, Rev. 8.12. Thus Christ somtimes suffered the third part of the Sun to be smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars; so that a third part of them were darkened; because the sun of Gospel-truth shined not, but was hidden; and the Moon representing the Church, and the stars represen∣ting the Ministers in it, were smitten, and lost much of their light. Rev. 9.2. When Antichrist openeth the bottomlesse pit, and there ariseth a smoak out of the pit, like the smoak of a great fur∣nace, it causeth an Eclipse of the Sun of truth, by reason of errours, superstitions, idols, and thereby an inundation of sin: Truth was hereby obscured, yea, a totall eclipse by an inundation of errours, and by a generall apostacy; As
in that Apostolicall Church, Rev. 6.12. When the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair: When men's inventions were mingled with the doctrine and merit of Jesus Christ, what a totall eclipse did the truth of Jesus Christ then meet with∣all? 2 In regard of us; Christ may seemingly be eclipsed. 1 When his graces are partially beclouded in us; as there is no star in the firmament, but is capable of an eclipse, so there is no grace in the soule but may be much darkned. A mans knowledge and faith may not onely be in the wain, but in the eclipse; so that though he have Christ in the pro∣mise, he shall not be able to discerne him: no more then those Luke 24.16. disciples going to Emaus; when their eyes were held that they should not see his person, i.e. know it. A strange detention! When it is with us, as it was with Mary, with her blubbered eyes; who mistaketh Christ for the Gardener. Or as it was John 20.25. with Hagar, that had a fountain of water be∣fore her, Gen. 21.19. yet could not see it till God was pleased to open her eyes. Christ may hide himselfe from our hearts, that knowledge or faith shall not be able to reach him. And as it is with knowledge and faith, so it is with hope too; as we see in those disciples fore-mentioned, going to Emaus, We hoped that it was he that should have redeemea Israel: and as it was with the Church in Jeremiah's time, We have loo∣ked, (i.e. we hoped) for good, but no good came, and for a time of healing, but behold trouble; and despondingly men are ready to say, Jor. 8.20, 15. The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved. Saints hopes may be ready, in regard of temporals, to give up the ghost, as it was sometimes with Paul, who professed that all Acts 27.20. hopes that we should be saved were now taken away. And the like I might instance in all other graces. But I must hasten. 2 In regard of comforts, which may be totally eclipsed, Job 13.24. When God doth either hide his face; whereof Job doth bit∣terly complain, Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy? thou writest bitter things against me, and makest me possesse the iniquities of my youth. This was that which drained so many tears from the Church Psal. 44.24 & 88.14 in David's
time, and from David with the Church; Wherefore hidest thou thy face, &c? And in Isaiah's time, Thou art a God that hidest thy selfe. Bitter it was to 2 Sam. 14.32. Absalom to be deprived of the sight of the face of David, so that he would rather put himselfe upon the visible hazard of death, then to be any longer without it: But infinitely more bitter it is to a Saint to be deprived of the face and favour of God. This draws out those mournful complaints, Psal. 13.1. & 89.46. How long wilt thou hide thy face from me? for ever? But however this be true, that there may bee partial eclipses of many graces, and total eclipses of many comforts: Yet this Sun being once up in the Hori∣zon of our souls, will never any more go down from us; What else is the meaning of those promises, that I shall only use to confirme this truth withall? This in the text is so plain, that whoever runs may read it, that once being risen in our hearts, he will never set any more unto us: And he that will not take Gods word in one place, will take it in no place. To which I might adde (if necessary) Matth. 28.20 Behold, I am with you alwayes, to the end of the world. A promise not only extensive to the Apostles, for speciall presence; or Mi∣nisters, the faithfull Dispensers of his word, their successors; but to all of them that were to believe by their Ministry: And that promise, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: A promise first past to Gen. 28.15. Jacob, then to Josh. 1.5. Joshuah; but yet for the people of 1 Sam. 12.22 Israels sake, which were a lively figure of Christians. And therefore by the Apostle it is extended to all believers: q. d. It cannot be that I should leave thee, or desert thee: Well I may sometimes be beclouded and e∣clipsed from thee, yet I will never leave thee totally. This is the basis of the Apostles confidence; Philip. 1.6. He that hath begun a good work in you, will performe it. When he layeth the foundations of the buildings of grace, he doth not desert his work, but he will stand by it, and carry it on, and that for ever. Hence it is, that Christ, when he takes possession of the soul, he comes to John 14.23. 1 Cor. 3.16.6.19. abide in the soul: And abiding (we know) implieth continuance of residence. He dwels here as in his house, habitation, or temple. 'Twas a pro∣mise of his to abide in Psal. 68.16. Mount Sion for ever; that was for
that periodicall ever of Christ's coming in the flesh. But John 14.23. Christ promiseth absolutely to abide for ever with his people by his spirit. He will be alwayes with us by his word, where∣by he hath made himselfe known in a covenant-way, and by his spirit to regenerate and sanctifie us to eternall life, by his speciall presence and power, preserving and securing us in all the collisions, combustions, confusions that are in the world. God engaging himselfe, Isai. 46.4. That as he hath borne us from the belly, and carried us from the womb; so even to our old age, and hoary hairs, he will carry us. Psal. 73.24. And he will guide us by his counsel, till he do receive us to glory. As the hils stand about Jerusalem, so the Lord stands a∣bout his people from this time forth even for ever. Now we know that God is not as man that he should lie, Num. 23.19. and as the Son of man that he should repent. Hath he said it, and shall he not do it? Hath he spoken it, and shall he not bring it to passe? These and many other promises that lie scattered up and down throughout the Book of God, are far more unalterable then the Lawes of the Medes and Persians; upon which we may safely rest for our eternal security; that Christ will not go down from us, in regard of his special presence. And for the presence of all his graces, that are absolutely necessary unto salvation; However they may come into an eclipse, Isa. 53.10, 11. yet Christ will never finally take them from us; because the gifts and the calling of God are without repentance. Psal. 125.2. That gift of God, whereby he hath set us apart in his own counsell is unalterable and unchangeable; as being bottomed upon his eternall grace, love and mercy. Numb. 13.19. Heaven and earth may change, but our God never changeth upon point of affe∣ction toward his people. Besides, the purchase of Jesus Christ, whereby he hath bought us to be to himselfe a pecu∣liar people, that stands still in force, and shall never be made void, being founded upon that unalterable Isa. 53.10, 11 trans∣action with his Father in the behalfe of us. But I must wave the inlarging of all these. Now for the improvement of all: These points may be improved. 1 By way of discovery: of which before, pag. 17.
2 By way of comfort, to every one of you, to whom this sun hath arisen, and the day-star hath appeared in your hearts. To you I mean, that can make it out by former discoveries, even to as many as Hos. 3.5. fear his name, fearing him and his goodnesse, or because he hath been good and gracious unto you: Thou that fearest to offend or provoke him (as a dutifull child) a loving Father, because he hath been boun∣tifull to thee, which makes thee to cry out, being solicited to sin, as Joseph did, Gen. 39.9. How shall I do this great wickednesse, and so sin against God? If Christ this true mysticall Sun, bee arisen in thine heart, he will never set in regard of those radicall graces, at least, conferred upon thee. But you say, that Christ will never go down, when once he doth arise to us; but alas, we find the contrary: If Christ be in us, whence then are all these evils upon us; how cometh it to passe that all our comforts are departed, and the love of Jesus Christ seemeth to be gone from our souls? For answer hereof, note, That Christ may be present, though his comforts be absent. The Sun is in the firmament, though he be eclipsed. Comforts are ecilpsed upon a dou∣ble ground. 1. Sometimes in a Prerogative way, when Christ doth with-draw himself from comforting of us; and this eclipse is not much unlike that at the passion of Jesus Christ, an e∣clipse not naturall, but Aquin. 3a q. 44.2. 2da. miraculous: Whither you respect, 1. The durance; for three whole hours, which no naturall eclipse doth last; because of the greatnesse of the Sun, and the smaleness of the Moon, and the quickness of her motion. 2. The time; Aug. lib. 3. de civ. Dei, cap. 15 in the full of the Moon; because it was then the Jewish Passeover; and Solar eclipses are alwayes confined to the Melancthon. in John 19. milli pag. 867. parte tertii. new of the Moon naturally; which made that Dionysius A∣reopagita. Philosopher to crie out, that either nature, or the God of nature did suffer, at the sight of that eclipse: Though I cannot approve of his observing of the Moons getting be∣tween us, and the Sun. 3. The universality; It was generall, not only in Judea, but in all the world, as is Gerbard. probably conjectured. Whereas no Solar eclipse can be universall in all the world, though it may be totall in one part.
The Eclipse at the suffering of Jesus Christ, was by the inhibition of the beams of it by the God of nature, who, Aquinas in Catanâ. as he can withhold the fire from burning, the water from drowning; so the Sun from shining for a time. Videtur mihi clarissimum mundi lumen retraxisse ra∣dios suos, ne aut pendentem vi∣deret Dominum, & impii blas∣phemantes, luce suâ fruerentur. Hieronym. lib. 4o. in Matthae∣um. Hee puts out seemingly the eye of the world, as being unwilling to behold the wickednesse then committing. Dionys. Arec∣pag. Some have fancied, that God fetched back the Moon at the passion of Christ, in a retrograde way; as he did do the Sun upon the diall of Ahaz: but that seems improbable; for then that eclipse had been naturall, in respect of the Sun, not supernatu∣ral. I rather look upon it as an eclipse in a way of meer prero∣gative, or Melancthon. miracle; and so Christ may withhold all his own rayes and beams of comfort, that none shal look down upon us; for the exercise of the graces which he hath already con∣ferred upon us. 2. Sometimes eclipses spring from naturall causes; as the interposition of the body of the earth; when the Sun and Moon stand diametrally oposite, and the shade of the earth is darted up to her: this causeth the Lunar eclipse. And so when the dense body of the Moon interposeth it selfe be∣tween us and the Sun, it causeth a Solar eclipse. These are the naturall causes of them. And so it is in regard of our spirituall eclipses, when as the condensated clouds of our sins ascend over our heads, and stand as the Moon between us and Christ, presently we come into an eclipse, in regard of our comfort. Your iniquities (as the Prophet saith) se∣perate between you and your God, and your sins Isai. 59.2. hide away his face from you. The Prophet seemeth to make use of eclip∣ticall expressions: for so it is that our sins make our God to Lam. 4.44. hide himselfe under a cloud, that our prayers can∣not come at him. See therefore the cause of the eclipse of thy comforts, it may be some sin will be found, that doth interpose it selfe between thee, and the Sun of all thy com∣forts. If thou findest sin in the wind, remove it away by repen∣tance, that thy comforts may flow down again upon thee. But the Eclipses of my comforts are very terrible and dreadfull; and it may prove prodigious too.
I deny not but it is in spirituall eclipses as in the eclipses of the Sun. They are 1. Very dreadfull in themselves, when totall, though our God would not have his people dismayed at them; Jerem. 10.2. Learn ye not the way of the heathen, neither be ye dismayed at the signes of heaven, for the heathen are dismayed at them. If God doth eclipse our comforts, he would not have us to sorrow, as men without hope; he biddeth us to have pati∣ence, and telleth us, though heavinesse cometh at night, yet joy will come in the morning. Yet 2 They are seldome prodigious. I have read indeed that Solar eclipses have had sometimes judgements seemingly to bring up the rear of them; and hence some have not stuck to father them upon the eclipses: Groundlesly, as 1 Famine, as that foretold by Acts 11. Agabus, is pretended by some to be ushered in with an horrible eclipse, if we be∣lieve Historians, Dion. which famine continued for five years, and the prices of all things came to be increased eight times more then ordinarily. 2 Captivity; Alsted. Chron. pag. 54. as that into Babylon: And some deem the ruine of the Jews was portended by that horrid, mira∣culous eclipse at the death of Jesus Christ. 3 Pestilence; as that great eclipse in the first Pelopones∣sian warre; when as the whole body of the Sun was almost darkned, so that many stars by day were seen of divers, and which is reputed by some to have ushered in that grie∣vous Attique plague, (whereof scarce the like) whereby A∣thens was almost quite destroyed; Thucid. lib. 2. pag. 117. 127. &c. and that great pestilence, which did miserably afflict all Germany and France, in the year, 1093. 4 Earthquakes: As that horrid Eclipse in anno mundi, 3733. When the earth was shook 57 times in one year, af∣ter such a prodigious defect of the Sun, And that in Gordi∣an's time, Julius Capito∣linus in vita Gordiani ter∣tit. pag. 161. anno Christi, 237. wherein many cities were rui∣ned, and many men lost their lives, when day was turned into night, and men could not see any thing without candle-light. 5 Persecutions: as that stirred up by Antiochus Epi∣phanes,
and that by Antichrist against John Husse, and Jerom. of Prague, when the Papists did confirme that hellish do∣ctrine, that Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks. Alsted. Chron. pag. 61. And when the darknesse was so horrid, that the birds fell down dead upon the ground. 6 Yea abundance of errours and blasphemies: as Aria∣nisme in Constantius's time, abounding after that eclipse; and that sad controversie about image-worship, between the Eastern and Western Churches, was fained by some to have been ushered in by an eclipse of the Sun. Eginhard. in vitâ Caroli magni. Apparuit per septem dies macula nigri coloris, &c. And all that dark∣ning of Gospel light, under all those successive Popes, seemed to some ushered in by that great eclipse, preceding the death of Charles the Great; after which, the Sun seemingly wore a black patch seven dayes successively, if we may credit it. 7 Wars; which sometimes have proved very bloudy; as that of Darius, when routed by Miltiades, and after by A∣lexander, where he lost 90000 of his men in one pitched battle; and that of Xerxes in two remarkable battels also. It cannot be denied but these have been the fore-runners sometimes, yet we cannot justly stile them the causes of these great judgements. But 1 When such like judgements at any time befall us Chri∣stians, they are more to be imputed to the conjunction of our sins, then to the conjunction of the Planets. And one dis∣criminating difference of Christians from heathens, is to look to the procuring cause of all; viz. sin: rather then to these supposed discoveries of the wrath of God. 2. I observe upon a just compute, Nam experien∣tia testatur, vi∣sis eclipsibus, saepe fertilissi∣mos, saluberri∣mos & exopta∣tissimos subse∣quutos fuisse annos. Alted. Encyclopaed. Vranoscop. par. 2. cap. 12. Reg. 10. bottomed upon the expe∣rience of a learned man, sometimes after eclipses, there have the most fruitfull, healthfull, and most desirable times fol∣lowed. And yet I take not upon me to determine what is in the womb of providence. 3 The world hath had as grievous famines, captivities, pestilences, earthquakes, persecutions, errours, wars without them, as ever it had with them; how then can they truely be fathered on them? 4 I have read, that Hannibal had the beginning of his
victories ushered in by one eclipse, and his totall and finall ruine by another: so that nothing certaine can bee con∣cluded. 5 The face of the heavens was never the same exactly ten dayes, no not two dayes together since the Creation; and how can there be any Cum experi∣entia sit saepe expertorum, & caedem constella∣tiones & revo∣lutiones, nun∣quam bis rever∣tuntur, nedum saepiùs, (ut o∣portuit) si cer∣tè inde regulae colligendae es∣sent, icus Mirandula: contra Astrolo∣gos. experimentall knowledge by this? 6 Most of the former judgements, cannot with the least colour of probability, be imputed to those eclipses: For that famine whereof Agabus prophesied, began before the eclipse, though it continued after. And the captivity of Judah did betide them seven years after that eclipse which which was fore-told by Thales Misesius. And the ruine of the Jewes (if at all) was portended not by a naturall, but a miraculous eclipse, as formerly I made out: for their ruine befell them above five and thirty years after the horrid eclipse in Christ's time, which is far beyond the mo∣dern account of our star-gazers, Lilly. Annus Tenebrosus. who confine the operating of any Solar eclipse to so many years as the hours are, in which it is eclipsed; which cannot naturally exceed three at most. And for wars; how many eclipses did betide c this Land, from the yeare one thousand five hundred and sixty, unto the year one thousand six hundred and twen∣ty? and yet how few were our wars in those times? 7 To intaile any of those former judgements upon e∣clipses, is meerly heathenish; or to look upon them as any way ominous, or prodigious; Jerem. 10.2. It being only the way of the heathen, and therefore not to be appoved of by any Christian: As when that Cleombrotus. Generall saw the . Herodor. lib. 9. pag. 516. Sun eclipsed, being at sacrifice, he presently draweth off all his forces, and would engage himselfe no further. The like might be instanced in many others. But so the doubt formerly urged. 2 However things may succeed after naturall and fir∣mamentary eclipses, cannot be determined by man; yet we have cause to look upon the malignity ( Suppositio nihil ponit. if there be any) of all eclipses to be from the malignity of our sins, when any bad consequences follow: if that the passion of the Micro∣cosme succeedeth the passion of the Macro-cosme; not because
of the malignant aspect of the stars, but because of the ma∣lignant nature of our iniquities. This I must needs assert, that as after the darkest night, followeth commonly the clearest day; so after the eclipsings of Gods countenance for a moment, commonly follow the influences of greatest mer∣cies. Saints (I am sure) have found it so by experience, af∣ter all these hidings of God. Psal. 30.5. It is for a moment that his wrath continueth, but with everlasting mercies that he doth frequently break in upon his people. Eclipses Solar do never exceed three hours, and the eclipses of the coun∣tenance of Jesus Christ, do seldome continue so long in the totall darknesse of them, but some promises, as so many stars, will appear unto them. But my infirmities do most of all discover them∣selves, when Jesus Christ doth eclipse himselfe from me? What I now speak, I shall not speak to palliat any mans sin. Yet we know that the spots of the Moon do ne∣ver so much appear, as in her eclipses. Then all may see that her parts are not equally condensated; yet in this case my advise is to humble thy selfe for these infirmities; and if thou be in Christ, thou mayest be then confident that thou hast Jesus Christ with the Father, to be an Advocate for thee, if thou be a penitent believer. And Psal. 37.24. that though thou fall (by infirmities) thou shalt not utterly be cast down; Vide Mollerum. For the Lord will uphold thee with his hand; which may be expounded not onely of falling into afflictions, but in∣firmities. But this troubleth me; never did any meet with such eclipsing of comforts, as I meet withall. But how canst thou tell that? A man may know the continuance of his owne, hardly of anothers paine. I conceive Alsted. En∣cyclo. lib. 11. Ʋranoscop. par. 2. cap. 12. reg. 4. there have been as many eclipses in former ages, as in these later times: though they never were recorded, or so much observed. And Saints doubtlesse in former times did some of them meet with the same, even as thou mee∣test withall this day. It is an observation by some, that the same eclipses do never return again, and that because
the face of the heavens altereth daily. Coeli motus in∣ter se sunt in∣commensurabi∣les. Nec un∣quam Phaeno∣mena, eodem prorsus modo re∣currere possunt. Alst. lib. & cap. quo supra. reg. 7. Which however it may hold true in naturals, yet it holdeth not true in spi∣rituals; because we know the same afflictions that we meet withall, our brethren that have been in the world, have met withall. 1 Pet. 5.9. Nothing hath happened to thee, but hath hap∣pened to others thy fellow-members before thee. The same Sun eclipsed in one way to some in one time, hath been e∣clipsed often in regard of other places. How often are men in India and Africa robbed of the light of the Sun by eclipses, when we our selves in England do enjoy the full benefit of it? And on the contrary. Thou art not therefore able to judge what others have met withall. But the eclipses of my comforts are very long and frequent. The eclipses of the Sun are longer, while the Moon standeth longer directly between us and it; And the shorter, the sooner the Moone is removed from between us and it. The longer sin continueth unrepented of after commissi∣on, the eclipse is like to be longer; and the sooner repen∣tantance followeth to remove sin, the shorter time, in all probability, it will continue. And for the frequency of thine eclipses; Some take upon them to determine, how often eclipses may happen to these two great Luminaries in a years space, viz. that there may be five, or thereabout, and not above six; Alsted. Ency∣clopaed. lib 11. Ʋranoscop. part 2. reg. 6. And they observe also that there is no year that hath not some eclipses, albeit they do not ap∣pear to us. Spirituall eclipses may return often, and yet no oftener then they have to others before us. But for thee, that art subject to these spirituall eclipses; I would offer these few things by way of direction, and so conclude. Of direction to thee in this estate. 1. See what it is that doth interpose it selfe between thee and Jesus Christ. In all probability, some sin or other. When Joseph's brethren had sold him, God at the last drawes a cloud between him and them, eclipseth his favour, startling their consciences, and then they conclude, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, Gen. 41.11. in that we saw the an∣guish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear: therefore is this distresse come upon us. Or, as Reuben saith plainely unto them, Therefore, Gen. 41.22. be∣hold also his blood is required. When conscience is awakened, then will the cloud appear more thick unto thee. 2. Take notice of the magnitude of thy sin by the greatnesse of thy eclipse. They are the e∣clipses of the Sunne and Moone, that shew both their greatnesse, and the greatnesse of the earth also: When David was under the eclipse, how doth he then bewaile the magnitude of his sin, as the procuring cause of it. My sin is ever before mee. And, Against thee, Psal. 51.3, 4, 5. thee onely have I sinned thus hainously. And hee runs back to Originall sinne, to see if that had not contributed something to that grand eclipse that was upon him: Behold, Psal. 51.6. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sinne did my Mo∣ther conceive mee. Men knowing, that it is the great∣nesse of the plaister, that may shew the great∣nesse of the wound: and the greatnesse of the eclipsings of God's favour may shew thee the great∣nesse of the sin, that is upon thee. 3. Let the Sight of thy Sin, and it's magni∣tude, drive thee unto repentance, which is the readiest way to bring thee out of thine eclip∣sed estate, and condition: Job 42.6. When Job was brought penitentially to abhorre himself in dust and ashes, how quickly did hee finde the flow∣ings downe of love upon him? And was it not so with David? How quickly did hee heare of joy and gladnesse, so that the bones that God had broken doe begin to rejoyce, after such time as he seriously repented. 4. Give thy selfe wholly to prayer. Prayer will not draw the firmamentary Sun out of the eclipse one moment the sooner; no more then the Romans beating of brasse pans, and lifting up their lighted torches
towards the Moone, Plutarch. in Aemilio. would draw her any whit the speedier out of the eclipse: Yet it may draw this super-coelestiall Sun much sooner out of it. When it came to that, Lord, in trouble they have visited thee, they have poured out a prayer while thy chastisement was upon them, Jonah 2.2. & 4.4. how quickly then doth this mysticall Sunne shine in upon them? And then they conclude, Thy dead men shall live, &c. Isai. 50.10. When Jonah was in the belly of the Whale, hee looketh unto the Lord, and his prayer cometh to his holy Temple. How quickly then doth mer∣cy come in to him? The penitent soule that goeth to God in the name of Jesus Christ, with a Bee not farre from mee, for trouble is near, or upon mee, may confidently expect, that comfort will not be long in coming. 5. Waite still on God. Sweet is the counsell of God himself, and exceeding cordiall, Who is among you that feareth the Lord, — that walketh in darknesse (i. e. Isai 30.18, 19. that hath his Sun eclipsed,) and hath no light; Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God: Paralell is that declaration, Our God waiteth to bee gracious unto his. A grand conde∣scention, for the Creatour to wait upon the crea∣ture! And he will bee gracious to thee, when he hears thy cry. He can cause light to rise out of most obscure darknesse. Psal. 112.4. Gen. 15.17. When the Sun went down in A∣braham's time, wee read expresly once, there was a great darknesse, and a smoaking furnace; and yet then God came in with a burning lamp among the pieces, i. e. emblematically, his people: God hath limited our eclipses, not onely firmamentary, but spirituall; not onely for hours, but for mo∣ments: And he waiteth still to be gracious to them that humbly wait upon him their God. 6. Keep out of the ecliptick line, when once thou art come out of it: Providentiall motions
bring on Solar and Lunar Eclipses: but selfe-sinfull motions bring on our spirituall Eclipses. If after thou are eluctated out of one, thou fallest into a∣nother again; Conscience will twit thee, Jer. 2.17. Hast not thou procured this to thy selfe? But if thou care∣fully wait upon God, and keep thy self from sin; thou shalt always find this text to be verified, That Christ this Sun of Righteousnesse will never go down to thee: He will never remove out of the Horizon of thy soule: Though in a prerogative way he may eclipse himselfe, yet thou shalt find that thy Sun will not any more go down from thee. FINIS. ERRATA. Pag. 23. line 1. for Apostolicall, read Apostatical. p. 30. l. 32. for so, r. to.
