B2707bA R228092 99900070 136239
THE BOOK OF THE REVELATION PARAPHRASED; WITH ANNOTATIONS ON EACH CHAPTER. Whereby it is made plain to the meanest Capacity. DAN. XII. 4. —Many shall run, to and fro, and Knowledg shall be increased. HAB. II. 2. —Write the Vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may run that readeth it. LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCXCIII.
THE PREFACE. THere is scarce any part of Holy Writ, which hath met with a more severe entertainment in the World, than this Sacred Book: For although it hath evident Characters of its Divine Authority, and more Humane Testimony, than any other Book of the New Testament; yet upon the increase of the Millenary Controversies in the Church; it was first called in question, and then boldly, and impiously rejected, by that party, whose Sentiments it oppposed, until they had found out a way of reconciling it unto them. Into such extravagancies will immoderate opposition transport men, and a fond Love, and heady Zeal for private Fancies and Opinions! Neither have those who have endeavoured to illustrate, and clear the difficulties of this Mysterious Book, met with less gentle usage in these latter ages, especi∣ally
from those of our own Nation; but have been commonly represented as Frantick Zealots, and Crazed Enthusiasts; or where such Characters could not be fastned on them; they have been ge∣nerally depressed in the World, if their Sentiments proved contrary to what was most prevailing in it; to the great discouragement of inquisitive Persons, and to the mighty hindrance of Truth, and Knowledg; which never thrive better than under a gentle, and moderate freedom. And therefore, I cannot but regret (although it be to the Dishonour of my own Nation) the hard fate of those two excellent Persons, Mr. Potter and Mr. Mede; the former of whom, although ad∣mirably skilled in many abstruse parts of Learn∣ing, yet lived, and dyed in an obscure retirement, in a remote corner of the Land; whilst the other (the Ornament of our Church, and of the Age he lived in) was never able so much as to keep a Horse for Health, not State, which was the heighth of his ambition. And I wish I could say, that we were grown more favourable to such disquisiti∣ons; that so a considerable person, of deep Thought, and of great insight into Mysterious Truths, (upon whose Hypothesis the following In∣terpretation is chiefly grounded, after much doubt, and tryal of it) might not be permitted to struggle with adversity, and lie under the depressing cir∣cumstances
of Restraint. But, alas, I fear that (like the Apostle Peter,Luke 9.33. when he desired the continuance of the Glory of Christ's transgfiurati∣on, upon this Earth,) we know not what we say, when we wish that such men had met with greater ad∣vantages in the World, as the present state of it is; and that we ought not to seekJerem 45. great things for our selves, or others, whilst the Church is in a Sack-cloath State, and Condition; but that our Souls are to be suited to God's Dispensations, and we are not to aim at high things, in the times of pub∣lick calamities. And whosoever makes this use of privacy, and adversity; may sooner meet with Divine Visitations, and comforts in the most ob∣scure corner; and with Spiritual Illuminations in a Patmos, or a Prison; than amidst the greatest af∣fluence of the enjoyments of this World; and all the advantages of great Parts, many Books, and much Learning; which too often swell the mind, and puff up, more than edifie; whereas the chief qualifications (next to Prayer, and the Divine assist∣ance) to the attaining to Knowledg in this, or any other part of Scripture, are Humility, Industry, and Patience in searching; and a ready submission to
Convictions, although they prove contrary to our former thoughts, and our present interest. For great application of Mind, is necessary to search into the bottom of Mysterious Truths; and a man who would understand the Will of God in this Prophecy; must during the Study of it, re∣nounce Parties, and Prejudices; and divest him∣self of his former Principles, although never so deeply rooted, and never so seemindy rational; and closely follow that Sense, which appears to be the meaning of the Holy Spirit. For God's Thoughts, are not as our Thoughts; and men of the greatest strength of Reason, when they happen up∣on false Principles, and too strictly adhere to them, are of all others the most irreclaimable. It were easy to shew that Alcasar (who spent twenty Years in the Study of this Prophecy) Ribera, and other very Learned, and Judicious Men amongst the Romanists, had scarcely missed of many great Truths, if they had not been of that Communi∣on; and that several truly great and good Men among the Protestants, were misled by a too fond respect for some private Principles: Such as were, the impossibility that so gross an Idolatry, and so Universal an Apostasy, as is supposed in this Pro∣phecy; should ever be permitted to overspread the Face of the Visible Church, which yet is supposed should actually come to pass towards the
end of the Word, by Ribera,Viegas, Victorinus, and most of the Ancient Fathers, Alcas. pag. 20. and other learn∣ed Papists, chiefly upon the evidence which this Book afforded them: And such also was their opinion of the necessity of an uninterrupted Suc∣cession in every Church; and the impossibility of deriving it from one which was formally Idola∣trous; together with a greater Love for the out∣ward Peace, Unity, and Prosperity of the Church; than it is capable of, during this imperfect State; in which they seem to have rested, without ex∣pecting one of a different Nature: Which seem to be the chief prejudices, upon which, Grotius, Mr. Thorndick, Dr. Hammond, and others, espoused a groundless, narrow, and inconsistent Hypothesis, contrary to the common Doctrine of Protestants, and of the Churches of which they were Mem∣bers, and to the Scope, and genuine sense of the words of this, and other Prophetical Books of Scripture; as hath been sufficiently shewn by Dr. Moor, Dr. Cressener, and several Divines of Fo∣reign Churches: Whereas Mr. Mede seems to have been rewarded by God, with the best grounded, the most consequential, and the most comprehen∣sive Hypothesis of any other; for his great freedom
of Mind, impartial Search, and universal Cha∣rity; which were joyned in him, with a rare, and uncommon mixture, of slowness, and yet large∣ness of thought. I am not ignorant, that many excellent persons, who have shaken off the fetters of Prejudice, and Education; and have too great Souls to he confined within the narrow com∣pass of a Party, or a private Interest; are yet very a verse to the Writings of those, who offer at the Interpretation of Prophetical Scripture, if their sentiments seem to look with a too close, and threatning Aspect upon the Age they live in: be∣cause of the frequent falsity of such pretences; and the ill influence they may have (especially at some times, and seasons) upon the publick peace of Church and State. And indeed, they are not to be blamed for being cautious, and watchful over such Pretenders; especially at a time, and in a Nation so prone to Enthusiasm; and so easily transported into irregular Practises, upon any new, or unusual Occurrence. But although due cau∣tion be commendable; yet a settled aversion to, or a careless neglect of searching into Scripture Prophecies, may be of as ill effect to the Publick, as the Confidence of false Pretenders to the In∣terpretation of them, or the rashness of the giddy Multitude can possibly be: And I cannot see what excuse Learned Men can have, for not weighing
and considering, what is offered from Scripture, History and Reason, towards the clearing up of that Prophecy, to the Study of which, the reward of Blessedness is promised in it. Rashness, and ground∣less Confidence, and pretences to immediate Im∣pulses, when not agreeable to Scripture, or Rea∣son, are indeed to be Despised; and it is fit that even those who propagate Truths after a Turbulent and Zelotick manner, should be restrained; but when things, which may seem something strange, and uncommon, are offered by Men of Piety, and Learning, although with an Air of some more than ordinary assurance; it is very commenda∣ble to search into the grounds of them; and not wholly to slight them, although there may be a mixture of Frailty and Error in them: For God doth not now ordinarily assist after an infallible manner; and sometimes permitted even his Pro∣phets1 Sam. 16.6. 2 Sam. 7.3. 2 Kings 4.27. to Err, when their desires were too ea∣ger, and their approbation even of a good design too hasty, and they spake as Men, not as Prophets. Enthusiasm, which arises from an overheated Imagination, is indeed a dangerous Disease of the Soul; and it is, I must confess, something diffi∣cult
for the best, and wisest Men, to avoid all taint, and infection of it, whilst they are too intent upon the Study of Prophetical Scripture; especially of those parts of it, in which God (who hath afforded us in Scripture, suitable matter for the ex∣ercise of all our Intellectual Capacities) has con∣descended to the Fancy, and Imagination of Man∣kind; and has entertaired them (as he hath done in this Book, if I may so speak) with a Divine Opera, representing the greatest transactions belong∣ing to his Church, in Sacred Emblems, and Hiero∣glyphicks. Upon which consideration, cre hath been taken, that no interpretation should be in∣serted into the Paraphrase upon the Text, which was not thought to be justly grounded upon the Scriptures quoted in it; and bare Imagination hath not been in the least indulged, but in the Annotati∣ons; where it is Lawful to Exspatiate, to propose conjectures to the Learned World, and to give the raines to Fancy, but under the curb, and restraints of Reason, and Prudence. But although Enthu∣siasm (which is a false pretence to extraordinary Impulses, and Inspirations from God) be very pernicious to the Souls of Private Persons, as well as to the Publick; yet it is certainly of very ill consequence, rashly to reject every thing as Enthu∣siastick; in the performance of which, good, sober, and judicious persons, profess themselves to have
found sometimes more than ordinary assistance, upon the due use of proper means: Because it tends to the disparagement of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; encourages Men in a Jejune, dry formality of Religion, without inward Life, and Spirit; and robs them of much of that Joy, and Comfort, they might otherwise find, in hearkning what God the Lord will say unto them, by bringing na∣tural, and revealed Truths into their Minds, and by opening, and awakening their Ears to Discipline, and Instruction; for God speaketh once, yea, twice, but man perceiveth it not. For let Men of narrow Souls, or those who have accustomed themselves only to dry Reasoning, think what they will; it is evi∣dent enough from some Mens Experience, and from the very Spirit, and Majesty which appears in their Discourses; that they are raised some∣times above themselves; and are afforded a clearer, and larger prospect, of useful, great, and mo∣mentous Truths, than their Faculties do ordina∣rily arrive to; or could have reached, without Divine Assistance, And extraordinary Truths, are not only to be expected from those, who have an happy Concurrence of all the Endowments which compleat a Great Genius; but are frequent∣ly bestowed upon men of meaner abilities; such Oar being often found amidst much Dross, and many Imperfections, especially of Style, and o∣ther
Ornaments, which the World too much va∣lues, and unreasonably dotes upon: God for the Exaltation of free Grace, and that men might not Glory in themselves, and attribute things to their own Skill; sometimes making use of the foolish, weak, and base things of the World; to confound the Wise, the Mighty, and most valuable things in the esteem of Men. And therefore, I hope, that men of Wit, and Natural Accomplishments; will not disdain to look into Authors, whose way of ma∣nagement may at first sight promise little; much less, rashly despise great Truths, for not being cloathed in a modish Dress: For many men, who have true, and just Thoughts of things, are very unhappy in expressing them; and they who much Study the Prophetical Writers (whose Style, as the ingenious Theorist of the Earth truly observes, is rather Bold, and Noble, than Just) will contract a swelling, obscure, and Metaphorical Style; which, elevated Minds, and even Plato himself, could not avoid; nor the generality of the firstPlutarch, . Philoso∣phers; who are observed to have admitted a Di∣vine Principle into their Philosophy (the want of which is an unpardonable fault in Aristotle, and o∣thers) as if an uncommon, and freer Style, were
the effect of Noble, and Divine Thoughts; and a too close, and jejune one, were the sign of a narrow and an Atheistical Disposition. But whatsoever may be thougnt of the Inter∣preters of this Prophecy; the Prophecy it self is certainly worthy the utmost thoughts of all Pious, Learned, and Ingenious Persons; whose pains will be sufficiently rewarded, by the plea∣sure, Spiritual Profit, and Advantages they will reap from it. For what can afford greater plea∣sure to Pious Minds, than to have a view in lively Emblems, of the Throne of the Majesty of tne great God; and to see his Glory, and Goodness pass before them, in Mystical representations of his At∣tributes, of the Mystery of our Redemption, and the Glorious Kingdom of Christ, the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World? Who can forbear breaking forth into Praises, and Thanks∣givings, upon reading the Songs of Victory, which the blessed Spirits sing before the Throne or God, at the several Exaltations, and Triumphs of Christ's Kingdom? And who is so in Love with this present World, as not to wish that he were Dissolved, that he might be with Christ in his holy MountChap. 14. 1.? And that even this Earth, and Hea∣vens
might meit and pass away (although he himself should suffer Loss thereby, and be saved, but so as by Fire) that he might be with Christ, and the blessed Saints, in a New World, wherein Righteousness shall dwell? What more grateful Entertainment for an Ingenious Mind; than to have a prospect of all the great Transactions of the World since Christ's Resurrection, represented as in Scenes shifted by the Ministry of Angels, at each great change upon the Stage of this World? For this Book is a Divine Drama, full of holy Art, and sacred Ornaments, taken from Prophetick Symbols, and Eastern Hiero∣glyphicks; into which the Holy Spirit hath trans∣ferred most of the Beauties, Excellencies, and Magnificence of the Old Testamens; and the great∣est part of the Types, and Figures of the Law; the Throne of God, and the Kingdom of Christ, being the True Tabernacle, of which Moses saw the Pattern in the Mount. And the Art observed in it, is very admirable, and much like that of a true, and just Poem; the design of it, being one great Action, viz. The Kingdom of Christ, to which all the lesser Actions are Subservient as to one great End; which is carried on after a delightful, as well as an Instructive manner, by Descriptions, Narrations, a Chorus of Angels and blessed Spi∣rits, and by Christ himself speaking on great oc∣casions; as by so many Episodical Ornaments. And
may God inspire some Pious and Devout Soul, with a Poetical Spirit, suitable to the greatnest of the Subject; with a Spirit like that which came from him upon his Servants David, and Solomon, when in Divine Raptures they set forth the glories of his Kingdom; for the Subject well deserves an inspir∣ed Pen, and will outlive all which have been hi∣therto undertaken, as affording the most proper matter for the Devotion and Contemplation of the New World; and therefore may be justly recommended to all Ingenious Persons, as worthy their most serious Thoughts, and pious Meditati∣ons. Ribera (a learned Romanist) resembles this Pro∣phecy to a vast Ocean full of Deep Gulphs, re∣ceiving, and swallowing up all Human Wisdom; and the Metaphor, although something bold, hath much of Truth in it; there being few of the Li∣beral Arts, and Scienes, which the Eternal Word, the Wisdom of God, hath not made use of in it; to exercise the understanding of those who have Spiritual Wisdom, and to confound the Wisdom of those who are wise in their own conceits. Here the Sacred Orator may find the most Magnificent Idea's of Divine things; and the most lively Images of what can most effectually raise Admiration, Love and Fear, the most prevailing Passions of Mankind; viz. the Glory of God, and of Christ's
Kingdom; and the horror and dread of the Punishments denounced, and executed in it: And all this expressed in a StyleStylus five Structura Orationis, qualis nunquam à Mortalibus usurpata fuit, nec apud quenquam Humanum Auctorem Extat.  hic vides non Humanam. Cotton. apud Poli Syn. more than Human; whereby some of the wisest and best of all Ages, have been induced to search into it for the Provi∣dential Fate of God's Church; and to admire and acknowledg its profound depth, and Divine Au∣thority, (as that great Critick,Euseb. Hist. Eccles. 7.25. Dionysius Alexan∣drinus did) even when they professed that they could not fathom the meaning of it; which is no slight Argument of the peculiar Majesty, and Excellen- of this Book. Neither let nice VVits be offend∣ed at the Paronomastical Allusions may he found in it; for they are frequent inVid. Maimonid Duct. Dubit. 2.43. Gen 9, 27.49, 8, 16, 19. Jerem. 1.11, 12. Dan. 5.25.—29. Zephan. 2.4. and the Notes on Chap. 2. 1, 3. Scripture (as they know who have skill in the Original Languages) and were much in use in the Eastern Nations. Those who have skill in History, and Chronology, may here exercise it, with great Delight and Satis∣faction; and every mind that hath Wisdom (whether it be in Numbers, Geometry, Architecture, Colours, Pre∣cious
Stones, Meteors, or any other parts of Knowledge here hinted at, or alluded to) ought to contribute their skill to it, For united Endea∣vours best promote Knowledge; and God him∣self usually joynedExod. 31.2, 3, 6. 36, 1, 2. Eccles. 4.9. Mark 6.7. 1 Cor. 12.8. many together, Two at least, in every great, and Weighty Work: He gave Aholiab to Bezaleel; joyned Aaron to Moses; and Christ sent forth his Disciples by Two, and Two; and raised up Two Witnesses, to testify to the Truths of this Prophecy. And therefore, I cannot but earnestly entreat all that are Wise-hearted, in whose Hearts God hath put Wisdom, and skill in Arts (for they are from him, and may thereby be Sanctifi∣ed) to stir up the Gifts which are in them, and to joyn heartily, and unanimously together, for the ser∣vice of the approaching Sanctuary, and Kingdom of Christ; for the work hath been long retard∣ed by the noise of1 Kings 6.7. Axes and Hammers, that is, by Divisions, and Contentions amongst Christi∣ans which ought not to be heard in the Building of God's House; whatsoever hath been hitherto permitted, under imperfect, and lower Dispensa∣tions.
But further; if the Hypothesis here advanced prove true; and this Book be found to contain the great Events belonging to the Christian Church, from the Reformation to the End of Time, and to the Kingdoms of this World, as they have a relation to it; will it not af∣ford a most cogent, and most illustrious Proof for the Being of a God, and a Providence; and for the Divine Authority of the Scriptures; and most effectually silence, the little, and unreason∣able Cavils of Atheists, and Antiscripturists? For how could so long a Series, and so great a variety of Events, depending on rational Instruments, and free Agents, seemingly independent on each other, and yet all tending to One End, be revealed so long before their accomplishment; but by One Infinite Mind, or Understanding, com∣prehending all things at one View, and over∣ruling, and conducting them all to One End? What but infinite Mind, and Wisdom could fore∣see, and so exactly describe the OrderlySee Chap. 6. Suc∣cession of the Roman Emperours, by the very particular Countries from which they came, and the great occurrences which happened under them; or so exactlySee Chap. 2, 10 6, 9-17. foretell the very Period
of the Persecution under Dioclesian; and at so long a distance shew the Souls of the Martyrs un∣der the Altar, and the fatal overthrow of Paganism? What else but the Eternal Knowledg, could fore∣tel, and that so particularly, in exact agree∣ment with all History; the Destruction of the Roman Empire, and theSee Chap 8. Various Fate of Rome, so often taken and retaken; so often Burnt, and yet not utterly Consumed? What else but Wisdom it self, could so livelilySee Chap. 9. represent the innumerable swarms of Tormenting Saracens, the Locusts and Scorpions of the Earth; and the mighty inroads of the Turkish Cavalry passing the River Euphrates; and foretel the very manner, and pre∣cise time of their taking Constantinople (which cannot therefore be the Beloved City, as Dr. Ham∣mond supposes) in agreement with the Opini∣ons of the latest, and best Chronologers, after a doubt concerning it? What else could Con∣nect the Saracenick Wo, with the Idolatry of the Chri∣stian Church as a Scourge to it; and foresee, that Mahomet (a Counter-Antichrist to the Papal One) should arrive to a Supremacy in the East; soon after the ChristianSee page 136, 137. Chalifs, or pretended Vicars of Christ, had Usurped one of another Nature in
the West? What butIs. 41, 21-29.44, 6, 7.45, 21. Wisd. 8. 1. that infinite Wisdom which reacheth from one end to another, and doth sweetly Order all things; could thus declare the end from the beginning, and from ancient times, the things which are not yet done; and unite together so many distant Events (in a∣greement with the Prophecies, and Types of the Old Testament, and the Truth of all Profane Histo∣ry) and make them conspire to One End, the Kingdom of his Son? Let the Oracles of the Heathens, shew any thing like this; or the most daring Wit demonstrate (and no less evidence ought to satisfy him of the contrary) how this could otherwise come to pass. And if this Book be of Divine Authoriy; why should the Divinity of our Saviour be doubted of? Who is expressly calledSee Chap. 1. 8, 14.3, 21.5, 6, &c. 17, 14 19, 9, 10, 12, 13.20, 6, 12.21, 6, 7.22, 6, 13. God in it; receives Divine Worship from Angels and Men; and has the same Attri∣butes given, him with God the Father, and is always represented in it as One with him. For such plain Testimonies ought to outweigh the contrary prejudices, which proceed chiefly from the Im∣perfection of our finite, and limited Understand∣ings, and their utter inability to comprehend an Infinite Being.
But as this Prophecy is Instructive in great Truths, so does it afford satisfaction also in many doubts: For from hence men may learn not to be too much disquieted at great Changes, and Re∣volutions in Churches, and States; and may the more readily be induced to submit to what is not evidently sinful in them; because they are from God; and that all such great Events are some way or other conducive to Christ's Kingdom; God often makeing use of the Sins of Men, to bring to pass the Wise, and Good, but Mysterious Counsels of his Will. And from hence also much may be learnt with relation to the Go∣vernment,Read the Epistes to the Seven Churches, Chap. 2. and 3. And Chapters 5. 6. 7. 10. 13, 18. 21, 10-27. VVorship, and Reformation of the Church, and to the abating of the warm Contentions about them amongst Protestants; for seeing that all Church States are as yet im∣perfect; and, like the Jewish Dispensation, but Temporary Ordinances until the time of the Reforma∣tion in order to the Kingdom of Christ; the best ought to bear with the worst, because they themselves are but Imperfect; and instead of violent Heats, and Animosities, should endea∣vour to shew each other, the Pattern, Form, and Fashion of God's House, the Apostolical Model, fre∣quently mentioned in this Prophecy; that so
they may all (according to the expressions of Ezekiel,Chap. 43. 10-12. in whom there is a Type of Christ's pure Church, whatsoever some triumphant VVriters, may, with scorn enough, have said to the contrary) be ashamed of what they have done, and of their Iniquities, and Deviations from it. And in the mean time, until God shall reveal even this unto them; what should they do, but in obedi∣ence to the Apostolical Precepts; Bear one anothers Burthens; please others rather than themselves; in Honour Prefer one another, do all their things in Cha∣rity; and to edification, and Peace, as well as for Truth, Decency, and Order. And let not any sincere, and conscientious per∣son of the Romish Communion, be offended at some harsh expressions he may find in this Book; for they are no other, then the Holy Spirit makes use of; to give them a true, and just Idea of the de∣formity and odiousness of Idolatry, Cruelty, and Church Tyranny in God's sight; that so they might be the more effectually deterred from them: and to create in the minds of Protestants, a due ab∣horrence of such Practises; by Notions, and Sym∣bols apt to raise a just indignation against them; which have also, by God's Providence, been so deeply imprinted in the minds of the Vulgar, that
all endeavours of some Learned Men to the con∣trary, have been unsuccessful, and sometimes of fatal consequence: and why should men speak peace, where God does not; and give complemen∣tal Names to those, whom the Holy Ghost hath stigmatized, and made infamous? So that if the Romish Church be Idolatrous, Usurping, and Cruel; he bringeth not a railing accusation against it, but speaketh the words of Truth, and Soberness; who applyeth to it the Titles of Beast, Whore, and Anti∣christ. And altho this charge against the Church of Rome, hath been managed by diverse arguments; yet I think by none more successfully than by those which are taken from this Prophecy; which I hope ingenuous Men of that Communion (and many such are there of it) will be pleased to read, and con∣sider; for I dare promise them that they will meet with manyEspecially Chapters 13. and 17. clear, and unexpected Proofs in it; and such as may give them satisfaction; for I can truly say, that I have experienced their efficacy for the removing of some of their Prejudices, which I lay under. As for the present performance, altho I find up∣on a cursory review, some mistakes, and many Im∣perfections in it, which cannot be avoided in a work of so great length, and difficulty; yet I can
assure the Reader that the utmost sincerity hath been used; and all the diligence possible amidst frequent indispositions of Body, and many avoca∣tions. And as for the main gounds upon which the In∣terpretation proceeds; viz. The gradual defecti∣on of the Church, the Antichristian Apostasy, es∣pecially of the Romish Church, and the future glo∣rious Kingdom of Christ; I hope that they have been fully, and plainly proved in their several pla∣cesRead especially Chapters 2. 3. 7. 13. 17. 20. 21. 22.: but other less material, or abstruse things, must take the common Fate of such disquisitions: and all that I shall desire from the Reader is, that he use diligence in search, read the Book throughout, and be true to his Convictions; and then I Hope, Pray, and Believe that he will not miss of Satisfacti∣on; humbly desiring him to remember him in his Prayers, who hath spared no Pains, nor cost in this matter, for his good, God's Glory, and the Promot∣ing of Christ's Kingdom. AMEN. Even so, come Lord Jesus.
THE Argument. THis Book is a Dramatick Prophecy, where∣in is represented as in Visionary Scenes, the great Events belonging to the Church of Christ, from his Resurrection,Chap 1. 10. pag. 11. In Comaedia, sive Tragaedia, nequaquam Spectatur Tempus illud quo Actio datur, sed potius tempus rei ipsius, cujus datur Actio. Alcas. pag. 6. to the Deli∣veryChap. 20. 11. up of his Glorious KingdomChap 1, 7 and Chap. 20. 21. 22. to God, and the Father: Which Kingdom is the chief Action, or End of the Prophecy, to which all the other Actions represented in it are conducive; and the whole is embelished by many accidental Ornaments, as by so many Episodes: As by a
description of theChap. 4. Throne of the Majesty of God; SongsChap. 5. chap. 7. 10, c. 11, 16. c. 12. 10, c. 14, 1. Chap. 15. and 19.1. &c. of Triumph, Praise and Thanks∣giving;Chap. 7. 9-17. pre-representations of Christ's King∣dom; Christ himself, and Angels speaking, voices from Heaven, together with Thundrings, and Lightnings, and frequent Interlocutory passag∣es, too many to be here particularly mentioned. It consists of two TomesSee chap. 4, 1. c. 5, 1. of Prophecy; the formerChap 2. and 3. of which, and the more general one, may be called the Church-Prophecy; the latter,Chap. 5. and more particular, the Book-Prophecy; both reaching from the Resurrection, to the same Pe∣riod of Time; and describing the same events, but after a different manner; the first by SymbolsChap. 2. c. 3. of Churches; the latterSee Chap. 6. 1. &c. by Symbols often taken from the Civil Occurrences of the Roman Empire; and from others relating to the Church as Seated in it; which principally respect the Af∣fairs
of the Church, and Kingdom of Christ; and yet are taken from civil Occurrences, that each event might be the better distinguished, as by so many notable Characters of time. It begins with a generalChap. 1. 1-12. Preface, or Prologue, wherein the EpochChap. 1. 10. of the Prophecy is setled, and theChap. 1. 5, 6, 7. Period of it, the Kingdom of Christ: And it ends with a general Conclusion,Chap. 22. 7-21. or Epilogue relating to some of the great events, but especially to the Vials. Besides the general Preface, there are also two Particular ones; the oneChap. 1. 11.-20. prefixed to the Church-prophecy; in which Christ is represent∣ed in a Priestly and Kingly Habit, as Supreme Lord of the Church; the Epistles are declared to be Mystical, and are ordered to be sent to the Churches and their Angels: The otherChap. 4. and 5. is plac∣ed before the Book-Prophecy, in which the Throne of God is described, the DivineSee page 70. Court of Judicature, which is to pass Sentence upon all
the Actions in the Prophecy, is setled, Christ is declared the Supreme Director of them; and ap∣pearsSee pag. 83. as ready to receive his Kingdom. But because Christ (according to the Mysteri∣ous Agreement betwixt him, and the Father) had promised byDan. 12 7. pag. 83. 87. 112. chap. 10. 6. Oath that the Beast should have his Times; therefore is the Book given into his hands Sealed withChap. 5. and 6. seven Seals, which are as so many stops or delays to it, and the seve∣ral openings of them, as so many removals of obstacles to it, concerning which, see Chap. 6. After the opening of the SixthChap. 6. 12. &c. Seal upon the downfal of Paganism, the Succession of a Christian Emperour, and the advancement of Christ's Church in the Empire; there is given a representationChap. 7. 9-17. of Christ's Kingdom (which, as being the cheif end of this Prophecy, is always kept in view in it) of which the Christian Em∣pire and Church thus advanced were an Emblem. But because the Mystery of Iniquity began then to
increase; thereforeChap. 7. 1-9. Chap. 11. 1. and Chap. 12. are the Servant of God Sealed, the Woman prepares for her Flight into the Wilderness, the Worshippers begin to retire into the Temple, and the Witnesses prepare to put on their Sack-cloath (which Visions are cotempo∣rary, and parallel) and not long after are Perse∣cuted by theChapters 11. c. 12. c. 13. c. 17. Beast, which carries the Wo∣man. A pure Church being Sealed, i. e.See on Chap. 7. 3, 4. Chap. 8. 1.-6. covered, and secured amidst the growing Corruptions, and the SeventhSee on Chap. 7. 3, 4. Chap. 8. 1.-6. Seal being opened at the final Victory over Paganism by Theodosius; there ap∣pear at the opening of that Seal, on the back-sideSee on Chap. 5. 1. of the seventh Roll of the Book, seven Angels, with sevenSee Chap 8. and 9. Trumpets, Symbols of so many Judgments upon the Antichristianizing Church, and Empire. The Judgments of the fourChap. 8. 6-13. first Trumpets were executed by the Northern Nations, which ended in the fall of the Western Emperours, and the Succession of theChap. 9, 1. Chap. 13. and 17. 8-13. Papal Empire;
the FifthChap. 9. 3-12. by the Saracens; and the sixthChap. 9. 12-21. by the Turks, who destroyed the Antichristian Eastern Empire; and still continue as a Wo upon the Western. Quickly after the passing of the Mahometan Wo, which is the second Wo, the Wo of the sixth Trumpet, (before which,Chap. 11. 14. 15. the Witnesses will rise, the ten Kings will hate the VVhore, the Anti∣christian Hierarchy will fall, and there shall be great Conversions) the feventhChap. 11. 12, c. 17, 16. See the Notes on Chap. 18. 21. and last Trum∣pet sounds, out of which there proceed sevenChap. 11. 15. Voices, which are theChap. 14. Voices of the seven Thunders unsealed, (which were sealed at the be∣ginning of the Reformation, described chap 10.) and are as so many preparations to the Blessed Mil∣lenuium; out of the seventhChap. 14.19. See Notes on chap. 14. 2. of which Voices, there issue seven Vials, containing the final Judg∣ments upon Antichristianism, and all the enemies of Christ's Kingdom raised to Judgment; where∣upon a MonumentalSee pag. 329. and chapters 15. 16, 18▪ and 19. Pillar, as it were, is
erected, with this Inscription, It is done; to shew that the Prophecy aims at a certain time of Christ's Victory over his enemies; and of his appearing in Glory, to his Friends and Servants; whereupon also anotner such Inscription is given, chap. 21. 6. After the pouring forth of the seventhChap. 16. 17. Vi∣al, the thousandChapters 20-21. 22. years Kingdom of Christ be∣gins; which being Expired, SatanChap. 20. 3. is loosed for a little space, but the final Judgment comes on; at the end of which, the Kingdom isChap. 20, 11. de∣livered up to God. And here it is to be observed; that because the same things are represented in the Chutch Prophecy, and in the Book Prophecy; that therefore there are many Synchronisms, or Contem∣porary Visions in this Book: And because the King∣dom of Christ, and Antichrist are Opposite; that therefore there are many , or Opposite re∣presentations in it: Of which the Reader is here presented with a general Scheme; the particu∣lars, which are very many, being to be care∣fully observed, and gathered out of the Book it self.
The Church of EphesusChap. 2. 1-8. See pag. 20. 32. is contemporary with the four first Seals, and reaches from the Resurrection, A. D. 33. to the beginning of the Persecution under Dioclesian, A. D. 303. The Church of SmyrnaChap. 2. 8-12. (in which the Sy∣nagogue of Satan arose) is contemporary with the fifth, sixth, and seventh Seal, and lasts until the sounding of the first Trumpet, A. D. 437. The Church of PerganusChap. 2. 1-15. begins to Wit∣ness in Sackcloath at the entrance of the Apostasy, A. D. 437. and is contemporary with the five first Trumpets, and part of the Sixth; and with the progress of the Apostasy, to a Throne, and the slaying of the Antipapal Witnesses, by Excom∣munications and Persecutions, until about the 12th Century, or between A. D. 1100, and 1200. Then arose the Church ofChap. 2. 18. &c. Thyatira, witnes∣ing against the depths of Satanical Corruptions, which continued (during the first Slaying of the VVitnesses, and the progress of the Mahometan
Wo of the sixth TrumpetChap. 10. until the Reformation, A. D. 1517. The Church of Sardis, together with some low appearances of the Philadelphian State (kept under by those of the Synagogue, chap. 3. 9.) are con∣temporary with the Reformation; and are to last, until some more perfect Church State shall ap∣pear; of which (if the CalculationsSee the Notes on Chap. 10. 7. on Chap. 11. 2 11. frequent∣ly mention'd in the following Book, prove true) there will be some more than ordinary appear∣ance about A. D. 1697. when the Beasts Months end. The PhiladelphianChap. 3. 7-13. State, the Church of Thyati∣raChap. 2. 19. in its last works, the undefiledChap. . 4. Names in Sardis, and those also of that State (whom this Prophecy calls Them of the Synagogue, chap. 3. 9. who shall come, and unite themselves to the Church of Philadelphia) carry on the whole series of things (during theSee Chapters 14 Voices and the Vials) from the rise of that Sate, until the Glorious Mil∣lenium; that is, if the Calculations here advanc∣edChap. 3. 1-7.
prove true from A. D. 1697. untilSee Chapters 14. and 16. A. D. 1727. and from 1727, to 1772. After the Millennium; Satan is loosed for a short season; Gog and Magog compass the City, but are destroyed; and all the Enemies of Christ are Judged, and perfectly Subdued; with which the LaodiceanChap. 3 14-22. Chap. 20. State of the Church is cotempo∣rary. But besides these Synchronisms betwixt the Church Prophecy, and the Book Prophecy, it is very ob∣servable that there are very many Visions in the Book Prophecy, which Synchronize one with an∣other, as is frequently observed in the Annotations, of which here is given a short Specimen, referring the Reader to the Book it self for a larger account of them. Synchron. 1. The Seals and many particulars in the twelfth Chapter, are contemporary; as will appear to any one who compares the sixth Chapter with the twelfth.
Synchron. 2. The Barbarous Nations, chap. 8. 7. entring as Gentiles into the outward Court; the Wor∣shippers in the inward Temple; the Witnesses in Sackcloath; and the Church actually flying into the Wilderness, are also contemporary. See Chapters 8. c. 11. c. 12. Synchron. 3. The Beast rising out of the Sea, coming into his Succession, and into his forty two Months, and the ten Kings receiving Power all one Hour with him; are contemporary with the Extinction of the Western Empire upon the Sounding of the Third Trumpet; because when the former Go∣vernment was expired, Another must needs im∣mediately come into Succession. Synchron. 4. The Witnesses lying Dead, and the Woman hid in the Wilderness from the face of the Ser∣pent, are Synchronous.
Synchron. 5. The ending of the two Times, the beginning of Half Time, the Thunders Voices Uttered, and then Sealed, are contemporary. See Chap. 10. Synchron. 6. The full rising of the Witnesses, the Fall of the tenth of the great City, the passing away of the second Wo, and the beginning of the se∣venth Trumpet to sound, are contemporary with the End of the three Days and an Half, of the three Times and Half, and of the 1260 days, and forty two Months, which are in an equal Dura∣tion. Synchron. 7. The seventh Trumpet, the Voices and the Vials; the Judgment on the Whore; the Beast and the False Prophet; the Lamb's Wife making her self ready, are contemporaries.
Synchron. 8. The thousand Years of Sathan Bound; the first Re∣surrection; the Blessed Participation of it; the New Jerusalem, the New Heaven, and New Earth are contemporaries. Synchron. 9. The thousand Years expired; Sathan Loosed; the Gog and Magog are together in time. Synchron. 10. The Fire coming down from Heaven; Sathan's casting into the Lake; the Dead Judged, and with Death cast into the Lake Synchronize; with the White Throne, the Laodicean Saints sitting down with Christ upon it.
The , or Opposites are cheifly these. The Kingdom of Christ, and of his Saints. The Kingdom of Sa∣tan carried on in the fourth, or Roman Monar∣chy; first as Pagan, then as Antichristian. The Church of Ephe∣sus, as Apostolical. The Church of Ephe∣sus having left its first Love, Chap. 2. 4. Smyrna. A Synagogue of Sa∣tan, Chap. 2. 9. Pergamus and Antipas. The Throne of Satan, Balaam, and the Nicolai∣tans, Chap. 2. 13, 14, 15. the false Prophet, Chap. 16, 13. Thyatira. The Depths of Satan, Jezebel, or the false Pro∣phetess, Chap. 2. 20, 14. The undefiled names in Sardis. Those of the Syna∣gogue, Chap. 3. 3, 4, 9. Philadelphia. The Laodicean Luke-warmness.
The Lamb. The Dragon, the Beast, the other Beast with two Horns like a Limb. Chap. 13. 11. The Bride, the Lamb's Wife, chap. 19. 7. The Whore, chap. 17. Christ's sealed ones and witnesses. The Marked Slaves of the Beast, chap. 13. 16. The great City, the Holy Jerusalem, the be∣loved City, the Camp of the Saints, c. 20, 9.21.10. Babylon, the great City reigning over the Kings of the Earth, c. 17. and the City of Gog and Ma∣gog, at the four corners of the Earth, c. 20.8. Twelve, the Apostoli∣cal Number, c. 7.4. Twenty, five, the Anti∣christian name, mark, number, c. 13. 18. Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, chap. 19. 16. The Kings of the Earth, chap. 19. 19. The Armies which come in the Heaven with Christ, c. 19.14. The Armies of the Kings of the Earth, and their Nations, Gog, and Magog, Chap. 19. 15, 19. 20, 8.
ERRATA. PAg. 6. l. 29. read 16. p. 9. l. 5. of the—of this World, p. 13. l. 16. r. denote, p. 14. l. 24. r. full of p. 21. l. 16. r. Rom. 2. p. 27. l. 27. r. Goods, p. 22. l. 32. r. 58. p. 41. l. 8. f. the r. that, p. 47. l. ult. r. 1 Cor. 2. p. 55. l. 26. r. Gospels. p 64. l. 15. blot out, an indifference, p. 66. l, 23. r. wilt, p. 72. l. ult. r. compare, p. 82. l. 21. r. slain, p. 83. l. 30. r. haveing. p. 84. l. 30. f. in the Earth, r. on, p. 85. l. 13. r. 19. l. 23. r, and that because, l. 30. r. brought in, l. 31. r. objects, p. 86. l. 20. r. also as well as, p. 88. l. 10. f. whence, r. where, l. 26. f. his, r. Gods, p. 113. l. 16. f. Psalm. r. Palm. p. 149. l. 3. r. in a Cave, p. 158. l. 3. r. about it, p. 170. l. 25. r. , p. 174. l. 7. r. , p. 191. l. 22. r. much indebted. p. 177. l. 14. r. that it, l. 15. f. that r. the p. 205. l. 7. f. Times r. Time. p. 283. l. 4. r. each of which Heads, p. 300. l. 7. r. Σ. p. 344. l. 20. r. were Types, p. 402. l. 7. r. the Lord God, p. 415. l. 17. insert, see thou do it not, I am, p. 235. blot out these words—A.D. 1507. within ten years of, p. 236. l. 4. r. 1529.
ANNOTATIONS ON THE REVELATION. CHAP. I. The Text. 1 THE Revelation of Jesus Christ [i.e. the Discovery and Ma∣nifestation of Divine Secrets in a Prophetical Vision from Jesus Christ:] which God [the Father] gave unto him [the Great Prophet and Mediatour,] to shew [or make known by Prophetical Symbols and Representations, and actually toSo the word is taken, John 5, 20.14, 8. and in this sense God is said to shew Christ; and he to be Revealed, when he came into the World. exhibit, or pro∣duce the Effect of every Vision in its proper time,] unto his Ser∣vants [i. e. those Eminent and Faithful Christians, especially Mi∣nisters, who dedicate themselves to his Service,] things which must shortly [i. e. suddenly and speedily begin 1 to] come to pass [one after another;] and [or whichAnd is here, according to the Custom of the Hebrew Language, put for the Pro∣noun Relative which.] he [Christ] sent and signified it [i. e. made known the Prophetical Visions of this Book] by his 2 Angel [sometimes one special Angel sent for this purpose, and sometimes another] unto his Servant John.
The Annotations. 1 Thus Grotius, Dr. Hammond, and most Interpreters ex∣pound these Words; this Prophecy containing a Discovery of things which were to come to pass, in a Succession of time one after another: of which it may be very appositely said, That they must come to pass shortly, when they are shortly, to begin to pass into Event; as an Army is said to be coming, when only the Van-Guard begins to appear. With which Interpretation these Words of Dr. Pocock agree (on Joel, pag. 145, 150.) Of those last things, which were to be done, or in doing, to the last of time in this world, St. John, by reason of the certainty of their being fulfilled in due time, saith, that they should be fulfilled, , or shortly come to pass. 2 Michael and Gabriel are employed in Daniel; but in this Prophecy several Angels are made use of, but none by Name; which, together with the Humane Subor∣dinate Ministry, employed under them, are generally call∣ed by the Name of Angel in this Book. From this Verse we may observe the Order of Divine Revelation; which proceeds from God the Father, as the Fountain and Original; and is committed by him to Christ, unto whom all Power is given in the Church: by whom it is sent to his Servants, especially Ministers, by the Ministration of his Angels, who are under him, as their Head and Lord; and his Ministers, to whom the Prophecy is principally directed, are also stiled Angels, from their Ministring to him in this Prophecy, together with the Angels. See on, ver. 20. 2 Who bare record [i. e. hath testified and declared by his Preaching and Sufferings, vers. 9. and in this Book] of [Christ] the Word of God, [John 1.1. Chap. 19.13.] and of the Testimony of Jesus Christ [i. e. the 3 Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.6] and of all things that he saw 4 [concerning Christ while he abode on Earth; and afterwards in this, and the following Visions]
3 Called his Testimony, because it testified of him, decla∣red the Will of God; and was testified unto, or confirmed by his Miracles. 4 Here the Apostle plainly discovers himself to be the Wri∣ter of this Book, from many Characters peculiar unto him∣self; as that he had given Testimony (which is part of the Office of an Apostle in Scripture, Acts 1.8, 22, &c.) unto the Gospel of Christ, and to the Divinity of the Word of God, by his Preaching, and by his Sufferings for it; and that he had delivered many things concerning Christ, of which he had been a peculiar Eye-witness; which are now upon Record in his Gospel, in the like manner of Speech, and way of Assurance, John 1, 14.19, 35. And moreover, this being a Preface to the whole Book of Visions he had already seen, these Words may very well refer unto them. 3 5 Blessed [here and here after] is he that readeth [and expoundeth with diligence and understanding,] and they that hear [with at∣tention] the words of this Prophecy, and keep [in their Minds, observe, and practise] those things which are written therein; for the time [of their beginning to be successively compleated] is at hand [and therefore to be regarded; and the Consideration of it not to be put off unto a further Day, as the Jews were wont to do, Ezek. 12.21-28.] 5 The Divine Authority of the Revelation, the Author of the Book, and the Subject-matter of it, having been deliver∣ed in brief, in the foregoing Verses; St. John here declares the Fruit and Benefit which the Readers and Observers of it shall reap by it; and very probably gives an intimation, That it ought to be read in publick Assemblies; here being mention of one , or Reader; and of many, as it were, assem∣bled to hear him Read, and Interpret, according to the Cu∣stom of the Church. And without doubt, great is the bles∣sing attending the sober Study of this Book; and the due
Observation of the Correspondence betwixt it, and the Events foretold in it, must needs be a matter of extraordinary com∣fort, especially to those who shall be so happy as to live near the Times of its full completion; as Christ told Daniel, chap. 12. 12. And even what is not so fully understood, is never∣theless (according to the Example of Daniel, and of the Bles∣sed Virgin, Luke 2.19, 50, 51.) to be pondered upon, and kept in our Minds, lest we be found wholly ignorant of the great Truths contained in this Book, when the Times of their Consummation appear; and that thereby God may be wrought upon to make known unto us, what we do not understand; seeing he hath declared, That he that seeketh shall find, and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. But chiefly the Blessed∣ness here pronounced belongs to those who practice accord∣ing to the pure and undefiled Rules of Christian Worship gi∣ven in this Prophecy. 4 John to the Seven 6 [Eminent] Churches in Asia, [the Less:] Grace [i. e. the free and undeserved Love and Assistance of God] be un∣to you, and 7 Peace [i. e.] all manner of Prosperity, especially Spiritual] from 8 him [or The] which is, and which was, and which is to come [i. e. the Eternal and Immutable God, Exod. 3.14. who can therefore reveal, and will certainly accomplish all which is here foretold, and which belongs unto his Church, from the beginning unto the end of Time:] and from the 9 Seven Spirits [i. e. the Holy Ghost or Spirit, Zach. 4.2, 6.] which are before his Throne [i. e. is present, and of Counsel with him who sits on the Throne, work∣ing and communicating Graces and Gifts, by its Operations, ac∣cording to his supreme Good Pleasure and Determination.] 6 The Seven Churches particularly mentioned in the 11th Verse, were the most eminent and flourishing of those which were under the peculiar Care and Government of John; up∣on which account they might be very well made choice of by the Holy Spirit, amongst many others, which were then pro∣bably planted in Asia Minor, now called Natolia. Some Tra∣vellers, (particularly the Ingenious Mr. Spoon) have remark∣ed
several Circumstances of their present Condition, an∣swerable to the Judgments denounced against them, in the following Epistles; which may render it something probable that they were immediately directed unto them; although the Arguments brought by Dr. Moor, and others, seem to me to carry with them a full Conviction, of what Grotius confesses, that the seven Asiatick Churches are but a Pattern, and Example of the sevenfold state and quality, successive temper and condition of the Universal Church, from the be∣ginning to the end of it; of which, perhaps (for it is not a thing unusual in Scripture) there may be some intimation in their Names, as Grotius has observed, which might pro∣bably have been made out more clearly, if we had a more par∣ticular account of the ancient History, and circumstances of those Churches; however that they are Mystical, and not bare∣ly Literal Epistles, I shall endeavour to prove by observations drawn from the Text it self, in my following Annotations; and shall not rest upon extrinsecal and more remote Argu∣ments, being sufficiently convinced of the frequent weakness of Reasoning upon such Topicks in these matters. But upon an impartial consideration of all circumstances, I cannot but be of opinion, That these seven Asiatick Churches represent the seven Periods, and Successions of the Ʋniversal Church; which in correspondence to the Creation (a Type of God's Transactions with his Church) is, according to the known Tradition of the Jews, after six thousand years of Labour and Imperfection, to enjoy a seventh of Peace, Holiness, and Perfection; from whence the Pythagoreans, whose Philoso∣phy came from the East, took their Doctrine of the perfection of this Number; which is in Scripture, and particularly in this Prophecy often made use of in what relates to Christ and his Kingdom; and is a perfect number, not upon an Arithmetical account (for the Number Six is the first perfect Arithmetical one) but upon a Mystical; in memory of God's having finished, and perfected his Works on the Seventb day; and of the Sab∣batical
Rest of the Church, in the Seventh Thousand Year of the World, after Six remarkable Periods of it from Christ's Resurrection, of which more hereafter on Chap. 20. 5. How∣soever thus much is certain; That what is contained in these E∣pistles, ought to be duly considered by all Churches; that so they may avoid the Faults therein reprehended, and the Pu∣nishments threatned in them; For what is therein written, is written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the World are come. 7 Peace, especially Spiritual, being the greatest of bles∣sings, is put in Scripture, to denote all manner of Prospe∣rity. 8 The That is; , Jehovah, who is Being it self; for these Words are an Explication of that Sacred Name. See the In∣terpreters on Exod. 3.14. 9 It is the Opinion of Mr. Mede, (Disc. 10.) and of Dr. Hammond, on the place, That by the Seven Spirits are to be understood Seven Angels: But besides that (as Grotius notes on the place) Spirits are distinguished from Angels in the Fifth Chapter; and that Chap. 4. 5. they are called the Seven Spirits of God; which is a Title not given to Angels in Scripture: it is not easily accountable, why Angels should be placed in the same rank, with the Persons of the Trinity, and that be∣fore the Son; and that Grace should be Prayed, and Wish∣ed for from them, when all good Gifts are said, by the Apo∣stle James, (Chap. 1. 17.) to come from above, from the Father of Lights; and there being no form of a Salutation, or Bles∣sing in Scripture in the name of a meer Angel (for the Angel- Gen. 48.15.6. is Christ, and not a created Angel) such an Inter∣pretation of these Words would give a greater Encouragement to Creature-Worship, than can be imagined to have been gi∣ven in this Prophecy, which is so severe against all Idolatry, and in which this very Apostle was twice reprehended for of∣fering to give Worship to an Angel. And therefore there be∣ing no necessity of interpreting the words in this Sense, it is
certainly the safest, and the truest way, in my Opinion, to understand them concerning the Holy Spirit, represented here by Seven Spirits, in respect of his Various, but Perfect Ope∣rations and Gifts (denoted by Seven, the Number of Perfe∣ction, as we have already noted, and shall declare more fully hereafter) to the Ʋniversal Church, in the Sevenfold successive State of it. Whereupon Zach. 4. the Seven Lamps at the 2d Verse, are at the 6th Verse said to be by God's Spirit; That is, from the Plenitude of the Holy Spirit, which in those Se∣ven Lamps diffused its Mighty and Perfect Operations. But although Angels are not to be placed before Christ, yet the Order of the Persons of the Blessed Trinity is not al∣ways observed in Scripture; not in that very Apostolick Benediction, 2 Cor. 13. where the Grace of Christ is placed first; and in this Form of Benediction, the Holy Ghost is put before Christ, because more was to be spoken concerning him afterwards, who was therefore more conveniently to be re∣served unto the last place. 5 And from 10 Jesus Christ, who is the Faithful Witness [of his Fa∣thers Will, and a Prophet worthy to be believed,] and the first begotten of [or first born from] the Dead [by his being first raised, which is a new Birth or a Regeneration, Acts 13.33.] and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth [i. e. the chief Ruler, and Dis∣poser of the Kingdoms of Men, especially the four Monarchies, which shall be broken to Peices, and consumed by his Kingdom, Dan. 2, 44.4, 17.] unto him that Loved us [unto the Death, John 15.13.] and washed us from our sins, in [or by] his own Blood [shed for them.] 10 Note here, the great Propriety of the Titles attributed to Christ; for he is said to be the faithful Witness, that the following Prophecy might be the more readily believed; and in Opposition to the Pretences of Antichrist to New Traditi∣ons, distinct from those delivered by him in his Gospel, the in∣tire
Revelation of his Father's Will. (2dly) His Resurrecti∣on is mentioned, because it was the chief Proof of his Divi∣nity, and the Ground of our Faith; and chiefly because that from thence is taken the Epocha, or the beginning of the Ac∣count of the Times and Seasons of this Prophecy. The other Titles plainly relate to the Efficacy of his Blood alone, to our Justification and Sanctification; and to our Praises due to him alone, in opposition to Merits and Satisfactions, Prayers to Saints and Angels, and the other Corruptions of the Op∣posite Antichristian Kingdom. 6 And hath made us Kings [to Reign on the Earth in his King∣dom, Dan 7.27. Rev. 5, 10.20, 6.] and Priests [to offer Spiri∣tual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 20.6.] unto God, and his Father, [and not unto Saints and Angels] to him [Christ] be Glory [i. e. Praise and Acknowledgment of his Perfections] and [Kingly] Do∣minion, for ever and ever, [in his Everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 2.44. Revel. 11.15.] Amen [So be it, and so it will be.] 7 11 Behold he cometh 12 [i. e. he will as certainly come, as if we saw him now a coming] with Clouds [i.e. with Power, and great Glory, Dan. 7.13. Matth. 24.30.) and every Eye [of all Men] shall see him [coming,] and they also which pierced him [i. e. the Jews, shall see him, feel his Power, and acknowledge him, Isa. 40.5. Zach. 12.10. John 19.37.] and all Kindreds [Tribes, or People] of the Earth [i.e. of the wicked, worldly, and 13 Antichristi∣an Part;] shall wail because of him [their Judg, whom they had pro∣voked:] Even so 14 Amen, [i. e. this is a certain Truth, to be ex∣pected and desired.] 11 This Verse relates to the coming of Christ in his King∣dom at the last Day, when the Jews, who crucified him, and all other his Enemies, shall appear, and be judged by him. And it is worth noting, That (according to the Precepts of Art, observed by the most Judicious Wri∣ters) we have here, from Verse 5. given us in short at the very entrance of this Prophecy, a brief Representation
of the chief End and Design of it, The Kingdom of Christ: of which, upon all fit Occasions we are presented with a short View; because it is the thing which all the Events Ty∣pified in this Book, were designed to produce; and as it were the Catastrophe of this  of the World (according to Plotinus's Phrase) or of all the Transactions which have appeared on the Stage of it. 12 A Form of Speech in use with the Prophets, denoting the Infallible certainty of what they foretold. Or, cometh, may here signifie, he beginneth to come; as Verse 1. SeePag. 145. 150. Dr. Pocock on Joel. 13 Earth is taken in this sense, sometimes in this Prophecy; as we shall see hereafter. 14 This Word, in Scripture, is put to affirm, that the thing will be, as well as to wish for it, and approve it. 8 [And do not doubt of the Truth, and Extent of this Pro∣phecy; for] I [Christ, who have revealed it] am Alpha 15 and O∣mega, the beginning and the ending [who am before all things, and shall abide after them for ever,] saith the Lord [Christ] which is, [or, The That is], and which was, and which is to come, the Almigh∣ty [as well as Eternal Jehovah, who can bring to pass the Words of this Prophecy, from the beginning of it, to the end of Time.] 15 These are the first and last Letters of the Greek Alpha∣bet; whereby the Beginning and Consummation of all Things, Times, and Seasons, is ascribed to Christ: as the incommuni∣cable Attributes of God also are, viz. his Name Jehovah, and his Almightiness. So that this Verse contains a plain Declara∣tion of the Divinity of our Saviour. 9 I John, who also am your Brother [in the same Faith] and Compa∣nion in tribulation [i. e. a Fellow-sufferer with you] and in the King∣dom
and patience [or patient 15 expectation of the Kingdom] of Je∣sus Christ [delayed unto the time of the end, Dan. 12.4-13. Rev. 10.4, 7.] was [in 17 Banishment] in the Isle that is called 18 Patmos, for [preaching] the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ [i.e. the Gospel.] 16 For so the words seem to signifie, and may very well be Translated, by a figure common in Scripture; for this Kingdom was to have begun in its full Power immediately at Christ's Resurrection, and was then expected by the Apo∣stles, Acts 1.6. but was still patiently to be waited for, until the time of the end to which it was deferred. Altho the words may more properly relate to the Patience of Christ; or to his own patient Expectation of his Kingdom, until the times agreed on with his Father. See Chap. 3.10. 17 In the time of Domitian, about the end of the year of our Lord 95, or the beginning of 96, as Chronologers gene∣rally agree. 18 Situate in the Archi-pelago, about 40 Miles from the Continent of Asia, towards Ephesus, in the Sea next to the Churches to which he wrote. And as Ezekiel and Daniel had their Visions when they were in Captivity; so also might it be, by way of Correspondence, Ordained by God, that John should receive this Prophecy in a place of Exile; Restraints, and places of Recess, and Retireme from the wicked World, affording the fittest dispositions, and op∣portunities for Divine Communications. 10. I was in the Spirit 19 [i. e. under the immediate Power of it] on the 20 Lord's day, and 21 heard [that is, perceived in my Spirit, unexpectedly, and as it were from] behind me, a great voice, as of a Trumpet, [i. e. a very loud voice, as the sound of the Trum∣pets on the solemn Festivals, Psal. 47.5. or in the time of War, Zechar. 9.14. to raise my attention, and to encourage me; and to signifie that Judgments were to be denounced.] 19 That is, I was not in the Body, but in a Spiritual Ex∣tasie
or Rapture, under the immediate actings of the Spirit of God, representing things to my Soul, and not to my Senses, 2 Cor. 12.2. 20 The First Day of the Week, or the Christian Sabbath, in∣stituted in Memory of Christ's Resurrection, and called, The Lord's Day (a Phrase never used in the New Testament, but with reference to this Day, and the Lord's Supper), because it was blessed and sanctified by Christ's Resurrection, and the De∣scent of the Spirit (intimated here, by John's saying, that he was then in the Spirit), and instituted, and set apart by his Au∣thority, as the Day in which his Worship was ordinarily and necessarily to be frequented by all Christians. And the Day is here punctually expressed (which is also exactly observed by Ezekiel and Daniel, for the benefit of the Church, which is to take notice of Times and Seasons), to shew that these Visi∣ons commence from Christ's Resurrection: For to that end on∣ly is the mention of this Day proper to this Prophecy; On which he might truly stile himself, The First Begotten of the Dead; and he that was dead, and is alive.. And according∣ly we are not to suppose, as some do, that he received this Prophecy on the Annual Day of the Resurrection; but that (according to the Decorum to be observed in Visions and Re∣presentations) the very Numerical Day, in which Christ arose, was, as it were, recalled, and represented unto him, as the Beginning of the Time allotted to the Actions of the whole Representation. And from its being said, That he was in the Spirit on that Day, it may be conjectured (seeing that every thing in this Prophecy has a mystical sense, which yet is the primary and most proper) that the Day of Pentecost, on which Christ gave the Gifts of the Spirit, was joyned in Vi∣sion and Representation with it; as the same Day may hap∣pen to be the King's Coronation and Birth day too. 21 Words of seeing, hearing, and the like, signifie in Scri∣pture, the Actions of the Inward Senses, as well as of the Out∣ward.
11 Saying; I 22 am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: And what thou seest [in this Vision] write in a Book, [for greater security and continuance, Job 19.23, 24.] and send it unto the seven 23 Churches which are in Asia [the Less], unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and un∣to Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadel∣phia, and unto Laodicea. 22 These solemn Titles of Christ's Divinity, are here repeat∣ed, not only for the greater Assurance of the Certainty of these Visions, but to signifie, by being placed immediately be∣fore the Command, to write to the Seven Churches; That these Epistles relate to what was to come to pass in the End of Time; and that they contain a Succession of Prophecy from the first to the last; and the solemn Appearance of Christ, which fol∣lows, and the whole Preface with which this Vision is intro∣duced, do make it highly probable, that they were designed for more than seven private Churches, of no very large Extent or Duration. 23 That these Cities were all in being in John's Time, is past doubt; only it hath been questioned by some, whether there were Churches as yet Erected in all of them; which yet seems to be a groundless Scruple; seeing that the Apostle Paul so long before professes, that he had at Ephesus a great Door, and an Effectual one opened to him; and that the Word of God increased so mightily throughout all Asia, that he thought good to tarry amongst them for the space of three years, Acts 19.10, 20. and 20.18, 31. See Archbishop Ush∣er's Treatise, concerning the Original of Bishops, and Metropo∣litans; and of the Lydian, or Proconsular Asia. 12 And I turned to see [whose] the voice [was] that spake with me: And being turned, I saw seven golden 24 Candlesticks [representing seven Churches.] 24 Candlesticks are Symbols, or visible Hieroglyphicks of Churches; taken from the Candlestick with seven Branches,
and Lamps in it, under the Law; which was a Type of the Church, Exod. 25.31. Numb. 8.2. Whereby is signified their Duty of enlightning and instructing, by the purity of their Doctrine, and Example, whereby they become preci∣ous as Gold in the fight of God. See and compare Psalm 19.10. Matth. 5.14. John 5.35. Rom. 10.15. Philip. 2.15, 16. And most, especially the Candlestick, Zec. 4. gives great Light to the Candlestick in this Vision. 13 And in the midst 25 of the seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of Man [i. e. Christ walking in the midst of them, to order them, as the Priests did the Lamps, Exod. 27.20, 21. and to protect, guide and watch over them, Levit 26.12. Matth. 18.20.28, 20. 2 Cor. 6.16.] cloathed [in the High-Priests Vestments] with a garment down to the foot [Exod. 28, 40.39, 27. Ezek. 9.2. Dan: 10 5.] and girt about the Paps with a golden girdle [of the Ephod, Exod 28, 8.29, 5. to denoe his Royal Priesthood; a golden girdle being also the habit of Kings, anciently amongst the Eastern Nations, Job. 12.18.] 25 Hence, perhaps, it was, that God commanded (Exod 25.37. and Numb. 8.2.) that the Lamps should be lighted on that part which was towards the midst, or middle Branch of the Candlestick; signifying thereby Christ, to whom we ought all to look for help, and from whom we have all our Light and Knowledge. See Ainsworth on Numb. 8.2. 14 His head 26 and his hair were white like Wool, as white as Snow [noting his Eternal Wisdom and Authority, Dan. 7.9.] and his eyes were as a Flame of Fire [Penetrating all things by his Pro∣vidence, with quickness, power and terror, Dan. 10.6. Ezek. 1.27. Hebr. 4.12, 13.] 26 Hence may be proved the Consubstantiality and Equality of the Son with the Father; the same Expressions being used in Daniel, concerning the Father.
15 And his Feet [especially when he comes to Judge his Church, Isa. 53.7.] like unto fine 27 brass, as if they burned in a furnace [i. e. representing the stability, power, glory and terror of his actions and punishments, and that his Servants are to be pu∣rified and refined by sufferings, Dan. 10, 6.12, 10. Malach. ch. 3. and 4.] and his voice as the sound of many Waters [i. e. his word was powerful and terrible, like that of a raging multitude, signified by Waters, Dan 10.6. Psal. 93.4.] 27 See Dr. Hammond, who seems to have given the true sense of these Words; wherein is represented a fiery flaming Appearance in Glory; taken from a flaming Fire, in which the lower part looks like Amber (which we translate Fine Brass), and the Flame, especially the upper part, is of a white colour. 16 And he had in his right hand [i. e. under his mighty power, direction and protection; in safety and great honour, Psal. 18.35. Jeem. 22.24. Cant. 8 6.] seven Stars [i. e. the Angels of the se∣ven Churches, ver. 20.] and out of his Mouth went a sharp two edged Sword [i e. his word, sharp, quick and powerful, for the destructi∣on of his Enemies, and the defence of his Friends, Eph. 6.17. Hebr. 4.12.] and his countenance [i. e. the manifestation of himself, Cant. 5.15. Psal. 4 6] was as the Sun shineth in his strength [at noon, in its greatest height and brightness; that is, very Glorious and of Majesty.] 17 And when I saw him [in this glorious and terrible appear∣ance,] I fell at his feet as dead [for fear:] and he laid his right hand [of power and support] upon me, saying unto me, fear not, I am the first and the last [i. e the Eernal, Almighty God, who can sustain and strengthen thee, Dan. 8, 18.10, 10, 18.] 18 I am he that Liveth [i. e. the living God, the Fountain and Author of Life] and was dead [for your Sins:] and behold [now] I am alive [and that] for evermore. Amen [i. e. This is a certain Truth.] and [I] have the Keys of 28 Hell [i. e. power over the state and place of separated Souls, to call them back or retain them when they are departed out of the Body;] and of Death [it self, to
keep men from it; and therefore fear not; for if you were real∣ly Dead, I could raise you up again. All which looks with a Full Eye on that great First Resurrection.] c. 20. 28 . See Hammond, on Matth. 11. and Bishop Pear∣son on the Creed. 19 [And upon this assurance, stand up upon thy Feet, and be of good Courage, and] Write [in a Book unto the seven Church∣es, as I before commanded thee, vers. 11.] the things which thou hast seen [already, 29 in the representation of the seven Stars, and seven golden Candlesticks, vers. 12, 13, 16.] and 30 [write also] the things which are [now in being in my present Apostolical Church,] and the things which shall be hereafter [successively to the very end of Time.] 29 It is manifest from the next Verse, that this is the true sense of these Words; where it is expresly said, that the Seven Stars were Seen by him in his Right Hand; which are there∣fore the things he had Seen; and were written with the rest of the Preface, in a Book, to the seven Churches, verse 11. 30 Here he is commanded to write the Epistles to the seven Churches; the first of which, viz. that to Ephesus, as we have there shewn, refers to the State of the then Apostolical Church, beginning at Christ's Resurrection; the others to the follow∣ing successive States of the Churches to the End of the World. 20 [Which things, present and future, are] the 31 Mystery [or the Prophetical and Mystical sense] of the seven Stars which thou sawest in my right hand [which are the things thou hast seen, and not the Mystery to be written concerning them;] and [write] the seven Golden Candlesticks [i e. the mystery or mystick sense of them also.] The seven 32 stars are [or signifie and represent, Gen. 41.26.] the Angels 33 [or Pastors] of the seven Churches; and the seven Candlesticks which thou sawest, are the seven Churches [or, are 34 seven Churches, that is Bodies of Christians under their several Pastors; as well those which are now, as those which shall be successively here∣after.]
31 These words, which are of the Accusative Case, and put by way of Apposition, plainly refer only to the things which are, and shall be; which are here said to be the Mystery, or mystical meaning of the seven Stars; which therefore are not referred to, as being not themselves the Mystery, but the things which were to be mystically explained in the following Epistles. And from hence also we are plainly given to under∣stand, that the Subject Matter of these Epistles is Mystical, and not barely Literal; and that they concern things future, as well as the present. 32 Here is explained what is meant by Stars and Candlesticks, whose further mystical meaning, as they relate to Churches then in being, and to future Successions of them and their Pastors, is largely delivered in the following Epistles. 33 The Ministring Spirits, which attend on God, are call∣ed Angels, in Scripture, from their being employed as Messen∣gers in his Service: and therefore by the Angels of the Churches, must be meant the Pastors of them (which are here clearly distinguished from the Churches themselves), from their like Office of delivering God's Messages to the People, and put∣ting up their Prayers unto him; Upon which Account the Jewish Priest is called, The Messenger (or Angel) of the Lord of Hosts, (Malach. 2.7.) where Angel (that I may observe this by the way) is evidently taken collectively (as Dr. Po∣cock, on the Place, confesses) for the Succession of the whole Jewish Priesthood, comprehended there under the common Name of Levi, their Father, and spoken of as one Person; because they were all of the fame Stock, and all separated to the same Function. And as they are upon this Account call∣ed Angels; so are they called Stars, from their Office of en∣lightning, or instructing others. By Angels therefore in this, and the following Chapter, is meant, the Evangelical Ministry; represented by Angels (as all other Ministerial Agents are in this Prophecy), because the present World is subject to An∣gels, under Christ, the Head of them, and the Angel of the
Covenant; Whereas the World to come (that is, the Kingdom of Christ, at his last coming, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.5.) is to be ruled by Christ and his Saints, and is not to be in subjection unto Angels. 34 It is here said, That the seven Candlesticks, are, or signi∣fie seven Churches (for so it is in the Greek); not the seven Churches, which might seem to have determined them to the seven in Asia. The Epistles are indeed to be sent to the se∣ven Churches of Asia, ver. 11. But the mystical meaning of them, is not here said to belong to the Angels, or to the Seven Churches of Asia only, but to Seven Churches, and to the An∣gels of them; from whence it is plain, that they are prophe∣tical, relating to Seven Successions of the Ʋniversal Church. See Mr.Book 1. Disc. 52. and pag. 905. Doctor Moor's Exposition of the Epistle to the Seven Churches. Mede.
CHAP. II. The Text. UNto the Angel [or Evangelical Ministry, Chap. 1. 20.] of the Church of Ephesus [that is now planted there; and of that Period 1 of the Church, which is mystically represented by it] write; these things saith he that holdeth the Seven Stars in his Right Hand, who walketh in the midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks; [i. e. Christ, the Light of the World, who is more immediately pre∣sent with them to enlighten, guide and support them. Chap. 1. 13, 16, 20.] Annotations on CHAP. II. 1 This I shall hereafter endeavour to make out, to be the principal, if not only drift of these Epistles, from such Chara∣cters and Arguments, as shall arise from the Text it self. Very good Interpreters, and particularly Grotius, on Revel. 1.11. have thought, that the several Successions of the Church, here represented, are intimated in their very Names, according to a way of Allusion made use of in Scripture, as well as in Hea∣then Authors. For thus the God of Ekron, whose True Name is thought to have been Baal zebachim, or the Lord of Sacri∣fices, is called in derision Baal zebub, or the Lord of Flies; and Belzebul, or the Dunghil God. And the Prophet Micah 1.14, 15. manifestly alludes to the Names of Cities, calling Achzib a Lie; as if its Name were derived from Cazab, which in Hebrew signifies to Lie; and the City Mareshah is threatned to be disinherited, in allusion to its Name; and A∣dullam is called the Glory of Israel, perhaps (says Doctor Po∣cock on the Place) from its Situation, its Strength, or its
Beauty, or some other Reason, probably taken from its Name, as the others are, although now unknown. And such Paronomasia's, or Allusions, may be more frequent in Scripture than we think for, by reason of our Ignorance in the Premi∣tive Language, and of the Story and Circumstances of the Places, whose Names are alluded to. 2 I know [observe and approve, Psalm 1.6.] thy [good] works and thy labour 2 [in the work of the Gospel; in converting, in∣structing, and governing those whom thou art set over, 1 Thes. 5.12. 1 Tim. 5.17.] and thy patience, [and perseverance in it, and under sufferings for it], and how thou canst not [endure, or] 3 bear [with] them, which are evil [in Life or Doctrine, but castest them, when they prove incorrigible, out of the Church:] and thou hast tryed 4 them [by the Gospel, Gal. 1.8. 1 John 4.1. by their Works Matth. 7.20. and by the Gift of discerning Spirits, 1 Cor. 12.10.] which say they are Apostles [sent and commissioned to preach the Gospel], and are not, and hast found them liars, [or False Apostles, Acts 20.29, 30. and 15.1, 24. 1 Cor. 15.12. 2 Cor. 11.13. Gal. 1.6. 1 and 2 Epist. to Timothy. 1 John 4.1.] 2 Labour also may here signifie a zealous and unwearied pro∣fession of the Gospel, amidst the greatest Discouragements, as the Word is taken, 1 Cor. 15.58. 3 These Words refer to the zealous Execution of Discipline, for which the Church was at first very remarkable, as appears from 1 Cor. 5. 1 Tim. 1.20. Tit. 3.10. 2. John 10. 4 It appears from Scripture, that there were many False A∣postles foretold by our Saviour, Matth. 24.11, and by the A∣postle Paul, in his Admonition to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20.29, 30. Who generally seem to have insi∣nuated themselves into the good Opinion of the People, by specious pretences of being Brethren, and by creeping into their Houses and Assemblies unawares, and privily, and by com∣municating with them in their Feasts of Charity, as appears from 2 Cor. 11.26. Gal. 2.4. 1 Tim. 3.6. Jude 4.12. and from this place; where they are said, to pretend to be Apostles, when
they were not. For the Hereticks seem to have acted more close∣ly and subtily while the Apostles were living than afterwards; which made i  task to try and detect them, which yet the Apostolical Church did with great Zeal and Care, by examining their pretences by the Doctrine they had received of Christ, and by Gifts of discerning False Spirits, as Clemens Romanus attests in his Epistle to the Corinthians. And this place seems to determine this Succession of the Church to the Times of the Apostles; the Pretence of being Apostles, or Mes∣sengers, sent and commissioned by God to preach New Doctrines, being peculiar to that Age, and made use of by Simon Ma∣gus, and his Followers, particularly by Cerinthus, against whom John wrote his Gospel; who pretended to New Reve∣lations: And it being not peculiar to Ephesus alone, but to most other Churches, we may reasonably conclude, that by E∣phesus is not understood that Church alone, but the Church-State of the Apostolical Age; which began on the Day of Pen∣tecost, next following the Ascension of our Saviour, in the Thir∣ty Third Year of our Lord, about the Twenty Fourth Day of May, as Bishop Pearson has stated the Aera of the Apostolical Church in his first Lecture on the Acts. From this place we may learn, That strict care ought to be taken in trying and examining those who are to be sent to teach others; and that the Canon of Scripture was setled by this Apostolical Church, she having duly tried and rejected all other Pretenders to A∣postolical Doctrines; and that the first State of the Church was purely Apostolical. 3 And [yet thou] hast born 5 [Afflictions, although thou canst not bear 5 with them which are evil;] and hast [still] patience 6, and for my Names sake [i. e. for me, and upon the Account of my Gos∣pel] hast laboured 6 [in it], and hast not fainted [under it, nor under thy sufferings for it, Gal. 6.9. 2 Thes. 3.13.] 5 Such kind of Allusions are frequent in Scripture, as Rom. 1.24, 25, 26, 28.
6 This being a Repetition of what was said in the foregoing Verse, seems to intimate, that their Labour and Sufferings were Great, and very Remarkable; a Repetition sometimes denoting so much in Scripture. 4 Nevertheless I have somewhat [of 7 complaint] against thee, be∣cause thou hast left [or 8 remitted, and abated something of] thy first 9 [or former, fervent, and intense] Love [of me, my Gospel, and Kingdom.] 7 So the Phrase is taken, Matth. 5.23. 8 So this word is rendred by Grotius and Doctor Hammond, and, I think, rightly. And as Grotius thinks, that Love and Desire, may by way of Allusion, be signified by the Word E∣phesus, so may also the Greek Word here made use of, intimate some Remission, or Coolness of their First Love, by the same Figure which the Prophet Micah makes use of, Chap. 1. 13, 14. and which Grotius thinks the Apostle uses, Rom. 1.17, 28, 29. where also in the 29th Verse there is a manifest Allusion to the Name Judah, which signifies Praise, Gen. 29.35. 9 The First Love, which the Prophet, Jerem. 2.2, calls the Kindness of Youth, and the Love of Espousals, is usually very fervent; but is wont soon to cool and abate in the best of Men. And accordingly the Church at first, when (as Hie∣rom speaks) the Blood of our Lord was warm, and the Faith of the New Converts was Fervent, was very Zealous in all its Du∣ties and Offices, as appears from the Acts of the Apostles, parti∣cularly from Chap. 2.41-47. and Chap. 4.31-37. where we have a perfect Pattern of the First Love of the Apostolical Church, in the Church of Jerusalem; especially in their ha∣ving all things common, and calling nothing their own. And yet in a very short space, as soon as the Number of the Disci∣ples, and with them the Church-Revenue, was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Graecians against the Hebrews, e∣ven in the Infant-Church, as we read Acts 6. occasioned by the Pride of the Hebrews, as Bishop Pearson has shewn, in his
Third Lecture on the Acts; wherein (as also in the Behaviour of Ananias and Saphira) there are early Tokens and Types given of a Declension in the Church, which proceeded so far as to this matter, even in those First Times of the Gospel, that Paul tells the Philippians, (Chap. 2. 21. of his Epistle to them, supposed to be written about A. D. 59, or 62.) that all Men sought their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ. For not on∣ly Demas forsook Paul out of Love to this present World, but Mark grew weary of the Labour of the Gospel, and went not with Paul and Barnabas to the work, Acts 15.38. and Pe∣ter himself, for fear of the Jews, was guilty of Dissimulation, Gal. 2.11, 12. And the Galatians had generally departed from the True Notions they had received of Christian Liber∣ty, and a Working Faith, Gal. 5.1, 6, 7. and were grown very remiss in their Acts of Charity, Gal. 6.9. And the Churches mentioned in Scripture, are frequently reprehended for great Enormites; so that it is no wonder that the Churches in After-Ages proved guilty of them; the Love of many wax∣ing cold betimes, as our Saviour foretold, Matth. 24.12. and Paul complained, 2 Tim. 1.15. and 4.16. But this Prophecy respecting principally the Apostacy which crept into the Visi∣ble Church; by this passage is chiefly meant some degrees of it, which were then advancing: John, at the close of his first Epistle, written not long after the Revelations, warning the Christians to keep themselves from Idols, and the Mystery of Iniquity, of which Worshiping of Angels was a part, already working, even when St. Paul wrote his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, about the year 49. as some think, or 53. ac∣cording to Bishop Pearson; from whose Opinion, that of a Judicious Person, well skilled in Scripture Chronology, does not much differ; who dates the Conception of Antichrist, A. D. 55. which may very well be called, an abating, or remitting of Love; a cleaving to the One God, being so often descri∣bed in Scripture by Metaphors taken from Chaste Love, and E∣spousals; and Idolatry being so often likened to its contrary,
Adultery, and Fornication. However, it is certain, That in the Times of the Apostles, something was even then work∣ing, which made way by degrees for the Following Aposta∣cy. Such, perhaps, were, (1.) A Natural Love of Quiet and Ease, and Fear of Trouble and Displeasure; whereby, by Degrees, their Zeal was abated, which was the Fault of Mark and Peter, who yet returned to their First Love and Works. (2.) An excessive Esteem for some Pastors, for their Gifts, to the despising of others; which was the Cause of the Divisions in the Church of Corinth, as appears from Paul's Epistles to them. (3.) A Domineering and ambitious Temper in the Pa∣stors themselves, which was the Fault of Diotrephes, 3 John 9, 10. (4.) A Want of mutual forbearing one another; the Jewish Christians Judging and Condemning the Gentiles, and the Gentiles despising the Jewish. (5.) Divers False Opinions brought by the Jewish and Gevtile Converts into the Church; especially with relation to Angels and Departed Souls; which are the usual Subject of Paul's Epistles; and of which he treats particularly, 2 Thes. 2. 1 Tim. 4.1. Col. 2. (6.) And last∣ly, God out of his infinite Wisdom, permitted, even in the pure Church of the Apostolical Age, not only Errors and He∣resies to arise through the Common Imperfections of Men and Churches, but also a Foundation to be laid for the Grand Vi∣sible Apostacy, which began very early; and rose to a great heighth, not long after the Departure of Paul from Miletum, and that from amongst the Christians themselves, as the Apo∣stle plainly asserts, Acts 20.28.30. And was to be carried on by some of them, or by the man of sin; that is by a Visible Body, or Succession of Men, under the pretence of Mystery and Godliness, and of Antiquity and Apostolicalness, as appears from 2 Thes. 2. 1 Tim. 4.1. and from the second Verse of this very Chapter. 5 Remember 10 therefore from whence [or, from what degrees of Love] thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first Works [with the like Zeal;] or else I will come unto thee quickly [and that on a sud∣den,
and unexpectedly;] and will remove thy Candlestick 11 [or Church] out of its place [and give it unto another, Matth. 21.43.] except thou repent. 10 Here is laid down the True Way of Reforming the Church, and of its escaping Destruction; viz. by her consider∣ing wherein she hath deviated from the Gospel; by which Rule the False Apostles were tryed, Verse 2. and in repenting of, or forsaking her Faults: and in a zealous practice of her first good Works, according to the Model of the Gospel. And we have here given us two different States of the First Chur∣ches; viz. of their First Love, or Purity; and of their Re∣mission of it, and Deviation from it. 11 This Removal is not to be understood of the particular Church of Ephesus; which is noted by Bishop Ʋsher, to have continued, and to have preserved its Metropolitical Prehemi∣nence entire, until the time of Constantine, whilst others of the Seven had been deprived of it: And although there be not now at Ephesus so much as One Christian, (which Mr. Spoon looks upon as a fulfilling of this Prophecy) yet the Judgment here threatned, was to come quickly; and must therefore refer to something more early than its present State. And therefore Ephesus mystically here representing a Church-State, the remo∣ving of its Candlestick must signifie, its ceasing to be such a Church-State as it was before; the Pure, Primitive, and Apo∣stolical State of the Church, degenerating, by degrees, and that very soon, from its First Love; and becoming a Syna∣gogue of Satan, in the following Succession: and its Priviledges and Preheminences, in the Kingdom of Heaven, being taken from it, and given to other Church-Successions, according to the Denunciation of Christ, Matth. 21.43. 6 But [yet, notwithstanding this defect,] this thou hast [com∣mendable in thee,] that thou hatest [so far art thou from suffering and conniving at] the [unclean] deeds [or, practices] of the 12 Ni∣colaitans, which I also hate.
12 A sort of impure Hereticks, who about the year 80 or 90, after Christ, much about the Time of Cerinthus, taught, that it was lawful to eat things sacrificed unto Idols; and that Ma∣trimony was a mere Humane Institution, not obliging the Con∣science; and asserted the Lawfulness of Fornication, and all manner of Ʋncleanness, fathering their Doctrine (as the Here∣ticks then were wont to do) upon Nicholas, one of the seven Deacons in the Acts; from which Opinions and Practices the Church was as yet free; although it afterwards fell into some of them; and there were some, even then, who forbad Mar∣riage, which was one step to the increase of this Impurity of the Nicolaitans, 1 Tim. 4.3. 7 He that 13 hath an [understanding] ear, let him hear [attentive∣ly, consider, and understand,] what 14 the Spirit [speaking by the Prophets] saith [by me, in this Prophetical and Spiritual Epistle] unto the Churches [of God in all Ages and Successions of them, for whose Uses it was written.] [And] to him [or that person] that overcometh [the Remissness of Love, which is to be found in this Church-State,] will I give to eat of the 15 Tree of Life, which is in the Paradise of God; [i. e. the Enjoyment of a happy State in Christ's Kingdom, Rev. 22.2. Ezek. 47.12.] 13 From this Verse it seems to appear, that these Epistles are Spiritual and Mystical, because the same Sentence is annexed to them, which Christ makes use of at the Close of his Para∣bles, or Mystical Discourses, to engage Attention, and to teach, That all men were not capable of understanding them, but those who had their Minds duly exercised in Spiritual Things: And the manner of speaking being here altered from what it was at the first Verse, viz. from these things saith Christ, into hear what the Spirit saith; Hereby seems to be intimated, that these are Spiritual and Prophetical Epistles, spoken by the Di∣vine Spirit in Christ, which was to teach the Apostles all things; and shew them things to come, John 16.12, 13. Part of which are here revealed, relating not to the single Church of Ephe∣sus
alone, but to the Churches in the Plural; that is, all the se∣veral Periods and Successions of them. 14 The Particle, what, refers not only to the following Sen∣tence, but to all which went before, as appears from the Epistles to the Churches of Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodi∣cea; in which there is nothing that follows this Proverbial Sentence; which must therefore have a reference to what pre∣ceded it. 15 This Promise refers to the particular Overcomers of the Evil of each Church-State, and not to the Churches themselves; for as some Men may fall short of overcoming Vice and Error in a good Church-State, so others may overcome the Evil of a bad one. And the Promises to the several Overcomers, are taken from the Descriptions given afterwards in the latter part of this Prophecy, of the New Jerusalem, or Kingdom of Christ; which as they have promoted, so shall their Reward be. Now the Earthly Paradise, was a Type of Christ's Heavenly Kingdom; and to eat of the Tree of Life, in the midst of that Paradise, is to be refreshed and nourished with Divine Communications, in the Kingdom of Christ; in which the Saints and Overcom∣ers shall Reign with him. And here we are to take notice, that the Rewards are suited to each particular State; to be re∣freshed by eating in a State of Happiness, being proper to those who are wearied with Labour and Sufferings; and a Crown in the next Succession, being the fit Reward of the Overcom∣ers of a state of persecution. It is also further fit to be observ∣ed, That the Right of Primogeniture is not given to Ephesus, but to Smyrna the Symbol of the afflicted Church-state, which has the Crown of Life bestowed upon it, the Symbol of Royal Dignity, which of Right belongs to the First Born; and the very King∣dom of the New Jerusalem is given to Philadelphia, of which the Key of David, and her Crown, are the Symbols: which seems to be shadowed out unto us, in the Blessings of Jacob, (Gen. 49. which may by way of Allegory, and as Typical, be accommodated to the Mystical Israel the Church), where
the Precedency, both in Dignity and Power, is taken from Reuben, the First Born, because of his Instability, and having defiled his Father's Bed; which may be Typical of Ephesus's Early Departure from its First Love, and of the Idolatrous A∣postasie which crept into it betimes; which is a spiritual De∣filement in Scripture: whereupon its Candlestick was removed out of its place; that is, it lost the Rank of priority it was to have in the Kingdom of Christ, which was given to the next Succession of Smyrna for it's Constancy in Afflictions; bur es∣pecially the New Jerusalem State, coming down in the Phi∣ladelphian Succession. 8 And unto the Angel [Verse 1.] of the Church in Smyrna 16, write; these things, saith the First 17 and the Last, which was dead, and is alive; [that is, Christ the Eternal God, who raised himself from the Dead.] 16 Smyrna is the next City of the seven, Northward from Ephesus, and about Forty Miles distant from it; and it is still a Metropolitical See, having yet no more than Two Churches of Greeks in it, and One or Two of Armenians. It's Name may by a Figurative Allusion, be derived from a Syriack word sig∣nifying Bitterness, to denote the bitter persecutions of the Church under this State. 17 These Attributes are made use of, to encourage them to undergo their Sufferings, as having been already experien∣ced by Christ, who was God, and had vanquished Death for them. 9 I know [and approve] thy [good] works, [in the propagating of my Kingdom] and tribulation [under persecutions] and poverty, [or extream want, by thy being spoiled 18 of thy Good;] but thou art [really] rich [in Grace, and in my Esteem and Favour;] and I know the blasphemy 19 [i. e. Idolatry] of them [or that party,] that say they are Jews 20 [that is, boast themselves to be the pure Christians, the true Worshippers of the one only God;] and art
not [truly so,] but are [really, and in God's Account] the 21 Syna∣gogue of Satan [that is, an Antichristian Congregation.] 18 As was usual in Times of persecution, Heb. 10.34. 19 Blasphemy is a Contumely, or Reproach of God, by attri∣buting that to a Creature which is properly his; whence in Scripture it is put to signifie Idolatry, which is the highest Blasphemy. See Isa. 65.7. 1 Maccab. 2.6. 2 Maccab. 8.4. And this Blasphemy then appeared in the Reverence paid to Martyrs, which was the Beginning of Idolatry. 20 The Phrases and Expressions of this Mystical Book are taken from the Old Testament, and the Jewish Oeconomy, which was Typical of the Christian, as the Apostle asserts, 1 Cor. 10.1-4. the Type in this prophecy, being constantly put for the Anti-Type, or thing signified. And therefore, according to that usual Figure; by Jews here must be understood, Chri∣stians, who are the mystical Israel, or the , the True Israel, as Justin Martyr calls them; whose Glory, and proper Priviledg it was, to be the Worshippers of the One True God; whilst all the World besides, were guilty of Idolatry. Now the Jews being wont to pride themselves in their priviledges; those here represented are also said, to say that they are Jews, that is, boast of it, in al∣lusion, perhaps, to the Name Judah, which signifying Praise and Thanksgiving; is here, and by the Apostle Rom. 2.17-29 put to denote a Boasting Confession, joyned with a seeking the Praise of Men, as Grotius has noted on the place; and as is ob∣vious from the last verse of that Chapter, as I before hinted. Of which Pride of theirs, there is an eminent instance in the very first Apostolical Church at Jerusalem, Acts 6. where the Hebrews, or Natural Jews who came from the Loyns of Abraham, neglected, or proudly despised, the Hellenists, or Pro∣selyted Gentiles, altho Jews by their Religion, as well as themselves. And therefore in proportion; by Jews here must be meant those Christians who more than ordinarily
boasted themselves to be the pure Worshippers of the True God only, when yet they were really guilty of Idolatry. For the word Jew, as Grotius notes on Rom. 2.17. was then a word significative of their Religion, rather than of their Nation; and denoted as much as a Worshipper of the one God; or one who confessed and acknowledged him, as the word Judah is Explained by Philo, and Interpreted by the LXX, Gen. 29.35. 21 Satan signifies, according to the Original of the word, the Great Adversary, the Devil; of whose Congregation, these Pretending pure Christians are said to be, and not of Christ's, because, by their Blasphemous or Idolatrous Practi∣ses, they did indeed, and in God's account, Worship him, and Propagate his Antichristian Kingdom. But this was at first the Fault only of a few of them, or of that Party that Valued themselves, and Despised others, calling themselves Jews, or the only True, or pure Israel of God; it having always happened so from the beginning of God's Church, that according to the Allegory insisted on Gal. 4.25, 29. the Corrupt Party hath stood most upon its Purity, Honour and Preheminence; and hath Persecuted, and Despised the pure one. Now the Church of Smyrna, comprehending that Succes∣sion of the Church, in which the great Persecutions happen∣ed; and in which a Crown of Life was at last given them at the Empires becoming Christian: The Blasphemy here reprehended, refers chiefly to the latter State of that Succes∣sion, when Honours and Riches Flowing into the Church, corrupted the purity of their former poor and suffering con∣dition; and the reverence at first innocently paid to Mar∣tyrs; and the introducing of Pagan Rites by degrees, un∣der pretence of winning the Heathens, gave a great encrease to the growing Apostasy; iniquity under the covert of a Myste∣ry, i. e. of Piety, Religion and well meaning Zeal, making daily progress in the Church, until it arose to an Antichristian Sy∣nagogue
or Congregation of a prevailing party amongst them. Which phrase is made use of, in opposition to the Title given the Jews in the Old Testament; who are called Numb. 31.16. The Congregation or Synagogue of the Lord: which the cor∣rupt party of this Succession had forfeited, by its Antichri∣stian or Satanical Innovations; as the Jews also did upon their Apostasy under Jeroboam, 2 Chron. 11.15. who are there∣upon said to have Sacrificed unto Devils or Satan. And it is worth Observation, that the last degeneracy of the Jewish Church, when, as it appears from the Gospels, it became a Satanical Synagogue, consisted chiefly, in vain Traditions, in Affecting Titles, Honours and Prehemency, in neglecting the Spiritual Service of God, and in expecting a present Worldly Kingdom of the Messias, instead of a Future, Heavenly State of it, and of the Kingdom of God within us, consisting in inward Righteousness and Peace; and lastly in Cruelty and Persecution, and in casting out of the Synagogue of the Lord, the true and faithful Servants of Christ. Now in whatso∣ever Age of the Church there may be found such a Temper and Spirit Prevailing; so much may it be said to have of the Synagogue of Satan in it: Much of which was visible, in this succession, in the strifes amongst Bishops, about the Superiority and the Prehemenency of their Sees; in their rash Censuring and Excommunicating one another for slight Matters, as ap∣pears evidently in the Behaviour of Pope Victor; in the Op∣positions made in this period to the Doctrine of the Antient Chiliasts; and in the introducing a great number of Cere∣monies, Rites and Customs into the Church, to bring over the Jews and Pagans to the Christian Religion. 10 Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: [For] behold the Devil 22, shall [by evil Men, as his Instruments,] cast some 23 of you [who have the courage not to deny me] into prison [i. e. vari∣ous and grievous Tortures and Persecutions;] that ye may be tryed [fully, whether ye be perfect and entire, James 1.2, 3. 1 Pet. 1.7.] and you shall have Tribulation [that is, one most notable Persecution;]
24 ten days [of years:] Be thou faithful unto [the suffering of] death, and I will give thee a crown 25 of Life [i. e. Freedom from Persecuti∣on, Rewards and Honours.] 22 Persecutors do the Devils Work, Eph. 2.2. and to him Justin Martyr frequently attributes the Pagan Persecutions, because they were promoted and set on by his Instigation. 23 For many fell away in the Times of persecution. 24 Days, in Prophetick account, are frequently put for Years; as is evident from Numb. 14.34. Ezek. 4.6. and Dan. 9.24. where the Days of the Seventy Weeks, are un∣derstood by most Interpreters of Years. For a Day being the First, and most Natural Measure of Time, depending upon the constant and most known Revolution of the Sun; is put in all Languages, and particularly in the Hebrew, to express indefinitely, a length or continuance of Time; as the Days of Herod signifie in Scripture, the Time of his Reign; and is limited to some certain continuance, by circumstances; or ac∣cording to the Will of Him who makes use of it: as it is by God in Scripture restrained to signifie a Prophetical Year, as is evident from the places I have quoted: against which, Grotius has Objected nothing material, as Dr. Moor has ful∣ly proved in his Mystery of Godliness, Book 5. Chap. 15. Now the last and greatest Persecution of the Church under Di∣ocletian, lasting, according to all Chronologers, exactly ten Years; It is evident that this place must refer unto it: espe∣cially if we consider that the Vision of the Souls under the Altar, which is Contemporary with this Succession; immedi∣ately preceeds the great Earthquake, or change of Things un∣der Constantine; and that no Example could be brought by Grotius, or Dr. Hammond of a ten days Persecution, in the Times to which they limit this passage; and that Ten, does not denote in Scripture a short time when put indefinitely, but is always put for one of a long continuance, (it being, as it were, the plentitude of simple Numbers) as is evident from Numb. 14.22. Job. 19.3. 1 Sam. 1.8. Eccles. 7.19.
Furthermore, seeing that the things referred to in this Pro∣phecy, being for the use of the whole Church, ought to be il∣lustrious parts of History, and not References to something not Transmitted unto us (with which shift Grotius puts off his Reader) what more Notable part of History could be referred to, than that of the ten Years Persecution, which gave Date to the Aera Martyrum, and is a most famous Character of Time; exactly answering in its ten Years Duration, to the Prophetical way of Accounting a Day for a Year, and fit to be made use of by the Holy Ghost, in Transmitting so remark∣able a Period of the Church down to after Ages. 25 A Crown denotes Regal and Triumphal Honours, and a Crown of Life is opposed to the Deaths and Martyrdoms they had before Suffered: And hereby is plainly set forth the Freedom from Persecution they Enjoyed under Constantine, at the end of the Tenth Persecution; which, according to the Accurate Computation of Mr. Pagi, in his Critical Annotations upon Baronius, began Feb. 23. A.D. 303. and ended June 13th, A. D. 313. when the famous Epocha was Instituted of the Churches Freedom from Persecution; mentioned by Eusebius in his Chronicon, and by the Author of the Alexandrian Chro∣nicon. From which Time we may date their Crown of Life; Con∣stantine daily proceeding to advance and secure the Church; which enjoyed great Freedom (bating only some short Per∣secutions, particularly that under Julian), until it came to its highest pitch of External Peace and Honour, under Theodosi∣us the Great, who died at Milan A. D. 395. on Jan. 17. or Feb. 24. after he had given Paganism its deadly Blow, by his Famous Defeat of Argobastes and Eugenius, A. D. 394. 11 He that hath an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches: [Verse 7.] [And] He [i. e. that person] who overcometh, [the Persecutions, and Evils of this Church-State, and perseveres unto the End, in the Precepts of the Gospel,] shall not be hurt of the second death, [but shall escape it, Rev. 20.6.]
12 And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos 26, write, These things, saith he who hath the sharp 27 Sword, [of the Word and the Spi∣rit,] with two edges, [to inflict severe and sharp Judgments, chap. 1.16.] 26 Pergamos is distant from Smyrna, Northwards, about five hundred and Forty Furlongs; and there are in it now but a few Families of miserable Christians, and but one Church; although it was anciently the most Famous and Chief City of Asia the Less, having been the Seat of the Attalidae, who were rich and potent Kings; and of the Roman Proconsuls: For which Reason, as well as in Allusion to its Name, it may be put to denote here, The exalted State of the Church; High and Lofty Fabricks, and Things, being called, , by the Asiaticks: And because of itsAndr. Caesar. in locum. excessive Idolatry, it is a fit Type of the Apostate state of this Succession, in which the Apostasy was exalted to a Throne. 27 Corruptions daily encreasing under this State, the Styleis here changed, and Christ is represented with a sharp sword in his Hand. 13 I know thy [good] works, and where thou dwellest, even where Satan's 28 Seat [or Throne] is, [i. e. under the Dominion of the Antichristian Apostasy;] and [I know that nevertheless] thou hol∣dest fast [or retainest the profession of] my Name [and hast not re∣nounced it, by becoming Antichristian;] and hast not denied my Faith [or Gospel; no not] even in those days [or Times of Dark∣ness and Cruelty,] wherein Antipas 29 [i. e. the Opposers of Po∣pery] was my faithful Martyr [or Witness,] who was flain [by De∣crees, Anathemas, and frequent Deaths] among you [or under your Jurisdiction,] where Satan [or Antichrist] dwelleth [or has his constant Residence, in great State and Power, 2 Thes. 2.4, 9]
28 The Apostasy is now called Satan's Seat, or Throne; because that upon the Churches Exaltation, under the Christi∣an Emperors, a Worldly Kingdom, and a Paganizing Christi∣anity, arose by degrees, especially at Rome, to such an heighth, that it became at last to have a Supremacy, or a Throne in it; to which Satan's power in this World is likened in Scripture, viz. Isa. 14.12-14. Luke 10.18. John 12.31. With which the History of those Times agrees; it being evident, that from about the year 400. and odd (the precise year I shall endeavour to determine hereafter), when Satan's Syna∣gogue seems to have arrived to its maturity; that the Aposta∣sy daily increased, chiefly upon the Growth of the Papacy, which came to have a Throne about the year 606, when Boniface the Third Usurped the Title of Ʋniversal Bi∣shop. 29 There might have been perhaps a Martyr of this Name at Pergamus; although the Story of him related in the Greek Menologies, is vehemently to be suspected, as Grotius has well noted; a Brazen Bull being not a Punishment amongst the Romans, whose Laws were then observed at Pergamus; and the Relations of those early Martyrdoms, being justly called in question by some of the Learnedst Men of the Romish Church. But howsoever, the Names made use of in this Book, having constantly a mystical signification, this also must be understood after the same manner; and it will then plainly denote, The Opposer of the Pope; that is, (by a Figure usual in this Prophe∣cy) the whole Body, or succession of those, who during this pe∣riod, witnessed against the Apostasy of that See; a Catalogue of whom you may find in Illyricus, Ʋsher, and other Authors. For  signifies against, or contrary; and  is the Old Word for Father; from whence, by a Reduplication of Let∣ters comes , or ; that is, Pope, or Holy Father; for which consult what is said by the Etymoligists out of Eu∣stathius.
And the Word Antipas, is made use of, and not , or , because this was a Common Name, which the others were not: And because those Names would have given a too open intimation of the Mystery designed designed by them, contrary to the Holy Secrecy and Reserve usually observed in this Prophecy. 14 But [yet] I have a few [or some little, small] things [to object] against thee, because thou hast 30 there [where thou dwellest, and amongst you,] them [or a prevailing Party] that hold [profess and practise] the Doctrine [Precept and Counsel] of 31 Balaam, [i. e. the False Antichristian Prophet,] who taught Balack [i. e. the Princes subject to Antichrist,] to cast a stumbling-block [or an Occasion to commit Sin] before the Children of Israel [that is, the Christians of that Age, the Spiritual Israel] to * eat things sa∣crificed unto Idols, and to commit [Spiritual] Fornication [which is I∣dolatry.] 30 Although the Apostate Church had the Throne; that is, the Antichristian Power, and Preheminence; yet the pure Church-State is here blamed for having them, or that prevai∣ling party amongst them, although they could not help it; because, that it had not arrived to that perfection of Gifts and Graces, as must necessarily have cast out the corrupt party by its power and efficacy. Thus the Apostle blames the Corin∣thians, 1 Cor. 5. and 2 Cor. 7. that they had not mourned, that the incestuous person might be cast out from among them; and, for want of vehement Affections of godly Sorrow, De∣sire, Revenge, &c. by which alone they could approve, and clear themselves in that matter. 31 Concerning this wicked advice of Balaam, who counsel∣led Balack to draw the Israelites to Idolatry, by enticing them with the Conversation of strange Women, you may read the 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th Chapters of Numbers, and the 16th
Verse of the 31st. as also Micah 6.5. 2 Pet. 2.15. and Jude 11. together with the Expositors on those places. Whereby is plainly signified the wicked Counsel of the Antichristian Party, especially of the Papacy, (which, like Balaam, pretends to Prophecy and Infallibility) whereby the Secular Powers, Represented by King Balack, were perswaded to entice the people to Idolatry; by worshipping Bread, and Saints, and Ima∣ges. So that this Period comprehends the Times in which these Doctrines were controverted, and at last imposed; and seems to reach until about the year 1100. when Antipas, or the faithful Witnesses against these, and other Errors, which had been before slain by the Anathemas of several Councils; and lay mostly concealed and hid within the Apostate Church; began to unite into an open and visible Body, and to appear under the Name of the Waldenses and Albigenses, in a more direct Opposition to that Satanical, or Antichristian Authori∣ty, which had hitherto over-powered them. Upon which, as History testifies, vast Numbers of all Ranks and Qualities united themselves unto them. * To eat things sacrificed unto Idols (as appears from the Apostles Discourse, 1 Cor. 8. and 12.) was accounted by the Corinthians no fault, and was defended by them (as Grotius notes upon the place) by very subtile Distinctions, not unlike those used by the Papists, in defence of their Idolatry; and therefore by it may be here meant, some lesser degrees, and plausible Entrances of Idolatry, such as the Honours given to Martyrs, their Relicks, and the like; which they were more guilty of in this Succession, than of downright Idolatry; and is therefore placed first here, before Fornication; but is pla∣ced after it, in the next Succession (Verse 2.) because flat I∣dolatry was then predominant, in respect of which, the o∣ther was but of a lesser Account, and is therefore put af∣ter it.
15 So hast thou also [in which thou art not wholly inexcusa∣ble, although it be against thy Will, Vers. 14. num. 30.] them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans 32 [i. e. those who counte∣nance and practise filthy Lusts,] which thing I hate [and which therefore ought to have been cast out by thee, though not by Pow∣er, which thou hadst not, yet by Mourning, and Prayer, and E∣minence in Gospel-Graces.] 32 These Deeds which were abhorred by the Ephesine Suc∣cession of the Apostolical Church, had by this Period gained many Teachers and Approvers. And hereby is very probably meant, those Encouragements which were given to Lust by corrupt Doctrines, about Celibacy and Virginity; and by In∣dulgences and Pardons for all manner of Sins; which being at first, only a prudent Relaxation of Discipline, were in pro∣cess of time, so far corrupted, first by the Martyrs and Con∣fessors, who granted them (as Cyprian frequently complains) to the Lapsi, before Pennance performed, or upon very easy ones; and afterwards by the Negligence of following Ages, still growing worse and worse; that at last, about the year 1100. they became Scandalous Dispensations for all sorts of Wickedness, and Encouragements for Men to take up Arms a∣gainst the Enemies of the Papacy, and Christ's faithful Anti∣pas, or Opposers of it. 16 Repent 33 [therefore, even of the few and small Faults thou hast; and mourn, and sorrow after the most earnest and fervent manner, that these Offenders may be taken away from amongst you, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2. and 7.] or else I will come unto thee 34 [in Judgment, indeed, for these thy smaller Faults; but so as not to 35 fight against, and destroy thee:] quickly [and on a sudden:] and will fight against [and destroy] them [amongst you, who hold these Doctrines] with the Sword of my Mouth [i. e. by my Gospel Threats, and Judgments effectually denounced, and executed, e∣ven to utter Excision; whilst thou shalt be visited with a Fatherly Correction, and that only in case thou repentest not.]
33 The True Church is commanded to repent; that is, of its want of such an intense Zeal, extraordinary Humiliations, Fervent Prayers and Supplications, as might have prevailed with God to cast those Errors and abominations out of the Church; which Discipline is also called Mourning and Repent∣ance, by the Apostle, in the places I have quoted: and for want of this (which is its small, or few things), Christ saith that he will come unto them in Judgment indeed, but not in anger, and with a Fatherly Correction, to bring them to a tho∣rough Reformation and Repentance. 34 Christ speaks only to the pure Church, because pure Chur∣ches are only accounted Churches in his Esteem; although it has the same Name with the corrupt; because that alone was visible. 35 Here is an allusion to the slaughter of the idolatrous Isra∣elites, at the Command (or by the mouth) of God, for joyn∣ing themselves to Baal-Peor, upon the instigation of Balaam, Numb. 25.4, 5. 17 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches, [Verse 7.] [And] To him that overcometh [the Corrupti∣ons of this Church-State,] will I give to eat of [or to partake of, and be nourished by] the hidden 36 Manna [i. e. the secret Consolati∣ons of God's Spirit.] And I will give him a 37 white stone [that is, a Reward for his Victory, and Absolution from the Censures and Excommunications he lies under,] and in the stone a new Name, [chap. 3, 12. 19, 16.] written, [importing, that they are Members of Christ's Kingdom, Children of God; and Heirs of Heaven, Isa. 62.2. and 65.15. Rom. 8.16. 1 John 3.1.] which no [Natural or Carnal, 1 Cor. 2.9-11.] man [of this Church-State] knoweth [the true Value of, 1 John 3.2.] saving he that receiveth it [from me, and hath experienced the Consolations of the Divine Mercy and Absolution, Rom. 8.16] 36 By Manna is meant the sweet Consolations which arise from the Knowledge of God, and his Will in Christ the True Manna, John 6. Which is called hidden, in allusion to the
Manna which was laid up in a Golden Pot, and put in the Ark, and kept in the most secret part of God's Temple, the Holy of Holies, Exod. 16.33, 34. Heb. 9.4. Whereby inward and spiritual Comforts are signified, enjoyed by the Saints in se∣cret, during their retired Worship at the Altar of Incense, whilst they were under the Power of the Antichristian Su∣premacy: So that the True Pergamus seems plainly to be the Type of the True Church, under the Power of the Apostasy; and of those faithful Christians, who are in that Church, but not of it; wishing and expecting the Coming of Christ's Kingdom, that they might be delivered from this their Sack-cloath and mournful Condition; in which they are fed indeed with pleasant Food, but as the Jews were with Manna in the Wilderness; the Type of a desolate State. 37 This is thought to be an Allusion to the Anci∣ent Custom of acquitting Criminals by a White Stone; and of giving Conquerors in the Games (to which Paul fre∣quently alludes) a White Stone, with their Names, and the Value of the Prizes written on it; which none was to look upon, and know, but those who won it: Whereby may be meant the publick Acquittal, Justification, and Rewards which the faithful Christians of this Succession should receive in Christ's Kingdom. But because the Allusions in this Prophecy are generally taken from the Jewish Customs, and the Old Testament; therefore it may not be altogether a groundless con∣jecture, that here may be an Allusion to the Stones on the Ora∣cular Breast-plate of the High-Priest, which had the Names of the Children of Israel engraven upon them, for a Memorial; to signifie, that Christ, our High-Priest, is always mindful of us; and to put God in remembrance of his People: to which End it is here said, that Christ will give them a White Stone, with their New Name, of being Members of Christ's Kingdom, the New Jerusalem written in it; that thereby they might be in his remembrance, and he might behold their purity (deno∣ted
by a White Colour) and shew mercy upon them; and open∣ly acknowledge and reward them in his Kingdom. 18 And unto the Angel of the Church in 38 Thyatira, these things saith the 39 Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine Brass [Chap. 1.14, 15. i. e. whose Providence is quick and penetrating and whose Judgments are pure and terri∣ble, to try the Pretences, and punish the Faults of this Succession, and to purge and purifie it.] 38 Thyatira is distant from Pergamus about Forty Eight Miles, and there is not now so much as One Christian Church in it. Stephanus, the Geographer, tells us, that this City, which was before called Pelopea, and Semiramis, was na∣med , (and afterwards Thyatira), by Seleucus Nica∣nor, upon the News he received there of the Birth of a Daughter; Which Name may therefore denote (according to the Allusion observed in the other Names) An idolatrous Daughter of an idolatrous Mother Jezebel, who was, as the Scripture Notes, 1 Kings 16.31. The Daughter of Ethbaal, the King of the Zidonians; and therefore fit to represent the Woman described, Chap. 17. of this Prophecy, who was the Idolatrous Mother of the Apostate Daughter, or Church of this Succession; and the Daughter of Paganism, as Jezebel was of Ethbaal the Zidonian. 39 Christ here makes himself more plainly known than he had hitherto done, and that by his Supreme Title, the Son of God; because that his Kingdom was now to arise more visi∣bly out of the Apostasy, and therefore to be owned and pro∣tected by him their Supreme Sovereign, who was to destroy their Enemies, and give them power over the Nations. 19 I know thy Works [in order to the propagating of my King∣dom,] and Charity [or Love and Zeal towards me, which thou hast not left or abated, Verse 4.] and Service [in thy Ministry, and towards the poor Saints, Rom. 15.25, 31. 2 Cor. 8.4] and Faith,
and Patience, [during the Corruptions and Persecutions of the A∣postasy,] and 40 thy Works, and the last [works of the Church typi∣fied by this State, to be performed by them at Christ's coming to his Kingdom, Verse 25, 26.] to be more [in Number, and Qua∣lity] then the first [Works at their first remarkable Rising out of the Apostasy.] 40 Here their Works are twice mentioned; and their last are said to be more than their first; whereby is signified, the the Faithful of this Succession (whom we have supposed to be the Waldenses and Albigenses) should, towards the approach of Christ's Kingdom, do things surpassing their first Works; which yet were very great, they having at first proselyted an incredible Number of all Ranks and Nations; as appears from History, and even the Confession of their Enemies; for which see Ʋsher, Thuanus, and a late English Trea∣tise. 20 Notwithstanding I have a few [or some little] things against thee, because thou sufferest 41 that [Notorious, Cursed] woman [2 Kings 9 34.] Jezebel 42 [i. e. the Papal Apostasy,] which calleth her self a Prophetess, [i. e. pretendeth to, and boasteth of Infallihility 43, and mi∣raculous Gifts,] to teach, and to seduce [by her cunning Devices, 2 Kings 9.22.] my Servants, [professing Christianity,] to commit [Spiritu∣al] Fornication [by Idolatry,] and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. [See Verse 14.] 41 The True Church is blamed for suffering the Apostasy, al∣though they were kept under by its Power and Dominion; because it was as yet so imperfect in its Gifts and Graces, as not to be able utterly to cast out those Corruptions, which cannot stand against the power of God's Word, when it appears in its utmost Efficacy. 42 A fit Type of the Romish Apostasy, (1.) for Idolatry, 1 Kings 16.31, 32. 2 Kings 9.22. (2.) for Cruelty, and persecuting of God's Prophets, or Witnesses, that protested a∣gainst Idolatry, 1 Kings 18, 4.19, 2, 10. 2 Kings 9.7.
(3.) for stirring up Ahab or the Secular Magistrate, to perse∣cute God's Servants, and to draw them to Idolatry, by false witnessing against them, 1 Kings 21.8, 9, 10, 25, 26. (4.) for her Paint, and Whorish Attire and her Witchcraft, or subtile Allurements, to entice to Idolatry, and keep Men in her Com∣munion; and her impudent impenitence, 2 Kings 9.22, 30. and lastly, for the manner of her Destruction; which was so entire, (as that of the Apostasy will be, Vers. 27.) that nothing remained of her, but so much as might serve for a Monument of her Destruction, 2 Kings 9.35-37. 43 Which Doctrine began to be advanced in this Successi∣on of the Church, by the Schoolmen, who appeared A. D. 1200. And perhaps Jezebel might have been one of the Prophetesses of Baal; for we read, 1 Kings 18.19. that an hundred of them eat at her Table, it being probably their Office to pro∣vide for, and Minister to the Prophets; which may also be further conjectured from her conversing with them; it being usual for the Disciples of the True Prophets, to be seized with their Enthusiasms; as Saul was, when he was amongst the Pro∣phets; which might be imitated by the evil Spirits in the ido∣latrous Prophets. 22 And I gave her space 44 to repent of her Fornications [i. e. her Ido∣latry,] and she repented not. 44 Which may be dated from the time of the more publick Appearance of the Witnesses, under the General Name of Waldenses, about A. D. 1100. or rather, (if we compare this place with its parallel, Chap. 9.20, 21.) from the Inroads of the Turks, into the Eastern Empire, ending in the taking Constantinople, A. D. 1453, until the Reformation, A.D. 1517. when the Sardian State began at the appearing of Luther; which great punishment of God upon the Eastern Empire, for its Idolatry, having not its due influence upon the Western; God was pleased to raise up Princes, who threw off the Ro∣mish
Ʋsurpations and Corruptions, and openly owned and pro∣tected the Reformation; which is the Sardian State of the Church, as it is favoured by Protestant Princes; as that of Thyatira is the Type of the True Church, under the Oppressi∣on of Popish ones; that being the Church-State immediate∣ly following the foregoing Pergamenian State, which was un∣der the power of Satan's Throne, in a hidden condition; ha∣ving in it Idolaters, which it could not cast out, because of the power of the prevailing part of the Church. For Thyati∣ra's suffering of the Woman, was not a willing connivance, but one arising from a necessity of the great Oppression she was under, and the imperfectness of their Church-State; for if it had been a voluntary connivance at Idolatry, Christ would not have said, that he had only a few, or some small things against them; Neither would this State have been approved by him so far, as to bid them hold fast that which they had already. And this space is typified by the time of Repentance which God gave Jezebel, which was from Elijah's denouncing Judg∣ment against her, 1 Kings 21.23. until her Death, accom∣panied with an impudent impenitence, 2 Kings 9.30-37. 22 Behold, I will cast her into a Bed 45 [of languishing, Psalm 41.3.] and them that commit Adultery with her [by being Partakers with her in Idolatry, Chap. 17.2.] into great tribulation, [at the pouring out of the Vials, chap. 16.] except they repent 46 of their deeds. 45 Instead of the Beds of her Whoredom and Idolatry; allu∣ding to Jezebel's Adultery. And it is apparent, that the Ro∣mish Church hath been in a languishing and decaying Condi∣tion ever since the appearing of the Witnesses, especially at the Reformation, 1517. 46 This refers to some second space of Repentance afforded the Apostasie, before the pouring out of the Vials; which may be probably the time allotted to the uttering of the Voices, Chap. 14. by which Babylon was called to Repentance.
23 And I will kill her [Idolatrous] Children 47 [i. e. her Prose∣lytes and Followers,] with death [i. e. I will certainly, and utterly destroy them;] and [by the greatness of the Punishment] all the Churches [of the World] shall know, that I am he which 48 searcheth the Ris [i. e. the Desires] and Hearts [i. e. the Thoughts, and can discern the Sincerity of them:] and I will give unto every one of you according to your works [and not according to your subtile and fair pretences.] 47 As the Disciples of the Prophets are called, the Sons of the Prophets; and as Timothy and Mark are called Paul's Sons in Scripture, because they were his Disciples, and were con∣verted by him; so are the Proselytes of Jezebel called here the Children of her spiritual Whoredom, as being brought o∣ver to the Apostasie by her subtile Enticements, and by the power of those Kings and Princes especially, who were of her Communion, and thereby had committed Adultery with her. 48 From whence it appears, that the Apostasie made use of plausible Insinuations to seduce Men to their Communion; and an appearance of Piety and Religion. 24 But unto you I say, and 49 to the rest in Thyatyra [that is, the Remnant of this Succession, which shall continue until I come in my Kingdom, Verse 25, 26.] as many [of you. I mean,] as have not [held and approved] this [Idolatrous] 50 Doctrine [of the Apo∣stasie before-mentioned, Verse 20.] and which have not known [so as to hold, and approve] the depths 51 of Satan [i. e. the Antichristian Mysteries and Policies] as 52 they [of the pure Church of Thyatira,] speak [or call them;] I will put upon you no other burthen 53 [of Com∣mand.] 49 The Church of Thyatira is distinguished into Two In∣tervals, viz. one before, and at the Reformation; the other after it, which is to last until Christ's Coming in his Kingdom, when upon the appearance of that Succession, their last works shall be greater than their former. The first Interval is deno∣ted
here by You; that is, you who are now in being: the second by , the Rest, or the Remnant. See Chap. 3, 2.11, 13. 50 By  are meant in Scripture, Sentences, or Para∣bles; and Precepts, or Discourses tending to Doctrine and Man∣ners; for so the Word is frequently used in the New Testa∣ment: of which sort there were many false and erroneous ones amongst the Jews, as appears from Heb. 13.9. and amongst the Primitive Christians, falsly attributed to the Apostles, and Apostolical Men. 51 The profound Mysteries, such as Transubstantiation, and Infallibity, and the deep Politick Devices of the Apostasie; are called here Satanical Depths: in opposition to the My∣steries of Christianity, called deep things of God, and the Depth, Rom. 11.33. 1 Cor. 2.10. 52 It was the chief Accusation of the Waldenses, the pure Christians of this Succession, that they called the Papacy, Ba∣bylon, and Antichrist; and adapted the Prophecies of this Book to that Church, as may be seen in a Treatise put forth by them, A. D. 1120. and printed in Perrin's History of them. 53 A Phrase taken from Acts 15.28. Where Ordinances, or Commandments are called Burthens; as they are also Matth. 23.4. And Christ here assures them, that he would not charge them with any Injunctions of doing their first Works, or repenting as he had done the other Churches; but bids them only stick close to what they held, and maintained; approving thereby their Integrity and Purity. 25 But that [or those necessary things, Acts 15.28.] which ye have already [believed and held] hold fast till I come [in my King∣dom.] 26 And he [i. e. that Body of Men, or those Persons] that over∣cometh [the Corruptions of this State,] and keepeth my 54 Works [or the Precepts and Commandments, which I have given them, and
enabled them to perform] unto the end [of time when Christ's Kingdom shall come, Rev. 10.6, 7.] to him will I [then] give pow∣er over the 55 Nations [or Gentiles, that is, the Apostasie, and their A∣bettors.] 54 They are called Christ's Works, in opposition to the Depths of Satan; which are the Works of the Devil, John 8.41, 44. And by his Works are meant Holy Worship and Practice, and the most vigorous Opposition of the Apo∣stasie. 55 As being no better than meer Gentiles, by reason of their Idolatry. 27 (And he [or the Saints of this Church-State] shall rule them [the Antichristian Party, and their Abettors] with a Rod of Iron, [that is, with just Severity] and as the Vessels of a Potter, shall they, be broken to shivers) [i. e. their Church-State shall be dissolved easily and irreparably; and I will give him power over the Nations,] even as I received [Power] of my Father [Psalm 2.9. for they shall reign with me.] 28 And I will give him the 56 Morning-Star, [i. e. these Witnesses shall first arise, and give early Notice of the approaching glorious State of Christ's Kingdom.] 56 A Phrase made use of by the Holy Ghost, in 2 Pet. 1.19. with reference to this very matter; where Prophetical Scripture is likened unto a light shining in a dark place, which yet not∣withstanding its Obscurity, was a more sure word then a Pri∣vate Voice from Heaven, and which might be understood not∣withstanding the dark state we are in, provided they be not in∣terpreted according to our own Natural Ʋnderstanding, called there, the VVill of Man; nor according to a Private Interpretati∣on; but according to the VVill of God, speaking in, and by the Holy Penmen; which is a Publick Interpretation; because it is taken from the Common Analogy of Scripture, (Rom. 12.6.)
and is agreeable to the VVritings of All the Holy Men of God; whose Spiritual Things are to be compared one with another, that so we may have a Publick Standard of Interpretation in the Church; and because it proceeds (although in an ordinary manner) from the same1 Cor. 6-16.12, 4. spirit (which alone knows the things of God) which at first moved the Holy Prophets; which is One, and agreeable to it self in all its Gifts and Operati∣ons; and which, when it incited them to speak and write, gave them not Prophecies of a private Sense, as relating only to private and particular persons; but which were to be un∣derstood in a Publick Sense, concerning Christ, his Church, and Kingdom. But although they may be understood by us, yet the Apostle tells us, that it will not be without great difficulty, until the Day shall dawn, and the Day Star arise in our Hearts; by which the appearance of Christ in his King∣dom is meant, who is called, Rev. 22.16. the bright and Morn∣ing Star; the first Dawnings and Approachings of whose Kingdom may be meant by the Morning Star; as the King∣dom in its full Glory, may be understood by the Bright Morn∣ing-Star. And therefore by the Morning-Star in this place is understood the Remnant (or the rest) of this Succession, which shall last until the Succession of Christ's Kingdom begins; and who shall (as the Morning-Star riseth before the Sun) give no∣tice of his Approach, by some more than ordinary works and Manifestations of it: Which we hope and pray, that the Lord will soon accomplish (and if he has vouchsafed to his Servants any Knowledge of Times and Seasons, it cannot be far off) by raising the poor oppressed Churches of the Valleys; who were the Morning-Star, or the first Visible Body of Witnes∣ses, before the Reformation; and we hope will arise, and that speedily, before Christ's Appearance in his Glorious King∣dom; for they have hitherto shined (according to their
own MysteriousMr. Leger Histoir. des Vaudois. Device, which is a lighted Taper, in a Candlestick, environed with Seven Stars, in a dark place, with this Motto, Lux lucet in Tenebris) amidst the Darkness of the Apostasie; And may Christ give unto them, and that quickly, the Morning-Star of his Glorious Presence. Amen, Amen, come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. 29 He that hath an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the Churches [i e. this is a Mysterious Truth, worthy the utmost Consideration.]
CHAP. III. The Text. 1 AND unto the Angel of the Church in 1 Sardis, write, These things saith he that 2 hath the Seven Spirits of God, [see Chap. 1.4.] and the Seven Stars, [Chap. 1.16, and 2, 1.] I know [and observe] thy Works, that thou hast a Name 3 [or a more than ordi∣nary Repute,] that thou livest [according to Christ's Doctrine, and art zealous in the Outward Profession of it;] 4 and [or, but] art [indeed] dead 5 [as to the perfect Purity of Religion, and its Life and Power, over thy Faith and Manners, Eph. 2.1. 1 Tim. 5.6. 2 Tim. 3.5. James 2.20.] Annotations on CHAP. III. 1 Sardes, or Sardis, is distant about Thirty Three Miles from Thyatira, Southward; It was antiently, as appears by its Ruines, a Magnificent, Splendid, and Proud City, as be∣ing the Seat of King Croesus; for which Reason, (as well as from an Allusion to the Precious Stones of that Name, whichHist. Lib. 37.8. Pliny asserts were called so from this Place, as being first found there) it may typifie, a splendid and stately Church-suc∣cession, which has a Name, or a Repute in the World. It is now (as the Learned DoctorNotit. Septem Asiae Eccles. pag. 133. Smith, an Eye-witness, te∣stifies, (who could not but weep at the sight of it) a most miserable Village, inhabited only by Shepherds and Herdsmen, and a few ignorant Christians, without Church or Priest;
whereby may be providentially set forth the Real Deadness of this Church-state, and the Desolation it is to suffer. 2 Sardis is thought to be the Type of the Churches of the Reformation, under the Favour and Protection of Reformed Princes, in a condition of External Splendor: Because, (1.) It succeeds that of Thyatira, which is the Type of Reformed Churches, under the Tyranny of Popish Princes; to which State the Reformation succeeded, begun by Luther, A. D. 1517. (2.) Because there is no mention made of Balaam, or Jeze∣bel, or Nicolaitism, in this Succession; which shews, that they had escaped from under the power of the Apostasy, typified by them. (3.) Because the same Title is given to Christ here, as is made use of in the Ephesine Succession, the Type of the A∣postolical Church; whereby seems to be intimated, that the Church began now to be Reformed according to the First Pri∣mitive and Apostolical Pattern: only it is here Remarkable, that it is not said, that Christ holdeth the Seven Stars in his Right Hand, but barely, that he hath them; to shew, perhaps, by the Omission of those Remarkable Words, that they had departed from the True Apostolical Model, which Christ had or held in his Right Hand; that is, had in great Honour. Nei∣ther is this to be taken for a groundless, and a loose Interpre∣tation; or a Licentious Fancy (as Dr. Hammond calls the like Conjectures of Mr. Brightman,) seeing, that in such a Concise Prophecy, God (whose Glory it is to conceal a thing, Prov. 25.2.) hath given us sometimes but slender hints, or intimations of great Truths; and that the Addition, or taking away of but a Letter in a Name, (as in the Names of Abra∣ham, Sarah, and Jeconiah; for which see Grotius on Jerem. 22.24.) is of great import in Scripture. And of how much greater signification then, may be the leaving out so material a part of Christ's Title, in a Prophecy so brief and mysteri∣ous?
3 From whence it appears, that this Church has a Reputati∣on in the World for its outward profession; but is very much wanting in inward Life, Truth and Holiness. 4 So And frequently signifies in Scripture. 5 Ephesus had only lost its First Love; but this Church was really dead, as to the True Spirit and Power of the Gospel, and the perfect simplicity and purity of it. 2 Be watchful [in observing the Times and Seasons of Christ's coming, Dan. 12.12. Matth 24.42-51. Rev. 16.15.] and strengthen [or uphold, and sustain,] the things 6 which remain [i. e. the necessary Truths which shall remain until Christ's coming; and which thou hast kept entire; but] that are ready to die [as to the Power and Life of them:] for I have not found thy works [of Reformation, according to the Gospel,] 7 perfect before God [so as to be able to stand before the Glory of his Kingdom, when it shall begin to appear; or to endure the Severity of his Tryal, whatsoever Esteem they may have amongst Men, Luke 16.15.] 6 By , or the rest, seems to be meant those Necessary Works, and Articles of Belief, which they had kept alive, or entire; and were to remain, during the following Successi∣on of the Church, until Christ's Coming, as being Necessary Truths, which would endure Tryal; and were essential to the being of it, as a Church: in which sense , and  is taken in this Prophecy; as , signi∣fies in Authors, the remaining, or succeeding part of the Day. 7 Filled up, or compleated, as the Rude Lineaments of a Picture, are said to be filled up by a Painter, when he comes to draw it to the Life; See Hammond on Matth. 5.17. Here this Church is blamed for not carrying on the Reformation to its utmost perfection; and for suffering necessary Truths to decay, and be almost ready to die.
3 Remember 8 therefore how [i. e. with what Sincerity and Zeal,] thou hast received, and heard [the Doctrine of Truth, at the begin∣ning of the Reformation;] and hold fast [what thou didst then receive,] and repent [of thy Deadness, Verse 1. thy Negligence and imperfections, Verse 2. and thy Departure from the Princi∣ples thou hast received and heard.] If therefore thou shalt not watch 9 [and wait for the Kingdom of God, Mark 15.43.] I will come on thee, as a Thief 10 [i. e. unexpectedly,] and thou shalt not know [by reason of not watching over the Times and Seasons which God has shewn unto his Servants,] what hour I will come unto thee [in my Kingdom, and discover thy Defects, and Unsuitableness to it.] 8 Here they are called upon to look back upon the Model of their First Reformation, which they had swerved from; and to hold fast those Principles, and to repent and amend what was faulty. 9 Here is intimated, as also in the second Verse, that this Church was careless, and slow to believe, and expect Christ's second coming in his Kingdom, before the Day of Judg∣ment. 10 This Phrase signifies in Scripture, a sudden and a surpri∣sing Judgment; as Matth. 24.42, 43. Luke 22.39, 40. 1 Thes. 5.2. And here is intimated the sudden coming of the Kingdom of Christ upon this Church, to its great surprize and amazement; occasioned by its ignorance of the disagreeable∣ness of its own State to it; or it's not knowing that it would have come so soon, or that she should have been so entirely removed by its First Appearances. 4 Thou hast a few Names 11 [or excellent Persons, Acts 1.15.] e∣ven in Sardis [although almost dead;] which have not defiled [no, not] their Garments [Jude 23: but have carefully avoided all the Corruptions of this State, and have had their Works perfect be∣fore God;] and they shall walk with me in white 12 [Garments; i. e. be favoured by me, and honoured in my Kingdom, and be justi∣fied,
and declared righteous:] for they are [in my sight] worthy [of it; as having kept themselves white, or undefiled.] 11 Excellent persons, and therefore known by Name, as Exod. 33.12. God is said to know Moses by Name; that is, after a special and particular manner. Or it is a Metaphor, either from Moses's taking the Names of the Children of Israel, Numb. 3.40, 43.26, 53, 54. or from the High priests bearing their Names upon the Stones on his Breast-plate; which being the Foundation Stones of the New Jerusalem, (Chap. 21.) the Names written on them, may be put to signifie Excellent, A∣postolical Members of the Church. But here we are to note, that these Excellent and undefiled persons, were but a few; and therefore it is dangerous to fol∣low the Majority, or Multitude of this Church, according to what is observed concerning the SardianBoet. de Gemmis. 2. 80. Stone that it hath but a very little of a pale or white colour mixt with its red. 12 Or shining Garments, (Matth. 17.2.) which were such as Kings used to wear, and bestow upon their Favourites; whereby also Chearfulness and Innocence is signified, and Pu∣rity and Righteousness, Eccles. 9.8. Rev. 19.8. And from this Verse we may observe, That this Church may be Communicated with without sin; there being some of its Members (although a few) who remain in it, without being defiled: and that the whole Church is spoken to, and is said to have those Exellent Names, and the undefiled Names are not blamed for having, or suffering the corrupt, as in Pergamus, and Thyatira; which are manifest Indications, that Sardis is not an Apostatical, but a True, and a Reformed Church. 5 He that overcometh [the Corruptions of this State] the same shall be clothed in white Raiment [Vers. 4. Rev. 19.8.] and I will not blot 13 out his Name out of the Book of Life [i. e. he shall be enrolled amongst the Members of my Kingdom, Dan. 12.1. Rev. 13, 7.17, 8.20, 12, 15.21, 27.22, 19.] but I will 14 confess his Name before
my Father, and before his Angels [i. e. I will make him be publick∣ly acknowledged and commended at the last day.] 13 This Phrase occurs, Exod. 32.32. Psalm 69.28. and seems to be taken from the Custom recorded, Ezra 2.62, 63. where we read, That the Jews kept Registers of the Genealo∣gies of their Priests; in which, if a man were not found, he was put from the Priesthood, as polluted. It was also an anti∣ent Custom (alluded to, as some think, in this place) of En∣rolling the Names of Citizens, and Blotting them out of the Publick Registers, when they had forfeited that Priviledge; From whence also came the Custom of blotting Names out of the Diptychs of the Church. But from whatsoever Custom the Phrase is taken, it plainly relates to the Rewards which will be bestowed upon the Saints of this Church-Interval in Christ's Kingdom. 14 Expressions taken from the Day of Judgment; noting the Gracious Requital Christ will afford them, for confessing his Name in greatest purity, Matth. 10.32. Luke 12.8. 6 He that hath an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. 7 And to the Angel of the Church in 15 Philadelphia, write, These things saith he that is holy, [or the Holy, who will shortly erect a holy Church, and Kingdom,] and he that is true [or The True; who will bring to pass what he has promised concerning his Church;] he that hath the Key 16 of David [i. e. full power of dis∣posing all things concerning his Kingdom;] he that openeth [a Door to his People;] and no man shutteth [against them;] and shut∣teth [against his Enemies] and no man openeth [i. e. hath Sovereign and irresistible Power; and will conduct his People through all Difficulties, to such a Church-State, as they shall never be depri∣ved of by their Enemies.] 15 Sardis represents those Churches of the Reformation, which have a Repute, or Name in the World, but want the
inward Life and Spirit of the Gospel; and Philadelphia seems to be the Type of the Reformed Churches which are low in Outward Strength and Esteem, but very strict in observing Christ's Word and Commands; which Characters I shall not venture to adapt to any particular Churches; but leave them to the impartial consideration of all concerned, as they may be gathered from the Text it self. Philadelphia is distant a∣bout Twenty seven Miles from Sardis, a City (as Strabo notes) never very Populous and Famous, because it was sub∣ject to Earthquakes; which yet withstood the Fury of theSmith de Statu Sept. Eccles. Turks with great Constancy and Gallantry, when all the rest of Asia had submitted; and has nowSpoon's Voyages. in it Four Churches of Greeks, and about Two Thousand Christians: which are no contemptible Remarks, as to our present pur∣pose, and would induce a Man to think, that the Divine Wisdom has afforded us some faint Resemblances of the little outward strength or power of this Church-state, and of its strict adherence to the Truth, and of the Ample Reward God will afford it; even in the Fate of the City from which it is de∣nominated. And, (if any thing be to be gathered from the Names of these Churches) the Nature and Qualities of this State are plainly discovered in its Name; Philadelphia signi∣fying Brotherly Love; as if this Church-State were to be esta∣blished upon that Principle, and not upon power outward splendor and superiority, Luke 22.24-30. See Grotius on that place, and on the parallel places in the Gospel. 16 An Expression taken from Isa. 22.22. where Eliakim (a Type of Christ, as his very Name imports, signifying one raised, or setled by God) has the Key of the House of David given him; whereby is denoted, Christ's Government over his Church; a Key being an Ensign of Government; and David's
House, Family, or Court, being a Type of the Church, espe∣cially as it shall be in the New Jerusalem, the City of David, or the Messias, who is the Great King of it. 8 I know thy Works [to be perfect before God:] behold [and 17 let it be noted and remarked,] I have set before thee, [or, given thee,] an open 18 door [i. e. a hopeful occasion, and means, of free∣ly and effectually propagating the Truth; and a prospect of bet∣ter things, and greater Liberty;] and no man [although they shall often attempt it,] can [be able to] shut it, [or, hinder you of this Liberty; but it shall continue accompanied with great efficacy, notwithstanding your many Adversaries, until my coming;] for thou hast a little [outward 19, worldly] strength [Force and Pow∣er to protect and countenance thee;] and [yet for all that] hast kept 20 my Word [or Gospel; as to Faith and Practice purely and entirely; and hast discharged thy Office faithfully:] and hast not denied my Name 21 [by entertaining any degrees of Anti-Christian Corruptions, which bear not my Name, or were not instituted by me, but hast openly avowed and professed my Name, as sole King and Law-giver of my Church.] 17 Behold, is a Particle denoting the importance of the thing to be delivered. 18 This is the true Import of the Phrase: for which see and compare Hosea 2.15. Acts 14.27. 1 Cor. 16.9. 2 Cor. 2.12. Colos. 4.3. And from this, and what follows, we may take notice, that this Church, although often denied Li∣berty of Preaching the Gospel (in which sense Grotius un∣derstands the shutting of the Door here mentioned,) should yet enjoy it, in despight of all opposition, and never have it wholly shut against them; and that this open Door, should af∣ford them a Prospect, and a hope and confidence of enjoying a more perfect State of things. 19 By Strength cannot here be understood inward and spi∣ritual strength, or Zeal and Courage to propagate the Truth, with all Boldness and Success; for that was great in them, and they have a high Character and Commendation given them for
it, by our Saviour; But by Strength must be understood, out∣ward humane Strength, Advantages and Authority, in respect of Birth, Power, Reputation for Learning, Riches, or the like; in which the Might of this World consists, 1 Cor. 1.25-28. but especially Countenance and Protection from the Secular Powers; of which they had but little, as having been in a pa∣tient afflicted Condition, and under Restraints; as appears from Vers. 8, 10. 20 To keep Christ's word, denotes their faithful preaching, and professing the Gospel, and their strict adherence to it, which is called, keeping the Charge of the Lord, in the Old Testament; which Ministers are to do in their own Persons; as appears from Ezek. 44.8. where, in a Vision of the New Jerusalem, (when this Philadelphian State comes to its perfection) those Priests are reprehended by God, who kept not the Charge of his holy things, but set keepers of them in his Sanstuary for themselves. 21 By Name here seems to be meant, the Name written on his Vesture, Rev. 19.16. viz. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; that is, Supreme Disposer of all the Kingdoms of the World, and sole Governour of his Church, which is his King∣dom. And this strict adherence of this Church, to the Word or Commandments of God only, is opposed to the departure of the Sardian and Ephesine Succession, from what they had re∣ceived and heard. 9 Behold I will 22 make them [who are] of the [part of the] 23 Syna∣gogue of Satan, [and by them, I mean those] which say they are Jews [or Pure, Primitive Christians] and are not, but do lye [by such false pretences:] Behold I will make them [by my providence and in∣ward convictions] to come and Worship before thy Feet [i. e. to shew 24 the greatest honour and submission unto thee; learn of thee; and joyn in Communion with thee; although in an inferior de∣gree of esteem,] and to know [i. e. be convinced, and acknowledg,] that I have Loved thee [as my pure and undefiled Church, Cant. 6.
4, 9. and have shewn it by preserving thee, notwithstanding all their endeavours to the contrary.] 22 In the Greek it is, I give, the Present for the Future, as is usual; and them is added as a necessary Supplement; and the Words supplied as they ought to be, may be very well rendred thus; Behold, I will give unto thee them of the Synagogue; i. e. I will bring them, or fetch them in, and present them unto thee. 23 By the Synagogue of Satan, is meant (as has been shewn on Chap. 2.9.) those who in the Smyrnaean Succession, intro∣duced Blasphemous or Idolatrous Doctrines and Practices into the Church, under pretence of Judaism or Israelitism; that is, pure, and primitive Christianity: and therefore by Conse∣quence, here must be meant, some of the Reformation (that Interval, or Succession being here described), who lie, and de∣ceive others by the same false pretence; not into Satanical, or Antichristian Blasphemy or Idolatry; but Defilements, (Verse 9.) that is, Corrupt Additions to God's Worship; which are cal∣led, Defilements, or impure Mixtures, by the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 43.8. and Lyes, Prov. 30.6. Isa. 29.13. But yet we are to take notice, that they are not called, The Synagogue of Satan; but They, or Them of the Synagogue; to signifie, that only a Prevailing Party amongst them were defiled; and that their Errors were not Idolatrous (as theirs were who are reprehended in the Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, called therefore, The Synagogue of Satan) but corrupt, or defiled, and false, or lying Additions; which yet were not so much their own Inventions, as taken up by them from Anti∣quity; whence they are called, not The Synagogue, but Of the Synagogue; as being of their party, and Imitators of them, under pretext of Conformity to the Ancient Synagogue of the Smyrnaean Succession, which first introduced those Corrupti∣ons.
24 All which may be implied in this Phrase; to lye prostrate at ones Feet, being the highest Act of Honour and Submissi∣on, amongst the Eastern Nations; for so Joseph's Brethren (which may be no unfit Type of what is here foretold), Gen. 42, 6.44.14. who had been the Authors of his Afflictions, came and bowed down before him to the ground, when he was exalted to be the Chief Governour in Aegypt: and it being also a Custom for Scholars to sit at the Feet of their Masters; to Worship at their Feet, may denote their learning of them, and joyning with them in their Worship, but as in an inferiour de∣gree of Knowledge and Esteem; according to the Expressions of the Prophet, Isa. 60.14. from whence this place seems to be taken. And the words also may be interpreted thus, to come and worship [God] before thy Feet; according to a pa∣rallel place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.25. 10 Because thou hast kept [and observed] the word 25 [or precept] of my patience [i. e. of the Patience which I taught, and practised; especially in expecting, with me, the coming of my Kingdom; and that in a low and mean condition:] I also will keep thee [or this Church State entire] from the hour [or suddain and unexpected time] of 26 Temptation [or general Tryal;] which shall come upon all the World to try them that dwell on the Earth [whether their Church States are pure or no; and to purify some, and destroy others, Dan. 12.1. Malach. 3.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor. 3.11.-15.] 25  signifies a Precept or Doctrine of Patience; in the sense that , or Word, is taken, 1 Cor. 1.18. and to keep the Word (as the Phrase is frequently used in John's Gos∣pel) is to observe that Precept; and that chiefly with reference to a patient Expectation of Christ's Coming, as the Phrase is taken 2 Thes. 3.5. and Rev. 1.9. 26 This, I suppose, is to be understood concerning the pour∣ing out of the Vials; as shall be endeavoured to be shewn, when they come to be considered.
11 Behold I come [to try and judg them,] quickly [or on a sudden after this period of the Church begins to appear;] hold that fast which thou hast [received and kept,] that no man take 27 thy Crown [i e. rob thee of that reward thou shalt have in my Kingdom.] 27 No Churches so perfect, but that it is possible for them, if left to themselves, to be perverted; and no Man so nigh the Goal, but he may lose the Prize, if he be not, by the Grace of God, made watchful, and careful. And here we are to ob∣serve, that these Promises are taken from the New Jerusalem-state in Christ's Kingdom, and that they are made after the most ample and plainest manner to this Church-state; because of its greatest purity, and patience, in expecting that Kingdom, and its fitness to receive it, in the near approach of it in the New Jerusalem. 12 [For] Him that overcometh [the temptations of this poor and despised Church State,] will I make a 28 Pillar in the Temple of my God [i. e. he shall be a Member of a strong, fixt, and stable Church State,] and he shall go no more out [of it, for it shall not be changed.] And I will write 29 upon him [or, upon this Pillar] the Name of my God [Jehovah] and the Name of the City of my God [The Lord is there, Ezek. 48.35.] which is 30 new Jerusalem [i. e. the prefect Gospel State in Christ's Kingdom, Hebr. 12.22.] which cometh down out of Heaven from my God [i. e. shall be established by God's more immediate Power, and by abundant Manifestati∣ons of Gifts and Graces, Ezek. 43.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Gal. 4.26. see on Rev. 21.2, 3.] and I will write upon him my new Name [Rev. 19.16.22, 4. i. e. he shall be 31 a Member of my Kingdom, who am King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. See before on verse 8. and Isa. 56.5. Rev. 19.12.] 28 In allusion to the Two Pillars before Solomon's Temple, called Iachin and Booz, from their strength and stability, 1 Kings 7.15, 21. The Apostles also are called Pillars, Gal. 2.9. and the Church, the Pillar of Truth, 1 Tim. 3.15. and Christians are compared to a Temple, and its Stones or Pillars, Eph. 2.21. 1 Pet. 2.5.
29 This may perhaps be an Allusion to the Inscriptions which were used to be put upon Pillars. Hence the Title of the sixteenth Psalm is in the Greek rendred, An Inscription up∣on a Pillar; and Absalom's Pillar, 2 Sam. 18.18. might have probably his Name graven on it. 30 New is often in Scripture put for excellent, or perfect. And this State may be called New, because the visible Glory of it did then first appear; and it was a strange, or new thing, it being known, or believed before by few. 31 For to be called, and to be, are of the same import in the Hebrew Phrase. 13 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. 14 And unto the Angel of the Church of the 32 Laodiceans write; these things saith the Amen 33 [i. e. The God of Truth, Isa. 65.16. who will perform what he has promised, 2 Cor. 1.20. and will in this period put a final end to all things;] the Faithful and True Witness [who hath performed punctually, what hath been hi∣therto promised by the Father, and will go on to do so to the end; although the Truths he hath delivered may seem never so incredible, Chap. 1.5.] the beginning 34 of the Creation of God [i. e. of the First Creation of all things; and of the New Crea∣tion or Constitution of things after the Resurrection, of which he was the first Born from the Dead, Col. 1.18. Rev. 1, 5.21, 1.] 32 This State succeeds the Philadelphian State, and there∣fore must be after the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, or the New Jerusalem, of which Philadelphia is a Type, as ap∣pears from Verse 12. It seems to be a State in which there was a great Remissness of the extraordinary Zeal which was shewn in the former Succession, during Christ's Kingdom; and its Name denoting (as Grotius remarks) The Judging of the People, it may from thence be probably concluded, that it is that State, during which the great Judiciary Act of Judging the People, or Nations, is to be performed. Rev. 20.8-15.
where occasion will be given of discoursing more largely of this Matter. It was once a most Famous and Rich City, as this Church-state is described to be at the seventeenth Verse, but is now only a heap of Ruines, and inhabited by none but wild Beasts; so that Monsieur Spoon, after all his search, could not find out where its Church stood; Christ having spewed it utterly out of his Mouth. 33 Amen signifies Truth; and denotes also the End, or Con∣clusion; and being put before what follows, concerning the beginning of the Creation of God, implies, that what con∣cerns the End of Church-states, is the chief thing typified by this Church. 34 Christ is said to be the beginning of the Creation of God, (1.) Because he was in the beginning with God, when all things were made by him, John 1.1. as being the first born of every Creature; that is, being above, and before all Crea∣tures whatsoever, and the Cause of them, Col. 1.15-17. (2.) because he was the beginning of the New Creation, or Constitution of things under the Gospel, Col. 1.18. 2 Cor. 5.17. and the Author of the New Heavens, and New Earth; or the New and Excellent State of things in his Kingdom upon Earth. And (3.) because he is the Beginning, the First Born from the dead, Colos. 1.18. which Title he here takes, because this Church-Period extends until the End of all Earthly Things; when follows the beginning of the New Creation or Constitution of things in his Kingdom of Glory. But of this more on the Three last Chapters. 15 I know thy works [and thy whole state and condition,] that thou art neither cold [i. e. neither void of all zeal for that Philadel∣phian glorious State of my Kindom, which is now withdrawn from the very new Earth, Rev. 20.11.] nor hot [i e. nor fervent∣ly zealous for it, according to the extraordinary Love which that State requires:] I 35 would [that I may speak after the man∣ner of men,] thou wert cold [for then being destitute of all Love, which is the Life of a Christian Church, thou wouldest be in a
deadly state, and fitted for destruction] or 36 hot [for then the vehement flame of thy Love, would have been irresistible, nd unextinguishable; and all things here below, would have been utterly contemned, in respect of me; Cant. 8.6, 7.] 35 Christ does not wish that they were cold, simply and absolutely, but comparatively, that they were rather so, than in such a State of Indifferency, which was dangerous to them∣selves, and more troublesome and displeasing, in some respects, unto himself. And the whole Expression is taken from the manner in which Men are wont to express themselves, when any thing is displeasing unto them; and is not to be too Rigorously insisted upon in every part of the Simili∣tude. 36 By Heat and Fire is meant Divine Love in Scrip∣ture; and by Coldness, on the contrary, is meant the absolute privation of it, which is the Death of the Soul, whose Life consists in the Love of God and Christ. This appears from several Expressions, especially in the Book of Canticles; where (Chap. 8.6, 7.) the Spouse, which is Christ's Church, in its most lovely Philadelphian State, in his Kingdom; repre∣sents the Love it has for him, by a strong vehement flame, or heat, such a one as can be kindled only from the Lord (as the Words may be translated), and which could not possibly be extinguished; nor could be translated from him to any o∣ther; but perfectly contemned and rejected all Earthly things, when they stood in competition with him. Now this being the Love which the Spouse had for Christ, in its perfect State (which is elegantly set forth in that Book) the Heat which is here wanting in this Laodicean State, must be such a fervent one, as that was, which was in the foregoing State; which was vehement, heavenly, overcoming all Difficulties, and preferring Christ, and things above, beyond all Earthly things whatsoever; yea, counting them as dross and dung, when compared with Christ. See Grotius, and Dr. Patrick on Canticles 8.6, 7.
16 So then [or therefore, after all this long debate within my self, what I should do with thee, which art so troublesome, and uneasy to me; this is the conclusion of the whole matter, that] because thou art 37 luke-warm, and neither cold [as some of the other Church-states were, which I have therefore destroyed,] nor hot [to the degrees of the state of the new Jerusalem, so that I can∣not pitch my Tabernacle any longer with thee, nor take thee up unto me, except thou overcomest the evils of this State, by following my counsels and hearkning to my rebukes, Rev. 20.11.21, 2, 3.] I will [I speak still after the manner of men, be∣cause of your infirmity,] spew 38 thee out of my mouth [i. e. I will wholly rid me of the uneasiness I have been under, and will have neither thee, nor any other Church-state any more upon Earth] 37 By Lukewarmness is not meant an indifferency to all Religion; but an indifference to that higher, Heavenly State of Love and Glory, which Philadelphia was raised to. For it is plain, from a diligent compare of this Prophecy, that after the Philadelphian State of a Thousand Years, there is to be another Church state; which is called (Rev. 20.9.) The Camp of the Saints, and the Beloved City; which must be this State of Laodicea, because it is the only one that remains af∣ter the Philadelphian; and therefore its Lukewarmness must be such as is consistent with the Love of God (for else the Members of it could not have been said to be loved by Christ, Verse 19.) and is only so in respect of the higher Fervors of the Philadelphian State, which is the HolyCanticl. .6, 7. Rev. 20, 11.21, 2, 3. City, which comes down from Heaven, like a Bride, with a most vehement Flame of Love for Christ her Husband; and after a Thousand Years of True Glory, was translated, or fled away with Christ into Heaven, into a Glorious State of Eternity; whereas this State is described, as being on the Earth, (Rev. 20.9.) and as retaining too much Love to the Glories and Enjoyments of
their Earthly State; although the Lustre of the Presence of Christ, manifested, during the Thousand Years, was with∣drawn; and as not having such a vehement Love for being with Christ, as to contemn all the Gold and Riches (which are mentioned in the next Verse) and all the Worldly substance of its Earthly State, for a Heavenly State with Christ; which it would have done, if it had had the Love of the Spouse in the Canticles. 38 This is a Metaphor from lukewarm Water, which pro∣vokes Vomiting, and casts off from a sickly Stomach what loads it, and is nauseous or uneasie to it; and is used in Scri∣ptureLevit. 18.25, 28.20, 22. Jerem. 9.19. Ezek. 36.13. to signifie the utter dispeopling of a Nation: in which sense it seems here to be taken for the total removal of this, and all other such like Church-States; as being uneasie to Christ, because of their imperfections; who would now be no more contented with any State but a Heavenly, Perfect, and Ʋnchangeable one; such a one, as no Waters could quench, nor any Floods drown, and which was to be set, as a Seal upon his Heart, Canticl. 8.6, 7. And accordingly, Christ is here representented, as uneasie under this State, rather than angry with it; and as deliberating, and at last resolving what to do with it; which is intimated by , an Illative Particle, no∣ting a Conclusion drawn from Premises deliberated of, and con∣sidered; and the Result is, That he could not indeed de∣stroy them in his Anger, by Fire from Heaven, as he would their Enemies, the Nations, (Rev. 20.9.) because he had a Love for them, and they were not cold in their Love to him; neither could he take them in the State they were in, unto himself in Heaven; and therefore he was at last resolved to spew all Earthly Church states out of his Mouth, and have no more
such upon Earth, by reason of the Imperfections and Corrup∣tions they were subject to, when left to themselves, and his more immediate presence was withdrawn from them. 17 [And this will I do] because 39 thou sayest I am [still as] rich [as I was before, and in the possession of the same Glorious State;] and [not only so] but I am encreased with Goods, and [which is more,] have need of nothing [but am in a perfect, self-sufficient State:] and knowest not [such is the ignorance of Man when left to himself,] that thou art wretched [or, The wretched, full of wants and defects;] and miserable [or, The miserable, in a help∣less condition,] and poor [in grace, and glory] and blind [or igno∣rant, seeing not thy wants, nor the remedy of them,] and naked [or i a shameful condition; in respect of the former; now the Bride, and her Husband are retired, and God dwelleth not with thee, Rev. 20, 11.21, 2, 3, 4.] 39 Here is shewn the Ground of their Lukewarmness, and the Reason why Christ would spew them out; because they thought that their present State was as Glorious as their for∣mer; and as much to be chosen, as that which had the full Glo∣ry of the New Jerusalem. 18 [And therefore,] I counsel thee [out of my Love to thee, verse 19.] to buy [or, obtain and procure] of me [what I will freely give thee, if thou will be sensible of thy own unwor∣thiness, and inability of thy self to procure it, Isa. 55.1, 2.] Gold tried in the fire [i. e. the most precious and most pure Wis∣dom of my Kingdom in Heaven above, Prov. 2, 4.3, 14. Zeck. 13.9. Math. 13.44, 45, 46. 1 Pet. 1.7.] that thou mayest be rich [in good and perfect works before God, Luke 12.21. 1 Tim. 6.17, 18.] and white raiment [i. e. unspotted and perfect Holiness, such as is required in my Kingdom;] that thou mayest be Cloathed [with my Righteousness, Rev. 19.8.] and the shame of thy nakedness [or thy shameful nakedness] do not appear [when I come to Judgment, Rev. 20.12-15] and anoint thy eyes with Eye-Salve [i. e. with clear knowledg that thou mayst see and discern betwixt the dark and imperfect state thou art in, and the glo∣rious
entire light and perfection of the former, Rev. 21.23, 24.22, 5.] 19 [Thou art the Camp of my Saints upon Earth, and the beloved City, and therefore have I permitted the Nations to gather themselves to Battel against thee, and to encompass thee, Rev. 20.8, 9.] for as many as I Love [and whom I Love, I Love unto the end, John 13.1.] I rebuke [as I have done thee for thy lukewarmness] and chasten [by afflictions, as thou hast been by the coming up of Gog and Magog against thee, Rev. 20.8, 9.] be zealous therefore [after a higher, and a more glorious state, and that in Heaven,] and repent [of thy lukewarmness, for to this end have I rebuked and chastened thee.] 20 [And to shew what Love I have for thee] Behold [and let it be taken special notice of,] I stand [waiting with an unwearied patience,] at the door [of the Heart and Conscience of each per∣son amongst you,] and 40 knock [or use frequent and loud impor∣tunities, by the motions of my Holy Spirit, Cant. 5.2. Prov. 1.20-] if any 41 man [or any one of the Saints of this beloved City; for to them, and concerning them, I now speak, and not of their Church State, which I will certainly spew out of my Mouth;] hear [and obey] my 40 voice [and all that I have loved will do so, John 10.27, 28, 29.13, 1.] and open the door [of his Heart, by removing all wilful impediments;] I [who have now withdrawn my glorious presence,] will come unto him, and will sup with him, and he with me [i. e. I will dwell with him, pos∣sessing his Soul with my Gifts and Graces, and will communicate my self after a friendly and a familiar manner unto him in my Heavenly Kingdom, Luke 14.15. John 14.20, 23. Rev. 19, 9.21, 3.] 40 40 It was the antient custom to knock, and call aloud at the same time. 41 Christ before spoke to the Church of Laodicea; here he speaks to the Members of it; to whom he promises high∣er, and more intimate communications of himself; altho he had resolved to ease himself of their imperfect Church State.
21 To him [or that person,] that overcometh [the evils of this State, by hearing and obeying my voice, and opening unto me,] will I grant to sit with 42 me in my Throne [in my Kingdom, whilst I judg the Nations, Satan, Death and Hell; and then to reign with me to all Eternity; John 17.22-24. Rev. 20.8-15.] even as I also overcame [Temptations, Sin, Death and Hell,] and am 43 set down with my Father in his Throne [in Heaven John 17.5.] 42 Here Christ and his Saints are represented as sitting in one and the same Throne; in allusion to the Thrones of the antient Eastern Kings, which were very large, and in the form of a Bed or Couch, so that many persons might sit in them at once, Cant. 3.7. 43 Mr. MedePag. 905. observes on this verse, that although the glorified Saints are said to sit here with Christ on his Throne; that yet none but Christ God-Man is said to sit with the Father on his Throne; because no Creature is capa∣ble of the priviledge of sitting on God the Father's Right Hand in his Throne; that being a Godlike Royalty altogether incommunicable. 22 He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear, what the Spirit saith unto the Churches.
CHAP. IV. The Text. 1 AFter this * [first Prophetick Vision of the Seven Church∣es,] I looked [or, I was seeing 1 in a Prophetical Vision, Dan. 4.10] and behold a door was opened in Heaven [i. e. a Discovery was made of Divine secrets;] and the first voice [or, the former 2 voice of Christ which I heard at first, Chap. 1.10.] was as of a Trumpet [i. e. full of Power and Authority, Chap. 1.10.] talking with me, which said [come up hither unto me to have a nearer access to, and participation of Heavenly Secrets;] and I [for none else can;] will shew thee [in Symbols and representations,] things which must be hereafter [in a Succession, one after another.] Annotations on CHAP. IV. * The foregoing Vision contained in the Second and Third Chapters, may be called, The Church-Prophecy, because that in it the several successive States and Periods of the Church, from the beginning of it, at Christ's Resurrection, until the Kingdom of Christ, and the End of all things, are represent∣ed under the Types of Churches, the most proper Emblem of them: and that the following Vision (which may be called the Book-Prophecy, from its Events being repre∣sented in a Book with Seals), to which this, and the next Chapter are a Preface, is of the same signification and extent, shall be argued hereafter, as occasion shall require; and may at present be gathered from some Congruities observable in the Prefaces to each of them; as that John is spoken to here by a Trumpet, as he was in the former Preface in the first Chap∣ter; and is in the like Spiritual Extasie as he was then in;
which being Circumstances peculiar to these Two Visions, may argue them to be of the like Nature and Import. And here it is not improper to observe, that in this, and the following Chapter is chiefly contained, (1.) A Representation of the Throne, Divine Consistory, or Court of Judicature of Almighty God, which is to pass Judg∣ment upon the State of things throughout the whole Pro∣phecy. (2.) The setling and appointing of Christ, the Lamb, new∣ly risen from the Dead, to be the Supreme Governour, and Director of all the Events which were to come to pass, by giving him power to open the Book, and loose the Seals of it. (3.) We have here a Pre-representation (as there is upon all suitable occasions) of the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, the chief End of all the Visions, given us in Two Doxologies; sung by Angels, and the Representatives of the Christian and Jewish Church; who are, as it were, a Chorus to this Divine Drama; as the Virgins, Companions, Watchmen, and Shepherds are in the Book of Canticles; which is a Sacred Dramatick Poem, relating to Christ's Kingdom. See Dr. Patrick's Pre∣face on the Song of Solomon, and Dr. Beverley's Exposition of it. 1 From whence Prophecies are called Visions, and Prophets Seers in Scripture. Hammond. 2  is put for  here, and in other places of Scripture; as John 1, 15.15, 18. 1 John 4.19. and this is the same with the first Voice of a Trumpet, cap. 1.10. 2 And immediately I was in the Spirit [Chap. 1.10.] and behold, a Throne was set in Heaven [i. e. God appeared as King and Judg, Isa. 6.1. Ezek. 1.26. Dan. 7.9.] and one [i. e. God the Father, Chap. 5.7.] sat on the Throne [i. e. appeared in Majesty, and as in Judgment.] 3 And he that sat, was, to look upon [or was in appearance 3 and resemblance,] like a Jasper [i. e. Glorious, Rev. 20.11.] and
a Sardine 4 stone [i. e. Glorious but Terrible, Exod. 24.10. Ezek. 1.27] and there was a Rain-bow [i. e. his covenant of mercy and peace, and his mindfulness of it, Gen. 9.11-16. Isa. 54.8-10. Ezek. 1.28.] round about the Throne [so that it might always be in his remembrance,] in sight like unto an Emerald 5 [denoting the never failing mercies of his Covenant; and the most pleasant, and precious promises of it, and of his Kingdom.] 3 For he saw not God, but only his Glory; ad such Ap∣pearances as denote his Attributes and Perfections, Ezekiel 1.28. 4 It is a Blood-coloured, or Red Stone, like Fire; and there∣fore fit to denote the Justice, and fiery Indignation of God, Heb. 10.27. 5 A Smaragd, or Emerauld, is a most precious Stone, of a very pleasant, and never fading Greenness; the chief Colour in the Rainbow. 4 And 6 round about the Throne, were four and twenty Seats [or, Thrones] and upon the Seats I saw [the] four and twenty 7 Elders [i. e. the representatives of the Jewish Church, 1 Chron. 24. Isa. 24.23.] sitting [on Thrones; as participating in Judgment and Government, Dan. 7.9, 22, 26, 27. Rev. 20.4.] cloathed in white 8 raiment [i. e. Priest's Vestments,] and they had on their Heads 8 Crowns of Gold [i. e. Regal Ornaments, Chap. 1, 6.5, 10.20, 6.] 6 They encompass the Throne, as faithful Ministers and Ser∣vants, to receive God's Commands; and to shew their Near∣ness and Access unto him, who was in the midst of them, to protect, assist, and give his Commands unto them, Matth. 18.20. 7 The Church of Israel, as it shall be advanced by Christ in his Kingdom, being plainly called, God's Antients, or Elders, by Isaiah, Chap. 24.23. it seems evident to me, that the four and Twenty Elders are here put for the Representatives of it, in allusion to the Four and Twenty Heads of the Courses of the Priests,
instituted by David, 1 Chron. 24. Elder, in its General Noti∣on, signifying a Head, or Governour amongst the Jews, as ap∣pears from Gen. 50.7. And this Word Elder, being by this time become familiar in the Church, to signifie the Pastors or Governours of it; why may not a Title used in the Christian Church, be put to denote the Governours of the Jewish; as on the contrary, the Jewish Types are all along in this Prophecy, put to denote the Christian Antitypes? 8 8 The Jewish Church seems here to be represented, (1.) by their white Vestments, which was the Habit of the Jewish Priests, Exod. 28.39, 40.39, 27. and (2.) by their Crowns; where∣by is denoted, that they were a Royal Priesthood, as they are called, Exod. 19.6. and that they, together with the Christi∣an Church, should reign with Christ. 5 And out of the Throne [of God the Father.] proceeded 9 light∣nings, and thunderings, and voices [denoting the Majesty of God, and the Terror of his Laws and Judgments, and of the appear∣ance of his Kingdom;] and there were seven Lamps of Fire burning before the Throne which are [the Symbols, or Hieroglyphicks of] the seven Spirits of God [i. e. of the perfect, warming and enlight∣ning influences and operations of the Holy Ghost towards the Church, Exod. 37.23. Ezek. 4.2. See the Notes on Rev. 1.4, 12, 20.] 9 These Words are taken from the Dreadful Appearance of God upon Mount Sinai, at the Delivery of the Law, Exod. 19. and 20.18, 20. and signifie God's Judgments, in behalf of, and upon his Church; and especially the extraordinary breakings forth, and signal comings of Christ's Kingdom, where∣by he shakes not the Earth only, but the Heaven; as they are set forth in Scripture by Metaphors, primarily taken (ac∣cording to the Opinion of the Learned Theorist of the Earth) from the last general Conflagration. See, and diligently com-
Haggai 2.6-9. Malach. 3.1. Psalm 18.13. Jerem. 25.30. Ezek. 1.13. Heb. 10.27-31. Heb. 12.18-29. 6 And before the Throne there was a 10 Sea [i. e. a large Vessel or receptacle, 1 Kings 7.23.] of Glass like unto Christal [i. e. pure and transparent, as that of the Tabernacle was, Exod. 38.8. denoting Baptism and the purity it requires; and the Blood of Christ by which we are washed and cleansed from our sins, Rev. 7.14] and in the midst 11 of the Throne [or, just before it, Ezek. 1.5.] and round 11 about the Throne [Numb. 2.2.] were four Beasts [or living 12 Creatures, representing the pure Apostolical Church of Christ in all parts of the World;] full of Eyes before and behind [i. e. very circumspect and vigilant; and skilled in the past and future state of Christ's Kingdom.] 10 The Laver, or Brazen Vessel in the Temple, for the Priests to wash in, is called a Sea in Scripture; as all Receptacles of Waters are: of which see Exod. 30, 18.38, 8. by which is aptly represented the , or Baptismal Lavers of the Antients, which were very large. 11 11 One of the Beasts might be probably placed before the Throne, or in the midst of it; and the other Three in just distances round about it; probably one behind, and two on each side of it; in correspondence to the Description of So∣lomon's Throne, 1 Kings 10.19. or according to the pitch∣ing of the Tents of the Israelites, which are described, Numb. 2.2. as being over against, and round about the Tabernacle; that is, encompassing it in a Square Figure, (as the Learned generally agree) each of the Four Divisions being placed at the Four Points of it, looking towards the Four Cardinal Points of Heaven. 12 For so the word  ought to be translated, as it is, Ezek. 1.5. that so they may be the better distinguished from , or the Antichristian Beast. These Four living Crea∣tures are called Cherubims, Ezek. 10.2; By which is meant Active Beings of an Angelical Nature, employed in the
Ministration of God's Providence, as appears from their De∣scription given by Ezekiel. Now the Representations here gi∣ven, figuring something analogous to them in the Church; they cannot be supposed to signifie any thing more proper∣ly than the pure Christian Church, represented by the Apo∣stles; who were so extraordinarily active in the propagating of the Gospel into the Four Quarters of the World; and were Twelve, making up Four Ternaries of Living Creatures, or Zealous Active Ministers of Christ; according to the Num∣ber of the Four Ternaries of the Twelve Tribes, under the Four Standards in the Wilderness. For we are to take no∣tice, that this Representation of the Throne of the Majesty of God; or this Theatre, or Stage of the Apocalyptick Visions (as Mr. Mede calls it,) exactly answers the Encampments of the Israelites; God's Throne being here placed in the middle, as the Tabernacle was there; the Four and Twenty Elders next, to answer the Station of the Priests and Levites; and the Four Beasts at each Angle, Diametrically opposite to each o∣ther, against the Four Cardinal Points of the Wind, represent∣ing Christians in the Four Quarters of the World, in analogy to the Four Standards of the Camp of the Israelites, having in them Figures of these Four Living Creatures, taken from the Cherubims of the Chariot, or Glorious Throne of Almigh∣ty God, 1 Chron. 28.18. For which, see Mr.Pag. 437, 594, 917. Mede, Dr. Hammond on the Place, Grotius on Numb. 10.15. and Mr. Ainsworth on Numb. 2. where he has given us the Figure of the Encampments, and has discoursed largely on them; and Dr.De legibus Hebraeorum, lib. 3. Dissertat. 5. Spencer. 7 And the first Beast [or living creature.] was like a Lion 13 [de∣noteing the Power and strength of the Gospel and Apostolical Mi∣nistry, Gen. 49.9. Psal. 103.24.] and the second Beast like a Calf 14
[or Ox; denoting their Laboriousness and Usefulness, Prov. 14.4.] and the third Beast had the face of a Man 15 [signifying Reason and Prudence;] and the fourth Beast was like a flying Eagle 16 [note∣ing their activity, and quick-sightedness into the Mysteries of the Gospel.] 13 This was the Standard of Judah, on the East side, com∣pared to a Lyon, Gen. 49.9. And the Qualities of these Living Creatures, do denote the like Gifts and Graces, requi∣red in the Ministry, which were after an extraordinary man∣ner eminent in the Apostles, the Representatives of the Christi∣an Church, and of its State in the Kingdom of Christ; to which this appearance relates. 14 The Standard of Ephraim, on the West side of the Camp; who is resembled to an Ox, Deut. 33.17. 15 Reuben's Standard on the South side. 16 The Standard of Dan on the North side. 8 And the four Beasts had each of them six 17 Wings, [noteing their speed, their Reverence in God s Presence, and their humble sense of themselves, Isa. 6.2] about 18 him; and they were full of Eyes within 19 [to observe themselves as well as to be vigilant over others;] and they 20 rest not day and night [but are constant and incessant in the Worship and Service of God, Isa. 60, 11.62, 6. [saying, Holy, 21 Holy, Holy, [i. e. infinitely and superlatively Holy, Isa. 6.3.] Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come [Rev. 1.4.] 17 With Two they covered their Faces, out of Reverence; with Two their Feet, or Nakedness, out of a sense of their own shame and impurity; and with Two they flew, to execute God's Commands, Isa. 6.2. 18 , round about them; that is, perhaps at several Distances on each side; as the Israelites are said to encamp , or round about the Tabernacle; that is, at distant Points of the several sides of the Square, encompassing it. So here each of the Living Creatures is said to have Six Wings, ; that is, on each side Three, one against another;
one pair on their Shoulders, with which they flew; another on each of their Breasts, stretched upwards, to cover their Faces; and the Third about their Hips, to cover their less honourable parts, or appearances. Andreas Caesariensis, reads, as our common Copies do; but if  be to be joyned to , as Grotius, and Dr. Hammond think; then their Expo∣sition may be consulted, as more commmodious. 19 The inward Eyes of these Creatures were represented unto John; the Figure, or Appearance (which was perhaps diaphanous) being contrived accordingly. 20 This was the Practice of the Apostolical Church; as ap∣pears from Acts 2.42, 46.20, 31. Luke 2.37. 2 Tim. 4.2. 21 Here it is acknowledged by the Apostolical Church, with the Joynt Consent of the Israelitish Church; that God is a Supereminent Being; and that he is to be worshipped incom∣municably, according to his most eminent and unparallell'd Holiness; and perhaps the Divine Being, in Father, Word, and Spirit, may be intimated in the Threefold Repetition of the Word Holy. But howsoever, in this First Doxology, the Lord God Almighty (who is, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, God blessed for ever,) is only mentioned, and not the Lamb; to shew, that the Belief of One God, who created all things, is the First Fundamental Principle of Religion; Christ, as Redeemer, the Lamb slain, being not acknowledged and wor∣shipped, until the Second Doxology, after he had appeared before the Throne of the Father, and had received his King∣dom; acccording to the Original Model of these Visions, in the Book of Daniel; where (Chap. 7.) the Son of Man is brought near to the Father, and then had Dominion and Glo∣ry given him. 9 And when [soever] these Beasts 22 [or, representatives of the A∣postolical pure Church,] give [or shall, and are wont to give] glory [i. e. acknowledgment of God's glorious Majesty, and Excellency;] and Honour [to God's Authority and Preheminence;] and thanks
[for his bounty, and gracious gifts to his Church;] to him that sat on the Throne, who liveth for ever and ever [i. e. to the Eternal and Liv∣ing God, not a dead Idol; who will open his Kingdom of Eter∣nal Life to all true Christians.] 22 At the fourth Verse, the Twenty four Elders are placed be∣fore the Living Creatures, to signifie the Primogeniture of the Jewish Church; Here they are placed after them, to signifie that the Truths here acknowledged, were first clearly made known to the Christian Church; and shall be at last commu∣nicated by them to the Jewish; which shall be excited, and provoked to Jealousie by them; and shall at their Conversion joyn with them, in an acknowledgment of these, and all other Truths of Christianity. 10 The four and twenty Elders [or Heads of the pure Jewish Church testifying their agreement with the Christian Church, do] fall down [in great humility and submission,] before him that sat on the Throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever; and cast their Crowns before the Throne [in token of Subjection and Homage,] saying, 11 Thou art worthy [and thou only,] O Lord, to receive [the Ac∣knowledgement of] Glory, and Honour, and Power; for thou hast cre∣ated all things [by thy Power,] and for thy pleasure [or Will, the on∣ly Motive to it,] they are [preserved in their Being,] and were [at first] created [Nehem. 9.6.]
CHAP. V. The Text. 1 AND I saw in the Right 1 Hand of him that sate on the Throne, [i. e. of God the Father,] a 2 Book [or Roll, Ezek. 2.9, 10.] written within, and on the back-side [i. e. containing a long Series of Events;] 3 sealed with 4 Seven Seals [to denote the Obscurity of the Prophecy, and the Delay of its Accomplishment, Dan. 12.4.] Annotations on CHAP. V. 1 God held the Book in his Right Hand, to shew his Pow∣er, and his Readiness to deliver it. 2 This Book seems to have consisted of seven several Rolls, rolled up into one, in the Form of a CylinderPoli Synops. Hammond on Luke 4.17. and on the place. Mede, pag. 789, 790, 791. Mori Oper. Theol. pag. 21. ubi formam libri videas., according to the Custom of the Antients; having seven Labels, sealed with seven Seals; which being opened in order, there ap∣peared in each of them, the Seulptures, or Hieroglyphicks here∣after mentioned; and the back side of the last Roll, which is the outermost in rolling, was written upon, to shew, that there was a long series of Events contained in this Book; it being not the Custom of the Ancients, to write on the back side of the Roll, but when the inside could not contain all their Wri∣ting. We may divide, for Order, and Memories sake, the whole Prophecy of this Book, into Two Tomes (as Mr. Mede calls them) the first of which, contained in the foregoing Chapters, may be called, TheSee on Chap. 4.1. Church Prophecy; wherein
Symbols of Churches then in being are used; the Second (which begins here) may be called, The Book-Prophecy, be∣cause its Events are represented by Hieroglyphicks in a Book: And both Prophecies are of the same Extent; this latter reach∣ing to the End of Time, and determining and distinguishing Church Successions and Affairs as well as the former; only with this difference, that they are represented in the latter by future Occurrences and Circumstances of the Civil State and Empire; that so the Times of their Accomplishment might be the better known, and taken notice of, by the illustrious E∣vents represented in them. For as it pleased God to describe and foretel by his Prophets the Fall of Babylon, and other E∣vents, under several Symbols and Representations, for the grea∣ter assurance of the Prediction (as in Pharaoh's Dream, Gen. 41.32.) and that the thing might be the more deeply imprint∣ed on Mens Minds, by the Variety of the Figures by which they are described; so hath the Divine Spirit, upon the same account, given divers Emblems of one and the same thing in this Prophecy. 3 I shall here, once for all, endeavour to give the true im∣port of Sealing, which seems to have these several Accepta∣tions in Scripture. (1.) It denotes a secret, or an hidden Condition; as we seal up things which we would keep secret. (2.) It denotes Security; Thus the Stone at the mouth of Daniel's Den, and our Saviour's Sepulchre, were sealed with Seals. (3.) It signifies Hindrance and Restraint: Thus God, Job 37.7. is said to seal up the Hand of every man; i. e. to hinder their Work by Storms and wet weather; and to seal up the Stars, Job 9.7. i. e. to restrain their Influences, as Satan is said, Rev. 20.3. to be shut up, and to have a Seal set upon him, to restrain him.
(4.) Propriety is signified by sealing in Scripture; from the Custom of sealing Goods and Servants when they were bought; thereby to denote their propriety in them, and to distinguish them from other Mens Servants; Hammond on Eph. 4.30. (5.) Lastly, From these, and other Metaphors, it often in Prophetical Scripture signifies the Obscurity of a Prophecy, and the concealing of it, in dark terms, from the Generality of the People, Isa. 8.16. and the stopping or hindring the Events foretold by it: so that sealing and writing, and sealing and opening, are opposed in prophetical Language to one another, and signifie as much as concealing and revealing, delaying the Accomplishment of a Prophecy, and bringing it into effect. See the Notes on Chap. 7.2, 3, 4. 4 With reference to the seven states of Christ's Church, which were hindred from coming into event, whilst the Book was sealed; and were to be by degrees accomplished, and dis∣covered upon the gradual opening of each of them. 2 And I saw a strong 5 Angel [or a mighty one, Psalm 103.20] proclaiming with a loud 5 voice [after the manner of a Herald, Dan. 3.4.] who is worthy [for Authority, and Ability,] to open 6 the Book, and to loose the Seals thereof [i. e. to bring into event the things there delivered.] 5 5 To shew the Weight and Concern of the thing to be de∣livered, as worthy to be heard of all Creatures. 6 To open it by unsealing it, or when it is unsealed. 3 And no 7 man [or no creature, Isa. 41.28.] in Heaven [i. e. nei∣ther Saint nor Angel,] nor in Earth, nor under the Earth [i. e. in the State of departed Souls, from whence Christ was just come,] was able to open the Book [i. e. to bring to pass the Events of it;] neither [so much as] to look thereon [if it were opened; that is of himself to understand, foresee, and govern the course of the Prophecy, and conduct it into Event.]
7 Here by a Hebraism, (consisting in describing the whole by an enumeration of its parts) is signified, that no Creature whatsoever, was able to open the Book, or so much as to un∣derstand it of himself. 4 And I wept * much, because no man was found worthy to open, and to read the Book, neither to look thereon, [as fearing that I should not be shewn those things that were promised me, Chap. 4.1.] * This weeping seems to be rather from a Despair, that things would not be carried on to the great Kingdom of Re∣demption; as the Two Apostles (Luke 24.21.) were sorrow∣ful, least Christ was not he which should have redeemed Isra∣el; and were astonished, as Mary also was (John 20.13, 15.) because the Lord could not be found, for which she wept. For Christ is represented at the sixth Verse, as just risen from the dead, and therefore in congruity to that appearance, what is here said, must relate to the time before he appeared, as risen; which is also a Circumstance that confirms the fixing of the Epocha of this Book at the Resurrection. 5 And one [or the 8 first, and chief] of the 9 Elders [or Repre∣sentatives of the Jewish Church, Chap. 4.4.] saith unto me, Weep not [for thy own sake, or the sake of the Church, which thou fearest will be deprived of what is contained in this Book; for] behold the Lyon 10 of the Tribe of Judah [i. e. Christ, Gen. 49.9. Heb. 7.13, 14. who is also] the root of David [Isa. 11.1, 10. Rom. 15.12.] hath prevailed [with the Father, by his Blood and Merits], to open the Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof [Vers. 2, 4. [i. e. to declare what is in it, and to accomplish it.] 8 For so One seems to signifie in this Prophecy; as also it does, Dan. 10.13. Gen. 1.4. Matth. 28.1. 9 The Jewish Church having been entrusted with the Ora∣cles and Prophecies of the Old Testament, concerning the Kingdom of Christ; it is very proper, that their Ministry should be here made use of, to declare unto John, the im∣port
of what had been delivered therein, concerning the Me∣rits and Power of Christ, in revealing and erecting his Kingdom: and therefore Christ is here described by Titles taken from what relates to the Jews; as the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah; because he came from that Tribe which is resem∣bled to a Lyon in Scripture; and the Root of David, be∣cause he proceeded from his Stock, as from a Root. 10 No Creature whatsoever (as Man signifies, Verse 7. and Isa. 41.28.) was able to open this Book, or look into it, but only Christ, by Vertue of his Merits; whereby that extra∣vagant Knowledge, which is ascribed unto Angels and Saints in the Romish Church, and their Mediatorship, is plainly ex∣ploded, as appears also from the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th Verses. 6 And I beheld [with great concern and expectation,] and lo [on a sudden] in the midst of the Throne, [i. e. just before it, and next unto it,] and of the Four Beasts, and in the midst of the Elders [i. e. betwixt God the Father, and his Church;] stood 11 [in a po∣sture of Defence, as Mediator and Advocate, and in a readiness to receive his Kingdom, Dan. 7.13; 14.] a Lamb [i. e. Christ, John 1.29.36.] as it had been [newly] stain [and just risen from the dead;] having seven Horns 12 [i. e. perfect Regal Authority, e∣specially over the sevenfold State of the Church;] and seven Eyes [signifying perfection of Knowledge, and Providential Ad∣ministrations, Zech. 3.9] which are [or represent] the seven Spi∣rits of God [i. e. the perfect Operations of Gods Spirit, Zech. 4.6, 10. See on, Rev. 1.4.] sent forth into all the Earth [to super∣intend, dispose, and conduct all things, 2 Chron. 46.9. Isa. 11.2.] 11 From Christ's being here represented, as just risen from the dead, with the Signs of his Sufferings, fresh and bleed∣ing; it may be gathered, that the Epocha of these Visions, is to be taken from Christ's Resurrection, and Ascension into Hea∣ven; as we have observed before on Chap. 1.10.
And he is represented as standing, to denote, that he was not as yet in possession of his Kingdom, which was due to him at his Resurrection (as the Psalmist plainly affirms, Psalm 2, 7, 8.) but that he stood ready to receive it; to which end he was brought unto the Father, as appears plainly from Dan. 7.13, 14. 12 Horns being the Weapons of Beasts, they are put to sig∣nifie Strength and Power, in Scripture, as Psalm 75.5, 10. and in Daniel, and this Prophecy, they denote Kings, and their Regal Power; as the Scripture interprets it self, Dan. 8.20, 21. Rev. 17.12. 7 And he [i. e. Christ being now entring upon his Kingly Of∣fice] came [to the Father, being brought near before him, to re∣ceive his Kingdom, Dan. 7.13, 14] and took the Book * out of the Right Hand of him that sate upon the Throne [i. e. received his King∣dom from the Father, and power to reveal and execute what was contained in that Book concerning it.] * This answers to Dan. 7.14. where, upon his being brought to the Father, a Kingdom is given him, of which this Book is a Symbol, as being the Book of the Kingdom of Christ: only we are to take notice, that the Book is sealed; the Kingdom being not to appear, but by steps and degrees, ac∣cording to the opening of the Seals, until the seventh Trumpet of the seventh Seal; during which time Christ was to sit in the patience and expectation of his Kingdom, at the Right Hand of God, until his Father made his Foes his Footstool; according to Psalm 110.1. and 1 Cor. 15.25, 27. 8 And when he had taken the Bok, the four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders [i. e. the Christian, and the Jewish Church, percei∣ving th t all Power was now given unto him, of the Father,] fell down before the Lamb, [to worship him] bearing every one of them Harps [to praise him;] and golden Vials [or Bowls to hold In∣cense in, 2 Chron. 4.22.] full of 13 Odours, which are [i. e. signi∣fie]
the Prayers [Psalm 141.2.] of Saints [i. e. of the living Crea∣tures, and Elders, and all Saints and Members of the pure Church in his Kingdom, Rev. 20.4.] 13 The Ascent of the Incense signifies the Ascent of Pray∣ers to Heaven; and the Odour of it their Acceptableness with God; for which see Dr. Hammond on the place, and on Luke 1.10. And here Christ appearing for his Saints, as in his Kingdom, makes them Priests to God, by giving them Incense. See Chap. 8.3, 4.20, 6.] 9 And they sung a new Song [of 14 singular Love and Grati∣tude, upon the occasion of Christ's Redemption, and King∣dom,] saying, Thou art worthy [and thou alone, Verse 23.] to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast re∣deemed us to God [i. e. to be his Servants and Worshippers; by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation [to be a Catholick Church and Kingdom.] 14 In this sense this Word is taken, Psalm 33.3. Isa. 42.9, 10. But it is rather called a New Song here, because it will have been for a long time out of use, during the Apostacy, which will have perverted the Doctrine of Redemption, and Kingdom of Christ therein celebrated: of which Kingdom there is here given an Appearance and Representation, signified by Musick and Harps, which are the Attendants of it in this Prophecy: Songs and Musick being not made use of in it, but upon some such Pre-appearance, until the Apostasie is at an end; as if du∣ring the Absence of the Bridegroom, Mourning were more suit∣able for the Church. 10 And hast made us unto [the Service and Glory of] our God, Kings and Priests [i. e. a Priestly Kingdom, Chap. 1.6.] and we shall reign 15 in the Earth [in thy Kingdom, Rev. 20.4.] 15 From hence it is plain, that Christ's Kingdom is to be up∣on Earth, Rev. 20.4.
11 And I beheld [or, was still in Vision,] and I heard the Voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and [round about] the Beasts, and the Elders, [i. e. the whole Church consisting of Angels, and Men, Christians and Jews, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.] and the number of them [i. e. of the Angels,] was ten tbousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands [i. e. innumerale, Heb. 12.22.] 12 Saying with a loud Voice [and suitable affection,] worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive [the Acknowledgment and Pos∣session of] power [and Authority over all things, especially his Church, Matth. 11.27.28, 18. John 17.2.] and of Riches [i. e. the inheritance of all things, Heb. 1.2.] and of Wisdom [to go∣vern his Church, as being the Eternal Wisdom of his Fa∣ther, Prov. 3.16.] and [of] strength [to conquer his Enemies;] and honour [from all Creatures] and glory [from his Father, John 17.1, 5.] and blessing [from Angels and Saints, and all creatures, Psalm 145.10, 11. Psalm 148.] 13 And every 16 Creature [Phil. 2.10.] which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing and Honour and Glory, and Power, be unto him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb [i, e. to God the Father, and his Son Christ,] for ever and ever. 16 Even inanimatt Creatures are frequently in Scripture cal∣led upon to praise God, by a common Figure usual to all Authors and Nations; that because they would praise him, if they could; and are the Objects and Occasions of Praise to Angels and Men; and are under the command of God, and subservient to his Glory, and his Churches good; and because the very Order and Beauty of the Creatures, especially as they shall be in the Restitution of all things, is a Real, and Vir∣tual Praising of God. And all Creatures, Saints and Angels themselves, are here brought as making this Acknowledg∣ment; to signifie, that God and Christ are the alone Objests of Worship; and not any Creature whatsoever, Exod. 20.4, 5.
14 And the four Beasts [i. e. the Christian Church] said, Amen [to this new Song; i. e. consented, and approved of it] And [after the Christian Church, to shew that they received the clear and explicit Knowledge of Chrisi, from the Christian Church, and to testifie the Agreement there is betwixt the Old and New Testament] the Four and Twenty Elders [i. e. the Jewish Church] fell down and worshipped him 17 that liveth for ever [i. e. God the Fa∣ther.] 17 Here it is to be observed, that as the Christian Church be∣gan (Chap. 4.8, 9.) with Hymns, and Worship to God the Fa∣ther; so the Jewish Church here Ends, (after they had joyned with the Christian Church in Praises and Acts of Worship to Christ, who has the same Worship here given him with the Father) with an Act of Worship to the Father; to shew, that as all things are Of Him, so are they also To Him; and His Glory; and that the Kingdom is to be delivered up unto him, and that all things are to be subject unto him, who is All in All, (1 Cor. 15.24-28.) which is signified by their falling down, and worshipping him, in token of their Obedience, and of the Subjection of all things unto him; all Creatures also are as them∣selves, bowing, or being subject unto him, in the sense that they praise him, Psal. 2.10, 11.
CHAP. VI. The Text. 1 AND Christ being now possessed of the Right to his King∣dom, and his sole and absolute Power and Dominion, having been acknowledged by all Creatures in the former Chap∣ter,] I saw [or was in a Vision,] when the Lamb [i. e. Christ ha∣ving now the Right, and Administration of the Affairs of his Kingdom] opened 1 one [i. e. the first, Chap. 5. 5. of the Seals [i. e. he revealed what was before hid, and accomplished what was re∣presented under each Seal;] and I heard as it was the noise [or a Clap] of 2 Thunder, [i. e. a powerful, and a terrible Voice; and efficaciously productive of its Effects. See on Chap. 1. 10.] 3 one [i. e. the first] of the four Beasts [or the Apostolical Ministry] say∣ing, Come and see [and consider the Mysterious Sculpture, which is to be seen in the first Roll of the Book, and the great Event re∣presented by it.] Annotations on CHAP. VI. 1 The Seals are as so many Stops and Delays to Christ's Kingdom; and the opening of them signifies, not only the making of the Visions known, wnich before were concealed; whereupon Prophecy is called, a sealed Book; but also the Effect of every Vision, as the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 12.23. Phrases it; or the several Steps and Advances made towards the Kingdom of Christ; this being the Book of Christ's Kingdom, whirh he opened, as King, with Power and Au∣thority, and by actually effecting the things signified in their due and proper times.
2 Hereby is signified the great Power and Efficacy which accompanied the first preaching of the Gospel, whence Mark 3.17. James and John are called the Sons of Thunder; and the utmost Force of God's Power, is called, the Thunder of God's Power, Job 26.14. 3 One, as is usual in this Prophecy, signifies the first of the Beasts, like a Lyon, whose Station being in the Eastern part of the Jewish Camp; hereby is signified the coming forth of the Gospel from Jerusalem, which is in the Eastern parts of the World; whence the Gospel was first preached, and the first Apostolical Church gathered, according to the Pre∣diction of the Prophets, Isa. 28.16. Micah 4.2. Acts 2.41- 2 And I saw, and behold [I perceiv'd engraven on the first Roll,] a white 4 Horse [signifying the pure and merciful power and con∣quest of the Gospel Dispensation, Psal. 45.4.] and he 5 [i. e. [Christ] that sat on him [i. e. who had the Power, and management of that Dispensation;] had a Bow 6 [i. e. the Gospel, Psal. 45.5.] and a Crown was given unto him [as King and Conqueror] and he went forth [from Jerusalem Mic 4.2.] conquering 7 [by the efficacy of his Gospel, and his Ministers;] and to conquer [by degrees, un∣till the completion of his Kingdom, Psal. 2.6.-8.] 4 Horses being a swift and warlike Creature (according to the admirable Description of them given in Job, Chap. 39.) the Scripture does signifie by them, some active and powerful Dispensation of his Providence, brought to pass by his Angels and Ministers; the Nature and Quality of which is denoted by the divers Colours attributed to those Horses; as appears plainly from Zach. 1.8, 10.6.2, 3.10, 3. Now the Dispensation here pointed at, being that of Christ's Kingdom, aBochart, Hieros. 2.7. white Horse is attributed unto him,
(1.) to denote his Power; Princes and Honourable Persons being used to Ride, and that on White Beasts; whilst Inferi∣ours went on Foot, as appears from Judg. 5.10. Eccles. 10.7. (2.) To signifie the Mercifulness of his Conquest, Psalm 45.4. Zech. 9, 9.10, 3. it being usual for Conquerors to ride on white Horses on the Days of Triumph, Rev. 19.11, 14. 5 That Christ is hereby signified, is evident from Rev. 19.11, 12, 13. compared with Psalm 2. and 45. from whence these Symbols are taken. 6 As an Archer with his Bow (according to the Descripti∣on given by the Psalmist 7, 12.11, 2.) first menaces and threatens at a distance, before he shoots; so Christ first ap∣peared with a peaceable Message of Salvation to all who would come in unto him; before he threatned, and executed his Judgments upon the Rebellious Jews and Romans; ac∣cording to the Description of his Kingdom, Psalm 2. and 45. 7 This refers to the Great Conquests the Gospel gained by the Ministry of the Apostles; and this first Seal seems to be plainly contemporary with the Ephesine Succession, in its first State, when their Works and Love was great, and their Preach∣ing powerful as Thunder; which is to be dated from Christ's Resurrection, A. D. 33. when he gave Commission to his Dis∣ciples to conquer, by teaching and baptizing all Nations, Matth. 28.18, 19, 20. 3 And when he [i. e. Christ] had opened the second Seal, I 8 heard the second 9 Beast [or Gospel-Ministry, as yet Apostolical,] 8 say, Come and see [what Desolations are coming upon the Earth.] 8 8 This living Creature speaks not in Thunder, as the o∣ther did, to shew, that the Gospel's Power and Purity was now something abated; Ephesus having soon left its first fervent and intense Love.
9 The Ox, whose Station was in the Western Quarter of the Camp. 4 And [the Enemies of Christ, the Jews and Gentiles, having refused to submit entirely to his Kingdom, Psalm 2. and 45.] there went out [from the Western Quarter,] another Horse that was red [de∣noting Wars and Effusion of Blood:] and power was given [by Christ,] to him 10 that sate thereon [i. e. who had the Execution of this Bloody Dispensation;] to take Peace from the 11 Earth [i. e. to en∣gage the Men of the World, especially in the Roman Empire, in Wars;] and that they [both Jews and Gentiles;] should kill one ano∣ther; and there was given unto him a great Sword [signifying great slaughter in War, Jerem. 16.4. Ezek. 14.21.] 10 Here the Desolations of the Jews foretold by Daniel, Chap. 9. and by our Saviour in the Gospel, seem plainly to be described: For, (1.) They were finally compleated by one coming forth from the West; that is, by Trajan and Hadrian, who were Spaniards, under whom they were miserably slaughtered, and almost utterly extirpated. And, (2.) Those Times were very remarkable for their mutual Slaughters one of another; the Romans killing vast Numbers of the Jews; and the Jews, on the contrary, almost dispeo∣pling some of their Provinces; and fighting so obstinately a∣gainst Hadrian, that the Conquerour could not boast of the Triumph, his Loss was so great; which is a thing so plain from all History, that we need not quote Authors to testifie it. This Seal may reach from A. D. 66. when these Desolations began in the War against the Jews, under Nero, by Vespasian and Titus; until the fatal Slaughter and Dispersion of that Nation under Hadrian, who ended his War against them, A. D. 134. and died, A. D. 138. on the Kalends of January; as Mr. Pagi has accurately stated this Account.
11 By Earth here is meant the Kings of the Earth, who were Enemies to Christ, the Jews and Gentiles, as Peter has explain∣ed David, Acts 4.25-27. 5 And when he had opened the third Seal, I heard the third 12 Beast [or Apostolical Ministry,] 13 say, Come and see, [and mark dili∣gently what you see and hear, Verse 6.] And I beheld, and lo, a black 14 Horse [i. e. a sad, and a severe Dispensation:] and he 14 that sate on him [or had the Execution of that Dispensation;] had a pair of 14 Ballances in his hand [to signifie strict, and impartial Ju∣stice.] 12 Like a Man, whose Station was in the South. 13 Here is no mention of Thunder, for the Reason given be∣fore, Numb. 8.8. 14 14 14 A pair of Ballances is the common and most appo∣site Emblem of Justice; and by a Black Horse cannot be sig∣nified a Famine, as is evident from what will be said on the following Verse; although Blackness be reckoned as the Ef∣fect of it, Lament. 5.10. And therefore it is most agreeable, that some sad Dispensation, and severe state of things should be signified by it; according to the Acceptation of Blackness, Job 30.30. Psalm 119.83. With which Emblems the Hi∣story of the Times succeeding the Desolations of the Jews un∣der Hadrian, does wonderfully conspire; which reach from A. D. 138. when Hadrian died, in whom the former Seal ended, unto A. D 235. when Alexander Severus was killed on the 14th of March, which seems to be the Extent of this Seal. For (1.) Septimius Severus was an African; whose Coun∣trey lay to the South; the Station of the Third Living Crea∣ture, which spake at the opening of this Seal. And he being the first and only Emperour, that ever came from that Coun∣trey; why may not that unusual Choice be more particular∣ly hinted at by the Black Horse he rod on; Horses of that co∣lour
being extremely valued by the Africans (as Bochar∣tusHierozoic. 2.7. has observed) out of their Resemblance to their own swarthy Complexion; and because of their strength and firmness? And of this kind, perhaps, was that Great and Couragious Horse, which stoopt to take him up, and car∣ried him into the Forum, after he had thrown his Predecessor Pertinax, in an Ominous Dream; related byLib. 2.34. Herodian. Which Observation, howsoever, may serve to illustrate the Apocalyptical Symbol here made use of; it being taken for granted by the Expositors of Dreams at that time, that a Horse signifies Imperatorial Power. (2.) There happened in his time, viz. A. D. 202. a bloo∣dy and a longSee Pagi in Baronium. persecution, continuing until after his Death, which was on the 4th of Feb. A. D. 211. of which a Black Horse is a fit Emblem; Blackness being the Symbol of Perse∣cutions, and Calamitous Dispensations in Scripture; as Cantic. 1.5. Zech. 6.2, 6. 3. This Emperour was very Cruel, and a Great and a Terrible Conquerour, of a very Rigid and Rough Disposition; and very strict and impartial in Administration of Justice, and Punishment of Delinquents; which are Qualities very pro∣perly represented by Blackness, and a pair of Ballances; espe∣cially if we consider that this Age was the Age of Lawyers, in which Papinian and Ʋlpian flourished, and were advanced to the highest Dignities, under Septimius Severus, and A∣lexander Severus, the Son of Mamoea, whose strict Justice, and Severity against Offenders, and excellent Laws, are Fa∣mous in all History: So that the Symbols of a Ballance, and the Voice from the midst of the Beasts, cannot but belong al∣so unto him, in a most particular manner, who was also a
great Warriour. And the Beast appearing at the opening of this Seal, having the Resemblance of a Man, which signifies Humanity, Reason, and Prudence; the excellent Race of the Antonines, famous for those Qualities, may be very well in∣cluded in the Period of this Seal; there having been an ad∣mirable Succession of Emperours (excepting Commodus, and Heliogabalus, whose Reign was short,) from Hadrian, in whom the former Seal ended, unto Alexander Severus, of whom the Ballance was a proper Emblem, his Motto being that Epitome of Justice, Do as you would be done by; and who was also very favourable to the Christians. 6 And I heard a Voice 13 in the midst of the Four Beasts [i. e. from Christ in his Apostolical Church, Chap. 5. 6.] say, A 15 Measure of Wheat for a penny, and Three Measures of Barley for a penny [i. e. let exact care be observed about necessary Food for eating;] and see thou hurt [or diminish] not the Oil and the Wine [i e. let no Fraud be used in Drinks and 16 Medicines] 15 A Famine cannot be here described; because, that scar∣city could not be great, where Barley and Wheat were not wanting; nor even Wine and Oyl, which are rather the Com∣forts of Life, than the Necessaries: And therefore this Verse refers to the strict Justice, and diligent Care observed by Se∣verus and Alexander, about publick Provisions; for which they are signally remarkable in History. But this Voice being heard so remarkably, amongst the Four Beasts; that is, as spoken by Christ, who is represented as in the midst of them, Chap. 5.6. seems to intimate something relating to Christ's Church, and that very remarkable; which I shall endeavour to explain, by what is offered by Dr. Be∣verley, a Person of deep thought, and of great insight in these matters. He thinks then, that by the Ballances in the Rider's hand, is figured Christ's weighing the Churches Purity in the exact Ballances of the Sanctuary; according to what is prophesi∣ed
of him, by Ezekiel, Chap. 25.9, 10-25. that he (the Prince) shall take care in the New Jerusalem state there pre∣figured, that their Oblations, or Worship, shall be exact, ac∣cording to the Old Standard of the Sanctuary, from which they had swerved; of which Worship, or Daily Service, Wheat, Oyl and Wine are the Symbols, they being the con∣stant Attendants of the Daily Sacrifice; as appears from Exod. 29.40. Numb. 28.7. Barley also denoting the Christian Oblation in the Sacrament, and their Praises and Thanksgi∣vings; because Barley was used in no Oblation, (except in that of the suspected Wife, Numb. 5.15.) but in the Oblation of the First Fruits of their Harvest, Lev. 23.9. which was a Type of the Christian Eucharistical Oblations, as Mr.Book 1. Disc. 51. and in his Christian Sacrifice. Mde has shewn. And (2dly,) He thinks, that the whole Time of the Seals, is, as it were, weighed in the Two Scales of this Ballance; the one half of it, being run out at the time when these Bal∣lances appeared to wit, A. D. 235. when Alexander Severus's Death put an End to this Seal; for the first Seal beginning at the Resurrection, A. D. 33. if you add to that 202 years, the Moyety of the whole Seals, the first half-Time will fall upon the year 235. the other half extending to 437 where he dates the beginning of the 1260 Years of the Apostasie; which will be made out more fully in the Process of these Annotati∣ons. 16 Wine and Oyl were also used in the curing of Wounds, and for Medicines, Isa. 1.6. Luke 10.34. 7 And when he had opened the fourth Seal, I heard the Voice of the forth Beast, 17 say come and see [what Judgments God will bring upon the Heathen Empire for their impenitence.]
17 The Church continues still Apostolical, because the Li∣ving Creature still speaks; although the Thunder, or mighty Power and Efficacy of the Gospel was departed from it. And the Apostolical Ministry here calls upon him to consider, the Obstinacy and Impenitency of the Pagan Empire, notwithstand∣ing the Gospel had been preached amongst them for so long a time, and that therefore God had resolved utterly to destroy them, after he had tried, whether he could reclaim them by his severe Judgments; amongst whom yet he preserved a Remnant of Christians to be a Holy Seed; according to God's Denunciations in a parallel Case, Ezek. 14.12-23. Now the voices of the living Creatures, or of the Apo∣stolical Representatives of the Christian Church still conti∣nuing, we may reasonably conclude that the Ephesine or A∣postolical Succession lasted during these four first Seals: a∣mongst the Apostolical Ministry of which Succession we may justly reckon, not only the Apostles and Apostolical Men; but the Primitive Writers and Witnesses of these times, from Justin Martyr, to Origen; who by their Apologies, exem∣plary Lives and Deaths, and Learned Writings, Justified the Christian Religion, confuted Judaism and Paganism, and called upon the Empire to Repent; many of them foretel∣ing its fall, and the rise of Antichristianism upon it, and speaking plainly concerning the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; for which, see Mr. Mede, Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, and Dr. Cressener. 8 And I looked and beheld a 18 pale Horse [i. e. great slaughter and mortality,] and his Name that sat thereon was Death; and Hell [or, the grave] followed with him [as his Attendant;] and power was given unto them over the fourth 19 part of the Earth [i. e. the Roman Empire;] to kill with the Sword [i. e. by War] and with Hunger [i e. by Famine] and with Death [i. e. by the Pestilence, Jer. 9.21.] and with the Beasts of the Earth.
18 The State of the Empire, from Maximin to Diocletian; that is, from A. D. 235. to A. D. 284. is here plainly Chara∣cterised. For (1.) Maximin was a Thracian, whose Countrey lay Northward, according to the Station of the Fourth Beast, the Eagle. (2.) In that small space of time, there were above Twenty Emperours (not reckoning the Thirty Tyrants under Gallie∣nus,) most of them very short-lived, and coming to untimely Ends; which is very appositely represented by Death's sitting upon a pale Horse, instead of a Rider. (3.) Besides the persecution of the Christians, the whole Roman Empire was then grievously harrass'd by Cruel and Barbarous Emperours, by Civil VVars, and Forreign Invasions; the Persi∣ans and Asiatick Scythians breaking in upon the Eastern part of the Empire; and the Goths about the same time invading the Western, after a most terrible manner; about the beginning of the Reign of Gallus A. D. 251.Pagi in Baron. or 252. as Zozimus observes. (4.) In this Period there was a dreadful Plague, that last∣ed for Fifteen Years together; which beginning in Aethiopia, went through most of the Provinces of the Roman Empire: upon the occasion of which Cyprian wrote his Books de Mor∣talitate, and against Demetrian, where that Holy Gospel-Wit∣ness, attributes that Mortality to the impiety and persecution of the Pagans, and not to the Innocent Religion of the Christi∣ans; and seriously exhorts the Heathens to a speedy Repentance. And there was a Famine also, as DionysiusEuseb. 7.22. Alexandrinus testifies, who lived at that time: After which Desolations, it was a frequent thing in those Countries for the Wild Beasts to ravage, and to break in into their very Cities, and commit
great Slaughters; which is a Judgment threatned in Scrip∣ture, Lev. 26.22. Deut. 32.24. Ezek. 14.15. 19 The Roman Empire seems to be called the , The Fourth of the Earth, because it was the Fourth Earthly Monarchy prophesied of by Daniel; after which, the Heavenly Kingdom was to be set up. See on, Chap. 8.7. 9 And when he [i. e. the Lamb Christ.] had opened 20 the fifth Seal; I saw under the Altar 21 [of sacrifice, Lev. 4.7. i. e. under the Power, in the presence of, and in Communion with God and Christ;] the Souls of them [see on Chap. 20.4.] that were slain for the word of God, and for the Testimony which they held [i e. the Chri∣stian Martyrs, especially under Diocletian. Chap. 2, 10.20, 4.] 20 The Beasts Voice, or the Apostolick Ministry here cea∣ses; to shew, that Satan's Synagogue was now rising in the Smyrnaean Succession; upon the Honours paid to Martyrs un∣der this Seal. 21 When Altar is put indefinitely, the Altar of Sacrifice is usually understood; where the Blood of the Sacrifice was wont to be poured out: and by being under the Altar, is signified the happy state of Martyrs under the protection, and in the pre∣sence of God and Christ, as appears from Heb. 13.10. Colos. 3.3, 4. compared with 2 Maccab. 7.36. Psalm 27.5. Phil. 2.17. And here is given a plain Character of this Seal; from the Voice of the Blood of the Martyrs, and from the change of Things immediately following it in the next Seal; whereby is evidently signified the great Persecution under Diocletian, whereupon the Aera Martyrum was instituted; and the over∣throw of Paganism under Constantine; from whence also it is very manifest, that the Smyrnaean Succession is contemporary with this Seal, from the like appearances, Chap. 2.10. 10 And they 22 cryed [instead of the Apostolical Voices;] with a loud Voice [thereby shewing their Number, their Zeal, and the importance of their Complaint;] saying, How long, O Lord [Christ,] holy [and therefore hateing Cruelty and Bloodshed;]
and true [to thy promises of avenging thy people, Luke 18.7, 8.] dost thou not judge and avenge our Blood [to vindicate thy Honour and thy Truth,] on them that dwell on the Earth [i. e. the Pagan Em∣pire; for our Persecution has been long and cruel, Revel. 2.10.] 22 As Abel's Blood did, Gen. 2.10. Heb. 12.24. 11 And white Robes [denoting Reward, Honour and Purity, Chap. 3.4.] were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet [in quiet, patiently expecting the time of God's Vengeance;] for a little season, until their Fellow Servants al∣so, and their Brethren [in Christ] that should be killed, as they were, should be fullfilled 23 [i. e. until the Times, and the Number of Martyrs determined by God, should be compleated.] 23 Hereby is signified the Martyrdoms which were to fol∣low under Licinius, Julian, the Arrians, and the Apostasie, until God's signal and last Vengeance, upon the Antichristian Tyranny, under the Vials. 12 And I beheld, when he had opened the Sixth Seal, and lo there was a great Earth-quake 24 [i. e. a great commotion, and a strange change of Affairs, Hag. 2.6, 7. Heb. 12.26] and the Sun 25 [i. e. the chief God of the Pagans, and the Heathen Emperour the chief Magistrate;] became black 26 as sackcloath of hair [Isa. 50.3.] and the Moon [i. e. the next in dignity,] became as 27 Blod [i. e. were Eclypsed, and lost their former Glory.] 24 It will not be altogether unseasonable to remark in this place, whatHistor. 4.11. Socrates, the Ecclesiastical Historian, notes from frequent Observation, that Earthquakes are the Signs and Forerunners of Changes, and Commotions in the Church. 25 Here by Metaphors taken from the Prophetical Descrip∣tions of the Day of Judgment, and the last Conflagration of the World, (to which several of them seem plainly to re∣fer, as Dr. Burnet has observed in his ingenious Theory of the Earth; and when the things described here by several Pro∣phetical
Accumulations, shall be fully verified.) God's Judg∣ments under Constantine, and his Successors, upon the Heathen Religion, and Empire, are set out unto us: Although the Po∣litical World being described in Scripture by Metaphors taken from the Natural, (as appears from Isa. 51.16. Dan. 8.10.) the Heavens here may denote what is superiour in it, and the Earth what is inferiour: and the Sun may be taken for the Supreme in the State, the Moon for the next, and the Stars for those which are next in order unto them; according to the Ancient Symbolical, and Hieroglyphical Learning of the Eastern Nations, of which we have an Example, Gen. 37.9, 10. Where Joseph's Dream concerning the Sun, Moon, and Stars, is interpreted by Jacob, of himself, as Father, and Chief of the Family; of his Wife as next, and of his Chil∣dren as subject unto them. And Sun, Moon and Stars, Hills and Mountains, being the Objects, and Places of Idolatry; Hereby may be also signified the final Overthrow of Pagan I∣dolatry; as well as of the Pagan Civil Powers. 26 A Metaphor taken from an Eclipse, in which the Sun appears black; and the Moon of a dark Red, like black Blood. 13 And the Stars of Heaven [i. e. the inferiour Deities, and Ma∣gistrates;] fell unto the Earth [i. e. were cast out, and displaced by the mighty Power of God;] even as a Figtree casteth her untimely Figs [Nahum. 3.12.] when she is shaken of a mighty wind [e.e. as easily, and in as great abundance, Isa. 34.4.] 14 And the Heaven [i. e. the whole superior State of the Hea∣then World Civil and Religious,] departed 27 [out of sight] as a scroll that is rolled together [so that they could not be seen;] i. e. they had no Authority, nor Esteem,] and every Mountain [i. e. all the places of Idolatry, and of great strength and security, Isa. 2.14-18. Jerem. 51.25. Zech. 4.7.] and Island, 28 [i. e. all their Provinces and Places beyond the Seas;] were moved out of their pla∣ces [i. e. the Government and Religion of them was changed and overturned.] 27 A Metaphor from the Ancient Manner of Writing up∣on
one long Scroll; which being rolled up, according to their Custom, what was written in it could not be seen. 28 The Jews called all Maritime Places Islands; and all pla∣ces beyond the Mediterranean. Consult the Interpreters on Gen. 10.5. and Mr.Book 1. Disc. 49. Mede. And hereby is meant, that no places escaped, altho never so strong or remote. 15 And the Kings 29 of the Earth [i. e. the supreme Powers sub∣ject to the Roman Empire, Isa. 10.8. Acts 4.26.] and the great men [or Nobles, Dan. 4.36. Mark 6.21.] and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, [or Soldiers, Judg. 5.22] and every bond man, and every free man [i. e. all of every rank and quality] hid themselves [for fear. Isa. 2.19.] in the dens and rocks of the Mountains [i. e. the most secret, and most inaccessible places, Judg. 6.2.] 29 Here, by an enumeration of the several Ranks and De∣grees of Men (according to the Scripture-Phrase), all the Members of the Roman Empire are reckoned up. From a due consideration of these Six Seals, it will be ma∣nifest that they are Synchronous with the two first Churches, ending in that of Smyrna; when that Period received a Crown of Life under Constantine and his Successors. 16 And said to the mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us [altho by crushing us in pieces, Isa. 2.19.-21. Hos. 10.8.] from the face [or anger] of him that sitteth on the Throne [i. e. God] and from the wrath of the Lamb, [i. e. Christ; that we may not see and feel the misery which is coming upon us.] 17 For the great 30 day of his wrath [i. e. the appointed time of his Judgments] is come; and who shall be able to stand [against it, oppose, or endure it.] 30 This immediately refers to the overthrow of the Pagan Powers by the Christian Empire; and has also a relation to the final Judgments upon Antichrist; when the Martyrs,
who are commanded to rest until that time, shall be fully avenged; this Judgment upon Paganism, by the Christian Empire, being a Type of the Judgment at Christ's King∣dom. CHAP. VII. The Text. 1 A And after these things, I saw four Angels 1 [i. e. Ministers of God's Providence;] standing [in a readiness to execute God's Commands] upon the four corners [i. e. Angles or Cardinal Points, Ezek. 7.2. Matth. 24.31. Zech. 2.6.] of the Earth; hold∣ing [back or restraining,] the four winds [or Instruments of trouble and commotion, Jerem. 49.36. Dan. 7.2. Zech. 6.5.] of the Earth; that the Wind 2 should not blow upon the Earth 3 [i. e. that the Roman Empire should not be disturbed;] nor on the 3 Sea [i. e. the common People, Chap. 17.15.] nor on any Tree 3 [i. e. the great ones, Isa. 2.13. Zech. 11.2.] Annotations on CHAP. VII. 1 The Living Creatures do not appear, but Angels in their stead; and they standing on the Angles of the Earth, and not on the Angles of the Throne, as the living Creatures did; whereby is signified that the strict Apostolical Purity was a∣bated, as I have often remarked; as the Glory of God, and the living Creatures in Ezekiel remove by degrees from the Temple, as it grew more and more polluted, until they departed totally from it. Read, and diligently Consider, Exek. 8.4, 6.9, 3.10, 15-19 11, 23.
2 Hereby is signified the Quiet which the Christian Em∣pire enjoyed from Constantine to Theodosius, in respect of what Commotions were before in the Empire, whilst it was Pagan; and should be afterwards upon the Death of Theodo∣sius; when its Ruin soon ensued, upon the Winds blowing by the Trumpets, Chap. 8. For by the Winds not blowing, is not meant, that they should have no Troubles and Com∣motions, but (according to the usual import of such Hyper∣bolical Expressions in Scripture) that they should be so little, or short (as the Tempest under Julian was) that they should be, in comparison, nothing at all: especially in respect of those Commotions the Empire was to undergo within a short season; which would produce great Changes in it; by in∣troducing a New Antichristian Supremacy with Ten Kings; whereby the Monarchick Power of the Empire (according to its Representation in Daniel), shifted from its Iron Legs into its Feet and Toes, part of Iron, part of Clay; and the Idolatrous Beastian Power was to pass into the Little Horn, and the Ten Horns; all which being to be brought to pass by great Concussions in the Empire; its present State under Christian Emperours is accounted a Calm, in respect of what was to ensue; the Pagan Beast being then subdued; and the Antichristian Man of Sin being withheld; so that Christianity was then, as it were, in a quiet and prosperous condition. 3 3 3 The whole Body of the Roman Empire, is here re∣presented by apt Metaphors taken from those things which are most subject to be disturbed with Winds. 2 And I saw another Angel, 4 ascending from the East [i. e. Christ] having the 5 Seal of the Living God [i. e. a Commission from him, Ezek. 9.4.] and he cried with a loud voice [to testify his Love and Affection to his chosen ones;] to the four Angels, to whom it was given [by God, who had determined great changes in the Em∣pire;] to hurt [by executing of Judgments] the Earth and the Sea [vers. 1.]
4 Christ is called, the Angel of the Covenant, Malach. 3.1. and the Sun of Righteousness, Malach. 4.2. and the Day∣spring, or rising Sun from the East, Luke 1.78. and Ezek. 44.2.3. the Prince of the Church; that is, Christ, and only he, has Power to enter in at the Eastern Gate of that Mysti∣cal Temple; from whence it is clear, that Christ is here to be understood; called so, because he enlightens and comforts his Church; and, like the Rising Sun, discovers Works of Darkness, and the good from the bad. See Dr. Hammond on Luke 1.78. Gregory's Observations, pag. 73. and Dr. Pocock on Malachi. 5 A Seal signifies a Command, or a Commission, from its be∣ing sealed with the King's Seal, 1 Kings 21.8. Esth. 3, 12.8, 8, 10. 3 Saying, hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea or the Trees, [i. e. the Empire, and its Inhabitants] till we have 6 sealed [or shall seal i. e preserve and secure in secret, Ezek. 9.1.-4.] the servants of 7 our God [i. e. those who serve God purely and sincerely, Nehem. 1.11.] in their 8 foreheads [i. e. very closely and securely.] 6 Men use to Seal those things, which they would have concealed, and preserved (as we have before hinted on Chap. 5. 1.) especially in times of danger; so God com∣manded the Israelites to sprinkle Blood upon their Posts, when he would save them; whereby, as with a Seal, he concealed and preserved them, Exod. 12. and the Scarlet Thread, Josh. 2.18. was a Sign or Seal to distinguish Rahab from those that perished; and Ezek. 9. a Mark or Seal of Distinction, Security and Preservation is put upon the Fore∣heads of those that were to be saved in that common Destru∣ction. And the prime and great import of Sealing, is to signifie, that the True Glory which shall appear in Christ's Kingdom, the New Jerusalem; was to be covered, and secured, while the false, and worldly Splendor and Glory of the Antichri∣stian
Apostasie, was cheifly visible and predominant, the True Worshippers being now in the Temple, the Witnesses in Sackcloath, and the Woman in the Wilderness; which are all equivalent with these sealed ones. 7 Christ as Mediator, and Head of the Church, has a joynt Relation to God with his faithful Servants, John 20.17. 8 In allusion to the Custom of the Eastern Nations, who marked their Servants on the Forehead: And hereby is signi∣fied a close concealment and security, when the Foreheads, or Faces of his Servants are sealed, or hid; so that they could not be known. 4 And I heard [and therefore am certain of what I relate;] the number of them which were sealed [or concealed, and secured] and there were sealed, an 9 hundred forty and four thousand, of all the Tribes of Israel, [i e a pure, Apostolical Church was preserved, but in a hidden and secret condition; the glorious appearance of Christ's King∣dom being stopped and hindred.] 9 Israel, in this Book (as hath been before observed, on Chap. 2.9.) is put for the pure Christian Church, propagated from the Twelve Apostles; as the Israelitish Church was from the Twelve Patriarchs. And the Number 144000. is a square Number, arising out of Twelve, the square Root of it, deno∣ting the Apostolical Doctrine to be the Root (Twelve times Twelve Thousand amounting to One Hundred and Forty Four Thousand) and Foundation of the Church; and that the pure Church is a square Body; because, (1.) It can admit of no other Foundation than that of the Apostles; as this square Number can admit of no other Root than Twelve: that is, it can be produced by no other Num∣ber multiplied into it self; which is what is meant by a square Root in Arithmetick. (2.) Because the Church is to be built in all After-Ages, upon this Doctrine, multiplied by it self only; as the square Number arises from the Root multiplied into it self. And
this is not to be accounted a groundless Fancy; but is no small part of the Knowledge of the Eastern Nations, in which Solomon, and Moses were skilled; who were wont to wrap up Mysteries in Hieroglyphicks, and Numbers, that they might be hid from the Vulgar, and known only by Persons fitted and capacitated for them; and at suitable Times and Opportunities; it not being convenient that some Truths should lie exposed to all, and at all Seasons. And according∣ly it hath pleased God, for the same Reasons; and that Hu∣mane Search and Diligence might be exercised and encoura∣ged; to make use of the same way of Concealment; to shew that all Humane Knowledge is to be subservient to Divine, and to his Church: Whereupon he hath made frequent use of the Number Twelve, in things pertaining to his People and the Church; the Patriarchs being Twelve, the Tribes Twelve, the Gates of Jerusalem Twelve, and the Apostles Twelve; and the Measures of the New Jerusalem being a∣dapted to this Number; for the Reasons before hinted, and for others, which we shall have a fitter occasion to mention hereafter. See the Notes on Chap. 1.20. and 20, 4. By these sealed ones, are meant a pure Apostolical Church, preserved from the time of Constantine, under the Calami∣ties of the Empire; and during the continuance of the Apo∣stasy; so as to be Witnesses against it, but in a hidden and concealed Condition. For (1.) They are said to be sealed; that is, preserved, (as we have shewn) but in a hidden Condition; as the Law is commanded to be bound up, and sealed, Isa. 8.16. and the Words of Prophecy to be closed up, and sealed, Dan. 12.4, 9. And the Church is said to be a Spring shut up, and a Fountain sealed, Canticl. 4.12. of which the Seven Thousand, which God had reserved to himself in secret, and had preserved from the Idolatry of Baal, 1 Kings 19.18. are a Type.
(2.) This sealing immediately follows the Downfall of Pa∣ganism under Constantine, at the opening of the Sixth Seal in the former Chapter; whereby is signified, that some great danger was then near, that Christ should seal and secure his True Church, so soon after their Delivery from Persecution. And the History of those Times clearly testifie, that the True Spirit of Christianity soon decayed, upon the Peace, Ho∣nours, Priviledges, and Prosperity which the Church then enjoyed; and that the excessive Veneration they had for Saints and Martyrs, gave Rise to the Apostasie; upon which the pure Church became sealed; that is, shut up and concealed; and a stop was put to its appearance in that true spiritual Glo∣ry, which it shall have under Christ's Kingdom; for its degene∣rating by degrees into a Satanical Synagogue. For sealing de∣notes also the Hindrances and Lets which Christ's Kingdom has met with, by its being over-powered by the Apostasie; which at last advancing to a Throne, wholly covered and hid it in an obscure and sealed State, no Church being at last visi∣ble, but the Apostatized one. (3.) It appears from the Third Verse, that the time of this sealing lasted from Constantine, until the sounding of the first Trumpet; i. e. until the Irruptions of the barbarous Nations after the Death of Theodosius the Great; during which time the Apostolical Church was under a continual sealing; i. e. its Visible State was daily obscured and covered; until at last by the destruction of the Empire; and the rise of the Apostasy upon it; it was closely sealed up in an invisible State. 5 Of the 10 Tribe of Judah 11 were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Reuben 12 were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Gad 13 were sealed twelve thousand. 10 The Number of each Tribe is particularised, and deter∣mined; to shew, that the Members, of God's pure Church, are
not chosen casually, and at all Adventures; but are determi∣ned by God, and that out of every Tribe, or part of the Ca∣tholick Church. And the Numbers of each Tribe are equal; viz. Twelve Thousand to each; to shew, that each particu∣lar Church is to be Apostolical in the profession of the entire and perfect Doctrine delivered to them; and that they are to be firm and stable in themselves; which is theSee the Notes on Chap. 20.4. Mysti∣cal signification of a CubicalDr. Moor's Cabbala. Nicom: Gerasen: Arithmet. Theolo. apud Photii Biblioth. pag. 459. Number, such as the Chi∣liads, or Thousands are, out of which each Tribe con∣sists. 11 It is the Opinion of Mr. Mede, that the Nature, Quali∣ties, and Circumstances of the pure Church, are included in the true Scripture-import, and mystical meaning of the Names of the several Tribes; which I shall therefore, in submission to his Opinion, insist upon more particularly; because there is good ground inMicah 1.14. Matth. 2.23. Rom. 2.29. Scripture for such Mystical Allusions, taken from Names. Judah is placed first; because the Go∣vernment was given to him in David; and Christ came of that Tribe; which, for the Generality, kept to the publick Worship of God, and the Rightful Kingly Succession, when the others had cast it of, Hos. 11.12. 1 Chron. 5.2. Heb. 7.14. His Name signifies Confession, or Praise, (Gen. 29, 35.49, 8.) whereby is signified, that the pure Church ought to pay a Eucharistical Service of Praise and Thanksgiving to God; and confess him openly and publickly in his Worship. 12 Reuben is the next, because although he lost his Birth-right for defiling his Father's Bed (Gen. 49.4. 1 Chron. 5.1.) yet he shewed great Courage, together with Gad, in that
Noble Resolution they made of passing over Jordan, ready Armed before their Brethren, Numb. 32. The Name signi∣fies, See the Son, whom God out of hisJoseph. Antiq. 1.19. Mercy sent, when he saw, and had a respect unto our Afflictions, Gen. 29.32. Whereby is intimated, that the Church ought to look up un∣to Christ in their afflicted State, as God did upon them, in their desperate Condition, when he sent his Son to redeem them. 13 Gad signifies a Troop, as is plain from Gen. 30.11. com∣pared with Gen. 49.19. called so, because that being situa∣ted on the Borders of the Countrey, it was to be always rea∣dy in Arms; and so should sometimes be overcome by its E∣mies; but should at last overcome them: whereby the State of the Church Militant, and of the Future Victorious State of the Kingdom of Christ, notwithstanding its many seeming Foils and Delays of Conquest, is fitly typified. 6 Of the Tribe of 14 Aser were sealed twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 15 Nepthali were sealed twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 16 Manas∣ses were sealed twelve Thousand. 14 Asher signifies blessed, because he was the cause that his Mother was accounted happy and blessed, Gen. 30.13. and because he lived in a fruitful and happy Soil, Gen. 49.20. Deut. 33.24. Whereby is signified the Delight which Christ has in his Church; the Fruitfulness of it; and the Blessing which they enjoy, who have God for their Lord, Psalm 144.12-15. 15 This is the Tribe in which our Saviour was very conver∣sant, his constant Residence being in Galilee, and most fre∣quently in Capernaum, a City of Galilee, in the Tribe of Nep∣thali, as Mr. Mede has ingeniously observed; upon which ac∣count
Nepthali is placed before his Seniors, and has received so great an Encomium from Moses, Deut. 33.23. The Word signifies, Gen. 30.8. very great and vehement wrestlings, or Endeavours, joyned withJosepho. . Skill and Cunning; or Fair Words, Gen. 49.21. By which may be signified the frequent Wrestlings of the Church with God in Prayer (Gen. 32.24-32. Hos. 12.3, 4) and their wrestling against Flesh and Blood, and resisting the Wiles of the Devil, and the Powers of Darkness, with a prudent Simplicity, joyning the Wisdom of the Serpent with the Harmlesness of the Dove. 16 Manasseh signifies forgetting; whereby is intimated, that God makes all true Christians forget all their former Toil, when he gives them Comfort and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and that whosoever would follow him, must forget and for∣sake all his Father's House, and worldly Relations; which seems to be the Gospel-import of the Words of Joseph, Gen. 41.51. and the thing for which Levi is praised, Deut. 33.9. 7 Of the Tribe of Simeon 17 were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 18 Levi were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 19 Issa∣char were sealed Twelve Thousand. 17 Simeon signifies Hearing; whereby is noted, that God hears the Prayers of his Church; and the Hatred with which their Enemies hate them, Gen. 29.33. 18 Levi indeed had no portion in the Division of the Land (as Dr. Hammond notes), yet in Christ their Portion was as good as any. Levi signifies joyned; for the Church, Christ's Spouse, is to be joyned unto the Lord, in Spirit and Fervent Affection, and not unto Idolatrous Harlots; which is the Spi∣ritual meaning of the Book of Canticles. Read Gen. 29.34. 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. Eph. 5.25-33. Deut. 33.9.
19 Issachar signifies, Gen. 30 17, 18. a Hire, or Reward gi∣ven by God; as appears from the Context; from whencePag. 55. Philo, makes him to be the Type of One whose Labours are Crowned and Rewarded by God; and that (asApud Rivetum in locum. Je∣rome remarks) with a great Compensation for slight and small Performances, of no greater Value than Mandrakes: by which the Rich Rewards which God bestows upon his Church, for their imperfect Services, may be not unfitly set forth. 8 Of the Tribe of 20 Zabulon were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 21 Joseph were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 22 Ben∣jamin were sealed Twelve Thousand. 20 Zabulon signifies Dwelling, Gen. 30.20. which was the Tribe upon the Borders of which our Saviour himself dwelt, Matth. 4.13. from which place, diligently compa∣red with Isa. 9.1. it may be gathered, that they shall have the greatest share of Christ's Presence, who have undergone the greatest Misery and Afflictions; and that he will come and dwell with the ignorant, but humble person, rather than with self-conceited and proud Professors; as Christ dwelt with the ignorant Galileans, rather than at Jerusalem; whe∣ther he went not but upon some solemn Occasions. See Mr. Mede upon this place; and Isa. 57.15. John 14.23. Matth. 9.13. 21 Joseph signifies, He will add, or adding, Gen. 10.24. for God daily adds to his Church more Blessings, and conti∣nues his Grace to those who pray unto him, and use their own diligent Endeavours, Gen. 30, 22.49, 22-26. Deut. 33.12-17.
22 Benjamin signifies, the Son of the Right Hand, Genes. 35.18. For the Church, which was Benoni, or the Son of Sorrows unto Christ, as being purchased by his Sufferings and Blood; is yet unto him, and his Father, a Benjamin; that is, much loved and regarded, as the Phrase is interpreted, Deut. 33.12▪ as near and dear to him as the Right Hand, the most Honourable of the Two; Upon which account, the people of Israel are called, the Men of God's right hand, Psal. 80.17. And we may observe, that Dan is here wholly left out, and Ephraim not mentioned by Name, because they both soon apostatized to Idolatry; it being a Custom amongst the Jews to leave out of their Genealogies and Chronologies the Names and Times of Wicked Persons; as Er and Onan, Judah's wic∣ked Sons, are omitted byAntiq. 2.7. Vossius de Sibyllin. Orac. cap. 1. Josephus, when he reckons up his Posterity. And altho they are mentioned in Ezekiel, yet that was when the whole Church was purified, and in its Jerusalem State; where∣as at this present time of Numbring, Dan and Ephraim were the Types of the Apostasie; and were therefore to be omitted; and not to be mentioned, but when the Righteous amongst them had been purified, and the Wicked had been purged a∣way by God's Judgments. 9 23 After this [Vision of the Apostolical Church secured and concealed;] I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kingdoms, and People, and Tongues [i. e. the 24 Catholick Church of Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 7.14, 27.] stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb [in communion with God, and Christ in his Kigdom;] cloathed with white Robes, [de∣noting Honour and Purity,] and 25 Palms in their Hands [denoting Victory over Persecutions and Temptations, and the Triumphs of Christ's Kingdom.]
23 The following Vision is taken from the Descriptions gi∣ven in this Prophecy of the New Jerusalem State in Christ's Kingdom, to which only it can, in propriety of Speech, be∣long; as appears from the many high Expressions made use of in it; and from the Elders (the Representatives of the Jew∣ish Church) having the Precedency; which will not be until the New Jerusalem State. And yet because that Kingdom is not to come until the Days of the Voice of the Seventh Angel, (who has not yet sounded) therefore this Description can∣not belong to the Kingdom it self, but to some Typical Re∣semblance, or Pre-appearance of it: it being usual in this Pro∣phecy (as I have already observed) for the Spirit to describe the several Praeludia, or faint Resemblances, and imperfect Appearances of Christ's Kingdom, by the State of the King∣dom it self; to shew what the Church ought and might have arrived to; and that his Kingdom should have appeared of Right at those times; if a stop had not been put to it, ac∣cording to the determinate Counsels of God, and Christ's Submission unto them, Dan. 12.7. For the Kingdom of Christ, which should have come in its Glory, upon the As∣cension of our Saviour, was retarded by the Times allotted to Paganism, and Antichristianism; and was thereupon delay∣ed until the Time of the End, (Dan. 12.) Only Christ at some certain seasons puts in, as it were, his Claim to his Kingdom, by some more than ordinary Appearances of it. Now the Appearance here referred to, seems to be plainly, that of the Christian Church, under the Christian Empire; which was the next remarkable Event after the Fall of Paganism, described at the close of the foregoing Chapter; and was so glorious a one, that it might justly be described by the State of the King∣dom it self; Paganism having been overthrown by it, the Church delivered from Persecution, and exalted into an un∣expected, and sudden State of Prosperity, and the Man of Sin withheld for some time, 2 Thes. 2.6, 7. And yet be∣cxuse this glorious State of things would not continue long in
purity, but would be soon corrupted by Pride and Ambiti∣on, and by the bringing in of Pagan Rites into the Church, under the Specious Pretences of a well-meaning Prudence, and Zeal: therefore it pleased God, to give an intimation of this early Corruption, by sealing a pure Church, even be∣fore he gives the glorious appearance of the Visible Church; that a competent Number of sealed Witnesses might be set a∣part, and preserved betimes in purity and integrity; before their Minds could be corrupted by the Glory and Honours of this Exalted Church; and by the Mystery of iniquity, which had been working in secret for a long time, and was advanced to a Satanical Synagogue, even in the foregoing times of Per∣secution. 24 Whereby is pointed out the great Number of Professors in the Christian Empire. 25 A Psalm is the Symbol of Victory amongst all Nations; whence in Ezekiel's Vision of the Temple, (Ch. 40, and 41.) Palm Trees are so often mentioned; which signifie the Conquests True Christians are to make over Sin and Persecution, and the Conquest they had now gained over Paganism. 10 And cryed with a loud 26 Voice [to denote the Affectionateness, and the Publick Freedom of their Worship;] saying, 26 Salvation be unto our God [i. e. let the Glory of our Deliverance be ascribed unto him, the sole Author of it, Psalm 3.8. Hos. 13.4.] which sitteth upon the Throne; and unto the Lamb [the sole Purchaser of it; to them alone let it be given, and not unto our own Merits, or any Creature.] 26 26 Hereby also is intimated the Publick Freedem of Wor∣ship they enjoyed in the Christian Empire; and their Deli∣verance from their Persecutors.
11 And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the El∣ders, and the four Beasts, and fell before the Throne on their Faces, and worshipped God [i. e. all the whole Church, consisting of Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Jews and Christians, Heb. 12.22-24. joyned in the Praise of God;] 12 Saying, Amen: Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgi∣ving, and Honour, and Power, and Might be unto our God, for ever and e∣ver, Amen. [Chap. 4.8-11.5, 11-14.] 13 And one [or the first] of the Elders [or Representatives of the Jewish Church, now fully instructed by the Christian, and one with it,] answered [or said, Matth. 11.25.] saying unto me [to excite my enquiry after a thing worthy of it, and out of a desire to inform me;] what are these that are arrayed in white Robes? and whence came they? 14 And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest [for I do not, and am desirous to be taught by thee.] And he said unto me, these are they which came out of 27 [the] great Tribulation and have 28 washed their Robes [i. e. their imperfect performances, Luke 15.22. Rev. 19.8.] and made them 29 white [or pure and shining,] in the Blood of the Lamb [Christ; i. e. they are purified, delivered, and rewarded by Gods acceptance of their actions and sufferings, upon Christ's Merits, Isa. 52.1.] 27 With reference to the New Jerusalem State, this Tribu∣lation (noted with a double Greek Article, The Tribulation, The Great, to shew the Remarkableness of it) refers to the Days of extraordinary Trouble, mentioned, Dan. 12. Matth. 24. Mark 9. and Luke 21. which shall precede Christ's Kingdom, perhaps at the pouring forth of the seventh Vial, and the Earthquake attending it; from which the Saints shall be de∣livered: but with reference to the Christian Empire, it has a relation to the Ten Days Tribulation under Diocletian, menti∣oned (Chap. 2.10.) from which they were delivered by Constantine, and to their Escape from out of the Great Day of God's Wrath against Paganism, Chap. 6.17.
28 These are the Saints and Martyrs who had white Robes given them, Chap. 6.11. and were bid to tarry, in expectati∣on of Christ's Kingdom, which they, and their Successors here enjoy: whereby is set forth the Advancement of the before Persecuted Church, and of its Confessors and Wit∣nesses. 29 They are made White or Shining by his Blood; as Wooll receives a more Noble and shining Colour by being died in Purple. And here is an Allusion to Joshua's Change of filthy Garments, and his putting on White and Clean Priestly Vest∣ments; as these Saints do here in Christ's Kingdom, in which they are Priests unto God and Christ. 15 Threfore [because they persevered under Persecution, and trusted in Christ's Merits,] are they before the Throne of God [in com∣munion with him, and under his particular care in a State of Prosperity;] and serve him 30 Day and Night [i. e. continually and inces∣santly;] in his Temple [of the New Jerusalem, in the General As∣sembly and Church of the First-born;] and he that sitteth on the Throne [i. e. God,] shall dwell among them [or pitch his Tent amongst them; i. e. they shall be his people, and he will afford them his continual Presence, Conduct aad Defence, Isa. 4. Ezek. 48.35. John 1.14. Rev. 3, 12.21, 3. 2 Cor. 6.16. Levit. 26.12.] 30 A Metaphor taken from the constant Service and Atten∣dance of the Priests and Levites in the Temple; some of which were always present in it Day and Night, 1 Chron. 9.33. Psal. 135.1, 2. Luke 2.37. 16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more [that is, they shall always enjoy God's Ordinances, and his Gifts and Graces, Isa. 49.10. John 4.13.6, 27.] neither shall the 31 Sun light on them, nor any [scorching] heat [i. e. they shall be delivered from Persecutions and Sufferings, Isa. 49.10. Psalm 121.6, 7.]
31 The Jews express all manner of inconveniencies by Heat; because of its Extremity in those Eastern parts, both from the Sun and burning Winds, Jonas 4.9. 17 For the Lamb which is in [or about] the midst of the Throne [i. e. Christ,] shall feed them, and shall lead them [as a good Shepherd Psalm 24.1, 4. John 4.10-14. and 21.15-17.] unto 32 living Fountains of Waters [i. e. perpetual Comforts and Refreshments, Isa 12 3. John 7.38] and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes [i. e. remove all Causes and Occasions of Sorrow.] 32 So the Jews call Fountains, continually bubling and springing up, Canticl. 4.15. John 4 10.
CHAP. VIII. The Text. 1 AND when he [i. e. Christ,] had opened the seventh Seal, there was silence 1 in Heaven about the space of * half an hour [i. e. there was a short respite from the commotions which followed upon the Sounding of the Trumpets.] Annotations on CHAP. VIII. 1 The Metaphors here are taken from theMr. Mede. Hammond on Luke 1.1. Ainsworth on Lev. 16.12, 13. Temple-Ser∣vice, (which shews that Church-Affairs are here typified, as well as those of the Empire) in which, at the offering of In∣cense, the People prayed without in the Court in private; whilst the Priest offered the Incense; which Prayers were ve∣ry short, and the whole Service performed in silence: where∣as the offering of Sacrifice, the first part of their Service, was accompanied with Singing, Musick and Trumpets, 2. Chron. 29.25. * See on Ver. 7. Num. 11. 2 And I saw the seven Angels which stood 2 before God, [as ready to execute his Pleasure;] and to them were given [by God's appoint∣ment,] seven 3 Trumpets [to denounce seven Judgments.] 2 These are expresly called Angels, and not The Spirits of God, whereby they are distinguished from the Seven Spirits, Chap.
1.4. And by these Seven standing before God, is denoted the Preparedness of the several Instruments and Means requi∣red to the executing of God's Judgments by the Seven Trum∣pets: and also the Majesty of the Divine Presence is expressed by them, in allusion to the Custom of the Eastern Kings (from whose Rites many of the Descriptions in Scripture are ta∣ken) who had Seven Princes, who saw their Faces, or stood be∣fore them, and were the Chief in their Kingdoms, Esther 1.14. Grotius on Matth. 18.10. 3 Here is an Allusion also to the Temple Service; where it was the Custom to blow with Trumpets after the Oblation of Incense (as appears from Ecclus. 50.15, 16.) strict Silence be∣ing observed before it: as here the Angels have Trumpets given them, to prepare to sound, but sound not until the Incense was offered. Angel signifies in this Prophecy, not only the Angelical Spi∣rits, but also the subordinate Ministers employed under them here upon Earth; as has been before shewn on Chap. 1.1, 20. And therefore here may be meant by this Angel, the Emperour Theodosius, who is the Chief Person concerned in this Vision, as we shall shew hereafter; whose Prayer, at the Head of his Army before the Battel with Eugenius, is very re∣markable in History; and also the whole Christian Church, which joyned with him in Prayer to God upon that great Occasion: Angel being taken Collectively in this Book, for all the several Instruments made use of in it. 3 And another Angel [or Ministring Spirit, representing the Persons employed in the like service on Earth;] came and stood at [or, by] the Altar [of incense; Exod. 30.1. having a Golden Censer [or Vessel to hold Incense, Levit. 16.12. Hebr. 9.4.] and there was 4 given unto him much Incense [Levit. 16.12, 13. Rev. 5.8.] that he should Offer it with the Prayers of all Saints 5 [or Holy Chri∣ans;] upon the Golden Altar [of Incense, Exod. 30, 3, 6, 7.40, 26.] which was 6 before the Throne [of God.]
4 Here may be an Allusion to a Custom in the Jewish Ser∣vice, of bringing the Odors to the Priest by others, Exod. 27.20. See Maimonides in Ainsworth on Levit. 24.2. 5 Here is also an Allusion to the High Priests offering In∣cense in the Temple, while the People, called here, All Saints, i. e. the Holy and Peculiar People of God; prayed in the Outward Court. And by what is here delivered. and in the former Verses, is intimated, that the daily Publick Sacrifice of pure Worship, which was wont to be performed in the Out∣ward Court, should cease, and was about to be contracted in∣to a retired, and a silent one, signified by the Silence, Vers. 1. and the Incense-Worship which was within the Temple: and that although the Saints, or Holy People, were as yet without, in the Outward Court, not yet trodden down by Antichristi∣an Defilements; that nevertheless it would not be long (but about half an hour, or a short space) before that, also (which was a Type of the Visible Church, and its Worship) should be polluted by them; concerning which Allusion, and the Grounds of it, see more on Chap. 11.1. 6 As the Altar of Incense in the Temple, was before the Mer∣cy-seat, Exod. 30.6, 7.40, 26. 4 And the smoak of the Incense [Chap. 5.8.] which came with the Prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand, [i. e. they were grateful and acceptable unto him through the Merits, and Intercession of Christ, Psal. 141.2. Acts 10.4.] 5 And the Angel took the censer [which was now empty, the In∣cense being consumed and their Prayers ended;] and filled it with fire from the Altar [of 7 Sacrifice or Burnt-Offerings;] and cast it [i. e. dispersed God's Judgment, and fiery Indignation, Ezek. 10.2. Luke 12.49.] upon the Earth [i. e. the Roman Empire; and there were 8 Voices, and Thundrings, and Lightnings [Chap. 4.5.] and an Earthquake [i. e. extraordinary Commotions in the Empire, and great Manifestations of Christ's Kingdom, Chap. 6.12.]
7 For there was a continual Fire on the Altar of Sacrifice, but none on the Altar of Incense. See Ainsworth on Exod. 30.8 and on Lev. 6.12, 13. This Service was performed in the Temple; but the Fire was taken off the Altar of Burnt Sacri∣fice in the Outward Court; to shew that God's Judgments (re∣presented by Fire, which denotes in Scripture any destru∣ctive thing) came upon them, by Reason of the Gentilism, or Antichristian Pollutions of the Outward Court, or Visible Church. 8 The other Seals having been distinguished by some nota∣ble Events in the Empire; it is reasonable to think that this is so too; and there is none which agrees better to it than the Wonderful VictorySa. Hist. 5.25. Sozom. 7.24. Howel's History, Part 2. pag. 427— of Theodosius over Eugenius, A. D. 395. Because, (1.) It follows in order the Event foretold in the sixth Seal, this Victory giving the Deadly Blow to Heathen∣ism, and perfecting what was begun by Constantine, and some of his Successors under that Seal. (2.) Because the following Trumpets (denoting the fall of the Empire) began to produce their Effects not long after this Defeat: So that it exactly corresponds, as a middle Event, with the foregoing and following ones. (3.) The Vengeance of God fell extraordinarily upon the Pagans; and their Defeat by a wonderful Tempest was mira∣culous; as Claudian the Heathen Poet confesses, and as the Sol∣diers, who were present at the Battel, told iitat. Di 5.26. Augustine: which is very naturally expressed by Fire cast by an Angel from Heaven upon Earth; Fire being a generalck on Joel 1.19. word in Scripture, for all manner of Mischiefs and Destructions.
(4.) This Victory was followed with the entire Destru∣ction of Heathenism; in which appeared an extraordinary Manifestation of Christ's Kingdom; of which Thunderings and Lightnings, and an Earthquake, are usual Forerunners in this Prophecy. (5.) This Victory was obtained at the Prayers of the Chri∣stians; Theodosius having solemnly prayed to God for it, in a Publick Church, when he set forward to the Army; and ear∣nestly begging it at the Hands of God upon his Knees, at the Head of his Army, in the very Day of Battel; the whole Church in the mean while observing solemn Fasts, and put∣ting up their united Prayers to God for his Success; which being their constant Custom, was without doubt, observed on this extraordinary occasion; as seems to be intimated byLib. 7.24. in fin. Sozomen: All which is manifestly here typified by the Offering of the Prayers and Incense of all Saints, and its Ascent before God. 6 And the seven Angels, which had the seven 9 Trumpets, prepared 10 themselves [that men might repent during the time of that prepa∣ration,] to sound [an Alarm of Judgments, Jerem. 4.19. Ezek 33.1-6.] 9 TrumpetsSee Ainsworth on Numb. 10. and Pocock on Joel 2.1, 15. were used amonst the Jews on several occa∣sions; as, (1.) In the several Journeyings, and Removes of their Camp in the Wilderness; whereby is not unfitly typified the several Motions of the Church in its Wilderness-Condition, upon the sounding of the Trumpets by the Angels in this Pro∣phecy. (2.) In calling the Ordinary Assemblies, and on Feast Days, and New Moons; and on their Fast Days, when they were
(according to the Observation of Maimonides) to sound Trumpets for Fasting and Prayer, because of the Enemies of Is∣rael, which were coming against Israel; and because of the Ap∣proaching Winds, Rain, and Earthquakes, Wars of Heathens with Heathens, and Pestilences, Locusts, and Caterpillers; and because of other Distresses, mentioned out of him, by Ains∣worth. So that the Trumpets given to the Angels, and their preparation to sound, may be as an Admonition to the Em∣pire, to Repent, in order to the diverting of Judgments. Lastly, Trumpets were used in sounding Alarms, in time of War; whence they signifie in the Prophets a Denunciation of Judgments, and a warning of the imminent Approach of them; as they do in this place. 10 They had Trumpets given them, Verse 2. and here they prepare to sound; by taking (as it were) their Trumpets into their Hands, and putting them to their Mouths; whereby a Respite and Delay is signified, from the actual Execution of the Judgment; or some lesser Judgments, preparatory to the great and fatal ones: according to the proceedings of the Merciful, but Just God; who, after Judgments threatned, gives time and space of Repentance; and punishes lightly, before he comes to utter Excision. 7 [And after some short space of Quiet and Respite, Vers. 1.] The first Angel sounded, and there followed 11 Hail and Fire mingled with Blood [i. e. a wasting, and bloody Devastation,] and they were cast upon the 12 Earth, [i. e. the Roman Empire,] and the third 13 part of 14 Trees [i. e. the great ones, Isa. 2.13. Zach. 11.2.] was burnt up, and all green Grass [i. e. the common People.] 11 This is a Description of a Thunder-storm; in which there is Blood instead of Rain, to make the Type more dreadful: And it is an Allusion taken from the Plague of Hail in Ae∣gypt, Exod. 9.22-35. whereby is signified a Furious and
Bloody Irruption, laying all things waste before it; as Fields and Trees are wont to be, by a raging and blasting Tempest. The like Scheme of Speech is made use of by Isaiah, (Chap. 28.2.) in describing the Invasion of the King of Assyria, which he likens to a destroying Tempest of Hail, and an overflowing Flood of mighty Waters; only Blood is here added instead of Water, to shew the Greatness of the Slaughter, which should attend it. And what fitter Metaphors could be used to set forth the terrible Inundations of the Barbarous Nations upon the Roman Empire; which happened in the Course of this Trumpet? For we are to understand, that theGrotii Prolegom. ad Procop. Sherringham de Anglorum Origin. Loccennius de Go∣thorum & Sueon. Orig. Howel's History, Part 4. Cap. 1. Goths (which seems sometimes to be used as a General Name for these Barba∣rous People) were originally a People of Scythia; who coming from thence, and having seated themselves in Scandza, or Scanzia (which comprehends Sweedland, Norway, and the vast Tracts of Land adjoyning) at length, in process of time, about Three Hundred Years before Christ; upon the occasion of a Famine, Wars, their great increase, or the desire of a better Soil, the usual Causes of the Transmigration of Nations; left that Countrey: and after long Wanderings (from whence they were afterwards called Vandals, that is, Wanderers) through Germany and Sarmatia, as far as the Palus Maeotis, one part of them setled there, and were called Getae; and the other, but the greatest part of them, returned from thence, and took up their Habitation in Dacia and Thrace; from whence they seem to have made their first Incursions underPagi in Baron: Philip, or Decius, about A. D. 251. After several Fights with them in the Times of Constantine, Valens, and Valentinian; immedi∣ately upon the Death of Theodosius the Great, they fell like a mighty Torrent into the Roman Empire: They first harrassed
the Eastern parts of it under Alarich, about A. D. 395. for about five Years together; and about A. D. 405. a vast num∣ber of them, under Radagaisus, invaded Italy; who was fol∣lowed by Alarich, who took Rome on the 24th of August, A. D. 410. a great multitude of them, mixt with other Bar∣barous People, having over-run Gaul, Spain, and Africk, at the instigation of Stilicho, about the same time that Alarich first invaded Italy, A. D. 406. From the Invasion begun by Alarich, Italy enjoyed but little Quiet, daily steps being made to its utter Ruine (some of which were as Preparations to the sounding of the Trumpets,) first by the Goths, then by the Huns, under Attila, and by the Vandals under Genserick; who from the Year 430. miserably wasted Italy, and the Provinces, especially about A. D. 455. when Genserick took Rome which is accounted a fatalHowel's Histor. Part 2. Pag. 692, 693. Mr. Mede, Pag. 659. Year, and stiled by some, the Year of Vengeance: But upon the Death of Aetius, Provinces were daily lost to the Barbarians, and the Roman Empire, which declined from the Death of Theodosius, received a Mortal Wound; under which it lay languishing until it expired un∣der Augustulus, about A. D, 476. So that we have here a fa∣mous Period of Time, from the Victory of Theodosius, upon which his Death ensued, A. D. 395, until 476: which seems to be called One Hour, or One entire Space, or Line of Time (for so  signifies, Ch. 9.15, Rev. 17.12. And therefore about half of that space seems here to be signified by about half an hour; which will reach from 395, unto 437; which is about the half of this whole Line of Time; and falls upon that Time, when the Bar∣barous Nations (who had been before often successfully repul∣sed) began to make their most Furious Impressions upon the Roman Provinces on all sides, under the weak Government of a Woman, Placidia, the Empress, and her Son Valenti∣nian,
who was a Child when he began to Reign; inso∣much that Genserick came then to be so powerful, as that he se∣verely persecuted the Orthodox, from the very YearRicciol. Chronol. 437. unto 476. when he died. And furthermore, it is very re∣markable, that about 430, and odd, the Apostasy, which be∣gan in Image-Worship, about 360. palpably increased, as Mr.Pag. 589. Mede has observed. So that the Year 437. is very re∣markable on all Hands, as being about the middle Point, or about half of the whole Hour, or Aera, reaching from the entire Defeat of Heathenism, to the entire Fall of the Western Empire; and because it may be justly accounted the Exact Year from which the actual sounding of the Trumpets are to be reckoned; which were but in preparation from 395. un∣til that time: and also because it may be with great Reason thought to be the beginning of the Antichristian Apostasy; which from that time generally increased, until it gained a Kingdom with the Ten Kings arising out of the Ruines of the Roman Empire, A.D. 476. and that at One Hour, that is, One en∣tire Hour made up of Two Halves, the first reaching from 395, to 437. the latter, at the End of which this Kingdom began, from thence to 476. See on Chap. 11, 2.13.5.17, 12. 12 The Fourth Kingdom, which is the Roman Empire, is called, Dan. 7.23 The Kingdom upon the Earth, to distin∣guish it from Christ's Kingdom, the Heavenly and Everlasting Kingdom: and Luke 2.1. it is called, all the World or Earth, because most of the then Known World was subject to it. 13 It is the Opinion of Mr. Mede, that by the Fourth of the Earth, (Chap. 6.8.) is meant almost all the Roman Empire;
which, upon due Compute (says Dr. Moor) was then one third part of the Earth; upon which account they take the Third part to be the Symbolical and Cabbalistical Character of the Roman Empire, according to the Genius of this Mystical Book, and the Custom of the Ancient Eastern Nations, who gave Characters from Numbers and Proportions. But to inter∣pose a Conjecture, not altogether groundless; I am apt to i∣magine, that as the Roman Empire is called the Fourth, Chap. 6.8. whilst it had its Imperial Seat fixed at Rome, the Head then of the Fourth Kingdom: So that after Constantine re∣moved the Seat of the Western Empire to Constantinople, it is called the Third; because its Imperial Seat was then in the Greek or Eastern part of the Roman Empire; which was the Third Kingdom of the Earth, in Daniel. From which time Constantinople, or New Rome, became the Chief Seat of the Civil Empire, Old Rome being abandoned to the New Eccle∣siastical Empire of the Pope; the Western Emperours seldom coming at it, and by degrees leaving it to them: So that e∣ven the Western Empire may be Charactered by the Third, be∣cause that Old Rome, the Chief Seat of it, and of the Trans∣actions of this Vision, had lost its Civil Imperialism over the Fourth part of the Earth, and was now forced to truckle to the third part, or Constantinopolitan Roman Empire; where the Chief Majesty of the Empire was seated; Old Rome being never able to gain its Preheminence; and the Ruin of its Civil Jurisdiction being owing to this Action of Constantine; which will appear also the more probable, if we consider, that the Rise and Fall of Empires is dated in Prophecy, from the like Fate of the Imperial Seats of them. See Chap. 9, 15.12, 4. 14 This is taken from Exod. 9.25. where we read, that the Thunder Storm of Hail smote every Herb of the Field, and broke every Tree of the Field: By which is here signified all the Mem∣bers and People of the Roman Empire, denoted by Metaphors taken from those things which suffer most by Storms: And
Trees here, according to the Prophetical Scheme of Speech, signifie the Great Ones; and Grass, by the like Analogy, sig∣nifies the Common People. 8 And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great 15 Mountain [or City, Jerem. 51.25.] burning with fire, was cast into the Sea; and the third part of the Sea [i. e. the Roman Empire] became Blood 16 [i. e. was ravaged with bloody Wars, Exod. 7.17, 18.] 15 This Type is taken from Jerem. 51.25. where it is used concerning Babylon; by which all along in this Book, Rome is understood. A Mountain denotes a Kingdom, or a City, from its Strength, and Lofty Edifices and Towers; as Annota∣tors have observed on Isa. 13.2. Jerem. 51.25. Zechar. 4.7. And the Sea signifies a Body Politick; because Seas are in Scripture-Phrase, a gathering together of Waters, which in this Book are put to denote People, and Multitudes, as appears from Chap. 18.15. And therefore by the Type in this Verse, the Confusions and Desolations (represented by the Psalmist, Psalm 46.2. by Mountains carried into the midst of the Sea) which the State and City of Rome then lay under, may be fit∣ly signified; it being at this time, as a great Mountain burn∣ing in the Sea, but not actually burnt; that is, in a consuming Condition, but not utterly destroyed. For (1.)Zosim. Oros. August. Civit. 5. 23. Radagaisus was entirely defeated by Stili∣cho, and he himself, and almost his whole Army, was destroy∣ed by Sword or Famine: Stilicho being made an Instrument by God of preserving the Empire; when he designed nothing but his own Interest, and the usurping of it; which appear∣ed also in another Memorable Instance, when heZosim. Oros. Hieron. Rubeus Hist. Raven. lib. 2. saved the Empire from total ruine, by succouring Saul, the General
of the Army, under him, at the very time that he was put to flight by Alarick. (2.) WhenOros. lib, 7. Socrat. 7.10. Sozom. 9.6-9. Jornand. Cap. 30. Alarick took Rome, he sackt indeed and rifled it; but burnt only some part of it, and that contrary to the wonted Custom of the Goths, as Jornandes hath particular∣ly observed; and left the large Church of Peter entire, for an Asylum for the Christians. (3.) When Athaulphus, the Goth, not long after, had pil∣laged Rome, and was resolved entirely to root out the whole Roman Power; he was opportunely diverted by Placidia, the Emperour's Sister, and perswaded to make aPetav. Ration. Temp. lib. 6. Peace, and retire into Spain; where he married her, A. D. 414. (4) Attila the Hun, and Genserick the Vandal, were both hindered from firing and destroying Rome, by the Eloquence and Prudent Behaviour of Leo the Great: AndProcop. pag, 359, 360, 398, 474. ex ed. Grotii. Totilas, who had resolved to burn it, and raze it to the Ground, was diverted by an Embassay from Belisarius; and when he af∣terwards retook it, he rebuilt what he had burnt and de∣stroyed of it. So that this City, which had been so often ta∣ken and rifled, and was so often in a burning Condition; was kept, as a burning Mountain in the midst of Waters, continu∣ally resisting the Fire, which would have consumed it; and will be so preserved by God, until the time of its final De∣shruction; in which, this City answers to its Type Babylon; which after it was taken, and pillaged by Cyrus, remained nevertheless in some sort of Glory, until the Times of Alex∣ander; as Rome, after its first being sacked by Alarick, con∣tinually recovered it self again; although not to the degrees of it's former Magnificence. And as the City, so also the Empire, although miserably harassed, was yet preserved from utter de∣struction,
during the Period of this Trumpet; but as a bur∣ning Mountain cast into the Sea, amidst the contrary strug∣lings of the People, some seeking to destroy it; others to preserve it: the Barbarous Nations themselves contributing thereunto; as the Goths did, by helping it against the Huns, Vandals and Sueves. 16 For these BarbarousProcop. Gothic. pag. 6. 512. ex edit. Grotii. Invaders were very bloody; killing all they met, Young and Old, Women and Chil∣dren. 9 And the third part af the 17 Creatures which were in the Sea, and had Life [i. e. the Fishes; which represent the Subjects and Inhabi∣tants of the Roman Jurisdictiction, Ezek. 29.4.] died 18 [as to their ancient Polity, they being not now one entire Jurisdiction;] and the third part of the 19 Ships [that is, Cities; or Goods and Mer∣chandise;] were destroyed. 17 The Type of a Mountain being thrown into the Sea, is here further alluded unto; And hereby is signified, that the great Mountain, or City of Rome, being in hazard of be∣ing destroyed and consumed by its being taken and pillaged; the Sea, or People of the Civil State, into whose contrary stri∣vings and struglings it was thrown, as into the Waves of the Sea, must needs suffer extremely by it; both in their Persons, denoted by the Living Creatures of the Sea; and in their Goods and Estates, denoted by Ships; as Metaphors most pro∣per to the Sea, from whence this Emblem is taken. 18 This came to pass when the Provinces of the Roman Em∣pire about A. D. 455. (the time when Genserick also took Rome) were divided into several Kingdoms, by the Northern Nations, which broke into it; which is the Death of a Civil State, when it ceases to be what it was before.
19 Cities are to a Countrey as Ships to the Sea; the Places wherein Men Live and Traffick; and wherein they are forti∣fied against Enemies, as by Ships against the Violence of the Sea, says Dr. Hammond on the place. But Grotius's Expo∣sition seems to me more apposite; for, as Sea signifies People, so (says he) Ships must, by the same Analogy, signifie their Goods or Moveables. 10 And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star from Heaven, burning, as it were a Lamp 20 [denoting the fall of the 21 We∣stern Emperour, Isa. 14.12.] and it fell pon the third part of the 22 Ri∣vers [i. e. upon the Co ntries and Provinces, Magistrates, and Ar∣mies of the Roman Empire, represented by Rivers, Ezek. 32.2-6.] and upon the Fountains 23 of Waters [i. e. the Capital Cities.] 20 This is a plain Description of that sort of Comets, or falling Stars, which for the Figure of them are calledPlin. Nat. Hist. 2.25, 35. Hevelii Cometograph. pag. 442. where the Figures of them may be seen. Lampadias. 21 The most remarkable DivisionRicciol. Chronol. Reform. of the Roman Em∣pire into the Eastern and Western (whose bounds you may see in ProcopiusPag. 1, 2. Vandalick History,) begun, (upon a Decree of Theodosius) Jan. 17. A.D. 395. when Arcadius reigned in the East, having his Seat at Constantinople; and Honorius in the West: After which time the Empire never came entirely into the Hands of one Monarch. Now this Western Empire cea∣sed under Augustulus, A.D. 476. when Odoacer became King of Italy, and translated the Seat of the Empire from Rome to Ravenna; after it had enjoyed the Imperial Dignity, for 521. Years. 22 A Type taken from One of the Plagues of Egypt, Exod. 7.17-22.
23 As Seas and Waters signifie the People, so do Fountains Capital Cities; from whence the People are derived into Co∣lonies and Provinces. 11 And the Name of the Star is called 24 Wormwood [denoting the bitter Afflictions which he, and the Empire felt under him, Rh 1.20. Jerem. 9 15.] and the third part of the Waters [i.e the People of the Roman Empire] became Wormood [i. e. were grievous∣l afflicted, and their Lives became bitter unto them;] and many mn died of the Waters [i. e. by mutual Slaughters, and by the grie∣vous Afflictions the Empire then suffered, Lament 3.15. Acts 8.23. Heb. 12.15.] 24 After the Death of Aetius and Valentinian, A. D. 455. the Western Empire suffered extremely under weak and short-lived Princes; and by the Incursions of the Huns, Goths, and other Barbarous Nations, into Italy, and the Roman Provin∣ces; especially of Odoacer with his Herulians (a People of Seythia, who had seated themselves in Pannonia) who extin∣guished the Roman Empire; which brought infinite Miseries, and a most heavy, and bitter Servitude upon the whole Peo∣ple;Procop. Gothic. Hist. pag. 139. Jornand. de reb. Getic. cap. 46. Augustulus (so called, because he came very young to the Empire) being also banished, and imprisoned. Whose Fall from Imperial Dignity is aptly represented by the Fall of a Star from Heaven, according to the like Allusion, Isaiah 14.12— 12 And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part [Verse 7.] of the Sun [i. e. the Roman Kingly Dignity,] was smitten [or, kid∣ed 25 and destroyed] and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars [i. e. the other inferiour Powers;] so as the third part of them was darkned, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise [i e. the whole 26 Roman dignity, and autho∣rity, was totally Eclypsed, see Chap. 6.12, 13, 14.]
25 For so to smite signifies in very many places of Scrip∣ture; it being rendred sometimes by Killing; as Exod. 2.12. 26 Odoacer, the Herulian, reigned Sixteen Years, as King of Italy; when he was conquered by Theodorick the Goth, who took that Title A. D. 493. and reigned Thirty Three Years with great Prudence and Moderation, towards the Romans, preserving the Authority of the Senate, and Consuls, and their other Dignities and Customs; which his Successors, the Go∣thish Kings of Italy for some time observed; whose Reign continued for about Seventy Six Years. But Justinian the Emperour having made War upon Italy, for regaining it from the Goths; after it had suffered miserably by a dreadful Fa∣mine, and a Bloody War under Totilas; it was at last joyned to the Eastern Empire: the Kingly Power being extinguished, and Narses made Governour of it for Justinian; about A.D. 553. who being removed from his Government after sixteen Years Administration of it; Longinus was advanced to it, un∣der the Title of Exarch of Ravenna, A. D. 569. When the Consuls entirely ceased, and the Authority of the Senate was abolished; and Rome, the Mistress of the World, became a Dutchy, and was subject to Ravenna: at which time also the Kingdom of the Lombards (who came Originally from Scan∣zia into Pannonia) began in Italy, which lasted until A. D. 756. after which, Charles the Great, who beat the Lombards out of Italy, was created Emperour of the Romans, by Pope Leo, Dec. 25. A. D. 800. all which time Rome was under the Government of the Papacy; as we shall see hereafter. 13 And I beheld, and heard an Angel flying [to denote speed] thorow the midst of Heaven [i. e. in the meridian height of it that he might be seen, and heard of all;] saying with a loud voice [audibly, and terribly,] Wo, 27 Wo, Wo, to the Inhabitants of the Earth, by reason of the voices of the Trumpets of the three Angels, which are yet to sound.
27 Here the extreme Misery, which the Empire was to suf∣fer by the Saracens and Turks, Chap. 9.12. and the Apsta∣sy, Chap. 11.14. is foretold. Under the Angels in this Chapter, are included (according to an Observation frequently made) all those Faithful Servants of Christ, who witnessed to his Truths, and against the Rising Antichristianism in the Church, during the Time and Course of the Trumpets; and of the pre∣paration to the sounding of them. Such were, amongst many others; (1.) Gregory Nyssen, who was a married Man; and wrote an excellentDr. Cave's Lives of the Fathers, Vol. 2. in the Append. pag. 45. Epistle against Pilgrimages to the Holy Land. (2.) GregoryDr. Cave, Vol. 2. pag. 322, 326. Nazianzen; who was so mightily of∣fended with the Quarrels and Contentions of Bishops and Councils, that he refused to come to a Synod at Constantino∣ple, saying, That Experience had sufficiently taught him how little good was to be expected from Synods; and then resign∣ed his Bishoprick, which he said, he knew not, whether to stile a Tyrannical, or an Archiepiscopal Dignity; and testified a∣gainst the excessive State, Power, and Honours of the Clergy, freelyTom. 1. pag. 61, 62. Orat. 1. adv. Julian. confessing, That the Mischiefs of the Church in his Time proceeded from thence. (3) Ambrose, who was a stout Defender of Discipline,Cave's Lives, pag. 409, 410. exercising it even upon the Great Emperour Theodosius; who with an extraordinary Meekness and Penitence submitted unto it. (4.)Dr. Cressener's Demonstrat. of the Apocal. in Append. pag. 13. Jerome, Theodoret, Andreas Caesariensis, Arethas, and others, who plainly testifie, That Rome was to be the
Seat of Antichrist; as does alsoCressener, ibid, pag. 30. Augustine, and Chryso∣stomCressener, ibid. pag. 30.; who were excellent Witnesses to many great Truths in this Succession; the formerAugustin. Epist. ad Januar. lib. 2. Ep. 55. complaining ex∣ceedingly of the encrease of Ceremonies in his Time, and confessing, that a more than Jewish Servitude was brought in by them; which Expression gives light to the Reason, why the prevaling party of this Succession, is called the Synagogue of Satan, Ch. 2.9. Although it must be confessed, that these, and the other Great Men of this Period of the Church, contributed much to the encrease of its Corruptions; which the best of Men may do, when God permits such Deviations from the Simplicity of the Gospel to prevail; and doth not withhold Men from being carried away with them by his more than ordinary Restraints. (5.) Salvian, Gildas, and the other Authors, who wrote concerning the Invasions of the Barbarous Nations, and lived in those Times, do loudly testifie against the Vices and Cor∣ruptions of them; as also Gregory the Great, who was a most Eminent Witness of the Approach of Antichrist in his Time; as will be shewn in the beginning of the An∣notations on the next Chapter; as were also all those Ex∣cellent Persons, who testified, during the fifth and sixth Trumpet, against the Worship af Images, and other Corruptions; for which God brought these Woes upon the Church. See the Protestants who have gathered Catalogues of Wit∣nesses, and the laborious Collections of Monsieur Allix, in his Ac∣counts of the Albigenses and Waldenses.
CHAP. IX. The Text. 1 AND the fifth Angel sounded, and I saw a Star [i. e. an 1 Angel or Minister of the Church, Rev. 1.20.] fall [or fallen,] from Heaven unto the Earth [i. e. Apostatized from a Christian Church state, to a worldly Kingdom;] and to him was given [by the Order, and Disposition of events, according to God's all∣wise Disposals;] the Key of the bottomless Pit [i. e. a Satanical Kingdom, and an Antichristian Authority, Rev. 2.24.] Annotations on CHAP. IX. 1 Here the Papacy is described. (1.) Because that which appeared, is said to be a Star; which is the Symbol of the Gospel Ministry, Chap. 1.20. (2.) It is said to be the Star that was fallen from Heaven; which cannot refer to Mahomet, who never had any Place in Heaven; i. e. any Place or Dignity in the Church; or any Dignity at all, from which he might be said to have fal∣len. (3) This Star is said to have fallen from Heaven to Earth, and then to have a New Dignity bestowed upon him; where∣by it is evident, that the fallen Star, mentioned Chap 8.10. cannot be here understood; because that Star fell upon the Waters, this upon the Earth; and that was a Comet, this a Star, which fell from one Power to another; whereas the o∣ther was in a burning and consuming Condition, bereft of all Power.
(4.) This fallen Star is said to have the Keys of the bottom∣less Pit given unto him; that is, a Satanical Authority, con∣sisting of a Synagogue, a Throne, and Depths of Satan; which being proper to the Apostasy, especially the Papacy; ought here also to be understood concerning it: For as (according to the Observation of Dr.Apud Poli Synops. in locum. Lightfoot,) the Keys of Heaven were given to Peter, when a Door of Salvation was to be o∣pened to the Gentiles, by his Preaching, and Erecting the first Christian Church; so when the Christian World was about to fall, as it were, into its former Gentilism, the Key of the bot∣tomless Pit was given to Antichrist. (5.) This Star is said to be already fallen, at the time that the Pit was opened, and the Locusts (that is, the Saracens) came out of it. Now the Rise of the Saracens is placed, by all Historians, in A.D. 622. when the Aera of the Hegira, or Flight of Mahomet began; and the Rise of Antichristianism in the Latin Church, as to the Point of Supremacy, is generally pla∣ced by Protestants, Sixteen Years before it; when Boniface the Third, A. D. 606. took the Title of Ʋniversal Bishop, and Head of all Churches; whichGregor. Epist. lib: 4.38. Gregory the Great had con∣demned before in the Bishop of Constantinople; asserting, that he who usurped it, was the Forerunner of Antichrist, the Prince of Pride; and that he imitated Lucifer, in exalting his Throne above the Stars of God; that is, his Brethren, the Bi∣shops, who are the Stars of Heaven; and in ascending above the heighth of the Clouds. Which words are, as it were, a Com∣ment upon the Place; and a Prophecy (as one ingeniously speaks) of their High-Priest, who spake not this of himself, but as being High-Priest that Year; foretelling the Fall of that Eminent Star from Heaven, to a State of Worldly Domini∣on,
according to the manner of the Kingdoms of the Earth. So that in a few years after the Rise of the Papal Antichrist in the West; there arose in the East a new sort of an Anti∣christian Dominion, to be a Scourge to it, and in opposi∣tion unto it's Idolatrous Practices; the Chief of which called themselves Chalifs, or Vicars of Mahomet, (for so the word signifies) as the Popes have called themselves the Chalifs, or Vicars of Christ. 2 And he opened the bottomless Pit [i. e. Exercised this Authority, and entred upon the Administration of his Kingdom;] and there arose a smoak 2 out of the Pit, as the smoak of a great Furnace [i. e. many gross and Antichristian Errors;] and the Sun, and the Air were darkned by reason of the Smoak of the Pit, [i. e. The Gospel, the Light of the World, was obscured by these errors.] 2 As a great Smoak hinders the Sight, so do Errors the Ʋn∣derstanding. He keeps to the Allegory; for Smoak takes from us the sight of the Stars; saith Grotius on the Place. And theBochart. Hieroz. lib. 4.4. Ludolph. Commentar. in Aethiopic. Histor. pag. 173. Locusts are wont to come in so great Numbers, that the Air hath been darkned, and the Sun, as it were, Eclypsed by them, Joel. 2.10. 3 And there came 3 out of the Smoak [contrary to the expectation of him that opened it;] Locusts 4 upon the Earth [i. e. the grie∣vous Plague of 5 Mahometism, with the Numerous and Destroying Armies of the 5 Saracens Exod. 10.3-15. Joel Chapters 1.2.] and unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of theBochart. Hieroz. lib. 4.4. Ludolph. Commentar. in Aethiopic. Histor. pag. 173. Earth have power [as to the manner of the Mischief they were to do, Verse 5.10.] 3 Locusts do encrease most in very dry Seasons, and come in bliting burning Easterly Winds; which are usually ac∣companied with a smoaky Vapour: whence probably is that
Expression, Hosea 13.3. according to the LXX,-and like a Smoak, or Vapour from Locusts. Although Bochartus is of Opinion, that here is an Allusion to the Custom amongst the Ancient Arabs or Saracens, of hunting Locusts byBochart. Hieroz. Part. 2. pag. 472, 484, 495. smoak. 4 Great Armies of Enemies are resembled toSee Dr. Pocock on Joel. Locusts in Scripture; (1.) By Reason of their Number, Judg. 6, 5.7, 12. Psalm 105.34. Joel 1.6. The Multitudes of Locusts, which in∣fest the Eastern, and sometimes the European parts, being al∣mostBochart. Hieroz. pag. 443, 445. Ludolph. Aethiopic. Histor. pag. 173, 174. incredible. And it is not altogether improper to remark here, that vast Numbers of Locusts have been fre∣quently seen to appear, before the Approach of great Armies; which is frequently noted by Abul Pharajai, and by Du Fresne in his Notes at the end ofPag. 530. Cinnamus. (2.) Because of the great, and unavoidable Mischief they do in the Fields, in Houses, and to Men themselves, whom they set upon, and are thought sometimes to have killedBochart. Hieroz. pag. 462, 477, 478. Ludolph. pag. 174. them. Book of Wisdom 16.9. (3.) From the exact MilitaryBochart. pag. 477. Discipline and Order they observe in flying; and the strength which is in their Ranks and Divisions when they fly, or go, Joel 2.7, 8. (4) From their climbing of Walls, and getting into Hou∣ses and Windows; like Men of War, in time of Seige, and Sacking of Towns, Joel 2.7, 9. Exod. 10.6. and from their notBochart. pag. 478. being subject to hurt, from Weapons, which they avoid by their Swiftness, and by the Subtilty and Tenuity of their Bo∣dies, Joel 2.8.
* Terrestrial Scorpions are (as Naturalists observe) of all the mostBoch. Hieroz. pag. 934. hurtful. (5) (5) The Saracens seem to be understood by Locusts, be∣cause, (1.) They came from the East, as the Locusts did, Exod. 10.13. Whence they were calledPocock. Not. ad Specim. Histor. Arab. sub init. Saracens, which sig∣nifies the Inhabitants of the Eastern parts of the World. (2.) Because of their vast Numbers, and their wandring State and Condition, they being of the Race of the AncientAmmian. Marcel. 14.4. Scenitae, who lived in Tents, roaming from place to place; with which agrees the Description of the Locusts, gi∣ven by the Prophet Nahum 3.15, 16. as the place is interpre∣ted byPag. 458. Bochartus. (3.) Because the Arabians, or Children of the East, are ex∣presly likened to Locusts or Grasshoppers, Judges 6.3-5. (4.) By Reason of the suddenness of their Invasions, and the Prodigious Swiftness of their Conquests, and the great ha∣vock and Ravage made by them; all which Circumstances are Notorious in the Plague of Locusts, who fall in prodigi∣ous Numbers in one Night, and sometimes almost in a mo∣ment, destroying all before them. And (Lastly,) because these Locusts are said to come out of the thick smoak of the bottomless Pit; i. e. out of gross Er∣rors, and filthy Practices; which is the plain Original of Ma∣hometism; which began in a very corrupt and dark Age, when the Christians were divided into many Sects and Schisms, and vented very gross Errors; such were those of the Arrians, Jacobites, Melchites, Eutychians, Monothelites and Nestorians; from whom proceeded many of the Opinions of
Mahomet; who wasSylburg. Saracenica, pag. 3, 5, 59. assisted in the Contrivance of his Religion by Sergius, a banished Nestorian, by an Arrian Monk, and other Hereticks; with whom the Church was then infested, as it was also by Contests about the Supremacy; and with gross Antichristian Errors; which are the Chief Things intended in this Prophecy: Of all whichHistor. Oriental. lib. 2.2. Hottinger has treated fully. But that we may the better understand the true Meaning of this Vision; I ll endeavour to give a brief Account of the Rise of Mahometism, and of the progress of the Saracenick Empire, from Authentick Historians, chiefly from Elmacinus, and Abul Pharajai, Two Arabick Writers; which will be of great use in the following Annotations. The Saracens are properly those Arabs which lived about Meccha and Medina, and the places adjoyning; who, under their Prophet Mahomet, began to be Famous, about A.D. 622. when he fled from Meccha, he place of his Nativity, for fear of the Tribe of the Coraisites, or Koreisheites, the Inhabitants of Meccha; who threatned him for endeavouring to usurp o∣ver them, and for introducing a New Doctrine amongst them: for although many of them had been converted to the Christian Religion, in and before the Reign ofSocrat. 4.36. Sozom. 6.38. Va∣lens; yet the Arabs were by this time mostlyAbul-Pharajai, pag. 101. Idolaters, worshipping the Stars, whose Motions and Influences they understood, which was allAbul-Pharajai, pag. 101. the Skill and Knowledge they had in their State of Ignorance; as the Mussulmen call the Times before their Conversion to Mahometism. They are mentioned byHist. Nat. 6.28. Pliny (and by none before him, as far as I can find) under the Name of Saracens; and are placed by him, and Ptolemy, in Arabia Felix; and that rightly; for
MecchaGabriel Sionita, de Morib. & urbib. Orient. Thevenot's Travels. Dr. Hyde's I∣tinera Mundi. pag. 87. is not a City of Arabia Deserta, as is commonly thought; but is situated over against the middle of the Red Sea, about a Days Journey from it, betwixt Jaman and Hig∣jaz, in Arabia Felix; about seven and Thirty Days Journey from Grand Caire, and about Ten Days Journey or Two hun∣dred and seventy Miles from Medina; the place of this false Prophet's Retreat; where he lived about Eight Years, and made the greatest part of his Alcoran. During this th he had many Battels with his Neighbours, especially the Krci∣shites, the Chief Tribe of those Parts; and propagated his Doctrine, and Dominion, in many parts of Arabia; but not much farther. After his Death (which was A. D. 631. as A∣bul Pharajai affirms, or according to Elmacinus, A. D. 632.) his Successors made swift and prodigious Conquests; over-running Persia, Syria, Aegypt, and Palestine in a very few Years; insomuch that about theRoderici Ximenes, Archiepisc. Toletan. Histor. Arab. cap. 12. Mr. Mede on the place. Abul-Phar. Pag. 129. Camerarit Narrat. Turcic. ex Sausovin. pag. 77. Year 729. in Fourscore, or an Hundred Years at furthest, they had subdued most of the Kingdoms and Provinces of the Known World; extending their Arms into India, beyond the Bounds of the Roman Em∣pire. About 643.Abul-Pharajai, pag. 115, 116. they invaded Africk; and from thence fell intoElmacinus, lib. 1.13. pag. 85. Roderic. Tolet. cap. 9. Petav. ad An. 712. Spain, about A. D, 711. which in Two Years space they wholly conquered. About A. D.Theophan. Paulus Diacon. Sigon. de Rogno Italiae, pag. 60. 716. (as Abulpharajai and Elmacinus both agree) they besieged Con∣stantinople with a vast Army; and Ravaged and over-run Languedoc, Provence, and several parts of France, from A. D.Mezeray's History of France. Petav. Ration. Temp. Sigon. de Regno Ital. pag. 66. 721. to A. D. 738. when they were totally van∣quished
and beaten out of those parts by Charles Martel. A∣bout A. D.Petav. Ratinar. 828. they took Sicily, and from thence infested Italy; pillaging RomeAnasias. vit. Gregor. 4th. the Year following; and A.D. 846. they came from Africk (as the LocustsPlin. Nat. Hist. 11.29. are wont to do) in∣to Italy, and again fell uponAnasias. in Leon. 4to. Sigon. de Regno Ital. pag. 120. Rome, burning the Famous Churches of Peter and Paul, and carrying away many of their Ornaments with them into Campania; where they pil∣laged several Monasteries: but whilst they were returning with their Spoils into Africk, they were dispersed by a migh∣ty Tempest, and the greatest part of them were cast away. They afterwards harrassed Italy for several Years, until they were subdued, and beaten out of it, first, by Otho, about 980. who was called, the Death of the Saracens; and then by the Emperour Henry the Second, and the Normans, betwixt the YearsPetav. Rationar. pars 1. lib. 8. 1014, and 1022. not long after which time, viz. A. D.Elmacinus, pag. 336. 337. Abul-Phar. 226, 227. 1055. their was an End put to their Empire, by Tangrolipix, or Tugrol-Beg: who fixed his Seat at Bagdad, the Imperial City of the Saracens, whereby that Empire devolved upon the Turks; he being installed Sultan there, A. D. 1057. by the Saracenick Chalif; Two Hundred Ninety Three years after its being built for their Imperial Seat, by Al-Mansur, A. D. 762. as bothAbul. pag. 43. Elmac. pag. 122. Abul-Pharajai and Elmacinus agree. 4 And it was [said or] commanded * them [by God, who raised them up, and sealed the True Christians, whilst Antichristianity only was exposed to hurt;] that they should not hurt [by pervert∣ing them from their Religion;] the Grass [or Herb] of the Earth, neither any green thing, neither any Tree [i. e. no Christians who had any Spiritual Life in them, and shewed it by its Fruits and
Effects, Psalm 1, 5.52, 8. Matth. 3.8, 10. Rev. 7, 1.8, 7.] but only those men, which have 6 not the Seal of God in their Foreheads [i. e. the Apostasy; for a pure, Apostolical Church was to be preserved in secret, Chap. 7.] * And to this End were they raised by Providence; which miraculously preserved them from being destroyed by the Ro∣mans, as Dr.History, part 3. pag. 283. Howel hath judiciously observed. 6 God was pleased to preserve a pure Church in secret, du∣ring the great Inundation of these Barbarous People; as ap∣pears from the Catalogues of Witnesses to the Truth, in this Age; although the whole Apostate Church, both of the Ea∣stern and Western parts, severely felt the Scourge of this Plague; which fell mostly upon them (that their Fault might be known by the very providential timing of their punishment) during some Remarkable Instances, and Workings of the Apo∣stasy. When the Saracens first appeared A. D. 622. the World was much given to Image-Worship; HeracliusTyrius de Bello sacro, lib. 23.30. the Emperour, having newly then recovered the Cross from the Persians, and restored it to the Temple of the Sepulchre, from which it had been taken; and upon that instituted, or at least celebrated the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross. When they inva∣ded Sardinia, about 720. Luitprandus, King of the Lom∣bards, bought the Relicks of St. Austin at a great price, of them; and went out to meet them in a solemn Procession, and being struck with the Wonder of the Greatness of the Mira∣cles which had been done by them, worshipped them (saysSigon. de Regno Ital. pag. 61. Sigonius) with Divine Honour. And it is very remarkable, that the great Quarrels betwixt Leo the Emperour, and the Popes, Gregory the Second, and the Third, about Images; were, upon the Saracens objecting Image-Worship, as Idolatry
to the Emperour; and that the greatest and fiercest assaults of the Saracens upon the Empire, were during the Time that Con∣test was hottest; to wit, from the yearSpanhem. Histor. Imagin. 713. when the Controversie with the Monothelites ceased, and the only one which then exercised the World, was that about Images: a∣bout which time they conquered Spain, and besieged Constan∣tinople; and fell into Italy not long after the Worship of Ima∣ges was established by a Law, in the Second Council of Nice, A. D. 787. 5 And to them it was given, that they should not 7 kill them [or utterly destroy even the Apostate Antichristian Roman Em∣pire;] but that they should be 8 Tormented five Months [of yeats;] and their Torment was as the Torment of a Scorpion when he striketh a man [i. e. very 9 vexatious, and painful, Prov. 23.32. Ezek. 2.6.] 7 To kill a Body Politick, is, (asDe Jur. Bell. & Pac. lib. 2. cap. 9. Grotius has obser∣ved) to make it cease to be, either by utterly destroying the people of it, or by subjecting it to a New Authority, whereby it ceases to be what it was before: Neither of which were the Saracens able to do in the Eastern or Western Roman Em∣pire; for although they often besieged Constantinople, yet they could never take it; and they tormented Rome and I∣taly, by frequent and sudden Incursions, but had never posses∣sion of the former, nor any long quiet settlement in any part of the latter; But (asHistor. Insabr. pag. 115. Putean remarks) Their Incursions in∣to Italy, were like a sudden Tempestuous Wind, which vanishes after it has done its Mischief. So that, as to the Chief and Ca∣pital parts of the Roman Empire, they never had power to kill them, or reduce them under their Authority, and could
not fix the Seat of their Empire, in any of its Imperial Cities; as the Turks afterwards did theirs at Constantinople; which is expresly called, slaying or killing the Third part of Men, Vers. 15. but seated themselves first at Damascus in Syria, after∣wards at Bagdad. 8 Here is a manifest Allusion to the time that Locusts are wont to live; whichBocharti Hieroz. pag. 495. Naturalists observe to be Five Months; which we are to understand according to the Pro∣phetical way of reckoning (of which there hath been menti∣on already made on Chap. 2.10.) of Months of Years. Now if we consider the whole length of the Duration of the Saracenick Empire, we shall find it to be precisely 435. Years; reckoning from A. D. 622. the Aera of Mahometism, unto A. D. 1057. when the Turkish Empire succeeded; asLib. 3.7. pag. 336, 337. Elmacinus, and Dr. Pocock, in the Margin of Abul-Pha∣rajai, has particularly noted. Which Line of Time consists of a Ternary of Five Months of Years; each of them a∣mounting to an Hundred and Forty Five Years, reckoningSee the Notes on Chap. 11.2. Twenty Nine Years of Days to each Month; of which, Two Five Months being allotted to their tormenting, and hurting of Men, the first in this Verse, and the second in the tenth; the remaining five months must be understood to belong to their declining and decaying condition; when they could not tor∣ment others. And with this, there is a wonderful Agree∣ment in History; which dates the Decay and Division of this Empire, from about 290, or 300 years after its Rise. For Elmacinus divides his History into Three Books, as we do the Duration of their Empire into a Ternary of five months; trea∣ting in the first Book of the Original, and Encrease of their Empire; which he extends from A.D. 622. to about A.D. 746: in
the second Book, of the Declension of it; and in the third of its Distraction and Dissipation; placing the fatalElmacin. pag. 255. Abul-Phar. pag. 175. Divi∣sion of it about A. D. 936. not much above twice five months after its first appearance; when he confesses, that the Power of the Chalif was diminished, and the Kingdom weakned; his Revenues taken away, and nothing but a Name left him; the Turks prevailing daily at Bagdad, from A. D. 863. and depo∣sing the Califs very frequently. And with  Account, agrees the Observation ofHistor. pag. 409. edit. Parisiens. Leunclav: Histor. Musulman. pag. 67. Ce∣drenus; who relating the Prediction of a Famous Alexandri∣an Astronomer, who foretold, that the prosperous Power, and flourishing Dominion of the Saracens, should be but for Three Hundred and Nine Years; judges him to have erred indeed, but not very much, in his Calculation. And therefore I can∣not but upon this occasion recommend the Study of Scrip∣tural, especially Prophetical Chronology, to all Learned Men; no ways doubting, but that they will find, that the greatest Difficulties may be cleared up by it. 9 BochartusHieroz. pag. 639, 640, 642. notes, That the Torment of Scorpions is very grievous, and of all other the most vexatious; whence troublesome Persons are likned unto them, Ezek. 2.6. Ec∣clus. 25, 15.26, 7. and observes, that they also, as well as the Locusts, hurt only for five months. Now that the Tor∣ment of the Saracens, was not only of the like duration, but of the like Nature, History sufficiently testifies, especially as to what concerns the Two Imperial Seats, Rome, and Constanti∣nople; which, as the next Verse clearly sets forth, (with which History accords) were frequently tormented with fresh Alarms of their Incursions and Invasions.
6 And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them [i. e. they shall be tor∣mented with continual Invasions, so that they shall desire Con∣quest and Death, rather than such a mischievous and unsetled condition, Joel 2.6. Jerem. 8.3] 7 And the Shapes of the Locusts were like unto 10 Horses prepared to biel [i. e. they were stout and swift, Joel 2.4. Job 33.23-25.] and on their Heads, were, as it were, 11 Crowns of Gold [signifying their Victories and Success, and the many Kingdoms should sub∣mit unto them;] and their Faces were as the 12 Faces of men [i. e. they had seemingly rational and plausible pretences, Rev. 4.7 Dn. 7.4.] 8 And they had Hair as the 12 Hair of VVomen [i.e their Preten∣ces were insinuating, enticing and deceitful, Canticl 4, 1.6, 5.] and their Teeth was as the Teeth of Lions [i. e. cruel and devouring, not white and clean, Canticl. 4, 2.6, 6. Joel 1.6.] 10Hieroz. pag. 474. Bochartus observes, that Locusts represent Horses, not only in their Swiftness, (which is here chiefly pointed at, the Conquests of the Saracens being carried on with pro∣digious and almost incredible speed,) but also in the shape of their Heads; the Figure of which may be seen inPag. 177. Ludol∣phus's Notes on his Aethiopick History. 11 As their rapid success is described before, so have we here represented the great Number of Kingdoms which they over-run; for (as Mr. Mede has truly noted) no Nation ever had so large an Extent of Dominion, or ever subdued so many King∣doms in so short a space. 12 12Hieroz. pag. 456. Bochartus notes, That there are some hairy and rough Locusts; and Mr. Mede observes, that the ancient Ara∣bians, or Saracens, were Famous forPlin. 6.28. Ammian. Marcel. pag. 654. Hieronym. in vit. Malchi. wearing long Hair,
and having their heads attired like women. But these Words (as appears from the Texts I have quoted) evidently refer to the Perfidiousness and Subtlity of the Saracens, for which they are notoriously infamous in allAmmian. Marcel. pag. 13. Excerpta è Legat. pag. 149. ed. Paris. Theoph. Simocat. Hist. 3. 17. History; and to the spe∣cious pretences by which they advanced their Religion, and the sagacity and strength of Reason, for which they areSylburgii Saracenic. pag. 69. —. pe∣culiarly noted to have valued themselves; they becoming also such great Proficients in the Peripatetick Philosophy, and the Art of disputing; that Charlemain brought in Aristotle's Philoso∣phy into the West, and set up the Schools, that the Christians might be the better furnished to oppose the Jews and Mahome∣tans. For the Religion of Mahomet was with great cunning adapted to the Looseness and Debauchery of that Age; and being made up of a Medley of Judaism, and of the Opini∣ons of the Hereticks of those Times, it was peculiarly fitted to prevail upon both of them. Furthermore, Mahomet is no∣ted to have come of a NobleHottingeri Hist. Orient. pag. 205, 206. Tribe, and to have got great Riches, although his Parents were very poor; and by Conver∣sation with people of all Perswasions, to have gained an in∣sight into the several Religions which were then professed; which being joynedElmacinus, pag. 11, 13. Hottinger: pag. 356-361. Sylburg. Saracenic. pag. 36. with a good Natural Wit, a sweet Voice, and a courteous Disposition to Men of all Conditions, especially to the Christians, whom he pretended mightily to favour, and forbad to be forced from their Religion (as ap∣pears from other Testimonies, as well as from his Last Will and Testament, which some Learned men do now judge to be Genuine,) were very plausible ways of gaining upon men.
But above all, the great Zeal which he shewed againstElmacinus, pag. 3. I∣mages, and Idolatry, together with theSee his Life, at the End of the Alcoran in English. And Dr. Moor's Mystery of Godliness, B. 5. 9, 10. seeming holiness of his Life, his solitary Retiredness into a Cave, for a considerable time, and the strange Feats he did by the power of Sorcery, were the most plausible, and most prevailing Insinuations he made use of; and which were permitted to prevail, by the just Judgment of God, as a punishment upon the Christians for their great Superstition and Idolatry; and that the Belief of the Ʋnity of the Godhead, and of his Abhorrence of Images; might be kept up in the parts of the Christian World, where the Apostasy had so mightily encreased. 9 And they had Breast-plates, as it were Breast-plates ef Iron [i. e. they were well armed, Joel 2.8.] and the sound of their 13 Wings, was as the sound of Chariots of many Horses running to Battel [deno∣ting their Swiftness, Noise, and Terror, Joel 2.5. Job. 39.20.] 13Hieroz. pag. 475. 478. Bochartus also notes, that the Locusts make a terri∣ble Noise with their Wings; and that (as was before obser∣ved) they are not easily wounded. 10 And they had Tails like unto Scorpions, and there were 14 Stings in their Tails [i. e. they pretended to Prophecy, and infected, and deceived Men by it, Isa. 9.15.] and their power was to hurt men five months [of years, i. e. 145. years.] 14 The Sting and Poyson of Scorpions is in their Tails; asHieroz. pag. 636, 637. Bochartus has observed; and hereby is signified, the poy∣son of their false Religion, grounded upon pretence to prophecy,
and converse with the Angel Gabriel; the Prophet that teach∣eth Lies being expresly likened to the Tail, Isa. 9.15. 11 And they had a King 15 over them [Eph. 2.2.] which is the An∣gel of the bottomless 16 Pit [i. e. a Satanical Instrument acted by an Evil Spirit, who came out of it with the Smoak, and Locusts, Verse 2, 3.] whose Name in the Hebrew 17 Tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek Tongue hath his Name Apollyon [i. e. the Destroyer  viz. Mahomet, whose Religion and Empire is seated in the Chief City of the Jews, Jerusalem; and of the Greeks, Constantinople: the Destroyer of the Lives and Religion of both.] 15 Hereby is intimated, that these were Mystical Locusts, not Natural o, which have no King over them, Prov. 3.27. 16 Mahomet's Hellish Doctrine is hereby described; who also was suspected of Sorcery, and therefore strives to clear himself of it in his Alcoran; and seems to have been possessed by an Evil Spirit; of which his extraordinary Epileptick Fits are thought to be no mean Argument. See Mr.B. 1. Disc. 6. Mede, and Dr. Hammond on Matth. 17.15. 17 This is in allusion to the Inscription upon our Saviour's Cross, Matth. 27.37. This is Jesus the King of the Jews: which was written (Luke 23.38.) in Letters of Greek, and Latine, and Hebrew: to shew, that Christ, our Saviour's Kingdom, was to be dispersed and established through the whole World: in correspondence whereunto, Mahomet's Superscrip∣tion is, The Destroyer, as Christ's was, Jesus, The Saviour; and his Name is written in the Hebrew, and Greek; but not the Latine Tongue: to shew, that he should prevail over Jeru∣salem, the Chief City of the Jews, and over Constantinople, the Chief City of the Greek Empire; but not over Rome, the Chief City of the Latin, or Western Roman Empire.
12 One Woe [or the first of the Three Woes. viz. the Sarace∣nick denounced Chap 8.13.] is past [in Vision,] and behold there ce Two Woes more hereafter. 13 And the sixth Angel sounded [an Alarm to a new Woe,] and I heard a 18 Voice from the Four Horns of the Golden Altar [of Incense,] which is before God, [Chap 8.3, 4.] 18 The Voice which commands the letting loose of the four Angels, which were to execute the second Woe, comes from t Man of Incense; which had Four Horns (as we read, Hd. 27, 2.30, 2. Ezek. 43.15.) denotingSee the Commentators on the place; and Spencer de Hebraeor. legib. pag. 562-569. the Suffi∣ciency and Excellency of Christ's Intercession, and his power and Authority, (of which Horns are an Emblem) over his Church, in the Four Quarters of the World. So that hereby is signified the Voice, or Prayers of the Saints of God, or the pure Church, gathered from the Four Corners of the Earth, who now prayed in secret, in a sealed, or retired Condition, (as we have shewn on the Eighth Chapter, Verse 3, 4.) that God would punish the Idolatry (Verse 20, 21.) which now Reigned upon the whole Earth, and was newly established at the Council of Nice. And the Voice proceeded from the Four Horns of the Golden Altar, to shew, that they were pure from Idolatry, and that Holiness to the Lord was graven upon the Horns of their Altar; as the sin of Idolatry was upon the Horns of the Jewish Altars, Jerem. 17.1. 14 Saying to the sixth Angel, which had the Trumpet, loose [from their Restraint,] the 19 Four [Evil] Angels [i. e. the Turkish Po∣tentacy;] which are bound 20 in the great River 21 Euphrates; [i. e. hin∣dered by Divine Restraint, and the Providential course of things, from making any considerable Progress in the parts of the Roman Empire beyond that River.]
19 The Bad, as well as Good Spirits, which God makes use of, are called in Scripture, Angels; which in this Book are put to denote the Men, and Instruments used by and under them in their executing the Commands of God. And because there is great Reason to believe, (as I shall shew hereafter) that the Turkish Potentacy is meant in this place, which immediately followed the Saracenical; I shall therefore endeavour to give you a brief Account of its Original and Progress: The Turks (called  byLib. 4. pag. 232. Mela 1. ult. Plin. 6, 7. Herodotus, and Turcae by Mela, and Pliny) are by all Accounts a Northern People; called therefore, The King of the North, Dan. 11.40. as the Saracens are, The King of the South; because they lie South∣ward of Palestine. They were Orignally Natives of Tarta∣ry, which is called Turchestân, by the Eastern Writers; and is a Countrey of a vast Extent, reaching from the River Volga to the extreme East; consisting of Two sorts of Tartars, the Eastern, or Mogul Tartars, lying above China, beyond the Mountain Imaus, or Emodus; and the Western Tartars on this side Imaus; whose Language is different from the former: and from these latter came the Turks, as appears from their Language, the Ground of which is Tartar; and those Tartars also, which inhabit the lesser Tartary; upon the Black or Euxin Sea, called, the Crim Tartary, or Tarta∣ria Precopensis; from a great Dike, near which its Chief City stands; Crim signifying a great Bank with a Ditch, in the Tartar Language; as Precop does in the Polish: who were originally of the same Race with the Turks, although they are now a mixt people; because their Prince is by Compact, to succeed the Grand Signior, upon de∣fect of Heir Male; which the Turks would not have consented to, if they had not been of the same Line.
Now the Turks made their Excursions from all parts at first; some of them from beyond (a) Tanais, (where those Turks seem to have lived, who sent an Embassy to Justin Junior, and were employed by Heraclius against the Persians, when he sailed through the Euxin Sea) into Georgia, and by de∣grees into Armenia: but the greatest and most Famous Body of them, came from Mawaralnàhra, or the Regions beyond the River Oxus; and from that part of it above the Caspian Sea, which is particularly denominated from them, Turchestân; the Chief Seat whereof is Samarchand; from whence they were cal∣led into Persia, and not from Armenia, as Abul-Pharajai, and El∣macinus both testifie; who make frequent mention of them, and their Kings, long hefore their setling in Persia. They at first fell into Chorasân, (a Countrey lying betwixt Persia and India) and ravaged some parts ofPetav. Rationar. Tempor. 9, 7. Persia, about A. D. 625. and afterwardsAbul-Phar. pag. 115, 116. assisted the Persians against the Saracens, about A. D. 643. AboutSabellic. Ennead. 9. lib. 2. A. D. 800. they made great Incursi∣ons through the Portae Caspiae; which is a narrow Passage near Derbent, (which signifies in the Persian Language a streight betwixt Mountains) called by the Turks, Demir Capi, or the Iron Gate, near the Caspian Sea, betwixt Armenia and Persia; and is part of that vast Ridge of Hills (at least 1500 Miles long) which runneth from West to East, from Arme∣nia to India; where the Branches of it run several ways, one great one of them separating the hithermost Tartary, from that above China, or the Mogul Tartary; and is called Imaus: these Hills receiving different Names, in the different Coun∣teies through which they run; sometimes being called MountNicephor. Bryenn. pag. 21. Du Cange in Not. ad Calcem Cinnami, pag. 299. Ex∣cerpt. e Legat. pag. 106. ed. Paris. Leunclav. Histor. Mussulm. pag. 22, 23. Elmacin. pag. 332. Abul-Phar. pag. 222. Abul-Pheda per Gravium. Knoll's History of the Turks.
Taurus, sometimes Mount Caucasus, and near Tartary, Imaus. Through this Natural Barrier of Nations, there is a Narrow Passage; which the Turks passed, and possessed themselves of the Northern part of Armenia, called, perhaps, from them, Turcomania: From whence, and about the same time, some of them went, and settled in Caramania, in Asia Minor, anci∣ently called Cilicia: whilst others of them, who were Sti∣pendiaries to the Saracenick Chaliphs, prevailed mightily at Bagdâd, betwixt the Year 863. and 900. insomuch, that although they had been often slain in great Numbers, and were driven out of Chorasana; they yet Rallied their Forces, under Tugrol, or Togrul-Beg,Du Cange ad calcem Cinnami, pag. 300. (called Tangroli∣pix, and by several other Names by the Greeks,) who came from the Countries beyond the River Gihon, or Jihun, (which is the same with Oxus) asPag. 222. Du Cange. ibid. Abul-Pharajai distinctly af∣fims; and passed that River, and not Araxes, which divides Armenia from Media; except those Two Rivers are con∣founded by the Greeks, as Du Cange thinks. This great Cap∣tain, together with the rest of his Brethren, of the Family of theElmacin. lib. 3.7. pag. 331. Abul-Phar. 226, 227. Leunclav. Histor. Musul. pag 69— Niceph. Bryen. pag. 21. & Du Cange ubi supra. Seljukidae, who began to be Famous about A. D. 1038. being called into the Assistance of the Persians; at last conquered them; taking Ispahan about A. D. 1050. and having embraced Mahometism, the Religion of that Countrey; they proceeded so far, as to conquer Bagdad, A. D. 1055. and to put an end to the Empire of the Saracens in those parts. Betwixt the yearsDu Cange ad Calcem Cianam. pag. 316. Histor. Byzant. illustrat. pag. 354-358. 1070, and 1080. they made great progress in Asia Minor; some of the Family of the Seljuki∣dae,
who came thither from Persia, fixing their Imperial Seat at Iconium; who are from thence called the Sultans of Ico∣nium, and are distinguished from the other Turkish Sultans, who Reigned in Asia the Great; whose chief Seats were in Persia, (where TangrolipixElmac. pag. 342. died, A. D. 1063.) and at Bag∣dad. But theTyrius de Bello sacro, lib. 5. & 6. Abul-phar. pag. 242. Christians in the Holy War, about A. D. 1097. having broken their power in those parts; and what through the Divisions which arose amongst the Sons of Cutlu∣musesAbul-phar. pag. 245, 290, 312. (the Cousin German of Tangrolipix, and the first who made considerable Inroads into Asia Minor) about A.D. 1108; We hear little considerable of the Actions of these Sultans, until their Credit and Power came to be advanced by Sultan Aladdin Caicobad, who was made Sultan A. D. 1219. and died about A. D. 1236. In the mean time, the Eastern Turkish Empire mightily encreased, especially under the Arms of SaladinAbul-phar. pag. 264-276. Fuller's Holy War, lib. 2. Chap. 35-& 4.19. (Salaho Ddin) who took Aegypt from the Saracenick Chalifs, about A. D. 1169. where the Turkish, and Circassian Mamlucs (i. e. Slaves, or Servants) afterwards bore sway for about 275 years, as Dr. Pocock informs us in his Supplement to Abul-Pharajai. But on a sudden, A. D.Abul-phar. p. 280-368. 1202. there arose a New Empire in the World; the Mo∣gul-Tartars (or Tatars, called so from aBizar. de reb. Perfic. River in that Coun∣trey, of that Name) falling in upon the Eastern Empire of the Turks, and making Incursions as far as Asia Minor (which the Arabians call Rumaea;) and at last taking Bagdad, A. D. 1258. whereby the Dynasty of the Arabian Mussulmen, was transferred unto the Kings of the Mogul-Tartars, according to Abul-pharajai; which Empire nevertheless lasted not long
in those parts; for it was broken by mutual Discords, about A. D. 1335. where Dr.Supplem. ad Abul-phar. pag. 1-6. Pocock places the end of that Dynasty; nothing considerable being performed by them, until the Time of Tamerlan (Timur Lenc) who died A. D. 1404. Since which time they have contained themselves within their own Eastern bounds; and have not carried their Arms into the Western parts. This great and terrible Inva∣sion gave occasion to the Rise of theAnnal. Turcici. Pandect. Turcic. & Histor. Musulman. per Leunclav. Pocock Sup∣plem. ad Abul-phar. pag. 41-53. Ottoman Turks; who being beaten out of Asia, by the Mogul-Tartars; and hearing of the Fame of the Sultans of Iconium; began their March from the Province of Mahan, in the Dominions of the Persians, towards Asia Minor, A. D. 1214. under the Conduct of Solyman-Shahum; to one of whose Sons, (he himself being drowned at the passing of Euphrates) Ala∣din, Sultan of Iconium assigned a Portion of Land, near the Mountains of Armenia: From which small beginnings they raised themselves by their Valour, and the Favour of Aladin, to such a heighth, that A. D. 1299.Dr. Pocock Supplem. pag. 42. Othman (commonly called Ottoman) Solyman's Grandchild, took the Name of Sultan, and so enlarged their Dominions, that his Son (he himself dying A. D. 1325.) took Brusia (formerly Prusa, a City of Bithynia,) either that Year, or very soon after, and made it the First Seat (as Hadrianople was afterwards, and Constantinople is now) of the mighty Ottoman Empire; whichLeunclav. Histor. pag. 78, 85, 93. succeeded the Aladinian Sultany, after it had been esta∣blished in Asia Minor, about Ninety Years. Since which time their History is so well known, that I shall not further insist upon it; having brought it down to the Times here mention∣ed; viz. their most Famous passing the River Euphrates; and
that at a time (asNarrat: Turcic. pag. 41. Camerarius has very well noted) when Ecclesiastical Authority had advanced it self above the Civil, and Divisions and Superstition had much encreased amongst Christians. Now the Cause why this great Empire should be Characterized by Four Angels, bound in the River Euphrates, and afterwards loosed; is a thing worthy our disquisition; and it may, perhaps, be for these Reasons: (1.) Because that the Kingdom of the Turks was divided into Four Proefectures, or Principalities, whilst they were bound in the River Euphrates; that is, had made no Incursions into those Western parts; which are bounded by that Famous River. For so we are expresly told in the RelationExcerpt. e Legat. inter Histor. Byzant. pag. 106-108. of an Embassy, from the Scythian Turks to Justin Junior, about A.D. 570. where the Turkish Embassadours being asked hy the Em∣perour concerning the State of their Kingdom; tell him, that the Chief Power was indeed solely in their King Disabulus; but that their Kingdom was divided into Four () or Principalities. (2.) At their most memorable passing the River Euphrates, they were under the Command of FourPocock. Supplem. pag. 41, 42. Captains, viz. So∣lymanLeunclav. Hist. pag. 86. Shahum, and his Three Sons; and upon the death of Solyman, who was drowned in the passing of that River (a circumstance not altogether to be disregarded,) they were a∣gain under Four Commanders; viz. Otrogules, and his Three Sons; of whom Ottoman was one; who, upon their being loo∣sed, (by having power from God to pass the River Euphrates,) laid the Foundations of that mighty Empire. All which are no obscure Circumstances, but most notable, and most famous
passages of their History; the Number of Four Illustrious Fa∣milies being so remarkable amongst them, thatPandect. Turcic. pag. 411. Paris. edit. ad calcem Chalcondyl Leunclavius hath a particular Chapter about. (3.) They are not only remarkable forLeunclav. Hist. 86, 87. pag. Four Chief suc∣cessive Families; viz. the Seljukian, Aladinian, Oguzian, and Ottoman: but if Mr. Mede's Observation prove true, they were actually divided into Four Tetrarchies, or Sultanies, whilst they were bound in Euphrates. And (lastly;) Because the Spirit of God, in delivering Pro∣phecies, which are on purpose dark and aenigmatical, may al∣lude to many passages and circumstances in one, and the same Type, and Figurative Expression; some less known and obvi∣ous than others, to excite men's Industry: why may not the Turkish Potentacy be signified by Four, because of the Ʋni∣versality of its Conquests, described Dan. 11.40-45. (Four, as Dr. Moor observes, standing for a Note of Ʋniversality in the Cabbalistick Mysteries) especially in the Graecian Monar∣chy, which it was more immediately designed to kill, or de∣stroy? For as the Horns of the Altar, from which the Voice comes (Vers. 13.) are Four, to signifie the Ʋniversal Extent of Christ's Church; so are there here Four Angels loosed; to shew, that this Woe was to fall Ʋniversally upon the Grecian Church and Monarchy, described in Daniel (Chap. 8.8.) by Four Notable Horns, towards the Four Winds of Heaven. For the Turkish Empire (as that Judicious Historian, Mr.Turkish History, in the Preface, and pag. 981. Knolls, has observed) hath brought fatal mutations, not upon Christen∣dom only, but the whole World; having under its Command the chief and most Fruitful parts of Europe, Africa and Asia; and having fixed it self almost altogether, even in the self same Kingdoms, Countries, and Regions, as belonged to the Greek
Empire. For although the Third of the Earth, and of Men, be the Symbol of the Grecian Empire; yet in respect of its Ʋ∣niversality, it may also be represented by the Number Four. 20 To bind, is to hinder and restrain; as appears from Rev. 20.2. and that by secret Impulses and Instincts, as the Word is taken, Acts 20.22. And from hence we may learn, That the Bounds of Em∣pires, and their progress, are from God; as are also the Pro∣vidential Seasons, in which he lets loose Barbarous Nations to chastise Christians. 21 A great River, upon which the Old Babylon, the Type of the Antichristian City, stood; it was the fatal Boundary of the Roman Empire; and was so oftentimes to the Turks; they making but small Advances beyond it, except in Asia Mi∣nor, (out of which they were also beaten, first by the Chri∣stians, and then by the Tartars) until that famous loosing them by God, to punish the Antichristian Babylon, about A. D. 1300. after which time their Success was swift and prodigious. 15 And the Four Angels were loosed [i. e. permitted to pass that River,] which were prepared [by God, from the first Erection of their Empire] for an 12 Hour, and a 23 Day [i. e. a Year,] and a Month [of Days, which are Years;] and a Year [of Prophetical Days, for Years;] for to slay the 24 third part of Men [i. e. to de∣stroy utterly the Constantinopolitan, or Greek Roman Empire.] 22 The Word , translated Hour; signifies, Dan. 4, 33.5, 5. Time, or Season; in which sense it is often used by John in his Gospel, and in this Book; particularly John 2, 4.4, 52.5, 25.7, 30. and Rev. 11, 13.17, 12. And thus also it is to be understood in this place; because it is famili∣arly used in this Sense, by the Writer of this Book; and no where by him in the other, for an Hour; which is but of little use to ascertaining a Line of Time; which is not wont to descend to such minute portions of it. And there∣fore
it is here to be understood (that it may bear a propori∣on to its Use in other places) concerning A certain portion of Time, not here particularly limited and determined, beyond those particularly specified; q. d. that they were prepared for a certain Time or Season, and also for a Day, a Month, and a Year, over and above that Time. And the Remark concern∣ing the Acceptation of the Word Hour for Time; receives great Light from the Observation ofDe Emendat. Temp. lib. 2. pag. 131. Scaliger; who notes; that Hours were a Devise of the Greeks; and so consequently were not in use amongst the Jews, during the Times of the Old Testament; from whence the Words and Phrases of this Book are taken. 23 This Prophetical Time (for which see Chap. 11. num. 12.) makes up 396 years; which is the exact space of Time from the beginning of the Turkish Empire, A. D. 1057. (as we have before shewn,) to the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, A. D. 1453. the very year assigned by the latestDe Emendat. Temp. lib. 2. pag. 131. and most accurate Chronologers, for the taking of that City, after much doubt concerning it: Which is an Observa∣tion that ought to be taken notice of, to Excite Learned Men to the Study of Scripture-Chronology. 24 We have before shewn, on Chap. 8.7. that this is the Mystical Symbol of the Greek, or Constantinopolitan Roman Empire; which was killed or destroyed, at the taking of Constantinople, the Chief Seat of it; when (as Chronologers note) the Eastern Empire of the Christians ceased, and came into the hands of the Turks; which was only tormented by the Saracens, who could never kill it, by taking its Imperial City; when an Empire, in the account of Prophecy, is at an End. See before on Verse 5. Ricciol. Chronol. Reform. Tom. 1. pag. 59, 60, 146, 211. Pocock Supplem. ad A∣bul-phar. pag. 47. Crucii Turco-Graec. pag. 75. 107. Leunclav. Histor. Musulm. pag. 579. 583.
16 And the number of the Army 25 of the Horsemen, were two hun∣dred thousand thousand [i. e. a vast number, Psalm 68.17. Dan. 7.10.] and I heard 26 the number of them [as if they had been repeat∣ed out of a Muster-Roll.] 25 Thus the Army of Gog and Magog is described by E∣zek. 38▪ 4, 15. And here is another Character of the Turks, whose chief Strength and Numbers consisted at first in their Cavalry; as that also of the Tartars, from whom they ori∣ginally came, and of the Persians did; with whom they are confounded, and are called by their Name in History, af∣ter they had conquered them. And from some such reason, perhaps, as this, is the Horses Tail, still carried before their Chief Officers, as an Ensign of Honour and Authority, in Me∣mory, that their Strength consisted chiefly in Horse; of which they were wont to bring vast Numbers into the Field; as they also did at the taking ofLaonic. Chalcondyl. pag. 202. ed. Paris. Constantinople. 26 When a thing is most certain, and very remarkable; some such vehement Expression is wont to be used in this Prophecy. 17 And thus [or after this following manner, in which I shall describe them,] I saw the Horses in the Vision, and them that sate on them, having 27 breast-plates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone; and the Heads of their Horses, were as the Heads of Lions [i. e. fierce and terrible, and making a roaring noise;] and out of their mouths is∣sued 28 fire, and smoke, and brimstone. 27 That is, Breastplates of Armour, excellently polished, like flaming fire; which will cast the Colours of Jacinth and Brimstone, when the Sun shines on them: For the Turks, and their Horses, were, perhaps, at first, in polished Armour of I∣ron,
which is of a Violet Colour; according to the Custom of theHistor. August. in Alex. Sever. pag. 1019. ed. Lugd. Bat. Heliod. Aethiop. lib. 8. Persians; from whose Countrey they came, when they passed Euphrates, and amongst whom they had lived for a long time. 28 This is a plain Description of the discharging of Guns by Men on Horseback; when the Smoak, and Fire of the Gun-powder seems to issue out of their Horses Mouths; and the Smell of Brimstone (of which mixed with Nitre and Charcoal, it is made) is so very prevalent. 18 By these three 29 was the third part of men killed [i. e. the Con∣stantinopolian Empire was destroyed,] by the fire, and by the smoak, and by the Brimstone, which issued out at their mouths [when the Riders discharged their Guns.] 29 Here is also another evident Character; for the Holy Ghost represents the Turkish Army, by those Warlike Instru∣ments, which were invented about the time of their being let loose upon the Empire; Guns being found out A. D.Ricciol. Chronol. reform. Chronic. pag. 179. 1354. or 1380. at furthest; and brought to perfection, a∣bout 1415; by the use of which, theLeunclav. Hist. pag. 296. 485. Turks enlarged their Conquests; and (as all HistoriansLaonic. Chalcondyl. pag. 123, 124, 202, 204, 206. Crus Turco-Graec. pag. 9— relate) took Constan∣tinople; the prodigious Great Cannon and Guns which they used at that Siege, being very Remarkable, and very Fa∣tal. 19 For their power is in their mouth [Verse 18. i. e. in their Arms,] and in their Tails [i. e. in false pretences to Prophecy,
Verse 10.] for their Tails were like unto Serpents [i.e. they were craf∣ty and Venemous,] and had heads [with mouths speaking great things; promoting and spreading their false Doctrines;] and with them [i. e. their 30 headed Tails] they do hurt [to the Souls of Men.] 30 They had Two Heads like the Serpent Amphisna: by which the spreading Venome of their poysonous Religion is de∣scribed; together with their manner of propagating it; viz. by Fire issuing out of their mouths; that is, by Force of Arms; and by their Tails, or crafty pretences; for they are noted to have at first entred EuropeLord Nepeir on the Revel. humanely, although they proceed∣ed after to oppression: And (lastly▪) for their high and Vain-glorious Words and Titles; and the fair pretences they made use of against Idolatry, which was then too visible and pre∣dominant in the Church. 20 And the rest of 31 the men [i. e. [the remaining part of the Empire; viz. the Western;] which were not killed [i.e. utterly destroyed] by these [foregoing] Plagues [inflicted by the Saracens and Turks;] yet repented not [notwithstanding these Judgments, which were designed by God for that End;] of the Work of their Hands [i. e. their Idolatry, 2 Kings 22.17. Jerem. 25.6, 7.] that they should not worship 32 Devils [i. e. Daemons, Lev. 17.7.] and Idols of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and of Wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk [i. e. Images, Psalm 115, 4.135, 15.] 31 The Third of men (i. e. the Eastern Empire) being killed; the rest of men, must signifie, the remaining part; that is, the Western Empire, which was usurped by the Pa∣pal Antichrist; whilst the Mahometan Antichrist Tyrannized in the Eastern.
32 By Daemons are meant Spirits of a middle Nature betwixt God, and Men; that is, Angels, and Souls departed. See Mr. Mede on the place; and his Apostasy of the Latter Times. 21 Neither repented they of their Murthers [i. e. Persecutions,] nor of their 33 Sorceries [i. e. Wicked Arts, and False Devices to deceive Souls, Nahum 3.4. Isa 47.9, 12.] nor of their Forni∣cation [or Unclean and Idolatrous Doctrines and Practices▪] nor of their Thefts [i. e. cheating of Men by sanctified pretences.] 33 Such as Exorcisms Relicks, Anointings, and her lying Signs and Wonders; together with all her bewitching and in∣toxicating Doctrines and Practices.
CHAP. X. 1 AND I saw 1 another mighty [or, powerful, Psalm 103.20.] Angel [i. e. 2 Christ,] come 3 down from Heaven [i. e. ap∣pear upon some extraordinary matter;] cloathed with a 4 cloud [of Power and Glory, Chap. 1.7.] and a 5 Rainbow was upon his He d [to shew his mindfulness of his Covenant, notwithstanding the Deluge of Antichristianism and Mahometism;] and his face was as it were the Sun [i e. the manifestations of himself were glorious, Chap. 1.16.] and his Feet [i. e. his actions, and comings to Judgment;] as Pillars of Fire [i. e. terrible, Chap. 1.15. Dan. 10.6.] Annotations on CHAP. X. 1 And therefore a distinct one from the Seven Angels with Trumpets. 2 Christ, the Angel of the Covenant here appears; for to him might, or  is Attributed Chap. 5.10. and this very An∣gel, altho in a distinct appearance, Chap. 11.3. declares that He will give Power unto His two Witnesses; which Words can agree to none but Christ; as well as the following de∣scription, taken from Dan. Chap. 10 and 12. which are to be understood of Him. 3 A Phrase frequent in Scripture, Signifying God's more than Ordinary notice of the Actions of Men; and that he was about to say, or do some Extraordinary Thing. Gen. 11, 5.18, 20, 21. Exod. 3.7, 8. Psal. 144.5. Isa. 64.1. Maimonid Ductor Dubit. 1.10.
4 A White Bright Cloud, answerable to the White Linnen, Dan. 10, 5.12, 6. 5 From hence it is Evident that this Angel was Christ, the Angel of the Covenant Malac. 3.1. Who appears thus Cloathed to the Comfort of His Servants, and to shew them that he was mindfull of His Promise, and that His Kingdom (of which the Rainbow, a sign of mercy, is the Symbol,) should Come; notwithstanding he had Permitted a Deluge of Antichristia∣nism to overflow the Church; and Mahometism to pre∣vail after so Extraordinary a Manner. See Notes on Chap. 4 3. 2 And he had in his Hand a little 6 Book opened [shewing that the Effects and Eents contained in it, were now ready to be Re∣vealed and fulfilled;] and he set his right Foot 7 upon the Sea, and his left Foot upon the Earth [as Lord of both, and to take Possession of them Psal, 2, 8.72, 8. Dan. 12.7.] 6 It was called a Book before, Chap. 5. but is now called a Little Book; to shew that many of its Visions were already fulfilled; whereupon it's bulk was contracted into a lesser space. And it was before Sealed; but now is Opened; to shew that what was contained in it was at the present, to have some Notable Appearance and Effect. 7 To Place ones Foot upon a Thing, signifies DominionDeut. 11.24. Psalm 60.8.; or to have in Subjection as it were under ones Feet; where∣upon God bids Abraham Gen. 13.17. to walk through the Land, and thereby take Possession of it. Now Christs King∣dom being according to Prophecy, to be Ʋniversal; he here fixes his Feet upon the Whole Terraqueous Globe, shewing by Actions as well as by Speech, in the third Verse (according
to the Custom of the Eastern People, who in matters of Moment joyn both) that his Kingdom was not only from Sea to Sea, as the Type of it, David's was, Psal. 72.8; but that all the World, the Sea and all that is in it (upon which account he stands upon, or over the Waters Dan. 12.6, 7.) were his Pos∣session, as well as the uttermost Parts of the Earth Psal. 5.8. So that by this Action is signified that Christ was Lord of all, of Sea and Land, and of all the Creatures in them, which he here again (as it were) takes Possession of; His Kingdom have∣ing been interrupted chiefly by Antichristianism, and by the spreading of Mahometism, which yet was a judgment up∣on the other. But methinks it is worth considering, (every Action and Word being Weighty in Prophecy) why Christ is more peculiarly represented as upon the Waters of the River Tigris, Dan. 12.6, 7; Whilst only two Angels stood on each side of its banks; and that he here sets his right Foot (the stronger and the more honorable of the two) upon the Sea, but his left upon the Land; which Grotius himself thinks to have some signification; who supposes the right Foot to signifie the Greater Part of the People, who are often Represented by Waters, Seas, Rivers, in this Book. We are therefore to understand that by the Sea in Scripture, is meant the Western Parts of the World; because the Mediterranean Sea, was the WesternNumb. 34.6. Border of the Land of Canaan: Where∣upon our Versions Translate, what is to the Sea, or Sea-ward in the Original; to the West, and Westward, Gen. 12, 8.28, 14. Exod. 10.19. Ezek. 48.1, 2. and in many other Places. And the Scripture not only calls all the Places to which the Jews were to pass by Sea, Islands, (as I have al∣ready noted) and particularly our European Parts, at least
those in the Archipelago, the Islands of the Gentiles, Gen. 10.5. but also divides the whole World into East and West, or according to the Phrase of their Language into Land and Sea, meaning by Land all the Continent which lay Eastward of them; and by Sea whatsoever lay to the West, Continent, as well as Sea: Which way of Speech is to this day Observed by the Chinese; who upon that account, call all the World, except Tartary, Si Yam, or the VVestern Sea; from whence Siam a Countrey in the Indies, takes it's Name, as being Situated towards the Sea, Westerly of China. And therefore by this action of our Saviour (seeing that in all other Places of Scripture the Earth is mentioned before the Sea) may be Intimated that the Gospel which was now almost extinguished in the Eastern parts, by Mahometism; Should appear. First in its Purity and Strength in the Sea, or the VVestern Parts of the World; signified by the mention of the Sea in the First Place and by Christ's putting his right Foot upon it, the Strongest and the Honourablest of the two: Which came to pass at the Reformation, foretold in this Vision, as shall beshewn hereafter. And that there sbould be in the latter Days (which Doctor PocockOn Hosea 3.5. Pag. 618. extends from Christs First, to his Second Com∣ing) some Wonderfull and Amazing motion of the People of God from the VVest, is evident from Hosea 11.10. Where the Prophet foretells that the Lord shall roar like a Lion, (an Expres∣on which very Remarkably Answers to the Roaring and Thundring in this Vision) and that thereupon, or then, the Children shall tremble from the VVest, or from theDr. Pcock on the Place. Sea, as the Word in the Hebrew Signfies, that is, from the VVestern Parts, and from Remote and Distant Countreys, and even
the uttermost parts of the Earth, which is encompassed with the Sea. Which strange motion, or conversion, is to come to pass near Christ's Second Coming (which Dr. Pocock asserts to be a Received Opinion, as to the Jews) in his Kingdom; which was to have appeared when Christ set his Right Foot upon the Sea; if the Thunders, the Effect of the Lord's Roaring, had not been sealed; that is, if a stop had not been put to the Efficacy of them: for Christ's Kingdom, when it comes in its full force, will prevail, to the placing of the Jews in their Houses, Verse 11. and to the bringing in the fulness, and per∣fection of the Gentiles. 3 And cried with a loud Voice [i. e. proclaimed his Right,] as when a Lion 8 roareth [i. e. terribly, and with Majesty, Isa. 31.4. Amos 3.8. Joel 3.16. Prov. 20.2.] and when he had cryed, seven Thunders 9 uttered their Voices [declaring the appearance of his Kingdom.] 8 Christ, called, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5. is here understood; whose Roaring denotes (as Dr. Pocock has shewn upon Hos. 11.10.) the Efficacious power of the preaching of the Gospel; resembled to the Voice of a Lyon, because of its calling Christians together to partake of it, and its Promises; as the Lyon does those of its own kind, to par∣take of the prey; and because it is accompanied with a Ter∣ror and an Awe, and extends it self to the uttermost parts of the Earth, with great power; as the Voice of a Lyon is terri∣ble, and loud. And hereby also (as appears from the Texts I have quoted) is signified, the Anger of God, when he appears for the Vindication of his Kingdom, against the Enemies of it. 9 Thunders (as I have before shewn on Chap. 6, 1.8, 5.) signifie the Power, and Efficacy, and signal Appearances of Christ's Kingdom, which, Seven, the Number of Perfecti∣on, peculiarly denotes; and which Hannah prophesied
would be exalted by the Lord's Thundering out of Heaven, 1 Sam. 2.10. 4 And when the seven Thunders had uttered their Voices. I was about to write [that which they had uttered;] and I heard a Voice from Heaven saying unto me, 10 Seal up those things which the Seven Thunders uttered, and write them not [i. e. conceal them, as things which are to come to pass hereafter, and hinder them from coming imme∣diately into Effect, Dan. 8, 26.12, 4, 9.] 10 Here Sealing and Writing are plainly opposed; Writing signifying the bringing of the Vision into Effect; and Seal∣ing, the delaying of the Acccmplishment of it; as I have shewn on Chap. 5.1. So that here is a plain stop put to the King∣dom of Christ; insomuch, that his Roaring did not prevail to make the Children come trembling from the West. 5 And the Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, lifted up his hand to Heaven [the Throne of God, in the posture and manner of Swearing, Gen. 14.22. Dan. 12.7.] 6 And swore by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created Hea∣ven, and the things that therein are; and the Sea, and the things which are therein [i. e. by the Eternal, Omnipotent God, who cre∣ated all things; and therefore can alter them, and their Times and Seasons;] that there should be [such] time 11 no longer [as that which the Prophet Daniel foretold, Chap. 7, 25.12, 7.] 11 Time in general, here called ; is divided by Da∣niel into several distinct ; that is, appointed Times, or Seasons; which he calls Time, Times, and the Dividing of Time; or a part, that is, an half of Time; which Distri∣bution is also used in this Book, Chap. 12.14. By Time is meant in Daniel, the most signal, and perfect part of the ap∣pointed Times and seasons, viz. a Year; as appears from Dan. 4.16. and 11.13. where Times plainly signifie Years.
By Times absolutely put, must be meant Two Times, or Two Years, because it is the Dual Number; i. e. the next Plural Number to Time, or One Year; and then by conse∣quence, by The Division, or cutting off, or Half of Time, must be meant Half a Year; as, I think, all Interpreters a∣gree. Now The Prophetical Day, being put for a Year, in Scripture, the Prophetical Year, must by consequence be put for a Year of Prophetical Days; that is a year of years; con∣sisting of as many years as a Year doth of Days; viz. of Three hundred and Sixty Years, in round and equal Num∣bers, according to the degrees of a Circle: and then 360, a Time. 720, Times. 180, half a Time. 1260. Times must be Two Years of Years; i.e. Seven hundred and Twenty Years; and the half Time must be half a year of years; that is One hundred and Eighty Years; all which amounts to Twelve hundred and Sixty Years. Rev. 11, 3.12, 6. Now Christ's Oath here having a clear reference to Daniel 12.7. by no more Time, must be meant, no more such Time, or of the same Nature with the Times there given to Anti∣christ; which were to cease, and no more time to be; except when Christ's Kingdom appeared (which is the import of the following Verse) when there should be Time indeed, but of a quite different Nature; dated, and reckoned from the glorious Reign of Christ; and not from the Abominations and Servitude of Antichrist; and ending in that, which is not so properly Time, as the completion and perfection of it, Eter∣nity: For Antichrist having changed Times, (Dan. 7.25.) his Time may very well be said to be no more, when it is chan∣ged
into those of another Nature. See the Annotations on Chap. 11, 2.20, 4. 7 * But in the days of the Voice [or sounding] of the seventh Angel, wben he shall 12 begin to sound [Chap. 11.15. and 13 when] the Mystery, [or wonderful Prophetical Secret, Dan. 12.6.] of God [concerning the coming of the Kingdom of Christ, Dan. 12.5-13. Rom. 11.25, 26.] should be [or is] finished, [there shall be Time indeed; but of a quite different Nature from the former:] as he hath declared [or Evangelized, the good Tidings of his Son's Kingdom, in the beginning, progress, and perfection of it;] to his Servants the Prophets [Acts 3.21-26.] * Dr.Oper. Theol. pag. 18 Moor reads , and renders it, except, or sa∣ving; making it to be the same with ; which is a Criti∣cism, neither necessary, nor grounded upon the Credit of Manuscripts. 12 The Word is rightly thus translated; and so it signi∣fies, Luke 7.2. John 4.47. Acts 23.27. And Beza hath well noted on John 4.47, That Aristotle prudently distin∣guishes betwixt , and ; the latter Word signifying what is in preparation, or readiness to begin; and not always what is past. 13 The Particle And, is in the Greek Copies; which ought to be restored to the Translation; and , or when, to be reduplicated, or repeated , with ; and the Words are to be translated, when it is finished; and not shall, or should be finished; for then it should have been , and not . From these Words thus settled, and interpreted in con∣junction with Daniel, may be drawn these following Obser∣vations:
(1.) That the Antichristian, or Gentile Times, are to have an End. For Christ here swears, That such time shall be no longer; and in Daniel he swears, that it shall be but for a Time, Times, and an half; that is, 1260. years; as hath been before shewn. (2.) That these Times are to end before the Days of the seventh Angel's sounding. For it is expresly affirmed by Christ, Ver. 6. That there should be Time no longer, but until those Days; in which there was to be Time indeed, but of another Na∣ture. (3.) The precise Time of their Ending is affirmed in Dani∣el, Chap. 12.6, 7. to be when the dispersing or scattering of the power of the holy people shall be accomplished. For one of the Angels having asked Christ, Verse 6. how long, or what space of Time it would be to the End of Wonders; or of These VVonders; i. e. Those he had before spoken of, from Verse 1. to the 5th; as the LXX. according to their Custom, enlarge upon the Words: It is answered, Verse 7. that it would be Twelve hundred and sixty years to the End of these VVonders; and (circumstantiating thereby the time of their End more particularly) that when the dispersion should be accomplished; all of those things, or wonders should be finished: thereby plainly intimating, that the scattering was to last during the Twelve hundred and sixty years; and that they were not to end until that was over. By which accomplishment of the scat∣tering, or dispersion of the power of the holy people, can be meant no other than the VVoman's coming out of the VVilder∣ness; where the holy people were dispersed and scattered; be∣cause that dispersion is of the same Duration with this; as appears from Rev. 12.6. and is immediately to precede the Voice of the seventh Angel; as will be shewn hereafter on Rev. 11.11, 14.
(4.) At the End of Time; that is, of the Antichristian, and Gentile Times, there shall be Time again, but of another Na∣ture. For Christ having sworn, there should be Time no lon∣ger; adds, But in the Days of the voice of the seventh Angel: intimating thereby, that Time was then to be again; which must be understood, to make the Sense compleat. And there∣fore Antichristian Time consisting of several , being end∣ed; the succeeding Time must be of a different Nature. (5) The Beginning of this New Time, and its Period, are are here precisely limited. For, (1.) In general, it is to be in the days, or times of the voice, or sounding of the seventh Angel. (2.) It is to begin precisely, when he begins, or prepares to sound (3.) It is to last until the Mystery of God, or the won∣ders, and wonderful things (Dan. 12.6, 7.) shall be finish∣ed; that is, until Christ shall say, It is finished, It is finished, at the entrance of the Thousand Years of the New Jerusalem State, when another sort of Time begins. (6.) The whole Duration of this New Time is given in pre∣cise Numbers, by the Prophet Daniel. For after he had assign∣ed a Time, Times, and a half, to the scattering of the holy people; he afterwards, verse 11. adds thirty years unto them; thereby making up the twelve hundred and sixty years, which are in∣cluded in them, to be twelve hundred and Ninety, for the full Time of the continuance of the Antichristian Abomination: And then, verse 12. adds Forty Five more to the twelve hundred and Ninety, making the whole time from the beginning of the scattering of the holy people, to be Thirteen hundred and thir∣ty Five years; when he promiseth a blessed State; verse 12. So that hereby we have gained a Line of Time, consisting of Se∣venty five years; reaching from the beginning of the sound∣ing of the seventh Angel, where John fixes it, through the Voi∣ces
and Vials issuing out of the Seventh Trumpet; until the finishing the Mystery of God, in the appearance of Christ's glo∣rious Kingdom; which will be but in a State of Preparati∣on, or in a Course, or Succession of Finishing, until that Time. But I cannot but after all observe, thatApud. Poli Sym. Piscator upon the place, supposes  (in ) to be Emphatical, and to signifie as much as ; that is, even then shall be finished the Mystery; the Aorist , according to the Genius of the Greek Language, being sometimes put for the Future. According to which Acceptation of the Word, the Seventh Verse, which is a part of the Oath here, and in Daniel, will relate to the finishing of the Mystery it self; and not only declare, that there shall be Time for the finishing of it; which latter sense seems to be not so fit to be the Subject of this Solemn Oath, as the former; although, according to the ordinary Grammatical Construction of the Words, it appears to be the most natu∣ral. (Lastly,) From the due consideration of this Chapter, we may conclude, that the Reformation, begun A. D. 1517. is fore∣told in it. (1.) Because it is the Only Remarkable Event in History, re∣lating to the Kingdom of Christ, following the taking of Con∣stantinople by the Turks; represented in the foregoing Chap∣ter. For the Spirit here affording us a Prophetical View of a Series of Events in their orderly Succession; it cannot be thought, that so great a one as the Reformation, should not at all be mentioned; or if it were, that it should not be men∣tioned in its proper and due place and season. Now allow∣ing
but Threescore and Four Years, as a space of Repentance al∣lotted by God, Chap. 9.20, 21. (which comes nigh the term of the years of his Indignation against Jerusalem, Zech. 1.12.) for the correcting, although not killing of the Western Apostasy, by the great Success of the Turks; and the next thing Remarkable, is the Reformation, begun by Luther, A. D. 1517. when at his first preaching against Indulgences, he, out of a small Spark, kindled such a Fire, as set all Europe in a Combustion; asRation. Temp. lib. 9. 11. Petavius speaks: who also remarks, that in the same year (which is pitched upon generally by Chronologers, for the Aera of the Reformation, Sleidan beginnning his Commentaries at it,) at the Conclusion of the Lateran Council, an Expedition against the Turks was resolved upon; for the carrying on of which, IndulgencesFox's Book of Mart. Vol. 2. pag. 47. Mezeray, pag. 562. were pretended to have been granted: Upon which it is that Mezeray observes, that the First Evil (meaning the Turks) gave occasion for the Birth of the Second Evil; as he calls the Reformation. Now upon the great success of the Turks, at a Time when Selymus had made extraordinary preparations against the Chri∣stians, and just before the appearance of that great and success∣ful Warriour, Selyman the Magnificent, who over-run Hunga∣ry, and bsged Vienna it self; it pleased God to give Birth to the Reformation: which was not only to be a Scourge, (al∣though of another, yet not of a less Formidable Nature, than the Turkish▪) to the Western Apostasy, for its impenitency; but also a most Notable Apperance of the Kingdom of Christ; whereby there might be a Recompence made for the Loss Christianity in general had suffered by the destruction of the Eastern Church.
For although that was sufficiently made up, in the true Va∣lue, and intrinsick Worth of the Reformation; yet God, for the sake of his Son's Name, is so far tender of Christianity, as not to let the Turk destroy the Western Empire, by taking Rome, or even Vienna it self; because it is the Seat of the Christian Emperour: as appears from the Vain Attempts of Solyman, A.D. 1529. and A.D. 1532. when he fled out ofBizarus de reb. Persicis, pag. 360, 361. Hungary, the Vengeance of God following him in a dread∣ful Plague; and from their late Defeat, fresh in our Me∣mory. And by the Reformation also, Christ was pleased to inti∣mate, That Cbristians were not to despond at the great pro∣gress of Mahometism; as if it had been such an extraordina∣ry Encroachment upon his Kingdom; seeing that was of a quite different Nature from that Religion generally profes∣sed in the parts of the Eastern and Western Empire, which were over-run by it; and was rather of such a pure and spi∣ritual Nature, as that of which the Reformation had given a Specimen. (2.) The Reformation is here meant; because then it might be truly sworn, that Time should be no longer; that being so great a Breach upon the Power given to Antichrist, that it could not happen during his Times. But if it be said, that his Time could not be then sworn to be past, because his Power still remains: It may be answered, that by Time here in the 6th Verse cannot be meant, all Time whatsoever in ge∣neral; but such Divisions as are made of it, Dan. 12.7, into Time, Times, and a half; and that therefore when the Time, Times, and any the smallest part of the half Time was past, it might be then truly affirmed, that Time, that is, such Time should be no longer; Half Time broken, and diminish∣ed,
being no longer, in propriety of Speech, Half Time; and the Time and Times being already wholly past. And that the full Expiration, and Actual End of all manner of Anti∣christian Time, cannot be here understood, is plain from the next Verse; where it is affirmed, that this is not to come to pass until the Voice of the Seventh Angel. And from hence it is, that a Worthy Person asserts, That this Oath took place as soon as ever Half Time was entred, and the first minutes of it were past; because that was the first opportunity in which it could be in Truth declared, that such Times sbould be no more; which Christ laid hold on, to give a timely notice of his approaching Kingdom; and to lay a Claim to it, as he had done before, at other Apperances; and that space enough might be afforded for the Transacti∣ons to be performed in the Remaining Parts of Half Time. Now if the half Time, began at 1517 180 1697 1517. then (seeing that consists of One hundred and Eighty Years) it must end, together with the whole twelve hundred and sixty years, at 1697. when the Seventh Trumpet shall sound, and all things shall tend to the finishing of the Mystery of Christ's Kingdom, according to Verse 7; which must also, according to the same Reason, have begun A. D. 437. for there the Aera of the twelve hundred and sixty years must be fixed, if we reckon backward, from 1517 437 1080 1080 437 1517 1517. deducting from it One thousand
and Eighty Years, the full Sum of the Time, and Times, then elapsed. (3.) The Action of Christ's setting his Right Foot upon the Sea, agrees very well to the Circumstances of the times, when the Reformation began; and to the Events which have followed upon it. For it began in the Western parts, viz. Europe, fignified by the Sea, as I have already shewn; and when the New We∣stern World of America was just found out; which was first attempted by Columbus, A. D. 1492. and discovered by A∣mericus Vesputius, AD. 1498. the Streights and Sea of Ma∣gellan, being found A. D. 1518. the very year after the be∣ginning of the Reformation: upon which there followed continually large discoveries, and a New World; whither the Gospel hath been carried, and where the Reformation hath found a Refuge, and made a considerable progress. All which seems to be the Effect of Christ's setting his Foot upon those places; whereby he took possession of the whole Globe, and made a passage for his Kingdom, through the Sea, ex∣tending it to the utmost parts of the Earth. (4.) The Reformation was a remarkable, and powerful ap∣pearance of Christ's Kingdom; and therefore may be very well here specified by the magnificent appearance of Christ; by his coming down from Heaven; by his having a Book open; by his loud Voice; by his Roaring; and the Seven Thunders: By all which are signified in Scripture (as I have already hinted) some remarkable, manifest, and efficacious appearances of Christ's Kingdom. For the Reformation was, asIn Prefat. & Apolog· Sleidan truly observes, one of the most Illustrious Events which has come to pass, and not to be parallell'd since the Apostles times; which none can think
of without astonishment, and the utmost degrees of admiration and wonder; there being in it great Discoveries made of God's Almighty Power, and admirable Counsels; which being de∣signed (as the Creation, and all his providential Works are) chiefly with reference to his Son's Kingdom; he hath been pleased to give us Visible Marks and Characters of it, in the Re∣formation; such as are, (1.) The Agreement and Consent which there was in the Substantials of Doctrine, at first betwixt the Reformers: Ʋ∣nity,John 17.11-23. Eph. 4.3, 4. in truth, being a Mark of Christ's Kingdom, and one of the most powerful external means to convert the World. For this great Work was begun about the same time in two distant places; by Luther in Germany, and by Zuin∣glius at Zurich; and although they held no Communication with one another, (Zuinglius on purpose abstaining from rea∣ding of Luther's Books, when they began to be common a∣mongst them) yet they differed in no Doctrine of any very considerable moment (as the French HistorianPag. 946. Mezeray con∣fesses, concerning the Protestants in general,) but in that of the Sacrament; where also their difference was not so great, but that they bothSleidan, pag. 97, 121, 159. edit. Anglic. agreed in the Substance of the Article, that Christ's Body was taken spiritually with the Heart, and not cor∣porally with the Mouth; and resolved, at a Conference they had about it, to refrain from all Contention concerning the manner, how Christ was present in the Sacrament. Where∣by it came to pass, that the people, amongst whom Luther's Wri∣tings were at last common, by hearing and reading of them, did see the same Spirit in both of them, according to the Scriptures; and did submit the more willingly to the Truth, although it seem∣ed
something New to them; which was Zuinglius's Design in abstaining from reading of Luther's Books; asMelchior Adam. Vita Zuingl. pag. 28. Melchior Adamus particularly testifies in his Life. (2.) The Reformation began on a sudden, with a surprise, and at unawares; when men were most secure, and were the least prepared for it; which are the Signs of the coming of Christs Kingdom in Scripture, Matth. 24.36-51. 1 Thes. 5.3. For LeoFather Paul's History of the Council of Trent, pag. 4▪ 5.9. Fascicul. re∣rum expetend, passim. Bishop of Meauxe's History of Variat. pag. 1, . the tenth, was then Pope, a most Voluptuous Li∣bertine, as loose in his Religion as his Manners; whose Ex∣ample also was followed by almost the whole Clergy; who were then, as the Popish Writers of those Times unanimous∣ly confess, very ignorant, and very vicious. And the Church also was then at ease and quiet, the Schism (as Father Paul speaks) being absolutely extinguished, and no considerable Ad∣versary appearing. When all on a sudden, whilst the Pope was at rest in his House, and flourishing in his Palace, dissol∣ved in Ease and Luxury; the Reformation broke out, to his great astonishment and disquiet, at an unexpected time, and by an Accident very observable; his Factors being then bu∣sie in selling Indulgences, to supply his excessive Prodigality, and to raise a Portion for his Sister. All which came to pass according to what the Scripture has assured us, That when Men say Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction cometh upon them, and that the coming of the Son of Man shall be, when Men are eating and drinking▪ marrying and giving in marriage; and so was it at this his re∣markable coming. (3.) The Reformation proceeded from small beginnings, and yet made a wonderful progress in a short time, notwithstanding the most powerful Endeavours to the contrary; being sometimes
carried on by Men who designed nothing less, and by Means, and to Ends unthought of, even by those who begun it. Which are plain Characters of the Kingdom of Heaven inMatth. 13. Mark 4.26, 27. Scri∣pture; which is likened to a Grain of Mustard-Seed, the least of all Seeds; which yet when it is grown up, is the greatest of all Herbs; and to Seed sown in the ground, which springs and grows up, and yet the Sower himself knoweth not how. ForFather Paul's Hist. of Counc. of Trent, pag. 6-12. 15, 17. 71. Sleidan, in Pre∣fat. & pag. 31. Luther was a Person of no great Fame, or Interest; who designed at first only to preach against the Scandalous Abu∣ses of Indulgences; and was carried on contrary to his Ex∣pectation, from one Controversie to another, and against his first Inclinations and Resolutions, chiefly by the forward Op∣positions of his Adversaries; he having often professed, that he was ready to let the Cause fall, if his Enemies would but permit him. And if some fewFather Paul's Hist. pag. 20-23. Bishop Burnet's Histor. Reform. part 1. pag. 255. things had been at first granted, (which Pope Hadrian was inclinable to, but was diverted from his purpose by others) it is generally thought, that a stop had been put to the Reformation. But God or∣dered things otherwise, making the sins of Men subservient to his Will: as is apparent from the Actions of Henry the Eighth; who intendedFox's Rook of Martyrs, Vol. 2. pag. 273. Vol. 3. pag. 92. nothing less at first, than the throwing of the Pope's Power, and seems in all his Actions, to be lead on by Providential Circumstances, to do that which he least designed. But as its Beginnings were mean and contempti∣ble, so was its ProgressSleidan 133. 160. Basnage Histoir. de la Religion, pag. 421. wonderful; for by the year 1532. Seven Princes, and Twenty Four Cities had received Luther's Doctrine; and as Erasmus tells us, it had spread all over Ger∣many,
and had stretched it self from the Ocean, as far as Swit∣zerland. Neither did it contain it self only within Germany, but the sound of it reached Sweden and Denmark; the former recei∣ving the Reformation, A.D. 1525. the latter A. D. 1537. and its progress was so sudden, and so swift, rouzing the whole World (as Erasmus speaks of it) out of its Lethargy; that I could never think of it, without reflecting upon the Que∣stion made by our Honest Martyrologist, JohnVol. 2. pag. 80. Fox; viz. how it should come to pass, that although the Romish Bishop hath had great Enemies and Gainsayers continually from time to time, both speaking and working, preaching and writing against him, yet notwithstanding never any could prevail before the coming of Luther? To which weighty Question, although he gives there seve∣ral good Conjectural Resolutions, as he calls them; yet the Chief Reason is to be assigned to the Thunders and Voices which were then uttered; and to the wonderful Efficacy which prophetical Times and Seasons, have upon the Affairs of Christ's Church; it being Necessary (as FatherHistory, pag. 4. Paul judiciously observes upon this very occasion) for the effecting of any thing, that the time come in which it may please God to correct the Errors of Men: Which (says he) met, together with fit Occasions, and Instruments which knew how to make use of them, in the time of Leo. For although Men's Minds were then disposed for a Reformation, by Reason of the Scanda∣lous Lives, Ignorance, and Tyranny of the Clergy; yet this Effect could not have been produced singly from these Occa∣sions; if the Times ordained by God's Infinite Wisdom, had not conspired with them. And what less than Divine Assist∣ance
could give Life and Success to a single, unassisted Per∣son; so as to enableBasnage ubi supra. him to convert a whole Town by one single Sermon; and to break through all manner of dif∣ficulties with an invincible Courage, notwithstanding the ut∣most Oppositions made against him, by that Great Emperour Charles the Fifth; and the United Forces and Counsels of the Pope, and his Party: So great Reason hadCalvin. 2 Disc. c. Westfal. Opuscul. fol. 785. 787. & ibid. 137, 141. Calvin to stile Luther the Trumpet, or rather the Thunder, which raised the World out of its Lethargy; and to say, That it was not Lu∣ther that spoke, but God that thundered by his Mouth. Neither were the forementioned Circumstances only obser∣vable in the Lutheran Reformation, but in that begun in Swit∣zerland, and Geneva: ForSleidan. passim. pag. 48, 70, 76. vita ejus per Melchior. Adam. Zuinglius was the only Person which appeared at first amongst the Helvetians; And although he met with great Opposition from the Popish Cantons, and from his own people, for endeavouring to disswade them from being Mercenary in the Wars of Forreign Princes; yet he broke through all Obstacles, and propagated his Doctrine in a few years, in very many parts of that, and the Neigh∣bouring Countries. The like to which appears in the Reformation ofSee Mr. Spoon's History of Geneva. Ge∣neva, begun A. D. 1532. only by Two Ministers of Pied∣mont; who, taking Occasion from some Divisions amongst the People, upon some Protestant Theses being set up by a few young Men in several Corners of the Street; propaga∣ted the Truth in a short time very successfully; the Common people hearing them gladly. For it was not until afterwards, A.D. 1536. that Mr. Calvin (that great Instrument for the promoting the Truth, Power, and Simplicity of Religion) came
to that City; whose setling there was no less Providential and unexpected, then his Success: For he intended only to take it in his way to Basil, or Strasburg, in one of which pla∣ces he designed to continue for some time; and when he was perswaded by Monsieur Farel, to tarry there, he met with so great Opposition, that he was banished the City; and yet upon his Return prevailed so far, as to settle his Doctrine and Discipline there, although it were utterly contrary to the Looseness of their Manners; where it hath ever since been exercised with great Vigour; that small State and City flou∣rishing (according to the wise Observation of Mr. Spon, with which he shuts up his History of that City) whilst other Ci∣ties have perished, and mighty States have been overturned: which God often permits by his admirable Providence, to let great and small States know, that their Subsistence or Ruine depends not on their own Strength or Weakness; but that they are all in his hand, and their Happiness and misery come only from him. But his Doctrine and Discipline did not contain it self within the Narrow Bounds of that City; but that small Leaven leavened many Kingdoms and Countries; viz. France, Poland, Germany, Scotland, the Netherlands, and Hungary: and hath maintained it self chiefly by the Severity of the Manners of its Followers, and the Strictness of their Disci∣pline, as the Judicious FrenchMezeray's History, pag. 951. See the Synodicon of the Reformed Churches of France, lately Printed in English. Historian hath observed: which is so great, that HenryPerefixes Life of Henry 4th, ad an. 1587. the Fourth himself, altho he was then King of Navarr, and Chief of their Party, was forced by the Consistory of Rochel, to make Reparation for a Scandal he had given, by his Looseness. (4.) The Reformation (whichVita ejus per Melchior. Adam: pag, 122. Luther foretold should
never be extinguished) hath been also miraculously preserved, as the Kingdom of Christ hath always been, amidst the Con∣vulsions of States and Empires; and hath been many times rescued from imminent Destructions by extraordinary Means, and unforeseen Accidents: Whereby it appears, that it is a Plant planted by our Heavenly Father; else it had been before now rooted up. The Troubles were so great, which the First Reformers en∣countred with, that goodSleidan, pag. 140. Melancthon was very much dejected at them; and even Luther himself, although of an undaunted Spirit, was sometimes oppressed with disconsolate Thoughts, about the State of Things; and had gone back, if he had not been extraordinarily assisted. When his Cause was in great danger, (as FoxVol. 2. pag. 49, 50. remarks) the marvellous Pro∣vidence of God, who had this matter in guiding, poovided a Remedy where the Power of Man did fail: and stirred up the whole Ʋniversity of Wittenberg, to petition Duke Frederick in his behalf, when he was upon the Point of Banishment: Whereupon the Duke began to consider his Doctrine, and to favour him. Several times did God preserve this tender plant, notwithstanding the many Wars, Leagues and Consultations to root it out; as upon the Death ofSleidan 250. George of Saxo∣ny; the many Successes of the Emperour; but especially thatSleidan 375— Mezeray. pag. 620, 624, 632, 633, 954. Melch. Adam. Vita Calvin. pag. 80. Summum Religionis discrimen, &c. remarkable one, when the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hesse were Prisoners; when the Reforma∣tion in Germany had been entirely destroyed, if God had not ordered Matters otherwise, by a strange turn of Affairs; whereby the Emperour was at last forced to grant the Edict
ofTbuan. Hist. Tome 1. pag. 503. Mezeray, 954. Passau, which is still the Security of the Reformation in those parts; and the True Foundation of the Liberty of the Protestants; as Monsieur Mezeray observes: which was done for fear of a War which threatned him on both sides, from the French and the Turks; by which means, Protestan∣tism was generally preserved in Germany, during the Reign of Charles the Fifth. And yet to see the admirable Care of Divine Providence over the Vine which he had planted; for whenSleidan, pag. 463. the Re∣formation was at its lowest Ebb in Germany, by the foremen∣tioned occasion; it went on very vigorously in England; the Mass being abolished there at that very Critical Conjuncture; whereby the Protestants were kept in heart, and its future increase was provided for. In England, asFox, Vol. 2. page 273, 370. Vol. 3. page 386, 792, 800. Bishop Burnet's Histo∣ry of the Reformation, part 1. page 135, 136. Historians have observed, the Reforma∣tion was remarkably preserved by many strange Accidents, amidst the unaccountable Humours of a Cruel and Vain-glo∣rious Prince; As, by the Intrigues of Woolsey, for the Papa∣cy, and his missing of it; which if he had obtained, no doubt (says Fox) the Authority of that See had never been extermina∣ted out of England: By the Sollicitations of the Emperour with the Pope, the Easiness of the Pope to grant the Bull, and again his Stiffness in denying it; but especially by his rash and precipitate Sentence against the King; and that contrary to the ordinary Forms of proceeding in his own Courts; which if they had observed the Breach betwixt them had been made up; the King's Submission arriving at Rome but Two Days after the Sentence given. But (as our late Ecclesiastical Hi∣storian judiciously observes) God in his wise and unsearchable
Providence had designed to draw other great Ends out of this Rupture; and therefore suffered them that were most concerned to hinder it, to be the chief Instruments of driving it on. The unprosperous proceedings of Q. Mary, and the strange Preser∣vations of Q. Elizabeth, together with other remarkable In∣stances of God's Providence in the Times of Persecution, are largely insisted upon by our Laborious Martyrologist, at the End of his Third Volume; which I shall not therefore men∣tion: as neither the secretCardin. Bentivol. History of the Wars of Flanders, page 6. Correspondencies betwixt Philip the 2d of Spain, and the King of France, for the Extirpation of Protestantism, discovered by William Prince of Orange; the MeasuresMezeray, page 651, 653. taken for exterminating it by the Spaniards and French, at a Treaty, wholly defeated by the sudden Death of Henry the Second; the Effect which the FrenchMezeray, page 651, 653, 957. Massacre met with, contrary to the Design of those who contrived it; whereby it was turned rather to the strengthening and secu∣rity of the Protestants, than their utter Ruine, as it might have done; to omit the Defeat in Eighty Eight, the Gunpow∣der Treason, and the later Deliverance, fresh in our Memo∣ries; for which I refer the Reader to a Sermon preached by Bishop Burnet, before the Queen, on July the 16th, 1690. (5.) The Reformation was an appearance of the Kingdom of Christ; as it cleared up the True Notion and Nature of his Spiritual Kingdom, in the Souls of Men; by instructing them in the Nature of Faith, and of Justification by Christ's Me∣rits; to which (as Mr. FoxVol. 2. page 80. hath judiciously observed) the Success of the Reformation was very much owing; those Doctrines having been mightily obscured by a wrong Notion
of good Works, and the Doctrine of Merits, one of the most Fundamental Errors of Popery. And it very much also con∣tributed to this End; by stripping Religion of much of its vain Pomp, and unedifying Ceremonies; which do not pro∣mote true inward Piety, but distract the Mind; which be∣ing of a limited Capacity, cannot well attend at once to two Objects of so different a Nature, as sensible and intellectual ones are. For the External Pomp of Religion, and its gaw∣dy Ornaments, are very contrary to the Simplicity of the Gos∣pel; in which only Two External Rites, and those very plain and simple ones, were instituted; viz. Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; Christian Religion consisting chiefly in the heart, and Affections; and in Externals, as they conduce to inward Holiness; according to what our Saviour hath told us con∣cerning his Kingdom, Luke 17.20. that it cometh not with ob∣servation; that is, is notSee Grotius on the place; and Hammond. attended with Pomp, Splendor, and Riches; but is a SpiritualRom. 2, 19. and 14.17. Kingdom, in the Heart and Spirit, consisting not in Meats and Drinks, but in Righteous∣ness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Whereupon theSleidan, page 53. Mezeray, page 948, 957. Reformation retrenched much of the superfluous Riches of the Church; which are apt to corrupt the best mens minds; and lessened much of the Secular Gran∣deur, Preheminence, and Superiority, Titles and Honours of the Clergy; whereby the Church becomes too like a worldly King∣dom: Whereas Christ plainly declares, that his Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.36. andMatth. 20.20-28. Luke 22.24-30. forbids his Apostles all secular Jurisdiction, and the Affectation, at least, of Titles of Honour and Authority.
(Lastly,) It was an appearance of the Kingdom of Christ, as it shook, and made a breach in that of Antichrist; which it is at last utterly to break in pieces, consume aed destroy, Dan. 2, 44.7, 26. And this it did after a most signal manner, by drawing of many Kingdoms and Princes, from the Antichristi∣an Corruptions of Popery. But as the Reformation was an Appearance of Christ's King¦dom, so it must be confessed, that it was but an Imperfect one; by reason of the sealing up, or putting a stop to those things which the Seven Thunders uttered: which would otherwise have produced Christ's Kingdom in Glory, and have broken in pei∣ces the Kingdom of Antichrist. And that such a stop was put to its Efficacy, will appear from these Considerations: (1.) Because the Reformation was not attended with Mi∣racles; which ourMatth. 12.28. Luke 10, 9.11, 20. Saviour makes to be a certain Sign of the coming of his Kingdom. And if it were the Sign of its first coming, have we not reason to expect, that it shall be so of its Second? But this Gift cannot be expected, whilst An∣tichristianism prevails so mightily in the World; whose en∣crease was the Cause of the Cessation of Miracles in the Church; which lasted for a considerable time (as hath been shewn by the Learned Mr. Dodwell in his Dissertations on Irenae∣us and Cyprian) beyond the Infancy of the Gospel, and the first propagation of it; for which Age therefore they could not only be designed; and gradually decreased, as the Errors and Corrup∣tions of the Church encreased. (2.) According to the Parables of our Saviour, Matth. 13. concerning his Kingdom; the Enemy soon sowed Tares in it whilst men slept; which choaked, and perverted the Word of the Kingdom at first preached, in many things; and the Men
which it gathered of every kind, bad as well as good, brought in a mixture of their own sins and infirmities into it. For, not onlyMezeray, page 948. Camden. Elizab. page 26. Fox's Martyr. Vol. 3. page 105, 442, 537. Politicians, and wicked Worldlings, carried on their private Designs, (which the Reformers here in England complained much of, as to the point of Sacriledge) but the Good Men, who most effectually promoted it, had their Weak∣nesses and Infirmities.Sleidan, 21, 43. & passim. Luther andAdam. Vit. Calv. page 109▪ See Calvin's Answer to Officium viri pii. Calvin, although extraordinary Persons, and of great Piety were both Men of very warm Tempers, and were sometimes too violently trans∣ported; and the latter is thought to have had a tooHooker's Preface to Eccles. Polit. over-weening Opinion for his own Discipline; endeavouring e∣very where to introduce it as Necessary, and of Divine Ori∣ginal; which yet was at first very imperfect; the firstSynodic. Gall. Reform. Tome 1. page 16. Plat form of it, as it is received in the Church of France, ha∣ving been altered and augmented in Three and Twenty Sy∣nods, before it could be brought to that Model in which it now is; which it must be confessed is very excellent; and fit to be diligently perused by all, whose Thoughts are employ∣ed in restoring Church-Discipline. But yet, to deal imparti∣ally, I cannot think, but that the Natural Severity of the Tem∣per of this Great and Good Man (to whose indefatigable pains and great Parts, we are endebted for the true Sense of the Scri∣ptures), gave sometimes a Tincture to his Opinions, or at least to his Expressions in the Praedestinarian Controversies; which his Followers urged with too great warmth and harshness to∣wards Dissenters, in France, and the Netherlands. Neither have theHistoire abregee de l' Europe, Tome 1. page 528, 663, 667. Lutherans been less rigorous in impo∣sing their Opinions; who having retained several Errors, as
in the point of Consubstantiation, Images, Ʋbiquity, and the like; would not admit the Reformed to their Communion, without their subscribing to some of those controverted Arti∣cles; and denied them Churches in their Cities, even when they were forced to retire unto them for succour in the heat of the last French Persecution. In which seems to be some Relicks of that Spirit which at first much retarded the progress of the Reformation in Germany; the Lutherans being then so wed∣ded to their Opinion about the Sacrament, that theSleidan, 122, 151. Con∣federates would not admit the Switzers, and those that follow∣ed Zuinglius, into their Leagues; thinking their Assistances to be unlawful; and that they would be as dismal in the E∣vents, as Confederacies with Idolaters in Scripture: and the Ten Years Imprisonment ofHistor. Carcerum per Pezelium. Casparus Peucerus, about the same Controversie, shews, that they did not afterwards much a∣bate of their Rigor. Furthermore, I cannot but be perswaded, that the many Wars and Confusions which the Reformation hath been enga∣ged in (which wereMezeray, 951, 952. The Account of the Persecution of th Vaudois, Printed at Oxford. often the Occasions of their Persecuti∣ons), argue it to have fallen short, in producing that Exem∣plary Patience, and Resignation to the Cross, which Christia∣nity designed, and which it at first wrought in the Primitive Christians. And the many Errors and Divisions, which sprung up with the Reformation, plainly prove, that there were many Tares mixt with it; which yet God hath been pleased to make use of to many good Ends; there being scarce any Errone∣ous Perswasion in Religion, which hath not some Truth mixt with it; and which was not occasioned by some Neglect in the Church: which God by those Extreams punishes them for,
and calls upon them to reform. Even the Extravagancies ofSleidan, page 52, 79, 83, 90, 96, 190. Munster, and the Boors (to whose Demands Luther gave too sharp and bloody an Answer, as his own Historian confesses) have a mixture of some important Truths; and theSleidan, page 244. Antinomians, who first appeared about A. D. 1538. seem to have been permitted, to admonish the Reformers of more Exalted Thoughts of the Riches of God's free Grace in Christ; which they seemed not at first sufficiently to admire: as God, by permitting the Extreams of Arminiauism on the other side, calls upon Men to make use of their own hearty En∣deavours; when Morality decays, and Men do not as much as they are able, upon the pretence of Impotency; which was the Plea ofVossii Histor. Pelag. page 21, 22. Pelagius, who, except in the point of Grace, and those Controversies which depend upon it, was for the most part Orthodox, and of a very good Life: and especially there∣by admonishes warm Zealots, to take care, lest in the Heat of their Disputes about difficult and inexplicable matters, they make God, at least indirectly, the Author of Sin; and lessen the Extent of his Grace. The Fifth-Monarchy-men upbraid the Reformation with its Ignorance in the Nature of Christ's Kingdom; and their inordinate Zeal, and furious Opposition of Civil Authority, upon pretence of its contrariety to the Gospel, ought to be an Admonisbment to Christian Magistrates, to endeavour after a more Holy way of Government, than the World hath yet arrived to. Enthusiasm is permitted, when Formality and Deadness in Devotion too much encrease. And even the Behaviour of the Quakers, may put Christians in re∣membrance of the Duties of Patience, and bearing of Inju∣ries; and may be designed by Providence, (which makes use of the Sins and Follies of Men to Good Ends) to witness a∣gainst
common Swearing, and Perjury; Deceit, and Equivoca∣tion in point of Trade; Pride, and Superfluity in Cloaths; Vain Complements, Flattering and Swelling Titles; and an Ʋnnecessary Ʋse of Words and Names, taken from Idolatrous Opinions and Customs; and those Plays and Sports, which nourish Lightness and Debauchery. The like Observation may be made upon the other Subdivisions amongst Prote∣stants; All of which carry something in them to upbraid the Reformation of its Imperfection; and may be made use of to Excellent Ends; it being as useful to the Church, to con∣sider what is good in them, as to confute them; and of grea∣ter benefit to the State, to amend the Faults which occasioned them, than to prosecute them with Rigor; which hath been sel∣domSee Thuanus's Preface to his History. successful. (3.) The Reformation is Imperfect, in what relates to Christi∣an Practice; as not having been able to bring in Everlasting Righteousness; and abundance of Righteousness, with Peace, Truth, and Glory; according to what is prophesied of Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 9.24. Psalm 72. and 85. (4.) Neither hath it arrived to the perfection of a Church-State, as it is laid down in Scripture; especi∣ally in the Model of the Church of Jerusalem, gi∣ven in the Acts of the Apostles; which was the first Christian Church, built (according to our Saviour's Promise) upon Peter; and called, The Church, by way of Emphasis and Eminence; as if it were the Pattern by which others were to be tried and modelled: For the First Apostolical Chur∣ches are the Standard of all Reformation; and not the fol∣lowing Churches, even of the First Ages, which degenerated very soon from their Primitive Purity and Simplicity. But because the Particulars of the Defects of the Reformation, as to this Head, are too many to be considered as they ought to
be in this place; I shall leave them to a particular Treatise on that Subject: only desiring the Judicious and Conscienti∣ous Readers to lay aside the great Fondness which the best of Men are wont to have for the Constitutions of the particular Churches, of which they are Members; and to consider im∣partially the several places ofConsider the Mystical signification of what is delivered in the Law of Moses, with relation to the Sanctuary, God's Worship, and his Priests; particularly, Exodus 28, 29, 30 Chapters. Leviticus 10.8-11. and Chapters 21, and 22. Ezekiel 42, 13, 14.44, 8-31. much of Ezekiel, from Chapter 40, to the end. Matth. 18, 15-20.19, 17.20, 24-29.23, 6-12. and Grotius on those places. John 15, 27.17, 0-23. Acts 1, 13-26.2, 37-47.3, 1.4, 31-37.5, 1-14, 41, 42.6, 1-8.8, 2.9, 39.12, 5.13, 2, 3, 15.14.22, 23, 27. Chapter 15.16, 2, 4, 5, 25.20, 7, 11, 27-36. Romans, from Chapter 12, to the End of the Epistle. First Epistle to the Corinthians, from the First Chapter to the 15th. and Chapter 16. most part of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. Galatians 2, and 6. Ephesians 2, 19-22. Chapters 4th, 5th, and 6th; the Epistle to the Philipppians; the greatest part of the Epistles to the Colossians, Tbessalonians, Timothy, and Titus; Hebrews 5, 12-14. and Chapters 6.1, 2.12, 14-29. and Chapter 13; the generality of the Epistle of James. 1 Peter, 2d Chapter, to the End of the Epistle; 2 Peter 1, 3-21. and Chapter 2d, and 3d; most of the Epistles of John, and Christ's Letters to the Seven Churches; Which places, diligently compared with what is prophesied of Christ's Kingdom, in the Prophets and the Three last Chapters of the Revelations; will furnish a Man with an exact Idea of the Church; as it was designed by Christ, with respect to Faith, Discipline and Manners. Scripture, which treat of Matters relating to Church-Affairs; and then to compare the State of the Churches now in being, with what God requires in a pure Church; and I am confident they will abate much of a too fond Dotage upon any particular Constitution, or Church-State, that is now in the World: Of which Opinion also are the Honest, and the Judicious of all Parties, when some hap∣py Conjunctures force them upon cool thoughts, and peaceable Considerations; which yet do not meet with their desired Success, but in God's own Times and Seasons. Which is re∣markably evident in the Reformation of the Church of Eng∣land; which although begun by very good and great Men, and carried on often very vigorously and successfully, yet hath
not been able to arrive to those Degrees of Perfection, which even the first Reformers, who planted it, and watered it with their Blood,Reformatio Legum Ecclesiastic. designed andPreface to the Comminat. Fox's Book of Martyrs, edit. ult. Vol, 3. page 67, 105, 107; 120, 121, 137, 362, 374, 385, 400, 403, 411, 412, 427, 442, 537. Bishop Burnet's History of the Reformation, edit. secunda: Tome 1. Praefat. pag. 147, 148, 189, 262, 300, 303, 315, 364. in the Collect. pag. 160, 178, 182. Praefat. ad Vol. secund. and page 44, 59, 67, 71, 72, 73, 75, 79, 80, 95, 96, 101, 104. ad 110, 112, 141, 145, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 182, 189, 190, 191, 196. ad 202, 218, 219, 304, 339, 376, 377, 387, 390, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 406, 407, 420. Camdeni Elizab. ed. Amstelod. pag. 26 in Praefat. 391, 392. Sir Simon D' Ewes's Journal, pag. 156-158. 161, 166, 167, 177, 184, 257, 302, 303, 329, 357-360, 557, 639. Bishop Stil∣lingfleet's Preface to his Ʋnreasonableness of Separation; the Discourses written lately about the Ecclesiastical Commission, and the Convocation: a Paper entituled, Grievances of the Church of England; supposed to be written by Archbishop Sancroft. Letters of the English Reformers, in the Library of Switzerland. and Bishop Burnet's excellent Discourse of the Pastoral Care. wished for: But, what through the inconstant Humour of a Vain and a Cruel Prince, under whom it begun; the Avarice and Dissentions of the Chief Ministers of rhe Court of King Edward the Sixth; the short Reign of that Prince; the contrary turn of Affairs in Q. Maries Days; and the invincible prejudices of that great Princess Q. Elizabeth, under whom it was settled, who was against Alterations in the Church: the glo∣rious Work did not receive the last and finishing Hand of its Master-Builders; but has ever since been hindered and re∣tarded by several strange Occurrences; but chiefly by the contrary struglings of two Parties, ever since the Differen∣ces at Frankford; whereby, through mutual Animosities, and immoderate Opposition (the chief Obstacle to all Noble and Peaceable Designs,) things have sometimes rather gone back, than forwards: So that there is little hope of going on unto Perfection; until the Times of Restitution begin to appear, and God shall be pleased to dispose the Minds of Men by his o∣ver-ruling Providence, to so necessary, and so glorious an Un∣dertaking.
8 And the Voice which I heard from Heaven [verse 4.] spake un∣to me again, and said, go, and take the little Book, which is open in the hand of the Angel, which standeth [or stood] upon the Sea, and upon the Earth. 9 And I went unto the Angel, and said unto him, Give me the lit∣tle Book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat 14 it up [i. e. com∣mit it to Memory, and keep it secret as yet, Dan. 7, 28.12, 4, 9. Ezek. 2, 8.3, 1-10.] and it shall make thy Belly bitter [be∣cause what is contained in it must be delayed for a longer time, Dan. 8.26, 27.10, 14-16.] but it shall be in thy mouth [when thou prophesiest again, Verse 11.] sweet as honey [as containing the sweet and glad tidings of Christ's Kingdom, Psalm 19, 10.119, 103. Jerem. 15.16. Ezek. 3.3.] 14 To eat, signifies to meditate, and digest Divine Truths; as appears from our Saviour's Discourse, John 6. and withal to keep them close and secret; as Mary did, Luke 2.19, 51: the Belly denoting in Scripture, the most secret Thoughts and Cogitations of a Man. By which is signified, that Christ's Kingdom, which had appeared but for a short time (only so long as to be just seen open, and whilst the Book could be taken into his hand and mouth) should soon have a stop put to it; and there∣by create much Sorrow to all the true Servants of God; but that it should again appear (signified by being again in his mouth, after it had been in his Belly) in its Glory, to the Joy and Comfort of them. 10 And I took the little Book out of the Angels hand, and eat it up, and it was in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter [i. e. I was really affected, after the manner the Angel had foretold.] 11 And he [i. e. the Angel] said unto me, Thou must 15 prophesie again [i. e. foretel the coming of Christ's Kingdom, Chap. 11.3.] before [of, or against] many 16 People, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings [i. e. before the People, and Rulers of the Kingdom of Antichrist.]
15 To prophesie (as is shewn on Chap. 11.3.) is to foretel the coming of Christ's Kingdom; which it is said here John should do; because he was to deliver more Prophecies concerning it; and because it was to be actually performed by the Witnesses re∣presented by John; as the people of Israel of Old were by the Prophets, who were sometimes Types of them. And from these Words we may observe; (1.) That the Witnesses, represented in, and by John, had already prophesied, and were still to prophesie. And, (2.) That the Spirit hath here given, by the mentioning of his prophesying again; an apt Transition to what was to be delivered concerning the Witnesses in the following Chapter, who are to Prophesie in Sackcloth. And, (3.) That the Reformation (represented in this Chapter) was an Apperance, or prophetical Representation of the Kingdom of Christ, altho very imperfect; because it is said, that John was to prophesie again: whereby is intimated, that he had pro∣phesied just before; and that the Kingdom was under a delay, and so consequently in Prophecy, and not fullfilled. 16 By this Phrase, the Subjects of the Babylonian Kingdom are described inChap. 2, 37.4, 1. Daniel; which was an Emblem of the Anti∣christian.
CHAP. XI. The Text. 1 AND there was given unto me [by the Angel,] a reed like unto a [measuring] rod, [i. e. a perch or Pole made of a reed Ezek. 40.3.] and the Angel [i. e. Christ, chapt. 10.1, 5.] 1 stood [near, or before me, and presented himself unto me;] saying, rise 2 [i. e. use all possible exactness, and diligence, for it is a thing worthy of it, Ezek. 40.4.] and 3 measure [i. e. enclose, and secure for the peculiar lot, and inheritance of God;] the Temple 4 of God [i. e. the pure Church of God,] and the Altar 5 [i. e. the pure Worship of God,] and them that Worship therein 6 [in secret, and under the Divine Security and Protection.] Annotations on CHAP. XI. 1 He is not represented, as standing upon the Sea, as be∣fore, Chap. 10. and therefore, perhaps, he might stand (as he does in the place of Ezekiel, here alluded to, Chap. 40.3.) in the Gate of the Temple; or rather, at the Altar of Incense as an Angel is represented standing in a Vision, which Syn∣chronizes wit this, Chap. 8.3. And it is the Opinion of a Worthy Person▪ that the Angel, in both Visions, is Christ; who is here said to have stood [, had stood,] viz. in that for∣mer Vision Contemporary with this, with the Incense of his Name and Intercession; and had then commanded, whilst he was at the Altar, that the Temple should be measured, and the Worshippers secured; which answer to the Hundred For∣ty
and Four Thousand, who were sealed about the same time, Chap 7. 2 So the Word signifies, Gen. 31.17. Josh. 1.2. Luke 1.39. and in several other places of Scripture; with which Sense of the Word, the vehement Charge given by this Angel to Ezekiel, on the like Account, is very agreeable, Ezek. 40.4. 3 Israel is called in Scripture, (Deut. 32.9. Psalm 16.5, 6.74, 2. Jerem. 10.16.) the Reed, the Line, and Cord of God's Inheritance; from the Manner of Dividing Lands a∣mongst them. And to measure, signifies, to make an Allottment of a particular possession, and to enclose and secure it, while others lie neglected, and in common. Thus the Temple is mea∣sured, Ezek. 40. and the Land of Israel, Ezek. 47.18. and Jerusalem, Zach. 2. and to leave out, (i.e. of the Enclosement) and to measure not, are of the same import in the following Verse. 4 TheSee Middoth ex edit, L' Emper. Pag. 190. Maimonid. de Aedific. Templi per Viel. Temple, properly so called (as distinguished from its Outward Courts, and Apartments) consisted of the Sanctuary, or Holy Place, (called also more peculiarly, The Temple,) and of the Holy of Holies; by which the pure, and holy Church of God is signified; of which the Temple was a Type. 5 By the Altar is here to be understood, the Altar of Incense (called sometimes simply , as Dr. Hammond confes∣ses on Rev. 6.9) because that only stood within the Temple, or Holy Place; the other Altar, for Burnt Offerings, being placed before the Porch, in the Inner Court of the Lord's House. And hereby Prayer (of which Incense is an Emblem) and the pure Worship of God is denoted; the Altar of Incen (as Dr. Ham∣mond has noted on Matth. 23.35. from Philo) being to be seen
by no other, but only by the Priests that are Clean. 6 That is, in the place where the Altar stood, just before the , or Temple, strictly so called; which is most properly the space betwixt the Table, and the Candlestick: although  may very well here be referred to , the Temple. Now the Temple being covered (whereas the Courts were open,) and secured with Gates, Veils, and High-Walls, from the sight and approach of the people: hereby is very appositely signified, the secret, and retired Members of Christ's Church, secured by God, during the time of the Apostasy; who are the same with the sealed ones before mentioned, Chap. 7. Whereupon, the Temple, when God's pure Worship is restored, is represented as open; whereby it also appears, that to measure, and to open, are opposite, and that it signifies Retiredness, and Concealment. For the Description of the Temple, and the further meaning of these, and the following passages; see (besides Josephus, and the Books before quoted) Dr. Lightfoot of the Temple, Dr. Hammond on Matth. 23.35. Luke 23.45. Eph. 2.4. Rev. 6.9. and Dr. Pocock on Joel; where he has given us a Scheme of the Temple, from a MSS. of Maimonides, thought by him to be as ancient as the Authors own times. 2 But the 7 Court, which is without the Temple [i. e. the Visible Church;] 8 leave [or cast] out, [as prophane, with Disgrace, and Ignominy;] and measure it not [i. e. secure it not;] for it is given [or hath 9 been given, and delivered by the Justice of God, for swer∣ving from the true measure of his Laws, Ezek. 43.10-12.] un∣to [or into the hands, and power, Dan. 7.25. of] the 10 Gentiles [or, Paganizi Christians;] and the Holy 11 City [i. e. the whole Visible Churc] shall they tread under Foot [i. e. possess it, Isa. 1.12. and use it prophanely and contemptuously, Dan. 10, 11.13. Isa. 28 3. Luke 21.4. 1 Maccab. 1.] Forty 12 and Two Months [of Days, which are Years.] 7 All the open space without the Temple, is called, as Gro∣tius notes, (and as I find the Word to be used in the Jew∣ish
Middoth, cap. 1. Sect. 4. L' Emper. in locum. Mishna) The Court; consisting of Three open Areas, or Courts; whereof the two outermost are called, 2 Chron. 4.9. the Great Court, and the Outward Court, by Ezekiel, where the Men and Women met in separate Partitions; and the Third Court is called, the Court of the Priests, and the Inner-Court; reaching from the Court of the Men, to the Vestibulum, or Porch of the Temple; in which the Altar of Burnt Offer∣ings stood. All which Space, or Area, is here meant by the Court which is without the Temple; for so it was: and the Court of the Gentiles (or the Fourth and Outermost Court, add∣ed by Herod) cannot be here understood, because it was al∣ways lawful for the Gentiles to pray there; and therefore it could not properly be said to be given unto them now, or to be polluted by them, as having been always accounted un∣clean; whereas they were never admitted into the other Courts. And by the Court without the Temple, is very appo∣sitely understood, the Visible Christian Worship; because the Visible Worship of God was performed in that place under the Law; whereas all the Temple-Worship was hid from the People. See the Books before quoted, and Mr.Pag. 19, 20, 478,, 479, 480. and Ainsworth on Exod. 40.33. Mede's Works. 8 Grotius on the places▪ notes, That this is called Extra∣cludere, by the Ancient Writers concerning the Limits and measuring of Grounds: But the Word also denoting inJohn 9.34. Acts 7, 58: 13, 50. Grotius in loca. Scripture, an Ignominious casting out, or an Excommunicati∣on; it may also here signifie, the leaving, or casting it out of the Sacred Enclosure, or Limits, as unsacred and polluted; as Mr.Pag. 587. Mede speaks.
9 So , which is of the past Sense, and not of the present, may be translated: whereby is signified, that it had been given up, or delivered by God, before the time in which it was measured; although it must be confessed, that the past Tense, is often used for the present, in Scripture. 10 ByHammond on Matth. 23.15. Grot. on John 12.20. Acts 21.28. Gentiles, or Nations, the Jews understand all but themselves, and Proselytes of Justice; who were circum∣cised, and accounted as Jews: which were the Proselytes of the Gates (as they call them,) who had renounced Idolatry, but had not embraced the whole Jewish Religion, and were per∣mitted to come no further, than into the Outer Court, called the Court of the Gentiles; and were thought to prophane, and pollute the Temple, if they did; as appears from Acts 21, 28, 29.24, 6. But by Gentiles are most commonly meant in Scripture, the Heathen Nations round about them; who, whilst they continued in open Idolatry, were not to live a∣mongst them; especially those who persecuted them, and laid their Country, City, and Temple waste; such as Nebuchad∣nezzar, and Antiochus, whose Desolations are bewailed and described inPsalm 74. and 79. Dan. 8.1 Maccab. from Chap. 1. to Ver. 16 of the 6th. Scripture: and such were also the Four Suc∣cessive Monarchies, of the Assyrians, Persians, Grecians and Romans; whose Times (, or appointed Seasons, the word made use of by Daniel, and Jeremiah, Chap. 27.7.) are called by our SaviourSee Grotius on the place, and Mr. Mede's Works, pag. 709, 753. Luke 21.24. the Times of the Gentiles; at the ending of which fort of Times, in the Ex∣piration of the Roman Monarchy continued in the Antichri∣stian, the Jews are to be restored, as our Saviour there plain∣ly asserts; and the Holy City is no more to be trodden under foot by the Gentiles.
Now the like Expressions, and some of the Words here made use of, being plainly taken from thePsalm 79.1. Dan. 8.10. 1 Maccab. 1.37, 38, 39.3, 45, 51.4, 60. Luke 21.24. Scriptures quoted in the Margin, it is manifest, that they have an Allusion to them; especially to the Story of Antiochus, a lively Type of Antichrist (who is therefore prophesied of in him, as a Type by Daniel,) and of the Gentile Times and Actions here fore∣told: and therefore the like Actions committed by some Chri∣stians, must be here referred to; called Gentiles, for bring∣ing theMr. Mede's Apostasy of the latter Times. Gentile Worship into the Church, together with Ty∣ranny, and crafty Baits to entice to Idolatry; according to the Example of Antiochus (the Type of Antichrist,) and the Paganizing Jews, who did after the Ordinances of the Hea∣thens, and built a Place of Exercise at Jerusalem, according to their Customes; and thereby gave a great occasion to the Tyrant to take Jerusalem, and to enter proudly into the San∣ctuary, and pollute it, and lay it waste, like a Wilderness; and to make the City an habitation of Strangers, or Gentiles; and to become strange to those that were born in it; as you may read in the places of the Book of Maccabes before quoted. All which agrees plainly to the Apostasy, which has introduced a Pagan Christianity into the Church. 11 Jerusalem is called so; which is the Type of the whole Christian Church; whereby is signified a Ʋniversal Apostasy in the Visible Church; the latent, or invisible one having been before measured and secured by God. 12 A Day is put for a Year in this Book, as hath been be∣fore shewn on Chap. 2.10. and then by consequence, a Month must be put for a Month of prophetical Days, consisting of as many common years as a common month doth of days. But for the better understanding of the Nature of these pro∣phetical
Times and Seasons; it will be very convenient to de∣duce this matter from the very Beginning and Original of it. And accordingly it is to be observed, that out of the whole space of Time assigned by God to the Transactions of this World, which is thought to be about Seven Thousand Years; there is a certain part allotted by him, for the Times of the A∣postasy, and the Reign of the Beast; called by Daniel, Time, Times, and half a Time, (Chap. 7, 25.12, 7. of which it hath been discoursed already on Chap. 10.6.) which are re∣duced into 1260. Days, and Forty Two Months, in the Reve∣lations: Into Days, with respect to the Witnesses, and the Seed of the Woman in the Wilderness, who are the Children of theMede, pag. 481, 492. Mori Oper. Theol. pag. 614, 616. Gen. 1. Luke 16.8. Acts 26.18. 2 Cor. 6.14. Eph. 5.8. 1 Thes. 5.5, 8. 2 Pet. 1.19. Rev. 22, 16. See the Notes on Rev. 12.1. Day; and into Nights, with respect to the Gentiles, and the Beast, whose Antichristian Deeds are Works of Darkness, and they the Children of the Night, of which the Moon has the Government. And as the Natural Day is divided in Scri∣pture, into Evening and Morning; so is this Line of Time, in proportion to that Distinction, divided into Days, which an∣swer to the Morning of the Natural Day; and into Months, which answer to the Evening, or Night of it; the Days and Months making up one and the same Line of Time; as the E∣vening and Morning make up One Natural Day: whence the Time allotted in Daniel, (Chap. 8.13, 14.) for the Course of Affairs, from Cyrus to the cleansing of the Sanctuary, is called Evening-Morning; out of which (for it principally respects the Apostasy, which defiled the Sanctuary) this Line is taken; the Months out of its Evenings, and the Days out of its Mor∣nings: which way of Speech is taken from Gen. 1.5, 16. where the Light is called Day, and the Darkness, Night; and the Moon is said to rule the one, and the Sun the other; and the
Natural Day is called Evening-Morning; the Evening be∣ing put before the Morning, because the Darkness, o Night of the Chaos, preceded the first appearance of Light, which made the Day; as the Darkness of the Apostasy (ac∣cording to the Course and Order of Nature, which proceeds from Privation to Form) preceeds the Morning-Star, and bright Day of Christ's Kingdom: whereupon the Months of the Gentiles are mentioned before the Days of the Witnesses; because the Gentile Apostasy must be in Nature, and Time, before the Witnesses could prophesie against it; although they both commence from the same Day or Year. Now a Day is taken in this Prophecy, for a Coelestial, So∣lar Year, consisting of Three hundred and sixty days, in round Numbers, according to the Custom of Scripture, and accor∣ding to the degrees of a Circle, and of the Sun's passage through the Ecliptick, by which the Year is made; as appears from Three 360 360 360 180 1260 Times, or Years, and a half; being made equal to Twelve hundred and sixty days: and therefore in proportion, by a montb must be meant, not a month in Civil Accounts; which are Arbitrary, according to the divers Customs, and Reckonings of Cities, and Nations; but a Caelestial, Natu∣ral Month, depending upon the Moon, by whose Motion from one Conjunction with the Sun to another, the Month is made: According to which Motion, a Month consists of some∣thing above Twenty Nine days, and a Lunar Year of 354 days, (not reckoning the Odd Hours, and Fractions, neither in this, nor the Solar Accounts;) which is six Days above Twen∣ty Nine Days to each Month of the Year; by which rec∣koning,
354 354 354 177 1239 Forty Two months of years, at 354 each year, a∣mount to 1239 years; and at 29 42 58 116 1218 Twenty-Nine Days each Month, to 1218 years. But because in the 1260 Days, there are five Days taken from each Solar Year, which indeed consists of 365 Days; therefore also in the Lunar Years of the Forty Two Months, there must be Five days taken from each, that they may bear proportion to the Solar Years: which are indeed only pro∣perly and naturally Years; the Lunar Year being no other∣wise a Year, than as it is determined by the Annual Course of the Sun; and being altogether uncertain, and arbitrary; but as it is adjusted unto, and brought into accord with its Mo∣tion: According to which Substraction, each Lunar Year will amount to 349 Days; and the whole Forty Two Months of Years, to 349 349 349 174 ½ 1221 ½ about 1222 Years; 1218 3 ½ 1221 ½ exceeding the Total of the Months, at Twenty Nine Days each, by about Four Days; which, because Fractions are neglected in these Accounts, we are to reckon full 1222 Years; 1222 38 1260 Thirty Eight Years less than the Twelve hundred and sixty Days of Years of the Wit∣nesses; according to the proportion betwixt the Motion of
the Sun and Moon; the latter of which exceeding the former by about 11 Days. 3 ½ Years of Years. 38 Eleven Days in a year (or a Thirty Third part;) the Encrease in Twelve hundred and sixty years, or Three years and a half of years, amounts to Thirty Eight years, or twice Nineteen years; that is, two CyclesBevereg. Instit. Chronol. lib. 2.4, 6, 7▪ of the Moon, or Golden Number; which, being grounded upon the Period of Meton (a Famous Athenian Astronomer, who flourished Four hun∣dred and thirty years before Christ,) was first brought into the Kalendar by the First General Council of Nice, A. D. 325. to settle the Paschal, or Easter Feast, about which so great Contentions had been in the Church; which Rule and Decree is Religiously observed (as Dr. Beveridge speaks) in the Church of England. And thus having settled the True Notion of a Month, and the Extent of it, we are next to find out, where the Begin∣ning of these Forty Two Months, and of the Twelve hundred and sixty Days, which are parallel to them, is to be fixed; the Holy Spirit having not been pleased to give the precise Epocha, or Beginning of them; but having left it to be search∣ed out, by the Industry of those who consider Times and Seasons. We are to take Notice then, thatSee Mr. Mede's Apostasy. Gentilism, con∣sisting in the Practice of Pagan and Idolatrous Customs, was come to a great heighth about A. D. 400. and that
there is great Reason to fix upon A. D. 437. for the precise Year, from whence the Lord of Times and Seasons thought good to date the Beginning of its Times, or Reign, may be made more than probable from these following Considerati∣ons: (1.) Because it is the precise Year, in which the Churches Purity ended; it being the Year which compleats the last Half Time of the Churches Purity, weighed in the Two Scales of the Ballance, which appeared under the Third Seal, as hath been shewn on Chap. 6.5. (2.) Because it is the very Year from which the Time, Times, and Half Time are to be reckoned; as hath been al∣ready proved, on Chap. 10. vers. 7. numb. 13. Which be∣ing made equal to 1260 days, Chap. 12.6, 14. the beginning of the Date of the one, must be the beginning of the Date of the other; and consequently of the Forty Two Months of the Gentiles, which run parallel to the 1260 days of the Witnes∣ses, and of the Woman in the Wilderness. Of which, the Re∣formation beginning A. D. 1517. just at the Entrance of Half Time, is an illustrious Proof; as hath been observed on Chap. 10. (3.) Because it is the middle Point betwixt the two remark∣able Half Hours, made up into One Hour, at the Ten Kings receiving power with the Beast: Concerning which, see what hath been largely discoursed on Chap. 8. (4.) If the beginning of the Gentiles Months, and of the 1260 Days of the Witnesses, be fixed at 437. there will be found to be a wonderful Congruity, according to the stri∣ctest Mathematical Proportion, betwixt the Days of the Wit∣nesses, the Gentiles Months; and the Months of the Beast; who, as is evident from Rev. 17.10, 11, 12. receiv'd not his power until he came to be the Eighth King, which was not until the End of A. D. 475. or the beginning of A.D. 476. upon the Fall of the Western Emperour. Now, if the Gen∣tiles
Months begin 437 1222 1659 38 1697 A. D. 437. then they must end (they amounting in the whole, as hath been shewn, to 1222. Years) at A. D. 1659, sooner by Thirty Eight Years, then the 1260 Days End; which is the Exact Astronomical Pro∣portion betwixt Solar and Lunar Time, as hath been before observed; and if the Beasts Months begin at 476 1222 1697 476. then they will end at 1697. together with the Days of the Witnes∣ses; and will carry on the Times of the Apostasy, from 1659 38 1697 the End of the Gentiles Months, to the End of all Antichri∣stian Time, by the same Astronomical Proportion; consisting of Two Cycles of the Moon, or Golden Numbers. For it is to be observed; that the Church was Paganized before the Apo∣statizing Hierarchy attained its Bestian Power; and that there∣fore the Months of the Gentiles (who are the Members of the Apostatizing Church, before it had an Antichristian King) be∣gan before the Months of the Beast; upon whose Rise they fall into his Months; and are continued down with them, al∣though only the Mouths of the Antichristian King came then into Publick Account; as after the Erecting of a Monarchy, or after an Interregnum, those only of the Supreme Prince do. And because these Times were given to the Beast, and Times are always reckoned from the Supreme Princes Reign; there∣fore the Gentiles Months are to be reckoned only as suppletory to the Beast's Months, by a kind of Intercalation of Thirty Eight Years; which by the All-wise disposal of Providence, is
the Exact Mathematical proportion betwixt the Time of the Sun and Moon: to teach us by the very Astronomical diffe∣rence here observed; that these were Pagan, or Gentile Times; the HeathensCary's Chronological Account of Time, Part 1. B. 1. Chap. 4. Spencer ubi infra. generally observing the Lunar Year, and making it give place to the Solar; although this were more Ancient, Easie, Equal, and certain than the other; Because that their Night-Revellings were wont to be celebrated upon the Rising of the Moon; and their Idolatrous Festivities de∣pended upon the Aspects, and superstitious Observations of that Planet. Whereupon God indulged theSpencer de Hebraeor. Legib. pag. 715-744. Jews the Obser∣vation of New Moons, and instituted Festivities of his own, which depended upon their Phases and Appearances; to take them off from following the Pagan ones; which yet they by degrees imitated. And therefore, I cannot but look upon the high Contest in the Church, about the Day of the Paschal Solem∣nity; (in the behalf of which an imposing, and a domineer∣ing Temper first appeared) and the regulating, and setling of it, according to the Motion of the Moon, to contain some Indications in it of an Apostasy then working in the Church; to which the superstitious Observation of Holy Days much contributed: whereas there was no Day at first observed as Necessary, but the Lord's Day; VallesiusValles. in Euseb. pag. 279. Pearson. Lect. in Acta Apostol. pag. 39, 40. himself confessing, that although the Primitive Christians met on other Days, that yet it was Voluntarily; and that it was not the Custom to do so every where; and that all were not wont to frequent those Assemblies, where it was. And I cannot also but observe further, That this Paschal Cycle of the Moon, after many Corrections, was settled up∣on
a New Hypothesis, in the very YearPetav. Doctr. Temp. 2.57. 437, by Cyril of A∣lexandria; that proud and assuming Prelate, who (as that prudent HistorianHistor. 7.7, 11, 13. Socrates notes) was the first Bishop that exercised Civil Power, and Coercive Authority, and advanced Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction at Alexandria, beyond its due bounds: For such Providential Congruities (if I may so call them) fatally, as it were, conspiring to signalize this Year, will, with other Concurrent Arguments tend much to faci∣litate our belief, that it is the very Epocha of the Antichristian Times; the Cycle of the Moon being then regulated, to shew that her Months were just beginning; and Usurpation upon Civil Rights, Tyranny and Persecution beginning then atSocrat. 7.11. Rome, as well as at Alexandria; whereby the Mystery of Ini∣quity was gradually advanced into a Beastian Kingdom, by Leo the Great, and his Successors; and by Cyril, at Alexandria; whose Bishops were the Conservators of the Moon's Paschal Cy∣cle; about which so manyBeverig. in Canon. pag. 19. 188. Ʋsser. Anti. Britannic, pag. 487. Councils had been held, and so ma∣ny rash Decrees had been made, for the anathematizing of all who dissented from them, as Hereticks; and that in a trifling Con∣troversie▪ grounded upon two contrary Traditions, one of which was submitted unto at last for the sake of Peace, rather than of Truth; neither Party being able to tell exactly which was in the Right: So dangerous a thing is it to give too great Cre∣dit to Traditions not recorded in Scripture; and to be wise beyond what is commanded in it. (5.) The 2300 Evenings and Mornings, given Daniel 8 14. will also tend very much to the ascertaining of this E∣pocha: For if these 2300 Days, are so many Years, reach∣ing from the first Year of Cyrus, A. M. 3459. to A. M. 5759.
which will be the Vulgar Year of our Lord, 1772; Then, if we take Daniel's Seventy Five Years, (which are immediate∣ly added by him, as has been shewn on Chap. 10. numb. 13. Paragr. 6. to the 1260 Days, as the End of all Time) from the Year of our Lord 1772; we shall come, going back∣wards in a Regressive Order, to the Year 1697. for the End of the Forty Two Months, and 1260 Days; which being also deducted from that Year, we shall arrive to the Year 437. for the beginning of the afore mentioned Days and Months. Bus because this is a matter of great moment, I shall en∣deavour to state, and settle it, by these following Observa∣tions: Obs. (1.) It hath pleased God to afford us a Scripture-Ac∣count of Time, to be our sure Guide amidst the difficulties, and intricate Mazes of Chronology; and that, sometimes in common Numbers, and sometimes in Prophetical and Mystical ones: amongst which there is a very remarkable one in Dan. 8.13, 14. Where a Line of Time is given, consisting of 2300 Days, called Evening-morning, in the Original Hebrew, in the Singular Number; perhaps to shew, that it was a con∣tinued Line of Time, consisting of many several , or Days of Years, answerable to the many particular Events to be transacted in them; which yet, for Memories sake, were contracted into One Aera, which might be called (as it is at the 26th Verse) The Evening-Morning Vision; and that with relation to the long Night of Idolatry and Antichristianism, called collectively, Evening; which was to precede the glori∣ous Morning of Christ's Kingdom, at the Entrance of the seventh Thousand Year; the Type of which, the seventh day, is not distributed into Evening and Morning, as the other six days are; to shew, that it is to be all Light, without any Antichristian Works of Darkness: So that this Phrase, Even∣ing-Morning, shews, That this was a Line of Time, reaching
through the Evening of Three Idolatrous Monarchies, to the Morning of Christ's Kingdom. Obs. (2.) In this Place of Daniel, a Question is put by an Angel to Christ, the Wonderful Numberer, who is the Word, or  (for so thePoli Synops. in locum. Words are to be understood), unto how long, or unto when the Vision, should last, or endure; as the LXX. have rightly supplied the Words; understanding them concerning the things represented in the whole foregoing Vision; and not only of those specified in this Verse; which are but a part of them; and are particularly mentioned, be∣cause they were things of the greatest moment, for which the Angel was most concerned; and being to be accomplish∣ed in the last place, were more immediately to be referred to, in the Answer which was to be returned. The Question proposed then is, How long it was to be to the End of all those things which he had seen; of which the Particulars mentioned were to be fulfilled in the last place? And the Words are to be rendred thus, according to the Hebrew Text; How long the Vision, the Daily, &c. and not concerning the Daily; the Question being, How long the Vision, as well as, how long the Daily, and the Transgression of Desolation? Obs. (3.) This Question must, in all propriety of Speech, be meant, concerning a Period of Time, to be deduced from the beginning of the Events foretold, to the End of them; the Answer to the Question being, That the Vision should be unto 2300 Days; viz. from the Time, when the Effect of the Vision should first take place: according to which sense, aJachiad. in Daniel. per L' Empereur. Jew has thus acutely paraphrased this Verse; Then the
Angel answered, That the Streights in which they were, were to last from the very time of the Vision, to the Evening, or Night, of the Morning, or Day of the two thousand three hun∣dred years. Obs. (4.) It is expresly contrary to the very Words of the Text, to date these days from the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice; the Question being not, How long shall it be from the pollu∣ting of the Sanctuary, to the cleansing of it? but, How long shall the Vision be? That is, the whole Vision he had before seen, concerning the Medo-Persian, and Grecian Empire, as well as the taking away of the daily Sacrifice. Obs. (5.) The Subject-Matter of the Vision is, (1.) Concerning the Medo Persian Empire, Ver. 20. (2.) Concerning the Greek Empire, their first King Alex∣ander, and the Division of that Empire into Four Kingdoms upon his Death, Ver. 21, 22. (3.) Concerning a Little Horn, or King, who was to rise out of One of those Four Kingdoms, in the latter time, or at the latter End of their Kingdom, Ver. 9, 23. which I take to be (at least principally, and in its chief mystical sense) the Lit∣tle Horn, or Antichristian King, mentioned Dan. 7.8. which came up from amongst the Ten horns of the Fourth Beast, which is the Roman Empire: and is said here at the 9th Verse, to come up out of the Four Notable Horns, towards the Four Winds of heaven; that is, out of the Western part of the World, or of the Ʋniversal Monarchy of the Grecians; where the Ro∣man Power was seated; and where it first appeared in Ma∣cedon, to encroach upon the Grecian; and theMr. Mede, page 654, 749. Fourth
Kingdom brought the Third into its Subjection, by conquer∣ing Greece, the Western, and Head Province of that Empire. Out of this Western Horn, or Kingdom, the Roman Power, with its Little Horn, amongst its ten horns, came forth; which alone is here mentioned; because that by it, the Exploits spe∣cified in the following Verses, were chiefly to be performed; many of which can also agree to no other, and none of them to any so properly as to the Antichristian King; who is cer∣tainly called a Little Horn, in the 7th Chapter, and has Chara∣cters given him there, parallel to those in this Chapter; as in speaking great things, Ver. 8. in having a look more stout, and fierce than his Fellows, Ver. 20. in prevailing against the Saints, and the holy people, and in being broken without hands, by the Ancient of Days, Ver. 21, 22. Obs. (6.) Although some passages of the Vision, from Verse 9, to Verse 12. may be understood of Antiochus, the Type of Antichrist; yet all of it, and especially the Exposition of it, from Verse 23, to 25. cannot be possibly meant concerning him; who understood not dark Sentences, nor was a King of any great Policy or Craft, as this little horn is described, Verses 23, 24, 25. but is expresly noted byLiv. lib. 41. Foy-Vaillant de Seleucid. Imper. pag. 161-163. Historians, to have behaved himself so strangely, and so unequally, that it was much doubted amongst the wisest, whether he were a Fool or a mad man. And the Characters given in those Verses of the little horn, are so utterly inconsistent with the Story of Antiochus; and are so agreeable to the Antichristian King, that even Dr. Moor is at last forced to confess, That this Passage was put in by the Spirit of Prophecy, with a more peculiar respect to Antichrist him∣self, in whom they are more eminently fulfilled, than to Antio∣chus his Type.
Obs. (7.) A Day being taken in other parts of Pro∣phecy, for a Prophetical Day, or a Day of Years; there is no Reason why it should be understood otherwise in this place; it being called here Evening-Morning, upon another account, as we have observed at the beginning of this An∣notation; and not to shew (as Dr. Moor thinks) that Pro∣phetical Days are not here meant, but Natural Days; which will amount but to six Years, three Months, and twenty Days; a very small space of Time, and which can be brought to comport only with the six Years Prophanations of Antiochus; which is but a part of the Vision, and cannot be here refer∣red to; as appears from Observation 4th, and the following ones. Obs. (8.) The Vision begins with the Medo-Persian Em∣pire, as plainly appears from the Explication of it, Verse 20. And if the Vision begins there, then the Line of Time must begin there too; because it is the measure of it, according to Obs. 2, and 3. Obs. (9.) The Vision ends at the cleansing of the Sanctuary, as appears from Verse 14. Then shall the Sanctuary be clean∣sed, viz. at the End of 2300 days, which were to last to that time. Which cannot be meant concerning the particular cleansing of it by Maccabeus from the Prophanations of Anti∣ochus; because this could not be called the Last End of the Indignation of God; the Temple having been afterwards pol∣luted, and blasphemed by the Successors1 Maccab. 6, 62.7, 33-50. and Chap. 9. of Antiochus, and trodden under foot, and entirely destroyed by the Ro∣mans.
Obs. (10.) This Line of Time is not yet at an end; be∣cause the daily Sacrifice of the Jews is not yet restored, nor their Desolations determined; but they are still in a despica∣ble condition, their Sanstuary and City being trodden under foot by the Turks, who at present have it in their posses∣sion. Obs. (11.) The beginning of the Medo-Persian Empire, is to be dated by the Joynt Consent of History, and of the la∣test and best Chronologers; from the taking of Babylon by Cyrus: from whence the Scripture reckons the first year of Cyrus; meaning thereby the first year of his Reign over the Babylonion Empire, which was the last of the Seventy Years Captivity of the Jews; and the first of their Return into their Countrey, upon the Edict of Cyrus. Now from a due consideration of what hath been said, we may make some advance to the setling of the beginning of the Gentiles Months: For if these 2300 years, are a Line of Time, reaching from the first year of Cyrus to the clean∣sing of the Sanctuary: Then if we gain the true Epoch of Cy∣rus's First Year; we may by consequence find out the Period of these Years, and the beginning and end of the 1260 years of the Witnesses, and of the Forty Two Months of the Gen∣tiles. And here, because the Reasonings of Chronologers are ve∣ry dubious; and their Epochs very different, and of an un∣certain Foundation (asEpitom. Baron. pag. 11. Spondanus with just reason com∣plains) I shall only desire this one equitable Postulatum, to be granted me; viz. that the Scripture Accounts of Time, as
they are given us in the HebrewHanc supputationem recentiores Chronologi qui post Scaligerum Floruere, uno ferme consensu complexi sunt. Anton. Pagi Appar. Chronol. Pag. 1, 2. Text, may be received as Authentick; when they are supported by reason, evidence from profane History, and the consent of the latest Chrono∣gers; amongst whom I shall pitch upon SpanhemiusChronol. Introduct. ad Eccles. Histor.; as one of the latest, and the most accurate in his accounts; consulting others, as there shall be occasion. Now if we guide our selves by this Postulatum, we shall, perhaps, find this following Scripture Calendar, to be most exact.     Years. A. M. From the Creation to the Flood. 1656. 2083. From thence to Abraham's coming out of Chal∣dea. Spanhem. à pag. 135, ad 140. 427. 2513. To the Israelites coming out of Aegypt. Span∣hem. pag. 142. 430. 2993. To the beginning of the building of the Tem¦ple in the fourth of Solomon, 1 King. 6.1. Spanhem. à pag. 143-145. 480. 3029. To Solomon's death, and the revolt of the Ten Tribes immediately upon it in the first year of Rehoboam, 1 King. 6, 1.11, 42. Span∣hem 149. 36. 3459. ante Chr. 528. From the First Year of Rehoboam, to the First of Cyrus's Reign over Babylon, which was the End of the 70 Years Cap∣tivity. 430.
This Number is gathered, by adding the 390 Years of E∣zekiel's bearing the sin of Israel, to the Forty Years of his bearing Judah's sin, Ezek. 4.4, 5, 6. In which Chapter the Prophet shews, (1.) That Jerusalem would be besieged, and the Temple and City burnt, according to what Jeremiah had prophesied; the Truth of which the People beginning to call in question, there having passed now Five Years since their Captivity, with∣out any appearance, or likelihood of it; the Prophet is com∣manded, Verse 3. to lay siege to Jerusalem in a Type, to be a sign to them of the real siege approaching. (2.) The Prophet is also commanded, Verse 9. to lie 390 Days (appointed by God himself to signifie Years, Verse 6.) upon his left side, to bear, as in a Type, the Years of the Pu∣nishment of the House of Israel, or the Ten Tribes; And then is expresly commanded, to lie again (Verse 6.) on his right side, to bear the Years of the Punishment of the House of Ju∣dah, Forty Days, after he had accomplished the Three Hun∣dred and Ninety; thereby plainly shewing the Forty to be different from the Three Hundred and Ninety, and not inclu∣ded in them, as Interpreters generally make them, with plain Violence to the express Words of the Text. (3.) It is evident from the 13th Verse, that the penitential and course Dyet, prescribed to the Prophet, during the streight∣ness of the Siege, (a freer Dyet perhaps being permitted him the remaining Forty Days after it) is not only a Type of the Famine and Misery they were to suffer; but also of the de∣filed and polluted Bread they were to eat among the Gentiles, during their Captivity; which is there evidently referred to, and not only the Siege of Jerusalem. (4.) By the mention of the House of Israel, and Judah, se∣parately and distinctly from each other; and by God's assign∣ing a distinct Term of Years to each, is plainly intimated, that they are represented in this Vision, as in a divided state.
(5.) The Years therefore of their Iniquity, Verse 5. which the Prophet was to bear, must be the Years of their Iniquity, whilst they continued in a divided state; which can be no other then the Years from their first Division, and Idolatry un∣der Jeroboam, until the End of the Captivity some of them were then under; particularly referred to Verse 13. So that the Pro∣phet does here in a Vision shew them in Prophetical Days for Years, how long their Captivity should last; and that it should not be ended untill Four Hundred and Thirty Years were compleated, from the time of their Division and Idolatry, which was the Iniquity for which they were carried Captive, and for which he was to bear their punishment in a Vision; shewing the time from their Defection, to the End of the Captivity. Concerning which Prophetical and Symbolical Line of Time, it is also further to be noted: (1.) That the greater Number of Years of Punishment, are allotted to the Ten Tribes, because they were First in the sin, and deepest in the Guilt: Whereas the Two Tribes, because they walked2 Chronicl. 11, 17.12, 1. Three Years, after the Division, in the ways of David and Solomon, and were less, guilty then the other; have their punishment assigned them after the other, and that of a less continuance: And the Prophet, when he bears their Guilt, is commanded to lie on his right side, to shew the greater Esteem God had of them; whereas he was bid to lie on his left, when he bore the Iniquity of Israel; which being the less worthy side of the Body; thereby is denoted the less value God had for them. (2.) It may be observed, that this Number, Four Hun∣dred and Thirty, is made up of Two Numbers;
(1.) Of Forty, which is the time that the Children of Is∣rael were to bear the punishment of the Apostasy of their Fa∣thers, Forty Days, each Day for a Year, Numb. 14.33, 34. And, (2.) 390 7 2730 Of 390, a Number, which if multiplied by Seven makes up 2730 Days for Years; the exact Sum 390 40 2300 2730 of the 390, and 40 Days in Ezekiel, and of the 2300 Evenings-Mornings in Daniel: whereby is signified by the multiplying the first Term of their punishment by the Number Seven; that the Jews should lie under a State of punishment for their Iniquities, for 2730 Years; a multiplication of punishment by seven times, being the proportion of punishment settled by God, with re∣spect to his people, Levit. 26.18, 21, 24, 28. and that after the fulfilling of that Term of Years allotted to their bearing of their Iniquity, God would restore them to their Land, and remember his Covenant; according to what God hath pro∣mised Levit. 26.40-46. Whereby, the Extent of the 2300 days of Daniel, to the End, and to the last End of the indigna∣tion, Verse 19. and to the cleansing of the Sanctuary, is wonder∣fully exemplified. And now from hence we have gained a Line of Time of 430 Years, from Solomon's Death, to the end of the LXX Years Captivity, which is the first of Cyrus; which is made out also by Dr. Beverley, from a distinct Enumeration of the Reigns of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and the fourteen
Years assigned to the Visions of Ezekiel's Temple; and does not much differ from the Calculations of the latest Chronolo∣gers; who make this time to amount to 437, or 439 years at furthest; although they confess after all their Pains, that this Line of Time is very uncertain and obscure, for Rea∣sons collected byIntroduct. Chronol. ad Hist. Eccles. pag. 150-159. Spanhemius. And therefore amidst so much doubt, and difficulty, where can we find a surer rest then in Scripture; whose accounts of time will after all be found the most exact; and that, when Profane History and Chronology is most in the Dark, if we take in Prophetical Time, as well as Historical. And now having settled the beginning of Cyrus's Reign, or the Epoch of the Medo-Per∣sian Monarchy, we have obtained the beginning of the 2300 years, and withal a Line of Time from it, to the Cleansing or Justifying of the Sanctuary, i. e. of the Christi∣an Church Typified thereby, from all Idolatry and Antichri∣stianism, when the Holy Place, which is now shut, will ap∣pear open in Heaven, Rev. 11.19: Which Account stands thus: A. M. 5759 A.D. vulg. 1772. From the beginning of the Medo Persian Empire by Cyrus, to the cleansing of the Sanctuary, Dan. 8.13, 14. 2300 Which will end in the 5759th year from the Creation, and the 1772 year after Christ, according to the common Account. From which if you take Daniel's 75 years, you come to the end of the 42 Months, and the 1260 days; and so, by a regressive order, to the Epoch, or beginning of them at A.D. 437, as hath been already shewn on Paragr. 5. pag. 210.
All which is deduced by particular Accounts, and after a most accurate manner by Dr. Beverley, in his several Treatises, called Scripture Lines of Time; and stand as they are prov∣ed by him in this Order:   Years. 1. From Cyrus to Daniel's 70 weeks 75 2. Daniel's Weeks 490 3. The time between the Weeks and the 42 Months 400 4. The 1260 days, or 42 Months. 1260 5. The 30, and 45 Years of Daniel 75 Which amounts to years. 2300 3 And I will give Power [i. e. Commission and Ability of Testimony and Prophecy] unto my two 13 Witnesses [raised, and sent on purpose to testify to the Truth, and to denounce Judg∣ments against the Apostasy;] and they shall Prophesie [i. e. declare and Preach 14 against it, and foretel Judgments;] a thousand, 15 two hundred and threescore days [of years;] cloathed in Sackcloath 16 [i. e. in a Despicable, Afflicted, and Mournful condition.] 13 To Witness, signifies to give Testimony to the Truth, against Errors and Corruptions; as the word is used, Is. 55.4. John 18.37. Acts 26.16. and also to pronounce God's Judgments against sinners, as the word signifies, Malach. 3.5. And the Witnesses are Two; because Two Witnesses at least, were required under the Law, for confirmation, Deut. 17.6.19, 15. and to shew that a small number, but a sufficient one, should be made use of to confirm the Truth: But chiefly in Correspondence to the Types in the Old Testament; where, these Witnesses are generally Two: and accordingly God here raises up Two Witnesses, to Witness and denounce Judgments against the Idolatry of the Christian Church; as Moses and Aaron, did against the Idolatry of Pharaoh, Egypt, Balaam, and Moab; as Elijah, and Elisha did a∣gainst Baal, Ahab, Jezebel, and Ahaziah; and as Zeroba∣bel,
and Joshua were Witnesses in Babylon during the Cap∣tivity. 14 So the Word Prophesie signifies frequently in the New Testament: Although the Proper import of it here seems to be the Foretelling of the Encrease and Ruin of Antichrist, and of the Coming of Christ's Kingdom, to destroy him; which being the Future Events of this Vision, the Prophesy∣ing, or Foretelling here mentioned, must relate unto them; particularly to the Kingdom of Christ, the Chief Subject of all the Prophecies of the Old Testament; which being not to begin to come into Event until the Expiration of the 1260 Days; it is until then under Prophecy, as a Future State: And the Witnesses prophesie of it, not only in their Discourses and Writings, but by the mournful State they are in; which is also of it self a signification that Christ's Kingdom is under a Delay, a Sealing, or a Prophecy; which are words of like import. 15 These Days begin with the Forty Two Months of the Gentiles, and reach to the End of Antichristian Times, run∣ning parallel along with them; God taking care, that as soon as Gentilism came into the Church, there should be Witnesses raised up to testifie against it, and to instruct the people in the contrary Truth, by their Preaching, and their Sufferings. See num. 12. 16 This was the Habit of Prophets, when they denounced Judgments; particularly, of Elias, one of the Witnesses un∣der the Old Testament, 2 Kings 1.8. Zech. 13.3, 4. Matth. 3.4. And thus Mattathias, and his Sons, put on Sackcloth, when the Gentiles prophaned the Sanctuary, un∣der Antiochus, 1 Maccab. 2.14. 4 These [two Witnesses] are [or are signified by what, in the Anti-type is represented by] the two Olive 17 Trees [Zach. 4;] and the two Candlesticks 18 [o  Rev. 1.20;] 19 standing be∣fore [or Ministring unto] the  the Earth [Zach. 4.14]
17 The Types in this Verse are plainly taken from Zech. 4. And the Witnesses are called Olive-Trees, upon these Ac∣counts: (1.) Because they are to be anointed ones (Zech. 4.14.) or Kings and Priests in Christ's Kingdom. (2.) Because, as the Olive Branches (Zech. 4.12.) they em∣pty the Golden Oyl out of themselves into the Candlesticks, or Churches; That is, impart to them the Fruit of those Gifts and Graces which they had received from the Spirit of God, and were as fully replenished with, as an Olive Tree is with Oyl; Whereupon Christians are said to be anointed by God; and the Holy Spirit, and the Effects of it, are called, The Ʋn∣ction, in Scripture, 2 Cor. 1.21. 1 John 2.20, 27. (3.) Because the Witnesses were to perform the same Offi∣ces in the Christian, and against the Antichristian Church; as Joshua and Zerubbabel did for the Jewish, and against Baby∣lon, the Type of Antichrist; who is called a Mountain, Zech. 10.4. And according to the Type in Zechariah, the Wit∣nesses are two anointed, or chosen Servants of God, replenish∣ed with his Spirit (Verse 6.) who are to level the Mountain of Antichristianism (Verse 7.) and to finish, establish, and build up the pure Church (Verse 9.) and that out of small things, (Verse 10.) that is, small beginnings, and a Sackcloth or contemptible, and afflicted condition. 18 From hence it plainly appears, that the Two Witnesses are Two Churches, which are signified by Candlesticks in this Prophecy, Chap. 1.20. as Grotius hath most appositely re∣marked on the place: And amongst the Candlesticks, or Church Successions, the Office of Witnessing must needs be∣long to the Churches of Pergamus and Thyatira, Chap. 2. because they are the only Successions wherein Antipas, or Christ's faithful Antipapal Witness is mentioned; and are the Churches which were to witness against the Antichristian Ba∣laam, and Jezebel; as Moses and Aaron, Elijah and Elisha,
the Types of Christ's Witnesses, did witness against the Li∣teral Balaam, and Jezebel, under the Old Testament. 19 To stand before, signifies to be ones Servant, in Scrip∣ture Phrase: And hereby is signified, that these Churches served God purely (nothing but what is pure being able to stand in his sight, Chap. 14.5.) and continually; as the Angels do, who stand before him, to receive and obey his Commands, Chap. 8.2. 5 And if any man will [knowingly and wilfully,] hurt, [i. e. oppress, injure or hinder] them [in the course of their Prophe∣cy;] Fire 20 proceedeth out of their Mouths [i. e. the Efficacy of God's Word, and his Judgments and fiery Indignation, shall attend their Prayers, and their Preaching, Is: 4.4. Jerem: 23.29. Malac. 3.11.] and Devoureth their Enemies [i. e. convinces, or confounds opposers, Is: 44.26. Jerem: 1, 10.5, 14.] and if any man 21 will hurt them, he must [for it will certainly come to pass;] in this manner 22 be killed [by Spiritual, and not by Carnal Weapons Zech. 4.6.] 20 In this Verse there is a plain allusion to what Elijah did, 2 Kings 1. Whereby is signified, that God will certainly a∣venge them, and that according to the Threats and Judg∣ments they denounce by his Spirit, and according to his Word. 21 This Repetition assures the Certainty of the Event, ac∣cording to what the Scripture observes concerning the doub∣ling of Pharaoh's Dream, Gen. 41.32. 22 To wit, Spiritually (at the 8th Verse intimates, this Pro∣phecy is to be understood) after the manner that Prophets are used to destroy; that is, by denouncing God's Judgments, as Jeremiah, (Chap. 1.10.) is set over Kingdoms to root out, and to destroy; that is, to foretel, and prophesie their Destru∣ction. Compare Jerem. 8.7, 9. and Ezek. 32, 18.43, 3. Hosea 6.5. and Dr. Pocock on that place.
6 These [Witnesses] have power to shut 23 Heaven [i. e. to de∣nounce this Judgment, Jerem. 1.10.] that it rain not [i. e. that there be a Spiritual Droughth and Famine of the pure Word of God, Isa. 5.6. Amos 8.11.] in the Days of their Prophecy [Vers. 3.] and have power over Waters [i. e. People and Nations,] to turn them to Blood, [i. e. to embroil 24 them in Wars and Confusions;] and to smite the Earth [i. e. the Worldly and Antichristian part of it;] with all Plagues [viz. by preaching and denouncing them, Jerem 1.10.] as often as they will [denounce them, according to the Will and Word of God.] 23 A plain Allusion to what Elijah did, 1 Kings, Chap. 17, 1.18, 1 41. as in the next Words there is to Moses's turning the Waters into Blood, Exod. 7.17. 24 Which will be the Event of God's Word preached purely and efficaciously; not of it self, but consequentially, upon sup∣position of the sins and passions of wicked men, and the cor∣rupt interests of the Antichristian Apostasy; as our Saviour, who was the Prince of Peace, yet saith, that he came to send a Sword upon Earth, Matth. 10.34. 7 And when they shall 25 have finished their 26 testimony, the 27 Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit [i. e. the Antichristian Aposta∣sy, now in its Ascent, or Rise to the heighth of a Satanical Pow∣er and Kingdom, Chap 2, 14. 9, 1, 2. Chap 13. and 17, 8.] shall make War against them [i. e. oppose and persecute them after a more open and cruel manner than he had done before, Dan. 7, 21.8.9-12.] and shall [at 28 last] overcome them, [i. e. prevail and pro∣sper;] and [shall 28 afterwards] kill them [by Anathema's, and Persecutions and by 29 suppressing and extirpating the Professors of the pure Religion.] 25 This seems to be the most Natural Interpretation of these Words;  being often rendred by postquam inMatth. 9.15. Luke 14.8. John 8.28.
Scripture; and thePoli Synops. in loeum. Aorist of the Subjunctive Mood, be∣ing often put for the past Tense; and accordingly the Words are thus rendred, in the Vulgar Latin, the French, and other Versions. 26 They prophesie the whole 1260 Days, but their Testi∣mony is finished, before the Beast makes War with them; du∣ring which War they also prophesied; from whence it is evi∣dent, that their Testimony is some way distinct from their Pro∣phecy, and is to end before it. Now the proper Notion of prophecying in this Vision, relating to the foretelling of Judg∣ments upon Antichrist (Verse 5, 6.) and of what belongs to the Kingdom of Christ, by which he is to be destroyed; the Witnesses may prophesie, in that sense, when they are dead; that is, anathematized, and deprived of Church-Priviledges: and the greater their Persecutions are, the more remarkable is the prophetical State they are in; and even when they are li∣terally killed, they may prophesie, in the sense, that the Blood of our Saviour, and Abel, being dead, yet speaketh, Heb. 11, 4.12, 24. But Testimony, supposing an Ability to appear o∣penly, and to be heard, believed, and credited: the Testimony of these Prophets may be said to be finished, when they were excommunicated, and could not appear, and be heard any more, in the capacity of Witnesses, giving Testimony; but only in that of Prophets. 27 A Methaphor taken from Daniel, where Idolatrous Mo∣narchies and Kingdoms are represented byVid. Mori Oper. Theol. pag. 598. Grot. in Dan. 2, 31. 7, 3. Matth. 20.26. Beasts: And that the Idolatrous Roman Apostasy, or Pagano Christian Mo∣narchy is understood in this Prophecy by the Beast, will be more conveniently shewnOn Chap. 13. and 17. hereafter: In the mean while,
the Reader may consult Dr. Cressener's Learned and Judici∣ous Treatise concerning the Beast in the Revelation, where he will find this great Truth evidently demonstrated. From the. Reduplication of the Article in the Greek, it may be inferred, That the Beast was become Notorious and Famous; and from his being represented, as actually ascend∣ing, in the Present Tense, it may be concluded, that the Ac∣complishment of the Testimony was when the Beast was ; i. e. the Rising, or Ascending Beast, out of Satanical Depths, and the bottomless Pit, into a Throne of Su∣premacy, which was about 606. as hath been shewn on Chap. 9.1. 28 For all this was not done at once, but by degrees, and not until after a long War, and doubtful Combats; according to the Description of the Rise of Antichrist, in Daniel, who was at first a Little Horn, and then waxed Great, but did not prevail, but by degrees, so far as to magnifie it self a∣gainst the Prince ef the Host, and as to cast down the Truth to the Ground. 29 This is most properly the Death of a true Church; which happens, when it ceases to be what it was before, as to Out∣ward Church Priviledges and Profession; which is the visible Life of a Church. 8 And their dead Bodies [i. e. these Churches anathematized and suppressed;] shall lie [unburied;] in the 30 Street of the great City [i e. their Censures against them, and suppressing of them, shall be Publick, Open, and Notorious, through the whole Extent, and in the most conspicuous places of the Antichristian Jurisdi∣ction;] which 31 spiritually [i. e. in a mystical sense, 1 Cor. 10.4.] is 32 called [by the Spirit of God in this Prophecy;] 33 Sodom [for its Spiritual Uncleanness by Idolatry;] and Aegypt [for its Tyran∣ny,
and its innumerable Superstitions and Idolatries;] 34 where also, [or in which great City] our Lord [Christ,] was crucified. 30 By Street in Scripture, is meant, the Broad, Open, and publick places of Concourse, as the Word is used, Matth. 5.6. and Esther 6.9. Whereby is intimated, that some Churches in the most Conspicuous, and Eminent Places of the Roman Territories, (which is the City concerned in these Visions, and is called theChap 14, 8.17, 18, 18,. 10. great City) should be persecuted, and anathematized by the Apostasy; and that the Devastations made upon the Witnesses, should be publick, and in open view; and that they should be capable of being raised and restored, contrary to what the wicked are threatned with, (Job 18.17.) that their remembrance shall perish from the Earth, and they shall have no name in the Street. 31 From hence it clearly appears, that what is here deli∣vered, is to be understood in a Metaphorical sense, by way of Mystical Allegory; which was common then amongst the Jews, and which the Sacred Writers, especially the Apostle to the Hebrews, makes frequent use of. 23 Or is, in a Spiritual, and Mystical Sense; for to call, and to be, are frequently used promiscuously in Scripture. Al∣though I presume, the meaning of this place, given in the Paraphrase, to be the truest; for as Gog was prophesied of by the Prophets, under the Names of Edom, Moab, Levia∣than, and the other Chief Enemies of God, and of the Jew∣ish Church, as the Prophet Ezekiel expresly declares Chap. 38.17. So are the Idolatrous Enemies of the Christian Church, prophesied of, under the Names of Aegypt, Babylon, and the like, in this Book, and in the Old Testament. 33 Thus Jerusalem is called Sodom and Gomorrah, Isa. 1.10.
34 Christ was crucified at Jerusalem; which is here menti∣oned: (1.) To shew, that this Slaughter of the Witnesses was to be under the Jurisdiction of the Romans; Jerusalem being then under their Dominion, and our Saviour being Crucifi∣ed by their Authority: Upon which account his Suffering under Pontius Pilate, and his Crucifixion, which was a Ro∣man Punishment, are mentioned in the Creed. (2.) Rome is called Jerusalem, because it succeeded theMori Oper. Theol. 721, 728, Synagogue in its Carnal, Hypocritical, and Persecuting Temper; and is a City that killeth the Prophets and Witnesses of Christ; as Jerusalem of old was wont to do. (3.) Our Saviour is said to be Crucified at Rome, because he is crucified there in hisMatth. 25.40, 45. Acts 9.4. Members; to whom whatso∣ever is done, he imputes as done to himself: Whereupon he asked Saul, why he persecuted Him, when he persecuted his Disciples. And because the Apostacy Reigns there, which sin is particularly called, the Crucifying of Christ afresh, and the putting him to an open shame, Heb. 6.4-8. 9 And they [or some] of the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations [who shall be disposed to attend to, and take notice of this matter;] shall see [or diligently consider,] their dead Bo∣dies [i: e. the deplorable, and ruinous State of these desolate Churches;] three days, and an half [see num. 37.] and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in 35 Graves [i. e. to be buried in utter Ob∣livion, and to be in an irrecoverable condition, out of all hope of being restored, Ezek. 37.11-14. Hos. 6.2.] 35 The same Metaphors that are here made use of, are also used in the same sense by Ezekiel, Chap. 37.1-14. and by
Hos. 13.14. where by dry bones in an open Valley, and by dead bodies in Graves, is meant a hopeless condition, without the least expectation of Recovery. 10 And they that dwell upon the Earth [i. e. the more sensual and earthly part of the Kingdom of the Beast;] shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another [as in time of pub∣lick Joy, Hest. 9.19, 22. Nehem. 8.10-12.] because these two Pro∣phets 36 tormented [by their Reproofs, denouncing of Judgments, contrary Life and Conversation, and the progress of their Do∣ctrine amongst the people, Hos. 6.5 Judg. 16.6. Jon. 4.9] them that dwell on the Earth [i. e. the Antichristian People.] 36 As the Prophets, and particularly Elijah, one of the Witnesses of the Jewish Church, are said to trouble wicked Kings and People, 1 Kings 18.17, 18.21, 20. 11 And after three 37 days and a half, the Spirit 38 of Life from God entred into them [i. e. they were wonderfully revived, Ezek. 37.5, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14. Hos. 6.2.] and they stood 38 upon their feet [i. e. were in a posture of Service and Defence, and appeared with Courage and Readiness to perform their Duty, Ezek. 2.1-3.37, 10.] and great fear 39 fell upon all them which saw them [revived so wonderfully, to the Joy of their Friends, and the Consternation of their Enemies.] 37 It is observed by the Lord Napeir, that besides the Com∣mon Prophetical Day, which is taken for a Year in Prophecy; There is also a great and extraordinary Day in Scripture, which signifies not a Year, but any Time, to be determined by Cir∣cumstances; as the Word Day is used in the Day of the Lord, and in Man's Day. Now if Day signifie Time in Scripture, it may very wellLord Napeir on the Revel. Prop. 1.15. Mori Oper. Theol. pag 179. and his Appendix to Dan. pag. 284-293. signifie so in this place;
where it seems to be necessary, that Three Days and an half should be brought to comport with Three Times and a half, 1260 Days, and Forty Two Months: All which being of the same signification, there seems to be no reason, but that the Three Days and a half should be of the same Nature too; especially if we consider, that the Woman in the Wil∣derness which is the Church, or Witnesses, collectively taken, from whom it differs only in Notion, as the Body doth from its Members; hath Three Times and a half allotted her, as well as 1260 Days; to which there must be something por∣portionable in the Times of the Witnesses, which are her Seed, and are coaeval with her: and the Three Days and a half are of the same Extent with 1260 Days, and Three Times and an half; if you account the Days for Years, and then again resolve those Years into Days; denoting so many Years. But for the clearer stating of this Matter, it is to be observed; that here is a plain Allusion to the time of our Sa∣viour's Continuance in the Grave, which is said by the Evan∣gelist Matthew, Chap. 12.40. to be Three Days, although he lay in the Grave only one whole and entire Day of them. For he was not enterred until after Three a Clock in the Afternoon of the Day in which he was crucified, Matth. 27.57. and rose again in the Evening of the Lord's Day, according to the Reckoning of the Jews, who begin their Natural Day at Evening; or (to make use of those Heathenish Names of Days which we unnecessarily retain, that I may be the better un∣derstood) on Saturday-Night, just before the Morning of the Lord's Day; he being already Risen (as the Evangelists te∣stifie, Matth. 28.1. John 20.1) before Day, whilst it was dark, when the VVomen came to the Sepulchre, on the first day of the Week. So that according to our Reckoning, only a part of Friday, and that a small one, to wit, from Three in the Afternoon until Evening, when the Sabbath-day began, in the Account of the Jews; Friday Night, and all Saturday, un∣til
towards Sunday-Morning, are calledDr. Hammond on Matth. 12.40. and the Expositors on the 5th Article of the Creed. Three Days and Three Nights; i. e. Three Natural Days, in Scripture; altho they consist only of the middle one entire; and but of a part of the First and Last Day. And from hence it is, that a very SagaciousDr. Beverley's Vision of the Witnesses slain: See Alcazer in Apocalyps. pag. 439. Person, thinks that the Three Days and a half in this place, are to be reckoned after the same man∣ner; making them to be only proportionable parts of the 1260 Days, and of the Times, and a half of the Beast; as the Three days of our Saviour's being in the Grave, are only parts of the Three Natural days of his continuance under death; which proportionable parts he calls , or Season; intimate and pregnant Time, and Time within Time. For as Christ's Death was towards the End of the First day, so is the First Day of the death of the VVitnesses to be begun from about the End of the First Time (or 360 Years, reckon∣ed from A. D. 437. where he begins the First Time, as hath been shewn on Chap. 10. num. 13.) which he places at A.D. 787. when the VVitnesses were killed, and were dead, as to all o∣pen power and liberty of witnessing upon their being Ex∣communicated by the Second Council of Nice, after a long War about Images, called in correspondence to Prophecy, Iconomachia. And then (this being the First of the Three days and a half) in proportion to our Saviour's being in the Grave the whole Sabbath day; he makes the two whole Times, consist∣ing of 720 Years to answer the two whole Days of the VVit∣nesses unburied State; which will reach to A. D. 1507. with∣in Ten Years of the Reformation, begun A. D. 1517. when the half time, to which the half day is parallel, begun; as
hath been before shewn. Upon which (in proportion to our Saviour's Rising at the beginning of the third day) some of the Witnesses began to rise, and were called Protestants, A. D. 1524. which Name he thinks (although grounded on∣ly upon a particular Protestation, made by some of the Prin∣ces of Germany, against the Edict) might be designed, and brought about by an over-ruling Providence, to signifie, that they were VVitnesses against the Beast, or Protesters, just then ri∣sen, and appearing to give Testimony, by way of Protestati∣on, against the declining Antichristianism; there being a my∣sterious and fatal signification in some Names and Appellati∣ons, unforeseen by those that gave them (who might perhaps ground them upon idle and insignificant Reasons) which point out some Remarkable Events then unthought of. And from hence he dates the Rising of the VVitnesses, in the beginning of the Half time, or Half day; said yet to be af∣ter three days and a half; as our Saviour is said, Mark 8.31. in the very same words () to rise again after three days, although it were but at the beginning of the third day, and that very early, as soon as so much of the Night was past, as that it might be called the third day: although he thinks it to be a partial and an imperfect one, suitable to the dark Evening (for so it was, John 20.1.) of the third day, when our Saviour arose; and to the imperfections of Half time: During which, there are to be continual Advances of the Reformation, and Endeavours after a higher pitch of perfe∣ction; which yet shall not be compleat; nor shall there be an entire Resurrection of all the Witnesses, until the End of the last half time; which he determines at 1697. upon Rea∣sons given before; even as our Saviour, who was seen before only by some few, appeared not unto all his Disciples, until Evening, Joh. 20.19.
Now this Hypothesis is so agreeable to the other parts of this Vision; and so gracefully proportionable to the Type of our Lord's Death and Resurrection; and so strongly supported by several Remarkable Passages of History; as the VVar about Images, the Decree of the second Council of Nice, establishing them; and the Reformation appealing just at the Half Time, or Half Day; that I cannot but give my Assent to it; and that after much deliberation, and tryal of the truth of it. Only I cannot but also do so much Justice to the contrary Opinions of some Famous Men, as to give the Reader a View of them, and to place them in the best light I can. (1.) It is the Opinion ofMede's Works, pag. 483, 760, 766, 850, 924. Mr. Mede, (and of Bishop Ʋsher) That the whole Body of Protestants should be oppres∣sed, and totally subverted for a short space; and that towards the End of the 1260 days, when they shall be finishing, and compleating their Testimony. Which Opinion is refuted by Dr. Moor, in his Appendix to Daniel; and seems to me to be highly improbable, because it supposes, that the Witnesses had never been slaughtered before nor lain dead in the Streets of the Apostate City; which is utterly contrary to all Hi∣story. (2.) Monsieur Jurieu, and other Famous and Judicious Persons, have thought that the Churches of Piedmont, and of France, are the Two Witnesses; and have accordingly remar∣ked several things relating to their Rising after three years and a half. Concerning which Opinion these following things may be observed: (1.) That these Two Churches are of a very Ancient Ori∣ginal, probably planted by Apostolical Men in the First Ages
of Christianity; the former being the Remains of that part of the Churches of the Diocess of Italy, which were under the Bishop of Turin; who are commonly called the Waldenses: and the latter (not called Albigenses, until after the Council at Alby in Languedock, A. D. 1178.) being the Successors of the Ancient Churches of Gaul. For which see Learned Mr. Al∣lix's Accounts of those Two Churches. (2.) These two Churches have maintained from the begin∣ning their IndependencyAllix. Du Pin de antiq. Eccles. Disciplin. pag, 23. 27. 82-96. from that of Rome; and have witnessed in all Ages against the ApostasyAllix Remark. on Albig. Chap. 19. on the Church of Piedm. pag. 188. 207-210. 286. Mede's Works, 517, 721. 722. Usher de Succession. Eccles. pag. 78. from the begin∣ning of it; always asserting the Pope to be The Antichrist; and attributing to him the Characters of him given in this Prophecy, of which they were diligent Readers: Upon which Account alone, their Adversaries having nothing else to ob∣ject against them, they were severely persecuted; becoming thereby after a most remarkable manner, Antipas, Christ's faithful Martyr, and Witness against the Papal Corrupti∣ons. (3.) These faithful Churches were placed by Providence, like Candlesticks on a Hill; being situated, as Mr. Allix re∣marks, amongst the Alps, and Pyraenean Mountains, that they might be exposed to the view of Four or Five Kingdoms all at once; one of them being planted in Italy, the very Seat of the Beast; and shining there (according to their own Motto and Device) as a Light in the midst of the Aegyptian darkness of the Apostacy surrounding them; and the other possessing the Southern parts of France, that it might the better convey the Purity of the Gospel into Spain, over the Mountains, and
into England, and other places from the Sea-Coasts; which was actually performedAllix's Remaaks on the Albig. pag. 222-237. by them with great success; some Remains of their Doctrine continuing in Spain until the times of the Reformation; and the Lollards, and the Followers of Wickliff, in England, having been instructed by them. (4.) As no Churches can shew a fairer Account from the most early times of faithful VVitnesses against the Apostacy; so can none parallel the Persecutions they have undergone from the Papacy; or pretend to a better Title, to prophecying in Sackcloath, for 1260 Years, being warred with by the Beast, killed by him, and lying dead in his great City, than they can, Insomuch, that although the Title of Witnesses may be justly given to all the other Bodies of Christians, who have testi∣fied through all Ages of the Church, against Antichristian Cor∣ruptions; yet they must be confess'd to have the Preheminence upon many Accounts: but especially by reason of their Visi∣bility, and uninterrupted Succession from the Times of the Apo∣stles; their Constancy, Zeal, Courage, and Success (most Na∣tions having received the purity of the Gospel from them) their Sackcloath, and mournful condition; and their dreadful and un∣parallell'd sufferings from the Papacy; under which they are still in a state of Death. (5.) But although these Churches are the most Eminent, and most Conspicuous Body of Christians, concerning which it can most properly be said, that they have prophesied, as Can∣dlesticks, or Churches, regularly, and orderly constituted, in a continued Succession of Pastors and People; and that by emptying the Oyl out of themselves into other Churches; most of which owe the Reformation to them: Yet they are not the only Body of Christians which are to be accounted
VVitnesses; and of whom it may be said, that they shall pro∣phesie 1260 Days. For the Albigenses, or Churches of Gaul, are accounted one of the Witness-Churches; which yet can∣not shew an orderly, continued Succession from the begin∣ning of the Apostacy; which is clear, and uninterrupted on∣ly in the Succession of the Churches of Piedmont: And all the faithful Christians in the Communion of the Apostacy, but not of it, who have, through the Succession of all Ages, witnes∣sed against it; are to be accounted Witness-Churches; that is, States or Successions of Faithful Witnesses, as Church is used in the Vision of the Church-Prophecy. For by the Two VVitnesses are meant (as appears from the Notes on Chap. 2.12-29. and on Chap. 11.4. num. 18.) in general, Two Successions of Faithful Christians, witnessing from the Beginning of the Apostacy: the one in the Commu∣nion of it, typified by Pergamus; the other in a distinct Com∣munion from it, typified by Thyatira, the Emblem of those pure Reformed Churches which are under the power of Anti-christian Princes; and are not Established by Laws, and maintained by Reformed Magistrates, as the Sardian, and Phila∣delphian Churches are; which rose out of the other Two Suc∣cessions at the beginning of half Time; and are still Witnes∣ses; but VVitnesses risen to an imperfect State; altho under Re∣formed Princes: Whereas the other are Witnesses still lying dead in the Streets of the City, as the French Churches do: or else risen only to some Favour and Protection; but with∣in and under the Dominion of Princes of the Apostacy; as the Churches of Piedmont. For during the space of Half Time, until the Three Years and a Half are fully ended; many of the Witness-Churches may lie dead; and none will be raised to a perfect State by the Spirit of Life from God. But as for those Churches of the Reformation, who are under Reformed States; they being already raised to Life, cannot again return to Popery, or be utterly extinguished by it; because they having been raised by Christ, cannot die again:
Only as to whatsoever remains of Antichristianism, may be in any of them. (6.) GodAlcazer in locum, pag. 420, 421, 439. hath ordained, that the Persecutions of wick∣ed and Antichristian Tyrants should sometimes end after three Years and a half; in congruity to the three times, and three years and a half of the continuance of Antichrist; and to the Resurrection of our Saviour after three days; this being the time in which the Church may have hope of deliverance, ac∣cording to the Type of Christ's deliverance from the Grave; a longer continuance of Persecutions being apt to make the Church despond; which expects (according to Hosea 6.2.) a Revival and Resurrection on the third day; and is out of ordinary hopes, if it last a day longer; as Martha despair∣ed of the Revival of Lazarus, because he had been dead four days. And thus it is observed, thatGrot. in Dan. 7.25. Antiochus, a Type of Antichrist, oppressed the Jews for three years and a half; and that the Persecution underAlcazer, pag. 420, 421. Nero, and that inPoli Synops. in Apoc. 11.19. Eng∣land under Queen Mary, and in the Netherlands under Duke D'Alva, lasted for the same space of time: That it was muchJurieu's Pastor. Let. Tom. 3. Let. 21. about that time from the Coronation of the late King James, to the Arrival of King William into England; and from the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, October 12/22, 1686. unto Their Majesties Coronation, April 11/21, 1689. when a Spirit of Zeal and Courage entred into the Protestants of France; That it was about that time, from Tyrconnel's en∣tring upon the Government of Ireland, Feb. 6, or 12. 1686/7. unto his Majesties signal Success in Ireland, in July, and August 1690. And (lastly) that the Protestants of the
ValleysSee Monsieur Jurieu's Pastoral Letters. An account of the Vaudois, Printed at Oxford, A. D. 1688. Peter Boyer's History of the Vaudois, Printed at London, 1692. The History of the Negotiation between the Duke of Savoy, and the Countrey of Switzer∣land, Printed at London, 1690. Lettres sur les Matieres du Temps. Tom. 3. Pag. 198. of Piedmont returned to their Countrey at the precise Term of Three Years and an half, after their total dis∣sipation. For by an Edict dated Jan. 31. 1686. their Reli∣gion was forbidden upon pain of Death, their Churches were ordered to be demolished, and their Ministers to be banished; which Edict was published in the Valleys, April 11. and was put in Execution by the help of French Troops, who attack∣ed them on the 22d of the same Month, and totally subdued them in the following Month of May; when many of those poor people were killed, and barbarously slaughtered; and the misera∣ble Remainders of them, were permitted to depart; who after a tedious March in the depth of Winter, arrived at Geneva the December following of the same Year 1686. But about three years and a half, after their dissipation (they having in the mean while, been kindly received by their Neigbours of Switzerland, Geneva, Holland, and others; and not suffer∣ed to be put in Graves by the Popish Nations round about them, who appeared in their Favour) All on a sudden, they took an Ʋnanimous Resolution of returning into their Coun∣trey; and that at first against the Advice of their Friends, who altogether despaired of their Success. And according∣ly, about the beginning of September, 1689. they passed the Lake of Geneva secretly, and without the knowledge of that Government; entred into Savoy with their Swords in their hands, recovered their Ancient Possession, and established themselves in it by the Month of April 1690. notwithstand∣ing the Opposition of the Troops of France and Savoy; Of whom they killed great Numbers, with an inconsiderable Loss
to themselves, who were but a few, in comparison of their E∣nemies. Upon which the Duke of Savoy finding them to be encouraged and assisted by Forreign Princes, recalled the rest of them, and re-established them by an Edict dated June 4. 1690. with Liberty for the French Refugees to return with them; three years and a half after their total dissipation, in the End of October 1686. For although they were not E∣stablished by the Civil Power, until the beginning of June, a Month after the Expiration of the three years and a half; yet they had regained their own Possessions, and expelled the Strangers out of them by April; and had received great As∣sistance in May, just at the End of the forementioned term of Years. Now although I must confess that there are many things ve∣ry much to be taken notice of in this Account; yet it can∣not be the Resurrection here pointed at: because the Sister Witness Church of France, still lies desolate, and dead in the Street of the great City; and what hath already been perfor∣med in Favour of the Waldenses, comes so much short of what may be justly thought to be meant by the Resurrection here foretold, that I cannot look upon it, but as a Providen∣tial Congruity (if I may so call it) and a Pledge and Earnest of a much greater Life, and that of a more spiritual Nature than what hath yet happened unto them: which I pray, hope and humbly believe, upon Prophetical Grounds, in which I trust God has graciously assisted me, not to be far off. 38 This is plainly taken from Ezekiel's Description (Chap. 37.) of the Restauration of the Jews from Babylon, and of what will come to pass at their final Restauration, of which the former was but a Type. Whereby is signified, that God shall extraordinarily revive the Witnesses which are in a dead condition, and mightily assist the Churches which are al∣ready raised, to imperfect degrees of Life, Gifts and Gra∣ces; and so are consequently still in a Sackcloath and mourn∣ful
Condition, for the continuance of Judaism, Paganism, and Antichristianism in the World, and the Imperfections of its own State: so that they shall be seen, and taken notice of by all; as standing upon their Feet: That is, as being in a sted∣dy Posture of Self Subsistence and Defence; and that after an Eminent, and most Conspicuous manner, Zech. 14.4. 39 For they shall stand upon their Feet, an exceeding great Army; according to what is prophesied of the Jews, Ezek. 37.10. 12 And they [i. e. the Witnesses standing upon their Feet in a Posture of readiness, and Preparedness;] heard a voice from Heaven 40 [i. e.] had an extraordinary call, and a Divine im∣pulse;] saying unto them, come up hither [unto a state of Securi∣ty, Purity and Glory;] and they ascended up to Heaven 41 [i. e. en∣joyed a pure, and Holy Church-State;] in a [bright, Matt. 17 5. Acts 1 9.] cloud [i. e. in Glory;] and their Enemies 42 beheld them [i. e. their great change and advancement was visible and notorious to all, even to the Antichristian Apostasy.] 40 From hence, and from what goes before, it is mani∣fest, that this will be performed after an extraordinary man∣ner, by the more immediate power and assistance of God; from whom the Spirit of Life came, and all the Preparations and Abilities for the performance of this great Action. 41 Their Church State is called Heaven, in opposition to the Antichristian one, which is called Earth, and the World; and because of the security from Persecution, which should attend it; and the Purity of its Doctrine, and the Holiness of it, and its Professors; and the Glory, Honour and Esteem it was to be in amongst Men; especially Supreme Powers, who are deno∣ted by Heaven in this Prophecy, Rev. 12.4. And a pure Church-State is called Heaven, because it is a Re∣semblance of the Kingdom of Heaven, as it shall be upon Earth; and is an Exemplar of what is actually decreed, per∣formed and represented in Heaven in behalf of it, before the
Throne of God; as appears from Chapters Fourth and Fifth. 42 Here, as well as in what goes before, is a manifest Allusi∣on to the Circumstances of the Ascension of our Saviour; but with this difference, that only the Apostles, or chosen Witnesses beheld Christ's Ascent; but here, even the Enemies of the Witnesses are to testifie it, it shall be so Notorious and Convin∣cing to all. 13 And the same hour [i. e. about the same time, but after their ascent, Chap. 8.1. Num. 11. Chap. 9.15.] was there a great * Earthquake [i. e. a commotion, and suddain change of thing, in the World, and especially in the Apostasy 43;] and the 44 tenth part of the [great] City [i. e. of the Roman Antichristian Kingdom, ver. 8. chap. 17.78] fell [by the com∣motion, change, or Earthquake;] and in the Earthquake were slain 45 of Men seven thousand: and the remnant [or the remaining successions of Men to the Kingdom of Christ. See chap. 2, 24. 3, 2.] were affrighted [at these Judgments;] and gave 46 Glory to the God of Heaven [alone; and not to Saints and Images as had been before done.] * As there was at our Saviour's Death, and after his Resur∣rection, Matth. 27, 51.28, 2. 43 Which is called Earth in this Prophecy. 44 By , may be meant, (1.) The Tenth part of the City;  being understood: and then it may denote Rome, as under the Papacy; which Mr. Mede supposes to be the Tenth part of Old Rome: or ra∣ther because it is doubted, whether Mr. Mede's Dimensions of Old and Modern Rome, be exact; some One most Notable Kingdom of the Ten, into which the Western Roman Empire was divided; as is observed on Chap. 17. Whereby the Kingdom of France may most peculiarly be denoted; which was the Tenth part of the City; that is, the last of those Ten Kingdoms which arose out of the Ruines of the Roman Em∣pire, and gave their Power to the Beast; as may be seen in
the Catalogue of them, given by the Judicious and Learned Author of the Book dePag. 17. Excidio Antichristi. Or, (2.) By the Tenth of the City, may rather be meant the whole Papal Jurisdiction; called, the Tenth, because it is symbo∣lized in Prophecy by Ten Toes, Ten Horns, Ten Kings, united under the Papacy; as will be shewn on Chap. 17. For , may signifie, not the tenth part of the City, but the , or Decem-Principality, the State of the Antichristian Jurisdiction, or City, after it came to have Ten Kings; as , Chap. 6.8. signifies not the fourth part of the Earth, but the fourth Earthly Kingdom, or Mo∣narchy; which is a Sense of the Phrase more comprehensive than the former, and more suitable to the symbolical Genius of this Prophecy. And it is said to fall; that is, to be ruined and destroyed in the Commotion; as Babylon is said, by the Pro∣phets, to be fallen, or destroyed. 45 In the Greek it is, were slain Names of Men seven thou∣sand. By Names of Men (as Dr. Moor observes) may be meant Titles, Dignities, Offices, and Orders of Men, by which they are named, and distinguished; or the Men themselves, who were Men of Name or Repute, upon those, and such like Accounts; as Vile or Base Men, on the contrary, are called, Men of No Name, Job 30.8. And by seven Thousand of them being slain, is meant, that there shall be a Perfect, Total and Solid Overthrow of the Popish Hierarchy and Jurisdiction; which shall entirely be slain, or cease to be what it was be∣fore; which is signified by Seven, a Perfect Number, multipli∣ed into a Thousand, a Cubical, Solid Number: as 1 Kings 19.17, 18. from whence this Expression is taken, God saith, that he had seven thousand left in Israel; That is a perfect Number
of pure Worshippers, reserved entire in secret. See Notes on Chap. 1, 4. 7, 4, 5. 9, 5. 20, 4. 46 To give Glory to God, is to confess their Faults, and ac∣knowledge the Righteousness and Justice of God in his Punish∣ments, as Achan did, Josh. 7. 19, 20. and Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.34-37. and thereupon to Honour and Worship him after his own manner; and to forsake their former Idolatry, Rom. 1.21, 25. 14 The second Wo 47 [of the sixth Trumpet, viz. Turkish Maho∣metism, chap. 8, 13, 9, 12] is past [already;] and behold the third 47 Wo [viz that of the sevenh Trumpet upon Antichri∣anism, chapters 14.15.16.] cometh quickly 47 [into event, and execution, after the second is past; upon the sounding of the seventh Angel, chap. 10, 7. 11, 15.] 47 The First Wo is that of the Locusts, or Saracens; the Second of the Horsemen of Euphrates, or the Turkish Mahome∣tans; the Third is the Wo of the seventh Trumpet, or Angel up∣on Antichristianism; which is largely related in some of the following Chapters. And in this Verse is plainly asserted, (1.) That during, or rather after the Earthquake, and the Effects of it, upon the Ascent of the VVitnesses into Heaven; the second Wo, or Turkish Mahometism should pass off; and that more particularly from the Grecian Churches, and their Empire, or Imperial Seat: For it is here said, after the Visi∣on of those Events, that the second Wo is past; that is, it was then past in Vision; and consequently was to pass off in the Event and Completion at the time immediately following the fulfilling of the foregoing Vision. (2.) That the Third Wo of the seventh Angel upon Anti∣christianism, was to follow quickly, upon the passing off of the second VVo; that is, upon its ceasing to be a Wo, or a Scourge to Antichristianism; for which End it was design∣ed
by God: who will then inflict Woes of another Nature upon them. And (3.) That the Effects of the seventh Trumpet shall not take up any long time in their accomplishing; but shall be performed with speed, and of a sudden; which may per∣haps be the meaning of : for, as a Judicious Per∣son hath acutely observed, the sixth Trumpet comes immediate∣ly after the Fifth, as well as the seventh after the sixth; and therefore it cannot be distinguished from the others by its immediate Succession, which is common to them all; but by the speed of its Motions, and the quickness of its Events. 15 And the seventh 48 Angel sounded, and there were great [or loud,] voices] of acknowledgment, of the Kingdom of Christ, and of Thanksgiving for it;] in Heaven [or in the Heavenly pure state of the Christian Church, num. 41.] saying, The Kingdoms of this World, are becometh Kingdoms of our Lord [God the Father;] and of his [Son] Christ, and he shall reign for ever 49 and ever [Dan. 2, 44. 7, 14, 18, 26, 27.] 48 Seven is a Number of Perfection, and hath a reference in this Vision to the Kingdom of Christ; which is here fore∣told should come upon the sounding of the seventh Angel; and is to consist, not in destroying, but in reducing the Kingdoms of this World; that is, the several Civil Governments of it, to a Constitution suitable to Christ's Gospel, whereby they be∣come his Kingdoms; and in Christ's Reign over these King∣doms thus modelled; which shall be for ever and ever; That is, to the End of all succeeding time here upon Earth; no other Empire or Kingdom being to succeed it, 1 Cor. 15.24-29. But of this we shall have Opportunity to discourse more fully hereafter, or the three last Chapters. 49 Dr. Hammond on Matth. 24.3. and Luke 1.70. signifies in Scripture an Age of the VVorld, or
some eminent Period of it; more particularly that of the Jewish Church and State; and therefore by , seems here to be denoted the End of all the Periods, or Divisions of Time, consummated in that of the Messias; which is called the , VVorld, or Age to come, by the Jews. 16 And the four and twenty 50 Elders [or representatives of the Jewish Church, chap. 4. 4, 9, 10] which sat before God on their seats [in a posture of Authority, as being to reign with Christ; yet fell upon their Faces with great humility and reverence,] and worshipped God [upon this happy, and glorious change of things.] 50 Here is an Acknowledgment of Praise and Thanksgi∣ving to God; according to the usual manner in this Prophe∣cy; as hath been before frequently observed; and that made by the Twenty Four Elders, the Representatives of the Jewish Church; and by Voices in the former Verse, which perhaps pro∣ceeded from the Four Living Creatures who are the Voices, or Speakers in the sixth Chapter. 17 Saying, We give thee thanks, O God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come [i. e. the Eternal Jehovah;] because thou hast taken 51 unto thee thy great [or extraordinary] power [which hath been hitherto usurped by Satan, Mahometism, Antichistianism, and the wicked Powers of this World;] and hth reigned [visi∣bly, and powerfully in Truth and Judgment without any rival.] 51 Here is declared the Succession of Christ's Kingdom; as it is the manner to proclaim the Succession of Prin∣ces. 18 And [or although 52] the Nations [or Gentiles, that is the Paganizing Christians, verse 2.] were angry [for being cast out of the visible Church, which they had defiled and usurped, verse 2.
Psal. 2. and 99.1.] and [or but 52] thy wrath 53 is come [or is ready to be poured forth and executed upon the living;] and the time of the Dead [is come;] that they should be Judged [both good and bad according to their Deeds;] and that thou shouldst [in that time of Judgment;] give reward unto thy Servants the Prophets [or Wit∣nesses of the Jewish Church; or Ministers, Dan. 12.3.] and to the Saints [or eminently holy Persons of the Christian Church;] and [to all] them that fear thy Name [in every Nation according to the light and talents God hath given them, Acts 10.2, 34, 35.] small and great [in Office or Graces; who shall be rewarded according to what they have received, and the use they have made of it, Mat. 25.] and shouldst destroy them [of all sorts] which destroy [or corrupt] the Earth [by their Tyranny, Wickedness, and Antichristian Apostasy.] 52 In both these Senses the Article is used in Scripture, according to its Acceptation in the Hebrew of the Old Te∣stament, Gen. 15, 10.17, 5. Job 17.10. Jerem. 11.17. and in several other places. 53 This Verse relates to the Time of Trouble, mentioned Dan. 12.1. and the great Battle, Rev. 16. and the Resurrection and Judgment, mentioned in the last Chapters; which shall be par∣ticularly discoursed of in their proper places. 19 And the Temple of God [i. e. his pure Worship] was opened in Heaven [i. e. became visible in the Church;] and there was now seen in his Temple [which before was measured, sealed, and shut up, verse 2.] the Ark 54 of his Testament [i. e. the greatest Myste∣ries of Religion, which were before obscured by Antichristia∣nism, were most clearly made known;] and there were light∣nings, and voices and thundrings, and an Earthquake, and great hail [i. e. high, and clear Manifestations, and signs of Christ's King∣dom, Mat. 24 Rev. 4, 5.8, 5.] 54 The Ark of theNumb, 4.5, 20. 1 Sam. 6.19. Exod. 25. Testament was always kept se∣cret,
and covered, and was to be seen only by the High Priest once a year; whereby the Mysteries of Religion are Typified; which the Angels desire to look into, and were not Revealed unto them but by the Church, 1 Peter 1.12. Ephes. 3.10. Now these Mysteries, called here, the Ark of His, that is, Christ's Testament, or New Covenant, which were mightily obscured and perverted under the Reign of Antichristianism appear opened; that is, clear∣ly manifested unto all, Jews as well as Christians, now u∣nited into One Body; from whom also they had been for a long time hid, by Types and Veils, and a Judi∣cial Blindness, 1 Cor. 3.13-16. Rom. 11.25. Which Temple here opened, and the Ark seen it; are more fully and largely prophesied of by Ezekiel, from Chapter the 40th to the End of his Prophecy.
CHAP. XII. The Text. 1 AND * there appeared [in vision;] a great wonder [or prodi∣gious sign portending great things;] in Heaven † [or in the pure Primitive Church State;] a Woman [i. e. the Church, the Spouse of Christ, Isa. 54.1. 2 Cor. 11.2. Eph. 5.32.] cloath∣ed [or Environed] wich the Sun [beams, shining all about her; i. e. full of Communications of Glory, Purity, and Holiness, from Christ the Sun of Righteousness; Malac. 4.2.] and the Moon 1 [i. e. Antichristianism] under her feet [i. e. in comtempt, and in subjection to her;] and upon her Head a Crown 2 of twelve 3 Stars [representing the twelve Apostles, chap. 1.20.] Annotations on CHAP. XII. * The Beast having been but just mentioned in the for∣mer Chapter, Verse 7. the Holy Spirit doth here (according to the Custom of Scripture, which takes occasion from the bare mention of a thing, to give a larger Account of it) be∣gin to set forth who he was, and from whence he had his O∣riginal, and how he came to be so powerful, as to make War with, and kill the Witnesses; which Subject is prosecuted in this, the following, and the seventeenth Chapter. And here we may observe, that the Vision of the VVoman is Cotemporary with the Fifth Seal, Chap. 6.9. when the pangs of Persecution were at the heighth, the Child being brought forth in the Christian Empire, in the next Seal.
† Heaven (as hath been cursorily observed on Chap. 11.12. num. 41.) is not to be understood always in this Book only, and perhaps not primarily of the Church-State on Earth; but of the Archetype, or State of it now in Heaven; there seeming to be in Heaven a Kingdom of Christ, and an Heavenly Tabernacle and Sanctuary; which is an Archetypal, and Exemplar State of what is to be performed on Earth in the Church. Whereupon a Door was opened to John in Hea∣ven, Chap. 4, 1. and the Temple of God was opened in Hea∣ven, Chap. 11.19. Which Interpretation will be much strengthned by a due Consideration of Hebr. 9. where the Apostle distinguishes betwixt a VVorldlySee Grotius on Heb. 9. and Mr. Dodwell of One Altar. Sanctuary, and a Heavenly one; and calls the Jewish, a pattern of things in the Heavens. And there is also in this Book, a Consessus, Synedrium, or Seat of Judgment in Heaven, described in the Fourth and Fifth Chapters; before which, Satan as God and Prince of this VVorld, was (as it were) tryed, and after his Accusation of God's Servants, and Defence of himself, adjudged to be cast from the power of Godship, which he had in those parts of the World which are concerned in this Prophecy. Whereupon there is Joy in Heaven (verse 12.) upon the Brethrens being acquitted, upon Satan's Fall from the Rule he had by God's Ju∣stice over the wicked World; the Glory which accrued to God by his Wise and Holy Administrations, and the present Ad∣vance of Christ's Kingdom: Upon the increase of which, the Saints may receive increase of Glory in that Heavenly Taber∣nacle which shall come down from Heaven in the New Jerusa∣lem State. 1 Worldly things, because of their Mutability, may be re∣prseented
by theSee Mr. Mede on this place; and Pag. 613. Poli Synops. in Gal. 4.3. Coloss. 2.8, 20. Moon; the lowest of the Planets, and nearest to the Earth: Paganism also (one and the same Sym∣bol having divers significations in Scripture, as Grotius ob∣serves on Heb. 9.11.) may be very well signified by it; but Antichristianism is here chiefly intended, the main Subject of these Visions; denoted by the Moon, because of the Paganism it introduced into Christianity; whose Idolatrous Rites were Works of the Night, or of Darkness, of which the Moon is the Governess; and whose Festivities depended upon the Motions and Aspects of that Planet, as hath been already observed on Chap. 11. num. 12. And by the Moon's being here under the Sun, as it is when it Eclipses it; seems to be pointed out the critical time of this Vision; viz. that it was when the pure Apostolical Church, typified by Ephesus, was about to leave its first Love; and to receive aCompare Luke 21.24. with Rom. 11.12, 25. , a Deminution or E∣clipse, from the increasing Apostasy; for the Lustre of the Christian Church of the Gentiles, was diminished upon the coming in of the Apostasy; and is not to have its , or Full Light of Graces, Knowledge, and Converts, until the Paganizing Times of the Gentiles, in the Antichristian Aposta∣sy, are fullfilled. 2 To shew, that the Apostolical Doctrine is the Chief Orna∣ment, Crown and Glory of the Church: Thus the Word Crown is used, Isa. 28.5. Phil. 4.1. 1 Thes. 2.19. And in this Verse there is an Excellent Description of the pure primitive Church, enlightned and adorned by Graces, Gifts, and Com∣munications from Christ; and with the pure Apostolical Do∣ctrine; but yet capable of having its Light eclipsed by Anti∣christianism, rising from under its Feet; and of having its
Crown of pure Gold fall from off its Head; except Christ hold it in his Right Hand, Chap. 1.16. 3 Hereby is signified, that the Church was Apostolical; the Twelve Apostles being represented by Twelve Stars, because they enlightned the Church, and were constant, and sixt in their Doctrine; not variable and unconstant, as the Moon is in its Appearances and Motions; whereby it is the fitter Type of Antichristianism. See the Notes on Chap. 7. 4, 5. and 21.15-21. And perhaps the Twelve Stars may be symbolical of the Twelve Tribes, as they shall be in the New Jerusalem State; Predicted and Typified by this State of the Church: as the Glorious Kingdom of Christ is by the Christian Em∣pire. 2 And she [i. e. the Church;] being with 4 Child [i. e. very Fertile and Fruitful with true Christians, Is. 54, 1.60, 22.66, 8. Ezek. 16.20] cried, travailing in Birth, and pained to be delivered [i. e. laboured with her utmost endavours, to bring forth, set up, and propagate Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 66.7. Gal. 4.19.] 4 The Metaphors in this Verse are chiefly taken from Isai∣ah's Description of the Perfect Church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles united into One Body, as it shall be in Christ's King∣dom, Isa. 66.5-24. 3 And [whilst the Women was in Travail;] there appeared an∣other Wonder in 5 Heaven, and behold a 6 great 6 red 7 Dragon [i. e. the bloody, and Persecuting Pagan Roman Empire of a great Jurisdiction and Extent;] having seven 8 Heads [or Forms of chief Government successively one after another. See Chap. 17. 9, 10.] and ten 9 Horns [or Kings, Dan. 7.20, 24. Chap. 17.12.] and seven 10 Crowns [or Diadems,] upon his Heads [noting the seven successive Forms of Government in the Roman State to have been Imperial and Supreme.]
5 The Dragon appears as in Heaven, because he was reputed as God by the Heathens; and was now worshipped, and in pow∣er in the Pagan Empire. 6 6 7 Pharaoh, Aegypt, and other Idolatrous and Persecu∣ting Powers and Empires, are represented byPsal. 74.13, 14. Is. 27, 1.51, 9. Ezek. 29, 3.32, 2. Dragons, in Scripture, and by Leviathan, and other monstrous Creatures; for so the Word translatedDr. Pocock on Mic. 1.8. Malac. 1.3. Dragons, signifies in general in the Old Testament: And accordingly the Roman Pagan Empire is set forth by a Dragon, because it was a Satanical Kingdom, shewing a Diobolical Spirit in its Persecution, Ido∣latry, Tyranny, and Unjust Enlargement of Dominion; Upon which also the Dragon is represented, as of a great Size, and red, or bloody: and because Satan, (called a Dra∣gon, or Serpent, from his tempting our first Parents in that shape, ver. 9.2 Cor. 11.3.) really influenced, and presided over that Empire, as a , or a Governing and Assist∣ing Daemon; and was indeed worshipped by them, when they sacrificed to their Idols, 1 Cor. 10.20. 8 Rome indeed stood upon seven Hills; which yet are not here meant, because Head signifies in Scripture, the Govern∣ing Part, Isa. 7.20. Dan. 7.6. 1 Cor. 12.21. and there∣fore by these seven Heads, are appositely denoted the seven successive Governments of the Roman State; viz. Kings, Con∣suls, Decemvirs, Dictators, Tribunes, Caesars or Emperours, and the Antichristian King, the seventh Head. See the Notes on Chap. 17. 9, 10. 9 Horns (as hath been shewn on Chap. 5.6.) signifie Kings and Kingdoms; and the Roman Empire is represented with Ten Horns, that it may bear proportion with the Description of it given Dan. 2.41. where the Fourth Kingdom hath the
Toes of a Man, which are Ten. See Chap. 17.12. 10 Crowns are an Emblem of Imperatorial and Supreme Pow∣er; and therefore the Ten Horns do not appear crowned, be∣cause they were not as yet in being as Kings, but were Sub∣jects to the Roman Empire. See on Chap. 13, 1. 17, 12. 4 And his 11 Tail [i. e. his Power and Subtility;] drew [after him, and reduced under his Power,] the third 12 part of the Stars of Heaven [i. e. the Potentacies and Governments of the world;] and did 13 cast them to the Earth [i. e. Subdued them;] and the Dra∣gon stood [watching, and ready, fierce and hungry, 1 Pet. 5.8.] before the Woman [or Christian Church;] which was ready to be delivered [of the Kingdom of Christ;] for to devour 14 her Child as soon as it was Born [i. e. to destroy the Kingdom of Christ as soon as it appeared.] 11 Some Dragons or Serpents, particularly those which are called Rattle-Snakess, have monstrous and prodigious long Tails; which are anMoor's Oper. Theol. pag. 601. Hammond on the place. emblem of a great retinue, and a long Military Train of Souldiers and Armies; the Tail also signifies in Scripture Subtility, and may here de∣note the Policy of the Devil, and his pretences to Miracles, Prophecy, Magick, and the like; whereby he corrupts and deceives the minds of Men. See Chap. 9.10. 12 By the third Part is meant the Grecian Monarchy, the third Monarchy in Daniel: whereby we have a remarkable Note of Time given us, viz. that it was now upon the point of time, in which the Seat of the Roman Empire was to be transferred from Rome, to Byzantium by Constantine; upon which it came to be called the third part: whereupon the Grecian Monarchy was cast to the ground, it's very Seat
and Power becoming thereupon Roman; ConstantineCave's Introduct. to the Lives of the Fathers, vol. 2. pag. 13. Rycaut's Pref. to the Lives of the Popes. com∣manding by a Law that it should be called New Rome, and having Peopled it with the best Families he could draw from Old Rome; and the Inhabitants of it being called Ro∣mans. 13 Here is implied that the fourth Empire Subdued all the rest, and bore Rule over all the Earth, after it had Subdued the Grecian Monarchy which stood in competition with it, according to what was foretold by Daniel, chap. 2. 39, 40. 7, 7, 19, 32. 14 This refers to the Persecutions which fell upon the Christian Church, by the Instigation of the Devil, and his In∣struments in the Roman Empire; especially to their last and most cruel Effort in the ten Years Persecution under Diocle∣sian; when the Woman was, as it were, teeming with a Glorious Church State in a Christian Empire, which was brought forth under Constantine; as a short Specimen, and imperfect Representation of the Kingdom of Christ; as hath been shewn on chap. 7.9.-17. 5 And yet [notwithstanding all his opposition, Psal. 2.] she brought forth a 15 Manchild [i. e. Christ reigned then as King, and Lord of his Church; and there was on Earth, a lively and manly representation of him, and his Kingdom for a short time, Psal. 2.7, 8. Is. 9, 6.66, 7, 8. Acts 4.23.-30.] who was to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron [i. e. was to have an universal King∣dom, Psalm 2.8-12.] and her Child was caught 16 up unto God, and to his Throne [i. e. Christ, and his Kingdom were advanced; and his Church was in a State typical of his glorious King∣dom, which yet not long continued, Psal. 110.1.] 15 Here the Kingdom of Christ is plainly set forth in Ex∣pressions chiefly taken from the second Psalm, which contains a Description of it; as all Interpreters agree.
And by the Man-child is meant, (1.) Christ himself; who is said to be brought forth, or born; because he at this time obtained, as King of his Church, a Conquest over Paganism, and a great increase to his Kingdom; whereby he was be∣gotten, in the Phrase of the Psalmist, Psalm 2.6, 7, 8. that is, the holy Child Jesus, was manifested and declared to be Lord and King. (2.) The Church, and Christian Empire under Constan∣tine, may be called, the Man-child; as Cyrus is called the Lord's Christ, or Messias, Isa. 45.1. because he was a Type of Christ; and as Christians are said to be Christ's Body, and to have Christ formed in them, Gal. 4.19. And if the Roman Empire it self may in some sense (as Grotius has well noted on Dan. 7.13.) be not unfitly called an Image, or Type of Christ; much more may the Christian Empire under Constantine (who was a greater Restorer of Christ's Kingdom than Cyrus was) be styled a Mystical Christ, and be an Emblem of his Glorious Kingdom on Earth. 16 Christ, after his Resurrection (which is called his Birth in Scripture) was taken up into heaven, as we also shall be caught up thither, 1 Thes. 4.17. where the same word is used; inso∣much that this Phrase is taken from Christ's Ascent into hea∣ven, and alludes to it: And its import may be, (1.) That Christ was then actually King of the Roman Hea∣then Empire, which he had newly conquered; signified by his being caught up to the Throne of God: whereby some Ascents of his Throne in the Heavenly Places, or Advancements of his Kingdom may be signified, in which he was installed and inaugurated at his Ascension, when he was caught up into Heaven. (2.) Hereby may be signified also the advancing of the Christian Religion to the Imperial Throne; as Christ was ad∣vanced at his Ascension to the Throne of his Father, at his Right Hand, Psalm 110.1. But as Christ was of a sudden ta∣ken
up in a Cloud, out of the sight of the Apostles, whilst they were looking on him (Acts 1.9.) so may also hereby be signified the short space of the continuance of the Roman Christi∣an Empire (Rev. 17.10.) answerable to Christ's being seen of the Apostles only for Forty Days, Acts 1.3: and the sudden de∣pravation of Religion, by a growing Antichristianism upon its advancement by Constantine; whereby in a short time the true Primitive and Apostolical Christianity was obscured, and could not be seen pure and unmixt; which (asAnd on John 1.1. Groti∣us has noted on the place) may be signified by being caught up to God, those things being said in Scripture to be with God which are invisible, and appear not unto Men. 6 And 17 [or but, yet it was not long before] the Woman, [or Church thus delivered from Persecution, and advanced in the Christian Empire;] * fled into the Wilderness 18 [i. e. was in a secret and obscure state and condition, in the midst of the en∣creasing Apostasy;] where she hath a place prepared by God [i. e. she is secured by him;] that they 18 should feed her there [or that she should be nourished, and preserved there after a wonderful man∣ner;] a thousand 19 two hundred and threescore days [i. e. Years. See chap. 11. 2, 3.] 17 When Christ was caught up to God, and the Heavenly State he designed became thereupon invisible; the Church soon retired into the Wilderness; i. e. into an obscure and in∣visible State too; as being bereft of that Presence and Power of Christ, which was necessary to advance it into that perfect and heavenly State which his Kingdom requires. Here the Flight which was after the War in Heaven, is mentioned before it, by a Prolepsis, or Anticipation, frequent
inGrot. in Gen. 1.27. Ecclus. 48.1. Scripture, and in thisSee Pererius on the Revelations. Grot. on Rev. 21.2. Prophecy; the Holy Spirit being wont to hasten to the chief point it is about, and to mention what intervenes of lesser consequence, afterwards; as is manifest from the History of the Creation; where Paradise, which was planted on the Third Day, is not described until afterwards, in the second Chapter; and the full and particular Relation of the Creation of Mankind, but briefly touched upon in the first Chapter, is deferred unto the second: which Figure is here observed, to shew, that the Man child, Christ's Kingdom, was not to succeed upon the Glorious Pre appear∣ance of it, Verse 5. and that the Church (the Woman) was to be in an obscure condition, and that immediately after her De∣livery; and that she was presently to prepare for her Flight, she being not to appear in Visible Glory, until 1260 Years after it. * So the Children of Israel went up in haste out of Aegypt, Exod. 12.31, 33, 39. 18 This Type is taken from the Children of Israel's sojourn∣ing in the Wilderness; after they had escaped out of the hands of Pharoah; who is expresly called (Psalm 74.13, 14. Isa. 51.9.) the Dragon, or Crocodile, lying amongst the Branch∣es of the River Nile, ready to devour the Israelites; as the Dragon here stood before the Woman, to devour her Child. And here the Paucity and Obscurity of the Members of the pure Church, upon the Growth and Increase of Antichristianism, after the Empire became Christian; is set forth by a Wilder∣ness state or condition; which is an obscure and retired, but a
safeSee Dr. Pocock on Hos. 2.14. one: to which Men betake themselves, when they are threatned, and pursued by Enemies; as the Israelites in the per∣secution of Antiochus (1 Maccab. 2. 28, 31.) when the Gen∣tiles had prophaned the Sanctuary, fled into the Mountains, and into the secret places of the Wilderness. And yet as when the Israelites fled from Pharaoh, into the Wilderness, they soon murmured, and apostatized from God; so was the Church no sooner delivered from the persecutions of the Pagan Empire; but the Antichristian, and Paganizing Apostacy began to in∣crease; amidst which yet the pure Church was preserved, al∣though small in Number, and in an obscure condition; as the few true Israelites were amongst the Numerous Apostatizing ones in the Wilderness; who were corruptedExod. 12.38. Numb. 11.4. by the mixt Multitude of Idolaters, who went up with them out of Ae∣gypt; as the Christian Church was by the Converted Pa∣gans. * This by a frequent Hebraism, may signifie no more than that she shall be fed, ot nourished, as the Phrase is explained at the 14 verse. But perhaps hereby may be meant the Two Wit∣nesses (from whom the Woman only differs as the Ʋniversal doth from all its Particulars, or the Body from its Members, taken collectively) by whom the Church may be said to be preserved and maintained because of their Preaching the Word of God, and distributing the hidden Manna; as the Israelites were fed in the Wilderness with Manna, and miraculous Food, by the Hands of Moses and Aaron, Two Old Testament Witnesses, Numb. 33.1. Psalm 77, 20.78, 52. 19 The Witnesses (chap. 11.3.) and the Woman have the same number of Days assigned them; as being not really dif∣ferent one from the other: only the Woman, or Church in
general, is to be understood as the Mother, and the Witnesses as the Seed and Children; begotten, as it were, in the Womb of the Church, in which they were Baptized and Regenera∣ted. And here it is fit to be observed, (1.) That a Day began first to be reckoned for a Year in the Wilderness. Numb. 14.34. whereby the like reckoning of a Day for a Year, in this place, is much enforced. (2.) That there were but just Forty Two Encampments of the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, reckoned up in the 33d. Chap. of Numbers; whereby may be fitly typified the Forty Two Months of the Gentiles, and the Twelve hundred and sixty days of the Woman (which differ only as Solar and Lunar time do one from another, as hath been shewn on the former Chap∣ter) sojourning together in the Wilderness; as the Few true Israelites did with the Numerous Apostatizing ones, in a latent, obscure, and almost invisible manner. (3) From hence also may be illustrated the Epocha, or be∣ginning of the Twelve hundred and sixty days, from A.D. 437. For as theExod. 12.40. Gal. 3.17. Israelites went out from Pharaoh, into the Wilderness, at the End of Four hundred and thirty years from the Promise, and the Covenant renewed by Sacrifice; so in cor∣respondence to its Type, may the Christian Church be well thought to have fled from the Dragon, Antichristianizing the Church; about the same time from Christ's coming to give the Promise of Salvation, and to enact the New Covenant by the Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross. 7 And there was War 20 [i. e. enmity and opposition, Eph. 6.12.] in Heaven 21 [and in the Christian Church and Empire;] Michael [i. e. Christ, Dan. 10.13, 21.12, 1.] and his Angels [i. e. the Christians in the Empire;] fought 22 against [i. e. op∣posed
and resisted;] the Dragon [i e. the Devil, and Paganism;] and the Dragon Fought [to hinder the progress of Christianity;] and his 23 Angels [i. e. the Pagans in the Empire.] 20 There has been always an Enmity betwixt the good and the bad in the Church, the latter persecuting the former; as Cain did Abel, and Ishmael Isaac; from whence the Apostle dates the Persecution of the Church, the Woman with her Chil∣dren, and the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.22-31. So that the Four hundred Years Affliction of Israel, Gen. 15.13. may be very well dated from about that time. 21 The Christian Church is vety appositely called by the A∣postle, Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem which is above, or the heavenly Jerusalem; by which also may be signified the Archetypal Church, or Kingdom in Heaven, mentioned on Verse 1. in the Administration of which, there is something like a VVar betwixt good and bad Angels; who are represented as fight∣ing in Scripture, Dan. 10.13, 20, 21. But here seemeth al∣so to be pointed out unto us, the downfall of Paganism in the Empire; which had its deadly Blow given it by Theodosi∣us the Great, as hath been before observed: Whence it also follows, that this War is Contemporary with the Times of Constantine and Theodosius. 22 An Expression taken from Dan. 10.13, 20. 23 Such were Licinius, Julian, Argobastes, and Eugenius, the Roman Senate, and all other Opposers of Christianity in the Empire. 8 And prevailed not [i. e. they were conquered and subdued;] neither was their place found any more in Heaven [i. e. Paganism was cast out of the Church and Empire, and lost all its power and Authority in it, as being adjudged by him that sitteth on the Throne, to have no longer continuance in it. See num. 1. and 21.]
9 And the great Dragon was cast out [of Heaven by Divine Sen∣tence; and out of the Christian Church and Empire; [that old Serpen [i. e. cunning and subtile, who had been used to deceit, ever since the time of our first Parents, Gen. 3.] called the Devil [i. e. the slanderer and calumniator of God to Men, and of Men to God;] and Satan [i. e. the Adversary and Accuser of Chri∣stians, Job. 1.9. Zech. 3.1, 2.] which deceiveth the whole World [into Idolatry, and Wickedness, 1 John 5.19.] he was cast out [of a state of rule, and dominion and reputed Godship in the Pagan Empire;] into the * Earth [i. e. into a mean condition in respect of his former state; and to rule in the Hearts of Earth∣ly minded Men, and of the Apostatizing part of the Church;] and his Angels [i. e. his Agents and Instruments;] were cast out with him [i. e. Paganism was destroyed in the Empire, now be∣come Christian.] * The State and Condition of the Dragon, under Anti∣christian Idolatry, may be very well express'd by his being cast from Heaven to Earth; because Polytheism, or the VVor∣ship of many Gods, being extirpated at the Overthrow of Pa∣ganism, he was no more worshipped as a God in the Empire; and the Worship of Saints and Angels succeeded to it, an Ido∣latry inferiour to the former; which being perfectly, and di∣rectly Satanical, was a State of things more agreeable to the Devil; which when he lost, he might very well be said to be cast from Heaven, to which the Pagans had exalted him in their Worship, to Earth; that is, to an inferiour sort of Au∣thority and Power in the VVorld, and an Idolatry less Diabo∣lical. 10 And [upon this Sentence, and Judgment obtained in Hea∣ven] I heard a loud 24 Voice [of praise and thanksgiving;] saying in Heaven [and in the Church thus delivered and exalted;] now is come Salvation [i. e. deliverance from Satan's Claim, Power and Kingdom as a God upon Earth, under the Divine Justice upon a faln World; and from Persecution;] and strength [i. e. the manifestation of God's Power in destroying his Enemies;] and the Kingdom of our God [i. e. the glorious advancement of his
Religion;] and the [manifestation of the] Power of his Christ [in advanceing his Church;] for the accuser of our Brethren [be∣fore God; and in the time of Persecution under the Pagan Em∣pire;] is cast 25 down [or thrown down upon the Earth;] which accused 26 them before our God day and night [i. e. was their indefa∣tigable and inveterate enemy, and false accuser.] 24 This Verse, and the following, contain an Epinicion, or a Song of Thanksgiving to God, upon the Conquest of Pa∣ganism; and theChap. 7. n. 23. and n. 1. of this Chapter. Appearance of Christ's Kingdom in the Empire, now become Christian; which yet lasted but for a short space before the Glory of it was Eclipsed by Antichristi∣anism, Chap. 17.10. Concerning the downfall of Paganism, see Dr. Cave's Lear∣ned Introduction to the Lives of the Fathers of the Fourth Cen∣tury. 25 A Metaphor taken from wrestling, as Grotius notes. And here we may observe, that when Idolatrous and wicked Men are cast out of Rule and Authority; it may be very well said, that the Devil is cast out; because he acts and governs in and by them. 26 Expressions taken from Job 1. and the 4th. and Zech. 3. where the Scripture, speaking according to the manner of Men, represents Satan as accusing good and pious men before God. Which he does, by aggravating their real Faults and Imperfections; and by exciting the Wicked Men of the World to raise False Accusations against them; as they Notoriously did against the Primitive Christians; see Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, Part 1. Chap. 1-4. But perhaps this Accusation may relate to Satan's appearing at this Judiciary Tryal; alledging the Faults of the Brethren, and demanding, that they might be delivered unto him, the
Executioner of God's Justice; which he might urge, was not yet satisfied. 11 And they 27 [i. e. our Brethren] overcame him [in this judi∣ciary Tryal before the Throne of God; and all his subtile arts, and powerful instruments, in the times of Persecution;] by the Blood of the Lamb [i. e. by Faith in Christ's Blood; and by his Me∣rits and Passion alone;] and by the word of their Testimony [i. e. by the Gospel which they Preached purely, and Efficaciously, and the Testimonies they had given under the four first Seals;] and [because,] they Loved not their Lives [no not] unto the Death [but despised them, and willingly and chearfully laid them down for Christ, and his Gospel's sake. Chap. 4. 9, 10, 11.] 27 In this Verse is shewn the Way how Paganism was over∣thrown; which is in a manner contrary to that which Anti∣christianism makes use of; viz. by the Blood and Merits of Christ alone, and not of Saints; by the preaching of the Gospel, and not by Ʋnwritten Traditions; and by the Christi∣ans chearful and patient Suffering, not by Resistance, VVars and Murther, Chap. 11.7. Although perhaps the Chief and Principal Import of this Verse, may be to set forth the Grounds and Just Proceedings of God against Paganism, and of the Victory here mentioned; which was obtained by the Blood of Christ, the great , and the Fundamental and principal Cause; who prevailed by his Blood to open the Seals, which were so many preparatory Judgments to this End; and by the Testimony of the Living Creatures, the Gospel-Ministry and Witnesses of the Four First Seals; and by their Deaths and Martyrdoms under the Fifth Seal, after which ensued the Ruine of Paganism under the Sixth Seal. 12. Therefore rejoyce ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them [i. e. ye Angels, and Saints, whose joy encreases, according to the advancements of Christ's Kingdom on Earth; and ye good, and heavenly minded Christians, which are faithful Members of the
Church now in an exalted state, although but for a short time;] wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth [i. e. the earthly minded, and Antichristian part of the Empire;] and of the Sea [i. e. the wicked multitude of the Empire, Jude 13.] for the Devil is come down [from Heaven, or his exalted State;] unto you [upon the Earth;] having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short 28 time [i. e. in respect of his former Reign.] 28 The Pagan Religion was overthrown by Theodosius the Great, and made only some feeble Efforts under Arcadius, and Honorius, and Theodosius the Younger, but with little Ad∣vantage: and therefore that being at an End, the short time here mentioned must be meant concerning the Antichristian Empire, which Satan knew was to have an End; and that in a short time, in respect of the several Thousand Years of his past Reign in the World, from the beginning of Idolatry. 13 And when the Dragon [i. e. the Devil;] saw that he was cast upon the Earth [out of his former Empire and Dominion;] he Persecuted * the Woman [i. e. the Church] which brought forth the Man-child [i. e. the Kingdom of Christ.] * Here the History of the VVoman is resumed; and the Persecution here mentioned, must relate to the Incursions of the Goths, and other Barbarous Nations, Chap. 8. because they are the only Persecutions which immediately succeeded upon the Dragons being cast upon the Earth by the Overthrow of Paganism: which Judgments, designed as a Chastisement by God, were intended by Satan (who stirred up those Na∣tions, by the permission of Providence) as a Persecuti∣on upon the Church: so that the Trumpets, (which are contemporary with this Persecution) were Divine Judgments in the Hands of the Angels, upon the Empire, and the Anti∣christianizing Party; but in the Designs of Satan, a Perse∣cution of the pure Church.
14 And to the Woman [i. e. the true and pure part of th Church;] were given [i. e. prepared by God's Providence, ver 6.] two 29 wings of a great Eagle [i. e. effectual means of a speedy and safe delivery from this Danger, notwithstanding all difficulties, and in despight of all oppositions;] that she might fly into the Wil∣derness [i. e. be in an obscure invisible condition, verse 6.] into her place [prepared of God, verse 6.] where she is nourished [or preserved,] for a 30 Time, and Times, and half a Time, [chap. 10, 6. 11, 2, 3, 9, 11.] from the face [or sight and wrath,] of the [very] Serpent 31 [i. e. the Devil, verse 9.] 29 VVings denote Flight in Scripture (Psalm 55.6.) and a great Eagles VVings, a swift and a safe Retreat, joyned with tender Care, Deut. 32.11, 12. Isa. 63.9. And here is an Allusion to Exod. 19.4. and Deut. 32.11, 12. where God tells the Israelites, that he had brought them out of Aegypt, as on Eagles VVings. Kings also, and Kingdoms, are represent∣ed by Eagles, and VVings inEzek. 17.3, 7. Dan. 7.6. Scripture: whence the two VVings of an Eagle may be here appositely put to denote the Eastern and VVestern Divisions of the Roman Empire (of which an Eagle is the known Ensign) which by supporting and advancing the Visible Church, secured also thereby the pure Church; although in an obscure and VVilderness-State in the midst of the growing Apostasy; as Wheat amongst Tares o∣ver-topping it; according to the Parable, Matth. 13. And here is also a Note of the Time when this came to pass; the most remarkable Division of the Empire being up∣on Theodosius's Death; when the Two Antichristianizing Di∣visions of it, by introducing a State of Christianity, which counterfeited the True one; so covered and hid the True Church under it; that the Enemies which Satan raised up a∣gainst
it, combated not True Christianity, but the counter∣feit of Antichristianism for it; which grounded its pretence to Grandeur on the very Glorious Promises made to Christ's Kingdom; and its Idolatry, on Honour for Christ and his Saints. Which made the Devil (who found that the Storms he had raised against the Church fell upon his own An∣tichristian part, the Church becoming soon invisible) to throw out of his Mouth (verse 15.) a Flood; thinking thereby to overwhelm her, wheresoever she was. 30 Upon this place it is fit to observe, (1.) That this is the very distribution of Time allotted to Antichrist, Dan. 7, 25.12, 7. Which was distributed after this manner, to shew the different States and Progress of Anti∣christ, who arrived not to his Kingdom but by Steps and De∣grees: for he was about One whole Time, or Three hundred and sixty Years, before his Kingdom was established, upon his pre∣vailing in the Iconoclastick War; and from thence continued about Two whole Times, or Seven hundred and Twenty Years, in a flourishing State of Supreme Power and Dominion; un∣til the Entrance of the Half Time, at the Reformation, 1517. when his Kingdom declined, and was in a broken and divi∣ded condition, signified by Half Time, which is called the dividing of Time, Dan. 7.25. See what hath been said on Chap. 10, 6. 11, 2, 3, 9, 11. and what is discoursed upon the Rise of Antichrist on the following Chapters. (2.) There being in the 1260 Days of the Witnesses, some Remarkable proportionable parts, called Three Days and a half; it is highly reasonable, that the woman in the Wilderness should have such a sort of Time allotted unto her; because she differs not from the Witnesses, but only Notionally, as hath been before observed. And therefore 1260 Days ha∣ving been allowed her at the 6th verse, it may be rationally concluded, that the Distribution of Time in this Verse, an∣swers to the Three Days and a half of the Witnesses; because
they are both of the same Extent; Three Times and a half be∣ing the same with Three Years and a half: and also because they may fitly denote the Time in which the Church in general (ty∣pified by the Woman) was narrowly preserved from Destructi∣on; whilst its Members, the Witnesses, were oppressed, and lay dead in the Streets. See the Notes on Chap. 11. 9, 11. 31 Serpents are noted by Naturalists to be quick sighted; and the Old Serpent is described as very subtile, Gen. 3. from whence we may conclude, that the True Church was now at this time so closely secured by God, that it escaped the sight of the Dragon himself, even when he took the Shape of a Ser∣pent; that is, used his utmost Craft and Subtilty, as well as Power; and walked about, seeking to devour her. And from hence also it appears, that Antichristianism had now so mightily prevailed, as to be praedominant; the Church being hid and overgrown by it, as the Wheat in the Gospel by the Tares; and that this was the very time when the Witnesses lay dead, as to Power, being anathematized and silenced; and yet prophesied in Sackcloth; i. e. in a Wilderness State and Condition; in which a Church was nourished and preserved by God, altho la∣tent, and almost invisible; the sealed ones being now closely secured, and the Worshippers retired into the inmost Recesses of the Temple; which are Symbols representing one and the same thing; according to divers Notions and Circumstan∣ces. For our better understanding of this Chapter, we may di∣stinctly consider the Woman, or Church, under these divers Respects: (1.) As Apostolical, during the pure state of the Church of Ephesus, Ver. 1. (2.) As in pain, and watched by the Dragon, that her Child might be devoured, during the Persecutions of the Church of Smyrna, Verse 2-4.
(3.) As Delivered of a Child under Constantine, Verse 5. (4.) As bereft of her Child, which was caught up to God, Verse 5. Whereby is signified, That Christ was not to ap∣pear long in the Glories of his Kingdom, at that time; but was to disappear after he had given but a short sight and glimpse of it. (5.) As persecuted by the Serpent stirring up the Barbarous Nations, Verse 13. (6.) As in a preparation to fly, when the Two Wings were given her, Verse 14. (7.) As fled into the Wilderness, Verse 6. and as bid there in an invisible State, during the closest times of her Wilder∣ness condition, called Three Times and a half, Verse 14. and Three Days and a half, Chap. 11. (8.) As persecuted by the Mahometan Inundation, Verse 15, 16. It may also here be fitly observed, That this Chapter con∣tains a plain Answer to the commonSee the Preface to Morney du Plessi's Mystery of Iniquity. Mr. Mede, Disc. 29.32. and pag. 649. And a Discourse of Bishop Sanderson concerning the Church. Question of the Ro∣manists; Where was your Church before Luther? For it was in an obscure state, sometimes more Visible than at others, and sometimes almost wholly invisible, amidst the Apostacy; as Wheat amongst the Tares. 15 And the Serpent [i. e. the Devil] cast out of his mouth 31 water as a flood [i. e. multitudes of Barbarous Nations;] after the Wo∣man [the Christian pure Church;] that he might cause her to be car∣ried away of the flood [i. e. to be destroyed in the common ruin.]
32 Water, as a Flood, signifies in this Prophecy, a sudden and violent Inundation of many People and Nations; which seem to be the Mahometan Nations, described Chap. 6th. be∣cause, (1.) They are said to be cast out of the Serpent's Mouth: by which the pernicious, and prevailing Imposture of their false Prophets Doctrine may be signified; whereby he deceived the Nations, as the Serpent did Eve by his Subtilty: Speech and Doctrine being compared in ScriptureProv. 18.4. Mede ou the place. to the deep and flowing waters of a Man's Mouth; and the Mahometans having been peculiarly described by their Subtilty, as well as their Power and Force, Chap. 9. 7, 8, 10, 19. (2.) Because this their violent and sudden Invasion, like that of a Torrent, or water as a Flood; was just before the Death of the Witnesses at the second Council of Nice, when the Wo∣man was flying into her closest, and most retired state; an∣swerable to that of the sealed, or secured from the hurt of the Mahometan Locusts, Chap. 9.4. for she was as yet visible to the Serpent, when he cast the flood after her; and was then fly∣ing into her invisible state: the Church being, as is plain from hence, sometimes totally over-spread with thick darkness; and at other times more or less Visible; as the Sun is in cloudy days, or the Stars in overcast Evenings, when they can scarcely be discerned, but by a piercing and stedfast Eye; or through Telescopes. 16 And the Earth [i. e. the corrupt, and apostatized part of the Church;] helped the Woman [by opposing this inundation;] and the Earth 33 opened her Mouth, and swallowed up the Flood which the Dra∣gon cast out of his Mouth [i. e. received, and suffered the mischeif of their invasions.]
33 These words are taken from Numb. 16.32. and allude to what has sometimes happened in Earthquakes, in which Rivers have been swallowed up by the Earth. And it may be obser∣ved, that it is not said, that the Earth swallowed the waters; (which might indeed denote the conversion of the Barbarous Nations, and their incorporating into the Apostasy) but that it swallowed up the Flood; whereby the Mischief of the Waters, or People, is more properly signified: which indeed fell se∣verely (as hath been observed on Chap. 9.) on the Idolatrous Apostasy, whilst the pure Church was sealed, or secured, and pre∣served from the hurt of the Locusts. 17 And the Dragon was wrath with the Woman [i. e. the pure Church;] and he went to make War [by means of the Beast, chap. 11 7. to whom he gave his Authority, chap. 13.2] with the [small] remnant 34 of her seed, [i. e. the Witnesses who became visible by separating from the Apostasy, chap. 11.] which keep the Commandments of God [purely and entirely without additions, and corruptions;] and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ [which is the Spirit of Prophecy, chap. 19.10. i. e. are Witness Churches chap. 11.3.] 34 The Seed of the woman are plainly the Witnesses (Chap. 11.) which small Remnant was warred with and killed, whilst the Church in general, or the Woman, was preserved by God
CHAP. XIII. The Text. 1 AND 1 [John] stood upon the 1 sand of the Sea, and saw [in Vision,] a [2 wild savage] 3 Beast [i. e. an Idolatrous, cruel and persecuting Body of Men, under a Chief Head;] rise up out of the 4 Sea [i. e. taking its beginning out of the Commo∣tions and Confusions of Nations and People, Dan. 7.2 3] having seven 5 heads [or Forms of Government, Chap. 12, 3.17, 10] and ten horns [or Kingdoms, Chap. 5, 6.12, 3.17, 12.] and upon his horns ten 6 crowns [or Diadems, to denote their Soveraign Pow∣er;] and upon his heads the name of Blasphemy [signifying that they were Idolatrous Governments, Chap. 2.9.] Annotations on CHAP. XIII. 1 The most proper place to receive a Vision of a Beast ri∣sing out of the Sea. 2 So the Word should be translated; for it is of a distinct signification from ; which also ought to be rendred Li∣ving Creature, and not Beast. 3 It appears plainly from Dan. 7.3, 17, 23. that this is the trueSee Grotius on Dan. 7.3. Mat. 20.26. Moor's mystery of Iniquity, Part 2. in the Word Beast. Scriptural Notion of a Beast in general.
4 This is taken from Dan. 7.3. where Four great Beasts, or Kingdoms, are represented as coming up out of the Sea, up∣on which the Winds had striven, whereby a Troublesome state of Affairs is aptly signified; out of which Empires and King∣doms have generally risen. See num. 6. 5 From hence it appears evidently, that this Beast is the Ro∣man Empire, which was under seven Forms of Government. See on Chap. 12, 3. 17, 10. 6 These Horns are the Kingdoms into which the Roman Empire was divided; as appears from Chap. 17.10. which are here represented as Crowned, to denote that this was the State of the Empire, under which that Division should come to pass; whereby it is distinguished from the State of the Em∣pire, given as Pagan, in the foregoing Chapter, where its Ten Horns are not Crowned. For although Prophecy, with Re∣spect to the Vision in Daniel, (Chap. 7.8.) generally repre∣sents the Fourth Beast, or Roman Empire, in its full and com∣pleat Portraiture, as well with Relation to what it was to be, as to what it actually was at the time of each Vision; yet that a distinction of the Times of its particular States and Conditi∣ons, might he the better observed, each Representation is ge∣nerally diversified by some particular circumstances relating to it: Whereupon the Ten Horns are represented as Crown∣ed, to shew, that this was the Beast with which the Ten Kings were to receive Power. From whence it appears, that this Beast is the Papacy, as is shewn on Rev. 17.12. which also rose out of the Sea, or out of the Confusions of the Roman City and Empire; when it was cast, like a burning Mountain, into the Sea, Chap. 8.8. It being plain fromMorney du Plessi's Mystery of Iniquity. pag. 81, 85. Heidegger. Histor. Papatus, pars 1. cap. 2. Bp. Overal's Convocat. Book, pag. 291, 292. History,
that the Papacy rose upon the Ruines of the Empire; which beginning with the the Invasions of the Northern Nations, about 400, we may well date its first rising out of the Sea, from about that time; whenEpist. ad Gaudentium, & in Prefat. ad libr. Didym. de Sp. S. where by the See thing Pot out of the North, he understands the Northern Nations. Jerom expected Antichrist; whomThis is confessed by Bellarmine de Roman. Pontif. 3. 5. See Mornay's mystery of Iniquity. Downham of Antichrist, B. 1. c. 3. Dr. Cressener's Append. to his Demonstrat. of the Apocal. he, and the Ancient Fathers believed should rise up∣on the Fall of the Empire; which they took to be the , or that which withheld the Man of Sin. 2 And the Beast which I saw was [in its Body,] like unto a 7 Leo∣pard [which represents the Grecian Monarchy, Dan. 7.6.] and his Feet were as the Feet of a 7 Bear [the Emblem of the Medo-Persian Monarchy, Dan. 7.5.] and his Mouth as the Mouth of a 7 Lion [which was the Symbol of the Babylonian, or Assyrian Monarchy, Dan. 7.4.] and the 8 Dragon [i. e. the Pagan Roman Emperours, Chap. 12. 3, 9, 13.] gave him [i. e. the Beast] his 9 power [i e. his Diabolical Arts and Forces to entice, and constrain Men to Idola∣try;] his 10 Seat [or Throne; i. e. his Imperial Seat at Rome;] and [his] great 11 Authority [Rule, or Government.] 7 7 7 From hence it appears, that this was the Fourth, or Roman Monarchy; because it is represented, as made up of the Three former; whose People and Nations it conquered, and out of whose Ruines it grew; and because it had all the evil Qualities and Properties of Subtilty and Cruelty, which are thought to beSee the Interpreters on Daniel 7. signified by these Beasts: which Fourth Beast having no shape  Daniel; has here one given it, in which the Parts and Shapes of the Image, and the Beasts in Daniel, are united into one Fourth Beast. Only
it is to be observed, that the Order of the Parts of this Beast is contrary to that in Daniel; the Leopard being placed first, because it represented the Grecian Monarchy, which imme∣diately preceded the Roman; which this Beast was like unto in its Body, as it was in its Mouth to the Lion; which corre∣sponds to the Head of the Image; and in its Fore-Feet to the Bear (whose strength lies in his Fore-Feet) which answer to the Arms of the great Image, as the Hinder-Feet or Legs do to its Legs and Feet; the proper situation of the Fourth, or Ro∣man Monarchy: And the Dragon answers exactly to the first appearance of the Fourth Beast, Dan. 7.7. and the Beast it self, with its Ten Kings, to the Ten Horned appearance of that Beast, and the Little Horn amongst them, Dan. 7.7, 8. These being but several Symbols and Hierogliphicks of one and the same thing; viz. of Four successive Ʋniversal Monar∣chies. 8 By the Dragon is meant (as hath been before observed on Chap. 12.3.) the Imperatorial Pagan Power, or the Hea∣then Emperours of Rome, the sixth Head; as under the In∣fluence of Sathan; who is mentioned chiefly with reference to the Roman Monarchy, in this Prophecy; which has the Character of Satanicalness, above all the rest. 9 Here the Succession of the seventh Head, or the Anti∣christian King, to the sixth Head, or the Pagan Emperours; is described by the Dragon's giving him his Power: which came to pass at A.D. 476. when the Christian Emperours, the seventh King (but no Head, as is shewn on Chap. 17.8-13.) ceased, and the Antichristian King succeeded. And the lat∣ter is represented as receiving Power from the former, by im∣mediate Succession, although there were about an hundred and Fifty Years distance betwixt them; because it was the next immediate Head to it, although not the next King; who being a Christian one, is of no account in the Annals of the Beastian Kingdom; as the Jews and Eastern People were wont to omit the History and Chronology of Ʋsurpers: and
because the Dragon's Antichristian Successor was then in Being, although withheld from his actual Succession by the Christian Emperours; according to 2 Thes. 2. as is fully shewn on Chap. 17. And the Dragon is said to give his Power to the Beast: that is, secretly to convey, and willingly to resign it to him; because of the insensible Change of Paganism into Anti∣christianism; and the Agreeableness betwixt them. 10 This being a Roman Beast, the Seat or Throne given it, must be at Rome too: Which was by a wonderful Interposal of Providence, kept, as it were, empty for the Beast; Con∣stantine removing from thence to Byzantium; and the We∣stern Emperours, residing mostly at Milan, and Ravenna; by which means the Power of the Papacy encreased at Rome; and the Dragon made sure of his Seat for his Successor: which he began to do as soon as he perceived that he must depart; by so influencing Dioclesian and Maximian (under the dis∣posals of Providence) that the one should live at Milan, and the other at Nicomedia, and resign the Empire in those Cities, and not at Rome. And this is a thing so evident from Histo∣ry, that it is expresly mentioned by LaonicusDe reb. gest: Imperat. Turcar. edit. Paris. pag. 3. Blondus instaurat. Rom. lib. 3. Steuch. Eugub. de Constantin. Donat. lib. 1. Chalcondy∣las, an Athenian, (whom I mention, to shew, that it was a thing so notorious, that Strangers took notice of it) with this Notable Remark; That the Romans, although Masters of the greatest Empire in the World, left Rome to the High-Priest, and passed into Thrace unto Constantinople, under the Conduct of Constantine. After the Division of the Empire in∣to Eastern and Western, Rome was so much neglected by the Western Emperours, that there are frequent Complaints of that City inSgon. de Imper. Oceident. lib. 10. pag. 167. edit. Hanov. Claudian, that Milan was preferred before it; and
when Augustulus abdicated, Odoacer retired to Ravenna, lea∣ving Rome to the Papacy (which came then into succession) as its proper Seat; and althoughSigon. ibid. lib. 16. pag. 271. Theodorick acknowledged, that it was a Crime to be absent from that City; yet (as if a Providential Fate had determined him contrary to his own Will and Choice) he immediately, after a splendid Triumph, retired from it to Ravenna; where his Successors, the Gothick Kings resided. And it is further to be observed, that when the Beast succeeded into the Dynasty (or Power) and Seat of the Dragon; that Odoacer called not himself Emperour of Rome (which was the Seat of the Beast) but King of Italy; and that although there have been, since the Time of Augu∣stulus, the last Emperour of Rome, Kings of Italy, Roman Emperours, and Kings of the Romans; yet there hath been no Supream Governour who hath had the Imperial Title of the City of Rome it self, at least for any long time, but the Pope; who is peculiarly styled, the Pope of Rome; and hath the Supreme Government of it. See more on Chap. 17. 11 This refers to the Authority the Pope hath in the Empire, in Union with the Ten Kings, of whom he is Head. See on Chap. 17. 3 And I saw 12 one of his Heads [to wit, the Sixth, the Pagan Emperours;] as it 13 were, wounded [or slain] to death [by the Christian Emperours;] and his [to wit, the Beast's] deadly wound [in its sixth Head;] was healed [by its survival in the seventh Head, which succeeded it. See Verse 14. and Chap. 17.8. 11,] and all the * World wondred after the Beast [i. e. were wonderfully ta∣ken with him, and followed him with implicit Consent and Applause.]
12 It is evident, by comparing Rev. 17.8-13. with this Verse, that by this wounded Head, must be understood the Pagan Emperours, the sixth Head, wounded by the Christian Emperours, the seventh King. 13 Here we may observe, that the Sixth Head is not said to be dead, but to have a Wound which seemedArethas in locum. to be deadly, or to be wounded as it were to death: whereby may be de∣noted, that although the Pagan Imperialism, the sixth Head, never came again into Succession for any long time, the Ro∣man Monarchickness of it only remaining under the Christian Emperours, and not its Pagan Idolatry, and Bloody Temper a∣gainst Christianity; that yet Paganism was not so entirely de∣stroyed at the Succession of the Christian Empire; but that it recovered for a short time under Julian; and was kept in some Life by the Pagan part of the Senate, and those Heathens who continued in Office until the time of Theodosius; and by the Emperour's connivance at their Religion; allDr. Cave's Introduct. to Vol. 2. of the Lives of the Fathers. of them also having accepted of the Pontifical Stole, and born the Office and Title of Pontifex Maximus, or Chief Head of the Colledge of the Priests of the Heathens, until Gratian, who refused it: and especially by the Heathen Customs and Rites which the Christians by degrees brought into the Church: by which Paganism gradually and insensibly passed into Anti∣christianism; and the Beast was kept alive, and at last perfect∣ly healed. So that here is described the State of the Roman Em∣pire, as in its passage under the Christian Emperours, from the sixth Head to the seventh, in a bleeding and desperate Con∣dition; but in hopes of having its Wound cured: And the State of the same Empire, as actually healed, is represented in the next Words; when a Monarchy and Idolatry was in∣troduced
so like that under the sixth Head, that its Rise is here described rather by the healing of an Old Wound, than by the Succession of a New Head. * Here is set forth the Extent of the Beast's Kingdom; the whole World being said to be his Followers and Admirers; which the Defenders of the Papacy make to be a Note of their Church: who are wont (as hath been wellRivet. Tom. 3. pag. 583. observed) by the just Judgment of God, to attribute those things im∣prudently to the Papacy; which are the Apocalyptick Marks of Antichrist. To wonder after him, may also imply the implicit Faith and blind Devotion paid to the Papacy; which is usually the Effect of a groundless Wonder, and an Admiration of Mens persons. And here we may observe, that it is foretold, that Defection from Truth shall be Ʋniversal. 4 And they [that wondred after the Beast, which were a very great multitude;] worshipped the 10 Dragon [or Roman Pagan Pow∣er or Monarchy;] which gave [his] power unto the Beast [i. e. they obeyed a Roman Pagan Diabolical Power in an Antichristian Successor;] and they 15 worshipped [and were subject unto,] the Beast [i. e. the 16 Roman Empire under its seventh Head the Papacy, as Imperial and Monarchick;] saying, 17 Who is like unto the Beast [in Eminency and Excellency?] who is 18 able to make War with him [i. e. resist or withstand his Power?] 14 It was one and the same Roman Monarchy under the Dragon and the Beast; because they had both the same Im∣perial Seat at Rome; upon the continuance of which a Mo∣narchy is continued in the Account of Prophecy: and be∣cause they were both influenced by the same Draconick and Devillish Temper and Spirit; whereby they became One Bo∣dy;
the Dragon living in, and being worshipped in the Beast: Whence it is that the Beast has but one and the self same Body under all its Heads; it being represented as One Beast, with divers distinct Heads; each of which Head also may be called a Beast, by a Synecdoche, or a Figure, whereby what belongs to the whole, may be attributed to an eminent part. 15 To Worship denotes alsoGrotius in locum. Gen. 37.7, 8. Subjection, in Scripture; because Subjects were wont to adore, or prostrate them∣selves to their Princes and Superiors in the Eastern Countries: As the Subjects also of the Popes do; who are not approach∣ed unto withoutRivet. Tom. 3. pag. 576, 577. Fouli's Romish Ʋsurpat. B. 1.4. Adoration; and are placed on theCeremonial. Roman. Sect. 2. cap. 2. And Sir Paul Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes. Altar after they are chosen, to receive the Adorations of the Cardinals, and others present. 16 Beast, absolutely taken, signifies, (1.) The Roman Empire with all its seven Heads. And (2.) The State of the Roman Empire, under the se∣venth Head, and Eighth King, the Papacy; which is the ge∣neral Acceptation of the Beast in this Prophecy. 17 This is an Expression frequently made use of inExod. 15.11. 1 Sam. 2.2. 1 Chron. 17.20. Scripture, to denote God's peerless, and appropriated Super∣eminence; and consequently his appropriated Worship. And by it is very appositely set forth theRivet. & Foulis ubi supra. extravagant, prophane and blasphemous Titles and Prerogatives given to the Pope by his Followers; who make as if he were something more than
Humane; calling him theirIn Gloss. extravag. Rivet. Tom. 3. pag. 518. confessed by Father. Walsh, the Author of the Controversial Letters, and other honest Romanists. God, and Christ's Vicar, and attributing toSee Mr. Dodwel's Fundamental Principle of Popery; where it is proved that this must necessarily be the fundamental principal of their Communion; although it be de∣nied by some of them. him Infallibility; all which is signified here by this Phrase; which is not unlike the blasphemous Expressi∣ons of Rabshekah, 2 Kings 18. 18 This mostSee Fouli's Romish Ʋsurpat. Mr. Dodwell's Considerat. of present concernment. Math. Paris, Anno. 1245 — Imperatorem Fredericum conculcavimus; & quis es tu qui nobis temere credis resistere? Graseri Histor. Antichrist. pag. 176. Omnes Prin∣cipes fortunam irritasse qui cum Papa certaruat. Kings and Kingdoms have found to be true in their Contests with the Papal Omnipotency; as some of their Admirers have called it. 5 And there was given unto him [by the Devil, God permitting, and ordering things accordingly, upon mens willful blindness;] a mouth 19 speaking great things [i. e. a Faculty of impudent lying and boasting concerning his own Power and Infallibility, in De∣crees, Anathema's, and the like;] and blasphemies [i. e. Idolatrous Decrees;] and power was given unto him to continue 20 Forty and two Months [of Years.] See on Chap. 11.2. 19 This Phrase is taken from Dan. 7.8, 11, 20, 25.11, 36. where it is the Character of the Little Horn, and the Antichristian King; from whence it also appears, that this Beast is an Antichristi∣an one: and that this also is a Mark of the Papacy, clearly ap∣pears, from theirSee the Authors quoted on num. 16. The Canon Law, the Bullarium Romanum, and the Authors who defend the Papacy, and the Court of Rome. extravagant Titles, and Decrees and Pretences to Universal Power. 20 Grot. in Jac. 4.13. Mede in Locum. when joyned with a word signifying any space of Time, denotes in Scripture the continuance of it.
6 And he opened his Mouth [with great boldness and arro∣gance;] in Blasphemies [or Idolatrous Expressions;] against God [Dan. 7 25.] to 21 blaspheme his Name [or Essence;] and his 22 Ta∣bernacle [i. e. Christ's Humane Nature, and his Church;] and them 23 that dwell in Heaven [i. e. Saints and Angels.] 21 By making Images of God, which is called Blasphemy or Idolatry, in Scripture. See Chap. 2.9. num. 19. 22 The Humane Nature of Christ, is called inJohn 1.14. Hebr. 8, 2.9, 11. Col. 2.9. See Dr. Hammond on John 1.14. Scripture the True Tabarnacle, in which the Divinity, as it were, sojour∣ned here upon Earth. And the Church also may be repre∣sented by a Tabernacle (as it is called, Ezek. 23.4. Rev. 21.3.) because of its wandring Wilderness-condition, in expecta∣tion of its Home, and  in Heaven. TheSee Dr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity. first is blasphemed in the Papacy many ways, but especially by the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the Idolatrous practises consequent upon it; the latter by Calumnies, Excommuni∣cations and Persecutions. It is the Opinion of a Learned Man, that by Tabernacle is here meant the State of Saints and Angels in Heaven, or the Heavenly State, in which Christ is said to minister, Heb. 8.2. and through which he is said to have passed, (Heb. 9.11.) to the Holy of Holies, the very Throne of God; which may also be the meaning of Heb. 10.20. And this Interpre∣tation he thinks to be most probable, (1.) Because the Humane Nature of Christ is it self the Mi∣nister of the Tabernacle; and not the Tabernacle in which the Ministration is performed. (2.) Because the Heavenly things themselves are to be pu∣rified and anointed (Dan. 9.24. Heb. 9.23) and therefore are to be supposed to have been prophaned and blasphemed; that is, Idolatrously abused: and because such an Acceptation
of the Word Tabernacle here is more agreeable to what is said in this Vision concerning the Tabernacle of Testimony be∣ing opened, and the Tabernacle of God being with Men; and with Ezekiel's Visional Temple, or Tabernacle; and with the Divine Tabernacle (Chap. 4.) the Scene or Apocalyptick Stage of these Visions. See Chap. 12, 1. 21, 3. And (lastly) because Christ in his Humane Nature may be more significantly comprehended under theJohn 1.1, 18. See Mercer, and Pocock on Joel 2.32. and Acts 2.21. Name of God. 23 Who are blasphemed by the Idolatrous Worship of them, taught and practised in the Church of Rome. 7 And it was given to him to make War with the Saints [i. e. to op∣pose, excommunicate and persecute the Witnesses, Chap. 11, 7. and the Seed of the Woman, Chap 12.17.] and to overcome them [Chap. 11.7.] and power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues and Nations [i. e. to make Proselytes in all parts of the World, and to Rule and Govern the Kings and People of the Antichri∣an Kingdom, Chap. 10.11.] 8 And all that dwell upon the Earth [i. e. the Apostacy;] shall worship him [i. e. obey, and honour him as an Infallible Head.] whose 24 Names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, slain from the Foundation of the World [i. e. except those Living, Emi∣nent and Excellent Members of Christ's Church, particularly known and designed by him to be effectually saved by his Blood; who was crucified in respect of the Divine Decree, Appointment and Agreement betwixt the Father and the Son, from all Eter∣nity, Phil. 4.3. Gen. 3.15. Acts 15.18. Gal. 3.17.] 24 See on Chap. 3. 4, 5. These are the Witnesses, Chap. 11. the seed of the Woman, Chap. 12.17. and the Sealed ones. 9 If any man 25 hath an ear let him hear [for what hath been now delivered in a Spiritual and Mystical manner, is very remarka∣ble, and worthy the most attentive, and most serious Observa∣tion. See Chap. 2.7.]
25 Hereby (as hath been already shewn on Chap. 2.7.) is intimated, that what has been delivered concerning the Beast in this Chapter, after an aenigmatical and parabolical manner (this being the Sentence made use of by our Saviour in the close of his Parables) is a Truth of the greatest importance; against which yet many would shut their Ears. And there∣fore all Christians are called upon seriously to consider, and weigh what is here delivered; and not to be driven from the profession of the pure Faith, by Fear of Punishment; nor wrought upon to follow the Beast, by the spendid Baits of Greatness, Power and Authority, or the high and big pre∣tences of Infallibility, Success, and Ʋniversality; seeing it was foreseen and foretold by the Holy Spirit, that the genera∣lity of Mankind should be earthly minded, and should there∣upon follow the Beast; and only a few chosen and beloved of God should escape this Ʋniversal Corruption. 10 He that leadeth 26 into Captivity, shall go into Captivity: he that killeth with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword [i. e. all Antichri∣an Enemies shall be dealt with at last, as they have dealt with o∣thers, Chap. 19. 20, 21.] Here is [an occasion for the Exercise of] the Patience and Faith of the Saints [in bearing their Sufferings, and in believing and patiently waiting for their deliverance out of them, and the destruction of the Enemies of God, and of his Church. See on Chap. 14.12.] 26 Here is a plain reference to the Beast's, and the False Prophets being taken Captive; and to the slaughter of the Remnant by the Sword, Chap. 19. 20, 21. For as the Pro∣phets of old were wont to comfort the People of God when in Captivity, and under great distress, by Denunciations of Ruine and Destruction to their Enemies; so does the Holy Spirit here revive the persecuted Saints, by telling them that their Persecutions should have an End, and that the Apostasy which now domineered, and blasphemed the Holy Name of God, should at last be abolished, and utterly destroyed; ac∣cording
to the just and righteous Judgment of Almighty God, who recompenses Tribulation to them that trouble his Saints, 2 Thes. 1.6, 7. Isa. 33.1, 2. Ezek. 39.10. Matth. 7, 2.26, 52. But yet they are commanded to have Patience; for although the Judgment is certain, yet it will not be so soon as they might expect, Hab. 2.3, 4. Matth. 21.19-24 11 And I beheld another 27 Beast [i. e. another Persecuting, and Idolatrous Body of Men under Superiors;] coming up [silently, slowly, and by degrees, as feet of Clay,] out of the 28 Earth [or A∣postasy;] and he had two 28 Horns [Potentacies or Powers;] like a Lamb 29 [i. e. seemingly Christian;] and he spake as a 30 Dragon [i. e. was in his Doctrines, Decrees, and Practises, Antichristianly Idolatrous, and Persecuting.] 27 This Beast is different from the former, as appears from his Original, Shape, and the other Characters here given of him; called therefore the other Beast; as being a distinct Beast from that whose Succession the Prophecy was descri∣bing. 28 28 The former Beast rose up out of the Sea; that is, the Commotions and Divisions of the Empire: This rises as things grow out of the Earth, silently, and by degrees. And as by the former Beast, the Papacy as Monarchick and Imperial, was fitly represented; so in this Type there seems to be a signification of the Apostate Hierarchy, or of the whole Bo∣dy of the Ecclesiasticks, as Antichristian; as appears, (1.) From the Account here given of its Original; viz. that it was out of the Earth; by which the Apostate State of the Church is signified in this Prophecy. For as the Papal Mo∣narchy rose out of the Providential Commotions and Trou∣bles of the Empire; so was the Antichristian Power of the Clergy founded upon the Apostatizing Spirit of Diotrephes, en∣creasing by degrees in the Church.
(2.) It appears, that some Christian Body of Men is sig∣nified by this Beast; because it is said to have Horns, like a Lamb, which is the Type of Christ in Scripture: By which Expression (Horns being the Type of Powers and Potentacies in Scripture) an Apostate Hierarchy, or a Holy Government (for so the Word signifies) acting under the sanctified pre∣tences of Christ's Authority, and his Religion, and in ordine ad spiritualia, is very appositely set forth unto us. And (3.) By this Beast's being represented with Two Horns, is very aptly signified, the whole Body of the Ecclesia∣sticks, under the Potentacy of the Ruling Clergy, or Hierarchy of the Two Divisions of the Empire, into East and West: and withal there is an intimation given, that this Beast rose when the Empire was thus divided. And (lastly) We may from hence conclude, that this Beast is not The Antichrist, who is represented as a Monarch, by One single Horn in Daniel; but a Body Politick (signified by a Beast in Prophecy) under Two co-ordinate Powers, or Horns; by which the Hierarchy of the Eastern and Western part of the Empire, before the Pope came to be an Horn, or to have his Antichristian Supremacy, is very fitly typified: especially the Eastern, and Western Patriarchates; which were a meer Ʋsurpation in the Church; arising from the ho∣nour of precedency, which the Metropolitans of the Chief Ci∣ties, gained upon Constantine's new modelling of the Em∣pire; which (as BishopAn account of the Govern. of the Christian Church for the first six hundred years pag. 192.310. and from pag. 188. to the end of that Book. Parker speaks) quickly became a Stirrup to Ambition, to mount into a Superiority of Power and Jurisdiction: And although there were many Contests betwixt the Eastern and Western Bishops, yet (as the same Learned and Judicious Person has observed) the Patriarchal
Ʋsurpation first began at Constantinople, and the Supremacy of the Church of Rome was founded meerly upon the Ambition of the Church of Constantinople. Which Words are an ex∣cellent Comment, upon this, and the following Verses, as his whole Discourse there is; wherein is proved, that the Ea∣stern Horn, or Hierarchy, as well as the Western, was the Chief Cause of advancing the Beast, or the Papacy, to its Kingdom. 29 Christ is typified by a Lamb inJohn 1.29, 36. Acts 8.32. 1 Pet. 1.19. Scripture; the Emblem of Innocency, Meekness and Purity: And here is in∣timated, that this is an Antichristian Beast, because of its having something of a Lamb in it; the Devil not being a∣ble to introduce Antichristianism, but under the Mask of Christianity, and under a pretence toSee Dr. Moor's mystery of Iniquity. Mystery, Godliness, andThe Popes, whilst they give themselves the humblest Titles, make the Proudest claims; and under the Name of Servus. Servorum, make themselves Princes of the World. Bp. Parker, ibid. pag. 347. with relation to Gregory the Great. Humility; by which ways it was at first brought in∣to the Church, and is still kept up in it. 30 Here is signified, that this Beast was a Pagano-Christian Beast, and a persecuting one; because he spake and acted like a Dragon, the Type of Paganism and Persecution; whilst his Pretences were the Authority and Honour of Christ; the Ad∣vancement of Ʋnity and Peace, and a Zeal for God's Glory; and a reducing of Men by Lamb-like, i. e. innocent and gen∣tle Methods; a Phrase much used by the French Clergy, in their Speeches to their King, upon his barbarous proceedings against the French Protestants. 12 And he [i. e. the Hierarchy] exercised all the Power of the first Beast [or the Roman Idolatrous Monarchy,] before 31 him [and in favour of him; for his Honour, and by his Consent;] and
causeth the Earth [or the Apostasy;] and them which dwell therein [i. e. the Apostate Members of this Earthly and Worldly Church, the Gentiles, the Subjects of this Hierarchy, Chap. 11.2.] to worship [Verse 4.8.] the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed [i. e. the Roman Empire under the seventh Head, and eighth King, Verse 2, 23. Chap. 17. 8, 10, 12.] 31 From hence it appears, (1.) That this was the Hierarchy of the Roman Empire, be∣cause it exerciseth Power before the Beast, or in his presence; which Beast was the Roman Empire; as appears from its De∣scription before given. (2.) That these Two Horns, answering to the Two Feet in Daniel (the same thing being fitly represented by Feet in the Image of a Man, and by Horns in the Type of a Beast's Head) and those Two Feet coming not into Succession until the Rise of the Ten Kings (who are the Ten Iron Toes of it) which was not until A. D. 476. when the Imperatorial Power ceased, and the Papal Succession began with its Ten Kings; it will follow, that this other Beast exercised not the Power of the first Beast until then. (3.) That the first Beast, with its seventh Head, the Papa∣cy, even when it was in Succession as the eighth King, A.D. 476. yet did not then exercise its Power of its self; as is plain from History; in which it is notorious, that the Pa∣pacy attained not its Supremacy until A. D. 606. and that all that time the Hierarchy of the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Empire, exercised all its Power before it, by ministring unto it, as the Phrase signifies, 1 Sam. 2.18. or inSee Grot. on Luke 4, 7.24, 19. its stead, and for its benefit, as a kind of a Protector of it in its Infancy; and as the Clayie part of the Feet of this Image, upholding and sustaining the seventh Head.
(4.) Although the first Beast were before the other Beast, as the first Beast signifies the Roman Empire; whence it is cal∣led the other Beast, with reference to some former, or first Beast; yet as it is the seventh Head, they are contemporary: the Papacy, and the other Beast, in that particular Notion, as Feet of Clay, coming into Succession together at 476. which yet were before the first Beast, as they were a domineering, and aspiring Body of Men, making way for the Papal King∣dom, during the time of the Christian Emperour, when the Beast lay wounded, and was partly kept alive, in an healing condition, by them; and as they were those who protected the New King, the Papacy, from his Succession at 476. until his Supremacy, at 606. 13 And [or for] he doth great 32 wonders [i. e. seemingly great, but really lying and counterfeit ones, 2 Thessal. 2.9.] so that he ma∣keth 33 Fire to come down from Heaven on the Earth in the sight of men [i. e. appeareth to worldly and apostatized Men▪ consenting to, and applauding the Cheat, to work as great Miracles as Elias did, 1 Kings 18.33. 2 Kings 1.10.] 32 Lying Wonders are one Character of the Man of Sin, gi∣veh by the Apostle, 2 Thes. 2.9. And accordingly it is no∣torious, that the great Apostacy was brought in by the Lying Miracles, Fabulous Legends, Counterfeit Writings, and pre∣tended Inspirations of the Clergy, as Mr.Apostasy of the latter times, B. 1. Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5. Bishop Stillingfleet's Second Discourse in Vindicat. of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, Chap. 3. his Discourse of Idolatry, Chap. 4. his Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle Apolog. Chap. 2. Mede, and others have proved. BishopAccount of the Government of the Church, pag. 249. the right of the Emperours, in chusing the Pope, was gained from them by a pretence to Divine Inspiration. Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes. Parker observes, that the Constan∣tinopolitan See (which was afterward one of these Horns
when the Clayie Feet came into Succession) was first advan∣ced by the pretended Inspiration of Diodorus, an Old Doting Bishop; andAnnal. lib. 4, & 5. Downham of antichrist, lib. 1. pag. 110. Aventinus confesses, that in the time of Gregory the seventh, when Antichrist came to his heighth, false Prophets were very frequent: And accordingly this very Beast is called afteewards the false Prophet. 33 This is one of those Miracles which thePoli Synops. in loc. Jews re∣quire for proof, that a Prophet is sent from God: By which is intimated, that this Beast was permitted by God to do great Signs; and that withal he was of a wrathful and a re∣vengeful Spirit, contrary to that of the Gospel; where Christ rebukes his Disciples for calling for Fire from Heaven. 14 And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth [i. e. the Pagano-Christian Worshippers, Chap. 11.2.] by the means of those Mira∣cles which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying to [i. e. teaching, perswading, and commanding] them that dwell on the Earth [i. e. the Genti e Worshippers, Chap. 11.2.] that they should make an Image 34 [of Universal, Roman, Persecuting, and Idola∣trous Empire;] to the [Honour of] the Beast, which had the wound by a Sword [of the Christian Emperours, the seventh King, in its sixth Head, the Pagan Emperours;] and did [now] live 35 [in this Image.] 34 Here is an Allusion to the Image whichDan. 3. Nebuchadnez∣zar set up; which he made of Gold, to represent himself (who was the Head of Gold in the great Image he had seen in a Vision, Chap. 2. 38.) as the sole Head, and Ʋniversal Monarch of the World, as he was acknoledged to be in the Titles given him, Verse 4; or at least to be a Figure of his Ʋ∣niversal Monarchy; of which a great Image is the Type in
Chap. 2.31-45. Daniel: which Image was also set up for Divine Wor∣ship, and is called God, at the 29th Verse; all who refu∣sed to serve, and worship it, being severely punished: To all which Particulars there are clear References in this Chap∣ter; and in the Usurpations of the Popes, the Worship of Images introduced especially by their means, and the great se∣verity used against all the Witnesses (of whom Shadrack, Meshack and Abednego were Types) who refused to worship I∣mages, and submit to the Papal Supremacy, which were the Image, and the Gods the Antichristianizing Hierarchy had set up. 35 Did live, signifies did revive, or recover, as Grotius and Vatablus render the Word, and that in or by the Image; up∣on the making of which, the Beast was perfectly cured; his Idolatry and Supremacy becoming then predominant; whereas it was before but in its Infancy, and under the Tutorage of the other Beast; who was, as it were, a Cardinal Patron, to the Beast in its Minority, acting all things for him, and in his Favour; as those Cardinals now do for the Popes, in their decrepit Age. The sixth Head, as it distinctly and particularly denotes the Pagan Emperours, was neither healed nor revived; the Monarchy passing from it to the seventh Head; although the Beast be represented in his entire Portraiture, to shew the Succession of his Heads: but as it denotes, and is a part of the Roman, Idolatrous, persecuting Monarchickness, in which Beastianism consists; so it was revived, and healed, when the seventh Head attained Idolatrous, and persecuting, as well as Roman Power: whereas during the Christian Empire, al∣though the Emperours had Roman, Monarchick Power; yet they were not Idolatrous, and persecuting Powers, as the Pa∣gan
were; whatsoever there was of degeneracy, or persecuti∣on, upon other Accounts. 15 And he had power to give 36 Life [i. e. activity, and a power of working upon the Minds of Men,] to the * Image of the Beast [i. e. unto the likeness, and similitde of the Pagan Roman Em∣pire;] that the Image of the Beast should both speak [in Decrees and Canons;] and [also] cause [by ts own power, and that of the secular Magistrate;] that as many as would not worship [obey, and be subject to,] the Image of the Beast should be killed [by Excom∣munication, and the Temporal Sword, Dan. 3.5, 6] 36 For this was not a lifeless, dumb Idol, like that of Ne∣buchadnezzar, or those described, Psalm 115. but was pos∣sessed with an active, and a restless Spirit, as some of theSee Dr. Hammond on the place. Idols, and Oracles of old were. Or, to give Life to the Image of the Beast, may signifie, the Revival of Paganism; as Life sig∣nifies, Chap. 11 11. and Verse 14. * The Devil being wounded in his Power, by the Wound of the sixth, or Pagan Head; and knowing from the Prophecy of Daniel, that there was to be no other Pagan Monarchy, and Draconick Head, gave his Power to the Beast: But perceiving that this Beast was not able to de∣ceive the World by a pure Imperatorial Power, and a bare∣faced Heathen Idolatry; he wrought upon the Gentile Wor∣shippers (or Antichristian Laity newly converted from Hea∣thenism, and retaining a great Love for the Magnificence and Customes of their former Religion) by means of the other Dan  or the Antichristianizing Hierarchy, to make an I∣mage which should be not only to the Honour of the first Beast, but should be a Resemblance of it. Now an Image
being not the thing it self, but a similitude of it, this Image must consist in some Likeness, or Resemblance of a Ʋniversal, Persecuting, and Idolatrous Empire; in which the Nature of Beastianism is placed by Prophecy. Which was exactly ful∣filled, (1.) When the Papacy attained an Ʋniversal Supremacy; which yet being but an Ecclesiastick, or Spiritual one, or a Temporal one under an Hierarchick Form, erected after the Model and Platform of the Civil Empire; was indeed but a Clayie Image, or Resemblance of the Real and Substantial Power, which the Emperors enjoyed; and wanted the strength ofDan. 2.40-43. Iron, which is necessary to all Domini∣on; which the Papacy has not of it self, but from the Iron and strength of its Ten Toes, or of the Kings united under him, as a Spiritual Head. Such an Image didAbbas Ursperg. ad an. 1298. Crakenthorp of the Pope's temporal monarchy. Boniface the Eighth appear to be, when he rode in Imperial Robes, with a Naked Sword carried before him; one proclaiming with a loud Voice, Ecce hic duo Gladii; Behold here are Two Swords, the Spiritual and the Tempo∣ral; and when toOveral's Convocat. Book, pag. 314. make his infinite Soveraignty more con∣spicuous and memorable to all Posterity, he came forth one day amongst the people, to be admired of them, with a Sword by his side, and a Crown upon his Head; strutting like an Image in vain Pageantry. (2.) When aMr. Mede's Apostasy of the latter times. Dr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity. part 2 lib. 1.17. Bishop Stillingfleet's Discourses of Idolatry. Pagano Christian Idolatry was establish∣ed; which is an Image, or Representation of Heathen Idola∣try.
(3.) This Image of the Roman Imperialism (which is chief∣ly represented by it) consisting of Antichristianism, as well as Supremacy, may be also lookt upon as an Image of Chri∣stianity; as being the Counterfeit of it; assuming Supremacy under the pretence of Christ's Soveraignty, whose Vicar he pretends to be; and introducing a Religion which substi∣tutes an imaginary counterfeit Christianity in the place of the true one, when it is indeed opposite to it; in which the Na∣ture of Antichristianism consists. 16 And he causeth all both small 37 and great, rich and poor, free and bond [i. e. all, of all Ranks and Conditions, Dan. 3.4, 5, 6.] to receive a 38 mark in their 39 right hand [i. e. to be obliged to engage, and act for him;] or in their 40 foreheads [i. e. or openly to avow, and own him, and his profession.] 37 A distinction ofGrot. in Locum. persons, in use in the Roman Em∣pire, comprizing all Ages and Conditions. 38 As the Followers of the Lamb have their Seal or Mark; so have the Followers of Antichrist: whereby is denoted his Propriety in them, their Service of him, and their open pro∣fession of his Name or Doctrine, by which they are to be known and distinguished from others. An Expression ta∣ken, asGrot. Ham. Poli Synops. Criticks think, from the Marks, which the Romans were wont to put upon their Possessions, Slaves and Soldiers; but may be rather an Allusion to Cain's Mark; or (which seems to be most probable) to the3 of Maccab. See Grotius on that place, and Hammond on this Verse. , or Mark of an Ivy-leaf, which Ptolemy Philopator caused to be burnt with Fire upon the Bodies of those Jews who were to enjoy the priviledges of the Common people of Aegypt; in token of
their being the Servants and Worshippers of Bacchus: For the same Word () is used in both places; and seve∣ral passages of the Books of Maccabees have been be∣fore alluded to in this Prophecy, as hath been alreadyPag. 203, 204. observed, concerning the Story of Antiochus; those Apo∣chryphal Books being preserved (as Dr.Scripture Line of Time, part 2. pag. 43, 44. Beverley has inge∣niously and judiciously observed) not without a Design of Providence, and put into the Canon of the Church of Rome; That a Prophet of their own, or a Scripture of their own Canoni∣zing, might be a Witness against them. 39 The Right hand being most in use, and the strongest, de∣notes Action: whereupon God commanded the Jews that the Law should be a sign unto them upon their hands; that is, should be obeyed and kept by them. 40 That is, that they should not be ashamed of professing his Doctrine, but should make their Relation unto him be as open, and as remarkable, as if it had been written upon their Foreheads; as the Jews were commanded to have the Law upon their Foreheads, and betwixt their Eyes, Exod. 13.9. Deut. 6.8— 17 And [he causeth also] that no man might 41 buy or sell [i. e. partake, or dispose of any Advantages or Preferments;] save he that had the mark [i. e. was engaged in his Cause and profession, and was active in it;] or the Name [i. e. 42 Nature] of the Beast, or the Number of his Name [i. e. the Number which shall shew his Nature.] 41 This Phrase has a relation to the Commodities, or Merchandizes of the Beast's Kingdom, and the Priviledges of
his City; reckoned up, Chap. 18. of which the Papacy de∣bars all Men, byVid. Poli Synops. in locum, & Medum, Brightman. Excommunications, Interdictions, and Civil Penalties, who will not own and profess its Doctrine. And here is a further Allusion to the Story of Ptolemy Phi∣lopator, in the Book of Maccabees before quoted; (who seems to be a Type of Antichrist, as Antiochus is confessedly owned to have been) who took away from all those Jews the Priviledges belonging to Alexandrians, which they be∣fore enjoyed, who would not embrace his Idolatrous Reli∣gion; and admitted only those into his Court, and the high∣er Rank of Citizens of Alexandria, who would be initia∣ted into it; thrusting even the Jews, who complyed so far as to take the Mark of Bacchus, into the Inferiour Rank of the Vulgar Aegyptians; which is an Instance exactly agreeing to the Proceedings of the Antichristian King, as allSee Foulis of Popish Ʋsurpations. Hi∣story testifies. 42 SoHammond on Matth. 2.23. Mr. Mede Disc. 2. Name signifies in Scripture; as Divines usual∣ly shew on the first Petition of the Lord's Prayer. 18 Here is [what requires, and will exercise] 43 Wisdom; let him that hath understanding [in such matters;] count 44 [or calcu∣late] the number of the 45 Beast [i. e. the Number which shall shew when he became an Idolatrous Beast;] for it is the Number of 46 a man [i. e. such an one as Men of Wisdom and Understanding may, and are wont to calculate;] and his number is six 47 hundred threescore and six. 43 By Wisdom is meant here, such Wisdom or Skill as the Aegyptians, and the Skillful Jews, and other Wise Men of the
Eastern Nations had; and for which Moses is so renowned in Scripture, Acts 7.22. of which, Knowledge inSee Bongus de Numeris, Meursius de denario Pythagorico, Wendelinus, and other Authors, who have witten of Pythagora's Tetractys. Grot. in Act. 7.22. Hammond. on 2 Tim. 3.8. Dr. Moor's Cabbala. Mr. Potter of the Number of the Beast. Num∣bers was none of the least. And that such like mystical and obscure Knowledge was anciently called Wisdom, is plain from the Author of the Book of Ecclesiasticus, who tells us (Chap. 6.22.) that Wisdom is according to her Name, () not manifest unto many; alluding (as Philo also of∣ten does) to theDr. Moor's mystery of Iniq. part 2. lib. 1. cap. 14. Etymology of the Greek Word; as if it were derived from the Hebrew . which signifies to cover, or hide. 44 ; which word signifies to calculate, as Arith∣meticians were wont to do of old, with Stones or Coun∣ters. 45 The Numbers of his Name seems to denote the Number which shall shew his Nature, Essence and Being; Name and Thing, to be, and to be called, being very frequently used promiscuously in Scripture: and the Number of the Beast seems to be different from that of his Name; and may signifie the Number which shall shew the Time of his becoming The Beast; as will appear more clearly in the following Annota∣tions. 46 Hereby is not signified, that Antichrist is a Man; but that it is the Number of Man (, not ,) or of the same kind that other Numbers are, which Men make use of; as Isaiah (Chap. 8.1.) is commanded to write with a Man's Pen; that is, with such a one, and in such Chara∣cters as are in use amongst Men; and as the Word is used, Chap. 21.17.
47 The Man of Understanding is not bid to calculate the Numeral Letters of the Beast's Name; but to calculate 666. the Number of the Beast; which Arithmeticians know can be done no other way but by extracting the Root of it: which seems wholly to overthrow the conceit whichLib. 5. Cap. 30. Irenaeus has delivered from Ancient Tradition; that  (the Nume∣ral Value of the Letters of which word make up 666.) is the Name of the Beast; and that the counting of the Number of the Beast, consists in nothing else but in the counting of the Va∣lue of the Letters of his Name; which is no great piece of Wisdom and Ʋnderstanding. And although the Authority of Irenaeus is not to be altogether contemned; yet it being notorious, that he was mistaken, or imposed upon, in some things, for which he vouches the Traditions of Apostolical Men (as particularly concerning our Saviour's Age, when he died) he is not to be followed, when there are so consider∣able Reasons to be brought against the Opinion he relates, and those from the very Text it self. For besides, that the Numeral Letters of several other Names, amount to 666. the Apostasy is no where set forth unto us in Prophecy, under Types, which have any reference to the Name of Latins, but only to that of Romans; which has also swallowed up for a long time the other Name; which is now out of use. And therefore I cannot but acquiesce in what Mr. Pot∣ter has said in his Admirable Discourse upon this Number; where he has shewn, that the counting of it consists in the ex∣tracting the Root of it, which is 25; the Number 25 25 125 50 625 41 666. 25. being
the only Number, which by being multiplied into it self, makes up the Square Number 666. when the Fraction (which is 41 in this Operation) is added to it; which is what is meant by the Square Root of a Number. And this Opinion I acquiesce in, (1.) Because it is the only way of counting, or calculating this Number; and is withal a piece of Ancient Wisdom and Ʋnderstanding; perhaps in use amongst the Eastern Sages, from whom the Greeks derived their Skill. (2.) Because the Root of it 25, gives us the Number of the Year, when the Beast first had a Name, or a Being. Concer∣ning which we are to observe, that the Epocha of all the Num∣bers in this Prophecy, are to be taken from the time of our Saviour's Resurrection, A. D. 33. to which if you add this Number, the Conception of the Beast will fall upon A. D. 58. about the time in which the second Epistle to the Thessaloni∣ans2 Ep. 2.7. thought by Mr. Dodwell, and Dr. Cave, to have been written 49. by Bp. Pearson, A.D. 53. and by several others, A. D. 57. was written, when the Apostle affirms, that the My∣stery of Iniquity was working. For as 12, the Root of the Number of the pure Church, may denote, that the Church con∣tinued pure until Twelve Years after the Resurrection, viz. un∣til A.D. 45. so may also the Root 25. lead us after the same manner to the Beginning of the Apostasy, at A. D. 58. (3.) Because the Square Number arising out of this Root, gives us the time when the Apostasy came to be the Image of the Beast. For if we add 666. to A. D. 58. the time of its Conception, we shall arrive to A. D. 724. when the Beast which rose about A. D. 600. (as hath been before observed) came to his Manly Age, as an Idolatrous Power; being then warmly engaged in the War about Images. Which Observa∣tion
is much illustrated by the Beasts being represented as an Image in this Chapter; in which 25 may be considered as the Root or Basis; and 666 as the Heighth of it. And as Nebu∣chadnezzar's Image (Dan. 3.1. the Type of the Image in this Chapter) was an irregular Figure, contrary to the Rules of Pro∣portion (as Interpreters have shewn on that place) and consist∣ed of Sixes, as this does; so is 25, the Basis of this Image, a Surd Number; out of which a regular, and perfect Square cannot arise, but one mixt with Fractions: to shew, that the Apostasy is in Truth an Irregular Religion; consisting of many unequal Additions; as 25 is an uneven Number, and 666. is not a square and perfect Number, arising out of 25 on∣ly; but is made up of Fractional Additions, Whereas, on the contrary, the Number 12. the Root of the pure Church, is an even number, making One hundred and Forty Four Thou∣sand, its Square, perfectly and entirely; to shew the Perfection, Entireness, and Agreeableness of its Doctrines. (4.) Except this be the meaning of the Number of the Beast, there will want an anti-numerus, or opposite number to the number of Christ's Kingdom; which is agreed on by all Interpreters to be 12. the square Root of One hundred and For∣ty Four Thousand; and thereby that graceful Antithesis, , or Correspondent Opposition, which is observed in this Prophecy, betwixt the things which relate to Christ's and An∣tichrist's Kingdom, will be violated and broken; and the An∣ti-Apostolicalness of this Church will not be so appositely sig∣nified. See Mr. Potter's Discourse. (5.) The Number 25. may very well be put to express the beginning of Antichrist's Kingdom; because it hath been al∣ways accounted, by Sacred and Prophane Writers, who have thought nothing of Antichrist, to be mysteriously evil; and to be an Hieroglyphical Character of some unhappy, desperate, de∣plorable, and Apostatical Estate of Christ's Church; because it
is an oddly uneven number, which is unevenly measured by an odd Number; as Mr. PotterChap. 12. hath proved out of Jerom, and others, in his Excellent Discourse on this Subject; an Exquisite Piece of Mysterious Knowledge. For which Reason also, 666 may be a Number expressing things belonging to Antichrist's Kingdom; because it consists of Sixes; a Number relating to the Pagan Kingdom, the Sixth Head; of which Antichrist is the Image: And also (asOn this Verse. Grotius observes) denotes the Things of this World; as Seven does the Things of the Better World, the Kingdom of the Messias. (6.) The Number 25 is most admirably applicable to the Antichristian Roman State; it being the only Conspicuous and Remarkable number in that Hierarchy; describing the Papacy in its most Essential Parts; that Church having been Fatally led to lay its very Foundations upon it; it having at first Five and Twenty Cardinals, and its Creed consisting of Five and Twenty Articles, as the Apostles doth of Twelve; as Mr. Potter hath accurately shewn in these, and many other Particulars. (7.) It may be observed, That as the Number 666. can by no means be made out of 12, whatsoever Number you multiply it by; so neither can the Antichristian State any way arise out of the Apostles Doctrine. (Lastly,) The Number 666. consisting of the same num∣ber in all its places, from Ʋnits to Hundreds; is upon that ac∣count (as Grotius observes on the place) very Remarkable,
according to the Opinion of the Wise Pagans, who made their Vows in the same proportion: And because it consists of an entirePoli Synops. in locum. Senary of numbers, arising by degrees from Ʋnits to Tens, and from thence to Hundreds; and that in a proportion very agreeable, by the multiplication of 6 by 10; so as that 6 are found 10 times in 60, and 60, 10 times in 600: it may from thence be thought to signifie the seeming Comeliness and Proportion of the Antichristian State; which is so great, that it is apt to deceive those who do not exercise Wisdom, to discern things; it being at first sight a Number more proportionable than 144, the Number of Christ's King∣dom. So necessary is it to count numbers, and to extract the Roots of them, by stripping things of their Outward seeming Ap∣pearances, although never so Comely; and searching into the very intimate nature, and Essence of them.
CHAP. XIV. The Text. 1 AND I looked [or was in Vision];] and lo, a Lamb [i. e. Christ,] stood [to import his settlement in his Govern∣ment, and his Rule and Defence of his people, Psalm 2.6. Mic. 5.4.] on the Mount 1 Zion [i. e. appeared in an exalted, and an e∣stablished State, in his Kingdom; Psalm 48. Mic. 4.1. Heb. 12.22.] and with him an 2 Hundred Forty and Four Thousand [i. e. a Body of Apostolical Pure Christians, Chap. 7.4.] having his [i. e. Christ's] Fathers Name 3 written in their Foreheads [i. e. open∣ly adjudged by God, and professing themselves to be the true Fol∣lowers of Christ. See on Chap. 7.3.] Annotations on CHAP. XIV. 1 ZionJosh. 15.63. 2 Sam. 5.1-10. 1 Chron. 11.1-9. 2 Chron. 3.1. Psalm 48.2. was the Mountain, or upper part of Jerusalem, on one side of which stood the House, or Palace of David; as the Temple did on the North side of it, called Mount Moriah; which was reckoned as a part of Mount Zion. This Moun∣tain was taken by David from the Jebusites, whom the Chil∣dren of Judah were not able to drive out, because of their Ʋnbelief; and was the first Exploit undertaken by him, af∣ter his being anointed King over all Israel, upon the Submis∣sion
paid unto him by all the Tribes of Israel, and their ac∣knowledgment of their being his Bone, and his Flesh; wherein they were Types of the Obedience that all Nations are to pay to Christ; and of their becoming Members of his Bo∣dy, of his Flesh, and of his Bones, Ephes. 5.30. David took it when he began to2 Sam. 5.4. Luke 3.22, 23. Reign, being Thirty Years old; according to the Age when our Saviour began to preach, gather Members for his Kingdom, and cast out Devils; as David also dispossessed the2 Sam. 5.6-8. Gregories Observat. Chap. 7. Jebusites, and cast out their Tutelary Idols, the Hatred of his Soul; called by him and his Followers, by way of Sarcasm and Contempt, the Blind; and the Lame; as having Eyes, but seeing not, and Feet, but walking not; according to the like Expression used by him, Psalm 115. When he had taken it, he fortified the Strong Hold of it; and afterwards built there, and made a Beautiful City, calling it, the City of David. In all which he was a Type of Christ, as that Mountain, Strong Hold, and City, were of the Strength, Stability, and Beauty of Christ's Kingdom; especially as it shall appear at last in a most glo∣rious manner; triumphing over all Heathen and Antichristi∣an Idols; when the Lord shall set his King upon his Holy Hill of Zion; and Christ shall stand, and feed his People, and be great unto the Ends of the Earth, Psalm 2.6. Micah 5.4. Only here it may be observed, (1.) That as the taking of this Mountain was the first Atchievement of David, after he came to the Kingdom, before he was fully established in it, and had built his City; so may this Appearance of Christ, be some
Preparatory State of his Kingdom, called the Kingdom of Da∣vid in Scripture; risingMicah 4.1, 2. to the Tops of the Mountains, and exalting it self above the Hills, that so the Everlasting Gospel might be heard, and People might flow unto it; but some∣what different from the State of its full Establishment, when his Kingdom shall appear in its utmost Glory: as in the De∣scription of it given Heb. 12.22. they first come unto Mount Sion, before they come unto the City of the Living God, and the Heavenly Jerusalem; as is more fully shewn on the Three last Chapters; where this whole matter is largely consider∣ed. (2.) That here is represented some Exalted State of the Heavenly Tabernacle it self, typified by Mount Sion; which was not yet of so high, and so exalted a Nature, as that which it shall afterwards arrive to, when it shall appear as in the highest Heavens, or in its Heavenly State: it being probable, that there are Exaltations of Christ's Kingdom in the Arche∣type of it, in the Heavenly Places; of which the several Ad∣vances it receives here on Earth, are the Counterpart, Patterns and Example; according to what hath been already dis∣coursed on Chap. 12.1. and will be shewn more largely here∣after: it being very difficult to give Account of many things in this Prophecy without this Supposition. 2 As this Vision relates to the State of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, there is hereby signified, a Body of Apostolical pure Christians, appearing in a State of open, and publick professi∣on of Christ's pure Religion: but as it refers to the State of things in the Heavenly Places, hereby is denoted an appear∣ance of the very 144000. mentioned in the seventh Chap∣ter,
who are the Saints and Witnesses departed in the Lord. 3 They were before sealed, and in a hidden, and invisible State; but now they have a Name written, that is, appearing legible upon their Foreheads; and that the Name of God: whereby may be understood some Approbation of them, and Declaration on God's part, before whose Throne they are (Verse 5.) as to be judged and approved by him, that they were Holiness unto the Lord; in allusion to the Inscription on the High-Priest's Frontlet, Exod. 20.36. and that they were worthy of the Exalted State they now were advanced unto: and withal an open profession of the Witnesses on Earth, that they were God's true Soldiers and Servants, (who used toSee Mr. Mede on the place, and Grotius. be marked in the Forehead) and not marked Slaves of the Beast. And by the mention of Christ's Sealed Number in this place, is intimated the great difference there will be in the Is∣sue and Event of Things, betwixt Christ's Servants appearing thus in Glory, and the marked Servants of the Beast, just be∣forementioned in the former Chapter; and withal (according to that known Rule, That Opposites, when placed near one another, illustrate each other) hereby is much established the Interpretation of the Number of 666. there given; 12 the Root of 144000. being an Anti-Number to 25, the Mark of the Beast; signifying an Apostolical Body of Witnesses, as that does an Anti-Apostolical one. See the Notes on Chap. 7. num. 9. and on Chap. 13.18. 2 And I heard a Voice 4 from Heaven, as the Voice of many Wa∣ters [i. e. a loud and powerful one, Chap. 1. 15.] and as the Voice of a great 4 Thunder [i. e. Terrible, Chap. 4, 5. 6, 1. 10, 3.] and I heard the Voice of 4 Harpers harping with their Harps [i. e. there was
a great and powerful Appearance of Christ's Kingdom, Chap. 11.15.] 4 4 4 Voices, Thunder (called so frequently, Psalm 29. and in other places, the Voice of God) Musick and Singing, are the constant Forerunners and Attendants of Christ's King∣dom, as hath been frequently observed. And it seems to me, that this Vision relates to the Appearance of Christ's Kingdom, upon the sounding of the seventh Angel, when there were greatSee Grot. on Rev. 5.8. Voices heard in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; and that it is Synchronous and contemporary with it; it being very rational, that the seven loud Voices, so audibly heard in order, in this Chapter; should be no other than the Voices of the Seven Thunders (mentioned, Chap. 10.3-8.) now unsealed, or opened; which were then sealed, and not to be written, or come into Event, until the days of the Voice of the seventh Angel. And here it may be observed; that by the Voices and Mu∣sick, is not only represented an Appearance of Christ's King∣dom upon Earth; but that also they signifie the Joy which is in Heaven, and in the Heavenly Tabernacle, upon the Exalta∣tion of Christ's Kingdom; For if there be Joy in Heaven up∣on the Conversion of a Sinner, it may well be supposed to be there also, upon the great Advancements of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth. And amongst all the Musick of the Temple, perhapsSee Grot. on Rev. 5.8. Harps are here more particularly mentioned; Because it is the Musical Instrument of Praise and Thanksgiving, which was wont to be made use of in setting forth Great and Ex∣traordinary Actions; and was the particular Instrument which
David was eminently skilled in, and which was the occasion of his being brought to Court, and fitted for the Kingdom; which was the Type of Christ's Kingdom here represent∣ed. And Thunder also may be here mentioned to shew, that the seven Voices of this Vision, were the several Openings, or Ʋn∣sealings of the seven Thunders, which were sealed, Chap. 10.4. 3 And they sung, as it were, a New Song [i. e. the Song of Re∣demption by Christ's Blood alone, which seemed to be New, be∣cause it had not been taught, nor heard openly during the Apo∣stasy. See Chap. 5.9.] before the Throne of God [Chap. 4.] and be∣fore the Four Beasts [or Living Creatures Chap. 4.6.] and the El∣ders [Chap. 4.4. i. e. the Doctrine of Redemption, and those who sung, and had taught it in the Church, whilst they were up∣on Earth, were approved of by God, and the Divine Consisto∣ry, which all along in this Prophecy appears as passing Judg∣ment upon the Actions represented in it. See Chap. 4.1. pag. 70.] and no man could learn that Song but the Hundred Forty and Four Thou∣sand [i. e. none could fully understand, and experience, the Doctrine taught in that Song, but those true Christ ans] which were redeemed [i. e. rescued and delivered by the Blood of Christ alone, from the Earth [i. e. from the Corruptions of Anti∣christianism.] 4 These are they which are not defiled with [Whorish] Women [i. e. were not Members of Idolatrous Churches, Ezek. 23. See Rev. 17.1.] for they are Virgins [and not Prostitutes, as Jezebel, and the Whore, Chap. 17. and had kept themselves pure from all Idolatry and Antichristian Pollutions, Psalm 45.14. Canticl. 1.3. 2 Cor. 11.2.] these are they which 5 follow the Lamb whereso∣ever he goeth [i. e. were the Faithful Disciples of Christ; and are now his more Immediate Attendants in the Heavenly State of his Kingdom here represented;] these were 6 redeemed from 7 among men, being the first 7 fruits unto God, and to the Lamb [i. e. the choi∣cest Members of his Church; and the first partakers of the Glory of his Kingdom.]
5 A Metaphor taken from those Officers who are the con∣stant Attendants of Princes; or from the Disciples of Pro∣phets, concerning whom this Phrase is used inMatth. 8.19. Luke 9.57. Scri∣pture; or rather from the Virgins, the Companions of the Bride and Bridegroom, Psalm 45.14. Matth. 25. Christ's Kingdom being likened to a Marriage-Supper, Chap. 19.9. and his Attendants as a Bridegroom, to Virgins, Matth. 25. who are also the Chorus to the Marriage-Song of his Kingdom, in the Book of Canticles. And they are men∣tioned in opposition to the Followers and Worshippers of the Beast. 6 As the First-born were wont to be under the Law, Exod. 13, 13.22, 29. 7 First FruitsExod. 22.29. Numb. 18.16. Jerem. 2.3. Zech. 2.12. James 1.18. See Mede on the place, and the Commentators on these Texts. were the First and the Choicest Offerings; and whatsoever was separated from Prophane Ʋses to Holy ones. Whereby is signified, (1.) The First Church of Choice, Holy, and Pure Christians, which shall appear at the expi∣ring of the Times of the Beast, upon the first Succession of Christ into his Kingdom; when (as hath been before shewn on Chap. 10. num. 13.) the Thirty Years in Daniel, which make the 1260 Years to amount to 1290. are to begin in the full and entire Resurrection of the Witnesses: Who are said here to be redeemed by the Lamb, or Christ alone, in oppo∣sition to their own and others Merits, and Antichristian Par∣dons and Indulgences; and that from among Men; i. e. from out of the World, or the common State of Mankind; or rather
from the Antichristian Men of the Earth, those Merchants, (Chap. 18.11-13.) who bought and sold Men and Souls. (2.) Because in this Vision there is described not only the State of Christ's Church and Kingdom upon Earth, but al∣so the State of the Archetypal Kingdom in Heaven; Hereby is also represented the first Glorious Appearance of the Members of it, the Witnesses departed in the Lord, who have the pri∣viledge to be the constant Attendants of the Lamb, in his Heavenly Tabernacle; and the first partakers of that exalted State of his Kingdom, here Visionally represented by Mount Zion. 5 And in their mouth was found no 8 guile [i. e. they were not found guilty of the great Lye of Antichristianism and Idola∣try;] for they are without Fault before the 9 Throne of God [i. e. they are acquitted and justified by God; although they had been con∣demned and anathematized by Antichrist.] 8 Idols are called Lyes inJerem. 16.19. Am. 2.4. Grotius and Mede on the place. Scripture; and Lying (as Grotius observes on the place) is a constant Concomitant of Idolatry; and hereby this Apostolical Number of Christ's Fol∣lowers, are distinguished from those which belonged to An∣tichrist, whose Religion is but an Image, or Counterfeit of Christ's, and is thereupon also justly called a Lye. 9 Hence it appears, that this is the Vision of some exalted State of Christ's Heavenly Kingdom, seen as before the Throne of God, or the Divine Sanhedrim, and Court of Judicature, coming down (as it were) on Mount Zion; where the Witnesses (who are the 144000.) who had been killed by
the Beast, appear, and are, as it were, adjudged by God, as worthy the exalted State they enjoy with Christ; and which they had obtained under his Conduct, and for his Sake: which Appearance shall have also (as hath been all a∣long observed) a parallel one on Earth, in the Philadelphian State of the Church. 6 And I saw 10 anoth r Angel [or Gospel-Ministry, Chap. 1. 1, 20] fly in the midst of Heaven [to denote the Swift; Publick, and Universal Public tion of the Gospel of the Kingdom, Chap. 8.13.] having [committed unto him 2 Cor. 5.19.] the 11 Everlasting Gospel [of the Kingdom spoken by the Mouth of all his Pro∣phets since the World began, which was to bring in Everlasting Righ eousne s, Dan. 9.24 Acts 3.21-26. Rev. 16.7.] to preach unto [all] them tha dwell on the Earth, and to 22 every Nation [of Pagan Mahometan, and Antichristian Gentiles;] and Kin∣dred [or Tribes of Israeli es;] and Tongue [or the various People of several Languages amongst them;] and People [i. e. to the whole multitude of each.] 10 There being no Angel mentioned before, but only a Voice (Verse 2.) By another Angel here must also be under∣stood, another Voice; which Word imports Ʋtterance of Doctrine; as John the Baptist is called, The Voice of one cry∣ing in the Wilderness: And this Voice is here called an An∣gel, because it was pronounced by an Angelical Voice, or Speaker; who was seen; whereas the former was only heard; so that this is another, or a distinct Voice or Angel from the former: Whereby a certain Order of Voices is plain∣ly represented; which being also Seven in Number, and di∣stinctly reckoned up, may very well be accounted the seven Thunders, opened into loud and distinct Voices. 11 The Gospel of Christ's Glorious Kingdom being the main Subject and Scope of these Visions, it must therefore be here referred to; which is called Everlasting;
(1.) Because it was the Doctrine, or Mystery designed by God from everlasting, praefigured in all the Types of the Old Law, and preached, or spoken by the Mouth of all the Prophets since the World began; by which Phrase Eternity is signified in Scripture. See Acts 3.21-26. Rom. 16.25, 26. 1 Cor. 2.7. Rev. 10.7. (2.) Because it was to bring in the Everlasting Righteous∣ness (mentioned Dan. 9.24.) or the way of becoming Righ∣teous in the Account of God by Christ alone; which will then be fully manifested to be no New Doctrine (as the Apo∣stasy, at the Beginning of the Reformation asserted it to be) but the way which was from Everlasting, and shall be until the End of all Things. I think it may not be unfit to observe in this place, That the Apostasy (that it might be a perfect Antichristian Counter∣feit of Christ's Kingdom) did pretend to a New Gospel, called theBishop Stillingfleet of Idol. Chap. 4. p. 238-246. Eternal Gospel; containing many Extravagant and Blasphemous Opinions; and asserting, that the Scrip∣tures contained not the Gospel of the Kingdom, but were to give way to a New Gospel, which should take place in A. D. 1260. Six Years after the preaching of it; which Gospel was so much favoured by the Popes, and the Court of Rome, that a Book written against it, was burnt by their Order; And although they were at last forced to burn the Eternal Gos∣pel also; yet it was done secretly, and with much unwilling∣ness. 12 This is a Pleonasm, or a Figure, wherein by a Redun∣dant Accumulation of many Particulars, is expressed the preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, for the bringing in of all Nations (whereby Ethnicks, or Gentiles of all sorts, are
meant in Scripture) and of all the Tribes of Israel to the Kingdom of Christ; according to Hosea 6.1-3. Matth. 24.14. Rom. 11.25, 26. which is to be near the End, when the Deliverer shall come out of Sion, and after Two days, in the Third Day; which Dr. Pocock on Hosea, extends even to the End of the World; but others, with more Reason, to the End ofSee on Chap. 11. 9, 11. Antichristian, or Gentile Times, when Christ's Kingdom shall appear, and they who have known (something of Christ's Kingdom) shall follow on to know the Lord, more fully and perfectly by the preaching of this E∣verlasting Gospel, Hos. 6.3. 7 Saying with a loud Voice [i. e. after a zealous, and most pow∣erful manner;] fear God [and not Idols, Isaiah 8.12, 13.] and give Glory to him [alone, and not to Creatures, Angels, and Saints;] for the Hour [or precise time, and appointed Season;] of his Judgment [Government, or 13 Kingdom, and of his Judg∣ments on all manner of Idolatry, Pagan, and Antichristian, which he will no longer wink at;] is come: and worship him [therefore the Creator of all things,] that made Heaven 14 and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of Waters [of the Great Deep, Gen. 7.11.] 13 So Judgment often signifies in the Old Testament; as Psalm 72.1, 2. and in other places of Scripture. 14 The Heathens worshipped all the parts of Nature, even the Seas, Rivers and Fountains, as is clearly proved byDe Idolatr. Vossius; which the AntichristianDr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity, part 2. lib. 1.17. Bishop Stillingfleet's Fourth Conference concerning Idolatry. Apostasy also having i∣mitated, in appointing Tutelar Saints, and Angels to most of the parts of the Creation, and in introducing a Worship
which is but an Image, or a New Model of Paganism; Do their Idolatries may be here meant. 8 And there followed another 15 Angel [or Gospel-Ministry;] say∣ing [i. e. preaching, and denouncing this great Truth;] 16 Ba∣bylon [i. e. Antichristian, or Papal Rome,] is 17 fallen, is fallen [i. e. will as certainly fall in a short time, as if it were a ready fallen;] that great City [of a large Juri diction, and Head of the Roman Empire;] because she made all Nations drink of the Wine of the 18 wrath of her Fornication [i. e. partake of her Idolatry.] 15 Some Copies read a Second Angel; for so it was, al∣though it was the Third Voice; for so saying imports. 16 Babylon is a known Type of Rome Antichristian; as is shewn more fully hereafter. 17 This is a common Scheme of Speech amongst the Pro∣phets, to signifie, that the thing will as certainly come to pass, as if it were already accomplished, Isaiah 21.9. Jer. 51.8. The Temporal Punishment of Babylon, or Rome, was executed, Chap. 11.13. before the sounding, and Voices of the seventh Trumpet; So that this Fall, which is after that sounding, must relate to some other Punishment: which may probably be its Eternal Punishment; which is executed, Chap. 18.2. and is here only Preached, or Denounced, as nearly approaching, by this Angelical Voice, or Preacher; and that after a more powerful manner (these Voices issuing out of Thunder unsealed) than had been done before. 18 They were drunk, and mad after Idols, and possest (as it were) with a high Rage of Lust after them; like to that of a Wild Ass, to which Idolatrous Israel is compared by the Pro∣phet, Jer. 2.24.
9 And the third Angel [but fourth Voice] followed [after] them, saying, with a loud Voice [to shew the Import, and Severity of the Denunciation;] if [after the Denunciation against the Antichri∣an City,] any man [shall still presume to] worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his hand [i. e. any way comply with Antichristianism, Chap. 13.11-18.] 10 The same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God [i. e. he shall be punished in 19 Wrath for the 19 Wrath of his Fornica∣tion, Verse 8.] which is poured out [or 20 tempered and prepared to be] witho t any [the least] mixture [or 20 Temperament of Mercy, Luke 16.24. James 2.13.] into the 21 Cup of his Indig∣nation [and Fury;] amd he shall be tormented with Fire and Brim∣stone [i e. with the most exquisite Torments,] in the presence [and with the Approbation] of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb [Christ; who shall command the Execution of the Sentence, and approve the Equity and Justice of the Judgments of God, 2 Thes. 1.5-11.] 19 19 A Figure frequent in Scripture; as Rom. 1.25, 26. and in several other places. 20 20 This seems to be the true meaning of ; which Phrase in this way of rendring has some Ele∣gance in it. 21 A Phrase whereby the Wrath of God is frequently ex∣pressed inJob 21.20. Psalm 75.8. Isaiah 51.17, 22. Jerem. 25.15. Ezek 23.32, 33. Scripture. 11 And the Smoak [from the fire] of their Torment ascendeth up [i. e. shall as certainly ascend as if it were now mounting up, and that] 22 for ever and ever: And they have no rest 22 day nor night [i.
e. their punishment shall be without interm ssion,] who worship the Beast, and his Image, and [he also shall be thus punished [whosoever receiveth the mark of his 23 Name [i. e. is any way Subj ct to Anti∣christ, and is of his Profession.] 22 22 In the former Verse there was a Denunciation (for the Judgments are only here preached and foretold, but not executed,) of the severest of God's Judgments; expressed, to set forth the Extraordinariness of them, by many full, and even redundant Expressions: And in this Verse it is declared that their Punishment shall be for ever, and without intermis∣sion: Whence it appears, that their Everlasting Punishment, and not their Temporal one, is here denounced. 23 Hence it is manifest, That the Mark of the Beast is the Impression of his Name: Image, Mark, Name, and Number of Name being all of the same import; Number including Mark, and Name too. 12 Here 24 [or just at the time now represented in the course of this Prophecy;] is [the end of] the Patience [or waiting] of the Saints [for Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 12.12. Rev. 13.10,] Here are [all] they [and none of them are lost,] that keep the Command∣ments of God and the Faith of Jesus, [i. e. the Faithful and Obedi∣ent Witnesses are here ready to receive the blessedness promised them, Dan. 12.12. in the Kingdom of Christ, and the first re∣surrect on, now at hand, Rev. 12, 17.13, 10.20, 5.] 24 This Voice (in exact correspondence with Chap. 13.10. which ought to be interpreted in agreement with this Verse) just after the Judgment on the Beast, sets Bounds to the Saints patient Expectation of Christ's Kingdom; intimating that it was near at hand; and that all the Faithful Witnesses, and Seed of the Woman (Chap. 12.17.) should rise; none of them having been lost, but Antichrist, of whom Judas, the Son of Perdition, was a Type, John 17.12.
13 And I heard a [Fifth] Voice from Heaven [as Thunder, Ver. 2.] saying unto me, 25 Write [i. e. unseal, and plainly deliver this impor∣tant, memorable, and necessary Truth, which will very shortly be accomplished;] 26 Blessed [Dan. 12.12] are the dead which dye in the Lord [i. e. who dye for his Sake, and Cause, and in his Faith and Favour, resigning their Life and Spirit into his hands, by vertue of Grace and Strength derived from him, 1 Cor. 15.18. 1 Thes. 4.14, 16.] from henceforth [i. e. they will be 27 immediate∣ly blessed; for the time is near, yea, even at the doors:] yea, [it is certainly so, Chap. 1.7.] saith the [Holy] Spirit [it self, whose Witness is Truth, 1 John 5.6. and which raiseth the dead, Rom. 8.10, 11.] that they may rest [Dan. 12.1, 2. 2 Thes. 1.7.] from their Labours [in the Kingdom of Christ, for a Thousand Years, Hebr. 4.9, 10. See on Rev. 20.5, 6.] and their [good] works [without the Trouble, Sufferings and Labour which before ac∣companied them;] do follow them [into the Rest prepared for them in that Kingdom, to their Praise and Honour, and that they might be rewarded for them, Heb. 4.] 25 Writing and Sealing are opposed in this Prophecy; as hath been beforePag. 80. observed; from whence we may con∣clude, that this Voice was one of the Thunders now unsealed, or Written. 26 In this Verse there is a plain Declaration of the First Resurrection; Concerning which see what is fully discoursed on, Rev. 20. And it is taken (as Grotius excellently ob∣serves on the place) from Dan. 12.12. where Blessedness is pronounced as belonging to those who shall wait, and come to the End of the 1335 Years: from whence also it appears, that this is to be accomplished at the completion of those Years; when a Blessed Resureection is to be, according to Dan. 12.1, 2, 3.
27 This seeems to be the import of the Particle , as Dr.On this Verse, and on Matth 23.39. Hammond hath observed: and although there be some difference amongst Criticks about the signification of this Word, and whether it should be referred to what goes before, or what follows after; yet the sense seems, according to all, to be much the same. 24 And I looked 28 [or was in Vision,] and behold a white [or bright] 29 cloud [of Glory, to denote, the Majesty, Justice, and Purity of Gods Judgments,] and upon the Cloud one 30 sate like unto the Son of Man [i. e. Christ, Chap. 1.13. Dan. 7.13. John 1.14] having on his head a Golden 31 Crown [denoting his Kingdom, and Conquests, Chap. 6.2.] and in his hand a sharp 31 Sickle [to reap the World swiftly and speedily, Joel 3.4, 13. Matth. 13.30, 36-43.] 28 The two former Verses contained evidently a Declara∣tion of a Blessed State of the Dead in the Lord, immediately to ensue; which State being the next thing in order to be performed, seems to be here set forth by Metaphors made use of to the same purpose, by the Prophet Joel, and our Saviour, in the places quoted in the Paraphrase on the Text; as shall be endeavoured to be shewn from what the Words of the Text shall suggest. 29 Here Christ is represented as coming in his Kingdom to Judgment; according to the Descriptions frequently given of it in the Gospels, Luke 21.27. Matth. 24, 30.26, 64. Dan. 7.14. 30 This posture also denotes Judicature and Government Joel 3.12. Matth. 19.22. to which answers his coming sitting
on a White Horse, as he does here on a White Cloud, in the parallel place to this, Rev. 19.11. 31 In Rev. 19. he hath also many Crowns upon his Head; which are a known Emblem of Regal Power, and Conquest: And as he had a Crown at his first going out to propagate the Gospel, Chap. 6.2. so is he here also represented with a Golden one, to shew the Glory of the Kingdom in which he is now established. 32 This is the Instrument of Reapers, with which they not only cut down the Corn, but also gather it together; accord∣ing to our Saviour's Parable, Matth. 13. and it is sharp, to denote the speed which will be then used, Joel 3.4. 15 And another [a sixth] * Angel [and Voice] came out of the Temple, crying with a loud Voice [i. e. earnestly, Luke 18.7. Rev. 6.10.] to him that sate on the Cloud [i. e. to Christ;] Thrust in [we humbly pray thee] thy Sickle, and reap: for the time is come for thee [the Lord of the Harvest, the Judge of the World, which raiseth the Dead, and quickneth them, Matth. 9.38. John 5.21, 22.] to reap; for the 33 Harvest of the Earth [or Field of the World,] is * ripe [i. e. all things are ready, and the time ap∣pointed for gathering the Children of the Kingdom is now just at hand, Matth 13.30, 38. John 4.35. Mark 4.29.The Day of the Lord is near. Joel 3.14] * This Angel, or Angelical Company (for Angel is taken collectively in this Prophecy) is not a Gospel-Ministry, be∣cause it does not denounce any thing as the others had done; but seems to denote the Attendants of Christ, the An∣gels, who are the Reapers, Matth. 13.29. and the Shout, the
Voice of the Arch-Angel, which shall accompany him at the last Day; and they cry out unto him from his Heavenly Temple, to expedite that Blessedness which had been so long delayed, and which the Saints so eagerly long after, and the whole Creation groans for, Rom. 8.22, 23. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.4, 5. 33 Harvest is plainly taken in a good sense in the places quo∣ted in the Paraphrase; and where it is common to the good and bad, as Matth. 13. they are distinguished from one an∣other as Tares and Wheat; and even in Joel 3.13. (from whence this Expression is taken) Vintage is peculiarly appropriated to the Wicked, and may be very well distinguished from the Harvest, which may relate to God's bringing, or gathering together his People, Verse 1.7. and his mighty ones, Verse 11. who seem to be the same with the Armies of Heaven, the An∣gels and the Saints, which shall accompany Christ at this great Day of his Kingdom, Rev. 19.14. And therefore the rea∣ping of both these at the last Day, being so plainly distin∣guished in Scripture, it is fit also that it should be so here also. * Ripe, that is, fully ripe, White to the Harvest; and there∣fore looks as if it were dried or withered (as the Word also imports) because of the long delay, and expectation of Christ's Kingdom. 16 And he that sate on the Cloud [i. e. Christ;] thrust in his Sic∣kle on the Earth, and the Earth was [immediately] reaped [of its 34 Wheat; i. e. the Just were gathered together at the first Re¦surrection, Matth. 13.30, 38, 48. Rev. 20.5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 Thes. 4.13-18.] 34 The Saints and Godly are understood (saith Mr. Bright∣man on the place) by the Corn, or Wheat of this Harvest; who are compared to it by our Saviour, Matth. 13.30, 38. and are here represented, saith he, as falling of their own
accord before the Sickle, through the great ripeness of them. Now seeing that almostPoli Synops. in Apocal. pag. 1098 in fin. all Interpreters agree, that these Words have a reference to the last Judgment, described by the same Metaphors in Dan. 7. and Math. 13. it is highly probable, that hereby is meant the gathering together of the Saints departed in Christ, by the first Resurrection; fitly call∣ed the reaping of the Earth of its Wheat; as it consists in the gathering together of the Bodies, and Dust of Saints, which are all that is precious, and of any Value in it; and the gathering of them, and those who remain alive, out of this Wicked, Antichristian Earth, into a New Heaven, and a New Earth; which is the proper meaning ofMetere est ex hac Vita colligere. Menoch. Tirinus in locum. Falx homines a Terra demet it ut Ecclesiae inserantur. Grot. in locum Reaping in Scrip∣ture: and because this is to be done in a moment, (1 Cor. 15.51, 52.) therefore is the Sickle represented as sharp, to denote the extraordinary quickness of this Action: But of this see what is largely discoursed on the Three Last Chap∣ters. 17 And another Angel [i. e. the Seventh and last,] came out of the Temple which is in Heaven [i. e. another Angelical Company of Reapers, who were to bind 35 together the Wicked, in order to destruction, Matth. 13.41.] he also having a sharp Sickle [to cut 36 down, and gather together the wicked ones for a swift Destru∣ction, Verse 14] 35 For such this Angel may very well be supposed to be, by the Description here given of him; and consequently the Angel, Verse 15. must mean the Reapers, who were to ga∣ther
the Wheat, or the Children of the Kingdom toge∣ther. 36 For this is the Use of a Sickle, as well as to ga∣ther. 18 And 37 another Angel came out from the Altar [of Burnt Of∣ferings, on which there was Fire continually, Levit. 6.9. Rev. 6.9.] which had power over fire [i. e. God's Judgments, in order to execute them, Rev. 8, 5.11, 5] and cryed with a loud cry [that the Blood of the Souls under the Altar might be speedily and ful∣ly avenged upon the Wicked, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.] to him that had the sharp Sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp Sickle, and gather [by raising them;] the clusters of the 38 Vine of the Earth [i. e. the Chil∣dren of the Wicked one, Matth. 13.30, 38, 41, 49, 50. Joel 3.13. Deut. 32.32.] for her Grapes are fully ripe [for Destructi∣on.] 37 It is the Opinion of Dr. Lightfoot, That here is an Allusion to a Custom amongst the Jews, who were not wont to put in the Sickle, until the Priests, who sate in the Tem∣ple, gave Order, and Command for it: But I presume, the Reason given in the Paraphrase, to be more appo∣site. 38 The Wicked, and the Antichristian Church, are repre∣sented by an Earthly Vine, whose Clusters and Grapes are bitter, like the Vine of Sodom and Gomorrah, Deut. 32.32, 33: as the True Church, and the Righteous Members of it, are by the Vine of the Lord, and of Christ, Isaiah 5. Psalm 80. John 15. Now if the Reaping of the Harvest, signi∣fies the Gathering of the Saints at the First Resurrection; then the Gathering of the Vintage must signifie the Re∣surrection of the Wicked, to whom it is expresly re∣ferred by the Prophet Joel, Chap. 3.13. Concerning which see what is discoursed on the Three last Chap∣ters.
19 And the Angel thrust in his Sickle into the Earth, and gathered the Vine of the Earth, and cast it into the great Winepress of the Wrath of God [i. e. into exquisite Torments.] 20 And the Winepress was trodden [i. e. these Judgments were executed;] without 39 the City [of the New Jerusalem, Chap. 21.2. Isa. 66.24. in the Valley of Decision, Joel 3 2, 12, 14. Rev. 16.16.] and blood came out of the Winepress, even to the Horses Bridles [i. e. the Destruction was very bloody, and ap∣parent to them with Christ, on White Horses, Rev. 19.14] by the space of a thousand, and six 40 hundred furlongs [i. e. it was Universal, Joel 3.2. Rev. 16.14.] 30 The New Jerusalem, the beloved City, the Camp of the Saints, which they came to compass (Rev. 20.9.) but could not enter, being discomfited, in a place without it, called Jehoshaphat, by Joel; whereby is signified, that Gods Judgments shall be executed upon them (which is the mean∣ing of the Word Jehoshaphat) in the places to which the Wicked shall be confined by God, during the Thousand years of the New Jerusalem. 40 Four, the SquareFour times four hundred amount to sixteen hundred. Root of 1600, is a Symbol of Ʋniversality; taken from the Four Corners, or Winds of Hea∣ven; which denote the whole Heaven, and the whole Earth, in Scripture: and perhaps also upon other Pythagorical and Cabbalistical Reasons, which may be seen in Dr. Moor's Commentary on this place. And here is to be noted what a Learned Friend sug∣gested unto me; That Four being a Square Number,
and Furlongs being the Measure of the Four Square Ci∣ty, the New Jerusalem, Chap. 21.16: Hereby may be fitly signified, that this Vengeance (described here as a Four square one, if I may so speak, coming out of the Four square City) was not only Ʋniversal, in the Four Quarters, or utmost Corners of the Earth, the Seat of the Wicked Nations, Revel. 20.8; but also Perfect and Re∣gular, (as a Four-square City is) agreeable to God's Holy and Righteous Admensurations of Justice, towards All Men, the Wicked, as well as the Saints.
CHAP. XV. The Text. 1 AND I saw [in Vision,] another sign [orMatth. 16.1. pro∣digious appearance, more 1 wonderful than the for∣mer seen Chap. 12.1.] in 2 Heaven, great and marvellous [for the Events signified by it;] 3 seven Angels [the immediate Ministers of this Judgment,] having [in their Vials, Verse 7.] the seven 4 last plagues [or Judgments;] for in them is filled up [or finished] the wrath of God; [and therefore they are the last.] Annotations on CHAP. XV. 1 For in the former, Paganism fell, and the Kingdom was only adjudged to Christ; but in this, Antichristianism falls, and the glorious Kingdom of Christ it self appears; whereas there was before only an Emblem of it upon Earth: which being a State of things more perfect than the former, is here called not only a great, but a marvellous Portent. 2 Three things in this Prophecy are more particularly seen as in Heaven.
(1.) The Divine Court of Judicature, or Grand Synedri∣um, Chap. 4. (2.) The Downfal of Paganism, and the Appearance of the Christian Empire, Chap. 12.1. (3.) The present Judgment upon Antichristianism: All of them referring to the Kingdom of Christ, in the New Jerusalem, but this to an high State of it now approach∣ing. 3 The Sabbatick Number of Seven is all along used in this Prophecy, to shew, that the End and Issue of all things in it, is with respect to Christ's Kingdom at the Seventh Thou∣sand Year of the World; as hath been before observed. 4 Hence we may note, (1.) That these Plagues relate to the Seventh Trumpet, out of which they must issue, because they are the last Plagues, and that the last We; at the first sounding of which the Wrath of God came (Chap. 11.18.) which is by these Plagues filled up, or accomplished. (2.) That the last Plagues must refer to the last Division of Time in Daniel (Chap. 12.12.) to wit, the last Forty Five Years, which being added to the Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years, make them up the One Thousand Three Hundred and Thirty Five Days of Years there mentioned. (3.) That the last Portion of Apocalyptick Time necessa∣rily supposes that there is a constant Order, or Connexion of Time in this Book, from First to Last; viz. from the First Seal to the Seventh and Last Trumpet; out of which, first the Voices, and then the Vials issue, which are the Last Plagues; after which, according to Daniel, the Blessed State of Christ's Kingdom in Glory begins; until when, none could enter the Temple, Verse 8. 2 And I saw, as it were, a Sea of Glass [representing the pure State of the Church and Kingdom; See on Chap. 4.6.] mingled
with 5 Fire [to denote the Fiery Indignation of God, to be pour∣ed out of the Vials;] and them that had gotten the Victory over the Beat, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the Number of his Name [i. e. who had overcome and escaped out of the Tem∣ptations of the Antichristian Profession; See Chap. 13.15-18. 14 11.] stand 6 on the Sea of Glass [in a Posture and State of Vi∣ctory, and happy Security from the Vengeance of the Vials;] having the 7 Harps of God [i. e. most Excellent, Holy, and Heavenly Musick, with Joyful and Thankful Hearts.] 5 This has a reference to the Red Sea, through which the Israelites passed; being made up, as it were, of the Christal∣line Sea, Chap. 4.6. and the Red Sea, Exod. 14. this Verse, and some others in this Chapter, containing an Allusion to that Memorable Story. 6 As the Israelites (Exod. 14.29, 30.) stood on the shote of the Red Sea, in safety, viewing the Overthrow of the Aegyptians, the Type of the Antichristian Party; for to stand on the Sea signifies to stand on the shore of it, 1 Kings 4.20. Exod. 15.22. Whereby is signified the Preservati∣on and Security of the Saints, during the pouring forth of the Vials upon the Wicked: Whereupon Fire is not here men∣tioned; where the Sea is spoken of with relation to them: And the Scripture seems to affirm that the Days of the last Great Tribulation (which may perhaps refer to the Vials) shall be shortned, or cut off, for the sake of the Elect, Isa. 10.22. Matth. 24.22. Rom. 9.28. 7 By a usual Hebraism, the most Excellent things are attri∣buted to God in Scripture; whence these Phrases, Cedars of God, Mountains of God, and the like. And by these Harps is signified, such Heavenly Musick, or Praise and Thanksgi∣ving, in this Representation of Christ's Kingdom, as David the King (a Type of Christ) used in his Royal Palace, and in the Service of the Temple; called, the Musick of God
in1 Chron. 16.42. 2 Chron. 7.6. Scripture: Skill to play on the Harp being one of those Gifts which God bestowed on David to fit him for the Kingdom, 1 Sam. 17.13, 18. and in which the Prophets ex∣ercised themselves, 1 Sam. 10.5. And so also at the pas∣sage over the Red Sea (which is here alluded to) the Women went out after Miriam, with Timbrels, Dances and Songs, Exod. 15.20-22. 3 And 8 they sung [now in an happy and secure State;] the Song of Moses [i. e. one of the same Spirit and Style with that which was sung by him, Exod. 15.] the [Deut. 34.10. Heb. 3.5. Eminent] Servant of God [andDeut. 34.10. Heb. 3.5. Faithful in all his House; and therefore a fit Type of these Faithful Witnesses; and worthy to be imitated by them in a Song in Memory of Gods Judgments on Antichrist, of whom the Aegyptians, the Subject of Moses's Song, were a Type;] and [they sung] the Song of the Lamb [Christ, sung Chap 5.8-14.] saying, Great [as to the Power by which they are wrought, Exod. 15.6, 7. Rev. 5.12] and marvellous [as to the Wisdom of them, Exod. 15.11. Rev. 5.12.] are [all] thy Works [espe∣cially those wrought in our Deliverance;] Lord God Almighty [glorious in Holiness, doing Wonders, Exod. 15.11. Rev. 4.8.] just [in punishing,] and true [in performing thy promises,] are thy ways [i. e. Proceedings and Actions, Exod. 15.13. Deut. 42.4.] thou King of Saints [whom thou dost defend, deliver, and exalt, Exod. 15.17, 18. Rev. 5.9.] 8 As Moses and the Israelites also did on the Banks of the Red Sea, Exod. 15. betwixt which Song, and that of the Lamb, Chap. 4, and 5. there is a very remarkable Congrui∣ty; as is observed in the Paraphrase. 4 Who [of all the Creatures, Rev. 5.13.] shall not fear thee
O Lord [for thy Judgments, Exod. 15.14-16. Jerem. 10.7.] and glorifie thy Name [i. e. Thee, thy Excellencies and Perfe∣ctions, Exod. 15.3, 11.] for thou only art holy [Exod. 15.11. Rev. 4 8.] for all Nations shall come and worship before thee [alone, Exod. 15.14-16. Rev. 4.8-11. and 5.13.] for thy Judgments are made manifest [in the Glories of thy Triumphs over thy Enemies, Exod. 15.6, 7. Rev. 5.13.] 5 And after that [Song, and Vision,] I looked [again, or was in Vision;] and behold the 9 Temple [orPsal, 28, 2. 138, 2. Grot. and Hammond on this place, and on Acts 7.44. Oracle, the most Holy Place,] of the Tabernacle of the Testimony [i. e. of the Di∣vine Habitation, or Dwelling-place, where God used to mani∣fest and exhibit himself, and give Testimony of his Presence, and in which were the Two Tables, the Witnesses of the Co∣venant betwixt God and his People, which were to testifie what God required, and testifie against them if they broke it, Exod. 25.10, 22.31, 18▪ 38, 21. Numb. 1.50. Deut. 31.6. Acts 7.44.] in Heaven [in the Heavenly▪ Tabernacle, and in the Pure Church; See on Chap. 14 2.] was opened [i. e. there was a very high Appearance of an Exalted State of Christ's Kingdom in the Heavenly Tabernacle; and a very great Manifestation of his Kingdom on Earth, and Extraordinary Communications of God's Will aod Evidences of his Presence, especially in 10 Judg∣ments] 9 The Temple of the Tabernacle, denotes the Holy of Holies, the most sacred part of it; which is now o∣pened, to signifie some extraordinary manifestation of Christ's Kingdom; there seeming to be many Gradual Openings and Visions of the several parts of the Temple; according to the several Advances of Christ's Church, and Kingdom unto its perfection: For in the Vision of the Temple Opened (Chap. 11.19. only the Ark of the Testament was seen; which
relates only to some particular great Mysteries concerning Christ's Redemption: Whereas here the whole Inward Taber∣nacle of Testimony was discovered, which had severalHeb. 9.1-5. o∣ther things in it besides the Ark; whereby other Manifestati∣ons may be signified. But although the Temple of Jerusalem be the primary Type alluded to; yet Ezekiel's Visional Temple is the more imme∣diate Type; and the ultimate Prospect of all, is upon God's dwelling in holy Souls, especially in the New Jerusalem State, by his Shecinah, or special Presence; and to God and the Lamb, being the Temple into which all is at last re∣solved, Rev. 21.3, 22. 10 This I take (as appears from the next Verse) to be the principal intent of the Opening of the Temple of the Taberna∣cle at this time; viz. That God's Will concerning the ap∣proaching Judgments, ready to be executed, was now plainly made known; expressed here by the Opening of that place, from whence the Divine Responses, and Oracles were wont to be made under the Law; and therefore the Angels come forth in the Habit in which the High-Priest was wont to come out of the Holy of Holies, with an Answer from God. 6 And the seven Angels [or Ministers of God's Judgments.] came out of the [Heavenly] Temple, having the seven Plagues [Strokes, or Punishments;] clothed in pure and white Linen [Chap. 3.4, 5.] and having their Breasts girded with golden girdles [i. e. they came out in the Habit of Priests, and Kings, to shew the Royal Priesthood of Christ's Kingdom, and Heavenly Temple, or
Tabernacle out of which these Judgments proceed; See Chap. 1, 13] 7 And one of the Four Beasts [or the first of the Representatives of the Apostolical Church, Chap. 4, 6. 6, 1.] gave 11 unto the seven Angels seven golden Vials [or Bowls, 2 Chron. 4.22. Rev. 5.8] full [not of Incense, but] of the 12 Wrath of God [trodden cut of the Winepress of his Wrath, out of which the Vial are filled, Chap. 14 19, 20. 15, 1. 19, 15.] who liveth for ever and ever [and therefore can, and will punish the Wicked with an utter, and an everlasting destruction, Deut. 32.22-43. Heb. 10.31.] 11 The seven Angels had indeed the seven Plagues; that is, the Judgments and Punishments which were to be executed; but besides the Materials (if I may so speak) of these Ju∣diciary Plagues, there is also something in God's severe Judg∣ments, which comes more immediately from the hand of God himself; in which the very Essence and Formality ofRom. 12.19. Heb. 10.28-31. See Dr. Tho. Goodwin's Discourse of the Punishment of Sin in Hell. Hell Torments is thought to consist. Now this Wrath of God (the Sting of his Punishments, and the very Gall of them) is here given to the Angels by One of the Four Living Creatures, that is, by the First of them (as One generally signifies in this Prophecy,) whose Voice was as Thunder, and who had the very Purity and Power of the Gospel; and that in Golden Vials, to signifie the Purity and Holiness of God's Judgments; and that they were executed upon the Prayers of Saints, of which Golden Vials and Incense are an Emblem, Chap. 5. 8. 12 The Wicked, with their sins, are cast as Grapes of So∣dom (Deut. 32.32, 33.) into the Winepress of God's Wrath, trod by Christ (Chap. 19, 15.) as Redeemer; and out of
that VVine are these Vials filled: Whereby is signified, that the Just Vengeance, and Recompence of God is executed upon them by Christ, as the Demerit and Consequence of their sins, for the Blood of his Servants they had shed: and as the Vi∣als of the Prayers of the Saints (Chap. 5.8.) are full of O∣dors, by Vertue of Christ's Intercession; so are these full of the VVrath of God, upon the Intercession of Christ for his op∣pressed Saints. 8 And the Temple was 13 filled with 14 Smoak from the Glory of God, and from his Power [i. e. there were setled Manifestatins of God's powerful, and Glorious Presence, in a blessed State; Ezek. 43.4-6] and 15 [or but] no man [or no Creature] was able to enter into the Temple [i. e. God's Glorious Presence could not be enjoy∣ed in its highest Manifestations, Ezek. 48 35. Rev 21.3, 23, 24.] till the Seven Plagues of the Seven Angels were fulfilled [i. e. until the perfect Destruction of the Wicked, whose Sins 16 hinder God's Presence, Ezek. 43.9.] 13 The ConstantExod. 43.34, 35. Lev. 16.2. Numb. 9.15-23. 1 Kings 8.10-13. 2 Chron. 7.1-4. Ezek. 43.1-9. Manifestations of God's Presence, are signified in Scripture, by a Cloud covering and filling the Tabernacle and Temple; whereby God took, as it were, pos∣session of them; who is represented in Ezekiel, as filling the House, or Temple, with his Glory; when he came to dwell in the midst of his people for ever, Ezek. 43.5, 7, 9. Where∣by is signified, that the New Jerusalem State was near its Set∣tlement in the Blessed Milennium, when God will dwell with Men, and he and the Lamb shall be the Temple of the City, Rev. 21.2, 3, 22, 23. 14 LightSee on Chap. 3. num. 36. and Bright Fire are the proper Emblems of
God, who is Love; but when Smoak appears with it, there is intimated some Darkness in the Dispensation referred to; and Mixtures of VVrath and Displeasure: as in this place; because God's VVrath was not as yet executed; the Glory of God (represented by Light and Bright Clouds in the Old Te∣stament) filled the Temple with Smoak, and not Light; there being as yet a Contest betwixt the VVrath, Jealousie, and Ju∣stice of God, and his Enemies to be destroyed; whose Defile∣ments (represented by Smoak, Chap. 9. 2.) and Sins were the Cause that God's Anger smoaked against them; for o∣therwise Fury is not in the Lord, Isa. 27.4. 15 An Allusion to what is related concerning Moses, Exod. 40.35. whereby is expressed the great Terror of this Time of Vengeance; which no Created Beings, not even the An∣gels themselves are able to bear; this being theIsa. Chapters 24, 25, 26, 27. Dan. 12.1. Matth. 24.21, 29, 30. Mark 13.19. Luke 21.23, 24. Rev. 3, 10.7, 14.16, 18. Time of such Trouble as never was; called, The Great Temptation, The Great Tribulation, and the Great Earthquake, in Scripture; which was to be shortned for the Elect's Sake; and will be so very Terrible, that they are pronounced Blessed by Da∣niel (Chap. 12.12.) who shall wait, and come to the End of those Days; when the Blessed Millennium shall begin: Which perhaps may be prefigured byExod. 24.12-18. Mose's not being able to go up into the Mount, until after six Days, and his be∣ing called up into it by God on the seventh Day, theSee the Notes on Chapt. 20.4. Type of the seventh Thousand Year, or the Sabbatical Mil∣lennium. And from hence it may be observed, that although there shall be several Manifestations of God's Presence, and Open∣ings
of the Temple, after the End of the Beasts Months; upon the Entrance of which, the Temple was shut up, and at the Ex∣piring of which, it must consequently be opened: that yet ne∣vertheless the highest State of it, in which God and the Lamb are the Temple; consisting in perfect Tranquillity, and Sere∣nity, without any smoak of Anger from God's Glory, shall not be enjoyed, until the Vials are poured out: which will not be, if the Beast's Months end at 1697, until A. D. 1772. when the 75 Years, which are added to the Times of Antichrist, by Daniel (Chap. 12.) will be expired; as hath been fre∣quently observed. 16 This was signified by the several gradualEzek. 8.4, 6.9, 3.10, 4, 15-19.11, 23. Removals of the Glory of God, and its departure from the Temple, in E∣zekiel; and his not returning into it, so as to fill it, and inha∣bit in it for ever, until he had consumed the wicked Idolaters, and their Abominations, in his Anger, Ezek, 39.11-29.43, 1-9.
CHAP. XVI. The Text. AND I heard a great Voice [or a powerful Command, full of Authority, and about a most important matter;] out of the [Heavenly] Temple [of Christ's Kingdom, the Original and Ar∣che-type of his Kingdom upon Earth, Chap. 15.1, 8.] saying to the seven Angels [or Ministerial Instruments of God's Will, who undertake nothing without a special Command;] Go your ways [with all speed, and swiftness, and by Virtue of my Commissi∣on;] and pour out [the very Dregs of] the Vials of thr Wrath of God upon the 1 Earth. Annotations on CHAP. XIV. 1 This Chapter relating wholly to things Future, is thereup∣on very obscure; it being doubtful, whether it is to be in∣terpreted in a Mystical Sense, as most Interpreters have done; or in a Litteral one; with reference to the Great Conflagra∣tion of the World; plainly asserted by the Apostle2 Ep. 3. Peter, and generally acknowledged as a great Truth. In the for∣mer
way of Interpreting; Earth, Sea, Rivers, and the other parts of the World, on which the Vials are poured, are to be understood only concerning the several Members of the An∣tichristian Kingdom, signified by them; but in the latter, they are to be taken Litterally; and the Vials are to be sup∣posed as so many Gradual Preparations to the General Disso∣lution of the World by Fire. To the clearing of which Que∣stion, it may be observed, (1.) That these Vials are filled out of the Blood which came out of the Winepress of God's Wrath; as appears from Chap. 14.19, 20. compared with the first Verse of this Chap∣ter. Whence it will follow, if that Observation be true, That these Vials must be poured out, after the gather∣ing the Clusters of the Vine of the Earth; that is, af∣ter the Resurrection of the Wicked, described, Chap. 14.18, 19. who are raised to the Judgment of the great Day, as well as the Saints, who come with Christ; and that with Minds so affected with Wickedness and Malice, as they were whilst before upon Earth; and with Bodies suit∣ed to their Wicked Minds, and capable of influencing each other; upon whom the Wrath of these Vials is to fall, as well as upon the Wicked, who shall then be alive; as appears from Chap. 11.18. compared with the first Verse of this Chapter; where the Wrath of God, and the Time of the Dead, who are to be Judged, seem to refer to these Vials out of which the Wrath of God is to be poured. See the Annotations on Chap. 20. (2.) It is plain fromDan. 7.9. 1 Thess. 1.7. Matth. 24. Dr. Burnet's Theory, 3.11, 12. Scripture, that Christ's coming
shall be in Flaming Fire; and that there shall be several Preparatory Dispositions of Things towards it, and the Con∣flagration. Now it not being probable, that so great a Change of Things should not be prefigured in this Prophecy, which so clearly refers to the End of the Old World, and the Beginning of a New One; where can it have place in it but in this Chapter? Which Observation is the more Remarka∣ble, in that there is a very surprising Agreement betwixt the Vials thus interpreted, and the most ingenious Hypothesis of Dr. Burnet, concerning the gradual Dispositions to, and pro∣gress of the great Conflagration. (3.) The Philosophy of Scripture being generally Popular, according to the Common, and Received Opinions of those to whom it was primarily written; these Vials must also be understood after the same manner. And the Preparations to the general Fire must be consequently conceived to be effect∣ed by fit and proper Natural Causes (but underDr. Burnet's Theor. 3.8. Mr. Ray of the Dissol. of the World. the Mi∣nistry of the Angels of each Vial) hinted at only, and inti∣mated by the Types in the Old Testament, to which each Vial alludes; and that after a popular manner, according to the common Sentiments of Mankind, but especially of the Jews, to whom the Scriptures were primarily written. 2 And the first [Angel] went, and poured out his Vial [i. e. exe∣cuted the Judgment he had received in Command,] upon the Earth [by producing an extraordinary 3 Heat, and Drought in it;] and there fell [or 4 was, as the Consequent of this Heat,] a noisome and grievous [or a loathsome, tormenting, malignant, and incurable, Deut. 28.27, 35. Job 2.7.] sore [or 5 fiery Ulcer, breaking forth in scalding Blanes, or boyling Blisters, which were
extreamly grievous, to those on whom they fell, and loathsome to others; and were accompanied with the sharpest Pains of Bo∣dy, and 5 Mind, Exod. 9.9, 11. Job 2.7, 8.6, 4.19 13, 19.] upon the Men which had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image [i. e. the Antichristian Professors, Chap. 13.15, 16.] 2 Earth is here taken for the Earth strictly so called, as distinct from the Seas and Rivers; upon which the Vials are poured afterwards. 3 This is signified by the hot Ashes of the Furnace, Exod. 9.8-11. (from whence the Expressions concerning this Plague are taken) which became small Dust (whereby Drought also is signified, Deut. 28.24.) in all the Land of Aegypt, and was, or became a Boyl on Man and Beast. And accordingly in this Plague, it may by the like Congruity be supposed, that many Hot, and Fiery Particles and Exhalati∣ons (which in the Plague ofRivet. in locum. Dr. Burnet's Theor. 3.7, 8. Aegypt were mixt with the Hot Ashes, when they fell upon the Land) will be poured forth from these Vials upon the Earth; which shall produce an extraordinary Heat and Drought, and be the Cause of the Sores here mentioned, which are wont to break out upon Mens Bodies in hot and dry seasons. 4 Exod. 9.10. It was, or there was, as the Greek transla∣teth, there were Boyls. Ainsw. on Exod. 9.10. 5 For such a Sore was that , or Ʋlcer (the same word which is here used) which fell on Job and the Aegyptians;
which was also accompanied with a great Vexation of Mind, as appears from the History of Job. 3 And the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it be∣came as the Blood of a 6 Dead Man [i. e. it stagnated,] and every li∣ving Soul died in the Sea [i. e. all the Fish of it died, Chap. 8.9.] 6 The Blood of a Man who has received a deadly wound, or of a Carcase, is clotty, thick, and glutinous; whereby the Stagnation of the Waters of the Sea is aptly represented; as also Fiery Eruptions in several parts of the Channel of the Sea: Whereby, in conjunction with other Causes, the mighty Ocean (according to Dr.Theor. 3.9. Burnet's Hypothesis) may be reduced to a standing Pool of putrid waters; which, according to Amos 7.4. may be also devoured by Fire. 4 And the Third Angel poured out his Vial upon the 7 Rivers, and Fountains of Waters, and they [also] became Blood [i. e. stagnated, and were corrupted, so that Men could not 8 drink of them, and were deprived of their necessary Sustenance, Exod. 7.18, 24. Jerem. 51.36.] 7 According to the Philosophy ofGen. 2.5, 6. Psal. 104.6-14. Eccles. 1.7. Isa. 44, 27.50, 2. Scripture (defended by manyDr. Plot de Origine Fontium. Ancient andDr. Plot de Origine Fontium. Modern Philosophers) Rivers de∣pend upon the Sea; and therefore the Sea is here represent∣ed as prepared for Stagnation, before the Rivers; to whose DiminutionDr. Burnet's Theor. 3.9. also, or Suspension, the preceding Drought, and following Heat, in the Eighth Verse, are to be supposed to contribute.
8 This is a grievous Plague, bringing the Judgment home to them, by inflicting it upon Necessaries; their Fish dying, and their water, which should have quenched their Thirst in the great Heat and Drought, being corrupted, and unfit for use; according to what God inflicted on Egypt, Exod. 7.14-25. when the River Nile, and all their Water stank, so that they could not drink of them; and their Fish died; whereby they were deprived of their necessaryGen. 46.34. Exod. 8.26. Numb. 11.5. Deut. 11.10, 11. Jerem. 2.18. Food, their River-Water being their common Drink, and Fish their ordinary Food, it being not lawful for them to eat Sheep, or Oxen. 5 And I heard the Angel of the Waters [or the Ministring Instru∣ments of God's Judgments uppn the Waters;] say [upon the consideration of the Greatness, and yet Righteousness of this Judgment;] thou art Righteous [and Just] O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be [i. e. the Eternal and Immutable God, who performeth infallibly his Promise and Threats, Exod. 3. Rev. 1.4.] because thou hast judged [and punished,] thus [i. e. after this just way of Retribution, and Retaliation, Psalm 58.10, 11. Matth. 7.2.] 6 For they [of the Antichristian Profession, Verse 2.] have shed the * Blood of Saints [i. e. Holy Men;] and Prophets [i. e. Witnesses, Chap. 6, 9, 10, 11. 11. 3, 18.] and thou hast [there∣fore,] given them Blood [or Bloody Waters,] to drink, for they are worthy [i. e. this is a just Judgment upon them, Judg. 1.7. 1 Sam. 15.33. Isa. 49.26. Obad. 16.] * Hencc it seems to appear, that this Vial is a Judg∣ment on the Wicked, raised to receive the Recompence of their shedding the Blood of the Saints; because the princi∣pal
Persecutors were already dead; and therefore must be raised, that they may partake of this Just Retaliation; for otherwise the Number of them who will be then alive, will be but small, in comparison of those who are dead; and the greatest Objects of God's Vengeance, will escape the Pu∣nishment of this Last Day, which is denounced in Scripture against all Ages and Generations of the World, and not only that which shall be then in Being. 7 And I heard another [Angel] out of the 9 Altar, say, [in the Name of the Saints and Martyrs, who lay under it, Chap. 6.9.] Even so [it ought to be,] Lord God Almighty [who art won∣derful in thy Judgments,] true [to thy Promises of avenging thy Saints, Chap. 6.10, 11.] and righteous are thy Judgments [in gi∣ving them Blood to drink for the Blood they had shed.] 9 The Angels are answered, as it were, by a Chorus of Saints, of the First Resurrection; who during the pouring out of the Vials, are protected by God, and are placed, as it were at the Altar: That is, in a place of Safety, and Refuge, as the Altar was under the Old Law; of which Zoar and Goshen were a Type. 2 Pet. 2.9. 8 And the Fourth Angel [having power over Fire, Chap. 14.18.] poured out his Vial upon the 10 Sun [and augmented his Heat;] and Power was [thereby] given unto him [i. e. the Sun,] to 11 scorch [the wicked] men [of the Earth] with Fire [i. e. grievously to annoy and afflict them, Jonah 4.8, 9. Matth. 13.6, 21.] 1• As the Light of the Sun may be multiplied by Parelia, and other Natural Causes (to which the Prophet alludes, Isa. 30.26.) So is it not difficult to conceive, that its Heat may be Naturally augmented by the Dissolution, or Dissipation of its Maculae; upon the Encrease and breaking forth of those Fluctuating Vortexes of Fire, which are in the Body of that Planet, and are stronger and clearer at its Center, than near
its Circumference; and by other Natural Causes, not un∣known to the Learned in such Studies. And if the Heat of the Sun may be encreased by Natural Causes, how much more by Supernatural ones, ordering and conducting them, and adding New ones? 9 And [the Antichristian, and Wicked] Men, were scorched, [or set on fire,] with great 11 Heat [i. e. they were extreamly af∣flicted, and tormented in Body and 12 Mind;] and 13 blasphemed the Name of God, which hath power over these [foregoing, and fol∣lowing] Plagues, [to inflict, or remove them;] and they 13 repent∣ed not to give him Glory [i. e. they were finally 14 impenitent, Heb. 6, 6.10, 26-31.12, 17. Rev. 22.12.] 11 11 Here seems to be an Allusion to the violent, scorch∣ing, and fuffocating Heats of the Sun, and theGrot. in Jon. 4.8, 9. Dr. Hyde's Itiner. Mundi. pag. 146. , or burning heat of the Wind (which usually accompany one another in the Eastern Climates) which afflicted Jo∣nah. 1• As Jonah also was much troubled, and grieved in Mind as well as Body, Chap. 4.6, 3. 13 13 Thus Jonah also was displeased, and very angry, and wished for Death, and repented not, but excused his former Disobedience, although he had been sharply punished for it, Chap. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9. 14 There was no place of Repentance for them; as being under the dreadful Doom pronounced by the Angel of the Vi∣als, who shewed John these things; and said, Let him that is filthy be filthy still, Chap. 22.11.
10 And the Fifth Angel poured out his Vial on the Seat [or 15 Throne] of the Beast [i. e. on Rome, the Seat of the Papacy, Chap. 13, 2.17, 3.] and his Kingdom [i. e. his whole Jurisdicti∣on,] was full of 16 darkness [i. e. was in a most afflicted and disconso∣late condition, Exod. 10.21-23. Isaiah 8.19-22.] and they 17 gnawed their Tongues for pain [i. e. were extreamly impatient, and furious under their Torment, Isaiah 8.21.] 15 Hereby is signified, that this Beast usurped Temporal State and Authority; as having a Chief, and Imperial City for his Throne, or Place of Residence. And it is observable, that this, and such like Phrases, of a too Ominous signification, crept into the Church by degrees; notwithstanding the Op∣position made to such Innovations, and to the Affectation of Temporal Titles and Authority: it being one Reason alledg∣ed by a Synod atEuseb. Eccles. Hist. 7.30. Antioch, for their deposing Paulus Sa∣mosatenus, that he affected State, Secular Titles, and Power; and that he erected a Tribunal in the Church, and a Stately Seat in it, like that of the Temporal Magistrates; which Pomp very much encreased afterwards; as Vallesius on Euse∣bius observes. 16 It is expresly affirmed inDan. 7.9-11. Rev. 18, 8.19, 3. Scripture, that Rome shall perish by Fire; for which Fate (as Dr.Theory of the Earth, 3.10. Burnet hath most ingeniously observed) Italy, the Kingdom, and Seat of the Beast, is most peculiarly disposed by Nature, by reason of the Sulphureousness of its Soil, and its Fiery Mountains and Caverns. And therefore if this particular Judgment upon the Seat of Antichrist be here intended; by the Darkness may be aptly signified, the Smoke of its Fire, now in preparati∣on to break forth, which had been kindled and encreased in
the Bowels of the Earth, by the extream heat of the Former Vials; according to the manner, in which Dr. Burnet suppo∣ses the Conflagration will be brought to pass. And here we may observe, that by a peculiar Direction of Divine Judgment, this Fire begins first at the Seat of An∣tichrist; it being very reasonable and decorous (as Dr.Theory 3.10. Burnet speaks) that the Grand Traitor, and Head of the Apo∣stasy, should be made the First Example of Divine Vengeance: From whence it may be supposed to spread it self through Italy, the more immediate part of the Beast's Kingdom; and so through his whole Jurisdiction; and at last, in the Ʋni∣versal Conflagration (to which these Vials are as so many Dis∣positions) through the whole Earth. It is also observable, that God's Judgments point out, and are proportioned, in their Kinds, to Mens Sins. Whence it may be conjectured, that the Antichristian Kingdom was punish∣ed with Darkness (even Natural Effects carrying along with them Intimations of Moral Reasons and Ends) because of the gross and palpable Ignorance it had introduced: as Aegypt was punished by hot Ashes of burnt Brick, for their oppres∣sing the Israelites at their Brick-Kills; and had their Waters justly turned into Blood, for making that Element the Instru∣ment of their Bloody Design against the Israelitish Infants, Ex. 1.22. 11 And blasphemed 17 the God of Heaven [by whose Command these Plagues were inflicted,] because of their Pains, and their Sores [or fiery Ulcers, and Torment of 17 Mind and Body, Verse 2.] and repented not of their deeds [as being given over to a Reprobate Mind, Verse 9.]
17 17 The extream Torment they were under, affected their Minds and Consciences, and made them blaspheme God, and gnaw their Tongues, as Men in the greatest Rage imaginable. For in this Vial there is an Allusion to the thick and palpable Darkness with which God plagued Aegypt, Exod. 10.21-23. wherein Men sate still for several Days together, in a most disconsolate condition; vexedPsalm 78.49. VVisd. 17. and tormented with great Terrors from their own affrighted Consciences, and the E∣vil Angels. 12 And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River 18 Eu∣phrates, and the Waters thereof were dried up [i. e. all manner of Impediments were removed, Isa. 11, 15. Jerem. 50, 38.51, 32, 36. Zech. 10.11.] that the way of the Kings 19 of the East [i. e. of those Living Saints who are to Reign with Christ in his King∣dom, Isa. 41.26. Rev. 21.24.] might be prepared [i. e. that all things might be 20 prepared for the Jerusalem State, in the New-Earth. See the Three last Chapters.] 18 In this Verse there is an Allusion to the Exploit of Cy∣rus, who dreined the River Euphrates when he took Baby∣lon, as had been foretold by the ProphetChap. 50, 38.51, 32, 36. Vid. Grot. in loc. Isaiah 41.26. Jeremiah; and to those passages of theIs. 15.15. Zech. 10.11. where, by the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, is meant, the Bay of the Mediterranean Sea, which lies next to Egypt; and by the River, not Euphrates; which has not Seven Streams, but Nilus, which by so many Mouths empties it self into the Mediterranean. Prophets, where the Return of the Jews into their own Land is described in the like Expres∣sions. 19 Here also is an Allusion to Isaiah 41.2, 25.46, 11.
where it is foretold, that one should be raised up from the North, and come from the Rising of the Sun to call upon, orEzra 1, 1, 2. proclaim God's Name; meaning thereby Cyrus, who by his Mother's side was of Media, which lies North from Ju∣dea; and by his Father was a Persian, whose Countrey lies exactly Eastward of the Holy Land. And although Arabia be sometimes called the East inJudg. 6.3. Job. 1, 3. Scripture, and the Arabs, the Children of the East (for Job was a King in Arabia, as Dr.Itiner. Mundi, pag. 72, 73. Hyde hath fully proved); yet it was in respect ofMede's VVorks, pag. 476. Egypt, where the Jews had learnt that Form of Speech, Arabia lying Southward of Palestine. Now Cyrus was a Type of Christ, and therefore by the Kings of the East may in proportion be here meant those Saints, who as so many Messiahsses, or Anointed Kings and Priests, (by which Name Cyrus is called in Scripture) shall Reign with Christ, who is expresly said to come from the East, Chap. 7.2. 20 An Expression used Isaiah 40.3. Malach 3.1. Matth. 3.3. And here it is to be noted, thatGen. 2.10-14. Euphrates was one of the Branches into which the River which watered Paradise was divided, after it had passed through it: It was also theGen. 15.18. Exod. 23.31. Deut. 1, 4.11, 24. Josh. 1.4. 2 Sam. 8.3. 1 Kings 4.21. 2 Chron. 9.26. Eastern Bound of the Land of Promise, to which David and Solomon extended their Dominion; the Kingdoms thereabouts being Tributary unto them; although the Jews never enjoyed a quiet Possession of them, as proper Owners,
for any considerable time; GodFuller's Pisgah Sight, 1.2. contracting their Bor∣ders for their Sins; and at last, scattering, and carrying them Captive beyond this very River, into the Dominions of the Assyrian and Babylonish Tyrants. So that this River, which at first was a Stream flowing out of Paradise, became the Fatal Boundary of the Kingdom of the People of God, over which they were carried Captive; and a Sign of En∣mity and Hostility to God's Church; Babylon, the Type of the Seat of Antichrist, being seated on one Branch of it. From which Observations we may conclude, that by dry∣ing up the Waters of Euphrates, that the Way of the Kings of the East might be prepared, is signified, (1.) Preparations for removing of all Impediments and Ob∣stacles whatsoever, especially from Antichrist, which may hinder the Kingdom of Christ, whose Dominion is to be ex∣tended beyond that River, unto the Ends of the Earth, as the Psalmist hath plainly foretold, Psalm 72.8. (2.) Here may also be intimated the near Approach of the New Earth, described in the Three Last Chapters; signified by the drying up that River, whereon the Type of the Antichristi∣an City was seated; which was an hindrance to the Saints entring into, and enjoying the Paradisiacal State of the New Earth of Christ's Kingdom. In order to which also (accor∣ding to Dr.Theory of the Earth, 3.9. Burnet's Hypothesis,) the Rivers are to be dry∣ed up, that so no stop may be put to the Conflagration, which is to burn up the Old Earth. 13 And I saw three unclean 21 Spirits [of Devils, Verse 14] like Frogs 22 come out of the 23 mouth of the Dragon [i. e. the Pagan Roe
man Powers, Chapters 12, and 13.] and out of the mouth of the Beast [i. e. the Antichristian King, Chap. 13.] and of the False 24 Prophet [i. e. the Antichristian Hierarchy, the other Beast, Chap. 13.11—] 21 An Epithet frequently given in Scripture to the Evil Spirits, to distinguish them from the Pure and Holy Spirit of God; and they are called unclean, because they tempt to, and take delight in Sin, which is Impurity and Ʋncleanness. 22 Like the Frogs of Aegypt, Exod. 8.1-14. who went up into the Houses of the Aegyptians, and even into the Bed-Chamber of King Pharaoh, and his Nobles, Psalm 105.30. Whereby is elegantly set forth the Vile Original of the De∣vil's Angels and Emissaries; born, as it were, out of the unclean Mud and Slime; and sent to Negotiate and Solicite (of which the Croaking of Frogs is a Symbol) the Kings of the Earth, into whose Bed Chambers, and most pri∣vate Retirements they insinuate themselves. 23 They came out of their Mouths, as Embassadours, to speak in their Name, and interpret their Mind and De∣signs. And these Spirits of Devils came out of the Mouths of the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet, to shew, that Satan had made use of them all along as his principal Agents; out of each of whom they came; to shew, that all their several and distinct Interests were now to be joyned together at this great Battle, and decisive Attempt. 24 He is called, the Other Beast, Chap. 13. whilst the Beast was in his Infancy; but when he arrived to his Kingship and Supremacy, then this other Beast became his False Prophet, serving and Advancing him by Lying Miracles and Won∣ders.
14 For they [three Frogs,] are [indeed] the Spirits 25 of Devils [like Frogs;] workng 26 [lying,] Miracles, [2 Thes. 2.9-11.] Rev. 13.13, 14.] which go f rth unto the Kings of the Earth [i. e. the Antichristian Potentates, and Enemies of Christ's Kingdom, Psalm 2.1, 2. Judg. 5.3.19. Rev. 20.7-10.] and of the whole World [Chap. 20.8] to gather them [by ex∣citing and engaging them] to the 27 Battle of that 28 great day of God Almighty [Chap. 19.19.] 25 These Wicked Agents for Paganism and Aneichristianism are called Spirits of Devils, because they are acted and in∣fluenced by the Devil and his Angels; who ever since their Fall, have been permitted to make bold Attempts, full of Malice and Rage against God, and Christ's Kingdom. 26 They are permitted, according to the Example of the Aegyptian Magicians, to work Lying Wonders; as the Devil had frequently done in the Times of Paganism and Antichri∣stianism. 27 This is the first Battle of Gog and Magog before the coming of Christ's Kingdom, now ready to appear; where∣in they are overcome; and the Wisdom and extraordinary Power of God (styled here upon that account , the Lord of Hosts, in respect of his Rule and Dominion over all things, and his Power by which he is able to perform them) is manifested in the Defeat of the Devil, who had summoned all his Force and Power together, under the Wise, Holy, and Incomprehensible Justice and Vengeance of God, to shew his utmost Malice and Rage against Christ's Kingdom. See on Chap. 19.19. and on the Three Last Chapters. 28 Wherein he would manifest his uncontroulable Power, and absolute Dominion, after the most extraordinary manner, beyond any thing which had as yet appeared
15 Behold 29 [says Christ,] I come [or am just ready to come in my Thousand Years Kingdom,] as 30 a Thief [i. e. on a sud∣dain, and after a surprizing manner, chap. 3.3, 10, 11.] Blessed [in that happy state, Dan. 12.12.] is he that 31 watcheth [in this time of trouble and temptation, and they who shall be found so do∣ing when I come, Luke 12.35-40.] and 32 [blessed also is he that [keepeth his Garments [i. e. his purity, righteousness and inno∣cency, chap. 19.8.] lest [loosing his righteousness,] he walk naked, and they see his shame [i. e. his shameful nakedness, be discovered to his utter confusion, and he be driven out of Paradise as his nak∣ed first Parents were, Gen. 3. 2 Cor. 5.3.] 29 These Words are a Parenthesis, spoken by Christ to those who professed his Religion (as appears from the Gentleness, and tender care of them) commanding them to watch over them∣selves with great diligence, and signifying what their state should be in his Kingdom just approaching; intimated by the Word Blessed, taken from Dan. 12.12. which is a place of the like import with this. 30 Christ is every where representedMatth. 24. 1 Thess. 5.2. in Scripture, as coming of a sudden to his Kingdom, notwithstanding the many Prognosticks given of it, and preparations to it; because his actual appearing will be on a sudden, and by surprize. 31 32 Hereby is signified, that all they shall be blessed, who have watched for Christ, with Oyl in their Vessels, as well as their Lamps; and shall be found really united to him, and having on his Righteousness, when he comes in his Kingdom. See Chap. 3. 16 And he 33 [i. e. the Spirits of Devils, under the justice and Vengeance of Almighty God, in order to his Glory, and the
punishment of his Enemies, Judg. 4.7. Joel 3.11, 12.] gathereth them [i. e. the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World,] together [by their instigations, and power ever them;] into a place called in the Hebrew tongue 34 Armageddon [i. e. there was a most Powerful and Diabolical Confederacy against Christ's Kingdom, Psal. 2.] 33 It is evident from Verse 14. that this gathering together is performed by the three Evil Spirits; where yet, as well as in this Verse, a Verb of the Singular Number is made use of, according to the Custom of the Greek Language, when a Noun of the Neuter Gender is referred to. And this gathering together is some desperate Attempt mana∣ged by the Wicked of the Old Earth, at the instigation, and by the help of the Evil Spirits, against Christ's Kingdom, just ready to appear; in which they are discomfited after some extraordinary and miraculous manner; as Sisera was at Megiddo, Judg. 4, 15.5, 20. and are confined by God in a miserable and most contemptible condition, during the Thou∣sand Years of Christ's Kingdom; upon the expiring of which, Satan, and his Wicked Kings and Nations are again loosed. See Chap. 20. 34 The Word signifies the Hill of Megiddo, called Megid∣don by theZech. 12.11, , LXX. Prophet; a Royal City in the Tribe of Issachar, but belonging to Manasseh, whichJosh. 17.11, 12. Judg. 1.27. the Canaanites inhabi∣ted in despight of the Children of Manasseh; and wasJudg. Chapters 3, and 4. fa∣mous for the miraculous Defeat of Sisera, and the Kings of Canaan (a Type of the Kings of the Earth in this Prophecy) by Barak and the Israelites, who came down from Mount Ta∣bor
(which was not far from that place) and discomfited them at the Waters of Megiddo, in the Hilly (asIn loc. Groti∣us thinks) and Mountainous parts of that place; and also for the Death of2 Kings 9 27. Ahaziah, but especially of2 Kings 23.29, 30. 2 Chron. 35.20-27. Josiah, who received his deadly Wound, with a great slaughter, in the Valley of Megiddo; where he was bewailed with so great a Lamentation, that the Mournings in that Valley are used by way of a proverbial speech, by the Prophet Zechariah; and Megiddo is interpreted by the LXX. the Valley of the slain, or cut off; as if it signified a place of great grief and slaughter. And the Name of this place is made choice of here, perhaps to signifie, (1.) That Satan shall be discomfited; and that, although he make choice of the most advantageous places, to defend himself; signified by the Mountains encompassing the Valley of Megiddo. For the Canaanites having had a Terrible De∣feat in the Valley; Satan, the Leader of these Wicked Kings of the Earth, may be supposed now to make choice of New Stratagems; signified by the Hill of Megiddo, according to the1 Kings 20.23. Notions received amongst Idolaters, that the Gods of the Hills were stronger than the Gods of the Plain. (2.) With reference to what is prophesied of byChap. 39.4. Ezekiel, concerning Gog (the Type of these Kings of the Earth) that he shall fall upon the Mountains of Israel. (3.) Megiddo is chosen as the Type and Symbol of the place of this Battel of Decision; to shew, that Satan intended the Destruction of Christ's Kingdom, now ready to succeed, ac∣cording
to what had before come to pass in the destruction of Josiah, who was a Type of Christ (as the godly Kings of Judah and Israel were) and was slain near that place, just when he had prepared the Temple of God, the Emblem of Christs Kingdom. 2 Chron. 35.20. (4.) To shew, that God (who over-rules evil Designs for good, and who declares, Judg. 4.7. the place here al∣luded to, that he drew Sisera, and his multitude together) had ordained, that these Kings should be totally overthrown, as the Kings of Canaan were at Megiddo; and that Christ's Church should triumph over them, and bless God for the great Victory (in the Song prepared for it, in the preceeding Chapter) as2 Chron. 20.26. Jehoshaphat, and the Israelites did in the Val∣ley of Beracah, or Blessing, for the Defeat of that great mul∣titude of Wicked People, which confederated against Israel: Whereupon this place of Decision is called, the Valley of Jeho∣shaphat, inChap. 3.2, 12, 14. Joel: The Battel being described sometimes as if it were to be in aJoel 3. Ezek. 39, 5. Valley or Plain; and sometimes as on aEzek. 39.4. Mountain; and confined to no particular place (JehoshaphatsFullers Pisgah Sight. pag. 280, 294. Valley being far distant from the Valley of Megiddo); but expressed so as to typifie other things unto us, and to shew that they shall be totally defeated, as men driven from their several Fastnesses, and Retreats, Mountains as well as Plains and Valleys. (5.) To shew, that both JewsZech. 12.3, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and Gentiles should mourn at the sight of Christ now ready to appear in his glo∣rious Kingdom; as there was a great Mourning for Josiah by
the Jews, and the Assyrians, whom he then assisted; which may probably be the meaning of Hadadrimmon, Zech. 12.11. which according toOn Zech. 12.11. Grotius, signifies the Glory of Rim∣mon, an Assyrian Idol. 17 And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the 35 Air, and there came a great voice out of the Temple 36 of Heaven from the Throne [i. e. there was an extraordinary manifestation of the intimate, and more immediate presence of God,] saying, it 37 is done [i. e. this is the last vial, and Judgment, upon the wicked Nations, Ezek. 39.8. See on chap. 20. and 21.6.] 35 By Air is meant inSee Dr. Hammond on Psalm 148.4. Scripture, the Aerial Expansum, or Firmament, consisting of Air, and Clouds, ballanced by the Weight of it, Job 37.16. which being the Place of Meteors, the Angel pours his Vial upon it; and there∣upon follow Thunder and Lightning, and a Great Earth∣quake, which commonly accompany each other; the Islands and Mountains fly away, and so great Hail falls, (which is a usual Attendant of Thunder-storms) as if the Clouds, with all theirJob 38.22, 23. Treasures of Meteors were thrown down from Heaven. Whereby the more immediate preparations to the Dissolution of the Old Earth, seem to be described; accord∣ing to the Prediction of the Apostle Peter, and the Descripti∣on given of it in Dr. Burnet's Theory: who yet very3.3, 7. prudently admonishes us not to be too positive, or presum∣tuous in our Conjectures about these Things; because if there be an invisible Hand, Divine, or Angelical, that touches the Springs and Wheels of Nature, it will not be
easie for us to determine with Certainty, the Order of their Mo∣tions. 36 Called so in remembrance of the Throne and Temple in Ezekiel. 37 A Phrase evidently taken from Ezek. 39.8. where it is used concerning Gog and Magog; whence also it appears that their Destruction is here referred to; concerning whom read Chap. 20. and Ezek. 38. and 39. 18 And there were voices, and thunders, 38 and lightning, aad there was a great Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake and so great [i. e. there were very high manifestations of Christ's glorious Kingdom, and a time of trouble, such as never was before; the powers of the Earth and Heavens being shaken, to make way for a new Heaven, and a new Earth, Dan. 12.1, 2. Matth. 24.29. Heb. 12.26-22. See on chap. 4.5. and on the three last chapters.] 38 See Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, Book 3. 19 And the great City [i. e. the whole Antichristian Jurisdicti∣on, and Kingdom, chap. 14, 8.18, 10, 21.] was divided [by the Earth-quake,] into 39 three parts [i. e. the whole strength of the An∣tichristian State, was dissipated, and overthrown;] and the Cities of the [wicked] Nations [of the whole World, verse 14. chap. 20.8.] fell, and great Babylon 40 [i. e. Rome, chap. 14.8.] came in [special] remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the Wine of the feirceness of his Wrath [i. e. to destroy her with a most severe and an utter destruction. See on chap. 14.8-11.] 39 The general Type of Three Parts, seems to be taken from Ezek. 5.2, 12. where Jerusalem, when it was designed for Destruction, is marked out into Three Parts: which Three parts here, are the Three United Forces of the Antichristian Kingdom, viz.
(1.) The Dragon, or Devil, with his Three Ʋnclean Spi∣rits. (2.) The Beast, and his False Prophet, who as being u∣nited in Force and Interest, have one punishment. (3.) The Kings of the Earth. See on Chap. 19.19-21. 40 Hence it appears, that the Conflagration is here pointed at; because it is plain from this Prophecy, that Rome shall be destroyed by Fire, as hath been before observed. 20 And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found [i. e. the 41 old Earth was dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. See on chap. 21.1.] 41 See Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, B. 3.9. whose in∣genious Hypothesis gives great light to this place; accord∣ing to which (as is here foretold) the Mountains are to be destroyed in the last place; and there are to be no I∣slands, because no Sea, in the New Earth; which is to be plain and level. 21 And there fell upon [the wicked, Kings, and] men [of the Earth, who were gathered together against Christ's Kingdom, verses 14.16.] a great Hail out of Heaven 42 [i. e. an extraordi∣nary Tempest of Divine Wrath inflicted by the more immedi∣ate command of God;] every stone about the weight of a Talent [i. e. each stroak of God's Wrath was extraordinary great, heavy and insupportable, Ezek. 38.22. Matth. 23.44. and [yet these] men Blasphemed God because of the Hail [i. e. were still obdu∣rate, and impenitent;] for the Plague thereof was exceeding great, [upon which they should therefore have humbled themselves un∣der the mighty hand of God.] 42 Hail was one of the Plagues of Aegypt; and the wic∣ked Kings of Canaan were destroyed by great Hailstones from Heaven, Joshua 10.11. as the Antichristian Aegypti∣ans, and Kings of the Earth here are. But this place
more immediately referrs to Ezek. 38.22. where God fore∣tells, that Gog and Magog shall be destroyed by a Thunder storm of Rain, and Great Hailstones. And from hence it appears, (as also from the solemn words, Verse 17. It is done, which are plainly taken from the same passage in Ezekiel) that the Judgments upon those wicked Nations are here referred to: and this may probably be that signal Vengeance which shall fall upon them, upon the passing away of the Old Earth; by which, as by a mighty Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, and prodigious Hailstones, (reserved by God against this time of Trouble, and this day of Battel and War; as Job speaks, Chap 38.22, 23. in the same Words used in this Chapter, and by Daniel, Chap. 12.1.) they shall be scattered into the Four Corners of the Earth, where they are to remain, under the Effects of God's Wrath, often set forth in Scripture by such Tempests, until the expiring of the Thousand Years.
CHAP. XVII. The Text. 1 AND there came [with Authority and Commission from God,] one [i. e. the first, Chap. 16.2.] of the seven Angels which 1 had the seven Vials, and talked with me [after a more famili∣ar manner;] saying unto me, Come hither [i. e. nearer unto me, to receive more clear and intimate communications of Knowledge;] and I will shew [or point out, and demonstrate] unto thee, the Judgment [i. e. the foul 3 guilt, Sentence and Destruction,] of the great 4 Whore [i. e. the gteat Idolatrous City and Church;] that 5 sitteth upon many Waters [that is, ruleth over much people, Verse. 15, 18.] Annotations on CHAP. XVII. 1 To shew, that this Woman was one of the Enemies of Christ's Kingdom, upon whom the Vials are to be poured, and withal the chief of them, with whom all the others were to fall. 2 As being now about to give him a more clear descripti∣on of the Beast, than he had as yet received. 3 So the Word signifies sometimes in Scripture, as Ezek 7.23. Rom. 5.16. 1 Tim. 5.12. 4 The People, Cities and Churches, which Apostatize from the True God to Idolatry, are called Whores in
Isa. 1.21. Nahum 3.4. Ezek. 23. Rev. 2.20. Scripture, for breaking their Covenant with God, to whom they were thereby espoused; from whence it is e∣vident, that a Christian City must be meant in this Chapter, and not a Pagan; which cannot be said to be a Whore, or an Apostate City, because Pagan Cities having never acknow∣ledged the True God, or been espoused unto him, cannot be said to Apostatize from him. And we may observe that there is here a Double Article in the Greek () to shew that this City was Eminent for Idolatry, and that she had been before noted for it in this Prophecy; that she had continued in it for a long time; that her sin was great in it self; and had been propagated through the large Extent of her Dominions; whence she is called, The Great Whore, and The Whore; as being the Chief and Me∣tropolitan of the Idolatrous Cities and Churches; the impudent Whorish Woman (according to Ezek. 16.30. and Chap. 23.) and the Jezebel, Rev. 2.20. 5 In Allusion to the situation of her Type, Babylon; which is called, The Great City, Dan. 4.3. and is described Jerem. 51.13. as dwelling upon many Waters; that is, situa∣ated upon Euphrates, which encompassed it, and ran through it, and the adjacent Countrey, in Cuts and Rivulets. 2 With whom [i. e. by 6 whose sollicitations, and example;] the [ten] Kings of the Earth, [verse 12.] have committed [spiritual] fornication [which is Idolatry, Isa. 23.17.] and [all] the inhabitants [or meaner people] of the Earth [i. e. of the Apostate Roman Empire,] have been drunk [i. e. madly zealous, and sottish y dote∣ing, Jerem. 51.7.] with the wine of her Fornication [i.e. her pleasing, and intoxicating allurements to Idolatry.]
6 Or, hereby may be signified, that they Idolized her, by worshipping her, and calling her the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, and attributing Infallibility to her; as the Phrase is taken Jerem. 3.9. Ezek. 16, 17.23, 37. 3 So he [i. e. the Angel,] carried me away in the Spirit [chap. 1. 10.] into the Wilderness, 7 [where the Woman, the true Church was, chap. 12. 6.] and I saw a 8 Woman [i. e. a City, verse 18. and Church] * sit [on high; and in an exalted state, verse 9.] upon a scarlet 9 coloured Beast [i. e. the Roman Empire,] full of names [or kinds] of Blasphemies [i.e. of all 10 manner of Idols, and Idolatries, and Idolatrous Titles, and Offices;] having seven heads [or successive forms of Government, verse 9, 10.] and ten horns [i. e. Kings, verse 12.] 7 The Wilderness was a proper place for him to see this Vision in: (1.) Because places of Retirement and Solitude, are fittest for the Reception of Divine Illuminations, and for Medita∣tion; and to signifie, that a clear and distinct View of the Apostasy could not be taken but by one who had retired at some distance from it, and from its bewitching pleasures; and the Hurry and Noise which attended its City, Church and Court. (2.) Because the Woman, the pure Church, being in the Wilderness, he could best compare them, and distinguish the one from the other. 8 Churches and Cities are represented by Women in Prophe∣cyIsa. 54.6. Jerrm. 6.2. Ezek, 16, 30. and 23d Chap.; as they are also in ancient Coyns and Pictures. And although a City be here chiefly signified, as is plain from
Verse 18. yet because the Church is in the City, and the foul and loathsome Crime of the City, here reprehended, is with relation to Church-Corruptions; therefore that is to be understood, and included in it. * She sitteth on high, on the Beast, by which she is born up, or exalted, as Imperial Cities are, by the Empires, of which they are the Chief Seat. 9 Scarlet Colour denotes Royal Authority, as appears from Dan. 5. Matth. 27.28. and the Military Robe of the Ro∣man Emperours was also of that Colour; whereby is ap∣positely signified the Tyrannical Cruelty of the Beast; and that this Woman, or City, was seated in the Roman Empire, and was the Imperial City of it. 10 All which may be included inSee Chap. 2, 9. 11, 13. numb. 45. Names of Blasphe∣mies; and is plainly fulfilled in the Numerous kinds of Ido∣latry, and Idolatrous Offices, in use under the Roman An∣tichristian Jurisdiction; no other Beast being proper to carry a Whore, or an Apostate Church; but an Apostate one. 4 And the Woman [i. e. the Romish City and Church] was ar∣rayed in Purple 11 and Scarlet Colour [i. e. arrogated to her self Im∣perial Power, and Majesty,] and decked 12 with Gold and precious stones and Pearls [i. e. was a pompous, and worldly Church, full of Pride and Riches;] having a golden Cup 13 in her hand [i. e. tempting Baits, and powerful motives ready at hand, to entice worldly minds;] full of abomination, 14 and filthiness of her fornication [i. e. of abominable and loathsome Idolatry.]
11 Scarlet was the Habit of the Romans in VVar, and Pur∣ple the Habit of the Emperours and Senate in Times of Peace, as Grotius observes on the place; whereby is signifi∣ed, that this was an Imperial Roman City. It is also obser∣vable, (1.) That this VVoman takes to her self the Colour of the Ornaments of the Tabernacle of God (as Grotius also notes) which were ofExod, 25.4. Purple and Scarlet, whereby her Idolatrous Ʋsurpations of what belongs to God may be set forth. And (2.) That these Colours are much affected in the Papacy;Heidegger. in Apocalyps. pag. 429, 430. Platin. in Vit. Paul. secundi. Vide Bezae argutum Epigramma in hanc rem. that Christ's Priests (saith Baronius) might be in their Pomp, equal to the High Priests amongst the Hea∣thens. 12 Such was also wont to be the Attire of Harlots, Prov. 17.10. And it is observable, that the Papacy has not only excessive Riches and Revenues, but that theRycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes, Popes have been so prodigal in procuring Ornaments and Jewels for their own Pontifical Attire, and especially their Triple Crown, (a fatal Counterfeit of Christ's many Crowns, Rev. 19.12.) that they have often run the Papacy into debt by it; which by their Prodigious Pride is loaden with Gold and Jewels, and became thereby so heavy, that Pope Paul the Second died of an Apoplexy, occasioned by the weight of it. 13 Babylon, her Type, is said (Jerem. 51.7.) to be the Golden Cup, that hath made the Earth drunken with her Wine.
14 Abominations signifie Images or Idols, and the abomina∣ble Practises accompanying them. 1 King. 11.5, 7. 2 King. 23.24. Jerem. 7, 30. 2, 34. 5 And upon her 15 forehead [after the impudent manner of a whore∣ish woman, Ezek 23, and 16.30.] was a Name 16 written [so plain∣ly, that it might be read and understood by those who exercise Spiritual Wisdom, verse 9.] Mystery 17 [of iniquity, 2 Thes. 2.7.] 18 Babylon the great [i.e. the Metropolis of the Fourth, or Roman Empire,] the 19 Mother [City, and Church,] of Harlots [i. e. of Ido∣latrous Cities, and Churches;] and abominations [i. e. the cheif Author and Promoter of Image Worship; and other filthy 20 and unclean Doctrines and Practices] of the Earth [i. e. of the Apostasy.] 15 Criticks have observed, that Harlots were wont to have their Names written on the Portals of the House where they prostituted themselves, and sometimes upon their Fore∣heads; and that hereby is accordingly signified, the notori∣ous Impudence of her Idolatry; although I presume, that this may be rather an allusion to the TitleExod. 28.36. upon the Fore∣front of the Mitre of the Jewish High Priest, which had Ho∣liness to the Lord, written upon it; and that hereby is inti∣mated, that this Apostate Church was of a contrary Temper and Spirit to what God required in his Church and Ser∣vants. 16 She was not one of those whom God had sealed in the Forehead; but had her Crime written upon it, her sin being publick and notorious, and easily to be discerned by the Mind that hath Wisdom. 17 Hereby is evidently signified, that this VVoman had compleated and brought forth that Mystery of Iniquity;
which began to work when the Apostle wrote to the Thessa∣lonians; called a Mystery of Iniquity, because it un∣dermined Christianity, the Mystery of Godliness, by the spe∣cious pretences of promoting and advancing it; as Dr. Moor hath shewn in his Mystery of Inibuity; where he hath also plainly proved, that this hath been actually done by the Ro∣mish Church; whose Religion and Worship (especially in what belongs to the Mystery of the Mass) is so mystical, that many Books have been writen to give the significations of it; and of the Habits of their Priests, and the Ceremoniet and Vestments they make use of. And that Papal Rome is hereby meant, will appear more evidently from what Scaliger has noted on this place; viz. that the WordHeidegger in Apocalyps. cap. 17. pag. 160. Downham of Antichrist. and Bishop Barlow's Brutum Fulmen. , was engraven on the Front∣let of the Pope's Mitre; and was changed by Julius the Third, when the Protestants began to adapt this Prophecy to the Papacy; which is also confessed to be true by Brocardus, a Papist, in his Notes upon this place, who lived in the times of Pope Julius; and is but faintly denied by Lessius, in his Answer to King James. 18 Babylon was the Seat of the Assyrian Monarchy; and is confessedDr. Cressener, lib. 1.3. by almost all Interpreters, Ancient and Mo∣dern, Popish as well as Protestant, to be a Type of Rome; which in here described by the Phrase Nebuchadnezzar made use of, when he proudly gloried in Babylon as the seat of his Kingdom; from whence it appears that Rome is here meant, under the relation of being the seat of the fourth Empire, as Babylon was of the first. And Rome as the seat of the
Fourth Empire under its Antichristian King, must be here meant; because it is called the Mother of Harlots; which is a Phrase peculiar to an Apostate City, and Church in Scrip∣ture; as hath been before observed on numb. 4. 19 The cheif of the Idolatrous Churches; from whence Idolatry is derived and propagated to all others; and on which they depend, as members of it; in Opposition to the True Jerusalem the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. 20 Such as the Denial of Marriage to the Clergy, whereby Ʋncleanness is promoted; the toleration and defence of For∣nication; and other abominable Doctrines and Practises which are Taught, or Connived at under the Papacy. 6 And I saw the Woman [as it were] drunken with the Blood of the Saints [or holy and pure Christians, which she had spilt with an excessive, and insatiable greediness and delight;] and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus [i. e. his Special and Faithful Wit∣nesse;] and when I saw her, I wondered 21 with great Admiration [what this Vision should mean] 21 This shews that Rome Antiehristian must be here under∣stood; for it would have been no such strange sight to have seen Pagan Rome, defiled with Idolatry, and drunk with the blood of Christians. 7 And the Angel said unto me, wherefore didst thou marvel? [for the thing when thou understandest it more fully, will not seem so strange, and therefore] I will 22 tell [or explain unto] thee, the mystery, [or secret meaning, and import,] of the Woman [i. e. the City and Church;] and of the Beast [i. e. the Roman Empire,] that carrieth or supporteth her, verse 3.] which hath the seven heads and ten horns [verse 3] 22 Here the Angel, contrary to his wonted custom, Ex∣plains the Vision to him; which shews that it is a very re∣markable
one, and upon which the understanding of all the others depend very much. 8 The beast [or Roman Empire, as under its seventh Head, the Papacy, verse 10, 11.] which thou sawest carrying the Woman, [verse 3.] was 23 [in the sixth head the Pagan Emperours; verse 10;] and is 23 not [as yet risen, and arrived to an Antichristian Supremacy. See chap. 13. 11 12.] and [or but,] shall ascend 23 out of the bottomless Pit [and arrive to that Supremacy; See on chap. 9. 1, 2. and chap. 13.] and [at last] shall go into 24 Perdition [i. e. be utterly destroyed, Rev. 19.20. Numb. 24.24. 2 Thes. 2.8.] and they that dwell on the [Antichristian] Earth [throughout all its Territories;] shall wonder after the Beast [i. e. be wonderfully taken with him, follow him with an implicit Faith, and Wor∣ship, and be subject unto him. See on Chap. 13. 3, 4. And by his Admiters, I mean those] whose names are not written in the book if Life [of the Lamb, chap. 13. 8.] slain from the beginning of the World [i. e. those who are not living members of Christ's true Church, chosen from all Eternity, and purchased by the Blood of Christ, the Eternal Sacrifice; but of a New, Apostate Church, which yet pretends to be the Catholick, and has introduced New Mediators, and New Sacrifices; all these shall with Wonder and Adoration, admire] when they behold [with great Applause, and with a superstitious Fear and Subjection,] the Beast that was [a Draconick Idolatrous Power in its sixth Head, the Emperours;] and is not [as yet manifestly and apparently the same Imperial Draconick Power;] and yet is [the same, but in an Image, or a Christian Disguise, having introduced a Pagano-Christian Idola∣try, and a Mock Imperial Power, under the pretence of a Chri∣stian Supremacy. See on Chap. 13. 14, 15.] 23 23 23 This is, as it were, the NameDr. Moor on the place, and his Synops. Proph. and Character of the Beast, taken from his different states and conditions; whereby is signified, that the Beast which he then saw car∣rying
or supporting the VVoman, or City of Rome, was the Roman Empire; which had been under an Imperatorial Pow∣er; but was now under one, which had been for some time advancing towards it, and was just ready to ascend () to it; being just come forth out of the bottom∣less Pit, which he went down to open (Chap. 9. 12.) and having exalted the Imperial City to the heighth of Ecclesia∣stical Dignity. By which is plainly signified, the Time when the Papacy attained its Supremacy from Phocas; and ex∣alted the Church of Rome above all Churches, after it had been for some time in a weak and Infant state, according to what hath been already discoursed on Chap. 9. 1, 2. and Chap. 13. 24 Antichrist is called the Son of perdition, 2 Thes. 2.3. as Judas, the Type of him, also is, John 17.12. because he brings perdition or destruction upon others, and is himself (as highly deserving it) devoted by God to perdition, and that a most exemplary and severe one, Numb. 24.24. 9 And here is [matter to exercise] the mind which hath [Mysti∣cal, and Spiritual] Wisdom [Chap. 13. 18.] The seven Heads are [the Symbols, and Representations of] seven 25 Mountains, on which the Woman [i. e. the City and Church of Rome] sitteth [or is situated.] 25 This is a most evident description of Rome, no other Imperial City being seated at the time when John saw this Vision (for it is described as then actually reigning, at the 18th Verse) upon seven Mountains. ForDu Fresne Constantinop, Christian. 1.8, 9. Constantino∣ple (which indeed stands upon as many Hills) was not then
built; and the Ancient Byzantium was not so situated, but was afterwards enlarged to that compass by Constantine, in imitation of Old Rome. And the seven Heads have a double signification, as otherGrot. in Heb. 9.11, Types have not unfrequently in Scripture. For they have not only a reference to the seven Kings, the moveable, and successive Heads of the Beast; but also to the seven Im∣movable Heads, or Mountains, on which the City of Rome was situated; which are called Heads, because they support the City which stands upon them; as the seven Heads, which are Kings, did the Civil State of it; which was kept up by the Majesty, Government and Residence of them. 10 And [also] there [or they *, to wit, the Heads,] are [or sig∣nifie,] seven 26 Kings [or Forms of Supreme Idolatrous Govern∣ment:] five are fallen [already from the Soveraignty which they had exercised in their proper Successions,] and one 27 [viz. the Go∣vernment by Pagan Emperours,] is 28 [now in being;] and the o∣ther 29 [King, but not Head, or Idolatrous Government, viz. the Christian Emperours;] is not yet come [into Succession;] and when he cometh, he must [or ought to] continue a 30 short space [in com∣parison of the five first, the Government now in being, and that which is to succeed it.] * So the Words in the Original ought to be tran∣slated. 26 Heads, by a very apt Similitude, signifie Supream Pow∣ers, as being the Governing part of the Body, signified by the Beast: and accordingly, seven Heads signifie here seven
Kings; i. e. Supream Governours, or Governments; as the Word is taken in Scripture, Deut. 33.5. Dan. 7.17, 23. And hereby the Roman Empire is undoubtedly signified, which had seven successive kinds of supreme Government; viz. Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Dictators, Tribunes, Em∣perours, Popes; asCressener Demonstrat. of the Apocal. lib. 3. Protestants generally reckon them up, with great Reason, from History. For the Triumvirate was rather a Confusion than a Government, and lasted not long; and is rejected byLab. 21. Fenestella, as no Magi∣stracy. 27 27 The Five first of these Governments were already past, and abrogated at the Time of this Vision; and are here only just mentioned; and that altogether, without any distinct Account of them, their Time, Names, Difference, or the Order of their Succession amongst themselves; because they were of no further use to this Propheey, then to shew, that the One Head then in being, was the sixth of the seven, af∣ter five already past. But although the distinct Order of the Succession of the Five Governments which were past, be not here particularly specified (whereby many doubts which might have been raised concerning them, are obviated) yet it is evident, that the whole seven Governments were succes∣sive, and not all together in being at one and the same time; because the sixth King is represented as following Five al∣ready past, and as One then in being, to which another not yet come, was to succeed; which are plain Characters of an Orderly Succession. 28 For John saw this Vision, under Domitian, a Pagan
Emperour. And from hence it is evident, that the Ancient Pagan Rome is not the Beast, because the Beast is the Eighth King, Verse 11. but the Pagan Emperours are the Sixth; to wit, the King then in being (the one that now is.) 29 The One King, or Government in actual being, when this Vision was seen, was certainly that of the Pagan Empe∣rours; and therefore the other here mentioned, must be the Christian Emperours; because they are the only King, or Government of Rome, which immediately succeeded the Pa∣gan Emperours. And they are most appositely called ; not only to signifie, that they were the Government next in Succession to the former, or distinct in Number from it; but that they were (as  signifies) of an other kind or sort from it, as not being Beastian or Idolatrous, but an utter Enemy to the Beast; during whose Reign it lay wound∣ed to Death, (Chap. 13. 3.) Whereupon  seems to be made use of by the Holy Spirit; that so it might be answered by , a Word which includes both the former Senses. For seeing that there are Eight Kings, and but Seven Heads, it is plain, that One of the Kings must be no Head; and therefore of a Nature different from all the other: which can only belong to this Seventh King; because the Five First Governments are known to be Idolatrous Govern∣ments, (which is the signification of an Head in this Prophe∣cy;) and the Eighth is expresly said to be one of the seven; that is, Idolatrous Heads. So that this Other is indeed a King, and that the seventh, of the Imperial City of Rome; but is not of the Seven; that is, is not a King who is also an Idolatrous Head of the Beast; as all the six Governments be∣fore the Christian Emperours were, and as the seventh Head was to be; who is the Eighth King, or Government; but the seventh Idolatrous King, or the seventh King, who is an Head, as well as a King; as appears from Verse 11.
30 This is also an evident Character of the Christian Empire; which (in comparison of the Reign of the Five preceeding Kings, and the 1260 Years of the Beast) lasted but for a short space; uiz. but about an hundred and Fifty Years, reckoning from Constantine, until the Fall of the Western Empire, under Au∣gustulus. A. D. 476. Whence also it is evident, that the Beast, the next, or Eighth King, must enter into Succession at that Time, together with his Ten Kings, who receive power as Kings, at the same Hour with him, Verse 12. These being evidently Governments immediately successive, as a Sixth to a Fifth, a Seventh to that, and an Eighth following it, without any Interregnum, or intermediate Government. And it is here said, that it must, or ought not to continue long; to shew, that Providence had ordained, that the Christian Empire should be short, on purpose that there might be space enough (out of the time destined for these purposes) for the Reign of the Beast, whose Kingdom was to be built upon the Ruines of the Christian Empire. 11 And the Beast that was [viz. in the sixth Head, Verse 8.] and is not [as yet risen to his Supremacy, Verse 8.] even he [and let it be observed;] is the 31 Eighth [King, Verse 10.] and is [one, to wit, the last,] of the seven [Heads, or Idolatrous Govern∣ments, the Seventh King being no Head, Verse 10.] and goeth in∣to perdition [i. e. shall be destroyed; and then all the Four Mo∣narchies end in him, and the Kingdom of Christ succeeds, Dan. 2. and 7. See on Verse 8. and on Verses 16, 17.] 31 From this Verse it is evident, (1.) That The Beast is the Papacy; because that although there were Kings of Italy, after the Extinction of the Chri∣stian Emperours, the Seventh King; yet Rome, the Woman, or great City of these Eight Kings, who upheld and sustained it by their Authority; and where the Heads and Kings were resident, which reigned over the inferiour Kings or Princes of the Earth: was never afterwards under the Supreme Govern∣ment
of any but the Pope; at least for any consider∣able time: who must therefore be the Eighth King here mentioned; they being called Kings, with respect to the City of Rome; as appears from Verse 3, 9, 10, 11, 18. and from what hath been observed on Chap. 13. 2. where the very same Beast with this is described; as is evident from the Chara∣cters given of them in both Chapters; which may be seen in Dr. Moor's Synops. Prophet. lib. 1. Chap. 10, &c. and in Dr. Cressener's Demonstrat. of the Apocalyps, (2.) That the Papacy is an Idolatrous Government, because the Eighth King, which is the Papacy, is of the Seven Heads of the Beast, or Idolatrous Roman Empire in general; and is also The Beast in particular, or that which is called so by way of Eminence; viz. the Seventh Head, but Eighth King, which was, is not, and yet is; which is called, the Beast, al∣though it be only a Head of it; as an eminent part has of∣ten the denomination of the whole; and to shew, that it is the same with the Little Horn in Daniel, which is called (Dan. 7.11.) The Beast, although it were only One of its Horns. Whence (3.) it will follow, that the present Papacy is the Beast; because that hath been in possession of the Govern∣ment of Rome ever since the Christian Empire; and so conse∣quently no other Antichristian King is to be expected to∣wards the End of the World; nor any other City to be un∣derstood here but the present Papal Rome: the Head of which, the Pope, is actually CrownedSir Paul Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes. with a Triple Crown after his Election; and that with so many Solemnities, that the Ceremony takes up a whole Day; and he has also all the En∣signs of Temporal Soveraignty; as a Court of Cardinals (who in the Ceremoniale Romanum, are called Princes in the
Church) Embassadours, Guards, and the like; and is ap∣proached with more Reverence than the Emperours them∣selves; which is so much taken notice of by theGraseri Histor. Antichrist. p. 142. Buxtorf. Lexic. Talmud. Jews andGraseri Histor. Antichrist. p. 142. Buxtorf. Lexic. Talmud. Infidels, that the Pope is frequently called the King of the Franks (i. e. the Christians) by the Turks; and the King of Edom by the Jews, by which they mean Rome. 12 And the ten 32 horns which thou sawest, are [or signify,] ten Kings [or independent Soveraignities;] which have received no Kingdom [or independency, of and in the Empire;] as yet [i. e. at the time of this Vision:] but receive Power as Kings [i. e. an independent, and Soveraign Power;] one hour 23 with the Beast [i. e. at the same time, that the Beast receives Power, and in conjuncti∣on with him.] 32 These Kings receive Power with the Beast when he comes to be the Eighth King; which coming not to pass un∣til the Extinction of the Christian Emperours of Rome, or the Western Caesars; by these Kings can be meant no other then those amongst whom the Empire was divided upon the Con∣quests of the Northern Nations; who are thought by Mr.Pag. 463. 661. Author. libri de Excid. Antichrist. Mede, and other Learned Men, to have been Ten at first; although that Number seems rather to be retained, upon the account of the Ten Toes of the Image in (c) Daniel; to which the Ten Horns of the Beast do correspond; to shew, that this Beast is the last State of the Roman Empire; in which the Image was to be broken in peices by the Stone (the Emblem of Christ's Kingdom) which is to smite it on its Feet, and Ten Toes. For the Endeavours of Learned Men to reduce the several Divisions of the Roman Empire into
Ten, are not so successful as could be wisht; Mr. Mede being forced to make the Greeks one of then; and the Author of the Book de Excidio Antichristi, confining them within the Rhine, and the Danube: So that I cannot but think, upon further consideration, that the True Account of this Divisi∣on, is with relation to the Image in Daniel; the Book of the Revelations being nothing but a more full illustration by va∣rious Emblems, of what is but briefly delivered in that Pro∣phecy. See the Annot. on Chap. 11, 13. 12, 3. 33 To wit, at One Hour, or Season, made up of Two Half Hours, beginning at A. D. 476. as hath been already fully discoursed on Chap. 8. 7. 13 These have 34 mind [as to matters of Religion] and shall give their power [or Force,] and strength [or Authority,] to the Beast [to wit, in Religious Matters; and their Assistance and Arms on other occasions.] 34 Here is plainly foretold the strict Ʋnion there is betwixt the Papacy, and the Popish Kings, or Kingdoms and Govern∣ments; and the Support, Assistance, and Authority they af∣ford it; which the Northern Nations were very Famous for, at their first Settlement and Conversion. 14 These shall make War with [i. e. oppose, and persecute,] the 35 Lamb [i. e. Christ, in his true Members and Faithful Witnesses, Psalm 2 Acts 4.27, 28. 9, 4] and the Lamb shall overcome them [by the high and powerful preaching of his Gospel, Chap. 14] for he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings [and therefore able to van∣quish them, and erect his Kingdom, Dan. Chap. 2. and 7. Psal. 2.] and they that are with him [i. e his Followers, when he comes to his Kingdom, Chap. 14. 1.] are called and chosen [by his Grace to this Service,] and [were his] faithful [Witnesses, Servants and Soldiers unto Death]
35 Hence it appears, that these are Antichristian Kings or Powers; there having been no Persecution in the Roman Em∣pire by Pagan Powers, since the Division of it by the Northern Nations. 15 And he [i. e. the Angel,] saith unto me [i. e. instructed me in the further knowledge of the Mystery I had seen;] The Wa∣ters which thou sawest [Verse 1.] where the Whore sitteth; are [i. e. signifie] 36 Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues [i. e. the People of the Roman Empire, Dan. 4.1.] 36 Here is shewn the Amplitude, and vast Extent of the Jurisdiction of the Papacy, a thing she so much boasts of. 16 And the Ten Horns [or Kings] which thou sawest upon the [Seventh Head of the] Beast; [even] these [Kings] shall [at last] hate the 37 Whore [whom they had before loved and admi∣red;] and shall make her desolate [by forsaking her Communion;] and naked [by stripping her of her Ornaments, Verse 4. and Au∣thority; and by exposing her to shame, Chap. 16. 15.] and shall 38 eat her Flesh [i. e. consume and devour her very Substance, and Revenues, Dan. 7.5. Psalm 27.2.] and burn 39 her with fire [i. e. destroy what is left of her.] 37 A Metaphor taken from the Ʋsage which Harlots often meet with, from those who have been misled, and abused by them; who are wont at first to entertain a dislike of them, then to hate them, afterwards to take from them the Gifts they had bestowed on them, and at last revenge them∣selves upon them by their utter Ruin. From this Verse it may be observed, (1.) That no one of the Kingdoms, or Principalities in Union with the Papacy, shall be able to arrive to an Ʋni∣versal Monarchy; but as all such Attempts have been hitherto vain, so shall they still be so: Because, as they were at first Many Independent Soveraignties, (said to be Ten, in allusion
to the Ten Toes of the Image, and Ten Horns of the Beast) when they at first gave thei Power to the Beast, Verse 13. So are they to remain so until they forsake her; it being expres∣ly here affirmed, that the Ten Horns shall hate the Whore. (2.) That the Whore, or Idolatrous Church of Rome, shall fall by those very States and Kingdoms, which had all along upheld her. Which is to come to pass (as is plainly assert∣ed in the next Verse) when the Words of God shall be ful∣filled; that is, the Promises of God concerning the expiring of the Beast's Times, shall be compleated, according to what hath been already observed on Chap. 10. 6, 7. When the Ten Kings, which support the City and Church of Rome, which sits on them, withdrawing themselves from her; the Tenth of that great City, or the City, and Jurisdiction, consi∣sting (in the Account of Prophecy) of Ten Principalities, must needs fall too. From whence also it plainly appears, that the Fall of the Tenth part of the City, mentioned Chap. 21. 23. refers to the Ten Kings deserting and forsaking her. 38 A Phrase taken from Dan. 7.5. Psalm 27.2. signify∣ing their taking away her very Substance, Revenues and Do∣minions, and converting what they had bestowed upon her, to their own Use; as Grotius interprets the place. 39 A Phrase taken from Levit. 21.9. where it is comman∣ded. That the Daughter of a Priest guilty of Wheredom, should be burnt with Fire. 17 For God hath put in their [willfully wicked] hearts [Rom. 1.26. 2 Thes. 2.10] to fullfil his Will, and to agree [Verse 13] and give their Kingdom [and its power and strength,] unto the Beast [by submitting unto him, and being governed by him;] until the words of God [by his Prophets, and by his Apostle in this Visi∣on, Chap. 13. 5.] shall be fullfilled [i. e. until the Promises made by
God, concerning the Expiring of the Times of the Beast; and the following Approach of Christ's Kingdom, shall be fullfilled, Dan. Chapters 2. and 7. and 12.7. See on Chap. 10.5, 6.11, 13. and Verse 16. of this Chapter, num. 37.] 18 And the Woman which thou sawest, is [or signifies] that [re∣markable] great City, which [now] 40 reigneth over the Kings of the Earth. 40 , The Regnant, Imperial City, now actually having, and exercising at this present time, Sove∣raignty over the Kings of the Earth. Which is a plain and evident Character that Rome is here meant; no other City being in Exercise of such Power at the Time when the Apo∣stle saw this Vision. It may not be unuseful to add here, in the Close of this Chapter, this short Digression concerning Antichrist; that the Reader might have in one View the chief of what con∣cerns him in Scripture; especially the more plain and Do∣ctrinal parts of it: In order to which it may be observed, (1.) That about Two Years after Ezekiel'sEzek. 40, &c. Dan. 2. Lightf. Works, Tom. 1. pag. 132, 133. Vision of the Temple and Throne, the Babylonian Monarchy began, up∣on the Conquest of Aegypt by Nebuchadnezzar, which was the only Kingdom that opposed him. Which Vision con∣tained a Type of Christ's Glorious Church and Kingdom, which was then to have come into Succession (in place of the Jewish Temple and City, then in Ashes) as a City and Tem∣ple fit for God's Presence; if the Idolatry, and other sins of his
People, had not hindred himEzek. 43.1-12. from dwelling for ever in the midst of them. Hereupon, by the infinite Justice and Wis∣dom of God, the firstDan. Chap. 2. and 7. Monarchy began; and a Course of Four successive Monarchies was to expire, before the Glo∣rious Kingdom of Christ should succeed. Which Monar∣chies (although as to their Greatness and Ʋniversality, they bore some Resemblance of the Kingdom of Christ) were yet indeed Antichristian; as being contray to Christ's Kingdom, in their Idolatry, bloody and persecuting Temper, and in respect of their usurping its place and stead; in which An∣tichristianism consists; which is anSee on Chapters 13, 14, 15. Abbot de Antichr. pag. 26. Downham of Antichrist, 1, 4. 2, 1. Moor's Mystery of Iniq. part 2. Opposition to, and a Delay, and Ʋndermine of Christ's Kingdom, which it usurps, and counterfeits. For seeing that Christ hath a Glorious King∣dom belonging to him, as come in the Flesh, the supplanting of this Kingdom is the peculiar Character of Antichrist; ac∣cording to 1 Joh. 4.3. (2.) It is plain fromDan. 4.33, 35, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.7, 8, 11, 12, 20, 21, 24, 25.8, 9-12.11, 36-45.12, 7, 11. Matth. 24.15, 24. Mark 13. Luke 12.41-59.21, 24.36. 2 Thes. 2. 1 Tim. 4.1-5. 2 Peter 2.1 John 2.18, 19, 22.4, 3.2 John 7. Scripture, that in the Times of the Fourth of these Monarchies (called the Times of the Gen∣tiles, by our Saviour, Luke 21.24.) there should arise (be∣sides the other many Antichrists) One Grand Notorious one, called, (1) , or The Antichrist, by way of Emi∣nence. (2.) The Man of Sin, or the sinful wicked One, the chief
Author and Servant of Sin, and not of God; whose Pro∣fession is nothing else but a Mystery of Iniquity. (3.) The Son of Perdition, or the graceless, hopeless Apostate, like Judas, called so John 17.12. the chief Author of Mis∣chief, and Destruction to Christ's Church; and therefore fitted for, and devoted by God to Destruction, or Perdi∣tion. (4.) , or theGrot. in 2 Thes. 2.4. and 1 Pet. 5.8. Satanical, and Apostate Ad∣versary, and Opposite to Christ's Kingdom. (5.) , or The Blasphemous, and Insolent Ʋ∣surper, upon the Authority of Christ, and the Supreme Powers, who are called Gods in Scripture. (6.) , or The Lawless One; one who pretends to be above all Laws; and violates all the Laws of God and Man. By which Man of Sin, is not meant a single person, but a SuccessionPoli Synops. in loc. See Downham of Antichr. 2.2. of Men; as Interpreters upon the place have observed from parallel places of Scripture: who is al∣so theMede's Works, pag. 763. same with Daniel's Wicked Horn, or Beast; as the Church (saith Mr. Mede) from her Infancy hath interpreted it. (3.) It is plainly asserted in2 Thes. 2. 1 Tim. 4.2 Pet. 2.1. See Mr. Mede's Works, B. 1. Disc. 29, 43. his apostasy of the latter times; and Dr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity; which is also confessed by Ribera, and those other Learned Romanists, who assert, that there shall be an apostasy of the Romish Church, towards the end of the World. See Alcazer in Apocalyps. pag. 20. 466. ed. Ant. Scripture, that the Sin of this Man of Sin, should, in general, consist in an Apostasy, and that a great and solemn one, which should overspread the Visible Face of the Catholick Church of Christ: which is called by the Apostle Paul, , The Apostasy, or the Grand Apostasy, and that from the Faith, or the Great My∣stery
of the Christian Religion, described in the last Verse of the Third Chapter to Timothy; which, as Mr. Mede hath well observed, should, according to the Division of the An∣cients, be the first Verse of the Fourth Chapter. (4.) In particular, this Grand Apostasy is limited in Scrip∣ture, chiefly to these Three Heads, (1.) To Idolatry and Superstition, Dan. 11.37-39. 1 Tim. 4.1-4. (2.) To an Insolent and Blasphemous Usurpation of a God-like Supremacy, in Opposition to the Supremacy of Christ, and of the Civil Magistrate, Dan. 7.8, 11, 20, 25.8, 9-14, 23, 24, 25.11, 36, 37.2 Thes. 2.4. (3.) To a bloody and persecuting Temper, Dan. 7.21, 25.8, 10, 24, 25. (5) It is also1 Tim. 4.1. . 1 John 2.18. expresly, plainly, and not aenigmatically, and mysteriously declared by the Holy Spirit, that this Apo∣stasy was to be in the latter Times. By which are meant, as Mr.Apostas. of the latter Times, Chap. 21, &c. Mede hath proved, the latter Times of the Fourth, or Roman Kingdom; whose Times he thinks are called the last Times, because it is the Last Kingdom in Daniel. (6.) Furthermore, the particular Time, or Season, of the Coming, Revelation, or Appearance and Manifestation of this Man of Sin; is expresly dated by the Apostle Paul, from the Fall of theThes. 2.6, 7. , and , (a word which signifies to retain, or hold fast, and also to obstruct, hold bàck, or hinder) is elegantly put to denote the Pa∣gan, and Christian, Roman Empire, and Emperours, the Sixth and Seventh Kings; from their holding their own proper Successions firm, during their own Times; and thereby holding back, or hindering the Succession of Antichrist: but the Christi∣an Empire, and Emperours, the Seventh King, is most especially thereby intimated, who held back, or hindered, more immediately, the Succession of the Antichrist, the Eighth King, that he might be revealed in his own Season, upon the Fall of Augustulus, the last of the Roman Emperours. See Chap. 8. 11, and this Chapter. Grot. in 2 Thes. 2.6. & Ham. ibid. & in Rom. 1.18. Abbot. demonstr. Antichr. pag. 91. Patres ad unum ferè omnes hoc agnoscunt. Roman Empire; which theSee Bellarm. de Rom. Pontif. 3.5. Chamier. de Antichr. Mede's Works, pag. 656. Ancients ge∣nerally
understand, by the taking out of the way that which letteth, or withholdeth, 2 Thes. 2.6, 7. Upon which the Apo∣stle says, that the Man of Sin should be revealed, ; i. e. in his own Season, as Dr. Hammond rightly translates the Word; which is the same with that made use of inDan. 12.7. Rev. 12.14. Daniel, and theDan. 12.7. Rev. 12.14. Revelations, concerning the Months, Times or Seasons of the Beast. (7.) The Apostle Paul in the same Chapter (2 Thes. 2, 6, 7, 8.) expresly assigns a Line of Time to this Man of Sin, da∣ted from his Birth, Coming, Revelation, or First Appearance, at the taking away of the Roman Empire, A. D. 475, or 476, and reaching unto the Coming of Christ: Which may be called, the , or Times of Antichrist; to distinguish them from the , or Times of Christ, mentioned 1 Tim. 6.15. it being remarkable, that Antichrist, Christ's Counter∣feit and Opposite, has also a Coming, Times and a Kingdom assigned him in Scripture, in Opposition to the Coming, Times and Kingdom of Christ. (8.) The manner of the Destruction of this Man of Sin, is described by the Apostle (2 Thes. 2.8.) in Terms so agree∣able to those made use of in Dan. 7. and theChap. 17, 8, 11. 19. 21. Revelations,
with reference to the Little Horn, the Beast, and the False Prophet; that it cannot well be denyed but that they are the same. (9.) The Apostle also further expresly declares, that this Man of Sin, which was not to be revealed, or appear openly, until the taking away of the Roman Empire; was yet in his Conception in the Womb, at theSupposed most commonly to be written about A. D. 57, or 58. See above, pag. 302. Time of his writing the second Epistle to the Thessalonians; aptly expres∣sed by2 Thes. 2.7. ; it hath received its beginninng, or is in pre∣paration to enter, and disclose it self to the World. Hammond on the place, and on Gal. 5.6. the then actual workings of the Mystery of Iniqui∣ty; called so, because of its Contrariety and Opposition to the Mystery of Godliness, which it undermined by secret and mysterious Operations and Workings of Satan, in Lying Wonders, and strong Delusions; by Hypocritical Preten∣ces of promoting Christianity; by departing from the Sim∣plicity of the Gospel, and Apostolical Traditions; and ta∣king pleasure in Unrighteousness, for Interest's sake, as the Apostle plainly asserts, 2 Thes. 2.7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15. 1 Tim. 4.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.3, 3. (10) It is evident from Scripture, that Satan had great suc∣cess in the early Times of Christianity, in perverting and se∣duceing Men from the Purity, Truth, and Simplicity of the Gos∣pel; as appears from the Complaints of the Apostles, and from the many Heresies and Antichrists then in being; from whence the Apostle John concludes (1 Ep. 2.18.) that it was then the last Time, and that the Grand and Notorious Antichrist, the Head of the Apostasy, should take his Origi∣nal
from those many Heretical Autichrists which were then in being; and that (as hath been before observed) in the latter Times of those last Times; which seems plainly to be the sense of those words of the Apostle. To which progress of the Mystery of Iniquity many things then contributed; (as hath been before observed on Chap. 2. 4.) brought about by the Justice and Providence of God, for the punishment of those who would willfully perish, and would not receive the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved, 2 Thes. 2, 10.16. To which Particulars may be added, the early Ambition of some who stretched themselves beyond their own Measure, Line or Rule; that is, beyond the particular Districts to which the Apostles had confined the Exercise of their Power, which was otherwise unlimited; of whom the Apostle Paul com∣plains, 2. Cor. 10.12.18. who also seems to intimate1 Cor. 15, 9-11. 2 Cor. 11.5. Gal. 2.1-12., as if the People thought that James, Peter and John had an Authority over him, because of their Gifts, Age and Conver∣sation with Christ: to which Opinion also the Apostles them∣selves might occasionally, and by accident contribute; who strove for Superiority whilst their Lord was with them; and were not afterwards infallible, save in what they did by the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost; as appears from what the Apostle Paul blames in the Conversation of Peter, Gal. 2. So early, so secret, so plausible, and so powerful might the Temptations and Occasions be, to the introducing of the great Apostasy; GodNec periclitor dicere ipsas quoque Scripturas, sic esse ex Dei voluntate dispositas, ut Haereticis materias subministrarent; cum legam, Oportere Haereses esse, quae sine Scri∣pturis esse non poslunt. Tertull. de Prescript. cap. 39. in his Just Judgments sending strong Delusions, and permitting all deceiveableness of Ʋnrighteousness to work upon them, who willfully delude themselves, and take pleasure in Ʋnrighteousness, 2 Thes. 2.
(11.) It is evident from History, that the Workings of this Mystery of Iniquity, were more visible in the following Ages; to which many things contributed: As (1.) TheEuseb. Hist. 4.22. Chamier de Antichr. 16.8. where he largely shews how Antichristianism was promoted by Heresies. Heresies which soon prevailed and cor∣rupted the Church, upon the Death of the Apostles. (2.) The GreekCol. 2. It is confessed by Learned Romanists, that several Pagan Customs were introduced, especially in Constantine's Time, to win the Gentiles, Baron. ad. an. 312. art. 94. ad an. 324. art. 79. Gregor. M. lib. 9. ep. 71. Polyd. Virgil. Proaem. ed 5. ultimos libros de rerum inventor: Philosophy, and Customs, brought in∣to the Church by the converted Heathens; and many Jewish Customs and Notions taken from theConfessed frequently by Grotius, in his Notes on the New Testament, and by Mr. Dodwell; particularly Append. ad Praelect. pag. 660-671. Essens; whereby theAmmian. Marcellin. lib. 2. sub fin. Testes Verit. Spanhem. summa Histor. Ec∣cles. sparsim. Gregor. M. lib. 7. Epistolorum fatetur se (in rebus Liturgicis) ab Apostolorum consuetudine discessiste. Simplicity of the Gospel was by degrees corrupted, which was at first simple and plain in its Doctrine and Wor∣ship; as Protestant Authors generally shew; and as appears from several Popish Authors, particularly Platina in the Lives of the Popes, who shews in each Life, what Customs each Pope introduced. (3.) An earlyThis is notorious, and confest frequently by Dr. Ham. in his Defence of Epis∣copacy. modelling of the Church according to the Form of the Civil Government in the Empire; which was one chief occasion of the many Quarrels amongst the Bishops a∣bout their Sees; and of their aspiring to a Worldly Dignity suitable to the places of their Residence: from whence came Patriarchs into the Church, (which are confessed to be an Ʋ∣surpation, by BishopParker of the Govern. of the Ch. pag. 289. Du Pin. de Antiq. Eccles. Disc. Parker, and the Learned Sorbonist
du Pin) and other Ecclesiastical Subordinations confessed by Learned Dr.Of the Pope's Supremacy, pag. 191—in 4. Barrow to be only Humane and Prudential Constitutions. (4.) The Strifes,Cypr. de Lapsis, pag, 123, 124. Origen. T. 1. pag. 71. 113. 142. 246. 441-444. ex edit. Huet. Euseb. Ec∣cles. Hist. 8. 1, 2, 13. Socrat. 7.11. & sparsim. Sozom. 7.7, 28, 29. Sulpit. Sever. sub fin. Grot. in Matth. 20.28. Ambition, and the too general De∣generacy of the Manners of the Clergy, much complained of by Ancient Authors: although God was pleased all a∣long to raise up Great and Good Men, who were Orna∣ments to the Church, and witnessed against, and opposed the overflowing Corruptions in Doctrine and Manners. (5.) The Encrease ofSee Pufendorf's history of the Popedom. Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes. Dr. Barrow of the Popes Supremacy, pag. 240, &c. The third general Council of E∣phesus was afraid, lest under pretence of Sacerdotal Power the , or Pride of Secular Dominion, should be brought into the Church. Parker, ibid. p. 234. See Overal's Convoc. Book, l. 3. 1-6. Ecclesiastical Authority; which from the Power of binding and loosing, inflicting of Cen∣sures, distributing the Charity of the People, and determi∣ning of Controversies in Civil Matters, voluntarily referred to them, according to the1 Cor. 6. Apostles Advice; arrived at last from such small beginnings to the Antichristian Prehemi∣nence now visible in the Papacy. (6.) ExcessiveOveral's Convocat. Book. B. 3. 1-6. Hieron. in Vit. Malchi. Postquam ad Christianos Principes Venit (Ecclesia) potentia quidem, & divitiis major, sed virtu∣tibus minor, facta est. I do not say, that an Ecclesiastical Society, may not lawfully for its support, use Power, Policy and Wealth, in some measure to uphold, or defend it self; but that a Constitution needing such things is not Divine; or that so far as it doth use them, it is no more than humane. Dr. Barrow of the Ʋnity of the Church, pag. 33. 4. Honours and Riches, whereby the Minds of the Clergy were corrupted and drawn off from the care of Souls, asEpist. 1. 5, 7. Gregory the Great confesses ingenuously; and
the Church became too like a Worldly Kingdom; especially when Kings and Emperours became over-lavish in their Li∣berality to purchase Pardons for their sins; whereupon, as the Learned Archbishop of Paris, deHeidegger. Histor. Papat. chap. 3. Marca observes; the Discipline of the Church was very much relaxed, in recom∣pence, as it were, for the large Endowments received from them. (6.) Early Forgeries of Books, and Traditions, confessed by Learned Romanists; a too great Reverence for Anti∣quity; and a Despair of knowing more than our Ancestors; which our LearnedAntichrist. Demonstrat. pag. 15. Abbot makes to be one main cause of the Rise of Antichristianism. (12.) It is evident that The Papacy is The Antichrist; be∣cause the several Properties and Characters given of him in Scripture, do agree to the Papacy, and to it alone. For the full proof of which Proposition, I refer the Reader to theAbbot's Demonstrat. Antichrist. a book much valued by Joseph Scaliger, who was not wont to be lavish of his commendations. Downham of Antichrist. Dr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity. Dr. Cressener's Demonst. of the first Principles of the Protestant applicat. of the Apocal. Jurieu's accomplishm. of Prophecies, Tom. 1. Chap. 24. Tom. 3. His Pastoral Letters. But chiefly Dr. Beverley's command of God to his People, to come out of Babylon, where this great truth is most evidently demonstrated. Books quoted in the Margent; and shall only here give him a brief View of what may be most observable on this Head: (1.) The Doctrines and Practises laid to the Charge of Antichrist in Scripture (the general Heads of which are rec∣koned up, paragr. 4.) are plainly taught and practised in the Romish Church; such as Idolatry, Superstition, Supremacy, Per∣secution; and the carrying on all this by Lying Wonders, for∣bidding
Marriage, and abstaining from Meats; and that after so subtle a manner, under a disguise of Piety; as that Good and Learned Men have been deceived by it: Whence it plain∣ly appears to be a Mystery of Iniquity, and The Apostasy fore∣told and described in Scripture; as Mr.Apostasy of the latter Times.] Mede, and Dr.Mystery of Iniq. Moor have fully proved. (2.) The Seven-hill'd City, the place of the Residence of Antichrist, can agree to none but Rome, the Seat of the Pa∣pacy; for whose Residence in it, the Emperours made way, by removing from it by degrees, as hath been observed on Chap. 13. 2. and the Name, Number, Image and Mark of the Beast, the excessive Riches, and gawdy Pomp of the Wo∣man, are sufficiently Visible, and Notorious in the Romish Church; as hath been also before observed on the 13th and 17th Chapters. (3.) The InsolentSee on Chapter 13. Boastings, unmeasurable Ambition, mad Zeal, and Devilish Cunning, the Tyrannical Ʋsurpati, ons of the Papacy over Emperours, and Civil Powers; and the universal spreading of that Mystery of Iniquity, do sufficiently shew, that it was plainly described by the Little Horn, and the King that should do after his Will, inChap. 7. and 11. See Mr. Mede's Works, p. 667, &c.—Graser. Histor. An∣tichr. p. 149, &c. Daniel, and by the Beast, and the Whore in the Revelations, whom the World followed, and wondred after. (4.) The WorldlyRycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes. Dr. Barrow of the Ʋnity of the Church. p. 33. 34. &c. in 410. Pomp, Temporal Dominion, Court, Guards, Titles, Style, and Coronation of the Pope, plainly shew, that he is a Horn, and a King, according to Prophe∣cy; and the Rise of the Papacy, upon the Fall of the Ro∣man
See on Chap. 13. and 17. Emperours, is a sufficient Proof, that the Popes are that Man of Sin who was to be witheld until that Time; and that they are the seventh Head, and Eighth King. (5.) It is plain from History, that the Converts from Hea∣thenism, and the Barbaroas Nations, Paganized the Western Parts of Christendom, and became the Chief Support of the Papacy. And how agreeable is that to Prophecy, which places the Entrance of theSee on Chap. 11. Chap. 13. Gentiles into the Court of the Temple, before the Succession, and Rise of the Beast; thereby intimating, that they were prepared before hand, as Sub∣jects for this King of Pride. (6.) How aptly are the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Empire, called the Two Horns of the Beast? And is it not accordingly notorious from History, that the GrandeurRex Superbiae prope est, & quod dici nefas est, Sacerdotum ei praeparatur exer∣citus. Greg. M. lib. 4. ep. 38. of the Papacy, and the Idolatry of it, was made way for by the Ambition and Corruptions of the Clergy of both those Divisions; by the Constantinopolitan, as well as Roman Bishops; who were theGregor. M. Epistolae. Abbot demon. Antichrist. Constantinopolitanus Episcopus Antichristi Praecursor. Forerunners of Antichrist; and in whose Dominions also Image Worship was decreed by the Second Council of Nice; whereupon they fell under the severe Ef∣fects of the Saracenick and Turkish Woes, described Chap. 9. And hath not that Clergy everMedes Apostasy of the latter times. part 2. since been the Chief Instru∣ments of promoting and keeping up that deceivableness of Ʋnrighteousness, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Thes. 2. And may they not therefore be well meant by the False Prophet in this Prophecy?
(7.) How observable is it fromMede's Works. p. 463. 661. History, that the Em∣pire was divided, when the Papacy rose; and that, upon those Divisions? and that Three Horns, or Powers, viz. the Exar∣chate, the Lombards, and the Franks, were removed by him, to make way for his Dominion in Italy? VVhich is plainly foretold, Dan. 7.8, 24. by the coming up of a Little Horn amongst the Ten Horns, by whom three of them were humbled, subdued, and pluckt up by the Roots. (8.) May not the Pope (according to Daniel 7.24.) be fitly called a King, diverse from all the rest of the Kings, which are united with him? Is not his Supremacy an Image (as it is called Rev. 13.14.) of Imperatorial power, not a true and real one; and does not he subsist meerly by the Will of the Princes and Kingdoms of whom he is the Spiritual Head? so that they may (according toDan. 8.24. Prophecy) be fitly said to give their power to him, and his power to be mighty, but not by his own power. (9.) Antichrist is called the Son of Perdition in Scripture And is it not notorious in allSee the Lives of the Popes, and the Histories of the Papacy before quoted. Foulis of Romish Ʋsurpat. Overals Convocat. Book lib. 3. Bp. Stillingfl. of Idolatry p. 314-337. History, that Perdition, Mischief, Wars and Bloodshed has attended the Rise and Progress of the Papacy? For it was founded upon the Perdition and Ruines of the Empire; it was raised to a Su∣premacy, by approving the Murther of the Good Emperour Mau∣ritius; and advanced it self above the Civil powers, and all that is called God, by trampling upon Kings and Emperours, raising VVars and Seditions against them, and by anathemati∣zing, persecuting, and killing all that opposed it. (10.) The Times of the Beast are most admirably divided
in Scripture, into a Time, Times, and an half Time; to de note the several Steps and Advances of it; and its Declination in the half Time; which being a Division, or breaking of Time, is an intimation of its broken and divided State; as hath been shewn on Chap. 12. Now it is plain from the History of the Papacy, that its Power was most considerably broken at the Reformation, A. D. 1517; So that we may very well date its half Time from that Year, after which so many Na∣tions fell off from it: if from that Year we ascend to the beginning of its Two Ʋnited Times (which are 720 Years) we arrive at A. D. 797. when his first time ended, consisting of 360 Years, the half of which is 180 Years; and there, according to Expectation, we find this Man of Sin, in the great strength and vigour of Manly Age; having conquered all the Obstacles which opposed his Establishment. For in that veryZonar. Cedren. Sigebert. Petav. Rationar. Tempor. Year (remarkable for a horrible Darkness for Seventeen Days together) the whole Race of Leo Conon, cal∣led Iconomachus, was utterly extinguished by the cruel Em∣press Irene; who had all along opposed the Pope in the Controversie about Images: whereby he was freed from his Enemies on all hands; his Power in the West being then also setled by theMezeray, pag. 99. It may be observed, that the Kings of France were the first Kings that embraced Christian Religion, as it was professed at Rome; and that they contributed the most of any Kings upon the Earth, to the raising and supporting of the Papacy; as appears from an Inscription on a Marble-Stone, still extant at Ravenna, where it is acknowledged, that Pepin was the first King who gave example to Posterity, how the power of Holy Church was to be amplified and encreased: and as they have all along afforded Refuge to Persecuted Popes (as Monsieur Mezeray speaks) so is it a thing remarkable, that France, although it hath no great Obligation or dependency upon Rome, except with relation to the priviledges of the Gallican Church; yet interests her self more warmly in her Affairs, and sends more Stately Embassies thither, than any other Princes: whence it may be observed, that it is upon all accounts the chief part of the Decem-principality; and that her Kings are the most remarkable of the Ten. Mezeray, pag. 15. 223. Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes. Kings of the Franks, to whom (as we may
observe by the way) the Popes chiefly owe their Temporal Grandeur. And if we ascend again from thence to the be∣ginning of its first Time (which must accordingly be A. D. 437.) we arrive to a very remarkable Year; in which we find the World very busie in setling the Lunar Year; as on purpose to point out unto us, that the Beast's Months were then just entring; in whose Times, compared with the Days of the Witnesses, there is observed the exact Mathematical pro∣portion betwixt the Motion of the Sun and Moon; a thing ve∣rySee before on Chap. 11. 2. admirable, and worthy observation. And further, not only the beginning and end of the first Time, (where the Two Times also begin) are remarkable for some notable things relating to the Papacy; but also the Year 1157, the very Joynt of Time in which the Two Ʋnited Times meet; is very Fa∣mous forBaron. Heidegger. histor. Papat. cap. 4. Foulis of Romish Ʋsurpat. 4.4. Pope Hadrian's setting up in the Vatican a Pi∣cture of the Emperour's Vassalage; who was fain to hold the Pope's Stirrup before he could be crowned; and for his insolent Letters to him; wherein he asserts, that he was set up by God to destroy Kingdoms and Countreys; and that the Roman Em∣pire was held as a Feif of the Papacy; whereby he sufficient∣ly shewed his Antichristian Spirit, and his Mouth speaking great things. So remarkable is each Joynt of the Beast's Times; di∣vided by the Wisdom of the Holy Spirit, into a Time, Times, (or Two Times united into One,) and half a Time, to denote the different States of Antichrist and his Kingdom; who was the whole first Time in his Growth, and Ascent to an Idolatrous Power; which he was fully established in at A. D. 797; ten Years after his finishing the Iconoclastick War in the Second Council of Nice: and because after that Time, until 1517. his Kingdom continually encreased, and received no decay,
and he went on, and prospered, in one and the same Kingly State; therefore are the Two next Times given in One united Line of Time, called Times, because it was One and the same Kingly State; the first Time, measuring out a different State from this, having a distinct Time to it self, and being then ended. And his last State beginning at the Reformation, A D. 1517. is very appositely measured by half a Time, be∣cause it was a divided, and a broken one. Seeing therefore that the Doctrine, Name, Number, Image, Place, Times, and all the other Characters, and Notes of An∣tichrist given in Scripture, do all agree to the Papacy, and to that alone; it will follow, that the Papacy is The Anti∣christ. Q E D. But that the Rise, Progress, and Times of Antichrist, may be the better understood, I shall give this brief Scheme of them; referring to the several places in the Annotations, where they are particularly discoursed of. (1.) AntichristSee pag. 22. 302. was in Conception in the Womb, when the Apostle Paul wrote the Second E∣pistle to the Thessalonians, probably 25 Years after the Resurrection, 58 A. D. (2.) He was formingSee from page 22-38, 93, 94, 112, 124, 125. from 204, to 215. from that time, by the work∣ings of the mystery of Iniquity, in the lower parts of the Earth (as the Womb is called, Psal 139.15. Eph. 4.9.) du∣ring the Ephesine and Smyrnaean Succession, in which the Synagogue of Satan arose, until he was brought forth, and the Gentiles Months began, about the middle space, betwixt the Death of Theodosius, and the Fall of the VVestern Empire, just when Cyril was setling the Lunar Year. 437 A. D.
(3.) From that time theSee on Chap. 8, 10, 11. 9, 1, 2, 3. 11, 1, 2, 3. and Chapters 13. and 17. and 2 Thes. 2. Gentiles, i. e. the peo∣ple newly converted to Christianity, Paganized it, by in∣troducing Heathen Notions and Customs; and thereby prepared the way for this Man of Sin's becoming the Beast, or the Seventh Head, and Eighth King, up∣on the Fall of the Western Empire; when he was revealed in his own Time, and the Beast arose with his Ten Kings; accordingSee the Author de Excid. Antichr. pag. 184. to all History; and his Months began, 475 or 476 A. D. (4.) This Man of Sin was indeed the King of Rome (according to the Course of Succession laid down in Prophecy,) at 476. when the Christian Em∣perours ceased; but he did not arrive to his Ʋniver∣salSee on Chap. 9. 1, 2. and Chap. 13. and Chap. 17. 8. and Heidegger. Histor. Papat. Chap. 2. Morney's Mystery of Iniq. Supremacy over all Churches, until A. D. 606. according to the general Consent of Protestants, in agreement with Prophecy (Chap. 9. 1, 2. 17, 8.) which was prepared for him by the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Empire; called the other Beast, with Two Horns, like a Lamb, Chap. 13. 606 A. D. (5.) At 606 he fell as a Star from Heaven to Earth, and became an Earthly or Antichristian Monarch over all Churches; and from thence by degrees proceed∣ed to kill and overcome, until he came to be anSee on Chap. 13, 14-18. and Chap. 11. 7. I∣mage, or to have a Supreme Idolatrous Power establish∣ed fully at the End of his First Time, 797 A. D.
(6.) FromHeidig. Histor. Papat. Chap. 4, 5, 6. that Time the Popes advanced them∣selves by degrees, especially by the means of Hilde∣brand (as is clear from all History,) until they came into a full possession of Dominion, and Power in Tem∣porals, which they had long strove and struggled for, 1157 A. D. (7.) After thatHeideg. Histor. Papat. Chap. 4, 5, 6. time (altho with some Variety of Fotune, according to the Temper of the Popes, and the Princes they were to contest with) they exercised the Power they had gained over Princes and Emperors, sitting in the Temple of God as God, and opposing and ex∣alting themselves above all that is called God; by De∣posing and Excommunicating Princes, absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance, dispensing with God's Laws, arrogating Infallibility to themselves, and filling the World with Slaughter and Confusion, and with scan∣dalous and abominable Doctrines and Practices, until the Reformation; when their Power in Spirituals and Tem∣porals was broken. 1517 A. D.
CHAP. XVIII. The Text. AND after these things [i. e. immediately after the distinct Re∣presentation of the Woman, and her whole State, in the foregoing Chapter,] I saw another Angel [or Minister of God's Judgment, distinct from him who appear'd Ch. 17. 1.] come down from Heaven [in the Name of God, and with a Commission from him,] having great power [as being to effect great matters;] and the Earth was lightned with his Glory [i. e. the Judgment and Ministration was very Terrible and Glorious, and accompanied with abun∣dance of Light and Knowledge, Ezek. 43.2.] 2 And he cried mightily with a strong 1 Voice [to shew the great∣ness of the Judgment,] saying, Babylon the great [i. e Papal Rome, Chap. 14, 8. 16, 19. 17, 5.] is fallen, is fallen [i. e. will now be totally, and finally overthrown, and that as certainly as if it were already fallen, Isa. 21.9. Jerem. 51.8.] and is become [the Judgment being now actually in execution;] the Habitation of 2 De∣vils, and the 3 hold of every foul Bird, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird [i. e. it is desolate for ever, Jerem. 51.62. See Note 19] Annotations on CHAP. XVIII. 1 This Angel gives a particular Representation of the Di∣vine Judgment upon Babylon, or Papal Rome; according to the general importance of the seventh Vial, Chap. 16. 19. And this Voice, or Angel, may probably be the same with the Angel of the seventh Voice, (Chap. 14. 18.) which had pow-over
Fire; for his Appearance is illustrious and Bright, like that of Fire; and the glorious Execution of the Judgment is as the loudest Voice. 2 Its Destruction is here described by Expressions taken from the Prophets, particulary from Isa. 13.19-22.34, 14. Jerem. 51.37.) which are Allusions to the popular Notions and Opinions then common amongst Men; for which see the Commentators on those places, and Grotius on this Verse, and on Matth. 10.1. and Matth. 12. 3 A Military word (says Grotius,) signifying the Stations, or VVatches of Soldiers. 3 For 4 all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her For∣nication; and the Kings of the Earth [Verse 9.] have committed For∣nication with her; and the Merchants of the Earth [Verse 11.] are waxed rich through the abundance of her 5 Delicacies [i. e. the several Members of the Papal Communion, have through her Means, been guilty of the foulest Idolatry, Cruelty and Sensuality. See Chap. 14. 8-11. and Chapters 13. and 17.] 4 Here is declared the Cause of her Ruin. 5 See Doctor Hammond on 1 Tim. 5.11. 4 And I heard another Voice [or Angel distinct from the former, Verses 1, 2.] from Heaven, saying, 6 Come out of her [i. e. out of My∣stical Babylon, the Papal City and Communion;] my 7 people [who have not defiled your selves with her Idolatry;] that ye be not parta∣kers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues [or punishments, which are now actually in Execution, Gen. 19.12-26. Numb. 16.26.] 6 These Words are taken from Isaiah 48.20. Jerem. 50, 8.51, 6, 45. and they are a Divine Admonition to all Ages; (especially since the Reformation, and the clearer discovery of
Babylon, and its Corruptions by it) to forsake that Communi∣on; as they tender their own Safety, and Deliverance from Sin and Judgments, the Consequents of it. They do also express the Grace and Mercy of God, by which he gathers his People from amongst the Wicked, and calls them out of Danger, into places of Retreat and Safety; as he now does those whom he had hitherto witheld from Antichristi∣an Errors, and was about to secure after a most glorious manner. 7 Hence it appears, that God may have people in an Ido∣latrous Communion, who are not of it; who yet are obliged actually to leave and forsake such a Communion, at some times, and in some Cases; as Protestants have shewn in their Dis∣courses upon that Controversie; of which Cases, a Fear of being guilty of its Idolatry is the Chief; by which the Title and Priviledge of being God's People is forfeited, 2 Cor. 6.14-28. 5 For her sins have 8 reached unto Heaven [i. e. have been ex∣traordinarily Clamorous, and have cryed aloud for Vengeance;] and God hath 9 remembred her Iniquities [i. e. doth now punish her acc rding to her deserts, Chap. 16. 19.] 8 This is an Allusion to the crying sins of Sodom, Nine∣veh, and other wicked Cities; which, when they are extra∣ordinarily notorious, are said to reach Heaven in Scripture, Gen. 4, 10.11, 4.18, 20, 21.19, 13. Jonah 1.2. James 5.4. 9 As God's Forgiveness of sin, is called, his forgetting of it, in Scripture; so his Punishment of it, is called, Remem∣bring of it. 6 Remember 10 her [ye, my people,] even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double [i. e. abundatly and utterly destroy her, Je∣rem.
17, 18.50, 14, 15.] according to her [abominable, evil] works: in the cup [of Affliction,] which she hath filled [to others,] fill to her double [for she hath impenitently, and irreclaimably sin∣ned against me, as well as injured you, and therefore a double pu∣nshment is justly due.] 10 This Verse refers to the Triumphs and Acclamations of the Saints, upon God's Just Judgments on his malicious, and irreconcilable Enemies; and to their Concurrence in infli∣cting of them, as far as can be thought proper for them. See Psalm 58, 10. and 137. 2 Thes. 1.6. 2 Tim. 4, 14. 7 How much she hath gloried her self [in her Authority:] and li∣ved deliciously [in Pride and Luxury,] so much torment, and sorrow give her [as a just Recompence of her sins, 2 Thes. 1.6.] for she saith 11 [or hath said,] in [the Pride, Carelesness, and wanton∣ness of] her heart, I 12 sit [as] a Queen [i. e. have supream and uncontroulable Authority,] and am no Widow [i. e. I have many Kings and People to defend me, and am the Mother, and Chief of Cities, and Churches, Isa. 47.7, 8. Zeph. 2.15.] and shall see no sorrow [in the loss of Children, or People, but shall con∣tinue the Seat of Ecclesiastical Power, and of Empire.] 11 This refers to her Pride and Boastings, in the Days of her Prosperity and Security. 12 Words full of Insolence and Blasphemy, and which (es∣pecially as they lye in the places of theIsa. 47.10-15. Zeph. 2.15. Prophets from whence they are taken) can be properly spoken only by God alone; and plainly refer to the insolent pretences of the Papacy to Supremacy, Infallibility, and Indefectibility. 8 Therefore [because of her Pride, Security, and arrogant pre∣tence
to what properly belongs to God alone,] shall her Plagues come in one day [i e. unexpectedly and suddenly, Isa. 47.9-11.] Death, and Mournin g, and Famine [i. e. Variety of punishments, which shall bear a conformity to her sins,] and she [i. e. Rome, the mystical Bnbylon,] shall be utterly burnt with 13 fire [i. e. shall be utterly destroyed and consumed:] for strong [and powerful,] is the Lord who judgeth her [and therefore able to inflict the severest punishment on her, as incredible as the thing may seem to her, or others] 13 See Dr. Burnet's Theory, B. 3.10. 9 And the Kings 14 of the Earth, who have committed Fornication [or Idolatry,] and lived deliciously with her [or in her Communion, Verses 3, 7.] shall bewail her, when they shall see the smoak of her burn∣ing [i. e. the signs of her Torment, Gen. 19.28. Ezek. 26.15-21] 14 The Ten Kings shall hate the Whore, and burn her, as is expresly asserted, Chap. 17.16. and therefore by these Kings must be meant, either some who shall adhere to her, even after the punishment inflicted by the Ten Kings; or else rather, the Kings who died Impenitently in her Communion, who are raised to Judgment, and first behold her punishment with Terror, and then partake with her in it: of which see more on the following Chapters. 10 Standing afar off, for the Fear of her Torment [which they know they have deserved, and must shortly feel;] saying [in the an∣guish, and horror of their Minds;] Alas, alas, that great City Ba∣bylon [or Rome,] that [once] mighty [or powerful] City; for in one hour [or suddenly,] is thy Judgment come [and therefore ours can∣not be far off.] 11 And the 15 Merchants of the Earth [i.e. the worldly Factors for the Roman Church; and those who had compassed Sea and Land to gain advantages by it, and Proselytes to it;] shall weep and mourn over her, for [or because] no man buyeth her 15 Merchandize any
more [i. e. they could have no more advantage by her, Matth. 10, 8.23, 15. 2. Pet. 2.3. 2 Cor. 2.17. Matth. 21.13.] 12 The Merchandize of Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, and of Pearls, and fine Linen, and Purple, and Silk, and Scarlet [i. e. whatso∣ever was precious, and for Ornament, the highest Preferments, and most gawdy Pomps and Ornaments of that Worldly Church;] and all Thyne Wood [or Sweet Wood, for Images, In∣cense and Temples,] and all manner Vessels of Ivory, and all manner Vessels of most precious Wood, and of Brass, and Iron, and Marble [i. e. Utensils, and Materials of all sorts, for their Temples] 15 15 This, and the following Expressions, are taken from Isa. 47.15. and Ezek 27. where the Destruction of Babylon, and of Tyre (Types of the Antichristian City) is represent∣ed after the same manner. And by Merchants of the Earth are meant all the busie and deceitful Negotiators and Factors (as the Word is taken, Hosea 12.7.) for the Papacy; who any ways contributed to her Grandeur, Idolatry and Superstition; whatsoever might serve to those ends being to be understood by the Merchandize here mentioned. 13 And Cynamon; and Odours, and Oyntments, and Frankincense [i. e. all things gratifying the Senses; and to be used in Censings and Unctions;] and Wine [for the Idolatrous Chalice,] and Oyl [for Chrism;] and fine Flower [for the Idolatrous Wafer] and Wheat, and Beasts, and Sheep [i. e. necessary Provision, and Tithes and Oblations for her Clergy;] and Horses and Chariots [i. e. what belonged to her outward Pomp and Equipage;] and Slaves [i. e. hiredSee Dr. Ham. on the Place. Servants and Attendants, and whosoever gives them bo∣dily Service,] and 16 Souls of Men [i. e. those who served them with their Wit and Understanding, their Craft and Cunning; and were Slaves to them in Soul as well as Body.]
13 This is taken from Ezek. 27.13. where Slaves, or Bond∣men are called Souls of Men; and hereby may be meant those who served them with their very Souls, who pawned their Consciences for them, and enslaved their very Souls to them, serving them with the utmost of their Craft, and intellectual Capacities; in contradistinction to them who served them with their Bodily Service only, called Bodies, or Slaves; all sorts ofSee the Commentators on this Verse. Servants being comprehended under those Two Words. Dr. Moor also thinks, that Souls in Purgatory may be here meant; the redeeming of which is a great part of the Traffick of the Romish Church. 14 And the 17 Fruits that thy Soul lusted after [i. e. the delicious advantages, and great Harvest of Gain thou hast so passionately pursued and longed for;] are departed from thee; and all things which were dainty [to taste,] and goodly [to sight; i. e. which might en∣tice and allure, Gen. 3.6.] are departed from thee, and thou shalt find thom no more at all [i. e. all manner of hopes of thy former ad∣vantages, and delights, shall be utterly cast off for ever.] 17 Or, the Harvest of the Desire of thy Soul. 15 The Merchants [I say] of these things [Goods or Merchan∣dise,] which were made rich by her [by buying, and selling,] shall stand afar off, for the Fear of her Torment [which they also expect to feel,] weeping, and wailing. 16 And saying, alas, alas, that great City, that was cloathed in fine Linen, and Purple, and Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, [i. e. that Rich, Proud, and Luxurious Church and City, Chap. 17.4. Luke 16.19.] For in one hour, so great Ri∣ches
is come to nought [i. e. that Rich and Pompous City and Church, is on a sudden utterly destroyed.] 17 And every 18 Shipmaster, and all the Company in Ships, and Sail∣ers, and as many as trade by Sea [i. e. the several Superiour and In∣feriour Orders of Men, who made Proselytes for, and got their Living by the RomishA Church is frequently likened to a Ship, by the Ecclesiastical Writers, who give a Rationale of the Names of its several parts. Church, especially those who brought Riches into her Treasury, from her Foreign Dominions;] stood afar off. 18 This is taken from Ezek. 27.25-36. And by Shipma∣sters may be meant those who Imported her Forreign Revenue, and whatsoever contributed to her Greatness, I∣dolatry, and Superstition; as by Merchants in the former Ver∣ses may be particularly, and precisely understood, those who Exported such like Traffick; or traded within the Territories of Rome, the Churches Patrimony. 18 And cryed when they saw the smoak of her burning, saying, what City is like unto this great [destroyed] City [i. e. there never was any City and Church like it, nor any desolation like hers, Ezek. 27.32.] 19 And they cast dust on their heads [in token of Sorrow, Ezek 27.30.] and cryed, weeping, and wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great City, wherein were made Rich all that had Ships in the Sea [i. e. all that traded and trafficked with her, importing what might serve and advantage her, and gaining Proselytes to her;] by rea∣son of her costliness [i. e. out of her Rich Treasure, and large Re∣venues,] for in one hour she is made desolate. 20 [But although they weep and wail, yet] Rejoice over her, [saith the Voice from Heaven, Verse 4] thou Heaven [i. e. thou
Heavenly Sanctuary, and Kingdom of Christ] and ye Holy Apo∣postles and Prophets [or Witnesses, who are the Members of it, Chap. 11.3.] for God hath avenged you of her [and therefore it beco∣meth you to rejoyce, to shew your approbation of God's Justice▪ on your behalf.] 21 And a mighty Angel [or a very powerful Minister of God's Vengeance,] took up a Stone, like a great 19 Mill-stone to shew the greatness and it recoverableness of her Downfall, Exod. 15.10. Nehem. 9.11. Jerem. 51.63, 64.] and cast it into the Sea [in which her Merchants and Ship-masters had traded,] saying, thus [or af∣ter this manner, in token of its Downfall,] with Vio∣ence [that it may never rise again,] shall that great City Babylon [or Antichristian Rome,] be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all [i. e. she shall be utterly destroyed with everlasting Desolati∣ons, Jerem. 51.26.] 19 There are several Falls of Babylon in this Prophecy; as, (1.) When the Ten Kings give their Power no longer to the Beast, but hate the Whore; whereupon the Whore, that is, the Idolatrous City and Church, must needs fall, when the Beast, who carries and supports her, has his Power withdrawn from him; upon which the , or the Decem-Principality, falls as in an Earthquake, Chap. 11. 13. (2.) It seems to be plain, that the Antichristian City shall be destroyed, and that by Fire, by the Ten Kings, Chap. 17. 16. But (3.) Besides these Punishments to be inflicted on the very City of Rome (which I take to be most particularly meant by Babylon here, and not the whole Jurisdiction) there seems to be in this place (as. Dr.Theory 3.10. Burnet hath observed)
ome intimations of a more dreadful Fate that will attend it; namely, to be abst,  swallowed up in a Lake Fire and Brimstone, after th nner of Sodom and Gomorrah, so as totally to disappear; which he takes to he a punishment di∣stinct from its exterior burning, to come to pass at the Confla∣gration, and to be here meant. See more on Chap. 19. It is remarkable, that Babylon, the Type, was (according to Prophecy, Isa. 13.19-22. Jerem. 50.13, 26.) utterly de∣stroyed, so as never to be inhabited, and built again. For after it had been taken by Alexander, it by degrees decayed; first, by reason of the Neighbourhood of Seleucia, built by Seleucus Nicator, on the River Tygris, about 293 years before Christ; then, by Ctesiphon's becoming the Seat of the Parthian Empire, built by them on the other side of the River Tigris, to exhaust Seleucia; and by the building of Bagdad on the same River, by the Saracens, A. D. 766, when it was finish∣ed. And although these Cities, especially Bagdad, are cal∣led Babylon, in Authors, yet it was certainly a distinct City from them; the Ancient Babylon of the Chaldees being situ∣ate on the River Euphrates, about Three Days Journey from Bagdad; and being now only an heap of Ruins; her Kings having first deserted her (as the Kings of the Antichristian Ba∣bylon will), and then the People; who transplanted them∣selves, at different times, to other places; and built a City in Aegypt of the same Name, by the permission of the Ptole∣mees: from which place Bp.See Pearson. Oper. Posthum. de Succession. Rom. Episc. Dissert. 1.8, Pearson supposes that the Apo∣stle Peter dated his second Epistle. 22 And the 20 Voice of Harpers, and Musicians, and of Pipers, and Trumpeters, shall he heard no more at all in thee [i. e. nothing which
tends to Pleasure shall be any more heard in thee;] and no Crafts∣man, of whatsoever Craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of Mill-stone [to grind Corn,] shall be eard no more at all in thee [i. e. it shall never be again City, and Society, which can∣not subsist without Necessaries, signified by Trade and Bread.] 20 Here, and in the following Verses, by several Exagge∣rations, (according to the custom of the Prophets, from whom they are taken) is set forth the utter desolation of the Antichri∣stian City. 23 And the light of a Candle shall shine no more at all in thee [i. e. thou shalt be perpetual Darkness and Desolation, without the least comfort, Jer. 25.10.] and the Voice of the Bridegroom, and of the Bride, shall be heard no more at all in thee [i. e, thy Polity and Society shall be no more propagated, but shall utterly cease, together with all the Joy of thy former Solemnities, and Festivities, Jerem. 7, 34.16, 9. and all this shall come upon thee] for [or because] thy Mer∣chants [who proselyrted Souls to their destruction, and made Gain of Godliness,] were the great 21 men of the Earth [i. e. were Lordly, Worldly, Ambitious, and Sensual; and also because, or] for by thy Sorceries [i. e. Idolatry, and Superstition,] were all Nations deceived. 21 See on Chap. 6.15. It is an Expression taken from Isa. 23.8. where it relates to the Merchants of Tyre, a Crowning, or Imperial City; and a Type of the Antichristian City; whose Worldly and Ambitious Clergy are here signified. 24 And in her was [also] found the [guilt of the] blood of Pro∣phets [or Witnesses.] and of Saints [or Holy Persons,] and of all 22 that were slain upon the Earth [i. e. she was found guilty of Per∣secution and Bloodshed, as well as Idolatry; and all which had been shed during the Times of Christianity, was laid to her charge; because she was the Off-spring of Persecuting Parents, had approved her Fore-fathers wicked Deeds, and had filled up the measure of their iniquities, Jerem. 2.34. Matth; 23.29- 39.]
22 This is to be understood, in the sense our Saviour uses the like Expression concerning Jerusalem, upon whom he charges all the Blood that had been spilt from Abel, Matth. 23.29-39. See also Zech. 5.5-11. where the Land of Shinar, or Babylon, is represented as having the House, and Basis, or Foundation of all Wickedness in it: as if she had been guil∣ty of all manner of sins; and all sinners were to be punish∣ed in the Lake of her Burnings. See Note 19.
CHAP. XIX. The Text. 1 AND after 1 these things [i.e. the things seen in the prece∣dent Chapter,] I heard a great Voice of much people in Hea∣ven [i. e. of the innumerable Company which stands before the Throne, and before the Lamb, Chap. 7.9.] saying, 2 Alleluja, [i. e. Praise ye the Lord,] Salvation [from all evils, especially those suffered under Antichristianity,] and Glory, and Honour, and Power [be ascribed] unto the Lord our God [and to him alone; for he is the sole Author of all good.] Annotations on CHAP. XIX. 1 From the First to the Tenth Verse, there is a Vision of a Triumphant and Joyful Appearance in Heaven, for the Judg∣ment upon the great Whore, described in the Two preceeding Chapters; and for the Marriage of the Lamb, and the near Approach of his Glorious Kingdom. 2 This Word is first used, Psalm 104.35. to express the Psalmist's Joy upon the prospect of the Accomplishment of his Prediction, or Desire, that sinners might be consumed out of the Earth. And it is here also made use of accordingly, upon the Judgment executed upon Antichrist, God's Chief Enemy; and upon a prospect of the Old Earth's being ut∣terly consumed, together with the wicked people of it; and a New Earth's succeeding in its place.
2 For true, and righteous are his Judgements [and therefore is he to be praised;] for he hath judged [and punished,] the great whore [or the Idolatrous City, and Church,] which did corrupt [and de∣stroy, Jerem. 51.25.] the Earth with her Fornication [or Idolatry,] and hath avenged the Blood of her servants at her hand [i. e. hath re∣warded her abundantly according to her demerits, for shedding the blood of his Faithful Witnesses and Servants, chap 18. 20.] 3 And again [or the second time,] they said Alleluja [to testifie their Joy, upon the sight of the smoke, the sign and token of her everlasting burnings.] And her smoke rose up [or was then in its ascent, and that] for ever, and ever [i.e. she was punnished with an everlasting Destruction.] 4 And the four and twenty Elders, 3 and the Beasts [i e. the repre∣sentatives of the Jewish and Christian Church, chap. 4.] fell down and worshipped God that sat on the Throne, saying, Amen, Alle∣lujah [i. e. there was a very great appearance, and manifestati∣on of Christ's glorious Kingdom; and the justice of God's Judg∣ments was acknowledged with Praise and Thanksgiving.] 3 The Elders of the Church of Israel, are placed first in this Appearance of the Divine Confessus, or Sanhedrim: from whence it may be concluded, that this was a Vision of the New Jerusalem-State, in which the Israelites, as the First Born, are to have the Preheminence; who (according to all Prophecy, and Rom. 11.) are to be converted, and restored to their own Land; as hath been before observed. And perhaps for this Reason also is the Hebrew word, Al∣lelujah, here retained. 5 And a voice 4 came out of the [midst of the] Throne [from Christ. See chap. 5, 6. 7, 17.] saying [by way of holy Excite∣ment, and Encouragement,] praise our God [my God, as well as yours, John 20.17. Rev. 3.12] all ye his Servants, and ye that fear [and worship] him, both small, and great [i. e. of whatsoever Nation, Quality and Condition ye are, for God is no respecter of Persons, Psalm 115.11, 13. Acts 2, 5.10, 34, 35. Gal. 3.28.]
4 This Voice seemes to be an Heavenly Excitement to all the Saints upon Earth, Gentiles, and Jews, small and great of all Nations now converted, to joyn with the Heavenly Assembly, in rendring Praises to God. 6 And [immediately upon this efficacious Exhortation from out of the Throne,] I heard as it were the voice of a great multi∣tude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty Thundrings [i. e. there was a mighty appearance of Christ's Kingdom, and powerful Communications from the Heavenly Throne, to all his Servants upon Earth that fear'd him; and Heaven, and Earth joyned in praises] saying, Alleluja; for the Lord 5 God Omnipotent [now] reigneth [and that Gloriously, Isa. 4.23.] 5 These Words are taken from Isaiah 24.21-23. where it is prophesied, That the Lord God of Hosts, (or the Lord God Omnipotent) should Reign in Mount Zion, and in Jeru∣salem, and before his Ancients (or Elders of the Christian Church), and that Gloriously; after he had punished, and shut up in Prison the Kings of the Earth. Which is a clear Proof, that the Reign of God, here mentioned, has a Respect to the Reign, and Kingdom of Christ, after the punishment of the wicked Kings, and Nations of the Earth, Chap. 20. 7 Let us be glad, and rejoyce [exceedingly,] and give honour [or praise, Luke 17.18.] to him [alone:] For the Marriage 6 of the Lamb [Christ with his Church; 2. Cor. 11.2. Eph. 5.32.] is [now actually] come, [in, and by the coming of his Kingdom, Psalm 45. Matt. 22, 11.25, 1-13. Luke 12.36.] and his Wife hath made her self ready [i. e. the new Jerusalem state, is now coming down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.2.] 6 Christ is represented frequentlyIsa. Chap. 54. and 62. Hos. 2. Psalm 45. the Book of Canticles, and Bp. Patrick's Preface to it. in Scripture as a
Bridgegroom, and the Church as his Spouse, and Wife; to whom he is actually married when his Kingdom appears in its Glo∣ry; as is plainly asserted, Chap. 21.2. The Time from his Death and Resurrection, until then, being rather the Time of betrothing, or Espousals, than of Marriage. Consider Can∣ticles 3.11. and the Mystical Sense of the Captive Spouse, Deut. 21.10-14 which may perhaps have some reference to this matter. 8 And to her was granted 7 [by Christ, in virtue of his Death, Eph. 5.25, 26.] that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white [or bright, and Royal 8 Garments, see on chap. 3.4.] For the fine Linen, is [i. e. signifies,] the 9 Righteousness of [the] Saints, [who now come down from Heaven with Christ in his Kingdom, chap. 21.2.] 7 Her Nuptial Garments, and Ornaments are here said to be Granted, or Given unto her; to shew, that all the Righ∣teousness we have, is of Free Gift and Grace; even the prepa∣ring, or making our selves ready, by putting on Christ's Righ∣teousness by Faith; which as subjected in our Faculties, may be called Our Righteousness; whereby we become perfect through the Comliness which God puts upon us, Jerem. 23.6. Ezek. 16.14. Zech. 3.4. Rom. 3. and 10.3, 4. Phil. 2.12, 13. 8 See Grotius on the place. Christ was now about to pre∣sent his Church without spot or wrinkle, Ephes. 5. and there∣fore is she cloathed in fine white Linen; of which sort also Royal Robes were wont to be; whereby is signified, that the Saints were now to Reign with Christ. 9 By  is meant in Scripture theGrot. in Matth. 22.11. Luke 1.6. and Hammond. on Rom. 8.4. Rom. 2.26. Precepts of
the Law, and Holy Actions conformable to those Precepts; in which sense it is here taken: which are said to be given un∣to the Saints, to shew, that the Justification, and also the in∣herent Holiness of Saints, is wholly from Christ our Righte∣ousness, and is given and communicated unto them out of his Fullness, 1 Cor. 1, 30.15, 10. Gal. 2.20. John 1.16. Doctor Hammond's Interpretation of these Words, (The Ordinances of the Sanctuary,) cannot possibly be true; be∣cause the Holy Spirit expresly says, that the fine Linen (which the Priest used when he went into the Sanctuary, which is here alluded to) is; that is, signifies (which is the constant meaning of that word in this Prophecy) Righteousness; and therefore the fine Linen it self cannot be here meant; but the Righteousnesses of Saints, signified by those Ordinances of the Sanctuary. 9 And he [i. e. an Angel, chap. 22. 8.] saith unto me, write [this Truth, and seal it not, for it will immediately be brought into effect, see on chap. 5, 1.10, 4.] blessed are they which are 10 called unto the Marriage Supper of the Lamb [which is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matth. 22.2.] and he [i.e. the Angel,] saith unto me,Or, these true words are of, or from God. these 11 are the true sayings of God [i. e. certain infallible, and most important Truths; as incredible, and as inconsiderable as they may seem to men] 10 The Righteous Saints, (who are called the Wife of the Lamb, that is the Church of Saints, collectively taken, in the Two foregoing Verses) come down with Christ out of Hea∣ven, as is evident from comparing those Verses with Chapt. 21.2. and therefore by the called in this Verse seems to be meant the Saints who shall then be alive upon Earth, who are said to have but a part in the first Resurrection, Chap. 20.6.
and are represented here only as Guests bidden, but not as the Companions, and Followers of the Bridegroom. See on Chap. 20.6. 11 These being not ordinary Scripture-Truths, but of an high and Prophetick Nature; therefore a particular Assevera∣tion of the Truth of them is here used; that they might gain belief the more easily, and to ascertain the Revelation of them; as the Angel particularly asserts the Truth of Daniel's Visions, Dan. 8, 26.10, 21.11, 2. And this Phrase is af∣terwards twice used upon the same account in this very Pro∣phecy, Chap. 21, 5.22, 6. 10 And I [being transported 12 with the Vision I had seen of the glorious state of Christ's Kingdom;] fell [through in∣cogitancy, and surprise,] at his [i. e. the Angel] Feet to Worship 13 him; And he [i. e. the Angel,] said [immediately, with 14 great Zeal, and in great haste, to prevent me as soon as he could;] I am thy fellow 15 Servant [and therefore am not to be Worshipped; Worship being to be given to Superiors, and not Equals; not to Angels, who are but Fellow Servan s, and Fellow Creatures with Men; and Ministring Spirits to the great God;] and [I am the Fellow Servant] of thy Brethren [the Prophets and Witnesses, chap. 12, 17. 22, 9] that have [receiv∣ed] the Testimony of Jesus [in his Gospel, chap. 1. 2.] Worship [therefore]* God [and him alone; and not his Servants, and Instruments, whatsoever their Excellencies, and Perfections may be; for they are but your Fellow Creatures: And even as to their Ministrations, and Offices, they are not Superior to you,] for the 16 Testimony of Jesus [which your Brethren the Witnesses have from the Scriptures concerning things future, chap. 1. 1, 2, 3.] is [of the same esteem, and value, with immediate Pro∣phecy it self; because that] the [very] 16 Spirit, [and Life] of Prophesy [consists in the Communication of it from Christ; and it matters not as to the value of the Prophecy, or of the Persons who recive it, whether it come from the Testimony of Christ in Scripture, or from immediate Revelation: And therefore seeing that thou and thy Brethren here received the Testimony of Christ; you are equal unto us; although you
have it not immediately from Christ, but by our Ministrati∣on; or from his Apostles and Disciples, chap. 1. 1-4. 22, 6.] 12 This Action seems to be chieflyOf this Nature are many Actions of the Patriarchs thought to be by Justin Mar∣tyr, who calls them . Dial. cum Tryphon. pag. 364, 371. Symbolical; and is transferred, as in a Figure, to the Apostle; to teach, and re∣present unto us, under the Person of the Apostle himself, that the best men are very apt to he surprized, and drawn by the Example of others, and by false pretences, into Creature-Worship; and that such Worship is unlawful, let the pre∣tences be never so plausible; and that the only way to a∣void all manner of Idolatry, is to keep to the Precept here gi∣ven, of Worshipping God alone. See on Chap. 22.8, 9. 13 As being an Angel employed in a great Ministry, and upon the most pleasing, and most grateful Message; of shewing him the New Jerusalem-State, consisting of Gentiles and Jews, his Countreymen, Brethren and Kinsmen (for whom the Apostle Paul could have wisht himself accursed from Christ, Rom. 9.3.) united together, and reigning with Christ in his Kingdom. 14 All this seems to be included in the broken, and abrupt form of speech here made use of by the Angel. 15 Here is declared, that Angels and Men are Fellow-Crea∣tures, and shall be Fellow-Servants in the New Jerusalem-State, the World to come; which shall not be subject to Angels; and in which there shall be an Equality betwixt them, and Saints, the Members of it; and that they shall joyn together in the Worship of Christ. Luke 20.36. Heb. 1, 6.2, 5.
* That is, Jesus the Word of God, who is God, and One with the Father; and is accordingly worshipped in this Pro∣phecy, Chap. 5. and. 22.3. and in other places. 16 16 Here the Angel delivers a most excellent Axiom, where∣in we are taught, (1.) That the principal thing to be attended to in Pro∣phecy is, Whether it be the Testimony of Christ, or no; That is, whether it be delivered in Scripture: which principal Cha∣racter, is here called, The Spirit of Prophecy; that is, the Life and Soul of it; which animates it, and gives it its true Value and Esteem; in the Sense that Spirit is often opposed to Let∣ter, and Flesh in Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.6. (2) That the Sense of Prophetical Scriptures, given from a compare of Scripture with Scripture, is (when it evidently appears to be so) of equal Credibility with the Prophecy it self; because it is the Spirit, of the Letter of it. (3.) That Interpreters of prophetical Scriptures, when their Interpretations are confirmed, are worthy of a Prophet's Re∣ward; because they have the Spirit of prophecy, Matth. 10.41. 11 And I saw Heaven 18 opened [for a glorious appearance of Christ,] and behold a white Horse [the Emblem of Christ's Royalty and Glory, from his Resurrection, to his second coming in his Kingdom, chap. 6. 2.] and he that sate upon him [i. e. Christ,] was called faithful 18 and true [to his Promises, and his Friends,] and in Righteousness [i. e. Truth, and Peace] he doth Judg 19 [his People, Psal. 96.10, 13. Is. 11.1-9.32, 16.] and make 19 War [with his Enemies, Is. 11.4.] 17 To shew that the Heavens shall open, when the King of Glory appears, Psalm 24.7-10. Matth. 24.30.
And this Appearance (which is the second Vision in this Chapter) is that of Christ's coming in his Kingdom to Judg∣ment; and is the same with that, Chap. 14.14. as will plain∣ly appear to any who considers the Circumstances, and De∣scription of both. 18 He is said to be Faithful and True; because of his ap∣pearing in his Kingdom, according to his promise; which A∣theists, Antiscripturists, and those of the Antichristian Party, had called in question; still asking, with those Scoffers (2 Pet. 3.) where is the promise of his coming? 19 19 Hence it appears that the great Battle of Armageddon, is by way of Judgment; wherein the Enemies of Christ, and of his Kingdom, are represented asEzek. 32.27. and Chap. 38. Rev. 20. Warriors in Arms; who when conquered, were wont, as Captives of War, to be judged by, and receive Sentence from the Conquerour, as ap∣pears from Jerem. 52.9. 12 His Eyes were as a flame of 20 Fire [penetrating and judg∣ing of all things, after a quick and terrible manner, chap. 1.14. 2, 18.] and on his head were many 21 Crowns [to denote the ampli∣tude of his Dominions, his many Conquests, and the several Exercises of his Regal Office, especially now in his glorious Monarchy, and Kingdom, Psal. 72 8-20. Rev. 14.14.] and he had a Name 22 written that no man knew but he himself [i. e. his Es∣sence, and Nature as God Incarnate; and his Will, Counsels, Judgments, and Rewards, c uld not be fully known, nor comprehended by any Creature; and not at all after a saving manner, but by them to whom he should reveal them, Judg. 13.18. Job 11.7, 8. Psalm 36.6. Matth. 11.27. Rom. 11.33, 34. 1 Cor. 2.6.-16. 1 John 3.2.]
20 Christ is to be revealed in flamingThes. 1, 8.2, 8. fire, when he comes to Judgment in his Kingdom; and therefore his Eyes are represented as a flame of fire, to signifie his Discerning Judgment, and All-seeing Wisdom; which he will then most peculiarly manifest. 21 Christ had a Kingdom from his very Resurrection; and has had all along many Conquests over his Enemies in the Administration of it; and is therefore very fitly represented with many Crowns; as David, a Type of Christ, put on his Head the Crowns of the several Kings conquered by him, 2 Sam. 12.30. 1 Chron. 20.2. See also 1 Maccab. 11.13. He has also many Crowns, because of his Kingdom, as the Eternal Word, and as Mediator; which he hath administred under the Father ever since his Resurrection, represented by the first Seal; and as he now enters upon the Administration of his Glorious Kingdom; as he is also King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, he hath all the Crowns of the Kingdoms of the Earth belonging unto him; and now, as it were, put upon his Head. 22 His Name, Emmanuel, God made Flesh, or God in our Nature, seems to be here more particularly understood; as being peculiar to him, as distinct from the Father, and the Spirit, Judg. 13.18. Isa. 9.6. Prov. 30.4. 13 And he was cloathed with a vesture dipt in [the] Blood [of his Enemies, Psal. 68.23. Is. 63.1-6.] and his Name is called [or, he is,] the Word 23 of God, [John 1.1] 23 That is, the Eternal Word of God; by whom God spake, when he made the World; and spake also to our Fore-fa∣thers
under the Old Testament, and unto us in the Gospel. And he may also be called, The Word, because in him the whole Word of God, Prophecies and Promises, are Yea and Amen; that is, constant, and not changeable, punctually fullfilled, un∣alterably confirmed, and ratified, 2 Cor. 1.19, 20. See Grot. on Joh. 1.1. Bishop Pearson on the second Article of the Creed; and Dr. Bull's Defensio Fidei Nicaenae. 14 And the Armies which were in Heaven [i. e. Christ's mighty Angels, and the Saints which shall accompany them, when he comes to Judgment in his Kingdom, Dan. 4 35. Zech. 14.5. Matth. 22.7. 1 Thes. 4.14. 1 Cor. 15. Phil. 3.29. 2 Thes. 1.7. Jude 14.15. See the Notes on Rev. 14:14, 15. and chap. 20. and on verse 11. of this Chapter] followed him upon white 24 Horses [as Companions, and Partakers with Christ in his Glory, and his Kingdom;] cloathed in fine 25 Linen, white and clean [i. e. they were Justified and Sanctified by the Righteousness; and Holy∣ness of Christ imputed unto them. See on verse 8.] 24 This Battle is a Judgment, as appears from Verse 15. So that these Armies of Heaven must be the Angels and the Saints who shall come with Christ in Judgment to his Kingdom, with glorified Bodies; as the Scriptures quoted in the Paraphrase, do plainly declare: and they are represented as on White Horses, to shew the Glory they shall appear in, and their joynt Rule and Reign with Christ; it being the custom for Kings Favorites, Nobles and Rulers, to be clad in White Garments, and ride on White Beasts; as hath been already observed on Rev. 3, 4, 18.6, 2. 25 These Heavenly Armies appear in the same Habit, with the Spouse, at the Eighth Verse; whence it follows, that they are Saints, who differ not from the Spouse, which is the Church, but as the Members do from the Body, the whole from the parts united.
But Christ only, and not the Saints, appears in a Vesture dipt in Blood; to shew, that this Victory over Antichrist, and the wicked world, was wholly owing to his Blood; according to Isaiah 63.1-7. and that the Saints Robes were washed, and made white in his Blood alone. 15 And out of his Mouth goeth a sharp Sword [of Sentence, and Condemnation, proceeding out of it, verse 21] that with it he should smite [all] the [Wicked] Nations of the Earth, and [after he hath smitten them,] he shall rule them with a rod of Iron [during the continuance of his Glorious Kingdom, Psalm 2. Rev. 2.27. See Rev. 20.] and he treadeth [and that alone, Isa. 63.1-6.] the Winepress 26 of the feirceness, and wrath of Almighty God [i. e. the wicked of the Earth were punished by him with exquisite Tor∣ments] 26 From hence it appears, that this Judgment and Victory, is contemporary with Chapter 14. 19, 20. See also on Chap∣ter 20. 16 And he hath on his [Kingly, and Glorious 27] Vesture, [Is. 63.1.] and on his Thigh [upon which the Sword of his Fury was also girt, Psalm 45.3. Is. 27, 1.66, 16. Ezek. 38.18, 21] a Name Written [legibly, and now seen, and acknowled by all;] King of Kings, and Lord of Lords [i. e. the only Supreme, Univer∣sal Monarch, Dan. 2.44, 45, 47. 1 Tim. 6.15. Rev. 17.14.] 27 Here Christ is represented as taking possession of his glori∣ous Kingdom, clad in Imperial, Glorious Apparel; and girt with a Kingly Sword, according to the Description of his going forth to his Kingdom in his Might, Glory, and Maje∣sty, Psalm 45. It is an ingenious conjecture of those who think, that as his former Name (Verse 12, 13.) denotes his Divinity; so does this denote his Kingdom, as the Son of Man: Where∣upon he wears a Title on his Vesture, as Kings are wont to do
their Regal Cognizances; by which they are distinguished, and made known: and also on his Thigh; to signifie, that he came from the Loyns, or Thighs of Abraham, and David (whose Son he was, according to the Flesh, Matth. 1.1. Rom. 1.3.) to whose Seed, which is Christ, an universal Kingdom was promised. Whereupon also they were wont to put their Hands under the Thighs of them to whom they swore Fidelity and Subjection; to shew, that Christ, the Blessed Seed, and Ʋniversal Monarch, was to come from the Thigh, or Loyns of Abraham, Gen. 24, 2.46, 26.47, 29. 1 Chron. 29.24. Ezek. 17.18. 17 And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun [to shew the Glory of Christ the King of Kings and the Sun of Righteousness now cmforting his Servants, and treading down his Enemies, Malach. 4.2, 3 Rev. 1.16.8, 12 10, 1.12, 1.] and he cried with a oud voice, saying, to all the Fowls 28 that fly in the midst of Heaven, come and gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great God [i e. come, and partake of, and c lebrate this his great Victory, Is 34.6. Jerem. 12.9. Ezek. 39.17, 19. Zeph. 1.7.] 28 In this Verse begins the Third Vision of this Chapter; wherein is described the Event and Success of the Battel of Ar∣mageddon, by a Feast for Fowls upon the Carcasses of the slain; to which they are, as it were, invited, by a Poetical Allocu∣tion, made use of 1 Sam. 17.46. Jerem. 12.9. and Ezek. 39.17-20. the place here alluded to; from whence it is evident, that the Battel and Success mentioned in this place, has a reference to Gog, the Subject of those Visions of the Prophet Ezekiel. Now, although by Fowl are meant in the Prophet, the Damned Spirits, who seize on lost Mankind, as Ravenous Birds on their Prey; yet because they are discom∣fited in this Battel, and are represented as bound in it, they cannot be understood in this place; which has a reference ra∣ther to the Saints (those Armies of Heaven on white Horses) who come with Christ in the Air at this Day of Judgment,
typified by a Battel of Decision; and are, as it were, invited to a Feast upon a sacrifice of the slain (as it is called Ezek 39.17-21.) according to the Notions and Customes of the Jews, who were wont toDr. Cudworth's true Notion of the Lord's Supper. Feast upon Sacrifices; and that after a Victory, and sometimes upon the Spoils taken in War; as Abraham was fasted by Melchizedeck; and his Soldiers upon the Spoils taken from the wicked Kings, a Type of the Kings here vanquished, Gen. 14. And accord∣ingly the Saints are here invited to an Eucharistical Feast, for the slaughter of Christ's Enemies; who are frequently in Scri∣pture said toSee Rev. 18.20. Psalm 58.10. Psalm 106. and 149. rejoice; not in the misery, but in the righ∣teous Judgments of Christ upon the wicked; in regard of which Righteousness they are comforted (as the Prophet Eze∣kiel speaks, Chap. 14.22, 23.) concerning the Evil which God brings upon the wicked, for their wicked ways and do∣ings. 18 That ye may Eat the Flesh of [the] Kings [of the Earth,] and the Flesh of Captains, and the Flesh of Mighty Men [or Soldiers, Jerem. 46 5.] and the Flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all Men, booth free and bond, both small and great, [i. e. that ye might rejoyce for the Judgments of God upon all his Enemies whatsoever, Psalm 110. and 149. Rev. 18.20. Ezek. 39.18-21.] 19 And I saw the Beast [i. e. the Papacy and its Hierarchy;] and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies [i. e. all the wicked Potentates of the Earth, and their followers, and adherents;] gathered together to make War [i. e. united in a Diabolical Conspiracy, chap. 16.13, 14, 16.] against him that sate on the [white] Horse [i. e. Christ, verse 11.] against his Army [the Saints, verse 14]
20 And the Beast was taken [captive, Rev. 13.10] and with him the false Prophet [i. e. the other Beast,] that wrought Miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that Worshipped his Image [i. e. the adherents of Antichrist, chap. 13.] these 29 both were cast 30 alive into a lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone [i. e. were punished after a most ex∣emplary manner, and with the utmost severity.] 29 The Beast, and the False Prophet, (as being the Chief in the Conspiracy against Christ's Kingdom) are first taken, and are condemned to the Lake, even before the Devil, and the wicked Nations; who found them there, when they were cast into it, Rev. 20.10-15. 30 This Phrase shews, (1.) That their Punishment will be very severe, and very exemplary, proceeding from the utmost Wrath, and Indignation of God, expressed by Fire and Brim∣stone. (2.) That it was their Final and Eternal Condemnation; as being the very same punishment, to which all the wicked are at last consigned at the final consummation of all things, Chap. 20. 10-15. So that hereby is signified, the Eminency and Transcendency of their punishment, and the utter and to∣tal Abolition of that Antichristian State; which, as being the base, and Hypocritical Counterfeit of Christianity; is most pe∣culiarly abhorred by God; and is accordingly consumed and abolished, so as never to appear again, immediately at the ve∣ry First Approach, or Dawning of Christ's Kingdom; as the shadows fly away when the Day breaks; and the Chaff is sud∣denly driven away with the wind, Psalm 1.4. Hos. 6, 4.13, 3. Canticl. 2.17.2 Thes. 2.8. 21 And the 31 Remnant [i. e. the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies, verse 18, 19] were slain 32 with the Sword of him that sate upon the [white] Horse [verse 11.] which Sword proceeded out of his Mouth [i. e. they were Condemned by the Light, Evidence and
Convictions of Christ's Gospel, according to which God will then judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, Rom. 2.16.] and all the Fowls were filled with their Flesh [i. e. all the Saints were fully satisfied with the Justice of their Condemnation, and the high Praises of God were in their Mouths for it, Psalm 149 5.6] 31 The Beast, and False Prophet, the Chief Enemies of Christ's Kingdom, are first sentenced, and are cast into the Lake, at the first Appearance of Christ, to which punish∣ment also all their Adherents are expresly adjudged, Rev. 14.9-11. although not at the same time (as seemeth to ap∣pear from their bewailing the Ruine of Babylon afterwards, Chap. 18.) or not to the same degrees of it: Whereupon it follows; that if under the Beast, and the False Prophet, their Armies and Adherents are to be comprehended, who must needs be vanquished with their Cheiftains; then by the Kings, and their Armies, must be meant all the other wicked of the Earth, besides the Antichristian Counterfeit; who are vanquished and condemned by Christ, and his Armies. And although the Devil and his Angels, and Armies, are not here mentioned, yet it is evident from Chap. 20.2. that the Dragon was laid hold on, or taken Captive; which Phrase respects the Issue of a Battel, and must consequently relate to this at Armageddon. But because those Enemies are Invisible Instruments, and acted in, and by the others; therefore are they not particularly named here, but only their Instruments and Agents, who openly appeared, and resisted Christ's King∣dom. 32 These are not cast alive into the Lake, because they are to appear again after the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; but are said only to be slain by the Brightness, Efficacy and Pow∣er of Christ's Kingdom: whereby is meant a Spiritual Slaugh∣ter, accompanied with Bodily Torments, proceeding from Anguish of Mind; in the sense of the Psalmist, Psal. 59.11, 13.104, 35. concerning which see more on the following Chapter.
Here it may be noted, That there are Three Enemies of Christ to be vanquished by his coming; which may also be the Three Parts of the great City: (1.) The Dragon, or Satan and his Angels; by whose Dia∣bolical Spirit all the Enemies of Christ's Kingdom were influ∣enced; who are bound and sealed up during the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; and are afterwards cast into the Lake, Chap. 20.2, 3, 10. (2.) The Kings of the Earth, and their Armies; i. e. those who had a bare Enmity and Hostility against Christ's King∣dom, and not under the pretence of advancing it; who are slain at this Battel, and then make Second Assault upon Christs Kingdom; in which they are overcome, and at last utterly abolished, and cast into the Lake, Chap. 20.9, 10. (3.) Antichristianism; consisting of Beastianism, and False Prophetism: which State is utterly abolished by the first Ap∣pearance of Christ; and all its Votaries, and impenitent Ad∣herents, lye under the severe Judgments of God, during the whole time of Christ's Glorious Kingdom; being never able to make any the least opposition against it.
CHAP. XX. The Text. 1 AND I saw an Angel come down from heaven [i. e. a very particular and peculiar Ministry of Angels, deputed by God for this purpose,] having the Key of the bottomless pit [i. e. a Power to open and shut the Pit of Hell, Luke 8.31. Rev. 1, 18.9, 1.] and a great chain in his hand [i. e. Powerful means to restrain the Evil Spirits, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6] 2 And he laid 1 hold on [i. e. seized upon, and secured, Matth. 14.3.] the Dragon, that Old Serpent, which is the 2 Devil, and Satan [Gen. 3. Rev. 12.9.] and bound him [i. e. restrained him from 3 deceiving the Nations] a thousand years [i. e. during the Reign of Christ. See on Verse 4.] Annotations on CHAP. XX. 1 An Account having been given in the former Chapter, how Two parts of the great City, or Two of the Three Ene∣mies of Christ had been disposed of; the Holy Spirit does in this Chapter, from Verse 1 to 4. particularly describe the Event of that Battle, with reference to Satan, or the Devil and his Angels, the Third Enemy, or Third part of the Great City, or Idolatrous and Wicked Polity of the Kingdom of Darkness.
2 ,Grot. in Marc. 3.26. Ʋniversitas Satanica, the Devil and all his Evil Angels; called The Dragon, as he presided over, and influenced the Pagan Empire and Emperours, and lived in the Imperial Supremacy of the Antichristian King, Chap. 13.4: and That Old Serpent, in respect of his Deceiving our First Parents in Paradise, in that Shape; and his working in and by Anti∣christ, with all lying Wonders, and deceivableness of Ʋnrigh∣teousness, 2 Thes. 2.9, 10. Rev. 12.3, 14: and the Devil, and Satan, as he is the Accuser and Adversary of Mankind, Rev. 12.9. Under whom are comprehended the several Sorts and Orders of Wicked Spirits, (mentioned Eph. 2, 2.6, 12.) acting as one Power, under one Prince and Chief of them; who are here restrained from all manner of Power whatso∣ever, either from themselves, or as influencing o∣thers, during the glorious Kingdom of Christ. 3 As he had done our first Parents in the first Paradise; so that there is no fear of being driven out of this New Para∣dise, or of being deceived by Diabolical Temptations in it: it being veryBurnet's Theor. 4.2. probable that the New Earth will be Para∣disiacal. 3 And he 4 cast him into the bottomless pit [which is also a place of Torment, Matth. 8.28, 29. Luke 8.31.] and 4 shut him up, and set a 4 Seal upon him [i. e. closely confined him, after the most se∣cure manner,] that he should deceive the Nations [Verse 8.] no more [as he had hitherto done, by the Lye of Idolatry, and other de∣ceitful Wickednesses and Temptations;] till the thousand Years [of Christ's Reign,] should be fullfilled, [or ended:] and after that, he must [according to the secret Counsel, and Will of God,] be loo∣sed [from this Restraint,] for a 5 little season.
4 4 4 By these several Expressions is intimated, that the Devil should be confined after the closest manner, and restrain∣ed from all sorts of Mischief: but because he was to be let loose after the thousand years; therefore he is said to be only shut up in the bottomless pit; and is not cast into the Lake un∣til afterwards, when he is made utterly uncapable of any manner of power, or Action against God and his Kingdom, for the least season, and that to all Eternity. And here end the first Triumphs, and Conquests of Christ in his Kingdom; which begins with the reducing of his Ene∣mies, viz. Antichrist, the Wicked Nations, and the Devil, so as to make them his Footstool; whom his Father had been subduing for him, from his Ascension; as is evident from Psalm 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25. 5 The duration of this Season is no where determined in Scripture, and therefore cannot be positively assigned: on∣ly if the Tradition of the seven Thousand Years duration of the World, prove true; it must comprehend that space of Time which will be found wanting to compleat the 7000 Years, after the Expiration of the 1000 Years of Christ's Kingdom. 4 And I saw 6 Thrones [i. e. solemn and glorious prearations for Rule and Judgment, Dan. 7.9] and 7 they [i. e. the Saints of the most High, who come with Christ, Chap. 19.14. Dan. 7.13, 18, 21, 22, 26, 27. Zech. 14.5. 1 Thes. 4.14.] sat 8 up∣on them [i. e. were invested in a Regal and a Judicial Office,] and 9 Judgment [i. e. Power of Governing, Sentencing, and Pu∣nishing,] was given unto them [who sat on the Throne, by God, and Christ, Dan. 7.22, 27.] and I saw the [separate] 10 souls of them [or of the Persons,] that we e beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God [i. e. the Souls of the Martyrs under the Pagan Emperour of Rome, Rev 6.9, 10 11.] and 11 [I saw also the 12 Souls of them] which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had received his Mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands [i. e.
the Faithful Witnesses killed by Antichrist, Chap. 6, 11. 11, 7. 13, 15, 16.] and they [i. e. all these Saints and Martyrs,] 13 li∣ved [again, in Spiritual and Heavenly Bodies, 1 Cor. 15 42-50.] and 14 reigned with 15 Chr st a 16 thousand Years.] 6 This Representation is taken from Dan. 7.9. in allusion to theMede's Works, p. 762. Grot. in Matth. 19.28. Thrones, or Seats of the Jewish Consistory; or ra∣ther (in the Opinion ofMede's Works, p. 762. Grot. in Matth. 19.28. Grotius) to the ancient Custom of the Jews, amongst whom the Princes of the Tribes were wont to sit with the King, ih publick Assemblies. And ac∣cordingly, This Court of Christ's Kingdom, and Grand Assi∣zes of the Day of Judgment, is represented as having many Thrones; as, (1.) The Throne of God the Father, Dan. 7.9. (2.) The Throne of Christ, in which he was enstated, (Dan. 7.13, 14) upon the Judgment passed upon Ant∣ehrist; to shew, that Christ's Glorious Kingdom begins not until after that Judgment and Destruction; as in this Prophe∣cy the Thousand Years do not enter until after the Battle of Decision; which is also called a Judgment. Chap. 19. (3.) Many Thrones of Saints, Dan. 7.10, 18, 22, 26. where the Saints are called The Judgment; and are said to he set in Judgment; and many Thrones to be set down, pitched, or erected, as the Word ought to be translated at the 9th Verse; which Thrones do not belong to the Angels; who are not represented as sitting, but standing, as Ministring and Assisting Spirits, 1 Kings 22.19. Is. 6.1. Dan. 7.10. 7 By a diligent compare of Dan. 7.13, 18, &c. with Rev. 19.14, 17. and this Verse; it will plainly appear, that the
Saints, those Armies of Heaven, who come with Christ in the Clouds to Judgment, are the They here referred to; the very They (Dan. 7.13. where the like Phrase is used) who come with the Son of Man upon the Clouds of Heaven; to whom Thrones, a Kingdom, and a Judicatory are ascribed inMatth. 19.28. Luke 22.30. 1 Cor. 6.1-4. Scripture, over the Wicked Angels, and the World; and who have here Thrones given them, as a Reward for their Atten∣dance upon Christ in the foregoing Battle; to whom alone yet the Victory is ascribed, Chap. 19.21. 8 To sit upon a Throne, denotes in Scripture, a continu∣ance in an undisturbed possession of Soveraignty and Domini∣on, with a Right of Judicature; as Expositors of the Creed have shewn, on the Article concerning Christ's sitting on the Right Hand of the Father. 9 This Word signifies Rule and Government, in Scripture; as well as a Judicial Power, Gen. 15, 14.19, 9.1 Sam. 4.18. Psalm 72.1, 2. 10 From this place it may be observed, (1.) That these were the Souls of the very Martyrs whom he had seen before under the Altar, Chap. 6.9-11. the same Expressions being used in both places. (2.) That they were particularly the Martyrs under the pa∣gan Roman Emperours; because they are said to have been beheaded; which was aGrot. in locum. Roman Punishment. (3.) That the Soul is Immortal, and sleeps not in its sepa∣rate
State; because they cry with a loud Voice, have Robes given unto them, and are admonished to rest for a little season, 6.9-11. 11 These are distinguished from the former, by the inter∣position of , or And: and are evidently (as appears from comparing this place with Rev. 6.11.) the Witnesses martyred under the Reign of the Beast, or Antichrist; who were to fill up, or compleat the Number of Martyrs; and then to Live and Reign together with the Martyrs under the Pagan Emperours. 12 Pareus supposes an Ellipsis in this place; which may be thus supplied, , &c. although sepa∣rate Souls are often spoken of in Scripture in the Masculine Gender, Luke 16.19-31. 13 They lived; that is, in their Persons, in Bodies, suited to the State of the Blessed Milennium; for this cannot refer to the Souls here-mentioned, which lived before; as hath been already observed. See also the Notes on the following Verse. 14 This (as well as almost all the other Expressions in the New Testament, concerning the Great Day of Judgment) is taken chiefly from Daniel; who in the second and seventh Chapters of his Prophecy, foretells, that during the Times of the Fourth Kingdom (evidently proved by severalMede's Works, pag. 711. Dr. Moor' Sps. Proph 2.13. Dr, Gresseners Demonstr. B. 2. 6-8. and the Append. Au∣thors to be the Roman) the God of Heaven should set up a Kingdom, which from small beginnings, or an Infant-State
(likned by Daniel to aMr. Mede 713, 743, &c. Stone) should by a Divine and Supernatural Power, increase so far, that at last, in the Days of the Ten Kings (who are the Ten Toes of the Feet of the Great Image, Dan. 2.43, 44.) it should become a Mountain, filling the whole Earth; that is, a Ʋniversal, and an Everla∣sting Kingdom, after it had put an end to all other King∣doms, particularly that of Antichrist; upon whose destructi∣on this Glorious Kingdom, or Glorious State of Christs King∣dom, is to begin. And that there shall be a glorious state of Christs Church, such as hath not hitherto been, is a Truth so apparent in Scripture, that thosePocock on Micah, pag. 24, 29, 32, 42. who are most wary of interpreting the Scriptures to this Sense, lest thereby any ad∣vantage might be given to the Jews, cannot but confess, that many Passages of the Prophets which relate to this State, are not as yet clearly, nor fully compleated; but that they are still in fulfilling, and more may be expected in the latter times; which Dr. Pocock extends to the second Coming of Christ. And although we ought to be cautious, how we administer occasi∣on of hardening the Jews in their Infidelity, by forcing Texts of Scripture to this Sense, which may be meant concerning the first Coming of Christ; yet the want of due distinguish∣ing betwixt his first Coming in a way of Humiliation, and Sufferings; and his second Coming in Glory, and that to erect a Kingdom upon Earth, and under the Heaven (as is expresly affirmed Dan. 7.27. Rev. 5.10.) in a State of perfect Righ∣teousness, Peace and Prosperity; has been no mean cause of Of∣fence to the Jews; and is the occasion of many Errors a∣mongst Christians. But that there shall be such a Kingdom of Christ, (which may be called his Mediatory Kingdom) di∣stinct from the Kingdom of Eternity, of which the Man Christ
Jesus is the Eternal King, as he is united to the Eternal Word; and from his Spiritual and Evangelical Kingdom; will appear evident from these following Considerations: (1.) Because the manyPsalm 2.8. Isa. 2.2-4. Micah 4.1. Mr. Mede Disc. 25. 29. 36. Prophecies, foretelling a Glo∣rious, Constant, and uninterrupted Visibility, and Ʋniversality of Christ's Church, not yet accomplished, do require such a Future State. For the Church hath been seldom gloriously vi∣sible, never constantly, and uninterruptedly so: neither hath it been at any time in possession of much above the sixth part of the known World; so far hath it fallen short of the Ʋniversa∣lity prophesied of in Scripture. (2.) ManyIsa, 11.6-9.65.17-25. Ezek. 48.35. Micah 4.3. Justin. Mart. Dial, cum Tryphon. Dr. Burnet's Theor, 4.5, 7. Jurieu's accom∣plishm. of prophec. Tom. 2. Chap. 18, 24. Grot. de Verit. Relig. Christ. 5.18. Quae∣dam vero etiam definite & sine conditione promissa, si impleta nondum sunt, ad∣huc possunt expectari. Constat enim, etiam apud Judaeos Tempus, sive Regnum Messiae▪ durare ad finem seculorum. Prophecies relating to the Temporal and Spiritual Happiness of Christs Church, are not yet at all fulfil∣led, or only in part; and therefore there must be some Fu∣ture State, in which they are to be accomplished. Such as those which foretel its perfect peace, prosperity, holiness, and the di∣vine presence resting and remaining in it; which can by no Art be so interpreted, as to make out that they are already fulfil∣led. (3.) Many of theJurieu T. 3. Ch. 19. Types of the Old Testament, prefigure and signifie such a State of Christ's Church and Kingdom: such as Paradice, the New World after the Flood, the coming
of the Israelites into Canaan, out of Aegypt, the Type of the An∣tichristian Apostasy; their Return from their Captivity in Ba∣bylon, into a peaceable possession of their Land; the Kingdom of2 Sam. 7.8-29. and 23.3-8. See the Notes on Chap. 14.1. David, in which he was established upon his Con∣quest over the Heathens, and not until after many Troubles and Distresses; wherein it was an Eminent Type of Christ's Kingdom, as it proceeded from weak, small and troublesome beginnings, to strength, and a lasting Peace, after great Vi∣ctories over the Sons of Belial, and the Heathen Nations: This Kingdom is also Typified byPsalm 72. Solomon's Kingdom, and his Marriage, in the Book of Canticles; and most eminently by theSee on Chap. 1.4. and what follows in the next Note. Sabbatism, or Rest of God, in the seventh day, after six, for finishing his Works; wherein the seventh Thousand Year designed for Christ's Kingdom, is evidently prefigured: for Christ's Kingdom being the main design of God, to be accom∣plished, in order to his Eternal Kingdom, and the chief means conducing to it; was the primary thing in his intention from the beginning, and was not only foretold by all the Prophets, but was prefigured by theEzek. Chap. 40, &c. Heb. 8, 5.9, 9, 10.10. 1. Types, which shall be perfect∣ly, and fully compleated in that State. (4.)Dan. Chapters 2, and 7. 2 Thes. 2.8. Burnet's Theory B. 4. 8. Antichrist is not yet destroyed; neither are theIsa. 11. and 14.1, 2.25, 8.56, 8. Chap. 60.65, 17-25. Ezek. 28.24-26.36, 25-38.37, 15-28, Hos. 3.4, 5. and Dr. Pocock on the place, pag. 162. Zech. 9, 9-17.10, 5-12. and Chapters 12, 13, 14. Amos 9.11-15. Mic. 2.12, 13. Rom. 11.2 Cor. 3.16. Grot. in Luc. 21.24. Mr. Mede Ep. 17. and pag. 891, Mons. Jurieu's accomplishm. of prophec. Tom. 2, Chap. 17. Jews called, nor is theIsa. 11. and 14.1, 2.25, 8.56, 8. Chap. 60.65, 17-25. Ezek. 28.24-26.36, 25-38.37, 15-28, Hos. 3.4, 5. and Dr. Pocock on the place, pag. 162. Zech. 9, 9-17.10, 5-12. and Chapters 12, 13, 14. Amos 9.11-15. Mic. 2.12, 13. Rom. 11.2 Cor. 3.16. Grot. in Luc. 21.24. Mr. Mede Ep. 17. and pag. 891, Mons. Jurieu's accomplishm. of prophec. Tom. 2, Chap. 17. fullness of the Gentiles as yet
come in; nor arePsalm 110.1 Cor. 15.24-29. Heb. 2.5-9. all things as yet subdued unto Christ; all which yet, according to plain Scripture, are to come to pass, some of them, before Christ's Kingdom, others before it be delivered up to the Father; whence it is evident, that this Kingdom is not yet come, much less already past, as some imagine. (5.) Christ is not yet come in his Glory, and therefore his Kingdom is not yet come: For theCompare Isa. 53. and 63. with many other places of Scripture: For there are twenty Texts which speak of his Second Coming to Glory, for one which speaks of his First Coming. See Mons. Jurieu. and Dr. Burnet's Theory. Scriptures evidently distinguish betwixt Two Comings of Christ; the one in a State of Humiliation already past, the other in a State of Glory; and most commonlyMatth. 16, 28.25.31. Luke 19, 13, 15.23, 42. 2 Tim. 4.1. joyn his Second Coming and his Kingdom together. (6.) The Scriptures joyn the Resurrection, and the Coming and Kingdom of Christ together. Whence it is evident, that this Kingdom is not come; because the general Resurrection is not past. For thus, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. Christ's coming plainly refers to his coming to the Kingdom, at the General Resurrection; he having all the while from his Ascension, sat at the Right Hand of the Father, in the patient Expectation of this his Glorious Kingdom, Psalm 110.1. Heb. 10.12. Rev. 1.9. (7.) There must be such a State, in which all things, even the inanimate parts of the Creation, are to be restored to their pure, primitive State; that Christ's Redemption might be perfect and compleat: For Christ died, and made an At∣tonement
and Reconciliation by his Blood, that he might carry on the great work of Redemption, through the several Ages of the World, to its full perfection. Now, thatRom. 8.19-24. 1 Cor. 23, 21, 22. Redem∣ption consisting in restoring whatsoever the First Adam lost, there must be a Restitution of the whole Creation to its first State; or else Christ's Redemption will not be perfect. But of this more hereafter. (8.) If the General Resurrection, and the Kingdom of Christ are the same; then the Arguments from the Justice, and Wis∣dom of God, and all the other general Topicks which are com∣monly brought for the proof of the former, will conclude as strongly for the latter: to which may be added, that it is a∣greeable to the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God, that he should reserve some Age of the World for his own entire Reign in Righteousness, who had permitted the Devil, and Antichrist, to domineer in so many Ages of it; and that his Son should be visibly glorified in the sight of that very Earth, where he had been humbled, even to the Death of the Cross; and the last Act, or Period of the Oeconomy of his Exalta∣tion, should be accompanied with the greatest Glory and Ma∣jesty; as the last Act of his Humiliation, was attended with the greatest Misery and Reproach: and that his Saints, who had undergone a long state of Misery and Persecution, should inheritRom. 8.19-24. 1 Cor. 23, 21, 22. the Earth in prosperity, according to the promises of God; and the Wicked should suffer in a Visible State of Shame and Ignominy; and that for some long space of time, and not only for a single Day of Judgment; that Men might be de∣terred from sinning here, by the length of the punishment, andBurnet's Theor. 4.5.
by the dishonour of it, which shall be notorious to the whole Creation; whereas the Eternal State of the Damned, is an hid∣den State; besides which, according to the general cur∣rent of Scripture, there must be a Visible Appearance of the Wicked, and the Good, at the general Retribution; when God will display to the whole World the Reasons and Grounds of his procedures, and the whole Scene and Contexture of his Pro∣vidence; that his Wisdom, Justice and Goodness towards his Creatures might be seen, acknowledged, and admired by all of them; to which the continuance of Mankind, under a Visi∣ble State for some considerable time, according to their De∣merits, in the Reverse of what they enjoyed here: will very much contribute. Psalm 73. Isa. 65.13, 25. Dan. 12.1, 2. Phil. 2.9-11. (9.) It is agreeableSee Dr. Home's Resurrection revealed, lib, 3. 5. to the wonted procedures of Al∣mighty God, that there should be a state of prosperity to his Church upon Earth. For he hath generally in all Ages punish∣ed on Earth, feirce Tyrants, and Persecutors of his Church; and given to it a general Rest, after long, and tedious Troubles, Afflictions and Persecutions; and that most commonly in the Churches Extremity, whiCh is God's Opportunity: and accord∣ingly, we may justly expect such a State, upon the Destruction of Antichrist; and that his Fall is not far off, because the two special Witness-Churches of France and Savoy, have been redu∣ced to the utmost Extremity. (10.) The Oeconomy, Dispensation, or Fatherly Admini∣stration af this Kingdom, which is God's Houshold, is placed by the Apostle, Ephes. 1.10. in the Fullness of Times; that is, of All Time; which not being as yet expired, we may
thence conclude, that this Kingdom is not yet come. For from the Consideration of Mark 1.15. Gal. 4.4, Ephes. 1.10. and Isaiah 2.2. it seems there were as if a Line of Time in Scripture, commencing from Christ's First Coming, called the Fullness of Time; and ending in his second Coming, call∣ed, the Fullness of Times, or of all such Times. (11.) The MonarchickSee Dr. Beverley's Kingdom of Jesus Christ entring its Succession; and Dan. 2, and 7. Image in Daniel, is not yet bro∣ken to peices, but continues in its Feet, and Ten Toes, under the Papacy, and its Ten Kings; and therefore the Kingdom of Christ is not yet come, which is to destroy it. VVhich King∣dom also, as it is there described, cannot be Christ's Evan∣gelical Kingdom, because that destroyed not Kingdoms, but converted them; nor his Kingdom of Eternity; because, ac∣cording to Prophecy, this Kingdom is to be under the Hea∣ven, and to fill the whole Earth, Dan. 2. (12.) Very many Texts of Scripture cannot possibly be explained, at least in their Fullest, and most compleat Sense and Latitude, without supposing some such State. For even the first, and great Prophecy, Gen. 3.15. concerning the brui∣sing of the Serpents Head. is not yet fully compleated, nor will be, until Christ's Second Coming, when Sin and Death shall be utterly abolished, 1 Cor. 15. Japhet's Tents (according to Noah's Prophecy, Gen. 9.27.) have not been yet enlarged through the whole Extent of the Northern parts of the World; neither hath God yet perswaded Japheth and Shem, Gentile and Jew, to live together in the same Tents, or Church. The Promises toDr. Homes Resurrect. revealed, B. 3. 2. Abraham as they are explained by the Apo∣stles)
of such a Numerous Race as shall possess almost the whole VVorld, are not fulfilled in their utmost Latitude; as neitherDr. Homes Resurrect. revealed, B. 3.2. some of Jacob's Prophecies, to befal his Posterity in the last Days, Gen. 49. particularly that Remarkable one, Verse 10. for the universal and compleat gathering of the people, both Jews and Gentiles, into one Body, is not as yet come to pass. And who can say, that theNmb. 24.17. Deut. 30, 3, 4, 5.32, 36, 43. Psalm 2, 8.22, 27-31.45.47, 7, 8, 9.49, 14.67.68, 22-35.72.86, 9.110.149. Very ma∣ny places in the Prophets already quoted. The places in the New Testament which speak concerning Christ's Kingdom. and the World to come of the Messias: and Luke 19.11, 12.23, 42. , in thy Kingdom. Acts 3.19-26. 1 Cor. 15.24, &c. Eph. 1.21. Heb 3.5-9. 2 Peter 3.13. Revel. 11.15. See a Treatise written by Alstecius, entituled, The Beloved City, or the Saints Reign. Mr. Archer of the Personal Reign of Christ. Dr. Homes's Resurrection Revealed. Dr. Burnet's Theory, B. 4. Dr. Beverley against Mr. Baxter. Mon∣sieur Jurieu, and Mr. Claude Oevres Posthm. Tom. 3. Le Ciquieme Empire. Prophecies contained in the places quoted in the Margent, are as yet compleatly full∣filled; or that the FirstSee Dr. Beverley on the Lords Prayer. Mede Ep. 52. Petitions of the Lords Prayer, can be well understood, without the supposal of such a King∣dom? (13.) VVhen the Apostles had received power (in which all necessary Gifts, Knowledge, as well as others, is included, Luke 24.49.) by the Holy Ghost's coming upon them; the know∣ledge of Times and Seasons was bestowed upon them by God; which indeed it was not for them to know before, of themselves, and without the Spirit; which alone knoweth the Secrets of God; for which they were rebuked by our Saviour (Acts 1.6-8.) and not for supposing such a Kingdom and Restauration. For in the first Sermon which the Apostle Peter made after the de∣scent of the Holy Ghost (Acts 3.19-26.) he plainly makes
mention of the Times, and appointed Seasons of (d) Restituti∣on, or Restauration, and Refreshment to Israel; determining also the precise Time, when this should come to pass; viz. at the second Coming of Christ from Heaven, foretold by all the Prophets; when the sins of the converted Israelites were to be blotted out, and they should have great comfort and refreshment from the presence of God by Christ's return; referring to the Prophecy of Moses (Deut. 18.15, 18, 19.) where it is fore∣told, that at the raising up, or coming of Christ, the Israelites shall hear, or obey him, in all things whatsoever he shall say unto them; which perfect Obedience hath not been as yet paid un∣to Christ's Doctrine by them; and therefore the Words must refer to some Second Coming; when, according to the Te∣nor of that, and other places of Scripture, the faithful Jews shall be restored, comforted and rewarded; and the Disobedient shall be destroyed from among the people. (Lastly,) The Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.24.-29. plainly asserts, that Christ shall have such a Distinct and Peculiar Kingdom to himself, as that he may be said in the Exercise of it, not to be subject to God the Father; and God the Father, during that Kingdom, not to be all in all. Which cannot be understood concerning him whilst he was upon Earth; because he was then in a State of Humiliation, and Sufferings, being made low∣er then the Angels, and having taken upon himself the Form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7, 8. Heb. 2.9: nor concerning him as he is now in Heaven; because he is represented in Scrip∣ture in his present State, as sitting on the Right Hand of God; whereby is denoted his enjoying and possessing, as the Son, Acts 3.2. the same word used Acts 1.6. by the Apostles, when they proposed this question to our Saviour.
of Man, a Glory and Authority next to that of God the Father; and the Exercise of his Regal Office, as a Branch of his Mediatorship, as in subjection, and subordination unto him; and as in expectation of having his Enemies subdued by the Father, Psalm 110.1. Heb. 10.12, 13. Nor can this be understood concerning the Kingdom of Eternity; be∣cause then God will be All in All; And although Christ must Reign in his Humane Nature to all Eternity, yet that is not as Mediator, but as God-ManJohn 13, 32.17, 5, 24. glorified with the Glo∣ry which he had with the Father before the World was; in which State his Humane Nature is not to have a proper and peculiar Glory of it self; but one in and with God, from him, and him alone: And therefore this must be understood con∣cerning some State of his Kingdom (called 1 Cor. 15.24. The Kingdom) in which Christ, as Son of Man, and Mediators, shall appear to Reign so gloriously, with such Evidences, and Ma∣nifestations of Glory, in and from himself, as that he may be said, not to be subject to the Father, but to have a distinct King∣dom of his own, although communicated from God the Fa∣ther; in which he Reigns freely and absolutely as King, and net as a Vice-Roy limited by a Commission; and which was not to be One with his Fathers Kingdom, until all things be∣come One in him; when Christ's Mediatory Kingdom is to cease; A Mediator, not being a Mediator of One. Now if there be such a Kingdom, and that Kingdom be not his Me∣diatory, nor Eternal Kingdom; what Kingdom can it be, but that Glorious Kingdom we have been treating of; which is to begin (as the Apostle there intimates, and shall be shewn hereafter) at the Resurrection, and is to end when all things are subdued unto the Son; when he shall deliver up his King∣dom
in which the Saints had been sanctified by him, and pre∣pared for Union with God; according to the Tenor of that admirable Prayer of our Saviour (John 17.) the Pattern of his Intercession. Q. E. D, 15 It is no where expresly said in Scripture, that Christ shall come down upon the Earth at the Day of Judgment; but on∣ly that he shall appear in the CloudsSo  may be rendered; compare Rev. 5.10. and Matth. 25.21. See Mr. Mather de Signo Filii Hominis; and Dr. Homes Resurrect. revealed, 2.2. over the Earth, in the lowest part of the Heavens, into which be descends from the highest Heavens, Judging the World, and Reigning there with his Saints. 1 Thes. 4.16, 17. 16 , The Thousand Years; which are to be understoood of a definite space of time; as appears from the Epocha, and Period assigned to this Line of Time; which is dated from the binding of the Devil, and ends in the loosing of him. And the Thousand Years are to be understood Literally, and not Prophetically, reckoning each Day for a Year; because all Prophetical Time will be at an end before the Blessed Mil∣lennium begins; according to Christ's Oath (Rev. 10.6.) that Time should be no longer, after the expiring of the 1260 Years, the Times foretold by the Prophets. Now if Prophe∣ticall Time be at an end before the Thousand Years enter; then they must be Literally, and not Prophetically understood; in which sense if they were to be taken, the Glory of the Divine State, in which God is all in all, would be deferred to so vast a length of Time, as could not rationally be supposed. But that this State is to last such a precise Number of Years, seems
to be plainly asserted by the Apostle Peter (2. Ep. 3.8.) who discoursing concerning the Day of Judgment, delivers this remarkable Axiom, (of which he charges those he wrote to, to take special notice, as of a thing very observable) viz. That one Day is with the Lord as a Thousand Years, and a Thousand Years as one Day. In which place the Apostle answers an Ob∣jection which he foresaw would be made by some Scoffers in the last Days, against the coming of Christ to dissolve this pre∣sent World, and make a New One; and tells the that this should certainly come to pass at the Day of Judg∣ment. But least his meaning should be mistaken, he says, that by the Day of Judgment, he does not mean a single ordinary Day, but a Day in the mysterious Account, and Reckoning of Almighty God, who made all things in Number, as well as in Weight and Measure; and had ordained accordingly, that a Day in his Account should be reckoned as a Thousand Years, and a Thou∣sand Years as One Day; and therefore that the Day of Judg∣ment being One of the Lord's Days (called frequently the Day of the Lord in Scripture) must consist of a Thousand Li∣teral Years; and a Thousand Years (when spoken of with re∣lation to some mystical Day, or Time of the Lord) must be ac∣counted as One mystical Day; comprehending a Thousand Years of common Account. And also he further intimates, that the Days of the Lord (in which he perfected the Work of the Creation, and rested from it) being Seven, there must con∣sequently pass before the Day of Judgment, six Thousand Years, or six mystical Days; and that the Day of Judgment must accordingly last a Thousand Years, which should be a Day of Sabbatism, or a Thousand Years of Rest or Peace, and of Sanctification or Righteousness; in correspondence to Gods resting on the Seventh Day, and blessing, and sanctifying it. And this Interpretation of the place is not only agreeable
to the TraditionsMede's Works, pag. 609. Grot. in loc. Ainsw. on Gen. 1.31. Burnet's The∣ory. B. 3, 5.4, 3, 6. of the Jews, to whom the Apostle wrote; and to the Sentiments of the Primitive Christians; but al∣so may be stongly enforced from the Circumstances of the Text it self. For if this were not the sense of the VVords, and it contained only this plain Natural Truth, that Time is nothing to Eternity, why should so solemn an Admonition be prefixed to it? VVhich is also a sense nothing proper to the scope of the Apostle; who was to answer the Objection of the Scoffers; and to comfort the Christians under the delay and long suffering of God; and to excite them to look for it, and hasten unto it; to which end it was no ways proper to tell them, that each Natural day of the Year, was with the Lord as a Thousand Years; which would but have encreased their impatient expectation; and would withal not have answered the Objection of the Scoffers; because there might be, for all the Apostle had asserted, many Thousand Years before the Pro∣mise of his coming should be fulfilled. VVhereas the other Interpretation, affords Hope to the Christians, that things should not always continue as they were, but that this wick∣ed World should be at last destroyed, and a New One suc∣ceed it; wherein they should be found of Christ at his com∣ing, in peace, that is, in a state of rest and peace, to their good and prosperity; according to what the Apostle Paul had written unto them in his Epistle to theEspecially in the 3d and 4th Chapters. Hebrews; where, besides the Rest from the VVorks of the Creation; and that promised to the Israelites in the Land of Canaan; he makes mention of another Rest, which he calls a certain limited Day, wherein another kind of Rest is to be expected; plainly intima∣ting the Day of Rest in the Times of the Messias, or a Sab∣batism (as the word ought to be translated, verse 9.) that is, a
seventh Thousand Years of Peace and Righteousness, after six Thousand of Labour, Misery and Sin; for, (according to the Key of Mystical Knowledge given by the Apostles Peter and John) after aBp. Fell's Sermon on 2 Pet. 3.3. Millenary Week, the Everlasting Sabbath shall commence. And further, this Number is to be taken literally, because by it is signified a State of Perfection; a Year being the per∣fect Revolution of the Sun; and a Thousand, being a perfect Number; and the perfection both of Time and Numbers con∣curring in a Thousand Years. For a Thousand Years is a CubeFor it arises out of the multiplication of Three Tens; Two Tens multiplied, ma∣king 100 Years; and 100 Years multiplied by the Third Ten, amounting to 1000 Years; which is a Cube of Time. See Meursii Denar. Pythagor. and Dr. Moor's Cab∣bala; Oper. Philosoph. Tom. 2. pag. 500, 501, 530, 532, 557, 558, 559, 561. of Time, whose Root is Ten; whereby is signified a steddy, uninterrupted, and permanent State, of which a Cube is the Symbol; and withal a perfect one, to which no other State is to succeed, but is to be swallowed up in the perfecti∣on of Eternity; as the Number Ten is a perfect Number, be∣yond which there is no simple Number, and comprehends all simple Numbers in it. Whence it is, that Man, being a sinful and imperfect Crea∣ture, could never arrive to the Term of a Thousand Years (as Jachiades, a Jew, has observed on Dan. 7.25.) the pe∣riod of a perfect State upon Earth; which the First Adam could not reach (for if he had, he had been probably trans∣lated into an Immortal State) nor any of the Sons of Adam during the Old World; but is proper only to the Sons of the Resurrection in the New World of the Second Adam, or the Messias.
5 But the 17 rest [or remnant] of the dead [i. e. those who wee slain by the Sword of Christ's Mouth, Chap. 19.21.] lived 18 not again, 19 until the Thousand Years were finished. This [living again of the Saints and Martyrs] 20 is the first Resurrection, [of Life, John 5.29. 1 Thes. 4.15, 16.] 17 It is plain from what hath been observed in the forego∣ing Annotation, that the Day ofSee Mr. Mede, pag. 531-537. 571-573. 577-580, 602-619. Ep. 15.2. and Book 5. And Dr. Beverley of the Universal Christian Doctrine of the Day of Judgment. Matth. 25.31, 34. Luke 19.12-27. Judgment mentioned in the Doctrinal parts of Scripture, is the same with the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; DayJohn 16.26. Heb. 3.8, 9. See Mr. Mede in the places quoted, and pag. 86. and Mr. Mather de Signo Filii Hominis. often signifying in Scri∣pture a long space af Time, and not only a single Day. And therefore, seeing that the Wicked are to be judged as well as the Good, they must be here meant by the rest of the Dead; who are evidently the same with the Wicked People slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, Chap. 19.21. the same Expres∣sions being used in both places. 18 The Wicked indeed live again, when they are raised to Judgment; but because they rise only to Shame, and Ever∣lasting Contempt, (as the Prophet Daniel speaks, Chap. 12.2.) and lye as dead, or slain under the condemning power of Christs Gospel, the Sword proceeding out of his Mouth; and shall ne∣ver live a Life of Happiness; therefore are they represented here as deadSee Matth. 8.22. Luke 15.32. 1 Tim. 5.6. 2 Peter 3.7. Jude 12. Men, which lived not again; and accord∣ingly, they are seldom mentioned in the general Discourses in theNeither in the 15th of the Corinthians, nor 1 Thessal. 4. New Testament about the Resurrection.
19 They are represented during the Thousand Years, as in a dead, spiritless, and unactive State, lying under the Judiciary Sentence of Condemnation; and the perdition which the day of Judgment shall bring upon ungodly men, 2 Pet. 3.7. upon the expiring of which, they become active, gather to Battle, and compass the Camp of the Saints, Verse 8, 9. 20 This refers to the Resurrection, and living again of the Saints and Martyrs, mentioned in the Fourth Verse; who are the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20.36. aand the dead in Christ that shall rise first; whose Resurrection hereupon is call∣ed The First Resurrection; i. e. the Resurrection of those who shall rise first at the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, and who are to have a Second Resurrection (as it may be call∣ed in the sense thatGrot. in Apocal. 20.5. word may be taken, Lament. 3.63. Heb. 11.35.) when they, together with the living Saints, shall be caught up, to be ever with the Lord in his Eternal Kingdom; to which their first Resurrection to Glory is a prepa∣rative: there being Four several Resurrections (as they may be called) in Scripture. (1.) To a Life of Grace, and of the Divine Spirit here. (2.) Of separate Spirits with Christ. (3.) The Resurrection to a state of Glory in Christ's Thousand Years Kingdom. (4.) The State they are caught up, to when they are uni∣ted to God in an endless Life to all Eternity. For as the Change the Living Saints are to undergo, may be called aTertall: de Resurrect. cap. 41. qui ab adventu Domini deprehendentur in carne, merebuntur compendio mortis per demtationem expunctae concurrere cum resurgentibus. Death, so may their being caught up be called a Re∣surrection.
But because the WickedDan. 12.2. Matt. 25.31. John 5.29. Acts 24.15. 2 Cor. 5.10. shall rise at the same time with the Just, and they both shall appear together at Christ's Tri∣bunal; therefore is their State here accounted for together with that of the Just; and the Resurrection not mentioned un∣til that be declared; although it is not properly a Resurre∣ction (which word when it is used simply, and absolutely, as it is here, signifies usually theLuke 14, 14.20, 35, 36. 1 Cor. 15. Resurrection of Life) but a Death. 6 Blessed [in a most especial manner, because he waiteth, and cometh to the end of Times; and the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 12.12.] and holy [for they also are of the Num∣ber of the Saints, who are not perfect without them, and shall at last be caught up with them, 1 Thes. 4.15, 17. Heb. 11.40. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Isa. 4.2, 3.] is 21 he [i. e. they which are alive, and remain unto the Coming of the Lord, 1 Thes 4.15, 17. Isa. 4.2, 3.] that hath [although but a] part [or share,] in the first Re∣surrection [and not an entire possession of the whole Happiness, and Glories, of that blessed State of Life and Reign with Christ, until they are caught up unto him, 1 Thes. 4.17.] on such the 22 se∣cond Death [in the Lake of ire and Brimstone, Verse 14, 15. Chap. 21.8.] hath no power [at all, for they being the Living, shall always live, and having part in the first Resurrection to Life; shall be found in the Book of Life, Dan. 12.1. Ezek. 47.9. and the 15th Verse of this Chapter;] but they shall be Priests of God [i. e. Holy, and dedicated to his Service alone,] and of Christ [enjoy∣ing the full benefit of his Redemption, in White, Priestly Robes of Righteousness, washed in his Blood, Chap. 1, 16.5, 10.19, 8, 9] and shall reign 23 with him a Thousand 24 Yers [i. e. shall enjoy a pure, peaceable, and glorious Church-State, and be a Political Body upon Earth, governing the whole World for a Thousand Years, according to the Laws of Christ's Gospel, by
virtue of his Power, and in relation unto, and dependance on him, Dan. 2. and 7th. See Notes on Verse 4.] 21 If the Sons, and Children of the First Resurrection be the Saints, and Martyrs, who rise first, and come with Christ in his Kingdom; then the He, or Body of Men, (as the Article so often signifies) here mentioned, must be the1 Thes. 4.15, 17, 1 Cor. 15.51 () The We living, or the Generation af Saints and Believers (such as the Apostle was) who shall be alive upon Earth at Christ's Coming, and shall never have Died, or fallen asleep in the Lord; but shall have been keptIsa. 4.3. 1 Pet. 3.7. alive, and preserved, as a Remnant (therefore called ) in the Judgment, and Burning, the Battle, and Fire of the last Day; because there are no other Saints mentioned in Scripture, who can be said to be partakers of the Resurrection. And they are properly said to have but a part in the first Resurrection; because they shall only be changed at the first Resurrection, when the Dead in Christ rise first; but shall not have such spiritual and incorruptible Bodies, and put on such Immortality, as the Dead Saints raised to Life, have at the ve∣ry first moment of their Resurrection, until they are caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, so as to be ever with him, 1 Thes. 4.17. 1 Cor. 15.52. Who are also here very remarkably placed in their due order, according to Do∣ctrinal Scripture; viz. after the Resurrection of the dead Saints to life, and the Resurrection of the dead Wicked, to condemna∣tion; who rise together; Whereas the living Saints are not caught up (which may be called a Resurrection) until afterwards, 1 Thes. 4.15, 16, 17.
Which will appear more plain from a close, and due con∣sideration of what Doctrinal Scripture hath delivered con∣cerning the Resurrection; in which it is asserted, (1.) That Christ is the1 Cor. 15.20, 23. First Fruits of them that sleep; from whence it follows, that the Saints raised, may be very well meant by the Harvest (Rev. 14.15.) before which the First Fruits were wont to be offered under the Law. (2.) The Apostle asserts, 1 Cor. 15.22, 23. 1 Thes. , 16. that there shall be an Order observed in the Vivification, or Resurrection of the Just to Immortality, and Incorruptibili∣ty; in which Sense the Apostle must be understood, 1 Thes. 4.16. where he says, that the Dead in Christ shall rise first, that is, to Incorruptibility; for otherwise, if Resurrection be to be taken simply, and absolutely, the Just do not rise before the Ʋnjust; nor are the living Saints changed after them; but all of them rise together in the same moment, 1 Cor: 15.52. (3.) The Bodies1 Cor. 15.52. 2 Cor. 5.4. 1 Thes. 3, 13.4, 14-17. 2 Thes. 1.7. Jude 14. of the Dead Saints are first raised, and that incorruptible, at the Descent of Christ from Heaven with a shout; and being caught up into the Air, are united to their Spirits; and then they come, or are brought along with Christ, at his Revelation, and Appearing in his Kingdom. (4.) The Living Saints are1 Cor, 15.52. changed indeed, at the same moment that the Dead Saints are raised; but they are not
caught up to an Incorruptible and Immortal State until after∣wards; as the Apostle expresly asserts, 1 Thes. 4.16, 17. where he says, that the dead in Christ shall rise first; and that then, or afterwards (for so the word ought to be trans∣lated here, as it is 1 Cor. 15.23. that the Apostle might not seem to contradict what he had said just before concerning the Dead rising first) the surviving Saints should be caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, to be with him to all Eternity in Heaven. Which is also asserted by the Apostle at the 15th Verse; where he says, that the Saints, who shall be alive at the Day of Judgment, shall not prevent them which are asleep; that is, shall not rise before them, or shall not, nequaquam assequemur, sive attingemus, Ludov. de Dieu. attain the same State of Incorruptibility, and Immor∣tality, they shall enjoy at the very moment of the sounding of the last Trump, until afterwards; which distance of Time is not determined by the Apostle; and may be many Years for ought that is asserted in this place by him; because the same word is used 1 Cor. 15.23. concerning the distance betwixt Christ's Resurrection, and that of the Dead Saints; which is now, almost the space of seventeen hundred Years. And al∣though the Apostle, 1 Thes. 4.17. seems to assert, that the Living Saints shall be caught, up together with the Dead Saints; yet those words must not be so understood; as if the Living Saints were caught up, at the same moment that the Dead Saints rise; for then the Apostle would contradict himself; but must be understood according to the acceptation of the word (), Rom. 3.12. viz. that they shall be caught up in their own Order and Time, as well as the other, and be in the like State with them; or else do rather refer to the last joynt Ascent of both together, into the higher Regions of the
Air (the appearance of Christ hitherto having been perhaps in some lower parts of it) in order to their being for ever with the Lord. This, and such like Parallels betwixt the Doctrinal and Prophetical parts of Scripture, as to this Point of the Resurre∣ction; did incline me to understand it in a litteral Sense; which I was for a long while averse to, (as I since find Mr.Pag. 770. Epist. 20. Mede was) until by a more close consideration of what Dr. Beverley hath discoursed on this Point; I was fully con∣vinced. 22 By Second Death is meant Final, Eternal Punishment; to distinguish it from the First Death of the slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth; for at the very beginning of Christs Kingdom, the Wicked are slain by the Conviction, Sentence and Condemnation of Christ's Gospel, and Appearance; which is called, the making of his Foes his Footstool, Psalm 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25. Rom. 16.20. Heb. 2.5-9. where∣by the first Act of Christ's Regal Power, at his first sending of the Rod of his strength out of Zion, to bring his Enemies under the Footstool of his Throne, seems to be signified; un∣der which they lie in a state of Death, that is, Condemnati∣on, and Inability to act any thing against Christ's Kingdom, until the Thousand Years are accomplished; when they are permitted to break forth into open Enmity and Hostility; and are at last utterly subdued, and cast into the Lake, to suffer Eternal Punishments; and the Son shall put down () or abolish, and bring to naught, all his Enemies; even Death it self, the last Enemy to be subdued, 1 Cor. 15.24, 26.
But those who are partakers in the first Resurrection, being found alive at Christ's first appearing in his Kingdom, are continued in that State; and suffer no Death at all; neither the first, proceeding from the Convictions of Christ's Gos∣pel and Judgments; nor the second, of final Condemna∣tion. 23 They may be said to Reign with Christ, in the sense that we are said to be crucified with Christ, and to live with him: for the PersonalSee Dr. Homes; and Mr. Mather de Signo Filii Hominis. Reign of Christ upon Earth, cannot be proved from Scripture; whatsoever Glorious Appearances may be of his Humanity, from his Throne in the Clouds, and the possession of the Kingdom is given to the Saints in Da∣niel: of which more hereafter, as occasion offers. 24 Here it may be observed, (1.) That the same individual Thousand Years, are meant throughout the whole Chapter; as appears from the Greek Article (); whereby, reference is made to each foregoing Thousand Years, and it is shewn that they are the same. For Satan is bound a Thousand Years, Verse 2. and is restrained, Verse 3. from deceiving the Nations () during the same thousand Years: The Dead Saints and Martyrs live and Reign with Christ () for the same space of Years, Verse 4. during which also, the Wicked are in a state of Death, Verse 5. The Living Saints are partakers in the first Resurrection, during a Thousand Years, Verse 6. at the End of which very Thousand Years, Satan is loosed, Verse 7. Whence it will follow, that the Thousand Years during which
Satan was bound, are the same with those, during which the Living Saints Reigned with Christ; and that they are the same with the Thousand Years assigned to the Dead Saints rai∣sed, and the Dead State of the Wicked; because they which a∣gree in one Third, must agree amongst themselves. (2.) That there are but three sorts of Mankind to whom the Thousand Years are assigned; viz. The Dead-raised, Saints and Martyrs: The Dead Wicked, raised to a Spiritual and Political Death: and the Living Saints changed: for there are only so many parts, or sorts of Mankind, in the state of the Thousand Years; and it is not assigned to any Living-Wicked, who shall live wickedly, and then die; because whatsoever liveth at all, shall live, Ezek. 47.9. 7 And when the [foregoing] Thousand Years [during which he had been bound, and restrained from deceiving the Nations, Verse 2, 3] were expired, Satan shall be 25 loosed out of his Prison [i. e. his close Restraints from all power and liberty of Temptation shall be taken off.] 25 Satan, who was always a Prisoner, and in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day; was more peculiarly restrained, during the Thousand Years, from all power of Temptation; which he had exercised, not∣withstanding his Chains of Darkness, from the time of his Fall from his first Estate, until then; when he was closely confined by the Glorious Appearance of Christ, and his King∣dom, in the New Heaven and Earth: but when that Appear∣ance was withdrawn from the New Earth, then Satan was, as it were, loosed, and at liberty to tempt; which he could not do, whilst the Holiness, Righteousness, Truth and Justice of Christ's Kingdom, appeared in their full Power and Glory.
8 And shall go out [of his Prison, and Restraints to and fro in the Earth, seeking whom he may devour,] to deceive the 26 Nati∣ons, which are in the four * quarters [or Corners] of the Earth, Gog 27 and Magog [i. e. the Enemies of God and his Christ, Ezek. 38.2, 3.39, 8. Rev. 19.18, 19, 21.] to gather them together [from all parts,] to 28 Battel [i. e. to oppose, persecute and destroy Christ's Kingdom upon Earth:] the 29 number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea [i. e. exceeding great, Ezek 38.8, 9, 15, 16.] 26 ,Grot. in Matth. 5, 7. Eph. 2.11, 12. that is, Gentiles, or Aliens, from the New Je∣rusalem State; banished, as it were, from that happy Society, into the Four Quarters, or Corners of the Earth; and living there as without God, in the New World of the Messias; belei∣ving indeed, but as the Devils do, with trembling, which is a Spiritual Death; who were typified by the Hamonah, and Multitude of Nations, Ezek. 38, 8, 9, 15, 16.39, 11, 16. who are to come up against the New Jerusalem, in the latter Days, after the Resurrection, Conversion, and Return of the Jews, and their Ʋnion with the Gentiles into One Church; as appears from Ezek. Chapters 36, 37, 38, 39. Now whatsoever is meant by these Nations in Ezekiel; it is plain, that in this place they can be no other than some of those to whom the Thousand Years are here assigned, who are the whole of Mankind: and seeing that it cannot be supposed that the Saints of any kind can be possibly engaged in such a design, against Christ's Kingdom, (as being the saved, and hea∣led, the Living, the Sons, and Partakers of the first Resurre∣ction, and secured by Christ, the Second Adam, in a State of Righteousness, who will lose none that are his, as the first Adam did) it will follow, that by these Nations must be
understood, the remnant slain, the rest of the Dead, who li∣ved not again, or the Dead-Wicked, raised to a state of Con∣demnation, and continuing under the Awe and Terror of it, during the Glories of Christ's Kingdom; who are now stirred up by Satan, their Head and Ringleader, to attack the Camp of the Saints upon Earth; whom he thought he might easi∣ly overcome, now the more immediate Presence and Assist∣ance of Christ was withdrawn from them. And to this sense agree many Expressions in Ezekiel, who calls them the Mul∣titude, or Nations of the Dead (Chap. 39.8-17.) and also the general scope of this Chapter, which has a relation, as is granted by all Interpreters, to what will come to pass at the last Judgment, and the Resurrection. * In the Four Corners, or Angles of the New Earth, which is represented as a square City, or Camp; without which, as it were, at the Four Angles, and Corners of it, the Wicked are placed, here and Chap. 22.15. in allusion to the Custom a∣mongst the Jews of executing Offenders without the Camp, and City; and of excluding and excommunicating all unclean persons out of it, Numb. 5.1-4. Heb. 13.11, 12, 13. 27 This is a plain proof, that these Nations are typified by the multitude of the Dead, in Ezekiel; who calls them Gog, and the Land of Magog; by which theEzek. 32, 26.38, 15.39, 2. The Mogul-Tartars above the Wall of Chi∣na, are called so by the Arabian Writers. Dr. Hyde. Epist. de mensuris Sinens. See Mr. Mede, pag. 574. and Ep. 41. Northern, and Scythian Nations are understood, in Scripture; a Type of the Enemies of God's Church and Kingdom, prophesied of in Old Time by the servants of God, the Prophets of Israel, un∣der
the Names of such Nations as were the Chief Enemies of the Jews, in the particular Times of each Prophet, Ezek. 38.17. So that Gog and Magog seems to denote the whole multi∣tude of God's Enemies in each Age; which admirably agrees with what hath been discoursed already; to wit, that these Nations are the Wicked dead of every Age of the World, rai∣sed to Condemnation. 29 This Battel is distinct from that at Armageddon; which was before the Thousand Years. Neither will it appear in∣credible, that the Faln Angels, and the Damned, should again attempt such a Design; and that after they had experienced the power of Christ's Wrath for a Thousand Years: If we con∣sider, that the Devils retain the same Enmity against God, not∣withstanding their many Ages of Punishment, and their Ex∣pectation of an Eternal Doom; and that this Attempt was under the wise Permission, and Order of Almighty God, at a time when his more immediate Glorious Presence was with∣drawn from the New Earth of his Saints, and the Laodice∣an state of Coldness and Indifferency, to the Glories of Christ's Kingdom, began. For the Wicked Nations, as they went down to Hell (according to the Expressions of Ezekiel, Chap. 32.26, 27.) with their Weapons of War; that is, with the same Enmity to Christ in which they lived; and laid their Swords under their Heads, in a readiness to act the same Wickedness over again; so are they raised with the same Passions, only the more enraged for their Punishments; and may very well be supposed out of Envy and Revenge, for their long confine∣ment under a State of Punishment and Infamy, to engage in this Attempt. 29 Although the Number of the Wicked, who shall be rai∣sed to Condemnation, will be very great; yet there will not be any inconvenience to our Assertion from thence, as if the Earth would be incumbred with so vast a Number of wicked
persons; because no very great space will be required for their confinement; if that be true, which is asserted by Sir WilliamSee his Essay in Political Arithmetick concerning the Growth of the City of London. Petty; That half the Island of Ireland, would af∣ford not only Footing to stand upon, but Graves to lye down in, for the whole Number of Men now living, and also for those that have died since the beginning of the World. To which may be added, that their Bodies shall be spiritual; they being to par∣take of the spirituality of the Resurrection, although not of the Purity and Blessedness of it. 9 And they went up [in Battle array, 1 Kings 10.1. from the Quarters and Corners to which they were confined,] on the breadth of the Earth [i. e. to assault the Kingdom of Christ, which had spread it self over the whole Earth, Isa. 8, 8.49, 6. Psalm 72.8.] and compassed [or besieged] the Camp 30 of the Saints [who reign with Christ, Verse 6.] and the 31 beloved City [i. e. they endeavoured to destroy Christ's Kingdom, and the New Jerusa∣lem State on Earth. See on Chap. 21.2, 3.] and 32 [or, but] Fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured them [i. e. they were suddenly, and miraculously discomfited by God, and most severe Judgments were inflicted upon them, by God's fiery Wrath and Indignation, Ezek. 38.22, 23.39, 6, 9, 10.] 30 A Metaphor from the Camp of the Israelites in the Wil∣derness; a Type of the Church and Kingdom of Christ. See Ains∣worth on Numb. 2.27. 31 Jerusalem is called God's Beloved, Psalm 60, 5.108, 6. which was a Type of the New Jerusalem State, the Holy City, the Bride, and Beloved of her Husband, Chap. 21.
32 The Israelites are represented by Ezekiel (Chap. 38.11.) as living in unwalled Villages, without Bars and Gates, safely, and at rest; when they shall be invaded by Gog, that is, the Heathen Nations, out of whose Captivity they are to be brought. And in such a Posture may the Saints upon Earth be well presumed to be, after the Thousand Years; when the Laodicean State (as hath been before observed on Chap. 3.14-21.) begins; in which, through a long conti∣nuance of Glory, and Prosperity, the Saints upon Earth be∣gan to be less Zealous, and did not so ardently desire to be caught up to Christ, and be for ever with him, as they had be∣fore done. 10 And the Devil that deceived them [or the Deceiver of them, and that from the beginning, John 4.44. 1 John 3.8.] was [without any Tryal, as being taken in the very Fact, and having been a notorious Murtherer, and Lyar from the beginning, and the Father of all Sin, and Enmity to Christ's Kingdom;] cast [im∣mediately,] into the 33 Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the 34 Beast, and the False Prophet are [who were before cast into it; Chap. 19.20.] and shall be tormented day aad night for ever and ever [i. e. he was ad∣judged upon undeniable Evidence of Fact, to a State of utter in∣ability of acting against God and Christ, and to extreme Tor∣ments to all Eternity, without intermission.] 33 He, and his cheif Agents, are condemned to the same punishment; having no remains of any Power left, no more than there is of a thing which is consumed by Fire; for the Devil shall not be only held in Chains, as formerly, but all his Power, and Authority, shall be utterly abolished. Gro∣tius in locum, & in Cap. 19,20. 34 From hence it appears, that Gog and Magog is not Anti∣christ, as some have thought; because Antichrist was in the Lake before their Discomfiture and Condemnation.
11 And I saw a 35 great white 36 Throne [i. e. a Representation of the last, and great Act of Judicature, in which all Enmity was destroyed, and the living, remaining Saints, were caught up to the Lord, to sit with him on his Throne; and all which belong∣ed to Christ's Kingdom, were fully sanctified, and glorified, and prepared for Union with God to all Eternity, 1 Cor. 15. 1 Thes. 4. Rev. 3.21.] and him that sat on it [i. e. Christ, Matth. 25.31. Acts 17.21.] from whose 37 Face [or Presence; upon the Declarati∣on of his Will,] the [38 New] Earth, and the [38 New] Heaven, sled 39 away [or disappeared, at his Rebuke and Command,] and there was found no 40 place for them [i. e. they were utterly abolish∣ed, and annihilated; Psalm 37.10. Dan. 2.35. Rev. 12.8.] 35 It was a great Throne, because all who had overcome, were to sit with Christ in it; and the whole World was to be fi∣nally Judged at it: and it was White, to shew the Glory, Sanctity, and Purity of Christ's Justice, and of the State in which the Saints were now to be invested; who at this great and last Session, are caught up together into the Air, to be with Christ for ever, after they had Judged the World with him. 36 From the Appearance of this Throne, and the follow∣ing Judgment, it may be concluded, that this was the Laodi∣cean State of the Church, according to the importance of the Word, which signifies the Judging of the People. See on Chap. 3. 37 Face, signifies a stedfast Will and Purpose, shewn by Gestures, or other Signs and Circumstances; as the word is ta∣ken, Luke 9.51-53. 38 38 These must be the New Heaven, and New Earth, whose Description is given in the following Chapter; be∣cause they fly away after the Expiration of the Thousand Years, which is the space of Time allotted to the Duration of the Reign and Kingdom of Christ, and of the Holy City, prepa∣red
as a Bride, the New Jerusalem; which are to be, not in the Old, but the New Heaven and Earth; as will plainly ap∣pear to any one who compares this Chapter with the follow∣ing, wherein (as is all along observed) are such Descripti∣ons given of the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, as can agree to no other but a New Heaven, and New Earth, in which dwelleth Righteousness. 39 This New Earth flies away, but the Old One is to be dis∣solved by Fire; of which, flying away, is not a proper Ex∣pression. 40 The Psalmist expresseth the Death of a Man, by his place knowing him no more, Psalm 103.16. But when it is said, That no place is found for a thing, thereby seems to be denoted its utter annihilation, and withal the impossibility of any other thing succeeding in its place, because there is no place remaining, into which it should succeed. Whence it follows, that this is the last Heaven and Earth; and that no New Ones are to succeed it; and that nothing else shall remain after it but the Eternal Kingdom of God, All in All, in the highest Heavens, and the Lake of the Damned. 12 And I saw the 41 Dead [in Trespasses and Sins, who had lain in an unactive State of Infamy, during the Thousand Years, and were afterwards discomfited by the Fire of God, which came down from Heaven, Verse 5, 9.] small 42 and great [i. e. all sorts, and the whole Race of them, Chap. 19.18.] stand before God [to be judged by him,] and the 43 Books [of God's Omniscience, Mens Consciences, and the Law,] were opened [i. e. Mens Actions, and God's Knowledge of them, were made manifest.] and 44 another Book was opened, which is the Book 44 of Life, [viz. the Lamb's Book of Life, from the foundation of the World, Chap. 3, 5.13, 8.17, 8, 21, 27.] and the [Wicked] Dead [raised to Condemnati∣on, and discomfited by God's severe Judgment and Indignation, and now brought all together to receive their final Sentence,] were
judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their [own wicked] Works [which were not also found written in the Book of Life, Verse 15.] 41 Hence it appears, that this is the Judgment of the Nati∣ons, the Gog-Magog, who were discomfited, Verse 9. because they are called, the Dead, in Ezekiel, and the Slain, and Dead in this Prophecy. 42 Hence it also appears, that these are the Kings, and their Armies, mentioned Chap. 19.18, 19. who are the slain, and the all men, small and great; viz. the whole Race of wicked Men. 43 A MetaphorDan. 7.10. Esth. 6.1. Isa. 65.6. Malach. 3.16. taken from the Rolls and Records of Courts of Judicature; and from the Registers kept by the Ea∣stern Kings, of the Actions of their Reigns; whereby God's exact Justice, and the perfect Knowledge which he hath of all Mens Actions, is set forth; and the evident Conviction which will attend the procedures of that Great Day, Matth. 12.36. 1 Cor. 4.5. 44 44 This is is the Book of Election, and Predestination, belonging to the Living in the New Jerusalem State; which is represented as One single Book; because it depends upon One single Decree of God, and One single Cause of that Decree, viz. the free Grace, and Good Pleasure of God in Christ, Acts 13.48. Rom. 8.28, &c. Eph. 1. VVhereas the Books of Re∣probation are many; because that depends upon the many E∣vil Actions of Men; which, Justice particularly weighs and
considers; and upon the Multitude and Diversity of Sinners, which are to be convicted and condemned, according to the Sins each of them had particularly committed; So that there is to be, a it were, a particular Book of Conscience for each of them. And it is Another () Book, or a Book of another sort or kind; to shew, that the Elect shall be justified, and sa∣ved by Free Grace, and not for their VVorks; nor even accor∣ding to their own VVorks, but those which Christ had wrought in them. 13 And [or for] the Sea 45 gave up [or had before given up, to Death, 46 and Hell,] the Dead which were in it [viz. at the beginning of the Day of Judgment, when the Dead Wicked were raised to Condemnation] and Death and Hell [i. e. the common Recep∣tacle of the Wicked, where they were under Confinement and Punishment during the Thousand Years,] delivered up, [now at this last Act of Judicature,] the Dead which were in them [i. e. all the Wicked which had been under their Confinement;] and they [i. e. the Dead Wicked,] were judged every man according to their Works 47 [which were not found written in the Book of Life; and which they had lately done against the Camp and City of God; as well as for all their other wicked Deeds which they had done whilst they were in the Flesh in this present World.] 45 Grotius and Piscator render the VVord, had given up, which must refer to the rising of the Dead Wicked, at the beginning of the Thousand Years; when, because there was to be No Sea in the New Earth, the Sea gave up its Dead. 46 For the Dead Wicked were condemned at first to the Four Corners of the Earth; which were as a kind of Hades, or Common Receptacle of the Dead, answerable to the Hamo∣nah, or City of Dead Carcases, in Ezekiel, Chap. 38, and 39. See on Verse 8. and Mr. Mede, pag. 57 1. and Bishop Ʋshers Answer to the Jesuites Challenge, concerning Limbus Pa∣trum.
47 Their Works, in the former Verse, are represented as written in Books; because being committed long before, they were thereby to be put in remembrance of them; and there∣fore the Books are opened unto them. But here being no men∣tion of Books opened, it may well be concluded, that these Works were those which they had newly committed against the beloved City, Verse 9. which being fresh in their Memo∣ries, there needed not any writing of them in Books, in order to their conviction. 14 And Death, 48 and Hell [or the Grave, the last Enemies to be destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.26, 55.] were cast into the Lake of fire [i. e. Mor∣tality, and all Places of Punishment, except that designed for the Eternal Torment of the Wicked, were annihilated; there being now no further use of them; and they having delivered up the Dead which were in them:] This [casting into the Lake,] is the 49 second Death [i. e. Death Eternal, Matth. 10.28. See on Verse 6.] 48 These are the Enemies of Christ, which, according to Doctrinal Scripture, in full concurrence with Prophetical, are to be destroyed by him at last; just before the delivery of his Kingdom up to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.25, 26, 54, 55, 56. 49 As that Expression, (Verse 5.) this is the first Resurrecti∣on, seems to denote, that it was to be at the beginning of Christs Kingdom; so does this parallel Expression intimate, that this Second Death was to be at the End, and last Appear∣ance of it; These Two being, as it were, solemn Inscripti∣ons on Two Pillars; shewing the Two Bounds of Christ's Kingdom; beginning in a First Resurrection of Saints, and a First Death of the Wicked; and ending in a Second Resur∣rection to Glory of the former, and a Second Death of the latter; as Absolute, Final, and Immutable as the Life of the former.
15 And 50 whosoever was not found written in the [Lamb's] Book of Life [i. e. whosoever was not a Living Member of Christ's Kingdom, during the Thousand Years of Life and Blessedness;] was cast into the Lake of Fire [i. e. was punished with Eternal Tor∣ments.] 50 The Reprobate are not only judged according to the Rules of Justice, by their own works; but the Book of absolute, soveraign, and free Grace, is looked into, when they are con∣demned; to shew the Agreement there is betwixt God's De∣crees, and the proceedings of his Rectoral Justice, in condem∣ning Sinners, according to their own demerits; there being none left out of the Book of Life and Grace; who shall not be shewn to have justly deserved to be condemned for their own sins. And hitherto hath been a Description of the Wicked, their City in the four Corners of the Earth, their Actions, and Final Condemnation: There follows now in the next Chapters a Description of the City of the Saints, and of their Final Reward in the Eternal Kingdom of God, All in All.
CHAP. XXI. The Text. 1 1 AND I saw a New 2 Heaven, and a New Earth [i. e. the Seat of the Kingdom of Christ, wherein the Saints Reign with him a Thousand Years, Chap. 20.4, 6. 2 Pet. 3. Isa. 65, 17.66, 22. Matth. 19.28. Acts 3.19.] for the first Hea∣ven, and 2 the first Earth [i, e. the Heavens and the Earth which are now, 2 Pet. 3.7.] were 3 passed away [with a great Noise, burnt up, and dissolved by Fire, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12.] and there was no more 4 Sea. Annotations on CHAP. XXI. 1 Here, according to the custom of the Sacred Writers, a particular Account is given of the Generations (as the Scri∣pture speaks, Gen. 2.4.) of the New Heaven, and New Earth, which he had before, (Chap. 20 11.) seen fly away, at the Consummation, and End of all things, when Christ shall deliver up his Kingdom to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. it be∣ing usual (as appears from Gen. 2.) for the holy Penmen to give a particular Description afterwards, of what they had before either briefly hinted, or only described in general; who are wont also to pursue the matter they have in hand, quite throughout, before they resume its more particular conside∣ration; as appears from the former Chapter; where the du∣ration; of the Kingdom of Christ is continued from its begin∣ning
in the Resurrection of the Saints, to its End, in the De∣struction of Death, his last Enemy; and to the flying away of the very New Heavens and Earth; when Christ's Mediatory Kingdom being at an end, the Eternal Kingdom of God, All in All, is to succeed. 2 The preceding Vision plainly relating to the Resurrecti∣on, and the last Day of Judgment; the New Heavens, and Earth here described, must accordingly be understood, con∣cerning those mentioned by the Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. 3.13. which are to succeed the general Conflagration of the present Heavens and Earth, to be dissolved at the very first Appear∣ance of Christ at his second Coming; who is to be manifested, or revealed in Flames of Fire: It being veryLuke 17.26-31. But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, &c. Even thus shall it be in the Day when the Son of Man is revealed, i. e. (to make good the parallel) in the very self same Day in which he is revealed. 2 Thess. 1.7, 8. 2 Pet. 3.10, 12. See Dr. Burnet's Theory, B. 3. and 4. Mather de Signo Filii Homin. 2. 5. plain from Doctrinal Scripture, that the present World shall be burnt before the end of all things; and probably at Christ's very first co∣ming to his Kingdom; to which Conflagration there will be many preceeding Dispositions and Preparations; which are called the Signs of Christs Coming, in Scripture; and are pro∣bably the Vials in this Prophecy before insisted on, Chap. 16. This NewDr. Burnet's Theory, B. 4. 3, 8. Heaven and Earth, which are to arise out of the Remains of the Old ones, as out of a Second Chaos; are no other than the Seat of the Kingdom of the Blessed Mil∣lennium, in which the Saints are to Reign with Christ, Chap.
20. because (according to the plain words of the Apostle Peter) it is that New Heaven and Earth in which Righteous∣ness is to dwell; i. e. Righteous Saints are to Reign in Holiness and Righteousness during the Day of Judgment, which is a Day of the Lords, consisting of a Thousand Years; which is as plain a Description of the Blessed Millenium, as can well be given: of which Truth also the following Verses will administer many Proofs. 3 The very word made use of by the Apostle Peter (2 Ep. 3.10.) concerning the passing away of the Heavens of this World, at the general Conflagration. For it is to be ob∣served, that the Scriptures make mention of Three Worlds: (1.) The World before the Flood; reaching from the be∣ginning of the Creation, to its perishing by Water. Which the Apostle2 Ep. 2, 5.3, 5, 6. . Peter calls the Heavens and Earth of Old, the World that then was, and the Old, or Original World; con∣cerning which see theBurnet's Theory, B. 1. and 2. and the Append, to the 4th Book. ingenious Theory of the Earth. (2.) The present World, reserved for fire, called in2 Pet. 3.7. Rom. 8.19-24. Gal. 1.4. John 12, 31.14, 30. 1 Cor. 2.6, 8. 2 Cor. 4.4. Mather de Signo Fil. Homin. 1. 2. Scri∣pture the Heavens and Earth which are now; this present evil World; and this VVorld, by way of Contempt, and to distin∣guish it from the world to come. (3.) The New2 Pet. 3.13. Heb. 2.5. Eph. 1.21. Luke 20.34-38. and Chap. 17. Heavens, and New Earth; called in
Scripture, the VVorld to come, that VVorld, the VVorld of the Resurrection from the Dead, and the Kingdom of God, and of the Son of Man at his coming: which is to succeed, when1 Cor. 7.31. Psalm 102.26. 2 Pet. 3. Psalm 104.30. Matth. 19.28. Acts 3.21. Rom. 8.19-24. Mather de Signo, &c. 2.5. Burnet's Theory. the Form, Fashion, and Disposition of the parts of this VVorld shall pass away, and be changed, upon its dissolution by fire; and there shall be a Restitution, Regeneration, Delive∣ry, Redemption, and Restauration of all things in the Natural, as well as Moral VVorld, into the Primitive State, from which they had fallen by Sin. 4 This is a very surprising confirmation of Doctor Bur∣net's Hypothesis, viz. That the VVorld shall be restored to its Primitive Paradisiacal State, in which there was no Sea; and that the Sea shall be devoured by the Conflagration: which lat∣ter is also alluded to by the Prophet Amos (Chap. 7.4.) where he supposes, that Fire shall devour the great Deep; of which it had already eaten up, or devoured a part in Vision. And the VVicked being separated by God from the Righ∣teous, now strictly united into one Body, and living together in perfect Peace and Unity; it seems to be very congruous there should be No Sea in that State; which as it is the Type of unquiet multitudes; so also is it an hinderance to the mutual communication of Men one with another. And here it may be convenient to give a brief Account of the Series, and Order of things, according to Scripture; from the Time of the Approach of Christ's Kingdom, until the End, and Delivery up of it to God.
(1.) Antichrist will fall, as soon as ever the Months of the Beast are expired; and Mahometanism, which was designed as a Scourge to it, shall consequently afterwards cease to be a VVo to the Christian VVorld. See Chapter 9, 12.11, 2, 3, 14. (2.) The Jews also will be restored to their own Coun∣trey, after the fullfilling of the Times of the Gentiles; i. e. at the End of Antichristian Times, Matth. 21.24. (3.) There will be Days of Great Tribulation; and imme∣diately after them, there will be many signs of Christ's coming, and of the End of the VVorld; and very great Preparations for the general Conflagration, Matth. 24.3, 29. Mather de Signo Filii Hominis. Dr. Burnet's Theory, B. 3. Chap. 10, 11, 12. (4.) Then will appear some Extraordinary Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven; upon which, all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn, and the Son of Man shall be seen coming in the Clouds of Heaven, Matth. 24.30. (5.) As soon as ever Christ shall appear, the Dead will be raised, and the Earth and Heavens of this present World, will at the same time be dissolved by Fire; in which, the Wick∣ed, Living, and Raised, are punished;2 Thes. 1.8, 9. 2 Pet. 3.7. Vengeance being to be taken on them, and they suffering Perdition in, and by this Conflagration of the Heavens and Earth, which were kept in store, and preserved by God for the perdition of ungod∣ly men; and that not only of the wicked men of that Gene∣ration
which shall be then alive; but of all who have died in their sins: it being plain, that our Saviour bids all, of every Generation watch, least that Day surprize them; and that he supposes that Sodom and Gomorrah, which were set forth for an Example of Eternal Fire, should suffer again in the Day of Judgment; and that all which repent not, must pe∣rish,Luke 13.3, 5. Matth. 11.24. Jude 7. () after the like manner with the Galile∣ans, and those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell; that is, by sudden, Bodily Judgments; which can happen to all impeni∣tents only at this General Judgment by Fire. (6.) The whole Antichristian State, will be utterly annihila∣ted, at the first appearance of Christ: Satan will be bound for a Thousand Years: and the Wicked will not be consumed in the Conflagration, but having Bodies capable of undergo∣ing it, will be brought thereby into a state of Confinement; and that, as it were, in theSee the Opinions of the Ancients about Limbus Patrum, in Bp. Usher's answer to the Jesuit. Ends, and Corners of the New Earth, during the whole space of the Blessed Millennium, Rev. 20. (7.) The Bodies of the Dead Saints being raised, are caught up into the Air; and the Saints which come with Christ, appear in them, together with him in the Heavens; and probably continue with him there in Glory, during the Thousand Years: the Heavens being purged, and purified, as it were, by Fire; and theLuke 10.18. Eph. 6.12. Evil Spirits falling down like Light∣ning from the Air, which had been so long possessed by them; whereby these High and Heavenly Places are, as it were, pre∣pared
for the Reception of Christ and his Saints. For Righ∣teousness must dwell in the New2 Pet. 3.13. . Rom. 8.22, 23. Heavens, as well as the New Earth; and the whole Creation groans, and waits for this Redemption. But this shall be further made out, as occasion offers, up∣on the following parts of this Vision. (8.) The Living Saints will beMalach. 3.1-3. 1 Cor. 3.10-16. purged and purified as Gold and Silver, and many of them shall be saved at this Day, with great Difficulty; but all shall be preserved by God (who knoweth how to deliver the Godly, as he did Lot, and the Three Children in the Fiery Furnace, which are Types of this Last and Great Deliverance, 2 Pet. 2.9.) in the general Con∣flagration; and their Bodies being changed, they shall Reign with Christ on the New Earth, theRom. 8.19-24. Burnet's Theory, 4.7-9. former being unfit, through the Vanity and Corruption it is subject to, for such a purpose. And this is that State of the Earth, which it earnestly ex∣pects, and groaneth after; and for which it was designed by God; who seems to declare by the Prophet Isaiah, (Chap. 45.17, 18.) that he created it not in vain; or to be such a Chaos, and subject to so much Vanity, (Rom. 8.20.) as it now is; but to be inhabited by the Mystical Israel of all the Earth, (Isa. 45.17, 21, 22.) who shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting Salvation.
(9.) All this will come to pass at the very beginning of Christ's Coming (whose Proceedings will be very sudden and swift, Malach. 3.5. 1 Cor. 15.52.) in whichMalach. 4.1-4. Psalm 110.1. the Wicked shall be burnt up, and trod down, and be as Ashes under the Soles of the Feet of the Saints, lying at the Footstool of Christ's Throne; whilst the Living Saints Reign with him on the New Earth, and the Raised Saints in the New Heavens. (10.) At the End of the Thousand Years, upon Christ's with∣drawing some of his more immediate Presence and Glory; Satan will stir up the Wicked Nations (who had been all that while in a State of Contempt and Punishment, Malach. 4.1-4.) to endeavour to destroy Christ's Kingdom on Earth; upon which he will catch up his Saints into the Air, and give them incorruptible Bodies; and the whole Body of Saints, with Christ their Head, shall finally Judge the wicked world; and the New Heavens and Earth shall disappear, and fly away; the Son shall deliver up his Kingdom to the Father; and the Saints shall remain with him to all Eternity; whilst Satan, and all the Wicked, remain in the Lake for ever; which is a place of Punishment; represented as a Lake, made out of the Liquefaction, and Dissolution of the present Earth, burnt with Fire. And this is a brief Scriptural Account of this great Trans∣action; againstSee Dr. Beverley's Ʋniversal Christian Doctrine of the Day of Judgment. which, although many Objections may be raised; yet there are few which may not be as plausibly alledged against the Day of Judgment, as it is usually under∣stood by Divines.
2 And 5 I John [the Apoclyptick Apostle, unto whom Christ had sent, and signified, and shewn things to come, thereby testi∣fying, that I was a Servant of his, and greatly beloved by him, Rev. 1 1. Dan. 9, 23.10▪ 7, 11, 19.] saw [and let it be observed diligently, for these words are true and faithful, Verse 5.] the 6 Holy City [or Polity of Saints,] New Jerusalem [above, the Mo∣ther of us all, Gal. 4.26. Heb. 11, 10, 16.12, 22, 23.] coming down [with Christ into the Regions of the Air, 1 Thes. 4.14-18. See on Chap. 19.7, 8, 9, 14.19.20, 4.] from God [the Father,] out of Heaven [before whose Throne it had hitherto been, in va∣rious degrees of Exaltation. See on Chap. 12, 1.14, 1.] prepa∣red, [and arrayed in Christ's Righteousness,] as a Bride adorned for her Husband [which is the Lamb Christ; that he might pre∣sent to himself a Glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle; and at last perfectly unite it to God in his Eternal Kingdom, Eph. 5.26, 27. Rev. 19.7, 8, 9] 5 He does not say simply, as in the former Verse, I saw, but I John saw; by that Emphatical Expression shewing the great Importance of the Vision, and likewise more earnestly affirm∣ing the Truth of that, which was to be of so great use and con∣solation to the Saints: hereby imitating the Beloved Prophet Daniel, who frequently makes use of the same Phrase, upon the like Occasions. 6 From a due compare of this place, with the places quoted in the Paraphrase, it appears, (1.) That the Holy City is no other than the Bride, or Saints, those Armies which come with Christ in the Air to Judgment in his Kingdom; the very They, who sit in Thrones, and Reign with him a Thousand Years, Chap. 20.4. as hath been before proved, and often observed. (2.) That this New Jerusalem is in the New Heavens, or Heavenly Places of the Air, as they are called in Scripture; into which the Saints come, or descend from Heaven with
Christ, as hath been before observed, and consequently, that the NewDr. Burnet's Theory, 4.3, 8. Heavens, and New Earth, are the Seat of the Thousand Years Reign of Christ; and the Saints the Inhabi∣tants of it; because they are here represented as coming in∣to it, as into a place newly prepared for them by God, Verse 1. (3.) That this New Jerusalem State coming down from God, is the Kingdom of Christ, in its Highest, and most Exalted State; which had been hitherto represented in this Vision, as before the Throne of God, in divers States and Degrees of Exaltation; according as Christ's Kingdom increased, and his Enemies were subdued by God the Father; at whose Right Hand he was to sit in a patient Expectation of this Kingdom, until all his Enemies were made his Footstool: which being now performed, he comes down from God out of Heaven, with his Bride, or Church purified, and perfectly sanctified, into his glorious Kingdom, in the New Heavens, and New Earth, the Seat of the Blessed Millenni∣um. For thus (Heb. 12.22. compared with Rev. 14.1.) the Saints first come unto Mount Sion, and then, unto the City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; or the Archetypal State of Christ's Kingdom in Heaven (to which there is one always correspondent on Earth) the Metro∣polis of the Christian Worship (which had its Original from thence, Heb. 12.25. and of which it is a Pattern, Heb. 9.1.) the True Temple built without hands, where our hopes is, and of which we are Citizens; and which is the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and the Mother of all True Chri∣stians, Gal. 4.26.
3 And I heard a great Voice out of Heaven [proclaiming a great Truth, and shewing me a New and Extraordinary Thing, which had never been before;] saying, Behold [with thine eyes and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall shew thee, Ezek. 40, 4.44, 5.] the Tabernacle of G d [i. e. the King∣dom of Heaven, of which the Tabernacle was a Type. See the Notes on Chap. 13.6 15, 5.] is [now] with 7 men [in the New Heaven, and New Earth, into which it is come down from God out of Heaven, Verse 2.] and he [i. e. God,] will 8 dwell [or Taber∣nacle, a second time, John 1.14] with them [in a State of Glory, Ezek. 37.26-28.] 9 and they shall be his [sanctified, Ezek. 37.28. 1 Thes, 5.23. Rev, 19.8.] People, and God himself shall be with them [in Christ; by peculiar, extraordinary, perpetual, and Glorious Manifestations of Presence, and Conduct;] and be their God [to sanctifie them wholly, and then to unite them unto himself in his Kingdom of Eternity, John 17.19, 21. 1 Cor. 1.8▪ 1 Thes. 5, 23.] 7 It comes down from God, and is with Men; and there∣fore a State in the highest Heavens cannot be here meant; for it is not said, that it Ascends, or that the Tabernacle of Men is with God; but that the Tabernacle of God is with Men. 8 God in Christ had dwelt with Men before, in a State of Humiliation; and his Glory appeared but to some few cho∣sen ones (for the World knew him not, and his own did not receive him, John 1.10, 11.) and that only at some transi∣ent Manifestations of it, such as the Transfiguration on the Mount; but now very great and gloriousBurnet's Theory, 4.7. appearances of Divine Majesty and Presence, are promised; to be continu∣ed for evermore in Heaven, after a Thousand Years duration in
the New Heaven, and New Earth, which are to fly away into Eternity, Ezek. 37.26. 9 Expressions taken from the Covenant made with Abraham, Gen. 17.7, 8. and the New Covenant mentioned Jerem 31, 31-34. 32, 40- 44. Ezek. 36.26, 27.37, 26, 27, 28 Heb. 8. whereby is shewn, that the Promises of that Cove∣nant are not fully accomplished but in the Glorious King∣dom of Christ; the Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not Man; which comes down from Heaven in this Vision. Compare Heb. 8. with the first Verses of this Chapter. 4 And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes [i. e. shall re∣move all Causes and Occasions of Sorrow, Is. 25.8.60, 20.] and there shall be no more death [or it shall be destroyed by Christ▪ Is 25.8 1 Cor. 15.26, 54.] neither Sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain [i. e. it shall be a state ofDr. Burnet's Theory, 4.7 Indolency, free from pain and want:] for the former things [of the first Heaven, and first Earth, the World of the first Adam, i. e. Sin, Diseass, Want, Satan, and his wicked Agents, Hell, and Death;] are passed away [out of the Limits of the first Heaven, and first Earth.] 5 And he that * sat on the [white] Throne [i. e. Christ, whom I had seen sitting on his own distinct Throne, at the delivery up of the Kingdom, Chap. 20.11.] said, behold [for it is a thing much to be observed,] I [am now about to] make all things new [i. e. to make a New Heaven, and a New Earth, and to renew, and fully sanctifie Humane Nature, John 17.19.] And he said unto me 10 Write; for these Words are true and faithful [i. e. the New Things declared by me, in these Words, are now ready to be made by me; whereby all my Words, Promises, and Declarations, will receive a full com∣pleion; and will appear to be True and Infallible.]
* There are Three Thrones ascribed to Christ in this Pro∣phecy, (1.) The Throne of the Father; in which Christ sits with him, from the Resurrection, until the Appearance of his own Throne in his Kingdom, Chap. 3.21. (2.) Christ's own Throne, or the Throne peculiar to his Hu∣mane Nature in his Glorious Kingdom; called, his Throne, Chap. 3.21. and the Throne of the Lamb, Chap. 22.3. (3.) The White Throne, Chap. 20.11. in which Christ appears at the last Judicial Act of his Kingdom j hen he is about to deliver it up to his Father. Which appce having been seen but just before (although it be after this in Time, and in the Order of Completion) is here referred to; to shew, that the same person, whom he had by way of Pro∣lepsis, or Anticipation (a Figure frequent in this Prophecy) seen dissolving all things; was now to appear as making all things New; the same Christ being the Omega, and End, who shall dissolve all things; and the Beginning, or Alpha, who is the Efficient Cause of the New Creation, the New Heaven and New Earth; and ofPsalm 22.27-31.102, 18. the Generation of Saints, the people which shall be created to inhabit it. 10 To write, is to bring into Effect, as hath been oftenSee on Chap. 19.9. observed before; whereby is signified, that all the New things he had promised and declared in his Word, were just ready to be made hy him.
6 And he said unto me, 11 It is done [i. e. what I was about to do is now performed; I have now sanctified and renewed my Servants, and delivered the Creation from its Vanity, Corrupti∣on, and Bondage:] I [the Eternal Word in Humane Nature,] am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End [of Prophecy; who made all things in the beginning, and have now created them a∣new; and am therefore able to say, it is done, Chap. 1, 8.3, 14.] I [who am able,] will [also] give unto him [i. e. unto the Saints of all Ages,] that is a thirst [i. e. that earnestly desire the full glo∣ry of m Kingdom;] of the Fountain of the Water of Life [i e. full and lasting Communications of Grace and Glory, to all the Li∣ving in this New Jerusalem, Isa. 4 3. John 4, 10, 14.7, 37.] freely [i. e. out of my mere Grace and Favour, Isa. 55.1, 2.] 11 Christ here, at the completion of what he was to do for his Servants, uses the same Expression he had before used (Chap. 16.17.) after the Destruction of his Enemies by the Vials: which may thereupon he lookt upon asSee on Chap. 3.12. Monu∣mental Inscriptions upon Two Pillars, placed, as it were, at Two remarkable Boundaries of Prophecy; of which, the one respects Christ's making his Enemies his Footstool; the other the Blessed State, and Lot of the Saints, at the End of Days mentioned Dan. 12.13. 7 He that overcometh [i e all of each Church-State who over∣come the Temptations of it. See Chapters 2, and 3.) shall inhe∣rit [as Sons,] all 12 [the New] things [i. e. Graces and Blessings of my New Kingom; under which is comprised all that is re∣ally desirable; and all the Promises made to the Churches, Chapters 2, and 3.] and I [Christ, God-Man,] 12 will be his God [and Father, as having begotten him to this New Life, Eph. 2.10.] and he shall be my Son [i. e. the Promises of the New Cove∣nant, and the Priviledges of Adoption shall be bestowed upon him, in the highest, and fullest Sense of them. Se on Verse 3.]
12 12 Here is declared, that theRom. 8. Restauration of all things, and the Adoption to the Inheritance, and Redemption of Bodies, will be fully compleated only in the Kingdom of Christ, who is the Father of the New World, the World to come. 8 But [all] the 13 fearful [of the Antichristian State especially, who dare not hold fast the Profession of their Faith without wa∣vering, but for fear forsake the assembling of themselves, draw∣ing back unto Perdition, Heb. 12.23, 25, 38, 39.] and unbeleiving [in the Promises of Christ's Coming, because of his long delay; and who upon that draw back from the true Faith, and scoff at it, Heb. 12.35-39. 2 Pet. 2 and 3 Chapters] the abominable [and defiled in their Mind, Conscience, and Practises, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.15, 16.] and murderers [especially of the Witnesses and Saints, Chap. 18.24.] and Whoremongers [who practise and advance Doctrines which promote uncleanness, Chap, 2.6, 15] and Sorcerers, [who bewitch Souls, Chap. 18.23.] and Ido∣laters [as the Antichristian Party are by way of Eminence,] and all Liars [who beleve, and make a Lye, especially the great one of Antichristianism, Rev. 3.9. 2 Thes. 2.9. 1 Tim. 4.2.] shall have their part [not in the first Resurrection to Blessedness and Holiness, but] in the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the se∣cond Death [and that Eternal. See on Chap. 20.6, 10, 14, 15.] 13 All sorts of Sinners are here understood, but most e∣specially the Antichristian, to whom the Characters a∣gree; Antichrist being the Man of Sin, and Shinar, or Ba∣bylon, which is Antichristian Rome, being the very House, and Base of all Wickedness, Ezek. 5.8, 11. Rev. 18.24. 9 And there came unto me 14 one [or the first and principal,] of the seven Angels, which had the seven Vials full af the seven last plagues [the very same who shewed me the Jdgment of the Great Whore, Chap. 17.1] and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew thee the
Chap. 19.7-9. Bride, the Lamb's Wife [i. e. the New Jerusalem State; and thou shalt plainly, and more distinctly see the Nature of it, and the vast dif∣ference there is betwixt it, and the Antichristian State which I be∣fore shewed the, Chap. 17.] 14 The same Angel that shewed him the Judgment on the great Whore, shews him also the New Jerusalem State; to ma∣nifest that the Destruction of Antichrist, and the pouring forth of the Vials, are highly, and immediately preparatory to Christ's Kingdom. 10 And he carried me away in the Spirit [i. e. I was in a Spiritual Extasie, and was carried in Vision, Chap. 1, 10.17 3.] to a great and high mountain [to denote the State of Christ's Church and Kingdom, now become a Mountain, Dan. 2.35. established in the Tops of the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills; and to shew that this was the City seen by Ezekiel, when he was set upon a very high Mountain. Isa. 2.2. Ezek 40.2.] and shewed me [not the Antichristian City of the Whore, Chap. 17.3. but] that [truly] great City [theBurnet's Theory, 4.9. general Assembly, consisting of all true Belie∣vers, and of the Spirits of all just men made perfect; Heb. 12.22, 23.] the Holy [and Heavenly] Jerusalem [the City of the Living God, and not the impure Idolatrous City of the Whore,] descend∣ing out of Heaven [i. e. the highest Heavens, into the lower Regions of it, Verse 2.] from God [by whom it was built, and the King∣dom was set up, Dan. 2.44. Heb. 11.10, 16.] 11 Having the Glory of God [i. e. the 15 glorious Presence of Christ, and of his Saints, Matth. 17:2. John 1.14. Heb 1.3] and her Light. [or that which enlightned her.] was like unto a Stone most precious, even like a Jasper Stone, clear as Chrystal [i. e. the
Presence of Christ wasOf which the Jasper is an Emblem. See Grot. on Chap. 4.3. and on this Verse. firm and lastng, dwelling and abiding in it; and it was full of Glory, Purity, and Holiness. See on Chap. 4 3.] 15 For this is the most proper Representation of the Di∣vine Glory; of which the Glorious Appearances of Fire, Light, and Bright Clouds, the Schekinah under the Old Te∣stament, were but faint Images and Types. 12 And had a Wall great, and high [i. e it was under the immediate protection of Divine Omnipotency, and those which were without, were excluded from it, Isaiah 26.1-5. 60, 18. Zech. 2.5. Rev. 22.15.] and had twelve Gates [for free access to all true Israelites, or Saints,] and at the Gates Twelve Angels [as Cherubims to guard this New Paradise, that nothing which had not right to Life, might enter therein, Gen. 3.24. Ezek. 48.31.] and Names written there∣on, which are the Names of the Twelve 16 Tribes of the children of Isra∣el [to shew that none but God's People, the true Israelitism, had a right to this New Jerusalem State. See on Chap. 7, 4-10.] 16 These are the very 14400, who were sealed, Chap. 7. 13 On the East three Gates, on the North three Gates, on the South three Gates, and on the West three Gates [i. e. there were Twelve Gates, answerable to the Twelve Tribes; Three on each side of the Four square City, towards each Corner of the Heavens; to shew, that the whole Israel of God, or all true Believers, from eve∣ry quarter of the World, have a right to the Kingdom of Hea∣ven, Luke 13.29. See Ezek. 48.31-35.] 14 And the Wall of the City [which was the Security and Pro∣tection of it, and excluded every thing which was unclean,] had Twelve Foundations, and in them th Names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb [slain from the Foundation of the World; to shew that the
Kingdom and Church of Christ was secured and protected by the Apostolical Doctrine, upon which it was built; Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, whose Blood is the Blood of the Everlasting Co∣venant, by which all things are secured unto us, ratified, and con∣firmed, being the chief Corner-stone, Eph. 2.19-22] 15 And he that talked with me [i. e. the 17 Angel, Verse 9.] had a golden [not a common] Reed [to shew that this was the glorious, pure, precious, and refined State of the Church, of which that measured by Ezekiel, with a common Reed, was but a Type, Ezek. 40.3.] to measure the [Dimensions, and Contents of the Ho∣ly] 18 City [or whole Visible Church, which was now rescued out of the hands of the Heathens, and Antichristian Enemies; and might therefore be measured, as being agreeable to the pure and exact measure of God's Law; whereas it was before left out as irre∣gular, and was not measured, Chap. 11.2.] and [to measure,] the Gates thereof [i. e. to declare who had right of access into it▪] and the Wall thereof [i. e. to shew, and declare, in what the defence and security of God's Church and Kingdom consists.] 17 The Temple (Chap. 11.1.) was measured by a Man, but this City by an Angel; that by a common Reed, like a Rod; this by a simple Reed, but a Golden one; to shew that this State (which was the real accomplishment of Ezekiel's Visionary City, and the full opening of the enclosed Temple) was an Angelical State, in which the Saints were Equal to An∣gels, Math. 22.30. and that it was purged and purified, as Gold in the Tryal of the Fire of the Last Day; and that Christ had broken to peices the Heathen Nations, by the Rod of his Power (Psalm 2, 9.110, 2.) and would now measure and rule by a Golden Reed, as by a Golden Scepter, (the Emblem of Favour and Reconciliation amongst the Eastern Nations, Esth. 4, 11.5, 2.8, 4.) and would no more chastise and correct his Servants. 18 The Temple only was measured before (Chap. 11.1, 2.) and not the City; but here there was no Temple, (Verse 22.)
and the whole City is measured, in all the Dimensions of it; to shew, that the whole Visible Church was now Regular and Symmetral, and was become a Living, and Holy Temple unto God. 16 And the City lieth foursquare [to shew that the Church in Christ's Kingdom, shall be 19 Universal; a Body 20 well compact, firm, and immovable; constant, 21 perfect, and always like it self; in 22 perfect Peace and Repose; and cannot receive the least 23 addition, or diminution, from what was once delivered unto it:] and the length is as large as the breadth [i, e. it was 24 exactly per∣fect;] and he measured the City with the Reed, Twelve Thousand Fur∣longs [to shew that it was perfectly 25 Apostolical; and exactly a∣greeable to the measures of the Sanctuary of the Holy City 26 Je∣rusalem, and wholly different from the Antichristian State of 26 Rome;] the 27 length, and the breath, and the heighth of it are equal [i. e. it was 28 exactly agreeable with it self, and entirely Apostolical, in the whole, and each part of it.] 19 Of which the Number Four is a Symbol, taken from the Four Quarters of the World, whereby the whole World is de∣noted in Scripture. 20 Of which Nature are Buildings of Four square Stones, and Armies drawn up in that Figure; whence Quadratum ag∣men, Corpus Quadratum, and Turres Quadratae, are used in Authors for strong Bodies, and well compacted and firm Build∣ings, and Armies; and such ought the Church to be, and shall be in Christ's Kingdom, Isaiah 33 20. Psalm 78.69. Matth. 16.18. Heb. 12.27, 28. Eph. 4.14, 16. 21 Whence the Phrase Homo , concerning a Perfect, Just, and Constant Man; as a Square Figure, or Cube, is e∣very way like it self, turn it on which side you please; and so ought the Church to be always constant to it self in all its Doctrines; not mutable and inconstant.
22 As a solid Square, Cube, or Dy, is a Figure the most stable of any other; which, throw it which way you will, always settles it self at last upon its own Basis, and remains firm; because its Basis is broad and equal. 23 As a Square is altered from its own Figure into another, by the least addition to it, or diminution from it: and thus the Church, when it takes from, or adds to the Faith once de∣livered to the Saints, looses that perfection in which it was built at first by God, and becomes irregular. Upon which, and other Reasons, a Four square Figure is much in use in Scripture; it being the Figure of theSee on Chap 4.6. Encampments round about the Tabernacle, and of the Divine Consessus in this Prophecy; of theExod. 27.. Altar,Exod. 28.16. Breast Plate, and the most1 Kings 6.20. 2 Chron. 3.8. Holy Place under the Law; as also of many things belonging toEzek. 41, 21.42, 20, &c. Vid. Grot. in locum. Ezekiel's Visional Temple. 24 As that is a perfect Square, whose length and breadth are equal; whereas if they were unequal, it would be a Pa∣rallelogram, or a Long Square; which is less perfect than a Square. See Mr. Potter, Chap. 28. 25 For Twelve signifies Apostolicalness, from the Twelve A∣postles; and a Thousand is a Number of perfection, See on Chap. 7, 4.20, 4. Here being also a Concurrence of Number and Measure;
viz. of the Number Twelve, with the Twelve Thousand Fur∣longs, the Measure of the solid Content of this City; hereby may be signified, that in this State, there will be an exact Con∣currence of whatsoever God hath required by his Rules and Laws to the perfection of Church-States; as things are known to be exactly just and equal, when they are not only the same they were at first in Number; but are agreeable to the Stan∣dard Weight and Measure. 26 26 To shew that this City is more peculiarly described in op∣position to the Roman Hierarchy; the Perimeter of the Cube 1200 Furlongs, is the Circuit of Jerusalem, the Holy City, as the Perimeter of the Cube Twenty Five Thousand Furlongs (which 25 is the Root of the Number of the Beast) is the Circuit of Rome: and to the Twelve Gates, Angels, Tribes, Foundations in the New Jerusalem, do answer Twenty Five Gates, Pastors, Parishes, Cardinals, &c. in the City of Rome. Dr. Moor on this place, and his Mystery of Godliness, 5.16. and Mr. Pot∣ter's Interpret. of the Number of the Beast. 27 Hence it appears, (1.) That this is anPotter, Chap. 28. Equilateral Square, the most perfect, and the most capacious of all such Figures; whereby the Perfe∣ction, and the Ʋniversal Extent of Christ's Kingdom, may be signified. (2.) That the City it selfPotter, Chap. 2, 3, 4, &c. is measured 1200 Furlongs; from whence it follows, that it is of a solid, Cubical Figure, like a Dy,
having Three Dimensions; and that its Measures are solid Mea∣sures (whereby they are made to agree with Ezekiel's Mea∣sures, by Mr. Potter) because nothing can measure a solid Fi∣gure but a solid measure. Whereby the Firmness, and Soli∣dity of this Church State is set forth; and also that itDr. Moor's Paraphrase on the place. cannot be a City litterally understood, and signifies not Walls, and Hou∣ses, but Men; because there can be no City of such a Fi∣gure. 28 Whereas the Antichristian State, and all Human Models of Churches, are disagreeable in themselves, from one another, and the exact Scripture-Measure and Rule. 17 And he measured the 29 Wall thereof, an hundred forty and fourA Cubit is the Oldest, the most common, and most famous Measure amongst the people of God; whence it is put by way of Eminence, for a Measure in general, Jerem. 51.13. and i was the Measure of the Prophetick Temple, and City in Ezekiel. Cubits [the Root of which is Twelve, the Apostolical Num∣ber; to shew, that the Safety and Security of the Church con∣sists in its conformity to the Doctrine and Discipline delivered by the Apostles, Acts 2 42. See the Notes on Chap. 7, 4.13, 18.] according to the measure of a Man [i. e. this Church-State was high∣ly 30 rational, and exactly agreeable to the Intellectual Capacities of Mankind, and such as Men of Understanding may find out, when hey make use of that part of Wisdom by which the Roots of Numbers are extracted. See on Chap. 13.18.] that is the Angel [to shew, that this was a State of Men above this present mortal State, in which the children of the Resurrection are made equal unto theGrot. in loc. Angels, Luee 20 35, 36.] and that it was not Beastian, or Antichristian, but Angelical.] 29 The Wall is measured; to shew that Apostolicism (signi∣fied by Twelve, the Root of its measure) contains all things
in it necessary to a Church; as the Wall does inclose the whole City; and is the fixt and unmovable Dimensions of it. 30 Whereas the Antichristian State is irrational; disagreeable in its self, and from the Divine Rule; in correspondence to its Root 25, which is a surd and irrational Number, uneven and irregular, in the Product arising from it, as well as in its self. See Mr. Potter, and the Notes on Chap. 13.18. 18 And the building of the Wall of it was 31 Jasper [i. e. it was firm, and impregnable, and withal glorious; Verse 11.] and the City was pure Gold, like unto clear Glass [i. e. this was a precious and pure State, andThe gawdy Whore had only External Ornaments; but this State is transparent, pure, and clean, within, as well as without. Forestus in locum. See Chap. 4, 6.15, 2. throughly enlightned by God, Verse 23.] 31 This Stove is not to be subdued by the knocks of the Ham∣mer, but is so strong, that it breaks all that strikes against it: Dr. Moor. See Grot. on Chap 4.3. and Verse. 11. 19 And the Foundations of the Wall of the City, were garnished with all manner of 32 precious Stones [to shew the Excellency of Christ, the (b) corner-stone of this Spiritual Building, and of the Do∣ctrine of the Gospel, upon which it was buit by his Apostles; and the great variety and compleatness of the precious Gifts and Gra∣ces of this State:] The first Foundation was Jasper, the second Saphire, the third a Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerald. 32 The Precious Stones hereafter particularly mentioned, are the same with those in the Breast-plate of the High-Priest,See Verse 14. and Braunius de Vestit. Hebr. 2.26.
(Exod. 28.17, 21.) but placed in a different Order from them; but for what Reasons I am not able to determine; as I neither can precisely and positively the particular significati∣on of each of them. Only in general they may signifie, (1.) Perfection of Glory, Prosperity, and Happiness; in the highest manner the Creation is capable of, in its renewed State, much beyond the choicest, and most precious things of this World; or even of Paradise it self, whose Rivers flow∣ed from the Land of Gold and Pearl. (2.) Perfection of Gifts and Graces, Divine Presence and Illumination, Doctrine and Truth; and whatsoever else may be justly thought to be the true meaning of the Stones, and the Ʋrim and Thummim in the Oracular Breast-plate of the High-Priest. For which see the Commentators on Exod. 28. and 39. Lev. 8. Deut. 33.8. and Braunius de Vestit. Sacer∣dot. Hebraeor. See also 1 Chron. 29.2. 2 Chron. 3.6. Isaiah 54.11-14. Ezek▪ 28.13. Tobit, Chapters 13, and 14. and Dr. Moor's Paraphrase, and other Commentators on this place. 20 The fifth Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius, the seventh Chrysolite, the eighth Beryl; the ninth a Topaz, the Tenth a Chrysoprasus, the eleventh a Jacinth; the twelfth an Amethyst [i. e. this was a glorious State, in which all true Israelites of the Twelve Tribes, whose Names were engraven on the TwelveSee Ainsw. on Exod. 28. Stones of the Breast-plate, were joyned, and united into one Body with the True Christians, who kept and professed the Doctrine they had received from the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb Christ.] 21 And the Twelve Gates were Twelve Pearls, every several Gate was
of one Pearl [to shew the inestimable value of the Gospel, that one Pearl, of great price; and the pure 33 conversation, and unity 34 of all who are to enter into Christ's Kingdom, by him the only Door, and Way to Eternal Life, Matth. 13.45, 46. John 10.1-14.] and the Street of the City was pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass [i. e. the Conversation 35 of the Saints of this State was pure and incorrupt, as refined Gold; and sincere, as if their Thoughts and Hears were transparent to each other; and the very places of concourse were free from all manner of defilement; contrary to what was in the Antichristian great City, which was defild with Uncleanness, and the Blood of the Witnesses, which lay dead in the Streets of it, Chap. 11.8.] 33 For they are of a White colour. Grot. in loc. 34 Pearls are called Ʋniones, because they are always found united together, and never separate from each other. Plin. Hi∣stor. 9. 35. 35 For the Street is the Forum Urbis, as Grotius notes; the publick place where Men meet, and transact Business. Moor's Paraphr. 22 And I saw noTempli appellatione destinato abstinebant Christiani. Grot. in Act. 7.48. Temple therein [i e. no one particular place in which alone God would be worshipped, and manifest his Pre∣sence, as in the Temple of Jerusalem, 1 Kings 8.] for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple thereof [i. e. do afford their Presence immediately, and after a glorious manner in this State; whereby each pious Soul becomes a Temple for God and Christ, to dwell, and manifest themselves in, Exek. 48.35. John 4▪23.20, 23. Acts 7.46-50. Rev. 3.20.] 23 And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine
in it [who were as it were, ashamed, an confounded at the grea∣ter Glory of the Divine Kingdom, and Presence, Isa. 24, 23.60, 19.] for the 36 glory of God [the Father, the Fountain, and Origi∣nal of all Being whatsoever, and of all Light, Knowledge, Life, Love, Grace, and Comfort,] did lighten it [by a Light commu∣nicated fro him,] and the Lamb [Christ, who is the Glory of God, Light of Light, and very God of very God,] is the light thereof [by the Glory of the Godhead, appearing illustriously in his Humane Nature. See Verse 11.] 36 God is not subject to the Son in this his glorious King∣dom, 1 Cor. 15.27. and therefore he is said to be the Light of it; and Christ the Son is said to be the , or the Lamp; as shining by a Light communicated from the God∣head, and residing in him, who is the brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person. See Bishop Pear∣son on the Creed, and Dr. Bull's Defensio Fidei Nicaenae. 24 And the 37 Nations of them which areIsa. 45.20. . Sunt ilii ex Gentilium reliquiis quos Diluvium Ignis, non inundaverit. Innelliguntur, ni fallor, qui cladem illam in Christi  saturam evaserint, quando venturus est ad hostes Ecclesiae suae perdendos. Mede's Works, pag. 915. saved [i. e. those Li∣ving Remaining Saints, who shall have escaped the Sword of Christ's Mouth; and the Fire for the Perdition of the Ungodly, Isa. 4 2-5.45, 20.60, 3, 11. See the Notes on Chap. 20.6.] shall walk in the Light of it [i. e. shall partake of the Glories of the New Jerusalem, in the New Heaven, where Christ and the Dead raised incorruptible, Reign together, Isa. 2, 5.60, 2, 3. See the Not s on Chapter 20.4] and the Kings [and Priests,] of the [New] Earth [i e. the Saints living upon the New Earth, and reigning with Christ a Thousand Years, Chap. 20, 6.21, 1.] do bring their Glory, and Honour into it [i. e. acknowledge all their Glory and Happiness to be derived from that State above,
and shall at last be caught up into it. See on Chap. 20. Psalm 68, 29.62, 10. 1 Thes. 4.17.] 37 Called Nations of the saved, to distinguish them from the Wicked Nations, Chap. 20.8. the Slain, and Dead, kil∣led by the Sword of Christ's Mouth, and devoured by Fire from Heaven, Chap. 19, 21.20, 8, 9. See the Notes on the former Chapter. It is acutely observed by Mr.Ep. 20. Mede, That the State of the New Jerusalem, and the State of the Nations, which shall walk in the Light thereof, are different; as is plain, because the Nations, and Kings of the latter, walk in the Light of the former, and bring their own Glory to it, as to a State diffe∣rent, and distinct from it: by the former of which seems plainly to be meant the Jerusalem above, which comes down from God out of Heaven, with Christ, and his Saints, into the New Heaven; and by the latter, the Camp of the Saints upon Earth; those Living, Remaining Saints, who shall dwell in the New Earth for a Thousand Years, partaking of the Glories, and Happiness of the Sains above with Christ, who Reign in the New Heavens, as in a Palace of Glory; from whence the Divine Light transfuses it self upon the Saints be∣low; who walk and rejoyce in it, being directed and in∣fluenced by it; until by Degrees (those Assistances, and powerful Communications being abated and withdrawn) they began to be too much in love with their State upon Earth, and did not so earnestly long to be caught up to be with Christ for ever: Whereupon Satan was loosed, and the wicked Nations drew together against them: Which is the Laodicean State of the Church, described in the Third Chap∣ter;
and will appear to be the true meaning of this place, to any one who will diligently compare it with what hath been discoursed on the former Chapter. 25 And the 38 Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day [but shall be open continually, Isa. 60.11.] for [although Men shut their Gates at Night; yet] there shall be no night there [and therefore the Gates need never be shut; because God and the Lamb are the Light of it, Verse 23.] 38 This seems to refer to the Free Communications there shall be in this State, betwixt the Saints upon Earth, and the Saints above in the Heavenly Jerusalem, with Christ; who mayEt si in nonnullis solenniis se praesens sistat Christi numen, circumstantibus An∣gelorum turmis, &c. Burnet. Theor. Tellur. lib. 4. 7. perhaps, descend sometimes upon Earth, and ascend again to Heaven, according to what is typified by Jacob's Mystical Ladder, Gen. 28.12. 26 And they [i. e. the 39 Kings of the Earth,] shall bring the glo∣ry and honour of the Nations into it [i. e. the whole Body of the re∣maining and Living Saints, who are the saved of the Nations, shall acknowledge all their Glory to be from this Heavenly New Jerusalem, and shall at last be caught up into it, Verse 24.] 39 The Body of Saints upon Earth, are a Kingdom of Saints; which, to shew the Universality of them, and the Polity, which will be in that State, are represented as Nae∣tions, under Kings, as Heads and Governours. 17 And there shall in no wise enter into it any [the least] thing
[whatsoever,] that defileth [i. e. it shall be a State of perfect Ho∣liness, Isaiah 35.8.] neither [any thing] whatsoever [that] work∣eth abomination [or Idolatry,] or maketh a Lye [i. e. the great Lye of Antichristianism,] but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life [i. e. none shall enter into this State, but those who are a∣mongst the Living, and are either raised to Life, or are alive, and remain unto the Coming of the Lord. See the Notes on Chap. 20.
CHAP. XXII. The Text. 1 1 AND he [i. e. the Angel, Chap. 21.9] shewed me a pure 2 River of Water of Life, clear as Chrystal [i. e. abundance, and even ful ess of Purely Spiriual, Divine, and Heavenly Life, Gifts, Graces, and Refreshments, Psalm 36.8. Ez. 47.1. Joel 3 18. Zech. 14.8. John 7.37, 38.] proceeding out of te 3 Throne of God, and of the 4 Lamb [as out of its Head, or Fountain, Gen. 2.10. Psalm 36.4. Cha. 21.6.] Annotations on CHAP. XXII. 1 This Chapter, to Verse the 6th, ought not to have been separated from the former, as being one continued Descrip∣tion of the City, in the midst of which this River was, Verse 2. • This is in allusion to the River of Paradise, which went out of Eden, as out of its Head and Fountain, to water the Garden, Gen. 2.10. VVhereby, as also by the Tree in the midst of this City, is intimated, that this State will be Pa∣radisaical. 3 In Ezekiel's Vision the River cometh out of the Temple and Altar; But there being no Temple in this New Jerusalem,
the Throne of God is put in the place of it; to shew that this State shall be wholly Divine. 4 The Lamb's Throne is the distinct, and peculiar Throne of Christ, as the Son of Man, in his Glorious Kingdom; in which State the Divinity will so dispense it self to the Hu∣mane Nature, as that it shall have a distinct Glory of its own, although derived from the Divine; and the Son may be said not to be subject, (1 Cor. 15.28.) because he is a King; even as in Christ's State of Humiliation, the Divinity did not generally manifest it self so gloriously, and illustriously in the Humanity, but that Christ might be said to have emptied himself of his Divine Glory, Phil. 2.6, 7. See pag. 441, 442. and Chap. 21.5. 2 In the midst of the street [or broad places; whereby is signifi∣ed the Assembly of the whole Body of the Saints, Chap. 20.9.] of it [i. e. of the City,] and of either side of the River was there the 5 Tree of Life [i. e. this was a Paradisiacal State, in which the Saints raised, and changed, could dye no more, but were made e∣qual to the Angels, Luke 20.36. 1 Cor. 15.] which bare Twelve manner of Fruits [i. e. afforded perfect 6 Pleasures, and Consolati∣ons to this 6 Apostolical Israelitism,] and yeilded her Fruit every Month [i. e. Variety and Fullness of Joy for 7 evermore, Psalm 1. and 16, 11.92▪ 12, 14. Ezek. 47.7, 12.] and the 8 Leaves of the Tree, were for the healing of the Nations [of the saved, who were to walk in the Light of the New Jerusalem State; that is, the Living Saints were to be preserved during the Thousand Years, in Bodies changed, which should afterwards be made incorrupti∣ble. See on Chap. 20. and 21.24] 5 Or A Tree of Life, viz. one on each side, at just, and convenient distances; for they were very many (as appears from Ezek. 47.7, 12. and from the Expression here used) at the Bank of the River, on the one side, and on the other: and yet they are here represented as One Tree, because they were all of One Kind, viz. of the same kind with the Tree of
Life, in the midst of Paradise; by which, Life was Sacra∣mentally conveyed to our first Parents; and a Symbol was given of the Immortality of the renewed Paradisiacal State of Christ's Kingdom. 6 For the Number Twelve is a Symbol of Perfection, of Apostolicalness, and of the True Israel of God, now united into one Body in this State. 7 The Year being the measure of all Time, bearing Fruit as oft as there be Months in the Year, must needs signifie the con∣tinual, constant fruitfulness of it. Dr. Hammond on the place. 8 TheEzek. 47.12. to which place this Verse alludes. Fruit of this Tree is for Meat; i. e. for solid Nourishment, and ordinary Food; but the Leaves of it, are only for medicine, or healing; from whence it follows, that the Nations here mentioned, had some Remains of Corrupti∣bility left, which required Care, and needed Preservation by Medicines; by which is admirably set forth the different State of the raised Saints, caught up immediately to Christ, into a State of Incorruptibility; and that of the living Saints on Earth, (the very Nations mentioned Chap. 21, 24, 26.) whose Bodies are only changed, but not made incorruptible at first; as hath been451, 452. already frequently observed; and therefore are represented as living indeed, Chap. 20.6. but with some Principle of Corruptibility in them, which stood in need of Healing; whereas the Dead Saints being raised to a Life of Incorruptibility, are very aptly represented as fed
and nourished with the very Fruit of she Tree of Life; that is, by immediate Communications of Incorruptibility from God, and Christ, who is Life, John 1, 4.5, 26. and Chap. 6. 3 And there shall be no more curse [or no Effects of Sin in this New Paradise, as there were in the first, Gen. 3.14, &c.] but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be in 9 it [by glorious Manifesta∣tions, and Communications;] and his 16 Servants [which were sealed. See Chap. 7.4.] shall serve him [perfectly in this State, and never fall from it, as our first Parents did, but shall be Kings and Priests to God for ever.] 9 This whole City, or State, as well that on Earth as in the Heavens, shall be replenished with Communications from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb; which shall be in the Ci∣ty on the New Earth, by its Light shining on it from the New Heaven, Chap. 21.24. 10 This Relative Particle respects both God and the Lamb; and yet is of the Singular Number; to shew the Ʋnity of the Godhead, and the Equality of the Father, and the Son, the Lamb as one with the Eternal Word. 4 And they shall see his Face [i. e. partake of the Nature and Glory of God, and of Christ, Matth. 5.8. 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2.] and his Name shall be in their Foreheads [i. e. they shall be ma∣nifestly known to be his Servants; who were wont to be marked on the Forehead; and they shall be Holiness to the Lord, accor∣ding to the Inscription on the High-Priests rntlet. See the Notes on Chap. 7, 3, 4.14, 1.] 5 And there shall be 10 no night there [i. e. no impuri, and  interruption of Happiness and Comfort, sl 6.  Joh .5, 6, 7.] and they need no Candle [,] ither igh f the Sun [i. e. no Natural Light, of which the Sun is the Fountain,] for the Lord God giveth them Light [i. e. affodeth them hi glorious Presence, and Consolations;] and th  for ever and ever [i. e. after the Thousand Years Mdioy King∣dom,
they shall reign with Christ for ever in the highest Hea∣vens; for Christ's Kingdom is an Eternal Kingdom, and of it there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. See Chap. 3, 21.5, 10.20, 4, 6.] 10 This, and the foregoing Verses, contain a Repetition of what had been said before; either by way ofGen. 41.32. hil. 3.1. Assur∣ance, and Confirmation, as is usual in Prophecy; or with refe∣rence to the Saints upon Earth, upon the mention of them, Verse 2. or with respect to the Persons, to whom that is now accommodated, which had been before spoken concerning their City, or State. Compare Chap. 21.23, 25. with the fifth Verse of this Chapter. 6 And he [i. e. the first of the Seven Angels which had the Se∣ven Vials, Chap. 21.9.] said unto me, 11 these sayings [of the Pro∣phecy of this Book, Verse 7.] are faithful and true [i. e. impor∣tant, certain, and infallible Truths. See on Chap. 19.9.] And the Lord 12 God of the Holy Prophets [i. e. Christ, who spake by them, and whose Spirit inspired them, Acts 3.21. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12.3, 19. 2 Pet. 1.21.] sent [or did send at first, Chap 2.1. and all along in this Prophecy,] his Angel [or Minstring Spirits,] to shew unto his Servants, the things [of this Prophecy,] which must shortly [after the Day of theSee the Notes on Chap. .1. Resurrection, the time when this Vision was seen, and from whence it commences; begin] to come to pass [in order, one after another. See on Chap. 1.1.] 11 Here begins the Conclusion, or Epilogue of this Sacred Drama; wherein the Angel (says Dr. Hammond in his Para∣phrase on the place) began to conclude, and fold up his Dis∣course, and to sum up what I had seen in this Vision, telling me,
that all this, as strange, and as glorious as it was, should cer∣tainly come to pass. And the Vision ends, as it began, with a Declaration of theChap. 1.5: Truth and Importance of the Pro∣phecy; and of itsChap 1.1. speedy issuing into Event; and of the most remarkable things contained in it. 12 Here is a plain Assertion of the Divinity of Christ, con∣cerning whom these words are to be understood; as is mani∣fest by comparing them with Chap. 1.1. and Verse 16. of this Chapter. 7 Behold 13 I [Christ] come 14 quickly [in Judgment to my Kingdom; for the 15 Vials are now ready to be poured forth:] Blessed [therefore, and this admonition is at this time, of all o∣thers, the most seasonable, when the severest Judgments of God are ready to be executed;] is he that keepeth the Sayings of the Prophe∣cy of this Book. [See Chap. 1, 3.3, 11.] 13 Here Christ himself speaks; this being a Sacred Drama; in which, according to the Nature of such Representations, several Persons are introduced, and there are many interlo∣cutory passages; as is observable in the Song of Solomon, which is a Dramatick Poem, in the Form of a Pastoral Eclogue. 14 This Epilogue, or Conclusion, seems to refer to some of the most important, and remarkable passages of the whole Vision; which it be∣hoved all to take the chiefest notice of; according to the Method observed in the first Chapter; which is, as it were, a Prologue, or Introduction to it. And accordingly, the sudden Coming of Christ to take Vengeance of his Enemies, in the pouring forth of the Vials, being one of the most remarkable Events fore∣told
in this Vision; is here again mentioned, as it had been before, Chap. 1.7. 15 For it seems probable, from Chap. 21.9. that this part of the Vision was seen and heard by John, just before he had the Representation of the pouring forth of the Vials; when the Admonition to keep and observe the Words of this Prophecy was most highly seasonable: For by a close consideration of Chap. 17, 1.19, 7-11.21, 9. it seems, as if the first, or prin∣cipal Angel of the Vials, which shewed John the Judgment of the Whore, and the New Jerusalem; gave him also this Con∣clusion at the same time; aptly fitted to the time just before the pouring forth of the Vials; when it was necessary, that the Saints should not only have a comfortable View of the blessed State, but also be assured of the sudden coming of it; that they might be sustained under the dismal Tribulation then ap∣proaching; whereupon they are again assured of his quick coming, Verse 12. 8 And I John [the Apocalyptick Apostle, and Servant of Christ, See on Chap. 21.2.] saw these [foregoing] things [relating to the New Jerusalem,] and heard [the Voice of Jesus, and of his Angel, Verse 6, 7. and 16 both saw, and heard all the Sayings, and Visi∣on of this Book: and therefore am worthy of belief, as having been an Eye and Ear-witness of] them. And when I had heard and s [the glorious State of the New Jerusalem,] I fell 17 down to wor∣ship before the Feet of the Angel which shewed me these things [and who had also brought me the glad tidings of a Judgment on God's E∣nemy the Whore, Chap. 17.1. and of the Marriage-Supper, Chap. 19 9.] 1• Although these Words have an immediate reference to h had been seen just before, yet they may also refer to all the  going Visions of this Book.
17 It is something difficult to determine whether this passage be the same with the former, related Chap. 19.7-21. and only twice repeated, to shew the Importance of the Matter, and the great danger of falling into the sin of Idolatry; although the Relation be something different from the former (according to the manner of the Evangelists, the latter of whom deliver some things more fully and compleatly than the former) and the Two Representations, although of the same thing, are very different; the one being upon the View of the New Jerusa∣lem State, in its full Glory, and compleat Description; the o∣ther, Chap. 19. only upon the sight of the preparation of the Bride, and her coming down out of Heaven. 9 Then saith he unto me [immediately, in great haste, and with great Zeal, and Vehemency. See Chap. 19 10] See thou do it not; for I am thy Fellow-Servant [and therefore am not to be worsh p∣ped,] and [the Fellow-Servant] of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep 18 the sayings of this Book [i. e. I, although an Angel of so great Rank, and Ministry, am yet but a Fellow-Creature with thee, and the Holy Saints, and Witnesses; and their Fellow-Servant also in the New Jerusalem State, in which you and they shall be equal unto Angels; and therefore I am nt to be worshipped; Worship being due to Superiors, not Equals, Creatures and Servants. See on Chap. 19.10.] Worship [therefore,] God, [and him alone, Matth. 4.10] 18 Here the Angel seems to intimate, as if the sayings of this Book were a Caution against the Apostatical State, and the Wor∣ship of Angels; and also the Rule and Model of Divine Worship, from the first Apostolical State of the Church, typified by Ephe∣sus, to the highest State of it in the New Jerusalem; according to which, as he could not receive such Worship, so ought not John also to have given it unto him. And this passage also affords a clear proof of the Divinity of Christ in Humane Na∣ture; because Divine Worship is paid unto him all along in this Book.
10 And he [i. c. Christ. Ver. 12, 13, 16, 20.] saith unto me, Seal 19 not the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book; for the time [of the comple∣tion of all the Sealings mentioned in this Book,] is [now] at hand. 19 These words must refer to the times of the seventh Trum∣pet, when all the Thunders were unsealed, Chap. 14. just before the pouring forth of the Vials; until when, it could not pro∣perly be used; it being expresly commanded, that every one of the Thunders should be sealed. 11 He that 20 is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy [i e. guilty of any other sin, all of which defile a Man, Mat. 15.18. Jam. 1, 21.3, 6▪] let him be filthy still, and he that is righteous [or justified,] let him be righteous still: and he that is holy [or sanctified,] let him be holy still [i. e. the time and place of Repentance is no more to be found, but he that is unjust, and filthy, will not repent; and he that is just, and holy, shall continue so still.] 20 These words seem to have a respect to the Times just be∣fore the pouring forth of the Vials; when those Men who had been proof against the preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, were judicially delivered over to punishment; because of the will∣ful Obstinacy, and Hardness af their Hearts: whereupon they blasphemed, and repented not. See Chap. 16.9. 12 And behold I come 21 quickly [to Judgment, in my Kingdom] and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be [good or bad, Matth. 16.27. Rev. 10.18.20, 12-15.] 21 This must be supposed to be spoken before the pouring forth of the Vials; in which the Wicked receive their Reward in Punishments. 13 I am Alpha, and Omega the Beginning, and the End, the First and the Last [i. e. I am the Eternal God, who as I gave Being to all things, so do I put an end to them too; and I am more espe∣cially
shewing this my Divine Power, in bringing all things to perfection in my Kingdom, and thereby putting an end to Pro∣phecy, whose main scope and design was with reference unto it. See on Chap. 1, 8.21, 6] 14 Blessed 22 [in Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 12.12. See on Chap. 14.13] are they thatThe King's M S. reads , that is, wash their garments. do his Commandments [i. e. are now found, and appear to have kept them,] that they may have right [by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, and upon their appear∣ing in the fineThe King's M S. reads , that is, wash their garments. white Linnen of Christ's Righteousness: See on Chap. 19.7, 8.] to the Tree of Life [i. e. to the incorruptibi∣lity of the new Jerusalem State, verse 2.] and many enter in through the Gates of the City [i. e. be admitted into that State. See on chap. 21.6, 12, 21.] 15 For without [this blessed State, in the four corners of the new Earth, see on chap. 20.8.] are Dogs [i. e. the Members of the AntichristianA Dog is thought by the best interpreters to signify a Sodomite, Deut. 23.18. Ca∣nes, qui Supra, cap. 21.8. , ut Hebrei exponunt, id quod est, Deut. 23.18 Grot. in Locum. Sodom, chap. 11.8. and those who are without the Covenant, Matt. 15.26. Profane, Bruitish, and Persecut∣ing Apostates, Matt. 7.6. 2 Pet. 2.22] and Sorcerers, and Whore∣mongers, and Murtherers, and Idolaters, and whoso∣ever liveth, and maketh a Lie [i. e. all wicked Persons, but especi∣ally the Antichristian Party, to which these Characters emi∣nently agree, see on Chap. 21.8, 27.] 16 I Jesus have sent my Angel [from the beginningChap. 1.1. of this Prophecy, all along to this present conclusion of it;] to testify unto you [John, and all my other Servants, chap. 1.1.] these things in the Churches [i. e. in, or concerning the seven Successions of my Church, see the Notes on chap. 1.4. and on chap. second and third,] I am the root, and the off-spring of David [i. e. the Mes∣sias, proceeding from David as from a root, to whom the King∣dom.
was Promised, see on chap. 5.5.] and the bright and morn∣ing Star [which only dawned in the Church Succession of Thya∣tira, but now shews in full brightness at the succession of my Kingdom, see the Notes on chap. 2.28.] 17 And the Shirit [speaking to, and in the several Successions of the Church, chap. 2. and 3. and makeing intercession for the Saints, Rom. 8.26, 27.] and the Bride [i. e. the Saints, chap 19.7, 8.21, 2] say, come [Lord Jesus, come quickly in thy King∣dom.] And let him that heareth [and obeyeth the words of this Prophecy,] say [joyning as in consort,] come [Lord Jesus.] AndThese are Christ's Words, and are a kind of Antiphon, in ths Divine Anthem, or Sacred Dialogue; wherein Christ in Answer to the Saints, says, as it were; if you so desire my coming, I will not be backward in inviting you, let him, say I, that is a thirst come. let him that is a thirst [for the comforts, and refreshments of the new Jerusalem State, see on chap. 21.6.] come: And whoso∣ever will [or has a sincere desire for these times of full refresh∣ments,] let him take the Water of Life freely [for the incorrupti∣bility of this State is of my free grace and favour, chap. 21, 6.22, 1.] 18 For I [Christ, verse 20.] testify [and declareAll this is frequently the import of the word Testifie in Scripture. openly, with the greatest earnestness, zeal, and holy Asseveration, as with an Oath, John, 13.21. Rom. 1.9. Acts 18.5.] unto every man, [of whatNullo excepto, pontifice, vel concilio. Paraeus in loc. quality, or dignity soever] that heareth the words of the Prophecy of this Book, [that it is a Book of so great per∣fection and life that] if any man shallElegans est allusio in  & . Grot. in Loc. add unto these things [con∣tained in this Book of Revelations, and by consequence to any other part of Scripture by 22 Traditions, and rash,Rashly to be the Authority of a false Interpretation of Scripture, is to take God's Name in vain in a high degree. Mr. Mede. This is the last authoritative Prophecy that is likely to come from Heaven, to be a rule of Faith to the Church; and whosoever shall go about to infuse any other expectations into men, than usually are agreeable to these Visions, God shall bring on him the Judgments here denounced against his greatest Enemies; and so in like manner whosoever shall derogate from the authority of this Prophecy, or occa∣sion mens not receiving the admonition of Christ here contained, in every part thereof, God shall cast him off. &c. Dr. Hammond's Paraphr. or wilfully
false Interpretations,] God shall add unto him [besides the retri∣butions of his ordinary Justice, and Wrath,] the [dreadful,] plagues that are written in this Book. 22 Here is a change of Persons, and John speaks; whose words plainly refer to the admittance and entrance of the Saints into the new Jerusalem State; and therefore must have respect to the times after the Pouring forth of the Vials, when the Wicked were shut out of the City. 19 And if any man shall take 23 away [as the Antichristian Party hath even the Scriptures themselves,] from the words [or autho∣rity,] of this of Prophecy, God shall take away his part and the Book of Life, [i. e. he shall not be found written in the Book of Life, a∣mong the Living in the New Jerusalem,] and out of the Holy City [from which he shall be debarred, and excommunicated,] and from the Things [promises, and blessings,] which are written in this Baok. 23 As the Antichristian Party hath done. 20 He which testifies these things [i e. Christ, who is Truth it self,] saith, surely [believe it, for it is a certain, and infallible Truth,] I come quickly [i. e. all my comings are unexpected, and by Surprize; I begin very suddenly after the date of this Visi∣on, to bring it into effect. I hasten all things to an end in the just and due time; and am now just upon coming to put an end to this, and all other Prophecies, being not slack in performing them, as some men count slackness, 2 Pet. 3.9.] Amen [saith John the beloved Apostle, and Servant of Christ, in the Name, and Person, of Angels and Saints his fellow Servants;] even so [be it; [come Lord Jesus [in thy Kingdom, come quickly.] 21 The 24 [Justifying, Sanctifying, and efficaciously opera∣tive] Grace [Proceeding from the undeserved Love, Favour, and Assistances,] of our Lord [God] Jesus Christ [our Saviour, and anointed Prophet, Priest, and King,] be with you all [Churches and Saints, to whom this great Prophetical Epistle is Written] Amen. [So be it, and so it will certainly be.]
24 This whole Book of Prophecies being as it were one en∣tire Epistle Monitory, to the Church of God throughout all Ages of the World; it is concluded, as it was begun, accord∣ing to the custom of the Apostles, with the usual Form of Valediction in their Epistles. AMEN, AMEN, COME LORD JESUS, COME QUICKLY FINIS.
