B3857 E665_19 R206859 99865958 118216
THE Copy of a Letter from THE REARE-ADMIRAL OF THE ENGLISH FLEET FOR THE COMMON WEALTH OF ENGLAND, TO AN EMINENT MERCHANT IN LONDON. Being a true and plaine Narration of the whole Proceedings and Fight betwixt them and the Dutch Fleet near the Downes, upon the 19. day of May, 1652. June 1st. LONDON, Printed by G. D. for William Hope, and are to be sold at his Shop at the North door of the Old Exchange, 1652.
The Reer-Admirals Letter to an Eminent Merchant in London. SIR, LEast my silence altogether may breed suspition of neglect to my friends, although you may well guesse I have little time yet to write, being scarce recrui∣ted with any rest, and having many things in head and hand at this season; yet I shall briefly offer thus much by way of advice, to the end you may with us acknowledge, that we have great incouragement to believe, that the pledge of Gods favour to us, is a sufficient Testimony amongst many more, that he is amongst us, and will appear in glory. The 18 of this Instant about ten a clock in the forenoon, Van Trumpe with 40 sail of Ships of War more, appeared very near the back of the Goodwin, the weather being haisie, we could not see him before. At which time of his appearance, my self being commanded thereunto, was left in the Downs, and wore a Flag at the Maintopmast head, and with me seven ships were left, the rest of the Fleet being with the General to the Westward, they consisting of 12. sail, when I saw them luf∣fing round in with the Southsands head, the tide of Floud being just then come; I concluded he was resolved for the Downs, and intended to have dealt with us, he knowing by in∣telligence that our Fleet was divided. I presently got loose, and those with me, and were in readiness for them with that small strength we had. But within two hours after he had lain muzled between the Sand-head and the Forland, two Frigots appointed by the General Trump, came towards us, which were met by one small Frigot, I sent out for that purpose to understand their Resolution; who answered, that they had a message to deliver to the Commander in the Downs, so they came into the Road, and the Captains of them both came a∣board
me, who in the name of their Admirall saluted me, and gave me this account of his approach so near: Namely, that he thought it necessary to send them to give this intimation of assurance, that he came with no intent to offer any injurie to the English Nation, and withall desired there might not be apprehension of any such thing, for he was forced there∣unto being put to Leeward with his Fleet by the Northerly winds that had blown hard, and that the day before he rode off Dunkirk, where divers of his Fleet had lost their An∣chors, and so forced to Leeward. This complement I received with great allowance on my part, in point of Credence; look∣ing at this but a juggle, and could not otherwise expound this, but a high affront to this State, and a great provocati∣on to us, and by his Messenger returned this Answer, that in part I believed their coming so nigh was occasioned by the winds. But I know well it was in their power whether that day they would have come so nigh us, and so returned a com∣plement to their Admiral, and desired, if he were reall in what he pretended, he would remove his quarters, else we should interpret it otherwise, and gave him to understand that our Admirall was plying up towards this place being Crucing a∣broad. Among other discourse they told me their Admi∣rall would have come into the Road, but was not willing to strike his Flag: To which I returned him answer, that we should expect nothing more nor lesse, but what they know to be the ancient right of this Nation, and that would be ex∣pected not onely here, but elsewhere in these Seas where∣ever we met him. And whatever our strength was in their outward Observation, we had the strong God on our side, who would judge between the Nations, and whether they intend∣ed War or Peace, it did not signifie much to me, but wished the hand of God might be upon that man, who should be first cause or ground of the breach between us. For our parts they might see sensibly that we had no such intentions, unless for∣ced thereunto. So they returned with this message, and that evening the whole Fleet anchored off the S. Foreland in the fair way. Of all this I gave account to the Councel of State, and also dispatched away a small Vessel with the like to the
General Blake, which came to his hand that night, and in the morning I received return from him, being between the Nesse and the Foulstone. All that night I kept a guard by two Fri∣gots that lay at a distance from me, and one from another, betwixt us and them, to give sight of their motion, but they moved not that night. About noon the nineteenth day, wee set sail with my Squadron towards Dover, supposing by that time I had the length of the Foreland, I should see our Gene∣rall, who that Floud would be with us: And immediately the Hollands Fleet weighed anchor, and all stood off towards the coast of France. I bore away to the Westward, and within an hour saw our Fleet at three Leagus distance almost, they plying we came neere them apace; all this while Trump stands over, and as I suppose, was fitting his Ships, and con∣sulting, what to doe, for by this time he saw our General: In∣deed I thought surely he would have plyed homewards to a∣void striking. But very suddenly after he bore up, and all his Fleet, fourty one in all, and made all sail, himself in the Van steering right our General, and so seasonably did God or∣der things according to our thoughts, that were just, and were in conjunction with both our Squadrons by the time that hee was come to our Admiral: He most insolently bore right to him with his Flag abroad, at which the General shot once, a second time, and a third; Upon which Trump fired his broad side, or the greatest part at him, and withall put abroad a bloudie Flag under his other, upon which every of us addres∣sed to the Ingagement, according to that God called us unto: Their Ships generally firing upon us first, and indeed the rea∣son of that in part was, because we would get neerer them, that so our Ordnance might doe the better execution on them, and withall we look at it as our advantage in point of Inno∣cencie, that they struck us first. About four in the afternoone wee began, and continued fighting till it was darke. Trump steered a way right afore it, the wind being Easterly, his Fleet followed accordingly, we being on his right wing, some of us endeavouring to break his body, divided them into two or three parts, wherein they shuf∣fled themselves into clusters, but by reason many of our Ships
and Friggots sailed very heavie by reason they are foule, we could not so fully attaine our desire upon them, yet by the help of God gave them so much, that they had no mind to engage any further then we could force it: for they made all sayle they could, most of them, and as wee coveted to be near them they declined, and I doe verily beleive they were heart-strucken notwithstanding their insolent Bravado. This gave us a clear call, and added a great deal of resolution to us, that they sought us, and came to us to make the quarrel, when as they might have avoided it do what we could. Our men very unani∣mous in the Work: And I am very confident upon very safe grounds of Faith, that they should be as driven stubble be∣fore the whirlewind of the Lord. I shall not add more, I blesse God I fear before him, He is our strength and our confi∣dence. But surely they quitted themselves very dishonora∣bly: forasmuch as they suffered us to take one of their Fleet, of thirty Guns, and as I presume by all circumstances we sunk another of the same force: both which fought very stoutly, yet none of their Fleet would succor them, so great was their haste, and I do verily think, that if we had had one hour or two more before it was dark, you would have received a bet∣ter account of many of the rest. As for that Ship that was taken, she is with us, and her men which are about ninety or one hunured, are devided aboard our Ships, the Captaine of her is a Flushinger, who was aboard off me at Calis, when I was abroad with a squadron, about three weeks agoe, and he cries out agaist Trump, and the rest, for their cowardly carriage in leaving them to our mercy, having so great a Fleet with him, we being but halfe his number, and withall avowes he had no knowledge of any intention to fight with us. As for the o∣ther Ship, I presume she sunk in the night, forasmuch as when our ships left her, she had six foot water in hold, and her main∣mast shot over-board, and our men durst not keep in her, the Captaine of her forsooke her, and came aboard in the Boate we sent aboard, but what is become of the men we know not, it being in the night, and our Fleet scattered were constrain∣ed to gather about our General, to the end we might consult what to doe, we having been surprized before we could speak
a word together, or receive any thing of command from him. What other spoile we did them we know not, what they have done to us is not very considerable, unlesse the bloud of our men, which will be called for in due season. The Ge∣nerall had six men killed, besides divers wounded, some others lost four, some two, and one, and some none killed, but few hurt. Our Rigging, Masts, and Sayles shot, most of us, and many shot in our Hulls, notwithstanding we have lost so few men. All I shall say is, this is the first of Gods appearing for us by Sea, and though the fight was running, and not so hot as otherwise it would, if they had not declined it, yet we look at God in his providence, giving us great boldnesse to believe that the Warre was his, and that if they go on to make warre, it is that they may be broken, although we are very unworthy of any such favour, and very weak and inconsiderable in strength. The 20. being yesterday, we saw them in the morning as farre as we could descry them, plying over as I suppose for Deip Roads, or the Coast of France, that night it was resolved at a Coun∣cel of Warre to ply into Dover Road, or the Downs, there to recruit some things we want, and also to receive a positive Order from our State in order to our proceedings. The Lord of Light be their Counsellor, and then fear nothing. I have been more tedious in this narrative, (not that I love long dis∣course, neither am very fit at present to write) but to satisfy you and all friends who are with us in heart, and are deeply concerned in this beginning. The Lord help you to remem∣ber us, and keep us faithfull unto him, and his Interest, and honour us much more in doing him service if he have any pleasure in us, which is the greatest ambition I have in this World, and so I crave leave to remaine, Your very affectionate and faithfull Servant, N. BOURNE. Aboard the Andrew, in the Downes, May, 21. 1652. in the afternoon.
