B4161 E1044_5 R20875 99867671 119992
SEVERAL TREATISES OF Worship & Ceremonies, By the Reverend Mr. WILLIAM BRADSHAW, One of the first Fellows of Sydney Col∣ledge in Cambridge; Afterward Minister of Chattam in Kent, 1601: Known by his learned Treatise De Justificatione. 1. A consideration of certain Positions Archiepiscopal. 2. A Treatise of Divine Worship, tending to prove the Ceremonies, imposed on the Ministers of the Gospel in England, in present Controversie, are in their use unlawful. Printed 1604. 3. A Treatise of the Nature and Use of Things Indifferent. 1605. 4. English Puritanism, containing the main opinions of the ridgedest sort of those called Puritans in the Realm of England. 1604. 5. Twelve General Arguments, proving the Ceremonies unlawful. 1605. 6. A Proposition concerning kneeling in the very Act of Receiving, 1605. 7. A Protestation of the Kings Supremacy, made in the name of the afflicted Mini∣sters, and oposed to the shameful Calumniations of the Prelates. 1605. 8. A short Treatise of the Cross in Baptism. 1604. Printed for Cambridge and Oxford, and to be sold in Westminster Hall, and Pauls Church-Yard, 1660.
A consideration of certain Positions Archiepiscopal. 1. Religion cannot stand without some Ceremonies, as kneeling, &c. REligion is the fear of God, to serve him precisely according to his Word, and therefore it is called Godliness, Isa. 29.13. Acts 2.5. & 10.2. & 26.5. 2 Tim 3.5. Heb. 9.1. Jam. 1.27. As by Super∣stition his Majesty meaneth, when one restrains himself to any other Rule in the Service of God than is warranted by the Word. Bas. dor. p. 15. Which is therefore called Will-Worship. Col. 2.21, 23. Howsoever it be Religion, out of the fear and love of God, to keep his Commandements as well of the Second as First Table, yet the conscionable observing of the Commandments contained in the first Table is, by an excellency, called Religion; And whereas man cannot judge of such observing the first and third Commandments, therefore is he esteemed Religions, who maketh conscience of the second and fourth Commandements; In sanctifying the Sabbath with such an outward manner of Worship, as is not after mans in∣vention, but according to Gods Word. So that by Religion, in this position is meant the outward (especi∣ally publique) worship of God: Religion being put for Worship, be∣cause the fear of God to serve him precisely according to his Word, is, of all the actions of men, especially to be manifest in worship∣ping God, who will be sanctified in all them that come near him, if they offer strange fire, Lev. 10.3. Religion (then) being put for out∣ward Worship, the Position is granted. For indeed the outward wor∣ship
of God, doth consist only of Ceremonies, that is, outward de∣monstrations of inward Worship. But, how doth this follow, The outward Worship of God cannot stand without some Ceremonies, Ergo, It cannot stand without the Ceremonies in question. As though Religion had no better ground than Diocesan Bishops have, according to this Maxim: No Ceremony, no Bishop. But more clearly to perceive the truth, it is to be considered, that some Ceremonies by nature, or general custome demonstrate in∣ward worship, as not only signs thereof, but effects also. Other do the same, as signs only by Institution. By which instituted Cere∣monie; God is not worshipped except they be by himself prescri∣bed; For as no fire could make any Sacrifice a savour of rest to God, but that which came from God, Lev. 9.24. and 10.1, 2. So no war∣rant can make outward worship, or any part thereof acceptable to God, but that which cometh from God, Mat. 15.9. Therefore it doth not follow, that because kneeling in Prayer is lawful, therefore the Ceremonies in question (namely the Surplice) be so too. For 1. Nature teacheth us to manifest inward reverence by outward gestures. 2. General custom amongst us maketh kneeling the most solemn sign of the greatest reverence. 3. In true Worship∣pers of God kneeling is not only a sign of inward Worship, but an effect also. 4. It is warranted by the Word. And 5. It is not ap∣propriated to the outward Worship of God: For men do usually, and may lawfully, demonstrate their inward reverencing of men by kneeling. Whereas the Ceremonies in question (namely che Sur∣plice) do not demonstrate inward Worship by Nature: For then all religious Worshippers would (at least) have a disposition to use the Surplice at all times, and in all places. (2.) None can affirm, that general custome maketh a Surplice a sign of inward Worship. Because the publike use of it is mostwhat omitted or enforced, and there is no such matter as the private use thereof, and by private persons. In both which considerations it may be (3) denied to be an effect of inward Worship, and the rather if it cannot be proved to be as effect of the obedience of faith to some commandment of God, prescribing the same. Which (4.) cannot be; Seeing in all the New Testament there is neither Precept, nor Example, nor other matter of necessary conclusion warranting the same. And yet (5.) It is appropriated to the Service of God, and therefore supersti∣tious, and not religious, especially being urged as it is. 2. Ceremonies are lawful, when their doctrine is lawful.
If by Doctrine of Ceremonies be meant their signification, then the Thesis is denied: For then other Popish Ceremonies may be restored. As setting up of Candles, to signifie that the works of all Christians, Phil. 2.15. especially Ministers, Mat. 5.14, 16. should shine before men; and yet it is pronounced in the third Injuncti∣on to be devised by mans Phantasie, besides Scripture, and therefore Superstitious. And unleavened bread in the Lords Supper may sig∣nifie Sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.8. And yet by the Commu∣nion Book (Rubrick after the Communion, Sect. 5.) it is re∣formed, To take away the Superstition, which any person hath, or might have: But many have, and may have Superstition in Ceremo∣nies retained. If the meaning of the Position be this, Ceremonies are lawful, when they are warranted by lawful Doctrine, it is to be granted; but then the Hypothesis must be denied. For it is petitio principii to af∣firm; that Ceremonies in question are so warranted. 3. The Doctrine of Ceremonies is part of the Gospel. This Position is true, but only according to the distinction of the Doctrine of Ceremonies by institution. Which Doctrine is either affirmative, shewing what Ceremonies by institution are to be used, and those be only the two Sacraments, which are indeed Seales, and not only Ceremonies. Or Negative, teaching what Ceremonies are not to be used, viz. Neither Ceremonies of the Jews, nor traditions of Elders, Joh. 4.20, 21, 23. Neither Carnal Rites, Gal. 3.3. Heb. 9.10. Nor commandments of men, Col. 2.22. Which negative Doctrine of Ceremonies is indeed according to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.3, 5, 12, 14. and that is contrary to the Ceremonial Law of Moses. Because that Law stood in carnal Rites, Heb. 9.10, 11. That is, Ceremonies instituted to instruct and direct the outward man unto the inward Service of God, and therefore was that Law called, A carnal Commandment, Heb. 7.16. and those Ceremonies accounted Rudiments of the World, Gal. 4.3. So that after faith (that is, the Gospel) came, that Law, and the Ceremonies thereof gave place, as being less perfect, a childish Paedagogy and beggarly Rudiments, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11. Gal. 3.25. and 4.2, 3, 9. In respect of the more perfect Word of Christ, Col. 3.16. 2 Cor. 3.13.17, 18. Who is that Messias, who when he came, did tell us all things concerning the outward worship of God. Joh. 4.19, 20, 25, 26. But Christ never told us the Ceremonies in question.
Therefore if the Negative Doctrine against Jewish Ceremonies instituted by God to the purposes aforesaid, be part of the Gospell, or Word of Christ, much more is the Negative Doctrine against Ceremonies instituted by man to the same purposes, without warrant of the word, part of the Gospel, Col. 2.20, 22, 23. Galat. 1.6, 7, 8, 10. And the rather, because the Word saith, That they, who burthen the Church with Ordinances of the world, which are Traditions after the Commandemens and Doctrines of men, do not hold Christ the hed, Col. 2.19, 20, 22. and 3.1. and opposing such Traditions to the Commandements of God, and Faith of Jesus, maketh them part of the Beasts Mark, Revel. 14.9, 12. Hereunto accordeth that which is affirmed in the BOOK of Common-Prayer, in the Preface of Ceremonies, viz. Christ his Gospell is not a Ceremonial Law (as much of Moses was) but it is a Religion to serve God, not in bondage of the Figure or shadow, but in the freedome of spirit. 4. Ministers refusing Conformity are Schismaticks. This word Schisme, according to the now received use thereof in the Church, signifieth A voluntary rending of the Church only for matters of the outward Government therof. So that, Schismaticks are by Dr. Bancroft, in his Notes before his Sermon at Pauls Cross, an. 1588. defined as out of Augustine, to be such, as retaining with us the true Faith, seperate themselves, from Orders and Ceremonies. In which sence though Brownists (so called) may be deemed Schismaticks, yet cannot Ministers refusing only to conforme, be so accompted: Because, their Deprivation or Suspension notwithstansting, they do not seperate themselves from the Church, neither do they (indeed) forsake the Ministry of the Gospel, which they desire (before all worldly benefits whatsoever) to execute with a good Conscience, but are thrust from it; and therefore, If men, driven by Excommuni∣cation out of the Church be not Schismatiques, much lesse Ministers driven by deprivation or suspension only from the Execution of their Ministry. This word Schisme is sometimes taken for any dissention in the Church, whereby the Peace, but not the Unity thereof is broken. 1 Cor. 11.18. In which sense they are to be called, Schismaticks, who are specially to be blamed for such Dissention. But if all the Prelates cannot give one Argument soundly concluded from the word to prove, That the Ceremonies, in question may be prescribed by authority, and yielded unto by the Ministry, without sin, then are they Schismaticks, according to the judgment of the Apostle,
who beseecheth the Brethren, To mark them diligently, who cause Division and Offences, besides the Doctrine which they have learned, and to avoid them. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple, Rom. 16.17, 18. By which Answer, Protestants do sufficiently justifie their Separation from the Papists: Much more may Ministers justifie their refusing to Conforme, yet without Separation. But when any such Argument shall be given (which hath not yet been heard of) then are Ministers refusing Conformity to be deemed Schismaticks. In mean while this Position is to be taken for Petitio Principii. FINIS.
A Treatise of Divine Worship, Tending to prove, that the Cere∣monies imposed upon the Ministers of the Gospel in England, in present Contro∣versie, are in their use unlawful. CHAP. I. Of Divine Worship in general. DIvine Worship is any action or service that is imme∣diatly and directly performed unto God himself, whether the true God or a false, whether comman∣ded by Divine Authority, imposed by humane, or assumed upon our own heads and pleasures. For in this latitude of sense is Divine Worship to be conceived, that it may comprehend under it both true and false Worship. 2. Though all Actions and Services that Man performeth un∣to Man are not parts of Civil Worship, yet every Action and Ser∣vice that Man performeth directly to God, is a part of Divine Worship, and ought meerly to concern his own glory. It being impossible to imagine how the Creature should perform any ser∣vice, or do any action to the Creator himself but Worship. For the ground of Worship is the sence of some excellent eminency of goodness in the Party worshipped, and defect and inability to do an answerable good to a good received in the party worshipping,
for we need not to worship God if we could be as good to him as he is to us, and therefore (except we should mock him) because receiving all good from him, we are not able to do the least good unto him; all that we can do, is to worship him, that is, to glo∣rifie him above all things; and debase our selves before him as nothing in his presence. 3. All special things therefore done in the Service and Wor∣ship of God, is Worship: and a part of that honour that is done unto him. And whatsoever special thing done in Divine Service, is not a special honour and worship unto God, must needs be a disho∣nour and abuse of his Majesty, who requireth nothing but worship at our hands, and unto whom we cannot possibly do any other good. 4. If therefore a man shall do any special Action in the Service of God, of which there is no use out of the same: and that Action so done, bring no special honour to God; the doing of it is a pro∣phanation of the Name of God. For all special Actions done in the Service of God, must either bring special honour to God, or else they must needs dishonour him. 5. Divine Worship is Internal only or External also. Internal worship is meerly spiritual, and performed only within the temple of mans heart, of which none are witnesses but God and a mans own conscience. All the inward motions of the heart directed un∣to God are parts of this VVorship, as Faith, Hope, Confidence, Love, Fear and Joy in God, &c. which are all of them divers acts and parts of Inward worship, in every one of which God is ho∣noured. All which spring from the apprehension of our own wants, and Gods infinite excellency and goodness towards us. We need not proceed any further in handling of this Worship, it nothing appertaineth to our present purpose. 6. External Worship is an expressing and setting forth of the In∣ternal by outward signs and rites: By which, as by certain outward bodily shadows and colours, the spiritual and Inward Worship of God is made visible and sensible to others.
CHAP. II. Of Ceremonies in general. THese signs and rites are called Ceremonies. A Ceremony is a corporeal adumbration of some hidden thing in the mind, that it desireth to affect others withall, in some effectual manner, for by such means as these, are the secrets of the soul disclosed and painted out or figured to our own and others bodily senses. 2. Such actions properly are ceremonial, that are meer shadows and signs, exhibiting nothing but some similitude and resemblance of such things as man is desirous, but not able to exhibite in sub∣stance and in deed. And therefore are called complements, be∣cause in doing them a man laboureth to supply that in a shadow, that he cannot do in substance. And hence it is that the more unable a man is to do that he would, the more he useth to supply his defect with signs and tokens. CHAP. III. Of Natural Ceremonies. CEremonies are either Natural or Instituted. Natural Ceremo∣nies are all such voluntary compositions and gestures of the body, as are with moderate deliberation used to shadow-forth those hidden motions, affections, and habits of the mind, that are begot∣ten in the mind by some goodness in those unto whom they are performed and done; for a man performeth no ceremony unto himself, but unto others, and the ground of that ceremony is in him unto whom it is performed. 2. For example: Authority in another, begetteth reverence in me. This reverence possessing and affecting my soul, it breedeth in me a desire to manifest it unto the party reverenced; but I cannot pos∣sibly do it by any other means, but by some bodily shadow and sign, whereupon nature teacheth me to bow the body; the like may be said of lifting up of hands, casting up the eyes, &c. All of which kind are certain natural impressions of the soul, made in and upon
the body, endeavouring in and by them to make her hidden motions so visible and effectual, as they may affect our selves and others. 3. Comliness and decency doth especially consist in the use of Ceremonies of this kind, and they have been ever carefully obser∣ved in the Church of God, as well before Christ as since, both in her publike and private ministrations; which wilfully to neglect, were to sin against God, and for any to inhibite only upon their will and pleasure, were impiety. But these Ceremonies in contro∣versie are of another nature as shall afterward appear. 4. This first kind of Ceremonies, the more natural they are, and the more they shall appear to flow from the free and inforced will of him that acteth them, the more decent and of greater grace they are, for they are such shadows as are sent forth from our passions by the light of nature, and are not fit for any other use or significa∣tion. 5. And as nature only frameth them well, so if it shall appear that they proceed from her, and are not forced and wrung from men (invita minerva) she putteth into them such a light, that any of ordinary conceit may in the sign see the thing signified. 6. These Ceremonies though Natural, and therefore common to all men, yet are they not in all degrees universally the same, because having their original from the natural motions and conceptions of the mind, especially passion and affection, by which they are ani∣mated and formed, there being in the stock of mankind such di∣versity of natures and dispositions; such divers degrees of the same inclination; such a divers composition and mingling of affections, it cannot be but nature must needs vary and be divers in them. 7. And though they are natural, yet are they no such as nature by violence forceth and wringeth from men (as the actions of panting and breathing) such as men cannot at their pleasure abstain from, or lay down; for laughter in extreme mirth, and weeping in great sorrow, though they be natural impressions and signs of inward and hidden passions, yet are they not Ceremonies; but such signes only are Ceremonies, wherein there is concurrence both of nature and will, in the framing and use of them, as appeareth in the particulars above specified; and therefore are such as may upon some special or particular occasions, be omitted or suppressed. 8. Thus much of natural Ceremonies. Instituted Ceremonies are such outward rites and signs as by reason of some Analogy or
similitude, are ordained and appointed to signifie and shadow forth any mystical truth, they being not brought forth by nature to any such end or purpose. Of which kind are all the Jewish Ceremonies, Our Sacraments, All Paganish and Popish Rites, and those Ceremonies in present controversie. For none of all those externall Rites, do by nature signifie any such matter, but their uses and significations are put upon them only by the will of the institutor or user, and are not so much intended for decency and order, as for solemnitie and state. 9. Those things that are put to this Ceremonial use, being not made by nature to any such end or purpose, must, if they be not vain and foolish, borrow light from some word of institution, for the more mystical the Ceremonies of this kind are, and of secreter sense, of greater grace they are. 10. Natural Ceremonies, if by institution and appointment they be put to any other use than nature it self hath fitted them unto; do lose their name, and become instituted Ceremonies, as kneeling tied to eating and drinking in the Sacrament, &c. CHAP. IV. Of Civil and Religious Ceremonies in general. THE Use of both these kindes of Ceremonies, that is, natural and instituted, is either in civil service; of man to man, or in religious services of man to God, from whence Ceremonies receive a second Denomination, and are called (whether they be natural or instituted) either Civill or Religious Ceremonies. 2. Civil Ceremonies therefore are such Rites and Ceremonies, as are performed in Civill Offices and Duties between man and man, as they are members of a Civill Body, or Incorporation: The right use whereof is called Civility, and the contempt rudeness; the end of Civil Ceremonies is to signifie and shadow those inward affections that one man desireth to shew to another: In the due use of these Ceremonies consists humanity, lowliness, courtesie, good manners, civil state, and pompe, &c. Because the Ceremonies of this kinde are not controverted, we passe them by. 3. Religious Ceremonies are such outward Rites as are performed in religious Duties and services of man to God: and
they are outward shadowes of zeal, devotion, faith, holiness, reveren of the Majesty of God, &c. 4. In the use of these Ceremonies especially doth external worship consist, whether true or false. 5. Religious Ceremonies are either common or proper: Common Ceremonies are such as are equally used in civil and religious matters: bowing the knee used in prayer, is a religious Ceremony, signifying in that action a Divine Reverence of God. Yet it is not a Ceremony peculiar and proper to Religion, because it is a Ceremony that is and may be used to the Magistrate, to shadow forth also civill Worship due unto him. Of which nature all natural Ceremonies seem to be, and any instituted Ceremony may be, if it have no reference to Religion in the Use. 6. Though matters of Civill Order and Decency be very improperly called Ceremonies, they being rather matters of substance, and it being impiety wilfully and without necessity to neglect them in the Congregation of Saints, or to do any thing contrary unto them: Yet all things tending thereto, may for Doctrine sake be referred to this head. For though Gods worship do not consist in them, yet Gods worship is prophaned in the wilfull contempt and neglect of them. Yea as far forth as naturall and civill decency and comlinesse are outward shadowes of inward worship, They may be safely reputed parts of divine worship. 7. Matters therefore of Order and decency in the service of God are all such matters as are drawn from the ordinary civil Customes of men, and which for any to neglect wilfully, would seem to the reason of a naturall man a disorderly and unseemly thing. As to come to the Assembly clothed, and that in seemly and usuall apparell, according to our civill Callings in the world, to sit there quietly, and in a comely manner, in respect of composition of body, to give as much as may be, upper place to our civill Superiours; that the place of meeting be fair swept; that the Table of the Lord in the time of Communion, be spread after the civil fashion of the Country, with a fair table-cloth; that men pray bare-headed, &c. These Orders used in civill Meetings of men, wherein civill decency is observed and kept, ought not to be neglected in religious Meetings, and therefore they may be called common Ceremonies or Orders. 8. These Ceremonies of civil Order and decency, are of that
nature and necessity, that for the Magistrate wilfully to inhibite, were sin in him, and for any particular man not to use and observe as much as conveniently he can, (though Authority had never enjoyned them in particular) were impiety. And therefore they are of a far different nature from the Ceremonies in controversie: For let it be supposed to be no sin to use these when the Magistrate enjoyneth them: yea suppose them to be holy Ornaments and Rites, yet if no Authority humane or divine had instituted them, it had been no sin for any man to neglect them, nay it were a foul sin to use them. For example: Our Lords spiritual enjoyn every Minister in Divine Service, to wear a white linen Ephod or Surplice, they may (if it please them) as lawfully enjoyn him to have painted before and behinde two fair red crosses: but if a private man upon his own head should use his Surplice so, though it be an honourable signe that he addeth, it would be made a grievous crime. 9. They therefore do but gull the simple of the world, that from humane authority to institute such civil Orders as are above specified, do inferre that man hath authority to bring into the service and worship of God such Ceremonies, as are clean of another nature. As though because the Magistrate may ordain such Ceremonies, as without his ordinance, were impiety for a man not to observe, therefore he may ordain such Ceremonies which without his ordi∣nance at least, were impietie and wickedness for any to use. CHAP. V. Of Ceremonies peculiar to Religion. THose Ceremonies that are proper to Religion are such as in a peculiar manner are tied to religious persons actions and purposes only, especially such as are in a special manner tied to the solemn worship of God. In these Ceremonies consists the external form of divine worship, and they are the outward badges and cognizances of the same. 2. All Ceremonies used in the service of God, are either civil Ceremonies (to wit, such as are also of the same use out of the service of God) or holy Ceremonies, to wit, such wherein holiness consists in the due use of them; or else they are prophane, that is, such as have no use, or a superstitious use. The Ceremonies in
controversie are not civilFor then the bare omission of them would argue rudeness and incvlity. Ceremonies: again it is granted, there is no holinesse in the use of themSome nigher his M. have given it out that he would (if h cou'd) hang those that put holi∣nesse in them., Therefore they are prophane Ceremonies, and by consequent, not to be mingled with holy things. 3. As there are diversities of Religion and Churches, so there are diversities of Rites and Ceremonies by which they are distinguished, and Ceremonies are the partition walls whereby (fo the most part) one Church is divided from another. For he that shall with a more narrow eye seek into these things shall see, that for the most part, the diversities and varieties of Ceremonies are the begetters of diversity of Doctrines, and Opinions, whereby one Religion differeth from another. 4. The more one Church differeth from another in Rites and Ceremonies, the more it useth to differ in substance of Doctrine; and the more one Church draweth nearer unto another in Cere∣monies, the more it draweth near unto it in substance of Doctrine. The Churches of France and Scotland in substance of Doctrine do so much the more differ from the Synagogue of Rome, by how much the farther they differ from her in Ceremonies, than other Churches; and some in the Church of England that do strive to come to Rome in Ceremonies, come so much the nearer to her in Doctrine, as might appear by divers instances, if the matter were not too too apparent. 5. He that hates the Religion it self, hates all the shadowes and shews of the Religion; and he that loves the shadows and Rites of a Religion, he loves the Religion it self; he loves a Pope well that loves the triple Crown; he loves a Fryer well, that dotes upon his Cowl, and shaven crown; and out of question he loves a Massepriest with all his heart, that is mad upon his massing attire, or any part thereof. 6. As it is rudeness and want of civility, to neglect or contemn a Civil Ceremony, so it is prophanesse and irreligion to neglect or contemn a religious ceremony: and as outward civility consists in the due use of civil Ceremonies, so outward holiness and religion consists in the due use of all Religious Ceremonies: Those Ceremonies therefore are prophane and not beseeming the true worship of God, that are so far from any shew of holinesse in the use of them, that they make the partie that refuseth the use of them to seem, and to be reputed pure, holy, and precise; of which nature our Ceremonies in controversie are. 7. As Civil Ceremonies tend to the honor of them unto whom
civil worship is due, and is a part thereof: So Religious Ceremonies tend to the honor of him unto whom religious worship is due, and is a part thereof: neither can a man possibly imagine how any thing should be religious, whether a substance or a Ceremony, but it must needs respect him that Reigion it self respecteth; s therefore we performe civil honour unto those unto whom we performe civil Ceremonies, so we performe Religious and Divine honours unto those that we obey in a Religious Ceremonie. They therefore that claim and performe obedience therein, do claim and performe that which is due only to God. 8. Nothing intended or done by man is an honour to God, but that which is an obedience unto God in some Commandement. All Ceremonies therefore of Religion that are an honour unto God, must be commanded by God himself: and to bring in such Ceremonies into his worship as are no honour to him, is to mock God. 9. All Religious Ceremonies or Ceremonies of Religion, are spiritual, that is, are ordained for spiritual uses and ends, and not for civil or temporal, and therefore are outward notes and testimonies of those things that make us spiritual men, and they are parts of spiritual honour due unto spiritual authority and Lordship. 10. All spiritual Lords may claim as their due, spiritual worship, and therefore may institute religious Ceremonies: for look what difference there is between humane and divine, Temporal and Spiritual, the same difference there is between the peculiar worship due to the one, and to the other: if therefore Temporal Lords may require all civil rites and honors, Spiritual Lords may require all Divine and Spiritual Rites and honors. 11. Civil honor and reverence only, cannot nor ought not to please a Spiritual Lord, hence it is that the Spiritual Lords of our Church cannot content themselves with such honor that we give to civil Magistrates and Princes, but we must obey them in peculiar religious duties and services; and surely it is meet that if there be any such besides Christ, that we performe spiritual homage unto them, and they are not worthy that high style that will be content with temporalls, when spiritualls are due. 12. Those Ceremonies that are enjoined by true spiritual Lords, are truly spiritual and holy, even as spiritual and holy as the Sacraments, though they consist of some things in their own nature indifferent; and those Lords are not spiritual, that are not able
by their sole authority and word, to hallow that which before was not holy. 13. Those that can make a Surplice, a Cope, a Cross, &c. to be ornaments of Religion and holy Ceremonies: can, when it plea∣seth them, make a shaven Crown, a Monks habit, spittle in Baptism, holy Water, the triple Crown, and all the Missal Rites as holy. For they are all of the same nature: And those that can find no reason to prove those unholy and unlawful, would find none to prove any other external Rite to be so, if they should in the same manner be imposed. 14. Those that have power upon their own will and pleasure to bring into Gods Service some indifferent thing, may bring in anyFor all in∣different things are of the same na∣ture. indifferent thing: those that may bring in without special warrant from God, pyping into his Service, might as well bring in dancing also; those that have authority to joyn to the Sacrament of Bap∣tism the sign of the Cross, have authority also (no doubt) to joyn to the Sacrament of the Supper, Flesh, Broth, Butter or Cheese, and worse matters than those, if they will. Yea, those that have power to make peculiar forms of Religion and Worship, have power to make and invent a Religion and Worship of their own. CHAP. VI. Of Divine Worship in special, and first of true Worship. THus much of Divine Worship in general, both Inward and Outward, and of Ceremonies, wherein Outward Worship especially consisteth. Now let us in special consider the same. Divine Worship therefore is either true Worship or false. 2. True Worship is that immediate service that the true God himself requireth to be performed unto himself. In the exercise whereof consisteth true holiness and Religion. 3. True Worship both for matter and manner, ought to be ac∣cording to the prescript rule of Gods Word only: Neither hath any mortal man authority to frame according to his own conceit, any form or fashion of Gods Service and Worship; for the man∣ner of Worship also must be holy, and not the matter only; and no man hath power to make any thing holy, that God halloweth not by his Word and Spirit.
4. All civil furtherances and necessary circumstances of Gods solemn Worship, though they be not essentiall parts of the same, nor by special Nomination commanded: Yet are they to be estee∣med Ordinances of God, and not humane inventions. As God ha∣ving ordained that this Saints dwelling together, both Men, Women and Children, of all sorts and degrees, should ordinarily at ap∣pointed times meet together, it must needs be presupposed to be his Ordinance that they meet together in some such ordinary pla∣ces, as are fittest for to receive most commodiously such Assemblies: So God having ordained that his Ministers should preach or pro∣claim salvation to a multitude gathered together, and that they should sit at his feet, hath also ordained that the Ministers seat should be higher than the rest of the Peoples; and the like may be said of all other such Circumstances of Divine Worship, which are matters of so base and low consideration, and so subject to com∣mon sence, that it neither beseemeth the majesty of the Word of God in special, or humane authority derived from God, to make any Laws in particular about them; no more than to make Laws that one should not fit in the Congregation upon anothers lap, or one spit upon anothers cloaths, or face: or that men should not make antick faces in the Church. CHAP. VII. Of False Worship. THus much of true Worship. False Worship is such a service of God as hath no warrant from God himself: Worship is false in matter or manner in whole or in part; neither can the true matter of Worship sanctifie a corrupt manner, or the true manner sanctifie a corrupt matter, or some parts of true Worship, or the whole it self, sanctifie any part of false Worship that shall be ad∣joyned to it, or mingled with it. 2. Whatsoever is unholy and superstitious out of Gods solemn Service, cannot be made by the sole appointment and will of man holy and good in the solemn Service of God, but must needs be more unholy and superstitious therein, and therefore a part of false Wor∣ship. If for a man to sign himself or another in the forehead with the sign of the Cross out of Baptism, be superstitious and unholy, it can∣not
be good in Baptism, but a prophane rite. 3. The more light and to toyish the things seem to be that without warrant from God, are brought into the Worship of God, the more we should abhor conformity unto them, it being a fearful presump∣tion, to serve God in a toyish manner: for who is he that trembles at the Majesty of God, that dares use in his Worship any toy and trifle? They are deceived therefore that think that therefore we should not make scruple to use them because they are toyes. 4. That is a corrupt manner of Worship wherein there is con∣fusion and undecency, for all things must be done in the Service of God in decency, order and comliness, as it is granted; and under the name whereof these Ceremonies are obtruded upon us: But those things that are undecent and disorderly in other matters, and of no necessary use in Gods Worship, cannot be matters of order and decency in the Service of God, except God himself should in a special manner command them. 5. It being therefore confusion and disorder in civil matters where a multitude joyns together in a common suit and supplicati∣on for all to speak at once the same words: And common wisdom and discretion having taught it to be a decent and orderly Cere∣mony, that some foreman should speak, and the rest hold their peace, giving only some sign and testimony of assent: He must be more than a man, that must make it an orderly thing in our general and ordinary suits and prayers to God, for all the Congregation to open their mouths together in a prayer, especially sith God hath in spe∣cial appointed the Minister to be the mouth of the People, and expressely requireth the assent of the People only in the word, Amen. 6. It being a ridiculous disorder in other matters in any solem∣nity, where any Deed or Record is to be read or rehearsed, for one to read one period, and another read or say another; how can it by mans wit and will, without Ordinance from God, be a matter of order, for the Minister to read one verse of Scripture, and the Peo∣ple another; for the Minister to say one piece of a Prayer, and the People, by way of catch, to say anoher. 7. If any thing be undecent out of the Worship of God (the same reason of undecency remaining) it is much more undecent in the Worship of God; for the more excellent the thing is, in which n undecent thing is used, the more undecent the thing is that is so used. As if it be undecent to go naked in any company, it is much
more undecent to go so in the Congregation: If foul apparel be every where else undecent, it cannot be decent in Gods Service, though all the Bishops in the world should decree it. 8. An undecent and disorderly thing the more strictly it is urged in the Service of God, the more dangerous it is to yield unto the same, and so much the more effectual cause of false Worship. 9. If there be some apparel that doth in special manner become the Service of God, and deserves to be appropriated unto it, then by the same position there must be some apparel that doth deform and disgrace the Service and Worship of God: for if no apparel can deform it, then no apparel can be an ornament or decent form un∣to it. 10. If any apparel do deform Gods true Worship, it is that appa∣rel that doth most beautifie and grace the false and Idolatrous wor∣ship of God: As that apparel must needs most deform a wise man that doth most adorn a fool, and that apparel must needs be most unbeseeming a King, that is seemly and decent for a beggar. 11. If therefore men would set their wits upon the highest strain to invent an apparel to disgrace the Ministers of the Gospel, they could not invent a more odious attire than the consecrated attire of a filthy Mass-Priest, the most abominable Idolater in the earth. 12. Those that abhor Idolatry as much as they do beggary and folly, cannot but hate and abhor the badges of Idolatry as much as the badges of folly and beggary, and therefore cannot but account that Priestly attire that is enjoyned unto us by our Prelates, an ap∣parel more unbeseeming the Minister of the Gospel, than a Cloak with a thousand patches, or a coat with four elbows, for beggary and folly being judgements and not sins, the notes of beggary and folly cannot be so odious in a spiritual eye, as the notes of Idolatry. 13. If it be denied, that the apparel enjoyned is Popish, because it was before Popery was; this answer may be made. 1. It can ne∣ver be proved that it was before Popery. For though not all Popery, yet some Popery was in the Apostles times: Most of the Heresies were before the full revealing of Antichrist, which notwithstanding we fasten upon them and count popish, they having entertained them. If therefore an errour, maintained before Popery, and re∣tained by Papists, deserve the name of a popish errour, why should not unnecessary apparel, though used before, yet entertained now only by them, and those that receive it from them, bear the name
of Popish attire? 2. As a coat of divers colours is a fools coat, notwithstanding that Joseph, one of the twelve Patriarkes, wore one, so a white linnen garment is a popish garment, though some Ministers in the East Churches did wear them, and yet it can never be proved, that either they wore such a one as is prescribed unto us, or that it was a ministerial garment, and not their ordinary civil at∣tire, or proper to the Minister only, or if all this, that it was well done: for there being no one Father that wrote since the Apostles times, but have erred in some matters of Doctrine, why may they not as well erre in matters of Ceremony? if all the true Churches of God, beside our own in England, and the greatest part of the sufficientest Pastors of our own Church, are held to erre in the ge∣neral renouncing of these Ceremonies; Why might not some few Ministers in the Old Church as well erre in instituting and using them? 14. A corrupt and scandalous Ceremony in the Worship of God is so much the more dangerous and scandalous to others, by how much the more it comes graced and countenanced with lawful au∣thority. A corrupt Ceremony enjoyned by a Heathenish Pagan and Tyrant unto the Ministers of the Gospel living under his jurisdicti∣on, cannot do so much spiritual hurt, as when it shall be required by a Christian Magistrate, for the good conceit of the institutor and ordainor of a religious Rite, is it that breeds Superstition. Those therefore whose special calling from God is, to edifie the souls of men and not to destroy them, ought so much the more to avoid these Ceremonies they judge and know to be scandalous and hurt∣ful to the souls of men, by how much the greater grace and counte∣nance they receive from the Authority of man, neither can the com∣mandment of the Magistrate be a sufficient plea at the bar of Gods Judgment Seat for a man that by vertue or force thereof alone, hath done any action (how indifferent soever in it self) that his con∣science tels him will scandalize his brother, and so hurt his soul; gross therefore is the Doctrine of them that teach, That Paul (if the Magistrate had commanded him) should have eaten flesh, though his brothers soul should have been damned for it. 15. The more indifferent an action is in it self, the more odious it ought to be unto us when we shall perceive it to hurt our brothers soul, which ought to be a thousand times dearer unto us than his body, or our own lives, for he shews neither love nor mercy to his brother, that had rather be the instrument of his everlasting dam∣nation,
than omit the doing of a meer indifferent thing, though he should incur therefore any bodily punishment whatsoever. That Form therefore of Gods Service that consists in the use of such things indifferent, as experience manifesteth, are a scandal (and by consequent a destruction) to the souls of infinite numbers, ought not to be used of any, much less of those who are called by Christ to feed the souls of men, and not to destroy them. How scandalous these Ceremonies are to all, how the omission of them cannot be scanda∣lous to any, but unto such as are worse scandalized already by em∣bracing them, requires a larger Treatise. 16. No Magistrate that is a Christian will challenge authority to destroy the soul of any man, and therefore he cannot upon his own meer will and pleasure, without sin against God, enjoyn any thing (not required by God) that evidently tendeth to the destruction of any mans soul; and those subjects that (being ready to perform any duty that God requireth unto the Magistrate) shall refuse to do any such thing so required, and shall patiently and meekly yield them∣selves to any punishment the Magistrate shall think good to lay up∣on them without resistance, shallA patient suffering, when we cannot in conscience obey, is the best obedience. perform more true and loyal obedience unto his authority therein, then any of those that shall yield obedience to any Laws of that kind enacted by never so good a Magistrate, and (in shew) to never so good an end. 17. No subject therefore can take any such authority from the hands of the Magistrate, which may warrant him to do any thing that shall evidently destroy his brothers soul at any time, much less in the Service and Worship of God wherein all things that are to be done, ought to tend to the edification of his soul in a special manner. 18. It is plain in the Word of God, that the Kingdom of God, (that is) the Service and Worship of God, standeth not in meats and drinks, nor any such external Rites having no authority from God. When therefore without any commandment from God, such external things shall be brought into the Service of God, and made the very forms of the same; such Rites must needs be false Wor∣ship, and that form of Gods Service must needs be adulterate, that is made to consist in such things. For no authority can make that a part of Gods Kingdom, that the word of God doth expresly deny to be a part thereof. 19. Those Ceremonies therefore in present controversie being meerly by man brought into the Worship of God, are by no means
to be yielded unto, for it is in effect to make the Kingdom of God to consist in meats and drinks, or in such like things. For if man hath authority to make the Kingdom of God consist in apparel, &c. he hath also authority, if it please him, to make it consist in eating and drinking, and may make them a part of the Lyturgie, as well as any of those things that are in controversie. 20. Those peculiar Rites and Ceremonies which are in that manner and form used in the Service of God, that if God himself did but ratifie and confirm, that present use of them should then be parts of his true outward worship, must needs, as they are used, (without Gods Ordinance) be parts of a false outward worship: But our Surplices, Crosses, Kneeling at the Lords Supper, &c. are such, that if God should but command to use them as we use them, that is, if he should require every Minister in Divine Service to wear a Surplice, to note Joy, Dignity or Sanctity, or in Baptism to cross a child, in sign, &c. N, though he should express no use at all, but barely enjoyn the things themselves to be used in his Ser∣vice, yet they should be parts of Gods true outward worship; for whatsoever God tieth in a peculiar manner to his worship, is a part thereof. These Ceremonies therefore, in controversie having such a use in the Service of God, unto which they are peculiarly tied, must needs be used as parts of Divine worship, for else the bare ratifying of their present use could not make them true worship; Being therefore (as they are used) parts of Divine Worship, and not parts of true Divine Worship, because not commanded of God; they are parts of false Divine VVorship, for that Divine VVorship that is not true VVorship, is false VVorship. FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE NATURE & USE OF Things Indifferent. Tending to prove, That the CEREMONIES in pre∣sent Controversie amongst the Ministers of the Gospel in the Realm of England, are neither in Nature or Use Indifferent. Joh. 18.23. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evill: but if I have spoken well, why smitest thou me? Mat. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely; Rejoyce and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you. Printed in the Year, 1660.
The Printer to the Reader. A Copy of this Treatise by the providence of God coming into my hand, I thought it behooful for my Country-men, that they should be made acquainted with it, that by means thereof they might receive some light of the truth for which so many suffer. The Author, whosoever he is, hath little cause to be offended with it; The pains he hath taken in it doth perswade me, that he cannot but desire the same in it self, though danger, and want of means, might hinder him from publishing it; But howsoever (good Reader) accept it as a Testimony of my Vows for the good of my Country, the Weal whereof shall ever possess me, though I can∣not possess it. Farewel.
A Treatise OF Things Indifferent. CHAP. I. Of Things Indifferent in general. A Thing Indifferent (in the largest extent of sense) is any Mean between two Extreams. 2. Extreams (properly) are the uttermost bounds and limits of any thing, being in direct opposition one unto the other. 3. To be a Mean between two Extreams, is so to be seated be∣tween them, as that it stand equally affected to either, enclining no more to the one than to the other. 4. Hence the Latines call things indifferent, Res mediae (middle matters) and that by reason of that analogy and proportion that is between them, and those things that in Physical or Mathemati∣cal Dimensions possesse the middle place in any line, figure or body: For, that is properly called the middle of any thing, that in positi∣on being as near as can be to both extreams, enclineth no more to the one than to the other, but is alike equally distant from both. 5. And they are therefore called things indifferent, because in their relation to those Extreams between which they are seated, and unto which they are referred, they stand indifferently disposed, and affected to either; whence of the Greeks they are called Adia∣phora,
unto which our English term doth precisely answer. For, as that is just the middle of a line, that leaveth on both sides so much to either extream, that there is in respect of it no difference between the one and the other; but unto it, both are equal and alike: So those things are called Indifferent properly, that with∣out any difference, do equally agree unto, or dissent from those Extreams, unto which they have reference and relation. 6. By all this it may appear that things Indifferent, are not such simply in themselves and of themselves considered, but as they are compared and have relation to the said opposite extreams, as the Center in a circle, considered in it self and by it self, is not the middle of any thing, but only as it hath reference to the opposite extreams in the Circumference: from any of which it is equally distant, and in that respect only, is it called the mean or middle of such a figure. 7. The very essence therefore of a thing indifferent, consists in that equal and indifferent reference and relation that it hath to some two opposite terms or extreams, unto which either in sence or rea∣son it is compared, and by which only it is measured. So that it is in the number of those things that in Schools are called Relatives, all which have only but an accidental being, the Subjects thereof being variable, according to the divers references and respects that they have unto divers things. For as a man simply considered in himself, is neither Husband, Father, nor Master, but only in re∣spect of Wife, Child and Servant. And as the same man in di∣vers respects may be a Father and a Son, a Master and a Servant: So nothing is in and of it self indifferent, but only in relation and reference to some opposite extreams: And those things which in some such respect may be indifferent, in some other respect may be Extreams. CHAP. II. Of things more commonly called indifferent. 1. THough things Indifferent may in that former generality, spread themselves to any mediocrity whatsoever: Yet Custom the Mistresse of all speech and language, hath restrained and limitted the name to such things only, as are a Mean between
good and evil. So that (to omit what in rigorous propriety of speech may be comprehended under the name that is given unto them) In common use of speech, a thing indifferent is only any mediocrity between good and evil. 2. The proper Extreams therefore of things indifferent, being good and evil, they cannot (retaining the nature of their indiffe∣rence) communicate or partake of either; for whatsoever standeth equally affected to good and evil, cannot in that affection, have in it either good or evil: It being impossible, that either of the ex∣treams should be found in the Mean, without destruction of the na∣ture thereof. 3. Whatsoever then void of all evil,Such they say are our Ce∣remonies. For those things are good that are decent, or∣derly & means of edification. participateth but the least measure of good; or void of all good, partaketh but theSuch we say and have pro∣ved the Cere∣monies to be. least de∣gree of evil, cannot bear the name of a thing indifferent: for there can be no indifferency in that, which inclineth more to the one extream, than to the other. 4. A thing indifferent therefore being a mean, between good and evil, it isSo are not these Ceremo∣nies. so seated between them, that it is as far removed from good, as a thing not evil can be; and as far removed from evil as a thing not good can be, and as near unto good and evil, as any thing can be, that is neither good nor evil. So that what∣soever is Indifferent, is neither good nor evil, whatsoever is either good or evil, is not indifferent, whatsoever is not indifferent is either good or evil. 5. Things Indifferent being equally divided from good and evil, are in like manner divided from all the properties of either; For every property being unseparable from that subject, from the na∣ture whereof it springeth, no one can be communicated to any thing, but unto that, unto which the subject it self communica∣teth it self: If therefore the property of any Extream be found in a thing Indifferent, the Extream it self is to be found likewise therein. Which to imagin, is as absurd, as to look to find the Circumference of a Circle in the Center. 6. No indifferent thing therefore as it is an indifferent thing,But they say that the Cere∣monies in con∣troversie have. For that which is a grace and ornament to good, maketh the better. hath power to make any thing good or evil, better or worse: For it is the property only of good and evil, either to make or increase good or evil in any thing. 7. ThatBut such are the ceremo∣nies in contro∣versie. which doth more hurt or good, than some things that are good or evil, is not indifferent, but either good or evil: for nothing but good can exceed in goodness that which is good; and
nothing but evil, can exceed in hurt, that which is evil. 8. WhatsoeverThis do the ceremonies in controversie. worketh upon any affection of man, stirring up in him love, hatred, delight, sorrow, zeal, malice, envy, jealousie, hope, fear, &c. cannot be apprehended as a thing indifferent, by him in whom these passions are wrought. For it is the property only of those things that present themselves as good or evil, to beget and move such passions in the soul of man. For it is impossible that a thing indifferent apprehended as a thing indifferent should beget any thing in the soul of man but Indifferency, and a Stoical apa∣thy or sencelesseness: So that whatsoever aAs our Pre∣lates do the ce∣remonies. man intirely loveth and delighteth in, admireth, commendeth, pursueth with zeal, commandeth with authority. Whatsoever also a man shall abhor, condemn, forbid, punish, persecute, he cannot in any sincerity affirm, that he judgeth that thing to be indifferent, but to be in some degree either good or evil. 9. The omission of that is indifferent, the commission whereof is indifferent: and that whoseSuch is the omission of our ceremonies said to be, and that in a high degree. omission is evil, is certainly good. 10. All the former Premises considered, this must needs follow, ThatTo command our ceremo∣nies is to com∣mand as they say, a great good, yea a publick com∣mon good. to command a thing indifferent, is to command no good; to forbid a thing indifferent, is to forbid no evil.But to use the ceremo∣nies is to do much good, if they edify the soul. To do a thing indifferent, is to do no good: To forbear a thing indiffe∣rentNone are more spitefully intreated than those that for∣bear these ce∣remonies, and therefore sure therein they do much evil. is to do no evil. And therefore to punish for a thing indif∣ferent, is to punish for no evil. CHAP. III. Of things Indifferent in special. 1. THE Essence of things Indifferent, consisting in a meer and equal privation of Good and Evil, there cannot be given any true kinds or degrees of them: For all privatives considered in themselves, are of the same nature. 2. Though there be no true kinds of them, yet they may be va∣ried according to the diversity of those Extreams with which they are compared: And therefore may be distinguished according to the common distinctions of good and evil. 3. That good that hath not an evil opposite unto it in the same kind, cannot be the Extream of any thing Indifferent, and therefore
cannot vary, distinguish, or denominate a thing indifferent. As, if there be not an opposite colour unto white, then it is impossible to imagine how white should be an extream to any other colour, or any other colour a mean unto it. 4. That which is properly a mean, must agree with the extreams in all things in which the extreams do agree: for Example, If black and white be both of them colours, that which is properly a mean between black and white must be a colour also; for it were absurd to call any thing but a colour, a mean between black and white: so that the mean followes the common natures and qualities of both the extreams, for as it is said before, That onely is a mean that is not only equally distant from two extreams, but withall is as neer to both as may be, which cannot be verified of that mean that shall not be found to agree with the extreams in those things wherein the extreams do agree within themselves, and therefore things indifferent follow their extreams. As therefore that cannot be an extream that hath not in the same kind an opposite, so that can be no medium to any extreams, that doth dissent from them in that wherein they shall accord and agree. So that that denomination and predication that belongs to both extreams, belongs also to their mean. The mean between two opposite Qualities is a quality; between two substances, a substance; between two actions an action; between two goods a good; between two evils an evil; between two quantities a quantity, &c. 5. Hence it will follow, that noAll substan∣ces therefore are indifferent only by acci∣dent, in respect of some use. substance (as it is a substance) can be called a thing indifferent, because that there is no substance that is evil as it is a substance. For an indifferent substance, must needs (if there were any such) be a mean between a good and an evil substance. If then there be no evil substances, it cannot be imagined how there should be any indifferent. 6. The like may be said of allAs also of all artificial which imitate natures. created species and kindes of things, considered not only in their substances, but qualities and dispositions. For the voice of God pronouncing them all to be good, none of them are evil: and if none of them be evil, none are indifferent. For indifferent created things can have no place, either real, or imaginative, but between a created good, and a created evil. There is therefore no Creature of God, nor no created property or quality of any creature, that is by creation a Thing Indifferent. 7. Also upon the said grounds it appears, that there is no
And therefore there cannot be made an absolute and perpetual law concerning any thing, under the name of indifferent; for a law bindeth only to good, and punisheth for evil: and therefore to imagine a law that bindeth to the doing of a thing indifferent, when that thing indifferent turns evil, as the most indifferent thing may, then the force of the law ceaseth. absolute Indifferent thing, because there is nothing in nature either absolutely good, or absolutely evil: In being impossible that any thing should be an absolute Mean, whose extreams are not absolute, for where one extream is absolute, and the other not absolute, the Mean cannot be absolute; for if it be, it enclineth more to one extream than the other, which is to destroy the nature of a thing indifferent. CHAP. IV. Of the first Distinction of Things Indifferent. 1. THings Indifferent therefore, being to be distinguished according to those distinctions of Good and Evil that are equally common to them both, we are in the next place distinctly to propound the same, and by them accordingly to distinguish the other. 2. First therefore Good and Evil is such, either in appearance only, or indeed also. Whence ariseth the first distinction of things indifferent, for accordingly some things are indifferent in appearance only, some indeed. 3. A Thing indifferent in appearance only, is that which is a mean between that Good and EvilConsider whe∣ther the mysti∣cal Rites of an Idolatrous Religion and Worship, be not at least an evil in appearance and shew, and therefore cannot be so much as in appearance indifferent. that is in shew and appearance only. For that appeareth to be indifferent, that being good or evil indeed, appeareth or seemeth to be neither. 4. A thing indifferent indeed, is that which is a Mean between those things that are in truth and verity Good or Evil. So that such an indifferent is void of all true good,If our Ce∣remonies were such, the Devil and Anti∣christ, and all superstitious and lewd persons would not so much dote upon them, and the hearts of so many learned and godly men would not burn against them as they do. and evil. 5. As that which is good in appearance only, is indeed either
evil or indifferent, and that which is evil in appearance only, is indeed either good or indifferent; and that which is indifferent in appearance only, is indeed either good or evil: So that which is indifferent indeed, is in truth, neither good nor evil. 6. AsIf Turcisme, Judaisme, Pa∣gnisme, and the grosest I∣dolatry that ever was a∣mongst the Heathen were established by that law and authority that these Ceremo∣nies are, any point or parcel thereof might be maintained by the same or the like grounds, that Mr. Hooker, Covel, Wilk s, maintain the Indifferency of these Ceremonies: And there is no Article of Faith and Religion, but (by the same method that the Surveyor useth against the Discipline of other Reformed Churches) it may be traduced and oppugned as most odious, grosse, and impious. the grossest evil may by means of some counterfeit or shadow cast upon it, be in appearance the greatest good, and the greatest good may be disguised, and in shew transformed into the greatest evil: So with much more facility may either of them by the wit of man have cast upon them the formes of things indifferent. So that there must be special heed taken that we admit not of all things as indifferent indeed, that present themselves to us under that name and shape: Florentines can disguise and colour any thing; and it is now adayes the common exercise of the greatest wits of the world to transforme Good into Evil, Evil into Good, and both into indifferent; so that in these dayes scant any thing is as it appears, or appears as it is. CHAP. V. The second Distinction of Things Indifferent. 1. GOod and Evil is either Internal or External, according to which difference ariseth a second Distinction of Things Indifferent. 2. An External Indifferent is whatsoever hath in it neither outward good norSome of our state Divines think all exter∣nal things indifferent: which shews that they that talk most of them, know least what they are. evil. 3. An Internal Indifferent, is whatsoever hath in it neither inward goodWhat inward hurt and evil is in these Ceremonies they best know, that are best acquainted with the state of their flock. nor evil. 4. SomethingThe Doctors of Oxford ask what hurt can a wise man see in a square Cap, and a Surplice? Indeed there is no outward hurt or evil in it; but it must be considered, whether there be not any inward hurt therein; for if it can be proved, that by them the soules of many are poysoned with superstitious conceits, then it is apparent that they have inward hurt in them. External Indifferent may have in it internal good or evil; and some things internally Indifferent may have in them outward Good or Evil.
CHAP VI. Of the third distinction of Things Indifferent. 1. THirdly, Good and Evil is either of it self or by accident: which also make the 3d Distinction of things Indifferent. 2. An Indifferent by accident is a mean between those Extreams thatIf it can be proved that these Ceremo∣nies are but evil by acci∣dent, (they be∣ing not good of themselves) it is enough to argue that they are evil, and not indifferent. For, if many things that are good in them∣selves be to be forborne, when by some acci∣dent they do hurt, much more ought a thing indiffe∣rent when it hunteth, though but by accident. are Good and Evil by accident, and not of themselves: for, that must needs be only accidentally indifferent, whose Extreams (by which it is limited and defined) are but accidentally Good or Evil: So that whatsoever is Indifferent only in relation of some accidental Good or Evil, is Indifferent not of it self, but by accident. 4.Ergo, There is nothing absolutely Indifferent (as our Divines of State dream) but by some circumstance of time, place, person, use, it may e ither very good, or very evil. There is nothing so Good of it self, but it may be made Evil by accident; nothing so evil of it self but it may become good by accident: Nothing so good or evil but it may become indifferent by accident; nothing so indifferent of it self but it may become good or evil by accident. 5. Unto this head may be referred such things as are Indifferent by comparison; for, as there are some things good simply, that are evil in comparison, and some things evil simply, that are good in comparison; so also there is some good and evil, that in comparison with others is indifferent. CHAP. VII. Of a fourth Distinction of things Indifferent. 1. THings are good or evil, either Actively or Potentially: So are also Things Indifferent. 2. A thing Actually Indifferent, is that which hath in it neither actual good nor hurt. 3. A thing Potentially Indifferent, is that which in act doth either hurt or good, though in possibility it may do neither.
4. There is nothing actually Indifferent but is potentially good orA possibility of evil in a thing indiffe∣rent, maketh it evil and worthy to be removed. Nature teacheth to prevent evils, and a man cannot do lesse in the prevention thereof, than to leave off a thing in it self indifferent, which doth no good, and may do hurt. evil: There is nothing potentially only indifferent, but it is actually either good or evil. Therefore there is nothing absolutely Indifferent. CHAP. VIII. Of the fifth Distinction of Things Indifferent. 1. LAstly, Good and Evil is either Corporall, in respect of the body; or Spiritual, in respect of the minde; In which respect Things Indifferent do alwayes vary. 2. A Thing Indifferent in respect of the body, is any such thing that applyed to the body, doth it neither good nor hurt. As that which maketh a man neither rich nor poor, strong nor weak, beautifull nor deformed, hungry nor yet satisfied, sick nor healthy, &c. 3. That may be GoodCircumstances of time and place do also vary the things of this kind exceedingly. For that in some time, and some place, is indifferent to some body, that in another place, and at another time is good or evil. to the body in one respect, that is Evil in another, & contrà; and that may be indifferent unto it in one respect, that is good or evil in another: Also that may be good or evil to one part of the body that is indifferent to another part: And a thing may be indifferent to one, that is good or evil to another. 4. A thing indifferent in respect of the minde or soul, is whatso∣ever having reference and relation to the soul,Either indeed or appearance of it self, or accident, actually or potentially. doth it neither good nor hurt. 5. The Goods and Evils of soul, are either dispositions, qualities, or habits in the soul, or such actions as proceed from them, As thoughts, words, deeds; all which are called moral. A Moral good is whatsoever in Man or from man is agreeable and correspondent to the Law of Nature, Reason, or the Divine Law of God revealed supernaturally in his word; unto this head are to be referred, all true wisdom, knowledg, understanding, providence, discretion, and all actions flowing from the same; Also all Moral vertues, as, Justice, Temperance, Holiness, &c. with all the Actions proceeding from them, all which are squared and ruled by some or other of the
former Laws. A Moral evil is whatsoever is any waies repugnant (whether in general or particular) to any of those former Laws. As Ignorance, Folly, Injustice, Intemperance, &c. with all Actions pro∣ceeding from them. 6. Those things are in a Moral respect indifferent (whether they be Qualities, Inclinations, Habits or Actions) That have in themSee cha. 8. sect 4. marg. neither vertue nor vice. Herein such Actions of mans will are most frequent, that are neither commanded nor forbidden in the Word of God. 7. There is no Action of mans will so indifferentSo that (by Mr. Hookers fa∣vour) a man may by taking up a straw or a rush commit a Moral vice. For example, if he should use to do it in the time of prayer. but the doing thereof (by some circumstance) may be repugnant to the Law of God, and by consequent be hurtful to the soul of man. 8. An Action that in some one respect unto someone special Law, is Indifferent, in respect of some other Law may be Good or Evil. As that action may be either Religious or Superstitious, that hath in it neither Temperancy nor Intemperancy. 9. Any action done by man that is not commandedSuch are the Ceremonies in Controversie: They are no where in gene∣ral or special commanded, no more then the shaven on crown and ho∣ly water, and yet they have been and are the special means and occasion of the Schism of many hundred Brownists. Of much superstition in ma∣ny thousand ignorant Protestants, and of confirmation of many infinites of wlful Papists in their Idolatry, as is most evident. Also, (if it be a sin to dislike our Lords spiritual) there is no one greater cause that moveth those that the prophane call Puritans to do it, then these Cere∣monies, which if they might be freed from, as all other reformed Churches are, there is no other Civil obedience or subjection due unto them, that they would refuse to perform, in as low a degree as any other whatsoever. by God, either expresly or by direct consequent, that is a means either of it self or by accident of any hurt either to the body or soul of a mans self, or of his Neighbour, either by bringing evill into them, or nourishing or encreasing evill in them, cannot bear the name of an Indifferent action; For there is no indifferency in that▪ which be∣ing not required of God (and therefore is not Good) doth hurt (any waies) a man: which must needs be against the Law of God. For the sum of the Law of God being the love of God and our Neighbour, and love aiming only at the good of the loved: That action, that (besides the Law) doth any hurt to any, must either have an exception in the Law, or else be against it, and then it cannot be indifferent. 10. Moral Actions, whether vertues or vices, respect eiher God immediatly, or our selves or our Neighbour, as is intimated before. So do also all indifferent Actions.
11. That Action is indifferent in respect of God, that doth nei∣ther advance nor obscure the glory of God: For this is the only good or Evil we can do unto God. 12. There is no ActionWhat honour receiveth God by our Cere∣monies? It is certain that Antichrist re∣ceiveth great honour by them. that a man can do by the power of his will, but either in it self, or by accident, it doth either glorifie or dishonour God, and therefore no action, in respect of God, is meer∣ly and absolutely indifferent, but thereby God receiveth some ho∣nour or dishonour. 13. All Actions of Religion (amongst whichSuch are the Ceremonies and Rites that are peculiarly acted in Divine Worship, if they be good and lawful. those are special that are peculiarly done in Divine Service) are (if they be as they ought to be) in a special manner good, tending more directly to the glory of God than any other Actions, therefore no Action of Religion, whether it be Moral or Ceremoniall, is indifferent, but either good or evil. 14. No Action of Religion, whether Moral or Ceremonial,Such are our Ceremonies else they are not indifferent. grounded only upon the will of man, and not upon the Word of God, can bring any special glory to God, and therefore no such Act can be an Act of Religion, but of Superstition, and therefore cannot be indifferent. 15. There being some mystical Ceremonies of Religion Good, and some Evil. If there be any mystical Ceremonies indifferent, they must then in some special and material point differ from the Evil, even as far as from the good. But there is no mystical Rite of Re∣ligionCrossing in Baptism being no more com∣manded, nor no less forbid∣den then brea∣thing upon the child, or a∣nointing, which are re∣jected as evill. It must needs come nearer to these, than it doth to Bap∣tism which is commanded. but doth come many degrees nearer to the evil than to the good. And therefore there can be no mystical Rite of Religion indifferent. 16. An evil Ceremony of Religion being therefore only evil because it is forbidden of God: A good Ceremony of religion is therefore only a good Ceremony because it is commanded of God: and tht must be an indifferent Ceremony that is neither forbidden nor commanded: But all Ceremonies in Religion that are not good, are evil, and therefore there are no indifferent Ceremonies of Religion. 17. As no man by his sole will can make that Ceremony good in Divine Worship that God forbiddeth to be done therein, or make that evil that God commandeth to be done therein. So can he not make that which is but indifferent to be good: For he can∣not make that to be commanded of God that is forbidden of God; Or that which (though it be not forbidden) is not commanded: If therefore what Ceremony of Religion soever is good be com∣manded
of God; and if every Ceremony of Religion ought to be good, and if whatsoever Ceremony is commanded of God is not Indifferent, hence it will follow: That no Ceremony of Religion is indifferent. 18. Thus much of Actions indifferent having reference to God. Those actions of man are indifferent in respect of a mans self, or his neighbour, that being committed, bring neither moral hurt nor good unto himself, or them. For those actions are evill to the doer, and such as hurt his soul, that are a means of bringing either upon himself or upon his neighbour any evill forbidden. And those acti∣ons are good to his soul, that are a means of affecting with any good commanded himself or his neighbour. 19. Whatsoever therefore, doing a man no good, is a means ei∣ther toBut we shall be ready to prove, that such is the Law that re∣quires these Ceremonies. take from a man any good thing that God hath freely granted unto him, as Life, Health, Liberty, Name, honesty, Piety, &c. Or to bring upon a man that evil that God otherwise withholdeth from him, that cannot be indifferent. 20. All such humane Laws therefore, thatMuch more those Laws that lay greater penalties upon the omission of some Indiffe∣rent than the omission of the greatest good, or commission of the grossest evil, as do the Canons and Laws that require these Ceremonies. upon any penalties, bind men to those things that are confessed indifferent, which are such things as God hath left to the free liberty of man to do, or not toThis hindereth not, but that the Magistrate may, and ought (if it be for the good of the Commonweal) command fish daies, and such like the neglect whereof may do much hurt, and the observation much good, for in such cases eating of fish and flesh is not a thing indif∣ferent, but that which men stand bound either to forbear, or to do according to the Civil Laws of Magistrates. do, is a depriving of men of that liberty that God hath gran∣ted unto them, and therefore such a Law is neither good nor indif∣ferent, but evil to the soul of him that enacteth it, though not of him that obeyeth it. For it is no indifferency in any man to take that away from a man that God hath freely given unto him. 21. All moral actions of men that are good or evill, are either private, or common and publike: The common and publike are either Domestical, Political, or Ecclesiastical. Actions also in their Indifferency may vary according to their divers references to these. 22. A private good or evil action, is that which affecteth with good or evill only a mans own person that doth it, and which spreadeth not to the good or hurt of any other (except secondarily and by ac∣cident) as he that eateth and drinketh) doth himself only good
properly: Though secondarily and by accident, he may, in that strength he receiveth, thereby do his Family or the Common∣wealth good. 23. That action is indifferent, in respect of a mans private self, that doth his own private Person any good or hurt. 24. Those Domestical, Political, Ecclesiastical actions are good or evil, that tend to the good or hurt of a Family, Commonwealth, or Church; and those are indifferent, that, being done, do bring neither good nor hurt, or as much good as hurt unto any of the said Societies. 25. That may be good, evil, or indifferent to a private person, as he is a private person, that is not so unto a Family, Common∣wealth or Church, or unto him, as he is a member of all or any of them. 26. That may be Indifferent to be done by a Family, or the Commonwealth, as it is such, That is evil and not indifferent to be done by a Church. That may be indifferent to one member of a House, Church, or Commonwealth, that is not indifferent to ano∣ther; that may be lawful or indifferent for the Church to do in one place, and at some one time, that is unlawful in another place, and at another time. 27. All which premises, or the most of them, being granted, it will easily appear, to any that can rightly apply these principles and ge∣neral assertions, that the Ceremonies, in present controversie in our Church, are not (as is pretended by the forcers of them) meer∣ly indifferent, but either excellent parts of our Religion, or noto∣rious parts of Superstition. FINIS.
Summa Summae. The Prelates to the afflicted Mini∣sters in this Realm. Let them prove this as∣sumption but by one Argu∣ment, and we will yield. But it is to be no∣ted, That the Prelates still take all things contained therein as granted and without que∣stion, whereas we have pro∣ved and offer to prove the contrary.ALL those that wilfully refuse to obey the King in things indifferent, and to conform themselves to the Orders of the Church authorized by him, not contrary to the Word of God, are Schismaticks, enemies to the Kings Supremacy and State, and not to be tolerated in Church or Commonwealth. But you do wilfully refuse to obey the King in things indifferent, and to conform your selves to the Orders of the Church, authorized by him not contrary to the Word of God. Ergo, You are Schismaticks, Enemies to the Kings Supremacy and the State, and not to be tolerated in Church or Commonwealth. The afflicted Ministers to the Prelates. ALL those that freely and willingly perform unto the King and State all Obedience not only in things necessary, but Indiffe∣rent, commanded by Law; And that have been alwaies ready to conform themselves to every Order of the Church, authorized by him, not contrary to the Word of God, are free from all Schism, Friends to the Kings Supremacy, and to the State, and unworthy in this manner to be molested in Church or Commonwealth. ButThis Treatise, and other books lately written and exhibited to authority, do prove the Assumption. there is none of us that is deprived or suspended from our Ministry, but hath ever been ready, freely and willingly to perform unto the King and State all obedience, not only in things necessary, but Indifferent, required by Law, and to conform our selves to every Order of the Church, authorized by him, not contrary to the Word of God. Ergo, We are all free from Schism, Friends, to the Kings Supremacy and the State, and most unworthy of such molestation in Church and Commonwealth, as now we sustain.
English Puritanism. CONTAINING THE MAIN OPINIONS of the rigidest sort of those that are called PURITANS, in the Realm of ENGLAND. Acts 24.14. But this I confesse unto thee, that after the way (which they call heresie) so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets. Acts 28.22. But we will hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. Printed in the Year, 1660.
To the Indifferent Reader. IT cannot be unknown to them that know any thing, that those Christians in this Realm which are called by the odious and vile name of Puritans, are accused by the Prelates to the Kings Majesty and the State, to maintain many absurd, erroneous, Schismatical, and Heretical Opinious, concerning Religion, Church-Government, and the Civil Magistracy. Which hath moved me to collect (as near as I could) the chiefest of them, and to send them naked to the view of all men, that they may see what is the worst that the worst of them hold. It is not my part to prove and justifie them: Those that accuse and condemn them must in all reason and equity prove their accusation, or else bear the name of unchristian Slanderers. I am not ignorant that they lay other Opinions (yea some clean contradictory to these) to the charge of these men, the falshood whereof we shall (it is to be doubted) have more and more occasion to detect. In the mean time all Enemies of Divine Truth shall find, that to obscure the same with Calumniations and untruths, is but to hid a fire with laying dry straw or tow upon it. But thou mayst herein observe, what a terrible Popedome and Primacy these rigid Presbyterians desire; and with what painted bug-bears and Scare-Crows, the Prelates go about to fright the States of this Kingdome withall, who will no doubt one day see, how their wisdoms are abused. Farewell.
English Puritanism. CHAP. I. Concerning Religion, or the worship of God in general. IMprimis, They hold and maintain, That the Word of God contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, is of absolute perfection, given by Christ the head of the Church, to be unto the same, th sole Canon and rule of all matters of Religion, and the worship and service of God whatsoever. And that whatsoever done in the same service and worship cannot be justified by the said word, is unlawfull. And therefore that it is a sin, to force any Christian to do any act of Religion or Divine service, that cannot evidently be warranted by the same. 2. They hold that all Ecclesiastical actions invented and devised by man, are utterly to be excluded out of the exercises of Religion; especially such actions as are famous and notorious Mysteries of an Idolatrous Religion: and in doing whereof, the true Religion is conformed (whether in whole or in part) to Idolatry and superstition. 3. They hold that all outward means instituted and set apart to expresse and set forth the Inward worship of God, are parts of Divine Worship, and that not only all moral actions but all typical rites and figures ordained to shadow forth in the solemn worship and service of God, any spiritual or religious act or habit in the mind of man, are special parts of the same: And therefore that every such act ought evidently to be prescribed by the Word of God,
or else ought not to be done: it being a sin to performe any other worship to God, whether External or Internal, Moral or Ceremo∣nial, in whole or in part, then that which God himself requires in his word. 4. They hold it to be grosse superstition, for any mortal man to institute and ordain as parts of Divine Worship, any mystical Rite and Ceremonie of Religion whatsoever, and to mingle the same with the Divine Rites and Mysteries of Gods Ordinance. But they hold it to be high presumption to institute and bring into Divine worship such Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, as are acknowledged to be no parts of Divine Worship at all, but only of Civil Worship and Honour: For they that shall require to have performed unto themselves a Ceremonial Obedience, Service, and worship, consisting in rites of religion to be done at that very instant that God is solemnly served and worshiped, and even in the same worship make both themselves and God also an Idol; so that they judge it a far more fearfull sin to add unto, and to use in the worship and service of God, or any part thereof, such mystical Rites and Ceremonies as they esteem to be no parts or parcells of Gods worship at all, than such as in a vain and ignorant superstition, they imagine and conceive to be parts thereof. 5. They hold that every act or action appropriated and set apart to divine service and worship, whether moral or ceremonial, real or typical, ought to bring special honour unto God; and therefore that every such act ought to be apparently commanded in the Word of God, either expresly, or by necessary consequent. 6. They hold that all actions, whether Moral or Ceremonial, appropriated to Religious or Spiritual Persons, functions, or actions, either are or ought to be Religious and Spiritual: And therefore either are or ought to be instituted immediately by God, who alone is the Author and Institutor of all Religious and Spiritual actions and things, whether Internal or External, Moral or Ceremonial.
CHAP. II. Concerning the Church. 1. THey hold and maintain that every Companie, Congregation, or Assembly of men, ordinarily joyning together in the true worship of God, is a true visible Church of Christ, and that the same title is improperly attributed to any other Convocations, Synods, Societies, combinations, or Assemblies whatsoever. 2. They hold that all such Churches or Congregations, commu∣nicating after that manner together, in divine worship, are in all Ecclesiastical matters equal, and of the same power and authority; and that by the Word and will of God they ought to have the same spiritual Priviledges, Prerogatives, Officers, Administrations, Orders, and Formes of Divine worship. 3. They hold that Christ Jesus hath not subjected any Church or Congregation of his, to any other superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, than unto that which is within it self: So that if a whole Church or Congregation shall erre, in any matters of faith or Religion, no other Churches, or spiritual Church-Officers have (by any warrant from the Word of God) power to censure, punish, or controle the same; but are only to counsel and advise the same, and so to leave their soules to the immediate judgment of Christ, and their bodies to the sword and power of the Civil Magistrate, who alone upon earth hath power to punish a whole Church or Congregation. 4. They hold that every established Church or Congregation ought to have her own spiritual officers & ministers, resident with her, & those such as are injoyned by Christ in the New Testament, and no other. 5. They hold that every established Church ought (as a special prerogative by which she is indowed by Christ) to have power and liberty to elect and chuse their own spiritual and Ecclesiastical Officers; and that it is a greater wrong to have any such forced upon them against their wills, than if they should force upon men wives, and upon women husbands against their will and liking. 6. They hold that if in this choice any particular Churches shall erre, that none upon earth but the Civil Magistrate hath power to controle or correct them for it: And that though it be not lawfull for him to take away this power from them, yet, when they or any of them shall apparently abuse the same, he stands bound by the Law of God, and by vertue of his Office (grounded upon the same,)
to punish them severely for it, and to force them under civil mulcts to make better choice. 7. They hold that the Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers of one Church ought not to bear any Ecclesiastical Office in another, but ought to be tyed unto that Congregation of which they are members, and by which they are elected into office: And they are not, (without just cause, and such as may be approved by the Congregation) to forsake their Callings; wherein if the Congrega∣tion shall be perverse, and will not hearken to reason, They are then to crave the assistance and help of the Civil Magistrate, who alone hath power, and who ought by his Civil Sword, and Authority, procure to all Members of the Church, whether their Governors, or others, freedome from all manifest injuries and wrongs. 8. They hold that the Congregation having once made choice of their spiritual Officers, unto whom they commit the Regiment of their Soules, they ought not (without just cause, and that which is apparently warrantable by the Word of God) to discharge, deprive, or depose them; but ought to live in all Canonical obedience and subjection unto them, agreeable to the Word of God: And if by permission of the Civil Magistrate, they shall by other Ecclesiastical Officers, be suspended, or deprived, for any cause in their apprehension good and justifiable by the Word of God, then they hold it the bounden duty of the Congregation to be continual suppliants to God, and humble suters unto Civil Authority for the restauration of them unto their Administrations, which if it cannot be obtained, yet this much honour they are to give unto them, as to acknowledge them to the death, their spiritual Guides and Governors, though they be rigorously deprived of their Ministry and Service. 9. They hold that though one Church is not to differ from another, in any Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, or Religious matters what∣soever, but are to be equal and alike; yet, that they may differ, and one excel another in outward Civil Circumstances, of place, time, Person, &c. So that although they hold that those Congregations of which Kings and Nobles make themselves members, ought to have the same Ecclesiastical Officers, Ministry, worship, Sacraments, Ceremonies, and Forme of Divine Worship, that the basest Congregation in the Country hath, and no other; yet they hold also, That as their Persons in civil respects excel, so in the Exercises
of Religion in civil matters they may excel other Assemblies, Their Chappels and Seats may be gorgeously set forth, with rich Arras and Tapestry, their Fonts may be of Silver, their Com∣munion Tables of Ivory, and if they will, covered with gold; the Cup out of which they drink the Sacramental blood of Christ may be of beaten gold set about with Diamonds; their Ministers may be clothed in silk and velvet, so themselves will maintain them in that manner; otherwise, they think it absurd and against common reason, that other base and Inferior Congregations must by Eccle∣siastical Tithes and Oblations, maintain the silken and velvet suits, and Lordly retinue of the Ministers, and Ecclesiastical Officers of Princes and Nobles. 10. They hold that the Lawes, Orders, and Ecclesiastical Juris∣diction of the visible Churches of Christ, if they be lawfull and warrantable by the Word of God, are no wayes repugnant to any Civil State whatsoever; whether Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical, but do tend to the further establishing and advancing of the Rights and Prerogatives of all and every of them: And they renounce and abhor from their soules all such Ecclesiasticall Juris∣diction or Policy, that is any way repugnant and derogatory to any of them, especially to the Monarchical State, which they acknowledg to be the best kind of Civil Government for this Kingdome. 11. They hold and beleve, that the equality in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and authority, of Churches and Church-Ministers, is no more derogatory and repugnant to the State and glory of a Monarch, than the Paritie or equality of School∣masters of several Schools, Captains of several Camps, Shepherds of several flocks of sheep, or Masters of several Families, yea they hold the clean contrary, that inequality of Churches, and Church-Officers in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Authority, was that principally that advanced Antichrist unto his throne, and brought the Kings and Princes of the earth unto such vassallage under him; and that the Civil Authority and glory of Secular Princes and States hath ever decayed, and withered, the more that the Ecclesiastical Officers of the Church have been advanced and lifted up in authority, beyond the limits and confines that Christ in his word hath prescribed unto them.
CHAP. III. Concerning the Ministers of the Word. 1. THey hold that the Pastors of particular Congregations are, or ought to be the highest Spiritual Officers in the Church, over whom, (by any Divine Ordinance) there is no superiour Pastor but only Jesus Christ: And that they are led by the spirit of Antichrist, that arrogate or take upon themselves to be Pastors of Pastors. 2. They hold that there are not by any Divine Institution in the word, any ordinary, National, Provincial, or Diocesan Pastors or Ministers under which the Pastors of particular Congregations are to be subject, as Inferior Officers. And that if there were any such, that then the Word of God would have set them down more distinctly and precisely than any of the rest: For the higher place that one occupieth in the Church, of the more necessity he is unto the Church; of the more necessity he is to the Church, the more carefully would Christ (the head of the Church) have been in pointing him out, and distinguishing him from other. Hence, in the Old Testament, the High Priest, his Title, Office, Function and special Administration and Jurisdiction is more particularly and precisely set down, than the Office of any of the Inferior Priests and Levites. Also in the New Testament, the Office of a Pastor is more distinctly, and more precisely set down, than of a Doctor, or any other inferior Church-Officer: So that a man may as well call into question the whole New Testament, as doubt whether there ought to be a Pastor in every Congregation, or doubt of his proper Office and Function. And if by Gods Ordinance there should be an ordinary Ecclesia∣stical Officer above the Pastors of particular congregations, than Christ out of all question would with that special care and cost have set it forth, by Titles, prerogatives, peculiar Offices, Functions, and Gifts, that the Churches and people of God should have reason rather o doubt of any Office or Jurisdiction, than of the peculiar office or Jurisdiction of the Primates, Metropolitanes, Arch-Bishops and Prelates of the world. 3. They hld that if there were a supream, National, Ecclesastical Minister or Pastor, that should be the Prince of many thousand
Pastors, that then also Christ (as he did in the Jewish Church) would have appointed a solemn National or Provincial Liturgy or worship, unto which at sometimes of the year, the whole body of the people should ascend, and that unto the Metropolitan City, as unto a Jerusalem; and that he would (as he did in the Jewish Church) more precisely and particularly have set down the manner of solemnization thereof, than of his parochial worship: Forasmuch therefore as they cannot read in the New Testament of any higher or more solemn worship, than of that which is to be performed in a particular Congregation, they cannot be perswaded, that God hath appointed any higher Ministers of his service and worship under the New Testament, than the elect Ministers of particular Congregations. 4. They hold that the High Priest of the Jews, was typically and in a figure, the supream head of the whole Catholique Church, which though it were visible only in the Province and Nation of Jury, yet those of other Nations and Countries (as appears by the History of Acts, even though they were Ethiopians,) were under this High Priest, and acknowledged homage unto him. So that he was not a Provincial Metropolitane, but in very deed, an Oecu∣menical and universal Bishop of the whole world. And therefore they hold, (this being the best ground in the word, for Metropolitane and Provincial Pastors or Bishops,) that the Pope of Rome, who alone maketh claim unto, and is in possession of the like universal Supremacy, hath more warrant in the Word of God, to the same, than any Metropolitane or Diocesan (not dependant upon him) hath or can have. So that they hold, that by the Word of God, either there must be no Metropolitanes and Diocesans, or else there must be a Pope. 5. They hold That no Pastor ought to exercise or accept of any Civil publique Jurisdiction and authority, but ought to be wholly imployed in spiritual Offices and Duties to that Congregation over which he is set. And that those Civil Magistrates weaken their own Supremacy, that shall suffer any Ecclesiastical Pastor to exercise any Civil Jurisdiction within their Realms, Dominions, or Seigniories. 6. They hold, that the highest and supream Office and authority of the Pastor, is to preach the Gospel solemnly and publickly to the Congregation, by interpreting the written Word of God, and applying the same by exhortation and reproof unto them. They
hold, that this was the greatest work that Christ and his Apostles did; and that whosoever is thought worthy and fit to exercise this au∣thority, cannot be thought unfit and unworthy to exercise any other spiritual or Ecclesiastical authority whatsoever. 7. They hold that the Pastor or Minister of the Word, is not to reach any Doctrine unto the Church, grounded upon his own judgment or opinion, or upon the Judgment or opinion of any or all the men in the world; but only that truth that he is able to demonstrate and prove evidently, and apparently, by the Word of God soundly interpreted; and that the people are not bound to believe any Doctrine of Religion or Divinity whatsoever, upon any ground whatsoever, except it be apparently justified by the Word, or by necessary consequent deduced from the same. 8. They hold that in interpreting the Scriptures, and opening the sence of them, he ought to follow those Rules only that are followed in finding out the meaning of other writings, to wit, by weighing the propriety of the tongue wherein they are written, by weighing the Circumstance of the place, by comparing one place with another, and by considering what is properly spoken and what tropically or figuratively. And they hold it unlawfull for the Pastor to obtrude upon his people a sence of any part of the Divine Word, for which he hath no other ground but the bare testimonies of men; and that it is better for the people to be content to be ignorant of the meaning of such difficult places, than to hang their Faith in any matter in this case upon the bare Testimony of man. 9. They hold that the people of God ought not to acknowledge any such for their Pastors, as are not able by Preaching, to interpret and apply the Word of God unto them in manner and forme afore∣said: And therefore that no ignorant, and sole reading Priests are to be reputed the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who sendeth none into his Ministry and service, but such as he adorneth in some measure with spiritual gifts. And they cannot be perswaded that the faculty of reading in ones Mother tongue the Scriptures, &c. which any ordinary Turk or Infidel hath, can be called in any congruity of speech, a Ministerial gift of Christ. 10. They hold that in the Assembly of the Church, the Pastor only is to be the mouth of the Congregation to God in Prayer, and that the people are only to testifie their assent by the word Amen. And that it is a Babilonian cofusion, for the Pastor to say one piece
of a Prayer, and the people with mingled voices to say another; except in singing, which by the very ordinance and instinct of nature, is more delightfull, and effectual, the more voices there are joyned and mingled together in harmony and consent. 11. They hold that the Church hath no authority to impose upon her Pastors or any other of her Officers, any other ministerial Duties, Offices, Functions, Actions or Ceremonies, eiher in Divine worship or out of the same, then what Christ himself in the Scriptures hath imposed upon them, or what they might lawfully impose upon Christ himself, if he were in person upon the earth, and did exercise a Ministerial Office in some Church. 12. They hold that it is as great an injury to force a Congregation or Church to maintain as their Pastor, with Tithes, and such like Donations, that person that either is not able to instruct them, or that refuseth in his own person ordinarily to do it, as to force a man to maintain one for his wife, that either is not a woman, or that refuseth in her own person to do the duties of a wife unto him. 13. They hold that by Gods Ordinance there should be also in every Church, a Doctor, whose special office should be to instruct, by way of Catechizing, the Ignorant of the Congregation (and that particularly) in the main grounds and Principles of Religion. CHAP. IV. Concerning the Elders. 1. FOrasmuch, as through the malice of Sathan, there are and will be in the best Churches many disorders and scandalls commit∣ted, that redound to the reproach of the Gospel, and are a stumbling block to many, both without and within the Church; and sith they judge it repugnant to the Word of God, that any Minister should be a sole Ruler, and as it were a Pope, so much as in one Parish, (much more that he should be one over a whole Diocesse, Province, or Nation) they hold that by Gods Ordinance the Congregaion should make choice of other Officers, as Assistants unto the Ministers in the spiritual regiment of the Congregation, who are
by office, jointly with the Ministers of the Word, to be as Monitors and Overseers of the manners and conversation of all the Congre∣gation, and one of another; that so every one may be more wary of their wayes, and that the Pastors and Doctors may better attend to Prayer and Doctrine, and by their means may be made better acquainted with the estate of the people, when others eyes besides there own shall wake and watch over them. 2. They hold that such only are to be chosen to this Office, as are the gravest, honestest, discreetest, best grounded in Religion, and the ancientest Professors thereof in the Congregation, such as the whole Congregation do approve of, and respect, for their wisdome, holinesse, and honesty, and such also (if it be possible) as are of civil note and respect in the world, and able (without any burden to the Church) to maintain themselves, either by their Lands, or any other honest Civil Trade of life: Neither do they think it so much disgrace to the policy of the Church, that Tradesmen and Artificers, (endowed with such qualities as are above specified) should be admitted to be Overseers of the Church, as it is that persons both ignorant of Religion and all good letters, and in all respects for person, quality, and state, as base and vile as the basest in the Congregation, should be admitted to be Pastors and Teachers of a Congregation. And if it be apparent that God (who alwaies blesseth his own Ordinances) doth often, even in the eyes of Kings, and Nobles, make honourable the Ministers and Pastors of his Churches, upon which he hath bestowed spiritual Gifts and Graces, though for birth, education, presence, outward estate and maintenance, they be most base and contemptible; so he will as well in the eyes of all holy men, make this Office which is many degrees inferior to the other, precious, and Honourable, even for the Divine Calling and Ordinance sake. CHAP. V. Concerning the Censures of the Church. 1. THey hold that the spiritual keyes of the Church are by Christ, committed to the aforesaid spiritual Officers and Governors, and unto none other: which keyes they hold that
they are not to be put to this use, to lock up the Crowns, Swords, or Scepters of Princes and Civil States, or the Civil Rights, Preroga∣tives, and Immunities, of Civil Subjects in the things of this Life, or to use them as picklocks to open withal mens Treasuries and Coffers, or as keyes of Prisons, to shut up the bodies of men; for they think that such a Power and Authority Ecclesiastical is fit only for the Antichrist of Rome, and the consecrated Governours of his Synagogues, who having no Word of God, which is the Sword of the Spirit, to defend his and their usurped Jurisdiction over the Chri∣stian World, doth unlawfully usurp the lawful Civil Sword and Power of the Monarchs and Princes of the Earth, thereby forcing men to subject themselves to his spiritual vassalage and Ser∣vice, and abusing thereby the spiritual Keyes and Jurisdiction of the Church. 2. They hold that by vertue of these Keyes, they are not to make any curious Inquisitions into the secret or hidden vices or crimes of men, extorting from them a confession of those faults that are con∣cealed from themselves and others: or to proceed to molest any man upon secret suggestions, private suspition, or uncertain fame, or for such crimes as are in question whether they be crimes or no; But they are to proceed only against evident and apparent crimes, such as are either granted to be such of all civil honest men: or of all true Christians, or at least such, as they are able, by evidence of the Word of God, to convince to be sins to the conscience of the Offender; As also, such as have been either publikely committed, or having been committed in secret, are by some good means brought to light, and which the delinquent denying, they are able by honest and sufficient testimony to prove against him. 3. They hold, that when he that hath committed a scandalous crime cometh before them, and is convinced of the same, they ought not (after the manner of our Ecclesiastical Courts) scorn, deride, taunt and revile him with odious and contumelious speeches; eye him with big and stern looks, procure Proctors to make Personal In∣vectives against him, make him dance attendance from Court day to Court day, and from Term to Term, frowning at him in presence, and laughing at him behind his back: but they are (though he be never so obstinate and perverse) to use him brotherly, not giving the least personal reproaches, or threats, (but laying open unto him the nature of his sin by the light of Gods Word) are only by do∣nouncing the judgements of God against him, to terrifie him, and so to move him to repentance.
4. They hold, that if the party offending be their civil Superiour, that then they are to use, even throughout the whole carriage of their Censure, all civil Complements, Offices and Reverence due unto him; That they are not to presume to convent him before them, but are themselves to go in all civil and humble manner unto him, to stand bare before him, to bow unto him, to give him all civil Titles belonging unto him; and, if he be a King and Supream Ru∣ler, they are to kneel down before him, and in the humblest manner to censure his faults, so that he may see apparently that they are not carried with the least spice of malice against his Person, but only with zeal of the health and salvation of his soul. 5. They hold, that the Ecclesiastical Officers, laying to the charge of any man any Errour, Heresie, or false Opinion whatsoever, do stand bound themselves, first, to prove that he holdeth such an er∣rour or heresie; and secondly, to prove directly unto him that it is an errour by the Word of God, and that it deserveth such a censure, before they do proceed against him. 6. They hold, that the Governours of the Church ought with all patience and quietness hear what every Offender can possibly say for himself, either for Qualification, Defence, Apology, or Justifica∣tion of any supposed crime or errour whatsoever; and they ought not to proceed to censure the grossest offence that is, untill the Of∣fender have said as much for himself in his defence as he possibly is able. And they hold it an evident Character of a corrupt Ecclesi∣astical Government, where the parties convented may not have full liberty to speak for themselves, considering, that the more liberty is granted to speak in a bad cause, (especially before those that are in Authority, and of judgment,) the more the iniquity of it will appear, and the more the Justice of their Sentence will shine. 7. They hold, that the Oath ex officio, whereby Popish and Eng∣lish Ecclesiastical Governours, either upon some secret informati∣ons, or suggestions, or private suspitions, go about to bind mens con∣sciences to accuse themselves and their friends of such crimes or im∣putations as cannot by any direct course of Law be proved against them, and whereby they are drawn to be instruments of many hea∣vy crosses upon themselves and their friends, and that often for those Actions that they are perswaded in their consciences are good and holy; (I say) that they hold that such an Oath (on the urgers part) is most damnable and tyrannous, against the very Law of Nature, devised by Antichrist, through the inspiration of the devil, that by
means thereof, the professors and practizers of the true Religion, might either in their weakness, by per jury, damn their own souls, or be drawn to reveal to the Enemies of Christianity, those secret reli∣gious acts and deeds, that being (in the perswasion of their consci∣ences) for the advancement of the Gospel, will be a means of hea∣vy sentences of condemnation against themselves and their dearest friends. 8. They hold, that Ecclesiastical Officers have no power to pro∣ceed in Censure against any Crime of any Person, after that he shall freely acknowledge the same, and profess his hearty penitency for it: And that they may not, for any crime whatsoever, lay any bodily or pecuniary mulct upon them, or impose upon them any Ceremo∣nial Mark or Note of shame, such as is the white sheet, or any such like; or take any fees for any cause whatsoever, but are to accept of, as a sufficient satisfaction, a private submission and acknowledg∣ment, if the Crime be private, and a publike, if the crime be publike and notorious. 9. They hold, that if a Member of the Church be obstinate, and shew no signs and tokens of repentance of that crime, that they by evidence of Scripture have convinced to be a crime, that then by their Ecclesiastical Authority they are to deny unto him the Sacra∣ment of the Supper. And if the suspension from it will not humble him, then (though not without humbling themselves in prayer, fa∣sting, and great demonstration of sorrow for him) they are to de∣nounce him to be as ye no member of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of that Congregation, and so are to leave him to God and the King. And this is all the Ecclesiastical Authority and Jurisdiction that any spiritual Officers of the Church are to use against any man, for the greatest crime that can be committed. 10. They hold, that the Officers of the Church are not to proceed unto the extreamest Censure against any man, without the free con∣sent of the whole Congregation it self. 11. They hold, that the Minister, or any other particular Officer, offending, is as subject to these Censures, as any other of the Con∣gregation. 12. They hold, that if any Member of the Congregation, having committed a scandalous sin, shall of himself forsake the Worship of God, and the Spiritual Communion with the Church, that then the Ecclesiastical Officers have no authority or jurisdiction over him,
but only the Civil Magistrate, and those unto whom he oweth Civil subjection, as Parents, Masters, Landlords, &c. CHAP. VI. Concerning the Civil Magistrate. 1. THey hold, that the Civil Magistrate, as he is a Civil Magi∣strate hath, and ought to have Supream power over all the Churches within his Dominions, in all causes whatsoever; and yet they hold, that as he is a Christian, he is a Member of some one particular Congregation, and ought to be as subject to the spiritual Regiment thereof prescribed by Christ in his Word, as the meanest subject in the Kingdom; and they hold, that this Subjection is no more derogatory to his Supremacy, than the Subjection of his body in sickness to Physitians, can be said to be derogatory thereunto. 2. They hold, that those Civill Magistrates are the greatest Ene∣mies to their own Supremacie, that in whole or in part, communi∣cate the virtue and power thereof to any Ecclesiastical Officers. And that there cannot be imagined by the wit of man a more direct means to check-mate the same, than to make them Lords and Prin∣ces upon Earth, to invest them with Civil Jurisdiction and Au∣thority, and to conform the state and limits of the Jurisdiction to the State of Kings, and bounds of Kingdoms. 3. They hold, that there should be no Ecclesiastical Officer in the Church so high, but that he ought to be subject unto, and puni∣shable by the meanest Civil Officer in a Kingdom, City, or Town, not only for common crimes, but even for the abuse of their Ec∣clesiastical Offices; yea, they hold, that they ought to be more puni∣shable than any other Subject whatsoever, if they shall offend against either Civil or Ecclesiastical Laws. 4. They hold, that the Civil Magistrate is to punish with all se∣verity the Ecclesiastical Officers of Churches, if they shall intrude upon the rights and prerogatives of the Civil Authority, and Ma∣gistracy, and shall pass those bounds and limits that Christ hath pre∣scribed unto them in his Word. 5. They hold, that the Pope is that Antichrist, and therefore that Antichrist, because being but an Ecclesiastical Officer, he doth in
the height of the pride of his heart make claim unto, and usurp the Supremacy of the Kings and Civil Rulers of the Earth. And they hold, that all defenders of the Popish Faith, all endeavours of re∣concilement with that Church, all plotters for tolleration of the Popish Religion, all countenancers and maintainers of Seminary Priests and professed Catholicks, and all deniers that the Pope is that Antichrist, are secret enemies to the Kings Supremacy. 6. They hold, that all Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Offici∣als, &c. have their Offices and Functions only by will and pleasure of the King and Civil States of this Realm; and they hold, that whosoever holdeth that the King may not, without sin, remove these Offices out of the Church, and dispose of their Temporali∣ties and maintenance according to his own pleasure, or that these Offices are Jure Divino, and not only or meerly Jure humano: That all such deny a principal part of the Kings Supremacy. 7. They hold, that not one of these Opinions can be proved to be contrary to the Word of God, and that if they might have leave, that they are able to answer all that hath been written against any one of them. FINIS.
TWELVE General Arguments, Proving that the CEREMONIES Imposed upon the Ministers of the Gospel in England, by our Prelates, are unlawful; And therefore, That the Ministers of the Gospel, for the bare and sole omission of them in Churh-Service, for con∣science sake, are most unjustly charged of disloyalty to His MAJESTIE. Mat. 18.23. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evill: but if I have spoken well, why smitest thou me? Printed in the Year, 1660.
To the Reader. GOod Reader, We come not as voluntaries into this field of Contenti∣on, but dragg'd into it by the very hairs of our head: If our cause be righteous and good, Thou wilt easily grant (in so great Imputations and Extremities inflicted upon us for the same) that we can do no less than give reasons for our selves and it. All the favour I require of thee, is, That thou wouldst look into our cause (not by the flashing lightings that come out of the mouths of our Adversaries the Prelates) but by the light of our own Reasons, by which, if thou shalt see the goodness of our cause, and innocency of our persons, than embrace it with us, and in pity pray for us, that (without shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience) we may endure patiently and meekly, whatsoever God shall suffer to be in∣flicted upon us for the same, in these wicked and licentious times.
THE FIRST ARGUMENT. All Will-Worship is sin. To use these Ceremonies in Church-Service, in manner and form prescribed, is a Will-Worship. Ergo, To use them is sin. THE Proposition cannot be denied, for the Apostle Paul plainly condemneth Will-Worship. The Assumption may thus be proved: All parts of Divine Service and Worship, imposed only by the will and pleasure of Man upon the Ministers of Divine Service, and that of necessity to be done, is Will-Worship. But to use these Ceremonies in manner and form prescribed, is to use such Ceremonies as are 1. Parts of Divine Service and Worship. 2. Im∣posed only by the pleasure and will of Men, upon the Ministers of Divine Service. 3. Of necessity to be done therein. Ergo, To use these Ceremonies in manner and form prescribed, is a Will-Worship. The Proposition is as clear as the Sun at noon-day. The Assumption hath three parts: 1. That they are parts of Divine Worship and Service. This is proved evidently by this Argument: All Mystical and Ecclesiastical Rites and formes of Divine Ser∣vice, instituted by Ecclesiastical authority, to be Ministerial actions in
the solemn Worship of God, and performed in that manner, and having that use in Divine Service, that if God should but ratifie and confirm the same use, they should then be parts of his true Worship; (I say) all such Ceremonies are used as parts of Divine Worship. But these Ceremonies in controversie, are either all, or the greatest part of them such. Ergo, They are parts of Divine Worship and Service. The Proposition cannot with any modest face be denied; For else how could a sole Divine ratification of the present use of them make them parts of his true Worship? If they were not used as parts of his Worship before. The Assumption is as manifest: For if Christ should by some Revelation from heaven signifie, That it is his will that a Minister in Divine Service should wear a white linnen garment, in Baptism make the sign of a Cross, to these ends and purposes that are ex∣pressed in the Service Book, then certainly they should be essenti∣al parts of his Divine Worship, else the Jewish Rites and Ceremo∣nies and our Sacraments are no parts thereof. The second part of the Assumption of the first Syllogism. That they are imposed only upon the pleasure and will of man. This is evident: For those things that God leaves as indifferent to the will and discretion of man to do, or leave undone, being im∣posed by man upon man, are imposed only upon the will and plea∣sure of man. The third part of the Assumption is: That they are of necessity to be done in Divine Service. Which is also out of all doubt; For a Minister stands bound to do them upon pain of suspension and deprivation: And God must have no solemn Worship in England, except it be administred in the same. Upon all this it follows: That to use these Ceremonies in manner and form prescribed, is to use such Ceremonies as are parts of Divine Worship, imposed only by the will of Man, &c.
The Second Argument. It is a sin against God, for him that is by way of Excellency a servant of Jesus Christ, (without a precise and direct warrant from him) at any time (especially in the Solemn Worship of God) to give special honour to Antichrist and his members. But to use these Ceremonies, is in that manner aforesaid, to give special honour to Antichrist and his members. Ergo, It is a sin against God to use them. THE Proposition is manifest and clear to any that have an eye of Reason and any light of Divinity shining in it: For what is a sin if this be not: That a Servant of Jesus Christ, even then when he is in the Service of Christ, should perform special honour and service to Antichrist, or any of his Limbs. The Assumption is proved (if our Adversaries will grant it, that the Pope is Antichrist, and that all the visible members of his Church, acknowledging him their supream head, are members of him) by this reason. Such a Conformity to Antichrist and his members in the Ceremonies of Religion and Form of Divine Worship, as is not only besides the Word of God, but in a special manner derogatory to all reformed Churches that have departed from the Synagogue of Rome, is a special honour to Anti∣christ and his members. But to use these Ceremonies in Divine Worship, is such a Conformity to Antichrist and his members. Ergo. To use these Ceremonies, in that manner aforesaid, is to give special honour to Antichrist and his Members. The Proposition is without exception: For if it should be a spe∣cial honour to the Bishops of England and their conformed Clear∣gy, for the Churches of Scotland, voluntarily to leave conformity to the Churches of the Low Countries, France, and Germany, and to conform themselves in Ceremonies and Form of Divine Wor∣ship to the Prelatical Clergy of England: It must needs be a spe∣cial honour to Antichrist and his Members, for any to do the like to them.
The Assumption is thus proved; For a Minister of Jesus Christ to conforme himself in such peculiar Rites, Ceremonies and Formes of Divine Service, to Antichrist and his members, as other reformed Churches have rejected for vain, foolish, and superstitious, is in a special manner derogatory to all other reformed Churches. But to use these Ceremonies in controversie, is in that manner to conforme himself. Ergo, It is in a special manner derogatory to all other Reformed Churches. Both parts of the Syllogisme are such as may easily be proved, if they be denyed. The 3. Argument. All Worship more than Civill, performed to any besides God, is a sin. To use these Ceremonies in manner and forme prescribed, is to performe a more than civil honour (even a Religious) only to a humane Power and Authority; Ergo, To use these Ceremonies is to sin. THe Proposition needs no proof: For there is no middle Honor between Civil and Divine; and therefore that which is more than Civil, is Divine. Now Divine Honor is to be given only to God, who will not have his Glory given unto another. The Assumption is thus proved; If these Ceremonies be Religious Ceremonies, and all Religious Ceremonies be a part of Divine worship, performed to that authority that instituteth and commandeth them. If also the authority that instituteth and commandeth them is but meerly humane, Then the Assumption is true. But the first is true: Ergo, The latter is true also. The Proposition cannot be denyed of any reasonable creature. The Assumption hath three Parts:
I. That these Ceremonies are Religious Ceremonies. This needs no proof: For what shall we make to be Religious Ceremonies, if those Ceremonies be not that are prescribed by the Church, to the Church only, tied to Religion only, and Religious Functions, Offices, and Persons; to be acted and performed only in Exercises of Religion and Divine Worship, and are mystical shadowes and types of Religious Doctrine? II. That all Religious Ceremonies are parts of Divine Worship. This neither should need any proof: If those that are adversaries unto us in this cause, did not too much presume of the weakness of our Discourse, and the strength of their own wit. For there being an external Divine Worship, which properly consists in the outward Rites and Ceremonies of Religion: What Ceremonies can be called parts thereof, if such Religious Ceremonies as these be not? For if bowing the knee, &c. in Divine Worship, (though it be used also in Civil Worship) be a part of Divine Worship, much more are those Ceremonies that are peculiarly appropriated to Divine Service and Worship, and wherein part of the forme thereof is made to consist. But it may (for further satisfying of men) be thus proved: All meer and immediate Actions of Religion are parts of Divine Worship. All Religious Ceremonies are meer and immediate Actions of Religion: Ergo, They are parts of Divine Worship. Further, How can a man imagine that a meer Religious Ecclesi∣astical Act, done by a Servant of God in the solemn Service and Worship of God, by precise Canon of the Church, should be no part of Divine Worship, sith all the solemn Rites and Ceremonies that are used in the solemn Services of Civil States, (especially such as are done in their presence) have been ever reputed parts of civil Honor and Worship. Lastly, Considering that God in his Divine Worship doth require the whole heart, and all the powers of the Soul during the act of his Worship, It were great presumption for any mortal Creature to prescribe any Action to man during the same Act that is no part thereof: considering that every Action so prescribed must of neces∣sity pull a part of the heart from Divine Worship.
III. That Authority that instituted them is but meerly humane. This is most certain, for if they were instituted by Divine authority, they could not be esteemed matters indifferent; and should not be in the power and discretion of the Magistrate to disanull them. The fourth Argument. If it be lawfull for a Minister of the Gospel without sin to use these Ceremonies in Divine Worship: it is lawfull for him upon the same occasion to use any Jewish, Turkish, Paganish, or Popish Ceremony whatsoever. But it is not lawfull for the Minister of the Gospel to use in Divine Worship, upon the same occasion, any Jewish, Popish, Paganish, or Turkish Ceremony. Ergo, He cannot without sin use these. THe Assumption cannot for shame be denied, We prove the consequent of the Proposition. If any Jewish, Turkish, Paganish, or Popish Ceremonies and Rite be a thing in its own nature as indifferent as these Ceremonies are, and either have, or may have by such like institution as good use, then the consequent of the Proposition is true. But the first is true, Ergo, The latter is true also. The Proposition, as I think, cannot be denied, nor the Assumption, but by bringing some contrary instance in some of their Ceremonies: When any such shall be given, this Argument shall be further prosecuted.
The fifth Argument. Every schismatical Action done by a Minister of the Gospel is a sin. To use these Ceremonies in controversie are schismaticall Actions. Ergo, To use these Ceremonies is sin. THe Proposition will be granted: I must prove the Assumption. All actions of irregularity and non-conformity to the Catholique Church wherein we live, are schismatical Actions. To use these Ceremonies in controversie, are actions of irregularity, and non-conformity to the Catholique Church wherein we live. Ergo, The use of these Ceremonies in controversie are schismatical Actions. The Proposition cannot be denied; for if we be branded with the cole of schisme justly, for denying conformity in some Cere∣monies, but to some of our own particular Churches wherein we live, though we be content to join with them that use them in Divine Worship: much more Schismaticks are they that are not conformable in Rites and Ceremonies, to the Catholick Church wherein they live. I prove the Assumption: If all the Protestants, Pastors, Ministers, and Governors, living this day in Europe, and all the painfull resident Pastors of our own Country, (except some non-resident Idol-shepherds, some that depend upon the Prelacie, and some other that are forced and constrained to use them against their will) do not only refuse to use these Ceremonies, but esteem them vain, foolish, and superstitious: Then the use of these Ceremonies are actions of irregularity, and non-conformity to the Catholique Church. But the first will be proved true; Ergo, The latter is true also. The Proposition is evident, by their own Principles: For an irregularity and non-Conformity to the Pastors and Governors of
Churches, is an irregularity and non-Conformity to the Church, for they are reputed the CHURCH-REPRESENTATIVE: and if they be to be anathematized, and excommunicated, that deny the bishops and other ministers assembled in the convocation, to be the Church of England representative, then surely are all the Pastors of the visible Churches in Europe, the Catholique Church representative, and those particular Ministers in this Realm, that shall use not only different Ceremonies, but such as they have renounced and forsaken, are Schismaticks and irregular persons. The Assumption is evident in it self. The sixth Argument. All spiritual Communion with those Idolaters amongst whom we live in the mysteries of their Idolatry and Superstition, is sin. To use these Ceremonies in Divine worship, is a spiritual Communion with the Idolatrous Papists (that do not only border round about us, but are tollerated in infinite numbers to live amongst us) in the mysteries of their Idolatry and Superstition. Ergo, To use these Ceremonies is to sin. The Proposition is his M. own, if Master B. have made a true report of the Conference at Hampt. Court; for therein his Ma. confesseth, That if we lived among Idolaters, we ought not then to communicate with them in their Rites and Ceremonies. The Assumpion is thus proved: If Papists be Idolaters, if we be not only in league with whole Kingdoms of Papists bordering upon us, and near unto us, but have many thousand professed ones living amongst us: if these Ceremonies be special mysteries of their Superstition: if to use the same Rites that they do in theirs, in our spiritual and divine Service, be spiritually to communicate with them in the same: then is the Sentence of the Assumption true. But we shall be able to prove, as soon as any shall deny, that the first, and every part and parcel thereof is true. Ergo, The later is true also.
The seventh Argument. To Mingle Prophane things with Divine, is to sin. To use these Ceremonies in Divine Worship, is to mingle Prophane things with Divine: Ergo, To use these Ceremonies in Divine Worship is to sin. THe Proposition shineth in the eyes of the very Heathen, who have esteemed it a dishonour to their Religion and Worship, that any prophane persons should be Actors in it, much more that any prophane Actions should be mingled with it. The Assumption is thus proved. All peculiar Actions done in Divine Worship, that are neither Civil nor holy, are prophane. These Ceremonies are peculiar actions, done in Divine worship, that are neither civil nor holy: Ergo, They are prophane. The Proposition cannot with any shew of reason be denied, there being no mean between these in such actions as are prescribed to be done in Divine Service, by Canon and Law: For though spitting, coughing, hemming, &c. if they be used for necessity, be neither civil, holy, nor prophane actions; yet if there should be an Ecclesiastical Canon that should require the Minister to spit at every full period, or the people to hem, and hauk, at every transition in a Sermon, they must needs then be referred to one of these three heads, as shall easily be proved if it be denied. The assumption is as clear: For first, His Ma. (with words of great disgrace and contempt of those that hold the contrary,) hath lately protested that they are not urged as holy and Religious matters; And that they are not civil Actions, hath been proved before; for there being an opposition in Reason between things Civil and Ecclesiastical, though they have some things common
to both (as all Opposites have) yet it is ridiculous to affirm, that those things are civil, that are meerly Ecclesiastical, and are Actions peculiarly appropriated, and tied to Divine Worship: For civil Actions, are performed in civil Affairs; & though there is a common civility also to be observed even in Divine matters, yet those Acti∣ons cannot be called Civil, that are used only in Divine Offices and duties, no more than those can be called Ecclesiastical and Divine that are used only in Civil affairs. For, it may be affirmed by as good reason, that an Ecclesiastical Officer, employed only in Eccle∣siastical matters, is a Civil Officer only: Or a Civil Officer em∣ployed only in Civil matters, is an Ecclesiastical Officer only; as that a meer Ecclesiastical action, done in and by the Church only, should be a Civil Action. The eighth Argument. If it be lawful to use these Ceremonies in Divine Worship, it is there∣fore lawful, because they are either lawful in themselves, or being things in their own nature indifferent, are made lawful by the com∣mandment of the Magistrate to be used in Divine Service. But they are neither lawful in themselves to be used, nor therefore lawful because the Magistrate commands them so to be used, though they be Matters in their own Nature indifferent. Ergo, They are unlawful to be used in Divine Worship. THE Proposition I think cannot be denied, when it is, I hope it may be proved. The first part of the Assumption is clear: For if they were in themselves lawful to be used, then might a Minister of the Gospel, being left to his own discretion by the Magistrate, invent, institute, and use the like Ceremonies in the same manner without sin. For any man, left to himself, may lawfully do that which of it self is lawful and indifferent. But a Minister should sin against God, if he should of his own head institute and use the like Ceremonies to these, though permitted by the Magistrate; except we should hold, that it is lawful for a Minister to do any indifferent thing in Gods Service, for a man may of any indifferent thing make a Ceremony like unto one of these.
The second part of the Assumption is thus proved: If they be therefore lawful, because, being thing in their own nature ifferent, the Magistrate commands them to be done in Divine Ser∣vice: Then whatsoever thing (being in its own nature indifferent) is, or shall be commanded by the Magistrate, is lawful to be done in Divine Service. But all things that are in themselves matters indifferent, are not lawful to be done in Divine Service, though the Magistrate should command them. Ergo, They are not therefore lawful to be used in Divine S rvice, because the Magistrate commands them, though they be things in their own na∣ture indifferent. The Proposition cannot be denied: For if some things, indiffe∣rent in their own nature, being commanded by the Magistrate, are unlawful, it can be no good Argument to say, These things, being indifferent, are commanded by the Magistrate. Ergo, They may lawfully be done. Much less therefore they ought to be done. Or as the Doctors of Oxf. affirm, that they bind the con∣science. The Assumption is more clear than the Proposition. If it be con∣sidered either what things are indifferent indeed, or go under the name and title of indifferent things. Eating and drinking, the avoiding the superfluities of Nature; due benevolence between Man and Wife; spinning and carding; killing of Oxen and Sheep, &c. which of themselves have in them neither vertue nor vice, are therefore indifferent Actions; and yet I think none, except pro∣fessed Atheists, but will hold it a foul sin to do some of these Acti∣ons in any Assembly, much more in the solemn Worship of God, though the Magistrate should command the same even upon pain of death. But if it be further considered, That Carding and Dicing, Masking and Dancing; for Men to put on Womens apparel, and Women Mens; Drinking to healths; Ribald, Stage-plaies, &c. are things indifferent to be done even upon the Lords own day: May a Minister of the Gospel, upon the Magistrates commandment, do any of these in Divine Worship? And yet there is none of these but may have applied unto them, by the Wit of Man, a Mystical and
Religious sence; and then by this Bishop of Canterburies Rule, They must needs be good and lawful Ceremonies: for his principal Argument to prove them lawfull at his last Convention of London Ministers before him, was this: They are Ceremonies that teach good Doctrine, Ergo, They are good Ceremonies. Whereas the filthiest actions and things that are may teach good Doctrine: The Holy Ghost resembleth the soul polluted with sin to a menstrous cloth: A man fallen again into sin, to a Sow wallowing in the mire: might therefore a filthie Sow, and such unclean Clothes, be brought into the Church, to be visible shadowes, and representations of such things? Nay, What may not by this means be brought into Gods Worship, and yet by this reason be defended to be a good Ceremony, if the Magistrates and Bishops should decree the same? A fools coat and a beggers, worne in Divine Service, may fitly teach this Doctrine, Not many Wise, Not many Noble: A Minister clothed in such apparrel as those that act the Devils part in a play may teach this, That by nature we are limbs of Sathan, and fire∣brands of Hell: Men might wear Womens apparel, and Women mens; The one to teach, That the Church is Christs Wife; The other to teach, that Women in Christ are equall to Men. Bear-baiting may teach us, How Christ was baited before the Tribunalls of the Pharisees, or the combate between the flesh and the spirit. But the grosseness of these Assertions will appear in our Special Reasons against the Ceremonies in particular.
The Ninth Argument. To administer unto the Church of God Sacraments that are not of Divine Institution, is to sin. To use divers of these Ceremonies, viz. The Cross in Baptism, the Ring in Marriage, the Surplice, &c. is to administer unto the Church of God Sacraments that are not of Divine institu∣tion. Ergo, To use these Ceremonies, is to sin. THE Proposition is granted of all, both Papist and Prote∣stant. The Assumption is thus proved: All mystical bodily Rites and Signs of spiritual grace, administred to the Church of God, in his solemn Service, to confirm Grace, and that by him that represents the Person of Christ, are Sacraments. The greatest part of these Ceremonies in controversie are such, and not of any divine Institution. Ergo, To use them, is to administer Sacraments that are not of Divine Institution. The Proposition is most evident, and cannot be denied of any that bears the face of a Divine. The Assumption is as evident, only this one clause may be doub∣ted of: Whether these Ceremonies be administred to confirm Grace, which is thus proved: Those Ceremonies that are administred to edifie the soul and consci∣ences, are administred to confirm Grace. These Ceremonies are administred to edifie the soul and consci∣ence. Ergo, They are administred to confirm Grace. The Proposition cannot with any colour be excepted against: For to edifie the soul, to confirm Grace in the soul, and to feed the soul, are equivalent.
The Sacrament of the Supper therefore being, for this only cause a Sacrament, because it is a mystical Rite, whereby the soul spiri∣tually feedeth upon Christ, i. e. is edified in Christ: These being Mystical Rites also, whereby the soul is edified, which it cannot be, but also by feeding upon Christ; It must needs follow, That these Ceremonies are Sacraments. The Assumption is their own, for when they are urged with this, That all things must be done to edification, They all hold with one consent, That they do edifie. The tenth Argument. It is a sin against Christ the sole Head of the Church, for any one of his Ministers, (especially in the administration of Divine things) either by Word or Signs, solemnly to profess and acknowledge a spiritual homage to an usurped spiritual authority in the Church. But to use these controverted Ceremonies in manner and Form prescri∣bed, is even in the solemn Service of Christ, by solemn Signs to ac∣knowledge a spiritual homage to the spiritual authority of Lord Archbishops and Bishops, which is usurped. Ergo, It is a sin to use these Ceremonies. THE Proposition may not be gainsaid: For all spiritual power usurped over the Churches of God, is an Antichristian autho∣rity; and to profess spiritual homage thereunto, is to profess spritu∣al homage unto Antichrist, which must needs be a sin, The Assumption hath two parts: 1. That these Ceremonies are an acknowledging by solemn signs a spi∣ritual Homage to the spiritual authority of Archbishops and Bishops. Which is most evident; for it having been proved before, that they are meer Ecclesiastical, Religious and spiritual Actions, enjoy∣ned by an Ecclesiastical and spiritual authority, They must needs be Signs of spiritual homage to the same authority. For either the doing of a Religious and spiritual Action, in obedience to a spiri∣tual authority, is a Sign of spiritual homage, or no Actions can be a Sign thereof. As therefore a Serving man, being a civil person, upon
the Bishops pleasure, wearing a Tawny Coat, and a Chain of Gold, holding up his Train, going bare-headed before him, holding a Trencher at his Table, lighting him to the house of Office, dres∣sing his meat, rubbing his Horses, &c. doth by these Actions, as it were by solemn Signs, acknowledge Civil homage to him, being a Civil Lord and Master: So a Minister of the Gospel, and a Pastor of a particular Congregation, being by his Office a meer spiritual man; being commanded by the Bishop, as he is a spiritual Lord and Ma∣ster over the Church of God, to wear a Tipper, a square Cap, a Priests Gown and Cloak, a Surplice; to make Crosses upon childrens fa∣ces; to put Rings on Brides fingers, &c. and all this in their Di∣vine Service: I say, a Minister doth thereby give solemn Signs and Tokens of spiritual homage to their spiritual Lordships; even as by preaching the Word and administration of Sacraments and Prayer, he professeth by solemn Signs a spiritual homage to the spiritual authority of Christ. If they shall peremptorily affirm, That they are only Civil mat∣ters (as some in high place have done to my self) then this will follow of it: Whereas the Bishops command now Ministers to wear a Surplice, a Priests Cloak, &c. he may command them to wear Tawny Coats, and livery Cloaks, and in their courses to wait and at end upon him, as serving Creatures: For there is no more Civil Authority shewed in requiring the one than the other, if the one as well as the other be Civil matters. Neither will it help their cause, that the Magistrate requireth these things to be done: For the Magistrate commanding Ecclesiastical matters to be done, his commandment doth no more make them Civil, than his command∣ing the Sacraments, and other parts of Divine Worship, to be ad∣ministred duly, doth make them Civil matters. For the ratification by Civil authority the Constitutions of Ecclesiastical authority, doth no more make them Civil matters, than the ratification and con∣firmation of Civil matters by Ecclesiastical authority doth make them Ecclesiastical or spiritual matters. Though therefore there is none of us that stand our in these matters, but have ever been con∣tent to yield unto their Lordships all Cvil honour, such as is given to Barons, Earls, Dukes, and Princes; yet, except they were Gods and Christs, we have no reason to give spiritual homage unto them; which is it that in very deed they require in these things: And therefore hence it comes to pass, That as they turn out of their Pa∣laces those Servants that refuse their Liveries, and to do their civil
Services: So, as though they were Lords and Masters in the Church, they turn the Ministers out of their Offices, and shut them out of the Church, if they refuse to wear their spiritual Liveries, and to do them spiritual and religious Service. But I come to the second part of the Assumption. 2. That the authority of our Lord Archbishops and Bishops, is an usurped authority. This is sufficiently proved of late by Mai. Jacob in his I. Assertion by many reasons, only because the weight of the Argument leaneth upon it, I will use one Reason. Those Officers and Rulers in the Church, that make claim to be of Divine Institution, challenge to themselves Apostolical authority and jurisdiction, as the only Successors of the Apostles, to sit only in Moses Chair; To have sole power of the Keys; To cut from the visible Church, and receive again; To have power of creating and displacing all other Ecclesiastical Officers; To be the Universal Pastors of whole Dukedoms and Kingdoms, under whom all other Pastors are as Curates, &c. And yet for all this, are such as stand and are supported only by humane Tra∣ditions and Ceremonies, such as a Civil Magistrate may, without sin, put out of the Church; and such as the true Churches of God may re∣nounce (and yet continue the true Church) as Antichristian Usurpers and spiritual Tyrants. (I say) all such Officers and Rulers exercise a usurped authority in the Church: But our Archbishops and Bishops are such Rulers and Officers as are aforesaid. Ergo, They execute a usurped power over the Church. The Proposition may easily be justified: For if inferiour Officers, viz. Pastors of particular Congregations have had, and may have firm continuance in the Church without these humane devises and inventions; If the Magistrate cannot, without sin, put them out of the Church; And if those can be no true Churches that renounce to have particular Pastors and Ministers over them, it must much more hold in such Church-Officers and Rulers as these are, if their authority be lawful and good: For whilest the Apostles lived, they needed not any humane Traditions and devices to support their authority; the Magistrates that sought to put them down sinned
with a high hand: And that was no Church that renounced and dis∣claimed their Office, Authority, and Jurisdiction. The Assumption is as easily justified: For 1. They make claim and title to all those Prerogatives before rehearsed in the first part of the Proposition, and unto more than that, as shall be proved if it be denied. 2. It is an Embleme of their own, NO CERE∣MONY, NO BISHOP. Ergo, No humane Tradition and Invention, no Bishop. Ergo, The Office of a Bishop is supported by them, either only or specially. 3. Their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is derived from the King, else it is a flat denial of his Supremacy. Also, themselves grant in their last Tables of Discipline, That the King hath power to encrease or diminish the Circuit of a Bishop∣prick: That he may make two or more Bishoppricks of one, and one Bishopprick to be two or more: Yea, what should hinder, but that he may devide the Bishopprick of London into eight hundred. For, where God hath not defined the number of Parishes that a Bishop is to raign over, it must needs be a thing indifferent: In which, by their own Doctrines, the King hath authority, without sin, to dis∣pose. If therefore the King may as well (notwithstanding any thing in the Law of God) Give the Keys of the Church to every particular Pastour of a Congregation, over his own Congregation, as to a Bishop over a Diocess, which taketh away the very Essence of an English Bishop; He may, without sin, take away the very Office of the Bishop, which consists in having Jurisdiction over many Congregations. Also, it being not defined, by the Word of God, but left free, what attire Bishops shall wear, as also, what main∣tenance they shall have; The King, having absolute power in things indifferent, according to their own Doctrine, He may turn them out of their Rochets and Parliament Robes; Thrust them out of their Pallaces, and put them to their stipends, to live upon voluntary de∣votions of poor Christian People, and then a man may easily ima∣gine what the Office of a Bishop would be worth: For, he that hath authority to prescribe to a Bishop, and other Ministers, the Forms, Rites, and Ceremonies of their Divine Service, hath also power much more, to prescribe, moderate, and appoint their Apparel, Diet, and manner of maintenance. So that it is clear, That the King may, without sin, disanul the Authorities, Dignities, and Preroga∣tives of Bishops; Any of which shall be (if it be denied) proved to be matters of greater indifferency, and therefore more appertaining to his Supremacy, than the prescribing of Forms of Divine Service,
and mystical Rites of Religion. For let the King take from the Bishop all indifferent things (which he may do by their own Do∣ctrine) and a Bishop will be no Bishop, as shall be proved, if it be denied. 4. There is no true and sober Christians but will say, that the Churches of Scotland, France, the Low-Countries, and other places (that renounce such Archbishops and Bishops (as ours are) as Anticristian and usurping Prelates) are true Churches of God: which they could not be, if the Authority and Prerogatives they claim to themselves, were of Christ, and not usurped. For if it were the Ordinance of Christ Jesus, That in every Kingdome, that receiveth the Gospel, There should be one Archbishop over the whole Kingdome; One Bishop over many hundred Pastors, in a Kingdome, and all they invested with that authority and Jurisdiction Apostolicall which they claim jure Divino, to be due unto them, and to reside in them, by the Ordinance of Christ; Certainly that Church that should renounce and disclaim such an Authority, ordained in the Church, cannot be a true Church, but a Synagogue of Sathan. For they that should renounce and deny such, must needs therein renounce and deny Christ himself. Thus the Assumption is cleared. The eleventh Argument. All Humane Traditions and Rites enjoyned to be performed in Gods worship as necessary to Salvation, are unlawfull. These Ceremonies in controversie, being but Humane Traditions, are enjoyned to be performed in Gods worship, as necessary to Salvation: Ergo, These Ceremonies are unlawfull. THe Proposition is freely granted of all our Adversaries hitherto. If any hereafter, by reason of some difficulties, the cause may be thrust into by granting the same, shall be so desperate as to deny the same; we shall be ready to make it good, at any time. The assumption is thus proved. Whatsoever Humane Tradition, Ceremony, or Action, that may without sin, or inconvenience to any part of the Worship of God be omitted
in the same, and yet notwithstanding are injoyned and urged as more necessary than those Actions that are by the Word of God necessary to Salvation: I say, such humane Ceremonies and Traditions are injoined as necessary to Salvation. But these Ceremonies are such, as may without any sin, or any inconve∣nience to any part of the Worship of God, be omitted in the same, and yet notwithstanding are enjoyned as more necessary for Christians to do, than those Actions that are necessary to Salvation by the Word of God: Ergo, These Ceremonies in controversie are injoyned, &c. as necessary to Salvation. He hath no blood of shame running in his veins, that will deny the Proposition. The Assumption hath two parts: The first is this, That these Ceremonies are such as may, without sin, or any inconve∣nience to any part of the worship of God, be omitted. This is evident: For 1. if they could not be omitted without sin in Divine Worship, they were Divine and not Humane Ordi∣nances. For example, Though to go clothed to the Congregation be a Civil action, yet, because it is a sin, for any to go naked to the Congregation, It is a Divine Ordinance, That men should go clothed thither. And in this case (as in any other case of sin) a man ought rather never Worship God publickly, than to go naked to the Congregation. For the omission of a Good Action is no sin, when it cannot be done, but by committing of a sin? 2. Divine Worship consisting in Prayer, the Sacraments, and the Word, no wit of man can shew wherein the bare omission of any one of these Ceremonies is inconvenient to any one of these parts: for what inconvenience can a man (that is not drunk with the dreggs and lees of Popish Superstition) finde it to publick Prayer, to be said in the Congregation without a Priests Surplice? The omission of ordinary pawses and Accents, points and stopps, the suppressing of the voice, or a loud hooping and hallowing out of the words, or an undistinct sounding of them, were such actions as common reason will teach are inconvenient for Prayer, and so inconvenient, that a man ought never to pray publickly in the Congregation, as the voyce thereof, that should by Canon be tied thereto: And the Magistrate (though there were no Canon to the contrary) ought to
turn such out of the Ministry that should omit such matters in prayer. But for a Minister to pray without a Surplice, can be in reason no more inconvenient, than for him to pray without Book, without a pair of spectacles upon his nose. And there may be as good reason given to prove it convenient for a man that saith a thing without Book, to put on a pair of Spectacles, as there can be to prove it convenient for him that is to pray in the Church, to put upon himself a white linen Garment. The second part of the Assumption is this; That they are injoined as more necessary for Christians to do, than those Actions that by the Word of God are necessary to Salvation. Which I prove by this collection of Reasons; 1. If the whole Solemn Worship and Mystery of Jesus must stoop and yield to these; And these must not stoop or yield to them. 2. If those that will yield to these are dispensed with, for omission of some duties that God requires of the Minister to be performed as necessary to Salvation, and those that are willing to do all necessary Services tending to the Salvation of Man, cannot be dispensed with for the omission of these, but must be turned out of Christs Service. 3. If those that refuse only conformity to these are worse than Idolatrous Papists. 4. If the bare omission of these, though upon tenderness of conscience, be Sedition, Schisme, Disloyalty, Rebellion, a denial of the Kings Supre∣macy, Anabaptistry, Frenzy, worthy imprisonment, Banishment, losse of Goods and Living. 5. If all that professe these to be unlawfull, are to be delivered up to Sathan, and anathematized as men holding wicked and damnable Errours. 6. If a man being in that Church, ought not to be of it where these Ceremonies are omitted. 7. If the bare omission of these, wake a Minister by our Law more subject to deprivation and suspension, than the commission of the foulest Crimes, even Drunkenness, Blasphemy, gross Ignorance, uncleanness. 8. If her late Excellent Ma. Religion consisted in these: I say, If all these Assertions be true, then are they enjoined as more necessary to be done, then those Actions that by the Word of God are necessary to Salvation. But all these Eight points are to be justified; Ergo, These Ceremonies are enjoyned as more necessary to be done, than some Actions that are necessary to Salvation.
The Proposition cannot be gainsayed. It being a Topick Axiom. Cujus privatio est deterior, illud ipsum est melius: to wit, The worse the Privation of a thing is, the better the thing is. For Example, If blindness be worse than deafnesse; Then is the positive habit of seeing better than that of hearing. So, if Non-conformity be worse than Drunkennesse, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Filthiness of Body, &c. It must needs follow, that Conformity is a more excellent thing in it self than Sobriety; the true Worship of God, the glorifying of the name of God, than a chaste and honest life: But all these are urged by the Word of God, as necessary means to Salvation: For the Holy Ghost saith, No Murderer, Adulterer, Unclean person, Idolater, &c. shall enter into the Kingdome of heaven. If therefore Conformity be more urged by our Lawes than these, and the Privation more punished: If this be more strictly required of Christians, yea, of principal Christians, even the Ministers of the Word, than the other, they must needs be urged more necessary to Salvation than the other. For, of the more excellency a Christian vertue is, the more necessary to Salvation it is. The Assumption in every part and parcel thereof may be justified by the practice and Assertions of our Adversaries, not only privately, but in publick: For the 1. God must not by Canon be Worshipped solemnly in England, except these be mingled with it, though without them he might be never so well worshipped. For the 2. Those that yield to these, need not preach at all in our Church except they will; No, nor to do any other part of Divine Service in their own person, if they will maintain a Curate, that will keep the Ceremonial Law, and fairly red or sing the Kings Service, as they call it: And yet if Preaching were not necessary to Salvation, Paul that was above an Archbishop, should not have been under a woe, if he had not done it. For no Minister of the Gospel is under a woe, that performeth all services to the Churches of God that are necessary to Salvation. Neither was Pauls Preaching a Reading of Homilies, or of a Service Book. For the 3. Nothing is more notorious then for us that make scruple of these things to be reputed worse than Papists: One that is a great Judge in these causes Ecclesiastical, affirmed it unto my self. Another, openly at Pauls Crosse, in mine own hearing, made no doubt but the Papists were in the Church, but he made great doubt whether the Puritanes were. And yet we are Puritanes for nothing else, but for refusing Conformity
to their Ceremonies: For, howsoever they slander us with many other gross imputations, yet they cannot lay any thing to our charge but our conscience in this. For all other matters concerning their own Estates and Dignities, considering how desperate they are, and unreformable, we can be content to leave them to the Judgment of God, who (as it seems) intendeth to glorifie himself by some other means, than by their Conversion. For the 4. Read Scottish, Genevat. The Survey, Remonstrance, &c. And ye shall finde all this laid to their Charge. Also their practice sufficiently proveth it; for the Ministers that are of late suspended and deprived, only refusing to use these Ceremonies, bear their condemnation under these Names and Titles. The 5. and 6. is proved by their own late Canons; For, if they be to be excommunicated ipso facto, as holding damnable and wicked Errours, that shall Profess any of these Ceremonies to be unlawfull, a man ought not to acknowledge himself a member of any such Church, as doth affectedly cast them out of Gods worship: For, for what Error a particular person is not to be reputed as a member of the Church, but as a Heathen and Publican; for the same a whole Church is not to be reputed a Church, but a Synagogue of Satan. The 7. may be justified by many Instances of many vile and impious persons of those kindes tolerated in the Ministry. The 8. is proved by him that answers the Plea of the Innocent, who saith, That they that call in question the lawfulness of these Ceremonies, call in question her late Majesties Religion; which they could not do, except (at the least) part of her Religion consisted in them. Further, If this doth not sufficiently prove the main Assum∣ption, let these Reasons following be wayed. 1. If the Church be necessary to Salvation, and if the Pillars of the Church be necessary to the Church, and if the Lord Bishops be the Pillars of the Church, and these or such like Cermonies be the main Supporters of Lord Bishops: then are these Ceremonies in the judgment of the Prelates necessary to Salvation. For no Church, no Salvation; no Pillar of the Church, no Church: No L. Bishop, no Pillar of the Church: No Ceremony, no Lord Bishop. Ergo, No Ceremony of this kinde, no Salvation.
2. All Divine Constitutions binding conscience are necessary to Salvation: But by the late Doctrine of the Prelates and others, these Ceremonies (being not unlawfull) when they are commanded by the Church, are said not to be humane but Divine Constitutions, binding conscience; therefore they (as they are urged) are necessary to Salvation. For all divine Constitutions binding conscience, are necessary to Salvation, or else, nothing on our part can be said in any sence to be necessary thereunto. 3. It is necessary to Salvation, that men should not only worship God, but worship him in a comely, decent, and orderly manner, it being a matter of damnation to worship God in a confused, unseemly, and disordered manner, but by the Doctrine of our Prelates, comeliness, decency, and order, consists in the use of these Ceremonies; Ergo, in their Judgment they are necessary to Salvation. Objection: The Church doth not intend to urge these things, as necessary to Salvation. Ergo, They are not urged as necessary to Salvation. Answ. 1. The Church urgeth not these things at all, but only three or four Bishops in the Church, which (if their own Doctrine be true) are Usurpers over our Churches, and not so much as any true members of a Church. What if the Synod should Decree that the King should hold the Arch-Bishops stirrop, and the Prince and Nobles kiss his toe, once or twice a year; and withall they should protest, that they do not require this as a worship, or honor to the Archbishop, but only for comelinesse, Order, and Edification, were not this a shamefull shift, as bad as the thing it self.
The twelfth Argument. All actions, not required by the Word of God, (though commanded by humane authority) that are apparent means of the Damnation of the Souls of infinite numbers of men, are directly against the Law of charity, and therefore sin. But these Ceremonies are such Actions. Ergo, THE Proposition is without question: For if, without com∣mandment from God, I may, upon the sole will and pleasure of the Magistrate, or Governours of the Church, do that by which I shall be a means of the damnation of my brothers soul, which is the greatest breach of the law of charity that can be: Then may I do any sin at their commandment without sin, for what greater sin can there be against the second Table than this, to be a witting Instru∣ment of my Neighbours damnation. Which though it be but a mat∣ter of Jest to our great Doctors, that have many Cures, and no care of souls, yet, to them which know the price of a soul, it is more than if, upon the meer will of the Magistrates, they should be forced to kill their own Children and dearest Beloveds with their own hand. Object. The Magistrate having authority given him by God to com∣mand things Indifferent, he commanding, they are to be done, notwith∣standing the Scandal of our Neighbour. Answ. 1. Though the Subject ought to obey his Magistrate in all Indifferent actions imposed upon him whatsoever, yet I desire that it may be proved, that God in his Word hath given to any Power or Potentate upon Earth any such absolute authority. The Magi∣strate is Gods Lieutenant, and the glory of the Magistrate consists in this, In that, under God, he beareth a Sword, to punish those that transgress his Laws, but he is by Gods Ordinance to be the procu∣rer and protector of the Christian Liberty of his Subjects. That therefore he hath power granted him of God (upon his own plea∣sure) to take away the same, especially in such a case, requires proof out of the Word of God. 2. If he have such a power, yet those things that God leaves to his will to command, or not to command, he cannot command
under a greater penalty than bodily death; for his Sword can cut no deeper, and then in the case of Scandal a Christian Subject ought rather to suffer the Magistrate to take away his life, than to do that which shall procure the Damnation of his Brothers Soul. And in thus doing, he is no contemner of the Magistrates Law, but a fulfiller of the Law of Charity, in not destroying his brothers Soul upon the meer pleasure of a mortal man. Object. But the commandment of the Magistrate takes away the scandal, when the thing is done in obedience to him. Answ. This is another desperate shift. As though the consci∣ence of the weak brother that judgeth a thing indifferent to be a Sin will be ever the more satisfied and relieved in the matter by the authority of the Magistrate, nothing but the authority of God either can or ought to satisfie a doubting conscience. And as for them that put superstition in things indifferent, and are that way scandalized, the authority of the Magistrate or Church com∣manding them, their scandal is encreased, and not removed by the same. Object. But we must more respect Obedience to the Magistrate, than the scandal of inferiour persons, the thing commanded being in∣different, and not evil. Answ. 1. The thing commanded is not indifferent, then when it is a scandal and stumbling block to our brother. 2. We must obey the Magistrate only in the Lord, but this is not to obey him in the Lord, only upon his pleasure to destroy a soul for whom Christ died. 3. An obedience to the Magistrate, so far as to the condemnation of our brothers soul, must be a special obedience, in some special good and just commandment, which cannot be verified of a commandment that requireth only a thing indifferent, much less such an indifferent, as is a scandal and means of destruction to mens souls. 4. Such a forbearing of obedience only in love to the salvati∣on of our brothers soul, being without apparent contempt of the Magistrate, and having adjoyned with it a meek submission to the mercy of the Magistrate, cannot be called a disobedience, but is indeed a better obedience than theirs, that do contrary, who in their obedience bring the bloud of the souls they destroy, both upon their own heads, and the Magistrate, which is a sin in the eyes of God worse than rebellion.
Object. But by obedience to these Ceremonies many souls by means of preaching are saved, which shall want the means in the re∣fusal. Answ. 1. We must not destroy the souls of some, that we may save the soules of other, we must do that which is just, though the World go to wrack for it. 2. The greatest good that a man can do, cannot countervail the least evil, much less so great an evil as to be a witting instrument of the damnation of a brothers soul. 3. He that preacheth cannot assure himself of the salvation of one soul by the same, for that is wrought by the work of the Spi∣rit of God. And he hath little cause to hope for a blessing upon that preaching which he purchaseth with the price of bloud, yea, of the bloud of souls. Object. But the King, the Magistrate and State are scandalized also at the omission of them, and their scandal is more to be respected than the scandal of inferiour persons, for the using of them. Answ. 1. For his Majesty, we doubt not but (if the Prelates would) he would easily yield to the removal of them, and therefore he cannot be scandalized at the refusal, when it is of meer conscience, though of conscience deceived. 2. The States and Inferiour Magistrates of the Kingdom have in all Parliaments shewed themselves willing, and ready to set their hands to the removal of them. 3. If the King and State will be scandalized, because upon their meer will and pleasure, I will not do that which I am perswaded will be a means of the destruction of their souls for whom Christ died: They will be much more scandalized at me if I do it; For such an obe∣dience as this, must needs be a means of begetting or confirm∣ing strange sins in their souls: for as it is a kind of deifying of themselves, To require (even in the case of scandal) a thing indifferent to be done; so they that shall in such a case obey, cannot but nourish exceedingly that corruption from which such a commandment shall proceed. 4. The soul of the meanest and poorest in a Kingdom cost as great a price, and is as dear to Christ, as the soul of the Noblest, and in the matter of scandal, as great heed is to be taken to them, as to any other: And it shews of what spirit these men are of, that think they may be∣tray the souls of Christs little ones, rather than displease a mortal man.
Object. What, Must the Magistrates Laws be changed for every humour that will pretend scandal? Answ. Yea, such Laws as command only things indifferent, in cases of general scandal, are to be changed; of particular scan∣dal, are (at the least) to be dispensed withall: For if Laws that command things necessary, are sometimes to be dispenced with, and if of them it is said, Extream right is extream wrong. Much more then such Laws as require only such things as are indifferent. 1. Such things that (but for the Commanders pleasure) makes no matter whether they be done or no. Which are indeed unworthy to be commanded of Worthies. 2. A pretended scandal in humour is easily discerned by those that are wise and not malicious, for they that are ready to performe all obedience to the Magistrate in all other heavier and greater things, are ready in his Service to spend their goods and lives, that think nothing too dear for the redeeming of his safe∣ty, that are in all other things as obedient, and more obedient than any other of his subjects: It is not to be supposed of any, (that are not possest with the malicious spirit of Antichrist) that such should refuse to obey the Kings pleasure in a toye, and a trifle, (such as are all things indifferent) except that in obeying him they were perswaded that they should sin against their own conscience, which, next unto God, they have cause to please, far above all the Kings of the earth, for it hath greater power to tor∣ment them than they have. But I prove the Assumption. All apparent means of confirming men in Schism, Superstition, and Idolatry, by means whereof many have professedly lived and died therein without repentance, are apparent means of the damnation and destruction of many souls amongst us: But These Ceremonies are such. Ergo, The Proposition cannot be denied, for what action of man can be said to be a means of the damnation and destruction of ano∣thers soul, if these actions be not, that confirm men in such foul sins? So that either a man can do nothing that shall destroy his brothers soul (which is directly against the express words of S. Paul) Or else such a conformity, in such actions as confirm men in such damnable sins, doth destroy his soul.
The Assumption is as evident as any such matter can be. For 1. The Papists, not only amongst us, (which are innumerable) but others also do profess, that by our use of these Ceremo∣nies (which are consecrated mysteries of their own Reli∣gion) they are confirmed in the truth of their Religion, and the falshood of ours. And good reason they have so to judge: For if the broth be good that the Devil is sod in, sure the De∣vil himself must needs be good also. 2. Those Christians of the Seperation, that are called Brownists, being many hundreds, professing the same faith that we do, are by the retaining of Reliques, confirmed in their Schism, and Seperation from us; And live and die in this opinion, That our Churches are no true Churches, and that a man cannot, without sin, communicate with them. And the main ground of this is, for that we mingle with Divine worship these base and vile inventions of men, Yea, of the accursed Antichrist. What? Is a linnen rag, and a Christs Cross, &c. to be reputed of so great value and price, that the fellowship and spiritual communion of so many Christians, (as sound in religion as any Prelate in the Realm) should be contem∣ned and rejected for them? 3. Common experience teacheth us, that there are infinite numbers in this Realm ignorant and superstitious folk, that place as much, or more holiness in these things, than in the holy Or∣dinances of God; And how can it be otherwise, when they shall see the Rulers of the Church, mingle Heaven, Earth, and Hell together in this manner about them. Cursing, and a∣nathematizing all that shall not embrace them. How can they but imagine, that the sight of a Surplice upon a Priests back shall bring them to heaven, when they shall see those that keep Heaven Keys, send a man, for want of such a wedding garment, ipso facto, to hell? 4. If it be but considered, that all other Protestant Churches have rejected them as menstruous cloaths, that more than the greatest number of Pastors in our own Land, that desires the name of faithful and painful Teachers, either count them impious, or at least the burdens or reproaches of our Churches: that the first appointers of them, (after our seperation from Rome) intended only a toleration of them, that the most scandalous and leud persons in our Congregations, are the hottest for them, that every Parliament since her Majesties raign
hath been forward in the removing of them, that the defence of them hath driven men to run into the broching of many grosse and Popish errours. And that so many Ministers, (a catalogue of whose names and states, I could wish were published to all posterity, that it may see the wonderfull milde and moderate government of Prelates) have endured and expected daily to en∣dure the gratest extremities for the same: I say, if these things be duly considered, a man shall easily see, that these ceremo∣nies are stumbling blocks, layd by the Devill and his Agents in the wayes of all the people of this Realm, to hinder the progress of the Gospel, and to make all men stumble in the wayes of sal∣vation. AN ADDITION. NOt onely our Conformers unto Rome, but they also that abhor the same; can hardly endure to hear, that these Ce∣remonies are parts of divine worship, for whose further satisfacti∣on I add this one Argument. Whatsoever being used in divine worship, is directly contrary to the 2d. Commandement, is a part of divine worship. These Ceremonies are used in divine worship, and are directly contrary to the 2d. commandement. Ergo The Proposition is evident, for all outward Idolatry is Divine worship; and nothing but outward Idolatry is directly forbidden in the 2d. Commandement. The second part of the Assumption is thus proved, All inventions and devices of man, grounded orely upon the will of man, and not upon any necessity of nature, or civility, set a-part to Gods outward worship; are contrary to the second Commande∣ment. These Ceremonies are such, Ergo. The proposition we prove thus. Either all such devices and inventions are contrary unto the 2d. commandement, or else there is noA trope or figure of speech, where∣in under one kind of Idola∣try all sorts are forbidden. Synecdoche therein. But there is a Synecdoche in the 2d. Commandement. The Assumption or latter part of this Syllogisme cannot be denyed of any, but such as shall desperately set themselves, a∣gainst the truth of God. For if there were no figure or Trope in the commandement, then to bow down unto, and to worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, or any other of Gods creatures, yea,
or any image made by any other, should be no breach of this commandement, much less to offer Jewish Sacrifices of sheep and Oxen, to circumcise, to go a pilgrimage to Saints, to kisse the Paxe, to sprinkle with holy water, to baptize Bells, or to use any other Popish rites; in which if a man sin not against the second commandement, he sinneth not against any. Again, It would be demanded, against what commandement, Nadab and Abihu sinned, when they offered strange fire. The Israelites, when they abused Gideons Ephod, Judg. 8.27. The Corinthians in eating meat offered to Idols, in the Idols Tem∣ples, 1 Cor. 9. Either they sinned not against this commande∣ment, and by consequent against none, or else there must needs be a wonderfull large Trope in the same, which I think never any Divine, Jew or Christian, Protestant or Papist ever denyed before now. The proposition is as evident if it be considered, that in the 2.d commandement, literally and in propriety of speech, nothing is forbidden, but the making of Images for worship, and the bowing down unto them & worshiping of them: Now if there be a Synec∣doche in the commandement, there must of necessity be not onely other kinds of false outward worship of Idolatry, different in form from making and bowing down unto Images and Idols, but there must be also some common cause or ground, upon which making and bowing unto Images is forbidden, which must be the third Argument, and reason by which all other kinds of false outward worship are brought under bowing unto images, & condemne in that, else it were senseless to make any thing that is not a bowing down unto Images to be condemned under that name and title. For when one thing is condēned under another, it is because that thing doth communicate with it in the same cause for which it is condemned. For example; if under, bowing down unto Images, Jewish Circumcision, Sacrifices, &c. are forbidden, forasmuch as these cannot in any sense be called Bowing down to Images; there must be some cause why bowing down into Images is for∣bidden, which must stretch it selfe unto them, and bring them under it, which must be as it were a common genus unto it and them. Now let all the wits in the world lay their heads together, and they shall never be able to devise any such common genus, that shall be the common cause why not onely bowing down to Ima∣ges:
but why, under it all other kind of Idolatry and false worship is condemned, but this, for that they were humane de∣vices, & inventions, and therefore under the most usual and ge∣nerall received invention of man, God condemneth all o∣ther Inventions used to the same end. If this be not the rea∣son then there are and may be infinite, outward Idolatries and Superstitions that cannot with any reason be referred to this commandement. Therefore it must needs follow that either there is no trope in the commandement, or that all such inventions of man are forbidden in the same. An Advertisement. I had thought (good Reader) to have fortified some other poynts in the Arguments, which to them that do not consider may seem weak, but I forbear for some speciall reasons, I am onely to admonish thee of one defect amongst others, that hath passed me, viz. The mistaking of the Archbishops Argument, though I made it better then it was. For thus it is, and hath been I know not how oft (as unanswerable) been propounded. Those Ceremonies whose doctrine is sound and good, are lawfull and good ceremonies. The doctrine of these ceremonies is sound and good. Ergo, Which is subject to the very same absurdities that the other, and more also. For 1. the Doctrine of them is unsound & false, for the doctrine of them is this, that they are matters indifferent, of order, decency, and edification, no parts of Divine worship, that they are Schismaticks that will not conform unto them, enemies to the Supremacy and State, that it is a wicked errour to hold them unlawfull and superstitious, that they are to be excommunicated that affirm them to be so, &c. All which is un∣sound doctrine concerning them. 2. Grant the Doctrine sound, yet it followeth not that the Ceremonies are good; for the thing may be wicked, any yet the doctrine of it sound. For, There is a sound doctrine of all vices. 3. In what respect doth he affirme the doctrine to be sound and good? Is it not from the use and end that is assigned unto them by himself? Because they are appointed for such and such ends? Hence will follow the very same absurdities, that I have observed in the former. For then any ridiculous or base Cere∣mony, may be instituted, so it be under pretence of a good end.
A PROTESTATION OF THE Kings Supremacy, Made in the name of the afflicted MINISTERS, and opposed to the shamefull Calumniations of the PRELATES. PSAL. 7.3.5. O Lord my God, if I have done this thing, if there be any wickedness in my hands; Then let the Enemy persecute my soule, and take it, let him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the Dust. Selah. JOHN 18.23. If I have spoken evill, beare witness of the evill: But if I have spoken well, why smitest thou me. Printed in the year, 1660.
To the civil States of this King∣dome. WEe beseech your H. and W. that you would by this true light that we shall give unto you, look into our innocency. His Excellent Majestie, your selves, and your sa∣cred Thrones are exceedingly abused, with Fogs and Mists, which (breathed out of the mouths of the Prelates) are cast between your eyes, and the integrity of our cause: through the darkness whereof you are led to give many heavy Sen∣tences against the most harmless Subjects in the Kingdome, as Enemies to the Supremacy and State. Whereas it shall appear that no Christians in the world give more unto the same then we, and that in very truth, the cause that we maintain is for the King and Civil State, against an Eccle∣siasticall State, that secretly, and in a Mystery (as we may hereafter have occasion to prove) opposeth it selfe against the same. If this protestation shall in any measure satisfie you, Then we desire your Honourable Mediations for us to the highest. If not; That then we may know wherein it is defective, and we shall be found ready to give all satisfa∣ction.
CHAP. I. A PROTESTATION of the Kings Supremacy. WE hold and maintain, the same Authority and Supremacy in all causes and over all persons Civil and Ecclesiasticall, granted by Statute to Queen Elizabeth, and expressed and de∣clared in the book of Advertisements and Injunctions, and in Mr. Bilson against the Jesuites, to be due in full and ample mannner (without any limitation or qualification) to the King and his Heirs and Successours for ever. Neither is their (to our knowledge, any one of us, but is and ever hath been most willing to subscribe and swear unto the same, according to form of Statute, And we desire that those that shall refuse the same may bear their own iniquity. 2. We are so far from judging the said Supremacy to be un∣lawful: that we are perswaded that the King should sin highly a∣gainst God, if he should not assume the same unto himself, and that the Churches within his Dominions should sin damnably, if they should deny to yield the same unto him, yea though the Statutes of the Kingdom should deny it unto him. 3. We hold it plain Antichristianism for any Church, or Church Officers whatsoever, either to arrogate or assume unto them∣selves any part or parcel thereof, & utterly unlawful for the King to give away or alienate the same from his own Crown and dig∣nity to any spiritual potentates or rulers whatsoever within or without his dominions. 3. We hold that though the Kings of this Realm were no Mem∣bers of the Church but very Infidels, yea & persecutors of the truth that yet those Churches that shall be gathered together within these Dominions ought to acknowledge and yeild the said supre∣macy unto them. And that the same is not tyed to their faith and Christianity but to their very Crown from which no subject or subjects have power to separate or disjoyne it. 5. We hold that neither King nor civil estate are bound in matter of Religion to be subject and obedient to any Ecclesiasti∣cal person or persons whatsoever, no further then they shall be able to convince their consciences of the truth thereof out of the
Word of God. Yea we think they should sin against God, if they should ground their Religion, or any part or parcel thereof upon the bare Testimony or Judgment of any man, or of all the men in the world. 6. We hold that no Churches or Church-Officers have power for any crime whatsoever to deprive the King of the least of his Royal Prerogatives whatsoeer, much less to deprive him of his Supremacy wherein the Height of his Royal Dignity consists. 7. We hold that in all things concerning this life whatsoever, the Civil Jurisdiction of Kings and Civill States excelleth and ought to have preheminence over the Ecclesiasticall, and that the Ecclesiasticall neither hath, nor ought to have any power in the least degree over the bodies, lives, goods, or liberty of any per∣son whatsoever, much lesse of the Kings and Rulers of the Earth. 8. We hold that Kings by virtue of their supremacy have power: yea also that they stand bound by the Law of God to make Laws Ecclesiastical such as shall tend to the good order∣ing of the Churches in their Dominions; And that the Church∣es ought not to be disobedient to any of their Lawes, so far as in obedience unto them, they do not that which is contrary to the Word of God. 9. We hold that though the King shall command any thing contrary to the Word unto the Churches, that yet they ought not to resist him therein, but onely peaceably to forbear O∣bedience, and sue unto him for grace and mercy, and where that cannot be obtained, meekely to submit themselves to the punishment. 10. We hold that the King hath power by virtue of his supre∣macy, to remove out of the Churches, whatsoever he shall dis∣cern to be practised therein, not agreeable to the Word of God. And if he shall see any defect either in the Worship of God, or in the Ecclesiastical Discipline, he ought by his royal Authority and power to procure and force the redress thereof, yea, though it be without the consent and against the will of the Ecclesiastical Go∣verners themselves. 11. We hold that the King hath as much Authority over the Body, Goods, and Affaires, of Ecclesiastical Persons, as of any other of his Subjects whatsoever. And that by his Authority, he may force them not onely to all civil duties belonging unto them,
but also unto Ecclesiastical: afflicting as great punishment upon them for the neglect thereof, as upon any other of his Subjects. 12. We hold that he hath power, to remove out of the Church∣es, all Scandalous Schismatical and Heretical Teachers, and by all due severity of Lawes to repress them. 13. We hold that all Ecclesiastical Lawes made by the King (not repugnant to the Word of God) do in some sort bind the consciences of his Subjects: and that no subject ought to refuse obedience to any such Law. 14. We hold that the King onely hath power within his Do∣minions, to convene Synods or general Assemblies of Ministers, and by his Authority Royal, to ratifie and give life and strength, to their Canons and Constitutions, without whose ratification, no man can force any subject to yeild any Obedience unto the same. 15. We hold that though the King may force the Churches to be subject and obedient unto him: and to be Members of the Common-wealth; yet that the Churches severally or joyntly, have no power to force him: or any Subject, against their will to any service unto them, or to any religions duty whatsoever. No, nor to be so much as a Member of any Church. 16. We hold that the King ought not to be subject to the Ec∣clesiastical Censures of any Churches, Church Officers or Synods whatsoever, but onely to that Church and those Officers of his own Court and Houshold, unto whom (in reverence of their Re∣ligion and of the spiritual Graces of God he sees shining in them) he shall of his own free will, subject and commit the Regi∣ment of his Soul, in whom there can be no suspition nor fear of any partiality, or unjust or rigorous dealing against him. 17. We hold that if any Ecclesiastical Governours (call them by what name you will) shall abuse their Ecclesiastical Authority in the execution of their censures, upon any man whosoever; That the King and Civil States under him, have power to punish them severely for it, much more if they shall abuse it upon the Supream Majesty himself. 18. If the King subjecting himself to spiritual Guides and Governours, shall afterwards refuse to be guided and governed by them according to the Word of God, and living in notorious sin without Repentance shall wilfully contemn and despise all their
holy and religious Censures, that then these Governours are to refuse to administer the holy things of God unto him, and to leave him to himself and to the secret Judgement of God, & wholly to resign and give over that spiritual charge and tuition over him, which by calling from God and the King they did undertake. And more then this they may not do. And after all this, We hold that he yet still retaineth, and ought to retain, intirely and solidly, all that aforesaid supream power and Authority over the Churches of this Dominion, in as ample a manner, as if he were the most Christian Prince in the World. 19. We acknowledge King JAMES to be our onely lawful Sovereign, and unto him to be due all the aforesaid Su∣premacy, and we renounce and abjure all Opinions, Doctrines, Practises, whatsoever repugnant or contrary to the same, as A∣nabaptistical and Antichristian, and wish they may be severely punished. 20. We never refused Obedience to any Lawes or Comman∣dements of the King, or State whatsoever, but onely to such as we have proved or are ready to prove, (if we might be heard with indifferency) to be contrary to the Word of God. And we are ready to take our Solemn Oathes, before the Throne of Justice, that the onely cause of our refusal of Obedience to those Canons of the Prelates for which we are at present so extreamly afflicted, is meere Conscience, and a fear to sin against God: And that if by due form of reasoning we may be convinced in our Conscien∣ces of the contrary, we are as willing as any Subjects in the Realm to Obey and Conform. 21. We refuse Obedience onely to such Canons as require the performance of such Acts, and Rites of Religion, as are rejected and abandoned of all other Reformed Churches, as Superstitious Disorders, Such, as are special Mysteries of the Romish Antichri∣stian Idolatry, Such as have been controverted in the Church e∣ver since the last breaking forth of the Light of the Gospel out of the cloud of Popery in Luthers time. Such as all Protestant Writers and Defenders of our Faith beyond the Seas, and most of our own Country men have either in general or particular con∣demned as vain, idle, and unprofitable, Such as all the Faithful, and Painful Pastors of this Realm, and in a manner all States and degrees of the same, would be content were removed, and swept out of the Church, and for which few or none are zealous but the Prelates, and their Adherents.
22. We deny no Authority to the King, in matters Ecclesia∣stical, but onely that which Christ Jesus the onely Head of the Church hath directly, and precisely appropriated unto himself, and hath denyed to communicate to any other creature or crea∣tures in the World. For we hold, That Christ alone is the Doctor of the Church in matters of Religon, and that the Word of Christ which he hath given unto his Church, is of absolute perfection, containing in it all parts of the true Religion, both for Substance and Ceremony, and a perfect direction in all Ecclesiastical mat∣ters whatsoever. Unto and from which it is not lawful for any Man or Angel, to add or detract. 23. We are so far from making claim of any supremacy unto our selves (and those Ecclesiastical Officers which we desire) that we exclude from our selves and them (as that of which we are utterly uncapable) all Princely and Lordly state, pompe and power whatsoever, holding it a sin for any whosoever to exercise (no not by commission from the Magistrate) any Authority over the Body, Goods, Lives, Liberty of any Man whosoever for any crime or offence whatsoever. So that any one of the basest and most inferiour civil officers in a Kingdom hath and ought to have (in our Judgement) more Authority and Power over men then any or all the Ecclesiastical Officers in the same Kingdom or in the whole World. Yea we hold that the highest Ecclesiastical Officer in the Church ought to be as subject unto the basest ci∣vil officers in the Kingdom, as the meanest Subject in the King∣dom; And that they ought not by virtue of their office, to chal∣lenge any freedom or immunity at all from any Civil Subjection whatsoever, belonging to any common Subject. 24. We confine and bound all Ecclesiastical power within the limits onely of one particular Congregation, holding that the greatest Ecclesiastical power ought not to stretch beyond the same; And that it is an arrogating of Princely Supremacy, for any Ecclesiastical person, or Persons whosoever, to take upon themselves Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over many Churches, much more over whole Kingdomes and Provinces of Christians. 25. We hold it utterly unlawful for any one Minister to take upon himself, or accept of a sole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over so much as one Congregation. And therefore we hold that some of the sufficientest and most honest and godly men in the Congrega∣tion, ought to be chosen by the Heads of Families, to be adjoyn∣ed
in Commission as assistants to the Minister, in the spiritual Regiment of the souls of that Congregation, of which he is the pastor. 26. We hold that these Ecclesiastical Officers being so chosen by the Church or Congregation are to exercise over the said Congregation only a Spiritual Iurisdiction and power, consist∣ing in a carefull oversight of the outward behaviour of the Mem∣bers of their Church, That it be not scandalous, offensive, and unbeseeming Christians, And if any Member shall be delinquent they are brotherly to admonish him, shewing him the nature of his crime by the word of God, And if after two or three admo∣nitions, he shew no tokens of sorrow and penitencie, then are they to deny unto him the pledges and seales of the Church, to wit the Sacraments. If this cannot humble him but that he continue obstinate in that sin, then they are by the mouth of the Minister in Congregation (the whole Church consenting freely thereto) denounce him to be no Member of the King∣dom of Heaven, and so forbear to have any further charge o∣ver him, untill God shall work the grace of Repentance, in him: in this manner they are to proceed against all apparent and E∣vident crimes only, as Murder, Adultery, Theft, Blasphemie, Ribal¦dery, Lying, Slandering, Profanation of the Sabothes, contempt of Divine Worship, Disobedience to the Civil Magistrate, &c. Neither ought the extreamest of the Ecclesiastical Censures any whit hinder the course of justice that the Civil Magistrate is to exercise against the same crimes; for if a Traytor himself should be penitent, the Church ought to forgive him and lovingly to imbrace him as a Son, but the Magistrate ought to execute him, if he should be obstinate in that crime: As the Magistrate ought to cut him off from the Civil Communion of men, so ought the Congregation (of which he is a Member) cut him off from all spiritual Communion with them. If any one of the Ecclesiasti∣cal Officers themselves shall sin, he is subject to the censures of the rest as any other member of the congregation. If they shall all sin scandalously either in the execution of their Office or in any other ordinarie manner: Then the Congregation that chose them freely, hath as free power to depose them, and to place others in their room. If the Congregation shall erre, either in choosing or deposing of her spiritual Officers. Then hath the Civil Magistrate alone power and authority to punish
them for their fault, co compel them to make better choise, or to defend against them those Officers that without just causes they shall depose or deprive. 27. We hold that those Ecclesiastical Persons that make claim to greater power and authority then this, Especially they that make claim Iure Divino of power and Iurisdiction to med∣dle with other Churches then that one Congregation of which they are or ought to be members, Do usurp upon the Supremacy of the Civil Magistrate, who alone hath and ought to have (as we hold and maintain) a power over the several Congre∣gations in his Dominions, and who alone ought by his autho∣rity not only to prescribe common Laws and Canons of unifor∣mity and consent, in Religion and worship of God unto them all; But also to punish the offences of the several Congregati∣ons, that they shall commit against the laws of God, the policy of the Realm, and the Ecclesiastical Constitutions enacted by his authority. 28. We hold that the King ought not to give this authority away or to commit it to any Ecclesiastical Person or Persons whatsoever, But ought himself to be as it were, Archbishop and general overseer of all the Churches within his Domini∣ons, and ought to imploy under him, his honourable Counsel, his Iudges, Leiftenants, Iustices, Constables and such like to over∣see the Churches, in the several divisions of their civil Regi∣ments, visiting them and punishing by their civil power what∣soever they shall see amiss in any of them: Especially in the Rulers and Governers. 29. For as much as no people are more hated, persecuted and wronged of the wicked world then the true Churches of Christ; We hold that no people in the Earth stand in more need of the ci∣vil Magistrate then they. And that it is the greatest outward bles∣sing they can injoy in this life, to live under the Protection of their Swords & Scepters, & the greatest cause of mourning when the same shall be bent against them. And we hold those Churches to be no true Churches of Jesus Christ that living in any Coun∣try, shall refuse subjection to the civil Regents and Governers of the same; be they (in respect of Religion) never such Paganish Infidells. 30. We hold it utterly unlawfull, for any Christian Chur∣ches whatsoever, by any armed force or power, against the will of the civil magistracy and State under which they live. To
erect and set up in publique, the true worship and service of God or to beat down or suppress any superstition or Idolatry that shall be countenanced and maintained by the same. Only, Eve∣ry man is to look to himself, that he communicate not with the evils of the times, induring what it shall please the State to in∣flict, and seeking by all honest and peaceable means all refor∣mation of publick abuses, onely at the hands of civil publicke persons, and all practises contrarie to these, we condemn as se∣ditious and sinfull. 31. All that we crave of his Majestie and the State, is, that by his and their permission and under their protection, and appro∣bation, it may be lawfull for us, to serve and worship God in all things according to his revealed will, and the manner of all other reformed Protestant Churches, that have made separati∣on from Rome, that we may not be forced against our consci∣ences to stain and pollute the simple and syncere worship of God prescribed in his word, with any humane Traditions and Rites whatsoever, but that in Divine worship we may be actors on∣ly of those things that may for matter or manner either inge∣neral or special be concluded out of the word of God. Also to this end that it may be lawfull for us to exhibite unto them and unto their Censure a true and syncere Confession of our faith, containing the main Grounds of our Religion, unto which all other doctrines are to be consonant: as also a Form of Divine worship and Ecclesiastical Government, in like manner warran∣ted by the word, and to be observed of us all under any civil pu∣nishment that it shall please the said Majestie, and state to inflict, under whose authority alone, we desire to exercise the same: and unto whose punishment alone we desire to be subject if we shall offend against any of those Lawes and Canons that themselves shall approve in manner aforesaid: and our desire is, Not to worship God in dark corners, but in such publick places and at such convenient times as it shall please them to assigne, to the intent, that they and their officers may the better take notice of our offences (if any such shall be committed in our Congre∣gations, and assemblies) that they may punish the same accor∣dingly. And we desire we may be subject to no other Spiritu∣al Lords but unto Christ, nor unto any other Temporal Lords but unto themselves, whom alone in this Earth we desire to make our Judges and supreame Governers and Overseers in all
causes Ecclesiastical whatsoever, renouncing as Antichristian, all such Ecclesiastical powers as arrogate and assume unto them∣selves under any pretence of the Law of God or man, the said power which we acknowledge to be due only to the Civil Magistrate. 32. So long as it shall please the King and civil State (though to the great derogation of their own authority as we may have occasion hereafter to prove) to maintain in this Kingdom, the State of the Hierarchy or Prelacie: We can (in Honour to his Majestie and the State, and in desire of peace) be content with∣out envy to suffer them to injoy their state and dignity, and to live as brethren, amongst those ministers that shall acknowlege spiritual homage unto their spiritual Lordships, paying unto them all temporal duties, of tenths and such like: yea and joyn∣ing with them in the service and worship of God so far as we may do it without our own particular communicating with them in those humane Traditions and rites, that in our consci∣ences we judge to be unlawfull. Only we crave in all dutifull manner that which the very Law of Nature yeeldeth unto us, that for as much as they are most malicious enemies unto us and do apparently thirst either after our blood, or shipwrack of our faith and consciences, that they may not hence forth be our judges in these causes, but that we may both of us stand as parties at the bar of the Civil Magistrate to be tried in those differences that are between us, and that when they shall pub∣lickly maligne or slander us or our cause, it may be lawfull for us in a dutifull, sober, peaceable and modest manner without personal reproach or disgrace, in as publick manner justifie our selves, and then insteed of that sillie mockservice to the King of wearing a linnen rag upon our backs or making a Christless Crosse upon a Babies face, we shall be ready to perform and yeeld triple homage, service, and tribute unto him, and shall think our lives and all that we have too vile to spend in the service of him and the civil state under him. FINIS.
A PROPOSITION CONCERNING KNEELING in the very Act of RECEIVING. Howsoever, Published to satisfie Professours, yet humbly Submitted to the Judgement of PROPHETS. ROM. 14.10, 11, 12. Why doest thou condemn thy Brother, For it is written, I live (saith the Lord) and every Knee shall bow unto me. So then, every one of us shall give accounts of himself unto God. 1 COR. 10, 14, 21. Flee from Idolatry, Yee cannnot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils. Printed in the year, 1660.
To my Christian Friend, N. Grace and Peace. HOwsoever it grieveth me to hear of, much more to see the troubles wherewith Sathan (knowing his time to be short) doth trouble the Church of God in all places, about unprofita∣ble and Popish Ceremonies, yet (to tell you the whole troth) my Grief is the lesse, when I consider that both they themselves, who be most troublesome, and do most urge those Reliques of Rome, be ambitious, or Dumb Doggs, or Non-Resident, serving their Bellies,Rom. 16.17, 18 Phil. 3.2, 19. Gal. 6.12. and minding Earthly Things, even like their Pre∣decessors, who urged the Ceremonies of MOSES in the Primitive Churches, and their proceedings, (like themselves) be so exorbitant that they cannot but prove odious to all men. What a matter is this, that after the Sacramental Bread is mini∣stred, the Cup should be denyed because of not Kneeling? If any of these scrupulous Ministers had played such a part, though it were with one openly known to live in sin, notorious without repentance, whom by the 26. Canon no Minister shall in any wise admit to the Receiving of the Holy Communion, how would that Precisian be trounced. But in this Puritan Government of the Church there is no fault but Non Conformity to superstitious va∣nities; A Bird of their feather may Preach scores of Popish Do∣ctrines, be scandalous in Life, and at his last cast at Dice when he hath lost all, say; In the Spite of God let him do now what he can, and yet hold his own well enough; An other Mans own and ill enough, I might well say if the Law might have due course: well, God amend all, and restrain the remnant of this Rage. In the mean while I rejoyce to hear that it is given to any of Gods people not onely to beleeve in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake, having the same fight which they see or hear to be in their Ministers, as it becometh the Gospel of Christ, the since∣rity whereof belongeth as well to the people as to the Ministers of Christ.Phil. 1.27. For howsoever all are not to wear the Whore of Babylons Smock, yet all are to make conscience of bowing the
Knee to Baal. To confirm your zeal against the superstition of KNEELING, I have long sought (being often sollicited so to do by you) and at length found a short but (in my poor judge∣ment at least to me) a sufficient discourse which I have printed, that I may comfort not onely you, but many others also who are in doubt, with that comfort wherewith I my self am comforted of God. I say comforted. For when the judgement is satisfied the heart is comforted; This onely I require of you that there be no inquiring after or guessing at the Author or Publisher. If that hurtful curiosity were mortified, learned mē now fearing that humour would be bolder to write and publish their Godly Judge∣ments, touching points in controversie; among other I hear of a more large and learned Treatise of this point, which no doubt the Author will publish in time, or other for him, if curious Heads, itching Ears, and wanton Tongues, do not hinder. In the mean while let us make as good use of this, as we can, And the Lord give us understanding in all things. Farewell.
CHAP. II. KNEELING in the very Act of Taking, Eating and Drinking the Sa∣cramental Bread and Wine, in the holy Com∣munion, cannot be without sin. 1. IT is to be understood, that, howsoever Kneeling may (in it self considered) be esteemed a natural gesture of the body, as standing, sitting, &c. yet in this case, it is by Institution of Man. For neither nature nor custom, doth teach us ordinarily to kneele when we eat and drink, neither doth the Word require Kneeling in this case. 2. If it be by institution, it must be either in respect of a more reverent receiving, or not. But if the most solemn sign of reve∣rence (used in these parts of the World) be without all respect of reverence, and that by Institution of Authority, in so high a part of Gods Service, may not such Kneeling be judged, if not a gross mocking of Christ, as was the Souldiers their bowing of knees before him,Matth. 27.29. Mal. 1.6, 7. yet a taking the name of God in vain. Seeing all significations of honour, in Gods Service, ought to be to the honour of his Name,Jer. 4.2. and an Oath not religiously intended (as in the nature thereof it ought to be) to the Honour of God, is the taking of Gods Name in vain.2 Kings 5.18. Did Naaman newly brought to the knowledge of God, attribute so much to bowing in the house of Rimmon when his Master leaned on him, so that it was not his voluntary Act? And shall we, who have had the Gospel long, kneeling by Institution and determination, in a principal part of Gods Service, make no account whether we Honour GOD, or no, by such kneeling? 3. If Kneeling be instituted for a more reverent receiving, then it must be either in regard of God, or of Bread and Wine; If in regard of God then must we be well perswaded that such kneeling is an acceptable service unto his Majesty.Rom. 12.1. & 14, 15, 23. Isa 29.13. Matth. 15.9. And that this may be, we must consider, whether such kneeling be a Will-worship or a service reasonable, and according to Gods Will. Least otherwise
we finde our selves so far from honouring God, as that we pro∣voke him. As did Nadab and Abihu, who offered incense,Levit. 10.1, 2, 3. but not with the very fire which God appointed, and were there∣fore devoured with fire. And as did King David, and the Priests,1 Chron. 13.10. & 15.12, 13. who carried the Arke otherwise than it ought to have been, and therefore Ʋzza died for it, with a sodain death. For God will be sanctified (if not by, yet) in all them that come neer him. 4. But kneeling is contrary to the example of Christ, and his Apostles, who ministred and received sitting,Luke 22.14. or in such a gesture as in those Countreys was most used at eating. From which ex∣ample to differ, without warrrant from Gods word cannot be without fault. Seeing examples of holy men, much more of Christ, are to be followed, except there be some reasonable cause to the contrary.1 Cor. 11.1. And the Apostle to reform an abuse which crept (even in their times) into Love-feasts, which were immediately before, or after the Lords Supper, did banish them thence, and reduced the manner of administring the Lords Sup∣per to the first institution, saying; Shall I praise you in this?1 Cor. 11.22, 23. I praise you not. For I have received of the Lord that which I have also delivered unto you, &c. Whereby it is apparent, that, that forme of Administration, which differeth from the first Institu∣tion, is worthy no praise, and therefore no acceptable service to God. For if the Apostle would not tolerate an indifferent thing (as was a Love-feast till then) to continue so near the Lords Supper, when it was abused, how would they allow the change of sitting into kneeling, especially in these two considera∣tions? First, because the abuse of love feasts, (viz. superfluity) was never so great, and scandalous, in the Apostles time, as the a∣buse of kneeling (viz. Idolatry) was and is in the synagogue of Rome: And besides, Love-feasts were either before, or after the Lords Supper, whereas kneeling is in the principal part of the holy Communion. Therefore if the Apostle banished Love-feasts from the Lords Supper, because of the abuse, and brought the Church to the simplicity of the first Institution, is it not a temp∣ting sin to retain the idolatrous kneeling of Papists, and reject the exemplary sitting of our M. Christ? And the rather, because it is in that Sacrament, and in that part of the Sacrament, which especially setteth forth our communion with Christ, and his Church, and is therefore, called The Communion.1 Cor. 10.16, 17. In due consi∣deration
whereof, how can we imagine that Christ hath any ho∣nour by our kneeling? Seeing it swerveth, not onely from his example, but also from the practise of all reformed Churches, except in England, which the papists themselves call Puritan-Papistical,Concertatio Ec∣clesiae Cathol. in argu. for retaining this, and other popish corruptions: and, seeing it may be an argument (especially to a Papist not understanding our tongue) that we have communion with An∣tichrist, and his synagogue, at least in the idolatry of Bread∣worship. Which our failing, or carelesness to avow our com∣munion with Christ and his Church, and not abhorring all com∣munion with Antichrist and his synagogue cannot be without grievous sin.Gal. 2.11, 12. Or else Paul sinned, when he rebuked Peter for not holding communion with the Gentiles converted, and wrote without good warrant, where he saith; If any lust to be conten∣tious, we have no such custome, neither the Churches of God. And in another place:1 Cor. 11.16. 2 Cor. 6.15.17 Deut. 12.30, 31. What communion hath Christ with Belial? Come out, and touch no unclean thing. Doth not God streightly forbid us to serve him as Idolaters do their gods? These things considered, can kneeling wherewith Papists do honour their breaden God, be honourable to Christ, in his holy Sacra∣ment? 6. Secondly, whereas the end of a Sacrament is to inform the outward man, by sensible demonstrations, it pleased our Mr. Christ, to use such a gesture, as, agreeably with bread and wine, setteth out our communion and spirituall familiarity with him, and rejoycing in him.Revel. 3.20. And therefore as he saith, If any hear my voyce, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me:Matth. 8.11. So he saith, Many shall come from the cast and west, and shall sit with Abraham, &c. By which place it appear∣eth that as by Supper, so by sitting, familiar rejoycing, or re∣joycing familiarity is expressed. In which respects the Commu∣nion is called the Lords Supp and not a Sacrifice,1 Cor. 11.2. & 10.21. and we are said to be partakers of the Lords table, and not of an Altar. And therefore not kneeling, and sitting is for receiving. We read not of any gesture of body prescribed, or observed in Circumcision and Baptisme as in the Passeover and Lords Supper. Because there needs no material regard to be had of any certain gesture in the two former Sacraments, so the foreskin were cut off, and water be used: But in the other two, a gesture, answerable to the action is requisite.Exod 12.11. And therefore God prescribed to his
people: when they were to flye out of Egypt,Num. 9.3.11, 12. Matth. 5.17 & 26.20. the gesture of loynes girded, and staves in their hands, because the eating then of the Passeover was in hast. But that gesture being but for that time, as may appear by the omission thereof, when the ob∣servation of the Passeover was established, our Mr. Christ, who came not to break but fulfill the Law, and knew what was fittest to be done, did eat the Passeover sitting, a gesture more answer∣able to eating in peace, than the former used in Egypt. Where∣by kneeling is convinced, as being a gesture altogether unanswe∣rable to eating. And the rather,Job 38.2. 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. because it darkneth the counsell of God, and eing a signe of the greatest submission obscureth that rejoycing familiarity, which the Lords Supper signifieth and sealeth. Do we not condemn the Papists for ministring the Communion in one kinde, because such an administration is against Christ his example, and doth not lively demonstrate the Lords death? Here a caveat is to be given, that none take occa∣sion by this discourse, to justifie the childish Pedagogy of signi∣fying ceremonies devised by man, seeing sitting was used by Christ, and the signification thereof is found in Scripture. And therefore that childish Pedagogy is not justified by that worthy servant of Christ, Mr. Cartwright his judgement viz. That sit∣ting doth signifie our rest in Christ Jesus. 7. That kneeling may be more soundly convinced as a will-worship, objections are to be answered. Therefore where it is supposed that Christ and his Apostles ministred and received fitting but by occasion, and not of purpose: because they were sitting before in eating the Passeover. Whereas if Christ had sit∣ten down of purpose to administer the Communion, then all that is said is granted to be some purpose. The answer is short, yet full: Christ did sit of purpose, when he ministred his last Sup∣per. For after the Passeover he rose, washed his Disciples feet, and sate down again. 8. If it be demanded, why the Church is not bound to the time of evening, as well as to the gesture of sitting, sith Christ observed the one, as well as the other? It may be answered;John 13.4.12. Time being a common circumstance to every action (for no∣thing can be done, but in some time) the particular time is not to be observed, except Christ had sanctified it to the communi∣on, as God sanctified the 7th. day, on which he rested,Gen. 2.2, 3. or (at least) chosen it of purpose, as he did sitting. But whereas it was
upon speciall,Matth. 26.31.45. Luke 22.53. and necessary occasion, for the Passeover must be eaten before the L. Supper could be instituted in stead thereof: and presently after Supper the hour came, when Christ was to be betrayed. Therefore if the Jews transgressed not the Institution of the Passeover, by changing a gesture, at the first prescribed by God according to that their present occasion, into another fitter for a time of rest, much less do Christians transgress the institu∣tion of the Lords Supper, by changing the time taken by Christ upon occasion, but not prescribed, into some other fitter (in dis∣cretion) for the ordinary celebration of the Lords Supper, as probably the Primitive Churches did. For every st day of the week (viz. the Lords day) the brethren came together to break bread,Acts 2.42. & 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2: Revel. 1.10 i. e. to minister the Communion. So that either they never met upon the L. day, but in the evening, or else they celebrated the Communion at some other times. But for my alteration of the gestures of sitting, especially into kneeling, there is the least pro∣bability. It is further objected; That we may kneel in regard of pray∣ers to be used by prescription of authority, at the delivering of the bread and wine, viz. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soule into eternall life, and take and eate this, &c. Here unto these answers may be returned; Seeing we reject Christs example of sitting for kneeling, we must not stand upon what we may do, but humbly consider what we must do. For if there be not a necessary and a justifiable cause both of those prayers, and of kneeling in regard of them, do we not presume upon Christ's patience, in rejecting his example? Now, what necessity is there of those prayers, at that very time? seeing prayers go before, and follow after. A∣gain, must we needs kneel at every bit of a prayer? Is there more necessity to obey a needless direction to kneel at those prayers, than to follow the example f Christ, in sitting when we take, eat and drink, things required in the same sentences prescribed? And why must the people kneel, when they hear those prayers, rather then the Minister who pronounceth them? But it is a que∣stion, whether those prayers be justifiable or no. For besides that, by reason of them, Kneeling, devised and abused by Anti∣christ,Mat 6 7 & 26.26. &c. doth cross the practice of Christ and his Apostles, and they may seem a vain repetition: Even the adding of them to the words of Institution is contrary to the mind of Christ. For he
did first bless or pray, and after gave the Elements, in a Sacra∣mentall form of words, without any addition, saying, take, eat,Mark 14.21. Luke 22.19, &c. &c. Which order of administration, and form of words, Mat∣thew, Marke, Luke, and Paul do so constantly, precisely, and sincerely related that any may perceive the meaning of the spirit to be. That the sacramental form of words ought precisely to be observed, without any addition. And the rather, because Paul beginneth his relation thus;1 Cor. 11.23, 24. I have received of the Lord that which I have also delivered, &c. So that it may seem to be against Religion and Reason, that to a sacramentall forme of speech, wherein the Minister should onely supply the person of Christ, there should be added a prayer, as in the name of the Church. This confusion is fitter for Babylon, than for Sion. Lastly, Why is not a short prayer, after other going before as well joyned to the sacramentall forme of Baptisme: viz. N. I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, &c.Rom. 14.5.23: If then this addi∣tion of Prayer to the sacramentall forme of words, be not of faith, how then can we, with faith and a good conscience, con∣firm, or allow the same with our kneeling? 10. Lastly, for justifying of Kneeling, it is affirmed; That it is indifferent whether we sit, stand, or kneel: seeing Christ did sit, when he did eat the Passeover. Whereas God commanded the children of Israel in Egypt to eate the Passeover standing, and some Reformed Churches receive standing, for all that Christ did sit at his last Supper: Therefore the KING may ap∣point Kneeling, as the most reverent gesture, and best beseem∣ing so holy an action. For answer whereunto, howsoever that which is already said may suffice. Yet it may be further considered, that though it be admitted, that it is indifferent to sit, or to stand, yet it doth not follow, that Kneeling is indiffe∣rent. For sitting is the example, and standing is a gesture sometimes used in ordinary eating, and (in the objection) it is said to be prescribed at a Sacramentall feast. Again, it doth not follow; That because Christ used a ge∣sture fitter for eating in his time, instead of a gesture prescribed upon occasion, it is therefore lawfull to use a gesture nothing answerable to eating,1 Cor. 14.36. and that taken out of the Synagogue of Antichrist (as though the Word of God came out of it, or to it onely) instead of a gesture most answerable to eating, and
of purpose used by Christ at the Institution of the Sacrament. So that, notwithstanding all that is said for Kneeling, His Ma∣jestie (upon whom the burthen as of this gesture, so of other Ceremonies,2 Chro. 29.25. is layd) may remember, That Hezekiah appoint∣ed Levites in the house of the Lord, with Cimbals, &c. accor∣ding to the commandement of David, and Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, for the commandement was by the hand of the Lord, and by the hand of his Prophets. And with∣all consider, that if Kneeling were the most reverent gesture, and best beseeming the holy Communion, our Lord and Master would not have sitten down of purpose, at his last supper. And that Ahaz was deceived in deeming the Altar at Damascus more honourable for Gods service,2 King. 16.10, 12.14.15. than the Altar of the Lord. 11. Having said that which may be sufficient to a man reaso∣nable, and not contentious, against the institution of kneeling for supposed reverence in regard of God, it remaineth that somewhat be said against the institution of Kneeling, for reve∣rence in regard of bread and wine, which need not to be much. For no sound Protestant of any knowledge, will affirme it, but rather presently consider, That if kneeling be instituted for re∣verence in regard of bread and wine, it must be either because they represent the body and blood of Christ, though remaining bread and wine touching their substance; And then for like reason, we may worship the Crucifix, and image of God, as the Papists do: Or, because Christ is really, bodily, and locally, though invisibly, present in them, either by Transubstantia∣tion, according to the heresie of the Papists, or by Consubstan∣tiation, according to the heresie of the Lutherans; These things cannot but be considered: And then it must needs follow, that if we abjure these heresies of Papists, and Lutherans, we must also abhor idolatrous, and superstitious kneeling, their daugh∣ter and Nurse, which was never heard of before Transubstan∣tiation was hatched in the synagogue of Antichrist.Reliques of Rome, fol. 98. & 99. Answ. to Mr. Juels chal∣lenge, fol. 111. So that immediately after Pope Innocent decreed Transubstantiation, Pope Honorius decreed kneeling. Therefore if Harding doth grant that it is not well to kneel, but in regard of a reall, and bodily presence; a sound Protestant should infer; But I de∣test your reall presence, therefore I abhor your Idolatrous kneeling.
12. We are to abhor kneeling, not onely because we abhor the heresies of worshipping Images, Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation, but also, because it is the show of the great∣est evils that ever were,1 Thes. 5.22. viz. Idolatry in worshipping a God made of a piece of bread, and of communion with Antichrist, rather than with Christ; and therefore the greatest scandall that ever was, or can be, both in regard of those evils it doth occasionally teach, or confirme, as also in regard of multitudes (indeed the most part of people) either not sufficiently instru∣cted in the right understanding, and use of the Sacrament, and therefore carried with a blind devotion learned by tradition, or corrupted (more or lesse) with the leaven of Popery. Who all in regard of their weaknesse, are endangered by this gesture, either grosly to commit the Idolatry of Papists, or to have a superstitious estimation of the outward Elements. And the ra∣ther, because by the 21 Canon it is provided: That no bread, and wine newly brought, shall be used, but first the words of In∣stitution shall be rehearsed, when the said bread and wine be pre∣sent upon the Communion Table. As if the words were Incanta∣tions, and the Table like the Altar which sanctifieth the Sacri∣fice. May not this Proviso seem (at least to the simple) to make way at least to the Popish consecration? How grievous a sin it is to scandalize the weak, may appeare by the words of Christ, viz. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, it were better for him, that a mil-stone were hanged about his necke,Matth 18.6. and that he were drowned in the midst of the Sea. And of Paul:1 Cor. 8.13. If meate offend my brother, I will eat no flesh, while the world standeth, that I may not offend my brother. What an offence or scandall is, the Apostle sheweth in the same Chapter, viz. An occasion of falling to the weake.Verse 9. The particular offence he speaketh of is this: Notwithstanding the Gospell was preached a convenient time, and that by the Apostles, yet many wanted knowledge,Verse 7.10. and, even unto that time, did eat as a thing sacrificed to an I∣doll. Of whom if any should see a man endued with knowledge sit at Table in the Idols Temple, his weak conscience might oc∣casionally be imboldened to eat those things which are sacrificed to Idols. If Paul would never eat flesh rather then he would offend in this case,Verse 12. because in so doing he should sinne against Christ; how dare a Christian, having knowledge, kneel in
the presence of any, who, for want of knowledge, receive su∣perstitiously. Of which sort, seeing there be so many even un∣till this hour, and ever likely to be, that we know not when, and where to communicate without some such, either old, or young: It followeth, that as sitting at Table in the Idols Tem∣ple, could not be without sinne, in the Apostles time, so kneel∣ing cannot be without sin in these dayes, when the number of faithfull Teachers is much decreased, but of Papists much in∣creased, and by our kneeling much confirmed in their Bread-worship.Sum of the confession. p. 74. Therefore if his Majesties judgement be sound, that the Surplice is not to be worn, if Heathenish men were commo∣rant amongst us, who, thereby, might take occasion to be strengthe∣ned in their paganisme? Shall we by our corrupt practice of kneeling, strengthen the Papists, who swarm among us in their Idolatry? Rub. after the com. Sect. 5.If the State doth well, in ordaining the Sacrament to be ad∣ministred in usuall bread to take away superstition, whereas Christ did by occasion, minister in unleavened bread, shall not we do ill, in teaching, or confirming superstition by kneeling, whereas Christ did of purpose minister sitting?Hom. against peril of Idol. part 3. Levit. 19.14. setting up of Images in Churches onely to be Lay-mens books, is, by au∣thority condemned, because they are as stumbling blocks in the way of the blinde: So that they have been, are still, and will be hereafter worshipped by ignorant persons. Is not kneeling as scandalous? How can it then be justified? But is said, that the Kings commandement taketh away scan∣dal, in things indifferent. And it may be averred that this is a begging of the question, except it be proved by the word, that kneeling may be without sin, and that notwithstanding it be an institution of man, contrary to the example of Christ, a signe of communion rather with Antichrist and his sinagogue of Rome, than which Christ and his Church, it have no proportion with sacramental eating, and have been, is, and will be bread-wor∣ship. But suppose that in it self it were as indifferent as was eating of flesh sacrificed to an Idol,1 Cor. 10.27, 28. not in the Idols Temple, but at a private table where no weak ones were, in the Apostles time: yet how doth the Kings commandement take away scan∣dal from kneeling in publick places? Doth it make all so sure, that none can be scandalized? Or, if that cannot be, doth it
take away guiltiness from the scandalizer, as if all the blame of scandalizing, were in the Kings commandement?1 Cor. 8.11. Numb. 35.37. 2 Sam. 11.15.16, 17. Surely it must be in the former, or els the latter cannot be, for by scan∣dalizing a weak brother perisheth. Of whose bloud the scan∣dalizer is guilty, as Ioab was of Ʋriahs bloud, notwithstanding the Kings commandment. Here his Majestie known to be of a gentle disposition, and to have learned, yea professed bet∣ter things in Scotland, is most humbly prayed, to take this word (King) as spoken in imitation, and understood of Cantor: who knowne to be of a violent disposition, did carry matters in the Convocation, and published Canons not orderly, and ful∣ly concluded, as some of his suffragane prelates report, But it is impossible, that the Kings commandement should make all so sure that none can be scandalized, the general ignorance of the people, the disposition, of the ignorant unto superstition, the old leaven of popery not purged and the multiplying of Pa∣pists, all well considered. Nay rather, It is likely, that by the commandementt the scandal will be the greater. Especially in regard of the 27 Canon, where ministers are commanded, un∣der pain of suspension, not wittingly to administer the sacrament to any, but such as kneel. May not simple, and superstitious per∣sons take occasion thus to argue? Why should kneeling be thus urged by authority, if the sacramental signes of the body, and bloud of Christ, be no more to be reverenced, than water ap∣plyed in baptizing children? Seeing that is also a sanctified signe of Christ his bloud, that washeth away our sins, and iniqui∣ties. To conclude, If kneeling in the very act of taking, eating, and drinking the sacramental bread and wine, in the holy commu∣nion, be (1) an institution of man. (2) If it be the taking of of Gods name in vain, when it is without all respect of reve∣rence (3) If God be not honoured thereby, except it be accor∣ding to his will. (4) If it swarve from the example of Christ his sitting, and therefore deserveth no praise. (4) If it be a provo∣king sin to reject the exemplary sitting of Christ, whereby we shew our selves to be in communion with Christ, and the refor∣med Churches; and to retain kneeling, which for bread-wor∣ship, ought to be banished, and whereby we seem to be in communion with Antichrist, and his synagogue. (6) If it obscu∣reth that rejoycing familiaritie in and with Christ which the
Lords supper signifieth. (7) If the argument from Christ his ex∣ample be made the stronger, in that he sat of purpose. (8) If the lawfulness of chusing a fitter time than the evening cannot justifie our rejecting Christ his exemplary sitting. (9) If the bits of prayer joyned with the words of institution do make kneel∣ing the more sinfull. (10) If kneeling be not as indifferent, as standing, nor best beseeming the holy communion, and the King must appoint nothing but by the hand of the Lord. (11) If we ought to abhor kneeling, as we abhor the worshipping of Images, Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation. (12) If to scandalize be grievously to sin, and kneeling be a shew of the greatest evils, and withall the greatest scandal. And (13) If it be a begging of the question to affirm, kneeling to be indiffe∣rent, and the Kings commandement (so called) doth rather in∣crease, than lessen scandal by kneeling, It may be averred, that kneeling in the very act of Taking, eating, and drinking the sacramental bread and wine, in the holy communion, cannot be without sin.
A SHORT TREATISE OF THE CROSSE in BAPTISME Contracted into this SYLLOGISME. No religious use of a Popish Idol, in Gods publique service is indifferent, but utterly unlawfull: But the use of the Cross in Baptisme is a religious use of a Popish Idol in Gods publique service. Ergo. The use of the Cross in Baptism is not indifferent but ut∣terly unlawfull. Printed in the yeare 1660.
Of the Signe of the Cross in Baptism. The use of the Cross in Baptisme is not a thing indifferent, but utterly unlawfull. For this reason. IT is against the Apostles precept 1. John 5.21. Babes keep your selves from Idolls.Profe of the Major. For the explanation whereof two things are to be scanned, first: what is meant by an Idol. Secondly: how far we are to keep our selves from the Idol. An Idol is what∣soever besides God is worshipped with divine honour. And though some restrain an Idol to a visible form, because it is de∣rived apo tou eidous yet as a learned writer observethZanch de re∣demp, lib. 1. cap. 17. Thes. 5. They which will treat of all sorts of Idolatrie, must needs take the name of an Idol in a larger signification. By the name there∣fore of an Idoll is understood whatsoever besides the true God a man doth propose or frame to himselfe to be worshipped, ei∣ther simplie, or in some respect. Neither is this spoken without good reason, for nothing is properly an Idol, as it is a visible form, but as it is religiously worshipped. If therefore it be worshipped it may be an Idoll, though it be no visible shape, otherwise the worshipping of An∣gels and the souls of just men were no Idolatrie, seeing these are invisible spirits, and therefore the signe of the Cross If it be religously worshipped, may prove an Idol though it be transiens quiddam a thing vanishing in the Ayre and no perma∣nent form. For as that learned Zanchy speaketh there is a two fold Idol, the one real the other imaginary, conceived only in the mind.How far we to keep our are selves from an Idol. For answer to the second question. Men may keep them∣selves from Idols two wayes: vix. a cultu, & ab usu Idoli: from the worship, and from the use of the Idol. For the first,1 Cor. 10.15 10.13. S. Paul is so strict that he alloweth not the Christians so much as to be present in the Temple at the Idola∣trous feasts, though they did it without any internal opinion, or external action of worshipping the Idol. But John in this place doth not speak so much of the worship as
the use of the Idoll for (as Aug. in psa. 113. well observeth) the Apostle commandeth that they avoid not only the the wor∣ship of the Images, but also the Images or Idols themselves. Now the use of an Image, or Idol, may be civil or religious, and both of them publick or private. That an Image, even such an Image as is Idolatrously wor∣shipped, may be made and retayned for civill respects of orna∣ment, story or such like: we make no question, though the tolerating of them in open and publick places, even extra cul∣tum, be offensive and turn into a snare, as Gideons Ephod was to his posteritie, when it was abused to Idolatrie. And upon this ground we yeild, that though the Cross be apparently an Idoll, yet in Princes Banners, Coronations, Coyn, Crown, or any other Civil respect it may have a lawfull use: But that any thing of mans devising being worshipped as an Idol, should be used religionis, ergo: and in the worship of God, seemeth di∣rectly against S. Johns precept, for, how do I keep my self from the Idoll, or how do I shew my zealous detestation of that filthy Idolatry, when I retayn it, and use it so honourably, as in the Temple, in the Sanctuary; in the service of God. Which in∣terpretation of this place of S. John, the Church of EnglandHomil against peril of Idola∣try part 2. Exod. 23. & 34 13, Deut. 7, 5, Psa. 16.4. doth on the warrant of Tertullian approve and commend. And this poynt is further strengthened by the second com∣mandement: which forbiddeth not only to worship, but e∣ven to make an Image, or any similitude whatsoever, to wit, ad cultum, or for religious use: as according to the Scripture the best interpretors,Calvin. insti. lib. 1 cap. 11, Ursin cathe. in exposit secun∣di▪ precept. Pet. Martyr loc. com. cla. 2. cad. 5. sect. 22 Hooper in 2 precept Zanch. de re∣dempt lib. 1. cap. 15. Bagington on the 2 com∣mandement. Perk. sermon cause cap. 21 Allen on the 2 com. Dod on the 2. com, partly against Images in Churches, partly on the words of the precept, do most naturally expound it. For surely, if Idolatry it self, as a most execrable thing be forbid∣den, then all occasions and means leading thereunto are like∣wise prohibited. And what stronger provocation to that spiri∣tual whordome, then erecting Images in the place of Gods wor¦ship? For as Augustine well observeth, in Psal. 113. Idols or Images, have greater power to corrupt a silly soul, in that they have a mouth, eyes, ears nose, hands, feet, then to correct it, in that they neither heare, smell, &c. And therefore without doubt, the meaning of the comman∣dement is to binde the Church from all such snares and allure∣ments to sin, and therfore doth Aug. in quest sup. Levit. q. 68. well conclude from this commandement, that such making of an Idol can never be just or lawfull. Now if no similitude at all be tollerable in Gods service; then
much less any that hath been and is worshipped Idolatrously. Tertullian against the Gnosticks accounted them Idolaters, not only which worshipped, but those also which made and re∣tained Images (nempe ad cultum or for holy use) & in his Book de Idololatria, he vehemently reproved the very makers of Images, though they did not themselves worship them, which sheweth in what execration the primitive Churches held any religious use of an Idol. The like we may find in Epiphanius ad Johannem Epūm Hic∣erosal. where he reporteth, that finding an Image of Christ, or some Saint, hanging at a Church dore, he rent it in peices, a∣vouching that to hang a picture in the Church of Christ, was contrary to the authority of the Scriptures and the Christian religion. From hence I conclude, that if the godly fathers were so ve∣hement, against erecting Images of Christ, and of the Saints, even at that time before any worship was given unto them; Much more would they withstand it now, after men have made Idols of them. And if they would not suffer an Idol so much as in the place of Gods worship: would they endure themselves to use such an Idol as the Cross in the service and sacraments of God. Their zeal against that spiritual fornication, would never permit them so h ghly to honour such an execrable thing neither was their zeal herein without ground of knowledge: for the spirit of God in psal. 115.8 speaking of Idolls, they (saith he) that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that trust in them Where a plain difference is made between makers and worshippers of Idols and both condemned, as cursed trans¦gressors of the law, shall any then make the Idoll of the Crosse, and that for religious use: and yet be innocent? Hsa. 16.14.Questionless by Davids example we must make no mention, that is to keep no honorable memory of an Idol, and therefore without doubt,Isa. 50.22. not give it so much honor as to use it, or the memorial thereof in the house of God and in his holy worship, but as Isai saith, we must pollute the reliques and the very co∣vering, and ornament of the Idol, and cast them away as a men∣strous cloth, and say unto it, get thee hence. Profe of the Minor.Now if any doubt, whether the signe of the Crosse be ado∣red, and so made an Idol: let them well consider the tract of Bellarmine, de adoratione crucis, where distinguishing the Cross on which Christ was hanged, from the similitude thereof, he saith: other crosses like to this are accounted sacred images.
And after he distinguisheth those similitudes of Christs Cross, into the Image, and signe of the Cross; so that if the Image of the Crosse be taken for an Idoll (and who knoweth not that it is the universal Idoll of popery▪ and to be adored, even cultu latriae (which worship as they themselves hold, is due only un∣to God): the signe of the Cross must needs be taken for no bet∣ter. Besides, the said Bellarmine having (as is said) distinguished the Cross into three sorts, the true Cross,De Image lib. 1. 30. the Image of the Cross, and the signe of the Cross: he layeth down this do∣ctrine generally of them all, we adore all crosses, and particu∣lerly, of the signe of the Cross he saith The signe of the Cross which is made in the forehead, or in the ayr, is sacred and venerable. To this agreeth Portiforium Sa∣rish. 4. where it is thus professed, we adore the signe of the Cross, by which we have received the Sacrament of Salvation. And that the Image and signe of the Cross is of one, and the same account with Papists, appeareth evidently as by divers, so particularly by Hart. For Doctor Reynolds (e) shewing that the Church of England, hath justly left the signe of the Crosse out of the supper for the Idolatry thereof,Confer. with Hart, cap, 8. divis. 4. doth prove that it is worshipped as an Idol, by such testimonies as indeed belong to the Image of the Cross, which Hart no way excepting against, doth imply, that look what estimation they have of the Image, the same they have of the signe, and what honour is due to the one is due to the other. For in very deed, they carefully teach, that it is not in regard of the matter, wherein the Cross is painted,Andra Orthod. expli. lib. 9. Bellarmine de imag. lib. 2. cap. 30. Tho. Aquin. part. 3. quest. 2 art 4. and di∣vers other. ibidem. or the colour whereby it is shadowed, but only and simply for the expressing of the likeness of Christs cross, and for the re∣presenting of Christ crucified (which the signe performeth as well as the Image) that they adore the cross with the same ho∣nor, that is due unto Christ himself. And this no doubt was the meaning of Aquinas when he saith, that every effegies or like∣ness of the cross (whereof the signe is one) is to be adored cul∣tu latriae, and Costerus doth avouch, that the same worship is due to the signe, as belongeth to the very crosse of Christ, when he saith (though falsly (f) The Christians from Christs time hi∣ther unto have worshipped with the highest honor,Coster Enchri cap 11. Orthod explice. lib. 9. both the wood of the Lords crosse, and the signe of the Crosse, with which they dayly sence themselves. Mark, that the signe of the crosse is worshipped with the highest degree of honor, and as Andradius, (g) in express words saith, in the same manner, that the Image of Christ himself is worshipped, then the which, what can be
more clear to prove, that not only the Image, but the signe of the crosse is by the Papists most Idolatrously worshipped. If any say: that to the signe of the crosse none boweth the knee, or vaileth the bonnet, and therefore it is not adored: I an∣swer first that adoration is interne & externe, and the extern a∣doration is therefore Idolatrie, because it proceedeth from the intern,Zanc. de re∣demp. lib. 1. cap 17. Thes. 5. Eph. 5.6. Colos. 5. Mark 10.24. 1 Tim. 6.19. Luke 12.15. Phil. 3.19. as Zancheus (h) very learnedly, and largely sheweth. If a man invocate to an Angel, or give any honour inter∣nal to a creature, shall it not be called Idolatry except he bow outwardly unto it? How then doth Paul say, that covetousness is Idolatry? For a rich man doth not outwardly worship his goods, yet because he giveth unto it intern confidence which is due unto God, it is truly called his Idol, as unto the Sardanapali. (q) their belly is termed their God. Right so the Papists ascri∣bing to the signe of the Crosse, that honor and confidence which belongeth to God, do make it an execrable Idol, and so most unfit to stand in the sanctuary, or to be annexed to the holy things of God.Quest. disputat. devenal pecto de effect. Sacra¦ment. lib. 2. 1 Tim. 4. sect. 13 14. Bellar. de effect. sacra. lib. 2. cap. 31. For first they ascribe unto the signe of the crosse power and vertue, to merit pardon at least for venial sins as appeareth by (k) Tho. Aquinas, Bellarmine, and Rhemists: Also it is held to partake of power efficient, and immediate∣ly (l) operative, and that to convert sinners, Martial de cruce, fol. 114, 115. Yea to gain salvation, Hosius contra Brent. pag. 227. saith unto a rude Clown whole dull understanding cannot reach to higher things, this onely (saith he) sufficeth for his salvation; and generally the whole rabble of Romish Doctors do teach to put great affiance in this signe for chasing away Devils, and curing diseases, and sanctifying both man and o∣ther creatures, to the use of man. Secondly, I say indeed they do give outward, as well as inward worship to the cross. For it is apparent that they invocate it in the same manner,In officio sanct. cruce, printed in English Anno 1599. that they invocate Saints when they say, by this sign of holy cross let evils all flie far from us Again, by the sign of the holy cross, from our enemies deliver us O Lord our God. Also in another place, victorious cross and admirable sign, make us triumph and joy, in heavenly Courts divine. Yea in prayers they joyn it with Jesus Christ, as in Officio missae is to be seen, where they supplicate: By the mercy of Jesus Christ, by the aide and sign of the cross, by the entercession of the blessed Vir∣gin,Hor. present ad usum Sarum Parisus impres. anno 1498. &c. They couple it also with the blood of Christ in these words; Defend me Jesu, from all evil vices past, present, and to come, by the sign of holy cross: and by the inestimable price of thy just and precious blood.
All which doth most manifestly prove, that among the Papists, it is religiously honoured both with inward confidence, and out∣ward reverence. And therefore if their Idols may in no sort be annexed to the service of our God, the cross in Baptism ought necessarily to be crossed and cursed out of our Liturgy. Neither is it a sufficient answer to say, that the cross amongst us is neither in number nor in use, the same that theirs is, and though their cross be an Idoll, yet ours is not. For when God commanded his people to break down the Images of the Heathen, and to extinguish the very name of them; had they performed that charge, if they had burnt all the Idolls of Canaan, and afterward made new of the same form, and to another use though not Idolatrous, yet reli∣gious? Or how have we discharged our duties and shewed our detestation of that filthy Idolatry, if having defaced all the popish Crucifixes and Idolls, we erect them new in our Church though not to Worship them, yet to any other holy use whatsoever. It is true that our cross, and theirs is the same both in name, & form, but not in use, for then it were Idolatrous; now I do not say that the Church of England doth commit Idolatry, but that it ought to abstain not onely from Idolatry or Worship, but even from all religious use of such humane Ordinances and inventions, which others have and do Idolatrously adore. For if to erect Crucifixes, and other Popish Images for holy use be (contrary to the Com∣mandement) a keeping of an honourable memory of the Idoll,Exod. 23 13. Deut. 12.2. Hos. 2 17. how can the religious use of the cross in Baptism being as well an Idoll as any of their Images, be retained without breach of the Law, Babes keep your selves from Idolls. Objection. The signe of the cross in the first institution was free from superstition and Idolatry, and if the abuse which grew after be removed,Of this nature are Churches, Pulpets, &c. things of ne∣cessary use and warranted by God himself but the retey∣ning of the Brazen Ser∣pent was no where commanded. why should it not recover his ancient use and indifferency, like as the Bread in the Lords Supper which the Papists do religiously adore? Answer. There is great difference between that which God hath created and commanded, and that which man hath ordained, for the one is necessary, and no abuse can alter the nature of it, the other in∣different, and by abuse may become unlawful, and therefore He∣zekiah did worthily break the brazen Serpent, not seeking to re∣dress the abuse of it. Now howsoever Bellarmine would insinu∣ate
that the cross is founded on Scripture, yet the weaknesse of his Arguments do bewray the unsoundnesse of the matter,Aut enim signū crucis habere vim spiritualē potissimum ex institute Dei. lib. 2. de effect. sacram & lib 2. de Imag. cap. 29 conatur vene∣rationem crucis Scripturae au∣toritate sta∣bilire de coro∣na mil. and therefore Tertullians judgement is to be preferred, which plainly saith; that there is no warrant in Scripture for it. His words be, (n) If thou seek any Law for this in Scripture, thou shalt find none. Tradition is avouched to be the Author, Custom the Confirmer, and Faith the Observer. Now it is further to be noted that a double use of the cross is mentioned in antiquity, the one Civil, the other Religious, against the former we do not dispute, yeilding all reverence to those Christians, which by that note shewed their rejoycing and glory, in that which the Heathens counted their shame, but now, that a∣buse hath turned both the Image and the sign of the cross into an Idoll, it seemeth thereby to be made execrable. For Gideons E∣phod being first a Civil monument of victory, when the people went a whoring after it, was it lawful for the Magistrate to erect in the Tabernacle or Synagogue though not the same, yet the like, both in name and form to any religious use? would it have sufficed to say this is not the same Ephod that Israel maketh an Idoll of, neither is it set here to be worshipped (for your brethren do grievously sin therein) but onely to keep in mind the great vi∣ctory that God by Gideon gave to Israel. Right so the cross used by the Ancients, to shew that they were not ashamed of Christ crucified being meerely civil, and yet expressing a most Christian resolution, having been abused, yea, continuing to be worshipped both in Image and in sign, it seemeth that this filth hath made it unfit, on any pretence of restoring it to his ancient use, to be an∣nexed to the holy things of the Sanctuary: especially while there are so many Papists that superstitiously abuse it among us. Now for the religious use of the cross by the Ancients, it was never free from sin and superstition as afterwards is shewed, and if it were, yet being an humane Ordinance, and now not onely abused to Idolatry, but becoming it self a most abominable Idoll, no water can cleanse it, nor any pretext purifie it for the holy service of Je∣hovah. But in very deed, to speak as the truth is, the cross is re∣tained among us with opinion very superstitious and erronious, for in the late CanonsCanon 30. it is said, that the child (c) is thereby de∣dicated unto the service of him that died on the cross. What is this but to equal Mans Ordinance with Gods, and to ascribe that un∣to the cross,Tertullian de baptiz. cap, 7, 8, Euseb. lib 6. which is due unto Baptism? a conceit fitter for igno∣rant Papists, then learned Christians to consent unto. Neither do we use it as the Ancients did, for Cyprian, Augustin, Chrysost∣om
and others, (m) it is apparent that those times did consecrate the Elements therewith, and did not cross the childs fore-head at all, but referred that unto the Bishops confirmation, so that our crossing the Infants fore-head and not the Element of Baptism is a meere novelty without any warrant of that antiquity,Cap 24 Inno∣cint. ep st cap. 3 Rab. made inst c eric. cap. 3. Duand. de ritib. Eccle. lib 1. cap. 20. Our use of the cross. Novelty of some 60 years standing. neither will that place of Tertullian De resurrectione carnis, prove the contrary. The flesh is washed that the soul may be purged, the flesh is annoynted that the soul may be consecrated, the flesh is signed that the soul may be guarded, the flesh is shadowed by the Imposition of hands, that the soul may be by the spirit inlight∣ned, the flesh doth feed on the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be filled and fatted of God. In which words he joyning together divers ceremonies of the Christians, doth indeed mention the signing of the faithful, but it may as well be referred to con∣firmation expressed by imposition of hands as to Baptism, under∣stood by the washing of the body and that one better reason, for it is more than probable that the sign of the cross was not yet used in Baptism,As for Martial his Epistle are justly su∣spected. seeing Justin Martyr in defens. ad Antoninum & Tertul. de Baptismo & de corona militis, do describe the form of Baptism used in those times, and yet make no mention of the cross therein, which in all likelihood they would not have omit∣ted if it had been used therein, especially Tertullian, who in that place speaketh of the cross, as used out of Baptism in the ordinary blessing of themselves. Objection, But the sign of the cross is not used in Baptism, but when Baptism is ended Answer. f you take Baptism only for that dipping and sprink∣ling of the party it is true, and so none of the popish additions, whereby they defile that holy Sacrament are in Baptism, for those which Bellarmine accompanie Baptism are not impious, but if you take Baptism as indeed we do, for the administration of the Sacrament, then both the prayers before & the prayers after, the actions after the dipping; do all indifferently belong to one and the self same thing, yea it is all one continual action of the Admi∣nistration of the Sacrament. Sure it is that it must be said to be, either in Baptism or out of Baptism, or no where; if it be out of Baptism, how is it by common consent of all, said to be the sign of the cross in Baptisme. Object. The sign of the cross is very ancient. Answer. So are many other Popish Traditions: And if on that ground we are to retain it, why do we not give the baptized milk and hony accor∣dingly. Why do we not bring offerings for the dead. For Tertullian the first
of the Fathers that ever mentioned the cross, doth establish these, and the sign of the cross, by one and the self same warranty. Besides, if upon the Fa∣thers Tradition we use the cross, then must we receive and use it as they have delivered it unto us, that is, with opinion of vertue and efficacy, not only in the act of blessing our selves, and in the expelling of Devils, but even in the consecration of the blessed Sacrament. For the first, Tertullian is wit∣nesse,De coron mil. saying, At every passage, at every setting forward, at every coming in and going out, at putting on of our cloaths, shoes, &c. We stamp our fore-head with the sign of the cross. For chasing of Devils, Jerom councelleth Demetrius to use the cross, say∣ing.Epistola ad De∣metriam. Lib. 4. cap. 17. And with often crossing guard thy fore-head; that the destroyer of Aegypt find no place in thee. Ltantius saith, Christs followers do by the sign of the cross, shut out the unclean spirit. Chrysostom in Psalm 109. The cross guardeth the mind, it taketh revenge on the Devil, it cureth the diseases of the soul, &c. But these superstitions are small in regard of that efficacy which in the Sacraments, antiquity ascribed unto the cross, for Cyprian (being the ancientest that maketh mention of the cross in Baptism) speaking of it. Whose virtue, perfecteth all Sacraments, without which sign nothing is holy, nor any consecration taketh effect,Cyprian de pa∣sione. and whosoever are the Ministers of the Sacraments, whatsoever hands do dip or anoint the comers to Baptism, out of whatsoever mouth the sacred word do preceed, the Authority of Operation doth by the sign of the cross, make effectuall Sacraments. It were superfluous to rehearse the rest. But hereby it is evident that the religious use of the cross, was even at the first sinful and superstitious, neither can it be shewed, that ever it was used by the Fathers, religionis ergô sine ad∣mixta superstitione, and this invention did no sooner creep into the Sacrament, but it drew unto it self such superstitious conceit of efficacy and necessity, that without it the means which God appointed for the consecration of the Ele∣ments seemed over-weak,Lately in Sur∣ry a child re∣baptized, be∣cause the cross was omitted. yea, unavailable, according as some (e) amongst us account not their children lawfully baptized, yea will have them rebap∣tized, if the cross have been omitted, out of which may be observed, first how dangerous a thing it is to bring any humane invention into the service of God, sith in the very pure age of the Church, it was punished with such a spiritual curse of horrible superstition. Secondly, though at this time popery was not hatched, yet the mystery of iniquity was then a working, and the beginning as it were of the whorish fornications was found even in the Fathers times, so that, as worshipping of Angels in Paules time,Colosi. 2.18. prayers and oblations for the dead in Tertullians time, be rightly counted Popish and Antichristian, though as yet that monster was not born: So this and other ceremonies ratified by the popish canons and con∣stitutions, may well be taken for Popish and Antichristian, even in the Fathers times, seeing they then made away for the beast, and since have received fur∣ther impiety and authority from him:Esay. 52.11. wherefore to conclude as Isay exhort∣eth Gods people, to keep themselves from the rites and pollutions of the heathen, saying, depart, depart ye, go out from them and touch no unclean thing: So the spirit in the same manner chargeth the Church not to meddle with the corruptions of Antichristian Babylon, but go out of her my people saith he, that ye may not be partaker of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.Apoca. 18.4. The fear of which curse doth keep us from all the superstitious and Idola∣trous ceremonies of that whorish Synagogue.
