C1411B R175692 43077484 151543
A CATALOGUE Of the titles of severall Books printed in Cambridge in the Year 1669. In a large Folio. FIve demonstrations to prove that a Frenchifyed Englishman, being a privy Councellour, may lawfully be a Pensioner to the Frence King. Dedicated to the Earle of St. Albans. In a smal Octavo. Crums of comfort for the East-India-Company: wherein it is made evident that Goa, Dunkirk, & the Nutmegg-Island are to be delivered to the English, when the Citradels are rebuilt in Scotland. In a large Folio. Three Arguments to prove that forty thousand pounds is but a small summ to play away in one winter in the French Court by a Ierman Count. Dedicated to the House of Commons. In a large Quarto. Reason & Iustice in 3 Tomes: proving the impartiallity of our Age, viz. in fetching the Lord Warreston out of France, & hanging him in Scotland; and suffering Clarendon at his ease in France to do further mischief. In the largest of Folios. Fifty unanswerable Arguments to prove Sr. George Downing a worse condition'd Traytour against his Master Okey, than Iudas against our Saviour, who, when he considered what he had done, went & hang'd himself. In a small Folio. Twenty Arguments to prove that never any Lawyer went to heaven (except Sr. Thomas More) though a Christian, especially such as take fees on both sides, & make no conscience of pleading in a bad cause. De∣dicated to Iack Fountain, Iack Maynard, Black-mouth'd Iones, & Sr. Ambrosele Befe the Butchers son at Smithfield-barrs. In a Duodecimo. A new way of paying old debts, Written by Plutofurens: viz: That the debtor ought to beat the Creditor if he trust a Courtier, & ask for his money. Dedicated to Howard the Mercer, Dean the Woodmonger and Avery the Coachmaker. In a large Folio. A Dam-me way of swearing & hectoring a Man out of life & estate: written in a black character by Plutofurens, & Compeers Dobson, Priestman & Granger. Dedicated to Alexander Fitton, Willi Carr Percival Hart and Blunden. In a small Octavo, An excellent method of lying, or inventing lyes, together with the Art of Memory requisite for a Lyar Composed by the 3 famous Authors Sr. Satan Birkenhead, Sr. Thomas Gore and Sr. Giddy-brain Gerard. With the learned Observations of Doctor Baber an exquisite Student & Practitioner in that Ar Dedicated to Coll. Noy. In a Quarto. Savill or the Vujust Steward; being a Tragi-Comedy, Acted at the Kings house: wherein is presented the injustice of the Steward in selling the Towns in Holland & Flanders. Dedicated to Queen Besses Tomb. In a large Quarto. Articles of Agreement made in a tripartite Alliance between the right Venerable Baud Benee, Madam Valeire & Madam Castlemain: with the proposalls of marriage between the High-born Bastards Lew%% de Bourbonne Valeire, Charles Castlemain, & the 2. Mistris Iermins in the Nunnery at Cullomb in Franc
In Folio. Twenty Reasons written by the Lady Benet, Damaris Page, Proserpine Civit & Madam Chiffins: with the Observations of their Sister Wood deceased: wherein is a direction to Madam Russell, & all other hope∣full Ladies likely to trade at Court; That they, on pain of poverty, diseases & old age, never offer to expose their Commodities to sale on trust; but first secure a good stock of Money & Titles of Honour: for that there is no trust in Princes or Sons of men: As for example, Mis at the Play-house, Roxellana, Warmsley, & other Whores of Honour. A new way of Institution & Induction practised on Doctor .... at the Fleece-Tavern in Holborn by Arch-Bishop Buckhurst, Arch-Deacon Sidley & Chancellour Blaney. Jn a Duodecimo. The heavy Iudgements inflicted on Sr. George Cartwright for his ruining the valiant Seamen of England, & cheating the Nation in the Exchequer: viz. to be confined Treasurer of Ireland for his miserable life. Jn a Folio. An exact model & survey of the Great Ships built by the Ld. Gerard & the rest of the Peers, according to the flourish they made at the burning of the Ships at Chattam. Dedicated to the Court of Aldermen & Common Councell building the Loyal London; with a Motto. 'Tis for a Merchant to keep his word: But for an upstart Lord a.... Jn a Folio. The English Interest firmly established in Ireland by outing the honest Adventurers, & innocent English families settled 100 Years in Ireland; & putting into their estates the known Irish Rebels. Dedicated to the Privy Council in 40 Articles by Alderman Barker of London. Jn a Quarto. Alderman Bolton's honesty to the poor burnt out of London comparted to the pissing out the fire of Lon∣don by wise Sr. Thomas Bludworth. In a Duodecimo. The Lady Benet's Receipt for lost maidenheads presented to Madam Churchill, Mrs. Warmsley & others, whores of honour. Jn a Folio. Sr. Poll alias Sr. Gilbert Gerard; Hypocondria for the cure of his mad wife, & the rest of the mad Daugh∣ters of Gutta Rosacea the Beast of Durham, Dedicated to the Bishops onely Son now a Pikeman in Russels Regiment. A rare Secret found out by the Beast of Durham's Chambermaid, being an Antidote against pissing & shit∣ing a bed when drunk.... by taking Goats hoof or it's bladder burnt to a powder, & drunk in the Colle∣giate cup at Peterburrow. Jn a Quarto. Gutta Rosacea his logick, that, as the Beast of Durhaem is a Prince Palatine he may lawfull ly with his maid severall years; & after, marry her to his Man, by a Licence from Sr. Satan Birckenhead. Dedicated to the Cobler of Glocester. The Milk-wife at Hackney her mistaken method of cureing Doctor Smallwoods mad wife, in sending the Doctors Bastard in a Basket, in stead of a basket of strawing herbs for his Church. n a large Folio. Vngratefullnes in 17 books, written by Monsieur Cadoule of Mompelier. Dedicated to Blood-Frayser a Lousy Scot in that Town.
A perite Medicament for the Cure of Doctor Frayser's broken vertex, found out by the Bayliff of West∣minster: & dedicated to Sr. Edmund Godfrey. The sad complaint of Royal blood with 200 other souls sent to the shade below, against Blood Frayser-De∣dicated to Mr. Read, Fraysers old Master. Jn Octavo. Five Arguments written by Izard the Printer, proveing Doctor Baber Pluto's Pimp, & Will: Cravens Cheatmaster Generall. Zanie or an Analeptica for the Cure of the Arthritical; experienced by Hyde on the Lady Mordant at Mompelier. Madam De rat's request to Iustice Baber to make her a bill of what she deservs for rubbing Clarendons shins every night in Mompelier. Sermons noted useless by the Comedians of both houses, & Westminster-Abby; with a Question put, —Whether Pauls-Church ought to be built first, or the Play-house in Salisbury-Court, & which will be of most use for this Age? In a Scotch Paper. The Frenchmens wonder, or the worlds astonishment, that ever Clarendon should have brains enough to be Chancellour of England; being judged, by such as discourse with him abroad, to be an ignorant lump of Cornbury-gutts. A new way found out in Ireland for the making good Soldiers, by nipping money out of each Souldiers days pay, for maintaining a Play-house for his Grace. The Tripartite Allyance of the Grand Senior, Devil & French King sent to all the secure negligent Prin∣ces & States. Jn a Quarto. An hoeterogeneous Remedy against Melancholly found out by C— Lantherdail. Dedicated to Royal blood. Romes thanks returned to Clarendon for his Kind endeavours in sending Sr. Richard Beling to the Popes ho∣liness with a Commission for Father Patrick to sit in the House of Commons. Dick Mason the Avenior his gracious condescention to his poor old Father for the continuance of his Ale∣house, & living poor in Stafford-shire: with the true relation how Dick cozzened a poor old woman on pretence of Marriage. An excellent Receipt against the sin of Sodom: by Phisiologer Bishop Dalben made in the Moon-light. Iustice Bales request to Docter Baber to prove Magna Charta a Chancery Lawyer, & not a Statute, as the wise Doctor once affirmed it to his Clerck & an ignorant Constable. An Action brought against Sr. Positive at all, Sr. Will: Killegrew & Senior Tomaso by the Wites who wrote their Plays. Dedicated to Iudge Drayton & Gresham-Colledge. The blessed reformation in the supposed Noble families of England, by resolving against a Puritanisme-life, & taking up Heathenism. Jn a Quarto. The Goodmans rest, or an Assurance that no miscarriages or cheats shall every be punished by the Com∣mittee of Brook-house: With a consolation to the troubled Brethren Gerard, Cartwright, brazen-fac'd
Bronckerd, Pen, Peck & others. with this in the title-page, Qui peccat & non corripit alienae, facit suae. Mr. Holders Remonstrance to the sober people in England; with 3. arguments to prove that the valiant Christian Act of Sr. Robert Holms in burning an innocent village in Holland, & robbing & cheating the Guiny-Company was not the cause of burning London, & Ships at Chatham by way of Lex talionis. Directions for any persons that are desirous to take Holy Orders from Pope Clement the ix. or his Succes∣sors, to repair to the Monaestery built at st. Iames, & at Castelles in Ireland. Jn a small Quarto. The Lord Gerards advise to.... That the way to govern the City of London & keep them from rebellion, is, to reduce the proud Knaves to their blue Capps & leather points, & suffer no more Lord Majors or Common-Council, but make a good Cittadel out of the Stones of Pauls in the middle of the City, & make a Hectoring Governour; according to the example of a Dam-me Lord who lost all Wales & all other places in his manaige. In a large Folio. An excellent discourse called the Metamorphosis of old Iack Vaughan; with the Dialogue between him &..... a worthy Commoner, who meeting old Vaughan in Westminster-Hall, saluted him with many congratulations, wishing him joy of his Court-preferments; to which old Vaughan replyed, Do you not see my grey-hairs? Alas, Alas, I am too old to be a Knave; the Court may design what they pleas, but they mistake the Man, I am resolued never to quit the Commons jnterest: Yet with 6. hours this old man turned young, & nimbly skipp'd to White-hall, where he made a Coupee, and from honest old Iack became Sr. Iohn, & with the Courant-figure became Serjeant Iohn, & with a Caper leapt into the Chief-Iustice seat in the Common-pleas; & is become an Excellent Dancer after a Court-horn-pipe; which caused one to send him these 2. lines to paint in his Coat of Arms, This is no wonder in such a Man; One honest Lawyer shew who can? The French Kings thanks with his present sent to his Pensioners by his faithfull Ierman Count, for en∣deavouring to break the Triple Allyance; that England & Holland may once more weaken the Protestant Interest, that the French King may have the easyer passage to England through Flanders & Holland. A true accompt given to the French King by Monsieur Colbert of the whole charge in the purchase of Dun∣kirk, wherein is cast up what the new hangings cost now hanging in the Louvre at Paris, wherein is the picture of Dunkirk with a purse of money held over the Town: Also what the presents cost that were giv∣en to the good old Gentlewoman & to Gerard for his officiousnes in that affair. Jn the largest of Folio's. Fiftie Theses, wherein the grand quaestion is stated, viz. Whether the abjureing Charles Stuart & a single person, or the abjureing the Covenant hath produced the greater plague on these Nations? in which book are large Cutts lively presenting unto this Age, Kimbolton & other Lords, with Iack Fountain, Serjeant Maynard, Iudges Terrhel, Sr. Harbottle Grimston, Doctor Hodges, Doctor Smallwood, & dissembling Ley, lifting up their hands to heaven, & crying that heavy Iudgements might pursue & fall on the Violat∣ers of that holy Covenant. In another Plate is Genll. Monck at the head of his Regiment abjureing a Single Person, & murdering all that would not do the same.
On 23d. Cutt are presented the severall Victories of the Common-wealth, where may be viewed the King of Spain plucking out one of his Eyes to please the English Ambassadour; the French King with his breeches down, & Card. Mazarin on his knees holding up the Kings shirt; the Portugall delivering his Ambassad: Brother to be a sacrifice to appease the Peoples anger for affronting the English Nation; the Swede offering Christian to be a Wife to any Son of the Common-wealth; the poor Dane with his back bare, and a whole Regiment of German Princes & Italian Common-wealths offering their services to Englands Common∣wealth; the Dutch claiming kindred & brotherly love; the Numerous Turks round the Mediterra∣nian humbly presenting to the Common-wealth all the English Slaves in fetters of Gold, admireing Blake, & calling him a Son of the God Common-wealth in England, & fearing that Blake would burn their Ships and destroy their harbours, from the Citys of Argiers, Salee & Smyrna, the Bashaws sending blank papers aboard the Generall to make his own Articles: And on the back-side of this Cutt is to be seen Sr. Thomas Allen beaten by a few Anchovy & Olive-boats, where is presented a feathered Captain with his Whore tyed to his back, and a bagg of money fastened to his nose as a leading-string, with a Turk pissing in the Captains eyes. And if you please to turn the other leaf, you will see a small Cutt where is pictured a hand out of a wall pointing at the Plague & fire of London, the burning of the Ships at Chatham & Dutch-Warre; with a Turk whipping a Bishop in his Lawn-sleevs, & calling him ignorant proud & drunken Priest. A Prophecy found by a Cold-streamer in an Abbey in Northumberland, foretelling that Oliver Cromwel & Genll. Monck should both dy in their beds aequally honest, & have sumptuous funerails, & be aequally exalted on Westminster-Hall for breaking their faith to their Masters. Tom of the Woods Prophecie, being sent to Will Lilly from Schooters-Hill in Kent, with Tom's desire that Lilly would give hïs judgement thereon unto the Lady Harvey. viz. When Monck Shall dy, we plainly See That Monmouth General shall be; Then Iames & Nan in a small flees To New-York fly they hold it meet. Til Charles the Second takes his rest: Then York & Monmouth shall contest Who hath most right to wear the Crown, And so in blood each other drown: The Commons then shall laugh & sing, And banish quite the Name of King: The Lords priviledge quite out of doors; Then every Peer must pay his scores: Then Castlemain that Papist-Whore Shall dy a death as did Iane Shore: And Drunken Shepheards run away; Both Dogs & Flocks shal go astray: The knavish Lawyers in disgrace, And honest men put in their place, Who shall with love make men agree, And justice plead without a Fee: The Cityzen & Countreyman Shall lovingly go hand in hand. Then Brittain shall in triumph ride, With peace & honour by her side; Dame Foresight with her looking-glass Shewing what's coming & what's past: Iustice with her ballance waits that Day To even all that Strife can say: Charitie full-loaded with her store Distributing Alms amongst the poor: Victory with her Laurel-Crown'd Spurning at Tyrants on the ground: Heaven then shall pleased be For seeing Love & Vnity Always waiting at the Gate To keep out discord from the State. In a large Quarto. Sr Satan Birckenhead proved to be a legitimate Child of the Devil, viz. That when the poor people who had their houses pull'd down on both Tower-hills, Petitioned the House of Commons for satisfaction, The said Sr. Satan stood up & affirmed to the Parliament, That to his knowledge His Maitie had taken parti∣culer care to satisfie & pay every Man to a farthing their whole damage; Upon which lie The House threw out the poor peoples Petition, who are not yet satisfyed, nor in any hopes of redress.
The Iesuits Conclusion & Arguments used to severall Protestant Princes abroad, That the Pope hath a great Interest in England; For that, say they, you find the Lord Taff E. of Carlingford, an Irish-Papist, Sr. Bernaed Gascoygn an Italian Papist. and Harry Howard the Head of all the Papists in England, with other Church-Papists employed as Embassadours to severall Princes Coures; as if there were not Protestant Subjects enough capable of trust. Montagu's faint request & Zeal in pressing the French King on behalf of the poor oppressed Protestants in France; Together with that Kings gracious Answers, & value had for the English Embassadours desires; viz. making 49. fresh Articles be published against the Protestants, which are such cruell Ones, that they are judged by moderate Persons, to be hatch'd in hell by the departed Iesuits, & printed to gratify their friends in England. A hot dispute between 2. young Students at the Vniversitie of Heidelbergh, the one a Frenchman, the other an Englishman; In which the Frenchman by many unanswerable Arguments proves, That as Queen Elizabeth promoted & defended the Protestants Interest in the Low-Countries, So on the contrary King Iames & King Charles of blessed memory destroyed not onely the Interest of Protestants in Cermany & France, but everywhere else: One Demonstration whereof was, That King Iames, (to gratifie Gundi∣mer the Spanish Embassadour) out of a fearfull, base, cowardly Spirit, sent orders to call home the Lord Vere & other brave English Officers, commanding 8000 Men out of the Cittadell at Manham & Castle at Heidelbergh, leaving those invincible fortifications to the plunder of the Duke of Bavaria; the English having then had in Manham above 200 fodder of wine which contain 1200. hogsheads, & all other pro∣visions in great abundance: Which Act was the immediate ruin of that renowned Prince Palatine, & almost all the Protestants in Germany. A second Demonsiration was, That when the Duke of Bukingham was sent to the relief of the Protestants in Rochel, there were private Instructions that they should land the English in the Isle of Rhee; and when God by a Iudgement cut off the Duke of Buckingham for his delaying to go with a second relief, there were found in his pocketts instructions from the Queen-Mother, that the Duke should make good his premise to delay the time till the Rebels & Rogues (as they were termed) were beaten before Mompelier & at Rochel. So that the French-man concluded, That 'twas no marvel that Queen Eli∣zabeth prospered, & was a terrour to the whole world, not suffering any French-Pensioners in her Court, employing none but true-born Englishmen: and that on the contrary, 't is no wonder, that so many Iudgements, plagues & disgraces have happened to England since her days, when you behold the treachery of our Chieftains & Leaders. An Account dropt out of the Privy-purse kept by Pimp-May, through Bridgmans carelessnes, & found by a Parliament-man: On the folding of the outside of the paper was written, The punishment of evill∣doers; viz. Item, To the Lord Gerard (for continuing his Art of swearing & ruining many poor Gentlemen, & other misdemeanours, & abusing the old King at Newark; and for his Ladys employ in the room of the Lady Wood) twelv thousand pounds; On condition that He quietly give his place to the Duke of Monmouth. Item, Four thousand pounds to the Lord Mordant to continue his practise of forceing Ladys, & abuseing Taylor & others. Item, Five thousand pounds to the Lord Culpeper to render his place in the Isle of Wight to Sr. Robert Holms. Item, To the Lady Castlemain, twelv thousand pounds to furnish Barkshire-House. Item, Eight thousand seaven hundred twenty five pounds a year to the Lady Castlemain out of the Post-Offices. Item, For the lying in of Mis at the Play-house, & for children abroad at Nurse &c.: with many Articles lying before the Accomptants at Brook-house; exactly cast up for satisfaction; with this Inscription, Mobile mutatur semper cum Principe vulgus. In a small Octavo. Sr. Philip Warwicks wise resolutions to weare little breeches, & never to ask any employment; Provided he
may enjoy the last Fifty thousand pound shared with pocky Sr. Robert Long of the Excheqr, Dedicated to the Commissioners at Brook-house. A Prophecie cryed in the streets in Paris. Being An Observation on a Dialogue between an English Gentleman & a French Nobleman at the Crowning of King Henry the Fifth in Paris; at which time the Englishman crowing & braying over his Prisoner, ask'd him, when a Frenchman should be crowned King of England in London-city, as now an Englishman was crowned King of France in Paris? To which the Frenchman modestly replyed, Sr, I will tell you, When Englands Sins are as great as the Sins of France are now, you may then see a Frenchman, or some other strange Nation crown'd in London: Which makes the Frenchman bragg that the time is near at hand: But honest English hearts do pray, & hope that England will return by a holy Repentance to a mercifull God that can prevent the fulfilling of this Prophecie. History of Bel & the Dragon. Being an excellent piece practised & experienced by the States of Holland, in which is proposed to the Duke of Bukingham 3. remedies in State for the prevention of the encrease & growth of vermin & cater∣pillars in England, viz. That the 400000 pounds a year in Rents, Fees & emoluments devoured by Arch-Deacons, Deans, Canons, Prebends, Chancellours, Commissaries, Officialls, Surrogates, Proctors, Gent-Apparators, Vicars, Petty-canons, Singing-men & Boys, Choristers, Organists, Gospellers, Epistlers, & Virgers & the rest of that joviall (& unusefull) Crew, (besides the vast incomes of the Bishops) be employed Virgers & the rest of that joviall (& unusefull) Crew, (besides the vast incomes of the Bishops) be employed--> for the maintenance of an able & Godly Ministry, & preservation of the poor; Or laid out in a Fishing-trade for encrease of Shipping; Or as a Stock to defray the Publick charge, in the room of Excise & Hearth-moneys. Dedicated to the Author of Omnia comesta â Belo, & the Cobler of Gloucester. Monks last & charitable Legacies bequeathed to Genll Lambert & Major Genll Overton, whereby he hath manifested himself to dy a true Son of the Church of England, according to the 40th Article, viz. Brethren forgive & love one another.
