C5027 E94_20 R209868 99868719 157276
THE TRVE COPPIES OF TWO LETTERS SENT FROM IRELAND: Shewing the severall Battailes and Victories obtained on the Rebels there. seal flanked by cherubs LONDON, Printed for J. B. and R. Smith. 1643.
From Dublin the 15. of March, 1642. Loving Brother, I Have received yours of the 14. 21. and 28. of February, and answered them by Mr. Abraham Goultier, Mr. Lucyes man of London: on Saterday last, came newes from our Army, by the Earle of Roscomon, who left them at Bellenparke, in the County of Wexford, on Wednesday the eight Cur∣rent; all in a prosperous estate, thankes be to God; I shall write you particularly of their journey thither, as I have it from the best relati∣tors, but as concerning their further designe, I cannot write you for certaine, but out of my owne conjecture, I shall trouble you with my owne opinion therein; they were then in the place betweene Wex∣ford, Waterford and Rosse, my opinion is, they will for Wexford, first, because (although it be strong) it is farthest from the enemies Army, which are gathering at Kilkeney, and I beleeve they have drawne men thence to Kilkeney, expecting the comming of our Army thither: secondly, it is the Port into the which all their Ammunition and assistance from Foraine parts comes, and there doubtlesse is much at this time; and from thence doe they transport all the Native Com∣modities, which being of little value amongst them, yeelds them great benefit being transported, and much more it concernes us the taking of it. Time will not permit me to write, but one thing, having it, we can carry all our Ammunition thence to Waterford and Rosse, by water, having already the Fort of Dunkonnon, which may be the ea∣sier gaining of both those places, but what of all these opportunities so much concerning our Christian Warfare, if we have not a supply of men out of England, that so much tender our good, as to come o∣ver to Garrison, and hold those places, but come and take the bles∣sings that God hath bestowed; but I perceive (notwithstanding what you have written) there is no Cessation of Armes in England, but kil∣ling one another with such Zeale, as if they were not of one and the same Religion: where is their compassion of our misery? where is their
affection to the cause in hand here? but that it might be said, the Lod will save us without you; our misery is much, and much more increasing here; But I will let to spend my time to write what God hath done with our Army. I wrote you of their going forth the first currant, and their strength (or rather their weaknesse, comparing with the enemies forces) I have written you before. On Fryday the third Currant, they came to Ca∣stlemartin, and drawing toward the Castle, there came out one Bag∣got, (who had some command there) and desired Quarter, which was granted, and, without resistance, they yeelded the Castle, from whence went about 300. men women, and children, but very few men, and not above sixteene fit to beare Armes. Our Army had a good Quarter of it there that night, but some of our men quartered further, there was much Corne and provision there; it is thought that there and at Tymalin (which was taken after) was at least 3000. Bushels of Corne, besides great store of good pillage, they left a Garrison there. And on Saterday the fourth, they marcht towards Moone, which is halfe a mile from Tymalin, intending to passe by Tymalin (because it was mightily fortified) and to quarter at Moone, where was a garri∣son of Rogues, but yeelded upon quarter, but passing by Tymalin, most of the Army and the Ordnance having gone beyond it, for our Ar∣my was not appointed to meddle with it, nor any other place of strength, whereby to spend any time by the way, but my Lord of Ormond, would omit no opportunity of comming unto the place in∣tended to be at, but onely to take up such places for quartering of the Souldiers, as might be easily obtained without losse of time, or men, or spending Ammunition, and that he might obtaine the place aymed at, before the enemy should be ready to oppose him. But from Tymalin came forth five Horsemen toward our Army, passing by (there being a Brooke betweene them and our Army, and one of them drew his sword and flourisht it, and bid our men come over, whereupon my Lord of Ormond commanded backe the Army and the Ordnance (not∣withstanding the strength of the place, whereon the enemy so confi∣dently relyed, more then on what God could doe against it. In the meane time, foure or five of our horsemen made over the Brooke, unto the five Rebels; and in pursuit of them they came upon an Ambush of Muskettiers of the Rogues, notwithstanding they dismounted one of the Rogues and brought away his horse, the rest of that day and
Saterday night, our Muskettiers playd on their outworkes. On Sun∣day morning they beat them out of the Trenches into the Castle, and Church, and steeple upon which our Ordnance played al Sunday and Munday the sixth, till about noone, and obtaining all those places with the losse of Lieutenant Olliver, two Sergeants of note, and some others, about twelve in all, they entred the Castle, but in their entrance the women there, which were appointed, by my Lord, to be saved a∣live, them and their children, those did much hurt to our men, who being so much incenst against them, they slew all, men, women, and children; about 600. amongst which there were very proper men. In which place, I heard that one of our Army got 1500. pounds in money and plate, and many others got good booties; a friend of mine writ to me that he mist of 600. pounds in money for want of more diligence. On Saterday night and Sunday night, my Lord quar∣tered at Moone, and on Munday afternoone, they left Tymalin, with∣out Garrison; they went forward towards Catterlagh (commonly called Carlagh,) which they could not reach that night, but comming to their Randezvous, at Bolton hill, they met with Captaine Harmon, and Captaine, or Lieutenant Grymes, who came with about 80. horse, and 120. Foot; from their Garrisons, (in or about Arthy) to meete my Lord and our Army, with 12. or 14. prisoners, three Collours, and 100. Armes, that they got in the way to Bolton hill, for on Sa∣terday the fourth, they met with 400. well Armed Rebels, with 4. or 500. Cowes; marching towards Kilkemy, to joyne with Preston, and making a retreat for gaining of good ground, they obtained their desire, and falling on the Rogues, slew (some write 200. some 160. besides prisoners,) about 200. in all, and tooke all their Cattle, and brought either 12. or 14. prisoners to my Lord, two Ensignes, and one Captaine, a Frenchman named Lynnod, they kept some alive, to be guides for our Army in the way; and Captaine Lynnod, because he was a stranger, and a good Souldier, the rest they hanged there; that Munday night they could no each Carlagh, b to Frumples Towne, or Crumpols Towne, to o Wals house, (about two or three miles short of Carlagh,) who was a ma protected by our Garrison of Carlagh, and the next morning they came to Catterlagh, and passing through the Towne, our Souldiers expecting to goe to Kilkemy, my Lord caused them to wheele about, toward the County of Wexford, and our Souldiers fearing a returne to Dublin, began to be dismayed; that they should so soone part with their plenty, to eate shotten He∣rings
without bread, and cold water instead of hot water, in Dublin, but God hath better provided for them, for the Rebells expecting their comming to Kilkenay, caused all the Country to be burnt before them that our Army might finde no provision, and thither were they gathering great strength, but their Cattle and what there could not be contained within their Walles, they sent into the County of Wexford, having there better shelter by meanes of the woods, then elsewhere; wherein God was pleased to defeate their Counsell, insomuch that our Army met with such plenty of all sorts of daintyes, that Mutton and Beefe began to be grosse meate, and no man present to begrudge it them, there plenty of Cattle you can∣not but conceive that they tooke, and yet at my Lord of Roscomons returne from Balleneparke from the Army the eighth, hee saw in the way which our Army had past such a multitude of Cattell as if that they had brought out of the woods to feede after our Army was past as if our Army had not gone that way; from Catterlagh they came Tuesday night the seventh, they came to Master Cheevers house at Grangefort and quartered there, where was none found but three Maides, passing by Tally they found the Towne set on fire, by one of my Lords kinsmen, who refused to suffer my Lord to quarter there in his owne house, but burnt the Towne and carryed all the goods into the Castle, but my Lord would not spend any time to secure any thing that concerned his particular benefit (as some Commanders would have done) but more aymed at the Common good; from Chevers they went to Master Beverly Brittaynes house at Balleneparke in the County of Wexford, one mile from Clehammons, and sixe from Erinscorthy, from thence all were fled, and carryed their goods to Wexford, so that the Earle of Roscomon left them all safe on Wednesday the eight, and brought us all the newes hither on Saterday. I have heard a Relation, and for certaine it is, that part of our Army going downe Burat, both the Towne and Castle of Kildaer, and having there and at other places, so much pillage, they could not but leave very rich things behinde them, which they burnt: you may then thinke what good things they have with them; and above all they have the speciall assistance of Al∣mighty God. Yesterday the 14. went forth my Lord of Roscomon, and Sir Morice Eustace to Tredagh, to meet with my Lord Moore, who are on Fryday to meete the Earle of Colnirichard at Titchmore, there to heare
what the Rebels can say for their rebellion, I shall not enlarge my selfe further, I rest, Your assured loving Brother, Robert Cole. Dublin the 17. of March, 1642. Loving Brother, I Have written a former at large by this Post, being a full relation of the proceedings done by our Army, so farre as Ballenparke, in the County of Wexford, to the eighth Currant; and yesterday came newes, a threefold relation, and the more likely to be true, because it comes all by the Irish, who love to boast of victoryes, when they are put to the worst, and to conceale any good newes from us; all tending to this effect (the time and place not mentioned) that our Army was intended to have beene compast by the Rogues, Preston with his for∣ces lying on one side, and the Barnes, Tooles, and others of the County of Wickled and Wexford, an the other side, and that our Ar∣my making out 1000. horse and foote fell in the night on Colo∣nell Barnes forces, and with Ordnance loaden with Musket bullets, have left few to carry home the newes to their Friends, but some left one legge, some one Arme behinde them, departed in a miserable case; pity them that are no Christians, for if it be true, it is farre lesse then they intended towards us; the next day morning, Preston fell on our Army, and held our men three houres fight, but at length was put to flight, and great execution done on his Army, by the space of five miles in pursuit of them; if this be true, we may truely say with the Prophet David, the Lord of Hoasts is with us, the God of Jacob our refuge: we expect suddenly a convoy fom our Army, then shall I write what is done for the truth, in the meane time it is so good newes, that I cannot but impart with it as I have it by report, it was done in some part of the County of Wexford, as I am informed, I rest, Your very loving Brother Robert Cole. FINIS.
