C5575 E988_19 99867105 119395
A COMMONVVEALTH, AND Commonvvealths-men, Asserted and Vindicated: Wherein The Necessity and Advantage of putting their Principles into speedy practice, is briefly repeated; And PEACE and UNITY, Commended to the People of this Nation. Tacit. Lib. 3. Annal. Postquam exui aequalitas, & pro modestiâ ac pudore, ambitio & vis in∣cedebat, Provenêre dominationes: multosque apud populos aeternum manscrit. Quidam statim, aut postquam REGUM pertoesum, LEGES maluerunt. London, Printed for Henry Fletcher, at the three Gilt Cups in Paul's Church-yard. 1659. June. 28
A COMMONWEALTH, AND COMMONWEALTHS-MEN, Asserted and Vindicated. THough in this time of general scribling, and day∣ly impregnating the Press with no less seditious then ridiculous Pamphlets, it cannot but be thought an Act accountable to discretion, for any one of a sober Spirit & settled Principles to appear in Print among such lewd Company, or to offer any thing of seriousness, in a way now rendered so unagreeable for business of that nature: Yet for the better composing & settling the minds of those who may by such and so many interfering va∣rieties, and spurious issues of corrupt brains, be render∣ed tottering from their foundations, either of Piety, Pru∣dence or Obedience; and for the vindicating the Inte∣grity and Reputations of those, who for their Love and Loyalty to their Country, are by all means and artifice endeavoured to be rendered liable to Obloquy and Dis∣grace, I shall adventure to break that silence which Prudence might perswade: And though neither the Cause now under agitation, nor the Persons acting, can with rational Men, receive any disadvantage from such
poor pamphleting Opponents, yet the number of the Honest and Wife being now and alwayes but small, the present state of Affairs, may justly exact something of Reason and Judgement to be repeated, for the establish∣ing of Mens Minds in the Equity and Right of that Cause which is endeavoured to be made so dubious, and dangerous, if not destructive. That therefore a Government is necessary to the con∣sistencie of all Societies of Men, is not (notwithstanding the Anarchical tendencies of some Mens Spirits) so much the Dispute amongst us, as, What sort and kinde of Government is most agreeable to the present state of these Nations. And the difference herein (the Parlia∣ment having now freed themselves from all jealousies of introducing an Oligarchy (the worst of Governments) remains onely between the Monarchists and Common∣wealths-men. The first, receiving the specious justifi∣cation of the precedent Custom and Use of this Nation: The latter, the disadvantagious imputation of a Nove∣lism, unpractised, and impracticable amongst us. In which Case, though it be confessed that Antient Laws and Usages are not easily, and upon slight occasions to be changed, according to that Quadrane of Pibrac, La ley soubs qui l'estat sa force a prise Garde la bien, pour goffe qu'elle soit: Le bon heur vient d'ou' ton nes' appercoit, Et bien souvent de ce que lou mesprise. Maintain those Laws (however rude and plain) Whereby before thy Commonwealth hath thriv'd: Good Fortune oft comes by the lowest mean, How, or from whence, sometimes is scarce perceiv'd.
Yet it cannot likewise but be granted, that Quod recte a∣lio tempore constitutum est, itidem recte alio tempore potest mu∣tari: That upon a mutation of the causes of things, the things themselves may (nay must) be likewise changed, and that without any imputation of Novelty. Augu∣stines Assertion being indubitably true, Id quod in tempore novum est, non est novum apud eum qui condidit tempora, & sine tempore habet omnia, quae suis quibus{que} temporibus pro eo∣rum VARIETATE distribuit: That which in the present time appears new to us, is not new with him who ap∣pointed that time, and who before the time, compre∣hends those things which he distributes to every particu∣lar time, according to its variety and change. So that we may conclude with Seneca, Non incidunt cuncta, ut puta∣mus, sed veniunt; Things do not suddenly and newly hap∣pen, as we conceive, but come in their due and appoin∣ted course. And therefore where GOD Almighty in his eternal Providence manifested to us in the present time, hath thought fit to change and subvert old founda∣tions, and to lay new ones amongst us, let it not be thought Novelty in those, who still to maintain the building upright and firm, relinquish the old rotten and obsolete foundations, and apply themselves to the erect∣ing of such agreeable superstructures on those which are now laid amongst us, as shall be most for the safety of the people, which is the Supreme Law of all Nations. But to arbitrate more clearly between these parties, I shall proceed upon such undenyable principles, as re∣ceive their confirmation both from Reason and Expe∣rience. And of those, this shall be the Corner-stone, That from the legall distribution and over-balance of pro∣priety, deriveth naturally all Government. Which Ma∣xime hath had such a general reception, is so obvious to
every capacity, and so manifested by experience, that it stands not in need of any further illustration. The case hath been learnedly and clearly deduced ab origine from the Government of Families,Mr. J. H. which may be either Monarchical, or Popular, according to the balance of propriety. If one Man have 1000 l. per annum, he in such case is absolute Monarch over his Sons and Servants, who depend solely upon him, and (as hath been well said) are hung upon him by the teeth: And if (as we have too frequent examples amongst us) this 1000 l. per annum be spent or consumed, his Monarchy imme∣diately thereupon fails, and he himself is reduced to the condition of a Servant, and of equality with those who formerly served himself. Whereby it appears, that the foundation or balance of his Empire was in the 1000 l. per annum, and not otherwise. But now, if six or ten men having 300 l. per annum apiece, agree to dwell together as one Family, not any one of these can pretend to be Lord and Master of the same; But they all agree together upon such Orders, unto which they consent equally to submit: And the parity of their Estates, creating in them a parity of minds and condi∣tions, (in which case the old Rules hold, par in parem non habet imperium, & Aequalibus velle imperare est contra na∣turam superbire) they naturally contract a common equal interest, and devolve into the State of a free Com∣monwealth, and are only capable of a Government of Laws and Orders, and not of one or more men. In ei∣ther of which cases, being thus put, it is referred to every or any capacity, whether without violence, or mo∣ring of propriety, a Popular family can be made of the Monarchical, or a Monarchical family of the popular. And we know, a Family is but a smaller society or Na∣tion;
and a Nation, but a greater society or Family. This therefore being premised as granted; and it being likewise yielded by me, that the over-balance of propriety in these Nations, as it lately was in the King and Nobility, doth naturally produce either an Aristo∣cracy, or a mixt Monarchy, as by a sufficient experience hath been manifest amongst us, And which (if the ba∣lance had so still remained) we might with some hap∣piness yet have enjoyed; It remains for the determining the question, only to shew that the balance is altered from the former Monarchical, and now remains in a popular scale: And then, according to that known rule, Restransit cum suâ causâ, It will necessarily follow, that the balance, the cause of Government, being changed; the Government it self, as the effect, must follow the balance it's cause. And that, and how the English Balance hath been and is varied and changed, is most politely and politiquely demonstrated by the Excellent Mr. Harrington (whose writings, if they were received and considered, with that respect, candour and inge∣nuity, which the Author and they deserve from this Na∣tion, they would soon give a conviction to the most stre∣nuous opponents of this cause.) I shall need therefore only to touch the matter of fact, and (with him) to af∣firm, that the Lands now in hold of the people, over∣balance those in the hold of the Nobility at least nine in ten; whereby it is evident that we now are upon a Po∣pular balance, down-weight; and being so, cannot ad∣mit of any other form of Government then such as is Popular, without violence and force offered to proprie∣ty: which once rightly perceived and understood, would I perswade my self, soon put a stop to the proceedings of the most violent Assertors of Monarchy, and rebus lo∣quentibus,
nobis tacentibus, convince them, That Mr. Wrens robustious Arguments, to alter and suit the Balance to the Government, and not the Government to the Ba∣lance, whereby, he saith, he hath at once inverted the aim, and overturned the frame of the whole Common∣wealth of Oceana, is but bad Logick, and would prove worse Policy; and which (as he truly saith) would real∣ly overturn and destroy the whole frame of this flouri∣shing Nation. The necessity of a Commonwealth being now evin∣ced, and that we are forced upon that form of Govern∣ment; It might be thought fit likewise to be shewn, that this necessity is no way hazardous, but advantagious to us; and that we are not constrained to that which is hurtful, but even to the embracement of our own hap∣piness: Which though I deny not, but that it may be, and hath been had under other Governments, yet it is and hath been in a more eminent and grateful man∣ner, under that of a Commonwealth. But the ad∣vantage of this Government is so cleerly already set forth to publique consideration,By I. H. that there is not any thing which may remain further to be desired therein. It may suffice that we but take notice, that the nature and effect of this Government is so well known to be Freedom, that it is thereby described; and in all Wri∣ters, the most frequent distinguishing terms between Monarchy and a Commonwealth, are Servitus and Li∣bertas; as one speaking of the inconstancy of mens minds,Clapmar. & Tac. in vita Agric. di∣cit, Princi∣patum ac liberta∣tem res esse dissociabi∣les. under either the one or the other, saith, Qui in servitute sunt libertatem exoptant, qui in libertate servitutem. And we know that Liberty (in what respect soever) is the most grateful and desirable thing, this world either doth or can afford us; and is that which hath been alwayes in∣grafted
in a most special manner, in the hearts and minds of this Nation, of whom, even whilst the name (though not the nature) of Liberty was scarce known to them, Tacitus thus relates: Ipsi Britanni dilectum, ac tri∣buta & injuncta imperii munera, impigre obeunt, si injuriae ab∣sint, has aegre tolerant, jam domiti ut pareant, nondum ut ser∣viant. And now I cannot but enter into an admiration of the waywardness of our people of this Age, who are so fast and wilfully fettered to their old Usages and Cu∣stoms, that though they cannot retain, yet will they not be perswaded to part with them; being of his froward humour in the Poet: Nec possum tecum vivere, nec sine te. But instead of endeavouring and applying themselves to the advancement of such a settlement as the nation in the present state of things is capable of, they estuate and torment themselves with repining and dissatisfacti∣on at the Providence and Prudence of GOD, and seem rather desirous to rush into Anarchy, or like the beast into the Battle, then to yeild their compliance or assist∣ance to the building of agreeable Superstructures upon that Basis of Government which even GOD and Nature have laid amongst us. Nay, such is the temper of these times, that those Persons who are both prudent in under∣standing of, and faithful in acting for the interest & set∣tlement of their Country, are forced to complain, That having offered ayd at this loss, they have escaped well if they be scorned, and not ruined, by their ungrateful Country, whose Liberty whilst they indeavour to pro∣cure, they thereby indanger their own.
—Pudet haec approbria nobis Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli. That this hath been, and still is the temper of many amongst us, who are guided more by Zeal then Kow∣ledge, is more apparent then that it should need to be shewn; and so much a crime, as that it cannot receive the palliation of any other excuse, then that whereby St. Paul extenuates his persecuting, It is done out of Ignorance. For the removing therefore of the Cause, and conse∣quently the Disease; I cannot think of any more wholesome Recipe's then these which follow: 1. That Mr. Harringtons Writings be diligently and seriously read and perused. 2. That before they be taken in hand, the Reader lay aside all prejudicate thoughts and opinions, concerning either the Author or them; but yeild himself up to be led by them, if he finde in them reason sufficient to do it. 3. That afterwards (since opposita juxtase posit a clarius illucescunt) Mr. Wren be likewise read▪ And then both together being laid in the Balance of Reason and Judge∣ment, the Readers restitution to a sound mind concern∣ing a Commonwealth will be expected. In the mean time, let us be assured, That Distraction and War, wherein is the absence of all Government, is infinitely more noxious then the establishment of the worst of Governments (were such a one intended to be imposed upon us) can possibly be. And though there be no great cause either to doubt or fear our being redu∣ced into such a state, yet the frequent Births and pub∣like
exposing of the many late pestilent Libels, being the issues of weak corrupted Judgements, and disconten∣ted Mindes, cannot but be looked upon as tendencies and excitements thereunto. It onely remains therefore that we be all perswaded to a free and voluntary, or at least, an Acquiescent submission and obedience to the pre∣sent Providence and Power manifested and set up a∣mongst us, and in peace and patience wait the result of their consultations and actions, which they have solemn∣ly promised and engaged shall be for our preservation in our Liberties, as Men and Christians, and for the set∣ling of us upon the solid and sure Foundation of a Free and Equal Commonwealth; and of their performance whereof, we have not as yet had, and with much confi∣dence perswade our selves we shall not at any time have any cause to doubt. I conclude with that Observation of Tacitus, That it was onely our dis-union that formerly rendered us subject to the conquest of the Romans; and for a farewel, give you his occasional consideration thereupon: Nec aliud adversus validissimas gentes pro no∣bis utilius quam quod in commune non consulunt, Ita dum singuli pugnant, Universi vincuntur. FINIS.
