C6337 E1176_2 R208087 99867083 119373
GOSPEL-REPENTANCE Floweth from FAITH, And ATTENDETH A Iustified Person all his dayes. Whereunto is added, The difference between the LAVV and the GOSPEL. Written by Francis Cornwell, a Minister and Servant of Iesus, the Christ, for the benefit of poor distressed consciences in City, Coun∣trey, and Campe. LONDON, Printed by John Dawson. 1645.
To the Honourable, Vali∣ant, and Victorious Commander Lievtenant Generall Cromwell, a Member of the house of COMMONS: As also, To the truely Generous, and Valiant Commander Major Generall Skippon, listed un∣der the command of the thrice Noble and Va∣liant Commander in chief, Sir Thomas Fairfax; and to all the Saints scattered, contending for the faith of Jesus, the Christ, (Matth. 16.16, 17.) once given unto the Saints; and opposing the Pop sh Antichristian powers, that denieth Iesus, the Christ, 1 Ioh. 2.22. Thrice Noble and Valiant Heroes, THe state of the Saints con∣gregated, or scattered, for their spirituals, or tempo∣rals in this Nation, may not un∣fitly bee compared to Noah in the Arke. If you shall demand where∣in
was Noahs safety? Was it in the Arke, or out of it? I answer, First, not in the Arke; for there was ly∣ons, and beares, and ravenous beasts, &c. the uncleane as well as cleane, Gen. 7.2. Secondly, out of the Arke no safety; for there was the roaring winds, the ra∣ging waves beating, and hee no Pilot, knew not what course to steare, nor no haven to friend; the waters so prevailed, as all the high hills that were under the whole heavens, were covered fifteene cu∣bits upward, Gen. 7.19, 20. Where was then his safety? It was by faith in the free promise, Gen. 7.1. Heb. 11.7. So thrice Valiant Worthies, where are the Saints safeties for
their temporals in these distres∣sed and distracted times? Is it in the City, or out of it? In the Camp, or out of it? In the Land, or out of it? In City, Campe, and Kingdome, is no peace; we have the uncleane, as well as the clean; the malignant, as well as true-hearted; the accursed Chams, as well as the compassionate Shems and Ia∣phets; the treacherous Ioabs, as well as true-hearted Amasa's: out of these no peace; for hee knoweth no∣thing, that knoweth not this, the whole earth is in uproare: and whosoever contendeth for the faith of Iesus, the Christ, (though hee have an evidence in himselfe that hee is borne of God, 1 Ioh. 5.1.) yet, hee is made a prey in all
countries and Kingdomes where the Papall Government beareth sway: Where is their safety then? Onely in the free promise, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without co∣vetousnesse, and bee content with such things as you have; for hee hath said, I will never faile thee, nor forsake thee: v. 6. So that wee may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not feare what flesh can doe unto me. Hence the Be∣liever triumpheth, Hab. 3.17. Al∣though the figtree shall not blossome, nei∣ther shall fruits be in the vine; the la∣bour of the olive shall faile, the fields yeeld no meate, the flocks shall be cut off from the folds, and there shall bee no herds in the stals; yet will I joy in the Lord, and reioyce in the God of my sal∣vation, v. 18. If it be demanded,
where is the Believers safety in spirituals? Is it in the Believer, or out of him? I answer, not within him, (viz.) in his workes, duties, or qualificati∣ons; for he is partly flesh and partly spirituall; so that hee must confesse his best workes are weak, unclean, imperfect. Hence (with the Church, Esay. 64.6.) the Believer acknow∣ledgeth, that all his best works are like filthy ragges, and will stand him in no steed to justi∣fie him before God. Is it with∣out him in the ordinances of God; as in prayer, hearing the word preached, Baptisme, or the Lords Supper? These returne the same answer to the Belie∣ver,
(as Iohn the Baptist did to the Pharises, Ioh. 1.20.) that they are not the Christ. What are they then? Prayer is but thy Orator to poure out thy humble request to thy Father in the name of Christ, for what thou wantest. What will the word preached do? Declare the good will and free love the Father of heaven beareth unto thee in the Gospel of his Sonne. What will Baptisme and the Lords Supper doe? Exhibite outwardly those mer∣cies in the bloud of a Iesus, that faith believeth, and the spirit inwardly witnesseth, and sealeth to thee in the free pro∣mise, that through the bloud
of Iesus, thy sinne is pardo∣ned, thy person accepted in the Beloved one. But with one vote they deny that they are the Christ. Where is their safety then? Onely believing in a crucified, dead, and risen Iesus, Act. 13.38, 39. Hence holy Paul glorieth, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and I live by the faith of the Sonne of God, that loved me, and gave himselfe for me, Gal. 2.20. To redeeme me from all iniquity, and to purge me to be one of his peculiar ones, zealous of good workes, to the praise of his glory, Tit. 2.14. This Treatise was written for the consolation of some
poor drooping Saints in the point of assurance, as the tract it selfe will more largely de∣monstrate. It is a balm (though a spirituall one) as requisite for a Souldier, as for a Citizen, if a Believer; for a soul true∣ly setled in the knowledge of this point of assurance, hath gained a rich treasure, a pre∣cious diamond, that will stand thee insteed at all seasons, in prosperity and adversity, in health and sicknesse; yea, and the houre of death. And while you live enjoying this, it will adde true valour and courage to all your noble acts, and he∣roicall exploits, that you doe for your Countries liberties,
and to preserve a Kingdome from arbitrary and tyrannicall governments, that those nati∣ons are subject to, that are subdued by the sword. This cordiall taken and possest by faith, will make you valiant in fight, to put to fleight the Armies of the Aliens, that are risen up to destroy our King∣dome, that sometimes was as Eden the garden of the Lord; but now (where the field of warre hath been) it is almost made a desolate wildernesse. The good Lord encrease your faith in his precious promi∣ses, especially in the grand pro∣mise made to you in the bloud of his Sonne Iesus, the Christ;
and valour and courage for your Countries liberties; and give you meeknesse of spirit to bear with tender consci∣ences, that stand for a Refor∣mation agreeable to the word of Christ, that the Lord Iesus may bee one, and his name one in the three Kingdomes; that wee and our posterity af∣ter us may live in peace, and love, and the Lord may de∣light to dwell amongst us. And so, while your Honours, with your Noble Ioshua (the Honorable Parliaments Heroi∣call Commaunder) goeth out with the hosts against our op∣pressing Amalekits, I and the Saints united will betake our
selves to the Mount, to pray for your good and prospe∣rous successe, and the King∣domes deliverance. Orpington, in Kent. May 15. 1645. Yours, who daily prayeth for the e∣stablishing of the Churches peace, and the Kingdomes priviledges, and Truths propogation, that the King∣dome of Antichrist may be ruined, Francis Cornewell.
Errata. Reader, before thou readest this book, cast thine eye upon these faults, and as thou comest at them, thus correct them; Page 6. line 25. for as read and. Page 15. dele fly at the beginning of the 9. line, and adde it to the beginning of the 10. line. In page 106. at the beginning of the page in some copies adde this line, [world to come, 2 Cor. 5.8. A man.]
The difference between Legall and Evangelicall Repentance. Quest. WHether a Beleever truely, and really entred into the free Covenant of Grace, made to him in Iesus Christ, up∣on the commission of an actuall known sin ought to believe the actuall pardon of that sin, before he actually repent for the same. IN my discourse, and disputation concerning this point, I doe in∣tend, through Gods gracious as∣sistance
to observe this order, and method: First, I will rightly state the question. Secondly, I will positively set downe that which I conceive to bee the truth. Thirdly, I will answer such ob∣jections as are made by the opposites. Fourthly, set downe a catechisti∣call instruction, for the satisfaction of the weake. Fifthly, set downe the difference between an hypocrite, borne under a Covenant of workes, and a sin∣cere-hearted beleever, begotten un∣der a Covenant of grace. First, wee must know, that the sinnes of Gods Elect, under the New Testament, may be said to be actual∣ly pardoned in a foure-fold respect: 1. In respect of Gods eternall dec∣ree, which was before the world began. 2. In regard of Gods actuall lay∣ing of their sinnes upon Iesus Christ,
which was done in the dayes of his flesh, in the time of his suffering. 3. In regard of actuall applicati∣on of Christ and his righteousnesse, to believing souls, when God actu∣ally entreth into Covenant with them; causing them to lay hold up∣on Christ and his righteousnesse, by the hand of faith, either at their first conversion, or by renewed acts of faith, through the whole course of their lives. 4. In regard of sense, feeling, and experience; which is done by a no∣table worke of Gods providence, or by a sensible worke of his holy spirit. The question then is, Whether a Regenerate person, once in the Co∣venant of grace made to him in Ie∣sus the Christ, upon the commissi∣on of some actuall knowne sinne, ought, presently, by a renewed act of faith in the Covenant of grace, according to his former generall grant, Heb. 8.12. I will be mercifull
to their unrighteousnesse, and their sins, and their iniquities I will remember no more; given at his first entrance, be∣lieve that this sinne is their pardoned amongst the rest; or else should sus∣pend his faith in this particular; not daring to believe, untill such time, as he find himselfe actually humbled for that sinne. Lastly, it must be observed that when wee affirme that regenerate persons ought in this case to believe, before they repent; it is to be un∣derstood of a priority in nature, not in time; faith and repentance being both brought forth together. They which say repentance must goe before faith, meane it must goe before it in time; namely, repentance must goe between this sinne com∣mitted, and this act of faith, wher∣by we believe that this sinne is par∣doned, either, as a ground to build our faith upon; or else, as a prece∣dent signe, whereby we know, we are rightly qualified to receive par∣don
of our sinnes; or else, have just right to believe that our sinne is pardoned. The question being thus stated, I come unto the controversie pro∣pounded, and confidently affirme, That a Regenerate person, in this case, ought to believe actuall par∣don of his sinne, before he actual∣ly repent for the same; and this I prove to be the truth of God, by these ensuing arguments. 1. This is the way that the Lord hath appointed, promised, Cove∣nanted, that his people shall take to get true, hearty, and unfaigned re∣pentance, as appeareth by these two places of scripture; Zach. 12.10, 11, 12, 13. Ezek. 36.29, 30, 31. Where the Lord promiseth, that when his people had grievously sinned against him; by looking into the free Cove∣nant of grace made to them in Iesus, the Christ, and seeing, by faith in a peirced Iesus, their sinnes are par∣doned, shall mourne bitterly for them,
and loath themselves in their owne sight, for the iniquities, and sinnes they have committed. 2. The Lord, in divers places of his word, saith, that he justifieth his children before they repent, or truely humble themselves, or doe any worke of righteousnesse; the Lord saith, hee justifieth the ungodly, Rom. 4.5. The Lord looketh upon his elect, when they are ungodly, and freely giveth them Christ, and his righteousnesse and so justifieth them. Againe, if the Lord should not justifie them, which are ungodly, he should justifie none; for by nature we are all ungodly, Ephes. 2.3.11. Joh. 3.6. So that in the moment in the which the Lord giveth mee Christ, and with all giveth me faith (which is the eye of a Beleever) to behold him,Gal. 3.22. Zach. 12.10. who for me was peirced, to take away my iniquitie, and reconcile me to God; as so, imputeth me righteous, through the
imputation of Christs righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.21. I am ungodly. Where is then repentance, or any act of humiliation, which must usher in faith? Indeed, in the very mo∣ment which God doth justifie a man, he is godly; but this godlinesse is not an antecedent, but consequent: as heate and fire were both produ∣ced together, though fire, in order of nature, goe before. The Lord is reconciled unto us, when we are his enemies, Rom. 5.10. In the very instant, when I am Gods ene∣mie, he giveth me Christ, and is reconciled to me through his bloud. If I have any repentance, or humi∣liation before I am justified, it is but the humiliation of an enemie: the Lord complaineth of his people for breaking of his commandements, for wearying of him with their sins; yet will he even blot out their trans∣gressions for his owne names sake, Esay. 43.22, 23, 24, 25. Ezek. 36.31. Though his Elect do no workes of
righteousnesse, but walke quite con∣trary unto Gods wayes; yet in Gods good time he calleth and justifieth them for his owne names sake: that which God affirmeth himself to do, that ought Gods children to believe. 3. The Lord hath absolutely promised unto a believer that in that very day, which he actually entred into Covenant with him, that hee will pardon his unrighteousnesse, and his sinne, and his iniquities will he re∣member no more, Heb. 8.12. Therefore a true Believer ought ever, after he is entred into Covenant, to believe assuredly, without wavering, that all his sinnes are pardoned: and not, upon the commission of any sin, sus∣pend his faith, till he have repented of it: Wee have the whole argu∣ment set downe upon the matter, Heb. 10.16. to the 23. v. If the Lord say unto a sinner all thy sinnes are pardoned; there is no time, no not upon the commission of any actuall knowne sinne, wherein I ought not
to believe, that all my sinnes are par∣doned; amongst the which, that which I now committed was one. God saith all my sinnes are blotted out, Esay. 43.25. must I suspend my faith here, upon any occasion, and make God a lyer; whether it were iniquitie, or unrighteousnesse, the Lord looked upon it, when he first entred into Covenant with a Be∣liever; and the lord telleth him, for his mercies in his Christ, he will re∣member it no more; Heb. 10.17.18. Heb. 8.12. 4. The children of God have al∣wayes, yea presently, upon the com∣mission of some actuall knowne sin, sufficient cause, and ground to be∣lieve that all their sins are pardon∣ed; yea, and amongst the rest, that which they lately committed; ther∣fore they ought presently to believe, and not one moment to suspend their act of faith, in expectation of prece∣dent repentance, or any penitentiall act. That they have sufficient cause,
and ground to believe is evident from these places: All their sinnes, yea, and that very sinne they now committed, was laid upon Christ in the dayes of his suffering; the Lord layd on him the iniquitie of us all, Esay. 53.6. It is actually blotted out, Esay. 43.25. so as God will remember them no more, Heb. 8.12. None can con∣demne them, nor lay any thing to their charge: Who is he that shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Rom. 8.33, 38. Neither that sin, nor any other they shall commit (seeing they are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation, 1 Peter 1.5.) shall seperate them from the Lord; nor things present, nor things to come. This a Regenerate person ought ful∣ly to be perswaded of: I am perswa∣ded, saith the Apostle: Where the Lord giveth present, and sufficient cause for a Christian to believe, there hee ought not to suspend his faith. 5. It is the way of faith, and
onely the way of faith, in a proper and a strict sense, to believe the bare word of God, without a signe or medium to perswade him to believe, besides the word of God, whether it be promises or threatnings; ther∣fore a Regenerate person, once in Covenant, ought presently, with∣out any of these signes, confidently believe the word of God, in a pro∣mise, that saith thy sinnes are blotted out, Esay. 43.25. and that he will re∣member them no more, Heb. 8.12. For thus saith the Lord to every one in Covenant, and thus saith the Sacra∣ments, the seales of the Covenant, Act. 22.16. Matth. 26.28. That this is the way of faith, it may appeare by that excellent de∣scription of faith; Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seene: wher∣by wee may plainely see, that the object of faith, are things hoped for, and not seen. The Lord giveth out his word of promise for the pre∣sent;
I looke upon no argument, or medium to perswade me to believe, or cause me to affect: Faith is all the medium, or argument I have: faith maketh as cleare an evidence to me, as though I had ten thousand arguments; faith is my ground and evidence. When I see I am justified by repentance, or any other mark, signe, or qualification, or looke up∣on it as a medium, to perswade me so to thinke; this is not properly faith; but science rather, though drawne from principles believed. That which Abraham was so com∣mended for, was, because hee put forth such an act of faith directly, and immediatly beleeving Gods word; who against hope believed in hope, Rom. 4.18. If hee would not have believed before he had seene some signe, this had argued weak∣ness of faith; v. 19. to believe Gods promise without any argument be∣sides, nay, contrary to reason, argued his strength of faith; v. 20, 21, 22.
If Abraham, having Gods promise, should have said thus, nay, but stay Lord a while, before I believe, I must see my body stronger; it must be with Sarah my wife after the man∣ner of women, otherwise I dare not believe; truly he had staggered at the promise through unbeliefe, and had not given glory to God. And he which is in Covenant with God in Christ, having a word of promise, though not extraordinary with A∣braham, yet ordinary in the mini∣stry of the Gospel, that all his sins are pardoned; yet, notwithstanding saith thus with himselfe; nay, but I will not believe, before I see some signe, or fruit of my justifica∣tion: should not such a one, thinke you, take a preposterous course, and dishonour God through unbeliefe. If we be Abrahams children, we must walke in the wayes of Abraham, and doe the workes of Abraham; for it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed unto him, but
for us also. If we believe on him, who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who was delivered for our offences, and raised againe for our justification, Rom. 4.23, 24, 25. 6. For a Regenerate person, upon commission of sin, immediatly, and directly to have an eye to the Co∣venant of grace, and to believe the pardon of sinne; for the same is the way to get such assurance as bring∣eth true and solid comfort unto him: Such a course was taken to heale men stung of the fiery scorpion; they were to looke on the brasen serpent, if once, twice, nay, seven times a day; so often as they were stunge, so often looking were heal∣ed, Numb. 21.8. Joh. 3.14. This the Apostle exhorted the Hebrews unto in the like case; they had back∣slided, and come nere unto the sin, unto the sin against the holy Spirit; the root of all this (as it should seem) was infidelity; therefore he exhor∣ted them to use all dilligence to at∣taine
to a full assurance of faith, and to believe whatsoever was contai∣ned in the Covenant of free grace; of which, remission of sinnes is one maine thing. But how shall they come to this assurance? Even by laying fast hold upon the Covenant, confirmed by an oath; by faith, the fly ankor of the soule, and thither to for refuge; wherby they may come to get strong consolation, Heb. 6.18, 19. We must therefore, upon our sin∣ning, fly by a true and lively faith, unto the free Covenant of grace, made and ratified to us in the bloud of Christ; and thence fetch pardon, and solid comfort and consolation. 7. Meerely, or primarily to be∣lieve, and be perswaded of blessed∣nesse, or of remission of sinnes, up∣on sight of precedent repentance, or workes of righteousnesse in them∣selves, is the way of Naturalists, Pa∣pists, Formalists, Hypocrites; and therfore is not a way to be taken up by Christians. Did not Aristotle, and
divers other Phylosophers, teach men to conclude their happinesse, from well living, and well doing? Do not the Papists make repentance, not onely the precedent cause, but also the meritorious cause of forgive∣nesse, to such as are fallen into sin after Baptisme; denying any ordi∣nary assurance, in an ordinary way, then morrall, and conjecturall by signes? Do not formall professors amongst us, generally reason thus; wee repent, humble our selves for our sinnes, and walke in the way of obedience: and therefore we must needs have faith, and be justified; neither can they believe further, then they can see themselves work? Doe we not read in Gods word, that hypocrites builded their faith upon their workes; or else, if they trust in Gods mercie (as they suppose) it is because they imagine, they find themselves rightly qualified by their workes? Are not these their very words? Have we not prophesied in thy
name? and in thy name have wee not cast out devils? Matth. 7.22. Wee have fasted, and afflicted our soules, and thou seest it not. Esay. 58.3. We have endured the heate, and the burden of the day, saith the Mercenary, Matth. 20.12. None of these can see themselves blessed, or justified without works. 8. To put repentance before faith in this case mentioned, doth thwart many divine precepts given to Gods children in his holy word; as al∣wayes to be confident; Heb. 10.35. To hold fast the confidence, and rejoyce∣ing of the hope, firme unto the end, Heb. 3.6. To rejoyce evermore, Phil. 4.4. To make our boast of God all the day long, Psal. 44.8. For it taketh away the ground, upon which the confi∣dence, and rejoycing of David, and all true Believers is built; namely, his free Covenant of grace made to us in Iesus, the Christ: wherein he removeth our transgressions from us, as farre as the East is from the West, Psal. 103.12. How can a Re∣generate
person constantly performe all these duties, when he must not al∣wayes be assured that all his sins are pardoned; but interrupt his confi∣dence in this particular, untill such time as he hath stirred up in himselfe some penetentiall acts. What shall he doe, when he findeth in himselfe nothing but stubbornenesse, rebel∣lion, repining, murmuring, blas∣phemy; for thus it falleth out many times, the Lord knoweth, with his dearest children; as with Job, Da∣vid, Jeremiah, and others. 9. This Doctrine of humbling ones selfe for sin committed, (be∣fore a regenerate person presumeth to believe the pardon of that sin,) causeth the childe of God to bee ever at an uncertainty concerning the pardon of his sinne; and must alwayes have his conscience mise∣rably racked, and tormented; now what you mean by an actuall known sinne, I doe not well understand; for mine owne part, I know that I
sinne every moment: I know that in mee, that is, in my flesh, (as holy Paul acknowledgeth) dwelleth no good thing, Rom. 7.18. Beside my origi∣nall sin, I have continuall actuall sins budding forth; covetuousness, uncleanenesse, pride, anger, impa∣tiencie, rash speeches, infidelity. I must then (as it seemeth to me) put forth sundry acts of humiliation, before I believe the pardon of these sinnes; and so runne ad infinitum: there will be little time left for faith of assurance to be exercised in, ac∣cording to the Covenant of promise made to us in Iesus, the Christ; and so to be a barre to spirituall joy. For before I can get my selfe sufficiently humbled for one sinne, another will break forth; if not twenty; none of which I must believe to be par∣doned, before I be actually humbled for them. Doe wee not see into what a laborynth this precedent repen∣tance hath brought us. Besides ad∣mit, that this Popish, actuall, mortall
sinne (which is here spoken of) be committed but once in ones life time; how shall a Regenerate per∣son ever know, when his repentance, that formeth his faith, is true; or when he is come to such a degree of humiliation, that hee may assure himselfe that his sinne is pardoned, and that hee may safely believe? which degree, if his repentance had not reached unto, his faith had been but presumption. Had not one a great deale better, according to the Lords command, come without mo∣ney, than bring such coyne, about the currantnesse, or summe whereof, a man shall be inexplicably perplex∣ed? when a man is a great deale bet∣ter welcome to leave these, and come without them; Esay. 55.1, 2, 3. But this is Gods curse upon such by∣wayes: Behold all yee that kindle a fire, that compasse about your selves with the sparkles, and walke in the light of the fire, and the sparkes that ye have kin∣dled; this yee shall have of my hand;
yee shall lye downe in sorrow, Esay. 50.11. If yee shall say, yee bring this money of humiliation, and of re∣pentance, not to tender unto the Lord for a price, but onely for him to looke upon as that he hath ap∣pointed for them to be qualified withall, of them that come. Nay, but if the Lord saith, thou must not come with it, what must then bee done? why, incline your eares, and heare, saith the Lord; come unto me, heare, and your soules shall live; what is that wee must heare? I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, Esay. 55.3. The Lord doth call his people from the wayes of repentance, and humiliation, and workes of righte∣ousnesse in the point of justification; and immediatly, and directly, doth cause his people to pitch upon the free Covenant of grace made to them in Iesus, the Christ. 10. This way of precedent re∣pentance doth certainely inferre,
and imply, that every childe of God must of necessitie die without the assurance of the pardon of all his sinnes. Now, that no man by this do∣ctrine (of humbling a mans selfe for sin committed, before one presume to believe the actuall pardon of it) can be assured of the pardon of all his sinnes: It thus appeareth. Every Believer, or Regenerate person, sinneth in the last act of faith, and repentance, that ever hee put forth: the more grace any one hath, the lower, and the unworthier he is in his owne eye; and the more he perceiveth with Paul, Rom. 7.18, 19, 20. he cannot do the good he would: he must not then assure himselfe his last sinne is pardoned, before he hath humbled himselfe for it, unlesse it be after his death; neither can hee get ever assurance of the pardon of that sinne, except it be after hee is dead: This must necessarily follow, unlesse they maintaine the distincti∣on
of mortall, and veniall sinnes. For Popish doctrine cannot be up∣held without Popish principles. 11. This opinion of precedent repentance cannot bee defended, but from this unsound, and rotten ground; to wit, that pardon of sin is granted in the Covenant, upon the condition of antecedent repen∣tance. Not much differing from that, which Bellarmin laboureth to defend; namely, that Evangelicall promises are made upon condition of fulfil∣ling the law; which opinion Cami∣erius confuting, affirmeth, and that truly, that there is no antecedent condition required in the Gospel, but only the consequent. If the Co∣venant of grace, in the pardon of sinne, made to Gods elect, did run thus, I will pardon all your sins; but yee must first repent before yee lay any claime unto this pardon: then of necessity they must first re∣pent of every sinne, before they presume to put forth any act of faith,
in the Covenant of grace, for the pardon of them; then were the do∣ctrine true the opposites affirm, and that false I defend: But the Cove∣nant of grace, made to Gods Elect, is absolute, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. abso∣lutely promising pardon of sinne to all that believe, Act. 13.38, 39. Re∣pentance followeth as an effect flow∣ing from this pardon, Ezek. 36.29, 30. Zach. 12.10. So that if any will call repentance a condition of par∣don of sinne, they must call it a con∣dition consequent, not antecedent. If any will have repentance goe be∣fore pardon of sinne, they erre, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. They never felt the power of God in a sensible apprehension of pardon of sinne; for if they had, they should experimentally know, what belongeth unto the Covenant of grace. They would find the scrip∣tures, wherein the Covenant of grace is laid downe, made good upon the soules; they should find repentance
no antecedent, but a consequent worke: they should not need to read many Commentaries upon Zach. 12.10. Ezek. 36.25. to the 31. Jer. 31. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12, 13. Heb. 10.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. for the meaning of these texts, wherin the New Co∣venant of grace is contained. They should have a School-Master to di∣rect them; even the unction from the holy one, the holy spirit, which would teach them, 1 Joh. 2.27. they would find free accesse to the throne of Grace, without qualifying re∣pentance. Therefore, since this opi∣nion stands tottering upon a Popish rotted foundation, and can no o∣ther-wayes be sustained; It is not the way which a Regenerate person must walke in. Having now confirmed by sun∣dry arguments that which I believe assuredly to be the truth: I come in the second place to answer such ob∣jections, as are made by the adver∣saries.
This is the way that the Lord hath appointed, that Repentance should goe before faith: this me∣thod John Baptist observed, Matth. 3.2. our Saviour himselfe useth, Matth. 4.17. Marc. 1.15. Peter, Act. 2.38. yea, and Paul, Act. 20.21. Wee must not thinke, that in Scripture, every thing that goeth before in word, goeth also before it in the nature of the things; for then should Baptisme goe before re∣mission of sins, in one of the places mentioned, Marc. 1.4. Act. 2.38. Act. 22.16. But we must looke to know what is the mind of God, and and the meaning of the holy Spirit, by observing the current of the word, the collation of Scripture, giving interpretation according to the Analogy of faith; which if we doe, we shall plainly see, that Evan∣gelicall repentance cannot goe be∣fore faith, but must needs follow. Where wee have the Covenant of grace set down, first we have a
word of faith: secondly, in the se∣cond place, we have a word of re∣pentance, as a fruit flowing from faith; yet, wrought in us by the same spirit that worketh faith; as for example, instance, Zach 12.10. They shall looke upon him whom they have pierced; there is the word of faith: they shall mourne bitterly for him, as one mourneth for his onely sonne, &c. there is the word of repentance. Eze. 36.25. I will sprinkle you with cleane water, and yee shall bee cleane, v. 29. I will save you from all your uncleane∣nesses, there is the word of faith: verse 31. Then shall yee remember your owne evill wayes, and your doings, that are not good, and loath your selves in your own eyes, for all your abhomina∣tions; there is the word of repen∣tance. So that it is cleare in the Co∣venant of grace, the first thing the Lord requireth, and promiseth, is faith; then repentance followeth as a consequent duty to be practised. The Lord Iesus, the Christ, in
his Sermon maketh mention of faith, and ascribeth unto it salvation, and everlasting life; and there being two maine duties in the Gospel, he setteth an Emphasis upon faith; this is the worke of God, that yee believe in him, whom hee hath sent, Joh. 6.29. And of these two commande∣ments, Faith, and Repentance; faith must have the precedency: This is his commandement, that yee believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave commande∣ment, 1 Joh. 3.23. If repentance goe before faith, it must of necessity be a dead work; for we live by faith in the Son of God, that loved us, and gave himselfe for us, to redeeme us from all iniquitie, and purge us to be a peculiar people, Zealous of good workes, Gal. 2.20. Tit. 2.14. It must be a sinne displeasing to God; for without faith it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11.6. Nothing is pleasing, and accep∣table unto God, but what cometh
from a new creature: For circumcisi∣on availeth nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. In a word, it must be work a of the flesh, yea, and an accursed worke of the divell: For whatsoever is of the flesh, is flesh, Joh. 3.6. yea, and cannot please God, Rom. 8.8. and before wee be quickned alive by faith in Christ, Satan worketh in us, Ephes. 2.1, 2. Now can any man imagine, that that repentance that the Lord Ie∣sus the Christ requireth, as one of the two main Evangelicall duties, is a dead worke, a sin, a fruit of the flesh; nay, an accursed work of the divel? Let us then, for shame, cease to conceive that repentance goeth be∣fore faith, except we will purposely stop the current of Scriptures, and turne it a cleane contrary way; and so refuse to expound the word ac∣cording to the Analogy of faith. It may be you will aske,  why the Lord speaketh so obscurely, and mystically; naming repentance be∣fore
faith; when as hee intendeth that faith should goe before repen∣tance. Our Saviour giveth the answer, Math. 13.11, 12, 13. that hee will make things plaine to his Elect, and chosen, and called ones; but para∣bolicall to the wicked, that one may be saved, and the other con∣demned, according to his absolute decree. If it be further demanded, why he biddeth them (whom he preach∣eth unto) some times only believe, and some times repent, and believe, and be saved? You must understand, that when the Lord Iesus in Scripture names onely faith, he instructeth them in the point of justification, where re∣pentance hath nothing to doe; but when he biddeth them both repent and believe, hee instructeth them how to leade a Christian life, where repentance must have his due place. In the former sense hee sheweth,
what it is that justifieth, onely faith; in the latter he declareth, what kind of faith it is that justifieth, to wit, repenting faith, working faith; Gal. 5.6. Q. Peradventure you will say, at our first conversion we do believe before we repent; but afterward, when we have fallen into sinne, we must repent before we believe. A. To this I answer with the Apostle, Rom. 5.10. If, when we were enemies, we were reconciled by the death of his Sonne, much more, being recon∣ciled, shall we be saved by his life. The Lord finding us his enemies, in our minds by wicked workes, Col. 1.21. justifieth us through the bloud of Christ, without any precedent re∣pentance: surely after we are recon∣ciled, he will save us without any such precious worke: What call we this, but Popery? Is not this a foolish doctrine? Are yee so foolish, saith the Apostle, that having begun in the spirit, yee will be made perfect
by the flesh, Gal. 3.3. Must wee be∣gin in such a way as the spirit of grace teacheth, and be made perfect in such a way, as flesh and nature teacheth? God forbid. The Lord hath entailed remission of sinnes, to works of repentance; hath not the Lord said, If wee con∣fesse our sinnes, he is faithfull and just to forgive us our sinnes, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousnesse, 1 Joh. 1.9. He that confesseth, and forsaketh his sinnes, shall have mercie, Prov. 28.13. therefore we must first repent, be∣fore wee lay hold of mercy, and forgivenesse. The ground, from whence the objection is raised, is not rightly understood; therefore the conse∣quence is false: It is presupposed in these, and the like places, that confession, and forsaking of sinne, are severed from precedent assurance of the pardon of these sinnes; which is false in those, which have ob∣tained precious faith.
2. In these, and the like places, are not set downe the order, and ranke, that faith cometh in, that re∣ceiveth mercy and forgivenesse; but here is described the property of the person, or the nature and quality of that faith, which findeth forgivenes, and mercy. It must be such a faith as doth discover to man his sinne, and bringeth forth confession; or else, John saith, the truth is not in him, 1 Joh. 2.4. the true worke of the Gospel is not in him; he hath no true faith: if hee have not such a faith, as both maketh him to con∣fesse, and forsake his sinnes, he shall not prosper, saith the wise Solomon, Prov. 28.13. Such may snatch at the hand of forgivenesse with a false faith, but they shall misse, they shall not find mercy: Only these that do put forth such an act of faith as is accompanied with hearty confessi∣on, and unfeigned forsaking of their sinnes, shall find mercy; Prov. 28.13. In this sense it is said that Ra∣hab
is justified by her workes, and Abraham was justified by his works, Jam. 2.21, 25. that is, by such a faith as did worke; so James ex∣pounds it, v. 22. So that it might truely have been said, in the dayes of Abraham, according to these Scriptures; if believing Abraham worke, he shall find mercy, and be justified; that is, if he put forth such an act of faith as worketh, and bring∣eth forth workes: and yet, I hope, none will say, his workes did goe before his faith; but as the Scrip∣ture saith, his faith wrought with his workes, and his workes did flow from his faith, Jam. 2.22. Wee cannot say, that Abraham ought to have wrought, before he had layd hold on the promised seed, Christ and his righteousnesse, whereby he was justified; because, it might have bin truly said, after he was justified by faith in Christ, that was promised to him, Gen. 12.3. if he work, he shall be justified, and find forgivenesse.
No more can it be said, that a re∣generate person, that is in the Co∣venant of grace, must confesse and forsake his sinne, and after put forth an act of faith to lay hold upon mercy; because, it is truly said, if the justified soule, by faith confesse, and forsake his sin, he shall find mer∣cy. In a word, these places are preg∣nant and strong for the truth of faith, which findeth mercy; but they make nothing for the precedency of works: It doth not follow, that, because he that doth not repent, shall not find forgivenesse; therefore he must repent in time, before he lay hold upon forgivenesse; but onely hee must put forth a repenting faith, if ever he meane to find forgivenesse. This doctrine of precedency of  faith, seemeth to shut out repen∣tance. It may seeme so,  to one whom the god of this world hath blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4. But it cannot so much as seem so to a man truly enlightned: In∣deed,
it shutteth out altogether Le∣gall repentance, the repentance of Formalists, and Hypocrites: it shut∣teth out also true Evangelicall, from coming into the point of justifica∣tion before faith; but it bringeth it into his due and proper place, mak∣ing it follow faith and justification, and attend upon a justified person all the dayes of his life: If any pre∣tending the Gospel, or free justifi∣cation, directly, or indirectly, ex∣clude true repentance, or any man∣ner of godly conversation, main∣taining or countenancing any kind of loose living, or by a licentious∣nesse of teaching, that we are freed by the Covenant of grace from the performance of duties, either from the first or second Table of the Law, in an Evangelicall manner of obe∣dience, and that by Christian liberty; let them be accounted filthy dream∣ers, bruit beasts, spots in our feasts, clouds without water, wandring starres walking after their ungodly
lusts; damnable hereticks: Wo un∣to them; for so, and much more, saith the holy Ghost of such, Jude in his epistle. Wee are freed from sinne by Iesus, the Christ, blessed be the Lord for ever; but he hath not given us any freedome to sin. Rom. 6. We must be servants to righteousness, that is freedome enough: Should any deny repentance, true repen∣tance, they cut off part of Gods Co∣venant of grace; he covenanteth to give his people an heart of flesh; to cause them to mourn bitterly for their sinnes against Christ; yea,Zach. 12.10 to loath themselves in their own eyes, for all the sins they have commit∣ted; Ezek. 36.31. Do we deny re∣pentance, because we will not make it a partiall Saviour? The Saints of God, in Scripture,  led by Gods spirit, did take this course, they humbled themselves, and repented to get pardon. That I may give a full answer to this objection, wee must know,
as I have said before, sinnes may be said to be pardoned in a two fold respect, making for the matter in hand: First, in regard of an actuall ap∣plication of pardon of sinne, freely tendred in the Covenant of grace, either for all sinnes in generall, or by a renewed act of faith, for any sinne in particular. Secondly, for a manifestation of pardon of sinne to a believing soule caused by some evident act of Gods providence, or sensible worke of his holy spirit. According to this distinction, I deny that ever a Saint of God, guided by Gods spirit, did ever repent, or humble himselfe to procure pardon of sinne in the for∣mer sense; that is, they did not re∣pent to get themselves rightly qua∣lified, that they might, upon just title, put forth an act of faith to be∣lieve pardon of that sinne; which is the point in controversie: they had no such Popish spirits, thus to
make a way by their workes for the forgivenesse of their sinnes: That which they sought for, was forgive∣nesse of sinnes in the latter sense; namely, Gods manifestation of this forgivenesse: and this is that which David the King so earnestly sued for, Psal. 51.8.12. Make me to heare of joy and gladnesse; restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. This is the reason that Gods children dayly pray for the forgivenesse of those sins, which they know are pardoned in Christ: they desire the Lord would pardon them to their sense, feeling, expe∣rience: that they may once taste how gracious the Lord is unto them; though they are assured by faith, that they are already pardoned in Christ Iesus. When Gods children are shut out  of the Church, by lawfull excom∣munication, for some scandalous, or inormous sin; the Church may not admit them againe, nor publish, nor declare unto them that their sin is
pardoned, but upon precedent re∣pentance: and that which they doe, according to Gods will on earth, is ratifyed by God himselfe in heaven; and therefore they which have thus sinned, are not to appre∣hend pardon, but upon precedent repentance. This reason is very inconsequent, and doth not follow; it supposeth that a believer can take no other way for the pardon of his own sin, then the Church is to take in this case for the publishing of the pardon of sinne in another. A Regenerate per∣son may be assured of the pardon of his owne sinne by faith, a long time before such evident, and no∣table fruits and effects are produced, as upon which the Church of Christ may openly declare the same. Be∣sides, this maketh nothing for the priority of repentance; for, when this repentance is brought forth, the Church doth declare that the sin is actually pardoned by a precedent
act of faith; of which, this conse∣quent repentance doth evidence the truth: and in this sense it is, that the Ministers of Christ, guided by the holy spirit, are to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, Esay. 61.1, 2, 3. That is, they are to declare unto them, that they are such as are justified from their sins by a true and lively faith; of which, they have evident effects, or fruits. But they, which would have repen∣tance goe before, deny, that these sins are pardoned by precedent acts of faith, but would have them, up∣on these qualifications, to put forth an act of faith to believe that their sins come to be actually pardoned; which before were but pardonable. Admit then, the Church do declare unto me that my sins are actually pardoned, when they see my repen∣tance; then surely my faith did actu∣ally apply pardon before I did re∣pent; therefore faith in this parti∣cular must goe before repentance.
This is a Doctrine of Liberty? Liberty, and licentiousnesse is not the proper effects and fruits of this doctrine, onely they follow by ac∣cident, either in part in Gods chil∣dren, who being called unto liberty, the flesh taketh occasion hereby more boldly to sinne; or else wholy in the reprobate, who being ordain∣ed of old unto condemnation, abuse the grace of God and turne it into lasciviousnesse; whereby the way of truth commeth to be evill spo∣ken of: It is a most dangerous thing thus to blaspheme the way of God; this is the ready way to deprive ones selfe of the presence of God, and the blessed company of his deare children. But when diverse were hard∣ned and spake evill of the way of truth before the multitude, he departed from them, and seperated the disciples, Act. 19.9. Let us take a new survay of this doctrine, and view it a little, to see whether it be a doctrine of li∣berty: This doctrine teacheth us,
that wee are delivered out of the hands of our enemies; but it is, that wee should serve him in holinesse and uprightnesse before him all the dayes of our lives, Luk. 1.74, 75. The grace of God, that bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared, teaching us that denying ungodlinesse, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. It affirmeth that the Lord hath redeemed us by his bloud from all iniquity, and purified us unto him∣selfe a peculiar people zealous of good workes: as also that the Lord hath freely blotted out our iniqui∣ties for his owne names sake, that wee beholding his love in the free pardon, may mourne bitterly for all the sinnes wee have committed a∣gainst Christ, and loath our selves in our own eyes for all our abhominations, Zach. 12.10. Ezek. 36.31. Whether this be a way of liberty, otherwise then Christian liberty, I hope, will be manifest unto the conscience of
every man. Indeed, there are a com∣pany of evill men, who walke for a time conscionable, though formal∣ly, as the way I oppose teacheth, come to be enlightned by some com∣mon temporary grace of the spirit, whereby they are f r the present wonderfully changed, and have esca∣ped the pollutions of the world; yet afterward turne from the holy com∣mandements, and abuse the grace of God, turning of it into lascivious∣nesse; but this ought not to cause any to speake evill of the way of truth: I doe acknowledge of these sorts of formall professors and liber∣tines, there is lesse hope of the latter then the former: For they, begin∣ning in the way of formall profes∣sing, upon this illumination turne licentious; now saith the holy spirit of such, the latter end of them is worse then the beginning; for so saith the spirit of God of such, 2 Pet. 2.20. I doe confesse there are many won∣derfully enlightned, which make a
faire shew a great while; yet, in time walke more loosely, are more light in their carriage, and conver∣sation; more unjust in their dealings then meere civill men; who for all their faith, knowledge, and gifts they boast to have, were never truly converted: dogges and swine they were at the beginning, and dogges and swine they are at their latter end; for so saith the spirit of God of such: but it is hapned to them according to the true Proverbe, The dogge is turned to his owne vomite; and the sow that was washed, to the wal∣lowing in the myre, 2 Pet. 2.22. These sorts of professors, by their scanda∣lous living, turne many out of the way, offend the weak Believers, yea, and are occasions of sore temptati∣ons to Gods deare children, who have no small measure of faith; yet for all this, because these filthy, beastly hypocrites, who take this course come neere the way, and seeme to walke in the way for a
time: God forbid, that hereupon wee should condemne the way it selfe; though Hymaeneus and Philetus erre concerning the faith, yet the foun∣dation of God standeth sure, 2 Tim. 2.17, 18. This is the constant practise of the Prophets, Apostles, and of all the faithfull Ministers, to exhort Gods people upon commission of sinne to humble themselves, and ex∣ercise this grace of repentance. I take this to be the force of this objection, this way of precedent faith doth hinder the course that these men of God did take, and stop∣peth the currant of mourning for sinne; humbling ones selfe, and af∣flicting ones soule, and is a let, and impediment to true Evangelicall re∣pentance, which God in his word doth so much urge by his holy Pro∣phets and Apostles; which if it did certainly it were not of God; and God forbid I should pleade for it: But if I make it appeare, that it is a
way so farre from hindering this godly sorrow, that it is rather a main procreant cause begetting the same; then, this objection will vanish and fall to the ground. The Lord maketh pardon of sin, apprehended by faith, a ground of the deepest humiliation that can be expressed, as hath bin partly shewed before; this is the course the Lord taketh, Ezek. 36.29. I will save you from all your uncleannesses; what is the effect, v. 31. then shall yee remember your own ways, and doings that were not good, and loath your selves in your own eyes for all your abhominations: Thus the Lord bringeth his people to re∣pentance: Zach. 12.10. I will powre upon the house of David, and the In∣habitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace, &c. That is, I will give them such a spirit, as shall abundantly mani∣fest unto them my free grace in par∣doning their sins. Now, what doth his produce? Mourning. Yea, bitter mourning, solitary mourning; the
holy spirit useth such expressions as holdeth forth the greatest mourn∣ing that possibly can be conceived: as the mourning of Hadradrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, where the Nobles of Israel cast away their mu∣sicall instruments, and clad them∣selves in sable, or sack-cloath, and breathing out their mournfull ele∣gy, cryed, Our crown is fallen from our heads; woe, woe unto us wee have sinned, Zach. 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. A notable place we have to this purpose, Ezek. 16.61, 62, 63. the Lord will have his people, that de∣spised the oath and broke the Co∣venant, brought to repentance, and to be confounded, and not open their mouthes for shame; how must this be effected, he will shew them his Covenant, and let them see that hee is pacified towards them: that thou maist remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, &c. I might bring many more places of Scripture, but these are so cleare
and evident, as I cannot devise what can be spoken against them; this is not a way, that he will bring two or three of his children to repen∣tance, but as many as he entreth into the Covenant of grace withall; for this is his Covenant: Let repentance then be vehemently urged; and the greater mens sins are, let the greater humiliation bee required, but a∣mongst other causes to produce this effect, this must be the chiefe; look∣ing upon a Christ by faith, bear∣ing all their sinnes; whom we have wounded by our transgressions, to consider that we have sinned against such a Christ as hath borne our sins: such a Father that hath given such a deare son to take away our ini∣quities out of our sight, and recon∣cile us to God. This is that which will melt the heart of such an one, as is endued with the spirit of a∣doption, and is truly born of God. Let the children of the bond-wo∣man think as long as they will, that
the apprehension of sin unpardoned will worke this repentance; this I am sure, God will lead the chil∣dren of the free-woman, the cleane contrary way; or else hee should not be faithfull, and keep his Co∣vnant. It may be you will say, how can pardon of sin be the efficient cause of this repentance, when as pardon followeth, many times, a long time after repentance; and repentance is prescribed as a way to get forgive∣nesse, Deut. 30.2, 3. Esay. 55.7. Ier. 12.16. 1 King. 8.33, 34, 35. 2 Chron. 7.14. and infinite other places. To these I answer, as I have partly done heretofore,  that in all these and the like places, forgiveness of sin is either taken for the impu∣tation of Christs righteousnesse, or for the covering ones sins with the robe of Christs righteousnesse; and then repentance is not enjoyned as a way antecedent, but only to de∣scribe the nature of that faith which
receiveth forgivenesse: It must be an humbling, repenting faith, or else forgivenesse is taken for the mani∣festation of forgivenesse, by some sensible worke of Gods spirit, or notable worke of his providence; whereby he doth lift upon true Be∣lievers the light of his countenance. And the destinction being thus con∣sidered, in this sense, repentance leadeth as a way precedent; yet it is such a repentance, as ought to come from assurance that their sinnes are pardoned, in the former sense; for which they humble themselves to get their pardon in the latter sense: after that David had his sinne par∣doned in the former sense to his faith, 2 Sam. 12.13. he urgeth ear∣nestly to have a manifestation of the pardon of his sinne, in the lat∣ter sense, to his own soule, that he may once taste how gracious the Lord is, and that his broken bones may rejoyce; and as it should seem hee received an answer from the
Lord, giving him a manifestation of his assurance, by some speciall work of his holy spirit, walking in this repenting way appointed by the Lord: I acknowledge my sinne to thee, and my iniquity have I not hid; I said I would confesse my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sinne, Psal. 32.5. That is, thou didst make me sensible of it, or ma∣nifest the pardon of my sin, to my sense, feeling, and experience: and God did not onely deale so with David, but hee will deale so with every Believer that waites upon him in the way of his ordinances: For this shall every one that is godly, pray unto thee in a time when thou maiest be found, Psal. 32.6. When one in the Covenant of grace, grosly sin∣eth against the Lord, that sin (a∣mongst the rest, in the generall grant made at his first conversion, when the Lord, by his good spirit, sealed up his mercie in the new Covenant, telling him, hee will be mercifull
unto him, in forgiving his iniqui∣ties, and will remember his sin no more) is already pardoned in Christ: he ought therefore, presently to re∣new his faith in the Covenant, look∣ing upon a crucified Iesus, that hath satisfied the justice of God, appea∣sed his wrath, and procured our pardon, and reconciliation with God; and hath discharged us from all our unrighteousnesse; so that in his perfect righteousnesse, wee stand holy and righteous in the sight of God, without spot or blame, Col. 1.19, 20, 21, 22. A regenerate person fallen, for∣saken,  hardned in sin, cannot, untill he hath been thoroughly humbled for sin, rejoyce evermore, and make his boast of God. An unregenerate person that hath no faith,  but liveth by sense (think∣ing that God changeth as he doth) cannot; but a regenerate person that liveth by faith, especially by a strong faith, can. Strong Christi∣ans,
though made heavy with many strong temptations, though they doe not enjoy God by sight and feeling; as those, which find him pre∣sent by melting of their hearts for sin, doe: yet they can exceedingly rejoyce in believing; which faith is more precious then gold that perisheth, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8. When sin is most prevalent, & the heart is most hard∣ned; so that they are captivated, and cannot doe that they would, but are forced, with holy Paul, to cry out of their own wretchedness, Rom. 7.24. yet then they can glory in Christ Iesus with a large heart, breaking forth into thanksgivings, Rom. 7.25. yea, when they see no∣thing but Gods heavy judgements, and evident signes of his wrath, and displeasure: yet, they can even then rejoyce in the Lord, and glory in the God of their salvation, Hab. 3.18.19. Make all sins equall, as long as you please in this controversie, we doe not.
This controversie,  wherein you deny equality of sin, is either in the point of justification, or the Belie∣vers assurance of justification; in both which respects, sins are equall: when the Lord giveth Christ to a soule, and justifieth him, he putteth no difference, because he discharg∣eth him of all his sins, Heb. 8.12. Hence ariseth Pauls challenge, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifieth, Rom. 8.33. There is indeed, a large dis∣proportion between sins, in regard of their causes, effects, and adjuncts; yet, the robe of Christs righteous∣nesse is so large, that it covereth the greatest sinne, as easily as the least. I confesse, there are sins doe vastare conscientiam, stupifie, and dead the conscience; what then, doe they hinder my justification, because they hurt my sanctification; justification is quite out of a mans selfe, consi∣sting in the imputation of Christs righteousness inherent in him; who
sitteth at the right hand of God, and far above the reach and spheare of sins activity; neither ought any one sin, to hinder a Believers assurance of justification, more then another: (the greater our sins be, the greater humiliation is required, as a fruit of faith and justification; but that is nothing to the purpose.) The word saith, that whether they be iniqui∣ties, or transgressions, or sins they are blotted out, so as God will remem∣ber them no more, Esay. 43.25. Heb. 8.12. He that commits a grosse sin, and doubteth the pardon of it, committeth a double sin; one against his sanctification, the other against his justification; the one being con∣trary to the sanctification of the spi∣rit, the other to the believing of the trueth of the Covenant of grace, made to us in the bloud of the Lord Iesus, 1 Joh. 1.7. What though a Believer usually, upon the commit∣ing of grosse sinnes, doubt of his e∣state? yet, this is from a defect in
faith, and not from any rule and precept in Gods word: As many as walke according to this rule, peace shall be to them, and mercy upon the Israel of our God, Gal. 6.16. We rack the conscience no more  in the one, than they doe in the o∣ther. That which is here affirmed is this,  that this doctrine of precedent repentance, is no more a rack unto the conscience, than that of prece∣dent faith; which saying how true it is, it may easily thus appeare: The way of precedent repentance, doth set a distressed soule upon the slip∣pery foundation of repentance, and tyeth him unto Christ with an un∣sound faith, and when the flouds of temptations doe arise, and wash a∣way this foundation, his faith fal∣leth, and down hee cometh, to the great breaking of his peace, and the tormenting of his conscience: wher∣as the way of precedent faith, doth directly fixe a perplexed soule up∣on
the free promise, made to him in a crucified Iesus; whereupon he layeth hold, as with an ankor, and though he by weakness, and sinfull infirmities, be subject to change; yet, so long as Christ & his word remain∣eth immutable, he is safe enough; and so in the most violent storms of temptation he keepeth his hold, and findeth strong consolation, Heb. 6.18, 19. As farre as I can conceive, they that maintaine this fore-going repentance, doe imagine, the Lord doth send such a Gospel as this to be published; Thou sinner, laden with the weight of thy sins, here is good news for thee, Christ is here offered unto thee, thou shalt have pardon through his bloud; onely this thou must doe, thou must re∣pent, before thou offer to lay hold upon him; and this faith thou must put forth at all times: be bold to rely on him for pardon, if thou first repent; and so often as thou fallest into any grosse sin, thou maist not
believe that this sinne is pardoned, though thou hast received Christ and his righteousnesse, wherewith all thy sinnes are covered, before thou hast humbled thy selfe for it: Thou maist not, at any time in this case, carry thy selfe directly to the free promise in a crucified Iesus, to have assurance by faith of the par∣don of thy sins; but thou must e∣ver, as thou committest some great sin, stay untill thou hast performed some act of humiliation, and then recoyle upon thine owne act, and from thence onely assure thy selfe of pardon. Pardon is not given be∣fore the Lord, before these fruits of repentance be brought forth. If you build upon any word, it must be upon this or the like, as farre as I can understand. Now because Christ hath no such word (for the Covenant of grace, made to Gods Elect in Christ, is absolute; abso∣lutely promising pardon of sinne to all that believe, Act. 13.38, 39.)
though Antichrist hath, you must of necessity (whatsoever is said or thought by a deceitfull heart to the contrary) build upon repentance, and make it your rock and ground∣work; turning the truth of God in∣to a ly, and worship and serve the creature, forsaking the Creator, which is blessed for ever, Amen. They would have a regenerate person to refuse to believe the Co∣venant of free grace, tendred to them in the bloud of Iesus, and sea∣led up to them, by the inward testimo∣ny of the spirit of promise, Ephes. 1.13. and onely give credit to the testi∣mony of this Idoll of supposed i∣maginary precedent repentance. How can it be, but that this do∣ctrine must most miserably rack the conscience; which teacheth, that a Believer must not, at all times, be assured that all his sins are pardo∣ned: For, if that man be blessed, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, Psal. 32.1, 2. in what an
accursed estate then, must that per∣son needs apprehend himselfe to be in, who may not believe the par∣don of his sinne, because hee doth not find himselfe rightly qualifyed by repentance. But this doctrine sleighteth re∣pentance,  and esteemeth it of no use. 1.  This is but a calumny of the old adversary, to cause the preci∣ous truths of Iesus, the Christ to be troden under foote; as salt that hath lost his favour. 2. There is an errour in the frame and drift of the objection; for, it carrieth the matter so, as if so be, that which wee endeavoured to prove were, that regenerate per∣sons having lost their assurance of pardon, should not seek it in a pe∣nitentiall way; which is farre from the truth: In a word, I take this answer for the matter of it, to bee very unsound and dangerous: for the manner and end which it seem∣eth
to drive at, somewhat injurious; covertly fastning an opinion upon me, which the Lord knoweth my soule abhorres: and so (I conceive) doe the soules of the faithfull, that truely feare God: yet stand up and contend with mee, for this faith which was given for the consolati∣on of all Saints. As if so be wee sleighted repentance, or humiliati∣on, or duties thereunto belonging, I had much better perish, then brotch or defend any such tenents; which may teach or incourage the faith∣full Christians to turne from the holy commandement of repen∣tance. I say, the more assured any man is of the pardon of his sin, the more the power of grace doth sof∣ten his heart, and causeth him to walke close with God in all his or∣dinances: It grieveth me to see no more of Gods faithfull witnesses in these corrupt, back-sliding, and peri∣lous times, professing in sack-cloath: It is a trouble and a temptation
to my spirit, to see professors play the hypocrites; Woe bee unto them, they say and doe not, Matth. 23.3. If men were so penitent as it is pre∣tended, how cometh it to passe that so many abhominable superstitions are yeelded unto, if not defended? If any man say, they see no such mat∣ter, let such an one know from the Lord, that a marvelous and won∣derfull judgement of God is fallen upon him; which the Lord threat∣ned a long time since by the Pro∣phet Isaiah; Esay. 29.13, 14, 15, 16. It is a marvell and a wonder, that so many wise and prudent men should understand no more in these matters: But it is such a marvell and wonder as the Lord in his just judgement hath done. If men by their sharp judgements dig deep; and by their subtill distinctions, and fallacious arguments thinke to hid their counsels from God; woe be to them saith the holy spirit. The Lord will one day, for all their
turning all things upside down, make them feele his power; and they shall know themselves to bee no gods, to frame Religion as they please; but to be as clay in the hands of the potter. For mine own part, I doe not desire to goe to that hea∣ven where unsanctified, and unrege∣nerate, and impenitent persons shall reigne. Yet, for all this, in the name of the Lord Iesus, tht Christ, my Lord and Saviour, I pronounce an A∣nathema against the opinion of prece∣dent qualifying repentance; which I have hitherto opposed a sa doctrine repugnant to the doctrine of Iesus, the Christ; as Antichristian and damnable. Now the Lord of his infinite mercy direct us by his holy word and spirit, and give us that anoin∣ting from the holy one, which may lead us into all his truth, and bring to our remembrance the things that hee hath spoken, Joh. 14.26. 1 Joh. 2.27.
Certaine Catechisticall Que∣stions and Answers set downe for the better clearing of that which I have already written, to confirme the point discussed on. Quest. WHat is the state of all man∣kinde by nature, whether Iewes or Gentiles? A. Dead in sins and trespasses, dead while they live, 1 Tim. 5.6. and blind and corrupt in their in∣tellectuals. Q. How prove you it. A. By these testimonies of holy Scripture; Rom. 3.9. we have pro∣ved both Iewes and Gentiles that they are all under sin; As it is writ∣ten, &c. v. 10. to the v. 20, 22, 23. Ephes. 2.1, 2, 3, 5. Ephes. 4.17, 18, 19. Tit. 3.3. 1 Tim. 5.6. Q. If all men that came of the root of the first Adam be dead in sinne, cor∣rupt throughout, and blind in their in∣tellectuals,
and have not the knowledge of the most high; seeing all within them standeth in open opposition against God, his grace and holinesse, Ephes. 2.1, 2, 3. Ephes. 4.17, 18, 19. Rom. 8.7, 8. Rom. 5.12.19 By what means is this spiritually dead creature raised? A. By the power and spirit of Iesus, the Christ. Q. How prove you it? A. Ephes. 2.5. Even when wee were dead in sinnes he quickned us to∣gether with Christ, and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Iesus; that in the ages to come, he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kind∣nesse towards us through Iesus Christ. Q. What is the Gospel? A. It is a divine heavenly spiri∣tuall light, that revealeth unto us Iesus, the Christ, to bee made of God for all the Elect, wisdome, righteousnesse, holinesse, redempti∣on; taking all from the creature, and giving all unto Christ, aswell
before conversion as after; aswell in sanctification as justification; that Christ may be all in all. The first thing that God created in the old world was light, Gen. 1.3. First, thereby the Choas of all disorder did appeare, Gen. 1.1. 2ly. Light discovered the world was not made of any preeixstent matter, but created ex nihilo, out of nothing. 3ly. Light discovereth the Sun to be the Lords next immediate instrument to give light and life to the world, to rule and governe it: When hee is neer us all things vegetate, grow, flowrish, ripen; but when he with∣draweth, all things dye, and creep into the earth. 4ly. That the whole glory of creating of the world out of such corrupt materials, might be given unto God. 1. So when God commeth to breath grace in a blind, dead, and unregenerate heart, the first thing God creates there, is the light of his Gospel, 2. Cor. 4.6. For God,
who commanded the light to shine out of darknesse, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glo∣ry of God in the face of Iesus Christ. We never see the Chaos and corruption of our owne hearts, till God dis∣cover it to us by his Gospel-light: Paul never saw himselfe a sinner, nor the chiefe of sinners, till he saw Christ, 1 Tim. 1.15.16. nor Isaiah neither, Esay 6.5. till then; birth-priviledges blinded their eyes, Phil. 3.6. The more grace Paul had, the more he saw his owne corruption, Rom. 7. 2. Gospel-light discovereth there is no fore-seen faith, nor works of righteousnesse, was any ground why wee were received to mercy; for, we had none, being sinfull through∣out, Tit. 3.3, 5. 2 Tim. 1.9. Ephes. 2.1, 2, 3. Ephes. 4.17, 18, 19. 3. Gospel-light discovereth or revealeth Iesus Christ to bee the sun of righteousness, from whence the new creature receiveth all his
spirituall priviledges of wisdome, righteousnesse, holinesse, freedome, that in him he may glory. 4. Gospel-light taketh away all glorying from the creature, that the whole glory may be given to God the Father through Christ, Ephes. 2.7. 1 Cor 1.30. Q. Is there any wisdome to know God, in the naturall man? A. No; Rom. 3.11. There is none understandeth, none seeketh after God. The naturall man cannot, they are too sublime and spirituall, 1 Cor. 2.14. Q. Is there any knowledge in the naturall man, of his spirituall misery out of Christ. A. Neither; by reason of the corrupt principle of flesh abiding in him, all the excellencies of the naturall man standeth in oppositi∣on against grace and holinesse, Rom. 8.7, 8. Q. How cometh a naturall man to the knowledge of his spirituall misery
out of Christ, and his rich and free-pri∣viledges he shall enjoy through a cru∣cified Iesus. A. God is pleased to reveale it to him through the Gospel-ministry, Act. 26.17. I send thee to the Gen∣tiles: v. 18. To open the blind eyes, and to turne them from darknesse to light, and the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgivenesse of sinne, and an inheritance amongst them which are sanctified by faith which is in mee. Q. What is the Gospel-faith? A. It is a beliefe in crucified, dead, and risen Iesus, whom God hath exalted at his right hand to be Lord and Christ; a Prince and Sa∣viour, to give repentance and remis∣sion of sinnes. Q. How prove you it? A. Act. 2.36. Act. 5.30.31. Act. 10.39, 40, 43. c. 13. v. 38, 39. Q. When was Iesus exalted to be the Christ? A. Then, when hee was raised
from the dead, and received power and authority from his Father to be the King of the Church; and grant out a commission in his name to con∣stitute his Church. Q. How prove you it? A. Matth. 28.18, 19, 20. Mark. 16.15, 16. Ephes. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Act. 2.36. c. 5.31. Q. Is there any righteousnesse in the creature for justification. A. No; the Scripture giveth out a negative voice, Rom. 3.10, 23. Gal. 3.10.22. Q. Who is the sinners righteousnes? A. The Lord Iesus is become the Lord our righteousnesse; that by him all that believe are justified from all those things, they cannot be justified by the law of Moses, Act. 13.38, 39. Q. When ought a regenerate person to believe that all his sins are pardoned? A. As soon as hee hath received Christ and his righteousnesse; hee hath then another word given forth for his faith to rest upon; even a
free promise to them that reveale life through Christ. Thus God gave Adam the promise of life, Gen. 3.15. So Abraham, Gen. 12.3. So Mary Mag∣dalen, Thy sins are forgiven thee, Luk. 7.48. So the Jaylor, Act. 26.31. Believe in the Lord Iesus and thou shalt be saved. Q. Must he ever, after he is justifi∣ed, believe that all his sinnes are for∣given him. A. Yes, he must hold fast the be∣ginning of his confidence even unto the end, Heb. 3.14. And if at any time he believe not Gods record, which hee hath given him concerning the pardon of his sinne, hee maketh him a lyar, 1 Joh. 5.10, 11. Q. What way taketh the Lord to confirme a Believer in this faith? A. Besides his word of promise confirmed by an oath, Heb. 6.18. He sealeth this truth unto him outward∣ly in Baptisme, Act. 22.16. and in the Lords Supper, Matth. 26.28. and internally by his spirit, which he sendeth in his good time into
our hearts, sensibly acting saving graces; which graces thus acted, are called the seale, or earnest of the spirit, Ephes. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Q. What if a Believer come, by rea∣son of some grievous sinne committed, and through Satans strong temptation, partly to loose his assurance, must he not seeke it againe of the Lord in way of humiliation and repentance? A. Yes surely, hee must repent of his sins, and amongst the rest, of his grievous sin of infidelity; and upon every back-sliding a Believer is to repent, Revel. 2.5. Remember from whence hee is fallen, and repent, and doe his first workes: Yea, and seek the Lord in all his ordinan∣ces, Esay. 55.7. and instantly pray unto the Lord for increase of faith, Luk. 17.5. Lord I believe help my un∣beliefe, Mark. 14.24. Q. Is it not sufficient in this case onely to believe, that the Lord will par∣don his sin after his repentance for them, and then onely when hee hath repented
of a sinne, believe that it is pardoned, and not before? A. No, this were to leave the true Gospel of Christ, which saith to a man in Christ, Thy sins are for∣given thee; and frame a new Gos∣pel, which saith, I will pardon thy sinne ever as thou repentest; mak∣ing repentance an antecedent to for∣givenesse; and thus a man should bring himselfe under an everlasting curse, and have his name raised out of the book of life, Revel. 22.18, 19. Q. How commeth it to passe that most Christians can believe pardon of sin no farther then they can see them∣selves humbled or repent for them? A. It is because they are either such as have a weak faith, and then they receive reprehension from our Saviour with Thomas, Joh. 20.29. Thomas because thou hast seen me thou hast believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. Or else they are Christians in name on∣ly, but in very deed hypocrites;
who build their faith upon their re∣pentance (though they say and think otherwise) and then no wonder when the foundation is removed, their faith faileth them, and they get a fall; because they were so foo∣lish to build their faith upon the sand of their work of repentance, or o∣ther such like qualifications; Matth. 7.26, 27. Q. What difference between these weak Christians, and these hypocrites? A. This weak Christian hath another secret frame of grace in him, which will not suffer him to rest upon this rotten foundation: the spirit of God bloweth upon him, and letteth him see and feel too, that this way of the flesh will faile him; and at last pitcheth him directly up∣on Christ, and maketh him directly lay hold upon the word of promise which endureth for ever, Esay. 40.6, 7, 8. When the Lord begetteth one with the immortall seed of his word,
he then letteth him know, that all flesh is grasse; and whatsoever flesh and nature can desire to rest upon, falleth away; and teacheth him to rest only on the word of promise, tendred in the Gospel, which en∣dureth for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. But the hypocrite not being blow∣en upon by this spirit, nor having the seed of grace conveyed unto him in the Gospel-promise, stum∣bles at this way of free justification, (Rom. 3.24. We be justified freely by grace, by redemption that is in Christ Iesus. v. 25. Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his bloud, to declare his righteousnesse, for the remission of sins that are past through the forbearance of God. v. 26. To de∣clare at this time his righteousnesse that hee might be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Iesus:) And seeketh it in another way, Rom. 9.31. But Israel which followed the Law of righteousnesse, hath not attained to the Law of righteousnesse. v. 32. Wher∣fore?
Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the workes of the Law; for they have stumbled at the stumbling stone: and waxeth confi∣dent in this way; teacheth it unto others; thinketh others foolish and blind in respect of himselfe, Rom. 2.17, 18, 19, 20. Yea, hee groweth so confident, as that hee dareth plead his cause with God; Matth. 7.22. Have wee not prophesied in thy name, &c? Q. Must a Believer as well assure himselfe that the grosse sinnes that hee commits are pardoned, as smaller offen∣ces? A. To make degrees of sins, in point of pardon and justification, is flat Popery, and derogatory from the infinite meritorious death of our Lord and Saviour Iesus, the Christ; as if hee could not pardon little sins by himselfe, or with little re∣pentance, but hee must be helped with a great deale of repentance, to pardon great sins: Though corrupt
nature maketh a difference, yet God maketh none, Act. 15.9. Q. Ought not a regenerate person to be more humbled for a grosse sin, then for one of an inferiour nature? A. Yea, this God requireth in his word, and the Saints have pra∣ctised it: For this end the Lord af∣flicteth his deare ones; yea, and the Church of Christ excommunicates, 1 Cor. 5. the incestuous persons. Da∣vid found it by woefull experience, Psal. 32.3, 4. c. 38. v. 3, 4. But this humiliation is no cause, nor ante∣cedent adjunct of faith, pardon, or justification; but an effect thereof: humiliation goeth not before par∣don, but followeth it. I doe not repent to get my sin pardoned, as the opposites intend; but because my sinnes are pardoned, therefore I re∣pent; or because nothing could ex∣piate or take away my sinne, but the bloud of my Christ, which for my sin was pierced, therefore my heart is pierced with godly sorrow,
which bringeth repentance to salvation never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. That Iesus Christ should vouch∣safe to looke upon Peter with an eye of mercy after his soule deny∣all, caused him to goe out and weep bitterly, Luk. 22.61, 62. Q. If humiliation bee an effect of pardon, why is it prescribed in Gods word, as a meanes to procure following pardon? A. That pardon which follow∣eth humiliation, is not to bee un∣derstood of such a pardon where∣by the guilt and curse due to sin is taken away; for that is done on∣ly by faith, without repentance; for we are saved by faith onely, Luk. 7 5. as I have formerly shewed. But the pardon that is here meant, is, wher∣by fatherly chastisements and cor∣rections are removed; as may evi∣dently appeare, 1 King 8.33, 34, 35, 36. 2. Though my sin be alwayes pardoned unto my faith, ever prece∣dent
unto repentance; yet they are not so to my sense, feeling, and ex∣perience, but may follow a long time after I have repented. And in this sense it may be said, as I have formerly shewed, that pardon fol∣loweth repentance. Q. If Believers sinnes are already pardoned to their faith, what need they to repent when they commit any sin? A. Hee need not doe it to pro∣cure pardon, or to get himselfe a right and title to apply pardon; but hee must repent for other rea∣sons. 1. Hereby hee cometh to doe the will of God, 1 Thes. 4.2, 3, 4. 2. The more abundantly hee re∣penteth and walketh in obedience to all the commandements of Iesus, the Christ, the more abundantly he injoyeth Gods presence, Psal. 51.10 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Joh. 14.21, 22 23. 3. Hee getteth good evidence of the truth of his faith, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
4. He doth hereby doe good to others, by his holy living, and al∣so bringeth glory to God, Matth. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.12. These and divers other grounds there are for the ne∣cessity of repentance. Q. What hurt will redound unto a Believer, if upon commission of sin he repent not at all? A. First, if he repent not at all, hee evidently declareth himselfe to be a false Christian, a very hypo∣crite, a vaine man, and his faith can∣not save him, Jam. 1.26. c. 2.14. Secondly, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of heaven, Matth. 18.3. Thirdly, if hee doe but deferre his repentance, hee bringeth upon himselfe fatherly corrections or cha∣stisments, 1 Cor. 11.29. Revel. 3.19. 4. Hee grieveth the good spirit of God, by which hee is sealed to the day of his redemption, Ephes. 1.30. 5. He looseth the vigorous act∣ing of the graces of Gods spirit: ex∣ample,
Ely, Asa, Solomon; and Da∣vid for a time found it by woefull experience, which made him bit∣terly to complaine, Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy ho∣ly spirit from me: Restore unto me the joy of my salvation, and establish me with thy free spirit; then shall I teach sinners thy way, and transgressors shall be con∣verted to thee, Psal. 51.10, 11. Sixthly, hee hurteth Gods chil∣dren with whom he converseth, 1 Cor. 5.6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Seventhly, hee giveth occasion for the enemies of the Lord to blas∣pheme: Instance David the King in the case of Vrriah the Hittite, 2 Sam. 12.14. Eightly, It were better for Gods children to dy, then in any such re∣spect thus to dishonour God, 1 Cor. 9.15. Q. Doth God correct his justified ones for sinne.
A. No, if wee take punishment in a proper sense for a legall satis∣faction of Gods justice, because Ie∣sus Christ is their dayes-man, or suretie that appeareth in the presence of God for them, to non-suit all their accusation,Rom. 8.34 and to take away all the penaltyes or punishments that can lie upon them; seeing it was all laid upon his shoulders, Esay. 53.6. God laid on him the iniquitie of us all: the Lord is the just God, hee will not exact it on the sinner, see∣ing the surety and Saviour of sinners Iesus, the Christ, hath discharged it; only he chastiseth the sinnes of his children for their good. 1. And the primary cause of his correcting his deare and justified ones is, his love, Revel. 3.19 As many as I love I rebuke and chasten: Heb. 12.6. 2. The accedentall cause is the sin and weaknesse of his children; this he seeth to pitie, help, and heal,
but not at all to diminish his love, but to manifest it so much the more: His love is tender love, sensible of all things wherewith wee displease him; yet it is so invincible and un∣conquerable that it overcometh all; as learned and venerable Dr. Sibs Sermons on the Canticles pag. 175, 176. 3. The finall cause of correction is not for sinne, to satisfie the justice of a revenging God, that will take vengance upon every one that doth evill; for that is satisfied and dis∣charged in the surety, the Lord Ie∣sus, Rom. 8.33. But from sin: God seeth evill indeed in his dearest Saints; but he seeth some good of his owne also, which moveth him more to love, then that which is evill in us moveth him to hate. What evill or corruptions he seeth in his Saints, hee seeth with a pur∣pose to vanquish, to mortifie, and eate it out; the Spirit is as fire to
consume it, and refine them; as wa∣ter and fullers sope to wash and pu∣rifie them. But what good he seeth of his owne, hee seeth with a pur∣pose to increase it more and more, and to perfect it: Heb. 12. The fa∣thers of our bodies for a few dayes chastened us after their own pleasure; because wee had no surety to save us from their displeasure: But the end of Gods correcting us, was for our profit, that wee might bee made partakers of his holinesse, Heb. 12.10. All Davids corrections were for his instruction, Psal. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word. 71. It was good for me that I was afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. 1 Cor. 11.29. The Church of Corinth chastned of the Lord, that they should not bee con∣demned with the world Q. Is there any holinesse in any na∣turall man, though a sonne of believing Abraham?
A. No; for Isaiah that was a son of believing Abraham, and circum∣cised the eight day, and rested up∣on many birth priviledges, (as was too too incident to the Iewish na∣tion to glory in them;) had no sooner seene Christ the King, the Lord of hosts, but hee cryed out, Woe is me I am undone; for, I am a man of polluted lips, and live amidst a people of polluted lips, Esay. 6.5. Paul acknowledgeth hee is by nature a child of wrath, Ephes. 2.3. Ioh. 3.16. Q. Who is the Believers holinesse? A. Iesus Christ hee is the root from whence every Believer recei∣veth his holinesse of heart and af∣fection, of life and conversation. Ezek. 36.27. I will put my spirit with∣in you, and cause you to walke in my statutes, to keep them and to doe them. Christ performeth the promises to to us, and for us, and in us, and in a more distinct manner, in regard
of absolute and conditionall promi∣ses, he performeth them all and gi∣veth them all unto us. 1. In respect of absolute promi∣ses; he it is that giveth them to us; He will shew mercy where he will have mercy, Rom. 9.15, 16. Micah 7.18. Hee retaineth not his anger for ever, because hee delighteth in mercy. When he cometh to pardon sin, it is a token that displeasure is in him: Then, how doth he not retaine his anger? Why? Truely, because he delighteth in mercy; hee pardons absolutely because he will shew mer∣cy: hee will doe so, no other rea∣son moveth him. 2. So also, in respect of condi∣tionall promises, hee also accom∣plisheth them in an absolute way: Why? Because he hath in his own person fulfilled all conditions in any promise, and that not chiefly for himselfe, but for us; therefore he saith to John the Baptist, Matth.
3.14. Thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousnesse. We stand in need of such an high Priest, as accomplisheth all conditions for us, Heb. 7.26. 3. So likewise, hee fulfilleth all conditionall promises for us, and in us: Esay. 59.20. The redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob. This is expounded by the Apostle Paul, Rom. 11.26. There shall come out of Sion the deliverer, and shall turne away ungodlinesse from Iacob. So that Christ the redeemer doth performe the con∣dition required: Hee turneth away ungodlinesse from Jacob; that is to say, from them, in whom and of whom the condition was required: For hee it is that worketh repen∣tance and remission of sinnes, and forgiveth them: Act. 3.26. Vnto you first, God having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to blesse you, in turn∣ing away every one of you from his ini∣quities. Act. 5.30. The God of our
fathers raised up Iesus whom yee slew and hanged on a tree. v. 31. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give re∣pentance unto Israel and forgivenesse of sinnes. Christ giveth faith by his spirit, to see and behold him whom wee have pierced, and to mourne over him, Zach 12.10. I will powr upon the house of David and upon the Inhabitants of Ierusalem, the Spirit of grace and of compassion, and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourne over him, &c. Ier. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12, 13. His new Covenant is, that he will write the Law and every con∣dition of it in our hearts; he work∣eth it in us indeed; hee giveth all, both absolute and conditionall pro∣mises and conditions, and all hee worketh. And thus Christ revea∣leth himselfe to be Amen in all his promises; and yet he doth it in such a gracious way, as that Christ re∣maineth,
and yet retaineth the pow∣er in his owne hand. The promises are Yea and Amen on Gods part that made them. Faith saith Amen to all the promises on our part, but yet so as it leads us to a Christ to be the Covenant, and Vndertaker betwixt God and us; God is well pleased with us in Christ, Col. 1.19, 20, 21. and we are ina∣bled by a Christ, to doe all those things that God commands; and wee rest on him for the perfor∣mance of it, Phil. 2.12. Worke out your salvation with fear and trembling; yet, lest the creature should faint, having no power to performe what is required, the holy spirit subjoy∣neth where, the creatures strength is, namely, in Christ: v. 13. It is God worketh in you, both to will and to doe of his good pleasure: Thus Paul ac∣knowledgeth, I am able to do all things Christ strengthning me, Phil. 4.13. Q. Hath the naturall man any free∣dome
from the Law, sinne, death, de∣vil? A. No, but hee is in bondage to them all his life long, so long as he remaineth under their govern∣ment. Q. Who shall free him from the ty∣ranny of the Law, sin, death, devil? A. None but a Christ; none but Iesus, the Christ, Heb. 2.14. Foras∣much then as the children are partakers of flesh and bloud, he also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. v. 15. And deliver them who through feare of death were all their life time subject to bondage. Hence holy Paul triumpheth, 1 Cor. 15.55. Oh death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin: and the strength of sinne is the Law, v. 56. But thanks be to God, who hath given us the vi∣ctory through Iesus, the Christ, v. 57. Hence you may see a difference be∣twixt
a soul brought up under a Covenant of workes, and a soule brought up under a Covenant of free grace; both worke. The first worketh for his life, for heaven, for happinesse, for glory; and so the Law enjoyneth him, Do this, and live, Gal. 3.12. And thus doe all those that bring in repen∣tance precedent to faith, to get or procure pardon of sins, for life and glory, without which they must perish. The second, namely, the new creature, that is begotten in a Co∣venant of grace, by the immortall seed of the word, that liveth and abideth for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. Hee worketh also, but it is from a principle of grace and life received, Col. 2.6. As yee have received Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke yee in him, rooted and built up in him. Hence, if the Lord Iesus say, Seek my face; the new creature, that hath
received life and power from Iesus Christ, answereth, Thy face Lord will I seek, Psal. 27.8. Christ saith, Hear my word; the sheep of Christ, whose eares he hath opened, answereth, Thy word Lord will I heare; and regardeth not the voice of a stranger, Ioh. 10.4, 5. So that a regenerate person is not carelesse of duty, but frequent in duty, and abounding in thanksgiving: Hence regenerate Paul, that was frequent in prayer and preaching, saith, I laboured more abundantly then you all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with mee, 1 Cor. 15.10. That the whole glo∣ry of the new creatures justificati∣on and sanctification, might be gi∣ven to God in Christ Iesus our Lord. Q. What difference is there betwixt repentance of the child of God and an hypocrite, seeing both stand for repen∣tance? A. There differences are great
and many, I will instance in some onely: 1. That which turneth an hypo∣crite from his sinne, causing him to grieve and mourne for it, is princi∣pally a convicted conscience, and restraining grace: This made Iudas confesse his sinne, and restore his pieces of silver, Matth. 27.4, 5. Ba∣laam to his confesse his sinne, and offer to returne, Numb. 22.24. This is that which maketh many a formall professor to walke in a way of re∣pentance; they are convinced of this course they take from the word of the Law; for they have a forme of knowledge and of the truth of the Law, Rom. 2.20. They cast them∣selves into this very forme, 2 Tim. 3.5. but all this while they have not the inward worke of Gods spi∣rit, Rom. 2.29. nay this power they deny, 2 Tim. 3.5. But the childe of God hath a∣nother thing, then convicted consci∣ence
or this restraining grace, which causeth him to repent: Hee hath this Law of repentance put into his inward parts, and written in his heart, Ier. 31.33. 2 Cor. 3.3. Though many times, in regard of strong motions in the flesh, hee would not repent, yet he cannot resist this Law of his mind, hee must doe it, Jer. 20.9. When the Lord saith in his word, repent and seek my face; this new creature replyeth, thy face Lord will I seek, Psal. 27.8. The very same that he is taught outwardly by the word, hee is taught inwardly by his anointing spirit, 1 Joh 2.27. Spiritu∣all obedience in the child of God, is not meerely from out of a con∣victed conscience, but from a prin∣ciple of grace received, so that it is naturall, Phil. 2.10. Even his meate and drink to do the will of God. 2. Repentance in the hypocrite proceedeth from a servile fear; for he is begotten under a Covenant of
workes, and hath in this very con∣ception conveyed unto him a spirit of bondage, and so liveth; and through fear of death, is subject to bondage all his life long, Heb. 2.15. Though he look to bee saved by faith and re∣pentance, being instructed out of the Gospel, yet he cannot, nor da∣reth not expect grace and pardon further then hee can see himselfe worke; for he looketh to be saved, though not altogether, yet as it were by the workes of the Law; think∣ing that mercy and pardon must fol∣low his workes, Rom. 9.32. And this is that, which maketh him take a great deale of pains in the Church of God, in praying, preaching, ex∣horting, instructing, &c. and cau∣seth him to suffer much in this way, disgraces, injuries, afflictions, it may be death; for he will beare the bur∣den and the heate of the day, Matth. 20.12. Yea, hee will performe a∣bundance of hypocritical service un∣to
the Lord, as it troubleth the Lord and maketh him weary, E∣say. 1.14. and all this commeth from a servile spirit. But the child of God is begot∣ten under a Covenant of grace, and hath not received the spirit of bondage to fear, but the spirit of adoption, to cry unto God, by the name of Abba Father, Rom. 8.15. he repents and serveth God without fear, in holinesse, and righteousnesse all his dayes, Luk. 1.74. He know∣eth very well, that sinne cannot damne him, being delivered out of the hands of his enemies by the bloud of Christ; yet for all this, though God cast him off, and put him to shame, spoyle him by his enemies, give him as a sheep for meat, scatter him amongst the heathen, sell him for nought, make him a reproach amongst his neighbours, and a scorn, and a derision, and a by-word, and
a shaking of the head, break him in the place of dragons, cover him with the shaddow of death, kill him as a sheep, yet will hee not forget God, nor deal falsly in his Covenant, Psal. 44.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Repentance in a child of God is not arbitrary, hee is bound un∣to it by the Covenant of grace: It is as possible for a justified per∣son to be damned, as for a true Believer not to repent. His faith worketh by love, the love of Christ constraineth him; he lo∣veth God, and he loveth all his commandements, which are ho∣ly, just, and good, and not grei∣vous; he loveth all Gods wayes: Many waters cannot quench this love, neither can the floud drowne it; if a man would give all the sub∣stance of his house for love, it would utterly bee contemned, Cant. 8.7. The more sinne the Lord forgiv∣eth,
the more hee loveth God, and repents, and mournes, and weepeth bitterly for sinne: In∣stance, Peter, Luk. 22.61, 62. and Mary Magdalen, that thought no∣thing to dear for a Christ; from whom shee received a quietus est, a free and a full discharge for all her sinnes, Luk. 7.48, 50. The hypocrite repenteth for slavish fear, but a sincere Christian for childish-love. 3. The hypocrite forsaketh sinne, and repenteth for it, not simply as it is a sinne, but as it is cloathed with such and such circumstances; hee looketh on it as it is a great sinne, which will break the peace of his conscience, discredit him, bring disprofit, draw downe Gods judgements upon him, yea, and damne him. If it be a little sin, controverted and doubtfull, which runneth full butt against his conscience, countenan∣ced
by authority, commodious, and as hee supposeth, for which the Lord will not plague him and damne him, with much a doe rather then all faile, will light upon it. What made Balaam, A∣hab, or the hypocriticall Israelits, of whom yee read Psal. 78. re∣pent, but for some of these by-respects: Did not Saul disobey God, in sparing some of the cat∣tell of the Amalekits, when hee had gotten some faire pretence? Would not Balaam have gladly cursed Gods people, if he could have gotten some revelation from the Lord for his conscience to rest upon; instance, his buil∣ding altars after altars, and ma∣king inquiry after inquiry, though the Lord had sufficiently told him his mind, Numb. 23. Did not Pi∣late deliver Christ to be crucifi∣ed, when he had gotten, as hee thought, a sufficient plea for him∣selfe,
after he could not prevaile with the people, when hee had washed his hands and protested his innocency in the matter, Math. 27.24. Truely, an hypocrite for some by-respect, will stand out against sin a long time, and will not bee drawn to that which is materially a sinne, till needs must, but in time of temptation falleth a∣way, Luk. 8.13. The reason is, because hee never turned from sinne, as a sinne, but for synister ends and by-respects; and when these cease, or a more prevalent motive cometh, then farewell re∣pentance, farewell obedience. But the child of God repenteth and turneth from sinne simply, as it is a sinne: How shall I doe this great wickednesse and sinne against God, saith chast Joseph to his wanton mistresse, Gen. 39.9. Remove all the circumstances be∣fore mentioned, yet there is a
deadly enmitie, and a strong an∣tipathy between the children of God and sinne. If it be presen∣ted unto him as a sinne, he con∣sulteth not in point of practise, whether it be a great sinne or a little sin; whether it bee autho∣ris'd or not authoris'd; whether it will damne him or not: it is enough if it be a sinne: Though an action bee lawfull and com∣mendable in it selfe, and yet if it cannot be done without appea∣rance of evill, some circumstan∣ces make it scandalous and offen∣sive, he will rather chuse to dye then to put it into practise, or be brought to doe it, 1 Cor. 9.15. for, all false wayes hee utterly abhorres, Psal. 119.104. 4. An hypocrite never turneth to the Lord with his whole heart, as the Lord requireth, Joel 2.14. For he is double minded, Iam. 1.8. True it is, he may walke accor∣ding
to his conscience, as farre as he is enlightned by the word of God; leading a blamelesse life with holy Paul, Phil. 3.6. and doth that which hee doth out of the integrity of his heart with A∣bimelech, Gen. 20.5, 6. Hee per∣swadeth himselfe he is in the right, when in truth he is farre wrong, and because he received not the love of the truth, the Lord sends him strong delusions to believe a lie, 2 Thes. 2.10, 11. That hee might be damned, who believes not the truth, v. 12. So, that although he live never so ex∣actly and strict in his owne opi∣nion, yet hee never did a good work in all his life; all his righ∣teousnesse, is as a filthy ragge in the sight of God. He may seem∣ingly turne unto the Lord, in re∣spect of many glorious actions; but he hath not a new heart, nor a renewing spirit within him: he hath not the seeds and habits of
supernaturall saving grace infu∣sed into him; without which he cannot turn himselfe from all his transgressions, Ezek. 18.30, 31. His actions may looke towards God, but the frame of his heart is turned from God; that which he doth, may bee for the matter right in the sight of God, but he doth it not with a perfect heart, in a due manner, 2 Chron. 25.2. Put that action (as hee thinketh that hee doth most uprightly) into an E∣vangelicall frame, he would most exceedingly hate it; because the car∣nall mind is at enmitie against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be, Rom. 8.7. Take then, the most precise hypocrite that can be imagined, let him re∣pent never so much, and performe never so many good duties, yet if the ground and bottome from whence it proceeds, and upon which they stand, bee flesh and
nature, and also the old man which never turned to God; as for that which should give a spirituall be∣ing to those actions, namely, faith in Christ, and the spirit of grace; these he doth hate from his heart. Thus you see the cause, why an hypocrite never turneth to the Lord with his whole heart. But a person truely regenerate hath a new heart, and a new spirit; he is a new creature, all things to him are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. And albeit the flesh lusteth against the spirit, yet this new creature turn∣eth wholy unto God, and is all for God; such a man seeketh the Lord with his whole heart, and all within him doth praise his ho∣ly name. This new creature would gladly seperate himselfe and bee gone from the old man,Rom. 7.24. which is a burden unto him, that he might perfectly serve the Lord in this life, and fully enjoy him in the
world to come, 2 Cor. 5.8. A man thus in Christ, so farre as he is re∣generate, hath his understanding, conscience, memory, will, affecti∣ons, bending and powerfully en∣clining towards the Lord; the stream and bent of his spirit run∣neth that way, so that he turneth to the Lord with his whole heart. 5. The hypocrite in all his performances aimeth at himselfe: when hee prayeth, and goeth to performe holy duties in the assem∣blies, it is for corne and wine and oyle, Hos. 7.14. Even some things that concerneth himselfe; when hee fasts and mourneth hee doth it for himselfe, not unto the Lord, Zach. 7.5. The salvation of his soul is his utmost end, for hee will part with any thing in this way, Mich. 6. But the child of God doth all for Gods glory, hee desireth the salvation of his soul, but he hath a further end; hereby the Lord
manifests his truth and mercy, and getteth himselfe a name; therefore wee shall find in the Psalmes, David putting up such or the like petitions as these; save me for thy mercies sake, save me for thy names sake: The child of God desireth to be led in the path of righteousnesse, but his principle end is for Gods names sake, Psal. 23.3. When the child of God is in a streight, in regard of tem∣porall danger, or seeth the Church of God in distresse, he will hum∣ble himselfe and pray earnestly unto the Lord for deliverance: but that which he above all look∣eth at is, that there may no dis∣honour light upon Gods great name, Jos. 7.7, 8. when hee re∣pents and confesseth his sinne, it is chiefely, that hee may give glory unto God, Jos. 7.19. As he findeth God giving a begin∣ning and a continuance unto all
his actions, so hee maketh the Lord the last and uttermost end of all his performances; for of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be glory, and praise, and dominion, for ever and ever, Amen. Soli Deo Gloria. FINIS.
Aug. 14. 1645. Imprimatur Iohn Downame.
