D45A 99896126 153891
A True and Full RELATION OF His MAJESTY's safe Arrival and Reception at the HAGƲE. Sent in a Letter from a Person of Quality, to his Friend in London. 3. febr. 1690/1. SIR, I Don't question but you have heard of His Majesty's being six∣teen Hours in a Longboat amongst the Ice, with great Hazard of His Person: He went off in a Fog, supposing himself to be upon the Coast, when he was at least four Leagues off: He entred the Hague privately, and yesterday made his Publick Entrance, being importuned to do it by the States; who had put themselves to a pro∣digious Expence, to entertain him with Splendor and Magnificence su∣table to the high Character of so mighty a Monarch. First, His own Coaches moved, then some of the Nobility, then some of the Nobi∣lity of Holland very well mounted; then his own particular Coach, which was very plain, himself in a Cloak; and at his left hand sate the Lord Overkirk, in the Back part of the Coach were the Duke of Ormond and the Lord Scarbrough, he was followed by the Duke of Nor∣folk's Coach, and the Rest of the Nobility in order, the Footmen bare, and the Pages behind the Coaches, the Procession began without the Hague, and moved through three Triumphal Arches; the best and last of which was before the Gates of the Court, 'tis of the Dorick Order, and built after the manner of Hadrian's at Rome. I have sent you the best of their Devices, and by them you may form to your self a Con∣jecture of the rest. In the Cornish of the last Triumphal Arch, (which as I have be∣fore signified to you, is the best of the Three) there is the following Inscription in large Capital Roman Letters. Pio, Felici, Inclyto, Gulielmo Tertio, triumphanti Patriae Patri Gubernatori P. C. L P. Restauratori Belgii Foederati, Liberatori Angliae, Servatori Scotiae, Pacificatori Hiberniae, Reduci. In English thus: To the Pious, Happy, Re∣nowned William the Third, Tri∣umphant, the Father of his Country, the Governour of P. C. L P. Restorer of the United Provinces, Deliverer of England, the Preserver of Scotland, the Peace-Maker of Ireland, upon his safe Return.
Near this was another Device with three Crowns in a Scale, weighed down by a Sword with, this Motto: Praemia non aequant. The Rewards do'nt equal his Service. Then another of a young Eagle soaring towards the Sun in its Glory, with this: Tener adversis innititur alis. Tho young, he boldly soars against the Sun. Another with a Phenix expiring, with this: Praelucet Posthuma proles. A Posthumous Off-Spring out-shines. Another with a Galley under sail, with this: Alter erit Tiphys. There shall be another Tiphys. Another of a Lyon and Unicorn, the latter holding his Horn over Toads and Serpents, with this: Virusque fugant, viresque repellunt. This Poison cures, and that does Force repel. In one of the Atticks is this Inscription: Gulielmum Posthumum Britannorum Aurantiumque tertium Patriae Spem, Resp. Palladium. William the Posthumous, the third of that Name, of Britain and Orange, the Hope of his Country, the Pal∣ladium of the Common Wealth. Another of Europa with her Arms displayed, and the Bull near her, with this Motto: Eripiet Miseram. He will deliver her from her Misery. The Fire-Works at Night were extremely curious, and the Burghers at the Hague were in Arms all the day. Here are no Princes here as yet, but the Duke of Brandenburgh; and he is at present incognito; The Dukes of Bavaria and Zell are daily expected. Tromp is made Ad∣miral, to the General Satisfaction of the People here, who expect won∣derful Performances from him this Summer. In short, Sir, you may imagine what a Glorious Appearance we shall have here at the Hague, when the rest of the Confederate Princes, who are now upon their Journy to this Place, are arrived; since the Figure we make at present is scarce capable of a Description. I am in haste, and must beg your Pardon for breaking off so abruptly. Tuesday, Feb. 6. 1690. New Stile. Your most humble Servant. J. D. LONDON: Printed for Walter Davis in Amen Corner. 1690.
