e1493 e1074_22 99867299 169323
A DECLARATION OF THE PARLIAMENT For a day of THANKSGIVING. THe signal Mercies wherewith God hath blessed this Commonwealth for some years past, are so evident and convincing, that such onely who are of∣fended at the hand from whence they come, can refuse to make acknowledgement. And had not the Concerns been more then hu∣mane, which were Imbarkt with the late Adventures in these Nations, their mis∣carriage might have been according to the expectance of the Adversary: But though not for our sakes, yet for his great Name
sake, who sits in Heaven and laughs to scorn all the Plots and Devices of the ungodly, hitherto we have been delivered. The snare is broken, and we are escaped. 'Tis not un∣known with what an outstretched Arm it hath pleased God, as well to prevent, as re∣pel those dangers which seemed of late to threaten this Nations Peace, by the Apo∣stasie of some from their former Engage∣ments in conjunction with old Enemies, to∣gether with a neutral Generation, in so much as few Counties of England but have been in some measure infested, though not with open acts of Hostility, yet with secret Complottings and Attempts, to debauch the people to an Insurrection, but more e∣specially the North-Western parts, where Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, Colonel Egerton, Colonel Werden, and sever∣al others their Accomplites, upon pretence of adding to this Nations Freedom, would have by force of Arms, brought it into Bon∣dage, by re-admitting a Kingly Interest and Family, against which God hath so long by a Successive and uninterrupted Series of Providences very fully witnessed; That when in many other places of this Nation, even at once the Enemy hath attempted to break in upon our peace like a flood, 'tis won∣derful to behold, how the Spirit of the Lord hath lifted up a Standard against him. All which the Parliament considering, hath re∣ckoned it a duty incumbent on them to set apart Thursday next, being the sixth day of October, one thousand six hundred fifty nine, for a Day of solemn Praises and Thanks∣givings,
to be returned unto the Lord; And to the end, that all who are truly free to such a Duty, within the Cities of London and Westminster, and late lines of Communication, may have an opportuni∣ty to offer a Sacrifice of Praise on this be∣half, the Parliament doth hereby De∣clare they are invited thereunto; and as for all other parts of this Commonwealth, upon the third day of November next: That as the true performance of this Duty is by such a people as are made free in the Sons freedom (for Praise waiteth for God in Si∣on) so an occasion is hereby given to render it to the Lord, even in the Great Congre∣gation. And although this Combination was so general, its appearance suddain, and there was not wanting a readiness of willing peo∣ple to offer themselves in such a day of tryal; yet that it hath pleased God, with the loss of so little Blood, to still the raging enemy and avenger, yea, after his defeat and disappointment, that both Persons and Things are brought to light in this matter beyond expectation, are none of the least motives to quicken and excite even all that fear God, and work righteousness in these Nations, unto such a Duty at this Season, not doubting but as it hath plea∣sed God to cause the wrath of man to praise him, so that the remainder of wrath will he restrain.
Saturday, Octob. 1. 1659. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Decla∣tion be forthwith Printed and Published. THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament. LONDON: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.
