H3295 e623_6 R206370 99865531 117776
THE HUE and CRY After those RAMBLING PROTONOTARIES Of the TIMES. Mercurius Elenticus. Mercurius Britanicus. Mercurius Melancholicus. and Mercurius Aulicus. Tu Captas alios, jàm sumus ergò pares. Mart: Epig. Published by Authority. VERITAS VIRESSIT VVLNERE printer's or publisher's device London, Printed by B. Alsop, MDCLI.
THE HVE and CRY After Those rambling Protonotaries of the times MERCVRIVS, ELENTICVS, BRI∣TANICVS, MELANCHOLLI∣CVS, and AVLICVS. HUsh! what Morphean spell hath lull'd asleep These blustring souls? Or do they sadly creep, Charm'd with a Gyges ring discern'd by none But th' Complices of their own faction?
Why how now Gallants? is it possible Such rantum tantum Heroes of the quill, Which aw'd our ripest actions, should be Thus silently damp't in obscurity? And that brave flash, Quis me impuè lacescit Shrunk to a poor contemptible Quiescit? Most horrid Change! the grand Monopolie Of reprehension routed? forc'd to flie To gloomy shades lockt from the vulgar Air, Which durst confront the Senate, and the Chair? What Heretick could have maintain'd that these Should lesse then be the latest Arteries Mov'd in the Royall Cause? nay when black fate Had sunck their Armies through intestine hate, Stand on the ruines to survive the fall, And raise new from their dust and funerall? But O they are unkennell'd, shab'd, and gone: Else their Gygantick riff raff, would have flown, Wing'd with a rampant bastinado stile In sculs about the City. O what guile Hath countermin'd this Crotchet? which so long Masqu'd like a subtile whiffler in a throng? Seven tedious winters have they serv'd in rime And obtrectation to reprove the Time. But now unhappy boyes slunk all away Sans their Indentures at the parting day. But I'le pursue their footsteps which perchance May help as much as a recognizance. Ho! Countryman! didst meet a scared crew Of Shabbaliseoes? a partiperpal'd blew
Messe of Intelligence? with hare-goose eyes Staring like Thieves scap'd from a grand Assize? Whom in thy sweet mistake thou once didst call The volk that benn'd the weekly Urinall? Sweating like butter'd Moons stew'd in their grease? Blenching each bush like a Justice of Peace, Serjeant, or Constable? prest to apprehend Their bodies, as their wits? and to suspend Their news and selves a while? prithee canst tell Me any hint? revolve th' emergent smell Foreran that Caravan of soil came after, To charge thy nose with stench, thy brest with laugh∣ter. Their rich imbroider'd breeches rent and tore With copious slits to vent their golden Ore: Which in abundance issu'd down their thighs In plenteous veins through th' heat of jealousies. For Falconbridge the Beadle (as they say) Appear'd to them in vision th' other day. Ho Aulicus! if one could possibly Retrive thy lamentable Phisnomie, What sad conclusions might I gather thence? How like a smoaky Herring in suspence Thy parboil'd Rabbet-ship now sneaks about Peaking as if thy Genius were thrown out To pen the sear'd worlds Epitaph. At best, Thy meagre presence was a Lenten jest. A meer Anatomy of bones, a trick Put upon nature, a Coarse called quick. What ghostly Metempseuchosis must then Thy fears refine thee to? Attome of men!
Perhaps thy thinner extract may be such To rarifie beyond our sight or touch. A pretty sharp evasion to get free From the after-game of thy fraternity. Those Counter-currs: which when men most shall NEED 'um Will bark on any side to shark their freedome. To thine eternall credit be it told, Thou art the onely man dares say and hold. These shuffling shakebags, wch can boxe their coats, And tune their mercenary hones and throats To any pitch or humour, let them be Kick'd for a flexible neutrality. Love Treason, hate the Traytor. They that take Up arms, nay ev'n rebell for conscience sake, And stick to their first principle's intent, Though the cause ill are semi-innocent. But lukewarm doublers let them deny'd Th' enjoyment of the curse of the worst side. And hang them up 'twixt heav'n and earth, t' expresse They have arriv'd once at a setlednesse. Else may some dextrous Doctour of the Post Scourge with a dog-whip this Mercurian rost Of Sckipping Batretters, 'tis granted good To purge those super Crescencies of blood Which frolick in the veins of Malecontents, And breeds a grief call'd Evil instruments, Yet my Bridewellian Champion, stay thy hand, And be advis'd a little in this grand Industrious Expedition. Some there be Claim just excuse for their simplicity,
The vulgar flesh-Flies; which depend alone Upon event and apparition: These passe for numbers sake, they'le cloy thee quite, And thy Arithmetique. But swinge the right. To Pauls Church-yard direct thy rambling whip, There Melancholicus lols, biting's lip, Storming to see his Fobs such Cowards grow, And cannot one poor ounce of mettal show: His clouded features mingled all together, Look like an endlesse Series of ill weather. Confine him till th' hast found Britanicus, That sniveling Retrograde at th' holy Buss, With some sweet Ruth behind a Kitchin-door, Or wheel-barrow fashion riggling of a W— Give his salacious Appetite a touch, To mittigate his itch not overmuch. Then down the Strand, observe the signs I tell you, A strange Rhinoceros with a shotten belly And trapstick leggs (who will not judge him stout That on such props dares venture such a Lout?) Will soon occure; which formerly 'tis said Berayd Elenticus now buried In a new term Politicus, a word May henceforth stand for a recanting T— Bast his back gammons, that his Patrons dripping May work out at his sides like leaks from shipping. Lash him through all his names, let no disguise Be thick enough to gloze his forgeries. A Satyr which can blow both hot and cold, Out of one mouth, stain vertu's self for gold.
Mince his gambadoes well in every shape, And let him know an Ape is still an Ape Though clad with Lions skins, and when his gore Has run enough to stew the two before, Let them pertake alike thine instrument, Till thou perceivest Apostacy quite spent. Then least their Physick purge them to their graves, Dismisse them for a leash of juggling Knaves. FINIS.
