H3492 e465_34 R205214 99864644 116876
The Humble PETITION OF THE Committee, Gentry, Ministry, and other the inhabitants of the County of LEICESTER, As it was presented to the right honorable The Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT; October 2. 1648. With the Parliaments Answer thereunto. London, Printed for G. Calvert. 1648.
THE Humble Petition OF The Committee, Gentry, Ministry, and other the inhabitants of the County of LEICESTER; Humbly sheweth, THat whereas Your Petitioners have long lien under the burthen of these in∣testine and devouring Wars, and are now lifted up with the hopes of a blessed Sun∣shine of Peace breaking forth upon us for the dispelling of all those mists that have wrapt
us up in this long Misery: In which Peace well setled none shall more rejoyce then your Petitioners, being ready to accept it as the fruit of all our labors, losses, crosses, yea all our hazards in this great adventure: Heartily praising the Lord for all your faithful endea∣vors to extricate us, and our afflicted Friends of these three Kingdoms out of our deep and unparaleld miseries: And perceiving the pre∣sent Treaty to be looked on by you as the great and last way to bring over unto us this so much beloved and longed for Peace, in which (seeing our concernment is so eminent, and our posterity gasping to receive the fruits of what we have sowen in tears and blood) we humbly crave leave to mind you of two Declarations, the one from the Assembly of the Church of Scotland, dated July the 5. 1645 charging his Majesty with spilling the blood of many Thousands of his best Subjects in the three Kingdoms: and the other of your own, Febr. the 15. 1647. wherein you give Reasons for no further Addresses, and speak as high as that of Scotland. We might add thereunto that also in answer to the Scottish
Commissioners Papers, dated the 4th of March 1647. All which have made our ears to tingle and our hearts to tremble, expecting with amazement what satisfaction you might have to these loud-crying and Heaven-provoking Crimes: viz. That about the death of his Royal Father: The betraying of Rochel; The Spanish Fleet with an Army in it: His Proclamation to cry down Parlia∣ments: His correspondency with Rome: The private Articles of his Marriage: His Commissions to the Rebels in Ireland: His violent attempt upon the House of Com∣mons: The inviting of Forreigners to inslave the three Nations: His proclaiming the Par∣liament of England Rebels: The designed bloody Massacre in London by his Commis∣sion: His destructive principle of yeelding an Account to none but God: His inviting over the Irish Rebels to subdue this Parliament: His backwardness to declare against them: Together with the eight years Misery of the three Kingdoms; Cum multis aliis. And yet your selves say these are but some few
of the many Reasons why you cannot repose any more trust in him. The Premisses considered, we desire, for our selves and the whole Nati∣on, we may not be left in the dark concerning these Suggestions and Charges; which if true, that pro∣ceedings may be accordingly, that we may not build our Peace upon such ruining foundations: but if o∣therwise, that his Majesty may be cleared so fully, that we may neither fear your Treating with him nor Trusting him in the great and weighty affairs of the three King∣doms. And we most earnestly beg, that since Your God and Ours hath put so many principal Enemies into Your hands, even to wonder, that
impartial and personal Justice may equally and speedily be administred, which we look at as the undoubted Remedy of all our Maladies; for Justice exalteth a Nation and establisheth a Throne. Jn the ob∣taining of these (we suppose) but just Requests, we are ready to ad∣venture our All with You and for You. And shall dayly pray, &c. The said Petition was by twenty Gentlemen, Ministers & others of the said County delivered at the Bar, which was acceptably received, read and debated; the Petitioners being withdrawn, were again called in, & had this Answer by Mr Speaker re∣turned.
The Answer of the House to the Petitioners, by Mr. Speaker. Gentlemen of the County of Leicester, THe House hath read your Pe∣tition and hath considered of your desires and hath comman∣ded me to give you this Answer, That they are engaged in a Treaty with the King, wherein they will take care for the preservation of Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Protection of those that have engaged with them: and so far J am Commanded to acquaint you. FINIS. Jmprimatur, G M.
