h922 E24_14 99871435 123846
A FVLL RELATION OF The Defeate given, and Victory ob∣tained upon Saturday last, by our Forces at ABBINGTON: Commanded by that Noble and faithfull Commander, Major Generall Browne, against the Oxford Forces, Commanded by the two Princes, Rupert, and Maurice, who then with much confidence came to storm and take the aforesaid Garrison. In a Letter from Collonell Samuel Hars∣net, to Captaine Jones in LONDON. Imprimatur, Ja. Cranford. LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, 1645.
A FVLL RELATION OF THE Defeate given, and Victory obtained upon Saturday last, by our Forces at ABBINGTON. January 12. 1644. SIR, I Have had a longing desire to requite your love in giving mee a Relation of that Fight of Alford; but never could meet with an opportunity, but some thing the Lord hath now vouchsafed worthy the Relation to our worthy Friends. I came on Friday night from Henly with our Com∣pany that came with us from London. Some others of our Garrison that wee found at Reading, and from thence after mid-night, past very quietly by Walling∣ford, and so about three a Clock came safe to Ab∣bington, seeing none in our way to trouble us, but
having been not above three houres here, wee had an Allarum from the same way wee came, which was about halfe a mile from us in Oxfordshire, called Cullum Bridge, which they posseft themselves of, be∣fore wee had time to draw forth any party to charge them; there were parties from Oxon, and from Wallingford, Prince Rupert Commanding in Chiefe, with whom was Prince Maurice, Sir Henry Gage, Go∣vernour of Oxford, and many other great Comman∣ders; their Force were supposed to bee in all about three thousand Horse and Foote, with two peeces of Ordinance. Behinde the said Bridge was a great hill with ma∣ny hedges, which they lined with Musqueteers, to the great annoyance of our men. But our Noble Major Generall upon hearing of the Allarum, Com∣manded our men to Armes, which was cheereful∣ly obeyed: and by parties were drawn along the Cawsie, that did lead from the Town to that Bridge, (Meadowes over-flowed with water, being on both sides) and comming to charge them at the Bridge, the Enemy stoutly opposed us, but to their losse, whereupon wee had two Drakes commanded thither: And our men cheerefully drawne into the water on both sides, did so pelt them, while the Drakes plaid upon the Bridge, that after foure houres fight wee drove them from the Bridge and the Hedges, and made them retreat, and wee having got the Bridge, which being of Stone, they had partly broken down. Yet our men got over, Commanded by Major
Bradberry, Major to Collonell Sparrowes Regiment of Essex, at the entring over which Bridge hee was slaine, but have not lost above eight or ten men at the most, and so the Enemy was forced shamefully to retreat. The Fight beganne betimes in the morning, at which instant there was a party of three score and ten, or fourescore Horse from Farringdon, to set upon our Horse, quartered at a Village called Drayton in Barkeshire, on the other side of the Town, neere two miles off, the Enemy was there, Commanded by Major Hatton Farmer, Major of the Prince his Regiment, our Horse carryed themselves very couragiously, beat the Enemy out of their quar∣ter, and pursued them within a mile of Farringdon, and killed the Major with divers others, and mortal∣ly wounded the Captaine Lieutenant of the Prince his Regiment, took many of the Men and Horse, a∣mongst whom were five Irish men, which wee hanged the same day in the Market place, and not above twelve of these Horse got into Farringdon, the rest slaine or taken, without the losse of any one of our men, or Horse. Their intent was, as wee are informed by Prison∣ers, and a Trumpeter, that this evening came from Oxford, to desire the Majors body, that the Horse should give us an Allarum on the one side, whilst the Foote stormed us on the other. And another that this day came from Oxford, did give our Major Ge∣nerall information, both of them affirme, that wee have slaine Sir Henry Gage, Governous of Oxford, and
many others of great quality. It is reported that Lieutenant Colonell Lower, Deputy Governour of Wallingford, is slaine, time will produce more: I am confident the Enemy had a great advantage of us by the bridge and hills, yet the Lord fought for us, and hath delivered us out of their hands, for which we de∣sire thanks may be generally given to the Lord of hosts, the God of Victory and in particular for this pre∣serving of us in our passage hither, the Enemy being upon their march very neere us; and had they ta∣ken us, it would have occasioned great Triumph in the Enemy; there being of us foure Colonels; besides other Captaines and Commanders. Our Major Ge∣nerall, Doctor wilson, and Quartemaster Generall Burrowes, remember their loves to you, and would have given you a touch hereof, but I undertooke to save them that labour; I pray you acquaint our Friends herewith: as having exprest nothing but what I know to be truth. One of the Messengers from Oxford informeth us that Prince Rupert engaged himselfe to the King and Lords, that hee would have Abbington on Sa∣turday before twelve a clocke at noone, but mis∣sing his hopes hee was ashamed to march into Ox∣ford with the Forces that returned, but came in pri∣vately another way, and there the Lords mock't him, askt him Where is Abbington, that hee boasted hee would so suddenly have. But wee gave them such a breakfast, that I thinke, hee will have little stomacke hereafter to come and visit our Noble Major Generall; wee could not for want of Horse
pursue the victory, Collonel Fines having left us, and I thinke God would not vouchsafe to doe him so much honour as to bee present at so noble an ex∣ploit: for the number of ours slaine, I have alrea∣dy given youan accompt: The slaine of the ene∣my are not yet certainly knowne; the Countrey re∣ports of three or foure Carts of dead and woun∣ded Corpes they tooke with them. Besides many of theirs were drowned; others throwne in after they were slaine, and some found dead upon the place. Abbington the 12 of Janua∣ry, 1644. at nine a clocke on Sabbath day night. I rest your Loving Friend and Neighbour, SAM. HARSNEY. FINIS.
