L3053 E640_15 99862947 165927
THE Lord Merlins Prophecy CONCERNING THE KING OF SCOTS: FORETELLING The strange and wonderfull things that shall befall him in ENGLAND. AS ALSO, The time and manner of a dismal and fatall Battel; the event and success thereof: a great Blowe to be given, and the Northern Chicken in∣forced to flie to forraign Countries for aid & succour. ALSO, King JAMES His Dream, and Queen ANN'S Prophecy touching the King, and the redusing of England, Scotland, and Ireland from Monarchy. WITH The Lady SYBILLA'S Prophecy, touching the de∣stroying of the Nobility, and what shall afterwards befall this Nation in Government and Discipline. LIKEVVISE, The Prophecy of PAUL GREBNER (a German) Concerning Charles Son of Charles the Emp: foretelling his greatness and victorious Conquests. Presented to Queen Elizabeth Anno 1582. and recorded in the Library of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, by Dr. Nevill, Clerk of her Ma∣jesties Closet. LONDON, Printed by J. C. for G. Horton, 1651.
A Prophesie of the King of Scots, &c. VVHen the Lyon of Righteousnesse is dead, then shall rise a White King in Britain, first flying, and after riding, after ligging down, and in this lig∣ging down he shal be lymed, after that he shal be led. This is verified by K. James, who was by the Prophet styled, The Lyon of Righteousness; for many affirm, that he had the picture of a Lyon on his brest, or side: and indeed he was the most acutest Prince of spirit that ever we read of, both in judgment either in things divine or humane, but the least ad∣dicted unto Martial Discipline. He was admonished of his Death by a Dream; for his Majesty dreamed, that his Tutor Bachanan appeared unto him in his sleep, and gave him these two verses: for the rarity thereof I thought good to repeat them. Sexte verere Deum, tibi vitae terminus instat, Cum tua candenti flagrat Carbunculus igne. In English thus: Thou Iames the sixt of that name King of Scots, fear God, the term of thy life is neer at hand, when thy Carbuncle stone burns in the hot fire. The next morning the King related his Dream to divers of the Lords of his privie Counsel, as also the preceding verses, which did exceeding astonish them; and suddenly after, as the King was sitting by the fire side, the great Carbuncle stone that he usually had fixed to his hat, fell out into the fire, & his Majesty immediatly fell sick, and died. After King James was dead, Charles Stuart (the white King) was then proclaimed King of Great Brit∣tain; so called, by reason of his apparelling himself the day of his Coronation in a White Garment, representing his innocency, as the Bishop of Canterbury
was pleased to demonstrate; whose office was to present the Crown: but the King impatiently in great haste, took up the Crown, and placed it upon his head with his own hands, which moved the Spanish Embassador, who was then present, to say; The Kings putting the Crown upon his head so rashly with his own hands, was an ill Omen. The preceding Prophecie was written by Ambrose Merlin (the Scot) 900 years since; But by reason there is another ancient Copy extant, of the Lady Postons more large and emphaticall, concerning the White King, I shall here render it verbatim, as followeth: The Lyon of Righteousness being dead, there shall arise in Britain a White King; first flying, then riding; then descending; and in his de∣scent he shall be insnared. Then men will point with their fingers, and say, Where is this white and noble King? At that time there will be chat∣tering of men, even in the same nature as we do with sheep and Oxen, & it will be publikely by some reported, There is a King: others shall say, There is no King. After these things he shall lift up his head as a King, or shall manifest himself to be King; it will be a time of Gleads or Kytes, and seven years shall this War continue within the Kingdom. After that the young one of the Eagle, or his Chicken, shall come upon woodden horses, within a year and a half into Brittain, and then there shall be war, at what time little shall be the Charity of most men, for what a man is Master of overnight, shall be taken from him in the morning. After that the White King shall go towards the West to an ancient place, near to a running water. Then his enemies shall make hast to meet him, and their Army shall be formed in shape of a Buckler; the King shall be straight∣ned before and behind, and on every side; and then the white, King shall slide into an Hall &c. What remains unfullfilled is in these words: After that the Chicken of the Eagle shall build in the highest rock of all Britain: nay, he shall not be slain young: nor shall he come to old age. Note, that the Prophet mentions not the Chicken of the Eagle (who is the present K. of Scots) with any Kingly Title: nor doth he say, He shall acquire his Fathers inheritance, or in plain terms, obtain the Kingdom of England, or be crowned King thereof: he onely saith, He shall build his nest in the chiefest Rock of all Britain: Which imports no more, but that like a flying Fowl, or as a man chased from one place to another, so shall his Worldly condition be in this World. Another excellent Prophecie I cannot omit, penned by Sybilla the Prophetess (a Scottish Lady) touching the Reign of the Kings of Eng∣land and Scotland; and if you will know the time of the extirpation of
Monarchy▪ be pleased to take a thousand in Calculation And the longest of the Lyon Four Crescents under one Crown With St. Andrews Cross thrice Then three score and thrice three In that year there shall a King, A Duke and no crowned King, Because the Prince shall be young, And tender of years. Much sorrow and strife Shall be in Lowthian and Fife. These are all the Scottish Prophecies, which ever I could attain sight of; and yet none of these make any mention of a fifth Monarchy, or the Lyon of the North, or do any other wayes mention that so great a King as Charles the Great, nay greater then he, shall be born of the Scottish Race, or in Scotland, or shall come from Scotland. From all which, I onely conclude thus much: That the present Charles Stuart is not that great Lyon of the North, or he that must conquer the English, or the present Com∣mon-wealth of England. To which prophetical expressions, give me leave, I beseech you, to add the ancient prophecie of David Ʋpan, a Welch man, viz. Karonog fab Ane yo wna diwedh ar y dro gane. In English thus: The Son of Ann crown'd, ends all our prophecies. We never had yet any King whose mothers name was Ann, but King Charles his mother was Ann, sister to the King of Denmark late deceased. The putting to death of the late King was prophecied of above 80 years before it was done, by Nostradamus, whose words were these: Senat de Londres mettront a mort leur Roy. In English thus: The Senate or Parliament of London shall put to death their K. There is another significant prophecie now extant, which hath been reserved in several Libraries of this Nation, even unto this day, which I shall here present, according to the Original, as followeth: Carolus Anglorum, ultimus Britannorum Rex. When one, named Charles, shall be King of the English, he shall be the last King of the Brittans.
Mr. Iohn Fox also foretels and shewes, the causes of the Northern Re∣bellion and in the year 1549. prophecied, That the time should come, when no King should reign in England, the Noblemen to be destroyed, and the Nation to be ruled by four Governours, to be elected and ap∣pointed by the Commons, holding a Parliament in Commotion, to begin at the South and North Seas of England. All the Kings that have reign∣ed in England since Wil▪ the Conquerour, have descended from his Issue; but this Prophet affirms, that in these dayes there shall be an end of his Line, and that his posterity shall fail of enjoying the Crown of England. Again, Remember M D. C. L X, Vand I, then ne're a REX. Calculated thus: In 1666, there will be no King here, or pretending to the Crown of England; For Charles the white King of Brittains Diadem, Shall most unfortunately lose his Realm By evill Counsel; and his Kingly head And life shall part from body, not in bed. His wife shall flee unto her native Nest, His Bearn's both rob'd of honour, means and rest, His son, successive to the Crown, shall be Enforced unto forraign parts to flee For ayd, his right and Crown for to regain; Many shall promise help, yet prove all vain And false to him; for thus it is decreed No King, from hence, shall rule on this side Tweed. An Irish man speaking of King Iames and his Issue, he bursts out. Et semen regis erit mendicum in terra aliena in aeternum, viz. The Off-spring of the King shall be poor, and for ever after live in a strange Country. So Merliu in an ancient Prophecie saith, That his seed shall become fatherless in a strange Land for evermore. Yet notwithstanding Prophet Carion (a German Writer) affirmeth, That the Church shall be restored and reformed by a Charles; and that there shall arise an Emperour named Charles, who shall rule imperially in Eu∣rope, by whom the decayed estate of the Church shall be reformed, and the ancient glory of the Empire again restored; for there shall come a people without an head, and then wo shall be unto Priests: Horrible mutations of
all Kingdome  then  hand; The beast of the West, and the Lyon of the East shall be  rule over all the world. This in no wayes reflects upon Charles Stuart. Nostradamus the ancient Prophet further saith, That there shall arise in the last times a Prince, sprung from the Emperour Charles, which shall recover the Land of Promise, and shall be Emperour of Europe. And Iohannes Amatus likewise saith, That in the latter dayes there shall be great wars and bloudshed, the fary of the wars shall last a long time, whole Provinces shall be left naked of Inhabitants, many Cities forsaken of people, the Nobility slaughter'd, the Gentry ruined, and great changes of Kings, Common wealths, and Rulers. The North prevaileth against the South, a learned and eloquent Prince, by little and little, shall attain the Empire; and a new King shall surmount all the rest, he shall make change of Religion, when he holds thereynes of the Empire. Somewhat neere these times also shall a great Eagle arise, and shall have power given him of the most High: He shall carry with him by Conquest three Kingdoms: He shall foyl the Lillies in the Land of Virgo; the Sun it felf shalt mourn with the Lyon, &c. By what I have delivered out of many reverend mens Prophecies, I onely evince thus much: That the late King Charles was not the Lyon of the North; or that his son, it that Charles, or that Eagle which the wise men of former times prophecied of; or that he shall act either such wonderful Deeds in war or peace, at the admirers of Grebners false printed prophecy would fasten upon him; who say, That a certain Northern King named Charles, who shall marry Mary of the Popish Religion, to his great unhappiness; so that his people re∣jecting him, shall set up an Earl of a very ancient Family, who shall con∣tinue three years or thereabouts; he dying, they shall elect in his stead a Warlike Knight, who shall rule a little longer; after him they shall e∣lect none. But in the mean while one of Charles his stock shal land on the Sea Coasts of his Fathers Kingdom, and with French, Swedish, Danish, Hol∣landian, Burgonian, and German Forces, in a most cruel Battel shall van∣quish all his Enemies, and afterward most happily govern his Kingdom, and be greater than Charles the Great. And about the year 1663. the King of the most ancient Britains, for the losse of some Ships at Sea, shall break his League and amity with the States of Holland; who fearing, shall have recourse unto the new King of Danes (named Christiernus) for succour, and he by fair intreaties and large gifts shall win ei he side to agreement. Nor doth he ever speak of England in all that samous Manuscript, but as the most warlike and potent Kingdom in Europe.
Therefore all good Christians ought to wish the new Warre were con∣cluded, rather by an happy agreement and composition, than by Sword and Musket, and the King placed on his Throne rather with the hands of his loving and rejoyceful Subjects, then with the Swords of Forraign∣ers. For if the beginning of his restauration be in blood, and tumbling of Garments in blood, the accomplishment of it will be with burning and fuel of fire. I shall not spend much time in confutation of these many untruths, and abusive Predictions, referring the Reader only unto: he true Ori∣ginal which I hereafter publish. The true Prophecy of Paul Grebner a German, presented to Queen Elizabeth. A Fatal necessity having torne and pull'd from the House of Austria the old Roman Scepter and Diadem, and after an oppression of the same Austrian House by the incursions of French, English, Danish, Swe∣dish, making their irruptions on all sides; there shall arise a horrid, bloo∣dy, sharp contest in Europe, which shall cruelly shake and break away part thereof, yea shall expose the same being strangely spoiled and dis∣membred to egregious alterations. A Swedish King then reigning, shall be invited to that quarrel to break in upon Pomerane, Mechlenburge, and some Provinces belonging to Denmark, being provoked by some offen∣sive Papers of the Romish See: whereunto if he shall hearken, he shall unseasonably and very unprosperously become an Allie to one that is most neer and intimate to him. Wherefore I advise the Swede to leave him in the same state wherein he findes him. By which meanes He, his Family and Posterity remaining contented with the bounds of their own natural Dominions shall preserve intire, and keep in good order and al∣legiance their own Subjects officiously disposed to peace and tranquillity. But if he shall in his heart propose to pervert his Subjects by fair perswa∣sions, God shall soon cut him off. And then from a Charles a great Charles shall obtain the Scepter, who with great success and prosperity shall reign over the Northern parts of the world; yea, the same Charles shall much break the Power and Tyranny of the Spaniard, and obtain a signal Victory over his Navy and Armadoe. And after the conjunction of his Forces with the States of Christendom He shall win a difficult, cruel Battel. After this, God shall remove his Popish Wife, to the great terror of the Bishop of Rome, who being incensed and stirred thereby, King Charles shall profess hastily against Antichrist, and joyning Forces
with the German and other Allies shall become enemy to Him, and the Crown of Spain both. At that time shall the Swede be very succesfull and perform admirable service against the Enemy with Men and Ships, as well by Land as by Sea. Out of the Manuscript of Paul Grebner of Sneburgh remaining in the Library of Trinity Colleage in Cambridge, given there by Queen Elizabeth. Another Prophecy taken out of a certain Library. AFter a certain time being past, the tayle of the Virgin shall enter the Lyon, and Scorpio shall ascend the back of Sagitary: the Nor∣thern Kingdoms shall be wasted by Reapers, the Southern Paincipalities shall end in dust, and the powers of the Island Monarchies without ei∣ther Bridle or Saddle shall be harnessed. Cruel Warres shall be scatter∣ed by the winds, and quell'd by a revengeful Hayle; whose beginnings were by a staffe, their growth and continuance by Bastards. The Sunne it selfe shall play on the Timbrel clad with a Vermilion Coat, and the Moon with Dun buskins, shall amble to the Faire. Laughest thou oh King? But those on whom these things shall come, for grief and sor∣row shall pine away. All these things shall scarce be accomplished, when a Prince of Royal stock shall come forth crowned from the Northern parts, as to his own people unexpected, but desired by forraigners; who because he shall bear a rampant Lyon, shall therefore be called a Lyon. He shall not rest, till having called a Synod, and after dissolved it by threats, he shall advance his conquering Armes against his Enemies, and by woful success shall harrasse the territories of neighbor Princes. He shall exceed Alexander the Great in vertue, and Cyrus in success: he shall passe the Seas, and be saluted Emperour by many Kings. A certain ancient City shall he say levell with the ground. In the mean while a Powerful Prince out of the East shall provoke him to battle, against whom the Lyon shall march with all his Forces, and pitching his Camp on this side Euphrates shall expect him. If the Prince shall come over the River, the Lyon shall be overcome; but he shall passe his Army o∣ver the River, and give his enemy a bloody defeat, and be Master of all the East. Whilst these things are in action, divers petty Kings from In∣dia shall break into Syria with mighty Armies, and provided for Battlle shall wait for the Lyon about the Valley of Iehosaphat, where they shal by him be all wholly cut off. Not long after shall the Wars shall
cease, after that, with eminent piety, he shall have established the King∣dom of Fugitives. Our Authour is now ingenuous, whilst he confesseth there is nothing more extant of this Scotish Merlines but this only peece. I would know of the wisest man living, how this Prophecy, (had it not seemingly tended to this purpose, we had not seen this rarity; but if we admit it once) can it any way prejudice our present State, or further the present Scotish King? for wherein is he nominated in this or Scotland it self? it rather seemes a general Prophecy of the last times. Certainly, had King Iames been a Warlike Prince, many things herein might be appropria∣ted unto him, but because of his extream cowardize, its fit not him: We know he was called the Lyon of the North, and that he procured the Synod of Dort; and how he was reputed righteous, &c. but it had no relation unto him, nor hath it any to the present Scotish King; the very words of the Prophecy are so significant, they need no refutation or fur∣ther exposiion, they agreeing wholly with many others in the sam thing, viz. That a certain Prince shall in the last times arise, who shall oe ver-run all Europe suddenly, and also destroy some Eastern Princes. To make an end of this Story, I shall conclude with the Prophecie of Sybilla Tiburtina, long since made publique unto the world. Which Prophecie of hers followeth: Orietur Sydus in Europe Supra Iberes admagnam Septentrionis domum, &c. In English thus: A Star shall arise in Europe over the Iberians, towards the great house of the North, whose beams shall unexpectedly enlighten the whole World. This shall be in a most acceptable time, when as mortal men being wearied with war and arms, shall unanimously be desirous to embrace peace. Certainly in those times it will be stoutly controverted, who shall be the best man, or unto whom the greatest Dominion may befall; du∣ring a vacancie of a Governour, and whilest there is an Interregnum or discontinuance of some prisoners. But at length the Off-spring of a most ancient Family prevails, and will proceed in a course of war, untill con∣trary Fortune overthrow him. For even at the same time, or near unto the setting of this Star, or dying of the Prince, signified by that Star, a light as ancient as the former shall break out, burning with more eager flames of war, and shall inlarge his Dominion unto the Coast of the An∣tipodes.
It hath been the onely labour of this Discourse all along, to manifest unto this Nation; first, That the present King of Scots is not that great Charles intended in Grebner, or any other Prophecy extanr either in Manuscript or in Print. Secondly, we have shewed from the writings of very famous men, of what Nation the Great Charles, or Lyon of the North shall be or Native of. Thirdly, we have examined the Prophecies both of the Scottish, Welch, and English Prophets, and from their Writings have discovered, That there are no more Kings to be expected to reign in England. We have much reason to believe their sayings shall prove true, having evidently beforehand known all or most of what they have prophecied to have exactly come to passe, even in our own dayes, and not before: I do neither add nor diminish unto them; I sparingly deliver my own conceptions, nor do I paraphrase upon the Prophecies, they are so plain and significant; there is not in any of these any the least mention of this present King of Scotland, nor is he called by the name of the Northern Lion, or is he designed to be the Man, who shall raise a fift universal Monarchy upon the earth. These are untruths and the fantasies of leud men. I know it will be expected I should say somewhat concerning this Northern Lion, who most assuredly shall appear unto the world, the Prodromus whereof was the Star, which appeared 1572. Many Authors or Manuscripts mentioning such a Lion, such a Northern Prince, or the Eagle of the North, the wonderful Eagle, or such a Man that shall in the latter times, or declining age of the world, do wonderful Acts in W, equalling, if not transcending all those we read of in the preceding Hi∣stories, either prophane or Divine; but they all unanimously proclaim a short reign, and a violent death, in his younger years; and to say the truth, there is scarce a Prophet or Man of any Nation in Europe, who hath been indued with Prophetick spirit, but he in some part of his works, or other, hath hinted at such a person, Emperor, or King; nay some have not been wanting to affirm his name, as you may see in the Chronicles of Magdeburg, testified by Carion in his third Book.
The wonderfull Year of the World. The certain year of these Monethly Predictions is not to be revealed, but such there will be in that great year, before the wonder∣ful Catastrophe of this world shall happen. Ianuary. A Showr of bloud shall rain continually for one houre space in one Land of Europe; that Reign or people thereof shall first come to destruction. February. All Nations troubled with rumours of wars, every Region preparing Armies, and mustering men, traffique generally prohibited by Land and by Sea, every Country inforced to live of their own stock and commo∣dities. March The main Sea shall hugely swell with mighty tempests and windes, so that the Sea-bankes in many places shall overflow their accustomed bounds, inundations universally or in every Country, one Island shall be quite overflown with the Sea, where the double Cross hath Govern∣ment, the sins of the Prince or Rulers thereof being so extreme high a∣gainst the Majesty of God. April. A terrible Sea-fight, such as hath not been before, occasioning the wa∣ter to look more red then the red Sea, the water all turn'd to bloud; England thou wilt have a share in this fight, God of his great goodnesse make thee victorious; after a hard fight thou shalt overcome. May. War and bloudshed over all the Earth, one Nation shall send so many men to the wars, that it shall for a time even be desolate of men, so that twelve women will be glad of one man: nay hardly procure one young men for them all. June. In the Eastern parts of the world a whole Nation shall fight a great
battle in a wrong cause, and defend an evil man; but the vengeance of God will rain down a showr of fire from the throne of Heaven, and con∣sume that Army wholly with all their wealth and treasures, even as they lodge in their Tents, &c. July. So great a drought will appear, that multitudes of people shall die in many places, for mere want of water; Soldiers shall not be able for heat to carry their arms; the Earth shall be so dry and parched with the Sun it shall yield no fruit to feed Cattle. August. Great plagues and Mortality will cover the whole face of the Earth, and so destroy Mankind, that there will not be sufficient Labourers to get in Harvest, or the fruits of the Earth; in this Month such swarms of noysome Fowls, and Flies shall come from the East, as they shall devour the Corn on the ground, the Fruit on Trees, that all shall be barren▪ Men living in those times, and in this Moneth, shall have more sorrow and woes, and more famine and distress, then was in Ierusalem when Titus besieged it. September. The season of this month will be so unnatural, and the Earth so unfit for Tillage, that all manner of Cattle will rat on the ground, which will breed such store of flies and vermine, that the earth will be empoysoned, and receive no Fruit to increase. October. A general Famine and dearth of Corn will overspread most Nations of Europe, so that the child shall sterve at her mothers breast, the mother having no food to nourish her self or child. November. One appears suddenly and unexpectedly a great Conqueror, the world filled with the Fame of this Man, who suddenly, like Augustus, gives peace unto the whole Earth. December. All wars end, Religion truly preached universally over the world, a ge∣neral peace, no more treason or rebellion; not long after the Trumpet founds, and Christ appears.
Divers Predictions upon the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, July 1623. 1 Divers sinister events shall seem to conspire together for the crossing of a great Prince, who by oppressing the common People, shall in the end drive them to sedition. This came to passe accordingly in K. Charles his Reign. 2 The conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in the House caelestial, called that of death, doth portend that some Prince shall be detained prisoner, to the great disadvantage of his affairs of Estate. 3 Ʋpon the first quarter of the Moon, which shall be the 27 of Februa∣ry, is foretold, That some King or Prince shall undertake a voyage of great consequence without certainty of return, which at the best shall be both later then expectation, and after the induring of many miseries. King Charles his succesless journey into Spain. 4 He which shall stand on the top of fortunes wheel, let him look warily to his feet, for fear of slipping; because so great a fall is threatned him, as shall astonish those who have climed up into the seats of honour unworthily. Read the Annalls of 1624. 1625. and 1626. 5 A Monarch that hath betrusted his affairs of great consequence to the direction of one, who was no way capable of so weighty a charge, shall be sen∣sible of the great fault he hath committed, whereof he shall too late repent. King Charles relying on Canterbury and other silly fellowes makes this good. 6 The stirrers and Incendiaries of sedition shall make residence in the Houses of Kings and Princes. 7 War deferr'd through want of money. 8 The Land and Town Geminist shall bewail the want of her Son. Lon∣don here is intended. 9 There shall be great levying of Souldiers for the execution of some stra∣tagem, but all shall turn to nothing; for the sudden departure of a great Per∣sonage shall cause much murmuring and discontent. It intends the private raising of Horse in Germany, &c. 10 Men disguised shall desire that their outward semblance may make shew of that which they are not, and shall be the Authours of many particular Combats in the Land Geminist. Thus much was in the old Manuscript.
Because I would give full satisfaction unto the three Nations of Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland, and beat all our Enemies with their own weapons, viz. with real Prophecies, give me leave to repeat a Scotish Prophecy. Priscae Scotorum Prophetiae. 1 Scotland be sad now, and lament thy Child whom thou hast lost: Bereft of Kings, falsly undone by thy unkindly Host. 2 Alas, the free, bond is become, and deceit is thy fall; Thy falshood to the Brutish race has brought thee into thrall. 3 The Grave of the most Noble Prince to all is great regrate, Not subject to Law, who doth leave the Kingdom and estate. 4 Oh anguish great, where every kind and age doth lament, Whom bitter death has tane away, shall Scotland sore repent. 5 Lately a Land of rich increase, a Nation stout and true, Has lost their former dear estate, which they did hold of due: 6 By hard conflict and by chance of Mobile fortunes force Thy hap and thy prosperity is turned into worse. 7 Thou wnt to win, now art subdu'd and come in under Yoke: A stranger reignes, and doth destroy what likes with swords stroke. 8 The English race, whom neither force nor manner do approve; Woe is to thee, by guilt and slight is only win above. 9 The mighty Nation was to fore invincible and stout. Has yielded lewe to destiny, great pitty is but doubt. 10 In former age the Scots renown did flourish goodly gay, But now alas is overcled with a great dark decay. 11 Then mark and see what is the cause of this so wondrous fall; Contempt of faith, falshood, deceit, the wrath of God withall. 12 Ʋnsatiable greedy of worlds gain, oppression, cries of poor Perpetual, a slanderous race, no justice put in ure. 13 The haughty pride of mighty men, of former vice chief cause, The nurtriture of wickedness, and unjust match of Laws. 14 Therefore this case the Prophets old, of long time did presage, As now has happened every point into this present age. 15 Since fate is so, now Scotland learn in patience to abide Slanders, great fears, and suddain Plagues, and dolers more beside. 16 For out of thee shall people rise, with divers happiness: And yet a Pen can scarcely write thy hurt, skath and distress. 17 The English Nation shall invade, &c.
The Prophecy of Queen Ann (Queen of Scotland) Mother to the late King, concerning his Maj and his three Kingdoms. Charles Stuart, late King of England, was born at Dumferlin in Scot∣land, 19. Novem. 1600. he lived 48 years, and about 72 dayes: He died in the beginning of his Climacterical year, fatal many times where killing directions in the Nativity threaten: He came to the Crown being aged 24 years, and about 4 moneths, and was noted to be very wilful and ob∣stinate by Queen Ann his mother; who hearing that he was sick and like to die, said, He would not then die, or at that time, but live to the ruine of himself, and occasion the loss of his three Kingdoms, by his too much wilful∣ness. A sad prediction from a Mother, who most intirely loved him; but it proved very true in the sequel. Yet while he was young he follow∣ed his book seriously, which his elder brother Prince Henry could not en∣dure; and therefore King Iames would frequently blame Prince Henry with the neglect of his book, and tell him how his brother Charles fol∣lowed it; whereupon the Prince would reply, When that he himself should be King, he would make his brother Charles Archbishop of Canter∣bury. Examined by the Original Papers, sent from the Ʋniversity of Cambridge; and other Li∣braries in England and Scotland, Licensed and published by Authority; and now pre∣sented to publike view, (together with a de∣scription of the Wonderfull Year of the World) to the end, that this Treatise may be dispierced throughout all Cities and Mar∣ket Towns in England and Wales. FINIS.
