L3314 E1905_1 99868842 170544
THE ENCHANTED LOVERS: A PASTORAL By Sr. WILLIAM LOWER Knight. Amico Rosa, Inimco Spina. HAGE: Printed by ADRIAN VLACK, 1658.
ACTORS. Thersander. A Cavalier disguised in the ha∣bit of a Shepheard in love with Diana. Thimantes. Disguised also in the habit of a Shepheard in love with Is∣menia. Clidamant. Disguised also in the habit of a Shepheard in love with Par∣thenia. Melnitus. A Shepheard of the Iland in love with Diana. Mercator. — A Merchant of Sevil. Diana. A young Lady disguised in the habit of a Shepheardesse Parthenia. Neece to the Princess, in love with Clidamant. Ismenia. A young Lady disguised in the habit of a Shepheardess. Molissa. The Princess of the Island, and Inchantress, in love with Thersander. The Goddess Diana. The Scene is in the Iland of Erithrea in Portugal.
THE ENCHANTED LOVERS. A PASTORAL. ACTUS I. SCENE I. MERCATOR, MELINTUS. MERCATOR. IF you have any service to command me At Sevil, honour me with your Com∣mission, To morrow I embarke, and leave the Ile, Until you Mart returns, and games renue. MELINTUS. But first you'l kisse the fair hands of the Nimph, And take her pasport with you? MERCATOR. That's a duty I dare not fail in, though my interest Were not concern'd in't. I intend this day
To carry her my casket of my richest And choicest merchandise; when she hath bought What best pleaseth her fancy, I shall be Dismist, having no more commodities To sell unto the Shepheards of her Court. MELINTUS. Have you sold well? MERCATOR. To what end should I feign? The trade goes well enough, I complain not: Rich Rubies, Pearls of price, bright Diamonds, Store of fair Coral, costly Amber-greece, Portraits, and other such dainty devises, Have passed through my fingers at good rates: Diana's festival is still kept solemn; And as the games which fail not every year To be renu'd, invite unto those woods The neighbouring Shepheards, to dispute the prizes Proposed on those dayes, I saw among them Some noble strangers clad in pastoral weeds That for the honour of this Island chose it Their sanctuary and repose. MELINTUS. You need not Wonder at this, the place which they have chosen Denotes their judgments; here ambition Hath no imployment; if at any time We sigh here, 'tis for love, no other passion Is seen among us; though this Island be A part of Portugal, we have our laws, And Empire to our selves; she that rules here Hath not the name of Queen, we subjects are Our Soveraigns companions, and her vertue Makes us to taste so much repose, that she
Hath put the Sheephook into the hands of A hundred Hero's, who wearied with Lawrels, And the noise of the war, are here retir'd From the four corners of the World: She rules So sweetly, that crime onely feels her anger. And as she is descended from the blood Of Zoroastres, she knows well the vertue Of Herbs, and th' influence of every star; She understands the secret misteries Of Magick, and sometimes makes use of it To serve her interests; there is no Prince Nor Monarch that stands not in fear of her. And suffereth her not to raign in peace For his own safety. MERCATOR. I know this Asyle, And charming residence looks not with envy Upon the Court o' th' King of Portugal; Besides I am not ignorant that the fair Ismenia, drawn here, by the sweet report, Of these inchanting pleasures, to enjoy them In quiet, left the favour of her Queen; And that this beauty by a sudden change, Adds no small lustre to this Paradise. MELINTUS. See where she comes, Diana too with her, I must in private speak unto this fair one; An interest of love obligeth me Continually to make her my devotions. MERCATOR. Go Sir, and prosper, may your Saint prove sweet And gentle as those South-gales I expect In my embarkment.— Exit Mercator.
SCENA II. DIANA, MELINTUS, IS MENIA. DIANA not seeing MELINTUS. DIANA. TRue, I hate that horrid noise; Now my free thought releas'd from such a trouble, Enjoyes it self. MELINTUS to DIANA. So soon to quit the sports, What was your fancy? DIANA. To avoid discourse That troubled me, and here I meet with new. MELINTUS. Can such a subject as brings homage to you, Produce th' effect you speak? DIANA. What doth not please me, Both troubles and offends me. MELINTUS. You will one day Quit those disdainful rigours? DIANA. Yes, when you Have neither hope, nor love. MELINTUS. D'ye entertain Every one thus that loves you? DIANA. If he be such As you, I use him just in the same manner. MELINTUS. Surely the Shepheard Clidamant speeds better.
DIANA. 'Tis then assuredly because he doth not Resemble you. MELINTUS. He entertain'd discourse. With you in gentle whispers at the Sports. DIANA. I do confess it, We talk'd of you, and of your little skill. MELINTUS. Your subject was more serious, without doubt. DIANA. What e'r it was. yours, I am sure, offends me. Remove this hated object from mine eyes; Your presence will at last provoke my anger. MELINTUS. Can one displease you, speaking of your Loves? Thou Husband'st for him that so sweet dis∣course. ISMENIA. Every one knows that who but speaks Melintus, Speaks jealous. MELINTUS. It is no secret what men think of thee; Every one knows, that who speaks but Ismenia, Speaks cocket. ISMENIA. Really thou hast much reason To be afflicted at that late discourse, Clidamant merits much, and I'le oblige him. DIANA. Leave us. MELINTUS. He doth expect you, and I trouble you; But wee'l find out a way to cross his fortune.
DIANA to ISMENIA He thinks that Clidamant enjoys my love. ISMENIA. Thou hast no reason, Shepheardess, to draw him Out of his errour: in the mean time wilt thou Not yield thee to the faithful services, The prayers and tears of the devout Thersander? Wilt thou not love him yet? he that encourag'd By thy fair presence, only to please thee, Hath gain'd so many prizes, who to give Thy anger no pretence, thought he loves much, Can more be silent, since the ardent flame Where with he burns for thee, is only known, To me, unto Thimantes, and thy self. DIANA. Ne'r speak unto me of it. ISMENIA. What! still cruel? But hearken, I will give thee an advise Shall touch thee; whilst we may, we should lay hold of The flying time; he only maketh beauties, And he destroys them; in the lovely season That thine lasts, use the gifts which nature gives thee; Thou wilt one day lose this fair lustre which So charmeth hearts, and be an object of Comtempt, as now thou art of adoration. DIANA. Rather that love, whose Orator thou art, Yet know'st his use so little, doth times office; 'T is he that withereth a face; the cares, The troubles and the griefs, which by his means Possess a heart, deface the lovely features, And mow the flowers▪ he is like time the Tyrant Of all things; he in a few dayes dryes up Our Roses, and our Lillies.
ISMENIA. Shepheardess, Such fear hath smal foundation, quit this thought For thy own interest; when love is once Lodg'd in the heart, the ey hath then more light The face receiveth thence its full perfection; Then we esteem us, then we please our selves, And know out utmost value, we correct By art even to the least defect, we call Our Glass to counsel in the ordering Our gate, our carriage, and our countenance; There our eye cheers with smiles, or kills with frowns, Or faintly darts its glances, or with strength, Either to wound neer hand, or further of; Therefore once more for thy own interest, I say unto thee, love, at least a little, Thersander that adores thee. DIANA. Really, Thou dost surprise me, to speak thus unto me, Thou that hast never yet had love, nor thought Tending to that sick passion, thou that mak'st So many Lovers only for thy glory, Without remembring one of them, thou that Pleasest thy self by turns in their discourse, Thou that wilt gain all, & conserve thee nothing. Thou sufferest Thimantes to adore thee To day; but tell me wilt thou entertain His love to morrow? ISMENIA. I love, but I have alwayes had my method In love, the Lover that is troublesome Unto me, is my Lover for a day; I burn not yet for love, not do I sigh for't: I make a sport on't still, but ne'r a torment; In thrusting no one of, I'm every day Attended by a multitude of servants That present courtship to me, and all strive
Who shall be formost, on whom I command And raign as Princess; they suppose they please me In putting up my praises; when I go Unto the Temple, they fail not to follow, And carefully to tread in all my steps. I am not pleas'd to see in such brave Shepheards A troop of slaves attending on my train; I please them all in flattering their desires: I'm much delighted, when I make them jealous, Provided that their jealousy extend not So far as, to betake themselves to arms For th' honour of my beautyl; this high point Of evidences might, perhaps, enrage Even all my other lovers. DIANA. Ha! how ill Thou know'st love, and his maximes, I behold Thy changes as so many crimes; for my part, If my heart were ta'ne with an object once, I could not pass from love unto contempt; I should be fix'd unto my first Idea, And that God wholly should possess my thoughts. ISMENIA. Well then, Diana, love, if thou think'st fit, Beyond the grave, and make so fait a fire Arise beneath thy ashes. DIANA. Oh, alas! ISMENIA. What signify those sighs? DIANA. They signify The sorrow of the heart.
ISMENIA. But whence proceeds That sorrow? is it from thy brothers death, Or from some lovers? come, deal plainly with me, Dost thou not love Thersander yet at last? DIANA. No, I assure thee. ISMENIA. Speak, I'm very secret. DIANA. I'le tell thee then, in Sevil I receiv'd Both life and love, Cleagenor, Ismenia, Is the name of the Conquerour, whose image Is graven in my heart. ISMENIA. O Gods! how this discourse Hath cosened my thought, I was about To give instructions; — but pursue. DIANA. Our parents Approv'd our love, and the day for our marriage Already was appointed, when Nearchus, Provoked by an infamous desire, Came to solicit me unlawfully In favour of his flame; this favourite Unto the King after a passion painted, And coloured with sighs, called his presents To the assistance of his faith; but this Proving effectless, he resolv'd my ruin; He came with open force to satisfy His beastly and unruly appetite; And to that end would carry me away. My Mother having notice at that instant Of his design, made me to take a drink, To frustrate it, and then, her subt'le policy
Spread through the Town the rumour of my death: Indeed the vertue of this drink procur'd me So long a sleep, that it appear'd to be The sleep of death; Nearchus terrified With this sad news, came to behold it painted Upon my face; remorse of conscience Within his heart then, quarrel'd with his love: His sad despair arm'd him to kill himself: But whilst his soul was troubled herewith, I was conveyed secretly into A Bark; scarce had I yet finish'd my sleep, But at my first waking I saw my self Upon the Sea. My Mother then related The whole adventure to me, and the secret Imposture of my feigned death, when suddenly A storm brake the discourse, horrour and death March'd on the floods: alas, what shall I say? Our vessel being carried by the fury O'th' winds and waves, was split upon a rock, The several pieces floated on the waters; I know not which o'th' Gods took care of me In putting one under my trembling hand, Which making me pass on those moving graves Through the disturbed empire of the winds, Carried me to the shore in all apparence Devoid of life; here in this quiet Island Of Erithrea where Melissa raigns My body found a receptacle; she Returning at that instant from the chase, Perceiv'd it lying, which th'enraged Sea Yet threatened on its banks, and that same God. Which would compleat his miracle, inclin'd Her heart to pitty at this spectacle: She caus'd me to be carried to her Court: It is unto her succour that I owe
The remnant of my dayes: here I first chang'd My name, the better to assure my flight, And so to disappoint Nearchus pursuit. ISMENIA. How Shepheardess, is not thy Name Diana? DIANNA. No, Celia was my true and only name; But for my safety I made to Metissa A feign'd relation of the miseries Of my sad life; since she receiv'd me Into her palace, where I live with her, And am now of her Court. Seven times the Sun Hath finish'd his Carier, since I have seen, Or heard news of my mother. ISMENIA. Was Cleagenor Inform'd of all this? DIANA. Oh, alas! this is One of the point that causeth my affliction: Cleagener surprised by the same Imposture, came to see me in my bed, As in my grave: I wonder that the noise Of his redoubled cryes brake not my sleep: The heat to revenge me dry'd all his tears: He found his rival, and assaulted him; They fought on equal terms; Nearchus fell Under his arms for dead; Cleagenor was forc'd to fly t'avoid the fury of Th'offended King: his sudden flight gave not My Mother oportunity t' inform him (As she intended) with the fiction Of my pretended death: since his departure 'Tis now seven years compleat, in all which time I've heard no news of him; so that I know not Whether I mourn the living, or the dead;
In the mean time to weep my fate more freely, And to conceal my miserable fortune, I feign'd a Brothers death. ISMENIA. I'm sensible Of thy misfortune, and will bear a part In thy sad grief, if that will make it lesse; I no more now condemne thy sighs, nor tears; But yet at last preserve thy beauty from Those murthering sorrows; in this doubtfull case Fix thy fair thoughts upon some other object; If death hath seiz'd thy Servant, sure thou losest Too many tears and sighs; or grant he live, Ist probable that he will keep his constancy For thee whom he thinks dead? but here's my Lover. SCENA III. THIMANTES, DIANA, ISMENIA. ISMENIA to THIMANTES. WHat busines brings thee hither? THIMANTES. Here I come A little to divert my thought. DIANA. What thought? THIMANTES. 'Tis a disease which doth assault my sense. ISMENIA. What ist, without more circumstance? THIMANTES. My plaint Without words would express it; at the sports Too many Shepheards had unto my grief
Too long thy free ear, and perhaps, thy heart; A World of people pressed round about thee: The Shepheard Dorilas, me thought, discours'd Too long with thee, I saw so many others Prostrated at thy foot — ISMENIA. Without more words Thimantes is become a jealous fool. Since thou wilt love me, learn to know me well: Thimantes I am free, and will no Master; I'le ne'r depend on any but my self. Tell me, I pray thee, did I ever promise To speak to none but thee? dost thou imagine So vainly, that thou art the only Lover That serves me? have not I yet some which ought To be conserv'd? and amongst all the Shepheards, Whose faith I have receiv'd, if I should open My mouth and eyes on none of them but thee, And that one of those dayes thy mind should change; And mine change too, (as all this well may happen) Would all the others, jealous of this kindness Express'd to thee thus in particular, Be still my Lovers, though I had lost thee? And if my liberty were not expos'd For all, which of them would commiserate My fortune in thy losse; I think upon Th'event of things, which thou canst not assure: At least if one quits me, another takes me: Consider if this humour pleaseth thee, If thou canst serve me all thy life time thus, And not be jealous; if thou canst, hope one day Both mouth and hand, and happily the heart May flatter thy affection.
THIMANTES. This way Seems very strange unto me, but almost Every fair evening some appointed place Of meeting seems t'assure me of thy love Sufficiently, and not to flatter me With frivolous hope. ISMENIA. Yet hitherto it is But airy words. THIMANTES. I hope all things from time In waiting for that day, our names engraven In every place, will speak my love, Ismenia, I promise— ISMENIA. But no more, here comes Thersander; That Shepheard, whose enflamed heart thine eyes Hath rendered as hes— DIANA. Well Ismenia, I leave you. ISMENIA. This is too much rigour, trust me, At least afford the face, if thou deny'st The heart. SCENA IV. THERSANDER, DIANA, THI∣MANTES, ISMENIA. THERSANDER to DIANA. OH stay, dear object stay, thou that art cause Of all my torments, I have but one word To say before I dye, the Nimph hath crown'd My valour with these prizes, here I come
To lay them at thy feet, with them my heart: If thou wilt triumph on this festival day. Suffer at least thy conquest in thy sight, That's all th' ambition of this captive heart. DIANA. Captive to me? if so, make it change Master, I freely do release it; break its chain Thy self, if thy design be not to have me Free it with my own hand. THERSANDER. Alas! it is not Its liberty that I desire. DIANA. Then let it Live still a slave, and sigh. THERSANDER. How, Shepheardess! Refuse a heart, this precious present which Is alwayes worth a Temple, and the Gods! Think well upon it, it becomes thy justice Not to despise this noble sacrifice, Since I give but the same victime and incense Unto the powers above; in my opinion Our Goddess in the Temple is less fair, And thou dost bear the bright name of Diana, As well as she. DIANA. Since this rich present is Of such high value, as 'tis worthy of A Temple and the Gods, I believe, Shepheard, That it becomes my justice not t'accept This noble sarifice, and I should wrong Our puissant Gods in daring to partake Their glory, and to share their incense with them, My name's Diana, to thy eyes I'm fair; But I am not a Goddess like to her.
THERSANDER. Although thou hast no Temple, nor no Altars, Thou mak'st thy self adored; 'tis to day Thy festival which I have celebrated: I have no other worship, nor no other Diana, the fire of my love is not A profane fire, and if some spark thereof Warm not thy breast a little, I must suffer The violent heat on't DIANA. Rather I advise thee, Quench it with my contempts, this remedy Will cure thee, that thou shalt complain no more. THERSANDER. Good Gods! what remedy is this which thou Offerest me here? I must dye, shepheardess, If thou cur'st so; flatter at least, I pray thee, With on sole word the love which thou hast rais'd; If I'm, not happy, make me think I am so. Alas! I cannot hear a single syllable To succour me; if thus thou curest, Shephear∣dess. I must dye, there is no prevention for't ISMENIA. Why carriest thou a heart still so rebellious To love? THIMANTES, Why dost thou persecute with scorn This faithful Shepheard? DIANA. It is best be gone. THERSANDER. Yet thrust of thy disdain, if thou wilt spare My hand, my death, finish the forming of
The sword that kils me, one word more of hate, And I die presently before thine eys; Speak, answer me. ISMENIA. No more, here comes the Nymph. DIANA. Happy arrival, which hath freed me from So great at touble! THERSANDER. Well for my part then, I'le try the temper of the marble rocks: My plaints may pierce them, though they could not move A Virgins heart to pitty, much lesse love. SCENA V. MELISSA, PARTHENIA, DIANA, ISME∣NIA, THIMANTES, CLIDA∣MANT, MELINTUS. MELISSA. SInce a full year and more that I have govern'd This happy Island in the right and lawful Line and succession of my Ancestours By the death of my Sister, and since first Diana's feasts were celebrated here, Never so many Laurels crown'd your heads, Nor ever any day ordain'd for pastime Hath entertain'd mine eyes with such delight. Every one striving to bear hence the prize Propos'd to his contention, shew'd his skill, Both at the Course and Lute; how hand somly Thersander did behave him at these exercises! With what a grace he acted every thing! How charming was his port! and if I may
Say what I think of him, he must be sprung Either from Kings or Gods; how happy is Thimantes in his friendship! THIMANTES. This happiness which I enjoy's not new, It hath a longer date then from to day: His name is precious to me; 't was my fortune To have the benefit of his acquaintance At my last voyage, I saw his arrival Form his own native country at the Court O'th King of Portugal; the sympathy Of humors which one man hath with another Tied us together in so firm a friendship That having met him sad and full of thought, I prevail'd with him as to bring him here, In hope that in this quiet region where Melissa reigns, he should lose all his grief. MELISSA. Indeed although that prosperous Shepheard hath Received all the prizes from my hand Wherewith he's crown'd, I find him notwith∣standing Stil melancholy may not this be in him Some sad effect of love, blest Shepheardess, Who e'r thou art! thrice happy is thy fortune, In which this noble stranger bound his choice! He is so far above the common merit, That a Nymph should not much abase her self In loving him. CLIDAMANT. Indeed he merits much, And we esteem him all, we love his vertues, Without being jealous of them. PARTHENIA. Clidamant Comes nothing short of him in my opinion.
ISMENIA. Thimantes too will go as far as he. DIANA. Another time, Melintus without doubt Will perform better. MELINTVS. Yes, when you shal turn Your eys on that side. MELISSA. Shepheards, once again Prepare, I pray you, for the Nuptials Of Thirsis with Parthenia; Neece, that Shepheard Is worthy of you, and you are not ignorant That I intend, as soon as he returns, To make him (as I hope) your happy husband. PARTHENIA. aside Yes, if my heart can suffer violence. MELISSA. In the mean time, let's go unto the Temple. Our thanks and our devotions to pay Vnto the Gods on this so glorious day. The end of the first Act.
ACTUS II. SCENA I. ISMENIA, THERSANDER, THIMANTES. ISMENIA. 'TIs true, Thersander, I have done for thee Asmuch as possibly I could, I made Thy sighs, thy constancy, thy faith appear For to perswade her, but I lost my labour, Diana is insensible, her heart, Which loves sweet applications cannot touch, Among so many rocks, is become rock. THERSANDER. What shall I doe, Thimantes? what a rude And rigorous fortune steers my destiny? THIMANTES. Quit that ingrateful, and come forth of slavery THERSANDER. How shall I come forth? I'm born miserable Under the frowning, and the fatal aspect Of an ungentle Star, Which in despight Of all my studies to defend me from it; Pursues Cleagenor under the name Of poor Thersander. ISMENIA. Softly. What is that I hear! Good Gods! THIMANTES. Thersander, what haft thou discover'd? Hath thy own mouth betrayed thus thy secret? See into what great danger thy imprudence Puts thee at present; fearest thou no more, Nearchus, and his power?
THERSANDER. No, I fear nothing After this sentence, but seek death, for since It is resolv'd by fate that I must die, What matter is it, by what arm it be, Whether Nearchus, or Diana kill me. ISMENIA. Oh Gods! how happy is he? — softly. Hath not she For whom thou diest had some intelligence That thy heart loves elsewhere? if it be so, And that thy inconstancy procures thy torment, Thou wrongfully accusest her of cruelty. THERSANDER. Quite contrary, this love therewith thou seest My heart disturb'd, is a sure testimony Of my fidelity: 'tis true, alas! I sometime lov'd an object of such beauty, That the Gods never fram'd so fair a peece: The Roses and the Lillies form'd the colour Which dy'd her cheeks, and in hersparkling eys The Sun was painted; to express unto thee Yet better her divine perfections. Diana is her Portrait to the life Celia is seen in her; she like Diana Had a Magestick carriage, she had A mouth, and eys like her, she had an air, Fierce too like hers, but amiable; lastly In every thing she seem'd Diana's self: My heart is constant therefore as before, Since still I love her in her living Portrait. I thought at first then, that her death was false, And that Diana was that lovely object; But when I few Diana entertain With such contempt the fervent love wherewith
My heart was taken, when I saw her rigours, And infinite hatred, I perceiv'd my errour, And said this is not Celia; so that I saw well by her cruelties indeed That I pursu'd her picture, and had passion But for a Portrait. ISMENIA. What! is Celia dead then? THERSANDER. Alas! that's my affliction, I saw her Stretch'd out upon her death-bed dead, Ismenia; And more dead yet then she, I saw those places Shine with a certain rest of brightness which Her eyes had darted; presently on this I had a Combat with Nearchus for This charming Beauty; that proud favourite Unto the King by infamous desires, Form'd him an object to his filthy pleasures, This outrage was intended to her sweetness: We fought on this occasion, it was My fortune to disarm him; but the death Of Celia, and the anger of the King, (To save me from the rigor of the Law) Enforc'd me to a flight, and made me wander Seven year from Province unto Province: last∣ly Wearied to see the Court of every Prince, I thought to free me of all dangers here Under the feign'd name of Thersander, and The habit of a Shepheard: to disguise me Yet better, the afflictions of my heart Have chang'd my Visage. ISMENIA. Hast thou nothing with thee That formerly was Celia's?
THERSANDER. Yes, one day I receiv'd from her hand this pretious pledge Of her unfeigned love, behold this Portrait, And judge, I pray thee, if I love Diana, Or Celia. ISMENIA. Let me have this Portrait; with it I'l cure thy evil, Diana seeing it Will become gentle, I'l go shew it her. THERSANDER. What wilt thou do, Ismenia? but I see Diana: O Gods! end my misery. SCENA II. DIANA, THERSANDER, ISMENIA, THI∣MANTES. DIANA. I Sought thee every where.—to Ismenia. THERSANDER. You will oblige me,—to Ismenia. Ismenia, to restore my Portrait to me. ISMENIA Troublesome Shepheard! I have much to say—to Diana To thee in private, therefore let us enter Into this Wood.— Exit Ismenia and Diana. THERSANDER Shew her that Portrait! oh my martyrdom! Traitrous Ismenia, is this that faith For which Thimantes alwaies answered To me for thee? yes it is by thy counsels, Thimantes, only that my seduc'd soul
Left her the conduct of my faithfull love; Nothing from thee or me can work upon her, She jeers at all; but let us find her out. Exit Thersander and Thimantes. Ismenia returns with Diana. ISMENIA. I see w'are private here, we may speak freely. A Mistress yet at last sighs for Thersander, And one too in this Island far lesse cruel Then thee; accept his service, and embrace His faith: this portrait which thou seest here, He receiv'd from her as a faithfull witness Of their reciprocal and mutual fires. DIANA. What do I see? ISMENIA. That portrait (as I take it) Whereof Thersander is so proud. DIANA. I gave Such a one to Cleagenor; Ismenia, Who gave it thee? ISMENIA. Cleagenor himself. DIANA. O Gods! what saiest thou to me? thou art in An extream errour. ISMINIA. I tell thee again Cleagenor himself gave it to me DIANA. This discourse holds no credit. ISMENIA. Every day Almost I see him, and thou seest him also
As well as I. DIANA. I comprehend not these obscurities. ISMENIA. He loves thee, and thou fliest him. DIANA. I fly None but Thersander. ISMENIA. Well, henceforth accuse None but thy self of these disasters, 'tis The same Cleagenor that loveth thee, And whom thou fli'st. DIANA. Cleagenor! Ismenia; That cannot be, is't possible that I Should have been two moneths without know∣ing him, For so long 'tis since he arriv'd among us. ISMENIA. Thy grief hood-winck'd thine eys, thou couldst not see him. Think'st thou that since those seven years thou hast liv'd Upon those fair banks, time that changeth all things, Hath not yet chang'd a face? there comes Ther∣sander; Take a full survey of him, whilst I hold him In some discourse; make shew as if thou'd sten∣ter Into that Wood, and have a care thou do not Discover thee till I have ordered Thy meeting with him.
DIANA. Happy pledge of love! Entring into the Wood. SCENA III. THERSANDER, THIMANTES, ISMENIA, DIANA. THERSANDER to THIMANTES. THou seest what she hath done; unto Diana Sh' 'as given the Portrait. THIMANTES. See she enters there Into that Wood. ISMENIA. A word with thee Thersander, THERSANDER. Perfidious, finish here thy crime, and be My murtherer; strike, strike this heart, I pray thee, That hopes no more; but by what interest Hast thou betrai'd me? ISMENIA. Why complainest thou? THERSANDER. O gross dissimulation! dar'st thou yet To ask what is my plaint? DIANA. He hath his gate. Softly, looking on him, where she was hidden. ISMENIA. Thy heat hears nothing, give me leave to speak. THERSANDER. Yes, to feign more, and to lie at thy pleasure, Am I oblig'd stil to thee for my life?
ISMENIA. How soon love doth degenerate into folly? THIMANTES. Thersander, hear her. THERSANDER. What is't she can say? ISMENIA. Since th'art so obstinate, let thy love go Which way it will, I'l have no more to do in't. THERSANDER. Speak then, what wilt thou? ISMENIA. I have nought to say now. THIMANTES. Thou would'st speak to him. ISMENIA. 'Twas to laugh a little. THIMANTES. I pray thee, speak unto him. THERSANDER. I conjure thee, Ismenia, in the name of all the Gods, Jeer not my Passion. ISMENIA. It is now my turn To be perverse. THERSANDER. I hear thee, speak, what sai'st thou? ISMENIA. Since thou wilt have it, know then that a Rival Hath caus'd thy grief and torments. THERSANDER. How, a Rival! At that Word I'm all fire, a Rival!
ISMENIA. Yes, A Rival, good Thersander, but a lov'd one. THERSANDER. What! loved of Diana? ISMENIA. Yes of her, And more too, of thy self. THERSANDER. That's very strange; How should I chuse but bear a mortal hatred To him my Mistress loves; who e'r he be, I must revenged die. DIANA Softly. If this should be Cleagenor, O Gods! how is he chang'd? THERSANDER. Where is that Rival? ISMENIA. With thee, Thersander; Thou would'st defend him, if occasion were, At the expence of all thy blood; believe me, Thou never leavest him. THERSANDER. Without dissembling, —to Thimantes Tell me Thimantes, art not thou that Rival, She means? I think thou art my friend, deal plainly And freely with me, art not thou that cruel, That false and traiterous Rival? THIMANTES. Answer him, Ismenia. THERSANDER. Well, what wilt thou say at last?
ISMENIA. Thersander hath for Rival in his love.— THERSANDER. Speak, whom? ISMENIA. Cleagenor, THERSANDER. Cleagenor! Ismenia, ha! my joy, sure, is extream; True, I confess, I love this Rival equal Unto my self, and if he may be loved Of th' object whom I serve, I will adore My chains Without condemning her of ri∣gour. ISMENIA. Thou hast lost nothing by this bout, thy for∣tune May create envy, fair Diana hath Yielded to Celia's portrait. DIANA. Softly, Who, to see Those decay'd features, could have known that face? But my love hath at last drawn them afresh Within my memory; I must draw neer him, And yield to my impatience. THERSANDER, to ISMENIA. Pardon me, I can't believe thee; but here comes Diana; See if her eys ha' n't the same cruelty, Alwaies the same pride, and the same disdain. DIANA. Ismenia, I am come to tell thee something. ISMENIA. Me Celia?
THERSANDER. How, Celia? ISMENIA. Yes, Celia. THERSANDER. Alas! I'm in an error; 'tis her eyes. Her gate, her countenance, but not her heart. ISMENIA. 'Tis she, Thersander, whom thou do'st behold, It is very self. THERSANDER. How! is't a custome To call forth from the bosom of the Grave Departed souls? and by what priviledge Hath that God, who at the eternal sleep Presides, ordain'd her waking? DIANA, to THERSANDER. Though thy faith Finds this point strange, is not love strong e∣nough To make thee to believe a Miracle? Cleagenor sees me, and knows me not: How comes it, is my Portrait false? have J No more artractions? see if't be thy Celia, At least if't be not she; it is no more That beauty which was late so cruel to thee; Cleagenor! THERSANDER. My Celia! DIANA. Is it possible, O Gods! that J should see again what J Best love i' th' World? THERSANDER. Is it you that J see?
ISMENIA. Take heed, be moderate, one may die with joy. THIMANTES. Ismenia, follow this example here; Grant only at this instant but a kisse To my impatience, see at last Diana Ceaseth to be unkind. ISMENIA. What! doth the object rouse thee, and th' ex∣ample Provoke thy spirits? thou wilt have but one kiss? THIMANTES. I will be satisfied. ISMENIA. Give me then Some verses, or at least a nose gay of The choicest flowers. THIMANTES. Ismenia, I'l not fail To bring them thee. ISMENIA. Then trouble not thy self, The kisse is thine. THIMANTES. Wilt thou with hold from me So long what is my due? ISMENIA. It will be better When it is much expected, and long'd for. THERSANDER. Behold my whole adventure in few words. DIANA. I've made thee too a full description Of my misfortunes thou seest how I feign'd (To give my grief full vent) a Brothers death
In weeping of my lovers. THERSANDER. What felicity Do I injoy now? THIMANTES. Use your utmost skil To make it lasting to you, and beware of The fickleness of fortune, and her wrongs. THERSANDER. What! have we yet any thing more to fear? Is not that blind inconstant Goddess weary Of persecuting us? THIMANTES. Love is a child, He must be govern'd well, Diana's beauty Hath gain'd her lovers, they may hurt, Thersan∣der; Melintus hath a subtle wit, and we Both know he loves Daina, and besides Is jealous of her; fear some foul play from him, If thou appear his Rival; he disposeth The spirit of Melissa at his pleasure; When he shall see you serve as obstacle Unto his love, he will take speedy order For your removal. THERSANDER. But to hinder him To hurt me, I conceive Diana hath No lesse power on the spirit of the Nymph. THIMANTES. But if the Nymph loves thee, as I observ'd Her heart expressed some such matter lately, When at her last return home from the Games, Her free confession to us all, declar'd How much she did esteem thee, but at last
With such an esteem that love followed Close at the heels in plain terms, and indeed Spoken by her of purpose, if she loves thee, I say (as I'm confirmed in that thought) How wilt thou steer thy course? ISMENIA. 'Tis very true, Her discourse comes into my memory. THERSANDER. O Gods! what's this you utter? DIANA. For my part I begin to believe it, and remember The passage too, I fear all things from thence; This is the only mischief we should shun. ISMENIA. What can she not do 'gainst your interests, When your refuse shall come to arm her anger Against you? Know that with a single word, I'th twinckling of an eye too, she can calm The floods and make a mutiny amongst them, Call froth corrupted bodies from their graves, Make their cold ashes speak, and their pale ghosts To walk; these were the secrets, Zoroastres Taught, whil'st he raign'd, to his posterity; She is descended from him; and to give Her self content, will make use of her art To serve her passion. THERSANDER. I know that her skill Extends to Magick. Yes I fear her love With so much power, and yield unto thy counsel Advise us what to do. THIMANTE'S. Disugise your selves
Under the names of Brother, and of Sister, In the mean time we'l spread abroad the rumor Of this event that every one shall hear it Within the Island. THEERSANDER. J approve this project. DIANA. My life lies on it. ISMENIA. I go to begin To lie unto Parthenia. SCENA IV. PARTHENIA, ISMENIA, DIANA, THERSANDER, THIMANTES. PARTHENIA. JSmenia, I would speak one word with thee but a mo∣ment. ISMENIA. Immediately when you have born a part In the contentment of this pair; Diana Hath for the future no more cause to weep Heaven hath been pleas'd that she hath found her brother. It is this happy Shepheard, they acknowledge Each other. PARTHENIA. This event, J must confess Confounds my spirit; Thersander found her bro∣ther? DIANA. Yes Nymph, it is the same, For whom my grief was hither to extream.
The Gods at length have heard my prayers and sighs. THERSANDER. Yes, Madam they have granted our desires. PARTHENIA. J'm very glad on't, and my soul is ravish'd With this good fortune of our friends, which makes Our lives content, Diana will obilge me If she please at her leisure to inform me with the discovery; but acquaint the Nymph Therewith, and to that purpose go to see her. THERSANDER. We ow that duty to our Soveraign. Exeunt Thers and Diana. PARTHENIA. In the mean time Ismenia and my self May entertain each other in discourse, Thimantes, J believe, will not be jealous. THIMANTES Let not a third come, Madam and J fear Nothing from you.— Exit Thimantes. PARTHENIA. Ismenia, J know not, If J may safely tell a secret to thee, Alas! ISMENIA. J know it well, since the heart sighs; When one would say J love, and dares not speak is, The heart at the nam'd point gives an Alas. Have not J well divin'd? PARTHENIA. Ismenia. I do confess it, see too, if thou canst Divine the object that procures my grief Let me not speak him, spare my cheeks those blushes.
ISMENIA. I cannot, a sigh carries not so far; You love; but what more, is beyond my skil To understand, unless vour self unfold That sigh unto me by its cause. PARTHENIA. 'Tis true I love. ISMENIA. But whom? PARTHENIA. 'Tis— ISMENIA. Outwith't. PARTHENIA. Clidamant. ISMENIA, Behold a handsom way to name a Lover; Ha! how you fear your lips should touch upon it! One must draw 't word by word out of your mouth; You have then but one lover; really 'Tis well as't happens; had you lists of them As I have, which I name, and reckon over Every hour of the day, your bashfullness Would well become you; love is a fair fruit, But then it must be gathered, modesty Leaves it to fall and wither, but I pray you What will Melissa say to't, who intends To match her Neece to Thirsis? PARTHENIA. Oh! I hate That Thirsis, and shall be even in despair, If the Nymph force me to observe my duty In that particular; yet I would keep it
Without disturbance, if the love I bear To Clidamant should not return me his; For to speak truly I am violent Where honour doth ingage me, therefore would I Have his heart to be sounded, and as I Find it dispos'd, I should pursue my love, Or quench my flame. ISMENIA. Speak unto him your self, Nothing's more easie. PARTHENIA. But, Ismenia. Thou hast a wit would help me; if I should Speak to him, he hath little understanding If he should not know that I first was taken And I should sin against the rule of maids To make such a confession. ISMENIA. You may write then, PARTHENIA. That is all one, still the same point of honour Forbids it me; my Letter would discover My love, and make him boast thereof, perhaps, To my dishonour, if he might have once That mark on't in his hand. ISMENIA. Let him then Divine it, if he be Astrologer. PARTHENIA. Treat not my passion thus with railery. ISMENIA. I must then serve you in it, I perceive; Well I'l about it with my best invention; I'l write a Letter to him, and invite him By a feign'd love, as soon as it is night,
To meet me at the Eccho of the Garden, To entertain us there. PARTHENIA. So in my absence. Thou shalt discern his thought. ISMENIA. This business Concerns you, Madam, and requires your pre∣sence. You shall speak softly to him, and in those Sweet moments, you shall understand much bet∣ter What his thoughts are, and thus you may your self, To find out if he loves, speak of your self. PARTHENIA. Thou wilt be present too? ISMENIA. Yes, J'l so well Contrive it, that he shal believe undoubtedly That it is I that speak. PARTHENIA. But how can we Speak to the Eccho, for thou know'st the Nymph, As soon as it is night, retires her self, And then we cannot come there, what devise now Hast thou that we may speak to him? ISMENIA. Cannot we Speak to him from the terrass which joins close Unto the Garden; you know that you can Conveniently come there at any hour From your apartment; 'tis upon this ground, And these conjunctures, that I've ta'n the plot For my invention. PARTHENIA. J admire thy wit,
Tis wonderfull industrious and ready. ISMENIA. I'l write the Letter here before your eyes, Behold the paper for it. PARTHENIA. How, these are Thy writing Tables! ISMENIA. They can speak of Passions Discreet and secret; J'l about my business, And use my smoothest stile. PARTHENIA, Especially Appoint him wel the hour and place of meeting: How redevable am J to thy wit For this great favour? what do J not ow thee For this good office, thou giv'st me again. Life, and repose. ISMENIA. See what J write unto him In two words for you, they are very pressing, And will ingage him to betake himself Unto the place appointed to know more. PARTHENIA. 'Tis very well; it rests now how to giv' 't him. ISMENIA. Leave me the care of that; but here he comes.
SCENA V. MELINTUS, CLIDAMANT, PARTHENIA, ISMENIA. MELINTUS, to CLIDAMANT. YES, J have heard Diana is his sister. CLIDAMANT, to PARTHENIA. Madam, Melintus and my selfare going To seek Thersander, to congratulare With him his happy meeting with his sister. ISMENIA, to CLIDAMANT. seftly Thersander's happy, and thou art no lesse, Since thy good fortune offereth it self Unto thy hand, from whence thou mai'st expect All that thou canst desire without that jealous. PARTHENIA, to ISMENIA. Come, let us go, the Nymph expecteth us. ISMENIA, softly to CLIDAMANT. Having no opportunity at present To speak unto thee, read, J think 't will please thee. CLIDAMANT. Read it, J think 't will please thee, what i'th name Of wonder doth she mean? MELINTUS. Take but the pain To open, and to read it thou shalt find. CLIDAMANT. J think, J may make thine eys withnesses Of what it doth contain, there's nothing in it Secret of serious, Ismenia loves To jest, and to be talk'd of; and this is
Some new piece of her wonted merry wit. MELINTUS. J am impatient, prethee open it. CLIDAMANT. Let me see what divertisement is here, Which she expounds good fortune, what is this? He reads. List of my Lovers by an exact order Of Alphabet. 'Tis very well put of; But so far forth as J can see yet, neither Obsetve J here Melintus or my self. MELINTUS. For my part, J renounce there; turn the leaf, Go on. CLIDAMANT, reads. Stanza's of Dorilas upon inconstancy. 'Tis true, Ismenia thou are fair, But more inconstant then the air; And every Lover is a Mark Exposed to thy humourous dart; As soon as he meets thy disdain, He flies to death to cure his pain, And makes but one large step in all From his bright glory to his fall. With these defects yet thou canst charm; But I'l not love, for fear of harm; Yet J approve all things in thee, Yea even to thy inconstancy;
And will not, to incur thy hate, Jealous Melintus imitate, Whose humour every thing offends, And nothing pleaseth but its ends. CLIDAMANT. Melintus, what sai'st thou unto them? MELINTUS. J see for what design she put those Tables Into thy hand, J call'd her cocket lately, And that, it seems, provok'd her to return me The injury with one of the same nature. CLIDAMANT, continues to read. Sonnet of Silvio, my most faithfull Lover. A Madrigal of Thirsis,—what's this follows, Unto the Shepheard Clidamant. CLIDAMANT. Melintus, Am J not purblinde, see if this name doth Strike thine eyes thus like mine! Melintus looking into the writing Tables. MELINTUS. Nothing 's more certain, It is address'd to thee; thou art more happy Then thou imagin'st CLIDAMANT, reads. As soon as the dark shadows of the night Hang o'r the light, At th' Eccho of the Garden let us meet; But be discreet; 'Tis love invites thee; more anon, When w' 're alone. Ismenia. Melintus would take the writing Tables. MELINTUS. Prethee let me see them,
Grant me this favor—not, then J, believe Thou do'st disguise the truth, and read'st Ismenia, When 'tis subscrib'd Diana. CLIDAMANT. Oh fond jealous! How long wilt thou thus be thy own tormenter? MELINTUS. Yet shew them me. CLIDAMANT. To cure thy troubled spirit, J 'l first o'r come thy curiosity; And since the discreet Lover, what vain heat So ever presseth thee, never shews thus His Mistress name— MELINTUS. But— CLIDAMANT. Quit those blind suspicions; as soon As it is night I'l go unto the Eccho Alone, and with our noise; I'm all a fire To know what she will tell me, in the mean time Let's go unto the Nymph to seek Thersander. MELINTUS, sofly To be more sure, and to inform my self Yet fuller of thy faith in this my doubt, I'l to the Eccho too, and sind it out. The end of the second Act.
ACTUS III. SCENA I. MELISSA, DIANA. MELISSA. I Say to thee again that J receive Much pleasute at this news, that thou, Diana, Art sister to the generous Thersander; He hath inform'd me with the strange misfor∣tune Which separated on the churlish Sea The Brother from the Sister, in what place Upon a plank, escaped from the wrack, The storm remov'd him from the anger of Th' inraged Sea, what countries he hath seen, What pains and troubles he hath undergone; Lastly he nam'd the happy fortune which Conducted him to us here; I thank Heaven, That made thee know him, I'm as sensible Of this content as thou canst be thy self; He is so highly qualified, that he's worthy The name of King, ye both shal find with me A Sanctuary, and what ever fortune Ye have, I will partake it good or bad; My fortunes, ye shall bare too, so that all things Between us shall be common: I believe Diana towards me will be so well Dispos'd of her part, and that whatsoever Concerns me, will touch her. DIANA. Madam, I should Be barbarously ingratefull otherwise;
I still remember that being on the Shore, Cast as a wretched wrack there by the floods, Expecting every minute deaths approach, I met with you my port and sanctuary: Oh that I have not power for all this goodness T'express how much acknowledgement I have! MELISSA. Thou hast. DIANA. How Madam? MELISSA. In expecting nothing But death as I do now, thou canst be to me At thy turn both my port and sancturary; Thou canst subdue the enemy that braves me, That of a Soveraign will make a slave; He's in thy power, thou canst abate his courage. DIANA. What is that enemy which troubles you? MELISSA. He's one whose Magick can enchant the arms Of the most Valiant; he can draw tears from The most Heroick; nothing is so strong, Which he can't compass; and without respect To any place or person whatsoever, He equally distributeth his flames. DIANA. I know him not yet by this Character. MELISSA. How know'st thou not that tyrant of great Mo∣narcks? That famons Conqueror of Conquerours, Who notwithstanding is but a blind child? DIANA. If J durst to express me, J believe,
I know him. MELISSA. Speak it freely. DIANA. I'm mistaken, Or I have seen love painted in such colours, Blind and a child, yet a great Conquerour. MELISSA. 'Tis the same love whereof I speak unto thee DIANA. Who is the happy Lover that procures Your martyrdome? MELISSA. Alas! could'st thou not spare me The shame to speak him? cover, gentle night, Immediately those places and my brow With the same colour, so to please my heat; I love; but let us finish since I've said I love, Thersander is my object. DIANA. What, My Brother? MELISSA. He. If his heart be a prize Not easie to be gain'd, there's nothing which I would spare for him, I would arm to have him; Nought should oppose me, every obstacle J would o'rcome; already by some words Which he observ'd not, spoken by the bie, My love was half expressed. DIANA. As he should not Dare to pretend unto so great an honour, He would be criminal, if he believed To understand you.
MELISSA. Well then, be thou here The mouth and true interpreter of my heart, Express the kind heat of my timerous soul; Tell him that I'm a subject to his Laws, That he may boldly fix his thoughts upon The person of Melissa, and not fear To be condemn'd, that his ambition May soar so high a pitch, and not be check'd, That he may sigh the same sighs with a King; Husband thar heart for me, to which mine aims; But let him not think that it comes from me; My honour would receive a prejudice By such a thought, thou only shalt acquaint him With this, as from thy self. DIANA. J understand you, He must needs yield to this; I'l do your will. MELISSA. As soon as he appears, I will retire me, And from one of these places I shall hear Every word that you speak one to another In reference to my flame. DIANA. I should methinks Act with more freeness, if J were to treat With him alone. MELISSA. No, J will hear my self What he thinks of me, J can best of all Trust mine own ears and eyes in this affair. DIANA. But, Madam, after all— MELISSA. Shepheardess,
The thing's resolv'd, thou need'st not say no more. Untill he come, J pray thee, entertain These woods here with some air, and let us see If the Eccho will answer to thy discourse; DIANA. Your prayer is a command; some plaints of love Shall make the subject of it. MELISSA. What thou wilt. DIANAS Song. Ye Trees, ye Rocks, perfumed Valleys, sweet And charming Zephirs, murmuring fountains keep My griefs close in your bosome, you alone Are witnesses unto my fires and mone, Tell me if my sad heart, not daring to Delare it it self, at least may sigh its woe? May sigh its woe—Eccho. Well then my sighs, make no noise as pe passe The airy Regions only breath alas Vnto the heart that sent you forth; since I Can't speak to thee, dear object of my cry, Let th' Ecco, that's attentive, say for me That if I love (as sure I do) 'tis thee. 'tis thee—Eccho
SCENA II. THERSANDER, MELISSA, DIANA. THERSANDER. DIana's here about, her voice assures me. MELISSA to DIANA. softly Thy Brother comes here, take this opportunity. Be sure thou speak unto him loud enough; Thou art my only hope; I go from hence To hear, and to observe thee. DIANA. softly. We are undone, Thersander will discover all in speaking. THERSANDER. 'Tis now no longer time to utter sighs, Let us resume our joy, and dry our tears, Crown our sad spirits with flowers, and think no more of Our pass'd misfortunes, let's form our discourse Of the most pleasant thoughts, and let us chat Of love. DIANA. Let me alone, I'l entertain thee Upon that subject. THEERSANDER. It belongs to me To speak of that, and when I do consider With what darts in my heart— DIANA. I know it well 'Tis of a longer date then from to day, That I have read thy heart; and I believe
That never any one hath seen a Brother To love his sister so. THERSANDER. The love wherewith I am assaulted, and would make thee see, Exceeds that of a brother, it begets, Complaints and Sighs, it driveth to despair, And kills; the love we bear unto a Sister, Makes not so many sufferings; but J love— DIANA. J divine whom, thou burnest with desire To speak unto me here of Celiaes love. THERSANDER. Thou do'st divine right, J take a great pleasure To speak of it with thee; methinks I see her Still when J look on thee; how sit I find thee To be the faithfull guardian of my love, Assur'd of thy fidelity, and that Thy heart is alwaies mine. DIANA. Thou need'st not doubt it. THERSANDER. O my dear! DIANA. Brother I'm not ignorant How dear I am unto thee. THIMANTES. Thy fair eyes— DIANA. How! flatter and court thy sister By thy discourse? THERSANDER. I cannot speak, unto thee Thou interrupt'st me still.
DIANA. Th' advice is worth it, and I'l give thee notice That from esteem they pass to love for thee, That scarce arrivedst thou unto this place But thy good fortune without any trouble Gain'd thee the conquest of a heart, for which Great Kings will envie thee, it is Melissa's. THERSANDER. O Gods! what dost thou say? DIANA. What doth astonish thee, I see how thou art troubled to believe it. This great heart finds no place yet in thy faith: To make thee happy in't, I must imbrace thee. She speaks softly to him, in imbracing him. The Nymph hears our discourse, 'tis fit thou feign. She speaks loud again. Wilt thou not yield to this excess of honour? Think that thy Celia in this conjuncture, Hath no resentment in her heart against thee, Nor murmurs at it. THERSANDER. In this extasie Wherein I am through this excess of honour, I'm seeking of my self, but cannot find me. How! dare to love the Nymph? t'aspire to her? No my ambition's not so criminal. DIANA. Under those high respects, J see thy love. THERSANDER. How can I otherwise express it, Sister? It the Nymph tempts me, and will make a crime on't, It shall then have the name but of a lawfull
Respect; and if I see occasion T'express me further on this point, this lawfull Respect shall bear the bolder name of love. DIANA. Brotherm, it hath that name, and J am ready To boast unto her, her illustrious conquest: But the Sun, J perceive, plungeth himself I' th' waters, and the shadows seise the tops O' th' Mountains, it is time now to betake me Unto Melissa; but behold, she comes. Melissa comes forth from the place where she was hidden. MELISSA. What serious discourse have you together? DIANA. Our subject is of Love, of Mistresses, Of Servants, and of Sighs. MELISSA. What! hath Thersander Already gotten him a Mistress? THERSANDER. Madam, I have too little merit and address: Besides to serve, to honour and obey you, I have no other thought; our discourse was, Your goodness for us, which my heart shall ever Record as in a Register of Brass, Where my acknowledgements shall never pass.
SCENA III. MELINTUS, MELISSA, DIANA, THER∣SANDER. MELINTVS. calling. HO, Clidamant! MELISSA. It is enough, let's go, I hear some noise, and would not be seen here I' rh' night.— Exeunt Melissa, Diana, Thersander. MELINTUS, continuing to call. Ismenia, Clidamant! they hear, But flie me, and the night robs my sight of them; But this is not Ismenia, and I am Deceived much, if I saw not the gate, The stature, and the gesture of Diana; Yes, Clidamant abus'd me with a lie, Diana builds his fortune at my cost, And that note which he would conceal from me Without doubt was subscrib'd with her fair hand; Yes, 'twas Dianaes, though he read Ismenia, To spare my grief a little, and my trouble. How simple was J that J followed Not close upon his steps: but soft, methinks, J hear a noise, perhaps it may be he.
SCENA IV. CLIDAMANT, MELINTUS. CLIDAMANT. O Night, lend me thy silence, make these woods To hold their peace in th' absence of the day, And let no sound be heard here but my love: At last I'm happily delivered from A troublesome companion, that would Obstruct my fortune, that same jealous Shep∣heard Without respect and faith. MELINTUS. I'm much oblig'd Unto thee for this noble character Thou giv'st me; in despight of all my care And cunning thou art come without my com∣pany To see thy lovely Mistress. CLIDAMANT. I came here To meet another person: for my Mistress, I have already spoken with her fully. MELINTUS. Yes, if mine eyes deceiv'd me not, thou talkd'st Unto Diana, and seeing me follow, Ye both fled at one time, these Woods conceal'd you. CLIDAMANT. Good Gods! what saiest thou to me? MELINTUS. But I'l be More wise another time, and heed you better. CLIDAMANT. I understand not what this language means, But this distrust doth me an injury:
Why covet'st thou t' accompany me thus, Since th' object that expecteth me, forbids it; Desirest thou to publish secret passions? Ismenia in thy sight gave me those Tables; 'Tis she that doth expect me at the place Appointed; for Diana, she knows nothing Of this invention: if thou canst, injoy That lovely Shepheardess and think not me Guilty of any treason, I seek only Ismenia, and shun society: In this affair, Shepheard retire thy self And leave my love in peace, why wouldst thou do me So ill an office? MELINTUS. This appointed meeting Denotes some artifice; I observ'd lately At our last Games the amorous commerce That pass'd between Diana and thy self, So many kind respects, such gentle glances, And private whilsperings forming the suspicion That still awakes me. CLIDAMANT. Cease to trouble me, And thy self too unnecessarily; Our discourse only was an effect of Civility; I say again, I leave Diana to thee; oh how perfectly I hate those vain suspicions and condemn them! MELINTUS. Ismenia's very free she would have had Boldness enough to express her love by day, Why should she make choice of the night to speak it? Why dar'd she not to utter it in words, But writ it to thee?
CLIDAMANT. In vain jealous Shepheard, Thou askest me that question, all that I Can say unto thee, is that I am sent for; I cannot tell thee more if the occasion Be good or bad; if J could satisfie thee Upon that point, believ't thou should'st excuse me. MELINTUS. I'l follow thee where ere thou goest. CLIDAMANT. Oh Gods! What a Tormentor have I? MELINTUS. I attend thee, CLIDAMANT. Then stay thou here, I'l leave the place unto thee. I seign to withdraw, to withdraw him also. softly. Exit. MELINTUS. What! leav'st thou me alone? and cunningly Hid'st me those secrets, which yet I must know: Feign as much as thou wilt, in spight of thee I will sind out to which of those two objects Thou giv'st thy faith, and dost direct they vows, I'l be a witness of thy secret love; Another shall inform me on't, Thimantes Will tell me all the Plot; to him I'l go, And give him notice of the assignation; He'l come to let me know sure, if Diana Appeareth there; or if it be Ismenia, J shall do him a mischief; when Thimantes Shall see his Mistress appoint secret meetings To others then himself at such an hour,
He hath a poor spirit if he loves her still: So shall I have pleasure in my resentment In weakning the sierceness of Ismenia, And of her servant, I'l to him immediately. SCENA V. PARTHENIA, ISMENIA. PARTHENIA, upon the terrass. I Hear a noise, Ismenia, is't not Clidamant? ISMENIA. Fear not, we shall hear of him presently. PARTHENIA. J hear no more noise, all is husht and still; Only the night, and silence raigneth here. ISMENIA. Hark, J hear something, let us handsomly Dissemble now. PARTHENIA. Oh how I feel my soul Seised with love and fear! SCENA VI. CLIDAMANT, ISMENIA, PARTHENIA. CLIDAMANT. NO person follows me, J am at liberty; jealous Melintus Haunteth my steps no more. ISMENIA. Madam, 'tis he.
CLIDAMANT, Well I'l go on to instruct me what Ismenia Hath to impart unto me in these Gardens; Ismenia! ISMENIA. Clidamant. CLIDAMANT. Is it thee, Ismenia? ISMENIA. Yes, I expect thee. CLIDAMANT. Thou may'st have pretence T'accuse my tardy comming, but a jealous— ISMENIA. It is enough, thou art belov'd, assure thee; Draw neer; but let us speak soft, I'm afraid We should be heard.— Put your self in my place and take this opportunity. softly. SCENA VII. THIMANTES, CLIDAMANT, PARTHE∣NIA, ISMENIA. THIMANTES. Speaking to Melintus behind the Stage. I Am oblig'd to thee for this advertisement; If J find at the Eccho either of them, Diana or Ismenia, believe me, I'l faithfully report it, to remove Thy trouble, if J can: Ismenia Appoints me very often here to meet her, Where, notwithstanding her inconstancy, Her mouth in secret giveth me the hope Of a most constant love, and for a pledge
Of her faith, never any but my self At those hours entertains discourse with her: I'l to her now, and charge her with this crime Of comming here without acquainting me. I'l approach softly without making noise Lest it might raise a scandal in the night; Ismenia, CLIDAMANT. quitting Parth. Some noise hath struck mine car, I'l return to you— Exit. PARTHENIA. O what feat is comparable To mine! Ismenia, come to me presently. CLIDAMANT, speaking to Thimantes, whom he takes for Melintus. Melintus, really I can no longer Suffer your importunity? why should you Imagine that J am the Author of Your trouble? J speak to no person here But to the Shepheardess Ismenia; J tell thee once again, she sent for me, And J am certain that the note is written And signed with her hand; 'tis true, this fair one Sighs only for the love of me, her mouth Hath told it me already, and I answer Unto her fires with a mutual heat; Assure your self, and settle upon this My faithfull protestation, that Diana Ne'r made me sigh. THIMANTES. softly. O most perfidious! CLIDAMANT. See what an injury you do me now, To satisfie you yet more fully hold,
There are the writing Tables, see her name. Examin't well, and take repose at last Without disturbing mine. D'ye place your glo∣ry In persecuting me? THIMANTES. softly. Shame of my love, Depart my memory, J have wherewith Both to reproach, and to convict thy falshood; And when I've done it, treacherous spirit, I'l quit thee, And then J shall be satisfied. CLIDAMANT. Melintus, What is't thou murmur'st yet? J must break with thee, If this strange humour lasts, in acting thus, You will lose all your friends, your jealous head, And strange fantastick humours, but he's gone; I will return unto the object which Both charms and loves me. PARTHENIA, to ISMENIA. There's our discourse, Make an end on't thy self. CLIDAMANT. I'm rid at last Of my impertinent; jealous Melintus Hath left me now. ISMENIA. Adieu, let us retire. I'm certainly inform'd that thy ambition Aspireth to Parthenia, in vain then Thou holdest me discourse. CLIDAMANT. In two words J will tell thee, that J have
Too full a knowledge of the eminence Of her condition, as to dare to lift My hope so high: Oh if I durst to love her; But being less ambitious, J obey My duty, and J better know my self. Adieu until to morrow. PARTHENIA, to ISMENIA. Oh Ismenia! What content have J? and how skilfull art thou In this affair of love? I do admire Thy wit, and thy invention; the thing Answered my wish. ISMENIA. By this discourse of his You may perceive love under that respect, Like fire under its ashes; 'tis not lately, Your charms have taken him. PARTHENIA. In the mean time— ISMENIA. In the mean time, live all fair wits, say J; Without me, you had been reduc'd unto A sad condition, to die with grief, And love, without expressing it. PARTHENIA. 'Tis late; Come, in the absence of the day let's prove, If sleep will follow on the steps of love. The end of the Third Act.
ACTUS IV. SCENA I. THIMANTES, ISMENIA. THIMANTES. HOw! in the night, perfidious, to exasperate My anger, dar'st thou to grant private meet∣ings To any but my self? yea in the night Without light and attendance in the Garden, Thou entertain'dst the Shepheard Clidamant. ISMENIA. How's this! Thimantes in a rage, O Gods! Who would have thought it? THIMANTES. Wilt thou say that J Complain now without reason, that J have A crack'd brain, and bleer'd eyes? it is too long, Inconstant, to arrest thy spirits, behold This witness, it hath told me every thing; Yet J should not believe that thou wert guilty, If such an evidence accus'd thee not, But since J dis-ingage my faith to thee, This very instant, J restore thy papers And will have nothing more to do with thee. ISMENIA. Well, let it be so then, J doubt it not, But J shall be provided in good time; When one forsakes me, presently another Offers his service, otherwise J should, In this unlucky moment of thy change, Be destitute of an officious Lover; But thanks unto the Gods, more then one calls me
His Mistress, and J shall have no less courtship And press for thy departure, these notes here Express the names of those that I've subjected, I'l blot thee presently out of my Table-book. THIMANTES. Light Shepheardess! ISMENIA. For all this J am troubled For thy disquiet, without further jesting, Know that this trouble which possesseth thee Proceeds but from a fiction, speedily I'l clear it to thee, only have but patience To stay here till the Shepheard Clidamant Arrives, before whom I have order to Discover the deceit; and then I know Thou wilt excuse me for it.—here he comes. SCENA II. CLIDAMANT, ISMENIA, THIMANTES. CLIDAMANT. HAve J not staid too long? suspect me not, Thimantes, J was sent for: well what is Your pleasure? ISMENIA. Thy misfortune is extream Thimantes cannot suffer that another Should love me, and one that accompt intends To measure with thee sword and arm to day. CLIDAMANT. He is my friend, and therefore J am loath To have a quarrel with him; to accord it, Chuse of us two him whom thou think'st most faithfull.
I am content to stand unto my fortune, ISMENIA. Thimantes, what say you? THIMANTES. J agree to 't. ISMENIA, to CLIDAMANT. Then thus; for him, J do confess I love him A little, but for thee,—nothing at all. My mouth interprets truely what my heart thinks CLIDAMANT, O the most fickle and most want on issue Of the inconstant sex! thou lov'st a momen, J love a moment also. ISMENIA. Notwithstanding J have a secret to impart unto thee. CLIDAMANT. A Secret in thy heart loseth its name In less time then a minute, without doubt: ISMENIA. Thou thought'st last night, that I discours'd with thee At th' Eccho of the Garden? CLIDAMANT. Yes, ISMENIA. But what If thou wert then deceiv'd, and that another In my place counterfeited there my voice? CLIDAMANT. What hast thou told me? ISMENIA. That which may be true.
CLIDAMANT. J cannot comprehend it, nor find thee; Thou dost do nothing but deceive at all times, And in all places; thou canst turn thy heart And eyes into all sences; how! another Possess my place? ISMENIA. What if by this advise J gained thee the heart of a fair Mistress, One that 's illustrious, and of noble blood, And who after the Nymph hath the chief rank! CLIDAMANT. Well feign thy fill, thou may'st speak what thou list; I'm henceforth in no humour but to laugh. ISMENIA. If by the greatest oaths wherein my honour Can be ingag'd, thou wilt believe the truth Of what J told thee, that another person Beside my self receiv'd thy vows last night J hope thou wilt find out some fitter Epithies Then false and wavering for me. CLIDAMANT. After such An obligation, my charity Would sway me much. ISMENIA. Then solemnly J swear, It was Parthenia in my place, to whom Thou didst express thy love; she borrowed My name and shape, and thine eyes suffered This sweet imposture. CLIDAMANT. Still thou dost abuse me, J knew thee by thy voice.
ISMENIA. When we spake loud, 'T was I that spake; then presently Parthenia Advancing in my place discovered softly Her soul and thought unto thee: after this, Iudge, if I have deserv'd from thee, or no. CLIDAMANT. How! is it possible that she, to whose High rank, I should not dare t' aspire unto So much as in a thought, that she to whom I durst not speak a word in way of plaint, That she, to whom my high respect conceal'd My amity, should yet feel pitty for me? Alas! this cannot be, 'tis sin to think it. ISMENIA. Thou shalt see if I lie, and how sh' esteems thee; I wait her here. CLIDAMANT. Therein I should obtain The hight of my ambition; for this favour, Oh let me kiss thy hands and die with plea∣sure. SCENA III. PARTHENIA, ISMENIA, CLIDAMAN∣TES, THIMANTES. PARTHENIA. WHat spectacle is this? I see Ismenia Sports with my fortune, if I trouble you, I will retire, continue that rare favour; Who freely gives the hands, may give the heart.
ISMENIA. Ha! Madam, really you are a novice In love; I gave him intimation of The arri fice we us'd, and he at first Received my discourse with so much joy, That he crav'd from me that civility. Unto what jealous strange suspitions Are you drawn by this object! he but aim'd To kiss my hand, and you are like to die for't? Trouble you self no more thus to no purpose. PARTHEIA. Ismenia thou restor'st me life, and rest, I love thee, Clidamant; this jealous fit, Methinks, might well have spared me the shame Of telling it. CLIDAMANT. Fair Nymph, believe— PARTHENIA. But let us Enter into this Wood. CLIDAMANT. I wish the Eccho, Sometimes a friend to Lovers, would redouble My voice in saying to you that J love, And make you to repeat my words, J love. PARTHENIA. Ismenia, be a faithful witness of Our chast amours, and come along with us To hear what we discourse, Thimantes be Discreet and secret. THIMANTES. Madam, I'm all silence. See, what a strange unnecessary evil Is that a jealous person doth sustain; Foolish Melintus how thou art deceiv'd
In thinking that Diana is the object Gf Clidamant's affection—here she comes Discoursing with her brother, J will leave them. SCENA IV. DIANA, THERSANDER. DIANA. LEt us consider what we are to do, She loves thee infinitely, and J have Command from her to speak to thee again, In her behalf. THERSANDER. Advise me what to do. DIANA. Since the Nymph loves thee with such passion, As I perceive she doth, 'tis ft thou flatter Her grief a little, otherwise I fear That I shall lose thee after having found thee. What mischief can she not do, when provoked? THERSANDER. Since there needs but to feign all will succeed. DIANA. In the mean time, Ismenia will be carefull To inquire for us, when the Merchant-ship That's bound for Sevill will be fully ready To set sail from the harbour; we shall hire him To land us where we will; till when, our care Must be not to offend the Nymph, for fear She ruine us; she'l presently be here. She's come already; act the Lover well, Dissemble handsomly, therein consists All that we can expect.
SCENA V. MELISSA, DIANA, THERSANDER. MELISSA. A Word, Diana. Hast thou remov'd that fatal obstacle, Which came to intetrupt the pleasant course Of my affections? hast thou setled My lifes content, and razed Celia Out of thy Brothers spirit? DIANA. His heart follows Where my voice and his glory calleth him, And cheerfully yieldeth obedience To such sweet Laws. MELISSA. Blessed Interpreter Of a most ardent love! hast thou advis'd him To keep it secret? DIANA. Only that point, Madam, J have forgotten, but J will redeem it; And tell him on't before you; if you please That I go for him. MELISSA. Go, and bring him hither. DIANA. softly. Feign handsomely unto her THERSANDER. softly to Diana. Fear it not. I'l speak before her but of you, and to you, And yet not make her jealous.
Then he saith to Melissa, by whose side is Diana, whom he looks upon. THERSANDER. aloud. Could you doubt My heart should be so stupid, and insensible Of my felicity how happy is My fortune, and how gentle was the storm That gave me this bless'd port, whereof great Kings Are jealous? What proud Conqueror would not Submit and lay his arms down with himself At the fair feet of such a charming object? A rude obdurate rock, would be consum'd, The coldest Marble would be kindled by it: Yes, Madam, a fair eye but openeth Its lid here, & 'tis day; the nights black shadows Fly only from the Sun of those bright eyes, Her fires too at the sight of them grow pale. I must confess then, Madam, that J love them, And that J live more in this beauteous object Then in my self: my spirit is charmed with A happiness unparallell'd, when J Think that J love them, and am lov'd again. MELISSA. Come, thou but feignest love? do not abuse me. THERSANDER. O Gods! what do you say? Madam, J love Or rather J adore. MELISSA. How hast thou then Dispos'd of Celia that reign'd o'r thy heart? THERSANDER. That affair's ordered well, I've put her interests Into my Sisters hands; sh' 'ath promis'd me
To make all fair of that side, and will answer To me for her. MELISSA. Hast thou not boasted to me That her eyes were the object of thy love? That for thy sake she cherished the light Of the alternate day, and that they would Cover themselves with an eternal night, If thou shouldst cease to live or to be faithfull: Think well of thy part what th'ast promised; Be firm, be constant, fail not in that point, Consider not at all this supream greatness; Stick to thine object, love it for it self, And have no interest for thy ambition, Flatter thee with the honour to possess her, Look only if she loves thee, not if she Enricheth thee; the beauty whom thou serv'st, Should be thy crown, all greatness whatsoever Should be esteem'd in thy accompt beneath it. THERSANDER. Ne'r doubt it, Madam, J shall have those thoughts; Greatness shall never blind me so far forth As to oblige me to forget my love; Which alwaies shall pure as the day star burn Base interest shall never sully me. DIANA. I'l tell my Brother now, what I forgate To THERSANDER. If thou know'st well to love, know thou as wel To hold thy peace, love like the other Gods, Is not without his secrets, he is serv'd Sometimes by hearts that can't express them∣selves: Take heed how thou provoke his jealous power,
Adore his Altars, but adore in silence; For silence is a part of his Religion; And oftentimes this fierce God is offended At his own name; if any thing hereof Should be known in the Isle, thou art undone: Love, without speaking of it, that's the law, Which is imposed on thee; she for her part Will love thee likewise, use the secret well, Melissa otherwise would die with grief; J know th' excess of love wherewith thy soul Is filled; but for thy own interest, Put a seal on thy mouth. MELISSA. Yes, have a care That none suspect our love, I'l take my time To publish it, in the mean time I'l study Thy setrlement and they repose which makes That of my life; this free confession now, Would call up envy from her Cell, and make Our greatest Hero's, to dispute with thee What J have promis'd thee, thine enemies. Judge then how precious thy obedience is; Since all thy good and happiness depends Upon thy silence. THERSANDER. Sure, J should be strucken With a strange blindness, if J observ'd not This your command; J will obey so well, That, Madam, even you your self shal doubt Whether J love, or whether you J love. MELISSA. In the mean time thy sister shall assist me, And have the ordering of our Amours; Believe what she shall say, since I will make her My only bosom friend, unto whose trust,
J will commit the secrets of my heart. THERSANDER. J will make use of her in the same manner. Enter Melintus, he speaks to Melissa MELINTUS. Madam, a Jeweller, that useth still. To come unto the Games, desires accesse Unto your presence. MELISSA. Cause him to come in: This Sevil Merchant cometh every year To sell and traffick in the Island with us. SCENA VI. MELISSA, MERCATOR, THERSANDER, DIANA, MELINTUS. MELISSA. SHall you remain sometime yet on our shore? MERCATOR. I stay but for your Passport to depart. Every year, Madam, by your Highness bounty My trassick thrives so well, that whatsoever Commodities I bring unto you Isle, J carry nothing back, you empty still My casket: now I'l shew you, if you please, such rarities, as can be had no where But in my hands. MELISSA. Let's see them. MERCATOR. Here's a Diamond Darts flame of all sides.
MELISSA. 'Tis a sparkling stone I like his lustre. MERCATOR. Will you have it, Madam? MELISSA. I'l tell you presently, shew all at once, Then I shall soon chuse: let me see that Coral. MERCATOR. The piece is very fair; till now your Isle Hath never seen the like. MELISSA. And what's that other? MERCATOR. A piece of Amber-greece; Madam, 'tis rare And of great price; I have pass'd divers Seas To purchase it; alone 'tis worth as much As all my casket. DIANA. For my part, J cannot See any thing that's new here. MERCATOR. Shepheardess, This rope of Pearl is very rich and new, 'T would make you look more fair, more gay, more sparkling. MELISSA. Without those Ornaments of Art, she is Charming enough, she needs no strange additi∣ons. She maketh all our Shepheards die for love: But for all this, though you are fair without them I will bestow them on you, if you like them. What saies Diana. DIANA. Madam, your great bounties—
MELISSA. Lay them aside. MERCATOR. But, Madam, look upon This Master-piece of Art, it is the Portrait In little of the King of Andalousia. MELISSA. He's one of the best made that I have seen. And who is this? MERCATOR. It is his favourite Nearchus sometime Prince of Pichery, Who by a beauty fatal through her charms, Gave up his arms, and life unto his Rival, A gallant Gentleman, his name Cleagenor, THERSANDER, the first line softly. May I believe! good Gods! how he observes me? But are you certain of Nearchus death? MERCATOR. He return'd sorely wounded from the fight, And died four daies after, as all know. MELISSA. His valour seems yet painted in his face. MERCATOR. But he that conquer'd him had more by much. Behold his Portrait. THERSANDER. softly Oh! what sheweth he? MELISSA. Is this that valiiant Cleagenor? MERCATOR. Yes, 'tis his picture. THERSANDER. softly, O unlucky accident!
MERCATOR. Of all those that J had, this only 's left me: Th' offended King commanded me to carry them Unto all places where J went, and traffick'd, That so he might be known, and then arrested; For after this great Combat, to secure His head from pursuit, he took flight immedi∣ately. MELISSA. Thersander, in my judgement, nothing can Better resemble you, J think your sister Will say as much. THERSANDER. Madam, we see that Nature Sports sometimes in her works, and makes some feitures In faces to resemble somewhat neerly. MELISSA. This Merchant,, I believe, 's of my opinion. MERCATOR. Madam, without doubt, 'tis Cleagenor, THERSANDER. The thing is little certain on the faith And bare ground of a Portrait. MERCATOR. Sir, you are The very same, I am confirmed now In my first thoughts, all that which hitherto Hindered me to judge so, was the name of Thersander, and the habit of a Shepheard. THERSANDER. Who! J, Cleagenor? MERCATOR. Yes, Sir, J saw you The last yeer in the fortunate Islands, and Not above four moneths since in Portugal;
Sevll's your native Country; since you meet here Your safety, to what purpose should you cover Those things with silence? MELISSA. Sure, you need not blush, Thersander, at this fair acknowledgement. THERSANDER. I confess, Madam, that J blush a little, Not that mine arm hath not done all that which It ought to do in the death of my Rival, Nearchus was too rash, and insolent; From the fair and unspotted object which Made my most chast desires, he in his thoughts Formed the object of his filthy pleasures; But he hath paid for't, and his death is just Only the thing that troubles and afflicts me, And for which I am sorry at my heart, Is that J told you nothing of my secret. MELISSA. J guess the cause of it, and know your thought. And what fear troubled it, and that you chose Another name only to free you from The penalty o'th' Law; but fear not any thing; I'l oppose power to power for your defence; Your interests are mine, J'l make your peace; The King of Andalousia shall be weary Of persecuting you; if he persift To trouble your repose, J'l invade his: If he refuse to grant what we demand, From our request we will proceed to arms. THERSANDER. What obligation have you upon me For all your goodness? MELISSA. But let's make an end
Of seeing all the rarities. MERCATOR. Behold With admiration, Madam, this rare piece, It is Diana's Picture. MELISSA. How Dianaes? DIANA. softly. O sad misfotrune! MERCATOK. It is the Divinity, Whose Temple's here, the Goddess of this place. DIANA. softly I cease to tremble, all is well again. MELISSA. What Portrait's this? MERCATOR. It is a Beauties, Madam, Whose heavenly graces made two desperate Lo∣vers, That sight for her, arm for the field, and fight; It is that fair ones whom I told you of For Whom Cleagenor and Nearchus burn'd, And who pursued hotly by two Rivals, Coft the one flight, and life unto the other. After Nearchus death, I bought his Portraits: This that he had without doubt's to the life. But who can better then Cleagenor Instruct you in this point? MELISSA, to THERSANDER. D' ye know this piece? THERSANDER. I know not what to say on't. MELISSA. I observe Much of thy sisters air in't.
DIANA. O ye Gods! Turn aside this misfortune. MELISSA. Really The glass, Diana, which receives thy image, Represents less thy shape and countenance; And any other but the Painter would Believe indeed that the finish'd this Portrait Upon thy presence. MERCATOR There's no doubt of it. One may admire in this adventure how Art imitateth nature: it is she For whom Nearchus sigh'd. THERSANDER. softly. O Gods! where are we? Our fortunes now are desperate. DIANA. Know'st thou me? MERCATOR. I am of the same Town, and therefore know you; Your mother is Melora, and she dwells At Sevil; I shal make her a glad woman At my return, to tell her that her Celia Lives yet, and is in health here in this Island. MELISSA. How! Celia? MERCATOR. Yes, Madam, that is her name, DIANA. What could of errour blindeth thy soul thus? That Celia whom thou mean'st, and dost discourse of, Died before Nearchus.
MERCATORS. It was believ'd so At first; but since, all Sevil knows the contrary, And that false death is now no more a mystery Unto me; J know where the mourning went, And how a Coffin only was interr'd Instead of you, that this apparent sign Of your death only could secure you from Nearchus ill designs; I know besides That you betook your self unto the Sea, Where you sight not, but for Cleagenor; The Sea prov'd false to you, and to your mother, And separated you one from another By the assistance of a hideous storm: She having sav'd her self upon a plank Sought you from one end of the World to th'o∣ther; But hearing no news of you, she believ'd At her return to Sevil that the Sea Had swallowed you, and death had made her search Unprofitable. DIANA. Thou knowest secrets which To me are Riddles. MERCATOR. Wherefore should you, Lady, Dissemble thus your knowledge of a thing Which is no more conceal'd; one of your people A complice of the Plot, divulg'd it lately; Melora too since her return reveal'd The whole Imposture, all impediment Being remov'd after Nearchus death: This that I know, I understood from her. THERSANDER. All this thou saiest, is strange news unto us.
MERCATOR. You have the art, I see, well to dissemble; But by your favour might it not be you That did imploy a friend unto me lately To pray me to receive into my bark Two Shepheards, natives of the Town of Sevil? THERSANDER. Madam, this Merchant doth compose Romants. And tells you all these strange adventures only, To shew his wit, and faculty that way. MELISSA. Yet his discourse in not without some ground, I find good reason so to judge of it; If I remember well, you willingly Did put the interest of Celia Into your sisters hands, she promised To make all fair of that side, and to answer To you for her: Merchant, another time See us again. How both of you abuse me With an Imposture form'd under false name's To carry on your love in a disguise! What in my Palace, in my Court, my presence, Sport with my person thus in a contempt! Insolent wretches, you shall feel what force My anger hath when thus provok'd, I'l make you— THERSANDER. Oh, Madam! MELISSA. Go, Impostor, thou shalt answer For all the troubles of my heart; none ever Affro ntd me yet without punishment: I'l sacrifice you both to my disgrace, In such a manner, that ye shal repent Eternally that e'r ye made me blush: Depart my sight.
THERSANDER. O what misfortune's this! MELISSA, to MELINTUS. See that you separate them one from another In several apartment, that they may Hold no discourse together. O misfortune Not to be parallell'd! What shall I do? Of whom should I take counsel in this case? Shall I hear yet my love that murmureth? Ought I to suffer, or repel the injury? It is resolv'd in my offended heart That those black Passions shal succeed my love, By which the soul when in disorder, breaks The chain wherewith she's ti'd, break forth my fury, And ruine these ingratefull they shal know My power, as they have seen my goodness to the: They shall not mock at my simplicity, Nor reproach me for my credulity: How! treacherous Thersander; oh! that name Thersander combats yet within my heart, In its defence, my spirits at this name Are wavering, and my anger's weak, my hate Is in suspense; I am not pleas'd with that Which I demand; I fear what J would most. Ha traitor, must J to torment my self Suspend my judgement upon thy destruction? Must J dispute the case within myself As doubtfull to determine, no pass sentence Against him for this barbarous affront: Arm my despair, and inspire thou my rage: And let me see how faithfully my Art Will serve my vengeance in the punishment Of these ingratefull Lovers, I intend not To give a sudden death to either of them,
But they shall suffer that which shall be worse: By the effect, and strange force of my charms, They shall have, without dying, every day A thousand deaths; I will continually By turns afflict the sad eyes of the Lover, And of his Mistress: both of them shal see, That they may suffer equally, each other To die and to revive, this punishment Is strange and cruell; but 'tis that I use In my revenges; come, why loiter we In our design? my heart like flint shall be Insensible of their calamity. The end of the Fourth Act.
ACTUS V. SCENA I. CLIDAMANT, PARTHENIA. CLIDAMANT. MIne eyes and ears ne'r saw, nor heard the like The miserable cryes of those poor Lovers Fill all these places with astonishment. Thersander and Diana are so chang'd, I could scarce know them, as I now came from them: Pale death by turns skipping from face to face, Can't make them yet to dye unto their love: But, Madam, is it true what's publish'd here Among the people, that those strange inchant∣ments Come from Melissa? PARTHENIA. Yes, they are the works Of her Art, without doubt, she could do more yet Nothing's too hard for her, the destiny Of mortals seems to be held in her hands, And as she pleaseth, she disposeth it. What can she not do, when she is in choler? The miserable Thirsis feels th'effect, And rigour of her power by sad experience. Hath not same yet inform'd you with his suf∣ferings? CLIDAMANT. Yes, Madam, J have heard them fully spoken. PARTHENIA. You know then that he lov'd Roselia,
And so deceiv'd the expectation, And desire of the Nymph who hitherto Design'd him for my husband, and knows not That I have love for you; to her commands This Shepheard was Rebellious: what did she? Roselia was fair, she became sick; She wept, she pined, she complain'd; the brightnes Of her fair eyes, extinguish'd in a moment: The whiteness of her Lillies as soon faded; And of so many beauties there remain'd Only the place, where sometime their seat was, Her Lover that perceiv'd her taken from him, Seeks her in every place, but cannot find her: That was a Master-piece of her Apprentiship; But this without doubt is another work Of higer knowledge; if in her resentment But for my interest she made poor Thirsis A miserable Lover, judge how far She may be carried, mov'd at her offence, In her revenge for her own interest. CLIDAMANT. If the Nymph knew the love I have for you, I could expect no other usage from her; She would without doubt cause me to be carried unto some fearfull Island where I should Be rendered miserable all my days: But let her art do what it can against me Imployed by her hate, it shall work nothing Upon my faith, to do it prejudice: Oh! could I flatter me with the same hope, That you would have like constancy for me! PARTHENIA. You need not doubt of it, I'm wholly yours, My love is strong, and little fears her anger; I'l keep it still sincere and firm unto you:
And you shall find me constant unto death: Should she destroy me with her power, & kil me I'le rather dye my self, then my affection. My life can't pay the debt J owe unto you. SCENA II. ISMENIA, THIMANTES, PARTHENIA, CLIDAMANT. ISNENIA. WHat strange news do we hear? is it true, Madam, That by th'effects of fortune and inchantment, Thesander and Diana dye by turns, And live again to wail their miseries? PARTHENIA. Ismenia, tis too true, they are inchanted. THIMANTES. If I durst speak my thoughts, & what I've heard, They impute this injuftice to the Nymph. PARTHENIA. It is not to be doubted but she is The Author of it, and this cruel punishment Denoteth that she studies high revenge, When she's offended. CLIDAMANT. Whatso'er her power be Which causeth fear, let us go presently With our complaint unto her: in my judgement, This is no way to make her self obey'd: Fear is the parent not of love, but hate. And that same fatal art which her revenge
Calls to her aid, establisheth her crime, And not her power. But here J see she comes. SCENA III. MELISSA, MELINTUS, CLIDAMAT, PAR∣THENIA, THIMANTES, ISMENIA. MELISSA to MELINTUS. WHat doth this stroak surprize thee? MELINTUS. Truly, Madam, Their punishment's too great, and all the Jsfland Murmureth at it. MELISSA. Shepheards, what say you? Can J revenge me of an injury? CLIDAMANT. Ye, Madam, and th'estate wherin y'ave put them Hath made all those their friends that envi'd them. Hear our petitions for them, and be pleas'd To do them justice: what have they committed Worthy of such a punishment? for having Hid their love from you, lived in your Court Under the name of brother, and of sister, Deceiv'd the hope and envy of their Rivals, Conserv'd their honour, and, perhaps, their life, s this so great a crime, as should be punish'd By charmes which have no end? must they be made To dye, and to revive continually By turns, and by a strange unworthy fate
The living be inforc'd successively Still to lament the dead? their pittious cryes, And hideous clamours give both souls & mouths Unto those rocks to join in plaints with me: The whole Isle's moved with them, and disturb'd PARTHENIA. Madam, I join in this petition, Vouchsafe to hear me: O forbear to dart Thunder and wrath upon this happy place, Where the Gods liberally pour upon mortals So many and so great felicities: Begin not to disturb the sweet repose Of an abode that's favoured by Heaven, To please those Shepheards, whose devotions May fix upon some other Sanctuary More safe, and other Soveraigns more sweet. THIMANTES. Yes, Madam, stop the mouth of this sad murmur, Let it be smother'd, this inchantment hath Continued too long, break, break the charm, And pacifie our spirits immediately, Which are astonished at this proceeding. ISMENIA. If in the freedom which J use too frequently, My mouth might date to speak, and not di∣please you, I should then tell you that this rigid course You take, would leave you here ner Shephear∣desses Nor Shepheards; they would seek this place no more For their retrait and sanctuary, but shun it Like a destroying rock; and this fair Iland The glory of the world, would be a wilderness: To enjoy subjects, rule your passions better, d be more soveraign over your self.
MELISSA. Shepheards, and Shepheardesses, your discourses Astonish and surprize me, know, my Art, Is a sufficient warrant for my actions; J could do greater yet, and stranger too: Though this which you have seen seemeth unjust Unto you, have you any right, or priviledge To complain to me, and to murmur thus? Much less to reprehend, and censure me? How! should the bold Shepheard Thersander dare To injure me, and to deride my power? Should he presume to lay aside his duty And respect for me, and I wink at it, That so can punish such an insolence? Presume it not, the blood of Zoroastres Is not yet born under so ill a star, J know its influence better, and can use it To the destruction of those that wrong me: Yes, Shepheards, I am skilful in the qualities Of herbs and roots, and as I have occasion J chuse them, some for poyson, some for medi∣cine: When I wil, I prescribed some to confound The memorie, and to distract the spirit; But those obnoxious weeds I never use But for their punishment that do offend me; Have I not reason to maintain my rank In dignity and honour? those that dare To brave me, without doubt, hazard themselves: My scepter's guarded with enwreathed serpents, Whose fearful aspects bid all keep aloof, And threaten death to those that dare to touch it: Thirsis hath felt their stings: what reason had he To be an enemy to his ovvn fortune And interest, in foolishly refusing The honour of the name to be my Nephevv:
I will advance him, and expect that he Shall yet accept this honourable title Of Husband to my Neece; Parthenia, Your colour changes, but in vain you hide Your thoughts from me, I can discover them, I know that you love Clidamant, and more What you design, and what you do discourse; But understand both one and t'other of you, That I must be obey'd in what I will; My power can force it; take heed ye provoke not My anger; if J may not be belov'd, J will be fear'd. PARTHENIA. Madam— MELISSA. It is enough, You know my prohibition. CLIDAMANT, I hope To bend her, but at present let's say nothing. THIMANTES. We all know your high rank and quality With reverence and respect, so in that notion We imploy but our prayers to perswade you; They are our onely arms, be touched with them, And dissipate these charms: Thersander, now Begins t'awake out of his fatal fit; You'l hear his plaints and clamours presently, His cryes and his despair for his dear Mistress This is the hour, wherein he is tormented: This object without doubt before your eyes Will raise up pitty, Madam, in your heart: His sighs will quench your anger, and prevail Much more then we; see he begins to move: Madam, you will be touch'd, to hear him speak.
SCENA IV. THERSANDER, DIANA, MELISSA, ISME∣NIA, PARTHENIA, CLIDAMANT, THIMANTES. THERSANDER by DIANAS body. O Lamentable object! why mine eyes Were ye not cover'd with eternal darkness, That J might not have seen this fatal spectacle? Oh! what cause have I to complain of fortune, That my sleep is not the last sleep of death? In the night of the Grave I should take rest, And not be ty'd to die thus all my life, I should be there but dust, and this sad sight Should not have martyred my heart and eyes. Yes, my dear Mistress, sometime my delight, Thy sight is now my greatest punishment, And in this sad estate wherein I see thee, Thou which wert once my joy, art now my grief; Thy body's but a trunk that gives me horror, Thy head all over's smoaking with thy blood, The graces lodge no more there, I see death In every place, where I saw love before: How! dost thou live no more then have I lost thee As soon as found thee hopes born and destroy'd With an immortal love, fantosine of fortune Which lasts good but a day, wealth too soon lost, Brightness too soon put out, excessive joy, To which so many plaints so soon succeed, Why in that splendor where with all you slatter'd, My name, did you promice so much unto me, And give so little. Fair eyes, sometimes conque∣rous, Whose lightsafe shut up in eternal night
In spight of all my prayers, call me not From death unto the light; is't possible That I can see here what Diana sees not No, no, I live no more since she is dead; Yet my heart moves; but this last strugling is But a small spark that's left behind, and shines A little after death; 'tis but a vapour, An exaltation, a wind, a smoak, Last dying and last kindled; I am coming To join with thee, object of my desire, To give thee soul for soul, and sigh for sigh; Death is my aid, my hope is but in her; I will express that I am faithful to thee In that, not able to survive thy fate, I put my self into the arms of death. CLIDAMANT. Madam, you see how great his torment is, And whereunto your hatred hath reduc'd him; You see besides how far without proportion Of the crime to the punishment, the power Of your inchantment goes; these woods weep at it; And these rocks which before heard no com∣plaints, Are pierc'd now with his cryes, and become soft, And sensible, the Eccho likewise mourns, And should you onely, Madam, be without Compassion for him. MELISSA. Yes, without compassion; Since he took pleasure alwaies to displease me, I'le please my self by a most just return Jn my revenge, and never cease t'afflict him: No, think not that J will incline to pitty. I'm too much injur'd to be pacifi'd His sorrow makes my joy, and I am glad To see that by this famous punishment
I shall establish my authority. THIMANTES. Diana's turn is now; see he revives To weep her lover, and immediately To follow him by the force of your Art: Sad spectacle? hearken unto her grief, And ope your eyes, and heart to her complaints, Diana upon Thersanders body. DIANA. What, my dear Lover, art thou then but dust! Alas! thy mouth wants speech, and thine eyes light. But inspight of the plot which makes me sigh, I have the happiness yet to lament thee: Flow, flow, my tears, and pour upon this object Torrents of flame, not water, there is nothing So cold in the dark bosom of the Grave, Which the fire of these Rivers cannot warm: Yes, by my tears at last, my cryes, my plaints, Dear ashes, I will kindle you again, Though cold now and extinguish'd like the Phenix I'le raise you up again by force of sights, Which you shall Eccho to me. THIMANTES. Madam can you Behold this sight, and not be moved at it! DIANA. Love, canst thou not answer to my desires! Thou art a miracle thy self, and therefore, Methinks, should'st do one: art thou in the world
No more a source of life? oh canst thou not Restore my lover to me, from whose armes They 'ave ravish'd him; which of the Gods can call him Back from the gates of death, if thou canst not? My dear Cleagenor, J pray thee, answer me By these my tender sighs, by Celia's name; How's this! I can pronounce thy name, and mine And yet, O Gods! thou answerest me nothing; I see, alas! thy mouth and eyes still shut: He's dead, and these names cannot touch him now. Love, since thou hast no power to succour me In that point as to make him live, at least Make me to dye: I come, my faithful lover, It is impossible I should survive thee; I feel that my despair t'enjoy thee here Gives me to death; my heart hath lost the spirits Which made it move, J scarce can utter more: Happy thy Celia, if her death could give Thee life again, if thy sleep might have end By mine, and if I could with all my blood Redeem thine; J have done, any love is coming To meet thy flame, and I espire upon thee The rest of my sad soul. CLIDAMANT. What! is your heart Not touch'd yet with this object? are you still Jnsensible of so much grief as she Suffers by your means? oh! let pitty yet Disarm your anger, the Inchanted Lovers
Have suffered enough Nymph, break the charm. MELISSA. Yes, I am touch'd at last, J must confess, And really am sorry for the evil Which they have drawn through their temerity Upon themselves; but though their grief appea∣seth My anger now, the charm which I have made J can't undo; to tell you truly, Shepheards, Jt is so strong that onely a Divinity Can break the chance on't; tis decree'd by fate That it shall last yet longer, and J cannot Prevent it, though it be my proper work. THIMANTES. How! cannot you prevent it? heavenly Gods, What saying's this? no, no, you have not left Your anger, but retain it still; and willing To punish them, and to revenge your wrong, Will make of them a lasting spectacle Unto the eyes of all; and to excuse Your self the better of this cruelty, Would put it off to some Divinity; But the Gods by our prayers and tears appeas'd, Jnspight of your attempts, wil stop your charms: Yes, Madam, the great Gods condemn your plots, They are the Soveraigns, and absolute Masters Of destiny, we hope all things from them, And that they'l suffer crime no longer here To raign and tyranize. Thou Goddess, which Art in this place ador'd which holdest fate, And fortune in thy hands, which hatest crime, and whose cares keep the Shepheards that serve thee
In this delightful Island, look upon The sad estate whereto love hat reduc'd Two miserable Lovers, whom the Nymph Pursues with horrid cruelty to death By fatal charmes, destroy the power of them, And render to this government again The liberty to lover, and to declare it. Thunder and lightning. PARTHENIA. Ha! what a sudden flash of lightning's this, That strikes mine eyes, and what a clap of thun∣der Shakes all this place? ISMENIA. With what a thick black cloud The Skie is cover'd? MELISSA. I believe Heaven trembles, And its Arch openeth; behold the Goddess Descends, and maketh sign, as if she'd speak: We must give audience.
SCENA Ultima. The Goddesse DIANA. DIANA. YOur prayers are heard, let nothing trouble you, Fair Celia and her Lover both shal live And love for ever, their afflictions Are ended, and I have dissolv'd the charm, No accident shall henceforth trouble them. They stir'd up pity in you, now they may Make you to envy them; search all Records, You'l find no subject equal to their love. THERSANDER, to DIANA. By what inchantment is thy life restord? DIANA, to THERSANDER. By what inchantment do'ft thou live again? The Goddesse continues. I'l recompense their inexemplar vertues, And pay the price of their affection; To consummate their happy Nuptials, I'l ope my Temple, and assure you all Of my protection. 'Tis my pleasure also That the love of the Shepheard Clidamant Be at the same time crown'd with Hymen's ho∣nours, And that he end his daies with sweet Parthenia, That henceforth he command in the Isle with her; My justice hath made choice of them to reign.
The Nymph I do degrade, she is too criminal, And dispense you of your obedience to her; I'l make the power of her Art unusefull; And free this Island from all future fear, And danger; but to save her from the Thunder Of the offended Gods, I will recive her Into my Temple, which shall be her Sanctuary. Her Sex hath long enough ruled the Province, I'l change the order of its Government, And henceforth it shall be under the power, And wise administration of a Prince, Which shall be of the blood of Clidamant From father unto son. Melissa seeing the Goddess to ascend. MELISSA. I confesse Goddesse, You do me justice in approving crime One makes himself a complice: without you, The Gods, high Soveraigns, Masters, and dispo∣sers Of destiny, would, sure, have punish'd me With death; I go into your temple now To imploy other charms, to wash away My criminal defilements with my tears To pray unto the immortal powers, whilst J Have breath, and so disarm them at your Altars: But to the end her law may be fullfill'd In every point, Cleagener, fail not To love your Celia. THERSANDER. O how redevable Am I to your rare goodness?
MELISSA. Clidamant, Enjoy what you deserve, accept Parthenia, With her, the crown, and succeed happily The rank which I freely resign unto you. CLIDAMANT. You command still, and keep your Soveraign rank, When the raign is conferr'd upon your blood; And by all my respects, I shall express That 'tis but in your name that I'l be Master. PARTHENIA. Though Heavens kind hand chuseth a husband for me, Since you allow him, I'l hold him of you, And will possess no honour here, nor power, But to express the more my service to you, And my acknowledgements. THIMANTES. Ismenia, Must we not couple too? ISMENIA. Yes, if the Goddess Had said it; we'l defer our marriage, Till she descends again. CLIDAMANT. Ismenia, I command in this place now, and J will it. ISMENIA. Since you will have it, I accept his vows Offaithfull service. If Melintus too Hath shaken of his jealousie, J must Be reconcil'd with him.
MELINTUS. Well, J agree to 't. Let us remain friends. CLIDAMANT. Heaven hath promis'd us. That we shall all be happy, let us go Forthwith unto the Temple to conclude This triple marriage, and henceforth we shall Honour this day as a great Festival. FINIS.
