L497 E127_4 R21639 99871467 156190
THE LAST NEWES FROM THE KINGS MAJESTIES Army now at MAIDENHEAD: CONTAINING Many Remarkable Passages, with Prince ROBERT his Intentions. ALSO Matters worthy of observation in and about the Ctiies of London and Westminster, with severall Pro∣ceedings of both Houses of Parliament to this present 11. of November. LONDON, Novemb. 11. Printed for T. Watson and J. Jackson. 1642.
The last Intelligence from His Majesties Army, together with Prince Roberts intentions, and other remarkable Passages and Proceedings in both Houses of Parlia∣ment to this present 11. of November. IT is a Maxime undeniable, that belli alea est incerta, the chance of warre is uncertain: even in lawfull under∣takings the successe is often ambigu∣ous, & proves contrary to our hopes somtimes; much more when two great Armies are met together, (such is the hazard of war) which of the two valiant Generals shalbe master of the field, is hard to determine: no mortall man can resolve this quaere, only the God of battels and Lord of hosts doth assigne victory to what and whose For∣ces, as himselfe pleaseth. At this present in regard of civill wars begun and continued amongst us, we are involved in a labyrinth of calamity, reduced to the very brink of misery and jawes of death. It is true, England and London never enjoyed so univer∣sall and blessed a peace as for a long time they have had, neither have they been molested or disturbed with any visible enemy in the world, either Chri∣stia or Infidell: our enemies are they of our owne house, such as our discords, divisions and distracti∣ons have raised up: and certainly where these are found (especially betwixt a King and his people) there is no greater cause of the misery and ruine of
a State. The Scripture informeth us; that a little ci∣ty united is very strong, but a great kingdome divi∣ded within it selfe cannot stand: there is not more strength and security in the one, then disquiet and instability in the other. From these premises this in∣serence I deduct, that our unhappy divisions and discords are the chief cause of our past troubles, present jealousies, and suture feares: so that Perditio tua est ex te, we may thank our selves for the mise∣ries we our selves have brought upon our selves. In∣tra muros hostis, the enemy is within the wals. The Parliament is informed of a malignant party with∣in the city of London, that hath privately endeavou∣red to invite the Kings Army to besiege London, promising to use their utmost power to betray the city into Prince Roberts possession. Whereupon it was ordered, that a Warrant in the name of both Houses should be sent to the Lord Maior, to have a speciall care of guarding the city, and to apprehend such malevolent and ill-affected persons in whom they could not confide, but are suspected will prove trecherous when opportunity shall concurre with their desires. There is no better way to eschew a dnger, then to premeditate of it before it come: and in a State, the wisdome of prevention is far be∣yond the wisdome of remedies. Praemoniti sunt prae∣muniti, they who are fore-warned are fore-armed. Hence is it that the great Councell of the Kingdom have been so circumspect for the publike good; as to put the Kingdome into a posture of defence, and strongly to fortifie the city of London, by enjoynin
all the trained Bands to be in a readinesse, amongst whom there are multitudes of soldiers lately come out of Essex, and now resident about the city. Hence is it that there are such trenches & bulwarks made in all places neer this city for the safety therof, that drums daily beat for more voluntiers to stand for the defence of the true Protestant Religion, the safe∣ty of His Majesties Person, the priviledges of Par∣liament, and the happy peace of the whole King∣dome. Hence is it that there is such incessant march∣ing up & down in the day, and such strong Courts of Guard in the night, and field-pieces of ordnance at every gate, and many other places, for preservati∣on of the city against the invasion of the enemy. Our adversaries are neer us, and their approach may be sudden, and sooner then we expect, and the hor∣rible outrages and insolencies which the Cavaliers have lately committed in all countreys where they have come, do teach the Citizens to put themselves into a posture of defence, least the Cavaliers having once entred London, (which God avert) should at∣tempt the like rapine and mischiefe, by plundering and pillaging them as lately they have done others. Prince Robert (they say) is become a notable Rob∣ber, who hath lately in his advancing towards Lon∣don seized upon whole cart-loads and waggons full of cloth coming to the city out of Glocestershire: His running army run away with all that they meet with in their way, and care not how they come by it so they may have it:
Unde habeant nemo quaerit, sed oportet habere. Meanes they must and will haue, they feare not by to haue it, they desire nothing more then to obtayne their own ends by a generall divastation and ruine of their own Countrey, they expect to be happy by others misery, and rich by their poverty; they would infringe our liberties, ensnare our conscien∣ces, haue swallowed us up long a goe in theire thoughts, having fancied to themselues the besie∣ging, and taking of the City of London, and (if re∣port be true) haue divided the streetes among them selues already, hoping all to haue Aldermens estates and to raise their decayed estates and lost fortunes by the fall and mine of others. These are their in∣tentions and practices, many of them having sup∣plied their necessities with ransacking of rich mens houses in townes, cities and countreys. Prince Ro∣bert an excellent horseman, and chief Captain of the Cavaliers (whose name signifies an horse-rider, be∣ing derived from the French word Chevalier) did to his utmost power seek to pillage his Excellencies waggons and carts loaden with silver and other ne∣cessary provision the last great battell at Kinton neer Banbury, which was the bloudiest battell for its continuance, that ever was fought in England: since which fight he hath menaced (if fame be not false) that when once he can but get into London, he will sell smocks as cheap as herrings are now sold in the city, he meant (as they say) the smocks of such as have caried their plate into Guild-Hall. In regard of these threatning speeches, and the like violent and
notorious actions, we have just cause to fear and be jealous: and therefore it is that the Commons of England do fear, for which cause they have put the Kingdome into a posture of defence; and in the ci∣ty of London every man stands upon his own guard; the former being an act of State-policy, and the latter an action of prudent security. Long may the Commons continue in their renowned resolution, and be united together as one man for the common good; and may our couragious Citizens like vali∣ant Centurions of old) march up and down for the safety of their Metropolis, and undauntedly stand in opposition, to keep out of their gates the outra∣gious Cavaliers. If they once enter with their for∣ces into London, we are then in great danger, but the Lord forbid they ever should, and I pray God they never may. In the mean time let us not cease to pray unto our good God, upon the bended knees of our soules, from the bottome of our hearts, that he would be graciously pleased to put a period to these unnaturall jarres, and uncivill warres, in his good time and pleasure; that these dismall clouds of dis∣sention and difference may be dissipated and scatte∣red, that there may be a cleer apprehension & right understanding between our royall Soveraigne and his loyall Parliament: for the happy effecting and accomplishing whereof, let us ascribe unto our all-sufficient God perpetuall praise, and to him I will subscribe for a conclusion this short prayer: O bone Jesu, esto nobis Jesus; O good Jesus, be thou unto us a Jesus; we confidently hope, rely, and depend
upon thy gracious mercy, that thou wilt not faile us now in the time of our extremity; we lift up our hands to the hornes of the Altar, and elevate our eyes to the hils, from whence cometh our help; as∣suring our selves, that as thou art able, so thou art willing (according to thy promise) to work all things together for good to them that love thee; and this not for any merits of ours, (for we disclaim them, nothing belonging unto us but shame and confusion of face) but for thy mercies sake, for thy names sake, for the peoples sake that are called by thy name, even for Christ Jesus sake, the annointed of God, and Saviour of man. O thou preserver of men, save and deliver us from the hands of our enemies, abate their pride, asswage their malice, and confound their devices, that we being preserved through thy help, may glorifie thee who art the on∣ly giver of all victory: to thee be rendred all ho∣nour and glory, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.
