M724 E1190_4 99867278 119583
XXIX. DIRECTIONS AND Considerations, stirring up to Watchfulnesse, where every Christian may get Armour in these dangerous times, to fight against Antichrist, and his Adherents. With Thirteen Principles of Religion; By M. Perkins: By way of Question and Answer. Shewing, What necessitie there is for all that are for Reformation, and are desirous to venture life fortune and estate, for Religion, King, Par∣liament, laws and liberties; against those who (if they prevail) will blot out Religion, and utterly destroy us all. Published by Richard Marsal Minister of Gods Word. Set forth by Authority, and printed with Order. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1647.
Thirteen Principles of Religion, taught by Mr. William Perkins, Preacher of Gods Word in Cambridge; (deceased) and sent to his Sonne in Law Iohn Hinde, resident in London in the Burrough of Southwarke. Q. WHat is your Happinesse; Answ. To know God and my selfe. Quest What is God; Answ. A spirituall substance, every way in∣finite; goodnesse it selfe, creatour and governour of all things: Distinguished into the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. Q. What art thou by Creation; Answ. A creature indued with the image of God. which standeth in righteousnesse and true helinesse. Q. What art thou by the fall of Adam; Answ. A sinner, and by my sins I have de∣served everlasting death which is the destru∣ction both of body and soule for ever, in the pit of Hell.
Q. What are thy principall sins? An. Guiltinesse in Adams first offence and the disposition of my heart to every evill, with the innumerable fruits thereof in thought, speech and action Q. What is the remedy of these sins? A. Jesus Christ the Son of God made man, who was cruecfied upon the crosse to redeeme all mankind that was lost in Adams disebedience in eating the forbidden fruit. Q. Sinner, how dost thou know that Christ was crucified for thee? A. By faith I believe that Christ was cruci∣fied for me and all believers, and thahe was made unto me wisdome, justification, sanctificati∣on, and redemption. Q. When doth this faith begin to be bred in thy heart? A. When I begin to be setled in the know∣ledge of the love and mercies of God in Christ and to hunger and thirst after Christ and his righteousnesse, above all the things of this world. Q. What is the meanes to begin and confirm this faith? A. The preaching of the word of God, reading reverent receiving the sacraments and prayer. Q. What is a Sacrament?
A. A signe to represent Christ till he came, a seal to confirm unto me his death and resurrec∣tion, an instrument to exhibite Christ with all his benefits to all believers. qu. What is Prayer? A. A speech to God made in faith wherein I ask in the Name of Christ, things wanting, and give thanks for blessings received. qu. What owest thou to God for thy redem∣ption? A. All thankfulnesse. qu. Wherein standeth thankfulnesse? A. In new obedience, which is to carry in my heart a constant purpose never to sinne any more but to endeavour to do the will of God, and that within the compasse of my calling, An Exposition on Mr. Perkins his Thirteen Principles. THe high calling that every child of GOD is called unto, is not this temporall calling which God hath placed us in, but out Election standeth in obedience to know Gods will, and to know what we are by nature, the children of wrath and fire-brands of hell, if we labour not to know God, and to be assured that Christ hath redeemed us from the second death, and that the
ates of Hell should not preaile against us; therefore our true happinesse is, to labour while we have time, to know our duty to God and man, and to labour to know, that of our selves we are lost in Adamstransgression, and that Christ hath made us frée citizens by his death and resurection. For man by nature in himselfe. out of Christ, is the unhappiest of all creatures that God made: therefore in these sad and perilous times, we must fit our selues for a better life, and whilst it is to day, har∣den not your hearts, but redeem your mis spent time, for the dayes are evill: Broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that find it; but narrow is the way that leadeth to everlasting life, and few there be that finde that strait gate. Therefore to labour to know Christ crucified that you may be sealed for the day of redemp∣tion: First, fast not as Adam fasted in eating the forbidden fruite, for which he lost Paradice, for in this world Paradice is wonne or lost? Mans life is short, and fraile, in comparison but a span long, therefore Christ bids us come buy milke without mony or price, Gods Word is swéeter then the honey or the honey combe: therefore let us taste the benefit that we have
by Christ and let us relish that by belief, Abra∣ham, Isaack, Jacob, and all the Patriarkes, were justified: It wet not Arons beard alone, but drencht his beard throughout, and finally it did rain downe his rich attyre. How precious it is and joyfull for to sée Brethren to hold together in the love of Christ, in the bouds of Unitie: and he that created us for this thing is God, who hath given us the earnest of his Spirit, For he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth, live unto themselves, but unto him: which died for us and rose againe. Therefore all they that desire to be in Christ, let them deny themselves, and hunger and thirst after Him and His righteousnesse aboue all the things in the world: For old things are past away, behold all things are become new, Now is the axe laid to the root of the Tree, eve∣ry tree that bringeth not forth fruit, shall be hewen downe and cast into the fire. Therefore let us deny our owne righteousnesse, and cry out with Saint Paul; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death; Therefore these thirteen Principles holds forth our happinesse to know what the essence of God is, in creating the world. Secondly, to know what we are by Adams disobedience in eating of the forbidden fruit
the which all Mankind standeth guilty of (which is our originall sinne which wee brought into this world) till we are grafted and baptised into Christs Flocke and made lively Members of the same. Thirdly, the mercies of God in Christ, that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head, and pierce his héel. All that by the eye of Faith lay hold upon this promise, are justified, and in fulnesse of time God sent his only begotten Son born of the Uirgin, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost; of whose Life, Death and Resurrection, his twelve Apo∣stles are witnesses: And to confirme his Death and Resurrection the night before he was betray∣ed (instituted at the eating of his Passeover) the Sacrament as a pledge. First in the breaking of Bread, which sets forth the breaking of his Body. Secondly he took the cup, drink ye all of this in remembrance that my body was broken, and my blod shd for you, and for many, for the remission of sins. Christs sufferings upon the crosse is our glo∣rification, which frees us from the second death: Therefore while wee have time, let us have re∣course to God in his Ordinances, for the righte∣ous man sinned seven times in a day: nay, se∣venty
times in a day. Therefore, how much néed have we to renew our covenant with God, and to forsake our sins and to loath them, and conditi∣on with God to become new creatures, that the guilt of sinne may be taken away. For Christ prest upon man, so oft as you take this sacrament by beliefe you are healed, and re∣new your covenant with GOD, to become new creatures. Let us take héed that we put not off this pre∣tious time lest we be numbred with the Foolish Uirgins tht while they went to buy Oyle, the wise Uirgins entred into the wedding chamber with the Bridegroome: so many put off this du∣ty, excusing themselves that they are not fitted; that is the Divels policy: First, labour to try your selves what you are by nature, then the be∣nefit you haue by Christ; He bids us, To day if you will hear my voyce, harden not your hearts, to morrow is not ours again: Christ saith, Come unto me, all that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Therefore, wee ought to crave a blessing of GOD by prayer, on all dur endeavours, whe∣ther in our callings, or in our walking abroad, or what ever we take in hand, we ought alwayes to pray to GOD for his blessing, and to desire his Kingdome to come, and his will to bee done.
For God requires nothing of us but thankfull∣nesse, and obedience to walke with him, with a purpose of knowledge of life: Therefore let us beseech the Lord, in mercy to open our blinde understanding, and to guide us in the right way, tht the commandements, the Articles of our Beliefe, and the Lords Prayer, may be a savour of life unto life, and not a savour of death unto death. Therefore let us remember our creatour in the dayes of our youth  adversitie, before the evill dayes come or the yeaes approach, when we shall have no joy in them, and to cast off our sinnes by repentance. For the Lord hath pro∣mised, he will not leave us nor forsake us hough we suffer for a season.
Considerations exciting to watchfullnesse against Temptations and motions to sinne, 1 COnsider the gorious and dreadfull, Majesty o that God with whome thou hast to doe he is a conuming fire, his commandments are to be obeyed, his threatnings to be feared, his service not to be slighted, but to be performed with watchfullnesse and feare, &c. 2 Consider thy sins, that in number exceed the hairs of thy head, in weight and measure the sand of the sea, the vilenesse of sin, the unthankfullnesse of thy sin in respect of that good God who hath done more for thee then for others. 3 Weigh the fearefull curses and punishments threatned against sin, and misery of this life, eter∣nall ntolerable torments hereafter. 4 Nothing melts the heart like love, ponder therefore the infinite love of God, and the rich grace of Christ taking thy sin upon himselfe, and bearing the wrath of his Father, which was due to thee. 5 Awaken thy soule with meditation of the small number of those that shall be saved, the mul∣titude of those that shall perish, the certainty of their damnation who carelesly despise, or willful∣ly abuse the grace of Jesus Christ to carnall secu∣rity,
orwilful continuence in known sinne. 6 Never call to mind the Divels unwearied ma∣lice, violence, and subtilty, how he goes up and down like a roaring Lyon, seeking whom he may devour, to whom it is easie to become a prey. 7 Know the desperate corruption that is in thy heart ready to betray thee to the basest lust, and most abhominable wickednesse. 8 What terrours of conscience what sharp and stinging scourges of outward crosses, sicknesse, pains, poverty, may God inflict to rouse thee out of thy spiritual slumber, if other means avail not. 9 How unworthily hast thou rejected the com∣mandment of God, whose mercie have been and are so abundant and free towards thee, with pro∣mise of more and larger mercies then for the pre∣sent thou enjoyest. 10 What snares and temptations thou art every day exposed to, by occasions ministred from the flesh within from the world without sometimes from the godly as well as from the wicked. 11 Consider thy latter end the shortnes of life, how it is subject to a thousand calamities, & no∣thing to be done for God or thy soul, after death. 12 Meditate on the noblenesse and excelency of thine immortal soul it is born to a higher imploy∣ment then the service of a base lust, or of the va∣nishing world, that is not fit to put pibbles in a golden caket.
3 Often revolve in thy mind the infinite glo∣ry of heaven & that eternal happinesse there kept in flore for them that fight the good fight of faith and finish their course and keep the faith, & look for the appearing of Jesus Christ. 14 Be every day drawing some sweetnesse from the precious promises of all sorts for comforts of this life to them that love God, and forsake any thing for Christ, that all things shall work toge∣ther for good to them, no good thing shal be with∣holden from them, and for any thing thou hast forsaken, thou shalt receive them in this world in the midst of persecutions, an hundred fold more, and eternal life in the world to come. 15 Behold the experience of the sweet peace of conscience, and blessed contentation, and spiritual rejoycing in the midst of tribulations and perse∣cutions that is found in many of the servants of God and withall prosesse to be certainly attaina∣ble by those that watch and pray and are sober, & exercise that faith and grace which the Lord hath imparted to them.
Christian directions concerning duties in evell times. 1 BE diligent to examine thy selfe whether thou art in the state of grace, or no, when we are like to be tried, it is wisdome to doe it be∣fore hand. 2 Strive with God to get thine heart weaned from the love of this preent world; a thing which is but hanged on a pin, is oon heaved off; things glued together are hardly sundred, excessive love to the world makes the Crosse ten times heavier. 3 Be much with God in holy duties: when Iu∣das plotted against our Saviour, he prepared for the Passeover, and last Supper: let us be moved with reverence to use the meanes to haue our selves and our families say to God, Thou art my hiding place, enter into thy closet, shut the doore to thee, hide thy selfe with God, untill the indig∣nation be over-passed. 4 Pray earnestly that thou mayst enjoy the fa∣vour of God, which is better then life. It is in∣tollerable to feare the wrath of God, and to bee deprived of all comfort of the creature at once. 5 Exercise thy selfe to keepe a clear conscience towards God and man, that if crosses and trou∣bles come to molest the outward man, yet thou mayest have sweet peace within. 6 Acquaint thy felse with the pretious pro∣mises: they will bee as strong water to keepe
the from sainting in the day of triall. 7 Get into thy heart the experimentall know ledge and love of the truth: you can never suffer for that you know not, much lesse for that you love not. 8 In evill times be forward to comfort and encourage others: for God hath a book of re∣membrance to write their names in, Mal. 3. 16. who often meet to commune together of the wayes of God. 9 Set before your eyes the joyes of heaven, as Jesus Christ did, and Moses, and Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and all the Martyrs, who for the name of Christ suffered tormenting deaths; our momen∣tany sufferings shall be recompenced with eter∣nall refreshings. 10 Spare not one sinne unmortified: for the love of any one sinne will work us more woe then all our enemies, and raise doubts and feares in us when others shall have comfort. 11 Cast away all confidence in thy selfe, trust not to any righteousnesse or work of thine owne; in his owne strength shall no man prevaile: boast not thy selfe of any thing in thee, but bee strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Eph. 6. 10. 12 Take heed unto thy words, The prudent shall keepe silence in evill times: It is their wisdome
to  now before whom and w that erhey speake. 13 Exercise your selfe in works of mercy, Cas thy bread upon the face of the waters, though it sem to be lost for the present, yet afterward thou shalt find it, Again, Give a portion to seven, and al¦o to eight, because thou knowest not what dayes  ome, take the present season to doe good in, the mercifull have the promise of mercy. 14 Prepare for a Judgment before it come, forewarned by Gods faithfull watchmen, fore∣armed; meditate upon the miseries which have befaln our neighbour nations, the Sword, famine, pestilence devouring thousands, and what do we know how God will deal with us. Those who slight God and Religion in prospe∣rity, take up religion for credit, and will not en∣dure small trials, they will not suffer the power of Religion to come into their hearts, nor will for religion and the truth, lay down their lives. FINIS,
