n1126 e1188_5 99867220 119524
The First Epistle. A CRYING VOICE of the holy Spirit of Love, wherewith all People are out of meer Grace, called and bidden by H. N. to the true Repentance for their Sins, to the Entrance into the upright Christian Life, and to the House of the Love of Jesu Christ. Luke 15.7. There shall be more joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repenteth, then over ninety and nine just persons that need no Repentance. O how lovely are the Feet of the Messengers that publish the Peace, preach the Good, and witness or declare the Salvation! Isa. 52.7. Rom. 10.15. Behold, I will send mine Angel or Messenger, which shall prepare the way, or path, the Street be∣fore me, Mal. 3.1. Matth. 11.10. Mark. 1.2. Luke 7.27. To day if ye hear his voice, then harden not your Hearts, that ye bide not without the Rest of the People of God, Psal. 95.7, 8. Heb. 3.15. and 4.7. Printed in the yeer, 1648.
The First Epistle. The First Chapter. THis is the Crying, or Voice, which cometh to passe, and is heard now in this present day, through the holy Spirit of the Love of Iesu Christ, and wherewith all People, are by H. N. called and bidden to the Repentance for their sins, and to the house of the Love of Je∣su Christ; theIsai. 32. Heb. 3. Heb. 4. Rest of all the Saints, or Chil∣dren of God; (And not alone with this Cal∣ling, but also with all the Scriptures heavenly testimonies, and spirituall Voyces of the eter∣nall Truth, which are gone forth from the ho∣ly Spirit of Love, and brought to light by H. N.) like as the Holy Ghost hath spoken there∣of, and warned all people, that they in that present day when they hear his voice, should in no wise hardenPsal. 95. Heb. 3. their hearts [namely, that they should not refuse2 Cor. 6. Heb. 12. nor resist the same proffered Grace, but humbly endeavour them thereunto] to the end, they might enter into the godly Rest, which, till unto this same day of Love, is reserved for the People of God for to rest them therein. 2. The most highest hath also, after such a long time that He had promised thePsal. 95. Heb. 3. Rest to the people of God, yet once more appointed a day, on theActs 17. which the universall Earth should be judged with Righteousnesse.
3. Therefore, as the holy Ghost saith,Psal. 95. Heb. 3. To day if ye shall heare his voice, (that is, when the time now is fulfilled, that the day of Love, which the most highest hath appointed to be a Rest for the People of God, declareth it self, then shall ye heare, that yee,Isa. 42. Cap. 51. O all ye Peo∣ple, are called and bidden to the same Grace and Mercy,) then harden not your hearts. 4. Let every one2 Cor. 6. Heb. 12. take heed to this same gra∣cious time, that he may live, and rest him in this same day from his Works, Travell, andApoc. 14. Labour. 5. Seeing then there is yet a RestIsa. 32. Hebr. 4. at hand for the people of God, which is made mani∣fest, and inherited in the family of Love, and that without the same or without his Service, there is nothing but allDeut. 12. good thinking,Isa. 59. te∣dious travell, labour, and misery, therefore doth not the holy spirit of Love cease this day, by his minister H. N. to call and bid all peo∣ple to the same family of Love,Psal 16. Psal. 84. Ecclus 24. Apoc. 21. full of all lovely being, and to his safe-making service to the preservation of them all in the godliness. and to warn them every oneIsa. 13. cap. 30. cap. 47. Dan. 12. Matth. 24. of the Wo and misery, & of the plagues of good-thinking that shall come upon them that remain without the same, or that will not suffer themselvs to be led into the same through the service of the said family of love, to the end, that they might all now in the service of love, and in the obey∣ing
of his requiring, do uprightMat. 3. Luke 3 Act. 2. & 3. repentance for their Sins, and enter into the Rest of the Lord. The Second Chapter. BEare sorrow for your sins,Ezek. 18. Matth. 3. and shew up∣right fruits of Repentance, the greatIsai. 14. Ioel 2. Obad. 1. day of the Lord is come hard by, and will now as a righteousIer. 46. Soph. 1 2. judgement of God, appear over the whole Earth. 2. Let every one now turn him away from the wicked world, and from the Abomination ofDan. 9. Matth. 24. her desolation, & make his repair hither to theIsai. 2. Mich 4. hill of the love, whereon the Lords house is builded, that he may be preserved in this same day of the righteous judgement of God. 3. Yea, turn you hither betimes to the house of the Love of Jesu Christ, and to his sake-making service; bear sorrow rightly for your sins,Matth 3. Luke 3. Luke 13. Acts 2. and shew forth upright Repentance or amendment for the same, O ye strayed people, before the day of the Lord fall upon you,Soph. 2. Mal. 4. to the recompencing of your wickednes. 4. Come now all hither, where the heaven∣ly day light,Isai. 60. Sap. 5 the Sun of righteousness shineth, and where the watersEzek. 36. Apoc. 22. of life flow forth out of the fountain of the living Godhead, to the purging of your Sins. 5. Let every one now forsake his own word, doctrine, and taken-on knowledge, and also the word, doctrine, and knowledge of allIer. 23.27.29. Ezek 13. Mich. 3. un∣sent
preachers, and good thinking wise-ones, whereby ye be seduced, blinded from the true fruits of Repentance, and estranged from the true sanctification of your spirit and mind: and come now all to this sameIer. 29. Ier. 31. Mich 1. sanctuary of God, out of the which the Lords livingIsai. 2. word is witnessed, the true repentance for the Sinne made known, and the uprightEphes. 4. Col. 3. righteousness and holiness of Jesu Christ taught, where-through ye be brought to the right quieting of your Consciences, to theMat. 11. health of your souls, and to the sanctification, orRom. 12. Eph. 4. renewing of your spirit and mind. 6. For that cause, come now all to this same hill,Isai. 2. or house of Love: and in his out-flowing water,Ezek 13. Ezek. 36. clense and amend, or hallow your be∣ing under the obedience of the Love of Iesu Christ, that your sins may beActs 3. wiped out, and ye become led even so into theIsai. 32. Heb. 3. Heb. 4. rest of all the children of God, and Saints of Iesu Christ. 7. Come now all likewise, which through yourRom. 1. Ephes 4. ignorant knowledge, or misunderstand∣ing, have turned away your selves from this sameIsai. 16. Heb. 5. seat of Grace, and lovely house of the love of Iesu Christ, and from ourIohn 17. 1 Ioh, 1. Commonal∣ty, grown offended at our meanes or2 Cor. 1. simple∣ness, and at the godly testimonies of our say∣ings, and so made up your selves2 Tim. 1. 2 Tim. 3. resistant a∣gainst us, and our good doctrine and exercises, separated your selves from us, and grown bit∣ter
or wrathfull towards us, together withall ye that have mistrusted us, andIohn 8. Iohn 10. 2 Thes. 2. not beleeved the holy word of the eter∣nall Truth, which we by Gods grace, do ad∣minister under the obedience of the love, but doubted therof, and so for that cause, through some perverse conceiving towards the same, or, towards us, refused theProv. 1. proffered grace, or kept your selves back:e Ezek. 18. and repent you for your sins, to your sanctification, and to the health of your souls. 8. Come likewise all ye, which through any opinion of the self-wise-ones, or through any good thinking, or imagination of the know∣ledge, have binProv. 18. unregarding towards this same gracious and godly service of Love, and towards his requiring; and also ye, which have heard or read the testimonies of the holy Spi∣rit of the Love of Iesu Christ, and shewed no right obedience; as likewise all ye, which have over-reached your selves in any disorderlySap. 14. Rom. 1. dealing, or false2 Pet. 2. Iude 1. freedom, or in hearing, and beleeving of anyIer. 23. Ier. 17. unsent Preachers, and so are faln to yourIer 7. Ier. 18. own counsell, or to the counsell of those that stand not submitted to the house of the love of Iesu Christ, nor to his service and requiring, or are strangers thereunto; or yee that through your negligence, or little re∣gardingPro. 6. Prov. 24. of the requiring of the service of love, are become vainly minded, with the wic∣ked
world, and with the vain or falseRom. 2. 2 Pet. 2. Praters through the imagination of the knowledge, that false light, come andEcles. 7. 1 Pet. 5. humble you, and let all your understandings be renewed, and to the obtaining of a good,Ephes. 4. knowledge of Ie∣su Christ and his godliness, brought to right under the obedience of the love: and under the same1 Pet. 1. obedience,Ezek. 36. wash your bodies with the pure water of the love, and so cleanse your hearts from all ungodly being,Isai. 1. and wicked thoughts. 9. Come now all hither, andGal 6. Ephes. 5. Apoc. 2. Apoc. 3. neglect not your time, to day becometh the grace of the love of Iesu Christ, poffered yet unto you all, and the hand reached forth serviceably with the same, to a peaceableEph. 4. Col. 3. Reconcilement with each other in Iesu Christ, to an unity of heart with us in all love. 10. Yea, to day (ere ever theProv. 1. Mat. 15. punishment of the last judgement go forth over all ungod∣ly ones, to their condemnation in the hellish fire) yet yee be all called and bidden, even out of meer GraceEph. 1. Eph. 2. and hearty love, to the Com∣monalty of Saints, which1 Ioh. 1. have their fellow∣ship with Christ in the house of the love of Iesu Christ, and that altogether to the preser∣vation of you all in the godliness.
The third Chapter. COme likewise all ye People, Governours, and Subjects, noble, and unnoble, rich, and poor, wise, and simple, as also all menMat. 9. sin∣ners, and women sinners: Turn you about be∣timesHeb. 5. to the Mercy seat, ere ever that ye be quite and clean swallowed up by the wicked world, or with seducing babling, through the false light, and overwhelmed with the curse by the wrathEccles. 5. Mal. 4. Rom. 2. of God. 2. Come now all hither, and confesse your sins, lay open theProv. 18. Eccles. 4. inwardnes of your, hearts, and bring forth rightMat. 3. Luke 3. fruits of Repentance: and so then suffer your selves to beEzek 36. Heb. 10. washed with the pure and safe-making water of the love in the Font ofSap 3. Eccles. 2. humiliation, to the end, that ye may beRom. 5. Rom. 8. Heb. 9. justified or cleansed from all your sins, received into the holy Commonalty of love, to beRom. 12. Ephes. 4. fellow members of the Body of Iesu Christ; and bide standing in holyPsal. 45. Sap 5. gar∣nishing, and not perish with the wicked world, when as she now in this same day is judged with the Lords mighty hand. 3. Which wicked world is kept2 Pet. 3. to the hel∣lish fire till unto this day of love, for to con∣demn the same for evermore in the same day of love, to her eternall cursing andMat. 25. 2 Pet. 3. judge∣ment of other fires cruelty, together with all
those that maintain the wicked world, as also are affected to the same, and will not turne them to Repentance. 4. Verily, in the same day, when as now all ungodly ones,Mat. 25. 2 Thes. 1, 2 Iude 1. and all self-wise-ones, with all unrepentant ones, & false hearts of the Scrip∣ture-learned, which in their own opinion, have falselyMat. 24. boasted themselves very stoutly to be Christians; do inherit the terriblePsal. 13. Psal. 47. Rom. 2. condemna∣tion with many smarts in the cruelty of the hellish fire, then shall the people of God, [namely, the whole Commonalty of the love of Iesu Christ, and all those that have turn∣ed them penitently from their sins, to the same Commonalty or family of love]Isai. 35. Isai. 65. rejoyce them in all love, and obtain a perpetuallIsai. 32. Sap. 3. rest in the everlasting life, according to the promises of God the Father, and his Christ. 5. For that cause, O all ye people upon earth, take heed to this my voice or calling, to this profferedProv. 1. Isai. 49. Grace, and to my warning, all yee, saith the holy Spirit of love, which will remain preserved, and be saved now in this same last day. 6. For after the day of love (inasmuch as it is the last or newest day, onActs 17. the which the whole earth shall be judged with Righteous∣ness) there shall noApoc. 10 day of grace appeare any more upon the earth, but a severe, or
hardHeb. 10. 2 Pet. 3. judgement over all ungodly ones, as is before said. Take it to heart. The End of the first Epistle. The Second Epistle. A short and pithy Instruction of the Mysterie of the Love. Labour for Love: Earnestly covet spirituall Gifts: but chiefly, that ye may prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.1. The End of the Commandment, and the chief sum of faith, is love, with a pure Heart, and with a good Conscience, and with unfained faith, 1 Tim. 1.5. There was demanded, and an Instruction required thereupon in writing, which is the Secretness, or Mysterie of the Love; and there∣upon is answered by H.N. in writing, accord∣ing to the Declaration of the spiritual and hea∣venly truth; this Instruction here following. He that hath Eares to hear,Mar. 13. Luke 8. Apoc. 2.3. let him hear. He that hath Wisdom, let him conceive under∣standing.
The First Chapter. WIth whom shall IProv. 8. speak (saith the Wisdom) that shall understand my words? 2. To whom shall I reveal the Mystery of the love, that shall conceive or know it? 3. VVho are those that give eare unto my doctrine, and have found my wayes? 4. Who hath marked where my dwelling is, and followed after me in my out-going and in-going? 5. Who hath born the contempt, blasphemy, and shame with me, when I lay in theProv. 1. Isai 59. street, where the people shaked their Heads atPsal. 22. Psal. 109. me (as at aIsai. 53. Sap 2. filthy thing that is worthy to be cast away) and as mad and frantick men, ran over me with feet? 6. Who hath had his pleasure in me, when I was soIsai. 53. Sap. 2. filthy and so loathsome to look up∣on, or to behold, before all wisdom of the flesh and of the Unrepentant ones? 7. Who hath denyedMat. 10. Mat. 16. Mar. 8. Luke 9. Luke 14. himself, and is for the loves sake, gone out of himself with me, when I did in the love require the mans salvation, and was condemned to the deathMat. 26. Mat. 27. Marke 15. Luke 22. John 18. Iohn 19. of the Crosse, and killed with the same death by the wise ones of the earth, as a despised one, or an out-cast upon the earth? 8. Who hath born such a deathRom 6. Phil. 2. of the Cross
with me, in all shame, despising, blaspheming, and wicked defamation, and shewed patience therein, even unto the death? 9. Who hath suffered himself to be buried in the heart of the earth with me, like one that is dead? 10. Who hath believed myIob 19. Dan. 12. 1 Cor 15. 1 Thes. 4. rising from the death, or trusted thereon, for to rise also with me, with his body? 11. Who hath seen mineMat. 16. Luke 24. Acts 1 ascension to God my Father, unto his right hand in the heaven∣ly being, and waited my comingIsai 25. Isai. 30. Mich 7. Phil. 3. from thence to a righteousnes upon the earth? 12. Who hath marked that I live and raign withEcclus. 24. God, and that my greatnes is more then all3 Reg. 8. 2 Par. 2.6. heavens can comprehend; where also no earthly1 Cor. 2. understanding, nor all whatsoever is born out of the earthly blood, can know me? 13. And if now there be any man that is pas∣sed thorow all these things with me, or that doth now presently go thorow this narrow way4 Esd. 7. Mat 7. Luke 13. with me to the life, he shall understand, and know the mysterie of the love. 14. He shall likewise taste and feel the per∣fection of all goodness, and approach to the love in her vertuous nature, and become of one being therewith. 15. Behold and consider, that is the ground of the holy and godly understanding, touching the Mysterie or Secretnes of the upright love.
The Second Chapter. OYe lustfull Souls to the mysterie of the love, gather out the1 Esd. 8. minde, and search no further. For doubtless the love suffe∣reth not her self to be approached unto, un∣derstood, nor known, neither for this nor that, nor through any manner of cause (let it be by what meanes soever it will) nor through any manner of minde or will, but only by her own vertuous nature and lovely being, as through her self, or through her service. For shee, the everlasting good, excelleth it all far away. 2. Also, she receiveth nothing of any man; but she her self, out of her almighty and ver∣tuous nature and spirit, is a plentiful distribu∣trix of her own abundant riches, as an infinite flowing river of all godly goods, alwaiesGen. 2. re∣freshing the Paradise of the Lord. 3. The Love is her self a nurse unto her chil∣dren, and a sure band unto all those that are incorporated to the everlasting life, and a mighty strength, which is able to suffer and to endureCor. 13. all things. 4. The Love is also anExod. 3. cap. 19, 20 Isai. 33. holy mountain, the which no man being unhallowed, or unpre∣pared, may touch or come neer. For whosoe∣ver toucheth the same mountain, and is not of her part, to him is she a consuming fire, whose burning heatIsai. 33. no man can endure, but he
which is of her like nature or seed. Who so resisteth, and submitteth not himself under her, and her service, he shall be broken and batte∣red to pieces likePsal. 2. Isai. 30. Ier. 18. Ier. 19. a Potters Vessell. 5. The love in her service, is an originall, or beginning of all good and upright life: For through her service, she draweth the minde, and thoughts of the heart away from all that is vaine, corruptible, and evill. 6. She unbindeth, or looseth the everlasting perfection: For to come into the life of the e∣ternall uncreatedness, in the kingdom of the God of heavens, full of all pure beauty, where∣in all earthly, and corrupt self-minded thoughts doe cease, and where the corruptible mortali∣ty is not beholden. 7. For in the love is nothing else but all good and life, as also the heavenly and endless king∣dom of Jesu Christ, in full undisturbable pow∣er, wherein the mindes of the pure hearts doe dwell free without care or fear, with allIsai. 35. Isa. 51. Apoc. 21. glo∣ry and joy, and with Christian Triumph. 8. Which freedom of the children of God, which fulness of the godly delights, and of the godly life, no man can obtain, that hangeth his delight, will, and life, and tyeth, or bindeth himself, on the earthly, visible, or corruptible beeing. But they remain vainly-minded in the darkness of the unbelieving mindes, whoseRom. 1. Eph. 4. hearts are blinded with the vain comfort of
this world, and of the good-thinking wise ones. For which Ignorances cause they can∣not understand the right ground of the secret love. 9. But salvation andLuke 2. Peace be unto all those that are good of will, and that take heed to the time1 Cor. 6. Heb. 12. of grace, that give their understanding captive under the obedience of the Love, and that doe even so with humble and obedient hearts, beleeve, or trust the love in her Service. 10. Happy are they, whose devotion of heart God stirreth up thereto. For through the love of God the Father, it shall all beActs 5. resto∣red again, whatsoever is estranged or turned away from God from the beginning of the World, and that is well-minded to the Con∣version unto his God, to the end, that it may all through the Love stand firm in his upright estate for ever. 11. Even thus it shall all be accomplished in the love, whatsoever God hath spoken in time pastActs 3. by the mouth of all his holy Prophets. For all what is gone forth fromMat. 22. Mar 12. Luke 10. God in times past, even from Adam till unto Christ, reach∣eth to the love, because that the love may in the last time, as an everlasting remnant, grow and blow, and bring forth her fruit abundant∣ly. For the Love is the Inheritance of the e∣verlasting Kingdome, as an endlesse safe-making service, according to the Promises,
unto all, and over all those that beleeve there∣on. 12. The same verily is theGen. 12. Gen 13. Gen. 15. Gen. 17. Gen. 22. Blessing which the God of heaven hath promised to Abra∣ham and his seed, to the blessing of all gene∣rations of the earth. 13. Of the same Blessing and upright beeing of the Love, we have witnessed and set forth in writing, with more and fuller Instruction or larger Declaration, in the glasse of righteous∣ness, to the end that every one which with our Commonalty giveth himself to the Love, and to the requiring of her service, might be satis∣fied in his understanding. And likewise to the peace and joy of all lovers of the truth which are furthersome to the service of Love, to the salvation of many men, Because that even so, throughEsa. 32. Esa. 62. the Love, the peace may be prepared upon the earth, which hath long lainEsa. 24. waste. 14. For the end,Rom. 13. Gal. 5. 1 Tim. 1. or the perfection of all things, (namely, the chief sum of all good, or all what one can name for righteousnesse and truth) that is the Love: Yea, all what is to be known or understood of the godly things, that1 Cor. 13 1 Iohn 2. 1 Iohn 9. 1 Iohn 4. is the Love; and her mistery is the ever∣lasting life. The Third Chapter. BEhold and consider; to that end hath the Truth her flowing forth (like as the
same is Image-like or figuratively set forth or patterned outExo. 25. Act. 7. Heb. 8. by Moses in the former ex∣ample) for to draw it all under the Love, even as the same is now likewise by the holy spi∣rit of the Love of Iesu Christ, openly and nakedly declared unto us, in the true beeing. But not by figures, Images, nor out of the let∣ter, but by the cleerness and appearing of theMal. 3. Mal. 4 Mat. 16. Mat. 24. Mat. 25. Mark 13. 2 Thes. 1. Act. 1. Apoc. 1. coming of our Lord Iesu Christ in his glo∣ry. In which day or cleerness of the coming of Christ in his Glory, the Resurrection of his deadDan. 12. Iohn 5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 Thes. 4. Apoc. 20. cometh to passe; who do also live with Christ in glory, and doe keep the judge∣ment with him, against all ungodly ones. 2. This verily is the trueEsa 3. Sap. 3 Mat. 19. 1 Cor. 6. Iude 1. coming of Iesu Christ, who appeareth and cometh now un∣to us, from the right hand of God the Fa∣ther, who is almighty; to keep a righteous judgement upon earth, even as is written thereof. 3. In which righteousness, the true Love of God the Father standeth comprehended or grounded; and out of the same righteousness hath the Love her Service upon the earth, to a perpetuall banishment of all wicked and evill-willing nature, and to an everlasting implanting of the holy ones of God, into his Love, to the end that the earth may even so (through the Love and her Service) be renew-and cleansed from all her unrighteousness.
4. But all those that are unbeleeving touch∣ing theRom. 2. truth, and ungodly or evill of will, shall also be judged in this same day, through the Love and her Service. 5. There shall no man likewise remain stand∣ing in the same judgement, that resisteth the Love, and despiseth her service. For theEsa. 40. Esa. 60. & 62. glo∣ry of God is revealed, through the revealing of the coming of Jesu Christ in the obedience of the Love, for that the earth may be full of theNum. 14 Psal. 72. glory of God, according to the Promi∣ses, and that all people may walke in the Love; and that the Love in her Service, may even so (as a light of life) flourish for evermore, among the children of men, and get theCol. 3. superiority in their hearts, to an everlasting thanksgiving un∣to God, for their salvation of life in the peace, which (by Gods grace) is come unto them u∣pon the earth, through the Love. 6. This same (even as we have here witnessed and declared it) is assuredly the right mysterie of the Love. It is also the true laud of the Lord, and the triumph of Christ with all his Saints, to an everlasting establishing of the promises of God the Father; and that altogether through the1 Cor. 13 Love and her Service. Which Love and her Service shall (according to the promises of God the Father & his Christ) con∣tinue from everlasting to everlasting. It is ve∣ry true. The End of the Second Epistle.
The Third Epistle. A groundly Instruction, wherin the difference betwixt God the Father, and his Son the Lord Iesus Christ, is declared, according to the spirituall and heavenly understand∣ing. Holy Father, this is the everlasting life; that they know thee, that thou only art very true God, and him whom thou hast sent, Iesus Christ. Iohn 17. There was demanded by a lover of the truth, and an Instruction desired, touching the diffe∣rence betwixt God the Father, and his Sonne the Lord Iesus Christ. And thereupon is answe∣red by H. N. in writing, according to the de∣claring of the spirituall and heavenly truth, this Instruction hereafter following. The First Chapter. I Have thus long deferred for to answer thee thy demand in writing, which thou belo∣ved brother desiredst of me, when I was last with thee; because of certain matter that were needfull for me first of all to further. Where∣through I, by that occasion, have not hitherto had convenient time to accomplish the same. 2. But I have not for all that forgotten thy demand, nor through slothfulness neglected
to write unto thee: neither do I desire in any wise, to deny thee thy request: but am alwaies welwilling to witness the same unto thee, ac∣cording to that understanding which the Lord giveth unto me; so much as it is profitable for thee to edification. Notwithstanding, I am burthened in my heart, because I have promi∣sed upon thy demand to write thee an An∣swer. 3. But not that the ground of the matter about the which thou hast questioned with me, and desired of me to answer the same in writing, is so hard or profound of understand∣ing, to answer, oh no, but because that the un∣derstanding of the same mind, is so utterly un∣knownMat 11. Mat. 13. Iohn 14. Ephes. 3. before all sense of the flesh. 4. Yea, how naked and bare soever the Scripture sheweth it, according to the mind of the Spirit, yet can it not for all that be un∣derstood1 Cor. 2. nor conceived by flesh and blood, unlesse the man must first, according to the counsell of the Scripture, be turned into ano∣ther mind. 5. Seeing now that the Scriptures of the A∣postles of Christ is spirituall,1 Iohn 5. 1 Iohn 6. and witnesseth of spirit and life, and that the man which readeth the testimonies thereof in the Letter standeth captived with a fleshly mind,Rom. 7. under the sin of his own good-thinking and sotaketh upon him out of the same mind of the flesh,
and his own good-thinking, to understand the mind of God out of the Letter,1 Cor. 2. so can he not doubtless bring it to passe, for his fleshly senses, and good-thinking thoughts, doe surely stretch no further, but like to such an In∣telligence, or knowledge of the fleshly un∣derstanding. 6. For that cause also the mind of the man doth not out of the letter of the Scriptures, understand nor comprehend the mind of God rightly, by meanes whereof there is likewise now at this present day (like as came to passe also in times past amongIer. 26. Ier. 28. Ier. 29. Mat. 12. Mat. 23. Mat. 26. & 27. the worldly wise, & Scripture-learned ones) much contention, va∣riance, and controversie found among the children of men, who doe contend about that which they themselves understand not, and will seem to know that which according to the mind of their understanding wherein they are comprehended, is not to be known, nor understood. 7. The whilst now that the rich bountifull God, out of the love of his grace understood, giveth unto us in1 Cor. 2. our inward mind, another Spirit for to discerne and understand withall, which1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 2. is not of flesh and blood, nor yet minded according to the earthly and fleshly wisedom of this world, nor according to the Prudence of the Ingeniousness of the world∣ly wise, and of the contentious Scripture-lear∣ned,
or those of famous Schools, therefore we doe perceive, that it is perilous to write over unto any man of the secretness of GodEphes. 3. and Christ; and that therefore we doe daily bear a care or a suspition, whether those that aske after the understanding of the godly truth, doe not desire to know the sameAct 17. out of curi∣ousness or sensuality, orIohn 8. to judge the same ac∣cording to their own good-thinking. 8. Therefore it is dangerous in this perillous time to discover, or to write over the ground∣ly depthsRom 11 of the godly wisedom unto any man, because that we doe now find many men that doe aske, to the end to know much; Yea they seek many knowledges, whereby to un∣derstand, and to judge the godly things, out of their sharpwittedness or industry. And that liketh all those well, which have no lust to do the Lords will. For therein lyeth the old root ofGen. 3. Rom. 5. Adam. where-out the disobedient know∣ledge springeth or cometh forth. 9. But toIohn 8. submit themselves obediently to the requiring of the gracious word of the god∣ly wisedom, and to the right Service of the love of Jesu Christ, also to cleave unto the li∣ving God in his godly nature or beeing,Exo 20. Deut. 5. and to serve, to praise, and to honour him, as he is a God in his Christ, that liketh few or none. Yet is the same the new fruit of the plant∣ing of Iesu Christ, whereunto the Scripture
pointeth us, which neither theMat. 11. Iohn 14. 1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 2. world nor her wise or Scripture-learned ones do understand, nor yet conceive the minde, for they know not the same. 10. Although I do thus rehearse these things my beloved, and that my Carefulness stand∣eth to such a suspition towards many, yet do I notwithstanding hope and trust somewhat better of thee, as that thou art more inclined to understand the will and mind of God, to the intent to1 Pet. 5 submit thy self obediently ther∣unto, to thy salvation, and to theEphes. 1. laud and praise of the godly glory, and so to beleeve the living God and his Christ, to incline unto him, and to become2 Pet. 1. partaker of his being, then for to know much thereof, according to the pleasure of thine own mind. 11. Therefore also I will not thinke it tedi∣ous unto me, to answer thy demand, with dili∣gence out of fervent Love; If happly God would vouchsafe through my small service; to openEphes. 1. thine understanding, and through his Increase or Blessing, to endow thee in thy Spirit with his Grace, and to stir up thy heart to a pure mind towards God, and towards his Love in Iesu Christ. The Second Chapter. THus was then thy saying unto me as I re∣member, that the word which the Apo∣stles
of Christ do write, was dark or incom∣prehensible for thee to understand,Rom. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 1. Gal. 1. Ephes. 1. namely, God our Father, and the Lord Iesu Christ. And that in certain places, Christ in stead of the Son, is also uttered forth for a Father and God. 2. Forasmuch as thy understanding supposed that there was no more but oneDeut. 3 Esa. 44. Esa. 45. & 46. 1 Cor. 8. God (as it is also true) therfore was thy demand thus un∣to me, whereof thou requiredst an Answer in writing: Seeing now that there is no more but one God, wherefore is he then pronounced forth in two manner of states? The which see∣meth according to the sound of the Scrip∣ture; as though the Apostles published two Gods. 3. Verily▪ the difference of this matter wher∣of thou desirest the Instruction, could not like∣wiseIohn 6. Iohn 7. & 8. certain Iewes in times past conceive ac∣cording to their understanding out of the flesh, yea, the same is yet also rightly under∣stood of few. Yet doe many perswade themselves notwithstanding, because that they in historicall manner, are minded after the new Testament, that they have thorowly well conceived the understanding of this matter, and doe for that cause perswade themselves, that they doe far exceed and excell the Iewes, supposing that they have the faith and the sal∣vation, and that the Iewes remain by the
works of the Law. Now this passed over, we will proceed to further the intent of our mat∣ter. 4. Verily, as we have spoken before, of God the Father, and the Lord Iesu Christ, these are hard things before the man, for to search out the understanding of them in his knowledge, if he do not know God and Christ, and the true righteousnes of the godly-beeing in himself, but imagineth of God and Christ without him, and so goeth on according to his own good-thinking, without the Administration of the true light and his Love. Yea, it isMat. 11. Mat. 13. & 19. Iohn 14. unpossible after that manner, to understand the right mind cleerly. And although likewise he would search out all the knowledge of the world, yet is it all in vaine, for to understand the same. 5. Although the man should imagine of the same minde, in the deepest ground of his rea∣son, yet can he not doubtless, with any man∣ner of prudence of the flesh, conceive that un∣derstanding. For it is an understanding,Esa. 57. Esa. 66. Sap. 1. Mat. 11. that riseth not up in the knowledge, but to the lowly and poor of spirit, namely, in the belief of the holy and gracious word, under the obedience of the Love. 6. For God, the Father, the Lord Iesus Christ, nor yet the true light of the godly wisdom, shallSap. 1. 1 Cor. 2. not be known, out of the blood or will of man, nor out of any deep searching
with the knowledge. For God is aIohn 4. Spirit, a very true light,Iohn 1. Iohn 8. Iohn 9. Iohn 11. Iohn 12. & 14. and an everlasting life; which God also, is not known, seen, nor understood, but in his own Spirit, and in his true light, and godly beeing. 7. Seeing then that the only God is a1 Iohn 1. very true Light, that no darknesses do know or be∣hold, & is not to be known or beheld but in his light,Psal. 36. therefore is not he known likewise, but by those that doe hear and beleeve his graci∣ous word, and that submit themIohn 8. obediently under the requiring of the same word and wil; and so do carry the Image1 Cor. 15. Eph. 4. of his godly-bee∣ing, or doe behold the same2 Pet. 1 in their Spirit, as a pattern of God, and hope thereon, through faith. And the Spirit of those same obedient humble ones, is the spirit that giveth respect too the serviceable testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love, to the end to be incor∣poratedJohn 15. Iohn 17. Ephes. 3. to the like-beeing of God (namely, the brightness of the cleerness of the godly beeing, the upright RighteousnessEphes. 4. and ho∣liness that God esteemeth) and then to know God the Father and his Son Jesu Christ rightly and according to the Truth, and to un∣derstand theIohn 17. Mat. 13. secretness of the kingdom of God and Christ. 8. But seeing now that the man is gon back or faln awayGen. 3. Deut. 32 Ier. 2. from his God, and from this pure beauty and cleerness of the godly-beeing;
andRom. 1. Ephes. 4. estranged from the understanding of the wisdom of Iesu Christ, therefore is he also be∣come dis-inherited of this cleerness or bright∣ness of the godly light, and hath neither known the Father, nor his Son, the Lord Iesu Christ; by meanes of which estranging, he hath not borne or carried in his spirit,1 Cor. 15. Ephes. 4. the Image or like-beeing of his God, namely, Je∣sus Christ, to which effect the Gospel orMat. 28. Mar. 16. joy∣full message is published, whereby to bring the man again to Christ, and to establish him in him. ButGen 3. the man is by the self wisdom of the flesh, and by his own opinion, quite led away from the upright minde or understand∣ing of the Gospel, and from the incorporating or establishing in Iesu Christ, and brought to the corruption; and hath with smart and cala∣mity, born the ungodly beeing or the contrary nature unto his God,Sap. 1. to the which he is nei∣ther created nor called. 9. This contrary nature unto God or dark∣ness, hath captivedMar. 6. Rom. 1. 2 Cor. 4. his senses and thoughts, and stoln away his heart and understanding, so that he can conceive or understand very little of the true light or Christ of God, and that only because he is so utterly estranged fromEphes 4. Col. 1. the beeing of God, and hath grounded him on the knowledge.
The third Chapter. NOw for to discover the minde a little, how or in what being or form, the word, God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, is witnessed by the Apostles of Christ; So must I rehearse a little of Adam, to what end he was created, whereby men may un∣derstand the intent whereto Christ is prea∣ched. 2. When the Almighty God who is full of wisdome and righteousness, had finishedGen. 1. hea∣ven and earth, and all their garnishing, then did he also create him a man,Gen. 1. Gen 2. Sap 2. Eccles 17. according to the likeness of his Godhead, who should carry or beare the very like beeing of God, and the Image of his glory, as a fellow partaker of or being like unto the godly nature and kind. Through which like beeing of God, God would be known everlastingly in the man, as a true God. 3. Here through was God in the beginning as a light of life, of one substance with the manly creatures, GodGen 2. brought forth the me∣mory, for a good and holy understanding, be∣cause that his like-beeing should not be alone in the manly creatures, but that the memory should in all good and holy understanding, be an help2 Gal. 10 or aid to the like-beeing of the
Godhead in the manly creatures, to all peace and concord, and to all Love and welfare up∣on earth. 4. Behold according to all like resemb∣lance, even as God is a very trueIohn 1. 1 Iohn 1. light and everlasting life, so is also his like-being a true light and everlasting life in the manly crea∣tures, (that are comprehended in the upright Estate of their manly being, and in Christ) in such like manner also in them, the memory that God hath brought forth out of his like-being: which memory in those same manly creatures (namely being in their right estate) is likewise a light of the true light, and a life of the true life, and that altogether to peace and righteousnesse upon earth. 5. This in the former Kingdom, was Gods glory in his manly creatures whom he had cho∣sen to himself to the end that they should2 Pet. 3. in∣habite the earth with righteousnesse, and that even so, there-through the highest God (as a living and true God) and his holy being and vertuous nature, should as well upon earth, as in heaven, be known for evermore in the spi∣rit of the manly creatures, and have his shape in them, and so live in them. 6. Behold that same true and like-bee∣ing of God, which is flowed or born out of the eternall and living Godhead, is the first born1 Cor. 15. Col. 1. of all creatures; and is the true
and living Christ of God,Psal. 16. Act. 2 Act. 13. which cannot be corrupted; but he continueth alwayesPsal. 9. and everlastingly. For he is theIohn 3. Rom. 1. only born son of God, and avery trueIoh. 1. Iohn 14. light, and eternall life for evermore like unto his Father. 7. From hence hath the man turned him, and seen and tasted the corruption: but so hath not the Christ of God. For Gods very like-being, the true Christ of God,Eph. 4. Col. 3. is the up∣right righteousnesse and holinesse, which is everlasting andSap. 1. immortall, also undestroyable, unchangeable, and uncorruptible. But the un∣righteousnesse is the obtaining of death, and of the corruption; which corruption or dead∣ly mortalityGen. 3. Rom. 5. 1 Cor. 15. the man hath taken on, and there-through hath born the contrary being to God,Sap. 2. Iohn 8. that Antichrist, the like-being of the devill, and so is driven from the beholding of God,Gen. 3 without the riches of the godly goods; and hath lost the mercy-seat of his salvation. 8. Which salvation of the mercy-seat, isGen. 12. Gen. 22. Act 3. Gal. 3. covenanted and promised again, by the God of life unto Abraham and his seed: And through that same, the blessing of all genera∣tions of the earth; after which salvation manyMat. 13. Luke 10. 1 Pet. 1. Kings and Prophets have sought and inquired, which they saw into afar off as coming: but they could not attain unto it, but have witnessed and prophecied thereof
that the same should be inherited in all Love, Peace, and upright Righteousnesse, in the last time. The Fourth Chapter. THis grace of salvation, and this like being of God, which became unknown through Adam, did in times past appear in Israel, outMat. 1. Luke 1. Luke 2. of the house of David, of the tribe of Iuda, like as God had promisedPsal 78. Esa. 9. Ier. 23. Ier. 30. Dan. 9. through the Law and the mouth of all his Prophets; and he is publishedAct. 2. Acts 3. Acts 13. to the whole generation of Israel to be their King, Saviour and Messias, and that God had shewed the mercyLuke 1. on them for to help up Israel his servant: And so at the same time God was mercifull unto his chosen people and hath not forgotten his Covenant, even as he had promised unto Abraham and his seed. 2. Even thus verily was this like-being of God, the true Christ and only born son of God from Eternity; born of theLuke 2. Rom. 1. seed of Da∣vid according to the flesh, to be a Saviour to the generation of Israel, for to set up Israel in his righteousnesse. But certain of the wise and scripture-learned ones after the Law,Mat. 12. Mat. 15. Mat. 21. & 27; &c. Acts 2. Acts 3. have neither believed nor received the same Iesus Christ according to the flesh, but have with∣stood him, and refused both him and his requi∣ring,Mat. 23. & not allowed of him but have deliver∣ed
him over unto the Heathen,Mat. 27. to the death of the Crosse. 3. Yea, so far is the unregenerated man dif∣fering from the minde of God (although he be∣wise, prudent, or understanding in the know∣ledge and Scripture-learnednesse) that he (for his own wisdomes cause) doth understandMat. 11. 1 Cor. 2. nothing at all of the mind of God, nor of the setting up of Israel; neither yet can he attaine thereunto, with his own wisdome: like as it hath also come to passe with the wise & Scripture-learned ones of the Law. And this Christ of GodLuke 24. Acts 3. Acts 17. hath been forced to suffer (yea, from theApoc. 13. beginning of the world forth) for the wisdome of the flesh, and the sinnes cause. And it went with him,Mat. 26 Luke 22. as was writ∣ten thereof: and he was killed on the earth, with the contemnableSap. 2. Mat. 27. death of the Crosse, and buryed in the heart of the earth. 4. Seeing now that it was impossible, that the death could hold him, or that he should see thePsal. 16. Acts 2. Acts 13. corruption, to a consumation; therefore is he risen againMar. 16. Luke 24. Acts 2. Acts 10. 1 Cor. 15. from the death, for a perpetuall conquering of the sinne and death, through his death of the Crosse, and hath made himselfe manifest unto his friends, that loved him, and were his Disciples: and renewing them in the word of his doctrine, heLuke 24 shewed them (through his suffering and death of the Crosse) the victory1 Cor. 15 against the
sinne, death, Devill, and Hell. 5. Now when as these his disciples were renewed and established in the word of his doctrine, and armed1 Pet: 4. with the same mind of the suffering of Jesus Christ,Mar. 16. Luke 24. Acts 1. then was he ta∣ken up from them to the right hand of God his Father, in the heavenly being. From thence hath he comforted his disciples, and comprised his shape in them, out of the hea∣venly being;Acts 1. Acts 2. powring forth v his holy Spirit into them, as a new and trueApo. 21. Jerusalem, which is not prepared by men, but by God, like a garnished Bride for her Husband. And even thus became God the Father, through his only-borne Sonne (Christ) of one sub∣stance againeActs 2. with the manly creatures: And to that end also, because that all manly creatures, should (through Christ) beIohn 17. one sub∣stance with God the Father, is Christ preach∣ed. And in such a state doth God require to have his people, or the Congregation of Jesu Christ. 6. Behold, these disciples of Jesu Christ (who through Christ, were sealed with the holyActs 2. Rom 8. 2 Cor. 5. Spirit of Christ, from the right hand of God,Mat. 13. taught to the Kingdome of the God of heavens, and established in God the Fa∣ther, and in the Lord Jesu Christ) were the right christians, not out of the letter or flesh,Mat. 26. Luke 22. Iohn 6. 1 Cor. 11. wherewith they had been served till unto the
coming of the same clearnesse of Christ: but out of the power of God,Luk. 24. Acts 1. Acts 2. 1 Cor. 2. in the Spirit: and did beare even thus2 Cor. 4. a costly treasure, in earth∣en vessels; namely, the very like-being of God the Almighty. 7. Which being of God,2 Cor. 4. Phil. 2. Col. 1. Heb. 1. is the true Christ himself, according to the spirit: with whom they had their fellowship. And through him (seeing he was one with God) their1 Ioh. 1. fellow∣ship was also with God the Father. Whereby they used that word: God our Father, and the Lord (his Son) Jesu Christ. The which also, many no doubt, doe speak or witnesse in that manner, out of the letter, and out of the imagination of the good-thinking know∣ledge: but they are wide of it, according to the truth. But these (whoActs 2. 1 Cor. 2. 1 Iohn 1. witnessed that word, out of the spirit and truth) have wit∣nessed the grace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesu Christ, in the truth of God. And yet notwithstanding, have con∣fessed no more but one God: but have wit∣nessed the wonderfull acts of God, shewed on them through Jesus Christ. AndIoel 2. Acts 2. it shall come to passe (saith God) in the last dayes. 8. This grace of salvation, thatLuke 1. Luke 2. Acts 2. Acts 3. Acts 4. &c. ap∣peared to the Jewes (which many of them in that time refused) is published to the Heathen,Mat 3. Luke 2. Acts 13. to a Repentance for their sinnes,
to the end that they shouldIohn 1. believe on the like-beeing of God the Almighty, that was appeared unto them, and so become parta∣kers likewise of the gifts of the holy Ghost (through Jesus Christ) out of the fatherly grace: and that their fellowship might be one1 Ioh. 1. with God the Father, and his Sonne Jesu Christ, in one manner of faith. 9. And to that end was the service of Christ ministred2 Cor. 10 under the obedience of faith (by the Apostles of Christ) to the unbelieving Heathen, namely, in the word of the preach∣ing of the Disciples and Apostles of Christ, to the intent that the same life of righteous∣nesse (that was refusedActs 3. by the Jewes) should be set up among the Heathen, through faith; and so they sought to confirme the Law a∣mong the Heathen, through faith, and to bring forth the righteousnesse thereby,Rom. 3. Gal. 2. Gal. 3. Phil. 3. that is re∣quired by the law. The Fifth Chapter. BEhold, even thus, for aLuke 2. Light and Sal∣vation of the Heathen, is this same (on∣ly out of grace, undeserved) published un∣to the Heathen, for a Gospel, to a morti∣fying of their vaine understanding,Rom. 1 Rom. 6. Rom 8 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 6. Gal. 5. Gal. 6. and of the corrupt ungodly beeing, and to an in∣corporating to the new man, whom the Apostles of Christ did publish, namely,
Christ (the like-beeing of God)Luke 1. Ephes. 4. in up∣right righteousnesse and holinesse. In whom (and in none other) standeth the forgive∣nesse of sinnes. 2. These publishers of the holy Word or Gospel of the Kingdome of God (seeing now that Jesus Christ had a shape in them, as a very true light and life of God, and that Gods shape was in Christ, where-tho∣rough they likewise were in Christ, and God in them) have published that word (Grace and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesu Christ) in the truth. 3. But although the Apostles did publish this after this manner, yet have they notwith∣standing, spoken no otherwise then of one God, who had shewed his procreation or generation in them as aIohn 1. glory of the only∣borne Sonne of the Father, full of grace and truth: namely, that God the Father had be∣gotten and declared in them, his likeIohn 1. 1 Iohn 1. life of God, out of his life, and his like light, out of his light. 4. Seeing then that they did beare this like∣beeing of the God-head, in them, there∣fore have they (through the same) knowne the living God, who was their salvation: namely, through the life of God, Jesu Christ, being appeared unto themEphes. 3 in the spirit. Where-through they also published the life that
is everlasting: and so witnessed likewise, that those which had1 Ioh. 5. not the Son of God, could not also have the Father, and that they were withoutEphes. 2. God in this world. For the like-life of God,Iohn 1. 1 Iohn 1. 1 Iohn 5. is the only born Son of God him∣self. And whosoever refused him, might not obtain the grace before God. For it is so concluded by God for ever, that in the Son is the life of salvation,Iohn 10. Iohn 14. and that it shall also be obtained in him. 5. This is verily the grace of God the Fa∣ther (which was published in times past unto the children of men, under the obedience of Faith, and which is also published now in the last time, under the obedience of the Love) that the life of the living Godhead is appeared upon earth, and that (through the same) the Unity in the Peace with God the Fa∣ther is to be obtained, whereby toIohn 8 Iohn 14. Iohn 17. know him in his glory, and his uniformeness with the manhood, through the Lord Iesus Christ. Read, Iohn 17. 6. Behold, this is the difference (with a brief Instruction) betwixt God the Father, and the Lord Iesus Christ. Take it to heart. 7. My service to content thee, my Beloved, vouchfase to take in good part, with a re∣gard to the God of the living. And this
my writing (to the answering of thy request) have I rehearsed in this manner; seeing other∣wise no means for to open the understanding of the Godhead of Christ, and to content thee, or to satisfie thy demand. 8. Behold, I have here witnessed the mind unto thee in full manner; so that in this Instru∣ction (so far forth as the LordEphes. 1. dothilluminate thine understanding) there shall be sufficient to answer thy request. And thy intent of heart in the Spirit, shall likewise through the beleif of the truth, if thou hast a right regard hereunto,Prov. 4. and takest this same to heart, be well-minded to our most holy Service of Love. The Almighty God lead thee into his Righteousness, Amen. The End of the Third Epistle. The Fourth Epistle. A cleer Instruction of the Mediation of Iesu Christ, that cometh to passe in the spirit, for a Reconciliation betwixt God and the Man. Jesus speaketh to his Disciples: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man cometh to the Father, but through me, John 14.6.
If any man enter in through me he shall be fa∣ved, John 10.9. I am the light of the world: who so followeth after me, walketh not in darkness; but he shall have the light of life, Joh. 8.12. If any man will follow after me, let him for∣sake himself: and take up his Crosse on him, and follow after me, Matth. 16.24. Luke 9.23. He that taketh not up his Crosse on him, and followeth after me, he is not worthy of me, or he may not be my Disciple, Mat. 10.38. Luke 9.23. There was demanded by a lover of the Truth, and an Instruction in writing desired thereupon, how the Mediation of Jesu Christ, (according to the Spirit, or spiritually,) com∣eth to passe in us, to ourRom. 5. Reconciliation with God the Father: and how Christ is anHeb. 1. heire of all things, and how1 Cor. 15. God is all in all. Whereupon this present Letter is written by H. N. out of an Inclination of the Love; very profitable and needful to the understand∣ing thereof, for all those that hope upon God, upon Christ, and upon their salvation, To the end that they may understand which is the right ground of the belief in Iesu Christ, where-through one is justified from the Sin, for to be in that sort reconciled with God in a new Life, according to the Scripture.
The First Chapter. FOrasmuch as I have alwaies found my self willingly bent to doe thee service, my beloved Brother, so doe I also still find my self ready prepared thereto, namely, in that wherein I may be serviceable unto thee, to a guiding into the holy understanding, to the end that thou (if God vouchsafe the same) mightest (through my small Service) be a little furthered to the good knowledge in God and his Christ. 2. But seeing I am alwaies carefull, and do stand in fear to write much of the deepe grounds of theRom. 11. secret knowledges of God and Christ; so am I alwaies carefull, lest that the same (if we should write boldly thereof) might thrust back any one from us and our godly doctrine, or offend him there∣by: or that any one should desire to glory or to boast therein, as in a knowledge of the flesh, and not before all things or with his whole heart, to be partaker in the spirit,2 Pet. 1. of the beeing whereof we doe write or witness. 3. For albeit that we do know well (accord∣ing to the comprehension of our naturall rea∣son) that there is a God, a Christ, and a holy Ghost, and so do talk of them; and yet do not (through that knowledge) believe, serve, nor love the same God, as he is a God, and his
Christ, as he is a Christ, and the holy Ghost, as he is an holy Ghost, nor yet desire to be∣come partakers of his being: but to live in aRom. 1. Ephes. 4. strange being, which is none of Gods be∣ing, and to cleave unto the same, so is then the knowledge of the holy secretnesse of God, more hurtfull then furdersome unto us. For if we know in what forme or being, that there is a God, and yet doe not honour nor serve him, as he is a God, but have a lust to the contrary-being unto God, then is that same to aMat. 25. Luke 12. more grievous condemnation unto us. 4. Seeing now that I (through the light) doe behold these perils, so am I likewise care∣full therein, to write of the secrets of God, before many. And if thou lookest with me in∣to the perils, then know I well, that thou wilt not disalow me in my carefulnesse. For I have much more delight in the obeying of the re∣quiring of the service of Love, and where Gods being, light, or upright righteousnesse, doth even so then rise up inEsa. 58. power, in the in∣ward man, then, where as men doe with speak∣able words (out of the knowledge) talke much of the secretnesse of God, according to the outward manner. 5. Thou also knowest partly my conversa∣tion, in what sort it was with thee, and how fearefully touching many words, I have be∣haved my self with thee: shewing thee, that the
Mat. 13. secretnesse of the Kingdome of God or Christ, consisteth not1 Cor. 2 in the multitude of words, nor in the riches of the knowledge, be∣cause that thou shouldest not suffer thy selfe to be bewitched by any man, with outward or strange words, or sayings of plentifull store of Languages, as to let thine heart commit whoredome therewith. But that thou mightest have a much more regard unto the power of God, and unto the upright righteousnesse that God worketh through the ministration of his gracious word and service of love, in the spi∣rit of the inward man, to the end for to live uprightly therein, with a meek-minded spirit. For a meek-mindedPsal. 5. Esa. 57. Isa. 61. Esa. 66. spirit (which hath his proceeding obediently, according to the re∣quiring of the Lords word) is very precious and acceptable before God. 6. And although that we doe (in the same spirit) goe on in silence, as touching the out∣ward manner, and are poore of spirit in Tongues or Languages, yet is not for all that, the richnesse of the spirituall and heavenly knowledge of God, ever the lesse among us, but rather the greater: and the same, and all that which is of God and Christ, doe we esteeme veryIob. 28. Psal. 19. Pro. 3. Pro. 8. Sap. 7. precious, yea much worthier then all the riches or costly treasures of this world: for that same (of worthinesse part) excelleth it all. For which occasion, we let our
words be few because that the same which we speak, may not proceed out of the know∣ledge, but out of the1 Cor. 2. power of God, and out of the truth of Jesu Christ. 7. And in the same speech of the godly things, we do also take heed with foresightful∣ness (so much as we may therein) of the loose ones of heart, to the end, that there be not one godly saying of the precious secret wis∣dome spoken out in vain. O! howEccl. 14. Eccles 15. Iames 3. happy is he that falleth not in his tongue, and whose wordsCol. 4. are tempered with salt? 8. Now this being omitted, I rejoyce me doubtlesse of thee, and of the Commonalty that is with thee; and I hope to rejoyce me yet more with thee with greater joy, by means of the Answer unto me, that I have heard from thee, as that ye altogether are wel∣minded to that which is the beeing it selfe, whereof the Scripture witnesseth (as per∣sonally) of God, of Christ, and of the holy Ghost: Which beeing (for those that be par∣takers thereof) are the secret Treasures, andMat. 12. heavenly riches of God, whereof the world, the rich Scripture learned ones, nor the good-thinking wise (with all their deep-groundly knowledge) do neither know nor understandMat. 11. 1 Cor. 2. any thing at all. 9. It is true, they have the Scripture of the godly witnesses, where-through they suppose
to be wise and understanding. But seeing they give not their understanding captive under the obedience of the Love of Jesu Christ and comeIohn 5. not even so to the beeing, whereof the Scripture speaketh, nor yet believe thereon,Iohn 7. as the Scripture saith, so is there likewise no light, nor truth, nor yet spirit nor being of God, among them, and they also doe nei∣ther know norMat. 22. 1 Tim. 1. understand that which they themselves speak thereof. 10. But the God of life (Ephes. 2. who is rich of mercie) hath (out of his hearty Love)Ephes. 1. Ephes. 2. Ephes. 3. Col. 1. re∣vealed the beeing of his glory unto us, renewed our ignorant understanding (under the obe∣dience of his Love) to a spirituall mind of the upright righteousnesse, and (when we were full of infirmities,Rom. 5. Ephes. 2. Col. 1. Col. 2. and dead, for the sinnes cause) begotten us again, out of his Love,Tit. 1. Tit. 3. to a sure hope of his life. 11. Seeing then thatHeb. 12. such a cloud of holy dew, is (by Gods grace) appeared in our sight, according to the spirit, and come from Gods right hand, as an heavenly blessing, and whereout also the right beeing of God (whereof we speak)2 Cor. 4. ariseth unto us, as a light and cleernesse: therefore have we (al∣though the Scripture witnesseth thereon, and that we doe heare many speak thereof) more regard unto that which is the upright beeing it selfe (wherein our joy standeth) then unto
that which witnesseth thereon. 12. For the same light that shineth now unto us, out of the heavenly truth,1 Ioh 1. is the everlasting life, which was with the Father, in the beginning: and it isPsal. 45. Heb. 1. the Mercie-seat of the godly Majesty, which continueth from everlasting to everlasting: Even as I likewise have talked with thee of the same, when I was last with thee. The Second Chapter. FOrasmuch then as thy request was unto me at that time, to write thee an Instruction of the mediation of Jesu Christ after the Spi∣rit: and how the same cometh to passe in us,Rom. 3. 2 Cor. 5. Ephes. 2. 1 Iohn 2. 1 Iohn 4. for a reconciliation betwixt God and us: and how Christ isHeb. 1. an heir of all things: and how1 Cor. 15. God is all in all: therefore will I open a little of the same unto thee: and I hope also to sa∣tisfie thee well with this instruction. 2. Inasmuch then as I have partly marked thine Inclination to the holy and spirituall understanding of the upright righteousnesse, therefore can I not of natures part omit, but must witnesse unto thee of that which thou de∣sirest at my hands, also reveale theEphes. 3. Mysterie of Christ, and make known unto thee, that which is hiddenRom. 15. Ephes. 1. Eph. 3. Col. 1. before the world, and all her wise ones, and describe it unto thee in writing, accordingly as the Lord illuminateth
mine understanding thereto, and as it may be profitable for thee to edification. 3. There is testified in the Scripture, (the which according to the spirit, is also very true) that God isIohn 4. 2 Cor. 3. a Spirit, and a1 Ioh. 1. very true light, with whom no darknesses or sins are mingled. But seeing that the man is falnGen 3. Esa. 59. into a strange contrary-beeing unto God, and goeth on, and liveth therein, so is he likewiseEphes. 4. Col. 1. estranged from God and from his light, and walketh accord∣ing to the flesh or outward, and according to the requiring and desires of the fore-skin of his uncircumcised heart, and not accord∣ing to the spirit, or according to the require∣ing of the godly-beeing; and so hePsal. 82. Ephes. 5. walketh in the ungodly-beeing of the darknesses; and that same ungodly-beeing of the darknesses hathRom. 1. Ephes 4. blinded his heart. And that verily is the sin,Esa. 59. which separateth the man from his God; and it is theEphes. 2. middle wall, as an en∣mity between God and the man. By meanes of which middle wall, both God and the man are grown into two parts, and are parti∣ally minded against each other. Yet ought they (both God and the man) to beIohn 17 Ephes. 5. one, like as it wasGen. 2. in the beginning. 4. Seeing now therfore that they are divided, (either of them in his own minde,)Gal. 5. against each other, so is God, (Iohn 4. 2 Cor. 3. who is a spirit) spiri∣tuall and minded to all upright righteousness,
against the minde of man, and the man who isGen. 6. flesh and blood, and not yet circumci∣edGen. 10. Ier 4. on the fore-skin of his heart, to a laying away of the sin,Rom. 8 is fleshly and ungodly minded against the minde of God. 5. Now doth Gods love and mercy extend towards the man, as alluring,Iohn 6. and drawing him daily (by his gracious word and service of Love, and by his Ministers) unto him, and to his spirituall minde of upright righteousnesse. But seeing that the darknesse, the sinfull flesh, or ungodly beeing, is grown between God and man as a fore-skinEsa. 59. Ephes. 2. or middle wall, and as an enmity: and that God is spiritually mind∣ed, and the uncircumcised man, fleshly minded, according to the minde of his fore-skin of the sinfull flesh; therefore doth not theRom. 8. 1 Cor. 3. man understand the spirituall minde of God the father, neither yet know the good will of God, that loveth him to Salvation; and he believeth not God in his word nor service: but he believeth the darknesse which hath in∣closed him; and following those sad lustsEphes. 4. of error, he goeth back, and so sinneth daily a∣gainst the father; and that is the sin that is forgivenMat. 12. the man, in his repentance for the sin, because of his ignoance through unbelief.
The Third Chapter. NOw mightest thou demand, what spirit or being is this God, of whom the Scrip∣ture witnesseth, or unto whom we ought to turne us in the Spirit? the Answer: Of the same have we rehearsed in theIntro. 22 Intro. 23. Introduction to the holy understanding of the glasse of righ∣teousnesse. But now for to come to the know∣ledge of our selves, and to a good knowledge of our God and his righteousnesse, so will we (to a larger declaring of our understanding, touching that whereof we speak, and to a di∣stincting of the true light, the living God, whoHeb. 13. was, and is, and continueth for ever) re∣hearse and testifie here in this place also, of the beeing of the only God. 2. This God (the living and very true one) is the trueExod. 3. God of Abraham, through whom theGen. 12. Rom. 4. promises of the mans salvation or blessing, doe come to passe in his faith, the true GodMat. 22. of Isaac in whom theGen. 21. Heb. 11. promises be inherited, and in whom the seed of bles∣sing is named, and the true God ofActs 7. Jacob or Israel, in whom the promises of the gloryNumb. 14. Esa. 40. of God, and of the mans salvation, orIer. 23. Ier. 33. blessing become established, andLuke 1. Gods true righte∣ousnesse, this selfe same God,Sap 5. Eccles. 24. 1 Pet. 2. Iames 1. is a very true unchangeable light, a cleerEphe. 1. day, and a gliste∣ring delightfull beauty.
3. This light is theIoh. 14. everlasting life of the upright righteousnesse, an overflowingPs. 42. Ier. 2. Iohn 4. fountaine of living waters, full of joy, full of all sweetnesse, full of Love, and full of peace, abounding with plenty of grace and mercy. 4. This life is theIohn 1. everlasting firm-stand∣ing essentiall word,1 Cor. 2. Heb. 4. full of power and pos∣sibility. 5. This word is theIohn 6. Ephes. 1. Ephes 6. & 4. true spirit, with full power of sealing, or to an everlasting esta∣blishing of the living Godhead, with the manhood, and that is unto the man the cer∣tainty of the truth, that he the same God is onlyPs. 116. Iohn 3. Rom. 3. a very true God. 6. This spirit isSap. 7. the holy wisdome, and the upright understanding, full of all spirituall heavenly goods. 7. This holy wisdome and upright under∣standing is theEccles. 4. providence, which so reseeth every thing that is good: and discerneth life and death, and giveth knowledge of the good,Pro. 2. to a warning from the evill. 8. This providence is the willSap. 1. which will∣eth that all that which is good should be and come to light. 9. In this same good will is theHeb. 11. beliefe grounded, as a sure and firme confidence, that all that which is good, and foreseen to the good, shall be performed or come to light,
the which the good will desireth, that all that which is good may be, become manifest and live. 10. The beliefe1 Cor. 2. Ephes. 1. Ephes. 3. Phil. 3. is the power as mighty to bring to light all good there through. 11. This power is the deed, or the work of all good, andPhil. 2. the accomplishment of all the works of God. 12. Behold, such a spirit or beeing, is the true God, of whom the Scripture speaketh, and unto whom the man ought to turne him: for he the same God is the right Father, who out of himselfe, and through the like-being of his Godhead, hath madeGen 1. Psal. 33. Iohn 1. Ephes. 3. all that is any thing, and all hisPsal 19. Ps. 89. & 97. Rom. 1. works doe testifie of him, that he the same God, is an everlasting living and true God, to the end that he only should beDeut. 6. Deut. 10. served, honoured, and worshipped in all his workes, as a great glorious GodPs. 10. & 29. who only is the Lord and King. 13. This everlasting God, seeing that he hath madePro. 8. Iohn 1. all that is any thing through his like-beeing (for that the same like-beeing, should beHeb. 1. an heir in all things) hath also in the beginning, formedGen 1. Sap. 2. that same (his very like-beeing) in the man: And so hath God made and ordained every thingEccl. 39. well through his godly beeing. AndIohn 1. without that same beeing, God hath made nothing that is any what, nor ordained any thing, without the
same; and that same like-beeing of his God∣head,Iohn 1. Iohn. 6. is his only born Son Jesus Christ, and is the1 Cor. 15. Col. 1. firstling or the first-born of all crea∣tures, whom God hath fore-seen thereto, ere-everPro. 8. the foundation of the world was laid,Heb. 1. and to be an heire of all his works. 14. He is promisedIohn 3. Rom. 8. and given unto us by God the Father, (as a Christ of God) for a life and for a Salvation: and is likewise soPs. 19. Acts 2. Act. 3. &c. prea∣ched and published to the world. But the world hath not beleeved in him; and there∣fore alsoIohn 8. Iohn 9. remaineth her sin and death. 15. For in no man else but in that same on∣ly ChristIohn 1. is the life. Which life, is a light of men, and that light shineth in the darknesses, and the darknesses have not comprehended it. 16. That same is a very true light,Iohn 8. which lighteth all men, through his coming into this world; and he was in the world, and the world was made through him, but the world knew him not. 17. He came into his own, and his own re∣ceived him not. But so many as received him, to them gave he the power to be children of God; namely, Those that beleeved on his Name, which are not born of blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God.
The Fourth Chapter. OF this selfe same only born Son of God the Father, the Prophet Isaiah doth al∣so witness;Esa. 3. A childe (saith he) is born unto us, a son is given unto us, whose dominion is up∣on his Shoulders, and he is called wonderfull, counsell, power, giant, everlasting Father, a peaceable Prince: Because that his dominion may be great, and no end of the Peace, upon the seat of David and his Kingdom. 2. Him hath likewise the Prophet David seen in the Spirit, and witnessed of him, that God hathPs. 110. Heb. 5. Heb. 7. sworn (and it shall not repent him) that he is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech; and he continueth also an High PriestHeb. 3. Heb. 10 over the house of God for ever, asHeb. 8. Heb. 9. a Minister of the spirituall and heavenly goods. Which ministration cometh to passe in the spirit, and not in the letter, even as is written of him. 3. But seeing now that the man is fallen a∣wayGen. 3. Ephes 4. Col. 1. or estranged from this upright beeing of his God; therefore hath this Christ (the true Lambe of God) sufferedPhil. 2. the death of the Crosse in the man. Which Lambe of God was killedApoc. 5. Apoc. 13. from the beginning of the world, for the sins cause. But seeing he is not of the death, but of the living Father, the God for ever, therefore is he also risenMar. 16. Luke 24. Acts 2. Acts 10. 1 Cor. 15 Col. 1. again, and as
theMat. 28. firstling, risen up from the death,Act. 1. Act. 2. Acts 10. & 13. and hath shewed himself alive unto his Disciples and Beleevers, and set himself at the1 Cor. 15 right hand of God his Father, in the heavenly bee∣ing, bearing the dominion, till that all his enemies be laid under his feet, to a conquer∣ing of sin and death through faith. 4. This is that Jesus Christ, which (like as he was preached before, andActs 1. 1 Thes. 5. 2 Thes. 1. should be seen in his coming) is2 Cor. 4 2 Tim. 1. appeared and come unto us, in the obedience of the Love, according to the scripture, who must possesse the heaven, till unto this time,Acts 3. wherein all becometh resto∣red again, that God hath spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets, from the beginning of the world. 5. This same was in times past published in the world,Mar. 16. Luke 24. Acts 1. Acts 2. for a Gospel or joyful message, to the end that all those wch were burthened wth sin & captived wth darknesses, should be bapti∣zed or washedRom. 6. Col. 2. in his death of the Cross, ac∣cording to the inward man, and planted into him2 Cor. 4. Phil. 3. wth his like death, for that all those wch be∣ved in him, should be born again out of the same death, & so become partakers of theRom. 6 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 3. re∣surrection of Christ, (the very like-beeing of God, the righteous one) and that they might even so then (in the spirit) have their fellow∣ship with Christ,Ephes. 2. in the heavenly beeing, in the Kindom of God his Father, and so rejoyce
them in this coming in the everlasting Life. 6. Behold, that is the uprightLuke 1. Ephes. 4. Righteousnes and holyness, which cometh to the Man in the Spirit, through Christ, to an everlasting Re∣conciling of the Man with God, or to anIohn 17. Ephes 2. U∣nity, betwixt God and the man, to th'end that God may in that sort, be1 Cor. 15 all in all, accord∣ing to the Promises. The Fifth Chapter. BUt seeing now that thy question is, how, or in what manner the same shall come to passe in us▪ so can I not omit to give thee a full instruction thereof. 2. Therefore behold, and consider in thine understanding, my beloved, how that now in the last time, the same living God (out of Grace undeserved) is2 Cor. 4. 2 Tim 1. appeared unto us out of his holy heaven, and dwelleth,2 Cor. 6. Apoc. 21. liveth, and walketh among us, (the family of his Love;) and how that he and his upright righteousness is (by his gracious word) administred in the familie of Love: and how that likewise in the same administration,2 Cor. 10. 1 Pet 1. the belief, and the obe∣dience to the requiring of the same God, is required of all men,Ephes 4. to an unity of heart with us in all Love. 3. So consider then wheresoever the same living God of heaven and his goodnesse (as an upright being, and very true Light, and
as the right Father of his like-beeing andIames 1. light for ever; and his will and requiring (as a fatherly Love, to the mans preservation in the godlinesse) is administred, in the mi∣nistration of his gracious word under the o∣bedience of the Love (of whose beeing and upright forme, we have witnessed before) and that then likewise in the same administra∣tion, belief and obedience is shewed by the man, in the same will and requiring of God, even there (in the belief) is the same living God seen and known, like as he (according to the Spirit) is an upright beingIohn 1. Iohn 8. 1 Iohn 1. and very true light, for a life of men, and the right Father of his like-beeing and light: there is also seen and known that the same Gods pro∣creation or seed, is likewise his upright bee∣ing and very true light, and is even so (in the believing and obeying of the same admi∣nistration) proceeding from the same Father, and that the same is wholly and altogether of one mind, andIohn 17. Col 8. of one substance with the Fa∣ther, and is the true Christ himselfe, and get∣eth in that sort, his forme in the man. 4. To whomsoever now the same Christ doth come thus in the spirit, essentially,1 Iohn 1. to those is he also seen and known rightly in the spirit: and he is likewise ofIohn 17. one sub∣stance with them, in all Love and upright righteousnesse.
5. This selfe same Christ, the true Son and like-beeingCol. 1. Heb. 1. of God his Father (although he (from eternity) be the1 Cor. 15. Col. 1. first born of all crea∣tures, and the onlyMat. 16 Luke 9. Iohn 6. born Son of God) is also (according to his birth of the seed of Da∣vid after the flesh) named the Son ofMat. 8. Mat. 12. Luke 6. Luke 9. & 21. Man, because that he (as the true seed of the pro∣mises of God the Father) is sown or planted in our manhood, through the ministration of the gracious word of the Lord, and through the belief and obedience to the same word; also manned with our manhood; and so (after our passing over his like death of the Crosse, unto theIohn 3. Rom. 12. Ephes. 4. second birth from the death) borne again out of our manhood. 6. And that is the very true Seed of God from heaven, which is sown in ourMat. 13. Mar 4. Luke 8. manhood, through the Administration of the holy and gracious word, under the obedience of the Love, and (at the appointed time) born again by us and out of us, as aIoh. 15. fruit of the overflow∣ing good life and of the upright righteousness and holiness; and where-through we are then likewise (according to the word of our Lord Iesu Christ) theMat. 12. Luke 8. Mother, brothers, and sisters of Christ, which do the will of his hea∣venly Father. 7. This same Man of God from heaven ac∣cording to the Spirit, and the Sonne of
manMat. 1. Rom. 1. of the seed of David according to the flesh, is in all points mindedMat. 26. Iohn 4. Iohn 6. & 8. according to the will of God his Father: and his will is, that all what is good, should be, and he bear∣eth in us thePhil. 2. Heb. 2. Heb. 5. image of the earthly man, and suffereth with us for our sinnes. 8. But now when the believer of his gracious word, hath2 Pet. 1. regard obediently unto his gracious word, according to the requiring of his Service of Love: and that even so (in his beliefe and obedience) the same word beginneth to appeare or break through, as a very trueJohn 1.2 Cor. 4. light of the upright life and like-beeing of the perfect clearenesse of God, and as a2 Cor. 5. Gal. 6. new creature from heaven, then hath God the Father his pleasureEsa. 42. Mat. 12. Mat. 17. 2 Pet 1. only in the same light and life of his like-cleernesse and upright righteousnesse. For that is his be∣loved Sonne (his spirituall heavenly beeing) whom he hath given unto us for an everla∣stingHeb. 1. heir, to the end that we should live through him. 9. Seeing now that the Lord (the God of heaven) is spirituall, and minded to the up∣right righteousnesse, and that the man of the earth is fleshly,Gen 6. Rom. 7. and minded to the sinne, and unbelieving and disobedient to the requiring of God in the ministration of his gracious word and Service of Love, therefore hath God (according to such a mind of the man)
noRom. 8. pleasure in the earthly man, nor yet the earthly man, in God, nor in his requiring. 10. But seeing now that the only-borneMat. 16. Luke 9. Iohn 6. Sonne of God the Father according to the spirit [namely, Christ, the likeSap. 7. Col. 1. Heb 1. beeing of God] is also the only-borne Sonne, out of theMat. 1. Rom. 1. manhood, of the seed of David accord∣ing to the flesh, and beareth in us the Image of the earthly manhood, as well as the Image of the heavenly God-head, therefore it is not his will that the man (whom he hath createdSap. 1. Sap. 2. Eccles 17. to be an Image of his like-beeing) should pe∣rish in the disobedience of the earthly man,Ezek 18. Ez k 33. 2 Pet 3. nor in the sins of the earthly being but should live for ever and ever, with him and with his spirit, in the upright righteousnesse of his heavenly beeing, and that all men likewise (which love God and his righteousnesse) should be assembled into the same beeing, and be saved both in soule and body. 11. Behold, the same forementioned Christ and Sonne of God (who for our sinnes cause, hath suffered in us the deathRom. 6. Phil. 2. of the Crosse, and armeth us1 Pet. 4. with the same minde of his suffering and death) maketh known unto us (as is before said) through his Service of Love, his upright beeing of righteousnesse. And in our good will to the same, he bringeth his belief unto us: and so in belief, he him∣selfeEsa. 53.1 Pet 2. beareth our sinnes, and justifiethRom 3. Gal. 2. us
from the same, through the belief. And so taking our sinnes upon him, in patience he1 Iohn 1. Iohn 4. reconcileth us before his Father, and mak∣eth hisIohn 14. Apoc. 21. dwelling in us. 12. Even thus verily with patience doth Christ come before the man (for hisRom. 8. 2 Cor. 12. Heb. 5. igno∣rance and weaknesse cause) in the ministration of the gracious word of God his Father: and in the same patience, he (through his Service of Love) r draweth the man away from all that is ungodly and unreasonable, and whereunto he is bound, or wherewith he is bewitched, according to his earthly and man∣ly mind. 13. Behold, in this sort doth Christ (in the obeying of the requiring of the service of his Love)Oze. 13. Rom. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 2 Tim. 1. Heb. 2. 1 Iohn 3. break all the bands of the Devill and of the selfe-mindednesse of the flesh: and bringeth the believing and obedient man, to his spirituall and heavenly mind of the up∣right righteousnesse, according to the mind of God his Father: and even so (as the1 Tim 2. Heb. 9. true mediatour, to our reconcilement with God the Father) he putteth away theEsa. 59. Ephes. 2. middle∣wall betwixt God and us: and procureth the man, that he uniteth him with a good will, with a Godhead, and God,Iohn 17. to an uniting with the manhood. 14. Behold, and have a good regard hereunto, my beloved, for even thus (as
is rehearsed) isRom. 55. the peace and reconcilia∣tion with God the Father, prepared for us through Christ: and so he maketh of two,Ephes. 22. that they be one, namely, the Godhead and the manhood. 15. But in the meane time that we doe suf∣fer withRom. 22. 2 Cor. 44. Phil. 3. 2 Tim. 22. Christ, for the sinnes cause, and doe daily take ourMat 16. Luke 14. Crosse upon us, with him, so doe there yet daily no doubt, many temptati∣ons meet with us, through the unbeliefe of the earthly man: and we doe stumble or fall, and doe sinne also yet sometimes, by reason of our ignorance and weaknesse. Which sinne we doe not then commit in the Father, butMat. 12. in the Sonne. But if we be good of will, and continue stedfast therein, then is the sinAct. 10. for∣given us, through his name. 16. For inasmuch as he himselfe beareth in us our sinnes, therefore hath heHeb. 55 compassi∣on with our weaknesse: and suffereth likewise with us, in the belief, till that all the con∣trary-being that is against the upright bee∣ing of God the Father, be overcome through the belief, in the like-suffering with Christ,Rom. 6. Phil. 2. of the death of the Crosse, and that Christ with his Father, have gotten1 Cor. 15. the dominion a∣gainst the sinne. Which Crosse or suffering of Christ, is the altar of the offering of Christ,Heb. 9. Heb. 13. in the holy, whereon our sinnes be offered up through the offering of Christ, as
a sinne-offering, death offering, and debt-of∣fering. Through which offering of Christ wherein we doe obediently follow after1 Pet. 2. him, till unto the second birth from the death) we be2 Cor. 5. Ephes. 1. Ephes. 2. Heb. 9. sprinckled with his bloud of the true testament, to the forgivenesse of sinnes, and to an everlasting reconcilement with God the Father, through faith, and that same is the fulfilling of the true God-service in the holy. 17. Through which fulfilling of the fore∣going Service in the holy, the godly under∣standing1 Cor. 13 Eph. 4 of the true age of the manly-beeing of Iesu Christ, is inherited by us.2 Cor. 3. the veil before the most holy, put away from us, and theEsa. 16. Heb. 1. Heb. 5. mercy-seat, uncovered and declared un∣to us: and likewise all the costlyCol. 2. riches of the upright spirituall and heavenly Goods in the very true most holy. 18. When as we now are thus renewedRom. 12 Ephes. 1. in Iesu Christ, through faith, also come to the sameEphes 4. age of the man Christ, and become one body with Iesu Christ, so is God the Fa∣ther then likewiseEphes. 2. one substance or manned with us, through Christ: and1 Cor. 15. is all in all: and we have the2 Cor. 1. paune of his inheritance: namely, the holy Ghost, wherewith we be grounded, sealed, and establishedEphes 3. in God, through Iesus Christ. And all that godly bee∣ing (even as we have witnessed before of God
the Father) doth then live substantially in us: and so we have our1 Ioh. 1. fellowship with God the Father, and with his Sonne (the Lord Jesu Christ) in the everlasting life, wherein our joy is perfect. 19. Behold, that is the true joyfulnesse with Christ, which we doe inherit in the Kingdome of God his Father: and doe know no more of the Sinne. For in that we are dead,Rom 6. that are we dead unto the sinne, and in that we live, that live we unto God, in Jesu Christ: and so have a good and quiet conscience through Jesus Christ, in his dominion over the Sinne and death. 20. Which dominion of Christ andLuke 16 King∣dome of God, is as then come inwardly into us: and it is with us in all points, one God in one beeing, namely, the Father, the Sonne, the holy Ghost, with the manhood, in all Love. And that is the life and peace, and theGen 21. Rom 4. Gal. 3. seed of Promise, to the blessing of all generations of the earth. The Sixth Chapter. MY beloved, this same (even as I have here witnessed unto thee) is the right mediation of Jesu Christ, inwardly in us, to our safe-making and reconciliationRom. 3. 2 Cor. 5. Col. 1. 1 Iohn 2. with God the Father: wherethrough also Christ is anHeb. 1. heir of all things, and God, all1 Cor. 15. in all. It is very true.
2. And with this Instruction out of the heavenly truth, doe I heartily salute thee in the Lord,Ephes 4. to an U∣nity of heart in the Love: and look thou with spirituall eies of a pure heart, into the ground of that whereof I write unto thee, to the end that thou maist comprehend the secret understanding of the spirituall and holy knowledge whereof I write unto thee; and let thine un∣derstanding awake, to the Love and to her Service. I desire likewise of thee, that the Commonalty which is with thee may also read the Letter, and salute them all in my behalfe,Rom. 16. 2 Cor. 13. with a salutation of the Love, and if there be any among you that are acquainted with any people, whom they know to seek God with heart, or that are no undiscreet blasphemers, but stand well∣minded to the unity of heart in the Love, let them also read over this writing: And love alwayes the unity of heart in the Love, to an increasing of the he∣ly knowledge, and rejoyce you among each other in the Love, through the spirituallEphes. 1. heavenly goods, which doe come unto us in the Spirit, out of the godly Love. 4. The love of God the FatherCol. 3. get the victory in all your hearts, Amen. 5. Pray for me that the Lord will strengthen me in my Spirit with his Love, to the end that I may bee strengthened in him without feare, and so may stand fast against all mine enemies, and that the concord of Peace may be prepared upon earth, through the Love and her Service, according to the Promises. The End of the Fourth Epistle. Our heart is the mind of God most High. Our beeing amiable, as the sweet Lilly. Our faithfulness, love, and truth upright, Is Gods light life, and cleerness bright. FINIS.
