N1222 E1714_1 99868485 170298
HERMETICAL PHYSICK: OR, The right way to pre∣serve, and to restore HEALTH. BY That famous and faith∣full Chymist, HENRY NOLLIƲS. Englished by HENRY UAUGHAN, Gent. LONDON. Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Princes Armes in St. Pauls Church-Yard, 1655.
THE TRANSLATOR To the ingenious READER. IF any will be offended with this Hermeti∣call Theorie, I shall but smile at his
frettings, and pitty his ignorance. Those are bad Spirits, that have the light; and such are all malicious despisers of true knowledge, who out of meere envie, scrib∣ble and rail at all endea∣vours; but such as sub∣mit to, and Deifie their rigid superstition, and twice sodden Colworts. For my owne part, I ho∣nour the truth where e∣ver I find it, whether in an old, or a new Booke, in
Galen, or in Paracelsus; and Antiquity, (where I find it gray with errors) shall have as little reve∣rence from me, as Nove∣lisme. Veritatem tempus manu-ducit. There is no reason (if they bind not their owne hands) but the discoveries of Survi∣vers and Posterity, may and should be more per∣fect, then the superficiall searches, and first at∣tempts▪ or aims rather of their predecessors. I wish
we were all unbiassed and impartiall learners, not the implicite, groundlesse Proselyts of Authors and opinions, but the loyall friends and followers of truth. It would not then be impossible, but that we might in a short time attain to that perfection, which while it is envied in some, will never bee found in all. As men are killed by fighting, so truth is lost by disputing; for while we study the
figments and subtilties of Sophisters, wee cannot search into the operations and virtues of nature. As many as wil consider this, it is not improbable, but they may do well. But de∣spisers, and such as hate to be quietly instructed, must be punished with silence, lest by seeking their peace, we lose our owne.
Plautus. Qui mali sunt, habeant mala; qui boni, bona; bo∣nos quòd oderint mali, sunt mali; malos, quod oderint boni, bonos esse oportet.
HERMETICALL PHYSICK &c. CHAP. I. Medicine or Physick is an Art, laying down in certain Rules or Precepts, the right way of preserving and restoring the health of Man-kind. THe word Medicine, hath a manifold sense. First, It is taken for some re∣ceipt or medicament. So the Philosophicall Stone is termed a Medicine. The
Lord hath created Medicines out of the Earth, and the wise man will not abhor them. Secondly, It is ta∣ken for the habit, or profession of the Physitian, and then it signifies the faculty of curing existent in some learned and expert Professor. This habit or faculty is delineated, or methodically described and laid down in the Dogmaticall Books of Physicians, that others may learne and practise thereby. Thirdly, It is taken for, and signifies a Physicall System or Treatise, and in this latter sence it is to be understood in this place. The Object of Medicine or Phy∣sick in this latter sence is, Man, not in general, but that man onely who desires to learn the Art of Physick, and is to be informed or instructed by this present Treatise: but the Object of Physick, as it is an habit in the mind of the Physician, is man in general, either for the pre∣serving
or the restoring of his health. The operation, use, and end of Phy∣sick, is health; as the work and end of Physical books, is a rightly principled and instructed Physitian; so far as instruction goes: It is termed Hermetical Physicke, because it is grounded upon Principles of true Philosophy, as the Physick of Her∣mes was. And for this very reason the true Philosophers applyed them∣selves wholly to the Hermetic sci∣ence, that they might thereby lay a true foundation of Physick, for the Hermetic Phylosophy layes o∣pen the most private and abstruse closets of nature, it doth most ex∣quisitely search and find out the na∣tures of health and sickness, it pro∣vides most elaborate and effectuall Medicines, teacheth the just Dose of them, and surpasseth by many degrees the vulgar Philosophy, and that faculty which is grounded up∣on the principles of the common,
supposititious knowledge, that is to say, it doth much exceed and out do the Galenical Physick. This ap∣pears most evidently, because the Hermetical Phisicians both can and frequently doe cure those diseases, which the Galenists adjudge to be incurable, as the Leprosie, the falling sickness, the Gout, &c. That the Principles of the Hermetists, are more certain then those of Galen, is sufficiently verified by their perfor∣mances; besides, it is a truth which cannot be denyed, that the Certain∣ty and proof of the principles of all Arts, can by no other meanes be known and tryed but by practise, as Paracelsus doth rightly urge In Praeft. D fensionum, page 252. Now all the knowledge of the Herme∣tists, proceeds from a laborious ma∣nual disquisition and search into na∣ture, but the Galenists insist wholly upon a bare received Theorie and prescribed Receits, giving all at
adventure and will not be perswa∣ded to inquire further then the mouth of their leader. I call not those Hermetists, who know onely to distil a little water from this or that Herb; nor those, who seeke to extract from other things by their sophistical operations a great trea∣sure of Gold, which onely nature can supply us with: for the most ig∣norant amongst the people, may make a very useful Distiller, and the other attempt is most commonly the task of Sophisters and Impostors: but I call them Hermetists, who observe nature in her workes who imitate her, and use the same me∣thod that she doth, that out of na∣ture, by the mediation of nature, and the assistance of their owne judgements, they may produce and bring to light such rare effectual me∣dicines, as will safely, speedily, and pleasantly cure, and utterly expell the most deplorable diseases. These
are the true Hermetists: As there∣fore I doe not approve of all those that would be called Hermetists, So neither doe I condemn all those, who diligently and conscientiously practise the Galenicall Physick: for some of them are precize and petu∣lant, others are sober & modest: and these latter sort acknowledge the imperfection of their medicines, and therefore they endeavour and take delight to adome, inlarge, and ac∣complish their profession with the se∣crets of Hermetical Physick: but the other sort ascribe supreme per∣fection to that Ethnic, Antichristi∣an writer, and his medicines, and will not for meer envy, or out of a childish depraved ignorance▪ looke upon the eminency of Hermetic Philosophy, nor inquire into the se∣crets of it, but seek rather by repre∣hending and carping those things they doe not understand, to magni∣fie their own way, and with peevish
and virulent language, raile at the Hermetic professors. Now as I pre∣ferre the Hermetical science to the medicines of these men: so (their Errours being first laid aside,) I u∣nite it with the Physick of the more sober Galenists, that theirs by con∣soclation with ours, may become perfect and irreprehensible: This Joseph Quercetar, a most expert Physician, and a learned Phi∣losopher, whom as my master in this science I worthily honour, (for I must confess, that by his instructi∣ons (God assisting me,) I benefited very much,) did most happily per∣forme. And many learned men even in this Age design the same thing, especially the professors of Physick in Marburg, who by an express and memorable decree of the most il∣lustrious and mighty Prince William Lantgrave of Hassia, proceed in that very course. And who then can justly blame me, for walking in the
same path with such eminent men? I shall conclude, and give my judge∣ment with learned Crollius (a man who for the advancement of the true Physick, was most worthy of a longer life) that whosoever desires to be eminent in the Art of Physick, (and none can be so, that will stu∣dy onely the Placets of one man) must (above all things) be unbias∣sed and addicted to no Sect, nor a∣any one Author whatsoever, but passe through them all in pursuit of the sincere truth, and subscribe on∣ly unto that, being mindful ever to preserve the same freedome for him∣self, which Horace did. Quo me cun{que} rapit tempestas, defe∣ror hospe, Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri. Where-e'r my fancy calls, there I goe still, Not sworne a slave to any Masters will.
II. Health is an incorrupt integrity, and soundnesse of the body pre∣served by, and depending upon the strength and virtue of the radical Balsame. WHence followes this Conse∣quence, that the more strong and virtual the Balsame is, so much the more vegetous and healthful is the body. III. The strength and virtue of the Bal∣same, depends upon the equal and mutual conspiration of the Hypo∣statical Principles, that by their e∣ven and peaceful consistency, the Balsame also may legitimately per∣form his functions, by which he may advantage and strengthen himself with the received aliment or food which is taken in, and may also (when separation is perform∣ed
by the stomack,) cast out through his proper Emunctories what is not nutritive, and may further provide that the seeds of diseases (if any lurk in the flesh, or in the blood, in the disguise of that tincture,) break not out, and bring suddain destruction to the body, or else may cause that those ll seeds may by the balsames strength and vigour, be cast out of the bo∣dy as superfluous impurities, which cannot consist with the health of man. IT is truth therefore which the most noble and learned Crollius speaks in his preface to his Basilica Chymica: In what body soever (saith he) the Hypostatical principles con∣sist by union, that body may be judged to be truly sound.
IV. Medicine or Physick, treats either of the preservation, or of the restora∣tion of health. CHAP. 2. Of the preservation of Health. THat part of Physick which treates of the preserving of health, is an Art, which by cer∣taine cautionary Rules, or Pre∣cepts, teacheth and prescribeth a certain way and meanes to de∣fend and save people from dis∣eases. It is by the Graecians termed : To effect what this Art promiseth, I give these following Precepts.
I. Lead a pious and an holy life. FOr Piety (as the Apostle tea∣cheth) is profitable for all things, having the promise of this present life, and of that which is to come. Now all piety consists in thi, that we love God with all our souls, and our Neighbours as our selves. Won∣der not therefore, that so many in this age perish so suddainly and so soon. Impiety now bears the sway: true and unfeigned charity hath no place to abide in; Perjury, Trea∣chery, Tyranny, Usury and Avarice, or (where these are not,) a vicious, lascivious, and loose life, are every where in request. The soul, which God made and ordained to be the nobler essence, and the mistress, is now the bond-woman, and the ser∣viledrudge to the vile body. We dai∣ly see, that one Groom will serve to
dresse and look to many Horses, one sheepheard will keep a thousand sheep, one Herdsman as many Kine or Oxen: but to dresse and feed one voluptuous body There's need (betwixt his clothes, his bed and bord,) Of all that Earth and Sea, and Air afford. And I would to God that all these would suffice! A most unhappy truth was that of the Stoic, He is a servant to many, that serves but one body: for doe but imagine thy selfe placed in the Clouds, or neare the Starres, and from thence to looke down and observe our actions upon earth, thou shalt not see one man quiet, they runne all as busie as Ants over Sea and Land, through Citty and Country, by right and wrong, to become Lordly and rich.
With restless cares they wast the night and day, To compasse great Estates, and get the sway. What wouldst thou say at such a sight as this? wouldst not thou cry out with Seneca, Oh the faith of God and men! how many persons doth one ambitious stomach imploy? If brutes and wild beasts devour or eat one another (unless they be compel∣led unto it by extream famine) we presently cry out, it is a prodigie: but what thing (I beseech thee) a∣mongst mankind, is more frequent then such prodigies? The Satyrist askes the question, —When ever did (I pray,) One Lyon take anothers life away? Or in what Forrest did a wild Bore by The tusks of his owne fellow wounded, die? Tygers with Tygers never have de∣bate,
And Beares amongst themselves ab∣stain from hate. —Quando Leoni, Fortior eripuit vitam leo? quo nomo∣re unquam, Expiravit Aper, &c. But men, whom God adorned with rationall soules, kill one ano∣ther, and those to whom nature, reason▪ and the faculty of speech, did (above any other creatures) com∣mend love and unity, do by troopes (as it were for spectacle and ostenta∣tion,) murther and butcher them∣selves. Add to this, that (as Seneca saith) a Dogge will bite before he barks; stormes will threaten us be∣fore they dissolve upon our heads; buildings will crack before they fall, and smoke will give us warning that fire is at hand: but the destruction of man by man is suddain, and without the least notice: nay, the nearer it is, it is by so much the
more diligently concealed. And what then is one man to another? who smiles, when he hates, salutes and embraceth, when he intends destru∣ction, who under a serene smooth countenance hides poyson, violence and blood-shed▪ Certainly thou wilt erre, and erre grievously, if thou wilt trust to those faces, that meet thee civilly, and salute thee fairly: they have (indeed) the complexi∣ons of men, but the conditions of Devils. Nay, thou wilt meet with some, who (as the same Satyrist hath observed,) Esteem it no point of revenge to kill, Ʋnless they may drinke up the blood they spill; Who do believe that hands, & hearts, and heads, Are but a kind of moat, &c. —Quorum non sufficit irae,
Occidsse aliquem, sed pectora, bra∣chia, vultus Crediderint genus esse cibi, &c. But thou wilt reply, that Sal∣vages, Barbarians, and Canibals, may (perhaps) commit such villa∣nies. Art thou no better acquainted with our Saints of Europe? that hu∣mane society and commerce, that godlinesse and sanctity, which we so much celebrate and commend our selves for, is nothing else but meere monopolizing, meere deceit, and a mutuall imposture. And amongst us Saints, who (in our owne opinion) are mighty righteous, tender-heart∣ed and brotherly, there is nothing more usuall, then to have store of Anthropophagi, or Men-eaters: for the rich, and the great amongst us, not onely feed upon and live by the sweat, the slaughter, and the blood of the poor and opprest, but esteem them (of all others) their choicest dain∣ties,
for they are swallowed without much chewing, and there is none to deliver them: Insomuch that those sheepheards, who were said to flay their sheep, robbing them of their Wool their skins, and their flesh, and leaving them onely their bare bones, may be truly said to be more merciful then those men. So that man to man, is no more a God, but a Woolf and a Devil. Wonder not then (as I said before,) that so many amongst us dye so suddainly, and so soon for they had rather die sooner, yea and die for ever, then become so∣ber▪ charitable▪ and truly pious. II. Follow after Sobriety. FOr as drunkenness and immo∣derate feeding oppress and wea∣ken the virtue of the radical balsame: so sobriety preserves from sickness, and diseases. Sober above most Kings
was Massinissa the Numidiar, who standing alwaies, and at his Tent∣doore, would in the open field eat his meat without sauce, being con∣tented with dry bread, and military Commons. For which very reason he was so vegetous in old age, that at the years of fourscore and six, he begat a Sonne, and after ninety two, did in a pitched field over-throw the Carthaginians, who had broken their league made with him; in which battel he did not onely supply the place of an active, and expert Leader, but performed all the duties of a common Souldier. By the bene∣fit of this virtue of temperance, did M. Valerius Corvinus live to be an hundred years old▪ and retain'd at that age a sound mind in a sound body. And Socrates continued all his life long in a perfect undisturbed health: yea, sobriety (if we should fall sick,) will restore us to health. There are some who think, that Cae∣sar
used no other remedy to cure his falling sicknesse, which tooke him first at Corduba in Spaine, so that by a meere spare dyet, hard labours, and tedious watchings, he escaped, and overcame that dangerous and most commonly fatall in disposition. III. Eat not greedily, and drink not immoderately. NAture in Vegetables, doth not swallow down her nutriment, nor take it in ravenously, and all at a time. She doth all things leasurely, and by degrees, that her motion may be covenient and useful, or assisting to her Preservation. It is thy con∣cernment to imitate Nature, and to do as she doth, when thou dost eat, and when thou dost drink. It is a most foul blemish upon the memory of Alexander, that after most of his Victories, he used to riot it with his
Officers, inviting them to delicious and sumptuous feasts, in which he used alwaies to drink Prizes, and he that could tun in more then all the rest, was rewarded with a Talent: But this intemperate eating and drinking, did cast him into such a violent, suddaine disease, that with∣in three dayes he dyed of it. IV. Let thy meat be simple and un∣arted. FOr such victuals (saith the most industrious Pliny,) are the most wholesome and agreeable: Nature is but one, therefore she doth most delight in one kinde of meate and drink. Whence followes this conse∣quence, Thou shouldest never at one meal feed upon divers sorts of meats & drinks.
For they are of an Heterogeneous nature, and the fire of Nature, which is but one and the same cannot work equally upon them all, and prepare (legitimately) a nutriment for his own body, out of divers and diffe∣ring cibations. Every thing the nea∣rer it is to unitie, is by so much the more perfect and durable. There are infinite sorts of Trees which live ve∣ry long, but they use all of them (without change) onely one kind of nutriment: But if it be so, that thou canst not abstaine from variety of meats, yet be sure (if possibly thou canst) that they have some agree∣ment and correlation amongst them∣selves: For Contraries, (as Hippo∣crates affirmes) will move sedition and differences, while some of them are sooner, some latter digested and communicated to the body. Octa∣vius Augustus, would never have above three dishes of meat to his sup∣per: Imitate him, and use not too
much indulgence towards thy selfe, so shalt thou live the longer and the better. V. Accustome not thy selfe suddainly to meats and drinks, which formerly thou hast not been used to feed up∣on, unlesse they be prescribed thee by some expert and learned Physi∣cian for thy healths sake. FOr every Change is dangerous. Nature is simple and alwayes the same: Other manner of operation is simple too, and without change, and she delights altogether in con∣stancy, and simple nutriments: but if thou dost change, she also will suffer the like change. We see daily, that those birds which are taken, and put into Cages, by changing their naturall dyet, fall into divers diseases, and dye frequently. A Lamb that is nourished with the milk
of a Cow, seldome comes to any improvement, but most commonly dyes. VI. Use Antidotes frequently, to preserve thee from poysons, and private or accidental mischiefes. LEst thou perish by venemous meats or drinks, or by the aire thou livest in, which may be poy∣soned as well as thy food. Mithri∣dates by the frequent use of an An∣tidote, which from him is still called Mithridate, did so strengthen na∣ture, that no poyson could hurt him: And when he tooke a vene∣mous, deadly confection of purpose to kill himselfe, it could not so much as make him sick: So that being o∣verthrown in battel by his Enemies, and not being able to poyson him∣selfe, he was forced to command his Armour-bearer to thrust him through, and so dyed. There be di∣vers
kinds of Antidotes. I shall one∣ly mention the most effectuall. The first is Quercetanus, his confection of Juniper and Vipers, described by him in his private dispensatory, page 349. The second is his blessed Theriac: the third, his celestiall Theriac, called so by way of Emi∣nency, and described both in the same Book. The fourth is (rollius his Theriac of Mummie, with another very soveraigne, one described by him in his Bafilica Chymica. Use these Antidotes according to the Philosophers prescriptions, and (God assisting) no poyson shall be able to hurt thee. VII. Fly contagious airs, and if the aire thou livest in, be infected, change thy habitation. VIII. Take Physick in the spring-time,
and in the Autumne. LEt us consider the nature of Ser∣pents and Vipers: these in our stated seasons of Spring & Fall, cast off their old skins, and are clothed with new. That Medicine or course of Physick, which in all its circum∣stances answers to the great world, will work the more easily, the more prosperously, and will have the greatest effect. Seeing therefore that Trees, and all Roots, which in the Winter time seem dead, doe about the entrance of the Spring break forth and bud, putting on greenness, and a renew'd youthfulnesse and fresh vivacity as it were, therefore the wise Ancients did at the very same time (by observing them) take their purging and restorative Physick, and by that meanes (God cooperating with them) did migh∣tily strengthen nature, and multiply their dayes upon earth. Such Physick
as this, is the starre of man improg∣nated with the Physicall tincture. Others use onely the Philosophicall stone These glorious medicines (whomsoever God shall reveale them to,) may in their just Dose be taken once in every week to the sin∣gular comfort, and incredible im∣provement of nature: So the Philo∣sophers tell me. The dose of the u∣niversall medicine, is the weight of one graine. IX. Vse not too freqnently, the permis∣sions of Marriage. MAn for procreations sake, should not abhorre the Con∣cessions and Priviledges of lawfull love, but let him eschew all wanton∣nesse, and confine his desires to na∣turall▪ and legitimate, and that too within the bounds of Wedlock: But in this also there must be moderati∣on.
Solons Law was thrice in the moneth. Emission of seed weakens all bodies: This experience tells us, for men that are addicted to this intem∣perance, have the most nice and ten∣der constitutions, easily offended, and seldome fruitfull▪ like Trees, which bearing too much in one year, yeeld nothing but leaves in the next. You are to understand from this Paragraph, that seed is two-fold, Radical, and Prolific. The Radical seed, is the innate balsame of the bo∣dy, which if it be advantaged with perfect digestion, will yeeld effusion, and a balsame of the same nature as it selfe. In this balsame the body lives as in his proper seed. Hence Anonymus Leschus, Tract. 7. in∣structs us, that so long as there is seed in the body it lives; but the seed being consumed▪ the body dies. It is no wonder then, that so many have perished by the intemperance,
whoIt was not long before the publishing of this peece, that I was told by a very noble Gentleman, that in his late travailes in France, he was acquain∣ted with a young French Physician, who for a long time had beene suiter to a very handsome Lady, and ha∣ving at length gained her consent, was married to her, but his Nupti∣al bed proved his Grave, for on the next morning he was found dead. It was the Gentlemans opinion, that this sad accident might be caused by an excessive joy, and for my part I subscribe to it; for a vio∣lent joy hath oftentimes done the worke of death: this comes to passe by an extreame attenuation, and diffusion of the animal spirits, which passing all into the exterior parts, leave the heart destitute, whence followes suffocation and death. Scaliger Exercit. 310. gives the reason of this violent ef∣fusion and dissipation of the Spirits: Quia similia maxime cuprint inter se uniri, ideo spiritus, veluti exire conantur ad objectum illud exer∣num atum ac jucundum, ut vi∣delicet cum eo vniantur, Illud{que} sibi maxime simile reddant. If any will suspect, that together with this excessive joy, there was a con∣currency of the other excess men∣tioned by my Author, I permit him his librty, but certainly I thinke he will be deceived. going to bed in a vegetous, perfect health, were found dead next morning. If you excite a Tree to bear fruit by violent and unnatural means, or by artificiall, as by kindling fire under his branches in an unsea∣sonable time, you will but kill the Tree, and manifest your own in∣discretion.
CHAP. 3. Of Diseases in Generall. HItherto we have spoken onely of that part of Physick, which teacheth us to preserve health; It re∣maines now, that we consider the other part, which treats of the re∣stitution of health. I. That part of Physick which teacheth us the restoration of health, is an Art laying down in certaine pre∣cepts or rules, a sure & safe way to redeem or free sick persons from di∣seases. It is termed by th Greci∣ans . II. In this we are to consider, first, the disease, and all its circumstances: secondly, the cure of it.
For the true method consists in knowing, first the disease, and after∣wards the cure. The Doctrine of di∣seases, is termed by the Grecians, . III. Disease or sicknesse, is a privation, or the loss of health. IV. Therefore; because health depends upon the strength and vigour of the radical balsame, sicknesse must needs proceed from the weaknesse and indisposition of it. V. But when the strength of the Bal∣same followes the conspiration of the Hypostatical principles, as his proper  r inclinatior, then or in that cause the insirmity of the balsame proceeds from the in∣dsposition of the principles.
Whence followes this consequence. THat those bodies, whose princi∣ples agree not amongst them∣selves, may be truly judged to be sick∣ly and ill disposed. VI. Touching the disease, there are two things to be considered. First, The conjoyn'd and apparent cause of the disease, which we shall terme Ex∣trarious. Secondly, the cause of that Extrarious or conjoyn'd cause. CHAP. 4. Of the Extrarious or conjoyned and apparent Cause of the Disease. I. The conjoyned' apparent cause of the
disease, I termeExtrari∣ous signifies such a sub∣stance, that is quite a∣nother thing, and of another disposition than ours is. by reason it is a Cause most remote from, and altogether a stranger to, our nature. II. This Extrarious Cause is twofold, Substantial and Accidental. THe substantial is so termed, be∣cause it is the substantiall Es∣sence, or matter of the disease. The other is termed accidental, by reason that the conjoyned cause signified by it, is an accident, not a substance. III. The substantial extrarious Cause, is either an impure tincture, or a Meteor.
IV. An impure tincture, is an impure spiritual nature, so exactly mixt with the most inward parts of our substance, that at the time of its commixtion, it doth not presently and manifestly hinder nor preju∣dice the functions of the Balsame, but remaining quiet and inoffen∣sive at first, and for a time, doth afterwards by degrees, discover its enmity and force, and so infects the body. TO this place must be referred; first, those impure seminal tin∣ctures▪ by which the prolific seed is tainted, and the child that is borne of it, comes to be Hereditarily in∣fected with the Diseases of his pa∣rents. Secondly, the impurity of the bo∣dy, that proceeds from the bloud, with which the child is fed and nou∣rished
in the wombe: from which last impurity, if the substance of the Childe were not vindicated, and free'd by frequent breakings out, by the Measels, and divers other extru∣sions, and petty and indispositions, besides the dayly discharge of it through the proper Emunctories of the body, it were not absurd to con∣clude, that his whole nature must needs be depraved and overcome by it. Purgations of this kind hap∣pen sometimes sooner, sometimes la∣ter, according to the strength of the Radicall balsame▪ which in some is slower, in others quicker and more vigorous; as we see it exemplified in our very fields, of which some are more barren, some more fruitfull, according to their scituation, and the aspect of the Sun-beames, shi∣ning directly and favourably upon some, upon others glancingly, and for a short time, which makes some places more forward, some more
back-ward, and their productions, whether flowers, or Hey, or Corne, to differ accordingly, some being ve∣ry good, some very bad. V. A Meteor is either volatile or coa∣gulated, both kindes are Extrari∣ous. I Call it a Meteor, because I would have the Reader to inquire, how theI promise my English Reader, that (if God will blesse me with health, and his perform∣ing assistance) I will shortly com∣municate to him, (according to the Hermetic principles) a most accurate Treatise of Meteors, their Generation, Causes, quali∣ties, peculiar Regions aud Forms: what spirits governe them, and what they signifie or fore-shew. Meteors of the greater world are ge∣nerated, and by their Generation, to learn and find out the true Doctrine of the Mi∣crocosmical Meteors.
VI. The volatile Meteor, is commonly called an Exhalation, and that is either dry or moist. THe dry Exhalation is termed a Fume, and the humid a Vapour: the fumid Exhalation, because it is a fume arising from a dry body or Principle, is hot, dry, light and sub∣tile, alwayes tending upwards, and is near to a sulphureous fiery narure, which will easily inflame and kin∣dle, and so is set on fire▪ and burns. Contrarily, a vapour is an humid flux, which if it be deprived by any exterior heat of its owne cold qua∣lity and so carried up into the Re∣gion of the Air, and there conden∣sed by cold, is presently (because of
its thin, Mercurial and aqueous na∣ture,) forced to resume its former state, and is turned againe into the nature of water. For as we see in the greater world, that thoe Vapors and Exhalations, which by the heat of the Sun, the influence of the Stars, and by their owne proper internall calidity, are excited and stirred up, doe afterwards afford matter for va∣rious, miraculous Meteors, and bo∣dies imperfectly mixt both in the Region of the Air, and in the bowels of the Earth; and that those which are of a Mercurial, cold, moist, and watry nature, doe alwayes produce Clouds, Raine, Hail-stones, Snow, Frost and winds; but those which are sulphureous, hot and dry gene∣rate Coruscations, Lightnings, Fire∣drakes, Thunder-bolts, and other burning Meteors: so in the lesser world, that is in the body of man, the like, and the very same vapours and Exhalations, afford matter for
the generation of many and diffe∣rent kinds of Meteors. Hence it is, that so many and such various sorts of Diseases afflict man-kind. Some of them being Mercurial, cold and moist; others sulphureous, hot and dry: Nor are they so in meer forme and accident, but in substance, that is to say, they are such in their essen∣tiall virtue, and are generated as wel in the inferiour Region, the breast, the stomack, and the belly; as in the superiour, the head and the braine, which parts do exactly quadrate and correspond with the airy Region, and the subterraneous Concavities of the earth. See Quercetanus, Tetr. page 45. 46. VII. The Coagulated Meteor, is termed Tartar, of which we shall treat in the following Chapter.
CHAP. 5. Of Tartar. I. Tartar is an acrimonious, pricking and corroding, or an aluminous, acid and styptic mucilage, which is bred in the body, and being se∣parated from its proper juyce, is by the supervenient spirit of Salt, ac∣cording to the various inclination of nature, at a set time, and in those places which are most apt to receive it, collected together, and coagulated; or if that juyce be not separated from it, it putrifies: from whence come worms and other in∣numerable symptoms. QUercetanus in his advice against the Joynt-gout, and the Stone, describes it thus. Salsugirous sub∣stances, because they have alwayes
mixt in them some portion of earth (though the predominant part in them be Liquefactive,) are in the body of man termed Tartar; a most apt (in truth) and most significant terme, which was first given them from the Analogy, or similitude that was found betwixt the humours in mans body, yea betwixt his very blood and the substance of wine: which of all the fruits of vegetables, doth most abound with Tartar. I doe not meane by Tartar in this place that substance which is dis∣solved, and flowes in new Wines, while they are thick and turbid, which being afterwards separated, or (as the common phrase is) settled, doth as the grosser, earthy, and more impure part subside into a feculent substance, found alwaies in the bot∣tome, and called Dregs. Neither doe I mean that Tartar onely, whose se∣paration is performed by a long Tract of time, and sticks to the
Dregs or Lees of old Wine-pipes. But I meane that Tartar also, which is in perpetual liquefaction and com∣mixture with the most refined wines, and which gives them their tincture either red or any other. This true Tartar, either by Evaporation, or simple distillation, or a Balneum Maris, is easily discerned to be mo∣derately hot, for the more liquid part of the humour (which was the Vehiculum, in which the Tartar in its dissolution was contained) being separated from it, the Tartar alone remaine in the bottom. This liquid humour, though of red wine, distills all bright and limpid, but the hea∣vler red substance, which I call Tar∣tar, stayes all behind: a solid sub∣stance, and the more you fetch out of the substantifical humour, it be∣comes by so much the more hard and the dryer. Nor is this Tartar onely in red, or white Wines, but in any other though decocted and al∣so
in the humours of mans body. Nor is it there onely in the Chylus, or nutriment, which answers in pro∣portion to wine newly made (for from the Chylus, as from new win, divers impure and tartareous dregs are separated,) but also in the very blood, yea in the most pure, and af∣ter the very same manner, as we de∣scribed it to be in wine. And as the Art of distilling (even that which is performed by the most gentle fire) discovers and manifests unto us this kind of Tartar: so nature also by her naturall fury both ranne and daily doth performe such separati∣ons of Tartar, by a consumption of the humoural parts of our bodies▪ out of which the Dogmatical Wri∣ters of Physick, suppose the stone to be generated. And it is wonderfull to consider, how many sorts of Di∣seases by the intervening of obstructi∣ons or ppilations, arise out of this meere separation, particularly the
joynt-gout, and the stone: which diseases according to the sentiment of these Dogmatists themselves, happen most frequently to those, who have the hottest Livers▪ and consequently the coldest stomacks: Who ingenerate much crudities and mucous matters, which for want of a through-digestion, may be com∣pared to raw fruits, that failing of their due and perfect maturity, (which is performed by a contempe∣rate heat that is all concocting and digesting,) remaine acid, bitter, sowre and green. These being mixt with, and in the whole Masse of blood, are there by the natural heate againe concocted, and a separation is made of the more crude and tarta∣reous portion, which sticks after∣wards to the inward parts, and cau∣sing divers obstructions, is at length forcibly carried into the joynts, where it stayes and lodgeth. For e∣very part of the body of man doth
naturally delight in, and attract to it, that which is most like to it selfe: the fleshie parts are nourished by that portion of the blood, which is most thinly moist, and mercuriall: the fat and marrowish parts, by that which is most oily, or sulphureous, but the joynts which are parts that be naturally glutinous and mucila∣ginous, love that portion which hath most likenesse and affinity with their nature; whence it comes to passe, that this Salsuginous and Tar∣tareous matter is taken in by them. Now, when it happens that these parts in some bodyes, either for their weakness, or an innate hereditary disposition, or some such cause can∣not by a proper and particular di∣gestion, inoffensively digest, nor ex∣pell this crude and indigested Tarta∣reous matter, then is this matter, be∣ing of a saltish, viscous nature coa∣gulated in them, and the ligaments of the joynts come to be stuffed up
and stiffened with it, whence pro∣ceed those acute intolerable paines which attend this Disease. And this is the true and genuine conjoyn'd cause of the paines and knottines of the Joynt-gout. The same cause is sometimes lesse acute, sometimes more, according to the nature and condition of the Tartar. For as we see that there is in the greater world, a great diversity of Salts, for the Earth yeelds first Salt-gemme, which answers in proportion to Sea-salt, that is onely saltish in tast; then Salt-nitre which is bitter in tast, and Salt-alum which is austere and Astringent: afterwards Salt of Vi∣triol, and Salt Armoniac which are acid and hot: and lastly▪ those corrosive sharp Salts which are ter∣med Alkal, with others that are sweet and pleasant as Sugar: so in the lesser world, that is in the body of man, there is generated a Tartar or Salt, which being dissolved, cau∣seth
onely a saltish humour, which the Dogmatical Physicians term sal∣tish phegme, in plaine termes, a salt water or humour. There is also ge∣nerated, a nitrous or bitter Salt, which mixeth with the Urine, and causeth bitter Choler; and a vitrio∣lated acid salt which predominates in acid phlegme and melancholy. In like manner there be also alumi∣nous and austere kinds of Tartar, and other sorts which resemble the acrimonie of Salt, as it is manifestly seen by the various affections of con∣tractures and astrictions of the si∣news, and the many perilous trou∣bles of acrimonious humours in Dy∣senteries and, divers Ulcers as well inward as outward, all which are caused by the many and dif∣ferent kindes of Salts, which are generated in the body. For why should not this be done by those things which are most like to doe it and most significant, and which do
most properly and fully expresse the natures and diversities of Causes, having their derivation and apposi∣tenes from the very fountains of na∣ture, who is the best Interpretress of her own concernments. These Salts (believe me) doe better expresse and discover unto us the essences and di∣stinctions of Tartareous or saltish di∣seases, then those four humours which are commonly termed the Sanguine, the Phlegmatic, the Bili∣ous, and the Melancholy, both be∣cause that these latter termes, signi∣fie nothing unto us of the essence or matter of the Disease, and also be∣cause that those Dogmatists them∣selves, Hallucinate and stagger very much both in the formation or apt∣nesse, and in the application of their said termes. II. Tartar is two-fold, Adventitious and Innate.
III. Adventitious Tartar, proceeds from meat and drinke, and the Impres∣sions of the Firmament. EVery thing that we eat and drinke, hath in it a Mucilagi∣nous, reddish and sandy Tartar, ve∣ry noxious to the health of man. Nature receives nothing for her own use, but what is pure. The stomack, which is an instrument of the Ar∣chaeus of man, or an internall, in∣nate Chymist, and implanted there by God, presently upon the recepti∣on of that which is chew'd and swallowed down separates the im∣pure▪ Tartareous part from the pure nutriment: If the stomack be vigo∣rous, especially in its faculty of se∣paration, the pure portion passeth presently into all the members to nourish and preserve the body, and the impure goes forth into the
Draught: if the stomack be weake, the impure portion is through the Msaraic veines conveyd to the Li∣ver, where a second digestion or se∣paration is made. Here the Liver se∣parates againe the pure from the im∣pure, the Rubie from the Chrystall, that is to say, the Red from the White: The Red is the nutriment of all the members the heart, the brain, &c. The white or that which is no nutriment, is driven by the Liver to the Reyns and it is Urine, which is nothing else but Salt, which being exprest from the Mercuriall portions, by the violence of the separation, is forced to a dissolution: It is dissol∣ved into water by the Liven & so cast forth. If the Liver, by reason of its debility, makes no perfect separati∣on, it casts that Mucilaginous and Calculous impurity upon the Reyns, where for want of a ight and through separation it is (accord∣ing to the concurrency and Method
of nature) by the mediation of the spirit of Salt coagulated into Sand, or Tartar, either Massie and Solid, or Mucilaginous. This Tartar there∣fore is the Excretion of meat and drinke, which is coagulated in all mens bodies by the spirit of Salt, un∣less the expulsive faculty by its owne peculiar vigour or virtue, can com∣mand it into the Excrements, and so cast it out by dejection. IV. There are four kinds of this Adven∣titiousTartar, which proceed ori∣ginally from the four distinct fruits or Cibations which we receive from the four Elements. THe first kind proceeds from the use of those things that grow out of the Earth, as from all sorts of Pulse, Grains, Fruits, Herbs and Roots, upon which we feed. The second proceeds from those
nutriments which we take out of the Element of Water, as from fish, shel∣fish, &c. The third is from the flesh of Birds and beasts, &c. The fourth comes from the Fir∣mament, which the spirit of Wine, in respect of its subtilty, doth most resemble. This kind of Tartar is of a most forcible impression, while the Air being primarily infected with the vapours of the Earth, the wa∣ter and the firmament doth after∣wards annoy us: as wee frequently see in those acute and pernitious A∣stral Diseases, the Pleurisie, the Plague, the Prunella, &c. V. Tartar innate, is that which is coge∣nerated with man in his mothers wombe.
VI. Besides these impure Tinctures and Meteors, there is another sub∣stantial Extrarious cause, which cannot be reduced to a certane kind. TO this must be referred, those Insecta's or quick Creatures which sometimes (though rarely) are generated in the body, as Snakes, divers worms, &c. Secondly, those things must be re∣ferred hither, which by inchant∣ment and the mediation of evill spi∣rits, are invisibly and insensibly con∣veyed into the bodies of men and Women. Thirdly, We are to reduce to this Aphorisme or Canon all Splinters, Bullets, or other weapons, which being violently thrust or shot into the body, lie deeply in the flesh, or under the skin.
VII. We have now done with the Substan∣tial Extrarious Cause. To the Ac∣cidental, I shall referre all dispro∣portions of Limbs, Gibbosities, Luxations, Wounds, and fractures of bones. CHAP. 6. Of God, the first and supreme Cause of the Extrarious Cause. HAving now done with the Ex∣trarious or conjoyned and ap∣parent cause of the disease. I shall consider the cause of that Extrarious Cause. I. This Cause I shall divide into six heads or branches. The first of which is God. 2. Excesse and de∣fect of Necessaries. 3. Fire. 4. He∣reditary
impurity. 5. Imaginati∣on. 6. Ʋiolent Illation. Of these I shall treat in their order; and first of GOD. MAn, because he is made in the Image of God, is bound al∣so to live according to his Will. I mean his will revealed and laid down in the Ten Commandements, and the holy Scriptures, namely in those Bookes onely which were left unto us, and which (with∣out scruple) we have received from the holy Prophets, and the Apostles of the Lord and Saviour: but when we transgresse and violate this Law and will of our maker, then doth God send upon us condigne punish∣ments, amongst which Diseases are numbred in the very Booke of the Law. For thus saith the Lord: If ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soules abhor my judgements, so that ye will not do my Commandements,
but that ye break my Covenants: I also will do this unto you, I will even appoint over your terrour, consump∣tion and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart. I will also smite thee in the knees and the legges with a sore botch, that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of the Head. I will make the Pesti∣lence cleave unto thee, untill it hath consumed thee from off the Land which thou possessest. And in ano∣ther place, The Lord shall smite thee with a Consumption, with a Fea∣vour, and with an inflammation and extream burning, and with the Sword, and with Blasting, and with Mildew: and they shall pursue thee untill thou perish. And the Heaven that is over thy head, shall be brass, and the Earth that is under thee shal be Iron. The Lord shall make the Raine of thy Land powder and dust, from heaven shall it come down up∣on
thee, untill thou be destroyed. Leviti. Cap. 29. 16. Deuteron. 28. And in the new Testament, that e∣verlasting and blessed Physitian, the Holy JESUS, who came not to de∣stroy, but to save the world; after he had healed the impotent man, who had beene sick of his infirmity eight and thirty years he dismissed him not without this loving and gracious caution: Behold, thou art made whole sinne no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. S. John Chap. 5. 14. and S. Paul also in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, re∣buking that new and sinfull custome (which had crept then into that Church) of prophaning the Lords holy Supper, with their own intem∣perate feasts, objects to them, that sharp visitation by Diseases, which (for that very abuse) God had pu∣nished them with: For this cause (saith he) many are weak and sick∣ly among you, and many sleep: for
some of them had beene punished with death. Thus is the just and all∣seeing God, the first and supreme cause of the Extrarious cause. CHAP. 7. Of the excesse and the defect of ne∣cessaries, which is the second cause of the Extrarious cause. FXcess of Necessaries, is to be con∣sidered, first in Victuals, where the offence is threefold. 1. In super∣fluousness. 2. In vairety. 3. In our manner of receiving them. We offend in superfluousness, when that which is to nourish us is taken in too great a quantity: whence follow frequent and unwholsome evaporations and belchings, which so fill and oppresse the vessels and Organs of the spirits, that they are hindered in their fun∣ctions; or the meat with its weight and quantity so indisposeth us, that
the inordinate operation and digesti∣on is retarded. Innumerable are the Diseases and molestations which pro∣ceed from this particular intempe∣rance. We offend in variety, when at one dinner or supper, we eate many and divers kinds of Meats and Drinkes, for these having a great dissimilitude and enmity amongst themselves, cause divers inconveniences by their various dissents and unequall di∣gestion. We offend in the manner of re∣ceiving, when we eate hastily, or swallow our meat before it be well chew'd and devour our Drinke like Whales, as those are accustomed who drink healths (as they term them) at Meales, taking off whole Bowles and Tankards , without so much as breathing time, and thinke the excess very fashionable & praise∣worthy.
Another Excess in Necessaries, happens about taking of rest and watching: When the Animal spi∣rits by too much sleep, are by de∣grees habitnated into a certaine dul∣ness, so that they perform their fun∣ctions sluggishly, remitting still something of their due vigour, until at length they lose all their activity, and are naturalized (as it were) in∣to an incurable stupidity. Contra∣rywise by too much watching they are easily inflamed, so that often∣times they cause Maniacal fits and phrensies, with divers others most desperate consequences. A third excess of Necessaries, happens from cold and heat. Excess of heat happens, either when the bo∣dy is over exercised, or when any o∣ther Extraneous heat hath too free an access to it, and the innate fire of nature is beyond measure excited thereby, so that inordinate exhala∣tions
are caused in the body, which produce an excessive and dangerous resolution and weakness of parts. Excess of cold happens either by a suddaine Refrigeration or cool∣ing after Exercise, or when we ex∣pose our selves too much to cold weather, which hinders the evapo∣ration of Excrementitious Exhala∣tions by stopping the Pores, and bea∣ting them back into the body, where they lodge and remaine. Whence it comes to pass, that being of an Ex∣trarious malignant disposition, they afford matter and foment for many and severall kinds of diseases. A like excess to this, proceeds fre∣quently from the hardness and thick Callousness of some peoples skins, by which fault (because little or no perspiration is performed) the secret, and the Ambient Aire of their bodies is intercepted, so that there
is no liberty for inspiration or ex∣spiration. Defect of Necessaries is first, the want of meat and drink in their due time and proportion. This is either famine or thirst. Secondly The want of naturall rest, according to the Verse, Quod caret alterna reque, durabile non est. The strongest body, and the best Cannot subsist, without due rest. Thirdly, The want of Refrige∣ration or coolness of aire, which by its needfull community and permea∣tion, allayes and tempers the inward heat of the heart. Fourthly, and lastly, the want of due and requisite heat, by which the Excrementitious Exhalations of the body are vented forth, and the ani∣mall
spirits incited to their peculiar functions. CHAP. 7. Of Fire, the third Cause of the Extrarious Cause. BY Fire in this place, I under∣stand not onely Kitchin-fire, or any other fire that burns, but also the celestiall fire of the Sun, and the Sun and the native implanted fire of all the parts of ns body. I. Externall fire is the producent of Extrarious Causes by its separa∣tive power or faculty, by which it separates & extracts them from o∣ther bodies, & communicates them afterwards to our nature.
II. The Internal, innate fire, produceth Extrarious causes, when by dige∣stion it separates the impure part, from that food or matter in which it first resided, whence our natural substance comes to be infected. SO the naturall heat digests our meat, and by the assistance of the innnate Salt dissolves it, that man may retain or keep in his body, that which is agreeable to his nature, and joyne it to his essence: but that which is contrariant, he segregates from the other, and casts forth at his proper Emunctories. This Segrega∣ted matter, or Excrement, doth of∣tentimes mightily afflict the body, and that it doth two manner of waies. The first by being retained in the body, or for want of evacuati∣on. The second, by a noysome ftid Exhalation, and sent ascending from
it to the nobler parts, when it is so retained. It offends by retention first, when it is carried (indeed) to the naturall Emunctories, or deijcient parts; but the weakness of the ex∣pulsive faculty is so great, that it cannot drive it out. Secondly, When it is left in the very stomack without farther Exclusion. Thirdly, when some subtil poyson, in and together with the nutritive portion or Chy∣lus, doth convey and insinuate it self into the most inward parts of the body: which poyson was first taken in with meat and drink. It happens often (saith the most learned and expert Quercetanus) that when the naturall Balsame is tainted by some impurity proceeding from food or nutriment, it doth afterwards give way and occasion for many dange∣rous symptomes and diseases. This Paracelsus, the great Father and leader of the German Philosophers, in his Treatise of the Being, and na∣turn
of poyson doth most learnedly expound. The Stars also doe fre∣quently powre down into the Aire, and upon the Earth, certaine Astral Emunctions, and Arsenical vapours, with other noxious Excretions and Exudations. See his Treatise of the Being, and the power of the Stars o∣ver inferiour Bodies. Hence proceed Distraction, Phrensies, Plurisies, the Plague, and frequent, suddaine Dy∣senteries. Putrified things grow to be noysome and hurtfull, by the meanes of those corrosive Salts and fuliginous Exhalations, which partly by an externall, partly by their own internall heat, are ex∣cited out of them and dispersed. Moreover the Excrements of man, when they happen to be retained in the body, are subject to a Re-pu∣trifaction, and frequently doe so, and Wormes are generated out of them: In this Case, the fuliginous, malignant spirits of that foul Masse,
ascend to the braine, whence pro∣ceed suddaine madnesse, the Verti∣go, the Falling-sickness, and divers other lamentable diseases. There are also certaine living Creatures, which (if they be applyed to man) will by their natnrall heat, sud∣dainly indispose him, by emission of that which is most remote from, and inconsistent with his nature. Cantharides are so full of this viru∣lency, that being onely externally applyed, they prove oftentimes per∣nicious. Bartholomew Montagna∣na reports, that a certain Citizen of Padua, applying them onely to one of his knees, did bleed at the Urinary passage, five quarts of blood. He af∣firms also, that the like inconveni∣ence happened to another, who ap∣plyed them to his great Toe, to take off the Leprous scurfe of his Nayls. The Basilisk hath such a subtil and violent poyson in his eyes, that his very looks infect and kill. How hurt∣full
Minerals are, when elevated into Mercuriall vapours, may be read at large in Paracelsus his books, Von den Bergfrancfheten. III. That Extrarious Causes, and divers indispositions, are introduced by common fire, none is ignorant. ALchymists, Goldsmiths, and Colliers, can sufficiently prove this point, who are oftentimes so of∣fended with vehement searching, Sulphureous, Arsenical and Mercu∣rial smoaks, that they fall into des∣perate and most painfull Diseases. The smoake of Galbanum, and Hartshorne will induce the Le∣thargy.
CHAP. 8. Of Hereditary impurity, which is the fourth Cause of the Ex∣trarious Cause. I. Hereditary infection, is a transplan∣tation of extrarious Causes, per∣formed by impressing a fixt tincture, springing from another fixt salt into the prolfic seed, which Pa∣rents contribute to the Generation of Children. SAlt alone and onely, is of all the three Principles fixt and fe. Therefore those Diseases which pro∣ceed from the indisposition of the Salt, are radically fixt, and for the most part Hereditary, as the Lepro∣sie, the Stone, the Joynt-gout, and the like. But those Diseases which spring from any infirmity of the fluxible
and volatile principles, that is to say, from Mercury and Sulphur (as all manner of Cathars and Feavers do,) cannot so easily infect posterity: for these Diseases neither fix their seeds firmly, nor deeply, because they have not their tinctures so tenaciously imprest. The nature of this kind of fixed Salt or Sulphur, may be perfectly discern'd in the seeds and the roots of Plants: for if you take but some particles of them, and transplant them▪ those very peeces will take root and grow, and bear fruit: But neither the leaves, nor the flowers in which the volatile Mercury & Sulphur have their seat, will do so. Now the fixed Salt is al∣waies conserved in the root, and in some pithy stalks & Siens or Graffes: but the fixed Sulphur is in the seed. And this is the reason that the trans∣plantation of all Vegetals, is perfor∣med by these onely: but by the Mer∣curiall parts, which easily fade and
wither, it cannot be done; nor by those parts, which have onely in them a volatile Sulphur, as the flowers, and the leaves of some Vege∣tables. See Quercetan, in his advice against the joynt-gout, and the stone. Therefore (saith the same Quer∣cetanus) whatever lodgeth in the body of the parents, that with a firm, spiritual, impure, and malignant tincture can affect or infect the radi∣cal Balsame, the vital seed, and the very root or fundamentall of hu∣mane nature: that same impurity (whatever it be) doth by an Here∣ditary transplantation pass into, and infect the Children. But if these im∣pure seeds of Diseases, have not ta∣ken such a deep root, nor so far cor∣rupted the radicall Balsame: or if by the helpe of nature, and her inter∣nall Balsame, there is a separation made of them; or if by the ministry of Art, and externall, specifical Bal∣sames
of Physick, they are effectually allayed and weakned, or are come to their proper terme and utmost du∣ration, so that their virulency and force is quite spent and broken: in any of these Causes, Gouty and Le∣prous persons, doe not alwaies beget Gouty and Leprous Children. For by these means, the roots of Diseases, even the most fixt and malignant are eradicated, impure seeds are pu∣rified, and the morbid tincture by long traduction becomes quite ex∣tinct. This Eradication of heredi∣tary Diseases, and Purification of diseased seed comes to passe by the benefit and assistance of good Seed∣plots, that is, by the excellent, whole∣some temperament of the Matrix, in vegetous and healthy women: whence it happens, that the Fathers seed, though tainted with some morbific indisposition, is by the laudable vigour of the mothers ra∣dical Balsame amended, so that
Arthritical and Calculous Fathers beget Children, which all their life∣time continue healthy and unat∣tempted by such Diseases. Yea, they beget such Children▪ as are not ob∣noxious or liable to such indisposi∣tions▪ In like manner also it happens, that a vegetous, healthy Father, contributing good seed, may have a sickly, impure issue, troubled with hereditary infirmities, the Fathers seed attracting to it the malignant propriety of those Diseases which possessed the Mother. Thus good Corne, if it be cast into a bad soile, will degenerate into Tares, or yeeld a very bad and a thin Crop: but sow it againe in good ground, and it will recover its former goodnesse and perfection.
CHAP. 9. Of Imagination, the fifth Cause of the Extrarious Cause▪ I. Imagination is a Star, excited in the firmament of man, by some ex∣ternall Object. II. When the Imagination is inflamed, or at the height, then strange passions and defections follow. III. It is inflamed first, when it feigns some object to it selfe, and longs for it, but cannot enjoy it. HEnce it comes to passe, that pregnant or breeding women (whose imagination is most vehe∣ment, because of the Starre of the
Child, which upon some singular longing, doth most powerfully move them,) doe by the force of an infla∣med or exalted imagination (when they faile to come by that Object they long for) impresse into the ve∣ry child, the perfect forme or figure of it; yea, it oftentimes causeth mis∣carriage, and the death of the Child, as may be seen in this following Hi∣story. A certaine woman great with child, seeing a Baker carrying Bread into the Oven with his Doublet off, longed for a peece of the Bakers shoulder, and when any other meat was offered unto her▪ or brought in to her sight, she would presently fall to vomit. Her Husband distrest be∣twixt love and pitty, offered such a large summe of money to the Baker, that he consented, & suffered her to bite off two morsels of his flesh, but being not able to endure the pain the third time, the woman presently fell in Labour, and was delivered of
three boyes, whereof two were alive, and the third dead. Mizaldus in his first Century, relates it out of Lan∣gius. To this first Division, must be referred those unfortunate Aspirers, who affecting some great knowledge or science, and missing to attain to it, by reason of a blockish stupidity, or imbecillity of apprehension, come to be distracted and stark mad. IV Secondly, The Imagination comes tomes to be inflamed, when by some unexpected Object or Accident, a man or woman is suddainly frigh∣ted. SUch Accidents prove oftentimes very pernicious. A causeless, i∣maginary fear in times of infection, hath cast many into the Plague, and the Plague hath beene their death. There lives at Gueilburg, a certaine Bakers wife, who being young with
Child, went into the adjoyning Woods or Forrest, to gather sticks, and being very intent in gathering with her face towards the ground a Citizen of that place comming sud∣dainly at her, did so fright her, that (not knowing well what to doe▪) she struck one hand into the other, and continued rubbing them toge∣ther with a very strong compression for a good while. This woman was shortly after delivered of a Son with one hand onely, which Childe I my selfe saw, and taught there in the publick free-Schoole. In the like manner, some men that have been frighted by Phantasms, and spi∣ritual Apparition in the night time, have instantly fallen into grievous diseases, and some have dyed. Others by the excesse and violence of the horrour had the hairs of their heads changed from the native colour, into a quite contrary, especially that part which they chanced to touch at the
time they were so frighted. I my self have known two, who affirmed, that such a change did happen to them upon the like occasion: the one had halfe his Beard turned gray, the o∣ther had part of the haires of his head turned perfect white, the rest retaining still their first colour. V. Thirdly, The imagination is infla∣med, when the stomack is offended by some object of sence. SUch perturbations happen of∣ten, and men are frequently in∣clined to vomit, when they looke earnestly upon those Ejectments which another hath cast up. VI. Fourthly, The imaginationis in fla∣med, when any person imagines or fancies, that paine or trouble he is
in, to be intolerable for him, and incurable. HEnce it comes to passe, that men despairing of their health or redemption, contrive their owne death, and make themselves away. CHAP. 10. Of violent Illation, which is the sixth and last cause of the ex∣trarious Cause. VIolent Illation is performed two wayes, Corporally, and Spi∣ritually. I. Corporally, when a man or woman is wounded, thrust, or shot, or fallen, or their bones broken. II. Spiritually, when by the meanes and
ministry of evill spirits, a man or woman is either blinded, or maimed, or any extraneous visible matter, is invisibly and without manifest violence, conveyed into, and lodged in their bodies, or when they are by any other preternatural wayes and meanes set upon and af∣licted. THat such things may and have been done, we shall prove by the truth of this following relation. In the year of our Lord, 1539. there lived in the village of Fugesta, with∣in the Bishoprick of Esteter, a cer∣taine Husbandman, named Ulrich Neusesser▪ who was grievously pain∣ed in the Hypochondriacal Region, with most violent and sharp stitches; whose sury and persistance made him send for a Chirurgion, and (incision being made) there was found, and taken out of his side, an Iron Naile, which lay under the
skin, without the least external sym∣ptome▪ or discoloration of the part. This, notwithstanding the pain cea∣sed not but was dayly exasperated▪ and did more and more increase: whereupon this miserable man re∣solving with himselfe, that there could be no cure for him but death, snatched a knife out of the hand of his attendant, and did therewith cut his own own throat. Upon the third day after, when his body was to be drest for buriall, there were present, Eucherius, Rosenbader of Weisenburg▪ and John of Ettenstet▪ (a Town in the Dukedome of Ba∣varia,) both Chirurgions who in the presence of as many persons as came to the Funeral did cut up the Body, and in the fore part of his belly, betwixt the Cartilages and the Navill, towards the side-region there were found, and taken out, and seen by them all (a prodigious and won∣derfull ight ) a round and long
peece of wood, foure knives of steel made partly with edges, and partly with teeth like a saw, and two pee∣ces of sharp and rough Iron▪ each of them being more then a span in length, and underneath all these, a great lock of haire wrapt close to∣gether and made up in the forme of a Ball. Mizaldus in his sixth Cen∣tury, relates this sad History out of Langius. CHAP. II. Of the cure of Diseases. HItherto we have known the Di∣seases by his Causes: It remains now that we teach the Cure of it; and this we shall doe onely by cer∣tain genernall Rules or Precepts. But lest we should proceed without method, we shall divide this Chap∣ter concerning the Cure, into seven Sections.
We shall teach, 1. What, and how manifold the Cure is. 2. How a Physician ought to be qualified. 3. Of what sort, kind or quality, the medicines or meanes of the Cure ought to be. 4. Out of what things those Remedies must be sought and taken. 5. Why Medicines sometimes cannot restore and introduce health. 6. How the Remedies or Medica∣ments ought to be administred. 7. How the sick man must carry or dispose of himselfe, while he is in a course of Physick. Section 1. What▪ and how manifold the Cure is. I. The cure of Diseases, is an operation by which a sick person is restored to his former health, and his sick∣nesse (what ever it be) quite ex∣pelled,
and radically extirpated. II. The cure or healing of all Diseases, (that I may in this place make use of the most apposite, significant termes of Severinus, out of Crol∣lius) is two fold. 1. Universal, which is an ab∣solute Extirpation of every radical morbid impurity, whether heredi∣tary, or from the sinister use of food, or by the force of externall impression. THis universall Cure is perform∣ed by a naturall medicinall Bal∣same, consentaneous to the nature of man, which resolves, discusseth and consumes the Seminary tin∣ctures of all impurities and diseases: but corroborates, confirms, and con∣serves the innate humane Balsame; for (as Paracelsus teacheth) so long
as the radicall humour keepes in its due quantity and proportion, no Disease or indisposition can be per∣ceived. And in this way of Cure, the pluralities, particularities, and orderly Rules of Symptoms and Prognosticks, have no place▪ for all Diseases (what ever they be) are universally & perfectly cured by this one universall medicine. It is not without reason then that Raymund Lulle affirms, that this onely one, supreme, universall medicine (to which, and in which the virtues of all other particular and specificall medicines are reduced and included) may be safely administred unto all sick persons, without inquiring what Disase they are sick of For wise na∣ture, by an instinct from her selfe, hath given unto this her favourite medicine▪ the prerogative and power to cure, and absolutely to extermi∣nate all naturall infirmities whatso∣ever; yea, and to rectifie and restore
her own selfe when disordered and weakned. There be four chief kinds of Diseases which if once confirm∣ed, or inveterate, can be expelled by no medicine, but the universall, namely the Falling-sicknesse, the Gout, the Dropsie, and the Leprosie. To these Paramount Diseases, all other inferiour sicknesses, as to their proper fountaines and originalls, have relation and affinity. This u∣niversall medicine, is a Jewel much to be wished for and worthy the looking after; but few are they whom God blesseth with his favou∣rite-secret. Lullius adviseth all Phy∣sicians, that diligently and faith∣fully labour for to search and looke after it: because it is the infallible remedy against all infirmities, and the greatest and most proper resto∣rative and comforter of the spirits in their functions: For in this me∣dicine (as in their onely and pro∣per subject) there is all and uni∣versall
collection and conjunction of all the operative, effectuall virtues of generall Physick, coacted and u∣nited together by a natural method, consent and design: which virtues are otherwise, (according to the or∣dinary course and dispensation of nature) confusedly dispersed and di∣stributed amongst and through herAnimalls, Vegetals, and Minerals. three great Families; and he that hath such an Anti∣dote against all bodily Diseases, hath the gift of God, which is an incor∣rupt, incomparable, and invaluable treasure in this life: What ever in∣firmity cannot be healed by this competent, natural medicine, we may boldly and safely conclude, that the finger of the great God of nature is in the Cause. But the paine (when we find it to proceed from his righ∣teous hand,) is by much the more tolerable, and we ought to beare it patiently, and thankfully, until the
Almighty Physician himselfe will be pleased to heal us, by those wayes and means which his divine and un∣erring wisdome shall judge the best. III. 2. Next to the universall, is the particular cure, by which the roots of diseases, and the Seminal tin∣ctures themselves, are not alwayes taken away; but the bitter fruits of them, the Symptoms, Paroises; and paines, are oftentimes preven∣ted, mitigated, and so supprest, that they cannot come to their exaltat∣on, or the worst passe, as the com∣mon phrase is. By this Cure, the Physicall evacuation of Excre∣ments is instituted, and some con∣siderable succours are communi∣cated to opprest nature by the friendly, consentaneous spirits of those medicines that are admini∣stred; which spirits can onely rightly know, and penetrate into
the secret lodges and topicall resi∣dencies of the radicall morifie impurity. NOw, though this particular Cure performs no more, than we have told you in the definition of it, yet is it not therefore to be slighted, nor rejected; for it doth oftentimes in the most desperate di∣seases, doe the work of the universal, because the most mercifull God hath discovered unto us certain secret-natural universals,☞ of which some containe in them the na∣ture of the whole Heaven, others of the whole Air, and some againe of the whole earth, by whose help most Diseases are easily known and cured. Moreover specifical, appropriate me∣dicines, when they are rightly refi∣ned and spiritualized, will emulate the virtue of the universal, by consu∣ming radical impurities & strength∣ning the virtue of the innate humane
Balsame. Seeing then that we want the universal, it will be happy for us, if we may attaine to the anie know∣ledge of (at least) the particular, subordinate, specifical and individu∣al kinds and means of cures. Section 2. How a Physician ought to be qualified. I. Every Physician that desires to cure sick persons well and happily, must be a sound Christian, and truly religious and holy. FOr true and perfect medicines, and the knowledge of them, can no where be had, but from God, whom we can serve by no other means in this life, but onely by piety, and piety hath included in it fervent and incessant supplications unto
God, hearty and frequent thanksgi∣vings for his gracious and free bene∣fits, with sincere and actuall love to∣wards our Neighbours. God is so infinitely good and kind, that he doth dayly give, and offer both to the good and to the bad, all those things which are necessary both for their sustenance and their health: but that we use those gifts to the glory of God, and the good of our Neigh∣bours, piety alone is the onely cause. Therefore, if thou desirest to select, and extract convenient and effectu∣all Medicines out of those Myriads of Creatures, which by the secret power of their Creator, dayly flow upon thee, & appear about thee, Fear God, and love thy Neighbour as thy selfe. This being done, I affirm it to thee, thou shalt find those things, which will fill thee with joy. Thou maist easily apprehend by what I say, that he is unworthily permitted to be a Physician, whose practise hath
no other aim then Covetousness and Usury, and abuseth the gifts of God (I mean his medicinal favours and discoveries▪) to hoord up for him∣selfe the riches of this world. They are all impostors, and faithlesse Mountebanks, who professe Physick, and its great ornament Chymistry, out of such a sordid, uncharitable, and unjust design. II. He must be the servant, not the Ma∣ster of nature, and according to the sentiment of Hippocratesand Calen, he must be a profound Philosopher, and expert, or well vers'd in the Art of healing. HE must be throughly seen in Phi∣losophy, because there be two sorts of Philosophers. The one (who are in truth but Philosophers by name,) after the common Doctrine of the Schooles, inquire onely into the Elementary qualities of sublu∣nary
bodies: but the other sort (who are the true Philosophers indeed) search into the most secret operations, proprieties, and perfor∣mances of nature: her most private Closers, and Sanctuaries, are ever o∣pen unto these; whence it comes to passe, that they have a perfect expe∣rimentall knowledge by the light of Nature▪ and are indeed true Physi∣cians: For the innate naturall fa∣culty of all productions of the earth, is, by the Chymical dexterity of these latter sort of Philosophers, vindicated from the drossie adheren∣cies of the matter, and united with the firmamentall virtue, or occult quality, which is caused and com∣municated to them, by the influence of the Stars. This Art of refining, and uniting inferiours to their supe∣riours, makes a compleat and a suc∣cessful Physician.
III. He must be an Alchymist skilfull in all spagirical operations, to sepa∣rate the pure from the impure, the drossie and venemous parts of his medicinall Ingredients, from the usefull and sanative, and one that knowes exactly how to prepare, and when to administer Chymical me∣dicines for the restoration of his Patients. FOr as Gold is seven times puri∣fied, so a Physician ought to try and refine all his Physicall Materials by the ministry of fire, which se∣parates the good from the bad. Also he ought to have in some things, a certain and confirmed knowledge acquired by long experience, and a diligent daily inspection into the works of nature; for true Philoso∣phy is nothing else, but a Physicall practise or triall, communicating
daily to industrious and learned o∣perators, most usefull and various conclusions and medicines. And af∣ter all the coyl of Academical licen∣ciated Doctors, he onely is the true Physician, created so by the light of Nature▪ to whom Nature her selfe hath taught and manifested her pro∣per and genuine operations by Ex∣perience. Section 3. Of Medicines, what their qua∣lities should be, and how prepared. I. Physicall Remedies or Medicines, should both expell the disease, and strengthen natu. HEnce came that infallible Rule of Physicians, Contraries are cured by their Contraries. For Con∣traries, by the consent of all Philo∣sophers, expell and drive out one an∣other,
therefore it is necessary, that those Medicines which take away the Disease, be repugnant and con∣trary to the Disease: and for the same reason▪ they must be auxilia∣ries and consentaneous to our na∣ture. Upon which very considera∣tion, that famous principle of the Hermetists is grounded: Every like is cured by its like. Therefore Medicines, as they respect, or look to the Hypostatical principles, ought al∣so to have some correspondence with the nature of the disease, but in their Energie and effect, they must be ad∣versant and quite opposite. Thus the stone which proceeds from Tartar, or coagulated Salt, is cured by Salt, but it must be Analyticalor resolvent salt. The Joynt-gout also which proceeds from Tartareous, sharp and corro∣sive Salts, is cured by lenitive and consolidating Salts. In like manner, sulphureous Diseases must be cured by their proper and specificall sul∣phurs:
but to inflammatory sulphur that causeth Feavers, we must op∣pose acid, Vitriolated sulphur, which is a most effectuall cooler, and will coagulate and allay those incensed sulphureous spirits. Whence followes this Consequence. That some Medicines may be corro∣sive, without any danger or preju∣dice. But with this Caution, that they be so qualified, as not to work upon the innate, radical Balsame, but on∣ly upon that Extrarious malignant matter, which is the conjoyn'd and apparent cause of the Disease.
II. It is requisite, that of Medicines, some be Spagyrically prepared, and some otherwise. FOr Chymical remedies must not be used at all times, nor in all Causes, but onely then, when our in∣ternal natural Alchymist is insuffici∣ent of himselfe to separate the pure from the impure, and perfectly to extract out of compound Medicines, that noble Essence in which the force and virtue, or spirit of the medica∣ment, is chiefly resident: or when there is a necessity in fixed and root∣ed Diseases, to use minerall remedies, that confirmed and obstinate Mala∣dies may be set upon, and brought under by such powerfull and active Medicines that will not be baffled. It is otherwise a foolish and needlesse imployment, to separate that by Chymistry, which nature her selfe
will performe with more ease and dexterity. And Nature knowes bet∣ter what is most convenient for her, then any Physician: for she makes use of her own proper fire, and Mag∣net, which attracts both from Phy∣sick and food, that which is conge∣neous, and most like to her selfe: whereas an Artist on the contrary, doth not at all times use the like fire, nor exactly in the same degree to perform his operations. For which cause, the true Hermetical Physici∣ans, do not at all times administer Minerals; but most commonly when they exhibite Minerals, they make use also of Medicines extracted out of Vegetables, or to quicken the opera∣tion of these latter, they give a com∣petent and safe quantity of the for∣mer.
III. All Medicines must be specificall and apropriated to the Disease. THat is to say, they must have in them by the gift of God, such a virtue, that is peculiarly proper, and designed (as it were) to remove those diseases against which they are administred. Whether they be uni∣versally so gifted, or particularly for some one sort of disease. That bo∣dy, or subject in nature, which will be easily corrupted▪ cannot be medi∣cinall for all diseases: and this is the reason, that out of such bodies, the true Philosophers extract onely spe∣cifical Antidotes, whose power or virtue is effectual onely against some particular kind of disease. That thou maist have some knowledge of those materials or ingredients which are requisite and proper to make such spcifical Medicaments, thou must
diligently read the Bookes of the Hermetists, De signaturis rerum, That is to say, Of those impressions and Characters, which God hath communicated to, and marked (as I may say) all his Creatures with. These Bookes thou must carefully peruse and all others which teach us the true and solid practise of Phy∣sick. But if it would please God to blesse thee with the universal Medi∣cine, these studies, and all other cures whatsoever, might be safely pretermitted. This glorious univer∣sal Medicine (without all doubt) is to be extracted out of such a sub∣ject, whose innate Balsame preserves both it Selfe, and the Body in which it exists from all corruption. This body is so adequate, and tempera∣ted with such a just and even pro∣portion of all the foure Elements, that the qualities of no one of them, can ever possibly corrupt it. If thou conceivest it may be bad in another
kind of subject, thou dost but play the fool and deceive thy selfe. What ever Nature hath, that she can give us; what she hath not, she neither will, nor can afford. To the wise man one word is enough. I speake out of the true light of nature: My Studies also hitherto cannot find a∣ny other Fudamental of an univer∣sal Medicine. Section 4. Out of what things Medicines must be sought. I. They must be sought. 1. Out of the Word of God. 2. Out of Nature: and in nature, out of Vegetals, Animals, and Minerals. I In this search, we must first pray for Gods assistance; and in the next place, we must attend to the instru∣ctions
of the wise Ancients. If thou couldst finde out such a thing as would purge and rectifie nature in the great world so effectually that ever after she would remaine sound and unimpaired, so that nothing of her Homogeneous essence and per∣fection, could be saved from her by any Extraneous fire, then (without doubt) both the way to, and the miraculous Energie of this onely true and undeceiving medicine were in thy hands. Section 5. Why Medicines cannot alwayes re∣store sick Persons to their former health. Owaldus rollus, a cruly learn∣ed and expert Physician, in his Preface to his Basilica Chymica, doth most fully and judiciously handle this point. His words are these. It is observed sometimes, that
sick persons by the most convenient and effectual Medicines, cannot be healed for some one or more of these eight subsequent reasons. The first is, because their appointed time or terme of life is come, which by no humane wit or Medicine can be prolonged. For there is no reme∣dy upon earth, by which our corrup∣tible bodies can be freed from death, the decreed penalty, and the wages of our sinnes: But there is one thing, which (if we add holinesse to it,) will keep back and restrain corrupti∣on, renew youth, and lengthen our short life as heretofore in the Pa∣triachs. Now though our life may be short∣ned andThe terme of life is moveable, not fixed: conditi∣onall, not positive, as appears by that commandement, which S. Paul ob∣served to be the first with a pro∣mise; and by ma∣ny other reasons, which cannot be in∣serted in this place. prolonged; yet because of the pu∣nishment for sinne, we must by the immuta∣ble decree of the eter∣nal Law, unavoyda∣bly
die: for a con∣junction of different Natures, and things (suppose a Spirit and a Body) must necessarily induce a dissolution, else we should state a Pythagorical Me∣tempsuchosis, or a revertency in ages as Plato did. And in this Case the use of our universall and supreme Medicine, will prove as vaine and ineffectuall, as an old womans Reci∣pe because the Marriage of souls and bodyes, ordained by an inevitable necessity for divorcement and separa∣tion, can by no industry of Artists, nor Ayds of nature be rendred per∣petuall; for the statute Lawes of the present things, and their great Law∣giver, are inviolable. It is impious therefore to seeke, and impossible to find out such a Medicine, that will carry us alive beyond those bounds, which the very Father of life will not have us to transpasse.
The second reason is, Because that sick persons are too too often brought to such a lamentable passe by the ig∣norance of unlearned Physicians, and their pernicious Recipe's, that the best and most virtual medicines can doe them no good, their bodies be∣ing utterly poysoned, and made im∣medicable by those fatal Tormentors and Executioners of mankind. In this desperate ase (most common∣ly) is the Chymicall Physician cal∣led upon; but then would I have him to call to mind, that saying of Trophilus in Plutarch, which af∣firms that man onely to be the com∣pleat Physician, : and not to cast away (but of vaine∣glory,) their soveraigne and unde∣served medicines, to alve the credit of such detestable villaines, whose infamy is past cure: : Let them beware also, that they suffer not their
Medicaments to be mingled with the sluttish and venemous compositions of others, lest the ill consequence of such doings be laid to their charge, and the success or good event (if any comes to passe▪) be arrogated by, and ascribed unto those impudent and clamorous impostors; for such a perverse and execrable envy posses∣seth these Medicasters, that to dis∣grace those that are more learned and expert than themselves, and to keep up their owne decaying repute, they will (if they can have that op∣portunity) cast those Patients which are curable and towards recovery, into an incurable and hopelesse con∣dition. Hence it comes to pass, that amongst the common sort of people, (who suffer most by them) they are publiquely saluted by the most ap∣posite▪ Title of Profest Poyso∣ners. The third reason is, Because the Physician is called upon too late,
when nature is quite mastred or ore∣come, and the disease hath got his full sway; otherwise if convenient or proper medines were seasonable, (that is to say, in a time of preven∣tion, by resisting the beginnings and first attempts of diseases) admini∣stred, no doubt but (with Gods bles∣sing and assent) the consequence and effect would be happinesse and health. The fourth reason is, because the sick person will not punctually ob∣serve the Physicians prescriptions: for it happens too often, that Di∣seased people charge the Physician or his Medicines, with those ill events which by some omission or irregula∣rity (contrary to that golden Law of the Locrenses in Aelanu,) they have drawne upon them∣selves. The fifth reason is, because the
nature or peculiar propriety of some persons, are not inclinable or adap∣ted to health, as we see some timber to be so tough and knotty, and out of a certaine natural defect, to dege∣nerate into such an untowardnesse, that by no force or Art it can be cleft or wrought: And it happens very frequently, that the time chosen for healing, together with the indispo∣sition of the Stars, oppose the Cure: for what ever Disease is unseason∣ably, that is to say, immaturely heal'd, the party will be ever after subject to a relapse, because it is the seasonablenesse or fulnesse of time, that (like harvest) gives a firme and a fixed health. A ripe Pear will fall off the Tree spontaneously, but if we seeke to have it off, while it is green, we must either bruise the tree by shaking it, or with more violence break off the bough. Therefore, if these considerations be neglected, e∣specially in the Cure of Astral di∣seases,
we shall but lose our labour, and come off with prejudice. Phy∣sicians also must religiously provide, that the remedies they give, prove not worse then the Disease, therefore let them never advise their Patients to any impious course, nor consent to doe those things, which by sal∣ving the sore, destroy the soule and the body too: let it be their chiefe care not to hurt, if they cannot help. By doing so, they will keep a good conscience, which is a continuall east, but for a bad one there is no medicine. The sixth reason is, because the disease is come to that pitch or con∣firmation, from whence there can be no regress by the Laws of nature, as in perfect, absolute, and confirmed bi∣tuminous, massie, sandy, and stony coagulations: for in such consumma∣ted Diseases, no medicines can availe: nor in a native deafnesse or blindness:
for what nature her selfe hath once deprived us off, that cannot be re∣stored by any Artists, no more then corporall disproportions and birth∣maimes, or transpositions can be a∣mended. The seventh Cause or Reason is▪ the sordid, tenacious parcimonie of some rich Patients, which makes the Physician (for no Money is better disbursed, nor more honestly gotten) discontented and carelesse: some∣times also the diffidence, incredulity, and suspition of Patients, (though the Physician be never so faithful and diligent,) hinders the operation of the Medicine, and is a great impedi∣ment to the Physician himself. The eighth and last reason is, the wisdome and the goodnesse of God, who (without further toleration) takes away the Patient, lest being recovered, he should commit more,
and more heynous offences against his Maker, his Neighbour, and him∣self, to the utter misery and perditi∣on of his soul. For every disease is an expiatory penance, and by this divine affliction, correction and rod of judgement is the patient called upon, and required to amend his life: or else by this fatherly visitati∣on and imposition of the Crosse, which every child of God (in imi∣tation of his blessed Sonne) must patiently bear, he is purposely exer∣cised to be an example of piety, sub∣mission, and perfection unto others; for God doth oftentimes permit some particular persons to be afflicted with many and grievous Diseases, whom the cheerefulness and health of the flesh▪ with their dayly continuation in sins (if left without rebuke,) had cast at length into some desperate spirituall malady, to the manifest hazard of their eternal welfare: for health▪ without holinesse, and a pe∣nitent
resentment of of our frequent infirmities, is no token of Gods mer∣cy, but rather of damnation, and the portion of this life. Moreover, sinnes by weakning the forces and activities of the soule, make her im∣potent and unfit to govern the body; so that the principall part being sick and unapt to rule, the bodily facul∣ties are profusely wasted and abused, and so death is hastned on, and with it a total and a finall destruction. At least by this yoke and bridle of sick∣nesse, as by a wholsome kind of pur∣gatory, men will be retained in the ordinary offices of piety, and (though they be but few, who are effectually reclaimed or converted by it,) yet this detainment of their health (which i still left to them, they had still abused,) will in some mea∣sure restrain and cut off from them, both the liberty and the power of sinning. Hitherto the most learned Crollius.
Thou wilt now (perhaps) object, that seeing all Diseases are not cu∣rable, it is consequently absurd, to terme any Medicine universal I an∣swer, That is termed universall, not becaus it takes away all diseases at all times & in all Causes, for that it can∣not do; but because it being but one, can expell and cure all those diseases, which by all other particular or specifical Medicines whatsoever can, or have been healed and eradicated; yea, and some diseases which by no appropriated particular medicine can be healed, as the Gout, the Fal∣ling sicknesse, the Dropsie, the Le∣prosie, &c. Therefore it is termed u∣niversal, because it hath in it real and effectually, all the manifest and oc∣cult virtues of all other specifical me∣dicines & that eminently, or by way of transcendency, so that all other medicines are subordinate and ac∣comptable unto this.
Section 6. How Medicines ought to be admi∣nistred to the sick, and after what manner the Physician must be∣have himself in their admi∣nistration, and generally in his practise. I. Every professor of Physick, when he is furnished with convenient, ef∣fectuall, and rightly prepared me∣dicines, before he enters into pra∣ctise, must be conversant with, and acquire the friendship of some lear∣ned and well experienced Physici∣ar, whose advise and assistance in his first attempts, he must make use of, not omitting his own obser∣vations. FOr in the multitude of Counsel∣lours there is safety, and a more
exact judgement is given of the Pa∣tients present condition, and the wayes and meanes to restore him are better and surer laid. By this Course, that opprobrious German Proverb, which sticks too fast to some young Adventurers (Ein newer Arkt, Ein newer Kirch-hoff: A new Physician must have a new Church-yard,) would be easily refuted and quite abolished. This very Course (after serious and needful considerations) I did heretofore propose to my selfe, and to effect it throughly, I procu∣red and entred into mutuall and friendly Covenants with a certaine Doctor of Physick, who was not un∣learned: and that I might by this meanes proceed farther in my Chy∣mical discoveries, I conversed with him by frequent Letters, and other more familiar wayes: And this I did, because I supposed him (at that time) to be a true Philososopher, but I could never receive one line from
him, that was not wholly dictated by the spirit of pride and arrogancy. At length, when it fortuned, that (after a most loving invitation, I could not for very moving, and ex∣traordinary reasons, attend upon him) he rail'd at me (though al∣together innocent,) with most hor∣rid imprecations, and virulent lan∣guage, terming me an unsanctified villaine, and laboured by all meanes to vilifie my studies and person, that by such clamorous and publique dis∣couragements, he might force me to desist, and give over my profession. But none of these things shall move me: for God will yet give me such friends, with whom I may freely de∣liberate, and advise about Physical operations, and the healing of the sick: too much knowledge is often∣times foolishness. True Philoso∣phers walk wholly in the plaine path of nature. What profits learning, where pride beares the sway, and
blinds the owner? I have ever judg∣ed, the modest knowledge to be the most divine. It is true indeed, we are not all equalls: but let him that hath more of the light, walke in that shining path with modesty. I confesse indeed, and it is true, that he was my superiour by many de∣grees, but had he beene moved to this harsh dealing, by a meer conceit of his superiority in learning, perhaps he would not have cast me off so as he hath done. God resisteth the proud, and gives grace even to the humble. Yea, the most wise, and the blessed JESUS, did humble him∣selfe in the very forme of a servant, that he might familiarly live and converse with the most obscure and inferiour sort of people: and he was not ashamed, nor disdained to teach those poore spirits, not a sublunary, transient knowledge, but the glo∣rious and permanent mysteries of the Kingdome of heaven. I love still the
learning of so eminent a person be∣cause others whom I love, commend it unto me: But that great know∣ledge, which he abuseth to an inju∣rious scorn and undervaluing of me, I heartily hate. God Almighty (it may be) for some secret respects, which his all discerning spirit one∣ly knowes, would not suffer me to impart any longer, (as we were mu∣tually bound) my private affaires unto him. Therefore from hence∣forth let him live to himselfe, onely I would have him understand by this which is published, that his vehe∣ment and bitter Letters made me ve∣ry sad. But to returne to what we have proposed in the Contents of this Section; A Physician that would practise successfully, must First and before all things find out the disease, and what the cause of it is. For in vain wilt thou either seek or
apply remedies, if the cause of the disease be not perfectly knowne unto thee: the beginning of the Cure, is a right knowledge of the Disease: but the disease cannot be known, with∣out knowing the cause: For then are we confident, that we know the matter and effect, when we have discovered the cause or effici∣ent of it. II. He must apply and appropriate his remedies to the root and originall apparent cause of the dsease, and not otherwise. III. He must administer no Medcine, whose forces or operative virtues in taking away the disease, he is not throughly acquainted with, un∣lesse he be well assured that they cannot indanger nor prejudice a person that is in health: by such trials he may safely and profitably
discern what his Medicines can and what they cannot effect. IV. He must administer nothing that hath in it a manifest poyson, unlesse the venome be first wholly and actually separated or taken out. V. He must before the administrati∣on of his Medicines, remove all impediments that are likely to op∣pose or weaken their virtues; and this must be done either by himself, or by another, viz. by a Surgeon. HE must let blood, take away all luxations, set broken bones, &c. And afterwards apply his Medicines inwardly or outwardly, or both wayes, as need requires.
VI. He must prescribe such a Dyet both of Meat and Drinke, as will be a∣greeable to his Patients present exi∣gencie, and for the furtherance or assistance of nature, and the resto∣ration of health. VII. He must carefully observe a just Dose in all his Medicines, with respect had to their operations, and to the strength of the Patient. VIII. He must never administer any of his Medicines, without sanctifying them in, and with the blessed name of JESUS CHRIST. Whatsoe∣ver ye doe (saith the Apostle of the Gentiles) in word or deed, doe all in the name of the Lord JESUS, giving thankes to God and the Fa∣ther by him. Colos. 3. 17.
Section. 7. How the sick man should behave himself, while he is in a course of Physick. I. Let the sick person acknowledge, that he hath deserved, and drawn upon himselfe, the just anger of God by his frequent sinnes: and that it is by his righteous permission, that he is visited with sicknesse. II. Let him by an unfeigned penitence, and a godly sorrow reconcile him∣himselfe unto God through the me∣rits of his Saviour, putting on an holy resolution to become a new man; and afterwards let him draw near to the throne of Grace, and intreat God for mercy, and his healing assistance.
III. After reconciliation and invocation of the divine Aide, let him send for the Physician, and Physick be∣ing taken, let him not doubt of Gods mercy, and his own recovery. THat is to say, let him certainly believe that there is communi∣cated and infused (by the gift of God) into the medicine which he hath taken, such an innate vertue▪ as is effectual and proper to expell his Disease. If he doth this, the event will be answerable to his faith, and the Medicine will in all circumstan∣ces work successfully. A firm creduli∣ty, chearfull hope and true love and confidence towards the Physician, and the Medicine, (saith that great Philosopher Oswaldus Crollius,) conduce as much to the health of
the Patient, yea sometimes more, then either the remedy▪ or the Phy∣sician. Naturall faith (I meane not the faith of Grace which is from Christ, but the imaginative aith, which in the day that the first man was created, was then infused and planted in him by God the Father, and is still communicated to his po∣sterity,) is so powerfull, that it can both expell and introduce Diseases: as it manifestly appeares in times of infection, when man by his owne private imagination, out of meere feare and horrour, generates a Ba∣siliscum Coeli, which infects the Microcosmical Firmament by means of the Imaginants superstition ac∣cording as the Patients faith assists, or resists. To the faithfull all things are possible, for faith ascertaines all those things which are uncertaine: God can by no meanes be reach'd and injoy'd of us, but onely by faith:
whosoever therefore believes in God, he operates by the power of God, and to God all things are possible. But how this is performed, no hu∣mane wit can find out: This onely we can say, that aith is an operati∣on or work not of the Belever but of him in whom he believes. Cogi∣tations or thoughts, surpasse the o∣perations of all Elements and Stars: for while we imagine and believe, such a thing shall come to passe, that faith brings the worke about, and without it is nothing done Our faith that it will be so, makes us i∣magine so: imagination excites a Star, that Star (by conjunction with Imagination) gives the effect or perfect operation. To believe that there is a medicine which can cure us, gives the spirit of Medicine: that spi∣rit gives the knowledge of it and the Medicine being known, gives health. Hence it appeares, that a true Phy∣sician, whose operations are natural,
is born of this faith, and the spirit (I meane this spirit of nature, or star of medicine,) furthers and assists him, according to his faith. It hap∣pens oftentimes, that an illiterate man performes those cures by this i∣maginative faith, which the best Physicians cannot doe with the most soveraigne medicines. Sometimes al∣so, this bare perswasion or imagina∣tive faith heales more and more ef∣fectually, then any virtue in the ex∣hibited Medicine, as it was manifest∣ly found of late years, in that famous Panacea, or All-heal of Amwaldus, and since his time, in that new me∣dicinall spring, which broke out this present yeare in the Confines of Misnia and Bohemia, to which an incredible number of sick persons doe daily resort. No other cause can be rendred of these Magnalia, or rare Physical operations, then the firme and excessive affection of the Patient; for the power, which work∣eth
thus, is in the Spirit of the re∣ceiver, when taking the medicine without any fear or hesitation, he is wholly possessed and inspired (as it were) with an actual desire and be∣liefe of health: for the rationall soule, when stirred up, and enkind∣led by a vehement imagination, o∣vercomes nature, and by her own ef∣fectuall affections, renewes many things in her own body or mansion, causing either health or sicknesse, and that not onely in her own body, but Extraneously, or in other bodies. The efficacy of this naturall faith, manifested it selfe in that woman with the bloody Issue, and in the Centurion. Hitherto are the words of Crollius. IV. When the Patient is delvered from his disease, and restored to his for∣mer health, let him heartily and solemnly give all the glory to the Supreme, All-mighty Physician:
let him offer the sacrifice of Thankes-giving, and acknowledge the goodness and the tender mercies of the Lord. And let not the Phy∣sitian forget to performe his duty, by a thankeful and solemn acknow∣ledgement of Gods gracious con∣cessions, by choosing and enabling him to be his unworthy instrument to restore the sick. And this he must do, not onely because it is his duty, and a most deserved and ob∣liged gratitude, but also out of a wise Christian caution, to avoid those judgements which are poured upon the negligent and ungratefull, by the most just jealousie of the ir∣resistible and everlasting GOD; unto whom alone be rendred by An∣gels and Men, and by all his crea∣tures, All Praise and Glory, and perpetual thanks in this the Tem∣porall, and in the eternall Being. Amen. FINIS.
