o123l e84_46 99871371 123781
A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from DOE Castle in Ireland, from an Irish Rebell, to DVNKERKE. And from thence sent to London, by a well-wisher to the advancement of the Protestant Religion. As also a Copy of the League which the Captaines of London-Derry have entred into, for the keeping thereof, and the County adjoyning. Jan: 12 LONDON, Printed for William Hope. 1643. 1642
To my loving Cosin Cap∣taine Donothy Ocane, in DƲNKERKE. Loving Cosin, MY former Letter about foure moneths since unto you informed you of the passages in these parts, but doubting it came not to your hand in re∣spect of the times, I have here writ you the briefe of the same: the Captaines of London-derry are entred in a League for defence of the City and Country adjoyning, it is the truth as neare as I could attaine by my best intelligence from thence, and I feare will prove the most materiall peece against our designe and cause in these parts, their Companies being as valiant as any I can heare of in the Kingdome, and is still upon service with the Regiments, and oftentimes a∣broad by themselves in the County of London-derry, and hath annoyed my Cosin Collonell Shane Ocane very much, and doth keepe in Mishowne that they cannot do as they would, Captaine Lawson and his Company hath beene severall times in our Country, and hath done us much harme: he hath our Cosin Captaine Ro. Rout Ocane prisoner in Derry, he entred the Castle of Strabane, and killed our good friend Captaine Shane, Mac Chinee, the next morning after our Co∣sin
Sir Philemy O Neale, left it unto Captaine Shane to kee, and one hundred of our men in it, and most of them all d by the Regiments that same day, and the Derry  at whh time our Cosin tooke the Lady of Strabane with him: I wrote to you before that we might have stopped Captaine Lawson his journey when he came first from Lisnagarry, about the last of November through our Country, and spoke then with our Cosin Collonell Shane Ocane, and was but three horse and himselfe at Muffe upon the way, and now since, we heare he left behind him a Foote company, and a troope of Horse, and was the first in those parts that opposed our Cosin Sir Con Mac Ginis of entering Lisnagarry, when the Lord Cono∣way his Troope of Horse, and al the townes people left it, and the Country about, and but for him we had had Balfast, and most of those parts in possession; we did little dreame any such action had beene in him, if we had, we would have cut him short of his journey, but now no remedy: We have burnt most of the Country about, onely Tirconell doth us much mischiefe, our Cosin Owen Mac Cart is landed here at Doe, and hath taken a Puritan Barke with Armes, we are glad of his Arrivall. As also of the troubles in England, I hope we shall see our desires upon our Enemies if Englands troubles continue, and be possest of all our owne Lands, we expect your assistance of Armes and Ammunition; and that all our Countrymen will come and assist us. I pray you write me all the newes from thence, by Watterford, or any way you can, it will come to my hand, in respect we are Masters of the Fields. Commend me to all our Friends. I rest Your loving Cosin, DONELL OCANE. From Doe Castle this first of August, 1642.
THE League of the Captaines of London-Derry, for the keeping thereof, and Country adjoyning. FIRST, IT is concluded by us whose names are sub∣scribed, that we will from this time for∣ward stand together for the safe keeping of this City, of Londonderry, and Country adjoyning, and be helpfull in all things con∣cerning the same. Secondly, It is agreed that on the mor∣row morning we will all joyne together with a competent number of our men, to expell all such Irish out of the City, as wee shall conceive to be needfull, for the safety of this City. Thirdly, That after this is done, that a Proclamation be made that no man or woman, so expelled the City, shall upon paine of death returne unto this City, or make their abode within two miles of the same. Fourthly, That the morrow morning, we take the advise of Sir John Ʋaughan, and Captaine Henry Ʋaughan, we survey the Suburbs of this City, and conclude what houses are to be pulled downe and what Gardens and Orchards to be cut for annoying the enemies approach, and that the same be spee∣dily put in execution.
Fifthly, That forty men be spared every watch night to guard the Ordnance, and the gates the next day, that is, twen∣ty men of the maine guard, and twenty men of the by guard, out of the two hundred watches every night. Sixthly, It is thought fit all our Companies be drawne forth into the fields, and that the Captaines and Officers shall take a Voluntary oath to be true to the King and State, and to keep the City to the expence of his life, and to leave it to the rest of the companies to doe the like if they please. The division of the Walls for Each Captaines quarter to make good. Seventhly, Captaine Pitts to make good the Kings Bul∣warke to the Ferrigate. Eighthly, Captaine Thornton from the Ferrigate to Master Wabions Bulwarke, and they two to make good the Ferrigate. Ninthly, Captaine Kilner from Master Wabions Bulwarke to Chichesters Bulwarke, and make good the Shipkeygate. Tenthly, Captaine Finch, from the end of Chichester Bul∣warke to the Butchersgate. Eleventhly, Captaine Osbourne from the end of Chichester Bulwarke to the Butchersgate. Twelfthly, Captaine Lawson to make good the Princes Bulwarke, and the Bishops gate, to the Kings Bulwarke. 13. Who ever hath the Towne guard Captaine Lawson is to make good his quarter, and the Captaine of the Townes guard, to make good Captaine Lawsons quarter. 14. Sir John Ʋaughan, and Sir Robert Stewart, to make good the maine guard, and all inhabitants, or residents within the said City, not under the Captaines, Commands to repair to the maine guard, for the better strengthening thereof and issu∣ing
of supplies as occasion shall require. 15. All women and Children, to keep within doores, and hang out lights in their severall houses. 16. Every Captaine to allow so many men to the Cano∣neeres as shall be requisite, and to give them their names the morrow morning. 17. Every Captaine to take the overfight of his owne quar∣ter, for the repairing of the defects of their severall quarters, or other fortifications, with the Gabions for the Cannoneers, which is to be done at the generall charge. The Names of the Captaines. Robert Thornton, Simon Pits, Henry Finch. Henry Osburne, John Kilmer, Robert Lawson, Hu. Finch. Since the Honourable Citie of London hath sent us fifteene peeces of Ordnance, and foure we had before, in all nineteene peeces, for which amongst other their goodnesse towards us, wee pray the Lord reward them, and preserve them, and con∣tinue his mercie with them, and divert his judgements in these evill times from them, that it may still continue a City flowing with plenty for ever. FINIS.
