P1455 E160_18 99859339 156920
MASTER HENRY PIERCIES LETTER TO THE EARLE OF NORTHVMBERLAND, and presented to the Parliament, June, 16. 1641. 1. Concerning the Bishops functions and votes. 2. The not disbanding of the Irish Army untill the Scots were disbanded too. 3. The endeavouring to settle his Majesties Revenue to that proportion was formerly. With a true Discovery of the late intended Plot. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
Mr. Henry Percies Letter to the Earle of Northumberland, and presented to the House of Parliament, JUNE 16. 1641. WHat with my owne innocencie, and the violence I heare, is against me, J find my selfe much distracted, I will not aske your Counsell, because it may bring prejudice upon you, but I will with all faithfulnesse and truth tell you what my part hath bin, that at least it may be cleared by you, whatsoever becomes of mee. When there was 50000 l. designed by the Parlia∣ment for the English Army, there was, as J take it, a suddaine demand by the Scots at the same time of 25000 l. of which there was 15000 l. ready, this they pressed with much necessity, as the Parliament, after an order made, did think it fit for them to deduct 10000 pound our of the 50000 l. formerly granted, upon which the souldiers in our house were much scandali∣zed, amongst which J was one, and sitting by Wilmot and Ashburnham, Wilmot stood up and told them, if that of the Scots would procure money, he doubted not but the Officers of the English Army might easily doe the like: but the first order was reversed notwithstan∣ding,
and 10000 l. given to the Scots, this was the cause of many discourses of dislike amongst us, and came to this purpose, that they were disobliged by the Parlia∣ment and not by the King, this being said often to one another, we did resolve that Willmot, Ashburneham, Pollard, Oneale and my selfe, to make some expressi∣ons of serving the King in all things he would com∣mand us, that were honorable for him and us, being likewise agreeing to the fundamentall Lawes of the Kingdome, that so sarre we would live and dye with him, this was agreed upon with us, not having any Communication with others, that I am coupled now withall, and further by their joynt consent I was to tell his Majestie thus much from them, but withall I was to order the matter so as the King might apprehend this as a great service done unto him, at this time when his affaires were in so ill a condition, and they were most confident, that they would engage the whole Army thus farre, but further they would undertake nothing, be∣cause they would neither infringe the liberties of the Subjects, or destroy the Lawes, to which J and every one consented, and having their sense, I drew the heads up in a paper, to the which they all approved, when I read it, and then wee did by an oath promise one ano∣ther to be constant and secret in all this, and did all of us take that oath together, then I said; Well Sirs, I must now be informed what your particular desires are, that so I may be the better able to serve you, which they were pleased to doe, and so I did very faithfully serve them therein, as farre as J could: this is the truth, and all the truth upon my soule. In particular discour∣ses, after that, wee did fall upon the Petitioning to the
King and Parliament for monies, there being so great arreares due to us, and so much delayes made in the por∣curing of them, but that was never done. 1. Concerning the Bishops functions and votes. 2. The not disbanding of the Irish Army untill the Scots were disbanded too. 3. The endeavouring to settle his Majesties Reve∣nue to that proportion was formerly. And it was resolved by us all if the King should re∣quire our assistance in those things, that as farre as we could we might contribute thereunto, without brea∣king the Lawes of the Kingdome. And in case the King should be denyed those things being put to them we would not fly from him, all these persons did act and concurre in this as well as I, this being all impar∣ted to the King by me from them, J perceived he had beene treated with by others concerning some things of our Army, which not agreed with what was pur∣posed by me, but inclined a way more sharpe, and high, not having limits either of honour or Law, I told the King he might be pleased to consider with himselfe, which way it was fit for him to hearken unto, for us we were resolved not to depart from our grounds, wee should not be displeased whosoever they were, but the particular of the designes, or the persons we desired not to know, though it was no hard matter to guesse at thē.
in the end I beleeve the danger of the one, the justice of the other made the King tell me he would leave all thoughts of other propositions but ours as things not practiceable, but desired, notwithstanding that Goring and Jermin who were acquainted with the other pro∣ceedings should be admitted amongst us, I told him J thought the other Gentry would never consent to it, but I would propose it, which I did, and wee were all much against it; but the King did presse it so much, as at the last it was consented unto, and Goring and Ier∣min came to my Chamber, there I was appointed to tell them after they had sworne to secrecie, what wee had proposed, which I did, but before I goe into the debate of the way, I must tell you Jermin and Goring were very earnest Suckling should be admitted, which we did all decline, and was desired by all our men to be resolute in it, which I was, and gave many Reasons: whereupon Mr. Goring made answer, he was engaged with Suckling his being imployed in the Army, but for his meeting with us, they were contented to passe it by. Then wee tooke up againe the wayes which were proposed, which tooke great debate, and theirs differ∣red from ours in violence and height, which wee all protested against and parted, disagreeing totally, yet remitted it to be spoken of by mee and Iermin to the King, which we both did, and the King constant to his former Resolutions told him, these wayes were all vaine and foolish, and would thinke of them no more, omit one thing of Mr. Goring, hee desired to know how the chiefe Commanders were to be disposed off, for if he had not a condition worthy of him, he would not goe along with us, we made answer that no body
thought of that, we intended if we were sent downe to goe all in the same capacity we were in, he did not like that by no meanes, and by that did worke so with Mr. Chidley, that there was a Letter sent by some of the Commanders to make him Lieutenant Generall, and when he had ordered this matter at London, and Mr. Chidley had his instructions, then did he goe to Ports∣mouth, pretending to be absent when this was a wor∣king, wee all desired my Lords of Essex and Holland, that if there were a Generall at Newcastle, they were pleased to give out a report that I should be Generall of the horse, but J protest neither to the King nor any else, did I ever so much as thinke of it, my Lord of Holland was made Generall, and so all things were laid aside, and this is the truth and all the truth, I knew of these proceedings, and this J will and doe protest unto you upon my Faith, and Willmot, Ashburnham, and Oneale have at severall times confessed and sworne, J never said any thing in the businesse, they did not eve∣ry one agree unto and would justifie: This Relation J sent you rather to informe you of the truth of the matter, that you may the better know how to doe mee good, but I should thinke my selfe very unhappy to be made a betrayer of any body, what concerned the Tower or any thing else, I never medled withall, nor never spake with Goring, but that night before them all, and I said nothing but what was consented unto by any party, J never spake one word with Suckling, Car∣narvan, Davenant, or any other Creature, me thinks if my friends and kindred knew the truth and justice of the matter, it were no hard matter to serve me in some measure. FINIS.
