P2249 669.f.14[17] 99869831 163005
To the Right Honourable the Commons assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of Sir Paul Pyndar, Sir John Jacob, Sir Job Harby, Sir Thomas Dawes, Executor to Sir Abraham Dawes, late dcceased, Sir Nicholas Crispe, Sir John Nulls, and Sir John Harrison, Knights; late contracted Farmers of the Customes, together with their Creditors. HUMBLY SHEVVING, THAT the said Farmers, having hereunto annexed a short Remonstrance of the state of their present sad condition; with the Course of their proceedings with His late Majesty and this Honorable House; and how far, and in what manner, both His Majesty, and the House, have thought fit to discharge and satisfie their disbursements and ingagements, formerly assigned upon a Contracted Farm, to be paid out of the Receipt of the Customs, which were otherwise disposed of by the Parliament. And since having other security appointed by His Majesty for their satisfaction, with reference and order (upon their former Petition) that Ordinances should be prepared for their relief, according to the former ingagements of the House. YOur Petitioners therefore doe humbly pray, That this Honourable House would vouchsafe the reading this short annexed Remonstrance, and seriously consider the heavy pressure and burden your Petitioners have long sustained, by so great a Debt contracted upon them; and that report may be made of the true state and condition of their case, from the Committee of the Navy, long since referred and examined by them; whereby your Petitioners may receive a comfortable relief and satisfaction, for their Debt due unto them, by such wayes and means as have been propounded, and that in order thereunto, some Acts may be prepared, according to former directions of this Honourable House: And we your Petitioners, with all ours, shall ever have occasion to acknowledge your Justice. And daily pray, &c. A brief Remonstrance of the state of the businesse of Sir Paul Pyndar, Sir John Jacob, Sir Job Harby, Sir Thomas Dawes, Executor to Sir Abraham Dawes, deceased, Sir Nicholas Crispe, Sir John Nulls, and Sir John Harrison, Knights; late contracted Farmers of the Customes, for their Debt owing by His late Majesty unto them thereupon. AFTER their security of the Customes was otherwise disposed of by the Parliament, the said contracted Farmers did apply them∣selves by Petition unto His said Majesty, for their satisfaction by some other branch of His Revenue. Which Petition was by His Majesty referred unto His then Commissioners of the Treasury, to consider some way of satis∣faction of the Debt then due unto the Farmers. Whereupon the said Commissioners of the Treasury, did by their Certificate unto His Majesty, dated the 15th. of May, 1642. propose and advise His Majesty the best and most advantageous way for the satisfaction of the Farmers said debt, to be out of the sale of such His Forrests lands, Chaces and Parkes, as are annuall charges unto His Majesty, and serve not for His royall disport, whereby His Majesty should not only pay His Debt, but much advance His Revenue. His Majesty by His Letter, dated the first of Iune, 1642. from Yorke directed unto His said Commissioners of the Treasury in answer to their Certificate of the 15th. of May, 1642 aforesaid, and taking thereby consideration of a Petition then exhibited unto His Majesty at Yorke, with a scedule of the Farmers Debt, together with interest incurred for the same, which Hee sends to the Commissioners, signified that for the reasons in the Certificate mentioned, Hee was very well enclined to discharge the Farmers said Debt, and resolved by all possible wayes and means speedily to satisfie the same; And therefore did thereby require with all convenient speed, a List of all His Parkes, Forrests, and Chaces to be presented unto Him, to the end Hee might speedily give further order how to dispose of them. And His Majesties Surveyour generall was for the more speedy effecting His pleasure, required thereby to give particulars and constats of the premises unto the said Commissioners: Which was done accordingly by the said Surveyour generall. And now the Farmers business being brought to this mature condition, upon the very point of satisfaction, to be setled for their Debt, in the way aforesaid, the difference with His Majesty and Parliament then arising, and so continuing, did hinder the Farmers from any further applications unto His Majesty then what aforesaid. Yet notwithstanding the Farmers groaning under so great a burden of Debt, could not but endeavour all means before them offered, and being made more miserable by a great fine paid by them to the Parliament, Anno 1641. (the sum being 165000l.) the House then considering the greatnesse of the Fine, and the speciall use and service the Common-wealth did receive at that present, by the speedy payment thereof, for the then disbanding of the English and Scottish Armies; the said Farmers were then promised, that care should be taken for the satisfaction of their Debt in due time. Hereupon the said Farmers in May, 1645. did renew their request unto the House of Commons by Petition, for order and directions, that their Debt and engagements might be discharged and satisfied. The House the 14th. of May, 1645. ordered, That the said Petition should be referred to the consideration of the Committee of the Navy, who were to prepare Ordinances for the relief of the Petitioners, according to the former engagements of the House, and they had power to receive such propositions as should be tendered unto them by the Petitioners. In prosecution hereof, the Farmers did attend the Committee of the Navy severall dayes, and did by their order, present unto them an Accompt of His Majesties Debt then due (being 276146 l. 15s. 11d ¼.) And further did give an accompt of their proceedings and former engagements of His Majesty to be satisfied their Debt out of His Forrests, Parkes and Chaces, as is aforementioned at large: And delivered unto the said Committee a copy of His Majesties said Letter, of the first of Iune, 1642. together with a particular List of the names of His Majesties Forrests, Parkes and Chaces, which was formerly delivered by the Surveyour generall unto His Majesties Commissioners of the Treasury. The Committee of the Navy after serious debate of this business, did in fine (as we were informed) come to this resolution, and ordered a report to be made forthwith unto the House, in answer unto the said reference, shewing to the House, how the Petitioners might receive relief, according to the justness of their desires. This report the Farmers have often sollicited, to be made, but the House being taken up with generall and publick business, could not admit of an opportunity or season to hear this particular, so that it remains ever since in this condition unreported. And without speedy relief herein, the said Farmers must perish in prison, to the utter ruine of themselves and families, together with many honest men, women, and orphans, for this engagement unhappily become their Creditors. FINIS.
