p3135 e303_24 99861108 158759
A LETTER FROM Colonell Generall Poynts, TO THE HONOURABLE William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons: Concerning Sir Tho. Glenham, Colonell Gerard, And Sir Marmaduke Langdale, In the last fight neere Chester. With a perfect narration of Colonell Parsons of the said proceedings. And the number of horse and men taken in the pursuit, and which way His Majesty is fled. Die Lune, 29 Septemb. 1645. ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament that Col. Gen. Poynts his Letter, with Colonell Parsons Relation be forthwith printed and published. J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings-head in the Old-baily. Sept. 30. 1645.
For the Right Honourable WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire, Speaker of the House of COMMONS. SIR, IN the conclusion of a hard march it hath pleased God to deliver the enemy into our hands, wherein he hath sufficiently manifested his pro∣vidence. Yesterday we discovered the enemy on Millers heath within three miles of Chester, whereupon I sent to Chester for some foot, which was very seasonably sent me, and in my advance towards them we unawares met a body of them in a narrow passe on the top of the heath, where we had a very violent encounter, wherein we cut off many of the King, Life guard and reted the rest, then we retreated to ne maine body, and toward foure of the clocke in the afternoon we advanced toward them, and finding the enemy ready for battell we presently fll upon them, kild, tooke, wounded, and routed the whole army, and I am confident they never received a greater blow. I have onely a Catalogue of few, the rest being sent to Tarvin and other garrisons in these parts,
cannot as yet be collected. These Colonels, Sir Thomas Glen∣ham. Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir Tho∣mas Dawbridge court, Sir Tho Gower, Col. Tho. Weston▪ sonne to the Earle of Portland and Col. Cromwell, Iames Martin Quartermaster generall, Col. John Gfford, Lieutenant Col. Edward Hatton, and Lieut Col Constable, Cap. Wyvell, Cap. Coterill, Cap. Morgan, Cap. Mountaine, Cap. Le Strange, Cap. Swinho, and Cap. Constable. Its reported Sir Marma∣duke Langdale is either killed or taken: you shall with all con∣veniency receive a compleat List from me. There was killed the Earle of Litchfield, brother to the Duke of Lenox, and Sir Brian Stapleton a notorious Papist, who was lately in Ireland His Majesties sollicitor for ten thousand men. In this tender of my service I desire it may be forthwith communicated to the House, from whom I desire to receive further orders, in the meane time I shall continue thereabouts, using my endeavours in reducing this City, wherein, and in all other my endeavours, I shall ever rest, Sir, Your most humble and faithfull servant, SEDNHAM POYNTZ. Milers-heath, Septemb. 25. 1645. Gerrard is deadly wounded if not already slaine. This Gentleman Colonell Parsons having the charge of brin∣ging up the reserves, has done very good service in the discharge thereof. I desire the house may thinke of some further incourage∣ment for the Yorkeshire horse. Col. Beathell and Col. Graves deserves very much for their service.
The Relation of Colonell Parsons communicated to both Houses of Par∣liament, Sept. 29. 1645. ABout the 18 of August last, the King with about 4000 horse and Dragoues advanced into Yorkeshire. The 19. Col. Rossiers horse came up to Generall Poyntz. The 21, they joyned with the Scots and Cheshire horse, a dayes rest the Scots horse would have, the next day all marched; But the King got by that meanes a dayes retreat before, whom Gen Poyntz according to his Order from the Com∣mittee of both Kigdomes, through many difficulties per∣sued above 300 miles, not resting above a day in any place. The knowledge of the Kings advance for the reliefe of Chester, being the onely certain intelligence he received of his motion, he marched day and night to be there be∣fore him, and tooke in a strong house with a Draw-bridge, moted, (which stood in the way of his march, and oppo∣sed him) in lesse then an houres space; And after a very hard march all night, on the 24 of this instant in the mor∣ning, his Van curriers discovered the enemy on a moore within two miles of Chester called Rowten-moore, where∣upon immediatly hee drew into Order, and advanced upon them (though all his force were not then come up) for he supposed to take the enemy at unawares, it being probable they could have no intelligence of his being so neare, though it proved otherwise, for his Letters (written that night to the Commander within the out-Lines of Chester, giving notice of his advance) were intercepted and the enemy
being possssed of the advantage of ground, and in order confronted out van led by Colonell Hugh Bethell in the mid∣dest of a Lane betwixt two Moores covered with the ar∣med men of both Battaliaes, where was given a very sharp and gallart charge by both parties, for after Pistolls were discharged at halfe Pikes distance, they disputed the mat∣ter with their Swords a full quarter of an houre, neither yeilding ground to other, till at length the enemy were for∣ced to retreate, whom, our men pursuing were re-encoun∣tred by a fresh reserve at the Lanes mouth, and they were likewise discomfited, and a third, but being over powred were in the end forced to retreate through the Lane, un∣capable of receiving a Reserve to second them: here wee had some losse, the enemy pursuing to the Lanes end, but wre beaten back, for there were space for our reserves to advance, Colonell Bethell and Colonell Graves were then sore wounded, after this the Generall perceiving the ne∣my lay upon his advantage, only skermished him with some flying parties, while hee hld correspondency with his friends in Chester Suburbs, whose signe was the discharge of two peeces of Ordnance when they would issue out with horse and soot to joyne with him, upon whose appearing the enemy quitted their station, and the Generall with a party advanced to take the most convenient ground give∣ing command to Col. Parsons Quartermaster generall of the Army, Col. Sandies who performed the duty of Commis∣sary Generall of the horse, during the aforesaid march be∣ing then imployed to the Committee of both Kingdomes to order up the rest, which was opportunely done, for they joyned with the Auxiliary force of horse and foote in the e∣nemies ground, and was drawn into many small divisions and reserves, being much over numbred by the enemy, who accompted themselves 5000 horse, and Gen. Poyntz
not above 2500 horse, besides two small bodies of foote, who were disposed in the two outmost intervals of horse; up∣on the very instant of this juncture the enemy advanced with their whole body, and the Generall (leaving the charge of the reserves to Col. Parsons) tooke care of, and led up the van divisions, with which after a round volly of shot from the foot, he joyned battell, charging the enemy in Front and Flanck, where his horse was deeply wounded on the head, being continually seconded with reserves as ofte as there was occasion, the rest being kept intire followe at a due distance; The prevailing Generall who put the Enemy to a totall rut, and alhough the pursuit was as hot as could be expected from such wearied horse, through narrow durty lane and over ditches, the enemy ralied in a great moore wide of Chester in two vast bodies a great distance assun∣der, the first (not without some dispute) were againe rout∣ed. and the other likewise, who retreated upon the War∣wick Regiment with such violence as bore them away con∣fusedly, intermixed with the flying enemy up to the out∣workes of the Suburbs, the Musketteers within were never the lesse liberall of their Gunshot, but the Divine provi∣dence appeared much in the distribution of the impartiall Bullets, few or none lighting upon our men, though many of the Enemy were found there expiring. A Body of horse all the while of these last disputes ap∣peared fixed on the top of a Hill, a little distant on that side Chester, wherein the King was very confidently repu∣ted to be, for confronting whereof a party of foot winged with Colonell Lidcot, and Colonell Bethells Regiments were drawn into a convenient Close in the bottome as a grand reserve; but the night by this time falling the bo∣dy on the Hill appeared not, and those in the bottome re∣turned to their comrades saciated with slaughter, prisoners,
and booty of the vanquished Enemy; while these things were thus agitated in the field the remainder of foote left with Colonell Lowthian in the Suburbs were not idle, for the Enemy made a strong fally upon them out of the City, and were more stremously repulsed, the number of the slaine of the prisoners and horse taken is not yet knowne, but is generally conjectured 800 slaine, 1500 men and 2000 horses taken, there was brought in that night the undr∣written list, of the considerablest men taken and slame in the fight, the King with a party of about five or 600 was seene going into Wales. Prisoners taken. SIr Thomas Glenham. Sir Thomas Dcres. Sir Philip Musgrave. Sir Thomas Dabridgecourt. Sir Thomas Gore. Col. Thomas Weston, sonne to the Earle of Port∣land. Col. Cromwell. Iames Martin, Quarterma∣ster generall. Col. Iohn Gifford. Lieut. Col. Edw. Hatton. Lieut. Col. Constable. Lieut. Col. Wigmore. Captaine Wivell. Cotterill. Morgan. Mountaine. Le Strange. Swinoe. Constable. It is reported Sir Marma∣duke Langdale is slaine. The Earle of Litchfield, brother to the Duke of Lenox, slaine. Sir Bryan Stapleton (the Kings agent for 10000 men in Ireland, slaine. FINIS.
