P3433 E1790_2 99868549 170374
SACRED ELOQUENCE: Or, the Art of RHETORICK, As it is layd down in Scripture. By the Right Reverend Father JOHN PRIDEAVX late Lord Bishop of VVORCESTER. — . 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for George Sawbridge, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the Bible on Ludgate-Hill, 1659.
SACRED ELOQUENCE: OR, The Art of Rhetorick, as it is laid down in Scripture. CHAP. I. SACRED ELO∣QUENCE is a Lo∣gicall kind of Rhe∣torick, to be used in Prayer, Preaching, or Conference; to the glory of God, and the convincing, instructing, and strengthning our brethren. The meditation of which gave Da∣vid more understanding than all his tea∣chers,
Psal. Psal. 119.19. 119.19. proved a Hammer to Jeremy, that breaketh the rocks in pie∣ces, Jer. 23.29. chap. 23.29. was St. Pauls Engine, for the pulling down of strong holds, and ca∣sting down imaginations, and every high thing that exaltth it self against the know∣ledge of God, bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. 5. At which, used by our Saviour, the people were astonished; For he taught them as one having authority, Matth 7.28. and not as the Scribes, Matth. 7.28. His perverse Country-men of Nazareth bare him witnesse, and wondred at the gratious words that proceeded out of his mouth, Luk. 4.22. Luk. 4.22. And the fee'd Officers, sent to apprehend him, returned with this ex∣cuse, Never man spake like this man, Joh. 7.46. Joh. 7.46. For it pricketh in the hearts of the hearers, Act. 2.37. Act. 2.37. The word of God is quick and powerfull, and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the di∣viding assunder of soul and spirit, and of the joynts and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. Heb. 4.12. 4, 12.
In this espe∣cially may be observed, 1. Tropes. 2. Figures. 3. Schemes. 4. Patheticks. Darbenoth, stimuli , quibus boves punguniur: & Masmeroth, clavi qui retinent illud, cui infiguntur. Eccl.  . 12.11. , Act. 2.37. 5. Characters. 6. Antisheses. 1 Tim 6.20. Oppo∣fits. Gal. 5.17 7. Parallels. Allusions, , cor-espondencies. CHAP. II. Of , vertere, To turn; A flou∣rish of speech, whereby a word is turned or changed from his ge∣nuine signifi∣cation into another. Cicero, de c'ar. Orat. calleth them, Verborum immutationes; in his Partitions, Verba modificata. It differeth from a Figure or Scheme, because the one doth alter the habit of or make a change in, the Words onely; the other, in the Speech.  Putar in vit Homer. Dictionum vero immutatio, appellatur Trepa compositionis contrà, Schema. Both the species of Elocution. Tropes. TRopes carry with them, in Scrip∣ture, the phraseologie of the sa∣cred Tongues, far differing in weight and majesty from Ethnick Ashdodism.
Most usefull amongst these may be noted, Hyperbole and Catachresis are by some modern Rhetoritians ac∣counted affections of a Trope, rather than Tropes them∣selves; because there is no Trope, but may be set forth in too harsh and unequall a dresse, which is a Catachresis; or be screwed up too high in hyperbolicall expressions. Yet neither Tully, Quintilian, nor any of the Antients observe this exactnesse, but number them a∣mongst Tropes, as doth the Author. 1. Hyperbole. Hyperbole and Catachresis are by some modern Rhetoritians ac∣counted affections of a Trope, rather than Tropes them∣selves; because there is no Trope, but may be set forth in too harsh and unequall a dresse, which is a Catachresis; or be screwed up too high in hyperbolicall expressions. Yet neither Tully, Quintilian, nor any of the Antients observe this exactnesse, but number them a∣mongst Tropes, as doth the Author. 2. Catachresis. Emphasis is rather a Figure than Trope, in precisnesse of speech; it belongeth not to the ador∣ning of a word, but sentence, which, by this Figure, is so pronoun∣ced, or otherwise notified, that what lyeth hid, and muffled under a clowd, doth manifestly appear. Emphasis est etiam inter figuras, cum ex aliquo dicto latens aliquid eruitur. But the Author taketh a Trope in the same latitude Quintilian doth, l. 9. c. 2. (Tropus est sermo à natu∣rali & principali fignificatione ad aliam, ornandae oracionis gratiâ) and so Emphasis may be permitted to stand where it doth. 3. Emphasis. 4. Metonymia. 5. Ironia. 6. Metaphora. 7. Synecdoche. , Excedere, supe∣rare; An ex∣cesse of truth, either by ele∣vating it too high, or depressing it, as low. Superlatio, ac trajectio veritatis, minuendi augendive causâ, Cicer. de Orat. l. 3. So all am∣plifications and extenuations, beyond or below their just measure, may be termed Hyperbolicall; although the words whereby they are expressed be not borrowed, but proper. Whence that of Virgil, Eclog. 9. Candidior cygnis, hederâ formosior albâ. that of Plaut. in Au∣lular. Pumex non aequè est aridus, atque hic senex, and such like, are ta∣ken by Rhetoritians to be hyperbolicall expressions, though the words remain unaltered from their native habit and signification. This Beumler will not endure, and therefore hath excogitated a double Hyperbole, the one Logicall, the other Rhetori∣call: the Logicall, where, in proper words the thing is hy∣perbolically set forth; Rhe∣toricall, where there are im∣proper or borrowed tearms used, for the amplyfying or extenuating a thing. Hyperbole. Hyperbolicall speeches are these, or the like, in the old Testament: Judah
shall bind his fole unto the vine, and his asses-colt unto the choise vine, and wash his gar∣ments in wine, and his cloths in the blood of the grape, Gen. 49.11. expressing the ex∣traordinary plenty of wine that shall stream in his coast. So Exod. 3.17. A land flowing with milk and ho∣ny. The rivers, the floods, the brooks of hony and butter, Job. 20.17. hyperbolically speak an incre∣dible abundance. With hony out of the rock should I have satisfied thee, Psal. 81.16. i.e. By means which could not be expected. In like manner the fiercenesse of the Horse is set forth, by swallowing the ground with his rage, and saying, Ha, ha, amongst the trumpets, Job 39.24, 25. The vastnesse of the Behemoth, by drin∣king up a river, and trusting that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth, Job 40.23. The hideousnesse of the Leviathan, whose eyes are like the eye-lids of the mor∣ning, out of whose mouth go burning lamps, whose breath kindleth coals; that maketh the deep to boyle like a pot, and the sea like a pot of oyntment; by reason of whose plunging, the mighty through fear
(purgant alvum, saith one) purifie them∣selves, (so our Translation) Job 41.25. which set forth an unutterable terri∣blenesse, not to be reached in other Languages. So, the skipping of mountains like Rams, and of little Hills like Lambs. Psal. 114. would have us to conceive the shattering of the finest creatures at the Creator's presence. In the New Testament, The passing of a Camell thorough the eye of a needle, Mat. 9.24. The Stars falling to the earth, as a figg tree ca∣steth her untimely figgs: the departing of the heaven as a scrowl rowled together, Revel. 6.13.14. The whole world cannot containe the books, wherein our Sa∣viour's acts should be written, Joh. 21.25. may not litterally be taken, but as sublime Hyperboles, expressing in the first, a matter of the greatest difficulty; in the second, a foretelling of stupen∣dious confusion; in the last, the not registred acts of our Saviour, hardly, and not necessary to be recounted of. So sin is confessed in tearms to be hy∣perbolically sinfull, Rom. 3.7. Light affliction, , in an eminent hyperbolicall manner, to work an eternall weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And St. Paul acknowledgeth, that,
, before his conversion, he persecuted the Church, Gal. 1.13. , Abusio, so called, when for want of a fit name to ex∣presse a thing by, we borrow that word which commeth nearest to hand; by which means it commeth to passe, that the word is abused, and the Trope is more harsh and unequall: as, —equum divina Palladis arte Aedificant— Catachresis. Catachresis, abused (as it were) or far-fetched incon∣gruous speeches, may be tearmed such, as, All the earth was of one lip, and one sort of words, Gen. 11.1. that is, of one Language, and spake one Tongue. Let us smite him with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. Jer. 18.18. that is, Slander him. I will open the shoulder of Moab from his Cities, Ezech. Ezek. 25.9. 25.9. that is, Dismantle his Townes to make way for his enemies. I will turn to the people a pure lip, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one shoulder, Zeph. 3.9. Zeph 3.9. that is, with one consent. So, Daubing with untempered morter, and sowing pillowes under arm-holes, Ezech. 13. Ezek. 13. are unusu∣all to expresse deceitfull and flattering doctrine; much more that (as the Doway Bible gives it) in the Canticle of my Cosen, concerning his vineyard in Horn; the son of oyle, Isai. 5.1. for, Isa. 5.1. Sci∣tuated in a fertile or fruitfull hill.
Likewise, Psal. 119. My soul is alway in my hand, Psal. 119. i. e. I am in eminent dan∣ger. The ploughers plowed upon my back, and made long furrowes, Psal. 129. Joh. 8.5. Psal. 129. grie∣viously afflicted me. To see death, Joh. 8.51. for, To die. To shake off the dust of the feet, Matth. 10.14. Matth. 10.14. for, Utterly to renounce or abandon. To pluck out the eye and cast it from us, Matth. 5.29. Matth. 5.29. to take away occasions; are elegancies in Scripture, which otherwise might seem catachresticall. So merit, and wages, or reward are urged, which import no more then a good work; and wages is called , because it is paid in the evening, when the work is done. Also plenty of all things is expressed by 1. Butter of Kine; and 2. Milk of Sheep; and 3. Fat of Rams; and 4. Rams of the breed of Bashan; and 5 Goats, with 6. the fat of the kidneys of Wheat; and 7. the pure blood of the Grape for drink, Deut. 32.14. Deuter. 32.14. So, I might have received mine own with usury; that is, with increase, a Catachresti∣call Synecdoche, Matth. 25.27. From one dead, sprang so many as the stars of heaven, Heb. 11.12. Heb. 12.1. . and as the sand beside the lip of the sea innumerable, Heb. 11.12. A clowd of witnesses, Heb. 12.1.
, speciem praebere, repraesentare; because thereby is a representation made of some speciall thing that lyeth hid in the words; which is made manifest, ei∣ther by the pronountlation of them, or by the affixing of some demonstrative article to them; and this, when it is not so safe or meet to ex∣presse our sense in words at length. Virgil. Non licuit tha∣lami expertem sine crimine vi∣tam, Degere, more ferae! Virum te praestes oportet. Emphasis. As Catachresticalls make an impression through their harshnesse and strangenesse; so an Emphasis worketh through its vigour, which in reading is enlivened by the pronunciation. Hitherto are referred such epithets, wherein the Apostles are called the salt of the earth, Math. 5. wicked men, the men of Gods hand, Psal. 17. Psal. 17. employed sometimes to chastise the godly. So, Man of sorrowes, Isa. 53. Isa. 53. Son of perdition, of Belial, of thunder, of the morning, have especiall emphases in them. As also, First born of death, king of terrours, bars of the pit, Job. 18.13, 14. Job 18.13. Ib. 17.16. Ib. 38.37. Ib. 17.16. Bottles of heaven, Ib. 38.37. With which may be ranged those high phrases and strains, Behold, I am against thee, O thou destroying mountain, (saith the Lord) which destroyest all the earth; and I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and I will make thee a burnt mountain, Jer. 51.25. Jer. 51.25. I will make it a possession for the Bit∣tern,
and pools of water, and I will sweep it with the beesome of destruction, Isa. 14.23. Isa. 14.23. His breath shall sift the Nations with the sieve of vanity, Ib. 30.28. Ibid 30.28. Nominis pro nomine posi∣tio: A putting of one word for another. By this Trope, the inventor is put for the thing in∣vented, the possessor for the thing possessed, the conti∣nent for the thing contained, and the efficient for the ef∣fect, &c. By Cicero tearmed Hypallage, immutatio & tra∣ductio, lib. 3. de Orat. Traductio & immutatio in ver∣o. Metonymia. Amongst Metonymies, those wherein the cause and the effect, the subject and the ad∣junct, the antecedent and the consequent, are taken one for another, are most of note and use. And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou dost not well, sin lyeth at the dore, Gen. 4.6, 7. [Sin] that is, the punishment for sin, the cause for the effect; or, as some, [Sin] that is, the sacrifice for sin, a repen∣tant heart in thy power; and therefore hast no reason to lowre at my dealing with thee. For the second, what more frequent in the Old and New Testa∣ment, then Sacramentall metonymies? as, To kill the passeover, Exod. 12.21. Kill the passeover. 2 Chron. 30.18. Keep
or celebrate the feast of the passeover. 2 Chron. 30.1. Christ our passeover is sa∣crificed for us, therefore let us keep the feast not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickednesse, but with the un∣leavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. where, Passeover, the thing signified, is put for the com∣memorative and sacrifice, by which it was to be presented, Exod. 12.14.27. In which metonymicall sense, the words of institution of the Lords Sup∣per must be understood, Hec est corpus meum, Matth. 20.26. 1 Cor. 11.24. the Signe dignified with the name of the thing signified, for the assurance of the performance on the part of him who sealed the evidence; except we would make a prodigie of the blessed Supper, appointed to set at variance, not in unity to fix believers. For the exemplification of the third kind of Metonymies, upon the mutuall change of antecedent and consequent, with the thing to be expressed. So, To know a woman, to go in unto her, to be with her. Hath Ammon thy brother been with thee? 2 Sam. 13.20. serve modestly to expresse what may be done, without otherwise speaking of it. So, Joseph is
not, and Simeon is not, Gen. 42.36. Ra∣chel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were not, Jer. 31.15. Matth. 2.18. by conse∣quence speak their precedent death. Simulatio, Because we speak one thing, and mean another. Cum aliud in pectore reclusum, aliud in lingua habemus, as in the Poet. Scili∣cet is superis labor est— It is like∣wise called by Tully, Inversio, a tur∣ning upside down of a thing, or con∣trary to the right form. A proper tearm to expresse this Trope where the contrary is meant to what is said Euge bone serve! curâsti probè. There are six species of it, 1. Chleuasmus, or Epicertomesis. 2. Charientismus, or Scom∣ma 3. Astismus. 4 Diasyrmus. 5. Ex∣utenismus. 6. Sarcasmus. Ironia. Ironies also find an admittance in both Testaments; for, He that dwelleth in heaven laugheth his e∣nemies to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision. Psal. 2. E∣lias mocked them [Baa∣lites] and said, Cry aloud, for he is a god, either he is tal∣king, or pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth and must be awaked. 1 King. 18.27. So that speech of Micajah to Ahab, Go up and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the King, 2 King. 22. can∣not stand with a true Prophets inte∣grity, if it be not passed with an Irony, as the King also took it, vers. 16. By the like proverb (which is the Scrip∣ture phrase) the King of Babylon is in∣tituled
Lucifer, son of the morning, which did weaken the Nations, Isa. 14.12. The Prince of Tyrus is also taunted, Behold, thou art wiser then Daniel, there is no se∣cret that they can hide from thee. VVith thy wisdom and with thy understanding thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures. By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou encrea∣sed thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches, Ezek. 28.3, 4, 5. In the New Testament, that of our Sa∣viour must needs be taken for an Iro∣ny, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers, Matth. 23.32. And that, Sleep on now, and take your rest; behold, the hour is at hand, and the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners, Matth. 26.45. So that of the Apostle, Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings with∣out us; I would to God ye did reigne, that we also might reigne with you, 1 Cor. 4.8. More bitter and baser were those Sar∣casms of the souldiers to our Saviour, whom they had crowned with thorns, Hail King of the Jewes, Matth. 27.29. Milder that of the Apostles, Ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise,
2 Cor. 11.29. And what is it wherein ye were inferiour to other Churches, except it be that I my self was not burthensome unto you? forgive me this wrong, ib. 12.13. Some would have that to be ironically spoken, Rather give alms of such things as ye have, and behold all things are clean unto you, Luk. 11.4. which others with greater reason deny. Translatio, when a word is transferred from one thing unto another, by reason of the likenesse that is betwixt them. Nihil est in rerum natu∣ra, cujus non in alijs rebus possi∣mus uti vocabulo & nomine. Vn∣de enim Simile, duci non potest? potest autem ex omnibus. Indi∣dem verbum unum quod simili∣tudinem continet, translatum lumen affert orationi. The Greek Rhetoricians under this notion did comprehend all the Tropes. Arist. , Id Rhetor. lib. 3. cap. 1. . So Cicero ad Brutum. Though the variety of this Trope be very great, and field large; yet Quin∣tilian endeavours to reduce it into four ranks. 1 When one ani∣mate is put for another, as Cato barked at Scipio. 2 Inanimate for an∣other as —Classique immitit habenas. 3 Inanimates for animates, as ferro an fato virtus Argivûm occidit? 4 Animates for inanimates, as, —Sedet inscius (metus) alto. Metaphora. As Metonymies, so Me∣taphors in Scripture are emi∣nent and numberless. What hast thou done? the voyce of thy brothers bloud cryeth unto me from the ground, Gen. 4.10. as an importunate Suiter crying for justice. We are come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Teastament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things, then that of Abel, Heb. 12.24.
whose also, being dead, yet speaketh, Heb. 11.4. Speech is here translated from man to blood. (2) We have fa∣thers, mothers, brothers, sisters, masters, servants, and such other relatives with∣out stint, metaphorically taken. So God is said to be father of all. Hath the rayne a father? or who hath begatten the drops of dew? Job 38.28. none but God, that created them. The child (Christ) is called the everlasting fa∣ther, Isa. 9.6. The divell is a liar, and the father of it, Joh. 8.44. that is, the author, inventor, propagator. Jabal, and Jubal, the fathers of such as dwell in Tents, keep cattle, handle the harp or Organ, Gen. 4.20.21. Micah's masse∣priest must be a father to the plunder∣ing Danites, Judg. 18.19. that is, an in∣structor. One Joab is the father of the valley Charashim, for they were crafts∣men, 1 Chron. 4.14. Elisha cryeth after Elijah, My father, my father, the Chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, 1 King 2.12. a surer protector, then all their Martialists with their best forces. With the same, King Joash reverenceth Elisha, ib. 13, 14. And Naamans ser∣vants honour their Master, My Father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some
great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? Ib. 5.13. Job stoopes to ac∣knowledge corruption to be his Father, and the worme to be his Mother and Sister in regard of his wofull plight, Job 17.14. And our Saviours position is catholick, Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my Sister, and Bro∣ther, and Mother, Mar. 3.25. not by ge∣neration but acceptation. In an oppo∣site sense is the inscription on Babylons fore-head, Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of harlots, and abhominati∣ons of the earth, Revel. 17.5. In as far∣fetch'd Metaphors we have The sons of the quiver, for arrows, Job 41.28. Lament. 3.13. Jonah's goard shall be the Son of a night, Jon. 4.10. The pas∣call-Lamb a male, the Son of the first year, Exod. 12.9. Corn the Son of the thresh∣ing floore, Isa. 21.20. the Owles daugh∣ters, Ib. 3.21. that is, Chicken. Villages belonging to Bethshean and other Cities are said to be their daughters, Jos. 17. Daughters of Jerusalem, Sion, or Babylon are the inhabitants which acknowledg those places for Mothers. In which sense, Jerusalem is said to be the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. To this Trope are referred Anthropopathies, wherein
hands, and eyes, and eares, and other members, and humane affections are referred to God, and Spirits: which Anthropomorphites taking literally were condemned for Hereticks. Of this kind are these passages, It repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved Him at the Heart, Gen. 6.6. His soul was grieved for the misery of Is∣rael, Judg. 10.16. Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them, Exod. 32.10. The Lord repented of the evill that he thought to do unto his people, v. 14. and the like. In which expres∣sions, for mans weak capacity, God is said to do such things out of passion, which from eternity he had determi∣ned: as men do out of weakness, when they change their minds. No change being in God, but in the things done: which fall out in men according to the mutability of their purposes, carried on by passion, Thou tellest my wandrings, put my teares in thy bottle. Are they not in thy book? Psal. 56.8. Comprehensio, intellectio. In∣tellectio est cum, res tota parva de parte cognoscitur, aut de toto parva pars. Author ad Heren. Synecdoche. Of Synecdoches, are met with no lesse store, 1. In
generalls put for particulars, Preach the word to every Creature, Mar. 16.15. meaning, that is capable of it. The ear∣nest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God, Rom. 8.19. all sorts of men hoping to have their states bettered. Submit your selves to every humane Creature for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. that is, every man to whom you are subordinate, be∣cause God will have it so, 2. Special∣ties put for generalls, as, The Sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the Moon by night, Psal. 1216. that is, nothing shall hurt thee. Edom, and Moab, and Ammon have confederated or covenanted to take unto themselves the houses of God in possession, Psal. 83. i.e. the progeny of such wicked persons. So souls are put for persons, All the souls that came into Egypt with Jacob were 70. that is all the persons, Gen. 46.27. His travell shall fall upon his own head, and his wickednesse upon his owne pate, Ps. 7.16. his person shall endure the brunt of it. Is not the hand of Joab in all this? 2 King. 14.19. Joabs advice and coun∣sell. 3. A synecdoche is frequently ob∣served in putting a set number for an indefinite, and reciprocally. If we
would contend with God we cannot answer one for a Thousand, 1 Sam. 18.8. that is, a great multitude: by which trope, 7 is often put for many, or an unlimited number. The women said to Naomi concerning Obed, He shall be un∣to thee a restorer of life, and a nourisher of thine old age. For thy daughter in law which loveth thee; which is better to thee then 7 Sons, hath born him, Ruth 4.15. So an evil spirit cast out, when he returns, is said to take with him 7 other spirits, which makes the re-pos∣session of him that was freed worse, than when he was first possessed, Matth. 12.45. It is a good caution put in by a fa∣ther, Augustinus de Doctr. Christia. Lib. 3. c. 5. & 10. & 11. that To urge a trope according to the letter, and that which is literally taken to wrest to a trope, in some sort verifieth that of the Apostle, The letter killeth, but the spi∣rit giveth life, 2 Cor. 3.6. Such a mis∣take the Disciples were guilty of, who understood the leaven of the Pharisees, and Sadduces, which their Master war∣ned them to take heed of, to be lite∣rally meant of bread, which should have been understood metaphorically of their leaven of doctrine, Matth. 16.12. And the false witnesses alledged
against Christ the destroying of the materiall Temple, which was spoken of him by a Trope concerning the Tem∣ple of his Body, Jo. 2.21. These tropes twisted together in a speech continuate are as sparkling Diamonds in a Ring, by the Apostle termed an allegory, Gal. 4.24. Gal. 4.24. And may be conspi∣cuously discerned in 1. Types. 2. Mysteries. 3. Apologues. 4. Parables. 5. Apothegms. 6. Reproofs. , exemplar, figura, a picture, or shadow of things to come, qui in veteri testa∣mento praefiguravit aliquid in novo: fit tribus modis vel. 1. Natura: vel. 2. Hominum confi∣lio: vel. 3. Dei. Types. Hagar and Sarah by the Apostle are urged as types of difference between the old and new Testament; as answerable to Sinai in bondage, and free Jerusalem, Gal. 4.25. Israels reducing from Egypt, mentioned by the Prophet Hosea 11.1. is made a type by the evangelist of our Saviours returning from thence, Matth. 2.15. The deliverance by the arke said to be a type of baptisme, 1 Pet. 3.21.
as likewise the lifting up of the brasen Serpent a type of Christ's lifting up on the Crosse, Joh. 3 14. The passing of the Israelites thorough the red sea, mannah, the cloud, and the rock; set down as types of the Sacraments of the New Testament, 1 Cor. 10. So, to take such precepts literally, as, Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mothers milk, Exod. 23.19. Thou shalt not plough with an asse and an ox together, Deut. 22.10. Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn, Ib. 25.4. and not morally, for avoiding cruelty, parting stakes in worshipping, and defrauding the Mi∣nister of his due, the Apostle brandeth as grosse; for, (saith he) Doth God take care for oxen? 1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Tim. 5.18. 1.  ud. An hidden secret in Religi∣on, the knowledge of which is not attainable by any strength of flesh and blood, but by divine revelation. Mysteries. Mysteries, under aenig∣maes or hidden speeches, contain matter either 1. Morall: 2. Sacramentall: 3. Propheticall; for informing of manners, by way of do∣ctrine; confirming of promises, or points of belief; or fore-warning of things to come, for the good of Gods
people, and terrour of their opposites. For instances in either: Without contro∣versie great is the mystery of godlinesse. God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and re∣ceived into glory, 1 Tim. 3.16. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to them that are with∣out, all things are done in parables, Mar. 4.11. Of these mysteries, the Apostles and their successors are the dispensers: Let a man so account of us as of the mini∣sters of Christ, and stewards of the myste∣ries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Which mystery was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith, Rom. 16.25, 26. This is called, The wisdom of God in a mystery, not revealed to the prin∣ces of this world, 1 Cor. 2.7. Which is uttered by the Apostle, not in words which mans wisdom teacheth, but which the holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spirituall things with spirituall. 2. Doctrinall mysteries are seconded by Sacramentall, as the mystery of Re∣demption, and regeneration by Bap∣tism,
and the Lords Supper. Christs spirituall marriage with his Church, (so gloriously set out by David, Psal. 45. and Solomon, thorough the whole book of Canticles) is tearmed a great mystery, somewhat opened by the en∣tire love that should be between man and wife, Ephes. 5.32. 3. All Prophecies, not understood or fulfilled, remain as mysteries; so are styled the seven Stars and golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.20. Concerning the calling of the Jewes, to be expected in latter times: I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant (saith the Apostle) of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits, that blindnesse in part is hap∣ned to Israel untill the fulnesse of the Gen∣tils come in, and so all Israel shall be sa∣ved, Rom. 11.25. He, that no man un∣derstands under unknown tongues, or Tropes, may speak mysteries: I will tell thee the mystery of the woman (saith the Angel) and the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns, Rev. 17. And so the same Angel must tell us of the number of the beast, though it be the number of a man, and set down to be 666. Rev. 13.18. And the 1000 years of the Saints reign up∣on
earth, whilst Satan is chained in prison, Rev. 20. Of the overthrow of Gog and Magog in the Battle of Arma∣geddon, and the like, before we shall decipher such mysteries. So the Ark, Urim and Thummim; so Isaiah's cup of the Lords fury, and dregs of the cup of trembling, cap. 51.17. Jeremi∣ah's cup of consolation for the death of father or mother, cap. 16.17. Eze∣kiel's cup of astonishment and desolati∣on, cap. 23.33. our Saviour's cup, which he prayed, conditionally, might passe from him, Mar. 14.36. the cup the Apostles were to drink of, Matth. 20.23. the devils cup, 1 Cor. 10.31. the golden cup of the great whore, full of abhominations, and filthinesse of her fornications, Rev. 17.4. are full of my∣sticall Tropes, without the knowledge of which, they cannot be understood. As neither the mysticall books of Job's logicall discourses, David's rhetoricall Psalms, Solomon's morall Institutions, and Canticall Pastoralls, can any way be opened without the same key, as Sampson's Riddle, Judg. 14.12. the hand-writing against Belshazzar, Dan. 5.25. our Saviour's, Wheresoever the carcase is, thither will the eagles resort, Matth. 24.28.
, Apthon: A feigned speech, under which the truth is represented, as in a picture. Aliud aperte dicit, aliud ex eo innuit ac profitetur; ergo,  nonnulli appel∣lare ausi sunt , sermones à sermone, unum ab alio conclusum: Martinius: There are three kinds, Ra∣tionall, Morall, and Mixt. Rationall, wherein some∣thing is feigned to be done by man. Morall, which doth imitate the manners of those things that are void of rea∣son, as Brutes, Trees, &c. Mixt, that doth consist of both; all designed to instruct man, and inform his man∣ners. Apologues. Apologues are here un∣derstood, not such as are to be rejected, as old wives, [] 1 Tim. 4.7. Jewish, [.] Sophisticall, [] 2 Pet. 1.16. but such as are taken from irratio∣nall creatures, wherein one thing is said, but ano∣ther meant; in which kind is that of the Trees, where the base Bramble usurps re∣gall authority, which the Olive, Fig-tree, and Vine refused, Judg. 9.7. That of the poor mans one little ewe lamb, which touched David to the quick, for his tyrannicall dea∣ling with honest Uriah, 2 Sam. 12. That of Jehoash to Amaziah of the Thistle, which would match his son to the Cedar of Lebanon's daughter, wherein he handsomly girdeth at his over-wee∣ning presumption, 2 King. 14.9. All which are a concatenation of divers Tropes, which from unreasonable creatures teach men to be reasonable:
Which kind of teaching some have not unfitly called Zoopaedia. An Onoma∣paedia from Scripture-names might in like sort be framed; as from Adam, ear∣thy; Cain, possession; Abel, vanity, may be congruously gathered, that all earthly possession is vanity. From Mishma, Du∣mah, and Massah, the names of the fa∣mily of Ishmael, Gen. 25.4; the He∣brewes gather by their Grammaticall derivation, that in destructive times, many things are to be heard, not spo∣ken of, but born with, when no other remedy may be hoped for. From Dib∣laim the mother, Fagius in Gen. Gomer the daughter; from Jezreel, Loruchamah, and Loammi the children, the corrupt condition of the Church of Israel was represented to Hosea. Whence may be inferred, that luxury and surquedry in a State, breeds a consumption and overthrow, which begets dispersion and desolation, whereby the people become out of mercy, and not to be accounted any people at all, as the etymon of the words gives it.
. Suid. Compara∣tio, collatio, quâ res diversae o∣stenduntur in aliquo esse similes. Amongst the Hebrews they were in so high esteem, that any choise and rare sentence they dignified with this ti∣tle; and those things that were so, they covered with this veil, thereby not casting their pearls before swine, to be trampled by them, and exposed to contempt: Here∣in imitated by the Aegypti∣ans in their Hieroglyphicks. Parables. Parables are differenced by some from Apologues, or fables, because that they descend not to irrationall actors, as of brutes, or bu∣shes, but are bounded within the scene of ratio∣nall representations. In which kind in the old Te∣stament, some make the whole Book of Job to be a pattern of a conference, grounded upon the true history of a man unexpectedly ruined, and mistaken by his friends that came to visit and comfort him. Solomon's Pro∣verbs to be a Symposium spirituale, where∣in Wisdom's invitation and chear is set out after an heavenly manner, where are Viands, 1. Ethicall. 2. Poli∣ticall, 3. Oeconomicall. 4. Aulicall. 5. Con∣jugall. 6. Experimentall. 7. Celestiall. The Canticles are acknowledged by all to be an Eclogue betwixt our Saviour and his Spouse the Church, beyond imagination of Poets, and expressions of human affections. Of the same kind these pieces of Apocrypha, Tobit, Judith,
Story of Susanna, Bel and the Dragon, are by divers taken, which find more pith in the Morality, than ground for the History. 2. In the New Testament, much of our Saviours Doctrine is pro∣posed in parables, vvhereof seaven vve have in one Chapter, Matth. 13. In all, some have reckoned —. Amongst vvhich, in the parable 1. of the sower, is set forth the diverse events of the same vvord preached, by reason of the divers dispositions of the auditors: of vvhich, Some have eares to heare, some none: 2. In that of the prodigall Son returning to his forsaken Father, Luk. 15. the cheerfull entertainment of a sinner that unfeignedly repenteth: 3. In that of the freed debter by God, Matth. 18.20. so tyrannical∣ly imprisoning his brother, and the hea∣vy doome that befell him upon it; the necessity that vve should forgive, if vve look to be forgiven: 4. In that of the labourers in the vineyard; and vvages pay'd them; that God endureth not Idlers, and rewards not as men exspect, but of pleasure, yet still beyond exspe∣ctation: 5. The case of him that vvas for building of Barnes, instead of thankfull∣nesse to God that gave corne to fill them, Luke. 12.16. and of Dives and
Lazarus; Luk. 16. for vvordlings not to surfeit so here, that they suffer for it hereafter; and for the pious poor, left here to the dogs, to finde favour vvith the Angels: 6. In the passages parabolically set forth between the Priest, the Levite, Luk. 10.30. the pittifull Samaritan, and the wounded Tra∣veller apparantly may be observed, that those vvho are most obliged common∣ly most neglect their duty; and help of∣ten commeth from vvhom, and vvhen, it might be least exspected: 7. Our Sa∣viour spake this parable unto certaine vvhich trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, and despised others, Luke. 18.9, 10. Tvvo men vvent up into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publican; their prayers and po∣stures vve have, but the event shevvs, not the vaunting gifted man, that pres∣sed so high vvith his perfections; but the poor penitent, that stood a far off, not daring to lift up his eyes to Heaven, that smote his breast crying, GOD be mercifull to me a sinner, came last, but sped best.
Sententia brevis & acuta, quae multa pau∣cis comprehen∣dit. Apothegms. Apothegms are speeches of pregnant instruction, smart reproof, or profound consequence; expressed in compendious proposals, resolvs, or replyes. As, when Benbadad sends to Ahab, The Gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfulls, for all the people that follow me. The King of Israel inferred, and said, Tell him, Let not him that girdeth-on his har∣nesse boast himselfe, as he that putteth it off, 1 King. 20.10, 11. for things may fall out unexpectedly, and events crosse hopes and presumptions. So of the wise Woman of Abel's proposall to Joab, that furiously stormed the Citty be∣fore any Summons given, they plainly spake in the beginning (it was noysed first amongst us of the Town, when we first admitted Sheba, and heard of thy pursuit) Surely, they will aske of Abell, and so make an end (they will not strike before they speak, or batter or throw down the walls, before they under∣stand whether we are Royalists, or Re∣bels, that will justifie Sheba's action) I am one of those that am peaceable, and
faithfull in Israel, thou seekest to de∣stroy a City, and a mother in Israel, why wilt thou swallow up the inheri∣tance of the Lord? a discreet and qui∣et conference would take up the mat∣ter. This put Joab upon a sight of his over-sight, and an Epizeuxical acknow∣ledgement, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up, or destroy: 2 Sam. 20.18, 19, 20. So, our Saviours answer to the combined Pharisees, and He∣rodians concerning tribute due to Caesar, left them all to marvel, but not a word to reply, Matth. 22.22. To Amaziahs message, (a kind of challenge) Come and let us look one another in the face, Je∣hoash's answer was pricking and perti∣nent, The Sonne of The thistle was no fit match for the Cedar's daughter, 2 Kings. 14.18. Our Saviour's Replies are here more then apothegmaticall: 1. To that of his mother, Son why hast thou dealt with us thus? Luk. 21.49. Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers businesse: 2. To her motion, They have no Wine. Joh. 2.3, 4. Wo∣man? what have I to doe with thee? mine hour is not yet come: 3. To them that told him, that his Mother and his Brethren waited for him (whom by Nature he was bound to respect); he stretched forth
his hands towards his Disciples, Matth. 12.48. and said, Behold my Mother, and my Brethren: for, whosoever shall doe the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Sister, and Brother, and Mother (in my esteem). My Mother and my Brethren are those that hear the Word of God, Luk. 8.20. and do it: 4. To that of the Pharisee, why do thy Disciples trans∣gresse the tradition of the Elders, Mar. 7.15. in not wa∣shing their hands before meat? His satis∣faction was, Not external ingredients, but internal, defile a man: 5. To that, Why eateth you Master with publicans and sinners? Matth. 9.11. Those that be whole need not the phy∣sition, but those that are sick. Go and learn what that meaneth, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: Mar. 2.18. 6. To that, why his Dis∣ciples fasted not as well as those of John, and of the Pharisees? It was not seaso∣nable while the bridegroom was with them; and no more advantagious then to put a new patch upon an old gar∣ment, and new Wine into old vessels, which will marre all, rather then make good: Things must be so ordered that they may doe good, and Disciples in∣structed that they may be edified: 7. To that, Mat. 2.27, 28. Why do thy Disciples pluck the eares of Corne upon the Sabbath day? which is un∣lawfull. They may do it, in case of ne∣cessity;
as David are the shew-bread when he was hungry: And, the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. Therefore the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath. Likewise him that intruded to be his follower, he discharged with, Luk. 9.58. Foxes have holes, and the birds of the ayre have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. Thou wilt misse of thy ayme, if thou think to make a vvorldly fortune by follovving me. Him that put off his call, Let me first go and bury my Father, he lessoneth, Let the dead bury the dead, but go thou and preach the Kingdome of God. So him that vvould comple∣ment vvith his friends, before he vvould serve his Master, he teacheth better manners, No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdome of God. Reproofs, Complaints, and Exe∣crations, mixed, or severed. As in a building there must be a sure foundation, strong vvalls, and a good roof, othervvise it vvill soon totter, ac∣cording to that of our Saviour, Matth. 7.27. So in spiritual building, Scripture must be the ground-vvork, Liturgy the
vvalls, and Discipline the roofe; other∣vvise it vvill never hold out against vvind and stormes. But Pharach's dream is verified in us, The lean kine so devour the fat, that they leave no bones behind them, Gen. 41. And the famine of Samaria encreaseth upon us, vvhere an asses head is prized at eighty pieces of silver; and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung, for five: 2 King. 6. Gehazi vvill cheat both Naaman, and his Master, though the Leprosie attend it, 2 King. 5. And Korah vvith his com∣plices oppose Moses and Aaron, though the earth her selfe doth gape to svval∣lovv them for it, and their families. Instead of acknovvledging of our re∣bellions, vve cry out vvith them in the prophet, we have no King because we fear not the Lord, What should a King do to us? false swearing, and a covenant will batter fit our plots, Hos. 10. We vvill not have this man shall reign over us, this is the heire come let us kill him, and the in∣heritance shall be ours, Matth. 21. Luke. 20. But shal the svvord devour for ever? vvill not this bring forth bitternesse in the end? 2 Sam. 2.26. In the mean vvhile Jonah, sentt to Niniveh, flyes to Tarshish; and vve, vvhen our Master is
going to suffer, are questioning, Who should be chiefest. Hovv can vve cen∣sure Esau for parting vvith his birth∣right at so lovv a rate? He vvept vvhen it vvas done; but we do vvorse, and boast of our bargains. O Judas, hovv doth our perfidiousnesse justifie thy highest treachery? Thou soldest thy Ma∣ster, yet in a desperate kinde of repen∣tance restored'st the money: but vve hold it a disparagement to be over-seen in any thing, and vvill venture rather Hell and the Gallovvs to be thought grand Politicians, then to part vvith that vve have once gotten. It vvas a poore content the rich man had of his full barnes, that must the same night lose his Soul, Luk. 12.16. And Dives feasting vvas not vvorth the reckoning, that afforded him not a drop of wa∣ter for a Grace-cup, Luk. 16. The Spirit of the Pythonisse could preach true Doctrin, These men are the servants of the high God, Acts. 16. but to bring about a plot, to drive the Apostles out of Town, by the infatuated Aldermen that heeded not God, but their gaine. Rebobohams brazen shields make a shew as those of Gold placed in the Temple, by his wiser father; but, put to the
touch, the case is altered. The Holy Ghost may be so invocated, that instead of a Dove, an Owl may make appea∣rance. So, many men talk of gifts, that are but shifts; and vaunt of taking pains, who from our Saviour, in the latter day, shall have small thanks for their la∣bour, Matth. 7.22. These Rabshakehs will tell us of lands, of corn, and vvine, and olives, and honey, that they will transplant us unto, 2 Kings. 18.32. but it will prove better to advise with some trusty Isaiahs, then to presume too far upon the Gentleman's word. The Woman that upbraided the Shoo∣maker for want of a shoo to fit her foot, was found to have a foot not to be fitted without a mis-shapen shoo made on purpose. It is dangerous to break such hedges, where a Serpent is like to bite us by the fingers, Eccles. 10.8. and to poure in new vvine into old vessels that will surely break them. Of the three Teaching Fig-trees in the Gospel, the first telleth us, that leaves without fruit draw on a curse, Matth. 21. The second, that where dressing helps not, it must not any longer stand to burden the ground, Luke. 13. The
third, that a day of reckoning is grow∣ing upon us, Matth. 24. It was too late to gather Mannah, when the Sun had risen and melted it: and in vain to cry, Lord, Lord, with the foolish virgins, when the doores are shut, Matth. 25. Thirst is a signe in Physick, that the purgation taken hath well wrought, as it should: My soul hath a thirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall I come and appear before the presence of my God? Psal. 42.2. My meat, is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his worke, John. 4.34. And, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righte∣ousnesse: for they shall be filled, Matthew. 5, 6. 1. The Generation of vipers: 2. Sons of Belial: 3. Baal Kemarims: 4. tongue-men: 5. belly-gods: 6. cursed lyers, and slande∣rers: 7. filthy dreamers, that blaspheme dignities, may have their portion here, but shall have their potion hereafter, fire and brimstone, storme and tempest; this shall be prepared for them, Psalm. 11. The Spider weaves a subtile web, and watcheth in it diligently to intan∣gle flyes, which he may devour: but when the beesom of destruction com∣meth, behold his travail shall come
upon his own head, and his wickedness on his own pate, Psalm. 7.17. Musicians usually tune their Instruments before they play in consort; and the foot should be looked unto, before we enter into the house of God; except we intend to offer the fool's Sacrifice, Eccles. 5.1. The water of Siloah, that runneth softly, will prove better in the end, then the Son of Remaliah's over-flowing torrents. Every plant that the heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted out, Matthew. 15.13. CHAP. III. Of Figures. AS tropicall Speeches consist of choise and gracefull Words: So Called by Cicero, Orationis habitus from the Greeke word , because speech is cloathed and adorned therewith: termed Figura, because it giveth a new shape, or face to the word, or sentence, that is embelished, and set forth with those flowers. . Plutarch. Figura aneem est, oratio immutata ab co, quod in usu in consuetudine positum est, constans fictione quâdam, ornatûs aut utilitatis causa. Tully in Bruto divides them in verberum & sententiarum lumina, . Figures arise from the fit placing, dis∣position, or repetition of vvords in Sen∣tences, vvhich othervvise vvould be re∣presented, as homely, or (as may be said) disfigured.
In this range, are these of especiall Note, and Use; to which the rest may be reduced. 1. Epizeuxis. 2. Anaphora. 3. Epistrophe. 4. Epanalepsis. 5. Epanados. 6. Paronomasia. 7. Polyptôton. Ab  ad, et , jungere, because the same vvord is adjoyned, or pre∣sently repeated, therefore termed by Quintilian, lib. 9. chap. 3. Geminatio. There are three ends of it, put down by him there: 1. for ampli∣fication, as occidi, occidi; non Sp. Metium, Wherein the first serves to shew, or demon∣strate, the other to affirme: 2. for commiseration, Ah Co∣ridon, Coridon: 3. for elevati∣on, being joyned with an I∣rony. Epizeuxis. By an Epizeuxis the same vvord is geminated in the same sentence; in an ele∣gant, earnest manner. My heart is fixed, O GOD, my heart is fixed, I vvill sing and give praise. Awake up my glory, awake up my lute and harp, I my selfe vvill awake right early, Psalm. 57.7. O God to whom vengeance belongeth, thou God to whom vengeance belongeth, shevv thy selfe, Psal. 94.1. Hovv long shall the wicked? Hovv long shall the wicked tri∣umph? Hovv long shall they utter, and speak hard things, and make such proud boasting? Ib. For these things I vveep, mine eye, mine eye, runneth dovvn vvith vvater: because the com∣forter,
that should relieve my Soul, is far from me, my Children are desolate, because the Enemy prevailed, Lament. 1.16. So, O earth, earth, earth, hear the vvord of the Lord, Jeremiah. 22.29. A sword, a sword, is sharpned and also fur∣bished: it is sharpned to make a sore slaughter, it is furbished that it may glitter, should vve then make mirth? It contemneth the rod of my Son, as every tree, Ezek. 21.9, 10. I vvill overturne, o∣verturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more untill he come, vvhose right it is, and I vvill give it him, Ezek. 21.27. In the same straine are these of our Sa∣viour; Martha, Martha, thou art carefull and troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary, Luk. 10.41, 42. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathereth her Chickens under her wings, but ye would not, Matth. 23, 37. Luk. 13.34. Mul∣titudes, multitudes in the valley of deci∣sion, for the day of the Lord is neer in the valley of decision, Joel. 3.14. Some∣time, a Parenthesis is interposed, as They seemed to be somewhat (vvhatso∣ever they vvere, it maketh no matter to
me, God accepteth no mans person) for they who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me, Gal. 2.6. To this Epizeuxis, may be referred Reduplicatie, called by Plu∣tarch , Verbi ejus∣dem repetitio à , dicere; quia idem sonus iteratur. Anadiplosis, which is when the same word, that ends one sentence, begins the other: and Climax, a climbing by a repetition of the words before, to make as it were a foot-step to ascend higher, as both words give it. I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord; our feet shall stand within thy gates O Jerusa∣lem. Jerusalem is built as a City that is at unity in it selfe, Ps. 122.1.2. I will laugh at your calamity, and I will mock when your feare cometh; when your feare cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirl-wind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you, Pro. 1.26.27. And it shall come to passe when they shall say unto thee, Whither shall we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith the Lord, Such as are for Death, to death; and such as are for the Sword, to the sword; and such as are for Famine, to the famine; and such as are for Captivity, to the captivity, Jer. 15.2. So, Zach. 11.9.
That which Dyeth, let it dye, and that that is Cut off, let it be cut off, and let the rest cut every one the flesh of ano∣ther. Of , scala, gradus, , because in this figure we do proceed as it were by certain steps, or rounds in a ladder: whence it is named Gradatio; repetit quae dictasunt, & prius∣quam ad aliud descendat, in prioribus resistit. Quintil. L. 9. c. 3. Climax, these nota∣ble concatenations we have in the New Testament, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be sa∣ved: How then shal they call on him, in whom they have not be∣lieved? and how shal they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they heare without a Preacher? and how shall they Preach, except they be sent? Rom. 10.13, 14, 15. Whom he did fore∣know, he also did praedestinate to be confor∣med to the image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many brethren. More∣over whom he did praedestinate, them he al∣so called; whom he called, them he also justi∣fied, and whom he justified, he also glorified, Rom. 8.29. We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope maketh not ashamed, be∣cause the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, Rom. 5.3.4, 5. Gi∣ving all diligence, add to your faith vir∣tue,
and to virtue Knowledge, and to know∣ledge Temperance, and to temperance Pa∣tience, and to patience Godlinesse, and to godlinesse Brotherly kindnesse, and to bro∣therly kindnesse Charity, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. In which kind is that saying, Learn to know, know to doe, doe to dye, dye to live, live to laud. So as by Higgaions, Selahs, Hosannahs, we may attaine at length to coelestiall Halleluichs. By Plutarch called , and by him taken no∣tice of to be very powerfull to work upon the affections as well as to delight the care;  quare videtur esse adhibenda & ad exornandam, & augendam orationem. Auth. ad Heren. Anaphora. In Anaphora the same word is re-assum'd to begin divers sentences. So bles∣sings, and cursings, are Ana∣phorically propounded. If ye walke in my statutes, and keep my Commandements, and do them, I will give you raine in due season, — I will give peace in the land, — I will have respect unto you, — I will set my Tabernacle amongst you. — But, if ye will not hearken unto me, but walke contrary to me, then will I walke also contrary to you, in fury; and I, even I, will hastise you 7 times for your sins, Lev. 26.3.27, 28. In like manner, Deut. 28. Blessed, blessed, blessed, —
and, Cursed, cursed, cursed, — are re-as∣sumed by Anaphora, as the 8 Beati∣tudes, and so many Woes are pronoun∣ced and denounced to the Happy, and Hypocrites, Mat. 5. & ch. 23. In the same figure, Charity is displayed; Cha∣rity suffereth long, and is kind; Charity envieth not, Charity vaunteth not her selfe, 1 Cor. 13.4. The abhominations of the bloody City of Jerusalem, in which the Princes of Israel were in their power to shed blood, are heavily taxed. In thee have they set light by Fa∣ther and Mother; in the midst of thee, have they dealt by oppressions, with the stranger; in thee have they vexed the fatherless and the widow. Thou hast despised my holy things, and profaned my Sabbaths; in thee are men, that carry tales to shed blood; in thee they that eat upon the mountaines; in the midst of thee, they commit lewdnesse; in thee, have they discovered their fathers na∣kednesse; in thee, have they humbled her that was set a part for pollution, and one hath committed abhomination with his neighbours wife, and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law, and another in thee hath humbled his Sister, his Fathers daughter; in thee
have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken usury, and encrease, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neigh∣bour by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord God, Ezek. 22.7. The devastations of Jerusalem are la∣mented by the Prophet, Mine eyes fail with teares, My bowels are troubled, My liver is poured upon the earth for the destruction of the daughter of my people? What thing shall I take to wit∣nesse for thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equall to thee? that I may com∣fort thee, O virgin daughter of Sion, for thy breach is great like the Sea, who can heal thee? Lament. 2.11.13. How∣soever Gods people may be worried, and vilified as trampled drosse, yet God professeth, He will make them his battle-axe, and weapons of War: Jer. 51.20, 21, 22. For with thee (saith he) will I break in pieces the Nations, and with thee will I de∣stroy Kingdomes, and with thee will I break in pieces the horse, and his rider, and with thee will I break in pieces the Chariot, and his rider; with thee also will I break in pieces man and woman, and with thee will I break in pieces old and young, and with thee will I break in
pieces the young Man, and the Maid. I will also break in pieces with thee, the Shepheard and his flock, and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoak of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces Captains and Rulers, Jer. 51.20. What went ye out into the wildernesse to see? three times assu∣med, Mat. 11.7. The 11th Chapter to the Hebrews is a continued Anaphora by resuming the word, By Faith. Rutilius calleth it , Hermogenes , Plu∣tarch. . Cicero Conversio, quid ad postremum continenter revertimur. Auth. ad Heren. Epistrophe. That elegancy which A∣naphora acquires by repea∣ting the same words in the beginning, Epistrophe equalls, by doing the like in the conclusion, which fol∣low one the other: Ye house of Israel, put your trust in the Lord; He is their succour and defender. Ye house of Aa∣ron, put your trust in the Lord; He is their succour and defender, Psal. 115. So, His mercy endureth for ever, Psal. 136. twenty and seven times repeated. To which Figure may be referred that of our Saviour, This is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth and be∣lieveth in him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6. Likewise that, If thy hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, then having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched. And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off; for it is bet∣ter for thee to enter in halt into life, then having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched; where the worm dyeth not, and the fire is not quenched. And if thy eye offend thee, pluck it out; it is better for thee to en∣ter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast in∣to hell fire, where the worm dyeth not, and the fire is not quenched, Mar. 9. So, of mysticall Babylon's ruine it is said, The voice of harpers, and musitians, and pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee. And no crafts∣man of whatsoever craft shall be found any more at all in thee; and the sound
of the mill-stone shall be heard no more at all in thee, and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee, and the voice of the bride-groom shall be heard no more at all in thee, Rev. 18.22. Under Epistrophe may be compri∣led Commoratio, quia in loco firmissimo, que tota causa con∣tinetur, monetur diutiùs, & eo∣dem saepiùs reditur: nam & commoratio in una re permul∣tùm movet. Cicer. de orat. Epimone est Tropus in theologiâ quando dictio repetitur ad ma∣jorem certitudinem, vel defide∣rii expressionem, ut, Amen, a∣men, dico-vobis. Alii. unt quod sit, quando dictio non tota repe∣titur sed principium & finis va∣riatur, ut, Expectando expectavi. Vetus Vocabularius. Epimone, When a sen∣tence, as it were the bur∣den of a song, is often re∣peated; as that, Turn us a∣gain, thou God of hosts, shew us the light of thy countenance and we shall be whole, thrice repeated Psal. 80. So, Why art thou so vexed, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God — Psal. 42.11. So that passage, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and de∣clare the wonders that he doth for the chil∣dren of men, Psal. 107. four times repea∣ted. As that, For all that, his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, Isa. 9. So that of our Saviour to his Disciples, He that loveth father or mother more then me is not worthy of me, thrice repeated, Matth. 10.37. And so, —receive a reward, Ib. 41. In the same
strain is that, Charity beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, en∣dureth all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. From Anaphora and Epistrophe joy∣ned together, ariseth Complicatio, because both the former Figures are fol∣ded and wrapt in this. Cum repetitio fit in principiis & clausulis. Sym∣ploce, as, O give thanks un∣to the Lord for he is grati∣ous, because his mercy endu∣reth for ever. Let Israel now confesse that he is gratious, and that his mercy en∣dureth for ever. Let the house of Aaron now confesse, that his mercy endureth for ever. Yea, let all them that fear the Lord confesse, that his mercy endureth for ever, Psal. 118.2, 3, 4. No man of us liveth to himself, and no man dyeth to himself; for whether we live, we live to the Lord, or whether we die, we die to the Lord: Whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords, Rom. 14.7, 8. We know in part, we prophesy in part; but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I was a child I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I be∣came a man, I put away childish things, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.11. A stupendious Symploce is that, Ezek. 32. Ashur is there, and all her company: his graves are about him, all of them slain, fallen by
the sword, whose graves are set in the side of the pit, and her company is round about her grave; all of them slain, fallen by the sword. There is Elam and her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised unto the neather parts of the earth, which caused their terrour in the land of the living, yet have they born their shame with them that go down into the pit— So, There is Mesech, Tubal, Edom, the Princes of the north, and all the Sidonians, in the same posture. More pun∣ctuall is that of Obadiah, Obad. 1.13. Thou shouldst not have entred into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; nor laid hands on their substance in the day of their calamity. To this may be re∣ferred that strain of our Saviour, If ye love them that love you, what thanks have ye? for sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thanks have ye? for sin∣ners also do even the same. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thanks have ye? for sinners also lend to sin∣ners, and to receive as much again, Luk. 6. So, Luk. 17.34. Two— the one shall be taken and the other left; thrice re∣peated.
Resumptio, quando primis respondent ultima. Quintilian. Author ad Heren. vocat Con∣duplicationem, cùm ratione am∣plificationis, aut commiserationis cjusdem unius, aut plurium ver∣borum fit iteratio. Epanalepsis. Epanalepsis ends with the same word it begins. For we are saved by hope; but hope that is seen is not hope, Rom. 8.24. Rejoyce in the Lord, and again I say, Rejoyce, Phil. 4.4. So Psalm the 8th beginneth with, O Lord our governour, how excellent is thy name in all the world? and ends with the same words. Like∣wise Psal. 103. hath this beginning, Praise the Lord, all my soul; and endeth in the same words, termed, The Ora∣tors round. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other gospell unto you then ye have received, let him be accursed. Inferred upon the saying before, Though we or an Angel from hea∣ven preach any other gospel unto you than ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9.
Regressio, sen Reditio in vi∣am, , Plutarch: Quando duas res, & nomina proponens aliquis, sensu nondum finito, redit ad utrumque nomi∣num, ut compleat sententiae de∣fectum, ut, — Divellimur inde Iphitus & Pelias mecum; quo∣rum Iphitus aevo Jam gravior— Epanados. Epanados resumes that which was spoken, and dis∣misseth it with an explica∣tion, ringing, as it were, the same Bells in changes: The ungodly have drawn out the sword, and bent the bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a right conversati∣on. Their sword shall God throw through their own heart, and their bowe shall be broken, Psal. 37.14, 15. Woe unto thee that spoilest, and wast not spoyled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee. When thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee, Esay 33.1. When the holy Ghost com∣meth, he shall reprove the world of sin, of righteousnesse, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me; of righ∣teousnesse, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more: of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged, John
16.8, 9, 10, 11. The Jewes require a signe, and the Greeks seek after wisdom; but we preach Christ crucified; to the Jewes a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishnesse; but unto them which are called, both Jewes and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wis∣dom of God. Because the foolishnesse of God is wiser then men, and the weaknesse of God is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1. Agnominatio, allusio Vocis ad vocem, quae fit per literae ad∣jectionm, detractiunem, tr∣spositionem, vel immutationem∣nt, Amantes sunt amentes. Raras das mihi literas; charas tamen. Paronomasia. Paronomasia seasonably used, delights the hearers, helps the memory, and shewes, in propinquity of words, the difference of things. Be∣hold, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but apher and epher, dust and ashes, Gen. 18.27. As for the gods of the heathens, they be but idols; their Elohim are elilim, Psal. 96.5. Diis, noddys, their idols addle, idle in English expression. In the mountain [of the Church] the Lord of hostes shall make unto all people mishteh shemanim, a feast of fat things; mishteh shemarim, feasts of wine in the lees, Esa, 25.6.
wherein shall be the complement of marrow-dishes, and brisk pure wine, which shall satisfie the utmost spiritual appetite. So,  and , envy and murder;  and , forni∣cation and wickednesse; , without understanding, covenant-brea∣kers, Rom. 1.29.31. have a colour of Paronomasia, which will savour of pe∣dantism to be too often used. In the eighth of Amos, vers. 1, 2. Kaits ushe∣reth in Keets; plenty, destruction. , multum; &  cao, quasi dicas, Casu∣um carietatem, cùm ejusdem nominis casus sapiùs commu∣antur, Cicer. ad Brut. Varia∣tur haec casihus & generibus i∣, under  no∣ Quint lib. 9. Con∣  variorum casu∣um dem fnte deductorum, ut Od Metamorph. lib. 5. Heu quantum scelus est in viscere viscera condi, Congesto{que} avidum pingues∣cere corpore corpus. Alteriusque animantem ani∣mantis vivere lethol Called by the Author ad He∣ren. Traductio, by others Me . Polyptoton. Polyptoton inculcates ve∣hemently, in divers cases and expressions, what we would have notice to be ta∣ken especially of. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked. Thou art waxen fat, thou art thick, thou art covered with fatnesse. Then he forsook God which made him, and lightly e∣steemed the rock of his sal∣vation, Deut. 32.15. Hath he smitten him as he smote those that smote him? or, is he flain ac∣cording to the slaughter of them which
are slain by him? Esa. 27.7. No, in measure. God will deal more favoura∣bly with his, then his enemies. When it shouteth forth he will debate with it, and stay his rough wind in the day of his east wind, , Matth. 15.14. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1.4. The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath; therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath, Mar. 2.27, 28. For he hath made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. The combining of these Figures to∣gether with the former Tropes, carry with them a delightfull and winning grace, especially in 1 petitions; 2 com∣plaints; 3 quick reproofs or encite∣ments. So, (1) that of the Apostle, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God I how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his waies past finding out? For who hath known the minde of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor? or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recom∣penced to him again? For in him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever. Rom. 11. My God, my God look upon me. Why hast thou forsa∣ken me, and art so far from my health, and from the word of my complaint? Psal. 22.1. O God my heart is ready, my heart is ready; I will sing and give praise with the best member that I have, Psal. 18.1. (2.) A complaint studded with such sparkling gems, we have, Psal. 69. (3.) Quick speeches, called by the Preacher, goads and nails, fastned by the masters of the as∣semblies, Eccles. 12.11. come under this reckoning. As, Our Saviour turned wa∣ter into wine to supply the new mar∣ried's wants; but we turn wine into water out of luxurious wantonnesse. If St. Peter's successor were stinted to his founder's allowance, Silver and gold have I none; he would quickly be weary of the Chair, which hath so scant a cu∣shion. Both sorts of those fanaticks are to blame, as well those that will have no set prayers, as those that will have no prayers but set. God makes
Protestants, but the Papists make god. Religion makes us, but they make re∣ligion; and this made-religion they maintain, that this maintained may maintain them. We should as well ap∣ply our selves to Christs merits, that so his merits might be rather a stay to our infirmities, then a stale to our enormi∣ties. We must therefore couple faith∣fulnesse with faith, that we may do, as well as believe, and that because we do believe. We must take heed, that whilst we hunt after neat expressions, , Col. 2.4. , 1 Cor. 1.19. , Ib c. 7.4. , unde , Ephes. 5.6. we let not slip the thing that should be chiefly pressed and expres∣sed. Divers aim to shew, how much they can say on a Text, with no regard at all how little their auditors can bear away; as though they came into a Pul∣pit to open onely their store, not to feed their flocks; and to beg applause of their Congregation, that they are ready Preachers, not to so lead them that they may be profitable hearers. Such soun∣ding brasse is not fit metal to make ves∣sels for the Temple; and such tinckling cymballs, without solidity and charity, make fit musick for a May-pole. These sycophanticall sermonings, angling for
gain, more then souls; and applause, more then the proficiency of the hea∣rers, the Apostle calls God to witness, was far from his manner of teaching, 1 Thess. 2.4, 5. CHAP. IV. Called , quia af∣fectus seu motus animi istas Sen∣tentiarum figu∣ras praecipué se∣quuntur. Differt Sententiae figura à figura Dictio∣nis, quòd illa sententias illu∣minet, in figuris autem dictionis aptè & jucundè inter se resonent: deinde quòd sententiarum conformationes mutatis verbis confistere possunt; Figurae autem dictionis non item, quia mutatis sedibus perit resonantia, quâ fit color. Of Schemes. TO teach, to delight, and through∣ly to perswade, are the scopes of Oratory. After teaching-Tropes there∣fore, and delighting-Figures, convin∣cing and perswading-Schemes may be well enquired after. These come un∣der the titles of 1. Ecphonesis. 2. Epanorthosis. 3. Apostrophe. 4. Prosopopoea. 5. Aporia. 6. Anacoinosis. 7. Synchoresis.
Exclamatio, because in the pronountiation there is re∣quired a straining and ele∣vation of the voice, the signe of which is either some Ad∣verb or Interjection. Ecce quàm bonum & quàm jucundum habitare fratres in unum! Psal. 133. O prosundas divitias tum sapientiae, tum cognitionis Dei! quàm inscrutabilia sunt ejus ju∣dicia, & ejus viae impervestiga∣biles? Rom. 11.35. Ecphonesis. Ecphonesis, or exclamati∣ons, are raised upon so va∣rious occasions, that they can hardly be confined; most fall within compasse of these limits: 1. Of Ad∣miring, How is the faith∣full city become an harlot! It was full of judgment, righteousnesse lodged in it, but now murderers. Thy silver is become drosse, Isa. 1.21. thy wine mixt with water. 2. Wishing; O that they (Gods people) were wise, that they un∣derstood this, that they would consider their latter end! Deut. 32.29. O that my people would have hearkened unto me! If Israel had walked in my waies, I should have soon put down their ene∣mies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have been found lyers. Also with the finest wheat-flower, and with hony out of the stony-rock, should I have satisfied thee, Psal. 14.15, 16. O that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy
presence, as when the fire of melting burneth, Isa. 64. the fire that causeth the wa∣ters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries. 3. Complaining: O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turn their backs before their enemies? for the Canaanites and all the inhabi∣tants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth, and what wilt thou do unto thy great name? Josh. 7.8. O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot a∣gainst the sheep of thy pasture? O think upon thy congregation whom thou hast purchased, and redeemed of old. Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance, and mount Sion wherein thou hast dwelt. Lift up thy feet, that thou maist utterly destroy every enemy, which hath done evill in thy sanctuary, Psal. 74. O wret∣ched man that I am! Rom. 7.24. who shall deliver me from this body of death? 4. In∣dignation. O generation of Vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Matth. 3.7. O faith∣lesse and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? Matth. 17.17. O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken? Luk. 24.25. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears; ye do alwaies resist the holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye, Act. 7.51. O full of subtlety and all mischief, thou child of the devill, Act. 13.10. thou enemy of all righteousnesse, wilt you not cease to pervert the wayes of the Lord? 5. Exsultation. Behold how good and joyfull a thing it is for bre∣thren to dwell together in unity! Psal. 133.1. What reward shall I give unto the Lord, Psal. 116.11. for all the benefits he hath done unto me? 6. Insultation. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer son of the morning! How art thou cast down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! Isa. 14.12. O thou enemy! de∣structions are come to a perpetuall end, Psal. 9.6. even of the Cityes which thou hast de∣stroyed, their memorial is perished with them. 7. Commiseration. Ah Lord God! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israell in pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem? Ezek. 9.8. Behold O Lord, and consider to whom thou hast done this! shall the women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shall the Priest and the Prophet be slaine in the Sanctuary of the Lord! Lam. 2.20.
To this Exclamation may be referred an Rei narratae, vel probatae summa acclamatio. Quint. ut, Tantae molis erat Romanam con∣dere gentem Ad ditur ad finem, fine exclamationis notâ. Epiphonema, or senten∣tious closure, relating to premises of consequence: Thus they provoked him to anger with their owne inventions, and the plague was great amongst them. Psal. 106.29. Thus were they stain'd with their owne works, and went a whoring after their own inventions. ib. 38. Thus they turned the glory of God into the similitude of a calfe that eateth hey. Ib. 20. Thus Joash the King remem∣bred not the kindnesse which Jehojada his father had done unto him, but slew his son; and vvhen he died, he said, The Lord look upon it, and require it, 2 Chron. 24.22. Quasi , Libertas loquendi. Parrhesia, an assumed freedom of speech, vvhich is commonly ushered in, vvith an excusing praeface. Men and brethren let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead, and buried, and his sepulcher vvith us this day, Act. 2.29. We cannot but speak the things vvhich vve have both seen, and heard. Ib. 4.20. the King knoweth of these things, before whom I speak, [] freely. For I am perswaded, that none of these
things are hidden from him; for this thing was not done in a corner, Act. 26.26. Correctio, quae tollit id quod dictum est; &, pro eo, id quod magis idoneum videtur, reponit. Author. ad Heren. Called by the Greeks likewise, , & . Epanorthosis. Epanorthosis doth in some sort qualifie that, which hath, as we make it, slipped from us; or drowneth some∣what, which we would have under∣stood, though not uttered. Can a wo∣man forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee, Esa. 49.15. Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I into the world, Joh. 12.27. I laboured more abundant∣ly then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. I marvell that you are so soon re∣moved from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gos∣pell, which is not another. But there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospell of Christ, Gal. 1.6, 7. Attendant to this is Reticentia, Cicer. Obticen∣tia, Celsus. Cal∣led by others, Interruptio, because the thred of discourse is broken off. Virgil. Quos ego: sed motos praestat componere fluctus. Used 1. To expresse anger; Quem quidem ego si sensero: sed quid opus est verbis, Plaut. 2. Fear: Virgil. Neque vincere certo: Quanquam O: sed superent quibus hoe, Neptune, dedisti. 3. An high passion of grief: Tu autem Je∣hova quousque! Psal. 6.4. Aposiopesis, when somewhat is left to be gathered,
by a breaking off abruptly. Oh this people have sinned a great sin, and made them gods of gold: yet now if thou wilt forgive them their sin [It is too much for me to ask, but thy infinite mercy may afford it]: if not, blot me out, I pray thee, of the book which thou hast written, Exod. 32. To whom I sware in my wrath, [if they should enter into my rest] left to be understood, Let not me be trusted any more upon oath. If thou hadst known, even at least in this thy day the things which belong unto thy peace, (thou wouldst have taken better courses, or the like): but now they are hid from thine eyes, Luk. 19.42. Aversio, ser∣mo aversus; be∣cause the scene of speech is changed and directed to an∣other. Apostrophe. Apostrophe, in a continuate speech, turns from the hearers, or matter pre∣sent, and bespeaks a thing or person absent, or present, by the By. So David, in lamenting the death of Saul and Jo∣nathan, lets fly an imprecation upon the place where they were slain: Ye moun∣tains of Gilboa, let there be no dew,
nor let there be rain upon you, nor fields of offerings; for there the shield of the Mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been annointed with oyle, 2 Sam. 1.21. So, in declaring Israel's exodus from Egypt, he bespeaks the sea, and Jordan, with the mountains, and earth it self: What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest! &c. Psal. 114.5. So Isai∣ah makes the heavens and earth his auditors; Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken. I have nourished and brought up chil∣dren, and they have rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2. Baldnesse is come upon Gaza, Askalon is cut off with the rem∣nant of their valley; how long wilt thou cut thy self? O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy self into thy scabbard; rest, and be still, Jer. 47.6. In the 24th Psalm; upon profession, that although The earth be the Lords, with all the fulnesse, and inhabitants of the world; yet because all have not that share in it as the Israelites, (God's favourites) Deut. 10.14, 15; the Prophet breaks out, by an high Apostrophe, to the Gates, for enlarging themselves, to en∣tertain
the Ark of God: Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Twice repeated; that the compellation of the senslesse gates might make the deeper impression, for opening to Christ knocking at the door of our hearts. And this sort of Apostrophe to senssesse creatures, is of∣ten met with in other Authors. But two other besides, the one to God, the other to our own souls, are peculiar in a manner to Scripture-Rhetorick. A∣postrophe to God, 1. by Petition. 2. Com∣plaint. 3. Praises. 4. Thanksgiving. 5. De∣testation of opposites. 6. Stirring up our selves. 7. Inciting others, and inviting. Thus, upon a narration of Gods won∣derfull conducting the Israelites out of Egypt, the Prophet raiseth a most pa∣theticall Apostrophe. Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holinesse, and of thy glory. Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowells and thy mercies, towards me are they restrai∣ned? — Doubtlesse, thou art our Father — O Lord, why hast thou made us to erre from thy waies, and hardened our hearts from thy fear?
by leaving us to putrifie in our own corruptions). O that thou wouldest rend the heavens — Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned? Isa. 63. Such are those of blessed King Charles, worthy of all imitation. Apostrophe to our own selves are termed Solilo∣quies, seldom found out of Scripture. So, The river of Kishon swept them a∣way, that antient river, the river of Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength, Judg. 5.21. In such a Soliloquy, David cheareth up him∣self, Why art thou so vexed, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted in me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet thank him, which is the help of my countenance and my God, Psal. 42.14. So, Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name, Psal. 103. So, 104. Praise the Lord, O my soul. Thus he doth him∣selfe, and makes Apostrophe's to others to do the like; O come let us sing unto the Lord — Sing unto the Lord a new song— So, all former Halleluiahs are shut up with an Apo∣strophe to all, Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord, Psal. 150.
Fictio personae, when the person is not there, but brought in upon the stage speaking as if he were pre∣sent. So a thing that is mute oft-times, is dressed up in a person, and words put in his mouth. In this, there ought to be a decorum ob∣served, that ye dresse not the servant like the master, but that there be a respect had to the thing personated, and accordingly to be clothed with words, Prov. 1.22. Prosopopoea. By a Prosopopoea, 1. Wis∣dom is filled with a speech; How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I wil make knovvn my words unto you. 2. A Harlot; I have peace-offe∣rings with me this day, I have payed my vowes. Therefore come I forth to meet thee diligently, to seek thy face; and I have found thee. I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved work, vvith fine linnen of Egypt. I have perfumed my bed vvith myrrh, Prov. 7. aloes, and cynnamon. Come, let us take our fill of love untill the morning, let us solace our selves with love. For the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey; he hath ta∣ken a bag of mony with him, and will come at the day appointed. 3. Sa∣crilegious Church-robbers: Come let us root them out, that they be no more a
people, and that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. Psal. 83.4. 4. Hypocriticall Separatists, Isa. 65.5. that walk af∣ter their own thoughts. Stand by thy self, come not near to me; for I am ho∣lier then thou. 5. Rebells; For now they will say, We have no King, because vve feared not the Lord, Hos. 10. vvhat then should a King do to us? They have spo∣ken vvords, svvearing falsly in making a covenant. Thus judgment springeth up like hemlock in the furrows of the field. The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of the calves of Beth aven. 6. Wretched Nabals: What shall I do? I have no room to bestovv my fruits. This vvill I do, Luk. 12.17, 18, 19. I vvill pull dovvn my barns and build greater, and there vvill I bestovv my fruits and my goods. And I vvill say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years, Take thine ease, eat, and drink, and be merry. 7. Penitent Prodigals: How ma∣ny hired servants of my fathers, have bread enough and to spare, and I pe∣rish vvith hunger? I vvill arise and go to my father and say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am no more vvorthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
hired servants, Luk. 15.17, 18, 19. In like manner the Pharisee and Publican are fitted vvith prayers, Ib. 18.11, 12, 13. And the desperate, vvith a speech con∣sonant to their remedilesse case: This vvas he vvhom vve had sometimes in derision, and a proverb; We fools ac∣counted his life madnesse, and his end vvithout honour. Hovv is he numbered among the children of God, and his life among the Saints?— We wearied our selves in the way of wickednesse. — What hath pride profited us? — All these things are passed away like a shaddow, Wisd. 5. Sometimes, in stead of personating one, divers are re∣presented on the theater, as, Who is this that comes from Edom, with his garments from Bozrah? that is glorious in his apparell, travelling in the great∣nesse of his strength. I that speak in righteousnesse, mighty to save. Where∣fore art thou red in thy apparell, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine-fat? I have trodden the wine∣presse alone, and of the people there was none with me. For I will tread them in my anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I
will stain all my raiment, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts; what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver; and if she be a dore, we will enclose her with boards of cedar, Cant. 8.8. Addubitatio, eùm ∣lamus quaerere, unde incipien∣dum, ubi desinendum, quid po∣tissimùm dicendum omnino fit. Quint. l. 9. c. 2. Aporia. Aporia is, as it were, a casting about, and delibe∣rating with our selves in a doubtfull business, what way to take. The Steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my Lord taketh away from me my Stewardship. I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed. Luk. 16.3. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Chirst, which is far better: nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more needfull for you, Phil. 1.22, 23, 24. Such deliberations by an anthropopathy are ascribed to God himself O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? for your goodnesse is as the morning clowd, and as the dew it goeth away, Hos. 6.4. So, Ib. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver
thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits he hath done unto me? I will receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vowes now in the presence of all his people. Right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints, Psal. 116.11, 12. A Dubitatione non procul abhorret Communicatio, cum aut ipsos adversarios consulimus, aut quando cum judicibus delibera∣mus. Quint. l. 9. c. 2. Anacoinosis. Anacoinosis debates the matter with others, and admits of scruples; but, so far, as we may plausibly decide them. And here a Prolepsis, the foreseeing and anticipa∣ting of doubts, is most naturall. Will a man rob his God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse; for ye have robbed me, even the whole nation, Mal. 3.8, 9. Thou wilt say, The bran∣ches be broken off that I might be graf∣fed in: Well, because of unbelief they vvere broken off, and thou standest by
faith; be not high-minded, but fear. For if God spared not the naturall branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee, Rom. 11.19, 20, 21. Thou wilt say unto me, Why doth he yet find fault, for who hath resisted his vvill? Nay, but, O man, vvho art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing framed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Rom. 9.19, 20. By this Scheme, any controversies of the Schools may be rhetorically hand∣led, as, Thou vvilt tell me, There is a purgatory, by vvhich David passed through fire and vvater, to a place of refreshing, Psal. 38. But this must be meant of temporall affliction, vvhich David in this life had passed. But, After this life there is a prison, vvhence re∣demption may be had upon payment of the uttermost farthing, Matth. 5. Allusions give not Conclusions; and the prison mentioned is no purging of the soul, but urging of a pious and timely agreement, to prevent further incon∣veniencies. But vvhy vvere men bap∣tised for the dead, if it did the dead no good? Baptised they vvere in their ovvn blood, vvhich they shed, rather then
they vvould bevvray their brethren. But 'tis knovvn, the Fathers held Pur∣gatory. But never as a tenent of religi∣on, but a matter of discourse, vvith a forsitan verum est, as St. Austin. Decked vvith this Anacoinosis is Rabshekah's ora∣tion, What confidence is this vvherein thou trustest? Thou sayest, I have coun∣sell and strength — Egypt is but a bruised reed, vvhich vvill pierce the hand of him that leans upon it — But if ye say, We vvill trust in the Lord our God; is it not he vvhose high places and vvhose altars Hezekiah hath taken avvay?— 2 King. 18.19. Concessiò, cùm aliquid eti∣em iniquum videmur causae fi∣duciâ pati. Quint. l. 9. c. 2. Gracis dicitur etiam . Ʋnde ali fi∣guram hanc Confessunem vocâ∣rent. Synchoresis. Synchoresis grants as much, as the adversarie can in reason desire; yet shewes, that it makes no∣thing for him. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and mak∣est thy boast of God, and knowest his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law, and art confident that thou thy selfe art a guid of the blind, a light of them that are in darkensse, an instru∣ctor
of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the forme of knowledg, and the truth in the law. Thou that teachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? thou that sayest a man should not com∣mit adultry, dost thou commit adultry? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacriledg? thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? Rom. 2. The Jews require a signe, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to the Jews, and to the Greeks foolishnesse; but unto them which are called, both Jewes, and Greekes, Christ the power of God, and the vvisdome of God. Because the foolishnesse of God is vviser then men, and the vveaknesse of God stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1. Am I a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God a far off? can any hide him∣selfe in secret places, that I shall not see him saith the Lord? Do not I fill heaven, and earth, saith the Lord? Jer. 23.23, 24. Upon vvhich dissention, the audito∣ry are usually desired to judg. And novv inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judg, I pray, between me and my vineyard. What could I have done more
to my vineyard than I have done unto it? Isa. 5.3, 4. I speak to vvise men, judg you vvhat I say; The cup of blessing, which vve bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread, vvhich vve break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.15, 16. Ye Hypocrits, ye can disern the face of the sky, and of the earth; but hovv is it that ye do not discern this time? yea, and vvhy of your selves judg ye not vvhat is right? Luk. 12.56, 57. CHAP. V. Passionem, seu affectam af∣ferens; such things as move the mind to love, hatred, &c. Of Patheticks. IN this vve have the heighth of Rhe∣torick, vvherein James and John, the sons of Zebedee, appear as sons of thunder, Mar. 3.17. Peter stabs the hearts of his auditory to a trembling prostration, Men and brethren, what shall we do?, Act. 14.11, 12. Apollos, the eloquent Alex∣andrian, mightily convinced the Jevves in publick, Act. 18. For an intro∣duction to vvhich, 1. The affections are to be considered, that are to be vvrought upon. 2. The vvorking upon
them diversly, by Scripture - Pathe∣ticks. Affections to be wrought upon may be conveni∣ently reduced to 1. Love. 2. Hatred. 3. Hope. 4. Fear. 5. Joy. 6. Sorrow. 7. Zeal. Motives to Love. Love respects God, our selvs, our neigh∣bours. David's love to God is express'd in divers places extatically, O how amiable arethy dvvellings, thou Lord of hosts! My soul hath a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh rejoyce in the Living God, Psal. 84. Happy Sparrovvs and Svvallovvs vvhich there may have a nest or house; to vvhich, a passage through this vale of misery is a procee∣ding from strength to strength; vvhere one dayes entertainment is better, than a thousand spent in vvorldly pleasure. The tents of ungodlinesse may be held delectable dvvellings; but I had rather be a dore-keeper in the house of my
God, than the chief commander in the stateliest palaces, Ib. So every vvhere in all his devotions, such flashes of love break out: The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart hath trusted in him, and I am helped. Therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song vvill I praise him, Psal. 28.8. Like as the Hart desires the vvater-brooks, so longeth my soul after thee, O God. My soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God; O vvhen shall I come to appear before the presence of God, Psal. 42.1, 2. I have set God al∣vvaies before me, for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. Where∣fore my heart vvas glad, and my glory rejoyced, my flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou vvilt not leave my soul in hell, neither vvilt thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Thou shalt shevv me the path of life: in thy presence is the fulnesse of joy, and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore, Psal. 16. The men of thy hand, and vvorldlings, may take pleasure in their portions in this life, vvhose bellies thou fillest vvith thy hid treasures. They have children at their desire, and leave the rest of their substance for their babes. But as
for me, I will behold thy presence in righteousnesse, and when I awake up after thy likenesse, I shall be satisfied, Psal. 17.14, 15, 16. This of David's, de arte amandi, is to be studied. The spe∣ciall motives thereunto, are. 1. Gods ten∣der love to us. 2. His inestimable benefits bestowed, and continued upon us. For what brutish disposition will not be taken to love him, from whom he re∣ceiveth his being, and all that he hath? Is it an ordinary expression of love from the King of Kings to the durty Israe∣lites, in Egyptian slavery? Israel is my Son, even my first borne, and I say unto thee, Let my son goe, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him goe, behold I will slay thy son even thy first born, Exod. 4.22, 23. And often he had brought them out, to the con∣fusion of mighty Pharoah, and all their opposites, and supplied their wants. What heart would not melt to ponder that affectionate winning speech? And now Israel, what doth thy Lord thy God require of thee? but to fear thy God, and to walk in his waies, and to love him, and to serve thy Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? Deuter. 10. More patheticall
is that (if it may be) concerning their hard usage (though deserved) from Assur and Babel. Israel is a scattered sheep, the lyons have driven him away: first the King of Assyria hath devoured him, and last this Nebuchadnezzar hath broken his bones. Therefore, thus saith the Lord of hosts, behold I will punish the King of Babylon, and his land; as I have punished the King of Assyria, and I will bring Israel again into his habi∣tation, and he shall feed in Carmel, and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount Ephraim, and Gilead. In those dayes, and at that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve. Go up against the land of the rebells, over against it, and a∣gainst the inhabitants of Pekoda that are to be visited, waste, and utterly de∣stroy after them, saith the Lord, and do according to all that I have com∣manded thee, Jerem. 50. If this love take not, what should the considerations worke, 1. that it is the Lord that woeth us, that made us, and not we our selves. 2. that loved so the world,
being his enemies, Joh. 3.16. Rom. 5.10. Col. 1.21. that he sent his only begotten son to redeem us from hellish slavery to an everlasting kingdome. 3. that sent his holy spirit to be our com∣forter, Joh. 16. to helpe our infirmities. Rom. 8.26. and to cry Abba father. 4. Psal. 119. his word to be a perpetuall lanthorn unto our feet, and a light unto our pathes 5. his blessing, for our supply in all necessaries, & all conveniences: Verily thou shalt be fed. Psal. 37.3. When young lyons do lack, and suffer hunger, those that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Psal. 34.10. his protection and safe conduct from the roaring Lion,1 Pet. 5.8.0 and his complices, that walketh about seeking whom he may devoure. 7. his deliverance from all contempts, Psal. 107.41. and pressures. Motives to preserve & love our selves. What can be more patheticall then that of our Saviour? What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his owne soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Matth, 16.26. or that of Job, What is the hope of the hypocrit? though he hath gaine. When God ta∣keth away his soul, will God hear his cry when trouble commeth upon him? Will he delight himselfe in the Al∣mighty?
will he all way call upon God? Job 26.8. Or that of the Apostle, Know you not that your members are the the members of Christ? shal I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. 1 Cor. 6.15. Know ye not, that ye are the temple of God? and the spirit of God dwelleth in you? if any man de∣fileth the temple of God, him God will destroy. For the Temple of God is ho∣ly, whose temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and your spirit, which are Gods. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. For the loving of Gods Church, and our neighbours, and ene∣mies, what can be more pathetical then that speech watered with teares of our Saviour over Jerusalem? When he was come neer, he beheld the city, wept over it, saying, If thou hadst known, even in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes, Luk. 19.41, 42. The Aposiopesis makes it more passionate. As that of Moses for the peo∣ple; O this people have sinned a great sin, and made them Gods of gold, yet now if thou wilt forgive their sin! If
not, blot me I pray thee out of the book which thou hast written, Exod. 32.31, 32. which St. Paul professeth in plainer speech, I say the truth in Christ, I ly not, my conscience bearing me witnesse in the holy ghost, that I have great heavynesse, and continuall sorrow in my heart. For I could wish my selfe were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen acording to the flesh, Rom. 9.1, 2, 3. And what a la∣mentation have we of Davids for Saul his enemy? 2 Sam. 1.17. And of Jere∣miah for Zedekiah, and Jerusalem, that had used him so barbarously, in his pas∣sionate Threnes? Which are a sufficient pattern where love should be opened and placed: which our Saviour urgeth as the cheife mark of his followers. A new commandement I give you, that ye love one another: as I have loved you, that ye also love one ano∣ther. By this shall all men knovv, that ye are my disciples, if ye love one ano∣ther, Joh. 13.34, 35. Which is farther urged by that beloved disciple, 1 Joh. 4. from the 7 v. to the end of the Chapter.
Motives to hatred. May be especially bent against, 1. slug∣gishnesse. 2. impertinences. 3. sordid ava∣rice. 4. bestiall luxury. 5. brutish inhu∣manity. 6. persidious breach of promises, oathes, and vowes. 7. and rebellion against such as God hath set over us. For the first; To the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her wayes, and be wise; which having no guid, overseer, or ruler, provideth her food in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest. How long wilt thou sleep ô sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of thy hands to sleep: So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy vvant as an armed man, Pro. 6. Why stand ye here Idle? Matth. 20. Belly∣gods, vvhose glory is their shame. Phil. 3.r9. to whom the Apostle would have no victuall afforded. 2 Thess. 3.10. Notwithstanding. 2. such pragmaticall, . and busy-bodies will work not at all, as they should, but dis∣order all, 2 Thess. 3.11. these will be digging a pit, which themselves fall into; breaking hedges till a serpent
bite them; removing stones and clea∣ving wood, whereby they shall be hurt and endangered, Eccles. 10.8. and slaves on hors-back, when Princes goe on foot. ib. Promising liberty to others when they themselves are the servants of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. Women will have their share amongst them with their tattling, . and idle running from house to house, 1 Tim. 5.13. And some of the pick-thanke tencher-chap∣laines, who will take upon them to epis copize it in other mens diocesses, 1 Pet. . 4.13. till a judgment fall upon them which they cannot avoyd. 3 Our Savi∣our waving the decision between two brethren for a matter of pelfe, with this exemplary put-off, Man who made me a judg? or a divider over you? lanceth this sordid avarice, with the proposall of a Parable of that base rich churle, that was all for the inlarging his barnes, without thinking on Him that sent the corne; that any ingenious person would detest the case of the wretch, who applauded himselfe in the gain of his Grain, to the losse of his soul, Luk. 12. And who can think upon the drunken sottishnesse of clow∣nish Nabal without indignation, and
detestation? who could not afford good words, where good deeds were due. Who is David, or who is the son of Jesse? There be many servants that now a dayes break away every man from his master. Shall I then take my bread and my water, and my flesh, that I have killed for my shearers, and give unto men, whom I know not whence they be? 2 Sam. 25.10, 11. Little knew this caitiffe (that was such a son of Belial, that a man could not speak to him) what mischeif was neer him, and his; if his wive's courteous demeanure had not prevented it; but God let it not so passe, Ib. This sordid humour by the Apostle is termed Ido∣latry, that praeferreth his muck before his Maker, Col. 3.5. the doltish vanity of which is touched by the preacher, When goods increase, they are increa∣sed that eat them, and what good is there to the owners thereof? saving the beholding of them with their eyes, and his foolish son perchance shall spend all: Eccles. 5.11.14. Who vvould not loath the labour, that brings so un∣pleasing an in-com? 4. To represent how much bestiall luxury is to be detested, the parable of Dives vvith the circum∣stances
may be insisted upon 1. backed most pathetically by that of our Savi∣our, They ate, they drank, they mar∣ried—til the flood came, and destroy∣ed them all. And as aftervvards in Lots dayes in Sodom, they ate, they drank, they sold, they planted, they builded, till fire and brimstone from heaven marred their market, Luk, 17. vvhere Lots wife is pillarred for a mark of re∣membrance. And Esau's bad bargain, in parting vvith his birthright for a morsell of meat, registred for a caution to all posterity, Heb. 12, 16. 5. Brutish inhumanity may be displayed to the detestation of the auditors, in the usage of Joseph, by his bretheren, They said one to another, Behold this dreamer cometh, come novv therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and vve vvill say, some evill beast hath devoured him, and vve shall see vvhat vvill become of his dreames, Gen. 37.19. Thus they brought his feet to be hurt in the stocks, the iron entred in∣to his soul. Of Jeremiah, vvhom they plunged so in the mirie dungeon, that he vvas fain to be dravvn up vvith cords, and cast-clouts, and rotten rags put under, to save his flesh from gaull∣ing.
Jer. 38.12. Of St. Stephen, whom they stoned, at least possessed with a phrensy, Act. 7.58. Of St. Paul, who was like to be pulled in peices between the factions of the Pharisees, & Saddu∣ces, Act. 23. (6. Breach of oaths and promises may be rendred odious by Zedekiah's heavy doome, for revolting from Nebuchadnezer, to whom he was obliged by oath, 2 Chron. 36.13. And what a misery fell upon the house of Saul, for wronging the Gibeonites? to whom their forefathers had so long before obliged themselves by oath? Jos. 9, though all that Saul did was out of his zeal to Israel, 2 Sam. 21.2. and Judah. (7) what can set out Rebellion to be hated more in his gastly colours, than the swallow∣ing up of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all that belonged to them? Num. 16. The prodigious hanging of Achito∣phel, and Absalom, 2 Sam. 18. And the fearfull end of Judas, the traitor, in Akeldama, Act. 1.18. Motives to Hope Hope layeth hold on 1. deliverances, 2. praeservation. 3. consummation, from which arise all spirituall comfors. God
is our hope, and strength, a very pre∣sent helpe in trouble? therefore will we not feare, Though the earth be mo∣ved, and though the hills be carried in the midst of the sea. though the waters thereof rage, and swell, and though the mountaines shake at the tempest of the same. The rivers of the flood thereof would glad the city of God—God is in the midst; therefore shall she not be removed. God shall help her, and that right early. The hea∣then make much adoe, and the king∣domes are moved, but God hath shew∣ed his voice, and the earth shall melt away, Psal. 46. God is called the hope of Israel, Jerem. 14.8. which maketh not ashaimed, Rom, 8.24. to which sal∣vation is attributed. Rom, 8.24. whose emblem is an anker, Heb. 6.19. which is layd up for us in heaven, whereof we have heard in the word of the truth of the gospell, Col. 1.5. and therefore with the work of faith, and labour of love the Apostle will have the patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, with∣out ceasing, to be remembred, 1 Thes. 1.3. Upon this hope of deliverance was grounded the resolute answer of the three children to angry Nebuchadnez∣zar,
We are not carefull to answer the, in this matter; if it be so, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will de∣liver us out of thine hand O King. But if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden image that thou hast set up, Dan. 3.17, 18. This hope was the onely help King Darius could find for Damel, Dan. 6.16. Thy God vvhom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee 2. for help of preservation, vve have a veyn of golden oare running through all the Psalmes, and allmost all the Scripture. I vvill not be afrayd of ten thousand of people, that have set them∣selves against me round about, Psal. 3.6. The Lord is my light, and salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of vvhom then shal I be afraid? When the vvicked, even mine enimies, and my foes came about me to eate up my flesh, they stumbled and fell, Psal. 27. Though I vvalk through the valley of the shadovv of death, I vvill fear no evill; for thou art vvith me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me, Psal. 23. Confidence against taking thought, we
have pressed by our Saviour, Matth. 6.25. Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat— ad finem: and Diffi∣dence reproved, Why are ye fearfull? Matth. 8.26. (3. For inflaming the hope of consummation, what can be more pa∣theticall then that of our Saviour? Let not your hearts be troubled, ye beleeve in God, beleeve also in me. In my fa∣thers house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, Joh, 14.1, 2. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world giveth give I unto you: Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid—if ye loved me, ye would rejoyce, ib. 27, 28. A glimpe onely, and tast of this joy, put Peter beside himselfe, Master it is good for us to be here—let us here pitch tabernacles, and not downe to the world againe. Motives to Fear. Fear is the betraying of those suc∣cours, which reason offereth, Wisd. 17, 12. arising from dangers, which reason telleth us we are unable to withstand. These dangers may affright
us 1. in our temporall estate. 2. in our spirituall. 3. in our eternall being here∣after. For temporall afrightments, what thunders are so terrible start∣ling, as those against 1. Pharoah, and Egypt for his perfidious and treache∣rous dealing with Gods people? Ezech. 29. 2. against Tyrus, and their King for their pride and luxury? 3. against Babylon? Isa. 13. and 14. for their captivating and insulting upon Gods people. 2. For his temporal estate, Cain complain∣ed not; Gen. 4.14. but the feare of a guilty con∣science was a Fury that ever haunted him, My punishment is greater then I can bear. Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive, and a vagabond, and it shall come to passe that every one that findeth me shall slay me. A scantling of the third, It is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the liv∣ing God, Heb. 10.31. This fcarfulnesse, in proposing the law, was so terrible, that the people could not endure that which was commanded; and if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned and thrust through with a dart: and so terrible was the sight,
that Moses said, I exceedingly feare, and quake, Heb. 12.20, 21. What hor∣rour will then be (can any heart ima∣gine) when the sun shall become as black as sack-cloth of hair, and the moone and the stars of heaven fall un∣to the earth, even as the fig-tree cast∣eth her untimely figs, when she is sha∣ken of a mighty wind, when the hea∣vens shall depart as a scroul rolled to∣gether; and every mountaine and iland shall be removed out of their places; when the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bond∣man, and every free-man shall hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountaines, and shall say unto the rocks, and mountaines, Fall on us, and to the hills, Cover us, and hide us from the face of him, that sitteth upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand, Rev. 6. When the dismall doome is once pronounced, Go ye cur∣sed of my father into everlasting fire, prepared for the devill, and his angells, Matth. 25.41.
Motives to Joy. Joy, the ayme of all our desires, must be raysed especially on the serious con∣sideration, 1. of joy in the holy Ghost. 2. comfort in a good conscience. 3. & a chear∣full and thankfull use of temporall bles∣ings. These depend one on the other. Temporals delight not, if conscience be not satisfied; & conscience receives not content, but from assurances from the holy Spirit, that all is well. A∣mongst the fruits of the spirit, this joy is served in with love, which quick∣neth all the rest. The fruit of the Spirit is lov, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentle∣nes, goodnes, faith, meeknes, temper∣ance, against such there is no law. Galat. 5.22, 23. Upon this is grounded that holy frolick (if the word profane not) of the Apostle to the Philippians, Rejoyce in the Lord alwaies, and again I say rejoyce. Let your moderation be knowen unto all men, the Lord is neer at hand, Phil. 4.4, 5. Upon which grounds, we have the excitation of the church, O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoyce in the strength of our salvation, Psalm. 95. O
be joyfull in the Lord all ye lands—Psal. 100. O sing unto the Lord a new song—Psal. 98. And divers other Psalms; set to the same key of joy. This was the rejoycing of the blessed-Virgin My spirit hath rejoyced in God my Sa∣viour Luk: 1.47. That which our Sa∣viour exhorteth his disciples unto, In this rejoyce not, that the spirits are subject to you; but rather rejoyce, that your names are written in heaven 2. Luk. 10.20 All the dayes of the afflicted are evill: but he that is of a merry heart (upon a good conscience) hath a conti∣nuall feast, Prov. 15.15. This merry heart maketh a cheareful countenance; but by the sorrow of the heart the spi∣rit is broken, Ib. For our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our con∣versation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. Thus the Apostles, when they were beaten, and threatned after their im∣prisonment, by the high priests com∣mand, departed from the presence of the Council, rejoycing that they were accounted worthy to suffer for his name, Act. 5.41. It was St. Paul's ex∣cercise
to have a conscience voyd of offence towards God, and towards men, Act. 24.16. And the Hebrews tooke joyfully the spoyling of their goods, knowing in themselves, that they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. 3. Joy and thankfullnesse for temporall blessings are not onely approved, but enjoyned, Thou shalt rejoyce before the Lord (in acknowledgment of temporal blessings) Deut. 12.12.18. At the presen∣ting of the first fruits, and tithes, after a set paryer, it is added, Thou shalt rejoyce in every good thing, which the Lord thy God hath given unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you, Deut: 26.11. When God crowneth the yeer with goodnesse, and the clouds drop fatness upon the dwellings of the wildernesse, the little hills are brought in to rejoyce on every side: when the folds shall be full with sheep, the vallies also shall stand so thick with corne, that they shall laugh and sing. Psal. 65.12. Whereupon the Kingly prophet sets forth a proclamation, O prayse the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God; yea a
joyfull and pleasant thing it is, to be thankefull, Psal 147. Motives to Sorrow. A sorrowfull spirit is a sacrifice to God, despise not, O Lord, humble and contrite hearts, Psal. 51.9. Sorrow ari∣seth commonly from any thing that crosseth our desires, and therefore may be either, 1. godly; or 2. worldy. Concer∣ning both which, we have that of the Apostle, Though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, though I did repent, for I perceive that the same Epistle hath made you sorry, though it be but for a season. Now I rejoyce, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance, for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive dammage by us in nothing: for godly sorrow worketh re∣pentance to salvation, not to be repen∣ted of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death, 2 Cor. 7.8.9.10. Motives to Godly sorrow, are frequently met with in Scripture; For 1. private corruptions. 2. publick calamities. 3. prae∣vayling pressures, and insultations of Satan, and his adhaerents, to the scandall of
christian religion, and professon. 1. What an heart-breaking was this to David? Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive, or warme m Psal. 51.5. Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are a sore burden for me, too heavy for me to beare, Psal. 38 4. Innumerable troub∣bles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to looke up; yea, they are more in number, then the hairs of my head and my heart hath failed me. O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me, make haste O Lord to help me, Psal. 40.15, 16. When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for sin, thou makest his beauty to consume avvay, as it vvere a moth fretting of a garment: Every man therefore is but vanity, Psal. 39.12. whence St. Paul. bemoans himselfe, I delight in the law of God after the in∣ward man: Rom. 7. but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, bringing me into captivi∣ty to the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? sin must needs bring sadnesse to many, that proved so odious
to God's nature, that it ruined the an∣gells, bereaved Adam of Gods favour and Paradise, could not be expiated but by the son of God, who knew no sin, yet was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousnes of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. (2. How publick calamities affect the heart with sorrow of all those that are true of heart, may be gathered by those passionate passages of Isaiah, Look away from me, for I will weep bitterly, labour not to comfortmè, because of the spoyling of the daughter of my people, Isa. 22.4. Of Jeremy, My bowells, my bowels I am pained to the very heart. The vvall of my heart makes a noyse vvithin we, I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard O my soule, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war. Destruction upon destruction is cryed, for the vvhole land is spoyled. Suddainly are my tents spoyled, and my curtaines in a mo∣ment. Hovv long shall I see the stand∣ard, and hear the sound of the trum∣pet? For my people is foolish, they have not knowen me, they are sottish children, they have not understanding they are wise to do evill, but to do good they have no knowledg, Jerem. 4
O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of teares, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people. Oh that I had in the Wildernesse a lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them: for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men, Jer. 9.1. Thus Jerusalem is bemoaned, made drunk with the cup of fury, that had none of her sons to take her by the hand to guide her, of all those she hath brought up, but lay as a bull in a net at the head of all the streets, Isa. 51. (3. Complaints of Sataincall insultations are, The ungodly for his own lust doth persecute the poore: He is so proud that he careth not for God, neither is God in all his thoughts: His wayes are always grievous, thy judgments are far above out of his sight, and therefore defieth he all his enemies. For he hath said in his heart, Tush I shall never be cast down, there shall no harm happen unto me, Psal. 10. This complaint is ta∣ken up again, Psal. 73. To which, satis∣faction is given, Psal. 37. and 49. Jeremy harps upon the same string, Wherefore doth the way of the wicked
prosper? wherefore are they happy, that deal very treacherously? Thou hast planted them, yea they have taken root; they grow, yea they bring forth fruit. Thou art neer in their mouthes, but far from their reines. But it followes, Those that have so trodden downe the Lords portion, and desolated the land, shall reap Thornes instead of Wheat, put themselves to pain with∣out profit. For they shall be asham'd of their revenues, because of the fierce an∣ger of the Lord, Jer. 12. Motives to Zeal. Zeal; which may be good or bad. Good is either, 1 for Gods honour, 2 house, or 3 people. The first was of Elias, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts, because the children have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thy altars, and slain thy people with the sword; and I, even I onely, am left, and they seek my life to take it away, 1 King. 19.14. For this zeal Phineas is commended of God. Phineas the son of Eliezar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my
sake amongst them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy Num. 25.11. Of this zeal Jehu boasted, Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord: so they made him ride in his chariot, 2 King. 10.16. The 2d sort of zeale may be typified in David, The zeale of thy house hath eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that re∣proached thee are fallen upon me, Psal. 69.9. My zeale hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words, Psal. 119.139. But pract∣ised by our Saviour, when he found in the temple, those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting, He made a scourge of small cords, and drove them out of the Temple, and the sheep, and the oxen, and poured out the changers-mony, and over-threw the tables, and said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence, and make not my Fathers house, an house of merchandize. And the disciples remembred that it was written, The zeale of thine house hath caten me up, Joh. 2.14. Much different from the zeale, of our modern zealots the zeale of whom eateth up God's house. 3. For zeale to Gods people; The zeale
of Moses and St. Paul are notoriously eminent, which was seconded by that of that resolute Priest Mattathias, who when he saw a Jew sacrificing to idols, was inflamed with zeale, and his reins trembled, neither could he forbeare to shew his anger according to judgment: wherefore he ran and slew him upon the altar. Also the Kings commissioners, who compelled men to sacrifice, he killed at that time, and the altar he pulled downe. Thus dealt he zealously for the law of God, as Phineas did to Zambri the son of Salom. 1 Maccab. 1. Bad zeale spendeth it selfe either in. Nemesis.  Zelotypia. 1 revenge. 2 rejoycing at others ruines, or 3 in impetuous undertakings, and pursu∣ances, not acording to knowledg. Belonging to the first kind was that of Saul, for rooting out the Gibeonites, 2 Sam. 21.2. And those more then forty, that had bound themselves under a curse, that they would neither eate, nor drinke till they had slaine Paul, Act. 23.12 Haman was sicke of this disease, and therefore he thought it scorne to lay hands on Mordecai alone, but all the Jewes must be destroyed with him. Hest. 3.6. All his riches, multitude of children, advancement above the
Peers of the Kingdom affected him lit∣tle, in comparison in his vaunting be∣fore his freinds, and Zerith his wife; yea Hester (saith he) the Queen lett no man come in with the King, to the banquet she had prepared, but my selfe; and to morrow am I invited un∣to her also, with the King: yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate, Hest. 5.13. (2. , Joy in anothers ruines, is a zeal which least be∣cometh Christians. It was a beseeming thought in furious Jehu, that after the tumbling of painted Jezabel down from a window, and trampling her under his horses feet, from the midst of his cups he could command, Go see now this cursed woman, and bury her, for she is a King's daughter, 2 King. 9.34. For want of which, Edom is sharply taxed, For thy violence against thy bro∣ther Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever in the day, that thou stooddest on the other side, in the day that the stranger car∣ried away his forces captive, and for∣reiners entred into his gates, even the wast one of them. Obad. 10. Such was he rejoycing of the dwellers on the
earth over the two Witnesses slain, whom they would not suffer to be put in graves, but were merry over them, and sent gifts one to another, because they tormented them that dwelt on the earth. 3. Blind zeal, Rev. 11.9.10. . sei∣zeth on any thing, putting no differ∣ence betwixt good or bad, friends or foes. This carrieth most commonly with it a mistake, in all the rest of the passions; as in the 1 of dotage or lust, for love. 2 Spite to the person or revenge, for hatred to the fault. In the 3 prae∣sumption, despair, or groundles cre∣dulity is obtruded for hope. In the 4 cowardice and needless trembling, for fear. In the 5 ridculous merriments, for true joy. In the 6 causeless dejecti∣on and melancholly-dumps, for groun∣ded sadness. Of all which, examples from Scripture may be gathered.
CHAP. VI. Of Characters, Descriptions, or Idea's. I. See that thou make all things accor∣ding to the pattern, shewed to thee in the Mount. Exod. 25.40. Act. 7.44. Heb. 8.5. Characters, as they come to hand, and for the easier remembring of them, (where the text will bear it) may be cast into heptades, As God will protect, them that call upon him, from 1 Wicked men, ungodly that feare not God. 2 evill that are injurious to men. 3 foolish in their practises. 4 vaine in their projects. 5 lying in their discourses. 6 blood-thirsty in their persecutions. 7 deceitfull in all their contracts, and dealings, Psal. 5.4, 5, 6. II. The way of Cain (Jude. v. 11.) consisted of 7 crooked-misleading steps. 1 Hy∣pocrisy, he would sacrifice as well, and readily as Abel. 1 Joh. 3.12. 2 His aemulating hatred to his brother, by reason of his pre∣ferred devotion. 3 This brought him to murder him. 4 which he endeavoureth to slubber over with a surly lye, Gen. 4.9. I know not where my brother is: am I his keeper? 5 his desperation upon con∣viction, without the least remorse, but
rather grumbles at God's just sentence; My punishment is greater than I can beare. Thou hast fined me too deep, dealt too hardly with me. 6 his opposi∣tion rather to withstand his punish∣ment, then submission to mitigate it; and marries, gets children, builds a citty, and names it Enoch to eternize his son's name. 7 the profaness of himselfe and his, who wholly forsook God, and prided themselves in their inventions, which is intimated by their contrary course, taken by the Setheans, who ap∣plyed themselves to call on God, whom the Cainites had forsaken. III. These six things doth the Lord hate: and seven are an abhomination, 1. A proud look, 2. A lying tongue, 3. Hands that shead innocent blood, 4. An heart that deviseth wicked imagi∣nations; 5. Feet that be swift in run∣ning to mischiefe, 6. A false witness that speaketh lyes, 7. And him that soweth discord among brethren, Pro. 6. IV. Gen. 4. Marked men for revived offences in our time, 1. Cain for fratricide, 2. Gen. 9.28. Cham, for insulting irreverently on his father's nakednesse, 3. Ishmael for
flouting Isaac, and playing, (it should seem) on his name, Gal. 4.29. given by God, terming him some such thing as a ri∣diculous young Master, which is called a kind of persecution, 4. Korah, for rebellious contradiction, Num. 16. 5. Saul for usurping the Priests office in sacrificing, sparing Amalek against God's expresse command, 1 Sam. 13. butchering innocent Abi∣melech, and all the inhabitants of Nob, the city of the Priests, 6. Ahaz for Sacriledge, and continued Idolatry when Gods hand was upon him, with this Character set upon him, This that King Ahaz, 7. Zedekiah for perjury, and neglecting Gods Prophets, 2 Chron. 28. 2 Chron. 26. V. Sin's genealogy, 1. Suggestion, from Satan, 2. Delectation, was plea∣sant, 3. Consent, she took it, 4. Act, did eate, 5. Contagion, gave her house∣band, 6. Horrour of Conscience, saw their nakednesse, feared, hid themselves, 7. Censure of punishment, because thou hast done this. VI. Practises of the Jewes against their owne, in the fury of their ignorant zeal, 1. They killed the Lord Jesus, 2. And their owne Prophets, 3. Persecuted
the Apostles, 4. Please not God, 5. Are contrary to all men, 6. Forbid∣ding to the Gentiles, [deceived] that they might be saved, 7. Fill up the measure of their sins, [to the brim,] that the wrath of God may come up∣on them at the utmost, 1 Thes. 2.15, 16. VII. A representation of the Divine Majesty, I saw the Lord sitting upon a 1. Throne, high and lifted up, (which is applyed to Christ, Joh. 12.) above it stood the 2. Seraphims, each one had 3. six wings; with twain He covered his face, and with twaine he did fly, and 4. cryed one to another, and said, 5. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory: and the posts of the door moved at him that cried, and the house was filled with smoak, Isa. 6. VIII. A larger representation to Eze∣chiel, in 1 four living creatures, each having the likenesse of a man with 4 faces, Of a man, a Lion, an Ox, an Eagle, 2. fourwings to shew their swift∣nesse, 3. Sparkling calves feet, like burnishing brasse, 4. Hands of a man under their wings on their four sides,
5. Four wheels animated one with in another full of eyes, 6. A throne of Saphire arched with a Rain-bow, 7. Upon the likenesse of the Throne, was the likenesse of the appearance of a man upon it. IX. Rev. 1.13. Our Saviour is set forth by his 1. Attire, a garment down to the foot, girt about the Paps with a Golden gir∣dle; intimating his priest-hood, 2. The colour of his Head and haire, white like Wool, as white as Snow; shewing his eternity, 3. The flaming of his eyes, expressing his omnisciency, 4. His feet like fine brasse in a furnace, leading to his revenge against his ene∣mies, 5. Seven stars in his right hand, assuring the protection of his Church against all opposers, 6. A sharp two∣edged sword from his mouth, to cut down all impediments, 7. His coun∣tenance as the Sun shining in his strength, with a voyce of the sound of many waters, to the daunting and ter∣rifying of all those that have neglected him. X. A good Bishop should have, 1. Good education, as Moses learned in all the wisdome of the Egyptians, Act.
7.22. The children of the Prophets under Samuel and Elisha. St. Paul at the feet of Gamaliel, Act. 22.3. Which society our Saviour graced, in sitting in the midst of the Doctours, Luk. 2.36. hearing them, and asking them questions. 2. He is advanced to his chair not am∣bitiously sought after, Be not ye called, Rabbi, Masters, Matth. 23. but humble your selves that ye may be exalted, 3. He must be free from busying himselfe in impertinencies, and intangling him∣selfe with many worldly businesses, 1 Pet. 4.15. 4. He is to Ordain and settle Priests in every Parish, Tit. 1.5. and neither suddenly, 1 Tim. 5.22.1.3. or without due examination to lay his hands on any, 5. He is espe∣cially to convince Innovators, and wrangling Sophisters, Act. 20.28. and to chase away Wolves, and Foxes from the Flock of Christ, 6. Against an Elder he is not to receive an accusation, but under two or three witnesses: But those that sin (scandalously) rebuke them before all, that others may also fear, 1 Tim. 5.19. 1 Tim. 5.17. Honouring them with double honour, that labour in the Word and Doctrine. 7. He is dis∣creetly to withdraw himselfe from
proud, and peremptory Fellowes, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strife of words, where∣of cometh strife, railings, and evill surmises, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds and destitute of truth, supposing that gain is godli∣ness, 1 Tim. 6. XI. A virtuous woman is of price far above Rubies, because, 1. The heart of her Hous-band may safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil. 2. She will do him good, and not evill all the dayes of her life, 3. She seeketh Wooll, and Flax, and worketh willingly with her Hands, 4. She is like the Merchant's ship, that bringeth food from afar, 5. She riseth when it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her Mai∣dens, 6. She considereth a Field, and buyeth it; with the fruit of her hands, she planteth a vineyard, 7. She girdeth her loines with strength, and strength∣neth her armes, 8. She perceiveth her Merchandise is good, Her candle goeth not out by night. 9. She layeth her Hands to the Spindle, and her Hands hold the Distaffe, 10. She
stretcheth out her armes to the poor, yea she reacheth her hands to the nee∣dy, 11. She is not afraid of the snow, for her household; for all her household are clothed with scarlet. 12. She ma∣keth her selfe covering of tapestry; her clothing is silke, and purple. 13. Her Housband is known in the gate, when he sitteth among the Elders of the land. 14. She maketh fine linnen, and selleth it, and delivereth girdles to the merchant. 15. Strength and hon∣our are her cloathing, and she shall rejoyce in time to come. 16. She open∣eth her mouth with wisdome, and in her tongue is the law of kindness. 17. She looketh well to the wayes of her houshold, and eateth not the bread of idlenesse. 18. Her children rise up and call her blessed, her housband also, and he praiseth her. 19. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excel∣lest them all. 20. Favour is deceitfull, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praysed. 21. Give her of the fruits of her hands, and let her owne workes prayse her in the gates. Pro. 31. XII. The picture of old age Eccles. 12.
to which the sun, the light, the moon and stars yield little comfort, by reason of one weaknes tumbling upon another as clouds returning after raine, one storme seconding another. 2. For in it, 1. the keepers of the house shal tremble, that is, the arms and hands (the readiest de∣fenders of the body) weakned by pal∣sies and other infirmities. 2, the strong men bow themselves, thighs, and legs through Sciatica, aches, defluxions. 3. the grinders cease, because they are few, the teeth, most lost; they left, rotten. 4. and those that look out by the windows be darknes, which must be meant of the eyes. 5. and the doores shall be shut in the streets, the lips or chaps little imployed when the sound of the grinding is low, when the teeth have little to do. 6. and he shall rise up at the voyce of the bird, awake early in the morning at cock-crow∣ing, or bird's singing, in regard old men through infirmity sleep little. 7. And the daughters of musick shall be brought low, the wind-pipes to utter, or ears to hear or delight in songs, as old Bar∣zillai acknowledged 2 Sam. 19.35. Also they shall be asraid of that which is high, and fear shal be in the way, old men dread
to climbe, and hazzard themselves in dangerous wayes by reason of the im∣becillity of their limbs. Now though these are sufficient remembrancers, yet nearer symptoms come with new me∣mento's. 1. the hoariness or baldnesse of the head, as white as the blossoms of an almond tree. 2. the belly or legs loaden with dropsies or gouts puffing him up and making him lazy, and mishapen as a locust; where grashopper denotes a gras∣hopper's unweildy devouring to no purpose. 3. the thought of his long home approaching, and sight of mourn∣ers dishearten him from all worldly pleasure, and cloud him with sadnesse. 4. especially when he, stooping in the back, shewes that the silver chord of spina medulla is loosed, which was wont to trusse him up more upright 5. the golden bowle, the pia mater which conteins the brain, is crack'd. 6. the pitcher, the miseraïc, cava and porta∣veines are stopped, or broken, that they bring not, as formerly, good blood from the fountaine of the liver to chear up the whole body. 7. And last, when the wheel of the lungs, which compasse and preserve the cistern of the heart,
from whence the vitall spirits are dis∣persed by the arteries, through the whole body to hold (as we say) life and soul together, then that must of force be thought upon, that Dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that gave it. XIII Necessaries for a Preacher, Eccles. 12.9. 1. as∣siduity in teaching others, Because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledg. 2. choice of matters of mo∣ment well studied, He gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many pro∣verbs, 4, Rhetoricall expressions, The preachersought out to find acceptable words. 5. warrantable doctrine, by its owne grounds, and confirmation of the mast∣ers of the assembly, that which was writ∣ten was upright, even words of truth. The words of the wise are as goads, and nails fast∣ned by the masters of the assemblies. 6. de∣rived from the Word, which is given by the hand of one shepheard, Christ our Saviour. 7. Abstaining from distracting studies, which wearie the flesh in making many books, when his owne bible would give content if it be right∣ly used, that we need (especially for matters of salvation) no other Direct∣ory.
XIIII The arms of a Christian Souldier against 1. principalities. 2. powers. 3. rulers of the darknes of this world. 4. spirituall wickednesses in high places. 1. the girdle of truth for the loyns. 2. for the breast, the brest-plate of righteousness. 3. for the feet, the preparation of the Gos∣pel of peace. 4. for the left hand next the heart, the shield of faith to quench the fiery darts of the Divel, 5. for the right hand the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. 6. for the head, the helmet of salvation. 7. for the accomplishing of all, prayer and supplications in the Spirit, with watching and all perseverance. Eph. 6.12.
CHAP. VII. Of Antitheses. I. IT is written that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a free-woman: but he that was of the bond-woman was born after the flesh; but he of the free woman was by promise. Which things are an Allegory. For these are the two covenants, the one from mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Hagar; for this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children, but Jerusalem which is a∣bove is free, and is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. Where may be noted correspon∣dencies, and antitheses between 1. Hagar a bond-woman, and Sarah free. 2. . Ismael, Hagar's son after the flesh; and Isaac, Sarah's, according to promise. 3. Sinai in Arabia the desert, and Jeru∣salem in the land of promise. 4. Sinai called by the Arabians Hagar, allegori∣zing the Law; Jerusalem, the mother of us all, the covenant of the gospell thence proclaimed. 5. dependers of the Law for justification, Hagarens born to
bondage; adherents to faith, the sons of Sarah, born to freedom. 6. fleshly Is∣maelites, persecutors; spirituall sons of Sarah, for a time under the crosse. 7. the censure, upon the persecuting just∣sticiaries, Cast out the bond-woman and her son: on the other side, The free∣woman's children shall be heyrs. II. Antithesis, between Christ and A∣dam, Rom. 5. (1) Not as the offence, so is the free gift: that, by justice ex∣tended; this by grace abounded, 2. That included the venome of one of∣fence, or propagated but one offence originall: this quits from originall, and infinite actualls, 3. That, by one brought in the tyranny of death; this by one the gift of Righteousnesse and reign in Life, 4. That the root of just Condemnation, this of the free gift of Justification, 5. That made all men sinners, this made many righteous, 6. The horridness of that is mani∣fested by the Law, the abounding of grace is more illustrious by the Gos∣pell. 7. That was attended by reig∣ning sin unto Death, this by Grace to Righteousnesse and Eternall Life. III. Antithesis, between the flesh, and
the Spirit, Rom. 7. where, 1. The flesh brings forth fruit unto death, the Spirit contendeth to serve in newnesse of Life, 2. The flesh holds by the old letter, the spirit by a new tenure, 3. The flesh worketh death by that which is good, that sin might become excee∣ding sinfull: the Spirit clears it selfe by pleading a pardon, 4. By the flesh we are sold unto sin, by the Spirit we attaine redemption, 5. In the flesh, to will may be present with us, but deeds follow not; but the spirit urgeth to performe, 6. The inward man de∣lighteth in the Law of God: but the Law of the members carry the in∣tents against the Law of the Mind, 7. The flesh makes up the body of sin, the Spirit obtaineth deliverance by Christ. IV. Antithesis between the Body before, and after, the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.1. It is sowen in Corruption, it is raised in incorruption, 2. It is sowen in Honour, it is raised in Glory, 3. It it sowen in weaknesse, it is raised againe in power, 4. It is sowen a na∣turall body, it is raised a spirituall body, 5. It is sowen, as the first Adams
issue, having onely a living soul; it is raised, as the second Adams purchase, made a quickning spirit, 6. The first is of the Earth earthly, the second from the Lord of Heaven heavenly, 7. The first carrying the image or stamp of earth, from which he was taken; the second the badg of Heaven, to which he is advanced. V. Antithesis between true pastors, and impostors or scorners, 1 Cor. 5. We are made a spectacle to the World, and to Angells, and to Men. 1. We are fools for Christs sake, but ye are wise in Christ, 2. We are weak, but ye are strong, 3. Ye are honoured, but we are despised, as it appeareth, because at this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place, and labour, working with our owne hands, 4. Being revi∣led we blesse, 5. Being persecuted we suffer it, 6. Being defamed we en∣treate, 7. We are made the filth of the world, and are the off-scouring of all things unto this day. VI. Gods Ministers to be approved, 1. In much patience, 2. In afflictions,
3. In necessities, 4. In distresses, 5. In stripes, 6. In imprisonment, 7. In tumults, 8. In labours, 9. In watch∣ings, 10. In fastings. By, 1. Pure∣nesse, 2. By knowledge, 3. By long∣suffering, 4. By kindnesse, 5. By the Holy Ghost, 6. By love unfained, 7. By the word of truth, 8. By the pow∣er of God, 9. By the armour of Righ∣teousnesse, 10. On the right hand and on the left, 11. By honour and dis∣honour, 12. By evill report and good report. As, 1. Deceivers and yet true, 2. As unknown and yet well known, 3. As dying, yet behold we live, 4. As chastned and not killed, 5. As sorrowfull, yet alwayes rejoy∣cing, 6. As poor and yet making ma∣ny rich, 7. As having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6. VII. The chast Matrone, and the whore of Babylon, are thus differenced, 1. The Matron is cloathed with the Sun from Heaven, Rev. 12.1. The great whore with Scarlet, and Gold, and Pearls from the earth, 2. The Matron hath the Moon, and spotted-changes under her Feet; the Whore sitteth on many waters, which will at length fail her,
3. The Matron hath a Crown of 12 Stars upon her Head; the Whore ap∣peares with a frontlet of blasphemies, Mystery, Babylon the great, Rev. 17.5.12.2. Mother of harlots, and abhominations of the earth, 4. The Matron is fruitfull, and travelling to bring forth Children; the Whore is drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs, and is more for destruction then honest propagation, 5. The Dragon watcheth the Matron to devour her off-spring; but mounts the Whore upon a beast, which hath seven Heads and ten Horns, the most terrible and majesticall in all his hel∣lish mewes, 6. The Dragon with his Angells enter the lists in the Whore's quarrell; but Michael and his adhe∣rents undertake for the Matron, to the Dragon's shamefull routing, 7. The Matron is furnished with Eagle's wings to be nourished, and preserved in the wildernesse; but the whore is deserted and hated by her Partizans, who shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, Rev. 17.36.
CHAP. VIII. Of Parables, and Similitudes. I Have spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplyed visions and used similitudes by the hand of the pro∣phets, Hos. 12.10. A Parallel betwixt Christ, and Melchi∣zedek. 1. both had like Ordination. 2. by oath, not by descent. 3. without prae∣decessors, or sucessors, father, mother, beginning or end of life. 4. greater than Abraham, by reason of receiving tithes from him, and Levi in his loins. 5. King of righteousnesse and peace. 6. blessing as the greater, but not re∣ceiving from him 7. both offering for others, not for their own sins, as Christ the antitype did once for all, Heb. 7. Between a minister, Matth. 5.15. and a candle. Men light not a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick and it gi∣veth light to all that are in the house, 1. A candle lightens not it selfe, but must be lightned of, and from, another: so a Minister must have his calling and gifts from God's illumination, How
shall he preach except he be sent? 2. Rom. 10.15. A candle is not lighted to be hid un∣der a bushel, neither a Minister or∣dained to behave himselfe as a dumb Dog, sleeping through idlenesse, ne∣ver satisfied through covetousnesse, and drowning himselfe and others in all kind of surquedry, 3. Isa. 56, 10. A candle must be set on a candlestick, for its more commodious giving light: So must the Minister reside in some de∣signed Cure, wherein he may do most good: he must not bischop it in ano∣ther mans dicecesse, 1 Pet. 4.15. nor boast without his measure in other mens lines, 4. 2 Cor. 10.15. A candle giveth light to all indifferently that are in the house: So a Minister should apply himselfe to all within his compasse, making himselfe all things to all men, that by all means he may save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. 6. A candle sometimes wanteth snuf∣fers; so may a Minister, correptions: But it should be with snuffers of Gold belonging to the Sanctuary, and by such as know, and have right to use them; not by polluted fingers or other meanes, which may rather extinguish, then make them burn the brighter; 7. A candle inverted is extinguished by
his owne nutriment: and so a Minister who turning that light downeward, which should turne upward, most commonly is fryed to destruction in his owne fatnesse. The course of mans life resembleth an expedition at sea, wherein 1. our nativity is the shore we lanch from. 2. the church the bottom wherein we are carried. 3. the world the sea. 4. Christ the pilot. 5. the Scripture, the compasse 6. the gifts of the holy ghost, the pros∣perous gales we saile by. 7. Sinus A∣brahae, the haven of happinesse we are bound for. Then are they glad because they be at rest; and so he bringeth them to the haven where they would be, Psal. 107. 30. God's people, as lively stones, are built up a spirituall house, an holy priesthood to offer up spirituall sacri∣fice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 2.5. A good man in divers respects resembleth a stone. 1. A stone is to be hammered fit for the place, before it be laid in building: So a faithfull man by education and suffering, is fashioned to the calling, wherein he is to be im∣ployed. 2. A stone is measured before it be laid in its place: So the faithfull
should be placed according to their abilities. 3. a stone must be hard to endure wind and weather, beside casuall assaults: the like opposition must be expected of those that live godly, 4. a stone in a lower range bear∣eth his superiour, covers his inferiour, and justles not with his fellowes set beside: the like respect should be had amongst good men to superiours, to peers, and inferiors. 5. a stone butting out must be beaten back to range with his fellowes: and so must too for∣ward exorbitants, which ambitiously perk before their brethren. 6. a moul∣dered stone must be plucked out to have a sounder set in his place: so in defect of a treacherous Judas, a Mat∣thias is justly chosen. 7. stones that are not well cemented continue not a building: so without the cement of charity, christianity shattereth, which is built upon the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles; Jesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner-stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: In whom yee also are builded together for an habitation of
God through the Spirit, Eph. 2.20. I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my fathers were, Psal. 39.12. (1) A pilgrim professeth himself to be so by carriage, and habite: so should a christian. 2. he passeth-by obvious sights, as not belonging unto him: this becometh a mortified christian. 3. He builds not in every Inne he lodgeth in: so ought a christian. 4. He burdens not himselfe with unnecessary carriage: such would be combersome to a christi∣an. 5. He shrinks not at impediments & dangers which crosse him, but constant∣ly struggles through them: much more should a christian. 6. He maketh the best of the entertainment he meets with any where, not calling fire from heaven upon inhospitable Samaritans, Luk. 9.54: this sorts with the calme spirit of a Christian. 7. He allwayes hath a desire to his true home: this should be the ayme and comfort of a christian. For while we are in the body we are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith, and not by sight: and therefore should be confident and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6.
1. For the Lords day there is ground in nature: Some time is to be set apart, for the publick worship of God, obser∣ved in all religions. And the same ground there is for Episcopacy, that some persons should be set a part, and prae∣ferred before others to performe, and oversee the performance of that sacred worship. 2. A patterne for that was a∣mong the Jewes, one day designed in seven. The like was also for church∣goverment, by chiefe Priests, Priests, and Levites: to which are answerable our Bishops, Priests, and Deacons un∣der the gospell, The most that is said for appointing the Lords-day for pub∣lick worship is the intimation, not prae∣cept of our Saviour, but practice of the Apostles: and so much we have, and more, in the differencing of the xij A∣postles, lxx disciples, and the observa∣tion of the Apostles and Church upon it. 4. The mention of the Lords day Apocal. 1. is not so cleare an evidence for the stablishing Sunday, for the jew∣ish sabbath; as the Epistles to the An∣gells of the 7 Churches there menti∣oned, conclude, that those were the Bishops of those Churches, whom our
Saviour alloweth by writing unto. 5. There cannot be brought any thing concluding for the Lords day out of the New testament so fully, as that for subordinat degrees in ecclesiastical hie∣rarchy. God hath set som in the church first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, &c. 1 Cor. 12. such as were Timothy and Titus, Paul and Bar∣nabas, who ordained Presbyters, and prescribed rules unto them. 6. The set∣ling of the Lords day for Christian as∣semblies in place of the Jewish sab∣bath, and deductions; will hardly be made so conspicuous, as the deduction of episcopacy, from the Apostles them∣selves in all eminent churches, before the late interruption of our licentious times: as it appears in the genuine and undoubted epistles of Ignatius, and all antiquity. 7. And those that are almost superstitious for the Sabbath, acknow∣ledg a kind of episcopacy; which they would be content to bear (if they might have the managing of it) and be obedient to the orders, and controul of it. St. Peter and St. Paul parallel'd. 1. Both called immediately by Christ;
the one, before; the other, after his as∣cension. 2. Both principall Apostles, Peter of the Jewes, Paul of the Gentils. 3. Both full of humility; Peter professeth himselfe to be , 1 Pet. 5.1. Paul to be  4. 1 Cor. 15.9. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Rom. 13. Both earnest for the supream autho∣rity of magistrates. 5. Neither Peter for the claime of the Pope, his pretended successor; nor Paul in his large epistle to the Romans, so much as give a hint of Papall supremacy. 6. Both are sent by, and give account to the Church. Peter to them of Jerusalem, Paul to the Antiochians. 7. Both take it well to be reproved: Peter reproved by Paul to his face. Gal. 2.11. Paul by Peter for his  2 Pet. 3: 16:
Of Similies. Similies are used by all, for illustra∣tion: and though they prove not sim∣ply, yet they teach more easily then firmer grounds; especially, those that be fed with Milk, rather than stron∣ger Meat, Heb. 5.12, 13. It was the method of teaching by the best Master; Whereunto shall I liken the men of this generation, and to what are they like? They are like unto children sit∣ting in the Market-place, and saying, We have piped unto you, but ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. For John came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine, and ye say, He hath a Devill: the Son of man is come eating and drinking, and ye say, Behold a glut∣tonous man, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners: but wisdome is justified of all her children, Matth. 11. Luk. 7. Are ye not asha∣med to be so way-ward, and childish as the Town-boyes? brawling for tri∣fles, or nothing, in the Market place? that nothing can please you, neither
Johns strictnesse nor my easie hand, but both must be rejected, and slandered by you? As Balaams cursed intention was turned into a blessing, Esau's fury into a friendly meeting with his brother Jacob, Sauls warrant to persecute into a grand commission for promoting the Gospell: so God may charme the hearts of the Labans of these times (Take heed thou speak not to Jacob ei∣ther good or bad, Gen. 31.) to be so far from injuring him any way, as to give him not so much as an ill word. This is the generation of them that seek him, even that seek thy face, O Jacob, Ps. 24.6. The man that walkes, 1. Not in the counsell of the ungodly] will have nothing to do with their plots, who take not God with them, 2. Stands not in the way of sinners] concurring with, and justifying their actions, 3. Sits not in the seat of the scornefull] contemning and jeering at those that take better courses, 4. But delights in the Law of the Lord] more then in the attaining of polfe and praefer∣ment, 5. And in that law is exercised
day and night] whereas other spend their time in revelling, and abhomi∣nations. Shall be like] not a hollow Reed pearing out of the Mire, but, 1. a Tree spreading abroad his boughs, 2. planted by a provident hand, that expects good of it, 3. not in a barren soyle, or rocky mountain, exposed to all blustring wind and weather; but, 4. by the water's side, which will mi∣nister it gratious moisture, that it may not stand for a shew onely, or shade, but, 5. bring forth fruit, 6. and that not unnaturally, or unseasonably to be blasted, but in due season, when ex∣pected, 7. The lease of such a Tree shall not wither with Winter, nor be scorched in Summer; but shall flourish, spreading abroad like a Cedar in Lebanon, and bringing forth fruit most in their age. FINIS.
