P4140A 45534408 171826
A PSALM of Thanksgiving, to be Sung by the Children of Christ-Hospital, on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in Easter Holy-days, (according to ancient custom) at St. Mary Spittle, for their Founders and Benefactors, 1679. LEt us rejoyce with chearful voice,This Chorus is to be Sung by all the Children, and repeated after e∣very Verse. God's Goodness magnifie, Who freely grants to all our wants most plentiful supply. VERSE I. WE,Monday. who were helpless; we, who in our soft & tender years Have known that woe, that hardship felt, wch the most stout man fears Poor, in distress, bereft of Friends, with direful Hunger pin'd. And worse than all those Miseries, none to inform the Mind, Chorus. (Thanks to a Providence Divine,) we know no more of grief, Neither in Mind, nor Body starv'd; in both we find relief. Let us, &c. VERSE II. Who so in deeds of Charity the needy doth regard, Him firmly hath our God ingag'd to keep (O great reward!) Him in all dangers will defend; so bless him, that the more With lib'ral hand he doth disperse, the larger is his store. Is Sickness he will Cherish him, will ease him in his Pain, Who did so oft relieve the Sick, and Indigent sustain. VERSE III. O Thers to Help,Tuesday. to Cloath, and Feed, from Misery to raise, How truly great and noble 'tis? how worthy is the Praise? Base pleasure 'tis Mankind to hurt; it is the only joy Of Tyrants, who abuse their power, to ruin and destroy: In British Isles (thanks be to God) we gen'rous Princes find; Who think that Royal Charity becomes a Kingly mind. VERSE IV. In Regions most remote from hence wee I spread our Founders Fame, And places yet unknown shall hear Our Sov'raign Charles's Name: Not to a Cloyster or a Cell his Bounty can be ty'd; It will support and comfort us throughout the World so wide. Where e're we come, in Gratitude, wee'l make it still appear, Who 'twas that first did nourish us; and who doth Feed us there. VERSE V. THat some might guard us,Wednesd. and in time of need assistance lend, Who might us from Oppression and Injury defend; After wise Counsel, who most fit to manage so great Trust, We were committed unto Men, both Liberal and Just. Such Government doth render soon our Happiness intire: When Wisdom, Wealth, and Honesty, in the same Men conspire. VERSE VI. For Trade and for Magnificence, London's Renown is known; Yet Faithfulness and Charity are Virtues she doth own: They do descend so low as us; nor is it a small share, Which we, amongst the rest, partake of this great Cities care. God's Kindness unto us is great, we must him ever Praise; Who Princes did excite for us, and Benefactor raise, A true REPORT of the great number of poor Children, and other poor People, Maintained in the several HOSPITALS, under the pious Care of the LORD MAYOR, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of LONDON, the year last past. CHildren put forth Apprentices,Christ's Hospital. and discharged out of Christ's-Hospital, the year last past, 83. 10 whereof being Instructed in the Arts of Arithmetick and Navigation, were placed forth Apprentices to Commanders of Ships out of the Mathematical-School, in the said Hospital, Founded for the benefit of this Kingdom, by the Kings most Excellent Majesty—83 Children buried the year last past—9 Children now remaining under the Care and Charge of the said Hospital, which are kept in the House, and divers places in London, and Suburbs thereof, and at Nurse in the Country. Five Hundred Fourscore and Seventeen—597 The Names of all which are Registred in the Books kept in the said Hospital, and are there to be seen from what Parishes they have been from time to time admitted. They being so many in number, and the Charges of keeping them so great, (and having sustained great Losses by the late lamentable and dreadful Fire,) it is hoped several good Christians will freely contribute towards the maintenance of the said Children: The certain Revenue of the said Hospital being little more than the Moiety of the necessary Charges thereof. THere have been Cured this year last past in the Hospital of St.S. Bartho∣lomew's Hospital. Bar∣tholomew, of Wounded, Sick, and Maimed Souldiers and Sea∣men, and other diseased Persons, from several parts of the Dominions of the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and from Foreign Parts; many whereof have been Relieved with Monies, and other Necessaries at their departure, though (as it hath pleased God) the greatest part of the Revenues of the said Hospital was consumed by the late dreadful Fire—1633 Buried this year after much charges on them—175 Persons remaining under Cure in the said Hospital—235 THere have been Cured,S. Thomas Hospital. presented and Discharged this year last past, in the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark, of Wounded, Sick, and Maime I Sea-men and Souldiers, and other diseased Persons, from the places adjcent, and from several parts of His Majesties Dominions, and from other Foreign Parts; many whereof have been relieved with Monies and other Necessaries at their departure, though (as it hath pleased God) not only a principal part of their Revenue was consumed in the general and dread∣ful Conflagration in this City, 1666. but the best of their remaining Reve∣nue was wholly burnt down in the great and dismal Fire in Southwark, which happened in May, 1676. wherein also the Site of this Hospital it self was very much damnified, being on Fire in some parts, although through Gods won∣derful Mercy, it was preserved from total destruction by the said Fire—1588 Buried this year last past after much Charge in the time of their Sickness—264 Remaining under Cure at the Charge of the said Hospital—258 REceived this last year into the Hospital of Bridewel,Bridewel Hospital. Vagrants and other indigent and miserable People, many whereof had both cloathing, and such other relief as their necessities required, being in great distress, and sent by Passes into their native Countries—919 Maintained in the said Hospital, and brought up in divers Arts and Trades, at the only Charge of the said Hospital. Apprentices, and others, notwithstanding it pleased God, the Hospital, and all the Houses within the Precinct thereof, (which was the greater part of its Revenue) were wholly consumed by the late dreadful Fire; besides the great Loss sustained in the remains of its Revenue by the terrible fire, which since happened in Wapping—113 THe Hospital of Bethlem is of great necessity for the keeping and curing Distracted Persons,Bethlem Hospital. whose misery of all others is the more deplorable, because they do not apprehend the same, it disabling the Mind as well as the Body. Brought into the same Hospital the last year distracted Men and Women—46 Cured of their Lunacy, and discharged thence the said year—39 Now remaining there under Cure, and provided with Physick, Dyet, and other Relief, at the Charge of the said Hospital—88 The Charge whereof is great, and the Revenue of the said Hospital so small as not to amount to one half part of the yearly Expences thereof; And the Building of the Old Hospital of Bethlem, being Ruinous, and not capacious to receive and contain the great number of distracted Persons; for the admission of whom, daily applications are made to the Governours thereof. Upon a Christian and Charitable Consideration of the Premises, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of this City of London, did lately grant sufficient ground whereon to erect a more large and commodious House for the keeping and Curing the said Lunaticks, and Distracted Persons: In the Building and Finishing whereof, the Governours of the said Hospital, have laid out and disbursed about Seventeen Thousand Pounds, whereby not only the whole Stock of the said Hospital is Expended, but the Governours thereof have been necessitated to take up several Thousands of Pounds for the Finihing the same, for which they pay Interest: And therefore the said Hospital is a very fit object of all good mens Charity, to do as God shall enable, them, towards the relief of the said poor Luna∣ticks, and payment of their great Debts; There having been, and daily are, by the Blessing of God, and the Charge of the said Hospital, and the Care of those that are intrusted therewith, divers reduced to their former Senses. decorative border LONDON, Printed by ANNE GODBID and JOHN PLAYFORD, 1679.
