R1914 E1370_1 99863365 115561
THE Countrey-man's APOTHECARY. OR, A Rule by which Countrey∣men may safely walke in taking PHYSICKE. Not unusefull for Cities. A TREATISE, Shewing what Herbe, Plant, Root, Seed, or Minerall, may be used in Physick in the room of that which is wanting. Published for the good of the KINGDOME. LONDON, Printed for Th. Andrews, in Smithfield, neer St Bartholomews gate. 1649.
To the Reader. Friend, IF thou wouldst be found so to thy selfe, buy this handfull of Phy∣sicke, the benefit will repay its price treble; for it is thy good it ayms at; herein being shewed what Physicall Simple may be used instead of another, and that without danger to the sicke. In Countrey Towns very often that Simple which is prescribed by the Doctor or Physitian is not to be had: this short Book tels what o∣ther may be administred instead thereof, and will prove as effectuall in the operation. It hath been approved of by Latine Authors, and is now translated, to be made use of among Englishmen; experience will tell thee more of its worth. Farewell.
ΠΕΡῚ ΤΩ῀Ν ΑΝΤΙΒΑΛΛΟΜΈΝΩΝ. OR, A Treatise of Succedanea's, One Ingredient used for another in the administring of Physick. The learned worke of William Rondeletius sometimes Regius Professor Monspeliensis. Translated into English for publique good. AFter I had a long time considered and enquired concerning those Ingredients which Physitians use in administring Physick, instead of such as are prescri∣bed, but are not to be got (commonly termed Suc∣cedanea;) at length I lighted upon the Treatise of that most learned man, and famous Practitioner William Rondeletius concerning the same; which I thought fit to publish in English, for the generall good of my native Countrey, as a Piece very pro∣fitable and usefull; and have for the easier finding them out digested the Simples into an Alphabeti∣call order, that so the benefit may be the greater. Physicians are often forced to use one Simple in the place of another; for every soile doth not bring forth all Simples, nor can they everywhere meet with most proper Ingredients. In the Coun∣trey
they are forced to use such Simples as are at hand; and in asmuch as upon sudden occasions pro∣per Ingredients are not at hand, but the present must be used, therefore they must necessarily make choice of such Simples as may with most safety be administred instead of those which are most pro∣per, but cannot at present be had; as we read Gal∣len did, and that with good successe, in the like case; For wanting Euphorbium to draw forth stings out of the fresh, he did instead thereof take from the Hives Propolis, that which Bees make at the mouth of their Hives to keep out the cold. These Succedanea are now more necessary then ever they were; both because at this day we want many of those simples which ancient Physicians did prescribe, and made use of, being they were sup∣plied with a plentifull and fertile increase thereof in their own Countreys, Eastern and Forraigne; and also for that counterfeit, and (by the crafty in∣vention of Jews and Merchants) adulterate Medi∣cines are transported, which if we reject, we must of necessity substitute others in the place thereof; besides many ancient simple Medicaments, former∣ly well known, and very common, are at this day exolete, and grown out of knowledge. Very many usefull compositions were devised and found out by the Arabians, and most soveraigne remedies of great use among them, the Simples whereof (by reason of the barbarousnesse of their terms) are altogether unknown unto us. For we are ignorant what they mean by those uncouth strange names, or else want the Simples themselves. But in the choice and use of these Succedanea, that most pernicious custome among Physitians is deservedly to be rejected, which hath now for many yeeres been much in use, though to the great pree and wrong of Patients; in which, in
compounding Medicines, they confusedly mingle all such Drugs which are commended or prescri∣bed usefull in such a disease to be applied to the part affected, or but soveraine for some symptome; so that having made use of all of the same quality, they have not left unprescribed one Herbe or Drug which may be used instead of another; whereas, if they would content themselves with one, two, or three Herbs, the Apothecary would never be desti∣tute of Succedanea; But because quantity will be necessary, for one handfull adde two; for two, three or foure, &c. Hence will ensue a double be∣nefit; first, the more certain working of the Phy∣sicke, and a more easie and speedy preparing there∣of; and secondly, the greatest grace of his Art, the Physitian will appeare to abound with variety of Drugs and Succedanea, when in his Recipies he can double, vary, and change his Drugs, and to under∣stand more then the ordinary sort of Mountebanks and Empericks. As for example, if in his decoction he hath prescribed Borrage, but in defect thereof substitutes wild Buglosse or contra; again if garden Endive be wanting, to prescribe the Juice or Sy∣rope thereof; if Succory be not to be had, to pre∣scribe Lyons tongue or Broad-lease, for ground Pine, Germander, or contrary; but what shall the Apothecary doe, if he prescribe all Drugs in one and the same Recipe? certainly it will prove no o∣ther then that Poeticall Chaos, a rude and indige∣sted lump. Let them consider and continually call to mind that of Villanovanus; it is deceit, cousenage to use compounds where simples may be easily had. Let them leave off that bad custome, and avoyd it as a dangerous rocke; let them likewise beware of naughty, covetous, dishonest, unlearned, and unskilfull Apothecaries, who greedy of wealth and
profit, commend an hodge-podge of even halfe rotten and putrified Drugs. Some do this that they may boast their store, or else out of ignorance or pride; and if any learned Physitians do it, it is that they may not seem to be lesse experienced in the knowledge of Drugs, then in the vertue and use thereof. Lastly, since there are some wholsome and fit compositions, by experience and reason received and approved, invented by ancient Physitians, we ought to search out, approve, and provide some Succedanea, that so soveraigne and excellent medi∣cines may be prepared, which in that respect are no waies to be refused and rejected, because with such good successe some Succedanea, not inferiour to the simples prescribed, may with equall benefit accomplish and effect all the promises of genuine or naturall Physicke. Let your Succedanea be as neere as may be, of the same genus and species, nature and kind. Herbe For Herbe Root For Root Flower For Flower Seed For Seed Juice For Juice Gumme For Gumme Rozen For Rozen Mussilage For Mussillage Metall For Metall Stone For Stone Earth For Earth Pitch For Pitch Grease For Grease Marrow For Marrow Bird For Bird Serpent For Serpent One part of a living creature For Another.
Composition for Composition: Powder For Powder Trochus For Trochus Opiate For Opiate Electuary For Electuary Pills For Pills Lohoch For Lohoch Confection For Confection Conserve For Conserve Plaister For Plaister Oyle For Oyle, simple or compound. Oyntment For Oyntment Salve For Salve The universall or common Theoreme or speculation. The Drugs that are to be used one instead of another, whe∣ther in inward or outward cau∣ses must agree in vertues & ope∣rations both secret and manifest, and in consistence, and be alike in taste smell age time and place of growth, nature, and temperament of quality. Some Drugs may by change be used in outward remedies which are not to be used in inward ap∣plyings, as the Juice of Carline Thistle may be used for the Juice of Lettice outwardly, but must not be taken for it inwardly, because it is poyson. Sometime not the whole simple, but some parts must be substituted, or used instead of another as
in a Muccago Mussilage of the seed of the Herbe Fleabane for a Muccago Mussilage of the seed of Quinces: all the seed of the Herb is not to be used, because the inward part thereof differs in temperament from a Mussilage, and is thought to be venemous; nor may the Quince Apple be used for the seed of the Quince, because they differ in o∣peration and consistence. Some recipeis or prescriptions in some remedies may be used instead of one another, as a conserve for the syrrop of the same simple whether of fruit, flower or root: as the conserve of Maidenhaire may be used for the syrrop of the same in opiates— but in the prescribing of the syrrop it cannot be so, because the forme or rule of the Physick will not permit it: For liquid druggs must be used in∣stead of liquid, therefore if the syrrop be pre∣scribed and not at hand, the destillation or deco∣ction of the Herb is to be used instead thereof. In some Candids or preserves, we may use the syrrop of the conserve, because they are conserved in the syrrop, as the syrrop of the conserve of Le∣mons, for the syrrop of Lemon pill; the syrrop of the Conserve of the roote of Buglosse, for the syr∣rop of Buglosse. Emplaisters and oyntments may be mutually used one for another; in case the part affected may be found to admit thereof: as the plaister of filii Zachariae, for the resumptive oyntment, and contra: but in the paines of the breast or stomack unlesse the stifnesse thereof be dissolved, or other∣wise mollified, it is not to be used, because plaisters when they are laid on, hinder the ribs from dila∣ting, enlarging themselves, and the freenesse of breathing. A plaister of Cerusse or white lead, for unguentum album, unlesse the inflammation doe forbid it, which will not admit of neither hard nor stiffe remedies.
Divers other medicines may be used instead one of the other; provided that their vertue and operation be the same. PIlls may be used instead of confections, and contra. as Hiera simply or aloes for the pils made of it, and the Herbe Benedicta or holywort, and contra for Pills to purge Phlegme, electuary diacarthame purgative with Lemon: for Pills to purge choler or melancholy, electuary of the juice of Roses and contra; so that the quantity of every one be observed. The doses of the Hiera and such like Electuaries are to be augmented by reason of the quantity of honey, which doth allay the strength of the Physick. A Syrrop, for Eclegma or a lohoch, if it be taken by dissolving in the mouth: as the syrrop of Jujuba for Lohoch sound and approved, the syrrop of Poppeyes for Diacodion. A powder for a Trochisous and contra. as the species of Diarrhodon for the Trochus of Diarrho∣don, a Trochus of Squills, for a Lohoch of the same, the quantity being either auginented or dimini∣shed according to the nature and quality of the dis∣ease and the scope of Physick In simples sometimes the parts are not strictly observed, as Turbith the root for Agarick in a Tro∣chus, and contra. Thus a simple may be put for a composition or contra, as Colocyn this wild gourds, or Colloquintida in a lesse quantity, for Agarick; and a double or treble dose of wild Saffron for A∣garick, and contra. And yet a simple Medicine for this use to be put in the place of another is hard to be found, which can truly, everyway and in every part agree as Avicennas testifies, be∣cause two simple medicines in case of want of o∣thers of like vertue and efficacy can scarce safely
be applyed instead thereof. Which since it proves so difficult, he did apply sometime two, sometime three of equall weight and measure, sometime in a doubled and trebled medicine, the fift or eight part of another Medicine being added; because (saith he) there are very few medicaments which are wholely like others in temperament and ope∣ration, or the same in consistence in grossenesse or thinnesse of the parts, and in other the hidden properties. The use of druggs or me∣dicaments in compositions is various and changeable in respect, either Of The heat the cold∣nesse the moistnesse the dri∣nesse. In the begin∣ning of the first, or in the mid∣dle and first de∣gree, and so of the rest. Or Of the parts the clamminesse, the taste, the smell, the colour. the grosse∣nesse. or the thin∣nesse. And therefore that which is like another in temperament, ofttimes differs from it in the grossenesse or thinnesse of the parts, or some other faculty and quality; as some thinke they may use Galanga or sweet cane for Folesfoot, or wild Spike∣nard, & yet they do not agree in every operation; for galanga can onely provoke urine, and bring downe womens courses, and therefore to be sup∣plied for Spikenard in prescriptions to provoke them: it hath no vertue to cause vomitting as Spikenard hath. In like manner the Hyacinth may be used instead of Anchusa or Buglosse Orcha∣net: but if there be need of Anchusa for the Co∣lour, as in oyntments, the Hyacinth is not proper: but instead thereof, dyers lacca or Red gum, Bra∣sile,
red Santalum, Painters Lacca or red gum, or scarlet Dye. Assa dulcis or that sweet gumme is not to be used for Assa foetida because of the smell, as Avicennas did in the griefe of the wombe, so by a sweet smell to have forst it upward, but it drawes towards sweet, flies from stinking sents or smells. Some druggs are used for taste; which yet are not convenient in every particular, as Honey, and Manna may be used for Sugar in some sorts of re∣medies as in laxative medicines, but in no wise in binding receits; for Manna is more loosening then either Sugar or Honey. Muccus a Mussilage, is usefull in a bloody Flux, and is used for a Len∣tor. Fenegreek, which makes a Mussilage but hot, and therefore not to be used in spitting of blood, as in externall remedies, as in the in∣flammation of the upper skin of the eyes, in which the white of an egge is preferred in the beginning and increase of the griefe, but in the stay and declining thereof a Mussilage fenegreeke is com∣mended. Those druggs which may be made use of instead of others, are not yet to be added in every sort of remedies; as Myrrhe may be used for Bdellium in Pills and oyntments, but in Pills made of Bdel∣lium it must in no wayes be added, for Myrrhe causeth a greater Flux of blood and of the Heme∣rods, as also of womens courses. Therefore in those druggs that are substituted this rule is to be observed, that the supposititious drugg, that is used in the Room of the adulterate genuine drugg, can effect the same which the genuine should, whether it be to heate, to coole, to make moist, to dry, to bind, to loose, or to concoct. For Wormewood (simply taken) Sea Wormewood, or Southerne∣wood may be used; For Sea Wormewood, or
Wormewood of Mount Taurus, Roman may be used; For Roman, the Wormwood which growes in the place where thou dwellest. This may be done in the choise of all Herbs, they may be of any Countrey, yet let your choise be of such an one as is an Herb of the neerest bor∣dering Country, or at least of the same tempera∣ture, of which sort is Craux vulgarly Gallo a Pro∣vince of Creet, where growes the best and grea∣test store of our narrow leafe Thyme and Epithy∣mon or that which growes oft upon it. In the se∣cond place Herbs of moist Countreys, if it be a scortching Summer, may be used for Herbs of an hot Countrey, which Galen informes us he did in preparing a Theriace or remedy against Poyson, using the rocke-parsley of another Countrey for Macedonian rock parsley; and yet the temperature of the Country ought to be observed, for the Countrey doth very much adde to, or diminish from the vertue and goodnesse of the medicament; for the Sclavonian Flower deluce we may use the Venetian, and for the African the Florentine. I come now to set downe the Succedanea, and first of Rootes. FOr Acorum or Galanga, take Calamus aroma∣ticus or sweet cane in the shops. For the same, in medicines to provoke and bring downe urine and womens courses, take the Rootes of Asarum folesfoot, or wild Spiknard. For Althaea Garden or wild Take the Roots of Mal∣lowes. For Apium or Parsley. Rock or Macedonian. For Aristolochy or long Birthwort; take the round; and contrary, and any one sort for all. For Asarus, Folesfoot or wild Spicknard, when
prescribed in a Purge or Vomit, take Helle∣bore, the seed of Genista Broome, and Rapha∣nus or Raddish seed. For Asparagus, Garden Sporrage: take Corruda or wild Sporrage, but in a lesse quantity, be∣cause it is sharper and stronger. For Calamus odoratus, sweet Gumme of Libanus: take Schaenanthum, sweet Rush, Camels haire, Acorus, or sweet Flags; if for smel, yel. Sanders. For The rinde of the root of the Caper tree: take the rinde of the root of Tamarisk, Wall∣wort or Dwarfe Elderne, Laurell, Poplar and Elder trees. For Costum, the root of an Indian herbe: take bastard Pelitory. For Galanga, the herbe Galingall: take round Cyperus, a kind of Rush: and cntra. For Gentian or Felwort: take halfe the quan∣tity of Asarus Folesfoot, and the root of Caper tree. For Lapathum Sorrell or kind of Dock: take the root of Oxalis or sowre dock. For Nardus, Spicknard: take any sort of it. For Rhabarbarum, Rubarbe for purging: take juice of Roses. For Rha Barbary Rubarbe to bind: take the root of Water dock; the greater Galin∣gall if there be need of hear, and of Bistorta the herbe if there be want of cooling. For Rha ponticum: take the root of great Cen∣tory▪ a pill of Rubarbe first. For Pontick Rubarbe infused and strained: and rosted Rubar be is approved by many for em∣pyreuma or a collection of corrupt matter in a mans body. For Ruscum, Butchers broome: take the root
of garden Sporage, and contra. For Secacul, Sampire: take the root of a Sea∣parsnip, Pastinaca. For Serpentaria Dragon, take Sarus Dracunculus, Dragonwort. For Turbith, a root to purge phlegme take the root of Thapsia, Turbith Mesuae, Agarick made into a Tro∣chus, and Colochynthis or wilde gourd in a lesse quantity or dosis. For Zingiber, take Ginger, Costum, Helenium, Helecompane, Pyrethrum, bastard Pelitory. For Zingiber, take Mechin, Woolfbane. Succedanea of Herbs Let Succedanea as neer as can be alike in every part in vertue, in kind and in sort. Abrotoni Southernwood, Absinthii Wormwood, Aconiti Woolfebane, Adianthi Venus haire, Allii Garlick, Anagallidis Pimpernell, Anchusae Orchanet, Anemones Redweed or wild Poppey, Anthemidis Camomile, Apii Parsley, Aristolochiae Birthwort, Asparagi Sporage, Betae Beete Bituminis Brimstone, Bliti Spinage, Brassicae Colewort, Caepae Onyons
Calaminthae Calaminth, Cedri Cedar, Chelidonii Celandine, Chondrillae Succory, Conizae Fleabane, Costi an Indian herbe. Cyelaminis an Herbe, Dauci Carrot, Equiseti the herb, Horsetaile. Hederae Ivy, except ground Ivy, Heliotropii Turnsol, Hieracii Hawke weed, Intybi an Herbe. Juniperi Juniper, Leucoii Gelliflower Lychnidis an Herbe, Malvae Mallowes, Marrubii Horehound, Mercurialis Mercury the herbe, Myrthi Mirtle, Nardi Spiknard, Nympheae Water Lilly, Orcheos Ragwort Origani Organy, Panacis an herbe, Pastinacae Parship, Picis Pitch, Piperis Pepper, Plantaginis Plantaine, Polygoni Polygony, male and female, Porri Leeke, Ranunculi Frogwort, Resinae Rosin, Rhamni Bramble or Christs-Thorne,
Rosmarini Rosemary, Rubi Great Bramble, Rumicis Soure docke, Rutae Rue, Sabinae Savin, Seselis an Herbe, Sideritidis Wall Sage, Symphyti Wallwort, Tithymalorum Sea Lettice, Wolfs milke, Milke Thistle, Tribuli Thistle, Valerianae Setwall, Ʋeratri Helebore, Verbasci Longwort, Ʋrticae Nettle, Of all the sorts of them. And lastly, all herbs of the same species or sort may be used for another, unlesse something disco∣vered forbid, as in Perwinkle of which Dioscor. writes that one sort gripes or frets, another loo∣sens the belly, another gathers and removes choller & phlegme, but the chief sort staies womens cour∣ses, and the Dysentery or bloody-flux. So the wilde Cucumber and Garden melons, and Colocynthis differ in their operation; but this is wont to be found in very few herbs. Also heed is to be taken to the parts; for some differ in their qualities, as the root Medium deco∣cted stayes womens courses, being taken for certain daies: but the seed thereof taken in Wine brings them down. The seed of Juniper may be taken in∣ward, but the shavings are discovered to be deadly to kill. The Juice of the herb Coriander is thought to be mortall, and yet the seed medicinall. There∣fore it is better for Physitians to use universals at no time, but rather particulars; for, for the most
part there is the greatest difference betwixt those which would be thought the neerest. Succedanea of Herbs and Leaves Therefore for Take Adianth Venus haire, Salvian, Politriton Maiden haire, or Black Venus haire. Leaves of Alsine, Chickweed, The leaves of Hel∣xine Pellitory of the wall, and contr. Amylon the floure of Wheat, The flour of Siligo, or Rie, dry. Apium mon. Moun∣taine Parsley. Garden Parsley dry and in a greater dose. Beta al. white Beet Black Beet. Betony, Verveine. Herbs Bubonium Inguinaria or Star-wort, The Herbe Antirrhinon, and contra. Buglosse or broad-leafed Burrage, Narrow-leafed Buglosse. Caepe Onyon, Portulacam Pur∣slaine. The Herbe Chamae∣lea, The herbe Thyme∣laea, Chamepytis, Ground pine or Laurell. Chamaepyti or Ground Pine, Chamaedrys, German∣der, or the leaves of Eupatoria, Agri∣mony. Clchoria syl-Woodsuccory, Lyons tooth. Coniza Fleabane, the first sort, The second. The second, The third dry, & in a greater quantity.
The leaves of Co∣riander. The leaves of Garden Petroseline outwardly onely. Dauci the leaves of Carrot, The leaves of either wild or garden Parsnip The first sort of Dittany. The second, third, and so of the rest. The herbe Dori∣cneon, Mandrake and contra. Filix femi. semi∣nine Fearne, Masculine. Fumetory, Seenie. Halyca Barley, An whole Ptisan of A∣vena Oates. The leaves of Hyp∣polapathon, Pati∣ence: Monks Ru∣barb, The leaves of Lapathon a kind of dock. Hyppomarathon wild Fennell, Coriander or Petrose∣line. Leaves of Hypeci Rue, The leaves of Poppey. Hypericon St. Iohns wort, Androsemon Tusane, The herbe Ascyron or Schoenanthon. Camels Haire. Hysope, Organie or sweet Mar∣jorum. Indian Malaba∣thron, the leafe, The leaves of Citron, Lemon tree, Cinamon tree, or common Mala bathron. The leaves of La∣brusca or wild vine The leaves of garden Vine, lesse prun'd. Lettice, Garden Endive, & cont. Lathris Spurge, the leaves, The leaves of Tithyma∣ris or Sea Lettice. Laurell leaves, Lemon leaves. The herbe Lepi- The herbe Drabe Iberis or wild cresses or water cresses.
Sterile Libanotis. The leaves of crowne Frankinsence. Mallowes Arbwes. Althaea or Mallowes of another kind. Wood Mallowes. Garden Mallowes. Melissa Mint. Marrubium Horebound and contra. or the Rine of the Le∣mon Tree. Mentha Mint. Balsamita Coarstmary. The Leaves of Myrthon Mockcher∣vill. The Leaves of wood-Peare-Sumach, Mastick Wild Olive, Service or Quince Trees. The leaves of the same. The berries of it and greene unripe wall∣nuts. The white Myrth. Nardum Monta. The black & contra. Mountaine spike∣nard. Italic, or French Spikenard. The Nymphaea Alba, white water Lilly. The yellow and con∣tra. The leaves of the wild Olive. The leaves of the Olive Tree. The leaves of the Olive or Ma∣stick. The leaves of the Walnut, Cypresse tree Pine or wild Pine. Oxyacantha vera, right white thorn. Pyrastrum the wilde Peare tree. The leaves of white Poppy. The leaves of night∣shade, black Poppy, & of white Henbane. The leaves of Pe∣plus round hea∣ded spurge. The leaves of Sea Let∣tice or spurge.
The leaves of Phi∣lyrea mock Privet. Olive Tree Leaves and contra. Harts Tongue Phyllitis. Smooth spleenewort, Miltwaste or Ceterach and contra. The leaves of the Pitch Tree. The Leaves of the Pine Tree. The leaves of Pithyusa Pine spurge. The Leaves of Ti∣thymali Spurge or Milkwort. Polygonum the leaves of Mas∣culst not-grasse. The Leaves of the Feminine of the same. Pulegion regal great Peny royall. French or Harts Peny royall. Portulaca Pur∣slaine. Vmbelicum Veneris Kidneywort, Wall Pe∣niwort. Ruta sylv. wild Rue. Dried Garden Rue in a greater quantity and contra. The leaves of Savin. The leaves of Cypres juniper and Cassia. The leaves Sam∣buci Elder. The leaves of Ebuli, and contra. The leaves of fe∣male Sangui∣nalis Bloodwort. The leaves of Mas∣culine, and contra. The greater sem∣pervivum Howslick. The smale Kidney∣wort, or small Peny∣wort. Seride Endive. Chondrillam Gumme Succory. The leaves of Seris Endive. The leaves of Lettice. Smyrnium Lovage Parsley or rock Parsly.
Garden night∣shade. Halicacabum, Win∣ter cherries. Soncho common Sowthistle. Prickly Sowthistle. The leaves of the service Tree. The leaves of the med∣lar Tree and contra. Indian spicknard. Syriack or Valerian. Italian spikenard. The Garden sort of it. Staebe Diosc Knapweed Scabeous, Thorny burnet. Shepeards purse, da∣sies all sorts and Cud∣wort. The leaves of Rocke Wallwort or Comfrey. The leaves of another sort or selfe heale. Orpine Telephum. Purslaine. The leaves of Te∣rebinthi the Tur∣pine Tree The leaves of the Ma∣stick Tree. The sorts of Thlaspi Treacle Mustard. Nasturtia Cresses. Thymbra Savory. Time & mother Time. Tyme. Savory, Organy. The leaves of one sort of Spurg, or Milkwort. The leaves of another sort in purging. Goates Marjorum. Organy and Contra. Land caltrops, in cooling receipts. Water caltrops, not in moistning medicines. The leaves of one sort Verbasci of Mullein. The leaves of another sort. White Briony. Black and contra The leaves and seeds Diticis of the Chast-tree. The leaves and seed of Rue. Succedanea of Seeds.
For Take The seed of Asa∣rabacca. The seed of Furse or Thorne broome. The Seed of Ba∣stard Saffron. Nettle Seed or Aga∣rick not made into a Trochus. Mandrakes seed. Hemlock seed. The seeds of the Myrthi Myrtle. Of the Barbery Tree and contra. Turnop seed. Rape seed. Succedanea of Juices. For Take For Juice of Wormwood. Of Southernewood wel prepared, or of the lesser centory, or of either sort of Cosemary, or Maudline. or The Juice of Wormewood. The juice of Pon∣tick, or Roman worm∣wood in outward re∣medies: Levant Wormwood if washt, may gently be given inwardly. The Juice of Aca∣cia binding beanetree. Of the Black Thorne, Slowbush, or selfe-heale. Fountaine water. River water. The juice of the Pomecitron. Of Lemon. Of Sowbread. Of Flower deluce. The Juice of Li∣coris. Of the same decocted and infused; or of Raisons of the Sunne, or Cute. The juice of Box∣thorne. Of Felwort in ulcers. The Juice of the same. The Lees of Oyle.
Grape Varjuice. Of Sumack and cont. Opium the juice of the heads of Poppies. Meconium or the juice of the Leaves, or the Juice of wild or gar∣den Lettice in a grea∣ter quantity. Opobalsamum, the juice of the Bas∣same tree. Stacte or the juice of Storax not adultera∣ted, or of Myrrh. In infusion for digestion, take the Oyle of Italian Spike or Spiknard. For Take The juice of Spurge Olive. Of Dwarfe Bay. Succedanea of Liquors and Gummes. For Take Turpentine of the Firr tree. Of the Pine. Aspalth the dry pitch of India, The Oyle of Peter and contra. Cedar Rosin, The oyle of the bowes of Juniper, or the gumme of Juniper. Cypresse Rosin, Larch tree Rosin. Gum Lake, Myrrh. Manna of the Frankincense tree, The barke to which some of the Frankin∣cense sticketh. Mastick, Turpintine of Fir tree hardned or dryed. Mumme, Pisaphalthum or Bitu∣minous, hard Pitch. Myrrh, Bdellium or the juice of Alisanders and Parsley. For the Gumme of the Olive tree, Of gumme Elemni. Opobalsanum, the juice of the Bal∣same tree, Stacte or liquid Balme prepared by nature or art. The liquor of the Turpine tree.
Not the juice of Carpasus; not Oyle of Lawrell, not the liquor of Myrthi nor the seed of Setwall, as some have prescribed. For Take Carpobalsamum, the berries or fruit of the Bal∣same tree. The seed of the Ma∣stick tree or Turpine tree, of which there are divers sorts. Cubebs in a smaller dose or two parts of the seed of the Turpine tree and of Cubebs. Opopanax the Gum of Frankin∣cense. The Gum of Amomum, or Galbanum, or Bdelliū in outward remedies. Stone pitch, Pine Rosin boyld. Soft pitch, Stone pitch dissolved in oyle, or softned in Oyle of Juniper. Pissaphaltum, Bi∣tuminous pitch, Pitch and Brimstone. Storax, Benjamin. Turpentine, Mastick. Xylobalsamum, the wood of the Bal∣same tree, Shoots or sprouts of the Mastick tree. Succedanea of Minerals. For Antimony take burnt Lead & contra, or burnt Tinne. For Cadmia ore of Brasse, take the stone out of which it is extracted. For the Flower of Brasse, take the green rust. For white Lead, take burnt Lead, or Lead ore For Lead, take Tinne. For the soile or ore of Brasse or Pompholix, take Spodium the soot of the trying of Brasse. For Sandarack, red Arsenick, take Arsenick Orpine. For Spodium the soot of the trying of Brasse, take Antispodium, Ashes made of the Myrtle, Mastick, and Oyle of the wilde Olive, Quince trees and Harts horne. The end.
