R2343A 36282353 150246
A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES at THETFORD IN THE County of NORFOLK the 15th Day of March 1692/3. By J. R. M. A. Rector of Brundal in Norfolk. Published at the Special Instance and Command of the JUDGES. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, for Samuel Oliver Bookseller in Norwich. 1693.
Aprilis 6. 1693. Imprimatur, Geor. Oxenden, Procan. Joh. Spencer. Nath. Coga. Ja. Johnson.
TO The Right Honourable Sr. JOHN HOLT Kt. Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND, AND One of Their Majesties Most Ho∣nourable Privy Council. And to the Honourable Sr. THOMAS ROKEBY Kt. One of Their Majesties Justices of Their Majesties Court of Common Pleas. My Lords, I Thought it so very incon∣gruous for one in my humble Station to offer any thing to the World, that indeed nothing but the Com∣mand of your Lordships could have obliged
me to publish the mean Discourse I pre∣sumed to preach before You. But since You were pleased to give me leave to pre∣fix your Great Names to it, I humbly Present it to You again, assuring my self, that by that Means it will be the more likely to promote the Design I had in Preaching it, and which I believe You had in Commanding it to be Printed: Which if it may in any measure obtain, I presume to say I shall so far be a Bene∣factor to my Country and to the Church of God, and be always Thankfull to Your Lordships for giving me the Ad∣vantage of being so; ever remaining My Lords, Your most Obedient Servant John Russell.
I Corinth. X. 10. Neither Murmur ye, as some of them also mur∣mured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. WE have a great deal of reason to be∣lieve, that Wisdom and Goodness is the constant rule of Providence in ordering the Affairs of the World; But yet it often happens that we do not perceive that Wisdom, nor resent that Good∣ness well; for the Truth is, we are too short-sight∣ed to see the bottom of the Counsels of God, and there is so great a variety and contrariety of Hu∣mours and Interests in the World, that the most be∣nign Dispensations, are necessarily cross to some: But yet it is very reasonable that God should rule the World; and unless Men will learn to submit to his Will, a great many are like to be very unea∣sie and troublesome in it. But to prevent this, that Great Lover of Man∣kind, who left no way unattempted to do us good, hath by his own Example recommended to us, the Duty of Resignation, and the prudence of a Patient conduct in all things: And his Holy Religion hath something peculiar in it, to promote such Temper in Men, as may create no Disturbance in the World, but yield glory to God, and ease to themselves,
under all the Vicissitudes of that which we call For∣tune. And herein we have very little reason to suspect him of so unkind a Design, as to dispirit Men, and make them content to be Miserable; for he propounds the most rational means for Redress, under real Afflictions, and that is, to apply them∣selves to him who hath the management of all things in his own hand,Phil. 4.6. and by prayer and supplica∣tion to make known their Requests unto God: But then, on the other side, he hath too great a sense of his own, and his Fathers Honour, to countenance quar∣relling at the order of Heaven, and especially in e∣vident designs of Mercy and Goodness, although they do not just sute their Interests or Wishes. And as in such cases, there is something in men that will not suffer them to make their complaints unto God, so there is also something that will be exciting dis∣content; and if not supprest, will ferment and soure their Minds, till it break out into open Disgusts, and dishonourable and unworthy Reflections. But then as Almighty God is not so much con∣cern'd, in such cases to grant redress, as he is to observe and resent the affront to his Wisdom and Goodness; so when such unreasonable Discontents, do break out into expressions of Contempt, it seems both ne∣cessary and just that he should shew his Displeasure upon such great Provocations: And some very re∣markable Instances we have of these things in the Children of Israel, which our Apostle refers to in the Text;Exod. 2.23, 24, 25. when they sighed by reason of their Bondage, and cried, their cry came up unto God; and God heard their groaning; and God looked upon the Chil∣dren of Israel and had respect unto them. But when Heaven by miracles had rescued them out of it, a
little unavoidable trouble set them a murmuring, it was taken as a great Affront: When they, weary and glutted with Manna and Quails, were so dista∣sted at the bounty of God, that they could not but sit down and sigh for their Garlick and Onions a∣gain: When they grew weary of their Deliverance,Exod. 11.5. and out of a peevish and unreasonable distaste at the Instruments of it, and because of some tolerable dif∣ficulties, they groaned to be in Egypt again, it was esteemed too great an Offence to be passed by, without some extraordinary Judgments. These things our Apostle observes to the Corin∣thians, were written for the admonition of others:Ver. 11. And therefore among other things, (well knowing the most likely consequences of such practices) he gives them that friendly Caution in the Text, Neither murmur ye, &c. In Discoursing whereof I shall I. First, enquire what the Apostle cautioneth against; II. Secondly, shew how little reason any have to admit such things into Practice; III. Thirdly, shew how likely they are, if ad∣mitted, to produce such Effect as is here pointed at; and IV. Lastly, make some improvement of All. Now that which the Apostle cautioneth against is, Murmuring; the Murmuring he intends, is such as the Children of Israel were guilty of in the Wil∣derness; And the effect it had, was Destruction; which I hope will give me the Advantage of ma∣king a good Improvement of the matter.
I. First, That which the Apostle gives caution against in the Text, is Murmuring; which seems to be in general a Discontent at the Dispensations of Providence, and a Quarrelling at what happens to come to pass in the World: This I say, is in general, but the Apostle in this place seems to re∣ferr particularly, to those Murmurings of the Chil∣dren of Israel, which brought such grievous destru∣ction upon them in the Wilderness; And there∣fore, in order to a just Information, we must a little look into the History of that People, during their continuance therein: And that we may the more plainly see the ill nature of the Offence, we will briefly take notice by the way, of the state of that People, because indeed it was the Circumstances that did so highly aggravate their Sin. Now you must know the Children of Israel, e∣ven the whole Stock of them, were Strangers and Bondslaves in Egypt, where they continued Four hun∣dred and thirty Years, and for a great part of that time, but especially toward the last, they were ve∣ry grievously oppressed;Exod. 1.13, 14. for says Moses, The Egyp∣tians made the Children of Israel to serve with ri∣gour, and made their lives bitter with hard bondage; and all the service, wherein they made them to serve, was with rigour. And this was not all, but there was besides, a Design on foot, to extinguish the Whole Race of them; for to that end there was an Edict past at Pharaoh's Court,Exod. 1.16. that every Man-child of theirs should be murdered, as soon as it was born: So that their Condition was truly deplora∣ble, and so desperate, that a Deliverance upon any Terms, could not but be a most welcome Blessing, and an unviolable Obligation of Love and Thanks
both to the Author and instruments of so great a Mercy; as also of the humblest submission, to the methods of accomplishing it, thô not in every point so easie as might be wished. In that most seasonable time, God heard their Cry, and delivered them, and not onely so, but al∣so gave them an Assurance of one of the richest and most fertile Countries in the World,Exod. 3.17. the land of Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; It should be theirs, and their Childrens after them, there they should dwell,Exod. 29.45. and God would dwell a∣mong them, they should be his People, and he their God. This was so great a Deliverance and Favour, that the Remembrance of it, ought for ever to have sti∣fled the resentment of little Troubles, and sweetned their Minds into the most obliging cheerfull Tem∣per; But yet in the midst of these Circumstances, we find them Murmuring; And First upon the account of the Water at Marah, because it was bitter:Exod. 15.24. The People murmured against Moses saying what shall we drink? Water they had enough; and yet they cry out, O what shall they drink? They had forgot that their Lives were bit∣ter but a little before, with hard Bondage, and now they stomack the Bitterness of the Water, as a most grievous thing, that they hardly knew how to forgive Moses for it, thô, God knows, it was none of his Fault. Next we have them murmuring for want of Bread:Exod. 16.2, 3. The whole Congregation of the Chil∣dren of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the Land of Egypt, when we sate by the Fleshpots, and when we did eat Bread to
the full; for ye have brought us forth into this Wil∣derness,Exod. 17.2. to kill this whole Assembly with Hunger. We find them also Murmuring for want of Water at Rephidim, and chiding with Moses, and wishing, Would to God they had died with their Brethren of the Plague.Numb. 20.4. compared with 11.33. But yet thô their Disgusts were risen very high, yet God had Compassion on their infirmities; here was Want of Bread and Water, the necessary Supports of Life; Hunger is sharp, and Thirst intolerable, and those Discontents that arose from thence met with Pardon and Pitty; for God gave them Bread to the full, and Water in abundance; here is no Destruction for this, and we are not yet come to the Murmuring the Text seems most expresly to relate to. Further therefore they murmured plainly at what God had done for them in Delivering them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage; and most unaccountably wish'd for Egypt again, for their old Slavery, out of which the Mercy of Heaven had delivered them by Miracles: And the occasion was this; the Spies that went to search out the Land, gave a very bad and false Account of it;Numb. 13. they whis∣pered strange things into the Peoples ears, as if the Land they were going to, did starve or eat up its own Inhabitants, and yet that at the same time, there was abundance of Giants in it, Men of such great Growth, that they were but as Grashoppers in comparison of them. And thô these Stories did not hang together at all, yet that Discontented Peo∣ple took the opportunity of Murmuring again, Would to God they had died in the Land of Egypt,Numb. 14.2, 3, 4. or in the Wilderness; And why (say they) hath the Lord brought us into this Land, to fall by the Sword,
that our Wives and Children should become a Prey to the Giants? Were it not better to return into E∣gypt? And they began to say to one another, Let us make a Captain, and let us return into Egypt. This seems to be some of the Murmuring pointed at in the Text; for at the time of the Writing of this Epistle, the progress of the Christian Faith was retarded, by the practice of some busie Hereticks, who had brought up an ill Report of it, which made a great many begin to think, they were as well before; and therefore some were for Judaism again, and others for the old Gentile Courses, from whence the blessed Conduct of the Gospel had de∣livered them: And we are sure, that for this Mur∣muring, the Israelites smarted much; being not only kept Fourty years from a settlement in their land, but also, all that Generation disinherited and destroyed, as I shall have occasion further to shew. Further, there was a murmuring upon the ac∣count of the Rulers God had set over them, even against those very Instruments God had raised up to deliver them out of Egypt, and to settle them in their own land: For Corah and his company ga∣thered themselves together, and very malepertly tell Moses and Aaron, they took too much upon them; and say they (when they knew that nothing but the hand and power of God, could put them into those posts) Wherefore lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?Numb. 16.3. And when God himself had asserted their Mission and Authority, by a miraculous destruction of some, (in prosecution of the vengeance he was inflicting, for their dissatisfa∣ction at their deliverance out of Egypt, and for their desire to return) others fell a Murmuring in a
more impudent manner, and most slanderously tell them,Numb. 16.41. They had killed the people of the Lord. This seems to be a second Murmuring pointed at in the Text; First, because these Murmurers were destroyed,Numb. 16.35, 49. viz. by the fire of the Lord, and by the plague; and further, because, that by reason of the Schisms that were then in that Church, there were great Commotions against their present Governours. In the last place, they Murmured at the unavoid∣able Difficulties and Inconveniencies they met with in their way to the Promised land; and particularly, after they had overcome the Canaanites at Hormah, The soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way;Numb. 21.4. and instead of the more proper method of Patience and Prayer, The people spake against God,Numb. 21.5. and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness; for there is no bread, neither is there any water. Now indeed, it is very probable, the way was not so pleasant, as they would have had it, and how could it be otherwise, it was a Wilderness, and they must now march through it, if ever they would get to Canaan; and as for their other Complaint, that was more perverse and unaccountable; for they eat An∣gels food, and as it is said, the water out of the Rock followed their Camp, but yet (to see what perverseness and discontent will prompt men to speak, even against all Truth and Modesty) they cry out they have neither bread nor water: but to say the Truth, they were grown Effeminate and Nice, and lusted for flesh, which as the Psalmist interprets it, was for meat for their lusts;Psal. 78.18. and that was indeed the true cause of their Murmuring; for being grown so exorbitant and ungovernable in their Appetites,
they knew not how to bear the Fatigue of the Jour∣ney, but murmured at the necessary and unavoidable Troubles they met with, altho' it was from a wea∣risome Bondage in Egypt, to a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and in order to their Settlement and E∣stablishment therein. And this seems also some of the Murmuring the Apostle refers to in the Text; for there were at that time most pernicious Hereticks in the Church, that piqu'd against the Severities that Christianity exposed its Professors to; for finding fault with the Hardship of Persecution, Self-denyal and Mortification, they were clearly for Indulgence and an easie Life, as if God were too severe to put such things upon Men, tho' it were in the way to everlasting Blessedness; And we find also that this brought Destruction up∣on the Children of Israel, and a very Remarkable Vengeance, whereby much People died.Numb. 21.6. These are the Murmurings which we may well sup∣pose the Apostle intends and cautions against; they being those the Israelites were guilty of, and for which so many of them met with Destruction in the Wilderness; and such as there was great Cause the Corinthians should then be expresly warn'd of. My next work, is to shew how great Reason there is that none such be admitted into Practice, especial∣ly among Christians. II. The more gracious Dispensation we are under, does not give us the greater Liberty to pique at Providence, or capitulate with Heaven; we have no Toleration to be Humoursome or Froward, tho' things do not just jump with our Interests or Wish∣es; But when we fall into Circumstances in any
thing like those of the Jews under our present Con∣sideration; As they had the least Reason in the World to resent things as they did, so have we: And this will be easily discern'd by a bare Stating of the Case in the forementioned Respects. First, Suppose the Good-will and Pity of Heaven (in compassion to any Distressed Church or People, groaning under Oppression and Fears) should, by some Surprizing Providence, deliver them, and put them into a hopefull prospect of being yet Happy, of a Secure Enjoyment of all the Blessings of Govern∣ment, and the Comforts of the Gospel: And sup∣pose all things in that Revolution and Hurry, should not just agree with every mans Expectation, Fancy or Interest (as it is impossible it should;) Is that a just Cause to forget the Mercy, and to set down and mutter Discontent? to murmur at what is done, and try to provoke Almighty God to break all in pieces again? Is this a good Reason to contemn the Deliverance, and with the perverse Israelites, to be for making Captains to carry them back, through Blood and War, by Confusion, Conspiracies and Tumults, into the Bondage, out of which they late∣ly cried so loud, Good Lord deliver us? The bare Stating of the Case seems to make the thing very plain. It is very probable that some of the Dissatisfied among the Corinthians, might think they had some Cause to be Discontented; the Leading Heretick among them might (like the Spies) tell them, that the Establishment they lookt for in the Church, was not like to be of that Advantage they expected; they must encounter the Pagan Fury, and the Jewish Zeal; And if they could make way through those
Difficulties, yet the strict Discipline they must submit to would make that desired State, an Uncomfortable one; and that therefore, they had as good settle back again, to Paganism or Judaism or as they were enclined. As they might represent things, the Dis∣contented and Unstable among them might think they could justifie their Complaints, and that they had Cause upon these Accounts, to throw off the Blessed Design of their Bishops and Pastors: But says the Apostle Murmur not: The Establishing of the Church of Christ among them, was so Blessed a thing, that to murmur at the Method, and rather than submit to the Difficulties in the way to it, to fall back to Idolatry again, would be both irratio∣nal and base, and no doubt extort Vengeance from God (as the Jews experienced) for so great an Of∣fence, and Contempt of his Goodness. Secondly, As to the next Case; Suppose some Extraordinary Person should be stirred up, in a gene∣rous Compassion or Zeal, to relieve any such Di∣stressed People, which had no way left in Humane Judgment, for an Escape out of their imminent Troubles and Fears, as Moses was: And suppose, such an One, should in a Way, as it were Miracu∣lous, accomplish his honourable Undertakings, and in so surprizing a Manner, that the Hand of God may be visibly perceived in it: And further, sup∣pose that in a gratefull Sense of such generous Love, and in acknowledgment of the Deliverance, as well as through Necessity, such an One thus recommen∣ded by Heaven, should be desired to undertake the Government and Protection of them, and He (when there is no Body else to doe it) should
undertake it: Is there any Cause for any to say, as some of the Jews did to Moses and Aaron, Where∣fore lift ye up your Selves above the Congregation of the Lord?Numb. 16.3. When it is apparent, that nothing but the Hand and Power of God, can put any One into such a Station, how little Reason is there to say, You take too much upon you. Corah and his Companions were as stiff against Moses, as if they would neither allow Heaven to set up a Ruler over them, nor give way to any Go∣vernment, but what was according to their Scheme; though doubtless their Brethren thought it was as Reasonable they should be pleas'd; and especially when they apparently concurred with the Will of God: But the Example of those Men is not to be followed,1 Cor. 10.5. forasmuch as, with them God was not well pleased, and they were overthrown in the Wil∣derness: And that it seems was designed by God himself to be a convincing Argument, that none, in such a Case, ought to pique against the Advance∣ment or Conduct of such Extraordinary Persons, when He sets them up, nor be offended that He is pleas'd to rule the World according to his own Will, and not theirs: but Lastly, The Children of Israel murmured that they met with some Difficulties, upon their Escape out of Egypt, in the way to the Holy Land: Of which, I shall observe here by the way, that they brought them upon themselves, and particularly for Disgusting their Deliverance, and the Advancement and Management of Moses: For their Forty years Pilgrimage, and all the Hardships they met with in the Wilderness, were purely by way of Punishment,
and on purpose to consume all that Stubborn Ge∣neration, that had Murmured at their Deliverance, and piqu'd against their Saviour: But waving this, Suppose the case as Natural as we can; we cannot well conceive how great Revolutions can be brought about, without a considerable Ruffle of Affairs, (though sometimes indeed we are convinced that nothing is impossible with God:) It is no wonder the Wind that wafts the Ship to Harbour should discompose the Waters, and raise some Billows to beat upon it: But then that Passenger is too pee∣vish, that complains that the Working of the Ves∣sel makes him a little more uneasie than he is used to be, and the Mariner that frets at the Wind for wearing his Sails, is too basely Selfish; and he that rather than comply with these Unavoidable Inconveniences, is willing to return or sink, seems abundantly worthy to be gratified. Suppose a Man fast asleep in a sinking Ship, should by a kind Friend be snatch'd out of his Cabbin, and set upon a Plank to save his Life; how very un∣reasonable would it be, that he should be Angry that he was disturbed in his Rest, and must be at the pains to swimm to Shore. Had it not been a very absurd, as well as an unworthy thing, if when the Angels took Lot, and his Family by the hand, and lead them out of the reach of Sodom's Fire and Brimstone, they should have murmured at the trou∣ble of Walking two or three Hours in the night, to Zoar to save their Lives? And if it were such a discontented humour (as it is very like it was) that made that woman,Gen. 19.26. that was turned into a pillar of Salt, look back, and was the occasion of that Pu∣nishment,
Then,Luke 17.32. as our Lord saith, Remember Lot's Wife. III. This brings me to the Third thing propoun∣ded, which is to shew, how likely such Practises as are here forbidden, are to produce such an Effect as is pointed at. And to this end I shall onely hint the ill Nature of the Sin, as it is here Circumstantiated, and the ill Consequences of it amongst those our Text and Matter relates to; and I think this will be enough, if we do but suppose that Heaven hath the same Resentment of Things now, it had of old: Onely this by the way, may be objected, that the Things that now come to pass in the World, are not so apparently the immediate Operation of Gods Hand, as those that the Children of Israel were concern'd in, in the Wilderness; nor such marks of Favour or Displeasure, but onely Things that fall out in the Common way of Providence. To which it may be answered; 'tis true, God did never so visibly appear in the Behalf of any Peo∣ple in the World, as he did for them, so that to disgust what he did was doubtless the more Provo∣king: And what if some among them had been plea∣sed to say, that all that Great Revolution, was one∣ly some Excentrick Motion of the Wheel of For∣tune, and offer Arguments, that all was contrived and wrought by that Designing and Ambitious Man Moses, who would never rest till he had made him∣self a Prince over them;Numb. 16.13. Yet this was not likely to lessen the Provocation, or evade the Punishment. And as to other People, by what Outward Means soever, or by whatsoever Management or Intrigue,
things may seem to be ordered and accomplished, yet it must be supposed that God rules the World still; and if we have not Faith enough to believe, that he takes the same Care of his Church now that he did of old, if there be evident Impressions of a Di∣vine Care and Goodness upon what comes to pass, the Murmuring at it upon by Accounts, must needs be of as ill Consequence now as ever, and especially in the Cases under our present Consideration. And to make this the more evident, I will briefly run o∣ver the three Heads of Murmuring the Text re∣fers to. The First was at Deliverance, when some unavoi∣dable Troubles and Difficulties were suggested: And if the nature of any one Offence, may be supposed to have a greater Influence upon the Displeasure of God than others, this seems to be of that sort: For to Murmur at Gods Hand, whatsoever it doth, does not become poor Worms, that are liable to all his Wrath; though things really grievous and severe befall Men (which was poor Job's Case) yet there seems to be some Danger in Murmuring at them; and when that unfortunate Mans Wife,Job 2.9, 10. bid him curse God and die, I suppose it was, because she thought it an effectual means to that end; but his Answer was much more becoming, What! says he, shall we receive Good at the Hand of God, and not evil? thou speakest like one of the Foolish Women: This may well be supposed, when People labour under real Grievances; but to groan under the Burden of Deliverance, seems to carry all the Marks of ill Na∣ture in it, and to be a very effectual Method of Courting Confusion; and if the Humour have but
leave to work, it will need no other Hand but its own, to procure the greatest Mischief; What can we think of the Children of Israel, that would needs have been for Egypt again? Had they made themselves Captains as they talk't of, to conduct them back again, whatsoever kind Thoughts they might on a sudden have had of their enraged and Implacable Enemies, in all likelyhood, they would soon have been cut in pieces, or at least they and their Children must have been Bondslaves for ever: And certainly it would have puzzled the most Critical Spy of them all, to have made his own private Fortune, whatever had become of the Publick, in that Horrid Revolution they were so very Cove∣tous of. God Almighty did indeed prevent that Fatal Pro∣ject the Murmurers were upon, for the Glory of his own Great Name, and consequently the Mis∣chief that would have ensued: But yet he had such a just and high Resentment of their Sin and Folly, that he would not pass it by; and as if his Anger had known no Bounds (the Provocation was so great) not onely the Murmurers themselves, but the Whole Congregation smarted for it; For, for fourty Years together they were kept in an unset∣tled State, in a ruefull Desert, where that whole Ge∣neration was destroyed, there being not a Man of them that was above Twenty years old at the time of the Provocation, save onely Caleb and Joshua, but what was Destroyed, and never lived to see the Promised Land, as may be fully seen, Numb. 14. as also with what Heat and Indignation, God de∣nounced that Sentence upon them.
Secondly, The next Murmuring our Text refers to, is, Against those Rulers, (and their Conduct) which God is pleased by his Grace and special Appoint∣ment to set up: And if we do but suppose this, That is is by God that Kings Reign,Psal. 75.7. that it is he that pulleth down One and setteth up Another, and that Rulers are the Ministers of God;Rom. 13.4. To pique against Them, is but to quarrel with Him that appoints Them; and therefore Moses asks the question, What is Aaron that ye Murmur against him?Numb. 16.11. he was but the Mini∣ster of God, as Moses was, and their Pique against them, was interpreted to have a further Reach, and to be a disgust at God, who had appointed Them: And when it comes to this that Men can say to those that are Commissioned of God, Ye take too much up∣on You, the Affront seems too Great to be passed by, without some Remarkable notice of Indignation. And indeed this sad Effect this Sin had among the Children of Israel;Numb. 16.20, 21. for says God to Moses and Aa∣ron, Separate your selves from among this Congrega∣tion, that I may consume them in a moment. It is true indeed, this general Sentence, upon their Sup∣plication, was Reversed. But yet the Heads of their Faction were destroyed by a most Remarkable Judg∣ment;Verse 23. for the Earth opened her Mouth and swallowed them up; they and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the Pit, and the Earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the Congregation. This was not all,Verse 35. but Fire came out from the Lord and consumed Two hundred and fifty more; and be∣sides this, God sent the Plague among them, which as it were in an instant swept away Fourteen thou∣sand and seven hundred more. And this was the sad Consequence of their Murmurings against their De∣liverers,
whom God had sent and set over them. Thirdly, the last Murmuring our Text refers to, is, At unavoidable Troubles upon Deliverance from far greater, and in the way to great Happiness; of which I shall onely say, that it is very strange that any People should be come to such a pass, that they cannot endure to bear a little, especially in such Ca∣ses; and it is very hard to know what Terms such would exact of Heaven to be Content. If we are not willing to set the Good against the Evil, or at least to take one with the other, as the state of this World requires, yet we have great Reason to place our Sufferings to the Account of our Sins, so far forth as not to Murmur at them, lest it prove a means to double our Sorrows; for there seems to be so much Perverseness and Folly, such Provocation and Affront to the Divine Goodness, in murmuring at the Necessary Methods of Accomplishing any of the Designs of his Mercy, that we cannot readily try a more fatal Experiment to incense his Wrath: And this we are assured of that for such unworthy Resentments of the unavoidable Inconveniencies they met with in the way to Canaan, after they were e∣scaped out of Egypt, God was much offended at his own People, and they found it of very ill Conse∣quence; For upon this very Account, the Lord sent fiery Serpents among them,Numb. 21.6. and they bit the People, and much People of Israel died. Having thus shewn the Unreasonableness of what the Apostle warns us against in the Text, as also the ill Nature and most likely Consequences thereof; IV. The last thing which remains is to make some
necessary Improvement of the Matter. And that which in General I would make thereof is (if I might) to prevail with every One to set down un∣der his own Vine, and bring forth and enjoy the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, Heaven having given us such an Advantage in this Case, over the greatest Part of the World. There are surely a great many Countries would esteem themselves very Happy, if they were in our Condition, and would think the rest of the World would account them the most unworthy People and unwise, because they have no Forreign Enemies within their own Bowels, to be quarrelling at Gods Dispensations, and piquing against their Governours and one another, whilest they might enjoy all the Blessings of Peace, and all the Advantages of the best Religion and Government in the World. Surely it is strange that any should follow their unreasonable Disgusts so far, as at once to reproach and forfeit their Religion, their Reason and Peace too! and not onely their own, but the Peace of their Country, and what is more, that of the Church of Christ; and for the sake of their own Resent∣ments to expose all to Confusion, and the Ven∣geance of the Almighty: For certainly, whatsoever we may wish or hope for, or whatever Ends others may pretend or seem to have in their Active Zeal, such perverse unwise Practises carry in them all the Presages of Mischief and Ruine: And though this be what some covet (as we may verily believe without any Breach of Charity) yet what Satis∣faction can it be to any, to set the World on Fire about their own Ears? or to be blowing the Coals of Sedition and Discontent, till it break out into a fire
not to be quenched, so long as there is any thing left for it to devour? What strange vizard hath Fate put upon Quietness and Peace, that all their Charms can't prevail with Men to embrace and enjoy them when they are put into their Arms? Or rather what unlucky Powers govern this Age, that the most de∣sireable Blessing is become a Nuisance? Liberty and Property use to be great Darlings, and a quiet and secure Enjoyment of True Religion is deserved∣ly esteemed the Greatest Blessing to any People, but now that Confusion should be preferred before them all, is very Unaccountable and Ominous. In Spiritual Concerns indeed this Folly, this brain∣less Madness is frequent; Men can and doe disdain Vertue and Purity, whilest they embrace Abominati∣on and Filthiness; they can contemn Immortality and Glory, passionately choosing Death and Hell, as if they were in love with Fire and Brimstone, and the Torments of the bottomless Pit: But that Men should be no Wiser in their Generation,Luke 16.8. and have no better Sense of their Secular Advantages, argues intolerable Delusion, and too great a Re∣proach to be wiped off: If we cannot be content to be Happy, nor know how to rest, till we have chan∣ged our Fortune, the World will deride us, our Ene∣mies will triumph, and we our selves will sadly repent it, and see, too late, that we were besotted to our own Destruction. But there are two or three Particulars the Text en∣joyns me to recommend, it being very usual in Holy Scripture for Negative Precepts to include and intend their contrary Positive Duties. And I. First, That ye have Honourable Thoughts of
the Goodness of God, and believe that what he hath done for us, was well intended: And doubt∣less we may appeal to all the World, whether it be not very reasonable we should, nay if it be not very unworthy if we should not: We may be sure that God is Wise and Good, and because he is our God, we ought to have honourable Thoughts of what he doth in reference to us, and especially when his Pro∣vidences are marked, with the most visible Tokens of his Love and Care; and though in the doing of it he chose rather to follow the counsel of his own Will, than to please one Party of Men rather than another; yet those that are Modest will conclude that God is Wiser and Better than they, and those that are Ingenuous will be Thankfull. And though some look so far before them as to be uneasie at their foresight, (without a due Trust in God,) yet for present Mercies we ought to give him Praise: It was great Grace in the Master of the Vineyard,Luke 13.6. to spare his fruitless Fig-tree one Year more, and greater still that it should be dressed and manured, and those that foresaw its downfall at the Years end, instead of reflecting either upon the Own∣er or Dresser of the Vineyard, ought to have admi∣red the Patience and Bounty that was expressed to it, The truth is, respite for a season from deserved Ruin, however Heaven brings it about, ought to be thought well of; And if neither the present Enjoyment of Good, nor the prospect of Evil a coming, will reduce us to temper, nor procure a due regard to our Duty, he that runs may read our Fate. II. Secondly, I am to recommend to you a Sub∣mission to Government, and particularly to the Powers
that be, because they are of God: And not onely so, but to seek the Peace of the Land, and every one in his Place to endeavour to assist that Establish∣ment, wherein we hope Heaven designs to make us yet happy. Obedience to Rulers doth use to be ac∣counted a distinguishing Mark of the Better sort of Christians,Rom. 13.2. and it hath been said of old, that those that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation; That we must not revile the Gods,Exod. 22.28. nor curse the Ruler of our People;1 Pet. 2.17. Prov. 24.21. that we must fear God and honour the King, and not meddle with those that are given to Change. All which carry such Authority in them, as Good Men will reverence and observe, and not suffer any ill Resentments to hinder the Discharge of the Duty they are so strongly obliged to; And though the Observance of our Duty in this case, as well as others, may be defeated of its natural Re∣ward in this Life, yet we are sure, that when we have done living here, it will be our Comfort. But this is not all we are concerned in, in this Case; but that also every one in his Place seek the Peace of the Land, and endeavour to assist the Establish∣ment, that through the Mercy of God, we now en∣joy: And there is this Reason for it, viz. That we know what our present Condition is, and that it promiseth well, if our ill Management and our Sins do not obstruct it; but what Condition another Re∣volution may put us into we cannot tell; but have great Reason to fear it will be a very sad one. And in the first place, Those that bear a share in the Government, and especially such as are in the Highest Orbs, ought not onely to be true to it, and (with all Reverence be it spoken) just to the Offices they fill, but also by their active Motions to
set the lesser Wheels a going, that an Universal life and vigour may run through and be seen in all the parts of the Common-wealth. It is indeed a most unhappy and no less wicked thing, if those in emi∣nent Posts especially, keep their places only for the Profit of them; but much worse, if they do it to make an Advantage of the Government, and destroy it together. Doubtless such have sad cause to re∣member their dismal Accounts, whilest the Unfor∣tunate Nation laments its hard Fate, praying Heaven to deliver it from such Plagues. If the Life of any Politick Body be onely perceived by that sacred Hunger in its Ministers, it is just such another fatal Symptom, as that of excessive Greediness in some sick People a little before their Death; but then this ought to be remembred, that when the flouri∣shing Ivy, by its close embraces hath suck'd away the life of the sturdy Oak, when that falls, it can∣not stand, but becomes a prey to the devouring Fire: And as I am this day the Orator of God (though a most Unworthy one he knows?) so I will presume also in behalf of the Land, to put up one Petition with all Veneration to our Terrestrial Gods, and that is, That they would remember,Psal. 82.7. that they shall die like Men, and stand before that Great Judge, with whom there is no Respect of Persons.2 Chr. 19.7. And as for those in inferior Stations, I heartily pray, That the Fear of God may so rest upon their Minds, that they be found Faithfull, and may give up their Accounts with joy at the last and great Day. And here it may not be amiss to consider a little, wherein especially the Endeavours of Men are most likely to be Advantageous and Successfull, for the Establishment and Peace of any People: And with∣out
being tedious in proving it, I will presume to say, that the Protection of Heaven is the best Defence, and Religion its best Establishment; and therefore to secure these is the greatest Policy and the wisest Pra∣ctice. That Justice and Judgment be executed; that Atheism, Blasphemy, Prophaness and Perjury be dis∣couraged and punished out of the World; that Op∣pression, Violence and Murder receive their just Re∣ward; that the Fear and Worship of God be pro∣moted, and that Vertue, true Religion and Good Men be cherished, encouraged and rewarded, is the best part of Politicks, as it is the most important Concern of Government: for this, as it is the most natural and rational Security of Society, so it will also inte∣rest us in the care of Heaven;Rom. 8.31. and if God be for us, who can be against us? The most active and cautious Management, the most critical Contrivance and Execution of Laws, for the Security of our Interests and Conveniencies, are but the trying of so many Experiments, which we cannot tell, whether they will doe or no: Many times we see the wisest Counsels defeated, the most rational Designs frustrated, the best Contrived Laws doing no good, and that potent Armies can't so much as fight, much less be Victorious. It is not very un∣worthy our Observation, that notwithstanding that necessary and improved Law was most industriously ex∣ecuted for mending the Roads,A great Snow. yet within a very little time, they became utterly Unpassable; and that not∣withstanding the most prudent Management of Af∣fairs, and the vast Expence of Treasure and Blood, we are yet subject to the Insults of our Enemies, both at home and abroad; by which and many other Instances,Eccles. 9.11. we may be convinced, that the Race is not
to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong; but that the great Dependance is upon him that ordereth all things, according to the Counsel of his own Will; And that indeed our help standeth in the Name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth.Psal. 124.7. And till we can compleat the Atheist's design, and usher God Almighty out of the World, we must by no means leave Him and his Glory out of our care and con∣cern, unless we think we can stand upon our own Legs, or else are willing to sink into the utmost Ruine and Confusion. Gods Laws therefore must be ob∣served, his Commandments regarded, and his Will done; his Holy Name must be rever'd, his Majesty adored, and his Mercy and Favour implored; his Worship must be duly and devoutly celebrated, his Sabbaths sanctified and his Goodness acknowledged: This is the laying of a good Foundation, and happy is the People that is in such a Case; because, blessed is the People who have the Lord for their God. And because this is the Product of true Religion, that is it that must be advanced and encouraged a∣bove all things, by the unanimous and joynt Endea∣vours of all, both Governours and Subjects; and not onely so, but most zealously practised by every one; For indeed so long as our Religion and our Lives do so strangely contradict and reproach one another, and our Practices are a continual Affront to Heaven, every thing else will be but as Pumping in a Ship without stopping the Leak. There is a certain Ma∣gic in sin and wickedness that baffles all Arts, that countermines all Policy, that undermines Kingdoms, ruins States, overturns Empires, and above all, hath a most direct and fatal Influence upon Christian So∣cieties: And that Deluge of Vice which hath al∣most
ruined us already, in spight of all the Mercies of God, and hath weakned us more than all the Ex∣pence of Men and Money we have been at, will cer∣tainly not fail, if we still continue it, to accomplish his Wrath upon us. Our crying sins, which we are not yet so wise as to part with, methinks sound like those Woes that the Man so passionately uttered day and night in Jerusalem, a little before its Destructi∣on, and speak the same thing, that the flaming Sword meant that hung over the Temple; and therefore to stem the tide of Debauchery, which runs so very high, and to stop the raging deluge of Vice, is the nicking Concern of every one: And whosoever hear∣tily engage in this Work, whether they be Magi∣strates, Ministers or People, the Blessing of the Righ∣teous rest upon them, and we wish them Good luck in the Name of the Lord. III. But to conclude, there is yet a Third thing the Text enjoyns, and which indeed the state of this World exacts of all that would be easie in it, and Prudence as well as the blessed Counsel of Jesus Christ recommends as a great piece of Wisdom as well as Duty; and that is, to be Patient under una∣voidable Troubles, and not quarrel and fret at what we cannot help, till we leap out of the Pan into the Fire. It had been indeed more Glory to have suffered Fire and Faggot, and Confiscation of Goods, for the sake of our Religion, than to bleed a little in our Purses, and suffer the Mortification of some of our Excesses; but we may justly fear, that there are very few so truly Christian and Magnanimous, as to have undergone such Tryals, and have gained that Glory, that are offended at much more tolerable Afflictions
now. Altho' therefore we cannot grow rich so fast as we would, nor spend so much upon Luxury and Riot as we use to do, let us be Content; and if Hea∣ven could find out any, or make the present an ef∣fectual means to substract the fuel of our Lusts, and oblige us to pare off our Extravagancies and Intem∣perance, it would be happy Providence, and would do us more good than all the Money in our Purses. But Finally, Since very few are like to be so easie in the World as they would be, let us all remember, that the world is really a Wilderness, and was never designed for a Paradise; that it is great folly to stand wrestling and contending with every thing that justles us, but that he is the wisest Man that makes the best of his way through it, toward the Promised Land. The harder things set upon us here, let us be the more in love with the Heavenly Mansions, and the more sollicitous to obtain a Lot amongst the Saints, that we may once be Happy;Heb. 12.3. Let us run with Pati∣ence the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despi∣sing the Shame, and is now set down at the right Hand of the Throne of God. With whom I pray that we may for ever dwell; And to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all Glory, Honour and Praise for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
