R2298 E313_29 99861215 113344
The Humble DESIRES OF Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, and others their Adherents, To the Kings most Excellent Majestie; TO Be tryed at a Counsell of VVar. Together with His Majesties Letter TO Colonel Samuel Sands Governour of Worcester, Concerning the Persons aforesaid. London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet, neer the Inner-Temple, December 30. 1645.
May it please Your most Excellent Majestie, VVHereas in all humility we came to present our selves this day unto Your Ma∣jesty, to make our severall Grievances known, we finde we have drawn upon us some mis∣construction by the manner of it, by rea∣son Your Majesty thought it appeared as a Mutiny. We shall therefore with all humblenesse and clearnesse present unto Your Majesty, That we the persons sub∣scribed, who from the beginning of this unhappy War have given such testimony to Your Majesty and the world, of our fidelity and zeal to Your Majesties Per∣son and Cause, do think our selves as un∣happy to lye under that censure, and as we know in our consciences, our selves innocent and free from it; We do in all humility therefore (lest we should haz∣zard our selves upon a second misinter∣pretation)
present these Reasons of our humblest Desires unto Your Sacred Ma∣jesty rather in writing then personally, which are these: THat many of us, intrusted in high Commands in Your Majesties ser∣vice, have not only our Commissi∣ons taken away, without any reasons or causes expressed, whereby our Honours are blemished to the world, our Fortunes ruined, and wee rendred incapable of trust or command from any Forraign Princes, but many others (as we have cause to fear) designed to suffer in the same manner. Our Intentions in our addressing our selves to Your Majesty were, and our submissive Desires now are, That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased, that such of us as now labour under the opi∣nion of Unworthinesse, and incapacity to serve Your Majesty, may at a Councell of War receive knowledge of the causes of Your Majesties displeasure, and have
the Justice and Liberty of our Defences against what can bee alleadged against us, and in particular concerning this Go∣vernment. And if upon the severest Exa∣mination, our Integrity and Loyalty to Your Majesty shall appear, that then Your Majesty will be graciously pleased, to grant us either Reparation in Honour against the calumny of our Enemies, or liberty to passe into other parts: Which are the humblest Desires of Your Majesties most obedient and loyall Subjects and Servants, Rupert. Maurice. Charles Gerrard. A. Thacket. Rich: Wyllies. Cha: Compton. Edw: Villers. Cha: Wheeler. Symon Fanshaw. Tho: Daniel. William Willys. Iohn Fisher. William Rolleston. William Bellenden. Som: Fox. Hen: Osborn. Iohn Skrimsher. Rich: Hatton. Sebastian Bunckley. Iames Rob: Dallison. George Bunckley. Iohn Daniell. Octo. 26. 1645.
To Our Trusty and welbeloved, Colonel Samuel Sands, Gover∣nour of Our City and Gar∣rison of Worcester. Charles R. TRusty and Welbeloved We greet you well; By Our former Letters We express'd Our care to prevent the Incon∣venience that might arise to the country and Our service, if Our Nephews, Prince Rupert & Prince Maurice, with their train and fol∣lowers, should make any long a∣bode at Worcester or other our quar∣ters; which by your Letters to
Sir Edward Walker We perceive was not without cause, as your care therein, and of Our service, is ve∣ry acceptable unto Vs, so We desire your continuance thereof. Our Nephews stay in Our quar∣ters, hath already bin longer then We expected; & because We presume it is like to be inlarged, in regard the Passes which have been sent them from London are such, as they thought not fit to accept of; Our Will and Command is, That you declare unto them, that Our pleasure is, That they deliver un∣to you a List of all their own Ser∣vants, which they intend to take with them; who We will you to accomodate as well as you may, with quarters and other necessa∣ries for them, during their resi∣ding with you, which We pre∣sume will not be long. And that for all others who adhere unto
them, as well those who have Passes from Vs, as those who have not, Our Command is, that you signifie Our pleasure unto them, That they leave Our quar∣ters by the first of December next, for that We may not bear the In∣convenience of the eating out of Our quarters, by those who have so abandoned Our service. Herein you are to be very carefull, and to give Vs a speedy account of your proceedings, for which this shall be your Warrant. Given at Our Court at Ox∣ford, Nov. 23. 1645. By His Majesties command, Ed: Walker. FINIS.
