S2618 E1021_7 99863690 115901
SERIOUS SOBER STATE-Considerations, RELATING To the GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND AND The Garrison of DƲNKIRK IN FLANDERS. BY Theophilus Verax a Dunkirker. LONDON, Printed by W. G. over against the Anchor in Little-Brittain, 1660.
Serious Sober State-Considerations, Relating to the Government of England, And the Garrison of Dunkirk in Flanders. 1. WHether, a Peace with Spain, be not desire∣able both by the English and Spanish Sub∣jects? And whether an honorable clo∣sure with the King, be not the most probable means to produce a good accommodation betwixt both Crowns? 2. Whether the composed Monarchical Go∣vernment of England, is not the best that ever was invented? And whether our late Distractions proceeded from the effects thereof, or from the National sins; and because the Treble of it hath of late years, been tuned too high for the Bass? And whether the only way, to procure the sweet Harmony of peace, is not to keep the Instrument of the Common-wealth in Tune, allowing to the Mo∣narchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, of which it's compounded, their due Rights and Preroga∣tives? 3. Whether since hard and dishonourable condi∣tions
of peace are seldome long lived,See H. 3. and Montford E. of Leicester. it be not dangerous to impose too high Termes upon the King upon his Ad∣mission? 4. Whether the rigid Episcopalians are not (next the Phanatique) the greatest Obstructers of the King and Nations settlement; in their scribling and preaching against all forms of Government but their own? 5. Whether the Jesuits, and the Sectaries (their Brats) are not now labouring, as for their lives, to widen the differences between Presbytery and E∣piscopacy, thereby to obstruct any good Settle∣ment? And whether it concern not the present Governours to be extraordinary watchful of them? 6. Whether a Brotherly Union betwixt these two parties, and a dutiful acquiescing in the de∣termination of the ensuing Parliament, will not (under God) be a great means to facilitate Settle∣ment in Church and State? And whether both parties are not in conscience and duty towards their Prince and Country bound thereto, since there is no difference betwixt them, in any fun∣damental of Religion, but only in Discipline and Form; which imports little to Salvation, onely upholds a Decency?
7. Whether the words of Desparadoes, and Chymney-corner health drinking friends of the last and present King, were not more Enemies to both, than the Swords of their adversaries; and did not these by their threats and sharing estates before they had them, drive many by force to fight against the King, that never intended any thing but quietnesse; and will not the like actings now produce the same effects? 8. Whether Plurality of Factions are not dan∣gerous, many times the overthrow of a State or Kingdome, as that of York and Lancaster to En∣gland, the miseries of France by the Royal, Po∣litick, and Catholick League, the destruction of Romes Common-wealth by the Factions of Pom∣pey and Caesar? 9. Whether it be not dangerous for a Prince or Governour, to become head of any Faction in his own Government? 10. Whether the Rump proceeded not accor∣ding to Achitophel's and Machevil's rule, in ex∣posing the Kings and others lands to sale, force∣ing the Soldiers to take parts for Arrears, thereby endevouring a perpetual and irreconcilable divi∣sions in the Nations? 11. Whether it be not the safest and best way
for Princes and Governours, to admit persons to places of honour and trust annually? And whe∣ther hereby men of wisdome, valour, and learning, by degrees, may not attain to dignity? and will not this make them strain to out-go each other in vertue, since the dore of preferment will be there∣by open to all indifferently, as they excel in goodnesse; will not hereby several dangers be avoyded, as Perpetuation, Lawlesnesse, and all fear of bringing those to subjection that raised them, taken away? 12. Whether the Purchaser of Lambeth-House be fit to keep the Records of the peace at West∣minster? 13. Whether the Lord Lockhart Governour of Dunkirk, be indeed a Scot, since he so much trans∣cends the nature of those he calls Countrymen? 14. VVhether in former times the English have not lost their Towns and Provinces abroad, by their Factions and divisions at home? And whether now the same cause may not hazzard the loss of Dunkirk.? 15. VVhether old Capt. Chapman, must not in Justice be restored to his command, being outed by the prejudice of a parcel of Traytors, Commis∣sioners from the Rump, without true ground, upon
the Oath of Bromfield the Informer, that was whipt under the Gallowes, lost his Ear, and banisht the Garrison, within a small time after he had sworn against Chapman in Dunkirk? 16. Whether the other five Members, Captains of the Army in Flanders, Devoe, Gargrave, Pox∣ton, Fitz-williams and Muse, ought in Justice to lose their Commands unheard, and their places supplyed for the most part with Phanatiques, by the Suggestions of Ashfield, Peirson, and Packer, who have been since outed themselves, for endevou∣ring to betray the Liberties of their native Country? 17. Whether Fort Manning or Fort Loggerhead be the proper name? 18. VVhether the Non-payment of the civil Officers their dues, be not the ready way to cause them to study Knavery, if they never knew any before? 19. VVhether it be not just that all the rest of the Phanatique Informers should follow after Lieutenant Copeland? 20. VVhether he be fit to be an Ammunition Commissary, that said it would never be well with England until London were burnt to ashes, for standing for their liberties, is glad at the out-ing
of all Governments, and if the Turk should rule, would be his Commissary, rather then be out of imployment? 21. VVhether the Collonels or the Master Gunner, have the more Authority, since the Gunner can commit such as the Collonels dis∣charge for the same offence? 22. VVhat so much Spanish cloath would be worth as would reach between Bromfield's the Dunkirk Informers two ears? 23. VVhether those that set Bromfield on work, to article and inform, being as bad as Bromfield himself, may not in due time follow his steps? 24. VVhether it be likely the woman at the Welcome to Dunkirk, will ever leave her pimping cheating over-reckoning, sell by just measures and turn honest, she having so long been used to such trade? 25. VVhether it be not a shame to the Prote∣stant Religion, that the English in Dunkirk must be forced to send their Children to the Papists to baptize, or keep them unchristned, as above 30. are at this time in that Garrison? And whether an able Orthodox Ministery there is not more requi∣site then in any part of the three Nations? 26. VVhen these matters will be amended. FINIS.
