S3030 E330_1 99861378 113511
The three Kingdomes Case: OR, Their sad Calamities, together with Their CAVSES and CVRE. Laid down in a SERMON PREACHED AT A Publique Fast at Kingston upon Hull. With some very remarkable Passages of Providence worthy of generall Observation. By JOHN SHAWE M. A. sometimes of Christs Colledge in Cambridge: and now Lecturer at Hull aforesaid. JER. 12. 10, 11, 12. They have made my pleasant portion a desolate wildernesse—being desolate it mourneth unto me, the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to heart: the spoylers are come upon all high places through the wildernesse, for the sword of the Lord shall devoure from one end of the land even to the other, &c. no flesh shall have peace. Nullus ferè credit quod propter peccata nostra variis modus Deus animadver∣tat in homines hujus secule: maior pars securè praeterit quaecun{que} profert Deus irae suae iudicia, alii fortunae tribuunt quae videntur in orbe conversiones ac mu∣tationes: in summâ pauci sunt vel propemodum nulli qui manifesta dei iudicia expendant,Aug. Plectimur à Deo, nec flectimur tamen; corripimur, sed non corrigimur,Salv. London, Printed by T. B. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop in Pauls Church-yard, at the Signe of the gilt Cup, under Saint Austins Gate. 1646.
To the Christian and wel-affected READER, especially to my worthy and loving friends, both the Inhabitants within the Town and Country of Kingston upon Hull, and also the Parishoners of Bradfield, in the West-riding of York∣shire: Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied. Christian Readers and friends, I Have looked with Elijah's servant more then seven times, to see what would be the issue of these troubles, 1 Kin. 18. 43. and I long since espied a great cloud (bigger then his, ver. 44. yea, like that ver. 45) and trembled because of this matter, and for the great , Ez. 10. 9. & my self have felt neither few nor small drops of these troubles (as you know;) and truly stil, if I did not see that the great and wise God had a speciall hand in carrying on, and ordering al these wars and combu∣stions, I yet see so much malice, private spleen even in those who return home and sit still, such factions, scisms, and upon (any occasion) apostacies; in a word, so much of that many-headed Monster Selfe, yet in the Kingdomes, that I could hardly expect fair, quiet, sun-shine dayes of long, but that the Lord raigneth, and therefore may the earth rejoyce, and this poor Island be glad thereof, Psal. 97. 1. I have in the ensuing lines, opened and applied, as I could, what the word and sword, my Text and times hold out unto you. My Text tels of war, plunderings, spoilings, which In locum. Hie∣rom refers to the overthrow of Jerusalem after Christ, by Titus, because the Jewes rejected Christ, the Son of God, and salvation by him, (ostendens ferociam Romanorum (saith he) in populum Judaeorum qui idcirco punitus
est quia Dei filium non recepit.) Piscator refers to the troubles of the Jewes by Zenacherib and the Assyrians, Calvin to the plague, famine, wars and all such miseries laid on them by the Lord at severall times; others, to Ne∣buchadnezzars desolating wars, and the Jewes seventy yeers captivity; Musculus to the war and misery which Is∣rael endured by the Philistines, Idumaeans, Amorites, Moabites, Syrians, Assyrians, &c. notwithstanding all which troubles, Israel could not be perswaded that sin was the cause, but either chance, or because they wanted their number of men, and were not strong enough; but the Pro∣phet prophesieth sin to be the true cause, and confesseth, that he living among them, had contracted sinne and guilt, so as that he had a hand in bringing downe these Judgements, (we have sinned) yet presently in the same verse, chan∣geth the person, his sin not being so wilfull, contemptuous, and perserved in as theirs, ver. 24. (they would not walk) yet in these sad wars and combustions of ours in Eng∣land (like those in the Text) I see some grounds of hope; as first, a budding generation comming up, hungring and gasping after Christ and the means of grace (a good signe that God is not leaving our land, but that the time of the promise drawes nigh, Acts 7. 17. Isa. 49. 20, 21.) Se∣condly, many active and eminent spirits raised up like Moses, Aaron. Phineas, like Zerubbabel and Joshua, for the work of the Lord in Church and State with bold∣nesse, Hag. 1. 12, 14. Jer. 50. 2. Micah 5. 5. Third∣ly, cleerer light shines in the Kingdom (even by contenti∣ons which satan stirs up to overthrow the truth) and in ma∣ny dark corners, Dan. 12, 4. adde to these, that the iron and clay break asunder daily, Dan. 2. 41, 42. and the stone cut out without hands growes more and more, Dan. 2. 43, 44, 45. and I see all this carried on above, and con∣trary
to the power and policy of the subtillest heads, by the mervailous hand of God, Zach. 4. 6. let me to the only praise of the wonder-working God, and the better to perpe∣tuate the memories of his miracles of mercies to this Town of Kingston upon Hull (which place, if ever any is most infinitely indebted to God, who hath shewed mercies indeed to other places, but to this town miracles) let me (I say) in∣stance in some particular mercies which God hath afforded to this town, wherein it appears, that God himself hath bared his arme and saved it beyond, and contrary to the wit and will of the subtillest enemies and seeming friends, and made the very enemies to help on your safety, and their owne ruine; as appears, first, in that a little before these wars began, your Castle and block-houses were out of re∣pair, and too much (through long peace and dis-use) unfit for service; upon which pretence, some of the Kings Coach∣men begged them of the King, and sued you for them; where∣upon you presently repaired them; which Forts, thus on this occasion repaired, helped now to keep out the Kings party: Secondly, whereas formerly you had no draw-bridges to keep out an enemy, Captain W. Legge and others of that party caused draw-bridges to be made about the Town, on purpose to keep out our Brethren of Scotland, when first they came into this land for our assistance; but these bridges kept out Captain Leg and that party: Thirdly, Arms were also sent hither for above 20000. men, under the manag∣ing of the said Cap. Leg; & after that, a Garrisonof 1000. should. here planted (having not bin any here for many yeers before) under the command of Sir Tho. Glenham, by the di∣rection & advice of the Earl of Strafford (for the same pur∣pose aforesaid) and yet all this turned to keep out that very party: Fourthly, in the dawning of these troubles, Captain Leg being setled in this Town, and having this strength and power aforesaid, and the Earl of Newcastle being also
sent hither by the King, with his Commission to be Gover∣nour here (who came into the Town by the name of Sir John Savage) but the town demurred upon their answer to him, till they heard from the Parliament) both these per∣sons (viz. Earl and Captain) thus in the town, upon a bare summons from Parliament, left the Town and posted to Westminster (a thing which I beleeve both of them have forethought an hundred times since.) Fifthly, the day be∣fore the King came first to Hull, to demand or command entrance (Sir John Hotham being then Governour here) the King sent the Duke of York, the Prince Elector, the Earl of Newport, the Lord Willoughby, Sir Thomas Glenham, and others, into Hull, which caused some jea∣lousies in the Governour and Towns-men, whereas if the King had come suddenly to the gates, without any warning, when the Duke and the rest came, I am confident none had then suspected his comming, nor would any souldier have hindred his entry at the gates (such a work was then rare.) Sixthly, the next day after (viz. about Ap 25. 1642. being saturday) the King with some hundreds of atten∣dants, came to enter the Town of Hull (the Governour be∣ing busied in entertaining the Duke of York, the Prince Elector, and their Company) and had the King still come without any further warning, suddenly to the gates, I am confident no souldier would have hindred him; but the King sent Sir Lewes Dives two hours before him, to tell the Governour that the King was within four or five miles off, and would dine with him (and this time and warning had Sir John Hotham to advise and hearten himself and his soul∣diers, to keep out that company that came with the King, and to draw up their bridges, &c. Seventhly, adde this for a wonder, that Sir John Hotham should then so resolutely keep these persons out, having such a numerous party of the
contrary mind, most active that day; both within and with∣out against him (a work at that time not for every mans spirit) himself, as since it appears, proving so unfaithfull; of whom and which work, I may this say, that when he could have ruined the Town, and endangered the Kingdom there∣by, he would not, and after when he would have done it, he could not: Eighthly, when the Kings Army came first against this Towne, they (thinking thereby to have compelled you to yeeld) burnt your Mils, but this did wonderfully set the hearts of all, both rich and poor against them (their food being endangered) whereas some of them before were not so fully affected to the Parliament and that cause. Ninthly, the Earl of Newcastle after this, having over-mastred all the North, save Hull and Wresle Castle, and ha∣ving got so great and formidable an Army, with which he might in probability have gone through most parts of Eng∣land then, and have ruined or endangered many a City, Town and County, yet were his old, wisest and subtillest souldiers so far befooled, that they perswaded him to bring this Army against Hull, in August 1643. and lay a se∣cond siege here; but partly by the shot and sallies out of the Town, partly by lying in wet trenches (the Country round about being drowned at spring-tides) their whole Army was brought almost to nothing, and those that were left of them (now no way formidabe) after six weeks and odde dayes siege, went away with infinite shame and losse, October 11. 1643. (for which mercy you still keep on that day an aniversary thankfull commemoration.) Tenthly, In all these six weeks siege, though the enemy shot many fiery hot bullets into the Town night and day, yet very few of you were hurt; sometimes many wel-affected per∣sons were met in a chamber to repeat sermons, and pray, as soon as ever they were departed and gone down the stairs,
(and not till then) came a red hot bullet through the place where they met; so in another chamber where children went to school, came another of those fiery messengers as soon as ever the children were gone from that place, and none hurt. Eleventhly, on Thursday, June 29. 1643. when Sir John Hotham was conceived trecherous, he being alwayes very active and vigilant, and especially then, yet were the Magazine, the severall guards and forts of the garrison seized on by the Towns-men and others (no experienced souldiers) within the compasse of lesse then an hour (and that before Sir John Hotham was aware) without the losse of any blood (which great and hazardous attempt, one would have thought, and it was feared, would have cost many a mans life. Twelfthly, that on the very day after this (viz. Friday, June 30. 1643.) the right Honourable and Noble Lord General Fairfax had that great losse at Atherton More, and when he was retired from the field into Leeds, and was in danger, yet more sad and troubled (as his Lordship said) for the losse of his men and the danger of the Country (and not well knowing which way, or what course to take the next day) a Boy came just in that nick Like the case of Mor∣decai, or the Shunamite, Est. 5. 14. with 6. 1, 4, 6, 10. 2 King. 8. 5. of time, with a Letter from the Major and Aldermen of Hull, acquaitnting his Honour, that Hull was open for him if he would come thi∣ther, and that the town and ammunition were seized upon, as aforesaid; Sir Iohn Horham fled, and in his flight ap∣prehended in Beverley, (a joyfull message at that time, though till then, neither had his honour heard thereof, nor the town, when they sent, of Lordships losse.) 13. Though it was generally said and thought, that if the wars should continue, and Armies should lye in York∣shire but one yeer, there could not possibly be any provision
or food left; yet have Armies been here almost six yeers already, in Yorkshire, sometimes six Generals and their Armies at once, often above 20000d. souldiers abominable firing, spoiling, plundering, &c. yet seldom have we seen meat & drink more cheap or plentifull here, then still it is (blessed be God:) This is the Lords own doing; thus have you Sea∣men, seen Gods wonders as much by Land Psa. 107. 23 24. as by Sea, and this Town sometimes a poor Hamlet called Wyke, after, in Edward the second his time, called the Kings Towne (upon the River Hull) which is a greater honour, then if by the cowardize or trechery of any, it had been turned to be (in that sense that some badly mean it) the Queens Town, may now justly be called Gods Town, because of the miracles God hath wrought for it. (Oh that it appeared to be so by our holy practice answera∣ble Psal. 116, 12, 13. to such mervailous mercies!) To conclude, let me for the same end acquaint you, the Inhabitants of Bradfield, with another instance, though of a lower ranke, viz. the mer∣vailous delivery of a Minister of Christs Gospel, born in your Parish, wherein you may still see Gods hand; learn to trust and praise him more: 'tis this, When the Earl of Newcastle besieged Rotherham in May 1643. at last, the Towne wanting powder (which was taken at Gains∣borough, as it was bringing to them) and some bouses being on fire by the enemies Granadoes, the Town was forced to entertaine a parley with the Earl, who after some shamefull repulse and losse) assured them under his hand, that upon laying down their Arms, they should have their estates, lives and liberties safe; but as soon as be entred, fined, impri∣soned, plundered many, and as it seems had a speciall intent to ruine the Minister of that place aforesaid; yet, first, that Minister went through the midst of the Town (then so throng'd) undiscerned by any; secondly, he hid himself in a vault of a bouse not inhabited (after he heard of the ene∣mies base unfaithfulnesse and cruelty) which house (the enemy pulling downe the Works about the Towne) came into, and kept as their main guard night and day, and lay close by him (which thing he neither did nor could suspect before-band;) thirdly, the enemy proclaimed him traitor by a cryer throughout the Town, yea, and all others traitors also, who know∣ing of him, brought him not in to them within 24. hours; in the afore∣said bouse the souldiers seeking him most diligently, thrust their swords betwixt the Loards frequently, yet neither found, nor hurt him; fourth∣ly, at last they looked up to a vault above their heads (which lay visibly open to view, by the space of three yards and more, where himself and his man lay indeed) and swore that he was there, whereupon they instantly ran up their stairs (which they kept) broke open the door (entring to the vault
which they saw, and where he was) found it lockt, and the key in the door on the in-side, sought him five severall times, the great windowes all open round about, be and his man lying on their sides, could have taken hold on them, yet never found either of them (no cause but that Jer. 36. 26) fifth∣ly, he having layen there on the stones most part of three days and nights, viz. from Thursday May 4. 1643. (when the Town was taken) till Saturday evening May 6. could not stir, scarce cough or spet, left be should be heard, and no friend, meat, drink or relief could come at him (the enemy keeping the Town, that house and stairs to the vault) be resolved that night, ra∣ther then starve, to goe down and yeeld himself to their cruell mercies (for be might hear them swear his death with many dammees) presently, that very afternoon they went away (be cannot to this day learn any reason why) for they came thither again the next day, and staid there constantly long after, as if they had meant (as indeed the good and wise God did) to give him just a fit time and space to get safe away, for neither before nor after could be get away thence, nor longer stay here: sixthly, when he was come down the stairs from the vault, though the enemy be found removed, yet were the doors lock; but the enemy had caused a Carpenter to pull up two boards of the floor to seek for him in a hollow place underneath, and left them unnailed down again; through which space (as if they had ment to have made him away forth) be got out: seventhly, when he came forth Acts 12. 7, 10. by that hollow aforesaid, he came through the midst of the Town again to his house undiscerned; and as he was stepping into the Hall (not knowing now who lived there or in any other house) there were seven Cavaliers billeted (having formerly plundered him sufficiently) amongst whom he was just stepping, had not a friend of his pulled him by the shoulders into another Room next the Hall: eighthly, yet durst he not carry there, but got to a vault in another house, and lay upon an earthern floor the remainder of three weeks in the midst among them, yet never got cold, nor was the least sick, no not so much as usually before: ninthly, after this he got safe to Manchester, & after some cumbers, is safely returned to his nativeCoun∣try; for all which, he entreats his friendly neighbours and readers that praises may be returned to the only wise God, and sole and lively confi∣dence put in him for ever and ever. Which passages (Christian Reader) together with the ensuing notes, bad I not been importuned to publish, till I was in Elishah's case, 2 Kin. 2. 17. nor thou nor I had had this trou∣ble: however, if God may have glory, his Cause any furtherance, or any of his people profit by them, I have all my aime, and rest The unworthiest of the least of Gods mercies, J. S. Hull Novemb. 17. 1645.
The three Kingdomes CASE, with their CAVSES and CVRE. OR, A SERMON Preached at Kingston upon HƲLL. ISA. 42. 24, 25. Who gave Iacob for a spoile and Israel to the Robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned, for they would not walk in his wayes, neither were they obedient unto his Law? Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his Anger, and the strength of battell, and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not, and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. I Need not (right Honourable and beloved) to use any other motive to bespeak your at∣tentions then the words immediately fore∣going my Text, verse 23. Who among you will give eare unto this? who will hearken and beare for the time to come? Only give me leave for the cleering of the words, to acquaint you (and that very briefly) first, with the Prophet; secondly, the time when; thirdly, persons to whom he prophesied; fourthly, the substance of his prophesie. Divines use to cast the sixteen Prophets (whose prophesies are recorded in the old
Testament) into three ranks; first, some prophesied before the Jewes seventy yeers captivity in Babilon, as Jonah, Hosea, Isaiah, and some others: Secondly, some of them gave cordials in the time of the captivity, as Eziel and Daniel: Thirdly, others quickned them after the captivity, and their returne, as Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. Amongst these, our Prophet is of the first ranke, yet though his prophesie be ranked in the first place, its not probable that he was the first of them in time that prophe∣sied, but rather Jonab, who prophesied before (or at least in the beginning of) the raigne of Jeroboam the second, 2 King. 14. 25 (whereas Hosea, though you grant him to be a Preacher seven∣ty yeers, began but in the latter end of his raigne, Hos. 1. 1.) so in the new Testament its thought by the History in the Acts of the Apostles, that not the Epistle to the Romans (though placed the first) but that to the Thessalonians was first writ; also, not the book of Malachi, but Nehemiah was the last book in order of time and story in the old Testament. This Prophet Isaiah was nobly borne, by both births, of na∣ture and grace, being of the royall blood both of Heaven and earth (let no man think himselfe too good, by reason of his birth or estate, to be Gods Prophet, see David, Solomon, Isaiah, &c. God cals to this office, sometimes men of greater birth and estates, as this Isaiah sonne of Amoz, sometimes poorer, as Amos, a poore Neat-heard of Tekoah, Amos 1. 1. which two names Robustus fortis,  Onustus durus  Hie. in Isa. 1. differ much both in the Hebrew writing and signification) Isaiah prophesied above sixty yeers to a stubborne people of the Jewes, that profited little (so did Hosea to Israel above seventy yeers) yet would not leave off his Ministry; to leave off ones Ministry because he cannot see it doe that good which he wi∣sheth (saith old Latimer) is a naughty, a very naughty deed. After all his toile and paines, he was sawne asunder by his neere Kinsman; let us learne to be content, though ill reward∣ed by men, seeing this Evangelicall and noble Prophet was so used, after so long and great paines for their soules good. The summe of the Prophesie is a discovery of the abomina∣tions of the Jewes, and of Gods judgements against the impe∣nitent for those finnes, together with a promise to the Elect, and prophesie of the Lord Jesus Christ; his birth, life, death, resurrection, ascension, and intercession.
In this chapter, the Lord holds out Christ full of beauty and bounty, goodnesse and pitty, ver. 1. 10. exhorteth the Jewes to prize and praise him, ver. 10. 13. but foreseeing their con∣tempt and rejecting of such an invaluable mercy, he denoun∣ceth heavy judgements against them, ver. 13. to the end, where∣of my Text is part. In which, consider, first, the punisher, the Lord; secondly, the punishment, battell, war, with the fruits of it, robbing, firing, spoyling, &c. And thirdly, the punished, not Heathens, but the Members of Gods visible Church, Ja∣cob, Israel; fourthly, the meritorious cause of this punishment, sinne and disobedience, neglecting Gods wayes; fifthly, the Peoples incorrigiblenesse and unprofitablenesse under all this, they consider not, nor lay it to heart. I will graspe as much together as I can, and collect some observations as suita∣ble to the Text, occasion and time, as with conveniency I may. And first this: Observ. 1. That warre with the fruits thereof, robbing, firing, spoyling, are very sad and heavy calamities, yet such as may befall a Nation professing the true Religion. Observ. 2. That when such warres befall such a Nation, it's God that sends them, and gives up a people to them (Who gave Israel to the robbers, did not the Lord?) Observ. 3. When ever God sends such warres and calamities on such a Nation, their sinnes and iniquities were the pro∣curing and meritorious cause. Observ. 4. That when a people have such judgements pou∣red upon them by God, and yet doe not consider rightly thereof, and lay it to heart, it much provokes and angers God. For the first, that the strength of battell, robbing, firing and spoyling, are sad calamities, it needs no further proofe, it's too apparent already; I may say of this, as our Saviour, Luke 4. 21. this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your eares; yet that this point may prove more usefull to us, let me a lit∣tle cut it up, and shew you the miseries of warre; first, by the precedents or occasions of it; secondly, the nature of it; third∣ly, the consequents, especially of a civill warre (such as ours now is.)
And first, for the occasions of warre, I will name some; as it's a sad thing when King a and people fall out, and clash one with another till one weaken another, and endanger the ru∣ine of both; thus Abimilech and the men of Sechem, the Lord sent an evill spirit of dissention betwixt them, Judg. 9. 22, 23. after Abimilech had raigned a while, ere long both parties took up armes, so as no man could safely travaile on the high-way because of the Souldiers, ver. 25. the event of this warre was this; first, the people were ruined, ver. 44. the City destroyed and sowne with salt, ver. 45. the Tower, a strong hold of Se∣chem, burnt, and a thousand men and women in it, ver. 49. and ere long, the King was ruined, and that dishonourably, ver. 53, 54. a sad and heavy case, to see a body tearing out its owne bowels, to see a Kingdome, like Judas or Achitophel, ma∣king it selfe away when the Lord sends a spirit of perversities amongst a people, Isa. 19. 14. (the Lord hath mingled a spirit of perversities, &c. Secondly, it's a sad thing when Courtiers and favourites of a King, who much mind not any Religion, yet come to Church and perhaps take a Protestation, the better to please men and keep their places a while, but as soon as they espie their time, take advantage upon a King, and labour to seduce & draw his heart from God and his truth, to idolatry, and to raise up armes and make warre upon his Subjects, and this hath been done, see 2 Chron. 23. 16. in Jehojada's dayes the Courtiers and people entred into Covenant to be the Lords people, and op∣posed idolatry, ver. 17. but assoon as Jehojada was dead, 2 Chro. 24. 15. the flattering CGurtiers with their congies, obeysance and cringes, vowing they would serve King Joash for ever, ver. 17. and espying their advantage with the King, wrought upon his nature, and drew him away with them from the pure wor∣ship of God, ver. 18. but see what warres followed, and what became of those Courtiers, ver. 23. Yea, sometimes a Queen, the wife of his bosome, may draw a King away, as Jezabel to Ahab, that was an high addition to all his other sinnes, that he took Jezabel to wife, 1 King. 16. 31. and there was none like him, whom his wife Jezabel stirred up: 1 Kin. 21. 25 so Solomon's wives, 1 King. 11. 3, 7, 8. and rending his
Kingdome followed upon it, ver. 11, 13, 14, &c. so Ezra 9. 2. 14. thus the Sonne of godly Jehosaphat did evill, because led away by a bad wife, 2 Chron. 21. 6. we read 2 Chron. 22. 1. that the So the people met to make Rehoboam King 1 King. 12. 1. See Deut. 17. 14, 15, &c. people made Ahaziah King (called Jehoahaz, 2 Chron. 21. 17 and Azariah, 2 Chron. 22. 6.) but two things drew him away, a bad mother, and her bad kinred and Counsellours, 2 Chron. 22. 3, 4. (if not a third, 2 Kings 8. 27.) and these cause warres and divisions. Thirdly, it's a sad thing when some young flattering Cour∣tiers be neer about the King, that perswade him to stand upon his points and prerogative, and not to condiscend to his Sub∣jects petitions at all, but either to rule by his own will (an arbitrary government) or else venture his Kingdom and all; thus did Rehoboam's young Counsellours, 1 King. 12. Solomon was the wisest of meer mortals, he had a thousand Wives and Concubines, 1 King. 11. 3. and yet had but one sonne, and he foolish; when his Subjects came humbly petitioning his Ma∣jestly, Rehoboam takes the advice of Malignant young Coun∣sellours, who tell him, would I have my neck under my Sub∣jects girdles? either rule at your own will, and keep them un∣der, or adventure all, 1 King. 12. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and see what rents in the Kingdom followed, ver. 16. Fourthly, it's a sad thing when malignant Counsellours and parasites about the King, who study the humours of Princes, lye at watch to spye an advantage, while they may take the King in a fit mood, to perswade him to ruine the Church and people of God, yea, subtilly entrap the King, and get his hand and seal (or else signe it themselves, and counterfeit his hand) to a decree destructive to the honest party, and by their deep plots draw the Kings heart away from them; thus did the ene∣mies of Daniel subtilly work upon King Darius, and got a de∣cree signed for Daniels ruine, though against the Kings mind, whose conscience told him, that Daniel was a faithfuller and honester Subject then they, Dan. 6. 5, 6, 9. they pretend they stand for the Kings honour, and that this decree is only for the Kings greater glory, ver. 7. the King ere long saw himself abused by them, but could not mend it, ver. 14. Fifthly, it's a sad thing when flatterers about the King per∣swade
him that those who are Gods best servants, and the Kings faithfullest Subjects, are Rebels and Traitors, and the Kings enemies; thus they accuse Christ to be enemy to Caesar, and that he would hinder his tribute and revenues of the Crown, Luke 23. 2. and they that favoured him were no friends to Caesar (that word struck deep) John 19. 12. thus the three childrens enemies perswade the King, that they are enemies and rebels against him, Dan. 3. 12. so did Daniels enemies, Dan. 6. 13. thus At halia cryes treason, treason, (but who was the Traitor?) so foul-mouthed Rabsbekah cryes rebellion, rebel∣lion, 2 King. 18. 20. thus Courtier Haman would preswade King Ahasuerus that the Jewes (Gods best servants, and the Kings best subjects, whereof one Mordecai had done more faithfull service to the King, then an hundred flattering Hamans) were a factious, perverse people, regarded not the King nor his lawes, and were against his profit, Ester 3. 8. Sixthly, it's a sad thing when those that are neer a King, not only whisper and tell lyes and tales to draw his heart away from his best Subjects, but also use all means, yea adven∣ture purse and life and all to ruine such: Balaam the Witch (Josh. 13. 22. Numb. 24. 1.) would seek to Heaven and Hel to ruine Israel; Moabites and Midianites were content to make their daughters whores to ruine them; so desperate is the old Serpents malice, (see Numb. 25. 1. Rev. 2. 14.) thus Haman, who would never give a penny to a good cause (not only makes the King glad with his lyes, Hos. 7. 3. as before) but will give ten thousand talents to the Churches ruine, Ester 3. 8. so that cursed Edomite Doeg (a stranger, but now made a Courtier) not onely lyes against the honest party, and sets on the King (who of himself was eager enough against them,) Psal. 52. 3. but himself (when the rest refused) playes the Butcher, not onely slaying the Priests (as he was bidden, 1 Sam. 22. 18.) but also man, woman and child beyond his commission, ver. 19 and so brings much crying guiltlesse blood upon the King and his owne head. Seventhly, it's a sad thing when Ministers (that should be men of God) advise and harten a King on to such a warre as
a matter of conscience; thus Zedekiah with four hundred Pro∣phets, or rather satan by them, 1 King. 22. 21. perswades Ahab to go up to a battle, which proved destructive to himself, 1 Kin. 22. 11, 12. and how bitter was Zedekiah against the true Pro∣phet, ver. 24. (a godly Minister hath not a worse enemy in the world, then a wicked, wretched Minister, see Jer. 26. 8, 11. with ver. 16.) hence followed a war that ruined King Ahab. Eighthly, it's a sad thing when some bloody minded men even force a King (for their own safety, gain or ends) beyond his own inclination. Let me put a case; I can tell you of a King that had two Nephews, his own sisters sons, the elder of these was General of the King his Uncle's Army, he was a furious, bloody-minded man, yet oft times the King his Uncle could not restrain him, but at last the King and he fell out, and the blood that he shed, fals in time upon his own head; my mean∣ing is, David the King had a sister called Zerviah, 1 Chron. 2. 15, 16. she had two sons, (for the third was dead, 2 Sam. 2. 18, 23.) Joah the elder of these was David's (his Uncles) General of his Army, he was bloody, very bloody, 1 King. 2. 5. yet his Uncle sometimes could not rule him, 2 Sam. 3. 39. at last they fell out, 1 King. 2. 5, 6. and his cruelty is revenged upon him, 1 King. 2. 32, 34. Ninthly, it's a sad thing when there is emulation and envy amongst Commanders in Armyes, or betwixt chief persons of the same side, so that out of envy some desert the cause, leave off, or turn to the other side; how did Aaron and Miriam envy Moses, Numb. 12. thus great General Abner makes Ishbosheth King, 2 Sam. 2. 9. (as the great Earl of Warwick said, it's more honour to make, then be a King) Ishbosheth afterwards reproves this Souldier for whoring, 2 Sam. 3. 7. presently Abner takes this in snuffe, and revolts to the other side, and loseth Ishbo∣sheth his Kingdom, 2 Sam. 3. 9, 10. ere long Joab and Abner (two great Commanders) envy one another, and Abner is slain ver. 27. see Achitophel and Hushas clashings. Tenthly, it's a sad thing when Souldiers make but a play of war and killing men, 2 Sam. 2. 14. Let the men arise and play be∣fore us:] and care not how long the wars last, or what ruine is done, so they may thrive, saying with Demetrius, by this craft we get our wealth, Acts 19. 25. all these are sad things,
which are but the beginnings and occasions of war: But the point will further appear, if we consider war it self, especial∣ly ours, and that but in a word (for I at once consider my time and your occasions.) Therefore Secondly, view a little what a sad thing war is; first, of all judgments war seems to be the sorest, by David's choyce, 2 Sam. 24. 14, &c. secondly, of all wars civill wars Graud. Sa∣ifice. are wont nothing got but grating one upon another, like mil-stones without grist (as I have shewed elswhere Summum (Brute) nes as Civilia bella satenuer, Ceto. apud Claud. 1. 2. in many particulars at large;) thirdly, of all civill wars, English war is Bella pox Emitheos plus quam Ci∣vilia Campas. See Mark 3. 24, 25. the worst, see the Barons war compared with forraigne troubles; fourthly, of all English wars these present wars is worst, if we consider, first, the truell bloody minds of the adversaries, who professe they had rather the Turk or Devil prevailed, then the Round-heads; secondly, in former times of ca∣lamity (as in Queen Maries dayes) there was an Ireland to fly to, not now, then sixty or seventy suffered, now so many thousands, then lands descended to the Martyrs heirs, but if this Parliament be by force brought down, you may write upon the doors of your Liberties and estates, Lord have mercy upon us. Ae 3ly the consequents of war (I will clean but a few) as, first, plague; secondly famine Ier. 14, 3, 4, . & 52. 6. Lam 4. 7, 10. & 2. 20. 2 King. 6. 26, 30. 2 Sam. 24. 13, 15. (read Jeremy and Josephus for both these on Jerusalem once and again;) thirdly, firing, Jer. 52. 3. Judg. 1. 8. & 20. 48. &c. fourthly, plundering, Where is strife there is every evil work, Iames 3. 16. Isa. 13. 16. many godly men left thouslesse, without Harbour, victuals, goods, money in an hour, by one party nor by another, what the pal∣mer-worm leaves; the locust, ranker worm or caterpillar eats, Joel 1. 4. we whose goods escape the sword of Hazael, yet plundered by Jebues, &c. Sabenns, Chaldeans, &c. fifthly, want of means of grace, Amos 8. 11, 12. neglect of studies, Pastors dare not come at their Flock, but hide themselves, Jor. 36. 26. nor Flocks at the Congregation; the wayes to Sion mourn, Lam. 1. 4. Psal. 74. 7. sixthly, want of execution of good Iudg. 5. 11. & 17. 6. Lam. 2. 9. Inter Arma si∣lent leges. laws, where all things are lawfull, nothing is right; seventhly, want of christian society of Saints, who are scatteved, perhaps never meet together again, husband and wife, parents and children in this world, Acts 8. 1. Math. 2. 14. eighthly, want of tre∣ding,
none dare passe the high-wayes, Judg. 5. 6. Levit. 26. 22. Lam. 4. 18. Isa. 33. 8. 2 Chron. 15. 5. ninthly, many like Me∣phibosheth, lamed, wounded, want arms, legs, &c. tenthly, many (whose blood is precious in Gods sight) are slain, and their blood run down the street, part from their friends, and never returne againe, Acts 12. 2. 2 Chron. 35. 23, 24. Judg. 20. Isa. 3. 5. Lam. 4. 5. & 5. 8. 21, 25, 35, &c. and many of the beggarly and baser sort, ri∣fle houses, and domineer over the persons of such worthies, whom they durst heretofore scarce look at. But I have much work yet to do, and little time, I adjourn the reasons; the truth of the point is apparent, and I accoast upon an Use or two. Ʋse. 1. Ad Magistratum, all you that be in places of autho∣rity and power, use all lawfull means, doe what in you lyes for the sheathing up of the sword, the preventing plunderings, spoilings, &c. and removing these sad calamities, &c. Secondly, Ad Clerum (as we use the phrase) pray we, and preach, and use our best endeavours for the composing of these differences, preventing these spoilings and robbings, to our griefe we see it; the Papists take away the second Commande∣ment, the Courtiers did take away the fourth Commadement, Plunderers the eighth, and the abuse of these wars in many places the praice of all. Thirdly, Ad Populum, and that in divers things; and first, be we all affected with mourning spirits for these sad judgments, war, and the fruits of it, as were Ʋriah. Nehemiab, Jeremiah, &c. Jer. 4. 19. Ezek. 21. 9, 10. My bowels, my bowels, &c. Should we now make mirth? &c.] take we up the lamentation, Lam. 3. 48, 49. 51. Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, &c. Isa. 22. 4. consi∣dering first, what a land we lately had, like the Garden of God before these wars, Joel 2. 3. secondly, how wofully now spoil'd especially in many places, like a desolate Wildernesse, ibid. 2 Chron. 15. 5. no peace to him that goes out or comes in: Thirdly, by whom all this is, viz. one neighbour against ano∣ther, yea, and by Papists (and their confederates) who in quie∣ter times burnt living men, women and children, and digged others out of the grave to burn their dead bodies; what would they now doe? Fourthly, how long it may yet last, The first Carthaginian war lasted 23 yeers, that betwixt the Hollanders and Spain about 70 yeers, we see the
differences are greatned, miseries hightned, and gape, widened every day, divisions in Church grow greater, and divisions in the State not lesser; see also how long the calamities were up∣on Israel in Aegipt, upon the Jews in Babylon, upon Germany of late yeers, &c. Secondly, pray hard for those of our Brethren, that be in, and under the sury of battle, and the cruelty of the enemies; and that first, they may not sin, that they may keep a good conscience; alas, this is their hour of temptation and sore tri∣all, Satan is winnowing them, pray their faith may not fail, Revel. 3. 10. Luke 22. 31, 32. see our case, Ezek. 22. 26, 31. Isa. 62. 6, 7. pray God to keep them from sinning, Psal. 74. 20, 21. Jer. 14. 19, 21. Secondly, pray God to sanctifie these troubles to them, to take away the scum, Ezek. 24. 6. to fan away the chaffe, purge away the drosse, Isa. 27. 9. Mal. 3. 2, 3. Thirdly, in due and the fittest time to deliver them from their troubles, and recompence the enemy, Psal. 79. 11, 12. Thirdly, endeavour in thy place and calling, to stench these wars, this bleeding wound, by first, repenting towards God: secondly, not willingly assisting the Enemies of the Common∣wealth, so as to hinder Delinquents from justice, or in what we are able any other just way. Fourthly, Prepare for the worst, who knowes what sad dayes we may yet see, Jer. 25. 15, 16. especially if we seriously look at, first, our sins and abuse of great mercies; secondly, what far better men then we have suffered before us; thirdly, how many clouds and mountains seem yet to be betwixt us and a quiet end; fourthly, how sins in every part of the Land yet encrease; fifthly, how all Treaties and probable means of reconciliation still knap asunder; we thought if ever the Ar∣mies met, one battle would do it, but, &c. sixthly, what selfishnesse and ends are yet in men, what envy and emulation, that sometimes we cannot agree to follow the probablest means close. Therefore prepare (I say) for the worst that can come, and trust not, first, to policy (how little hath been done in these warres, by the deepest dungeon politicians (those who were thought the wits and Achitophels of our time) even as much as
Balaam and Achitophel did; God hath befooled men, I Cor. 1. 19.) secondly, nor to riches, oft-times they make men fare the worst, as at Jerusalem, 2 King. 25. 9, 12. and massacre at Paris; thirdly, nor to strong wals & works (as was said to Phocas) Nahum 3. 12. fourthly, nor to multitude of souldiers, strength of men and horse: But first, turn to him that smiteth speedily, cordially, throughly, Isa. 9. 12, 14. Hosea 6. 1. Secondly, get into the Ark, Noah's Cabbin, Jesus Christ by faith; then safe, if floods come, Isa. 26. 20. thirdly, take heed of lying in any sin securely, Amos 6. 7. fourthly, look to uprightnesse, that fundamentall grace of sin∣cerity, pluck up a good heart; so Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 3. fifthly, keep peace with Heaven and conscience, however things goe here below; sixthly, gang loof off from the creature, take heed of being insnared now, Jer. 45. 5. Seventhly, hide thy treasure in Heaven, where no plundering, &c. Ʋse. 2. Reproves those that delight in war, and are the wic∣ked incendiaries of these troubles, and still adde (for their own ends) fuell to the fire, Psal. 68. 30. And this delight is fur∣thered, either, First, by custome in the wars; about five or six yeers agoe, what a strange thing was it to hear of a man slain, or especially if twenty or thirty slain, now (to many once flesht in it) but a play, 2 Sam. 2. 14, 15, 16. or secondly, tre∣chery; should two Neighbours have walked together seven yeers agoe, and one of them should have wept; his friend asks him, why weepest thou? the other should answer, I fore-see within these four or five yeers the Papists and Atheists in Ire∣land, will raise a horrid rebellion; and I foresee, that though thou and I walk to Church together, eat and drink together, yet thou wilt join in the same cause with them, and wilt plun∣der my house, seek to betray me and mine, yea, to slay me, &c. this would have been thought strange, yet now proved true in many; see this 'twixt Elisha and Hazael, 2 King. 8. 11. how true is that now in many, Psal. 55. 12, 13, 14. God hath opened a window in mens brests (as sometimes through the wall to Ezekiel in a vision, Ezek. 8. 8.) whereby their hollow-hearted∣nesse hath been discovered: Thirdly, gaine, as Demetrius said, By this craft they get their wealth. Object. But if sword and war be such sore judgements, Ezek.
14. 21. is not war then simply unlawfull? Answ. so said Cypri∣an and Lactantius of old, so Erasmus and others of late, others affirm it unlawfull only to Christians in the new Testament (as Anabaptists formerly) but he that considers that war is an art, first, of Gods teaching, Psal. 18. 34. & 144. 1. secondly, of Gods directing, 1 Sam. 23. 2. thirdly, commanding, Numb. 31. 1. Josh. 6. 2. himself Captain, Josh. 5. 14. fourthly, practi∣sed by choysest Saints, with good approof from God, as Abra∣ban, Joshua, Gideon, David, &c. Secondly, ye war with men professing the same true Religion with you is lawfull, Jndg. 20. 28, &c. 2 Sam. 2. 13. & 18. 7. yea thirdly, in new Testament lawfull, as appears, first, by Christs direction, Luke 3. 14. and secondly, the Magistrates Commission, Rom. 13. 14. and third∣ly, by the Saints practice allowed, as Centuriou, &c. Matth. 8. 10. Acts 10. 1, 2, 4. Revel. 17. 14. he needs not doubt the law∣fulnesse of it. Qu. 2. But secondly, the greater Quere is, When, and in what cases war is lawfull? An. first, in generall (for we speak of ordinary war) when it's necessary, and when no other means can obtain our just and necessary desires; but in particular, our Casuists require four conditions to a just and lawfull was: First, lawfull and sufficient authority requiring it; secondly, a just cause; and not only so, but weighty (not de lna capitan) but first, for defending of our laws, lives, liberties, &c. as a Sam. 3. 1. & 18. 7. secondly, for taking just revenge upon such as doe publike wrong, out-face justice, Malignancs, Delinquents &c. Jud. 20. 8, 18. 1 Sam. 15. 2. 2 . 10. 7. or 3ly toregain some∣thing unjustly taken or detained by Land or Sea, 2 Sam. 7. 14. &c. 2 Chr. 13. 5. Thirdly, a right end, not to maintain a popish Diana, nor any faction, or private opinion, not inrolled in sa∣cred writ (such as of which Chrysippus used to say, that many times he wanted new opinions to broach, but if he had the opinion, he never wanted arguments to defend it) not to main∣taine monopolies, great places, to get other mens estates, to revenge private spleen, &c. but to obtain a just peace, 2 Tim. 2. 2. so 2 Sam. 11. 2. it's there said, that David demanded of Ʋri∣ah, how the war prospered; in the Hebrew it is [of the peace of the war] i. e. in what readinesse the war was for a peaceable
end; the end of suits is to be quiet; and of physick is health: Fourthly, a right manner of managing the war for such an end; as, first, undertaking it by prayer in the fear of God, Judg. 20. secondly, when we goe along in a just manner, not to phansie a man guilty for a word, Isa. 29. 31. or for praying Dan. 6. 5. thereby to plunder him, not to accuse men falsly, but be content with their wages, Luke 3. 14. not to whore, be drunk, steal, &c. holinesse should be on the bels of the horses, and souldiers blades, as well as Priests frontlet, Zach. 14. 20. Deut. 23. 9, 14. thirdly, firsttender tearms of peace, Deut. 20. 10, 11, 12. fourthly, carry it wisely, Josh. 1. 7. Deut. 20. 38. There is yet a third Quere, more difficult then the two for∣mer, and that is; Qu. 3. What may be said for the lawfulnesse of these wars which the Parliament now maintain; are not those against the King, and so unlawfull? Answ. I have elswhere said my thoughts, Brittains Re∣membran. at present take this; first, that there should be Rulers, or superiours over men, 2 Sam. 23. 3. is Jure Divino, all lawfull government, whether Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy; whether Kings, or (which were before them in Israel, Judges, Patriarchs; whe∣ther by Consuls, Dictators, Tribunes, &c. in a word, all law∣full government is of God, and the Ordinance of God, this is cleer by the light of nature, reason, Scripture, old Testament and new: But secondly, whether this or that Kingdom (or any particular Nation now) shall be governed by Kings, States or Consuls, by a Monarchicall, Aristocraticall, or Democra∣ticall government, this can be but Jure Humano, according as that people at their first union, coalition and fundamentall constitution, did bargain or agree; God never by his Word or Revelation said, that France and Spain should be governed by Kings any more then Holland, Venice, &c. when Rome was governed by Consuls, Dictators, &c. it was lawfull, according as they did agree for the publike good and safety of the State; the world hath yet not stood six thousand yeers, and the greater part of this time that the world hath stood was spent, ere Gods Israel had a King, 1 Sam. 8. 5, 6, 7. yea, among the Jewes, where they needed no Parliaments (for God him.
self made and gave them their Law of the Land) and God had a speciall hand in choice of their Kings (more then can be said of any Kings now) yet even then the people had a hand and consent in the choice of their Kings, Deut. 17. 14, 15. 2 Chro. 22. 1. 1 King. 12. 1, &c. much more in any other Kingdoms) the institution of government is of God; but the constitution of this or that particular government, is from men. Thirdly, if any Nation be governed by Kings, yet what line or family shall be the Kings or chiefe governours there, this is from man, or according as the people first made their com∣pact, gave their binding consent and choice: Marriage is Gods Ordinance, but whether this woman shall have this man to be her head, is by her own choice and consent; God hath not said, thou such a one, be thou King of Spain, &c. Fourthly, suppose this line or family, King of this or that Nation, yet whether he shall be King for yeers, or for life, or to him and his heirs, or to him and his heirs males for ever, this is Jure humane, a humane Ordinance, 1 Pet. 2. 13. accor∣ding as that Nation first made their bargain, agreement, &c. Fifthly, what priviledges, Prerogatives such a King shall have, what liberties immunities that people under him shall have, this is Jure humano, according as they have, and do make the bargaine, according to the fundamentall constitutions, agreements and laws of that Land (for France, Spain, Denmark, Hungary, &c. are not all bound by any word of God to have just the same liberties, laws, prerogatives, &c. but according as themselves agree, so they be not against the generall rules in Scripture; so that I herein concur with the Lord Digby, that our case is not so much to be resolved by Divinity, but law; and properly to be determined by those who are Judges of what is, or is not law; what are, or are not the fundamentall constitutions of our government: Now to the case in England, the King was never made or esteemed Judge of Law; men used not to goe to the King to know what is Law; & if he said this or that to be Law, it was but his own opinion; neither are our Lawyers or inferiour Courts the ultimate Judges, but the last Judge from which there is no appeal with us, is the su∣pream Court of Parliament: (now no Court of the Kingdom
is null, or the acts of it void, because the Kings person is not there, or his mind against it.) This supream Judicatory affir∣ming and declaring to me, that by the fundamentall constitu∣tions and constant agreements and laws of this land, we may defend our laws, liberties, lives, estates, &c. by arms, and that now is this case, and necessity thereof; I beleeve it, and have no further to goe for resolution in this case: The objection of conquest is fond and frivolous; an unjust conquest without just title (meerly because another is stronger) gives a man no right to my purse, without my consent some way, much lesse to a Kingdome; should the Turk or Spaniard unjustly make wars upon our King Charles, and conquer him, have they a just right therefore to his Kingdom? But secondly, I conceive a man may very much see the hand of God in these wars going along with the Parliament; if we consider, first, the beginning of them, and that first, when we were very low, when by reason of flatterers, &c. many were banished and terrified, so as it was thought no man durst lift up his head, Zach. 1. 21. yet thousands appeared presently; se∣condly, when it was thought that by idlenesse and long disuse we were grown so effeminate, rusty and unfit for war, yet have we found men not bred, but made as gallant souldiers on the sudden, as any in the world; thirdly, when we were embroiled in a war with our brethren of Scotland, yet some of both Nati∣ons delivered, like brands out of the fire, for this work, Zach. 3. 2. Secondly, if we consider the growth of them, first, God hath wrought upon mens spirits, and that is above mans work, Haggai 1. 14. God touched mens hearts, Ezra 1. 1. 1 Sam. 10. 26. and hath fitted men like Bezaleel and Aholiab, Exod. 31. be∣yond their naturall temper for this work; of weak, made strong; of dull, made quick, see Judg. 6. 1, 6. a strong, potent enemy, ver. 5. yet a poor Leader (a thrasher) Gideon, mean person, mean family, mean furniture, weapons, &c. pre∣vailed. Thirdly, consider how God hath befooled the strongest wits and subtillest, deepest plots in this businesse, how little mens deepe plots have done in this work, but God hath car∣ried
on-things beyond the wit of man, 1 Cor. 1. 19. Isa. 44. 29. had those reaching wits many a time taken a quite contrary course, how much in probability, had we been endangered? Fourthly, we have gone most forward by going backward, gained most by our losses, like that plot, Josh. 8. 20. 22. at our losse of Albertan, Bristol, Leicoster, &c. how did our seeming friends turn, and were discovered, and when we were weakest, we did most; in most great victories, we almost quite lost all, ere we conquered, as Keinton, Newbery, Hessam-More, Naseby, &c. at Atherton we first won, then lost all. Fifthly, our enemies have helped and furthered us much in this work; how came the Bishops to be shut out of the House of Lords, Delinquents from the House of Commons, but by their own deeds? trecherous persons and plots discovered the enemies victories and plots knit the Houses firmlier together when any breach, and won them a peg higher (see Daniels three childrens, and Josephs enemies raised them, this is Digi Dei.) Sixthly, Religions purity, the plots and filth of popery more discovered; tell me of any war in all the world (Greci∣ans, Romans, &c.) that ever looked at the power and purity of Religion so much as this: Seventhly, the work is done, not by might or by power, but Gods way, by Gods spirit, Zech. 4. 6. like Jericho's wase, the way that Babybon must down, Revel. 14. 6, 7, 8. and Anti∣christ fall, 2 Thes. 2. 8. Ezra 5. 1, 2. Object. But Antichrist seems to befar from his fall and go∣ing down. Answ. Consider if as great things, and as unlikely have not been done in England within these few yeers, he that should have told thee but six yeers agoe, that we should have an in∣dissoluble Parliament (save by its own power) that it should The Lord is gone out besore us, Iudg. 4. 14. last above five yeers together, that there should be never a Mo∣nopoly or Bishop in England, that the Book of Common-pray∣er and twenty such things should be removed; would you have beleeved them? may not we say, God hath done wonders that we looked not for, Isa. 64. 3. Bd. 15. 11. and who knowes but God may say, thou shalt see greater things  these,
John 5. 20. then may we change our praises as they, Jer. 16. 14. Secondly, when Antichrist goes down, he will goe down suddenly, like his Master, Luke 10. 17. like Pharaoh, Human, Belshazzar, unexpectedly, see Revel. 18. 8, 10, 17, 19, 21. like a great mil-stone thrown down violently. Eightly, God hath done much already, he hath already made that good to us in Isa. 14. 2. that Gods people take them captives, whose captives they were, and rule over their oppres∣sors: but the time warns me, let this serve for the first point, and I will dispatch the rest in few, or else prorogue them. The next is, That when wars, plunderings, &c. befall a Nation, it's God that sends them, that gives up a people to them, 2 King. 24. 3. 2 Chron. 15. 5, 6. Amos 3. 3. the enemies are Gods rod, Isa. 10. 5. Gods sword, Psal. 17. 13. Gods battle-Axe, Jer. 51. 20. And this is not without reason, if we look at Gods glory, on his peoples benefit:  First, at Gods glory; he hereby manifests wisdome, in discovering the cowardly, trecherous and rotten∣hearted, the plots of open enemies, and falshoods of seeming friends, are in times of wars and plunderings much discove∣red, many such visions like that Ezek. 8. 8. hath God revea∣led to us. Secondly, his power; that he can make medicines of poy∣sons, bring light out of darknesse, and much good to his peo∣ple and Church by wars and losses, 2 Chron. 12. 9. and in the first time (eft times as worst, as Isaac) deliver them, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 9. make devouring Whales and Lyons help and save them, as Jonah, Daniel. Thirdly, his love; when the wars and spoilers have left them nothing but a God to live upon, yet oft times then have they most enlarged, full comfort, as John in Patmos, &c. Apo∣stles Acts 4. . Reas. 2. In regard of his people, God suffers plunderers; and that, First, hereby to put them in mind of their former abuse of their houses, lands, estates and liberties, therefore suf∣fers them to be plundered of them, and to teach them to prize and value them better another time, and God in them.
Secondly, to prevent some spirituall disease, or sore evil that he sees would else grow upon them, perhaps pride, carnal se∣curity, loosnesse, therefore he hedgeth their way with these thornes, Hos. 2. 14. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Thirdly, to quicken them to duties with more heat, to cry more heartily, Hos. 5. 15. to take away their scum, Ezek. 24. 6. to make them shine brighter, Dan. 11. 34, 35. Isa. 4. 3, 4. Zech. 13. 8, 9. Isa. 1. 25, 26. & 27. 9. and other such good ends, which I have formerly mentioned. Ʋse 1. To apply it briefly, first, art thou robbed, plunde∣red, spoiled, look up higher then man, as Job did, Job 1. 21. & 2. 10. as David, 2 Sam. 16. 10. Psal. 39. 9. not like dog at the stone. Ʋse 2. Snarl not, but learn patience, it is God hath done it, who is just and wise, who may doe what he will, who will doe what is best; it's a fathers cup and rod; any thing on this side hel is mercy; thou art no poorer yet, then thou came in, and must goe out of the world: Consider first, such a submit∣ting patient frame of heart God loves and likes, and looks for, 2 Sam. 15. 26. secondly, such a frame of spirit hath a pro∣mise of ease and delivery, Levit. 26. 41, 42. thirdly, with such submission cast thy care on God, and thou needest take no di∣stracting care in the worst times, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Phil. 4. 5, 6, 7. Ʋse 3. Is it God? here is a cordial in the worst times; he can take off these spoilers, plunderers again (who sent them) when he will; go to him, he can hook back a Zenacherib, bring down a Pharaoh, Herod, Haman, when he pleaseth, by Angels, Stars, winds, rains above; by Lyons, Whales, lice, frogs, &c. below; weak means, contrary means, no means, Job 34. 20. when past hope in mans eye, Deut. 32. 36, as Isaac, Jonab, &c. wait on God then in these hardest times, and comfort we our selves: for first, are there not a great number of Abels slain, whose blood cries under the Altar, Revel. 6. 9, 10. and will not God avenge his elect speedily? Luke 18. 7, 8. Jer. 51. 35. Secondly, many Saints (though dead) have left prayers for these times, and for this work, who sowed what others must reap, John 4. and laid the first stone of this work, and these prayers are upon the fyle.
Thirdly, there are many thousand Saints alive, for whom God will doe much, as for ten righteous in Sodom, for the wheats sake, yea, many young ones comming on (and we use not to execute a woman while great. with child;) the Lord often blesseth a Potiphar, a Labans house, for a Joseph, a Jacob's sake; when the great men of a Kingdom be in a combustion, yet the Saints then are the strength of a Land, Zech. 12. 5, 6. Fourthly, we have a thousand of wrastling prayers goe to God daily for this cause, if one poor widow can so prevail with an unjust Judge, Luke 18. one Jacob, Gen. 32. 26. how much more the Armies of prayers that begirt Heaven; the thing that we aime at, that Christ may raign, is the desire of the godly in all Nations, Haggai 2. 6, 7. Fifthly, we have many sweet experiments, tastes, and be∣ginnings of what we desire already; the bush is not consumed, two Kingdomes reconciled, much done already, many grie∣vous yoaks we are freed from. Sixthly, Gods Name is much engaged in this work, Exod. 32. 12. Numb. 14. 15, 16. Seventhly, enemies sins ripen apace, Gen. 15. 16. Zech. 5. 9. Ephah fils apace. Ʋse 4. Learn to profit under Gods rod; and that first, by seeking our wayes more then formerly, Haggai 1. 7. Lam. 3. 40. (you hear my haste;) secondly, accept the punishment meek∣ly, Micah 7. 9. Levit. 26. 41. thirdly, learn obedience, Heb. 12. 10. & 5. 8. fourthly, learn reformation, Josh. 7. Isa. 9. 13, 14. Hos. 6. 1. fiftly, prize mercies more hereafter, and use them better. For first, this is Gods end when he sends these robbers and troubles, Zeph. 3. 5, 7. secondly, it was the Churches way, Davids Psal. 13. 1. Isa. 26. 9. thirdly, then the plaster will fall off, &c. But to end it: Ʋse 5. Lastly, art thou, thy friends, or Church distressed, look up at him for cure that made the wound, meet God, Amos 4. 12. seek his face, 2 Chron. 7. 13, 14. Psal. 80. 3. yea, cry to God for help now; for first, the enemies are very cruel, Ps. 83. 3, 4. secondly, Church in much need, like a woman in travail, rea∣dy to bring forth an excellent birth, but a Dragon stands rea∣dy to devour it, Revel. 12. many are like those wicked spirits,
Mark 9. when they see they must be cast out, they rend all (though a Kingdom) in pieces; thirdly, God expects thy cries for his sick Spouse, Ezek. 36. 37. fourthly, Church expects and cals for it, Isa. 51. 18. Lam. 1. 1, 2, 17. But may I but have leave to give you a brief of what I should have said to the other points, and I have done. Observ. 3. Jacobs sins and iniquities are the procuring and meritorious causes of Jacobs punishment, Micah 6. 9. Jer, 9. 12. Lam. 3. 4. Isa. 59. 1, 2. and no wonder;  first, it's but just that God should send plunderers and spoilers to rob us; when we by sin doe what in us lyes to plunder God of his Sabhaths, of his pure worship, of his praise, of his obedience, of his goods, our souls and body: Secondly, sin gives God the lye; it is so saith God; it's not, saith sin; let me have my will, saith God; nay, but I will have my will, saith the sinner: There is no peace to the wicked, saith God; I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my own heart, saith the sinner: Such and such persons cannot be saved, saith God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. oh but they shall, saith the sinner: thirdly, sin would take away Gods soveraignty; a wicked wretch could with there was no God, and will not have Christ to rule over him: fourthly, sin crosseth the nature of God; he is not only holy, but holinesse; not onely righteous, but righteousnesse, Jer. 23. 6. but sin is unrighteousnesse, it's a very opposition to in∣finite truth and justice, &c. fiftly, sin kicks God upon the bow∣els, abuseth infinite kindnesse, patience; for which of my good works doe you stone me? wherein have I wearied you, &c. no wonder then if this procure sore punishments: A word or two of Application shall shut up this point. Ʋse 1. See then whom to blame for all the miseries that have and still doe befall us; all the Nations in the world could not have put us into that condition that our sins have, and that justly; we but drink as we brewed; cleer God in all, he hath done nothing without a cause. Ʋse 2. It informs as also, who is the greatest Malignant in all England, Scotland, Ireland, &c. truly sin; there are bad Cour∣tiers, but sin is worse, else all hel could not have made us thus miserable and distracted.
Ʋse 3. Let this shew us sin in a right glasse, and hereby learn to hate and leave it; we may say of this war as Zipporah of Me∣ses, a bloody war hast thou been unto me, in which some have lost their husbands, some their sons, some their friends, some their estates; but then chiefly say, oh bloody sins that caused all this: There are four glasses wherein I would shew you the basenesse of sin: First, in the rise and spring of it, it's a bastard, whereof the Devil is the father & mans naughty heart the mo∣ther; who would nurse such a brat, &c. Secondly, in the nature of it, it's a thwarting and crossing God and his law to his face: Thirdly, See two clean Birds. by way of comparison, dirt, poyson, crosses, De∣vill, hell, are nothing so ill as sinne, but shadowes of it, &c. fourthly, in the effects of it; see what misery it brought upon Angels; Secondly, Adam; thirdly, Sodom; fourthly; old world; fiftly, what troubles on Jesus Christ: sixtly, on all the world to this day, it's a make-bate and break-peace every where, in Heaven, earth and hel. Ʋse 4. Exhorts us as ever we would have war removed, sword sheathed, wounds healed, break off our sins by repen∣tance; would you like it to see your Town robbed and spoiled, your channels run with blood, your houses plundered? if not, forsake your sins that procure these; then first, acknowledge 1 Iohn 1. 9. Hos. 5. 15. thy sinne, Psal. 32. 5. and thy worthinesse to perish forthy sin, come before the Lord like Benhadad, with ropes about your necks, say, Lord if thou wilt condemne me, here I am, thou shalt need no other witnesse; acknowledge thy sins, national, personal, inside and out-side. Secondly, break off thy darling sin, that is a main work, this fasting day, Isa. 58. it's not consessing, like Judas, or sack∣cloath with Ahab, will serve without this, Isa. 1. 11, 15. Thirdly, doe the contrary good, Matth. 21. 29. repenting was expressed in the sonnes doing the contrary to his former finnes. Fourthly, mourn, lend a tear to a poor sick mother when we are almost robbed of our God of our King, of our Religion, and our liberties, of our estates, of our friends and lives, and  still in many  the growing hand; should we now make,  1. Ezek. 21. 6. be not insensible; but a word of this in
the next point, and an end. Which is, Observ. 4. That when God pours these sore calamities of war, spoiling, &c. aforementioned, upon a people, he expects they should be sensible of, affected with them and mourn un∣der them, and is very angry and displeased, if they doe not lay them to heart; and no wonder, for first, God cals for this mourning temper, when he afflicts a people, Isa. 22. 12. Rom. 12. 15, 16. secondly, Church cals for it, have pitty upon me, have pitty upon me, Job 19. 21. Lam. 2. 18, 19. thirdly, God complains when we are not affected with the rod, when we lay it not to heart, Hos. 7. 9. Amos 6. 6. Obad. v, 12, 13. so doth the Church also complain for want thereof, Lam. 1. 12. fourthly, the Saints of God have laid Gods rod sore to heart, when it hath layen on their brethren, though themselves have been free; thus Nehemiah, though he had provision, wine, &c. enough, and was servant in ordinary to the highest Potentate on earth, Neh. 1. 3, 4. & 2. 2, 3. so Daniel one of the highest subjects on earth. see how he is affected with the Churches ca∣lamities, Dan. 10. 3. so Jer. 9. 1. witnesse his Lamentations, see Ʋriah, 2 Sam. 11. 11. see Elisha, when he but foresaw the miseries that would come on Israel, 2 King. 8. 11, 12. above all, see Christ over Jerusalem, Luke 19. 41, 41. And reason good, if we look at, first, God; secondly, our Brethren that suffer, or thirdly, our selves. Reas. 1. In regard of God, it's he that strikes, his rod, his work, his strange work, and should we not be affected then? if a father lash one child, smite another, chide a third, shall not the rest lay it to heart; a child of God trembles at his word, Isa. 66. 2. much more at his blows and judgments; the Church trembled and were all afraid, when but one or two were smit∣ten, Acts 5. 11. how much more when God strikes down thou∣sands, David cryes, he was afraid of Gods judgements, Psal. 119. 120. Secondly, in regard of God also, because in plundering, fighting, robbing times, there is much wickednesse committed against God; see in our times what open wickednesse against both Law and Gospel; what professed Atheisme against the first Commandement, like him that was advised to leave sin,
else there was hel for him, cried, Tune credam cum illuc venero; or that Souldier that on the one side of his shield (as he fancied) pictured the image of God, with these words under it, Si tu non vis, on the other side, the Devil, and under it these words, Isle rogitat, if God will not, the Devil will; that was all that he cared: So what open Idolatry against the second Comman∣dement (Atheists and Papists being combined together,) what prophane swearing, cursing, damming, ramming, banning against the third; so that many men (tolerably civill seven yeers agoe) cannot now speak except they swear; I think veri∣ly God hath given them over to that in wrath; which they at first prided themselves in; for the fourth Commandement, we need no books of sports to be read to cry it down; amongst many, it's almost forgot, some denying it in opinion, others in practice; for the fifth, how doe the vilest people if stronger, insult over the ancient, rifle his house, so that he whose face they durst scarce (the other day) look at, cannot say, his house, lands, goods, wife, children, &c. are his own, Isa. 3. 5. Lam. 4. 5. & 5. 8. but drag him forth of his house bare, though gray headed and bare-foot, and use him villanously, as Phocas did to that good Emperour Mauritius, for murder, whordome and stealing, (breaches of the sixth, seventh and eighth Comman∣dements) which usually goe together; how rarely are these punished? nay, made but a jest? plundering, smoaking, &c. lying is grown a trade in word, writing, print, &c. For the Gospel, how do men jeer at it, the gospellers, gospel lives, faith, &c. nay, how do some openly cast off the old Testament & much of the new, both in doctrine and practice? and should we not, nay, can we but lay these things to heart that are practised in these plundering times? if our father, husband, wife, &c. vvas struck down, vve would mourn; and is not God dearer to us then a thousand friends, shall vve not lay it to heart vvhen men grow vvorse then Devils, James 2. 19. neither beleeve nor tremble? Thirdly, vvhen the enemy gets a petty victory, Gods name is blasphemed, therefore should vve be affected and afflicted, he cannot be content to strip, plunder, beat the poor Saint (whom he blasphemes Round-head) but he must rail on and revile his
God; where is your God now? what is become of your Fa∣sting, Conventicles, long prayers, praying by the spirit? alas, this kils a Davids heart, troubles old Eli and his daughter, more then other crosses, 1 Sam. 4. 18, 19, 21. Psal. 74. 18, 19. & 79. 10, 11. so Moses, Exod. 32. 11. Numb. 14. 16. so Psal. 3. 2. & 10. 13. & 42. 3. Reas. 2. In regard of our Brethren and Country; for first, many are banished, plundered, wounded, slain, their houses burned, themselves outwardly undone, that are very dear to God, whose lives are precious, Lam. 4. 2. blood precious, Psal. 72. 14. death precious, Psal. 116. 15. Gods servants, friends, children, heirs, Christs fellows (fellow servants, fellow sufferers fellow conquerors, Rom. 8. fellow judges, 1 Cor, 6. 2. fellow citi∣zens with the Lord Jesus Christ, Rom. 8. 17. nay, Christs spou∣ses, partakers of divine promises, divine nature, divine (com∣municable) priviledges of Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and shall we not lay this to heart? Secondly, they are neer to us, of the same house with us (for all Gods Church is but one house, only severall Cham∣bers and Parlours, 1 Pet. 4. 17.) nay, members of same body, under same head, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 26. and when these suffer deep∣ly, shall not we mourn? then are we but glassie eyes, and wooden legs, no living members; shall Christ be sensible, who is the head, Acts 9. 4, 5. Matth. 25. 42, 43. and not your fellow∣members? 2. Cor. 11. 29. 1. John 2. 9, 10. Thirdly, in regard of our Country; can we see our native Country spoiled, torn in pieces by its own sons and not mourn? see Neh. 2. 3. Psal. 107. 34. Joel 2. 3. how hath this dar∣ling soyl and Kingdom been harassed and over-run by the Sax∣ons (Anno 447. after Christ) whom King Vortiger sent for to help him against the Picts and Scots, who came over hither under the conduct of Hengistus and Horsus, with about 9000. men at first, but after they had conquered the enemy, they con∣quered King Vortiger himself, slew his Nobles, got first a Ca∣stle in Kent (Thong Castle) then a County, then most part of our Kingdome, and made seven Kingdoms of it, plundered, banished and spoiled the Brittains: After came in the Danes, fetcht in by one of our Nobility, Beorne Bockard (as some say, by occasion of one Lothbroke) under the conduct of two Da∣nish Captains, Hunga and Hubba, upon the Danes comming in∣to
England, they slew Osbert King of Northumberland, and so re∣venged the cause of Bockard, & after shot King Edmond to death with arrows, having bound him to a Tree, therein revenging the death of one Lothbroke (slain by one Beric King Edmonds fal∣coner:) These Danes again plundered the poor Inhabitants of this Land, kept them under as slaves, so as they could not drink, but a Dane would cut an English-mans throat; hence were they fain to get one to pledge them when they drank, to save their throats from being cut. After this, came in the Normans from Normandy in France, in the dayes of King Harold brought hither by William Duke of Normandy (after called Wil∣liam the Conquerer) landed neer Hastings in Sussex, September 28. 1066. Duke William sunk all his ships, that so his men might resolve to fight (for fly they could not) fought with Harold October 14. in the yeer of Christ 1066. in which battle were slain about 68000. men, William proved the Conquerer, got the Crown, the poor Inhabitants were again plundered, their lands, places, estates were given to the French, many fled to Scotland, to King Malcolme there, &c. but yet these were plun∣derings from forraign Nations, but now are we tearing out our own bowels in civil wars and broils one with another; it's true also, we have had terrible civill warres in England before this in the Barons war, in the divisions twixt the houses of Lancaster and York; but still ours are worse; when those wars were at hottest, it's Chronicled for a strange wonder, that in the Reign of Edward the fourth, there were nine severall bat∣tels fought in that civil war, and yet he reigned (I think) al∣most 23. yeers. But I can tell you of nine battles in half a yeer in King Charles his time, nay three times nine battles in three yeers of his Reign, and the Lord knows how many more yet may be. In every one of our late Soveraigns Reigns, there hath been some remarkable trouble or danger to this Laud; burn∣ing in Queen Maries dayes, a Spanish Navy in 88 in Queen Elizabeths days; a hellish Powder-plot in 1605. in King Iames his days, but these troubles in King Charles his days exceed all the rest; in Queen Maries days some three hundred were burnt, in our days above thrice three thousand slain; alas; how is our Country (lately like the Garden of God) now become a de∣solute
Wildernesse, Joel 2. 3. that Land that Gregory (after cal∣led the great) at Rome called Angel-land, a Land of Angels; which Spain called the fortunate Island; how sits she like a wi∣dow? alas, one comes from the Army and brings news like his 1 Sam. 4. 17. there hath been a great slaughter, and thy sons are slain, and then what pitty to see how Rachel weeps because they are not; another cries, my Husband is slaine; another comes like Jobs messengers, and cries, thy goods are plunde∣red, sheep and Cattel &c. gone by the Sabeans, &c. Job 1. another is shot to death, but lockt in the saddle, swags up and down; another hath his arme off, leg off, nose off, hand off, &c. ah, alas ten thousand pitties! Corn-fields burnt, houses; Churches burnt down, Isa. 64. 10, 11. Psal. 74. 4, 7. thumbs and toes cut off, as in Adonibezek's time, Judg. 1. 7. swords make women childlesse, as in Agag's time, 1 Sam. 15. 33. cru∣elty used to living, yea and to the dead also, Psal. 79. 2. which a very Tacitus would have abhorred. Reas. 3. In regard of our selves: First, our sins have had as deep a share in bringing these judgments as any, and shall we not be affected then with them? then are we worse then the old Prophet was, 1 King. 13. 30. he hurt the young Prophet, but then mourned; Davids sins hurt the people, Actions the Army; the peoples sin hurt Ʋzzah, 1 Chron. 13. 10. a bad sto∣mack hurts a good head, and shall we not mourn then, as Daniel did in the like case? Dan. 9. 5, 6. Secondly, because that which lies on others to day, may be our case to morrow, ille bodiè ego cras, as Bernards good old man said, the cup may passe unto us, Lam. 4. 21. we may be forced to drink round of Gods cup, Jer. 25. 28, 29. & 49. 12. say not they are greater sinners then we that are sharplier chastized, Luke 13. 4, 5. but lay it to heart as if we were in bonds, Heb. 13. 3. Gal. 6. 1. But I must break up; an Use or two therefore shortly, and I have done. Ʋse 1. Of reproof to many (herein nigh a kin 20 Jacob, to Israel) that though we are thus given to the robbers and spoi∣lers, yet consider not, yet lay it not to heart; these are of di∣vers sorts; First, they that are glad of it; enes cry, down with us, down to the ground, Psal. 137. 7. seeming friends,
that say, hereby they get their wealth, Acts 19. 25. Newters of Gallio's temper, or of theirs, 2 Sam. 2. 14. Obadiah ver. 12. Psal. 35. 15. Secondly, they that are sensible of Jacobs troubles, but im∣pute them to a wrong cause, they say as Barbarians of Paul, or Job's friends of him, Surely Iacobs cause is naught, be goes in a wrong way, else had never been so given up to the spoilers and robbers; but oh see ere thou judge, Judg. 20. 21, 25. Thirdly, they who are sensible of, and affected with the crosse and trouble, not the sin. Fourthly, they that make it appear they are not affected with our miseries and sins, no not upon our humiliation, fa∣sting and mourning dayes; for first, some come not, cannot spare time from work; secondly, other game, card, sport this day, which is much more needlesse then work; thirdly, others feast this day purposely, set up an anti-fast, as well as an anti∣parliament, see Isa. 22. 12, 13, 14. Fifthly, others take occasion this day, while you are shut up here mourning and weeping, and praying, to haunt Ale∣houses, and whordome, and pour more oaths out, and more cups in, then we pour out tears, like brazen-faced Zimri, when all the Congregation was weeping, Num. 25. 6. Sixthly, they that come hither and sit here, but are not affe∣cted, mourn not; fasting days should be weeping days, fasting and weeping used to be joyned together, Neh. 1. 4. Est. 43. 1 Sam. 7. 6. Joel 2. 12. many are very eager and earnest in buying, in selling, trading, hunting, coursing, only mighty carelesse, mindlesse, in hearing, praying, and when they should be weeping. Seventhly, others weep & mourn for a day, but hold not out, are not like wrastling Jacob, or the importunate widow, or like mourning Jeremy, Lam. 3. 50. till God look down and heal his Church: Now this insensiblenesse in these sad days, this not laying these things to heart, is, first, a walking contrary to God, Isa. 22. 12. Levit. 26. 40. secondly, it argues much folly and blindnesse of mind, Jer. 5. 3, 4. thirdly, much hardnesse of heart, worse then Pharaoh, Manasses, Prodigall, they in times of crosses relented, Exod. 9. 27, 28. 2 Chron. 33. 12. Luke 15.
fourthly, it's a despising God; let him smite and doe what he will, saith the sinner, I will not yeeld, like Balaam, will not turn back for all sword and miracle, Numb. 22. fiftly, it argues a mervailous love of sin, as the child that is whipping for playing with rattles, will still play with them while he is on the knee whipping, sure he loves them dearly, as Balaam did the wages of unrighteousnesse, so as word and sword could not turn him, 2 Pet. 2. 15. sixtly, it argues want of love to Christ, 1 John. 3. 17. & 4. 20. seventhly, want of love and zeal to Gods Cause, Psal. 74. 18, 19. & 79. 10, 11. Ʋse. 2. The second Use should have been for tryall, whe∣ther we are rightly affected with Jacobs troubles; first, are we as much affected with them now, as we were at the beginning of these wars? secondly, how are we afflicted on dayes of humilia∣tion, Levit. 23. 27. Ezek. 7. 16. thirdly, are we affected with sin, the cause of all these troubles? fourthly, doe we turn from our evil vvays and reform, Jonah 3. 10. Ʋse 3. But to end, lastly, be exhorted this mourning day, to consider and lay to heart Jacobs troubles; as first, the scat∣tered dry bones of Germany; secondly, the Acheldema and tor∣tures of Ireland; thirdly, the divisions of Scotland; fourthly, the plunderings in England: fiftly, the fury of battle and sword, hacking & hewing amongst us; sixtly, the destroying Angel, the noysome pestilence in many places of our Land and Country; seventhly, the scisms, rents, old, new errours in the Church; eightly the encrease of sin daily, of all kinds, as light encrea∣seth; there vvas light and knovvledge in King Edward the fixt his dayes, more in Queen Elizabeths, more still in King James his, most in King Charles his dayes, yet still sin encreaseth, yet some doe not see, some vvill not see, some pretend to see that vvhich is not to be seen; ninthly, God dravvs neerer and neerer vvith his judgements and vvarnings, begins novv to make his approaches, intrench and make his batteries; he began in Ger∣many, came on to Ireland, then to Scotland, then to England, then to Yorkeshire, then to the gates of Hull; and that first, mildlier, vvhen the King came to the gates in April 1642. then sharplier in the first siege, then more terribly in the second siege, from vvhich you vvere delivered Octob. 11. 1643. bevvare the fourth
time; novv God knocks at the gates vvith a fear of the plague the King called in Anno 1642. the King of Kings knocks novv in 1645. tenthly, the danger of continuing these troubles, till all be dasht in pieces, and many such like evils. Qu. What should vve do? Ans. first, ponder sadly, the lands miseries, the particulars, the quantity, the quality of them, Psal. 41. 1. secondly, ponder thy ovvn evil vvays, as sadly, Psal. 4. 4. Ezek. 36. 31. Lam. 3. 40. sift thy self for thy sins (as the word is Zeph. 2. 12.) when God sifts the Land, Amos 9. 9. doe as the Prodigall, return to thy self, Luke 15. 17. thirdly, clear God in all this, and condemn thyself, Ezra 9. 13. though thou art no rebel against the King, yet against the Kings King thou hast been; fourthly, have a fellow feeling of thy brethrens miseries Heb. 13. 3. so as to pitty them in thy heart, Jer. 4. 19, 20. Lam. 3. 51. and pray for them with thy heart and tongue, Isa. 62. 3. help them in thy life, mourn for them, Neh. 1. 4. and look not only on them, as Priest and Levite did, but to thy power be a good Samaritan; thirdly, you that have power, punish wic∣kednesse and vice, let it not be now when the Kingdom bleeds (as a godly Divine saith) as hard to pull down a base Ale∣house, Mast. Bol. as to win Dunkirk, &c. Motives might be many, but I will only hint at one or two and conclude: First, to lay to heart Jacobs troubles, with the cause thereof, is the way to save us in time of danger, Ezek. 9. 4. when King Zedekiah would juggle on all sides, mourning Ieremy speaks home and plain, yet finds more favour from the Chaldeans heathen Army, then Zedekiah and all the Nobles, Jer. 39. 6, 7, 11, 12. so Ester 4. 14. Secondly, we have set apart this day to lay to heart Jacobs troubles, let us doe the work that we came for: Thirdly, consider how Jesus Christ was and is affected with the churches miseries, Luke 19. 41. Acts 9. 4, 5. Fourthly, how great things now lye at stake, not an Army only new moulding, but Kingdom, &c. but I to case you, and myself, break off with the sad complaint of mourning Jeremy Lam. 3. 48, 49, 50, 51. Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction of the daughter of my people; mine eye trickleth down and ceaseth not, without any intermission, till the Lord look down and behold from Heaven; mine eye affecteth my heart, because of all the daughters of my people. FINIS. Decem. 26. 1645. Impri. JOSEPH CARYL.
