S295 E86_12 99872821 155688
A LETTER Sent by Mr. Henry Iarmin, Now resident in PARIS, TO Mr. VVilliam Murrey, OF His Majesties Bed-Chamber: As it was intercepted at Sea by Captaine JAMES MORGAN, Captaine of the good Ship, called the Mary-Rose of Bristoll. Wherein is expressed the full and reall intentions of the said Mr. Iarmin, and the other English Fugitives in France, against the proceedings of the Honou∣rable, the high Court of Parliament here in ENGLAND. London, printed for James Jobson. Ian. 26. 1643.
A Letter sent by Mr. Henry Iarmin to Mr. William Murrey of his Majesties Bed-Chamber. Honest Will: IT will seeme strange to thee, to receive any tydings of me from France; as it did appeare miraculous to mee, to heare the state of all affaires in England from thee by the last Post, that intelligence I hope will hope, if you care to direct and ma∣nage it, so that it may meet no interception. I would not write back to you by the said messenger, lest my letters might have arrived sooner at London to the Parliament, than to thee at Oxford, and so fortunately encountring a man of Sir Ralph Hoptons at Paris, where I am now, who brought me some Expresses from his Master out of the West of England; I thought best by him, both for the securitie and suddennesse of the conveyance, to send back by him an answer of thy former letter, and my true respects to thee my deare Will, whom since my departure I have still worne about my heart. I am exceeding glad that his Sacred Majestie is so well and strongly seated (as I am enformed he is) at Oxford, and hope his Councell will advise him there to continue, till all the turbulent businesse of the times be reduced to an happy
period, I hope, and so does all the rest of his servants here, who suffer in his Majesties cause, that Hee will not want strengths at home to settle Him in his wonted Royaltie at White-Hall, where wee had all rather be attending his Sa∣cred Person in our former garb and greatnesse, than live here like Honourable Exiles at Paris; for that is (trust mee) the best account the French men make of us. Concerning the managing your domestick affaires, and the prosecution of the present war in England, it were a needlesse presumption for me to dventure on advising you. I know his Majestie hath so many able head-pieces about Him, that were I there present, I should blame my modesty, should I intrude mee on any counsell in the directing those affaires, which certainly had my successe answered my in∣tentions, or my power my will, had by the course I shaped, been at far more setled rate than now they are, His Maje∣stie had never been driven to these straights, nor the Parlia∣ments endevours succeeded so prosperously. But they were blasted in the bud of their expectation and progresse, and so no more can be said of them; but that were like too early fruit, easily shaken downe to earth, and there betrayed to rottennesse. For the services which my selfe, and others of his faith∣full ministers here in France, under the umbrage of ba∣nishment, have endevoured in the advancement of His Majesties present wars; I shall give thee a short and reall account, such as may befit the integritie of my heart to the King, and my affection to thee my friend. I have for mine owne part, having by reason of the Queens commends, and the interest of my former acquaintances best credit in this Court, employed my whole studies to ingage the King of France to the succours of the King our Master, as I have by former letters advised thee. But during the life of the Car∣dinall Richelieu, who for what cause I know not, was still adverse to my proceedings, my suits and endevours were cast against the wind, and so vanished. Since his decease, I
have found my addresses in that businesse, and easilier enter∣tained both by his Majesty of France and his Councell, who notwithstanding by a politike pretension of conserving the league inviolable between the Kingdomes of England and France, have waved my desires so, that have not suted to so full an effect as I aimed them. I find this Nation flexible e∣nough, I meane the great ones of it, to give eare attentively to the King our Masters wants and sufferings; but when I urge them home for a supplement to those wants, with a complementall courtesie they answer; They could heartily wish the differences between his Majesty and Parliament were fairly composed, and that to work that composition, they would willingly engage their King to employ his ut∣most powers; but still with that clause, Saving the amitie between our Kingdome and the Kingdome of England: so that verbally I may define, ready to serve the King, but cordially the Parliament, which hath so much afflicted me, and discomposed my little patience, that I have often in plaine termes intimated to them, the great disparage∣ment it would cast upon the dignitie of Kings in generall, to bee forced to stand to the arbitrements of their subjects, they have answered me flatly, they understood not how mat∣ters went between the King of England and his Parliament, whom they believed to be far better instructed in the lawes of the Kingdome and the prerogative of our Kings, against which, it was not likely they would attempt any thing, then they which were strangers. And-when I requested there might be some ayds of men and ammunition sent over by the King of France, as testimonies of his love to his Majestie of England, they have replyed, that with all their hearts they would be yeelding to the transferring any such suc∣cours, but that they did believe their King could not in his wisdome, considering his pregnant necessities, being ingaged in severall parts of his Dominions against the powerfull for∣ces of the Spanyard, transmit any of his soldiers as auxiliaries hither, since he was scarce furnished with men enow to keep
the field and maintaine his frontier garrisons against his ad∣versarie, that so many ways infested, every part of the Realm of France, wearyed & disheartned with these circumstantiall delayes, which were indeed flat denyalls. I was resolved to cease any further prosecution of that businesse, determining with my selfe to rest my selfe here in a quiet banishment; and since I could no other way advantage his Majesties af∣faires, as much as I would by my prayers, till now with∣in these late dayes: the French and Spanyard both tyred with the tedious expences of their precedent wars, began to ef∣fect some treaty and overture of peace, which if it be once (as I hope it will be ratified between them) I shall not doubt to procure his Majesty very considerable ayds out of these parts. To facilitate the effecting of which, I have spared no paines, no diligence, nor omitted any cost which was with∣in my abilities, to the favorites and Minions of the Court of France, to endeare their Master to the King our Masters assistance. I have remonstrated to them the many indignities which have been offered to his Majestie, his royall Consort, their Kings sister, and all their royall Progenie, by expelling them from the Court at White-hall, since which time, her Majesty hath beene forced to live in the manner of an exile in Hol∣land at the Hagne. I laid before them the many straits and grievous exigents which the King our Master was brought into by the disobe∣dience of his Subjects, being deprived of his revenue and magazines, and how acceptable such supplies of his present wants would arrive to him, and in what an eternall obliga∣tion of friendship it would indeare his Majesty to the King and State of Franch to receive such demonstrations of their aptitude to his reliefe, as were men and ammunition. Many other motives, such as either my wit or judge∣ment in the Kings present affaires could prompt mee to, did I intimate unto them; by all which I thinke (for I have no assurance but imaginary, on which I can build no certainty)
I have won so much on the King of France and his Councell, to intend some succour to the King our Master: For since that time, Ships fit for service have been stayed in all the ports of Normandy and Britaine, and the adjoyning parts; choyce of all the able Mariners made for manning the said vessells; store of harnesse and millitary provision sent to the forementioned parts, and the most signall Commanders in France commanded to give their attendance thereabouts: 15000. well experienced soldiers being provided for the fur∣nishing those Ships, whither they are bound is not yet divin∣ged, but the rumour goes for England, which if it be so, and that they can get safe landing there, and joyne with his Ma∣jesties present forces, wee may then assuredly hope the best, and that his Majesty will be victorious over all his enemies. But in troth, deare Will, wee can but onely flatter our selves with these hopes, as men doe which with it should be so, but not affirme it so; many pregnant reasons indu∣cing me to thinke the contrary, as the infallible knowledge the State of France, of the prevailing power of the Parlia∣ments forces and their strength , where the French∣men are no wayes so good souldiers as they are at land, nor to be held comparable to the English, who now are reported here, to guard the Coasts of England and the narrow Seas. Besides, it may be a fine tricke of French policy, whilest the Spanyard is amazed with the present overture of peace to beat him at his owne weapon (craft) to provide this Na∣vie, and these souldiers in store for the succour of the King, so to have them in readinesse upon all occasions (which are not unlikely to fall out) of breaking of this treaty of peace, to fall upon the Spanyards townes in Flanders, or to set forth for the invasion of some other of his Dominions at the approach of the Spring, till when, they cannot be rigged nor in readinesse to set out; such trickes there are frequent in the actions and policies of State, but wee hope the best; and if these provisions be really intended for the assistance of his Majesty, I shall thinke my inforced discontinuance
from my Countrey and friends fortunate, since by it I have beene an instrument to promote his Majesties peace: how∣soever, my kind Will, I wish with all my heart matters had never proceeded to this unluckie heighth betweene his Ma∣jesty and his Parliament, then had wee enjoyed one ano∣thers company in peace at Whitehall, and these miseries never been inflicted on our owne unhappy Countrey, where, so all matters were fairly composed betweene his Majesty and the Parliament, I could heartily wish my selfe in my former condition, that I might be happy in the society of thy selfe and all my other friends, to whom I desire thee to doe my best commendations; and as my last Encaricmento, and so of most consequence to be performed, I desire thee to let his sacred Majestie know, that I prostrate my life at his roy∣all feet, wishing no longer to enjoy life, then I shall ever strive to be esteemed his Highnesse humblest and loyallest Subject and servant, and thy true friend, H. I. Paris, 19. Ianuary, Stilo Novo. FINIS.
