s3448a 99895601 153342
Mother SHIPTONS PROPHESIE: WITH Three and XX more, all most Terrible and Wonderful, Predicting strange Alterations to befall this Climate of ENGLAND. VIZ. 1. Of Richard the III. 2. Mr. Truswal Recorder of Lincoln. 3. Lilly's Predictions. 4. A Prophesie alluding to the Scots last Invasi∣on. 5. Ignatius his Prophesie. 6. Mrs. Whites Prophesie. 7. Old Sybilla's Prophesie. 8. Merlin's Prophesies. 9. Mr. Brightman's. 10 Old Orwel Bins. 11. Paulus Greberus Proph. 12. A Prophesie in old Eng∣lish meeter. 13. Another ancient Proph. 14. Another short, but pithy. 15. Another very obscure. 16. Saltmarsh his Predict. 17. A strange Prophesie of an old Welch-woman. 18. St. Bede's Prophesie. 19. William Ambrose. 20 Tea's Prophesie. 21. Thomas of Astledown. 22. Saunders his predictions. 23. A Prophesie of David, Cardinal of France, &c. woodcut of mother shipton delivering her phophecy to cardinal wolsey Wolsey. Mother Shipton. Yorke. LONDON, Printed by A. P. and T. H. for F. Coles, and are to be sold at his Shop, in Vine-street on Saffron-Hill, neer Hatton-garden. 1678.
The Prophesie of Shipton's wife in the time of Henry the Eighth. Note, that this Prophesie was never exactly Printed before.WHEN she heard that King Henry the 8. should be King, and Car∣dinal Wolsey should be at York, she said, that Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York, Which the King and the Cardinal hearing, being angry sent the Duke of Suffolk and the L. Darcy to her, who came with their men disguised to the King's house near York, where leaving their men, they went to Mr. Besly in York, and desired him to go with them to Mother Shipton's house: where when they came they knocked at the door, she said, Come in, Mr. Besly, and those honourable Lords with you; and Mr. Besly would have put in the Lords before him, but she said, Come in, Mr. Besly, you know the way, but they do not. This they thought strange that she should know them and never saw them; then they went into the house, where there was a great fire, and they drank and were very merry. Mother Shipton, said the Duke, if you knew what we came about, you would not bid us so welcome. She said, the Messenger should not be hanged. Mother Shipton, said the Duke, you said the Cardinal should never see York. Yea, said she, I said he might see York, but never come at it. But, said the Duke, when he comes to York thou shalt be burned. We shall see that, said she; and plucking her Handkerchief off her head she threw it into the fire, and it would not burn; then she took her staff and turned it into the fire, and it would not burn; then she took and put it on again. Then, said the Duke, what mean you by this? She replied, If this had burned I might have burned. Mo∣ther Shipton, quoth the Duke, what think you of me? My Lord, said she, the time will comeThe Duke was afterward beheaded. you will be as low as I am, and that is a low one indeed. My Lord Piercy said, and what think you of me? My Lord, said she, Shoe your Horse in the quick, and you shall do well, but yourThis proved true, for he rose in rebellion in the North, and by not flying when he might, he was taken and beheaded in York, where his Body was buried, and his Head was stollen away and carried into France, tempore Eliz. Reg. bo∣dy will be buried in York Pavement, and your head shall be stoln from the Bar and carried into France. At which they all laugh'd, saying, That would be a great lop between the Head and the Body. Then said the Lord Darcy, and what think you of me? She said, You have made a great Gun, shoot it off, for it will never do you any good; you are going to War, you will pain many a man, but kill none. So they went away. Not long after the Cardinal came to Cawood, and going to the top of the Tower he asked where stands York, and how far it was thither; and said, that one said he should never see York: Nay, said one, she said you might see York, but never come at it. He vowed to burn her when he came to York. Then they shewed him York, and told him it was but eight miles thence. He said that he would soon be there; but being sent for by the King, he dyed in his way to London at Leicester of a Lask. And Shipton's wife said to Mr. Besly, Yonder is a fine Stall built for the Cardinal of the Minster of Gold, Pearl and precious Stones, go and present one of the Pillars to King Henry; and he did so. Mr. Besly seeing these things fall out as she had foretold, desired her to tell him some more of her Prophesies. Mr. Besly, said she, before thatThis came to pass, for Trinity Steeple in York was blown down with a tempest, and Owse-bridge was broken down with a great floud; and what they did in repairing the Bridge in the day time with the stones of the Steeple, fell down in the night, until they remembring this Prophesie, laid the bighest stone of the Steeple for the foundation of the Bridge, and then the work stood. And by this was partly verified another of Mother Shipton's Prophesies, viz, that her Maid should live to drive her Cow over Trinity Steeple. Owse-bridge and Trinity Church meet, they shall build on the day, and it shall fall in the night, until they get the highest stone of Trinity Steeple to be the lowest stone of Owse-bridge.
That the day will come when the North shall rue its wondrous sore, but the South shall rue it for evermore: when Hares kindle on coldSupposed to be  by suppression of Abbies & other religious houses; and at the Lord Wil. Howards house at Naworth, a Hare came and kindled in his Kitchin upon his hearth. hearth-stones; and Lads shall marry Ladies & bring them home. Then shall you have a year of pining hunger, and then a dearth without corn, a woful day will be seen in England, a King and a Queen. The first coming of theThis was fulfilled in K. James's coming in, for such multitudes of people stood at Holdgate-Bar to behold him, as that to avoid the press he was forced to ride another way. King of Scots shall be at Holgate Town, but he shall not come in through the Bar; and when the KingWhen K. James was at London, his Children were at Edinborough, preparing to come into England. of the North shall be at London, his tail shall be at Edinborough. After this shall waterThis is verified by the conducting of water into York streets through bored Elms and the Conduit-house hath a Wind-mill on the top that draws up the water. come over Owse-bridge, & a Wind-mill shall be set on a Tower, and an Elm∣tree shall lie at every mans door; and at that time women shall wear great Hats and great Bands. And when there is aA Lord Myor whose house was in the Minster-yard in York, was killed with three stabs. Lord Major at York let him beware of a stab. When two KnightsSir T. Wentworth and Sir John Savil, in choosing Knights to the Shire, in the Castle-yard at York, did so fall out, that they were never well reconciled. shall fall out in the Castle-yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives after. When allColton-hag in her time was Wood, land ground full of Trees, which bore Corn seven years; and the seventh years after that was the year of the coming in of the Scots, and their taking of Newcastle. Colton-hag hath born crops of Corn, seven years after you shall hear News, there shall two IudgesIn the year 1616 two Judges of Assize went at a Gate in York, where never any Judges were known to go out before. go in and out at Walmgate-bar. Then VVars shall begin in the Spring, Much woe to England it shall bring. Then shall the Ladies cry well away, That ever we liv'd to see this day. Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most. You shall not now of the War over night, yet you shall have it in the morning; and when it comes it shall last three years. Between Cardon and Air shall be great warfare; when all the world is lost, it shall be called Christ's Cross. When the Battel begins, it shall be whereNear Licester, where Richard the 3. was slain in battel, the Col. Hastings was one of the first in arms, endeavouring to settle the Commission of Array in opposition to others that were setling the Militia. Crook-back Richard began his fray. They shall say, To warefare for our King for half a crown a day, but stir not (they will say) to warfare for our King on pain of hanging, but stir not; for be that goes to com∣plain, shall not come back again. The time will come when England shall tremble and quake, for fear of a dead man that shall be heard to speak. Then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snap, and when the one is down they will go to London town. Than there will be a great battel between England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time, when they come to Brammamore they fight, and are again pacified for a cime. Then there will be a great battel between England and Scotland at Stockmore. Then will a Raven sit on theIt is to be noted and admired, that this Cross in Shipton days was a tall stone Cross, which ever since hath been by degrees sir king into the ground, and now is sunk so low, that a Raven may sit upon the top of it, and reach with her hill to the ground. Cross. and drink as much
bloud of Nobles, as of the Common. Then woe is me, for London shall be destroyed for ever after. There will come a Woman with one eye, and she shall tread in many mens bloud to the knee; and a man leaning on a staff by her, she shall say to him, Who art thou? And he shall say, I am the King of Scots. And she shall say, Go with me to my house, for there are three Knights. And he will go with her, and stay there three days and three nights. Then will Eng∣land be lost and they will cry twice a day, England is lost. Then there will be three Knights in Peter-gate in York, and the one shall not know of the other; there shall be a Child born in Pomfret withThere is a Child not many years since born at Pomfret, with three thumbs. three thumbs, and those three Knights will give him three horses to hold while they win England, and all Noble bloud shall be gone but one; and they shall carry him to Sheriff Huttons Castle, six miles from York, and he shall die there; and they shall chuse there an Earl in the field, & hanging their horses on a thorn, will rue the time that ever they were born to see so much bloud shed. Then they will come to York to be∣siege it, and they shall keep them out three days and three nights, and a penny-loaf shall be within the Bar at half a crown, and without the Bar at a penny; and they will swear if they will not yield, to blow up the Town-walls. Then they will let them in, and they will hang up the Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen, and they will go into Crouch Church, there will three Knights go in, and but one come out again, and he will cause Proclamation to be made, that any man may take house, tower or bower for 12 years; and while the world endureth there shall never be warfare again, nor any more Kings or Queens, but the Kingdom shall be governed by three Lords, and then York shall be London. And after this shall be a white Harvest of Corn gotten in by Women. Then shall be in the North, that one woman shall say unto another, Mother, I have seen a man to day: and for one man there shall be a thousand women. There shall be a man sitting on St. James's Church-hill, weeping his fill. And after that a Ship come sailing up the Thames till it come against London, and the Master of the Ship shall weep, and the Marriners shall ask him why he weepeth, being he hath made so good a voyage? And he shall say, Ah! what a goodly City was this, none in the world comparable to it, and now there is left scarce any house that can let us have drink for our money. Unhappy he that lives to see those days, But happy are the dead, Shipton's Wife says: In the worlds old age this woman did foretel, Strange things shall hap, which in our time have fell. A Prediction of K. Richard the Third. IN the reign of K. Richard III, his Majesty with his Army lay at Leicester the night before the battel of Bosworth field was fought. It happen'd in the morning as the King rode through the South-gate, a poor blind man (by profession a Wheel-wright) sate begging, and hearing of his approach, said, That if the Moon changed twice that day (having by her ordinary course changed in the morning) K. Richard should lose his Crown and be slain. And riding over the Bridge, his left foot struck upon a stump of wood, which the old man hearing, said, Even so shall his head at his return back hit on the same place, which so came to pass: And a Nobleman that carried the Moon for his Colours revolted from K. Ri∣chard, whereby he lost that Day, his Life, Crown and Kingdom; which verified the presages of that poor blind old man. Mr. Truswal's, Recorder of Lincoln. THe Lilly shal remain in a merry world, & he shal be moved against the sed of the Lion, &c he shall stand on one side amongst Thrones of his Kingdom & Country. And there shall come the Son of man bearing 3 wild Beasts in his Arms, which Kingdom is the Lord of the Moon, which is to be dread throughout all the world; with a company of people he shall pass many waters, & shal come to the land of the Lion, looking for help, with the beasts of his own country. And in that year there shall come a Eagle out of the East, & his wings spread with the beams of the son of man; & that year shall be destroy∣ed Castles upon Thames, and there shall be great fears over the whole world, and in a part of the land there shal be great battels among many Kingdoms. This day shalbe the bloudy field, & the Lilly shall se his Crown, & therewith shall be crown'd the Son of man. And in the 40 years many Battels shall
be for the Faith, and most of the World shall be pen, but the Son of man with the Eagle shall be preserved, and there shall be an universal Peace over the whole World: Then shall the Son of man receive a marvellous token, and there shall be great plenty of all manner of Fruits, and then shall he go to the Land of the Cross. Mr. Lilly in the 59 and 60 Page of his Astronomical Predictions foretels, THat the Scots intend to invade us again, but shall not set a foot so far as York in a ho∣stile manner: The child is now born that shall see that a most flourishing City: If they come they must not expect so fair an Enemy as Cromwel, nor so good Quarter as lately they found; Jockey, Jemmy, and Moggy, that the Souldiers must then to the Sword, Fire, Famine and Destruction, following them to the walls and heart of Edenborough it self. A Prophesie of the Scots Invasion. VVHen you have had hard work to do, And added Five to Forty two, You shall perceive a goodly Play spoil'd, And by unworthy Actors foyl'd: The Scene transpos'd, the Act confus'd, The Poet shamefully abus'd. The first intention of the Plot, By their confusion's quite forgot; Yea, them to Tragick acts design'd, Who entred with a Comick mind. Some personating double parts, With double tongues and double hearts, Shall from one side to t'other run, Till they are scorn'd of every one: And by their means (when Peace seems near) The troubles which did first appear, In Thirty nine prolong'd will be Till fifty two and fifty three; And now what courses will be took, When those years wheel about, go look. Ignatius his Prophesie. IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive Thou mayst, till Thirty four or five. After that E is Dead, a Scot Shall govern there, and if a Plot Prevent him not, then sure his sway Continue shall till many a day. The Ninth shall dye young, and the first Perhaps shall Reign; but (Oh) accurst Shall be the time when thou shalt see To sixteen joyned twenty three: For then the Eagle shall have help, By craft to catch the Lyons whelp, And hurt him sore, except the same Be cured by the Maidens name. In July month of the same year; Saturn conjoyns with Jupiter. Perhaps false Prophers shall arise, And Mahomet shall shew his prize: And sure much alteration Shall happen in Religion; Believe this truly, if then you see? A Spaniard a Protestant to be, Mrs. White a Welchwoman, Prophesied as follows, on the Month of May. THe 25th. of this Month of May, Shall be a sad disastrous day; And they that Charles his patt doth take, Shall dearly suffer for his sake: And many of his Friends shall fly Like dust before the Enemy. But in the pleasant Month of June, The Birds shall sing another tune; A glorious splendor shall appear, And so protect our Soveraign dear. Dieu cathee whee Guenthelin White, aged 112 years. The Prophesie of old Sybilla. VVHen Scotlands 109 unconquer'd Kings, The sixteenth hundred thirty and nine, Into his age of thirty nine shall Reign, Then shall the Papal overthrow appear, Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire For Scotland shall that blessed work begin, Then shall the Whore of Babel had here Be banisht quite, which Bishops did bring in. Then thou brave England, which was led so blind, By their perverse Episcopal pride, And Iretands shameful superstitious fin Shall be supprest, who cruelly have cry'd, So that, that sacred Prophetess Sybilla, Shall shortly come to pass, she tells Tom Milla, And Tom tells me, and I must tell't again, Through Scotland, England, Ireland, France and Spain Merlin's Prophesie. ON Borcas wings then hither shall be born, Through Week o'r Tweed, a Princely Unicorn, Who brought into the world his own fat Crest, A rampant Lyon figured on his brest. And to his arms six Lyons more shall quarter, With six French flowers invironed with the Garter Joyning by fates unchangeable dispose, The Northern Thistle in the Southern Rose. He shall the true Apostolick Faith maintain With pious zeal during his blessed Reign. That Lincoln was, that London is, and York shall be; Brave London prays those days she ne'r may see.
The Prophesie of Orwel Bins, kept by Mr. Smith, Vicar of Hudderfield 40 years. THen James shall see a second Crown, In pulling Pope and Papists down; But James shall vanish from their face At half Elizabeth's Royal Race' Then using foreign policies, Grudgings and discontents arise; Yet shall they 'ssemble at the seat Of Parli'ment for a work most great; But strange Opinions there shall sow Dissentions that too high shall grow: And Laodicea's England's Church, Of grace and beauty some shall lurch; And Smiths of policy shall invent To cast new molds of Government. While vulgar Birds of weaker wing Grow stout against their Eagle King; Whose just integtous heart shall prove The Adamant of subjects love. Then pride shall some in prison lock, And lop a head off on a block; By honest power they shall bring down An aspirer that assum'd the Crown: That he whose power did Laws contemn, Might find a grave no Diadem. Some Comick Scenes shall then be acted By vulgar Players much distracted; The Gospel from a Tub or Tun Shall preached by Mechanicks run. Petticoats shall in Pulpits preach, And Women be allowed to teach: And in those gloomy dogged days, They shall tread off the Muses bays. Thus strife and envy shall encrease, And Round-heads shall disturb the peace Of Religion, while they it toss In blankets, and pull down the Cross. The Brownists shall no old Prayers brook, Sermons shall drown the Service-book. Then all men in those times shall see Great troubles and calamity. Then on the Irish Bogs and Heath Many a man shall taste of death. The souldiers wages shall encrease, Till Wars at last in Conquest cease. To such as are good Landlords known, In hostile times some love is shown: But for all such as have great store, They're in less safety then the poor. Then twenty pounds of coyn in hand, Is worth so much of yearly land. From Ireland then there shall come one Must lose his head upon a stone. But when England shall swim in flouds Of plenty, and grow proud of goods; Then from their sleep they shall be waked, To know themselves both blind and naked. Christs Church must know some misery, Then shall be a doleful Tragedy. Prophesie. WHen Englands Church grows Englands shame, Full of luke-warmness, glory vain: The worst in works and outward form, And with contrary factions torn: When Romish Rites by Reformation Shall be expell'd out of this Nation. Lord Beggar Bishops then shall come To ruine and be overthrown. The Priests shall be vile to each Wight. Their downfal read with much delight. For God will not the guiltless hold, That have been neither hot nor cold. The Scotch Church shall be in condition. A Virgin free from superstition; They shall be joyn'd in Covenant, 'Gainst which the world shall boast and vant. But England's Church must feel the storm Until she truly her self reform: Such hurly-burly and such stir, No form of Church shall remain in her. But Reformation shall take breath From the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Paulus Grebnerus his Prophesie, presented to Q. Elizabeth, anno 1682, concerning those times. THat a Northern King shall Reign, Charls by name, who shall take to Wife Mary of the Popish Religion, whereupon he shall be a most unfortunate Prince. Then the people of his Dominion shall chuse to them∣selves another Commander for Governour, v z. an Earl, whose Government shall last three years or thereabout. And afterwards the same people shall chuse another Commander (or Governour) viz. a King, not of the same Fa∣mily or Dignity. And after him they shall chuse none at all. Then after him shall appear one Charls, de∣scending from Charls the First, and shall go∣vern his Father's Kingdoms wonderful hap∣pily, and shall bear rule far and near; and shall be greater then Charls the Great. A Prophesie very ancient in old Meeter. IN the same year that fully shall expire, The sixth great wonder o the world's Empire. THen Tydersi. e. Hen. Edw. Mar. Phil. Eliz. HEMPE shall end I dare a read; Thenafter Q. Elizabeth King Iames. E shall fall, and J shall stand in stead. In the same year a great Plague shall reign, The which a thousand days it shall remain. At Mary's Mass in Court they hold, The which a bloudy ink shall be inroll'd; There many a plea shal pass with brawling words, And short daggers shall be better then long swords.
On unslow-heath soon after shall be seen A fierce battel fought by a King I ween; Of Knights there shall be three thousand there, Of which there shall but ten back again appear. O here shall many a battel and braul be, And then a huge host shall pass over the Sea; Concluding a Peace, but on this wise, Betwixt C C two L L so long shall last two I I; Another. EVer shall {:::} be call'd the first of Dice, When {·} shall bear up, Then shall England be ecleped Paradise, When {:·:} and {::} be set on side; The name of {::} shall spring full wide. And when {::} and {˙.} drive out {˙·.}, Then may England sing well-away: Then it is all shent, For then shall be another Parliament. {:::} shall up, and {·} shall under. The Lion, the Rose, the Flower-de-lu The lock shall undo: Then shall {:::} bear the prime, And {·} shall help thereto. Another short, but pithy. IN Germany begins a Dance, Which passeth through Italy, Spain and France. And to Ireland is a Leaper. There the Dance lyeth at a stand, Till it ventures o're into Scotland; But England shall pay the Piper. Another. ENgland thy proper Native thee betrays. Because all Nations hate thee and thy wayes Spain doth undermine thee, France doth grow, Wales threats, the Irish thee by snares doth awe. And bravest men do on a sudden dye, And thou thy self dost wholly ruin'd lye, Yet seest it not, but under feigned Peace Dost thine own misery still more increase. Mr. Saltmarsh's Predictions, declared to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and the Councell of his Army, the motives that occasion'd it, and the manner of his death. HE being at his house at Yilford in Essex, December 4. 1647. told his wife, that he had received a Command from God, to make known to the Armies what the Lord had revealed unto him; the like he said to Sir H. M. Knight, a Member of the House of Commons, as soon as he arrived at Lon. The next day, being the Lord's day, he found some difficulty to procure a horse, but after din∣ner he got one, and rid alone towards Windsor, but missing his way, lodged at night seven miles short, where he declared, That the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, when all men shall be judged by Jesus Christ; and then shall the ways and actions of all men appear, &c. Early the next day De∣cemb. 6. he again missed his way in a Forest, but espying a house rid to it to demand his way, and there made known that God was purposed to destroy the wicked, and draw the Saints to himself, with much more. After which he departed, and about nine of the clock came to Windsor, where Mr. A. a Adjutator saluted him. He said, Mr. A. depart from these Tents lest you perish with them, for the Lord hath revealed unto me that he is angry with this Army, because they have forsaken him. Another, a Captain asked him how he did? To whom he replied, that he had nothing from God to say to him because he had always been a seeker under specious pretence. Then seeing one E. D. another Officer, he said, he could not own him, for he was for distinction. Then he went to he general Council, where many Officers were met in expectation of the General; he told them, that he was come thither to re∣veal the Lords command; that though God had done much for them, and by them, yet he had left them and their Councels, because they had forsaken him; that God would not prosper their consulta∣tions, but destroy them by divisions amongst themselves; that formerly he came like a Lamb, but now God had raised in him the spirit of a Lion, because they had sought to destroy the Prophet of God Some said that he look'd like one distracted, and that he had been sick and was not well recovered, To whom he replied, that he had been sick, but was well in health then, and sensible of what he said, and, that should be the last time that ever he should speak to them. Afterwards he went to the Gene∣ral not moving his hat, and told him, that he had no command from God to honour him; that he had honoured him so much, as he offended God in doting on his person, and that God would no lon∣ger prosper him, &c. Then going to the L. Gen. who asked him how he did? he without any respect answered him, that God was very angry with him for abusing the godly, and that the Armies falling from their first principles would occasion their ruine and destruction, &c. After which he departed, and on Tuesday Decemb. 7. he went again to the L. Gen. and declared, that he was sorry to see such obstinacy in him, and wished him to be mindful of what God had declared unto him. Afterwards he took his leave of the Army, and said, he had done his errand, and must leave them, never to see his Army any more. On Wednesday Decemb. 8. he came to London, and took leave of some friends, to whom he recommended his Wife. On Thursday Decemb. 9 he went from London to his house at Ylford, not sick at all, and told his Wife what he had done. On Friday Decemb. 10 he said he had finished his course, and must go to his Father: in the afternoon he said his head aked, and laid himself upon the bed. On Saturday Decemb. 11 he was taken speechless, and about four or five of the clock in the after∣noon he died.
The several Prophesies of divers men. A Strange prophesie of an old Welch-woman lately deceas'd, found written in her trunk in old writing, fore-shewing the ruine of Rgland Castle, the Scots invasion and destruction in the year 1649, and that the Scots shall the next year 1650 make another attempt to invade this land, but again be beaten; but after that the year following hey will come again with far more strength, and then shall waste and utterly undo many; but afterward they shall find such a terrible repulse, that most of them shall be utterly overthrown and vanquished. ST. Bede saith, Sin shall cause great trouble in every land, and right shall not reign in his inheri∣tance. Seven deadly sins shall be upholden; Falshood shall proudly stand, and black clowds of ignorance shall stop the light of remembrance, Truth and equity down shall be laid, for men shall their God forsake, and give themselves to misgovernance. In heart great sorrow then shall awake, for  of vengeance, but ever worse and worse their life shall be, so that all Realms shall speak of thee, with death and dearth in every Country. God shall so punish this Nation with Battels beyond-Sea, they shall be brought into desperation. WIlliam Ambrose saith, Treason shall labour fast with all her might to keep Right out of the land, with Laws and Ordinances day and night, and no token of true love shall be found: ranting Gallants with reason shall punish all about, and then make a sentence in justice of Law, and cause many one to stand in great doubt, and after a cursed manner they shall ever draw, and against the right they shall ever malign, and they shall lose their heads ever among, and they that bear the Lantern shall lie in the mire, and the people shall wade deep in sin, for the Pastors of the Church shall rest and sleep in blindness and simony, and have great treasures in their chests, and be secret with Ladies and others, and sport them in adultery, and say it is natural, causing many to sin, and their audacity shall be great to cover the sin withal; and the blind shall lead the blind till both fall in the ditch, and many one shall go wrong for lack of clear light; for where the foundation is not sure, down it goeth. TOD saith, The great shall supplant the poor, and pill them daily, and keep them full low, and shal compel them daily to know falshood, which shall be called true and right, and the great shall climb and win to have all after their content to set aside a Common-wealth. Wherefore you Saxons, think not, though God tarry a time, that the Normans and you both shall be driven away, the Brutes of the first line shall enter again; and be never so loath, ye shall go from hence for your great sin; the Brutes were the first, and shall be again dwelling in the land, and with them shall abide all that is true bloud, (the Brutes were driven hence for their great sin, and when they win least) so shall the Saxons. The holy men dsired to know when these sorrows should begin, and what Battels should be, and how, who should le and who should win. A voice answered and sad] When all sin is favoured without correction, and Lords wed their own kin, and men in God have no affection; when Priests and Lay-people be all one in word and deed without any fare, and men shall not care what they do, nor how they get their goods, nor where; and innocence in that time the Crown shall wear. And this time of trouble shall continue fourty years ere it be ended all. THomas of Astledown saith, There shall be a deceitful Parliament, in the which shall be shewed much malice, which they can no longer keep in secret, which hath of long time been prevented; and there shall be such controversies in Opinions, that the Realm shall be in four parts. And with that voice shall arise the third part of the world against us, to punish us for the great abominable Heresies and whoredom of them of the holy Orders. Saunders Prediction for the Year 1659. IT's worth the noting, That the 14 great Orb in which the Moon and Leo have ruled, shall have its period 1659, and then begins the 15 great Orb, in which Saturn and Virgo shall predominate: which Sign Virgo was the Sign of the great Conjunction before the coming of Christ, which shall pro∣duce great changes in the world, and principally concerns Mercurialists, who will then have more rule in the world. And under this there will be a King in England David's Prophesie, Cardinal in France. CHarls mighty Monarch did the C begin, After whose death usurping C came in; By will and force he some few years bore sway, Nothing but bloud his fury could allay: Alas this hundred and his crooked Race Were like Usurpers turn'd out of the place Of Honour, as they well deserv'd indeed. And now the L for fifty doth succeed. Stout Neptune's left, and by the Monk so bold, Who doth appear this Riddle to unfold. Right shall have Right, for in a little space, A hundred shall be of the hundred Race. The Monk will joyn (as appearance shows) The exil'd Thistle to the happy Rose. Who shal in peace these Naions free from fears, Govern in safety for three hundred years FINIS.
