S3895 E293_27 R200169 99860974 113101
Sir Thomas Fairfaxes ENTRING BRIDGEWATER By Storming; on Munday last. In which Town he took from the Enemy; 4. Collonels. 50. Captaines, Lieutenants, and other Officers. 500. prisoners, whereof some Papists. 60. Horse. 1. Great piece of Ordnance, in the Royall Fort. The Royall Fort also taken. Mr. Harveys House taken. And a List of all the particulars, and what losse was on both sides; And the manner of the Fight: And in what posture the rest remain in those Holds where they lye. ALSO, The Termes tendred by Sir Hugh Chlley, for the surrender of Scarborough Castle. Commanded to be printed, and published according to Order. London, Printed by B. Alsop, and I. Coe. 1645.
The storming of BRIDGEWATER on Munday last, by Sir Thomas Fairfax his Forces, at which time he entred into the Towne: VVith a List of the particulars of what was taken. SIR, IN the first place I must not forget to give the glory to God, who hath done things by us so far beyond our ex∣pectation; for it is by his power that we have done it. And yet I can assure you that it is admirable to consi∣der the constant paines of the Generall, Lieutenant-Generall, and the rest, who lose no opportunity. The Generall is full of action, never idle, but still upon one designe o other; it is to be wondred how he can be a∣ble to hold out; to watch, act, and take so little rest; it is God that strengthens him, to him be the glory. It hath pleased God still to give us more additions of his favour, in bringing us into Bridgewater with so little▪ losse.
On saturday the 20. of Iuly 1645. The Generall ha∣ving before viewed all the workes, and placed all his batteries, yet not falling on at the time first appointed, yet to the end that he might lose no opportunity, he sent out some Scouts so neere to Bridgewater as they durst venture, and when the Generall was fully satisfied of the condition of the Tone, and had made use of the Countrey people, for he tryes all wayes for the doing of all things wisely; he sate in Councell the next day, being the Lords day. On the Lords day Iuly the 21. it being concluded on to fall on Bridgewater the next morning, so early as they could see, fell to action, all preparations were made for the storming of the Garrison accordingly. That night a party of foot were drawn out for the de∣signs comanded by Lieutenant Colonel Heson, Colonel Pickerings Lieutenant Colonell, and Sergeant Major Dove, Colonell ainsboroughs Sergeant Major, and it was concluded, that Major Generall Massey should face them on the other side of the River, whilest they stormed the north side of the Towne. On the Lords day early in the morning, our Foot a∣bout two of the clocke marched up, and indeed they marched as freely and as cheerfully, and with so much joy, as being much taken with the worke they went a∣bout; and whilest Major Generall Mssey faced the one side, Lieutenant Colonell Hewson fell on the other, and stormed them with such violence, that though they stood to it a while, yet our Foo fighting like Lions, forced them back, and y valiant activity brake into the Towne, killed many of the enemies, and tooke divers of them prisoners, as you may see by the List. Master Harvey who is Lord both of the Towne, of the great
House, and of the Castle, went to secure himselfe to the other side of the Towne and Colonel Windham, the Town being all in a terrible alarme. Now to the end that you may know the gallantry of this service, which I cannot forbeare to tell you, our men charged against nigh 1000. of the enemies that kept this part of the Towne, and the workes v strong, yet that did not discourage us, knowing the Lord to be the God of Hosts, and not doubting but that hee who hath begun, will perfect the work he hath to do by us. It seemes the Souldiers in the Town would have Mr. Haveys house pulled downe, fearing lest in case they should lose that side of the Towne, they might be pre∣judiced by it, for it commands the Town, and the Mar∣ket-place, but Mr. Harvey being there himselfe, and bearing so great a sway amongst them, hee procured leave that it might stand; the souldiers then propoun∣ded that some sconces might be made for the securing of the Castle and the maket-place, in case they should come to lose that part of the Town. This Town of Bridgewter is divided by a River into two parts, one of which we have taken, and the other the enemy still keepes, but we hope by to morrow night at the farthest to gaine that part of the Towne they are in, into which they had drawn most of their carriages, and their Ordnan, save only one Peece which was too big for them to draw off, being their great Ordnance for their Fort Royall, which we have taken, with all this part of the Towne on this side the River, and divers of Colonell Stowens horses, and 500. foot, and are yet pur∣suing the victory, the enemy being terribly astonished at our approach into the Town, there being in the Castle many very considerable men, as Knights, &c.
In the meane time the rest of our Forces are not idle, but move in all places according to their severall Quarters, to oppose the enemy every where; one part hinders Gorings recruits, and attend his motions so neer as they can, keeping neere the Body, which is not to be divided; another part to attend the Northerne side of the West towards the Sea-coasts; Col: assey and the Club-men  that side towards Bridgewater. All are full of action, and we heare daily skirmishes with them in one place or other. I cannot tell you what the enemy will doe with us in Bridgewater, whether capitulate presently, or betake them to the Castle, and stand upon some terms; but we hope by to morrow next to determine all. It may be they will stand out to the uttermost, being that there are so many considerable Papists amongst them; but we beleeve they will be overborne by the rest, who one-would think are too much engaged in the Towne, to please them so much. All our men that were in this action behaved them∣selves exceeding▪ wel in the storming and taking of this place; the Works being so good, the Trenches ten foot deep in water, the Town well mann'd, and no want of Ammunition. But truly God hath struck a terrour into their hearts; and which is wonderfull, we have lost so few men in this service, as is to be admired; I think ve∣rily we have not 100 wounded, and not above a matter of 6 men missing. The General, and the rest of the Councel of War do order things so discreetly, both for the taking▪ all ad∣vantages against the enemy, as also for the safety of his owne souldiers, as is to be admired. Never was so much done, and with so little losse.
The intent is when the 6000 foot, and 1400 horse come to us for the recrute of our Army, to besiege the chiefe Garrisons with one part, and the Club-men are willing to assist us in it; and the other part to pursue the enemy in the field, and we hope to give a good account of more places besides Bridgwater. Dated, Iuly 21. 1645. Here followeth a Lyst of what was taken at Bridgwater, on Munday the 21 of Iuly, 1645. by Lievtenant Colo∣nell Hewson, and Major Dove. 4 Colonells, Lievtenant Colonells, and Serjeant Majors. 50 Captaines, tenants, and other officers. 500 Prisoners. 60 and odde horse. Many slaine. 1 Great peece of Ordnance. The great Fort-Royall on the North side of the Town▪ Mr Harvies his house a Lawyer, that is Lord of the Town, and Castle of Bridgwater. 600 Ames. All that part of the Town▪ which is on the North side, which is about  the Town▪ there being a River between that part of the Town and the other. The enemy had at that time as followeth. The Castle, but a very weak one. The Market place which M. Harvies house commands, our peeces are planting there to play upon them. And they have all that side of the town, and the works belonging thereto. And all the Ordnance, save onely the peece we took in the great Fort, and Gorings baggage is with them. We lost in the fight but 6 men. We doubt not but the next day (which was Tuesday last) that Sir Thomas Fair∣fax had all the Town.
From the North there came Letters which certifie▪ that Sir Hugh Chlmly ath offered Articles, whereup∣on he is willing to surrender, his Articles are to this effect: I. That Sir Hugh Cholmley may have liberty himself to passe safely into Holland. II. That his Lady may have liberty to sell and dispose of his estate freely for him, and that he may be free from sequestration. III. That the Officers and Souldiers in the Castle may march away wih their Armes. IV. These and some other Propositions being granted, hee offers to surrender, but on further pitulation no doubt Sir Hugh Cholmley will yeeld to other termes. FINIS.
