S4648 E84_19 99859516 111602
A DECLARATION OF THE Right Honourable, the Lord Marquis of Hartford, Read in the House of Commons upon Sa∣turday last: Wherin he doth declare his Resolu∣tion to oppose the Earl of Worster and his Army of Papists, and to adventure his life for the Protestant Religion. Likewise his Majesties Command to the Lord Herbert, to apprehend the Marquis of Hart∣ford, and to commit him to safe custody. Together with the Desires of the House of Commons to Sir Paul Pinder, with Sir Paul Pin∣ders Answer to the same. Also, a great Victory obtained by the Manchester Forces against the Earl of Derby, where the Earl himselfe and his whole Troop were put to flight, and 72. prisoners taken, many of them being Commanders. Jan. 5. Printed for John Feast. 1643.
Joyfull NEWES From the Marquis of HARTFORD Wherein is expressed the Declaration of the said Lord Marquis, to oppose and resist the Earl of Worster, and his forces, and the rest of the of the Papists in the Kings Army. ON the 31 of December last, Let∣ters came to the House of Commons, intimating that the Marquis of Hartford is resolved to oppose the Kings Army of Papists and their Confederates, and hath declared himself against the E.
of Worster and his Forces, and refuseth to joyne with him, by reason that his Army consisteth for the most part of papists and disaffected persons, which are enemies to the protestant Religion, and the peace and happinesse of this Kingdome, whose en∣deavours and actions are for the utter dis∣solving of the Parliament, and Gods true Religion, tending to nothing else but to bring in popery and superstition in this Kingdome. The said Lord Marquis doth further Declare, that by the Commission which he received from his Majesty he was com¦manded not to entertain any papists, or disaffected persons, which are supposed to this Kingdom. And however his Majesty is siner per∣swaded and wrought upon to grant Com∣missions for the raising of papists, and hath appointed a great papist to the Ser∣jeant Major Generall of the Earl of Wor∣sters Army, and in divers other parts of this Kingdome hath also put notorious papists in great places, through whose
actions it is a meanes to bring this Land to ruine and desolation; unlesse the Al∣mighty who is the Giver of all Conquests be pleased to aid and assist us with His strong power and strength. And therefore for these and the afore∣named Reasons, the Marquis of Hartford doth declare, that he is resolved never to comply with such a Faction, nor be forced to it either by threats or any other per∣swasions whatsoever. And although His Majesty was pleased so Declare his Royall Will and pleasure against the said Lord Marquis to the L. Herbert, a great papist, and Son to the E. of Worster, to apprehend the Marquis of Hartford for not obeying his Command, yet he is resolved to oppose the Lord Her∣bert, and hath set down his Resolution to sight it out, before he will have any ally∣ance with him, and it is reported, that they have had a great battell, the certainty whereof will appear by the next Post.
The Propositions of the house of Common to Sir Paul Pinder. THe House of Commons having seri∣ously debated and considered of the Motion lately presented unto them by Sir Paul Pinder, and divers other Gentle∣men, and after some consultation thereup∣on, they sent a Messenger to Sir Paul Pin∣der, desiring him to come to the House, which he did accordingly, where Master Lenthall Speaker of the said House of Commons acquainted them with the De∣sires of that House, which were to this ef∣fect, viz. That the Army now raised for the De∣fence of the Protestant Religion were in distresse for want of moneyes, there being great want of the same to maintaine the Army; and therefore the House desired that the aforenamed Sir Paul Pinder wold lend the Parliament twenty thousand pounds to be imployed towards the charg of the Army, untill the Propositions of both Houses should be agreed upon be∣tween
His Majesty and them, that so these bloudy distractions may be brought to a full period. The Answer of Sir Paul Pinder, to the aforesaid Desires. SIr Paul Pinder after some consultation of this businesse, returned Answer, that the House would be pleased to appoint some of their members to treat with him concerning it, hee would give them a sa∣tisfactory answer, wherupon a Committed was appointed to treate with him accor∣dingly. The E. of Warwick sent a Leteer to the House of Commons, Declaring unto them that he hath sent 17. chiefe Commanders unto Gravel-end, which were took neere Plymouth, desiring them that they would take some speedy course for their safe con∣duct to London. Whereupon the House ordered that a Company of Musquetiers should be sent
down to fetch them from thence and that they should be committed to safe custody, upon an accusation of levying war against the King and parliament, which is high Treason. The Manchester Forces have given a great overthrow to the Earl of Derby, killing many of his men at Leigh; and taking 72 prisoners, divers of them being Com∣manders; and put the Earl of Derb himself, and his whole Troop to flight. Those that stand for the Parliament in that part of Lincolnshire near Newark, are like to be much indamaged (the Cavaleirs having taken the Town, and strongly fortified the Castle) but the Earl of Lin∣coln, Sir Edward Aiscough, and Mr. Gran∣tham, are there with 1500 men, to defend that County. FINIS.
