S534 E375_5 99860494 112614
The Kings Maiesties LETTER INTERCEPTED By the Commissioners attending his MAJESTY. (A copie whereof was sent to the PARLIAMENT.) AND Mr. MUNGO MURREY apprehended, who was appointed by the KING to deliver it to Montrel, the French Embassador, Who is going over to the QVEEN to FRANCE. And a List of the Jests of all the severall places where his Majestie hath lain, and is to lie everie day be∣tween Newcastle and Holmby house. Also the maner of the Scots marching home into Scotland, with other newes from the Court, and Newcastle. PErused, and (being examined) is appointed to be Printed and Published, according to Order of Parliament, Feb. 9. 1646. LONDON: Printed by A. COE, neer Cripplegate, 1647.
The Kings Maiesties Letter intercepted, By the Commissioners attending his Majesty. A Copie whereof was sent to the PARLIAMENT. WORTHY SIR, YOURS by the Post I have received, for which I thank you, and in demonstration of it, give you this return. Sir, I suppose you cannot want intelligence how things are managed here, and my labour might be spared; howsoever, I cannot but assure you, the Scots are all departed; and had I not seen them march, I could never have beleeved, either their number to have been in the Kingdom, nor their sad behaviour up∣on their departing: yet I impute it not to the Nation,
nor the Army, but to particular persons therof, though some Officers coive to , I dare affirme, that of all the Horse I ever saw in this Kingdome, since the first marching from Keinton, I never saw so many bave Horse together, at least six thousand. The Of∣ficers all marched wh naked swords, but their Hor∣ses were not be; for they were all ded and cloathed to purpose. But they have been so reall in the main, that I will goe backward and hide their nakednesse. The Vce Admials Ship is still in Lieth Road in Scoland, stopping , nor doth the winde serve for her to come away as et. The Holland man of Warre at Tinmouth, longs as much to be gone, as we to have him, but is wind∣bound. The Vice Admrall waits on her in the Con∣stant Warwick, and hath two more with him. Yesterday wee heard of the Fellowship without the Barre, but a storm came up about three a clock, and put her off to Sea. There dined aboord the Vice Admirall Ship, Adju∣tant Generall Deate, of the Army, the Judge Advo∣cate, Commissioner Potter, Major Smith, and Cap∣tain Skippon. Major Smith received Tinmouth Ca∣stle, and is there at present. Who shall be governor of Tinmouth Castle, I shall advertse you in my next. On Saturday last the English Commissioners took ssession of his Majesty, and setled Families: His Majesty took it very ill to have his old Servants taken om him. That (and some other things which I for∣beare at present) put his Majesty into an humour that he would not heare Major Kee preach on the Lords day, although two dayes before he caused a note to be
sent to him to preach, but be applyed himselfe to the Commissioners, and acquainted them that he would take no notice of it without their Summons. Then Maor Keme was appointed to preach, who ac∣cordingly came hither to Newcastle on saturday night; and being come, he sent the same night to Mr. Marshal, to know which time of the day he pleased: who spake with Mr. Keme, and told him, that both he and Mr. Cll had had some pivate discourse with the King about it, but that His Majesty was resolved to heare none of them. And accordingly on that Lords day his Majesty was as good as his word, his Majestie never came, although much imptuned by the Earle of Pembroke, the Earle of Denbigh, &c. His Majestie hath now other maner of Table and attendance then formerly, a great many honest godly Courtiers, and good Souldiers, Mr. Harbert, Sir Fnlke Grivill, Captain Mildmay Carver, Mr. Harring∣ton of the Bedchamber, Mr. Douser, Captain Titus Querrey, &c. The King yesterday tooke his journey from hence, I have sent you here inclosed a list of the severall places appointed for his quar∣ters every night from hence  by House. The Lord move his Majesties he art to con∣sider what is past, and take his journey Hea∣venward, to act for his glory for the future. On Munday last one Mr. Mungo Murey,
who hath been a servant to the King, desired leave of the Commissioners to take his leave of the King, and so to go into Scotland: which was granted to him. The said Mr. Mungo Murrey, having thus obtained leave, came to his Maiesty, and his Maiesty gave him his hand to kisse, which he did. But withall somthing was perceived (by one of the Commissioners) to be put in Mr. Mungo Murries hand, by the King; who be∣ing followed, and by the Commissioners ex∣amined, and searched, it was found to be alet∣ter, which he was to deliver to Montrel the French Agent. It was all in Cyphers, so that nothing could be read of it, but the Commissioners have sent it to the Parliament to see if they have keyes to unlock those Ciphers, the particulars whereof will be with you first, if opened. Some suppose it to be a letter to Montrell, to give him directions in some things which he should do; others guesse it to be a letter which should have been sent to the Queene to France, whither (it is supposed) Montrell is immediately to go, from Scotland.
But, the letter is all in figures, and Cyphers, both within, and without, the very Super∣scription. This Mr. Mungo Murrey was apprehended, and in Custody for two dayes, and then suffi∣cient security was given for his forthcoming within 4. dayes, in case that he should be de∣manded, so he had his liberty. And the Com∣missioners have sent up to the Parliament to know their pleasure therein. His Maiestie set out from hence yesterday∣night in great Pompe, with attendance more befitting and sutable to a King, than some years past. God grant all maybe for the best, so prayes Newcastle the 4. of February 1646. Your humble Servant L. SAMMEL.
A list of the Jests, and severall places ap∣pointed for His Majesties quarters each day betwixt Newcastle, and Holmby House. Wednesday Feb. 3. his Majesty went from New∣castle to Durham. Thursday Feb. 4. his Majesty passed to Bishop Auk∣land. Friday Feb. 5. his Maj. was to passe to Richmond. Saturday Feb. 6. his Maj. was to passe to Repton. Sunday Feb. 7. his Majesty was to stay at Repton all that day. Munday Feb. 8. his Maj. was to passe to Leeds. Tuesday Feb. 9. his Maj. was to passe to Wake field. Wednesday Feb. 10. his Maj. is to passe to Ro∣thram. Thursday Feb. 11. his Majestie is to passe to Masfield. Friday Feb. 12. his Majestie is to passe to Not∣tingham. Saturday Feb. 13. his Maj. is to passe to Leicester. Sunday Feb. 14. his Majestie is to stay all that day at Leicester. Munday Feb. 15. his Majesty is to go to Holmby House. FINIS.
