S5804 E83_17 99871678 124091
A barbarous and inhumane SPEECH Spoken by the Lord Wentworth, Sonne to the late Earle of STRAFORD, VVherein he incourageth his souldiers to plunder Townes, and ravish Virgins, with many more inhumane outrages. Also a Protestation made by the said Lord VVentworth. Wherein he sollemnely protesteth to revenge his his fathers death on all the Kingdome. Likewise a true relation of a cruell combate that happened betweene the said Lord Went∣worths Regiment, and the Regiment under the Command of Prince Robert, Where they slew above 800. of their owne men, in striving who should plunder the Towne of Cicitur, on thursday December 21. Decemb. 24. Printed for I. H. and William Sommerset 1642.
Ioyfull Newes from the Kings ARMY, Or the destruction of the Cavaliers ON Thursday December 21. there happened a grea Skirmish be∣tween Prince Roberts owne Regiment, and the Lord Wentworths sonne to the late Earle of Strafford, for both Regiments happened to meet neere the Roade to the Towne of Abbington in Oxfordshir, upon the way to Cicitur, a great Market Towne, and the Jnhabitants richly pos∣sest of Earhs indowments, this Towne these two Regiments had plotted to
plunder, (but their intentions altogether unknowne to each other) so that they happily met each other, and God so so brought things about, that the mis∣chiefe that they intended against the said Towne fell upon themselves, for meeting each other, the question was made by by the Lord Wentworths Regiment, whe∣ther the other were marching, Answer was made, to quar ter themielves at Cici∣ter, the other replyed, that they had made choyse of thoe quarters, and there∣fore they would keepe them, or loose their lives in the defence of them, these things being agravated, they grew to∣wordes, and from wordes to blowes, in such a cruell manner, that all the Kings Army was presently in an uprore, and the Country up in Armes, during this combate, the Towne got intelligence of the cause of the Battaile, and called the County in, to their assistance, and fortefi∣ed themselves, all this time the number of the Cavaliers increased, for severall
Troopes of Horse came and sided some with Prince Roberts Regiment, and some with the Lord Wentworths, according as they stood affected, so that the Battaile was very firce and bloody, for there was slaine above eight hundred of the Cavaliers in the space of an houre and halfe. At last the Lord Wentworth having received intelligence of the proceedings of his men, came rideing post to the place of Bataile, where he found his men disordered, and put to apparent rout, which he seeing commanded his Trum∣peter to sound a parley, which was an∣swered by the other Regiment, and both Parties gave over fighting and retreated, then he rode up to Prince Roberts Regi∣ment, and Commanded them to march up, and front his Regiment, and to put themselves into a compleate Body, and so to march in a close order, which was by them withall speed and Dexterity effected.
Then he ordered his owne men and put them into the same posture and cau∣sed them to troope up close towards the other Regiment. And having brought them up close to∣gether, leaving a small intervaile between each front, he with a loud voice began to speake as followeth. Fellow Souldiers J much wonder at your inbecillity and rashnes, can not you find in all this spacious Kingdome, ene∣mies to vent your spleene on, but you must needs imploy your vallours to de∣stroy your selves about a petty quarrell, have you not enemies in every corner, round dealing blades, whose chests are stuft with Gold, and kept for you to oe with, and must you needs, about one petty Towne: shed thus much blood and give your enemies cause to glory in your ruine leave of for shame joyne yovr united strength in one firme body: and turne your revenge upon your Enemies.
Pillage and plunder, ransacke all their Chests, and if they doe denye to yeeld their treasure, tye burning Matches to their Fingers, or else about their hornes untill you make the Couckolds to dis∣cover where they have hid their treasure. Beeing laden with Wealth, if you de∣sie to taste forbidden F▪ ravish their Vir∣gins, force the timorus maides to clip with you in dalliance, and wreake your utmost spleen upon the roundheads. Jn the performance of which, you shall have my assistance, I lost a father, for whome J'le be revenged on all the multitude, especially of London, whose clamorus outcries caus'd my fathers death and as they ceased not, but with remorse∣lesse rigour urged the Law, so my re∣venge, as boundlesse as their mallice, shall swim in blood and triumph in their ruine. Having spoke thus in a barbarous and inbumane manner, the whole Crew in an applausive manner, cryed out, A
A Wentworth, A VVentworth, so they im∣mediately joyned Bodies, and marched towards Ciciter, what the Event will be J know not, but wee hope they will find very bad entertainment, for the Country made great haste to goe in to their rescue. Thus you may see the depth of the intentions of that viporus Crew, which pretend that they stand for the true pro∣testant Religion, when by their Actions and endeavours, they labour to destroy both it and the professors. FINIS.
