S6115B 45789419 172729
A Succinct Narrative Of the Bloody Murder of Sir EDMONDBURY GODFREY By the PAPISTS, Octob. 12. 1678. With the various and Wonderful Circumstances of the Motives, Manner, Time, Place, Persons, &c. relating to the said Mur∣der, Faithfully collected out of the several respective Depositions given upon Oath before the House of Lords by Captain William Bedloe, and Mr. Miles Prance, to the Amazement and Horrour of all True-Protestants. Capt. Bedloe's Depositions. Mr. Prance's Depositions. Lords Journ.THe Papists, because Sir Edmond∣bury seem'd to be an obstacle to Them, and had taken the Information of Oates and Tongue about the Plot, re∣solv'd and contriv'd to take away his Life. Lords Journ.1. THe Papists, because Sir Edmond∣bury seemed an Enemy to the Queens Servants, and would not consent to discharge one Gerald from Parish-Duties, (as another Justice did) resolv'd and contriv'd to take away his life. Ibidem2. Pursuant to which Design, they hir'd for 4000 l. Le Phaire, Walsh, At∣kins, Pritchard, the Deponent, and some Jesuits, to do the Fact. Ibidem2. Pursuant to which Design, they hired (for what Reward the Deponent doth not know) Hill, Green, Kelly, the Depo∣nent, Gerald and Berry, to do the Fact. Ibidem3. Accordingly, the above-named Persons Trepan'd Sir Edmundbury in∣to Somerset-House about five a Clock at night, on Saturday the 12th. of Octo∣ber. Ibidem3. Accordingly the above-named Per∣sons Trepan'd Sir Edmondbury into So∣merset-house about 8 or 9 a Clock at night: But the Deponent doth not well remember the Day. Counc. Journ.4. This Trepan was effected thus; The Deponent was told by Le Phaire, that He, Walsh and Atkins met Sir Ed∣mundbury near the Kings-Head-Inne in the Strand, and decoy'd him into So∣merset-House, under pretence of appre∣hending some Plotters. Lords Journ.4. This Trepan was effected thus; Green gave the Deponent notice that He and Gerald had sett Sir Edmondbury in St. Clements; And Hill decoy'd him down the Water-gate, under pretence of par∣ting a Fray between two Fellows quarrel∣ling in the Yard. Lords Journ.5. When they had him in the upper great Court of Somerset-House, They thrust him into a low Room, put a Pistol to him, threatned him if he made a noise; then stifled him between two Pillows; And finding him still alive strangled him with a long Crevat in the Room where he lay. Ibidem5. When they had him near the Rails by the Queens-Stables, Green strangled him with a twisted Handkerchief; Then finding him still alive, rung his Neck quite round, and punch'd him with his Knee in the open Yard; Which done, they dragg'd him into Doctor Godwin's Lodgings. Ibidem6. On the Monday following precise∣ly between 9 and 10 a Clock at night, the Body was shewn to the Deponent by Le Phaire, in the Room, or the next to it where the Duke of Albemarle lay in State in the upper square Court; There it was by the help of a Dark Lanthorn the Deponent saw the Body in the presence of Le Phaire, Walsh, At∣kins, and Two other Persons. Ibidem6. On the Monday following, pre∣cisely between 9 and 10 a Clock at night, the Body was shewn to the Deponent by Hill, Green, and Gerald, in a Room in the back Square-Court below Stairs next the Garden. There it was by the help of a Dark-Lanthorn the Deponent saw the Body in the company of the said Hill, Green, and Gerald, who were only pre∣sent.
Lords Journ.7. On the same Monday at 9 a Clock at night the dead Body was carry'd out through the great Gate by certain Chair-men (Retainers to Somerset-House,) whose Persons were unknown to the Deponent; These persons carry'd him in a Chair to the corner of Claren∣don-House, and from thence convey'd him in a Coach to Primrose-Hill, where they made a Wound in his Body, and laid his Sword by his side. Lords Journ.7. On the next Wednesday after about 12 a Clock at night, the dead Body was put into a Sedan, and carry'd out by the Deponent and Gerald into Covent-Garden, where Green and Kelly took him up, and carry'd him to Long-Acre; There the Deponent and Gerald resumed their Burden, and carry'd him to the So-hoe; from thence he was convey'd astride on Horse-back before Hill into the Fields, where they thrust his Sword through his Body, and cast him into a Ditch. A Two-fold Protestation of Mr. Miles Prance, con∣cerning the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. His Protestation made first before Capt. Richardson in Newgate, and then before the King and Council, soon after his first Discovery in De∣cember 1678. Reduced into Form. His Protestation made in Solemn man∣ner, April 14. (82.) being Good-Friday, immediately preceding the Feast of Easter, wherein he received the Holy Sacrament, at his Parish-Church. WHereas by the Suggestion of the Devil, Worldly Interest, and my own Malice, I Miles Prance most wick∣edly devised an horrid Story of the Murder of Sir Edmonbury Godfrey, wherein (being before-hand sufficiently secured both of His Majesty's Pardon for the pretended Crime, and of Reward for the Discovery,) I feigned my self a Party, the better to gain credit to my Damnable Forgery. WHereas some bold and Ill Men have several times by various but different Suggestions, and particu∣larly, more openly of late, pretended they are able to Disprove an Account I have given from my personal know∣ledge of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, wherein with unspeakable grief (though yet not without a firm belief of forgiveness from Almighty God upon unfeigned Repentance, as well as the grant of His most Gracious Majesty my Earthly Soveraign's Par∣don) I acknowledge my self most wick∣edly drawn in, and concerned. Now I the said Miles Prance, do with unspeakable grief (though yet not without a firm belief of Forgiveness from Almighty God upon sincere Repentance) hereby in the presence of the All-seeing and Heart-searching God, and of all Holy Angels and Good Men, Solemnly and Sincerely declare, that whatever I deposed upon Oath, relating either to my own Know∣ledge and concurrence in the said Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, or to any other Person or Circumstance touching the same, is, in the whole, and every part thereof false, and the meer groundless product of my own Devillish Invention. Now I the said Miles Prance, do hereby in the presence of the All-seeing and Heart-searching God, and of all Ho∣ly Angels and Good Men, Solemnly and Sincerely avow and declare, that what∣ever I formerly deposed upon Oath, and set forth touching the manner and Cir∣cumstances (as far as the same fell within my knowledge) of the said Sir Edmond∣bury Godfrey's Murder, is most punctual∣ly and Religiously true. For all which my detestable wicked∣ness as with  repentant heart I crave the mercy of God, so do I humbly beg Pardon of the King, and Forgievness of those whom by my Hellish Malice, I have so hainously and unjustly Accused. And as to all and every part of this my Solemn Protestation, as I do hereby under my hand most seriously aver and avow it, so in farther confirmation of the Truth thereof do I resolve (with Gods Help and Permission) to receive the Holy Sacrament. Printed for the Use of Miles Prance, 1683.
