T57 E603_8 99865078 165653
SEVERAL PASSAGES CONCERNING THE Declared King of Scots, BOTH BY SEA and LAND, COMMUNICATED By Letters, to Persons of Credit. ALSO, The Confessions and Speeches of the Laird Darsey, Major General Hurry, and Collonel Spotswood; made upon the Scaffold at Eden∣burgh before their Execution. WITH Some remarkable Passages concerning the City of London, several Letters intercepted, and the advance of the two great Generalls, the Lord Fairfax and the Lord Cromwel into the NORTH. LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, and without Cripplegate, 1650.
A LETTER FROM NEW CASTLE, CONCERNING The Confessions and Death of Col. SPOTSVVOOD, the Laird DARSEY, and Major General HURRY. SIR, FRom Scotland we have intelligence, that they have proceeded to execute Major Gen. Hurry, the Laird Darsey, and Col. Spotswood; these persons (being within the pale of the Kirk) received more fa∣vour at their death then Montross, the manner I am in∣formed to be thus. A Scaffold was built near the place where Montross was hanged, on which place was laid a block, and these three one after the other, were
brought thither, and had their heads chopt off by the Hangman. They had Ministers with them to their end, and were exceeding penitent, especially Col. Spots∣wood, who being desired that he would not conceal at his death, any thing that troubled his mind, or lay hea∣vy upon his Conscience, (amongst other things which he confessed to be a great grief unto him,) he said to this effect following. The substance of the Confessions of Col. Spotsworth, the Laird Darsey, and Major Gen. Hurry. THat he was guilty of a most horrid murther, and that he thought many times that he saw the bloody wounds of Dr. Dorislawes, in whose death himself was an instrument being present with the rest, acknow∣ledging Gods just judgement upon him, for this and other many great sins which he had committed with deserved death, he prayed that others might take warn∣ing by what did befall unto him, That he loved and honoured his King, and what he did was to promote his service, wishing that he might be well dealt with, if he came amongst them; saying, that it was an ill beginning at this conjuncture of time, to fall so se∣verely upon such as had so near relation to him, yet did he submit to the justice of the sentence, in relation to himself. The Laird Darsey shewed much penitency and humility upon the Scaffold, and after a salutation to those of his acquaintance that were about him, he made a short speech, acknowledging his misfortune to be brought this way to his end; and after a short prayer in private, prepared himself for the block: Ma∣jor
Gen. Hurry laid some blame upon others, as being drawn into that snare, and in his deportment beheaved himself somewhat like a Souldier then the rest. A great number of people were present, the objects af∣fording matter of joy to some, and grief to many o∣thers: After execution was done, their bodies were carried away, and buried in Christian burial. There is brought prisoner to Edenburgh a French Marquess, who was taken in the North of Scotland, He confes∣seth that he came thither with a resolution to joyn with Montross, himself and some others having Commission from their declared King, and Letters of importance which are likewise taken: He saith, that he heard not that Montross was taken and executed before he came thither, in which he may easi∣ly be believed; for had he known that, he would cer∣tainly have been so wise as to kept away, he is com∣mitted to safe custody, and the report goes, that he wil be tryed for his life, as an invader of that Kingdom. Another which would surely have gone to pot, had he been taken, was a Brother to Montross, who striking in with a small Frigot, thinking also to come to his Brother, having knowledge as soon as he came to shore, what had befallen to his Brother, made an es∣cape by another vessel; but the Frigot wherein he came is taken, and in it several Commissions from their declared King, and a Letter from him to Mon∣trosse, the contents whereof was, that he should prose∣cute his Commission with effect, untill such time as he received farther Orders or directions from him; ascer∣taining Montross and others with him, that his affecti∣ons were ardent towards them, with many such like expressions and promises, which when he came thither
in person should be really observed; but (saith the eli∣vated Presbyterian) this was at a time when our decla∣red Kings Majesty had no other string to his bow: yet now we hope to find better things from him, if he comes hither, and hath about him such persons as our unerring Church and State shall appoint: And those of this perswasion are the onely men that long for his coming, and are so confident, that his purposes are re∣al therein, that I have seen a Letter which one wrote to his Friend, meerly upon a report or noyse, which ran as far as Edenburgh, about two dayes since, that their King was landed at Sterling, unto which the subscriber gave so much credit, that to use his own words, he saith; that he hoped to attend his Majesty the next morning. At present all is quiet, not any Letters from his declared Majesty to the Parliament, since William Murry came, who is returned back again about 10. dayes since, with a letter from them in a very submis∣sive manner, directed To his most excellent Majesty, The matter inclosed is a covering for their proceedings a∣gainst Montross, the Laird Darsey, Major Gen. Hurry, and Col. Spotswood, perswading his Majesty that there is a vast difference in the case betwixt him and them, for they valued their King to be worth 10000 such, and that his Majesty may not doubt hereof, they affirm that they have an Army of 12000 men already in pay, which they promise to be his Guard, in case he puts himself on that account, and that they have listed 13000 more, to be ready at beat of Drum, to serve him against Sectaries, &c. which is all at present from Newcastle 7. Jan. 1650. Your assured Friend S. T.
A Letter from a Gentleman in London, to his Friend in the Countrey. SIR, ACcording to your Request, I shall abreviate from you here, what you have not leasure to read at large. The first thing considerable in order to time, is, an Act of Par∣liament, for setling the Militia of the City of Westmin∣ster, Subburbs of London, and parts adjacent within the weekly Bill of mortality, nominating a Committee which have power to raise, leavy, and array men; and to appoint Collonels, Captains, &c. with power to lead and conduct the said forces, as occasion shall require, into any part of the Common-wealth of England, to appease all insurrecti∣ons, &c. The Act for Creditors and Prisoners, ordered to be debated again the next week. The Act for the probate of wills read and committed. The Act for bringing in of a new Representative, committed and ordered to be brought in again on Wednesday next. The Lord Gerard Scalph, Commissioner from the States of Holland, hath had Audience, the business to be somewhat further considered. The Lord Cromwel hath made re∣port to the house, touching the state and condition of Ire∣land, the forces left there, under what mediate Command, as also the strength of the Enemy, the Towns remaining in their possession, and several other things in relation to that Countrey. This week was a Common-conncel summoned by vertue of a Warrant, signed by divers Commoners of the City of London, without the Lord Mayor (a thing not usual) which they grounded upon an Act of Parliament, dated the 28. of Febr. 1648. which Act inableth any ten of
the Common-councelmen to call a Common-councel, in case the Lord Mayor should refuse; but the Lord Mayor is so far from refusing, that he acts with them for the good and welfare of the whoe, and both himself and the Alder∣men were at this time present, we have intelligence that Hurry and some other eminent persons which were taken with the Marquess of Montross are beheaded at Eden∣burgh, by which we may see the condition of earthly things, and that mischance standeth next to good fortune, and how suddainly they that make not conscience of their wayes, may fall and leave nothing behind them, but ignominy and re∣proach. Much debate hath been this week about the publick Affaires of the Nation, and it is agreed that the two great lights in our horizen, the L. G. Fairfax, and the L. Crom∣well, shall advance Northwards; who both excelling in wisdom and Martial-knowledge, are deservedly above o∣thers to be esteemed and honoured: much talk hath been within a day or two, that the declared King of Scotland is taken, somesay by the Scots with a Breda net, others say by the English Fleet, as he was going thither, what is of certain time must produce, onely at present take what com∣eth from most assured hands, viz. That he is gone out of Hol∣land, for they were desirous to be eased of him; and besides, some Ships that attended for him, Vantrump had about 20. sayle, which according to vulger report, were to con∣duct him: About 10. of these were seen to sayle towards Jersey, and if there were more, its thought they sayled for Scotland, and then its likely he is taken, or else they that were to be his Convoy, returned back again upon sight of the Parliaments Ships, which ride on the Northern Coast. London 15. June, 1650. FINIS.
