T632 E1886_1 99868960 170524
MANS MASTER-PIECE: OR, The best Improvement of the worst Condition. In the exercise of A Christian Duty. On six Considerable Actions. Viz. 1. The Contempt of the World. 2. The Judgment of Gods against the wicked, &c. 3. Meditations on Repentance. 4. Meditations on the Holy Supper. 5. Medita. on afflictions and Martyrdom. 6. With a Meditation for one that is sick. By P. T. Kt. Luke 16.13. We cannot serve God and Mammon. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Barber at the Lamb, and Samuel Speed at the Printing-Press in Saint Pauls Church-yard. 1658.
ON THE EFFIGIES, Of the most accomplisht LADY, Dame ELIANOR TEMPLE. REceive this Lovely Lady in the Roome, Of the lost Author, it cann't misbecome Her worth, her Person; Since all must admit, Her constant Practice is, the same he writ; Different in Nation, Time, Sex yet agree, In Vertues of vast magnitude; Souls Sympathy, Souls be n't confin'd; our sad defeat at Babel Wants influence on Those, nor is it able,Confusion of Tongues. T'obstruct or Termiante such Notions, Blest-Births, proceeding from the pur'st Motions Of the Bright Dove th' Adore: Like sweet Lutes plac'd at distance, touch but This And a Harmonious-murmur Ecchoed is Soone by's Confederate; No vertue being Exempt, From her fair practice of, The World's Contempt. P. T. Another on the EFFIGIES. THe Graver did his part (ingeniously) Mixing (with curious Art) much industry; Yet both, fall short, of what is Natural, Than Infinitely of that's Spiritual;
How is't then possible, for my dull Pen; To trace divine lines, not conceiv'd by men? Her High-born soul, (disdaining sorded clay, Illustrates that Person,) Crowns our day. Many her Noble Graces, yet most High; In what surmounts them all; HUMILITY. Flourish then in my lines, as thou art sure To fix on Syon, and shine evermore. P. T. Another on the EFFIGIES. THis stately frame, containes a gallant soul, Whose praise, whose fame extends beyond each pole; Perfumes the earth, with rich, with fragrant scent, In whose bles't birth, A Treasure vast was lent To unworthy Mortals; Who her enjoyes, of Heaven is favoured; Like my best choice, Angels are figured. Her Mother fed on flowers when she bred One like a Seraphim, accomplished: A blessed Geneus (questionlesse) is she, At whose approach, grim Demons quickly flee. Since Spirits have conformity with Her, Haunt me each night; Dear, Dear Familiar. Peter Temple.
To the most PERFECT PATTERN AND PATRONESSE Of Vertue and Piety, The LADY ELIANOR TEMPLE, The Glorious Consequen∣ces, of a Gracious Conver∣sation, be multiplied. My Joy, PRovidence, (that most Potent Byas of Mun∣daine affaires, inclin∣ing our actions, (as well the swarthy, lesse-commendable,
as most splendid) to a more prosperous end than our crooked, our oblique designes directs them.) That ever watchful, all-piercing eye (I say) extracting (in∣differently, its glory out of all our en∣terprises; When I [possibly] was soli∣citous of lesse-profitable discourses,French. in that Feminine-language) fixes my roving eye on Le Mispris du Monde, this, suddenly swells my drooping soul, with just indignati∣on, to contemne, what had too oft, too treacherously deceived, disap∣pointed, and (finally) disserted my fairest ambition; Thus, con∣verting my intended divertion to an inestimable treasure: This provi∣dence (I say) together with the delightful raptures, the satisfacti∣ons (if not benefit) I enjoy'd in the perusal first, and after in aiding this stranger to lisp, to stammer our native tong, ue who, (in his own)
had so aptly pourtraied the sober conceptions of my heart) that you, my Dear, might the more readily apprehend his worth;) thereby (at worst,) entertaining and deluding (as with a no-lesse faithful, than chearful and comfortable compani∣on) the sad solitudes of (otherwise) tedious minutes; And lastly, (my matchlesse moity) you, being con∣stantly the most worthy object, of my most immaculate inclinations; To you therefore (as well out of yours, and the Authors vertuous sympathy; as your interest in what is mine,) does this Essay most properly appertain, which (neverthelesse like a prodi∣gal spring, you may (without ex∣hausting your proper store) hereby, with some advantage communicate to the Common-Wealth of Piety) To you I say, does this Alien, (now a Denizon) addresse himself (fully satisfied of your civil reception of
persons of lesse merit) Imagine then you beheld him, in his native puri∣ty, (yet without Patron or Protector more than his innocent vertue,) om∣bellish't with such splendid linea∣ments, so fluently uttering that har∣monious dialect of Canaan, in such enchanting numbers, such soul∣charming straines, such bemoaning, such languishing accents; that whe∣ther you remark the subject, sub∣stance, design, elegant stile, or apt delivery; he is of more than ordina∣ry consideration: and no other than a product of divinity, since lesse than the inspirations of the Spirit of peace and joy, could not breath such fra∣grant aires, such ejaculations: But I may not ally, nor disparage his na∣tive value, with my imperfect com∣mendations, 'tis sufficient to passe him currant, that he bears your excellent image, and exact proporti∣on on his wealthy-Ore: And, (by the
permission of your fair (but frail) sex,) whom you surpasse as well in that rich, that glittering Jewel (that illustrates your amiable person) your gracious, and therefore glorious soul, as in your most exquisite outward frame, and cimetry, your body, that stately structure of the divine Archi∣tect, its most lovely Cabinet,) by your imploying and improving those minutes in the contemplation, and exercise of vertue, which others pro∣digally lavish and trifle out in a too passionate pursuite of the vain∣est extravagancies of the Authors Nation; yet now, dearest (though your strict severity, scarce permits you to imitate the most decent fashions of your all bright, all dazling sex,) be you in this (as in the other perfecti∣ons of your life) entirely consisting (as by long and happy experience I am confirm'd) in an unwearied exercise of vertue, and an imbred
and implacable aversion to vice) be, I say, not onely their Phair, their Mirrour for pre∣sent, for future generations to regulate, to adorne their illu∣strious soules by, in your Con∣tempt of the World; but here∣in my Dearest, give them the Mode, the Garb of the new Hie∣rusalem, converting their Ro∣mantick diversions, to Divine and World-contemning Con∣templations, exchanging their delights to sacrifices: march∣ing ever before them, as a No∣ble Heroesse, a brave Conduc∣tresse of the lovely Troop of silver Swannes, in that innocent via∣lactia of piety, that tends to a blessed eternity, that when the bodies gilt shall varnish, and fall off, you may together exalt your all-charming voyces, in chanting forth Hallelujahs to
him who was pleas'd to direct, and strengthen my weake hands to cleave wood for his Sanctu∣ary, and to adde my might to the treasure of those graces, that adorn thine incomparable person; attribute only what disgusts to me, who should want confidence, to intrude this on the World, but under your Banner; whose peculiar Function, and con∣stant Custome it is, to palliate, to ex∣tenuate, to cover the frequent infir∣mities of the hand that presents them, not as directions to, but as a character (rather) of your spotlesse conversation; neverthelesse, impre∣cating hereby (in some degree) it may supply, the other Defects, Disa∣bilities, and want of Industry, which his Relation oblidges him to, for your information, and instruction; in the perusal, you cannot (altogether) regrete your pains, nor remain un∣satisfied, with those reflections of
your own Pure spirit (whose motions are none other, than restlesse actions, tending to Holinesse and Righteous∣nesse, the honour of God, the com∣fort of Men (that parallel 'twixt his sayings, and your performances.) And, if the generality of men over∣passe this with neglect, with con∣tempt, yet Providence (when it shall be instal'd in your Oratory, that Sanctum Sanctorum of unsullied Devotions, your Closet) may be plea∣sed to move some curious eye, who may collect some word, some syllable that may faciliate his voy∣age to the City of my God; this ensuing Treatise, not onely wean∣ing men from the World, but gradually conducting them (in the five subsequent discourses) to life eter∣nal, through the gastly gate of death, not dreadful (though) to worthy Christians, but a rest from their labours: at worst, I may not
(altogether) dispair, but (here∣by) to fix a more than ordinary impression, on the spirits, of the tender productions, of our entire affection, our selves multiplied; who may, (as persons more near∣ly concerned, in their parents ac∣quisitions,) extract, what may advance their eternal well-fare; which if it fall out, as my Pro∣phetick soule whispers and sug∣gests, and my most frequent and fervent addresses to the Throne of Grace importune, I am abundant∣ly recompenc'd for my cordial in∣tentions, in thus exposing my self, to the censure of this choice pal∣lated generation: But, (my best blest soul) I may not longer de∣tain thee from what's more wor∣thy thy consideration, since it's an effect of his singular regard, whose terrestrial glory solely consists (in what renders him the object of o∣thers
envy) that perfect, and in∣dissolvable amity he contracted with thee, from that happy moment, he had the peculiar priviledge and felicity to subscribe, what he entirely is, MADAM, My Dearest, Passionately En∣amor'd onely with the title of Your most Affectionate, More oblig'd Husband. Peter Temple.
TO THE Reader. I Hold it not im∣pertinent to Ad∣vertise thee, That (notwith∣standing) the in∣finite number of excellent Treatises of this nature (our Nation so abounding with persons, famous in their gene∣ration,) that it may seem as I∣dle an Irregularity, to addresse to this Forreiner, as to imitate the extravagancies of his Nation, yet, the (not too) frequent, per∣usal
in the Original (possibly, out of curiossity, remarking that in a stranger, which I might have over-past in a Denizon) so enter∣tain'd (otherwise) but tedious, and unpleasant houres, with such an agreeable Conversation, as encourag'd (nay more) obliged me thus to expose my self to an u∣niversal censure in this Publicati∣on, so I might (thereby) Relu∣minate this glimmering, yet glittering sparke of Divinity, who in his native language (as well as choyce subject) is so pro∣per, so admirably excellent, and insinuating, that I never observ'd a more sad, sober, languishing, yet becoming, yea, enticing countenance, Portrayed by a more Judicious Pensil, and in more flourishing, [not garish co∣lours] which hitherto notwith∣standing, never so much as warm'd our more Frigid climate,
and (more than probable) having served his generation, through the Authours modesty,In omit∣ting his name. or over∣sight of men, is near extinct in his Native Country: The subject is the most necessary, Faith, and Repentance; Instructing to do, to suffer; The Active, The Passive Posture of a Christian; But I shall not longer detain you, with a tedious Appollogy, to so short a Collation, yet dare I avow, your entertainment, both whol∣some, and not unsavory; your only Infelicity is, in being thus slenderly served, and at second hand. I wish I had no greater Frailties, than my deffect in not perfectly comprehending the language of the Original; Attri∣bute then to him (whose abilities reach't not his cleer intentions) all over-sights, and imperfecti∣ons, (but what it may contract in the Presse) and them alone,
besides some necessary variations (that of't sounding harsh in a for∣rain stile, which is most exact∣ly ellegant in it's Native Dia∣lect,) It being the common fate of Translations to abate of their Primitive purity, [as the most-knowing can easily determine;] The rest, I gratefully return to the memory of the Pious Au∣thour, [whose worst fate 'tis,] Thus to deliver his excellent con∣ceptions, [by so insufficient an Interpreter] his name [que∣stionlesse] is regestred in hea∣ven, though obscur'd here; I heartily desire you no lesse satis∣faction, [I would say advan∣tage] then I reap't; The same providence, [whose wayes are past finding out] that directed it to my hand [in the chiefest confluence of the most ellaborate pieces in the Courts of his deso∣late Sanctuary,St. Pauls Church∣yard.] moving your
heart, and if I be any way In∣strumental herein, to contribute to the consolation, or informa∣tion of any deprest, dejected, or gasping soul [this being a most Rich Cordial for a fainting spirit] he who only heareth all prayers, [and to whom only they ought to be directed, and addrest,] hath after his accustomed mfull manner, abundantly answered  Fervent Potion of Your Companion in armes, under the invincible ban∣ner of the ✚ P. T.
A POST-SCRIPT. IT may possibly prove no unsea∣sonable Argument [to the Reader,] that Lot urg'd for the rescuing of Zoar, out of that doleful, and general conflagra∣tion, It's but a little one, spare it and my soul shall live; For the same [if no other] reason, per∣use this, [let me thus excite such, as happily imploy not their time alwayes more thrifti∣ly,] 'Tis not tedious, but doubt∣lesse of admirable use and com∣fort, [specially, for such Reverst, overwhelmed spirits] who there∣by may be establish't to attend, to submit to the divine pleasure,
and not rashly give way to their extremities, Inhummanly to precipitate them, to the eter∣nal destruction of their precious souls; being a too frequent, too deplorable remedy, or rather such an immortal Barbarisme a∣gainst themselves, that their most malicious, most cruel ad∣versaries, want gall to wish, and abillity to effect:
ERRATA. Page 7. line 14. read he is, for we are. p. 14. l. 22. add men, (before may) p. 25. l. 1. after retrograde, ad to heaven. p. 34. l. 7. say that that. p. 41. l. 17. r. their, for her. p. 43. l. 9. for layeth, r. loveth. p. 45. l. 4. r. (of the) add paths. p. 46. l. 19. make a, at selves, p. 60. l. 24. omit he. p. 75. l. 1. for feigned r. sayning. p. 76. l. 15. make a, at serve, and omit that, at manner, p. 78. l. 29. for parke r. sparke. p. 88. l. 3. r. victory for ministry. p. 114. l. 6. r. in the extremity of my numberlesse afflictions. p. 133. l. 10. make a, at grave, p. 158. l. 1. r. to take a greater in his Globe. p. 168. l. 6. for so he r. as one. p. 203. l. 14. leave out the first and. p. 206. betwixt the 12. and 18. l. you must 7. times. r. her, and she, for him, and he, &c. p. 215. for highly r. slyly.
A DISCOURSE UPON THE CONTEMPT OF THE WORLD. WE, having now a long time (in vain) pursued the shadow that flyes from us, and hasted af∣ter the Dreames and Imaginations of the World, which we could never attain: Are our selves wandred from the path of our Felicity, stooping toward the earth: notwithstanding it behoveth us, that
our Passion transport us not ever into obscurity. Let us (then) break off our slum∣bering, and rouze our selves up, re∣garding the perilous bancks of our Sea, and the false visions of our night. If we farther grope in the dark, and creep into corners, to redouble our obscurity, if our spirits continue to embrace the impure Mud of this gloomy earth, it is to be (more than) feared, that the infection of this pesti∣lent aire, altogether converts our glimmering into blindnesse, and our stupidity, into a continual lethargy of Ignorance. The strength of the Poyson which the world vomits against us, is subtile, and peirsing: in one instant charming our spirits, inchanting our sense, de∣priving us of Reason, and rening us lost. This World treats us, as the Torpille with the other Fishes;The Cramp∣fish. she breaths upon them, she freezes them, she stiffens them, she lulls them asleep, and then devoures them. Her touch de∣prives us of sense, as that of the Leo∣pard the Scorpion. The blast of her
mouth is not lesse fatal to us, than that of the Basalisk, who rends the sound∣est hearts, by the sweetnesse of her sofisticated beauty, she deprives us of our time, to the intent to make us plunge our selves to the bot∣tome of her designes, and compels us to accept of apparances instead of truths, and to cause us to straggle and steere irregularly, even unto ship∣wrack. But we may not for ever stageer and float at the mercy of all these blasts, it behoves us to fix our sliding steps, and to sustain our stomacks with some wholsome nourishment. We are created to aspire above the Sunne, and Moon: the earth is too base to be our end, 'tis re∣quisite we have an object more rich, more high. Our spirits may not ever be fixt and anchored within this body: It behoveth that she languish after, that she raise her self up to a more soveraign station, toward a more absolute fe∣licity. Let us (then) rend off the muffer that hood-winks our eyes, and
contemplate on the condition where∣in we are, to the end we may observe how we runne (with the multitude) to our destruction: it will be a con∣siderable task to kindle the lamp to enlighten our obscurity, and direct our selves safely, to the end we straggle not more, in the Desarts of the World. We shall have obtain'd no small advantage, when we have chast away those clouds which obscure the Sunne, and leaves us (like flowers) langnish∣ing in the shadow, when we shall call to mind the traiterous hooks of false delights: when we shall have discove∣red, the otion of our designs and pro∣jects, which render us slaves to those things, were created for us and for our use. O how happily shall that houre be employed, in which we shall disco∣ver how the flesh precipitates the soul, how it's desires stifle it, how it constraines that divine part to cast a∣way it's Scepter, to render it self ab∣ject, to offend it's dignity, and to be subservient to corruptible things: Instead whereof, she, (without
ceasing) ought to raise her self up to∣ward heaven, where her inheritance is, and whether all her designes should tend! Assuredly, this day shall be blessed for us, wherein (having chast a∣way all those follies which possesse and master our spirits, and in which, ha∣ving received force to surmount and vanquish all our passions,) we shall call to mind that our repose is in a higher Region than the earth: That this world should not serve us for o∣ther than a passage to mount up to heaven, that it ought to be our way, not our end: That whil'st we so∣journ here, we should ever elevate our thoughts on high, toward him who disposeth the ever moving heaven, and governs the erting courses of the wandring Starres: who sustaineth the earth without trouble, and containes in his hands, the seasons, the ages, and winds, as servants to his will. Our conscience, and the care of our safety oblidge us: the sound of his omnipotent voice which ec∣choes dayly here below, adverti∣seth us; crying, that it is time to think of it, and presseth us unto it. But our
designs shrivel in the bud, these Divine seeds so soon as they begin to spring in our soules, and we are so feeble that those motions which we direct to∣wards heaven, are check't in an in∣stant; They appear a little, and are suddenly dissipated, vanishing like lightning. Let us then consider a little with our selves, let us free our feet from this subtile laborinth, let us (for some time) disassociate our spirits from the body, let us go out of our selves, let us for a while abandon the man; and so retiring, we shall evidently behold the confusion of those designs, and the deformity of those councels that possesse humanity. Behold he embraceth more than he can retain, his greedinesse is uncapa∣ble of moderation, he engageth in more businesse than he can perfect. It's a perpetual motion without stay, without end. His desires follow him, and produce each other: abandoning one gulf, he enters another: The World al∣luminates him, one designe as ano∣ther is extinguisht. He is ever clam'd
and choak't up, and resembles those unconstant leaves, who as oft shift place, as the aire changes the wind. One hope enchants him, which afterward proves vain, and in the in∣stant he throwes himself upon another, which incontinently vanisheth away in a dreame:Fr. Pro. His counters are found lyars, there is (without ceasing) a misreckoning in his Cipher. The im∣petuossity of one passion assaults him, and suddenly he is transported with a new desire. We are ever giddy-headed, al∣wayes troubled, continually pensive, and that under a hope of an uncertain and perishing good; for the price of a handful of winde, for a mortal thing, which every moment, slideth and slippeth out of his hands: for the obtaining of that, which cannot stop the hasty flight of his yeares, which cannot prolong his life one breath, nor can it prevent that his songs be not changed into Plaints, his dayes into darknesse, his pleasures into sor∣rowes. O how much more expedient
were it for him that this violence and desire would employ it self upon the contempt of what he so ardently embraceth: and that instead of his groveling on the earth, dazled with it's vain splendor, he would erect his face toward that sacred source, whence springs his life. There should he draw waters, (more than sufficient) to satisfie the thirst of his scorch't throat: and having his eares ravish't with the harmony of the pleasant mur∣muring of that purling streame, no path should seem rough to him. The fruitful Rivers of this Divine Foun∣taine dilating over him, and (by an ample Deluge) happily choaking all those cares that would approach him. The truth (ever by him) would dispell all imaginations that would torment him, possessing him with the real enjoyments of those celestial delights, which he onely knowes by sight: and from that eminency would shew him the follies of men, and those winds which tosse and threaten their vessels in this turbulent Sea, discovering to him the perils of others without running their fortune.
Truly his estate would be marvei∣lously changed, his condition would be extreamly blessed. But can we not follow this Trace? is this place unaccessible to us? Let's try, let us divert our selves a little from the World, let us search out the ready way to conduct us unto so plea∣sant, so delightful a habitation. If our passions heat us, let us runne to these waters, let's extinguish this conflagration. Some flowers natural∣ly turn toward the Sunne, let us en∣force our selves to their imitation, remounting toward our Original. To the effecting whereof, let us consider how the actions of this World have a false look; and that under a pleasant appearance they embrace men but to strangle them: resembling the Ivy which corrupts, and ruinates the Wall which it cherisheth and enfoldeth. He makes much of that man whom thou beholdest; he accosts him,The Covetous man de∣scribed. he bears him company: Observe in what condition it hath rendred him. Be∣hold him who having runne most eagerly, having alwayes some designe afarre off, his covetousnesse is never so
that he will finish it, in that which hath succeeded to him. He alwayes desires, he ever feares: his desires are a fire that consumes him, his fears an ice that chills him. And among the infinite multitude of Worldlings, that are there assembled, there is not one alone that is content with his fortune, with his condition, nor which maketh the lesse quest for the satisfaction of his proper inclina∣tions. All take one remedy for another, for to cure their griefs, they endeavour to lose the sense of them: they administer to themselves poyson for antidotes, and death for life. In∣stead of receiving medicines, proper to close up and consolidate their wounds, they apply corruption and the worme: they adde one project to another, they do nought but (with∣out ceasing) turn, seek, and enquire, and in conclusion thrust out more desires, and yet imagine new, they enfold, and pester themselves in their businesse as the silk-wormes, and stifle themselves. Their care awaken; them before
the dawning, and (yet overcharg'd with slumber) draggs them to their labour. There, these poor children of pain and misery, apply their thoughts (all the day) to their bu∣sinesse, they bow their backs to their work, and employ their hands in the labour of this wretched World. They search for rest in that toyle which consumes them, like to the Torch which diminisheth by degrees, feeding it self of it's Losse and living on it's Ru∣ine. They are gray in the flower of their youth. The whole life of the most happy among them, is nothing but a punishment, but a continual passion, but pain, but vexation, which ever attends them till it hath over-turned them into their Sepulchres. He there imagines, he discovers a∣farre off, at the end of the course, some appearance of repose,☜ Note. he conceives that after having heap't up much wealth, he shall (with his armes crost) sit at ease, and enjoy the fruit of his travel. But, as the eye which athwart a cloud, or the water, appre∣hends
objects untruly: after the same manner his spirit which judges through the cloudy and false ices of the World which obscures them, conclude o∣therwise of things than they are. For, whilst he is in the carreire, so many difficulties crosse the way, so many waves flow on each other, and beat on his bark with desire for to split it: so many hindrances are on the road, that divert and amate him, that usually (willing to passe forward) his strength failes him, he loseth his breath, and destroyes himself, and if happily he is preserv'd, and acquires the riches, which is the end he so much desires: 'tis after so many years, with a body so wasted and feeble, that his labour re∣mains unprofitable to him, not being able more to enjoy, what he hath pur∣chast with so much sweat: and is in∣continently constrained to quit the possession of that, the hopes of enjoy∣ment whereof tormented him all his life. And if (at any time) he would stretch out his armes to comfort him∣self of his labour, it (not seldome) happens to him that he findes a sha∣dow
instead of a body, a Chest in lieu of a Treasure: he oft imagining to hold a Bird with both his hands, and sees nothing betwixt his fingers but a feather. He beholds (before his face) a fire which devoures his structures, tro∣phys of his vanity, erected for ages, and as if he should live for ever. He views the haile that batters down his harvests, and the heat that consumes them: he observes that he renders him∣self an imitator of the spider, who frames a web with much labour, which the least broom can tear off. He perceives that his goods are carried away like leaves with the wind, and overturn'd as woods with the axe: and understands what manner of things those are, after the which he hath so much tormented himself. O Men! behold the riches for the which you lose so much repose and sleep; Observe O ye blind the price for which you take so much pleasure to hasten your deaths.☜ Fraile and caitifie generation,Note. con∣sider the state of the place, for which you despise Paradise.
Miserable wretches; follow your vocations, to which you (by the provi∣dence of God) are called, avoid idlenesse, the nourisher of all evils; eat your bread with the sweat of your browes; it is the commandment of God. Enjoy those good things he hath given you with a liberal hand: but bound your desires to his will,☞ and remember that it may possibly fall out, that before to morrow you may leave the World. Enjoy (then,) this wealth as not possessing it, and having ever the glory of God, and the salvation of your soules as your princi∣pal aime. What folly, what mad∣nesse, to destroy your selves in the pur∣suit of things? by means of which tra∣vel men tend to misery and ruine, and do not so much as (one hour) meditate on those things by the which (with joy & contentment) may obtain eternal fe∣licity? Neverthelesse mark this unsati∣able spirit, which can fix no period to it's covetousnesse: he obliges himself ever to the time to come, he does no∣thing but crave, and never enjoyes: he surfets of, abounds in wealth, he hath his full measure, he cannot
grasp any more, and for all that hath not lost the relish of increasing. He uncessantly pursues that mettle the father of so many evils.Gold. He ever sets his heart on things that are to be obtain'd: and his desire is like to fire, which furnisheth a thousand fires without abating it's own ardure: like the greedy flames, which are so much the more enflam'd, by how much they are supply'd with fewel, and that nourishment encreaseth in their mouths. His thirst can be no more quench't than that of the Dropsie. When he possesseth the wealth and treasures of the earth, the care of it doth not faile to accompany his wretched steps. His desire hath no limits, he findes nothing that stayes it: it still encreaseth with the augmenta∣tion of his wealth. His avarice interrupts his sleeps, accusing him of sloth, spurs up his dili∣gence the hath alwayes some designe upon his neighbours estate: his eye is ever pensive, ever sad, ever evil, and ever watching the riches of his neighbours, as adulterers the wives of other men. He renders himself a
slave to his wealth, he commits him∣self into it's power, and possession, and still stares and gazes upon it. When he considers that they are fleeting and unstable, that none can e∣ver hold them sure, that there is ever danger, that they be not taken away: then he trembles, then he changes co∣lour, then he growes pale. Behold∣ing them ravish't in his presence, he suddenly tares, dismembers, and butch∣ers himself with rage. He cannot behold (without de∣spair) the losse of the riches, which altogether possesses his will. Poor and blind man! thou observest not how thou plungest thy self into the water after those superfluous and pe∣rishing things: that the defect is not in thy wealth, but in thy spirit: that by how much the more thou augment∣est thy treasures, by so much art thou laid open to the stroakes of adversity. Go,☞ go, fill not the aire with so many vain complaints, weep not more for that thou hast lost thy wealth, but because thy riches have lost thee. Shed rivers of teares for that thou hast
hitherto disturb'd thy spirit, and not for that they are slipt out of thy hands. If gold would prolong thy dayes, if death would accept a randsome for thy life, thou hadst (then) some ex∣cuse to have so afflicted thy heart to be separated from them. But thy stately structures, the spatious extent of thy fields, thy large and oriental pearles, the lustre of thy diamonds, and thy ornaments of pride, have not suffici∣ent vertue, as to remove sorrow from thy heart, and anger from thy countenance. Thy feavour will not forsake thee to behold thy treasures display'd, nor by unfolding thy great wealth: the cold fit will as much shake thee in a bed of state, as of straw. Thou wast too eager, sharp and greedy after the pro∣vision of this life, thou shalt have more than is necessary, for the way that is behind. Observest thou not how speedily our age passeth, that life then leaves us, whil'st we make preparation to live: how death pursues us, how he casts his darts after us, and at one blow parts us from our riches? To what end
serves all this wealth, seeing life is so fraile and failes. So lightly, so easily?☞ seek then things necessary for thee,Note. and not more; Search them without Passion, enjoy them without care, and lose them without regreat; For the Future, Elect Treasures which can secure themselves from oppressi∣on, and that are not subject to Moth, or Rust; and hide them in such a place, that by none they may be betrayed, un∣lesse thy self. Behold another who is driven with different gusts,The Am∣bitious man de∣scrib'd. whose industry is not lesse, marke what paines he un∣dergoes to atchief glorious Titles to satisfie his ambition? he hath not o∣ther end of his strugling than a vain grandure; he is puft up, and swells his soul to the heighth of his Station; he prides himself to observe the ex∣cellency of the structure of his Palace; To see the threshold of his gate throng'd by multitudes of Sutors; And despises and contemns all beneath him: but the miserable wretch Idolizeth the lustre of some dignity more eminent than his own, and being arived to that, he yet aspires higher: and so he
dayly pants, gapes and reaches after those things which are above him, untill that death at one stroke deprive him of his life, and cause him at one horrible leap, to tumble as low, as he designed to have flowen high. What fury is so puissent and preva∣ent, that can transport his spirit so long enraged with a blind errour, to seek his content in the throng of such a multitude of unpleasant and trou∣blesome affaires? what folly is it rather to seek his glory in a half worm∣eaten Title, Ancient Marble in a Rusty Helmet, than in his ver∣tue,☜ his Knowledge, his Prudence? what madnesse to glow with a desire, to eternise ones memory, by erect∣ing of Palaces which time will de∣molish, rather than engraving his glory in an eternal Brasse: and to seek a perdurable habitation within the Holy dwelling of Paradise, where lyes the Grandure and Immor∣tallity of name, and not in the vani∣ties and smothers of the world? This Rock is more firme, This Holy Pillar more sollid and more assur'd, than the earth which hath not received
from God other foundations than the slippery prop of the most sub∣till Element.Ayre. 'Tis there then that he ought to establish his felicity, and not in-humane delights, which suddenly passe and escape our eyes in an instant.The Vo∣luptuous man de∣scrib'd. This other worldling which thou beholdest, is baited with the vain sweets and delights of the flesh, he sucks his vapors with long draughts: he stupisies all his senses in the pleasures and extacises of an adulterous bed; he plunges and precipitates himself head∣long in these transports; and that she who possesseth his soul, which even ravisheth him with delight, with one onely glanse of her eye, being incited with the same cupidity, and ever the more for to entice him, mixes a thousand beauties with her native lustre: she addeth art to the workmanship of nature, wherewith she so very properly embellisht all the glances of her countenance. She a∣dornes her head with false hayre, and borroweth her complexion from a most exquisite paint and tincture. But all these delights shall perish in an instant, like dreames who lose their
pleasure in awaking. These Delicates are (to them) venomous potions: These Perfumes penetrating poysons (which murther in an instant.) They swallow Pills outwardly guilded and sugred, whereof they shall incontinent∣ly relish the bitternesse; They eat of the apples of our first Parents, pleasant to the sight, but hard of digesti∣on. These ayres which flow so sweetly from the mouth, and with such an agreeable Tone, are Syrens Songs, which (through the eares) charme their souls, and slacks them, to ruine them. Their mouth for one kisse, breaths out a thousand sighths, their hearts for a dram of delight, sends forth a thousand groanes; The time of their pleasure is not to be com∣pared to the length of their Repent∣ance. And often (by a sudden muta∣tion men see one day) the sun shining upon their delights, and on the mor∣row, Hell covering their miseries. Behold some of those Dreams we ran after: The Passions, within the which we bury our selves, without pow∣er to disengage us. There are an infinite number of o∣thers,
whereof the recitall would be troublesome and superfluous, seeing that in these alone the vanity of our Cogitations are but two apparent, and their end cannot be hid. The covetous wretch hath but a little gold, and land, this Mallady is not folly, 'tis Rage: all to him is too little, and a little to him is nothing. The Ambitious know∣eth no Serene dayes, the ferver of his desire causes him every moment passe his life in renewing deaths: And in conclusion he enjoyes nothing but winde. The voluptuous man has but little pleasure, which glides, vanishes away, and forsakes him sooner than thought, or instant, leaving him nought but a Boysing,☞ but a sad Repentance: and all three are so inchain'd, so fastned to the world, and yet have secret Vultures which without intermission, gnaw, and tyre on their Hearts. Let us not then, like them, Establish our hopes on Humane things, which are leaves moved with every blast. Let us not pursue these vaine Gran∣dures, neither plunge our selves in these Delights, followed with so sad, so
miserable a conclusion. Let us steere our vessels out of Perill, and not linger till the Tempest (by force) cause us make Port after ship-wrack. Let us not longer be slack to our good, considering that all is vanity which the heavens encompasse: defacing and razing one of our hearts all the Tracks of the world; e∣stablishing our assurance on the force and right hand of him, whose firme support shall no way be able to fru∣strate our expectation. Our Ornament shall be quite dif∣ferent to theirs, and the fruit of our labour shall far surpasse them. They heap up these earthly vapors, and ex∣halations which as suddenly vanish: They fill the ayre with their clamours, and wishes: they sow to the winde, and reap nought but vanity and empti∣nesse. They Build on the sand, and their edifices fall to ruine: They paint on the floods, and the Traits of their Pensill disappears. They are carefull of nothing but their fraile Bodyes, and permit their souls (the immor∣tal seed of heaven) to lye neglect∣ed: They wallow in Mud and Dirt,
and come forth desil'd:☞ They search for Paradise in Honours, in Riches, in the world, and find nought but Passi∣ons, but paine and sorrows. Instead of meditating of, and assuring the life after these ashes, they close up against themselves the passage of heaven. In the course of their vanity they are cleere seeing Owles: and of that which is above blind Molds: They suffocate their Reason in their De∣lights, and live as creatures, that have not other care but for their bellyes. Instead of transforming them∣selves to Angels, they degenerate into Beasts: They abase, instead of exalting themselves: in lieu of eleva∣ting (continually) their hearts on high, they pronounce not the Name of God, but with Blasphemies: In stead of dreading the powerful effects of his puissant arme, they have nought (but their desires) for Law. And if they (sometimes) talk of God, 'tis not but (like Paretts) with their lips, without understanding what them∣selves say, and are deafe to their own proper voyces. Let us not then follow this path, by
the which men march retrograde: but contrarily, not give rest to our eyes, till we have discovered the true path: walking by the way that tends to our Original: Neither let us aspire to any thing but our felicity, being still mindfull of our salvation. Let us build on the Rock, and on the Free-boord, to the end that we may remaine firme as the Mount of Syon. Let's oppose our spirits to our flesh, by a solemn Protestation consecra∣ting our hearts, our voyce, and our hands, to the Glory of the Chief, Universal, and the Principal cause of all beings. Let our desires terminate in him, that his fear may be a Curb to our follyes. That in his love, these springing passions may be extin∣guisht: To the intent that we may hold in chief of Heaven, and not so much as relish of earth. Joyning our voyces to the sweet and me∣lodious accents of those Divine spi∣rits, and beautifull soules, which glitter in the midst of our Dark∣nesse, as stars in the night. And ever be mindfull, that our other
chiefest agitations proceed from artificial, and ridiculous causes: but that our prime, and universal obli∣gation is that of God, in which con∣sideration we ought freely to engage all the estate and our lives. Cast∣ing behind us the Idolatry of pe∣rishing beauties, being obliged to trample under foot, that lustre we so blindly adored: It's expedient to be effected, that the delights of the world should be despleasant to us: it behoveth us not (like mad men) to weave the web of our proper destruction, and building our felicity on a basse of so short a duration, and which resembles a flash of fire; which is extinguish't as soon as kindled. The riches of men are fleeting and subiect to be lost,James 1.10. there is no assu∣rance in their favours: the rich with their enterprizes, will fade as the flower of the grasse: having great de∣signs, yet know not what shall fall out to morrow, their life is nothing but vapour and smoke. He lives in pleasure upon earth,James 5.2. he abounds, and satisfies his heart,
but his Riches shall corrupt, his garments shall be moth-eaten, his money shall rust, and it's rust shall be a testimony against him, and shall gnaw his flesh like fire. His fields shall yield a plentifull encrease, he shall gather goods for many yeares; but in the following night, God shall require his soul. Let's not (then) more labour after the food that perisheth,Luke 12.20. but after that which endureth to life eternal.John 6.27. Let's follow the steps of Jesus Christ, and push from us (with de∣testation) the enchanting voyce of the world, leaving our nets in the Sea after the example of Saint Peter, and Saint Andrew: quitting the ship and Zebede in imitation of St. James and St. John; following the Saviour of the world who summons us. The graces of the Omnipotent are the greatest happinesse we can attain to.Tim 6.7. He forewarnes us that we set not our hearts on the uncertainty of rich∣es, but on him, who bestoweth all things plentifully.
He hath advertis'd us,Tim. 6.7. that cove∣tousnesse is the root of all evil, makes men wander from the faith, and en∣volves them in many sorrowes. Go to them!☞ let's call to mind that there's no felicity, but in him, and that none but his love is Perma∣nent. He hath caus'd the earth to yield fruits to nourish our Fathers: he (by its dayly productions) releeves us af∣ter them: and will effect it (by his goodnesse) that it shall still bring forth to sustain our Posterity. He, who hath satisfied five thousand mē with five loavs & two little fishes,Mat. 14.19. will ever supply us with means suffici∣ent to pass the rest of our time, which he will have us to live upon the earth. The men of the world have their Heritage in this life, their bellies are satisfi'd with food, their children are glutted, and leave the over-plus to their little ones. They imagin themselves rich, and that nothing is wanting unto them; but see not that they are blind and naked, that they possesse nought but things transitory: and that they are far from residing in
the Courts of the Lord, and to have an everlasting habitation, within the holy place of his Palace.☜ 'Tis then enough to have lived for riches, for glory, for delights: Let us live for our selves, for our souls, let's recollect our cogitations for our advantage, let's stand firm, and fall no more: & principally, let's coragiously pursue our marke. Let's not proceed as those who commence their course eagerly and slack in running: preser∣ving our selves from the same Bil∣lowes, from the same waves that (at other times) have overwhelmed us. Considering that relapses are more fatall than diseases, that desires in∣terrupted encrease and augment by their intervals. Let's Rally our forces, Reassem∣ble our spirits, let's mortifie our Passions, and render our selves par∣ties against them, chasing away these adversaries to our repose. These are but slender and frivolous gins and cords that bind us to them, and (in the interim) we budge not from their company, not otherwise than if they had enchained us.
Shall we not more cheerefully smell to a heap of flowers, than to stinking weeds, to grasp lillyes, than thistles, to be confederate to heaven, then to earth? what difference 'twixt peace and war, betwixt the love of God, and this of the world, life and death, between that which is above the heaven, where there is nothing not stable, and the earth on which there is nothing but inconstancy? To what intent follow we the world so violently and eagerly, since we are but bladders which burst with the least pricking: which hourely threa∣tens us with death, where our feet dayly descend into the grave, that time carryes away our yeares which returne not any more, and leaves nought but a miserable sound of our name, and after a few dayes inconti∣nently defaces our trace upon the earth, so that it shall not otherwise be known, than that of an Eagle in the ayre, and of a ship in the waves? why do we not rather addresse our vowes unto that high place which is durable for ever, than on this Empire of the world which shall burne to pie∣ces,
and take end? Know we not that in that great day which will ra∣ther make it self seen,☜ than fore-seen, that these Rocks, and these lofty hills shall dissolve, That Jordan, Ganges, Euphrates, and the Nile, and all the other Rivers which Purle and Roul so proudly on a gilded sand, shall dry up: and that the great O∣tian, the Father and nourisher of men, shall become a flame, with all his troopes, who now divide with such swiftnesse, his Billowes, with their gliding finns? Concive we not that the Sun shall suffer an eternal Eclips, that that day shall be overcast, the hea∣ven shall cover his face, the ayr shall change, and stifle so many birds that beat it now so pleasantly with their wings? That this all, that seemes firme in its course, shall be shive∣red in a moment, shall be reverst Pell-Mell, shall be consum'd and Reduc't to smoke? So then, let's acknowledge out Error, let's not more abase our spi∣rits to these mortall things, let's give
the earth a bill of divorce: let's not breath any thing more but what's e∣ternal. Let's consider we are contrary to Rivers who arise from small streames of water, and wax proud the farther they are from their spring. Let's immitate the flame which advances and ascends continually up∣wards, as the Iron toucht with the Adamant which ever regardes the North. We have countenances erected towards heaven, thither let us elle∣vate our cogitations. Their, infinite incredible Mervills will ravish our serious and solid spirits in the con∣templation of the Almighty, who in one twinkling of an eye, causes the whole Universs to tremble, who go∣verns all the world, and conducts it by his providence. From thence we shall receive what is necessary to entertaine the rest of our dayes? 'Tis of this moone, whereon depends the flux and Reflux of Humane af∣fayres. The Otian swells it self, and is Iri∣tated at her will. This great Pilot
(who hath drawn men alive out of the bowels of fishes) shall supply us with shipping convenient to passe the Seas of this world without pe∣rishing.☜ He causes us continually to behold his face, to the intent that by the light of his Divine splendour, we may guide our selves with all assu∣rance. He will crack the chaines by which the world fastens us to the earth; he will cause that we escape her sorrows, and free us from her Precipices. He will give us a reward, greater than our wish: He will make us live content, both in businesse and lea∣sure, in our Houses, and in our Ar∣mies, in the country, and in the throng of the Court. And drawing our spirits by the power of his own, upon the high Olimpus, and will cause us (with a steedy eye) to behold these humane plaines on the which these world∣lings follow their besotted Passions: and these fields which serve them at Amphitheaters and stages to act their bloody Tragidyes.
Go to then, Let us dash against the earth all our designes, all our delights; and if (hitherto) we have continued stupid, let's now (being prick't forward by divine fury) disdain this world, and for the love of the Omnipotent, cause that which pleased us more than him, be the object of our indignation. In the contempt of these vanities, pure and innocent desires are pro∣duc't, which will chase away, all these shadowes and illusions that torment us. In the contempt of these dreames, we shall enter into an affection to the holy Scriptures, the most certain, the most prosound guide, the Sun least o∣vershadow'd with clouds, least eclip'st, the most resplendent star of all stars, and in the light whereof we shall be ravish't with a desire to embrace the truth, which we shall finde in these sacred volumes, in this elegant text, in these rich phrases so eloquent, so pure, so clear, and which (neverthe∣lesse) are to worldlings characters unknown, and which they cannot conceive, although one touch the
letters, and put their fingers on the syllables, and shew them how they ought to be assembled; and so reti∣ring our selves from evils, and ap∣proaching to vertue, flying Hell, and embracing Paradise, our spirits shall incline all it's actions to that which is to its satisfaction, and salvation, it shall make war againt the body, shall render it captive, and subdue it: he shall ever bear his greatest wealth a∣bout him, he shall know the use of it, during the rest of his dayes, he shall lend himself onely to the World, and shall not give himself but to God, who is our Shepheard, our Sheep∣hook, and our support, who holdeth firme the Mountaines by his force, and who is girded with strength. 'Tis necessary then that hence∣forward, God be he alone to whom we addresse our vowes. 'Tis then expedient, that our spirits and our pens waste not their labours on the furrowes of the World, but to cause them to fructifie to his glory. God (alone) is praise-worthy: God alone merits to be engraven on
Brasse for a perpetual remembrance, all other things are unconstant, sub∣ject to change and perishable. He alone is fixt in his essence, on∣ly he who giveth Law to the disorders of the World. Let us supplicate him to root out our crimes, and plant thornes in our hearts, which may pierce us in a thousand places to enforce teares to flow out, that are agreeable in his sight. Let's trust only in his goodnesse, and not longer rest on the vain pillars of our delights; which may render us lost for ever under their ruines. Let's not love the World, nor the things of the World.Ephes. 1.5. Joh. 2.15. If any man love the World, the love of God is not in him. The World vanisheth with the co∣vetousnesse thereof,☞ but who doth the will of God shall abide for ever.
The Judgment of God against the Wicked, with an Ex∣hortation to retire from vice and sinne. THe Heaven and the Earth shall passe away, but the Word of God which is living, and more sharp than a Sword, shall continue for ever. He hath ut∣tered with his mouth that he will cause the grave to swallow the ungod∣ly quick, and will stretch forth their carcasses on the bloody dust, and scat∣ter them under the power of his thunder-clap. That His calamity shall come suddenly upon them, that they shall speedily be bruised, and that without hope of remedy. And
certainly in time past, the horrour of the sinnes of our fathers, caused the floods to overwhelme them, so that none were reserved but one family; and lately our crimes have drawn a deluge of blood upon the universs, so that the plague devoures what hath escaped the Sword, and the Famine the remainder of both. And (neverthelesse) in lieu of raising up trophyes of glory to the honour of God; which causeth the earth to move, according to the pleasure of his powerful hands, we continually more enkindle the coals and flames prepared for the perpetual punishment of our crimes. Every day renders us culpable of infinite abominations, every houre we designe some cursed work: our feet hast to evil, our soules entombe themselves in sinne, we even crack under the burthen and weight of our transgressions, which otherwhile we are acted in the shadow, and (at pre∣sent) have abandoned the night, and (being altogether impudent) discover themselves in the light. In a word, we bend our browes a∣gainst
heaven, we provoke the tem∣pest of God, as if we had armes of proof against his artillaries: and plunge our selves into these iniquities like mad beasts, stupid, and unca∣pable of judgement, which cannot cover our faults with any excuse. For we know that God is in every place remarking and noting our offences: that this eternal light spreads it selfe, and in the twinkling of an eye pene∣trates all the laborinths of the World, and observeth both that which is open and secret, our bodies, and spirits, our vices, their causes, and their progresse. We understand that our course is too slack to avoid the stroakes of the Swords of his Angels, who glide too and fro through the aire: where his Word directs them, and that our walls are not strong enough to sustain the violence of the flood, who (at his voyce) will bound from Rock to Rock, and bear away (in a moment) our Bridges and our Shoares: he hath heretofore consumed (by fire) en∣tire Nations, for their abominations: he hath manifested the severity
of his judgements on his people, his well-beloved, the first-born of his Family. In our dayes a Nation (Anciently the most Noble of the World) not onely in Armes and Arts,Greece. but also in the Christian faith is made a slave to an infidel, who ravisheth their chil∣dren from betwixt the armes of their Christian parents,This then said of France, may well be applied to us. ☞ and causeth them to be circumcised in his Mos∣que's. And for our own particular, we behold that to punish our extravagan∣cies, he hath arm'd our malice against our selves. We see our Land drunk with the blood which flowes on our Plaines; Our fields cover'd with cockle; Our Cities are infected with a pesti∣lent aire. We observe the hand of God wea∣ry to stay his thunder, in the racks of the sky to preserve us that we be not reduc'd to dust: and yet notwith∣standing, we are as a sea of vices, agi∣tated without intermission, and which can obtain no repose. We abandon our selves to the pur∣suit
of crimes, which we adorne with the glorious titles of vertue: as if they were not sufficient of their proper and natural impetuosity to allure us, with a breath moist and infected, and from an execrable mouth we belch forth curses and blasphemies which corrupt the aire and earth, sad to be co∣ver'd with such derestable Mon∣sters. We belie those promises which we have imprinted on our browes: each one breaths forth mischief, delights in it, glories in it, and impudently boasts of it. And as the young Eaglets, (issu∣ing from under the wing of her Dam,) incontinently wageth war with the Serpents: and as the Lyons whelps, the first time they quit their cavernes, attach the Bulls which they encounter: after the same manner, from the very spring of our age, we precipitate our selves (with displai'd ensignes) into the most furious crimes. One lets loose his eyes to adulte∣ries, and pursues it like an Oxe to the slaughter, or as a bird, who hasteth to the snares.
This man ever burnes with venge∣ance, neither is he nourished but with flesh, nor quenches his thirst without blood, and hath not other pleasure, but to paddle and imbrew his hands in the hearts of them he e∣steems as enemies; and oft-times, (as an ungrateful Viper rendeth the flanks of his expiring mother,) in like sort seeks he the destruction of him, to whom he is signally obliged: recei∣ving his condemnation from the ex∣ample of the sparrow-hawke, who ha∣ving held a sparrow under his wing to foment and heat his breast, he re∣stores it to it's liberty, and hasts as far from it as he can at one different flight, to the intent he may never imbrew his beake with that flesh from whom he hath received a bene∣fit. In a word, our fathers have en∣kindled the wrath of God upon them∣selves and us: and we have forc't it down on our persons and our poste∣rity. We sleep as entomb'd in our vices, although that vigilance were more requisite for us.
Charity, (the glittering mark of Christians) is extinct in our dayes,☜ and not so much as one alone takes thought for the poor, who are the creatures of God as well as we, who are under the same vault of heaven, and upon the same Globe of Earth. One layeth a false ballance, and hateth equal weights,☜ and nothing can touch the heart of this man, nei∣ther fear of God, nor reverence to his Lawes, can restrain his ravening hands. In brief, such are our offences, that we are obliged to banish the dis∣course of our abominations, as dreading to publish such things as the eares and thoughts of men ought not to receive; as likewise men may judge what may be our hidden crimes, when those which appear are so enormous. It then remaines to call to re∣membrance the excesse of our vices, and how far this feavour hath trans∣ported us. It rests to observe the heat of our passions, to conceive a just hatted, to
take leave of them to discharge them for ever, and to detest the very thought of them, if it be not to de∣mand pardon for them. It's a shame to make such slender profit of the wonders, by the which heaven calls us to repentance: and, notwithstanding so many advertise∣ments to behold our selves groveling in vices, and so corrupt in our beha∣viour. When stormes and tempests arise, the Pesants tremble, they assemble themselves, they make vowes, every one for the conservation of his cot∣tage, and his little Field. When a clamour of fire is in the City, every one runnes to quench it, the weak contribute their cries, the children their sighths. And when the wrath of God is ready to tumble down on our heads, when the plague is already begunne, we stand immovable: one arme is already rotten, before the other stirs; the body is in the agony of death, before the spirit is awa∣ked. Go to then! let's consider of our
wretchednesse, let our cogitations. tend to our advantage, let's be active in the reformation of our vi∣ces, let's draw our feet out of the of iniquity: let us (with strength ex∣pectorate these crimes, these plagues, these poisons, and not (hence for∣ward.) suffer that the heart recoile: let us have them in horrour, let's convert our rage upon them; let's tear them with wrath, let's vow an irreconcileable enmity against them, and constraine our hands to wage war upon them. Let us for the future, love God with all the faculties of our soules: let's contain our selves within the li∣mits of our duties, within the bounds of our subjection: let's not again pre∣cipitate our selves into the abismes of rebellion. Let every one that bears the image of God, be pure from such imaginati∣ons. It's the fairest ambition to the which we can direct our vowes, 'tis the best Inheritance, and the most Eminenst Nobility we can enjoy. The pure soules detesteth vice,
their whitenesse flies such ordure, their beauty feares the touch of their hands. If any lost man shakes not off the yoke of Satan, (who forgeth a thou∣sand wiles to ravish him from hea∣ven, if others proceed as the reed, which shooteth forth a long and strait blade at his first springing, but after∣wards makes frequent knots, as pau∣ses, which declares him languishing and out of breath; for that, let not us lose courage, let us not quit our strength, let's not easily abandon our felicity. These are Worldlings fil'd with va∣pours, which at first display their pu∣issance, and advancing, tire them∣selves at every step, abating some part of their strength: and then one may (al∣so) receive instruction, by contra∣ries, as by examples, by flight, as by pursuit. In hearing an unskilful player touch an harp, one may learn to nautiate discords and false mea∣sures. Let's abandon these worldlings to the dreadful judgment of God. Who
shall exactly collect their vices, and rigorously chastise their offences.☜ Whil'st (in the interim) the fear of punishment (which ought to humble them) remain continually imprinted in their guilty memories. The Image of gloominesse never reti∣ring from their eyes. They shall ever have a Judge to at∣tend them, a million of afflictions which shall stuffe them with despaires, and hells, which shall tyre on their hearts, which shall pursue them in their flight; which shall watch over their slumbers, and shall constantly accompany their wretched lives. Punishment derives its original from sinne,☜ this World hath nothing secure but innocence, which we ought to cherish, which we are obli∣ged to embrace, as our infallible Rudder, as our assured Anchor. But if our vices still survive in us, if they spring in our hearts, if we grow obstinate in our offences, if the experience of impunity, multiplies our evil inclinations, or if the scourge hardens us, God will take vengeance of so many out-rages, he
will declare himself to us in his fury, he will compel us to acknowledge his omnipotency; he will convert judg∣ment into severity, he will scatter the bonds of our impiety, he will render us confused in our temerity. He will thrust his sharp sickle in the Field so over-grown with brambles, with stinking and loathsome weeds, and will over-turn in the mire by Pestilence, by the Sword, by Fa∣mine, so many bastard-seeds, and un∣pleasant in his sight. In his fury, he is the generous Ly∣on, prick't forward by his force, which redoubleth his fierce roarings over his enemies. He is the untamed Bull who casts forth his affrightful bellowings, and under the horrour of his stern look, overthrowing (for ever into obscurity) those, who are obstinate in their offences. He is the Omnipotent, who hath terrours by his side, death in his hand, and who darteth (on the wick∣ed) the fire of his just ven∣geance. He defeates (in the twinckling of
an eye) the Batallions of men, and causeth to graw the earth, the most Ancient of all the Monarchs and most August Kings, and who me∣rit a principal place in the Register of the glorious Caesars, with the like facility as the smallest, and most infirme and inconsiderable of the world. We have felt, we have proved the weight of his arme: But what we have beheld, is but the first act, our eyes have shed Rivers of teares. Our Theaters have distill'd all with blood, the bowels of the earth have been torne up on every side to receive our carcasses, the Divine Justice engages it selfe against us on all sides to our destruction, and yet these are but the prologus to the rigour of the horri∣ble Judgement of the living God, if we prevent not his severity by a∣mendment of life. He is all goodness, all mercy, all clemency, He sufficiently demon∣strats with what regreat he layes hand on the sword, or fire: He never proves the last remedyes, he pro∣ceeds not to the rigour of chastise∣ments,
till after he hath tryed all o∣ther expedients; but his backward∣nesse is seconded with extreame af∣flictions, and punishments. That which men enterprize against heaven, he causeth to recoyle upon them. Whosoever striketh against God, he will there finde such solidity, that the repercussion will tumble him down shattred like an earthen Pit∣cher. Whosoever precipitates himself into that encounter, there sinks, and (ordinarily) perishes, before that he hath enterpriz'd it. Let's not then flatter our selves, not then be drunken, then let's not slumber, whil'st that God spares us. Let's not expect till (for conclu∣tion) his arme fall heavy upon us, till he trouble and consume us, as slaves of iniquity and of Satan. The Master that is not obey'd by his servants, but outraged out of spight and contempt, will not he break up his Family from whence he reaps nought but vexation? So, the
Master of the world who is (without intermission) affronted by our vices, will he not withdraw (from the midst of us) his graces, the testimonyes of his presence? will he not approach us in his anger, to destroy and to afflict us under his stormes? He is Just, he is Omnipotent, his power marcheth equal pace with his pleasure: he will crush his enemies, he will terryfie them after such a sort, as to disable them to Rally or reunite, he will cause them to tremble under his sword, as eares of corne under the siccle: their bodyes (torne and dis∣member'd with wounds) shall be a pray to salvage beasts, they shall serve as food for Ravens: he will inflict on the children, the rigour of his revenging lawes, for their fathers offences: he will punish the trans∣gression in the Race, who shall shrivel and fade with a shameful brand on the brow of the Nephewes: and in vain would men ward his blows, in vain will they sly before his face. For neither the thundering Can∣nons, nor the sharp sword, nor the high Bullwarks, nor the most inac∣cessible
Mountaines, nor the whole universs rang'd in battel array can preserve them, of whom he hath vowed to take vengeance. Let all the ungodly rally them∣selves, let them assemble, he would destroy them at one stroak, he would reduce them into one handful of ashes,☞ into nothing, such is his force, that he can vanquish his ene∣mies, and not onely overturne them, but entice and dragge them and their Armies, and tumble them (for ever) head-long into the gulph of darknesse, belching with fire, and carcasses fil'd with despaires, and horrours, where∣in they shall be tormented without intermission, without having a thou∣sand millions of yeares of exquisite torments, to be esteemed as one on∣ly point of eternity; in which they shall languish, suffer, and endure perpetually with rage, the racks, the flames, and what ever can be imagi∣ned dreadful. The Lord is living in truth, (saith Jeremiah) he is living in judgement and justice,erem. 4. wherefore cloath you in sack-cloth, lament and howle. Di∣rect
the ensigne toward Sion, retire to∣gether, and tarry not, for feare lest his anger break forth as fire, and that it doth not inflame by reason of the wickednesse of your deeds. Let us beware then, that we be not of those accursed, flourishing like the lawrell, but are suddenly vanish't,Psal. 37. suddenly they are no more, and are in a Moment destroyed with their trans∣gressions. Let us beware that we are not of those reprobates, which have been beaten, and have felt no smart;Jerem. 5.3. warn'd and hardned their hearts, re∣jecting admonition, and refusing to turn unto the Lord:Num. 2.4. nor contemning the riches of his goodnesse, of his patience, and long-suffering; which excites us, which calleth us, and which (so long a time) envites us to repentance. God liveth for ever, He is Great, He is Omnipotent, He is Dreadful, He will be Redoubted, will you not feare me, (saith He) will you not tremble before my face? I can do all, all things are in my hand.
I have plac't the sand for limits to the Sea, I have fixt his waves within the shore, that they may not passe beyond them; what then? shall we persist still in our crimes? shall our own feet search out the snares of our desolati∣on? what? shall we again lance out selves into the depth of the torrent? to the end, that the stream of the water overslowing may carry us away? shall we again thrust the sword into our bo∣somes, that our own hands should give us a wretched death? we, did I say, from whom God hath taken the vaile from our eyes, on whom he hath bestowed holy, and manifest in∣structions, we allyed to the Divinity. Shall we abandon heaven? shall we quit the faithful and saving coun∣sel of that truth? to plunge our selves into the world, and precipitate our selves into these vices? God hath instructed us in his wayes, He hath taught us his paths, He hath (with his own mouth) cutsed the wicked: we know that we ought to love him with all our hearts, and with all our mindes, that He ought to be Renowned for his judgments, that
our salvation should be more deare and precious to us, than all the vain pleasures, and false treasures which can sustaine this perishable earth. How is it then, that we follow the Prince of Darknesse, which worketh effectually in us as the children of re∣bellion? How do we swerve out of the course, how break we out of the Park, to expose our selves to be abandon'd to Wolves? What considerations can deliver us up to the concupiscence of our flesh, without judgment, without reason? Bethink with our selves, that Sa∣tan does surmount, that he blinds and besots us. We are of those of whom Paul speaks, who having known the righ∣teousnesse of God, which understand that they which commit such things are worthy of death, and neverthe∣lesse plunge our selves therein: we are inexcusable (saith he) for that having the knowledge of God, we glorifie him not as God, neither ren∣der him praise for his benefits; but are vain in our discourse, having our
our Hearts filled with Dark∣nesse. Let us then remember, how we have been enlightned, that we have been partakers of the Holy Spirit, that we have tasted of the heavenly gift, the Word of God, and the power of the World to come: and that all his bles∣sings having been heap't upon us, we again crucifie the Some of God in fol∣lowing the tracts of iniquity,Heb 6.4. and (as much as in us lies) exposing him to contempt. Come then, let us force Foun∣tains of teares to issue from our eyes; let us (from the bottome of our hearts) cause sighths and regreats to arise, which may produce the fruits of repentance: 'Tis time to set our affaires in order, the houre presseth us, the season hasteth us, the mischief is at hand, if suits not our purpose to slumber, the defluxion of this poison choakes us. Let us awake, awake our selves from death,Ephe. 5.41 2 Tim. 2.26. that Christ may enlighten us, and cause us to escape the snare of the Devil, by the which we have been taken, for to accomplish his will. Be we
not like to rebellious people, disobedi∣ent,Rom. 10 22. gain-saying, which turne our backs on the Lord, while he calleth us, and stretcheth out the hands of his mercy towards us. Let's walk altogether according to the Spirit,Gal. 5.16. chasing away the covetous∣nesse of our flesh; we very well under∣stand which is the sure path for the conduct of our worldly affaires, and can we not also discern that which is just, and what is necessary for our sal∣vation? since 'tis thither that we ought to move our hands, whether our cares should tend, where all our labours should terminate, since we understand nothing is more happy for man, than what is proposed. To follow the way, tract him out by the finger of God: that we know that none can sojourne in the Tabernacle of of the Lord,Psal. 15. none can inhabit the place of his holinesse; who regulates not his steps according to his divine Ordinances. In the Country of the Gadarens, the man who had an unclean spirit, which inhabited not but in Desarts n Sepulhres; which broke all the
cords, all the chaines which re∣strain'd him, who roared without in∣termission, and gash't himself with stones; when (afarre off) he beheld the Saviour of the World, he ranne and prostrated himselfe at his feet; and we, who are not cram'd and stuf't with Devils, who have not our abi∣ding in Cavernes, and who do not dismember our selves with rage and fury; we I say, who apprehend the verity of the Gospel, who have the knowledge of God, shall we fly be∣fore him, when he approacheth us? shall we stop our eares at his voice, to lance and destroy our selves in vice? Let's awake our selves from our drowsinesse, and render our selves ca∣pable of our proper good. The men of Nineve reformed themselves, at the preaching of Jo∣nah. The Queen of the South travelled from the extremities of the earth, to heare the Wisdome of Solo∣mon. There is in the Gospel, greater than Jonas, greater than Solomon;
there is the Spirit of God who talk∣eth to us, who excites us to retire from our sinnes, who hastens, who threatens us. Let us submit our selves (then) to God, let's approach him, let's re∣mark our offences, let's lament, weep, and purifie our hearts, let's humble our selves under his powerful hand, to the intent that he may se∣cure us from the Devil, who encompasseth us, to devoure us. Let's abandon our transgressions, and submit our neeks under the just government of the Omnipotent; acknowledging him the stedfast Wall, against which, who knocketh, breaketh himself. Let's lift up our tyred hands,Heb. 12.12. and our dislocated knees; and adore him, who hath formed both the heaven and earth, the Seas and all Fountaines of waters: and not longer abase our selves, as the impious; as unregard∣ful of his glory, which we should ele∣vate more high, than the heavens; if there remaines in us any recent∣ment of his graces, (whil'st his fa∣vourable
hand) continues on us for our good; whereof he has been more Prodigal than Liberal. Let's offer instantly our bodies a li∣ving sacrifice, let's spread out our hands, before his wrath; by prayers and amendment of life, dreading his vengeance, or ever it irrevocably destroy and overwhelme us; which if we omit, we hasten our deaths, we ate the hang-men of our own soules: if we longer attend,Luk. 13.25. the gate of Gods mercy shall be for ever closed against us: and in the day (wherein we shall be∣hold Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, wherein we shall see set at the Table of God, his children, who shall come from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South,) we shall be mise∣rably cast into darknesse. 'Tis long since God having endu∣red our manners, expecting our re∣pentance: he hath not hitherto cor∣rected us, but with the chastisements of a Father, but if still we are insen∣sible of these stripes, and of our offences, we shall constraine him to
punish us with the Sword of extermi∣nation, and give us up unto the pow∣er of the Executioners of his Justice. Long patience contemn'd,Heb. 2.1. draw∣eth rigour without pity. If what was pronounc't by Angels was firme, and e∣very transgression and disobedience hath received a just reward: how shall we escape, if we neglect the judgment of God; so often declared against the children of iniquity? would we be of the cockle and straw, which shall be cast into the fire? would we be of those cursed ones,Mat. 13.49. who by the An∣gels shall be separated from the just, to be cast into the Furnace? Of those e∣vil servants, who shall be punish't with many stripes? of those Repro∣bates, who shall be overtaken with sudden destruction? of those plants of offence, who shall be devoured with consuming flames? Would we be of those of whom Jeremiah complaines, in these terms; They know the way of the Lord,Jerem. 5. but themselves have broken the yoke and the bonds. Therefore are they slain by the Lyon of the Forrest, the Wolfe of the
Evening hath wasted them, and the Leopard watcheth against their Cities, whosoever cometh out, shall be torn in pieces; for their offences are multiply'd, and their rebelloins are increased. How shall I pardon thee for this? (saith the Lord) thy children have forsaken me, I have fed them to the full, and they have committed adultery, and are gone in Troops into Harlots houses, shall I not visit for these things? (saith the Lord:) shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation? God is not idle in Heaven, He contemplates on what is done here below; He is there seated as a Judge, to punish iniquity: and when he reaches his hand highest, 'tis but to give the heavier stroak. Why tarry we,Rom. 2.5. if (by the hardnesse of our hearts (without repentance) we heap up wrath against the day of the just judgment of God, who rendreth ho∣nour, immortality, & life eternal to them, who with patience and well-doing, seek his glory; and who giveth tribulation and anguish to every soul of man, who rebelleth against him and followeth ini∣quity. If God spared not the Angels who had sinned,2 Pet. 2.4. and at once drowned
the whole World, except eight persons: If he have given so many testimonies of his rigour on them, who live in impiety; what waite we for? since 'tis recorded in so many passages of the Gospel, that we shall be more se∣verely handled, than Sodom and Go∣morrah, which were burn'd and re∣duc'd into a heap of sinders? Seeing then that it is said,2 Thes. 1.8. that God shall exer∣cise vengeance with flames of fire against those who serve him not and are disobedient to his will? Would we swallow the cup of the wrath of God even to the dregges? would we dry up, and exhaust (to the very bottome,) the treasures of his patience? Go to then, since our mala∣dy is yet capable of Reme∣dy. Let us tear out those motes that are in our eyes; let us reconcile our selves to God, who stretcheth out his armes to us, remembring that his children are not born of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,John 1.13 nor of the unsatiable de∣sires of man, but are born of God; are born of prudence, of charity, wis∣dom and vertue.
Let's not tarry longer, fearing that he should rain fire and brimstone up∣on us, and that he chase us not (as cursed gates into eternal fire, prepar'd for the Devil and his Angels.Mat. 25.41. In∣stantly detesting our crimes, abjuring our vices, our sinnes and offences; let us cast and prostrate our selves at the feet of God, let's raise our voi∣ces, suing for our pardon, redoub∣ling our petitions, submitting our selves entirely to his pleasure: other∣wise the tempest will surprise us, hell attends to torment us within it's hor∣rours, and the dreadful gulph is pre∣par'd to open his jawes eternally to consume us in his flames.
Meditations upon Repen∣tance. MY Soul, Jerusalem (the heritage of the Lord, the beloved City,) hath trans∣gressed: she was not cleansed from the pollution of her feet, neither hath she been mindful of her end: where∣fore she hath been rendred desart, solitary, and a prey to the Gen∣tiles. My soul, Corah, Dathan and A∣biram for not having obeyed the Lord,Num. 16 were punish't by the earth; who opened her jawes, and swallowed them in her gulph;Mat. 24.25. The servant supriz'd in de∣bauchery, is punish't, separated, and ranck't with hypocrites;Mat. 25.1. And the
Ʋirgins for being but a little separate from the Bridge-groom, have found the door for ever clos'd against them. These are the Judgments pro∣nounc't by the Word of God, who is High, Penetrating and Effectual. These are the Judgments pro∣nounc't against them who stop their eares at the voice of the Saviour of the World,Mat. 4.17. Who cryeth on the Earth, amend you, for the Kingdome of God is at hand.Act. 3.19. Mat. 3.7. Amend you and be ye conver∣ted, that your sins may be effaced; Fly from the wrath to come, bring forth fruit meet for repentance. My soul, be apprehensive then of the judgments of God; Consider of thine own salvation, apprehend so many new plagues, which from the incensed heaven thou beholdest tumbling upon thee; Consider so many woes that environ thee; and such numberlesse fore-runners of fu∣ture miseries. Prevent the vengeance of God by humility and penance, that so thou mayest not be prevented by his wrath. Imitate the humble Dove, who
creeps into the bottome of the shrubs, beholding (afar off) the ra∣venous Eagle, cutting and dividing the aire with his wings, and hasting to surprize her. Fill the aire with thy sighths and regreates for thy vices; e∣ven to the very bitternesse of thysoul; cast forth cryes of displeasure and re∣pentance: demean thy self as alto∣gether dejected, altogether wasted, perfectly penitent, even at the foor∣stool of the Lord: spread forth thy hands toward his mercy, addresse thy voes and most ardent supplications unto him, to divert from thee the flames of his wrath, and to appease his indignation. Importune thy Saviour with so ma∣ny plaints, with so many sacrifices of praise, thereby to shake the Sword out of his Hand: Force the Kingdom of heaven, and ravish it with violence:Mat. 11.12. whil'st a means of reconciliation is o∣pen; and be careful not to procrasti∣nate, till the day when the door shall be most securely bar'd. Go to then, my Soul, defer not longer, make hast to cover thy head with ashes, and lamentations: cause
to distill tears of acknowledgment of thy sinnes; and raise up thy meditati∣ons on high to avoid thy Destru∣ction. Retire thy self from the presse of the World, and dispose thy self as the Pelican who seeketh the least frequen∣ted, the most solitary places. Come out of Babylon, and follow the way of the heavenly Jerusalem: propose for a pattern, Jacob, Abraham, Mo∣ses, Elias, who retired from Mese∣potamia, from Caldea, from Egypt, and from the Court of Samaria. Imitate the great Legislator of the Hebrewes,Moses. who separated him∣self from the multitude, and went to the Mountain of Sinai, the more freely to converse with God. My soul, be not like the inhabi∣tants of Corazin and Bethsaida, who shall be more rudely handled in the day of Judgement,Mat. 11.21 than those of Tyre, Sydon and of Sodome, for that they were not reformed at the Word of the Lord. Contrarily, immitate those of Hierusalem,Mat. 3.5. of Judea, and of the Country about Jordan, which ran un∣to
St. John who prepared the path of the Saviour of the world. Oppose to the Justice of God, his proper succours: oppose the blood∣shed by his Son, oppose thy prayers, thy vowes, thy fasting, and thy repentance; He had decreed the sack∣ing and ruine of Niniv: yet notwith∣standing as soone as thy had bewaild their faults, he suspended his decree: sanctifie then a fast, my sonne rend thy heart with teares and lamentati∣ons in the presence of thy God: Re∣turne unto him, He is mercifull, he is pityfull, slow to anger, and a∣bundant in kindnesse. In ancient times (by a perpetual Ordinance) 'twas expresly comman∣ded to his people, to celebrate a fast on the tenth day of the seventh month, which was the solemne feast of Propitiations: He had ordained them to afflict their souls, and to re∣frain from labour: For as much as the Priest made a propitiation for them to the end they might be clensed from their sinnes in his pre∣sence.
This day, my soul, is the feast of propitiations to thee, wherein 'tis thy duty to be converted to the Lord. Imitate (then) the people, afflict thy self, masserate thy flesh with watchings, and fastings, to the in∣tent thou may'st be the more strong, and cry with the Priests who wept be∣twixt the Portck and the Altar;Joel 2.16. Pardon me my God, and expose not thy Heritage to Reproach. Lord, I lament before thee, I seek by amendment of life, to take a re∣solution to follow thee. I humble my self, I abase my self to attaine even unto the heavens. But, Lord, for to approach to thee, it's requisite I retyre altogether out of my self; and that I can no way effect without the succours of thy hand. Lord, the very Angels tremble in adoring thee, and I wretched and abominable sinner, manifest no to∣ken of astonishment: I quake not, I have not an humbled heart, nor eyes drowned in teares: I much desire it my God, I heartily wish it, but it's impossible without thy grace. For if
thou Prevents not the wicked by thy compassion, he can never a∣mend. A man revolted and slip't into dis∣obedience, returns not unto thee without the conduct of thy spirit. Enlighten them, Lord, my soul by the operation of thy holy Spirit, pre∣vent its cold and slothfulnesse: Pierce it with a thousand stings, and thou∣sands remorces of conscience, to the end he may discover his malady unto thee, and that to thee he may make his heat and anguish appear, to obtain remedy. Lord, thou art the wise Pilot of my squiffe tottering at the mercy of the waves: thou art not ignorant of the stormes and the floods that batter this fraile vessel: thou art the bright and shining lanthorne, which must be the Bear-star in all extremityes to guide, to direct this poore Barke on this raging Sea. Guard me then from ship-wrack; rebuke the winds, who mutiny against me, and confederate together, are set against my sayles. Strike from the highest heaven,
one considerable stroke, to engrave in my heart the lively impressions of the love of thee, and to dispose my spirit to thy service. Open my eyes as thou did'st the servant of Elisha: encline my eares to thy Word, arme my conscience against my flesh, and make to arise out of this stone, a childe of Abra∣ham. Mine iniquities are now against thy pleasure, but then shall my innocence be agreeable to thee. Lord I would present my selfe at thy feet, I strug∣gle, I move that way, but instant∣ly the horrour of my offences restrain me. My enormities cannot endure thy sight, nor my transgressions sustaine thy presence. Neverthelesse, my God, re∣pentance serves as a plaster to my wounds, confession is the remedy of my distemper: 'Tis requisite then, that I manifest and publish my iniqui∣ty before thee. Lord, I have not stir'd up and awakned thy displeasure by a small bruit rashly committed, I have belched out torrents of corrup∣tion,
and am turned unto detestable insolencyes; I am become a Maga∣zine of vice, a spout and sinke of fil∣thynesse, my conscience is so hard∣ned, my offences are so monstrous, my night is so gloomy, that my ob∣scurity is uncapable of other compa∣rison, that hath preceded it. The multitude of my crimes surpasse the number of the sand. It appears that the name onely of Christian remains to me: My eyes have had nothing more agreeable than the shadow: they have trod under foot the torch and light whose brightnesse should be so precious unto them: and these In∣fidels who should onely bewaile my offences, have lamented none but worldly losses. I have pursued my laciviousnesse, I have yielded and submitted to their inclinations, despising thy precepts: I have continually stumbled at the same stone, I have without intermis∣siō, audatiously & impudently advanc't my browes against my neighbours, I have been deafe to thy voyce, I gave way to the temptations of the Devil, who vanquisheth me by the assistance of my own hands.
My wishes have been insatiable, my desires boundlesse, and bottom∣lesse, my tongue not true, and my hands have delivered into thy power weapons for my proper destruction,Rom. 3.10. and have drawn down chastisements upon my own head. My throat is an open sepulchre, under my lips is the venome of Aspes, my mouth is full of curses, my feet swift to evil, destruction and misery are in my wayes, and I have been ignorant of the paths of thy peace, thy fear hath not been in my sight. I am that figtree planted in the vine∣yard,Liv. 13.6. thou camest thither after so many yeares seeking fruit, and find∣ing none: I do nought but unprofi∣tably cumber the ground: I am of those Rotten trees who merrit to be cut down and cast into the fire:Mat. 7.19. I am of the number who have received thy seed into stony ground, into thorney places. My words are ever idle and unprofitable,Mat. 12.35. and I alwayes exhaust evil things out of the bad treasure of my heart. I approach thee with my mouth, I honour thee with my lips, but my heart is far from thee. I am
of those feined hypocrites whose re∣pentance is nought but prevarication:Esay 29.3 of those Pharisees, whose only ver∣tue is in their countenance, who are adorn'd with Hypocrisiy, not Faith. True whited Sepulchers shining and glittering without, but fil'd with bones, with ordure, with iniquity. I have not ranged my self under thy wings,Mat. 23.37 as thou assemblest thy little ones: I have not pluck't the beame out of my eyes,Mat. 5.37 my discourse have been fraught with blasphemyes, insteed of simply yea and no. I have not given to those that ask me, neither have I lent to such who would have borrow∣ed. I have not rendred my self a worthy childe to thee my Father; who causest thy Sun to rise upon the good and upon the wicked: thy Raine to descend on the just, and on the unjust. I have not affected my ene∣myes, neither have I blest those who curse me: I have not done good to them who hate me, nor prayed for those who persecute me. Lord, I am of those Goats who have contemned thee, who have
disdained thy little ones, in the per∣son of whom Thou would'st be che∣rish't. I have not quenched their thirst, the gate of my house hath been clo∣sed against them, and I have not been so much as enclined to aswage their griefs. Lord, I am convinc't of such a multitude of crimes, I am so over∣whelmed with iniquities: and those numberlesse vices, wherewith I have lived from the houre of my nativity, which I have followed, which I have served after such a manner, accuse me, that they present no other thing to me, but a shrou'd, Coffin, an ob∣scure monument, hideous, and dreadfull: Lord, when I behold the Myrror of thy Law, when I read thy volume, I find my self smitten with so many Gangrens, that they make me afraid, and even terrible to my selfe: and with bloody, and hearty groans I accuse my impiety, I acknowledge the Grandure of thine indignation, stir'd up by the multi∣tude of my offences: and confesse I deserve to beare the punishment of
my demerits, if thy great mercy remove not the severity of thy Justice. Lord, thou holdest in abomination the workers of iniquity: thy counte∣nance is set against them, thy day is mighty, it's strong, it's terrible saith Joel, and none can sustaine it.Joel. 2.11. Also my God, I stoope at the onely sound of thy voyce, I start, I trem∣ble with feare, I am a party against my self: I condemn my offences, I detest them:Luk. 13.1. I acknowledge that the Gallaleans (whose blood Pilate mixt with their Sacrifices) were not so eulpable as my self. That the eighteene upon whom the Tower of Shiloe fell, had not com∣mitted so many abominations. I ac∣knowledge that I cannot beare thy sight alone: I confesse thou hold'st (in thy hands) the power of the windes, that with one onely blast, thou canst cause me to disappeare that if thou pleasest only to move a little ayre against me, I should be no more, but, my God, my soul is plung'd in anguish & sorrow, wherein it flotes altogether fil'd with bitterness: it
is bruis'd under the violence of a mil∣lion of remoreses that agitate it. I am altogether wan, altogether trem∣bling, altogether feeble. I am aba∣ted, and turn'd earth, and my heart is pierc't through with assaults, sigh∣ing for anguish, and makes me swerve, testifying her regrets. Lord, thou hast chosen me before thou compas∣sest the foundation of the earth, be∣fore thou fixed the mountaines, and stretched out the heavens. Lord, encline thine eare to my complaints, open thine eyes to my desolations, manifest not thy pow∣er against a shadow, against a wi∣thering herbe, languishing and dryed. Lord, all the perfections of thy Angels, are but imperfect before thee: all the splendour of the Sun (to thee) is but obscurity: Thou findest nothing pure, nothing firme in them: How much more then in me, who am form'd of dust, who live on mud, and am ever mixt with ordure? Lord, from the Cedars of Lebanon, even to the least wilde plant, some parke of thy Divinity shines: all
thy creatures beare thy marke, and thy Character on their fronts: My God, I am (likewise) the workman∣ship of thy holy hands, display then over me some rayes of thy grace. Lord, I am lost in the Otian of my offences, I am drown'd in their waves: Preserve me (then) from ship-wracke, I am the prodigal child famish't, covered with raggs: I have sinned against thee, embrace me my Father, Extinguish (with thy hand) these burning Torches which consume me, these fire-brands of de∣solation, these so abominable crimes: To the intent that these chaines of my captivity being broken, I may recover my liberty in thy grace to my salvation, to the glory of thy Name, and the confusion of Sa∣tan. Lord, my end is certaine if thou stanch'st not the blood which streams from my wounds. Banish me not from my presence, turne no thy countenance from me, with-draw not thy clemency which sheweth it selfe after thy displeasure, and which should not be of use if men lived in∣nocently.
Drive far from me that cursed spirit, who from the begin∣ning separated thy creature from thee. Chase away that old enemy, whose ambushes are so prom't, and whose assaults so rude: Adorne and Decke my heart with the spoyles of my sinnes, dispose me to walke with thee from the dawning; facilitate my teares, and fill me with a desire of my salvation. Cause me to for∣sake all mundane contagion, and plunge me in the pleasant streames of a holy and a peaceable life, give me an esteeme of this chast and ravishing penetence, which opens me a passage into thy holy habitation, which may bury my transgressions, and swallow my vanities under an eternal ob∣livion. Lord, I lament bitterly before thee, I poure forth my teares of com∣plaint, which, without drying, drench my soul in bitternesse, and dissolves it in displeasures. I present my self to thee with an humbled and frozen spirit, a soul af∣flicted and touch't with true repen∣tance. Receive then my God, this
penetent sinner, be thou apt to par∣don, destroy not thine own worke. Approach unto me, my God, cause to wither in me this multitude of plants of perdition, who produce these fruits of iniquity, and helpe my Mallady without indigna∣tion. Manasses prostrated himself before Idols, he profaned thy Altars; yet never the lesse, he being converted unto thee, and repenting his impie∣ties, he appeased thee. Thou deliv∣ered'st him from the hands of the As∣syrians, and from the fetters where∣in thou had'st caused him to fall, and returnd'st him a glorious King, com∣mander of Palestine. And I Lord, I present thee my homage with a con∣trite spirit; stifle and choke not (then) my heavynesse and my life, Exercise not thy power on me to my destructi∣on who am thine: cause not to des∣cend (on me) thy punishments from heaven, stigmatise me not with an eternal infamy: but open (Lord) unto me the gate of thy mercy,Dan. 10.12. and give eare to my supplycation as thou did'st unto Daniel from the first day
he afflicted himself before thee. Thy coming was to call sinners to repen∣tance,Luke 5.32. Thou commandest thy Apo∣stles to go unto the lost sheep:Mat. 10.6. I am of that number, cause me then (in the midst of this displeasure,) to expe∣rience thy comiseration,Luk. 8.24. the Tem∣pest is descended on the lake, my bark leakes, I am in hazzard, awake thy self my God, rebuke the wind, appease the waves, and make it calm. By the example of Daniel (with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes.) I addresse my face toward thee, Thou strong, Thou great, Thou terrible God: I have sinned, I have commit∣ted iniquity, I am estranged from thy Law. Lord, to thee belongs Justice, to me confusion: but mercies and com∣passions are (likewise) from thee. Turne away then thy displeasure and indignation, hearken to my supply∣cations, and cause thy holy Spirit to shine on thy desolate servant: I be∣long to thine election, I am an in∣heritor of the merit of thy Son, and have my lot and portion in heaven.
Regard me (then) Lord, in him: for in his countenance, in his wounds thou canst not deny me pardon. The father defers (till the last) to cut off his members: He weeps, he grones in severing them. Thou art my Father, good God, suspend thy stroaks, restrain them, have com∣passion on my ashes who am lesse then ashes, and of the lees and scum of the world: Purifie them after such a manner, that they be not annihi∣lated, let them not be forsaken of thee, who have deserted thee: If they be reduc't to nought, thou canst not extract glory from them: for in nothing, nought is found but no∣thing it self. I say not, my God, that thou hast created these eyes, to make them en∣dure so much, and to dissolve them∣selves into streames; For, Lord, their eye-lids have exalted themselves against thee, (They are the reason that thou assistest me not farther with thy favours:) after such a manner that they ought to distill into teares, untill they have encountered the port of thy clemency, which now files
them and with-drawes it selfe away from their sight. Lord, wilt thou be stedfast in thy wrath? wilt thou wage war with an earth-worme? wilt thou regard the weight of my offences, and not that of thy goodnesse? I am guilty of errours and crimes, but I am co∣ver'd with ashes and teares: I am a sinner, but created with the sweet and fragrant breath of thy mouth: I am cover'd with offences, but thou art the Father of grace, the Fa∣ther of salvation, the Father of compassion, and in saving me thou conservest the work of thy hands: in blessing me thou repleatest thy selfe with joy and delight. Receive then Lord, my prayer, that it be not lost, and vanish into ayre. Hearken to my mouth, and my throat, which consumes with cry∣ing: and give eare to their groans: Give remedy to that distemper, whose birth I ought to avoyd: stretch forth and abase thy hand here below to succour me, drive back by the powerfull motions of thy browes,
the plagues which threaten me. Speak unto me as unto the Parali∣tick, and save me by thy grace. I resemble blind Bartimeus,Mat. 10.47. who lifted up his voyce to thee, and redou∣bled his intercessions equal to their reproofs and rebuks, to the intent he should hold his peace. My offences by the brute of their obscure gloominess, will drowne the cleernesse of my voyce: but, being fortified by thy holy Spirit, I take courage, I reinforce my self, and attaine the victory.Mat. 5.1. Lord thou hast expelled Legions of unclean spirits out of their bodyes who presented themselves before thee. Chase then from the those offences which I can∣not tame: drive away these miseries which (by a divine vengeance) vissibly torment me. Lord, glory not in thy Puissance a∣gainst me, to make thy self Re∣nowned: Display not thy force a∣gainst me, since, with one glance of an eye, thou may'st discomfit me, neither can I sustaine thy presence: Rifle me, dart thy flames from hea∣ven, I acknowledge I have deserved
more:The World. But Lord, this great City would become desolate, if nothing should remain is't, but what thou would'st absolve in the severity of thy justice: and thou art the pitiful Fa∣ther, who givest more terrour than stripes; and delightest rather to re∣store, than to destroy. Thou hastest to receive the cryes of one penitent sinner: if he repents himself, thou pardonest him: and as he addes transgression upon trans∣gression, thou multipliest the acts of clemency. Be not then; My God, inexorable to my fault; pursue me not unto ex∣tremity. The Nurse forbears not to give the breast to her child, because it disturbs her repose and sleep: Thou art to me, more than a Fosterer, be not (then) deaf to my plaints, and deny not the milk and the sweet∣nesse of thy grace to thy infant, whom thou hast imbellish't for an high designe, and whom thou hast re∣deem'd with the life of thy onely Son. I have forfeited thy grace my God, but thou never losest thy goodnesse;
behold me in thy clemency, not in thy justice: my hopes survives in thee alone, swallow my transgressions in thy compassions, and the fruit shall remain to thy glory. Lord, my braines dissolve into teares, my haires are full of ashes, my visage heavy, my eyes are hollow sunk, and dull. But Lord, if my teares can render thee more gentle, if they can move thee to extinguish the flames of my crimes, set open the Fountaines of my weeping, and cause me to bathe in the waters of my penitence, untill that by the merits of the Saviour of the world; thou hast overturned my transgression, and impure desires un∣der the power of thy compassion. Lord, I am nothing but Rotten∣nesse and Corruption: But the very ashes of a rich substance want not their value: I am ransom'd by the stripes of thy Sonne, I am cleansed by his blood, I speak to thee by hismouth; be mindful then of that sweet smel∣ling sacrifice which Jesus Christ offer∣ed on the Crosse: and do me the ho∣nour
I may participate in the Tri∣umph of his perfect and compleat Ministry. Thou promisedst to Abra∣ham, not to destroy Sodom, if so be that there thou couldst finde ten just persons; and I Lord,Gen. 15.36. I am holy, I am enclo∣sed, I am a member of the just one, without spot; of one just justifying, who hath swallowed my transgressi∣ons in the Ocean of his merits: of one Just, who is the light from whence I borrow the rayes of splen∣dor: Of one Just, who hath cherish't me in his bosome, and who makes me to draw the breath of his mouth. Accept then, the offerings my God, of my humble acknowledg∣ment which I bring to thy Altars; with all the zeal and devotion whereof I am capable.Psal. 51. I beseech thee (with the Psalmist David,) O God, have pity upon me according to thy loving kind∣nesse; according to the multitude of thy compassions efface my offences: wash me from mine iniquity, and purge me from my sinne. I acknowledge my trans∣gressions and my faults are ever before thee; I have sinned against thee, purge
me with bysop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. Turn thy face away from mine iniquities. O God, create in me a clean heart, and a stedfast spirit: east me not away from thy presence; neither take from me the Spirit of thy holinesse. Restore me to the gladnesse of thy salva∣tion, open may lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Lord, cause thy graces to abide with me, conduct and lead me in thy wholsom paths, by a divine inspiration, touch (to the quick) my spirit and my sense, and fill me with an ardure to thy service. Open my lips, which my transgressions have closed: make to spring in me, piety, integrity, the love of my neighbours, modesty: and that my vices (after having so long time abused thy creature) may in conclusion quit and surrender the place to a blessed, to a reformed e∣state: Effect it, that my very counte∣nance may answer for me, that one may read in my eyes and voice, the integrity of my intentions. Enable me that I may fructifie as Trees plant∣ed by the streames of waters. Enable
me to walk worthily, as it is requisite before thee, increasing in all sweet savour, and declaring that I am a member of thy Church, instructed in thy Gospel, and that thy Word dwel∣leth in me. Lord, thou hast unto this day con∣served me, thou hast born me upon thy wings. Enable me (then) to be obedient to thy Voice, that I may keep thy Covenant, and that I may be of the Kingdome of thy Priests, and of thy holy Nation. Engrave thy holy Ordinances in my spirit, cause my eares to resound the sweet and gratious ayres of thy Word. Bring to passe that my tongue may sing a perperual song, and be an eccho to thy heavenly voice; and for the time to come, I may ever addresse most ardent supplications (not idle drowsy words) unto thee, then when as carried away with a Designe or Slumber, and that I speak and under∣stand not my self. Establish my heart in thy fear, retain my inclinations in obedience to thine: fill my soul with charity, which is the Complement of the Law, the establishment of grace,
the preparative to glory; which (as the influence of the Sunne,) enables me with a vertue to fructifie and in∣crease. Lord, receive me into thy favours wholly blot out my sinne, temper and aslwage the scaldings of my wounds. Encamp thy Angels round about me, dispel and scatter all evil farre from me: Be thou my Guide, through the perisous straights of the World, and the turbulent stormes of the violence of my passions; suffer me not to dah against the rocks of this Sea of the world; and (under the conduct of thy Holy Spirit,) cause me to arive at the Port of thy salvarion, and cast anchor in the midst of thine. Love me my God, to the intent I may love thee, that I may seek thee, serve thee, pray to thee, that I may give thee glory and honour for ever.
A Meditation upon the Ho∣ly Supper. UP then my Soul, conti∣nue not longer buried in the delights and va∣nities of the World. Arise, awake thee, rouze thy self, and lend an attentive ear to the sacred voice of the well-be∣loved Sonne of God, who invites thee to take place at his feast, to sit down to the Banquet of eternal life. Arise, recollect all thy strength, and lift thy self up toward this Fountain of light, who (by his Sunne) il∣lustrates all the Starres of heaven, and illuminates all the parts and corners of the earth. He is the only Physici∣an on whom depends all thy delive∣rance:
He is the onely Authour of grace, who can conserve thee against darknesse, against hell: he onely is Omnipotent, who can carry thee for ever into heaven. Up then my Soul, prostrate thy self before him, fortifie thy zeal follow thy God who calleth thee to participate of that great & divine mystery which he hath instituted and ordained in his Church: which is the Sacrament of his body, of which one must take part to obtain eternal life. The Sacra∣ment of his body, by the which he is united unto thee, to convey thee into his glory; whereby he removeth, he a∣bolisheth, he effaceth all that is in thee of sin, of cursing, and of death; and there replanteth his grace, his life, and his felicity. All whatever he has brought from heaven, all the grace which is infused into him, all the treasure of those merits which he ac∣quir'd on the Crosse, is conferred on thee by the communion of this holy Sacrament of his Supper, which is the Fountain of spiritual sweetnesse: by the which God nourisheth, sustaineth, and conserveth the life he hath
confer'd on us in Baptisme, and hath united us unto himself, making s (as saith Saint Paul, flesh of his flesh, bones of his bones, and members of his proper body: But my God, all times are ever present with thee, thou mindest not the past, nor attendest the future. Thou watchest over my cogitations, thou art the Judge of my intentions; nothing is hid from thee, all things to thee are naked, and entirely mani∣fest: my heart is fast closed in my breast, but my bosome is not other than glasse in thy sight, and thou be∣holdest Lord, that the fervour of my faith is (as it were) quite extinct, that my brow hath neither sincerity nor candor; that I take not repose but under the branches cracking with fruits of iniquity, and that my soul is more defil'd, than the mire of which my body is form'd. I cannot then, great God, approach thy holy Table, till I have (in thy presence with a true resentment and entire affection, without hypocrisie, and with an open and free heart,) confessed my shame, acknowledging thy glory. Lord, I am oppressed with fear
and astonishment, I humble my self at thy feet, I poure forth (in thy sight) all my offences which appeal my countenance. I accuse, I blame and condemne my ingratitude and my failings: I acknowledge, I am the most infirme, the most abject of all thy creatures; the very scorn of the earth, and the most vile and detesta∣ble of all that the heaven covers. I have suffered my self to be carried a∣way with the deceitful delusions and enticements of the world; I am quite over-spread with foul and filthy scales, which ke me stumble into precipices: and inead that thou hast opened my mouth, to the end I should exalt thee, and hast given me the knowledge of thy truth to declare it on the earth, I am ever backward to that which concerne thy glory, and my salvation. Lord, thou mayest dart thy light∣ning from heaven, thou canst con∣sume and over-whelme me with thy storms: but I am nothing, and in punishing me thou losest thy labour and thy thunder; thou art the Omni∣potent God from all eternity: and I
a fraile man, yet the work of thy hands: as thou art powerful in thy wrath, so art thou Omnipotent in thy clemency. Rend not him then, who is humbled, I am thine now, thou canst have no delight in my Fu∣nerals; I am a great sinner, but thou art yet greater in thy mercies: thou holdest the lives of men in thy hands, 'tis thy mouth which pronounces their absolution; have pity then on me, my God: by the infinite number of thy compassions, blot out my innu∣merable iniquities, and save by thy grace, him whom thou mayst damne in thy justice: deliver him who is ransom'd by the precious blood of thy Sonne, of thy Sonne, who all glittering and resplendent with glory hath so far humbled himself, as to be cloathed with our flesh, to raise up the mud and refuse of the earth toward the Throne of thy Gran∣dure. Cause Lord, that my Repentance and Confession, may be to thee sweet sacrifices agreeable and of pleasant o∣dour. I knock at the gate, let it not be closed, seeing thou art merciful;
with thee the word and effect are the same; grant me pardon, from de∣served punishment, and mollifie the hardnesse of my heart, which is in thy power. Lord, in times past, thou drewest out, and deliverest thy people from the fetters of Egypt, thou hast divided the Red Sea, and formed a Rampart of waters against the waters: continue then thy goodnesse towards thine own. Deliver me Lord, Deliver me im∣mediately by the merits of thy Sonne, from the servitude of mine iniquities, under the bondage whereof, with an∣guish I emplore thy succours. Bow down thy greatnesse over me, display upon my soul the rayes of thy holy Spirit, and enlighten me with the lustre of thy divinity; to the end that I may meditate and fully compre∣hend, how the body of Jesus Christ my Saviour, is given and broken for thine elect, and his blood spil't on the Crosse, is made mine, by the com∣munion of thy holy Sacrament. I am unable of my self to raise me up from this miserable earth to a subject
so High and Excellent: But Lord, Thou hast cleft the obscurity, thence to draw out light. Thy divine eye enlightens the darknesse, touch my spirit with thy brightnesse, as thou didst that of Saint Paul; render me uncapable and untractable to the va∣nities of the World, and clear-sighted in the inestimable treasures of thy Gospel. Assure my faith, establish my faith Lord, stay it upon thy promises: fortifie me mightly according to the riches of thy divinity, so that Christ may abide in me, and that I may com∣prehend with the Saints his love and greatresse,Ephes. 3.16. which passeth all under∣standing. That we (who when ene∣mies) having been reconciled by the death of the Saviour of the World, may now much rather being justied by his blond;Rom. 5.10. Shall I be preserved from thine ire? Regulate Lord, the disor∣dred affections and appetites of my heart, mundifie the impure cogitati∣ons of my spirit, cleanse all the pol∣lutions of my lips, and wrench my sins in the blood of thy Son, to the intent I may present my self pure at
thy Table. Grant, that my under∣standing may comprehend Thee, that my heart may affect Thee, my soul adore Thee, and that all my powers and faculties may render and yield thee, the obedience which is thy due. Father of glory, grant me the spirit of wisdome, enlighten my eyes,Eph. 1.18. to the end I may apprehend what is the excel∣lency of thy Son, whom thou hast cau∣sed to sit at thy right hand, in the he∣venly places, and whom thou hast pre∣fer'd to all principalities and powers, and above every name which is invo∣ked, not onely in this world, but like∣wise in that which is to come. Give eare to me, Thou onely object of the Angels, through thy Sonne Jesus Christ our Lord, who liveth and reigneth in unity with Thee, and thy holy Spirit for ever and ever. Lord, after having formed the light, after having stretched out the heavens with thy hands, separated the earth from the flood, and finishest the creation of such a multitude of starres, of so many creeping things, of such a variety of Fowles
who have a being to thy Glo∣ry. Thou tookest dust, thou embel∣lished it and formed man, subjecting the earth under his feet, giving him dominion over the fishes of the Sea, and over the Fowles of the Ayre. And this man (good God) instead of lifting up (without ceasing) his vowes to thy honour and praise, and to possesse with joy eternally the de∣lights of Eden, hath open'd his mouth against thee, and contrary to thy expresse command and menaces, hath tasted the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil; and with his rebellious throat hath swallowed at once the Apple and Death: He hath swallowed the leprosie which hath corrupted the masse of all his blood, and the poyson which hath penetrated through all the members, issues of his body. This, Lord, this fountaine which hath continued corrupt in all it's streames: this is the gloomy and black cloud, whence distills not one drop not infected. 'Tis, Lord, this cursed rebellion
which hath constrained the heavens, ever bright and serene before, to conspire and confederate against man, and to poure forth upon him deluges of blood, and universal scourges to extirpate and exter∣minate the Posterity of this An∣cestor. 'Tis this rebellion which hath cau∣sed man to totter from his first estate, rendred him a slave of sinne, and a prey of that roaring Lyon, who gras∣peth his throat with his foot: So soon as the prohibition was made, sinne followed: and by sinne, we have all received a Decree of condem∣nation. But great God, thou hast rais'd up, and restored thine through thy mer∣cy. Thou hast destroyed that cursed spirit, who would glut himself with the blood of our entrals: and hast born us upon thy wings, as an Eagle his Ayry: Thou hast brought back, and rend∣dred in a flourishing condition our soules, who were languishing and a∣based unto death. The deluge of
our vices, hath drawn a deluge of plagues upon us, but the deluge of thy Compassions hath swallowed the deluge of these Maledictions. Thou hast cleansed these streames of iniquity in a sorce perpetually flowing into life. Thou hast healed these leprosies with a vermillion blood, and cor∣rected and abated the force of these poysons by a heavenly An∣tidote. By the offence of one alone, death reigned over men: and by the merit of onely one, men shall reigne unto life. The transgression of Adam is fallen up∣on all to condemnation: and the justice of Christ justifying is come also upon all to justification. Many by the diso∣bedience of one alone,Rom. 5.17. were rendred sin∣ners; and by the obedience of one alone, many are rendred just: To the intent that as sinne reigned unto death, grace should (also) reign unto eternal life. 'Tis Lord, that which Thou hast so often foretold to our Fathers, by the mouths of thy Prophets; who have declared on the earth, that thy
Sonne should bear our sorrowes, that he should charge on himself our afflictions, that he should be pierced for our offences, and bruised for our iniquities. Thou hast caused all our out-rages to fall upon him, and the wounds are come on him for the Transgressions of thy people: As a Lamb is led to the slaughter, neither hath he opened his lips:Dan. 9.26. he is set as an oblation for the transgressions of them who have known him, is cut off, not for him∣self, but for us. Oh admirable Architect of the World, who hast stretched out the heavens, sustained the massive foun∣dations of the earth; and commanded the waters of the Ocean to distill gently through the veines of the Rocks for the nourishment of men: Oh holy streame of our felicity, the strength of our Might, that the graces of thy divine goodnesse, are singular, & the effect of thy providence marvei∣lous in the conservation of men, in ha∣ving prepared for us by thy mercy this
conciliation before the foundation of the World: and from the beginning having prefigured this sacrifice by the Tree of life in the Terrestrial Paradise, afterwards by the Paschal Lamb, by the Manna, by the loaves of propitia∣tion, by the bread which the Angel brought to the Prophet Eliah, in the strength whereof it is said, that he went even unto the Mountain; to have instructed us that so much blood of Bulls and Goats which was spilt be∣fore thee, and the ashes of an Heifer, wherewith they besprinkled the un∣clean, were prefigurations of that juslifying blood, which was requisite to be poured on the earth to blot out our transgressions. And lastly Lord, after having of∣ten spoken to our Ancestors by thy Prophets,Heb. 17. Thou wouldst speak to our fathers face to face by thy Son, who is the brightnesse of thy glory; who as the snow tumbling from heaven, & scatter∣ing it self to whiten our plaines: so is he descended from on high, to publish peace from the rising, to the setting of the Sunne: and to save those who were fallen among the precipices, for
for the punishment due to their offences. The woman the first se∣duc'd, sees her self a thousand times happier, she did see her self a Virgin-Mother, containing in her womb the Saviour of the World. Oh happy day, that thou art Re∣markable among us, for having first beheld, and having first caused us to see the well-beloved Son of God, the Father and the Redeemer of the faith∣ful! And you bright Services, that you are precious, having given growth to the body, who hath suffered for our sinnes, and who since is risen with so much glory! And thou earth, thou art happy to have nourish't within thy bosome, and seen to march upon thy face, the Sa∣viour of the World! The Sages con∣ducted by the Star, hasted to prostrate themselves at thy feet; thy Angel in giving advice to the Shepherds: and the multitude of the heavenly Host leaping for joy, lifted up their voy∣ces to thy honour, saying, Glory be to God on High, in Earth peace, good will toward men.Acts 5.3. Then Lord, he whom thou hast
raised up by thy right hand, for a Prince and Saviour to give repentance unto Israel and remission of sinnes, appeared in the flesh, that so the flesh might live, and by his humani∣ty, thy Clemency might approach us, which before was with-drawn; Thou hast sent him as a Bright Sun to en∣lighten all the compasse of the Earth. He appeared cloathed with hu∣mane flesh, but all repleat, and all shining with Divinity. The Power of His Vertue was manifest to the eyes of all the people. The most im∣petuous stormes and billowes of the Ocean, gave way unto the sole power of His word. The tempestuous while-whinds which troubled the se∣renity of the aire, gave truce to their whistlings & roarings, at the only wag∣ing of his hand: and acknowledg'd that they ought him respect and silence, and that all things should be prepared to receive His Commands. Men, captiv'd under the power of the Devil, were enlarged, with the onely glance of His eye: The most inveterate maladies departed at the
only touch of His garment: and the bodies mouldering; under the ob∣scurity of the Coffin, rose again at his voyce in the Tombe. His life was nothing but an open Book of Doctrine, with a multitude of miracles and favours toward men; The limits of his Course were so pleasant, they were so bright, with the beames of his compassion; so glittering with his triumphs over the enemy of men. The History is therein so rich, that the ex∣cesse takes away and obstructs the de∣scription. And that the world (as saith his Beloved Apostle) is not sufficient to contain that which might be written.John. 21.25 Also Lord, He came to stifle (by the impetuosity of his power, and by the grandure of his merit) our cursed enemy, and to cut off the streame of the course of his puissance, flying through the world: He came as a great Royal Eagle from the heighth of heaven to de∣scend on the earth: and in favour of his own to scatter (with the onely ayre of his vigerous clapping of his
wings) all the strength of Satan, un∣worthy of his encounter. He came as the Evening, and close of our miseries, and dawning of our felicity: as the bright Sunne of men to comfort and strengthen them by his wholsome and pleasant influ∣ence. He came as the morning, which chaseth away the night, and advan∣ceth, declaring the returne of the light: as the holy Columbe of the world, the solid pillar of the heavens, the lively image of his charity, and the divine foot-steps which giveth life. And finally my God, thy Christ our Saviour, being upon the point to die, would that the last act of his life, should be the institution of the Holy Sacrament of his body, which he celebrated in the company of his Apostles: declaring unto them, that all they who firmly believe in him, shall have remission of their sinnes; in the effusion of this blood, and shall for ever possesse the King∣dome of heaven; and to conferre on us an infallible assurance, he elected (for a seal and witnesse of his last
will,) bread and wine: to the intent that the faithful (by these signes) should be ascertained of the treasures which are acquired for them by his bounty. But my Great God. 'Tis now that we must commemorate the excellent Sermon made to the Disciples, for to instruct them and to render them ca∣pable of the participation of this Ho∣ly Sacrament. 'Tis here expedient to call to mind the words of him, which thou pro∣nounc't with thy voyce in the Moun∣tain, in the hearing of Saint Peter, Saint James, and Saint John, this is my well-beloved Sonne, hear him;Jon. 6.53. He then said, Ʋerily, verily, y unto you, that if you eat not the flesh of the Son of man, and drink not this blood, you shall have no life in your selves: he who eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath life eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: he who eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. As the Father, who is living, hath sent me, and I live by
the Father: So he who eateth me, Shall live also by me. That is the bread which descended from heaven, not as your fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead: who eateth this bread, shall live for ever. He spake these things in the Synagogue, teaching in Capernaum: But knowing that many of his Disciples found this saying hard, he added, doth this offend you? what will you do then if you shall behold the Sonne of man as∣tend there, where he was at the begin∣ning? 'Tis the Spirit that quickens, the flesh is unprofitable: the words which I speak to you, are spirit and life. And after he had finish't these instru∣ctions, he made them partakers of his Holy Supper, even as he hath de∣clared by the hand of his blessed A∣postle. In the night wherein he was be∣tray'd, He took bread, and having gi∣ven thanks, he broke it, and said, take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also after Supper, he took the Cup, saying, this Cup is the New Testament of my blood, do this in remembrance of me. For how often, and
whensoever you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup, you shall shew forth my death even untill I come. And in the end Lord, his incom∣prehensible Charity, and (which ex∣ceeds all admiration) having con∣ducted him to the hour: wherein (by his death,) he would redeem our lives, he became the saving hand which broke and opposed the blow, and re∣ceived the smart of the other mem∣bers. And be who was able as a Thunder∣clap of heaven to overturne under his Tempest the highest Mountaines: who could as a whirle-poole swallow all in an instant that opposed this power; and as a whirle-wind sweep away all that was on the earth: He said I, who by the force of his Arme with one small motion can destroy all humane soules, and with one onely glance of his Eye, arme a million of Angels, and overthrow under his feet the heaven and the earth, submitted himself to the rage and brutishnesse of his people; adopted above all people, the first-born among men: and whom thou defendest as the
Apple of thine eye. He permitted them to extend his members on the Crosse, to wash our sins in his blood, and in that flood which the Iron made to issue from his body. And thus, great God, Thine on∣ly Son gave his life a ransome for us, and delivered us from the curse of the law, which had so long time held us slaves to sin. He offer'd his body in sacrifice, and by that holy oblation, acquir'd for us the gifts and the fulnesse of his graces wherein the blessed shall eter∣nally rejoyce. 'Tis this Christ who is worthy to take the Book of life,Apoc. 5.9. and to open the seals thereof. 'Tis he who is the Lambe,Apoc. 5.12: who meriteth to receive power, strength, Honour, and Praise. His death was the sacrifice of sacri∣fices, the accomplishment and con∣summation of all ceremonyes, which have been from the beginning of the world. This is the sacrifice without renew∣ing, whereby the wrath of God is for∣ever appeas'd, his justice satisfied,
and the transgressions of men ef∣fac't. 'Tis that bright shining sacrifice in comparison whereof the foregoing were but obscure shadowes. This is the only sacrifice full of Majesty, which is alone the object of all sacrifices, offered in time-past by all people adoring the true God. All that which the oblations of Aa∣ron and of our fathers, have had of Propitiation and of sweet Odour were anticipated on the fulnesse of grace, and on the infinite merit of this sacri∣fice so often made in all foregoing ages. This is the eternal sacrifice, fill'd with lively splendour, which darts his Rayes, and confers his Balme up∣on his, to render them a sweet Odour before thee my God. This is the sacrifice which hath pla∣ced them on the sacred seat of the Church, and hath carryed them into the glorious Temple of the legitimate Spouse of Christ, all Glittering with Divinity. 'Tis my God this sacrifice which hath conferred thy love on me, which
(without intermission) I observe to shine in the flames of my own wret∣chednesse, and hath acquired for me the infinite Grandure of thy compas∣sion, which I have ever beheld firme in the glances of my extreame affli∣ctions. Also, my God, there was nothing but the puissant and victorious hand of thy Sonne, which could sever the cords and the entangling which held us bound in the snares of Sa∣tan. There was none but he alone pro∣per for so great an enterprize, He a∣lone who hath drawn us out of the path and slaughter of death, to fill us with Triumphs. He alone, who is the Phaire and the Lanthorne who directs us to arive in a safe harbour, and who hath ever his eyes open for our happinesse, and watcheth over our affictions. He alone, who is the channel of perpetual sweetnesse, which unces∣santly distills on them who cast them∣selves into the Port of thy Cle∣mency. Great God, The compasse of the
Universs adores thy Grandure: but as the glory of thy chiefest benefits, are perpetually graved in the hearts of thy faithfull ones, in whom (by this holy sacrifice) thou hast planted thy victorious lawrels: Also it is re∣quisite that I be the Temple in which for ever there may be chanting and sounding forth the Hymnes of thy Triumphs: and that thou may'st be the sole object of my heart, as thou art the cause of my repose: and the end of my vowes, as thou art the Redeemer and Conserver of my be∣ing, what more beautyfull object my God, can I enjoy then for ever to contemplate, that Christ is the inex∣pugnable wall and Rampart of my life: and that his charity heated with his watchfulnesse over me, causeth, (without intermission) to spring in thy compassions new sprouts of com∣passion? This is the true Father of men, who transported with the love of his children, is offered for them in sacrifice, and hath embraced their sorrowes, and his death. Up then, my soul, let thy thoughts be ravish't in the contemplation of
this holy light of the world, who shineth over the heaven and the earth, and enlightneth with his flame the gloominesse of our most obscure night. Up, admire his compassion, adore this Lamb without spot, that holy Burnt-offering, that eternal high Priest, who hath given himself for thee. Rejoyce thou oh my soul, since thy clensing is so perfect and so pure, since the merit of that death shall carry thee into the heavens. Thou hast not my soul,Heb. 7. one of those Sacrificers which are subject unto death, made after the law of a car∣nal commandment, who have need to offer continual sacrifices: first, for their own sinnes, then for those of the people: Thou hast one Sovereign high Priest, made according to the power of an uncorruptible life, and who hath one perpetual oblation, one holy Priest, Innocent, separate from sinnes, exalted far above all heavens, who is consecrated for ever, offering himself once, to obtaine an eternal redemption.
The light of the world (my soul) chaseth the night and obscurity farre from thee: but the knowledge of this sacrifice dissipateth all darknesse from thy eyes, and renders thee capable (happily) to finish thy course on earth, and attain (with joy) an aboad in Paradice. Divine Trinity: the only founda∣tion of salvation, Holy unity of three persons, in whom consisteth all per∣fection, and felicity, whereof my soul can be render'd capable: Grant me that I may worthily comprehend the majesty of this sacrifice, and that all the dayes of my life, I may medi∣tate on its greatnesse. Lord, the Lamb is slain from the beginning of the world: and both our fathers and we our selves have washed in one same blood, and are redeemed by the same sacrifice. 'Tis what the Apostle saith, our fathers were all under the cloud,1 Cor. 10.1. and have all passed throw the Sea, and were all baptized in Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and have all eaten of one and the same spiritual food, and have all dranke of one
and the same spiritual cup. For they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ. So, Lord, the Patriarchs, and Is∣raelites, have eaten and drank the same spiritual substance with us, and have participated as we of the Com∣munion of the body of the Saviour of the world. The word Prophetick and Aposto∣lick, have the same efficacy: Christ in the one and the other throw all e∣qual to himself. Their Sacraments giving them Je∣sus Christ to come, to assume hu∣mane flesh, and suffer for their sins: and ours give to us the Saviour of the world, come, having taken flesh of the Virgin, endured the Crosse, and risen for our Justification: The Manna and the water signified to them their future redemption, and the bread and wine signifie to us the satisfaction of our Randsome acquit∣ted by Christ, come, dead, and ri∣sen, after such a sort that we have but one like, and same faith under divers signes.
Christ the only salvation of the Church, in all its periods, without the law, under the law, and under Grace. He is prefigured in all the sacrifi∣ces, exhibited in all Sacraments; as well Old as New, which are (in all times) unprofitable without Christ, which is himself alone both the foun∣dation and the sustance. Abraham saw the day of the Lord, and rejoyc't: This great secret was revealed unto the Prophets who Pub∣lish't it through the world: they were the signes of salvation to come,Or Host and of the holy Bread which should be offered up for their sins, and for our sakes, the great Saviour of the world would rayse to the hea∣vens (at thy right hand,) the body which he had taken of the Virgin, instituting the Sacrament of his body and of his blood: to the intent that That, which was once offered for the satisfaction of our sinnes, should continually be honoured by a my∣stery. Baptisme admitteth us into an ally∣ance with God, instead of ciricum∣cision:
The holy Supper instead of the Passeover, nourisheth and enter∣taineth us. Baptisme, is called Regeneration, that is to say, a new birth. The ho∣ly Supper, The Communion of the body and blood of our Lord, to nourish us to life eternal. Of Ba∣ptisme, water is the sign, The blood of Christ the thing signified: The water which washeth the staines of the body; The blood which clen∣seth the sins of the soul. In the holy Supper, the bread and the wine are the signes, The Body and the blood of Christ, the things signified, and signified most conveniently and properly, by these signes of bread and wine: for as much as the nourishment of our souls which is in Christ, could not be better express'd than by that of our Body, which converteth into their sustance that which they eate and drink. So in the Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist, the bread which is blest, and which is broken and given to eate, and the cup which is blessed and giv∣en
mee to drink, represents to me, The body and blood of Jesus Christ given and shed for me on the Crosse, to me are the sacred Symboles and as∣sured earnests, that I am received into the communication of his body, and of his blood, which I spiritually enjoy by Faith, in the Participation of the supper. When I see the bread broken in the celebration of the sup∣per, I meditate with my self of his body, which hath suffered death on the Crosse for the remission of my sinnes. When I behold the wine poured into the cup, I call to my remem∣brance his blood shed for to acquire (for me) life eternal. By the receiving the bread and the wine, I enter by faith into a commu∣nity, into the society of the body and blood of the Son of God: I draw life, I draw absolution, and am cloth∣ed again with his innocence and with his Justice. By the vissible receiving (which I performe) of the bread and of the wine, I am assured, that I am spiri∣tually united to Christ, and made a
Citizen of the Kingdome of heaven, that he hath bequeath'd me, and pos∣sessor of eternal life which he hath given me, and in eating and drink∣ing the bread and the wine at thy ho∣ly Table I am assured my God, that I Participate of the body and of the blood of thy Son, which I truely re∣ceive by faith, and by which I parti∣cipate of the Treasures and Heritage which he hath acquired by his death, and which he hath bestowed on his faithful servants. When I receive the bread and the wine, I receive not only the Ele∣ments which are the figures and sa∣cred signs of his body and of his blood, but I receive by faith and in spirit the things themselves which are signified, and represented. Not that the bread and the wine of the Eu∣charist communicate to me his body and blood: but thy goodnesse, my God, Thy truth, Thy majesty, Thy vertue and the efficacy of thy holy Spirit, communicate and reach forth this body and blood to my under∣standing and my soul to be spiritually eaten and drank by faith: The bread
and wine serving to this purpose, be∣ing sacred signes of his Body and of his blood, which should be eaten by the operation of his holy Spirit, with∣out understanding any thing therein of sensual, any thing corporeal,☜ any thing carnal; and without searching here below, and in our corporal mouths. His true body, with it's proper es∣sentials, with it's inseparable acci∣dents, with it's quantity and dimen∣tions, which is ascended to the hea∣vens, and set at the right hand of God, where 'tis requisite that the heavens contain him even until the restaura∣tion of all things. Thus Lord, I seek the body of Christ in heaven,Acts 3.21. by faith I celebrate in the holy Supper the memory of his Death and of his Passion: I declare it, I esteem it, and magnifie it even untill he come, and I receive it not with a carnal mouth and corporal throat, but after a Divine manner, Sacramentally, under a signifficant mystery, with the mouth of my heart, and spiritually by faith. By faith, which is the substance of
things hoped for: By faith, where∣by I really embrace his Body and blood, and which bring to passe, that in the holy Eucharist I am made partaker of it. By faith, which is the vessel, and the hand whereby I receive thy Gra∣ces. And, as Lord, 'tis by faith that the Lamb was slaine from the begin∣ning of the world: 'tis by faith that Abraham saw the day of the Lord, 'tis by faith that the Galatians have had Christ crucified before their eyes; 'Tis by faith that the Gospel gives me at this present eternal life. Also Lord, 'tis by faith, that in the celebration of thy holy Supper His body and his blood are present and subsistent in my heart, in my spi∣rit, and in my soul. 'Tis by faith, that I embrace his body, and suck his blood which distil∣leth from his wounds: And by means of this Sacramental eating and feed∣ing on the body of the Saviour of the world, and this spiritual drinking of his blood, I am made bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, I am incor∣porated
in him. I draw (by faith) eternal life from his flesh broken for me, and from his blood shed for me: I live of Christ, and in Christ, I live of his Justice, instead that I should dye of my sinne: I am justified by him, sanctified in him, to be eniivened and glorified in him. By this holy Sacrament, I am also admonished of my duty toward my Neighbour, in regard as we are ran∣somed with the same blood, made members of the same body, and De∣pendants of one and the same Head: and consequently, one among our selves and by the Commandment of God, and natural duty. We all draw life from one and the same death; nourishment from one and the same food, and the self same cup. Up then my soul, 'tis here where thou oughts to Anchor and fix thy co∣gitations, stay thy course, and cast thy eyes upon the love of thy God. 'Tis here that thou oughtest to sup∣plicate that Divine & heavenly heart, who onely bestowes motion upon men.
That only pulse and life of thy be∣ing. 'Tis the only base, whereon thou foundest thy hope, to inspire in thee the ardent flames of his Spirit, and turn into thy heart, the gene∣rous boylings of zeale, heate and ar∣dour toward him; to the intent that thou mayest be a worthy partaker of that holy Sacrament, which is the most singular consolation, the most effectual remedy, and greatest guift which he hath communicated to his upon the earth. It's the entyre Summe and Sove∣raign abridgment of his benefits, it's the certaine token of his infinite love, the true treasure of his boun∣ty. Lord,Eph. 1.7. thou hast ransomed me by the blood of thy Sonne, according to the rick∣es of thy grace, which thou causest plen∣tifully to abound over me. In∣structing me in the secret of thy plea∣sure. Thou hast informed me, that 'tis the bread of life, by the which my soul is sustained: That 'tis the true Vine, whereof I am a branch. The gate of Honour, and the rich assent
which conducts me to the mount of Glory. Thou hast called me to the com∣munication of his body, Hast apply∣ed his merits to me, made me his Co-heritor, partaker of his Riches, enjoying his celestial heritage. In time-past I was not of thy peo∣ple, but now am I of the chosen ge∣neration, of the Royal Priest-hood, of the holy Nation, of thy purchased people: To th' intent I should set forth and magnifie thy grace and ver∣tue, my God, who hast called me out of darknesse into thy merveilous light. Thy Sonne is my only sacrifice, my only oblation, my onely Holo∣cost, by the vertue and merit where∣of, the heavens and all the treasures of heaven are open to me. 'Tis the onely remedy of my sin, the onely spunge capable to efface my crimes. 'Tis the Sanctuary, the Assillum of my salvation, my heritage, the joy and the Divine chaine sufficient to rayse me from these miserable pla∣ces.
'Tis the tongue of succour, who undertaketh my defence, 'Tis the sa∣cred Anchor which stayeth my vessel, and secureth it from ship-wrack, and the prosperous Gale, which freeth and delivereth me from the depths, and Gulfes of the world. If the food, Lord, which will sustaine me but one day, obligeth me to praise thy Fatherly goodnesse, how much more ought to be excited and enflamed my Devoyre to render thee thanks for the bread of life, and for this spiritual wine, which giveth me an eternal Paradice, which re∣turneth me from death to life, which giveth me so perfect a recovery, that there remaines no scar in my ulcers: which conducts me unto an estate, wherein I shall not more suffer the temptations and approaches of sinne: where I shall be no more subject to change, where I shall be a Citizen of the Kingdome of heaven? I pro∣strate my self (then) before thee my God, who art my Judge, my Crea∣tour and Redeemer all in one: give me I beseech thee both heart and lips, and that I may adore thee with
all the affections, and all the facul∣ties of my soul. Drive away my disobedient hu∣mours, fill me with true zeal, and with sincere intentions to thy service: and scatter far from me these desires of the world, who entangle, them∣selves in my cogitations, and thwart my holy resolution. I am happy my God,Isa. 22.7. to enjoy that which so many Kings,Nahum 1.15. and so many Prophets desir'd to behold: I am hap∣py to possesse that holy Heritage, which they having but obscurely seen and saluted by faith, they have cryed out with vehement desire,Rom. 10..15.5 Oh how beautiful are the feet of those who preach the Ghospel! I am not Lord, in the extremity of the poor Paraletick who attended so many yeares to have the first place in the Bath troubled by thy Angel: I re∣ceive immediately my recovery of the blood of my Saviour, and there is no need that one, (more sound than my self) take me in his armes to embrace and carry me into the wa∣ter. For the Faith which thou hast given me, lifts me up even unto hea∣ven;
She thither conducts my soul, which washeth her self in this pretious blood, and comes forth clean and white. I sinne continually, and have cause of humiliation, and to dread and ap∣prehend Death and Hell, and I am ever cheered with hope by the me∣mory of that Eternal Sacri∣fice. But my God, make me so perfect that I receive not thy Manna unwor∣thily, that I take it not in contempt of thy Word and thy glory, to be pu∣nish't in thy wrath, as he who was de∣voured of a Lyon, having (contra∣ry to thy command) eaten bread in the house of the false Prophet: to be punish't, as he, who was bound and cast into darknesse, inasmuch as he came to the marriage without being cloathed with a Wedding gar∣ment. Lord, I know that 'tis recorded in the Gospel, that who so eateth of this bread, and drinketh of this cup un∣worthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of Jesus Christ thy Son.
But, my God Thou art Wonder∣ful in thy mercies. Thou rejectest no man, Thou abhorrest not the Thief who confest thee, nor the sin∣ner who wept, nor the Canaanite who accused her self,Mary Magda∣len. nor the Disci∣ple who denied Jesus, nor even they themselves who persecuted thee, in∣somuch as they repented. And I Lord, I confesse my sinnes, I condemne them, I accuse my self, I beg thy pardon, I entreat thee to behold thy goodnesse, not my de∣merit. Lord, Thou hast vanquish't death, thou hast raised my soul from the grave, thou hast drawn me out of the pit, thou hast opened to me the gates of eternal life. Supply then my defaults with thy blessings, and grant me that in thy Temple, in the Assembly of thy faith∣ful ones, I may worthily receive with faith, this heavenly food, and this spiritual drink: and that I take (with zeal and reverence) the bread and wine which are presented to me, by him who hath the honour to preach
thy Word, and whose mouth is the breast of thy Church. A Thanksgiving after the recei∣ving of the Sacrament. My Soul blesse the Lord, who day∣ly filleth and loadeth thee with his treasures: Blesse God, who causeth the sweet dew of his Clemency to di∣still on thee. My Soul blesse the Saviour of the World, who hath loved us, who hath washed our sinnes in his blood, who hath made us Kings and Priests to God his Father. Blessed be the Lamb who sitteth upon the Throne,Apoc. 5: 13: to whom shall resound pray∣ses for ever under the Ʋaults of heaven, and his Sacred Name shall be Celebrated and Magnified from age to age. Oh my glorious God, how much satisfaction do I receive, in casting and overthrowing my self at thy feet, how happy am I to approach thy holy Table!
'Tis thou oh my God, who hast tamed the Hidra of my miseries, who hast preserved me from the devouring knives of the Devil, who hast suc∣coured me in my bloody agony, who hast recented my afflictions, seeing me exposed to the Savageness of the infernal Tygers, who had reduc't me to the cruel darts of death; I was bu∣ried in despair and in the grave swal∣lowed and overwhelmed in the jawes of a miserable servitude, overtaken with the storme of so many mis-for∣tunes. But my God, by thy singular com∣passion, (though I bedewed not my face with tears, nor filled the ayre with my complaints:) Thou hast re∣stored me to my first condition, thou hast imbellish't me with-the splendour of the graces of thy countenance, and pollish't me with the first lustre of my natural beauty; I was over∣whelm'd under my proper ruine, I was entomb'd in the gulfe di gged with my own hands, I had cast my self within the horrible Den of Satan; but thou hast restored me, thou hast
lifted me up, and delivered me from my extremities. I was captive, and now the gate of liberty is open to me: my vessel was on every side batter'd with the Tem∣pest: It was ready to split it self a∣gainst the bancks, and now saileth gloriously on the water, and cuts and divides the waves, driven by a pros∣perous gale. I was the prey of Satan, and now triumph (through thy mercies) a∣bove all his temptations, above all his ambushes and all his powers, I cry out now Lord with Simeon, let thy ser∣vant depart in peace, according to thy Word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepa∣red before all men, to be the enlight∣ning of all Nations, and glory of thy people Israel. Lord, I render thee such thanks as I am able, not such as I ought; I am oblidg'd to magnifie thy Name for ever, with a thousand sacrifices of praise, to humble my self (all con∣trite) at thy feet to enflame my heart with repentance, and sacrifice the
ashes to thee. Thou hast cleansed me, wash't me from my offences, made me approach thy holy Table, and partaker of thy merits; there remaines nothing after this Sa∣crament, but to be united to thy glory. Grant me, Lord, that I may sub∣mit to thy pleasure the remainder of my dayes. Grant me repentance of my offences, not for a day, but which may last even unto my Sepulchre: that I may continually addresse my vowes to thee, that I may exalt thee without ceasing, and that (for ever) I may be at thy feet to do thee ho∣mage as my God, my Soveraign, and my Redeemer. Grant me, Lord, that I may be at∣tentive to the reading of thy holy Scriptures, to the end that the sharp Sword of thy Word, may sever and reverse the deepest and profoundest roots of my infidelity: and that the divine light of thy Gospel, which hath enlightned thy Church from the Apostles even to this day, may dissi∣pate
the thick darknesse which over∣whelmes me. Grant me that I may serve thee in holinesse and righteousnesse; that I may furnish my memory with the beauty of thy divine power: enlight∣en the gloominesse and obscurity which environes me, prepare my feet to the path of peace; and my mouth to pronounce thy praise: and permit not that I be surpriz'd with any evil slumbers, and that I sleep not unto death. Raise up my Soul Lord (by the fer∣vour of devotion to a constant meditation) on heavenly things: conserve me as he whose name is written in thy book of life.: as he, who is ransom'd with the blood of the Saviour of the World, is desti∣ned to be a vessel of honour in thine house. Unite my spirit (by continual me∣ditations) to them of thine elect, to the intent that being endowed with thy graces, I may serve thee for a pleasant habitation, as a fair Jeru∣salem.
In Conclusion Lord, to thee I re∣commend my Soul and my Body, my Councels and Cogitations, my Words and Actions, the conduct of all my Wayes, the Course and End of my life.
A Discourse of Afflictions and Martyrdome. THe Children of God are marked with a different Character, from the rest of the Citizens of the Earth. God hath assigned them for portion here be∣low, Poverty, Ignominy, the losse of kindred, maladies, and the most in∣sufferable kinds of deaths; but happy are these afflictions tending to salva∣tion: blessed these chastisements, which are to correct, not to de∣stroy. Praised be God who (by these stroakes) prevents the celerity of our gangrenes, who hath recourse to ab∣sitions to preserve our lives, and ap∣plies the lance to the inflammations of
our ulcers, untill the venome ceases to prevail. Those whom he corrects not, are such whom he disdaines to amend, those are the children of the World, who have their Paradise on earth, not in heaven. Their wealth often exceeds their wishes, their honour surmounts their desires: but the season of their de∣light fades in an instant, and that of their calamity is eternal. The Fatherly hand afflicteth not them daily, they are only buffetted by the enemy of men, which cometh too late, and in recompence he tor∣menteth them for ever. Let us (then) call to mind that it's fore-told in the Gospel, that we are destined to suffer griefs, to support out-rages, and be cut off from the world: and that we are commanded to comfort our selves in these tribu∣lations, and to skip for joy in the midst of our torments, for asmuch as our reward is great in hea∣ven. If we suffer our selves to be trans∣ported by heavinesse beyond measure,
'tis to be suspected that afflictions will overcome us, & give us over to despair, as unworthy the consolations, which are presented to us by the hand of God, and of the certain pro∣mises, which he hath left us by writing in his Word. Let us raise up our soules (then) above all the things of this World. Direct our cogitations to remember the state of our lives, and on the remedies which God hath bestowed on us to solace our sorrowes and cala∣mities: of a truth, our prosperity, & the sweetnesse of content ordinarily pas∣seth in a little space, and giveth place to afflictions, who march on with a hideous and frightful visage. Our life is nothing but a motion, if one day be pleasant, another renders it self unsupportable: and that we enjoy of content, never continues constant. But since this is the condition, in which it pleaseth God we should live, we must not adde our bloody hands to tear our wounds, and become un∣just in respect of what remaines, for the regreat of what we have lost. It's folly to take on ones self the
punishment of his infelicity, to stay upon the part offended, and to look upon the worst side of our lives. Let's not (then) more imbitter our evils by our impatience, neither (hereafter) render our greene wounds and emotions, mortal stroakes, and incurable ulcers. Let's cast behind us that pusilanimi∣ty, which ever puts us to flight, cau∣sing us to cast forth cries equal to the measure that the Ocean is irritated and raised up against us, and hinders us from sustaining the storm without being appall'd. Let's fortifie our hearts, let's fill them with assurance, to the intent that contemplating with a confident brow the miseries of the world, not to apprehend their approach, to sustain them with a couragious aspect, and encounter them with valour. Let's approach afflictions to under∣stand them, and (by the way) re∣solve our selves to constancy. The Souldier is unworthy of that name, who trembles so soon as he beholds an enemy, and perswades himself
that already their Sword is at his throat: and he is marveilous feeble, who is afraid at the only appearance of afflictions. Their view cannot of∣fend us, and their endeavours (if we please) may be rendered suc∣cesselesse. Why (then) make we any diffi∣culty to enter into the lists against them; since their wounds ought to harden us, constantly to suffer their assaults? Those who are nourisht in the shade, dread the ardure of the Sun, and not those that are accusto∣med to it. Children are apprehensive, and fear to behold their blood, and not old Souldiers, who have of't seen it, as it were continually to distill, and flow from their wounds. Few new afflictions can present themselves, we already have beheld and sustained the most of them: if they be great and confiderable, the more danger and peril, the more glory. What delight to rend off the scales which would forme themselves against the brightnesse of our eyes?
what satisfaction to prevent those dis∣cords, which would trouble our har∣mony? Up then, let us learn to accustome our selves to all diversity and inequali∣ty of life, and to receive every thing of the saving hand of God. And as the Superiour part of the aire, which is nearest to the heavens, is never darkned with clouds, nor a∣gitated with thunders: so our soules, (ever elevated above these passions,) should never be shamefully overtur∣ned under griefs and sadnesse, but so much as is necessary to bring her to repentance. Let us not precipitate our selves desperately as mad men, after our affections: enduring (with all our heart) the adversity of the world, ever calling to mind, that as the di∣vine benedictions, which we shall one day enjoy, are setled in a conti∣nued and happy rank, so (also) these mortal things are tossed by an infinite number of blustres, and totter and in∣cline sometimes to one side, some∣times to another. It is familiar in the croud and
throng of a battel, to take ones for∣tune; upon the Ocean, to be beaten with stormes, upon the earth with di∣verse afflictions. The Pilate, for having been preser∣ved from so many tempests, cannot longer dread Ship-wrack. The Souldier for the frequency and assiduity of peril contemns danger: The infinite number of afflictions should instruct us not to esteem them as considerable. Our life is no other than a continu∣al war-fare: if sometimes we are free from heavinesse, it's nothing but a short truce with the world; or rather a suspension of armes, and no abso∣lute, no entire peace. If the Sunne shines bright, a sud∣den storm (in an instant) chaseth a∣way the serenity of the ayre, and fil∣leth all with darknesse: if we behold a glimpse of light, we are again plunged presently into a more close prison. War interrupts peace, sicknesse, health, death, the sweetnesse of con∣versation. Pleasure and sorrow are of near assinity, and ever entertain
each other. Such is the condition of men, against which plaints are unpro∣fitable: Such it was to those in ages past, and so shall it be to them in time to come. The remedy is, that we serve our selves of these changes as Musitians of Tones, flat, sharp and diverse. It's necessary that we learn to conduct our vessel; not onely in calme, still waters, but also in the high going and rough billowes. Contrary winds do not hinder that we aid our selves by following the North, if so be we hoyse and trimme our sailes as we ought. The bitternesse of griefs are sweet∣ned by remedies, the nettles do not sting, when we presse them very hard, nor afflictions when we tread on their throat. If they made choice of persons, if in passing by some, they spar'd them al∣together, their inequality would be more insupportable: but the bullet is blind, it pierces as soon the Captain as the Souldier: The feavour is deaf, it retires not sooner for the plaints of the greatest, than the meanest: The
heat of the Sunne scorches without distinction all those who are in the Plain: The cold as easily penetrates the Velvets as the Shagges; and death overturnes every one without excepting any, to the intent that the equality of each ones necessary de∣stiny, should serve for a general con∣solation. But if it appeares to us, that we be∣hold some who are ever at their ease, who live and flourish in great plenty of all things, without encountering any affliction: assuredly we abuse our selves; it's the lustre of their habits, which dasles us, their Port and Fashi∣on, which deceives us: we see not with what a multitude of agitations their soules are tormented, what per∣turbations, and what desires vex their spirits, putting them into inquietude, and interrupting their repose: we see not their Catarrs, their issues, and the cryes they send forth in the dolour of their stone and gout: the condition of their spirit, and disposition of their Bodies is unknown to us. They go not forth of their houses
but in health, they shew not them∣selves in publick, but with a cheareful countenance, whereas often their hearts are heavy, and that is it which deceives us; and then, what know we what afflictions they have had heretofore, what distempers, then when we were in health: what hea∣vinesse at such time, when we were in delight? what understand we what mischiefs hang over their heads, rea∣dy to overcome and destroy them? An Ague is ready, a pestilent ayre, a weaknesse, a fall, the treachery of an enemy: And if we be not satisfied with so many Considerations, let's cast down our sight, and beholding so many poor people afflicted of all sorts, seeing the beggar often in de∣spaire, for default of finding a morsel of brown bread. Behold them tormented with a feavour, impaired, languishing; laid overturned on the pavement: ob∣serve the greatest consolation which they receive from our charity, they are dragged to a hideous place fil'd with wretches: there they understand nothing but cries, but plaints, but
groanes, but gaspings after death: oft-times the dead remaining long a∣mong them, before they be enterred: and thus in these continued miseries, they finish their lives. Behold on the other side, a poor father sick, stretch't out upon the straw, to whom bread is wanting when his labour failes him, having five or six small children lying about him, crying for hunger. Behold one Bed-ridden of the Pal∣sie these foure yeares, continually pierc't through with heavinesse, con∣stantly gasping after death: if we be so mischievous to receive any conso∣lation from the harmes of another, agreeable to our sorrowes: 'Tis most facile for us (by this communion of miseries) to asswage our own, and to mitigate our affliction; by the mul∣titude of other afflicted ones, which are so innumerable. But let's return to our selves, what advantage have we by so many plaints? do our afflictions retire for our cryes?☞ no, they never swerve out of their way. Give them passage then, and crosse
their humour, to the intent they should not abide in our Compa∣ny. If by lamentations we think to chase away our evils; If by teares we hope to lift up the Tombs, and re∣new and enlighten again the extin∣guisht lives of our friends: I should be of opinion to enforce our selves to distill out all we have of oy∣sture. But if our lamentations bring them no advantage, if that our regreates are not so much as understood by them, if the marble that presseth them, hea∣reth not our groanes, to what end are so many unprofitable sighths, so many rages, so many faintings to no effect? If it be in regard of them, 'tis fol∣ly, if for our own, do we love our ease so much, then as to cruciate our selves for the losse of one content∣ment, of one support, or a little wealth? If we lament, for that 'tis an affliction, consider our misery, ob∣serve how one stroak seconds ano∣ther: and how that if for every occa∣sion
we will afflict our selves,☞ teares will faile us sooner, than a ground for lamentation. 'Tis a miserable remedy to go a∣bout to drive away one heavinesse with another, it's the way to passe a∣way our life in continual teares and sadnesse, and not to manifest the grandure of our courage, and gene∣rosity of our soules. Who is more praise-worthy, or he who being surpriz'd and overtaken by an affliction, doth by his impatience aggrevate and imbitter his misfor∣tune, and gives himself to despair? or rather he, who yieldeth not to it's assaults, and thereby abates and fru∣strates the force of adversity by an in∣vincible heart, and couragiously bears away the victory? The good disposition of our spi∣rits, should not change as that of our bodies, according to Climates and Moons. This World, which beholds our per∣sons may afflict them, but not our soules, which should (continually) re∣side in the hand of God; what though our bodies are sometimes lan∣guishing,
wasting and consuming, we are neverthelesse sound in our better parts, to wit, our soules, see∣ing we fill them with assurance. And why bemoan we our selves for so many diseases? understand we not that our bodies are no other than re∣ceptacles of corruption, and that many of them are hereditary, and left us as a sad patrimony? If we con∣sider of how many diverse parts our bodies are compos'd and fram'd, to how many several accidents each is subject, and that the least change which causeth discord, is sufficient to cast us into a feavour; nought re∣maines, but to admire, how we are sometimes so long without pain. Our maladies are pleasant, seeing they so faithfully divide the time with health: and then not seldome their anguish makes us relish the pleasure of a speedy amendment. The Sunne seems more bright after darknesse, rest more welcome after travel, health more lovely after di∣stempers. Wherefore repine we at our bet∣ters? Know we not that the Vallies
are lesse subject to stormes than the lofty Mountaines? That a shrub is more rarely thunder-struck than an high towering oak, which seemes to despise the earth? That the highest and straitest trees, are not the best? that the Popplers and Sallowes receive (un∣gratefully) their nourishment, and (contrarily) that the Vine bowed on the earth, is fruitful? how many great ones from the heighth of their digni∣ty, are tumbled among the multi∣tude? How many Kings have beheld their Scepters broken betwixt their hands, and their Crowns shiver'd in diverse parts? And if our wealth be taken from us, why lavish we so ma∣ny sighths for things so casual? where∣fore do we throw away our content∣ment after our riches? Have not so many presidents that we have ob∣serv'd, admonis us, that all world∣ly wealth is set on slippery places, and that that which shineth brightest  us,The  may be obscur'd in a mo∣? It's not expedient that they be to joyned and glued to us, that we cannot part with them, without rend∣ing away something of our own.
If we live not so gloriously, we live neverthelesse not lesse hap∣pily. That man disburses very much to fill his belly, and then awakens sluggish by his unsavoury stomach; and we, lesse satisfies us to sustain our lives: and at worst, if one must lose all, is it not better to die for hunger without so much fear, and such a deal of vex∣ation, than in heavinesse and torment of spirit? The poor man, whom necessity compels to labour, (who gaines not his living but by his fingers ends) is all day attentive at his businesse, with∣out any passion: he eates his bread in quiet, he sleepeth all night (without care) untill the morning wakens him to his work: very many of the most wealthy, passe not their time so plea∣santly, many prove this truth. Wealth and rest unwillingly co∣habit.☜ And then would we be ever in our spring? Is it not said that the rain fol∣lowes the heat, and ice moisture? who is that Souldier who would live conceal'd in his Tent, the general
who continues in his Chaire with his hands on the Carpet without present∣ing himself in the Field of Battle? Great men are well-pleas'd (some∣times) to behold themselves in pain, vertue shines brightest among perils, she is greedy of labour, knowing that her sufferings are a considerable part of her glory. We are oblig'd to please our selves sometimes in discovering our con∣stancy in afflictions: 'tis no small ho∣nour, when we cannot shunne a mis∣chief, to resolve our selves to a coura∣gious sufferance. Go to then, all ye who bear the mark of God in your fore-heads, re∣solve your selves with me, let's unite in this Combate, arming our tender breasts, with vertue, and magnani∣mity, let's fall on with fiercenesse, let's advance (continually) to the prize against these afflictions: & so soon as we perceive them appear, let's improve our courage by the cry and the course: even as the Rock immovably sustain∣eth the waves and assaults of the enra∣ged Sea; in like sort let's dispose and contrive  that  soules continue
firme and constant against the threats and stroakes of the world: even as the diamond in the midst of ordure casts forth a more bright lustre of his beau∣ty: even so (amongst afflictions) let's bear a more serene visage and smiling countenance, to make a more eminent vertue appear. A few Plancks joyned together, serve us to sayle down rivers, to passe the Seas, and tame their most violent and angry tides and waves without apprehension of Ship-wrack. Constancy, Magnanimity, Pati∣ence, and all these shining vertues u∣nited together will assist us to passe athwart all the adversity of the world, without feeling their assaults, and with an immovable Cou∣rage. Let's sustain our selves fixt betwixt publick and private Desolati∣ons: If we cannot Go, let's Crawle. Men may (without difficulty) stile a man wretched, but it's at his liberty whether he will be so.☜ We are summon'd to encounter
afflictions which seem formidable; but let's furnish our selves with con∣siderable reasons to enkindle an heat in the chillest frosts of the hearts of the most timerous. Let's lay hold on weapons, which not onely wound these afflictions, but destroy and kill them. Let's not onely overturn them one by one, but execute them altogether, that they may fall upon the place. What if the enraged stormes unite in one? what if they be assisted by the tide of the Sea, and if they drive a ship with their most vigerous and im∣petuous force, the Remora neverthe∣lesse (in fixing himself, and thrust∣ing into the plancks) stops it quite short: in like sort, some great adver∣sity, some extreame affliction which may overtake us, we are able to bear and sustain it with patience, and take it in good part, remembring with our selves, that it falls from on high, and from that divine providence who go∣verns and rules all things of  ∣vine  who  our , who
Angels about us, to prevent that none do us the least violence, exceed∣ing that he hath ordained. 'Tis the great King who with one glance of an eye can overturn this vast Globe, who causeth his showers to distill upon us. 'Tis his puissant Arme, who hath fra∣med this al, whence his thunder is shot. 'Tis that great Pilate at whose voice the Sea yieldeth such ready obedience, who causeth us to be weather-beaten by it's storms. We fly in vain, when his hand pur∣sues us: his voice ecchoes in our ears throughout the world: the blast of his mouth could shatter us even to the most obscure & profound caverns of the earth: he corrects us when he pleaseth: he hath none other law but that of his pleasure; he conducts us through the Plains and through the Mountains, by the spring, and by the winter, in prosperity and in afflictions. We must esteem the night as well as the day, the evening as the morn∣ing: we must be satisfied with the  communicates  would for him∣self
to undertake a great enterprise, endangers himself to lose his sight therewith: We must submit to the pleasure of God who governs all this Universs by his providence. When it so pleaseth him, He con∣verteth (in a moment) the miseries of his into rejoycings: He drowneth their afflictions under the streames of Benedictions, he sustaineth them when ready to fall, and confirms them, that their succoures and deli∣verance comes from his hand: He re∣stores them when abased: He reme∣dyes their distempers without distur∣bing himself:☞ and even he healeth the wound he hath made: and after cauterising and searing, he applyeth Beninge and gentle Fomentations, and touches them with a most delicate and tender hand. And (usually) then,☞ when all hu∣mane help failes and forsakes us, 'tis then, that he is nearest to his own. Let's remit and cast our selves then on his holy Providence, rejoycing before him, leaping for joy, eleva∣ting our eyes to heaven.
He who hath fixed the Sun and stars in heaven, He who hath preserved his holy Arke from the surges, and from the Tempest, He who hath caus'd it to snow a savoury Manna up∣on his people, and hath caused foun∣taines to flow-forth of Rocks: To him who needs no Base for a founda∣tion, who buildeth on the vacuum, as on the fulnesse, on nought, as on mat∣ter:☜ He who electeth (when it pleaseth him) the most contemptible raysing them out of obscuri∣ty, and placing them upon the most Eminent dignities; is he not more than sufficient to cause the Lillies to flourish under the Scepter of his A∣noynted,Flower Deluce. and under the ayre of a pleasant and gentle peace, without ever being faded by a storme? Can he not effect it that our fields should an∣swer our desires, That our good for∣tune should surmount and exceed our expectations, that our dayes should flourish in health and honour, and that we should dye heavy and satiated with old age? Proceeds it not from him who causeth that the earth is not yet tyred with so many Births and
Productions, and that (of his own libe∣rality) she dayly furnisheth us with ne∣cessary nourishment: who causeth that the floods descend drop, by drop: that the Sun bringeth back the spring, and giveth carnation to the Roses, the Purple to the Gilly-flowers, Per∣fumes sents and odours to so many se∣veral various Plants? what though the enemies of the Gospel confede∣rate against us, if they assemble toge∣ther, if they levy warre against the Church: have we cause of terrour, being cover'd under the Banner of the great God, loaded with victory, who enjoyeth the principal point, and soveraign period of the glory? of the great God, who produceth so much splendour from the Armies of his children? who causeth the Cities to open their gates at the only ap∣proach of their Host, that the moun∣taines yield and bowe under the bur∣then of their forces, who overturnes the most powerful armies, by the keen edge of their sword, who pa∣veth the earth with the bodies of their enemies, cementing their Plaines with their blood, and furnisheth
them with such a multitude of Tro∣pheys upon Tropheys, and so many divers and sundry subjects to enrich e∣verlasting Histories; Have we not so much spirit to consider on these bene∣fits? Are we not capable to behold so many benedictions, The continu∣ance, the grandure, the number ta∣keth that the admiration from us? He's as Puissant now as ever, to warrant us, and to settle and assure the victo∣ry on our standards, and the honour and glory on our browes. He's the same who appeared to Moses in a burning flame,Exod. 3. and de∣clared that he had heard the affliction of his people, that he had heard their cryes, and understood their sorrows, that he would deliver them out of the hands of the Egyptians, and conduct them into a land flowing with milke and honey. 'Tis the very same who effected so many Myracles (by the hand of Mo∣ses) in the presence of hard-hearted Pharoah:Exod. 13.21. 'Tis the same eternal who march't by day before his poople in a Pillar of a cloud, to conduct them in the way,Exod. 14. and by night in a Pillar of fire to
give them light. 'Tis the same who by an East winde clave the red-sea, piling up the waters to make way for Israel, and who (soon aftar) overwhelm'd in the Billowes, Pharaoh and his Armey. 'Tis he, who caused that the enterpri∣ses of Gideon were numberlesse:Joshua 12. who made Joshua to Triumph over thirtie one Kings, who stayed (in favour of his Battailes) the Sun in the midst of his course, and made him continue im∣movable for a long space of time, whil'st that he overturned his enemies (by mil∣lions) on the dust. 'Tis he who confirmed Israel fly∣ing before the Philistine, before that great Thunderbolt of war, causing that the fury of a stone, parting from the hand of a Shepheard, should plant it self in the midst of his fore∣head. 'Tis the same who fill'd Hester with courage against Haman, who caused that Baruch, that Sampson, that Jeph∣ta, that David, that Samuel, and so many Prophets have combated Kingdomes, have closed the throats of Lyons, have repell'd the force of fire, have escap't the devouring sword,
have shewed themselves mighty in Battle, and turned their enemies to flight. But these are favours which flow from his hand when it pleaseth him, and then only when he knows it expe∣dient for his glory. In the interim we are obliged to rest satisfi'd with our condition, in the which it pleaseth him we should live,☜ and receive those corrections which he giveth us, to the intent to amend us: who opposes himself against God, to repine & bemoan himself, shall incurre the danger (instead of tem∣porary adversity,) to suffer eternal torments. The afflictions which overtake us, are ordained by solemn Decrees; whereto we ought to acquiesse and submit; by Ordinances, against which it's not permitted we open our mouthes. The Murmur against Decrees so ho∣ly, is punish't as the entyre voyce, the Will, as the Effect. Moreover, these are afflictions ten∣ding to our health. Ruines, to cause us turne to our wealth, Poverty, to
make us regard our riches. The clattering of his Thunder falls to awaken us, his corrections to put us upon repentance, These chastise∣ments, to force from our hearts sigths and repentance. These are the effects of the love of the Creatour, testimonies, that he ever has an eye over his work-man∣ship, and that he will make them understand their errors. The Soveraigne Law of a King, is the safety of his People, of God the safety of his own, to make them ever tend to that poynt, he applyeth all manner of remedyes: observing them too intent on the world, he ad∣deth to the losse of their substance, the losse of their kindred, and by these torments he awakneth their zeale, which slumber'd in a peace∣able time: He disturbeth their ease, to preserve their ardure from rusting, He imployeth the Fanne to clense his Graine, Vineger to efface the aines. He is the Physitian, who laboureth for health, not for pleasure, who would heal the distemper, not sooth
and flatter it, who ordaineth rather Ruburb than Suger, who useth scal∣ding and sharpe medicines, but very healthful: we must not expect from him Flowers, Straw-berries and Cream: but bitter rootes, nautious Pills, and Potions black and trou∣bled. He extracts out of our sufferings, our prosperity, and that which seemes to us, to tend to our destruction, he con∣verts to what makes for our safety: He conserves us by strict dyets, and ex∣treame thirst, and severs our Rotten members which cannot be continued without the desolution of the whole Body. But then when our well-fare re∣quires that so it must be, it's better to perish in part, then entyrely, to lose one, than both our eyes: of't-times a member spar'd, costs the life. If we be alwayes heated with Prospe∣rity, if we ever live at our ease, what a multitude of designs would take up our thoughts and interpose that we lift not up our soules to that which is on high? with how little difficultie will we permit our selves to slip into vices,
and to be partakers of all the vanities of the word? That little interval we have enjoyed, gives us full assurance, the example of very many removes all doubt. We are slothful to our safety, we must be prest to it, we are slack, and advance not but by constraint. The Eagle hovers round about her young, to teach them to rayse them∣selves from the earth, he lets some dayes passe without feeding them, to the intent that hunger may compell them to seek out their food: and for the utmost remedy: He beats them, he corrects their sloth with strokes both with his beak and wings. Even so the great God delivers his Ordinances into our hands, to observe them, He commands us to obey them, he summons, he threa∣tens us: and in conclusion when bare words makes no impression in our hardned hearts, He puts us forward, and constraines us through sundry afflictions. He deals by us, as a Father who hastily snatch∣es the Knife out of the hand of his
childe, fearing he should hurt him∣self, and forbeares not for his crying: As the Father who retyres his sonne from the brinck of the River, and in with-drawing him, corrects him, to the end he should not return again; He chastiseth us, to the intent we should resent our offences: he leads us off, beating us, and ever addes some surcharge to our afflictions, thereby to humble us. During our prosperity we pride our selves, beholding every thing with a scorneful eye, we value none but our selves, and think not of ought but our content and felicity. And as bodies that are fatted, lan∣guish under their proper weight, and stoop beneath the burthen and charge of themselves: in like manner, our overmuch and continual repose drowns us in pleasures, and (lessons in delights) the first glances men observe to blaze of our zeal and ar∣dure to pursue the path of the chil∣dren of God. The skilful Physician sometimes breaths a veine, not for present ne∣cessity, but to prevent and remove
the cause of that malady he judges ap∣proaching: In like manner, God afflicts us to turn us from vices, which we are ready to em∣brace. And so he prunes off many branch∣es of a plant, to the intent it may be∣come more fruitful: we undergo afflictions, to the intent we may fructi∣fie the more; and that we may in∣crease our zeal. That we may preserve our selves dextrous and strong, we accustome our selves to Justs & Turneys, we counter∣feit war in a full & absolute peace: and to preserve our soules ever amiable, alwayes healthy, do we refuse adversi∣ty, afflictions, and tryals? we con∣ceive not of our felicity, but by the same measure that we recent evil,☞ we joy not in heaven, but so far as earth torments us, we embrace not God, but in the same degree that men afflict us. Men distinguish the children of God by their scars, their songs are sighths: their garments sable, mourn∣ing and gloomy; their Edifices Pri∣sons and the Grave.
Men send the stout Souldier to the assault, they plant him in the midst of the breach, they place him in the mouth of the Cannon; the Loyal in battel, against difficulties, losses and vexations. The Courage of the Souldier, soft∣ens and relents during the truce, his generosity abates, if he be long ab∣sent from the Field of battel: In like-sort, the zeal of Gods Children languisheth, and consumeth it self in time of prosperity. He there signalizeth himself by the scars in his front, and by the wounds received for default of his Armes: This here, by afflictions proceeding from the hand of the Omnipotent God. All his adversities are advertise∣ments, these rubarbs are healthful nourishments, and bitternesses tend∣ing to pleasantnesse; we may not i∣mitate the Caterpiller, converting flowers into poyson: the An∣vil, which hardens it self against the Hammer. The sonnes of earth, who sinke in despaire: The valiant brow searches
the glory of Lawrels and Palms, for te∣stimonies of their courage: the true believers suffer the honour of crosses, of griefs and tryals, for signes of their faith. Let's then quit the Field to these Panick, these feeble amasements, o∣verthrowing them under our weap∣ons: enduring them with a cheareful aspect; (since 'tis the pleasure of God) that afflictions (as pointed arrowes) should be fixt in our bodies. Suffering with constancy, if his hea∣vy hand presseth us on, abates us, dis∣members us, and hence forward, be∣ing rather apt to penance than plaints. Being of good courage, he is ever a spectatour of his own, who strugle and contest against calamity: He is ever at hand to yield them cou∣rage, by their sides to aid and assist them: He was by Job stretcht out on the Dunghill: He accompanied the three Children in the Furnace; He descended with Daniel into the inner∣most crannies of the Den of Lyons; He was near Elias in the Desart, with Saint Peter in the Prisons, with such a
multitude of Martyrs in the midst of the flames. This labour is an exercise of true Courage, in the sweat whereof men finde felicity: The end, the aime, whereunto we are call'd, is so excel∣lent and admirable, that we are ob∣lidg'd to embrace all enterprises, which may conduct us thither: Then let these Ignominies, these faded, withered things, these dolours be our Lawrels, our Palmes, our Crowns: let them be the marks of our vertue, engraven on our bodies. Let us chearefully receive these Presents from the hand of God, let's relish these wholsome medicines, let's embrace (if it be the pleasure of God) wounds, Martyrdome and Death. What then? If for his honour and glory, if the more to publish the Name and Merit of the Saviour of the World; He delivers us into the hands of these Barbarians, who oppose pub∣lick afflictions, and the horrour of death, to check the progresse of the Name of Christ: who seek not their glory, but by the measure and pro∣portion
of their cruelty against perse∣vering Christians: if he deliver us into the power of these Butchers, who imagine the heavenly Field is husbanded as ours, by the labour and assistance of the Iron: who persecute us by publick punishments, by the astonishment of flames, by the hor∣rour of Gibbets, and of Pillaries: surfeting of blood and carcasses, and by the dread of Butchers prepared to death and destruction? What? Shall we not conserve this precious earnest, this holy gage, this divine faith planted in our hearts by the powerful operation of the Omni∣potent Spirit? Shall we not inviolab∣ly observe this sacred oath of fidelity given to Jesus Christ at our birth? What? Shall we not freely lavish out our blood on so glorious an oc∣casion? What? (That we renounce not our faith, our salvation) shall we not ad∣vance boldly to death, whereby we shall passe to immortality? let not these Barbarians (then) imagine by the fear of their torments, to wrest
from us any expressions loose, and un∣worthy of Christians. Faith is the greatest gift, which men have received from the hand of God. Faith is of such vast importance, that it must out-ballance every hu∣mane consideration; when it con∣cernes our faith, we must suffer none to be more Eminent, more Gallant, more Generous than the Christian; nothing more scorning and con∣temning the Sword, more despi∣sing the flames, more contemning death: 'tis necessary that we bedew and besprinkle her with our blood, and restifie it with our death; 'tis ex∣pedient that it augment our zeal in the Prisons, that we professe and affirme it before Magistrates, to rein∣force it in Martyrdome. Rendering our selves like green Trees, who bowe themselves on one side, when men would force them to yield to the other: stiffning them∣selves proportionably, as men would bend them: Imitating the Diamond, which obstinately resists both the iron and the fire: as the gold who spreads
well, but wasts not; which loseth his drosse, but not his weight; his scurse, but not his sub∣stance: like the quick-silver, the which the more men presse it to col∣lect it together, the more he is con∣strained, the more he is excited to obtain his liberty, and free, goes vanishing and spreading into a mul∣titude of particles. Do we make any difficulty to enter upon tryal of the constancy of a true Christian? Feare we the ran-counter of so rare, so precious a Prize, for which so many of our Fathers have improved, and fatned the earth with their bodyes, and run so cheerefully to Martyrdome, to joyne themselves eternally to God? Let's maniest that we are true shoots of those Ancient stocks which have produc't such admi∣rable and pleasant fruit: Let's de∣clare that we are successors of the splendor of their faith. 'Tis for this fayre occasion that they have esteem'd it so honourable to suffer: 'Tis by this staire and assent that they are mounted into heaven, by this Road that they are past into e∣ternal beatitude.
Let's (then) hereafter be alwayes ravish't, ever taken with a Divine fervour: not having other aime nor object than what concernes the glo∣ry of the great God, and the salvation of our souls: for the rest of the world have not other esteeme than so farre forth as it shall serve to advance and attaine it. It's not onely permitted to us to beleeve in Christ, but also to suffer for him: Consider with our selves that we have to struggle against flesh and blood, against Principalities and Powers, and the Signeories of the world. If God will not nourish us in the shadow, if he calls us to the tryal, let's glory in tribulations, supporting our selves with constancy. And al∣though that our enemies give us many assaults, yet for all that the glory, the crown belongs not to them. God afflicts and visits, God imploies those that he loveth: and those whom he seemeth to favour, He reserveth to Desolation: Chastisements cor∣rect us; and impunity carries away them.
St. Paul saith that he gave not place by submission, no not for a moment, to the intent that the truth of the Gospel might be permanent: He saith that he made reckoning of nothing, that his life is not precious to him,Cal. 2.5. to the end that he may finish his course in the Grace of God.Acts 20.22. Moses refused to be called the sonne of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to be afflicted with the people of God,Heb. 11.24. than to enjoy the pleasures and delights of sinne for a season, better affecting the service of God, than to possesse the rich∣es of Egypt. Daniel delighted rather to expose himself to the savagenesse of the Ly∣ons, He chose sooner to be cast into their Den, wherein he expected to be (in an instant) dismembred, than to abstain (for thirtie dayes) to a∣dore God with his windowes open, as he did afore time. The three children rather elected to be cast into the ardent flames, than to bow before the Idol. Eleazer gray and bald, and that Mother fearing God with her seven Children, suffer'd Martyrdome and
death, rather than to infringe the Commandment of God by permit∣ting swines-flesh to enter their mouths. It's most certain that there is but one path, to arive at felicity, but one only heavenly Collume, whereon we must take place, but one only Arke wherein we must be enclosed to avoid the Deluge. All other wayes, how Contiguous, how neare, how like soever they be, lead directly in∣to the Jawes of the Divel. All other vessels, but that of Noah split, be∣ing swallowed by the waves. The truth of the Gospel is publish't by the voice of the Apostles, proved by Myracles, sealed by the blood of Martyrs, and acknowledged by the evil spirits: What? shall we be so very detestable as to bely the holy writ, to reject our salvation, to dissavow our Saviour? He descended for us, hath suffered for us, hath dy∣ed for us: shall we make difficulty to confesse him, to suffer for him, to dye for him? No, No, let our speeches ever agree with our thoughts, let our thoughts be always the same with our words.
Let's not cast our selves (by the sound of our lips) into the snares of Satan, that the fear of torments cause us not to renounce heaven, that the dread of death make us not to aban∣don Jesus Christ and his heritage: that our Timidity occasion not a sad ship∣wrack in the very harbour: not chang∣ing our affections with fortune, nor varying our Face like as a Masse of wax, nor our habitation as the wan∣dring foul for the cold. Let not the bands of the vanity of the world so eclips our sight, that we discern not our offence, that our de∣signes stifle and extinguish not the bright sparkles of our soules; that our desires deprive us not of our Salva∣tion. We have tasted the heavenly gift, let not an Emotion and light distem∣per cause us to disgorge and vomit it, we are pure, let's not fill our selves with Ordure: we are clean, let's not defile our selves in the myre: Electing rather a glorious and honou∣rable grave, than a lothsome, infa∣mous life. Let's rather instantly dye with a
sound and entyre spirit, let's finish now our voyage and life with God, than here (for a short space) with the world, with dispayre, with Sa∣tan. Who would preserve himself by quitting the Helme, suffereth ship∣wrack: who imagins to recoyle one step, tumbleth into a bottomlesse deep: who retyres from Paradise, precipitateth himself into hell. God hath not ordained all to be out-rag'd for his holy Name, all are not capable: God hath not marked all the inhabitants of the earth with the badge of his Sonne, few are trea∣ted like the Master. There's but one plant taken of the stock, of the plant, one bunch, of the bunch, a few grapes. Blest is he who is capable, happy he who is treated as the Master, Hap∣py he who is of those grapes. The Children of this World, who are not couch't in a divine estate make themselves merry; they are weak-sighted, altogether imperfect to contemplate on heavenly mysteries; they are strayed too far to recover the right way, they imagine not that the
reward is at the end of the race: but they shall one day find, that our mi∣series shall terminate in delights, which endure for ever; and their pleasures end in horrible and eternal torments. 'Tis (then) in this Combat against afflictions and death, that we must contest, that we must vanquish, and that we must search for the Crown of Christianity, and Kingdome of God. Our hearts will be crush't, our eyes blemisht, but our souls shall be filled with gladnesse: we shall be beaten, we shall be torn, but our zeal shall augment, and in its augmenta∣tion, our contentment shall en∣crease. Thou Barbarian, thou mayst ravish our goods, but the Eternal will not forsake us: thou can'st exile us, but all the Earth is the Lords. Thou can'st threaten our lives, but 'tis those of our bodies, 'tis that of the World, our soules are immor∣tal. Thou mayest send us to death, but we conduct our selves thither, we there
shall receive it, we will there suffer it patiently: Our spirits are heads and masters of our bodies, they are so ele∣vated by the assistance of the Omni∣potent Spirit, that they are able to surmount all sorts of torments, and death it self. Infidels, with what do you affright us so much? with punishment! with what do you menace us so highly? to take away our lives? with what do you make us so much afraid? of death! O pitiful Adversaries, we con∣temn, we despise the world, we make no account of afflictions, we trample over the fear of death. Ha, wherefore should we fear so much to give for so admirable and excellent a Subject, so Glorious, so Honou∣rable. That which such a multitude of persons lavish dayly, to obtain a little pay: That which so many Generals give so freely, to merit to have their browes encircled with a branch of O∣live or of Palme? How many mighty men hazard themselves dayly to the peril of a thousand shot, presse into dangers,
and into the croud of a battel, on the hopes of an earthly victory, rather than to behold their proper valour surmounted? what a multitude presse and advance to the forefront, bearing their bodies against wounds, exposing themselves to the edge of the Sword, stretching out their per∣sons on the earth, to sustaine the Banners of a stranger, of whom they receive not above foure Crowns of pay? With how much more reason than they should we render ourselves ob∣stinate in the Combat? resolute of the victory? We contend not for a point of ho∣nour and glory; we endure not for a stranger, we suffer not for an incon∣siderable reward, we have a better and different hope, than a punctillio of honour, or of gain, than of pay. We contest for the immortal ho∣nour of true Christians: we endure for the great God, for the Creatour of heaven, of earth, of men: we suffer for our Saviour, our Christ, our
Salvation: for a glittering recom∣pence, resplendent, and enduring for ever. God hath not given us a spirit of fear, but of courage; we can performe all things through Christ which streng∣thneth us:2 Tim. 1.7 Phil. 4.13. we can demonstrate that no∣thing can reverse the Banners of the Church, and that every thing that op∣poseth it self against it's course, is not but for the augmentation of its glory. What if Murtherers leavy war a∣gainst the Gospel, they do nothing but dash against a mighty and puissant Rock, which fixes and strengthens it self within it's own wait. Let them satisfie their rage and fury, they shall not for that overthrow the Kingdome of God. Their fathers imagined they had massacred all the Prophets, and ne∣verthelesse the Lord reserved to him∣self seaven thousand men, who had not bowed their knees to Ba∣al. 'Tis requisite (mauger all the Wolves) that the Gospel passe from one Pole to the other; That it cause
his voyce to eccho over all that which the Sunne illustrates with his beames, that it glide like a Thunderbolt of fire, as a flash of lightning, even to the most barbarous and savage regi∣ons, and fill their mouths with the memorable and mighty acts of the Lord. God, when it shall be seaso∣nable for his glory, will multiply his own by meriads, when it shall be sea∣sonable, he will cause his Church to out-shine all the Idols of men: To the intent, that as he caused (miraculously) the Rod of Aaron to flourish among the twelve:Num. 17. laid on the Tabernacle by the Tribes of Israel; he ratified and confirmed his High Priest against the murmure of the people; after the same sort, having caus'd his Church to flourish above all false do∣ctrines of men, he shall by so much the more confirme his own. When it shall be seasonable, he will smite our enemies with dimnesse, as he did the Inhabitants of Sodom, who would have forc't the house of Lot, wherein he had withdrawn two of his Angels.
When it shall be convenient, he will silence these Vultures and these Ravens, who foretell epidemical ca∣lamities, these fire-brands and incen∣diaries who come to light again the flames, and to foment the sparks of our adversities: he will stifle and si∣lence these Trumpets of sedition; these bloody voyces, these stomachs of Iron and of Brasse, who howle (with∣out intermission) to procure the de∣struction of Christians. When it shall be seasonable, he will cause to rebound on their ac∣count,Luk. 11.51 the righteous blood spilt from that of Abel, even unto that of Zecha∣ry, who was slain betwixt the Altar and the Temple: and from that of of Zecharie, even untill this day. But these dayes shall come in that rank, which he hath ordained for them by his providence, who now calls us to suffer affliction with con∣stancy. We know that the Nations ought to exalt themselves against us,Mat. 24.6. that we must be led before Governours and Kings, for Christs Name sake.
Our nearest relations must deliver us to death, we must be afflicted, we must be hated,☞ we must behold the a∣bomination fore-told by Daniel the Prophet: we must be torn as sheep by the Wolves; we must suffer hun∣ger and thirst, we must be Vagabonds in Desarts, and to endure persecuti∣on in every place; but our reward is great in heaven, and the same hath been practic'd against the Pro∣phets. We are blessed to suffer persecution for righteousnesse, and to manifest that we are the Children of God in patience, in anguish, and in labours; we are happy to be guided through these dusky nights to the desired ha∣ven of our repose. Our bodies are blessed to suffer these stripes which heal their wounds, and more blessed our souls to receive them to their salvation. We shall relish somewhat of sweet∣nesse in our sufferings of repose in our inquietudes, we shall blesse our lives, and magnifie our miseries. Fear not then, the wolves who have power but over the wooll: but
fear God who hath puissance over our ouls. Let's fear God, who saith, that he ho taketh not his Crosse, and cometh ot after him, is not worthy of him: who foretold,Mat. 13.13 Mat. 10.33 that we shall be hated for is Names sake, but he, who shall en∣sure to the end, he shall be saved: who saith, that he who shall deny me before en, him shall I deny before my hea∣venly Father: If after having recei∣ved the cognizance of the truth, we abandon Christ, there remaines no o∣ther sacrifice for our sinnes, but a hor∣rible expectation of the judgment of God, and a servent and violent fire that must devoure his adversaries; if any man had contemn'd the Law of Moses, he died, without mercy upon the testimony of two or three;Deut. 19.15. how much more rigorously shall he be pu∣nisht, who hath abandon'd the Sonne of God, and the Blood of his Cove∣nant? to him belongeth vengeance: It is a terrible thing to fall into the hand of the living God. Go to then, let's take felicity (as St. Paul) in our infirmities, render∣ing our bonds, celebrous and mani∣fest:
let's rejoyce for that our names are written in the heavens, let's watch, let's be firm in the Faith, fortifying our selves:2 Cor. 12.10. that our light may shine before men,Phil. 1. and 13. to the intent that they may glorifie the mighty God of Jacob,1 Cor. 16.13. who is our strength and our retreat. Declaring that op∣pression, that persecution,Mat. 5.16. that the perill and the sword, cannot sepa∣rate us from the love of Christ:Rom. 8.54. shew∣ing that neither death, nor life, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, can separate us from the love of the Saviour of the world, who hath given his life for all:2 Cor. 5.15. to the intent that they who live, may not longer live to them∣selves, but to him who is dead, and who is risen again for them. Let's be with∣out reproach, and harmlesse children of God, Irreprehensible in the midst of a crooked and perverse Ge∣neration, among whom we shine as lights, who hold forth before them the word of life,Phil. 2.15. we are the children of God, Heires of God, Co-heires with Christ; let's endure (then) with him, let's dye for him, to the
intent we may be glorified with him. And esteem with St. Paul, that the sufferings of this present life are not comparable to the glory to come.Mat. 7.25. After that we have built on the Rock, if the Rain descend, the torrents en∣crease, and the winds bluster, we shall not fail to abide firm and stedfast, as the mountaine of Syon; let's per∣sist in one same spirit, let's strive together all with the same courage for the faith of the Gospel,Phil. 1.27. without being (at all) dismayed by our adversa∣ties, and not being never so little removed from the love of Christ, whom God hath Soveraignly raised up, to whom he hath given a name,Phil. 2.9. which is above every name, to the end, that at the name of Jesus every knee might bow, of them who are in heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth, and that every tongue shall confesse, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father. The Kingdome of heaven is that Precious Pearle to acquire which the Merchant sold all his substance, it's his rich stone for the which we ought o cast our selves: hood-winck't into
the Jawes of death: for the which we must alwayes direct our counte∣nance right toward heaven, and con∣temn and neglect the sultery heat and the stormes, the sword and th fire: and for the which men must trample underfoot, the Pride of al the thunderings of men. Not regarding (then) things vi∣sible which are for a time, but the in∣visible,2 Cor. 4.17 which are eternal. Our light af∣fliction which doth passe away, produce in us an eternal weight of excellent glo∣ry.2 Cor. 5.1. If our earthly habitations are de∣stroyed, we have a heavenly dwelling which is not of humane structure. How many of the faithful, o whom the earth is not worthy, have wandred in Desarts and Cavernes  cloathed with skins of sheep, or of Goats afflicted, tormented;Heb. 11.37 and in conclusi∣on are stoned, sawed, scorch't and burnt at a gentle fire, not regarding to be extended with torments, to th intent to obtain a better life? The request made to God by Elias  is it not enough?Rom. 11.3 Lord, they have slain thy Prophets; Demolisht thin
Altars; I onely remain, and they hunt to take away my life. Saint Paul foretold what should befall him, saith he not? I am ready not onely to be bound, but also to dye in Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.Act. 21.13 It's then most certain, that all they who will live according to piety in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution:2 Tim. 3.12. It is certain that the faithful shall have afflictions, in great number:Psal. 34. but the Lord shall deliver them. We are in the Furnace,1 Pet. 4.12 2 Cor. 1.5. but the Spirit of God shall rest upon us; The sufferings of Christ shall abound in us, and so also shall his consolation: Men augment our torments, and he will multiplie his graces: and at the end of the race, our afflictions shall determine, and our souls shall dance with perpetual consolati∣ons. These are the promises of God, this is his Word. The Holy and the Just, the Omnipotent and Eternal, appearing to Saint John, having his aspect like the Sun, when he shineth in his full strength,Rev. 1.16. holding the seaven stars
in his hand, and his voice was like the noise of mighty waters; hath pro∣nounced it with his mouth: you shall have sufferings, the Devil shall cast you into prison, to the intent you may be terrified, but be thou faithful even unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. He who overcometh, shall not be hurt by the second death:Rev. 2.10 To him who overcometh, I will give him to eat of the Tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: To him who overcometh, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and to him will I give a white stone,Rev. 2.7. and on the stone a new name written, which name none shall know,Rev. 2.17. Rev. 2.26. but him who receives it. To him who overcometh, and shall keep my sayings, even to the end, to him will I give puissance over the Nations, and will give him the morning star. Who overcometh, shall be cloathed with white vestments, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life,Rev. 3.5. but will confesse it before my Father and before his Angels.Rev: 3.10.
Who overcometh, him will I ordain a Columb in the Temple of my God,Rev. 3.12 and he shall never go forth more, and I will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, which is the new Jerusalem. Who overcometh,Rev. 3.21. I will cause to sit with me upon my Throne, even as I also have overcome, and am set with my Fa∣ther in his Throne. What hinders us now, what doth obstruct us then to bear afflictions and miseries with constancy? who hin∣ders to surmount and overcome these things? Is it this World? are they our riches? Alas, why change we not chearfully and willingly our lands, our habitations, and our lives, for repose, for felicity, for eternal beatitude? Our life is short, wherefore for so short a time do we renounce a perpe∣tuity of blessednesse, of the ages of Paradise? Our life passeth in an instant, why (for to preserve a few dayes) do we precipitate our soules in the A∣bisme? Our life is precious to God, he
holds it, he keeps it in his hands: i he dispose it, 'tis for his honour, 'tis for our preservation,☞ why deny we him this glory, and to our selves this profit? Do we dread torments? there is more of grief and anguish to finish ones life by a long and continued di∣stemper, than by a violent stroak; death is more languishing and tor∣menting in a bed, than in the sight of heaven in an assembly. The Feavers, Convulsions, Ca∣tarrhs are more insupportable and fa∣tal than torments. Christ is present, he exhorts us, he offers himself to us, he invites us, he spreads his armes to receive us; he will open the heavens for our con∣solation, as to Saint Steven, than when the enemies of the Gospel sto∣ned him. He will assist us with his strength, and augment our courage, as he hath done to so many Martyrs, who have en∣dured for his name. Let us not then loyter any longer, committing our selves into his hands; The Lawrels and the Palmes never
cast their leaves, the true Children of God never quail. The love of heaven doth so ravish them, they are after such a manner fil'd with that divine fury, so that when nothing remaines to them, but their heart, wherewith they are ac∣customed to contemne the most dreadful things, that continues sound, even to the end of their lives: their souls are invincible, untameable, free, and generous. Let's suffer then with patience, lifting up our hearts to heaven: Let those savage Beasts (which are not satisfi'd but with blood and wounds,) who are not asswaged but with mur∣thers, who are not delighted but with the sounds of racks, having no∣thing agreeable, but to dismember Christians. Let us suffer (if it be the pleasure of God, to deliver us into the hands of these Butchers) if they cause our bodies to stoop under the weight of Martyrdome. Let us suffer, if they redouble their rage, if they do not forbear any kind of cruelty, and as Lyons Whelps fil'd
with flesh, they feed their eyes on our dead bodies; and dabble their hands in our bloody effusions: God will assist us with his power, and will raise us by his Omnipotent Spirit, (when 'tis for the honour of his Name) a∣bove the racks and flames. The most cruel torments shall not be considerable to us, the greatest, most ponderous punishments shall be plea∣sant unto us, these cruelties cannot astonish us, death it self, shall be life. Our faith shall sustain our bodies, seeing them torn, it shall the more encourage us to suffer. Our holy zeal shall delude the most sowre afflictions, will cause us to ad∣vance into flames, without amaze∣ment, we shalconsume our selves, with satisfaction, embracing Martyrdome. We shall imitate those Martyrs, who for such a subject have endured a thousand afflictions, have a thousand times spilt their blood, have sustained a thousand flames. These Martyrs, whose Names and Renowns, have found the earth too narrow to comprehend them.
These Martyrs who have magnifi'd Christianity by their blood, who have accepted Martyrdome for their Crown. These Martyrs, who by a few tor∣ments are gone for ever into Supreme felicity. Up then Barbarians, what havock and slaughter soever you make of our bodies, we remain firme and reso∣lv'd to die. Our bodies are van∣quish't, our spirits remain Conque∣rors. You shall behold us languish full of delight in a divine Martyr∣dome. You shall see our blood boyling with devotion, to distill and trickle into the flames. That our death shall be lovely and beautiful, to be for ever famous to Christianity! That our bodies shall be blessed, to be consumed for the glory of the Saviour of the World! That our blood shall be precious to witnesse, and trace out the way to heaven! That those flames shall be exquisite, which set a lustre on the truth, in the eyes of a throng and
croud of poor Ignorants! That our ashes shall be pretious, to celebrate, publish, and to spread the Gospel a∣mong men! If the earth be glutted with our blood, the example of our Martyr∣dome, will make us re-created by Mi∣riads: if they consume us, as the Phenix, we shall be renewed with∣in our ashes.
Meditations for one that is sick. FRail Creature, in the midst of thy imagina∣tions, thou wastest and consumest thy self, thou straglest, thou wanderest and losest thy self amongst the vanities of the World. Thou runnest out of knowledge in these slippery paths, without under∣standing thy feeblenesse, without considering that at the first step, upon the first advance thou mayst stumble, that a sprain may turn thee quite short, and that thou hast no sooner weighed anchor, than thou art in dan∣ger of Ship-wrack; thy health hath puft thee up, thy courage hath raised
thee up, precipitating thee into plea∣sures and delights: and suddenly a chilnesse surpriseth thee, some heat, a pain in the head, thou art dejected, thou tremblest, thou doubtest whe∣ther it be some light distemper, or rather a disease tending unto death. O Lord, the World to this mo∣ment hath possessed me: her delusi∣ons have intoxicated me: at this instant my sinnes stare in my face, as if I were awaked from a prosound slumber. I begin to recover my spirits, my eyes retort their looks upon my self, to behold my weaknesse, and my bo∣dy tyred and consum'd with the fea∣vour which is mixt with my blood, and with the pain which torments it, is constrain'd to acknowledge her mi∣sery, to reject her Presumpti∣on. Lord, these fogs which obscure heaven to me, begin to fall off, my Soul (so long blinded) recovers some glimmering. I have lived to this very instant, swimming and floating at the plea∣sure
of the Tide, give me grace, that I may arrive at the Port: I have passed my time in darknesse, give me light in the rest of my dayes. Poor Carcasse! thy Original is in infection, thy habitation in a station fil'd with tempests, with diseases, with torments, with bloody wars: in a place common to the savage beasts, upon an ingrateful earth, out of which thou can'st extract nothing, but with the Plow-share and edge of the Iron. For thy end, thy flesh is the prey and triumph of wormes, thy designs and thy grandures are buried with thee in the same shroud. Thy sorrests are reduc'd to a biere, thy buildings to a stone; and yet thou art so blind, so bewitch't with the love of the earth, which dispoyles thee of the knowledg of thy condition, that thou dayly augmentest the number of thy vowes, of thy wishes, of thy desires, which presse thee hourly forward, until God, with the celerity of his ayd prevents thy fall, stretches his hand over thee for to interrupt thee, to make thee behold the vanity of thy imagi∣nations
and cogitations, to make thee feel the earth to totter already under thy feet, that she is ready to re∣demand what thou hast borrowed of her, and to shew thee the fatal pre∣cipices, the horrible depths, and frightful gulfes, within which all thy passions would destroy thee. Bestir thee then, vapour of earth, shadow of life, since the great God descends from his Throne to abase himself even to thee, and to admo∣nish thee. Come then, order and command all thy unworthy, servile and foo∣lish imaginations to retire from thee; dispoyle thy self of man, submit thy spirit unto God, and to thy spirit all the affaires of the World: smother up in thy breast, thy stinking breaths, and permit truth only to proceed out of thy mouth. O Lord, I am dust, compos'd of the earth, my members fram'd of this imperfection, are apt to dis∣solve. I am like the flower, which hath its birth and funeral in the same day, who in twelve houres sees it's spring
and winter, birth and death. I am like the Rose, who in his blooming, regardeth his decline, as the Lillies, who shoots up suddenly to perish; as all the flowers of one morn, which the same instant blooms and fades, which the least wind dry∣eth and causeth to fall. This body increaseth in it's spring time, then cometh its Summer, the winter seases, and nips it, and it ap∣pears no more: the least cold chills it, dispoyles it, as the Trees of leaves, and of its natural vigour: and oft times in its first season, it falls be∣num'd by some glance of thy displea∣sure; thou mowest it in thy fury, as the grasse: one stroak, a feavour stops his course and his life, and so many sundry mischiefs which conspire its destruction, in the end prevaile a∣gainst it, it vanisheth, and choaks its memory. Lord, I am born of the dregs of the World, I acknowledge it most reasonable that I have a sense of it: out of rottennesse, proceeds nought but clay, of corruption, but wormes: The earth hath produc't me, hath
nourisht me to receive its accidents, to participate its wretchednesse. I am unlike the Fishes, who live in the Sea, without relishing of the Salt, and without being distur'bd by the winds and tempests. I am more in∣clin'd to the humours of the earth, I am subject to all its evils; where∣with it abounds and cannot decline their attaints: every day threatens my life, and every houre raiseth me up some affliction; but in the midst of these evils, I must not imitate the Children of the world, which think not but of the edge that wounds them,☞ but of the Catarr that suffo∣cates them, of the heat that burns them: like to beasts who convert their rage to ceaze the stones where∣with they be wounded, and to wreak their spleen with their teeth. It's requisite, Lord, that I raise up my Soul toward thy hand, from whence the stroak proceeded, toward thy arme who darts the stone, toward thee, who reservest (in thy power) the poyson and the antidote, rest and labour, death and life. 'Tis necessary that my afflictions
admonish me to retire my self from these innumerable billowes, to arive again at thy favourable harbour. I ought to fix my eyes on thee, who must serve me as a Star of light, and a Phare during so perilous a voyage: toward thee, who already seems to comply, to commiserate my grief, and to offer thy omnipotence for my re∣fuge. Thou shalt find, Lord, my Soul shattered by the contagion of my bo∣dy and of its senses; neverthelesse, thou remarkest some traces of thy hand, some reliques of thy linea∣ments. Thou beholdest them there sullied, not defast, it's flame and lustre cove∣red, but not extinct: and regarding it in its distressed condition, thou wilt have compassion on thine own image, of the work of thy hands. Thou wilt inspire it with thy holy Spirit, making it glitter again, sparkle and lighten my obscurity, for the time I have to live. Give him then Lord, so much zeal, so much fervour to seek thee, that as hitherto she hath appear'd cold
and lazy: she hath resembled the earth, who depriv'd of the light of the Sun, remains disconsolate and sterill, cover'd over with a profound, troubled silence. But good God, if thou wilt be pleased to disperss some rayes of thy Spirit to enlighten it, incontinent∣ly all her transgressions (in the midst whereof she is buried) will disap∣peare as clouds chased by the wind: This Ice, frozen about his heart, shall dissolve it self, and shall slide and trickle on the ground; and so he perceiving himself discharg'd of all his miseries which opprest him, un∣tangled from so many Passions that bedim'd him, and animated by the power of thy Spirit, she shall present her self before thee, contemplating with delight, on that great day, the last of this life, full of contentment and satisfaction for the Elect, full of ter∣ror, of dolors and horrible sighings for the wicked. But Lord, can I rationally implore thy favour, and thy assistance, seeing that all my actions merit death? can I well require of thee an absolution
from my offences, which already seem fitted and prepared for an Eter∣nal destruction? And this careasse al∣together stuft with vices, cover'd over with ulcers and sores, dares it yet boldly humble it self before thy holy Majesty, whom it hath so many waies provoked, to demand pardon, to supplicate thee not to permit, that the burning furnace, and the horrible Gulf swallow it up? Yes, good God, yes, and with assurance: For what though my sins retyre me far from heaven, never the lesse, the blood of thy Son shed for my clensing, will give me entrance there, his wounds heal mine, rendering thee prompt to pardon me, hindering thee to destroy thine own work-man∣ship. His descent from heaven was made in my favour, He hath quitted his glory to hast to my rescue, by the merit of his death, He hat retyred me from hell, and given me the vi∣ctory over my transgressions. O Lord, since that I am redeemed with so precious a ransome, with so high a prize, since his innocent
blood poured on the earth, recoyles upon me, and flowes on every side of my body to clense it, I will take the boldnesse to present my self be∣fore to thee, and (with assurance) to expect that blessed day, wherein it will please thee to retyre my spirit, and reduce this body to dust. I will contemplate it with satisfa∣ction and delight, that this world doth not properly belong to us, that thou hast given us but the use of it for a time, for a time which thou cuttest, which thou shortnest, at all times, e∣very moment, according to thy plea∣sure. And not being lesse prudent than the savage creatures, who know their dens, and love them; and the foules, who desire their nests, and they please themselves there: I will lift up my soul, and direct my eyes toward my true and natural Country, wherein I ought to trust, toward that heaven, wherein pleasures are heap't upon delights, wherein (at all seasons) the beauty of the amiable spring, flourisheth, in such delightful cogitations, I shall find ease to my mallady, the refreshment proper to
extinguish and sweeten my scortch∣ing. In these pleasant fountaines I shall draw out waters and liquors to allay and temper my feavour, and my heat: and plunging my self into these holy streames I shall despise all other remedyes, as being but an aggravation and fomentation of my paine; and although, that where-ever I stay my self, my body pains me. Neverthelesse I shall receive more of ease in the contemplation of my misery and of thy Grandure; of the quantity of my offences, and the multitude of thy graces, which they have not, which give not themselves but to be inquisitive after divers re∣medyes, which they esteem healthful; and find a way and a means to pro∣voke them to sleep by the harmony of resounding voyces. I seek not my recovery in the sub∣stance of rootes and herbs, but in the might of thy hand, who hath made the plant to spring, and hath given it it's encrease. I shall not seek my rest in diverting my self from the remembrance of my
mallady, but in reducing to my me∣mory, the wretchednesse of my con∣dition, in representing to my self that fancying a thousand conceptions in my brain. I was neare swallowed in the Bil∣lowes and over-flowings of my de∣fires, that I have a long time borne the wound in my heart without sense, or without complaint, that I well nigh imitate the fish who swallow (at the same time) the bait and death: That this world never affords me a cheerful look, dains not to smile on me; that afflictions have ever clouded my countenance, that my pleasures are fill'd with torments, my hopes with dispayres, that the course of my afflictions have been equal to those of my dayes. Briefly, that I have been a subject to all accidents that hang over the head of man, that I am the Butte and white, against which all the crosses and mis-fortunes of the world, let fly and discharge their shot, and their arrowes. And so, Lord, I constrain and force not my self to expect my reco∣very
in the vertue of herbs. I sooth and flatter not my mallady, and de∣ceive not my pain in stupifying and benuming my spirit, or otherwise diverting it: I seek not my recove∣ry in flight, but contrarily, I feel the inequality of my pulce, and the difficulty of my respiration: I will consider how my mallady is fixt, that it is rooted, that it holdeth off my body, and that I beare in my sto∣mack the spring and receptacle of heat and cold which consumeth me: and that all the parts of this body cease their operations and sunctions, through the grief that afflicts them, and not longer able to support it, fail, and yield to death. Behold me then, gracious God, as the Bird in crossing the otian, and not finding where to pirch her self af∣ter she hath long laboured with her wings, in the end drops down wea∣ry, and not able to struggle longer, into the sea and death. I have walked among the paths of this world, the Thornes have pricked me, the Brambles have offended me, the stones have made me to stumble,
the strokes have bruised me, they have batter'd me, the feavours have weakned me, I have search't for me∣dicines and emplasters, I have ap∣plyed splinters to sustain my bones, I have swallowed bitter juces to drive away my distempers, I have sustained and propped this poore cottage on all sides: but (in conclusion) 'tis necessa∣ry that it ravel, that it crack, that it sink under it's proper weight: I per∣ceave Lord, that it slacks, that it dissolves, that it growes loose: I behold on the other side that my soul the which she depresseth, distasts and cleers himself of him by degrees, as not longer able to contain it. But alas, It is very requisite, this poore carcasse cannot ever draw his yeares under so heavy a bondage, it cannot last ever, 'tis necessary that in the end she render her self to this deafe and inexorable death, who yields not to any prayres, who comes to surprize him without noyse, and demands his debt without agreeing to delay. In conclusion, I must (after having so long course over the sea, slaves to
stormes and tempests,) enter the haven, which I have toucht already, that I am already entering into; It's expedient that I retyre out of the croud and throng of the world, to a more pleasant conversation, and that I sustaine this assault and attempt without palenesse, without amaze∣ment, and without a dejected spi∣rit. How! I'st not more expedient, I fall once for all, than alwayes to re∣maine tottering? wherefore decline I the terminating of this life, which to me is a passage to a thousand better lives? why should not death be agree∣able, since she comes to unloosen the bonds which fetter me so closse to anguish and misery? why make I difficulty to embrace death, to ob∣tain heaven, and everlasting delights and pleasures, and to arive at the haven where the feare of death shall neare approach? Shall I doubt, Lord, that 'tisnot seasonable to dye (since 'tis but to live better) till the wayes to live fail; shall I preserve my life to my torment? no, good God, no, I will march confidently unto death,
I will commit my self to thee, who hold'st (in thy hands) the number of my yeares, the bounds and markes of my life. I will cast my self into thy embra∣ces, to the intent thou shalt dispose of thy Image and thy clay, according to thy good pleasure. I will constantly suffer the law of my condition, and the decree pro∣nounc't by thy mouth. Moreover good Lord, what can I farther expect of my so frail life, so feeble, so subject to lose it self? what can I hope farther of the continuance of this body, which hath endured so many miseries, that hath suffered so many evils, that hath been so of't menac't, and that so ma∣ny light occasions hath so varyed it's condition? can it be but this smoak must sometime vanish, and that this dust should be carryed a way with the wind? observe I not that the strongest, the most sturdy, and most healthful are but light shadowes, who must sud∣denly encrease the number of the dead? That these great thunder-bolts of war find themselves not armed a∣gainst
death? That these beautiful tresses, these white breasts, the line∣aments of these graces are not ex∣empt, and that fame it self who tri∣umphs over time and death, in the end, tumbles into it's obscure abode? perceive I not how easily old age sur∣prizes us, and crumbles our carcasses under the weight of his yeares? how highly our dayes glide away. That the present makes way to the future, that importunes it, that pres∣seth it, that treads on it's heels; that our yeares are consum'd by months, the months passe away by dayes, the dayes glide by houres, and the houres by moments, and that encreasing to be, we advance our selves to decrease, and be no more? Perceive I not Lord, that in this world all things incline to their de∣struction, posting to their period? marching and running into death? and notwithstanding that there are some works of thy hand very durable, yet neverthelesse there is nothing that is permanent. Witnesse those great and proud Cities, who find themselves sudenly
devoured and suddenly swallowed by earth-quakes. Those nations grown in∣solent by their long rule & authority, who behold themselves in an instant, mowed down by millions, by the Pe∣stilence. I shall therefore prepare my self good God, cheerfully to obey thy Or∣dinances, I shall contemplate on my infirmity which by degrees cuts off the use of this life. I observe that my fall is already far advanc't, that death mixes and con∣founds it's self through out my life. I shall joyfully and cheerfully re∣ceive, and (with an unastonish't countenance) that which it pleaseth thee to ordain for this poor creature, and shall not be of their number, who submit to thee by constraint, because the winde carryes them, be∣cause the celestial decrees, (who e∣ver conserve their puissance) draw them from above, and because they understand, that in vain, they should resist thy invincible power, which tames and surmounts all things, wherefore (then) esteeme I not my
self blessed to have an entyre and ab∣solute deliverance from my suffer∣ings, and to go and triumph with the ever blessed Citizens in heavenly joyes and delights, who feel not any griefs nor distempers? wherefore (af∣ter having so long turn'd & tost,) ha∣ving so long time floated at the plea∣sure of the waves and floods, do not I please my self to have attain'd the shore, and to appear in the Port? why should not the haven be agree∣able, from whence I see a far off, the Sea swelling, stir'd up and enraged by the tempest, to lift it self up to the clouds, and the Billowes foaming, to sink the ships, or cast them against the Shelves and the Rocks to break them; and my self in the mean time, freed from ship-wrack? Up, arise my soul, thou art here far off from perfection, fix not thy eyes longer on the earth, with-draw thy sight from the miseries of the world, efface them out of thy fan∣tacy. Imitate the Pilgrim, who seekes the fresh and the cool shadows to ease him of his travel.
Up up my soul, remember thy self, that God gives not admission into his pleasant Syon, but by the sa∣cred gate of a blessed issue out of this world: abandon the night, to enjoy that Sun, quit these desolate fields, and desarts, to enter into these quarters of flowers: come out of these endlesse Gulfs of mischiefs, to live in these fulnesse of bles∣sings. Up, rouze thy courage, fortifie thy zeal, embrace this Divine pre∣sent. Embrace this passage to ascend to heaven; Follow chearfully thy God, who will catry thee for ever into his holy Temple, all resplendent, and glittering with glory and felicity, where thy eyes shall perfectly behold him, whom thy spirit adores, where thine age shall remain firm, where thou shalt be rendred more sparkling and bright than the Stars, where thou shalt behold the earth under thee, and the day to issue and break from under thy feet. O wretched vessel, which the waves, which the winds and the Pi∣lot
direct and steer to such contrary courses! that thou shalt be happy to have power speedily to traverse these dangerous Shelves and Rocks of this life, to behold thy self in all safe∣ty and shelter, in a freedome, in a place of rest, in a place where tran∣quility and peace inhabit for∣ever! O my soul, that thou shalt be con∣tent, freed from the vexations of the world, to understand those holy notes, and that sweet, that pleasant, and Divine harmony of heaven, which so many millions of Angels render unseasantly unto the Lord! Quit then thy shackles and thy prison,☞ render thy self into his hands who hath formed thee, and will car∣ry thee into this holy habitation, wherein repose is infinite, the satis∣faction eternal, and riches without measure: where thy cogitations shall have no other aime than thy God, thy eyes no other object than his glo∣ry: where thou shalt flourish in an eternal spring,☞ and shalt breath no∣thing but most perfect and absolute felicity.
Praise, praise, this Divine He∣rald, which comes intimating the day of thy departing, that thou must cease to live, and disrobe thee of thy de∣sires: imitate the swans, who in dying, render their voyces most har∣monious, being the last day of their songs. Good God, I am without colour, without vigour, and without moti∣on, unlesse that which perturbations of minde causes; a thousand cares gnaw my spirit, and a thousand snares of solitude entangle in my cogitati∣ons, and hold me straightly fixt to their sorrowes: the same distemper, the same grief, equally labours my body and my soul. I miserably languish in this poor carcasse, which surfeits on sorrows, and savours of nothing but the Cof∣fin: My soul is stuffed with ignorance and gloominesse, with ice and cold∣nesse, 'tis stupid and heavy: but by thy grace, in one instant, she will mount her self into heaven, she will be fil'd with splendour and light, she shall be ravish't in the contemplation of the beauty of thy Divinity, she
will be partaker of joyes not to be ex∣prest, and with contentments, the only contemplation whereof begets an ardent desire in my will: she shall adorn her brow with a wreath, the folyage whereof shall ever flourish, and never wither: she shall bathe her self in thy Divine spring, there to draw water, and drink, to the in∣tent never to thirst more; to the end, that that draught should be made a fountain of living water in her, flow∣ing into life eternal. O holy stream, Current of joy, and entyre delight, Eternal Source which never dryes up, that my soul might ever repose under thy shadow, that it might draw the sweetnesse of thine ayre, let her live in the admira∣tion of thy perfections. This Lord, is the ardent desire that inflames me, 'tis the only vow which possesseth my heart: the health of this body concernes me not, her greatest age is not so much as one poynt to the price of the eternity of my soul, and then 'tis necessary to return to earth, to be fashioned anew, that she may dye in Adam, to be
born again in Christ, that she may descend into the grave, to come forth immortal; that she must hide her self under the earth, even to the day that thou comest to awaken on a sudden, raising it up to glorifie it: until that great day, which shall surprize all hu∣mane designs: Thou shalt make this All, to shiver at the sound of the Trumpets of thine Angels, which shall Harp before the Saviour of the world, who shall gloriously descend from the vaults of heaven, all those whom the Sea hath overwhelm'd, or the earth received: to the intent that being clothed with their bodyes, be∣fore the great Judge, they may receive their definitive sentence of life or death. O Lord, that I may be of their number, who shall arise to their glo∣ry; and not of them who shall arise to their infamy: that I may be of them who shall rejoyce with perpetu∣al Triumph, and not of those who shall for ever remain slaves of that horrible Monster. That I may be of that number that may be borne into the brightnesse of
heaven, and not of those that shall be tumbled down into gloomy places, and to eternal night: That I may be a Citizen of thy heavenly habitation, that I may inherit thy Paradice, that my seat may be near my Saviour, that my place may be there designed, that I may not be of those victims pre∣par'd for Hell: that I may not be of that number that shall be precipated into the abism of death, which shall have their abode in darknesse, and their habitation in the grave. O good God, suffer not my Barke to fall into so cruel, so sad and dis∣mal a storme! It should be more expedient for me never to have been born, than be ranck't in the number of them who were created to their destructi∣on. Bring to passe (then) at that great day, that my rotten cossin may be listed up, enlighten this extinguish't carcase, cause it to live and shine with my soul, make them to flourish together for ever and ever. I am nothing Lord, but a lump of mud, yet never the lesse thy hands
have compast me: I am nothing but corruption, but I bear on my brow thine Image drawn to the life: I am all vice, all sinne, all abomina∣tion in thy sight. Thy love makes no impression farther than my lips, Thy Divine flame pierces not within my soul. But Lord, I have been washed with the water of holy Baptism, I have participated of thy Sacraments, I have received a seal, a token, a sa∣cred testimony of my pardon. I have sucked that powerful anti∣dote, that immortal Ambrosia, that heavenly nourishment which shall concerve me against the poyson and venome of my sinnes, and against the power of Satan. Lord,A lively Descripti∣on of the last Judg∣ment. it seems to me, that I alrea∣dy behold thee descending from on high, set on thy Throne of Glory, filling all with astonishment, en∣vironed with a Million of Angels, holding the sword of vengeance in thy hand. It appears to me, that I now be∣hold an infinite company of scatter'd men, delving the earth to hide them∣selves,
not daring ot sustain the bring flames of thy countenance: that I behold the flock of thy chosen postrate at thy feet, crying out, that the squadrons of thy holy Angels dare not appears in reverence of thy just se∣verity: crying out that their souls were purchase by the precious blood of thy body. That their sinnes are surmounted by thy grace, that the ho∣nour of thy goodnesse is manifest in their salvation, that thou wilt not cut and prune off thy members, and reject those whose names are written in thy book of life. It seems that I behold thy counte∣nance turn'd toward them, standing at thy right hand, and thy mouth pro∣nouncing their absolution, and say∣ing to them, Come ye blessed of my Father, possesse for heritage the Kingdome which was prepared for you, from the foundation of the World. Methinks I behold them rejoycing and filling themselves with splendour while thou art speaking, beholding them transported by a sweet and de∣lightful ravishment, by an ardure full
of zeal for thee, and for thy glory, to remain there for ever. O good God, 'tis thither that we must direct all our vowes, and confine all the desires of our soules; 'Tis the lustre of that glorious and holy day that should dazle our eyes, and not the riches of this world: 'Tis the remem∣brance of these extream bright and perfect beauties, which should ever entertain our thoughts, and not the dark shadowes of our cares. Bestir thee, (then) let's not longer stay on these earthly cares, which are so many spiritual Divorces and Adul∣teries. My Soul, entertain not other dis∣course, my heart have no other wish∣es, my mouth pronounce no other name, than that of our Saviour, and thy salvation. Let's up, and anchor here our bark, in these fair desires let's perfect this man, finish this body, let's forbear to corrupt and ulcerate our wounds, to encrease our woes, to open again our miseries; that our dolors, that our convulsions, that our fleames, (if it seem good to them) hail us quick,
and drag us alive to the Tomb: that our carcasses be consum'd with wormes, that our bones may be re∣duc't to dust, it matters not, seeing that the Saviour of the world renders as possessors of the fruit of so signaland happy a victory, that he bestowes on us, our share and lot in his land, that he covers us with Lawrels and with Palmes. O God, this Crown is very high, 'tis above this aspiring rock, whose way is narrow and uneven, incumber'd with thornes and bryars. I lye tumb∣ling on my Bed, I cannot pull up my feet, not raise my head above my bolster: my carcasse is nothing but dung, and my Soul then corruption; I am laden with a counter-wait, which ever presseth me down, my of∣fences are bolts and shackles on my feet, which makes me ever stumble; The Devil places them near, the a∣venues to close up the passage, to render the way dreadful, and to drive me to despair of my salva∣tion. But what shall I say good God! I must not require the endeavours of
my attenuated legs, and my carcasse half benum'd to climb this Moun∣tain, to pierce the thicknesse of the clouds, and raise my self even to the heighth. 'Tis onely requisite that I dive into the contrition of my heart, the con∣fession of my month: I need but lift up my eyes, and taise up my cogitati∣ons toward the great Saviour of the World, who openeth his armes to transport me. O my Rock, thou art not then any longer hard for me to prevail with: Christ the object of my faith, Christ the only medicine who can close and consolidate my wounds: Christ, in whom I establish all my present and future felicity. Christ my guide, and my Bare star who must conduct me to the light of his ensign; he shall open to me the way, shall make my faith to surmount all despaires; he shall deliver me from these hindrances; he shall raise me up free, and conduct me even in∣to heaven; making me mount by his divine degrees, and shall guide (by the might of his holy Spirit) my
blessed and happy soul into his high place, where the seasons passe eter∣nally. I will leave (to him) this Tri∣umph. I will leave to him the ac∣complishment of this great work, the honour shall be to his blood, to his blood, the only vertue whereof shal fix & establish this handful of earth higher than the heavens; I already perceive the rayes of his divine grace, which begin to shine over my soul: I feel (in my self) the assistance of his holy Spirit. Away then all worldly cares, get you behind me, be packing, and ap∣proach no more. You are nothing but corrupt water, but rottennesse, then infection, in respect of those heavenly beauties, of those odoriffe∣rous and fragrant flowers, which cast forth so sweet a sent, which surpri∣seth my spirit, and ravisheth me in the contemplation of them. But good God, pain and torment, cuts off my speech, whilst I implore thee, consider my malady, which re∣inforces it self, which redoubles its violence: It appears to me, that my
feavour is obstinate to revenge (on my flesh and on my bones) the of∣fences committed against thee; the heat stifles me, the chilnesse causeth the members of my feeble carcasse to shiver, to sustain, and endure a thousand torments; I can do no more but sighth, and bemoan my self, I languish all wounded, quite undone, and my vigour hourely wasts and decayes; I am thirsty, my mouth is dry, I can find nothing that can quench my infinite drought: my fea∣vour takes away from me the relish of every thing, all liquors seem bitter, all food is against stomach, their very sight is nautious, not so much as the thought, I swallow my spittle instead of all nourishment. Alas Lord, I well perceive what will become of me, I cannot longer resist the assaults of so many evils: all the succours of the earth are too feeble to heal me, my countenance droops, its extinct, my members be∣gin to feel the rigour of death: I tosse and tumble up and down, I stretch my self, and am no more: I court a little repose, a little sleep,
but it flyes me, I can obtaine none. Alas, formerly my repose descend∣ed, and dropt so pleasantly into my eyes! The night was accustomed to bury all my cares, to give truce to my labours, to enclose all my torments, in a grateful slumber. I ever ad∣journ'd my trouble untill the day, untill the Sun came to open mine eyes: But now Lord, I cannot with great difficulty, close my eyes to slum∣ber, but instantly I waken my self, affrighted with the terrour of a thou∣sand dreams, with a thousand hor∣rible visions, which appear before me successively. The silence of the night, which was so agreeable to me, at present redoubles my horrours: my eye-lids are inclined to watch perpe∣tually, my infirmity increases dayly! its rigour and violence recovers new force every moment, and op∣presseth me, the more it gains upon me. Lord, thou hast made adversity, as saith the Prophet Amos; thou hast created it, as saith Isaiah; and no∣thing
comes upon us but by thy just providence, as Job hath acknowledg∣ed in the extremity of his afflicti∣on. Alas, my God? thy judgments are perfect, I feel the effects of thy fury, the weight of thine Arme: I submit and render my self to thy mercy, cure not my evil by another, apply not remedies more sharp than the distem∣per, have pity on my suffer∣ings. At least, Lord, prevent that the tediousnesse of my pain discompose not, offend not, nor overturn my spirit: continue my judgment to me, to the intent that I may employ that little time which remaines to medi∣tate and consider thy graces, and to beg my pardon. Lord, thou hast caused waters to flow out of the rock, and to refresh thy people in the Desart: cause to spring (out of my faith) a fountain to refresh my scaldings, and to give intermission to my evils, to the end, that my soul (fil'd with a divine zeal) may wholly raise up her self to hea∣ven, and civert from this carcasse,
the sense of its miseries. Lord, Lord, approach thee near to me, my voyce cannot convey my sorrowes even to thy eares, and so my miseries shall surpasse my plaints. Lord, from thy Royal Palace, from thy holy and sacred Throne thou considerest all that is acted here be∣low. Alas, incline thy countenance to my aid & assistance; redouble not more the extremities of my feavour, augment not my sufferings, I understand good God, that by the destruction of this car∣casse my Soul must enter into its felici∣ty: but cause what remains to dissolve easily, cause that my natural faculties diminish by degrees: and that my Soul may depart gently, and, from the midst of this bed, she may fly to thee. Lord, my breath is so short, my infirmity is so violent, my disso∣lution is so near, that I behold no∣thing but the shadow of my Coffin, and the depth of my grave which at∣tends me. My half dead body, makes me utter interrupted speeches, my words vanish in my mouth, and wil∣ling to continue my complaints, I
cannot make an end. Alas, good God, I fear that my voyce will forsake me, strengthen me for awhile, or at least be so gracious, that in my Soul I may acknow∣ledge my faults, and obtain thy pardon. Grant me, (that the short time I have to live) may be nothing else but a penitence for my sinnes, and a meditation of thy goodnesse: that I may not delight but in the sound of thy voice, that thy holy volume may be in lieu of a pillow: that my heart, that my spirit may breath forth and contemplate thy praises. Lord, my distemper is so violent, that it suffocates me, yet notwith∣standing it oppresseth me not so much as the vast number of my sinnes, which I observe hasting before me, and the punishment that followes. I tremble, when I turn my eyes to∣ward thee, great God, revenger of iniquities, which enlightneth and pierceth through the shadowes, and remarkest the tracts of all my offen∣ces: Thou beholdest my conscience without any vail, without ornament,
all my cognitations are open to thee, the past and present are both alike be∣fore thee, thou readest during the course of my life, the train of my offences that I have committed, thou beholdest thy enemy in my habitati∣on, thou findest him inclosed in my bosome. My voyce should ever sound in thy eares, it ought incessantly to cause thy praises to eccho upon the earth: (on the contrary) my mouth hath ever been open to blasphemies, closed to thy Word. Thou hast given me a spirit to know thee, a heart to adore thee, hands to stretch forth to the support and relief of my neighbour: I am revolted from thee, I have despised the afflicted, and have avoided the path of the poor and needy, fearing their ran-counter, I have avoided their company, as if I had dreaded to behold them. When thy heaven hath thundred, I have stopt my eares, I have rendred my self deaf. When thy Sun hath cast forth his beames upon me, I have made my
self blind: when thou hast sought af∣ter me, I have fled away, when thou hast called me, I have not answered, when thou hast corrected, I have been hardned at thy stroakes; Inlieu of sacrifising my life for thine honour, I have continually betray∣ed thy service: I am abandoned to vices, I have serv'd riches, the fol∣lies and vanities of the world, the exe∣cutioners of my life. I have been immoderate and ex∣cessive in every thing which is contra∣ry to thy pleasure, without having other bound than an imbicility to ad∣vance farther. My memory Lord, is not suffici∣ent to comprehend and enumerate such a multitude of crimes; and I now have more bashfulnesse to nomi∣nate them, than I had shame to act them. Also Lord, what need the trouble to recount them, seeing they present themselves, they oppose themselves against me, accusing and confound∣ing me: seeing that the least, but lately committed, is sufficient for my damnation, without the trouble
to search after the past, which serve not but for astonishment, how the nature of man could invent and com∣mit so many mischiefs. Behold them, Lord; they fail not to passe into my remembrance, and as an heavy burthen, presse me so sore, that I am ready to yield, to give my self up to dispayre, and to lose my self. Lord, I cannot so much as deny them, I have committed them, they were acted in thy sight, in thy pre∣sence: with a feeble, fearful, and astonish't voyce, I acknowledge them, and am vanquish't: the fear that I have (beholding their great number) hath frozen my heart, and appaled my countenance. And (on the contrary) consider∣ing the rigour and strictnesse of thy judgments, my sense fails me, and I attend nothing but the hour of pu∣nishment. I will willingly lye down instantly (half quick in my grave) and in expi∣ring, draw the earth over me, to the intent I may remove my self from be∣fore thy Justice, so much do I dread
that thy hand will wax heavy against me to destroy me. I am like the poor Publican, who durst not lift up his eyes towards thee, I dare not so much as entertain any imagination of remission for a cri∣minal so culpable; I dispayre to a∣void them, even as undergoing the exemplar-punishment of my abomi∣nable practises: The depravity of my manners, renders the severity of thy censures sharp against me: and I know that no man hath place in thy eternal felicity, but those that are clensed from sin, who are not fully∣ed with the spots of iniquity, who have submitted and dedicated (to thy service) their hearts and their toungs: as for me I have done quite other∣wise. Neverthelesse, Lord, thou wilt not bruise in thine indignation those whom thou hast created after thine own Image. Thou wilt not precipitate into the gulf, and forsake (abandoned to the roring Lyon) those who are graffed and regenerated in that great Media∣tour, in the grand Saviour of the world.
On the contrary, Good God! Thou hast commanded us to pray to thee in his name, Thou hast promis∣ed to hear us in his name, Thou hast assured us that when our sins are as red as vermillion, nevertheless thou wilt make them as white as wool, see∣ing we have recourse to that Treasure of our Justification, to that only Re∣deemer, to that only Authour of our salvation. Now, O Saviour of the world, O Precious Stone, O Spirit of my Spirits, I embrace thee, I discharge the burthen of my sins upon thee, I ease my self upon thee. Thou art purposly descended here below, thou art clothed with out flesh, thou hast made thy self man, to the intent that I might be able to speak to thee: Thou hast stretc'h forth thy limbs on the Crosse, thou hast shed thy blood, thou haft seen it distil from thy wounds all vermil∣lion, to heal my mortal sores, to dround my sinnes, to cloath me again with innocence: Thou hast suffered death, to give me the life. Thou hast made thy self the oblation
and most immaculate offering, to take upon thy self the pains which I have meritted: Thou hast yielded thy self captive to set me at liberty, of immortal, thou hast made thy self mortal, to the intent that of mortal, to render me immortal: Thy ver∣tue ever flourisheth, that never wax∣eth old, display it over me, approach, touch my sins, and they shall dissolve away as wax before the beames of thy Sun, they cannot remain near thee, thy sight shall be their flight, thy pre∣sence their dissipation: Thou shalt efface their steps, and their strag∣lings. Thy hand can bruise the gate of hell, thy hand can lift me up into the heavens, and make me to ascend by the ladder that appeared to Ja∣cob. Lord, I cannot sufficiently com∣prehend thy infinite goodnesse to∣wards persons so vile and unwor∣thy. If I contemplate the excellence of thy Divinity, in thy descent unto the earth, or whether I consider them to whom thou art come, I admire
the Grandure of thy charity: and far∣ther Ruminating thereon, I call to mind the happinesse of thy humane condition: The Creatour of hea∣ven and of earth, The Omnipotent, who is not displeas'd, but with man, is descended for man, and made himself man: is come to save him from the torture of the fire, and the horrors of hell, and hath taken his forme: the Physitian is hasted to the succour of the diseased, the Master to ransome the slaves, the streight path presents it self to the straglers; Life of∣fers it self to the carcasses enclosed under the Tombs; the Shepheard is descended from the top of the moun∣tain, to seek the straying sheep; He hath again lifted them up on high, and enclos'd them in his Fold: The Hen hath gathered her chickings un∣der her breast, hath made a shield with her wings, to protect them from the Ravenous Kite. Now, good God, drive far from me those doubts which Satan goes a∣bout to frame in me, assure me, comfort my spirit, fortifie my faith, redouble it's strength, make her to
vanquish all fears, all the dispayres which he would suggest unto her: En∣able her to repel all allutements and assaults of all his temptations: She must not longer be affraid, she may not longer tremble, hell can have nothing against me, seeing thine on∣ly Sonne hath taken my sinnes upon him, because he hath wash't me with his pure blood; after it hath pleas'd thee to allow (on mine ac∣count) the value of his satisfacti∣on. If thou art pleas'd Lord, to pro∣ceed with me according to my de∣serts, I should be far distant from a∣ny such happinesse, my salvation would be desperate: There was ne∣ver any contention with so much dis∣proportion, the weapons are too unequal, my fault is extreame, so is thy Justice; But Lord, thy mer∣cy is infinite, thy goodness surpas∣seth my mallice, Thou coverest my faults with the body of thy Son, by his merit thou hast satisfied thy Justice: Thou hast given me life, there thou concervest me, I hold of thy clemency.
Lord, Thou hast spoken (by the mouth of thy Prophets,) that thou art nigh to such as are of a broken heart, and that thou deliverest such which have contrite spirits. Lord, thou contemnest not the afflicted, thou hidest not thy face from them, forget not then my op∣pression: forget not my afflictions, which are violent and permanent: forget not the sorrowes of my heart which are augmented. Lord, my Soul is consumed, even to the dust; my belly cleaves to the earth: Hear then, my God, myclamour, and my supplication, and forbear to aggravate my torments: regard my afflictions and my travel, and forgive me all my offen∣ces. Lord, I suffer in my groanings, I mingle my Couch with my tears, I am pierc't with afflictions on the bed of languishing: The earth is not ca∣pable to deliver me out of this extre∣mity; The heavens alone have the glory of the medicines that are requi∣site for me. Make hast then to come to my deliverance, my God, who
doth dayly comfort me in my distresse, and shelter me in all my stormes. Lord, I am afflicted that I cannot depart, more than that I cannot live: But, good God, who hast freed from death the great Shepheard of the flock, by the blood of the perpetual Covenant, turn thy compallionate countenance towards my torment, and cause it to shine upon me in joy and in salvation. Lord, thou hast instructed me to understand my end, and what is the wretchednesse of my dayes. But good God, since thou hast ordain'd that I must die, cause me to depart in thee, that Imay live again; I have sinned, my God, I have displeased thee, I have a thousand and a thousand times every day provoked thy fury, but thou art the God of my deliverance: I am washt, I am sanctifi'd, I am justified by thy grace in the name of Jesus Christ; who hath taken my sor∣rowes upon him, and charged my of∣fences upon himself. I am a fellow-Citizen of the Saints, of thy Hous∣hold: I am built upon the foundati∣on
of the Prophets and the A∣postles. Pardon then my sinnes, Lord, in the name of thy well-beloved Son, correct me not in thy displeasure nei∣ther chasten me in thy fury; have mercy on me that am destitute of strength. I beseech thee my God, in the bitternesse of my Soul, in the words of the Propher David. Lord, heare my request, and make my supplication come unto thee: Hide not thy face from me in the time that I am in cala∣mity, encline thine ear unto me in the day that I cry unto thee, hast thee to answer me: for my bones are dryed as an hearth, and they cleave to my flesh by reason of my groaning; and my time vanisheth away like smoke, and as a shadow which passeth away, and as for me, I am become withered as the grasse. Lord, I said once again with Da∣vid, Eternal, reprove me not in thine indignation, thine arrowes have pierc't me, and thy hand hath over∣whelm'd me: there is no entire part in my flesh, there is no rest in my
bones, by reason of my sinne, for mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are too weighty, as n hea∣vy burthen above my strength; I am bowed down, and swerve beyond measure: I am weakned and bruised more and more. Lord, all my desires are before thee, and my afflictions are not hid from thee. Forsake me not my God, be not far from me, hast thee and help me. All my hope is in thy mercy. Lord, thou hast spoken by the mouth of thy Prophet Esay, I have heard thee in an acceptable season, and succoured thee in the day of salvati∣on. My God, now behold the agree∣able time, see now the day of salvati∣on. Be thou now Lord, my Rock, and my Fortresse, be thou my Delive∣rer, and sure Retrait. The snares of death hath surpriz'd me, destruction hath environ'd me, but I lift up my self to thee my God: hearken to my supplication from thy holy place, and let my cry enter into thine ears. Give me by thy free mercy the wa∣ges and entire reward, notwithstand∣ing
that I entred not into thy Vine∣yard till at the close of the day: shew me thy sight, give me life eternal after this fleeting, languishing and cransitory life, and assure me of heaven, to the intent that the grave swallow me not up for ever. Grant me, my God, that when the Saviour of the World shall appear, I may appear with him in glory. Grant me that I may accompany that infinite number of thine, which shall be before the Throne cloathed in long white Robes, holding Palms in their hands, and that I sing with a loud voyce with them, salvation is of our God, who is set upon the Throne, and of the Lamb. Wash my garment, and cleanse it in his in∣nocent blood; to the end, that I may eternally serve thee in his holy Temple, wherein I shall never suffer hunger nor thirst, that I be no more molested nor distemper'd with the Sun, nor with the Winter, nor with miseries; my tears and my pains wip't away with thy hand. O Lord, I am at the last gasp of my life, in the agony and shadow of
death; to thee I direct my latest vowes, my last words: All my acti∣ons have not been better than vanity, in respect hereof. Good God, arme not thy self with vengeance against me, I render to thee my penitent Soul, deploring, languishing, which savours of nought but earth and dust, to which this car∣casse shall be incontinently reduc't. I oppose my cryes, my tears, my re∣quests, my plaints, and my groans a∣gainst my condemnation and my fall. Let the confession of my mouth, the contrition of my heart cause thy Sword to tumble out of thy hands; let my gasping move thy goodnesse, magnifie not thy power and might against a languishing, attenuated, immoveable carcasse: against withe∣red grasse, laid on the earth, expect∣ing nought but to be driven away by the smallest blast: I am at my end, I neither have more power nor heart to offend thee: but I may still serve thee, to publish thy elemency, the foundation of my hope, and thy bounty, the spring of my life. I am thine from the Cradle, thou hast san∣ctified
me: I have been redeem'd and ransom'd by the blood of thy Son, who died innocent to give life to the guilty: by the blood of thy Son, who must open to me the door of felicity. I have my recourse to him, I beseech thee in his Name: It is not reaso∣nable that my sinnes should violate me in so holy a Sanctuary. Rouse thee good God, a rise speedi∣ly, the extremity of my affliction will not admit any delay: to the end that these sinnes, be not too powerful for me: hearken to my prayers, give me strength to prevail against these bil∣lowes, that drive me off from the heavenly shoar; hast thee to absolve me: preserve (in thy hands) my Soul, lest it remain a prey: drive these sins our of thy presence, which are the work of thine enemy, and Lord pardon me, that am the work of thine hands. Lord, I render praise for that thou hast made me capable to participate of the heritage of Saints in thy light: for that thou hast delivered me from the power of darknesse, and hast transported me to the Kingdome of
thy well-beloved Son, in whom I have deliverance, and remission from my sins. Lord, I perceive the establishment of thine assistance, I feel my self re∣plenish't with thy Holy Spirit, who effaces my transgressions, and ravish∣eth my Soul even unto heaven, to shew him the inheritance which the mercy of thy Son hath bestowed on me, in thy presence. O good God! how blessed shall I be to hear from thy Holy Spirit, that the last of my dayes, shall be the first of my repose, that I am not farther from my satisfaction, than the length of the last groan of my life. I am ap∣proaching Lord, to thy Throne of grace with assurance, to obtain mer∣cy by the vertue of my High Priest, who hath compassion on my infirmi∣ties. I am coming to behold thee face to face, whereas now I discern thee but darkly, as in a mirrour: I am quitting these miseries, for a ful∣ness of delight; from these dolors, in∣to the Mountain of Syon; from this Militant, to the Triumphant Jerusa∣lem; from this World, to the City of
the living God. I voluntarily cease to live on the Earth, to survive in heaven; I contentedly part with this wretched life, for that which is most happy: I chearfully quit my self to follow thee, I abandon this carcasse, and render my Soul into thy hands. FINIS.
