6509 S1084 52633142 173956
Londons Tempe, OR, The Feild of Happines. In which Feild are planted seuerall Trees of Magnifi∣cence, State and Bewty, to Celebrate the Solemnity of the Right Honorable Iames Campebell, At his Inauguration into the Honorable Office of Praetorship, or Maioralty of London, on Thursday the 29 of October, 1629. All the particular Inuentions, for the Pageants, Showes of Tri∣umph, both by Water and land being here fully set downe, At the sole Cost, and liberall Charges of the Right worshipfull Society of Ironmongers. Written by THOMAS DEKKER. Quando magis Dignos licuit Spectare Triumphos? coat of arms or blazon
To the Right honorable Iames Campe-bell, Lord Maior of the most renouned Citty of London. Honorable Praetor: THe Triumphes which these few leaues of paper, pre∣sent to your vew, (Albeit their glories are but short-liued as glittering onely for a day) Boldly show their faces vnto the eye of the world, as Seruants attending on your Lordship onely to doe you honor. With much care, cost and curiosity are they brought forth; And, with exceeding greatnes of Loue, a free han∣ded bounty of their Purse, a Noble and generous Alacrity of Spirit, haue your worthy Fraternity, and much to be honored Brother-hood of Ironmongers, bestowed them vpon you. It much winnes vpon them, to haue such a Cheife; and you cannot but be glad to haue such a Society: By a free Election are you Londons Praetor; The Suffrages of Commoners call you to your seate. A succession to the place, Takes you by the hand, your Industry hath met with Blessings, those blessings giuen you ability, and that ability makes you fit for a Maiestrate. Yet there is a musicke in your owne bosome, whose strings
being touchd yeilds as harmonius a sound to you, as All theis: And that is, to see your selfe heire to that Patrician Dig∣nity with which your Father was Inuested. Jt was an ho∣nor to him to weare that Robe of Scarlet, It it a double glory to you, in so short an age to haue his sword borne be∣fore you. You haue the voyce of Senators breathing out your wel∣come, A confluence of Graue Citizens, Adding state to your state, The acclamations of People, vshering you along. Whilst I (the least part of this Triumphant day) spend such sand as I haue to helpe to fill vp the houre glasse, my Ser∣uice ronning. Attending on your Lordship Thomas Dekker.
Londons Tempe. WEre it possible for a Man, in the Compasse of a Day, to behold (as the Sunne does) All the Citties in the World, as if he went with Wal∣king Beames about him; That Man should neuer see in any Part of the yeare, Any Citty, so Magni∣ficently Adorned with All Sorts of Tryumphes, va∣riety of Musicke, of Brauery, of Bewty, of Feastings, of Ciuill (yet Rich) Ceremonies, with gallant Lords and Ladies, and Thronges of People as London is in∣riched with, on the first Day, that Her Great Lord (or Lord Maior, for tis all one) Takes, That Office vpon him. In former Ages, He was not Encompast with such Glories, No such Firmaments of Starres were to be seene in Cheape-side: Thames dranke no such Costly Healthes to London, as hee does Now. But as Troyno∣uant spred in Fame, so our English Kinges, shined vpon her with Fauours. In Those Home-spun Times, They had no Collars of SS, no Mace, Sword, nor Cap of Maintenance,
These came by Degrees, as Additamenta Honoris, ad∣ditions or Ensignes of more Honour, Conferd by se∣uerall Princes on this Citty: For, in the time of Ed∣ward Confessor, the chiefe Ruler of the Citty was called Reeue, Greeue, or Portreeue: The next to him in autho∣rity, Prouost. Then in the first of Richard 1. two Bayliffes carried the sway: This continued till the ninth of King Iohn, who by Letters Patents gaue the Citizens power, yearely to choose themselues a Lord Maior, and two Sheriffes. Then, King Henry 3. made the first Aldermen in London (yet the Name of Ealdorman was knowne in the Saxons time, for Alwin in the reigne of Edgar, was Alderman of All England, that is to say, Chiefe Iustice:) and those Aldermen of London, had Rule then (as Now) ouer the Wardes of the Citty, but were euerie yeare changed, as the Shreiffes are in these dayes. Then Edward 1. ordained that the Lord Maior, should in the Kings absence, sit in all Places within London, as Chiefe Iustice; And that euery Alderman that had bin Lord Mayor, should be a Iustice of Peace for London and Middlesex all his life after. Then, in the reigne of Henry 7. Sr. John Shaw Gold∣smith, being Lord Maior, caused the Aldermen to ride from the Guild-hall to the water side, when he went to take his Oath at Westminster, (where before they Rode
by land thither,) and at his returne to ride againe to the Guild-hall, there to dine, all the Kitchens, and o∣ther Offices there, Being built by Him: since which time, the Feast has there bin kept: for before, it was ei∣ther at Grocers Hall, or the Merchantaylors. Thus small Rootes grow in time to Caedars, shallow streames, to riuers, and a Hand of Gouernment to be the strongest Arme in a Kingdome. Thus you see London in her meane attyre, then in Robes Maiestical; and sitting in that Pompe, cast your Eye, vpon those alluring Obiects, which she her selfe Beholds with Admiration. The first. The first Scaene is a Water-worke, presented by Oceanus, King of the Sea (from whose Name the Vni∣uersall Maine Sea is called the Ocean) He, to celebrate the Ceremonies and Honors, due to this great Festi∣uall, and to shew the world his Marine Chariot, sits Triumphantly in the Vast (but Queint) shell of a sil∣uer Scollup, Reyning in the heads of two wild Sea∣horses, proportioned to the life, their maynes falling about their neckes, shining with curles of gold. On his head, which (as his Beard) is knotted, long, carelesly spred, and white, is placd, a Diadem, whose Bottome, is a conceited Coronet of gold; The middle ouer that, is a Coronet of siluer Scollops, and on the
top a faire spreading branch of Corrall, interwouen thickly with Pearle. In his right hand, a golden Tri∣dent, or three forked Scepter. His habit is Antique, the stuffe watchet, and siluer: a mantle crossing his body, with siluer waues, Bases, and Buskins cut likewise at the top into siluer scol∣lups. And in this language he congratulates his Lord∣ship. Oceanus his Specch. THus Mounted, hither comes the King of waues, Whose voyce Charmes roughest Billows into slaues, Whose Foote, treades downe their necks with as much Ease As in my shelly Coach, I reyne vp These. Lowd Ecchoes cald me from my glittering Throne To see the Noble Thamesis;— A Sonne To this my Queene and Me () whose Eare Ne're Ieweld vp such Musick as sounds Here. For, our vnfaddomd World, Roares out with None But Horrid Sea-fights, Nauies Ouerthrowne, Ilands halfe-drownd in Bloud, Pyrates pell mell, Turkes slauish tugging Oares, The Dunkerks Hell, The Dutchmans Thunder, And the Spaniards Lightning, To whom, the Sulphures Breath giues Heate & Heightning, O! These are the Dire Tunes my Consort sings, But here! old Thame out shines the Beames of Kings. This Citty Addes New Glories to Ioues Court.
And to All you, who to this Hall resort, This  via (as a Path) is giuen, Being Pld with Pearle, as that with Starres in heauen I could (to wll my trayne) Becon the Rhine. (But the wylde Boare ha tusked vp his vine.) I could Swif Volga Call, whose curld head lies On seauen  pillowes, (But, in merchandizs The Russian, him imployes)-I could to theis Call Ganges, Nilus, long haird Euphrates, Tagus whose golden Hands claspe Lisbone walles, Him could J call too, But what neede theis calles? Were they all here, they would weepe out there eyes, Madde that new Troys high towers on tiptoe rize To hit Heauens Roofe: Madde, to see Thames this day (For all his age) in wanton windinges Play, Before his, new Graue Praetor, and before Theis senators, Best fathers of the poore. That Grand Canale, where (stately) once a yeare A Fleete of bridall Gondoletts appeare, To marry with a golden Ring, (Thats Hurld, Into the sea) That minion of the world Venice to Neptune,-A poore Lantscip is, To these full Brauereis of Thamesis. Goe therefore vp to Caeasars Court,-And clayme What honors there are left to Campe-bels name As by disent, whilst we tow vp a tyde Which shall ronne sweating vp by you barges side:
That done, Time shall Oceanus Name Inroll, For guarding You to Londons Capitoll. The second Presentation. The Inuention is a Proud swelling Sea, on whose Waues is borne vp, a sea Lyon, as a proper and emi∣nent Body, to Marshall in the following Triumphes; In reguard it is one of the supporters of the East In∣dian Company, of which his Lordship is free, and a great aduenturer. And these Marine creatures, are the more fitly imployed, In regard also, that his Lord∣ship is Maior of the Staple, Gouernour of the French Company, and free of the East-land Company. On this Lyon (which is cut out of wd to the life) rides Tethys wife to Oceanus, and Queene of the Sea; for why should the King of waues be in such a glorious progresse without his Queene, or she with∣out him? They both therefore twin themselues toge∣ther to heighten these solemnities. Her haire is long, and Disheuelled, on her head, an antique sea-tyre, encompast with a Coronall of gold and pearle, her garments rich, and proper to her quality, with a Taffaty mantle fringed with siluer crossing her body. Her right hand, supporting a large streamer, in which are the Lord Maiors armes. On each side of this Lyon, attend a Mermaid, and
Merman, holding two Banners, with the Armes of the two New Shrieues, seuerall fishes swimming as it were about the border. And these two hauing dispat∣ched on the water, hasten to aduance themselues on Land. The third. The third show is an Estridge, cut out of timber to the life, biting a horse-shoe. On this Bird rides an In∣dian boy, holding in one hand a long Tobacco pipe, in the other a dart. His attire is proper to the Country. At the foure angels of the square where the Estridg stands, are plac'd a Turke, and a Persian. A pikeman & a Musketeere. The fourth. The fourth presentation is called the Lemnian Forge. In it are Vulcan, the Smith of Lemnos, with his seruants (the Cyclopes) whose names are Pyracmon, Brontes & Sceropes, working at the Anuile Their habite are wast coates, and lether approns: their haire blacke and shaggy, in knotted curles. A fire is seene in the Forge, Bellowes blowing, some filing, some at other workes; Thunder and Lightning on occasion. As the Smiths are at worke, they sing in praise of Iron, the Anuile and Hammer: by the concor∣dant stroakes and soundes of which, Tuballcayne be∣came the first inuentor of Musicke.
The Song. BRaue Jron! Braue Hammer! from your sound, The Art of Musicke has her Ground, On the Anuile, Thou keep'st Time, Thy Knick-a-knock is a smithes Best Chyme, Yet Thwick a-Thwack, Thwick, Thwac-a-Thwac-Thwac, Make our Brawny sinewes Crack, Then Pit a-pat-pat, pit-a-pat-pat, Till thickest barres be beaten flat. We shooe the Horses of the Sunne, Harnesse the Dragons of the Moone, Forge Cupids Quiuer, Bow, and Arrowes, And our Dames Coach, thats drawne with Sparrowes. Till thwick-a-thwack, &c. Ioues Roaring Cannons, and his Rammers, We beate out with our Lemnian Hammers, Mars his Gauntlet, Helme and Speare, And Gorgon Shield are all made here. Till thwick-a-thwack, &c. The Grate which (shut) the Day out-barres, Those golden studdes which naile the starres, The Globes-case, and the Axletree, Who can Hammer these but Wee. Till thwick-a-thwack, &c.
A Warming-panne to heate Earth's bedde, Lying ith frozen Zone halfe-dead, Hob-nailes to serue the Man ith Moone, And Sparrow-bils to cloute Pan's shoone. Whose worke but ours? Till thwic-a-thwack, &c, Venus Kettles, Pots and Pennes, We make, or else she Brawles and Bannes, Tonges, Shouels, Andirons haue their places, Else shee scratches all our faces. Till thick a-thwack, &c. Cupid sits in one place of this Forge; on his head a curld yellow haire, his eyes hid in Lawne, a Bow and Quiuer, his armour. Wings at his backe; his body in light colours, a changeable silke mantle crossing it: Golden and siluer arrowes, are euer and anon reached vp to him, which hee shootes vpward into the aire, and is still supplied with more from the Forge. On the top sits Ioue, in a rich Antique habite, a long white reuerend hayre on his head, a beard long and curld: A Mace of Triple fire in his hand burning who calling to Vulcan, This language passes betweene them. Ioue. Ho Vulcan. Vul. Stop your Hammers: what ayles Ioue? We are making arrowes for my slip-string sonne, Here, —reach him those two dozen; I must now A golden handle make for my wifes fann: Worke my sine Smugges.
Ioue First heare; you shall not play, The Fates would scold should you keepe Holiday. Vul. What then? Iov. Command thy Brawny fisted slaues to sweate At th' Anuile, and to dust their Hammers beate, To stuffe with Thunderbolts Ioues Armoryes, For Vices (mountaine-like) in black heapes rize, My sinewes crack to fell them:— Ideot pride Stalkes vpon stilts, — Ambition, by her side, Climbing to catch Starres, breakes her necke it'h fall, The Gallant Roares, — Roarers drinke oathes and gall, The Beggar curses, — Auarice eates gold Yet ne're is fild, — Learning's awrangling scold, Warre has a Fatall hand, — Peace, whorish Eyes, Shall not Iove, beate downe such Impieties? Ist not high time, Ist not true Iustice then (Vulcan) for thee, and thy tough Hammer-men To heate thy Anuile,—and blow fires to flames To burnethese Broodes, who kill euen with their Names? Vul. Yes Ioue, tis more then Time. Iove. And what helpes this, but Iron! O then, how high Shall this Great Troy, Text vp the Memory Of you her Noble Praetor, and tall Those (Your worthy Brotherhood) through whose Care goes That rare, rich prize of Iron, to the whole Land, Iron! farre more worth then Tagus golden Sand. Iron! best of Mettals! Pride of Minerals!
Hart of the Earth! Hand of the World, which fals Heauy when it strikes home: — By Irons strong Charmes Ryots lye bound: —Warre stops her rough Allarmes Iron; Earthquakes strikes in Foes: — Knits friends in loue, Iron's that maine Hinge, on which the World doth moue: No Kingdomes Globe can turne, Euen, Smooth and Round, But that his Axletree in Iron is found: For, Armies wanting Iron, are puffes of wind, And, but for Iron, who thrones of peace would mind? Were there no gold nor siluer in the land: Yet Nauigation (which on Jron does stand) Could fetch it in —Gold's Darling to the Sunne, But Iron, his hardy Boy, by whom is done More than the Tother dare: The Merchants Gates By Iron, barre out theeuish assassinates: Iron is the Shop-keepers both Locke and Kay, What are your Cours of Guard, when Iron's away? How would the Cornepricke vp her golden Eares: But that Iron Plough shares, all the labour beares In Earth's strange Midwiffry? Braue Jron! what praise Deserues it? More tis beate, more it obayes; The more it suffers: More it smoothes offence: In Drudgery, it shines with Patience. This Fellowship, was then with Iudging Eyes Vnited to the twelue great Companies: It being farre more Worthy, than to Fill A File inferiour; — You's the Sunne's guilt Hill:
On toot: Ioue guardes you on: Cyclopes a Ring Make with your Hammers, to whose Musicke Sing. The Fift. The fift Presentation is called Londons Tempe, or The Field of Happinesse; thereby redecting vpon the name of Campe-bell, or Le Beu Champe, A faire and glo∣rious field. It is an arbor, supported by 4 Great Termes: On the 4 Angles, or corners ouer the Termes, are pla∣ced 4 Pendants with armes in them. It is round about furnished with trees and flowers: the vpper part with seuerall fruites: Intimating that as London is the best-stored Garden in the Kingdome for Plants, Herbes, Flowers, Rootes, and such like; So, on this day it is the most glorious Citty in the Christian world. And therefore Tytan (one of the names of the Sun) in all his splendor, with Flora, Ceres, Pomona, Ver and Estas, are seated in this Tempe; on the top of all stands a Lyons head, being the Lord Maiors Crest. Tytan being the Speaker, does in this language court his Lordship to attention. Tytan his Specch. WElcome (great Praetor) Now heare Tytan speake, Whose beames to Crowne this Day, through Clouds thus Breake My coach of beaten gold is set aside,
My Horses to Ambrosiall mangers tied, Why is this done? why leaue I mine owne Sphere? But here to circle You, for a whole Yeare: Embrace then Tytans Counsell: —Now so Guide The Chariot of your sway in a Iust Pace, That All (to come hereafter) may with Pride, Say, None like you did Noblier quit the Place▪ Lower than Now you are in Fame, Neuer fall, Note me (the Sunne) who in my Noone Careere, Renders a shaddow, short or None at all, And so, since Honors Zodiac is your sphaere, A shrub to you must be the tallest Pine, On poore and rich you Equally must shine. This if you Doe, my Armes shall euer spread About those Roomes you Feast in:—From her head Flora, her garlands plucke (beeing Queene of Flowers) To dresse your Parlors vp like summers Bowers: Ceres, lay golden sheaffes on your full boord, With fruit you from Pomona shall be sloard, Whilst Ver and Estas (Spring and Sommer) Driue From this your Tempe, Winter, till he Diue I'th frozen Zone, and Tytans Radiant shield Guard Campe-bels Beuch ampe, Londons fairest field. The sixth and last Presentation. This is called Apollo's pallace: because 7. persons representing the 7 liberall Sciences are richly Inthro∣ned
in this Citty. Those 7 are in loose roabes of seue∣rall cullors, with mantles according, and holding in their hands Escutcheons, with Emblemes in them proper to euery one quality. The body of this worke is supported by 12 siluer Columnes. At the foure angles of it, foure Pendants play with the Wind. On the top is erected a square Tower, supported by foure golden Columes. In euery square is presented the Embosd antique head of an Emperour, figuring the 4. Monarches of the world, and in them, pointing at foure Kingdomes. Apollo is the chiefe person; on his head a garland of bayes; In his hand a Lute; Some Hypercriticall Cen∣surer perhaps, will aske, why hauing Tytan, I should bring in Apollo, sithence they both are names proper to the Sunne. But the yongest Nouice in Poetry can answer for me, that the Sunne when he shines in hea∣uen is called Tytan, but being on Earth (as he is here) we call him Apollo. Thus therefore Apollo tunes his voyce. Apoloes speech. APollo neuer stucke in Admiration till now: My Delphos is remouen hither; my Oracles are spo∣ken here: Here the Sages vtter their wisedome, Here the Sybels their diuine verses. I see Senators this day in Scarlet riding to the Ca∣pitoll, and to morrow the same men riding vp and
downe the field in Armors Gowned Citizens, and Warlike Gowne-men. The Gunne here giues place, and the owne takes the vpper hand. The Gowne and the Gunne march in one File together. Happy King that has such people, happy Land in such a King! Happy Pretor so grac'd with Honors! Happy Senators so obayed by Citizens. And happy Citizens that can command such Triumphes. Good in your full glories: whilst Apollo, and these Mistresses of the Learned Sciences, waft you to that Honourable shore; whither Time bids you hasten to arriue. A speech at Night, at taken leaue of his Lordship at his Gate, by Oceans. AFter the glorious troubles of this day, Night bids you welcome home,—Night who does lay All pompe, all Triumphs, by,-state, now desends, Here or Officious Trayne their seruice ends, And yet not all, for see: the golden Sunne, Albeiu he had his dayes worke fully done, Sits vp aboue his houre, and does his best To keepe the starres from lighting you to rest, Him will I take along to lay his head In Tethys lape, Peace therefore Guard your bedds: In your yeares Zediacke may you fairely moue, Shin'd on by Angels, blest with goodnes loue.
Thus much, his owne worth, cryes vp the Work∣man (M. Gerard Chrismas) for his Inuention, that all the peeces were exact, and set forth liuely, with much Cost. And this yeere, giues one Remarkeable Note to after times, that all the Barges followed one ano∣ther (euery Company in their degree) in a Stately and Maiesticall order. This being the Inuention of a Noble Citizen, one of the Captaines of the Citty. FJNJS.
