B2623B R172927 53981605 180117
Advertisement. A SUPPLEMENT to the New Version of Psalms by N. Tate and N. Brady, containing, 1. THE usual Hymns, Creed, Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments, set to their proper Tunes; with additio¦nal Hymns for the Holy Sacrament, Fe∣stivals, &c. 2ly. Select Psalms done in particular Measures, to make up the whole variety of Metres that are in the old Version, with Duplicates to most of them, and Gloria Patri's with the Tunes. 3ly. A Set of Tunes for all the New Version of Psalms. LONDON: Printed and Sold at Stationers Hall near Ludgate. D. Brown at the Bible with∣out Temple-Bar, J. Wilds at the E∣lephant, Charing Cross, and other Booksellers. {inverted ⁂} This Supplement to be had singly or bound with the New Version. Price in Sheets 6 d.
A SUPPLEMENT TO THE New Version OF PSALMS BY N. Tate and N. Brady; CONTAINING, I. The usual Hymns, Creed, Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments, all set to their proper Tunes; with Additional Hymns for the Holy Sacra∣ment, &c. II. Select Psalms in particular Measures to sup∣ply the whole Variety of Metres that are in the Old Version, with Duplicates to most of them, and Gloria Patri's; and the Proper Tune for each Metre. III. A Sett of Tunes for the foresaid New Ver∣sion of the Psalms. LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, and Sold at Stationers Hall near Ludgate; by D. Brown at the Bible without Temple-Barr, J. Wild at the Elephant at Charing-Cross, and most Booksellers, 1700. Price in Sheets 6 d. to be stitch'd singly, or to bind up with the foresaid Version.
The Usual Hymns, &c. To the PROPER TUNES. Te Deum Laudamus, &c. O God we praise thee, and confess, that thou the on╌ly Lord And e╌ver╌last╌ing Father art by all the Earth ador'd. To thee all An╌gels cry a╌loud, To thee the Pow'rs on high, Both Che╌ru╌bim and Se╌ra╌phim Con╌ti╌nual╌ly do cry,
Thrice holy Lord, the God whom all the heav'nly Hosts obey; The world is with the Glory fill'd of thy Majestick Ray. Th'Apostles glorious Company, and Prophets, crown'd with Light, With all the Martyrs noble Host, thy constant Praise recite. The holy Church, throughout the World, O Lord, confesses Thee; That Thou eternal Father art, of boundless Majesty. Thy honour'd, true and only Son; and Holy Ghost, the Spring Of never ceasing Joy: O Christ of Glory thou art King. The Father's everlasting Son, thou from on high didst come To save Mankind, and didst not then, disdain the Virgin's Womb. And having overcome the sting of Death, thou open'dst wide The Gates of Heav'n to all, who firm in thy Belief abide. PART II. Crown'd with the Father's Glory thou at God's right hand dost sit; Whence thou shalt come to be our Judge, to sentence or acquit. O therefore save thy servants, Lord, whose Souls so dearly cost; Nor let the Purchase of thy Blood, thy precious Blood, be lost. We magnifie thee day by day, and ever worship thee.
Vouchsafe to keep us, Lord, this day from sin and danger free. Have mercy, mercy, on us, Lord! to us thy Grace extend, According as for mercy, we on thee alone depend. In thee I have repos'd my trust, and ever shall do so, Preserve me then from Ruin here, and from eternal Wo. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the God whom we adore, Be Glory; as it was, and is, and shall be evermore. Veni Creator, &c. Proper Tune. First Metre. COme Holy Ghost, Cre╌a╌tor come, and visit all the Souls of thine; Thou hast inspir'd our hearts with life, inspire them now with life divine. Thou art the Comforter, the Gift of God most high; the Fire of Love, The everlasting spring of Joy, and holy Unction from above.
Thy Gifts are manifold; thou writ'st God's Laws in ev'ry faithful Heart: The Promise of the Father, thou dost heavenly Eloquence impart. Enlighten our dark Souls, till they thy Love, thy heav'nly Love embrace! And since we are by Nature frail, assist us with thy saving Grace! Drive far from us the mortal Foe; and grant us to have Peace within, That with thy Light and Guidance blest, we may escape the Snares of Sin. Teach us the Father to confess, and Son, who from the Grave reviv'd, And, with the Father and the Son, the Holy Ghost, from both deriv'd. With thee, O Father, therefore may the Son, who was from Death restor'd, And Sacred Comforter, one God, to endless Ages be ador'd. Veni Creator, &c. Second Metre. COme Holy Ghost, Cre╌a╌tor, come, inspire the Souls of thine, Till ev'ry Heart which thou hast made is fill'd with Grace divine.
Thou art the Com╌for╌ter, the Gift of God, and Fire of Love; The e╌ver╌last╌ing Spring of Joy, and Unction from a╌bove. Thy Gifts are manifold, thou writ'st God's Laws in each true Heart. The Promise of the Father, thou dost heav'nly Speech impart. Enlighten our dark Souls till they thy Sacred Love embrace; Assist our Minds by Nature frail, with thy Caelestial Grace. Drive far from us the mortal Foe, and give us Peace within; That, by thy Guidance blest, we may escape the Snares of Sin. Teach us the Father to confess, and Son from Death reviv'd; And with them both, thee Holy Ghost, who art from both deriv'd. With thee, O Father, therefore may the Son, from Death restor'd, And sacred Comforter, one God devoutly be ador'd. As in all Ages heretofore has constantly been done, As now it is; and shall be so, when Time his Course has run.
Benedictus. The Song of Zacharias. Luke I. v. 68, &c. NOw blest be Isr'els Lord and God, whose mer╌cy at our need Has vi╌si╌ted his peoples grief, and them from bondage freed. And rais'd in faithful David's House Sal╌va╌tion which of old E'er since the World it self began his Prophets had foretold. To save us from our spiteful Foes, and keep his Oath in mind, Which he to Abraham heretofore, and to our Fathers sign'd;
That we, from Fear and Danger freed, his Temple may frequent; And all our Days as in his sight, in holy Life be spent. And thou, O Child, shalt then be call'd, God's Prophet, to declare His Message, and before his Face his Passage to prepare. To give them Light who now in Shades of Night and Death abide; And in the way that leads to Peace our Footsteps safely guide. Magnificat. Song of the B. Virgin. Luke I. 46, &c. MY Soul and Spirit fill'd with joy, My God and Saviour praise; Whose goodness did from poor e╌state his humble Handmaid raise.
Me blest of God, the God of Pow'r, all Ages shall confess, Whose Name is ho╌ly, and whose Love, his Saints shall e╌ver bless, The Proud, and all their vain Designs, he quickly did confound; He cast the Mighty from their Seat, the Meek and Humble crown'd. The Hungry with good things are fill'd: The Rich with Hunger pin'd: He sent his Servant Isr'el help, and call'd his Love to mind; Which to our Fathers, heretofore, by Oath he did ensure, To Abr'am and his chosen Seed, for ever to endure. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the God whom we adore, Be Glory; as it was, and is, and shall be evermore.
Nunc Dimittis. Song of St. Simeon. Luke I. 29. LOrd let thy Servant now depart in╌to thy promis'd Rest, Since my ex╌pect╌ing Eyes have been with thy Sal╌va╌tion blest; Which till this time thy favour'd Saints and Prophets on╌ly knew, Long since prepar'd, but now set forth in all the people's view. A Light to shew the Heathen World the way to saving Grace; But O, the Light and Glory both, of Isr'el's chosen Race.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the God whom we adore, Be Glory; as it was, is now, and shall be evermore. The Creed. I Sted╌fast╌ly believe in God, the Father of all might, Who made this lower World, and all the glorious Worlds of Light. And I believe in Je╌sus Christ the e╌ver╌last╌ing Word; Th'Almighty Father's on╌ly Son, and our most gracious Lord.
Conceiv'd by th' Holy Ghost, and of the Virgin Mary born; By Pontius Pilate doom'd to bear most bitter Pains and Scorn. Was crucify'd; and for a time, both dead and bury'd lay; Descended into Hell; and rose to Life on the third Day; Ascended up to Heav'n; and there at God's Right Hand is plac't; From whence he shall return to judge the Quick and Dead at last. I likewise firmly do believe O Holy Ghost in thee; The Holy Universal Church; and Saints Community. Forgiveness of repented Sins, (through Christ our Sacrifice) The Resurrection of the Dead; and Life that never dies. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the God whom we adore, Be Glory; as it was, is now, and shall be evermore. Lord's Prayer. To the 112 Ps. Tune. First Metre. OUr Father who in Heaven art, Thy Name be hallow'd in each Heart: Thy Kingdom come; may we fulfill, Who dwell on Earth, thy heav'nly Will, With equal Chearfulness and Love As Saints and Angels do above.
Give us this day our daily Bread; Us into no Temptation lead, But with thy Grace preserve us still From Sin, and every thing that's ill. For thine the Kingdom and the Pow'r And Glory are for evermore. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, The God whom all the Sacred Host Of Saints and Angels do adore, All Glory be, as heretofore It was, is now, and so shall be To Ages of Eternity. Second Metre. To any Tune of Common Measure. OUr Father, who in Heaven art, all hallow'd be thy Name; Thy Kingdom come; thy Will be done, throughout this earthly Frame, As cheerfully as 'tis by those who dwell with thee on high; Lord let thy Bounty day by day our daily Food supply; As we forgive our Enemies, thy Pardon, Lord, we crave; Into Temptation lead us not, but us from Evil save; For Kingdom, Pow'r and Glory, all belong, O Lord, to thee; Thine from Eternity they were, and thine shall ever be.
The Ten Commandments. GOD spake these words, O Isr'el hear, what I shall now command, Thy Lord and on╌ly God am I, who with al╌migh╌ty hand From Egypts Land, and from the House of Bondage set thee free: And therefore Isr'el, (1.) Thou shalt have no o╌ther God but me. 2. Thou shalt no graven Image make, nor likeness shalt thou feign, Of any thing that Heav'n or Earth, or wat'ry Deeps contain.
Thou shalt not bow thy self to them, nor outward Worship pay; Much less shalt thou, in Heart, adore, and to an Idol pray. For I thy God, a Jealous God, the Father's Sin chastize To third and fourth Descent, of all who are my Enemies: But Mercy do to thousands shew, and bounteously repay All those who me sincerely Love, and my Command, obey. 3. The Sacred Name of God thy Lord thou never shalt profane, For God will them not guiltless hold who take his Name in vain. 4. Remember thou the Sabbath Day to keep with holy care; Six Days for Labour thou shalt take, to finish each Affair: But God, thy Lord, the Seventh Day his Sabbath did ordain, In which thou shalt from ev'ry kind of worldly Work refrain. Thy self, thy Children, Servants, then, from Labour shall be free, Thy Cattle, and the Stranger, whom thou tak'st to dwell with thee. For God thy Lord the solemn space of six whole Days did take, The Heavens, Earth, and Seas, and all therein contain'd, to make; But rested on the Seventh Day, which for that cause, he blest, And sanctify'd it to be kept a Day of holy rest.
5. Honour thy Parents, that thou mayst both long and happy live, In that blest Land which God, thy Lord, did for thy dwelling give. 6. From Murder. (7.) From Adultery. 8. And Theft thou shalt forbear: 9. Nor falsely shalt in any case against thy Neighbour swear. 10. Thou shalt, not covet House, or Wife, or Man, or Maid of his, Or Ox, or Ass, or ought whereof he rightful Owner is. Have Mercy therefore on us, Lord, and all our Hearts incline With Diligence and Care to keep these righteous Laws of thine.
Additional HYMNS which may be Sung to any of the Tunes of Common Measure, printed to∣wards the end of this Supplement. Song of the Angels at the Nativity of our Blessed Saviour. Luke II. from v. 8. to v. 15. WHile Shepherds watch'd their Flocks by Night all seated on the Ground, The Angel of the Lord came down, and Glory shone around. "Fear not, said he, (for mighty Dread "had seiz'd their troubled Mind) "Glad Tidings of great Joy I bring "to you and all Mankind; "To you, in David's Town this Day "is born of David's Line, "The Saviour, who is Christ the Lord; "and this shall be the sign: "The heav'nly Babe you there shall find "to humane view display'd, "All meanly wrapt in swathing Bands, "and in a Manger laid. Thus spake the Seraph, and forthwith appear'd a shining Throng Of Angels praising God, and thus addrest their ioyful Song; "All Glory be to God on high, "and to the Earth be Peace; "Good-will, henceforth, from Heav'n to Men, "begin and never cease.
EASTER-DAY. 2 Cor. .7.SInce Christ our Passover is slain a Sacrifice for all; Let all with thankful Hearts agree to keep the Festival Not with the Leaven, as of Old, of Sin and Malice fed; But with unfeign'd Sincerity, and Truth's unleavn'd Bread. Rom. 6.9.Christ being rais'd, by Pow'r Divine, and rescu'd from the Grave Shall die no more, Death shall on him no more Dominion have; v. 10.For that he dy'd, 'twas for our Sins he once vouchsaf'd to die, But that he lives, he lives to God for all Eternity: v. 11.So count your selves as dead to Sin, but graciously restor'd, And made, henceforth alive to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the God whom we adore, Be Glory; as it was, is now, and shall be evermore. Second HYMN. Cor. 5.20.CHrist from the Dead is rais'd and made the First-Fruits of the Tomb, For, as by Man came Death, by Man did Resurrection come. v. 21.For as in Adam all Mankind did Guilt and Death derive, So, by the Righteousness of Christ, shall all be made alive.
Coloss. 3.1.If then ye risen are with Christ, seek only how to get The things that are above, where Christ at God's right hand is set. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the God whom we adore, Be Glory; as it was, is now, and shall be evermore. For Whit-Sunday and Trinity-Sundays may be sung the Te Deum and Veni Creator. Hymns for the H. Communion. HYMN I. Out of the Revelation of St. John. Ch. 4.THou God, all Glory, Honour and Pow'r art worthy to receive, Since all things by thy Pow'r were made, and by thy Bounty live. Ch. 5. v. 12.And worthy is the Lamb, all Pow'r, Honour and Wealth to gain, Glory and Strength; who for our Sins a Sacrifice was slain. v. 8.All worthy thou, who hast redeem'd and ransom'd us to God, From ev'ry Nation, ev'ry Coast, by thy most precious Blood. Blessing and Honour, Glory, Pow'r, by all in Earth and Heaven, To him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb be given.
HYMN II. Rev. Chap. 19. V. 5.ALL ye who faithful Servants are of our Almighty King, Both high and low, and small and great, his Praise devoutly sing! v.Let us rejoyce, and render Thanks to his most Holy Name; Rejoyce, rejoyce, for now is come the Marriage of the Lamb. His Bride her self has ready made, v. 8.How pure and white her Dress! Which is her Saints Integrity and spotless Holiness. O therefore blest is ev'ry one who to the Marriage-Feast And holy Supper of the Lamb is call'd a welcome Guest. HYMN III. The Thanksgiving in the Church-Communion-Service. TO God be Glory, Peace on Earth, to all Mankind Good-will! We bless, we praise, we worship thee, and glorifie thee still: And thanks for thy great Glory give, that fills our Souls with Light; O Lord! God! Heav'nly King! the God and Father of all Might. And thou, begotten Son of God before all time begun; O Jesu Christ, God, Lamb of God, the Father's only Son!
Have Mercy thou that tak'st the Sins of all the World away: Have Mercy Saviour of Mankind, and hear us when we pray! O thou who fitt'st at God's right Hand, upon the Father's Throne, Have Mercy on us, thou, O Christ, who art the Holy One: The Lord, who, with the Holy Ghost, whom Earth and Heav'n adore, In Glory of the Father art most high for evermore. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Nation being at this time much inclin'd to Psalmody, and the New Version of Psalms ha∣ving the Royal Allowance, and Recommendation of the Archbishops, Bishop of London, and other Fa∣thers of the Church; This Supplement was thought Requisite to make up the whole Variety of Metres, that are in the Old Version, with Duplicates to most of them, and Gloria Patri's: The want of which has partly occasion'd the Disuse of many excellent Tunes: All which Tunes and Gloria Pa∣tri's, being printed in this Supplement, may so far accommodate those who sing the Old Version, and be acceptable to those Persons who employ their Fa∣culty in the laudable and pious Work of Teaching Psalmody in either Version. And for further Accommodation, here is likewise added, a Collecti∣on of all the most usual Tunes both of Common Measure and Others.
PSALMS done in particular Measures to make up the whole Variety of Metres that are in the Old Version, with their proper Tunes. PSALMS to the Tune of the Old 50th Psalm. Psalm XLVII. O Clap your hands ye people shout & sing To God the great and u╌ni╌ver╌sal King; 'Twas he subdu'd whole Nations of our Foes Then for our Lott the Pride of Jacob chose. God is gone up, the Lord is high ascended With trumpets sound & shouts of Joy attended.
To God the great and Universal King, Exalted Praise, with Understanding, sing! The Heathen he rules from his holy Throne; Whom he, in time, shall call and make his own: Whose Chiefs shall joyn with Saints, by him elected; For by his Pow'r the Earth is all protected. Gloria Patri, &c. To Father, Son, and Spirit ever blest, All Honour, Praise, and worship be addrest; As it was done in Ages long ago, As now it is, and shall continue so To the last Bounds and Date of Time extended, And still endure when Time his Course has ended. PSALM XCIII. To the same Tune. WIth Glory crown'd, and matchless Strength array'd, So firmly God the World's Foundation lay'd, That like his Throne, it shall remain the same, Till he who made, dissolves the mighty Frame.
For he is God, in Majesty transcending, That always was, and never shall have ending. His louder voice, in Thunder from the Skie, Makes swelling Floods, and warring Seas comply. His Promises to all who him adore, Shall, like himself, endure for evermore. Who in his Courts, expect to have their Dwelling In Holiness must always be excelling. Psalm CXVII. To the same Tune. IN Praise to God, let all the People join, And distant Lands, in praising him combine; 'Tis just, the World should all, his Bounty praise. Since that extends, to all the World its Rays: Then let Mankind, with one consent, persever, In praising him, whose Praise endures for ever. GLORIA PATRI. TO Father, Son, and Spirit ever blest, Immortal Praise, and Glory be addrest As it has b en, in Ages long ago,
As now it is, and shall continue so; Beyond the Date and course of Time extending: For Time must cease, god's Praise shall have no ending. Psalm LXIV. Toe the Tune of the Old CIV Psalm. OUR God bless us, all with Mercy and Love; The cherishing Beams of Favour bestow; That Earth his just dealings may see and approve,
His healing Salvation, all People may know. Let therefore Mankind, O God, praise thy Name, For joy, shout and sing. to see thy just ways: With Wisdom thou govern'st, the World's mighty Frame. Let therefore all Nations, O God, give Thee Praise, Then shall the glad Earth, afford her increase; And God, our own God, still present appear, To bless us and ours, with Plenty and Peace; And Earth's remote Borders, of Him stand in Fear. Psalm XXIV. To the same Tune THE Praise of our God, all People repeat; Throughout the wide World, his Triumph extend Whose Mercy and Kindness To us are so great! Whose Love has no limit. his Truth has no end. GLOR. PATR. TO Father, Son, Spirit, all Praise be addrest;
By Angels and Saints, of ev'ry Degree: To God in three Persons, One God ever blest; As it has been, now is, and ever shall be. To the Tune of the Old CXI. The same Psalm. WIth my whole Heart, thy Fame, O Lord, I will proclaim. in all the Peoples sight. The Works that thou hast wrought Are great, and duly sought, of all whom they delight.
God's Work is nobly vast, His Truth shall always last, his works of wondrous fashion, Shall still be kept in mind; The gracious Lord is kind, and full of sweet compassion. With Plenty he has stor'd, Those who his Name ador'd; His Promise firmly stands: His Pow'r he did express, And made his Saints possess, The vanquish'd Heathen Lands. His Works are just and pure; All his commands are sure, And shall endure for ever; In Judgments ballance weigh'd; And by the Model made Of Truth that varies never. His People first he freed; Then, with the chosen Seed,
A solemn League did frame, That they for evermore, Devoutly should adore, His holy, awful Name. To fear th'Almighty King, of Wisdom is the Spring; They only, who persever, His Precepts to fulfill, Have true and saving skill: His Praise endures for ever. Psalm CXXXI. To the same Tune. THOU, Lord, my Witness art, I am not proud of Heart, Nor cast a scornful Eye. I have no vain Desire, Nor do my Thughts aspire, at Things for me too high, But with an humble mind, Contented and resign'd, I have my self demeaned, All innocently mild, And peaceful as a Child, that from the Breast is weaned. Let Isr'el then like me, For succour, Lord, on thee, with humble trust rely; Make thee his only stay, Ev'n from this present Day, to all eternity. GLOR. PATR. TO praise the Father, Son, And Spirit, Three in one; let all true Saints persever, As 'twas in Ages past, Is now, and so shall last, for ever and for ever.
To the Tune of the Old CXII. The same Psalm. HOW blest is he, and only he, Who fears the Lord, and loves his Law, His Seed on Earth, renown'd shall be, And Blessings on their Off╌spring draw; His House in wealth shall never fail; His Justice shall his Heirs avail. To him shall Light in Darkness rise; Kind, Good, and Just, he gives and lends; While prudent management supplies, What he in Charity expends. The sweet remembrance of the Just, Shall flourish when he sleeps in Dust. . Ill Tidings may assault his Ear, But nev r can his Heart sùrprize: Which, far above the reach of Fear, On God, his safety's Rock, relies,
Where, seated in secure repose, He sees the ship-wrack of his Foes. The Poor he freely has reliev'd: His Truth shall last, his Honour grow; When Sinners at his triumph griev'd, Shall fret and gnash their Teeth for woe: While their unrighteous hopes decay, And vanish with themselves away. Psalm CXXXIV. To the same Tune. ALL you, who to the house of God, As faithful Servants have access, And nightly wait in his Abode Lift up your hands in holiness; And, with your hands, devoutly raise, Your Hearts and Voices in his Praise. Then, by Commission from above, Bless you the People in his Name, And say, "The God of Peace and Love, "Who did the whole Creation frame, "From Sion bless, for evermore, "Both you and yours, who him adore. GLOR. PATR. TO God Almighty, Father, Son, And Comforter the Holy Ghost, Be Honour, Worship, Hommage done, By Saints and Angels sacred Host, As 'twas in Ages heretofore, Is now, and shall be evermore.
To the Tune of the Old CXX. The same Psalm. IN trouble and distress, To God I did address, Who rescu'd me from wrong. For shelter, Lord, to thee, From lying Lips I flee, And from the slandring Tongue. Small profit can accrue, But mighty Wrath is due, Perfideous Tongue to thee: Thy Sting on thee shall turn; Of Flames that fiercely burn, The Fewel thou shalt be. With Grief how am I prest? A Sojourner distrest,
In Mesech's barren Soil, With Kedar-Tents enclos'd, To Savages expos'd, And hourly made their Spoil. My Dwelling is with those Who Peace and Love oppose, And Pleasure take in Harms: Sweet Peach is all I seek, But when of Peace I speak, They strait cry out to Arms. To the same Tune as Psal. CXI. Old. v. THou Lord my Witness art, I am not proud of Heart, Nor have a scornful Eye. I have no vain Desire Nor do my Thoughts aspire, To things for me too high: But with an humble mind, Contented and resign'd, I have my self demean'd. All innocent and mild. And peaceful as a Child, That from the Breast is wean'd. Let Isr'el then like me, For succour, Lord, on thee With humble trust rely; Make thee his only stay, Ev'n from this present Day, To all Eternity. GLOR. PATR. TO God the Father, Son, And Spirit, Three in One, All Praise and Glory be; As 'twas in Ages past, Is now and so shall last, To all Eternity.
To the Tune of the Old CXXI. The same Psalm. TO Sion's Hill I lift my Eyes, From whence my help descends, My Soul, for help, depends On God, the God who Earth and Skies by his pow'r did first create, By the same upholds their state. Thy God shall thee in safety keep, No Thunder can surprize, . Thy Keeper's watchful Eyes. Our Isr'el's Shepherd will not sleep. A true Guardian he will stand, With sure aid on thy right hand. No Sun by Day, nor Moon by Night, Shall ever do thee harm, While his encircling Arm
, Defends thee with resistless Might; He shall thy dear Life protect, Evermore thy Ways direct. GLOR. PATR. TO Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Eternal Three in One, Be all Obeysance done, By Saints and Angels sacred Host; As 'twas, is, and so shall be, Henceforth to Eternity. Psalm CXXIX. To the same Tune. OFT have they now, may Isr'el say Me from my Youth assail'd, But never quite prevail'd; Opprest with cruel Wrongs, we lay, But the Righteous God reliev'd, And from Bondage us retriev'd. Confusion, Ruin, most forlorn, Shall prove the wretched state, Of all who Sion hate. Untimely they shall fade like Corn On the tops of Houses seen, That decays as soon as green. Which never for the joyful Day, Of Harvest was design'd, For who will reap or bind? When None that passes by, will say, "May your work have good success, "God from Heav'n your Labour bless. To Father, Son, &c.
To the Tune of the Old CXXII. The same Psalm. HOW did my Soul rejoice, To hear the Peoples Voice: To Sion's Court let us repair, Jerusalem in thee, We shall assembled be; Thou City most compact and fair. The Tribes shall thither throng, Who to our God belong;
To worship at his Holy Place, For there with Justice crown'd, The Judgment Seats are found, Of David, and his Royal Race. O pray for Salem's Peace; Their Blessings shall increase, Who hearty Zeal for thee retain: May therefore Happiness, Thy Palaces possess, And Plenty in thy Streets remain. For Friends and Brethren's sake, Who in thy Joys partake, I'll seek thy Good, and wish thee well; But, for the Temple, more, Where we our God adore, And where our God vouchsafes to dwell. Psalm CXXXIII. To the same Tune. O 'tis a joyful sight! When Brethren do unite, And Hearts with mutual Love are fill'd; 'Tis like the Balsom shed, On Aaron's sacred Head, Which to his Garment's Hemm distill'd:
Or like the Crystal Drops, That early on the tops Of Hermon, and Mount Sion shine: For Sion is the Place Of God's appointed Grace, The Seat and Spring of Life Divine. To the Tune of the Old CXXIV. The same Psalm. HAD not the Lord, (Let thankful Isr'el say), Had not the Lord, Been pleas'd to interpose For our relief, When Men against us rose.
Their swelling Rage. in that most dismal day, Had soon o'rewhelm'd, and snatch'd us quite away. But God be blest, his Praise we will declare, Whose Mercy did our Sentenc'd Lives reprieve, And from their Jaws the panting Prey retrieve. Our heedless Souls, By his most watchful care, Are scap'd like Birds, Out of the Fowler's Suare; The Snare is broke, which they so closely laid; And we to Life and Liberty restor'd. Therefore on him, our ever gracious Lord, We will rely, and still depend for Aid, On God, the God Who Earth and Heaven made.
GLOR. PATR. TO God most high, the Father and the Son, And Holy Ghost, all Worship, Thanks and Praise Be now ascrib'd, As in the former Days From Time's first Birth, has constantly been done; And so shall be, When Time his Course has run. Psalm LIV. To the same Tune. TO save me, Lord, thy Truth and Pow'r display; Hear my Complaint, and to my words incline! Strangers, and such as fear no God, combine To make my Soul, my guiltless Soul, their Prey: But God will give, my Friends and me the Day. The God of Truth, shall my false Foes requite; Then to his Courts free Off'rings I will bring, To his blest Name with Praise and Comfort sing. When he from cares has freed my Soul outright, And my proud Foes, dispers'd before my sight.
To the Tune of the Old CXXV. The same Psalm. First Metre. ALL who on Sion's God depend, Like Sion's Mount shall still abide, For as the Hills on ev'ry side Jerusalem's fair Gates defend; So his surrounding Arm, Protects the just from harm. Ungodly Tyrants may oppress The best of Saints, but ne'er prevail, To make their steady Virtue fail: Or seek base means for their redress. For God will Grace impart, To all of upright Heart.
They who perversly turn aside To crooked Paths, the Lord shall them With Reprobates to Death condemn; But Blessings for his Saints provide, To make their troubles cease, And crown their days with Peace. GLOR. PATR. TO Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (The blest Eternal Three in One) Be Honour, Praise, and Worship done By Saints and Angels sacred Host, As always was, is now, And ever shall be so. To the Tune of the Old CXXV. The same Psalm. 2d. Metre. ALL they whose Hopes on God depend, Like Sion's Mount shall still abide; For as surrounding Hills defend Jerusalem on ev'ry side.
So, Day and Night, The Lord of Might, His faithful People does embrace, And with strong Arm, From fear and harm, Will always guard his chosen Race. Though Tyrants may sometimes prevail, They shall not them so long oppress; To make their Faith or Virtue fail, And seek base means for their Redress. To those, O Lord, Who love thy Word, Do thou continue ever kind; To each true Heart, Thy Grace impart, Let such thy constant favour find. All they who chuse the crooked Path, And wander in the Sinner's way, The Righteous Lord incens'd to Wrath, Shall them with harden'd Sinners slay. The Lord of might, Shall thus requite, Those who against his Law rebel, But Truth and Peace, Shall never cease, Amongst his faithful Saints to dwell. Psalm LIII. To the same Tune. THE wicked senseless Fool hath said, Within his Heart, "there is no God: Corrupt they are, and all misled, Not one in Vertue's way has trod. The Lord look'd down, From Heav'n his Throne,
And all the Sons of Men did view; One Soul to find, Amongst Mankind, Who his just Will perform'd, or knew. But all he saw, were gone astray, All were become corrupt and base; Not one that walk'd in Vertue's way, Not one of all the sinful Race. Can they all be, To that Degree, Of Wickedness and Folly grown, That they each Hour, My Saints devour, And God's Almighty Pow'r disown? Therefore when quite of Fear bereft, At once with shame and Death surpriz'd, Their Carcasses on Earth were left, Contemn'd of God whom they despis'd. O would our God. From his Abode, March on, our Captive Sons to free, Could we survey, That glorious Day, Then Isr'el's Joy compleat would be. To the Tune of the Old CXXVI. The same Psalm. WHen Sion's God Her Captive Sons from Bondage freed,
A pleasing Dream It seem'd, of what we long desir'd. But when convinc'd By happy Proofs, 'twas so indeed; Mirth fill'd our Mouth, And Joy our silent Tongues inspir'd: Our Foes repin'd, But were compell'd to own The wondrous works Our God for us had done.
'Twas great (said They) 'Twas great, and most amazing strange; What then should we, For whom he wrought the happy Change? To us bring Home, The Remnant of our Captive Bands, More welcom far, Than Rain to parcht and thirsty Lands. Who sows good Grain, Altho' in Tears, shall come, And bring with Joy, a full-Ear'd Harvest home. Psalm CXIIII. To the same Tune. WHen Isr'el, who Had suffer'd cruel Bondage long, From Egypt march'd; And pious Jacob's chosen Seed, From Men who spake A foreign and offensive Tongue, By Miracles And most amazing Signs were freed, The Lord of Hosts, From Judah's royal Tent, Through Isr'el's Camp His Sov'reign Orders sent: The frighted Sea, And Jordan's stream, shrunk back with awe, The Mountains skipp'd Like Rams, the lesser Hills like Lambs; Why fled'st thou Sea? Why, Jordan, did thy streams withdraw? What terrour seiz'd On you, O Mountains, that like Rams, Ye skipp'd? and why, Ye little Hills did you,
Like frighted Lambs, Your Leader's flight pursue? Earth tremble on, Well may thy Guilt make thee afraid, Before thy Lord And Maker's Presence to appear; 'Tis time, high time, That Nature's self should be dismay'd, When Jacob's God, The mighty Lord of Hosts, draws near; Whose sov'reign Will cou'd cancel Nature's Law, Turn Rocks to Lakes, From Flint a Fountain draw.
To the Tune of the Old CXXVII. The same PSALM. IN vain we build with vast Expence, unless the Lord the Work sustain, Our Cities watch and ward in vain, Unless the Lord be their Defence; In vain we needful Rest forbear, and feed upon the bread of Care.
He freely on his Saints bestows supplies of Life, for with success He does their daily Labour bless, And crowns their nights with sweet Repose. Children are presents from the Lord, and sent as Piety's reward: Like arrows in a Giant's hand, to Parents Safety they afford: The Man who has his Quiver stor'd with these defensive Arms, may stand And bid defiance to his Foes, Who him, at Law or War, oppose. Gloria Patra. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (The blest eternal Three in One) Be Homage and Obeysance done, By Saints and Angels sacred Host; As it has been in Ages past, Is now, and shall for ever last.
To the Tune of the Old CXXX. The same PSALM. FRom the lowest depth of Woe, to God I sent my Cry: Hearken Lord to my Com╌plaint, and grac'ously reply Shoud'st, thou Lord, severely Judge, who can the Trial bear? But thou dost forgive, lest we for╌sake thee through De╌spair.
Io! my Soul with Patience waits, for thee the living Lord; All my hopes are built upon thy never failing Word. Isr'el in thy God confide, whose Mercies ne'er decay; Flowing Streams they are, to heal and wash thy Guilt away. Glor. Patr. To the Father and the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, God ador'd by Saints on Earth, and by the Heavenly Host, Glory be, as always was, in Ages heretofore; So 'tis now, and shall be so Henceforth for ever more. Psal. LIV. To the same Tune. Save me, Lord, for thy Name's sake, and in thy strength appear; Judge my Cause, accept my Suit, and to my words give Ear: Strangers, whom I never wrong'd, to ruin me design'd; Cruel Men, who fear no God, against my Life combin'd. But the Lord vouchsafes at once, my Friends and me to guard: The just God shall give my Foes their Falshoods due reward. Then free Off'rings I will bring, with Comfort bless his Name, Who has freed me from Distress, and brought my Foes to shame. Glor. Patr. To the Father and the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, &c.
To the Tune of the Old CXXXVI. The same PSALM. O Praise the Lord, for he is good, for his Mercy en╌dur╌eth for e╌ver: The God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, for his Mercy en╌dur╌eth for e╌ver; Who Wondrous Works alone can do, for his Mercy endureth for ever; Who by his wisdom made the Heav'ns, for his Mercy en╌dur╌eth for e╌ver.
Who stretch'd the Earth above the Seas, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Who fill'd the Skies with shining Lights, for his Mercy endureth for ever. The glorious Sun that rules the day, for his Mercy endureth for ever. The Moon and Stars, that rule by Night, for his Mercy endureth for ever. All Egypt's first-born Sons he slew, for his Mercy endureth for ever. And brought his People forth with might, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Through parted Waves, made Isr'el pass, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Where Pharaoh and his Host were drown'd, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Then through the Desart led our Tribes, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Where great and famous Kings he slew, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Sehon who Ammon's Scepter sway'd, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Gigantick Ogg, proud Bashan's King, for his Mercy endureth for ever. And gave their Lands to his Elect, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Thought on and sav'd us when distrest, for his Mercy endureth for ever. With Food all Creatures he supplies, for his Mercy endureth for ever. Give Thanks to God, the God of Heav'n, for his Mercy endureth for ever.
The usual TUNES FOR PSALMS OF Common Measure.
Psalm XLIV. Windsor Tune. O Lord, our Fathers oft have told, in our at╌tentive Ears, Thy wonders in their days perform'd, and older times than theirs. Psalm XXVII. St. David's Tune. WHom should I fear, since God to me is saving health and light; Since strongly he my Life supports, what can my Soul affright?
Psalm IV. Oxford Tune. O Lord, that art my righteous Judge, to my complaint give ear, Thou still redeem'st me from distress, have Mercy, Lord, and hear. Psalm V. Litchfield Tune. LOrd, hear the voice of my Complaint, accept my secret Prayer; To thee alone, my King, my God, will I for help repair.
Psalm XXIII. Canterbury Tune. THe Lord himself, the mighty Lord, vouchsafes to be my Guide; The Shepherd, by whose constant Care, my Wants are all supply'd. Psalm XXXVIII. Martyrs Tune. THy chast'ning wrath, O Lord, restrain, though I deserve it all; Nor let at once on me the storm of thy displeasure fall.
Psalm XIX. York Tune. THe Heav'ns declare thy Glory, Lord, which that a╌lone can fill; The Firm╌a╌ment and Stars express their great Cre╌a╌tor's skill. Ps. XVI. St. Mary alias Hackney T. PRo╌tect me from my cru╌el Foes, and shield me Lord, from harm, Because my trust I still re╌pose on thy Al╌migh╌ty Arm.
THE TUNES For PSALMS OF Particular Measures MOST Usually SUNG.
Psal. CXLVII. London New Tune. O praise the Lord with Hymns of Joy, and Ce╌lebrate his Fame; for pleasant, good, and comely 'tis, to praise his holy Name. Psalm XXV. Proper Tune. TO God, in whom I trust, I lift my Heart and Voice: O let me not be put to shame, nor let my Foes rejoice.
Psalm CXIX. Proper Tune. HOw blest are they who always keep, the pure and perfect way; who never from the sacred Paths of God's Commandments stray, How blest, who to his righteous Laws, have still obedient been, And have with fervent humble zeal, his favour sought to win.
Psalm CXLVIII. Proper Tune. YE boundless realms of Joy, exalt your Maker's Fame; His praise your Song employ, above the starry Frame. Your Voices raise, Ye Cherubim and Seraphim, to sing his Praise.
Psalm CXIII. Proper Tune. YE Saints and Servants of the Lord, the triumphs of his Name record, His sacred Name for ever bless, Where e'er the circling Sun displays; his rising Beams, or setting Rays, Due Praise to his great Name address; God through the World extends his sway, The Regions of eternal day,
but shadows of his Glory are, with him whose Majesty excells, Who made the Heav'n, in which he dwells let no created Pow'r compare. Psalm C. Proper Tune. WIth one consent, let all the Earth to God their cheerful Voices raise; Glad homage pay, with awful Mirth, and sing before him, Songs of Praise.
Psalm XCII. Proper Tune. HOw good and pleasant must it be, to thank the Lord most high, And with repeated Hymns of Praise, His Name to magnifie. With ev'ry Morning's early dawn his goodness to relate, And of his constant Truth each night, the glad effects repeat.
Psalm LXXXVIII. To the Tune of the Old 51 Psalm, and may be sung to any Psalm of this Measure. TO thee, my God and Saviour I by day and night address my Cry; Vouchsafe my mournful Voice to hear; to my distress encline thine Ear; For Seas of Trouble me invade, my Soul draws nigh to Death's cold shade; Like one whose strength and hopes are fled they number me among the Dead. FINIS.
A TABLE of the Hymns, &c. in this Suppliment. TE Deum, &c. Page 3 Veni Creator, first Metre Page 5 Veni Creator, second Metre Page 6 Benedictus Page 8 Magnificat Page 9 Nunc Dimittis Page 11 The Creed Page 12 Lord's Prayer, first Metre Page 13 Lord's Prayer, second Metre Page 14 Ten Commandments Page 15 Additional Hymns. Song of the Angels at the Nativity of our Blessed Saviour. Page 18 Easter day, first Hymn Page 19 Second Hymn Page 19 Hymns for the H. Communion. First Hymn Page 20 Second Hymn Page 21 Hymn Third; being the Thanksgiving in the Church Communion Service Page 21
Psalms in particular Measures, with their proper Tunes. To the Tune of the Old 50th Psalm, Psalm 47. Page 23 To the same Tune; Psalm 93. Page 24 To the same Tune; Psalm 117. Page 25 To the Tune of the Old 100 and 4th Psalm; Psalm 74 Page 26 To the same Tune; Psalm 117 Page 27 To the Tune of the Old cxith Psalm, the same Psalm. Page 28 Psalm 131. To the same Tune. Page 30 To the Tune of the Old cxiith. The same Psalm. Page 31 To the same Tune; Psalm 134. Page 32 To the Tune of the Old cxx. the same Psalm, Page 33 To the same Tune; Psalm cxxxi. Page 34 To the Tune of the Old cxxi. the same Psalm. Page 35 To the Tune of the Old cxxix. the same Psalm, Page 36 To the Tune of the Old cxxii. the same Psalm, Page 37 To the same Tune, Psalm 133. Page 38 To the Tune of the Old cxxiv. the same Psalm. Page 39 To the same Tune, Psalm 54. Page 41
To the Tune of the Old cxxv. first. Metre; the same Psalm. Page 42 To the second Metre of the Old cxxv the same Psalm. Page 43 To the same Tune; Psalm 53. Page 44 To the Tune of the Old cxxvi. the same Psalm. Page 45 To the same Tune; Psalm 114 Page 47 To the Tune of the Old cxxvii. the same Psalm. Page 49 To the Tune of the Old cxxx. the same Psalm. Page 52 To the Tune of the Old cxxxvi the same Psalm. Page 53 The usual Tunes for Psalms of Com∣mon Measure, begin at Page 57 The Tunes for Psalms of Particular Measures, most usually Sung, begin Page 63
