C5900 99883126 183263
A Conscionable Couple: OR, The valiant Resolution of a Young-man and a Maid, That have left all their Kindred, as true folks have said: Twas for their Religion and good Conscience sake, That they forsook England, a Voyage to take. These two loving Protestants kindly together, Are gone to seek Fortunes, there's no man knows whither. To a curious new Tune, Or, The Faithful Friend. This doth make the world to wonder, That thou and I must pat sunder; Parting from thee sre doh grieve me, O so loth I am to leave thee: Leave thee, leave thee, I'll not leave thee, O so loath I am to leave thee. I love thee deer, yet dare not show it, Let not thy Friends nor Father know it, The joyes and comforts late abounded; Now is my heart with sorrows wunded. Parting from thee sore doth grieve me, O how loath I am to leave thee. Thy amorous looks makes me admire, And set my senses all on fire: I would foego all earthly treasure, T spend my time with thee in pleasure: But we must part, which sore doth grieve me, O how loath am I to leave thee. Thou in mine eye art such a creature, The like was never fram'd by Nature: Thy sweet behaviour and thy carriage, Loves Queen by no means can disparage, But we must part, which sore doth grieve me, O how loath am I to leave thee! Cruel Fortune, I must curse the, Cause thy false design & doth force me; Thus to go and have my True-love, Farewel, ten thousands times adieu Love We needs must part, that sore doth grieve me, O how loath I am to leave thee! Mark these words which here are spoken, This gold Ring keep for a token; And when I am furthest from thee, Prethee Sweet-heart think upon me, Part we must, which sore doth grieve me, O how loath I am to leave thee! 'Tis long of England's strange Division And the altering of Religion: That I am expos'd in danger, And to trvel like a stranger; This of all the rest doth grive me, That I am inforc'd to leave thee. My dear Love, when we are pated I shall be so heavy-hearted, That no joyes I shll recover, Therefore as thou art my Lover, Prethee Svveet-heart take me to thee, Say but the vvord, and I'll go vvith thee. Let Father frown, and Mother chide me, I'le go with thee what-ever beide me; If it were through fire and water, Lead the way, Ile follow after: I prethee Sweet-heart take me to thee, Say but the word, and I'll go with thee. I to the Seas thou make thy venter, I in the hip will also enter: Or if thou on the Shore wilt tarry, I the self-am mnd do carry, So thou vouchsafe to take me to thee, Speak but the word, and I'll go with thee. Or if thou wilt be a Souldier, Place a Musket on my shoulder: Put me on some mans apparel, I will staely fight thy quarrel; I fear not what man can do to me, Speak but the word and I'll go with thee. Neither Sword nor Persecution Shall break off my Resolution: Though al the world forsake thee For my Comrode I will ake thee; If thou wilt but take me to thee, Speak the word, and I'll go with thee, Farewel Father, farewel Mother, Farewel Sister, farewel Brother, Frewel Friends, and farewel Kindred, I from my Love will not be hindred; Now prethee Sweet heart take me to thee Hap well or woe, I'll now go with thee. Since thou stand'st firm to th' old Religion My slf am of the same condition; England wee'l leave, and march together, No ertly creature shall know whither; Conscience moves me to come to thee, Thou hast spoke Love, I'll go with thee. Finis. London, Printed for F. Coles T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clark.
