C6386A R174281 53299015 179790
INSTRUCTIONS How to Play at Billiards, Trucks, Bowls, and Chess. Together wih all manner of GAMES Either on Cards, or Dice. To which is added, the ARTS and MYSTERIES OF Riding, Racing, Archery, and Cock-fighting. LONDON, Printed for Charles Brome, at the Gun at the West End of S. Pauls. 1687.
The Explanation of the Frontispiece. BIlliards from Spain at first deriv'd its name, Both an ingenious, and a cleanly Game. One Gamester leads (the Table green as grass) And each like Warriers strive to gain the Pass. But in the contest, e're the Pass be won, Hazzards are many into which they run. Thus while we play on this Terrestrial Stage, Nothing but Hazzard doth attend each age. Next here are Hazzards play'd another way, By Box and Dice; 'tis Hazzard is the Play. The Bully-Rock with mangy fist, and Pox, Justles some out, and then takes up the Box. He throws the Main, and crys, Who comes at Seven? Thus with a dry fist nicks it with Eleven. If out, he raps out Oaths I dare not tell, Hot, piping out, and newly come from Hell. Old-Nick o're-hearing, by a Palming-trick Secures the Gamester; thus the Nicker's nickt. Now t' Irish, or Back-Gammoners we come, Who wish their money, with their men safe home; But as in War, so in this subtle Play, The stragling men are ta'ne up by the way. By entring then, one reinforceth more, It may be to be lost, as those before. By Topping, Knapping, and foul play some win; But those are losers, who so gain by sin. After these three the Cock-pit claims a name; A sport gentile, and call'd a Royal Game. Now see the Gallants crowd about the Pit, And most are stockt with Money more than Wit; Else sure they would not, with so great a stir, Lay ten to one on a Cocks faithless Spur. Lastly, observe the Women with what grace They sit, and look their Partners in the face. Who from their eyes shoot Cupids fiery Darts; Thus make them lose at once their Game and Hearts. Their white soft hands, (when e're the Cards they cut) Make the men wish to change the Game to Putt. The Women knew their thoughts, then cry'd, Enough, Let's leave off Whist, and go to Putt, or Ruff. Ladies, don't trust your secrets in that hand, Who can't their own (to their great grief) command. For this I will assure you, if you do, In time you'l lose your Ruff and Honour too.
THE COMPLEATE GAMSTER. engraving of men playing billiards engraving of men playing backgammon engraving of men playing cards engraving of cock fighting match engraving of man and woman playing cards Printed for Hen: Brome
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Reader, I Was once resolv'd to have let this ensuing Treatise to have stept naked into the World, without so much as the least rag of an Epistle to defend it a little from the cold welcom it may meet with in its travails; but knowing that not only cu∣stom expects but necessity requires it, give me leave to show you the motives indu∣cing to this present publica∣tion. It is not (I'le assure you) any private interest of my own that caus'd me to ad∣venture
on this subject, but the delight & benefit of eve∣ry individual person; Delight to such who will pass away their spare minuts in harmless recreation if not abus'd; and Profit to all, who by inspect∣ing all manner of Games may observe the cheats and abu∣ses, & so be arm'd against the injuries may accrue thereby. Certainly there is no man so severe to deny the lawful∣ness of Recreation; There was never any Stoick found so cruel, either to himself, or nature, but at some time or
other he would unbend his mind, and give it liberty to stray into some more pleasant walks, than the miry heavy ways of his own sowr, will∣ful resolutions. You may ob∣serve the Heathen Sages of the first world founded with their Laws their Feasts, with their Labours their Olym∣picks, with their Warfare their Triumphs. Nay at this day the severest Dionysian-Pedagogue will give his Scho∣lars their Play-days, & Brea∣kings up with a Horum mise∣rere laborum, fessum quies pluri∣mum
juvat. And the most co∣vetous Masters will tye their servants but to certain hours; every toyl exacting as ex offi∣cio, or out of duty some time for Recreation. I my self have observed in the course of ma∣ny men of exceeding strict lives and conversation, to whom although severity of profession, infirmity of body, extremity of age, or such like, have taken away all actual re∣creation, yet have their minds begot unto themselves some habits or customs of delight, which have in as large mea∣sure
given them contentment whether they were their own, or borrowed, as if they had been the sole actors of the same. Furthermore, Recrea∣tion is not only lawful but necessary: Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis, Ut possis animo quemvis sufferre laborem. So intermix your care with joy, you may Lighten your labour by a little play. Now what Recreation this should be I cannot prescribe, nor is it requisite to confine any to one sort of pleasure, since herein Nature taketh to her self an especial Prero∣gative, for what to one is most pleasant, to another is most
offensive; Some seeking to satisfie the Mind, some the Body, and others both in a joint motion. To this end I have laid before you what variety of Pastimes I could collect for the present, leaving the rest (as you like these) to be suppli'd hereafter. Mistake me not, it is not my intenti∣on to make Gamesters by this Collection, but to inform all in part how to avoid being cheated by them: If I am im∣perfect in my discoveries, im∣pute it to my being no pro∣fest Gamester, and the hatred
I bear that Hellish society; by whom I know I shall be laught at, and with whom if I should converse, I might sooner by my study come to be Nature's Secretary, and unriddle all her Arcana's, than collect from them any new unpractised secret, by which they bubble ignorant credulity, and purchase mo∣ney and good apparel with everlasting shame and in∣famy. To conclude, let me ad∣vise you, if you play (when your business will permit) let
not a covetous desire of win∣ning another's money en∣gage you to the losing your own; which will not only disturb your mind, but by the disreputation of being a Gamester, if you lose not your estate, you will certain∣ly lose your credit and good name, than which there is nothing more valuable. Thus hoping you will be thus ad∣vis'd, and will withal excuse my Errors, I shall ever study how to serve you, and sub∣scribe my self a well-willer to all men.
The Contents. OF Gaming in general; or an Ordi∣nary described. Page 1. Ch. 1. Of Billiards. p. 17 Ch. 2. Of Trucks. p. 28 Ch. 3. Of Bowling. p. 34 Ch. 4. Of a Game at Chess. p. 36 Principal Games at Cards. Ch. 5. Of Picket. p. 56 Ch. 6. The Game at Gleek. p. 64 Ch. 7. L'Ombre, a Spanish Game. p. 69 Ch. 8. The Game at Cribbidge. p. 75 Ch. 9. A Game at All-Fours. p. 79 Ch. 10. English Ruff and Honours, and Whist. p. 81 Ch. 11. French-Ruff. p. 86 Ch. 12. Five-Cards. p. 87 Ch. 13. Of a Game called Costly Co∣lours. p. 88 Ch. 14. Bone-Ace. p. 91 Ch. 15. Of Put and the High-Game. p. 92 Ch. 16. Wit and Reason, a Game so cal∣led. p. 97 Ch. 17. A Pastime called, The Art of Memory. p. 99
Ch. 18. A Game called Plain-dealing. p. 100 Ch. 19. A Game called Queen Naza∣reen. p. 101 Ch. 20. Lanterloo. ibid. Ch. 21. A Game called Penneech. p. 104 Ch. 22. Post and Pair. p. 106 Ch. 23. Bankafalet. p. 107 Ch. 24. Beast. p. 108 Games within the Tables. Ch. 25. Of Irish. p. 109 Ch. 26. Of Back-Gammon. p. 110 Ch. 27. Of Tick-tack. p. 112 Ch. 28. Dubblets. p. 115 Ch. 29. Sice-Ace. p. 116 Ch. 30. Ketch-Dolt. ibid. Games without the Tables. Ch. 31. Of Inn and Inn. p. 117 Ch. 32. Of Passage. p. 119 Ch. 33. Of Hazzard. p. 120 Ch. 34. The Art and Mystery of Riding, Whether the Great Horse or any other. p. 124 Ch. 35. Of Racing. p. 141 Ch. 36. Of Archery. p. 149 Ch. 37. Of Cock-fighting. p. 152
Of Gaming in General, or an Ordinary described. GAming is an enchanting witchery, gotten betwixt Idleness and Ava∣rice: An itching Disease, that makes some scratch the Head, whilst others, as if they were bitten by a Tarantula, are laugh∣ing themselves to death: Or lastly, it is a para∣lytical distemper, which seizing the arm the man cannot chuse but shake his elbow. It hath this ill property above all other Vices, that it ren∣ders a Man incapable of prosecuting any serious action, and makes him always unsatisfied with his own condition; he is either lifted up to the top of mad joy with success, or plung'd to the bottom of despair by misfortune, always in ex∣treams, always in a storm; this minute the Game∣ster's countenance is so serene and calm, that one would think nothing could disturb it, and the next minute so stormy and tempestuous that it threatens destruction to it self and others; and as he is transported with joy when he wins, so losing he is tost upon the billows of a high swel∣ling passion, till he hath lost sight both of sense and reason.
I have seen some Dogs bite the stones which Boys have thrown at them, not regarding whence they were flung; so I have seen a losing Game∣ster greedily gnawing the innocent Box, and sometimes tearing it to pieces as an accessary to his throwing out; nor must the Dice go unpuni∣shed for not running his chance, and therefore in rage are thrown on the ground to be kickt to and fro by every body; and at last lookt upon no other than the fit companions of every saucy Skip-jack. Then fresh Dice are called for, as thinking they will prove more kind than the former, or as if they believed that some were good natur'd, others bad, and that every Bale produced a dif∣ferent disposition. If these run cross too, the Box-keeper shall not go without a horrid execra∣tion, if for nothing else but that he lookt strict∣ly to the cast, it may be conceiving that his very eyes were capable of making them turn to his disadvantage. This restless man (the miserable Gamester) is the proper subject of every man's pity. Restless I call him, because (such is the itch of play) either winning or losing he can ne∣ver rest satisfied; if he wins he thinks to win more, if he loses he hopes to recover: To this Man's condition the saying of Hannibal to Mar∣cellus may be fitly applied, that nec bonam, nec malam fortunam ferre potest, he could not be quiet either Conqueror or Conquered. Thus have I heard of some who with Five Pounds
have won Four Hundred Pounds in one Night, and the next Night have lost it to a sum not half so much; others who have lost their estates and won them again with addition, yet could not be quiet till they lost them irrecoverably. And therefore fitly was that question pro∣pounded, Whether men in Ships at Sea were to be accounted among the living or the dead, be∣cause there were but few inches betwixt them and drowning. The same quaere may be made of great Gamesters, though their estates be never so con∣siderable, Whether they are to be esteemed poor or rich, since there are but few Casts at Dice betwixt a rich man (in that circumstance) and a beggar. Now since speculation will not be convincing, unless we shew somewhat of the modern pra∣ctice; we must therefore lay our Scene at an Ordinary, and proceed to action: Where note, an Ordinary is a handsome house, where every day, about the hour of twelve, a good Dinner is prepared by way of Ordinary, composed of variety of dishes, in season, well drest, with all other accommodations fit for that purpose, whereby many Gentlemen of great Estates and good repute, make this place their resort, who after Dinner play a while for recreation, both moderately and commonly, without deserving reproof: But here is the mischief, the best Wheat will have Tares growing amongst it, Rooks and Daws will sometimes be in the company of Pi∣geons;
nor can real gentlemen now adays so se∣clude themselves from the society of such as are pretendedly so, but that they oftentimes mix company, being much of the same colour and feather, and by the eye undistinguishable. It is reported of the Polypus (a Fish), that it will conform it self to the colour of what is nearest, for security and advantage: And so do these pretended Gentlemen attire themselves in what is both gentile and fashionable, that under that disguise they may with more facility riggle themselves into the society of such worthy per∣sons, out of whom they intend to squeeze some sums of moneys by Cards, Dice, or otherways. These Rooks can do little harm in the day time at an Ordinary, being forc'd to play upon the Square, although now and then they make an advantage, when the Box-keeper goes with him, and then the Knave and Rascal will violate his trust for profit, and lend him (when he sees good) a Tickler shall do his business; but if discovered, the Box-keeper ought to be sound∣ly kickt for his pains: Such practices, and some∣times the Box-keepers connivances, are so much us'd of late, that there is nothing near that fai play in an Ordinary, as formerly. The day being shut in, you may properly compare this place to those Countries which ly far in the North, where it is as clear at midnigh as at noon-day: And though it is a house of Si yet you cannot call it a house of Darkness, fo
the Candles never go out till morning, unless the sudden fury of a losing Gamester make them extinct. This is the time (when ravenous beasts usu∣ally seek their prey) wherein comes shoals of Huffs, Hectors, Setters, Gilts, Pads, Biters, Di∣vers, Lifters, Filers, Budgies, Droppers, Cross∣byters, &c. and these may all pass under the ge∣neral and common appellation of Rooks. And in this particular, an Ordinary serves as a Nur∣sery for Tyburn; for if any one will put himself to the trouble of observation, he shall find, that there is seldom a Year wherein there are not some of this Gang hang as precious Jewels in the ear of Tyburn: Look back and you will find a great many gone already, God knows how many are to follow. These Rooks are in continual motion, walk∣ing from one Table to another, till they can dis∣cover some unexperienc'd young Gentleman, Casheer or Apprentice, that is come to this School of Virtue, being unskill'd in the quib∣bles and devices there practised; these they call Lambs, or Colls: Then do the Rooks (more properly called Wolves) strive who shall fasten on him first, following him close, and engaging him in some advantageous Bets, and at length worries him, that is, gets all his money, and then the Rooks (Rogues I should have said) laugh and grin, saying, the Lamb is bitten.
Some of these Rooks will be very importunate to borrow money of you without any intention to pay you; or to go with you seven to twelve half a Crown or more, whereby without a very great chance (ten to one or more) he is sure to win: If you are sensible hereof, and refuse his proposition, they will take it so ill, that if you have not an especial care they will pick your pocket, nim your gold or silver buttons off your Cloak or Coat; or it may be draw your silver-hilted Sword out of your Belt without disco∣very, especially if you are eager upon your Cast, which is done thus; the silver buttons are strung, or run upon Cats guts fastned at the upper and nether end; now by ripping both ends very ingeniously (as they call it) give it the gentile pull, and so rub off with the buttons; and if your Cloak be loose 'tis ten to one they have it. But that which will most provoke (in my opi∣nion) any Man's rage to a just satisfaction, is their throwing many times at a good Sum with a dry fist (as they call it,) that is, if they nick you, 'tis theirs; if they lose, they owe you so much with many other quillets: some I have known so abominably impudent, that they would snatch up the Stakes, and thereupon instantly draw, saying, if you will have your money you must fight for it; for he is a Gentleman and will not want: however if you will be patient, he will pay you another time; if you are so tame to
take this, go no more to the Ordinary; for then the whole Gang will be ever and anon watching an opportunity to make a Mouth of you in the like nature. If you nick them, 'tis odds, if they wait not your coming out at night and beat you: I could produce you an hundred examples in this kind, but they will rarely adventure on the at∣tempt, unless they are backt with some Bully-Huffs, and Bully-Rocks, with others whose for∣tunes are as desperate as their own. We need no other testimony to confirm the danger of as∣sociating with these Anthropo-phagi or Man-eaters, than Lincolns-Inn-Fields whilst Speerings Ordinary was kept in Bell-yard, and that you need not want a pair of Witnesses for the proof there∣of, take in also Covent-Garden. Neither is the House it self to be exempted, every night almost some one or other, who ei∣ther heated with Wine, or made cholerick with the loss of his Money, raises a quarrel, swords are drawn, box and candlesticks thrown at one anothers head, Tables overthrown, and all the House in such a Garboyl, that it is the perfect Type of Hell. Happy is the Man now that can make the frame of a Table or Chimney-corner his Sanctuary; and if any are so fortunate to get to the Stair-head, they will rather hazard the breaking of their own necks than have their Souls pusht out of their Bodies in the dark by they know not whom. I once observed one of the Desperadoes of the
Town (being half drunk) to press a Gentleman very much (at play) to lend him a Crown, the Gentleman refus'd him several times, yet still the Borrower persisted, and holding his Head somewhat too near the Casters elbow, it chanced to hit his nose, the other thinking it to be affront enough to be denied the loan of Money without this slight touch of the nose, drew, and stepping back (unawares to the Gentleman) made a full pass at him, intending to have run him through the body; but his drunkenness misguided his hand, so that he ran him only through the arm: this put the House into so great a confusion and fright, that some fled thinking the Gentleman slain. This wicked Miscreant thought not this sufficient, but tripping up his heels, pinn'd him as he thought to the floor; and after this, takes the Gentlemans silver sword, leaving his in the wound, and with a Grand-Jury of Dammees (which may hereafter find him guilty at the Great Tribunal) bid all stand off if they lov'd their lives, and so went clear off with sword and liberty; but was notwithstanding (the Gen∣tleman recovering) compel'd to make what sa∣tisfaction he was capable of making, besides a long imprisonment; and was not long abroad before he was apprehended for Burglary, com∣mitted, condemned, and justly executed. —Fatebere tandem Nec Surdum, nec Tiressam quenquam esse Deorum.
But to proceed on as to play: late at Night when the Company grows thin, and your eyes dim with watching, false Dice are frequently put upon the ignorant, or they are otherwise cheat∣ed by Topping, Slurring, Stabbing, &c. and if you be not careful and vigilant, the Box-keeper shall score you up double or treble Boxes, and though you have lost your money, dun you as severely for it, as if it were the justest debt in the World. The more subtile and gentiler sort of Rooks (as aforesaid) you shall not distinguish by their outward demeanor from persons of condition; these will sit by a whole Evening, and observe who wins; if the Winner be bubbleable, they will insinuate themselves into his company by applauding his success, advising him to leave off whilst he is well; and lastly, by civilly inviting him to drink a glass of Wine, where having well warm'd themselves to make him more than half drunk they wheadle him in to play; to which if he condescend he shall quickly have no money left him in his Pocket, unless perchance a Crown the Rooking-winner lent him in courtesie to bear his charges homewards. This they do by false Dice, as High-Fullams 4, 5, 6. Low-Fullams 1, 2, 3. By Bristle-Dice, which are fitted for their purpose by sticking a Hogs-bristle so in the corners, or otherwise in the Dice, that they shall run high or low as they please; this bristle must be strong and short, by
which means the bristle bending, it will not lie on that side, but will be tript over; and this is the newest way of making a high or low Fullam: the old ways are by drilling them and loading them with Quick-silver; but that cheat may be easily discovered by their weight, or holding two corners between your forefinger and thumb, if holding them so gently between your fingers they turn, you may then conclude them false; or you may try their falshood otherwise by breaking or splitting them: others have made them by filing and rounding; but all these ways fall short of the Art of those who make them: some whereof are so admirably skilful in making a Bale of Dice to run what you would have them, that your Gamesters think they never give e∣nough for their purchase if they prove right. They are sold in many places about the Town; price current (by the help of a friend) eight shillings, whereas an ordinary Bale is sold for six pence; for my part I shall tell you plainly, I would have those Bales of false Dice to be sold at the price of the Ears of such destructive Knaves that made them. Another way the Rook hath to cheat, is first by Palming, that is, he puts one Dye into the Box, and keeps the other in the hollow of his little finger, which noting what is uppermost when he takes him up, the same shall be when he throws the other Dye, which runs doubtfully any cast. Observe this, that the bottom and top
of all Dice are seven, so that if it be 4 above, it must be a 3 at bottom; so 5 and 2. 6 and 1. Secondly, by Topping, and that is when they take up both Dice and seem to put them in the Box, and shaking the Box you would think them both there, by reason of the ratling occasioned with the screwing of the Box, whereas one of them is at the top of the Box between his two forefingers, or secur'd by thrusting a forefinger into the Box. Thirdly, by Slurring, that is, by taking up your Dice as you will have them ad∣vantageously lie in your hand, placing the one a top the other, not caring if the uppermost run a Mill-stone (as they use to say) if the under∣most run without turning, and therefore a smooth table is altogether requisite for this purpose; on a rugged rough board it is a hard matter to be done, whereas on a smooth table (the best are rub'd over with Bees-wax to fill up all chinks and crevises) it is usual for some to slur a Dye two yards or more without turning. Fourthly, by Knapping, that is, when you strike a Dye dead that it shall not stir, this is best done with∣in the Tables; where note there is no securing but of one Dye, although there are some who boast of securing both: I have seen some so dexterous at Knapping, that they have done it through the handle of a quart Pot, or over a Candle and Candlestick: but that which I most admired, was throwing through the same less than Ames Ace with two Dice upon a Groat
held in the left hand on the one side of the handle a foot distance, and the Dice thrown with the right hand on the other. Lastly, by Stabbing, that is, having a Smooth Box, and small in the bottom, you drop in both your Dice in such manner as you would have them sticking therein by reason of its narrow∣ness, the Dice lying one upon another; so that turning up the Box, the Dice never tumble; if a smooth Box, if true, but little; by which means you have bottoms according to the tops you put in; For example, if you put in your Dice so that two fives or two fours lie a top, you have in the bottom turn'd up two two's, or two treys; so if six and an Ace a top, a Six and an Ace at bottom. Now if the Gentleman be past that Classis of Ignoramusses, then they effect their purpose by Cross-byting, or some other dexterity, of which they have all variety imaginable. A friend of mine wondring at the many slights a noted Gamester had to deceive, and how neatly and undiscoverably he managed his tricks, wondring withall he could not do the like himself, since he had the same Theory of them all, and knew how they were done; O young man, replyed the Gamester, there is nothing to be attain'd with∣out pains; wherefore had you been as laborious as my self in the practice hereof, and had sweat∣ed at it as many cold winter mornings in your shirt as I have done in mine, undoubtedly you
would have arrived at the same perfection. Here you must observe, that if these Rooks think they have met with a sure Bubble, they will purposely lose some small sum at first, that they may engage him the more freely to bleed (as they call it) which may be at the second, if not beware of the third meeting, which under the notion of being very merry with wine and good cheer, they will make him pay for the roast. Consider the further inconveniences of Ga∣ming as they are rank'd under these Heads. First, if the House find you free to the Box and a constant Caster, you shall be treated with Suppers at night, and a Cawdle in the morning, and have the honour to be stiled a Lover of the House, whilst your money lasts, which certain∣ly cannot be long; for here you shall be quickly destroy'd under pretence of kindness, as Men were by the Lamiae of old; which you may easily gather if from no other consideration than this; that I have seen three persons sit down at twelve penny In and In, and each draw forty shillings a piece in less than three hours, the Box hath had three pound, and all the three Gamesters have been losers. Secondly, consider how many persons have been ruined by play, I could nominate a great many, some who have had great estates have lost them, others having good employments have been forced to desert them and hide themselves
from their Creditors in some foreign Plantation by reason of those great debts they had contra∣cted through Play. Thirdly, this course of life shall make you liable to so many affronts and manifold vexati∣ons, as in time may breed distraction. Thus a young fellow not many years since, had by strange fortune run up a very small sum to a thousand pounds, and thereupon put himself in∣to a garb accordingly; but not knowing when he was well, fell to play again, fortune turn'd, he lost all, ran mad, and so died. Fourthly, is it not extreme folly for a man that hath a competent estate, to play whether he or another man shall enjoy it, and if his estate be small, then to hazard even the loss of that, and reduce himself to absolute beggery; I think it madness in the highest degree. Besides, it hath been generally observed that the loss of one hundred pounds shall do you more prejudice in disquieting your mind, than the gain of two hundred pounds shall do you good, were you sure to keep it. Lastly, consider not only your loss of time which is invaluable, Nulla major est jactura quam temporis amissio, but the damage also the very watching brings to your health, and in particular to the eyes, confirmed by this Di∣stick. Allia, Vina, Venus, Fumus, Faba, Lumen & Ignis, Ista nocent oculis, sed vigilare magis.
Garlick, Wine, Women, Smoak, Beans, Fire and Light Do hurt the Eyes, but watching more the sight. I shall conclude this Character with a peni∣tential Sonnet, written by a Lord (a great Game∣ster a little before his death) which was in the Year 1580. By loss in play men oft forget The duty they do owe To him that did bestow the same, And thousand Millions moe. I loath to hear them swear and stare When they the Main have lost; Forgetting all the Byes that were With God and Holy Ghost: By wounds and nails they think to win, But truly 'tis not so; For all their frets and fumes in sin They moniless must go. There is no Wight that us'd it more Than he who wrote this Verse, Who cries peccavi now therefore, His Oaths his heart do pierce; Therefore example take by me That curse the luckless time, That ever Dice mine eyes did see, Which bred in me this crime. Lord pardon me for what is past, I will offend no more, In this most vile and sinful cast Which I will still abhor.
The Character of a Gamester. SOme say he was born with Cards in his hands, others that he will die so; but cer∣tainly it is all his life, and whether he sleeps or wakes he thinks of nothing else. He speaks the language of the Game he plays at, better than the language of his Country; and can less in∣dure a solecism in that than this: he knows no Judge but the Groom-porter, no Law but that of the Game, at which he is so expert, all appeal to him, as subordinate Judges to the supream ones. He loves Winter more than Summer, because it affords more Gamesters, and Christ∣mas more than any other time, because there is more gaming then. He gives more willingly to the Butler than to the Poors-box, and is never more religious than when he prays he may win. He imagines he is at play when he is at Church; he takes his Prayer-book for a Pack of Cards, and thinks he is shuffling when he turns over the leaves. This man will play like Nero when the City is on fire, or like Archimedes when it is sacking, rather than interrupt his Game. If play hath reduced him to poverty, then he is like one a drowning, who fastens upon any thing next at hand. Amongst other of his shipwracks, he hath happily lost shame, and this want sup∣plies him. No man puts his brain to more use than he; for his life is a daily invention, and
each meal a new stratagem, and like a flie will boldly sup at every man's cup. He will offer you a quart of Sack out of his joy to see you, and in requital of this courtesie you can do no less than pay for it. His borrowings are like Subsidies, each man a shilling or two, as he can well dispend, which they lend him not with the hope to be repaid, but that he will come no more. Men shun him at length as they do an Infection, and having done with the Aye as his cloaths to him, hung on as long as he could, at last drops off. CHAP. I. Of BILLIARDS. THe Gentile, cleanly and most ingenious Game at Billiards had its first original from Italy, and for the excellency of the Recre∣ation is much approved of, and plaid by most Nations in Europe, especially in England, there being few Towns of note therein which hath not a publick Billiard-Table, neither are they want∣ing in many Noble and private Families in the Country, for the recreation of the mind and ex∣ercise of the body. The form of a Billiard-Table is oblong, that is, something longer than it is broad, it is rail'd
round, which rail or ledge ought to be a little swell'd or stuft with fine flox or cotton: the superficies of the Table must be covered with green-cloth, the finer and more freed from knots the better it is: the Board must be levell'd as exactly as may be, so that a Ball may run true upon any part of the Table without leaning to any side thereof; but what by reason of ill-sea∣son'd boards which are subject to warp, or the floar on which it stands being uneven, or in time by the weight of the Table, and the Gamesters yielding and giving way, there are very few Billiard-Tables which are found true; and there∣fore such which are exactly level'd are highly valuable by a good player; for at a false Table it is impossible for him to show the excellency of his Art and Skill, whereby Bunglers many times by knowing the windings and tricks of the Table have shamefully beaten a very good Game∣ster, who at a true Table would have given him three in five. But to proceed in the description thereof; at the four corners of the Table there are holes, and at each side exactly in the middle one, which are called Hazards, and have hanging at the bottoms Nets to receive the Balls, and keep them from falling to the ground when they are hazarded. I have seen at some Ta∣bles Wooden Boxes for the hazards, six of them as aforesaid, but they are nothing near so com∣mendable as the former, because a Ball struck
hard is more apt to flie out of them when struck in. There is to the Table belonging an Ivory Port, which stands at one end of the Table, and an Ivory King at the other, two small Ivory Balls and two Sticks; where note if your Balls are not compleatly round, you can never expect good proof in your play: your Sticks ought to be heavy, made of Brasile, Lignum vitae, or some other weighty wood, which at the broad end must be tipt with Ivory; where note, if the heads happen to be loose, you will never strike a smart stroke, you will easily perceive that de∣fect by the hollow deadness of your stroak and faint running of your Ball. The Game is five by Day-light, or seven if odds be given, and three by Candle-light or more according to odds in Houses that make a livelihood thereof; but in Gentlemens houses there is no such restriction; for the Game may justly admit of as many as the Gamesters please to make. For the Lead you are to stand on the one side of the Table opposite to the King, with your Ball laid near the Cushion, and your Adversary on the other in like posture; and he that with his Stick makes his Ball come nearest the King leads first. The Leader must have a care that at the first stroke his Ball touch not the end of the Table leading from the King to the Port, but after the
first stroke he need not fear to do it, and let him so lead that he may either be in a possibility of passing the next stroke, or so cunningly lie that he may be in a very fair probability of ha∣zarding his Adversaries Ball, that very stroak he plaid after him. The first contest is who shall pass first, and in that strife there are frequent opportunities of hazarding one another; and it is very pleasant to observe what policies are used in hindering one another from the pass, as by turning the Port with a strong clever stroke; for if you turn it with your Stick it must be set right a∣gain; but indeed more properly he that doth it should lose one; sometimes it is done (when you see it is impossible to pass) by laying your Ball in the port, or before your Adversaries, and then all he can do is to pass after you; if he hath past and you dare not adventure to pass after him, for fear he should in the interim touch the King and so win the end, you must wait upon him and watch all opportunities to hazard him, or King him; that is, when his Ball lyeth in such manner that when you strike his Ball may hit down the King, and then you win one. Here note, that if you should King him, and your Ball fly over the Table, or else run into a Hazard, that then you lose one notwithstand∣ing. The player ought to have a curious eye, and
very good judgment when he either intends to King his Adversary's Ball, or hazard, in taking or quartering out just so much of the Ball as will accomplish either; which observation must be noted in passing on your Adversary's Ball, or corner of the Port. Some I have observed so skilful at this Recreation, that if they have had less than a fifth part of a Ball they would rarely miss King or Hazard. As this is a cleanly pastime, so there are Laws or Orders made against lolling slovingly Play∣ers, that by their forfeitures they may be redu∣ced to regularity and decency; wherefore be careful you lay not your Hand on the Table when you strike, or let your Sleeve drag upon it, if you do it is a loss; if you smoak and let the ashes of your Pipe fall on the Table, where∣by oftentimes the Cloth is burned, it is a for∣feiture, but that should not so much deter you from it as the hindrance piping is to your play. When you strike a long stroke, hold your stick neatly between your two fore-fingers and your thumb, then strike smartly, and by aim∣ing rightly you may when you please either fetch back your Adversary's Ball when he lyeth fair for a pass, or many times when he lyeth behind the King, and you at the other end of the Table, you may King him backward. If you lie close you may use the small end of your stick, or the flat of the big end, raising
up one end over your shoulder, which you shall think most convenient for your purpose. Have a care of raking, for if it be not a for∣feiture it is a fault hardly excusable, but if you touch your Ball twice it is a loss. Beware when you jobb your Ball through the Port with the great end of your Stick that you throw it not down, if you do, it is a loss, but do it so handsomely that at one stroke with∣out turning the Port with your Stick you effect your purpose; it is good play to turn the Port with your Ball, and so hinder your Adversary from passing; neither is it amiss if you can to make your Adversary a Fornicator, that is ha∣ving past your self a little way, and the others Ball being hardly through the Port, you put him back again, and it may be quite out of pass. It argueth policy to lay a long Hazard some∣times for your Antagonist, whereby he is often entrapped for rashly adventuring at that distance, thinking to strike your Ball into the Hazard, which lieth very near it, he frequently runs in himself by reason of that great distance. There is great art in lying abscond, that is, to lie at bo-peep with your Adversary, either subtlely to gain a pass or hazard. Here note, if your Adversary hath not past and lyeth up by the King, you may endeavour to pass again, which if you do, and touch the King, it is two, but if thrown down you lose: Some instead of a King use a string and a bell,
and then you need not fear to have the end, if you can pass first; this is in my judgment bung∣ling play, there being not that curious art of finely touching at a great distance a King that stands very ticklishly. For your better understanding of the Game read the ensuing Orders. But there is no bet∣ter way than practice to make you perfect therein. ORDERS to be observed by such who will play at Billiards. 1. IF the Leader touch the end of the Table with his Ball at the first stroke he loseth one. 2. If the Follower intend to hit his Adver∣saries Ball, or pass at one stroke he must string his Ball, that is, lay it even with the King, or he loseth one. 3. He that passeth through the Port hath the advantage of touching the King which is one if not thrown down. 4. He that passeth twice, his Adversary having not past at all, and toucheth the King without throwing him down wins two ends. 5. He that passeth not hath no other advan∣tage than the Hazards. 6. He that is a Fornicator (that is, hath past
through the back of the Port) he must pass twice through the fore-part, or he cannot have the advantage of passing that end. 7. He that hits down the port or King, or hazards his own Ball, or strikes either Ball over the Table loseth one. 8. He that hazards his Adversarie's Ball, or makes it hit down the King, winneth the end. 9. If four play, two against two, he that mistakes his stroke loseth one to that side he is of. 10. He that after both Balls plaid, removes the Port without consent, or strikes his Ball twice together, or that his Adversaries Ball touch his Stick-hand, Clothes, or playeth his Adversaries Balls, loseth one. 11. He that sets not one Foot upon the ground when he strikes his Ball shall lose an end, or if he lays his hand or sleeve on the Cloth. 12. A stander by though he betts shall not instruct, direct or speak in the Game without consent, or being first asked; if after he is ad∣vertised hereof he offend in this nature, for e∣very fault he shall instantly forfeit Two pence for the good of the Company, or not be suf∣fer'd to stay in the Room. 13. He that plays a Ball, while the other runs, or takes up a Ball before it lie still, loseth an end.
14. He that removes the Port with his Stick when he strikes his Ball, and thereby prevents his Adversaries Ball from passing, loseth an end. 15. All Controversies are to be decided by the Standers by, upon asking judgment. Here note, that whosoever breaks the King forfeits a shilling, for the Port ten shillings, and each Stick five shillings. 16. Five ends make a Game by Day-light, and three by Candle-light. The ORDERS in Verse, as I found them fram'd for a very ancient BILLIARD-TABLE. 1. THe Leading-ball the upper end may'nt hit; For if it doth, it loseth one by it. 2. The Follower with the King lie even shall If he doth pass or hit the others ball; Or else lose one: the like if either lay Their arm or hand on board when they do play. 3. That man wins one who with the others ball So strikes the King that he doth make him fall. 4. If striking at a hazard both run in, The ball struck at thereby an end shall win. 5. He loseth one that down the Port doth fling; The like doth he that justles down the King.
6. He that in play the adverse ball shall touch With stick, hand, or cloaths forfeits just as much. 7. And he that twice hath past shall touch the King, The other not past at all shall two ends win. 8. If both the balls over the Table flie, The striker of them loseth one thereby. And if but one upon the board attend, The striker still the loser of the end. 9. One foot upon the ground must still be set, Or one end's lost if you do that forget: And if you twice shall touch a ball e're He Hath struck between an end for him is free. 10. If any Stander-by shall chance to bet, And will instruct, he then must pay the set. 11. The Port or King being set, who moves the same With hand or stick shall lose that end or Game. 12. He that can touch being past, or strike the other Into the Hazard is allowed another. 13. If any Stander-by shall stop a ball, The Game being lost thereby he pays for all. 14. If any past be stricken back again, His pass before shall be accounted vain. 15. He that breaks any thing with violence, King, Port, or Stick is to make good th'offence. 16. If any not the Game doth fully know May ask another whether it be so. Remember also when the Game you win, To set it up for fear of wrangling. 17. He that doth make his ball the King light hit, And holes th'other scores two ends for it.
There are several other Orders which only concern the House which I omit, as impertinent to the Rules of playing at Billiards. Since Recreation is a thing lawful in it self if not abused, I cannot but commend this as the most gentile and innocent of any I know, if rightly used; there being none of those cheats to be plaid at this as at several other Games I shall hereafter mention. There is nothing here to be used but pure art; and therefore I shall only caution you to go to play, that you suffer not your self to be over-matcht, and do not when you meet with a better Gamester than your self condemn the Table, and do not swear as one did playing at Nine-Pins, this L. N. hath put false pins upon me. To conclude, I believe this Pastime is not so much used of late as formerly, by reason of those spunging Caterpillars which swarm where any Billiard-Tables are set up, who making that single Room their Shop, Kitcing and Bed-cham∣ber; their Shop, for this is the place where they wait for ignorant Cullies to be their Customers; their Kitching, for from hence comes the Major part of their provision, drinking and smoaking being their common sustenance; and when they can perswade no more Persons to play at the Ta∣ble, they make it their dormitory, and sleep un∣der it; the Floor is their Feather-bed, the legs of the Table their Bed-posts, and the Table the Tester; they dream of nothing but Hazards,
being never out of them, of passing and repas∣sing, which may be fitly applied to their lewd lives, which makes them continually pass from one Prison to another till their lives are ended; and there is an end of the Game. CHAP. II. Of TRUCKS. TRucks is an Italian Game, and is much used in Spain and Ireland; it is not very unlike Billiards, but more boisterous, and in my opi∣nion less gentile. It is a pastime less noted in England, where∣fore the Tables are rarely met withal; one I have seen at Tower-hill, but so bunglingly com∣posed, and so irregularly form'd and fram'd, that it was fit for none to play at but such who never saw or plaid at any other than that. A right Truck-table ought to be somewhat larger than a Billiard-table, being at least three foot longer than it is broad and covered with Green Cloth, but it need not be every whit so fine as the former. It hath three holes at each end, besides the corner holes; the middlemost at one end stands directly against the Sprigg which stands for the King at Billiards, and the other end, middle∣most
hole, stands exactly against the Argolio, which is in the nature of a port at Billiards. Of each side there are ten holes, none of these have nets to receive the Balls, and therefore it is a sport more troublesome than Billiards. The Argolio stands as the Port at Billiards as aforesaid, and is made of a strong hoop of Iron fastned to the Table, that it cannot stir, having a wider passage than a Port, and in its bending is higher from the Board. The Sprigg is another piece of Iron, about the thickness of a Man's little finger, and is tal∣ler than the Billiard King, and driven into the Board, so that it is immovable. The Tacks with which they play, are much bigger than Billiard Sticks, and are headed at each end with Iron; the small end is round from the middle, or farther running taperwise, but the great end is flat beneath, though rounding a top; good Gamesters play for the most part with the small end. The Balls are made of Ivory, and are in big∣ness like Tennis-balls, and require much art in their rounding, for otherwise they will never run true. You may lead as you do at Billiards, but that is lookt upon as bungling play; the best Artists at this Game usually bank at the fourth Cushion from the end where the Argolio stands, and is commonly markt for distinction with a little chalk.
The Game, because it is sooner up than Billi∣ards, is Nine, and sometimes Fifteen, or indeed as many, or as few as you please. He that leads must have a care he hit not the end, for that is a loss, but he may bank if he please; if the Leader lie in pass, the Follower must hit him away if he can, for if he pass it is ten to one but he wins the end, because he may boldly strike at the Sprigg. If the Lea∣der lies not in pass, he may either strike at him, or lye as well to pass as the former, and then all the strife lyeth in trucking one another, or striving who shall pass first. In passing here is this subtlety to be obser∣ved, if your Adversary's Ball lie straight before the Argolio, and yours lies a little behind it, and it is your stroke, you would think it impos∣sible to pass by reason of that obstruction; whereas it is easily done thus, take the small end of your Tack, and set it sloaping behind your Ball, but touch it not, for if you do, you lose the end; then bend your fist, and give your Stick a smart cuff, and it will raise your Ball o∣ver your Adversary's through the Port with much facility, this is called by Artists, falkating; all that the follower can do to save the end, is (lying as he doth just against the Sprigg) to pass and touch the Sprigg at one stroke, and that is two; if he touch not the end, is the others; if in striking the Sprigg too hard, he run not our of one hole or other, and then he loseth.
For the advantage of striking you may lay one hand on the Table, arm, &c. without for∣feiture; but you must not touch your Ball with your sleeve or hand without leave first obtained under the loss of the end. As thus, you may not know which is your Ball, upon this you cry, By your leave, Sir, and then you may take it up and see by the mark whether it be yours or not. If you truck your Adversary's Ball it is one, but if you do it and run out, or flye over the Table, you lose one, so if you strike at your Adversary's Ball, and one or both flye over the Table it is a loss to you. If after you have past you truck your Ad∣versary's Ball and hit the Sprigg, it is three; if you pass at one stroke, truck your Adversa∣ry's Ball and hit the Sprigg, you win four; this is very rarely done, as you may well imagine, yet I have seen it done, but never done by de∣sign, but casually; there is much art in holding your Tack rightly, the best way I can inform you is to hold the great end in your right hand, and level the small end over your fore∣finger and thumb, leaning your left arm on the Table, for the more steddy and direct guidance of your Tack to transmit the Ball to what part of the Table you shall think most requisite, and when you intend a smart stroke let your shove be brisk. In short, I must leave this as all other Games
to your observation and practice; only this let me advise you, if any difference arise, leave it to the judgment of the Table, to decide the Controversie, but end it not with your lives, by using two such clubbing Arbitrators as you play with, for with one stroke (they are so strong and heavy) they are sufficient to dash out a Man's brains, and by the several great mischiefs have been done thereby be advised not to fall into the like dangerous rashness. One thing I had almost forgot, and that is, if you fulkate over hand be very careful how you strike your Ball, for by carelesness or missing your Ball you frequently wound the Table. Now fulkating over hand, is, when you lie near the Cushion for a pass, and your Adversary's Ball lies directly before yours, to make yours to jump over his through the Argolio, you must strike a strong stroke, sloaping downwards, which will make your Ball mount aloft. Orders for a Truck-Table. 1. IF the Leader touch the end, it is the loss of one. 2. If the Follower intend to hit his Adver∣sary's Ball from the pass at the first stroke he must string his Ball even with the Sprigg, or loseth one. 3. He that passeth and first hits the Sprigg wins one.
4. He that passeth twice and hits the Sprigg wins two. 5. He that passeth backward (and is called a Fornicator) he must pass twice through the fore∣part, or he cannot have the advantage of passing that end. 6. He that trucks his own Ball, or strikes it, or his Adversary's over the Table, loseth one. 7. He that trucks his Adversary's Ball wins two. 8. He that toucheth his Adversary's Ball with Hand, Stick, or Clothes, or strikes it for his own, loseth one. 9. He that passeth and toucheth at a stroke, wins two. 10. He that having past trucks his Adversa∣ries Ball and hits the Sprigg with his own, wins three. 11. Lastly, he that passeth, trucketh his Ad∣versary's Ball and hits with his own the Sprigg, wins four. There are other trivial Orders, which for brevity sake I here omit.
CHAP. III. Of BOWLING. BOwling is a Game or Recreation, which if moderately used is very healthy for the body, and would be much more commendable than it is, were it not for those swarms of Rooks which so pester Bowling-Greens, Bares, and Bowling-Alleys where any such places are to be found, some making so small a spot of ground yield them more annually than fifty Acres of Land shall do elsewhere about the City, and this done, cunning, betting, crafty matching, and basely playing booty. In Bowling there is a great art in chusing out his ground, and preventing the windings, hang∣ing, and many turning advantages of the same, whether it be in open wide places, as Bares and Bowling greens, or in close Bowling-Alleys. Where note that in Bowling the chusing of the Bowl is the greatest cunning. Flat Bowls are best for close Alleys; round byassed Bowls for open grounds of advantage, and Bowls round as a Ball for green swarths that are plain and level. There is no advising by writing how to bowl, practice must be your best tutor, which must ad∣vise you the risings, fallings, and all the several
advantages that are to be had in divers Greens, and Bowling-Alleys; all that I shall say, have a care you are not in the first place rookt out of your money; and in the next place you go not to these places of pleasure unseasonably, that is when your more weighty business and con∣cerns require your being at home, or some-where else. The Character of a Bowling-Ally and Bow∣ling-Green. A Bowling-Green, or Bowling-Ally is a place where three things are thrown a∣way besides the Bowls, viz. Time, Money and Curses, and the last ten for one. The best sport in it, is the Gamesters, and he enjoyns it that looks on and betts nothing. It is a School of wrangling, and worse than the Schools; for here men will wrangle for a hairs bredth, and make a stir where a straw would end the controversie. Never did Mimmick screw his body into hall the forms these Men do theirs; and it is an Ar∣ticle of their Creed, that the bending back of the body or screwing in of their shoulders is suf∣ficient to hinder the over-speed of the Bowl, and that the running after it adds to its speed. Though they are skilful in ground, I know not what grounds they have for loud lying, crying
sometimes the Bowl is gone a mile, a mile, &c. when it comes short of the Jack by six yards; and on the contrary crying short, short, when he hath overbowled as far. How sensless these Men appear when they are speaking sense to their Bowls, putting confidence in their intrea∣ties for a good cast! It is the best discovery of humours, especially in the losers, where you may observe fine variety of impatience, whilst some fret, rail, swear, and cavil at every thing, others rejoyce and laugh, as if that was the sole design of their creation. To give you the Moral of it, it is the Em∣blem of the World, or the Worlds ambition, where most are short, over, wide or wrong by∣assed, and some few justle in to the Mistress, Fortune! And here it is as in the Court, where the nearest are the most spighted, and all Bowls aim at the other. CHAP. IV. Of a Game at Chess. CHess is a Royal Game and more difficult to be understood than any other Game whatever, and will take up sometimes in the playing so long a time that I have known two play a Fortnight at times before the Game hath
been ended: and indeed I believe the tedious∣ness of the Game hath caus'd the practice there∣of to be so little used; however since this pa∣stime is so highly ingenious that there is none can parallel it, I shall here lay down some brief Instructions tending to the knowledge thereof. The first and highest is a King, the next in height is a Queen, the cloven heads are Bishops; they who have heads cut assaunt like a feather in a Helmet are called Knights, the last are cal∣led Rooks, with a round button'd cap on his head, and these signifie the Country and Pea∣santry, the Pawns are all alike, and each Noble∣man hath one of them to wait upon him. The Chess-men standing on the board, you must place the White King in the fourth house being black from the corner of the field in the first and lower rank, and the black King in the white house, being the fourth on the other side in your Adversaries first rank opposite to the white King; then place the white Queen next to the white King in a white house, which is the fourth on that side of the field; likewise the black Queen in a black house next to a black King in the same rank. Then place on the other side of the King in the same rank, first a Bishop, because he being a Man of counsel is placed before the Knight, who is a man of action or execution; the Knight af∣ter the Bishop, and after the Knight place the Rook (who is the peasant or Country-man) in
the last place or corner of the field: place also on the Queens side and next to her a Bishop, next a Knight and then a Rook; the Pawns take up the last place; one of which you must place before each Nobleman as Attendants, so that these great or Noblemen fill up the first rank and the Pawns the second from one corner of the field to the other, and as many great Men and Pawns as belong to the King so many hath the Queen, viz. three great men and four Pawns a-piece, that is, one Bishop, one Knight, and one Rook with their Pawns. Having thus placed and ordered your men, you must in the next place consider their march, how they advance and take guard and check. The Pawns do commonly begin first the onset, and their march is forward in their own file, one house at once only and never backward; for the Pawns alone never retreat, the manner of his taking men is side-ways in the next house forward of the next file to him on either side, where when he hath captivated his enemy, and placed himself in his seat, he proceeds and re∣moves forward one house at once in that file, un∣til he find an opportunity to take again. The Pawn guards a Piece of his side which stands in that place, where if it were one of the contrary party he might take it. In like man∣ner the Pawn checks the King, viz. as he takes not as he goes, which Check if the adverse King cannot shun either by taking up the Pawn himself
(if the Pawn be unguarded, or occasion his ta∣king by some of his Pieces, he must of necessity remove himself out of the Pawns Check) or if it lie not in his power it is pawn-Mate, and so the Game is ended, and lost by him whose King is so Mate. The Rook goes backward and forward in any file and cross-ways to and fro in any rank as far as he will, so that there stands no piece between him and the place he would go to. Thus he doth guard his own and check the King also, which check if the King can neither cover by the interposition of some piece of his between the checking Rook and himself, nor take the Rook, nor be the cause of his taking, he must remove himself out of that check or it is Mate, and the Game is up. The Knight skips forward, backward and on either side from the place he stands in to the next save one of a different colour, with a sideling march or a sloap, thus he kills his enemies, guards his friends, and checks the King of the adverse party, which because (like the Pawns check) it cannot be covered, the King must either remove or course the Knight to be taken (for he himself cannot take the Knight that checks him) or its Mate, and the Game is up. The Bishop walks always in the same colour of the field that he is first placed in, forward and backward, asloap every way as far as he lists; provided, that the way be clear between him
and the place he intends to go to: thus he re∣bukes the adversary, guards his consorts, and checks the adverse King, which not being avoid∣ed as aforesaid, is Mate to him and the Game is ended. The Queens walk is more universal; for she goes the draughts of all the aforenamed pieces, (the Knights only excepted, for her march is not from one colour to the other asloap) so far as she listeth finding the way obstructed by any piece, and thus she disturbs her Adversaries, protects her subjects, and mates the King, unless (as a∣foresaid) he removes, covers, takes, or causes her to be taken, otherwise it is his Mate and the Game is concluded. The Kings draught is from his own to the next to him any way, that either is empty of his own subjects, or where he may surprise any un∣guarded enemy, or where he may stand free from the check of any of the adverse party. Thus he confounds his foes, defends his friends, but checks not the King his enemy, who never check one another; for there must ever be one house or place at least between the two Kings, though unpossest of any other piece; and if one King be compel'd to flie for refuge to the King of the adverse party, then it is Mate or a Stale, and so he that gives the first wins the Game. Let this suf∣fice for the various draughts and several walks of the Chess-men: but this is not all, I shall give you some other Instructions as brief as I may,
and refer the rest to your own observation. Kings and Queens have seven a piece to attend them. The King whether white or black guards five persons before he goes forth, and being once advanced into the field, though it be but into the second house, he then and afterwards in his March guards eight houses till he come again to one side or other of the field. The five the King guards before his March, are the Queen, the Bishop, his own, his Queens, and his Bishops Pawn. The Queen protects her King, and Bishop, her Kings, her Bishops, and her own Pawn. Thus the Queen guards as many as the King before she goes forth, and after till the Game be won or lost. The Kings Bishop guards the Kings Pawn, and his Knights, the Queens Bishop guards, the Queens Pawn and her Knights guard but three houses apiece before they go forth; but after they are marched off from the side of the field, they guard as many houses as the King and Queen do. Those houses which the Knights guard ere they go out, are the Kings. The Knight guards the Kings Pawn, and the third house in the front of the Kings Bishops Pawn, and the third house in the front of the Kings Rooks Pawn. The Queens Knight guards her Pawn, and the third house in the front of her Bishops Pawn, also the third house in the front of her Rooks Pawn. The Kings Rook guards his own Pawn,
and the Kings Knight and no more till he be off of the side of the field, and then he guards four houses, and the same does the Queens Rook. The Pawns likewise guard these places before they be advanced into the field, viz. The Kings Pawn guards the third house before the Queen, and the third before the Kings Bishop, the Queens Pawn guards the third house before the King, and the third before her Bishop. The Kings Bishop's Pawn guards the third house be∣fore the King, and the third before the Kings Knight. The Queens Bishop's Pawn guards the third house before the Queen, and the third be∣fore the Queens Knight. The Kings Knights Pawn guards the third house before the Kings Bishop, and the third before the Kings Rook. The Queens Knight's Pawn guards the third house before the Queens Bishop, and the third before the Queens Rook. The Kings Rooks Pawns, and the Queens Rooks Pawn guard but one house apiece, that is to say, the third houses before the Knight, because they stand on the side of the field. Next consider the value of the great men. The King exposeth not himself to danger upon every occasion, but the Queen is under him as General, and doth more service than any two great Men besides; and when it happens that she is lost, her King most certainly loseth the field, unless the Adversary knows not how to make use of so great an advantage. Wherefore
if a King lose two or three of his best men in taking the opponents Queen, yet he hath the best of it, if he can but manage his Game rightly. Next to the Queen in value is the Rook, and is as much in worth above the Bishop and Knight, as the Queen is above him; so that a Rook is more worth than two Bishops, or two Knights, because he can give a Mate by the help of the King, which no other piece can do, unless plaid with excellent skill. Bishops are accounted better than Knights, because they can give a Mate with a King when no other men are left to help them, with more ease than the Knights can; for they seldom or never do it: yet it is more dangerous to lose a Knight than a Bishop, because the Knights check is more dangerous than the Bishops; for the Bishop is tyed to one colour of the field out of which he cannot pass, but the Knight passeth through all the houses of the field; the Bishops check may be covered, the Knights cannot; be∣sides if it fall out that one of the Kings hath no other men left but his Bishops, and the other King none but his Knights, the Knights with their checks can take the Bishops one after ano∣ther, because the Bishops cannot guard each o∣ther, which the Knights can do; so that at the beginning of the Game it is better to lose Bi∣shops for the Adversaries Knights, than the con∣trary.
The difference of the worth of Pawns is not so great as that of Noblemen, because there is not such variety in their walks, only thus much, the Kings Bishop's Pawn is the best in the field among the Pawns, and therefore the Gamester ought to be very careful of him; for if it should happen that the black King lose his Bishop's Pawn to gain the white Kings Pawn, the black Kings loss is the greater, because he cannot af∣ter this accident make a rank of Pawns of three of a rank on that side of the field for his own security, which is a great disadvantage, so that it is better for either of the Kings to lose his own Pawn than his Bishops. But if you should object that the King which loseth his Bishops Pawn may relieve himself on the other side of the field, turning to his Queens Rooks quarters, where he shall have Pawns to succour him, I answer, 'tis true, he may do so, but he will be a longer time in effecting his bu∣siness, because there are more pieces between him and his Queens Rooks by one draught than between his own Rook and himself; so that in playing that draught he indangers the whole Game if his adversary know how to make use of advantages. The Kings Pawn is next in worth, which oftentimes keeps the King from check by discovery; then the Queens Pawn is next, and after that the Knights, and last of all the Rooks Pawns, because they guard but one house apiece in the field.
The King and the Pawn have certain privi∣ledges granted them, which none of the other Chess-men have; as for instance, The King whose remove (as hath been already mentioned) is from the place of his standing at any time to the next house in file or rank of any side (that is one only step at once,) yet if at any time his rank be empty of his men, so that no one stands between the King and the Rook of either corner, the King may then shift or change with what Rook he pleaseth, between whom and himself the way stands clear from other men; and that for his better security, provided, that neither the King nor the Rook he intends to change with, hath not as yet been removed from the place of their first standing. Now the manner of the Kings shifting or changing with a Rook is thus: The rank cleared as aforesaid, and neither King nor Rook having yet stirred, he may go two draughts at once to his own Rook, and so towards his Queens Rook, causing the Rook he changeth with to change his place, and come and stand by him on the other side; that is, his own Rook in the Bishops place, and the Queens Rook in the Queens place, and either of these changes but for one draught. This is the Kings first prerogative. The second is, that whereas any man may be taken by any adversary, if he be brought so near as to come within the compass, the King cannot, but he is only to be saluted by his adversary
with the word check, advising him thereby to look about him the more warily, and provide for his own safety: now if that adversary do this unguarded so near the King, he may step thi∣ther by his true draught, and the King may stay him with his own hand, if he judge it con∣venient. As for the Pawn, the first priviledge he hath, is, that whereas his walk is but to the next house forward in his own file at once when he march∣eth, and to the next house side-long forward of the next file of either side, when he takes, I say, his priviledge is, that he may remove to the second house forward, which is the fourth rank in his own file for his first draught, and ever after but one forward at once. The second priviledge is greater, and that is, when any Pawn is come so far as to the first rank of the adversary, and seats himself in any of his Noble houses, he is dignified for this fact with the name and power of a Queen, and so becomes chief of his own Kings forces if the first Queen were slain before, and if the first Queen be yet standing in the field, the Pawn coming to the rank aforesaid in any house whatsoever, may there make what piece you please which you have already lost. Some are of opinion that Chefs as well as Draughts may be plaid by a certain Rule, indeed I am partly inclined to believe it notwithstand∣ing that most are of a contrary opinion.
The first remove is an advantage, and there∣fore you must draw for who shall have the first draught, which may be done with a black and white man distributed into either hand, and offer'd the Opponent which he will chuse; if he chuse his own man the first draught is his; but when a Game is ended, and a Mate given, he is to have the first Draught next Game who gave the former Mate. The first remove is divers according to the judgment of the Gamester, as some will first remove their Kings Knights Pawn one single re∣move, that is to the third house in his own file, others play the Kings Rooks Pawn first a double draught; but the best way is to play the Kings Pawn first a double remove, that so if they are not prevented by their adversaries playing the like, they may still remove that Pawn forward with good guard; for he will prove very inju∣rious to the adverse King. This Pawn I shall advise you to remove first, but not so venturously as a double remove, be∣cause if you cannot guard him cunningly, then are you like to lose him with a check to your King, by the Queens coming forth upon him to the great hazard of your Kings Rook; there∣fore play your Kings Rook one single remove, that there may be way made for the coming forth of Queen one way two houses asloap, and to your Kings Bishop the other way three hou∣ses asloap, and so upon the neglect of your ad∣versary
he may be put to a Scholars check, at least in danger of it: here note it is ill to play the Bishops Pawn first, and worse to play the Queens. He that would be an Artist in this noble Game, must be so careful to second his pieces, that if any man advanced be taken, the enemy may be likewise taken by that piece that guards or seconds it; so shall he not clearly lose any man, which should it fall out contrarily might lose the Game; he must also make his passages free for retreat, as occasion shall serve, lest he be worsted. In defending you must also be very careful that you are as able to assault as your enemy; for you must not only answer your adversaries assault by foreseeing his design by his play, and preventing it, but you must likewise devise plots, how to pester and grieve your assailant, and chiefly how to entrap such pieces as are advan∣ced by him, preventing their retreat, amongst which a Pawn is the soonest ensnared, because he cannot go back for succour or relief; but Bishops and Rooks are harder to be surprized, because they can march from one side of the field to the other to avoid the ensuing danger; but the Knights and Queens of all are most difficultly be∣tray'd, because they have so many places of re∣fuge, and the Queen more especially: where note as a great piece of policy, that if possible you constantly have as many guards upon any
one piece of yours as you see your enemy hath when he advanceth to take it, and be sure with∣all that your guards be of less value than the pieces he encountreth you with; for then if he fall to taking you will reap advantage thereby; but if you see you cannot guard yours but must of necessity lose it, then be very circumspect and see whether you can take a far better piece of his in case he takes yours, by advancing some other piece of yours in guard; for so as it often falls out, that yours which you had given over for lost may be saved, whereas no other way could have done it. When an adverse piece comes in your way, so that by it all may be taken, consider with your self first whether it be equal in worth to yours; next whether it can do you any damage in the next Draught, if not let it alone; for as it is best to play first, so it is to take last; unless as was said you might take the piece clear, or get a better than that you lose to take it, or at least dis∣order him one Pawn in his taking your man that took his; but when you have the advantage be it but of one good piece for a worse, or of a Pawn clear, then it is your best way to take man for man as often as you can; besides you are to note, that whatsoever piece your adversary plays most or best withall, be sure, if it lie in your power, to deprive him thereof, though it be done with loss of the like, or of one somewhat bet∣ter, as a Bishop for a Knight; for by this means
you may frustrate your adversaries design and become as cunning as himself. Now the chief aim at Chefs is to give the Mate, which is when you so check the King of the adverse party, that he can neither take the checking piece (because it is guarded) nor cover the check, nor yet remove out of it. Your care ought to be in the interim how to deprive him of some of his best pieces, as his Queen or Rook; and the way to entrap a Queen is two-fold, First by confining her to her King, so that she may not remove from him for leaving him in check of an adverse piece; Secondly, by bringing her to or espying her in such a place as a Knight of yours may check her King, and the next draught take her. In the same manner you may serve a Bishop if the adverse Queen covers her slope-wise; but if she stand not in such a po∣sture she may be brought to it; entice her thi∣ther with some unguarded man, which she out of eagerness of taking for nothing, may indis∣creetly bring her self into trouble. But if you intend to catch the Queen with a Knight, imagine that the adverse King stands in his own place unremoved, and that the Queen hath brought her self to stand in that place where the Kings Rooks Pawn stood; first, she standing in this posture bring if you can one of your Knights to check her King in the third house before his own Bishop; and if there be no man ready to take up your Knight, immediate∣ly
he will take up the Queen at the next draught. The Rooks are also to be surprized two ways; first, by playing your Bishop into your Knights Pawns first place of standing, which Bishop shall march aslope towards the adverse Rook of the opposite corner, which if you can make unco∣vered of the Knights Pawn, your Bishop will then undoubtedly take clear for nothing; the o∣ther way is like that of surprizing the Queen with a Bishop or a Knight; where you must take notice that your adversaries Queens Rook is so much the easier to be taken with your Queens Knight, that that Knight at his third draught may check the King and take the same Rook at his fourth draught. There are several other ways to take a Rook, which practice must inform you. There is an ingenious way of taking a great man for a Pawn; when you espy two great men of your adversaries standing in one and the same rank, and but one house between them, then prepare a Guard (if you have it not ready to your hand) for a Pawn, which bring up to the rank next to them in the middle or front of both of them, and without doubt, if he save the one your Pawn will take the other; this way of taking is called a Fork or Dilemma. The neatest and most prejudicial trick you can put upon your adversary at Chess is a Check by discovery, which may be thus effected; observe
when you find your adversaries King any way weakly guarded, or perhaps not at all, that is, easie to be checked, then before you bring that piece that can check him there to provide some other man in that course that checks him not; afterwards bring that piece of yours which will check him (your brought-piece being away) and then with all possible speed remove away for that former piece where it may most annoy him, saying withall, Check by discovery of your last brought a piece: which he being compelled to cover or remove, you may do him a greater prejudice with that piece you removed from between the check at the next draught thus de∣monstrated. Suppose you play with the White-men, he removes first his Kings Pawn a double draught forward, you answer him with the like play; he then plays out his Kings Knight in front of his Kings Bishop's Pawn, you do the like with yours: that Knight of his takes your Kings Pawn, and your Knight takes his likewise; he advances the Queens Pawn, and removes to chase away or to take your Knight; you play up your white Queen one remove before your King to frighten his Knight also: he thinks it better to save his Knight from your Queen, than take yours with his Queens Pawn; and there∣fore conveys him away into a more secure place; you play your Kings Knight in front of his Queens Bishop's Pawn, and therewithall say
Check by discovery of your Queen; now let him cover this check by Discovery as well as he can, your Knight at the next draught will assuredly take his Queen. There are several other ways to make a discovery, and a Mate given with it, which is the noblest Mate of all. A Queen if lost indangers much the Game; but if there be Pawns lft on either side, there is possibility of making a new Queen, and so by consequence the renovation of the Game, which ten to one was lost before: There are several ways to Mate this Queen and estate her in as great power as the former, for brevity sake, two Pawns in files next one to the other, and plaid first one forward and the other back∣ward close together, is a good way to make a new Queen, especially if any one of them be guarded underneath with a Rook, for so they will force their way before them, nor can any of them be taken without great difficulty and danger. As to short Mates take these observations: having both placed your men and yours the first draught; suppose you advance your Kings Pawn forward one single remove, your ad∣versary plays his Kings Pawn forward a double remove in his own file; you at your second draught come out with your Queen upon that Pawn, placing her in the house forward of your Kings Rooks file, your enemy to guard his Kings Pawn plays forth his Queens Knight into
the third House of the Queens Bishops file, you (hoping that he will not spy the attempt) bring not for your third draught your Kings Bishop, which you place in the fourth house of your Queens Bishops file, he not perceiving your intention judging all secure makes for your Queen with his Kings Knight, playing it in the front of his Kings Bishops Pawn, either to chase her away or take her; you immediately upon this take up that Bishops Pawn with your Queen, and for your fourth draught give him a Mate, which is called a Scholars Mate; because any but young beginners may prevent it. You may also give a Mate at two draughts if you encounter with a raw Gamester, playing after this manner; first remove his Kings Bi∣shops Pawn a single draught (which is ill play at first) you your Kings Pawn a single remove, he his Kings Knights Pawn advanced a double re∣move for his second draught, you bringing out your Queen into the fifth house of your Kings Rooks file give him a Mate at your second draught. There is another called a Blind-Mate, and that is when your Adversary gives you a check that you cannot avoid by any means, and is in∣deed a Mate absolute; but he not seeing it to be a Mate, says only to you check, and it is there∣fore called a Blind-Mate; this should be both loss of Game and stake if you before agree not to the contrary.
A Stale may be termed a Mate and no Mate, an end of the Play but no end of the Game, be∣cause it properly should be ended with a Check-Mate. The Stale is thus: when his King hath the worst of the Game, and brought to such a strait, that he hath but one place to flie unto, and the pursuing King is so unadvised as to bar him of that place or stop it without checking him, the distressed King being no way able to remove but in Check, and having no other piece of his own that he can play, then it is a Stale and a lost Game to him that gives it. There∣fore he that follows the flying King gives him check as long as he hath any place to flye to; but when he hath none left to avoid his check, let him then say check-Mate, and both Game and Stake are won. Lastly, there is another term used in Chess∣playing, and that is called a Dead-Game, which makes (if I may say improperly) an endless end of the Game, both Gamesters saving their Stakes: and thus it is, when the Assailant falls to take all that comes near, carelesly giving man for man, so that it happens that either King hath but one man apiece left him, the Assailant fol∣lowing his eager pursuit takes his Adversaries man, not minding that his King can take his also, so that the Kings losing all their men and they being so unable to come so near as to grapple the Game is ended, but the Stakes on both sides are saved.
I shall conclude this Game with the Laws of Chess, which are these following. 1. What Piece soever of your own you touch or lift from the point whereon it standeth, you must play it for that draught if you can, and into what house you set your Man there it must stand for that draught, according to the saying at this Game, Touch and take, out of hand and stand. 2. If you take up your Adversaries man, and after think best to let it stand untaken, before you set your piece in place thereof, you must cry him mercy or lose the Game. 3. If your Adversary play a false draught, and you see it not till you play your next draught 'twill then be too late to challenge him for it. 4. If you play a false draught through mi∣stake, and your Adversary take no notice for his advantage, and plays his next draught, you can∣not recall it. 5. If you misplace your men, and so play a∣while, and then discover it, it lies in your Adversaries power to continue or begin the Game. 6. Pawns may be plaid a double remove for∣ward for their first draught, but no Pawn hath that priviledge without permission, on whose next file on either side a Pawn of your Adversa∣ries is already advanced as far as your fourth rank.
7. The standing of the King ought to be cer∣tain in his shifting and not as you please to place him as some men play. 8. If your King stand in the check of any adverse piece, and you have plaid one draught or more without avoiding the check, your Ad∣versary may say, check to you when he listeth, and for your draught then make you avoid that check you stood in, though it may be to your great peril. 9. If any one condition by wager, that he will give Mate or win the Game, and the Ad∣versary brings it to a Dead-Game, though he save the first Stake yet he loseth the Wager. 10. He that gives over the Game before it is finished, without the consent of his Adversary, loseth his Stake. Many more Observations might be here in∣serted for the understanding of this noble Game, which I am forced to wave to avoid prolixity. CHAP. V. Principal Games on CARDS. PICKET. BEfore you begin the Game at Picket, you must throw out of the Pack the Deuces, Treys, Fours and Fives, and play with the rest
of the Cards, which are in number thirty and six. The usual Set is an hundred, not but that you may make it more or less; the last Card deals and the worst is the Dealers. The Cards are all valued according to the number of the spots they bear, the Ace only ex∣cepted, which wins all other Cards, and goes for eleven. The Dealer shuffles, and the other cuts, deli∣vering what number he pleaseth at a time, so that he exceed not four nor deal under two, leaving twelve on the Table between them. He that is the elder, having lookt over his Cards, and finding never a Court-Card among them, says I have a blank, and I intend to dis∣card such a number of Cards, and that you may see mine, discard you as many as you intend; this done, the Eldest shows his Cards and reck∣ons ten for the blank, then taking up his Cards again he discards those which he judgeth most fit: here note he is always bound to that num∣ber which he first propounded. This being done, he takes in as many from the Stock as he laid out; and if it should chance to fall out that the other hath a Blank too, the youngers Blank shall bar the former and hinder his Picy and Repicy, though the eldest hands Blank consists of the biggest Cards. It is no small advantage to the eldest to have the benefit of discarding, because he may take
in eight of the twelve in the Stock discarding as many of his own for them, nor but that if he find it more advantageous he may take in a less number; after this the Antagonist may take in what he thinks fit, acquitting his hand of the like number. Here note, that let the Game be never so good, the Gamesters are both obliged to dis∣card one Card at least. After the discarding you must consider the Ruff, that is how much you can make of one suit; the eldest speaks first, and if the youngest makes no more the Ruff is good, and sets up one for every ten he can produce; as for example, for thirty reckon three, for forty four, and so onward; withall take notice you are to count as many for thirty five as for forty, and as much for forty five as fifty, and so of the rest; but from thirty five to thirty nine you must count no more than for thirty five, and so from thirty to thirty four count no more than for thirty; and this Rule is to be observed in all other higher numbers. As for Sequences and their value after the Ruff is plaid, the Elder acquaints you with his Sequences (if he have them) and they are Tierces, Quarts, Quints, Sixiesms, Septiesms, Huictiesms and Neufiesms, as thus; six, seven, and eight; nine, ten, and Knave; Queen, King, and Ace; which last is called a Tierce Major, because it is the highest. A Quart is a sequence of four Cards, a Quint of five, a Sixism of six, &c. These Sequences take their denomina∣tion
from the highest Card in the Sequence. It is a Tierce Major or a Tierce of an Ace when there is Queen, King and Ace, a Tierce of a King when the King is the best Card; a Tierce of a Queen when there is neither King nor Ace, and so till you come to the lowest Tierce, which is a Tierce of an eight. You must reckon for every Tierce three, for a Quart four, but for a Quint fifteen, for a Sixiesm sixteen, and so up∣ward; now what ever you can make of all you must add to your Blank, and count the whole together. Here note that the biggest Tierce, Quart, or other Sequence, although there be but one of them, makes all the others less Sequences useless unto him be they never so many; and he that hath the biggest Sequence by vertue thereof reckons all his less Sequences, though his Ad∣versaries Sequences be greater, and otherwise would have drowned them. Farther observe, that a Quart drowns a Tierce, and a Quint a Quart, and so of the rest, so that he who hath a Sixiesm may reckon his Tierces, Quarts, or Quints, though the other may happen to have Tierce, Quart, &c. of higher value than the others are that hath the Sixiesm; trace the same method in all the other like Se∣quences. After you have manifested your Sequences, you come to reckon your three Aces, three Kings, three Queens, three Knaves, or three
Tens, as for Nines, Eights, Sevens, and Sixes, they have no place in this account; for every Ternary you count three, and they are in value as it is in Sequences; Aces the highest and best, Kings next, after these Queens, then Knaves, and last of all Tens. The higher drowns the lower here as in the Sequences. He that hath three Aces may reckon his three Queens, Knaves, or Tens, if he have them, though the other hath three Kings; and this is done by reason of his higher Ternary. Now he that hath four Aces, four Kings, four Queens, four Knaves, or four Tens, for each reckons fourteen, which is the reason they are called Quatorzes. Now they begin to play the Cards, the elder begins and younger follows in suit as at Whisk, and for every Ace, King, Queen, Knave, or Ten, he reckons one. A Card once play'd must not be recall'd, un∣less he have a Card of the same suit in his hand, if the elder hand plays an Ace, King, Queen, or Ten, for every such Card he is to reckon one, which he adds to the number of his Game be∣fore; and if the other be able to play upon it a higher Card of the same suit, he wins the Trick, and reckons one for his Card as well as the other. Whosoever wins the last Trick reckons two for it, if he win it with a Ten, but if with any Card under, he reckons but one; then they tell their Cards, and he that hath the most is to reckon Ten for them.
After this, each Person sets up his Game with Counters, and if the set be not up, deal again; now a set is won after this manner, admit that each party is so forward in his Game that he wants but four or five to be up, if it so happens that any of the two have a Blank, he wins the set, because the Blanks are always first reckon∣ed; but if no Blanks, then comes the Ruff, next your Sequences, then your Aces, Kings, Queens, Knaves, and Tens, next what Cards are reckoned in play, and last of all the Cards you have won. If any of the Gamesters can reckon, either in Blanks, Ruffs, Sequences, Aces, &c. up to thirty in his own hand, without playing a Card, and before the other can reckon any thing, instead of thirty he shall reckon ninety, and as many as he reckons after above his thirty, adding them to his ninety; this is known by the name of a Repicy. Moreover, he that can make in like manner, what by Blank, Ruff, Sequences, &c. up to the said number, before the other hath play'd a Card, or reckoned any thing, instead of thirty he reck∣ons sixty, and this is called a Picy. Here note, that if you can but remember to call for your Picy, or Repicy, before you deal again, you shall lose neither of them, otherwise you must. He that wins more than his own Cards reck∣ons Ten, but he that wins all the Cards reckons Forty, and this is called a Capet. The Rules belonging to this Game are these.
If the Dealer give more Cards than his due, whether through mistake or otherwise, it lieth in the choice of the elder hand whether he shall deal again or no, or whether it shall be play'd out. He that forgets to reckon his Blank, Ruff, Sequences, Aces, Kings, or the like; and hath begun to play his Cards cannot recall them. So it is with him that sheweth not his Ruff before he play his first Card, losing absolutely all the advantage thereof. He that misreckons any thing, and hath play'd one of his Cards, and his Adversary finds at the beginning, middle, or end of the Game, that he had not what he reckoned, for his punishment he shall be debar'd from reckoning any thing he really hath, and his Adversary shall reckon all he hath, yet the other shall make all he can in play. He that takes in more Cards than he discardeth is liable to the same penalty. He that throws up his Cards imagining he hath lost the Game, mingling them with other Cards on the Table though afterward he per∣ceive his mistake, yet he is not allowed to take up his Cards and play them out. No man is permitted to discard twice in one dealing. He that hath a Blank, his Blank shall hinder the other Picy and Repicy, although he hath no∣thing to shew but his Blank. He that hath four Aces, Kings, Queens, &c.
dealt him and after he hath discarded one of the four reckons the other three, and the other say to him it is good; he is bound to tell the other, if he ask him what Ace, King, Queen, &c. he wants. If after the Cards are cleanly cut, either of the Gamesters know the upper Card by the backside, notwithstanding this the Cards must not be shuffled again. In like manner, if the Dealer perceive the other hath cut himself an Ace, and would therefore shuffle again, this is not permitted; and if a Card be found faced, it shall be no argument to deal again, but must deal on; but if two be found faced, then may he shuffle again. Lastly, Whosoever is found changing or taking back again any of his Cards, he shall lose the Game, and be accounted a Foul Player. CHAP. VI. The Game at GLEEK. DEuces and Treys must be cast out as useless in this Game, then lifting for Dealing the least Card deals: The number of Persons playing must be three, neither more nor less, and most frequently they play at Farthing, Half∣penny,
or Penny-Gleek, which in play will a∣mount considerably. The Dealer delivers the Cards by four till e∣very one hath twelve, and the rest are laid on the Table, for the Stock, being in number eight, seven whereof are bought and the Ace is turned up; the turn'd up Card is the Dealers; and if it be Tiddy turn'd up is four apiece from each to the Dealer. The Ace is called Tib, the Knave Tom, the four of Trumps Tiddy, Tib the Ace is fifteen in hand and eighteen in play, because it wins a Trick, Tom the Knave is nine, and Tiddy is four, the fifth Towser, the sixth Tumbler, which if in hand Towser is five and Tumbler six, and so double if turn'd up, and the King and Queen of Trumps is three. The eldest hand bids for the stock in hopes of bettering his Game, though sometimes it makes it worse: the first penny you bid is twelve, thir∣teen, and so on; if at sixteen they say take it, and none will venture more for it, he is bound to take it, that is taking in seven Cards, and putting out seven in their stead, and must pay besides eight to one, and eight to the other of the Gamesters for buying, if any odd money be given, as 15, 17, or the like, the eldest hand usually claims it, or else it is given to the box; but if he have Mournival, Gleek or Tiddy in his hand after he hath taken in the Stock, he bates for them all, and so possibly may gain by
it, if he have a good hand and pay for his buy∣ing two. Here you must note that if Tib be turned up it is fifteen to the Dealer in reckoning after play, but he must not make use of it in play be∣ing the Trump-Card, for then 'twould make him eighteen, because it would win a Trick which is three more. Next you speak for the Ruff, and he that hath most of a suit in his hand wins it, unless some of the Gamesters have four Aces and then he gains the Ruff, though you have never so ma∣ny of a suit in your hand. If any wins a Ruff and forgets to show it before a Card plaid he lo∣seth it, and he that shews any for a Ruff after shall have it. The first or eldest says, I'le vye the Ruff, the next says, I'le see it, and the third, I'le see it and revie it: I'le see your revie, says the first; because he hath as many in his hand as another: the middle probably says, I'le not meddle with it; then they shew their Cards, and he that hath most of a suit wins six pence or farthings ac∣cording to the Game of him that holds out longest, and four of the other that said he would see it, but after refused to meddle with it; but if any of the three Gamesters says he hath nothing to say as to the Ruff he pays but a farthing, half-penny, penny, according as the Game is aforesaid; and if the eldest and second hand pass the Ruff the youngest hath power to
double it, and then it is to be plaid for the next deal, and if any forgets to call for the double Ruff, it is to be play'd for the next deal after that. Sometimes one of the Gamesters having all of a suit in his hand bids high for the Ruff, and the other having four Aces is resolved to bid higher, so that it sometimes amounts to sixteen and more, then I'le see it and revie, saith one; I'le see it and revie, saith another, that is eight to the winner, and all above is but two a time, as it may be they will say, I'le see it and revie it again, and I'le see that and revie it again, saith a∣nother, for which seeing and revying they reck∣on but two, after that it is once come to eight; but he that hath the four Aces carrieth it clearly, &c. as aforesaid. Buying or bidding for the Ruff is when you are in likelihood to go in for Mournival, Gleek, or increase of Trumps, that so if you have bad Cards, you may save your buyings and your Cards too, whereas otherwise you may lose all. If you call for either Mournival or Gleek, and have lay'd them out in the stock, if you be taken in it, for forfeit double what you receive. Sometimes out of policy or a vapour they will vie when they have not above thirty in their hands, and the rest may have forty or fifty, and being afraid to see it, the first many
times wins out of a meer bravado, and this is good play though he acquaint you with it here∣after. A Mournival of Aces is eight, of Kings six, of Queens four, and a Mournival of Knaves two a piece. A Gleek of Aces is four, of Kings three, of Queens two, and of Knaves one a piece from the other two Gamesters. A Mournival is either all the Aces, the four Kings, Queens, or Knaves, and a Gleek is three of any of the aforesaid. Here note, that twenty two are your Cards; if you win nothing but the Cards that were dealt you, you lose ten; if you have neither Tib, Tom, Tiddy, King, Queen, Mournival, nor Gleek, you lose because you count as many Cards as you had in tricks, which must be few by reason of the badness of your hand; if you have Tib, Tom, King, and Queen of Trumps in your hand, you have thirty by honours, that is, eight above your own Cards, besides the Cards you win by them in play. If you have Tom only, which is Nine and the King of Trumps, which is three, then you reckon from twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, till you come to two and twenty, and then every Card wins so many half-pence, pence, &c. as you play'd for; if you are under two and twenty you lose as many. Here note, that before the Cards are dealt,
it is requisite to demand, whether the Gamesters will play at Tiddy, or leave it out, it being a Card that is apt to be forgotten; and know, that it is lookt upon as very foul play to call for a Gleek of Kings, Aces, Queens, or Knaves, when the person hath but two in his hands. If you discard wrong, i. e. lay out but 5 or 6 Cards, if you call for any Gleek or Mournivals, you lose them all if it be found out that you so dis∣card. Let this suffice for this noble and delight∣ful Game or Recreation. CHAP. VII. L'OMBRE, a Spanish Game. THere are several sorts of this Game called L'Ombre, but that which is the chief is called Renegado, at which three only can play, to whom are dealt nine Cards apiece, so that by discarding the eights, nines and tens, there will remain thirteen Cards in the Stock; there is no Trump but what the Player pleaseth; the first hand hath always the liberty to play or pass, after him the second, &c. There are two sorts of Counters for Stakes, the greater and the lesser, which last have the same proportion to the other as a penny to a shilling: of the great Counters each man Stakes
one for the Game, and one of the lesser for passing, and for the hand when eldest, and for every Card taken in one Counter. There are two suits, Black and Red; of the Black there is first the Spadillo, or Ace of Spades; the Mallillio or black Deuce, the Basto or Ace of Clubs; the King, the Queen, the Knave, the seven, the six, the five, four, and three. Of the Red Suit there is the Spa∣dillo, Punto, Mallillio, &c. The Spadillo or Ace of Spades, is always the first Card, and always Trump, and the Basto or Ace of Clubs is always third; of the Black there is 11 Trumps, of the Red 12. The Red Ace enters into the fourth place when it is Trump, and it is called Punto then, otherwise only called an Ace. The least small Cards of the Red are always best, and the most of the Black; except the Deuce and Red Seven, which are called the Mal∣lillio's and always second when Trump. The Matadors (or killing Cards) which are the Spa∣dillo, Mallillio, and Basto are the chief Cards, and when they are all in a hand the others pay for them three of the greater Counters apiece; and with these three for foundation you may count as many Matadors as you have Cards in an interrupted series of Trumps; for all which the others are to pay you one Counter a∣piece. He who hath the first hand hath his choice
(as aforesaid) of playing the Game, of naming the Trump, and of taking in as many and as few Cards as he list, and after him the second, &c. having demanded whether any one will play without taking in, you oblige your self to take in though your Game be never so good, where∣fore you do well to consider it before. If you name not the Trump before you look on the Cards which you have taken in, any other may prevent you and name what Trump they please; if you know not of two suits which to name Trump first, the black suit is to be pre∣ferred before the Red, because there are fewer Trumps of it. Secondly, you were best to chuse that suit of which you have not the King, because besides your three Trumps you have a King which is as good as a fourth. When you have the choice of going in three Matadors, or the two black Aces with three or four other Trumps, if the Stakes be great you are to chuse this last, as most like to win most Tricks; if it be but a simple Stake you are to chuse the first, because the six Counters you are to receive for the three Matadors more than countervail the four or five you lose for the Game. He that hath the first hand is never to take in nor play, unless he have three sure Tricks in his hand at least; to understand which the better, know the end of the Game is to win most Tricks, whence he that can win five Tricks of the nine hath a sure Game; or if he win four and can so
divide the Tricks as one may win two, the other three, if not it's either Codillio, or Re∣puesto, so the Player loseth and maketh good the Stakes. It is called Codillio when the Player is beasted, and another wins more Tricks than he, when this takes up the Stakes and the other makes it good. Here note, although the other two always combine to make him lose, yet they all do their best (for the common good) to hinder any one from winning, only striving to make it Repuesto, which is when the player wins no more Tricks than another, in which case the Player doubles the Stake without any ones winning it, and re∣mains so for the advantage of the next Player. Here note that Kings of any suit are accoun∣ted as good Trumps, mean while all other Cards but Kings and Trumps are to be discarded. The Player having taken in, the next is to con∣sider the goodness of the Game, and to take in more or less for the best advantage of his Game; neither is any for the saving a Counter or two to neglect the taking in, that the other may commodiously make up his Game with what Cards he hath left, and that no good Cards may lie dormant in the Stock, except the Play∣er playeth without taking in, when they may refuse to take in, if they imagine he hath all the Game. When one hath a sure Game in his hand, he
is to play without taking in, then the others are to give him each one of the great Counters as he is to give them, if he play without taking in a Game that is not sure and loseth it; if you win all the Tricks in your hand or the Voll, they likewise are to give you one Counter a∣piece, but then you are to declare before the fifth Trick that you intend to play for the Voll, that so they keep their best Cards, which else, seeing you win five Tricks (or the Game) they may carelesly cast away. If you renounce you are to double the Stake, as also if you have more or fewer Cards than nine, to which end you must carefully count your Cards in dealing and taking in before you look on them; besides according to the rigour of the Game if you speak any thing tending to the discovery thereof, either in your own hand or anothers (excepting Gagno) or play so, to hin∣der the making of Repuesto or Codillio, you are not fit to play. Observe, that in playing Trumps, if any plays an ordinary one, and you have only the three best Cards or Matadors singly or jointly in your hands, you may refuse to play them without renouncing, because of the priviledge which these Cards have, that none but com∣manding Cards can force them out of your hand. You are to say nothing when you play your Card, but I pass or play, or gagno, or gagno del
Re when you play your Queen to hinder them from taking it with the King. Now since it is impossible to provide against all accidents in the Game, only take notice of these general Rules. First, never win more than one Trick if you cannot win more than two, because of the ad∣vantage you give the Player by it, in dividing the Tricks. Secondly, you are to win the Trick always from the Player if you can, unless you let it pass for meer advantage, where the second is to let pass to the third if he have the likelier Game to beast the Player, or if he be likelier to win it. There may be diverse advantages in refusing to take the Players Trick; but the chief is, if you have the Tenaces in your hand, that is two Cards, and if you have the leading, you are sure to lose one of them; if the Player lead to you, you are sure to win them both; For example, if you have Spadillio and Basto in your hand, and he have the Mallillio and another Trump, if you lead you lose one of them; for either you play your Spadillio, and he plays the lesser Trump upon it, and wins your Basto the next Trick with his Mallillio, and so the contrary; whereas if he leads he loseth; for if he leads his Mallillio you win it with your Spadillio, and with your Basto win the other Trump, &c. If you are not sure to win five Tricks, ha∣ving only three Matadors, and Kings your auxi∣liary
Cards; if you have the leading, play first a Matador or two before you play your Kings to fetch out his Trumps which might have trum∣ped them, and if you have three Matadors with two other Trumps, your best way is to play your Matadors first to see where the Trumps lie; if both follow, you are sure if the Trump be red there remains only one Trump in their hands, if black none at all. Lastly, if the Players have but a weak Game, they are to imitate cunning Beast-players in di∣viding the Tricks, and consulting to play their Cards. To conclude, lay your Tricks angle-wise, that you may the more facilely compute them. CHAP. VIII. The Game at GRIBBIDGE. AT Cribbidge there are no Cards to be thrown out, but all are made use of; and the number of the Set is sixty one. It is an advantage to deal, by reason of the Crib, and therefore you must lift for it, and he that hath the least Card deals. There are but two Players at this Game, the one shuffles and the other cuts, the Dealer deli∣vers
out the Cards one by one, to his Antagonist first and himself last, till five apiece be dealt to one another; the rest being set down in view on the Table, each looketh on his Game, and ordereth his Cards for the best advantage. He that deals makes out the best Cards he can for his Crib, and the other the worst, be∣cause he will do him as little good as he can, be∣ing his Crib; which Crib is four Cards, two a piece, which they lay out upon the Table, not knowing nor seeing one anothers Cards, and then they turn up a Card from the parcel that was left of dealing, and each of them may make use of that Card to help them on in their Game in hand, and when they have play'd out their three Cards, and set up with Counters their Games in their hands, the Crib is the others the next deal, and so they take it by turns. The value of the Cards is thus: Any fifteen upon the Cards is two, whether nine and six, ten and five, King and five, seven and eight, &c. A Pair is two, a Pair-Royal six, a double Pair-Royal twelve, Sequences of three is two, Sequences of four is four, of five five, &c. and so is a Flush of three, three; of four, four, &c. Knave Noddy is one in hand and two to the Dealer; that is, if you have a Knave of that suit which is turned up, it is Knave Noddy. A Pair of Aces, Kings, Queens, Knaves, Tens, &c. is two; Three Aces, Kings, Queens, &c. is a Pair-Royal; a double Pair-Royal is four Aces,
four Kings, four Queens, &c. and is twelve Games to him that hath them. Having lookt on your Cards, you count your Game after this manner: Suppose you have in your hand a Nine and two Sixes, after you have laid out two Cards for the Crib, that makes you six Games, because there is two fifteens and a pair, by adding your Nine to the two Sixes, and if a Six chance to be turn'd up, then you have twelve Games in your hand; for though you must not take the turn'd up Card into your hand, yet you may make what use you can of it in counting, so that the three Sixes makes you six, being a Pair-Royal, and the Nine added to every Six makes three fifteens, which six more added to the former, makes twelve, which you must set up with Counters or otherwise, that your Op∣ponent may know what you are, though you must not see his Cards, nor he yours; if you think he plays foul by reckoning too much, you may count them after the hand is play'd. Thus you have set up your twelve, your Op∣posite it may be hath four, five, and six in his hand; that is two, because of Sequences of three; then it is two more because it is four, five, and six; again, taking in the counting six that is turn'd up, that is in all four, then there is fifteen and fifteen, four and five is nine, and six is fif∣teen, and then with the six turn'd up 'tis fifteen more, which makes eight Games, this he like∣wise sets up, keeping his Cards undiscovered.
Here note, he that deals not sets up three in lieu thereof. Having thus done, he that dealt not plays first, suppose it a six, if you have a nine play it, that makes fifteen, for which set up two, the next may play a four which makes nineteen, you a six twenty five, and he a five that is thirty, you be∣ing not able to come in, having a six in your hand, he sets up one, (for it is one and thirty you aim at in playing the Cards), because he is most, and two for Sequences four, five, and six, which were his four after the fifteen, your five and his six; and that doth not hinder them from being Sequences, though the six was play'd be∣tween the four and the five; but if an Ace, Nine, King, Queen, or the like, had been play'd be∣tween, they had been no Sequences; so the two for the Sequences, and the one for thirty being most (as at one and thirty) makes him three, which he must set up to the rest of his Game, and in this playing of the Cards you may make Pairs, Sequences, Flush, Fifteens, Pair-Royals, and double Pair-Royals, if you can, though that is rarely seen. Lastly, you look upon your Crib, that is the two Cards apiece laid out at first, which is the Dealers; if he find no Games in them, nor help by the Card that was turn'd up, which he takes into his hand, then he is bilkt, and sometimes it so happens that he is both bilkt in hand and crib. Thus they play and deal by
turns till the Game of sixty one be up. Here note, if you get the Game before your Adversary is forty five (forty four will not do it) you must then say, I have lurkt you, and that is a double Game for whatever you play'd with, six shilling, or a greater sum. CHAP. IX. A Game at ALL-FOURS. ALL-FOƲRS is a Game very much play'd in Kent, and very well it may, since from thence it drew its first original; and although the Game may be lookt upon as trivial and inconsiderable, yet I have known Kentish Gentlemen and others of very considerable note, who have play'd great sums of money at it, yet that adds not much to the worth of the Game, for a Man may play away an estate at One and Thirty; as I knew one lose a consider∣able sum at most at three throws. This Game I conceive is called All-Fours from Highest, Lowest, Jack and Game, which is the Set as some play it, but you may make from seven to fifteen, or more if you please, but commonly eleven. There are but two can play at it at a time, and they must lift for dealing, the highest Put∣card
deals, who delivers to his adversary three Cards, and to himself the like, and the like a∣gain, and having six apiece, he turns up a Card which is Trump; if Jack (and that is any Knave) it is one to the Dealer. If he to whom the Cards were dealt after perusal of his Game like them not, he hath the liberty of begging one; if the Dealer refuse to give him one, then he deals three apiece more, but if he then turns up a Card of the same suit, he deals further till he turns up a Card of ano∣ther suit. Here note, That an Ace is four, a King is three, a Queen is two, a Knave one, and a Ten is ten. Now you must play down your Cards, but to what advantage I cannot here prescribe, it must be according to the Cards you have in your hand managed by your judgment to the best advantage. Having play'd your Cards you reckon, if you are highest and lowest of what is Trumps, you reckon two; if you are only highest but one, and the like of Jack and Game; some∣times you are highest, lowest, Jack, and Game, and then you must reckon four; the Game is he that tells most after the Cards are play'd, and therefore a Ten is a very significant Card, which crafty Gamesters know so well that they will frequently take out of a Pack two Tens, and hide them contrary to the knowledge of the o∣ther,
which is a great advantage to this foul player, if he play of the same suit of these Tens he hath absconded, for it must of necessity secure him from losing the Game. Here note, That he that wins Jack wins one also; and furthermore observe that for advan∣tage reneging is allowable if you have Trumps in your hand to trump it. There is another sort of All-fours called Run∣ning-All-Fours, at which they play One and Thirty up, and in this Game the Dealer hath a great advantage, for if he turn up an Ace it is four, a King three, a Queen two, and a Knave one, and these are the same also in play. A Ten is the best Card for making up. CHAP. X. English Ruff and Honours, and Whist. RUff and Honours (alias Slamm) and Whist, are Games so commonly known in Eng∣land in all parts thereof, that every Child al∣most of Eight Years old hath a competent knowledge in that recreation, and therefore I am unwilling to speak any thing more of them than this, that there may be a great deal of art used in Dealing and playing at these Games which differ very little one from the other.
In playing your Cards you must have re∣course altogether to your own judgment or dis∣cretion, still making the best of a bad Market; and though you have but mean Cards in your own hand, yet you may play them so suitable to those in your Partners hand, that he may either Trump them, or play the best of that suit on the Board. You ought to have a special eye to what Cards are play'd out, that you may know by that means either what to play if you lead, or how to trump securely and advantagiously. Re∣neging or renouncing, that is, not following suit when you have it in your hand, is very foul play, and he that doth it ought to forfeit one, or the Game upon a Game, and he that loseth dealing loseth one, or a trick as you make it. At Ruff and Honours, by some called Slamm, you have in the Pack all the Deuces, and the reason is, because four playing having dealt twelve a piece, there are four left for the Stock, the uppermost whereof is turn'd up, and that is Trumps, he that hath the Ace of that, Ruffs; that is, he takes in those four Cards, and lays out four others in their lieu; the four Honours are the Ace, King, Queen, and Knave; he that hath three Honours in his own hand, his partner not having the fourth sets up Eight by Cards, that is two tricks; if he hath all four, then Sixteen, that is four tricks; it is all one if the two Partners make them three or
four between them, as if one had them. If the Honours are equally divided among the Gamesters of each side, then they say Honours are split. If either side are at eight Groats he hath the benefit of calling Can-ye, if he hath two Honours in his hand, and if the other answers one, the Game is up, which is nine in all, but if he hath more than two he shows them, and then it is one and the same thing; but if he forgets to call after playing a trick, he loseth the advantage of Can-ye for that deal. All Cards are of value as they are superiour one to another, as a Ten wins a Nine if not Trumps, so a Queen, a Knave in like manner; but the least Trump will win the highest Card of any other Card; where note the Ace is the highest. Whist is a Game not much differing from this, only they put out the Deuces and take in no stock; and is called Whist from the silence that is to be observed in the play; they deal as before, playing four, two of a side, (some play at two handed, or three handed Whist; if three handed, always two strive to suppress and keep down the rising-man), I say they deal to each Twelve a piece, and the Trump is the bottom Card. The manner of crafty playing, the number of the Game Nine, Honours and dignity of other Cards are all alike, and he that wins most tricks is most forward to win the set.
He that can by craft over-look his Adversa∣ries Game hath a great advantage, for by that means he may partly know what to play secure∣ly; or if he can have some petty glimpse of his Partners hand. There is a way by winking, or the Fingers to discover to their Partners what Honours they have, as by the wink of one eye, or putting one Finger on the Nose or Table, it signifies one Honour, shutting both the eyes, two; placing three fingers or four on the Table, three or four Honours. They have several ways of securing an Honour or more in the bottom when they deal, either to their Partners or selves; if to their Partner they place in the second lift next the top, 1, 2, 3, or four Aces, or Court cards all of a suit, according as they could get them together in the former deal, and place a Card of the same suit in the bottom, when the Cards are cut they must use their hand so dexterously as not to put the top in the bottom, but nimbly place where it was before. If they would secure Honours to themselves when dealing, they then place so many as they can get upon their lap or other place undis∣cerned, and after the Cards are cut, then clap them very neatly under. But the cleanliest rook∣ing way is by the breef, that is, take a pack of Cards and open them, then take out all the Ho∣nours, that is as aforesaid, the four Aces, the four Kings, &c. then take the rest and cut a
little from the edges of them all alike, by which means the Honours will be broader than the rest, so that when your Adversary cuts to you, you are certain of an Honour, when you cut to your Adversary cut at the ends, and then it is a chance if you cut him an Honour, because the Cards at the ends are all of a length, thus you may make breefs end-ways as well as side∣ways. There are a sort of cunning fellows about this City, who before they go to play will plant half a dozen of these Packs (nay some∣times half a score) in the hands of a Drawer, who to avoid being suspected will call to their confederate Drawer for a fresh pack of Cards, who brings them as from a shop new, and some of these Packs shall be so finely markt, where∣by the Gamester shall plainly and certainly know every Card therein contain'd by the out∣side, although the best of other eyes shall not discern where any mark was made at all; and this done with that variety that every Card of every suit shall have a different distinguish∣able mark. Some have a way to slick with a Slick-stone all the Honours very smooth, by which means he will be sure to cut his Partner an Honour, and so his partner to him again, and that is done by lying a fore-finger on the top indif∣ferent hard, and giving a slurring jerk to the rest which will slip off from the slickt Card.
It is impossible to shew you all the Cheats of this Game, since your cunning Gamester is always studying new inventions to deceive the ignorant. CHAP. XI. FRENCH-RUFF. AT French-Ruff you must lift for deal, most or least carries it according to the agreement of the Gamesters. You may play either two, four or six of a side, dealing to each five a piece, either two first at a time, or three, according to pleasure, and he that deals turns up Trump; the King is the highest Card at Trumps, and so it is highest in all other Cards that are not Trumps, the Queen is next, the Knave next, and next to that the Ace, and all other Cards follow in pre∣heminency according to the number of the Pips, but all small Trumps win the highest of any o∣ther suit. Having turn'd up Trumps, he that hath the Ace must take the Ace turn'd up, and all other Trumps which immediately follow that, if so a∣greed among the Gamesters, laying out so many Cards as he took up in lieu thereof. After this they play: to win two tricks sig∣nifies
nothing, to win three or four wins but one, but to win five is the winning of five. If you play at forsat (that is the rigour of the play) he that deals wrong loseth one and his Deal. You are bound to follow suit, and if you renounce or renege, you lose the whole Game, if you so make it, otherwise but one or two ac∣cording to agreement. He that plays a Card that is trumped by the follower, if the next player hath none of the former suit he must trump it again, although he hath never a trump in his hand that can win the former trump, and so it must pass to the last player. All the Players round are bound to win the highest trump play'd if they can. Here note, that he who playeth before his turn loseth one, unless it be the last Card of all. CHAP. XII. Five-CARDS. FIve-Cards is an Irish-Game, and is as much play'd in that Kingdom, and that for con∣siderable sums of money, as All-fours is play'd in Kent, but there is little analogy between them. There are but two can play at it, and there
are dealt five Cards a piece. The least of the black, and the most of the red wins. The Ace of Diamonds is the worst of the whole Pack, unless it prove to be trump. The five fingers (alias, five of trumps) is the best Card in the Pack; the Ace of Hearts is next to that, and the next is the Ace of Trumps, then the Knave, and the rest of Cards are best according to their value in pips, or as they are trumps. Before you play ask whether he will five it, if he speaks affirmatively turn up the next Card of the Pack under that first turn'd up, and that must be trumps; if not, play it out: he that wins most Cards wins five, but he that wins all, wins ten. Observe, that the Ace of Hearts wins the Ace of Trumps, and the Five-fingers not only wins the Ace of Trumps, but also all other Cards whatever. CHAP. XIII. Of a Game called Costly-Colours. THis Game is to be play'd out only by two Persons, of which the eldest is to play first as in other Games. You must deal off three a piece, and turn up the next Card
following; then the Eldest is to take his choice whether he will Mogg (that is change a Card or no) and whosoever refuseth is to give the other one chalk or hole, of which generally Threescore and one makes the Game. Then must the Eldest play, and the other if he can must make it up fifteen, for which he shall set up as many holes or chalks as there are Cards upon the Table; so likewise for five and twen∣ty, and also as many Cards as are play'd to make up thirty, no more nor less, so many chalks may be set up who play'd last, to make up one and thirty, and if one and thirty be not made, then he that play'd last and is nearest one and thirty without making out must set up one, which is called setting up one for the latter. This being done, the eldest must show how many Chalks he hath in his hand to set up, and after him the youngest, which they must reckon in this manner, taking notice both of the co∣lour and number of pips upon the Card turn'd up as those in their hands still, reckoning as ma∣ny for all the fifteen and five and twenty as there go Cards to make the number; and if you have it by chance in your hand, and with the Card turned up one and thirty, then you must set up four for that: you must also set up if you have them in your hands or can make them so in the Card turn'd up as followeth, two for a pair, be they either Coat-cards, or others;
two for a Knave, and if a Knave of the same colour and suit of the Card turn'd up, then you must set up four; and so for a Deuce four, if it be of the same colour turn'd up: if you have three of a sort, either three fours, five sixes, or Coat cards, you must set up nine, and this is called a Pair-Royal; now if they are all either Hearts, Diamonds, or the like, then you must set up six for Costly Colours. If you have three of a colour, you can reckon but two for Co∣lours. Whosoever dealt, if he turn'd up either Deuce or Knave, he must set up four for it; as for example, imagine you had dealt your Ad∣versary three Cards, viz. the five of Hearts, four of Hearts, and eight of Hearts; to your self the Deuce of Hearts, seven of Clubs, and nine of Hearts. Lastly, you turn up a Card, which is the Knave of Hearts, for which you must set up four; then because he will not ask you to change one, he gives you one, which you must set up, and then he plays, suppose it be his five of Hearts, you then play your seven of Clubs, which makes twelve, then he plays his eight of Hearts which makes twenty; then you play your nine of Hearts, which makes twenty nine, and because he cannot come in with his five of Hearts, you must play your Deuce of Hearts, which makes you one and thirty. For your five you must set up five, then he must set up what he hath in his hand,
which you will find to be but six, for he hath nothing in his hand but Costly-Colours. Then must you set up your Games, which first are two, for your nine of Clubs and nine of Hearts which make fifteen, then that fifteen and the Knave turn'd up makes five and twenty, for which set up three; then for your Deuce of Hearts which is the right, set up four, and three for Colours, because you have three of a sort in your hand with that turn'd up, now these with the five you got in playing for thir∣ty one makes you this Deal with the Knave turn'd up and the Cards in your hand just twen∣ty. Many other examples I might give you, but that it is needless, since this one is sufficient to direct you in all others. And thus much for Costly-Colours. CHAP. XIV. BONE-ACE. THis Game you may look on as trivial and very inconsiderable, and so it is by reason of the little variety therein contain'd, but be∣cause I have seen Ladies and Persons of quality have plaid at it for their diversion, I will briefly describe it, and the rather because it is a licking Game for Money.
There are seven, or eight (or as many as the Cards will permit) play at it at one time. In the lifting for dealing the least deals, which is a great disadvantage; for that makes the Dealer youngest hand. The Dealer deals out two to the first hand, and turns up the third, and so goes on to the next, to the third, fourth, fifth, &c. He that hath the biggest Card carries the Bone, that is one half of the Stake, the other remaining for the Game; now if there be three Kings, three Queens, three Tens, &c. turn'd up, the eldest hand wins it. Here note that the Ace of Dia∣monds is Bone-Ace, and wins all other Cards whatever: thus much for the Bone; afterwards the nearest to one and thirty wins the Game, and he that turns up or draws to one and thirty wins it immediately. CHAP. XV. Of PUTT and the High-Game. PƲtt is the ordinary rooking Game of eve∣ry place, and seems by the few Cards that are dealt to have no great difficulty in the play, but I am sure there is much craft and cunning in it; of which I shall show as much as I un∣derstand.
If you play at two-handed Putt (or if you please you may play at three hands) the best Putt-Card deals. Having shuffled the Cards, the Adversary cuts them, then the Dealer deals one to his Antagonist, and another to himself till they have three apiece: five up or a Putt is commonly the Game. The eldest if he hath a good Game, and thinks it better than his Ad∣versaries, puts to him, if the other will not or dare not see him, he then wins one, but if he will see him they play it out, and he that wins two tricks or all three wins the whole set; but if each win a trick and the third tyed, neither win, because it is trick and tye. Sometimes they play without putting, and then the winner is he that wins most tricks. Here note that in your playing keep up your Cards very close; for the least discovery of any one of them is a great advantage to him that sees it. This Game consists very much in daring; for a right Gamester will put boldly upon very bad Cards sometimes, as upon a five, seven and a nine; the other thinking there are good Cards in his Adversaries hand, having very indifferent ones in his own dares not see him, and so by go∣ing to stock loseth one. Here note that he that once hath the confidence to put on bad Cards cannot recall his putting, by which means he frequently pays for his bravado. The best Putt-Cards are first the Trey, next
the Deuce, then the Ace, the rest follow in pre∣heminence thus; the King, the Queen, the Knave, the Ten, and so onwards to the four, which is the meanest Card at Putt. Some of the Cheats at Putt are done after this manner: First, for cutting to be sure of a good Putt-Card, they use the Bent, the Slick, and the Breef; the bent is a Card bended in play which you cut, the slick is when before-hand the Game∣ster takes a Pack of Cards, and with a slick∣stone smooths all the Putt-Cards, that when he comes to cut to his Adversary with his four-fin∣ger above and his thumb about the middle, he slides the rest of the Cards off that which was slickt, which is done infallibly with much faci∣lity; but in this there is required neatness and dexterity for fear of discovery, and then your confidence in this contrivance will be vain and of no effect. Lastly, the Breef in cutting is very advanta∣gious to him that cuts, and it is thus done: the Cheat provides before-hand a Pack of Cards, whereof some are broader than others; under some of which he plants in play some good Putt-Cards, which though they shuffle never so much they shall rarely separate them; by which means he that cuts (laying his fingers on the broad Card) hath surely dealt him a Putt-Card. In dealing these Rooks have a trick they call
the Spurr, and that is, as good Cards come in∣to their hand that they may know them again by the out-side (and so discover the strength or weakness of their Adversaries Game) I say some∣where on the out-side they give them a gentle touch with their nail. Now when they intend to bleed a Col to some purpose whom they have set before, they always fix half a score Packs of Cards before (as I have related in Whist) by slicking them or spurring them, that is, giving them such marks that they shall certainly know every Card in the Pack, and consequently every Card that is in his Adversaries hand, an advantage that cannot well be greater. But if they are not furnished with such Cards, and cannot accomplish their ends by the former indirect means without palpable discovery, then they have accomplices who standing by the in∣nocent Col look over his Game, and discovers what it is to his Adversary: and to strengthen their interest by cheating, they frequently carry about them Treys, Deuces, Aces, &c. in their Pockets, which they use as need requires, or if not, they will steal them out of the Pack whilst they are playing, which is the securest way and freest from discovery. Lastly, they have one most egregious piece of Roguery more, and that is playing the High-Game at Putt; and this is to be done but once at a Set-meeting; and therefore on this de∣pends
the absolute overthrow of the Col that plays, or the Col that is a stander-by. This High Game at Putt is thus performed: the Rook whilst playing singles out the Deuces and Treys for the last Game, and placeth them thus in order, hiding them in his lap or other covert, first a Deuce, then a Trey, next a Deuce, then a Trey, then a Trey and a Trey; now stooping letting fall a Card or some other way as he shall think fit, he claps these Cards fac'd at the bottom, having shuffled the Cards before, and bids his Adversary cut, which he nimbly and neatly with both his hands joyns the divided Cards, and then the bottom fac'd Cards are up∣wards, and then he deals, and lest there should be a discovery made of the facing, he palms them as much as he can, nimbly passing the last Card. Now do the Gamesters smile at the goodness of each others Game, one shows his to one, the other his to another; and cries who would not put at such Cards? the other in as brisk a tone, says, Come if you dare. What will you lay of the Game, says the Rook? what you dare, says the Col; then pausing a while the Rook seems to consult with his friends, who cry, they know not what to think on't; five pound cries a rooking Confederate on this Gentle∣man's side, the Col encouraged hereby, cries ten pound more: and thus the Rook holds him in play till there be a good Sum of Money on the
Board; then answers the Putt of the now ruin'd Cully. They now play; the Col begins with a Deuce, the Rook wins that with a Trey; the Rook then plays a Deuce, and the Col wins it with his Trey; then he plays his Deuce which is won with a Trey; thus the Rook wins the Day. This Game may be plaid otherways ac∣cording to fancy: let these and the former cheats be a sufficient warning. CHAP. XVI. VVIT and REASON, a Game so called. WIT and Reason is a Game which seems very easie at first to the Learner, but in his practice and observation shall find it o∣therwise. It is a Game something like one and thirty, and is plaid after this manner. Two playing together, the one hath all the red Cards, and the other hath the black: then they turn up cross or pile who shall lead; for the Leader hath a great advantage over the o∣ther, as shall be demonstrated. You are not to play a ten first; for if you do you shall certainly lose; for one and thirty being the Game he that first comes to it wins; now should the Leader play a ten the follower
will play another ten, that makes twenty; let the Leader then play any thing next, the Fol∣lower will be sure to make it up one and thir∣ty. He that hath the Lead if he play a nine may certainly win the Game, if he look about him; ever remembring to get first to twenty, with∣out spending two of one sort, as two Deuces, two Treys, two Quaters, &c. otherwise you will lose: As for example, you play a nine first, your Adversary plays a Deuce that makes ele∣ven, you then play a nine again, and that makes twenty; thus you have plaid out both your nines, wherefore your Antagonist plays a Deuce, now you can play no Card but he wins; for if you play an eight (for you cannot come in with your ten) and you have never a nine, then he hath an Ace for one and thirty; so if you play a seven, which makes nine and twenty, he hath a Deuce remaining to make up one and thirty, and so you may observe in the rest of the Cards. Take this for a general rule, that you have a very great advantage in fetching out by play any two of a number, as aforesaid; as two fives, two sixes, two sevens, &c. wherefore you must not play rashly, but with due consideration a∣rithmetically grounded to make up a certain Game of one and thirty. To conclude, he that hath the art of playing well at one and thirty without Cards, that is by naming such a number
at first, and prosecuting it by such addition of others, that your Adversary cannot think of any number but what shall be your Game; I say such a Man is fittest to play at this Game called Wit and Reason. CHAP. XVII. A Pastime called The Art of Memory. THis Art of Memory is a Sport at which Men may play for Money, but it is most commonly the way to play the Drunkard. It is best when many play at it; for with few it is no sport at all: For example, as many persons as do play, so many Cards trebled must be thrown down on the Table with their faces upwards; which every one must take notice of and endea∣vour to register them in his Memory. Then the Dealer must take them all up, and shuf∣fling them after cutting deals to every one three a-piece. The first it may be calls for a King, which must be laid on the Table with his face down∣wards by him that hath it in his hands; the next it may be calls for a ten of the Spades, which must be laid down in like manner, and so it goes round; now if any one calls for what is already laid down, if they play for Liquor, he must
then drink a Glass; if for mony, he must then pay a farthing, half-penny, or the like. This sport wholly depends on the Memory; for want of which a Man may lose at this sport his Money or his Understanding. CHAP. XVIII. A Game called PLAIN-DEALING. HE that deals hath the advantage of this Game; for if he turn up the Ace of Dia∣monds he cannot lose: to his Adversary he deli∣vers out nine and but three to himself; then are the Cards plaid as at Whist, the best of Trumps or other Cards wins, and but one to be gotten at a deal. I cannot commend this Pastime for its ingenuity, and therefore only name it, be∣cause we treat of Games in general.
CHAP. XIX. A Game called Queen Nazareen. THere may as many play at it as the Cards will allow of, five Cards are dealt to e∣very Player. The Queen of Diamonds is Queen Nazareen, and he that hath it demands three apiece of every Player. The Knave of Clubs is called Knave Knocher, and he that hath it chal∣lengeth two a-piece. If Women play among Men, it is customary for Knave Knocher to kiss Queen Nazareen. Lastly, he that lays down a King the last Card that is plaid challengeth one, and begins again; and he that hath first plaid away his Cards de∣mands as many Counters as there are Cards in the hands of the rest. CHAP. XX. LANTERLOO. LAnterloo is a Game may be plaid several ways, but I shall insist on none but two; the first way is thus. Lift for dealing, and the best Putt-Card car∣ries
it; as many may play as the Cards will permit, to whom must be dealt five apiece, and then turn up Trump. Now if three, four, five or six play, they may lay out the threes, fours, fives, sixes and sevens to the intent they may not be quickly loo'd; but if they would have the loos come fast about then play with the whole pack. Having dealt set up five scores or chalks; and then proceed forwards in your Game. He that is Eldest hand hath the priviledge of passing by the benefit thereof, that is, he hath the advantage of hearing what every one will say, and at last may play or not play accord∣ing as he finds his Game good or bad. If the Eldest saith he passeth, the rest may chuse whe∣ther they will play or no. You may play upon every Card what you please, from a penny to a pound. Trumps as at Whist are the best Cards, all others in like manner take their precedency from the highest to the lowest. You must not revoke, if you do you pay all on the Table. If you play and are loo'd (that is, win never a trick) you must lay down to the stock so much for your five Cards as you plaid upon every one of them. Every deal rub off a score, and for every trick you win set up a score by you till the first scores are out, to remember you how many tricks you have won in the several deals in the Game.
All the Chalks for the Game being rub'd out, tell your own scores, and for so many scores or tricks which you have won, so much as they were valued at in the Game so much you must take from the Stock; thus must every one do according to the number of tricks he hath won. Here note, that he who hath five Cards of a suit in his hand loos all the Gamesters then playing, be they never so many, and sweeps the board; if there be two loos he that is eldest hand hath the advantage. As there is cheating (as they say) in all trades, so more particularly intolerable in Gaming; as in this for example, if one of the Gamesters have four of a suit and he want a fifth, he may for that fifth make an exchange out of his own Pocket if he be skill'd in the cleanly art of conveyance; if that fail, some make use of a friend, who never fails to do him that kind office and favour. There are other Cheats to be performed, which I shall omit, since it is not my business to teach you how to cheat, but so to play as not to be cheated. Lanterloo another way plaid. LIft for dealing as aforesaid, and the best Put-card deals five to every one apiece. The Dealer for his five Cards must lay down so many Six-pences, Shillings, and so forth, as they
conclude upon and agree for every Card, or so many Counters being valued at either Six-pence or Twelve-pence, more or less. After this all must play; if any be loo'd he must lay down so much for his loo as his five Cards amount to. If any next dealing be loo'd he must lay down as much for his dealing, and as much more for his loo. If after this the eldest hand pass, the rest may refuse to play, or play if they think they can win a Card. Here note, If there be never a loo the mo∣ney may be divided by the Gamesters according to the number of their Tricks, if there be a loo the winners must take up the money, and he that is loo'd must lay down as much money on the board as every one had laid down before, be it never so great a summ, besides the like quantity for dealing, if he that was loo'd dealt. CHAP. XXI. A Game called PENNEECH. HAving dealt seven Cards apiece, turn up a Card, and that is Trumps. The Ace and Coat-Cards of Trumps are thus reckoned, the Ace is five, the King four, the Queen three, and the Knave two.
Having play'd, he that wins the first trick turns up another Card, and that is Trumps; and so every trick produceth a fresh Trump, till all the seven be play'd. Now if it so happen, that what is turn'd up proves an Ace or Coat-Card, that is a great advantage to him who won the last trick; for if it be an Ace turn'd up then he reckons five, if a King four, if a Queen three, as aforesaid. After all the seven Cards be play'd, (which at first are dealt one by one) he that won the last trick turns up a Card, and if it prove Ace, King, Queen, or Knave, he reckons for it accordingly as aforesaid. If the Seven of Diamonds be turn'd up, that is Penneech, and is reckon'd fourteen turn'd up, but it is but seven in hand, and not that neither unless Diamonds be Trumps; if it be Trump it is the highest Card and wins all others; if it be not Trump it wins all Diamonds. Lastly, Having play'd out all the fourteen Cards betwixt ye, count how many Cards you have more than your own seven at first dealt you, and for every Card reckon one, and so you must reckon on with the value of your Coat-Card Trumps, with Penneech turn'd up or in hand, till you come to sixty one, which is the Game. Here note, if you have neither Ace nor Face, you may throw up your Game and deal again.
CHAP. XXII. POST and PAIR. POst and Pair is a Game on the Cards very much play'd in the West of England, as All-Fours is play'd in Kent, and Fives in Ire∣land. This Play depends much upon daring; so that some may win very considerably, who have the boldness to adventure much upon the Vye, al∣though their Cards are very indifferent. You must first stake at Post, then at Pair; after this deal two Cards apiece, then stake at the Seat, and then deal the third Card about. The eldest hand may pass and come in again, if any of the Gamesters vye it; if not, the Dealer may play it out, or double it. The Ace of Trumps, as at Ruff and Honours, is the best Card of all, and so of the rest in or∣der. At Post the best Cards are one and twenty, viz. two Tens and an Ace, but a pair-royal wins all, both Post, Pair, and Seat. Here note, that he who hath the best Pair or the best Post is the winner. A Pair is a pair of any two, as two Kings, two Queens, &c. A Pair-royal is of three, as three Kings, three Queens, &c. The Vye is what you please to adventure upon the goodness of your own hand, or if it be bad, and you imagine your Adversaries is so likewise, then bid high couragiously, by which means you daunt your Antagonist, and so bring him to submission.
If all the Gamesters keep in till all have done, and by consent shew their Cards, the best Cards carry the Game. Now according to agreement those that keep in till last, may divide the stakes, or shew the best Card for it. Observe, where the Cards fall in several hands of the same sort, as a Pair or Pair-Royal, and so forth, the eldest hand carries it. CHAP. XXIII. BANKAFALET, a Game on the Cards so called. THe Cards must be cut into as many heaps as there are Players, or more if you please, and every Man lays as much money on his own Card as he thinks fit, or on the supernumerary heaps. So many as the Dealers Card is inferior to, so many he pays; so many as his Card is su∣perior to, so many he wins from. The best Card is the Ace of Diamonds, the next to that the Ace of Hearts, thirdly the Ace of Clubs, and lastly the Ace of Spades, and so the rest of these suits in order, according to their degree. The Cheat lies in securing an Ace or any other good sure winning Card; and if you mark the Cards aforehand, so as to know them by the backside, you know how to make your advantage.
CHAP. XXIV. BEAST. IT is called by the French, La Bett, and is play'd by them after this manner. The best Cards are King, Queen, and so forwards. They make three heaps, the King, the Play, and the Triolet. To every one is dealt five Cards, (there may play three, four, five, or more) as at French Ruff, with the same rigour; before the Cards are dealt, every one stakes to the three heaps. He that wins most tricks takes up the heap that is called the Play; he that hath the King takes up the heap so called; and he that hath three of any sort, that is, three fours, three fives, three sixes, and so forth takes up the Triolet.
Games within the Tables. CHAP. XXV. Of IRISH. IRish is an ingenious Game, and requires a great deal of skill to play it well, especially the After-game. It is not to be learn'd other∣wise than by observation and practice, however I shall lightly touch hereon. The men which are thirty in number are e∣qually divided between you and your Adversary, and are thus placed, two on the Ace point, and five on the sice of your left hand Table, and three on the cinque, and five on the Ace point of your right hand Table, answer'd on the like points by your Adversaries men with the same number; or thus, two of your men on the Ace point, five on the double sice, or sice Cinque point, three on the Cinque point in your own Tables, and five on the sice point at home, and all these pointed alike by your Adversary. In your play have a care of being too for∣wards, and be not too rash in hitting every blot, but with discretion and consideration move slow∣ly but securely; by which means though your
Adversary have fill'd his Tables, but withall blots, and you by hitting him enter, you may win the Game; nay sometimes though he hath born his men all to a very few. 'Tis the part of a prudent Commander as he leads out his men to bring them home as safe as he may; so must you have a care of your men as you are bringing them home that they are not pickt up by the way. Have a special care that your Adversary dou∣ble not the Trey, Ace-point with his men, and so make what convenient haste you can to fill up your own Tables, and beware of blotting; that done, bear as fast as you can. For an After-game I know not what instructi∣ons to give you, you must herein trust to your own judgment and the chance of the Dice, and if they run low for some time, it will be so much the better. CHAP. XXVI. Of Back-Gammon. YOur men are placed as at Irish, and Back-Gammon differs but very little from it, but in Doublets which at this Game is plaid four∣fold, which makes a quicker dispatch of the Game than Irish.
Be sure to make good your Trey, Ace-points, hit boldly and come away as fast as you can, to which end if your Dice run high, you will make the quicker dispatch. When you come to bearing have a care of making when you need not, and Doublets now will stand you most in stead. If both bear together, he that is first off with∣out Doublets wins one. If both bear and one goes off with Doublets he wins two. If your Tables be clear before your Adver∣saries men be come in, that's a Back-Gammon, which is three; but if you thus go off with Doublets it is four. False Dice are much used at Irish and Back-Gammon for the benefit of entring, wherefore have a special care that you have not Cinque-Deuces, and Quater-Treys put upon you, you may quickly perceive it by the running of the Dice. The person that is cunning at play has great advantage of a novice or innocent man, which is commonly by toping or knaping, which by its often practice may be suspected by his Adver∣sary; then he has recourse to Dice, which runs particular chances for his purpose, which the other being ignorant of, is almost an equal ad∣vantage with the former. For example, he pro∣vides Dice that runs 6, 5, 4, 'tis his business to secure those points, so that if he happens to sur∣prize
any of your men coming home, as 'tis two to one but he does, he does without a kind of Miracle win the set. 'Tis possible sometimes they may make use of 3, 2, which are the low Chances; but that they seldom do for this reason, the high or forward points being supplied, you must enter if at all upon the low points which keeps you backwards and gives him advantage. The advantage of this Game is to be forward if possible upon safe terms, and to point his men at that rate that it shall not be possible for you to pass, though you have entred your men, till he gives you liberty, having two to one the advantage of the Game. CHAP. XXVII. Of TICK-TACK. ALL your men must stand on the Ace-point, and from thence play forward, but have a care of being too forward, or so at leastwise that Doublets reach you not. Secure your Sice and Cinque-point whatever you do, and break them not unless it be when you have the advantage of going in, which is the greatest advantage you can have next to a hit; for your Adversaries eleventh point standing
open you have it may be the opportunity of going in with two of your men, and then you win a double Game. A hit is but one, and that is, when you throw such a cast that some one of your men will reach your Adversaries un∣bound, but sometimes though it hits it will not pass by reason of a stop in the way, and then it is nothing. Sometimes it is good going over into your Adversaries Tables, but it is best for an After-game. Playing close at home is the securest way, play∣ing at length is both rash and unsafe, and be care∣ful of binding your men when you lie in danger of the enemy. Moreover, if you see you are in danger of losing a double Game, give your Ad∣versary one; if you can it is better doing so than losing two. Here note, if you fill up all the points of your second Table with your own men you win two, and that you may prevent your Adversary from doing so (if you are in danger thereof) if you can, make a vacant point in his Tables, and it is impossible for him to do it. This is the plain Game of Tick-Tack, which is called so from Touch, and take, for if you touch a man you must play him though to your loss; and if you hit your Adversary and neglect the advantage, you are taken with a Why-not, which is the loss of one: likewise if you are in, and your cast is such that you may also go into your Adversaries eleventh point by two other men,
and you see it not, either by carelesness or eager prosecution of a hit which is apparent before your eyes, you lose two irrecoverably. Besides, it is a very great oversight as your men may stand, not to take a point when you may do it. Now some play this Game with Toots, Bo∣veries, and Flyers; Toots is, when you fill up your Table at home, and then there is required small throws; for if you get over with a Sice, you have no benefit of Toots. Boveries is when you have a man in the ele∣venth point of your own Tables, and another in the same point of your Adversaries directly answering. Flyers is, when you bring a man round the Tables before your Adversary hath got over his first Table, to the effecting of which there is required very high throwing of your side, and very low throwing of his. Much more might be said as to the craft of the play, which cannot be so well discovered as from observation in your own or others play∣ing. There are several foolish pastimes to be plaid in the Tables which are ridiculous to treat of, wherefore I shall only mention these Three, Viz.
CHAP. XXVIII. DUBBLETS. AT Dubblets the fifteen men are thus pla∣ced; upon Sice, Cinque and Quater there are three men apiece, upon Trey, Deuce, Ace, but two apiece. He that throws most hath the benefit of throwing first, and what he throws he lays down; and so doth the other; what the one throws and hath not, the other lays down for him to his own advantage; and thus they do till all the men are down, and then they bear, but not till they are down; he that is down first bears first, and will doubtlesly win the Game if the other throws not Dubblets to overtake him; now he that throws Dubblets apace is certain to win, for as many as the Dubblets are, so many he lays down, or bears; for example, if two fours, he lays down, or bears eight, and so for the other Dubblets; and therefore he that can either nap, top, or hath high runners about him hath a great advantage herein.
CHAP. XXIX. SICE-AGE. FIve may play at Sice-Ace with six men a∣piece, they one load another with Aces, sixes bears only, and Dubblets drinks and throws again, so often some I have seen that for the lucre of a little money have resolved rather to lose themselves than a penny. It is commonly agreed the last two, or the last out shall lose, and the rest go free. CHAP. XXX. KETCH-DOLT. AT Ketch-Dolt the first throws and lays down from the heap of men without the Tables, what is thrown at it may be Sice Deuce, if the other throw either Sice or Deuce, and draw them not from his Adversaries Tables to the same point in his own, but takes them from the heap, and lays the Ace down, he is dolted and loseth the Game, or if he but touch a man of the heap and then recall himself, the loss is the same. Some by frequent practice will never be Dolted,
and then they strive who shall fill up their Ta∣bles first; which done, he that bears them off first hath won the game. And so much for play within the Tables. Games without the Tables. CHAP. XXXI. Of Inn and Inn. INn and Inn is a Game very much used in an Ordinary, and may be play'd by two or three, each having a Box in his hand. It is play'd with four Dice. You may drop what you will, Six-pences, Shillings, or Guinneys; every Inn you drop, and every Inn and Inn you sweep all; but if you throw out, if but two play, your Adversary wins all; if three play, that Out is a Bye between the two other Gamesters, which they may either divide or throw out for it. Here you are to observe that Out is when you have thrown no Dubblets on the four Dice; Inn is when you have thrown two Dubblets of any sort, as two Aces, two Deuces, two Kings, &c. Inn and Inn is, when you throw all Dubblets,
whether all of a sort or otherwise, viz. four Aces, four Deuces, or four Cinques, or two Aces, two Deuces, two Treys, two Quaters, or two Cinques, two Sixes, and so forth. Your Battail may be as much and as little as you will, from twenty Shillings to twenty Pounds, and so onward to a thousand, which Battail is not ended till every penny of that money agreed upon for the Battail be won; and it is but requi∣site, for it is frequently seen that in a Battail of ten Pound a Gentleman hath been reduced to five Shillings, and yet hath won at last the Battail. For a Gamester that would win without ha∣zarding much his money, Dice that will run ve∣ry seldom otherwise but Sixes, Cinques, Qua∣ters, &c. are very necessary; If those instru∣ments are not to be had, a Taper-box will not be amiss, that as the Dice are thrown in may stick by the way, and so thrown to advantage. I have heard of one, who having spent the major part of his Patrimony in good fellowship, and such pastimes as the heat of blood with vigor∣ous youth most prosecute; at length consider'd how he should live hereafter, and finding but small encouragements at home, and lesser a∣broad, thought if he could contrive a way to win a considerable sum at play (having been a great loser himself) that should be the basis of his future settlement; after various consultations within himself he at length contrived this strata∣gem; He caused a Box to be made, not as they
are usual screwed within, but smooth, and pro∣cured it to be so well painted and shadowed within that it lookt like a screw'd Box; now this Box was but half board wide at top, and nar∣row at bottom, that the Dice as aforesaid might stick, and the Box being smooth would come out without tumbling. With this Box he went and play'd at Inn and Inn, by vertue whereof and his art of taking up and throwing in his Dice into the Box, he got the first night a Thousand pound, and the next night Two hundred a year, with a Coach and six Horses, which Coach and Horses (being very valuable) he sold, but the Estate he lives on to this day with great improvements, and never would handle a Dye since, well knowing how many worthy Families it hath ruin'd. CHAP. XXXII. Of PASSAGE. PAssage is a Game at Dice to be play'd at but by two, and it is performed with three Dice. The Caster throws continually till he hath thrown Dubblets under ten, and then he is out and loseth, or dubblets above ten, and then he passeth and wins; high runners are most requi∣site for this Game, such as will rarely run any
other chance than four, five, or six, by which means if the Caster throws Dubblets he scarcely can throw out. There is the same advantage of the Smooth taper-box aforesaid in this Game, as at Inn and Inn; with the like benefit of the Dice, whether by palming, topping, slurring, or knap∣ping. CHAP. XXXIII. Of HAZZARD. HAzzard is a proper name for this Game; for it speedily makes a Man or undoes him; in the twinkling of an eye either a Man or a Mouse. This Game is play'd but with two Dice, but there may play at it as many as can stand round the largest round Table. There are two things chiefly to be observed, that is, Main and Chance; the Chance is the Ca∣sters, and the Main theirs who are concerned in play with him. There can be no Main thrown above nine and under five; so that five, six, seven, eight and nine are the only Mains and no more which are flung at Hazzard; Chances and Nicks are from four to ten, thus four is a chance to nine, five to eight, six to seven, seven to six, eight to five; and nine and ten a chance
to five, six, seven and eight: in short, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine and ten are chances to any Main, if any of these Nick it not: now Nicks are either when the chance is the same with the Main, as five and five, six and six, se∣ven and seven, and so on, or six and twelve, se∣ven and eleven, eight and twelve; where note, that twelve is out to nine, seven, and five; and eleven is out to nine, eight, six, and five; Ames-Ace, and Deuce-Ace, are out to all Mains what∣ever. That I may the better illustrate this Game, it will not be amiss to give one example for your better information; Seven's the Main, the Cast∣er throws five, and that's his chance, and so hath five to seven; if the Caster throw his own chance he wins all the money was set him, but if he throw Seven which was the Main, he must pay as much money as is on the Board; if again Seven be the Main, and the Caster throws ele∣ven, that is a Nick, and sweeps away all the mo∣ney on the Table; but if he throw a chance, he must wait which will come first; Lastly, if Seven be the Main, and the Caster throws Ames-Ace, Deuce-Ace, or twelve, he is out, but if he throw from four to ten he hath a chance, though they are accounted the worst chances on the Dice, as seven is reputed the best and easiest Main to be flung; thus it is in eight or six, if either of them be the Main, and the Caster throw either four, five, seven, nine, or ten, this is his chance,
which if he throw first, he wins, otherwise lo∣seth; if he throw twelve to eight, or six or the same Cast with the Main, he wins; but if Ames-Ace or Deuce-Ace to all he loseth; or if twelve when the Main is either five or nine. Here note, that nothing Nicks five but five, nor no∣thing nine but nine. Four and Five to Seven is judged to have the worst on't, because Four (called by the Tribe of Nickers little Dick-Fisher) and Five have but two chances, Trey Ace and two Deuces, or Trey Deuce and Quater Ace, whereas Seven hath three Chances, Cinque Deuce, Six Ace, and Quater Trey; in like condition is nine and ten, having but two chances, six trey, cinque and quater, or six quater and two cinques. Now six and eight one would think should admit of no difference in advantage with seven, but if you will rightly consider the case, and be so vain to make trial thereof, you will find a great advantage in seven over six and eight. How can that be you will say, hath not six, seven and eight, eight equal chances? For example, in six, quater deuce, cinque Ace, and two Treys; in eight, six deuce, cinque trey, and two quarters, and hath not seven three as aforesaid? It is confest; but pray consider the disadvantage in the dubblets, two treys and two quarters, and you wil lfind that six deuce is sooner thrown than two quarters, and so consequently cinque Ace or quater deuce soon∣er
than two treys. I saw an old Rook once take up a young fellow in a Tavern, upon this very score: the bargain was made that the Rook should have seven always and the young Gentle∣man six, and throw continually; agreed to play they went, the Rook got the first day ten pound, the next day the like sum; and so for six days together losing in all threescore pounds; notwithstanding the Gentleman, I am confident, had square Dice, and threw them always him∣self. And farther to confirm what I alledg'd before, not only this Rook, but many more have told me that they desir'd no greater advantage than to have seven always and the Caster to have six. Here note, it is the opinion of most that at the first throw the Caster hath the worst on't. Certainly Hazzard is the most bewitching Game that is plaid on the Dice; for when a man begins to play he knows not when to leave off; and having once accustom'd himself to play at Hazzard, he hardly ever after minds any thing else. I have seen an old man about the Age of Seventy play at an Ordinary when his own eyes were so defective, that he was forced to help them with a pair of Spectacles; and having an opportunity one day to speak to him, How a man of his years could be so vain and boyish still to mind play; insisting withall upon the folly of that action to hazzard his money when he had not sight enough remaining to discern whe∣ther
he had won or lost; besides Sir, said I, you cannot but hear how you are derided every time you come to the Ordinary; one says, here comes he that cannot rest quiet, but will cry without the rattle of the Dice; another cries, certainly such a one plays by the ear, for he can∣not see to play. Let them talk what they will, said the Gentleman, I cannot help it, I have been for above forty years so us'd to play, that should I leave it off now, I were as good stop those Is∣sues about me, which have been instrumental in the preservation of my life to this length of time. To conclude, happy is he that having been much inclined to this time-spending-money-wast∣ing Game, hath took up in time, and resolved for the future never to be concerned with it more; but more happy is he that hath never heard the name thereof. CHAP. XXXIV. The Art and Mystery of RIDING, Whether the Great-Horse or any other. AS an Introduction to the Art of Riding, I think it requisite to treat of the taming of a young Colt: In order thereunto, observe, that after your Colt hath been eight or ten days
at home, and is reduced to that familiarity that he will indure currying without showing aver∣sion thereunto, and will suffer his Keeper to handle and stroke him in what part of the body he thinketh best, then it is time to offer him the Saddle; first laying it in the Manger that he may smell to it, and thereby grow acquaint∣ed with it, using all other means that he may not be afraid either at the sight thereof or at the noise of the Stirrops. Having gently put on the Saddle, take a sweet watring Trench washt and anointed with Honey and Salt, and so place it in his mouth, that it may hang directly about his Tush, somewhat leaning thereon: having so done, which must be in a morning after dres∣sing, then lead him out in your hand and water him abroad, then bring him in, and after he hath stood rein'd a little upon his Trench an hour or thereabout, then unbridle and unsaddle him, and give him liberty to feed till Evening, and then do as before; having cherished him, dress and cloath him for the Night. The next day do as you did before, and after that put on him a strong Musrole, or sharp Ca∣vezan and Martingal, which you must buckle at that length, that he may only feel it when he jer∣keth up his head, then lead him forth into some new plow'd land or soft ground, and there ha∣ving made him trot a good while about in your hand to take him off from wantonness and wild tricks, offer to mount, which if he refuse, then trot
him again in your hand, then put your foot in the Stirrup, and mount half way and dismount again; if he seem distasted at it, about with him again, and let him not want correction; but if he take it patiently, cherish him, and place your self in the Saddle, but stay there a very little while, then cherish him again and give him bread or grass to feed on; then having seen all things fit and strong without offence to your self and Horse, remount him, placing your, self e∣ven in the Saddle, carrying your Rod inoffen∣sively to his eye, then let some person having in his hand the Chaff-halter, lead him a little way, then make him stand, and having cherisht him, let him forward again, do this seven or eight times, or so often till you have brought him of his own accord to go forward, then must you stay and cherish him, and having brought him home, alight gently, then dress and feed him well. Observe this course every day till you have brought him to trot, which will be but three at the most, if you observe to make him fol∣low some other Horsman, stopping him now and then gently, and then making him go for∣ward, remembring his seasonable cherishings, and not forgetting his due corrections as often as you find him froward and rebellious; and when you ride him abroad, return not the same way home, that you may make him take all
ways indifferently: and by these observations you will bring him to understand your will and purpose in less than a Fortnights time. Having brought your Horse to receive you to his back, trot fore-right, stop and retire with patience and obedience, be never unmind∣ful of your Helps, corrections and cherishings, which consist in the Voice, Bridle, Rod, Calves of the Legs, and Spurs; the last of which is chief for correction, which must not be done faintly but sharply when occasion shall require it. Cherishings may be comprehended within three Heads, the Voice delivered smoothly and lovingly, as so, so boy, so; then the hand by clapping him gently on the neck or buttock: lastly the Rod by rubbing him therewith upon the Withers or the Main, in which he very much delights. The next that you are to regard, is the Mus∣role or Cavezan and Martingale; this is an ex∣cellent Guide to a well disposed Horse for set∣ting of his Head in due place, forming of his Rein, and making him appear lovely to the eye of the Spectator; and withall this is a sharp correction when a Horse yerketh out his Nose, disorders his Head, or endeavours to run away with his Rider.
The manner of placing it, is thus: let it hang somewhat low, and rest upon the tender grissel of the Horses nose, that he may be the more sensible of correction; and let it not be strait, but loose, whereby the Horse may feel, upon the yielding in of his Head, how the offence goeth from him, and by that means be made sensible, that his own disorder was his only punishment. You must carefully observe how you win your Horses head, and by those degrees bring his Martingale straighter and straighter, so as the Horse may ever have a gentle feeling of the same, and no more, till his head be brought to its true perfection, and there stay. When you have brought your Horse to some certainty of Rein, and will Trot forth∣right, then bring him to the treading forth of the large rings. If your Horses nature be sloathful and dull, yet strong trot him first in some new plow'd field; but if agil, and of a fiery spirit, then trot him in some sandy ground, and there mark out a spacious large ring, about a hundred paces in circumference. Having walkt him about it on the right seven or eight times, you must then by a little strait∣ning of your right Rein, and laying the calf of your left Leg to his side, making a half cir∣cle
within your ring, upon your right hand down to the center thereof, and then by strait∣ning a little your left Rein, and laying the calf of your right Leg to his side, making another semi-circle to your left hand from the center to the outmost verge; which two Semicir∣cles contrary turned, will make a perfect Ro∣man S within the ring; then keeping your first large circumference, walk your Horse about in your left hand, as oft as you did on your right; and then change within your ring as you did before, to your right hand again; and then trot him first on the right hand, then on the left, as long as you shall think conveni∣ent, either one, two, or three hours, to per∣fect him in this lesson; and this must be done every morning and evening too, if you find your Horse sloathful and dull; otherwise you need not take so much pains with him. Having taught him to trot the large rings perfectly, which will not require above four or five days; then in the same manner and changes make him gallop the same rings, ma∣king him take up his Feet so truly and loftily, that no falshood may be perceived in his stroke, but that his inward Feet play before his out∣ward, and each of a side follow the other so exactly, that his gallop may appear the best grace of all his motions.
Here note: You must not enter him all at once to gallop this great ring, but by degrees; first a quarter, then a half quarter, &c. ever remembring, not to force him into it with the spur, but by the lightness and cheerfulness of your body let him pass of his own accord into a gallop. Helps, corrections, and cherishings in the ring-turn, are as aforesaid, the elevation of the voice, and the threatning of the rod, and strait∣ning of the bridle, are good helps, which you must use as you must the spur, rod and leg, for timely due corrections: neither must you ever cherish without desert. Having made your Horse gallop as well as trot the large ring, then teach him to stop fair, comely, and without danger, after this manner: First, having cherisht him, bring him into a swift trot forward about fifty paces: then draw in your bridle-hand straightly and suddenly, which will make him gather up his hinder and fore-legs together, and thereby stand still: then ease your hand a little, that he may give backward: which if he doth, give him more liberty, and cherish him: having given a little respit, draw in your bridle-hand, and make him go back three or four paces, at which if he strike, instantly ease your hand, and draw it up again, letting him come and
go till he yield and go backward: but if he refuse it, let some person standing by, put him back, and then cherish him, that he may know your intention. Thus every time you stop, make him retire, till you have perfected him in these two lessons at one time. Have a care that the ground be not slip∣pery where you stop, but firm and hard, lest the Horse apprehensive of the danger of falling, refuse to stop as you would have him. When your Horse can stop well, and retire, you must then teach him to advance before, when he stoppeth; a lesson that carrieth much grace and comeliness therein; it is performed in this manner: After you have stopped your Horse without giving your hand any ease, lay the calves of both your Legs hard to his sides, shaking your Rod, and crying, Ʋp, up; which though he understand not at first, yet by fre∣quent practice, with helps, cherishings, and corrections as aforesaid, he will come to un∣derstand your meaning. But be sure you look narrowly to the comeliness of the advancing, which consists in taking up his Legs both even together, bending them inward to his body; next, his advance must not be too high, for fear of his coming over upon you; but let him couch his hinder-loins close to the ground, but
by no means suffer him to sprawl or paw with his Feet forward. Lastly, he must not advance for his own pleasure (for that is a great fault) but for yours, according to your will and command. If in advancing he rise too high, ready to come over, or sprawl, or paw; give him not only your spurs both together, but lash him twice or thrice with your Rod between his ears, and if he advanceth of his own accord, then jerk him over the knees, doing so as often as he commits those faults. Now the use of advancing is this; it not only graceth all his other lessons, but makes his body agil and nimble, and fits him for ready turning; it is most used at stopping, and then very gracefully. In the next place you must teach your Horse to yerk out behind, after this manner: As soon as you have made him stop, presently give him a good jerk under his belly, near his flank, which will make him understand you in time, though not presently. At first doing, cherish him much, and having let him pawse, make him do it again, till he will do it as often as you will have him: but with∣all, look to the comeliness of his yerking, for it is not graceful for him to yerk out his
hinder-legs till his fore-legs be above the ground; and see that he yerk not one leg far∣ther out than the other, but both even toge∣ther, and not too high, or one leg out whilst the other is on the ground. Helps in yerking, are the constant staying of his mouth on the bridle, the stroke of the Rod under his belly, or a gentle touch there∣of on his Rump. If he refuse to yerk, or doth it disorderly, then a single spur on that side that is faulty; and lastly, continual diseasing him till he hath done it. Now to teach him to turn readily on both hands, is first to bring his large rings into a narrower compass, that is about four yards in circumference, walking your Horse therein with all gentleness, and at his own pleasure, till he is acquainted therewith: After this, carry your bridle-hand constant, and somewhat straight, the outmost Rein straighter than the inmost, making the Horse rather look from the ring, than into it; and thus trot him a∣bout, first on the one side, then on the other, making your changes as aforesaid. Thus ex∣ercise him an hour and half, then stop and make him advance three or four times together, then retire in an even line, afterwards stand still and
cherish him: Having pawsed a while to re∣cover breath, exercise him as aforesaid, still endeavouring to bring his trot to all the swift∣ness and loftiness possible, making him do his changes roundly and readily, and causing him to lap his outmost leg so much over his inmost leg, that he may cover it more than a foot over: and thus exercise him seven or eight days, every morning at least three hours, and suffer him only to practise his former lessons once in a morning; in this manner you teach your Horse three lessons together, the Terra à Terra, the Incavalere, and the Chambletta. The turn Terra à Terra in the outmost cir∣cle of the straight ring, and the Incavalere and Chambletta in the changes, wherein he is forced to lap one leg over another, or else to lift up the inmost Leg from the ground, whilst he brings the outmost over it: This lesson is so difficult, that a compleat Horseman should think his Horse hath never perfectly learn'd it; and therefore he must continually practise his Horse in trading, trotting, and galloping these nar∣row rings; and from thence to pass them a∣bout in ground-salts, as from taking up his fore-legs from the ground both together, and bringing his hinder-feet in their place, and so passing the Ring as often as the strength of your Horse and your own reason will allow of.
Thus you see the perfecting your Horse in the large Ring will easily introduce him into the knowledge of the straight Ring, and that brings him to turn perfectly, and stopping be∣gets retiring, and retiring advancing. Having brought your Horse to this perfe∣ction, take off his Musrole and Trench, and in their stead put on his head a gentle Cavezan, in such manner that it lye on the tender grissel of his nose somewhat near the upper part of his nostrils; put in his mouth a sweet smooth cannon-bit, with a plain watering chain, the cheek being of a large size, let the Kirble be thick, round and large, hanging loosly upon his neather lip, so that it may entice him to play therewith. Having so done, mount, casting the left rein of your Cavezan over the Horses right shoul∣der, and bear it with your thumb with the reins of the Bit in your left hand; let the right reins of the Cavezan be cast over his left shoulder, and bear it with your Rod in your hand, and so trot him forth the first morning about two miles in the high-way, making him now and then stop and retire, and gather up his head in its due place; the next day bring him to his former large Rings, and perfect him therein with the Bit as you did with the Snaffle in all the foregoing lessons, which is more easily done by
reason the Bit is of better command and of shar∣per correction. The next thing we shall speak of (to avoid every thing that is not very pertinent to our purpose) is the Turning-Post, which must be smooth and strong, and very well fixt in the center of the straight Ring, then causing some person to stand at the Post, give him the right rein of your Cavezan to hold about the Post, and so walk or trot your Horse about the same as oft as you think fit on your right hand; then change your right rein for your left, and do as before; continue thus doing till your Horse be perfect in every turn. Having so done, teach him to manage (the proper posture for a sword) which is thus performed: Cause two Rods to be prickt in the earth, at what di∣stance as you shall think fit from one another; then walk your Horse in a straight ring about the first on your right hand, passing him in an even furrow down to the other Rod, and walk about that also in a narrow Ring on your left hand, then thrust him into a gentle gallop down the even furrow, till you come to the first Rod, and there make him stop (as it were) and advance without pawse or intermission of time; thrust him forward again, beat the turn Terra à Terra about on your right hand; then gal∣lop forth right to the other Rod, and in the same manner beat the turn about on the left
hand, do this as often as you shall think con∣venient: Though there are many sorts of Ma∣nages, yet I hold but two necessary and useful, and that is this already described, called Terra à Terra, and Incavalere or Chambletta, dis∣coursed afore-going. As for the Career, I need not speak much thereof; ony this, when you run him forth-right at full speed, stop him quickly, suddenly, firm and close on his but∣tock, and mark that you make not your Ca∣reer too long, nor too short; the one weak∣ens, and the other hinders the discovery of his true wind and courage; therefore let not the length of your Career extend above six∣score Yards; and be sure you give him some little warning by your bridle-hand, be∣fore you start him, and then stop him firmly and strongly. Thus much for the War-Horse or great Saddle.
Of the Horse of Pleasure. IF you will make your Horse to bound aloft, you must first trot him about sixteen yards, then stop him, and when he hath advanced twice, streighten a little your Bridle-hand, and then give him the even stroke of both your spurs to∣gether hard, which at first will only amaze him, but if he have good mettle and courage, he will at length rise from the ground by often doing it; if he doth it, though but little, cherish him very much, then let him pause and give him your spurs again, and if he acts according to your desire, cherish him again, make him do thus three or four times a day, till he is so per∣fect that he will do it at any time at your spurs command. Next, teach him to corvet thus; hollow the ground a Horse's length, where two walls joyn together, then place a strong smooth Post by the side of the hollowness of a Horse's length, likewise from the wall, then over against the Post fasten an Iron-ring at the wall; this done, ride your Horse into the hollow place, and fa∣sten one of the Reins of the Cavezan to the Ring, and the other about the Post; then (ha∣ving first cherished your Horse) make him ad∣vance
by the help of the calves of your Legs, twice or thrice together, then let him pause; after this (cherishing him again) advance him half a score times together, and daily encrease his advancings, till you perceive he hath got such a habit therein, that he will by no means go forward, but keeping his ground certain, advance both before and behind of an equal height, and keep just and certain time with the motions of your Legs; and if he raise his hinder legs not high enough, you must have some body behind, who having a rod, must gently jerk him on the fillets, to make him raise his hinder parts. By taking this course, in a few days you will so teach your Horse to corvet, that without any helps at any time and place, you may make him cor∣vet at your pleasure. I need not speak of the Capriole, since it is the same manner of motion as the Corvet, only it is done forward, gaining ground in the salt, raising his hinder parts as high or higher than the foremost. If you would have your Horse go side-long on any hand, you must draw up your bridle-hand straight, and if you would have him go on the right hand, lay your left rein close to his neck, and the calf of your Leg close to his side, making him put his left leg
over his right, then turning your rod back∣ward, gently jerking him on the left hinder thigh, make him bring his hinder parts to the right side also, and stand in an even line as at the first, then make him remove his fore∣parts more than before, so that he may as it were cross over the even line, and then make him bring his hinder part after, and stand in an even line again, and this do till by practice he will move his fore-parts and hinder-parts both together, and go side-long as far as you please; and if you would have him go on the left hand, do as before. To conclude, these are the most material Lessons requisite to be taught any Horse whatever, either for service or pleasure, which if taught your Horse with care and patience, you may conclude your Horse perfect and compleat. But be sure you observe this, that whatsoever Lesson your Horse is most im∣perfect in, with that Lesson ever when you ride begin and end with it; repeating every one over, more or less, lest want of use breed forgetfulness, and forgetfulness absolute ignorance.
CHAP. XXXV. Of RACING. FOR the compleating a Gentleman's de∣light in the Art of Racing, he is to take special cognizance of these subsequent Rules and Orders. First, He is to consider what is the most convenient time to take his Horse from grass, which is about Bartholomew-tide, the day be∣ing dry, fair, and pleasant; as soon as he is taken up, let him let him stand all that night in some convenient dry place to empty his body; the next day put him into a stable, and feed him with wheat-straw, but no lon∣ger; for though the Rule be good in taking up Horses bellies after this manner, yet if you exceed your time in so doing, this straw will straighten his guts, heat his liver, and hurt his blood; therefore what you want in straw let it be supplied by riding him forth to wa∣ter morning and evening, airings, and other moderate exercise. And for his food, let it be good old sweet Hay, and clothe him ac∣cording to the weather and temper of his body; for as the Year grows colder, and thereby you find his hair rise and stare about
his neck, flanks, or other parts, then add a woollen cloth, or more if need require, till his hair fall smooth. Where note, That a rough coat shews want of cloth, and a smooth coat cloth enough. A Race-horse ought to be drest in his rest∣ing days twice a day, before his morning and evening waterings; and must be done after this manner: Curry him from the tips of his ears to the setting on of his tail, all his body entirely over with an Iron-Comb, his Legs under the knees and gambrels excepted; then dust him and curry him high again all over with a round brush of bristles, then dust him the second time, and rub all the loose hair off with your hands dipt in fair water, and continue rubbing till he is as dry as at first, then rub every part of him with a hair-cloth, and lastly rub him all over with a white lin∣nen cloth; then pick his eyes, nostrils, sheath, cods, tuel, and feet very clean, then cloath him and stop him round with wisps. There is no better water for a Race-horse, than a running River or clear Spring, about a mile and half from the stable, near some level ground, where you may gallop him af∣terwards, having scop'd him a little, bring him to the water again, then scope him and bring him again, so often till he refuse to drink
more for that time; after this, walk him home, clothe and stop him up round with great soft wisps, and having stood an hour upon the bridle, feed him with sweet sound Oats, ei∣ther dryed by age or art: If your Horse be low of flesh, or hath a bad stomach, add one third of Beans to two parts of Oats, and that will recover both. The next food you shall give him shall be better and stronger, and it is bread, which you must make after this manner: take two bushels of beans, and one of wheat, and grind them together, then boult through a fine Range the quantity of half a bushel of pure meal, and bake it in three loaves, and the rest sift through a Meal-sieve, and knead it with wa∣ter and good store of barm, and bake it in great loaves; with the courser bread feed your Runner in his resting days, and with the finer against the days of his exercise and great∣est labour. The times of his feeding, upon the days of his rest, must be after his coming from wa∣ter in the morning, an hour after mid-day, after his evening watering, and at ten a clock at night; but upon his labouring days, two hours after he is throughly cold, outwardly and inwardly, afterwards as aforesaid.
Let his Hay be dry and short; if it be sweet no matter how course it is, for if it be rough it will scowre his teeth. As for the proportion of his food, I need not prescribe a quantity, since you must allow him accord∣ing to the goodness and badness of his sto∣mach. His exercise ought to be thrice a week, and it must be more or less according to the con∣dition of his body; for if it be foul, exercise him moderately to break his grease; if clean, you may do as you think fit, having a care that you discourage him not, nor abate his mettle; and after every exercise give him that night, or the next morning, a scouring; the best I know to purge a Horse from all grease, glut, or filth whatever, is this, take three ounces of Anniseeds, six drams of Cummin∣seeds, a dram and half of Carthamus, two drams of Fenugreek-seed, and of Brimstone an ounce and half; beat all these to a fine pow∣der, and searse them; then take of Sallet-oyl somewhat more than a pint, a pound and half of Honey, and a pottle of white Wine, then with fine white Meal knead it well into a strong paste, and keep it by you, it will last a long time; when you use it, dissolve a ball thereof in a Pail of fair water, and give it him to drink after exercise, in the dark, lest discolouring the water, the Horse refuse to
drink. This is an excellent scouring, and a remedy for all internal distempers. Now after exercise, cool him a little abroad before you bring him home, then house him and litter him well, rubbing him with dry Clothes till there be never a wet hair about him, then clothe and wisp him round. Here note, before you air your Horse, it will be requisite to break a raw Egg into his mouth, for it will add to his wind. If he be fat, air him before Sun-rise and after Sun-set; but if lean, let him have as much comfort of the Sun as you can. Coursing in his clothes sometimes to make him sweat is not irrequi∣site, so it be moderately done; but when without his clothes, let it be sharp and swift. Let his body be empty before he course; and to wash his tongue and nostrils with Vinegar, or to piss in his mouth e're you back him, is wholesom; having courst him, clothe him, after he hath taken breath, and ride him home gently. To be short, what is here defective in the right ordering of a Race-horse, your own judgments may easily supply. All that you have to do, is to be careful when to take him up, how to clothe him and dress him, when and how to feed and water, what and
how much exercise is requisite either by air∣ing or by coursing, and his ordering after exercise, and what scowrings are most requi∣site; and that I may add a little more to your knowledge, and conclude this subject, take these general Rules and Instructions. 1. Course not your Horse hard at least four or five days before you run your match, lest the soarness of his Limbs abate his speed. 2. Except your Horse be a foul feeder muzzle him not above two or three Nights before his match, and the Night before his bloody courses. 3. As you give your Horse gentle cour∣ses, give him sharp ones too, that he may as well find comfort as displeasure there∣on. 4. Upon the match-day let your Horse be empty, and that he take his rest undisturbed till you lead him out. 5. Shoo your Horse ever a day before you run him, that the pain of the Hammers knocks may be out of his Feet.
6. Saddle your Horse on the Race-day in the stable before you lead him forth, and fix both the Pannel and the Girths to his back and sides with Shoo-makers wax, to prevent all dangers. 7. Lead your Horse to his course with all gentleness, and give him leave to smell to o∣ther Horses dung, that thereby he may be enticed to stole and empty his body as he goes. 8. Lastly, When you come to the place where you must start, first rub his limbs well, then uncloath him, then take his back, and the word given, start him with all gentle∣ness and quietness that may, lest doing any thing rashly, you choak him in his own wind. A Race-horse ought to have all the finest shapes that may be, but above all things he must be nimble, quick, and fiery, apt to flye with the least motion. Long shapes are to∣lerably good, for though they shew weakness, yet they assure sudden speed. The best horse for this use is the Arabian Barbary, or his Bastard; not but Gennets are good, but the Turks much better. Having laid you down all these advantages
for ordering your Racer, from his taking up, to the day of his running, I hope you will make such good use of them, that if upon an equal match you should lay your money on the heels of your Horse thus ordered, he shall be so far from kicking away his Ma∣sters stake, that the nimbleness of his feet shall make it double. I might here insert the many subtilties and tricks there are used in making a Match, the craft of the Betters, with the knavery of the Riders, but that they are now too generally known by the woful experience of too many Racing-losers.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of ARCHERY. ARchery, as it is a recreation, so it hath been heretofore, and is still in some parts of the World very useful in military affairs, but now quite laid aside by English men for fighting, there being found out more dextrous and speedy ways to kill and destroy one another. Yet it is not so laid aside, but that it is used by some for pastime, either at Buts or Rovers, and should not be forgotten by Ci∣tizens, as appears by the continuance of that ancient custom for every Lord Mayor to see the prize performed by shooting annually with the pound Arrow. Certainly this shooting in the long Bow is very healthful for the body, by extending the Limbs, and making them pliant; and it hath been necessary for a Commonwealth, in the defence and preservation of the Country; but since it is so little used now adays, I shall abbreviate my discourse. There are these Rules to be observed for shooting in the Long-bow.
First, He must have a good eye to behold and discern his mark; and knowing-judgment to understand the distance of ground, to take the true advantage of a side-wind, and to know in what compass his Arrow must fly; and a quick dexterity, to give his shaft a strong, sharp, and sudden loose. Secondly, He must in the action it self stand fair and upright with his body; his left foot a convenient stride before his right, both his hams stiff, his left arm holding his Bow in the midst, stretcht straight out, and his right arm with his first three fingers and his thumb drawing the string to his right ear, the notch of his Arrow resting between his fore-finger and middle-finger of his right hand, and the steel of his Arrow below the feathers upon the middle knuckle of his fore-finger on his left hand; he shall draw his Arrow close up to the head, and deliver on the instant, with∣out hanging on the string. The best Bow is either Spanish or English Yew; the best Shaft is of Burch, Sugar-chest, or Brazel, and the best Feathers gray or white. There are three Marks to shoot at, Buts, Pricks, or Rovers.
The first is a level mark, and therefore you must have a strong Arrow with a broad feather. The second is a mark of some compass, yet most certain in the distance, therefore you must have nimble strong Arrows, with a middle feather, all of one weight and fly∣ing. The last; which is the Rover, is uncertain, sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, and therefore requires Arrows lighter or heavier, according to the distance of shooting. If you want strength, by debilitation in the Arm or Back, you may reap the same pleasure by using the Cross-Bow, with which you may shoot at Buts, Pricks, or Rovers.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of Cock-Fighting. COcking is a sport or pastime so full of delight and pleasure, that I know not any Game in that respect is to be preferred before it, and since the Fighting-Cock hath gain'd so great an estimation among the Gen∣try, in respect to this noble recreation I shall here propose it before all the other Games of which I have afore succinctly discoursed; that therefore I may methodically give in∣structions to such as are unexperienced, and add more knowledge to such who have al∣ready gain'd a competent proficiency in this pleasing Art, I shall as briefly as I can give you information how you shall chuse, breed, and diet the Fighting-Cock, with what choice Secrets are thereunto belonging, in order thus.
Of the Choice of the Fighting-Cock. IN the election of a Fighting-Cock there are Four things principally to be consi∣dered, and they are Shape, Colour, Courage, and Sharp-heel. First, as to his shape, you must not chuse him neither too small, nor too large; the first is weak and tedious in his fighting, and the other unweildy and not active, and both very difficult to be matched; wherefore the middle-siz'd Cock is the proper choice for your purpose, being easily matcht, and is both strong and nimble. His Head ought to be small, with a quick large eye, and a strong back, and (as Master Markham observes) must be crookt and big at the setting on, and in colour suitable to the plume of his Feathers, whether black, yel∣low or reddish, &c. The beam of his Leg must be very strong, and according to his plume, blew, gray, or yellow, his Spurs rough, long, and sharp, a little bending and looking inward. Secondly, his Colour ought to be either
gray, yellow, or red, with a black breast; not but that there are many other colour'd pyles very excellent good, which you must find out by practice and observation, but the three former by the experience of most found ever the best, the pide pyle may pass indiffe∣rently, but the white and dun are rarely found good for any thing. Here note, That if your Cocks neck be in∣vested with a scarlet complexion it is a sign he is strong, lusty and couragious; but on the contrary, if pale and wan, it denotes the Cock to be faint, and in health defective. Thirdly, you may know his courage by his proud upright standing, and stately tread in walking, and if he croweth very frequently in the Pen, it is a couragious demonstration. Fourthly and lastly, his narrow-heel or sharpness of heel is known no other-ways than by observation in fighting, and that is, when upon every rising he so hits that he extracts blood from his opponent, gilding his Spurs continually and every blow threatning immediate death to his adversary. Here note, That it is the opinion of the best Cock-Masters, that a sharp-heel'd Cock though he be somewhat false, is better than a
true Cock with a dull heel; and the reason is this, the one fights long but seldom wounds, the other carrieth a heel so fatal that every moment produceth an expectation of the Bat∣tails conclusion; and though he is not so har∣dy as to endure the utmost hewing, so com∣monly there is little occasion for it, being a quick dispatcher of his business; now should your Cock prove both hardy and narrow-heel'd, he is then the best Cock you can make choice of. To conclude, make your choice of such a one that is of Shape strong, of Colour good, of Valour true, and of Heel sharp and ready. How to breed a Cock of the Game. WHatever you do, let your Hen be of a good complexion, that is to say, rightly plumed, as black, brown, speckt, gray, grissel, or yellowish; these are the right and proper colours for a Hen of the Game; and if she be tufted on the crown it is so much the better, for that argues courage and reso∣lution, and if she have the addition of wea∣pons they conduce very much to her excel∣lency.
Let her body be large and well poked be∣hind for the production of large Eggs; you will do well to observe how she behaveth her self to her Chickens, whether friendly or fro∣wardly, and take especial notice of her car∣riage and deportment among other Hens, if she will receive abuses from them without re∣venge, or show any thing of Cowardice, va∣lue her not, for you may assure your self her Chickens will be good for nothing. By the way take this observation, confir∣med by the opinions of the best Cock-Masters both ancient and modern, that a right Hen of the Game from a Dunghill-Cock will bring forth very good Chickens, but the best Cock from a Dunghill-Hen will never get a Bird that's fit for the Game: wherefore if you intend to have a good breed get perfect Cocks for your perfect Hens. The best season for breeding is from the encrease of the Moon in February, to the en∣crease of the same in March. Let her Nest be so placed that she may not be disturbed by the sight of any other Fowl, which fre∣quently so raiseth her choler that the Eggs are in great danger; let the composure of her Nest be made of soft sweet straw, and let it stand in some warm place, for she is a Bird that is very tender.
The next thing that you are to observe is, whether she turn her Eggs often or not, if she is remiss therein, you must supply her du∣ty, but if she save you the labour, prize her more than ordinary. And that she may not straggle too far from her Eggs being necessi∣tated to seek abroad for food, and so cool her Eggs, it will be altogether necessary for you to set by her such necessary food as you shall think fit with some fair water; and that she may bathe and trim her self at her plea∣sure: in the place where she siteth let there be sand, gravel and ashes finely sifted. The Hen hatcheth her Chickens commonly after one and twenty days; observe in the hatching to take those newly hatched, and wrapping them in wool keep them warm by a fire-side till the rest are disclosed; being all hatcht put them under the Hen, and be sure to keep her warm, and suffer not your Hen and Chickens to straggle abroad till they are above three weeks old; and let the room wherein they walk be boarded, for all other Flours are either too moist or too cold. Let their Walk be in some Grass-court or Green-place, after they are a month old, that they may have the benefit of feeding on Worms, and now and then to scowre them∣selves with Grass and Chick-weed, but be
careful they come not near Puddles or filthy places, for they engender in birds of this na∣ture venemous distempers, which commonly prove fatal; for the prevention of such ma∣ladies by way of antidote give them every morning before they range abroad, the blades of Leeks chopt or minced small and mingled among their usual diet; also it will be requi∣site to perfume their room with burnt Peny∣royal or Rosemary. Observe to take this course till their Sexes are distinguishable; as soon as the Comb or Wattles are discernable, or plainly visible to the eye, cut them away, and anoint the sore place with sweet butter, till it be whole. The reasons why their Combs or Wattles should be cut so soon, are these, First if you let them grow till they arrive to their full bigness, and then cut them, there will follow a great flux of blood, and the least loss of blood in feather'd fowl is very dangerous; if much, frequently mortal; moreover to let them grow thus, causeth gouty thick heads, with great lumps; whereas if you take them off betime as aforesaid, they will have heads finely small, smooth and slender. The time of the separation of the Cock-Chickens is when they begin to fight with and peck one another, till which time you
may let them walk with the Hen promiscu∣ously together, but afterwards let their Walks be apart, and that Walk is best where he may securely and privately enjoy his Hens without the disturbance and annoyance of other Cocks, for which purpose walks at Wind-mills, Water-mills, Grange-houses, Lodges in Parks, and Coney-Warrens, are very good Walks, but that the later is somewhat dange∣rous, being too frequently haunted with Pole∣cats, and other vermin. Let the place of feeding be as near as you can on soft dry ground, or on boards if the place be harder, as on paved earth, or floors plaister'd, it will so weaken and blunt their beaks, that they will be unable to hold fast. Here note, That any white Corn is good for a Cock in his Walk, and so are white-bread tosts steeped in drink, or man's urine, which will both scowre and cool them in∣wardly. Let not above three Hens walk with your Cock, for should you suffer more, they will tread too much by reason of the hear of their nature, and by often treading they will con∣sume their strength, and become so debilita∣ted, that though they have courage enough, yet they have not strength to perform their
parts as they ought to do in a battel. Observe the crowing of your Chickens; if you find them crow too soon, that is be∣fore six months old, or unseasonably, and that their crowing is clear and loud, fit them as soon as you can for the Pot or Spit, for they are infallible signs of cowardise and falshood: on the contrary the true and perfect Cock is long before he obtains his voice, and when he hath got it, observes his hours with the best judgment. Suffer not your Cock to fight a battel till he is compleat and perfect in every member, and that is when he is two years old; for to fight him when his Spurs are but warts com∣paratively, is no sign of discretion, for you may then probably know his valour and cou∣rage, but you cannot know his worth and goodness. In especial manner take care that your Cocks roosting-Perch be not too small in the gripe, or so ill placed that he cannot sit with∣out stradling, or if it be crooked it is bad, for by these means, a Cock will be uneven heel'd, and consequently no good striker; and know that a Perch either maketh or marreth a Cock; to remedy or prevent such faults, is to have in your roost a row of little Per∣ches
about eight inches in length, and ten inches from the ground, that the Cock may with more facility ascend, and being up, is forced to keep his Legs near together; and here take notice of this maxim amongst the best Cock-breeders, That the Cock which is a close sitter, is ever a narrow striker. Let the foot-stool of the Perch be round and smooth about the thickness of a man's arm, or if you will have the best form for a Perch, go visit the houses of the most skil∣ful Cock-masters, and from them all gather what is most necessary for your purpose by making inspection into their feeding-pens and other places; and let the ground underneath the Perch be soft, for otherwise when he leaps down, he will be apt on a rough and hard ground to hurt his feet, insomuch that they will grow knotty and gouty. Of dieting and ordering a Cock for Battel. IN the dieting and ordering of a Cock for Battail consisteth all the substance of pro∣fit and pleasure; and therefore your cunning Cock-merchants are very cautious of divulg∣ing the secrets (as they call them) of diet∣ing,
for on that depends the winning or lo∣sing of the Battel, they knowing very well that the best Cock undieted is unable to en∣counter the worst that is dieted; let others be as niggardly as they please of their expe∣rience and observations, for my part I shall be free and scorn to conceal any thing that may tend to the propagation of the art and mystery of Cock fighting; wherefore as to the dieting and ordering of fighting Cocks take these Instructions following. The time of taking up your Cocks is a∣bout the latter end of August, for from that time till the latter end of May Cocking is seasonable and in request, the Summer sea∣son being improper by reason of its great heat. Having taken them up, view them well, and see that they are sound, hard feather'd, and full summ'd, that is having all their fea∣thers compleat, then put them into several pens, having a moving Perch therein, to set it at which corner of the perch you think most convenient; the fashion and form of these pens you may have at the house of any Cocker, and therefore I shall give you no directions how to make them; only be advi∣sed to keep your Pens clean, and let not your Cocks want either meat or water.
For the first four days after your Cock is pend, feed him with the crumb of old Man∣chet cut into square bits about a handful at a time, and feed him thrice a day therewith, that is at Sun-rising, when the Sun is in his Meridian, and at Sun-setting, and let his wa∣ter be from the coldest Spring you can get it. Having fed your Cock thus four days, or so long till you think he hath purg'd himself of his corn, worms, gravel, and other coarse feeding, then in the morning take him out of the Pen and let him Sparr a while with another Cock. Sparring is after this manner: Cover each of your Cocks heels with a pair of Hots made of bombasted rolls of Leather, so covering the Spurs that they cannot bruise or wound one another, and so setting them down on straw in a room, or green-grass a∣broad, let them fight a good while, but by no means suffer them to draw blood of one another; the benefit that accrues hereby is this, it heateth and chafeth their bodies, and it breaketh the fat and the glut that is with∣in them, and adapts it for purgation. Having sparred as much as is sufficient, which you may know when you see them pant and grow weary, then take them up, and taking off their Hots give them a Dia∣phoretick
or sweating after this manner: You must put them in deep straw-baskets made for the purpose, or for want of them take a couple of Cocking-bags and fill these with straw half ways, then put in your Cocks se∣verally, and cover them over with straw to the top, then shut down the lids and let them sweat; but do not forget to give them first some white Sugar-candy, chopt Rosemary, and Butter mingled and incorporated together, let the quantity be about the bigness of a Wal∣nut, by so doing you will cleanse him of his grease, increase his strength, and prolong his breath. Towards four or five a clock in the even∣ing take them out of their Stoves, and having lickt their eyes and head with your tongue, put them into their Pens, and having fil'ed their Troughs with square-cut-manchet, piss therein, and let them feed whilst the Urine is hot; for this will cause their scouring to work, and will wonderfully cleanse both head and body. After this, diet your Cocks with a Bread made after this manner: Of Wheat-meal, and Oat-meal Flower, take of each a Gallon, and knead them into a stiff paste, with Ale, the whites of half a score Eggs, and some Butter; having wrought the Dow very well, make it
into broad thick Cakes, and when they are four days old, cut them into square pieces; I will not advise you to use (as some impru∣dently do) Liquorish, Anniseeds, or rather hot Spices among your foresaid Ingredients; for they will make a Cock so hot at the heart, that upon the concluding of the Battel, he will be suffocated and overcome with his own heat. In short, that food is best which is most consentaneous to his own natural feeding. The second day after his sparring, take your Cock into a fair green Close, and having a Dunghil Cock in your arms, show it him, and then run from him, that thereby you may intice him to follow, you permitting him to have now and then a blow, and thus chace him up and down about half an hour; when he begins to pant, being well heated, take him up and carry him home, and give him this scouring; take half a pound of fresh But∣ter, and beat it in a Mortar with the leaves of Herb of Grace, Hysop and Rosemary, till they all look like a green Salve, give him thereof a piece as big as a Walnut, and then stove him as aforesaid till evening, and then feed him according to former prescription. The next day let him seed and rest, and spar him the next day after; thus do every other
day for the first fortnight, either sparring or chasing, and after every heat a scowring, which will keep him from being faint and pursie. Feed him the second fortnight as you did the first, but you must not spar him or chase him above twice a week, observing still, that if you heat him much, you must stove him long and give him a greater quantity of scow∣ring. When well in breath, slight heats, small scowrings, and little stoving will serve the turn. The third fortnight (which is a time suffici∣ent for ordering a Cock for the Battel) you must feed him as aforesaid, but you must not spar him at all for fear of making his head sore, but you may moderately chase him twice or thrice in that time as aforesaid, then give him his scowring rolled well in brown Sugar-Candy which will prevent the scowring from making the Cock sick; now may you let him fight, having first let him rest four days, ob∣serving that he come empty into the Pit.
The right way of Cock-matching. OF all things have a special care how you match your Cock; for should you feed your Cock with never so much circumspect care and prudence, it will avail nothing if your Cock be over-matcht. In matching, take notice of these two things; first, the length of Cocks, secondly, the strength of Cocks; for the length, if your Adversaries Cock be too long, yours shall hardly catch his head, and so be incapable of indangering eye or life; and if he be the stronger, he will overbear your Cock, and not suffer him to rise or strike with any ad∣vantage. The length you may judge of by the eye, when you gripe the Cock by the waste, and make him shoot out his legs, in which posture you shall see the utmost of his height, and so compare them together, being herein gover∣ned by your judgment, his strength is known by the thickness of his body. Take this for a Rule, That a Cock is ever held the strong∣est, which is the largest in the garth.
You shall know the dimension of the garth by the measure of your hands, griping the Cock about from the points of your great finger to the joynts of your thumbs, and ei∣ther of these advantages by no means give your Adversary; if you doubt loss in the one, be sure to gain in the other: for the weak long Cock will rise at more ease, and the short strong Cock will give the surer blow. How to prepare Cocks for Fight. SInce all Cocks are not cast in one mould, the advantages on either side must be re∣conciled by matching; and having made an equal Match as near as you can, you must thus prepare him to fight: First, with a pair of fine Cock-shears cut all his main off close unto his neck, from the head to the setting on of the shoulders; Secondly, clip off all the feathers from the tail close to his rump, the redder it appears the better is the Cock in condition. Thirdly, take his wings and spread them forth by the length of the first rising feather, and clip the rest slope-wise with sharp points, that in his rising he may there∣with endanger an eye of his adversary. Fourth∣ly, scrape, smooth, and sharpen his Spurs with a Pen-knife. Fifthly and lastly, see that there be no feathers on the Crown of his head for
his adversary to take hold of; then with your spittle, moistning his head all over, turn him into the Pit to move his fortune. How to order Cocks after Battel, and how to cure wounds. THe Battel being ended, immediately search your Cocks wounds, as many as you can find, suck the blood out of them, then wash them well with warm urine, and that will keep them from rankling; after this give him a roll or two of your best scowring, and so stove him up as hot as you can for that night; in the mor∣ning, if you find his head swell'd, you must suck his wounds again, and bathe them again with warm urine, then take the powder of herb Robert, and put it into a fine bag, and pounce his wounds therewith; after this give him a good handful of bread to eat out of warm urine, and so put him into the stove again, and let him not feel the Air till the swelling be fallen. If he hath received any hurt in his eye, then take a leaf or two of right ground Ivy, that which grows in little tufts in the bottom of Hedges, and hath a little rough leaf; I say, take this Ivy and chew it in your mouth, and spit the juyce into the eye of the Cock, and this
will not only cure the present Malady, but pre∣vent the growth of Films, Haws, Warts, or the like, destructive to the eye-sight. If after you have put out your wounded Cocks to their Walks, and visiting them a Month or two after, if you find about their head any swollen bunches hard and blackish at one end, you may then conclude in such bun∣ches there are unsound cores, which must be opened and crusht out with your thumbs; and after this, you must suck out the corrupti∣on, and filling the holes full of fresh Butter, you need not doubt a Cure. Cures for some Distempers in a Cock, Chick, or Hen o'th' Game. THe Pip is a white thin scale growing on the tip of the tongue, by which means Poultry in general cannot feed, it is very visible to the eye, and proceedeth from foul feeding or want of water; it is cured by pulling off the scales with your nail, and rubbing the tongue with salt. The Roup is a filthy byle or swelling on the rump of the Cock, Hen, &c. and will corrupt the whole body. It is known by the staring and turning back of the feathers. For the
cure, you must pull away the feathers, and open the sore to thrust out the core, then wash the place with water and salt, the Cure is ef∣fected. If your Cock or Hen have the flux which hapneth by eating too much moist meat, you may cure them by giving them scalded Pease∣bran; but if they cannot mute, anoint their vents, and give them corn steept in Man's Urine. Lice is a common infirmity among them, proceeding from corrupt food, or for want∣ing of bathing in Sand-Ashes or the like; this Malady you must cure by taking Pepper beaten to powder, and mixing it with warm water, wash them therewith. If they are troubled with sore eyes, take a leaf or two of ground-Ivy, and chawing it well in your mouth, spit the juyce thereof into their eyes, and it will presently heal. What other infirmities are in∣cident to these Birds of Game I shall leave, and their Cures, to your own practice and observation.
An excellent and elegant COPY of VERSES upon two Cock's fighting, by Dr. R. Wild. GO you tame Gallants, you that have a name, And would accounted be Cocks of the Game; That have brave Spurs to shew for't, and can crow, And count all Dunghill breed, that cannot show Such painted plumes as yours, which think on't vice With Cock-like lust to tread your Cockatrice; Though Peacocks, Woodcocks, Weathercocks you be If y'are not fighting-Cocks, y'are not for me. I of two feather Combatants will write, And he that means to th' life to express their fight, Must make his ink the blood which they did spill. And from their dying wings must take his quill, No sooner were the doubtful people set, The match made up, and all that would had bet, But straight the skilful Judges of the Play Brought forth their sharp heel'd Warriors, and they Were both in linnen bags, as if 'twere meet, Before they dy'd to have their winding-sheet. Into the Pit they're brought, and being there Ʋpon the Stage, the Norfolk Chanticleer Looks stoutly at his ne're before seen foe, And like a Challenger began to crow, And clap his wings as if he would display His warlike colours, which were black and gray. Mean time the wary Wisbich walks and breathes His active body, and in fury wreathes
His comely crest; and often looking down, He beats his angry beak upon the ground. This done, they meet, not like that coward breed, Of Aesop's; these can better fight than feed. They scorn the Dunghil; 'tis their only prize, To dig for Pearls within each others eyes. They fought so nimbly that 'twas hard to know To th' skilful whether they did fight or no, If that the blood which dy'd the fatal floor Had not born witness of 't. Yet fought they more, As if each wound were but a spur to prick Their fury forward. Lightning's not more quick Or red, than were their eyes; 'twas hard to know Whether 'twas blood or anger made them so. I'm sure they had been out, had they not stood More safe, being wall'd in each others blood. Thus they vy'd blows; but yet, alas at length, Although their courage were full try'd, their strength And blood began to ebb. You that have seen A watery combat on the Sea, between Two angry roaring boiling billows, how They march and meet, and dash their curled brow, Swelling like graves, as though they did intend T' intomb each other, ere the quarrel end; But when the wind is down, and blustring wea∣ther, They are made friends, and sweetly run together, May think these Champions such; their blood grows low, And they which leapt but now, now scarce can go,
For having left th' advantage of the heel, Drunk with each others blood, they only reel; And yet they would fain fight; they came so near Methought they meant into each others ear To whisper wounds; and when they could not rise, They lay and lookt blows int' each others eyes. But now the Tragick part! After this fit When Norfolk Cock had got the best of it, And Wisbich lay a dying, so that none, Though sober, but might venture seven to one; Contracting, like a dying Taper, all His strength, intending with the blow to fall, He struggles up, and having taken wind, Ventures a blow, and strikes the other blind. And now poor Norfolk having lost his eyes, Fights, guided only by antipathies. With him, alas, the Proverb is not true, The blows his eyes ne're saw, his heart must rue At last by chance he stumbling on his foe, Not having any strength to give a blow, He falls upon him with his wounded head, And makes his Conquerors wings his feather∣bed. His friends ran in, and being very chary, Sent in all haste to call a Pothecary; But all in vain, his body did so blister, That 'twas not capable of any clister. Physick's in vain, and 'twill not him restore. Alas poor Cock he was let blood before. Then finding himself weak, op'ning his bill, He calls a Scrivener, and thus makes his Will:
Imp. first of all, let never be forgot. My body freely I bequeath to th' pot Decently to be boil'd, and for its Tomb Let it be buried in some hungry Womb. Item, For Executors I'le have none, But he that on my side laid seven to one, And, like a Gentleman that he may live, To him and to his heirs, my Comb I give, Together with my brains, that all may know, That oftentimes his brains did use to crow. Item. For comfort of those weaker ones, Whose wives complain of, let them have my stones. For Ladies that are light, it is my will, My Feathers make a Fan. And for my Bill I'le give a Taylor: but faith 'tis so short I am afraid he'l rather curse me for't. And for that worthy Doctors sake, who meant To give me a Clister, let my Rump be sent. Lastly, Because I find my self decay, I yield and give to Wisbich Cock the Day. FINIS.
