D2426A 99885016 182837
The DUTCHESS of PORTSMOUTHs Farewel: The Dutchess holds a Dialogue, and talks with Madam Gwin; Yea, doth relate the wretched state, that now she liveth in. To the Tune of, Tan tarra rara tan tivee. I Prithee dear Portsmouth now tell me thy mind with a fa, la, la, la, fa, la la, Dost thou not think that the Fates are unkind, with a fa la, &c. It is not long since thy fame it was great, But now 'tis eclipsd by unkindness of fate, Thy case now doth seem a sad tale to relate, with a fa la la la, fa la la. Ah! Nell could I but my sorrow explain, with a fa la, &c. Which fisteth my heart with sorrow and pain, with a fa la, &c. from mine  I should certainly weep, of the Ocean so deep, friend lyes fast in his sleep. with a fa la, &c. Magnificent splendor did on thee attend, with a fa la, &c. And now I would have thee thy life to amend, with a fa la, &c. On rich and on poor, Dame Fortune doth frown, Thou from thy great honour art tumbled down, It is not thy money thy actions can crown, with a fa la, &c. Add not to my sorrow now I am perplext, with a fa la, &c. For ought I do know Nell thou may'st be the next, with a fa la, &c. Then seem not at my distress for to scorn, To happiness lasting few people is born, And I like my self am now left forlorn, with a fa la, &c. What must thou return to thy country of France with a fa la, &c, Or will not thy chastity here thee advance, with a fa la, &c. What hast thou forsook thy most amorous trade, Or hast thou left off the game thou hast plaid, Tho' not one in ten rook thee for a Maid, with a fa la, &c. These quirks are too quick you do put on me Nell, with a fa la, &c. And thou thine own self, lov'st the sport very well, with a fa la, &c. Then  not one another deride, For  many Gallants that love it beside, But  I fear now will pull down my pride, with a fa la, &c. Your beauty and vertus now seem to decline, with a fa la, &c. I know not how soon your fate may be mine, with a fa la, &c. Now unstring your purse, and be kind to the poor, I know that confinement you cannot indure, There is nothing on earth that is stable and sure, with a fa la, &c. You seem Nell with speed for to post me a way, with a fa la, &c. But e're I go hence my debts I must pay, with a fa la, &c. And is not this now a most sorrowful thing, That I who had the great world in a sling, Must now in this plight most mournfully sing, with a fa la, &c. But Madam from hence you sent treasure away; with a fa la, &c. And here I suppose that a while you must stay, with a fa la, &c. But what I my self have got by my game, I freely in England expended the same, But you hane transported yours to your shame, with a fa la, &c. But one of my Sisters hath suffer'd before, with a fa la, &c, She I do remember was called lane-shore; with a fa la, &c. For now I am possessed with sorrow and fear, And in my fad dreams strange visions appear, I have lost my best friend that I loved so dear, with a fa la, fa la la. printed for I. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T. passinger.
