H12AA 99887555 182284
Fancies Phoenix. O The Peerless Paragon of the Times. Being a young Gallants description of a Lady which hee hath settled his thoughts on, resolving never to change, nor to love any other beauty or face in the World. And is perswaded if there bee, A Phoenix in the world, 'tis shee. To an Amorous new Tune. COme all you Batchelors so brave, that spend your time in Cupids court And with your Complements do crave, with many Ladies for to sport I am contrary to your mind I Court but one and she's unkind. She's vertuous, chaste, and if there bee a Phoenix in the world, 'tis shee. I must confesse I am in Love although I thought I never should But sure she was sent from above and made of Natures chiefest mould So pure, so fair, and all Divine Ile quit the world to make her mine, She's vertuous, chaste, and if there be, &c. I little thought I ever could by any beauty ere be won Nor can I now if that I would remove my mind on any one No wealth, no beauty, nor no face my fixed thoughts from her displace, Shee's vertuous, chaste, and if there be, &c. Do you not sée the Stars retreat when Sol salutes the sky so clear So must all beauties ne're so great shrink and withdraw when shee appear So bright, so clear that all must say 'tis fair Roselia claims the day Shee's vertuous, chaste and if there be, &c. Her bashful Cheeks with blushing swéet casts such a rich vermilion dye That Rose and Lilly there doth méet each striving for the victory So rare, so pure, you'l scarce beleeve dame Nature could such colours give Shee's vertuous, chaste, and if there be, &c. Her Eyes like sparks of Diamonds clear such glances casts in modest sort No wantonness in them appear yet Cupid sure thre keepe his Court 'Twas from her eyes he shot his dart that thus hath peirc't my love-sick heart Shee's vertuous, chaste, and if there be a Phoenix in the world, 'tis shee. The second part to the same Tune BVt say my Muse, what need have I to praise her beauty in such sort When as her fame abroad doth flye more than I can of her report Were shee to mee as kind as fair then might I live and not despair; But sure I think if that there be a Phoenix in the world, 'tis she, For shee desires to be alone and never to participate Her love she saith to any one, but single live without a mate Such thoughts I think in few remain yet doth in her, the more's my pain Then sure I think if that there be, &c. Cruel she is to none I hear no more shee is not unto mee Nor proud shee is not that is rare you'l say in women for to be She's courteous, lovely chaste and fair 'tis few that can with her compare, For sure I think if that there bee, &c. Then if shee Phenix-like will live and dye alone I am content My heart to her Ile freely give unto no other Ile consent But in her flames my heart shall burn and Phenix-like to ashes turn For it is her and none but shee by whom I must revived bee. And if shee will not yeeld at last but still her resolutions hold I will not think my time ill spent nor yet my love shall near wax cold To stay for such a one as she I think no time there lost wil bee I'de better with my fancy wed than lodge some women in my bed. If that you needs would know of mee whereas this Phenix doth abide For that I must excused bee yet near the Strand shee doth reside, No other notice will I give to any one whilst I do live, And if she doth a Phoenix dye look in her ashes there am I. You roving Batchelors that bee resolved for to spend your time In several Maidens company when as their beauty are in prime Beware, beware, let virtue guide thee to a Maid to make thy Bride Let not her beauty tempt your eye least vertue too in her you spye. I must depart time calls away I cannot now express my mind This Song is long nough you'l say unless that she did prove more kind She's vertuous, caste, and therefore I resolve to love her till I dye; For sure I think if that there bee a Phoenix in the world, 'tis shee. C. H. FINIS. London, Printed for F. Grove▪ Entred according to Order.
