M2242 52212027 175729
The Miserable CASE OF THE Poor GLASS-MAKERS, Artificers, and several Hundred Fami∣lies that were Imployed in the said Manufacture; Humbly Offered in reference to the Duty on Glass. THAT the said Art of Glass-making being so much Improved in this Kingdom, hath caused great encrease of Workmen and Artificers, and several Hundred of Families were Imployed and Maintained in the said Art. That the Poor Workmen, Artificers and Families, have been great Sufferers by the present War, not having near so much Work as formerly; and the present Duty on Glass makes our Mi∣series and Hardships much greater. That since the Duty, especially on the Bottle-houses, from whence it is supposed the chief part of the Duty comes, is so great, viz. One Penny each Bottle, being Sixty per Cent. here, and in some parts of the Kingdom above 90 per Cent. of what the Goods was before Sold for; and indeed on all sorts of Glass so great, as makes the vent so small, that many of us the Artificers, have not had any Work this seven or Eight Months, nor like to have for several Months longer; the Masters having great Quantities on their Hands, and made since the Duty: And we the poor Artificers, being always used to Work in the Fire, are unsuitable for other Callings, are reduced to that Extremity, that excepting those whom some Masters lend Money to, some are sorced to Pawn their Goods, others to Sell their very Beds, and must come to the Parishes for Relief, if the Duty be continued. That there is already, since the Duty Commenced, several of the greatest, oldest, and best scituated Glass-houses in England laid down, and offered to Sale; and it is supposed that most of the Glass-houses in England will be forced to do the same, if the Duty be continued. And we hear there is two Glass-houses already going to be set on Work in Holland, which if once they get the Art, we may in effect loose it. To prevent the Evils whereof, and to take off the Burthen of this great Duty, which chiefly lyes upon poor Men's Labours, which we presume will appear to be very inconsiderable when the Accounts of the said Duty are stated, the charge of Collecting and Debentures, for w hath been and will be Exported, is Deducted. We most Humbly Propose to this Honourable House These several Ways following, in Liew of the present Duty on Glass-Wares, &c. as to your grtea Wisdom shall seem most meet. That in England and Wales, from Dr. Davenant's Book of Essay, upon Ways and Means; ap∣pears stated to the Year 1690. when (by gathering in of the Hearth-Money) the Number of Houses there were 872457 And is supposed to be since new Built 002543 Making 875000 That admit of the Use of One Pound of Soap a Week to each House, when few using less, and in many Houses is more used makes to each House 52 l. a Year; and for Total 100 weight. 455000 Which at 4 s. the Hundred makes 90000 l. a Year. That this single Commodity, if Taxed, will not offend any Artificers, as does the now Duty on Glass-Wares, &c. to their alone Ruine, nor be grievous to either Buyer or Seller; is of ge∣neral and certain Use, but a trifling Charge on the Subject, and readily Collected, for a mode∣rate per Annum. November 1696. Form'd by Charles Palmer. Secondly, Or by an Additional Postage of Letters of one third more. Thirdly, Or by a Duty upon all Lead or Lead Oar Exported, of two Shillings per Hundred more then it now pays, which amounting to 50000 Tun per Ann. amounts to 100000 l. a Year, and requires no charge in Collecting. Fourthly, Or by a Duty on Flax and Hemp imported, of five Shillings per Hundred on Flax, and 2 s. 6 d. per Hundred on Hemp, more then the present Duty, which, 'tis presumed may Encourage our own Growth, and is Collectable without Charge, and supposed to amount to 200000 l. a Year. Fifthly, Or by a Duty on Hops of one Penny per Pound, being 9 s. 4 d. per Hundred, to be paid by the first Proprietor, and upon all Foreign Hops the same Duty, more than is now paid, which, computing the Expence 11000 Tun per Ann. amounts to 100000 l. per Ann. Collectable by a small Charge of one Month in a Year. It is therefore most Humbly Hoped, that this Honourable House will be pleased to take into their serious Consideration these Proposals, which being general, and no ways tending to the Ruine of poor Artificers, as doth the present Duty on Glass Wares.
