s1405 53981721 180348
EDINBURGH, The 16. day of June, One thousand six hundred seventy and four Years. ACT Assuring a reward to any who shall apprehend some Rebels and others. FOrasmuch as the keeping of Field-Conventicles, and the intruding upon, and invading of Pulpits, are most unlawful and disorderly practices, tending to the disturbance of the Peace, and to the affront of His Ma∣jesties Authority, and notwithstanding the Laws and Acts of Parlia∣ment prohibiting the same, under high pains therein mentioned, the Ring-leaders, Promoters, and other persons guilty of the said disor∣ders, are emboldned to commit the same, presuming that they will not be discovered and brought to trial and punishment: Therefore the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council for the encouragement of all His Majesties good Subjects to discover and apprehend all such persons as is after-mentioned, do hereby offer, declare, and give assurance, that if any person, being of His Majesties standing Forces, or of the Militia, or any other His Majesties Subjects, shall seiz upon, and apprehend any person or per∣sons, who since His Majesties late gracious Proclamation of the 24. of March last, hath Convo∣cated any number of persons to Field-Conventicles, or at any  persons thereto, or shall apprehend any Heretors or others being at Field-Conventicles, while the saids persons are present at, or coming from the same, so that the saids persons apprehended shall be brought to a trial, and shall be found guilty and convict of the said offences, that the appre∣henders of such persons shall have the gift of the Fines of the saids persons given to them: And in∣case any person or persons be cited for the saids crimes and offences, and after certification is grant∣ed against them for their contumacy and not appearing, shall be apprehended, the apprehenders of such persons shall have the gift of their Escheats, and benefit arising from the said certifications. And whoever of the standing Forces, Militia, or others His Majesties good Subjects, shall appre∣hend any Minister or other person Preaching at any Field-Conventicle, or who hath Preached since the said Proclamation, or shall at any time hereafter Preach at Field-Conventicles, or any of them. And whatsoever person or persons shall apprehend and seiz upon any Outed Minister who are not licenced by the Council, or any other person not authorized nor tolerat by the Bishop of the Diocess, who since the time foresaid have invaded, or shall invade any Pulpit or Pulpits, the per∣son or persons apprehending any of the Ministers or other persons foresaid guilty of Preaching at Field-Conventicles, or invading of Pulpits, shall for their reward have payed to them the sum of an thousand Merks: And for the persons after-named, viz. Mr, John Welsh, Mr. Gabriel Sempil, and Mr. Samuel Arnot, the apprehenders shall have the sum of 2000 Merks payed to them. And His Majesties Subjects are not only warranted to seiz upon, and apprehend the saids disorderly persons in manner foresaid; But it further declared by the saids Lords of Council, that upon consideration of the condition of the persons who shall be appre∣hended according as they have been more stickling and active in the said disorders, and the pains and diligence of the apprehenders and other circumstances, they will also consider what further reward shall be given to them for their service. And ordains these presents to be Printed, that none pretend ignorance. Tho. Hay, Cls. Sti. Concilii. EDINBURGH, Printed by His Majestie's Printers: Anno DOM. 1674.
