19933.5 [ocm]68222535 183776
A PIL To purge Melancholie: OR, A PREPRATIVE TO A PVRGATION: or, Topping, Copping, and Capping: take either or whether: or, Mash them, and squash them, and dash them, and diddle come derrie come daw them, all together.
In laudem implaudim. This worthy Worke may printed bee, For ought therein that I can see: For the gaue Author nothing sayth Contrary to the Catholique faith; Nor ought therein that doth agree With learning, wit, or good moralitie. His od vaine.
To M. Bavv-vvavv Health, with increase of mirth and merrie conceites. MAister Baw-waw, as one vnknowne, yet mooued through affection, as also hearing of your arriuall into England, I haue made bolde to dedicate this my simple labor vnto you; to be shrowded, sheilded, and defended by your indifferent censure, you beeing a Spirit all compoz'de of mirth and merrie conceite: And although it may seeme but a toy, yet be∣ing read, may refrigerate your senses tossed and weeried with the tedious trauell of for∣raine Countries, as also stirre vp a hart plun∣ged in melancholie, and adde alacritie to a minde disposed to mirth. Thus, not kno∣wing how I may well commend it, I referre it (as before) by you to be censured. Yours his blue vaine,
A Pill to purge Melancholie. I Cannot but maligne, and with dyre execrations bellow foorth the gorgonian dieresis of your late cōmensed misprision, wher∣by you do vnkennell your Goa∣tish affections, and let loose the firie codpeece-humor, & Spar∣row-like dominations calcioa∣ted with the modultion of your supposed Arcadian sprightlinesse, to serenize my meta∣phisicall partes. But I wonder how this crooknosd con∣ceite of yours, came snayling it selfe into the diurnall reuolution of your Iadelike, plunging, durtie, & scauen∣ger-like, sweeping & rakeing togeather the rubbish and outcast of your Herringcobs inuentions: But to shape my inuention to your Taylors wit, and my tilting style to your Noddiships vnderstanding, now I come to it. I heare that you meane (Oh scuruie louzie meaning) to betrate vnto the world the vntimelie birth, or the addle egge of your late long ill lobored lines, which you haue like ill commodities so oft thrust vpon my handes, con∣tinually solliciting me with them; which I casheere: and yet me thinkes you should not be so inconsideratly foo∣lish, as to be the Bellowes to puffe abroad thine owne disgraces: and I haue almost perisht my braines with continuall retrograding them, how thou durst presume to call my vnstayned name in question, with thy scattring Papers like halfe penny gigges: but I commaund thee
by thy Pumpes and Pantables to desist from printing them, or I do asseuerate my bath vnto thee, that I will cause thee to be most dangerouslie exulcerated. Hadst thou none to theorize thy halting barbarism and wit-wanting Howliglas vpon, but me, and then to print it for euery trencher-waighting foolish knaue to slauer on't As God ketch me, either downe vpon your knees erectis manibus, and yell for mercie at the portall grates of my compassion, or I will so castice thee inflicting dismall coratiues vpon thy fainting soule, that thou shalt be en∣forced to vilifie thy Rotundities, the onely storehouse for thy Bread and Cheese. Therefore, presently turne the hower-glasse of your determination, or looke for Roddes. She that skornes thee and thy puffie stuffe: Snuffe.
A Pill to purge Melancholie. I Haue double dd. receiued your Letter, written in a fidling style: which I haue answered with a crowding spirit. I haue been diuers times at the Portal grates of your compassion, to aske forgiuenesse for my sinnes, but by reason of your ab∣sence, I remaine as yet still a wicked sinner, because you are not there to giue me absolution. I do perseueere in my scuruie louzie meaning, to beray & betray the world with my flattring Papers like sixe pennie gigges, and to haue them printed: and to confirme my resolution, I haue sworne by my Pumpes and Pantables, Bootes, Slippers, and Shooes, it shall be performed with as much expedition as may be. Your scuruie loftie louzie Letter, with my crabbed crooked answere to be printed amongst the rest, to your prayse and my shame: and if you will send me twentie more such snuffes, they shall be answered, but how: I will not promise you in an Arca∣dian spirit, but rather with some Lenton relictes, or with some drunken drouzie draffie durtie dounghill stile, or scauenger like kind of wryting and inditing, fit for such driueling scribling sniueling filthy fidling stuffe: Therfore I countermaund you, presently to aucrt your heauy displeasure & indignation conceiued and intended against me, or looke for no fauour at my handes. He that loues thee and thy snuffie stuffe, Snipsnap.
To all skorners, skoffers, mockers, iybers, and de∣riders: And to all foule knaues, fine knaues, faire knaues, proud knaues, prettie knaues, prating knaues, foolish knaues, flattring knaues, fliering knaues, cog∣ging knaues, deceitfull knaues, soothing knaues, smoo∣thing knaues, dissembling knaues, made knaues, merrie knaues, drouzie knaues, dronken knaues, harme hatch knaues, warme watch knaues▪ cold catch knaues, harme watch knaues, and harme catch knaues: and to all other inferior knaues, of what qualitie and proper∣tie soeuer; togeather with all lackes, whipiackes, and skipiacks; Dawes, Woodcocks, Peacocks, and Wea∣thercocks: and to all and singuler flat knaues and very knaues, Tapsters, tilters and tylers; diggers, ditchers and deluers; plotters, workers, deuizers and contriuers of Roagrie, knauerie, and villanie: long cut, short cut, pinch cut, and plucke cut; the writer hereof sendeth greazing and greeting, raking, shooueling, swapping, loading, threshing and sweeping; with salting, seazo∣ning and sauoring, powdring, spiceing and fauouring; brushing, blouzing and blazing, with blowing, fyring, and flaming. YOur Letter (faire Mistris) was de∣liuered, and receiued, according to the direction: but being written in a loftie stile, it may require some ex∣traordinary deliberation to answere your fooliships abhomination: but because it may not seeme altogether t se h race and maiestie, I thought I would hit ye and wit ye, and scant ye and want ye, and lacke ye and
lot ye, and get ye and haue ye, and lose ye. Then feele ye and find ye, and fire ye & flint ye, and flame ye, and tiler ye and tayler ye, and trifle ye and trash ye, and tilt ye and tinke ye and tile ye, and tinker ye and moyle ye and toyle ye, and thimble ye, and thatch ye & thresh ye, and sheepe ye and sithe ye and sheare ye, and shape ye and sowter ye and shooe ye and size ye and saaw ye and seame ye, and quiuer ye and quauer ye and quake ye, and mould ye and crust ye and knead ye, and brew ye and bake ye and kake ye, and wake ye and crum ye and cram ye, and shinke ye and shanke ye, and sise ye and sinke ye, and shiuerye and shackle ye and shake ye, and quip ye and quirke ye and quilt ye, and firme ye and farme ye, and iron ye and presse ye and fit ye. Then tit ye and lip ye and tap ye, and heele ye and halt ye, and hop ye and top ye and cop ye, and lip ye and lap ye & lop ye, and hick ye & hack ye & hew ye, and hood ye and hart ye and hind ye, and horne ye and hammer ye and stammer ye, and stunnie and head ye. Then hip ye and nip ye and skip ye, and trim ye & trie ye, and tard ye and trace ye and trip ye. Then nettle ye and tickle ye and prickle ye, and taint ye and tempt ye & turue ye, and wind ye and paintye and burne ye, and couler ye and tart ye and tinckt ye, and mouze ye and touze ye, and tugg ye and touch ye and taste ye. Then snaile ye & slow ye and slime ye, and snake ye and snig ye and lime ye, and spider ye and thread ye and spin ye, and weaue ye & waue ye, and web ye and wirpe ye and warpe ye, and wriggle ye and wrangle ye and wrap ye, and friske ye and fringe ye and fold ye, and nicke ye and nit ye and net ye, and scramble ye and scrawle ye and crawle ye, and mount ye and creepe ye & clime ye. Then traine ye and taile ye, and trill ye and trowle and traile ye, and trap ye & clacke ye and clap ye, and fish ye and she ye & flap ye, and nibble ye and worme ye and bayte yt, and angle ye and hooke ye
and hinge ye. Then snare ye and snarle ye and snatch ye, and grippell ye and grappell ye and gripe ye, and snaffle ye and snuffe ye and sniffe ye, and snip ye and snap ye, and clip ye and cap ye, and crispe ye and cripp and crop ye, and sniuell ye and snout ye, and snift ye and snieze ye, and snit ye and snat ye and snot ye. Then tricke ye and pricke ye and pranke ye, and span ye & spew ye and spit ye, and trampe ye and tracke ye & tread ye, and goate ye and butt ye and bucke ye, and hunch ye and punch ye, ann kibe ye and kidd ye and kit ye, and sparrow ye and spurne ye and kicke ye. Then curbe ye & knife ye and cut ye, and wound ye and vlcer ye and hurt ye. Then honor ye & hower ye and sower ye, and sipp ye and sopp ye, and sauce ye and sowse ye, and salt ye & seazou ye and sauer ye, and powder ye and spice ye and fauor ye, and suger ye & swaue ye, and hounie ye and bitter ye and sweete ye. Then carue ye and serue ye and salue ye, and playster ye and heale ye & cure ye, and alter ye and palter ye, and pinder ye and pander ye and pedler ye, and plume ye and feather ye and fidler ye. Then crooke ye and cukold ye and corne ye, and knit ye and knot ye and knag ye, and snig ye and snag ye & crag ye, and kricke ye and kracke and krancke ye, and bind ye and fast ye & lose, and knaue ye & crampe ye & knacke ye. Then hinch ye and wrinch ye, and twinch ye and pinzer ye and pinch ye, and wring ye and wrest ye and writh ye, and catch ye and cozen ye, and klinke ye and claspe ye and clinch ye. Then owle ye and gloze ye and glaze ye, and gander ye & goose ye and gaze ye, and glasse ye & glimse ye and glance ye, and glaunder ye and glade ye and glyde ye, and pumpe ye and slipper ye and slide ye, and glitter ye and gull ye and gleeke ye. Then stagger ye and stumble ye and strip ye, and straddle ye and strap ye and stride ye, and stifle ye and style ye and steele ye, and fillip ye & fiddle
ye and firke ye, and crowde ye and finger ye and fyle ye. Then fine ye and foule ye and faire ye, and clatter ye and claw ye and scratch ye, and harbor ye and hoouer ye & hide ye, and hatch ye and harrow ye and hoord ye, and store ye and hiue ye and starue ye, and sooth ye and flatter ye and fayle ye. Thē apple ye and eye ye, and eare ye & feare ye, and spunge ye & singe ye, & single ye and signe & seale ye. Then chip ye and chop ye, and champe ye and chaw ye and chouze ye, and scatter ye and spread, and butter ye and bast ye and bread ye, and chalke ye and change ye and cheeze ye, and batter ye and bite ye and refuze ye. Then sticke ye and straw ye and daw ye, and fluse ye and fling ye and flaw ye. Then ferret ye and feare ye and fray ye, and gast ye and ghost ye and spright ye, and fetter ye and foxe ye and fright ye. Then shroue ye and shrine ye, and shriue ye and shrift ye, and court ye and coch ye and cart ye, and durt ye and driue ye and dragge ye, and drudge ye and drosse ye and draffe ye, and dawbe ye and myre ye and lagg ye, and whoope ye and hallow ye and whissle ye, and dish ye and dash ye, and lash ye and plash ye, and shuffle ye and card ye and shift ye, and clish ye and clash ye, and coupe ye and couch ye and cash ye. Then foole ye and floute ye and poake ye ad peate ye and poynt ye, and thrust ye and foyne ye and foyle ye, and flie ye and free ye and flight ye. Then hawke ye and lurcke ye and lure ye, and male ye and meale ye and sift ye, and hand ye and hart ye and fist ye, and prime ye and prune ye and princke ye, and currle ye and frizzle ye and frounze ye, and pearle ye and purle and pincke ye, and prampe ye and fillit ye and pride ye, and swip ye and swap ye, & rake ye and shoouell ye and sweepe ye, and noy ye and toy ye and coy ye, and iewell
ye and iem ye and ioy ye. Then pill ye and picke ye and pare ye and powle ye and shaue ye & spare ye, and bald ye and skin ye and bare ye. Then slit ye and sliue ye and slay ye, and slise ye and thinne ye and share ye, and drench ye and diue ye, and ducke ye & drowne ye, and swim ye and sinke ye and saue ye. Then skoggin ye and skoffe ye and skorne ye and skald, and skar ye and skurfe ye and skarfe ye, and mocke ye and mop ye and mow ye, and shelter ye and shield ye, and shrowd ye and shade ye, and house ye and mow ye and mew ye. Then hobbie ye and horse ye and hire ye, and dingle ye and dandle ye, and spingle ye and spangle ye, and fickle ye and fancie ye, and ferrie ye and fingle ye and fangle ye, and handle ye dandle ye and daunce ye, and hazzell ye and dazzell ye, and muze ye and maze ye, and fizzell ye and mizzell ye, and madd ye and mewt ye and mist ye, and dull ye & dolt ye and dunce ye. Then diddle cum derrie cum bee ye and boe ye and buzze ye, and amble ye and trot ye and prance ye. Then addle ye and idle ye and bridle ye, and bramble ye and brier ye and branch ye, and burre ye and bride ye and brush ye, and larke ye and lerke ye and ierke ye, and gigg ye and iogg ye and iolt ye, and iangle ye and rod ye and ride ye, and whiscum whascum brake ye & brine ye & breech ye. Then swigger ye and swegger ye, and swagger ye and swelt ye, and stibb ye and stabb ye, and stobb ye and stare ye and start ye, and roue ye and run ye and rime ye, and riddle ye & rend ye and riue ye. Then tune ye and time ye and tame ye, and pot ye and pitcher ye and pan ye, and stopple ye and bottle ye and bagg ye, and begger ye and pipe ye and can ye, and itch ye and pitch ye and patch ye, and bangle ye and bungle ye and botch ye, and mende ye and cobble ye and peece ye. Then base ye and case ye and buske ye and brace ye and lace ye. Then ruffin ye and ruffle ye, and rampe ye and ripe ye and reach ye, and
pilfer ye and pelfe ye, and rifle ye and spoyle and rob ye, and flea ye and filch ye & fleece ye, and ribbell ye & rabbell ye, and stibber ye and slabber ye, and scribbell ye & scrab∣bell ye, and blibber ye and blabber ye, and bluster ye and blister ye, and storme ye and whirtle ye and wind ye and raine ye and haile ye, and chaffe ye and snow ye, and bla∣ther ye and blow ye and blast ye. Then huffe ye and buffe ye and muffe ye, and toe ye and taw ye, and tuffe ye and raw ye and rugg ye and ruffe ye and rag-men rowle ye and snuffe ye, and post ye and past ye and puffe ye, and clod ye and turde ye and turfe ye, and court ye & coast ye and puffe ye and cuffe ye and snuffe ye. Then blubber ye and sullen ye and sob ye, and drip ye & drop ye & driuel ye, and sliuer ye and slauer ye, and sloouen ye and sott ye and slut ye, and wipe ye & trencher ye and tripe ye, and boyle ye and some ye, and suddes ye and sope ye, and surge ye and swill ye & swell ye, and water ye & lade ye, and mell ye and fell ye, and wag ye and colt ye, and quiddle ye and quill ye and quell ye, and flish ye and flash ye, & driggle ye and draggle ye, and willow ye wallow ye & wash ye and laue ye & blith ye & bath ye, and lout ye and clout ye and cleaue ye, and lance ye and lanke ye, and blanch ye and blanke ye, and hanch ye & lanch ye, and leg ye and flinch ye and flanke ye. Then rascall ye & royster ye, and rotton ye and roag ye and raze ye, and rauell ye and reuell ye and riuill ye, and ierke ye and iag ye & rag ye, and blacke ye blot ye and blur ye, and vaile ye and maske ye and mum ye, and chaunce ye and dice ye, and drum ye, and nod ye vice ye and scum ye, and spot ye and blue ye and blend ye, and bleare ye and blinke ye and blind ye, and twerrle ye and twist ye and twine ye, and rocke ye and reele ye and wind ye, and ricke ye and racke ye & roule ye, and stitch ye and tacke ye and round ye, and bend ye & bruze ye and breake ye, and band ye and ball ye & bound ye, and chase
yeand chafe ye & heate ye, and coole ye and sweate ye and sound ye, and grind ye and grate ye and greeue ye, and grauell ye and gall ye & ground ye. Then stragle ye and struggle ye and strangle ye, and slip ye and soupe ye, and sloupe ye and slop ye, and slim ye and slam ye & slaue ye, and stemme ye and streame ye and stray ye, and garnish ye and burnish ye and furnish ye, and bud ye & blossome ye and bloome ye, and florish ye and flower ye & fresh ye, and gay ye & may ye and ray ye, and sport ye and rig ye and play ye, and wreath ye and bower ye and braue ye. Then bird ye and bolt ye and cage ye, and graue ye and wise ye and sage ye, and pope ye & prince ye and page ye, and rope ye and hang ye and rage ye, and gild ye & gold ye and gage ye. Then swillow ye and swallow ye, and swish ye and wash ye, and bib ye and drinke ye, and quiffe ye and quart ye and quaffe ye. Then iugg ye and iacke ye, and ginger ye and ginnie ye & gill ye, and morter ye and barter ye, and muster ye & maister ye, and martir ye and margerte and marrie ye. Then maime ye & iarre ye and marre ye, and manch ye granch ye, and mash ye & quince ye and quash ye, and mumble ye and mince ye and melt ye. Then humble ye and fumble ye and iumble ye, and lighten ye and flighten ye, and rumble ye and thunder ye and thret ye, and itter ye and titter ye and tipple ye, and mingle ye and mangle ye, and tingle ye & terrifie ye and tangle ye, and type ye and tosse ye and tyre ye, and totter ye and wearie ye and tumble ye. Then haunt ye & deyntie ye and daunt ye, and taunt ye and viliffe ye and vaunt ye, and gigg ye and iebe ye, and iuggle ye & iade ye & iest ye, and trouse ye and trumpe ye and frumpe ye, and loue ye and loath ye and leaue ye, and win ye & weare ye & teare ye, and prize ye and prayse ye and please ye, and chant ye and charme ye, and chin ye and check ye & chocke ye, and locke ye and chaine ye and clogg ye, and link ye & chink
ye, chatter ye and cherp ye & chime ye, and cock ye and crow ye, and cob ye and kembe ye and combe ye, & cackle ye and cockle ye, and chockle ye & throttle ye choake ye, and cherrie ye and merry ye, and roze ye and checke ye and cheere ye, and print ye and lift ye, and load ye & light ye, and rowze ye and rect ye and right ye, and rayze ye and eaze ye, and grace ye and greaze ye and greete ye. Then ayme ye and marke ye, and pin ye and prop ye, and shaft ye & shoot ye, and drib ye and short ye & misse ye. Then name ye and blame ye, and string ye and stretch ye and straine ye, and ting ye and towle ye and ring ye. Then stampe ye and staine ye, and sting ye and limpe ye and lame ye. Then ban ye & bane ye, & noynt ye & balme ye, and slicke ye and smeare ye and smooth ye, and bundle ye & blouze ye and dlaze ye, and smoother ye and smoake ye and waste ye, and barbe ye and blesse ye and curse ye, and kisse ye and crosse ye and craze ye, and crab ye and crush ye and squize ye, and clowne ye and crowne ye, and sparge ye & spindle ye and sprinkle ye, and bill ye and beard ye and braine ye, and hit ye and fit ye and misse ye. Then pepper ye and poyson ye and pearch ye, and pine ye and perish ye and paine ye, and so fret ye and frost ye and freeze ye, and plunge ye and pardon ye & plague ye. And so fire the worlde with Rattes and Brattes, and Sprattes and Gnattes, and knottes and cords, & kogges and bobs, and noddes and oddes and Hearing-cobs, and Bussardes and Beares and Bugges and Battes, and Flagges and Flyes & Waspes, and Burres & Beeues and Buffes, and Bees and Bawdes and Butterflyes.
VAL. I commend me vnto you, and to your Sis. Although at this time not worthie either to be re∣membred or commended, because she thought that a red Hearring was not a dish daintie enough to feast so royall a guest as a Commaunder, yet thinke I my stomacke eager inough at all tymes and seasons to feede vpon a poore Sprat, in her company. And although she thinkes Sorrell a sauce too sweete for an Asse-head, yet I thinke Mustard & Greene-sauce without Suger, not sweete inough for her Calues-head. So I am very well content to beare the Asses burden ou my backe for once, if she be as willing to weare the Eares, as I am pleased to stinke of the Pumpe, because I am not able to endure a paire of straight Leather Shooes on my feete, my heeles being sore. And to requite your kindnes and goodwill, which I perceiue you beare mee, I haue sent you by this bearer some Ditties and Songes, such as I haue: And if it lie in my power to gratifie you with a bet∣ter thing, ye shall commaund me. In the meane time, I rest beholding vnto you for your curtesie shewed me at the poore Widdowes house, being in your Sisters conceite too homelie a roofe to entertaine so great a Commaunder: And for bidding me, Come vp Asse into a higher roome, that Chollericke Pill of hers will easely be disgested with one pleasant conceit or other of Moun∣sier de Kempe on Monday next at the Globe, where I would gladly meete you, if your leysure will so permit▪ In the meane time I bid you farewell. FINIS.
