C7604 R232971 [ocm]69648583 184893
CUPIDS Kindness to Constant CORIDON, OR, air SILVIA VVouned with a Dart. hen Beauties bright, Young men can sight, and seek their overthrow, Then Cupid's Darts must wound their hearts, he will not leave them so. Tune of Charon make hast &c. This may be Printed R. P. depiction of Cupid depiction of a lady Ilvia the Fair by the side of a River, where she sat combing her Golden hair, pid he drew forth a Dart from his Quiver, and without pitty he smites her there; w when she fle her heart was wounded, strait cryed with voice both soft an shrill, ht sudden change has my freedom confounded? why must I love now against my Will. Often in Valleys young Corridon courted me, yet I lookt on him with scornful Eyes; But now strange Raptures of love has transported me, which does my sences and soul surprie, This very Minute, time, and Season, sorrow and Grief my heart doth fill, Here I admire what should be the reason, that I must love him against my Will.
lady gentleman I ws resolved to live and dye single, tho' I had Suitors alwaies in store, Bt e'ry vein in my heart does now tingle tho like I never did feel before, I had to love a Detetation, the which does now my comfort spill; This is a sudden and strange Altertion, that I must love him against my Will. There was no Swain I cou'd ever admire; all my delight was to live alone; Therefore I'll triumph o're e ry desire, in love I will not be overthrown: Let Cupid seem to frown and lower, nay use his best and chiefest skill, I will endeavour to baffle his power, why shou'd I love him against my Will? But still her Passion encreased the stronger, and her Swéet Beauty grew pale and wan So that she could not endure any longer, but crying out my sweet Corridon, May e'ry Blessing now betide thee, dnt a fainting Lover Kill, Altho' 'tis true, I have often deny'd thee, now I must love thee against my will. If I shall dye for the loss of my Iewel, there is none but my self in blame, Sith to my Corridon I was too cruel, when like a Captive to me he came But for this Crime I have repented; yet remain in sorrows still With sighs and Tears I have often lamented, now I must love him against my Will. O that he heard but my sorrowful Ditty, likewise would come my sweet Life to save And with true Love and compassionate pitty, pardon the frowns which to him I gave; He could no longer stand to hear her, but did approach with right good will, To his fair Silvia in order to cheer her vowing he would be her true love still. Thanks be to Cupid that gain'd me thy favour, my drooping Spirits once more to raise, Now do I promise to Love thée for ever, and in these Valleys wee'll spend our days, Can there be any greater blessing, my wounded heart with joy to fill, Then my fair Silvia, here to be possessing, whom I do Love and admire still. Printed for I. Back, t the Black Boy near the draw-bridge on London-Bridge.
