8437 506.h.10[105] 99892807 187201
¶ Articles to be performed by vertue of our Commission of Sale annexed, touching Forrests, Parkes, and Chases. INPRIMIS, that you haue a speciall regard, that in the Sale, no Tree be taken in Forrest, Chase or Parke, which carieth not some apparent marke of decay, nor any Tree which you finde marked by our Officers of our Nauie. Item that of decaying Trees, there be not sold in any Forrest, Parke or Chase, aboue two of the hundreth respecting the whole number of Trees surueyed, or to be surueyed, nor any Tree to be cut, other then in places assented vnto, by such as wee haue appoynted to take care for the beautie of the Forrest, Parke or Chase, and foode for our Deere, nor any tree to bee cut or caried in fence time, to the disturbing of our Game, and that you may sell such two of the hundreth in places so assented to. Item for meere Dottards, and Trees so decayed, that they beare no vert, seruiceable for browse for our Deere, to sell of them what the Countrey will vent, and at valueable rates, and the smal∣lest of them to leaue for the Keepers fewell, as shall be hereafter assigned for him to haue by fu∣ture Warrant, And you must also prouide and foresee, that all sorts of Trees which shall be cut this season in any of our Forrests, Parkes, and Chases, bee cut and caried thence before All Saints-tide next, or else the Buyer to loose the said Trees then left vncaried. Item whereas by our Commission hereunto annexed wee haue appointed the chiefe Officer of our Forrests, Parkes and Chases to be of the Quorum, with you A. B. whome wee haue especially authorized for this seruice: You shall hereby vnderstand that wee doe not determine to tye him or them personally to attend the execution of all things incident to this sale, but onely to assigne what number of Trees shall be taken, and in what places they may bee spared without any ble∣mish to the beautie of our aforesaid Parkes, Forrests, and Chases, wherein wee doe commaund you A. B. to conforme your selfe, because in that particular we doe repose principall confidence in his iudgement and discretion. ¶ Instructions to be obserued for Sales in our Mannors, Granges, Farmes and Tenements. ITEM as we haue prescribed you to sell in our Forrests, Parkes, and Chases, of Trees that beare vert, onely such as are decaying, and that not aboue two in the hundred: so although we meane not to limit you so particular a proportion for sales in our Mannors, Granges, Farmes and Tenements; yet we would haue you know that it is our pleasure, wheresoeuer you sell any Trees thereupon, that you haue a principall care, to forbeare the felling of any Trees, or faire Tufts so neere the Scite or mansion house (if there be any of any note) as may disgrace the habi∣tation, and likewise to giue warning to our particular Woodwards there, that notwithstanding any warrants which may come vnto them, or haue come, for falling, or selling wood hereafter, that they also haue the same respect, And further, that you bee very carefull to leaue in other places vpon the premisses sufficient timber and wood growing, for the continuall maintenance and reparations of the premisses, and vse of his Maiesties Tenants from time to time. All which directions first carefully obserued, you may then sell such and so many Trees, timber and other vpon our said Mannors, Granges, Farmes and Tenements, as shall be thought fit by you A. B. our particular Surueyour, one of the next Iustices of the Peace, the Surueyour of the Countie of our Lands where such sales shall be made, or any two of you, whereof you A. B. to be alwayes one.
Item for timber and other wood, growing vpon Copiholds of Inheritance, that you make no sale thereof, except the Copiholders themselues doe seeke it at your hand, whereby they may be more sure to haue the same vpon all necessary occasions at their owne voluntary disposition. Item whereas you A. B. are now particularly chosen and trusted in this inployment, for perfor∣mance whereof wee haue appointed you sufficient reward out of our owne Treasure; wee doe hereby straitly charge and command you, to forbeare to exact any fees from our Subiects, or to put them to any other payment, then such as shall appeare to bee solely due to vs for the Woodes whereof you make sale, And that before you make any sale, you faile not publiquely to pro∣claime your sale in the next market Towne, that men may know there is such a purpose in hand. Item, that before you doe make any generall Sale in grosse, of any great quantitie of Trees to any particular person, you doe first make offer of such quantitie to our Tenants dwelling vpon the premisses, and next to such other our louing Subiects thereabouts, as may be necessary for them, in case they shall without delay resort vnto you, and be willing to pay according to the rate you might sell otherwise. And their necessities serued, or they refusing to buy at the said rates without delay, then you may sell to other in grosse such quantities as you shall finde may most conueniently be spared, and for such prices as shall be for our best profit. And herein wee trust you will carie your selfe so, as may be most for our good, and the generall reliefe of our Subiects that lacke timber, and not for your owne particular interest. ¶ For increase of timber and fire wood in Forrests, Parkes, Chases, Mannors, and Tenancies to future ages. TO renew our ancient copices in places fit. To replant new Copices, where the soyle will naturally breed wood, where it may bee conueniently done without impediment to our Game, or disgrace of our Forrests, Parkes or Chases. ¶ For wastes and spoiles in what place or places soeuer. WHere wastes haue beene committed, to informe your selues thereof by all wayes and meanes, to learne when, and by whom, those wastes haue beene committed, as also to whom any Timber trees, or any other Trees, or fire wood, haue beene sold, giuen, taken, or deliuered, by whom, when, where, and by what warrant, and what was answered for the same, and what was the value thereof, to the onely end, the seller of the same may an∣swere the value thereof. The Commissions for sale in all the Articles of these Instructions to bee directed to the parti∣culer Surueiour, the Surueiour of the Countie for Mannors, the Surueiour generall of the Woods, the next Iustice of the Peace, who, nor none of his Ancestors, nor any whose estate he hath, hath had any of the Kings woods there, in Lease, or any office concerning the Kings woods since primo Elizabeth, or any two of them, whereof A. B. to be alwayes one. The like Articles also in all points, and to all intents to bee performed by the now Commissio∣ners for sales of wood, in our Forrests, Parkes, Chases, Mannors, Granges, Farmes, and Te∣nements, within our Dutchy of Lancaster, and thereunto in any place belonging. ¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO DOM. 1609.
