9238.9 S100675 99836505 178440
THE KINGS MAIESTIES Declaration to His Subiects, CONCERNING lawfull Sports to be vsed. LONDON Printed by BONHAM NORTON, and IOHN BILL, Deputie Printers for the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XVIII.
A
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
By the King. WHereas vpon Our returne the last yeere out of Scotland, Wee did publish Our plea∣sure touching the re∣creations of Our peo∣ple in those parts vnder Our hand: For some causes Ʋs thereunto moouing, We haue thought good to command these Our directions then giuen in Lanca∣shire with a few words thereunto ad∣ded, and most appliable to these parts of Our Realmes, to be published to all Our Subiects. Whereas We did iustly in Our Progresse through Lancashire, re∣buke
some Puritanes & precise people, and tooke order that the like vnlaw∣full cariage should not bee vsed by any of them hereafter, in the prohibiting and vnlawfull punishing of Our good people for vsing their lawfull Recrea∣tions, and honest exercises vpon Sun∣dayes and other Holy dayes, after the afternoone Sermon or Seruice: Wee now find that two sorts of people where∣with that Countrey is much infested, (Wee meane Papists and Puritanes) haue maliciously traduced and calum∣niated those Our iust and honourable proceedings. And therefore lest Our reputation might vpon the one side (though innocently) haue some asper∣sion layd vpon it, and that vpon the o∣ther part Our good people in that Coun∣trey bee misled by the mistaking and misinterpretation of Our meaning: We
haue therefore thought good hereby to cleare and make Our pleasure to bee manifested to all Our good People in∣those parts. Jt is true that at Our first entry to this Crowne, and Kingdome, Wee were informed, and that too truely, that Our County of Lancashire abounded more in Popish Recusants then any Countie of England, and thus hath stil continued since to Our great regreet, with litle a∣mendment, saue that now of late, in Our last riding through Our said Coun∣ty, Wee find both by the report of the Judges, and of the Bishop of that dio∣cesse that there is some amendment now daily beginning, which is no small con∣tentment to Ʋs. The report of this growing amend∣ment amongst them, made Ʋs the more sory, when with Our owne Eares Wee
heard the generall complaint of Our people, that they were barred from all lawfull Recreation, and exercise vpon the Sundayes afternoone, after the ending of all Diuine Seruice, which cannot but produce two euils: The one, the hindering of the conuersion of many, whom their Priests will take occasion hereby to vexe, perswading them that no honest mirth or recreation is lawfull or tollerable in Our Religion, which cannot but breed a great discon∣tentment in Our peoples hearts, especi∣ally of such as are peraduenture vpon the point of turning; The other incon∣uenience is, that this prohibition bar∣reth the common and meaner sort of people from vsing such exercises as may make their bodies more able for Warre, when Wee or Our Successors shall haue occasion to vse them. And in place
thereof sets vp filthy tiplings and drun∣kennesse, and breeds a number of idle and discontented speaches in their Ale∣houses. For when shal the common peo∣ple haue leaue to exercise, if not vpon the Sundayes and Holydayes, seeing they must apply their labour, and winne their liuing in all working dayes? Our expresse pleasure therefore is, that the Lawes of Our Kingdome, and Canons of Our Church bee aswell ob∣serued in that County, as in all other places of this Our Kingdome. And on the other part, that no lawfull Re∣creation shall bee barred to Our good People, which shall not tend to the breach of Our aforesaid Lawes, and Canons of Our Church: which to ex∣presse more particularly, Our pleasure is, That the Bishop, and all other in∣feriour Churchmen, and Churchwar∣dens,
shall for their parts bee carefull and diligent, both to instruct the igno∣rant, and cōuince & reforme them that are misled in religion, presenting them that will not conforme themselues, but obstinately stand out to Our Iudges and Iustices: Whom We likewise command to put the Law in due execution against them. Our pleasure likewise is, That the Bishop of that Diocesse take the like straight order with all the Puritans and Precisians within the same, either constraining them to conforme them∣selues, or to leaue the Countrey accor∣ding to the Lawes of Our Kingdome, and Canons of Our Church, and so to strike equally on both hands, against the contemners of Our Authoritie, and ad∣uersaries of Our Church. And as for Our good peoples lawfull Recreation,
Our pleasure likewise is, That after the end of Diuine Seruice, Our good people be not disturbed, letted, or dis∣couraged from any lawfull Recreation; Such as dauncing, either men or wo∣men, Archerie for men, leaping, vaul∣ting, or any other such harmelesse Re∣creation, nor from hauing of May-Games, Whitson Ales, and Morris∣dances, and the setting vp of May∣poles and other sports therewith vsed, so as the same be had in due and conue∣nient time, without impediment or neg∣lect of diuine Seruice: And that wo∣men shall haue leaue to carry rushes to the Church for the decoring of it, accor∣ding to their old custome. But withall We doe here accompt still as prohibited all vnlawfull games to bee vsed vpon Sundayes onely, as Beare and Bull∣baitings, Jnterludes, and at all times in
the meaner sort of People by Law pro∣hibited, Bowling. And likewise Wee barre from this benefite and libertie, all such knowne Recusants, either men or Women, as will abstaine from comming to Church or diuine Seruice, being therefore vn∣worthy of any lawfull recreation after the said Seruice, that will not first come to the Church and serue GOD: Pro∣hibiting in like sort the said Recreati∣ons to any that, though cōforme in Re∣ligion, are not present in the Church at the Seruice of GOD, before their going to the said Recreations. Our plea∣sure likewise is, That they to whom it belongeth in Office, shall present and sharply punish all such as in abuse of this Our libertie, will vse these exercises before the ends of all diuine Seruices for that day. And We likewise straightly
command, that euery person shall resort to his owne Parish Church to heare di∣uine Seruice, and each Parish by it selfe to vse the said Recreation after diuine Seruice. Prohibiting likewise any Offensiue weapons to be caried or vsed in the said times of Recreations And Our pleasure is, That this Our Decla∣ration shalbe published by order frō the Bishop of the Diocesse, through all the Parish Churches, and that both Our Iudges of Our Circuit, and Our Iustices of Our Peace be informed thereof. Giuen at Our Mannour of Greenwich  the foure and twentieth day of May, in the sixteenth yeere of Our Raigne of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the one and fiftieth. God saue the King.
