9125 816.m.12[57] 99885091 190208
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT ¶ By the King. ¶ A Proclamation for the due Assizing of Bread. WHereas a new Book intituled Artachthos, for the just assizing and weighing of Bread, aswell with Avoirdupois weights, as with Troy weights, hath been lately composed by the Art, industry and pains of Our welbeloved subject John Penkethman, gent. and Accomptant; By means whereof the Assize and weight of the severall sorts of Bread, appointed by the Laws and Ordinances of this Our Realm of England, according to the different and variable prices of Wheat, may be certainly known and assized, which Book (as it hath appeared un∣to Our Privy-Councell, by Certificate from the Lord Mayor and Al∣dermen of Our City of London) is exact and true, and doth justly and truly set forth the same, being rightly grounded upon the Statute made in the one and fiftieth yeer of the reign of King Henry the third, and will be of good use for Our subjects, and for the be∣nefit of the Common-wealth, where the old Book formerly set forth, Intituled, The Assize of Bread, (being made for Troy weights onely) is certified to be very false and unfit for use: Neither could the Magistrates & Officers that have authority to assize and weigh the Bakers Bread in most parts of Our Kingdom, make use of the said old Book (in case the same were true) for want of Troy weights, (which are very scarce, as Wee are informed) So that the Bakers, taking advantage of such defects, do continue their usuall course of offending, yet passe unpunished. Wee therfore in favour of Arts, and good endeavours, have granted especiall priviledge to the said John Penkethman, for the sole printing and publishing of the said new Book, Intituled, Artach∣thos, during the terme of one and twenty yeers, in recompence of his said pains and his expence therein. And in respect Our said Subjects, especially in the remote parts of Our Realm of England, and in Our dominion of Wales, cannot otherwise take knowledge of the approbation gi∣ven to the said new Book, and that they should be at all times hereafter thereby regulated in the Assize of Bread, Wee do hereby publish the Premisses unto all Our loving Subjects, and chiefly to all Iustices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughs, and o∣ther Our Officers & Ministers, whose duty it is to look unto the just weight & Assize of Bread according to the Law: Straightly charging and commanding them to take care that the same be duly observed according to the said new Book, whereby the deceits now commonly practi∣sed in the under-weight of Bread may be discerned and prevented, and the offenders therein con∣dignely punished. Given at Our Palace of Westminster,  the nineteenth day of November, in the fourteenth yeer of Our Reign. ¶ God save the King. ¶ Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of JOHN BILL. 1638.
