B2163 [ocm]15556410 206179
A MODEL OF THE Gospel-Sanctification IN THESE FOLLOWING GENERALS, Drawn especially according to Rom. Chap. 6. Chap. 7. Chap. 8. fol∣lowing that Great Discourse, Rom. 5.12. to the end, by way of compare betwixt the First, and the Second Adam, and shewing the infinite surmount of Grace, Righteousness, and the Reign of Life flowing from the Second Adam, above the Sin, the Judgment, the Condemnation, the Reign of Death, flowing from the First Adam, and notwithstanding the Law coming in after it, that the Offence might abound. I give the Scheme or Model of this Doctrine together for two Reasons; 1. That the Beauty and Proportion of the whole Portraicture being seen together as in the Picture of a Man, not in several parts, may strike us deeper. 2. Because I would not be prevented at least in giving a Scheme, and therefore take the first Opportunity. I therefore lay down these Generals. THE Foundation of all True Sanctification, as of Justification is in the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ; For seeing Christ did in Dying, not only dye for Sin, but to Sin; Sin, viz. Rom. 6. to v. 12. not in Himself, but as a Common Head for Believers, and sanctified Him∣self, that they might be sanctified through the Truth of it preach'd to them, John 17.19. (and so proportionably in his Resurrection) It
thence follows, That sooner may the Beams be clip'd off from the Sun, then Sanctification be cut off from the Justifying Death, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And to pretend to benefit from thence without dying to Sin, and living to Righteousness must enforce either, that such have no benefit by Christ, or that He must come down to dye again to Sin for them, and Rise again for them to newness of Life, seeing what he hath done hath not avail'd to what must so necessarily be done; which is to bring him down from Heaven, and up again from the Dead, contrary to Rom. 10.6.7. The Spirit of God in the Sanctification of the Soul becomes a mighty in∣ward, John 14. c. 15. c. 16.  Advocate, 1 John 2.1. c. 16. v. 14, 15. intellestual Advocate with the Soul for Holiness, according to all which Christ hath done: He shall take of mine, viz. My Death, Resur∣rection, Redemption, and shall shew it to you by real effectual Commu∣nications of Truth and Holiness. Hereby the bighest Rational, Intellectual, Immaterial, Immortal Spirit in the Regenerate man is perfectly and entirely sanctified, . 1 Thes. 5.23. and in it self made Partaker of the Divine Nature, as it is consider'd I say in and by it self. But as it dwells in the finer and most spirituous parts of the Matter, or Body joyn'd to it; which is called, Soul and Spirits, James 3.17. &c. And as it dwells and resides in the yet lower Earthly parts of that Matter, call'd more properly Body, and Flesh, and enlivens and acts them, It is not so throughout sanctified; so that it cannot Rise to the Heights of Spiri∣tuality, it would; nor restrain the Motions to Evil, it hates. Its Wisdom therefore comes down from above, and is neither Earthly, as of the lowest Body, nor Animal, as of the Soul in the spi∣rituous parts of Body; nor least of all devilish, as in the higher Soul or Spirit, a Seed of which Diabolickness is in all unsanctified Spirits now, and will be absolutely and to the Height so in Eternity. By this entire perfect sanctification of the Higher Soul, it becomes impossible to live in the Course of any actual, known Sin, or the Omission of any absolutely necessary Holy Duty, Rom. 6.13. &c. according to that of the Apostle, Let not Sin Reign in your Mortal Bodies, that you should obey it in the Lusts thereof; Neither yield you your Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness, &c. But yield your Members as Instruments of Righteousness, &c. By all which the Apostle shews, that although the lower Soul, and Body are not to be countermanded wholly in their Motions, and Stirrings to Evil, nor in their Reluctancies and unwillingness to Good;
yet that higher sanctified Soul hath a Despotic, that is an absolute Com∣mand to prevent the actual Commission of Evil, or the Omission of Good; not to yield, or to yield the Members according to the Direction of this higher Spirit, Led and Acted by the Spirit of God; which is the Dif∣ference betwixt Natural Conscience resisting Evil, and the Soul Acted by the Spirit of God. One is able to Command, the other not: Natural Conscience cannot overcome; the Soul renewed shall overcome throughout, as to the Resistance of Actual Sin, and the Actual performance of Duty, ex∣cept by surprize, or in some violence of Temptation, and Desertion; so that the Walk, and Conversation of all True Believers is not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. In Regard of these Remainders of Sin in the Spirit, or higher Soul, as it resides in, Animates, and Acts the lower Soul and Body, and also in re∣gard of the Falls by Temptation and Desertion; there is a continual Appli∣cation to Jesus Christ, as the Husband of the Soul, and to the perfect Ho∣liness, and Purity of his Humane Nature, by Reason of which, It is not under the Law, but under Grace; It serves in newness of Spirit, or according to the Covenant of Grace, Rom. 7.4, 5, 6. c. 8.2, 3, 4. and not in the oldness of the Let∣ter, or according to the Law, and so brings forth Fruit unto God, and not unto Death; For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus sets it free from the Law of Sin, and Death; so that the Righteous∣ness of the Law is fulfilled in them, who thus walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. The Witness of the Counsel and Transaction of the Father, of the word, and of the Spirit in the whole Work of Redemption, 1 John 5.7.8. of which they keep the Record in Heaven, is seal'd, ratified, and confirm'd in the Witness of the Spirit, viz. of the Word, of the Gospel in the Power, and Love of the Truth; of the Spirit of Prayer, Crying Abba Father, in the Witness of the Power of Baptism, enabling to make the Answer of a Good, 1 Pet 3.21. that is of a Justified and Sanctified Conscience by the Resur∣rection of Jesus Christ, and in the Power of the Blood, of the Lords Supper, Given for the Life of the World, and making perfect in every good Work All Those in Him. Superior and yet joyn'd with all This, is the Witness of the Spirit, that we are the Sons of God, making our Calling and Election sure, Rom. 8.29.30. &c. For whom He Calls and Justifies, those he hath predestinated, so that there is a Joy in hope of the Glory of God, and assurance of his Love, from which nothing can separate; Heb. 10.19. &c. There is a drawing near with a true Heart, in full Assurance of Faith, &c. And to this State not the Spi∣rit
of Bondage to Fear, but of Adoption is always justly due, and be∣longing, however by Darkness, Fears, and Doubts It may be clouded. From all this Arises a Holy Readiness to suffer for Christ so necessary to the Sanctification of the Gospel, that no one can be the Disciple of Christ without it. And It is establish'd in that Great Principle, The Sufferings of the present Time are not worthy to be compar'd with the Glo∣ry, Rom. 8.18. that shall be reveal'd in the Day of the Restitution of the whole Creation (for which It Grones) and in the Day of the Adoption of our Bodies. In Death, All the Remainders of Sin vanish, For the Spirit being entire∣ly Sanctified, except in the Powers of Animating the Soul, and the Body, which are wholly useless in the separated State; Rom. 8.10. It must needs as the Apostle speaks, be Life, because of Righteousness, and that immediately. When the Body is Rais'd a Spiritual Body by the Lord from Hea∣ven, the Quickning Spirit; It becomes a Body of a new Constitution, and Regeneration, 1 Cor. 15.44, 45. &c. and not under the Old Covenant of the Apostate Adam, and so inherits Incorruption; For the Holy Spirit dwelling in its most substantial parts, Phil. 3. last. dedicated to God by the sanctified Spirit, Raises it in Conformity to the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The General Application of these General Points of Sanctification may be thus Given. 1. We may Appeal to our own, and to all the Light of Natural Consci∣ence in the World, whether the Doctrine of the Gospel having such a Frame, and Doctrine of Sanctification essential to it, can be either a Licentious, or a Trivial Doctrine, and whether It be not the most awful and weighty in the whole World. 2. Let us All Consider, whether these Things are True in us, as They are in Christ; 1 John 2.8. For so the Apostle John Remarks to us concerning the Laws, and Truths of the Gospel; That They are True in Him, and True in us. 3. We should always Remember, that though All the Morality, and Goodness that ever was requisite to the Nature of Man is Adopted by the Gospel of Christ; yet It is of a much higher and more exalted Vein, and Spirit of Goodness, in Christ the Second Adam, then ever was given to the First Adam, and much more then can possibly be found in the best Remains of that Humane Nature now in the World.
