B4522 515.l.2[162] R226758 99886905 189656
A Brief Account OF THE TRYAL OF Peter Cooke, Esq; Who was Tryed before the Lord Chief Justice TREBY, &c. At the SESSIONS-HOUSE in the Old Baily, on Wednesday, May 13. 1696. for High Treason. THE Court being sate, and the Pannel call'd over, the Priso∣ners Council, who were Mr. Serjeant Darnell, and Sir Bar∣tholomew Shore, made some Exceptions as to the Pannel, be∣cause a new one, and urged. That the Prisoner ought to be Tryed upon the Old Pannel, which the Court over-ruled. After which, they made some Exceptions as to the Indictment, pretending false Latin, but that was also over-ruled. Then the Prisoner was set to the Bar, and the Jury were called to be sworn, of whom he challenged 35 peremptorily; at length 12 were sworn, Mr. Henry Shelbrook being Fore-man; then the Indictment was read, setting forth as in former Tryals. Mr. Attorney General opened the Indictment at large, charging the Prisoner only with the Invasion. The Witnesses against him were Capt. Porter, and Mr. Goodman, who deposed, That in order to the bringing in of K. James, there was a meet∣ing in May last, at the Kings-Head in Leadenhall-street, where there dined the Earl of Aylesbury, the Lord Montgomery, Sir John Fenwick, Sir John Friend, Sir William Perkins, Mr. Charnock, the Prisoner, and Capt. Por∣ter, and Mr. Goodman came in after Dinner; upon which they entred into a Consultation for restoring K. James; and it was agreed to send Charnock to France to invite over K. James with 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons, promising to join him with 2000 Horse upon his Landing, &c. And Chernock putting the Question, Whether they all consented he should go on that Errant? They all stood up and said, Yes you may. And both the Witnesses agreed, that all the rest sate, but the Prisoner kneeled on a Chair, and leaned on a Table; They were examined apart, at the Prisoners request.
The Prisoner's Counsel did not insist on the Matter of Fact, or the Overt Act, but endeavour'd to invalidate Mr. Goodman's Testimony; to which end they produced a Record of his being Convicted of hiring one Amedie to impoyson two Flasks of Florence Wine, to poyson the Dukes of Grafton and Northumberland. Then they produced one Edwards, who said, That discoursing Mr. Good∣man about Mr. Cook's Tryal, he said, Mr. Cook or himself must Die, that Hanging was but a silly thing, with some other light Expressions. And this Evidence was contronted by Mr. De la Rue, who said, He went by the Name of Edwards, but his right Name was Douglas, was Chap∣lain to Dundees Regiment, and was in the List of the Assassines, which Chernock sent to Capt. Porter. Next they produced two Drawers, and Mr. Cock the Vintner of the Kings-head, to prove, that Mr. Goodman was not at that Consultation. And these were confronted by Capt. Por∣ter, and Mr. Goodman, who both gave particular instances of his be∣ing there. Then they called one Mr. Hammond, and two others, who spoke to the Prisoners Reputation, that he was Religious, a Lover of his Country, an Abhorrer of all Invasions by Foreign Forces, and had often wished well to his Majesties Fleet, &c. The Evidence on both sides being done, the Prisoners Counsel sum∣med up the Evidence very eligantly in behalf of their Client, who then spoke in his own behalf, protesting his Innocence, &c. with Asseve∣rations. Then the King's Counsel briefly answered the Objections made by the Prisoners Counsel against Mr. Goodman; after whom the Lord Chief Justice Treby, learnedly and impartially summed up the Evidence on both sides, leaving it fairly to the Jury, who withdrew, and after above half an hours Consultation, returned, and brought him in Guilty. London, Printed for R. Greene.
