F1820 4151.de.6[7] R220235 99884961 193376
For the holy Women that trust in God and do profess Godliness with good Works, according to the Apostle's Doctrine in this Age to read over and put in Practice. THE Apostle saith, I will therefore that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with Shame∣facedness and Sobriety, and not with broided Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or Costly Aray, but as becometh Women professing Godliness with good Works, 1 Tim. 2.9, 10. And likewise Peter, saith, in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ, to the Women, whose Adorn∣ing, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and wearing of Gold, and of putting on of Apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the Heart, in that which is not Corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of a great price, for after this manner in old time the holy Women also who trusted in God adorned themselves, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. Now all Women may here consider what is to be the practice of such Women that profess Godliness, and trust in God, their adorning is the hidden man of the Heart, which is Incorruptible, and their ornament is of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of a great Price; but those Women whose outward adorning is with broided and plaited Hair, and Gold, and Pearls, and costly Aray, these are not the modest Apparels
which become Modest, Sober, Shamefaced Wome that profess Godliness with good Works; but such as are Unsober, Unshamefaced and Unmodest, such look upon such things to become them, are cloathed with corruptible and unquiet Spirits, that do not possess God∣liness with good Works; and these outward Ornaments, as plating and broiding the Hair, and wearing of Gold, and Pearls, and costly Array; the Apostle saith, Do not become Women professing Godliness with good Works; but them that do not profess Godliness, that are Shameless and Unsober, they may become such Women that do not trust in God, their corruptible Spirit may lead them to adorn themselves with such things, as is said before, which the Apostle forbids; but the holy Women of God which professed Godliness with good Works, and trusted in God, adorned them∣selves not with plating the Hair, or wearing of Gold, or Pearls, or costly array; but with the hidden man of the Heart, in that which is not Corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of a great price. And now consider also, you Women that profess Godliness, and go under the name of holy Women, and trust in God, see that your selves, and your Children, and all your young Women are Adorned and Arrayed, and have on this Ornament, as the Apostle wills the Church of Christ to put on, as the holy Women did of Old, and be not of an unmeek and unquiet Spirit, and unsober and unshamefaced, when you are admonished and exhor∣ted not to act contrary to the holy Women of old that trusted in God, and such as professed Godliness according to the Apostles Doctrine. And here you may see what care the Apostles had to
keep the Saints, the Church of Christ, their Eyes, Minds and their Spirits above the wearing of Gold, plat∣ing their Hair, and Pearls, and costly Aparrel, which was the Glory of the World, which the holy Women that trusted in God and professed Godliness and good Works, these things were not to be their Adorning nor Orna∣ments, but as is said before, the hidden man of the Heart, which was not Corrupt, even the meek and quiet Spirit, which is with the Lord of a great price, and this ought to be, and is the Adornment and Ornament of all the holy Women that profess Godliness and good Works, and trust in God. And all you that have been convinced of the Lords Truth by his Spirit, take heed of Sathan taking you up into that Mountain, and then of his shewing you the Glory of the World, and then of your Minds and Eyes going after it, and receiving of it, and so in that you fall from the Spirit and Truth of God that did convince you, and then so to worship the Devil, the King of Pride, the God of the World, that abode not in the Truth, in whom there is no Truth, and then he to lead your Minds and Eyes after every new vain Fashion of the World that passeth away, and that lieth in wickedness, and so draweth you into the Love of the World, which is Enmity to God, and into the Wisdom of the World, by which ye do not know God, & then to such the Gospel of Life and Salvation is hid, in whom the God of this World hath blinded their minds, and in such disobedient ones the Prince of the Air rules, and gets into them by disobeying the Truth, and in such Christ doth not rule in their hearts by Faith, and it is not like, when they make Shiprack of it, and a good Conscience; and there∣fore walk in the Light of Christ, and grow in his Grace,
and the Knowlege of the Lord Jesus Christ that bruises the Serpents Head and destroys the Devil and his Works, that you may all be established upon Christ the Rock and Foundation. And if ye do believe in the Covenant of Light, Life and Grace, then, why do not you all train up your Chil∣dren in the same? did not the Lord command the Jews to train up their Children in the old Covenant and teach them to walk in it? and were not all the Males to be Circumcised? and they that were not Circumcised were to be cut off from the Congregation of the Lord; so are not all you that profess the new Covenant of Grace, Light and Life, and the Gospel of Salvation Preached to Every Creature, and the Grace of God which brings Salvation that hath appeared to all men, to teach them to live Godly, and to deny Ungodliness, &c. (I say) are not you all to train up your Children and Families in this Light of the Gospel and Grace of Christ which brings Salvation, and brings them into favour with God, that you may have the comfort of your Children in this World, and in that which is Everlasting? and that they may be Circumcised with the Spirit of God, which he poureth out upon all Flesh, that with his Spiritual Cir∣cumcision the Body of Death and Sins of the Flesh may be cut off, which are come into Man and Woman by Transgression, that neither you nor they might dye in the Body of Death, and in the Sins of the Flesh, and such do not die in the Lord, for they that are not Cir∣cumcised with the Spiritual Circumcision are cut off from the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of God and Christ, and from the Church of the Living God written in Heaven: And therefore, if you will have the comfort of your Children in this World, and that which
is to come, train them up in the fear of God, and in his Covenant of Light and Grace, which Grace brings their Salvation, and brings them into favour with God, and into the Spiritual Baptism and Circumcision, so that they may Serve and Worship the Living God in his Spirit and Truth, Amen. And now, do not say but you are all warned in your Life time; and therefore prise your time, while you have it, that you way spend it to the Honour and Glory of God.
Concerning Children and Young People. AND if Children and young People must be left and let alone to themselves, and not be Admonished, Exhorted and Restrained from the Evil and Vanities of the World, then why did Moses and the Prophets, and the Apostles, which were sent of God, exhort the Peo∣ple to train up their Children in the fear of the Lord, and to teach them his Law while they were Young, that they might not depart from it when they were Old? and if that they did, the Lord did Judge them, as ye may read in the Scriptures of Truth; and if that they must be left to themselves, and not restrained from Evil, then how came it to pass that old Ely lost his Life, and his Priesthood, and the Ark of God, for not restraining his Children from evil? And again, if that they must be left to themselves, why did the Prophets and the Apostles say, that they must not Quench, nor Vex, nor Grieve, nor Rebel against the Spirit of God, nor turn the Grace of God into Wanton∣ness, nor walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace? but walk in the Spirit, and in the Truth, and in the Light, and to Love it, and not to Hate it; for they that do not Love it, the Light, but Hate it, are Condemed by it, and so grow in the Condemnation, and are not in the Justification of Life. The Lord God commanded Abraham to Circumcise himself and his Children, and servants that were Bought with Money, and were Born in his House. He was to bring all his Males into this Covenant of outward Cir∣cumcision.
And the Lord said, That Soul shall be cut off that is not Circumcised, he hath broken my Covenant of outward Circumcision, as you may see, Genesis 17. Here you may see, Abraham was to teach and instruct his Fa∣mily and Servants, and he was not to keep any Man or Servant that was Uncircumcised in his Family. Now you that profess the new Covenant, are not you, and all your Children and Servants to be Circumcised with the Spirit of Circumcision? and do not they that have not the Body of Death and the Sins of the Flesh, cut off by Circumcision, go down into the Pit, and not into the Paradise, and the Kingdom of God; and there∣fore may not such Uncircumcised by the Spirit hurt the Families of true Christians in the Light. Therefore consider Abraham was not to suffer any of his Children and Servants that were Bought with his Money, or Born in his House to be Uncircumcised, in the old Covenant, this care the Lord laid upon him, in his Family, in the old Covenant. Therefore consider you that profess the new Covenant of the Spirit of Cir∣cumcision, what care lies upon you in your Families, of Teaching and Instructing your Servants and Children, and to bring them to the Spirit of Circumsicion. The 9th of the 5th Month 1686. G. F. THE END.
