F2442 [ocm]09822471 204515
THE HISTORY OF Waltham-Abby in Essex, Founded by KING HAROLD. Patria est ubicun{que} est bene Bene vixit, qui bene latuit. By THOMAS FULLER, the CURATE thereof. SIC OMNI TEMPORE VERNO LONDON, Printed in the Year, M. DC. LV.
To the Right Honourable, JAMES HAY, EARL of CARLILE, VISCOUNT Doncaster, BARON of Sauley and Waltham. I Have formerly in this History presumed to trouble your Honour, and now adventure the second time. Indeed this Treatise con∣taineth the description of your large De∣mesnes, and larger Royalty and Command. Should I therefore present it to any other, save your self, it would be held as a STRAY indeed, (wandring out of the right way it should go in) and so, (without any thanks to me) would fall to your Lordship, as due unto you by the Custome of your Manor. Your Honours most obliged Servant and Chaplain. THOMAS FULLER.
THE HISTORY OF Waltham-Abby. PRovidence, by the hand of my worthy friends, The Authors design. having planted me for the present at Waltham-Abby, I conceive, that in our general work of Abbies, I owe some particular description to that place of my abode. Hoping my en∣deavours herein may prove exemplary to others (who dwell in the sight of remarkable Monasteries) to do the like, and rescue the observables of their habitations, from the teeth of time and oblivion. Waltham is so called from the Saxon Ham, Waltham why so named. which is a Town (whence the Diminutive Ham∣let) and Weald, or Wealt, that is, woody (whence the Weald of Kent) it being Anci∣ently over-grown with trees and timber. Thus Kiriath-jearim, or the City of the woods, in Palestine; Dendros, an Island in Peloponnesus Sylviacum, an An∣cient City in Belgia, got their names from the like woody scituation. Some will have it called Waltham, quasi Wealthie-Ham: I wish they could make their words good, in respect of the persons living therein, though in regard of the soyl it self, indeed it is rich and plentiful. The Town is seated on the East side of the River Ley, which not onely The situation thereof. parteth Hartford-shire from Essex, but also seven times parteth from its self, whose septemfluous stream in coming to the Town, is crossed again with so many bridges. On the one side, the Town it self hath large and fruitful Medows (whose intrinsick value is much raised by the vicinity of London) the grass whereof when first gotten an head, is so sweet and lushious to Cat∣tle, that they diet them at the first entring therein to half an hour a day, lest otherwise they over-eat themselves, which some Kine yearlie do, and quick∣ly die for it, notwithstanding all their Keepers care to the contrary. On the other side a spacious Forest spreads it self, where, fourteen years since, one might have seen whole Herds of Red and Fallow Deer. But these late licenti∣ous years have been such a Nimrod, such an Hunter, that all at this present are destroyed, though I could wish this were the worst effect which our wo∣ful Wars have produced.
The aire of the Town is condemned by many, for over-moist and Aguish, Excused from bad air. caused by the depressed scituation thereof. In confutation of which censure, we produce the many aged persons in our Town, (above threescore and ten, since my coming hither, above threescore and ten years of age) so that it seemes, we are sufficiently healthful, if sufficiently thankful for the same. Sure I am, what is wanting in good air in the Town, is supplied in the Parish, wherein as many pleasant hils and prospects are, as any place in En∣gland doth afford. Tovy, a man of great wealth and authority, as being the Kings Staller, First Found∣ed by Tovy. (that is, Standard-Bearer) first Founded this Town, for the great delight which he took in the game, the place having plenty of Deer. He planted on∣ely threescore and six in-dwellers therein. Athelstan, his son, proved a Prodigal, and quickly spent all his Fathers Falls back to the Crown. goods and great estate, so that by some transactions the place returned to the Crown. Edward the Confessour, bestowed Waltham, with the Lands thereabouts, Bestowed on Earl Harold on Harold his Brother-in-law, who presently built and endowed therein a Monastery, whereof nothing at this day is extant, save the West end, or body of the Church. A structure of Gothish-building, rather large then neate, firm then fair. The model of the modern Church. Very dark (the design of those dayes to raise devotion) save that it was help∣ed again with artificial lights; and is observed by Artists to stand the most exactly East and West of any in England. The great pillars thereof are wrea∣thed with indentings, which vacuities, if formerly filled up with Brasse (as some confidently report) added much to the beauty of the building. But, it matters not so much their taking away the Brasse from the Pillars, had they but left the Lead on the Roof, which is but meanly Tiled at this day. In a word, the best commendation of the Church is, that on Lords-dayes generally it is filled with a great and attentive Congregation. To the South-side of the Church is joyned a Chappel, formerly our Ladies, Mortality tri∣umphant. now a School-house, and under it an arched Charnel-house, the fairest that ever I saw. Here, a pious fancy could make a feast to its self on those dry bones, with the meditation of mortality: where it is hard, yea, impossible to dis∣cern the Sculls of a rich, from a poor; wise, from a simple; noble, from a mean person. Thus all counters are alike when put up together in the box, or bag; though, in casting of account, of far different valuation. King Harold Dedicated the Monastery to the honour of an Holy Cross, A Dean and Canons foun∣ded at Wal∣tham. found far West-ward, and brought hither (as they write) by miracle; whence the Town hath the addition of Waltham-Holy-Cross; but the Church we finde in after ages also Dedicated to St Laurence. His foundation was for a Dean, and eleven Secular Black Canons. Let none challenge the words of impropriety, seeing a Dean, in Latin, Decanus, hath his name from  ten, over which number he is properly to be preposed. For, nothing more common, then to wean words from their infant and original sense, and by custome to extend them to a larger signification, as Dean afterwards plainly denoted a superiour over others, whether fewer then ten, as the six Preben∣daries of Rochester; or moe, as the three and thirty of Salisbury. The Dean and eleven Canons were plentifully provided for, each Canon having a Manor, and the Dean six for his maintenance. For in the Charter of Confirmation made by King Edward the Confessor, Seventeen Manors con∣firm'd to them by the Confessor. besides North-land in Waltham (now called, as I take it, North-field) where∣with the Monastery was first endowed, these following Lordshops, with all their appurtenances, are reckoned up. 1. Passefield. 2. Walde. 3. Upminster. 4. Walthfare. 5. Suppedene. 6. Alwertowne. 7. Wodeford. 8. Lambehide. 9. Nesingan. 10. Brickindon. 11. Melnhoo. 12. Alichsea. 13. Wormeley. 14. Nichelswells. 15. Hitchche. 16. Lukendon. 17. West-Wealtham.
All these the King granted unto them cum Sacha & Socha, Tol and Team, &c. free from all gelts and payments, in a most full and ample manner; Wit∣ness himself, Edith his Queen, Stigand Archiepiscopus Dorobornensis, Count Harold, and many other Bishops and Lords subscribing the same Charter. Afterward Harold usurpeth the Crown, but enjoyed it not a full year, kill'd Harold Crow∣ned, killed & buried at Wal∣tham. in Battle-fight, by King William the Conqueror. Where either of their swords (if victorious) might have done the deed, though otherwise both their titles twisted together, could not make half a good claim to the Crown. Githa, Mother of Harold, and two religious men of this Abby, Osegod and Ailric, with their prayers and tears, hardly prevailed with the Conquerour (at first denying him burial, whose ambition had caused the death of so many) to have Harolds Corps (with his two Brethren, Girth and Leofwin, losing their lives in the same battle) to be entombed in Waltham Church, of his foundation. He was buried, where now the Earl of Carlile his leaden Fountain in his Garden, then probably the end of the Quire, or rather some Eastern Chap∣pel beyond it. His Tomb of plain, but rich gray Marble, with what seem∣eth a Cross-Floree (but much descanted on with art) upon the same, support∣ed with Pillarets, one Pedestal, whereof I have in my house. As for his re∣ported Epitaph, I purposely omit it, not so much because barbarous (scarce any better in that Age) but because not attested, to my apprehension, with sufficient Authority. A Picture of King Harold in glass was lately to be seen in the North-win∣dow Deforming Reformers. of the Church, till ten years since some barbarous hand beat it down under the notion of Superstition. Surely had such ignorant persons been im∣ployed in the dayes of Hezekiah, to purge the Temple from the former Ido∣latry; under the pretence thereof, they would have rended off, the Lilie-work from the Pillars; and the Lions, Oxen, and Cherubims from the Bases of Brass. However, there is still a place called Harolds-Park in our Parish, by him so denominated. Let not therefore the village of Harold on the North side of Ouse neer Bedford (properly Harewood, or Harelswood, on vulgar ground∣less tradition) contest with Waltham for this Kings interment. The Re-foundation of WALTHAM-ABBY by HENRY the Second. ONe will easily believe, that at the death of King Harold, Waltham-Abby, Waltham Ca∣nons in a sad condition. Founded by him, was in a swoon, and the Canons therein much disheartned. However, they had one help, which was this; that, Edward the Confessour was the confirmer of their Foundation, whose memory was not onely fresh and fair in all mens mindes (bearing a vene∣ration to his supposed sanctity) but also King William the Conquerour, had the best of his bad titles by bequest of the Crown from this Confessour. So that in some sense Waltham-Abby might humbly crave kindred of King William, both deriving their best being from one and the same person. The industry of Rob. Fuller last Abbot of Waltham. Know Reader, that what ever hereafter I alledg touching the Lands and Li∣berties of Waltham (if not otherwise attested by some Author in the margin) is by me faithfully transcribed out of Waltham Leidger-Book, now in the pos∣session of the Right Honourable, JAMES Earl of Carlile. This Book was collected by Robert Fuller, the last Abbot of Waltham; who, though he could not keep his Abby from dissolution, did preserve the Antiquities there∣of from oblivion. The Book (as appears by many inscriptions in the initial Text-letters) was made by himself, having as happy an hand in fair and fast writing, as some of his Sir-name since have been defective therein.
Not long after the Conquest, Waltham-Abby found good Benefactors, and Queen Maud gives Waltham Monks a Mill. considerable additions to their maintenance. For, Maud, the first Queen to King Henry the first, bestowed on them the Mill at Waltham, which she had by exchange for Trinity-Church in London, which I take to be part of the Trintly-Priory, now called the Dukes-place. Adelisia, second wife to King Henry the first, being possessed of Waltham as part of her Revenue, gave all the Tythes thereof, as well of her Demesnes, Queen Adeli∣sia the Tythes as all Tenants therein, to the Canons of Waltham: Mean time how poorly was the Priest of the place provided for? Yea, a glutton Monastery in former ages, makes an hungrie Ministrie in our dayes. An Abby and a Parsonage un∣impropriate in the same place, are as inconsistent together, as good woods and an Iron Mill. Had not Waltham Church lately met with a Noble Founder, the Minister thereof must have kept more fasting-dayes, then ever were put in the Roman Calender. King Stephen, though he came a wrong way to the Crown, yet did all King Steven his bounty. right to the Monastery of Waltham (as who generally sought the good will of the Clergie to strengthen himself) and confirmed all their Lands, profits, and priviledges unto them. King Henry the second utterly dissolved the foundation of Dean and eleven King Henry dissolves the Dean and Canons at Waltham Canons at Waltham. The debauchedness of their lives is rendred in his Char∣ter as the occasion thereof, Cum in ea Canonici Clerici{que} minùs religiosè & aequaliter vixissent, ita quòd infamia conversationis illorum multos scandalisasset. Whether these were really, or onely reputed vitious, God knows, seeing all those must be guilty whom power is pleased to pronounce so. Sure it is, King Henry outed this Dean and Canons, and placed an Abbot and Regular Au∣gustinians in their room, encreasing their number to twenty four. And be∣cause (to use the Kings own words) it was fit that Christ his Spouse should have a new dowry, he not onely confirmed to this Monastery the primitive patrimony, mentioned in the Confessors Charter, cum peciis terrae, With many pieces of land, and tenements, which their Benefactors since bestowed upon them; but also conferred the rich Manors of Sewardstone, and Eppings on this Monastery. The whole Charter of King Henry is too long to transcribe, but some pas∣sages Augustinians substituted in their room. therein must not be omitted. First, the King had the consent of Pope Alexander, for the suppression of these Canons; the rather moved thereunto, quia praedictis Canonicis sufficienter provisum fuit, because the aforesaid expelled Canons had sufficient provision made for them. For, grant them never so scanda∣lous, this was to add scandal to scandal, to thrust them out of house and home, without any means or maintenance. Secondly, this Charter presents us with the ancient liberties of Waltham-Church, that, Semper fuit Regalis Capella ex primitiva sui fundatione, nulli Archiepiscopo vel Episcopo, sed tantùm Ecclesiae Ro∣manae & Regiae dispositioni subjecta. And, though since Reformation, the Church hath been subjected to the Arch-Bishops jurisdiction (as succeeding to the Royal power) and sometimes (with grumbling and reluctancy) to the Episcopal power, yet it never as yet owned an Arch-Deacon, or appeared at his Visitation. The metioning of the consent of Pope Alexander to the suppression of Rome-land in Waltham. Waltham Dean and Canons, and substituting Augustinians in their room, min∣deth me of a spacious place in this Town, at the entrance of the Abby, built about with houses, called Rome-land, as (Peter-pence were termed Rome-scot) at this day. It is generally believed, that the rents thereof peculiarly be∣longed to the Church of Rome. Thus the Pope would not be so bad a carver, as to cut all away to others, and reserve no corner to himself. King Richard the first (though generally not too loving to the Clergie) Fitz-Aucher setled at Copt-Hall. amply confirmed his Fathers Foundation, and gave Lands to Richard Fitz-Aucher in this Parish, to hold them in Fee, and hereditarily of the Church of Waltham-Holy-Cross. This Fitz-Aucher fixed himself at Copt-Hall, a state∣ly house in the Parish. Whether so called contractedly, quasi Cobbing-Hall,
from Cobbing,   a rivolet running not far off, or from two ancient and essential Turrets of that house, which are coped and covered with Lead: or from (in my minde most probable) an high and sharp Hill (thus Copeland so cal∣led in Cumberland) whereon the house is founded. In or about this Kings Reign, Hugh Nevil, with the consent of Jone his Hugh Nevil a bountiful benefactor. wife, and John his son, bestowed the Manor of Thorndon on the Monastery of Waltham, of whom largely before. King Henry the third, to spare Court-keeping, came often and lay long at Abbies; so that Waltham (the nearest mitred Abby to London) had much of his company. Being a Religious Prince, great were his desires, but with∣all necessitous, small his deeds in endowing Churches. However, what he wanted in giving himself, he supplied in confirming the gifts of others. And finding it the cheapest way of benefaction, to give liberties then lands, he bestowed on Waltham a weekly Market and a Faire (so called à feriando, from peoples playing there) to last seven dayes; which now is divided into two, but of shorter continuance, the one on the third day of May, the In∣vention, the other on the fourteenth of September, the Exaltation of the Cross. We now have a Market on Tuesday, but cannot boast of much trading Waltham Mar∣ket. therein. Indeed there is plenty of Flesh, but little Corn brought thither: and Bread is the staff, as of a man, so of a Market. Nor let us impute the thinness of Chapmen in Summer to Husbandmens having no leasure, as busied in tillage, Hay, or harvest: or in Winter to their having no pleasure to re∣pair thither in so deep and dirty wayes, seeing the plain truth is, no under∣wood can thrive neer the droppings of so great an Oke, the vicinity of London. The golden Market in Leaden-Hall, makes leaden Markets in all the Townes thereabouts. In the first year that Simon was made Abbot (which by exactest propor∣tion Broils be∣twixt the Ab∣bot and the Townsmen about Com∣mons. we collect to be about the thirtieth year of King Henry the third) the M. S. of Ed∣ward Stacy, written (as appears by character) 140 years since, fol. 42. men of Waltham came into the Marsh, which the Abbot and his Covent for∣merly enjoyed, as several to themselves, killed four Mares, worth fourty shillings sterling at least, and drove away all the rest. The Abbot was poli∣tickly pleased, for the present not to take notice thereof. The next year some men of Waltham went to the Abbot, the Thursday before Easter, in the name of the whole Village, and demanded of him to remove his Mares and Colts out of the Marsh. This the Abbot refused to do, adding withal, that if his Bailiffs had placed his Cattle otherwhere then they ought, they might do well to have it amended, yet so, as to defer the matter till Tuesday after Easter. On that Tuesday, Richard, Brother to the King, Duke of Cornwall, came The sturdi∣ness of the Townsmen. to Waltham, at what time both the men and women of the Town repaired to the gate of the Abbey, to receive the Abbots final answer. He told them that he could not speak with them for the present, as providing himself for a long journey into Lincoln-shire, there to visit the Justices itinerant; but by his Prior and other Canons, he desired them to be patient till his return, when he would mend what was to be mended. Not satisfied therewith, and neither respecting the spiritual holiness of the Abbot, nor Temporal greatness of the Duke, railed at and reviled him. Then into the pasture they go, and, in driving out the Abbots Mares and Colts, drowned three worth twenty shillings, spoil∣ed ten moe, to the value of ten marks, and beat their keepers who resisted them, even to the shedding of bloud. But, after the Abbot returned from Lincoln-shire, the Townsmen, fear∣ing The most guiltie first accuse. they should be trounced for their riot, desired a Love-day, submitted themselves unto him, and profered to pay him damage. But next day, when the performance of these promises were expected, away went the Wal∣tham-men, with their wives and children, to the King to London, inraging him as much as in them lay, against the Abbot, accusing him that he would
disinherit them of their right,   bring up new customes, take away their Pa∣stures, and (to use their own words) eat them up to the bones; and that he had wounded and abused some of them, who stood defending their own rights. Which false report was believed of many, to the great disgrace of the Covent of Waltham. The Abbot would not put up so great a wrong, but, having Episcopal The Abbot comes off conqueror. power in himself, proceeded to the Excommunication of the Rebellious Wal∣thamites. But the Townsmen went another way to work, namely, to defend their right by the Common Laws of the Realm. Whereupon Stephen Fitz-Bennet, Simon of the Wood, William Theyden, and Ralph of the Bridge, in the name of all the rest, implead the Abbot for appropriating their Commons to himself. But in fine (after many cross pleadings here too long to relate) the Abbot so acquitted himself, that he made both his own right and the Townsmens riot to appear: who at last at the Kings-Bench were glad to confess that they had done evil, and were amerced twenty Marks to the Abbot, which he not onely remitted unto them, but also on their submission assoiled them from the Excommunication. The brawls betwixt the Abbot and Townsmen of Waltham were no sooner The sute be∣twixt the Ab∣bot of Wal∣tham and the Lord of Chest∣hunt. ended, but far fiercer began betwixt the said Abbot and the Lord of Chesthunt, on the like occasion. This Chesthunt is a large Parish in Hertford-shire, con∣fining on the West of Waltham, so called saith In his short Survey of Hertford-shire. Norden, quasi Castanetum, of Chestnut-trees, though now, I believe, one hardly appears in the whole Lordship. In this sute, Plaintiff. Peter, Duke of Savoy, the Kings dear Uncle, (first founder, I take it, of the Savoy in Lon∣don) on whom the King conferred many Lord∣ships, and Chesthunt a∣mongst the rest. Judges. Ralph Fitz-Nicolas, John of Lexington, Pau∣lin Peyner Seneschal, Henry of Bath, Jeremy of Caxton, Henry de Bretton. Defendant. Simon, the Ab∣bot, and the Co∣vent of Wal∣tham. Solicitor. Adam de Alverton. The Case. The Plaintiff endeavoured to prove, that the stream of Ley, (called the Kings-Stream) dividing Hertford-shire from Essex, ran thorow the Town of Waltham, all the land West thereof belonging to the Manor of Chesthunt. This was denied by the Defendant, maintaining that Small-Ley-stream, running wel∣nigh half a mile West of Waltham, parted the Counties, all the interjacent meadows pertained to Waltham. Perusing the names of these the Kings Justices at Westminster, who would A like not the same. not suspect, but that this Henry of Bath was Bishop of that See? considering how many Clergy-men in that age, were imployed in places of Judicature. But the suspicion is causless, finding none of that name in the Episcopal Cata∣logue. Others in like manner may apprehend, that Bretton, here mentioned, was that Learned Lawyer (afterwards Bishop of Hereford) who wrote the See Godwin in his Bishops of Hereford. Book De Juribus Anglicanis, and who flourished in the latter end of the Reign of this King Henry the third. But his name being John, not Henry, dis∣covereth him a different person. Not long after, this sute was finally determined, and Peter Duke of Savoy remised and quit-claimed from him and his Heirs, to the said Abbot and
his Successors, the right and claim he had to ask in the same Meadows and Marshes of the said Abbot. This is called in the Instrument sinalis concordia, though it proved neither final, nor a concord. For, soon after this pallia∣cure broke out again, and the matter was in variance and undetermined be∣twixt Robert, the last Abbot, and the Lord of Chesthunt, when the Abby was dissolved. Many accessions (besides those common prolongers of all sutes, namely the heat of mens anger, and the bellows of instruments, gaining by Law) did concur to lengthen this cause. 1. The considerableness and concernment of the thing controverted, being a large and rich portion of ground. 2. The difficulty of the cause, about the chanels of that River, which, Proteus-like, in several Ages hath appeared in sundry formes, disguised by derivations on different occasions. 3. The greatness of the Clients; Chesthunt Lordship being alwayes in the hand of some potent person, and the Corporation of Waltham Covent able to wage Law with him. Hence hath this sute been as long-liv'd as any in England, (not excepting that in Cambden in Glocester-shire. Glocester-shire, betwixt the posterity of Vice-Count Lisle, and the Lord Barkley;) seeing very lately (if not at this day) there were some sutes about our bounds; Waltham Meadows being very rich in grass and hay, but too fruitful in contentions. For mine own part, that wound which I cannot heal, I will not widen: and, seeing I may say with the Poet, Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites. No power of mine so far extends, As for to make both parties friends. I will not turn, of an unpartial Historian, an engaged person, who as a neigh∣bour wish well to Chesthunt, as a Parishioner better to Waltham; as a Christian, best to both. And therefore so much for matter of fact, in our Records and Lei∣ger-books, leaving all matters of right for others to decide. Mean time, whilest the Abbot and Monks of Waltham, were vexed with the men of Chesthunt, they found more favour (if publick fame belies them not) from some loving women in that Parish, I mean the Holy Sisters in Chest∣hunt-Nunnery, whose House (when ever Founded) I finde some ten years since thus confirmed by Royal Authority. Henricus Rex Anglie, Dominus Hybernie, Dux Normanie, Aqui∣tanie, Chesthunt Nunnery Founded. & Comes Andegavie &c. Shestrehunt Moniales totam terram Dom. teneant cum pertinentiis suis{que} Canonicis de Cathele &c. quos amoveri fecimus. Datum apud West. xj. Aug. Anno Regni nostri xxiiij. But this subject begins to swell beyond the bounds intended unto it, lest therefore what we intended but a Tract should swell to a Tome, we will here descend to matters of later date. Onely be it premised, that some years before the Dissolution, Robert the Copt-Hall past to King Hen. 8. last Abbot of Waltham, passed over the fair seat of Copt-Hall, unto King Henry the eighth. Thus as the Castor, when pursued by the Hunter, to make his escape is reported to bite off his own stones, (as the main treasure sought af∣ter)
and so saves his life by losing a limb: So this Abbot politickly parted with that stately Mansion, in hope thereby to preserve the rest of his revenues. However all would not do, (so impossible it is to save, what is design'd to ruine) and few years after, the Abby, with the large Lands thereof, were seized on by the King, and for some Moneths, He alone stood possessed thereof. The Extraction, Charter, Death and Issue of Sir Anthony Dennie, on whom King Henry the Eighth bestowed WALTHAM-ABBY. AT the Dissolution, King Henry bestowed the Site of this Abby, with A Lease of Waltham-Ab∣by given to Sir Anthony Denny. many large and rich Lands belonging thereunto, on Sr Anthony Dennie, for the terme of Thirty one years. Let us a little enquire into his extraction and discent. I finde the name very Ancient at Speed, or ra∣ther Sr Rob. Cotton in Huntingdon-shire. Chesterton in Huntington-shire, where John Denny the great soulder in France. the Heir-general was long since married, to the worshipful and Ancient Fa∣mily of the Bevils. It seems, a branch of the Male-line afterwards fixed in Hertford-shire; Whereof John Denny, Esquire, valiantly served Henry the fifth in France, where he was slain, and buried with Thomas, his second Son, in St Dionys his Chappel; their interment in so noble a place speaking their worthy performances. In the Reign of Queen Mary, a Frier shewed their Tombes to Sr Matthew Carew, together with their Coates and differences. Henry, eldest son of this John Denny, begat William Denny of Chesthunt in Hertford-shire, which William was High Sheriff of the County in the year 1480. lea∣ving Edmond Denny to inherit his estate. Edmond Denny was one of the Barons of the Exchequer, in credit and favour Edm. Denny Baron of the Exchequer. with King Edward the Fourth, and Henry the Seventh. He Married Mary, the Daughter and Heir of Robert Troutbeck Esquire, on whom he begat Tho∣mas Denny, from whom the Dennies in Norfolk are descended. Anthony Denny, second Son to Baron Denny, was Knighted by King Henry Anthony Denny his high com∣mendations. the Eighth, made Gentleman of his Bed-chamber, Privy-Councellour, and one of his Executors. I cannot say he was bred any great Scholar, but finde him a Mecaenas, and grand favourer of Learned men. For, when the School of Ascham, Commend. Epist. fol. 210. Idem. fol. 208. Sedbury in the North, belonging to St Johns in Cambridg, was run to ruine, the Lands thereof being sold and embezeled, Sr Anthony procured the re∣paration of the Schoole, and restitution of their means, firmly setling them to prevent future alienation. Hear what character c Mr Ascham gives of him; Religio, Doctrina, Respublica, omnes curas tuas sic occupant, ut extra has tres res nullum tempus consumas; Religion, Learning, Common-wealth, so employ all thy cares, that besides these three things you spend no other time. Let then the enemies (if any) of his memory abate of this character to what proportion they please (pretending it but the Orators Rhetorical Hyperbole) the very re∣mainder thereof, which their malice must leave, will be sufficient to speak Sr Anthony a worthy and meriting Gentleman. I finde an excellent Epitaph made on him by one the Learned'st of Noble∣men, His Epitaph made by the Lord Howard. and Noblest of Learned men in his age, viz. Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, and eldest son to the Duke of Norfolk, worthy the Reader his pe∣rusal.
Ʋpon the Death of Sir Anthony Weavers Fu∣neral Monu∣ments, p. 852. Denny. Death, and the King, did, as it were, contend, Which of them two bare Denny greatest love: The King, to shew his love 'gan far extend, Did him advance his betters far above. Neer place, much wealth, great honour eke him gave, To make it known what power Princes have. But when Death came with his triumphant gift, From worldly cark he quit his wearied ghost Free from the corps, and straight to Heaven it lift. Now deem that can, who did for Denny most. The King gave wealth, but fading and unsure: Death brought him bliss that ever shall endure. Know Reader, that this Lord made this Epitaph by a Poetical Prolepsis; otherwise, at the reading thereof who would not conceive, that the Author surviv'd the subject of his Poem? Whereas indeed this Lord died (beheaded 1546.) in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, whom Sr Anthony out-lived, being one of the Executors of his Will. Nor was it the worst piece of ser∣vice he performed to his Master, when (all other Courtiers declining the employment) he truly acquainted him with his dying-condition, to dispose of his soul for another world. Sr Anthony died about the second of Edward the sixth, Dame Joan his His issue by Dame Joan his wife. Wife, surviving him. Daughter she was to Sr Philip Champernoon of Mod∣bury in Devon-shire: a Lady of great beauty and parts, a favourer of the Re∣formed Religion when the times were most dangerous. She sent eight shil∣lings by her man, in a Violet coat, to Anne Fox, Acts & Monuments, fol. 1239. Aschough when imprisoned in the Counter; a small sum, yet a great gift, so hazardous it was to help any in her condition. This Lady Joan bought the Reversion in Fee of Waltham, from King Edward the Sixth, paying three thousand and hundred pounds for the same, purchasing therewith large priviledges in Waltham-Forest, as by the Letters Patents doth appear. She bare two Sons to Sr Anthony, Henry Denny, Esquire, of whom hereafter: the second Sr Edward, who, by Gods blessing, Queen Elizabeths bounty, and his own valour, atchieved a fair estate in the County of Kerry in Ireland, which at this day is (if any thing in that woful war-wasted Countrey can be) enjoyed by his great Grand∣child, Arthur Denny Esq; of Tralleigh. The condition of Waltham Church from the Dissolution of the Abby, untill the Death of King HENRY the Eighth. HAving the perusal of the Church-Wardens accounts, wherein their An∣cient expences and receits are exactly taken, fairly written, and care∣fully kept, I shall select thence some memorable Items, to acquaint us with the general devotion of those dayes.
Know then, there were six Ordinary Obits which the Church-wardens did annually discharge, viz. For Thomas Smith, and Joan his wife, on the sixteenth of January. Thomas Friend, Joan and Joan his wives, on the sixteenth of Fe∣bruary. Robert Peest and Joan his wife, on the tenth of April. Thomas Towers and Katharine his wife, the six and twentieth of April. John Breges and Agnes his wife, the one and thirtieth of May. Thomas Turner and Christian his wife, the twentieth day of De∣cember. The charge of an Obit was two shillings and two pence; and, if any be curi∣ous to have the particulars thereof, it was thus expended. To the Parish-Priest four pence; to our Ladies-Priest three pence; to the Charnel-Priest three pence; to the two Clerks four pence; to the Children (these I conceive Chorisers) three pence; to the Sexton two pence; to the Bell-man two pence; for two Tapers two pence; for Oblation two pence. Oh the reasonable rates at Waltham! two shillings two pence for an Obit, the price whereof in Saint Pauls in London was fourty shillings. For (forsooth) the higher the Church, the holier the service, the dearer the price, though he had given too much that had given but thanks for such vanities. To defray the expences of these Obits, the parties prayed for, or their Executors, left Lands, Houses or Stock, to the Church-Wardens. Thomas Smith bequeathed a Tenement in the Corn-Market, and others gave Lands in Ʋpshire, called Pater-noster-Hills; others ground elswhere, besides a stock of eighteen Cows, which the Wardens let out yearly to farm for eighteen shil∣lings, making up their yearly accounts at the Feast of Michael the Arch-Angel, out of which we have excerpted the following remarkable parti∣culars. Anno 1542. the 34th of HENRY the 8th. Imprimjs. For watching the Sepulchre, a groat.] This constantly re∣turnes in every yearly account, though what meant thereby, I know not. I could suspect some Ceremony on Easter-eve, (in imitation of the Souldiers watching Christs grave) but am loath to charge that Age with more supersti∣tion then it was clearly guilty of. Item, Paid to the Ringers at the coming of the Kings Grace, six pence.] Yet Waltham Bells told no tales every time King Henry came hither, having a small house in Rome-land to which he is said oft privately to retire, for his pleasure. Item, Paid unto two men of Law for their counsel about the Church∣leases, six shillings eight pence. Item, Paid the Attorney for his Fee, twenty pence. Item, Paid for Ringing at the Prince his coming, a penny. Anno 1543. the 35th of HENRY the 8th. Imprimis, Received of the Executors of Sr Robert Fuller, given by the said Sr Robert to the Church, ten pounds. How is this man degraded from the Right Honourable the Lord Abbot of Waltham (the last in that place) to become a poor Sr Robert, the title of the meanest Priest in that age. Yet such his charity in his poverty, that, be∣sides
this legacy, he bequeathed to the Church a Chalice The Church-wardens ac∣count, Anno 1556. silver and gilt, which they afterwards sold for seven pounds. Anno 1544. the 36. of HENRY the 8th. Imprimis, Received of Adam Tanner the overplus of the money which was gathered for the purchase of the Bells, two pound four shillings and ele∣ven pence.] It seems the Kings Officers sold, and the Parish then purchased the five Bells being great and tunable (who, as they gave bountifully, so I presume they bought reasonably) and the surplusage of the money was de∣livered. Item, Received of Richard Tanner for eight Stoles, three shillings.] A Stole was a vestment which the Priest used. Surely these were much worn, and very rags of Popery, as sold for four pence half penny a piece. It seems the Church-wardens were not so charitable to give away, nor so superstiti∣ous to burn, but so thrifty as to make profit by sale of these decayed vest∣ments. Item, Paid for mending the hand-bell, two pence.] This was not fixed as the rest in any place of Church or Steeple, but (being a Diminutive of the Saints-bell) was carried in the Sextons hands at the circumgestation of the Sacrament, the visitation of the sick, and such like occasions. Item, Paid to Philip Wright, Carpenter, for making a frame in the Bell∣frey, eighteen shillings four pence.] The Bels being bought by the Parishioners, were taken down out of the decayed Steeple, and we shall afterwards see what became thereof. Mean time a timber-frame was made (which the aged of the last generation easily remembred) in the South-East end of the Church-yard, where now two Yew-trees stand, and a shift made for some years to hang the Bells thereon. Anno 1546. the 38. of HENRY the 8th. Item, For clasps to hold up the Banners in the body of the Church, eight pence.] By these, I understand, not Pennons with Arms hanging over the Graves of interred Gentlemen, but rather some superstitious Sireamers, usu∣ally carried about in Procession. Item, Paid to John Boston for mending the Organs, twentie pence. The state of Waltham Church during the Reign of King EDWARD the Sixth. OLd things are passed away, behold all things now are become new. Super∣stition by degrees being banished out of the Church, we hear no more of prayers and Masses for the dead. Every Obit now had its own Obit, and fully expired, the Lands formerly given thereunto being imployed to more charitable uses. But let us select some particulars of the Church-wardens accounts in this Kings dayes. Anno 1549. the 3d. of EDWARD the Sixth. Imprimis, Sold the Silver plate which was on the desk in the Charnel, weighing five ounces for twenty five shillings.] Guess the gallantry of our
Church by this (presuming all the rest in proportionable equipage) when the desk, whereon the Priest read, was inlaid with plate of silver. Item, Sold a rod of iron which the curtain run upon before the Rood, nine pence.] The Rood was an Image of Christ on the Cross, made generally of wood, and erected in a loft for that purpose, just over the passage out of the Church into the Chancel. And, wot you what spiritual mysterie was couched in this position thereof? The Church (forsooth) typified the Church Militant, the Chancel represents the Church Triumphant; and all, who will pass out of the former into the latter, must go under the Rood-loft; that is, carry the cross and be acquainted with affliction. I add this the rather, because Fox Acts & Mon, in the examination of Tho. Hawks, pag. 1590. Harpsfield, that great Scholar (who might be presumed knowing in his own art of Superstition) confesseth himself ignorant of the reason of the Rood-scituation. Item, Sold so much Wax as amounted to twenty six shillings.] So thrif∣ty the Wardens, that they bought not candles and tapers ready made, but bought the wax at the best hand, and payed poor people for the making of them. Now they sold their Magazine of wax as useless. Under the Reformation more light and fewer candles. Item, Paid for half of the Book called Paraphrase, five shillings.] By the seventh Injunction of King Edward, each Parish was to procure the Para∣phrase of Erasmus, namely, the first part thereof on the Gospels, and the same to be set up in some convenient place in the Church. Item, Spent in the Visitation at Chelmsford amongst the Wardens and other honest men, fourteen shillings four pence.] A round summe I assure you in those dayes. This was the first Visitation (kept by Nicholas Ridley newly Bishop of London) whereat Waltham-Wardens ever appeared out of their own Town, whose Abbot formerly had Episcopal Jurisdiction. Anno 1551 the 5th of EDWARD the 6th. Imprimis, Received for a Knell of a servant to the Lady Mary her Grace, ten pence.] Copt-Hall in this Parish being then in the Crown, the Lady (af∣terwards Queen) Mary, came thither sometimes to take the air probably, during whose residence there this her servant died. Item, Lost fourty six shillings by reason of the fall of money by Proclamati∣on.] King Henry much debased the English Coyn, to his own gain and the Lands loss (if Soveraigns may be said to get by the damage of their Subjects) yet all would not do to pay his debts. His Son Edward endeavoured to re∣duce the Coyn to its true standard, decrying bad money by his Proclamation, to the intrinsick value thereof. But, prevented by death, he effected not this difficult design (Adultery in Men, and Adulterateness in Money, both hard∣ly reclaimed) which was afterwards compleated by the care of Queen Eli∣zabeth. Item, Received for two hundred seventy one ounces of Plate, sold at se∣veral times for the best advantage, sixtie seven pound fourteen shillings and nine pence.] Now was the Brotherhood in the Church dissolved, consist∣ing as formerly of three Priests, three Choristers, and two Sextons; and the rich plate belonging to them was sold for the good of the Parish. It may seem strange the Kings Commissioners deputed for that purpose, seised not on it, from whose hands Waltham found some favour (befriended by the Lord Rich their Countrey-man) the rather because of their intentions to build their decaied Steeple.
Church-alterations in the Reign of Queen MARY. NEw Lady new Laws. Now strange the Metamorphosis in Waltham. Condemn not this our Como-graphie, or description of a Country-Town, as too low and narrow a subject, seeing in some sort the Hi∣storie of Waltham-Church is the Church-History of England, all Parishes in that age being infected alike with superstition. Nor intend I hereby to renew the memorie of Idolatrie, but to revive our gratitude to God for the abolishing thereof, whose numerous trinkets here ensue. Anno 1554. Mariae primo. Imprimis, For a Cross with a foot copper and gilt, twentie five shillings. Item, For a Cross-staff copper and gilt, nine shillings and four pence. Item, For a Pax copper and gilt, five shillings.] Greet one another, saith St 1 Cor 16. 20 Paul, with an holy kiss, on which words of the Apostle the Pax had its ori∣ginal. This Ceremony performed in the Primitive times, and Eastern Countries, was afterwards (to prevent wantonness, & to make the more expedition) com∣muted into a new custome, viz. A piece of wood, or metall (with Christ's picture thereon) was made, and solemnly tendred to all people to kiss. This was called the Pax, or Peace, to shew the unity and amity of all there assem∣bled, who (though not immediately) by the Proxie of the Pax kissed one another. Item, For a pair of Censers copper and gilt, nine shillings and eight pence.] These were pots in the which frankincense was burned, perfuming the Church during Divine Service. Item, For a Stock of brass for the Holy-water, seven shillings.] Which by the Canon must be of marble, or metall, and in no case of brick, Durantus de Ritibus Eccles. num. 6. pag. 173. lest the sacred liquor be suck'd up by the spunginess thereof. Item, For a Chrismatory of pewter, three shillings four pence.] This was a vessel in which the consecrated oyl, used in Baptisme, Confirmation, and Extreme Ʋnction, was deposited. Item, For a yard of silver Sarcenet for a cloth for the Sacrament, seven shil∣lings eight pence.] Here some Silkeman or Mercer must satisfie us what this was. The price seems too low for Sarcenet inwoven with silver, and too high for plain Sarcenet of a silver colour. Item, For a Pix of Pewter, two shillings.] This was a Box wherein the Host, or consecrated wafer, was put and preserved. Item, For Mary and John that stand in the Rood-loft, twenty six shillings eight pence.] Christ John 19. 26▪ &c. on the Cross saw his Mother, and the Disciple whom he loved standing by. In apish imitation whereof the Rood (when perfectly made with all the appurtenances thereof) was attended with these two images. Item, For washing eleven Aubes and as many Head-clothes, six pence.] An Aube, or Albe, was a Priests garment of white linen down to their feet, girded about his middle. The thin matter denoted simplicity; colour, purity; length, (deep Duranius de Ritibus Eccles num. 9. pag. 316. Divinitie) perseverance: and the cincture thereof signified the person wearing it prompt and prepared for Gods service. Their head-clothes were like our Sergeants Coifes, but close, and not turned up. Item, For watching the Sepulchre, eight pence.] Thus the price of that service (but a groat in King Henries dayes) was doubled. However, though Popery was restored to its kinde, yet was it not re-estated in its former degree,
in the short Reign of Queen Mary, for we finde no mention of the former six Obits anniversarily performed, the lands for whose maintenance were alienated in the Reign of King Edward, and the Vicar of the Parish not so charitable as to celebrate these Obits gratis without any reward for the same. Item, For a Processioner, and a Manual, twenty pence. Item, For a Corporas-cloth, twelve pence.] This was a linen cloth laid over or under the consecrated Host. Item, To the Apparitor for the Bishops Book of Articles at the Visition, six pence.] This Bishop was bloudy Bonner, that corpulent Tyrant, full (as one said) of guts and empty of bowels; who visited his Diccess before it was sick, and made it sick with his Visitation. His Articles were in number thirty seven, and John Fox Acts & Mon. pag. 1474. Bale wrote a book against them. The Bishops chief care herein was the setting up of compleat Roods, commonly called (but when without his ear-reach) Bonners Block-almightie. If any refused to provide such blocks for him, let them expect he would procure fagots for them. Anno 1556. Mariae tertio. Imprimis, For coles to undermine a piece of the Steeple which stood after the first fall, two shillings.] This Steeple formerly stood in the middle (now East end) of the Church; and, being ruined past possibilitie of repair, fell down of it self, onely a remaining part was blown up by underminers. How quickly can a few destroy what required the age and industry of many in long time to raise and advance? It soundeth not a little to the praise of this Parish, that neither burthen∣some nor beholding to the Vicinage for a collection, they re-built the Stee∣ple at the West end of the Church, on their own proper cost, enabled there∣unto, partly by their stock in the Church-box, arising from the sale (as is aforesaid) of the goods of the Brotherhood, and partly by the voluntary contribution of the Parishioners. This Tower-Steeple is eighty six foot high from the foundation to the battlements, each The thirty three foot on the top (diffi∣culty & dan∣ger of climb∣ing made it the dearer) cost fourty shillings a foot, as ap∣peareth by the Church∣wardens ac∣counts, Anno 1563. foot whereof (besides the mate∣rials preprovided) costing thirty three shillings four pence the building. Three years passed from the founding to the finishing thereof (every years work discernable by the discolouration of the stones) and the Parish was forced, for the perfecting of the building, to sell their Bells, hanging before in a wooden frame in the Church-yard; so that Waltham, which formerly had Steeple-less-Bells, now had for some years a Bell-less-Steeple. The condition of the Church from the beginning of Queen ELIZABETH, to this day. IN eleven full years, viz. from the last of King Henry the Eighth, Anno 1547. till the first of Queen Elizabeth, 1558. this Church found four changes in Religion; Papist, and Protestant; Papist, and Protestant again. The last turn will appear by the Wardens following accounts.
Anno 1558. Elizabethae's primo. Imprimis, For the taking down of the Rood-loft, three shillings two pence.] If then, there living and able, I hope I should have lent an helping hand to so good a work, as now I bestow my prayers, that the like may never in England be set up again. Item, Received for a suite of Vestments, being of blew velvet, and another suite of Damask, and an Altar-cloth, four pound. Item, For three Corporasses, whereof two white silk, and one blew velvet, two pound thirteen shillings four pence. Item, For two suits of Vestments, and an Altar-cloth, three pound.] Now was the superstitious Ward-robe dispersed, and that (no doubt) sold for shillings which cost pounds. They were beheld as the garments spotted with sin, and therefore the less pity to part with them. But see what followeth. Anno 1562. Elizabethae quinto. Item, For a cloth of Buckeram for the Communion-Table, and the making, four shillings.] Having sold so much could they not afford a better Carpet? Is there no mean betwixt painting a face, and not washing it? He must have a fixt aim and strong hand, who hits decency, and misseth gaudiness and sluttery, But there is a generation of people who over-do in the spirit of opposition: such conceive that a tressel is good enough for Gods Table, and such a Table, Covering enough for it self. Item, For Lattices for the Church-windows, fifteen shillings.] Fain would I for the credit of our Church by Lattices understand Casements, if the word would bear it. Yet surely it was not for covetousness wholly to spare gla∣zing, but thrift to preserve the glass, that these Lattices did fence them on the outside. Item, Paid for a Bay Nagge given to Mr Henry Denny for the Abby wall, three pound seventeen shillings.] This Nagge was rather a thankful acknow∣ledgment of Mr. Denny his propriety, then a just valuation of what the Pa∣rish received from him, for it followeth. Item, To Labourers which did undermine the said wall, fourty five shil∣lings nine pence.] What then may the materials of that wall be presumed worth in themselves? I conceive this was a building which ranged East be∣yond the old Steeple, the demolishing whereof brought much profit to the Parish, whose Wardens for some years drave a great trade in the sale of Lead, Stone, and Timber, all devoured in the roofing, flooring, and finishing of their Steeple. Anno 1563. Eliz. 6to. Imprimis, For an old house in the old Market-place, thirteen pound six shil∣lings eight pence.] This Tenement low-rented yielded annually nine shillings. Now the Parish sold it, (and another house in West-street) outright, letting Leases also of their other Church-lands for twenty one years, such bargains made a Feast for the present age, and a Famine for posterity. Item, For the old timber in the little Vestiary of St Georges Chappel, fifteen shillings.] In vain have I enquired for the scituation hereof, long since de∣molished, and no wonder if St George his Chappel cannot be found, when St George himself is affirmed by Phppus Melancthon in Apologia Ar∣ticulo 21. con∣fessionis Augu∣stana. some as one never existent, in rerum natura. Item, Received of Mr Denny for one Cope of Cloth of gold, three pound six shillings eight pence.
Item, For two Altar-Cloaths of Velvet and silk, two pound.] It seemeth the Parish did not part with all their gallantry at once, but made several stakes thereof, and parcelled them out as their necessities did require. Item, Received of Mr Tamworth twenty loads of timber ready hewed, which he gave to the Parish.] This Gentleman by his bounty to the Publick seems bet∣ter known to God then to me, having neither heard nor read of any of his name living in or near to Waltham. Item, For taking down the stairs in the Abby, seven shillings eight pence.] This was part of the Nag-purchase, whereby we collect that a large structure was by this bargain conveyed to the Parish. Item, For taking down the Lead from the Charnel-house, and covering the Steeple, eighteen shillings.] The Steeple was conceived above the Charnel-house as in height so in honour. Wherefore now the Lead taken from it b was a Which is now but tiled translated to the covering of the Steeple. Call this removing of this metal from one part of the Church to another, onely the borrowing of St Peter to lend to St Paul. Item, For the Arch-Deacons man coming for a Record of all the Inhabitants of the Parish, four pence.] I know not on what Canon this was founded. It may be her Majestie in those dangerous times desired (not out of Pride, but necessary Policy) to know the number of her Subjects, and might enjoyn the Arch-Deacons in their respective Visitations, to make this inquiry. But Day begins to dawn, and the light of our Age to appear, matters coming High time to knock off. within the memory of many alive. We will therefore break off, Waltham since affording no peculiar observables. Onely will add that Sr Edward (Grand-childe to Sr Anthony) Denny, was created by King James, Camdens Brit. in Essex. Baron of Waltham, and since made by King Charles, Earl of Norwich. A Noble person, who setled on the Curate of Waltham (to whom before a bare Stipend of Eight pound did belong) one hundrod pound per annum, with some other considerable ac∣commodations, tying good Land for the true performance thereof. The Abby is now the Inheritance of this Earls Grand-childe, by Honora his James Earle of Carlile pre∣sent owner of Waltham. Nicholas the most eminent Abbot of Waltham. daughter) James Hay Earl of Carlile, who Married Margaret, Daughter to Francis, Earl of Bedford, by whom as yet he hath no Issue, for the continu∣ance of whose happiness my prayers shall never be wanting. The Reader may justly expect from me a Catalogue of all the Abbots of this Monastery. But to do it falsly, I dare not; lamely, I would not; perfect∣ly, I cannot; and therefore must crave to be excused. Onely let me observe, that Nicholas, Abbot of Waltham was most triumphant in power, of any in his place; he flourished in the Reign of King Richard the second, and was Hen de Knighton de eventibus Angl. lib. v. pag 2687. one of the fourteen Commissioners, chosen by Parliament, to examine the miscari∣ages in that Kings Reign since the death of his Grand-father. Amongst the Natives of Waltham for States-men, John de Waltham bears John de Wal∣tham. away the bell. He was keeper of the Privy Seal in the Reign of King Richard c Hen. Knigh∣ton ut prius. pag. 2685. Roger Wal∣tham a lear∣ned writer. the second, being the third in number, chosen amongst the fourteen Commis∣sioners aforesaid, impowred to examine all misdemeanours of State. And now was not Waltham highly honoured with more then a single share, when amongst those fourteen, two were her Gremials, the forenamed Nicholas living in Waltham, and this John, having his name thence, because birth therein. But amongst Scholars in our Town, Roger Waltham must not be forgotten, Canon of St Pauls in London, and a great favourite to Fulk Basset, Bishop there∣of. He wrote many learned books, whereof two especially (one called Bale de script. Brit. cent. 4 pag. 302. Hugh Nevil buried in Waltham. Compendium Morale, the other Imagines Oratorum) commend his parts and pains to posterity. Pass we from those who were Born, to eminent persons Buried therein. Here we first meet with Hugh Nevile, a Minion of King Richard the first, he was Interred in Waltham Church, saith my Mat. Paris in Anno 122. page 315. and also Ro∣bert Passe lew. Author, in Nobili Sarcophago Mar∣moreo & insculpto, in a Noble Coffin of Marble engrav'd. If a Coffin be call'd Sarcophagus (from consuming the Corps) surely Sacriledg may be named Sar∣cophago-phagus,
which at this day hath devoured that Coffin, and all belong∣ing thereunto. We spoil all, if we forget, Robert Passellew, who was Dominus fac totum, in the midle, and fac nihil, towards the end of the Reign of Henry the third. Some Parasites extolled him by allusion to his name; Pssle-eau, (that is, passing the pure water) the Wits of those dayes thus descanting upon him; Collect. of Mr. Camb. M: S. in Sr. Tho. Cottons Libra∣ry. Est aqud lenis, & est aqud dulcis, & est aqua clara, Tu praecellis aquam, nam leni lenior es tu, Dulci dulcior es tu, clara clarior es tu, Mente quidem lenis, re dulcis, sanguine clarus. But such who flattered him the fastest, whilest in favour, mocked him the most in misery, and at last he died in his own House in Waltham, and was Matt. Paris Anno. 1252. A heap of difficulties cast together. bu∣ried in the Abby-Church therein. And now because we have so often cited Matthew Paris, I never met with more difficulties in six lines, then what I finde in him; which because nearly relating to this present subject, I thought fit to exemplifie. MATTHEW PARIS in Anno 1242. p. 595. Eodem{que} Anno, videlicet in crastino Sti Michaelis dedicata est Ecclesia con∣ventualis Canonicorum de Waltham, ab Episcopo Norwicensi Willielmo, solem∣niter valde, asistentibus aliis plurimis Episcopis, Praelatis, & Magnatibus ve∣nerabilibus, statim post dedicationem Ecclesiae sancti Pauli Londinensis, ut peregrinantes hinc inde, indistanter re∣mearent. And in the same year, namely the morrow after St Michaels day, the conventual Church of the Canons at Waltham, was dedicated by Wil∣liam, Bishop of Norwich very so∣lemnly, many other Bishops, Pre∣lates, and venerable Peers assisting him: presently after the dedication of St Pauls in London, that Pilgrims and Travellers up and down might indistantly return. It is clear our Church of Waltham Abby is intended herein, See Speed his Catalogue of religious houses. Queries on queries. England affording no other Conventual Church. This being granted, how comes Waltham Church (built by Harold two hundred years before) now to be first Dedicated, that Age accounting it as faulty and fatal, to defer the Consecration of Churches, as the Christning of Chil∣dren? 2. What made the Bishop of Norwich to meddle therewith? an Office more proper for the Bishop of London to perform, Waltham being (though not under) in his jurisdiction. 3. What is meant by the Barbarous word indi∣stanter? and what benefit accrewed to Travellers thereby? I will not so much as conjecture, as unwilling to draw my bow, where I despair to hit the mark, but leave all to the judgment of others. But I grow tedious, and will therefore conclude. Anno 1641. King CHARLES came the last time to Waltham, and went R. Charls his last coming to Waltham. (as he was wont, where any thing remarkable) to see the Church, the Earl of Carlile attending him; His Majestie told him, that he divided his Cathe∣dral Churches, as he did his Royal Ships, into three ranks, accounting St Pauls in London, York, Lincoln, Winchester, &c. of the first form; Chichester Lichfield, &c. of the second; the Welch Cathedrals of the third, with which Waltham Church may be well compared, especially if the Roof thereof, was taken lower and Leaded. The Earl moved His Majestie, that seeing this Ancient Church, (Founded Conditionally granteth the repairing of the Church. by King Harold his Predecessor) was fallen into such decay, that the repair
was too heavy for the Parish, he would be pleased to grant a moderate Tole of Cattle coming over the Bridg, (with their great Driftss, doing much da∣mage to the High-wayes) and therewith both the Town might be Paved, and the Church repaired. The King graciously granted it, provided, it were done with the privity and consent of a great Prelate, (not so safe to be named as ea∣sie to be guessed) with whom he consulted in all Church-matters. But when the foresaid Prelate was informed, that the Earl had applied to But it miscar∣rieth. His Majestie before addresses to himself, he dashed the design, so that poor Waltham Church, must still be contented, with their weak walls, and worse Roof, till Providence, procure her some better Benefactors. As for the Armes of Wal∣tham Abby, being loath to set them alone, I have joyned them in the follow∣ing draught, with the Armes of the other Mitred Abbies, as far as my indu∣stry could recover them. SOLI DEO GLORIA. FINIS.
THE SEALES OF ARMES OF ALL THE MITRED ABBEYS IN ENGLAND Edwino Rich Armigèro uni è Magistres Curiae Cancellariae, Benefactori meo munifico, in gratitu∣dinis tesseram. J. F. seal Tavestock. seal Glastenbury seal Midleton. seal Abington. seal St.ames Reading seal Battaile. seal St.Augustin Cant: seal Glocester. seal Colchester. seal Winch-combe. seal St.Albans. seal St.Iohns of Ierusalem. seal Westminster. seal Waltham. seal Waltham seal St.Edmondebury seal Thorney seal Ben̄etts in ye Holme. seal Ramley seal Peterborrough. seal Crowland. seal Tewkes;bury. seal Shroesbury seal Selby. seal St. Maryes yorke. seal Malmsbury seal Cirencester seal Bardney seal Booke 2. page. 123. Iames Langham Bjq: seal Booke 2 p.138 Baldwine Hamey Dr. of Phisick. blank seal B:4.pa:177 Thomas Rich Esqr. blank seal B:11. pa:197. Giles Vandeput Nerehadt. seal Ibidem. Edward Clegar Merchant. seal Hist:of Cam: pa: 117. Edward Palmer Esqr. seal Hist: of Camb: pa: 137 Fra: Ask Esqr. blank seal Know reader the Cutter in wood being sick, and the Press not sta∣ing his recovery; the armes of my Patrons omitted in ye body of ye booke are supplied in these quarters.
