12587 99855789 21291
THE QUEENE OF ARRAGON. A Tragi-Comedie. LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes, for William Cooke, and are to be sold at his shop at Furnivals Inne gate in Holburne. 1640.
The Actors Names. THe Queene of Arragon. Decastro Generall of the Forces of Arragon in love with the Queene. Ossuna Friend to Decastro. Florentio Generall of the Forces of Castile enamor'd on the Queene. Velasco a great Commander under Florentio. Ascanio, the King of Castile disguisd. Lerma a Noble man Privie to his disguise. Oniate a sober Courtier. Sanmartino, a halfe witted Lord. Browfilldora, Dwarfe to Sanmartino. Floriana, wife to Sanmartino. Cleantha, a wittie Court Lady. Captaine. Servants. Severall Souldiers.
The Prologue at Court. HAd not obedience ov'r rul'd the Authors feare And Iudgement too, this humble peece had nere Approacht so high a Majestie, not writ By the exact and subtile rules of wit; Ambitious for the splendor of this night But fashion'd up in hast for his owne delight. This, by my Lord, with as much zeale as ere Warm'd the most loyall heart, is offered here To make this night your pleasure, although we Who are the Actors, feare twill rather be Your patience: and if any mirth; we may sadly suspect, twill rise quite the wrong way. But you have mercy sir, and from your eye Bright Madam, never yet did lightning flye, But vitall beames of favour such as give A growth to all, who can deserve to live. Why should the Authour tremble then, or we Distresse our hopes, and such tormentors be, Of our owne thoughts, since in those happie times We live, when mercie's greater than the crimes
The Prologue at the Fryers. ERe we begin▪ that no man may repent Two shillings and his time; the Author sent The Prologue, with the errors of his Play, That who will, may take his money and away. First for the Plot, it's no way intricate By crosse deceits in love, nor so high in state, That we might have given out in our Play-bill, This day's the Prince writ by Nick Machivill. The Language too is easie, such as fell Unstudyed from his pen, not like a spell Bigge with misterious words, such as inchant The halfe witted, and confound the ignorant. Then what must needes afflict the Amorist, No Virgin here in breeches, casts a mist Before her Lovers eyes; No Ladies tell How their blood boyles▪ how high their veines doe swell. But what is worse, no bawdy mirth is here; (The wit of bottle Ale, and double Beere) To make the wife of Citizen protest, And Country Iustice sweare, twas a good Iest. Now sirs you have the errors of his wit: Like or dislike, at your owne perills be't.
THE QVEENE OF ARRAGON. Actus Primus. Scena Prima. Enter Sanmartino and Cleantha. Clean. MY Lord, lets change the subject: Love is worne So thred-bare out of fashion, and my faith So little leanes to vowes. San. The rage of time, Or sicknesse, first must ruine that bright Fabrique, Nature tooke pride to build. Clean. I thanke my youth then For th' tender of your service: Tis the last Good turne it did me, But by this my feares Instruct me, when the old bald man cal'd Time Comes stealing on me, and shall steale away What you call beauty: my neglected face Must be inforc't to goe in quest for a new Knight Errant. San. Slander not my constant faith, Nor doubt the care fate hath to stoppe the Motion Of envious Time, might it indanger so Supreame a beautie. Clean. Sure my Lord fate hath More serious businesse, or Divines make bold T' instruct us in a scisme. But grant I could Induce my selfe, (which I despaire I shall) To heare and talke that emptie nothing Love Ist now in season, when an Armie lyes Before our Citie gates, and every houre A battery expected? Deere my Lord
Let's seale our testament, and prepare for heaven: And as I am inform'd by them, who seeme To know some part oth' way, Loves not the neerest Path that leades thither. San. Madam! he is but A Coward Lover, whom or death or hell Can fright from's Mistris. And for danger now Threatning the Citie; How can I so arme My selfe, as by your favour, proofe against All stratagems of warre. Cleant. Your Lordship then Shall walke as safe, as if a Lapland witch (You will not envie me the honour of The metaphor) preserv'd you shot-free. But Who is your Confessor? Yet spare his name His function will forgive the glory of it. Sure he's ill read in Cases to allow A married Lord the freedome of this Courtship. San. Can you thinke Madam that I trust my sinnes (But vertues are those loves I pay your beauty) Toth' councell of a Cassock? Who hath art To judge of my confession; must have had At least a Privie Chamberer to his Father. We of the Court commit not as the vulgar, Dull ignorant sinnes. Then that I'm married Madam Is rather safety to our Love. Clean. My heart! How sicke am I oth' sudden? Good my Lord Call your dwarfe hither. San. Garaganta! Boy. Enter Browfilldora. Clean. Preethee, thy pedegree. San. Madam! What meane you? Clean. O any thing, but to divert from Love. Another word of Courtship, and I swound. Garag. My Ancestors were Giants Madam. Giants Pure Spanish, who disdain'd to mingle with The blood of Goth or Moore. Their mighty actions In a small letter Nature Printed on Your little Servant. Clean. How so very little? Gar. By the decay of Time, and being forc't From fertile pastures to the barren hills Of Biskay. Even in trees you may observe
The wonder, which transplanted to a soile Lesse happie, lose in groath. Is not the once Huge body of the Roman Empire, now A very Pigmie? Cleant. But why change you not That so Gigantick name of Brumfilldora. Gar. Spight of malignant Nature, Ile preserve The memory of my forefathers: They shall live In me contracted. San. Madam! lets returne To th' love we last discourst on. Clean. This my Lord Is much more serious. What course thing is that? Enter Oniate and Floriana. Flor. I owe you sir, for th' pleasure of this walke. Oniate. Madam it was to me the highest honour. Exit. Oniate. Clean. Welcome ó welcome to redeeme me. What Can the best wit of woman fancie, we Have beene discoursing of? Floria. Sure not of love? Clean. Of that most ridiculous hobby horse Love; That foole that fooles the world. That Spaniell Love That fawnes the more tis kickt. San. Will you betray me? Clean. Thy Lord hath so protested Floriana; Vowed such an Altar to my beutie, swoare So many oathes, and such prophane oathes too; To be religious in performing all That's impious toward heaven, and to a Ladie Most ruinous. Floria. Good Cleantha: all your detraction Winnes no beleefe on my suspition. Cleant. Be credulous and be abused. Floriana! There's no vice so great as to thinke him vertuous: Goe mount your milke-white steede fit Lanceloi Your little squire attends you there. In suburbs Inchanted Castles are where Ladies waite To be deliver'd by your mighty hand, Goe and protest there. San. I thanke your favour Madam. Exit. Sanmar. Clea. It is not so much worth sir, come weele follow. Flor. But stay Cleantha. Prethee what begot That squeamish looke, that scornefull wry oth' mouth When Oniate parted?
Clean. Why? Thou hadst So strange a fellow in thy Companie His Garbe was so uncourtly, I grew sicke. Flor. He is a Gentleman: and adde to that Makes good the Title. Clean. Haply he may so And haply he's enamor'd on thy beautie. Flo. On mine Cleantha? Clean. Yes deere Floriana. Yet neither danger to thy chastitie, Nor blemish to thy fame. Custome approves it. But I owe little to my memory, If ere I saw him 'mong the greater Ladies: Sure he's some suburbe Courtier. Flori. He's Noble: And hath a soule. A thing is questiond much In most of the gay youths, whom you converse with. Clean. But how disorderly his haire did hang? Flor. Yet 'twas his owne. Clean▪ How ill turn'd up his beard? And for his cloathes. Florian. Though not fresh every morning, Yet in the fashion. Clean. Yes ith' soberfashion: Which Courtiers weare who hope to be imploy'd And aime at businesse. But he's not gentile: Not discomposed enough to Courta Ladie. Flor. His thoughts are much more serious. Clean. Guard me Fortune▪ I would not have the Court take notice that I walked one houre with that state Aphorisme, Each Autumne to renew my youth. Let us Discourse with Lords whose heads and legges move more Than doe their tongues, and to as good a sense. Who snatching from my hand a Glove, can sigh And print a kisse, and then returne it backe. Who on my buske, even with a pin can write The Anagrame of my Name: Present it humbly Fall backe and smile. Flor. Cleantha! I perceive There is small hope of thy conversion; Thou art resolv'd to live in this heresie. Clean. Yes: since tis the Religion of our Sex. Sweete Floriana, I will not yet suffer
For unregarded truth Court persecution. Enter Ossuna and Oniate with divers Souldiers. But what are they appeare there? Flor. Wee'le away. Exeunt Floria. and Cleantha. Ossuna. This is the place for enterview. You who'ar Deputed for this service from the Lord Florentio, use such caution as befits Your charge. How ere your Generalls persons safe: The Lord Decastro having past his word. Oniate. Yet tis my wonder, that Florentio A Souldier so exact, practis'd in all The mysteries of warre and peace, should trust Himself where th' enemies faith must best secure him Ossun. The great Decastro sir, whom our late King Deputed regent at his death, and whom The Kingdome judgeth fit to marry with His onely heire the present Queene (though she Disdaine his love and our desires) hath proved To time and fortune, that he feares no danger But what may wound his honour. How can then Florentio (though he now set downe before Our Citie with so vast an Army) choose A place for enterview, by Art and Nature So fortified; as where Decastro's faith Makes it impregnable? Oniate. Distrust my Lord, Is the best Counceler to great designes: Our confidence betrayes us. But betweene These two are other seeds of Jealousie: Such as would almost force Religion breake Her tying vowes, authorize perjurie, And make the scrupulous Casuist say, that faith Is the fooles vertue. They both love the Queene, Decastro building on his high deserts, And vote of Arragon: Florentio on The favour he gain'd from her Majestie When here he lived imploy'd by his great Master King of Castile. Ossuna. Such politicke respects May warrant the bad statesman to darke actions. But both these Generalls by a Noble warre, Resolve to try their fate. Oniate. But here my Lord
Enter Sanmartino. Is a full period to all serious thought. This Lord is so impertinent, yet still Vpon the whisper. Ossuna. He's a mischiefe Sir, No Court is safe from. Oniate. What fine trickes he showes Each morning on his gennet, but to gaine A female Vision from some halfe-open'd window, And if a Lady smile by accident Or but in scorne of him; yet he kinde soule Interprets it as Prophesie to some Neere favour to ensue at night. Ossuna. I wonder What makes him thought a Wit. Oniate. A copper wit, Which fooles let passe for currant. So false coine Such very Alchimie, that who vents him For ought but parcell asse, may be in danger: Looke on him, and in little there see drawne The picture of the youth is so admired, Of the spruce Sirs: whom Ladies and their women Call the fine Gentlemen. Ossuna. What are those papers, With such a sober brow, he lookes upon? Oniate. Nor platforme, nor intelligence, but a Prologue; He comes to whisper to one of the Maids Ith' Privie chamber after supper. Ossuna. I praise the courage of his folly yet, Whom feare cannot make wiser. San, My good Lord! Brave Oniate! Saw you not the Generall? Onia. He's upon entrance here. And how my Lord? I saw your Lordship turning over papers, Whats the discovery? San. It may import Decastro's knowledge. Never better language Or neater wit. A paper of such verses Writ by th' exactest hand. Ossuna. In time of businesse As serious as our safety, to intrude The dreames of madmen? San. My Judicious Lord!
It with the favour of your Lordship may Concerne the Generall. Such high rapture, In admiration of the Queene, whom he Pretends to Love. How will her Majestie Smile on his sute, when in the heate of businesse He not neglects this amorous way to woe her? Enter Decastro. Decast. No man presume t'advance a foot. My Lord Ossuna I desire your eare. San. My Lord I have a peece here of such elegant wit. Decast. Your pardon good my Lord; we le finde an houre Lesse serious to advise upon your papers, And then at large we'le whisper. San. As you please My Lord youle pardon the errour of my dutie. Exit Sanmar. Ossun. The Queene my Lord gave free accesse to what I spoke oth' publicke, but when I began To mention love. Decast. How did she frowne? Or with What murdering seorne, heard she Decastro named? Love! of thy laberinth of Art, what path Left I untroden? Humbly I have labor'd To win her favour: and when that prevail'd not; The Kingdome, in my quarrell, vowed to emptie The veines of their great body. Ossuna. Sir her heart Is mightier than misfortune. Though her youth Soft as some consecrated virgin waxe, Seeme easie for impression: Yet her vertue Hard as a rocke of Diamond, breakes all The battery of the waves. Decastro. Unkind and cruell! Ossu. She charg'd me tell you that a faith lesse Moore Who had gain'd honour onely by the ruine Of what we hold religious, sooner she Would welcome to her bed; than who t' his Queene And Love had beene a Rebell. Decast. How? A rebell? The peoples suffrage, which inaugurats Princes, Hath warranted my actions. Ossun. But she answeres The suttle Arts of faction, not free vote Commanded her restraint.
Decast. May even those starres Whose influence made me great, turne their aspects To blood and ruine; if ambition rais'd The appetite of Love. Her beauty hath A power more Soveraigne, than th' Easterne slave Acknowledg'd ever in his Idoll King. To that I bowed a subject. But when I Discover'd that her fancie fixt upon Florentio (Generall now of th' enemies Armie) I let the people use their severe way: And they restrain'd her. Ossuna. But my Lord their guilt Is made your crime. Yet all this new affliction Disturbs her not to anger, but disdaine. Decast. She hath a glorious spirit. Yet the world The envious world it selfe must justifie; That howsoever Fortune yeelded up The Scepter to my power; I did but kisse it And offer'd it againe into her hand. Enter Florentio, Velasco, and others. Oniate. My Lord, the Generall of Castile, Florentio. Decast. He's safely welcome. Now let each man keepe At a due distance. I have here attended Your Lordships presence. Floren. O my Lord! ar' we Whom Love obleigeth to the same alleigance, Brought hither on these termes? Decast. Th' are termes of honour. And I yet never knew to frame excuse, Where that begot the quarrell. Floren. Yet me thinkes We might have found another way to it. We might have sought out danger, where the proud Insulting Moore, profaines our holy places. The noise of Warre had beene no trouble then, But now too much 'twill fright the gentle eare Of her we both are vowed to serve. Decastro. That Love Which armes us both, beares witnesse, that I had Much rather have encounterd lightning; than Create the least distraction to her peace. But since the vote of Arragon decrees That my long Service hath the justest claime To challenge her regard; Thus I must stand
Arm'd to make good the title. This vaine language Scarce moves my pitty. What desert can rise So high to merit her? Were each short moment Oth' longest lived Commander lengthen'd to An age, and that exposed to dangers mighty As Cowards framethem; can you thinke his service Might challenge her regard? Like th' heavenly bounty She may distribute favour: But 'tis sinne To say our merits may pretend a title. Decastro. You talke Sir like a Courtier. Floren. But my Lord You'le find a souldier in this Arme: which strengthen'd By such a cause, may levell mountaines high As those the Giants (emblems of your thoughts) Piled up to have scaled heaven. Decasto. That must be Decided by the sword. And if my Lord Our enterview hath no more sober end, Than a dispute so froward; Let us make The trumpet drowne the noise. Floren. You shall not want That Musique. But before we yeelded up Our reason unto fury; I desired We might expostulate the ground of this So fatall warre: and bring you to that low Obedience Nature placed you in. Decast. My eare Attends you. Floren. Where is then that humble zeale You owe a Mistresse; if you can throw off That duty which you owe her as your Queene? What justice (that faire rule of humane actions) Can you pretend for taking Armes? Decastro. Pray forward. Floren. Ile not denie (for from an enemie Ile not detract) during her nonage, when The publicke choyce, and her great fathers will, Enthron'd you in the government; you manag'd Affaires with prudence equall to the fame You gain'd▪ And when your sword did fight her quarrell, Twas crownd with victory. Decast. I thanke your memory. Floren. But hence ambition and ingratitude
Drew onely venome. For by these great Actions▪ You labor'd not t' advance her state or honour; But subtly wrought upon the peoples love: A love begot by errour, following still Apparencie not truth. Decast. You conster fairely. Floren. The sunne is not more visible, when not One cloud wrinckles the brow of heaven. For On that false strength you had ith' multitude, You swel'd to insolence: dared court your Queene: Boasting your merit; like some wanton Tyrant Ith' vanitie of a new conquest. And When you perceiv'd her judgement did instruct her To frowne on the attempt; profainely 'gainst All Lawes of Love and Majestie, you made The people in your quarrell seize upon The Sacred person of the fairest Queene, Story ere boasted. Decast. Have you done my Lord? Floren. Not yet. This injurie provok'd my master To raise these mighty Forces for her rescue: And named me Generall, whose ayme is not A vaine ambition, but t' advance her service Ere we begin to punish, take this Offer: Restore the Queene to liberty, with each Due circumstance that such a Majestie May challenge, freely to make choyce of whom She shall advance to th' honour of her bed. If your deserts beare that high rate you mention; Why should you doubt your fortune? On these termes The King, King of Castile may be induced To pardon th' errour of your ruine. Decast. Thus In short my answere. How unlimited So ere my power hath beene, my reason and My love hath circumscrib'd it. True, the Queene Stands now restrain'd: But tis by the decree Of the whole Kingdome, least her errour should Perswade her to some man lesse worthy. Floren. How? Decast. Lesse worthy than my selfe. For so they judge The proudest subject to a Forraigne Prince. But when you mention love, where are your blushes? What can you answere for the practising
The Queenes affection, when Embassador You lay here from Castile; pretending onely Affaires importing both the Kingdomes? Nor Can you my Lord be taxt by your discretion, That by the humblest Arts of Love, you labour To win so bright a beauty, and a Queene So potent. Your affection lookes not here, Without an eye upon your profit. Floren. Witnesse Love. Decast. No protestation. If you will withdraw Your Forces from our Kingdome, and permit Us to our Lawes and Government; That peace Which hath continued many ages Sacred, Stands firme betweene us. But if not. Floren. To Arme. Decast. Pray stay my Lord. Doth not your Lordship see Th' advantage I have in the place: with how Much ease I may secure my fortune from The greatest danger of your Forces? Flo. Ha! Twas inconsiderate in me. But I trusted To th' honour of your word, which youle not violate. Decast. Goe safely off my Lord. And now be dumbe; All talke of peace: Wee'l parley in the drumme. Exeunt severall wayes, the Drumme beating. Actus Secundi. Scena Prima. Enter Sanmartino, Captaine, Souldier, and Garaganta. Captain. COme on you Atlasses of Arragon: You by whose powers the Castilian cloud Was forc't to vanish. We have ferk'd Florentio, In the right Arme: made the enamor'd Donn Retire to dolefull Tent. Sanmar. We sallyed bravely. Cap. Thou didst ith' sally fight like lightning Conde, Let th' ayre play with thy plume, most puisant Peere. No Conde Sanmartino now; but Conde S. George, that Cappadocian man at Armes, Thou hast done wonders, wonders big with story,
Fit to be sung in loftie Epick straine: For writing which the Poet shall behold, That which creates a Conde, gold. Gold which Shall make him wanton with some suburbe Muse, And Hypocrene flow with Canary billow. Th'art high in feate of Arme. San. Captaine I thinke I did my part. Captain. Base is the wight that thinkes, Let Condes small in spirit drinke harsh sherry, Then quarrel with promooting knights, and fine for't Thou art in mettall mighty, tough as steele As Bilboe or Toledo steele. Fight on. Let Acres sincke, and bancke of money melt, Forsake thy Ladies lappe, and sleepe with us Upon the bed of honour, the chill earth. Tis that will make thee held a potent Peere, Mong men oth' Pike, of buffe, and bandeliere. San. Thou speakest brave language Captaine, Captain. Ile maintaine Tis Arragonian, Conde. Garagan. Captaine Cedar, Though in thy language lofty, give a shrub Leave to salute thee. Sure we two are neere In blood and great attempt. Don Hercules VVas as I read in Chaldeon Chronicle, Our common Ancestor. Don Hercules Who rifled Nimph on top of Apennine. Captain. Small Imp avant. Garagan. Stout sturdie Oke, that growes So high in field of Mars, ô let no tempest Shake thee from hence. And now I have with labour Attain'd thy language, Ile thy truchman be, Interpret for thee to those smaller soules, Who wonder when they understand not. Soules! Whom Courtiers gaudie outside captives, And plume of Coronell. Captain. I must expire. Not talke to fish. Seest thou that man of match Though small in stature, mighty he's in soule, And rich in gifts of mind, though poore in robes: Reward like Phillips heire his daring arme, Which fetcht thee off from danger. Once againe Most doughty Don adieu.
Garagan. Great Don Saltpeeter, I am the servant of thy famed caliver. San. These are strong lines. Now friend! Art thou oth' garison? Soul. If't please your Lordship. San. It doth not please me, It is indifferent. I care not what thou art. Art thou extreamely poore? Soul. Ift please your Lordship. San. No not that neither. Why should I maligne So far thy fortune, as to wish thee poore? Twere safer for my purse, if thou wert rich: Then all reward were base. Soul. Ift please your Lordship. San. O no more Prologue. Prethee the first Scene, To th' businesse man. Soul. Then I must tell your Lordship. I scorne that wealth makes you thus wanton, and That wit which fooles you. Did the royall favour Shine but on you, without enlarging warmth To any other, I in this torne outside Should laugh at you, if insolent. San. This is saucie. Soul. I tell thee petulant Lord, Ile cut thy throate Unlesse thou learne more honour. San. What shall I doe? Enter Floriana, and Cleantha. But see Cleantha. Not to be made Grande, VVould I she should discover me in parley VVith such course cloathes. There fellow take that gold, And let me see thy face no more. Away. Throwes backe the money. Soul. There tis agen. I will not owe one houre Of mirth to such a bounty. I can starve At easier rate, than live beholding to The boast of any giver. Lord! I scorne Thee and that gold which first created thee. Exit. Sould. Flor. That Souldier seem'd to carry anger in His looke my Lord. San. What should his anger move me? Clean. O no my Lord: The world speaks wonders of Your mighty puissance. Flor. Tis my joy y'are safe. But why adventured you into this quarrell? Cleant. The Queene will hardly thanke your valour: since
They of Castile profest themselves her Souldiers. San. The Queene must pardon courage: Men who are Of daring Spirit, so they may but fight Examine not the cause. Flori. She doth expect us. Clean. I will attend her here. For here she gives Decastro audience. I must not loose This Lord yet, it so neere concernes my mirth. San. Madam! I wonder with what confidence You after such an injury, dare indanger Discourse with me. Cleant. I injure you my Lord? Whose favour I have courted with more Zeale Than well my Sexe can warrant? Triumph not Too much upon my weakenesse; cause you have Got victory ore my heart, take not delight To make my griefe your sport. San. Be witty still, And keepe me for a Trophie of your pride, I hope to see that beauty at an ebbe; Where will be then your over-flow of servants? You'le then repent your pride. Clean. O never, never. If you'le particularize your vowes to me; You who toth'title of the Courtly Lord, Have added that of valiant. And beshrew me, She's no good huswife of her fame, that wants A daring servant. Sanmar. This perhaps may worke. Cleant. If she live single; he preserves her name And scarce admits a whisper, that the Jealous May conster points at her. And if she marry; He awes the husband, if by chance or weaknesse, She have offended. San. This cannot be fiction. Clean. Then if she use but civill complement To a Courtier Batchelor; He streight be speakes The Licence, and the Favours, and calls in Some wit into his Councell for the Posie, While I feele no tentation to such folly But with a married Lord. San. How gentle Madam? Clea. Our walkes are priviledg'd, our whispers safe, No feare of laying contracts to my charge,
Nor much of scandall. And if there be cause, Who is so fond a Ghamster of his life, As meerely out of spleene to stake it? But My Lord I now suspect you conster'd ill That language I used to your Lady, when I told her of your love. But I presume You were not so dull sighted as in that Not to discerne the best disguise for love. San. What a suspicious asse was I? How captious? I nere mistrusted my owne wit before. Mischiefe how dull was I? Clean. Pray turne your face Away. Now know when worth and valour are Led on by love to win my favour. But The Queene. Enter Queene Decastro, Ossuna, Floriana, &c. San. Divine Cleantha! Noblest Lady! Decast. Ossuna let me begge thy care. Though we Bravely repulst the enemie: They seeme To threaten a new assault. Ossuna. Command your servant. Decast. Beare then a vigilant eye, and by your scouts Learne if they any new attempt prepare. Exit. Ossuna. May't please your Majestie, command these many Eares from your presence. Queen. Good my Lord! you who Have power to guide your Queene, may make our presence Or full or emptie as you please. Decast. Then with Your licence Madam they may all with draw. Queen. Not with our licence. If your usurped greatnesse Will banish all attendance from our person; I must remaine alone. But not a man Stirre hence with our good liking. Decast. If your will (Averse from sober councell) would submit To safe advice. Queen. You have instructed it To more obedience, than I guesse my birth Did ere intend. But pray my Lord teach me To know my fault and I will finde amendment If not, repentance for it. Decast. Then great Madam
I must acquaint you that the supreame Law Of Princes, is the peoples safety: Which You have infring'd, and drawne thereby into The inward parts of this great state a most Contagious Feaver. Queene. Pray no Metaphor. Decast. You have invited warre to interrupt With its rude noise, the musique of our peace, A forraigne enemie gathers the fruite, The sweate and labour of your subjects planted. In the coole shadow of the Vine we pruin'd He wantonly lyes downe, and roughly bids The owner presse the grape: that with the juyce His blood may swell up to lascivious heates. Queene. My Lord I answere not th' effects of war, But I must pay Castile all thankefull service, For his faire charitie. Decast. Doe you then Madam Reckon on mischiefe as a charitie? Queene. Yes, such a mischiefe as is mercifull, And I a Queene opprest. But how dares he Whose duty ought with reverence obey, And not dispute the councells of his Princesse, Question my actions? Whence my Lord springs this Ill tutor'd priviledge? Decast. From the zeale I owe The honour of our Nation: Over which Kings rule but at the Courtesie of Time. Queen. You are too bold: And I must tell your pride It swells to insolence. For were your nature Not hoodwink'd by your interest, you would praise The vertue of his courage, who tooke Armes To an injured Ladies rescue. Decast. Twas ambition, Greedy to make advantage of that breach Betweene you and your people, arm'd Castile; Unpittyed else you might have wept away The houres of your restraint. Queen. Poore erring man! Could thy Arts raise a tempest blacker yet Such as would fright thy selfe. It could not for One moment cloud the splendor of my soule. Misfortune may benight the wicked, she Who knowes no guilt can sinke beneath no feare:
Decast. Your Majestie mistakes the humble aime Of my addresse. I come not to disturbe Th' harmonious calme your soule enjoyes: May pleasure Live there enthron'd, till you your selfe shall wooe Death to enlarge it. May felicities Great as th' Idaeas of Philosophie Waite still on your delight. May fate conspire To make you rich and envied. Queen. Pray my Lord Explaine the riddle. By the cadence of Your language, I could guesse you have intents Farre gentler than your actions. Decast. If your eare Great Madam, would convey into your heart The story of my love. My love, a flame. Queen. Leave off this history of love, and flame▪ And honestly confesse your feares my Lord, Least Castile should correct you. Decast. Correct me? No Madam, I have forc't them t' a retreate. And given my fine young Generall cause to wish He had not left his amorous attempts On Ladies, to assault our Citie. Queen. But he is not wounded? Decast. Not to death perhaps, But certainely w' have open'd him a veine, Will cure the Feaver of his blood. Queene. O stay! Decast. Torment! And doth she weepe? I might have falne Downe from some murdering precipice to dust, And mist the mercie of one teare: though it Would have redeem'd me backe to life agen. Accurst be that felicitie that must Depend on womans passion. Queene. Florentio! If in my quarrell thou too suddenly Art lost ith' shades of death; ô let me finde The holy vault where thy pale earth must lye, There I will grow and wither. Decast. This is strange! My heart swells much too bigge to be kept in. Queen. But if that Providence which rules the world Hath to preserve the stocke of vertue, kept Thee yet alive.
Decast. And what, if yet alive? Pray recollect your reason and consider My long and faithfull service to your crowne: The fame of my progenitors, and that Devotion the whole Kingdome beares me. How Hath nature punisht me, that bringing all The strength of argument to force your judgement, I cannot move your love? Queen. My Lord you plead With so much arrogance, and tell a story So gallant for your selfe, as if I were Exposed a prize toth' cunningst Orator. Decast. No Madam, humbler far than the tand slave kneeles. Tyed to the Oare, I heere throw downe my selfe And all my victories. Dispose of me To death, for what hath life, merits esteeme? What tye, Alas, can I have to the World? Since you disdaine my love. Floria. Will you permit The Generall kneele so long? Queen. Feare not Floriana, My Lord knowes how to rise, though I should strive To hinder it. Decast. Here statue-like Ile fix For ever, till your pity (for your love I must despaire) enforce a life within me. Alarum and Enter Ossuna. Ossuna. O my Lord! To arme, to arme. The enemie encouraged By a strange leader, wheel'd about the towne, And desperately surpris'd the carelesse guard. One gate's already theirs. Decast. Have I your licence. Queen. To augment your owne command, and keepe me still An humble captive. Decast. Madam! your disdaine Distracts me more, than all th' assaults of fortune. Exeunt all but the Queene, Floriana, and Cleantha. Queen. My fate! O whether dost thou leade me? Why Is my youth destin'd to the stormes of warre? What is my crime, you heavenly powers! that it Must challenge blood for expiation! Clean. Madam! Queen. Fortune! O cruell! For which side soe're
Is lost, I suffer: either in my people, Or slaughter of my friends. No victory Can now come welcome, the best chance of warre Makes me how ere a mourner. Cleant. Madam, you Have lost your vertue, which so often vowed A cleere aspect, what cloud soever darken'd Your present glory. Queen. I had thoughts Cleantha: But they are vanisht: what shall we invent To take off feare and trouble from this houre▪ Poore Floriana. Thou art trembling now With thought of wounds and death to which the courage Of thy feirce husband like a headstrong jade, May runne away with him. But cleere thy sorrowes. If he fall in this quarrell, thou shalt have Thy choise 'mong the Castilian Lords. And give My judgement faith, there be brave men emong them. Flor. Madam, I have vowed my life to a Cloyster Should I survive my Lord. Queen. And thou art fearefull Thou shalt be forc't to make thy promise good. Alasse poore soule! Inclosure and course dyet, Much Disciple and early prayer, will ill Agree with thy complection. There's Cleantha! She hath a heart so wean'd from vanitie, To her a Nunnery would be a Pallace. Clean. Yes, if your Majestie were Abbesse. Madam, But Cloyster up the fine young Lords withus, And ring us up each midnight to a Masque In steed of Mattins; And I stand prepar'd To be profest without probation. Drum beats. Flor. Harke! What noyse is that? Queen. Tis that of death and mischiefe. My griefes! but Ile discemble them. Yet why, Cleantha being the sole beautious Idoll Of all the superstitious youth at Court; Remainst thou yet unmarried? Cleant. Madam I Have many servants but not one so valiant As dares attempt to marry me. Queen. There's not a wit but under some feign'd name Implores thy beauty, sleepe cannot close up Thy eyes, but the sad world benighted is,
Or else their sonnets are Apocriphall. And when thou wakest the Larke salutes the day, Breaking from the bright East of thy faire eyes. And if mongthy admirers there be some Poore drossie braine who cannot rime thy praise, He wooes in sorry Prose. Enter Servant. Ser. Halfe of the Citie Already is possest by th' enemie, Our souldiers flye from the Assailants, who With moderation use their victory. So far from drawing blood, th' abstaine from spoyle. Queene. My comforts now grow charitable, This Is the first dawning of some happier fortune. Flor. Where did you leave my Lord? Ser. Retiring hither. Queen. And your good nature will in time Cleantha Beleeve all flattery for truth. Clean. In time I shall not. But forth' present Madam give Leave to my youth to thinke I may be prays'd, And merit it. Hereafter when I shall Owe Art my beauty, I shall grow perhaps Suspicious there's small faith in Poetrie. Que. Canst thou thinke of hereafter? Poore Cleanthal Hereafter is that time th'art bound to pray Against. Hereafter is that enemie That without mercie will destroy thy face, And what's a Lady then? Clean. A wretched thing. A very wretched thing. So fcorn'd ánd poore Twill scarce deserve mans pittie. And Ime sure No Almes can ere releeve it. Queen. Floriana, You yeeld too much to feare. Misfortune brings Sorrow enough: Tis envie to our selves, T'augment it by prediction. Enter Sanmartino. Cleant. See your Lord. San. Fly Madam fly. The Armie of Castile Conducted by an unknowne leader, masters The Towne. Decastro yeelding up his fate To the prevailing enemie is fled. Cleant. And shall the Queene flye from her friends my Lord?
Sanmar. You have reason Madam. I begin to finde Which way the Gale of favour now will blow, I will addresse to the most fortunate. Exit. Sanmar. Queene. Some Musique there, my thoughts grow full of trouble, Ile recollect them. Clean. May it please you Madam To heare a song presented me this morning. Queen. Play any thing. During the Song, Enter Ascanio, Lerma, Sanmartino, &c. Ascanio. Cease the uncivill murmur of the drum: Nothing sound now but gentle, such as may not Disturbe her quiet eare. Are you sure Lerma Th' obedient Souldier hath put up his sword? Lerma. The Citizen and souldier gratulate Each other, as divided friends new meeting. Nor is there execution done but in pursute Of th' enemie without the walls. Asca. Tis very well. My Lord is that your Queene? San. It is the Queene sir. Asca. Temper'd like the Orbs: Which while we mortalls weary life in battell, Move with perpetuall harmonie. No feare Ecclipseth the bright lustre of her cheeke. While we who infants were swath'd up in steele, And in our cradle luld a sleepe by th' Cannon, Grow pale at danger. San. Ile acquaint her sir That you attend here. Ascanio. Not for a diamond Bigge as our Apennine. She's heavenly faire. And had not Nature plac't her in a throne; Her beauty yet beares so much Majestie, It would have forc't the World to throw it selfe, A captive at her feete. But see, she moves! I feele a flame within me, which doth burne Too neere my heart: And tis the first that ever Did scorch me there. San. Madam here's that brave Souldier Which reinforc't the Armie of Castile. His name as yet unknowne. Ascanio. And must be so. Nor did I merit name before this houre, In which I serve your Majestie, enjoy
The fortune of my sword your liberty. And since your Rebell subjects have denyed Obedience, here receive it, from us strangers. Queen. I know nor sir to whom I owe the debt, But finde how much I stand obleig'd. Ascanio. You owe it To your owne vertue Madam, and that care Heaven had to keepe part of it selfe on earth Unruin'd. When I saw the Souldier flye, Sent hither from Castile to force your rescue, Their Generall hurt almost to death. I urg'd Them with the memory of their former deedes, Deeds famed in War. And so far had my voyce (Speaking your name) power to confirme their spirits That they return'd with a brave fury, and Yeeld you up now your owne humbled Arragon. Queen. My ignorance doth still perplex me more. And to owe thankes yet not to know to whom, Nor how to expresse a gratitude, will cloud The glory of your victory, and make Me miserable however. Ascanio. I must pennance My blood with absence, for it boyles too high. aside When we have order'd your affaires, my name Shall take an honour from your knowledge Madam. Queen. You have corrected me. Sir we'le expect The houre your selfe shall name, when we may serve. Ascanio. Ime conquer'd in my victory. But Iletry A new assault: And overcome, or dye. Exeunt.
Actus Tertius. Scena Prima. Enter Velasco and Oniate. Oniate. MY Lord it shewes a happie Discipline Where the obedient souldier yeelds respect To such severe commands. Now when victory Gives licence to disorder. Velasco. Sir our Generall The Lord Florentio, is a glorious Master In th' art of war. And though time makes him not Wise at th' expence of weakenesse or diseases; yet I have beheld him by the easie motion But of his eye, represse sedition, When it contem'd the frowne of Majestie For never he, who by his Princes smile Stood great at Court, attain'd such love and awe With that fierce viper the repining people. Onia. Our Kingdome owes its safety to that power. For how dejected looked our Majestrate When conquest gave admittance to the Soludier▪ But how their feares for sooke them, when they saw You entrie with such silcence? Velasco. Sir, castile Aim'd not at spoile or ruine in this warre, But to redresse that insolence, your Queene Did suffer under, in Decostros pride. Oniate. And yet Auxiliaries oft turne their swords To ruine, whom they come to rescue. Velasco. The Barbarous keepe no faith in vowes. But we We of Castile, though flattering advantage Perswade to perjurie, have still observ'd Friendship inviolate: No Nation suffering To which we give our oath. Oniate. You speake my Lord Your glories Nobly. And it is our joy Your Generalls wound but frighted us. Velasco. The Surgeons Affirme there is no danger, and have licenced His visit to the Queene. Oniate. Tis thought how-ere His Love had not obey'd such a restraint,
Though death had threatned him. But in his health Consists the common safety, since those Forces Decastro in the morning did expect, Ere you the Towne assaulted, are discover'd To which he fled expel'd the Citie. Velasco. Sir, We shall contemne and with ease break that Armie, Whose Generall we have vanquisht: having wonne▪ The Citie and your Queene into our power. Enter Sanmartino. San. Save you my Lord! Sir your most obedient! And how likes your good Lordship the great Acts Of the strange Cavaliere? was not his conduct Most happie for you, in the late assault? Velasco. He happily supplyed the Office of Our Generall▪ Howere your Citie had Beene ours. For though our Spanish Forces may At first seeme beaten, and we to retreate A while, to animate a giddie enemie. Yet we recover by our Art and patience What fortune gives away. This unknowne leader (I know not how to stile him) prest among Our Souldiers, as they were returning back After a small repulse: Encouraged them, (Though it was much superfluous) and got honour, Perhaps not so deservingly: But 'twas well. Oniate. Your Souldier speakes his glory even with wonder. Velasco. The ignorant are prone to it. But sir I thinke in our whole armie there fought none, But who had equall spirit. Fortune may Bestow successe according to her dotage. I answere not for that. San. This is pure Castile. But what is his birth, Country, qualitie, And whether is he bound? Velasco. I seldome trouble My language with vaine questions. Some report (It not imports who are the Authors) that His Country's Sicily; his name Ascanio, (Or else some sound like that) that he's a Lord: (But what's an Island Lord?) and that he came Into our continent to learne men and manners. And well he might: for the All-seeing sunne Beholds no Nation fiercer in attempt,
More stay'd in councell. Oniate. He's of a brave presence, I never saw more Majestie in youth Nor never such bold courage in a face So fashion'd to delight. San. The Queene commends him Almost with wonder. Velosco. Did the Queene regard A man unknowne? Oniate. His mirits spoke his worth, And well might challenge a particular eye. San. But his, as if in that dumbe Oratory, He hoped to talke all th' history of love, Still sixt upon her. Velasco. Your most humble servant. Exit. Velasco. Oniate. This is abrupt. San. What most pollitique flea Is got into his Donships eare? Oniate. Now must The Junto sit till midnight, till they racke Some strange designe from this intelligence. Enter Cleantha and offers to goe out. San. Nay on my honour Madam! Clean. Good my Lord! San. Benight us not so soone. The short liv'd day That gives the Russian in the winter hope Of heate yet failes him; not so suddenly Forsakes the firmament. Stay fairest Madam▪ That we may looke on you and live. Clean. My Lord I feare you two were serious. San. Never I Upon my Conscience Madam. Oniate. No Ile sweare: Nor none of the whole forme of you at Court, Unlesse the stratagem be for a Mistresse, A fashion, or some cheating match at Tennice. Clean. But happily that Gentleman had businesse, His face betrayes my judgement, if he be Not much in project. San. You mistake him Madam. Though he talke positive, and bustle 'mong The Sober Lords, pretend to Embassies And state designes all day; He's one of us
At night: Hee'le play, hee'le drink, you guesse the rest, Hee'le quarrell too, then underhand compound. Why for a need hee'le jeere and speake profane, Court and then laugh at her he courted. Madam Forgive him his pretence to gravitie; And he's an absolute Cavalier. Clean. My Lord He owes you for this faire certificate: Yet I feare your character's beyond his merit. Oniate. Madam dissemble not so great a vertue. Nor to obey the tyrannie of custome, Become the Courts faire hypocrite. I know This vanitie for fashionsake you weare, And all those gayeties you seeme t' admire Are but your laughter. Clean. Sir your charitie Abuseth you extreamely. Oniate. Come you cannot Disguise that wisedome, which doth glory in The beautious mansion it inhabits. Madam This soule of mine, how course so ere tis cloath'd, Tooke th' honor to admire you, soone as first You shin'd at Court. Nor had a timorous silence So long denied me to professe my service, But that I fear'd I might be lost ith' crowde Of your admirers. Clean. Nor can I perceive Any strong hope now to the contrary. Oniate. Nor I. But give me licencet' undeceive The world, that so mistakes you. This young Lord Flatters his folly that indeed you are Sicke of that humor, you but counterfeite. Beleeves y'are fraile and easie; since if not, His courtship were without designe. Cleant. My Lord What meanes the Gentleman? He hopes to talke me Into a vertue I neere practis'd yet, And much suspect I never shall. San. Pray Madam Pardon his ignorance: tis want of breeding. Onia. Pardon your mirth faire Madam, and brush off This honor'd dust, that soyles your company; This thing whom Nature carelessely obtruded Upon the world to teach, that pride and folly
Makes titular greatnesse th' envie but of fooles, The wise mans pitty. Sanmar. Sir your words are rude. Oniate. Sure no, my Lord: Perhaps in times of yore They might be conster'd so, when superstition Worship'd each Lord an idoll. Now we finde By sad experience, that you are meere men, If vice debauch you not to beasts. San. The place Is privileg'd sir. Oniat. I know it is, and therefore speake thus boldly, If you grow hot, you have your grots my Lord, And in your Villa you may domineere Ore th' humble Countrie Gentleman, who stands A loofe and bare. Clean. My Lord leave off the combat Yea're hard matcht. And see the Lord Florentio. Enter Florentio and Velasco. The Queene attends his comming. Sir voule finde A more convenient schoole to reade this lecture. Oniate. But none so beatifull to heare me. Exeunt severall wayes Sanmartino, Cleantha, and Oniate. Floren. And are you sure my Lord, he durst presume To looke up at her? Velasco. Yes, and she commends His person and his spirit. Floren. Twas too much T' observe his person. Sure his spirit's great, And well may challenge the Queenes memorie: I have not seene him yet. Velasco. Nor I my Lord. Flor. He had a fortune gentler far than mine. In envie of that service which I vowed To Arragon; heaven used a strangers arme In this great action: I was judged a thing Unfit for use. Velasco. Your glory was the greater, Your courage even opposing 'gainst your fate In the attempt. Floren. But yet mistaking man Esteemes the happie onely valiant. And if the Queene (Velasco) should smile on His merits, and forget that love I have
With such religion payd her. But these doubts Are impious: and I sinne, if I but listen To their disloyall whispers. And behold, Enter the Queene, Floriana, Cleanitha, &c. She opens like a rocke of Diamond; To th' curious search of th' almost banckrout merchant, So doth the Pilot finde his starre, when stormes Have even sunck his barke. Divinest Madam! Queen. Welcome my Lord! But pardon me my joyes If I must interrupt you with a sigh. I cannot looke upon Florentios arme, But I must grieve it bled for me. Flo. O spare The treasure of those teares! Some captive King, Whom fortune hath lockt up in iron, wants One such to buy his freedome. Madam all Those streames of blood which flow to warme my earth Least it congeale to death, cannot compare For value with the least drop shed for you: By such a quarrell made inestimable. Queene. The warre I see hath onely beene the field To exercise your fancie. Your discourse Shewes that the Court was kept beneath your tent; Yet cannot I my Lord be jealous but Tis mingled with some love. Floren. Tis a pure love, Unmixt as is the soule. The world perhaps May judge a kingdome hath enamor'd me, And that your titles dresse you forth, to raise My appetite up higher. Pardon love, If it grow envious even of your fortune; And that I me foc't to wish, you had beene daughter Of some poore mountaine cottager, without All dowre but your owne beauty. Then I might Have shewed a flame untainted with ambition: And courted you. But now the circumstance Of greatnesse seemes to challenge more than I Have power to give: and working up my love, I serve my fortune. Queene. You have not my Lord Found me uneasie to your vowes. And when The troubled streame of my tempestuous state Shall meete a perfect calme: you then shall know How worthy I esteeme your vertue.
Flor. Speake but those words agen, and seate me in An Orbe above corruption! O confirme Your thoughts but with a promise. Queen. How, a promise? I shall repent my favour if I heare A syllable that sounds like that. Upon My marriage day I have vowed to bring my selfe A free oblation to the holy Altar. Not like a fearefull debtor, tender love To save my bond. My Lord I must not heare One whisper of a promise. Floren. I'me silent. And use me as your Vassall, for a title More glorious I shall never covet. But Queen. No jealousie my Lord. Enter Lerma. Lerma. Your Majestie Is great in mercie: And I hope á stranger Shall meete it, if his speech be an offence. Queen. Your pleasure sir. kneeles. Lerma. The Lord Ascanio charg'd Me fall yet lower if the earth would licence. For to so high a Majestie, obedience Cannot bend downe enough. Then he commanded, I in his name, should begge the honour for him, Before he take his journey from your Country, To kisse your hand. Queen. Pray sir lets know the houre, But let it not be sudden. Yeares should sweat In preparation for his entertainment, And Poets racke invention till it reach Such praises as would reach the victories Of th' old Heroes. Lerma. Madam, if his arme Did actions worthy memory; it receiv'd An influence from your quarrell: In the which Adwarfe might triumph ore an Armie: But He humbly craves, his audience may not be With croude and noise as to Embassadors; But with that silence which befits his businesse: For tis of moment. Queen. Sir, we will obey His own desires, though ours could wish his welcome With a full ceremonie. I attend him. Exit. Lerma.
Floren. Madam this stranger. Queen. Pray my Lord let Love Not interrupt your businesse. I beleeve The Armie which Decastro so expected Being now arriv'd, your souldier tired, the Citie Ill setled in her faith, much councell will Be needfull. When your leisure shall permit, Our joy shall be to see you. Floren. I'm all obedience. Exeunt Queene and Florentio, at severall doores. Manent Sanmartino, and Cleantha. San. And when sweete Madam will you crowne our joyes? Lets not like riotous gamsters throw away The treasure of our time. Appoint the houre, The houre which must weare garlands of delight, By which wee'le make it th' envie of the age. Clean. My Lord what meane you? San. What all fine Lords meane, Who have plenty, youth, and title. Clean. But my fame? San. Tis the fooles bugbeare. Clean. Then my conscience▪ San. A scarecrow for old wives, whom wrinckles make Religious. Clean. What will the Court say? San. Why nothing. In mercie to themselves, all other Ladies Will keepe your councell. Clean. But will you not boast it? San. Ile be degraded first. Clean. Well I'm resolv'd. San. But when sweete Madam? Name The moment. Clean. Never. For now I weigh things better, The antidote 'gainst feare is innocence. San. Will you delude my hopes then? Pitty Madam A heart that withers, if denyed this favour. Clean. In pitty I may be induced to much; And since you urge compassion, I will meete. San. Where excellent Madam? Clean. Ith' Sycamor walke. San. The minute, ô the minute? Clean. An houre hence. San. Felicitie! fit for thy envie Love!
You will not faile now Madam? Clean. To be such As you shall count that houre your happiest. Exeunt. Enter Browfilldora, and Oniate. Oniate. This is a challenge! Prethee my small friend May not a man take th' height of thy Lords spirit, Looking on thee? Browfill. Pray sir leave off your mirth And write my Lord your answere. Oniate. Little sir, I never learnt that pretty qualitie; I cannot write. Onely by word of mouth. Garagan. Your place sir? Oniate. The market place. Garag. Tis fantasticke: and my Lord will take it ill. Your weapons sir. Oniate. Two English Mastives, which Are yet but whelpes, and not transported hither: So that the time will be I know not when. Garag. Your sport is dangerous. If my Lord forgive you; I must resent th' affront as to my selfe, And will expect a most severe account. Onia. Thou lesse thought angrier thing than waspe, farewell. Exeunt. Enter Queene and Ascanio. Queen. I am inform'd my Lord that you have businesse, And tis of moment: Ascanio. Great as that of Natures In her most mighty worke, Creation. For to preserve from dissolution, equalls The gift of our first Being. Not to hold Your Majestie in riddles, tis to begge Your pardon for a Souldier doom'd to dye; Inevitably doom'd: Unlesse your mercie Steppe betweene him and death. Queen. My Lord we use T' examine well the fact, for which he is To suffer, ere we pardon. There be crimes Of that blacke qualitie, which often makes Mercie seeme cruell. Ascanio. That's the feare which frights Me to this palenesse: sure his crime is great But fondly I presuming on the service My fortune lately did you, gave my vow Ne're to forsake your eare with earnest prayers,
Till you had granted. Queen. Would you had not vowed. For by the practise of my enemies, My fame is 'mong the people yet unsetled, And my capacitie for government, Held much too feeble. Should I then by this Provoke them to disdaine me, I might runne Apparent hazard even of ruine, now Warre so distracts our Kingdome. But my Lord Your merits are too ponderous in the scale, And all respects weigh light, you have his pardon. Asca. Your hand on that. The Doune on the Swans bosome, kisses and holds it. Not white and soft as this: Here's such a dew As drops from bounteous heaven in the morning, To make the shadowie banke pregnant with violets. Queen. My Lord! Ascanio. I kist it, and the Phenix seem'd (The last of the whole race) to yeeld a perfume More sweete than all his dying Ancestors Breathed from their funerall piles. O shrink not back! My life is so concomitant with love, That if you frowne on either both expire; And I must part for ever hence. Queen. How strange appeares this extasie? My Lord I feare Your braine feeles some disturbance: If I cause it, I will remove the object. Ascan. Pardon Madam The errour of my fancie (which oft seemes To see things absent) if my tongue did utter What misbecame your eare. And doe not forfeite Your servant to perpetuall misery For want of a short patience. Queene. No my Lord; I have the memory of your great deedes Ingrav'd so deepe; no errour can have power To raze them from a due respect▪ You beg'd To have a pardon. speake th' offenders name. Ascan. Th' offenders name, is Love. His crime, high treason▪ A plot how to surprize and wound your heart; To this conspirator I have given harbour, And vow'd to begge your mercy for him. Queen. How? Asca. And if you breake your grant, I will hereafter Scorne all your Sex, since the most excellent
Is cruell, and inconstant. Queen. Pray my Lord Goe recollect your reason, which your passion Hath too much scatter'd. Make me not have cause To hate, whom I would ever strive to honour. Ascanio. Madam you haply scorne the vulgar earth Of which I stand compacted: And because I cannot adde a splendor to my name Reflective from a royall pedegree; You interdict my Language. But be pleas'd To know, the ashes of my ancestors If intermingled in the Tombe with Kings Could hardly be distinguisht. The Starres shoote An equall influence on the open cottage, Where the poore sheepheards childe is rudely nurst, And on the cradle where the Prince is rockt With care and whisper. Queen. And what hence inferre you? Ascanio. That no distinction is 'tweene man and man, But as his vertues adde to him a glory, Or vices cloud him. Queen. But yet heaven hath made Subordination, and degrees of men, And even religion doth authorize us To rule; and tells the subject tis a crime And shall meete death, if he disdaine obedience. Ascan. Kinde heaven made us all equall, till rude strength Or wicked pollice usurp'd a power, And for Religion, that exhorts t' obey Onely for its owne ease. Queen. I must not heare, Such insolence 'gainst Majestie: And yet This lesse offends than love. Ascanio. If reason bends You not to mercie; let my passion plead, And not meete death from her, in whose faire quarrell I could each moment bring a life to th' hazard. Philosophie, hath taught me that content Lives under the course thatch of Labourers With much more quiet, then where the sam'd hand Of Artists, to the life have richly drawne Upon the roofes the fictions of the Gods. How happie then might I lengthen my life, With some faire Country Girle, so ignorant
She knew not her owne beauties: Rather than Indanger death and scorne in your deniall, And in your grant nothing but pompe and envie. Quee. My Lord be wise, and study that best content. This bold presumptuous love, hath cancell'd all The bonds I owed your valour: henceforth hope Not for that usuall favour I shew strangers, Since you have thus abused it: would I might With safety have appear'd more gratefull. Exit. Asca. She's gone, as life from the delinquent when Justice sheathes up her sword. I faine would have Conceal'd lov's treason, but desire t' obtaine her Put me to th' torture, till each Nerve did cracke, And I confest, then dy'd upon the racke. Exeunt. Actus Quartus. Scena Prima. Enter Cleantha and Floriana. Floria. THy pride is such a flatterer of thy beautie, That no man sighes by accident, but thou Dost pitty as enamor'd. Clean. Floriana! Not so kind natured surely. I have put The sighes of Courtiers in a scale, and finde Some three score thousand may weigh downe a fether. I' have tryed their teares, which though of briny taste, Can onely season th' hearts of fooles, not women. Their vowes are like their duells, ever grounded, Upon the idlest quarrell. Floria. This, experiences Perhaps instructs you to. But yet your pride I feare is over easie to beleeve. Tis meerely to flye idlenesse, that my Lord Hath troubled you with courtship. If the Queene Would make a statesman, she might cure a Lover. Want of imployment made him dreame on beauty, And yours came first t' his fancie. Clean. I begin
To thinke his making love but vanitie, And a mistake in wit. Floria. And you begin Perhaps to feare it? Clean. True, perhaps I doe. For though we care not for the Lover, yet We love the passion. Though we scorne the offering We grieve to see it throwne away, and envie If consecrated to another. Woman Hath no revenge 'gainst th' injurie of custome, Which gives man superioritie, but thus To foole him to subjection. Floria. Yet Cleantha! I could have wisht your charitie had spared This triumph o're my Lord. Clean. You see I take The next way to redeeme him. This the houre, And this the place. Here he resolves to raise A trophe in my ruine. And behold Enter Sanmartino, winding up his watch. The just man of his promise. Not a minute He failes; when sinne's the payment. Floria. Ile indanger His vertue to a blush: And happily Convert an Infidell. Clean. This is my province, Nor shall you envie me the honour of A worke of meritorious. Let him walke A while, and sinne with his owne fancie: Then Ile undertake him: and if there be neede, Be you prepared to assist me. Floria. Thou dost build Such Forts on the opinion of thy wit. Exeunt Floriana and Clean. San. Tis a full houre, and halfe a minute over. And yet she not appeares? How we severe Strickt Creditors in love, stand on the minute? But yet the paiment never comes unwelcome, Untill the gold, through age grow soule and rustie, We stand not on a graine or two too light. Enter Dwarfe. Now your discovery? Dwarfe. My Lord I have Made search in every Ally, every Arbour, Not left a bush, wherein my littlenesse
Could creepe without due scrutinie. And yet No whispering of taffetie: No dazeling Of your bright Mistresse forc't me to a wincke. I saw no mortall beautie. San. Sure shee'le not Be so unworthy to delude me now? Dwarfe. But I had a more prosperous fate in love, My Lord I met my mistresse. San. You, a mistresse? Dwarfe. A Mistresse to whose beauty I have payd My vowes, most fervent vowes, ere since I was Of stature fit to be an Amorist. San. One of the Maides of honor to Queene Mab? Dwar. Your Lordship guesses neere. For she is one Oth' Chamberers to her Fayrie Majestie; A Ladie of most subtle wit: who while She puts a handkerchiefe or gorget on Her little highnesse, holds intelligence Abroad, and orders payment for the Spies. She raiseth factions, and unites the angry. She's much upon designe. San. Where found you her? Dwarf. Walking alone under the shadow of A Tulip, and inveying 'gainst Court Arts, 'Cause one of Oberons Groomes had got from her The Monopoly of transporting gnats, A project she long aym'd at. San. No more fooling. I am growne angry with my patience. Boy, sing those verses, were presented me This morning. Dwarf. I will creepe behind a bush, And then for voyce, vie with the Nightingale: If seene I am so bashfull. Sanmar. Take your way. Song Without. As the Song ends Enter Cleantha veil'd. She breakes forth like the Morning in a Cloud. Tis for the safety of my eyes, you veile The glory of your beauties, which else might Dazle, not catch the sight. But I discerne A faire Cleantha through this gloominesse. Appeare, and speake bright Madam. Why such silence? O famish not my eare, which greedily
Longs to devoure the Musique of your Language: Is it to teach me that delight must be Intomb'd in secrecie? Or else to shew How mad a spend thrift I'm to talke away The treasure of this houre. Come faire unveile. Clean. O give me leave, yet to retaine my blushes. San. Deceite of timorous modesty! Traitors To love your blushes are. Your feares are envious Of your delights. Lets vanish hence and neere To th' vulgar eye againe appeare: Till we Growne old in pleasure be transform'd t' a Vine Or Ivie, so for ever to entwine. Clean. Then I unveile. San. O flye into my armes, As a rich odor to the ravisht sence▪ Perfume me with thy kisses. Clean. Stay my Lord: Actions of moment (as I take this is) Must be maturely thought on. I have cal'd My reason to account. San. Your reason Madam? Clean. Yes my good Lord. That onely doth distinguish A woman from bruite beasts; or what's more sensuall, A vaine loose man. What sinne scandalls my carriage To give encouragement to this presumption? What priviledg'd this attempt? San. That tempting beauty. Clean. It is a traytor then to my pure thoughts: And to preserve your eye, would it were wrinckled; I could much easier suffer the reproach Of age, than your bold courtship. If a Lady Be young and sportive, use curiositie And perhaps Art, to helpe where nature seem'd Imperfect in her worke, will you, from the False argument of your owne loose blood, conclude Her guilty? Or if she select a friend; Whose innocence gives warrant to her faith, Will you infer their whispers have no ayme But that of Brothels? Cause you finde your selfe Nought but loose flesh, will you turne Heretick, And thence deny the soule? San. This language Madam Sounds nothing to the purpose of our meeting. Clean. More to the benefit. But in your patent,
'Mong all the priviledges of a Conde Where finde you lust inserted? Without which Till age hath made you wise or impotent, You thinke your honour is defective. 'Cause Your cloathes are hansome, and mine too; must we Deforme our minds? Is it sufficient motive To sinne, if opportunitie and youth Perswade us? Such as you, are those foule plagues Infect the ayre which breathes our fame, and make The cautious sirs oth' Country shunne us. San. Madam? Clean. When we admit you to our bedchamber, Powder, or haply bath before you. What Of honor's here more than a groome may boast, Our maides are tired with? Yet this with a smile Is whisper'd to your friend, and you inferre How easie a more neere approach will be. My Lord learne vertue, and your wit may then Not serve you to so fond a purpose. If That courage you are fam'd for be no slander, Goe to the warres. Twill be a farre lesse maime To lose an eye there than your honour here. If peace enamour you, and the Court, live honest; And hope the heire who shall succeed you, may Be yours. Revenge destroyes more chast it ie, Than all the temptings of such Lords as you. San. You shall not talke me Madam from that pleasure This houre doth promise me. Clean. You'le not commit A rape my Lord? San. That is a question as Yet unresolv'd. For force is my last refuge. Clean. Thinke on the danger; for the sinne I see Little distracts your conscience. San. I propose Felicitie, which none can merit, who Refuse so poore a venter. Here I vow No prayer or Art shall free you. If you will Hazard a life devoted to your service, Ile dye your Martyr. Clean. Come my Lord, Ile free you From all such hazard. San. There spoke harmonie. Clean. Ile not be cruell. You shall have kisses, such
As will melt your soule into your lippes. And what Is sweetest, no repentance shall be th' issue Enter Floriana and Oniate. Of your delight. Looke here my Lord. She's yours. San. No halter now? Not tree convenient? O! A steeple would be precious for my purpose! But Oniate's there. Ile fight with him; Be kill'd, and be redeem'd. Sir you receiv'd A challenge from me! but return'd no answere. Oniate. My Lord I had other businesse: you'le excuse me. San. What satisfaction doe men give, when challeng'd? Oniate. According to their spirit. If they be Regardlesse of their fame, then they submit. If not, they fight. San. What Sir, will you then doe? Oniate. Let me consider. Neither. San. Come you shall fight. Oniate. My Lord I will not. San. Then you shall subscribe Your selfe a coward. Oniate. Not for the whole world: Such an apparent lye would be a sinne Too heavie to my conscience. I subscribe My selfe a coward? If I should; no souldier Would thinke but that my hand were counterfeited. San. Then you must fight. Oniate. My Lord on no condition. Hope not for it. San. Then you shall sweare, never to speake my name But with respect. Oniate. Hereafter, if you can Deserve it. For the present, I must crave Your pardon with much mirth to laugh at you. San. Sir I shall meete you. Oniate. It shall contradict All my endeavours then. San. I goe sir. But. Exit. Sanmar and Floria. Clean. For mercie sake goe with thy Lord. Repentance May turne to desperation. Floria. Ile preserve him. Clean. Have you no businesse sir, imports you more Than t'hold discourse with me? Troth I shall pitty You want imployment. Oniate. Madam, what can be More serious?
Clean. Nothing more: If your designe Be to convert me; for I know you hold All Ladies in a Schisme, who are young and proud. Oniate. Your pardon Madam. I beleeve in cunning, Court Ladies choose some pettie veniall errors, To set perfection off. For should you not Usurpe a hansome pride, your fame would lye Like unwal'd Cities, open to the prey Of each invading youth. Did you not shew A scorne, you would deserve it. Clean. Sir take heed. Hope not to win my favour, by extolling What in our better thoughts our selves condemne. Iam so wearied out with vowes and oathes, With impious praises and most tedious flattery: That nothing but plaine speaking truth, can gaine On my affection. Oniate. Madam! your affection? Clean. Pray sir doe not comment upon the word; It doth portend no danger to you. Oniate. And if it did, where's the beatitude? For though I grant you vertues great as beauty Can entertaine; and foolish I resolv'd To captivate my stocke of life t' a woman: Yet would I not adventure on you, if You did not vow to performe Articles. Clean. Suppose the businesse come to Articles. Oniate. Ith' first then you should covenant love, not squinting On every finer youth, or greater Lord; But looking streight on me. Cleant. To the second sir. Oniate. No dotage on the Court, so far that my Estate must rue it: and no vanitie Be started up, but my fond Lady must Be melancholly, and take physick, till She get into it. Clean. Why! You envie then Us our owne trouble. Keepe us from the expence And leave us to our discontent for pennance. Oniat. No. I would have the minde serene: Without All passion, though a masque should be presented; And you ith' Country. I must have you wise, To know your beauty mortall: which you must Preserve to warme my eye: not ayde by Arts,
To keepe the Courtiers wit in exercise. From his so practis'd flattery, your care Must turne with a brave scorne; and when his eye Doth offer parley, seeme so ignorant As not to understand the language. Clean. Sir You haply will debarre us our she friends too? Oniate. As secret enemies who'se first betray you. Clean. Youle not allow us, wearied of our husbands, To send them on discovery of new worlds? Or if we take a toy our selves to travell, Perhaps to Barbary, or Tartary, Or the remotest parts? Oniate. To Bedlam sooner. Clean. Or if our Sexe should warrant it by custome, To play at Tennice, or runne at the Ring, Or any other Martiall exercize; I feare me scrupulous sir, you will condemne it As dangerous to my honour? Oniate. Sure I should. Clean. I then perceive small hope of our agreement. Oniate. But I a confidence. For I discerne How much you loath these follies, you pretend. Clean. Good sir no more of this so kind mistake, Youle finde some other Ladie more deserves it. And I aspire not to the honour. Oniate. Ile try yet farther. Exeunt Oniate Cleantha. Enter Lerma and Velasco. Lerma. My Lord you offer nobly. Velasco. Tis a steppe Beneath Florentio's greatnesse, whether you His birth consider, or his place. Sir the Queene By natures seated and her high deserts, Where onely mighty soules (such as the Generalls) May offer to aspire. Lerma. My Lord your laps To this proud language is so injurious, that I must be forc't to purge the humor. That The Lord Florentio offers by a duell To shew no man can have fairer pretence To serve the Queene; must be allowed. But that You dare cast disregard upon this Lord Although a stranger, urgeth me to' intreate Y'ould draw your sword:
Velasco. It hath seene light, and made Way through an Armie, when fond victory Smil'd on our enemies. It hath done wonders, When the thicke troopes of Moores invaded us, It feares no opposition. Lerma. Shew th' effect of 't. Velasco Not in a cause so triviall. Each small breath Disturbs the quiet of poore shallow waters: But winds must arme themselves, ere the large sea Is seene to tremble. Pray your pardon sir: I must not throw away my courage on A cause so triviall. Lerma. As you pelase my Lord; But to omit all circumstance, you bring A challenge to my Lord Ascanio: The reason of the Lord Florentio's anger, A rivallship in Love. Velasco. You speake it right. Lerma. Ile bring you backe his resolution, Before you have attended many minutes. Velasco. Sir 'twill be descent, for my nature knowes Not how to waite. And if no delayes Be used, 'twill shew a fierce valour in him, And happily prevent discovery. For you may easily conjecture, that A Generalls absence soone will wake the eye Of the suspicious Souldier. Lerma. Is my Lord In readinesse. Velasco. He walkes not far from hence Lerma. You shall have use then but of a short patience. Exit. Velasco. It will be gratefull to us sir: My Lord. Enter Florentio. Floren. And will Ascanio meete? Velasco. Immediately. Floren. I had no other way. Yet this is rough, And Justice whispers tis unsafe to treade it. If to love her be sinfull, what am I? How dare I call his passion to the barre, And nourish it my selfe? Why may not he Who hath as bold a fortune, entertaine As bold a love; and in the fate of warre Having outgone by service, why not then Present it to the selfe-same Altar? But
We cannot harbour both in the same Port; Or he or I am shipwrack'd: for the storme Is rais'd, and to appease it, death must be The sacrifice. Enter Lerma. Velasco. My Lord here is the second. This stranger dares not meete with your great spirit. Floren. Suspect him not my Lord. He hath a courage Above the sense of feare. Well sir your answere? Lerma. My Lord Ascanio could have wisht his life Might have beene destind to a happier purpose. And charged me tell your Lordship that he had Much rather have beene lost with common dust, In the cheape Churchyard, than endanger'd fame In this great duell. Floren. Sir explaine his reasons. Lerma. He calls to his sad thoughts, the mischefes which This Kingdom needes must fall into when you Shall perish by his sword; certainely You cannot scape it, thus provoking death. Then to what ruine may the Queene, whose safety You both have labour'd, be engaged? He could With patience almost suffer on his name, The infamie of coward, rather than Hazard the quiet of her estate. But you. Floren. Let me consider; Tis an idle rage That heates me to this quarrell, Let her fate Remaine unshaken, though she choose my foe Into her love and bosome. If she live Above the feare of ruine; I am mighty, Mighty enough, though by my griefes growne feeble And weakned too, diseases fright the healthy. I will referre my cause and life to her, And ne're dispute it by the sword. Velasco. My Lord! Floren. Velasco, I am safe enough against The taint of Coward. Spaine beares witnesse that I dare, as farre as honour dares give warrant. But in this cause. Velasco. My Lord you'le lose the glory Of all your former Actions; and become The mirth of Courtiers, empty things who braule Not fight, if you returne after a challenge Without performance. Floren. Tis a serious truth.
Velas. Moreover this young Gentleman hath hope To talke you from your resolution: The Lord Ascanio will too much exult, If this way too he can orecome you. Floren. It must not be sir, tell my Lord I waite His leisure. Lerma. And your Lordship shall not have Reason to thinke it long. Prepare your selfe His onely prayer is now; that when he comes There may be no discourse to take up time, He hath desire the businesse may be all: What he can say, hath beene by me delivered. Exit. Floren. We will obey him. Tyrant Love! Why is Thy crueltie so wanton to delight In murder? Like that impious Roman Prince, Thou joyest to smother, whom thou lov'st, in Roses, And stifle them with the choysest perfumes. But This is no place for reason; She may hold Dispute in sober schooles, where studie raises The soule to knowledge. Here's the Theater For the bruite part of man to fight his last, I must redeeme the Laurell, fortune crown'd His Temples with, or perish in th' attempt. My fate decrees it. Enter Ascanio, and Lerma. Lerma. Here's my Lord Ascanio. Floren. Why doth he turne his face away as if He durst not looke on danger: Doe his feares Now triumph ore his courage. Lerma. Put it to the tryall. They fight. Floren. He's more than Mortall sure. He strikes like lightning Himselfe not passive. But Ile try agen, And disinchant the Sorcerer. I there I reacht him home. You bleed, open your doublet The wound perhaps is dangerous. Ascanio. But a scratch. Floren. Sure I have heard that voyce, and seene that face, Velasco tis the King. Ascanio. My Lord what meane you? Floren. Some Planet strike me dead, and fixe this arme A monument to tell posterity The treason of my errour: Mighty sir, Shew mercy to your Creature, that my death (Which hastily steales on me) may not be
Too foule for after story. Ascanio. Rise Florentio, This act cannot endure the name of Treason. Floren. Some Surgeons quicke to search the wound! O sir How doe you feele your selfe? speake life, or I Shall sinke downe to my Center. Ascanio. Not a man Stirre hence, thy sword was loyall as thy thoughts, And scarce hath peirc't the skin. O my Florentio. Floren. My Lord and King! But why did you engage Your sacred person into danger? Twas not well; How many thousand lives depend on yours? Ascanio. Envie oth' greatnesse I possest, without The merit, and desire to know those perills We wantonly our subjects cast upon On every weake exception; wrought my youth Into this action. Nor can I repent Th' experience of this waire? Floren. But oh great sir, Why did your Majestie suffer this duell? Twas cruell and unkinde. How easily This hand might have committed sactiledge? The very thought whereof, like some pale vision Congeales my blood. Ascanio. Search not that wound to deepe. Florentio! I shall blush, blust like some Ladie Surpriz'd in sin, if you too farre examine. Floren. Conceale it not great sir, though in the speaking Poyson steale through my eare. Be confident, Unvaile your thoughts. Ascanio. You needes must hate me then: And will have Justice to throw off that duty You owe me as a subject. Let it be Unspoken still; though smothering it be death Good heaven desend. What is an Armie of us Exposed to certaine slaughter, if compared To th' shortest moment that should serve your quiet? And shall I live and see my Soveraigne weare A sorrow, on his brow? Ascanio. Florentio! thou Art glorious in thy vertue. So was I Till looking on the Queene I grew oth' sudden Darker then midnight? Floren. O my cruell fate!
Ascanio. I grew a theefe, a most ungratefull theefe In my designes, and labour'd to have stole The Jewell of thy life from thee. A Jewell, My selfe so freely had bestowed upon The merits of thy youth. Floren. My soule foresaw this. Ascanio. How justly had I perisht by thy sword. How happie for my safety. Then had I Beene lost in my disguise; or dyed, my crime Unknowne unto the world. Now if I live I must wade through a sea of injuries, T'attaine an unsafe haven. Enter the Queene. Floren. Cheere your selfe Dread sir: Though as I give the Legacie I breath my last; yet will I shew a heart Thankefull to your great favours. Madam, here Behold the Soveraigne of Castile. Queen. You have Beene cruell in your kindnesse Sir, to keepe So long your sacred person hid from us. Floren. He is your Lover Madam, and deserves The title. Whether you observe his youth, So beautious, Nature dotes upon her worke: Or weigh his greatnesse powerfull to defend you, Should fate and all mankinde conspire your ruine; And adde to that, he merits you, his sword Having restored you freedome: when poore I Was judg'd like some old instrument of warre Unfit for service. All my interest I here resigne to th' Author of my fate; My Love I cannot, which must still remaine, Companion to my life. But Ile take heed My wound appeare not, though it inward bleed. Exit. Ascan. I waite here Madam, and attend your sentence For 'tis my doome. Queen. Sir I am that sad wretch, Stands trembling at the barre. I know your merit, And know a gratitude, great as ere was owing, By an injured soule releev'd. I duely weigh That double tye which doth obleige me yours. First when you sent your souldiers to my rescue; Then by exposing your most sacred person To th' dangers of a warre.
Ascanio. A triviall nothng. Queen. What honour can come equall to my state As by so high a match? And gainst your person The envious cannot finde a quarrell. Asca. Madam All this is circumstance, the politicke Busie their fancie with. I bring a love, An humble love, which is of value to Enoble the parcht labourer, and force An Emperesse listen to his vowes. Consider In me nothing of fortune, onely looke On that, to which Love new created me. If once receiv'd your servant; what's Castile In the comparison? For Princes are Too bold, if they bring wealth and victory, To enter competition with those treasures A Lover aimes at in his Mistresse favour. May I not hope your smile? Queen. You must command it. Asca. Then give me leave to whisper to my hopes What strange felicities I shall enjoy. Queen. But sir, consider how you gave away To your Florentio, all that claime, you might Have to me, as so great a neighbouring Prince. Ascan. It was a gift my ignorance made, which I Was cozen'd in. For had my eye beene honor'd With sight of such a beauty; safer he Might have petition'd for my Scepter: And The grant had not so soone begot repentance. Queen. But promises of Princes must not be By after Arts evaded? Who dares punish The breach of oath in subjects; and yet slight The faith he hath made them? Ascan. But my Florentio, Hath given me backe his intrest. Queen. That gift Was like a vow extorted, which Religion Cancels, as forc't from Conscience. Asca. But your selfe Are free, and never by an oath made his. Queen. My resolution, grounded on his service, Ties more than formall contracts. Asca. Ile not urge You father, but by these, which never yet
Found passage through my eyes not he, nor all Mankinde contracted to one heart, can harbour A love that equalls that I burne with, Madam Thinke on't: and let your thoughts finde out that path Which leades to mercie. Exit. Ascanio. Queen. How I am dazled, Plac't on a precipice by tyrant Love? The King is Noble, and his merits claime A retribution great as I can make. He loves me; and yeelds onely to Florentio, In the priority of service. My sad soule! Enter Florentio, lookes on the Queene, sighes and goes in againe. Betweene these two I might stand distracted! But Vertue guide me: Nor can I ere stray While that directs, and honour beates the way. Exeunt. Actus Quintus. Scena Prima. Enter Decastro and his Armie. Decast. MY fortune yet forsakes me not. There's something Whispers my soule, that though a storme did cloud My morning, I shall set the envie of My yet prevailing enemie. Had you My fellow souldiers not beene three houres march From ayding us, when the Castilian Armie Made the assault: we had given their fate a checke, And taught them how unsafe it is to Court Dangers abroad. I must intreate your courage To suffer for some moments, a short time Will bring us the Queenes answere. If she yeeld (As reason may perswade her) we shall spare Much losse of blood, if not your valour will Have liberty to shew it selfe. Yet still Remember that the Cities forc't t' obey A stranger; in their votes they fight for us. Did no man see the Lord Ossuna since Our fight ith' morning? Capt. He appear'd not since
We left the Citie to the enemie. Which hath bred jealosie, my Lord, that he Chang'd with the present fortune. Decast. Doubt him not. He hath a heart devoted to the greatnesse And safety of his Country. Well he may Be lost ith' number of the slaine. But fate Cannot enforce him stoope beneath the vow Of rescuing Arragon from forraigne Armes. Enter two common Souldiers, haling Ossuna in as an Hermit. What insolence is this? Unhand the man, Me thinkes his hahit should beget respect. Sould. My Lord we guesse he is some spie, he came Sculking from th' enemies campe. Pray guard Your person, mischiefe often lurkes in shapes As holly. Decast. I allow your care and thanke it, Leave him to me; and for a while retire. Exeunt. Ossuna. Your Lordship knowes me not? Decast. Ossuna, welcome! Blest bethy better Angell who preserv'd thee! How happie to the fortune of this warre Art thou restor'd? I should have fought unarm'd, Had I not had the fare t' embrace thee thus. How was my friend preserv'd? Ossuna. By vertue of This sacred habit. In the mist of warre Disguis'd I thus escaped, though close pursued By some of the Queenes faction. To this weed I owe my safety. Decast. Quickly throw it off, And reinvest thy body in that steele, With which thou still hast triumpht. O my Lord▪ How oft have we all bath'd in blood and sweat, Though clouds of dust found out the way to force Backe victory to our side; when fortune seem'd To doate onth' enemie. We two have growne Like Caedars up together, and made all Seeme shrubs to us, no man sleeping secure But in our shadowes. Ossuna. Yes; we have beene happie. Decast. Thou speak'st so hollow, as there were a doubt We might not be so still. Ossuna. But there's is no faith
In humane fate. An Emperour did serve As footestoole to the Conqueror: and are we Better assured of destinie? Decast. What strange Unworthy faintnesse weakens his great soule, Who heretofore, neere understood the language Danger speakes in? Hath one defeate lost you That mighty courage, which hath fixt upon Your name a glorious memory? Reassume Your selfe my Lord: Let no degenerate feare Benight the luster of your former acts. Ossuna. I call your selfe and Arragon to witnesse, My life hath yet beene such, ye reverend shades Of my great Ancestors, neede not looke pale Or blush, to know my story. To your selfe, To whose brave youth I tyed my youth a servant; I ever have perform'd all Offices Due to so brave a friendship. Decast. Tis confest. Ossuna. And here I vow, setting aside those feares Distract me as a Christian; I could smile, Smile like some wanton Mistresse, upon death What ever shape it weares. Decast. My Lord this warre. Is warranted by Casuists for lawfull▪ But they (you'l say) flatter the present state, And make divinitie serve humane ends. But in it selfe its just. A warre your judgement Gave approbation to; and urg'd me first To undertake. Therefore make good your owne, And throw off this unusefull habit Ossuna. Never. Decastro. What sayd my friend? Ossuna. By all things sacred, never. In this I will grow old, and with the weight Of yeares bend to the earth▪ In this Ile breath A happier ayre, then you in all your soft And varied silkes. Decast. Some coward devill sure Possesseth him. Ossuna. My Lord I am instructed T' a patience far above your injuries. Nor shall your scorne or anger triumph o're My resolution. I'm fixt here, unmoov'd
As is the center. Decast. I was much to blame. This may be a brave vertue. Pray my Lord Give me your reasons, why you tread this path So little beaten by the feete of Courtiers. I would not have the world mistake your ayme, And conster it to feare or melancholy? Ossuna. That cannot shake me. He who by the Card Oth' worlds opinion steeres his course, shall harbor In no safe port. But to your care my Lord I give this free account. Seven winters past When I set saile from Scicily, a storme Ore tooke the ship, so powerfull that the Pilot Gave up the Sterne to th' ordering of the waves, His Art and hand growne uselesse; Those kind starres The Sailors use t' invoke, were lost ith' tempest And nothing but a night not to be seene Was seene by us. When every one began T' advance himselfe toward death as men condemn'd To th' Axe, when hope of pardon is shut out. I spight oth' envious cloud look'd up to heaven And darted my faith thither: vowing to Forsake the flattered pompe and businesse of The faithlesse world, if I with safety might Attaine the Land. Decast. Was not I there my Lord? Ossuna. You were. Decast. And made no I the selfe same vow? Ossuna. Heaven hath recorded that we both did vow it. Oth' sudden night forsooke us, and the loud Unruly winds fled to their unknowne dwellings; When a soft breath gan whisper to our sailes A calme was to ensue. Decast. My memory Afflicts me much. But these are feeble vowes Made onely by our feares: We ought to have Our reason undismaid, when ere a promise Can force performance. Ossuna. I dispute it not. Soone as I reacht the shore I courted on Those vanities which had my youth enamour'd, Yet still with some remorse. Honors betrayd me Into a glorious trouble, and I grew Proud of my burden. But if heaven had beene
Severe to my delayes, in this diseas'd Surfet of pompe, my soule might have beene call'd T' her last account: And O my Lord where then Had breach of vow beene safe. Decast. These are sad thoughts. Ossuna. But necessarie. When the mornings losse Made me search out a shape for flight: this habit It selfe presented; and againe redeem'd me, And know I am resolv'd, neere to forsake it Till in the vault, my earth and it together Shall weare away to dust. Decast. My Lord you have Good title to your vertue. Pray retire Into my tent. This suddaine change, if knowne, May much amaze the Souldier, and endanger The glory of th' attempt. I shall intreate Your prayer, since you denie your arme. Ossuna. My Lord may heaven direct you. Exit. Ossuna. Decast. What have I obtain'd By all this sweate of businesse? Like the winde, Prosperous ambition onely swell'd my saile To give me courage to incounter with A tempest. Early cares and midnight frights, Faint hopes and causelesse feares, successively Like billowes have mooved in me. What a foole Is humane wisedome; what a begger wealth; How scorn'd a nothing that proud state we doate on? Time laughes us out of greatnesse, and shuts up Our wide designes in a darke narrow roome: Whence when the valiant Monarch shall creepe forth He will like some poore coward, hide his eyes And hope to scoulke away. But these are thoughts, And now 'tis time for Action. Enter Souldier to Decastro. Soul. If your Lordship Will please for some few moments to retire Into your tent, her Majestie in person Will give you parly here. Decast. In person sir? The favour beares some omen! she who in The tempest of misfortune still did spread Her saile at large; why doth she strike them now, The winde so prosperous? This is a descent Beneath her greatnesse.
Souldier. I reach not, my Lord, The misteries of Princes, but this message She charg'd me to returne. Decast. The Acts of Princes Are govern'd often by as fraile a Passion, As those are of the vulgar, the same rage That stirres two footmen to a fray, creates Warre betweene Kingdomes; but the zealous subject Gazing a farre, on th' actions of the proud, Finds towres and Lyons in an emptie cloud; But Ile obey her leisure. Watch you here Till you discover her advanc'd this way. Exit. Decast. Enter Ascanio, Florentio. Floren. Sir you created me; and rais'd me up Toth' state of Duke, when I was common dust. And had not fortune given me interest Ith' favour of the Queene, I had continued In the worst fate of man, ingratitude. Now I can boast I have restored you backe A love rich as the bounty you showred on me. 'Tis all the stocke of my poore life. Ascanio. Sad fate! That I must wound thee to the heart, to cure My Leprosie with thy blood. Florentio search Ith' stocke of women there's some other beauty, Floren. O no! no other. Ascanio. Ile endow her with The wealth of all Castile. Floren. Poore emptie nothing! Ascan. If Soveraignetie be th' Idoll of thy soule, I will devide my Kingdome: thou shalt raigne As independant as my selfe. Floren. Great sir, Continue but your favour, and my starres Cannot afford a greatnesse equalls it. The treasures of th' ambitious, are the scorne Of those who seriously contemplate life: My fortunes high enough. And now my thoughts Grow temperate; not for th' Empire of the East, (Which yet retaines the treasures, man enjoy'd Ere he grew blacke with sinne) would I have wanted This blest occasion to expresse the zeale I owe my Prince. Here with as free a soule I give her to your Armes as ere you threw
A smile upon my service. Ascanio. Thankes deere friend! (That word must speake our loves) by this great gift Thou hast redeem'd me from the tortue, and Possest me of the fairest. Floren. O! Ascanio. The fairest, Nature ere made for wonder. Floren. She is faire. Ascanio. Injoying her thy King shall live, who else Were desperate beyond cure. He shall be envied. And every yeare as age threatens decay, He shall regaine new life from her. Florentio Beleev't there's miracle in such a beauty. Floren. Surely there is. Enter Queene Sanmar. Oniate, Cleantha, Floriana. And see sh' appeares. How like some heavenly vision That kills with too much glorie. Ascanio. Stand still, and wonder with me. Queene. Cleantha! O the prodigie! And how Wilt thou endure his serious face? Canst thou Whom nothing tempted but wit parcell guilt And the last fashion, suffer Oniate? Clean. Madam! I undertake him for a pennance: Perhaps he was enjoyned me. Queene. It was love You went to shrift with then. And yet how that Young wanton idlenesse, should counsell you To this conversion still is more my riddle. Clean. The Court is full of wonders Madam: and Tis hansome to doe things extravagant. Queen. But how in th'heate of warre, your thoughts should be So apt for loves impression. Clean. Love will dance As nimbly to the Trumpet, Fife, or, Drum, As to those many Violins which play So loud at Court. Moreover it concern'd My safety. I so streightly was beseig'd And by so strong a Caesar. Queen. O my Lord I am inform'd with how fierce a spirit You doe assault our Ladies. Sanmar. Pray your mercie, And if your Majestie will please to banish The Art of making love quite from the Court;
Ile not be out of fashion. Queen. For your sake I will contrive it so: And good my Lord Will you begin th' example; you will see How soone the fine young Lords will follow you. Your pardon sir, had I but seene your highnesse, I had not lost so much of language from A most expressive gratitude. Ascanio. Madam you pay a triviall debt with too great intrest For how contem'd a slightnesse was my life Untill imploy'd to serve you? Florentio. She glanced this way, And Loves Artillery playd from her eye. Unhappie banchrout what a Kingdome have I forfeited? So often in a caime Some vessell rich in fraught and proud in saile, Doth spring a sudden leake, and sinckes for ever. Ascanio. But Madam is there hope your heart can yeeld To an exchange in love? My title's good, Florentio having given up his claime. Enter Decostro, &c. Queen. But sir th' estate is still my owne nor have I neede to sell it. But Decastro's here, And if your Majestie will daigne your presence Unto the parley'twill advance the honour And purpose of our meeting. Ascanio. I'me your servant. Queen. My Lord you see how neere the safetie of Our subjects toucheth us: We can stoope thus Beneath our Majestie, and enter parley Even with a Rebell. Decast. Madam, 'tis in vaine To hold dispute gainst what you will condemne. And it were insolence to boast my power, Or speake my right, now when the hearts of all men Confirme the justice of my taking Armes. Cast but your eye on this vast body, which The Kingdome doth unite in my defence, And see how ruinous is your errour, that Must leane to forraigne succors! Queen. Tis a refuge Your practice forc't me to. Decast. But would your highnesse Had lent a gentler  the safe counsell
Of him who had no crime but too much love. Ascanio. My Lord, that word fell rudely from your tongue, And I may say, unmannerly; Tis duty You owe the Queene. Decast. Right sir, an humble duty, Ambitious to expose my life to dangers, Greater than any other soule dares fancie. Ascanio. Pray stay Florention: this is now my cause, And I (proud man) will tell you, your great heart Doth want expansion to receive a love Worthy her scorne. Decast. And I will answere you (Proud Monarch of Castile) what mold Soever Nature casts me in, my mind Is vaster than your empire. And I can Love equally with him whose name did Conquer Kingdomes as large as yours. Ascanio. Your Majestie Must licence here my rage, to teach his folly (Presumptuous folly) a submisse repentance. Decast. Sir here I stand prepar'd. A shout within. Queen. What noise is that. Oniate. The Cities all in Mutinie: and vow To perish in the Lord Decastro's cause. Th'are ready now to lay rude hands upon The Garrisons of Castile. Your Majestie Should hinder mischiefe; if you suddenly Returne, and by your presence stop their furie. Decast. Pray Oniate take this signet: tell The Magistrats, her Majestie and I Are now accorded, with a due regard To th' publique safetie. Take some of my armie To give authoritie to what you say. Assure them all is well. Exit. Oniate. Ascanio. What meanes this wonder? Floren. This speakes him Noble, even to our envie. Queen. My Lord in this you have oblig'd us: Pray Informe us of your thoughts, that we may studdie To make this parley happie. Decast. Mighty Lady, I finde my love hath not beene drest so smooth To tempt your liking; and I must confesse My passion (like the spleene of witches) hath Begot whirlewinds and thunder. Would I might
Have found a softer way t' have wrought my ends. For by your beauty (the most sacred oath A Lover can sweare by) that was the marke The sole faire marke I aim'd at. For if pride Had overswayd my love, I could have stood Oth' levell with that Prince, so much your people Were vowed to my devotion▪ Queen. On my Lord, You fairely speake your vertues. Decast. And but view The vastnesse, and good order of my Campe; Your best townes sworne to runne my fortune, and Youle say 'twas love did begge this enterview. Ascanio. My Lord your language cannot fright us from The Queenes defence. Decast. Great sir, she needes it not. Downe on your knees my fellow Souldiers, and With me bow to your Soveraigne: sweare with me Never to lift your Arme 'gainst her command. Thus as your subject. As your Lover thus, Thus to the earth I fall, and with my lippes Seale my obedience. kisseth the ground. Queene. Pray rise up my Lord, Would I could merit thus much favour; but. Decast. Pardon I interupt you. But you cannot Finde love to answere mine; nor will I force it Be happie in your choise, and wheresoere You sixe, shine ever glorious. From this houre Ile never more distube you. Queen. Now beshrew me, Me thinkes I feele compassion. Good my Lord Write in that blancke all your demands, and by The honour of a Princesse, Ile deny Nothing you shall insert. He lookes on it and returnes it. Decast. There tis agen: The paper innocent as when you gave it. Queen. My Lord you have writ nothing. Decast. And tis nothing Now I have mist your selfe, I can demand, Fortune contract thy treasure from all Nations, And guild it ore with honour and with beautie; Yet hast thou not the power to force one wish; Now I have lost this Lady. Ascanio. A great spirit.
Decast. One humble prayer I have which must not be Denied. And tis your Majestie will give Me leave neere more to see you. Queen. O my Lord. Decast. My vowes irrevocable. I shall secure Your Kingdome best by absence, and my eye Will never brooke so rich a treasure made The purchase of another. To a Cave Some undiscover'd Cave, to which no path Doth leade the wandring Lover, I have vowed The remnant of my dayes. Enter Ossuna. Floren. A strange conversion, And 'twill behoove my fate to follow him. Decast. My Lord Ossuna here, and I have sworne Our lives to solitude, which weele observe Religiously; And since I cannot prove Possessor Ile be Couqueror in Love. Ascanio. Pray stay my Lord. Behold Florentio there He hath out donne you. He for love of me, Hath done what you for love of heaven. All The interest he had in that bright Queene He hath resign'd to me. Decast. He hath payd you for Your favours. Floren. Tis confest; what's mine is yours. Ascanio. Thankes my Florentio. For with her my youth May be still happie, and my age disdaine To know a weakenesse. From her eyes I may Draw still new vitall heate, and finde what fooles Have studied for, th' Elixar. In her Armes I may be safe 'gainst all invasion from Abroad, or civill dangers nurst at home. Quest. Your highnesse pardon. I confesse how high Your merits rise in my esteeme, but must not To honour your deserts, my selfe become Unworthy after story, blemisht with That scorne which still defames our Sex, registerd A most Inconstant woman, or whats much More infamous; one who reserves her love To serve her profit, and exposeth it, to the Merchant that bids fairest. Ascanio. Madam spare that breath to cleere The ayre when poyson'd by contagion. I know your setled thoughts, and that my power
Or title weighs not in your love. Plorentio I will no longer racke you, though the Queene Beth' onely fire ere warm'd this heart, and I Despaire ever to love agen; I will Disdaine to be unjust. I will not be Orecome in friendship; reassume thy right. Floren. Sir you undoe me; In your injurie, I was lesse wretched, like a banckrout, now Without all hope of payment I must owe. Ascanio. Th' ambition of my service, and disguise Was to advance your fortune Madam: Nor Can I attempt you farther though the conquest Would wreath my Temples with a prouder Laurell, Than the addition of the world unto My Scepter. Be safe in your choise and happie. Queen. This goodnesse growes even to a Miracle. In his behalfe sir, I must vow my selfe A subject, and your servant. Ascanio. O command For I have nothing Madam but obedience. My Kingdome shall be proud to share with yours In danger, and Ile glory to be stiled Your Souldier. Floren. I am lost in wonder. Sir I know not how to entertaine this blessing I feare my Joyes will be my ruine. Decast. Be both happie. And may time never father that blacke moment Which shall appeare to you lesse fortunate. Ascanio. Joyne then your hands for ever. He doth live Mighty indeed, w'hath power, and will, to give. Exeunt.
The Song in the second Act. NOt the Phoenix in his death Nor those banckes where violets grow, And Arabian winds still blow, Yeeld a perfume like her breath. But ô! Marriage makes the spell: And tis poyson if I smell. The twin beauties of the skies. (When the halfe suncke saylors hast, To rend saile and cut their mast) Shine not welcome as her eyes. But those beames, then stormes more blacke, If they point at me I wracke. Then for feare of such a fire, Which kills worse than the long night Which benumbs the Muscovite: I must from my life retire. But ô no! for if her eye Warme me not; I freeze, and dye. The Song in the fourth Act. FIne young folly, though you were That faire beauty I did sweare, Yet you neere could reach my heart. For we Courtiers learne at Schoole, Onely we are sects to foole, Y'are not worth the serious part. When I sigh and kisse your hand, Crosse my Armes and wondring stand: Holding parley with your eye, Then delate on my desires, Sweare the sunne nere shot such fires, All is but a handsome lye.
When I eye your curle or Lace, Gentle soule you thinke your face Streight some murder doth commit, And your virtue doth begin To grow scrupilous of my sinne, When I talke to shew my wit. Therefore Madam weare no cloud Nor to checke my love grow proud, For in sooth I much doe doubt It is the powder in your haire, Not your breath perfumes the ayre, And your Cloathes that sets you out. Yet though truth has this confest, And I vow I love in Iest When I next begin to Court And protest an amorous flame, You will sweare I in earnest am: Bedlam this is pretty sport. The Epilogue at Court. VVE have nothing left us but our blushes now For your much pennance, and though we allow Our feares no Comfort, since you must appeare Iudges Corrupt, if not to us severe: Yet in your Majestie we hope to finde A mercy; and that our pardon finde. And how can we despaire you will forgive Them who would please, when oft offenders live; And if we have er'd, may not the Curteous say; T was not their trade, and but the Authors Play.
The Epilogue at the Fryers. VVHat shall the Author doe? it madnesse were To entreat a mercy from you who are severe, Sterne Iudges and a pardon never give, For onely merit with you makes things live: He leaves you therefore to your selves and may, You gently quit or else condemne the Play, As in an upright Conscience you will thinke fit, Your sentence is the life and death of wit. The Author yet hath one safe plea, that though A Middlesex lury on his play should goe, They cannot finde the murther wilfull, since T was Acted by Command, in his owne defence. FINIS.
