16630 99844433 9244
THE STRATAGEMS of Ierusalem: With the martiall lawes and militarie discipline, as well of the Iewes, as of the Gentiles. By Lodowick LLoyd Esquier, one of her Maie∣sties Serieants at Armes. Sap. 7. Candor lucis aeternae est sapientia. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede, 1602.
TO THE RIGHT Honourable Syr Robert Cecill Knight; Principall Secretary to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie; Maister of the Court of Wardes and Liueries, One of her Highnesse most Honourable priuie Councell, and Chauncellour of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. ALexander the great (right Honorable) thought long to write the straunge sights hee sawe in India, to Aristotle the philosopher in Ma∣cedonia, Caesar made haste to write the celeritie of his vic∣torie in Pontus, to his friend Anitus at Rome. The like desire is in my selfe, with no lesse longing to make my labour knowne to such honourable friends, as will both accept and defend my trauaile herein; Of whom I made choice of your honour, to dedicate the
Stratagems of Ierusalem, as vnto one that is furnished with stratagems, wisedome, and knowledge, of whō I may say, as Plato spake of such like, Consili∣um eius est, qui rei cuius{que} peritus. Such wise and graue councellors the Lord euer prouided, to attend on godly and vertuous Princes, as eyes and eares, to preuent both home and forraigne stratagemes of enemies, as Chusai with Dauid, to preuent the wic∣ked purpose of Absalon; and Nathan with Salomon, to finde out the trecherous intention of Adonias. The Lord left not the wicked Samaritans vnpro∣uided of Prophets & councellors, yea euen amōg Infidels and Pagans the Lord stirred vp Daniel to counsel Nabuchodonozer in Babilō, & Ioseph to coun∣sell Pharao in Egipt, that they might confesse & ac∣knowledge God to be the Lord; therfore wel said Solon, Non quae suauissima, sed quae optima, sunt cōsulenda: It is not the cōsultatiō of the Romains with their soothsaiers, that made their Empire so to florish, nor of the Persians with their Magi, that got the Monarchy of the Assyrians to Persia. All strata∣gems, victories, & good counsell commeth from the Lord, so wisdom saith, I dwel with Princes in councell, and am among them that seek wisdom & knowledge. Plato the Philosopher could so say, Omnis consultatio quiddam sacrum est: and Aristotle his scholler, called councell of Princes, Diuinissimum
consilium. The kings of Persia, when they admitted any into councell, tooke their fignet, & laid it on their mouths, as a seale of silēce, saying, Anima cōsilij secretū; so Alexā: did to his councellor Ephestiō; Nei∣ther could any be of councel in Persia, but such as were in coūcell most secret, & in gouernmēt most wise & prudent. The cause why Demosthenes was so esteemed amōng the Atheniās, was his wisdō & policie often to preuent the force & stratagems of Phillip of Macedon. The cause why Vlixes was iudged more worthy of Achilles armor then Aiax, was his experience and councell to Agamemnon in the Grecian warres. So it may be well spoken of Nestor, who was preferred before all other Greeke Captaines, for the like cause, Multitudo enim sapientū sanitas orbis terrarū est, saith wisdom. It was not the counsel of the Nimph Egeria to Numa, which was ridiculous, but the wisedome & policie of Numa, therby to establish his lawes, much commēded. Neither the counsell of Iupiter in the Capitoll to Scypio, which was foolish, but the policie & prac∣tise of Scypio, therby to animate his soldiers, much extolled. But no councell, no policie against the Lord, no wisdom nor Stratagem to ouerthrow a king or a kingdom, but the sins of the king & the kingdome. So could Cratippus the Philosopher, to that effect answere Pompey the great, Fata per causas
agunt; So could Phaetenissa the Witch answere Saul at Endor, Fatum pietatis appendix; So could the Idoll of Apollo aunswere Augustus Caesar at Delphos, the one willing to know what should become of the kingdome of Israel, the other of the Empire of Rome. But such busie ambitious braines, like Cor∣nel. Lentulus, that dreamed, he should be the third Cornelius that should gouern the Empire, were ba∣nished out of Athens by the law Ostracismus, & such might not come in Rome in gownes or in long cloakes into the Senate house, by the law of Cinci∣us. Many haue Iocobs voice, but they haue Esaus hands, like Balaam, Qui vocem non mentem mutant. These dissembling Gibeonites were found out by Ioshuah; these bragging Ephraimites were tried by pronouncing the letter Schiboleth. None can resist the set purpose of the Lorde, who could hinder Moses of his triumph in the midst of the sea? or let Ioshuah to set his trophey in the middest of the hea∣uens? euen he that commaunded the seas to be di∣uided, and commanded the Sun to stand ouer Gi∣beon, and the Moone ouer Aialon; to whom iustly belong all stratagems, victories, tropheys, and try∣umphes. Your Honors alwayes readie at commandement, Lodowick Lloyd,
To the courteous Reader. ALphonsus king of Cicile (gentle Reader) was euer wont to say, Optimos consiliarios esse mortuos, meaning wise and profitable bookes, both at home and abroad. Lucullus one of the greatest captaines among the Romaines, and Philopomē of no lesse fame among the Greci∣ans; the one by reading Euangelus bookes, the other by reading Xenophon, became excellent souldiers. In so much that Cicero wondred that Epaminondas being such a singular Philosopher, should become so famous a Captaine. A great staine in M. Corilianus and in C. Marius, (though otherwise stout and valiant) not to be learned. Caesars Commentaries are at this time as much esteemed among the Turkes, as Homers Illi∣ads were in auntient time among the Grecians. If these Polymar∣chies and Campmaisters confesse, that by holding a penne in the one hand, do profit as much, as by holding a sword in the other, or rather more; If Fabius weakned Hanibal more by delayes, then Marcellus did by the sword; If Fabritius wearied Pirrhus more by counsell, then all Rome could do by their warres, then it is tru∣ly said, that Plura auspicijs & concilijs, quam telis & mani∣bus geruntur. So that sometimes that saying of Cicero is true, Cedantarma togae; an other time the saying of Lysander is as true, Sileant leges inter arma. So all Empires ought to be, Non olùm armis decorata, verumetiam legibus ornata. There∣fore Alexander Seuerus vsed both the sword and the penne, as well in decreeing of his lawes at home, as in mannaging of his warres abroad, Consilijs togae, & militiae literatos adhibere. I speak not of such bookes which Plato compareth Adonijs hor∣tis, fresh and full of sauour in the morning, and withered and de∣cayed at night, like the Elephants of India at their first sight in Asia, were so wondred at, that Antiochus the great, hauing but two, named the one Aiax, the other Patroclus, the names of two Princes: but when these Elephants became so common in Rome
and in Asia, that they were in euery Cōsuls triumph, they were cal∣led but Boues Lucanias; a great change frō the names of Greeke Princes, to bee named oxen of Lucania. Bookes are no otherwise; for in auntient time, when bookes were yet rare, they were fellowes and companions with Kings & Princes in courts, it so seemed by Alexander the great, who could not sleepe before he laid Homer with his dagger vnder his pillow; and by Scypio Affrican, who would not frō Rome to Carthage, without either Panetius or Polybius in his company: and now bookes being common, are so little regarded, rather bought for their golden tytles which the Printer giueth them for his sale, then for the matter therein by the Author written for the Revder, much like to Mithridates sword, whose scabbard was farre more precious and richer without, then the blade within. Of such bookes Plato speaketh, Qui subitò & vno die nati, celerimè pereunt, therfore seldome seene in sight are most in request. The Ebaine tree which Pompey the great brought in his triumph into Rome, was more wondred & gazed vpon, then all the braue shewes of the triumph besides: So fewe wise words out of a wise mans mouth, are more esteemed then heapes of wordes out of an vnwise mouth, like the Abderites Embassa∣dors, more desirous to heare fewe words out of Zeno the Philoso∣phers mouth, then of all the Athenians besides: and therfore Pau. Aemilius, after he had subdued the king and kingdome of Mace∣donia, wrote no more to the Senators, but Victus est Perseus. Caesar, after he had conquered king Pharnaces, wrote no more words, but Veni, vidi, vici: Like the Lacedemonians, whose wri∣tings and speeches were so short and briefe, that they would answer either Embassadors, friends, or foes, by writing or by mouth, in two or three words. And so with the like fewe words, I referre my selfe to the gentle disposition of the reader, rather to excuse my tra∣uell in curtesie, then to accuse my goodwill wrongfully. Lodowick Lloid.
The first Booke of the Stratagems of Ierusalem. CAAP. I. Of diuers Battels and Combats. Of seuerall markes of di∣uers nations vpon the good and bad. Of the calling of Abraham, and of his praise and trauell. THe whole BIBLE is a Booke of the Battels of the Lord, and the whole life of a man a militarie marching to these Bat∣tells betweene the seede of the womā, & the Ser∣pent, which Battel was first fought in heauē be∣tweene Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his angels, at what time Satan was ouerthrowne and cast out of heauen with all his angels with him. The second Battell was in Paradise, fought be∣tweene the seede of the woman, and the seede of the Serpent, where likewise Sathan was ouer∣throwne, for then it was promised that the seede of the woman should tread downe the Serpents
head, thereby perpetuall warre was publikely pro∣claimed in Paradise, to continue betweene the seed of the woman and Sathan, and therefore are the bat∣tels of the Lord innumerable, in respect of number, for that euery liuing man must fight in this battell in his owne person for his owne life, and inuincible in respect of power and force: for all battels and victo∣ries are of the Lord, yea euen amongst Infidels and Pagans. Which if the Hebrewes had so acknowled∣ged it, and had marched truly and faithfully in the Lords battels, they should haue acknowledged this to haue bin their true Oracle, that all victories come from the Lord, and not from the arme of man. Thē the Hebrewes might haue known, that Egipt where they had bene bondmen and slaues 430. yeares, was giuen to them for a pray frō the Lord, by the hands of Moises and Aron, and after Egipt, the Canaanites, Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines, and diuers other nations were also giuen into their hands, they might haue acknowledged that the ouerthrow of 39. Kings was no small bootie to such simple men, 39. Kings ouerthrowne by Moises and Ioshua. as were no souldiers by education, but brought vp as shepheards from Abrahams time to Moises. But they forgot the great armies and legions of Frogges, Flies, Grashoppers, and such armies which the Lord prouided to fight for them, while yet they were bondmen in Egipt, where they had ten victo∣ries, and ten tryumphs, some in the midst of the land of Egipt, some in the midst of the Court of Pharao; and some in the midst of the red sea, to the wonder, and terrour of the whole world. The Hebrues might likewise haue knowne, that the Chaldeans were giuē
to the hands of the Assyrians: the Assyrians to the Persians, the Persians to the Macedonians, the Ma∣cedonians to the Romanes. Yet all these miraculous victories, which the Lorde gaue the Hebrewes ouer so many Kings and Countries, could not make them to acknowledge the author thereof, but what victories soeuer the good kings of Iudah got by seruing of the Lord, that the euil & wicked Kings both of Iuda & Israel lost by their Idolatry and contempt of the Lord, vntill they themselues were rooted out of their Countrey, slain and ouerthrowne, and their Kings taken & carried captiues, the one by Salmanasser to the Assirians, the other by Nabuchodonozer into Babilon, of whom you shall reade more, of them and of their warres here∣after. And now I thinke it most conuenient to speake somewhat of diuers seuerall combats, which is the Of combats. strongest and onely battaile, for in this battaile euery man must first ouercome himselfe, and after be ready armed to fight with Sathan and his souldiers, the onely enemie of man, against whom all men are The vow of Cherim. bounde by the vow of Cherim, to fight the battels of the Lord. We are commanded to be as subtill as Serpents to preuent the subtill stratagems of Sathan with spirituall weapons, who from the beginning against the Lord in heauen, and against man in Pa∣radise practised his policies, this is the old Dragon which Michael threw downe out of heauen, this is the serpent which the seed of the woman subdued in Paradise, this is that ghostly enemy which practi∣sed his stratagem by his seruant Pharo in Egypt, not onely by making a lawe and decree first to kill the
Hebrewes children, and after by a second decree to drowne them in Nilus, least he should be deceiued in the first, but also with a like stratagem by his ser∣uant Herod to kill to the number of 14000. yong In∣fants in Bethelem and in Iuda, among the which he sought Christ: therefore we are commanded to be strong and valiant, as the Lord commanded not on∣ly Ioshua, Dauid, and others of his owne seruants, but also Nabuchodonozer and Cyrus. In these kinde of battels or combats, euery man must be armed with such spirituall weapons, as is by Paul the Apostle appointed, to resist the violence of so great an enemy, who doth not only assault vs a∣broad, but in our chambers, yea in our beds, we must therefore wrestle with this enemy as Iacob wrestled with the Angell, for the which he was named Israel: as Iob wrestled with Sathan, for the which the Lord called him his seruant Iob: Or as Dauid did with the Gyant Goliah, for the which he was annointed King of Israel. In these kinde of combats the Prophets & Mar∣tyrs of the Lorde win many victories of Sathan and his souldiers, as Esay that was sawed in peeces by Ma∣nasses in Ierusalem, Ieremy that was stoned to death at Taphnis in Egipt by the people: Ezechiel whose brains were beaten out in Babilon, and infinite numbers of the Martyrs of the Lord, which fought in these bat∣tels of the Lord with legions of diuels, and armies of spirits, and got glorious victories, and were crow∣ned not with the Oliue of Olimpia, nor with the Lawrell of the Romanes, but with Crownes and Garlandes made of the tree of knowledge, and of
the tree of life, crownes of immortalitie, and gar∣lands of eternitie. These might say with Paul, We haue runne a good race, and fought good combattes, farre grea∣ter combattes then Romulus had with Acron, and yet it was for two kingdoms: greater then the com∣bat that Artaxerxes had with his brother Cyrus for the great kingdome and Empire of Persia, or the combattes betweene Hector and Aiax, where ma∣ny Kings and kingdomes were ouerthrowne: but the only combat which makes euery souldier stout and valiant, was by the seede of the woman who rescued Adam from the bondes of Sathan, and Adam rescu∣ed by the seed of the womā. restored him to libertie, and wanne a greater vic∣tory to Adam, then Adam had lost to Sathan: this is the strong armed man that is spoken of in the Gospell of Saint Luke, that did binde Sathan and Luke. 11. tooke his rich spoyle out of his clawes, restored to Adam his life and libertie, with a condition to stand out and resist Sathan, and to fight stoutly a∣gainst Sathan in these combattes and battailes of the Lorde, for Adam was first a murtherer of his children, before he had children, and Adam was the cause that Christ was slaine for him, thereby to saue him and his children. Vnder this strong armed Captaine, all men must march armed to fight the Lordes battaile, as Elias did, who marched himselfe against 450. false Prophets of Baal, in combat of life & death, whom hee ouercame and slue for theyr Idolatry, at the brooke Kyson.
In like sort marched Elizeus and led the whole Army of Benhadad from Dothan to Samaria blinde Elizeus lea∣deth the Ar∣my of Benha∣dad blind frō Dothan to Samaria. among their enemies, for Benhadad king of Syria had sent to bring Elizeus from Dothan to Damascus, as Achab sent Captaines with 50. souldiers to take E∣lias in mount Carmel, but Elias commaunded fire from heauen to destroy them, as he destroyed Baals Prophets: thus the Prophets of God are for theyr victories ouer Kings crowned, for the Lord raised a∣mong all Nations some faithfull seruants of his to fight in these combats, as Ioseph in Egipt, Daniel in Ba∣bilon, Iob in the land of Huz, and many such, were crowned victors, and triumphed ouer Sathan, for none shall bee crowned saith Bernard, but hee that obtaineth victorie, none obtaineth victory but he that fighteth, no man fighteth but with him that is his is enemie: so the Lord reserued as he said to E∣lias, 7000. in Israel, that neuer bowed, nor bended knee to Baal, for the Lord hath marked his people in all Countreys with the letter Tau in their fore∣heads. So hee marked the Hebrewes in the land of Go∣sen, to be saued from the plagues in Egipt, the An∣gell also was commaunded of the Lord to marke the doore postes of the houses in Egipt with the sprinkling of the bloud of a lambe, as a mark to spare his people. So the Lord commaunded his Angels to goe They that mourned in Ierusalem were marked with the let∣ter Tau. through the whole Cittie of Ierusalem, that those that wept and lamented for Ierusalem, should bee marked in theyr foreheads with the letter Tau.
The Lord also charged those Angels that had power to hurt the earth and the sea, not to hurt the earth vntill the seruants of the Lord were sealed and marked in their foreheads. Paul as himself said, bare the markes of the Lord Pauls marke. Iesus in his body, opposing the markes of those stripes which hee bare for his maister Christ, as a mark of his Apostleship against the outward circum∣cision of the Iewes, these were externall markes by the Prophets set downe in the olde Testament, but in the new Testament, the seruants of the Lord were marked, with the bloud of the Lambe Christ Iesus, a true marke of our saluation. There is a Nation in the East Countrey, dwel∣ling Iacobites marke. in some part of Armenia called Iacobites, both circumcised and baptised, that are marked both in their forehead and in their breast with the character or likenesse of the crosse. The wicked also haue their inward and out∣ward markes: Cain had his marke, not outwardly seene by men, but inwardly so felt of Cain, that hee Cains mark. oft did wish to die, and could not, for that was his marke, that whosoeuer kild Cain should bee seuen folde punished. Esau had also his marke, and such a marke, that all the Edomites that came of him had also Esaus mark, Esaus marke whose marke was that hee could not repent though he sought it with teares. So had the false Prophets their markes, as the messengers of Sathan, to speake lies to the people: and so Heretiques had their marks, for blaspheming the name of the Lord, denying one article or other of our faith.
I leaue these inward marks to such as be marked in cōscience with hot Irons, & come to the external marke ofthe Romans, who marked men cōdemned to die, with two letters, Cappa & Thita, as marks of death: and those that should be saued with T. and a. Turneb. lib. 24. cap. 12. as markes to liue: this letter Tau was vsed in many Countries for a marke to liue: so souldiers that esca∣ped The markes of diuers na∣tions with the letter Tau. the daungers of warres, were likewise marked with this letter Tau. As among the Romanes by the decrees of Honorius and Arcadius, both Emperours of Rome, the souldiers were marked vpō their armes. The Thracians were marked in their foreheades, whereof they were so proud, and reioyced so much of these markes to terrifie their enemies, like the old Britaines who painted themselues, that they might seeme terrible in their warres. Of these markes of souldiers I shall haue occasion to speake of, when I entreat of military discipline to souldiers, omitting now further to speake of letters written in seruaunts foreheads, of rings on bondmens feete, and haires of the head halfe shaued. Of which Appulius writes, Appul. lib. 9. Frontes literati, Pedes annulati, &c. So that among di∣uers nations they were marked on the breast, fore∣heads, hands, and armes. As the Syracusans burned their seruants in the forehead with the print of a horse, to be knowne as bondmen, so the Sameans burned the Athenian souldiers taken captiue in the warres, in the forhead with the print of an Owle. And in like sort the Athe∣nians burned the captiue souldiers of Samana in the Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 6. cap. 18. forehead with the likenesse of a ship.
Among the Lacedemonians, and in most part of Greece, it was not lawfull for bondmen to weare haire neither on head nor face. Among the Romains for 454. yeares, there was no Barbers seene nor knowne: Pub. Tycinius was the first that brought Barbers fom Sicilia to Rome: and The time that Barbers were first seen in Rome Scypio Affrican was the first that shaued his beard in Rome. It is written that Caesar the first Emperor of Rome, so hated hairie heads, that whersoeuer he met them, he caused the hinder part of their head to be shaued that they might seeme bald, because hee was bald himselfe. Phillip king of Macedon vnderstanding that one Philip. of his Captaines died the haire of his head & beard, disgraded him from his place. The like did Archida∣mus Archidamus. king of Sparta, when he sawe one with coloured haire, exhorting and animating the people, forbad him straight to speake, saying he could not haue a true tongue, that had a false coloured head: yet both Pirrhus and Hannibal in Italy coloured their haires, but it was a stratagem to deceiue the enemies that they should not be knowne. I come to speake of greater markes, the markes of calling of Gods people, both of the Iewes and of the Gentiles: For as Abraham was the first man of Abraham the first man marked. the stocke of the Hebrewes, that is called the Father of the faithfull, so was he the first man marked amōg the Hebrewes, to confesse the name of the Lord, to whom the first promise was made, who beeing ad∣monished by an Oracle at 75. yeares of age to leaue the Chaldeans, remoued to Carres a Citie of Mesopo∣tamia,
where he buried his olde father Thare, from thence Abraham remoued, and went to dwell in the land of Canaan, where so great a famine began, that Abraham with his wife were forced to flie to Egipt, where likewise he doubted that the beautie of Sarah Gen. 12. Abraham feared Abi∣melech and Pharao for his wife. should put him into much perill and daunger, and therefore hee named her his sister and not his wife, for he feared Pharao, as he feared Abimelech king of Ierar, saying to his wife Sarah, I know thou art a faire woman, and therefore they will destroy me for thy sake, for I know the feare of God is not in these pla∣ces. But the Lorde deliuered Abraham from all this care and feare, and vexed both king Pharao and A∣bimelech for their wicked thoughts, and intention a∣gainst Sarah: with such terrour and feare by visions, and vexations both of themselues & of their people, that they were warned by their owne Oracles, to re∣uerence and to honour Abraham as a Prophet, after which time Abraham continued in Egipt 3. yeares, taught the Egiptians true religion, and read Astro∣nomy Abraham read Astro∣nomy in Egipt so long there, in the which Science he being instructed in his owne Countrey among the Chal∣deans, the first learned Nation and Empire of the world. Of this Abraham, Berosus the Chaldean writer Ioseph. lib. 1. de Antiq. I. reporteth these words: Post diluuium decimae aetate a∣pud Chaldeos, erat quidam iusticiae cultor, Vir magnus & syderalis sciētiae peritus. And Damasenus also reporteth that Abraham dwelt in Damascus, that at the time of Iosephus, not only his name was much spoken of, but also his house well knowne where hee dwelt in Da∣mascus,
and therefore we will speake something of the Hebrewes, of whom Abraham was the first Fa∣ther of the faithful. I am not ignorant that Heber was the first of the Hebrewes name before Abraham. In those dayes seldom was seene any battel, for the first and greatest onely battell among kings that we read of at that time, was the battell at Siddim, which was fought in the time of Abraham. CHAP. II. Of the Battell at Siddim, where foure kings were ouer∣throwne by Abraham, and Lot rescued. IN this Battell met nine Kings to∣gither to ioine battel, foure against fiue, the king of Shinaer, the king of Ellasar, the king of Elam, and the king of the nations, against the fiue kings of Pentapolis: In this battell were Rephaims, Emims and Horims, Gyants, which liued of theft and robbery in mount Seir, and in other places: yet in this battell the fiue kings of Pentapolis, were ouerthrowne by the foure kings and fled, and Lot the Nephew of Abraham, was taken prisoner in this battell by the Assirian kings, besides they tooke all the wealth and substance of these fiue kinges for a spoyle to the souldiers, they were such kings at that time, as had the whole Em∣pire of Asia betweene them foure. Abraham rescued the fiue kings, and Lot his Ne∣phew. Abraham hearing this hard news of the ouerthrow of these kings his neighbors, & of Lot his nephew, v∣sed this stratagem, made strait after thē in the night time with his onely houshold seruants, which were
three hundred and eighteene, came suddainly, and set vpon them, fought with them, ouerthrew them, and chased them to Dan, where Abraham gaue them another battell, recouered Lot, the men, the women captiues, and all the wealth of the fiue Cities called Pentapolis, and deliuered all the wealth to the kings of Zodom and Gomorrah, the owners therof, and kept no part to him nor to his souldiers. This was a battell of the Lord, that Abraham be∣ing but a priuate man with his houshold seruants o∣uerthrew foure of the greatest kings of Asia, for in these battels of the Lord numbers are not respected. As Gedeon marched with three hundred Souldiers, The victorie of Gedeon o∣uer the Ma∣dianites. Iud. 7. against the Madianites and Amalekites, who were like Grashoppers in number, and like sandes of the sea in multitude, yet were they ouerthrowne, cha∣sed and slaine an infinite number by Gedeon, and his three hundred souldiers: with the like stratagem as Abraham did the Assirians. So Dauid with foure hundred souldiers marched after the Amalekites after they had burned Ziclags, Dauid res∣cued his two wiuess. 1. Sam. 30. and had taken Dauids two wiues with al the rest cap∣tiues, slue & ouerthrew them, and rescued his wiues at Bezor, with all the men, women, cattel, wealth, and all the spoyle which the Amalekites tooke away frō Ziclags. But yet Dauid according to his maner, wold neuer begin battel before he had consulted with the Lord, commanded Abiather the Priest to bring him the Ephod, and was assured thereby of the victorie ouer the Amalekites at Bezor, as Gedeon was of his victorie ouer the Madianites. So Abraham rescued Lot his Nephewe, at the
battel of Siddim, where Melchisedech king of Salē, for the victory therof met Abrahā, & entertained him & his soldiers with great liberalitie, & Melchisedech of∣fered gifts vnto Abrahā, and sacrifice vnto the Lord, with thanks for the victorie, and Abraham gaue Mel∣chisedech Gen. 14. tythes of all the spoyles hee had by the vic∣torie, and deliuered it to the king of Zodom, and the rest of the kings their wiues, and all the men and wo∣men captiues which the foure kings tooke away, and Abraham refused to take the worth of a shoe lat∣chet at the king of Zodoms hand, least he should say I haue made Abraham rich. So that Abraham was in his own person in the first and greatest battel, where nine kings met in battell: after this Abraham retur∣ned to Canaan, and dwelt in Hebron, vntill Zodome and the rest of the fiue cities were destroied with fire from heauen in the sight of Abraham, who but fewe yeares before defended Zodom from the foure kings of Assyria. And at that time Abraham staied the Angels, as they went to destroy Sodom, vnder the oake of Mam∣bre, Three An∣gels feasted at Mambre with Abra∣ham. where he feasted them, and intreated them on the behalfe of Zodome, that if ten godly men might be found in it, the citie might be saued, but none was found there but iust Lot, at this verie time vnder the oake of Mambre Isaac was promised to Abraham, for so the Lorde named him at that time, Sarah his mother being 90. yeares old. Foure were named be∣fore they were borne. So Samuel was borne of Anna his mother, so Ia∣cob, and so Ioseph his sonne were borne of barren women, as Isaac was, foure also were named before they were borne, Ismael the sonne of Abraham by Agar, Isaac, Solomon, and Iosias.
Now againe to Abraham, after Lot was rescued by him, Lot dwelt againe in Zodom, among repro∣bates Tantae vir∣tutis est, quā∣tae & difficul∣tatis bonum esse inter ma∣los. Bernar. Epis. 25. and wicked vngodly men, being named iust Lot, hard it was for Lot to liue honest or iust among such wicked Zodomites, and yet in Zodom Lot saued himself, but in Zoar Lot was ouerthrowne: Abraham could rescue Lot at the battell at Dan from 4. kings, the Angels could saue Lot from the fire & brimstone in Zodom, yet could not Lot saue himself from drun∣kennesse in Zoar, so fowle a fact by so iust a man may not be much spoken off. Hence grew the first beginning of the Moabites and Ammonites, enemies vnto God, so much may be spoken of Ismael Abrahams sonne, by Agar, who Ismaelites would not be called Aga∣reni of Agar, but Sarace∣ni of Sarah. grew so great & so mighty on earth, that they would not be called Agareni from Agar the bond-woman their mother, from whence they tooke their begin∣ning, but they would be called Saraceni, as borne of Sarah the true wife of Abrahā, & as the Ammonites and Moabites were left to plague the Hebrewes, as pricks in their sides, and needles in their eyes, so the Saracens & Turkes are now left to plague the Chri∣stians with sword and fire. Before the battell at Siddim, no battels in a man∣ner haue bene fought, but what was by Nimrod don, who liued within a hundred & thirtie yeares of the flood, at what time people liued, not knowing the name of a king, vntill Nimrod grew so mightie and so great, that hee brought the people vnder subiection, in such feare and awe of him, that they rather wor∣shipped him as a God, then obeyed him as a king, whereof Nimrod waxed so proud, that it grew to a
prouerbe, that if any Monarke or King should waxe too insolent or proud, he should be noted & named hic alter Nimrod, for now Nimrod hauing obtained the Monarchy into his hands without resistance, he called the people together to make a Tower frō the The Tower of Babel builded by Nimrod. earth vnto heauē, to reuenge the iniuries of his pre∣decessors, and to defend himselfe & his Empire, and to resist the violence of any further deludge: He for want of men to fight withal on earth, made a Tower that he might ascend vp to goe fight with the host of heauen. So Cyrus imitating Nimrod, hauing subdued all Cyrus army to Scythia. nations and kingdomes about him, went for want of men to fight against him, to fight against women into Scythia. Alexander also imitating Cyrus, after he had sub∣dued Alexan. voy∣age to India. all men, and that no king would fight against him, he went vnto India to fight with Elephants. Leauing Nimrod to build his Towers in the aire, Cyrus to fight with women in Scythia, and Alexander the great to fight with Elephants in India, we come to Ninus, who tooke vpon him to be the first Mo∣narch Ninus the first Mo∣narch. ouer the Assirians, 150. yeares after Nimrod, who after hee had ioyned his force with Aricus king of Arabia, hee went with his army against Babilon, subdued it, and brought it into Assyria, led his army vnto Armenia, gaue battell to the Armenians, sub∣dued them also, tooke their king Barsanes, and went Barsanes. Diodor, fic. lib. 3. conquering all the kingdomes about, vntill he came vnto Medea, where the king fought with Ninus, and the battell was equally fought of both parts, but af∣ter that in another battell, Ninus ouerthrewe the
Meades, and tooke their King in the battell, and hangd him, his wife, and his seuen children, in his Farnus K. of the Meades. owne kingdome. So that within seuenteene yeares, Ninus subdu∣ed all Asia, and became so great, that if the authors write truth, hee had such an armie as none is read to Seuen hun∣dred thou∣sand. haue the like, especially at that time when the world was not populous, within 50. yeares after the flood. Before Ninus, the Greeke, nor the Romane wri∣ters, make no mention of any warre or battell, who proceeded forward and marched (after he had con∣quered Arabia, Medea, and Babilon) vnto the Bactri∣ans, and fought with Zoroastes their king, who is said to haue first found the Art of Astronomy and Ma∣gique, but this Zoroastes was slain in the field by Ni∣nus, and Ninus himselfe slaine with an arrow as Oro∣sius saith: others say that hee was slaine by his wife Semyramis. It is written of this Zoroastes, that when all Zoroastes laught at his birth. The first Ido∣latry by Ni∣nus. other Infants weepe at their birth, he laught. In Ninus time, we reade of the first Idolatry in scripture, and that by Ninus himselfe, who set vp the Image of Belus his father, in a Temple which Ninus made & dedicated to his father Belus after his death, in Niniuie, where all the countries and people, came to worship and reuerence the name of Belus, which grew in such credit in Asia, and the East kingdomes, that there was no lawe, nor religion, but what by Baals Priests and Baals Prophets were allowed. And at that time that Nabuchodonozer raigned in Babilon, a thousand yeares after Ninus, Baal was so reuerenced and honored in Babilon, that if any man should speake words against Baal, or not kneele to
him, or worship him, should die for it. So was Sy∣drach and his fellowes throwne into a hot fierie for∣nace to be burned. So was Daniel throwne into a denne to be deuoured of Lyons, but neither Ly∣ons nor fire had power to hurt the seruants of the Lord. This Baal was the onely Idoll in the East coun∣trey, vntill Elias found out the shifts of the false Pro∣phets of Baal, in the time of Achab King of Israel, who first nourished Baals prophets in Israel: After Elias, Daniel found out in Babilon the falshood of Baals priestes, how they cousoned Nabuchodono∣zer, for his great allowance, of bread, wine, and meate. Leauing Belus to be the first Idoll, and Ninus the first Idolater, after whom little mention is made of Baal the first Idoll. the most part of the kings of Assyria, sauing a cato∣logue of their names, though the Greekes (as theyr manner is) speake more then needs of them, for the which Berosus the Chaldean writer doth much re∣prehend them for it, and Plato their owne countrey Plato in T∣meo. man called them children, for that they are addic∣ted vnto fables, and not giuen to learne antiquities: but letting the Assirians to sleepe in silence, I will re∣turne to the marching of the Hebrewes, vnder Moses out of Egipt.
CHAP. III. Of the calling of Moses and Aaron to lead the children of Israel out of Egipt. THe Hebrewes which were 430. years bōdmē & slaues vnto Pharao in Egipt, vntil they multiplied to be such in number, as Pharao doub∣ted either to let them goe out of Egipt, least they ioyned with the Affricans, or with the Assirians, to warre vpon Egipt, or else least the number of the He∣brues should be so multiplied in Egipt, as they might ouerthrow Pharao in his owne kingdome: and ther∣fore Pharao kept them in slauery and bondage, vex∣ing and molesting them, and withall decreed a lawe to put himselfe out of doubts, and his kingdome out of danger, that all the male children of the Hebrues The male children of the Hebrues were thrown to Nilus. borne in Egipt, should be presently murthered after their birth, with a great charge giuē that they should bee slaine, his feare was such, that it did not con∣tent Pharao, but least hee should be deceiued with killing of them, hee made another lawe that they should be drowned in the Riuer Nilus. But Pharao determined, and God disposed, for the Lord reuenged the house of Israel vpon Pharao, The tyrannie of Pharao. with ten horrible and terrible plagues, and at last Pharao the king, his peeres, and the most part of the nobles of his land, and almost all his kingdom, were drowned in the red sea to an infinite number, and as
Orosius saith, more of the Egiptians were drowned, then the number of the Hebrewes that came out of Oros. lib. 1. cap. 10. Egipt, yet there is no iust number written by Iosephus, who ought best to know it. As the Egiptians were compared to the Romains A compari∣son betweene the Egiptians and the Ro∣manes. for their crueltie, so were the Hebrewes compared to the Christians for their punishment, the Iewish Synagogue to the Christian Church, and as the He∣brewes were plagued by the Egiptians 430. yeares in Egipt, so were the Christians so long afflicted and persecuted throughout all the Empire of Rome, but as Pharao and all Egipt were destroied for their vexa∣tions of the Hebrewes, so Rome, and the Empire of Rome, was plagued for their bloudie persecutions a∣gainst the Christians, and therefore euery seuerall plague in Egipt, shall be compared to euery seuerall persecution in Rome. The Lord now being armed to mannage warre with the Egiptians, and to reuenge the wrong of his people the Hebrewes, hee appointed his souldiers readie, and diuided them into seuerall troupes and bands. He hath an armie aboue in the heauens, the Sun, the Moone, and the Starres, hee hath another armie in the aire, lightning, thunder, haile-stones, and such The armies of the Lord in Egipt vn∣der Moses. souldiers: another in the waters, whales, crocodiles, serpents, and such monstrous creatures in the seas. Another in the wildernesse and woods, as Lyons, Beares, Wolues, Tygres, and the like beasts. Yea the Lord hath his armies in ditches & lakes, as Frogges and Toades, and hath also his armie euen out of the dust & ashes of the earth, Lice, Flies, and vermines,
The Captaine that the Lord appointed ouer these armies was Moses, which was but a shepheard, to dant the courage of Pharao, who at the commande∣ment of the Lord, marched to Egipt with these legi∣ons of souldiers, to take his people from the bōdage of Pharao, threatening warres vnto Pharao, and yet not without conditions of peace, according to the lawe of armes, if Pharao would let his people peace∣ably depart out of Egipt, with bag and baggage. Moses (to whome Iehouah appeared in the bush burning) was commaunded to take the charge of the Hebrues, and lead them from Egipt to the lande of Canaan, Moses obeyed the Lords commandemēt, yet accused himselfe of some imperfection he had in his speech, and therefore had Aaron his brother for his Orator, who hauing done the Lords commaun∣dement in Egipt to Pharao, their message was reiec∣ted, and had no audience at Pharaos hand. Thē was Moses cōmanded by the Lord, to stretch his rod vpon Nilus, and vpon all the riuers of Egipt, The first plague. the pooles and standing waters, that they might be turned into blood, so that the Egiptians were con∣strained to drinke of that bloodie riuer Nilus, the iust iudgement of God vpon Pharao, who thirsted for blood, to drink blood, like so Tomyris Queen of Scy∣thia spake to Cyrus, whose head she caused to be cut off being slaine in the field, and to bathe it in a great tunne full of blood, saying, drink Cyrus of that blood which thou didst euer thirst for. So Pharao in like sort was forced to drinke of that bloody riuer, where be∣fore time hee commanded all the male children of the Hebrewes to be drowned, and where Moses him selfe being but three months old, so long his mother
kept him secretly vnknowne vnto Pharao, but Amri Moses father, much fearing that he, his wife & family should die for it, according to the decree that Pharao made, committed him to Gods prouidence in Ni∣lus, by whose prouidence Moses was saued, to bee a captain ouer his people, to lead them out of Egipt, to plague Pharao, and to reuenge the 430. years cala∣mities & miseries of the Hebrues in Egipt, vpō Pha∣rao & his kingdom, with ten such terrible plagues, as was neuer heard or read of before, like in all points to the ten cruell persecutions, which cōtinued in all the Romane Empire during the raigne and gouern∣mēt of ten Emperors, which persecuted the Christi∣ans in Rome, as Pharao plagued the Hebrues in Egipt. This first plague of the Egiptians, may be cōpared to the first persecution of the Christians, vnder that The compa∣rison of the first plague with the first persecuton. cruel Emperor Nero: at what time there was nothing in Rome, nor in Italy, but as in Egipt, for as Nilus & all the riuers of Egipt wer turned into blood, so in Rome in euery street, was nothing but sheading of christiās blood, vnder the tiranny of Nero, by whō Paul, Peter, & diuers others of the chief members of the church, were most extreamely persecuted, some beheaded, some hangd, & some burnt, so that (beside his vehe∣ment persecutiōs to the Christians) few escaped the cruelty of Nero, otherwise he spared none, no not Se∣neca his maister, nor his mother Aggrippina, but Nero like his cruell vncle Caligula, wished all Rome to haue but one neck, that he might with one stroke cut it of, for he caused Rome to be set on fire, & to burn 6. daies to resemble ye burning of Troy, where he in his tower Maecenatiā beholding the great flames of fire, recited merily certain Odes of Homer, touching the burning Orosi. lib. 7. of Troy.
Thus from one tyrannie to another, he passed all men in tirannie, that as the fish that was in Nilus, and al the riuers of Egipt, died & stank in the riuers, so the Christians were murthered & persecuted by Nero, whose bodies likewise stanke for want of buriall: but as Nero without mercy or respect slue all, spa∣red none, and at last slue himselfe, being proclaimed Nero slue himselfe. by the Senators of Rome a traytor to his Countrey, thus Nero liued and ended his life with blood, and for that he could kill no more, hee kild himselfe, in whom also ended the whole stocke and familie of Caesar. So Abimelech the base sonne of Gedeon, slue his seuentie brethren to vsurpe the gouerment by de∣stroying the lawfull sonnes of Gedeon, or like proud Hamon, who sought with all meanes possible to de∣stroy Mardocheus, and all the Iewes within the hun∣dred Ester 3. and seuen and twentie Prouinces of Persia. So Nero sought the destruction of the Christians, with∣in all the Empire of Rome: Achab was not so greedie to haue his wrath and anger satisfied vpon the Pro∣phet Micheas, nor Iezabel vpon the Prophet Elias, as 3. Reg. ca. 19 Nero was to haue Paul the Apostle and Peter slaine in Rome, who fild all the streets of Rome with the blood of Christians, as Manasses king of Iuda filled all the 4. Reg. ca. 21 streets of Ierusalem with innocent blood: so that Ne∣ro could not be satisfied, vntill he had ended his tra∣gedie, killing his mother, his wiues & his sisters, and after himself, as Mithridates king of Pontus had done before him. The second plague. The second message of Moses was to command Pharao to let the Hebrues depart out of Egipt, which
being refused & denied, the Lord vsed a stratagem, began to vexe them with a second plague, with an vgly armie of Frogges, which assaulted Pharao and his country so fiercely, that all the Riuers and all the land of Egipt were couered ouer with loathsome Frogges, Pharaos Court, his priuie chamber, his vic∣tuals, An armie of Frogges. vpon euery man these Frogges scrawled, clim∣bed vpon Pharao, his Peeres, his States, and vpon all his people, without respect of persons they spa∣red none, that all the force & strength of Egipt, could not resist the force & violence of these simple crea∣tures, but were constrained to forsake their houses, their beds, and to seeke to escape these filthy Frogs, who left no secret place vnsought, but the Hebrews Exod. 8. in the land of Gosen were free from these plagues. Pharao being dismaied and fearefull to see such vgly sights & terrible stratagems, was forced to yeeld himselfe to Moses the Captaine and leader of this armie, at what time Moses had his second tryumph in the midst of Egipt. This was the second victorie and The second tryumph of Moses in E∣gipt. tryumph, which the Hebrewes had in Egipt, by an armie of Frogs, weake souldiers of themselues, but there is nothing so weak that the Lord cannot cause to ouercome the greatest power of man. Yet Pha∣raos heart was so hardned, that hee answered Moses message from the Lord, Quis est dominus? Who is the Lord saith Pharao, most blasphemously, much like to the blasphemy of Nicanor, who doubted of The blas∣phemy of Ni∣canor puni∣shed. the Lord being in heauen, and demaunded of Iudas Machabaeus, Is there a Lord in heauen, that can com∣maund you to keepe the Sabboth day? But I haue power on earth to execute the kings commaunde∣ment
Nabuchodonozer, besides him there is no Lord in heauen nor in earth, that can defend you out of Nabuchodonozers hand, but that tongue which blas∣phemed the Lord was cut off, and cast to the sowles of the aire to be eaten: the head and the hand that fought against the Lord, were cut off, he being slain in the battell by Iudas Machabeus, and hangd vpon the Temple in Ierusalem. This secōd plague may be well resembled to the The compa∣rison of the second plagne with the se∣cond persecu∣tion. second persecution vnder Domitianus the Emperor, who, with no lesse crueltie persecuted the Christi∣ans in Rome, then Pharao did the Hebrewes in Egipt, or as Nero his predecessor did in Italy, but as in Egipt all men fled from their houses, their beddes, their ta∣bles, to seeke some rest from the Frogges, so in Rome and in Italy, the poore Christians fled euery where frō place to place to hide themselues in secret caues and dennes, to escape the cruell sword of this swel∣ling toade Domitianus, who excelled Pharao in ty∣rannie. Pharao saide, Quis est dominus? Who is the The horrible blasphemie both of Pha∣rao, and Do∣mitianus a∣like. Lord? I know not the Lord. But Domitianus named himselfe Lord, and god Domitianus, and by a de∣cree commanded so to be named of all mē in Rome, and throughout the Empire of Rome: and therwith∣all caused his Image to be set vp in the Temple at Ie∣rusalem. This cruell and blasphemous Emperour Domi∣tianus, Domitianus Image set vp in the temple as Ierusalem. so persecuted the Christians, and so vexed the whole Empire, that not only the Citizens of Rome, but also all Italy, sought other places in other coun∣tries as banished men, to seeke to auoyd the sword of this bloodie Emperor, who passed Pharao in blas∣phemy,
and Nero in tyrannie, but his end was no better then Neroes, for as Nero slue himself with his own hand, so was Domitianus in his owne house murthered & slain Domitianus slaine in his owne house by his ser∣uants. by his owne seruants, for he that killeth many, must of some be kild, and so Domitianus was, for blood is reuen∣ged with blood, and is one of those foure sinnes that crieth vp to heauen for vengeance: but Rome was euer full of blood betweene their forrein warres abroad, and their ciuill warres at home. CHAP. IIII. Of the third and fourth plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the third and fourth persecutions of the Christians. MOyses againe after two denialls, mar∣cheth with his armie against Pharao to his third battell, which was with more The third plague. simple and weake souldiers, then the second battell was: for the Lord com∣maunded Moses to smite the dust of the earth with his rod, that all the dust of the earth became Lice throughout all the land of Egipt, Exod. 8. and these were the armies of the Lord, the which crept vpon euery man, and vpon euery beast, and went as in battell raie, and well instructed souldiers, vpon Pharao, his Lords, and his Courtiers, and ouer all the land of E∣gipt, this armie spared no place, feared no man, but the land of Gosen, and the Hebrewes there dwelling. To this were Iamnes and Iambres, and all Soothsay∣ers Iamnes and Iambres. and Charmers of Egipt publikely forced to say, that it was digitus dei, the finger of God, and Pharao after them, was (as afore twise) now the third time constrai∣ted to yeeld to Moses, but still without grace or repen∣tance.
Thus euery victorie had his triumph, and euerie triumph was solemnized without either a stroak giuen, or a sword drawne, but with a white rod in Moses hand, so that it seemed rather a combat betweeene Moses and Pharao, then a set battell betweene the Hebrewes and the Egiptians. The third persecution vnder Traiane in Rome, in all points is to be likened to the third plague vnder Pharao The third persecution. in Egipt, for the bloud of the Christians in Rome, and the plague of the Hebrewes in Egipt, crie for equal ven∣geance and iustice vpon wicked Tyrants and murthe∣rers vnto heauen. Though Traiane was wrote vnto by Pliny the second, to admonish him to mittigate the vehe∣ment persecutidus of the Christians, certifying Traiane that the Christians liued soberly and quietly, not offen∣ding the Romane lawes, but by professing their religi∣gion and the name of Christ. Notwithstanding Pliny Pliny to Traiane. could do litle good with his Letters to Traiane the Em∣perour in the behalfe of the Christians at Rome, no more then Philo could do with his perswasions to Nero, for the Iewes in Alexandria, though Philo himselfe be∣ing learned and graue, and of great authoritie with the Iewes, spake in person to Nero, and yet Appian the E∣giptian, Philo was not heard of Nero. being but a schoolemaister in Alexandria, a man of no reputation, had audience of Nero, which was deni∣ed to Philo, so much Rome hated the Christians, & Egipt the Hebrews, that their plagues & persecutiōs may well bee compared together, for still persecution encreased in Rome, in so much that the Christians that were dis∣persed & scattered in euery place for feare, were so per∣secuted, that vnder Traiane and vnder Sapor King of Sapor King of Persia. Persia, infinite slaughter was made of the Christians, and euery where, where the Romane Emperours ru∣led,
th was but sword and fire, but the more the Christians were persecuted, the more they were en∣creased, the more they were hanged, slaine, and bur∣ned, the more were they multiplied, and encouraged through faith, to esteeme little or nothing these tyrants, or theyr tyrannie, which might moue the Romanes as well to say, that it was Digitus dei in the third per∣secution, as the Egiptians did confesse in their third plague. For if the Egiptians had obserued how the Hebrews in the land of Gosen, had neuer heard, or seene, or felt a∣ny plague, being in one Countrey, and at one time, nor so much as a dogge among the Hebrewes miscarried, or if the Romanes had but considered the workes of the Lord, how hee encreased the Christians to sur∣mount the slaughters of the persecutions, and streng∣thened the Christians to conquer the crueltie of these Tyrants, that as the Hebrews multiplied in Egipt to the ouerthrow of Egipt, in spite of Pharaos killing & drow∣ning: so the Christians multiplyed in all the Romane Empire, for all theyr slaughter and destroying of the Christians. But no amendment appeared in Pharao by the three former plagues, then marcheth Moses forward with his fourth Army, commaunding with one mes∣sage still; thus saith the Lorde, Let my people goe, The fourth plague. or else to bee afflicted with the fourth plague, with the like simple Army of souldiers, as before in the second and the third, for great swarmes of flyes came into the Court of Pharao, and into all the lande of Egipt, so that all Egipt was corrupted by this infi∣nite multitude of flyes, but in the lande of Gosen,
(to the great wonder of Pharao and his people) were none of these souldiers seene: for the Lord had sepera∣ted the lande of Gosen where his people the Hebrewes dwelt, that they should not bee touched either with Frogs, Flies, or Lice. Pharao, and all his kingdome of Egipt, man and beast, were so bitten and infected with these swarmes of Flies, and wearied with these souldi∣ers, The fourth yeelding of Pharao to Moses. that Pharao againe yeelded to Moses, and requested Moses to do sacrifice for him vnto the Lord, and promi∣sed Moses that Israel should goe out of Egipt. Notwithstanding he kept no promise, but still har∣dened his heart, and prouoked the Lord to plague him, his court, and his kingdome. It seemed the Egiptians hated the Hebrewes mortally, being thus persecuted with such horrible plagues, that they still yeelded, but neuer repēted. But no plague, no calamitie, could moue Pharao to yeeld obedience to the lord, neither acknow∣ledge his name, but still saying Nescio dominum, but by meanes made to Moses to remooue these plagues from him, yeelding euer the victory to Moses, but neuer yeel∣ding his heart to the Lord. In Rome, in Antioch, in Alexandria, in Caesaria, and e∣uery where else where the Romanes had any gouern∣ment, the Iewes were giuen to be deuoured of wild and fierce beasts, as Lyons, Elephants, and Tygres, and to The fourth persecution. fight vpon publike theaters to solemnize the tryumphs of Vespasian & Titus. And therefore were the Hebrues well compared to the Christians, for their manifolde plagues and miseries, and the Egiptians to the Romains for their tyrannie. Yet the Hebrewes had some oddes The fighting of the Iewes with wilde beasts. more then the Christians had, for they might fight on publike shewes & vpō theaters, with Lyons, Elephants, and wild beasts, which Titus sent frō Ierusalem to Rome,
to beautifie his father Vespasians triumph to the number of 16000. Iewes: but the Christians with present death, with all the tortures that could be inuented, executed vpon them. I may not forget Pharao in Egipt, for his well deser∣ued plagues, the violence whereof he could not resist, nor defend himselfe frō these armies in his priuy cham∣ber. For that it was the Lords battell, as Iamnes and Iam∣bres, and the charmes of Egipt before did confesse. So Nabuchodonozer cōfessed, after he was taken from The yeelding of tyrants. the throne of his kingdome in Babilon, to liue among beasts in the field. So Manasses cōfessed after he was taken captiue from his kingdome in Iudah, to become from a king a bond∣man in Babilon. So Iulian the Apostata was constrained, after he threw into the aire a handfull of his heart blood, to say, Vicisti Galile: and so all blasphemers and tyrants confesse, that the Lord is God, when they are punished and plagued, and cannot resist it, and yet Pharao in Egipt would not confesse that it was the finger of God, as Iamnes & Iam∣bres did, neither acknowledging the Lord to be God, as Nabuchodonozer and Manasses did, neither yeelding the Blasphemers confesse the Lord to be God. conquest vnto the Lord as Iulian the Apostata did, and therefore Moses is sent vnto Pharao to denounce vn∣to him the fift plague, and to giue Pharao the space of a whole day to think on it, assuring Pharao, the next mor∣ning it should come to passe, vnlesse hee would let his people goe.
CAAP. V. Of the fift and sixt plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the fift and sixt persecutions of the Christians. BEhold the fift plague by the hand of the Lord vpon Pharao, and vpon his The fift plague. cattell, his Horses, Asses, Camels, Ox∣en, and Sheepe, with a mightie great morraine, so that all the cattel of Egipt died, and of the cattell of the Hebrues died not one. Pharao being with this astonished, more fearefull of these plagues and losses, then carefull to auoyd punishments, or mindfull of re∣pentance, not acknowledging God to be the Lorde, sent to the lande of Gosen to know whether any of these plagues happened among the Hebrewes, being instruc∣ted and certified that there was nothing in the lande of Gosen but loue, mirth and ioy, none of their cattell, nor of their beasts died. It is the nature of wicked men to enuie vertue and godlines, in good men. Yet Pharao reuolted from the Lord, and refused his mercies often offered, though afore-hand he knew, and Moses told him, that the next day the Lord should bring this fift plague to passe. And so before the waters were turned into blood, before the Frogges, the Lice, and the Flies, who like armed souldiers Phalanges wise assaulted Pharao, of the which hee was warned before by Moses, but yet it mooued not Pharao for all this to repentance, though Pharao was often astonished, and mooued to yeeld victorie, yet not to embrace penitencie, far worse then Esau who would haue repented, but could not, Pharao and Esau com∣pared. The fift per∣secution. though he sought it with teares. This fift plague may fitly and well be compared to the fift persecution vnder Sept. Seuerus, for as in Egipt
both man and beast died of the morraine, so vnder this cruell Emperour, as well by bloodie persecution, as ci∣uil warres, euery where blood was shead, beside the Ro∣mane legions of souldiers were slain, that the slaughter was infinite. For like as in Egipt their horses, asses, oxen, camels, and sheepe, and all their beasts were slaine with a mightie great morraine, so the Romane generals, their collonels, captaines, and all kind of souldiers were slain, as wel in Rome and Italy, as euery where throughout the Romane Empire, as well with wars, as with diuers sick∣nesses & diseases, yet not ceasing to persecute the Chri∣stians, according to their custome, but the martyrs of the Lord, the souldiers of God increased still in number in euery country. Such euer was the prouidence of the Lord, that Sep∣timius Septimius and Antio∣chus mur∣thered. & the like, were either murdered & slaine in their country, or else banished & died out of their country as this Septimius did, or as the great Antiochus Epiphanis did being the only enemies of Gods people, tyrannizing a∣gainst Iudah, forcing them with sword & fire, to forsake God, their religion & lawes, strangling men, hanging some womē with their childrē about their necks, other women they cast downe headlong ouer the walls, with their babes hanging at their breasts; making search for the bookes of Moses, and burning all that he could finde written of the law of Moses, prophaned the temple, sacri∣ficed swines flesh against the law of the Iews, compelled the Iews to eate swines flesh, to forsake circumcisiō, and to adore his gods, his tyrannie was such, that the Sama∣ritans The tyrannie of Antiochus against the Iewes. 1. Machab. 6. sent vnto him messengers for very feare, denying themselues to be Iewes, but a people comming out of the Meades and Persians, (therin they said the truth for they were not true Iewes) requesting Antiochus that the Temple which they builded in Mount Garisim,
should be named the Temple of Iupiter, and that they would bee gouerned by Appolonius and Nichanor his Lieftenants, and become Antiochus seruants. Yet the Lord raised those in Iudah that esteemed not his threatnings, waighed not his commaundements, Ioseph. li. 12. cap. 13. feared not his tortures; for so the Lord said to Elias, that he reserued 7000. that neuer bowed nor bended knee to Baall, which kept the lawes of the Lord, as Mattathias and his fiue sonnes in Modin, and diuers other in Iudah, not weighing Antiochus nor his Lieftenants. When this cursed and cruell Antiochus sawe how little the Iewes weighed his threatnings, and how they Antiochus at his death confessed the great wrong he did to Ie∣rusalem and Iudah. stil increased in number, and how forward they were in their religion, he thereby fell sicke, and confessed, that the euill that he did to the Temple of Ierusalem, and to the inhabitants of Iudah, was the cause that he must die in a straunge land: for before, Antiochus had proudly promised to make Ierusalē a graue for al the Iewes burial, we leaue Antiochus dead out of his Countrey in Persia, and turne to Moses in Egipt. This was euer the commaundement of the Lord to Moses, rise, and stand vp before Pharao, and say thy The sixt plague. wonted message, thus saith the Lord, let my people goe. Yet nothing moued Pharao, but as a sworne enemy a∣gainst the Lord, stiffe necked and hard hatred, refused al graces and mercies offred: and therfore Moses was com∣manded to take the ashes out of the furnace, & to sprin∣kle it vp into the aire before Pharaos face, & strait out of the same ashes there brake out sores with blaines, bot∣ches & swellings both in man & beast: so that Iamnes and Iambres, & all the Sorcerers of Egipt could not stand be∣fore Moses, forthey thēselues were plagued with botches & biles, which Manetho an Egiptiā historiographer falsly
fained a fable, that these blaines and botches which the Egiptians had to be a leprousie on the Hebrues, naming The fable of Manetho of Moses which he named O∣sarphis. Tisithes. Moses Osarphis, a Priest & a law-giuer ouer the Hebrues. Yet Cheremon named him Tisithes, one contrary to ano∣ther, and both cōtrary to the truth, and as Iosephus saith, both Manetho and Cheremon affirmed, that what Moses had done concerning the myracles in Egipt to be done by Magicke. So Pliny held the like opinion, that Moses Pliny his opi∣nion of Mo∣ses. was a great Magitian, and did all those myracles before Pharao in Egipt by Magicke. Pliny had no cause so to say, for Nero the Emperour which was instructed with the best Magicians of all the East kingdomes, which Tirida∣tes king of Armenia brought with him to Rome: yet it helped not Nero at his need, neither the Emperor Iulia∣nus Apostata being well learned and throughly instruc∣ted in Magick: It could do him no good, no more then Iamnes and Iambres to Pharao. And therefore I will set downe the true History of Moses written by Iosephus, a graue & a learned Iew, and a gouernour of all the coun∣trey of Galiley, farre to be preferred before Appian an Egiptian Schoolmaister in Alexandria. Who after their Ioseph. lib. 2. contra Ap∣pionem. fabulous lies most impudently blasphemed their Tem∣ple, affirming an Asse head all of gold, by the Iewes most religiously worshipped and honoured in their temple: which was found in the time of Antiochus Epiphanis, when he sacked Ierusalem & spoyled the temple. We wil passe ouer these false Egiptiās writers, & come to Moses. This sixt plague is likened to the sixt persecution vn∣der The sixt per∣secution. Maximinus, a most cruell Emperor, being puffed vp with pride & insolency, and wearied with vulgar perse∣cutions, proceeded forward to persecute Bishops, Doc∣tors, and other learned Christians that professed the Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 37. Polycarpus. name of Christ, as Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, Ignatius;
and such he spared no degrees within the Romain pro∣uinces: but as the Egiptians were plagued with soares, botches, blaines and biles, so hee vexed the Christians with sword, fire, and extreame tortures. And as nothing could moue Pharao in Egipt to acknowledge the Lorde to be God; so nothing could moue this tyger Maximi∣nus, to acknowledge Christ to be the Lord, but without mercy and compassion persecuted & afflicted the Chri∣stians. Thus not only the Emperors of Rome tyrannized a∣gainst Christians, but also the kings of Syria, little inferi∣our to the Romans in tyrannie, against whom the Lord did not only stirre men, but women & children to con∣temne their threatnings, and to despise their crueltie, as Antiochus king of Syria commanded caudrons & brazen pots to be heated, straitly charging that he that spake but a word with Moses law, should haue his tongue cut out: this could not terrifie a woman with her seuen sonnes, who one after another, denied the eating & sacrificing of swines flesh, the defiling of their temple with Images, refusing to forsake the lawes of Moses, and in this to liue and die. The king straight commanded that the tongue of the eldest brother should be cut out, to pull the skin ouer his The perse∣cution of the seuē brethe∣ren. 2. Machab. cap. 7. head, to pare off the edges of his hands & feete, and af∣ter these tortures, while yet there was any life in him, to be fried in the hote caudron, and that in the sight of his mother, and his other sixe brethren, assuring them, that they should suffer the like torments one after another, vnlesse they would forsake the religion & lawes of the Iewes, eat swines flesh, and offer sacrifice of swines flesh vnto Iupiter, vpon the altars at Ierusalem & Samaria, but they esteemed the least iot of their lawe, more then the
greatest tortures, that either the Emperours of Rome which persecuted them, or the kings of Syria which ty∣rannized ouer them, could inuēt, saying that they wold onely obey the lawes which the Lorde gaue vnto them by Moses, and not the commaundement of the king: then were the other brethren one after another put to death with the like tortures as their elder brother was, in the sight of their mother, who spake to her children these words, My sonnes I neither gaue you breath nor soule, nor life, and as you regard not your selues, to die for the law es of the Lord, so shall the Lord restore vnto you, your soules & your liues to liue for euer. And thus were theyto rtured to death, one brother after another, and the mother after her sonnes. And now I wil returne to Pharao. CHAP. VI. Of the seuenth and eight plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the seuenth and eight persecutions of the Christians. AMd Moses was sent with his seuenth message to Pha∣rao, saying; How long will it be before thou submit thy self to me, saith the Lord? But Pharao being marked with Cains marke, who could not die, though he would faine die, or like Esau, who would repent & could not, though he sought it with teares. So Pharao though he yeelded victorie to Moses, yet could not hee yeeld his heart vnto the Lord, but refused the offers of the Lord, and despised his mercy, and therefore Moses was com∣maunded to vex Pharao with the seuenth plague, which The seuenth plague. he executed vpon Pharao with thunders, haile & light∣nings, fiery soldiers of the Lord, this smote the hearbs, & brake the trees of the field, this smote al the land of E∣gipt,
both man & beast, the thunder, the raine, the haile and the fire mingled together, so hurtfull, and so gree∣uous, as there was not the like in Egipt, since it was a na∣tiō: and yet the land of Gosen where the Hebrues dwelt neither hard thunders, nor saw fire, lightnings nor rain. But Pharao stil against his promise, staied the Hebrues in extreame bondage in Egipt, and yet with terrour and feare of the punishments, requested Moses and Aaron to cease the horrible thunders, and fierie lightnings, which being ceased, Pharao ceased not to sinne vpon sin, nei∣ther gaue he himselfe to seeke the Lord, for all the ter∣rors of so many plagues past. The Macedonians at any Eclipse of the Moone wold be so frighted and terrified, though the naturall cause were opened vnto them of the defects thereof by many Liui. 35. of their Captaines, yet would they not but against their will, at the Eclipse time enter into battell. So the old Romanes were so amazed that they tooke the ebbing & flowing of the sea, to be wrought by some Q. Curtius lib. 4. diuine power of the gods. So Scipio confessed at the be∣sieging of Carthage, and said to his souldier, Ducem sequi∣mini Neptunum. Though the Romanes and the Mace∣donians confessed the Eclipse of the Sunne & Moone, and the ebbing and flowing of the Seas to be the works of God, yet Pharao confessed not the wonders which Moses did in Egipt. This cruell marching of Pharao against the Hebrues in Egipt, resembleth much the cruell persecution vnder The seuenth persecution. Decius Emperour of Rome, vnder whom raigned stil per∣secutiōs of the Christians, as vnder others his predeces∣sors. But the Lord so plagued the Empire at this time, euen from the East vnto the West, with plagues, and diuers suche sicknesses, as not onely the earth was
infected, but the ayre corrupted, with such slaughter of man and beast by sicknesse, that there wanted in many places of the Empire, men aliue to burie the dead, iustly Great plagues and sicknesses vp∣on the Ro∣manes. plagued and punished, so that betweene the cruell per∣secutions of Christians, in Antioch, Caesaria, and Alexan∣dria, and the multitude of the Romanes that died, made the ground of Rome and Italy to stink, as Egipt stunk with their bloudie water and dead frogs, and as in Pharaos dayes, the Hebrewes so multiplied in Egipt: for all Pha∣raos tirany, so likewise the Christians encreased in Rome, and euery where in the Romane Empire in spite of the Romane Emperours, though they sought euery way to deuour them with sword and fire. Moses is sent againe to Pharao, and to say, let my people goe, behold to morrowe will I bring grasse∣hoppers into thy land, and they shall couer the face of the earth in euery place, and quarter of Egipt, that the earth cannot be seene, and they shall eate the re∣sidue The eight plague. which remaineth vnto you, and escaped the haile, they shall eate all your greene trees vpon the fielde, and shall fill your houses, and all your seruants hou∣ses, and these threatnings, and cominations of Mo∣ses could nothing moue Pharao, and yet dissembled like an hypocrite to Moses saying, I haue sinned against the Lord, and against you, forgiue me therefore, and Hypocrisie of Pharao. pray for me, it is to be wondred that Pharao and all E∣gipt wold suffer such horrible plagues for the Hebrews, to them a straunge nation, whom they mortally hated, and yet stopt and stayed them in Egipt, against the lawe of Mena and Bocoris and custome of Egipt, and against the custome of all countries. The Lacedemonians by Lycurgus lawe would not admit any straunger to stay in Lacedemon. In Athens Pe∣ricles
made a decree, that no straunger might dwell in Athens, but such as were banished for euer from their Pericles made a de∣cree in A∣thens against strangers. Strangers not long en∣tertained in Carthage. Countrey, those onely might stay in Athens, bringing their gods and their goods with them. Likewise the Carthagineans could not abide stran∣gers, for those that sailed into Sardinia or to Hercules pil∣lers, escaped hardly the Carthagineans handes, for that they would suffer no straunger to dwell in their ter∣ritories. So also in India no stranger might stay among them past three daies, so straight were strangers looked vnto in all Countries, that the Romanes would not admit any mercenarie souldier being a stranger in their warres. The Hebrewes suffered no stranger to dwel among them, to vse forraine religion, & therfore it was not law∣full for the Samaritans to come to Ierusalem, nor for the Samaritans to conuerse themselues with the Iewes. Yet Pharao against the lawes and customes of all countries, and against the lawe of his owne country, ad∣mitted strangers, his owne enemies to dwell in Egipt. Pharao as I said before, had Esaus mark, could not yeeld, and let these strange Hebrewes goe. How fitly this eight Egiptian plague, resembleth the eight Romane persecution vnder the Emperor Valeria∣nus, The eight persecution vnder vale∣rianus. who like as Antiochus compelled the Iewes to for∣sake the Lord, their lawes, and religion, so Valerianus cō∣strained the Christians to Idolatrie, and forced them to forsake the religion of Christ, commanding by his Let∣ters sent to his lieftenants, and generalls, euery where to burne, to kil, and to murther all the Christians that pro∣fessed the name of Christ, so odious was the name of the Christians among the Romanes, as the name of the Hebrewes among the Egiptians.
And like as the grasse-hoppers in Egipt, did waste, spoile, and eate all that was left vntouched and vnspoy∣led by the plague of haile-stones and lightnings be∣fore, so this bloudie Emperour Valerianus left no place vnsought to persecute the remnant of the Christians, (which his predecessors could not find) with sword and fire, vntil he himself was taken, & his army ouerthrown by Sapor King of Persia, who tooke him and kept him in prison all his life time in bondage, and slauery, vsing him as a blocke to mount on horsebacke, things hard and straunge to the Romanes, to haue their Emperour in such slauish seruice, & to become a vassal and a blocke for Sapor King of Persia, to lay his foote vpon his necke to goe on horse. And was not the great Turke Pazaites ouerthrown, and his Army slaine at Mount Stella by Tamberlane, a Valerianus the Emperor of Rome vsed as a blocke by Sapor king of Persia. rude and barbarous Scithian, and himselfe taken, and kept in a cage vnder his table, and carried him in that cage in all his warres, during Tamberlanes life, so that the great Emperour of Rome died as a blocke for King Sapor in Persia, and Pazaites the great Turke died in Tamber∣lanes cage, as a captiue in Scythia. So Pharao in diuers battels was ouerthrowne by Moses, and vsed as a blocke, and at last drawne as it were by a corde like a dogge, by Moses from Egipt, into the redde sea, and there to dye as you shall read in the two next plagues that fol∣lowe.
CHAP. Of the ninth and tenth plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the ninth and tenth persecutions of the Christians. MOses is sent from the Lord to Pharao, and commanded to hold out his hand vnto heauen, that there was darknesse The ninth plague. vpon all the land of Egipt, & such pal∣pable darknesse, that neither fire, can∣dle, torch, or any light, might giue thē light, it was such palpable darknesse that the Egiptians might feele it, and this darknesse con∣tinued three daies long, that one might not see an other. Yet Pharaos heart was so hardned, that now in his furie and rage, he commaunds Moses and Aaron to goe out of The dissimu∣latiō of Pha∣rao. his sight, threatning them with death if they came any more before him, though in the last plague he requested Moses and Aaron to pray for him, and to forgiue him his sinnes, but then were his words full of dissimulation, and his repentance full of hypocrisie: hee could say, I haue sinned, but he could not say, I haue repented, and beforie for his sinnes. The ninth persecution vnder Aurelianus in Rome, may throughly bee likened to the ninth plague vnder The ninth persecution. Pharao in Egipt. The like threatnings of speech, and the like words that Pharao vsed to Moses and Aaron in Egipt, the like vsed Aurelianus against the Christians in Rome: but it contiued not long, for he was slaine as others his predecessors were. And as for the great palpable dark∣nesse in Egipt, so was it in Rome, when their minde was more darke then darknesse it selfe. The Egiptians hated not the Hebrews so much, as the Romanes hated the
Christians. For Pilate the Romane presidēt in Ierusalem, which gaue sentence on Christ to die, and sawe many myracles done by him, sent Letters to his maister Tibe∣rius the Emperor, and to the Senators, recyting the my∣racles Christ deni∣ed among the Romanes. that Christ had done before he died, saying hee was worthy to bee canonized & placed among the Ro∣mane goddes, which all the Senators with one consent denied, though Caesar requested them first, and threat∣ned them after, yet Christ was not allowed to be a Ro∣mane God. Tiberius without effect of his good motion died, & so did that wicked Emperor Aurelianus, in the midst of his cruel persecutions. After whō succeeded a good valiant Emperor Flam. Claudius, & so valiāt that he vanquished the Gothes; the Illyrians, and Macedonians, whereby in Rome he was so honoured, that the Senators sent to him A goldē tar∣get sent by the Senators. a goldē Target, which afterward was set vp in the shew∣place, and a golden statue to stand in the Capitoll, but he died too timely of a sicknesse at Sirmium. After him succeeded his brother Aurel. Quintilius, a good moderate Emperour, equall, or rather to be pre∣ferred before his brother, but he was slaine within 18. daies after hee was elected Emperour by the souldiers. These good Emperors onely I name, for that persecuti∣ons were euer executed by cruel Kings and Emperors. But these cruell Emperours, as they cruelly destroy∣ed The euill end of cruel Em∣perours. others, so cruelly were they destroyed after: as some of them were killed by theyr owne handes, as Nero, some murthered by their owne seruants, as Domitianus, some suddenly slaine riding by the high way, as Decius, some banished died in straunge Countreys, as Seuerus: others died captiues in bondage and slauerie, as Valeria∣nus did in Persia: others eaten with cankers & wormes,
as Maximinius, others murthered one after an other, as Aurel. Tacit. and Florianus. Thus were those Empe∣rours slaine and murthered that cruelly persecuted the Christians. The Lorde beeing determined now to finish his plague in Egipt, and to bring his people away, willed The tenth plague. euery man and euery woman to borrow of their neigh∣bours, Iewels of gold and siluer, for Moses was verie great in the land of Egipt, with Pharao, and with the peo∣ple: for before this, Pharao had appointed Moses Gene∣rall of the Egiptians, against the king of Aethiopia, which I wrote in the Historie of Moses. Yet said the Lord, I will bring one plague more vpon Pharao, and vpon E∣gipt, and after that he will let you goe hence, for all the first borne of the land of Egipt shall die, euen from the first borne of Pharao that sitteth on his seate, vntill the first borne of the maide seruant that sitteth in the mill. The Lord knew at that time how to saue the He∣brewes in Gosen from all the plagues in Egipt, and to The Lord useth all things by meanes. saue Noah from the geneall deluge in the Arke, to saue Lot from fire and brimstone in Zodome, and to saue the Christians from the destruction of Ierusalem in Pella. As this tenth plague was the greatest, and the hea∣uiest, so the tenth persecution was the greatest, and the The tenth persecution. longest, vnder Dioclesian in the East parts; and vnder Maximianus in the West, either of them persecuting and afflicting with such slaughters of martyred Christians, that for the space of tenne yeares, for so long continued the tenth persecution, there was nothing but the won∣ted bloudie persecution, sword and fire, by the com∣maundements of both these Emperours with most ex∣tremitie to bee executed, and as vnder Nero the first persecution began, so vnder Dioclesian it ended. For the
Church of God so flourished, the Christians so en∣creased, and the godly martyrs so multiplyed, that these tyrants were wearie to persecute them any lon∣ger. At that very time, when persecution ended vnder Dioclesian, then heresie began to spring vnder Sathan: When perse∣cutiō ended, heresie begā. for when one stratagem of Sathan faileth, he practiseth an other. Now Arius marcheth with his Antitrinitary crew, and set themselues in battell against the Lord, with hor∣rible and blasphemous weapons, and as the Poets faine, the Gyants set themselues in battell against the Sun, the Arrius the first of his sect. Moone, and the Stars, so this crew of heretikes set them∣selues to fight against God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, some denying Christ by nature to bee Cod, but onely of accidentall participation of diuine properties as Arius. Some affirming that Christ tooke his beginning of the Virgin Mary, denying the diuine nature of Christ, as Samosatenus and Photinus. Others imagined that Christ had not a true and na∣tural body borne of the Virgin Mary, as the Marcionites Euseb. in ma∣ny of his bookes espe∣cially in the fourth at large, writes of these mas∣ters. Saturninus. and Manichees. The Ebionites affirmed Christ to be naturally born of a woman gotten by man. I will omit to speake of Simon Magus, and his disciple Menander, of Cerdon, and his disciple Marcion, and of Saturninus, and a number more of this crewe, who denie one Article or other of our Christian faith, confounding the diuine nature of the Trinitie. These heretikes possessing diuers seates, as Arius in Alexandria, Saturninus in Antioch, Pho∣tinus in Lions, and so of the rest, which beeing the verie blast and breath of Sathan, haue brought into
their heresie many kings and princes of Asia and Europe, but all these heretikes were by generall councell confu∣ted and condemned. The Nicene councell condemned Arius and his partners which denied the deitie and diuine nature of Christ, this councell held vnder the Emperour Constan∣tine, where 318. Bishops met together to confute Arius and his heresie. The second councell at Constantinople, vnder Gratia∣nus the Emperour, against Eudoxius and Macedonius, de∣nying The 4. gene∣rall councels. the holy Ghost to be God. The third councell at Ephesus vnder Theodosius the great against Nestorius, affirming two sonnes, the one of God, the other of man, denying the mistery of the in∣carnation of Christ. The fourth councell at Calcedon vnder Martianus a∣gainst Eutiches, who confounded the natures in Christ for the vnity of the three persons. CHAP. VIII. Of the marching of the Hebrewes from Egipt vnder Moses and Aaron, toward the land of Canaan. Of the life of Mo∣ses in Egipt, and of his victories against the Aethiopians. NOw Moses and the Hebrewes beeing discharged out of Egipt, where they had bin in bondage and miseries ma∣ny yeares, and were called Hicsos, now they march like souldiers of the Lord Hicsos. vnder Moses and Aaron, towardes the lande of Canaan: but marke the hardnesse of Pharaos heart, for while the Hebrewes were in Egipt, beeing extreame enemies vnto Pharao, yet Pharao endured tenne horrible and ter∣rible
plagues, before he would let the Hebrewes goe out of Egipt, vntill hee was brideled and hooked by the nosthrils as Senacharib was, and compelled to let the He∣brewes goe. Yet Pharao with his wonted hardened heart, with all the power and force of Egipt followed The mar∣ching of Pha∣rao after the Hebrewes. after, beeing two hundreth thousand footemen, fiftie thousand horsemen, sixe hundreth chosen chariots of the kings owne army, a sufficient armie against weapon∣lesse and vnarmed men. Notwithstanding he had infi∣nite number of footemen, horsemen, and chariots, out of all parts of Egipt, assuring himselfe, by this multitude he would make a full end of the Hebrewes, hauing this aduantage, the sea being before the Hebrues, the moun∣taines on either side them, and Pharao with all the force of Egipt at their back, a narrower straight as Pharao sup∣posed, then the Greeks had against the Persians at Ther∣mopyla, and there Pharao thought to ende his long desi∣red tyrannie vpon the Hebrewes. It was to be wondred that after ten great victories in Egipt, gotten against Pharao, by no other weapon then with a rod in Moses hand, durst not looke Moses in the face, & after these victories in Egipt, durst follow Moses, hauing sixe hundred thousand Hebrewes marching in his campe, this was the time appointed of the Lord to do with Pharao that which Pharao thought to do to the Hebrewes, for the Lord commaunded Moses to hold vp his rod, and to stretch out his hand vpon the sea, and to A stratagem of the Lord. diuide the seas, to let the Hebrues goe through on drie ground, and to suffer the Egiptians to follow after, vntil the Lord commaunded Moses againe to stretch out his hand vpon the sea, (a diuine straragem of the Lord) to The drow∣ning of Pha∣rao in the red sea. let the waters turnevpon the Egiptians & ouerwhelme them. So the Lord by water saued the Hebrewes his
people, and by water drowned the Egiptians his ene∣mies. Yet Appian most impudently affirmed Moses to haue done what hee did by Magicke, whom the common people in Egipt named Tisithes, and Ioshuah Peresephes. Appian alleageth Manetho and Cheremon two Egiptian Appins im∣pudent lies a∣gainst Moses writers, to proue his fond assertions. Pliny also held that opinion that Moses was a great Magician, and did many miracles in Egipt through Ma∣gick, yet it is more lawfull for Pliny that wrote of so ma∣ny thinges, to lie in some thinges, then for Manetho a poore schoole-maister in Alexandria, or for Cheremon, two fabulous writers of the Egiptian history onely. The best Magician that helped himselfe at need, was Appollonius Thianeus, who beeing accused of capitall crimes before Domitianus the Emperour, being deman∣ded Appolonius Thianeus. by the Emperour what helpe hee could do now to himselfe by his Magick, nothing said he but this, and va∣nished This storie is reported o∣therwise in the life of A∣pollonius. away out of the Emperours sight, so much could not Iamnes and Iambres do to saue themselues from the botches & blaines, which as they say was done by Moses Magicke in Egipt. And therefore I thinke it best to set downe the true history of Moses, before yet he was cal∣led by the Lord to leade the Hebrewes out of the lande of Egipt into Canaan. Moses the sonne of Amri, was of the tribe of Leui, and the seuenth from Abraham borne in Egipt, brought vp by Thermutes king Pharaos daughter and heire, in this childe Moses shee delighted so much, being brought vp in all the learning and knowledge of the Egiptians, that Moses pleased Thermutes so well, that she moued her fa∣ther hauing no male childe but her selfe, that it might please the king to make Moses her adopted sonne, least
Thermutes also should be barren, and want an heire to possesse the crowne. This being agreed vpon betweene Pharao and his daughter, Moses grew great in Egipt, The educa∣tion of Moses in Egipt. fauoured and well beloued amongst all the Aegipti∣ans. It happened at that time that the Aethiopians had warre with the king of Egipt, hauing wonne two great victories ouer the Egiptians, spoyled and wasted Egipt vnto the verie citie of Memphis. The Priests of Egipt being instructed by the Oracles of Ammon to choose an Hebrew captaine, to lead their armie against the Aethiopians, the king being informed Moses cho∣sen captaine for Pharao. of this Oracle, spake faire to his daughter Thermuthes through the perswasion of the Priests, who vsed the like pollicie to haue Moses slaine among the Aethiopians, as Ioseph. lib. 2. cap. 5. de an∣tiq. Iudaic. Saul vsed to haue Dauid slaine among the Philistines, Thermutes perceiuing the daunger of her fathers king∣dome, which fell vnto her by succession, would knowe of Moses secretly his minde therein, Moses being there∣with contented, the kings daughter brought Moses be∣fore her father and the Priests, to whom Thermutes in this sort spake: Is Moyses the man whome before this time you founde by Oracles, shoulde destroy Egipt, and now you finde by the same Oracles, to haue that man to be your captaine to saue Egipt? But the Priests forgat not when Thermutes laide the diademe vpon the childes head, which Moses being but Moses death sought by the Priests of Egipt. a very childe, with both his handes tooke the diademe from his head and threw it to the ground, and treaded it vnder his feete; whereat the Priestes of Egipt were so astonished, that they told the king, that that childe shoulde bee the ouerthrow and destruction of Egipt,
they all counselled Pharao to take away the feare of E∣gipt, and the hope of the Hebrewes. Notwithstanding Moses, as he was by the prouidence of God preserued, saued from killing & drowning be∣ing a childe, so likewise then was he kept from the enuy and malice of the Priestes, and of the Egiptians, who sought to kill him, as the Iewes thought to kill Paul, but as Paul preuailed ouer the Iewes, so Moses preuailed o∣uer The victo∣ries of Mo∣ses in Ae∣thiopia. the Egiptians, and marched forward with this He∣brew army towards Aethiope, gaue them two great bat∣tels, ouerthrew them, chased them, and daunted the courage of the Aethiopians, that they were brought lower by the Hebrewes, then the Egiptians were before by the Aethiopians. The Aethiopians thus being brought lowe, Moses brought his armie, and besieged Saba, the chiefe citie of Aethiope, at what time the king of Aethiope his daughter named Tharbis, hauing hard such great report of Moses fortitude and prowesse, went vp on the walles of the ci∣tie, to behold the armie of the Hebrewes, where she saw Moses manfully and valiantly fighting before his armie, she much admired his courage, and wondred at his prowesse, doubting much the destruction of her coun∣trey, she sent some of her chiefe seruants vnto Moses, by whom shee opened her fauour & her loue towards Mo∣ses, offering her selfe to him in marriage, and to cōclude peace between the Aethiopians & the Egiptians, which Moses accepted vpon her oath, that the citie Saba should be yeelded vp into Moses hand, and peace concluded The marri∣age of Moses to Tharbis. betweene Aethiope & Egipt, which presently was yeel∣ded vp, and the marriage performed, notwithstanding Moses at his returne to Egipt, his seruice was more mali∣ciously accused and suspected, then thankfully accep∣ted,
such hatred & malice grew in Egipt towards Moses, by meanes of the Priestes, and the king himselfe sus∣pected him for his greatnesse, and successe of his victo∣ries ouer the king of Aethiopia, that Pharao doubted that Moses might doo the like in Egipt: by these meanes traps and snares were laide to destroy Moses, that Moses was in such feare of his life, & the rather for that he kild an E∣giptiā that abused an Hebrue; that he was forced secret∣ly to flie through the wildernesse vnto the Madianites, where he maried Zephora, Iethro his daughter, and there Ioseph. lib. 2. cap. 5. continued fortie yeares, from whence he was called by the Lord to lead his people from Egipt to Canaan; whose greatnesse then was more knowne then before, as is set downe in Exodus, so that Appian with his Egiptian Au∣thors, with their fained fables against Moses, are worthie to be scoft at for their impudent lies, for Moyses was Appians lies. brought vp with Thermutes the kings daughter, & heire of Egipt, and married to Tharbis the kings daughter of Aethiope. But let vs omit Appian with his fellow lyers, and come to Moses, marching with his Hebrew campe. CAAP. IX. Of certaine military lawes and marshall exercise of the He∣brewes, vnder Moses in the wildernesse. AFter that Pharao and the Egiptians were drowned in the red sea, the Hebrewes had such rich spoyles by their dead bodies found on the sea shoares, that now the Hebrewes became from poore shepheardes called Hicsos in Egipt, to be rich souldiers, that neither Phillip Hicsos. king of Macedonia, had such spoyle in Delphos, nor his sonne Alexander in Babilon, nor Nabuchodonozer in Ie∣rusalem,
as the Hebrewes had of the spoyle of the Egip∣tians vpon the shoare. For now the Egiptians paie them their hires for the seruice and bondage of foure hun∣dred and thirtie yeares. So Philo said, that the borrowing of Iewels of siluer and Iewells of Golde, was nothing else but to paie Philo. the due debt vnto the Hebrewes, for their long bon∣dage and seruice. So Rupertus saide, the wages and hires which the Egiptians kept so long vniustly from the Hebrewes, by an honest guile the Hebrewes obtained their long deteined due, for the Lord commanded the Hebrues Exod. 12. to borrowe Golde and siluer of the Egiptians: and the spoyle which is gotten of the enemies is due by the lawe of armes. The Hebrewes marched vnder Moses with Egiptian weapons, with songs of hymnes and Psalmes, for the victorie vnto the Lord. Myria Moses sister, the women and virgins of Israel, with violls, harpes, and tabrets, and with great melodie, gaue thankes vnto the Lord, so that it was afterwardes a custome among the Vir∣gines of Israel to sing Psalmes and Songes, to thanke the Lorde for their victories, and withall to aduaunce the fame of the Generalls and Captaines, as they did to Saul and Dauid. The Lorde sets downe certaine martiall lawes to Moses, to gouerne and to rule his people, commaun∣ding him to make two siluer Trumpets, to assemble the armie, to call the congregation, and for the re∣mouing of the Campe, and charged the sonnes of Aa∣ron The lawe of armes. to sounde out the trumpets in any seruice, onely the Priests were appointed by the lawe to sound the trum∣pets, & to carry the arke, which was their office for euer.
When thou goest out with the host against thy ene∣mies, keep thee then from all wickednes, be clean from pollution in the night, for the Lorde may not abide in the hoste any souldier that is any way vncleane, be∣fore he be washt with water, and purified, and when a souldier must serue the necessitie of nature, amōg other weapons he must haue his paddle staffe to dig the earth, The 2. lawe of armes. and after to couer his excrement, for the Lord would haue his people pure and holie both in soule and bodie, for the Lord walketh in the midst of the campe among his souldiers. The Hebrues were also commanded whē they went to any battell, that the Priest should stand before the whole armie, being called together with the sound of a trumpet, to exhort the armie, and to encourage them to feare nothing the multitude of their enemies, but to fight valiantly the battels of the Lorde, assuring them that the Lorde would be their Captaine, and goe be∣fore The 3. lawe of armes. them, and therfore not to doubt of the victorie. So the Lord promised, and said to Moses, I will goe before thee to Egipt against Pharao. So the Lord said to Ioshua, that he would goe before him and his armie to Iericho. So the Lord with the like words spake to Nabucho∣donozer, when he went against Ierusalem. And euen so he spake to Cyrus, when he went against Babilon, All battels & victories are mine saith the Lord. As the Lord promised, not only to Moses, to Ioshua, and to others, but also to Nabuchodonozer & Cyrus, Hea∣then Princes to goe before them in his own battels, and therefore the Heathen kings made their souldiers be∣leeue, that the Gods taught them stratagems to ouer∣come their enemies.
Archidamus vsed a stratagem against the Arcadians, commaunded secretly in the night time, certaine horses to goe round about his campe, and in the morning hee shewed his souldiers, the steps of the horses, saying that it was Castor & Pollux, that would be readie in the next battell to take their parts, and to fight with them against the Arcadians. So did Epaminandas, he caused the armor which did hang in the temples, and were dedicated to their Gods, Front. lib. 1. cap. 11. The strata gems of Ar∣chidamus, Epaminandas and Pericles. secretly to be taken downe, by this stratagem he perswa∣ded his souldiers, that the gods promised to be in those armors themselues, to fight in the battell. Pericles Generall for the Athenians vsed the like po∣licie, caused a comely tall man of great stature, all in pur∣ple, to sit on a high stately chariot, drawne with goodly white horses, standing in a thicke wood consecrated to Pluto, where both the armies might behold him, vntill the signe of the battell were giuen, then he called to Pe∣ricles, and willed him to goe forwards, and said, that the gods of Athens were at hand, by this stratagem Pericles got a great victory, for the enemies fled before the bat∣tell began. The Gentiles & the Heathens beleeued & confessed that all victories & good successe, came to them by ser∣uing of their gods, and all their ouerthrowes & calami∣ties fell vpon them by offending their gods, so much stood the Heathens in awe and feare of their gods. And like as Ioshua, Iosaphat & Dauid, returned to giue thankes to the Lord, with violls, harpes & trumpets for Ioshua &c. their victories, so the Lacedemonians with trumpets and flutes, crowned with garlands made of all kinde of flowers, and with a song to Castor & Pollux for any vic∣tories which they had obtained. Castor and Pollux.
The Romanes also and the Grecians, not only with building of Temples and Aultars, but with the great sa∣crifice Haecatombae did please their Gods for theyr victo∣ries. In Hercules Temple in Sparta, the Armours that were hanged vp and consecrated to Hercules, seemed to make Cic de diuin lib. 2. a sound and and a noise, and at Thebes in the Temple of the same Hercules, the gates of the Temple being shut, were suddenly of themselues opened, and the shields and the targets that were hanged vp in the roofe of the Temple dedicated to Hercules, fel downe & were found vpon the ground, which foreshewed to the soothsayers the destruction both of Sparta and Thebes. Now to the Hebrewes. The Lord commaunded that hee that buildeth a new house, and had not possessed it a yeare, should be spared from warre. Ioseph. lib. 4. cap. 8. Hee that planted a vineyard and not receiued the fruites thereof should also be spared from warre. And he that betrothed himselfe to a wife, and had not married her, might in like case be spared from war. After the Priest had ended his exhortation to the souldiers, the Generall of the Army proclaimed that if The lawe of Armes. any timerous or fainthearted souldier were within the Army, hee should returne home, least hee through his cowardlinesse should disanimate or discourage the rest of his Army. Hence the Gentiles had the first instruction to vse the like long after this time, for the lawe of Armes which the Lord gaue vnto his people the Hebrewes in the wildernesse, were in all countries of the Gentiles afterwards imitated in all their warres. The Priests Faecials in Rome. As among the Romaines the Priestes Faeciales in
like sort as the Hebrewes exhorted and encouraged the Romanes manfully to fight for their Countrey, repea∣ting the lawe of Armes of the Hebrewes. So the Athenians before they cōmenced any battel, The Priests Mantes in Athens. their Priests called Mantes stood before the army, made a speech to the souldiers, of the iust cause of theyr wars, and would bee further instructed by their Oracles to know of their victories. The Persians likewise would take no warre, nor battell in hand, before they had consulted with their Magi in Persia. soothsayers, which were their wise men called Magi. CHAP. X. Of the camp of the Hebrews, of their exercise in the wildernesse, and of the whole Army, deuided vnder foure principal stan∣darts: and of placing of the Arke in the midst of the Camp. THe Lord commaunded at the setting out of the Army vnto the battell, that the Arke should be carried by the Le∣uites, which Ark signified the presence of God, & the figure of Christ, at what time Moses vsed alwaies these words, at the lifting vp of the Ark, rise vp Lord & The remo∣uing of the Arke. let thy enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, flee before thee. And when the Arke rested, Moses al∣waies said these words, Returne (ô Lord) to thee many thousands, when the Arke was caried, a cloude couered the Arke, and where the cloud stayed, there the Arke would rest, and when the cloud remoued, the Arke was also to be remoued, for by the remouing of the cloud, the Arke was also to be remoued. The Lord commanded in the wildernesse of Sinai to
Moses and Aaron, with the twelue Princes of the Tribes of Israel, to take muster, & to number thē that were able to goe to the wars frō twentie yeares vpward, hence frō 1. Number. the Hebrewes, the Gentiles tooke their instructions in numbring, and mustring their souldiers. Moses numbred The nūbring and mustring of the He∣brew Army by Moses. the people, and found six hundred three thousand fiue hundred, & fiftie able men to go to wars in the camp of the Hebrews, beside the Leuites which were appointed to attend the Tabernacle. For the Leuites were numbred three seuerall times, the first time they were numbred at a moneth old, when they were consecrated vnto the Lord: The second time at 25. yeares olde, when they were appointed to serue in the Tabernacle. The third time at 30. yeares old, to bear the burthens of the Tabernacle, and to serue in the Ta∣bernacle vntill 50. yeares, and then to cease from bea∣ring such heauie burthens, and painful seruice. But after that, they should minister in the Tabernacle, singing hymnes & Psalmes, instructing, counselling, & keeping of things in order. After that Moses had brought the Hebrews frō Egipt, instructed them with military discipline, & giuen them martiall lawes, then the Lord would not haue Moses to bring his people straight way to the land of Canaan, but to lead them too and fro in the wildernesse, to keep thē in cōtinual exercise, & to teach them military discipline The He∣brews were left in the midst of their enemies to practise Armes. by the law of Arms appointed, for they might within 3. daies as Philo writeth, haue passed frō Egipt to the lād of Canaan, but that the Lord would haue thē to endure la∣bour, & to be exercised in martiall discipline to become good souldiers, & therfore suffred the Amalekites, Moa∣bites, Edomites, & the Philistines to be wt thē as needles in their eies, & thornes in their sides, being their profes∣sed
enemies, to warre, to fight, and to keepe them still in practise and exercise of armes. The Lord suffered the Camp of the people to wan∣der too and fro in the wildernesse backward & forward, to learne to endure cold and heate, and all kind of hard∣nesse, remouing their campe too and fro 42. mansions, 42. Mansiōs. before they came to the land of Canaan. Cai. Marius perceiuing his souldiers readie to yeeld for want of drink, shewed them a Riuer behind the ene∣mies, Stratagems of Marius and Cyrus. saying: if you will drinke, you must drinke in yon∣der Riuer, that I shewed you, either you must win it of your enemies or loose it. Cyrus King of Persia brought his souldiers to a cer∣taine wood, and caused them all day to hewe downe Front. lib. 1. cap. 2. trees, vntill they were wearie, the next day he prepared for them great feasts, and liberall banquets, and in the midst of their good cheare, Cyrus demaunded of them, whether they thought better of their paine and trauell in hewing of wood the day before, or of their feasting and banquetting that day: they preferred feasting be∣fore hewing of wood. But said Cyrus, you must come to the one by the other, vnlesse you fight valiantly & ouer∣come the Meades, you cannot enioy the pleasures and good cheare of Persia. So Moses brought the Hebrewes to the wildernesse, and said: you must take paines, and exercise militarie discipline, to learne to fight with the Canaanites, Edo∣mites, Moabites, & Philistines, the enemies of the Lord, before they should passe ouer Iorden, and enioy the plea∣sures of Canaan, the land of milke and honey: for as these Nations were left as prickes and needles to vexe the Hebrewes, so Satan is now left, to vex, to tempt, and to be an enemie to Gods people withall the stratagems he can.
No doubt the Chaldeans, the Assirians, the Persians, and other Nations, had their first military discipline frō the Hebrews, and were taught to exercise their souldi∣ers to endure labour, as it seemed the Gentiles vsed it by imitation from one Empire to an other. Moses being the onely generall of so great an Army, being continually vexed and molested, without any vn∣der officers to aide him, the Lord taught him, and after his father in law Iethro, to choose from amōg the whole 70. Gouer∣nors chosen vnder Mo∣ses. Exod. 18. army 70. wise, religious, valiant, and iust men, to rule and gouerne the people, as magistrates, and officers vnder Moses, to guide & lead them into all seruice. For among the Hebrewes no Generall was chosen without consul∣tation of Vrim and Thummim, after Moses and Ioshuas time. Marke the discipline and martiall lawes of the Lord to his people. The Hebrews were commanded euery man to stand in his place, & vnder his standart, through∣out The Leuites tents about the taberna∣cle. the whole Army of the Hebrewes, but the Leuites should pitch their tents round about the Tabernacle, who were three and twentie thousand in number, and when any victory was gotten by the Hebrews ouer the enemies, the first part of the spoile was yeelded to the Leuites who attended the tabernacle: the second to the souldiers that fought in the field: the third to them that remained in the campe. The whole Army was deuided vnder foure generall The foure standarts of the He∣brewes. and principall standarts. The first standart vnder Iudah, the second standart vnder Ruben, the third standart vn∣der Ephraim, the fourth standart vnder Dan. Euery Tribe should stand, and campe by his standart, and vnder euery standart were three Tribes, & ouer the three Tribes, three captains, and the number of the soul∣diers
of the three Tribes vnder their Captaines. The Tribe of Iudah had seuentie foure thousand and six hundred souldiers vnder their Captaine. The Tribe of Isacher had foure and fiftie thousand and foure hundred souldiers vnder their captaine. The Tribe of Zabulon had seuen and fitie thousand and foure hundred souldiers vnder their captain. These three Tribes were appointed to stand by the standart of Iudah, and the whole number of the host of Iudah, were The tent of Iudah on the East. one hundred, foure score, and sixe thousand, and foure hundred souldiers vnder their three captaines, and the standart of the host of Iudah was appointed to camp on the East side of the Tabernacle. Of the South side of the Tabernacle, was the standart of the Tribe of Ruben, the Tribe of Simeon, & the Tribe The stan∣dart of Ru∣ben on the south side. of Gad, with their three captaines, and the whole num∣ber that marched vnder the standart of Ruben, were one hundred, fiftie one thousand, foure hundred and fiftie souldiers, and this was the second principall standart. The third standart of the campe of Ephraim was to∣wards The standart of Ephraim on the West side. the west, with the Tribe of Ephraim, the Tribe of Manasses, and the Tribe of Beniamin, with their seuerall captaines, and the whole number that marched vnder the standart of Ephraim, was one hundred, eight thou∣sand, and one hundred. The fourth standart of the host of Dan was on the North side of the Tabernacle, with their three Tribes, The standart of Dan on the North side. the tribe of Dan, the tribe of Asher, and the tribe of Nep∣thali, with their three captaines, and the whole number that marched vnder the standart of Dan, was one hun∣dred, fiftie thousand, and sixe hundred. In this most solemne and royall sort marched the
campe of the Hebrews 40. yeares in the wilnernesse vn∣der these foure principall standarts, where their garmēts and cloathes were not worne, nor any thing they had The mar∣ching of the Hebrew cpo. decayed, heauen gaue them bread, the foode of Angels, Manna, and euery rocke in the wildernesse gaue them drink, the Lord fed thē, otherwise they were simply and slenderly prouided for so great an army, but marching in the wildernesse amōgst serpents, & venemous beasts, and yet without daunger or harme, but had all things at their wils that were necessary to the wars, frō the Lord. Notwithstanding all these blessings, the Hebrewes wished stil to haue staied in Egipt, and made diuers pro∣fers of return, at any touch or triall of them, they longed for the flesh pots of Egipt, of which they made often mention, of the oynions, melons, and garlecke, but they made no mentiō of the slauery, bondage, and seruitude, which they endured for 430. yeares in Egipt. If you looke into the maiestie & state of the Hebrew campe, of the presence of the arke, of the placing of their The state of the Hebrew campe. standarts, of the solemnitie of their marching, & of their orders & lawes, & that in a wildernesse, where they had neither castles, townes, cities, or forts, to defend thē; and Xerxes great Army yet they far excelled Xerxes with his innumerable army, in his voyage against the Greeks, ye sailed on land, & mar∣ched on seas, & much doubting whether Hellespont had sufficient roome, and Greece had land inough for his soul∣diers, or the ayre had place inough to receiue his shot. The Hebrew Campe farre exceeded Alexander the Alexander. great, (who after he had subdued all Greece, and the Per∣sians) tooke in hand to conquer the whole world, and wept because hee heard there was two worlds. Yet neither Xerxes, nor Alexander the great, might bee compared with the Hebrewe Campe for state and maiestie, euery Tribe marching vnder his Captaine
and euery Captaine vnder his standard, euery standard placed to stand about the Tabernacle, and the Taberna∣cle was placed in the midst of the camp, because it might be in equall distance from each standard, that all might The Taber∣nacle placed in the midst of the camp. indifferently haue recourse to the Arke, where the Lord instructed Moses, and instructed him frō the mercie seat, for at the doore of the Tabernacle it was commaunded to Moses what he might do, and how he should gouerne the Army, for the custome of the Hebrewes was, to run to the Arke, as to their onely Oracle, where the presence of the Lord was, to crie and to call for help at the Lords hand in their most danger and greatest calamitie. As the Arke was made by Noah to saue himself from the deluge, in such forme & fashion as the Lord had cō∣manded, The Taber∣nacle 30. cu∣bits long, and 12. broad. Exod. 26. the lēgth, the breadth, & the height: so was the Tabernacle made by Moses, in which the Arke was pla∣ced, in such proportion as the Lord commanded Moses, that the tabernacle shuld be 30. cubits long, & 12. broad, the Arke 2. cubits & a half long, & a cubit & a half broad. A cubit of the Greekes two foote, of the Romanes a foote and a halfe. After the vse of the Tabernacle, the Temple was ap∣pointed, where Salomon and the Priests were instructed to manifest the word of the Lord vnto his people. The Gentiles also ranne in any danger or doubt, as to Iupiter in Hammon, to Apollo in Delphos, to Baall, and o∣ther such Oracles, where their woodden Idols and gods gaue false answeres. And where the Hebrewes (as I said before) had no prouisions for their wars, either in towns Chiefe and strong forts of the Gen∣tiles. or Cities, nor any place to flie vnto but the Tabernacle, where the Romanes in any danger might defend them∣selues in the Capitall. The Carthagineans to their strōg fort Byrsa. The Thaebans to their Castle Cadmea. And so the Argiues to their strong fort Larissa. And the Syracu∣sans to the Castle Acradina. These were the forts of the Gentiles.
Besides the Gentiles had theyr treasures and theyr money laid vp in strong holds and forts. As Tygranes king of Armenia, kept his treasure in Tygranes. Bambinsa & Olena, two strong castles, to warre with the Romanes. Iugurth king of Numidia, kept his mony in two of his Iugurth. strongest cities called Capsa, and Thola, to warre with the Romanes. So likewise Mithridates king of Pontus, kept his trea∣sure Mithridates in Ptera, to war against the Romanes. So the kings of Macedonia, and all the kings of Asia, had their treasures and store houses to warre against the Romanes. The Hebrewes had no such store houses prepared, nor mony laid vp, nor prouisions readie, but their foode was such from the Lord that they wanted nothing, and yet they conquered more kings, and subdued more countries, then all they. CHAP. XI. Of the maner and order of the Gentiles, and of their principall standards. Of the setting vp of the Tabernacle, and the de∣dication of the altar by Moses. HAuing spoken something of the He∣brew camp, of their seueral marching The stan∣darts of E∣gipt. vnder their standards, I thinke it not amisse to set downe the orders & ma∣ners of the marching of some of the Gentiles in their campes for varietie of matters, and for that men may see and vnderstand how farre inferiour were all the nations The He∣brewes na∣med of the E∣giptians Hic∣sos. of the world to the poore Hicsos the Hebrews. And first of the Egiptians, who carried in their proper standard
into any battel the Image of that Idoll which they wor∣shipped in that citie, as in Heliopolis an oxe, in Memphis a bull, in Arsinoe a crocodile, and so in other cities, cattes, calues, serpents, such as they worshipped in the temples, such they carried as their ensignes to the field. The Persians carried in the first and principall stan∣dart, the Image of the Sunne, which the Persians call Mithra. In their second standart they carried the picture of The stan∣darts of Persia. Viget. lib. 2. cap. 6. the eternall & sacred fire which they call Orimasdes. In their third standart they carried a golden spread-Eagle. The old Romanes when their Empire grew strong had fiue principall standarts, which were carried before their military legions. The first standart before the legi∣on was an Eagle, this was chiefe, in the second was car∣ried The stan∣darts of the Romanes. the picture of a Wolfe, in the third the picture of Minotaurus, in the fourth the picture of a horse, in the fift the picture of a boare. The Athenians carried in their standart the Image Athenians. of an Owle, which was likewise printed on their coyne with the face of Minerua. The Thaebans caried in their standart the picture of Thabans. Sphinx into any battell. The Cymbrians caried before their armies in their standart vnto the field the picture of a brazē bull, so did they in the Cymbrian wars against Marius the Romane Consull. The old Germains vsed to carry the picture of light∣nings The old Ger∣maines. to lead their armies into the field in their standart. Sometimes great kings for their proper standarts in their warres, carried the pictures of diuers and sundrie beasts and fowles, as Osiris the first king of Egipt, a dog. Anubis.
Cyrus also the great king of Persia, gaue in his en∣signe a cocke, as Themistocles did, for the day before The∣mistocles had battell with Xerxes, by the crowing of a cocke he was sure of victorie. Iulius Caesar gaue in his ensigne an Elephant, for that he vanquished Iuba king of Mauritania, who bare an E∣lephant Caesar. in his ensigne, and so Porus king of India, bare in his ensignes the picture of Hercules. The Hebrues might better haue claimed the Sunne in their ensignes then the Persians, as Ioshua, for that the Sun staied ouer Gibeon, and the Moone ouer Aialon, at Ioshuaes commandement, vntill he had full victorie ouer the Amalekites, and therefore he might aswell haue the Image of the Sun in his ensigne being aliue, as he had it set on his graue being dead. So might Iudah, Gedeon, Da∣uid and others, which had the sonne of God, the starre of Iacob, & the liō of Iudah in their standarts & ensignes. Because we may omit nothing that the Lord com∣maunded Moses concerning the setting vp of the taber∣nacle, and the dedicatiō of the altar, the twelue Princes of the Tribes of Israel, at the setting vp of the tabernacle, The setting vp of the ta∣bernacle. after the tabernacle was anointed & sanctified, brought their offerings before the Lord, sixe chariots couered ouer, and twelue oxen, one chariot for two Princes, and for euery one of the Princes an oxe, which they before the tabernacle offred to the lord, which were deliuered to the Leuites. So for the dedication of the altar, after it was annointed & sanctified, these twelue Princes offred their offerings before the altar, euery prince offered a sil∣uer The dedica∣tion of the al∣tar. chargior of an handreth & thirtie shickels weight, a siluer bowle of seuentie shekels, a cup of gold full of In∣cense, a yong bullock, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde, and a hee goate. This was the maner of the setting vp of the tabernacle, and dedication of the altar.
Hence grew the building of temples, the dedica∣on of altars, oblations and ceremonies among the Gen∣tiles and Heathens, to dumbe Idolls & woodden gods. It was euer the propertie of Sathan like an Ape to counterfeit, and seeme to imitate the lawes of the Lord. There was nothing so rife among the Gentiles as temples and altars, which made Paul full of anger to see The multi∣tude of altars in Athens. so many altars in Athens, and especially one dedicated Ignoto deo to an vnknowne God. Athens excelled all Greece for the nomber of theyr gods, and of their altars, for they had an altar in Athens to lust, another to shame. They had also straunge kinde of altars in Delos, one to Apollo, made onely of the right hornes of all kinde of Straunge al∣tars in Delos. beastes, and an other altar made of the ashes of the sa∣crificed men and beasts, like Belesus, who raised vp a pro∣montorie in Babilon, of the ashes of the citie of Niniuie destroyed, to giue light to passengers that sayled by Ba∣bilon Diod. fic. li. 3. cap. 7. on Euphrates, in the which ashes Belesus carried se∣cretly all the wealth, gold, siluer, and all other rich met∣tals melted of Niniuie into Babilon. Numa Pomp. a verie prophane religious king, put vp The lawes of Numa. a temple to Faith, another to Terminus, and decreed a law, for that Terminus was the god of peace, and a Iudge of meares and markes betweene neighbours, that who∣soeuer would plough any of his neighbors markes, and meares, both hee and his oxen should be sacrificed and slaine to god Terminus, vpon the very meare where the offence was done: This temple which king Numa buil∣ded to Terminus, was made vncouered and open aboue, as the Greekes did vse to build their temple to Iupiter, Hypaethra. Open Tem∣ples aboue in the toppe. and to Anfidius, which the Greeks called Hypaethra, both the Romanes and the Greekes thought it not fit, that
that these gods should be honored and serued in close & couered temples, and vpon their altars no sacrifice of blood should be offered, but according to Pythagoras lawes, fruits, cakes, hony, flowers, and such because they were gods of peace. Againe the Romanes, the Greekes, and the Egipti∣ans, vsed in olde time to build temples out of the cities to those gods that should watch & guard the cities from Temples builded of the Gentiles. the enemies. And therefore Romulus builded a temple to Vulcan out of the walles of the citie of Rome: so his successor king Numa, builded two temples, the one to Bellona, the other to Mars, foure miles from the gate Ca∣ena, out of Rome. The Athenians to that purpose as the Romains did, builded a temple to Hercules out of Athens, named Cy∣nosarges. Cynosarges. Neither would the Egiptians allow the tem∣ple of Esculapius to be in any city of theirs, neither wold they allow any temple to Saturne, or to Serapis, within the citie, supposing by their watching & garding abroad they might liue more safe and sure from the enemies. So among other Gentiles, temples were builded to the gods of feare, of pouertie, and of olde age; because Superstitio fondnes of the Gentiles. they might pray to these gods to escape the wants and miserie of pouertie and old age: and thus the Gentiles tooke patterne of the Iewes who had so many Syna∣gogues, and but one Temple, for the Iewes after∣wards became so Idolatrous as the Gentiles, that (as Ie∣remy said) euery citie in Iudah had a god, & euery where in groues and hils were seuerall altars, that mount Oliuet Mount Oli∣uet. thereby was called the mount of corruption, because they had made altars vnder euery groue, and vnder eue∣ry greene tree, to honour their Idols. But now let vs re∣turne to the Hebrues vnder Moses in the wildernesse.
Moses leading the armie of the Hebrewes in the wil∣dernesse from Egipt, marched with sixe hundred thou∣sand, and hauing diuers battels giuen him by the king of Arabia, by Arad king of the Canaanites, by Zeon king of the Ammorites, and Og the king of Basan, & after them hauing battel with the king of Madianites, and the king of Moabites, whom hee conquered before Ioshua had charge of the armie, and because the battels of the Lord were most miraculous in Egipt, gotten by a white rod, by the which Moses obtained ten victories, and ten try∣umphs, The victo∣ries of Mo∣ses ouer di∣uers kings. ouer the Egiptians in Egipt. So Moses in the wil∣dernesse had the like successe, not by deuised stratagems of their owne heads, but by following the commande∣ments of the Lord, which are the onely stratagems of all victories. After that Moses had brought the Hebrues out of E∣gipt into the wildernesse, as to a schoole to instruct them in military discipline, and to be acquainted with marti∣all lawes, to arme themselues ready souldiers to fight the Lords battels, at Ioshuahs commaundement, who in the battell at Riphidim was against the Amalekites, at what The battell of Riphidim. time Moses, Aaron, and Hur, went vp to the top of mount Horeb, and Moses held vp the rod of the Lord in his hand and praied for victorie, for the battell continued vntill Sun setting, and when Moses hand was weary, Aaron and Hur held vp Moses hand betweene them, and Ioshua pre∣uailed, ouerthrew Amelech, and all his army, & wanne a great victorie, for Moses praiers and Ioshuahs sword, were both meanes by the Lords appointment to obtaine the victory, for while Moses hand was vp the Hebrewes pre∣uailed, and when hee let downe his hand Amelech pre∣uailed, this great victorie was commanded by the Lord to Moses, to be written in the booke of the lawe, for a
remembrance of so great a victorie. And all other victo∣ries which they had aswell against Pharao before they came out of Egipt, and against the Canaanites before they passed ouer Iorden, were obtained by stratagems of the Lord, in the behalfe of his people, which the Lord had determined to place in Canaan. King Arad hearing of the great ouerthrow that the Hebrues gaue the Amalekites, their friends and neigh∣bours came with a great army, and fought against the Hebrues, and for that the Hebrues serued not the Lord, The battell at Horma. and were thanklesse for the last victorie, king Arad pre∣uailed, slue, and tooke of them many prisoners. When the Hebrues cried vnto the Lord, and made a vow to destroy the Canaanites, if they might haue the victory, the Lord vpon their promise & vow deliuered the Ca∣naanites, their king Arad, their cities and townes, and The ouer∣throw of the Canaanites and Arad their king, by the He∣brues. the people, vnto the hands of the Hebrues, that the Ca∣naanites were slain & vtterly destroied, this was the bat∣tel of the Lord, for the Hebrues vanquished king Arad, and the Canaanites, according to their vowes which they made to the Lord. These were lawfull vowes to destroy the enemies of the Lorde by the vow of Cherim, of which vowe the Lord himselfe is the author, the Lord himselfe determi∣ned and commaunded the Hebrues to destroy the Ca∣naanites as his enemies. So the Prophet published a commaundement say∣ing; Vow vnto the Lord & performe it: the same Pro∣phet saith; Thy vowes are vpon me (ô Lord) I will ren∣der praise vnto thee, hauing that which I required, I am Psal. 56. bound to pay my vowes of thansgiuing, as I promised thee (ô Lord.)
CHAP. XII. Of the vowes and feasts of the Gentiles. Of espialls sent to the land of Canaan by Ioshua, with diuers other Strata∣gems. IN all Countreys of the world, as well the Gentiles as the Iewes, were wont to make vowes vnto their Gods, with praiers and promise to performe those things which they vowed, if their gods would graunt victories in warres a∣gainst their enemies, or health to their Kings and Princes, or to remooue any plague or sicknes from the people. The Persians when they vowed any thing to the Sunne, the King with his councel called Magi, ascended vpon a high hill or mountaine, where they made two piles of wood one vpon an other for sacrifice, and vpon the same powring wine, milke, honey, frankenscense, The vowes of the Per∣sians. with other sweete odours, for a sacrifice to the Sunne, the King himselfe with his soothsayers called Magi, with their song Theogonia, fired this pile of wood, for the Kings of Persia would offer no sacrifice without theyr Magi were present, nor the auntient kings of Rome, with∣out their soothsayers, which they called Augures. The Egiptians vsed when they vowed, to bring the swords, the shields, the rotten ships & chariots, with all The vowes of the Egip∣tians. Appian. de bello punico. the armours & ensignes of war of the enemies vnto one place, laying thē all vpō a pile of wood, the generall hol∣ding a firebrand in his hand, kindleth the pile of wood, the souldiers standing about the pile according to the Egiptian maner, with songs, mirth, and ioyes for the vic∣tories.
In like sort the olde Gaules burned and sacrificed Caesar. lib. . de bello gall to Mars and Minerua as the Egiptians did, their targets and old armours. No victorie was had among the Gentiles, but some of the spoyles therof were burned and sacrificed to their Gods, some hanged vp to honour and beautifie their Temples. So Alexander the great sacrificed & con∣secrated some of the spoiles of his victorie ouer Tyre to Hercules. Plut. in Co∣riliano. The Romanes after any victory, hanged vp some of the spoiles thereof in the Temple of Castor and Pol∣lux, the Egiptians in the Temple of Vulcan, according Liui lib. 1. to the old auntient lawe, Vulcano armaius esto. The Grecians when they prayed for victories to The vowes of the Gre∣cians. their Gods, they promised and vowed to present their Gods with Images, statues, chaines, iewels, crowns, and garlands, with songs of Paeana. The Romanes also promised and vowed to Iupiter and to Mars, to build them Temples, to make them pla∣ces to sacrifice the tenth man, and the tenth beast taken in the wars, and to keepe an annuall feast in the Capital, in memorie of their victories. This vow (the Dictator, The vowes of the Ro manes. Consul, Praetor, & the high Bishop going before them) was made in the Capital, before they went to the wars. For both the Romanes and the Greekes vpon any great victories obtained, celebrated the great feast Hecatom∣beon. The Athenians for any prize they brought into the The feast Bendidia. Hauen Pyroea, celebrated a feast, where many Orators and great Captains came once in a yeare to solemnize this feast, for in sea victories Athens excelled all cities of Creece.
The old Romanes had an auntient feast called Con∣sualia, in memorie of Romulus watchword Talassa, at the The first Consualio. rauishment of the Sabine virgins. They had an other feast called Anoyllia, in memorie of Mamurius Targets that he made in Rome, like the Ancyllia. Nymphe Egerias Target which shee gaue to Numa Pomp. The Romanes had an other feast in Rome, called Tu∣bilustria, in the which the magistrates met in the Capital, Tabilustria. and celebrated a solemne sacrifice vnto Vulcan, with sounding of Trumpets about the citie, to purge the citie of their crimes and offences against their gods. The Athenians had diuers feastes, they had one in memory of Thesius, for his victorie ouer the Amazons: an other in memorie that he brought diuers men out of Achaia to dwell in Athens, being straungers, who cele∣brated The feast Metoichia. an annuall feast to honour Thesius, as Milcia∣des had a feast in memorie of his victories at Mara∣thon. Themistocles had an other feast for his victorie ouer the Persians at Salamina. And Thrasibulus for his victorie The feasts of the Greekes in memory of their cap∣taines. ouer the thirtie tirants at Athens, these were the tirants that vsed such crueltie, that made the children of Athens to daunce in their fathers bloud. The like feasts they vsed in Achaia, in the citie Cycio∣nium, yearely in the honour of Aratus victories. A feast celebrated among the Romane youths, called Agonalia, wherin they cōtēded about mastry in all kinds of exercise, for triall of agilitie, courage and strength, The feast cal∣led Agonolia. hauing therevnto many kindes of crownes and gar∣landes appointed for rewards vnto the victors, imi∣tating the manners and orders of warre, in scaling of walles, in assaulting of forts, in fighting of battailes,
and such other militarie discipline, that some were crowned with Lawrell, some with Pine, some with okē boughes, euery victor bearing in his hand a braunch of Palme, in token of victorie. In Syracusa also they held an annuall feast to ho∣nour Timoleon, in memorie of many benefites and Timoleon. greate victoryes that hee obtained to the Syracu∣sans. For among the Grecians and the Romanes, diuers feastes were celebrated, and triumphes solemnized, in memory of victories to stirre vp, and kindle young soul∣diers mindes to embrace armes, and to imitate the ex∣amples of their predecessors. Hauing spoken something of the vowes and feasts of the Gentiles, we must returne to the Campe of the Hebrewes, marching vnder Ioshua, beeing readie to passe ouer the Riuer Iordan, who sent certaine espi∣alls Espialls sent by Ioshua to Canaan. to view the land of Canaan, one of euery Tribe, twelue in number, that should instruct him of the state, scituation, strength, and manners of the people, which beeing returned after fortie dayes, with such fearefull newes, of theyr strong and lustie men, of theyr walled Citties, strong Fortes, huge and mon∣strous Gyants, of the strength and inuincible scitua∣tion of the Countrey, that brought the Armie to such terrour and feare, that they were more wil∣ling to returne to Egipt, then to goe forwards to con∣quer the Canaanites, vntill Caleb ouerthrew theyr Caleb. speeches, and founde great faultes in his fellowes and consociates of his iourney, to disanimate the Ar∣mie. It dooth much amaze souldiers, to see or to heare ter∣rible reports, for at that time the people were ready to
stone Caleb and Ioshua, to force them to fight against such Fearefull re∣ports in wars are dāgerous. a strong Nation, fearefull reports to terrifie the souldi∣ers, were euer dangerous, and therefore wise Generalls and Captaines inuented and framed many subtill stra∣tagems to conceale and hide the multitude of enemies, to keepe terror and feare away from the souldiers. Tullius Hostilius vsed a skilfull stratagem to annimate his souldiers against the Fidenates, who stood in feare as well of the multitude of their enemies before them: as also the report they heard of Messius Generall of the Al∣banes, lying in some secret ambush for his aduantage, being indifferent to set either vpon the Romanes, or vp∣on the Fidenates. Tullius the Romane Generall percei∣uing The Strata∣gem of Tulli∣us. the terror of his souldiers, spurred his horse for∣wards before the Army, and told them, they need not to feare Messius, for he was gone, neither to feare the enemies, which being a scattered Army, to make them∣selues seeme a great multitude, were more readie to flye then to fight. So Iugurth in his warres at Nunudio against Cai. Ma∣rius, Front. lib. 1. cap. 12. spurd his horse forwards & rode to euery part of the battell, crying aloud in Latine as he rode from place to place in the battell, go on forward souldiers, I slew Cai. Marius with my owne hand, whereby the Nunudians were so animated and encouraged to fight the more lu∣stily, that Iugurth by that stratagem obtained a great vic∣torie ouer the Romanes. Val. Leuinus the Consull in his wars at Tarentum a∣gainst Pirrhus, vsed the like stratagem, shewing a bloudy sword in his hand, saying to his souldiers that it was the bloud of Pirrhus whom he slew with his owne hand, thereby to moue the souldiers to greater courage, & to fight more manfully.
Souldiers ought not to be terrified with the multi∣tude of enemies, with slaughters of their Armies, wher∣by Cities, Townes, and Countries reuolt to the ene∣mies, Varro. as at the battell at Canne, the report of Varro the Consul, of the ouerthrow of the Romanes, caused all the citie of Capua to reuolt to Haniball. Againe the report in Praeneste, of the ouerthrowe of Sylla by Telesinus, at the battell of Antemna, and of the The battel of Antemna. marching of Telesinus towards Rome, with all his whole Army, it so affrighted Offella one of Syllas Colonels, that he at that time besieging Praeneste, thought to raise his siege, hearing such hard newes of Sylla the Generall. Skilfull Generalls and wise Captaines vsed euer to Milciades & Themistocles couer and conceale the multitude of enemies, as Milcia∣des, Themistocles, and other Greeke captaines kept the in∣numerable multitude of the Persian Armies secret from the souldiers. So did Mardonius conceale from Xerxes the great slaughter of the Persians in Greece. The Romanes being besieged by the Gaules, many of the chiefe Romanes, to the number of a thousand, fled into their Capitoll. The Gaules hauing possessed the Cittie of Rome for seuen moneths, expecting the yeelding of the Capitoll, the Romanes also within the Capitoll hauing welnigh consumed their victuals, vsed The Romans stratagem. this stratagem, to throwe loaues of bread in euery place out of the Capitoll, in such abundance, though at that time they wanted prouision of bread, that the Gaules were amazed, suspecting they had prouision inough to hold out that they presently fell to composition with the Romanes. The Thracians beeing besieged on such a straight hill where their enemies could haue no accesse to come
vnto them, and readie to die for famine, vsed this strata∣gem, to feed certaine beasts with wheate and cheese, and to let the beasts goe downe towards their enemies Front. lib. 3. cap. 15. Camp, which being takē of the enemies and killed, they found wheate and cheese in the bowels of the beastes, (thinking thereby that the Thracians had bin well vic∣tualled and prouided) remoued their siege. Clearchus the Lacedemonian, vnderstanding that the Thracians had caried sufficient prouision of victuals for Clearchus. themselues vp to the mountaines to their Campe, the Thracians sent their Embassadors, still expecting when Clearchus for want of victuals would remoue his siege. Clearchus knowing that the Thracian Embassadors Front. lib. 3 cap. 5. were comming, vsed this stratagem, commaunded one of the captiues to bee slaine, to bee deuided in peeces, and to be distributed betweene him, and other tenne of his captains in his pauiliō, in the very sight of the Thra∣cian Embassadors, the sight whereof made the Thraci∣ans so astonished and thereby to yeeld, thinking that they that could feed on such foode, might continue too long for the Thracians to endure it. But the Sonne of God gaue himselfe to be slaine for his souldiers, to bee their spirituall foode, to feed them both in body and soule, to wearie Satan which still con∣tinueth his siege against Ierusalem. I shall haue occasion to write of more stratagems hereafter, and therefore I returne to the battels of the Hebrewes against the Canaanites.
CHAP. XIII. Of the great victorie had ouer fiue Kings, in the plaine of Mo∣ab by Ioshua. Of their vnthankfulnesse afterward, & diso∣bedience, and of their marshall punishment therefore. A Great battell was fought in the plaine of Moab, commaunded by the Lord vnto Moses, where fiue Kings of the Reba, Eui, Reken, Zur, & Hur. Madianites were slaine, their names you may read in the margeant, all their villages and citties burnt with fire, all their people slaine with the sword, the Hebrewes tooke all the spoile and all the pray both of men and beasts, and Moses was angry with the Captains of the host, for sparing the women, as Samuel was with king Saul, for sparing Agag king of the Amalekites, and Disobediēce punished. Elizeus with Achab for sparing Benhadad, and caused all women that had knowne men carnally to be slaine with the sword, and to saue those that were virgins that knew no man, which were two and thirtie thousand, whereby it appeared that innumerable was the slaugh∣ter of men, women, and children, in this battell, where two and thirtie thousand virgins were found and reser∣ued to liue, whereby also the spoyle and pray was very rich in this battell to the Hebrewes. In this battell was not one slaine of Ioshuas souldiers. All the Captains and Colonels of the Army came before Moses, saying: thy seruants haue taken the number of all the men of warre which are vnder our authoritie, and there lacketh not a man of vs. This was a stratagem of Ierusalem in the battels of the Lord, that not one man died of the army in so great a victory.
The Lacedemonians reioyced much that Archidamus had obtained a great victorie, got great spoile, and slew many of his enemies without the loosing of one of his Archidamus souldiers, and therfore called it Bellumsine lachrimis. Yet the Hebrewes (for their three former victories at Ri∣phidim, at Horma, and in the plaine of Moab) were vn∣thankfull vnto the Lord, and murmured and rebelled The vnthank fulnesse of the Hebrews. against Moses and Aaron, and after against Ioshua & Caleb, as at Taberah, where they so murmured against Moses their Generall, that the Lord was so displeased with Nomb. 11. ca. them, that he executed martiall lawes vpon them: for the fire of the lande burnt them, and consumed the vtmost part of theyr Army because of their diso∣bedience. Moses sister Myria, for that she spake against the Gene∣rall, and began to rebel in the campe, martiall laws were Nom. 12. executed vpon her, she was not spared for that she was Moses sister, nor Moses himselfe when he had offended the Lord at the water of Meribah: shee was made lea∣prous, and shut out of the host seuen dayes, vntill shee had due punishment for her seditious mutinie, and prayers made by Moses before she was receiued into the host. Againe, Coreh, Dathan, and Abiron, conspired and rebelled against their Generall, with two hundred and Martiall pu∣nishment. fiftie souldiers that were famous in the Congregation, and men of renowme, but the lawe of armes was most Nomb. ca. 16 terribly executed, the ground claue asunder vnder∣neath them, and opened her mouth, and swalowed them aliue with all their treasures and wealth, and all their families. Againe, they murmured against Ioshua and Caleb, that the whole multitude would haue stoned Ioshua & Caleb,
so seuere was the Lord against his owne people the He∣brewes for their disobedience and murmuring, that he Six hundred thousand di∣ed for diso∣bedience in the wilder∣nesse. vsed martiall lawes vpon them, that all they that came out of Egipt, sixe hundred thousand, for their disobedi∣ence against the Lorde, and rebellious mutinies, from time to time, from place to place, at Horeb, at Taberah, at Massa, at Riphidim, at Meribah, died in the wildernesse: for the Lord accepteth obedience more then sacrifice. And therefore Noah for that he obeyed the Lord in making the Arke, saued himselfe and his family from the deluge. Abraham, for that he obeyed the Lord, and was rea∣die to offer, and to sacrifice his sonne Isaac, the whole world was blessed in his seed, therefore the Lord said to Gene. 6. Salomon, If thou do all that euer I shall commaund thee, thy throne shall be established for euer in Ierusalem. 3. Reg. 9. The Lord commends the Rechabites for their obe∣dience to Ionadab their father, because Ionadab said, Non Iere. 35. Obedience of the Re∣chabites. 1. Machab. 2. Great obe∣dience of creatures to God. Psal. 148. bibetis vinum. Mattathias & his children answered Antiochus mes∣senger, saying; Wee had rather obey the lawes of the Lord giuen to Moses and to our fathers, then to obey the king. So the seuen brethren answered that they had ra∣ther die, then disobey the lawes of the Lord. The Prophet saith, Fire, haile, snow, Ise, obey the commaundements of the Lord, hee commaunds seas and windes, and they obey the Lord, he commanded rauens to feede Elias, and they obeyed. 3. Reg. 17. Cyrus King of Persia obeyed the Lorde, for Cyrus Cyrus. Lib. 1. Esdr. 1. cap. confest that hee was commaunded to set forwards the Iews to build vp the temple in Ierusalem, and as obe∣dience is vnto the Lord most acceptable, so is disobedi∣ence euen in the least things extreamly punished.
He that gathered sticks vpon the Sabboth day was stoned to death. And the man of God for that he eate 3. Reg. 13. bread in Bethel against the Lords commaundement, he was deuoured of a lyon, and Ionas the Prophet, for that Ionas 2. he fled from the presence of the Lord, he was throwne for his disobedience into the sea and swallowed vp of a whale. And Moses the seruant of God, with that rod that strooke the rocke that water gushed out, with that rod which diuided the red seas, that turned all the riuers and waters of Egipt to blood, that turned all the dust of E∣gipt into Lice, & brought Frogs, Flies, Grasse-hoppers, and wrought so many wonders in Egipt, yet for that The offence of Moses & Aaron at the water of Meribah. Moses disobeyed the Lord at the water of Meribah, the Lord was so offended with Moses & Aaron for their in∣credulitie and disobedience before the people, that the Lord told them that they should not enter into the land of promise, and that Moses should die in mount Nebo, and Aaron his brother in mount Hor, such was the exact iustice of the Lord, and his seuere punishment against wilfull and disobedient people, that he spared none, no not Moses his owne seruant, Aaron his owne Priest, Ionas his owne Prophet, nor Israel his owne people. CHAP. XIIII. Of the martiall lawes and military discipline of the Gentiles. IN all Countries, among all Nations where militarie The martiall lawe of E∣gipt. discipline was not obserued, there martial lawes were executed. As among the Egiptians the Souldier that brake militarie rules, to forsake the ranke, to goe out of the campe, and would disobey the chiefe magistrates, officers & captaines of the armie, and would any waies offend the martiall lawes, he should be displaced from
his place, were he either Serieant, Lieutenant, or any o∣ther officer, and be placed in the meanest place of the armie; and if he should bewray the counsell of his cap∣taine, or speake any thing against the generall, he should haue his tongue cut off, and sowed vpon his helmet. Among the Persians there was a martiall law writ∣ten, that if any cowardly souldier should steale secretly from the campe, and become a vagabound or a runna∣gate frō place to place, he should (being taken) be cloa∣thed The marti∣all lawes of Persta. in a womans apparell, and be chained fast with an Iron manicle vpon his hands, sitting with both his legs in a paire of stocks, in the midst of the campe, to be flou∣at, and scoft at of all the whole armie, which in like sort the Thrasians obserued) and after hee should be taken for a woman and not for a man. The Romanes were somewhat more seuere against The martiall lawe of the Romanes. disobedient souldiers, especially against seditious & fu∣gitiue souldiers, and against them that forsooke theyr standart, and turned their backes to the enemies, and from the camp to flee to the enemie, these amongst the Romanes were punished with death. The law in Sparta was, if any soldiers of theirs should in any great and shamefull faultes in the warres offend, they should be so noted and defamed, that they might The martiall lawe of La∣cedemonians. not borrow so much as a cup of water, or a brand of fire with their next neighbors, nor light a candle, besides it was not lawfull for any man that met thē in the streets, to speak to them. These punishmēts far differ from the former punishmēt of the Lord, fire frō heauen, the ope∣ning of the earth, the throwing into the feas, deuouring by lions, & such of which I shall speake in another place. Now to the marching of Ierusalē vnder Ioshua, to whō a charge was giuen of a new army which was borne in
the wildernesse, after their fathers came out of Egipt, to whom the Lord said, Moses my seruant is dead, as I was with Moses so will I be with thee, and will neuer leaue The charge of a new ar∣mie giuen to Ioshuah. thee, nor forsake thee, be strong and bold, feare not, and shewe thy selfe stout and valiant, therefore obserue and do, according to all the lawes which Moses my seruant commaunded thee. What is spoken here to Ioshua, was spoken after Ioshua to Iudah; and after Iudah to Gedeon, to Dauid, and others, so carefull was the Lord ouer his people, that they should not choose them a Generall without the consultatiō of Vrim & Thummim, to guide and gouerne the armie to fight the battels of the Lord. So among all nations in all ages, they were very care∣full to haue and to choose wise, stout, and skilfull Gene∣ralls. For as the Romane captaine Fabritius said, that it was Pirrhus skil that ouercame Leuinus the Consull, and not the Epirotes the Romanes, and besides the straunge sight of the Elephants, which the Romanes neuer sawe before that battell at Heraclea, which the Romanes cal∣led Boues Lucanias. Fabritius thought it a scorne that the Romanes should be ouerthrowne by any nation in the Commenda∣n of Gene∣ralls. world, if they had discreet, valiant & stout generals. The like imaginatiōs the Romanes supposed, that they were ouerthrowne at the battels of Trebeia, Trasimen & Can∣nes, either by the subtill and deceitfull policie of Hanni∣bal, or else for that their gods were offended with them; and not by the strength of the Carthagineans nor the Affricans. But Pirrhus after foure yeares warres with the Ro∣manes, Pirrhus for∣sooke Italy. Elephants first seene in Rome. was constrained to forsake Italy after his ouer∣throw at the battel of Arusina: & to leaue his Elephants behinde to beautifie Curius Dentalus tryumphe, which was the first sight of Elephants in Rome: for before no∣thing
could be seene in Rome in former tryumphes; but cattels of the Volscians, flocks of beasts of the Sabines, broken weapons and old armour of the Samnites, coa∣ches and couerings of the old Gaules. Hannibal the greatest enemy that euer the Romanes Hannibal. had, yet after seuenteene yeares warres, hee was forced to retire from Italy to Carthage, and there in his owne countery to be ouerthrowne at the battell of Zama by Scypio Affrican. Hannibal so straightly besieged the citie Casselina, that the Romanes could by no meanes send a conuoy to re∣lieue the souldiers, the Romains deuised this stratagem, to fill certaine tunnes, some with flower, and some with meale, and to let them goe downe vpon the riuer Vul∣turnus, but the riuer being chained ouer by Hannibal, this stratagem was preuented. In another stratagem the Romanes deceiued Han∣nibal, Front. lib. 3. cap. 14. they scattered infinite numbers of Nuttes, and let them goe downe with the same selfe riuer Vulturnus, which neither Hannibal himselfe, nor his chaine could preuent, so that the souldiers of Casselina were relieued and refreshed for a time with these Nuttes. Such a stratagem vsed▪ Hircius to relieue the poore Ro∣mane souldiers in Mutina, being besieged by Mar. Anto∣nius, who wanted chiefly salt, Hircius let go infinit num∣bers of great close bowls made like litle tuns, full of salt, to swim downe ye riuer Saniturnus, & so relieued Mutina. So should we vse such stratagems against Satan, that if Satan shuld ouerthrow vs in the first, we should arme our selues with spirituall weapons to ouerthrow him in the second. Againe to Ioshua. The Lord commaunded Ioshua to march forward to vanquish the Canaanites, because the cōquest might
not be assigned vnto man; the Lord commaunded Io∣shua & all the strong men of warres to goe round about the walls of Iericho once a day for seuen daies, and seuen priests to beare seuen trumpets of Rammes hornes be∣fore the Arke, and to compasse Iericho the seuenth day seuen times, and then commanded the priests to blowe the trumpets, and all the men of warre without shot or sword, to shout with a loud & great shout, and then the Amiracu∣lous ouer∣throw of Ie∣richo. Ioshua cap. 6. walles of Iericho should fall flat downe to the grounde, this was the Lordes stratageme at his battell, at which time Ioshua saw a man stand ouer against him with a na∣ked sword in his hand, who being asked of Ioshua what he was, said, I am the Prince of the Lordes host, and am therefore comen now to be a Captaine of the Lordes people, and Ioshua bowed himselfe & worshipped him, and thereby acknowledged him to be Christ the sonne of God. Now Ioshua being instructed of the Lorde what to do, the priests and the warriours by Ioshua (the walls be∣ing fallen flat downe) went vnto the citie, destroied both man and woman, young and old, oxe and sheepe, with the edge of the sword, & after burnt the citie with fire, and Ioshua cursed that man before the Lord that would build vp Iericho again to the destruction of himselfe and both his sonnes. That captaine that went before Ioshua to the battell at Iericho, and was present at the fall of Ierichos wall, went likewise before Cyrus, as himselfe said to Cyrus, I will goe before thee to Babilon, and I will breake their brazen gates, and crush in peeces their iron barres, I wil humble the glorious people of the earth in thy presence. Es. 10. The same captaine spake to Nabuchodonozer as hee spake to Cyrus, I wil send Nabuchodonozer as the staffe of
my wrath, and the rod of my punishment, and he shall tread my enemies downe like the myre in the streets, so that all victories come from the Lord, euen to all good kings and to tyrants. After the ouerthrow of Iericho, the Lord commaun∣ded Ioshua to besiege the citie of Ai, where hee slew all that dwelt in Ai, and left not one to liue, and tooke their king aliue, and hangd him on a tree vntill the euening, The destruc∣tion of Ai. and the citie was burnt, and twelue thousand slaine, for the Lord said to Ioshua, stretch out the speare that is in thy hand towards Ai, in tokē of the victory. Now mark Signes giuen of victories. the victories of the Lord in his battels, the victory at Ri∣phidim, was had by holding vp of Moses hand, the victory of Iericho, by sounding of Rams hornes, the victory of Ai, with the lifting vp of Ioshuah speare, the victory at A∣phec by shooting of Ioas Eastward, the victory ouer the The victories of Ioshuah & others in the Lords bat∣tels. Madianites by Gedeon, with the sounding of trumpets and breaking of pitcher pots, these are stratagems which are often seene in the battels of the Lord. So also the Lord strengthened many of his people, to vanquish & ouercome their enemies in seuerall com∣bats, one man to ouercome many, as Sampson with the iaw bone of an asse slue a 1000. Philistines. Samgar with an oxe goade slue 600. Philistines. Dauid with his fling & litle stone, slue the monstrous & blasphemous Gyant Golias. Who knoweth not, that Moses rod, Ioshuahs spear, Gedeons pitcher pots, Sampsons iaw bone, Samgars goade, or Dauid with his sling & litle stone, had bin but weake meanes to ouerthrow so many enemies, had not the Lord strengthened the meanes by the men. These were battels of the lord, which were not fought with swords, shots, nor weapons, but armed with spirituall armours, and fought with weapons of faith, & vanquished theyr enemies.
But such victories were onely graunted to the souldiers of the Lord, the people of Israel, which victories at that time were to them onely peculiar. The great victorie which the Lord gaue vnto Samuel by meanes of thunderboltes, lightnings, and earth∣quakes, that therby the Philistines were so amazed, that Samuel vnlooked for, fell vpō thē, slew them, ouerthrew 1. Reg. 7. cap. them, and chased them til they came to Cortaeos, which is Bethgar, such stratagems vseth the Lord against his ene∣mies, as thunderboltes, lightnings, and earthquakes. Mar. Aurelius hauing warres with the Germains and Sarmatians, his Army being like to be lost for water, re∣quested Mar. Aure∣lius. Euseb. 1. the legion of Christian souldiers to pray vnto their God for helpe, and they were heard of the Lord, the Emperor confessed the goodnesse of God, naming Legio fulmi∣nea. him Iupiter, at what time their enemies were stricken with lightning and fire, that they perished, and therfore these souldiers were called Legio fulminea, the legion of thunder, by the Emperour himselfe. Cornelius, a Captaine of an Italian band in Caesaria, a iust and a deuout man, was by an Angell warned to goe to Ioppa to bee baptised of Peter, and to become from a Heathen, a Christian Captaine, to fight in the battels of the Lord. So likewise the Centurion, which was at the death of Christ Iesus in Ierusalem, seeing the myracles that were then done, confessed him to bee the Lord, and glorified God: these two were called both to be Chri∣stian Captaines. In the battell that Iudas Machabaeus had with Gorgias the gouernor of Edumea, where the victorie fell to Ma∣chabaeus, In. Machab. Deut. 7. they found vnder the coates of them that were slaine, Iewels consecrated to the Idols of the Iamnites,
but as the Lord commaunded the Hebrewes to burne such Idolatrous Iewels, destroy their gilded Images, and the gods of the Gentiles, and not to take the siluer and golde that is on theyr gods, as Achan did against the lawe at the Cittie of Ai, and dyed for it by the lawe. I will proceed for to shewe, in olde time in what sort and after what manner euery Nation entered into battell. I thinke it not amisse, as well for varietie of matters to please the reader, as also of their diuers and straunge The simplici∣tie of souldi∣ers in olde time. fashions of their coming into battell, being then not ac∣quainted with so many sundry shots, with such Armors of proofe, but with the sword and shield, the speare and launce, yet euery Nation deuised stratagems and straunge meanes to terrifie the enemies, and to obtaine victories. The auntient Greeks vsed in their warres the skins Homer. Illiad. of sea dogges for theyr helmets, and for great plumes of feathers which souldiers vse now to weare, they vsed the manes and tailes of horses. The Affricans came to the battel with leopards & horse skins. The Aethiopians & the Scythians, with Foxe skins. The Troglodites with Serpents skinnes. The Cydones with Goate skinnes. The Massagets with barkes of trees. The people called Geloni, with the skinnes of the slaine enemies in the field. The old Troians came to the battel The strange fashions of diuers natiōs in their wars. with hornes of oxen and eares of horses on their heads, and all to terrifie the enemie. The olde Brytaines vsed to paint their faces to looke grim and terrible vppon the enemie, and to seeme cruell and fierce souldiers in the battell. The Thracians vsed Foxe skinnes for their hel∣mets, and painted their faces with such markes as might make them seeme terrible to the enemies, like the olde
Brytaines. The people of Mauritania came vnto the countries of their enemies with Elephants & Lyons skins: so the A∣rabians vpon camels, and the Indians vpon Elephants came vnto the wars, which before Alexanders time were not seene in Asia, neither before Pirrhus time in Rome, which the Romans at the first sight thought strange, but after they had subdued Affrica, these strange beasts, ele∣phants, camels, lyons, & such, were in Rome, as in India or Veget. lib. 3. cap. 24. in Affrike, and vsed in Rome so familiarly and commonly vpō the Theaters to fight with other beasts & with men. And yet Pirrhus as I said before, was the first captaine that brought Elephants to Lucania in Italy, where being Pirrhus brought E∣lephants to Lucania in Italy. ouerthrowne in his last battell at Arusnia by Curius the Consul, at what time foure Elephants were brought to Rome, which were so straunge among the Romains, that they called them Boues Lucanias, the great oxen of Luca∣nia, but within fiftie two yeares after, Metellus in his vic∣torie at the battell at Panormus, sent to Rome 104. Ele∣phants, Plyni. lib. 8. cap. 2. &. 6. or as Plyni saith, a hundred, fortie and two. The auntient kings of Egipt were wont to weare on Veget. lib. 1. cap. 20. their helmets, the likenesse of diuers kindes of heads of beasts, either the head of a Lyon, of a Bull, of a Dragon, or such, which the Grecians imitated, and after them the Romanes. In many Countreys they vsed to weare on their hel∣mets the likenesse of Lyons, Wolues, Harts, Dragons, Dogs, Eagles, and other such beasts and fowles, as plea∣sed the Generalls or Captaines to weare for a terrour to the enemie. For in the Cymbrian warres against Marius, it is written in Plutarch, that the Cymbrian horsemen ware on their helmets the likenesse of monstrous and terrible Plut. in Ma∣rio.
beats wide gaping, and open mouthed, thinking there∣by to feare their enemie. And what enemie soeuer he slew in the field, might by the law of Armes take the Swords, Targets, Helmets and all other weapons of the enemie, and hang them vp as Tropheys at the doores and gates of his house, the rather to moue others by the sight thereof, with greater desire to armes, as the Belgeans were wont sometime to cut off the head of the slaine enemie, and to take off his bloudie garments, and to hang them vpon postes and trees, as trophies of victories. Now after the old and auncient maners and strange habites of diuers nations going into wars, as you haue The account of the He∣brews for their souldi∣ers. read of the Affricans, Arabians, and Indians, so also in numbring their souldiers, you shall read the manner of diuers natiōs, when they sent their souldiers to any bat∣tell, and first of the Hebrewes, who brought account to Ioshua of the souldiers slaine and not slaine in battell. The custome among the Persians was, that the soul∣diers that went to the wars should euery one take a shaft out of his quiuer, and write his name theron, and throw The custome of the Persiās for their souldiers go∣ing to wars. the same vnto great chests before the chiefe magistrates, and that the souldiers that returned from the wars again aliue, shuld take their arrows frō the chest, that the Persi∣ans therby might know the nūber of their lost souldiers. In like sort the Romans recorded the names of their souldiers in writing tables, that they might know at their returne from the wars by their names written, how ma∣ny were slaine in the warres. For among the Romanes The maner of the Ro∣manes for their souldi∣ers. there could be no greater reproach to the General, then to be ignorant of the names of all his captaines, officers, and magistrates of the field: and also not to be acquain∣ted with the name of any well deserued souldier.
Cyrus therefore King of Persia, and Mithridates King Cyrus could name all the souldiers in his armie. of Pontus, were both much honoured and much estee∣med of their souldiers. Cyrus for his skill and art of me∣morie, for he could name all the souldiers in his Army. And Mithridates for his knowledge of tongues, for hee could speake two and twentie languages to all those na∣tions Mithridates could speake 22. langua∣ges to his souldiers. that serued vnder him. CHAP. XV. Of diuers battels and victories which Ioshua had at Iahaz, at Edrei, and ouer fiue Kings at the battell at Gibeon. THe Hebrewes proceeded forwards in their warres against the Canaanites, for the Lord said to Moses, Goe to Se∣hon king of Amorites, prouoke him to battell, and conquer his land, for that he denied passage to Moses Army, to goe through his land to the land of Canaan: and therefore the Lord gaue Sehon King of the Amorites vnto Moses hands at the battel at Iahaz. And the The battel of Iahaz. Army of Israel destroyed all the Cities of the Amorites, with their King, men and women, from the Riuer of Arnon vnto Gilead, there was not one Citie that escaped, the Lord had cursed Canaan, and therefore he comman∣ded to spare none. Deut. 28. 3. In like sort in the battell at Edrei, the Lord deliuered Og King of Basan the Giant into Moses hands, as he did Sehon King of the Amorites, and the Hebrewes smote the king and all his people, destroyed three score strong The battel of Edrei. walled and fenced Cities, the Hebrewes destroyed all the Countrey of Argob, and all the kingdome of Og in Basan, which was called the land of the Giants, and pos∣sessed
from the Biuer of Arnon to mount Hermon. Og king of Basan remained onely of the Giants, for the Lord said vnto Moses, I will send the feare and dread of thee vpon all the Nations vnder heauen, so that when they heare of thee, they shall tremble and quake for feare of thee. As Sehon king of Hesbon denied passage to Moses to goe through his land to the land of Canaan, so the Citti∣zens of Ephron denied Iudas Machabaeus passage through Ephron de∣stroyed. their Countrey, though he sent with peaceable words vnto them, as Moses did to Sehon king of Hesbon before, that he might passe through their land, doing no harm, but they denied him his request, wherevpon he besie∣ged Ephron, tooke it, destroied it, and spoiled it, and slew as many as were males within the Citie. Diuers kings assembled themselues against Ioshua, hearing how Ioshua and the Hebrewes had conquered two great Cities, Iericho and Ai, fiue kings came toge∣ther to fight against Ioshua at Gibeon, for they feared ex∣ceedingly the report of the great battels and wonders, Fiue kings ioined against Ioshua. that Moses before Ioshua, had done vnto the Arabians, Madianites, Amalekites, & others, for the Lord promi∣sed to send the feare and dread of the Hebrews vpon all people vnder heauen, and all the Nations of the world should tremble and quake at the fame and great glorie of the Hebrewes, and therfore came these fiue kings The victory of Ioshua at Gibeon. with all their Armies most strongly against Ioshua, but it was the battell of the Lord, for the Lord discomfited them before the Hebrewes, and slew them at Gibeon with a great slaughter, and the Hebrewes chaced them from Gibeon to Bethoron, and the fiue kings fled with the rest that were vnslaine, but the Lord cast great stones downe from heauen vpon them, that more of them
died by the stones that fell from heaue, then the He∣brues slew with the sword in the field, and the fiue kings that fled into a caue in Makedah, were brought before Ioshuah, and he called the captaines and chiefe men of the Army, and commaunded them to set their feete vpon the necks of these kings, signifying vnto them, that they should so ouercome all nations, and vanquish all their enemies in the battels of the Lord. This Ioshuah did to encourage his captains, in the set∣ting of their feet vpon the fiue kings necks, that conque∣rors may do what please them of kings conquered. So did Sapor king of Persia vse Valerianus the Romane Emperour, as a blocke to lay his foote vpon his necke, to Sapor. Oros. lib. 7. cap. 22. Tamberla∣nus. mount on horsebacke. The like did Tamberlane to the great Turk Pazaites at mount Stella, where he ouerthrew him, and tooke him prifoner. There also Pompey the great ouerthrew Mithridates K. of Pontus before, where Tamberlane gaue the ouerthrow to the great Turke, tooke him, and kept him in a cage vnder his table, and carried him about with him to his warres. Obserue how the kings of the Canaanites, Edomites, Maobites, Ammonites, and Philistines knit themselues together against the Hebrewes, feeling in themselues such inward fear of them, as the Macedonians, the Per∣sians, and all Asia were fearfull of the Romanes, as you Monarches. read before of Mithridates king of Pontus, Tygranes king of Armenia, and Iugurth king of Numidia, and yet pre∣uailed not, for the Lord had determined to take the Mo∣narchie out of the Macedonians hands, & giue it to the Romanes, as he gaue it before from the Persians to the Macedonians. Cratippus the Philosopher could say so much to Pom-Pey the great, after he was ouerthrowne by Caesar at the
battell of Pharsalia. Pompey being desirous to know what should happen of the Empire of Rome, Cratippus answe∣red Cratippus saying to Pompey. that all Kingdomes and Empires are fatall. And as Sirach saith, Regnum non trasferetur, nisi ob in iustitiam reg∣ni & regis, so the kingdomes & monarchies of the world passed one vnto another by the Lord appointed. Now Ioshua proceedeth forward to his last battell at the waters of Merom, where diuers and sundrie kings ga∣thered together with all the force and power they had to fight with Ioshuah, with as many people as the sand that is on the sea shore, for multitude of men, horses, and chariots, for in this battel al the kings ioyned their force The last bat∣tell and vic∣torie of Io∣shua ouer the Canaanites. and power together against Ioshuah at the waters of Me∣rom, for to fight against the Hebrewes, but the Lord gaue them into Ioshuahs hands, for they were so slaine that they fell before Ioshua, and fled before the He∣brewes vnto Sidon, and vnto the valley of Mispech. Such a great victorie did the Lord giue vnto Ioshuah ouer these kings, that the Sunne stayed ouer Gibeon, and The sunne staied ouer Gibeon. the Moone ouer Aialon, vntill Ioshuah had full victorie ouer the Canaanites, hauing subdued one and thirtie Kings. These are the stratagems of the Lord in the be∣halfe The Moone ouer Ailon. of Ierusalem. What stratagems hath not the Lord vsed to saue his people from their enemies, enuironed with so many na∣tions against them in the wildernesse, and readie to bee deuoured of so many Kings about them in Cana∣an, for the Canaanites thought it more straunge, that Ioshua should come into the land of Canaan with his poore Hebrew Army, called Hicsos, in scorne among the Egyptians, then the Babylonians thought of Cyrus to come to Babilon with his most inuincible Persian Armye, or the Carthagenians of Scypio, to
come to Carthage and Affrica with his Romane armie. Both Cyrus & Scipio vsed stratagems to winne these vic∣tories. Decius Brutus being so straightly besieged by Mar. Antonius at the citie Mutina, to whom Hircius the Cō∣sull deuised a stratagem, to write certaine letters vpon Front. lib. 3. cap. 13. lead, and to send them tied about souldiers neckes that swam down the riuer Scultenna to Mutina, by the which he was certified of the Consuls minde. Another stratagem of Hircius, who tied certaine let∣ters about tame Doues neckes, which hee kept to that purpose hungry without meate and in darknesse, which were sent by some of his souldiers in the night time, as Stratagems. nigh as they could to the citie Mutina, and then to let them flie, the Pigeons being hungry fled straight to the Towers and high buildings of the towne, which were brought to Brutus. Brutus being now instructed with this stratagem of Hircius, vsed the like himselfe, to feede Pigeons within the citie Mutina, and to let them flee, which were for a time carriers of letters betweene Hircius the Consull, and Brutus. It is not read that the Hebrues reuolted during the whole time of Ioshuah, the Hebrues needed not to doubt of victories, if they would serue the Lorde, hauing the Arke in the midst of their campe, where the Lord pre∣sented himselfe to giue them Oracles, and therfore they might boldly commence warre, or enter any battell, be∣ing imboldned by the Lord, as hee promised to Moses and to Ioshua that hee would goe before them with such miraculous stratagems, some in the seas as against Pharao, some in the Sunne & Moone as against the Canaanites: some with fire from heauen as against Baals false pro∣phets
and priests. Some with the opening of the earth in swallowing rebellious Iewes. And other such strata∣gems with stones, lightning and thunderbolts, to de∣stroy the enemies of Ierusalem. CHAP. XVI. Of the order and manner of the Gentiles, how they brought their wiues and concubines, how they ware their best appa∣rell, and how they brought the dearest and preciousest Iewels they had in the sight of the campe before they entred into any battell, because they should more manfully and couragi∣ously fight. THe kings of Asia souldiers whē they went The souldi∣ers of Asia. to fight any great battel, they brought in∣to the field their most dearest things and preciousest Iewelles which they ware a∣bout them; to signifie how willing & glad they were, to offer their liues, and all that they had in the defence of the country of Asia. The Persians brought not onely into the field, their The souldi∣ers of the Persians. Iewels, treasures and wealth, but also their wiues & their concubines, which the Persians esteemed and preferred before all the treasures of the world, that by looking on their wiues and concubines, they should the more be encouraged & kindled manfully to fight for their coun∣try, for their wiues, and for their concubines. The Romane souldiers vsed to put all the money and gold they had in bagges sealed, and to laie them vn∣der The stoutnes of the Ro∣manes. the principall standart of the Generall, as pawnes and pledges that they would fight the battell lustily and valiantly like Romanes. The Lacedemonians the onely souldiers of Greece; before they would goe to any battell they would wash The Lace∣demonians.
themselues, weare the best apparel they had, they would trim their beards and kembe their heads, and therefore called Comati milites, & entred into any battel as though they should goe to the games of Olimpia, or to the plaies of Histmia, but all these nations could not bring such a treasure, nor such a Iewell into the field as the Hebrues did, which was the arke where the presence of the Lord was, and continued with them in the middest of the campe. Now after all these victories ouer the Canaanites, Iosuah returned to Gilgal, where the Campe was, and where the Arke remained, to giue thanks vnto the Lord for so many great victories he had ouer so many kings, and so many nations. After that Ioshuah was dead, the manner of the He∣brues was to consult with the Lord, and to take coun∣sell by Vrim and Thummim of their further proceedings and choosing of a Generall, to leade & gouerne them in their warre, as the like in all countries were vsed. The Iudges of Greece called Amphictiōs, assembled to∣gether for the whole state of Greece, to consult of marti∣all Amphicti∣ons. causes, and matters concerning the state, in the tem∣ple of Neptune at Trozena. So among the Latines, before the Romanes time, they met at the woods Ferentina, to decree and deter∣mine of matters of warres: after the Romanes had sub∣dued the Latins, they agreed vpon all causes of warres in the temple of Ianus in Rome. The temple of Ianus. The Lacedemonians when they had any warres in hand, they met in the temple of Diana in the confines of Laconia, with the Messenians and others, to conclude of great warlike causes, and to prouide for their Gene∣ralls.
The Aetolians would allow no decree, nor no lawe Consilium Panaetolium. passed vnlesse it were done in their counsell house Pa∣naetolium, with the consent of the whole state. So the Senators of the Athenians met in Panaegiris; Panaegyris. to consult of warlike causes, there was no countrey or citie in Greece, but they had their Senate and Councell house to determine of warres, and other matters of state concerning their Countrey, for at that time all Greece was in armes one citie against another through ciuill warres. As among all nations, they euer sought wise, stout, discreet and godly captaines, for the whole force of the armie dependeth vpon a wise, resolute and stout captaine. And therfore the Carthagineans and the Af∣fricans Xantippus sent from Sparta to Carthage. sent in any great warres to Sparta, for a Lacede∣monian captaine. And so the Carthagineans had Xan∣tippus sent to them for their Generall. So the Tarentines sent for Pirrhus to be their Ge∣nerall Pirrhus. against the Romanes; skilfull Generals were so esteemed in Greece, that the Athethians made Phocian twentie seuerall times their Generall, and Pericles nine Pericles. times. That made the Achaians to appoint Aratus se∣uen Aratus. Pelopidas. times their Generall. So the Thaebans made Pelo∣pidas thirteene times their Generall. And the Achaians made Philopomen eight times their Generall. So that it Philopomen. was not hard among the Grecians to finde skilfull Ge∣neralls that knewe how to ouercome theyr enemies, though not by force and multitude of many souldiers, yet with stratagems and pollicie of fewe. As by the stratagem of Leonidas at Thermopyla, and the stratagem of Themistocles at Salamina, with fewe Grecians ouer∣threw many thousands of the Persians.
The Greekes for that they were wise, politique and learned, far exceeded the Romanes in stratagems, espe∣cially Agesilaus and Epaminondas, two great noble cap∣taines, Agesilaus and Epami∣nondas. whose greatnes was such, that the one enuied the other, as much as Caesar enuied Pompey, or Pompey Caesar, though the Romanes farre excelled the Grecians in armes, yet were the Romanes inferiour to the Grecians in policies and stratagems, the Romanes accepted no trecherie to ouercome their enemies but by armes, they refused to giue money to Timocheres Pirrhus Phisition, Timocheres. though he offered to Fabritius to poyson his maister for money, for Fabritius thought it an infamie to the name of the Romanes, any way to accept trecherie, therein they farre excelled the Grecians or Macedonians. For Philip king of Macedonia, got as many victories Phillips speech. by corruption and fraud, as he did by armes, and there∣fore he was wont often to say, that there was no citie so inuincible, but an asse loaden with gold might enter in through the strongest gate of that citie, nor no wall so Byzantium now called Constanti∣nople. high but a ladder of gold might scale it, so Philip tooke Byzantium, and so Lysimachus Philips successor, tooke Ephesus. Conon Generall of Athens, hauing ouerthrowne the Conons stra∣tagem. Persian nauie in the Ile of Cyprus, hee caused his owne souldiers to put on the armours and cloathes of the Per∣sians, whom he ouerthrew, and placed them in Persian Front, lib. 4. cap. 4. nauies, and sailed to Pamphilia, to another Persian army on the land, the Persians doubting nothing seeing their owne ships, and their owne souldiers, as they supposed, Conon landed with his Grecian armie, cloathed with Persian garments, and gaue them such a battell at the riuer Eurimedon, that he obtained by this stratagem two victories ouer the Persians, the one on sea in Cyprus, the other on land at the riuer Eurimedon.
The like stratagem vsed Epaminondas vppon a Feast day, in one of the cities of Arcadia, the womē & virgins of the citie comming to solace themselues abroad, Epa∣minondas caused certaine of his souldiers to be cloathed in womens apparell, in like garments as the women of Arcadia had, and to goe and mingle themselues among the citizens of Arcadia, and entered the towne among other women, as though they had bene citizens wiues, and in the night time slue the watche, and opened the gate to let Epaminondas and his armie come in. As Epaminondas vsed Arcadian garments to deceiue Epaminon∣das. the Arcadians. So Conon vsed Persian garments for a stratagem to deceiue the Persians. So Hanibal deceiued the Tarentines with hūters garmēts, like the Tarētines. Front. lib. 3. cap. 2. So the Gibionites deceiued Ioshua, but we must de∣ceiue Sathan with a contrary garment, we must put off the old garments of the first Adam, and put on the gar∣ments of the second Adam, which is Christ. If we meane to obtaine victories ouer Sathan, wee must put on our wedding garment, if wee mean to come to the banket. Note also the custome and manner of the Gentiles, The old cu∣stome of the Romrnes and the Per∣sians in choo∣sing their kings. aswell in choosing their Generals (as you heard) as also in choosing their former & auncient kings, some by fly∣ing of fowles, as the old Romains choosed Numa Pomp. some by neying of a horse, as the Persians choosed Da∣rius: others by swiftnes and agilitie of the body, as in Ly∣bia: others by strength, qualities, & comelinesse of per∣son, as among the Meades. So the Aethiopians, if they Alex. Neo∣pol. lib. 4. ca. 23. wanted one of the kings stock & his name, they made a choise as the Meades did, of one to bee theyr king of a most comely personage, that excelled in strength & in qualities. So because the Israelites wold haue a king, and were weary of those gouernours that the Lord set ouer them, the Lord cōmanded Samuel to annoint Saul to be Saul.
their king, who was the tallest and the goodliest man in all Israel from his shoulders vpwardes. And so Xerxes Xerxes. (though an Infidel) among ten hundred thousand men which hee brought in his army from Persia against the Greeks, was the only tallest and goodliest man of all his hoste, and so in many countries among diuers nations, they made such choise of their generals & of their kings, that they should be such men as should haue Bonum ani∣mi and bonum corporis, fit and apt qualities both in mind and body to rule and gouerne an army. But so did neither the Grecians nor the Romanes: Agesilaus ame. for Agesilaus was lame, and had one leg shorter then the other. Darius king of Persia had one hand longer then another, Hanibal for two eyes had but one: & Caesar for Darius long handed. Caesars bald∣nesse. his baldnes was fain to couer it with a garland oflawrel: yet lame Agesilaus for his many victories  warlike know ledge, was called Agesilaus the great. Hanibal with his one eye was the only captain of his time of all men reputed called Hostis Romanis, & Caesar (though bald) yet had not his peere, nor his equal in martial exploits, captains that farre excelled these goodly and tall kings Saul & Xerxes, and farre exceeded those comely & tall captains, whom the Meades, the Aethiopians & the Lybians were wont in old time to choose to be their kings. And as the Lord is indifferent in bestowing his good gifts vpon the simplest & meanest that serue him, aswell as vpon the comeliest and goodliest men, for the Lord hath no respect to the personage of men, as we reade in sacred scripture. Moses was goodly & tall, faire of complection, and of Moses tall and slender. Phryg. in vi∣ta Moses. Ioseph. Gen. 39. yealow haire, and a seruant of the Lord. Absolon, the comeliest & best made man from the crown of his head to his toe, and yet the seruant of Sathan. Ioseph the sonne of Iacob, the fairest & best fauored in Egipt, a godly ser∣uant
of the Lord. Saul the tallest man in all Israel frō his shoulders vpwards, yet serued not the Lord. So the gifts of nature appeare vpō the good & the bad as you heard. So may it be said of Elias a Prophet of the Lord, be∣ing rough and hairy, so we read of him & of Esau, rough Elias rough and hairie. & hairy like Elias, but a reprobate of the Lord, for so the Lord said; Iacob haue I loued, and Esau haue I hated. In fine, Elizeus was bald, for so was he mocked and called baldpate, but a bear came out of the wood & deuoured 42. childrē in Bethel for calling the prophet bald pate. 4. Reg. 2. ca. Dauid the least of his brethren, not able to carry Sauls armour to fight with Golias, and yet valiant inough to kill Golias, and to bring his head to Saul. Zachaeus so litle a fellow, that he could not see Christ among the presse of the people, but climbed a figge tree, where Christ saw him, & bad him quickly come down, This day wil I dine in thy house said the Lord to Zache∣us. So that Dauid being but of litle stature, Elias rough and hairy, and Flizeus bald, yet three chosen Prophets of the Lord. Now to the marching of Ierusalam. CHAP. XVII. How Iudah was elected to be the third Iudge of Israel, by V∣rim and Thummim, of his battell at Besecke. Of Ehud, Deborah & Gedeon with their victories, togither with certaine stratagems as well of the Iewes as of the Gentiles. AFter Ioshua died, Iudah was appointed the third cap∣taine ouer the Israelites, by the iudgement of Vrim Iudah the third captain ouer Israel. and Thummim, elected & chosen to be the leader of the whole army of Israel: the Lord from the beginning had appointed iudges and gouernors to lead his people frō Egipt to the land of Canaan, as Moses, Ioshuah, & after Io∣shuah, Iudah now the third captaine, who fought the bat∣tell of the Lord in Bezeck, and slew ten thousand of the The battell at Beseck. Canaanites, and the Perezites, and tooke Adonizebech,
not a king, but a tirant. This king was by the iust iudgement of the Lord, v∣sed in like sort as he vsed other kings, for the thumbes of his hands and of his feete were cut off, as he most cruel∣ly cut off the thumbes of the handes & of the feete of se∣uentie kings, which he kept and fed with the crummes The tyrannie of Adonize∣bech. that fell from his table, for so he confessed himselfe, that as he had done, so the Lord rewarded him, for hee was brought to Ierusalem and there died. Hannibal well nigh plaied the like part, who vsed the poore captiue Romanes in like sort being weak & wea∣ried, Lu. Flor. li. 2. cap. 6. he cut off their thumbes & pared the soales of the feete of a great number, and so left them that they could neither stand nor goe. Fabius Seruilianus, equall or rather before these ty∣rants in tyrannie, after he had vanquished a great num∣ber of the barbarous people of Scythia, and had taken 5. Oros. ca. 4. A cruell act of Fabius the Romane. captiues (Iure deditionis) very many, yet contrary to the faith and nature of the auncient Romanes, hee cut off both the hands of fiue hundred of the principallest soul∣diers of them, and left the poore Scythians without hands, as Hannibal left the Romains without feete. Thrasibulus being a tyrant for his tyrannie, sent one The figne of Periander sent to Tha∣sibulus. of his chiefe men to Periander, another tyrant to con∣sult and to be aduised by him, how he might liue with∣out feare and daunger, he being a tyrant among the Mi∣lesians. Periander brought the messenger of Thrasibu∣lus to a ripe corne field, where with the staffe he had in his hand, he did beat the eares of the corne, and turnd to Thrasibulus messenger, and said no more, but com∣mend me to thy maister. Thrasibulus after he heard what Periander did, knew his meaning was that he should de∣stroy & kill all the chiefe men & citizens in Milesia, if he would liue in safetie. That tyrant must needs fear some, of whom all men stand in feare.
This was such a dumbe stratagem which Periander taught Thrasibulus, as Torquine the proud taught his son Sextus, by a seruant which he sent to his father, whom Dyonis. lib 7. cap. 4. Torquine brought vnto a garden, where with his staffe he beate the head of poppies. This was a dumbe strata∣gem which Torquine sent to his sonne, wherby he knew his fathers minde, slew the chiefe Citizens, and betray∣ed the Towne to his father. Though the Israelites fell to Idolatrie after Ioshuahs death, who (during the time of Ioshua) serued the Lord, and neuer forsooke him, yet the Lorde at all times, though they alwaies offended him, deliuered them frō their enemies, when they cryed vnto him for his ayde and helpe. So being now vexed with their euemies, the The strata∣gem of Ehud Iudge and generall of Israell. Lord sent Ehud as a Iudge and Captaine, to leade them and to gouerne them as their Generall, beeing a stout and a valiant Captaine, who was wont to say to his soul∣diers, follow me, went boldly to Eglon king of the Moa∣bites, & vsed this stratagē, told the king that he had some Iudges. 3. ca. secret from the Lord to tellhim, wherevpon the cham∣ber being auoyded, and the doore shut, hee out with his dagger, slew Eglon the king, and came out and shut the doore after him, and after slew ten thousand Moabites Eglon king of Moab slaine. at that time: yet Ehud was left-handed, and vnable to fight, and therefore it was a stratagem of the Lord. Iabin king of Canaan, an other enemie of the Israe∣lites, sent his generall Cisera, a mightie captain, with nine hundred chariots of Iron, and a huge Army of souldi∣ers, to fight against Israel, yet the Lord still prouided for his people, and deliuered the Canaanites into the hand of Deborah, a woman, and Barac; euen the whole Army The victory of Debora ouer Cisera at Meroz. of the Canaanites, at the battell at Meroz, where euen the starres (in their courses) from heauen fought against
Cisera, as Deborah confessed in her song of thanksgiuing to the Lord for the victorie. For all the battels that the Lord had fought for Isra∣ell, yet they sinned more, and so offended the Lord, that they were deliuered seuen yeares into the hands of the Madianites for their wickednesse, that Israell made themselues dennes and caues in the Mountaines for feare of the Madianites and Amalekites, whose tents were as thicke as Grasse-hoppers in multitude, so that they, their cattels, and their camels were without num∣ber. Yet the Lord, when Israell cryed for helpe, rai∣sed vp sound Iudges, as Othoniel, Ehud, Barac, and Debo∣rah, What kinde of men were generals and Iudges amōg the Hebrues. who ouercame their enemies, and had many vic∣tories ouer them, but still Israel offended the Lord, and therefore the Lord left Sidonites, Canaanites, and Phi∣listines to afflict and vex the Israelites, for that they still offended the Lorde. Hee left these Nations among them with their gods and Idols, that should be as snares vnto Israel, and as thornes in their sides, and needles in their eies to trie them, and to force them to call vpon the name of the Lord. The Hebrewes as they offended the Lord, so were they punished by the Lord, who often gaue them ouer into their enemies hands, for their rebellious sedition and disobedience, and therefore the Lord made choise of a wise and discreet generall, whom he strengthned to Gedeon chosē Iudge in Is∣raell. rule his people, sent his messenger to Gedeon a husband∣man threshing his corne, to bee their captaine before them, who with the three hundred souldiers that laped the water by putting their hāds to their mouthes, as the Lord had commaunded him by that signe, and had ap∣pointed the number for him to take the Lords battel in hand, & to let the rest which were one and thirtie thou∣sand
and seuen hundred returne to their home, which were by proclamatiō discharged. The generals that the Lord made choise of to rule his people, were but shep∣heards, heardmen, and husbandmen, as Moses, Ioshua, Ge∣deon, Saul, and Dauid, and of the like men he made choise for his Prophets. Gedeon obeyed the message of the Lord, & called at the Lords hand for strength and courage to fight his battel, and after deuided the three hundred men into three se∣uerall bands, and vsed this stratagem, gaue euery man a Gedeons stratagem. Trumpet in his hand, with an emptie pitcher, and lampes within the pitchers, signifying by these weake meanes which the Lord vsed, that the whole victorie should come from the Lord, and not from man. So Ge∣deon their generall comming to the side of the enemies with his threee bands, he commaunded all the souldiers at once to sound al the trumpets together, to break their pitchers, and to shout & crie, the sword of the Lord and of Gedeon, the enemies were so frighted, & the Lord set euery mans sword vpon his neighbour, and caused the Madianites to kill one an other. He made the Moabites, the Ammonites, & Edomites, in like sort one to destroy an other. They tooke in that battell two Princes of the Madianites, called Oreb and Zeb, whom they slew and brought their heads to Gedeon from beyond Iorden, as they fled from the sword of Gedeon. The slaughter was an hundred and twentie thousand that were slaine with three hundred men as the Lord had commaunded. Obserue the stratagem of Gedeon, who commanded his three hūdred souldiers at once to sound al the trum∣pets together, to breake their pitchers, and to shout and crie, the sword of the Lord and of Gedeon. It so amazed the Madianites that the victory was Gedeons.
Ioshuah in like sort was by the Lord commaunded, after he had carried the Arke round about Iericho seuen times vpon the seuenth day that the Priests should blow the rammes hornes, and all the souldiers to crie aloude, and to shout out all together at once, that the walles of Iericho fell. With a stratagem also Ioshua deceiued the king of Ai, who came out of the Citie to fight with Ioshua, who tooke vpon him to flye from the king, but hauing laide ambushes vpon the way and about the Towne, the Lord gaue both the Towne and the King to Ioshuas Iosua. 8. hand. So did the Israelites deceiue the Beniamites with the like stratagems as Ioshua did, who tooke vpon them to flye, to draw the Beniamites from the Citie to the high Iud. 20. wayes, vntill they were compassed round about with the Israelites, who destryed 25. thousand and 100. men. These are diuine stratagems, and to be attributed vn∣to the Lords doings. Pericles generall of the Athenians, besieging a certain Citie in Greece, who vpon the sudden in the night time, caused all the Trumpets to be sounded at once, and all Pericles stratagem. the souldiers to shout and cry as loud as they could: it so terrified the Citizens within, that they ranne from all parts of the Cittie vnto that place where Pericles com∣manded the trumpets to be sounded, and that loud crye to be made, thinking thereby that the enemies had en∣tred  lib. 3. cap. 9. the Citie, Pericles without resistance made an entrie into the Citie in an other place. Antiochus vsed the like stratagem against the Ephesi∣ans, Antiochus stratagem. commanded certaine Rhodians which were of his Army to shout out loud, and to make a sudden out crie in the dead time of the night, their feare and terror was
such, that all went to defend that place of the Towne, and left the other side of the Towne without defence to let Antiochus enter in. Luc. Cornelius after he had besieged and taken many Townes in Sardinia, he vsed this stratagem, to take a po∣pulous strong Citie, made a great number of his souldi∣ers to hide themselues in ambush, he hauing but fewe souldiers, prouoked them of the Towne to come out, faining himself to flye, the enemie following with great furie after. Luc. Cornelius with all his hidden souldiers returned vpon the sudden with such a terrible crye, that the enemies turned theyr backes and fled to the Towne, and the Romanes followed after them close at the heeles, and entred the Towne with them all toge∣ther. So Pompey the Consull, Generall for the Romaine Army in Albania, perceiuing the enemies both in hors∣men Front. lib. 2 cap. 3. and in footemen to be farre more in number then the Romanes, practised this stratagem, placed his foote∣men behind the horsemen, being in a straight, and com∣maunded his horsemen to couer their helmets, least by the sight of the helmets they should be seene of the ene∣mies, and to take vpon them to flye to draw the enemies forwards into the midst of the Army of footemen, and then the Romane horsemen to turne backe, and deuide themselues, and to set on both sides of the enemies. By this stratagem Pompey got a great victorie ouer the Alba∣nians. Iphicrates the Athenian, compared an Army in this sort, the light horsemen to the hands, the men of armes to the feete, the battel of footemen to the stomacke and breast, the captaine to the head. But the Hebrewes for all the victories of Ioshuah, of
Iudah, and of Gedeon, were still vnthankful, and wrought wickednesse in the sight of the Lord, for all the bat∣tels that the Lord fought for them, they were so well acquainted with the gods of the Gentiles, yea they serued the gods of Acron, the gods of Sydon, the gods of Moab, and the gods of the Philistines, and forgat the The vnthāk∣fulnesse of the Israelites god of Israel, they serued straunge gods, and attributed victories vnto their Idols, and honoured them, and gaue no glory vnto the Lord of Israel, and therefore the Lord gaue them ouer, and solde them to their enemies and were eighteene yeares sore tormented and vexed by the Ammonites and Philistines, and the enemies, proudly went ouer Iorden to fight against Iudah, against Beniamin, and against the house of Ephraim, but they cryed vnto the Lorde according to theyr custome in extremitie, and were aunswered by the Prophet from the Lorde: Let the Gods whome you serue, saue you, and whom you trust vnto defend you, for you waigh not me, neither will I defend you, and then they put away their straunge gods from among them. Thus the Israelites did not onely rebell vpon the death of Ioshuah, but also vpon the death of Iudah, Ehud, The Israe∣lites forget their victo∣ries. Deborah, and others, neither did they esteeme the victo∣ries which they got by Deborah a woman, and by Gede∣on a Husbandman, who with three hundred souldiers slew a hundred and twentie thousand, but euer for∣getfull and vnthankefull to the Lord, more willing to returne to Egipt to be slaues vnto Pharao, then to stay in Canaan to serue the Lord. The name of Leonidas was famous among the La∣cedemonians, for his victorie at Thermopyle, where Leo∣nidas with three hundred, ouerthrew twentie thousand Leonidas.
of Xerxes Army, being innumerable. The Athenians gloried much for theyr great vic∣torie at Marathon by Milciades and Callimachus, hauing The victory at Marathō. but 10000. Grecians in their army, ouerthrew the gene∣rall of king Darius Army, and made a great slaughter of the Persians, to the number of two hundred thou∣sand. The Romanes bragge much of the victorie of Ma∣rius, The Ro∣manes. with fewe souldiers ouer the Cymbrians at the ri∣uer of Xextas, of Sylla ouer Mithridates at the battell of Orchomenon, and of Lucullus ouer Tigranes king of Arme∣nia, being three great victories, with infinite slaughter, with the losse of fewe Romanes. The very Schythians can boast and bragge of the o∣uerthrow The Scythi∣ans. of Cyrus, hauing two hundred thousand in his Army, and that by a woman, which encreased the fame of the Scythians, to the greatest infamy of the Persians. All Nations can bragge and boast of theyr victo∣ries, and be thankfull vnto their Idols, and to their gods, with sacrifices, with vowes, with games and playes, with rearing of Aultars and building of Temples, but the Hebrewes and the people of the Lord, who The vnthāk∣fulness of the Hebrewes. had greatest cause and occasions to remember theyr victories and triumphes that they had ouer so many Kings and so many Nations, before they came to the Land of Canaan, by fire, haile-stones, thunder, and great stones from heauen, and though the Lords presence went before them in the Arke, and the Arke a∣mong them in the midst of the campe, yet were the Is∣raelites stiffe necked people, euer offensiue to the Lord, seditious against theyr leaders, and enuious one to∣wardes an other, so the Lord cryed out against them,
and said: I haue nourished and brought vp children, and they are fallen away from me, the Oxe knoweth his Lord, and the Asse his Maisters stall, but Israel know∣eth Esai. 1. not me, wicked children, sinfull people, a froward generation, which are ouerladen with blasphemies. Nothing could instruct them to obey the Lord, nei∣ther the Arke of couenant, neither the Tabernacle of Moses, neither the pillar of fire, where the Lord ap∣peared The Arke of couenant. vnto them, and after the vse of the Taberna∣cle, neither the Temple of Salomon, nor the Prophets to whom the Lord manifested himselfe in Ierusalem, yea euen in Samaria among the wicked Samaritans they had the Prophets of the Lord, Elias and Elizeus to in∣struct them. CHAP. XVIII. Of Iepthas victories ouer the Ammonites and Ephraimites, the ciuill warres, the tyrannie of Sylla and Marius in Rome. Of the slaughter of the Philistians by Samp∣son, the reuenge of pulling out his eyes, and of the battell of Saul at Mich-mash. NOw after Gedeon, the Lord sought out Ieptha, beeing fledde and chased by his bretheren from his countrey, to the Land of Tob, from whence hee was called by the Lord (who alwayes appointed a generall ouer Israell while they serued him) to leade his peo∣ple against the Ammonites, which the Lord deliuered into Iepthas hand.
At that time Ieptha made a rash vowe to the Lorde, Iepthas rash vow. (that if hee should haue victorie ouer the Ammonites) that which came out of the doores of his house, when he returned home in peace shalbe the Lords, and he wil offer it vp a burnt offering. He foolishly performed that which he rashly vowed. Though some of the Rabines The opinion of some of the Rabines of Iepthas vow. do excuse Ieptha that his daughter died not, but was se∣perated to dwell by her selfe from common conuersati∣on in a solitary place, to bewaile her virginitie, accor∣ding to the custome and manner of the virgins of Israel, to liue in prayers, and to consecrate her selfe vnto the lord. Yet some of  best diuines, as Augustine & Ambrose, which both were of a cōtrary opiniō that she was sacri∣ficed according to Iepthas vow. But the Lord gaue the victory to Ieptha ouer the Amonits, with the ouerthrow of twentie cities, and with exceeding great slaughter. Ieptha againe after his first victory ouer the Ammo∣nites, Ieptha the Generall, threatned to be bur∣ned. Iudg. cap. 12. had another victory ouer the Ephraimites, who enuied the former victory of Ieptha most ambitiously, as they before did vnto Gedeon, threatning to burne the Generall in his house, wherevpon Ieptha with all the men of Gilead gathered themselues together against the Ephraimites, ouercame them, and slue two and fortie Fortie two thousande slaine of the Ephraimites. thousand of the Ephraimites, the greatest cause of this slaughter was, that the Ephraimites called the Gilea∣dites, runnagates of Ephraim. And yet both the Ephrai∣mites and Gileadites were Israelites, much like to the battell betweene Silla and Marius, being two Romains, who for meere malice one towards another, continued their ciuil warres ten yeares: in the which were slaine a hundred and fiftie thousand Romanes, fiue and twenty flaine that haue bene Consulls in Rome, threescore that had bin in Rome, in the office called Aediles, & welnigh
two hundred Senators slaine, equall in number almost to the slaughter of Hannibal, for Consuls, Senators, Prae∣tors, and other magistrates. Cinna then Cōsull, with his Romane legions, and Ma∣rius with his banished men & fugitiues, entred the citie of Rome: at what time Sylla was with his armie in Greece, slue many of the chiefe citizens of the Senators, and of diuers that had bin Consuls, that whē the heads of these slain mē were presented to Cinna & Marius at their ban∣quets, it was cōmanded by Cinna the Consull, that some The tyrannie of Cinna and Marius. should be set vp in the market place, some in the Orato∣ry, & some in other places. Such was the tiāny of Mari∣us thē in Rome, that the rest of the Senators that were left vnslaine, sought to escape the hand of Cinna, the crueltie . of Marius, the rage of Fimbria, and the force of Sertorius, Oros. ca. 19. and 20. and to flie to Sylla in Greece for succour. At whose return Marius with his cōfederates fled from Rome, where Sylla plaid a part of a second tragedie, destroying all that hee knew or heard of to be Marius friends, setting downe in his first proscription fourescore of the chiefest of Marius side, besides Marius himselfe, Carbo, Norbanus, and Scipio, who had bin all Consulls of Rome. Marius being at that time in his seuenth Consulship, and died in the begin∣ning of it, but too late to his countrey, yet left Sertorius, Carbo, Cinna & others, to plague his country after him, But as before I spake of Iepthas victories, & of the sacrifi∣cing of his daughter, so now I thinke good by compari∣sons to shew the maner and custome of the Gentiles in the like. The report of Iepthas sacrificing his daughter, came (as it seemed) first from the land of Canaan into Greece, Iphygenia. wherby Agamemnon sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia in the citie of Aulis in Baeotia to please Diana. For their voy∣age
to Troy, and after ten yeares warres in Troy after vic∣tory had, they slue Polixena king Priamus daughter, vpō Prolixena. the graue of Achilles, for a sacrifice to Neptune for their safe returne from Troy to Greece againe. So Ericthius king of the Athenians, sacrificed his daughter as Agamemnon did, to haue a victorie ouer Eu∣molpus, generall of the Thracian Army. It is not onely a common thing among the Gentiles to sacrifice their seruants and their children to their I∣dols, but also among the Hebrewes, as Achab, Manasses, and other kings of Israel, offred their sonnes and daugh∣ters for sacrifice vnto Molech, and as Ieptha sacrificed his Molech. daughter according to his rash vow, so Saul king of Is∣rael The oath of Saul. would haue slaine his sonne Ionathan, to perform his foolish oath. These kind of sacrifices onely vnto Idols, are otherwise then the sacrifice of Abraham, being com∣manded by the Lord to offer his only sonne Isaac, which was the true type of Christ Iesus the onely son of God, Differences of sacrifices. but these wicked Idolatrous kings Achab & Manasses, of∣fered their childrē to dumbe Idols and wodden gods, not following Abraham in sacrifice: they far differed frō Ieptha, he vowed to sacrifice his daughter to the Lord, and not to Idols, and Ieptha differed farre from Abra∣ham, in that Abrahams faith was accepted without sa∣crificing of his sonne, and Iepthas affection was reiec∣ted though he sacrificed his daughter; for so the Lord himselfe testified, saying: I haue no pleasure in your feasts and sacrifices, neither do I delight in your new moones, how much lesse is he pleased with the killing of an innocent virgin, as Ieptha did? These bloudy sacri∣fices of Achab and Manasses, were not like the sacrifice Iud. cap. 6. of Gedeon, which was but a Kid, a fewe cakes made but of an Epha flower, a peece of flesh in a basket,
and a litle broath in a pot, this sacrifice did the Lord ac∣cept of Gedeon, vnder the oake of Ephrah, as a signe of his victory against the Madianites. The Lord strengthened Sampson to plague the Phi∣listines sundry times, burning their corne and their vin∣yards, killing a thousand of them at once with the iawe Iudg. 15. bone of an Asse, and destroyed the fiue Princes of the Philistines, and aboue sixe thousand Philistines besides, The reuenge of Sampson vpō the Phi∣listines for his eyes. Iudg. 16. by pulling downe of a house vppon them, their wiues, their children, their friends and their seruants, at a ban∣quet. Because Sampson being molested & vexed by meanes of his wife Dalyla, to whom he trusted too much as ma∣ny do, by opening his secrets where his strength lay to his wife, who betraied him to her owne brood & stocke the Philistines, who came and tooke him, bound him, and put out his eyes, at what time the fiue princes of the Philistines so reioyced, that they gathered themselues togither to offer sacrifice vnto Dagan their god, for that Dagan. Dagan deliuered Sampson into the Philistines handes as they supposed, being mery and glad they sent for Samp∣son to this great feast, where they offered solemne sacri∣fice vnto their god Dagan, to laugh and scoffe at him, that at that feast so many Philistines came to see Samp∣son, that three thousand for want of roome, were forced to take theyr place vpon the roofe of the house. Sampson being agreeued that he offended the Lord, praied vnto the Lord that hee might be reuenged vpon the Philistines, and the Lord strengthened Sampson, that he reuenged their scoffes, their flouts, and the pulling out of his eyes, vppon the princes of the Philistines Dagans seruants, that Sampson sacrificed himselfe vnto Sampsons sacrifice. the Lord, slue & sacrificed them vnto their god Dagan.
Many armies haue bene taken, slain & ouerthrowne in the midst of banquets, as the Syrians were at the be∣sieging of Samaria, making merry in their tents & ban∣quetting, were forced to flie, and in their flight to be slaine. So was Simon the high Priest at Ierusalem with his two sonnes slaine at a banquet, by the stratagem of Pto∣lomeu who married Simons owne daughter, after he had receiued them into his house, and were merry at theyr banquet. So Tryphon slue Ionathan, and both his sonnes. So Ismael being receiued of Godoliah into his house and well entertained, Ismael slue Godolias in his owne house, too many such stratagems are extant. CHAP. XIX. Of the Priesthood taken away from the house of Elie, and go∣uernment of Iudges taken from Samuel and his posteri∣tie: and of the first electiō of kings in Israel, and of Saul the first king, and his battell at Michmash. AFter Sampson the last Iudge in Israel di∣ed, Eli was appointed high Priest to gouerne them, who (though a godly man himselfe) yet brought not vp his sonnes in vertue & in the fear of God, therefore the Lorde rebuked Eli, and The Priest∣hood taken frō the house of Ei. said to Samuel, I haue sworne that the wickednesse of Eli his house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for euer, for the Lord tooke away the priesthood from Eli, and from his house, for the transgression of his children. Likewise the Prophet Samuels sonnes, for that they followed not their fathers steps, but looked after lucre, 1. Reg. 2. cap.
and tooke rewards, were reprehended for corruption Ioseph. lib. 6. cap 3. de An∣tiq. The gouern∣ment taken frō the house of Samuel. 1. Reg. 8. cap. and bribery. For Samuel being olde not able for age to execute his office, he appointed both his sonnes to be Iudges in Bersabe, but they loued rewards and bribes, and therefore the people complained to Samuel of his sonnes refusing to be gouerned by them, but would be gouerned by a king as other nations were. Therefore was the Priesthood taken away from the house of Eli, for the wickednesse of his children Oph∣nes and Phineis. So was the gouernment taken from Samuel and from his house for euer, through the cor∣ruption and briberie of his sonnes, Ioell and Abi∣ah. Who would thinke that so good a King as Dauid should haue so wicked a sonne as Absolon, that kild his brother Ammon in his owne house, and sought the crowne of Iudah euen from his fathers head, a mur∣therer of his Brother, and a notable Traytour to his Father. Who would thinke that good king Ezechiah should haue so wicked a sonne as Manasses to succeed him, that sawed the prophet Esay in the midst, and filled the streets of Ierusalem with blood? And againe, who would iudge but Salomon being the onely wisest king of the world, hauing a thousand Queenes and concubines, yet had but one sonne Rheho∣boham, Ten Tribes forsooke Rhehoboam. that he was so brought vp to offend the people, that ten of the twelue Tribes forsooke him, and went to Ieroboam his fathers seruant? Such was the care of kings among all nations, that Philip king of Macedonia, was glad to haue a sonne born in Aristotles time, by whom hee might learne to knowe Philip of Macedon. how to be a king, and of whome Alexander the great
himselfe was wont to say, that he was as much bound to Aristotle his maister for his learning, as he was to Phi∣lip his father for his birth. And therefore Cyrus commaunded his sonne Cam∣bises, at his going to warres to Scithia, to followe the counsell of Craesus, to be ruled and gouerned by him: For Cyrus knew Craesus to be so wise, that by naming of Cyrus. Solons name, he saued his owne life. In like sort king Antigonus commaunded his sonne Antigonus. Helenus, to be aduised and counselled by Aratus, whom he knew to be a great learned man & a noble captaine, for that he was chosen to be seuenteene times Generall ouer the Achaians. The cares of the kings of Persia was such for their chil∣dren, The kings of Persia. that they made choise of foure principall men in all knowledge to instruct them and to bring them vp. The first schoole-maister should teach them the ser∣uice of the gods, with their sacrifice and ceremonies. The second should instruct their children, in the auncient lawes and customes of the kings of Persia. Gemma Pla∣tonis. The third should bring them vp in sobrietie & tem∣perancy, to vanquish lust and incontinency. And the fourth should learn them to be valiant and hardy, and to be acquainted with military discipline. And therfore Alexander the great brought vp three Alexander. thousand Persian youthes in the martiall discipline of the Macedonians. And so Sertorius brought vp all the Sertorius. noble mens sonnes in Hispaine in martiall discipline of the Romanes. This much I thought good to write of the good bringing vp and education of children, for by the wic∣kednesse of Eli his sonnes, and corruption of Samuels sonnes, the Priesthood was taken from the one, and
the gouernment taken from the other, and therefore Is∣rael Israel cried for a king. cried for a king, therat Samuel was much displeased, but the Lord said vnto him, heare the voyce of the peo∣ple, they haue not cast thee away, but me that I should not raigne ouer them: yet saith the Lord, Tell them the nature of a king, that he will take their sonnes to runne before his chariots, to eare his ground, to gather in his haruest, and the king wil take their daughters, and make them dressers of his oyntments, his cookes, and bakers, Samuel ex∣poundeth to the people the nature of a king. the king shall take the best of their fields, of their vine∣yards, and of their oliue trees, and giue them to his ser∣uants, he shall take the tenth of their seed, and of theyr vines, the best of their men seruants, and maid▪ seruants, their young men and their asses to doo his worke, yet (though Samuel told al this to Israel from the Lord) they would haue a king, much like the fable of the frogs. The frogs would haue a king, being refused of many, they came to the storke, and would haue him to be their The frogs would haue a king. king, which he accepted, he got him a block, as a seate to sit on, to heare their causes, and to giue iudgement, but when the frogs came before their king to complaine, he began with his bill to pricke them, and after to wound thē, that some were wounded, some slain, & some made hast away. So Samuel spake to the Israelites to that effect, as they found in Saul, Ieroboam, Achab, Manasses & others such wicked kings. The Apology of Iothan, may be now well mentioned, who spake in a parable to the Sychemites, that the trees Reg. 9. would haue a king, but the vine, the figge, and the oliue trees refused to be their king, then would the trees haue The appollo∣gy of Iothan. a bush or a gorsse to be their king, who did accept of it. This bush or gorsse would easily take fire, and burne all the Sychemites in Sychem, and did not Abimelech so? af∣ter
hee killed 70. sonnes of Gedeon his bretheren, he de∣stroyed Sychem, and slew all the Sychemites, and sowed Plyni. lib. 13. cap. 7. salt in that place to make it barren for euer, for salt as Pli∣ny saith, makes ground barren and vnapt to bring any thing. When the Philistines heard that Israel had a king, The battel of Saul at Michmash. they gathered themselues together to fight against Isra∣el, thirtie thousand chariots, six thousand horsemen, and the footemen were like the sand by the sea side in multi∣tude, and they pitched their camp in Michmash, and the Philistines seemed so many vnto the Israelites, that the Israelites hid themselues in holtes, in towers, caues, rockes, and pits, and many of them fled ouer Iorden, yet the Lord deliuered the Philistines into Ionathans hand, The victory of Ionathon. Sauls sonne, that Israel might know that victorie consists not in multitude, nor armour of men, but onely in the arme of the Lord, and therfore Ionathan smote the Phi∣listines, and the Lord turned euery mans sword vpon his fellow, so that there was a very great ouerthrow, and the battell continued vntill they came that fled for feare of the Philistines from mount Ephraim, and now follo∣wed the enemies vnto Bethauen, & the victory was great which Saul got ouer the Philistines. Saul in this battel did binde the souldiers by oath, not The rash law of Saul. to eate till euening, and cursed him that would eate any foode till night, for Ionathan tasted a little hony with the end of his rod, and Saul his father would haue put him to death, sauing that the souldiers rescued and deliuered him, for the Lord had giuen a great victory by Ionathan ouer the Philistines.
CHAP. XX. Of the victorie of Saul at Iabesh Gilead, and after how he was ouerthrowne by the Philistines, and slew himselfe in mount Gilboa, and of the reward of diuers treasons. AFter the battel at Michmash, Saul had an other victorie ouer the Ammonites, where the Ammonites were slain at Ia∣besh The victory of Saul. Gilead, & the Lord prospered Saul, and endued him with such vertues as were meete for a K. yet Saul disobey∣ed Sa. cap. 5. the Lord, being commanded to de∣stroy the Amalekites, and sley both man and woman, The disobe∣diēce of Saul. both infant and suckling, both oxe and sheepe, both ca∣mel and asse, yet he spared Agag king of the Amalekites, and the fat beasts and the lambes, the sheepe, and the oxen that were good, against the commaundement of the Lord, and therefore Samuel reproued him, and tolde him that the Lord had reiected him, and that his king∣dome should bee giuen to an other, and vpon Sauls dis∣obedience, Samuel was commaunded to annoint Dauid king ouer Israel, so Saul wonne the victory, but lost his kingdome and his life in the next battell. Saul being forsaken of the Lord for his disobedience, the Philistines preuailed against him in diuers battels, for Saul was more desirous to kill Dauid the seruant of the Lord, then to destroy the Philistines the enemies of the Lord. But Dauid was reserued, and ordained to fight the battels of the Lord, & to destroy the Amalekites, the Philistines, & the rest of the Lords enemies, whom Saul spared, being commanded to the contrary: therfore the Lord gaue Saul to the hands of the Philistins, at the bat∣tell
in mount Gilboa, that the Israelites fled, and fell be∣fore the Philistines, and the three sonnes of Saul were flaine, and Saul himselfe sore wounded. Such was his cruell life seeking to kill Dauid, that he had a desperate death, for he slew himself with his owne sword, seeing the battell so sore against him, his sonnes Saul slew himselfe in mount Gilboa. slaine, his souldiers killed, and all the rest of his army fled. This was the end of Saul the first K. of Israel, like the end of Zedechia the last king of Israel. And whē the Philistins came to the spoyle of them that were slaine, they found the body of Saul and his three sonnes in mount Gilboah slaine in the battel, and they cut off Sauls head, and strip∣ped him out of his armour, and they laid vp his armour Sam. 51. cap. in the Temple of their god Astaroth, and hanged vp his body on the wall of Bethshan in token of victorie and triumph, and they sent the head of Saul vnto the land of the Philistines, that they might shew it in their cities, and publish it in the Temples of their Idols among the people, and after to set vp Sauls head in the Temple of Dagon. This was the end of Saul, whom the Lord raised Sauls head set vp in the temple of Dagon. from keeping his fathers asses, to be a king ouer his peo∣ple, for not obeying the commaundement of the Lord: thus euer the Lord punished disobedience in Saul, in Rehoboam, Achab, Manasses and Zedechiah, that the Lord deliuered Ierusalem, and the kingdome of Iudah to the hands of Nabuchodonozer king of Babilon. Saul being now slaine in mount Gilboa, the Amale∣kite which brought to Dauid Sauls crowne and his bracelets, and tolde Dauid that hee himselfe slew Saul, (which was a lye, for Saul slew himselfe) thought to haue a great reward for such good newes, but Dauid com∣manded him to be slaine.
The like reward had Rechab and Banah, that brought Isbosheths head vnto Dauid, who disguised themselues as Marchants to buy wheate, and went to Isbosheths house Traitors had euer like re∣wards. who slept on his bed at noone, and they slew him, tooke his head with them, and presented it vnto Dauid at He∣bron, supposing they should bee better rewarded then the Amalekite was, but Dauid rewarded them in this sort, that their hands and their feete were cut off, & han∣ged vp ouer the poole in Hebron. The recompence of such treacherous seruants were euer so rewarded, as Bessus the onely chiefe captaine vn∣der Darius head brought to Alexander. Darius, who after he fled from the battell at Arbela, was slaine by Bessus, and his head cut off, and brought vnto Alexander, who thought to be aduanced for his trecherous seruice, but Alexander commaunded that he should be tyed to the tops of two young trees bending to the ground, that he by the swinge and lifting vp of the trees might be torne in peeces. So Septimius and Achillas commaunded by Ptolome∣us king of Egipt, to kill Pompey, and to present his head vnto Caesar from him, though Pompey before time had restored Ptolomeu his father to his kingdome in Egipt, and Septimius had beene Pompey his souldier in diuers warres, yet they slew him most trecherously in his boate at Pellusium, and cut off his head to please Caesar, but they were rewarded of Caesar as Bessus was of Alexander, for the king was slaine, and his kingdome giuen to Cleo∣patra his sister. When Antigonus sawe Pirrhus head presented vnto Trechery iny rewar∣ded. him by his sonne, though they were both enemies, and in the field in armor one against an other, yet he coue∣red Pirrhus head with his hat, discommending the cru∣eltie of his sonne, with such a reward, that he made his Caus.
bloud run about his eares, saying: how durst thou like a sauage beast bring Pirrhus head from his body being dead, whom no prince or captaine in Asia or in Europe durst in the face meet in the field aliue? Yet most men think that trecherie is allowed though traitors be not accepted. I do not thinke but the head of Darius brought to Alexander by Bessus, and the head of Pompey to Caesar, were as gratefull as Ciceroes head was to Marc. Antonius, brought by Popilius: or as Marc. Crassus Treason hath better suc∣cesse then traitors haue head sent by Surena to Horodes: for thereby had Alexan∣der the kingdome of Persia, & Caesar the Empire of Rome, treason hath better successe then traitors haue. To this effect spake Iezabell to Iehu: Had Zimri peace which slew his maister Elah? as though she should say, can trai∣tors Iezabell. haue good successe? but she was rewarded by Iehu, (for that Naboth was stoned to death by her meanes for his vineyard) as the rest were. Euen cruel Sylla the Romane, the enemie of Marius and all his well-willers, and especiall of Sulpitius, Syllas mortall foe. Yet when Sulpitius seruant would haue betrayed Sulpitius his maister vnto Sylla, Sylla caused him to bee throwne headlong downe from the rocke Tar∣peia. So much the olde Romanes hated traitors and trea∣sons, that when Viriatus an other Haniball, and a great Traitors odi∣ous to the old Romanes. enemie of the Romanes, for 14. yeares space, gaue di∣uers ouerthrows to some Romane Praetors & Consuls, as Cai. Vetulius, Cai. Plantius, and others, that he waxed so proud and insolent of his victories ouer the Romans, Oros. lib. 5. cap. 4. that he hanged vp the Romane Ensignes on high hilles and mountaines, as trophies to shewe his victories ouer the Romanes, but Viriatus was betrayed and slaine by some of his souldiers, by meanes of Caepio the Consul,
against the manners of the olde Romanes, which neuer allowed trechery, thinking to haue a great reward of the Romanes for his trechery: but they according to their Viriatus na∣med the se∣cond Hani∣ball. manners, sent him backe bound vnto Hispaine, as a tray∣tor to his captaine and countrey, as they did to Timoche∣res, Pirrhus Phisition, who offered the Romanes if they would to poison his maister Pirrhus. Timocheres. So Camillus sent the schoolemaister of the Phaelici∣ans (who brought all his schollers beeing noble mens sonnes to betray the Towne) backe naked before his schollers, euery scholler hauing a rodde in his hand to whip his master, for betraying their fathers, their frends, Camillus. and the citie: so that neither Viriatus seruant that slew his maister, neither Pirrhus Phisition that would haue poisoned his maister, nor the schoolemaister that would betray his citie, could get any rewards at the Romanes hands for trechery. Now to Dauid, whose ex∣ample of warres and victories vpō the Ama∣lekites, Canaanites, and the rest, as in this the next booke shalbe mentioned. The end of the first booke.
The second Booke of the Stratagems of Ierusalem. CHAP. I. Of Dauid the second King of Israel, and his great victo∣ries and good successe which hee had in all his warres a∣gainst the Canaanites, Edomites, Moabites, Ammo∣nites, Philistines, and others. DAuid a man whom the Lord found to his owne heart, a second Ioshuah of Is∣rael, hee fought many battels of the Lorde, and wonne many victories: for when the Philistines heard that Saul was dead, they sought for Dauid to fight with him, and Dauid asked counsell of the Lord before hee would take any battel in hand, which made his victories so many, and himselfe so famous, that all his enemies feared him. So should all Kings, Generalls, and Captaines, hold that rule for a principall part of theyr charge, and not to commence warre without a iust cause, and lawful meanes to be exe∣cuted. Iosias had no good cause to fight with Necho king of Egipt, who commaunded his souldiers not to fight with Vniust and vnnecessary warres. Iosias, but against Charchemish, a citie of the Assirians. So the King of Syria charged his souldiers to fight
with none but with Achab king of Israel, at what time Iosaphat king of Iudah was spared, and therefore retur∣ned safe and sound to Ierusalem, by the counsell of the king of Syria. Had Iosias followed the counsell of Necho king of E∣gipt, as Iosaphat followed the counsell of the king of Sy∣ria, Iosias had saued his life as Iosophat did. Dauid fought with the Philistines, smote, scattered them, and slew them, that they fled before Dauids face The battel of Dauid at Ba∣al Pharazim 2. Sam. cap. 5. in the valley of Gyants, which is, the plaine of diuision, because of their victories, and there they left their Ima∣ges and Idols, and Dauid burned them, much like to the Iamnites, who carried the Images of their Idols in theyr bosomes to the battell, and tyed them about Iamnites. theyr neckes, for they were so found after the Iam∣nites were slaine: as in auntient time the Egiptians carried their gods and their Idols, painted on their En∣signes and Banners into the field, as their standarts. Againe, the Philistines gathered their force against The victorie of Dauid at Rephaim. 2. Sam. 5. Dauid at Rephaim, which is called the valley of Gyants, and Dauid ouerthrew the host of the Philistines, & cha∣sed them from Geba vnto Gazar. An other battell of the Lord against the Philistines fought by Dauid, and he againe subdued them, & tooke the strong citie of Gath, which they called the bridle of bondage, out of the hands of the Philistines. This citie Gath the bridle of bondage. kept the countrey round about in subiection and bon∣dage. Thus all wise and skilfull generals ought to imi∣tate Dauid herein, to seize by all warlike policie vpon those strong citties and fortes that can commaund the countrey. So Hanibal thought himself sure of Rome, hauing gottē Capua and Tarentum, two of the strongest citties in Italy
into his hand. So the Romanes hauing gotten Syracusa, Policies of Generalls. doubted not to take Carthage: and hauing Carthage in their hands, they soone cōquered all Affrike: and hauing Affricke, they made no account to win Asia: for at that verie time the best souldiers of the worlde were in the West kingdomes. For Antiochus the great, the greatest Antiochus. king at that time in all Asia, was soone ouerthrowne by a Consull of Rome. So Dauid went forward in his victories, after he had gotten the strong citie of Gath, he smote Moab, and mea∣sured them with a cord, he slue them & cast them down to the ground, he ouercame whom he would, and saued whom hee listed, so that the Moabites became Dauids seruants, and brought him gifts and presents, that the Lord made Dauid famous throughout all the world. During the time of Dauids warres against the Ca∣naanites, and other nations their associates, there was no great warre then among the Syrians, neither in any part of Asia, and especially in Europe, which was scant Europe scant inhabited in Dauids time throughly inhabited in Dauids time, and therfore there was no such warre to be written of, as was thē between the Israelites and the Canaanites, in the time of Dauid. For as Ioshua slue the Canaanites, and gaue the possessi∣on of the land vnto Israel, so Dauid rooted them out, slue their gyants, and brought all the land tributary vnto Sa∣lomon his sonne, who gouerned Israel fortie yeares in peace and quietnesse without warre. Hadarezer king of Zobah, hearing of the name and Hadarezer. fame of Dauid, went to establish his borders by the ri∣uer Euphrates, with a great army with him, where Da∣uid gaue him battell, fought with him, ouerthrew him, and tooke from him a thousand chariots, seuen thou∣sand horsmen, and twentie thousand footemen. Dauid
destroyed all the chariots, and hought all the horses, The number i lesse in the 2. of Sam. cap. 5. but reserued an hundred chariots for himselfe, so that the Lorde was with Dauid wheresoeuer he went, and whatsoeuer he tooke in hand. The Aramites hearing what great ouerthrow Ha∣darezer king of Zobah had by Dauid, came from Damas∣cus with a very great army to succor the king of Zobah: for they knitted themselues against Israel with all theyr force and power, but they had the like welcome, as the Philistines, the Moabites, and the king of Zobah had. Da∣uid slue of the Aramites two & twenty thousand, & Da∣uid The Ara∣mites & Phi∣listins broght vnder Da∣uid. put a garrison in that part of Syria where Damascus was, and the Aramites became Dauids seruants, and brought him presents & gifts. Dauid so plagued the A∣ramites, which are also named Siriās, that they bare such mortall hatred to Iudah, for they euer ioyned them∣selues after with the Ephraimites against' the Tribe of Iudah. Obserue the martiall proceedings of the Israelites, to put garrison in euery strong Citie and fort where they had subdued. So by these meanes Dauid and Io∣shua before him, brought the Moabites, the Edomites, and the Philistines, and all theyr enemies round about to be vnder their gouernment. So after Dauid all na∣tions did the like (a principall point in all good Gene∣ralls to strengthen themselues with garrison in strong places.) Herein the Remanes excelled all nations, that wher∣soeuer, or whosoeuer they subdued, there they placed The Romain gouernours ouer diuers prouinces. Romane Magistrates to gouerne. As Scypio and Pom∣pey the great did in Asia, Titus and Sylla in Greece: this made the Romanes to be feared and dreaded among all nations of the worde. For after the Romaines had sub∣dued
the Carthagineans, they made Carthage a pro∣uince to bee gouerned vnder a Proconsull of Rome. After they had subdued Numidia and Lybia, they were made prouinces, and gouerned vnder a Consul of Rome. So Egipt and Mauritania, were in like sort gouer∣ned vnder Romane Presidents. So Sardinia, Cicilia, Achaia, and many others, were made Praetorian prouinces, and gouerned vnder the Romanes. But wee will proceede forward with the warres of Dauid, euery where vnder his Generall Abishai, Ioabs 1. Chron. 18. brother, who slue eighteene thousand of the Edomites in the salt valley: and he put garrion in Edom and all the Garrison in Edom. Edomites became Dauids seruants, so that Dauids en∣terprises and his battels, which hee fought against the enemies of the Lord, had (wheresoeuer he went) good 2. Sam. ca. 12. successe. Dauid euer vsed martiall lawes vpon the Lords enemies, when Rabbah was taken by Ioab, he was pre∣sently commaunded by Dauid the king, to put all the people to cruell death, and for that they were malicious enemies vnto the Lord, he put them to such tortures, as vnder sawes, Iron harrowes, Iron axes, and cast them Martiall lawes. into the tylekilne, so cruell and greeuous were the pu∣nishments of the Lord vpon the cities of the Ammo∣nites. The fame of Dauid grew so great, that all the kings about him enuied him much, that Hamnon king of the Ammonites prepared an army against Dauid, vnder∣standing that Dauid would reuenge the iniury hee did vnto his Embassadors, whome Dauid sent to Ham∣non of meere kindnesse and courtesie, the cause was that Dauids Embassadours, by the King of Ammon,
and the counsell of his Princes and Lords, had the halfe of their beards shaued, and their garments cut off in the middle euen vnto their buttockes, and so sent them a∣way, which among the Israelites was the greatest re∣proach The lawe of armes bro∣ken. that might be. Thus the Embassadors of Dauid against the law of armes were disfigured, to make them odious vnto others, but they were commaunded by Dauid to stay in Iericho, to auoid the obloquy of so fowle a fact vntill they were prouided for. Alcibiades Generall ouer the Athenians, laying siege to the chiefe citie of the Aggregentines, which was so strongly euery way defended with forts and trenches, that Alcibiades deuised a new stratageme, and thereby sought meanes to haue a conuenient place of parley to talk with them before he would lay siege to the towne, which being graunted, Alcibiades appointed certaine captaines, while hee held the Aggrentines in parley of peace, to take the citie. Alcibiades & Ionathans stratagems. Ionathan after that Iud. Machabaeus his brother was slaine in the field by Bacchides, and after that the chil∣dren of Amri tooke Iohn, Ionathans brother, he vsed this pollicie to reuenge his brother vpon the mariage day of a daughter of one of the noblest Princes of Canaan. Ionathan & his men hid themselues, and laie in ambush 1. Mac. 9. vnder the couert of a mountain, that when the children of Amri came out of Medeba, with tymbrels, Instrumēts of musicke and great pompe, Ionathan set vpon them, slue the most part, and the rest fled, so that their mariage was turned into mourning, and the noyse of their me∣lodie to lamentation: thus Ionathan reuenged his bro∣ther at Medeba. Cymon the sonne of Milciades, a noble Greeke Cap∣taine, Cymons stratagem. at the besieging of a citie in Caria, vsed this strata∣gem
to burne the temple of Diana, which goddesse the Front. lib. 3. cap. 2. Carians most religiously worshipped, the temple be∣ing builded without the walles of the towne, all the ci∣tie ranne to defend Dianaes temple from burning, Cy∣mon with his Athenian armie, entered and obtained the citie, while they were busie about the temple. The like policie vsed Demetrius to deceiue Ionathan, who hearing that Ionathan came in the night time with his men armed, Demetrius and all his armie feared and Demetrius stratagem. trembled in their hearts, and kindled great fires in theyr Tents, and fled away, which Ionathan suspected not that they fled, because they saw the fire burning in the tents, and so Demetrius by this strageme of fire passed ouer the 1. Machab. 12. flood Eleutherus, and escaped from Ionathan. Many such stratagems haue bene vsed by fire to de∣ceiue the enemie, as Hannibal by fire tyed to Oxens hornes in the night time against the Romaines: Samp∣son by tying of firebrands to Foxes tayles to burne the corne of the Philistines. So Absolon vsed the like stra∣tagem against Ioab, with many such. Now hauing heard that Ioabs chiefe captains came in, & that Dauid was comē ouer the riuer Iorden, fiue kings came against Ioab, and pitched their tents before Mede∣ba, The battell at Medeba. a citie of the Tribe of Ruben, but when the battell ioyned together, the Ammonites and the Aramites fled and fell before Israel, so that the victorie was Ioabs, and yet had they two and thirtie thousand chariottes, and fiue kings set in battell-raie to fight against Dauid, but it was the Lords battell, and therefore too fewe if they had had tenne times as many. And therefore the Ara∣mites & the Ammonites were sore greeued at the good successe of Dauid, that they gathered their whole force and power together; and sent messengers beyond Ior∣den,
to draw all the enemies of Israel to fight another battell against Dauid, and Dauid hearing of their great armies, came ouer Iorden to Hel, and fought with The number of the chari∣ots and men are other∣wise set down in the . of Sam. ca. 10. and 18. them, and the Aramites fled before him, and Dauid de∣stroyed of the Aramites seuen hundred chariots, fortie thousand footemen, and killed Sophach Generall of the hoste. Dauid at length made a generall conquest of the Phi∣listines, destroyed the Ammonites and theyr chiefe ci∣tie Rabbah, slue their King and Princes, and cut the peo∣ple in peeces with sawes, with harrowes of Iron, and with axes, and Dauid requited fully the spitefull & ma∣licious wrong they did vnto his Embassadors. And as Ioshua brought them ouer Iorden, and placed them in A full con∣quest ouer the Canaa∣nites by Da∣uid. Canaan, and destroyed their enemies before them, and gaue the Hebrewes the possession of Canaan, so Dauid rooted these nations out, and made a full conquest of them, and left Israel in peace and quiet to his sonne So∣lomon, and Salomon to his sonne Rehoboam, so that the Tributes to the kings of Israel by Dauids meanes. Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites, became Dauids seruants, and paied tribute vnto Solomon, during his whole life.
CHAP. II. Of tributes paide to the kings of Egipt. And what manner of tributes the old Romanes and Persians receiued. The re∣wards of adultery. SO Ioseph made a lawe in Egipt, that the first part of all the land of Egipt should be as a yearely tribute paide vnto Pha∣rao, so that Ioseph enriched Pharao by meanes of the yearely tribute, and sa∣ued Tributes to the kings of Egipt by Io∣seph. Pharaos life and all Egipt by Gods prouidence and his wisedome, that at that time hee was called in Egipt, Pater patriae, but soone forgotten in Egipt, as was seene after in the ty∣rannie of the Egiptians towards Iosephs children, and the whole stocke of the Hebrewes. Victories and ouerthrowes by warres gotten, im∣posed Steuech. com. in Uiget. lib. 3. cap. 5. such tribute as pleased the cōquerer. For among the Romanes before their Empire grew great, the Lu∣canians payed for their tribute but swine, the Brusians oxen; the Frizians the skinnes of oxen: others paid di∣uers kindes of wine, others waxe, others fish, and such like. And as the olde Romanes tributes were but cattell, The old Ro∣manes tri∣butes and tryumphes. corne, wine, fish, and such, so were their tryumphes had ouer the Samnites, the Volscians, Sabines, Ta∣rentines, and olde Gaules, but the weapons, armors, coaches, garments, cattells, and such like of the ene∣mies. To the Persians, while yet the Monarchie was in Persia, the Aethiopians payed but Ebanye, Iuo∣ry, Elephantes teethe, Frankencense, and certaine
measures of base gold euery third yeare. So the Capa∣docians payed to the Persians for yearely tribute fiue hundred Horse, two thousand Moyles. So likewise the Townes and small Villages about Babilon, were to prouide and feede the dogges of the king of Persia. But Tributes paide to the Persians. the Citie of Babilon it selfe, paide for tribute to the king of Persia, Artabas plenas argento certaine accounts of mony euery day. The Arabians likewise paide to the King of Persia certaine measures of such sweete odours, as the coun∣try did abound, as Frankincense and such like. These were but small tributes, as swine, oxen, corne, wine, fish, in former time which the Romanes had, in respect of their tributes had ouer Asia, Affricke, and Eu∣rope afterwards, which commaunded not only corne, nauies, horses, souldiers and armours, but also after this, a farre greater tribute beganne in the time of Paul: Aemilius, who after he had subdued the Macedonians, and Persius their king, the Illyrians and their king Gen∣tius, hee imposed vppon the Macedonians and Illyri∣ans halfe the tribute which they were wont to paie to their former kings. So Scypio Affrican after hee had conquered Hanibal at Zama, and brought the Carthagineans to such com∣position Composition between Sci∣pio and the Carthagine∣ans. as pleased himselfe, to paie two hundred ta∣lents yearely for fiftie yeares, with such conditions that the Carthagineans should depart from Sardinia and Cicilia, to restore the Romane souldiers which Hanni∣ball brought captiue with him out of Italy, and to de∣liuer Appian. in Lybico. vp their Elephants and all their nauies (tenne ex∣cepted). To such greatnesse grewe the tributes of the Ro∣manes by their victories, that Hispaine and Carthage
were to pay yearely stipendary tributes, not onely in Veget. lib. 3. cap. 3. money, but also horses, corne, nauies & armours, and to maintaine stipendary souldiers. And among all other conquered nations by them, they had in their cities and townes places called Cripta, for corne and prouisions Horre Romanum. for souldiers, but especially in Egipt, which was for their prouisions called the storehouse or barne of Rome. But now to the victories of Dauid againe, which af∣ter hee had raigned twentie yeares king quietly in Ieru∣salem, he lost two great battels, in the one he lost seuen∣tie thousand, and in the other battell hee had welnigh lost both himselfe and his kingdome: in the first battell Dauid committed great faults in setting out his power, his glorie, his victories, and his greatnesse, and most am∣bitiously to commaund Ioab to number all Israel from Berseba euen vnto Dan, as though power, strength, and victorie came from him, and not from the Lord. Here Dauid consulted not with the iudgement of Vrim and Thummim, and therefore he lost the victory, and Sathan gaue him a buffet. Dauid againe in the second battel was ouerthrowne by prouokemēt of the former enemie, not only to looke The offences of Dauid. vpon the beauty of Bethseba from the roofe of his house, but also to send for her, and lie with her, and to hide the first wicked great fault, he committed a greater, he sent Letters to Ioab his captaine, to put Vriah, Bethsebas hus∣band in the front of the battell to bee slaine: in this battell also Dauid did not call for the Ephod, nor asked counsell of the Lord, as he was wont to do, therefore Sathan gaue two such great buffets to Dauid, that he lost the field and two victories one after an other: of these buffets and stratagems Paul speakes, that he was buffet∣ted of Sathan, least he should glory too much by reue∣lation
shewed vnto him. Moses also had a buffet of Sa∣than at the water of Meribah, for his incredulitie, that the Lord said vnto him, that hee should not enter into the land of Canaan, but dye in mount Nebo. Iob also had a buffet in the land of Huz. Sathan vseth many such stratagems, whereby hee giueth many such buf∣fets. If Moses, Iob, Dauid, Paul, and others, were thus buf∣feted by Sathan, who can thinke himselfe free from the stratagems of Sathan? wee must therefore watch, if wee will not bee deceiued, and wee must fight if we thinke to haue victorie, our battell is not against flesh Ephes. 6. and bloud, but against power and states of heauens, against the prince and ruler of darknesse, and against spi∣rituall enenemies. But the Prophet Nathan was sent to Dauid, to open vnto him the rewards of adultery and murther, & that the sword should not go from Dauids house, the banish∣ment, the punishment and miserie that should fall vpon The rewards of adultery and murther him for offending the Lord. First his sonne died gotten in adultery by Bethseba; the rauishment of his women by his owne sonne Absolon; the incest of his daughter Thamar by her brother Ammon; the murthering of Da∣uids eldest sonne Ammon, by his brother Absolon; and The tragical ende which Dauid sawe on his childrē the rebellion of his sonne Absolon against his father the King. Thus Dauid sawe the iust iudgement of the Lord, and the tragicall end of his children, for offending the Lord. Euen Dauid that subdued so many nations, that got so many victories, that fought with a beare, with a lyon, and with a gyant, and subdued them, is now sub∣dued by a woman; had Dauid after these victories so much temperance and chastitie at the sight of Bethseba,
as hee had faith and courage at his combat with Golias; hee had conquered both alike; but the Lord punished 2. Reg. 16. Dauid and his house. The sonne of Emor for that he violately abused Dina Iacobs daughter, her bretheren tooke at it such a spite, that Simeon and Leui, Iacobs sonnes, went and slew Si∣chem Dina Iacobs daughter. and his father Emor, and all the men within Si∣chem, and tooke Dina theyr sister away with them. Gen. 34. Thus the gadding abroad of Dina to Sichem, to see the manner and fashion of the Sichemites, was the cause of the ouerthrowe of Sichem and the Siche∣mites. The going of the Sabine virgins to the feast of Con∣sus, to see playes in Rome, were rauished and taken by The Sabino virgins. the Romanes, to the number of six hundred, were the onely cause of the warres between the Sabines and the Romanes. In Siloth likewise on that day the feast of the Lorde was kept, the virgins of Siloth came abroad to daunce, to The virgins of Syloth. sing, and to play, the Beniamites caught the maides of Siloth, to the number of 200. and brought them to the land of Beniamin. So the abuse of one woman, the Le∣uites wife, by the Beniamite, cost sixtie foure thousand mens liues and more, in Israel. For by the taking away of Viriahs wife by Dauid, Is∣rael was plagued with the death of seuentie thousand men, and the taking away of Menelaus wife from Greece, cost the liues of many millions of men, and the warres of tenne yeares betweene the Greekes and the Troians. And for that the time of the taking away of Vriahs wife by Dauid, agreeth with the historie of the taking
away of Menelaus wife by Alexander, otherwise called Paris. After the death of Dauid, and Salomon his sonne, the kingdome of Israel was established vpon Rehoboam Salo∣mons sonne, he forsooke the law of the Lord, and reiec∣ted his fathers wise and graue counsellors, and followed The sacking of Ierursalē and many ci∣ties of Iudah by Shesak. rash young mens counsell, and therefore the Lord rai∣sed Shesak king of Egipt against Israel, and he came with twelue hundred chariots, three score thousand horse∣men, and his footemen were without number: for from Egipt came with him the Lybians, the Troglodites, and 2. Chron. cap. 12. the Aethiopians, he tooke the strong cities of Iudah and Ierusalem, and all the treasures of the Lords house, and all the treasures of the kings house, and he carried away two hundred targets and three hundred shields of gold, which Salomon made, and returned to Egipt with a great spoile, because Rehoboam forsooke the Lord, and there∣fore was forsaken of the Lord. The temple that Salomon his father builded, was spoiled by the negligence of Re∣hoboam, Salomons sonne. This was the first victorie that was had ouer Ierusa∣lem by Shesak king of Israel: and here began the first bat∣tell of the ciuill warre betweene the kings of Iudah, and the kings of Israel: and such ciuill warre if you consider The first bat∣tel of ciuill warres be∣tweene Iudah and Israel. the slaughter betweene Iudah and Israel, and the conti∣nuance of their warres, you must needs confesse that in one battell betweene Abiah and Ieroboam, were more slaine of the Israelites, then among the Romanes in for∣tie yeares: to talke of the Romanes ciuill warres, which was fortie yeares betweene Sylla and Marius, betweene Caesar and Pompey, and last betweene Octauius and Marc. Antonius: or the ciuill warres of the Greekes, called the Peloponesian warre, which endured seuen and twentie
yeares, it was nothing in respect of the murther and bloud betweene Iudah and Israel, for in the ciuill warres of the Romanes, histories doo not record aboue the 500000. Israelites slaine. deaths of three hundred thousand Romanes. Where in this battell, being the first ciuill battell betweene Ierobo∣am king of Israel, against Abiah king of Iudah, at what 2. Paralip. cap. 13. time was slaine in the field fiue hundred thousand of king Ieroboams souldiers in one battell; which neither Tamberlane nor Xerxes (though they could match them in number, yet could they neuer match thē in slaughter. For as the Romanes were full fiue hundred yeares in conquering the Sabines, the Latines, the Vients, the Fi∣denates, the Samnites, Tarentines, Hetruscans & others, frō Romulus time to Scypio Affrican, before the Romanes could be Lords of Italy. The like may bee spoken of the Israelites in conque∣quering the Moabites, Ammonites, Amalekites, Phili∣stines, and others, from Moses time vnto Dauid, welnigh fiue hundred yeares, and as the Romans held their Em∣pire, so long a time as they were in winning of it frō Scy∣pio Affrican, who conquered Haniball and Italy, vnto the Emperor Probus, which was fiue hundred years, at what time the whole Empire fell by degrees to decay. So Israel as they subdued their enemies, from Moses to Dauid, fiue hundred yeares, as you read before: so after The compa∣rison of the Hebrewes with the Ro∣manes. Dauid by ciuill warres of Iudah and Israel, vnto Zedechias time, which was fiue hundred yeares, they lost both the kingdomes Iudah and Israel; the one taken captiue by Salmanasser vnto Niniuie: the other by Nabuchodonozer vnto Babilon: so that now the land of Iudah called the land of milke and honey, is become Athisme, subiect to Pagans & Infidels, which continued from Abraham the The sinne of Israel. first father of the faith, vntill Titus Vespasian, two thou∣sand
and odde yeares, and al through disobedience and contempt of their Lord and God. Euen so the Romanes which were wont to be cal∣led lords of the world, whose Consuls at that time ruled and gouerned the most kingdomes of the world, are now left without King, Emperor, or Consull, and many cities in Italy at this day preferred before Rome, now go∣uerned by the Pope a Bishop, as Ierusalem is gouerned by the Turk an Infidel: so that in all things the Romanes The enemy of Rome was Italy. and the Hebrews may be compared: for as the greatest enemie that euer Rome had, was Italy, and the dange∣rousest foes that the Romanes had were Italians: for the Gaules, the Cymbres, the Carthaginians, and the Affri∣cans, The enemy of Iudah was Israel. vexed not the Romans as the Italians did, their own country men and next neighbors. So Iudah had no enemies but the house of Israel. So Israel had no enemies but Iudah, for Ierusalem could not away with Samaria for their two Idols, the one at Dan, the other in Bethell, so Samaria could not brooke Ierusalem for the great so∣lemnitie of Salomons temple. CHAP. III. The great battell betweene Abia king of Iudah, and Ierobo∣am king of Israel, where 500000. were slaine on Ieroboams side. Of the victories of Asa and Iosaphat kings of Iudah, ouer Zerah king of Aethiopia, & ouer the Edomites, Am∣monites, and Maobites. AS it seemed by the long oration which Abiahs ora∣tion in mount Zemaraim. Abiah made to Ieroboam and his army vpon mount Zemaraim, before the bat∣tell ioyned together, to disswade them from the battell, saying: that the Lord had giuen the kingdome ouer Israel to Dauid, and to his house, but Ieroboam
contemned Abiahs counsel, and thought by his policie and subtill stratagem to haue ouercome the host of Iu∣dah, but he himself was deceiued, to the losse of fiue hun∣dred thousand of his souldiers, that his power and force failed, that he was not able during his life to preuaile a∣gainst Iudah; for Ieroboam had gathered to encrease his army, all leaud, idle, and wicked vnthrifts, to fight this battell against Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon, like Cinna in Rome, that made open proclamation, that al bondmē, 2. Chron. 13. wicked doers, and banished men, should come to Cinna the Consul, & they should be restored to their former li∣bertie Cinna. & freedome, and thus Cinna gathered al the leaud and wicked men within all Italy: he then being Consul, taking part with Cai. Marius, against his other fellow Consull Octauius, which helde with Sylla, slaine at that time, & a number more of the citizens of Rome, but The crueltie of Marius and Sylla in Rome. between Sylla and Marius, one reuenging vpon an other fomig in their countries bloud, that all the streetes of Rome. anne of bloud. These two Marius and Sylla began the first Romane ciuil warres (as Ieroboam and Rehoboam did) and yet were they both compared to Scypio Affri∣can, for their victories to their countrey, though they were compared to Hanibal for the harm & hurt which Oros. they had done to their countrey. Had Ieroboam harkned to the counsell of Abiah king of Iudah, vpon mount Zemaraim, he had saued fiue hun∣dred thousand Israelites which were slaine at the battel. If the Beniamites had taken counsel of their brethe∣ren the Israelites, and to yeeld vnto them the wicked mē Iudie. 20. that abused the Leuites wife, the whole tribe of Benia∣min had not bin destroied. It was the ouerthrow of Iudas Good counsel not obeyed. Machabaeus by Bacchides at the battell of Laisa, for that he would not be perswaded by his friends to refraine the battell for that time.
Had the Prophet Ieremy beene heard of Zedechiah and the princes of Iudah, Zedechiah had saued the liues of his owne children slaine in his sight, and had likewise saued his owne eyes in his head, which presently were pulled out, after he saw his children slaine, and himselfe caried captiue and blind vnto Babilon, Ierusalem destroy∣ed, and the kingdome of Iudah subdued by Nabuchodo∣nozer: so it may be said of Saul refusing the counsell of Samuel, and so of Iosias disobeying the counsell of Necho. After the great victorie that Iudah had ouer Israel, by Abiah king of Iudah, his sonne Asa fought with Zerah, king of Aethiopia, an Infidel, who brought an host of ten hundred thousand men, & three hundred chariots from Aethiope to Iudah, and came to Maresha a citie of Iudah; The great victorie of Asa king of Iudah ouer the Aethio∣pians. & Asa the king of Iudah came with an army of fiue hun∣dred and foure score thousand into the valley of Zepha∣tah, and both the kings set the battel in a ray. But Asa began with praiers, & cryed vnto the Lord by praiers for ye victorie, putting no trust in his own power, or pollicie, neither fearing the strength of the multitude of his enemies, & so with full confidence in the Lord, he set vpō the Aethiopians, & the Lord smote them before Asa and before Iudah, that the Aethiopians fled, and the army of Iudah followed, and pursued them vnto Gerer, for the Lord had striken the Aethiopians with such fear, that there was no life in them, that the slaughter was ex∣ceeding great, & the spoyle exceeding much, of camels, sheepe, and cattell. And Asa after the victorie which he had giuen him by the Lord, returned to Ierusalem, and gaue the Lord thankes, who giueth all victories, so as all good kings and generals ought to pray to the Lord be∣fore they enter into battell, so ought they also to giue thankes after the battell, for their victories.
This victory was a requitall and a full reuenge vpon the Aethiopians, for the sacking and spoyling of Ierusalem, and of the great slaughter of the people by Shesak king of Egipt. In like maner as Abiah beganne with prayers before he beganne to battell, so did king Asa his sonne follow his fathers rule and order in seeking helpe and aide at the Lords hand, which euery King, Generall, or Cap∣taine should doo. So Iosaphat Asas sonne did when it was tolde him that the Moabites, Ammonites & Edo∣mites Good kings praied for victories. came with an infinit number to fight against him, he set himselfe to seeke the Lord, and to aske counsell of him, and all Iudah with him prayed vnto the Lorde, to aide and strengthen him to fight the Lords battel, wher∣by hee got a maruellous victorie ouer his enemies, for The victorie of Iosaphat. 2. Chron. 20. before he went into the battell, Iosaphat caused a Psalme of thankesgiuing to the Lord to be sung before the men of armes, and so entred the battell, and the Lord laide ambushments and shewed such stratagems against Am∣mon, Moab and Edom, that euery one helped to destroy another, and the Lord turned euery mans sword to kill his fellow. Where the Lorde leadeth the armie the victorie is soone gotten, so Iosaphat putting his whole trust & con∣fidence in the Lord, slue all his enemies that none did escape, and the spoyle was such of golde, of siluer, and pretious Iewels, that they were three dayes in gathe∣ring and in carrying the spoyle away, and then they as∣sembled together after the victorie by Iosaphats com∣maundement to giue the Lord thankes for the victory, and called the place where they got the victory Bera∣chab, Beracha. and they returned to Ierusalem with violls, harpes, and with trumpets.
These three battels of Abiah, Asa, and Iosaphat, were battells of the Lord, and as the Lord had done at that battell at Michmash to Ionathan, so the Lord did now at the battell at Beracha to Iosaphat, and so the Lord in all the battels of the good kings of Iudah and Israel shewed alwaies his diuine stratagems for the defence of Ierusa∣lem, as in Egipt by Moses against Pharao, by Elias at the brooke Kyson against Baals prophets: by Elizeus at Do∣than, against king Benhadads souldiers. The Gentiles in like sort, commence no warre, en∣ter Gentiles. no battell before they sing a song vnto their gods: as the Lacedemonians brought vp onely in warre from seuen yeares old, vsed before they went to the warres, to Plut. in Li∣curgo. make solemne sacrifice to the Muses & to the goddesse Feare, with a song to Castor & Pollux. The Thrasians sing a song to their god Mars, and bragge much of Mars for that he was borne in Thracia. Others made vowes when they went to any warres. As among the Romanes, their wiues, their children, and Veget. lib. 1. cap. 6. their friends, should make vowes, and cause the same to be written in tables, and to be set on that gate, through the which they went out of the citie to warre, that vpon their return home they might see and read their vowes and performe them. The three hundred Fabians, which were slaine at the Three hun∣dred Fabiās. battell at Crimera, the gate that they went through out of Rome then, was euer called after that Porta Scelerata. So did the Romains likewise call the field, where one of the Vestal virgins called Minutia, for her incest & carnall Minutia. Oros. lib. 3. cap. 9. fault, was buried in the field was called Sceleratus Cam∣pus, according to the Romain lawes made for the Vestal virgins that so offended. We leaue the prophane marching of the Romanes
and the Greekes, and we will returne to the marching of Israel vnder king Asa and king Iosaphat his sonne, who both by praiers obtained great victories, as all the Israe∣lites preuailed more by praier then by fight. As by prai∣er Ioshua made the Sun to stand stil ouer Gibeon, and the Praiers both commended and also com∣pared. Moone ouer Aialon. By praier Elias made the cloudes to fall & raine. By praier Moses made his enemies to flie. E∣lizeus raised the dead to life. Solomon obtained wisdom. So long as the Lord taketh not away thy praying, so lōg he doth not take away his grace & mercy from thee, for a wicked man cannot pray well, and he that praieth wel cannot liue wickedly. And therfore praiers are com∣pared to Sampsons haires, for as Sampsons strength laie in his haires, so our strength lieth in praiers. Ester praied to haue that to come to proud Ammon, Esters prai∣ers. which Ammon wished to haue done to Mardochaeus, and the poore Iewes. Iudith praied at the striking, and the cutting off, of Iudiths prai∣ers. Holofernes head, which blasphemed the Lord, and wold preferre Nabuchodonozer before the God of Israel. Susan praied vnto the Lord for her innocēcy against Susannas prayers. the false Iudges at Babilō, that accused her of incōtinen∣cy, and they were stoned to death by meanes of Daniel. We read also of Iud. Machabaeus, a noble captaine of Iud. Ma∣chabaeus. the Iewes, that he neuer entred into any battell before he praied, yet was hee in twelue set battels, and in euery one obtained victorie sauing at the last, at what time some write hee praied not, where hee was slaine in the field by Bacchides, and his people ouerthrowne. As you heard of good kings by praiers that wanne victories, so also shall you heare of wicked & Idolatrous kings, as Achas who caused an Idolatrous Altar to be Achas. made in Iudah, like the Altar at Damascus, and consecra∣ted his sonne in fire, and offered him to Moloch.
In like sort the king of Moab supposing his Idol Che∣mosh to be angry with him, slue and sacrificed his eldest sonne, that should haue raigned next after him King, and offered him as a burnt offering to his God Chemosh vpon the walles of the Towne. As Achab and Manasses Kings of Iudah did sacrifice their children in the valley of Hynnon to Moloch: for Achab was one of the first kings that brought the name of Baal into Israel; and maintei∣ned betweene him and his wife Iezabel, foure hundred and fiftie false prophets of Baal. Achas had good king Ezechias to his sonne, but A∣chas the father walked not vprightly before the Lorde, The Idola∣try of Achas. as his sonne Ezechias did, but made moulten Images for Baalim, and burnt Incense in the valley of Benhynnon, sa∣crificed his sonnes and burnt them with fire, and offered them vnto his god Moloch, and sought helpe at the gods of Damascus, at Chemosh god of the Moabites, Milcombe god of the Ammonites, and other straunge gods: and therefore the Lord gaue him ouer, and deliuered him into the hands of the king of the Aramites, and he smote him, and slue a great number of his soldiers, & brought many prisoners of Iudah with him to Damascus. Againe, the Lord deliuered Achas into the hand of Sixe score thousande slaine. the king of Israel Phaekah, and he slue in one day six score thousand in Iudah; and tooke two hundred thousand prisoners of women, sonnes & daughters, and brought them into Samaria with all the spoyle. The Edomites slue of them of Iudah, a great number, and carried ma∣ny captiues away: Marke what mischiefe happeneth where an euil king doth raigne. The Philistines also in∣uaded the cities of Iudah, and tooke Aialon & Gederith, and other cities of Iudah, and thus were they vexed by Iudah vexed by the Ara∣mites. &c. the Aramites, Edomities, and Philistines, and by the
Israelites being their owne nation; for that Achas king of Iudah forsooke the Lord, and sought helpe at strange gods, and not at the hands of the god of Israel. After wicked Achas, the good king Ezechias his sonne succeeded, he was to commence a battell with Senache∣rib, who blasphemed the Lord, and threatned destructi∣on to Ierusalem, but the Prophet Esay had instructed E∣zechiah, that this was the Lords battell, & that he would be reuenged vpō the blasphemy of Senacherib, for proud Ashur challenged the Lord into the field to fight with him, saying, what god could take Iudah out of his hand? he numbred the kings and their gods which he and his fathers destroied, and with horrible blasphemy perswa∣ded the king of Iudah not to trust to his god, but to yeeld vnto him; but the lord did put his hooke in his nosthrils, and his bridle in his lips, as the Lord had told Ezechiah The blasphe∣my of Sena∣cherib puni∣shed. the king, by Esayas the prophet, that Senacherib with all his army should not come to Ierusalem, nor shoote an ar∣row there, for the battel is mine saith the Lord. And hee sent his Angels that night which destroyed all the Chron. ca. 19. princes, all the captaines, and all the valiant men of A∣shur, and all the whole army of Senacherib, to the num∣ber of an hundred, foure score and sixe thousand, with∣out the drawing of one sword of Iudah, and Senacherib fled with tenne men with him, some thinke that Nabu∣chodonozer was one, but I thinke time will not so allow, for he was at that time but a very childe. But Senacherib fled to Niniuie, where he was slaine in the temple, pray∣ing before his Idoll Nisroch, whom he preferred before the liuing God, & that by his two sonnes (the iust iudge∣ment Adramelec & Sharaser. of the Lord for his blasphemy) to be slaine, before his owne god, before whom he worshipped and pray∣ed when he was slaine by his owne sonnes; and thus we
see in all iust battels whē we serue the Lord, & trust one∣ly in him, that victories come not by man, but by ye Lord. Iosaphat a good king had Ioram an euil king to his son, Iosaphat. a murtherer of his bretheren. Ezechias a good king in Ierusalem, had Manasses to his Ezechias. sonne, a wicked Idolater, who filled all the streets of Ie∣rusalem with bloud. Iosias a good godly king, had to his fonnes Ioachas and Ioachim, who were taken captiues by Nabuchodonozer in∣to Iosias. Babilon, for their transgressions and sins, at what time Daniel was taken captiue, and many other gentlēmen of Iudah; euen Ierusalem whom the Lord had defended frō 2. Reg. ca. 17. the sword of Senacherib, and from all the kings of Egipt and Ashur: yet when the sinnes of Ierusalem were ripe, it was deliuered into the hand of Nabuchodonozer, to be carried captiue into Babilon, as Samaria was to Niniuie by Salmanasher, one hundred thirtie and three years before Iudahs captiuitie. After Ashur had taken the ten tribes of Israel away, he brought from Bethel, from Cutha, from Anah, and frō A∣math, straunge people, and placed them in the cities of Samaria, in stead of the children of Israel, and of these The Sama∣ritan woman people came the Samaritans, of whom mention is made often in the gospel, with whom the Iews would haue no societie, for so the woman spake to Christ at Iacobs well, that why he being a Iew, should aske water of a Sama∣ritan. This time Zedechiah the king gaue no hearing to the Prophet Ieremy, who forewarned the king of their de∣struction Ieremy and Micha both striken & put in prison. to be at hand, for the which the Prophet was imprisoned, first by Fashur high bishop of the tēple, who smote Ieremy and put him in the stockes, strooke him as Zedechiah the false Prophet strook Micha, who was after Iere. cap. 20.
commaunded by Achab to be imprisoned as Ieremy the Iere. 18. Prophet was, and by meanes of the nobles of Iudah to king Zedechiah. Ieremy was imprisoned in a dirtie dunge∣on, Ieremy notwithstanding spared not to tell them, that they should die an horrible death, and should lie as dung vpon the earth, and no man to burie them; wherat they were so moued saying, let vs not regard his words, and let vs cut out his tongue. The citizens of Anathot commaunded Ieremy not to preach vnto them in the name of the Lord, & if thou do thou shalt die. Ieremies speech was performed to the ouerthrow of Iere. 11. the whole kingdome of Iudah, neither could it be other∣wise, considering they sinned still against the Lord, and the long ciuill warres betweene themselues, which con∣tinued so long from Ieroboams time, who caused Israel first to sinne, vnto the last king of Israel. Elias after he had destroied two captains one after ano∣ther, with their 50. souldiers seuerally with fire frō hea∣uen, & after he had subdued 450. of Baals Prophets, after all these great conquests, and many other such, he fea∣red so much one woman, that for very feare hee fled Elias. from place to place from her, & being wearie of his life, he lay vnder a Iuniper tree, wishing to die, and prayed to God that hee might die, complaining vnto the Lord that there was none left of the Prophets of the Lord but himselfe, but hee was aunswered by the the spi∣rite of God, that there was seuen thousand more in Israel that yet neuer once bended theer knees vnto Baall. The like may bee spoken of Ionas, beeing like E∣lias Ionas. wearie of his life, hee sought meanes to forsake his Countrey, and to flye by sea to other Countreys,
but the sea could not brooke him, but deliuered him to be deuoured of a wh, and the whale could not keepe him, but was compelled to vomit him vp from the bot∣tome o his by to goe to preach to Niniuie, so that E∣lias   die vnder the Iuniper tree, and Ionas would  be throwne and drowned in the Sea, leane contrary to the purpose and prouidence of the Lord. E  ly of his life to see the Prophets of the Lord so destroyed and Ionas to see his labour in prea∣ching profit nothing, that he should be pured a false Prophet, the Lord not destroying the Citie after fortie daies according to his word, but sparing it in mercie as he did pittie the gourd in mercy. After the Lord had giuen great victories to many of 4. Reg. the kings of Iudah. to Asa ouer Zerah king of Aethiope; to Iosaphat ouer Shesak king of Egipt; to Ezechiah ouer Ioseph. lib. 7. ap. 6. Senacherib, yet Iudah still forsooke the Lord, though Ie∣emy tolde them from the mouth of the Lord their de∣struction, when they rather threatned then beleeued. But neither Ioachim, nor Zedechias, would neither heare, nor beleeue the Prophet, and therefore the Lord deliuered them both into Nabuchodonozers hands, the one was slaine in Ierusalem, and his body commaunded to be cast out of the citie, and to be left vnburied like an asse: the other Nabucho. tooke prisoner, and caused his owne children & all his chiefe friends to be slaine in his sight, and after hee sawe this tragicall sight with his eyes, Nabuchodonozer being then in Rebla, before whom Zedechia was brought, after he reprehended him for his periurie and trecherie, and accused him for his false∣hood, caused his eyes to be put out, and so bound in a chaine and carried prisoner to Babilon, where hee lay
and dyed in prison, being the last king of the line of Da∣uid, and the twentieth king after Saul. There was a mightie king in Damascus ouer the Sy∣rians called Adad, who after many great battels with Dauid, was subdued in a great battell at Euphrates. This Adad was so great for his great victories among the Syrians, that they named euery king after his name A∣dad, to the number of tenne, and the tenth king was that Benhadad which besieged Samaria in the time of the Prophet Elizeus, whom this king Adad could no better fauour, then Adad his predecessor could fauour Dauid, or king Achab did Elias. After this great victorie Dauid imposed tributes vpon the Syrians, as he did before vpon the Idumeans, Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 6. Moabites, and others, hee returned to Ierusalem, de∣dicated and consecrated as a trophey of his victorie, the armours and rich spoile of Adad, king of the Syrians, in Ierusalem to the Lord. So the Philistines vsed the body of Saul, slaine in mount Gilboa, after they had sent his head to the Land of the Philistines, and hanged his body on the wall of Bethshan, they would be sure to lay vp his Armour in the temple of their god Ashtaroth, according to the customes and manners of the Gentiles: for they vsed to hang the armors and spoiles of their victories in their Temples to their Gods.
CHAP. IIII. How Achab though a wicked king had two great victories a∣gainst Benhadad king of Syria, who had 32. kings in his armies. Of diuers great blasphemers punished. Of the Idolatry of Israel. And of the prophecying against Ieru∣salem. BEnhadad king of Aram, assembled an army against the Lorde, hauing two 32. Kings came with Benhadad against A∣chab. and thirtie kings, which were gouer∣nours and rulers of prouinces, with horses and chariots without number, came and fought against Achab king of Israel, a most wicked king. And yet the Lord seeking to winne this wicked king, as well by victories now, as by myracles before, sent a Prophet to 1. Reg. 20. Achab; promising him ouer Benhadad king of Aram a great victorie. For the army of the Syrians were so ma∣ny, that Benhadad sent a Herald vnto Achab, commaun∣ding him to deliuer vp to his hand Samaria, and all the cities of Israel, or else hee would come with such an ar∣mie, that the dust of Samaria should not be inough for euery souldier a handfull; much like Xerxes king of Per∣sia for his vaunts and bragges, who doubted that the sea Hellespont had not roome ynough for his nauies, nor Greece had land inough for his armies, nor the aire wide inough for his shottes, but Xerxes was answered by De∣marathus Achabs words to Benhadad. the Philosopher, as Benhadad was by Achab: Let him not brag that putteth on his harnesse, as he that puts it off, but the king of Syria bragged as Xerxes did be∣fore he wan the victory, for the Lord gaue the victory to Achab, and such a victory by slaughter, by chasing, by ta∣king of men, horses and chariots, that the king of Syria
fled and escaped narrowly with fewe horsemen that were his guard, and said that the gods of Israel were the gods of the mountains, & therfore they ouercame vs, & chalenged a battel with Israel in the valleys, where they assured themselues of victory; thus they blasphemed the Lord in their furie, but to their losse & great ouerthrow. The blasphemy of Rabsacis, & of his maister Senache∣rib king of the Assirians, saying to king Ezechiah, let not thy god deceiue thee in whom thou hopest and puttest thy trust; was not he slaine praying before his god Nes∣roch in Niniuie, by his owne two sonnes? The blasphemy of Nabuchodonozer, saying: What God is hee that is able to take you out of my hands? was not he punished with the losse of his kingdome, and to liue among beasts like a beast, and not like a king, vntil he ac∣knowledged the Lord? The blasphemy of Holofcrnus, saying there was no god but his maister Nabuchodonozer, was not his head Diuers great blasphemers punished. cut off by Iudith a womā, & put vpō the wals of Bethulia? And likewise the blasphemy of Nicanor, which said: is there a God mightie in heauē that commands to keep the Sabboth day, and I am mightie on earth that com∣commaunds the contrary? but his head, his hands, and his blasphemous tongue were cut off, and hanged vpon the pinacles in the temple at Ierusalem. And so the blasphemy of the Scribes and Pharisies, saying, that Christ the Lord did not cast out diuels by his owne vertue, but by the power of Belzebab, but the Lord left not them vnpunished. The blasphemy of Benhadad, saying, that the Lord was the God of the mountaines onely, not God of the val∣leys: 2. Reg. 8. was not he strangled by Hazael his owne seruant, in his owne house, and in his owne bed?
Yet the Syrians prepared such a number for the se∣cond battel, after they had escaped hardly from the first battell, that they filled all the countrie, and the children of Israel were like to little flockes of Kids in respect of their number: but the Lord sent his Prophet to Achab, saying: Because the Syrians haue said that the Lord is The second victorie of Achab ouer Benhadad. the God of the mountaines, and not God of the valleys, behold, this great multitude of men, and Benhadad the King himselfe, withal the two and thirtie Kings besides, will I deliuer to thine hand, and he shall know that I am the Lord as well of the valleys as the mountaines. And so the Lorde brought it to passe, that in that battell an hundred thousand footemen were slaine of the Syrians, and seuen and twentie thousand that fled from the field to Aphec to saue themselues, were killed by the fall of a wall that crushed them to death, and Benhadad the King fled to the citie, from chamber, to The great victorie of Achab ouer Benhadad at Aphec. chamber, and hid himselfe, according to the Prophets saying, vntill many of his chiefe Princes that escaped hardly from the battell, came with sackcloath about their loynes, and ropes about their neckes in token of submission, to entreate Achab king of Israel for the life of Benhadad, which he graunted, contrary to that which he was by the Lord commaunded for to do as Saul did by Agag king of the Amalekites, so Achab did by Benhadad, but it was told Achab by the Prophet, that his life should goe for his life, and his people for his people. This Achab a wicked and Idolatrous King had such two great victories for that the Lord alwayes would haue Israel to forsake their calfe in Bethell, and their Ido∣latry to Baall in Samaria, but sinne was written in the The two great victo∣ries of A∣chab. table of their hearts, and grauen vpon the edges of their Aultars, with a penne of Iron, and with an Adamant
clawe said the Prophet, that there was nothing among Iere. 17. them more pretious then woods thicke trees, groues, mountaines, hills and fields, for altars to serue their Ido∣latrous Iere. 18. woodden goddes, so greatly they offended the Lord that he asked the Heathens, if any heard such hor∣rible The Idolatry of Israel. things as his people had done, yea the Priests to whom the lawe was committed, the Prophets which wanted not the word of the Lorde, and the graue wise Senators. So that Israel would not be instructed, neither take warning by the Prophets, before the finall end and sud∣daine destruction of Ierusalem by Nabuchodonozer king of Babilon, though the Lord commaunded the Prophet Amos to strike the lintell of the doore, that the postes Amos 9. might shake, signifying the threatning of the Lorde a∣gainst Israel. So was Ezechiel commaunded to take a bricke and to purtray the citie of Ierusalem vpon the bricke with a sharpe knife, to signifie the destructiō of the people and of the citie; and the ame selfe Prophet sheweth the de∣struction Ezechi. 24. of Ierusalem by Nabuchodonozer king of Babel, by a parable of a seething potte, and the day was com∣maunded to be written by the Prophet. Ierusalem the the valley of vision, so named, because of the Prophets The valley of vision. which were also called seers. The Lorde said that hee would bring such a plague vpon Ierusalem, that the eares of them that should heare it should glowe, for I wil send many fishers to take them, & many hunters to hunt thē from all mountaines and hilles, and out of the caues of stones saith the Lord. Yet though Ierusalem was so seuerely prophesied Ierusalem. by Amos, Ezechiel, and other Prophets, to be destroyed, yet they were comforted by the Prophet Ieremy againe, Iere. cap. 16.
that they should returne frō their captiuitie after seuen∣tie yeares, and rebuild Ierusalem. And as by Ieremy by hiding of his leather girdle by the riuer Perah, as the Lord had cōmaunded him, signifying Iere. 13. 33. that by the rottēnes of the girdle Ierusalē shuld be rebuil∣ded after seuentie yeares. And by the selfesame Prophet they were assured by his buying of the field Anothot, and by the hiding of his writing of possession thereof, in signes and tokens of their libertie againe, and that Ieru∣satem should be builded againe, and inhabited: this was but the second ouerthrow of Ierusalem by Nabuchodono∣zer. This was like Noah that preached the destruction of the world by a deluge, before the deluge, and yet marri∣ed Noah. a wife, much like to the Prophet Ieremy that preached the destruction of Ierusalem, and yet bought lands. The Prophets vsed many of these signes as eye-wit∣nesses to confirme their memory better, and to expect with more faith the words of the Prophets. The Prophet Ieremy proceedeth forward to denounce the ouerthrow of those proud kingdomes, that reioy∣ced Iere. cap. 51. much at the destructiō of Ierusalem, as Egipt and Ba∣bilon, and all the euill that should come vpon Babilon, Ie∣remy wrote it in a booke, & sent Sheraiah with his booke to read it, and when he had done reading, Ieremy com∣maunded him to binde a stone to the booke, and to cast it into the midst of the riuer Euphrates, and then to say, thus shall Babilon be cōfounded; thus the Prophets vsed besides their prophesies to adde some action to make the words the more to be remembred. So also the Prophet Ezechiel prophesied against Egipt, and against their great cities, saying: The sword of the Lord shall come to Memphis, to Pellusium, and to Alexan∣dria,
I will ouerthrow Memphis saith the Lord, I will de∣stroy Ezechiel. Pellusium the strength of Egipt, and I will make a great slaughter of all the men in Alexandria. For as Babilon was taken, Maradach ouerthrowne, and Bel cōfounded, so was the strength of Egipt, & the arme of Pharao destroyed without any recouery of their Em∣pires againe, but so was not Ierusalem. Nabuchodonozer in like sort as he ouerthrew Ierusa∣lem, and made a conquest of the countrey, euen so his great citie of Babilon was caried by Cyrus away into Per∣sia, within seuentie yeares after he tooke Zedechiah the last king of Iudah captiue in Babilon: so Egipt was taken by the Persians, and last by the Romanes. But Ierusalem as you heard by Ieremy, should not bee so destroyed, but should be defended against all her ene∣mies, and the Lord shall destroy all nations that come against Ierusalem, for the Lord hath deliuered Israel out of the fierie furnace of Egipt, and from all the stratagems of the Heathens. I will make the Princes of Iudah like Zach. 12. coales of fire among the wood, and like a firebrand in the sheffe, and they shall deuour all people round about them, saith the Lord. The foure hornes which Zachary saw, which scatte∣red Ierusalem, Iudah, and Israel, but the Lord appoints Zachary. Carpenters and Smiths, with mallets and hammers, to breake the hornes of those enemies, for Iacob the Patri∣arke prophesied that the scepter should not depart from Iudah vntill Siloh should come, so that after the destructi∣on of Ierusalē vnder Nabuchodonozer, to the last destruc∣tion of the same vnder Titus, Ierusalem cōtinued her go∣uernment, according to the prophesie of Iacob, so that neither force, power, nor strrtagems could preuaile a∣gainst Ierusalem.
CHAP. V. Of Semiramis stratagems in India, and of Tomiris in Sci∣thia. Of the victories of Alexander the great. Of Pyr∣rhus warres in Italy, and of the ouerthrow of Xerxes armie in Greece, by Leonidas at Thermopyles, and by Themistocles at Salamina. THe stratagems which Ierusalem vsed in the battells of the Lord, were nothing like to the stratagemes of the great Monarchies and Polymarchies of the world, who re∣posed their trust in their dumbe Idolles and woodden gods, and in multitude of men and beastes, as Semyramis did, a woman of great fame and report in histories, willing to excell men in martiall actions, tooke her voyage into India, with such innumerable armies, that Staurobates king of India was so frighted with the report thereof, that he caused all his Elephants to be brought and to be set in the most shewe to terrifie the Assirians, that it made the Assirian armie more willing to returne backe, then to goe for∣wards. Semyramis perceiuing that the Assirians were afrigh∣ted and amazed, at the sight of so many Elephants, and that the king did purposely set his Elephants in sight to amaze the Assirians, which was the order of the Indiās to terrifie all Princes with the sight of their Elephants: Semyramis stratagem in India. Diod. sic. lib. 3. cap. 5. she vsed this stratageme, caused 300. thousand great oxen to be slaine, and their skinnes to be stuffed & fil∣led with heye, and to be framed in forme and fashion like Elephants: in euery one of these she put in a Ca∣mell, and a man vpon his backe, which she placed in the
forefront of the battell to terrifie the Indians, and their king Staurobates, for (as Semyramis thought) the Indians supposed that all the world could not bring more Ele∣phants into the field then the Indians could. After these fained elephants, she placed such an infinit number of camels behind the armie, that the sight ther∣of much terrified Staurobates & his army, that Semyramis by this stratagem got two great victories in India. But after these fained elephants were betraied by one of Se∣myramis Captaines taken in the warres, who by torture confessed the secresie of Semyramis stratageme, that she was glad to leaue India, and to returne to her Coun∣try. Euen so Tomyris Queene of Scythia, to requite Cyrus stratageme, by a banquet which he made purposely to deceiue the Scythians, fained to flie for feare, and left his tents full of wine and good cheare, and sodainly re∣turning, found the Scythians banquetting and feasting, and so charged with wine, that they were more readie The victory of Cyrus in Scythia. to sleep then to fight; whereby Cyrus slue Sargapises To∣myris sonne, with two hundred thousand Scythians. The like stratagem vsed the Lorde against the Ara∣mites, when an Asse head was solde in Samaria for fif∣tie sickles, that such plentie was in Samaria as Elizeus said before, that the Aramites left their Tents with all prouisions, and fled without any shewe or likenesse to bee done against them, but this was a diuine strata∣gem by the Lord. Tomyris after her great losse which she had by Cyrus of her sonne and her people, caused trenches, deepe dit∣ches, and sharpe stakes to be made secretly, and placed Tomyris stratagem against Cy∣rus. armed souldiers in the same, being in narrow & straight places, dissembling that she was not able to giue a secōd
battell to Cyrus, but faigned her selfe to flie, and al her ar∣my Tomyris Stratagem. with her, to draw the Persians after her, vntill shee brought thē vnto these trenches, ditches, & narrow pla∣ces, where she had set in wait an innumerable multitude of armed Scythiās round about Cyrus & hisarmy, which vpon the sudden fel vpon the Persians, & slew two hun∣dred thousand of them, that there was not one left aliue to bring tidings vnto Persia of Cyrus death; & thus Cyrus the great king of Persia was ouerthrowne with all his ar∣my by Tomyris Queen of Scythia, a woman, with the like stratagem as he ouerthrew Tomyris before. Sampson who ouerthrew 6000. of the Philistines at one time by ye fall of a house, at an other time slew 1000. Iud 16. of them with a Iawe bone of an asse, who burned theyr rickes and their corne, destroyed their vines, & plagued them euery way. Yet this Sampson was taken, bound, his eyes pulled out, solde and deliuered to the Philistins his enemies, by a stratagem of a woman, Dalyla his wife. Moses being chosen general ouer the Egiptians against the Aethiopians, hearing by reports of the dangerous pas∣sage through the wildernesse frō Egipt vnto Aethiope, de∣uised a stratagem to passe through the wildernesse full of Moses stra∣tagem. noisome serpēts, where Moses must needs passe through, he made certain chests of bull-rushes, & caried out of E∣gipt with him a number of the birds called Ibes, which bird to kill in Egipt was a capitall crime by law made, for that they were so beneficiall to Egipt, whose naturall ha∣tred is such against serpents, that when serpents assaulted Moses in the wildernesse, he would let out his birds Ibes who assaulted them, chased them, & slew them, that Mo∣ses by this means passed safe through the wildernesse, to the wonder of both the Egiptians & Aethiopians, and therby had two victories ouer the Aethiopians. Alexander the great, twelue hundred yeares af∣ter Semyramis taking his iourney with his Armye into
India, where, when his army sawe so many Elephants set in battell raie, along vpon the riuer of Ganges side, it so amazed the Macedonian army, that they told Alex∣ander that they came not to fight with beasts but with mē, so fearfull at the sight of the Elephants, that the Ma∣cedonians would goe no further: Alexander being of inuincible courage that nothing could feare him, with∣out stratagems, but of meere magnanimitie, requested the Macedonians & the Persians that were in his army, not to leaue him their king to such shamefull reports, as the sight of a few Elephants might terrifie Alexander the great and his inuincible army. The Argyraspides his principall souldiers, hauing per∣swaded the most part of the army to auoyd shame & in∣famy, and to stick to their captain Alexander, whose only request was to haue them altogither at once to shoote at Alex. his victorie ouer king Porus. Porus King of India, which being perswaded hardly thervnto, were forced for shame to perform the request which Alexander sought at their hands, which they per∣formed, that so many shots lighted vpō the king at once that he fell to the ground from his Elephant, and the In∣dians fled, supposing their king to haue bene slaine. Thus Alexander got the first victory in India, made a great slaughter, tooke their king, being sore wounded, & deliuered him to his generals & captains to cure: and Porus was substituted a king vnder Alexander in India. Alexander had not such a booty in India by taking king Porus, as he had by Darius in Persia: the greatest treasure which Alexander brought from India were a fewe Ele∣phants, which were not before Alexanders time seene in Asia: Alexander had such treasure in Susa, being but one citie in Persia, that he found aboue 40. thousand tal∣lents of gold & siluer in the kings treasury at Susa vncoi∣ned: Diod. fic. lib. 17. he found besides, nine thousand tallents of gold in Dariks, which were with Darius name stamped on it. A-
Alexander also found in Persepolis the chiefe citie of Persia, twelue hundred thousand talents of golde & sil∣uer, The infinite treasure which Alex∣ander found in Persia. which were from Cyrus time, ready alwaies kept for the warres, for the yearly reuenewes of Persia were kept in Persepolis. It is written that Alexander the great founde such a maruellous treasure in Persia, that he loaded ten thou∣sand Moyles, and three thousand Camels, with the gold and siluer of Persia onely, and the kings warderobes. At what time he was requested by one Thais a Curtizan of Athens, of singular beautie, that the great pallace of king Xerxes might be destroyed and burned, to reuenge the Xerxes pal∣lace burnt in Persepolis. burning of Athens, and the iniuries which Xerxes did in Greece, that it might be said afterwards that a woman of Athens, requited the wrong which Xerxes did to Athens, with the burning and destroying of great king Xerxes pallace in Persepolis. Yet got Alexander more fame by the Elephants he brought out of India into Asia, by the ouerthrow of king Porus, then by all the wealth he had Elephants the onely strength of India. in Persia by subduing of Darius, for as Elephants were the only strength of the Indians against Alexander with his Macedonian and Persian army, and of the Affricans against Scypio, and others of the Romane armies. So in Asia in many places Camels were their onely force in field. So Mithridates furnished his warres a∣gainst Lucullus with Camels. So did Antiochus the great against Scipio. So also it is written of Craesus, that the sight of his Camels was such, that the horses ouerthrew their ryders, that Craesus wanne by his Camels great vic∣torie. All the Arabian kings vsed Camels in their warres, Front. lib. 2. cap. 4. as the Indians & Affricans vsed Elephants, for Camels were as plentifull in Arabia, as Elephants were in India.
After Alrxander the great, Antigonus vsed Elephants, after Antigonus Pirrhus, who grew so great a souldier af∣ter he had vanquished Demetrius king Antigonus sonne, that hee brought from Epyre to Lucania in Italy twentie Elephants, to fight with the Tarentines against the Ro∣manes, at what time Elephants were first sent in Rome, as I said before: but in Hanibals time after Affrica was subdu∣ed by the Romanes, Affrican Elephants were as cōmon at Rome in a maner as horses (though not so cruel in fight as the Indian Elephants were) yet seldome vsed by the Romanes in any of their warres, but rather vsed in tri∣umphes. Leauing these Elephants, & a litle to speak of Thais, a Curtizā of Athens, who was no lesse desirous to become famous vpon some conquest ouer the Persians, then was Semyramis Queene of Babylon ouer the Indians. If the desire of fame be thus in women found, how much more in men? and therfore Scypio Affrican would Plyni. lib. 7. cap. 30. haue the picture of Ennius the Poet put vp in the Capi∣toll, for that Ennius wrote that while Affrica was subiect to the Romanes, and as long as the Romane Empire should flourish, so long the name of Scypio should flou∣rish. Pompey the great gaue to Theophenes a whole citie because hee wrote much of the name and fame of Pom∣pey, and Alexander the great thought Achilles to be most happie, for that his warres and victories were aduanced Cic. pro Archis. by Homer, and the same Alexander (hearing Anaxar∣chus alledging a place of Democritus his maister, that there were many worlds) wept, for that hee had not wonne halfe a world; thus great men sought euer to haue their name aduanced on earth. Haniball being called from Italy into Affrick, after his
brother Asdrubal was slaine, to resist Scipio Affrican Ge∣nerall ouer the Romane army at Carthage, Hannibal be∣fore he returned from Italy, caused tryumphant arches and pillers to be set vp to aduance his fame, in many pla∣ces of Italy, in the which hee caused to be ingrauen his Hannibals trophies in Italy. great victories, and the number of all the Senators, Cō∣suls, Proconsuls, Praetors, Romane knights & captains, which he vanquished and slue at the foure great battels, Tisinum, Trebeia, Thrasimen and Canne, which were set in Greeke & Punike letters, for a memoriall of his being in Italy. Pirrhus, after that he had giuen two ouerthrowes to the Romanes in the behalfe of the Tarentines, had the third ouerthrow himselfe, and such an ouerthrow, that of twentie Elephants which he brought with him from Greece to Italy, he brought none backe from Italy againe vnto Greece. Yet Pirrhus caused an Epilogue of his victories and fame to be writtē & set vp in the temple of Iupiter at Ta∣rentum, Oros. lib. 4. cap. 1. in these words; Qui antehac inuicti fuere hos vici, victus{que} sum ab ijsdem, the stout Romanes which were by none before ouerthrowne, I ouerthrew, and was a∣gaine by the Romains ouerthrowne, but being blamed by his chiefe captaines that he confessed himselfe to be ouerthrowne, said; I so ouerthrew the Romanes, that I dare not answere them another battel, lest I should haue no more men come out of Italy, then I haue Elephants. The Romanes in the warres against Pirrhus in Italy, The Romans stratagem a∣gainst Pir∣rhus. were once or twise ouerthrowne by meanes of Pirrhus Elephants, but the Romaines thus annoyed in the first and second battel by the Elephants, inuented this strata∣gem, to fling downe bundels of broom-stalks or hemp, besmeared with pitch, tarre, and brimstone, being set on Oros. lib. 4. cap. 2. fire from the walles vpon the Elephants and the souldi∣ers in the Turrets.
Vpon these Elephants were strong Towers made of wood, vpō euery tower was 32. men placed that fought in them, besides the Indians that ruled them, but by the foresaid stratageme they were all ouerthrowne, sauing Curius De∣tat. his try∣umphe. foure which were brought to Rome from Lucania, to set forth Curius his tryumph, but in the time of Hannibal to prouoke these Elephants to fight, they vsed to shewe them the blood of grapes & mulberies. So did Antiochus 1. Machab. 6 in his warres against the Iewes. In Italy, betweene the Tarentines and the Lucans a great battell was appointed to be fought, in the which battel Archidamus king of Lacedemonia, taking part with the Tarentines was slain in the field by the Lucanians. Archidamus slaine in Italy This Archidamus was the son of great Agesilaus, he had gottē diuers victories in Greece his own country, & that victory especially ouer the Arcadians called the teareles Bellum sine lachrimis. battell, and yet this king died in Italy, being called from Greece to aide the Tarentines. So Pirrhus in the like, was almost taken by the Ro∣manes, but he was driuen to forsake Tarentum, and glad to his losse to flie from the Romanes, though he was the most renowned warriour in the world at that time, and to say that the Romanes had their Pirrhus, as Hannibal said after 17. yeares warres with the Romanes, that the Romanes had also their Hannibal, and that Rome could hardly be subdued but by Romanes, for both Pirrhus and after him Hannibal, found the Romanes to be an in∣uincible nation. For after that Cineas Pirrhus Embassador had retur∣ned from Rome, being demaunded of Pirrhus of what state the Romaines were in Rome, what rules, what lawes, and what kinde of gouernment the Romanes had.
Cineas answered that the Senate of Rome appeared to him a counsell house of many Kings, and euery man seemed to him in Rome to be such as King Pirrhus was in Epyre. At that time Pirrhus said to Cineas, were I king of Rome, or had I Romane souldiers, I should soone be an Pirrhus speech of the Romanes. other Alexander. For Pirrhus was by Hanibal adiudged to be the second souldier at that time in the world after Alexander. Pirrhus was a man so full of courage and valour, that when he was chalenged into a combat by a Generall of the Army, and though hee was wounded in the bat∣tell, yet bloudie as hee was, hee could not endure the challenge, but aunswered his challenger, and killed him. Marc. Seruilius for priuate challenges in combats ex∣celled all, who had bene a Consul, and had fought in his owne person 23. challenged combats of life and death, and slew as many as he fought withall. For among the olde Romanes and the Grecians, (when two armies met together) they vsed to chalenge Deuers kinds of combats. combats to saue bloud, betweene one and one, as Mar∣cellus and Britomarus: betweene three and three, as the Horatians and Curatians, betweene three hundred and three hundred, as the Lacedemonians and the Ar∣giues. For-at the great battell betweene Marcellus the Ro∣mane Consull, and Britomarus King of the Gaules, who challenged Marcellus to fight a combate be∣tweene them both in the battell at Chastidium to spare bloud, and to yeeld the conquest where the victorie fell. The combat being performed, and the king slaine by
Marcellus in the field, both the armies ioined their forces The battel of Chastidium. together, and fought it out, that foure score thousand were slaine of the Gaules, and their King, which honor happened to none of the Romans besides, but to Romu∣lus, who killed Acron King of the Caeninians in the like combat, and also to Cornel. Cossus, who slew Tolumnus generall of the Thuscanes. The Romanes were so ioyfull of this victorie of Mar∣cellus, that they caused a massie cup of gold to bee made of the spoile, and to be sent to Appollo Pythian in Del∣phos. So did Xerxes the great king of Persia, in his voyage against the Grecians, dranke a cup of wine to Neptune, and after his draught threw the cup into the middest of the sea, as a sacrifice to please Neptune, yet had not hee such good successe as Romulus and Marcellus had, for at 600000. bushels of corne daily spēt in Xerx∣es army. that time Xerxes leuied so great an army into Greece, that sixe hundred thousand bushels of corne was daily spent in Xerxes Army, thinking to conquer all Greece with ter∣rour and feare of such an Army, for that Greece at that time was busie in setting forth their Olympicall feast. He came to Thermopyla, where hee was met by Leoni∣das Herodot. li. 7. a noble Greeke, with sixe hundred Grecians, and Cic. de fini∣bus. 2. was put to flight with the losse of twentie thousand Per∣sians. This was one of the most samous victories and rarest battels that euer the Grecians had ouer the Per∣sians, though the battell at Artemisium and Salamina, by Themistocles, and the battell at Marathon by Milciades, were farre greater battailes, with such slaughters as Xerxes lost three hundred thousand Persians, yet none was fought with such a resolute courage, as noble Leo∣nidas did to the last man at Thermopyla.
Such was the courage of Leonidas, that when it was tolde him, that the Army of the Persians were innume∣rable, Front. lib. 4. cap. 5. and so many that they couered the Sunne as it were with a cloude with the multitude of theyr Ar∣chers, we shall fight the better said Leonidas, in the sha∣dowe. Xerxes Armie beeing ouerthrowne first by Leoni∣das at Thermopyla, and after by Themistocles at Arte∣mesium, after much slaughter of the Persians, Themi∣stocles souldiers thought to take away the bridge, to pre∣uent Themistocles stratagem. those Persian souldiers, that sought by flight to escape through the bridge. But Themistocles forbad the contrary, saying, I had rather haue the Persians willing to depart out of Greece, then to force them desperately to fight in Greece against their wills: this time vsed Themistocles a subtill strata∣gem, he sent to Xerxes a secret messenger, and faigned himselfe to be Xerxes friend by the messenger, and tolde him what danger he was in, vnlesse he would make hast out of Greece. Many vsed these kinde of stratagems, as Caesar did a∣gainst the Germains, and Agesilaus against the Thaebans, Front. lib. 2. cap. 6. for it was one of Pirrhus precepts left to his souldiers in writing, not to resist the violence of the enemy, being desperately vrged to fight. The like stratagem vsed Lu. Martius, Generall ouer the Romane army against the Affricans, hauing com∣passed round about the army of the Affricans, that ey∣ther they must fight valiantly, or die. Martius knowing well that all men will fight desperately in extremities, commanded his souldiers to giue them way inough for passage, and to hide themselues out of sight, and present∣ly to fall vpon them in their flight disordered, so that the
poore Affricans being glad to flie, were miserably slaine of the Romans, without any slaughter of the Romans. Clau. Nero after he ouerthrew the Affrican army, and their generall Asdrabal, comming to Italy to aide Hani∣ball his brother, but being preuented, his army was ouer∣throwne and slaine, and his head cut off and sent to his brother Haniball on a pole for a present, which so daun∣ted Hanibals courage and his army, that he had no lon∣ger Front. lib. 2. cap. 9. list to stay in Italy, then Xerxes had to stay in Greece. So Lu. Sylla sent the heads of Marius captaines which were slain in the field, vpon poles to discourage his ene∣mies, being besieged by Syllas captaines at Praeneste. The very like did Arminius generall of the Germains, Diuers stra∣tagems. caused the heads of those souldiers that he slew in ye field, to be sent & cast in the trenches or rampiers of the ene∣mies, strange sights, and strange reports, doth much dis∣courage the enemies: for Q. Sertorius stabd a souldier, for that he said that Herculeus one of his great captaines was slaine in the field, least hee should discourage the souldi∣ers: these are kind of stratagems which great captaines vse, to terrifie the enemies, and to encourage their owne souldiers. So Iugurth said that he killed Cai, Marius with his owne hand in the warres of Numidia. And Leuinus said, that he killed Pirrhus with his owne hand in the warres at Tarentum: but these were words to encourage their souldiers, but it fel out otherwise, that Iugurth was taken by Marius, and sent to Rome prisoner from Numidia, and Leuinus the Consul ouerthrowne by Pirrhus at the citie Heraclea, by the riuer Cyris.
CHAP. VI. Of military discipline and reward of souldiers among diuers nations. IN all nations military discipline was so taught, and martiall lawes so obser∣ued, that if they deserued by theyr good seruice any preferment, though hee were but a meane souldier, hee should not loose the honour and dig∣nitie of his aduancement, to rise by degrees from the lowest souldier vnto the highest cap∣taine, and so in like sort by faults and offences commit∣ted, they should be disgraded and casseerd from their gouernment and regiment, and bee punished further by the lawes military for them therin appointed, which I will intreat of, when I come to speake of euery seuerall country, of their warres, battels, and victories, then you shall finde the seuerall military discipline agreeable to the skilfulnesse of the captaine, the greatnesse of the vic∣tory, and the nature of the place. It should seem that all nations of the world had their first instruction from the Hebrewes, as well their mili∣tary The originall of military discipline frō the Hebrues. discipline, as martiall lawes, for the Lord comman∣ded Moses first in the wildernes to muster the people frō twentie yeares vpwards, and likewise Moses commaun∣ded Ioshuah to muster the Hebrewes to fight against the Moabites, for that the Moabites denied them passage through their countrey into the land of Canaan. Among the Persians imitating the Hebrewes, their youthes from twentie to fiftie should be brought vp in warres, and no longer by the Persian lawe might they
continue in warres, but had their maintenance and pre∣ferment Golden gir∣dles giuen by the Hebrues and by the Persians to their souldi∣ers as re∣wards of seruice. after to liue at rest, & to teach the yong youthes of Persia military discipline, hauing after their long ser∣uice golden girdles giuen them by the king, to shewe their good seruice to their countrey, and their credite with the king of Persia. The like lawe among the Scythians was duly ob∣serued and carefully examined, that no souldier past fit∣tie sixe yeares old should be chosen a fit souldier for the warres, though both in Persia and in Scythia, two nati∣ons The order and lawe of the Scythi∣ans. euer in warres one with the other, their captaines and officers were men of knowledge, counsell & autho∣ritie, to instruct the army by whom they should be go∣uerned. So also the later Romanes being Polymarchies, and camp-maisters of the world, hauing brought all king∣domes & countries vnder their gouernment, were not ignorant of all forraine, externall martiall lawes, and military discipline, but followed the Persians and the Scythians in instructing of their soldiers, making choise of the fittest, and yongest men, from twentie to fiftie, to serue the common-wealth. Though Camillus in his Old souldi∣ers of Alex∣ander and Caesar much esteemed. warres against the Latines and the Volscians, and Alex∣ander the great in his warres against the Grecians and the Persians made choyce of skilfull and olde souldiers, which were brought vp in warres before with Philip of Macedon his father; to be in his Campe. So likewise did Caesar honour much his old souldiers. In later time the kings of Syria vsed to send collers of gold, robes of purple, and to be called the kings friends, to the chiefe captaines of the Iewes, so the Iewes were wont to send to the Romanes, and to the Lacedemoni∣ans, targets & crownes of gold to be in league & fauour Collers of gold, &c.
with the Romains, so that all nations sought fauour and friendship at the Romanes. So the Carthagineans sent to the Romans gifts & rewards for captains & generals. The Romane souldiers that were of courage, and knowne as Praetorian, legionarie or manupular souldi∣ers, were rewarded with such gifts and presents, as they were in all countries preferred and aduanced from one office to another, esteemed & extolled, with sūdry kinds of gifts & rewards, as crownes & garlands, some crowns Crownes and garlands of the Romains. made of Lawrell, some made of mirtle, some of Popley, some of Oliue, and some of Pine, some made of Oaken boughes, for those that had saued cities or citizens. There were in the later time of the Emperours, new Suet. in vita Calignlae. kinds of crownes inuented, by the Emperour Caligula, made, some like the Sunne, others like the starres, called Exploratoriae coronae, Tribunes and great Captaines had bracelets and golden ringes. The Romains wanted no varietie of crownes & gar∣lands, beside mony, lands, and other gifts. Besides there were certain speciall crownes & garlands called Murales coronae, made like the walls of a citie, for those that scaled Murales co∣ronae. walles, as Cicinnanus; for others that besieged fortes, as Corilianus, crowns were made of green grasse, called Co∣ronae graminea: for those that saued cities, or by sea fight, crowns made like a ship, called Coronae nauales wer giuē, as to Lu. Varro, by Pompey the great, in his warres against the Pyrates. Such crownes & rewards were chiefly by the generall appointed by the law of armes, to be giuen Aulus Geli. lib. 5. cap. 6. to such souldiers that had either scaled walles, besieged forts, saued cities, or by sea fight. For euen as the Con∣suls & Generals might claime a tryumph by their victo∣ries, so might the Collonels, Captains, and gallant soul∣diers, claime their garlāds, & military rewards for them for their seruice apointed. It was lawful for any Roman
knight to come with his horse in his hād before the Cē∣sors The custome of the knights of Rome. of Rome, declaring euery captaine vnder whō he ser∣ued, what countries he had bin in, and hauing declared an account of his victtories and seruice, requesting to be dispenst with for going any lōger to the wars, according to the custome of the knights of Rome, he might with li∣cence of the Censors take his ease according to the law. So Lucullus gaue ouer after he had gotten many vic∣tories & triumphs, and much enriched Rome & himself, tooke his rest & quietnesse according to the lawe of the Romans, though after he was in scoffe called by Pompey the great, the Romain Xerxes, for his great fare, and idle Xerxes Ro∣manus. life in Rome, yet he escaped thereby the tragicall ende of Pompey, whom Lucullus called the great Agamemnon, to requite the name of Xerxes by Pompey giuē vnto him, he also escaped the tragical end of Caesar, who wold not take his rest before he became Perpetuus Dictator, to be slaine in the Senate. So also of Crassus, who could not stay in Rome being the wealthiest man in Rome, and thought no man wealthy, but hee that could keepe an army of his owne charge, but would goe seek for more wealth into Asia, to be slain in Parthia, & to haue gold melted in his mouth, being dead among the Parthians in reproach of his auarice, as Cyrus had his head bathed in blood in Sci∣thia, in reproach of his tiranny. Had Scipio when he had ioyned Numantia vnto Car∣thage, and vanquished Hanibal, followed Lucullus in ta∣king his ease, after his great victories. Had Cicero him∣selfe Foresight i great wise∣dome. after he had quenched Catelines cōspiracy, quieted himselfe, no doubt his head had not bin brought by Po∣pilius to Mar. Antonius. Had M. Crassus bene not moued with the sight of Lucullus triumph, staied in Rome, & takē his rest as Lucullus did, his head had not bin sent to Hero∣des by Surena. But I wil return to military rewards of the Persians, among whom diuers military gifts were ap∣pointed for souldiers.
The king gaue them a golden girdle, and rings of gold that had either by pollicie or manhood gained fame by seruice, whereby they were knowne to be in the kings fauour, and therfore to be accepted and reputed among the Persians as gallant souldiers, in any prouince of the Persians. Among the Romanes and the old Gaules, as among Vlpian. de infamia mili∣tum. the Persians, the greatest honour that they could giue their souldier, was to giue them girdles, and the greatest infamy and dishonour that might be, was to loose their girdles from them, which was as great a dishonour, as to take their speares out of their hands, or their horse from vnder them. The Kings of Persia herein followed the Hebrewes, for in the time of Absolon in his warres against his father in the wood of Ephraim, where he hanged by the haire 2. Reg. 18. of his head between two oakes, at what time Ioab would haue giuen the messenger that brought these tidings, In Dauids time girdles giuen to soul∣diers. tenne sickles of siluer and a souldiers girdle, if hee had killed Absolon; and therefore girdles were giuen to soul∣diers among the Hebrews, in the time of the kings of Is∣rael, before the kings of Persia. Among the Hebrewes before the time of the kings, after they came to the land of Canaan from Egipt, the souldiers had lands, townes, cities, countreys, and what spoile soeuer they gained by the sword, for all that they wonne in the land of Canaan, and other countreys, was equally diuided between the Hebrew soudiers and the twelue tribes. The Kings of Asia so esteemed the olde and chiefe souldiers of Alexander the great, called Argyraspides, that The honor of the souldiers Argiraspides in Asia. they sate in counsell with the kings of Asia, as Iudges o∣uer other souldiers, to direct and instruct them in mili∣tary
discipline, and after if occasion required, to correct them for military faults, and martiall offences, hauing their allowance out of the kings treasury: for these cap∣taines after the death of Alexander the great, contemned to serue vnder Antigonus, Seleucus, Demetrius, or Lysima∣chus, which during the time of Alexander, were named but Argyraspides themselues. In Egipt the chiefe and auntient souldiers called Ca∣lasiries, had after good seruice done, besides their marti∣all The allowāce of the kings of Egipt to their souldi∣ers Calasiries allowance, a certaine proportion of bread and flesh, and a measure of wine, by the king appointed in seuerall cities and garrisons of warre in Egipt, to instruct the E∣giptian youthes in martiall affaires. Euen so the Aethiopian kings, imitating the manner The Aethi∣opians. of the Egiptians, obserued the like law, their old & chief souldiers being bruised and broken in the warres, called Hermothibij, with a certaine proportion of allowance of bread and flesh. The Grecians very carefull to maintaine their good The Iudges Amphictions consulted of the publike warres in Greece. souldiers, they met together at the temple of Neptune in Isthmos, and there the Iudges of Greece, called Amphicti∣ons did consult, & with iudgement discerne, & through∣ly examine the deserts and seruice of euery well deser∣ued souldier, with such rewards & gifts as were appoin∣ted for them accordingly by martiall law. The Amphi∣ctions as you heard, were wont twise a yeare, in March and September to meete, the one in Isthmos, the other in Trozaena, wherein the one seuen cities appeared, and in the other twelue, to consult of martiall causes. So that it was not lawfull among the barbarous Scy∣thians, that any souldier should claime or challenge any The Scythi∣ans law for souldiers. martiall reward by the law of Scythia, vnlesse hee had brought an enemies head slaine by himselfe in the field,
vpon his speare vnto the campe, and presented it before his captaine, he might not be partaker of any bootie or pray among other souldiers, without some exploit done worthy of it. CHAP. VII. Of prouisions and maintenance of souldiers. Of the honourable burials of them that were slaine in the field, and of diuers Monuments. AMong all Nations of the world, the greatest care they had was to prouide meanes to maintaine souldiers, that Solon made a lawe in Athens, that the The law of Solon for souldiers. rewards due vnto those valiant soul∣diers that died in the warres, should bee distributed vnto their children, be∣ing aliue, and those gallant Captaines that died in the field, should be honourably buried, with pillars and ar∣ches set vpon their graues, and their names written vpō them in Ceramicus and such other places. This law of Solon was reuiued two hundred and three score yeares after by Alexander the great, who so 120. knights buried in the field Adra∣steis by Alex. much honoured and aduanced the worthinesse of mar∣tiall men, that he caused to be buried in the field Adra∣steis, one hundred and twentie knights, that died valiant∣ly in the field, and caused strong arches, and pillars of marble to be made ouer their graues, with their statues and Images, and their names written vpon them, with their due commendation as an honourable monument of their perpetuall fame. Licurgus lawe was, that no dead man should put his
name in brasse, in Iuorie, or otherwise vpon his Tombe, Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 6. cap. 4. vnlesse hee had bene slaine in the field like a valiant soul∣dier, fighting for his countrey. These Funerall monuments were vsed long time before the Greekes among the Hebrewes, who vsed to set vp pillars and monuments on the graues of the dead, the auntient Fathers did it to testifie the hope they had of the resurrection, not as the Gentiles did it, for pompe and pride of their triumphes and victories, but as monu∣ments and vertuous visions. Iacob after his vision had in his dreame, tooke the Bethel the house of God. stone that he had laid vnder his head, set it vp, and made a pillar of stones in that place, and after hee had an∣nointed the same with oyle, which was the first an∣nointing Gen. 25. wee read of in scripture, hee named it Be∣thel, which was Luz before, which name continued Bethauē the house of ini∣quitie. vntill Ieroboams time, 784. yeares, at what time Iero∣boam erected a golden calfe to be worshipped, and ther∣fore was named Bethauen, as mount Olyuet, for that it Osee. 10. was full of Images, Idolls, and Aultars in the time of the Kings of Iudah, was named the mount of cor∣ruption. After this, Iacob when his wife Rachel dyed at the birth of her sonne whom she named Benoni, which Ia∣cob Monuments of vertuous men. after his wiues death called Beniamin, on whose graue hee pitched vp a pillar of stones, as Ioshua had the picture of the Sunne on his graue. So Samuel tooke a stone and pitched it betweene Mazphah and Sene, and called the name thereof the stone of help, as a marke and a trophey of victory which The stone of helpe. the Israelites had ouer the Philistines. Yet Absolon fol∣lowing the Gentiles, of very pompe and pride reared vp a pillar, saying: I haue no male childe, and there∣fore 2. Reg. 18.
I will pitch vp a pillar as a monument to haue my name in remembrance, and he called it after his owne name Absolons pillar, to haue his name great. There was euer care in former age of holy mens buri∣als, long before Ceramicus in Athens, or the field of Mars Ceramicus in Athens. in Rome, these places were appointed, where Greek and Romane captaines were buried with their pompe and Mars field in Rome. pride together. Abraham the Patriarke had care for the buriall of the faithfull, and bought a field therefore in Hebron for the Abraham bought a field for his buriall. burial of him, his wife Sarah, his children, and poste∣ritie. So Iacob did commaund his sonne Ioseph to bring his body from Egipt to Hebron. The like charge gaue Ioseph to his children when he died. We read of certain kings of the Gentiles, who had such care of their buriall, as Menedes king of Egipt, imitating Abraham, appointed a place of burial for himselfe & the kings of Egipt that lineally succeeded him, of his name and stocke, which continued the raigne of 17. kings suc∣cessiuely after king Menedes. In like manner Perdica king of Macedonia, shewed to his sonne Argaeus a place, where he himselfe and his po∣steritie The care of burials of the Gentiles. after him should be buried, for he was instructed by an Oracle, that as long as they buried the kings of Macedonia in that place, the kings should continue in one stocke and family, which continued three hundred and three score yeares, vntill the time of Alexander the great, who died in Babilon out of Macedonia, and was bu∣ried in Alexandria in Egipt. This much I wrote to proue the Hebrewes to be fa∣thers of all antiquities; and now to Athens, and to theyr souldiers, where with such care they were looked vnto
after any victory that their haires should be curled, and The houor of the Atheniās to their gene∣rals for vic∣tories. trimmed vp with siluer fillets, others were crowned with a knot like the rowle that women weare on theyr heads, others were decked with garlands of mirtle. In this the Athenians seemed equall to the Romanes, that they brought all the Images and statues of their gods, and all the whole state of Athens with such solemnitie & pomp, came crowned with Oliues, Mirtle, and Iuye, to meet the cōqueror at their gates with the song of Paeana, at what time the Orators & Poets contended vpon thea∣ters to excell one an other in the praise of the conqueror and his captains, as they did of Demetrius, and others. For amōg the Grecians diuers places of exercise were appointed for Orators & Poets, as at Thesius graue, & at Helicon, where some in Comedies & some in Tragedies, contended for victories, where Sophocles was iudged to bee victor in his Tragedies ouer Aeschylus, for the which he was rewarded with a Bucke Goate. Againe in the second games and playes the Poets met in the Citie of Elis, where Menander was ouerthrowne by Philomene in the contention of Comedies, for the which Philomene had in reward a Bull. So Theopompus, Isocrates scholler, had the garland gi∣uen him by consent of all the Iudges. Hesiodus in verses cōtended with Homer, & had at that time onely the garland giuen him, for the victory therof Hesiodus wrote an Epigram vpon a pillar, in memorie of his victorie ouer Homer in Helicon. Among all these Poets & Orators, there was one wo∣man Alex. Nea∣polit. genial. lib. 6. cap. 19, called Corinna, so excellent in verse, that shee was named Musca Lirica, and contended with Pindarus the Poet in Thaebes in verses, & had 5. seueral victories, for the which victories she was 5. times crowned with garlāds.
And because Corinna shall not be alone without fel∣lows, Arete, Aristippus the Philosophers daughter, shalbe the second, who after her fathers death ruled and gouer∣ned Cic. de natu∣ra. deoz. li. 1. Aristippus schollers, & read philosophie in Athens. So Leonitum as a third fellow, though light, yet so lear∣ned, that she durst write & that in Atticall phrase against that great Philosopher Theophrastus. Agamemnon Generall of all Greece in the warres of Troy, so rewarded Aiax for a combat that he fought with Hector hand to hand, with the sacrificing of an oxe with gilt hornes; and rewarded Achilles for that he killed Hec∣tor Alex. Nea∣polit. in the field, with tenne talents of gold, twelue horses, and seuen faire women of Lesbia, that was the olde cu∣stome Achilles. and manner of auntient time in that countrey to reward such champions. So Themistocles was crowned with a crowne of the sa∣cred Oliue tree, and gratified with a rich triumphant Themistocles honoured of the Grecians. chariot by the Lacedemoniās, for the deliuery of Greece at the battell of Marathon, from the inuasion of the Per∣sians. Horatius Cocles had a statue of marble to him erected in the pallace of common meetings, for that hee resisted the army of the Hetruscans, being but himselfe, standing on a bridge of wood ouer Tiber. The reward of souldiers among the Scythians was, to drinke out of the Kings cup, as oft as they had brought The maner of the Scythi∣ans to honor good souldi∣ers in the field. an enemies head to the campe, and might by the law of Scythia make claime to drinke of the kings cup, as oft as any souldier slew an enemy in the field, and brought his head to his captaines tent. It was the maner and custome among the Scythians, that the kings cup should be carried vp & downe in the field to honor those noble captaines that had wel deser∣ued by seruice to drink out of it.
So among the Indians the souldier that had brought the head of an enemy to his captain, should haue for his reward, a black horse, & a blacke bull, which colour was farre more esteemed in India then any colour else. CHAP. VIII. Of triumphes, tropheys, and victories, and of military lawes, and aduancing of souldiers. NO victorie was gotten in Rome, without feasts, sacrifices, and triumphes made, to annimate the generalls, captaines, and souldiers, valiantly to stand in the face of their enemies. For Pompey the The 3. tri∣umphs of Pompey. great in his three triumphes ouer Af∣frica, Asia, and Europe, carried captiue three hundred, thirtie, and nine kings, kings children, princes, peeres, and noble men, brought as prisoners and pledges with him to Rome. In this Pompey was compared by Plutarch to Alexander the great, for his triumphes ouer three quarters and parts of the world. Others brought in their triumphs withall pomp and solemnitie, crowned with Lawrell and with Oliue gar∣lands, the formes, likenesses, and pictures of mountains, hills, woods, cities, townes, and riuers, scituated in those regions whom they conquered. Lu. Cornel. Scypio, after he had put Antiochus the great The triumph of Scypio A∣siaticus. to flight, he carried into Rome in his triumphe, the like∣nesse & form of an hundred and thirtie cities & townes which he conquered in Asia, and therefore was surna∣med Asiaticus. Luc. Sylla in like manner carried in his triumphe The triumph of Lu. Sylla. all the Citties of Greece, which were set out very liuely
in large ensignes, and painted brauely in banners and flags. So did Marcellus carrie the citie of Syracusa in his tri∣umph set out on long tables. So did Caesar carrie the likenesse and forme of the ri∣uer Nilus, and the riuer of Rien in long tables painted, Caesars tri∣umph. with the picture of Scypio and Cato. Pau. Aemilius triumphed ouer Persius king of Mace∣donia, and his children, whom hee conquered, and brought them captiues and prisoners into Rome. In this triumph Aemilius brought all the olde auntient mo∣numents The noble triumph of Pau. Aemi∣lius. of the Kings of Macedonia, and the greatnesse of Alexanders Empire, which was brought by Alexan∣der from Persia to Macedonia, was troden vnder foote in one or two victories, and the Empire carried by Aemili∣lius, from Macedonia to Rome. In this triumph of Pau. Aemilius, the rich armours of all the Macedonian and Illyrian kings, then al the plate, cubbords, and Iewels of the auntient kings of Macedo∣nia, were carried in charriots, after followed foure hun∣dred princely crownes of golde, which the cities of Greece sent to honour Aemilius victorie, and to beautifie his triumph, in the which triumph such wealth and treasure was brought to Rome by Pau. Aemilius, as farre exceeded the triumph of Scypio Asiaticus, who carried in his triumphes the pictures of Townes and Citties of Asia painted in tables, or the triumphes of Caesar, who brought but the likenesse of hilles, mountains, and ri∣uers: or of Pompey the great, who brought in his seuerall triumphes 339. kings, kings children, princes, peeres & noblemen, yet none of these were equall to Pau. Aemi∣lius, in respect of the wealth he brought in one triumph to Rome, who brought all the treasure & wealth of two
kingdomes, Macedonia and Illyria, not in shewe, but in substance. Others brought in their tryumphes, the Images and statues of the kings which were slaine, or otherwise di∣ed before they could bee taken captiues, as Lucullus brought the statue or picture of Mithridates, set out and painted very liuely in ensignes. Scipio carried in his tryumphe at Carthage, the Image The Image of Asdrubal. of Asdrubal, Hannibals brother. So Augustus Caesar brought the Image of Cleopatra to Rome in his tryumphe, after shee slue her selfe to beare The Image of Cleopatra. company with her friend Mar. Antonius. Others brought in their tryumphes kings aliue, as Iuba brought in tryumph to Rome. Iul. Caesar brought king Iuba and his sonne with all their treasures of Mauritania, in great tryumphe and pompe into Rome. Marius brought in his tryumphe Iugurth, with all Iugurth. spoyles and wealth of Numidia, with all the solemnitie that could be. Yet in the infancie of Rome, before Rome grew to any greatnesse, the first kings tryumphed on foote into the citie, as Romulus, who though he tryumphed ouer king Acron whom hee slue in a combat challenged, yet he being a king carried vpō his shoulders the rich spoyls The com∣bats of Ro∣mulus Cor∣nel. Cossue and Mar∣cellus. of the same king, being set in order vpon a young green bough of an oake, as trophies of tryumphes, without either horse, coach, Elephant, or braue shewes, and yet his tryumphe was for two kingdomes. So did Corneli. Cossus, who slue fighting in the field hand to hand, Tolumnus Generall of the Thuscans. And so did Marcellus, who likewise slue with his owne hand Britomarus, king of the old Gaules, before they were called Frenchmen, this honour happened to
none of the Romaines besides, but to these three, for Rome yet was scant heard of out of Italy. Vechoris king of Egipt, by Herodot called Sesostris, for examples sake of courage & fortitude of souldiers, and to kindle their mindes to attempt great exploits in wars, hee vsed when hee had ouerthrowne a valiant Armie, and manly souldiers, he would set vp a marble pillar, The maner of Sosostris tryumphes. and vppon it the picture of a man in brasse, with a na∣ked swoord in his hande, as a trophey in tryumph of his victorie ouer hardie men: and if hee had vanqui∣shed but a cowardly company and timerous souldiers, hee would cause to bee put vp the picture of a naked woman with a Glasse in her hand and a combe, to dis∣grace the souldiers which hee had conquered, signi∣fying they were timerous, cowardly and womanish souldiers. For honour and rewarde of military discipline of all kingdomes and countreys, were inuented by wit, and by lawe confirmed, to set vp monuments of fame to great conquerers and noble Captaines, to stirre vp young men to embrace Armes, and to exercise marti∣all feates. As Pericles in Athens had nine seuerall trophies for Pericles tro∣phies. nine seuerall victories, and vpon euery one his name written. So Sylla for his victorie against Archelaus had a tro∣phey Syllaes tro∣phies. set vp, and his name written with these words, Victoria & Sylla. Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabius Maximus, for their victories against the Allobroges, were the first among The trophies of Dom. ano∣barbus and Fab. Max. the Romanes that builded vp high towers of stone and pillars of wood, and hangd the enemies armors & wea∣pons theron, as trophies & monumēts of their victories.
Sicinius Dentatus, to signifie his singular commen∣dations, Sicinius Dentat. Rewards for serce. had for his noble exploites in diuers warres, eight golden crownes, foure ciuill crownes, three sca∣ling crownes called Murales coronae, foure score & three chaines, eighteen pure speares, and had a hundred three score bracelets giuē him in rewards & gifts, for his braue seruice in seuerall battels. The like praise had Manlius Capitolinus, who besides foure ciuil crownes, had twentie sixe military rewards: and before he was seuenteen years old, wanne two rich spoyles of the enemy. So forward to winne fame and become famous were the old Romanes. The old Romanes vsed to honour them that saued a citizens life with a garland of oaken boughes, for so was Corilianus by the Dictator Titus Largius, at the last Corilianus. battell of Torquine the proud, crowned with a garland of oaken boughes. Besides these crownes, garlands, chaines, bracelets, rings, and armour, giuen by the Generall, they had cer∣taine military garments, and certaine acres of ground, Lexagraria. diuided betweene worthy and well deserued souldiers by the lawe Agraria, appointed to encourage the soul∣diers to hardinesse. Alexander the great so esteemed the Tribune of the souldiers, that he would admit none in the place vnder three score yeares old, vnlesse he had bene of great skill, long experience, and a man of good and long seruice, Plyni lib. 33. cap. 1. to whome Alexander the great admitted to weare gol∣den rings, as a reward of a military honour, neither was it lawfull to any Romaine citizen, vnlesse hee were a Senator, or of the order of knighthood, to weare gol∣den ringes in auncient time.
This officer called Tribunus militum with the Ro∣manes, was named with the Lacedemonians Harmostes, an officer of the care and charge of seruice, as the Tri∣bune Harmostes. or the Collonell of souldiers, and might not con∣tinue in that office past sixe moneths, as long as the Dic∣tator of Rome was to enioy his office. And when the Emperor, Prince or Generall, would allow and commend the office & place of the Tribune to a graue skilful Captaine, he would put a naked sword The forme and maner of making of Tribunes. in his hand, signifying his authoritie ouer the souldiers, repeating the wordes of the lawe of armes before the whole armie, set downe in these words; Milites quibus iussierunt, Parento, eorumque Tribuni sunto. The same forme vsed Traiane the Emperour in his time, when he appointed Zura a Tribune ouer the Prae∣torian souldiers, giuing a sword in his hand saying; Accipe gladium, quem prome &c. If I vse this gouern∣ment Dio. in Tra∣iano. well, vse it for mee, If I do euil, vse it to destroy mee. None might be with the Romanes admitted to be Tribunes of the souldiers, vnlesse he had bene before a leader of the band called Cohortes, neither might any man be taken Harmostes among the Lacedemonians, vnlesse he had bene a Captaine, or a leader of the band called Agema. Agema. In all countries the honor of armes was aduanced, and the skilfull souldiers so esteemed, that one nation practised how to excell another in feats of armes. As among the nations called Auctyles, people of Ly∣bia, Auctyles. who practised to fight in the darke with their ene∣mies, to excell others, they became so prompt & readie, that they made no difference betweene night and day, either to fight on horse or on foote.
The people called Arij dwelling in Russia, delighted Ar so much to fight in the darke with blacke shields, and blacke apparell, for that one should not see the other. So we reade of the Lacedemonians, because they would excell others, they would in the darke night goe to the field, and learne to fight in the darke one with the other, to excell others in martiall knowledge. Iugurth when hee would enter battell with the Ro∣manes, hee would make choyce of his time in the eue∣ning, Front. lib. 2. cap. 1. that if his souldiers should be ouerthrowne, they might better escape, and hide themselues in the night time, then in the day time. So Mithridates kings of Pontus, fled from Pompey the great in the night time to saue himselfe, but 40000. of his souldiers were slaine. The souldiers notwithstanding of Athens, might not by the law of Solon go out of their chamber in the night Souldiers might not walke in the night time in Athens. time without light, such differing of military discipline was betweene Athens and Sparta, for the busie-headed Orators at Athens, often troubled and mooued the best captaines to seditions, and therfore Solons lawe was ob∣serued, so that no captain might goe abroad in the night without light. In like sort the Parthians (as the Athenians) were by Parthians. lawe commaunded not to fight in the darke. The Persian king had besides the souldiers called Homotimi, others which were tenne thousand chosen souldiers, of the best and chiefest men in all Persia, na∣med Turmae immortales, the immortall band, a thousand of these were elected to be the kings chiefe guard, cal∣led Mellephori the kinges guard of Persia. Mellephori, these had chaines, bracelets, ringes, and girdles of gold, and onely commaunded to attend vp∣on the kings person, and were such souldiers in Persia,
as the guard of Romulus called Celeres, were with the Ro∣manes. With the Lacedemonians their chiefe and stron∣gest souldiers called Neodomadae, which Sparta euer kept Neodomadae chiefe soul∣diers of tho Lacedemo∣nian. in store, as their onely staie in any great battell, against the Persians, these plagued the Persians, and therefore called of the Persians Gardates. The Turke hath in his principall band called Iani∣zari, one thousande, two hundred chosen men of the Ianizari chiefe soul∣diers of the Turkes. greatest skill, and longest experience in warre, which is among the Turkes, called Robur & Medula Turcici ex∣cercitus, instituted by Amurates, the second of that name, and resembling much the Macedonian Armie called Phalanges, for the Turke imitateth the Macedonians, as the patterne of their military discipline in all martiall ex∣ployts. For as that litle kingdome was much renowned by the fame & fortune of Alexāder the great, who brought the Empire from Persia to Macedonia, so was that king∣dome and other kingdomes, by ciuill warres betweene his captaines destroyed within fewe yeares after Alex∣ander. Now it followeth after we haue spoken of the ho∣nour and tryumphes of nobles, captaines, and skilfull souldiers, and after the gifts and rewards of good soul∣diers, to speake of the punishments due to such idle in∣solent souldiers, that were seditious & rebellious with∣in their campe.
CHAP. IX. Of seuerall military punishments by martiall lawes, both of the Iewes and of the Gentiles, in diuers kingdomes and countries. DIuers punishments by diuers great no∣table captains were inflicted vpon re∣bellious, seditious and cowardly soul∣diers, As first of the punishment of the Hebrewes, as Chore, Dathan, and Abi∣ron, Chore, Da∣than, and A∣biron. were so punished for their disobe∣dience, that the earth swallowed them vp aliue, and many of their complices, to the number of two hundred and fiftie. Achan for stealing of the Babilonian garment at the Achan pu∣nished. citie of Ai, hee, his wife; his children, and all his fami∣ly, was burnt to death at the commaundement of Io∣shua, so seuere the lawe of the Lord was against disobe∣dient souldiers in diuers places of the wildernesse, as at Massa, Riphidim, and Meribah, that it spared not Moses Generall of the armie, and the seruant of the Lord, it farre excelled the punishment of the Gentiles, besides in the wildernesse they were stung and bitten with ser∣pents, and venemous beastes, as also they were left a∣mong the Canaanites, Amalekites, and others, that should be as prickes in their sides, and needles in theyr eyes, to punish them. So the souldiers that obeyed Moses, Ioshua, and o∣thers, were rewarded with all good blessings, with Man∣na and Quailes from heauen, and drunke of euerie rocke.
Besides, Moses was commaunded to lift vp a brazen Serpent in the wildernesse, that those that were stung, bitten, and daungerously hurt by Serpents, by looking on the brazen serpent should be healed. Thus were the Hebrewes fortie yeares in the wildernesse, where their The brazen serpent. shooes were not worne, theyr apparell, nor theyr gar∣ments chaunged, and thus were the souldiers of Moses both punished for theyr faultes, and rewarded for their seruice. Now to the punishment militarie of the Gen∣tiles. The Romanes which excelled all Nations for their liberalitie in rewarding good souldiers, and for theyr seueritie in punishing euill souldiers, had such cruell se∣uerall lawes to inflict punishment, as farre exceeded all people. As Fabius Maximus, was so seuere for his military punishment, that he would cut off the right hand of any mutinous or seditious souldier within the campe. Aufidius Cassius, being Consull and Generall in the field, would cut off both the hands & the feete of those souldiers that so offended, saying, that they should haue no hands to fight with the enemies, nor feete to goe to the enemies. Euen so Scipio Affrican commaunded those souldi∣ers that were seditious, to be deuoured of beastes, and Seditious and mutinous Romane sol∣diers puni∣shed. Paul. Aemilius commaunded them to feed Elephants. So Iul. Caesar thought no punishment sufficient for those that were seditious among their fellowes in the campe, and fled from the campe to the enemies. The Romanes woulde not suffer the least offence in a soul∣dier vnpunished. It was Caesars rule and order that his souldiers should come as braue to the field as himselfe, that no man knew the difference betwixt Caesar and his
souldiers. It was not so with Agesilaus, as great a captaine The differēce betweene A∣gesilaus and Caesar. accepted among the Grecians, as Caesar was among the Romanes, and as much feared of the Persians and of all Asia, as Caesar was feared among the Gaules and all Eu∣rope. Agesilaus went as simple among his souldiers, as the basest souldier he had. Many great captaines imitated Agesilaus in all his discipline military, who onely among the Greekes for his victories and greatnesse of minde, was called great Agesilaus, whose stratagems were nota∣ble; for that noble captaine and great souldier Agesilaus hauing warres with Tysaphernes, the king of Persia his Front. lib. 1. cap. 8. generall, faigned himselfe to remoue his campe, and to go to Caria, by which stratagem he entised Tysapher∣nes to follow after him, Agesilaus in the meane season en∣tred into Lydia, sackt cities, slew many, and caried much of the Kings treasure, and of the wealth of Lydia, into Stratagems. Greece. Many the like stratagems vsed Agesilaus against the Persians. Antigonus king of Macedonia, compelling the Aeto∣lians into a narrow straight siege, readie to famish, and beeing aduised that the Aetolians would come out des∣perately Front lib. 2. cap. 6. to fight, and valiantly to die, before they would either yeeld or be famished, commanded certaine of his captaines to draw backe, and to hide themselues, to giue them an open passage to flie, and in their flight to set vp∣on them. Epaminondas with his Thaeban Army, being ready to strike a battell with the Lacedemonians, vsed this stra∣tagem, to make his souldiers beleeue, that the Lacede∣monians, Front. lib. 1. cap. 11. if they should haue victorie, had decreed to kill, and to make an end of all the Thaebans, and to bring their wiues and children into seruitude and bondage to
Sparta, to make his Thaeban souldiers to fight more va∣liantly for their countrey, for their wiues, and for theyr children. So Christ Iesus doth instruct vs to fight the battels of our saluation against Satan, with all our hearts & minds, least he should bring vs in perpetuall seruitude, not to Sparta, but vnto Gehenna. Marcellus vsed those souldiers that began to flye from the battell, and for feare forsooke their standart. Mar∣cellus brought those at the next time, and placed them Marcellus military pu∣nishment for souldiers in the forefront of the battell, either there to die like men in the battell, or else to recouer the shame and ig∣nomie that they had sustained in the last battell be∣fore. Appuis Clau. appointed those fugitiue souldiers that would first flye, and turne their backs to the enemy, to be brought bound before the whole army, and to num∣ber The law of Decimation. them, and after to take euery tenth souldier by Deci∣mation, & to kill them with clubs in the open sight of the army. Many Romane generals vsed this punishment ac∣cording to the auntient law of Decimation. Alexander the great caused two captaines that kept a castle, committed to their charge by Alexander, for that they fought not in their place, the one was slaine with the other being bound to a poste, and shot to death by Front. lib. 4. cap. 6. captaines with arrowes. Yet Alexander was of that gen∣tle and milde nature, that when he sawe one of the soul∣diers shaking, and readie to dye for colde in the win∣ter time, and colde weather, Alexander sitting in his chaire at the fire, made him sit in his seat and warm him well, saying: If thou were borne in Persia, and hadst sate in king Cyrus chaire, thou shouldest die for it, but not so in Macedonia, to sit in Alexanders chaire.
The like humanitie was in Xenophon, being on horse∣backe, who commaunded certaine of his souldiers, to take a hill hard by, one of the company murmured, Front. lib. 4. cap. 6. and said, it is easie to command on horsebacke, Xeno∣phon presently lighted, and made that base murmuring souldier to ride in his place, and hee marched on foote vp the hill before his souldiers, vntill the Ar∣mie was ashamed, and forced him to take his horse againe from the souldier, whom the souldiers reuiled and railed on, beating and buffeting him. Bochoris decreed a military lawe against offensiue Diod. sic. lib. 2. cap. 3. souldiers in Egipt, that would not obey theyr Cap∣tain or forsake their standart, or any way were seditious, they should bee remoued from the place where they serued, and become againe as base souldiers as they be∣ganne. Bochoris mi∣litary law in Egipt. Also if there were any souldier that would betray any secrets of the Campe to the enemies, hee should haue his tongue cut out of his head by the lawe of Bo∣choris. Iuba King of Mauritania, for the like offence, for that certaine souldiers of his Army fied from their company to their tents, caused them to be hanged vp on a gybbet, in the midst of the campe. The Persians thought it no greater infamy to theyr souldiers, then to breake the lawe of their countrey, the The Persian punishment. penaltie whereof was, that the idle, sloathfull, and co∣wardly souldiers, should beare on their backs a knowna strumpet, or a cōmon woman, through the whole camp in the sight of all the Army, open faced and barehea∣ded, because hee might bee knowne for euer after to be a defamed ignominious souldier, and therfore Scypio in his warres against the Affricans, and Artaxerxes in
his warres in Persia, forbad by the lawes made, that no woman should follow the campe, least souldiers should Women ba∣nished from the campe of Persia. be among women out of the way, when they should be in the way to fight in the field amongst men. Yet Alex∣ander the great, and Alexander Seuerus the Romane Emperour, allowed women to follow the campe. Among the Lacedemonians, the onely skilfull soul∣diers of Greece, the Iudges called Ephori, made a lawe in Ephori. Sparta, as the Ariopagites made in Athens, or as the offi∣cers Censores did in Rome, against vagabounds, runna∣gates, and idle souldiers. Ariopagit. Among the Macedonians it was not lawfull for any man that was not Miles adscriptus, and had not taken a military oath to be a souldier in any warre that the Ma∣cedonians tooke in hand: neither might a souldier vn∣sworne bee admitted to fight or draw his sword against the enemie, so carefull then was olde age to keepe the order of military discipline, and martiall lawes. The lawe among the Syracusans was, that the Ge∣nerall of the horsemen did write the names of those souldiers in tables that disordered themselues, or trou∣bled Syracusa. others of the Army, that they might be punished after the battell, with such punishments as was appoin∣ted for them by the lawes of Syracusa. The people called Daci, had a lawe writren in theyr country, that when their souldiers had not fought stout∣ly Daci. or manfully, they should lie with their heads down∣ward, towards the beds feete, without pillow or boul∣ster, and be at their wiues commaundement, and theyr heads to lye at their feete, if they should breake this lawe, their wiues might haue an action against them in lawe. Aurelianus the Emperour so seuerely charged the
Tribunes & Colonels, that in any case they wold punish those souldiers, that would either steale a lamb, or pullet, eyther grapes frō the vine, or plucke eares frō the corne. Obserue among all nations, the punishments and seuerities of offences, and that by the rudest nation of the world. As among the barbarous Scythians, Tamber∣lanes seueritie was such, that a poore woman complai∣ned of one of his souldiers, that hee tooke a peece of cheese and a little milke, and after refused to pay, Tam∣berlane Tamber∣lanes seue∣ritie. caused the army to stay at the complaint of the woman, and to march before the womans face, vntill she found that souldier, hee caused his body to bee ript, and opened in the sight of all the Army, and when hee saw milk and cheese in his mawe, he said to the woman, behold, I haue made this souldier to pay well for thy cheese and milke, & so wil I make others that so offend. An other example in Tamberlane, being presented by a poore husbandman with great treasure which he found in a vessel as he was digging in his owne ground, Tamberlane demaunded whether his fathers name and Image were vpon thē, causing the superscription of the money to be read; being answered that it was Caesars the Romain Emperors, he said, thē they be not Tamberlanes, and commanded that none of the souldiers should rob or spoile the poore man of the benefits of his good luck by his trauell. This was that great Scythian Tamberlane, that had six hundred thousand footmen, & foure hundred thousand horse against Pazaites the Turke, and gaue him battell at mount Stella, a place more famous, for that there Pompey Pazaites subdued and taken by Tā∣berlane. the great ouercame Mithridates king of Pontus: there Tamberlane ouerthrew the Turks, & tooke Pazaites their Emperor, kept him, & fed him in a cage vnder his table,
whom hee carried afterwards in a cage euery where in his warres. The like infamy hapned to one of the Empe∣rors of Rome, by Sapor king of Persia, who kept him al the dayes of his life as a blocke to mount on horse. Ualerianus. But Sesostris king of Egipt, did farre passe the Scythian Sesostris. and the Persian kings in his victories, for he caried those kings and princes whom hee subdued, bound round a∣bout his coach from countrey to countrey, from region to region, as in a great triumph, wherein Sesostris gloried much. And yet all these three came short to Adonizebech, who kept seuentie kings vnder his table, whose toes and thumbes he cut off. Thus cruell tyrants haue the like punishment oftentimes, as others were by them puni∣shed. CHAP. X. Of certaine noble Romane Captaines, compared with Greeke Captaines. Of the force of eloquence, the commendations of diuers great Captaines, and their stratagems. PLato saith, that from great minds, great vertues, or great vices do proceed, and so it seemed in many noble and heroi∣call men, as well of the Greekes, as of the Romanes, as Alcibiades might well bee compared to Lu. Sylla, and Deme∣trius with Mar. Antonius, al alike giuen to vertue and vice, friendes and foes to theyr Coun∣treys, and yet all foure valiaunt and wise, whose fortune seemed not much vnlike in all theyr victo∣ries. Plutarch therefore very fitly compareth some Cap∣taines
of the Greekes with the Romanes, as Lucullus compared with Cymon the Athenian, both of equall for∣tune Comparisons of certaine Romane captains with the Greekes. in great victories, the one in Asia, the other Persia. Mar. Cato, surnamed the Demosthenes of Rome, compared with Aristides surnamed the Iust in Athens. So Hanibal is well compared to Philip of Macedon, for false, subtil, deceitfull, & craftie stratagems, they weyed Plutarchus in Alcibiad. not how they conquered, so they might conquer, they were in no wise to be trusted vnto either, by their pro∣mise, or by their oathes: so farre differed Philip from his sonne Alexander, that what Alexander wonne, he wonne it onely by magnanimitie, and Philip by fraud. Demetrius after many victories of Ptolomeu king of E∣gipt, and an other victory by sea in the Ile of Cyprus ouer the same king: the third victory against Cassander king of Macedonia at Thermopyle in Greece, this Demetrius grew so fortunate and great, that Seleucus, Ptolomeus, Lysimachus and Pirrhus, foure mightie kings, enuying Demetrius greatnesse, conspired against him, and ioyned their force together, for they all feared and doubted his courage, and enuied the greatnesse of his fortune. Demetrius marching on with a great army to besiege Athens, Crates a Philosopher, carefull of his Countrey, and fearefull of Demetrius least hee should destroy A∣thens, the schoole of learning, and the eye of Greece, The force of eloquence. met Demetrius vpon the way with his Army, whom he so entreated with sweet perswasions, & eloquent words, that the fury of Demetrius was mitigated by Crates the Crates. Philosopher, that he raised his siege, and departed from Athens. So Demades the Orator in like sort did perswade Alex∣ander the great, readie with his army to plague and to Demandes. destroy all the cities of Greece.
So did Arius the Philosopher perswade Augustus Ca∣sar to spare the citie of Alexandria. Arius. So had Cicero welnigh perswaded Caesar from the bat∣tel Cicero. at Pharsalia, with such pithie force of eloquence, with such vehement words, that Caesars countenance chaun∣ged, and his body so shooke, that the booke which hee held fell out of his hand. Cyrus spared Craesus for Solons sake; and Alexander spa∣red Thaebes for Pindarus sake; the force therefore of elo∣quence is such, that Philip king of Macedon euer doub∣ted the tongue of Demosthenes more then the strength of the Athenians. But againe to returne to Demetrius, whose greatnesse grew so great in Macedonia, in Asia, and in Greece, that in sumptuous building of ships, fra∣ming of all sorts of engines of batterie, this Demetrius excelled all Kings of his time: For Aeropus King of Macedonia, delighted onely to make fine tables and lampes: Arsaces King of Parthia, in making their ar∣rowes heads keene and sharpe: Attalus King of Asia, in planting of phisicall hearbes: but Demetrius might bee The greatnes of Demet. compared for his engines of batteries, and his princely practise, to Archimedes himselfe, being the onely Geo∣metrer of the world at that time, whose death Marcellus lamented more, then he reioyced for the winning of Sy∣racusa. For when Archimides was slaine in his studie, and Syracusa taken by Marcellus souldiers, hee sought no longer time to liue, but till hee had ended certaine Geo∣metricall Cic. de Na∣tura. deor. lib. 3. conclusions which he had inuented, for Mar∣cellus that noble Romane feared more the Geometricall engines of Archimedes, then all the force of Syracusa, and therfore Pythagoras whē he found any new skill in Geo∣metry, he straight offered sacrifice to the Muses.
Demetrius grew so great in Greece, that at a generall assembly of the states in Greece, hee was chosen Lieute∣nant generall of all the Grecians, where none were but foure before him. Philip king of Macedon, and his sonne Alexander the great: before them, none but Agesilaus and Agamemnon, and yet died Demetrius a yeelded prisoner to Seleucus, whom Demetrius in his greatnesse was wont to call but keeper of the Elephants. Demetrius laughed them to scorne which called any other prince king, but Antigonus his father, and himself. The orators in Athēs cōtended in orations who shuld exceed in preferring new titles of honors to Demetrius. In so much they decreed that the moneth Munichian Demetrius picture car∣ried in the tryumph of Peplon. which is Ianuary, should be called Demetrion, and their feast Dyonisia, should be called Demetria, and that De∣metrius and his father king Antigonus, should haue their pictures carried with the pictures of Iupiter and Minerua in the tryumphe of Peplon, in the holy banner of Athens. This was the marching of Demetrius greatnesse to die a prisoner. CHAP. XI. Of the war like marching of diuers noble Captaines, with their famous victories and stratagems. Of the crueltie of Mi∣thridates against the Romanes. Of Marius, and his re∣uenge ouer the Cymbrians. TWo other great marchings of Epaminon∣das & Agesilaus, the emulation betweene these two Captaines, was the cause of the ouerthrow of Sparta, in the battell at Leu∣ctres, by Epaminondas: at which battell Cleombrotus the king, with all his captains and chiefest of the Lacedemonians was slaine, and that
noble Greeke Cleomenes, was slaine at the kinges foote, with a thousand of the most valiāt Spartans about him, at that time there was a great feast at Sparta, when this newes came to the Ephories of the victorie of the Thae∣bans. This battel was thirtie yeares after the ouerthrow of Athens by Lysander the Lacedemonian, and now the ouerthrowe of Sparta by Epaminondas the Thae∣ban. Epaminondas fame. These two cities were named the two eyes & the two legges of Greece: and yet Sparta could not abide Athens, nor Athens abide Sparta: there was neuer such a victory heard of in Greece, that the stout Lacedemonians, the most skilfull souldiers & warlikest people of all the Gre∣cians, should haue their king slaine in the field, and the chiefe captaines and citizens of Sparta. In this battell Pelopidas being neither Generall nor gouernour, but Captaine of the holy band, deserued as much honour and glorie of this victorie as Epami∣nondas Pelopidas commended. did, being then Generall of the whole armie, and gouernor of Baeotia, & this great ouerthrow of the La∣cedemonians, fel iustly through the malice & enuy that Agesilaus their king bare to the Thaebans, being there∣vnto mooued by the stout answere of that most noble Captaine Epaminondas, giuing no place to king Age∣silaus greatnesse, nor to his stout Lacedemonians. Pelopidas the Thaeban, laying siege to two great ci∣ties of Greece at one time, wrought this stratageme, cau∣sed foure Captaines to come all crowned with garlands of mirtle on their heads, hauing brought some of their owne souldiers, as fained captiues to Pelopidas, and withall caused a whole wood, which was betweene the two cities to be burnt, as though it had bene that citie The strata∣gems of Pe∣lopidas. which they besieged, which so terrified the towne, that
vpon the sight of that fire, they yeelded to Pelopi∣das. Epaminondas being readie to enter battell with the Lacedemonians, his seate where he sate, after he rose Front. lib. 3. cap. 8. vp, fell downe, which the souldiers tooke for no good signe, which he perceiued, and said; We are forbidden to sit going about to win victorie. We must watch and The strata∣gems of Epa∣minondas. pray, we must not be idle, for Satan is most busie, when we thinke our selues most sure: We must say as Epami∣nondas saide to his souldiers, Vetamur sedere, so Christ speakes vnto vs, Videat qui stat nè cadat, You that stand, take heed lest you fall. Another famous victorie at Mantinea the chiefe ci∣tie of Arcadia, the glorie thereof fell to the Thaebans, by the prowesse and courage of Epaminondas their Ge∣neral, and yet died he of a wound he had in that battell. When Epaminondas died, died the honor and glory Epaminondas praise. of the Thaebans, for before him no great fame was heard of Baeotia, and after him nothing esteemed, so litle he weighed glorie, as hee weighed wealth, and so little he esteemed wealth, that when Epaminondas died, hee wanted mony to burie him. In so much that Cicero said, Cicero. that he wondred that so great a Philosopher and so sin∣gularly learned, should become so noble a captain that all Greece preferred him for both. Many sought to imitate Epaminondas, for Philopo∣men Philopomen imitated E∣paminondas. followed Epaminondas steppes in all his actions, but chiefly in three things: hee followed his hardinesse to enterprise any thing: hee followed Epaminondas wise∣dome to execute all great matters; and followed his in∣tegritie from corruption, bribery, and taking of money, hereby came Philopomen to be the most renowned cap∣taine of all Greece in his time.
Philopomen was eight times Generall of the Achai∣ans, being then seuentie yeares olde, for Philopomen de∣lighted from his youth in warre and martiall exercise, and loued alwaies souldiers and armes, for he was in his time one of the best, and one of the last Captaines of Greece, and therfore reputed a better Captaine for war, then a wise gouernour for peace. For at the battell by the riuer of Larissus, Philopomen being Generall of the Achalans against the Aetolians, where hee slue Demo∣phantus Generall of the Aetolians, in a combat fought betweene them both in the sight of the armie, and after ouerthrew the whole hoste. Philopomen grew so great in Greece, that the name of Philopomen made the Baeotians to flie for feare from the siege of Maegara, and made the Spartans after he had ra∣sed the towne to forsake Licurgus lawe, and compelled the Lacedemonians to follow the Achaians maner and customes. The Grecians so loued and so esteemed this Philopomen a noble cap∣taine. Philopomen, that Titus Flaminius, enuyed him for his fame and greatnesse in Greece, beeing then Consull of Rome, and had restored all Greece to her former liber∣tie. Philopomen turned all curiositie and daintie fare, to Plutarch. in Philop. braue and rich armour, to gallant and warlike horses. Philopomen was the last famous man of the Grecians, af∣ter whose death Greece decaied. Hee was wont in his youth to reade Homers Illiads, and especially Euangelus bookes of the discipline of warres, for by reading and talking he became an excellent souldier. So Lucullus by talking with souldiers, by reading of bookes, and by exercising of military discipline, be∣came one of the noblest Captaines that the Romaines had: for at the battell at the riuer of Rindacus, hee gaue
the ouerthrow to Mithridates souldiers, that fortie thou∣sand were slain in the field, fifteene thousand taken, and The victorie of Lucullus. sixe thousand horse of seruice, besides an infinit number of beasts for carriage, the ouerthrow was such, that they which came frō the citie Appolonia, had as great a spoyle Plutarch. in Lucullo. while both armies were a fighting, as Lucullus and his souldiers had after the victory was gotten. Lucullus fought with Mithridates another battell at the riuer Granicus, where Alexander the great gaue the first battell to Darius king of Persia. Here also Lucullus in a very great battell fought with his Romane armie so Appian. in lib. Mithrid. fiercely and with such courage, that both the riuer of Granicus and the riuer of Asapus ranne all of blood: and the number that were slaine of Mithridates souldiers as mentions are made, were welnigh three hundred thou∣sand men of all sorts of people. This Mithridates was the greatest enemy that the Romanes had after Hannibal, and yet Hannibal and all Affrica was subdued within seuenteene yeares by the Romanes, and that most noble captaine Pirrhus, who fought with the Tarentines, Samnites & others, against the Romanes, hee was driuen out of Italy within foure yeares, but Mithridates endured the fury of the Romans fortie yeares, vntill he was weakened by Sylla, wearied by Lucullus, and at last subdued by Pompey the great. Mithridates king of Pontus, fearing much the power and pollicies of the Romanes, frequented hunting, that he vsed no house in towne or country for seuen yeares, that thereby he was able to endure any labour and to preuent any stratagem of his enemies. So did Sertorius, with many other Romane & Greek Xenoph. lib. de venatione. captaines, that Xenophon maketh a catologue of theyr names that became noble souldiers by hunting.
Hannibal laying siege to Tarentum, beeing agreed with one Eoneus a Tarentine for a certain sum of money to betray the citie Tarentū, Eoneus vsed this stratagem by the counsel of Hannibal, to go out a hunting in the night time, for feare of the enemies, and to bring to Liuius Stratagems of Hannibal. the gouernour of Tarentum, buckes, boares, and such other wilde beasts, as Hannibal himselfe deliuered vnto him, who taught him the stratageme. Hannibal seeing that Eoneus was nothing suspected, for that he vsed hun∣ting, caused Affrican souldiers of his to be cloathed like these hunters, and to enter with these hunters into Ta∣rentum, who assoone as they entered into the Towne, kilde the watch, and opened the gates to Hannibal to come in. Lysimachus king of Macedonia vsed the like stratagem, Lysimachus. laying siege to Ephesus the chiefe citie of the Ephesians, hauing corrupted one Mandro an arch pyrate for mo∣ney, who often vsed to come to Ephesus with a shippe loaden with praie to relieue the Ephesians, and by his often comming, being not suspected, brought cer∣taine Macedonian souldiers fast bound to his shippe, as Captiues taken to please the Ephesians, which af∣terward betrayed and deliuered the towne to Lysima∣chus. So did Marcellus take the citie Syracusa, by sollici∣ting Marcollus. of one Sosistratus a Syracusan, whom hee wanne with money to be his friend, who counselled him to be readie, and to come vnder intreatie of peace vpon the Syracusans feast day called Epicides, by this meanes through the counsell of Sosistratus, Marcellus obtained Syracusa. This great Romane enemy Mithridates king of Pon∣tus, so hated the Romanes, that hee gathered together
all the poore banished Romains, scattered euery where The crueltie of Mithri∣dates against the Romans. in Asia, Romain marchants & others, busied about their traffiques, & caused them to be slaine, to the number of 50000. in one day, to satisfie his wrath vpō the Romains. Lucullus had also two of the most famous and renow∣ned victories ouer two of the most mightiest & greatest Two great victories of Lucullus. princes of Asia, Tigranes king of Armenia, & Mithridates king of Pontus, at mount Taurus: for Tigranes armie as Lucullus himselfe wrote vnto the Senate, was two hun∣dred three score thousand men; of the which number aboue a hundred thousand footemen were slaine, and fewe of all the horsemen were saued, and the king dri∣uen in his flight to throwe his Diademe to some of his friends, who was taken with the Diademe and brought to Lucullus. It is written by Plutarche that the Sunne sawe not the like ouerthrow. So Lucullus reuenged the great spite of Tigranes king of Armenia: and Mithridates king of Pontus, for the spite and hatred they bare to the Romanes, as Cai. Marius re∣uenged vpon the Cymbrians, and Almaines, and as Ca∣millus reuenged vpon the Gaules. Ca. Marius reuenge was such and that in time, for that the Cymbrians, Teutons, Ambrons, Tygurins, and Ger∣manes, The reuenge of Marius ouer the Cymbrians. had conspired and ioyned their force together, after the ouerthrow of both the Consuls, to the slaugh∣ter of fourescore thousand Romanes, that they ioyntly marched together towards Rome, at what time Cai. Ma∣rius and Luctatius his fellow Consull gaue them such a meeting, that two hundred thousande of them were slain, foure score thousand taken prisoners, Lugius & Bo∣iorex two kings slain in the battell, besides innumerable that fled from the battell, & hangd themselues on trees, and for want of trees, they tyed slipping halters about
their neckes, vnto the hornes and feete of their oxen, and prickt them forwards with goades, that they might tread & trample them vnder their feete vntil they were killed, besides the horrible crueltie of the womē, which was most terrible, in strangling their young babes with their owne handes, they cast them vnder their Cartes wheeles, and betweene the horses legges, and at last slue themselues. At what time Marius for his great fortune, victories and seruice, was called Pater patriae, the father of the countrey. After Marius had bene seuen times Consull in Rome, Marius se∣uen times Consull. and called the father of the counrey, which was so great a name among the Romaines, that none but Romulus, Cicero, and himselfe had it, and had shewed himselfe a valiant noble captaine, in diuers and sundry great bat∣tels, and wanne many victories, besides the victories o∣uer the Cymbrians, Teutons, and the rest, ouer the Spa∣niards, Numantines and Affricans, open proclamation was made by the Senate throughout all Italy; that they should apprehend Marius, and either kill him whereso∣euer they found him, or to bring him before the Sena∣tors of Rome aliue. This was the ende of Marius mar∣ching, which if you compare him with Sylla, you shall finde them both firebrands to their countrey, for the harme they haue done to their countrey, and yet both great benefactors to their countrey before their ciuill warres. For Sylla was either another Hannibal in doing harme to his countrey, or another Scypio in doing good to his countrey And as concerning Marius, Scypio him∣selfe spake, that he was the only next man that should do great good, or great harme to the Romains after Scypio. The like words spake king Antigonus of Pirrhus, that if Pirrhus should liue till he were an old man, he should proue so great a captaine, that he should be feared of all nations.
CHAP. XII. Of the maners and forme of warres, denounced by the Prophets of the Lord, against the Canaanites and other nations which were enemies to the Hebrewes. THe order and manner of the Prophets by the Lord cōmaunded to denounce warres to the Canaanites, Edomites, Ammonites, Philistines, and all other natiōs that were enemies to Israel, was in this sort. The Lord commaunded the Pro∣phets as his heraulds, to denounce warre after this man∣ner: Ezechiel. 35. Set thy face against the Idumeans, and say, behold (ô mount Seir) I come against thee, and will stretch my hand out against thee, I wil make thee desolate, and wast all Idumea. And so against the Egiptians, Ezechiel was comman∣ded as an herauld from the Lord, to set his face against that dragon Pharao, to publish warre, and to say, I will Ezechiel. 32. water with thy bloud all the land of Egypt, and as Nilus ouerfloweth Egipt with water, so will I make the bloud How the pro∣phets denoun∣ced warres to the Iewes & to the Gen∣tiles. of thy Army to ouerflowe Nilus. Against Tyre in like sort Ezechiel was commaunded with the like words: Set thy face against Tyre, & say, be∣hold (ô mount Tyre) I will come vpon thee, and will bring Nabuchodonozer king of kings against thee, and wil make thee a desolate citie. Ezech. 26. So likewise as the Prophet Ezechiel was commanded by the Lord to publish warre against the Idumeans, the Egiptians, and against Tyre, so against Gog and Magog the Prophet was sent with the like words, for it was the
charge and commaundement of the Lord to all his pro∣phets, being his Heraulds, to proclaime warre against the great monarches, and Polymarchies of the earth, enemies to his church and to his people, as to the Chal∣deans, the Assirians, Egiptians, Affricans, Lybians, and Persians, shewing vnto them their destruction before the sword of the Lord came vpon them. So the Lord sent Moses his first Prophet and his He∣rauld, long before this time, to Pharao in Egipt with the like words as he did to these Prophets now, they spared not Ierusalē nor Samaria, but they had their message told them by the Prophet. And so much of the manner and forme of the publishing and denouncing of warre by the Lords Heraulds, his Prophets. And now likewise to shewe the maner and forme of the Gentiles in denoun∣cing of warre by their Heraulds. The Gentiles in olde time proclaiming their warres against their enemies in seueral sorts, as the Romains by The maner of the Gen∣tiles in pro∣claiming of wars to theyr enemies. their Priests called Faecials, which were first instituted by Numa Pomp. and after appointed by the Romanes to be their heraulds, both for warre and peace: for the law was written in these words. Belli pacis, faederum inducia∣rum, or atorum faeciales Iudices sunto. The chiefe of thē was called Pater Patratus, being crowned with a garlād made Au. Gelius. li. 16. ca. 4. noct. Attic. of Verbena; who went with foure of them to the cōfines of the enemies, reciting the iust cause of the wars, which were it not by the enemies satisfied & answered within 33. daies after, the Faecial Priests being sent frō the Sena∣tors and Citizens of Rome, should throw after the word spokē, a bloudy dart or an iron speare, into the enemies lands, proclaiming warre against them (Iure faeciali). But if the Romains had their warres farre from Rome, the Faeciall Priests should goe out of the citie through
the gate Carmentalis, to the Temple of Mars, in the which Temple there was hanging a bloudie speare vp∣on one of the pillars of the Tēple, called Columna bellica, and from that place should the Faeciall Priest throw that Columna bellica. bloudie dart towards those natiōs whom they denoun∣ced to be their enemies: then after this, the Consul, Pro∣consul, Viget. lib. 1. cap. 6. or Praetor, should goe to the Temple of Mars, and take the Targets called Ancyllia in his hande, and after pricke the Image of Mars with his speare or launce, and say, Mars Vigila. The Persians also vsed this ceremony, to throwe a The Persians bloudie dart towards the confines of theyr enemies, thereby denouncing warre, either to haue land and wa∣ter Amian. li. 19. histor. by yeelding, or else to abide warre. The manners and customes among the Grecians, whē they went to publish warre, they vsed to send their The Greekes Herauld to the confines of the enemies, & after the iust cause of the warre being publikely declared, vnlesse they were Perius sanctum legatorum, satisfied, the Greekes sent a Ramme to the enemies confines, to signifie that they were readie armed for their enemies; for the sending of the Ramme with the Greekes, did signifie as much as the throwing of the bloudie dart, or Iron speare with the Romanes, for the Romanes were instructed in mar∣tiall discipline by the Greekes, as the Greekes were by the Persians, and the Persians by the Egiptians. The old Gaules vsed this manner of order, that their Senators called Druydes, called a councell of the chiefe The olde Gaules. men, which should be all armed, and therefore called a∣mong them the armed councell, and after consultation had between these Priests Druydes, and the armed coun∣cell, that whatsoeuer was agreed vpon betweene them, ther of warre or peace, was established for a lawe.
The Scythians had strange customes in defying their enemies, and in proclaiming of warre, they did send by Embassadors to Darius king of Persia, a bird, a mouse, a The Scythiās frogge, and an arrow, signifying thereby, that vnlesse the enemies would flye away like a bird, creepe away like a Front. lib. 3. mouse, or swim away like a frogge out of Scythia, that an arrow should pierce them through. Warres being proclaimed by the Lacedemonians, warlike people, the herauld should carrie in his hand a vine twig, wreathed about with wooll, which the ene∣mies, The Lacede∣monians. if they would accept and receiue vpon conditions by the herauld opened, it should be a full bond of peace, otherwise a denouncing of warre, and withall, the he∣rauld threw the vine twigge out of his hand, as in defi∣ance. The Carthagineans though they could neuer abide the Romanes, yet vsed they the selfesame ceremonies, (Hastae proiectio) as the Romanes did in pronouncing The Cartha∣gineans. of their warres. There was a strange maner and custome among some nations, when they proclaimed warre, they would send a herauld with a present to theyr enemies, wrapped round about with the likenesse of snakes, which if the present would be vpō conditions accepted, they would take away the snakes, and deliuer them the present: if o∣therwise, the herauld would deliuer the enemies the The olde Co∣rinthians. snakes in defiance, and bring the present away: this ma∣ner of defiance against their enemies, the old Corinthi∣thians vsed, with others. Now that you read the maner and forme of proclai∣ming of warres among diuers nations, you shall also ob∣serue diuers fashions and ceremonies touching compo∣sition of peace, for both proclaiming of warre, and con∣cluding
of peace were in all authoritie, Per vifaciale, but altered in ceremonies. CHAP. XIII. Of the maner, and diuers ceremonies in con∣cluding of peace. THe concluding of peace of diuers na∣tions, was in this sort, those that were sent as Heraulds to proclaime warre, were againe sent as Embassadors to en∣treate for peace in diuers Countries, for as bloud was sought by warres, so by bloud peace should be reconciled. For as you heard the Lord did threaten warre long before warre came, to the Hebrewes, the Chaldeans, Assyrians, and the rest, by the Prophets and his He∣raulds, and before these nations punished the first age for their sinnes with an vniuersal deluge ouer the whole world (eight persons excepted) and after made a league of peace, and gaue the Rainebowe as a signe in the hea∣uens, The Raine∣bowe. not to destroy the world any more with water, and when the people againe transgressed his commaun∣dements, the Lord commaunded his Prophets to threa∣ten the Hebrues, the Chaldeans, and Assyrians, denoun∣cing warre to punish them, as you heard of the Egipti∣ans, the Sodomites, & others, with a condition of peace to continue betweene him and his people, which was written out in the law of Moses. This league was signified & confirmed also with the bloud of a lamb, as the bloud of couenant between God and man, the true type & figure of the lambe Christ Ie∣sus, which gaue vs euerlasting peace by his bloud in the
new : this peace was proclaimed to the Shep∣heards in the field at Bethelem by legions of Angels, which came downe from heauen singing, glory bee to Luk. 24. God on high, & on earth peace towards mē. This peace Christ repeated to his disciples, saying, Peace be vnto you, this peace he brought into the world, this peace he left with his people in the world, which the world cānot giue, for there is no peace to the wicked faith the Lord. The ceremonies of euery natiō in all countries in con∣cluding of peace, was generally by bloud, and as it were confirmed by an oath in supping each others bloud, or by dipping in of their swords, arrowes, flint-stones or wooll. The manner and ceremo∣nies of all na∣tiōs in cōclu∣ding of peace. As the Meades drewe bloud out of theyr armes, the Lydians out of their shoulders, the Arabians out of their fingers: that by sucking and licking of each others bloud they thought it the soundest and surest testimony of peace and friendship that could be. The Armenians vsed to draw bloud, euery man out of his thumbe, & that euery man should licke an others Radamistus & Murates. bloud, in witnesse that all should liue in peace and loue therafter: so did Radamistus king of Hiberia, with Mitra∣tes king of Armenia. But in the place where the Scythians concluded peace, they had a great bowle of wine before them, and The Scythi∣ans. there euery man letting a vaine to bleed into the bowle of wine, & then dipping a sword and an arrow into this bowle, dranke one to another this mingled wine and bloud, in token of peace and friendship between them. In like maner the Carmanes, people in Persia, when The Carmās. they met together at a banquet, they would strike a vain in their forehead to draw bloud, to mingle their bloud with wine, & to drinke that one to an other, which was
among them the greatest oath, & the surest bond of loue that could be. The ceremonies of the Arabians, whē they were to be agreed with their enemies, they would drawbloud with Arabians. a sharp flintstone out of their fingers into a dish, & ther∣in dip white wooll, & certain small thin stones, with the which stones & wooll, they would rub and die their gar∣ments, to continue as a perpetuall league of peace be∣tweene them. The old and auntient manner of the Persians was, to bring their wiues, their children, & their dearest friends, Persians. and at their banquets, calling their hospitall gods to bee their witnesses, and their friends then present, to bee as pawnes, and pledges of their faith & peace, by drinking one to an other. The Thracians and the Egiptians also had their cere∣monies in contracting conditiōs of peace, which was, to The Thraci∣ans. drink wine out of an oxe horn one to an other, being an old ceremoniall custome among them of great antiqui∣tie: for without drinking out of that oxe horne, no com∣position of peace could be taken in Egipt, or in Thracia, for the horne was an auntient monument reserued for that purpose. Clearchus generall of the Lacedemonians, at what time the Persians and the Greekes were at composition Clearchus. of peace, Clearchus sacrificed a bull, a wolfe, a boare, and a ramme, and in the bloud of these sacrified beasts, the Greekes dipt their swords, & the Persians their launces, as a full record before the gods of peace and amitie. Aristides labouring much for vniuersall peace a∣mong Aristides. the Greekes, after long ciuill warres, at the concluding of the peace, hee threw hotte fierie Iron bowles into the sea, praying vnto the gods, that as those
fiery bowels were extinguished by water; euen so they that would breake this league of peace, and liue in Greece with all their friends and confederates, should be rooted out of Greece, or quite destroyed in Greece. Had Agesilaus bene so willing as Aristides was with E∣paminondas, when all Greece came to Lacedemon, to Agesilaus. make a generall peace, Sparta had not bene so plagued at the battell of Leuctres, where King Cleombrotus was slaine, and a thousand of the best souldiers and citizens of Sparta. Fabius Max. being sent by the Romanes, as an Em∣bassador Fabius Max. to the Carthagineans, vsed these words: I bring you here in the lap of my gowne, warre or peace, wher∣of you must make present choise. The like embassage the Romane Popilius carried frō Rome to Antiochus Epiphanis, opening the whole cause Popilius. of his embassage. Antiochus seeming to cast off time with delayes, Popilius made a circuite with his rod round a∣bout him, saying: you must answere the Senators of Rome before you goe out of this round circuite, whether you will haue warre or peace: so valiant and stout the Romanes euer were, that they offered peace and warre together, and the enemies to make the choise. Now hauing opened the maner & order of denoun∣eing warres, and concluding of peace, before I proceed forward to military discipline taught in all countreys, and among all nations, I will set downe the maner and order how diuers nations were wont in olde time to yeeld and to seeke peace at their enemies, being in the enemies hands without hope of life, and readie to be o∣uerthrowne.
CHAP. XIIII. The manner of yeelding among all nations. Of diuers battels and victories, and how the Romanes and the Greekes estee∣med their weapons. THe maner of yeelding of diuers nations in old time was, either in the field to their enemies, or else by entreaty of peace, The manner of yeelding. they should come in base and simple ap∣parell to offer theyr lands, their waters, their liuings, their cattels, their Temples, and their Cit∣ties. So the Egiptians came with poore simple garments, without weapons, to seeke peace at the enemies, and to yeeld themselues, their Priests carrying their gods be∣fore them with sacrifice. So the cittizens of Alexandria came to yeeld them∣selues to Caesar. So the Iewes came out of Ierusalem with theyr high Priest, to meete Alexander the great, yeelding vnto him Iosep. lib. 2. cap. 8. all dignitie and honour, submitting themselues vnto him. So the Gibeonites came to Ioshua, faigned them∣selues Ioshue. 9. Embassadors, tooke olde sackes vpon their asses, and olde clowted shooes vpon their feete, and said vnto Ioshua, we be thy seruants, we be come from a far coun∣trey; so Ioshua consented vnto peace, made a league with them, and suffered them to liue. So the Sabine Embassadors when they came to yeeld themselues to the old Roman kings, were demanded by Torquin: Do you & your people come to yeeld your sel∣ues Liu. lib. 1. to me & my people at Rome, your lands, your waters, your cities, your temples, your wealth, your liberties, and all that you haue? the Embassadors answered wee
do, and I king Torquine accept and receiue your yeel∣ding. The Greekes likewise came as the Egiptians did, in sad mourning apparell, and offered boughes of Oliues, The yeelding of the Greeks and branches of Lawrell to the enemies, as signes and tokens of submission, in yeelding and in seeking of peace. The Persians maner was to offer land and water to the conquerour, as a signe of yeelding, for so the Persi∣ans The maner of the yeel∣ding of the Persians. sought of others, when they tooke warres in hand, before they conquered, which was their pride & brag. But the Athenians according to the lawe of armes put the Persian Embassadors to death; for that they sought land & water, before any warre was denounced, or bat∣tell giuen. The Assirians also according to their wonted man∣ner, Assirians. when they come to yeeld themselues, their Priests come with their labels, miters, and holy ornaments, to seeke peace at the enemy. The Syrians came to yeeld themselues with halters about their necks to Achab to entreat for peace for Ben∣hadad their king, who said a litle before that the dust of Samaria was too little for euery one of his souldiers to haue a handfull. With the Frenchmen and Spaniards, it was their custome and maner to yeeld to their enemies in shew∣ing their hands and armes naked to the enemy. The Lacedemonians, when they sought peace and yeeded to the enemies, they threw their shields away The Lacede∣monians ma∣ner in yeel∣ding them∣selues to the enemies. from them, and tooke the enemies by the hand, saying Herbando, a word of yeelding. For in all military discipline amōg all nations, and by martial lawes of all countries, those that were forced to
seeke peace & yeeld themselues to the conqueror were to be accepted (Iure deditionis). Yet the Romanes could Viget. lib. 2. cap. 14. scant away with yeelding souldiers, for those Romane souldiers that yeelded themselues to Pirrhus, were not redeemed by the Romains, especially soldiers that yeel∣ded Eutrop. li. 2. in armour, were neuer after accepted as Romaines, and the souldiers that fled back from the enemies to his fellowes in the campe, should be met by the way and slaine by their owne fellowes, so that the Romaines would neuer grace a yeelded souldier. So Philopomen said, hearing certaine Grecians much commending a valiant captaine for his courage and po∣licie; Can you said Philopomen, so commend a valiant Philopomens speech of the Romanes. captaine that yeelded himselfe, and was contented to be takē prisoner aliue? I like the Romanes said Philopomen, that would neuer pay raunsome for a Romane captaine taken aliue in battell, and yet they would raunsome the body of a captaine slaine in the field to bury him. Yet at the battell of Pharsalia, after Pompey and his captaines fled, and his army scattered, the rest yeelded to Caesar, holding their targets on their heads, and deliue∣ring their weapons to Caesar. So much the Romanes esteemed their targets, that laying them vpon their heades, though they yeelded their swords, their speares and other weapons to Caesar, yet would they not yeelde their targets but together with their heads. So did the Greekes esteeme their targets, that the A souldier to lose his tar∣get in the fielde was death in Greece. Lacedemonians mad lawe, that that captaine or that souldier that had lost his shield in the battell, should loose his life after the battell. And therfore the womē of Lacedemonia commanded their childrē whē they went to warres, holding vp, and
shewing a Target in one of their hands, saying: Aut cuns hoc redeas, aut super hoc moriaris: eyther to dye vpon their shields and targets in the field, or to bring with thē their targets from the field. So odious were coward souldiers in Lacedemonia, that the women of Sparta would meet their sonnes that The saying of the women of Sparta. fled from the battell, and hold vp their clothes, saying: where will you flye you cowards? will you creep again into your mothers belley? Of all nations, onely the Lacedemonians and the old Germans, were so seuere against those that lost their shields in the battell, that among the Germaines they should not be allowed to come to any publike councell, Cornel. Ta∣cit. nor bee admitted to come to the Temples, or to the Church, to heare seruice. Though there was punishment appointed for soul∣diers that lost speare, launce, or any other military wea∣pon, yet not capitall punishment, which was onely by law appointed to those souldiers that lost their shields, Enemies fin∣ding their targets. for that both the Greekes and the Romane captaines had their names written within theyr shieldes, and therefore they thought it moste ignominious, that Their shields much estee∣med among the Romains and the Gre∣cians. their shelds should be lost, least their shields should bragge of their names, which made that worthy Cap∣taine Epaminondas, beeing wounded to death at the battell at Mantinea, to enquire if his Target were safe, which beeing deliuered vnto him, hee tooke it and kissed it, and saide: now Epaminondas dyeth not, Oros. lib. 3. cap. 2. but beginneth to liue, for I haue two daughters of mine, Mantinea and Leuctres, to celebrate the fame of Epaminondas, which subdued the stout Lacedemo∣dians, subiect vnto the Thaebans. Scypio Affricanus looking on a souldiers target which
was most braue and most richly adorned, said I much Front. lib. 4. cap. 1. commend thee to make most of that which defendeth and saueth thy life most often. So Marius and Catulus both Gonsuls of Rome, in their warres against the Cymbrians, their souldiers, each one had his captaines name, and his owne name written on his shield and other military weapons, that by looking on their captaines name they might do the greater ser∣uice to honour their captaines. So auncient was the fame and honour in olde time giuen to targets and shields among the Grecians & the Troians, that the name of Neptune was written in the shields of the Grecians, and the name of Minerua on the shields of the Troians. I will therefore speake something of the Grecian warres against the Persians, before I intreat of military discipline, and I will mention but foure principall spe∣ciall victories, which the Grecians had ouer the great kings of Persia, for that the Grecians may not be thoght to esteeme their targets for nothing. The first and most renowned victorie of the Greci∣ans Plut. in Ari∣stide. ouer the Persians, at the battell of Plataea, where of sixe hundred thousand fighting men, which Mardonius Generall of the Persians had in his campe, there was Oros. lib. 2. cap. 8. slaine two hundred thousand Persians, and Mardonius himselfe slaine by a Spartan souldier vnder Pausanias. In memory of this victory, there is a common assem∣bly The Greci∣ans victorie at Plataea. of all the states of Greece at Plataea, where the Platae∣ans make a solemne sacrifice vnto Iupiter protector of their libertie, for those noble Grecians that were slaine at Plataea, with chariots laden with braunches of firre trees, with nosegaies & garlands of triumphs, then fol∣lowed a black bull, and some young noble gentlemen,
that carried great bowles full of wine, and others carried pots full of milk to powre upon the graues of those dead noble captaines that died for their countrey, others car∣ried oyles, perfumes, and sweete odours in glasses. After this followed the Generall, holding a funerall pot in the one hand, & a naked sword in the other, vnto the graues The funerall ceremonies for those cap∣tains that di∣ed in the bat∣tel at Plataea. where these noble captaines & gentlemen were buried, that were slain in that battell, and there the General wa∣shed the pillars, arches & Images of those noble valiant Greeks that were wrought vpon them: then annointed them with oyles, sweet sauours, & after beautified them with sweet flowers & nosegaies, & crowned them with seueral kinds of garlands. In this solemne sort the Gene∣rall tooke a great bowle of wine, holding out his hād to∣wards the graues, saying; I drinke to you noble captains and valiant gentlemē that died in the defence of Greece. Alexander the great vpon the graue of Achilles, vsed a funeral sacrifice, not altogether vnlike the Grecians ma∣ner, caused himselfe with diuers of his company to be Alex. Nea∣poht. lib. 5. cap. 26. washed, and after to be annointed with ointments, with garlands of mirtle vpō their heads, and in solemne pro∣cession to goe round about Achilles graue, all naked, sixe hundred yeares after Achilles death. So Traiane the Emperour in Alexandria vsed the like funerall sacrifice vpon Alexanders graue 400. yeares after Alexanders death, after the Romane maners & custome, with garlands & crowns made of flowers vpō his graue, with sacrifice of frankincense & other sweet odours, in the very same house in Alexandria, where Alexander dwelt, for he died at Babilon, & was buried in Alexādria his owne towne. They vsed the like funerall ceremonies in the feast Parentalia. Alex. Nepo∣lit. lib. 3. cap. 12. called Parentalia in Rome, which was celebrated with beanes, pulses, wafers and drie figges, laide vpon a bare
flint stone, on the graue of their dead parents, or their great friends and next kinsmen, which graue they deckt with flowers, nosegaies, and all kinde of sweet hearbes, Lemuralia. and garlands, going about it naked, and after sitting a∣bout the graue of the dead banketting & feasting, much like to the feast called Lemuralia, where among the Gre∣cians they drinke to the soules of the dead. The Iewes held an anuall feast called Purym, in me∣morie of their deliuerance from the malice of Ammon, A feast of the Iews cal∣led Purym. who had obtained frō king Ashuerus lycence to destroy all the Iewes dwelling in 127. prouinces in Persia, vpon that very day that Ammon thought to kill the Iewes and hang Mardocheus vpon a gallows which he made of ten cubits high, was Ammon himself withhis ten sonshāgd vpon the same gallows which he made for Mardocheus. But to return to the victory at Marathon, for the which victory strife grew between the Lacedemonians & the Athenians, at what time Milciades was Generall for the Athenians, & Pausanias for the Lacedemonians, but the victory was by Aristides & by all men giuē to the Platae∣ans Herodot. lib. vlt. to end the strife. This battel of Marathon was in the morning, and in the euening of the same day was the battel and victory at Mycala, though some hold opinion there was some distance of time betweene them. Vpon the very day that Lu. Crassus was slaine by the Parthians at Carras, and his Romain army ouerthrown: Alex. Nea∣polis. lib. 4. cap. 20. vpon that very day fewe yeares after were the Parthiās ouerthrown by Pub. Ventidius, which so reuēged Crassus with such a slaughter of ye Parthians ye Pachorus the eldest son of the king was slain. And vpō the very day that the Cymbrians gaue the ouerthrow to the Romain Cōsull Caepio, and his army, vpō that very fame day Marius after∣wards with terrible slaughter of ye Cimbriās requited it. Again the secōd victory which the Greciās had ouer
the Persian nauy by sea at Salamina, at what time armed men were seen in the aire that did reach out their hands from the Ile of Aegina towards the Grecian galleys, also songs were heard in the aire in the praise of Bacchus, and flames of fire were seen in the Element, with many moe wonders which appeared towardes the Citie Eleusina, this was one of the most glorious and greatest victories that euer the Greekes had, chiefly gotten by the pol∣licie and cunning of Themistocles the Athenian. Artemidord, Queene of Alicarnassus, came to aide Some call her Artemi∣sia. Oros. lib. 2. cap. 10. Hrodot. lib 8. the Persians against the Grecians, as Pentheselia Queen of the Amazons came to aide the Troians in their wars against the Grecians, but the one died in Greece taking part with the Persians, and the other died in Troy in the quarrell of the Troians: yet some writers affirme that Artemisia was not slaine in Greece. In this battell Xerxes king of Persia had a thousand shippes of warres, of the which he lost eight hundred of The victo∣ries of The∣mistocles ouer Xerxes & his armie. them, and his Admirall called Ariames taken, the wis∣dome and foresight of Themistocles in this battell was honoured of all the Grecians, for it was equall to the famous battell at Plataea, for renowne and fame, though not so great a victorie, and yet Themistocles being but a young man, at the battell at Plataea vnder Callimachus and Milciades, two noble captaines of Athens, shewed himselfe so valiant that all Greece much commended his courage. Themistocles was euer wont to say in his youth, that the fame of Milciades victories & triumphs, would not suffer Themistocles to sleep, nor to rest in his bed. So likewise was Themistocles the cause of the most renowned victory of the Greekes ouer the Persians, by sea at Artimisium, where Xerxes with all his whole nauie was ouerthrowne.
This victory made Themistocles to be so honoured of the Grecians, that the Captaines after sacrifice done, gaue him an Oliue braunch in token of victorie, and The battel at Artenisium. they sent three hundred of their lustie youthes to ac∣company Themistocles. His renowne grew such by this victory, that when Themistocles came to the next feast of the Olympicall games, all the people cast their eyes vp∣on him, clapping their hands, and shewing him vnto Plut. in Themist. straungers that knew him not, but Themistocles onely at Artemisium, was the originall cause of the sauing of all Greece, and did then most aduance the honour and glo∣ry of the Athenians, and was after battell done honou∣red aboue all the Grecians, and also all the Grecian cap∣taines, hauing vpon the Aultar of their sacrifice, sworne that Themistocles best deserued the glorie of that victory, yet was hee banished from Athens, though his victories were so great ouer the Persians, as Hanibals victories were ouer the Romanes. CHAP. XV. Of straunge apparitions in the ayre, and prodigious myracles. Of seuen signes seene before the ouerthrow of Ierusalem, with the last destruction thereof. Of diuers great Captains by the Lord appointed to fauour Ierusalem and the Iewes. MAny strange apparitions were seene in the ayre in many places of Greece, be∣fore the victories which the Grecians had ouer the Persians, and before the victories which the Affricans had o∣uer the Romanes. And first at the bat∣tell of Salamina, as you read before, where flames of fire were seene in the element, songs
were heard in the ayre in the praise of Bacchus, and ar∣med men were seene in the aire, as you read before, that did reach out their hands from the Ile of Aegina, towards Strange ap∣paritions in the ayre. the Grecian galleys. So at the battell at Thrasymen, at Arpos, the likenesse of bucklers were seene in the heauens, and the Sunne seemed to fight with the Moone at Carpena; and two Targets sweat bloud at Sardinia; and at the very battell it selfe, such earthquakes hapned, that townes and rocks fell to the earth, mountaines were carried frō one place to an other, and the riuers ranne backwards, yet in the battell it selfe it was neither knowne nor felt of the Ro∣mans, nor of the Affricans: for among the Romanes seldome happened any earth-quakes without great losse or harme, either by ouerthrowning of towns and cities, Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. 6. or losse of victories, as the Romanes supposed; and yet in the second Affrican war, 57. earthquakes hapned amōg the Romains in one yeare; also an oxe spake, & said, Caue tibi Roma. In Piceno it raigned stones. In Cicilia two Tar∣gets sweat bloud. At the citie Antium in Italy, bloud flowed out of the eares of corne, & many such prodigious signes, and yet not so many as were equall to the Romanes calamities, during the time of the second punike warre, but it was euer the greatnes of the Romanes to be most valiant in their greatest afflictiō. And as in the second Punike war an oxe spake, so in the time of Torquine ye proud after his ouerthrows in 2. battels, a dog spake, & a serpēt barked. At the destructiō of Cōstantinople by the Turks, a great Alex. Nea∣polit. Genial. lib. 3. cap. 15. multitude of dogs were seen in the aire, after which fol∣lowed a great nūber of diuers kinds of beasts, in maner and form of light armed souldiers; after them followed an other cōpany of beasts with spears & targets; another
company of beasts deuided in troups on horse; after thē followed a mightie monstrous man, of a terrible stature, riding vpō a terrible horse, which appeared 3. houres o∣uer the citie Comū, & vanished away a litle before night. Strange apparitions & meteors haue bin in many bat∣tels seen in ye aire, eclipses of sun & moone, earthquakes & such, besides many visiōs seen, & many voices yelded. Pub. Vatinius a Roman Praetor, late walking out of Rome, there met him Castor and Pollux, vnknowne to Vatinius, P. Vatinius. Cic. de natu∣ra deorum. 1. like two goodly yong gentlemen on white horses, who told him that the Consul Aemilius had taken Persius K. of Macedonia, & ouerthrown his whole force, the selfesame day. Vatinius reciting the same to the Senate, was presēt∣ly cōmitted to prisō, vntil letters came frō Pau. Aemil. vn∣to Rome frō Macedonia, certifying ye Senators of their vic∣tories, & taking of Persius the same day ye Vatinius told thē. In the wars that the Lucaniās had against the Romans, the likenes to a mā of exceeding great stature, appeared to the Romans, & spake these words, Gradus victoriae fac∣tus, Valer. Max. lib. 1. cap. 6. de mirac. & after these words passed through the midst of the enemies, & vanished away; at that time the Romans got the victory, slew 20. thousand, & tooke 23. ensignes. Camillus in his warres against the Vients, after the peo∣ple were destroyed & the towne takē, the general Camil∣lus commanded the souldiers to carry the Image of Iuno Liui. 5. & Valer. Max. lib. 1. cap. 8. from Veients to Rome, and being demanded of one of the souldiers in a ieast whether she willingly would remoue from Vients, and come to Rome, the Image suddenly an∣swered I wil: which words so amazed the Romans, that they with all honor brought her to Rome, and builded a temple to Iuno in mount Auentine, where she was hono∣red as one of their chiefe gods among the Romanes. Thus the Romanes imagined that all their victories were had by means of their gods, & therfore brought as
many gods as they could to Rome, and yet when Pilate wrote from Ierusalem to Rome, to his Lord and maister Tiberius the Emperor, to haue Christ allowed to be one Pilate wrote to Tib. Caesar of the Romane gods, Pilate was flatly denied, though the Emperour himselfe perswaded the Senators, of ma∣ny myracles that Iesus had done in Ierusalem, but the Senate would not allow Iesus to come to Rome among their gods. Iosephus writes, that at the destruction of Ierusalem, there were many signes seene in the ayre, and voyces heard in the earth, before the Citie was destroyed, and the Temple burned, signifying the calamitie which was at hand. The first signe was a Comet, like a sword, hanging in the ayre ouer the Cittie of Ierusalem, which conti∣nued a whole tweluemoneth, contrarie to the nature of a Comet, which was not seene to continue past six mo∣neths. The second signe was a lightning that shined in the night time, about the Temple, and about the Aultar, as light as day, & this light continued the space of halfe an houre, of the which some iudged well, some other∣wise. The third straunge sight was, that an oxe beeing brought vp on the feast day to bee sacrificed, brought Seuen signes seene before the destructiō of Ierusalem. forth a lambe, which terrified the people, & made them much amazed. The fourth myracle was, that the great brazen gate on the East side of the Temple, being lockt and strongly barred, opened of it selfe, which could scarce bee shut with the force of twentie men. The fift signe was, that after the feast dayes, a little before Sunne setting, were seene Iron Charriots, and
an host of armed men houering round about the citie in the cloudes. The sixt vpon the feast of Penticost, when the Priests went according to their maners, into the temple to ce∣lebrate diuine seruice, they heard as it were some noise or stirring, and after they heard a voyce that said, Migre∣mus hinc, Let vs remoue from this place. The seuenth and last, and the straungest signe of all, one Iesus a simple man, seuen yeares before Ierusalē was Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 12. de bello Iudaic. destroied, cried out, Vox ab oriente, a voyce from the east, a voyce from the west, a voyce from the foure windes, a voyce against Ierusalem, and against the Temple, and a voyce against all this people. Thus went hee still through all the streetes of Ierusa∣lē, with these words in his mouth, Vae Ierosolymis, though hee was whipt and scourged, and brought before the Romane President Albinus, yet hee vsed all one words, woe to the Cittie, woe to the Temple, and woe to the people; thus hee cryed out for seuen yeares and fiue moneths, and at the last words which he spake, Vaeautem mihi, a stone came from the wall and killed him. This is written of Iosephus, who was a Tetrarch in Galiley, and fought many battels with his countrey a∣gainst the Romanes vntill he was taken by Titus, and brought with him to Rome, where he wrote of the anti∣quitie of the Iewes twentie bookes in Greeke, & wrote seuen bookes of the Iewish warres, and was as much esteemed in Rome, as Berosus the Chaldean was in A∣thens; but the Iewes little esteemed Nabuchodonozer in the last destruction by Ieremy and Ezechiel before pro∣phesied, they following the counsell of such false Pro∣phets that both prophesied and promised victorie to Achab, when he was slaine, and his army ouerthrowne:
so they said that the Babilonians should not come with∣in Ierusalem, and they were beleeued, and Ieremy impri∣soned; so now for all these signes seene, and for all that Christ prophesied the destruction of Ierusalem, & wept vpon mount Olyuet for the same, yet the Iewes belee∣ued no prophesie, weighed not the Romanes, no more then they weighed before the Babilonians. The like prophesie was found in Cataldus booke, Bi∣shop of Tarentum, being long time before dead, who ap∣peared in a vision to a Priest in Naples, and willed the Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 3. cap. 15. Priest to dig in such a secret place and to bring a booke written by Cataldus, being so found in a table of lead nai∣led, and to shewe it to the king, where he found the ca∣lamities and eminent destruction of Neapolis. In the twelfth yeare of Nero the Emperour, Vespasian was sēt with an army to subdue the Iewes, which could not be quiet, but rebelled euer against the Romanes, whom the Iewes mortally hated, though the Romanes had so many Presidents vnder them to gouerne the Iewes, as Pilate, Petronius, Festus, Albinus, and last of all, Florus. Yet they would not be brought to subiectiō. And after Vespasiā had cōquered all Galiley, where Fla. Iosephus was appointed Tetrarch, who was taken in this warre, and all the whole Country beyond Iorden, as Gadara, Macherun∣ta, Hiericho, and other cities, Ierusalem hee gaue to his sonne Titus to lay siege to it, and Vespasian went to Alex∣andria, and from thence to Rome; leauing Titus to subdue The last o∣uerthrow of Ierusalem by Titus and Vespasian. the Iewes at Ierusalem. For vpon the very day that Christ dyed vpon the Crosse in mount Golgotha, on the same very day eight and thirtie yeares after, was Ierusalem ta∣ken, and destroyed quite to the ground by Titus, the Temple burnt, eleuen hundred thousand slain with the
sword and famine, an hundred thousand solde publike∣ly as slaues, and sixteene thousand were sent to Rome, to beautifie his fathers triumph, as Iosephus an eye-witnesse doth report. The Iewes looked not for their destruction so nigh at hand, they obserued by tradition of some of their Ra∣bines, that their Messias should come about the time of Augustus, as a magnificent mighty king, & not as a poore man, the sonne of a Carpenter, whom the Iewes whipt and scourged, for that he tooke vpō him to be the sonne of God, & made himself Messias, the Iewes litle thought that he was the Messas, when they cryed to Pilate to haue him crucified in Golgotha, saying: his bloud be vpon vs, and vpon our children. The greedie desire and expectation of the people was such, that many tooke vpon them to call themselues the Diuers faig∣ned thēselues to be the Messias. Messias, as Iudas Galileus, and an other called Atonges a shepheard: but aboue them all, one Barcozba had diuers followers, & was receiued for their Messas thirtie yeares, but when they saw that he could not defend them from the Romanes, they would no longer accept him for their Messias, but slew him. Titus proceedeth forward to destroy the Iewes, but especially the Priests, the Scribes, & Pharisies, on whom he had no mercie, saying, that they chiefly ought to dye with the sword, sithence the temple was burnt with fire, they onely being rebellious and seditious, and the cause of the destruction of the citie. Titus spared none of the stocke of Herod. In this warres of Titus were ten of the learned Rab∣bines slaine, whose names I thought good to write, as I found them written in Genebrardus Chronicles.
Rabbi Simeon ben Gamaliel. Rabbi Ismael ben Elizei. Rabbi Hanina ben Tedarion. . Rabbi Husiphith. Rabbi Eleazer ben Samaa. Rabbi Iuda ben Dama, Rabbi Isbak Scribam. Rabbi Iuda ben Hachinas. Rabbi Iuda ben Baba. Rabbi Askiba. These tenne Rabbines were slaine by Titus, which the Iewes record in theyr latter Talmud for tenne martyrs and after Ierusalem was thus destroied, Titus ap∣pointed Rabbi Iohanan ben Zachai, gouernour ouer the remnant of the Iewes in Ahua, Byther, Oza, & other pla∣es as Nabuchodonozer did appoint Godoliah gouernor of the rest of the Iewes when he destroyed Ierusalem, in the time of Zedechia the king. Titus also left Bonia, a younger brother of Fla. Iose∣phus, to gouerne other places in Iudah, and he returned with his prisoners and captiues which he brought with him to Rome, to beautifie his fathers triumphes and his. This was the fift and last ouerthrow of the Iewes, & de∣struction of Ierusalem. First by Shesac King of Egipt, in the time of Rehoboam; secondly by Nabuchodonozer, in the time of Zedechias, Ierusalem destroied 5. mes. the last King of Iudah: thirdly by Antiochus: fourthly by Pompey the great: and fiftly and last, by Titus and Ves∣pasian. Thus the Iewes that subdued all natiōs before them, and conquered all the Kings about them, that in the time of Ioshua & Dauid, all the earth trembled at the na∣ming of the Iewes, whose gouernment continued from Abraham to Vespasian, two thousand yeares and more, though for a time, while they were in Egipt 430. yeares, litle spoken of, vntil the Lord raised them, & so strength∣ned thē vnder Moses and Ioshua, that first they ouerthrew
Pharao and his kingdome, & after subdued the Canaa∣nites, Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Philistines, and the Syrians, which of the Hebrewes were called Aro∣mites, the strongest nation vpon the earth at that time, which were subdued notwithstanding by Dauid. Thus the Iewes which were as famous, and feared as much in those dayes, as the Romanes were in the time of their Consuls, are now so destroyed, and their coun∣try subdued like wandring banished mē, without king, lawe, or countrey. The cause wherof was the sinne of Ierusalem, which would neuer acknowledge the goodnesse of God to∣wards them, nor his myracles and his mercy wrought amongst them, they refused his grace offered, and perse∣cuted him most violently to death. Yet Dionisius Areo∣pagita and his fellow Appollonius, in the citie of Eliopolis in Egipt, they both obserued by the Eclipse of the Sun, at the verie houre the sonne of God suffered, more then the rebellious Iewes did, for all the blessings and mer∣cies which they had receiued, they cried out still vnto Pilate, crucifie him, his blood be vpon vs, and vpon our children. These learned Heathens openly confessed in Egipt, that either the sonne of God did suffer death, or else the Dyonisius & Appollonius. frame of the whole worlde should be dissolued, these two Heathens confessed and named him to bee the sonne of God, but the vngratefull Iewes called and named him the sonne of Ioseph the Carpenter, in con∣tempt of him, and therefore it is conuenient to set forth the great goodnesse of the Lorde in a briefe and a short catalogue, what the Lord hath done to Israel, since he brought them out of the furnace of Egipt, where they were bond-slaues vnder Pharao, 430. yeares, euen from
the first comming of Abraham into Egipt, vntill Moses brought them out of Egipt. For after Esau & Iacob had diuided their fathers pos∣session, Esau went to dwell in Edumea, and Iacob tooke for his part Canaan, where he dwelt and his childrē, vntil Iacob went to Egipt with all his family to his sonne Io∣seph, which was 215. yeares after the being of Abraham in Egipt, and 215. yeares before Moses brought the chil∣drē of Israel out of Egipt into the land of Canaan, at what time the law was written & giuen to Moses in mount Si∣nai, to gouern the people; and after the lawe was giuen, The Taber∣nacle was made. the Tabernacle was commaunded by Moses to be made in the wildernesse, which should stand to them for a Temple to serue the Lord, and after the Tabernacle, the Arke was made, where the tables of the lawe were com∣maunded by Moses at his death to be kept, where Moses gouerned the whole army of the Hebrues fortie yeares before they went ouer Iorden. And Moyses before he died, he deliuered the army of the Hebrewes into the hands of Ioshua, with a charge from the Lord, vnder whom they passed into the lande of Canaan, after whose death they began to be rebellious & seditious. Yet the Lord fauoured thē, & sent thē stout Ioseph. lib. 5. cap. 5. 6. 7. 8. and wise gouernors, as Iudah, Ehud, Barac, Iephtha, Gedeō, and Sampson, yet stil rebelled they like Idolatrous people against the Lord, that they were weary of that gouern∣ment, and reiected Samuel & his gouernmēt, and would haue a king: the Lord denied them nothing, and they had kings to rule them: during which time of kings, I∣dolatry presently crept in, that the lord & his lawes were forsaken, and Baal with his prophets & priests accepted. Hence grew ciuil warres between the 12. Tribes, ten a∣gainst two, that of one kingdom they made two; so that
there was nothing but slaughter and blood, betweene the house of Israel & the house of Iudah: and that straight after Solomons death 500. thousand were slain in mount Zemaraim of the king of Israels side, by the king of Iudah. Againe such a slaughter of the king of Iudahs side by the king of Israel, that two hundred thousand of womē and children were taken prisoners in Samaria, so that they wasted and spoyled one another in such sort, that frō a happy & populous people, by forsaking their Lord and God, they became a most miserable & Idolatrous people to serue strange gods. For during the time of Da∣uid which was 40. yeares, the kingdome of Israel was the most famous & renowned kingdome of the world. For so the Lord spake, I will make the Princes of Iudah, like coales of fire among the wood, and like a fire-brand in the sheafe, and they shal deuour all people round about them. So Dauid brought all the kings & nations about, subiect & tributary vnto Israel, whose happie whole go∣uernment was such, that at his death hee left a hundred 100000. talents left by Dauid to Solomon to builde the temple. thousand talents to his sonne Solomon to build a temple to the Lord, which he himself had determined to build, but that the Prophet Nathā warned him from the Lord that he should not, for that he was a man of blood, but that Solomon his sonne should build him a house. This kingdom of Israel being so happy (as you heard) in king Dauids time, and in Solomons time, so glorious a temple builded, and so richly furnished vnto the Lord, that in Solomons time, such plentie was in Ierusalē, mony was no more esteemed thē stones in the streets, yet pre∣sently vpō Solomons death in the time of Rehoboham his sonne, the state of Ierusalem was so obscured & altered, Ioseph. lib. 8. cap. 8. that the citie was sackt, and the temple robd, with great slaughter of people by Shesac king of Egipt, so that the wealth and treasure of Ierusalem and of the temple, was carried by Shesac into Egipt.
Againe the kings of Israel became so Idolatrous, that there were no gods among the Heathens, but they were as gods worshipped in Israel, so that they were far worse then the Grecians or the Romans, who would allow no Ioseph. lib. 9. cap. 14. strange gods to raigne neither in Athens nor in Rome, and therefore for that they forsooke the Lord, the Lord for∣sooke them, and gaue them ouer, and their kingdome to the Assirians, by the hand of Salmanasser, and so Samaria and other townes in Israel were inhabited by strangers. So the kings of Iudah after Israel within 133. yeares after, were carried captiues into Babilon by Nabuchodo∣nozer, yet the Lord gaue them not ouer, but brought Three great kings of Per∣sia fauoured the Iewes. them within 70. yeares after againe to Ierusalem, & stir∣red vp Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, three great kings of Persia, to fauour and to aide them with license to returne to their countrey, to inhabit Ierusalem with money and much treasure, to build vp the Temple, redeliuering vn∣to them all the rich vessels of gold and siluer, which Sa∣lomon left in the Temple at his death, and which Nabu∣chodonozer tooke away from the Temple, and brought to Babilon. After Cyrus and these kings of Persia, the Lord stirred vp a great Heathen Prince Alexander the great, who Alexander reuerenced the high priest in Ierusalem when he came to Ierusalem, lighted off his horse, and came to meet the high Priest, and reuerenced him with great obeysance, where were read vnto him the pro∣phesies of Daniel, where it was found that a Grecian Ioseph. lib. 11. cap. 8. Prince should subdue the Persian kingdome, which Alexander acknowledged to be himselfe, and therefore went into the temple & sacrificed to the God of Israel, and not only freely granted to the high Priest whatsoe∣uer he would aske, but commaunded him to aske what he would haue him do, & the high Priest asked nothing
but that the Iewes that dwelt in Babilon, in Medea, and in other countreys about vnder his gouernment, might enioy and liue according to the lawes of their countrey, which Alexander graunted, besides his great and liberall gifts which he bestowed vpon the Priest & the temple. Nabuchodonozer vsed himselfe otherwise then Alex∣ander did against Iudah, for he commanded Holofernus, to spare no people, no kingdome, saying, Non Parcet oculus tuus vlliregno. The terror of Holofernus army ther∣by Iudith. 2. and 3. was such, that they came out of euery citie crowned with crownes on their heads, and lamps in their hands, to receiue him with all kind of musicke, and with daun∣cing & songs to please him, yet could they not mittigate the fiercenesse of his fury. After Alexander the Lord stirred vp Pthol. Philadel∣phus, so to fauour the Israelits, & to loue their lawes, that Ioseph. lib. 12 cap. 2. he had the lawes of Israel written in the Greeke tongue in Alexandria, and released many prisoners and captiues of the Iews, to the number of 120000. (which Ptol. Lagus his precessor had brought from Iudah to Egipt,) with as great bountifull rewards & gifts, as Alexander did. So Zeleucus shewed such fauour to the Iewes dwel∣ling in Antioch, in Ionia, & in Ephesus, that he graunted to them the liberties & lawes of their countrey. After Zeleucus the Lord stirred vp Antiochus the great, being before a great enemy of the Iewes; & after Antio∣chus many of the kings of Asia, so to fauour them, that all the cities of Asia where the Iewes dwelt, should suffer them to liue according to the laws of their country, and Ioseph. lib. 1 cap. 3. to enioy the benefites of the same, and though many of the Assirian kings troubled and molested them with great warres, which ioyned themselues with the Sama∣ritans to subdue the kingdome of Iudah. Yet the Lord raised vp the house of Assamonias, Matta∣thias
to resist the violence of the Assyrians, and after him his sonne Iu. Machabaeus, who slew of the enemies, Edumeans and Assyrians, that sought the ouerthrowe Ioseph. lib. 12 cap. 9. of his countrey, two hundred, thirtie sixe thousand, and seuen hundred, in the defence of Ierusalem, and after 1. Machab. 3. cap. him his other foure bretheren forsooke not the lawes of the Lord for all the tyrannie of the Romane Empe∣rors and the Assyrian Kings. But the Iewes from time to time so reuoulted from the Lord, that Aristobulus the sonne of Hircanus, made Aristobulus first king of the Iewes af∣ter their cap∣tiuitie. himselfe a King 481. yeares after the returne of the cap∣tiuitie of the Iewes from Babilon, but hee enioyed his kingdome but one yeare after he famished his mother and killed his brother, for in Iudah their kings had no better succession then the kings of Rome had, though in both the kingdomes, they made great meanes to be∣come kings. After this Aristobulus, there was no king a∣mong the Iewes vntill Herod, who was made by the Se∣nators Ioseph. lib. 13 cap. 19. of Rome, with the consent of Augustus Caesar, and Mar. Antonius, both Emperours of Rome, vnder whom Iudah was a Prouince. Yet one false Alexander a Iew, most subtilly adopted himselfe, being very like to Herod, to be of the stock and family of Herod, and brother to Aristobulus, and thereby Pseudalex∣ander. claimed to bee king of Iudah, saying, that he was Herods sonne, as false Philip faigned himselfe in Macedonia, Ioseph. lib. 17 cap. 14. to be Persius sonne king Philips brother, and as the com∣mon people there reuerenced false Philippe in Mace∣donia, so likewise in all parts of Iurie was this false A∣lexander Pseudophil lippus. carried in coach from Cittie to Cittie, with all the reuerence and honour that could bee, as though he were their true and lawfull king, but being brought to Rome before Caesar, who found by the hardnesse of
his hands, and rudenesse of his behauiour, that hee was not brought vp like a Kings sonne, and therefore Caesar hauing found his falshood, bound him all his life time as a galley slaue, and commaunded all his counsellors and conspirators to bee killed with the sword. This house continued vntill the last destruction of Ierusalem. So that the Iewes after Christ his death, beeing e∣uery where afflicted and oppressed, from Babilon were forced to flie to Zeleucia, the chiefe Citie in all Syria, Affliction of the Iewes. which Zeleucus Nicanor builded; a Towne where Greekes, Macedonians and Syrians dwelt together: there also the Greekes and the Syrians conspired toge∣ther against the Iewes that there dwelt, and slew treche∣rously of them to the number of 50000. So sedition also began between the Iewes in Alexan∣dria, and the Aegiptians: in Samaria betweene the Sa∣maritans and the Iewes, and all the Iewes which dwelt Ioseph. lib. 9. cap. 14. in Rome, in Sardinia, & other places of the Romaine Em∣pire, were from thence banished. These Iewes had not so much as a place to rest vpon the earth, but were scattered like rogues & vagabounds euery where, without credit or loue, without Prince, Priest, law or religion, (the iust iudgement of the Lord) for their blasphemy against the sonne of God, saying: his bloud be vpon vs and our children. Thus the Iewes whom Moses & Aaron brought out of Egipt, to the num∣ber of six hundred thousand, died all in the wildernesse, for their rebellious mutinie. Moses and Eleazer (after Aarons death) numbred Moses num∣bred the peo∣ple. the people in the wildernesse, where all the other died, and they found sixe hundred thousand, seuenteen hun∣dred and thirtie able and sufficient men for the warres, and yet not one of them which Moses & Aaron numbred
in the desart of Sinai after they came out of Egipt, sa∣uing Num. 26. Ioshua & Caleb, but died in the wildernesse, for diso∣bedience and stubbernesse, euer preferring the cucum∣bers, melons, oynions & garlicks of Egipt, before Māna, quailes, and sweete water which they had from euery rocke in the wildernesse, where neither their cloathes were worne, nor their shooes spent for fortie yeares, yet Egipt which should be a hel to them, was their paradice. The tenne Tribes of Israel raigned in Samaria 240. yeares, seuen moneths, and seuen daies, during which time they neither obeyed the lawes of the Lord, nor heard the Prophets that forewarned them of these cala∣mities which were to come, and therfore the Lord gaue them ouer, & they were taken prisoners, & their last king Osea, & brought captiues by Salmanasser vnto Niniuie. So the kingdome of Iudah and the house of Da∣uid was likewise taken by Nabuchodonozer in the ele∣uenth yeare of Zedechiah, the last king of Iudah, who was Zedechia taken cap∣tiue. taken captiue, his noble men & his children slaine in his sight, before his eyes were pluckt out, and after led in a chaine vnto Babilon, where he died in prison 133. yeares Ioseph. li. 10. cap. 2. after the kingdome of Israel was destroyed by Salmanas∣ser, that was the cause of his miserable end, for the con∣tempt he had to the Prophet Ieremy, disdaining either to hear him, or to read his booke, for before any king raig∣ned in Israel Iudges by the Lord appointed, ruled 370. yeares, the kings of Iudah after Solomons death raigned 395. yeares, which agreeth well with Iosephus account. And so of the continuance of the Bishops or high Priests, euen from the building of the temple of Solomon (Sadoc being their first high Priest or Bishop) were seuē∣teene high Priests or Bishops in Ierusalem, by succession of the children after their fathers. The end of the second booke.
The third Booke of the Stratagems of Ierusalem. CHAP. I. Of the care and diligence which Kingdomes and Countries tooke in military discipline to exercise their souldiers. THe Romanes most carefull in all mili∣tary discipline, in no wise trusted stran∣gers, but euery Romaine souldier should take a military oath by the Co∣lonell. The Persiās also, were in this point No mercena∣ry souldiers allowed by the Romains or the Per∣sians. like the Romains, for not admitting of mercenary souldiers: seldome is found any constancie or soundnesse in mercenary souldiers, as by too many examples the Romanes and others found. Iugurth by trechery of fewe Thracians that serued the Romanes in Affrike, in the night time betraied the Salust. Romanes to Iugurth, and made a great slaughter of them. In like sort the Thessalians were trecherous to the Athenians whom they trusted, but they forsooke the A∣thenians Thucid. 1. at the battel of Tanagra, wherby through their falsehood and trecherie to the Athenians, the victorie fell to the Lacedemonians, therefore neither the Ro∣manes
nor the Persians trusted any mercenary souldiers, for mercenary souldiers and strangers are not to be tru∣sted, for they doo not onely forsake their friends in any Liui. 21. danger, but ioyne with the enemy for any aduantage. So did the Gaules in the warres of Carthage, slew the watch of the Romanes, and fled to Haniball. The lawe of armes in euery countrey should holde and maintain the crowne & dignity of the prince by the sword, so most necessary it is, that subiects should be loo∣ked vnto with great care and prouision to maintain the Care of coun∣tries for soul∣diers. willing, forward, and good souldiers, & due punishmēts and sharpe corrections for euill, leaud, & wicked dispo∣sed men, carelesse of their countries good. How carefull euery common-wealth hath bene of this, you shall read first of euery kingdome & country seueral punishments by law appointed, & after of the rewards, honor, & dig∣nities of good souldiers; of which Plato saith: Omnis res∣pub: paena & Praemio continetur. Agesilaus therefore appointed gifts and rewards to draw and encourage his souldiers to shoote, to throwe the dart, the sling, to ride, to runne, and with diligence and care to keepe them seuerely from faults & offences, and to exercise them in martiall feates, which kinde of Agesilaus his exercise for his souldiers. exercise among the Greekes was most commonly vsed, called Pentatlon, in the games of Olympia & Isthmia, to ho∣nor Hercules and Thesius, two protectors and principall captaines that loued souldiers. Alexander the great was so seuere in martiall lawes to∣wards his souldiers, that if any souldier or captain shuld lye, or be any way proued a lyer, hee should be depriued Antigenes banished for a lye. frō his office and place of seruice, & banished from his camp: for so was Antigenes, though a valiant captaine o∣therwise, yet was both casseerd & banished for making of a lye.
Alexander after he had banished all bakers, cookes, brewers, and such like frō his campe, said, that marching in their armour in the night, they should prouide them a dinner, & a stomacke to eate theyr dinner against the next morning, & as for a supper, he said they should not looke for wine nor flesh to sleepe after it, but for bread, Alexander his lawes & exercises for his souldiers. and hee would prouide for water, which is the onely foode of a souldier, and the most necessary care of a ge∣nerall. Hereby his souldiers being brought vp by Philip king of Macedonia his father, were hardned with conti∣nuall paine and trauell, and long exercises of warres, that Alexander with an army of thirtie thousand, af∣ter he had vanquished Darius king of Persia, he procee∣ded forwards without any resistance, but by yeelding of all the Kings of the East countries. It is not read that Alexander vsed any stratagemes as his father Philippe did. The like hardinesse and courage was found in Masi∣nissa king of Numidia, being foure score yeares old, that he in the cold winter and hard frost, bareheaded, would march before his souldiers ouer mountaines, through Masinissas hardinesse in marching. woods and desart places, with such paine and trauell, with such hunger and thirst, as hee beeing a king and a captain, marching before, heauie and laden with ar∣mors, the souldiers were kindled with great courage to follow after, being driuen therevnto for very shame, to imitate such a valiant captaine. Well therefore Lysander Lysander. said, that a Lyon before three hundred Deares, was bet∣ter then a timerous Deare before three hundred Lyons. And as well did Iphicrates the Athenian captaine com∣pare the whole band of an army to the whole body of a Iphicrates. man: for as the head gouerneth & ruleth the whole bo∣dy, so the Generall ruleth and gouerneth the whole ar∣my.
Fabius Max. would neuer suffer his souldiers to be ei∣ther sloathfull or idle, but before they should take any ease, he would stil remoue his whole camp from place The diligēce of Fabius Max. to his souldiers. place, to keepe his souldiers in exercise of seruice, and to auoyd sluggishnesse and idlenesse, which idlenesse was the first beginning of Hannibals ruine in Italy, and as af∣ter followed the whole ouerthrow of all his Affrican Army in Campania, for they still tooke their ease and pleasure in Capua without military trauell of exer∣cise. For we read that Epaminondas that famous Thaehan captaine, finding one of his souldiers idle and sleeping in his tent, did runne him through with his speare, and turning to his army, said, wee left this souldier as wee found him. The like did  Caesar, finding one of his army asleep caused him to be bound to a poste, and he himselfe with his Lieftenants and Captaines, shot him to death, spea∣king loud to his captains and souldiers, we must purge our army with the sacrifice of such dead souldiers; for said Caesar, Frater euim mortis somnus est. Therefore Scypio Affrican was wont to say to idle la∣zie Scypios say∣ing to his souldiers. Veget. lib. 3. souldiers, that the souldiers that would not haue their swords and speares imbrewed with the bloud of the enemies, like valiant souldiers should be diggers and deluers like slaues in their shirts, with dyrtie mat∣tockes and spades, in lewe of swords. And so Caesar said, that the souldiers that could not vse their swords and shields, should vse the mattock and spade. Bochoris decreed a military lawe against sloathfull Bochoris lawes. Diod. sic. lib. 12. and idle souldiers in Egipt, that would not obey theyr captaines, or forsooke their standart, they should be re∣remoue
from the place where they serued, and become agrarij milites, base souldiers as they began first, and if any souldier would open any secrets to the enemies, he should haue his tongue cut out of his head by the lawe of Bochoris. The fatte and full fed souldier among the Romanes, that neither could nor would take paines on foote or on horse, the captain might take his horse from vnder him, and giue him to an other. So Agesilaus did in the Peloponesian warres in Greece, Agesilaus military dis∣cipline. for when he sawe young braue souldiers of Asia in his campe, which had more pride in their apparell, then care of their seruice, more like to women then to men, Agesilaus tooke their braue and fine apparell from them, and gaue it to those souldiers that better deserued it, and forced them to serue very bare and naked, vntill they knew better how to become souldiers. So the Romanes vsed to take the speares from those souldiers that were giuē to idlenesse and sloathfulnesse, though before through seruice they wonne them, and deserued them. They also vsed to open a vaine vpon the forehead of a wilde, rash, and disobedient souldier, to let him bleed to become sober. The Gaules vsed to put a marke vpon the souldiers girdle, which if the souldier through idlenes would not keepe himselfe within that marke, he should be straight∣ly Caesar. lib. 5. de bello gallic. kept in prison with thin dyet, vntill the marke of his girdle would serue him. The olde Gaules had an other lawe, that hee which came last to the muster should be slaine in the presence of the multitude, for that hee seemed vnwilling to come, & to be with the first to answere for himselfe and for his countrey.
It was so also among the Romanes, that hee which would not answere to the first call at any publike muster of souldiers, should be noted as a great offender to his country, and banished out of his countrey, as a man not borne nor fit for his countrey. Eumenes a noble captaine, a souldier of Alexander the great, to take that sluggishnesse from his souldiers that grew by idlenesse, did acquaint them with trauell and paine to keepe them in breath, sometimes marching for∣wards The exercise of Eumenes to his souldi∣ers. faire and softly, and then retiring with great haste vpon the sudden, much like to the Parthians in theyr fighting, taking vpon them to flee for feare from the enemies, to drawe the enemies after them, and then to returne vpon the sudden againe to fight with their ene∣mies: so did Eumenes by his souldiers, which made them readie in seruice as well backwards as forwards, which many captaines vsed as stratagems. Fabius Max. thought good to reclaime the faults of an euil and ignorant souldier by lenitie and gentlenesse, and wished no captaine to vse his souldiers more sharp∣ly then the husbandman vsed his Figge trees, Oliue trees, and wilde Pomegranates, which by pruming Fabius Max. and good handling of them, do alter their hard & wilde nature. Charondas made a lawe to punish those souldiers that loytred in their countrey, and refused to goe to warres for their countrey, and also those souldiers that were in the warres, that brake any martial order by leauing their ensigne and their company, the souldier that so offen∣ded, should be cloathed in a womans apparell, and bee brought into the midst of the campe, and there to stand in the sight of all the army three seuerall daies together. So Artaxerxes vsed cowardly souldiers in Persia with the
same selfe lawe as Charondas did. And therefore Attil. Regulus passing with his Army from Samnium to Lucerna, met with the enemies vnex∣pected: Frent. lib. 4. cap. 1. his souldiers being taken vpon the sudden, be∣gan to flye, Regulus commaunded certaine of his cap∣tains to kill those souldiers that fled from the enemies. The old Romanes for the greatest punishment they had for their slaues in Martius Corilianus time, was, to carrie a limmer on his shoulders, that is fastned to the axeltree of a coach called Furea, and compelled to go vp and downe in that sort among his neighbours, and after to be called Furciser. Certaine military punishments by law of Armes set downe: Castigatio, Pecumariaemulctae, numerum indictio, militiaemutatio, gradus dciectio, ignominiosa missio. I will Modesti. de re militari. spare to put them in English because they are in English mentioned before. If any be desirous of more military punishments, let him read Vegetius, the third booke and fourth chapter, where hee setteth downe that if a souldier beeing puni∣shed for any offence by him committed, should contra∣ry his Captaine or the Collonell, by resisting or stay∣ing Military pu∣nishment for souldiers. his captaines hands, or by breaking the staffe or the sticke wherwith he is punished, he is by martiall law dis∣placed from the place he serueth in, and quite remoued from the campe. If any souldier resist correction, & lay violent hands on his Captaine or Collonell when he is corrected, he is to suffer capitall punishment, which is death by mar∣tiall law appointed. Augustus Caesar commaunded those souldiers that of∣fended in the campe, with sloathfulnesse and idlenesse, which framed not thēselues like souldiers, to carry vpon Augustus Caesar.
their backes Decempedam, a pearch or pole of ten foote long, sometimes to carrie turffes in their shirts bare-legd Decempede. and barefooted, to be flowted and scoffed of their com∣pany. Sertorius for that he saw a number of souldiers negli∣gently omit military discipline, he caused them to bee Sertorius. whipt and scourged in the midst of the Campe, threat∣ning death for the least fault the next time they offen∣ded. For said Sertorius, In bello bis peccare non licet. Genutius the Consull, disauthorised and purged his Genutius. campe of foure thousand souldiers, whom hee found sloathfull and negligent in the army, and brought them to open publique punishment. Cyrus therfore after he had conquered the Lydians, knowing them to be soft and effeminate souldiers, suffe∣red none of them to be in his campe. Among the Carthaginians, the Lacedemonians, and they of Creete, a lawe was made, confirmed by Plato Plato. in Greece, that no souldier might drinke wine during the time of theyr warres, which made Marius to speake to his Armye, perceiuing them to bee verie thyrstie, we must breake our thirst in yonder Riuer after the battell. Pittacus a singular wise man, made the like lawe in Pittacus. Mittelena, as Plato made in Greece, that the souldiers that would drinke wine, might receiue double punishment without pay. Among the Romanes seuere lawes were made a∣gainst wine drinkers, and executed not onely vpon soul∣diers by the Generall, but also vpon the women in Rome by their husbands, as Egnat. Metellus punished his owne wife. If any souldier should go any where out of their camp,
and be found without sword and weapons about him, Cornel. Ta∣cit. lib. 2. Ueget. lib. 3. cap. 8. he should be accused of a capital crime, & hardly escape death, vnlesse it were the first offence of a yong soldier. Those souldiers that cast vp bankes, made trenches and diches, might not be without weapons about them, though they were but agrarij milites. So vsed Marius, and after him Caesar, they made their souldiers to worke with their swords on their sides, and mattockes in their hands. So did the Iewes for feare of the Samaritans, and o∣thers, build vp Ierusalem and the temple, hauing theyr weapons in one hand, and working with the other. Scipio Aemilianus, at the warres of Numantia, percei∣uing that his vnder captaines and his officers forgat the military discipline of the old Romaines, which was that women should not follow the warres, and many other The warres at Numantia abuses and enormities which were suffered in the camp without looking vnto, and therefore Scipio purged all his army of all idle & leaud company with whip & scourge, that might hinder seruice & infect the army. So did Cyrus the great king of Persia, with the like care keepe his souldiers from slothfull idlenesse, com∣maunding his Generalls & Captaines to exercise theyr souldiers with paine & trauell, to suffer hunger & colde Cyrus dis∣cipline to his souldiers. without meate or drinke, before they woulde certifie their captaine what military exercise either on foote, or on horse they had done. And after that Cyrus had conquered the Lydians, knowing them to be false and treacherous fellowes, ve∣ry cowards & timerous soldiers, he dismissed them from his campe, and suffred them not to stay among his soul∣diers, because they should not infect souldiers, nor cor∣rupt military discipline.
For that the martiall disciplines of the Romaines were such as I thought good to make a catalogue as I found them in the Commentary vpon Vegetius, virgis caedi, vite verberari, linguae abscissio, this kinde of punish∣ment vsed the Egiptians, by a lawe confirmed in E∣gipt, to cut off the souldiers tongue that betrayed any counsell to the enemie: the fourth punishment among the Romanes was Manuū amputatio, to cut off the hands of those souldiers that were founde stealing or filching in the campe. The fift punishment was Crurum exectio, Polib. lib. 6. the breaking of the legges of those souldiers that for∣sooke theyr standart, and so to leaue them without legs Tacit. lib. 3. anual. to staie behinde, because when he had legges he would not follow his standart. Another punishment they had called Decimation, Val. max. li. 2 cap. 7. for offences among the souldiers vnknowne, the tenth man by lot as it fel vpon him should die throughout the whole company: this punishment Decimation, was in∣uented first by Appius Claudius, which long endured a∣mong the Romanes, and most frequented. The seuenth punishment was for them that fled to the enemies, and returned to be eaten and deuoured of beasts. So Scipio Affrican punished some Romain fugitiues. Another punishment among the Romane souldiers, was to be stoned to death, so was Posthumius stoned in his Tents. Another punishment among souldiers, was to be shot to death the souldier being tied to a stake. This pu∣nishment vsed Caesar, Alexander the great, and many other Generalls in diuers countries. To be short, Se∣pultura priuari, sub crate necari, carpento trahi, and many other such you may read in Viget. lib. 3. cap. 4.
In this the Romaines differed from the Persians, Mercenary souldiers. hardly would the Romanes trust any mercenary soul∣dier, or suffer any straunger as a souldier to be within their campe. The Persians imitating the great king Cyrus coun∣sell, who euer thought it best to choose a souldier, as a a man would make choice of a good horse to trauell far from home, and to spare his owne people the Persians, vntill extreame necessitie forced warres, cleane contra∣ry to the Romanes who neuer vsed but their owne Ro∣mane legions, though they subdued the Macedonians, the Persians, and their kings, yet the Romanes would not vse their martiall discipline, which made the Ro∣manes to vanquish all nations, and to rule ouer all coun∣tries. CHAP. II. Of the prouinciall regiments of the Romanes. Of their rule and gouernment ouer the greatest kings of the world. THe Romanes euery where most renow∣ned for their fame, in a manner Lords of the whole earth, after they had conque∣red all nations & kingdomes vnder them to pay tribute to the Empire of Rome, and had appointed gouernors and regents to gouerne vn∣der them in euery country: Some vnder Consuls, some The gouern∣ments of the Romanes. vnder Proconsuls, some vnder Presidents, some vnder Praetors, and some vnder Knights, and after they had di∣uided these kingdomes & countries, some into princi∣pallities, some into prouinces, some into Toparchies, as Sex. Ruffi∣nus. Syria, some into Tetrarchies, as Paphlagonia. Some into Tribes, and some into Ethnarchies, as France: Gasgoyne and Brytaine were diuided into eighteene prouinces, and gouerned vnder Praetors.
Hispaine in sixe prouinces, two of them vnder Con∣suls gouernment, the other foure vnder Proconsuls. Macedonia was diuided into seuen prouinces, Thra∣cia Macedonia. into sixe, and Illyria into seuen prouinces. This might seeme strange, that Consuls of Rome be∣ing but one citie, should rule & gouerne so many king∣domes, that after they had subdued Affrica & the most part of Europe, before they came to Asia, and had establi∣shed Affrike & Europe vnder Romane gouernors. And as by the death of Alexander the great, all the East king∣domes were left without a king, that they that were Diuision be∣tweene the successors of Alexander. then but Alexanders Souldiers, diuided all the king∣domes of the East as booties and praies between them, Macedonia to Antipater, Egipt to Ptolomeu, Asia the lesse to Antigonus, and so other kingdomes were diuided be∣tweene others of Alexander his souldiers and they that could agree vnder one captaine, as fellowes, friendes, and souldiers of one countrey, fell to ciuil warres with∣in themselues, that one destroyed another, that by this meanes the Romanes subdued the kings of Asia, as they subdued the kings of Affrica and Europe. After the Romanes had subdued Italy, their coun∣trey-men and next neighbours, they graunted to the Volsces, the Tyrrhens, the Samnites, Lucans, Taren∣tines & Thuscans, the Romane lawe called Ius Latij. So did the Romanes in Cicilia, which was the first people subdued, and made the first prouince vnder the Romanes, they had Iura Latinitatis. In Carthage, Leptis, and diuers other cities in Affrike Liberties and freedoms allowed by the Romains. and Hispaine, they had their freedome & libertie againe, and the lawes of Italy graunted them by Alexander Seue∣rus the Emperour: so that in Affrica were fifteene Ro∣mane cities, where no magistrate might gouerne but a
Romane citizen, and that Per ius Latinitatis. The like law made Pompey in Armenia & in Pontus, Romian ma∣gistrates go∣uerned in A∣sia and in Af∣frica. and other cities of Asia, that Romain magistrates should gouerne them, as they did in Hispaine and in Affrica. All Hispaine were so subiect to the Romaines, that thirtie townes were made free to vse their liberties and lawes, & named Romane cities in one part of Hispaine, and one hundred & twentie townes that paid anuall sti∣pend Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 2. cap. 27. to the Romanes. The Athenians, Thessalians, and all Greece, were re∣stored to their lawes & liberties by diuers Emperors of Rome, as by Pau. Aemilius, Ti. Flaminius, Lu. Silla, & others. But other kingdomes and countries were not so: For though the Romains excelled and exceeded all nations in prowise, in conquests and victories, yet made they all kingdomes and countries their friendes and consede∣rates which they subdued. So was Masinissa king of Nu∣midia, Masinissa. euer a friend to the Romanes against Hannibal while he liued, and at his death made the Romane Em∣pire his heire. And Attalus king of Asia, for the friendship that he Attalus. found with the Romanes, committed his kingdome in∣to the Romanes tuition, and made also the Empire of Rome his heire as Masinissa did. And though the Cappadocians were a free nation gouerned by their owne lawe, yet sought they free∣dome and libertie of the Romanes, and would be go∣uerned by them onely forsaking their owne libertie, so that they were ruled as the Egiptians were by Romaine knights, for that the Romane knights and the Senators were of equall power at that time. For no Consull, Proconsull, Praetor, or such as had Serieants or Tipslaues before them, might in no wise
come into Alexandria or any part of Egipt, for that the Romanes had an olde prophesie, that their dignitie and iurisdicton should cease in Alexandria, and also in Egipt, when any Romane officer came to Alexandria, hauing Serieants with Maces before them. The Romanes beeing now Lords of the most part of Affrica, Asia, and Europe, grew so proud of their for∣tunes, of their triumphes, their victories, and greatnesse Ambition in Rome and in Athens. farre from Rome, that they through ambition and enuie, began one to spite an other in Rome, so that there was nothing in Rome but as it was in Athens, seditions, tu∣mults, enuie and malice: and as Iugurth spake of Rome, that it was Vrbs venalis si haberet emptorem, a towne soone sold, if it had a chapman. So Demosthenes spake of the three monsters of Athens, the people, the owle, and the Populus, Nectuo, & aco. dragon: these were the causes that ouerthrew Rome and Athens. The Israelites in like sort as the Romanes before they conquered the Canaanites, they agreed and ioy∣ned their force together, and the Lord prospered theyr warres when they serued him, that from Ioshuahs time, who brought them and gaue them the possession of the land of Canaan, vnto Dauids time, who setled the Is∣raelites as the Lords ouer the Canaanites, that the Moa∣bites, Ammonites, and other nations about payed tri∣bute to Dauid, and to his successors, and that there was no king, no nation, but feared and trembled at the name of Israel. And as you heard before of the ciuill warres of the Macedonians betweene Alexanders seruants, and of the Romanes, so Israel likewise fell to ciuill warres, which Israel. was the cause of the destruction of the Persians, the Macedonians, the Romanes, the Israelites, and others:
for the Hebrewes beeing the onely auntientest people which were brought vp in the military discipline of the Lord, their lawe giuer, and Generall of their Army, vnder whom Moses, Ioshua, Dauid, and others, kept and executed the same, whose fame grew so great thereby, that all the kings and captaines of the earth trembled thereat. The Gentiles in their warres with their enemies, tooke not onely counsell of their Oracles and Sooth∣sayers, but also made their simple souldiers to beleeue, that they were instructed by some diuine power sent from Iupiter, or from Appollo. As Sertorius, a captaine no lesse famous in Affrike, then Sylla was in Asia, which did by a white hinde vse many stratagems, whom he taught to follow him euery Sertorius white hind. where, euen into his bed chamber, making his souldiers to beleeue, that hee would consult with this white hinde in some secret place, before hee would take any warres in hand, and after he had consulted with this white hinde, hee certainly assured his souldiers of victo∣rie, this hee vsed to encourage his souldiers in all his warres in Affrica. Hereby he ouerthrew Cotta the Con∣sull in a battell on the sea: and also ouerthrewe Do∣mitius Front. lib. 1. cap. 11. the Romane Proconsull in Hiberia, and constrai∣ned Metellus to his loss many times to yeeld, vntill Pom∣pey the great came with his legionarie army from Rome, to aide Metellus against Sertorius, with whom Pompey had somewhat to doo before hee ouerthrew Serto∣rius. Thus hee encouraged his souldiers in Affrica by reason of his white hinde, as Lucius Sylla did practise manye such Stratagemes in Asia, who did make
his souldiers beleeue by looking on the picture of Ap∣pollo, which he carried about his neck in a litle close ta∣blet, that he was instructed by Appollo to take such bat∣tels in hand, that Sylla would make his souldiers beleeue the victory should be his. So Cai. Marius in his warres against the Cymbrians, caried in his coach an olde woman of Scythia, named Martha, by whom he had often secret conference, and perswaded his souldiers that all the victories he had, was by the instructions of this Martha, which Marius made Marius pol∣licie. his souldiers beleeue she was a prophet, and therefore not to doubt of any battell, but to haue victorie. Scipio Affrican in like maner would take no publike matter in hand before he had gone to the Capitoll and consulted with Iupiter, whereby the souldiers were per∣swaded, and hee also enformed them before he entered Scipio his stratagem to his soul∣diers. into any battell, that they need not doubt of victories, for so hee himselfe was instructed by a messenger from Iupiter. Thus were the souldiers of the Gentiles blin∣ded with their owne superstitiousnesse, that they would beleeue their captaines in any thing they spake, that their lawes were made, and victories were gotten by the false oracles of their Idolls. So Sertorius did by his white hinde. Sylla by con∣sulting with Appollo. Cai. Marius with his prophetesse of Scythia, and Scypio Affrican by his messenger from Iupiter, these meanes which they vsed as stratagemes was to perswade theyr souldiers forwards, with more Val. Max. lib. 1. courage to take the battel in hand, so religious were the Gentiles towards theyr Gods, that they thought no∣thing coulde happen amisse if theyr gods were well pleased.
Diagoras the Philosopher was therefore banished out of Athens, because hee confessed that hee doubted Dagoras the Philosopher. Cic de natu∣ra. deor. lib. 1. whether there were any gods or no. So was Archilocus banished from Sparta, for that he said, I had rather loose my shield then my life. The Israelites were charged not to vse these Idola∣trous meanes, and forbidden to seeke forren helpes, ey∣ther of the Egiptians, or of the Babilonians, Romanes, or Syrians, but of the presence of the Lord in the Arke, and from the mercie seate to take their answere what they might doo, and after the vse of the Arke, in the Israel con∣sulted with idolatrous Oracles. Temple of Salomon at Ierusalem: but the Israelites after consulted with Milcom and Moloch, the gods of the Gentiles, and the house of Ephramites ioyned their force with the Syrians, and sought helpe against Iudah. It seemed by the instructions of the Gentiles to their souldiers, set forth in their lawes of Armes, that they were most carefull to haue them brought into such straight obseruations, by obedience to their chiefe gene∣ralls and officers: for it was no small reproach nor little shame, but for euer publike infamy amōg the Romains, Military pu∣nishment of the Romains. for any souldier, captain, collonel, or any other officer, to be disauthorised & reiected from his former dignitie of seruice, to disarmor him of his weapons, to take his horse frō vnder him, to be vnspurd, to take his speare out of his hand, his shooes from his feete, his gyrdle from his mid∣dle, to giue him barley for wheate, to goe barefooted, and to begin againe to be Agrarius miles, to be a meane souldier, so seuere were the Romanes against disobe∣dient souldiers. It was an auntient lawe among the olde Romanes, that the Captaines and Centurions that fled from their company should stand with their garments loose, and
their swords drawne in their hands in the midst of the campe, which was one of the greatest & infamousest pu∣nishments among the Romanes for a Romane captain. The penall law they had in Sparta against those that Plut. in Li∣curgo. fled from the battell, they were compelled to weare old tattered rags, and to shaue the one side of their beards, A penall law in Sparta for souldiers. and to bee reuiled and flowted of euery man that met them, that it was not lawfull for them to giue any word of answering. And if they were captaines, or any great officers in the field, they should weare an olde patched gowne of diuers colours, they should beare no office in the com∣mon-wealth after that time, they might haue no mans daughter to marriage, neither would any marrie theyr daughters, but as men left to liue in shame without any credite, forsaken and refused to come into any Spartans company, for euery man liued in that warlike towne Sparta as in a campe, where each souldier knew his al∣lowance, and what he had to do: for the bondmen cal∣led Helotes. Helotes, did till their ground, and yearely yeelded thē certaine reuenues to maintaine their warres, for Sparta was not walled as other strong cities be, but walled with valiant souldiers, readie alwaies in armour to fight with their enemies, for as the Romanes said Membra militum arma, so the Lacedemonians said, Vrbis maenia milites. The Lacedemonians of all people so honoured mar∣tiall discipline, that they studied nothing but to endure How the La∣cedemonians march to their warres. all labours, to sustaine any paine, and to be ready alwaies to fight, and when they marched in battell ray to any set battell, they put theyr garlands of flowers on theyr heads in the very face of the enemie, and sung a song to Castor and Pollux, commaunding their warlike instru∣ments to sound, and to agree with the Dittie of theyr
song called Pirricha, and so with motions and gestures of their bodies in their armour, they marched forwards Perricha. towards the enemie, wearing tawny short cassocks, least Enoplia. the enemie should see any bloud vpon them. The Massagets went also vnto any battel in such co∣loured cassocks as best resembled the colour of bloud, Massagets. least the sight of bloud should terrifie some cowardly faint hearted souldier of their army. The Aethiopians held a cleane contrary opinion to the Massagets, they went into the warres all in white Aethiopians colour, because they might the more be encouraged by the sight of bloud to reuenge bloud, and as the Aethio∣pians would often say, that bloud should be reuenged when they sawe their bloud. Artaxerxes king of Persia, came with an army of nine hundred thousand, all in red iackets, against his brother Cyrus, to the battel of Conoxa, where Cyrus gaue him bat∣tell with a great army, all in white cassockes. So also sundrie nations came into the field with di∣uers coloured shields and targets, as Alexander the great Veget. lib. 1. cap. 18. his souldiers came all with white siluered shields, and therefore called Argyrasipides. Argyraspides The Romane Emperour Alex. Seuerus, came with golden gilted shields, and therefore called Chrysoaspides: Chrysoaspi∣des. the Romains came with diuers coloured shields, but ne∣uer with white, vnlesse for the first yeare to young soul∣diers. The Carthagineans neuer vsed any other shields but white, and the rather because the Romans refused white Iustin. lib. 14. histor. shields, for the Romanes and the Carthagineans could neuer agree.
CHAP. III. Of the forme and manner of military oathes in diuers coun∣treys ministred vnto souldiers. AFter the mustering and numbring of souldiers, and their names written in tables, they were also sworne before they went into any warres. The Persians for that they prefer∣red the faith of their souldiers before any profit, they were compelled to sweare by the Sunne, sometime by fire, called their god The Persi∣ans oath. Orimasdes, to obey and follow the comman dements of their Generals, according to the martiall law of Persia. Among the Romanes a military oath was not one∣ly ministred vnto the souldiers to obey the direction and correction of the Consuls, but also the Consuls and Praetors themselues were sworne, before the Senators Consuls dis∣placed. of Rome, that they should attempt no battell without full instruction from the Senators, for many Consuls, Praetors, and Generals, haue bene displaced from theyr Cōsulships, for not obeying the orders of the Senators. The same obseruation of oathes as well of captaines as of the souldiers, were ministred to the souldiers by the magistrates in Sparta, called Ephori, though the La∣cedemonians in their warres against the Messenians, re∣garded as much their aultars, their gods, and their faith, as the Athenians did against the Maegarians, who cau∣sed their souldiers to take an annuall oath, to waste, to spoyle, and to destroy, and to do as much harme as they could to the Maegarians.
The Aethiopians and Egiptians made their souldiers to sweare by the names of those noble dead captaines, whose seruice aliue did most aduance their countrey, whose bodies they preserued with all sweete odours in glasse, in their sumptuous tombes. The Thracians and the Scythians, laying their stand The Thraci∣an oath. vpon the sword of Mars, make their souldiers sweare in solemne sort, to performe true seruice to Mars & to their countrey. When King Artaxerxes would haue Hipocrates the Phisition to be sworne towards him, and offered him a Hypocrates. Plut. in vita catonis. great summe of gold, Hipocrates sware vnto Artaxerxes, that he would neuer serue vnder a barbarous King that should be an enemie to the Greekes. This oath was ob∣serued euer after of all the Phisitions of Greece. The oath that Benhadad king of Syria sware vnto Achab king of Israel was, thus the gods do vnto me, Benhadads oath. if thou doost not deliuer me all thy treasures, and yeelde thy selfe vnto mee, the dust of Samaria shall not bee enough for euery one of my souldiers to take a hand∣full. As you heard of the Lacedemonians against the Messenians, and of the Athenians against the Maegari∣ans, so the Thessalians weighed so little their oathes, that in the Peloponesian warre they fled from the Atheni∣ans The Thessa∣lians oath. vnto the Lacedemonians, making no account of their oathes before made to the Athenians, like the Parthians which made no account of a military oath in warres. Notwithstanding the infidelitie of the Thessalians, the Parthians, and others, I thinke it conuenient to set downe the olde auntient forme of the Romanes, when they ministred oathes vnto theyr souldiers or
otherwise. The Romanes would sweare by Iupiter, lay∣ing their hands vpon the aultar and on the sacrifice, say∣ing these words: If I say otherwise then truth, or deceiue any man, so Iupiter throw me out of Rome, as I throw this stone out of my hand. The same words in effect did Scipio Affrican vse to Lu. Metellus, and to other Romanes after the great ouer∣throw of the Romanes at the battell of Canne, hearing that Metellus and his company had determined to forsake Italy, and to take sea, Scypio Affrican went pur∣posely vnto Metellus lodging, whom hee found very re∣solute in their purpose, Scypio drew his sword naked vp∣on them, saying: I sweare vnto you, that during Scypios The oath of Scypio Af∣frican. life, I will not forsake Rome nor any part of Italy, neither will I suffer you nor any Romane citizen to depart out of Italy with my life; If I do, Iupiter confound mee, my house, my family, and all that I haue in the world. Veget. lib. 2. cap. 5. This was Scypios oath to Metellus, after that Han∣niball had ouerthrowne the Romanes, and so vrged Metellus and his company to sweare the same oath, and so to ioyne theyr force together against Haniball; for after the great victorie of Haniball at Canne, his for∣tune by degrees began to quaile, for Mar. Liuius and Clau. Nero, both Consuls' of Rome, hearing that As∣druball Generall of the Affricans came with a great Armie vnto Italy to ayde his brother Haniball, met him vppon the sudden, and gaue him battell at the Riuer Metaurus, with the like ouerthrowe as was e∣quall to the battell of Canne, for Asdruball was slaine, Asdrubals head sent to Hanibal his brother. and his head cut off and sent to his brother Haniball for a present by Claudius Nero, and fiftie sixe thousand men of his Army slaine, and his Campe taken, vpon
the which ouerthrow, Hanibal was sent for presently, to come from Italy to Affrica. After this great battell Hanibals force and fortune began to bee weakened, and hee made meanes to Scypio for peace, and great Carthage began to alter and chaunge, and yet were they most angry with Hanibal, for that he counselled them not to follow their vaine hope of any victory, but rather to entreat for peace at the Romanes. But Carthage could not abide the name of Rome, nor Rome Carthage, and therefore forced Hanibal to take the battell at Zama in hand, which was The battel at Zama. the last battell and the vtter ouerthrow of Hanibal and of all the Carthagineans. The Affricans and the Carthagineans almost like the Romanes, laide theyr hands on the Aultars of theyr Countrey goddes, and on the sacrifice, holding in Liui. lib. 31. the left hand a lambe, and in the right hand a flint stone, saying: If they otherwise spake then truth, Carthage. or that they should deceiue any man to their know∣ledge, so they wished that Iupiter should strike them as dead, as they did strike the lambe with the flint stone. The latter Romanes made their souldiers to sweare by the name of the Emperours, as the souldiers sware by the name of Vespasian, and by the name of Au∣gustus. So the Emperour Caligula sware by the name of Drusilla in Rome. Drusilla. So Ioseph sware by the life of Pharao in Egipt, yet it was not permitted for women in Rome, to sweare by the name of Hercules. Hercules. The auntient Greekes in their most solemne oathes, were wont to come to the temple of Ceres Tesmophore,
and there after sacrifice done, to put on a purple robe vpon the goddesse Ceres, holding lampes in their hands lighted, and there to sweare before the goddesse Ceres, Tesmophore. Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 5. cap. 10. in a maner the like words, as the Romanes did of Iu∣piter. Both Euripides and Aristophenes, charged the Spar∣tanes, that they obserued neither their oathes, neither Aristocrates. their faith, nor their aultars, and named their king Ari∣stocrates in his warres against the Messenians, to bee as false as the Thessalians were. Among other nations they sware by waters, riuers, and welles, as the Indians sware by the water of Sanda∣racina: Massagetes. the Massagets by the Riuer of Tanais. Many Philosophers sware Per genium Socratis. Many Pythagorians sware Per quaternionem, which with them Pythagori∣ans oath. was the most perfect number. CHAP. IIII. Of the last ouerthrow of Hanibal at the battell of Zama, by Scypio Affrican, of his going from Affrike to Asia to Antiochus the great, and from thence to Prusias king of Bythinia. HAnibal before hee came out of Italy, seeing his force declining, after hee saw his brother Asdrubals head thrown into his tent, said, I euer thought Car∣thage vnluckie, and I know it should bee destroyed, but I requited the Romaines before my brothers head was cut off, at the battailes of Trebeia, Thrasymen, and Canne, with the losse of three hundred Romaine Consuls & Senators heads, for Hanibal sent at that time
after the victory of Canne to Carthage, three bushels of Three bu∣shels of gold rings. gold rings, which were had from the slaine Romaines in the field. After that Hannibal was ouerthrowne by Scipio at the battell at Zama, he fled to Antiochus the great, whom hee perswaded with all meanes possible to take warres against the Romanes, being so weakened and brought lowe by Hannibal, at which time Antiochus beganne a new warre vpon the Romains, whom they feared at the first beginning as much as they did Hannibal, for before he had warres with the Romanes, hee had conquered and subdued the most part of Asia, and all which Zeleu∣cus had subdued before him. And Antiochus waxed so strong that he subdued many barbarous and warlike na∣tions, that therby he was called Antiochus the great, and The ouer∣throwe of Antiochus at the battell at Magnesia. became so proud, that by Hannibals meanes hee must needs war with the Romanes, by whom hee lost diuers victories, and lost all that he wanne before, & was quite subdued by the Romanes in the battell at Magnesia, and driuen to be well contented to liue with very small ter∣ritories, without kingdomes or countries, within the precincts of Mount Taurus. Of this Antiochus, might well be spoken, what An∣tigonus spake of Pirrhus, who compared him to a dice The saying of Antigonus. player, who will not giue ouer vntill hee loose all his winning. Hannibal after hee fled from Affricke, being ouer∣throwne by Scipio, went to Antiochus the great, whom he perswaded to take warres against the Romanes, to whom Hannibal taught many stratagemes, among the which hee taught him to throw little vessels full of Ad∣ders and Vipers into the Romane nauies on sea battels, to hinder not only the souldiers from their fighting, but also the saylers from their businesse.
The same selfe stratagem did Hannibal shew to Pru∣sias king of Bythinia, to whom he fled after Antiochus the great was ouerthrowne by the Romanes. This Hanni∣bal and his brother Asdrubal, the one in Italy, the other in Hispaine, so afflicted and plagued the Romanes, but it was well requited by the two Romane brethren Sci∣pio Front. lib. 4. cap. 7. Affrican, and his brother Scypio Asiaticus, both vpon Affrica and vpon Asia. Scipio Asiaticus in Lydia, in a battell against Antio∣chus the great, (after great tempest and raine which continued a whole day and a night together, that both Antiochus the great ouerthrown by Scypio. man and beast seemed weary) was counselled by his brother Pub. Scipio Affrican, the next morning to strike a battell against Antiochus, though it was by the Ro∣mane lawes a day forbidden to fight, and by his bro∣thers counsell, Scipio Asiaticus obtained a great victo∣rie ouer Antiochus the great, which was the first king among the Syrians, called Antiochus the great, and thereby Scipio was surnamed Asiaticus, after the ouer∣throw of Antiochus, as his brother Scipio was surna∣med Affricanus, after the great ouerthrowe of Han∣nibal. So Cn. Pompeius was called Pompey the great, after the ouerthrowe of Sertorius and his complices in His∣paine. So Alexander was called Alexander the great, af∣ter hee ouerthrew Darius, and obtained the Empire of Persia. This good successe of these victories had by the Romanes, onely by the meanes of Scipio Affrican, who draue Hannibal out of Italy into Affrica, and out of Af∣frica into Asia, and brought all the Citties of Italy vn∣der
the obeysance of the Romaines, neither Scipio would giue Affrica or Carthaginians ouer, before he sawe Carthage burnt before his face, yet all the Cap∣taines of Carthage when nothing did profit them, af∣ter The burning of Carthage. the matrons and women of the Citie had shaued all their heads and brought their haires vnto the cap∣taines, as the Massilians and the Rhodians did the like, to make Gables for theyr Nauies, and Match for theyr shottes, and yet when they sawe it would not holde, then all the Towne lockt theyr gates, and brought all theyr goods and treasure to the midst of the Towne, and burned them, and themselues, before they would yeeld to the Romanes, in the sight of Sci∣pio, who with teares bewayled the vnfortunate estate, and lamentable ende of Carthage, burning before his face, for the space of seuenteene dayes, saying to Po∣lybius, Veniet illa dies qua Troia nostra peribit. After all this seruice of Scipio, hee dyed banni∣shed out of Rome, as Hannibal died out of Affrica. In Rome after Scipio, beganne Marius to be great, and so great, that he was chosen seuen seuerall times Con∣sull Marius se∣uen times Consul in Rome. of Rome, vnder this Marius, serued Lu. Sylla, a young gallant Captaine, and grew by degrees in Rome so great, that he went against fifteene Generalls of his enemies, who had foure hundred and fiftie Ensignes of footemen, well armed in the field against him, as Syl∣la himselfe reporteth it in his Commentaries written to Lucullus, but he wanne the victorie. This time said Carbos words of Sylla. Carbo, the head and chiefe of all Marius faction, the onely enemie of Sylla, that Sylla was lyke a Foxe to deceiue his enemies, and like a Lyon to fight with his enemies.
Sylla fought with captaines of greatest power and ouercame them. What king liuing then in the East was of such power as Mithridates, of such courage as Lampo∣nius, of such stoutnesse as Telestinus the Samnite? This Sylla after the ouerthrow of these three, by force of arms got many victories in Asia and in Greece, and became as Sylla and Marius the fire-brands of Italy. great as Marius was in Rome: and they both grewe so great, that one could not abide the name of the other: hence grew factions and partakings in Rome, betweene Sylla and Marius by ciuill warres; That as the Giliadites suffered not one Ephraimite to passe ouer Iorden, that could not pronounce Shchiboleth, so none might liue in Shchiboleth. Rome, but those whom Sylla either spake vnto, or Marius reacht his hand vnto. Such was the hatred betweene them both, that Rome could not containe Sylla and Ma∣rius, together at one time, no more then Rome could en∣dure Pompey and Caesar, and yet in the midst of their ci∣uil wars, Marius saued Syllas life against Sulpitius minde, but Marius and his sonne were after ouerthrowne by Sylla. So Caesar saued Brutus life in the battell of Pharsalia, against Mar. Antonius will, but Brutus was one of the chiefe conspirators that kild Caesar in the Senate house. So Brutus saued Mar. Antonius life, at that time when Caesar was slaine in the Senate against Cassius will. But Brutus. Mar. Antonius neuer gaue Brutus ouer vntill he slue him at the battell of Philippus. And thus Marius was ouer∣throwne by Sylla, whose life he saued. So was Caesar slain by Brutus, whose life Caesar saued: and Brutus by Mar. Antonius, whose life Brutus saued. But after Sylla & Marius rage was past, Pompey, which Sertorius called Syllas boye, when Pompey was a young captaine vnder Sylla in Affrica, this young captain Syllas
boy, subdued all Sertorius captaines, Marius, Carinna, Caelius, and Brutus. After them, Pompey ouerthrew Scypio the Consul, and after Scypio, Carbo, who had bene three times Consul in Rome. After that Pompey had subdued all Sertorius captains, and at last Sertorius himselfe, he tooke king Iarbas, who The martiall exploits of Pompey. fought on Domitius side, one of Sertorius captaines, and brought him prisoner to Rome in his triumph. So that within fortie dayes, Pompey ouercame all the Marians, which tooke Marius part, which were ene∣mies to Sylla, subdued Affrike, and established all the af∣faires of all the kings and kingdomes of all that country, that Sylla named him Pompey the great. Yet Sylla sawe Pompeys greatnesse growe on so fast, that he went about to hinder Pompeys triumphes: which Pompey spake to Syl∣las face, that men honour more the sunne rising then the sunne setting. Pompey hauing bene neither Praetor, Consul, or Se∣nator, had his triumph granted him against the lawe, when he was but 24. yeares of age. Pompey gaue an other ouerthrow to Sertorius cap∣taines, at a set battel hard by the citie of Valentia, slew ten thousand men of Sertorius souldiers, and at that battell The victory of Pompey as Valentia. Pompey slew Herennius and Perpenna, both notable soul∣diers, and Sertorius Lieftenants, and so obtained the vic∣torie, and ended all this warre, for the most part of Serto∣rius captaines were slaine in the field at that battell. Yet had Pompey his hands full with Sertorius at the battell of Lauron, a noble and valiant captaine on Mari∣us side, and one that galled Pompey more then all the rest, for Pompey could do no good though hee sawe the citie of Lauron burnt before his face, where Sertorius shewed himselfe a most skilfull and valiant captaine.
In like sort at the battell hard by the Riuer Sucron, Pompey had his hands full with Sertorius, where Pompey was forced to take his horse, and driuen from his horse, The battell at Sucron. to flye, and in his flight to forsake his horse, & to take his feete, and to leaue his horse for a pray to Sertorius Affri∣cans souldiers, being so rich a spoile to stay the enemies, who fought for the horse, and let Pompey goe. The Gaules hauing a great battell to fight with At∣talus king of Asia, deliuered all their gold and siluer to be kept, that if they were driuen to flye, they should scatter the gold and siluer vpon the way, that by staying the e∣nemies Front. lib. 2. cap. 13. to gather vp the gold & siluer so dispersed, they themselues might escape. The like stratagem vsed Mithridates king of Pontus, to saue himselfe, who fled from the enemies that follo∣wed hard after him, who left a Mule laden with golde Mithridates stratagems and others. and siluer, a bootie which Mithridates knew would please the Romanes, to stay them, and to saue himselfe from Lucullus souldiers. So did Triphon king of Syria (to escape from king An∣tiochus horsemen) scattered money euery where on the Triphon. way, to stay Antiochus souldiers that Triphon might escape, so did Alaricus king of the Goates and others, saue themselues by the like policies. Fewe great captaines hardly escaped with their liues from diuers dangers and perils. Sylla hardly escaped from Telesinus at the battell of Antemna, and Caesar himselfe after he had lost 32. En∣signes, Antemna. & a thousand of his best souldiers, escaped hard∣ly the hand of Pompey at Dirachium, and after in the bat∣tell Dyrachium. at Munda in Affrica, from the Pompeyans.
CHAP. V. Of Pirrhus warre against the Romanes, of diuers stratagems, of the marchings of diuers nations, of the ouerthrow of Torquine last king ouer the Romanes, of the praise of Porsenna and Mutius Scaeuola. PIrrhus the great captaine in the battell hard by the riuer Siris, after he had gi∣uen to Leuinus the Consull, a great o∣uerthrow Pirrhus. before, and made vp a tro∣phey in the temple at Tarentum to Iu∣piter, yeelding thanks for his victories, being demaunded of the Tarentines to haue one battell more with the Romanes, sith he had subdued the Romanes in two battels before, he answe∣red: If I stay to giue the third battell to the Romanes, I shal haue neuer a souldier to return from Italy to Epyre. Thus Pompey vnder Sylla, Sylla vnder Marius, Mari∣us vnder Scypio, and Scypio vnder his father, whom hee rescued in the battell at Canne from the Affricans, as A∣lexander the great rescued his father Philip at the battell at Cheronea, being but eighteene yeares of age, as Scypio was, when he rescued his father at Canne. While Pompey flourished in Rome after Syllas death, that all the Romane Empire rung out Pompeys fame. Caesar practised among the Gaules his secret ambitiō, which was such, that he went as a Romane captain with his army far from Rome, to practise his stratagems, where he conquered the Gaules with the weapons of the Ro∣manes, Caesars am∣bition against Rome. and wonne the Romanes with money of the Gaules, fewe in Rome knew this, but such as he fed with money in Rome to be his friends.
Hence grew the malice and enuie betwneene Pom∣pey and Caesar, for Pompey could not abide his equall in Rome, nor Caesar his superiour. Plut. in Caesare. Caesar was suspected to be confederate with Cateline in his conspiracie, not onely to ouerthrow the state of the Common-wealth, but also to destroy the whole Empire of Rome, for the which cause Cato and Piso fell out with Cicero, for that hee then beeing Con∣sull, had not bewrayed Caesar, when Cicero well might Plut. in Ci∣cero. haue done it, for many sawe the greatnesse of Caesar farre from Rome before hee came to Rome, they sawe his courage and minde to bee inuincible, his marti∣all skill to bee singular, that such was his conquests o∣uer the Gaules in tenne yeares, that hee tooke aboue eight hundred Townes, and hauing such an infinite number of enemies, of thirtie hundred thousand soul∣diers, Gaules, Germaines, Teutons, and diuers others, he slew of them at seuerall times aboue tenne hundred thousand. So that Caesars praise, his warres, his battels, his victo∣ries, Caesars praise. and conquests, had excelled all the strongest kings and princes of Europe, had he not onely shewed him∣selfe an enemie to his Countrey in the battell at Pharsa∣lia, where Pompey the great, the Senators, and the most part of the noble men of Rome were slain, ouerthrowne, and taken. Had Caesar bene in the time of Hanibal, of whom Scypio demanded, who had bene, and were the greatest captaines of the world, to whom he answered, Alexan∣der Scipios de∣maund of Hannibal. was the first, Pirrhus the second, and Hanibal him∣selfe the third. Then Scypio demaunded of Hanibal, what if Hanibal had subdued Scypio? Hee aunswered that then Hanibal should not haue bene the second, nor
the third, but the first. For what Pirrhus could not bring to passe in foure yeares, nor Hannibal in seuēteen yeares, Caesars cele∣ritie in his victories. that could Caesar bring to passe within threescore dayes, he was Lord of all Italy, Emperour of Rome, and con∣querour of all the Romane Empire, and therefore wor∣thily to be preferred before Pirrhus or Hannibal, had he spared his countrey. Such was the celeritie of Caesars victories, ouer Phar∣naces king of Pontus, at the battell by the citie of Zela, that hee wrote but three words to his friend Anitus to Rome, from Pontus, Veni, vidi, vici. Againe, he tooke three campes in one day, and slue fiftie thousand of his enemies, and lost but fiftie of his souldiers for all the force of king Iuba, Cato, Scipio, and Affranius. The souldiers of Epaminondas, perceiuing that the winde blew away the labell, which hangd as an orna∣ment about Epaminondas speare, and lighted vpon the graue of a dead Lacedemonian, at the which sight the Thaebans were so frighted, vntill Epaminondas said vnto them merily, Ah worthie souldiers, this signifieth the Epaminon∣das strata∣geme. ouerthrowe of the Lacedemonians, and forewarneth them of their buriall. These wise stratagemes by noble captaines, were to remoue feare and terrour from soul∣diers mindes, which were so superstitious at the sight of any toy to doubt of victories. Scipio Affrican sayling from Italy into Affrica, at his going out of his ship had a fall, which not a litle moued the souldiers, who tooke it for a signe of no good lucke, Front. lib. 1. cap. 12. hee perceiuing by his souldiers that they were amazed and astonished at his fall, spake vnto them presently with a merrie countenance and said; Ludite milites, Affricans oppressi, Be merrie souldiers I haue ouercome Affricke,
and so by this stratagem he turned their doubts & feare into boldnesse and stoutnesse. As Scipio spake Affricam oppressi, I ouercame Affrike, so likewise we may speake through Christ that eternall Scipio & staffe of saluatiō, who ouercame not only Affri∣ca, but the whole world, & the prince of the same Satā. The very like chaunce happened to Caesar, who as he went to take shipping, had the like lucke as Scipio had, and least his souldiers should thinke it a signe of hard lucke, he vsed this stratageme, imbraced the earth fast and saide; Terra, te teneo mater, which was interpreted by his soothsayers that he should conquer many lands and countries through victories. Caesar after all his great fortunes and victories which Caesar was in 52. pitcht fields. he had in two and fiftie pitcht fields and set battels, en∣tered with his last tryumph of Ouation, after foure great tryumphes had before ouer forraigne enemies, being Consul, Dictator, and Emperour, by his sword, made a kinde of tryumphe of Ouation from mount Albanus to the Capitoll, fiue moneths before the Ides of March, which time Spurnia the soothsayer willed Caesar to take heede of, at what time Caesar was slaine in the Senate house. This was not to be called a tryumphe, because it was done in the time of ciuill discord, for that in ciuill warres among the Romanes, it was decreed by the Se∣nate, No triumphs in ciuil wars at Rome. that no Romane might tryumphe ouer another Romane, so it was also among the Thaebans, Epami∣nondas might not tryumphe ouer the Lacedemonians for his victorie at Leuctres. Sylla might not tryumphe ouer Marius, neyther Caesar ouer Pompey, nor Octauius ouer Mar. Antonius. Yet Caesar against the lawe tryumphed, and carried
the pictures of Cato, Petronius, & others, but refused to carry the picture of Pompey, because hee knew it would offend many of the Romains, and the rather for that Cae∣sar gaue his daughter Iulia in marriage to Pompey. Caesar after these his conquests, was named the first Emperour of Rome, the Romanes hauing had before seuen kings, which ruled two hundred and fiftie yeares, after kings Consulls, which continued fiue hundred yeares. For Valerius Publicola, the first Consul after the The battell betweene Torquine and Publi∣cola. kings, in the battell betweene the wood called Arsia Syl∣ua, and the meadowe Aesuuia, where two and twentie thousand & sixe hundred Romanes were slaine, where Torquine the proud was ouerthrowne. In this battell Brutus one of the Consuls died, who not by chaunce, but of set purpose, sought to encounter with Aruns, king Torquines eldest sonne, to execute the deadly malice they bare each other, that fighting so de∣sperately with such furie that one killed another dead at once. The first tryumphe of Publicola being the first Con∣sul: he had this libertie graunted him, that the doore of his house should open outwards into the streete, which was neuer seene in Rome before: but the greatnesse of this fauour came from Greece to Rome, and Publicola had the first honours and libertie thereof, and the first The first fu∣nerall Ser∣mō in Rome. funerall sermon that euer was in Rome, was made by Publicola for Brutus his fellow Consul slaine in this bat∣tell. So that the name of Torquines was as odious in Rome, as the name of Tyrants, that the Romanes ne∣uer suffered any King to gouerne after Torquine the proude, neither could they abide euer after the name of a king. In the second battell that Torquine prepared to re∣couer
his kingdome, hee went to the citie Clusiu, and had king Porsenna to promise him his aide, in whose behalfe, he sent his Herauld straight to summon the Ro∣manes to receiue their king, but being by the Romanes stoutly refused, Porsenna proclaimed open warres, in the which warres, after much slaughter of the Romanes, Porsenna. the citie of Rome had bene taken, and Torquine restored again to his kingdom, had not Horatius Cocles, and the noble act of Mutius Scaeuola bene, who had determined fully to kill king Porsenna, and missing the king, kild the Mutius Scaeuoa. next vnto him, supposing him to be the king: which be∣ing reprehended therefore and tortured, holding his armes in flames of fire, spake boldly vnto king Porsennas face, that there were three hundred Romanes sworne to do the like enterprise as he did, and had sworne Por∣sennas death, which made him to forsake Torquine, and Torquine to forsake Rome, and to liue as a banished pri∣uate man fourteen yeares after, expelled from his king∣dome. The Romanes in memorie of these enterprises cau∣sed two Images made of brasse to be set vp in the temple of Vulcan, to honour the name of Mutius Scaeuola, and Horatius Clocles. Thus was Torquinius Superbus the last king of the Romains, for the rauishment of Lucretia Collatinus wife, put from his kingdome, and all the kings of Rome after Torquine driuen from Rome. him. And after the kings, the ouerthrow of the ten Com∣missioners called Decemuiri, for the like offence by Ap∣pius Clau. to Virginea, a Romane virgin, so that the kings of Rome lost their kingdomes for the rauishment of Col∣latinus wife, and the Decemuiri lost their place and offi∣ces for the rauishment of Virgineus daughter. Decemuiri.
Therefore the glory and fame of the Romans grew by the Consuls, which increased more and more vntill Caesars time, who because he was denied the place of a Caesar. Consul with their good will, he became an Emperour against their will. We leaue the Romanes thus mar∣ching, from Kings to Consuls, from Consuls to Empe∣rours; from Emperours without an Empire, and will speake of the marching of other kingdomes. The Scythians marched into Asia, and wanne ma∣ny great victories, possessed many strong Forts, gaue di∣uers The mar∣ching of the Scythians. battels to the Egiptians & the Persians, and builded many cities in diuers places, as well in Greece as in Asia, to whom Asia paied tribute for fifteene yeares. So marched likewise the Saracens into Affrick, where Saracens. they had so many great victories, that they wanne and possessed the most part of Hispaine vnder their gouern∣ment, welnigh eight hundred yeares. So the Turkes marched into Europe, and got the Em∣pire The Turkes. of Constantinople out of the Romanes hands, to the lamentable losse of many countries, prouinces, and ci∣ties: so the Turkes marched vpon the Romanes, as the Romanes marched vpon others. Cyrus the great king of Persia, hauing an hundred Cyrus. and seuen and twentie prouinces, after his conquest of many kingdomes and nations, marched with two hun∣dred thousand Persians to be slaine in Scythia, and that by a woman: so Cyrus lost Persia, seeking to winne Scy∣thia, and lost his life to get more landes. Zerxes marching into Greece with such an innume∣rable Zerxes. armie, that they dranke and dried vp many riuers, as Scamander in Thessalia, the riuer Simois in Phrygia, Cli∣dorus in Beotia, Lysus in Samothracia, & the riuer Menalia by Hellespont: yet he came from Greece home, to be mur∣thered
by Mardonius his seruant, in his owne kingdom. Alexander the great hauing subdued the most parts of the world, he also for want of men marched to India Alexander the great. to fight with Elephants; and returned from India to Ba∣bilon, where he was poysoned by his owne seruants. Many such crooked marchings, were as well among the Iewes, as among the Gentiles. Saul the first king of Israel marched not as he ought Saul. to haue done, against Agag king of the Amalekites, and therefore was he slaine with his three sonnes, in the bat∣tell at mount Gilboa by the Philistines. Ieroboam marched not rightly to the battel in mount Iboam. Zemaraim, against Abiah king of Iudah; and therfore fiue hundred thousand Israelites were slaine of his soldiers. The most part of the kings of Israel, because I need not to name, as Acha, Manasses, Zedechiah, & the rest, & ma∣ny of the kings of Iudah, for that they marched not in the path of the Lord, but followed Ieroboā, which made Israel to sinne, and therefore marched with Ieroboa to their destruction. These marched not with Moses, who said to the God of Israel, We will not goe hence, if thou goe not before vs. Nor with king Dauid, who would take no warre in The mar∣ching of the Lorde his aptaines. hand before he had consulted with the Lord. Nor with Gedeon, who would not goe to any battell vnlesse the Lord had giuen him a signe before he went▪ so the cap∣taines of the Lorde marched no where, attempted no warre or battell without consulting with the Lorde by Vrim & Thummim, or with some Prophet of the Lord. The Gentiles likewise would take no warre in hand without consulting with their Oracles, as the Romains besought the gods of Carthage, promising them Tem∣ples, Altars, sacrifices & feasts, if they would forsake Car∣thage
and come to Rome: and therfore the Gentiles were so superstitious and blinde, that in many countries they would binde the Images of Hercules and Mars, lest they Hercules and Mars. should forsake them and goe to other nations their ene∣mies, for no doubt it should seeme, that either they read or heard of Moses bookes, how the Lord forsooke the Israelites, and gaue them ouer to the Canaanites; Phili∣stines, and other nations about them, and how the Arke was taken frō them by the Philistines. Here hence grew the blindnesse of the Gentiles, that the Arke being taken away from Israel, they feared also lest their gods should be either allured by faire promises, or taken away by strength of victories. CHAP. VI. Of the maner and forme of vowes, as well of the Iewes as of the Gentiles for their victories in warres. A Bigail Nabals wife, vsed a policie to please Dauid, fea∣ring Gee. 32. least Dauid would be reuenged vpon her hus∣band for his churlish deniall of reliefe to him and to his company, went after Dauid with victualls, gifts and re∣wards, and pleased him with faire words, as Iacob plea∣sed Stratag his brother Esau, who vsed the like stratagem to win his brother Esau, to send him gifts and rewards to please his brother, whom he much feared, for Esau promised to kill his brother Iacob when his father should die. For Iacob the Patriarke made a vow, when he went to Mesopotamia after his vision in Luz, which thē Iacob na∣med The vow of Iacob. Bethel, and said, If God be with me, and helpe me this iourney, and will giue me bread to eate, and cloaths to put on, he vowed of all things that the Lord would giue him, that he would giue the tenth vnto the Lord.
Iacobs vow is farre more godly then Absolons vow, for Iacob sought but bread to eate, and cloaths to put on, and safe reture againe from Mesopotamia ouer Iorden, but rebellious Absolon sought the kingdome of Israel from his father Dauid, by a dissembling vowe, saying; I Arebelli∣ous vowe of Abslon. will goe and performe my vowes, which I vowed vnto the Lorde in Hebron; which vowe, he made his father the king beleeue that hee vowed in Ieshur in Syria, that if the Lord would bring him to Ierusalem he would per∣forme his vowes in Hebron, this is a rebellious vow, like to the wicked vowes of the Iewes, which vowed before they would either eate or drinke to kill Paul. The Israelites after they were ouerthrowne in a great battell by Arad king of the Canaanites, they vowed vn∣to the Lorde, that if the Lorde would giue Arad and Nom. 21. the Canaanites into theyr handes, that they would truely ferue the Lorde, and destroy the Canaanites, theyr landes, and theyr cities. They bound the Lord to so many conditions, that if they should obtaine victories, they promised him true seruice, and to fight manfully against the Cananites. And againe for another victory that the Lord gaue them against the Canaanites, they vowed the tenth, and The vow of the Israe∣lites. performed their vowe, the Hebrewes wanted no victo∣ries vpon their obedience & dutiful seruice to the Lord. Iephtha in his wares against the Ammonites, vowed vnto the Lord, if he should haue victory ouer the Am∣monites, Iudg. cap. 11. that whatsoeuer first met him at his returne from his victory, comming out of his house, should be a sacrifice vnto the Lord. Asa king of Iudah vowed vnto the Lord, as Abiah The vowe of king Asia. his father did, when Shesac king of Egipt came with an infinite number. Asa and all Iudah made a couenant to
seeke the Lord, promised & sware, that they that sought ot the Lord, small or great, man or woman, should die; this with an oath he vowed, that Iudah reioyced for the victory they had ouer Zerah king of Aethiope, with all his army of tenne hundred thousand. Ionas a Prophet of the Lord, when he fled from Ni∣niuie to Tharsis, being in danger of shipwracke, he tolde the Marriners that he was the cause of the perillous tem∣pest, Ion. and willed the Marriners to throwe him into the sea, confessing the lot fell iustly vpon him, saying, I will performe the vow which I promised vnto the Lord. So Anna vowed vnto the Lord, and said, that if the Lord would bestowe a man childe vpon her, she would Annas vow, Samuels mo∣ther. giue him vnto the Lord, and she vowed that neither ra∣zor or sheares should come vpon his head, and so per∣formed her vow, and brought Samuel her sonne before the Lord. There was nothing so common among the Gentiles also, as vows, as you heard of the Hebrues, of their vows to the gods of Israel, so likewise among the Greekes and the Romanes, vpon any conditions to be performed, they vowed a vow to their gods and Idols. The olde Gaules hauing warres with the Romains, their General Aristonicus vowed vnto Mars a rich massie chaine of gold of the spoiles of the Romans, if he might win the victorie. Flamminius the Consul, & Generall of the Romane army, in the self-same war against Aristonicus, vowed like∣wise, Flammini vow. if he should haue victory, wheras Aristonicus vow∣ed but one chaine vnto Mars, Flamminius promised all the chaines that the Gaules had, & to put vp a trophey, and to hang their swords, weapons, and armors, vpon the trophey, to honor Mars.
In like sort Marius, & Cai. Luctatius, Consuls of Rom; and Generals in the warres against the Cymbrians, lif∣ted vp both their hands to heauen. Marius promised and The vow of Marius. vowed a solemne sacrifice vnto the gods of an hundred oxen; and the other Consul Luct. vowed to build a tem∣ple vnto Fortune, if the Romanes might haue victorie ouer the Cymbrians. At the last battell of Thrasymen, Fabius vowed being Dictator elected, against Hanibal, and promised to sacri∣fice all the profits & fruits that should fall the next yeare, of sheep, of sowes, of melch kine, & of goates, betweene Fabius Max. vow. the Calends of March, and the Ides of May, in all the mountaines, champion countries, riuers, or meadowes of Italy; & also vowed to build places of musicke, to haue victory ouer Hanibal: such were the wicked & Idolatrous vowes of the Gentiles; that theyneither spared land, life, nor liuing, to please their goddes, they would haue no warres, no battels, without consultations with oracles, or conference with sooth sayes, for they thought all vic∣tories came by performing, or not performing of vows. The Athenians hearing of the innumerable army of Xerxes, comming with such terror vnto Greece, they sent The vow of the Atheniās to Aeolus. to Delphos, from whence they were admonished by the oracle of Appollo, to erect vp an aultar to Aeolus, & there∣vpon to sacrifice with prayers and vowes, to please the windes, to plague the Persians, to scatter and ouerthrow the infinite nauies of Xerxes. The Greekes and the Romanes vsed a vowe called Haecatombae, in the which they builded an hundred aul∣tars, wherevpon they offered to the gods a hundred ox∣en, a hundred sheepe, & a hundred swine, & sometimes The vowe called Hae∣catombae. the Dictators & Emperors of Rome, the kings & generals of Greece, added a hundred Lions, & a hundred Eagles, to make their vowes (as they supposed) of greater effect;
this was chiefly done for the preseruation of kings and kingdomes, Emperours and Empires. So Augustus Caesar would needs goe to Delphos to learne of Appollo, who should raigne after him in Rome, and what should become of the Empire, bestowing the liberall sacrifice of Haecatombae; was answered by Appollo, Suidus in Vi∣ta Augusti. that an Hebrue child was borne, who commanded him to silence, and to giue no Oracles, but willed the Empe∣rour Augustus to depart with silence from his aultar, and to hold with the people his credit. So Saul being reiected from the Lord for his disobe∣diēce, spake to Samuel, yet honor me before the people. So rebellious Absolon, ro disgrace his father, and to please the people, wished that he were a Iudge, for that the people wanted a lawe, to minister vnto them iustice. Many such rebellious & ambitious mē are in the world, which vow many things in their harts, much like to Ha∣milcar, who caused his sonne Hanibal, being but a boy of Hanibals oath. eight yeares old, to make a vow, & to take his oath to be an enemy, & to hold wars with the Romans during life. It was the maner among the Romaines when they made choise of their Consuls, to goe vp to the Capitoll, and after sacrifice done, there to vow building of tem∣ples, of aultars, and the decimation of the spoiles gotten by victories. So Lucullus did promise and vow to Hercules for his Lucullus. victories at the riuers of Rindacus and Granicus. So Pausanias general of the Lacedemonians, vowed Pausanias. to Appollo for his victories at Marathon against Mardonius. These vowes were so many and so diuers among the Gentiles, that the husbandman vowed to Tellus for the seed sowne in the earth, and the fruite thereof, to Silua∣nus for their oxen and kine, to Hippona for their horses and mares, to Castor and Pollux for their shipwrackes,
for labourers to Tutanus, for shepheards to Pa; for ∣uellers on long iournies to Hercules, for theeues to steale safely to the goddesse Lauerna. Thus the Gentiles serued and obeyed their Idols, with vowes and sacrifices, but as apes do counterfeit to imitate men, so Satan would Seuerall vowes. seeme to imitate the Lord. Such fond and foolish vowes were vsed among the Gentiles, that if the Athenians would haue victory ouer the Thraciās, Erictheus the king must sacrifice his daugh∣ter; a stratagem of Satan. If Agamemnon would haue sound returne from Troy Stratagems of Satan. to Greece, he must sacrifice Iphigenia his daughter, or if Marius would haue triumph ouer the Cymbrians, hee mustkil & sacrifice his daughter Calfurnia; the very drifts and shifts of the diuell, & the oracles of Satan; & there∣fore in many countries they would binde their Idols with chaines and bonds. So did they in Carthage binde the Image of Hercules with chaines & bonds, least (when the Romaines made their supplications and prayers to Hercules) hee should forsake Carthage and come to Rome. In wicked men oftentimes the word of God is in their mouthes, when the grace of God is not in theyr hearts, as in Balaam, who came with his full good will to Philos speech of the wicked Balaac to curse Israel, but he was commaunded against his will to blesse Israel; and therefore that which Philo saith is true, of the wicked, Dona dei sine deo saepe sunt in impijs; for oftentimes false Prophets prophesie the truth, as Balaam and Cayphas did. Satan stands alwaies among the Angels before the Lord, to haue licence with his present seruice to seeke whom he may deuour, so that Satan is often a lying spi∣rit in the mouth, (not onely of false Prophets) but a∣gainst
the seruants of God, as Iob, who, though Satan tooke from him his seruants, his children, & his goods, yet his malice chiefly was against Iob; such stratagems he vsed before against the seruants of the Lord, as Abra∣ham, Moses, Dauid, and others. There is an other kinde of vow of the Nazarites, whose vowes were but for certaine number of dayes, of moneths, or of yeares: these Nazarites should abstaine onely from wine, or from any strong drink, they should let their haires grow, and let no razor come on it, they The vowes of the Naza∣rites. should not violate themselues with any mourning for the dead: yet Samuel being a Nazarite, mourned for Saul, Ieremy being a Nazarite, wept for the captiuitie of Iudah; and Christ himselfe the true Nazarite, wept for the citie of Ierusalem. The Monasticall vowes of Monkes, Benedics, Fran∣ciscans, and Dominics, who would faine be Nazarites, but that they loued wine too well, and shaued theyr Monasticall vowes. crownes too often: for they seperated themselues from the world, vowed virginitie, & yet had bastards, vowed many things, & performed nothing. These were super∣stitious orders of Franciscans, and not the vowes of Na∣zarites. The Ethnicks likewise suffered their haires to grow, because they might dedicate it either to Iupiter, to Ap∣pollo, to Mars, or to some of their gods. So did Thesius dedicate his haire vnto Appollo, vpon Thesius. his father Aegaeus graue. So Achilles dedicated his haire vpō the tombe of his Achilles. deare friend Patroclus. So did Orestes consecrate his haire vpon the tombe Orestes. of his father in lawe Agamemnon, after he had killed him with the consent of his wife Clytemnestra.
So Euripides was of Archelaus king of Macedonia so honoured, that hee lamented Euripides death in mour∣ning apparell, and with a shauen head and beard. After the vowes of Iacob, of Dauid, of Asa, and such godly men, after the vowes of the Nazarites, and of the Rechabites, which was commanded from Ionadab the father vnto his children, and to their posteritie, was kept vnuiolated three hundred yeares. These vowes were of The Recha∣bites vowes. the Lord accepted; but for Heathen vowes, which wil∣fully offer & sacrifice their seruants, their childrē, & thē∣selues, to Moloch, to satisfie the oracles of diuels, speaking in dumbe Idols, as vnto Curtius that rode sacrificing of a quick man, which made Curtius on horseback in armor, to ride into an open wide gulfe in Rome, and Codrus king of Athens likewise in beggers apparell, to sacrifice them∣selues to satisfie the oracles. Yet Heliodorus was better aduised, and more to be commended, being sent by Se∣leucus Heliodorus. king of Syria, to rob and spoile the Temple of Ie∣rusalem, after he was scourged on both sides with many 2. Mac. 3. cap. stripes by some diuine power, hauing recouered his life by the prayer of Onias the high Priest, Heliodorus of∣fered sacrifice vnto God, and made his vowes vnto the Lord, which had graunted to him his life, and thanked Onias, confessing the name of the Lord to be great in Ie∣rusalem. Antiochus after his flight frō Persepolis in Persia, thought to reuenge his wrath vpon Ierusalem, aduancing himself, Antiochus. that he would make Ierusalem a graue of all the Iewes; 2. Mac. cap. 9. but he was striken of the Lord, that hee promised and vowed (that whereas hee had spoiled the holy temple before) now to garnish it with gifts, to encrease the holy ornaments, to become a Iew himselfe, and to preach the power of the Lord, through euery place of the world.
So Artaxerxes king of Persia so fauoured the Iewes through the goodnesse of the Lord, that hee called Es∣dras the Priest, and reader of the lawe of the Lord, and Artax. 3. Esdar. ca. . willed him with all the Iewes that would goe with him, to goe to Ierusalem, allowed them golde, and siluer, and The fauour of the kings of Persia to the Iewes. cattell, to sacrifice vnto the Lord, and to performe the vowes which they vowed vnto the Lord. So Nabuchodonozer, Cyrus, and Darius, were moued by the Lord to fauour his people Israell. And therefore olde Homer said, that the sacrifices and oblations, with all their vowes and ceremonies which the Troians offered to Iupiter, were nothing of him accepted, for that Iupiter rather esteemed the vowes and sacrifice of Agamemnon, and the oblations of the Greckes before king Priamus and his Troians. So the oracle of Ammon answered the Athenians, The oracles of Ammon. that the gods esteemed more the vowes and prayers of the Lacedemonians, with the sacrifice of milke, honey, frankincense, cakes, and wine, (according to Pythagoras rule) then the rich spoiles and great gifts of the Atheni∣ans, with the great sacrifice of Haecatombae. So the Prophet answered the Iewes from the mouth of the Lord, I abhorre your incense, I cannot away with The saying of the Prophet. your new moones, your sabbothes and solemne dayes I detest, your ceremonies and fastings I hate, although you make many praiers, and offer many oblations, yet do I neither heare your prayers, nor accept your oblati∣ons.
CHAP. VII. Of Oracles and soothsayings, as well of the Iewes as of the Gentiles. THe Lord commaunded in the lawes of Moses, that no soothsaying should be a∣mong the Israelites, yet things contei∣ning of necessary causes, are not for∣bidden, for signes were asked of the Israelites, and giuen vnto them of vic∣tories by the Lord. Ionathas desired a signe of the Lord, and he had by the spirit of the Lord a token, that if the Philistins would say vnto Ionathas, come ye hither vnto vs, Ionathas by that Ionathas. signe knew he should haue victorie. The like signe was giuen to Gedeon of his victorie, by Sam. lib. 1. cap. 14. a fleece of wooll, that should be so full with deawe, that the deawe therof filled a bowle with water, and drie vp∣on Indic. cap. 6. all the earth besides. Elizeus bad Ioas shoote eastward in token of his good Signes of victories giuē frō the Lord. successe in Aphec. And againe hee bad Ioas smite the ground, and hee smote the ground thrise, so many great victories against the Syrians he had. Samuel caught the lap of Sauls coate and rent it, say∣ing: 2. Reg. cap. 13 Thus shall God rent the kingdome out of thy hand Sam. 15. and giue it to an other. So did Ahiah the Prophet take the garment of Ierobo∣am, and rent it into twelue peeces, saying: So shall the 1. Reg. 11. Signes giuen by the Pro∣phets. Lord rent the kingdome out of Salomons hand, and giue tenne of the twelue Tribes vnto thee. These were signes giuen before hand by the Prophets from the Lord. A prophet of Iudah came to Bethel, and cried against the Aultar of Bethel, and gaue them a signe that Iosias 3. Reg. cap. 13
which was borne three hundred yeares after, should of∣fer Priests of the hill altars, and burne mens bones vpon the altar, and this shall be a signe, the altar presently shall rent, and the ashes that are in it shall fall out. The being of Ionas in the Whales belly three dayes, Ionas in the whales belly. was a signe, as Christ himselfe saide, that the sonne of man should be three dayes in the belly of the earth. It was lawfull for the Israelites to call for the Arke, which was the presence of God & the figure of Christ, they would call for the Ephod, they would consult with Vrim and Thummim, before they tooke any battell in hand. The Iewes required a signe, the Grecians sought after wisdome, but Christ crucified vnto the Iewes, was euen a stumbling blocke, and vnto the Grecians foo∣lishnesse. For the Greekes & Persians went for Oracles to Delphos, the Egiptians and Affricans to Ammon, but the Hebrewes were taught to come to the doore of the Tabernacle, and after the vse of the Tabernacle, to con∣sult The He∣brewes con∣sulted with Urim and Thummim. with Vrim and Thummim, to come to the Temple of Salomon, or to the Prophets, and there to be instruc∣ted what to doo. The Hebrues tooke no warres in hand, vnlesse they ame to the Priest first, who would stand with his Ephod rment before the Arke of the Lorde, and there to be ught what to do. So Ioshuah Generall of the Israelites, vsed to stand Nom. 22. and 27. bre Eleazar the Priest, to take his instruction by Vrim and Thummim. So Iudah the successor of Ioshua, was chosen by Vrim Iudah. and Thummim, to be a Generall of the Hebrue army. So did Samuel stand before the high Priest to receiue he Oracle of Vrim and Thummim.
The Hebrewes were instructed by the word of the Lord in the mouth of the Prophet, or else they were an∣swered at the mercy seate, or counselled by Vrim and Thummim. So soothsayings & oracles were so had in reuerence among the Gentiles, that nothing should be taken in Superstiti∣ousnesse of the Gentiles. hand, neither in peace, nor in warres, without consul∣ting with the soothsayers and oracles. So that at any Eclipse of the Moone, the Romanes would take their brazen pots & pannes, and beat them, lifting vp many Torches and Linckes lighted, and fire∣brandes into the aire, thinking by these superstitious Veget. lib. 4. cap. 42. meanes, to reclaime the Moone to her light. So the Macedonians were as superstitious as the Romanes were at any Eclipse of the Moone. Nothing terrified the Gentils more in their warres then the Eclipse of the Sunne and the Moone. The like vsed the Thracians, when it thunders they take theyr bowes and arrowes, and shoote vp to the cloudes against the thunder, imagining by theyr shooting to driue the thunders away. Cabrias the Generall of Athens, beeing readie to strike a battell on sea, it suddenly lightened, which  terrified the souldiers, that they were vnwilling to fig Front. lib. 1. cap. 12. vntill Cabrias said, that now is the time to fight, wh Iupiter himselfe with his lightening doth shewe a sige that he is readie to goe before vs. So Epaminondas, at his going to battell it suddenly lightned, that it so amazed his souldiers, that Epami∣nondas Epaminōdas stratageme. comforted them and saide; Lumen hoc Numina ostendunt, by these lightnings the gods shew vs that we shall haue victories, but we may better say so throug our Lord and Sauiour, then Epaminondas or Cabri
sith we haue the great light of the Gospell to lighten vs and to goe before vs to attempt any warre or to com∣mence any battel against Sathan and his armies, whose will is euer to destroy, though his power cannot. Cuius Gregor. magnus. semper iniqua voluntas licet nunquam iniusta potestas. In Rome, the Dictator, the Consul, the Praetor, and other Magistrates, were to be remoued from their of∣fices, if the soothsayer sawe any occasion by lightning, The Consuls of Rome, and kinges in Sparta, de∣posed. thundering, by remouing of starres, by flying of fowles, by intrailes of beasts, by Eclipse of the Sun & Moone. So that there was a lawe in Sparta, that euery ninth yeare the chiefe magistrates called Ephori would choose a bright night without Moone light, in some open place to behold the starres, and if they had seene any star shoot or moue from one place to another, straight these Ephori accused their kings that they offended the gods, and therby deposed them from their kingdome. So did Lysander depose king Leonidas. So likewise the Romains were perswaded that their ouerthrow at the battels of Thrasimen, Trebeia, and Can∣ne by Hannibal, were, for that they supposed they of∣fended the gods, either in not performing their vowes, or in not doing of sacrifice, or else for the vnskilful∣nesse of theyr Generalls. So did they suppose theyr ouerthrowes by the Cymbrians to be by the vnskilful∣nesse and ouersight of Quin. Scaepio, their Generall, but Quin. Sce∣pio. Ca. Marius. Cai. Marius afterward reuenged the ouerthrowes of the Romaines, with the greatest ouerthrow that euer the Cymbrians had. By these meanes, the Consuls were oftentimes re∣moued & displaced, from their offices of Consulship by the Senators as Varro, Mansinus, Leuinus & others, as the kings, and Generals were in Sparta, by meanes of their
magistrates called Ephori, such sure trust and confidence they had in their soothsayers, that without the counsell of soothsayers in Rome, or the counsell of Magi in Persia, or of the Ephori in Sparta, the kings of Rome, of Persia, and of Sparta, would attempt nothing concerning the state of the countrey. And therfore the Macedonians made a decree that no monument of triumph should be made within their kingdome, for that a Lyon had raised vp a pillar, which The super∣stitions of the Macedoni∣ans and Ro∣manes. was set vp in memorie of a great victory gotten, they thought the gods to be offended with them, and there∣fore the decree was made. So the Romanes after Carthage was destroyed, and after restored againe, when the Romanes had diui∣ded and measured their lands, and limited their meeres and markes by the pole, for the Romaines to inhabite there, for that the marks & limits were bitten & gnawed with wolues, the Romanes paused & staied before they had consulted with Oracles. The first king of Rome Romulus, builded his kingdom by flying of fowles and soothsaying. Soothsaying by flying of fowles. So Numa Pompil. was chosen second king of Rome by flying of fowles. So Torquinius Priscus, an Eagle tooke his cappe from his head, and fled vp on high to the skies, and after des∣cended, and let his cappe fall on his head againe, signi∣fying thereby that he should be king of Rome. Pau Aemilius, Consul and Generall of the Romanes in Macedonia, at what time he sacrificed vnto the gods in the citie of Amphipolis, it lightned, whereby he was per∣swaded, it pretended the ouerthrow of the kingdom of Macedonia, and his great victory and tryumphe of the same at Rome.
Swallowes followed king Cyrus going with his army Swallowes. from Persia to Scythia, as rauens followed Alexander the great returning from India and going to Babilon, but as the Magi tolde the Persians that Cyrus should die in Scythia, so the Chaldean Astrologers told the Macedo∣nians Cyrus and Alexander forewarned of their death by soothsay∣ing. that Alexander the great their king should die in Babilon without any further warrant, but by the Swal∣lowes that followed Cyrus to Scythia, and by the rauens that followed Alexander to Babilon. By Swallowes also lighting vppon Pirrhus Tents, and lighting vpon the mast of Mar. Antonius ship, say∣ling after Cleopatra to Egipt, the soothsayers did prog∣nosticate that Pirrhus should be slaine at Argos in Greece, and Mar. Antonius in Egipt. The Arabians, Carians, Phrygians, and Cilicians, do most religiously obserue the chirping & flying of birds, assuring themselues good or bad euents in their warres. Themistocles was assured of victory ouer king Xerxes Themisto∣cles. and his huge army by crowing of a cocke, going to the battell at Artemisium, the day before the battell began, who hauing obtained so great a victory, gaue a cocke in his ensigne euer after. So Iu. Caesar gaue an elephant in his ensigne, after he had subdued Iuba king of Maurita∣nia. The Lydians, Persians and Thracians, esteeme not soothsaying by birds, but by powring of wine vpon the ground, vpon their cloathes, with certaine superstitious praiers to their gods, that their warres should haue good successe. Pau. Aemilius was assured of victory ouer Persius king Cice. de di∣uinatione. 1. of Macedonia, by a word pronounced by his little girle Tertia, saying to her father that Persius the dog, and her play-fellow was dead.
Aristander the soothsayer in the battell at Arbela, being the last against Darius, was then on horse backe Aristander. hard by Alexander, apparelled all in white, and a crowne of golde vppon his head, encouraging Alexander by the flight of an Eagle the victorie should be his ouer Darius. Both the Greekes, the Romaines, and the Lacedemonians, had theyr soothsayers hard by them in their warres. Alexander the great had not reioyced in his great victorie ouer Darius at Arbela, and his conquests ouer kingdomes and countries, had hee knowne hee should haue bene poysoned in Babilon. Caesar had neuer taken the ciuill warres in hand a∣gainst Pompey the great, had hee knowne that hee should haue beene murthered before Pompeys Image in Rome. Priamus had hee knowne the slaughter of himselfe, his wife, his children, & the last destructiō of Troy his ci∣tie, had not resisted the Greeks, nor denied their lawfull request in restoring Helen: and therefore saide Cicero, Multò melius est nescire futura quam scire, Ignorance is bet∣ter then knowledge of thinges to come: but these had no Ephod, no Vrim & Thummim, nor prophet to tel them of things to come, as Ioshua, Dauid, Gedeon, and others had, and yet Alexander had his soothsayer Aristander, Caesar had Spurina, & Priamus was warned by his daugh∣ter Cassandra, but euer when they escaped one danger, they fell into another, as Iob said; Fugiet impius armafer∣rca Iob. 20. & irruet in arcum aereum. So superstitious grew the Gentils, with such abhomi∣nable Idolatry, that in Persia by a cock, in Egipt by a bull, Superstitious oracles of the Gentiles. in Aethiope by a dog, they tooke soothsaying, in Beotia by a beech tree, in Epyre by an oake, in Delos by a dragō, in
Lycia by a wolfe, in Ammon by a ramme, they receiued their oracles, as their warrant to commence any warre, to enter any battell, or to attempt any enterprise. And therfore Alexander the great went to the oracle at Ammon, to know the successe of his warres in India. And Licurgus went to Delphos, to be instructed to make lawes in in Sparta. Some went to the graue of Amphiraus, sacrificed a The graue of Amphiraus. Ramme, and couered the graue of Amphiraus with that Ramme skinne, and sleeping vpon the same skinne all night, all things should be shewed to them by oracles. But to such men as come to dead mens graues to seek helpe, might be spoken that which Semyramis spake to Darius king of Persia. For Semyramis had written vpon her graue, that what Prince soeuer had wanted money or golde, should open her tombe and be satis∣fied. Darius being greedie of money opened her tombe Darius. and found this sentence written vpon a table, O coue∣tous wretch, vnlesse thou hadst bin an vnsatiable Prince, thou wouldst neuer haue opened the graue of the dead for money. The like was spokē to Xerxes that opened Belus graue, and found nothing but an emptie glasse, with this wri∣ting on a pillar, If any would open Belus graue, and not Xerxes. Aelian. li. 13 fill the emptie glasse with oyle, he should be vnfortu∣nate. Which being read of Xerxes, he willed straight to fil the glasse with oyle, which would hold oyle no more then Belides buckets held water. Xerxes departed sad therefore, imagining some ill lucke to come thereby, as within a while after it came to passe that he was slaine in his owne pallace at Persepo∣lis by Artabanus.
The Prophets of the Lorde, Esai, Ieremy, and the rest, tooke no oracles from flying of fowles, from starres, and such, but from the mouth of the Lord, saying; Thus The oracles of the Pro∣phets. saith the Lorde: giuing more certaine oracles to the Is∣raelites, then the Persians, Egiptians, and Grecians, had by Swallowes, Rauens, Eagles and Cockes. The Prophet Dauids manner was, when he went to any battell, to know of the Lord whether hee should goe or no against the Philistines, Canaanites, and other enemies of the Lord. So the Israelites would take no warre in hand a∣gainst the Beniamites, before they asked counsell of the Lord. When the Moabites denied Ioshua and his army pas∣sage Any strata∣gem in iust warre is lawfull. through the land, Ioshua was commaunded by Mo∣ses to muster a thousand of euery Tribe, and to giue them battell. For it was lawfull in iust warres, to vse any policies, stratagems and snares against the enemie, as Abraham did in rescuing Lot, made after the foure kings, fought with them, ouerthrew them, and brought Lot backe againe to his owne house (where he dwelt) in Zodom. And so Gedeon did to the men of Sucoth, and to the men of Phanuel, for that they denied to giue some bread to relieue his three hundred faintie souldiers, at his re∣turne Gedeon. from the victorie, hee tare the flesh of threescore and seuenteene Elders, and chiefe men of Sucoth with Sucoth. briers and thornes, and brake downe the Tower of Pha∣nuel, and slew the men of the Towne, according to his promise before tolde. But let vs returne to the ora∣cles and soothsayings aswell of the Gentiles as of the Iewes.
The Athenians in euery publike counsell that they tooke in hand, without their Priests called Mantes, were present in place, to sacrifice, and to offer oblations vnto their Idols, nothing should be done among the A∣thenians. Among the Lacedemonians in like manner the au∣thoritie of soothsaying was such, that in all consultati∣ons among the Senators, they would conclude vpon nothing in matters of doubts without warrant frō their The credit of soothsayers among the Gentiles. soothsayers. The credite and existimation of soothsayers was such among the Romanes, that they could dispossesse any Senator from the Senate, any Consull or Praetor from their offices, as is said before: for the soothsayers were called in Rome, Nuntij & interpetres Iouis, the mes∣sengers of Iupiter, and his interpreters. So the latter Iewes serued and sacrificed to the Idols of the Gentiles, neither would they attempt any thing without oracles from Chemosh the Idoll of the Moa∣bites, from Nesroch the Idoll of the Assyrians, and from Dagan the Idoll of the Philistines; & yet Senacherib was slaine praying in the Temple before his owne god Nes∣roch, Idolatry of Israell. by his owne sonnes: and the fiue Lords of the Phi∣listines, at the great feast which they made to their god Dagon, were slaine by the fall of the house where they feasted. Yet Israel would take no example thereby, but forgat the lawe of the Lord, which they obeyed vnder Ioshuah, Iudah, Gedeon, and others, but they would haue new kings, new lawes to gouerne them, an other forme of a common-wealth then the Lord had appointed, and a new kinde of religion to serue straunge gods, other∣wise then the Lord had commanded them, and to seeke helpe and aide of other nations, which the Lord forbad
them, saying: The strength of Pharao shall bee your shame, and your trust to the shadowe of Egipt shall de∣ceiue you, neither the gods whom you serue shall saue you, neither the nations whom you trust vnto shall de∣fend you. As the Ethnikes vsed dreames, lots, prophesies, ora∣cles, soothsayings, and charmes, to instruct them in their warres, so Nabuchodonozer consulted with his oracles, asked counsel of the soothsayers, and obserued the liuer of a beast for the destruction of Ierusalem: but they are cursed in Gods booke, that would vse sorcery, or seeke Ezech. 21. helpe by any other meanes then by the Lord: for what haue the faithfull to do with Infidels, which were for∣bidden to goe to Iupiter at Hammon, or to Appollo at Del∣phos? where the Gentiles came to offer gold, pearles, iewels, chaines, crownes, shields, targets, and Images, to hang there in the temple of Appollo, that Philip king of The rich spoile which Philip had in Delphos. Macedonia at the spoile thereof, had as great a pray, as Alexander his sonne had of Babilon, or Nabuchodonozer of Ierusalem. CHAP. VIII. Of sanctuaries allowed to the Hebrewes, and of the multitude of sanctuaries among the Gentiles. SAnctuaries were priuiledged among all Nations, not onely for souldiers that fled from the warres, and seruants that fled from their maisters, but also for those that by chance kild any man, or had committed such capitall crimes without proofe, these might bee suc∣coured
in sanctuaries vntill the truth were knowne and proued, and therefore the Hebrewes had sixe citties of Sanctuaries allowed by the Lord to the Hebrues refuge by the lawe of Moses, where if any man had slaine vnwittingly or vnwillingly a man, he might flee to any of these sixe Cities, as to a sanctuary of refuge, but they that had killed a man willingly, and had commit∣ted any capitall crime purposely, should not onely be taken away from the sanctuarie, but bee pluckt away from the aultar, as Ioab was for killing of Abner, and A∣donias Ioab and A∣donias taken from sanctu∣aries. though hee pretended treason before against Sa∣lomon, yet had hee the priuiledge of the sanctuarie for that fault by Salomon, but when hee sought to haue Abizaig to his wife, he was pluckt from the Aultar as Io∣ab was. Those that were lawfully succoured by Moses lawe in the sanctuary, it was not lawfull for them that fled thither to returne home, vnlesse it were at the death of the high Priest, which was a shadow of the death of Christ, by whose death the regenerate turne to their e∣ternall home. The Gentiles imitating the Hebrewes, had too many licentious sanctuaries with the like libertie and priuiledge, in so much that in continuance of time, it grew, that Temples, Aultars, Images of Emperours and Kings, and graues of dead men, were allowed for sanctuaries, as if any that would flye vnto the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, and claimed by the right of a sanctuarie to be defended, hee was made free, and had his libertie graunted vnto him, and that conti∣nued a sanctuarie from the time of Alexander the great, who amplyfied the Temple of Diana the quantitie of a furlong, which temple was burnt before by Hero∣stratus, The temple of Diana burned. vpon the very day that Alexander was borne, vn∣till
the time of Augustus Caesar, three hundred yeares af∣ter Alexander, by whom the wickednesse of that sanctua∣ry was was abrogated and quite taken away. Cadmus (as some write) at the building of Thaebes, was the first in Greece that gaue any priuiledge to sanc∣tuaries. The sanctua∣ries of the Gentiles. Others thinke that some of the posteritie of Hercules erected vp in Athens the temple of mercie, where euery man might flee for succour, fearing least they should be punished and plagued for the iniuries that Hercules their predecessor did to others, and the Athenians made a decree, that none that fled to the aultar of mercie should be pulled away. Romulus imitating Cadmus at the building of Rome, for the encrease of his citie, graunted impunitie to all such wicked men that came to Rome, whose example all other Gentiles followed after, in so much that kings and kings sonnes fled vnto sanctuaries: so great was the priuiledge of sanctuaries, that king Pausanias fled to the Kings fled to sanctuaries. Temple of Minerua in Sparta, and king Cleombrotus fled to the Temple of Neptune in Taenero: and Adonias King Dauids sonne fled to the Temple in Ierusalem. Likewise a souldier taken in the warre, if he had fled from thence to the statue of any King, Emperour, or great captaine, he was to haue his libertie. The liberties and abuse of sanctuaries grew so great among all nations, that where sanctuaries were allowed chiefly, first for those that slew any man by chaunce a∣gainst their will, for captiue souldiers that fled from pri∣son, & for poore distressed seruants that were abused by their maisters, in time it became dens for theeues, stewes for wicked men and leawd women, that whatsoeuer was done, if they came to the Temple of Osiris in Egipt,
or to the Temple of Diana in Thracia, or to the Temple Sanctuaries become dens for theeues. of Venus in Phos, they were freed, & might there take their libertie, but poore Demosthenes was taken from the Temple of Neptune by the tyrant Archyas, and brought to Athens, before his onely enemy Antipater. Demosthenes Sanctuaries grew so common, that not onely soul∣diers, but also any offenders might fleee from theyr li∣berties, The graues of dead men were sanctu∣aries. especially in Greece, to the graues of Achilles, Thesius, and Aiax: in other places to the graue of Her∣cules. In other places, the offender, if he had fallen downe at the feete of Iupiters Priest, of Mars, or of Vulcan, at the gates of their temples, he should goe free. Though the old auntient Romanes could not abide a souldier taken in the wars, they would neither redeem him, nor allow him sanctuarie, yet Agesilaus king of the Lacedemonians, allowed any temple of their gods, to Agesilaus. be a sanctuary for souldiers that fled for succour. So did Cyrus proclaime sanctuaries for all banished, & bond men in Greece, & in all Asia; & leuied therby a huge army to fight against his brother Artaxerxes. So did Sertorius one of Marius sect, proclaime sanc∣tuaries to all the Romaine fugitiues in Hispaine & in Af∣frike, that he as much harmed Rome, being a Romaine borne, and now out of his countrey, as eyther Sylla or Marius did in their countrey. Hauing sufficiently spoken of these kinde of sanctua∣ries, of theyr too much libertie that grew thereby in all kingdomes, as among the Hebrewes by Ieroboam, in the battell at Mount Zemaraim, among the Persians The abuse of sanctuaries. by Cyrus at the battell at Conauxa, among the Ro∣manes by Cinna, and among the Affricans by Scotorius, who all proclaimed sanctuaries and liberties to all fugi∣tiue
and banished souldiers, we leaue sanctuaries, which were appointed as a refuge for those that fled thither for succour and helpe, vntill the truth were knowne, and speake not of those that abused sanctuaries as a cloake of their tirannie and wickednesse. You heard before how Adonias and Ioab were taken from the Aultar, for they had abused the sanctuary; for the Lord commaunded that his lawes should be se∣uerely kept, and that no part thereof should be broken, for King Oza vsurping the Leuites office against the lawe, was striken with sudden death, for the vnreue∣rent handling of the Arke, which was the Leuites of∣fice. Ozias the King was striken with leprosie, for burning Kings de∣stroied for breach of the lawe. incense against the lawe, which was the Priestes of∣fice. Abihu and Nadab, Aarons sonnes, for that they both tooke Censors in their hands, & put fire therevpon, and incense therein, & offered straunge fire before the Lord, Malach. 1. contrarie to the Lords commaundement, fire from hea∣uen destroyed them, for the priests were commaunded to take no fire but from the aultar, neither might they offer vncleane bread vpon the Lords table, nor sowe cockles for corne in the Lords fields, for the Lord will be more sanctified in his ministers then others, and ther∣fore he spared not Oza for handling the Arke, nor Ozias for burning incense, though they were both kings, for transgressing one iot of his lawes. So seuere was the Lord, that he punished fiftie thou∣sand 50000. Bethsamites more slaine. Bethsamites, for looking into the Arke. It should seeme that in Rome, Numa Pomp. in his pro∣phane religion, imitated the lawe of Moses: he institu∣ted orders of Priests called Flamines, to Iupiter and to
Mars, he likewise instituted the Vestal virgins to attend the fire consecrated to Vesta, to whom Numa commaun∣ded, rhat if the fire by negligence were out in the lamp, they should take no other fire but from the heate of the sunne. Numa also instituted the Priests called Aruales, much like to the olde Priestes of the Gaules called Druydes, or Numaslawes in Rome. the Idolatrous Priests called Chemarims in Samaria, who serued the golden calfe vnder Ieroboam, which made Is∣rael first to sinne: so religious a King was Numa Pomp. that Romulus souldiers, his predecessor, were by Numa Pompilius turned from souldiers to become religious, and made the olde Romanes beleeue, that the Nimphe called Egeria, gaue him rules and lawes to instruct his people, with such sundrie and diuers ceremonies, as The Nimph Egeria. Numa Pomp. himselfe deuised, during whose raigne of fortie yeares, Ianus Temple was neuer once ope∣ned. He also decreed certaine seuere lawes for those that offended in religion, and yet no Images were seene in Rome for 170. yeares, but ceremoniall superstitious ser∣uice of vnknowne gods, which Numa decreed then in Rome. And for to prophane any of the holy misteries of religion, was a sacriledge as well among the Grecians, as among the Romaines, for so Alcibiades was accused, that hee had offended against the goddesse Ceres and Proserpina, for that hee counterfeited in mockery theyr holy misteries, apparelled himselfe in vestiments, as the Priests of Ceres called Eumolpides were wont to do, with his Torch-bearer and Verger before him, where none should be at this secret seruice, but priests holding torches in their hands, and women crowned with gar∣lands made of the ares of corne, and therfore Alcibiades
for his contempt herein, was first banned and cursed by the Priests and Nunnes of Ceres, & after his goods con∣fiscated, The propha∣nation of the ceremonies of Ceres by Alcibiades and Clodius. and himselfe banished out of Athens by Eumol∣pides lawes. In like manner Clodius was accused in Rome of the like sacriledge by Cicero, with as great inuectiues against Clodius for prophaning of religion, as Cicero did against Cateline for his treason towardes his Countrey. For Clodius was accused that hee entered secretly into the misteries of Flora against the lawe, whereby he was accused with Pompeia Caesars wife, but it cost Ciceros bannishment out of Rome afterwardes by meanes of Clodius, when hee became Tribune of the people, at 20000. ware mourning ap∣parell for Ci∣cero in Rome what time twentie thousand ware mourning apparell in Rome for Cicero: but it cost Clodius life by degrees, for Milo slew him, and Cicero pleaded with all the eloquence hee had before Pompey the great then Con∣sul, in the behalf of Milo, so that Alcibiades was banished from Athens, and Clodius slaine in Rome for the propha∣ning of their religion. For the like occasions grew warres betweene the Athenians and the Acarnanites, for that two young men of the Acarnanites, and others with them bee∣ing not Priests, came to Athens, and entered into the se∣cret Acarnanites. misteries of the goddesse Ceres, against the lawe, which the Athenians tooke for a sacriledge, & therfore Liui. lib. 31. they slew the Acarnanites. The Acarnanites beeing agrieued with the Athe∣nians, sought helpe of Phillip king of Macedonia, against the Athenians, to reuenge theyr wrong, who was alwayes readye to take quarels against the Atheni∣ans.
So seuere and straight were the Heathens in obser∣uing the lawes of their religion & ceremonies of their gods, that euen among the Scythians a rude and a bar∣barous nation, Anacharsis the Philosopher, for that he Anacharsis slaine in Scy∣thia. altered the religion of Scythia being his countrey, and imitated the Greekes in their ceremonies, he was slaine in Scythia by his owne countrey men. CHAP. IX. Of the reward of souldiers. Of honourable buriall of Captaines, and of ambition. TVllius Hostilius, the next king in Rome after Numa Pomp. changed peace into warres, and religiō into armes; and made as ma∣ny lawes for souldiers, as Numa made for Priests. Yet Cicero was of opiniō that the Romanes wanne more kingdomes rather by religion then by armes, for the Romanes said Cicero were not equall in number Ciceros opi∣nion of the Romanes victories. to the Hispaniards, neither in strength to the Gaules, nor in subtiltie & craft to the Affricans, neither in lear∣ning and knowledge to the Grecians, but only the Ro∣manes ouercame these nations as Cicero said; Pietate & religione. Yet Vegetius affirmeth, that the Romanes became Ueget. lib. 1. cap. 1. Lordes ouer all Nations through military discipline, which the Romanes had from the Greekes; and especi∣ally from the Lacedemonians, to whom not onely the Affricans, the Carthagineans and Cicilians, but also the Italians and the Persians, sent for skilfull Generalls and Captaines, as the Syracusans had Gilippus a Lace∣demonian
captain against the Athenians: and the Per∣sians had Phocian the Athenian their Generall against Phocion. the Lacedemonians. Antalcidas was therefore much offended with Age∣silaus, Antalcidas saying to A∣gesilaus. for that he taught the Persians to conquer Greece, by often and continuall warres with the Persians, say∣ing, you teach women to ouercome men against Li∣curgus lawes. So the Lygurians grew warlike & skilfull souldiers, by long fighting & contending with the Romains. And so the Thaebans became skilfull souldiers by continu∣all warres with the Lacedemonians, that Epaminondas ouercame the Lacedemonians at the battell of Leuctres, and brought the pride of Sparta vnder Thaebes. Thus Sparta. the warlike Lacedemonians, whose aide and helpe was sought of all nations, are ouerthrowne by theyr next neighbours the Thaebans: Euen the Lacedemonians, who thought it a shame, to followe the enemies that fled from them; and made a scoffe of the Persians great armies, who thought neither Iewe nor Gentile equall to them, are now ouerthrowne in their owne coun∣trey by their owne countrey men. We leaue the La∣cedemonians in theyr losse, and will speake of those great captaines, that had the like care to bring vp their souldiers as the Lacedemonians had. Alexander the great, when any of his souldiers were maimed or hurt in the warres, that they could Alexander the great rewarded maimed sol∣diers. no longer serue, either being hurt, or for their age, he liberally rewarded them, and sent them to Macedo∣nia with his Letters vnto Antipater, that they should be placed in the chiefest place of games and shewes, with Garlandes of flowers on theyr heades, to ani∣mate
others to martiall exploytes, and to embrace armes. So liberall was Caesar to his souldiers, that hee would haue them goe braue in apparell, and feede them with Iul. Caesar. gifts and rewards, and would often say vnto them, win gold, and weare gold. Agesilaus vsed his souldiers with the like martiall exercise, and instructed them in all military discipline, Xenoph. lib. 3. de rebus Graecorum. that hee appointed certaine Armours, braue Targets, Swordes, and such military weapons that should be giuen to those Souldiers that should moste exceede others. So Cai. Caesar caused not onely the olde warriors Viget. lib. 2. cap. 9. the Romane knights, to traine vp the Romane youthes in martiall discipline, but the Senatours themselues, not only abroad, but priuately in theyr houses, should be carefull and diligent to see the young souldiers well instructed and brought vp in warlike exercise. Well therefore saide Epaminondas to his countrey-men, If you wil be Princes of Greece, Castris est vobis vtendum Tacit. lib. 2. annal. non palaestra, you must vse Tentes for warres, and not places to exercise wrestling, and such vaine games, whiche made Alexander Seuerus the Emperour, to bring vp his sonnes in warlike Tentes farre from any Citties, to become sober and temperate, without the sight of any thing that might entice them from theyr weapons. Heereby grewe Titus to bee so well beloued in Titus. Rome among his souldiers, who beeing so liberall in his warres, that hee was named of all men, Deliciae hominum.
Fabritius also and Valerius, two noble Romaines, were more carefull to inrich their souldiers then them∣selues. Fabritius. So in all countries they made much of souldiers, and rewarded them with presents and gifts, as the Persi∣ans rewarded their souldiers with chains, bracelets, and golden girdles. The Greeks rewarded their souldiers with crownes, garlands, siluer fillets for their haire, and money: the Romanes with landes, liuings, territories, and military garments, with such honours done to their captaines slaine in the field, that they made certaine plaies at weapons, that prisoners being cōdemned to die, should fight it out to death vpon Theaters, and after to be sa∣crificed The honour of the Ro∣manes and Persians to∣wardes their gene∣rals & cap∣taines. on the captaines graues, to honour marshall fu∣nerals. The Persians buried maimed souldiers to accom∣pany their Generalls and Captaines to the graue when they died. This kinde of killing and sacrificing of men, was to allure & embolden yong youthes to loue armes, to vse their weapons, to be acquainted, and to see bloo∣die battels, aswell the manner of souldiers in warres, as also the cruell slaughter and terror of the warres, and to become from skilfull souldiers, renowned captaines, to deserue such honour aliue and dead. So the Greekes vsed to honor their dead captaines, to buy condemned murtherers and theeues, to be slain and sacrificed on their graues, to extoll the fame of their Condemned murtherers. sacrificed on captaines graues. valiant captaines that died in the field: the Greeks were so carefull, that they would not forget the beastes that serued them long. Cymon the sonne of Milciades, a famous captaine of Athens, for that his mares wanne at the games of Olym∣pia Cymons mares. in the horse race thrise the garland, hee caused his
mares to be buried hard by his graue. And old Xantippus, for that his dog swamme by the galleys side from Athens to Salamina, and died when he landed for very wearinesse, he buried him in the top of a cliffe. The Romains in like maner would suffer no draught oxen that ploughed their lands, and carried their fuells to be sold, when they could not plough for age, neither might they in Athens by the lawe of Solon kill an olde Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. Genial. cap. 11. wearied oxe for sacrifice, but should feede him in his age, so carefull were the Romanes and the Greekes to recompence seruice, euen vnto beasts, that had labo∣red & done seruice vnto man. For the Athenians made a lawe in fauour of the moiles that carried the stones to The Moiles in Athens. the building of the Temple Haecatonpedon, that they should be suffered to grase euery where without let or trouble of any man, if the Greekes and the Romains so esteemed their beasts, how much more had they cause to relieue their old maimed souldiers. And therefore Hannibal was more detested & hated of his souldiers, that being so cruell and so couetous, he lost not only many of his owne souldiers, but also many of his friends and associates forsooke him. And so Persius king of Macedonia, a most miserable couetous prince, who to spare his money, lost both his Couetous princes euer lost more thē they wonne. money, his kingdome, and his life. Posthumius for that he denied the spoiles to the soul∣diers, which he promised, was stoned to death by his souldiers. So that Hanibal lost (through his couetousnes and crueltie) to the Romains, what he wanne by skill and pollicie of armes of the Romaines. This is the end of all vnlawfull warres, to be worse farre then the begin∣ning. Viriatus. So was it with Viriatus, for his fourteene yeares
warres for Hispaine, with Hanibal for his fourteen yeares with the Carthagineans, and with king Mithridates for fortie yeares warres with the kings of Asia against the Romans, but the Romains subdued all their countries, and all came vnder the Romane Empire. I remember Aristotle bringeth in a verse of Homer, in describing the affection of the desire & wrath of men, and saith, that anger to Achilles was as sweete as honey Achilles wrath. melted vnder his tongue, but the end of his anger and wrath was, that he was slain out of Greece in Phrygia, and to be buried in Illion. So sweet was couetousnes vnto Craesus, being the only wealthiest man in Rome, that it brought him frō Rome to Craesus co∣uetousnesse. be slaine among the Parthians, the onely enemies of the Romanes. So reuenge was to Hanibal, as sweet as wrath to Achil∣les, the one to satisfie his wrath vpon the Troians, the o∣ther to performe his vow & oath to his father Hamilcar Hannibals reuenge. to plague the Romans, but both therby died out of their countries, the one slaine in Phrygia, the other poysoned himselfe in Bythinia. So to Pirrhus, quarrels were as sweet, as reuenge was to Hanibal, and therefore taking quarrels in hand euery Pirrhus quarrels. where, at last was slaine out of his countrey in Greece. So may it be spoken of the ambition of Caesar & Alex∣ander: Ambition. the enuie that Caesar had to Alexanders conquests was so great, that hee much complained of himselfe be∣ing an old man, and yet wanne no fame by his smal vic∣tories, in respect of Alexanders great cōquests being but a young man. So likewise Alexander exclaimed against himselfe, in respect of the fame & greatnes which Homer gaue to A∣chilles. Thus ambitiō was as sweet to Caesar, and to Alex∣ander, as either wrath to Achilles, couetousnesse to Caesar, reuenge to Hanibal, or quarrels to Pirrhus.
Therefore ambition was painted out in Heliopolis, a citie in Egipt, without legges, because ambition might not clime, for ambitious men are not so glad and proud to see many that follow and obey them, as they are in∣wardly afflicted and grieued to see fewe not obedient vnto them. In the same self citie were the pictures of Iudges pain∣ted Iudges. without hāds because they shuld receiue no bribes. And the pictures of princes painted blind without eies, Princes. because they might not see to fauor their friends, and in the midst between these three pictures, was ye picture of The Image of Iustice painted in Egipt. Iustice painted without a head. The moral hereof is bet∣ter to be liked thē the law of Lycurgus, who euer thought ambitiō a necessary spur to prick men forward in causes of common-wealths, as Agamemnon was glad to see A∣iax and Vlisses at variance for Achilles armour; and Caesar Contention betweene Aiax and Vlisses. was not sorie to see Crassus contend with Pompey in Rome. These men wanted no legges to clime, neither a∣mong the Romaines nor among the Grecians, nor yet among the Iewes. In Athens a lawe was made against ambitious men, that if any sought singularitie, either by his wisedome, or by his wealth, or by fauour of the people, hee should be banished by the lawe Ostracismus out of Athens, as Themistocles was. So ambitious men in Rome to get loue and fauour of the people by the lawe called Lex agraria, were not one∣ly Cai. Grac∣chus slaine. banished out of Rome, as Themistocles was out of A∣thens, but sometimes slaine in Rome, as both Tiberius and Cai. Gracchus were. And therfore Platoes opiniō was, that he which began to be ambitious by any secret practise with the enemies, Platoes opi∣nion against ambitious men. to hurt his country, or made meanes to make warres of
his owne head, should be deliuered into the enemies hand, and therefore Asdrubal did counsell the Cartha∣gineans to giue Hannibal into the Romanes hands, be∣cause Hannibal hated the Romans, because he made war of his owne priuate head, without the authoritie of the Senators of Carthage. And so Cato, Marcellus, and others, perswaded the Senators of Rome to deliuer Caesar vnto the Gaules, for the like cause, for that they suspected Caesar with Ca∣teline, and euer found him ambitious and desirous of warre, in Rome, and out of Rome: and therefore ambiti∣ous Generalls and Captaines are euer most dangerous, and most necessary to be lookt vnto. The ambition of the Israelites is not to bee passed ouer, as Absolon through ambition vnder pretence of iustice went about to take away the hearts of the peo∣ple from his father the king, saying often, Oh that I were a Iudge of the land, that I might do iustice to them that haue matters in the lawe, and when any man came to do him obeysance, he tooke him by the hand, and kis∣sed The ambiti∣on of Absolō and Adoniah. him, and thus by degrees stole the hearts of the men of Israel from his father. Likewise Adoniah Absolons brother, through ambi∣tion also exalted himselfe, and wanne all his bretheren 2. Reg. 15. the kings sonnes, and all the men of Iudah, the kings ser∣uants, that through ambition hee occupied the king∣dome, 3. Reg. ca. 1. vnwitting to his father the king. Hammon the Macedonian was so ambitious in Persia Hammon. the kings court, that he could not abide the sight of Mar∣dochaeus, because he wold not bend & bowe his knee vn∣to him. Abimelech went to Sychem, and communed with The ambiti∣on of Abime∣lech. his mothers kinred, for that hee was a bastard to Ge∣deon,
saying in the eares of the people, that it were better for them to haue one, then to let the seuen∣tie sonnes of Gedeon to raigne ouer them, for I am your bones and your flesh: so ambitious was Abime∣lech, that hee went secretly to Ephrah, and slew the 70. sonnes of Gedeon vpon a stone. Antipater was so ambitious in Athens, that he could not suffer the Orators to liue in Greece, no more then Ha∣mon could suffer the Iewes to liue in Persia, but sent di∣uers to seeke and to search for them, that when Hiperides was found, he was commaunded by Antipater to be pu∣nished with all tortures, to haue him to reueale the se∣crets of Athens, and to confesse the faults of Lycurgus, De∣mosthenes, Isocrates, and others. Demosthenes and Isocrates hearing of Hiperides great tortures, and thereby his death, and of the victory at the The Orators of Athens. battell of Cranon, vnder that cruel king Antipater, which after marched with his army towards Athens, the one famished himselfe, the other poisoned himselfe, the ra∣ther for that the tyrant Archias should not bring Demo∣sthenes aliue to Antipater, who made great search for him, so Antipater most cruelly tirannized with secret ambiti∣on against the poore Orators in Athens. Not onely the Orators in Athens, but also diuers Philosophers, as Cleanthes, Zeno, Empedocles, and others, Philosophers. who in like sort to auoyd Antipaters tyrannie, slew themselnes for very griefe, to see Athens the schoole and nurse of learning, at that time so oppressed through ambition. The ambition of Sylla was such towards Marius, and Marius towards Sylla, that it ouerthrew welnigh the Empire of Rome, betweene them and their confederates, that Sertorius, Carbo, and other Romane Captaines, car∣ried
flames of ambition from Rome, to Hispaine and Affrica, after whom warre followed so fast, that Sertorius could scarse settle himselfe to gather an army either in The victories of Sertorius. Hispaine or in Affrike, but three Romane captaines one after an other followed him at the heeles, Cotta, to whom Sertorius gaue battell, and ouerthrew him by sea, after Cotta, Phidius, whose army Sertorius ouerthrew, and caused Phidius to flye; after Phidius, Toranius, whom he slew, and the most part of his army; the fourth Me∣tellus, who was driuen by Sertorius to such a pinch, that had not Pompey the great comne from Rome, he had fa∣red litle better then the rest, who for a time both Pompey and Metellus had both their hands full to do with Ser∣torius. This is that Metellus which caused Scypio Affrican to sweare that he would not forsake neither Rome nor Italy his countrey, which he thought to do with many Ro∣manes Metellus. more, after the great ouerthrow of the Romanes by Haniball at the battel of Canne. This Metellus is that old woman, of which Sertorius said, that he had whipt Pompey Syllas boy, had not that olde woman Metellus comne, which being told Pompey, he answered, I had ra∣ther be Syllas boy then Syllas fugitiue, as Sertorius is. Pompey himselfe within 34. yeares after, was forced to follow Sertorius steppes, and to flye from Caesar, as Ser∣torius fled from Sylla: for Caesar followed Pompey from the field Pharsalia to Egipt, where Pompey was slaine, as Pompey followed Sertorius from Rome to Affrike, where Sertorius likewise was slaine. Ambition therefore the secret serpent in euery com∣mon-wealth, as you heard before among the Grecians, Aristides. among the Israelites, and among the Romanes, and yet in Athens there was one Aristides that resisted the
ambition of Themistocles, and in Rome one Cato that re∣prehended Cato. the ambition of Caesar, and in Israel one Io∣than that accused the ambition of Abimelech. But as the Philosopher said, the whole world is a common-wealth of contention, that if strife and con∣tention Licurgus law allowed ambition. had no place in nature, the generation of all things should be at a stay, and therefore ambition and contention was allowed among the Lacedemonians by Licurgus lawe, as a spurre to prick them forward to mar∣tiall actions. Among the Athenians they thought it great polli∣cie, to keepe men of state in equall authorities, least any should excell, either in greatnesse, wealth, wisedome, honour, or credit among the people, and therefore Ari∣stides was ioyned in all authorities with Themistocles, and Ambitious men banni∣shed from A∣thens. Phocion with Alcibiades, for Themistocles and Alcibiades were noted ambitious men in Athens, and Aristides and Phocion knowne to be found and iust, and if any seemed to seeke singularitie through ambition or otherwise a∣mong the Athenians, he should be banished out of A∣thens, by the lawe of Ostracismus. So likewise among the Romanes, as among the Greekes, nothing was so common as banishment, as in Athens, Aristides for his iustice, Milciades for his victo∣ries, Phocion for his good life, Socrates for his vertues, So∣lon for his sound lawes. So the best deserued men in Rome, as Corilianus that saued the citie of Rome, Scypio Affrican that brought Car∣thage and Numantia into Rome; Metellus and diuers o∣thers of the best Romanes were banished by proclama∣tion, Corilianus banished. and sound of a trumpet out of Rome, and yet Corili∣anus being so vniustly banished frō Rome to ye Volscians,
at the request and teares of his mother Veturia, and of his wife Volumnia, hee refused to fight against the Ro∣manes, being Generall of the Volscians, & therfore was slaine of the Volscians in the Citie Curiolis, which Corili∣anus before time wonne to the Romanes, at what time he was named Corilianus, after the name of the citie Cu∣riolis, as all Romane captaines were that wonne townes, countries, or cities: thus sparing to destroy his vngrate∣full countrey, Corilianus lost his life therfore by the Vol∣scians, he might well haue said, as Scypio Affrican said at Linternum after he was banished, Ingrata patria non habe∣bis The saying of Scypio. ossa mea, Oh vngratefull countrey, thou shalt not pos∣sesse my bones. Themistocles also being banished by the law of Ostra∣cysmus from Athens, went to dwell in Argos, from Argos he was faine to flye to Corphu, & from thence to Asia, for Themistocles banished. the king of Persia offered two hundred talents to him that would bring him Themistocles, for that Themistocles was the onely enemie that destroyed so many Persians in Greece. But Themistocles vnderstanding of the kings inten∣tion, for he supposed it the surest way to auoid the kings wrath, and to saue his owne life, to goe and yeeld him∣selfe vnto the king of Persia, where he was so accepted Myontium, Lamplacus, Magnetia. that he had three great cities for his entertainment, and grew in such great fauour with the king, that the princes and nobles of Persia so enuied him, that they sought by all meanes to destroy him. But when Themistocles was required by the king, to lead a Persian army against the Greekes, according to his oath, he thought that fact vnworthy of the name of Plut. in The∣mist. Themistocles, to beare armes against his countrey men the Greekes, though he was banished from Greece, but
resolued to die like a true Greeke, reseruing his loue to his country, and his oath to the Persians, least he should by any meanes seeme to hinder the victories and tri∣umphes of Cymon, at that time general of the Grecians, or seeme any way to staine himselfe with a trecherous name against his countrey, after secret conference with his friends (whom he feasted) and sacrifice done to his gods, Themistocles died in Magnetia, as Cleomenes did in E∣gipt in the citie of Alexandria, which when Cleomenes sawe he could not escape the kings hand, to whom hee bare mortall hatred, after much slaughter within the towne, Cleomenes exhorted the rest of the Greekes, be∣ing his company, which were but thirtie in number, to die like men by their owne hands, and not by the ene∣mie, saying: Let not fortune triumph ouer fortitude. Plut. in Cleomenes. Thus Cleomenes perswaded his company to dye like no∣ble Spartans, which they performed, for they slew themselues one after an other by their owne handes. And thus after Cleomenes had raigned sixteene yeares king of Sparta, dyed as you haue heard in the Cittie of Alexandria in Egipt, as Themistocles dyed in Magnetia. CHAP. X. Of the comparison betweene the noble and wise Captaines of both the Romanes and the Grecians: of their sundrie mili∣tary kindes of triumphes and watchwords of Generals in their warres. PLutarch therefore compareth the state and liues of the Romans, with the Grecians, and matcheth them as well in likenesse and qualities of nature, as also for their qualities of fortune, for their victories, for their
triumphes, and for their benefites done to their coun∣try, & therfore compareth Agesilaus king of the Lacede∣monians to Pompey the great, Consul of Rome, & though Comparisons betweene the Romains and the Grecians. Plutarch preferreth his country man the Grecian for his skill & martial knowledge, yet was he forced to aduance Pompey for his victories and conquests, which was com∣pared to Alexander the great, for his victories ouer the three parts of the world, Asia, Europe, and Affrica. Pelopidas compared to Marcellus for theyr cou∣rage and prowesse, for that the Thaebans called Pelo∣pidas, Pelopidas. the arme of Thaebes, & for that Marcellus was called of the Romaines the sword of Rome, both of equall for∣tune, both of great prowesse & courage, yet without ad∣uertisement, rashly and wilfully, ouerthrew themselues both alike. Pericles was compared to Fabius Max. for his graue gouernment and wisedome, the one called the hand of Fabius and Marcellus ised∣ly . Athens, the other called the target of Rome, Fabius Max. for his wisedome, that by watching & long delaies, wea∣ried & weakened the force of Hanibal, that as the history saith, Cunctando rem restituit. Of these two noble Ro∣maines Hanibal himselfe was wont to say, that Marcel∣lus wearied him, and Fabius weakned him. Yet Plutarch compareth Fabius life with Pericles. Marcellus. The glory of Greece before by Milciades in the battel at Plataea, the great good fortune and successe in warres of Cymon his sonne against the Persians, the noble tri∣umphes and victories of Myronides, the noble & valiant acts and exploits of Leocrates, the many & valiant deeds of Tolmydes, made  name of Pericles to be more famous in Athens, at what time Greece was in her greatest glorie, Pericles sur∣named O∣lympius. and Pericles most flourished, who then was surnamed O∣lympius, for his wit & great eloquence, hauing nine seue∣rall
monuments of triumphs set vp in Greece of his good fortune, and yet was Pericles supposed to be the cause of the Peloponesian wars; for his great hatred towards the Maegarians was such, that all the cities of Greece diuided themselues, and held hot ciuill wars 27. yeares. The like may be said of Iulins Caesar in Rome. The great name and fame of Scypio in vanquishing Hanibal and the Affricans, the valiant exploits of Mari∣us ouer the Cymbrians and Teutons, the great victories of Sylla ouer Asia and Greece, the noble triumphs of Pom∣pey ouer three parts of the world, made the fame & con∣quest of Caesar to be the greater, for Caesar performed that Pirrh saying. which Pirrhus said of Italy and Rome, that Italians must conquer Italy, and Romaines ouercome Rome, as Caesar did. Next we compare Sylla the Romane, with Lysander the Lacedemonian, two noble and valiant captaines, Lysander. that the one did what he would in Rome, the other did what he listed in Sparta, both good and beneficiall to their countreys, for their victories which they had a∣gainst their enemies out of their coūtries, but both scor∣pions that scourged & plagued both their countrey and countrey men, that Rome and all Italy was plagued by Sylla, as Sparta and all Greece was by Lysander. Q. Hortensius euer boasted that hee neuer tooke part in any ciuill warres. So said Asinius Pollio to Augu∣stus Hortensius & Asinius Pollios say∣ings. the Emperour, being willing to haue him goe with him to the battell at Actium, against Marc. Antonius, hee answered and refused, saying, Ero praeda victoris. Yet the lawe of Solon in Athens was, that he which seperated Velleius. 2. himselfe and tooke no part in ciuill warres, Is domo, pa∣tria, fortunis{que} omnibus careto, he should be banished from his friends and from his countrey.
Timoleon compared to Pau. Aemilius two noble cap∣taines and worthy members of their countries, the one so esteemed in Syracusa, that whatsoeuer Timoleon said, Timoleon. was taken for a lawe among the Syracusans, the others fortune was so great in Rome, that hee enriched the Ro∣mane treasurie, with the wealth and riches of two king∣domes, Macedonia and Illyria, and brought to the Empire of Macedonia all the olde monuments of the auntient Kings of Macedonia, and of Alexander the great vnto Rome. Philopomen also was compared to Titus Quint. both great benefactors to their countries, both at one time in Greece: Philopomen being the last captaine of the Greci∣ans that defended Greece, and Titus one of the first Ro∣mane Philopomen the last cap∣taine of any fame in Greece. captaines that first subdued Greece, and after enlar∣ged them, and restored to them their lawes and liber∣ties, at what time crowes fell downe to the ground by the sound of mens voices, when Titus proclaimed peace and libertie vnto the Grecians at the games of Isth∣mia. Ishmia. And so likewise in Rome, when Pompey the great re∣stored the Tribuneship vnto the people which Sylla tooke away, the like happened, that the people being so many, and their ioyes so great, the sound of the people pearcced the ayre, that many crowes fell downe in the market place at Rome, as they did in Greece at the games of Isthmia. Hauing compared some Greeke and Romane cap∣taines in their warres and victories, one with the other, it were not amisse to touch the sundry militarie instru∣ments, and warlike soundes which all Nations vsed in going to the warres, and of their watch-word in their warres.
Among the olde auntient Romaines they vsed the sounding of diuers trumpets and hornes together, go∣ing The olde Re∣manes did sound trum∣pets in their warres. to any warre or battell with the Romane legions. The Egiptians cannot abide the sound of ttumpets, for that it doth resemble the crying of an asse: for there is nothing so odious among the Aegiptians as is the noyse of an asse; and so odious, that if any man do The Egipti∣ans bad bra∣zen timbrels and hornes. call a man an asse in Egipt, an action may be had a∣gainst him by the lawe of Bochoris, they vsed brazen tymbrels and hornes for trumpets when they goe to warres. The warlike Lacedemonians sound neither trum∣pets The Lacede∣monians vsed flutes and pipes. nor hornes, when they goe to their warres, but flutes, which yeeldeth so sweete and plausible a sound, that they march proportionably with their feet, keeping measure with their instrument. This was set downe to the Lacedemonians by Licurgus. Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 4. genial. The Parthians in their warres vse great hollow ket∣tles and pannes, and great brazen pottes, and a num∣ber of little belles, like the lowing of many wilde The Parthi∣ans vsed ket∣tles, pannes, brazen pots, and a num∣ber of litle bells. beastes, with such terrour and noyse to feare the ene∣mies. The Lydians come to their warres with diuers kinds of pipes, as howboies, recorders, bagpipes, and diuers other such. The Cymbrians with diuers kinde of dried skinnes, drawne hard round about their chariots and coaches, Cymbrians. in forme and maner like great and huge drums, which they beate and strike, which makes such an horrible sound much like the great thunders. The Indians in theyr warres vse Cymballes and Indians. Belles, for it was not lawfull among the Indians to vse Flutes, but in the Kings house, when the King went
to bed. As the king of Cicilia vsed harpes, and chirping notes of birds to make the king sleepe. Among the people of Creete, they vsed flutes and Creet. harpes in their warres, and thus in all countries they vsed their proper warlike instruments when they mar∣ched into their battels. The Hebrues in the warres which they had with the Canaanites, vsed trumpets and rammes hornes, for Mo∣ses was commaunded by the Lorde to make two siluer Tho Ho∣brues had in their warres siluer trum∣pets and rams hornes. trumpets, and to sound them to call the armie together, when they marched against their enemies. So was Io∣shua at the battell at Iericho, likewise commaunded, that the Priests should sound rammes hornes. These He∣brew battels were the only examples to the Gentiles in their warres, for as the trumpets & hornes are most aun∣cient, so after among all nations, they inuented diuers warlike instruments, as in steede of trumpets in theyr warres, and diuers kindes of variable sounds. The Phrygians sounded most lamentable and pitti∣full notes, the Lacedemonians sweet & pleasant notes, the Lydians mournfull and planctiue, the Ionians mer∣ry The diuer si∣tie of soun∣ding in wars. & pleasant notes, the Dorians warlike notes. In so much that when Timotheus the trumpeter soun∣ded that Doriā warlike note, Alexander the great streight called for his armor, it so kindled and inflamed Alexan∣ders minde to armes. Hannibal neuer vsed sound of trumpets nor warlike notes, but secret stratagems, without further notice or knowledge to his enemies, but only his tents couered with red, the very selfe same day that he would haue his souldiers readie to fight. It seemed that Hanibal imita∣ted Alexander the great herein, who vsed to set vp cer∣taine red banners and flags about his tents, in his warres against Darius king of Persia.
And Darius himselfe in the selfe same warre against Alexander, had vpon his tent the Image of the Sunne, set in Christall, that shined ouer all the whole campe, especially in the night time. So vsed the Romanes aswel as the Greekes in the sea fight, euery captaine to hang vp in theyr ship some marke or other to be knowne: as Of tents and sailes. Lysander hangd vp in his ship a brazen target, as a signe to be knowne to the rest of the nauies. Brutus in his warres against Mar. Antonius at Philip∣pus, had a round circle, that his nauy might be knowne from others. Mar. Antonius in his battell against Octauius Augustus at Actium, gaue purple sailes to his Praetorian nauies, as signes of his pride, and hope of his victories, but soone forsaken, for he was glad to flie, & follow after Cleopatra. Alexander the great, when he sailed to India, vsed di∣uers colours of sailes in his nauies, wherby one captaine might know the other, and himselfe in his owne shippe had purple sailes. The Romaines vsed to haue painted vpon their ships banners and flagges, the pictures, Images, and names of their Emperours and Generalls. The Grecians vsed also to paint & write the names of their nauies, according to the names of those Iles where they were made. Others the Image & pictures of their gods of the countries, as the Greekes Neptune, and the Troians Minerua. Now that you haue read, what military and warlike instruments all nations vsed in their warres, you shall al∣so read the watchwords of great Generals & noble cap∣taines, which they vsed in their greatest warres. Cyrus the great king of Persia, vsed this sentence for his watchword, Iupiter belli socius & Dux. Clau. Caesar imitating Cyrus, vsed a whole sentence
for his watch-word to his souldiers, Virum vlscis decet. Others for the most part both of Greekes and Ro∣manes, vsed onely to giue one word to their souldiers, as Iulius Caesar gaue for his watch-word in some battels, Victoria, in other battels his watch-word was Faelicitas. In some other of his battels his watch-word was, Venus genitrix. These were his vsuall watch-words in 52. set battels which he had. The Romaine Consul Sylla in all the warres which he had in Asia and in Greece, his watch-word was to his The watch-word of di∣uers noblo captaines in their warres. souldiers, Appollo. Cn. Pompeius in all his warres which hee had vnder Sylla in Affrica against Sertorius, his watchword was a∣mong the Romanes, Pietas, while yet he was a young man, but when his victories and his triumphes grew great ouer Affrica, Europe, and Asia, and that hee was cal∣led Pompey the great, hee gaue his watch-word to his souldiers according to his greatnesse, Inuictus Hercu∣les. King Demetrius in diuers warres which he had with many kings and princes, after his father king Antigonus dyed, hee still vsed one watch-word in all his warres a∣gainst Zeleucus, Pirrhus, Lysimachus, and Cassander: Iupiter & Victoria. Antiochus surnamed Soter, leading a great Armie a∣gainst the people Galatae, his watch-word was, Bene∣ualere. C. Caligula, a beast, and not an Emperour, gaue ac∣cordingly a beastly watch-word to his souldiers, Priapus & Venus. Other Emperours of Rome, as Sept. Seuerus, a noble captaine, gaue his watch-word to his souldiers, Labo∣remus.
And so Pertinax the Emperour, his watchword was Militemus. And the good Emperour Antoninus, his words was euer to his souldiers, Aequanimitas. After these comparisons betweene the Romaines and the Greekes in all military discipline, it were also fit to compare some of their stratagems. As Darius king of Persia, to escape the daunger by flight which he was in, from the Scythians, vsed a stra∣tagem, Front. lib. 1. cap. 5. left dogges and asses barking and braying in his tents to deceiue the Scythians: which the Scythians supposed by barking & braying of dogges and asses to haue found Darius in his tents. The like stratagem vsed the Lygurians to escape the hands of the Romanes, who bound diuers wilde oxen and buffes to certaine trees to deceiue the Romaines, which made such a roaring noise, that the Romanes thought therby the Lygurians to be in their campe and in their tents, when they escaped secretly away. Hannibal being most busie in plaguing Italy, Scypio Affrican vsed a stratagem, passed with a great Romaine Front. lib. 1. cap. 3. armie to Affricke, to drawe Hannibal from Italy: who was forced streight to follow after to succour the Car∣thaginians. The like pollicie vsed Themistocles to drawe the ar∣mie of Xerxes from the land into a sea battell, knowing the Athenians farre vnable to answere Xerxes armie on land, sent all the wiues & children from Athens to Tro∣xaena, and to other cities of Greece, and left Athens emp∣tie. The Persians hearing that Themistocles left Athens, followed hard after him, whereby Themistocles by this stratagem got a noble victorie ouer the Persians at Sala∣mina. Cities besieged, suffered as though they were rea∣dy to yeeld, and where they found the enemies so care∣lesse,
that they expected nothing but yeelding, they so∣denly issued out with great fury, and ouerthrew theyr enemies. So did Furius the Consull, so did Caesar with the like stratageme: so did Labienus. So doth Sathan when he findes men without watching and praying, li∣uing slothfull and carelesse, and as men suppose in secu∣ritie, then Sathan vseth this stratagem, finding them vn∣armed, without spirituall weapons, ouerthrowes them, takes them, and brings them as prisoners & captiues to his tents. CHAP. XI. Of two ouerthrowes of the Romanes, by the Parthians and by the Cymbrians, and their Generall Crassus slaine. Of di∣uers other battels both of the Romanes and the Greekes, and of many Libraries destroyed by warres. THe Romainas flourished at that time with victories and triumphes ouer all na∣tions, yet had some of the best of them many shamefull ouerthrowes: as Mar. Crassus a noble Romane, equall in force and power to Caesar or to Pompey, after many great vic∣tories, was among the Barbarians and Parthians ouer∣throwne Crassus slain among the Parthians. by Carres, a famous citie in Mesopotamia, and the more famous for that Abraham dwelt there, at what time many noble captaines slue themselues for verie shame and sorrowe, after their Generall Crassus & his sonne were slaine by Surena Lieutenant of the Parthi∣ans. This Surena was the second person next the king in Parthia, his greatnesse was such, that he had a thousand camels to carry his sumpters, a thousand men of arms
armed, two hundred Coaches of Curtizans, that his whole traine made aboue tenne thousand horse. Cen∣sorius, Octauius, Petronius, and diuers other Romaine Gentlemen slue themselues, and Surena after he strake off Pub. Crassus head the sonne, and sent him to the king his maister, in the very selfe same day was slain also Cras∣sus the father. In this battell twentie thousand Romains were slain, and ten thousand taken prisoners, for he had seuen legions in his army of footemen: and after that Crassus head & his sonnes sent to the king of Par∣thia. Surena had bathed Crassus head in blood, and had mel∣ted golde into his mouth, to the great reproach of the Romanes, he sent both the heads of Crassus & his sonne to Horodes king of Parthia, at which time the king of Par∣thia and his nobles, laughed and scorned the other cap∣tiue Romanes, making rimes, verses and enterludes of both Crassus heads. This ouerthrow was one of the most ignominious that euer the Romaines had, sauing the ouerthrow of Valerianus the Emperour, by Pazaites the Turke, whose army was quite ouerthrowne, and himselfe taken priso∣ner, and vsed as a block for the Turke to goe on horse. And another ouerhthrow which the Romaines had Oros. lib. 5. cap. 16. by the Cymbrians & Teutōs by the riuer of Roan, where C. Manilius & Q. Scaepio were Generalls of the Romaine armies, had such an ouerthrow, that of foure score thou∣sand The ouer∣throw of the Romanes by the Cymbri∣ans. Romanes, and of their associats scant ten escaped with their liues away, the newes thereof made Rome so to quake, and the Senators to feare, that they were so amazed & so terrified, as they were at their ouerthrow at the battel at Canne, but Cai. Marius fully reuenged and requited vpon the Cymbrians at the riuer Xextus the ouerthrow of the Romaines, with such a victory ouer the Cymbrians, that neither man, woman nor childe escaped.
In like sort was M. Crassus reuenged vpon the Par∣thians by Pub. Ventidius, vice-Consull vnder Mar. An∣tonius, hauing done great exployts in subduing the in∣habitants about mount Taurus, and also hauing wonne diuers victories ouer the Parthians, a stout and hardie Nation, whom the Romanes plagued sundrie times in reuenge of Mar. Crassus death, which was the third man of reputation in Rome. Pub. Ventidius was suffered Pub. Venti∣dius try∣iumphes o∣uer the Par∣thians. to haue both the triumphes vnder Mar. Antonius, who chiefly at that time was Generall of the Romane Ar∣my, appointed by the Senators and people of Rome. But Ventidius better deserued to haue this triumphe then Mar. Antonius, who began to esteeme and attend Cleopatra more then his Romane Army. Ventidius wonne more victories ouer the Parthians, then any Romane Captaine else did, and yet the Ro∣maines had eighteene pitcht battells against the Par∣thians, for the Parthians had eighteene kingdomes vn∣der them. These were stout Nations, and called theyr king, king of kings, as the Persians called their kings the great kings, and the Phrygians called their kings the greatest kings, which the Romane Consulls, could endure no great names but themselues, as Sylla, Lucullus, and Pompey, tooke the best hand, either going, riding, or sit∣ting, of any king in Asia. Augustus Caesar also reuenged on the Parthians Aug. Caesar. Crassus death, and brought againe to Rome all the Romaine Ensignes, and all that Crassus lost in Par∣thia, sauing Crassus himselfe, his sonne, and the Romans that died there. The Greekes in like sort as the Romanes, after they had giuen diuers ouerthrowes, and gotten many great
victories ouer the Persians, as at the battell at Artemi∣sium, at the battell of Salamina, and at the battell of Ma∣rathon, where the Athenians wonne a famous victorie ouer the Persians, who were ledde vnder Pisistratus a The victorie of the Greeks at Marathō. banished man out of Athens, not like Themistocles, who refused to fight, but like himselfe a tirants sonne, though a Greeke borne, yet hee presented himselfe to Darius Hisdaspis, king of Persia, to lead his army into Greece, his countrey, where he was slaine, and two hundred thou∣sand Oros. lib. 4. cap. 14. Persians at the battell at Marathon, by the Athe∣nians for his welcome home, who were conducted vn∣der Milciades and Callimachus, two noble Captaines. In this warre flourished Themistocles, a young man, and was as much commended by the Athenians for The praise of Themi∣stocles. his prowesse and courage, beeing so young, as Alexan∣der the great was in the battell at Cheronea, or Scypio Affrican at the battell at Ticinum. This young The∣mistocles was wont to say in his youth, that he could not sleepe in his bed for the sound and report of Milciades triumphes. The Greekes hauing so many victories and such good successe in theyr owne countreys ouer the Persi∣ans and others, were as greedie as the Romanes were to win other countries, & the Greekes had the like lucke with the Syracusans, as Mar. Crassus had with the Par∣thians, who in both the battels at Syracusa, the one by Not Demo∣sthenes the Orator, bus a captaine of that name. land, the other by sea, were ouerthrowne by the Syracu∣sans, by the rashnesse of Demosthenes, who was Ge∣nerall with Niceas in this voyage, beeing malicious∣ly counselled by Alcibiades, to commence warre a∣gainst the Syracusans, but after these victories which the Syracusans hadde ouer the Athenians at the Ri∣uer Asinanius, where was the most cruell slaughter
of the poore wretches the Athenians, euen as they were a drinking, vntill Niceas fell downe flat at Gilippus feete, and yeelded himselfe, Demosthenes beeing taken The victory of the Syra∣cusans ouer the Atheniās prisoner before, not Demosthenes the Orator, but an o∣ther Captaine in Athens of that name, and hauing taken the residue of the Captaines vnslaine, brought them to∣gether in troupes, first vnarmed thē, & taking their wea∣pons frō thē, hung thē vp as tropheys, vpō the goodliest young trees that grew by the Riuers side, in token of tri∣umph, then they put on triumphing garlands on theyr Plut. in Nicea. heads, hauing trimmed the horses in triumphant man∣ner, leading all the horses of the enemies shauen, with some of the best captaines in chaines, entered into the Citie of Syracusa with great pompe, and after they had put all the Athenian captaines to death, and had impri∣soned the best, and solde the slaues and poore wretches as bondmen, and burned them in the forehead with the print of a horse. The Syracusans decreed a feast for euer to bee ce∣lebrated (in memorie of the Athenians) in Syracu∣sa, called Asinarus, after the name of the Riuer Asinarius feast. where the victorie was gotten, by the counsell of Euri∣cles the Orator, with sacrifice to their goddes. Ni∣ceas and Demosthenes, both Generalls of the Atheni∣ans, killed themselues by a word sent to them by Her∣mocrates, to auoyd the furious crueltie of the Syra∣cusans. Niceas. Yet the Syracusans did not so much annoy the A∣thenians as the Lacedemonians did, theyr neighbours and countrey men, in the great battell at the Riuer of Aegospota∣mos. Gotes, where the Athenians were so ouerthrowne, and the citie of Athens it selfe was destroyed vnto the verie ground by Lysander.
After Lysander had destroyed Athens, Antipater king of Macedonia at the battell at Cranon, which was the vt∣ter destruction of the Greekes, the rather for that Philip The battell at Cranon. king of Macedonia before had giuen a great ouerthrowe to the Greekes in the battell at Cheronea, by the meanes of Demosthenes, who would neuer haue the Greekes to yeeld, neither to Philip, nor to his sonne Alexander the great, and though Alexander after his father, thought to haue made a full conquest of all Greece, and began with Thaebes, tooke the citie, and rased it to the ground, slew sixe thousand Thaebans, solde thirtie thousand slaues, and spared none but such as were friends and kinsmen to Pindarus the Poet, whom Alexander loued no lesse, then Augustus loued Arius the Philosopher, for whose sake he spared the whole streete in Alexandria where A∣rius dwelt. The miserie of the Thaebans by Alexander brought downe, made the Phoceans, the Plataeans, the Atheni∣ans, and all Greece, to quake for feare of Alexander; hee spared Priests and religious people, and such as were kin The feare of Alex in Greece. to any of the Macedonian Lords, and this did Alexan∣der onely to terrifie Greece, and to bring them in subiec∣tion without further warre: so that the victory of Anti∣pater at the battell of Cranon, after that Philip and his sonne Alexander had brought Greece so lowe, brake quite the backe of Greece, for Antipater so tirannized o∣uer the Grecians, that he spared none, especially the O∣rators, by whose meanes onely he knew Greece so long resisted kings. Yet neither Philip king of Macedonia, with his bat∣tell at Cheronea, nor Alexander the great with his victo∣ry ouer Thaebes, neither Antipaters victory at Cranon, har∣med Greece so much as their ciuill warres, which is the
ouerthrowe of all Common-wealths, and the decay of all states, whereof the example you may read. Octauius Augustus after he had vanquished Mar. An∣tonius, in their ciuill warres in a battell by sea at Actium, from whence Antonius fled into Egipt after Cleopatra, where Antonius and Cleopatra ryoting in Alexandria, A battell at Actium. feasting and dauncing for fewe dayes, vntill Antonius hearing that Augustus followed him as hee followed Cleopatra, dispairing to haue any longer peace with Oc∣tauius, Plut. in An∣tonio. slew himselfe, whom Cleopatra buried, and after in short time slew her selfe, ouer whom triumphed Ostaui∣us, carrying her picture from Egipt in his triumph into Rome, as Iu. Caesar his vncle in his ciuil warres betweene him and Pompey, carried the pictures of Cato, Petronius, and others in his triumphes, from Affrike vnto Rome, at what time the greatest, and most famous library of the world was burned, which Pio. Philadelphus had prepa∣red and gathered together in Alexandria in Egipt, to the number of foure hundred thousand volumes, at what time Philadelphus sent to Ierusalem to the high Priest E∣leazarus for the Hebrew Bible, and for seuentie two The library of Philadel∣phus in A∣lexandria burnt. learned men to translate it out of the Hebrew into the Greeke tongue, which were all burned and destroyed, as well in the ciuill warres betweene Iulius Caesar & Pam∣pey, as in the ciuill warres betweene Mar. Antonius and Augustus Caesar. The like library of Pisistratus in Athens, was destroy∣ed by Sylla, who after he had subdued the most part of The library in Athens destroyed. the cities of Greece, he laid siege to Athens, tooke it about midnight, with such a noise, number of hornes, and sound of trumpets in order of battell, with their swords drawne making such an vncredible slaughter, that the greatnesse of that murther, and the number of the per∣sons
that were slaine could not be knowne, the noblest men of the citie were in such dispaire, that they made account to liue no longer, because they sawe such tiran∣nie and crueltie in Sylla, that an infinite number slew themselues before they should come to Syllas hand, at which time the learned libraries at Athens were destroy∣ed quite and burned. The most famous library at Pergamus, gathered to∣gether of all the vniuersities of the world, by the great diligence and industry of Attalus and Eumenes, kings of The library of Attalus & Eumenes in Asia de∣stroyed. Asia, of the which library one Euporion had the charge, by the appointment of Antiochus the great, which was also burnt and destroyed in the warres of Asia, between Antiochus the great and the Romanes, which Antiochus by the perswasiō of Hanibal, would take warres in hand against the Romanes, supposing by his two Elephants, whom he named Aiax and Patroclus, to terrifie the Ro∣manes with these beasts. Hanibal might haue tolde him he had foure score Elephants in his warres against Scypio Aiax and Patroclus. Affrican, and after Hanibal was ouerthrowne, and his E∣lephants brought to Rome. Metellus at his victorie at Pa∣normus, sent to Rome a hundred foure and twentie Ele∣phants, and fiftie yeares before Metellus, Pirrhus was glad to leaue foure Elephants to beautifie the triumphes of Curius Dentatus, and to forsake the Romanes, and to flye to his countrie. Antiòchus the great might haue knowne this well, eyther by himselfe, or by Hanibal, but being o∣uerthrowne of the Romanes, the library also of Perga∣mum was destroyed. Againe, the most noble library at Rome began by A∣sinius The library at Rome. Pollio, and finished by Mar. Varro, was such, that both these great learned men had their Images and sta∣tues set vp in the market place at Rome, while yet they liued.
If the Romanes had bene as desirous of bookes and learning, as they were of bloud and spoile, Caesar might as wel haue brought the library frō Alexandria to Rome, as he brought the pictures of Cato, Petronius, and others from Affrike to Rome, or as Augustus brought the picture of Cleopatra. Lu. Scypio might as well haue brought vnto Rome the library of Pergamus from Asia, as to bring in long tables painted the forme and likenesse of 130. cities & townes, which he subdued and conquered in Asia. And so Lu. Sylla might haue brought the library of Athens to Rome, as well as he did bring all the cities of The Ramans onely profes∣sed armes. Greece set out and painted brauely in tables, banners and ensignes to aduance his triumph, but the Romanes e∣steemed nothing but victories, they weighed not for bookes, but for battels, they banished Mathematicians and Philosophers out of Rome, and out of all Italy, for the Romans professed onely armes, and yet many of them were learned: for Cato though learned himselfe, yet hee would haue no Philosophy read in Rome, hee much dis∣liked that Carneades the Academick Philosopher, (who came as Embassador from Athens to Rome) should tarrie long there, least the Romain youthes that were desirous of learning and eloquence, would giue ouer the honor and glorie of Armes, and yet many of the best Romaine captaines were well learned. It was but the opinion of Cato, for Philopomen the Greeke, by talking of warres with Captaines, and by reading of Cincius and Euangelus bookes, became an ex∣cellent captaine. Lucullus in like sort himselfe being learned as it see∣med, for Lu. Sylla dedicated his commentarie of 22. bookes vnto Lucullus, who was as noble a Captaine as
any was among the Romanes. Alexander the great would neuer sleepe in his bed without the Iliads of Homer vnder his pillow. So Caesars Cōmentaries at this time is no lesse esteemed with the Turkes, then Homers Iliads with the Greekes. It seemed in those dayes that it was not hard to find famous and learned libraries, when so many learned and profound schollers wrote so much, as Callimachus wrote Callimachus eight hundred bookes. Crisippus a stoik Philosopher, wrote more then others could read, so many Greekes Chrysppus. and many Romanes, wrote all the dayes of their liues, but as you heard, the end of warre, sword, and fire, con∣sumes all, especially of ciuill warres. Some bookes are also mentioned of the Prophets and of the Apostles in their writings, which are not ex∣tant, Nomb. 21. as the booke of the battels of the Lord, the booke of the Iust, called Iasher, and the booke of the Chro∣nicles of the kings of Iudah, often mentioned in the Ios. 10. booke of kings. In the new Testament of the prophesie of Enoch, and the storie of the body of Moses mentioned in the Epistle of Iude, but now not extant. These things are also declared in the writing of Ne∣hemias, how he made a library, and how he gathered the Acts of the Kings, and of the Prophets, the Acts of Da∣uid, 2. Mac. 2. and the Epistles of the kings.
CHAP. XII. Of the breach of the lawe of Armes, of the trechery and murther that came thereby. THe Castle of Thaebes called Cadmea, was taken by Phaebidas, a Spartan cap∣taine, before the Thaebans mistrusted any thing, for there was a league be∣tweene the Thaebans and the Lace∣demonians, howbeit the Lacedemo∣nians against the lawe of armes, tooke the castle, and the captaine that then kept the castle, na∣med Ismenias, and sent him to Sparta as a prisoner. Pe∣lopidas The lawe of armes brok. and others saued themselues by flight; and for that the Spartans brake their league with the Thaebans, hereby grew great warres betweene the Lacedemoni∣ans and the Thaebans, to the vtter confusion of the La∣cedemonians, and the last ouerthrowe of Sparta, at the battell of Leuctres, where Epaminondas & Pelopidas were victors. This ouerthrow fell iustly to the Lacedemonians, for that they brake their league and conditions of peace with the Thaebans, for the which it is lawfull among all nations to commence warre, so is it great wisedome for all nations to auoyd the great harme that may fall by entreatie of peace. For vnder colour of peace many haue practised means to warre: so Metellus deceiued Iugurth with faire words tending to peace. Philip king of Macedonia, hauing a vaine hope to haue peace with the Romains, thinking therby to repaire his
force, being before foiled by the Romanes, was the se∣cond Liui. 32. time vanquished by the Romanes, thrise he rebel∣led, and thrise he was vanquished. This was not that Philip father to Alexander the great, who neuer kept conditions of peace, but false and tre∣cherous in all his promises: he could be as rebellious as the last Philip, but not so soone subdued. Cotys, King of Thracia, vnder colour of a league, was with faire words allured to a banquet, where he was Tacit. 2. annal. slaine. It was the counsel of Archidamus, Agesilaus sonne, to talke of peace to the Lacedemonians, & to prouide for Thucyd. lib. 1 warre, and therefore the Romanes gaue audience out of the citie to any forraine Embassador, especially in matters of peace, and after they would conduct the Em∣bassadors to shipping, to preuent practises and pollicies vnder colours of peace. The Romanes in this imitated the Athenians, who entertained the Embassadors of the Lacedemonians in Oros. li 3. ca. 2 like sort, but Rome and Athens were much deceiued, for the cities of Italy often rebelled against Rome, and the ci∣ties of Greece against Athens. Much murther and slaughter was euer found in the Godolias. breach of faith, and much mischiefe committed vnder colour of peace. Godolias being made gouernour by Nabuchodonozer ouer the rest of Iudea, after Ierusalem was destroyed, was deceiued by the faire words of Ismael, who came with ten men with him that were sworne to him to do what he would haue them to do in Mazphah, to the house of Godoliah, where he was well entertained, but Ismael slew Godoliah, all the Iewes, and all the Chaldeys that Ismael found waighting on Godoliah, and the next day after
that Ismael had slaine Godolias, certaine men came from Ierem. cap. 41. Sychem, from Siloh, and from Samaria, to the number of fourescore, which had shaued their beards and rent their cloathes, with meate offering and incense to offer in the house of the Lord. And Ismael went weeping out of Mazphah to meete them, and said; Come and goe to Mazphah to see Godoliah the Gouernour, where Ismael slue them in the midst of Mazphah, as hee did Godoliah, in the one he deceiued Godolias with faire words, in the other hee deceiued them with teares to come to Maz∣phah to see Godoliah, whom he slue all sauing tenne, and threw their bodies into one pit. Triphon, one of Ismaels broode, after he had taken Ionathan by deceit, he sent him to Ptolomeu, where hee tooke Ionathans children for hostage, and money for his redemption. So Triphon promised to deliuer Ionathan, Triphon. but Triphon killed Ionathan and his children against his faith, and promise, and the law of armes of all nations. Alexander king of Syria fled to Arabia, to be defen∣ded from Ptolomeu his father in lawe king of Egipt, but Zabdiel the Arabian slue him most treacherously, and sent his head to Egipt to Ptolomeu. Bacchides and Alcinus, Gouernors vnder the most cruell king Demetrius, slue threescore Assideans, that came to entreat Antiochus for peace, against the lawe of The breach of the lawe of armes. armes. In like sort Nicanor thought to deceiue Machabaeus, as Antiochus did, vnder colour and pretence to seeke peace. Met. Suffetius, Generall of the Albaines, promising by oath his faith and truth to the Romanes, and that his friendship should not faile to be readie at the Romaines commaundement, yet breaking his oath in the same,
practising his treachery against the Romane armie, he was bound to two toppes of trees both hands and feete, Valer. max. lib. 7. cap. 4. and terribly pulled in peeces by the trees. The breach of faith by the lawe of armes set downe, was euer among the Romaines most seuerely puni∣shed: in so much that the Romaine souldiers stoned Posthumius, for that he denied the spoile which he pro∣mised to the souldiers. The like is read, that the Embassadors of the Lace∣demonians, being sent to the king of Persia, to haue his Theucyd. lib. 2. aide against the Athenians, being in league with the La∣cedemonians, were taken and brought to Athens, and by the Athenians slaine. The Embassadors of Carthage, and Macedonia, be∣cause they did conspire against the Romaines contrary to their league, were taken, and by the law of armes iust∣ly slaine. Diuers Embassadors were slaine for breaking theyr leagues against the lawe of armes, as the Embassadors of the Romanes were slaine by the Illyrians, the Embassa∣dors of the Athenians by the Persians, the Embassadors of the Persians by the Macedonians, the Embassadors of Dauid king of Iudah by the Ammonites, not slain, but 2. Sam. cap. 10. ignominiously abused; for Dauid sent his Embassadors to Ammō the king to comfort him for the death of his fa∣ther, in kindnes & of good will, but they had halfe their beards shaued, and their garments cut off at their but∣tocks, & thus were they turned back in reproach with∣out thankes to Dauid. So were the Embassadors of the Romanes without cause against the lawe of armes, most iniuriously slaine by the Illyrians, who were gouerned vnder a wo∣man, to the great reproach of the Romaines, but the
Romane Embassadors being thus slain, had their statues put vp in the Oratory, and their names written vpon L. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 5. their Images, P. Iunius, & T. Coruncanus, but the Ro∣manes reuenged it to the losse of their kingdome. Thus euery where trechery and murther was com∣mitted in all countreys, vnder colour of leagues and lawes broken, and most time without eyther lawe or league, but with violence and trecherie practised by ma∣ny false stratagems among all nations. As Zopyrus practised by a dissembling stratagem to bring the Persians into the hands of Cyrus, though some Zopirus. say it was Darius, by cutting & deforming his face, and mangling his body, in this pittiful sort cōming to Babilō, Front. lib. 3. cap. 3. saigning and dissembling that he had hardly escaped frō Cyrus army, promised the Babilonians to do them great seruice to reuenge his wrong, if they would vse his ser∣uice. By these subtill and craftie meanes he brought Cy∣rus to be king of Babilon, of this Zopirus, Cyrus was wont to say, that he wished as many friends like Zopirus, as a Pomegranate had kernels. The like stratagem vsed the Grecian Sinon for Aga∣memnon in the warres of Troy, therefore Agamemnon said, he had rather haue tenne Nestors, or tenne Vlixes, Ten Nestors, & ten Vlixes then tenne Achilles, or tenne Aiax: for more doth coun∣sell and pollicie profit in warre, then force or courage, and therefore when Achilles dyed, Aiax made claime to his armour, as one that might claime it best by the lawe Aiax. of Armes, clayming a combat if any one would say the contrary. Aiax being warned by his olde father Telamon, when he went with Agamemnon from Greece to Troy, to fight valiantly, & to aske at the gods hands good successe and fauour, but Aiax more proud then wise, answered his fa∣ther,
that slouthfull men and cowards seeke helpe at Plyn. lib. 35. cap. 9. Gods handes, but said hee could ouercome without Gods helpe. Vlixes also made claime to Achilles armour, saying, that his pollicie and counsell did profit more the Greci∣ans in the warres at Troy, then the sword of Aiax. Aga∣memnon knowing how much pollicie and wise counsell auailed in wars, gaue to Vlixes the armor of Achilles, for Agamemnon said, had he had but ten such councellors as Cyrus and Agamem∣nons wish. Nestor was, he doubted not but soone to subdue Troy. So Cyrus spake of Zopirus, and so Pirrhus spake of Romane souldiers, Plus praestant senes consilio quam inuenes armis. Thus the Polymarchies of the earth seeke to cōquer another world like Alexander, being not cōtented with one, and couer all the seas with their sailes like Xerxes, Xerxes. Nimrod. and to build castles high vnto the heauens like Nimrod, who wold build Babel to reach vp to heauen, to reuenge the iniury done to his predecessors by the vniuersall de∣ludge, resembling much the battell of the Gyants, who challenged Iupiter, and the rest of the gods to battell: but though this be fabulous cōcerning the Gyants, yet the building of Babel is written by Moses, that Babel was builded so high by Nimrod, both to auoyd a second de∣ludge, and to reuenge his stock and family destroyed in the first: but the Lord saw their folly, confounded their workes by a confusion of one language into many. Philo might aske a questiō aswell now, why the Lord did not ouerthrow the tower of Babel with winde, tem∣pest, and thunderbolts, as he did aske, why the Lord did not destroy Egipt with Lyons, Tygres, Beares and such. But as Philo answered his owne question, that it was to Philo. fright them with Frogges, Flies, Grashoppers, and suche simple vermines, to shewe his mercie, and to saue them to repentance, and not to destroy them with
wilde beasts. And so with the like reason Philo, or any man for Philo, may now answere, that the Lord would not destroy the Tower of Babel with tempest and wind to destroy the people, but by diuiding of one tongue in∣to many, that they might acknowledge the Lord to be God, and to confesse their owne folly. If Nimrod had confessed his sinne, and said I haue 2. Reg. 12. sinned, as Dauid spake to Nathan the Prophet, or with Daniel, who said, Peccauimus, iniquitatē fecimus: or with Dani. 9. Nehemias, who said, I and my fathers house haue sinned, to whom the Lord shewed mercy. Nehemi. 1. Wicked Pharao also said to Moses, I haue sinned a∣gainst the Lord, and the Lord is iust, I and my people Exod. 9. are wicked. Saul said I haue sinned, and haue done foolishly. So Iudas the traytor said, I haue sinned in betraying inno∣cent 1. Reg. ca. 26. blood, but the Lord accepteth not the fained Math. 27. confession of wicked men.
CHAP. XIII. Of securitie of Generalls in warres. Of celetitie in victories. Of diuers dreames and names giuen. TWo much securitie was in Pompey his souldiers, af∣ter he had giuen two repulses to Caesars souldiers at Dyrachium, as Caesar said himself, the victory might haue bene Pompeys, if he had followed his good fortune. So againe if Pompey had followed his good lucke, and had not staied the Romane youthes being fierce to goe for∣wards at the battell at Pharsalia, he had put Caesar to grea∣ter daunger then he was at Dyrachium. So Hannibal was toucht with that fault by Hamilcar the Affrican, that if he had gone forwards and brought his armie after the battell at Canne before Rome, as Scipio Securitie in warres hurt∣full. after his ouerthrow of Hannibal brought his force be∣fore Curthage, Rome might haue bene in as great a daun∣ger as Carthage was. Nothing abused Pompey so much as his owne cap∣taines, flattering him, and calling him the great Aga∣memnon, king of kings, by Domitius, Scypio, Spinther, and Pompeys pa∣rasites. others, after the victory at Dyrachium, assuring them∣selues soone to ouerthrow Caesars armie, and conten∣ding in brauery for offices at their return to Rome, draw∣ing lots who should be Consuls, Praetors, Quaestors, or high Bishop, which Caesar himselfe was at that time. It should seeme that Pompey and his captaines, made no doubt of the victory, for when his campe was taken, his tents and pauilions were full of nosegaies, and gar∣lands of mirtle, and their coaches all couered with flow∣ers,
their tables full of bowles of wine, as men more rea∣die to doo sacrifice for ioy before the victorie, then ar∣med and prepared to fight for the victory, At Fortuna vitrea cum splendet frangitur? So also Tigranes king of Armenia, was flattered with his Leiftenants, Captaines, and other Parasites, who scoffed and flowted the Romanes, they sported and made a May▪ game of Lucullus army, some deuiding the spoile, and drawing lots before the battell began, much like to the Cherussians, the Sueuians, and the Sycam∣brians, who gathered themselues together in a great ar∣my, they likewise like the Armenians, little esteeming L. Flor. lib. 4 cap. 12. the Romaines, deuided the Romane spoiles betweene them before they fought for it: the Cherussians would haue all the Romane horses, the Sueuians would haue all the gold & siluer of the Romanes, & the Sycambri∣ans all the Romain captiues taken prisoners in the wars. Thus had they fully concluded before the battel began, but it fell out otherwise, for Drusus the Romaine Cap∣taine ouerthrew them, that their horses, their cattels, The victory of Drusus. their chaines, their gold and siluer, and they themselues were a spoile and a pray to the Romanes. Incerti exitus pugnarum & Mars communis said Cicero, it was euer found in all warres, that Nimia fiducia semper noxia. The like victorie had Lucullus ouer Tigranes king of Armenia, whose captaines before scoffed and flowted The victory of Lucullus ouer the A∣thenians. Lucullus army, deuiding the Romane spoyles before the battell beganne, but they were ouerthrowne by Lucul∣lus, to the slaughter of a hundred thousand footemen, and the most part of the horsemen slaine, and the king himselfe hardly escaped: and for that so many were slaine of the enemies, and so fewe of the Romans,
Plutarch saith, that the Sun saw not the like ouerthrow, that such varietie of shews were seen, of Chariots, Coa∣ches, Plut. in vita Luculls. and of infinite number of Cartes, that carried the spoiles, of Armours, of Ensignes, of battering peeces, besides twentie cupbords full of siluer plate, thirtie cup∣boords full of golden vessels, eight Moiles laden with golde, a hundred and seuen Moiles loaden with sil∣uer coine. Crassus, at the sight of this Lucullus triumph, was af∣terwards when he was Consul with Pompey the great, so beyond all measure most desirous with all celeritie to take his iourney against the Parthians, with more haste then good speed. In like sort the sight of Milciades triumphe mooued Themistocles in his youth to say, that he could not sleepe in his bed, before he had obtained the like triumph, and so he proued among so many great captaines in Greece, one of the greatest, for he was being but a young youth at the battell at Plataea, being the first battell and the first Themistocles celeritie in his victories. victorie that the Grecians had ouer the Persians. Hee was also at the battell at Marathon, with more com∣mendatiō then he had at Plataea, but in the battels at Sa∣lamina and Artemisium, all Greece gaue him the honour and fame, the one by sea, the other by land: he did all thinges with such celeritie, that Themistocles himselfe would say, that whatsoeuer hapned to him well, hap∣ned by celeritie. But it seemed that Themistocles with all celeritie mis∣sed to borrowe money in the Ile of Andria, though he brought two great and mightie gods with him from Athens, the one called the God of Loue, the other the God of Force, requesting the Andrians to lend some money to please & to satisfie the want of their Gods.
But he was answered by the people of Andria, that there were two as great goddesses with them in Andria, as there were in Athens, the which commaunded the Andrians, neither to lend, nor to giue any money to Themistocles gods, saying our goddesse of Pouerty weigh∣eth not for loue, neither doth the goddesse of Impossi∣bilitie weigh for force. The Lacedemonians were not so religious as the Athenians were, for Agesilaus tooke another course thē Themistocles did, when he wanted money, he went to the confines of Persia, to spoile and to plague the Persi∣ans, for the Persians euer feared the greatnesse of Agesi∣laus, Thirty thou∣sand archers draue Agesi∣laus out of Persia. and yet was he but a litle lame man of stature, that hee was satisfied with golde and siluer to returne to his countrey, that Agesilaus would often iest and say, that thirtie thousand Archers did driue him out of Asia, which was the Persian coine, that was stampt with the print of an Archer: with these Archers the Persians cau∣sed oftentimes Agesilaus to returne frō Persia into Greece againe. The like iest did Gilippus seruant, he told the Ephories of Sparta, that his maister Gilippus had vnder the roofe An Owle printed in the coine of Athens. of his house, more Owles then all Athens, for the coine of Athens was stampt with the print of an Owle, as the Persians was with the print of an Archer: for Gilippus had taken from his maister Lysander much money, and hidden them vnder the shield of his house, and so by his seruant was in a iest betraied. Thus leauing Agesilaus with his Archers, and Gilippus seruant with his Owles, I will returne to Themistocles, to whom Marcellus shall be compared in celeritie, of whom Hannibal said, that Marcellus could not be quiet, neither with good for∣tune, nor bad, neither victor, nor conuicted.
Scypio Affrican with such celeritie, after he had con∣quered Hannibal at the battell at Zama, soone subdued Carthage. Pau. Aemilius with great celeritie subuerted the whole Empire of Macedonia, and brought their king Persius and Gentius king of the Illyrians, both prisoners vnto Rome in his tryumphe. Pompey the great vsed such celeritie, that within for∣tie daies he vanquished all the Pyrates, who had a thou∣sand ships on the seas, and taken aboue foure hundred townes, they robd and spoyld all marchant venturers, Plut. in vita Pompei. rifled and destroyed all the Ilands and townes vpon the sea coast, and destroyed many Temples, they feared no force, neither weighed for kings nor subiects, and grew so strong, that they ruled both land & sea without lawe. But Pompey had such victory ouer them, that after the great slaughter in the battell at the citie Coracesium, he tooke twentie thousand persons prisoners: and thus in lesse then three moneths Pompey ended and quite van∣quished the Pyrates. Celeritie praised. Caesar in all his warres excelled all men in expediti∣on and celeritie, in the which he had such wonderfull good successe against Pompey in Pharsalia, against his sonne in Affrica, against Affranius in Hispaine, against Cato in Vtica, with such expedition, that he became as you read, being one that was denied to be Consul, to be Perpetuus Dictator, and the first Emperour of Rome. Clau. Nero the Consul, considering that Italy was plagued by Hannibal in Lucania, and by Asdrubal his brother in Vmbria, made such secret great hast, that be∣fore Hannibal knew he went out of his campe in Luca∣nia, he was in Vmbria, and before Asdrubal knew he was in Vmbria, he was with his fellow Consul at the battell
of Metaurus, where Asdrubal was slaine, his armie ouer∣throwne, and his head sent to his brother Hanibal in Lu∣cania: so that by one Romane stratagem, the two great Polyb. 11. Front. lib. 1. cap. 1. Romane enemies, Hanibal and Asdrubal, were ouer∣throwne, the one slaine at the Riuer Metaurus, and the other driuen from Italy into Affrike. Celeritie vpon deliberation is most necessarie at all times, therefore the chiefe guard about Romulus person, were called Celeres, for their quicknesse and celeritie in executing Romulus commaundement. Dauid king of Iudah had such resolute men called Cerethites about his person, readie with such celeritie to Cerethites effect any thing the king would commaund them, that when they heard the king longing for some water out of the well of Bethelem, they presently ventured theyr liues through the campe of the enemies, and brought water to the king from Bethelem, before the king missed them, but Dauid sacrificed the water vnto the Lord, and would not drinke of it, because his men offered theyr liues for it. Caleb vsed such expedition, after he had viewed and trauelled all the land of Canaan, that he returned within Caleb. fortie dayes to the Hebrew campe with a full resoluti∣on, perswading Ioshua to take the warres in hand. Ehud, one of the Iudges of Israel, who was wont to say to his souldiers, follow mee, went fully resolued to Eglon king of Moab, an enemie of the Lord, and therefore slew him in his chamber. Many souldiers of the Lord, are resolued through faith, to effect many things with celeritie and zeale: so Nomb. 25. Phineas slew Zimri the Israelite, & Cosbi a Lords daugh∣ter of the Madianites, for that they offended the Lord in the campe, and therfore Phineas thrust them through both with his speare.
Iehu, though a wicked man, yet much commended for his resolute zeale, for that he ouerthrew Achabs house, 4. Reg. . 10 slew Baals prophets, and destroyed Baals temple and his aultars. The great kings of the world are resolued to ha∣zard theyr liues to winne fame and glory, eyther by pa∣rasites or flatterers, moued therevnto, or by oracles of theyr Idols, or by visions and dreames especially, as A∣stiages king of the Meades dreamed that his daughter Mandanes which was Cyrus mother, made water that o∣uerflowed all Asia. Astiages dreames. Astiages dreamed the second time, that a vine grew out of his daughters wombe, whose braunches coue∣red all Asia, therefore hee called all his wise men and soothsayers of his kingdome together, to interpret him these two dreames, who tolde him that his daughter should haue a sonne that should bee such a king, that hee should rule ouer all Asia, which made Cyrus so am∣bitious Herod. lib. 1. and proud, that he could not be content with all the kingdomes of Asia, but must goe to be slaine in Scy∣thia. The like dreame sawe Xerxes, before his voyage in to Greece, that in his dreame hee thought hee sawe Xerxes dreams. an Oliue tree crowned, whose boughes and braun∣ches couered the whole earth, and withall suddenly va∣nished Alex. Nea∣polit. genial. lib. 3. away. The same Author writeth, that Iulius Caesar dreamed that he lay with his mother, and by these meanes he was flattered by his soothsayers, that hee should subdue the whole earth. Euen so Hamilcar Generall of the Carthagineans, Cic. diuini. 1. thought hee heard in his sleepe a voyce that hee should the next night suppe in Syracusa, but he was so glad of
his speech, that he was deceiued of his hope, and yet he supt in Syracusa, not as a conqueror but as a prisoner, but was deceiued as Xerxes was by the hope of his crowned Oliue, or as Caesar was by his mother. Hannibal after the taking of Saguntum, dreamed that Iupiter should call him into councell with the goddes, where hee was commaunded to take warres in hand a∣gainst the Romanes, there hee seemed that Iupiter had Cic. diuin. 1. giuen him a captaine to goe before him, euen from the Hanniballs dreame. councell house, one of the company of the gods, and looking behinde him, hee thought he sawe a terrible monstrous Serpent, which Hannibal in his sleepe asked Iupiter what monster that was, which was answered and said to be Vastitatem Italicae, the spoile and destruction of Italy. Homer and Virgil, both faigned that all kinde of dreams passe through two sundry gates, the true dream through the hornie gate, the false dreame through the Iuorie gate. Yet we reade in the sacred scripture, that Ioseph was exalted by expounding Pharaos dreame in Egipt, and so was Daniel, by expounding Nabuchodonozers dreame in Persia. But Ioseph while yet he was amongst his brethren a young boy, dreamed, and tolde his bretheren say∣ing, we were making sheaues in the field, and loe, my sheffe arose and stood vpright, and your sheaues stood round about and made obeysance to my sheffe. Then Iosephes dreame. saide his brethren shalt thou be our king, or shalt thou raigne ouer vs? They hated him before, for that his fa∣ther loued him more thē they, and for his dreame they hated him the more.
And Ioseph told his father and his brethren a second dreame, saying; I sawe the Sunne, the Moone, and the eleuen starres make obeysance to me, and his father re∣buked him, saying; shall I, thy mother, and thy brethe∣ren, come and fall before thee? but yet his father noted his dreame: but his brethren tooke such indignation a∣gainst him, that they solde Ioseph to an Arabian mar∣chant, Iosephs se∣cond dreame who solde him againe into Egipt, where he came by expounding of Pharaos dreame, of the seuen leane Gen. 37. kine that did eate the seuen fatte kine, and yet were but leane, to be the second person, and the onely ruler of Egipt vnder Pharao. Thither came his brethren constrai∣ned by a dearth in Canaan, to buy corne in Egipt, and after Ioseph being knowne, his father Iacob, and all his houshold came. These were the Sunne, the Moone, and eleuen Starres: heere his bretheren performed the dreame, honouring Ioseph vpon their knees, as all Egipt did. In like manner Daniel being a captiue of Nabucho∣donozers, by expounding his dreame, and his sonne Bal∣thazers after him, was commaunded to bee cloathed with purple, and to put a chaine of golde about his Daniel by expounding of dreames. necke, and by proclamation made ruler ouer the third part of the kingdome of Persia, and to be one of the three Princes that ruled the kingdome of Persia, of a hundred seuen and twentie Prouinces vnder King Da∣rius. Dan. 5. & 6 No doubt Ioseph was instructed by an Angell to expound the dreame of Pharao, and Daniel to expound the dreame of Nabuchodonozer. Angels did instruct men, minister vnto men, re∣buke sinners Angels comforted the afflicted, and fore∣told
things, an Angell appeared to Zachary, who told him, that his wife should bring forth a sonne, and his name should be Iohn. So an Angell appeared to the vir∣gin Mary, and said shee should haue a sonne, and his name shalbe Iesus. Abraham in the feast which he made to the Angels vnder the oake of Mambre, was promised hee should haue a sonne by Sarah, and was named by the Angels Isaac, laughing, for that his mother laughed, hearing she Isaac named should haue a childe in her olde age, being foure score and tenne. So was also Ismael, Solomon, and Iosias, named long be∣fore they were borne. The olde Hebrewes tooke example, for that the name of Abram was chaunged by the Lord, and named Abraham, which signified the father of many nations. Iacob likewise was named of the Angell, (with whom hee wrestled) Israel, the prince of God. So the Hebrewes gaue such significant names of things to come vpon their children, that when they re∣membred the names of theyr children, they should also remember the thing signified by the name, as Solomon was named Iedidia, beloued of God, Iosias an oblation to the Lord, and so Ismael the son of Abraham by Agar, Absolon the sonne of Dauid, and others more, named of the Hebrewes in like manner. Women onely gaue names to their children among the Hebrewes, as Leah and Rachel, Iacobs wiues, named Womē amōg the Israelites gaue names to their chil∣dren. the twelue sonnes of Iacob. So Sampson was named of his mother, and so also was Samuel named by his mother, for the Hebrew women gaue such names to their children, as should containe
something signified by the name, not following the fa∣thers name, but one onely name, which the Hebrew women gaue to their children. The Romanes had three or foure names common∣ly, contrary to the Hebrewes, and besides three or foure names which were proper vnto them, they would pur∣chase as many names as they could get, as Pub. Cornel. Scypio, had the fourth name Affricanuss for his conquest ouer Affricke, and his brother Lu. Scypio, was surnamed Asiaticus, for the fourth name, because hee subdued Asia. Lu. Q. Metellus, surnamed Numidicus, by his victo∣ries in Numidia. Mummius, for his victories in Achaia, surnamed Achaicus. So the Romanes being glorious people full of their victories, would possesse as many names as they could haue, and being not contented with so many names, they would haue the moneths of the yeare to be named after their names. So Iu. Caesar called the moneth Quin∣tilis, after his owne name Iuly, Augustus the second Em∣perour, Moneths named after the names of Emperours. called the moneth Sextilis, after his name Au∣gust. So other Emperours imitating them, as Nero would haue the moneth of Aprill after his name Neronius, and Domitianus would haue October named Domitianus. Likewise Claudius wold haue May called after his name Claudius: and Germanicus would haue September na∣med Germanicus after his name. So the Grecians began to honor Demetrius in like sort, in so much they decreed that the month Manichion which is Ianuary, shalbe cal∣led Dēmetrion, and their feast Dionisia which was dedi∣cated to Bacchus, should be called Demetria, after Deme∣trius name, and that Demetrius, and his father king Anti∣gonus,
should haue their pictures set vp & carried in the sacred banner of Peplon, where none but the picture of Iupiter and Minerua were set and placed. Clearchus the tyrant would be called sonne vnto Iu∣piter, as well as Alexander the great, so king Antigonus, because hee might be called Bacchus, hee resembled Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 1. cap. 28. him outward in his habite, ware a Diademe on his head made of Iuie like Bacchus, and for his scepter, bare in his hand Thyrsus. The Greekes also, most commonly had but one name, vnlesse he had a name added vnto it, either by some vertue or vice noted in him: as Pericles for his elo∣quence and sweete perswasion, was surnamed Olympius. Aristides for his integritie, surnamed the iust. Antigonus for his liberalitie was surnamed Doson, and The sur∣names of great Ge∣neralls and Captaines in Greece. yet reported in Plutarch, that hee promised any thing, and performed nothing. So likewise the Greekes named those that had any blemish on their bodies, as Antiochus surnamed Griphos for his great belly. Another Antigonus surnamed Gonatos, for that hee had great knees. Demetrius, surnamed Polycrates, for his inuention and skill of warlike engines as Elepolis, there∣by as famous welnigh as Archimedes: otherwise the Gre∣cians vsed but one name. And although Agesilaus was a great souldier, for skil and knowledge in warre so famous, that hee was sent from Egipt vnto Greece, for to be their Generall, and al∣so among the Persians so feared, and among the Greci∣ans so esteemed, and yet hee was called but Agesilaus, without any surname of addition among the Grecians, neither other great captaines of Greece, as Milciades, The∣mistocles, Cymon, and others, had no such surnames by their victories as the Romanes had.
The Hebrues also had but proper names, & some had Rabbi, Iuda ben Dama. Rab. Si ben Gama∣lael. Rab. Ismael ben Elizei. Genebrar∣dus, lib. 2. cron. their fathers name added vnto it, so our Sauiour in the Gospell named Peter, Simon the sonne of Ionas, so was it oftentimes spoken to Esay the Prophet, Esay thou sonne of Amos; so all the Iewish Rabines were named after their fathers names, as Iuda the sonne of Dama, Simeon the sonne of Gamaliel, Ismael the sonne of Elizei, but a∣mong the old Hebrewes as you heard, they were so na∣med as pleased the mothers. The Egiptians vsed also Greeke additions to their names, as Pto. surnamed Euergetes, for his good deeds and benefites to his countrey. Pto. surnamed Ceraunos, that is to say, lightning, for his quicke dispatch. Pto. surnamed Aetos, an Eagle for his swiftnesse and celeritie, and so Philadelphus, and other kings and great men of Egipt, added to their own proper names Greek surnames. The surnames of the last kings of Egipt began from a souldiers name, who grew so great among the Egipti∣ans, that he strengthened and established the countrey, being subdued and ouerthrowne before by the Persi∣ans, that the Alexandrians so hououred him after his Alex. Nea∣polit. lib. 1. cap. 2. death, that all his successors the kings of Egipt, were cal∣led after his name Ptholomei; for as all the first kings of Egipt were called Pharaones, so were the last kings of E∣gipt called Ptolomei. So Arsaces a poore Scythian borne, a great souldier, Arsaces the name of all the kings of Parthia. with a great armie of poore banished men of the Par∣thians, ouerthrew king Zaleucus, and restored the Par∣thians to their libertie, for the which benefites he was made king, and all the kings his successors, were named Arsaces after his name.
These men seeke name and fame on earth, where they haue no citie, nor place permanent, but houses made of clay, and forget to builde immortalitie and eter∣nitie in heauen, they make sumptuous and durable tombes for their bodies, like the Egiptians, which make pyramides for their dead bodies to dwel for euer. Some againe like the Agrigentines, which build them such strōg houses as though they shuld liue alwaies, and yet eate & drinke, as though they should die the next day. But we leaue these builders that build towers in the aire with Nimrod, and Iuorie houses with Achab, and would lose immortalitie with Vlisses, for Ithaca his country, and come to Paul, who would be losed from the bodie and be with Christ, and with Ioshua to fixe our triumphes and tropheys in Heauen, with the euerlasting Ioshua Christ Iesus the sonne of God, who purchased vnto vs eternall habitations, and went in bodie before vs to prepare for vs a dwelling place: to him therefore with the father and the ho∣ly Ghost, be all honor, glory and praise, for euer. FINIS.
A Table containing a briefe summe of the whole Booke. Matters contained in the first Booke. THirtie nine kings ouerthrown by Moses & Ioshua page. 2 Of diuers combats pa. 3 Of the vow of Cherim pa. Ead. Adam rescued by the seed of the woman pa. 5 Elizeus leadeth the army of Ben∣hadad blinde pa. 6 They that mourned in Ierusalem, were marked with the letter Tau Ead. Of diuers and seuerall markes. pa. 7 The time that barbours were first seene in Rome pa. 9. Abraham the first man marked. pa. Ead. Abrahaham feared Abimelech and Pharao for his wife. pa. 10 Abraham read Astronomie in E∣gipt pa. Ead. Abraham rescued the fiue kings, and Lot his nephewe pa. 11 The victory and stratagem of Ge∣deon ouer the Madianites. pa 12 Dauids victory at Bezor in rescu∣ing his two wiues. pa. Ead. Three Angels feasted at Mam∣bre with Abraham pa. 13. Foure named before they were borne. pa. Ead. The Ismaelites would not bee cal∣led Agareni of Agar, but Sa∣razeni of Sarah. pa. 14. The Tower of Babell builded by Nimrod pa. 15 Ninus the first Monarch. pa. ead. Alexanders voyage to India. pa. Ead. Zoroastes laughed at his birth. pa. 16. The first Idolatry by Ninus. pa. ead. Baall the first Idoll pa. 17 The male children of the Hebrews throwne to Nilus pa. 18 The tyrannie of Pharao pa. Ead. A comparison betweene the Egip∣tians and the Romanes pa. 19 The armies of the Lord in Egipt vnder Moses pa. Ead. The first plague of Egipt. pa. 20 The comparison of the first plague with the first persecution vnder Nero pa. 21 Nero slew himselfe. pa. 22. The second miracle and triumph of Moses in Egipt. pa 23 The blasphemy of Nicanor puni∣shed. pa. Ead. Domitianus Image set vp in the Temple at Ierusalem pa. 24 Domitianus slain in his owne house by his seruants pa. 25
Iamnes and Iambres, Phoraos soothsayers pa. ead. The third persecution vnder Tra∣iane pa. 26 Philo was not heard of Nero. pa. ead. The fourth army of the Lord in Egipt, was swarmes of flyes. pa. 27 The fighting of the Iewes with wild beasts pa. 28 The yeelding of tyrants pa. 29 Pharao and Esau compared. pa. 30 Septimus and Antiochus murthe∣red pa. 31 The tyrannie of Antiochus against the Iewes pa. ead. Antiochus cōfessed the great wrong he did to the Iewes at Ierusa∣lem pa. 32 The fable of Manetho and others, concerning Moses, whom he na∣med Osarphis pa. 33 The persecution of the seuen bre∣theren pa. 34 The seuenth plague of Egipt. 35 The comparison of the seuenth persecution vnder Decius, with the seuenth plague. pa. 36 Great plagues and sicknesses vpon the Romanes pa. 37 Hipocrisie of Pharao pa. ead. Pericles made a lawe in Athens a∣gainst straungers pa. 38 The eight persecution vnder Va∣lerianus pa. ead. Valerianus the Emperor of Rome, vsed as a blocke by Sapor king of Persia pa. 39 The ninth plague of Egipt. pa. 40 The dissimulation of Pharao. pa. ead. The ninth persecution vnder Au∣relianus pa. ead. Christ denied among the Romanes. pa. 41 A golden target sent by the Sena∣tors pa ead. The euill end of cruell Emperors. pa. ead. The tenth plague of Egipt. pa. 42 The tenth persecution vnder Dio∣clesian pa. ead. When persecution ended, heresie began pa. 43 Arius with diuers crewes of here∣tiques pa. ead. The foure generall Councels. pa. 44 The marching of Pharao after the Hebrewes pa. 45 The drowning of Pharao in the red sea pa. ead. Appians impudent lies against Mo∣ses pa. 46 The education of Moses in Egipt. pa. 47 Moses chosen captaine for Pha∣rao pa. ead. Moses death sought by the Priests
of Egipt pa. ead. The victories of Moses in Aethio∣pia pa. 48 The marriage of Moses to Thar∣bis, the king of Aethiope his daughter pa. ead. Appians lyes pa. 49 Philo his speech of the Hebrewes. pa. 50 The law of Armes set downe by the Lord to Moses pa. 51 The stratagems of Archidamus, Epaminondas, and Pericles. pa. 52 Of the lawe of Armes pa. 53 Of the Priests Mantes in Athens. &c. pa. 54 The remoouing of the Arke. pa. ead. The numbring and mustering of the Hebrew army by Moses. pa. 55 The Hebrewes were left in the midst of their enemies to practise armes pa. ead. Stratagems of Marius and Cy∣rus pa. 56 Seuentie gouernours chosen vnder Moses pa. 57 The Leuites tents about the Ta∣bernacle pa. ead. The placing of the foure Stan∣darts of the Hebrewes. page. 58 The marching of the Hebrue camp. pa. 59 Xerxes great army pa. ead. Chiefe and strong forts of the Gen∣tiles pa 60 The Hebrewes named of the E∣giptians, Hicsos pa. 61 Of the seuerall standarts of the Gentiles pa. 62 The setting vp of the Tabernacle, and dedication of the Aultar. pa. 63 The multitude of Temples and Aultars among the Gentiles. pa 64 Superstitious fondnesse of the Gen∣tiles pa. 65 The victories of Moses and diuers kings pa. 66 The battell at Riphidim pa. ead. The ouerthrowe of the Canaanites and Arad their king by the He∣brewes pa. 67 Of diuers and sundrie vowes of the Gentiles pa. 68. & 69 Of diuers Heathenish feasts. pa. 70 Espialls sent by Ioshua to Canaan. pa 71 Fearful reports in warres are dan∣gerous pa. 72 Diuers stratagemes pa. ead. A Romaine Stratagem. pa. 73 The stratageme of Clearchus. pa. 74 Disobedience punished pa. 75 The vnthankefulnesse of the He∣brewes
for so many great victo∣ries pa. 76 Martiall punishment pa. ead. 600000. died for disobedience in the wildernesse pa. 77 The great obedience of all crea∣tures to God pa. ead. The offences of Moses and Aa∣ron at the water of Meribah pa. 78 The martial lawes in Egipt. pa. ead. The martiall lawes in Persia pa. 79 The martiall lawe of the Romanes and of the Lacedemonians. pa. ead. The charge of a new army giuen to Ioshua pa. 80 Commendations of Generalls a∣mong all nations pa. ead. Pirrhus forsooke Italy pa. ead. Elephants first seene in Rome. pa. ead. A stratagem of Hanibal against the Romanes pa. 81 A stratagem of the Romanes a∣gainst Hambal pa. ead. The ouerthrow of Iericho by soun∣ding of rammes hornes pa. 82 Signes giuen of victories pa. 83 Logio fubinnea pa. 84 The straunge fashions of diuers na∣tions in their warres pa 85 Pirrhus brought elephants to Lu∣cania in Italy pa. 86 The numbring of the Hebrewes of their souldiers. pa. 87 The maner and custome of the Ro∣manes and Persians, when their souldiers goe to warres. pa. ead. The battels at Iahaz and Edzei. pa 88 Cyrus for his languages, and Mi∣thridates for his memorie. pa. Ead. Fiue kings ioyned against Ioshua. pa. 89 The victory of Ioshua at Gibeon. pa. ead. Valerianus taken by Sapor king of Persia pa. 90 Pazaites the Turke takē by Tam∣berlane pa. ead. Cratippus saying to Pompey. pa. 91 The sunne stayed ouer Gibeon. pa. ead. Stratagems of Brutus and Hirci∣us pa. 92 The diuers orders of the Heathens going to their warres. pa. 93 Amphictions Iudges of Greece. pa. 95 Xantippus sent from Sparta to Carthage pa. ead. Conons stratagem pa. 96 Byzantium now called Constanti∣nople pa. ead. The olde custome of the Romanes and Persians in choosing theyr kings pa. 97 Description of Xerxes, Agesilaus, Caesar, Darius, and others. pa 98 The battella Besecke pa. 99
The tyrannie of Adonizebech. pa. 100 A signe of Periander sent to Thra∣sibulus pa. ead. The stratagem of Ehud, Iudge of Israel pa. 101 What kinde of men were Generals and Iudges in Israel pa. 102 Gedeon chosen Iudge and General in Israel pa. ead. Gedeons stratagē against the Ma∣dianites pa. 103 Stratagems of Antiochus & Pe∣ricles pa. 104 Pompeys stratagem pa. 105 The vnthankefulnesse of the Is∣raelites pa. 106 The victory at Marathon pa. 107 The Romanes brag of their victo∣rie by Marius ouer the Cym∣brians pa. ead. The Scythians brag of their victo∣rie ouer the Persians. pa. ead. The arke of couenant pa. 108 Iephtha threatned to bee burned. pa. 109 42000. of the Ephramites slaine. pa. ead. The tyrannie of Cynna and Mari∣rius pa. 110 Kings sacrificed their daughters to please their Idols pa. ead. Difference of sacrifices pa. 111 The great sacrifice of Sampson. pag. 112 The Priesthood taken from the house of E pa. 113 The gouernment taken from the house of Samuel pa. 114 Tenne Tribes forsooke Rhehobo∣am pa. ead. The care of all nations for educa∣tion of their children pa. 115 Israel cryed for a king pa. 116 The trees and frogs would haue a king pa. ead. Ionathans victorie at Michmash. pa. 117 The disobedience of Saul. pa. 118 Saul slew himselfe in mount Gil∣boah pa. 119 Sauls head set vp in the temple of Dagon pa. ead. Traitors rewards pa. 120 Treason hath better successe then traitors haue pa. 121 Traitors odious to the olde Ro∣manes pa. ead. Uiriatus named the second Hani∣ball pa. 122 Matters contained in the se∣cond Booke. VNiust and vnnecessary warres page. 123 Dauid the second king of Israel, his battels and victories. pa. 124
Pollicie of Generals and Captaines. pa. 125 Europe scant inhabited in Dauids time pa. ead. The Aromites and Philistines brought vnder Dauid. pa. 126 The Romane Gouernors vnder di∣uers Prouinces pa. ead. Dauid put garrison in Edom. pa. 127 The lawe of Armes broken by the Ammonites against Dauid. pa. 128 Alcibiades and Ionathans strata∣gem pa. ead. Demetrius stratagem and others. pa. 129 Tributes paide to Israel by the E∣domites and others pa. 130 Tributes paid to the kings of Egipt by Ioseph pa. 131 What manner of tributes the olde Romanes and latter Romaines had pa. 132 Tributes paid to the Persians. pa. ead. Composition of peace betweene the Romanes and the Carthagine∣ans pa. ead. The sinnes of Dauid punished. pa. 133 The tragicall ende which Dauid sawe on his children pa. 134 Diuers stratagems in rauishing of virgins pa. 135 The first sacking of Ierusalem by Shesac pa. 136 The first battell of ciuill warres between Iudah & Israel. pa. ead. Fiue hundred thousand Israelites slaine pa. 137 The comparison of the Hebrewes with the Romanes pa. ead. The enemie of Rome was Italy. pa. 138 The enemie of Iudah was Israel. pa ead. The crueltie of Marius and Sylla in Rome pa. 139 Good counsell of the Prophets not obeyed pa. ead. The great victory of the king of Iu∣dah ouer the Aethiopiās. pa. 140 Good kings prayed for victories. pa. 141 The victory of Iosaphat. pa. ead. Three hundred Fabians slaine at the battell of Crunera pa. 142 Praiers commenaed & compared. pa. 143 Iudah vexed by the Aromites. pa. 144 The blaspemy of Senacherib puni∣shed pa. 145 Ieremy and Michah both striken and put in prison pa. 146 Elias fled from Iezabel. pa. 147 Two and thirtie kings came with Benhadad against Achab. pa. 150 Achabs words to Benhadad. pa. ead Diuers great blasphemers puni∣shed pa. 151
The second victory of Achab ouer Benhadad pa. 152 Ieremy preached the destruction of Ierusalem pa. 154 The foure bornes which Zachary sawe pa. 155 Semyramis stratagem in India. pa. 156 The stratagems of Cyrus and To∣myris in Scythia. pa. 157 Moses stratagem pa. 158 Alexander his victory ouer king Porus pa. 159 The great treasure which Alexan∣der found in Persia pa. 160 Xerxes pallace burnt in Persepo∣lis pa. ead. Of Elephants and Camels vsed in warres pa. 161 Hanibals tropheys in Italy. pa. 162 The Romaine stratagem against Pirrhus pa. ead Curius Dentat. his triumph. pa. 163 Pirrhus saying of the Romanes. pa. 164 600000. bushels of corne daily spent in Xerxes army. pa. 165 Themistocles stratagem against Xerxes pa. 166 Of Romane stratagems. pa. 167 The originall of military discipline had frō the Hebrewes. pa. 168 Golden girdles giuen by the He∣brewes and the Persians. page. 169 Of diuers military rewards to en∣courage souldiers. pa. 169. 170 The custome of the Knights of Rome pa. 171 Lucullus named the Romaine Xerxes, and Pompey called Aga∣memnon the great pa. ead. Foresight is great wisdome. pa. ead. Argyraspides, Alexanders souldi∣ers pa. 172 The Scythians lawe for souldiers. pa. 173 The lawe of Solon for souldiers. pa. 174 One hundred and twentie knights buried in the field Adrasteys, by Alexander the great. pa. ead. Of monuments pa. 175 Bethel become Bethauen. pa. ead. Abraham prouided for the buriall of himselfe, his wife, and his po∣steritie pa. 176 The care of the Gentiles for theyr burials pa. ead. The honor of the Atheniās to their Generals for victories. pa. 177 Themistocles honored of the Gre∣cians pa. 178 Pompey for his victories and tri∣umphes compared to Alexander the great pa. 179 The triumphs of Scypio, Lu. Sylla, & Pau. Aemilius. pa. 179. & 180 The 3. great combats of Romulus, Cossus, & Marcellus. pa. 181
The maner of Sesostris triumph. pa. 182 The Greeke and Romane tropheys pa. ead. Sicinius Dentat, his reward to his souldiers pa. 183 The forme and manner of making of Tribunes pa. 184 Auctyles people of Libia. pa. ead. Souldiers might not walke in the night time in Athens. pa. 115 Mellephori chiefe souldiers of the king of Persia pa. ead. Neodomadae among the Lacede∣monians, and Ianizari among the Turkes pa. 186 Of diuers military punishments. pa. 187 The difference betweene Agesilaus and Caesar pa. 189 Stratagems of Agesilaus, Antigo∣nus, and Epaminondas. pa. ead. The lawe of Decimation. pa. 190 Bochoris lawe in Egipt. pa. 191 Coward souldiers punished in Per∣sia pa. ead. The punishment of cowards a∣mong the people called Daci. pa. 192 Tamberlaines iustice and seuerity. pa. 193 Comparison of certaine Romaine captaines with the Greekes. pa. 195 The force and perswasion of elo∣quence pa. ead. The greatnesse of Demetrius en∣uied pa. 196 Demetrius picture carried in the triumph of Peplon. pa. 197 Epaminondas and Pelopidas com∣mended pa. 198 Philopomen imitated Epaminon∣das pa. 199 Philopomen greatly commended. pa. 200 The victories of Lucullus. pa. 201 Stratagems of Hanibal, Lysima∣chus, and Marcellus pa. 202 The crueltie of Mithridates a∣gainst the Romanes pa. 203 The reuenge of Marius ouer the Cymbrians pa. ead. Marius seuen times Consul. pa. 204 How the Prophets denounced wars to the Iewes, & to the Gentiles. pa. 205 The maner of the Gentiles in pro∣claiming warres to their ene∣mies pa. 206. 207. 208 The rainebowe, a signe that the world should not bee destroyed with water againe pa. 209 The manner and ceremonies of all nations in concluding of peace. pa. 210. 211. and 212 The manner of yeelding among all
nations. pa. 213. 214. 215 A souldier to loose his target, was death in Greece pa. 215 The saying of the women of Sparta concerning cowardly souldiers. pa. 216 Shieldes much esteemed among the Romaines and the Grecians. pa. ead. The victorie of the Grecians o∣uer the Persians at Plataea. pa. 217 The funerall ceremonies for those captains that dyed in the battell at Plataea pa. 218 A feast of the Iewes called Purim. pa. 219 The victories of the Grecians ouer the Persians at Salamina and Artemisium pa. 220. 221 Many straunge signes and appari∣tions in the ayre. pa. 222. & 223 Signes seene before the destruction of Ierusalem. pa. 224. & 225 The last ouerthrowe of Ierusalem by Titus and Uespasian. pa. 226 Diuers faigned themselues to bee the Messias pa. 227 The Rabins slain at the siege of Ie∣rusalem pa. 228 Ierusalem destroyed fiue times. pa. ead. The saying of Dio. Areopagita and Appollonius of the Eclipse of the Sunne pa. 229 100000. Talent's left by Da∣uid to Salomon to build the tem∣ple pa. 231 Heathen kings fauoured the Iewes pa. 232. & 233 Aristobulus first King of the Iewes, after their captiuitie. pa. 234 Affliction of the Iewes. pa. 235 Zedechiah taken captiue. pa. 236 The contents of the third Booke. NO mercenarie souldiers al∣lowed by the Romains nor the Persians page. 237 Of the care of kingdomes and coun∣treys in military discipline. pa. 238 Alexander his lawes and exercise for his souldiers pa. 239 Massinissas hardinesse in marching pa. ead. Fabius Max. diligence to his soul∣diers pa. 240 Bochoris military lawes. page. ead. Full fed souldiers punished by the Romanes pa. 241 Agesilaus military discipline. pa. ead. The exercise of Eumenes to his
souldiers pa. 242 Military punishment recited by Modestinus pa. 243 Lawes of Plato and others against wine drinkers pa, 244 The warres at Numantia. pa. 245 Cyrus discipline to his souldiers. pa. ead. Diuers kindes of martiall punish∣ments pa. 246 Prouinciall regiments of the Ro∣manes pa. 247 Diuision betweene the successors of Alexander pa. 248 Liberties and freedomes allowed by the Romanes pa. ead. Romane Magistrates gouerned in Asia and in Affrica. pa. 299 Ambition in Rome and in Athens. pa. 250 Sertorius white hinde pa. 251 Marius carried Martha his Scy∣thian soothsayer pa. 252 The pollicie of Scypio to his souldi∣ers pa. ead. Israel consulted with Idolatrous oracles pa. 253 Pennall lawes in Sparta. pa. 254 How the Lacedemonians march to theyr warres pa. ead. The manner and habit of all nati∣ons in going to theyr warres. pa. 256 Of military oathes ministred vnto souldiers in diuers countreys. pa. ead. Oathes of the Romanes and of the Grecians pa. 257 Asdrubals head sent to Haniball his brother pa. 258 The ouerthrow of Haniball at the battell of Zama pa. 259 Three bushels of golde Rings sent by Haniball to the Senators of Carthage pa. 261 The ouerthrowe of Antiochus the great at the battell of Magne∣sia pa ead. The saying of Antigonus and of Pirrhus pa. ead. The burning of Carthage. pa. 263 Marius seuen times Consul. pa. ead. Ciuill warres betweene Marius and Sylla pa. 264 The diuers victories of Pompey the great pa. 265 Stratagems of great Captaines that saued themselues by flight. pa. 266 Scypios questions with Haniball. pa. 268 Caesars celerity in his victories. pa. 269 Epaminondas and Scypios strata∣gems pa. ead. Caesar was in 52. pitcht and set fields pa. 270 No triumphes in ciuill warres at
Rome pa. ead. The battell betweene Torquine and Publicola page. 271 The first funerall sermon in Rome. pa. ead. The noble act of Mu. Scaeuola and Horatius Cocles pa. 272 Torquinus the proud driuen out of Rome pa. ead. The marching of the Scythians, Saracens, and Turkes pa. 273 The marching of the kings of Is∣raell pa. 274 Arebellious vowe of Absolon. pa. 276 The vowes of the Israelites. pa. ead. The vowes of the Romanes. pa. 277. 278 The vowes of the Athenians to Aeolus. pa. ead. Of diuers seuerall vowes. pa. 279. & 280 Stratagems of Satan pa. ead. Philos speech of the wicked. pa. ead. The vowes of the Nazarites. pa. 281 Monasticall vowes pa. ead. The Rechabites vowes. pa. 282 The Oracles of Ammon. pa. 283 Signes of victories giuen by the Lord pa. 284 The Hebrewes consulted with Urim and Thummim. pa. 285 The superstitious Oracles of the Gentiles pa. 286 The Consuls of Rome, and the Kings of Sparta deposed. pa. 287 Soothsaying by flying of fowles. pa. 288 Cyrus and Alexander forewarned of their death by soothsaying. pa. 289 Themistocles pa. ead. Aristander, Alexander his sooth∣sayer pa. 290 Superstitious Oracles of the Gen∣tiles pa. ead. The greedinesse of Dacius and Xerxes of money pa. 291 Any stratageme in iust warres is lawfull. pa. 292 The credit of Soothsayers. pa. 293 The Idolatry of Israel pa. ead. The rich spoile which Philip had in Delphos pa. 294 Sanctuaries allowed by the Lord to the Hebrewes pa. 295 Sanctuaries allowed among all na∣tions pa. 296 Kings fledde to Sanctuaries. pa. ead. The abuse and ill order of Sanctu∣aries pa. 297 The breach of lawes seuerely pu∣nished in kings pa. 298
Numas religious lawes in Rome. pa. 299 The prophanatiō of the ceremonies of Ceres by Alcibiades and Clo∣dius pa. 300 20000. ware mourning apparell for Cicero in Rome. pa. ead. Ciceroes opinion of the Romaine victories pa. 301 Antalcidas saying to Agesilaus. pa. 302 Alexander the great rewarded maimed souldiers pa. ead. The liberalitie of Captaines. pa. 303 Condemned murtherers sacrificed on Captaines graues. pa. 304 Greedie Princes euer lost more the they wanne pa. 305 Of ambitious Generals and Cap∣taines. page. 306. 307. 308 The Image of Iustice painted in Egipt without a head. page. 307 Platoes opinion against ambitious men pa. ead. Philosophers slew themselues. pa. 309 The victories of Sertorius. page. 310 Licurgus lawe allowed ambition. pa. 311 Ambitious men banished from A∣thens pa. ead. Themistocles banished. pa. 312 Comparisons betweene the Ro∣manes and the Grecians. page. 314 Pericles surnamed Olimpius. pa. ead. Pirrhus saying of Rome. pa. 315 Philopomen the last Captaine of any fame in Greece. pa. 316 Of diuers kindes of trumpets in warres 317. 318 Of diuers tents and sailes. page. 319 The watch word of diuers noble captaines in their warres. page. 320 Of sundrie stratagems. pa. 321 Crassus slaine among the Parthi∣ans pa. 322 The ouerthrow of the Romanes by the Cymbrians pa. 323 Pub. Ventidius triumphes. page. 324 The victories of the Greekes at Marathon pa. 325 The victorie of the Syracusans o∣uer the Athenians. pa. 326 The battell at Cranon. pa. 327 Alexander feared in Greece. pa. ead. Libraries destroyed pa. 328 The librarie of Attalus and Eu∣menes in Asia destroyed. page. 329 Aiax & Patroclus two Elephants, so named of Antiochus. pa. ead. The librarie at Rome pa. ead.
The Romanes only professed armes pa. 330 The opinion of Cato pa. ead. Callimachus and Chrysippus, great writers pa. 331 The lawe of Armes broken. pa. 332 Faire words deceiued many Cap∣taines pa. ead. Archidamus counsell to the Lace∣demonians pa. 333 Much bloud spent in breach of faith pa. ead. The breach of the lawe of Armes. pa. 334. 335 Zopyrus stratagem pa. 336 Aiax foolish answere to his fa∣ther pa. ead. Cyrus and Agamemnons wish. pa. pa. 337 The great pride of Xerxes and Nimrod pa. 338 Securitie in warres hurtfull. pa. 339 Pompeys parasites pa. ead. The victorie of Drusus pa. 340 The flatterers of Tigranes King of Armenia pa. ead. The victorie of Lucullus ouer the Athenians pa. ead. Themistocles celeritie in his victo∣ries pa. 341 30000. Archers draue Agesilaus out of Persia pa. 342 An Owle printed on the coyne of Athens pa. ead. The celeritie and quick dispatch of great captaines pa. 343 Celeritie praised page. 344 Astiages dreames pa. 345 Xerxes dreame pa. ead. Hanibals dreame pa. 346 Ioseph enuied of his bretheren. pa. ead. Iosephs second dreame. pa. 347 Ioseph and Daniel expounders of dreames. pa. ead. Isaac named pa. 348 Women among the Israelites gaue names to their children. pa. ead. The surnames of great Romaine captaines pa. 349 Moneths named after the name of Emperors pa. ead. The surnames of great Captaines and Generals in Greece. pa. 350 Arsaces the name of all the Kings in Parthia pa. 351 The Iuorie house of Achab. pa. 352 FINIS.
