16678 99845283 10174
THE VVOVNDS of Ciuill VVar. Liuely set forth in the true Trage∣dies of Marius and Scilla. As it hath beene publiquely plaide in London, by the Right Honourable the Lord high Admirall his Seruants. VVritten by Thomas Lodge Gent. O Uita! miserolonga, foelicibreuis, LONDON, Printed by Iohn Danter, and are to be sold at the signe of the Sunne in Paules Church-yarde. 1594.
The most Lamentable and true Tragedies of Marius and Scilla, Enter on the Capitoll Sulpitius Tribune: Caius Ma∣rius: Q. Pompey Consull: Iunius Brutus: Lucretius: Caius Granius: Lictorius: Lucius Merula Iupiters Priest: and Cyna: whom placed, and their Lictors be∣fore them with their Rods and Axes, Sulpitius begin∣neth. SVLPITIVS TRIBVNE. GRaue Senators and Fathers of this State, Our strange protractions & vnkind delays wher waighty wars doth cal vs out to fight Our factious wits to please aspiring Lords, You see hath added powre vnto our foes, And hazarded rich Phrigia and Bithinia, With all our Asian Holds and Cities too: Thus Scilla seeking to be Generall, (VVho is inuested in our Consuls Pall) Hath forced murders in a quiet State: The cause whereof euen Pompey may complaine, VVho seeking to aduance a climing friend, Hath lost by death a sweete and curteous sonne. VVho now in Asia but Mithridates, Laughs at these fond discentions I complaine? VVhile we in wrangling for a Generall,
Forsake our friends, forestall our forward warre, And leaue our Legions full of dalliance, VVaighting our idle wills at Capua. Fie Romaines, shall the glories of your names, The wondrous beauty of this Capitoll, Perish through Scillas insolence and pride, As if that Rome were robd of true renowne, And destitute of warlike Champions now? Loe here the man, the rumor of whose fame, Hath made Hiberia tremble and submit; See Marius that in managing estate, Through many cares and troubles he hath past, And spent his youth, vpon whose reuerend head The milke-white pledge of wisedome sweetly spreds: He sixe times Consul, fit for peace or warre, Sits drooping here content to brooke disgrace, VVho glad to fight through follies of his foes Sighs for your shame whilst you abide secure; And I that see and should recure these wrongs, Through Pompeys late vacation and delay, Haue left to publish him for Generall, That merites better titles farre than these: But (Nobles) now the finall day is come, VVhen I your Tribune studying for renowne, Pronounce and publish Marius Generall, To leade our Legions against Mithridates, And craue (graue Fathers) signes of your content, Q. Pomp: Beleeue me Noble Romains, & graue Se∣nators, This strange election, and this new made Law, VVill witnes our vnstable gouernement, And dispossesse Rome of her Emperie; For although Marius be renownd in Armes, Famous for prowesse, and graue in warlike drifts, Yet may the sunne-shine of his former deeds Nothing eclipse our Scillas dignity: By lot and by election he was made,
Chiefe Generall against Mithridates, And shall we then abridge him of that Rule; T were iniurie to Scilla and to Rome: Nor would the height of his all daring minde, Brooke to the death so vile and fowle disgrace. Iu, Brutus: VVhy Pompey, as if the Senate had not powre To appoint, dispose, & change their Generals: Rome shall belike be bound to Scillas Rule, VVhose haughty pride and swelling thoughts puft vp, Foreshowes the reaching to prowd Tarquins state: Is not his lingring to our Romaine losse At Capua where he braues it out with feasts, Made knowne thinke you vnto the Senate here? Yes Pompey, yes: and hereof are we sure If Romaines State on Scillas pride should lie, Romes Conquests would to Pontus Regions flie: Therefore graue and renowned Senators, (Pillers that beare and hold our Rule aloft, You stately, true, and rich Piramides) Descend into the depth of your estates, Then shall you finde that Scilla is more fit, To Rule in Rome domesticall affaires, Then haue the Conquest of Bithinia, Which if once got, heele but by death forgoe, Therefore I say Marius our Generall. Lucretius: Lo thus we striue abroad to win renowne, And naught regard at home our waning states; Brutus I say the many braue exploits, The warlike Acts that Scilla hath atchieude, Showes him a souldier and a Romaine too, Whose care is more for Country than himselfe: Scilla nill brooke that in so many warres, So hard aduentures and so strange extreames, Hath borne the palme and prize of victory, Thus with dishonor to giue vp his charge: Scilla hath friends and souldiers at commaund,
That first will make the towres of Rome to shake, And force the stately Capitoll to daunce, Yer any robbe him of his ust renowne: Then we that through the Caspian shores haue runne, And spread with ships the Orientall Sea, At home shall make a murder of our friends, And massaker our dearest Countrimen. Licto: The powre of Scilla nought will vaile gainst Rome, And let me die Lucretius ere I see, Our Senate dread for any priuate man, Therefore Renownd Sulpitius send for Scilla backe, Let Marius leade our men in Asia. L. Merula: The Law, the Senate wholy doth affirme, Let Marius lead our men in Asia. Cynna: Cynna affirmes the Senates Censure iust, And saith let Marius leade the Legions forth. C. Granius: Honor and victory follow Marius steps, For him doth Granius wish to fight for Rome. Sulpitius: why then you sage and auncient Syres of Rome, Sulpitius here againe doth publish forth, That Marius by the Senate here is made, Chiefe Generall to lead the Legions out, Against Mithridates and his Competitors, Now victory for honor of Rome follow Marius. Here let Marius rowse him selfe. Marius: Sage and imperiall Senators of Rome, Not without good aduisement haue you seene, Old Marius silent during your discourse: Yet not for that he feard to pleade his cause, Or raise his honor troden downe by age, But that his words should not allure his friends, To stand on stricter tearmes for his behoofe: Sixe times the Senate by election hath, Made Marius Consul ouer warlike Rome, And in that space nor Rome nor all the world, Could euer say that Marius was vntrue,
hese siluer haires that hang vpon my face, Are witnesses of my vnfained zeale, The Cymbrians that yer-while inuaded France, And held the Romaïne Empire in disdaine, Lay all confounded vnder Marius sword, Fierce Scipio the myrrour once of Rome, whose losse as yet my inward soule bewailes, Being askt who should succeede and beare his Rule, Euen this (quod he) shall Scipios armour beare, And therewithall clapt me vpon the backe: If then graue Lords, my former passed youth, was spent in bringing Honors into Rome, Let then my age and latter date of yeares, Be sealed vp for honor vnto Rome. Here enter Scilla with Captaines and Souldiers. Sul: Scilla, what means these Arms and warlike troops These glorious Ensignes and these fierce Allarms, Tis prowdly done to braue the Capitoll. Scilla: These Armes Sulpitius are not borne for hate, But maintenance of my confirmed state: I come to Rome with no seditious thoughts, Except I finde too froward iniuries. Sul: But wisedome would you did forbeare, To yeeld these flight suspitions of contempt, where as this Senate studieth high affaires. Scil: what serious matters haue these Lords in hand? Sul: The Senators with full decree appoint, Old Marius for their Captaine Generall, To leade thy Legions into Asia, And fight against the fierce Mithridates. Scilla: To Marius? Iolly stuffe: why then I see, Your Lordships meane to make a babe of me. Iu. Brutus: Tis true Scilla the Senate hath agreed, That Marius shall those bands and Legions beare, which you now hold against Mithridates. Scil: Marius shal lead them then, if Scilla said not no,
And I shall bea Consuls shadow then, Trustles Senators and ingratefull Romaines, For all the Honors I haue done to Rome, For all the spoiles I brought within her walles, Thereby for to enrich and raise her pride, Repay you me with this ingratitude: You know vnkinde, that Scillas wounded Helme, VVas nere hung vp or once distaind with rust: The Marcians that before me fell amaine, And like to winter haile on euery side, Vnto the City Nuba I pursude, And for your sakes were thirty thousand slaine: The Hippinians and the samnits scilla brought, As Tributaries vnto famous Rome: I, where did scilla euer draw his sword, Or lift his warlike hand aboue his head For Romaines cause but he was Conquerour: And now (vnthankeful) seeke you to disgrade, And teare the plumes that scillas sword hath wonne. Marius I tell thee scilla is the man, Disdaines to stoope or vaile his pride to thee; Marius I say thou maist nor shalt not haue, The charge that vnto scilla doth belong, Vnlesse thy sword could teare it from my hart, VVhich in a thousand folds impalls the same. Marius: And scilla hereof be thou full assurde, The honor whereto mine vndaunted minde, And this graue senate hath enhaunsed me, Thou nor thy followers shall derogate, The spence of yeares that Marius hath ore-past, Inforraine broyles and ciuil mutenies, Hath taught him this, that one vnbrideled foe, My former fortunes neuer shall oregoe. scilla: Marius, I smile at these thy foolish words, And credit me should laugh outright I feare, If that I knew not how thy froward age,
Doth make thy sence as feeble as thy ioynts. Marius: Scilla, Scilla, Marius yeeres hath taught Him how to plucke so proud a yonkers plumes, And know these haires that dangle downe my face, In brightnes like the siluer Rodope: Shall add so haughtie courage to my minde, And rest such percing obiects gainst thine eies, That maskt in follie, age shall force thee stoope. Scil: And by my hand I sweare ere thou shalt mase mee so, My soule shall perish but Ile haue thy bearde, Say graue Senators shall Scilla be your Generall. Sulpitius: No the Senate, I and Rome her selfe agrees▪ Ther's none but Marius shall be Generall. Therefore Scilla these daring teames vnfit, Beseeme not thee before the Capitoll. Scilla: Beseeme not me? Senators aduise you, Scilla hath vowd whose vowes the heauens recorde, VVhose othes hath pierst and searcht the deepest vast, I and whose protestations raigne on earth: This Capitoll wherein your glories shine, VVas nere so prest and throng de with scarlet gownes, As Rome shall be with heapes of slaughtred soules Before that Scilla yeeld his titles vp, Ile mate hir streets that peere into the clouds, Burnisht with gold and Iuorie pillors faire, Shining with Iasper, Iet, and Ebonie, All like the pallace of the morning sunne, To swim within a sea of purple blood Before I loose the name of Generall. Mar: These threats against thy country and these Lords. Scilla proceeds from forth a Traitorshart, VVhose head I trust to see aduanced vp On highest top of all this Capitoll: As earst was manie of thy progenie, Before thou vaunt thy victories in Rome. Scilla: Graybeard, if so thy hart and tongue agree,
Draw forth thy Legions and thy men at armes, Reare vp thy standerd and thy steeled Crest, And meete with Scilla in the fields of Mars, And trie whose fortune makes him Generall. Marius: I take thy word: Marius will meet thee there, And proue thee Scilla a Traitor vnto Rome, And all that march vnder thy traiterous wings, Therefore they that loue the Senate and Marius Now follow him. Scilla: And all that loue Scilla come downe to him, For the rest let them follow Marius And the Diuel himselfe be their Captaine. Here let the Senate rise and cast away their Gownes, hauing their swords by their sides: Exit Marius and with him Sulpiti∣us: Iu: Brutus: Lectorius. Q. Pompey: Scilla, I come to thee, Lucretius: Scilla, Lucretius will die with thee, Scilla: Thankes my Noble Lords of Rome. Here let them goe downe and Scilla offers to goe forth and Anthony calls him backe, Anthony: Stay Scilla, heare Anthony breath forth, The pleading plaints of sad declining Rome. Scilla: Anthony, thou knowst thy hony words doo pierce, And moue the minde of Scilla to remorse: Yet neither words nor pleadings now must serue, When as mine honor calls me forth to fight, Therefore sweete Anthony be short for Scillas hast. Anthony: For Scillas hast, O whither wilt thou flie? Tell me my Scilla what dost thou take in hand? VVhat warres are these thou stirrest vp in Rome? VVhat fire is this is kindled by thy wrath! A fire that must be quencht by Romaines blood, A warre that will confound our Emperie, And last an Act of fowle impietie. Brute beasts nill breake the mutuall law of loue, And birds affection will not violate,
The senceles trees haue concord mongst themselues, And stones agree in linkes of amitie, If they my Scilla brooke not to haue iarre, What then are men that gainst themselues doo warre Thoult say my Scilla honor stures thee vp: Ist honor to infringe the lawes of Rome? Thoult say perhaps the titles thou hast wonne, It were dishonor for thee to forgoe: O, is there any height aboue the highe, Or any better than the best of all? Art thou not Consul? Art thou not Lord of Rome? VVhat greater Tytles should our Scilla haue? But thou wilt hence, thou wilt fight with Marius The man, the Senate, I and Rome hath chose. Thinke this before, thou neuer liftst aloft, And lettest fall thy warlike hand adowne, But thou dost raze and wound thy Citie Rome: And looke how many slaughtred soules he slaine, Vnder thy Ensignes, and thy conquering Launce, so many murders makest thou of thy selfe. Scilla: Inough my Anthony, for thy honied tongue VVasht in a sirrop of sweete Conseruatiues, Driueth confused thoughts through scillas minde, Therfore suffize thee, I may nor will not heare, so farewell Anthony, honor calls me hence, scilla will fight for glorie and for Rome. Exit Scilla and his followers. Merula: See Noble Anthony the trustles state of rule, The stayles hold of matchles soueraignetie, Now fortune beareth Rome into the Clowds, To throw her downe into the lowest hells, For they that spread her glory through the world, Are they that teae her prowd triumphant plumes: The hart-burning pride of prowd Tarquinius, Rooted from Rome the sway of kingly mae, And now this discord newly set abroach,
Shall ease our Consuls and our Senates downe. Anthony: Vnhappy Rome and Romaines thrise accurst, That oft with triumphs sild your Citie walls, VVith kings and conquering Rulers of the world, Now to eclipse in top of all thy pride, Through ciuill discords and domesticke broiles: O Romaines weepe the teares of sad lament, And rent your sacred Robes at this exchange, For Fortune makes our Rome a banding ball, Tost from her hand to take the greater fall. Gra: O whence proceeds these fowle ambitious thoughts, That fires mens harts and makes them thirst for Rule: Hath soueraignty so much be witcht the minds Of Romaines: that their former busied cares VVhich erst did tire in seeking Cities good, Must now be changd to ruine of her walls? Must they that eard her stately Temples vp, Deface the sacred places of their Gods? Then may we waile and wring our wretched hands, Sith both our Gods, our temples and our walls, Ambition makes fell fortunes spightfull tnalls. Ex: all. A great Alarum: le young Marius chase Pompey ouer the stage, and old Marius chase Lucretius: Then let enter three or fowre souldiers and his Auncient with his cullors, and Scilla after them with his hat in his hand, they offer to flie away,. Scilla: Why whither flie you Romaines, VVhat mischiefe makes this flight? Stay good my friends, stay dearest Countrimen. 1. souldier: Stay let vs heare what our Lord Scilla saith. Scilla: What wil you leaue your chieftains Romains the And loose your Honors in the gates of Rome? VVhat shall our Country see, and Scilla rue, These Coward thoughts so fixt and firmd in you? VVhat are you come from Capua to proclaime, Your harties treasons in this happy towne? VVhat wil you stand and gaze with shameles looks,
VVhilst Marius butchering knife assailes our thros? Are you the men, the hopes, the staires of state? Are you the souldiers prest for Asia? Are you the wondered Legions of the world, And will you flie these shadows of resist? VVell Romaines I will perish through your pride, That thought by you to haue returnd in pompe. And at the least your Generall shall proue, Euen in his death your treasons and his loue. Lo this the wreath that shall my body binde, VVhilst Scilla sleepes with honor in the field: And I alone within these cullors shut, VVill blush your dastard follies in my death, So farewell hartles souldiers and vntrue, That leaue your Scilla who hath loued you. Exit. 1. souldier: VVhy fellow souldiers shall we flie the field, And carelesly forsake our Generall? VVhat shall our vowes conclude with no auaile? First die sweete friends, and shed your purple blood, Before you lose the man that wills you good. Then to it braue Italians out of hand: Scilla we come with fierce and dedly blowes, To venge thy wrongs and vanquish all thy toes. Exeunt to the Alarum. Actus secundus. Scena prima Appian solus. Enter Scilla triumphant, Lucretius, Pompey, with souldierr. SCilla: You Romaine souldiers, fellow mates in Armes, The blind fold Mistris of incertaine chaunce, Hath turnd these traiterous cmers from the top, And seated Scilla in the chiefest place.
The place beseeming Scilla and his minde, For were the throne where matchles glorie sits, Empald with furies threatning blood and death, Begirt with famine and those fatall feares That dwell below amidst the dreadfull vast: Tut Scillaes sparkling eyes should dim with cleere The burning brands of their consuming light, And master fancie with a forward minde, And maske repining feare with awfull power. For men of baser mettall and conceipt Cannot conceiue the beautie of my thought. I crowned with a wreath of warlike state, Imagine thoughts more greater than a crowne, And yet befitting well a Romane minde. Then gentle ministers of all my hopes, That with your swords made way vnto my wish, Hearken the frutes of your couragious fight, In spite of all these Romane Basisks, That seeke to quell vs with their currish lookes, We will to Pontus weele haue gold my harts, Those orientall pearles shall decke our browes: And you my gentle rends, you Romane peeres, Kinde Pompey worthie of a Consulls name. You shall abide the father of the state, Whilst these braue lads Lucretius and I, In spight of all these brauling Senators, Will, shall, and dare attempt on Asia, And driue Mithridates from out his doores. Pomp. I Scilla, these are words of mickle worth, Fit for the master of so great a minde: Now Rome must stoop, for Marius and his frends Haue left their armes, and trust vnto their heeles. Scilla. But Pompey, if our Spanish Iennets feete Haue learnt to poast it of their mother winde, I hope to nip vpon the gray beards heeles, Till I haue cropt his shoulders from his head.
As for his sonne, the proud aspiring boy, His beardlesse face and wanton smiling browes, Shall (if I catch him) decke yond Capitoll: The father, sonne, the frends, and souldiers all, That awne on Marius, shall with furie fall. Luer: And what euent shall all these troubles bring? Scilla. This: Scilla in fortune will exceed a king. But frends and souldiers, with dispersed bands Goe seeke out Marius fond confederates: some poast along those vnfrequented paths, That trackt by nookes vnto the neighbring sea: Murther me Marius, and maintaine my life. And that his fauorites in Rome may learne The difference betwixt my fawne and frowne, Go cut them short, & shed their hatefull blood, Ex. Soul. To quench these furies of my froward mood. Lucr. Loe scilla where our senators approach, Perhaps to gratulate thy good successe. Enter Anthonie, Granius, Lepidus. Scilla I that perhaps was fitly placed there: But my Lucretius, these are cunning Lords, VVhose tongues are tipt with honnie to deceiue: As for their hearts, if outward eyes may see them, The diuell scarce with mischiefe might agree them. Lep. Good fortune to our Consull, worthy scilla. Scilla And why not Generall against the king of Pontus? Gran: And generall against the king of Pontus. Scilla. sirrha, your words are good, your thoughts are ill, Each milke white haire amidst this mincing beard, Compard with milions of thy trecherous thoughts, VVould change their hiew through vigor of thy hate. But did not pitie make my furie thrall, This sword should finish hate, thy life and all. I pre thee Granius, how doth Marius? Gran: As he that bydes a thrall to thee and fate, Liuing in hope as I and others doo,
To catch good fortune, and to crosse thee too. Scilla: Both blunt and bold but too much Mother wit; To play with fier where urie streames about, Curtall your tale fond man cut of the rest: But here I will dissemble for the best. Granius: Scilla my yeares hath taught me to discerne, Betwixt ambitious pride and Princely zeale, And from thy youth these Peees of Rome haue markt, A rash reuenging hammer in thy braine, Thy tongue adornde with flowing eloquence, And yet I see imprinted in thy browes, A fortunate but froward gouernaunce. And though thy riuall Marius mated late, By backward working of his wretched fate Is falne, yet Scilla marke what I haue seene Euen here in Rome the Fencer Spectacus, Hath bin as fortunate as thou thy selfe: But when that Crassus sword assayed his crest, The feare of death did make him droope for woe. Scilla: You saw in Rome this brawling encer die, VVhen Spectacus by Crassus was subdewd: VVhy so, but sir I hope you will applie, And say like Spectacus that I shall die? Thus peeuish eld discoursing by a fire, Amidst their cups will prate how men aspire: Is this the greeting Romanes that you giue, Vnto the Patron of your Monarchie? Lucretius shall I play a prettie iest. Lucre: VVhat Scilla will, what Romane dare withstand▪ Scilla: A briefe and pleasing answere by my head, VVhy tell me Granius dost thou talke in sport? Granius: No Scilla my discourse is resolute, Not coynd to please thy fond and cursed thoughts: For were my tongue betraide with pleasing words, To feed the humors of thy haughty mind: I rather wish the rot should roote it out.
Scilla: The brauest brawler that I euer heard, But souldiers since I see he is opprest VVith crooked choller, and our Artists teach, That fretting blood will presse through opened veines, Let him that hath the keenest sword arrest, The gray-beard and cut off his head in iest. Souldiers lay hands on Granius. Granius: Is this the guerdon then of good aduise? Scilla: No but the meanes to make fond men more wise, Tut I haue wit, and carry warlike tooles, To charme the scolding prate of wanton ooles, Tell me of Fencers and a tale of Fate? No, scilla thinkes of nothing but a state. Granius: VVhy scilla I am armd the worst to trie. Scilla: I pray thee then Lucretius let him die. Exeunt with Granius. Beshrow me Lords but in this iolly vame, Twere pitty but the prating foole were slaine: I feare me Pluto will be wroth with me, For to detaine so graue a man as he. Anthony: But seeke not scilla in this quiet state, To worke reuenge vpon an aged man, A senator, a soueraigne of this towne. scilla: The more the Cedar climes the sooner down And did I thinke the prowdest man in Rome, VVould winch at that which I haue wrought or done, I would and can controwle his insolence. VVhy senators, is this the true reward, VVherewith you answere Princes for their paine, As when this sword hath made our Citie free, A brauing mate should thus distemper mee? But Lepidus and fellow senators, I am resolude and will not brooke your taunts, VVho wrongeth scilla, let him looke for stripes. Marke Anthony: I but the milder passions show the For as the leafe doth beautifie the tree,
The pleasant flowres bedecke the painted spring, Euen so in men of greatest reach and powre, A milde and piteous thought augments renowne▪ Old Anthony did neuer see my Lord, A swelling showre that did continue long, A climing towre that did not tast the wind, A wrathfull man not wasted with repent, I speake of loue my Scilla, and of ioy To see how fortune lends a pleasant gale, Vnto the spreading sailes of thy desires: And louing thee must counsaile thee withall, For as by cutting fruitfull vines increase, So faithfull counsailes workes a Princes peace. Scilla: Thou hony talking father speake thy minde. Anthony: My Scilla scarce those teares are dried vp, That Romaine Matrons wept to see this warre: Along the holy streets the hideous grones, Of murthered men infect the weeping aire: Thy foes are led not ouertaken yet, And doubtfull is the hazard of this warre: Yea doubtfull is the hazard of this warre, For now our Legions draw their wastfull swords, To murther whom? Euen Romaine Citizens. To conquer whom? Euen Romaine Citizens. Then if that Scilla loue these Citizens, If care of Rome, if threat of forraine foes, If fruitfull counsailes of thy forward friends May take effect, goe fortunate and driue, The king of Pontus out of Asia, Least while we dreame on ciuill mutenies, Our wary foes assaile our Citie walls. Pompey: My long concealed thoughts Marke Anthony, Must seeke discouerie through thy pliant words: Beleeue me Scilla ciuill mutenies, Must not obscure thy glories and our names: Then sith that factious Marius is supprest,
Goe spread thy colours midst the Asian fields, Meane while my selfe will watch this Cities weale. Scilla: Pompey I know thy loue, I marke thy words, And Anthony thou hast a pleasing vaine, But senators I hammer in my head, VVith euery thought of honor some reuenge: Enter Lucretius with the head. Speake what shall Scilla be your Generall? Lepidus: We doo decree that Scilla shall be Generall: Scilla: And wish you Scillas weale and honour too▪ Anthony: We wish both Scillas weale and honor too Scilla: Then take away the scandall of this state, Banish the name of Tribune out of towne, Proclaime false Marius and his other friends. Foe men and traitors to the state of Rome, And I will wend and worke so much by force, As I will master false Mithridates, Lepidus: The name of Tribune hath continued long. Scilla: So shall not Lepidus if he withstand me. Sirra you see the head of Granius, VVatch you his hap vnlesse you change your words, Pompey now please me Pompey graunt my sute. Pompey: Lictors proclaime this our vndanted doome, we will that Marius and his wretched sonnes, His friends Sulpitius, Claudius and the rest Beheld for traytors, and acquit the men That shall endanger there vnluckie lines, And henceforth Tribunes name and state shall cease, Graue Senators how like you this decree? Lepidus: Euen as our Consulls wish, so let it be▪ Scilla: Then Lepidus all friends in faith for me, So leaue I Rome to Pompey and my friends, Resolud to manage those our Asian warres, Frolike braue Souldiers wee must oote it now, Lucretius you shall bide the bunt  me, Pompey farewell, and farewell Lepidu.
Marke Anthony I leaue thee to thy books, study for Rome and scillas Royaltie. But by my sword I wrong this graybeards head, Goe sirra place it on the Capitoll: Aiust promotion fit for scillaes foe. Lordings farewell, come souldiers let vs goe. Exit. Pompey: scilla farewell and happy be thy chaunce, VVhose warre both Rome and Romaines must a duaunce. Exeunt senators. Enter the Magistrates of Minturnum with Marius very melancholie, Lucius Fauorinus, Pausanius with some atten∣dants. Pausanius: My Lord the course of your vnstaied fate, Made weake through that your late vnhappie fight, VVithdrawes our wills that fine would worke your weale: For long experience and the change of times, The innocent suppressions of the iust In leaning to forsaken mens reliefe, Doth make vs feare lest our vnhappie towne, should perish through the angrie Romaines sword. Marius: Lords of Minturnum when I shapd my course, To flie the danger of pursuing death, I left my friends, and all alone attaind (In hope of succors) to this little towne, Relying on your curtesies and truth. VVhat foolish feare doth then amaze you thus? Fauorinus: O Marius, thou thy self, thy sonne, thy friends, Are banished and exiles out of Rome, Proclaimd for traitors, rest of your estates, Adiudgde to death with certaine warrantize. should then so small a towne my Lord as this, Hazard their fortunes to supplie your wants? Marius: VVhy Citizens, and what is Marius? I tell you not so base as to dispaire, Yea able to withstand ingratitudes.
Tell me of foolish lawes decreede at Rome, To please the angrie humors of my foe: Beleeue me Lords I know and am assurde, That magnanimitie can neuer feare, And fortitude so conquer silly fate, As scilla when he hopes to haue my head, May hap ere long on sodaine lose his owne. Pausanius: A hope beseeming Marius, but I feare, Too strange to haue a short and good euent. Marius: VVhy sir Pausanius haue not you beheld, Campania plaines fulfild with greater foes, Than is that wanton milke-sop natures scorne. Base minded men to liue in perfect hope, VVhose thoughts are shut within your cottage eues, Refuse not Marius that must fauour you: For these are parts of vnaduised men, VVith present feare to lose a perfect friend, That can, will, may controwle, commaund, subdue, That brauing boy that thus bewitcheth you. Fauorinu: How gladly would we succour you my Lord, But that we feare. Marius: VVhat? the Moone-shine in the water. Thou wretched stepdame of my fickle state, Are these the guerdons of the greatest minds, To make them hope and yet betray their hap, To make them clime to ouerthrow them straight? Accurst thy wreake, thy wrath, thy bale, thy wheele, That makst me sigh the sorrowes that I feele. Vntroden paths my feete shall rather trace, Than wrest my succours from inconstant hands. Rebounding Rocks shall rather ring my ruth, Than these Campanian piles where terrors bide. And nature that hath lift my throne so hie, Shall witnes Marius triumphs if he die. But see that gaue the Lictors rod and axe, To wait my sixe times Consulship in Rome,
will not pursue where erst she flattered so, Minturnum then farewell for I must goe, But thinke for to repent you of your no. Pausa: Nay stay my Lord and daine in priuate here, To waight a message of more better worth, Your age and trauels must haue some releefe, And be not wroth, for greater men than we Haue feared Rome and Romaine tirranie. Marius: You talke it now like men confirmde in faith, well let me trie the fruits of your discourse, For care my minde and paine my bodie wrongs. Pausanius: Then Fauorinus shut his Lordship vp, within some secret chamber in the state, Meane while we will consult to keepe him safe, And worke some secret meanes for his supplie. Marius: Be trustie Lords, if not I can but die. Exit Ma. Pausanius: Poore haples Romaine, little ottest thou, The wearie end of thine oppressed life. Lucius: Why my Pausanius, what imports these words? Pausanius: Oh Lucius age hath printed in my thoughts, A memorie of many troubles past, The greatest townes and Lords of Asia, Haue stood on tickle tearmes through simple truth, The Rhodian records weil can witnes this. Then to preuent our meanes of ouerthrow, Finde out some stranger that may sodainely, Enter the chamber where as Marius lies, And cut him short, the present of whose head Shall make the Romaines praise vs for our truth, And Scilla prest to graunt vs priuiledge. Lucius: A barbarous act to wrong the men that trust, Pausanius: In Countries cause in iustice proueth iust. Come Lucius let not sillie thought of right, Subiect our Citie to the Romaines might: For why you know in Marius onely end, Rome will reward and scilla will be ,
Lucius: Yet all successions will vs discomend. Exeunt. Enter Marius the younger: Cethegus: Lectorius with other Romaine Lords and souldiers. Young Marius: The way ward Ladie of this wicked world. That leads in luckles triumph wretched men, My Romaine friends hath forced our desires, And framde our minds to brooke too base reliefe, VVhat land or Libian desert is vnsought, To finde my father Marius and your friend: Yea they whom true relent could neuer touch, These fierce Numidians hearing our mishaps, VVeepe flouds of mone to waile our wretched fates. Thus we that erst with terrors did attaint, The Bactrian bounds and in our Romaine warres, Enforst the barbarous borderers of the Alpes, To tremble with the terrors of our looks. Now flie poore men affrighted with our harmes, Seeking amidst the desert rocks and dens, For him that whilom in our Capitoll, Euen with a becke commaunded Asia. Thou wofull sonne of such a famous man, Vnsheath thy sword, conduct these warlike men To Rome, vnhappie Mistris of our harmes: And there since tyrants powre hath thee opprest, And robd thee of thy father, friends and all, So die vndaunted, killing of thy foes, That were the offspring of these wretched woes. Lectorius: VVhy how now Marius, will you mate vs thus; That with content aduenture for your loue? VVhy Noble youth resolue your selfe on this, That sonne and father both haue friends in Rome That seeke olde Marius rest and your reliefe. Marius: Lectorius, friends are geason now adaies, And grow to fume before they tast the fire: Aduersities bereauing mans aailes, They flie like feathers dallying in the winde,
They rise like bubbles in a stormie raine, Swelling in words and flying faith and deedes. Cethegus: How fortunate art thou my louely Lord, That in thy youth maist reape the fruits of age, And hauing lost occasions hold-fast now, Maist learne hereafter how to entertaine her well: But sodaine hopes doo swarme about my hart, Be merry Romaines see where from the Coast, A wearie messenger doth poast him fast. Enter Cinnas slaue with a letter inclosed posting in hast. Lectorius: It should be Cinnas slaue or els I erre, For in his forhead I behold the scar, Wherewith he marketh still his barbarous swaines. Marius: Oh stay him good Lectorius for me seeme, His great post hast some pleasure should present. Lectorius: Sirra art thou of Rome? Slaue: Perhaps Sir no? Lectorius: VVithout perhaps say Sirra is it so? Slaue: This is Lectorius Marius friend I trow, Yet were I best to learne the certainetie, Lest some dissembling foes should me disery. Marius: Sirra leaue off this foolish dalliance, Lest with my sword I wake you from your trance. slaue: Oh happie man, Oh labours well atchieude, How hath this chance my wearie lims reuiude: Oh Noble Marius, Oh Princelie Marius. Marius: what meanes this Pesant by his great reioice. slaue: Oh worthy Romaine, many months haue past, Since Cinna now the Consul and my Lord, Hath sent me forth to seeke thy friends and thee: All Libia with our Romaine Presidents, Numidia full of vnfrequented waies, These wearie limbs haue troad to seeke you out, And now occasion pitying of my paines, I late arriude vpon this wished shore, Found out a Sailer borne in Capua,
That told me how your Lordship past this way, Marius: A happie labor worthie some reward, How fares thy master? whats the newes at Rome? Slaue. Pull out the pike from off this iauelin to And there are tidings for these Lords and thee, Marius: A pollicie beseeming Cynna well: Lectorius read, and breake these letters vp. Letters. To his honourable frend Marius the yon∣ger greeting. BEing Consull (for the welfare both of father and , wish other thy accomplices) I haue vnder an honest policie  my instalment in the Consulship, caused all Scillas frends that were indifferent with the other neighbring Cities to reuolt: Oc∣tauius my fellow Consull with the rest of the Senate mistrusting me, and hearing how I sought to vnite the old Citizens with the new, hath wrought much trouble, but to no effect. I hope the souldiers of Capua shall follow our faction, for Scilla hearing of these hurly-burlies is oating homeward verie fortunate in his warres against Mithridates. And it is to be feared, that some of his frends here haue certified him of my proceedings, and pur∣pose to restore you. Cethegus and Lectorius I heare say are with you. Censorinus and Albinounus will shortly visit you. There∣fore hast and seeke out your father, who is now as I heare about Minturnum. Leuie what power you can with all expeditio, and stay not. Rome the Kalends of December. Your vnfained frend, Cinna Consull. Marius: Yea Fortune, shall yong Marius clime aloft, Then woe to my repining foes in Rome, And if I liue (sweete Queene of change) thy shrines, Shall shine with beautie midst the Capitoll,
Lectorius, tell me what were best be done. Lector: To sea my Lord, seeke your warlike Sire, Send backe this pesant with your full pretence, And thinke alreadie that our paines haue end, Since Cynna with his followers is your frend. Marius: Yea Romanes we will furrow through the fome Of swelling flouds, and to the sacred Twins Make sacrifice to shield our ships from stormes. Follow me Lords, come gentle messenger, Thou shalt haue gold and glorie for thy paines. Exeunt. Finis secundi Acti. Actus tertius. Scena prima. Enter Cynna, Octauius, Anthonius, Lictors, Citizens. Cyn: VPbraiding Senators bewitcht with wit, That terme true iustice innouation: You ministers of Scillas mad conceipts, Will Consulls thinke you stoope to your controules? These yonger Citizens, my fellow Lords, Bound to maintaine both Marius and his sonne.
Craue but their due, and will be held as good For priuiledge, as those of elder age: For they are men conformd to feats of armes, That haue both wit and courage to commaund. These fauorites of Octauius, what with age And palsies shake their iauelins in their hands, Like hartlesse men attainted all with feae: And should they then ouer-top the youth. No, nor this Consull, nor Marke Anhonie, Shall make my followers faint, or loose their right, But I will haue them equall with the best. M. An: Why then the Senates name (whose reuerence Hath blazd our vertues midst the Westerne Ile) Must be obseurde by Cynnas forced powre. O Citizens, are lawes of Countrey left? Is iustice banisht from this Capitoll? Must we poore fathers see your trooping bands Enter the sacred Synode of this state. Oh brutish fond presumptions of this age, Rome would the mischiefes might obscure my life, So I might counsaile Consulls to be wise. VVhy Countri-men wherein consists this strife? Forsooth the yonger Citizens will rule, The old mens heads are dull and addle now: And in elections youth will beare the sway? O Cynna, see I not the wofull fruits Of these ambitious stratagems begun, Each flattring tongue that dallieth pretie words, Shall change our fortunes and our states at once. Had I ten thousand tongues to talke the care, So manie eyes to weepe their wofull misse, So manie pennes to write these manie wrongs: My tongue your thoughts, my eyes your teares shuld moue, My pen your paines by reasons should approue. Cynna: VVhy Anthonie, seale vp those sugred lips, For I will bring my purpose to effect.
Ath: Doth Cynna like to interrupt me then? Cynna: I Cynna sir, will interrupt you now, I tell thee Marke, old Marius is at hand, The verie patron of this happie law, VVho will reuenge thy cunning eloquence. Ma. An: I talke not I to please or him or thee, But what I speake, I thinke and practice too: Twere better Scilla learnt to mend in Rome, Than Marius come to tyrannize in Rome. Octa: Nay Marius shall not tyrannize in Rome, Old Citizens, as Scilla late ordaind, King Tullius lawes shall take their full effect, The best and aged men shall in their choice, Both beare the day and firme election. Cynna: Oh braue Octauius you will beard me then, The elder Consull and old Marius frend, And these Italian freemen must be wrongd. First shall the frute of all thine honors faile, And this my ponyard shall dispatch thy life. Lepid. Such insolence was neuer seene in Rome: Nought wanteth here but name to make a King. Octa: Strike villaine if thou list, for I am prest, To make as deepe a surrow in thy brest. Yong Cit: The yong mens voices shal preuaile my lords. Old Cit: And we will firme our honors by our blouds. Thunder. Anth: O false ambitious pride in yong and old: Harke how the heauens our follies hath contrould. Old Cit: What shall we yeeld for this religious feare? Anth: If not religious feare, what may represse These wicked passions, wretched Citizens. O Rome, poore Rome, vnmeet for these misdeedes, I see contempt of heauens will breed a crosse: Sweete Cynna gouerne rage with reuerence. Thunder. O fellow Citizens, be more aduisde.
Lepid. VVe charge you Consulls now disslu the Court The Gods contemne this brawle and ciuil irres. Oct: We will submit our honors to their wills: You ancient Citizens come follow mee. Exit Octauius, with him Anthonie & Lepidus. Cynna: High Ioue himselfe hath done too much for thee, Els should this blade abate thy royaltie. VVell yong Italian Citizens take hart, He is at hand that will maintaine your right: That entring in these fatall gates of Rome, Shall make them tremble that disturbe you now. You of Preneste and of Formiae, VVith other neighbring Cities in Campania, Prepare to entertaine and succor Marius. Citizen: For him we liue, for him we meane to die. Exe. Enter old Marius with his keeper, & two souldiers. Marius: Haue these Minturnians then so cruelly, Presumd so great iniustice gainst their frends? Iailer: I Marius, all our Nobles haue decreed To send thy head a present vnto Rome. Marius: A Tantals present it will proue my frend, VVhich with a little smarting stresse will end Old Marius life, when Rome it selfe at last, Shall rue my losse, and then reuenge my death. But tell me Iailer, couldst thou be content, In being Marius for to brooke this wrong. Iailer: The high estate your Lordship once did wield, The manie frends that fawnd when fortune smild, Your great promotions, and your mightie welth: These (were I Marius) would amate me so, As losse of them would vexe me more than death. Marius: Is Lordship then so great a blisse my frend? Iailer: No title may compare with princely rule. Marius: Are frends so faithfull pledges of delight?
Iailer: VVhat better comforts than are faithfull frends? Marius: Is welth a meane to lengthen liues content? Iai: VVhere great possessions bide, what care can tutch? Marius: These stales of fortune are the common plagues▪ That still mislead the thoughts of simple men. The shepheard swaine that midst his country cote, Deludes his broken slumbers by his toyle, Thinkes Lordship sweete, where care with lordship dwelt The trustfull man that builds on trothles vowes, VVhose simple thoughts are crost with scornfull nayes, Together weepes the losse of welth and frend: So Lordship, frends, welth, spring and perish fast, VVhere death alone yeelds happie life at last. O gentle gouernor of my contents, Thou sacred chieftaine of our Capitoll, VVho in thy christall orbes with glorious gleame, Lendst lookes of pitie mixt with maiestie, See wofull Marius carefull for his sonne, Carelesse of lordship, welth or worldly meanes, Content to liue, yet liuing still to die: VVhose nerues and veynes, whose sinewes by the sword Must loose their workings through distempering stroake: But yet whose minde in spight of fate and all, Shall liue by fame although the bodie fall. Iail: VVhy mourneth Marius this recurelesse chance? Mar: I pre thee Iailer wouldst thou gladly die? Iail: If needes, I would. Mar: Yet were you loath to trie. Iail: VVhy noble Lord, when goods, frends, fortune faile VVhat more than death might wofull man auaile? Mar: VVho calls for death (my frend) for all his scornes, VVith Aesops slaue will leaue his bush of thornes. But since these traitrous Lords will haue my head, Their Lordships here vpon this homely bed, Shall finde me sleeping, breathing forth my breath; Till they their shame, and I my fame attaine by death.
Liue gentle Marius to reuenge my wrong, And sirrha see they stay not ouer-long. For he that earst hath conquered kingdomes many, Disdaines in death to be subdude by anie. He lies downe. Enter Lucius Fauorinus, Pausanius, with Ped, a French-man. Iail: The most vndanted words that euer were. The mightie thoughts of his imperious minde, Do wound my hart with terror and remorse. Paus: Tis desperate, not perfect noblenes, For to a man that is preparde to die, The heart should rent, the sleepe should leaue the eye: But say Pedro, will you doo the deed? Pedr: Mon monsieurs perla sang dieu, mee will make a trou so large in ce belly, dat he sal cry hough come vne por∣ceau. Featre delay, il a true me fade, hee kill my modre. Faith a my trote mon espee: erale fay dun sol dat, Sau, sau, Ieieuera, come il founta pary, me will make a spitch-cock of his persona. Fauor: If he haue slaine thy father and thy frends, The greater honor shall betide the deed: For to reuenge on righteous estimate, Beseemes the honor of a French mans name. Pedro: Mes messiers, de fault auoir argent, me no point de argent, no point kill Marius. Paus: Thou shalt haue forty crowns, wil that content thee? Pedro: Quarante escus, per le pied de Madam, me giue more dan foure to se prettie damosele, dat haue le dulces tet∣tinos, leleures cymbrines. Oh they be fines. Fauorinus: Great is the hire and little is the paine, Make therefore quicke dispatch, and looke for gaine. See where he lies in drawing on his death,
VVhose ies by gentle slumber sealed vp, Present no dreadfull visions to his hart. Pedro: Bien monsieur, le demourera content. Maries tu es mort. Speake dy preres in dy sleepe, for me sall cut off your head from your espaules before you wake. Qui es stia, what kinde a man be dis. Fauor: VVhy what delaies are these, why gaze ye thus? Pedr: Nostre dame, Iesu estiene, oh my siniors der be a great diable in ce eies, qui dart de flame, and with de voice d'un beare, cries out, Villaine dare you kill Marius. Ie trem∣ble: aida me siniors, autrement I shall be murdred. Paus. VVhat sodaine madnes daunts this stranger thus? Pedro: Oh me no can kill Marius, me no dare kill Mari∣us: adieu messiers, me be dead si ie touche Marius, Marius est vne diable. Iesu Maria saua moy. Exit fugiens. Paus. VVhat furie haunts this wretch on sodaine thus? Fauor: Ah my Pausanius I haue often heard, That yonder Marius in his infancie VVas borne to greater fortunes than we deeme: For being scarce from out his cradle crept, And sporting pretely with his compeeres, On sodaine seuen yong Eagles soard amaine, And kindly pearcht vpon his tender lap. His parents wondring at this strange euent, Tooke counsaile of the Southsaiers in this, VVho told them that these seuen-fold Eagles flight, Fore figured his seuen times Consulship: And we our selues (except bewitcht with pride) Haue seene him sixe times in the Capitoll Accompanyd with rods and axes too. And some diuine instinct so presseth mee, That sore I tremble till I set him free. Paus: The like assaults attaint my wandring minde. Seeing our bootlesse warre with matchlesse fate, Let vs intreat him to forsake our towne, So shall we gaine a frend of Rome and him:
Marius awaketh. But marke how happely he doth awake. Mar: What, breath I yet pore man, with mounting sight Choaking the riuers of my restlesse eies? Or is their rage restraind with matchlesse ruth? See how amazd these angrie Lords behold The poore confused lookes of wretched Marius. Minturnians why delaies your headsman thus To finish vp this ruthfull tragedie? Fauorinus: Far be it Marius from our thoughts or hands To wrong the man protected by the Gods: Liue happie (Marius) so thou leaue our towne. Marius: And must I wrestle once againe with fate? Or will these Princes dally with mine age? Pausan: No matchles Romane, thine approued minde That earst hath altred our ambitious wrong Must flourish still, and we thy seruants liue To see thy glories like the swelling tides Exceed the bounds of Fate and Romane rule. Yet leaue vs Lord, and seeke some safer shed, Where more secure thou maist preuent mishaps: For great pursuits and troubles thee awaite. Marius: Ye piteous powres that with succesfull hopes, And gentle counsailes thwart my deepe dispaires: Olde Marius to your mercies recommends His hap, his life, his hazard and his sonne. Minturnians, I will hence, and you shall flie Occasions of those troubles you expect. Dreame not on dangers that haue faud my life: Lordings adieu, from walls to woods I wend, To hills, dales, rockes, my wrong for to commend. Exit. Fauor: Fortune vouchsafe thy manie cares to end. Exe.
Actus tertius. Enter Scilla in triumph in his chare triumphant of gold, draw∣en by foure Moores, before the chariot: his colours, his crest, his captaines, his prisoners: Arcathius Mithridates son, Aristion, Archelaus, bearing crownes of gold, and mana∣cled. After the chariot, his souldiers bands, Basillus, Lu∣cretius, Lucullus: besides prisoners of diuers Nations, and sundry disguises. SCilla: You men of Rome, my fellow mates in Armes, VVhose three yeares prowesse, pollicie, and warre, One hundreth three score thousand men at Armes Hath ouerthrowne and murthered in the field: VVhose valours to the Empire hath restorde, All Grecia, Asia, and Ionia. VVith Macedonia subiect to our foe: You see the froward customes of our state, VVho measuring not our many toiles abroad, Sit in their Cells imagining our harmes, Replenishing our Romaine friends with feare. Yea, Scilla worthy friends, whose fortunes, toiles, And stratagems these strangers may report, Is by false Cynna and his factious friends. Reuilde, condemnde, and crost without a cause. Ye (Romaines) Marius must returne to Rome, Of purpose to vpbraid your Generall. But this vndunted minde that neuer droopt: This forward bodie formd to suffer toile, Shall hast to Rome where euerie foe shall rue, The rash disgrace both of my selfe and you:
Lucretius: And may it be that those seditious braines, Imagine these presumptuous purposes? Scilla: And may it be? why man and wilt thou doubt, VVhere Scilla daines these dangers to auere? Sirrha except not so, misdoubt not so, See here Ancharius letters reade the lines, And say Lucretius that I fauour thee, That darest but suspect thy Generall, Read the letters and deliuer them. Lur: The case conceald hath moued the more misdoub, Yet pardon my presumptions worthy Scilla, That to my griefe haue read these hideous harmes, Scilla: Tut my Lucretius, fortunes ball is tost, To forme the storie of my fatall powre: Rome shall repent, babe, mother, shall repent, Aire weeping clowdie sorrowes shall repent, vvind breathing many sighings shall repent To see those stormes concealed in my brest, Reflect the hideous flames of their vnrest: But words are vaine, and cannot quell our wrongs, Briefe periods serue for them that needs must postit. Lucullus since occasion calls me hence, And all our Romaine senate thinke it meete, That thou pursue the warres I haue begun, As by their letters I am certified, I leaue thee Fimbrias Legions to conduct, vvith this prouiso, that in ruling still, You thinke on Scilla and his curtesies. Lucullus: The waightie charge of this continued warre, Though strange it seeme, and ouer great to wield, I will accept it so the Armie please. Souldiers: Happie & fortunate be Lucullus our Generall. Scilla: If he be Scillas friend, els not at all: For otherwise the man were ill bested, That gaining glories straight should lose his head. But souldiers since I needly must to Rome,
Basillus vertues shall haue recompence. Lo here the wreath Valerius for thy paines, VVho first didst enter Archilous trench: This pledge of vertue sirrha shall approue, Thy vertues, and confirme me in thy loue. Basillus: Happie be Scilla, if no foe to Rome. Scilla: I like no iffs from such a simple groome, I will be happie in despite of state, And why? because I neuer feared fate. But come Arcathius for your fathers sake, Enioyne your fellow Princes to their taskes, And helpe to succour these my wearie bones. Tut blush not man, a greater state than thou, Shall pleasure Scilla in more baser sort. Aristion is a iolly timberd man, Fit to conduct the chariot of a King. VVhy be not squeamish, for it shall goe hard, But I will giue you all a great reward. Arcath: Humbled by fate like wretched men we yeeld Scilla: Arcathius these are fortunes of the field. Beleeue me these braue Captyues draw by art, And I will thinke vpon their good desart. But stay you strangers, and respect my words, Fond hartles men, what folly haue I seene: For feare of death can Princes entertaine Such bastard thoughts, that now from glorious armes Vouchsafe to draw like oxen in a plough. Arcathius I am sure Mithridates VVill hardly brooke the scandall of his name: Twere better in Picaeo to haue died Aristion, than amidst our legions thus to draw. Aristion: I tell thee Scilla, captiues haue no choice, And death is dreadfull to a caytiue man. Scilla: In such imperfect mettals as is yours. But Romanes that are still allurde by fame, Chuse rather death than blemish of their name,
But I haue hat, and therefore will reward you. Goe souldiers, with as quicke dispatch as may be, Hasten their death, and bring them to their end, And say in this that Scilla is your frend. Arcathius: Oh ransome thou our liues sweet conquero▪ Scilla: Fie foolish men, why flie you happines, Desire you still to lead a seruile life. Dare you not buy delights with little paines. VVell, for thy fathers sake Arcathius, I will preferre thy triumphs with the rest. Goe take them hence, and when we meete in hell, Then tell me Princes if I did not well. Exeunt milites. Lucullus, thus these mightie foes are downe, Now striue thou for the king of Pontus crowne. I will to Rome, goe thou, and with thy traine, Pursue Mithridates till he be slaine. Lucul: VVith fortunes help, go calme thy countries woes VVhilst I with these seeke out our mightie foes. Enter Marius solus from the Numidian mountaines, feeding on rootes. Mar: pat: Thou that hast walkt with troops of flocking frends, Now wandrest midst the laborynth of woes, Thy best repast with manie sighing ends, And none but fortune all these mischiefes knowes. Like to these stretching mountaines clad with snow, No sun-shine of content my thoughts approcheth: High spyre their tops, my hopes no height do know, But mount so high as time their tract reprocheth: They finde their spring, where winter wrongs my minde: They weepe their brookes, I wast my cheekes with teares. Oh foolish fate, too froward and vnkinde, Mountaines haue peace, where mournfull be my yeres: Yet high as they my thoughts some hopes would borrow,
But when I count the euening end with sorrow. Death in Minturnum threatned Marius head, Hunger in these Numidian mountaines dwells: Thus with preuention hauing mischiefe fled, Old Marius findes a world of manie hells. Such as poore simple wits haue oft repinde, But I will quell by vertues of the minde. Long yeres misspent in manie luckles chances, Thoughts full of wroth, yet little worth succeeding, These are the meanes for those whom fate aduances: But I, whose wounds are fresh, my hart still bleeding, Liues to intreate this blessed boone from fate, That I might die with griefe to liue in state. Sixe hundreth sonnes with solitarie walkes, I still haue sought for to delude my paine, And frendly Eccho answering to my talkes, Rebounds the accent of my ruth againe: She (curteous Nymph) the wofull Romane pleaseth, Els no consorts but beasts my paines appeaseth. Each day she answeres, in yond neighbring mountaine, I doo expect reporting of my sorrow, Whilst lifting vp her lockes from out the fountaine, She answereth to my questions euen and morrow: Whose sweete rebounds my sorrowes to remoue, To please my thoughts I meane for to approue. Sweet Nymph draw nere thou kind & gentle Eccho. Eccho. VVhat help to ease my wearie paines haue I? I. VVhat comfort in distres to calme my griefes? griefes. Sweet Nymph these griefes are growne before I thought so? I thought so. Thus Marius liues disdaind of all the Gods. Oads. VVith deepe dispaire late ouertaken wholy. Oly. And wil the heavns be neuer wel appeased? appeased. VVhat meane haue they left me to cure my smart? art. Nought better fits old Marius mind then war, then war. Then full of hope say Eccho, shall I goe? goe.
Is anie better fortune then at hand, at hand. Then farewell Eccho, gentle Nymph farewel. farewell. Oh pleasing folly to a pensiue man. VVell I will rest fast by this shadie tree. VVaiting the end that fte allotteth mee. sit downe. Enter Marius the sonne, Albinouanus, Cethegus, Lectorius, with souldiers. Marius: My countrimen and fauorites of Rome, This melancholy desart where we meete, Resembleth well yong Marius restles thoughts. Here dreadfull silence, solitarie caues, No chirping birds with solace singing sweetlie, Are harbored for delight: but from the oake Leaueles and saples through decaying age, The sctch-owle chants her fatall boding layes. VVithin my brest, care, danger, sorrow dwells, Hope and reuenge sit hammering in my hart, The balefull babes of angrie Nemesis Dispearse their furious fires vpon my soule. Lector: Fie Marius, are you discontented still, VVhen as occasion fauoreth your desire? Are not these noble Romanes come from Rome? Hath not the state recald your father home? Marius: And what of this, what profit may I reape, That want my father to conduct vs home. Lector: My Lord, take hart, no doubt this stormie slawe That Neptune sent to cast vs on this shore. Shall end these discontentments at the last. Mar: pat: VVhom see mine eyes, what is not yon my son? Mar: iu: vvhat solitarie father walketh there? Mar: pa: It is my sonne, these are my frends I see: vvhat haue forepining cares, so changed mee? Or are my lookes; distempred through the paines And agonies that issue from my hart?
Fie Marius, frolicke man, thou must to Rome, There to reuenge thy wrongs and waight thy tombe. Marius iu: Now fortune frowne, & palter if thou please, Romanes behold my father and your frend. Oh father. Marius pa: Marius thou art fitly met: Albinouanus and my other frends, VVhat newes at Rome? what fortune brought you hither? Albino: My Lord, the Consull Cynna hath restord The doubtfull course of your betrayed state, And waits you prresent swift approch to Rome, Your foe man Scilla poasteth verie fast, VVith good successe from Pontus to preuent Your speedie entrance into Italy. The neighbring Cities are your verie frends, Nought rests my Lord, but you depart from hence. Mar: iu: How manie desart waies hath Marius sought, How manie Cities haue I visited, To finde my father, and releeue his wants? Marius pat: My sonne, I quite thy trauells with my loue, And Lords and Citizens we will to Rome, And ioyne with Cynna haue your shipping here? VVhat are these souldiers bent to die with mee? Soul: Content to pledge our liues for Marius. Lect: My Lord, here in the next adioyning port, Our ships are rigd and readie for to saile. Marius pa: Then let vs saile vnto Hetruria, And cause our frends the Germanes to reuolt, And get some Tuscans to increase our power. Deserts farewell come Romanes let vs goe, A scourge for Rome that hath deprest vs so, Exeunt.
Actus quartus. Scena prima. Enter Marke Anthonie, Lepidus, Octauius, Flaccus, Senators. Octa. WHat helpes my Lords to ouerhale these care? What meanes or motions may these mischiefe end? You see how Cynna that should succor Rome, Hath leuied armes to bring a traitor in. O worthlesse traitor, woe to thine and thee, That thus disquieteth both Rome and vs. Anth: Octauius these are scourges for our sinnes, These are but ministers to heape our plagues: These mutinies are gentle meanes and waies, VVhereby the heavns our heauie errors charmes, Then with content and humbled eyes, behold The christall shining globe of glorious Ioue: And since we perish through our owne misdeedes, Go let vs flourish in our frutefull praiers. Lepid: Midst these confusions mighty men of Rome, VVhy wast we out these troubles all in words, VVeepe not your harmes, but wend we straight so armes, Loe Disia spoyld, see Marius at our gate▪ And shall we die like milksops dreaming thus? Octa: A bootles warre to see our o ntrey spoild. Lep: Fruteles is dalliance whereas dangers bee. Anth: My Lord, may courage wait on conquered men? Lep: I euen in death most courage doth appeare. Octa: Then wating death I meane to seate me here, Hoping that Consulls name and feare of lawes, Shall iustifie my conscience and my cause, Enter  messenger▪
Now sirrha, what confused lookes are these, VVhat tidings bringest thou of dreriment? Messen: My Lords, the Consull Cynna with his fre Haue let in Marius by Via Appia, VVhose souldiers wast and murther all they meete, VVho with the Consull and his other frends VVith expedition hasteth to this place. Anth: Then to the downfall of my happines, Then to the ruine of this Citie Rome. But if mine inward ruth were laid in sight, My streames of teares should drowne my foes despight. Octa: Courage Lord Anthony, if Fortune please, She will and can these troubles soone appease. But if her backward frownes approch vs nie, Resolue with vs with honor for to die. Lep: No storme of fate shall bring my sorrowes downe, But if that Fortune list, why let her frowne. Anth: VVhere state's opprest by cruell tyrants bee, Old Anthony, there is no place for thee. Drum strike within: Harke, by this thundring noyse of threatning drums, Marius with all his faction hether comes. Enter Marius, his Sonne, Cynna, Cethegus, Lectorius with souldiers: vpon sight of whom Marke Anthony pre∣sently flies. Octa: Then like a traitor he shall know ere long, In leuying armes he doth his countrey wrong. Marius pa: And haue we got the goale of honor now, And in despight of Consulls entred Rome? Then rouze thee Marius, leaue thy ruthfull thoughts: And for thy manie toiles and cares sustaind, Afflict thy foes with twice as many paines. Goe souldiers seeke out Bebius and his frends, Attilius, Munitorius with the rest, Cut off their heads, for they did crosse me once: And if your care can compasse my decree,
Remember that same fugitiue Marke Anthony, VVhose fatall end shall be my frutefull peace. I tell thee Cynna, nature armeth beasts With iust reuenge, and lendeth in their kindes Sufficient warlike weapons of defence: If then by nature beasts reuenge their wrong, Both heauens and nature grant me vengeance now, Yet whilst I liue and sucke this subtill aire That lendeth breathing coolenes to my lights, The register of all thy righteous acts, Thy paines, thy toiles, thy trauells for my sake, Shall dwell by kinde impressions in my hart, And I with linkes of true vnfained lone VVill locke these Romane fauorites in my brest, And liue to hazard life for their releefe. Cyn: My Lord, your safe and swift returne to Rome, Makes Cynna fortunate and well appaid, Who through the false suggestions of my foes, VVas made a coffer of a Consull here: Lo where he sits commanding in his throue, That wronged Marius, me, and all these Lords. Mar: iu: To quite his loue, Cynna let me alone, How fare these Lords that lumping pouting proud Imagine how to quell me with their lookes. No welcome sirs, is Marius thought so base? VVhy stand you looking babies in my face? VVho welcomes mee, him Marius makes his frend: VVho lowres on mee, him Marius meanes to end. Flaccus: Happie and fortunate thy returne to Rome. Lepidus: And long Marius liue with fame in Rome. Marius: I thanke you curteous Lords that are so kinde. Mar: iu: But why endures your Grace that brauing mate To sit and face vs in his roabes of state. Mar: pa: My sonne he is a Consull at the least, And grauitie becomes Octauius best.
But Cynna would in yonder emptie seat, You would for Marius freedome once intreate. Cynna presseth vp, and Octauius staieth him. Octa: Auant thou traitor, proud and insolent, How darest thou presse nee ciuill gouernment. Mar: VVhy Master Consull, are you growne so hot? He haue a present cooling card for you. Be therefore well aduisde, and moue me not: For though by you I was exilde from Rome, And in the desart from a Princes seate Left to bewaile ingratitudes of Rome. Though I haue knowne your thirshe throates haue longd To baine their selues in my distilling blood. Yet Marius Sis, hath pitie ioynd with powre: Loe here the Imperiall Ensigne which I wield, That waueth mercie to my wishers well: And more see here the dangerous trote of warre, That at the point is steeld with ghastly death. Octa: Thou exile, threatnest thou a Consull then? Lictors, goe draw him hence: such brauing mates, Are not to boast their armes in quiet states. Marius: Go draw me hence. VVhat no relent Octauius▪ Mar: iu: My Lord what hart in durate with reuenge, Could leaue this lossell, threatning murther thus? Vouchsafe me leaue to taint that traitors seate VVith flowing streames of his contagious blood. Octa: The fathers sonne, I know him by his talke, That scolds in words when fingers cannot walke. But Ioue I hope will one day send to Rome The blessed Patron of this Monarchie, VVho will reuenge iniustice by his sword▪ Cynna: Such brauing hopes, such cursed arguments, So strict command, such arrogant controwles. Suffer me Marius, that am Consull now, To doo thee iustice, and confound the wretch▪ Mar: pat: Cynna, you know I am a priuate man,
That still submit my censures to your will. Cynna: Then souldiers draw this traitor from the throne, And let him die, for Cynna wills it so. Mar: iu: I now my Cynna, noble Consull speakes, Octauius, your checkes shall cost you deare. Octa: And let me die for Cynna wills it so? Is then the reuerence of this robe contemnnd? Are these associates of so small regard? VVhy then Octauius willingly consents, To entertaine the sentence of his death. But let the proudest traitor worke his will, I feare no strokes, but here will sit me still. Since iustice sleepes, since tyrants raigne in Rome, Octauius longs for death to die for Rome. Cyn: Then strike him where he sits, then hale him hence. A souldier stabs him, he is caried away. Octa: Heauens punish Cynnas pride and thy offence. Cynna: Now is he falne that threatned Marius, Now will I sit and plead for Marius. Mar: pat: Thou doost me iustice Cynna, for you see These peeres of Rome haue late exiled mee. Lepid: Your Lordship doth iniustice to accuse Those who in your behalfe did not offend. Flacc. VVe grieue to see the aged Marius Stand like a priuate man in view of Rome. Cyn: Then bid him sit, and loe an emptie place, Reuoke his exile, firme his gouernment, And so preuent your farther detriment, Lepid: VVe will accompt both Marius and his frends, His sonne and all his followers free in Rome: And since we see the dangerous times at hand, And here of Scillas confidence and hast, And know his hate and ranco to these Lords, And him create for Consull to preuent The policies of Scilla and his frends. Cyn: Then both confirmd by state and full consent,
The rods and axe to Marius I present, And here inuest thee with the Consulls pall. Flaccus: Long, fortunate and happie life betide Old Marius in his seuenfold Consulship. Mar: iu: And so let Marius liue and gouerne Rome, As cursed Scilla neuer looke on Rome. Marius pat: Then plade in Consuls throne, you Romane states He takes his seate. Recald from banishment by your decrees, Enstald in this imperiall seate to rule, Old Marius thankes his frends and fauorites: From whom this finall fauor he requires, That seeing Scilla by his murthrous blade Brought fierce seditions first to head in Rome, And forced lawes to banish innocents: I craue by course of reason and desert, That he may be proclaimd as earst was I, A traitor and an enemie of Rome: Let all his frends be banisht out of towne: Then cutting off the branch where troubles spring, Rome shall haue peace and plentie in her walls. Cynn: In equitie it needes must be my frends, That one be guiltie of our common harmes: And since that Marius is accounted free, Scilla with all his frends must traitors bee. Mar: iu: My fathers reasons Romanes are of force: For if you see and liue not too secure, You know that in so great a state as this, Two mightie foes can neuer well agree. Lepid: Then let vs seeke to please our Consull first, And then prepare to keep the exile out. Cynna, as Marius and these Lords agree, Firme this Edict, and let it passe for mee. Cynnn: Then Romanes, in the name of all this state, I here proclaime and publish this decree: That Scilla with his frends, allies and all▪
Are banisht exiles, traitors vnto Rome. And to extinguish both his name and state, VVe will his house be raced to the ground, His goods confiscate: this our censures is. Lictors proclaime this in the market place, And see it executed out of hand. Exit Lictor. Mar: pat: Now see I Senators, the thought, the care, The vertuous zeale that leads your toward mindes, To loue your frends and watch your common good: And now establisht Consull in this place, Old Marius will foresee aduenient harmes: Scilla the scourge of Asia as we heare Is prest to enter Italie with sword, He comes in pompe to triumph here in Rome, But Senators you know the wauering wills, Of foolish men I meane the common sort, VVho through report of innouatios, Or flattering humors of well tempred tongues, VVill change and draw a second mischiefe on: I like your care, and will my selfe apply To aime and leuell at my countries weale. To intercept these errors by aduice, My sonne yong Marius, Cethegus and my frends, Shall to Preneste to preuent and stop The speedie purpose of our forward foe. Meane while ourselues will fortifie this towne, This beautie of the world, this maiden towne, VVhere streaming Tybris with a pleasant tyde, Leads out the stately buildings of the world. Marius my hope, my sonne, you know your charge, Take those Iberian legions in your traine, And we will spare some Cymbrians to your vse, Remember thou art Marius sonne, and dreame On nought but honor and a happie death. Mar: iu: I go my Lord in hope to make the world Report my seruice, and my dutie too,
And that proud challenger of Asia, Shall finde that Marius sonne hath force and wit. Exit cum Cethego. Marius pat: Goe thou as fortunate as Greekes to Troy As glorious as Alcides in thy toiles, As happie as Sertorius in thy fight, As valiant as A chilles in thy might. Go glorious, valiant, happie, fortunate, As all those Greekes and him of Romane state. Enter led in with souldiers Cornelia and Fului. Corn: Traitors why drag you thus a Princes wife, As if that beautie were a thrall to fate. Are Romanes growen more barbarous than Greekes, That hale more greater than Cassandra now? The Macedonian Monarch was more kinde, That honored and relieud in warlike campe Darius mother, daughters and his wife, But you vnkinde to Romae Ladies now, Perhaps as constant as the Asian Queenes, For they subdude had frendship in disgrace, VVhere we vnconquered liue in wofull case. Mar: VVhat plaintiffe pleas presents that Ladie there VVhy souldiers, make you prisners here in Rome? Soul: Dread Consulls, we haue found Cornelia here, And Scillas daughter posting out of towne. Marius: Ladies of worth, both beautifull and wise, But ere allied vnto my greatest foe: Yet Marius minde that neuer ment disgrace, More likes their courage than their cmely face. Are you Cornelia Madame, Scillas wife? Corn: I am Cornelia Scillas wife: what ther? Marius: And is this Fuluia Scillas daughter too▪ Fuluia: And this is Fuluia Scillas daughter too. Mar: pat: Two welcome guests in whom the maiestie of my conceit and courage must consist: VVhat thinke you Senators and countrimen?
See here are two the fairest starres of Rome, The deerest dainties of my warlike foe, VVhose liues vpon your censures do consist. Lepid: Dread Consull the continuance of their liues, Shall egge on Scilla to a greater hast. And in bereauing of their vitall breath, Your grace shall force more furie from your foe: Of these extreames we leaue the choice to you. Mar: Then thinke that some strange fortune shall insue, Ful: Poore Fuluia, now thy happie daies are done, In steed of marriage pompe, the fatall lights Of funeralls must maske about thy bed. Nor shall thy fathers armes with kinde embrace Hem in thy shoulders trembling now for feare. I see in Marius lookes such tragedies, As feare my hart, and fountaines fills mine eyes. Corn: Fie Fuluia, shall thy fathers daughter faint Before the threats of dangers shall approach? Drie vp those teares, and like a Romane maid, Be bold and silent till our foe haue said. Marius: Cornelia wise vnto my traitor foe? VVhat gadding mood hath forst thy speedie slight, To leaue thy country, and forsake thy frends? Corn: Accursed Marius, off-spring of my paines, VVhose furious wrath hath wrought thy countries woe▪ VVhat may remaine for me or mine in Rome, That see the tokens of thy tyrannies? Vile monster, robd of vertue, what reuenge Is this, to wreake thine anger on the walls? To race our house, to banish all our frends, To kill the rest, and captiue vs at last? Thinkst thou by barbarcos deedes to boast thy state, Or spoyling Scilla to depresse his hate? No Marius, but for euerie drop of blood And inch of wrong he shall returne thee two. Flaccus: Madame, in danger wise dome doth aduise,
In humble termes to reconcile our foes. Marius: She is a woman Flaccus, let her talke, That breath forth bitter words in steed of blowes, Corn: And in regard of that unmodest man, Thou shouldst desist from outrage and reuenge. Lect: VVhat, can your Grace indue these cursed scoffs! Mar: VVhy my Lectorius, I haue euer learnt, That Ladies cannot wrong me with vpbraids. Then let her talke, and my concealed hate, Shall heap reuengement vpon Scillas pate. Fulu: Let feauers first afflict thy feeble age, Let palsies make thy stubborne fingers faint, Let humors streaming from thy moystned braines With cloudes of dymnes choake thy fretfull eyes, Before these monstrous harmes assaile my syre, Mar: Byr Ladie Fuluia, you are gaily red, Your mother well may boast you for her owne, For both of you haue words and scoffs at will: And since I like the compasse of your wit, My selfe will stand, and Ladies you shall sit: And if you please to wade in farther words, Lets see what brawles your memories affords. Corn: Your Lordships passing mannerly iniest, But that you may perceiue we smell your drift, VVe both will sit and countenance your shift. Mar: VVhere constancie and beautie doo consort, There Ladies threatnings turnd to merry sport. How fare these beautifull, what well at ease? Ful: As readie as at first for to displease. For full confirmd that we shall surely die, VVe wait our ends with Romane constancie. Mar: why think you Marius hath confirmd your death! Ful: VVhat other frute may spring from tyrants hands! Mar: In faith then Ladies, thus the matter stands, Since you mistake my loue and curtesie, Prepare your selues, for you shall surely die.
Cornel: I Marius, now I know thou dost not he▪ And that thou maist vnto thy lasting blame, Extinguish in our deaths thy wished fame. Grant vs this boone that making choice of death, VVe may be freed from furie of thine yre, Marius: An easie boon, Ladies I condiscend, Corn: Then suffer vs in priuate chamber close To meditate a day or two alone: And tyrant if thou finde vs liuing then, Commit vs straight vnto thy slaughtring men. Marius: Ladies I grant, for Marius nill denie, A sute so easie, and of such import: For pitie were that Dames of constancie, Should not be agents of their miserie. Here he whispers Lectorius. Lectorius, harke, dispatch. Exit. Lector. Corn: Loe Fuluia, now the latest doome is fixt, And naught remaines but constant Romane harts, To beare the brunt of yrksome furies spight, Rouse thee my deare, and daunt those faint conceipts, That trembling stand agast at bitter death: Bethinke thee now that Scilla was thy syre, VVhose courage heauen nor fortune could abate. Then like the off-spring of fierce Scillas house, Passe with the thrice renowmed Phrigian Dame, As to thy marriage, so vnto thy death: For nought to wretches is more sweete than death. Ful: Madam confirmd as well to die as liue, Fuluia awaiteth nothing but her death. Yet had my father knowne the course of change, Or seene our losse by luckie augurie, Thys tyrant nor hys followers had liued, To ioy the ruine of fierce Scillas house. Mar: But Ladie, they that dwell on fortunes call, No sooner rise, but subiect are to fall. Ful: Marius I doubt not but our constant endes,
Shall make thee waile thy tyrants gouernment. Marius: VVhen tyrants rule doth breed my care & woe Then will I say two Ladies told me so. But here comes Lectorius, Now my Lord, haue you brought those things. Lector: I haue noble Consull. Mar: Now Ladies, you are resolute to die. Corn: I Marius, for terror cannot daunt vs: Tortors were framde to dread the baser eie, And not t'appall a princely maiestie. Marius: And Marius liues to triumph ore his foes, That traine where warlike troopes amidst the plaines, And are inclosde and hemd with shining armes, Not to appa such princely Maiestie. Vertue sweete Ladies is of more regard In Marius minde where honor is inthronde, Than Rome or rule of Romane Emperie. Here he puts chaines about their neckes: The bands that should combine your snow white wrests, Are these which shall adorne your milke white neckes: The priuate cels where you shall end your liues, Is Italy, is Europe, nay the world: Th'Luxnian sea, and fierce Sicilian Gulph, The riuer Ganges and Hydaspis streame, Sha'l leuell lye, and smoothe as christall yce: VVhilst Fuluia and Cornelia passe thereon: The souldiers that should guard you to your deaths, Shall be fiue thousand gallant youths of Rome, In purple roabes crosse bard with pales of gold, Mounted on warlike coursers for the field, Fet from the mountaine tops of Cortia, Or bred in hills of bright Sardinia, VVho shall conduct and bring you to your Lord, I vnto Scilla Ldies shall you goe, And tell him Marius hods within his hands, Hor for Ladies, for Ladies rich reward,
But as for Silla and for his compeeres VVho dare gainst Marius vaunt their goldn cests, Tell him for them old Marius holds reuenge, And in his hands both triumphs life and death. Corn: Doth Marius vse with glorious words to iest, And mocke his captiues with these glosing tearmes? Mar: No Ladies, Marius hath sought for honour with his sword, And holds disdaine to triumph in your fals. Liue Cornelia, liue faire and fairest Fuluia: If you haue done or wrought me iniurie, Scilla shall pay it through his miserie. Fuluia: So gratious (famous Consull) are thy words, That Rome and we shall celebrate thy worth, And Scilla shall confesse himselfe orecome. Corn: If Ladies praiers or teares may mooue the heauens, Scilla shall vow himselfe old Marius frend. Mar: Ladies for that I nought at all regard, Scilla's my foe, Ile triumph ouer him, For other conquest glorie doth not win. Therefore come on, that I may send you vnto Scilla, Exeunt Enter a clowne drunke with a pint of wine in his hand, and two or three souldiers. 1 soul: Sirrha, dally not with vs, you know where he is. Clowne: O sir, a quart is a quart in any mans purse, and drinke is drinke, and can my master liue without his drinke I pray you? 2 soul: You haue a master then sirrha? Clowne: Haue I master thou scondrell? I haue an Orator to my master, a wise man to my master. But fellowes, I must make a parenthesis of this pint pot, for words make men dry: now by my troth I drinke to Lord Anthonie. 3 soul: Fellow souldiers, the weaknes of his braine hath made his tongue walke largely, we shall haue some nouelties by and by.
Clowne: Oh most surpassing wine, thou marow of the vine, More welcome vnto me, than whips to schollers bee, Thou art and euer was a meanes to mend an asse, Thou makest some to sleep, and manie mo to weep, And some be glad & merry, with heigh down derry, derry. Thou makest some to stumble, and many mo to fumble: And me haue pinkie nine, more braue and iolly wine: VVhat need I praise thee mo, for thou art good with heigh ho 3 soul: If wine then be so good, I pree thee for thy part, Tell vs where Lord Anthony is, & thou shalt haue a quart. Clow. First shal the snow be black, & pepper lose his smack And stripes forsake my backe, first merrie drunke with sack, I will go boast and tracke, and all your costards cracke, Before I doo the knacke shall make me sing alacke: Alacke the old man is wearie, for wine hath made him mer∣rie: with a heigh ho. 1 soul: I pre thee leaue these rymes, and tell vs where thy master is. Clown: Faith where you shall not bee vnles ye goe with mee. But shall I tell them so? O no sir, no, no, no, the man hath manie a foe, as farre as I doo know: you doo not flour me I trow. See how this licor fumes, & how my force pre∣sumes. You would know where Lord Anthonie is? I per∣ceiue you. Shall I say he is in yond farme house? I deceiue you. Shall I tell you this wine is for him? the gods forfend, and so I end. Go fellow fighters theres a bob for ye. 2 soul: My masters, let vs follow this clowne, for que∣stionles this graue orator is in yonder farme house. But who commeth yonder? Enter old Anthonie. Anth: I wonder why my peasant staies so long, And with my wonder hasteth on my woe, And with my woe I am assaild with feare, And by my feare await with faintful breath The final period of my paines by death.
1 soul: Yonds the man we seeke for (souldiers) vnsheath your swords, and make a riddance of Marius ancient ene∣mie. Clowne: Master flie, flie, or els you shall die: a plague on this wine hath made me so fine, and will you not be gone, then Ile leaue you alone, and sleepe vpon your woe, with a lamentable heigh ho. Exit. Anth: Betraid at last by witles ouersight, Now Anthony, prepare thy selfe to die: Loe where the monstrous ministers of wrath Menace thy murther with their naked swords. 2 soul: Anthonie well met, the Consull Marius with o∣ther confederate Senators, haue adiudged thee death, ther∣fore prepare thy selfe, and thinke we fauor thee in this little protraction. Anth: Immortall powers that know the painefull cares, That waight vpon my poore distressed hart, O bend your browes and leuill all your lookes Of dreadfull awe vpon these daring men. And thou sweet neece of Atlas on whose lips And tender tongue, the pliant Muses sit, Let gentle course of sweet aspiring speech, Let honnie flowing tearmes of wearie woe, Let frutefull figures and delightfull lines Enforce a spring of pitie from their eyes, Amase the murthrous passions of their mindes, That they may fauour wofull Anthonie. Oh countrimen what shal become of Rome, VVhen reuerend dutie droopeth through disgrace? Oh Countrimen, what shal become of Rome, VVhen woful nature widdow of her ioyes, VVeepes on our wals to see her lawes deprest? Oh Romaines hath not Anthonies discourse, Seald vp the Mouthes of false seditious men,
Assoild the doubts and queint controlls of powre; Releeud the mournfull matrone with his pleas? And will you seeke to murder Anthonie? The Lions brooke with kindnes their releefe, The sheep reward the shepheard with their fleece: Yet Romanes seeke to murder Anthony. 1 soul: Why what enchanting termes of arte are these? That force my hart to pitie his distresse. 2 soul: His action, speech, his fauor, and his grace, My rancor rage and rigor doth deface. 3 soul: So sweet his words that now of late me seemes His art doth draw my soule from out my lips. Anth: VVhat enuious eies reflecting nought but rage, VVhat barbarous hart refresht with nought but blood, That rents not to behold the sensles trees In doaly season drooping without leaues? The shepheard sighs vpon the barrain hills To see his bleating lambs with faintfull lookes. Behold the vallies robd of springing flowres, That whilom wont to yeeld them yerely food. Euen meanest things exchangd from former state, The vertuous minde with some remorse doth mate. Can then your eyes with thundering threats of rage, Cast furious gleames of anger vpon age? Can then your harts with furies mount so hie, As they should harme the Romane Anthonie? I farre more kinde than sensles tree haue let A kindly ap to our declining , And like a carefull shepheard haue foreseene The heauie dangers of this Citie Rome, And made the citizens the happie flocke Whom I haue fed with counsailes and aduice, But now those lockes that for their reuerend white, Surpasse the downe on Aesculapius chin: But now that tongue whose termes and fluent stile For number past the hoasts of heauenly fires:
But now that head within whose  braines The Queene of flowring eloquence did wh: Enter a Captaine. These lockes, this tongue, this head, the life and all, To please a tyrant traitrously must fall. Capt: VVhy how now soldiers is he liuing yet? And will you be bewitched with his words? Then take this fee false Orator from me, stab him. Elizium best beseemes thy faintfull lims. Anth: Oh blisfull paine, now Anthony must die, VVhich serud and loud Rome and her Emperie. moritur Capt: Goe curtall off that necke with present stroke, And straight present it vnto Marius. 1 soul: Euen in this head did all the Muses dwell: The bees that sate vpon the Grecians lips, Distild their honnie on his tempred tongue. 2 soul: The christall dew of faire Castalian springs, VVith gentle floatings trickled on his braines: The Graces kist his kinde and curteous browes, Apollo gaue the beauties of his harpe, Enter Lectorius pensiue. And melodies vnto his pliant speech. Cap: Leaue these presumptuous praises, countrimen, And see Lectorius pensiue where he comes, Loe here my Lord the head of Anthony, See here the guerdon fit for Marius foe, Whom dread Apollo prosper in his rule. Lector: Oh Romanes, Marius sleepes among the dead, And Rome laments the losse of such a frend. Cap: A sodaine and a wofull chance my Lord, VVhich we intentiue faine would vnderstand. Le: Thogh swolne with sighs my hart for sorrow burst, And tongue with teares and plaints be choaked vp, Yet will I furrow forth with forced breath A speedie passage to my pensiue speech. Our Consull Marius, worthie souldiers,
Of late within a pleasant plot of ground, Sate downe for pleasure ere a christall spring, Accompanied with manie Lords of Rome: Bright was the day, and on the spredding trees The frolicke citizens of forrest lung Their layes and merrie notes on pearching boughes: VVhen suddenly appeared in the East, Seauen mightie Eagles with their tallents fierce, VVho wauing oft about our Consulls head, At last with hideous crie did sare away. VVhen suddenly old Marius all agast, With reuerent smile determinde with a sigh The doubtfull silence of the standers by. Romanes (said he) old Marius now must die. These seuen faire Eagles, birds of mightie Ioue, That at my birth day on my cradle sate, Now at my last day arme me to my death: And loe I feele the deadly pangs approach. VVhat should I more? in briefe, with manie praiers For Rome, his sonne, his goods and lands disposd, Our worthie Consull to our wonder dide. The Citie is amazde, for Scilla hasts To enter Rome with furie, sword, and fire. Goe, place that head vpon the Capitoll, And to your wards, for dangers are at hand. Exit. Capt: Had we foreseene this luckles chance before, Old Anthonie had liude and breathed yet. Exeunt. Actus quartus. A great skirmish in Rome and long, some slaine. At last enter Scilla triumphant with Pompey, Metel∣lus, Citizens, souldiers. Scilla: Now Romanes after all these mutinies, Seditions, murthers, and conspiracies,
Imagine with vnpartiall harts at last VVhat frutes proceed from these contentious brawles▪ Your streetes, where earst the fathers of your state In robes of purple walked vp and downe, Are strewd with mangled members, streaming blood. And why? the reasons of this ruthfull wrack, Are your seditious innouations, Your fickle mindes inclinde to foolish change. Vngratefull men, whilst I with tedious paine In Asia seald my dutie with my blood, Making the fierce Dardanians faint for feare, Spredding my cullers in Galatia, Dipping my sword in the Enetans blood, And foraging the fields of Phocida. You cald my foe from exile with his frends, You did proclaime me traitor here in Rome, You racde my house, you did deface my frends, But brauling wolues, you cannot byte the moone, For Scilla liues so forward to reuenge, As woe to those that sought to doo me wrong. I now am entred Rome in spite of force, And will so hamper all my cursed foes, As be he Tribune, Consull, Lord or Knight That hateth Scilla, let him looke to die. And first to make an entrance to mine yre, Bring me that traitor Carbo out of hand. Bring in Carbo bound. Pomp. Oh Scilla, in reuenging iniuries, Inflict the paine where first offence did spring, And for my sake establish peace in Rome, And pardon these repentant Citizens. Scilla: Pompey, I loue thee Pompey, and consent To thy request, but Romanes haue regard, Least ouer-reaching in offence againe, I load your shoulders with a double paine. Exeunt Citizens.
But Pompey see where iolly Carbo comes ooting it featly, like a mightie man, VVhat no  sirrha to your Lord? My Lord? No Scilla, he that thrice hath borne The ame of Consull scornes to stoop to him, Whose hart doth hammer nought but mutinies. Pomp: And doth your Lordship then disdaine to stoope Carbo: I to mine equall Pompey as thou art. Scilla: Thine equall villaine, no he is my frend, Thou but a poore anatomie of bones, Casde in a knauish tawny withred skin: VVilt thou not stoop? art thou so stately then? Carbo: Scilla, I honor gods, not foolish men. Sci: Then bend that wythered bough that will not break And souldiers cast him downe before my feete: They throw him downe. Now prating sir, my foote vpon thy necke, He be so bold to giue your Lordship checke. Beleeue me souldiers, but I ouer-reach, Old Carbos necke at first was made to stretch. Carbo: Though bodie bend, thou tyrant most vnkinde, Yet neuer shalt thou humble Carbos minde. Scilla: oh sir, I know for all your warlike pith, A man may mae your worship with a wyth. You sirrha leuied armes to doo me wrong: You brought your legions to the gates of Rome: You fought it out in hope that I would faint. But sirrha now betake you to your bookes, Intreate the God to saue your sinfull soule. For why this carcasse must in my behalfe Goe feast the rauens that serue our augures turne. Me thinkes I see alreadie how they wish, To bait their beakes in such a iolly dish. Carbo: Scilla thy threates and scoffes amate me not: I pre thee let thy murthrers hae me hence, For Carbo rather likes to die by sword,
Than liue to be a mocking stocke to thee. Scilla: The man hath hast good souldiers take him hence, It would be good to alter his pretence. But be aduisde, that when the foole is slaine, You part the head and bodie both in twaine. I know that Carbo longs to know the cause, And shall: thy bodie for the rauens, thy head for daw. Carbo: O matchles ruler of our Capitoll, Behold poore Rome with graue and piteous eie, Ful-fild with wrong and wretched tyrannie. Exit Carbo cum militibus. Enter Scipio and Norbanus, Publius Lentulus. Seill: Tut the proud mans praier wil neuer pierce the skie. But whether presse these mincing Senators? Norbanus: VVe presse with praiers, we come with mour full teacer▪ Intreating Scilla by those holy bands That linkes faire Iuno with her thundring Ioue, Euen by the bounds of hospitalitie, To pitie Rome afflicted through thy wrath. Thy souldiers (Scilla) murder innocents. O whither will thy lawles surie stretch, If little ruth ensue thy countries harmes. Scilla: Gay words Narbonus, full of eloquence, Accompanied with action and conceipt. But I must teach thee iudgement therewithall. Dar'st thou approch my presence that hast borne Thine armes inspight of Scilla and his frends? I tell thee foolish man thy iudgement wanted In this presumptuous purpose that is past: And loytering scholler, since you faile in art, Ile learne you iudgement shortly to your smart▪. Dispatch him souldiers, I must see him die. And you Carinna, Carbos ancient frend, Shall follow straight your heedles Generall. And Scipio were it not I loud thee well.
Thou shouldst accompanie these slaues to hell: But get you gone, and if you loue your selfe, Exit Scipio, Carinna: Pardon me Scilla, pardon gentle Scilla. Scilla: Sirrha, this gentle name was coynd too late, And shadowed in the shrowds of byting hate. Dispatch: why so, good fortune to my frends, As for my foes, euen such shall be their ends. Conueigh them hence Metellus, gentle Metellus, Fetch me Sertorius from Iberia, In dooing so, thou standest me in stead, For sore I long to see the traitors head. Metell: I goe confirmd to conquer him by sword, or in th' exployt to hazard life and all. Scilla: Now Pompey let me see, those Senators Are dangerous stops of our pretended state, And must be curtald least they grow too proud, I doo proscribe iust fortie Senators, Which shal be leaders in my tragedie. And for our Gentlemen are ouer proud, Of them a thousand and sixe hundreth die, A goodlie armie meete to conquere hell. Souldiers performe the course of my decree, Their friends my foes, their foes shal be my friends, Go sell their goods by trumpet at your wills, Meane while Pompey shall see and Rome shall rue, The miseries that shortly shall ensue. Exit. Alarum skirmish a retreat, enter young Marius vppon the walles of Preneste with some souldiers all in blacke and wonder∣full mellancoly. Marius: Oh endles course of needy mans auaile, VVhat sillie thoughts, what simple pollicies makes man presume vpon this traiterous life? Haue I not seene the depth of sorrow once, And then againe haue kist the Queene of chaunce,
Oh Marius thou Tilliius and thy frends, Hast seene thy foe discomfetted in fight. But now the starres haue formde my finll harmes, My father Marius lately dead in Rome, My foe with honour doth triumph in Rome, My freends are dead and banished from Rome, I Marius father freends more blest then thee: They dead, I liue, I thralled they are free, Here in Preneste am I cooped vp, Amongst a troope of hunger staued men. Set to preuent false Scillaes fierce approach. But now exempted both of life and all. VVell Fortune since thy fleeting change, hath cast Pore Marius from his hopes and true desiers, My resolution shall exceed thy power, Thy coloured wings steeped in purple blood, Thy blinding wreath distainde in purple blood, Thy royall Robes washt in my purple blood Shall witnes to the world thy thirst of blood, And when the tyrant Scilla shal expect To see the sonne of Marius stoope for feare, Then then, Oh then my minde shal well appeare, That scorne my life and hold mine honour deare. Alarum aretreat. Harke how these murtherous Romaine viperlike, Seeke to betray their fellow Citizens, Oh wretched world from whence with speedie slight, True loue, true zeale, true honour late is fled. Sould: VVhat makes my Lord so carelesse and secure, To leaue the breach and here lament alone? Mar: Not feare my frend for I could neuer flie, But studdy how with honor for to die, I pray thee cal the cheefest Citizens. I must aduise them in a waightie cause, Here shal they meete me and vntill they come,
I wil goe view the danger of the breach. Exit Marius and the souldiers. Enter with drum and souldiers Lucretius with other Ro∣manes as Tuditanus &c. Lucretius: Say Tuditanus, didst thou euer see So desperate defence as this hath been: Tudit: As in Numidia Tygers wanting food, Or as in Libia Lions full of yre, So fae these Romanes on Preneste wals. Lucret: Their valure Tuditanus and resist, The man like fight of yonger Marius, Makes me amazd to see their miseries, And pitie them although they be my foes▪ VVhat said I foes? O Rome with ruth I see Thy state consumde through folly and dissention. VVell sound a prle, I will see if words Can make them yeeld, which will not flie for strokes? Sound a parle, Marius vpon the wals with the Citizens. Marius: What seeks this Romane warrior at our hands? Lucr: That seekes he Marius, that he wisheth thee: An humble hart, and then a happie peace. Thou seest thy fortunes are deprest and downe, Thy vittels spent, thy souldiers weake with want, The breach laid open readie to assault, Now since thy meanes and maintenance are done, Yeeld Marius, yeeld, Prenestians be aduisde, Lucretius is aduisde to fauor you. I pre thee Marius marke my last aduice. Relent in time, let Scilla be thy frend: So thou in Rome maist lead a happie life, And those with thee shall pray for Marius still. Mar: Lucretius, I consider on thy words, Stay there a while thou shalt haue answere straight. Lucretius: Apollo grant that my perswasions may,
Preserue these Romane souldiers from the sword. Marius: My frends and citizens of Preneste towne, You see the wayward working of our starres, Our harts confirmd to fight, our victuals spent. If we submit, its Scilla must remit, A tyrant, traitor, enemie to Rome, Whose hart is guarded still with bloodie thoughts. These flattring vowes Lucretius here auowes, Are pleasing words to colour poysoned thoughts▪ What will you liue with shame, or die with fame? 1 Cit: A famous death, my Lord delights vs most. 2 Cit: We of thy faction (Marius) are resolud To follow thee in life and death together. Marius: VVords full of worth, beseeming noble mindes The verie Balsamum to mend my woes. Oh countrimen, you see Campania spoild, A tyrant threatning mutinies in Rome, A world dispoyld of vertue, faith and trust. If then no peace, no libertie, no faith, Conclude with me, and let it be no life. Liue not to see your tender infants slaine, These stately towers made leuell with the land, This bodie mangled by our enemies sword: But full resolud to doo as Marius doth, Vnsheath your ponyards, and let euerie frend, Bethinke him of a souldierlike farewell. Sirrha, display my standerd on the wals, And I will answere yond Lucretius, VVho loueth Marius, now must die with Marius▪ Luer: VVhat answere wil your Lordship then return v▪ Marius: Lucretius, we that know what Scilla is, How dissolute, how trothles and corrupt: In briefe conclude to die before we yeeld: But so to die (Lucretius marke me well) As loath to see the furie of our swords Should murther frends and Romane citizens.
Pie countrimen, what furie doth infect Your warlike bosomes, that were wont to fight VVith forren foes, not with Campanian frends? Now vnaduised youth must counsaile eld: For gouernance is banisht out of Rome. Woe to that bough from whence these bloomes are sprung, VVoe to that Aetna, vomiting this fire: VVoe to that brand, consuming Countries weale: Woe to that Scilla, careles and secure, That gapes with murther for a Monarchie. Goe second Brutus with a Romane minde, And kill that tyrant: and for Marius sake Pitie the guiltles wiues of these your frends, Preserue their weeping infants from the sword, Whose fathers seale their honors with their bloods. Farewell Lucretius, first I presse in place stab. To let thee see a constant Romane die, Prenestians, loe a wound, a fatall wound, The paine but small, the glorie passing great. againe. Prenestians see a second stroke: why so. I feele the dreeping dimnes of the night, Closing the couerts of my carefull eies. Follow me frends: for Marius now must die With fame, in spight of Scillas tyrannie. moritur. 1 Cit: We follow thee our chiefetaine euen in death, Our towne is thine Lucretius: but we pray For mercie for our children and our wiues. moritur. 2 Cit: O saue my forme Lucretius, let him liue, moritur. Lucretius: A wondrous and bewitched constancie, Beseeming Marius pride and haughtie minde, Come let vs charge the breach, the towne is ours Both male and female put them to the sword: So please you Scilla, and fulfill his word. Exeunt A little skirmish, a retreat: enter in royaltie Lucretius.
Lucret: Now Romanes we haue brought Preneste low, And Marius sleepes amidst the dead at last. So then to Rome my countrimen with ioy, VVhere Scilla waights the tidings of our fight, Those prisners that are taken, see forth with VVith warlike iauelins you put them to death. Come let vs march, see Rome in sight my harts, VVhere Scilla waights the tidings of our warre. Enter Scilla, Valerius Flaccus: Lepidus, Pompey, Citizens Guard: Scilla seated in his roabes of state is saluted by the Citizens, &c. Flascus: Romanes you know, and to your greefes haue seene A world of troubles hatched here at home, VVhich through preuention being welnigh crost By worthie Scilla and his warlike band: I Consull with these fathers thinke it meet To fortifie our peace and Cities weale, To name some man of worth that may supply Dictators power and place, whose maiestie Shall crosse the courage of rebellious mindes, VVhat thinke you Romanes, will you condiscend? Scilla: Nay Flaccus, for their profits they must yeeld, For men of meane condition and conceipt Must humble their opinions to their lords, And if my frends and Citizens consent Since I am borne to manage mightie things, I will (though loth) both rule and gouerne them. I speake not this as though I wish to raigne, But for to know my frends: and yet againe I merrit Romanes arre more grace than this. Flaccus: I countrimen, if Scillas powre and mind If Scillas vertue courage and deuice, If Scillas frends and fortunes merit fame, should  Dictators name.
Pompey: VVhat think you Citizens, why stand ye mutepunc; Shall Scilla be Dictator here in Rome? Citizens: By full consent Scilla shalbe Dictator. Flaccus: Then in the name of Rome I here present The rods and axes into Scillas hand, And fortunate proue Scilla our Dictator. Trumpets sound: crie within Scilla Dictator. Scilla: My fortunes Flaccus cannot be impeacht, For at my birth the plannets passing kinde Could entertaine no retrograde aspects. And that I may with kindnes quite their loue, My countrimen I will preuent the cause, Gainst all the false encounters of mishap. You name me your Dictator, but prefixe No time, no course, but giue me leaue to rule, And yet exempt me not from your reuenge: Thus by your plesures being  aloft, Straight by your furies I should quickly fall. No Citizens, who readeth Scillas minde, Must forme my titles in another kinde. Either let Scilla be Dictator euer, Or flatter Scilla with these titles neuer. Citizens: Perpetuall be thy glorie and renowne, Perpetuall Lord Dictator shalt thou bee. Pompey: Hereto the Senate frankly doth agree. Scilla: Then so shall scilla raigne you Senators, Then so shall Scilla rule you Citizens: As Senators and Citizens that please mee Shall be my frends, the rest cannot disease mee▪ Enter Lucretius with souldiers. But see whereas Lucretius is returnde. Welcome braue Romaine where is Marius? Are these Prenestians put vnto the sword. Lucre: The Cittie noble Scilla raced is, And Marius dead not by our swords my Lord, But with more constancie than Cato died,
Scilla: VVhat constancie and but a verie boy, VVhy then I see he was his fathers sonne, But let vs haue this constancie describde. Lucr: After our fearce assaults, and their resist, Our seige, their salying out to stop our trench: Labor and hunger rayning in the towne, The yonger Marius on the Citties wall, Vouchsafte an interparle at the last: VVherein with constancie and courrage too, He boldly armed his freends him selfe to death: And spreading of his coloures on the wall, For answere saide he could not brooke to yeeld, Or trust a tyrant such as Scilla was. Scilla: VVhat did the bransicke boy vpbraid me so? But let vs heare the rest Lucretius. Lucre: And after great perswsasions to his freends And worthy resolution of them all: He first did sheath his ponyard in his breast, And so in order dyed all the rest. Scilla: Now by my sword this was a worthy iest, Yet silly boy I needs must pittie thee, VVhose noble minde could neuer mated bee, Beleeue me countrymen a sodaine thought, A sodaine change in Scilla now hath wrought. Old Marius and his sonne were men of name, Nor Fortunes laughes, nor lowers their minds could tame, And when I count their fortunes that are past, I see that death confirmde their fames at last. Then he that striues to manage mightie things, Amidst his triumphes gaines a troubled minde. The greatest hope the greater harme it bringes: And pore men in content their glory finde. If then content be such a pleasant thing, VVhy leaue I country life to liue a king? Yet Kings are Gods and make the proudest stoope, Yee but themselues are still pursude with ha
And men were made to mount and then to droope, Such chances wait vpon incertaine fate, That where she kisseth once shee quelleth twice, Then who so liues content is happy wise. VVhat motion moueth this Philosophy? Oh Scilla see the Ocean ebbs and floats. The spring-time wanes when winter draweth nie. I, these are true and most assured notes. Inconstant chance such tickle turnes hath let. As who so feares no fall, must seeke content. Flaceus: VVhilst grauer thoughts of honor shuld allure thee VVhat maketh scilla muse and mutter thus? scilla: I that haue past amidst the mightie troopes Of armed legions through a world of warre, Doo now bethinke me Flaccus on my chance, How I alone where manie men were slaine, In spite of Fate am come to Rome againe, And o I wield the reuer end stiles of state, Yea, Scilla with a becke could breake thy necke, VVhat Lo of Rome hath dre as much as I? Yet Flaccus knwst thou not that I must die? The laboring sisters on the weary Loombs, Haue drawne my webb of life at length, I know: And men of witt must thinke vpon their tombes. For beasts witt careles steps to : Where men whose thoughts and honors, clime on hie, Liuing with fame, must learne, with fame to die. Pomp: What les my Lord in gouerning this state, To liue in rest, and die with honor too? ssilla: What lets me Pompey? why my curteous frend, Can he remaine secure that weilds a charge? Or thinke of wit when lattrers doo commend? Or be aduisde that careles runs at large? o Pompey, honnie words makes foolish mindes, And pore the greatest wit with error blindes. I murdred Antoe thy frend,
Romanes: some here haue lost at my commaund Their Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, and Allies, And thinke you Scilla thinking these misdeeds, Be thinks not on your grudges and mislike? Yes Countrimen I beare them still in minde. Then Pompey were I not a silly man, To leaue my Rule and trust these Romans than? Pompey: Your Grace hath small occasions of , Nor seeke these Citizens for your disclaime. scilla: But Pompey now these reaching plumes of pride, That mounted vp my fortunes to the Clowds, By graue conceits shall straight be laid aside, And scilla thinks of farre more simple shrowds. For hauing tride occasion in the throne, Ile see if she dare frowne when state is gone. Loe senators, the man that sate aloft, Now deignes to giue inferiors highest place. Loe here the man whom Rome repined oft, A priuate man, content to brooke disgrace, Romanes, loe here the axes, rods and all, Ile master fortune, least she make me thrall. Now who so list accuse me, tell my wrongs, Vpbraid me in the presence of this state. Is none these olly Citizens among, That will accuse or say I am ingrate. Then will I say and boldly boast my chaunces, That nought may force the man whom Fate aduances. Flaccus: what meaneth scilla in this sullen moode, To leaue his titles on the sodaine thus? scilla: Consull I meane with calme and quiet mind, To passe my daies while happy death I finde. Pomp: What greater wrong, than leaue thy countrey so? scilla: Both it and life must scilla leaue in time. Cit: Yet during life haue care of Rome and vs. scilla: O wanton world that flatterst in thy prime, And breathest balme and poyson mixt in one.
See ow these wauering Romaines wisht my raigne, That why lom sought and sought to haue me slaine, My Countrymen this Cittie wants no store Of Fathers warriors to supplie my roome, So grant me peace and I will die for Rome. Enter two Burgers to them Poppey and Curtall. Curtall: These are verie indiscreet counsailes neighbor Poppey, and I will follow your misaduisement. Poppey: I tell you goodman Curtall the wenche hath wrong, oh vaine world, oh foolish men, could a man in na∣ture cast a wench downe, and disdaine in nature to lift hir vp again? could he take away ir dishonestie without bouncing vp the banes of matrimonie? oh learned Poet wel didst thou write ustian verse. These maides are dawes that goe to the lawes and a babe in the belly. Cur: Tut man tis the way the world must follow, for maides must be kinde, good husbands to finde. Poppey: But marke the fierce if they swell before, it will grieue them sore. but see yondes Master scilla, faith a prettie fellow is a. Scilla: what seekes my countrymen? what would my freendes? Curt: Nay sir your kinde words shall not serue the turne, why thinke you to thrust your souldiers into our kindred with your curtesies sir. Poppey: I tel you Master scilla my neighbour wil haue the Law, he had the right he wil haue the wrong for therein dwels the Law. Consull: what desires these men of Rome? Cur: Neighbour sharpen the edge tole of your wits vpon the whetstone of indiscretion that your wordes may shaue like the rasers of Palermo, you haue learning with ignorance therefore speake my tale.
Popp: Then worshipfull Master Scilla, be it knowne vn∣to you, that my neighbors daughter Doritie was a maid of restoritie, faire fresh and fine as a merrie cup of wine. Her eies like two potcht egges, great and goodly her legs, but marke my dolefull dittie, alas for woe and pittie: a souldier of yours vpon a bed of flowers, gaue her such a fall, as she lost maidenhead and all. And thus in verie good time I end my rudefull time. Scilla: And what of this my frend, why seeke you mee, Who haue resignd my titles and my state To liue a priuate life as you doo now? Goe moue the Consull Flaccus in this cause, VVho now hath power to execute the lawes. Curtall: And are you no more Master dix cator, nor G∣neralitie of the souldiers? Scilla: My powers doo cease, my titles are resignd, Curtall: Haue you signd your titles? O base minde, that being in the powles steeple of honor, hast cast thy selfe in∣to the sinke of simplicitie. Fie beast, were I a king, I would day by day sucke vp white bread and milke, and go a ietting in a acket of sike, my meat shou'd be the curds, my drinke should be the whey, and I wold haue a mincing lasse to loue me euerie day. Poppey: Nay goodman Curtall, your discretions are ve∣rie simple, let me cramp him with a reason. Sirrha, whether is better good ale or small beere? Alas see his implicitie that cannot answere me: why I say ale. Curtall: And so say I neighbor. Poppey: Thou hast reason, ergo say I tis better be a King than a clowne. Faith master Scilla, I hope a man maye now call ye knaue by authoritie. Scilla: VVith what impatience hare I these vpbraides That whilome plagude the least offence with death. Oh Scilla these are stales of desteny, By some vpbraids to try thy constancie. My friends these scornes of yours perhaps will moue,
The next Dictator shun to yeeld his state, For feare he finde as much as Scilla doth. But Flaccus, to preuent their further wrong, Vouchsafe some Lictor may attach the man, And doo them right that thus complaine abuse. Flaccus: Sirrha, goe you and bring the souldier That hath so loosly leant to lawles lust, VVe will haue meanes sufficient be assurd To coole his heate, and make the wanton chast. Curtall: We thanke your mastership: come neighbour, let vs iog, faith this newes will set my daughter Dorothie a gog. Exeunt cum Lictore. Scilla: Graue Senators and Romanes, now you see The humble bent of Scillas changed minde. Now will I leaue you Lords, from courtly traine To dwel content amidst my country caue, VVhere no ambitious humors shall approch▪ The quiet silence of my happy sleepe. Where no delicious Iouisance or toyes, Shall tickle with delight my tempered eares, But wearying out the lingering day with toile, Tyring my veines and furrowing of my soule. The silent night with slumber stealing on Shall locke these carefull closets of mine eies. Oh had I knowne the height of happines, Or bent mine eies vpon my mother earth: Long since O Rome had Scilla with reioyce Forsaken armes to leade a priuate life. Flaccus: But in this humblenes of minde my Lord, VVhereas experience prooude and Art doo meete. How happy were these faire Italian fields, If they were graced with so sweete a sunne: Then I for Rome and Rome with me requires, That Scilla will abide and gouerne Rome. Scilla: O Flaccus, if th'Arabian Phoenix striue By natures warning to renue her kinde,
VVhen soaring nie the glorious eye of heauen, Shee from her cinders doth reuiue her sexe. VVhy should not Scilla learne by her to die? That carst haue beene the Phoenix of this land. And drawing neere the sunne-shine of content, Perish obscure to make your glories growe. For as the higher trees do shield the shrubs, From posting Phlegons warmth and breathing fire, So mighty men obscure each others fame, And make the best deseruers fortunes game. Enter Genius. But ah what sodaine fues doo affright? VVhat apparitious fantasies are these? Oh let me rest sweete Lords, for why me thinks, Some fatall spells are sounded in mine eares. Genius: Subsequitur tua ors: priuari lumine Scillam, Numina Parcarum am fera precipiunt. Precipiunt fera iam Parcarum numina, Scillam, Lumine priuari, mors tua subsequitur, Elysium petis, ô foelix! & fatidici astri: Praescius Heroas, ô petis innumeros! Innumeros petis ô Heroas! praescius astri Fatidici: & foelix, ô petis Elisium! Euanescit subitò. Scilla: Ergóne post dulces annos properantia fata? Ergóne iam tenebrae pramia lucis erunt? Attamen, vt vitae fortunam gloria mortis Vincat, in extremo funere cantet olor. Pom: How fares my Lord? what dreadful thoughts are these VVhat doubtfull answeres on a sodaine thus? Scilla: Pompey the man that made the world to stoope, And ettered fortune in the chaines of powre, Must droope and draw the Chariot of Fate Along the darksome bankes of Acheron. The heauens haue warnd me of my present fall. Oh call Cornelia forth, let Scilla see
His daughter Fuluia ere his eyes be shut. Exit one for Cornelia. Flaccus: VVhy Scilla, where is now thy wonted hope In greatest hazard of vnstaied chance? VVhat shall a little biting blast of paine Blemish the blossomes of thy wonted pride? Scilla: My Flaccus, worldly ioyes and pleasures fade, In constant time like to the fleeting tide VVith endles course mans hopes doth ouer-beare? Nought now remaines that Scilla faine would haue, But lasting fame when bodie lies in graue. Enter Cornelia, Fuluia. Cornelia: How fares my Lord? how doth my gentle Scilla? Scilla: Ah my Cornelia passing happie now. Free from the world, allied vnto the heauens, Not curious of incertaine chaunces now. Cornelia: VVords full of woe still adding to my griefe, A curelesse crosse of many hundreth harmes. Oh let not Rome and poore Cornelia loose, The one hir frend, the other her delight. scilla: Cornelia, man hath power by some instinct And gracious reuolution of the starres, To conquer kingdomes not to master fate: For when the course of mortall life is runne, Then Clotho ends the web hir sister spun. Pompey, Lord Flaccus, fellow senators, In that I feele the faintfull deawes of death steeping mine eies within their chilly wet, The care I haue of wife and daughter both, Must on your wisedomes happily elie, VVith equall distribution see you part, My lands and goods betwixt these louely twaine, Onely bestow a hundred thousand Sestercies, Vpon my friends and fellow souldiers. Thus hauing made my finall testament, Come Fuluia let thy father lay his hand,
Vpon thy louely bosome and intreat A vertuous boone and fauour at thy hands. Faire Romane maide, see that thou wed thy faires, To modest vertuous and delightfull thoughts: Let Rome in viewing thee behold thy sire, Honour Cornelia from whose fruitfull woombe, Thy plenteous beauties sweetly did appeare, And with this Lesson louely maide farewell. Fuluia: oh tedious and vnhappy chance for me. scilla: Content thee Fuluia, for it needes must bee. Cornelia I must leaue thee to the world, And by those loues that I haue lent thee o, In mutuall wedlocke rytes and happie warre. Remember Scilla in my Fuluia stil: Consull farewell, my Pompey I must hence, And farewel Rome, and Fortune now I blesse thee, That both in life and death wouldst not oppresse mee, dies. Cornelia: oh hideous stormes of neuer danted fate, Now are those eyes whose sweet reflections coold The smothered rancors of rebellious thoughts Clad with the sable mantles of the nigt. And like the tree that robd of sunne and showres Mournes desolate withouten leafe or sap: so poore Cornelia late bereft of loue, Sits sighing, haples, ioyles and forlorne. Fuluia: Gone is the flower that did adorne our fields, Fled are those sweete reflections of delight, Dead is my Father, Fuluia dead is hee In whom thy life, for whom thy death must bee. Flaccus: Ladies, to tyre the time in restles mone VVere tedious vnto frends and nature too, Sufficeth you that Scilla so is dead, As fame shall sing his power though life be fled. Pompey: Then to conclude his happines my Lords, Determine where shall be his Funerall. Lepidus: Euen there where other Nobles are interd.
Pompey: VVhy Lepidus what Romane euer was, That merited so high a name as hee? Then why with simple pompe and funerall VVould you intombe so rare a paragon? Corn: An vrne of gold shall hem his ashes in, The Vestall virgins with their holy notes Shall sing his famous (though too fatall) death, I and my Fuluia with dispersed haire VVill waight vpon this noble Romanes hearse. Fuluia: And Fuluia clad in blacke & mournfull pale VVill waight vpon her fathers funerall. Pomp: Come beare we hence this trophee of renowne, VVhose life, whose death was farre from fortunes frowne, Exeunt omnes. The Funeralls of Scilla in great pompe. Deo iuuante, nil nocet liuor malus: Et non iuuante nil iuuat labor grauis. FINIS.
