17463 99847572 12610
Pappe with an hatchet. Alias, A figge for my God sonne. Or Cracke me this nut. Or A Countrie cuffe, that is, a sound boxe of the eare, for the idiot Martin to hold his peace, seeing the patch will take no warning. VVritten by one that dares call a dog, a dog, and made to preuent Martins dog daies. Imprinted by Iohn Anoke, and Iohn Astile, for the Bayliue of Withernam, cum priuilegio perennita∣tis, and are to bee sold at the signe of the crab tree cudgell in thwack∣coate lane. A sentence. Martin hangs fit for my mowing.
AA To the Father and the two Sonnes, Huffe, Ruffe, and Snuffe, the three tame ruffians of the Church, which take pepper in the nose, because they can not marre Prelates grating. ROome for a royster; so thats well sayd, itch a little further for a good fellowe. Now haue at you all my gaffers of the rayling religion, tis J that must take you a peg lower. J am sure you looke for more worke, you shall haue wood enough to cleaue, make your tongue the wedge, and your head the beetle, Jle make such a splinter runne into your wits, as shal make thē ranckle till you become fooles. Nay, if you shoot bookes
like fooles bolts, Jle be so bold as to make your iudgements quiuer with my thunderbolts. If you meane to gather clowdes in the Common∣wealth, to threaten tempests, for your flakes of snowe weele pay you with stones of hayle; if with an Easterlie winde you bring Catterpil∣lers into the Church, with a Northerne wind weele driue barrennes into your wits. VVe care not for a Scottish mist, though it wet vs to the skin, you shalbe sure your cocks∣combs shall not be mist, but pearst to the skuls. J professe rayling, and think it as good a cud∣gell for a Martin, as a stone for a dogge, or a whippe for an Ape, or poyson for a rat. Yet find fault with no broad termes, for J haue mesured yours with mine, & I find your broader iust by the list. Say not my speaches are light, for J haue weighed yours and mine, and I finde yours lighter by twentie graines than the allowance. For number you exceede, for you haue thirtie ribauld words for my one, and yet you beare a good spirit. J was loath so to write as J haue done, but that J learnde, that he that drinkes with cutters must not be
without his ale dagger; nor hee that buckles with Martin, without his lauish termes. VVho would currie an Asse with an Juo∣rie combe? giue the beast thistles for prouen∣der. J doo but yet angle with a silken flye, to see whether Martins will nibble; and if J see that, why then I haue wormes for the nonce, and will giue them line enough like a trowte, till they swallow both hooke and line, and then Martin beware your gilles, for Jle make you daunce at the poles end. J knowe Martin will with a trice bestride my shoulders. VVell, if he ride me, let the foole sit fast, for my wit is verie kickish; which if he spurre with his copper replie, when it bleedes, it will all to be smeare their consciences. Jf a Martin can play at chestes, as well as his nephewe the ape, he shall knowe what it is for a scaddle pawne, to crosse a Bishop in his owne walke. Such dydoppers must be taken vp, els theile not stick to check the king. Rip vp my life, discipher my name, fill thy answer as full of lies as of lines, swel like a toade, hisse like an adder bite like a dog, & chatter like a monkey,
my pen is prepared and my minde; and if yee chaunce to finde any worse words than you brought, let them be put in your dads dictio∣narie. And so farewell, and be hangd, and J pray God ye fare no worse. Yours at an houres warning Double V.
To the indifferent Reader. IT is high time to search in what corner of the Church the fire is kindled, being crept so far, as that with the verie smoke the consciences of diuers are smothered. It is found that certaine Martins, if no miscreants in religion (which wee may suspect) yet without doubt malecōtents (which wee ought to feare) haue throwen fire, not into the Church porch, but into the Chauncell, and though not able by learning and iudgement to displace a Sexton, yet seeke to remooue Bishops. They haue scattered diuers libels, all so taunting and slanderous, as it is hard to iudge, whether their lyes exceed their bitternesse, or their bitternesse their fables. If they be answered by the grauitie of learned Prelates, they presentlie reply with railings; which argueth their in∣tent to be as farre frō the truth of deuotion, as their writings from mildnes of spirit. It is said that camels neuer drinke, til they haue troubled the water with their feete, & it seemes these Martins cannot carouse the sapp of the Church, till by faction they make tumults in religion. Seeing thē either they expect no graue replie, or that they are settled with railing to replie; I thought it more conuenient, to giue them a whisk with their owne wand, than to haue them spurd with dee∣per learning. The Scithian slaues, though they bee vp in armes, must bee tamde with whippes, not swords, and these mutiners in Church matters, must haue their mouthes bungd with iests, not arguments. I seldome vse to write, and yet neuer writ anie thing, that in speech might seeme vndecent, or in sense vnhonest; if here I haue vsed bad temes, it is because they are not to bee an∣swered with good tearmes: for whatsoeuer shall seeme lauish in this Pamphlet, let it be thought borrowed of Martins lan∣guage,
These Martins were hatcht of addle egges, els could they not haue such idle heads. They measure conscience by their owne yard, and like the theeues, that had an yron bed, in which all that were too long they would cut euen, all that were too short they would stretch out, and none escapte vn∣rackt or vnsawed, that were not iust of their beds length: so all that are not Martins, that is, of their peeuish mind, must be measured by them. If he come short of their religion, why he is but a colde Protestant, hee must bee pluckt out to the length of a Puritane. If any be more deuout than they are, as to giue almes, fast, and pray, then they cut him off close by the workes, and say he is a Papist. If one be not cast in Mar∣tins mould, his religion must needes mould. He saith he is a Courtier, I thinke no Courtier so peruerse, that seeing the streight rule of the Church, would goe about to bend it. Jt may be he is some Iester about the Court, and of that I mer∣uaile, because I know all the fooles there, and yet cannot gesse at him. What euer he be, if his conscience be pind to his cog∣nizance, J will account him more politicke than religious, and more dangerous for ciuill broyles, than the Spaniard for an open warre. I am ignorant of Martin and his main∣tainer, but my conscience is my warrant, to care for neither. For I knowe there is none of honour so carelesse, nor any in zeale so peeuish, nor of nature any so barbarous, that wil suc∣cor those that be suckers of the Church, a thing against God and policie; against God, in subuerting religion; against po∣licie, in altering gouernment, making in the Church, the feast of the Lapithees, where all shall bee throwne on ano∣thers head, because euerie one would be the head. And these it is high time to tread vnder foote: for who would not make a threshold of those, that go about to make the Church a barne to thresh in. Itaque sic disputo. FINIS.
Pappe with an hatchet. GOod morrow, goodman Martin, good morrow: will ye anie mu∣sique this morning? What fast a sleepe? Nay faith, Ile cramp thee till I wake thee. O whose tat? Nay gesse olde knaue and odd knaue: for Ile neuer leaue pulling, til I haue thee out of thy bed into the streete; and then all shall see who thou art, and thou know what I am. Your Knaueship brake you fast on the Bishops, by breaking your iests on them: but take heed you breake not your owne necke. Bastard Iunior dinde vpon them, and cramde his maw as full of mallice, as his head was of malapertnesse. Bastard Senior was with them at supper, and I thinke tooke a sur∣fet of colde and raw quipps. O what queasie girds were they towards the fall of the leafe. Old Mar∣tin, neuer entaile thy wit to the eldest, for hee'le spend all he hath in a quire of paper. Now sirs, knowing your bellies full of Bishops bobbs, I am sure your bones would be at rest: but wee'le set vp all our rests, to make you all restie. I was once determined to write a proper newe Bal∣let, entituled Martin and his Maukin, to no tune, be∣cause
Martin was out of all tune. Elderton swore hee had times lying a steepe in ale,Hee sweares by his mazer, that he will make their wits wetshod, if the ale haue his swift cur∣rent. which should marre all your reasons there is an olde hacker that shall take order for to print them. O how hee'le cut it, when his ballets come out of the lungs of the li∣cour. They shall be better than those of Bnner, or the ierkes for a Iesuit. The first begins, Come tit me come tat me, come throw a halter at me. Then I thought to touch Martin with Logick, but there was a little wag in Cambridge, that swore by Saint Seaton, he would so swinge him with Sil∣logismes, that all Martins answeres should ake. The vile boy hath manie bobbes, and a whole fardle of fallacies. He begins, Linquo coax ranis, cros coruis, vanaque vanis. Ad Logicam pergo, quae Mart'ins non timet ergo. And saies, he will ergo Martin into an ague. I haue read but one of his arguments. Tiburne stands in the cold, But Martins are a warme furre: Therefore Tiburne must be furd with Martins. O (quoth I) boy thou wilt be shamed; tis nei∣ther in moode nor figure: all the better, for I am in a moode to cast a figure, that shall bring them to the conclusion. I laught at the boye, and left him drawing all the lines of Martin into sillogismes, uerie conclusion beeing this, Ergo Martin is to bee hangd.
Nay, if rime and reason bee both forestalde, Ile raile, if Martin haue not barrelde vp all rakehell words: if he haue, what care I to knocke him on the head with his owne hatchet. He hath taken vp all the words for his obscenitie: obscenitie? Nay, now I am too nice; squirrilitie were a better word: well, let me alone to squirrell them. Martin, thinkst thou, thou hast so good a wit, as none can outwrangle thee? Yes Martin, wee wil play three a vies wits: art thou so backt that none dare blade it with thee? Yes Martin, we will drop vie stabbes. Martin sweares I am some gamester. Why, is not gaming lawful? I know where there is more play in the compasse of an Hospitall, than in the circuite of Westchester. One hath been an old stabber at passage: the One that I meane, thrust a knife into ones thigh at Cambridge, the quarrel was about cater-tray, and euer since he hath quarrelled about cater-caps. I thought that hee which thrust at the bodie in game, would one daie cast a foyne at the soule in earnest. But hee workes closelie and sees all, hee learnd that of old Vydgin the cobler; who wrought ten yeares with spectacles, and yet swore he could see through a dicker of leather. He hath a wanton spleene, but we will haue it stroakt with a spurne, because his eies are bleard, he thinkes to bleare all ours; but let him take this for a warning, or else looke for such a warming, as shall make all his de∣uices as like wood, as his spittle is like woodsere. Take away the Sacke, and giue him some Cina∣mom
water, his conscience hath a colde stomacke. Cold? Thou art deceiued, twil digest a Cathedral Church as easilie, as an Estritch a two penie naile. But softe Martins, did your Father die at the Groyne? It was well groapt at, for I knewe him sicke of a paine in the groyne. A pockes of that re∣ligion, (quoth Iulian Grimes to her Father) when al his haires fell off on the sodaine. Well let the olde knaue be dead. Whie are not the spawnes of such a dog-fish hangd? Hang a spawne? drowne it; alls one, damne it. Ye like not a Bishops rochet, when all your fa∣thers handkerchers were made of his sweete harts smocke. That made you bastards, and your dad a cuckold, whose head is swolne so big, that he had neede sende to the cooper to make him a biggin: and now you talke of a cooper, Ile tell you a tale of a tubb. At Sudburie, where the Martin-mōgers swarmd to a lecture, like beares to a honnie pot: a good ho∣nest strippling, of the age of fiftie yeares or therea∣bout, that could haue done a worse act if compa∣nie had not been neere, askt his sweete sister, whe∣ther lecherie in her conscience were a sinne? In faith (quoth she) I thinke it the superficies of sinne, and no harme if the tearmes be not abusde. for you must say, vertuousty done, not lustily done. Fie, this is filthie ribaldry. O sir, ther is no mirth without ri∣baldrie, nor ribaldrie without Martin, ask mine ho∣stesse of the iuie bush in Wye for the one, & my old hostesse of the Swanne in Warwicke for the other.
She is dead:They are not so many, thei are all Centimani, an hundred hands a peeces so that in all they are but one thousand. the diuell shee is. You are too broad with Martins brood: for hee hath a hundred thou∣sand that will set their handes to his Articles, and shewe the Queene. Sweeter and sweeter: for wee haue twentie hundred thousand handes to with∣stand them. I would it were come to the grasp, we would show them an Irish tricke, that when they thinke to winne the game with one man, wee'le make them holde out till wee haue but two left to carrie them to the gallowes: wel followed in faith, for thou saidst thou wert a gamester. All this is but bad English, when wilt thou come to a stile? Mar∣tin hath manie good words. Manie? Now you put me in minde of the matter, there is a booke cōming out of a hundred merrie tales, and the petigree of Martin, fetchte from the burning of Sodome, his armes shalbe set on his hearse, for we are prouiding his funerall, and for the winter nights the tales shall be told secundum vsum Sarum: the Deane of Salisbu∣rie can tell twentie. If this will not make Martin mad, malicious and melancholie (ô braue letter fol∣lowed with a full crie) then will we be desperate, & hire one that shall so translate you out of French into English, that you will blush and lie by it. And one will we coniure vp, that writing a familiar E∣pistle about the naturall causes of an Earthquake, fell into the bowells of libelling, which made his eares quake for feare of clipping; he shall tickle you with taunts; all his works bound close, are at least sixe sheetes in quarto, & he calls them the first tome of his familiar Epistle: he is full of latin endes, and
worth tenne of those that crie in London, haie ye a∣nie gold ends to sell. If he giue you a bob, though he drawe no bloud, yet are you sure of a rap with a bable. If he ioyne with vs, perijsti Martin, thy wit wil be massacred: if the toy take him to close with thee, then haue I my wish, for this tenne yeres haue I lookt to lambacke him. Nay he is a mad lad, and such a one as cares as little for writing without wit, as Martin doth for writing without honestie; a notable coach companion for Martin, to drawe Diuinitie from the Colledges of Oxford and Cam∣bridge, to Shoomakers hall in Sainct Martins. But we neither feare Martin, nor the foot-cloth, nor the beast that wears it, be he horse or asse; nor whose sonne he is, be he Martins, sonne, Iohns, sonne, or Ri∣chards, sonne; nor of what occupation he be, be a ship-wright, cart-wright, or tiburn-wright. If they bring seuen hundred men, they shall be boxt with fourteen hundred boyes. Nay we are growing to a secret bargaine. O, but I forgate a riddle; the more it is spied, the lesse it is seene. Thats the Sunne: the lesse it is spied of vs, the more it is seene of those vnder vs. The Sunne? thou art an asse, it is the Father, for the old knaue, thinking by his bastardie to co∣uer his owne head, putteth it like a stagge ouer the pale. Pale? nay I will make him blush as red as ones nose, that was alwaies washt in well water. What newes from the Heraldes? Tush, thats time enough to know to morrow, for the sermon is not yet cast. The sermon foole? why they neuer studie, but cleaue to Christ his dabitur in illa hora.
They venter to catch soules, as they were soles; Doctors are but dunces, none sowes true stitches in a pulpet, but a shoomaker. Faith,Martin Iunior saies, hee found his fathers pa∣pers vndwas  his Fourme. thou wilt bee caught by the stile. What care I to be found by a stile, when so many Martins haue been taken vnder an hedge? If they cannot le∣uell, they will roue at thee, and anatomize thy life from the cradle to the graue, and thy bodie from the corne on thy toe, to the crochet on thy head. They bee as cunning in cutting vp an honest mans credit, as Bull in quartering a knaues bodie. Tush, (what care I) is my posie; if hee meddle with mee, Ile make his braines so hot that they shall crumble, and rattle in his warpt scull, like pepper in a dride bladder. I haue a catalogue of al the sheepe, and it shall go hard, but I will crosse the bel-weather. Why shuld I feare him that walkes on his neats-feete. Neither court, nor countrie that shal be free, I am like death, Ile spare none. There shall not misse a name of anie, that had a Godfather; if anie bee vnchristened, Ile nicke him with a name. But whist; beware an action of the case. Then put this for the case, whether it bee not as lawfull to set downe the facts of knaues, as for a knaue to slander honest men. Alls as it is taken; marie the diuell take al, if truth find not as many soft cushions to leane on, as trecherie. Theres one with a lame wit, which will not weare a foure cornerd cap, then let him put on Ti∣burne, that hath but three corners; & yet the knaue
himself hath a pretie wench in euerie corner. I could tickle Martin with a true tale of one of his sonnes, that hauing the companie of one of his sisters in the open fieldes,He calls none but the heauēs to witnesse. saide, hee woulde not smoother vp sinne▪ and deale in hugger mugger a∣gainst his Conscience. In the hundred merrie tales, the places, the times, the witnesses and all, shall be put downe to the proofe, where I warrant you, the Martinists haue consciences of proofe. Doost think Martin, thou canst not be discouered? What foole would not thinke him discouered that is balde? Put on your night cap, and your holie day English, and the best wit you haue for high daies, all wil be little enough to keep you from a knaues penance, though as yet you bee in a fooles paradice If you coyne words, as Cankerburie, Canterburines, &c. whie, I know a foole that shall so inkhornize you with straunge phrases, that you shall blush at your owne bodges. For Similes, theres another shal liken thee to anie thing, besides he can raile too. If Martin muzzle not his mouth, and manacle his hands, Ile blabb all, and not sticke to tell, that pewes and stewes are rime in their religion. Scratch not thy head Martin, for be thou Martin the bird, or Martin the beast; a bird with the long∣est bill, or a beast with the longest eares, theres a net spread for your necke. Martin, Ile tell thee a tale woorth twelue pence, if thy witt bee woorth a pennie. There came to a Duke in Italie, a large lubber and a beggerlie, saying hee had the Philosophers
Stone, and that hee could make golde faster, than the Duke could spend it; The Duke askt him, why hee made none to mainteine himselfe? Because quoth he, I could neuer get a secret place to worke in; for once I indeuoured, and the Popes holinesse sent for me, whom if he had caught, I should haue been a prentice to mainteine his pride. The Duke minding to make triall of his cunning, & eager of golde, set to him worke closely in a vault, where it was not knowen to his neerest seruants. This Al∣cumist, in short time consumed two thousande pound of the Dukes gold, and brought him halfe a ducket: whie (quoth the Duke) is this all? All quoth he my Lord, that I could make by Art. Wel said the Duke, then shalt thou see my cunning: for I will boile thee, straine thee, and then drie thee, so that of a lubber, that weighed three hundred weight, I will at last make a dram of knaues pow∣der. The Duke did it. Martin, if thou to cousen haue crept into the bo∣some of some great mē, saying thou hast the chur∣ches discipline, & that thou canst by thy faction & pollicie, pull down Bishops and se p Elders, bring the lands of the Clergy, into the cofers of the Tem∣poraltie, and repaire Religion, by impairing their liuings, it may bee, thou shalt bee hearkened too, stroakt on the head, greasd in the hand, fed dainte∣lie, kept secretlie, and countenaunst mightelie But when they perceiue, that all thy deuices bee but Chymeraes, monsters of thine owne imaginations, so farre from pulling downe a Cathedrall Church,
that they cannot remooue a corner of a square cap, thē will they deale with thee,Martin & his mainteiner are both saw∣ers of timber, but Martin stands in the pit, all the dust must fall in his eies, but he shal neuer walke on the boards. as the Duke did with the Alcumist, giue thee as many bobs on the eare, as thou hast eaten morsels of their meate, and make thee an example of sedition to be pointed at, that art now so mewde vp, that none can point where thou art. All this tale, with the application, was not of my penning, but found among loose papers; marie he that did it, dares stand to it. Now, because I haue nothing to doo betweene this and supper, Ile tell you another tale, and so begin Winter by time. There was a libeller, who was also a coniurer, so that whatsoeuer casting of figures there was, he deceiued them; at the last, one as cunning as him∣self, shewed, wher he sate writing in a fooles coate, & so he was caught and whipt. Martin, there are figures a flinging, & ten to one thou wilt be found sitting in a Knaues skinne, and so be hangd. Hollow there, giue me the beard I wore yester∣day. O beware of a gray beard, and a balde head: for if such a one doo but nod, it is right dudgin and deepe discretion. But soft, I must now make a graue speach. There is small difference between Swallowes & Martins, either in shape or nature, saue onely, that the Martins, haue a more beetle head, they both breed in Churches, and hauing fledgde their young ones, leaue nothing behind them but durt. Vnwor∣thie to come into the Church porch, or to be nou∣rished vnder anie good mans eues, that gnawe the bowels, in which they were bred, and defile the
place, in which they were ingendred. They studie to pull downe Bishopps, and set vp Superintendents, which is nothing else, but to raze out good Greeke, & enterline bad Latine. A fine pe∣riod; but I cannot continue this stile, let me fal into my olde vaine. O do ost remember, howe that Ba∣stard Iunior complaines of brothells, and talkes of long Megg of Westminster. A craftie iacke, you thoght because you twitted Mar-martin, that none would suspect you; yes faith Martin, you shall bee thresht with your owne flaile. It was one of your neast, that writt this for a loue letter, to as honest a womā as euer burnt malt. Grace, mercie, and peace to thee (O widow) with fer∣uent motions of the spirit,Hee thought Lats had still lien at Corinth aswel as Paul. that it may worke in thee both to will and to doo. Thou knowest my loue to thee is, as Paules was to the Corinthians; that is, the loue of co∣pulation. How now holie Martin, is this good wooing? If you prophane the Scriptures, it is a pretie wit; if we but alledge Doctors to expound them, wee are wicked If Martin oppresse his neighbor, why hee saith, it is his conscience; if anie else doo right, it is extremitie. Martin may better goe into a brothell house, then anie other go by it; he slides into a bad place like the Sunne, all others stick in it like pitch. If Martin speake broad bawdrie, why all the crue saies, your worship is passing merrie. Martin will not sweare, but with indeede, in sooth, & in truth, hee'le cogge the die of deceipt, and cutte at the bumme-carde of his conscience. O sweetelie
brought in, at least three figures in that line, besides the witant. One there was, and such a one as Martin would make the eldest of his Elders, that hauing fortie an∣gels sent him for a beneuolence, refusde to giue the poore fellowe a quittance for the receipt, saying, Christ had giuen his master a quittaunce, the same howre he told it out: & this was at his table, where he sate with no lesse than fortie good dishes of the greatest dainties, in more pompe than a Pope, right like a superintendant. Now to the two bastards, what were you twins? It shuld seeme so, for there wēt but a paire of sheeres betweene your knaueries. When the olde henne hatcht such eggs, the diuell was in the cocks comb. Your father thrusts you forward, remember pettie Martins Aesps crab, the mother going backward, exhorted her sonnes to goe forward; doo you so first mother quoth they, and we will follow. Now the old cuckold hath puld in his hornes, he would make you creepe cleane out of the shell, & so both loose your houses, and shewe your nakednesse. You go about impossibilities, wele no such chāge, and if ye had it, ye would be wearie of it. There was a man like Martin, that had a goose, which euerie daie laid him a golden egge; hee not content with the blessing, kild his goose, thinking to haue a myne of golde in her bellie, and finding nothing but dung, the gāder wisht his goose aliue. Martinists that liue well by the Church, & receiue great benefites of it, thinke if all Churches were
downe, they should be much better, but when they shall see cōfusion in stead of discipline, & atheisme to be found in place of doctrine, will they not with sighs wish the Churches and Bishops in their won∣ted gouernmēt? Thou art well seen in tales, & prea∣chest Aesops fables. Tush, Ile bring in Pueriles, and Stans puer ad mensam, for such vnmannerlie knaues as Martin, must bee set againe to their A. B. C and learne to spell Our Father in a Horne booke. Man∣tin Iunior giues warning that none write against re∣uerent Martin: yes, there are atribus ad centum, from three to an hūdred, that haue vowed to write him out of his right wittes, and wee are all Aptots, in all cases alike, till we haue brought Martin to the ablatiue case, that is, to bee taken away with Bulls voyder. O here were a notable full point, to leaue Mar∣tin in the hangmans apron. Nay, he would be glad to scape with hanging, weele first haue him lashte through the Realme with cordes, that when hee comes to the gallowes, he may be bleeding new. The babie comes in with Nunka, Neame, and Dad: (Pappe with an hatchet for such a puppie) giue the infant a bibbe, he all to beslauers his mo∣ther tongue, if he driuell so at the mouth and nose, weele haue him wipte with a hempen wispe. Hui? How often hast thou talkt of haltring? Whie it runnes still in my minde that they must be hangd. Hangde is the Que, and it comes iust to my pur∣pose. There was one endited at a Iaile deliuerie of fe∣lonie,
for taking vp an halter by the high way. The Iurie gaue verdit and said guiltie. The Iudge an honest man, said it was hard to find one guiltie for taking vp a penie halter, and bad them consider, what it was to cast awaie a man. Quoth the fore∣man, we haue enquired throughly, and found there was a horse tied to the halter. I marie (quoth the Iudge) then let him be tied to the halter, and let the horse goe home. Martin, a Monarch in his owne moyst conceit, and drie counsell, saies he is enuied onelie, because he leuelleth at Bishops; & we say as the Iudge saith, that if there were nothing else, it were hard to persecute them to death; but when we finde that to the rule of the Church, the whole state of the Realme is linckt, & that they filching a∣way Bishop by Bishop, seeke to fish for the Crown, and glew to their newe Church their owne con∣clusions, we must then say, let Bishops stand, & they hang; that is, goe home. Looke howe manie tales are in this booke, so manie must you abate of an hundred in the next booke, reckon this for one. There came by of late a good honest Minister, with a cloake hauing sleeues: ah (quoth a Marti∣nist, sitting on a bulke in Cheapside) he is a knaue I warrant you, a claspe would become one of his coate to claspe his cloak vnder his chinne. Where tis to be noted, that they come in with a sleeuelesse conscience, and thinke it no good doctrine, which is not preached with the cloak cast ouer each shoul∣der like a rippier. Twas a mad knaue and a Martinist, that diuided
his sermon into 34. parts for memorie sake, and would handle but foure for memorie sake, and they were, why Christ came, wherefore Christ came, for what cause Christ came, and to what end Christ came; this was all for memorie sake. If that Martin could thatch vp his Church, this mans scabship should bee an Elder, and Elders they may bee, which being fullest of spungie pith, proue euer the driest kixes. For in time you shall see, that it is but a bladder of worldlie winde which swells in their hearts, being once prickt, the humour will quicklie be remoued. O what a braue state of the Church it would be for all Ecclesiasticall causes to come before Weauers and Wierdawers, to see one in a motlie Ierkin and an apron to reade the first lesson. The poore Church should play at vne∣qual game, for it should loose al by the Elder hand. Nay Mas Martin, weele make you deale, shuffle as well as you can, we meane to cut it. If you had the foddring of the sheep, you would make the Church like Primero, foure religions in it, and nere one like another. I cannot out of his gaming humour. Why? Is it not as good as Mar∣tins dogged humour, who without reuerence, re∣gard, or exception, vseth such vnfitting tearmes, as were hee the greatest subiect in England hee could not iustifie them. Shut the doores (sirs) or giue me my skimmer, Martins mouth had sod vnskimde these twelue months, and now it runnes ouer; yet let him alone, he makes but porredge for the diuell.
His Elderberines though it be naught worth, yet is it like an elderberrie, which being at the ripe∣nes of a perfect black, yet brused staines ones hands like bloud. They pretending grauitie in the rotten∣nes of their zeale, bee they once wrung, you shall finde them lighter than feathers. Thats a simile for the slaues. Nay, Ile touch them deeper, and make them crie, O my heart, there is a false knaue among vs. Take away this beard, and giue me a pikede vaunt, Martin sweares by his ten bones: nay, I will make him mumpe, mow, and chatter, like old Iohn of Paris garden before I leaue him. If Martin will fight Citie fight, wee challenge him at all weapons, from the taylors bodkin to the watchmans browne bil. If a field may be pitcht we are readie: if they scratch, wee will bring cattes: if scolde, we will bring women: if multiplie words, we will bring fooles: if they floute, we will bring quippes: if dispute the matter, we will bring schol∣lers: if they buffet, we will bring fists. Deus bone, what a number of we will brings be here? Nay, we will bring Bull to hang them. A good note & signe of good lucke, three times motion of Bull. Motion of Bull? Why, next olde Rosses motion of Bride∣well, Buls motion fits them best. Tria sequuntur tria, in reckoning Bull thrise, me thinkes it should pre∣sage hanging. O bad application▪ Bad? I doo not thinke there can be a better, than to applie a knaues necke to an halter. Martin cannot start, I am his shadowe, one parte of the day before him, another
behinde him; I can chalke a knaue on his backe thrice a weeke, Ile let him bloud in the combe. Take heed, he will pistle thee. Pistle me? Then haue I a pestle so to stampe his pistles, that Ile beate all his wit to powder. What will the powder of Martins wit be good for? Marie blowe vp a dram of it into the nostrels of a good Protestant, it will make him giddie; but if you minister it like Tobacco to a Puritane, it will make him as mad as a Martin. Goe to, a hatch before the doore, Martin smels thee, and wil not feare thee; thou knowest how he deales with the Archbishop and a Counseller, hee will name thee and that broadlie. Name me? Mary he and his shall bee namefied, that's it I thirst after, that name to name, and knowing one another, wee may in the streetes grapple; wee except none: wee come with a verse in our mouthes, courage in our hearts, and weapons in our hands, and crie▪ Discite iustitiam moniti, & non temnere dius. Martins conscience hath a periwig; therefore to good men he is more sower than wig: a Lemman will make his conscience curd like a Posset. Now comes a biting speach, let mee stroake my beard thrice like a Germain, before I speak a wise word. Martin, wee are now following after thee with hue and crie, & are hard at thy heeles; if thou turne backe to blade it, wee doubt not but three honest men shall bee able to beate sixe theeues. Weele teach thee to commit sacriledge, and to robbe the Church of xxiiij. Bishops at a blowe Doost thinke that wee are not men Martin, and haue great men
to defend vs which write? Yes, although with thy seditious cloase, thou would'st perswade her Ma∣iestie, that most of the Gentlemen of account and men of honour, were by vs thought Puritanes. No, it is your poore Iohns, that with your painted consciences haue coloured the religion of diuers, spreading through the veynes of the Common∣wealth like poyson, the doggednes of your deuo∣tions; which entring in like the smoothnes of oyle into the flesh, fretteth in time like quicksiluer into the bones. When children play with their meate, tis a signe their bellies are full, & it must be taken from them; but if they tread it vnder their feete, they ought to be ierkt. The Gospell hath made vs wantons, wee dallie with Ceremonies, dispute of circumstances, not remembring that the Papists haue been ma∣king roddes for vs this thirtie yeares; wee shall bee swing'd by them, or worse by Martin, if Martins bee worse. Neuer if it, for they bee worse with a witnesse, and let the diuell be witnesse. Wee are so nice, that the Cap is a beame in our Church, the booke of Common Praier a milstone, the Pater noster is not well pend by Christ. Well, either re∣ligion is but policie, or policie scarce religious. If a Gentleman riding by the way with twentie men, a number of theeues should by deuise or force binde all his seruants; the good Iustice of Peace would thinke he should bee robd. When Marti∣nists rancke robbers of the Church shall binde the legges and armes of the Church, me thinkes the
supreme head of the Church should looke pale. They that pull downe the bells of a steeple, and say it is conscience, will blow vp the chauncell to make it the quintessence of conscience. Bir Ladie, this is a good settled speech, a Diuine might haue seemd to haue said so much. O sir, I am nor al tales, and riddles, and rimes, and iestes, thats but my Liri∣poope, if Martin knock the bone he shall find mar∣row, & if he looke for none, we'le knock the bone on his pate, and bring him on his marie bones. I haue yet but giuen them a fillip on the con∣ceipt, Ile fell it to the ground hereafter. Nay, if they make their consciences stretch like chiuerell in the raine, Ile make them crumple like parchment in the fire. I haue an excellent balme to cure anie that is bit∣ten with Martin mad-dog. I am worth twentie Pistle-penners; let them but chafe my penne, & it shal sweat out a whole realme of paper, or make thē odious to the whole Realme. O but be not partial, giue them their due though they were diuels, so will I, and excuse them for ta∣king anie money at interest, There is a good Ladie that lent one of these Martinists fortie pounds, and when at the daie shee required her money, Martin began to storme, aud said, he thought her not the child of God, for they must lend, looking for nothing againe, and so to ac∣quite himselfe of the blot of vsurie, he kepte the principall. These Martins make the Scriptures a Scriueners
shop to drawe conueyances, and the common pleas of Westminster to take forfeitures. Theyle not sticke to out-law a mans soule, and serue it presently with an execution of damnation, if one denie them to lie with his neighbours wife. If they bee drunke, they say, they haue Timothie his weake stomacke, which Saint Paule willeth to warme with wine. They haue sifted the holie Bible, and left vs no∣thing as they say, but branne; they haue boulted it ouer againe and againe, and got themselues the fine meale; tis meale indeede, for with their wresting and shuffling holie Writ, they finde all themselues good meales, and stand at liuerie as it were, at other mens tables. Sed heus tu, dic sodes, will they not bee discoura∣ged for the common players? Would those Co∣medies might be allowed to be plaid that are pend, and then I am sure he would be decyphered, and so perhaps discouraged. He shall not bee brought in as whilom he was, and yet verie well, with a cocks combe, an apes face, a wolfs bellie, cats clawes, &c. but in a cap'de cloake, and all the best apparell he ware the highest day in the yeare, thats neither on Christmas daie, Good fridaie, Easter daie, Ascension, nor Trinitie sundaie, (for that were popish) but on some rainie weeke-daie, when the brothers and sisters had ap∣pointed a match for particular praiers, a thing as bad at the least as Auricular confession. A stage plaier, though he bee but a cobler by oc∣cupation, yet his chance may bee to play the Kings
part. Martin, of what calling so euer he be, can play nothing but the knaues part, qui tantum constans in knauitate sua est. Would it not bee a fine Tragedie,If it be shewed at Paules, it will cost you foure pence: at the Theater two pence: at Sainct Thomas a Watrings nothing. when Mar∣docheus shall play a Bishoppe in a Play, and Martin Hamman, and that he that seekes to pull downe those that are set in authoritie aboue him, should be hoysted vpon a tree aboue all other. Though he play least in sight now, yet we hope to see him stride from Aldgate to Ludgate, and looke ouer all the Citie at London Bridge. Soft swift,Read▪ Martin Seniors Libell, and you shall perceiue that he is able to teach Grac∣chus to speake seditiouslie. he is no traytor. Yes, if it bee treason to en∣courage the Commons against the chiefe of the Clergie, to make a generall reuolt from the go∣uernment so wel established, so wisely maintained, and so long prospering. Because they say, Aue Caesar, therefore they meane nothing against Caesar. There may bee hid∣den vnder their long gownes, short daggers, and so in blearing Caesars eyes, conspire Caesars death. God saue the Queene; why it is the Que which they take from the mouthes of all traytors, who though they bee throughly conuinced, both by proofe and their owne confessions, yet at the last gaspe they crie, God saue the Queene. GOD sane the Queene (say I) out of their hands, in whose hearts (long may the Queene thus gouerne) is not engrauen. Her sacred Maiestie hath this thirtie yeares, with a setled and princelie temper swayed the Scepter of this Realme, with no lesse content
of her subiects, than wonder of the world. GOD hath blessed her gouernment, more by miracle thā by counsaile, and yet by counsaile as much as can come from policie. Of a State taking such deepe roote, as to be fastened by the prouidence of God, the vertue of the Prince, the wisedome of Coun∣sellers, the obedience of subiects, and the length of time; who would goe about to shake the lowest bough, that feeles in his conscience but the least blessing. Heere is a fit roome to squese them with an Apothegme. There was an aged man that liued in a well or∣dered Common-wealth by the space of threescore yeares, and finding at the length that by the heate of some mens braines, and the warmnes of other mens bloud, that newe alterations were in ham∣mering, aud that it grewe to such an height, that all the desperate & discontented persons were readie to runne their heads against their head; comming into the midst of these mutiners, cried as loude as his yeares would allow; Springalls and vnripened youthes, whose wisedomes are yet in the blade, when this snowe shall be melted (laying his hand on his siluer haires) then shal you find store of durt, and rather wish for the continuance of a long frost, than the comming of an vntimely thaw. Ile mora∣lize this. Ile warrant the good old man meant, that when the ancient gouernment of the state should be alte∣red by faction, or newe lawes brought in that were deuised by nice heads that there should followe a
foule and slipperie managing; where if happelie most did not fall, yet all would bee tired. A settled raigne is not like glasse mettal, to be blowne in big∣nesse, length or fashion of euerie mans breath, and breaking to be melted againe, & so blowne afresh; but it is compared to the fastning of the Cedar, that knitteth it selfe with such wreaths into the earth, that it cannot be remooued by any violent force of the aire. Martin, I haue taken an inuentorie of al thy vn∣ciuill and rakehell tearmes, and could sute them in no place but in Bedlam and Bridewell, so mad they are, and so bad they are, and yet all proceedes of the spirit. I thinke thou art possest with the spirites of Iacke Straw & the Black-smith, who, so they might rent in peeces the gouernment, they would drawe cuts for religion. If all be conscience, let conscience bee the foun∣dation of your building, not the glasse, shew effects of conscience, mildnesse in spirit, obedience to Ma∣gistrates, loue to thy brethren. Stitch charitie to thy faith, or rip faith from thy works. If thou wilt deale soberlie without scoffes, thou shalt be answered grauely without iests, yea and of those, whom thou canst not controll for learning, nor accuse for ill life, nor shouldst contemne for au∣thorie. But if like a restie Iade thou wilt take the bitt in thy mouth, and then runne ouer hedge and ditch, thou shalt be brokē as Prosper broke his hor∣ses, with a muzroule, portmouth, and a martingall, and so haue thy head runne against a stone wall.
If thou refuse learning, and sticke to libelling; if nothing come out of those lauish lips, but taunts not without bitternesse, yet without wit; rayling not without spite, yet without cause, then giue me thy hand, thou and I will trie it out at the cucking∣stoole. Ile make thee to forget Bishops English, and weep Irish; next hanging there is no better reuenge on Martin, than to make him crie for anger; for there is no more sullen beast, than a he drab. Ile make him pull his powting croscloath ouer his beetle browes for melancholie, and then my next booke, shall be Martin in his mubble fubbles. HEre I was writing Finis and Funis, and deter∣mined to lay it by, till I might see more kna∣uerie filde in: within a while appeared olde Martin with a wit worn into the socket, twinkling and pinking like the snuffe of a candle; quantum mutatus ab illo, how vnlike the knaue hee was be∣fore, not for malice but for sharpnesse. The hogshead was euen come to the hauncing, and nothing could be drawne from him but dregs: yet the emptie caske sounds lowder than when it was ful; and protests more in his waining, than he could performe in his waxing. I drew neere the sil∣lie soule, whom I found quiuering in two sheetes of protestation paper. O how meager and leane hee lookt, so creast falne, that his combe hung downe to his bill, and had I not been sure it was the picture of enuie, I shoulde haue sworne
it had been the image of death, so like the verie A∣natomie of mischiefe, that one might see through all the ribbes of his conscience, I began to crosse my selfe, and was readie to say the Pater noster, but that I knewe he carde not for it, and so vsed no o∣ther wordes, but abi in malam crucem, because I knewe, that lookt for him. I came so neere, that I could feele a substantiall knaue from a sprites sha∣dowe. I sawe through his paper coffen, that it was but a cosening corse, and one that had learnde of the holie maid of Kent, to lie in a trance, before he had brought foorth his lie; drawing his mouth awrie, that could neuer speake right; goggling with his eyes that watred with strong wine; licking his lips, and gaping, as though he should loose his childes nose, if he had not his longing to swallowe Chur∣ches; and swelling in the paunch, as though he had been in labour of a little babie, no bigger than re∣bellion; but truth was at the Bishoppes trauaile: so that Martin was deliuered by sedition, which pulls the monster with yron from the beastes bowells. When I perceiued that he masked in his rayling robes, I was so bolde as to pull off his shrowding sheete, that all the world might see the olde foole daunce naked. Tis not a peniworth of protestation that can buy thy pardon, nor al worth a penie that thou pro∣claimest. Martin comes in with bloud, bloud, as though hee should bee a martir. Martins are mad martirs, some of them burnt seauen yeares agoe,
and yet aliue. One of them lately at Yorke, pulling out his napkin to wipe his mouth after a lie, let drop a surgeans caliuer at his foote where he stood; these fellowes can abide no pompe, and yet you see they cannot be without a little squirting plate: rub no more, the curtall wrinches. They call the Bishops butchers, I like the Meta∣phore wel, such calues must be knockt on the head, and who fitter than the Fathers of the Church, to cut the throates of heresies in the Church. Nay, whē they haue no propertie of sheepe but bea, their fleece for flockes, not cloath, their rotten flesh for no dish, but ditches; I thinke them woorth neither the tarring nor the telling, but for their scabbed∣nes to bee thrust from the pinfolde to the scaffold, and with an Habeas corpus to remooue them from the Shepheards tarre-boxe, to the hangmans bud∣get. I but he hath sillogismes in pike sauce, and argu∣ments that haue been these twentie yeres in pickle. I, picke hell, you shall not finde such reasons, they bee all in celarent, and dare not shewe their heads, for wee will answere them in ferio and cut their combes. So say they, their bloud is sought. Their bloud? What should wee doo with it, when it will make a dogge haue the toothach to eate the puddings. Martin tunes his pipe to the lamentable note of Ora whine meg. O tis his best daunce next sha∣king of the sheetes; but hee good man meant no harme by it. No more did one of his minions,
that thinking to rap out an oath and sweare by his conscience, mistooke the word and swore by his concupiscence; not vnlike the theefe, that in stead of God speede, sayd stand, and so tooke a purse for God morowe. Yet dooth Martin hope that all her Maiesties best subiects will become Martinists; a blister of that tongue as bigge as a drummes head; for if the Queenes Maiestie haue such abiects for her best subiects, let all true subiects be accompted ab∣iects. They that teare the boughs, will hew at the tree, and hauing once wet their feete in factions, will not care how deepe they wade in trea∣son. After Martin had racked ouer his protestation with a Iades pace, hee runnes ouer his fooleries with a knaues gallop, ripping vp the souterlie seames of his Epistle, botching in such frize iestes vppon fustion earnest, that one seeing all sortes of his shreddes, would thinke he had robd a tay∣lors shop boord; and then hee concludes all dog∣gedlie, with Doctor Bullens dogge Spring, not re∣membring that there is not a better Spanniell in England to spring a couie of queanes than Mar∣tin. Hee sliues one, has a fling at another, a long tale of his talboothe, of a vulnerall sermon, and of a fooles head in souce. This is the Epistle which he woonders at himselfe, and like an olde Ape hugges the Vrchin so in his conceipt, as though
it should shew vs some new tricks ouer the chaine, neuer wish it published Martin, we pittie it before it comes out. Trusse vp thy packet of flim flams, & roage to some countrey Faire, or read it among boyes in the belfrie, neuer trouble the church with chattering; but if like dawes, you will be cawing a∣bout Churches, build your nests in the steeple, de∣file not the quier. Martin writes merely, because (hee saies) people are carried away sooner with iest than earnest. I, but Martin neuer put Religion into a fooles coate; there is great oddes betweene a Gospeller, and a Li∣beller. If thy vaine bee so pleasaunt, and thy witt so so nimble, that all consists in glicks and girds; pen some play for the Theater, write some ballads for blinde Dauid and his boy, deuise some iests, & be∣come another Scogen; so shalt thou haue vēt inough for all thy vanities, thy Printer shall purchase, and all other iesters beg. For to giue thee thy due, thou art the best died foole in graine that euer was, and all other fooles lacke manie graines, to make them so heauie. There is not such a mad foole in Bedlam, nor such a baudie foole in Bridewell, nor such a dron∣ken foole in the stockes, nor such a scolding foole on the cuckingstoole, nor such a cosening foole on the pillerie, nor such a roaging foole in the houses of correction, nor such a simple foole kept of alms, nor such a lame foole lying in the spittle, nor in all the world, such a foole, all. Nay for fooles set down
in the scriptures, none such as Martin. What atheist more foole, that saies in his heart, There is no God? What foole more proud, that stands in his own cōceit? What foole more coue∣tous than he, that seekes to tedd abroad the Chur∣ches goods with a forke, and scratch it to himselfe with a rake. Thou seest Martin with a little helpe, to the foure & twentie orders of knaues, thou maist solder the foure and twentie orders of fooles, and so because thou saist thou art vnmarried, thou maist commit matrimonie, from the heires of whose incest, wee will say that which you cannot abide, Good Lord deliuer vs. If this veyne bleede but sixe ounces more, I shall proue a pretie railer, and so in time may growe to bee a proper Martinist. Tush, I doo but licke ouer my pamphlet, like a Beares whelpe, to bring it in some forme; by that time he replies, it will haue clawes and teeth, and then let him looke to bee scratcht and bitten too. Thou seest Martin Moldwarpe, that hetherto I haue named none, but markt them readie for the next market: if thou proceed in naming, be as sure as thy shirt to thy knaues skinne, that Ile name such, as though thou canst not blush, because thou art past shame, yet they shall bee sorie, because they are not all without grace. Pasquil is comming out with the liues of the Saints. Beware my Comment, tis odds the margent shall be as full as the text. I haue manie sequences
of Saints; if naming be the aduantage, & ripping vp of liues make sport, haue with thee knuckle deepe, it shall neuer bee said that I dare not venter mine eares, where Martin hazards his necke. Now me thinkes Martin begins to stretch him∣selfe like an old fencer, with a great conscience for buckler, and a long tongue for a sword. Lie close you old cutter at the locke, Nam mihi sunt vires, & mea tela nocent. Tis ods but that I shall thrust thee through the buckler into the brain, that is through the conscience into the wit. If thou sue me for a double maime, I care not though the Iurie allow thee treble damages, it can∣not amount to much, because thy cōscience is with¦out wit, and thy wit without conscience, & there∣fore both, not worth a penie. Therefore take this for the first venew, of a yonger brother, that meanes to drie beate those of the Elder house. Martin, this is my last straine for this fleech of mirth. I began with God morrowe, and bid you God night. I must tune my fiddle, and fetch some more rozen, that it maie squeake out Martins Matachine. FINIS. Candidissimi Lectores, peto terminum ad libel∣landum. Lectores. Assignamus in proximum.
