20423 99840173 4648
¶ A faythfull and true pronosticatiō vpō the yere. M. CCCCC. xlviii. and parpetually after to the worldes ende gathered out of the pro phecies and scriptures of god, by the experience and practise of his workes, very cō∣fortable for all Christen her∣tes deuy∣ded into seuen chapters. And in the ende ye shal finde an almanack for euer, translated newly out of hye Al¦mayne into englysh by Myles Couerdale.
To the reader. THe first chapter of genesis declareth how that at the be gynnynge whan the water was now in his place, God sayde: Let the earthe brynge forth grene grasse and herbe, that beareth seede, and frutefull trees, that may beare frute euery one af∣ter his kynde &c. Genesi, i. And so it came to passe. Afterwarde vpon the fourth daye made he lyghtes in the sirmamente of heauen: one greater lyght for the daye, & a lesse for the nyght, namely the Sonne and the Mone, and made them to be tokens, and not to haue influ∣ence vpō these nethermost bodies, as the Philosophers & oure pro∣nosticatours haue wrytten hyther to, Contrary vnto it yt god sayeth
here, how that they shuld be vnto tokens, & how that the earth was fruteful or euer the starres & lygh¦tes were made. Now where as they shewe any thynge yt is his doynge, and not theyrs: he onely doth great won∣ders. Psal. c. xxxv. he couereth the skye with cloudes, he prepareth rayne for the earth, & maketh the grasse to growe vpon the moun∣taynes. Psal. c. xlvi. therfore are not they the cause of tempestes or stormes, nether of good wethers or frutefulnes in these nethermost creatures, whether it be in man, beest, or frute: but are tokēs only. For the which cause God doth oft warne vs in the lawe. Leuiti. xx. Deut. xviii. And in the prophetes Iere. xxvii. Esa. xlvii. yt we shulde regarde no heauen gaser, no be∣holder of starres, nor soythsayer
because they haue no power to chā¦ge the tyme nor ye course of heauen wherfore me thinke it a fooly she thinge, yt we are so afrayed where no feare shulde be, and that we re∣garde so many vayne pronostica∣cyons. why do not we rather re∣ioyse, in so moche as all thinges are in Gods hand, and gouerned by Iesus Christe. Muste not all thinges be subdued vnto him. i. Cor. xv. Heb. ii. Can any creature of his, werke otherwise then he wyll haue it? Or how so euer they worke, do not al thynges turne to our best? No doute. Put thou thy trust then in god. and be sure, that as longe as he is thy frēde (which he hath promised to be if thou loue him & his worde) ther cā nothyng harme the: And as for the plages yt shal happē this yere vnto the per secuters and enemyes of Gods
worde, (yf thou cleue vnto it) thou nedest not feare thē nor be afraide of thē: but certaynlye mayste thou loke to be pertaker not only of his outwarde blessinges this yeare, but of the toye for to come, whiche is euerlastynge. The fyrste Chapter concernynge the gouernours of this yeare. Christe. be gospell he worlde. VUhan I loke well & con¦syder the hy maister of ye starres in his doctrine & writinge, I fynd yt this yeare and from hence forth vnto ye ende of the worlde, the Sunne, Mars & Mercurius shall reygne Now where as other mē seke their speculaciō out of the starres, that do not I regarde so much as expe¦rience in the doctrine of Christē? And for the exhortacion and war∣nynge of all estates, I wyll des∣cribe the nature and properties of
these thre gouernoures. The Sonne a myghtye Lorde o∣uer heauen and earthe, is Iesus Christe oure only redemer and sa¦uiour, in al thinges lyke vnto his heauenly father. Psal, ii. Io. xiiii. the bryghtnes of his glory. Sap. vii. Heb. i. the ymage of the inuisi∣ble god: by whom al thynges that are in heauen and earth, were crea¦ted: thinges visible and thinges inuisible, whether they be maie∣sties or lordeshyps, ether rules or powers, Col. i, This Iesus Christ the euerlastynge worde of his hea¦uenly father, which toke oure na¦ture vpon hym: Heb: ii. Phil. ii. & she wed vs his fathers wyll, com∣mynge into this worlde, broughte with him Mars that is the gos∣pell, euen out of the bosome of his father. But wonder not thou that The god is called Mars. I call the gospell Mars. Christe
our sauioure sayth in Mathew. Thinke not y• I am come to sende peace vpon earthe, I came not to sende peace, but a swerde, for I am come to set a man at variaūce against his father, and ye dough∣ter againste her mother. &c. and a mās foes shalbe they of his own housholde. Mat. x. Luce. xii. Mi∣chee. vii. Is not this a batayle? They shall put you to trouble say¦eth he) and kyll you, and of al peo¦ple shal ye be hated for my names sake. Mat. xxiiii. Therefore maye the gospell well be called Mars.  the ospell. for where it is preached there is ye swerde, there is trouble and perse∣cucyon, there wyll the enemyes sometyme draw theyr daggers at the preachers therof. As for Mercurius, the Poetes fayne hym to be the messaunger & oratoure of ye Heithen goddes, for
the whiche cause he maye well be likened vnto the world, which wt eloquence, painted wordes & out∣ward appearance perfourmeth ye message of the deuel, & entiseth me so longe, tyll it brynge them into destruccion. But (as sainte Ihon¦sayeth in his epistle) the world pas¦seth away & the lust therof 1, Io. ii And as S. Paule sayeth. The fas¦shion of this worlde passeth away 1. Cor. vii. Therefore muste we so hold vs within the feare of god, yt we suffre not oure selues to be dis∣ceaued or seduced by Mercurius frō the sonne & Mars. Leste we be corrupt with this disceitful world & so be defrauded of ye ioy of ye euer lasting world to com: nether shuld yt paynted wisedom of this worlde moue vs in somuche as god ma∣keth it very foolyshnes. i. Cor. i. & his worde (which semeth to be but
folyshnes in the sight of the world that sheweth he to be onelye wise∣dome and the very power of god, to the saluacion of as many as be¦leue theron: Roma. i. Who so euer now hath the grace to perceyue and consyder this, let hym not go after Mercurius, let hym not folow the worlde and the beautifull lusters therof, let hym not entre in at the wide gate and brode waye that leadeth vnto de∣struccion. Mathe. vii. but let hym go in at the straite gate, and at the narowe waye, whiche is euen Ie∣sus Christ. Ioh. xiiii. the only mer¦cy seate. Rom. iii. & meane to come by the fauoure of GOD. By hym who soeuer entrethe, he maye be sure to be saued. Ioh. x. to receaue mercy, to fynde grace, & to be hel∣ped in the time of nede. Hebre. v, whiche god the father graunte vs
for his sake. Amen. ¶ The seconde Chapter, concer∣nyng the increace or growing of frutes, and the dearth of the same. THe sōne sheweth playn∣ly: that all soch as feare god, shall haue a verye frutefull yeare. Psal. c. xxvii. & plēteousnes in the dayes of derth. Psal. xxxvi. In so moch yt though Christe sende them with∣out wallet, without scrippe & with out shues, yet wyll he so prouide for them that they shall lacke no∣thinge. Luce. xxii. For he sayethe him selfe: The labourer is worthy of his meate. Math. x. Luc. x. who so nowe wyll laboure, shall eate. But who so euer wyll not worke, ought not to eate, ii. Tessal, iii. Sturdy idle flows shal not eate. Now yf we labour, I say, we shall eate also. Yee but where shall we
get it? Christ our sauyoure sayth: Be not ye carefull for youre lyfe, what ye shall eate or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall put on. Is not ye lyfe more worth then meate, and the bodye more of value then rayment? Be∣holde ye foules of the ayre: for they sowe not, nether reape, nor yet ca∣ry into the barnes, and yet youre heuenly father fedeth them. math. vt. He geueth meate to the yonge rauēs. Psal. c. xlvi. he openeth his hande and fyllethe his creatures with plenteousnes. Psal. c. iii. Therefore though our handes we ought to laboure with oure handes and to cast our take vpon the Lorde. shulde alway be occupied in some good laboure. Eph. iiii. yet ought not oure hertes to take thoughte what we shall eate or drynke, but first to care howe to seke the kyng¦dome of god. math. vi. & so shulde all thinges necessary be ministred
vnto vs. And why? Man, lyueth not, by bred onely, but by euery worde that procedeth out of the mouth of god. Deute. viii. math iiii. which thynge Christ our saui∣oure hath manyfestly declared, in that he fed so many people with so few loaues & fysshes, lyke as he had done afore vnto the chyldren of Israell by ye space of forty yeres in the wyldernes, where they wan¦ted nothynge, for he hym selfe fed them, & blessed them in all ye wor∣kes of theyr hande. wherfore in so moch as god our mercyfull fa∣ther taketh soch care for vs (.i. Pe v.) we shulde by ryght cast all our care vpō him, & faithfully to cleue vnto his worde in our hertes, so ye we nether mystrust his godly pro∣uysion, nor leade an ydle lyfe. And yf we meane well in oure hertes, and deale truly with our handes, doutlesse he shall sende vs neces∣sarye
meate by some bodye, as he dyd to Elias the prophete by the wedowe in Sarepta. iii. Re. xvii. and lyke as he prouyded a break fast vnto Daniel amonge the Li∣ons by the ministration of Aba∣cuc. Dan. xiiii, Thus, I saye, they that feare god, shall haue plentye and aboundaunce of all thynges this yeare. But so farre as I can se or per∣ceiue by this theologicall Astro∣nomye, Mars threateneth a verye euyll and vnfrutefull yeare to dy∣uerse spiritual prelates, as popish byshops, & popish preistes, & other mo, except ye sonne thorow his gra¦cious influence be good vnto thē, although Mercuri{us} reigne in thē with neuer so many horses, greate pompe, auctoritie, riches, oppressi¦on, with excedynge many seruaun¦tes and dogges, which neuerthe∣les
yf they wyll forsake theyr abu¦lions and dyete them selues after the qualities of the Sonne, they shall be kept fro many dyuerse sur lettes, and haue a very frutefull yeare in all thynges. And so wold I councell them to do: for Mars goeth aboute now this yeare, to withdrawe from the spiritualtye the gospell wyl resorm the spiritu∣altye. the excesse of theyr frutes, ryches, and worldly auctorite (lyke as he hath threatened them this great whyle) & intendeth planely to re∣sourme them: And where as theyr whordome & olde custome with∣stande the furtheraūce of ye trueth Mars purposeth to take ye Sōne the gospell wyll suffre the spiritu∣altye no more to vse their whore¦dome. to helpe, and with the playster of mariage to heale the infirmitie of their vnclēnes, yee and with his owne swerde of the spirite, to sub∣due theyr olde euell customes. As for the multitude of the vn
godly in generall, there shal come a great derth vpō thē, acording to ye wordes of a certayn true astro∣nomer: Beholde, the tyme cōmeth (sayeth the lorde god) that I shall sende an hōger into the earth: not the honger of bred, nor the thyrst of water, but an honger to heare ye worde of the Lorde: so ye they shall go frō the one see to the other, yee frō the north vnto ye east, rēnynge about to seke the worde of ye lord, and shall not fynde it. Amos. viii. but because they wyll not beleue the trueth and haue pleasure in vnryghteousnes, therfore shall God sende them stronge delusion, that they may beleue lyes. ii. Tess. ii so that the tyme shall come whā they shall desyre to se one daye of the sonne of man, and shall not se it. Luce. xvii. I passe ouer many other plages that Mars threate∣neth
vnto them, because they wyll not knowe the tyme of their vtsita¦tion. Luce. xix. ¶ The thyrde Chapiter concer∣nynge the sycknesses and dis¦ceases of this yeare: THe Egipcians haddea maner and vse in theyr bāckettes, to cary about an ymage of deathe, and to saye vnto euerye man that was at the bancket, Looke vpon this, eate, drynke and be mery, such one shalt thou be whan thou dyest. And this they dyd (do doute) to put men in remembraunce of tem∣perauncy and of deathe, leste they vndiscretly thorowe excesse of ea∣tynge and drinking, shoulde hap∣pen to dye afore their age, for so doth god vse to punyshe soche syn: wherefore yf we dyete and temper oure selues thorowe the influence
of the sone, we shall haue few disea¦ses, except Mars brynge some o∣ther thinge to passe, that we mys∣knowe not our selues. As for such as folowe Mercu∣rius, lyuynge nyght and daye in  shall  ths are. ryote and vnclēnes, these (I saye) shal thorowe ye Sonne haue great diseases in all the membres of the bodye, in the lunges, leuer, han∣des and fete, yea and parel also of the soule, I passe ouer ye pouertie that dronkardes and riotous per∣sons shall haue? we shall be vnto them? sorowe, stryfe, brawlynge, & woundes shal be amonge them. Pro. xxiii. yea and soch as wyll ne∣des be ouerladen with excesse of eatynge and with dronkennes. &c. shall sodeynly be preuented with the daye of the Lorde. Luce. xxi There is douteles a maruelous sore punyshmēt to come vpon the hole world of the wycked, swerde,
warres, honger, not onely spiritu∣all (as I sayd before) but tempo∣rall, which plages haue ben aiore our tyme, but are not yet all pase. I nede not reherce the pestilence and other greate plages that god wyll sende to the reformacion of as manye as wyll be warned. As for the comō sorte of the vngodly, ther shal such a fearfulnes of deth come vpon thē yt they shall not tel wher to turn thē nor how to escape death. O how bytter and greuous shall the remembraunce of deathe be this yeare, to soch as seke reste and consolacion in transitory sub∣staunce of this worlde, to soche as knowe of no aduersitie but haue good dayes, and liue in volupgu∣ousnes. Eccle. xli. But O deathe howe acceptable & welcome shalte thou be vnto soch as are in aduer¦site, i theyr last age, or in dispayre.
who so euer thou be therfore y• woldesie escape the sickenesses of this yeare, bewarre that thy bodye be not ouerladen with ouermoche man is houe . eatynge or with dronkennes. Luc xxi. For excesse of meates bryn∣geth sycknesse, and glotonye com∣meth at the laste to an vnmeasura∣ble heate. Eccle. xxxvii. Thorowe glotonye shall manye one perisshe this yere, but he that dyeteth hym¦selfe temperarlye, shall prolonge his lyfe. As for vnsaciable eaters, they shall not onely slepe vnquiet∣ly this yeare, but shall haue ache & payne of the body. Eccle. xxxi. Concernynge the spirituall dis¦ease and sycknes that shall reigne this yeare, as it hathe done afore tyme, Paule one of ye truest Astro∣nomers sayeth playnely, that we be all synners. Ro: iii. yf we saye that we haue no sinne, we disceaue our
selues, and the trueth is not in vs i. Io. i: This is now the spirituall disease that shall comonly reigne this yeare, but specyally in them syn is m¦in them  wyll not a know of it that feale least of it, and wyll not knowlege it. Io. ix. For ye Sonne hath soch vertue, that who so euer can se this disease, and wyll com∣playne of it. i. Ioh. i, it shall clense them, and make them whole. Yee ye astronoemer sayth playnly, that Christ Iesus came into the world to saue synners . Timo. i. And an other that warneth vs in his pro∣nosticacyō to bewarre of this sick¦nesse, gyueth vs yet good conforte and sayth: If any man synne, we haue an aduocate with the father euen Iesus Christ which is rygh¦teous: and he it is that optayneth grace for our synnes, not for oure synnes only, but also for ye synnes of the whole worlde. i. Ioh. ii.
who soeuer therefore hath this disease (as there is no man with∣out it) let hym do wysely, let hym proue and examen him selfe by o man  . tymes. i. Cor. xi. ii. Cor. xiii. And go to phisicke afore he be to sore sycke. Eccle. xviii. And aboue all thinges let hym bewarre of soche false surgeons and fayned phisi∣cyans, as heale the hurt of the peo¦ple with swete wordes. Iere. vi. and (as a true Astronomer repor∣teth) thorowe swete preachinges and flatterynge wordes disceaue the hartes of innocentes, and all for their belyes sake. Rom. xvi. Soch false phisiciās laye wronge plasters to mēs sores, and speake the meanyng of theyr owne herte, but not out of the mouth of the lord Iere. xxiii. yea they make soche as despise the worde of god, to conty∣nue still in their dregges. Soph.
i, and to do as theyr fathers haue done before them to theyr vtter de¦struccion. Ierem. xliiii. For soche false phisicians, as longe as they haue anye thynge to byte vppon, preache vnto men that all shall be well, Micher. iii. and mayntaine thē in their wyckednes, makynge them beleue to do as their elders haue done before them, though it be contrary to gods worde, is the righte waye. Tusshe, saye they, ye shall prosper right well. Ier. xxiii. And vnto all them that walke af∣ter the luste of theyr owne herte, they saye? Tusshe, there shall no mysfortune happen vnto you, ye shall se no swerd, there shall no hō¦ger come vpō you. Iere. xiiii, But yf a man put not somthing in their mouthes, they preach of warre a∣gainst him. mic, iii, wherfor if thou wilt be hole of thy disease, beware
of soch fayned Phisicians: at whō yf thou seke helth they shall make the pay dubble for it, yt shall neuer e warie of . do the good: but go thou boldly vnto hym, which only healeth the contrith in herte and byndeth vp theyr woundes. Psal. c. xlvi. He shall not cast ye away. Ioh. vi. But yf thou come vnto hym, he shall re¦freshe the, he shall ease the. Math. xi. Ye thou be sycke, go vnto hym. for he is the ryght Phisician for soch as are diseased. Math. ix. Yf thou be thyrsty, and commest vn∣to hym, he hathe the water of lyfe for the. Ioh. iiii. Yf thou be an hō∣gred after ryghteousnesse, thou shalt be satisfied. mat. v. Summa h hym selfe wyl fede the, & bryng the to rest. Eze. xxxiiii. Thoughe thou be lost, he wyl seke ye: though thou haste gone astraye, he wyll brynge the agayne: thoughe thou
be woūded, he wyll bynde the vp∣though thou be sycke and weake, he wyl make the hole and stronge Seke hym therfore this yere and as longe as thou lyuest, for with hym there is mercy, and plēteous redempcyon. Psal. c. xxix. He hath saluacion ynough for the: thou ne¦dest not to seke helpe at any other, nether is ther saluacyon in any o∣ther. Act. iiii. Therfore byddeth he the euer come to hym selfe. Math. xi. Ioh. vi. He neuer bad ye seke other phisicians to heale the of this disease, for there is no help in the chyldren of men. Psal. c. xiv As for corporal diseases, god hath ordeyned outward medecynes for them in his creatures by the mi∣nistracyon of true phesiciās, whi∣che gyfte of god no wyse man wyl abhorre. Eccle. xxxviii. But a∣gaynst the sycknesse of synne there
is no helpe nor succour but onelye in him selfe. And as there is no sal¦uation withoute hym, so is there euer grace, mercy, pardon, & clene remission frely in hym, Esa. lv: for all soch as wyll receaue it, and be thankefull for the same: ▪ The fourthe Chapter concer∣nynge the stryfe & trouble of this yeare, and the cause therof. THe swerde that I spake of partly in yt fyrst Chap¦ter, is lyke to be drawen this yeare, for why, The Sonne, Mars, and Mercurius can not agre together. How accor∣deth the worlde with Christ & the gospel? They shall neuer be at one Sore eyes may not abyde ye clare lyght of the sonne, the lyghte wyll not consent to the workes of dark∣nesse, nether wyll ye beleuers haue parte with infidels. ii. Cor. vi.
Thus can there be no agremente, for they be of contrarye natures. A¦gayne, a scornefull bodye (as Sa∣lomon sayeth) loueth not one that rebuketh hym. Pro. xv. The chyl∣dren of this worlde are scornefull. and therfore are they not contente The gospel . to be refourmed by the gospel, whi¦che neuertheles thoughe it haue many enemyes (as it hathe euer had) yet because it is the truthe, it shall beare awaye the victorye. iii. Eso. iii. And that shortly. For god hath put into the hertes of dyuers princes to fulfyll his wyll, and to hate ye whore of Babylon, to make her desolate & naked, to put down her abusions. Apo. xvii. & vtterlye to set her out of her stole. So yt it appeareth euydentlye, that sathan shall no more haue so great domi∣nion, as he hathe hadde in tymes paste. And nowe that he seythe
that his kyngdome wyll haue a fall, he worketh (and shall do) al yt he can by the chyldrē of vnbeleife (specially by the shauē Madiani∣tes) to styrre vp warres, sediciōs, secrete treason, and vtter defiaūce both amonge Princes and comi∣nalties. For soch aduersaries of the trueth had rather set all nacy∣ons by the eares, and wyckedly to relyste the ordinaūce of god in the auctorite of theyr Prince, then to submyt them selues to the gospel. And wher as God hath raysed vp good mē to preach his worde, the deuell is so wood at it, that he hath sent them a letter of defiaūce by some of his mēbres, euen with soch an answere as was geuen to Ieremy the prophet. For they say playnly. As for the gospel, we wyl not hear it, but what so euer goeth out of oure owne mouth, that wyl
we do, we wyll set vp candels and offre to stockes and stones, we wyl do as oure fathers haue done be∣fore vs. For whan we so dyd, then had we plenteousnes of vytayls, then were we in prosperite, and no mysfortune came vpon vs. Iere. xliiii. But sence we lefte of soche Gods seruice, we haue had scarce¦nes of al thinges, and the worlde was neuer well sens. &c. Soch strife (I saye) & debate shall happen this yeare because of the worde of god, for the enemyes therof had rather draw theyr dag∣gers at it, then to be refourmed. But the louers of it shall spare no labour to conuerte them, and to mayntayne peace, and therefore I truste verely that thorow the gra∣cyous influence of the sonne this stryfe and deuysyon shall turne to no bloud sheddynge, for god shall
sende princes to defende his peo∣ple from the malyce of the wycked yet shall the enemies of Goddes worde not cease from persecutyng but do all the myscheife they can, that by one waye or other the gos∣pell of the glorye of God maye be stopped. Therefore thou louer of God and his worde, whā any soch heat of trouble happeneth vnto ye (for by trouble muste thou be try∣ed Maruell not at it, as thoughe it were a straunge thinge but re∣ioyse, in asmuche as thou art par∣taker of Christes affliccions: that whan his glorye apperethe, thou mayest be mery and glad: And be euen as contente to be reuyled as he was. i. Peter. ii. For there is no disciple aboue his maister, nether seruaunt better then his lord. mat. x. yf: they haue called the good mā of the house Belzebub, howe much
more shall they cal thē of his hous∣holde so? These and manye other swete wordes sayeth he hym selfe vnto the, that in hym thou mayest haue peace & a quiet cōscience. In ye worlde thou shalt haue trouble: but be of good conforte, he hathe ouercome the worlde. Ioh. xvi. ¶ The fyfth chapter concernyng the estate of kynges, and prynces, and superioure powers. THe influence of the Sonne and Mars declareth euident¦ly by all coniectures (yee certayn∣ly without any dout) that kynges and princes shall haue a prospe∣rous yere: & me thynke I dare be bolde to saye the same, in as muche as I se that they begyn nowe some of them to seeke the true honoure of God, and to delyuer theyr peo∣ple from oppression. And to
wake me doute ye lesse herin. Sa∣lomon (whiche was a kynge hym selfe, and that of greate experiēce) sayeth these wordes: Pro. xxv. Take awaye vngodlynes frō the kynge, and his seate shalbe stabli∣shed with righteousnes. Seynge nowe that god beginneth so graci¦ouslye to worke in Princes, who hath not occasiō to hope for great increace of prosperite in thē? For lyke as whan a prince delyteth in lyes (as sayeth the wyse man. pro. xxix.) all his seruaūtes are vngod¦ly, euen so whā ye kynge or prynce is a fauourer and mayntenet of the trueth, his people shall ye more be geuē to the fear of God. And I dout not, but god this same yeare (by the faithfull ministracion of his auctorite in kinges & princes) shall brynge noble actes to passe, to the great deliueraūce of poore
people, and reformacy on of ye ig∣noraunt. Thynkest thou not that God intendeth great good vnto vs, in that he so gracyously endeweth ye hertes of dyuerse prices? dout not therin. Let them remembre ther∣fore that the power whiche they haue, is geuē them of the Lorde, and the strength from the hyest: Sap. vi. lest they beynge officers of Gods empyre, be necligent in kepyng the lawe of ryghteousnes But yf they delyte in moche peo∣ple, let them loue the lyght of wys¦dome which is gods worde: for by it they shal set the people in ordre, and the nacyōs of theyr enemyes shalbe subdued vnto them: Sap. viii. who so euer he be then that lo¦ueth not to resyst the ordynaunce of god, let hym submytte him selfe to the auctorite of his prynce, and
let hym not byte his lyppe at it, though good Ezechias breake ye brasen serpente, that the chyldren of Israell haue worshypped so lōge. iiii. Re. xviii. let it not greue hym (I saye) that the vertuous kynge Iosias expelleth soyth say∣ers, charmers, expounders of to∣kens, Idois, and other abhomina cyons out of his londe, to set vp ye wordes of the lawe of God. iiii. Reg. xxxiii. Let euery man rather geue thankes vnto God, and bee glad, that Bell is delyuered into Daniels power, that the falshede of Bels prestes is come to lighte, and that the dragon is deuoured, whome the people was wonte to worshippe. Dani. xiiii. Let no mā therfore resyst this power of God that doth soch actes by ye ministra¦cion of prynces, but let euery wyse man be cōtent to be refourmed of
his erroure, to do wel, and remem¦bre that the kyng beareth not that swerde for naught. Ro. xiii. & the (as the wysemā sayeth:) The kyn∣ges displeasure is a messaūger of death. Pro. xvi. Be thou therfore yf thou b thankfull vnto god & obedient v¦to thy pri thou shalt haue a pros¦perous yere thankfull vnto god and obedient vnto thy prynce, & doute not but thou shalte haue a ryght prospe∣rous yeare, and I can not se how it is possible to be otherwyse, for as longe as the kynge maketh so manye Daniels of his councell it must nedes be to the great wealth and prosperite of the people. ¶ The syxte Chapter concer∣nynge the darknesse of this yeare: WHan I consydre the cor∣rupte nature of Mercu∣rius, & how he hath ben, is, & euer shalbe cōtrarie
vnto Mars & the Sōne, I fynde by all experience, that he shall cast a greate myste betwene vs and the Sonne, so that it shall be darke: for though ye lyght shyne in darke¦nesse, and become into the worlde Iohn. i. yet shall they (whose wor∣kes are euell and after the condi∣cions of Mercurius) loue ye dark∣nesse more then the lyghte. And thus shall this darkenes be in thē yt lyue naughtelye & folowe theyr owne abhominacions, for because they do euell, therefore shall they hate the lyght, and not come to it, lest theyr dedes be reproued. Ioh. iii. And (as Paul sayth) yf the gos¦pell shalbe yet hyd, it shalbe hydde in them that are loste, among whō the God of this worlde shall blynd here shalbe  not the gospell. the myndes of them that beleue not, lest the lyght of the gospell of the glory of Christe (whiche is the
ymage of god) shulde shyne vnto them. ii. Corint. iii. But where the chyldren of God are, there shall be lyghte. Exod. x. and the workes of lyfe. Seynge therefore that the lyght is yet a lytle whyle with the walke whyle thou haste it, that the darkenesse fall not vpon the. Ioh. xii. for he that walketh in darknes woteth not whether he goethe. But beleue thou stedfastlye on the lyght, while thou hast it, that thou mayest be the chylde of lyghte, and escape the horrible darknes of the wicked. sapi. xvii. ¶ The seuenth Chapter, concer∣nynge the estate of the spiritualte. IF our spiritualtye sate not oute of Moyses seate, Mathewe, xxiii. and taughte not theyr owne lawes and consti¦tutions: yf they taughte vs the truethe althoughe they were but
sayers and not doers them selues Mat, xxiii. yf they transgressed not the commaundemēt of god be¦cause of theyr owne tradicyons, math xv. yf they layed not to he∣uy burthēs vpon mens shulders, mat. xxiii. Yf they loued not the hyest seates, and shute not vp the kyngdome of heauen before men, yf they deuoured not wedowes houses vnder the coloure of longe prayers, and were not full of rob∣berye and vnclennesse, ypocrisie &, wyckednes within, yf these corrup¦cyons (I saye) were not in them. yee yf all the abhominacyons of the world besyde were not in a ma¦ner as a shadowe in conparysō to theirs, it wer not to be mistrusted, but that they shulde haue a ryght prosperous yeare, but seynge they speake euell of the waye of trueth, & thorow couetousnes with fained
wordes make marchaūdyse of vs ii. Pet. ii. Seynge they folowe the waye of Balaam, and walke styll in theyr erroures. Seynge they speke false thorow ypocrisi, forbid dynge all prestes to marye, and co¦maundynge to abstayne from the meates which god created to be re∣ceaued with thankes geuynge i. Tim. iiii. seynge they haue not fed the flock of Christ, but thē selues, & are churles to the people. Ezech xxxiiii. seynge the most parte of thē entre not in at ye dore into ye shepe∣folde, but come in some other way to steale, to kyll, and destroye, Io. x. Seyng they tel but lyes to man tayne theyr preachynges withal, and blaspheme the name of God vnto the people for an handfull of barleye or a pece of bread, Ezecht. xiii. Seyng (I say) that theyr wal is buylded but with vntempered
morter, it muste nedes fall, for the Lorde hym selfe wyll vpon them, & requyre his shepe out of theyr han¦des. Eze. xxxiiii. yee the shepe them he broken all wyll owne. selues shall folowe them no more, but flye from them, seyng they are but straungers, and hyred seruaū¦tes: for in so moch as Christe go∣eth now before his shepe, they wyll folow him and harken no more to the voyce of straungers. Iohn. x. This is now the yeare of aduersite that ye spiritualtie is lyke to haue for in so moche as they haue not Gods worde on their syde, they shall be fayne to stoppe their mou∣thes. Mich. iii. And all plantes yt the father in heauen hath not plan¦ted, shalbe pluct vp by the rotes. Math. xv. For all this when I consydre ye gracyous influence of the sonne, I fynde by the instruccyon of
Mars, that though all the constel lacions be against the spiritualtye yf they wyll obeye the ordinaunce of God, and submytte them selues to his worde, there shall none pe∣ryshe but the chyldren of perdici∣on. Ioh. xvii. As for all soche as stryue agaynst the frame, & wyll nedes of malyce resiste the power and persecute the people of God, let them bewarre that they be not drowned with theyr Pharao: for God hath herde the complaynte of his poore oppressed, & lente them a Moses to be theyr gyde, to brynge them out of Egypte, and not onely to defende them, but all other also as manye as wyll conuerte vnto his word, and be refourmed by his auctorite and power in his anoyn∣ted kynges. Seyng then that god hathe called so manye of the spiry∣tualtye all readye, and doth dayly
cal mo to ye knowlege of his word, I can not dispayre but ye he wyll also be gracyous to many mo of them, for thoughe the rebellyons are lyke to haue an euell yeare, I dout not but ther be many among them, which shortly whā the hyer powers shall requyre them, wyll be refourmed, to the great wor¦shipe of the worde of God. To whom for the cō∣uersion of some all ready, be thankes, honour and glorye now and euer more. AMEN. ▪ THere endeth this true & fayth∣full Pronosticacō vpō the yere. M, CCCCC. xlviii. gathered out of the scriptures of God.
¶ A spirituall Almanacke, wherin euery Christē man and womā may se what they ought daylye to do, or leaue vn∣done. Not after the doctrine of the Papistes, not after the lernynge of Ptolomy, or other Heythen A∣stronomers, but out of the very true & wholso me doctrine of God our almyghty heuenly father, shewed vn to vs in his worde, by his prophetes & Apostles, but specyal¦ly by his deare sonne Ie¦sus Christ. And is to be kept not onely this newe yeare, but contynually vnto the daye of the LORDES cōmynge agayne.
FOR so muche as Al∣myghtye GOD hath charged by Moses. Dente. vi. and. xi. that we alwayes shulde ha∣ue his commaundementes in oure syght and mynde, as a sygne & to∣ken in oure handes, and to teache our chyldren his godlye wyll and commaundement. Ephe. vi. to cō∣men & talke therof at nyght whan we go to bed, and in the morninge whan we ryse, & to wryte the same vpō the walies and postes of oure houses, to the intent that we shuld nat forget his worde, his wyll and cōmaundement, and lest we shuld folowe our owne ymaginations: Therfore (good christen man and woman who so euer thou be) I thought it frutefull to putte the in remembraunce of thy dewtye. And this coulde I not do better,
than by these godly textes of holye scripture, which I haue broughte here together, speciallye to the ho∣noure, laude and praise of god, ex∣hortynge the that art necligente & forgetfull in kepinge his lawes, to take better holde, and go for∣warde in his wayes and turne not asyde, nether to the ryghte hande nor to the lefte, but be ware of such as teache the ought saue the doc∣tryne of god. And yt thou mayst be sure what thou doest. I praye Ie∣su Christ our onely mediatour ob∣tayne for the his holy spirite, and geue ye a good holsome newe yere with the true knowlege of his god¦ly wyl, and increace of his faythe. Amen. To daye yf ye wyll heare the voyce of God, hardē not your her∣tes. Hebre. iii. Euery day it is good to beleue,
to lerne, and to do what god hath commaunded: And so lykewyse is it good to leaue vndone that god hath forbydden. This daye is it good to lerne gods worde, for it is the vncorrup¦tible sede, wherof we are borne a∣new in god. i. Pet. i. It is the fode of the soule, wherby mālyueth. Deut. viii. math. iiii. & not only by bred. The worde of god is quycke & myghty in operacyon, & sharper then any two edged swerde, & en∣treth thorow, euen vnto the deuy∣dynge asōder of ye soule & ye sprete, & of the ioyntes & the mary. Hebr. iiii. &c. It is good in dede to lerne gods worde, for all good thinges al good thī¦ges come in gods word. come to vs with it, & innumerable ryches there thorow. Sap. vii. Therfore are they blessed yt heare it, and to do therafter. Luc. xi. This daye is it good to beleue
the worde of god: for he yt beleueth and is baptysed, shalbe saued. Mar. xvi. yee god geueth them power to be his chyldren, yt beleue in his name, Ioh. i. wherfore he that commeth vnto god, must be∣leue, for without faythe it is not possible to please god. Hebr. xi. This daye is it good to kepe the worde and commaundementes of God, for he yt loueth me (sayeth Christ) wyll kepe my worde, & my father wyll loue hym, and we wyl¦come vnto hym, and wyll make oure dwellyng with hym. Ioh. xiiii. He that hath my commaun∣dementes (sayeth he) and kepeth them, ye same is he that loueth me, and he that loueth me, shalbe lo∣ued of my father. Therfore (I say) it is good this daye for euery one of vs to kepe gods commaunde∣mentes, that is, to haue no Gods
but one. Exod. xx. To sanctifie and halowe the name of god: that is, to call onely vpon it in all nede & necessite &c. To halowe the Sab¦both the righte sabboth. day, namely to rest from our owne workes, as god dyd frō his, Heb. iiii. to the intent that he may worke in vs, and we to fulfyll his wyll by hearynge his worde, by stedfast fayth and prayer. &c. To honour father and mother, Mar. xv. that is, to be obedient vnto thē Ephe. vi. To helpe them in theyr nede, to cherysh them to comforte them in aduersite. &c. for that is ac¦ceptable and well pleasynge vnto the Lorde. Collos. iii. To kyll nobodye, that is to hate no man. mat v. o beare no malyce in oure myn∣des, to geue no euell wordes, but euen to loue our enemies. Mat, v. and to do good for euell▪ To breake no lawfull wedlocke, that
is, to commytte no whoredome, ad¦uowtrye, nor vnclennes, but ether to lyue chaiste or els to marye. i. Cor. vii. To steale nothynge, that is, to vse no false marchaundyse, neither in barganing, weyght nor measure. i. Tess, iiii. Leu. xix. Deu¦te: xxv. Ezech, xlv. but truely to la∣bour in some good occupacion, for the susteynyng of the poore: Eph: iiii. To beare no false witnes, that is, to hurt no mansname nor fame to lye of no man. Ephe. iiii: but e∣ther to saye yt truth, orels to kepe sylence. To couet no mans house wyfe, seruāt, good, nor any thynge that is his, that is, not once to lust after our neghbours euell. Rom. vii. and xiii. but hartelye to loue hym euē as our selues. Leuit. xix. and to do vnto hym after the ma∣ner as we wolde he dyd vnto vs. Mat. vii. Cob, iiii: These cōmaū∣dementes
(I say) is it good for vs to kepe, not onely this daye, but as longe as we lyue, to the honou¦rynge of the blessed name of god in vs, to the increace of his kyng∣dome, and to the fulfyllyng of his godly wyll. This daye is it good in fayth and stedfast beleue to worke par∣tyte good workes & that by loue, for loue is the fulfyllyng of ye law Rom. xiii. & hydeth the multitude of synnes. i. Pet. iiii. loue hath ma¦ny noble condicyons, loue is pa∣cient & curteous, loue enuieth not i. Cor. xiii. loue doth not frowarde¦ly, The condi¦ous of . loue is not puffet vp, loue dea∣leth not dishonestly, seketh not her owne, is not prouoked vnto an∣ger, thynketh no euell, reioyseth not of iniquite, but reioyseth in the trueth, beareth all thynges, bele∣ueth all thynges, hopeth all thyn∣ges,
suffereth all thynges. who so euer now hath the sprete of God, and hath truly receaued the lyght of his worde, wyll vse these wor∣kes, these frutes of the sprete, gal. v. and this armoure of lyghte. True bele¦necs do good wor∣kes. This is the new commaundemēt that oure master hathe geuen vs, for by this shall euery man knowe ye we are his disciples, yf we loue one another, Io. xiii. not in worde and tonge onely, but in dede and verite. i. Ioha▪ iii. not to suffre thē to want, and we haue, not to let them peryshe, and we maye helpe them, but louyngly & with a good hert, to distiribute vnto ye necessi¦tes of ye saites. Ro. xii, to fede ye hō¦gry, to minister drinke to ye thyrsty The wor∣kes of C¦sten men. Esa. lviii. Eze, xviii. To lodge the harbourlesse, to vyset the sycke. ii: Tim. i. to burye the deed. Tobi. i. and shortly, to do vnto eueryman,
euen as we wold be intreated out selues. This daye is it good one of vs to tell another his faute, and that louynglye after a brotherlye cor∣rectyon without any desyre of ven geaunce, for it is written: Thou shalt not auēge thy selfe, nor bear euell wyll agaynst the chyldren of thy people. Leui. xix. Thou shalte not hate thy brother in thyn hert, but shalt tell thy neghboure his faute, that thou bear not synne for his sake, And (as yt wyse mā sayth) Tell thy frende his faute, lest he be ignoraunt, and say: I haue not done it. Or yf he haue done it, that he do it nomore. Ecel. xix. Reproue thy neghboure, that he maye kept his tonge, and yf he haue spoken (any thynge amysse) that he say it no more. For yt doctrine of Christe and the Apostles is, that yf any
man be ouertaken of a faute, they yt are spiritual oughte to enfourme hym with a meke sprete, conside∣rynge them selues, that it is theyr they that haue the sperite of gods kno¦wlege, ought to e¦form their brethren. owne nature also to be tēpted. Galla. vi. yf thy brother trespace agaynst the (sayeth oure mayster Christ) go thy way & tell hym his faute betwene the & hym alone. yf he hear ye, thou hast wōne thy bro∣ther. But yf he hear ye not, thē take yet with the one or two, that in the mouth of two or thre wytnesses e∣uery matter may be stablished. yf he heare not them, then tel it vnto the congregacyon. yf he hear not the congregacion, then holde hym as an heythen and publycan. mat. xviii. Now yf any that is in yt nō∣bre of the breathren in Christ, & wyl be taken for a Christē man in dede be an whoremonger, or couetous, or a worshipper of ymages, ether
a rayler, or a dronkarde, or an ex∣torcyoner, the doctryne of Paule is playne, that we shulde not eat, nor kepe company with soch. This day is it good to beware of false prophetes, of mens owne Bewarre of false do¦trine. ymaginacyons and dreames, lest we receaue lyes in stede of ye truth lest we receaue the poyson of Anti christes lawes, in stede of ye blessed worde of God, lest we shote at a wronge marke, and be disceaued by soch as walke in humblenes of theyr owne chosynge and in spiri∣tualy of Angels. Coll. ii. But let vs beware of false prophetes, whi¦che come vnto vs in shepes clo∣thynge, and are ranynge wolues within. math. vii. who so euer ther fore cōmeth vnto vs, & bryngeth not yt doctrine of Christ, let vs ne∣ther receaue hym into ye house, nor salute hym, lest we be partakers
of his euell dedes. For by false pre¦chers doth ye Lord our god proue vs to were whether we loue hym with all our herte and with al our God pro∣ueth vs by false prea∣chers. soule. Deu. xiii. wherfore it shalbe good for vs, not onely this daye, but as longe as we lyue, to walke after the Lorde our god, & to fear hym & to kepe his cōmaūdemētes his statutes, his lawes, & his cōsti¦tucyōs, to herkē vnto his voyce, to serue hym, & to cleue vnto hym. ye subiecte tes obeye four pry∣ces. This day is it good for euery subiecte to be obedient, and to sub¦mitte hym selfe to the auctorite of the hyer power, i. Pe. ii. Sa. vi. for there is no power but of god. The powers yt be, are ordined of god: so yt who so euer resysteth yt power, re¦sisteth yt ordināce of god. And they yt resiste, shal receaue to thē selues dampnacyon. For rulers are not to be feared for good workes,
but for euell. yf thou wylt be with out feare of the power, do wel then and thou shalt haue prayse of the same, for he is the mynister of god for thy wealth. But yf thou do e∣uell, then feare: for he beareth not the swerde for noughte. For he is the offycer of god, a taker of ven∣geaūce, to punyshe hym that doth euell. wherfore we muste nedes o∣beye euery one of vs, not onely for punyshement, but also because of conscience. we are warned also by saynte Paule in an other place, to submytte oure selues vnto pryn∣ces, and to the hyer auctorite, and to obeye the offycers. Tit. iii. Sub¦mytte youre selues, sayeth saynte Peter, vnto all maner ordinaunce of men for the Lordes sake: whe∣ther it be vnto the kynge, as vnto he kynge the chef:  vnder d. the chefe heade, or vnto rulers, as vnto them that are sent of hym, for
the punyshemēt of euel doers, but for the prayse of them that do wel, i. Pet. ii. As for such as wyl nedes disobeye, let them remembre that the kynge beareth not the swerde for nought. Ro. xiii. & that (as Sa lomō sayeth) The kynges displea¦sure is a messanger of death. Pro∣uerb. xvi. This daye is it good for kyn∣ges, ye prynces execute you office prynces and temporall iud∣ges, to execute theyr offyce as out of the power that god ministreth vnto them. i. Pet. iiii. for in verye dede the power is gyuen them of the Lorde, and the strength from the hyest. Sap. vi. Therfore seing they are the offycers of his kyng∣dome, as the wyse man sayth, they ought not to be neglygent, but to execute true iugement, to kepe the lawe of ryghteousnes, to walke af¦ter his wyll, to loue the lyghte of
wysedome, to expell soythsayers, charmers, expounders of tokens. Idols and all abhominacyōs out of theyrlonde. iiii. Reg. xxxii to set vp the wordes of the lawe of god, to put downe the houses of Idols trye, to se that the lawe and worde of god be taught among ye people The study to good rynet. ii. Para. xvii to spare nether cost nor laboure for the mayntenaūce and defence of ye same, to seke the peace, wealth, & prosperite of their comons, to iudge euery man rygh¦teously without any wrestynge of the lawe. Deut. xvii. to knowe no mās person in iudgement, to take no gystes: Leui. xxiii. but euer to haue the lawe of God by them, & to reade therin al ye dayes of theyr lyues, that they may lerne to fear the Lorde theyr god, to kepe al the wordes of his lawe, and to do ther after, Deut. xvii. that they lyft not
vp theyr hertes aboue theyr bre∣thren, and so turne asyde from the commaūdement, ether to yt ryght hande or to the lefte, but that they may prolōge theyr dayes in theyr office: Ye seruaū¦tes obeye your Lor∣des & Ma∣stres. This day is it good for seruaūtes to obey theyr bodely masters, with feare and tremblyng, in syn glenes of theyr herte, euen as vn∣to Christ, not with seruyce only in the eye syghte, as mē pleasers, but as seruauntes of Christ, doynge ye wyll of god frō yt herte with good wyll, thynkyng ye they serue euen the Lorde and not men. Ephe. vi. Ye seruaūtes (sayeth saynt Paule in another place) be obedient, vn∣to, youre bodelye maysters in all thynges, not with seruyce of the eye as pleasers of men, but in syn∣glenes of the herte, fearyng God. what so euer ye do, do it hertely
euen as vnto the Lorde and not vnto men. And be sure, that of the Lorde ye shall receaue the reward of the inheritaūce, for ye serue the Lorde Christ. Coll. iii. And vnto Tit. ii. Exhorte seruauntes to be obediente vnto theyr maysters, to please in all thinges, not answe∣ryng no bedient uaunt ca¦seth the ore of  to haue good re∣. agayne, nether to be pykers, but to shewe al good faythfulnes that in all thynges they maye do worshipe vnto ye doctrine of God our Sauiour. Tit. ii. wherfore ye¦seruauntes, (sayeth laynt Peter) o beye youre masters with al feare, not only yf they be good and cur¦teous, but also yf they be forward i. Pet. ii. And therfore was saynt Paule so earnest to se this ordy∣nan̄ce of God kept: namely that as many seruauntes as are vnder the yocke. shulde count theyr ma∣sters worthy of all honour, that
the name of god and his doctrine be not euell spoken of. And ye they which haue beleuynge maysters, shulde not dispyse them because they are brethrē, but rather do ser∣uice, for so moch as they are bele uynge, and beloued, & partakers of the benefite. i: Timo. vi. This daye is it good for soche men as haue seruaūtes, to put a∣waye ye lordes Masters d youre ser∣uauntes  eucl all threatenynges and chur¦lyshe wordes, Eph. vi. doynge vn¦to theyr seruauntes that which is iust and equall, and knowe ye they them selues also haue a master in heauen, Col. iii. Therfore (accor∣dynge to the councell of the wyse man) where as thy seruaunt wor∣keth truly, intreate hym not euel, nether the hyrelyng, that is fayth full vnto the. Eccle. vii. loue a dis∣crete seruaūt as thyn owne soule. defraude hym not of his lybertye.
nether leaue hym a poore man. How be it yf he be not obedient, bynde his fete. but do not to moch vnto hym in any wyse, & without discrecyon do nothynge, Ecclesi. xxxiii, Therfore shuld euell serua¦tes be correcte, seynge they wyll not be the better for wordes, Pro. xxix. for though they vnderstonde them, yet wyl they not regarde the Do thou then the councell of the wyse man: tame thy euell seruaunt with bōdes and correccyon. Eccl, let not oue ser¦uauntes go∣dle. xxxiii. Yf thou set hym to laboure, thou shalt fynde rest, but yf thou let hym goydle, he shall seke lyber¦tie. For as (Salomon sayeth) he ye delycatly bringeth vp his seruaūt from a chylde. shal make hym his mayster at length. Prouerb. xxix. Sende hym to laboure therfore, yt he go not ydle, for ydlenes bryn∣geth moche euell. Set hym to
worke, for yt belongeth vnto hym & becōmeth hym well. Eccl. xxxiii. This daye is it good for wemē to be obedient & to submytte them¦selues ye we men o¦beye youre husbandes. vnto theyr husbādes as vn¦to the Lorde. For the husbande is the wyues heade, euen as Christe also is the heade of the congrega∣gatyon, and he is the sauioure of his body. Eph. v. Therfore as the congregacyon is in subieccyon to Christ, so lykewyse let the wyues be in subieccyō to theyr husbādes in al thynges, as it is comly in the Lorde: Col. iii. yt euen they whiche beleue not the worde, maye with out the worde be wōne by yt cōuer¦sacyon of the wyues, whan they se theyr good lyuynge, i. Pe. iii. And let not theyr outwarde apparel be wemē shal not be to gorgiously arayed. with broyded heer, & hauynge on of golde, or in putting on of gorgi¦ous aray, but let the in warde mā
of the herte be vncorrupte with a meke and a quyet sprete, which before god is moch set by. For after this maner in the olde tyme dyd the holy wemen whiche trusted in god, tyer themselues, and wer o∣bediēt vnto theyr husbādes: Euen as Sara obeyed Abraham & cal∣led hym lorde. Gen. xviii. This daye it is good for men to loue their wiues, euē as Christ ye men loue your wiues loued the cōgregation, and gaue hym selfe for it, to sanctifie it. and clensed it in the fountayne of wa∣ter by ye worde, to make it to hymselfe a glorious congregation, ha∣uynge no spotte nor wrincle, nor any soche thyng, but that it should be holy and without blame. Eph. v. So ought mē also to loue their wyues, euē as theyr owne bodies. He ye loueth his wyfe, loueth hym selfe. For no mā euer yet hated his
owne fleshe, but noryssheth & che∣rysheth it, euen as the Lorde doth also the congregacyon. Therfore ought euery man to do so, that he loue his wyfe euen as hymselfe, & not to be bytter vnto them, Coll. iii. but to dwell with them accor∣dyng vnto knowlege, geuyng ho∣noure vnto the wyfe, as vnto the weaker vessell, and as vnto them y• are heyres with them of ye grace of lyfe, that theyr prayers be not let. i. Pe. iii. ye childre honor you fathers mother. This daye is it good for chyl∣dren to honoure theyr fathers and mothers, and to obeye them in all thynges, for that is well pleasyng vnto the Lorde. Ephe. vi. Coll. iii. yee the Lord wyll haue the father honoured of the chyldren: & loke what a mother commaūdeth her chyldrē to do, he wyll haue it kept Eccl. iii. who so honoureth his fa∣ther,
his synnes shalbe forgeuen hym, and he that honoureth his mother, is like one that gathereth treasure together, who so honou∣reth his father shall haue ioye of his owne chyldrē, and whan he ma¦keth his prayer, he shalbe herde. He that honoureth his father, shal haue a longe lyfe: and he that is o¦bedient for ye Lordes sake, his mo∣ther shall haue ioye of hym: He yt feareth the Lord, honoureth his father and mother, and doth them seruice euen as it were vnto the Lorde hymselfe. Honoure thy fa∣ther therfore in dede, in worde, & in all pacyence, that thou mayste haue his blessinge: for the bles∣synge of the father buyldeth vp the houses of the chyldren, but the mothers curse roteth out the foū∣dacyons. Reioyse not thou whan thy father is reproued, for it is no
honoure vnto the, but a shame. For the worshipe of a mās father is his owne worshippe, and wher the father is without honoure, it is ye dishonesty of ye sone. My sōne make moche of thy father in his age, and greue hym not as longe as he lyueth. And yf his vnderstō¦dynge fayle, haue pacyence with hym, and despyse hym not in his strength: For y• good dede yt thou shewest vnto thy father, shall not be forgotten, and whan thou thy selfe wantest, it shalbe rewarded the. &c. He yt forsaketh his father, shal come to shame, and he that de¦fyeth his mother, is cursed of god wherfore my sōne, do thou thy deu¦tye with louynge mekenesse, and so shalt thou be loued aboue other men. ye fathers brynge vp youre chyl∣dren in the fear of god This day is it good for fathers and soch men as haue chyldren to
brynge them vp in the norture & informacyon of the Lorde. Ephe. vi. and not to be cruel vnto them, lest they be of a desperate mynde: Collo. iii. But diligently to teach them the commaundementes of God, for (as the wyse man sayeth) who loueth his chylde, holdeth hym styl in norture and vnder cor¦recyon, Pro. xiii. that he may haue ioye of hym afterwarde. Eccl. xxx. and yt he grope not after his negh¦bours dores. He that teacheth his sonne, shall haue ioye in hym, and nede not be a shamed of hym a∣monge his acquayntaunce &c. An vntamed horse wyll be harde, & a wanton chylde wyll be wylfull. Therfor who so euer thou be that hast a chylde, geue hym not lyber¦tye in his youth: Bowe downe his necke whyle he is yonge, hit hym vpō his sydes whyle he is a child,
lest he be to stubborne, and geue nomore force of the, (and so shalte thou haue heuynes of soule.) Teach thy chylde and be diligent therin, lest it be to thy shame. with holde not correccion frō the chyld: for yf thou beatest hym with the rodde, he shal not dye therof. Pro. xxiii. Thou smytest hym with the rod, but thou delyuerest his soule from hell. This daye is it good for euery ye spiritu a shepherds fede your lockes one ye is a bishope or spiritual shep¦herde, to be blameles, the husbād: of one wyfe, sober, discrete. i. Tim iii. As the stewarde of God: Tit. i. not wylfull, not angry, not geuen vnto moche wyne, no fyghter, not gredy of fylthy lucre, but manerly harberous, apte to teache, gentle, abhorryng stryfe, abhorryng coue¦tousnes, such one as loueth good∣nes, and is ryghteous, holy, tem∣perate,
one that ruleth his owne house honestly, hauynge obedient chyldren with al honesty, such one as cleueth vnto the true worde of doctrine, that he may be able to ex¦horte with holsome lernynge, and to improue them yt say agaynste it For aboue all thynges it is good byshopes euty for a byshope or spirituall shepe∣herde, to shewe hymselfe an exam¦ple of good workes, with vncor∣rupt doctryne, with honesty, with the wholsome worde whiche can¦not be rebuked: that soch as with stande, may be ashamed, hauyng nothynge in them to disprayse. Of soch thynges also as belonge to ye doctrine of Christ, wolde ye apostle haue thē to speake earnestly: that they whiche are beleuers in God, myght be diligēt to excell in good workes: for these thynges at good and profitable vnto men.
For a conclucyon, who so euer thou art or of what estate so euer thou be, take hede yt there be not in the an euell herte of vnbeleue, to departe frō the lyuynge god Hebr. iii. but exhorte thy selfe dayly with his worde, whyle it is cal∣led, To daye, lest thou waxe harde herted thorow the disceatfulnes of synne ¶ Printed at Londō by Rychard Kele, dwellyng at the longe shoppe in the Poultry vnder saynt Myldreds church cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
