689 99836053 296
THE EXPLANATION. OF THE TRVE AND LAVVFVLL RIGHT AND TYTLE, OF THE MOSTE EXCELLENT PRINCE, ANTHONIE the first of that name, King of Portugall, concerning his warres, againste Phillip King of Castile, and against his Subiectes and adherentes, for the recouerie of his kingdome. TOGETHER VVITH A BRIEFE HI∣storye of all that hath passed aboute that matter, vntill the yeare of our LORD. 1583. Translated into English and conferred with the French and Latine Copies. By the commaundement and order of the Superiors. At Leyden In the Printing house of Christopher Plantyn. 1585.
The order of the Priuiledge. MAurice Erle of Nassawe, Catzenellebogen, Vianden, Dietz, &c. and the counselors of estate appointed in the prouin∣ces vnited of the low countreis: To all to whom these pre∣sents shall come greeting. Th'ambassador of the moste noble prince Anthony King of Portugall, Algarbes &c. hath decla∣red vnto vs, that he hath caused a little treatise to bee made, in the Latine, Frenche, and Flemmish tongues, conteyning the iustifica∣tion of the said king Anthony, with a briefe historye of all that hath passed betweene his maiesty and the King of Castile: vntill the ta∣king of thislands of Assores, together with an exhortatiō to all prin∣ces & potentates of Christiandome, how muche it standeth them vpon, to aid and succour the said king Anthony to recouer his king¦dom. The which discourse the said Ambassador is desirous to cause to be imprinted with asmuch expedition as possiby he may, to wit in the Latine & French tongs by Christopher Plantin, & in the Flē∣mish tong by Peter Verhaghen printer of Dordright. Wherefore & for other causes vs hereunto mouing, we haue giuen & granted, & by these presents do giue & graunt vnto the said declarer licence, authority & permission to cause the said treatise & boke to be prin∣ted by the said Christopher Plantin & Peter Verhaghen, & to put the same to sale in the tongues aforesaid. Wherefore we commaunde all men generallie and particularlie that they suffer the said decla∣rer fullie and peacablie to enioy and vse this our present licence authoritie and permission, causing all troubles and empechemēts contrary to the same, clearelie to surcease and be remoued: For∣bidding as hereby we doe straightly prohibite & forbid all other printers of the said prouinces vnited, to imprinte or imitate the said booke in anie of the saide three tongues or in anye other language without the knowledge and consent of the saide am∣bassadour, or his successor in office, to sell or distribute the same either within the said Prouinces vnited, or elsewhere, without the same, vpon pain of arbitrary correction and to forfait L. l. for a fine For so haue we found it conuenient, Giuen at Delft the 15. of Ia∣nuarie. 1585 Ad Meetkerke. In the absence of my Lord the Earle, by thorder of the counsellers of estate abouesaide. I. VAN, LANGEN.
resent woorke. the second his Cosen germaine, e vviues. 3 ONOR, the sister of themperour Charles the fift, by whome he had one sonne named Charles that died in his infancie, and Marie that died vnmaried. 6 LPHONSVS o was made rdinall. 7 HENRIE, who was also made Cardinal, and af∣ter king by the death of Kinge Sebastìan. 8 EDVVARDE, who married Theodosia Du∣ches of Bergan∣tia of whome is∣sued ARIE who married nder Prince of Par∣ whome are issued children. KATHERINE, who married the Duke of Bergantia. Edwarde who died and was neuer married. 9 ANTHONIE, who died in his infancie.
The explanation of the true and lawfull Right and Tytle, of the most ex∣cellent Prince, Anthonie the firste of that name, King of Portugall, as touching his warres against Phillip, king of Castile and his Subiectes and adherents, for the Recouerie of his kingdome. Together with a briefe hi∣story of all matters passed vpon that occasion vntill the yeare of our Lord. 1583. WHen Iohn the second of that name, King of Portugall, was departed out of this mortall life, without any issue of his bodie lawfully begotten, then liuing, (For his onely legittimate sonne Alfonsus, while his Father was liuing, dyed at Santaren, by the fall of a horse.) The kingdome of Portugall descended, or rather was giuen by election of the people, vnto Emanuell the first of that name, sonne of Ferdinando, who was vncle to the same king John. This was that king Emanuell, whiche in the time of his Reigne conquered and annexed to his crowne, a good part aswell of the East as of the West Indies, toge∣ther with diuers Cities and Townes of Affrica, which at this day remaine subiect to the kinges of Portugall. The whiche king E∣manuell had three wiues, the first whereof was Isabell the eldest daughter of Ferdinando and Jsabell king and queene of Castile. which queene Isabell wife of the said king Emanuell dyed in child-bed after she had brought forth her first and onely son Michaell, who when he was declared and sworne Prince of Castile and Por∣tugall dyed in his yong yeares. whereupon the said king Emanuell tooke to his second wife, Marie the second daughter of the said king Ferdinando and queene Jsabell his wife. By whiche Marie he had nine children. The first whereof, was John the third, who succeeded his father in the kingdome, and tooke to his wife, Ca∣therine, the daughter of Phillip, the first of that name, king of Ca∣stile, and Archeduke of Austriche, &c. The seconde childe was Jsabell who married the Empeorour Charles the fifte, of whome is∣issued
three children, to wit Phillip the second of that name nowe King of Castile, Marie who married the Emperour Maxi∣milian the seconde of that name, and Iane who was married to John prince of Portugall the sonne of King Iohn the thirde of that name. The thirde childe of the sayde King Emanuell was Beatrice who marryed Charles Duke of Sauoy. The fourth was Lodowike who (as it hath beene since founde) was secretlye married to one Jolenta of honest parentage, & of a singular beaw∣tye, adorned with vertue and good quallities, by whome hee had one onely sonne, named Anthonie: (who is the same par∣tye, of whome and concerning whose righte and tytle this treatise principallye maketh mention). The fift childe of the sayde King Emanuell, was Ferdinando who married a daughter of the Earle of Marialua in Portugall, by whome hee had two sonnes who dyed while their father and mother were lyuing. The sixte was Alfonsus who was made Cardinall and so dyed without issue. The seuenth was Henrye who lykewise was made Cardinall and prymate of Portugall, and after that King, by the death of King Sebastian, as heereafter in this treatise more at large shall bee declared. The eyght childe was Edwarde who married Theodosia Duchesse of Bergantia: by whome hee had three children, that is to say, Mary who marryed Alexan∣der Prince of Parma of whome are issued three children: also Ka∣therine who marryed Iohn Duke of Bergantia. And Edwarde who dyed vnmarryed. The ninthe chylde and laste sonne of the sayde King Emanuell of his sayde seconde marryage was Anthonie, who also dyed in his infancye. The thirde wyfe of the same Emanuell was Eleonour sister to the Emperor Charles the fifte, by whome he had two children, to wit, Charles, who dyed in his infancie, and Marye who also deceased and was neuer marryed. When the sayde Emanuell was deceased, Iohn the thyrde of that name, his eldest sonne succeeded him in the kingdome as is aforesayde, who by Katherine his wife had manye children the whiche dyed all in their infancyes, ex∣cept Prince John, and Marye; The whiche Marye marryed Phillip, nowe King, and then prince of Castile, and dyed be∣fore her sayde husbande came to his Crowne, leauing one onelye sonne whose name was Charles. Whome (as the fame
thereof is constante) his father King Phillip commaunded to bee put to death in pryson. When Prynce Iohn came to the age of sixteene yeere, hee married Jane the daughter of the sayde Emperour Charles, and dyed aboute one yeare after lea∣ving his wife greate with childe, who in the sixte monethe after the death of her husbande, brought foorth a sonne whose name was Sebastian, whiche yong Prince when hee came to aboute the age of foure yeares, succeeded in the kingdome by and after the death of the sayde Iohn the thirde his Graundfather by the fathers side. Now when King Sebastian was come to the age of foure and twentye yeares, vppon the intreatye and solicitation of Mu∣lei Mahumet Kinge (as hee pretended) of Fez and Mar∣rocos, who by Mulei Maluco his brother was expelled and driuen out of his kingdome, the sayde King Sebastian at the last determined to passe into Affryca with a greate and puis∣sant Armye, to restore this Mulei Mahumet to his kingdome. And for the better accomplishmente thereof, hee prayed his vncle King Phillip of Castile to voutchsafe some ayde vnto him in that beehalfe. The King of Castile graunting this petiti∣on, promised to ayde him, with fiftye Gallyes well appointed and furnished, and foure thousand armed souldyours. King Sebastian trusting thereunto, with all care and dilligence pre∣pared his armye, wherewith in the monthe of Iune. 1578. hee departed from Lisbone and came to a porte of Castile neere the streighte of Gibraltare called, el puerto de Sancta Maria, where hee stayed certayne dayes for the Gallyes and menne whiche the Kinge of Castile had promised to sende vnto him. But the Kinge of Castile, vnder pretence that the greate Turke, prepared an Armye for that yeare, not onelye denyed to per∣forme his promise, but also (that is farre woorse) caused a pro∣clamation to bee made and published thorowoute all Spayne, subiecte to his Iurisdiction, whereby all his subiectes were commaunded vppon greate pennalties that none of them shoulde accompanye Kinge Sebastian in that Voyage, where∣of certaynelye there can no other coniecture bee gathered, sauing onely that the king of Castile by his vnmesurable ambition & insatiable desire to haue dominion, neither coueted nor hoped
for any other thing then onely that the yong prince king Sebasti∣an his nephew, for want of sufficient force, should be ouerthrown and come to destruction in the same Iourney, so as thereupon the said king of Castile might by that meane haue oportunity to ioyne the kingdome of Portugall to his kingdome of Castile as it came to passe. Neuerthelesse the saide king Sebastian being a prince of greate magnanimitie, when hee had all thinges in a readinesse, and em∣ployed infinite expences vpon the furnishing of this armie whiche was aboue a thousand Saile, determined to pursue his voyage, and ariued in Affrica and there landed all his armie amounting to a∣bout fifteene thousand fighting men. Thereupon in the end hee came into a plaine fielde whiche beareth the name of Alcazar, where the fift day of August in the same yeare, was fought a great and terrible battaile betweene him and the enemie, wherein the said yong king Sebastian was not onelye ouercome but also slaine in the field together with Mulei Mahumet whose parte he tooke, at what time neyther did Mulei Maluco the king that fought a∣gainst them escape, For he, in the time of the battaile being sicke and wearye of sitting his horse, was remoued into his horselitter and there dyed during the battaile. A battaile certainlye worthie to be had in remembraunce, for in the same dyed three kinges together in one daye, as in lyke manner there were slaine in the same aboue sixe hundred of the cheefest of the Lordes and gentle∣men of the kingdome of Portugall besides the common souldiers, the most wherof were slaine in the battaile, and the rest taken pri∣soners, amongst whiche number Don Anthonio of whome this booke specially treateth was one of the Captiues. Further there be certaine persons who affirme, that after the death of the sayde king Maluco, there was found in his pocket a letter written vnto him from king Phillip wherein he assured king Maluco, that king Sebastian nephew of the saide king Phillip shounde haue no ayde at his handes. whereby may be perceaued agreat vnfaithfullnes of king Phillip against his owne blood. Now when as by the death of king Sebastian, the linage of king Iohn the third his grandfather by the fathers side, was vtterly ex∣tinct: it must follow of necessity (if collateral succession, take place in this behalfe,) that recourse must be had to the linage of the said
Lodowike as seconde sonne of the aforenamed king Emanuell. Whiche Lodowike (as is afore aleaged) had one onelye sonne called, Don Anthonio, who therefore (his lawfull byrthe presup∣supposed) was the onelye lawfull and rightfull successor of the kingdome. But it fell so out, that while he in the said discomfiture of Affrica was taken prisoner and there remained captiue, (how∣beit vnknowne of the enemie,) as it was alwaies before that tyme vnknowne, yea and that also to Don Anthonio himselfe, that hee was the legittimate sonne of the said Lodowike: Henry the Cardi∣nall his vncle, the fift issue male of King Emanuell, was preferred to the kingdom being then a very old man. within a little while after, by a wonderfull meane, or rather by the prouidence of God, the sayd Don Anthonio about forty daies after the losse of the battaile, was deliuered out of captiuitie, and returned into Portugall, where he was with great ioy receaued, not onely by King Henry, but also by all the nobilitie and principall gentlemen of the countrey, and most chiefly and principally by the common people. For hee was beloued of all men, as well in respect of his noble and excellent disposition of mynde, as for the singular and rare vertues of his sayde Father Lodowike which most cleerely shined in him. Within a fewe dayes after Don Anthonio was arriued at Lys∣bone the metropolitan Citie of the kingdome, he was aduertised by one of his father Lodwikes ancient seruantes who was a man of good callinge and approued integritie, that his father Lodowicke (as is afore mencioned in this treatise) was secretlye married to the said Iolenta. And howe there were diuerse credible witnesses yet liuinge that could testifie the trouthe therof. And besides that dyuerse men of good credit & calling, had expressed and declared the same by their last willes and testamentes for the discharge of their consciences notwithstanding that it was alwaies kept verye secret through the endeuour of the said Lodowike aswel in respect of thine quallitye of the persons, as also for that the publishinge thereof was not materiall at that time, for that Don Anthonio was brought vp to be a Priest and Churchman and for that also there were then many other heyres of the kingdom that were nearer to the Crowne then he. When Don Anthonio had receaued the same aduertisement, he opened the matter to King Henry his vn∣cle, and besought him to voutchsafe the examitation thereof, and
to graunte that hee might produce certaine witnesses and poofes whereby the truth of the matter myght bee founde oute and ma∣nifestlye knowne, for the auoydinge of all controuersies and warres which otherwise were lyke to arise betweene them who after the death of the sayde Kinge Henry myghte pretende Ty∣tle to the kingdome. For sithe hee was the onelye sonne of the sayde Lodowike seconde sonne of the sayde Kinge Emanu∣ell (if his byrth bee prooued to bee legittimate) hee necessarilye excluded and barred all others that by tytle of consanguinitye myghte aspyre or pretende tytle to the succession of the king∣dome, notwithstanding there were anye of the children liuing who were beegotten of the daughter of the sayde Kynge Ema∣nuell, which was elder then the sayde Lodowike her brother, for∣asmuche as the kingdome of Portugall falleth not by succession to the woman nor anye other descending of her. When Kynge Henrye had vnderstandinge thereof beeing a verye olde manne (as afore is aleaged) and fearing least him∣selfe shoulde (in case Don Anthonio were proued to bee borne in lawfull marriage) bee depriued of his kingdome, he con∣ceaued so greate indignation thereat, that immediatlye hee bannished Don Anthonio, Thirtye myles from his courte, with expresse commaundemente that hee shoulde not presume to retourne thither vntill his Maiestye shoulde take further order in that behalfe. Thereuppon Don Anthonio yeilding his obe∣dience to the same commaundemente made his repayre to the Cytie of Columbria being foure and thyrtie myles from Lysbone where at that tyme Kinge Henry kepte his Courte. But yet neuerthelesse the sayd Don Anthonio lefte at Lisbone, the sayde auntient seruaunte of his fathers, from whome hee had receaued the sayde aduertisemente, who at the same tyme was in the seruice of the sayde Kinge Henry and verye farre in his fauoure. To this man, the sayd Don Anthonio at his de∣parting from Lisbone, gaue a speciall charge, to sollycite his cause to the Kinge in his absence with all endeuoure and diligence. The which the same Minister promised with all fi∣delitye to accomplishe, and made humble petition to Kinge
Henry, that with his good fauour and lycence, hee might pro∣secute the affayres of the sayde Don Anthonio. Whiche the Kinge not onelye graunted, but also expressely commaunded him so to doe. When the said Agent had receaued this aunswere of the King, he required Emanuell Bishop of Almada, then conseruator of the priuileges of the order of the Knights of saint Iohn at Thisle of Malta, competent Iudge, of the sayde Don Anthonio as prior of Crato of the same order: To receaue and heare the depositions of witnesses and certain documents and instruments wherby the said Don Anthonio intended to verifie and proue himself to be issued of a lawfull marriage: praying the sayd Bishop neuerthelesse to keepe the matter very secrete least the King by vnderstanding the same shoulde conceaue some newe displeasure. Whereuppon the sayde Byshoppe proceeded in the examination of the cause. Be∣fore whome were produced three witnesses, who perfectlye & with lawfull circumstaunces deposed that they were present at the celebration of Marriage betweene the sayde Lodowike and Iolenta parentes of the sayd Don Anthonio. Also there was broughte and produced beefore the sayde conseruatour, the Testament of one Rui Celema, who while hee liued was knowne to bee a verye honest credible man, of approued integritie, and was seruaunte to Don Anthonios Father and in good esti∣mation not only with him but also with King Henry. This Rui Ce∣lema by his testament had declared that he alwaies vnderstood & certaynelye knewe, that the sayde Lodowike Father of Don Anthonio was secretlye marryed to Jolenta, setting downe therewithall diuerse reasons whiche sufficyentlye prooue the same, and bycause hee was at poynte of death, and for that in tyme to comeit myghte bee expediente and beehouefull to the common wealth of the kingdome of Portugall to knowe that Don Anthonio was issued of a lawfull marryage, therefore and for the discharge of his conscience, hee had made true declaration thereof in his sayde Testamente. There was also exhibited before the sayde Byshop, the Testa∣ment of the sayd Lodowike wherby he ordeined and appointed the said Don Anthonio his son his only heire, not only in al his goods
Patrimoniall, but also in certaine patronall rightes of greate im-Portance which were lefte vnto the saide Lodowike by the testa∣ment of his brother Ferdinando and his wife who (as is aforesaide) dyed without children. Further there were produced before the sayde Bishop other witnesses of good calling and credite, who de∣posed that King John the third of that name, immediatlye after the death of the sayd Lodowike his brother, gaue vnto Don Anthonio, the signet and Armes of his father commaunding him to vse the same frankly and freely without barre or breach, in as ample man∣ner as his sayd father had the vse thereof, as the sayd Don Antho∣nio hath alwayes since accordingly done. Vppon the proofe of all these thinges, the sayd Bishop taking vnto himselfe certaine o∣ther Iudges of the same order gaue sentence touching the same matter: whereby it was pronounced and declared, that the sayde Don Anthonio was the lawfull sonne of the said Lodowike and Io∣lenta, the which sentence was also pronounced and confirmed in the Chauncerie of the saide order, howbeit secretly for the cause afore aleaged. In the meane tyme, King Henry, assembleth the estates of his kingdome to treate of diuers matters concerning the common¦wealth and tranquillitie of the same, and speciallye to deliberate, who should be the next and meetest Heire to the crowne after his decease: and yet neuerthelesse gaue expresse commaundement to Don Anthonio, not to come to the said assembly but to send some deputie or agent that might represent his person there. Also the same king Henry being very fearefull least Don Anthonio should proue himselfe to be legittimate, required the Pope of Roome to voutchsafe to commit vnto him the hearing and examination of the cause touching the legittimation of the said Don Anthonio. In the meane time the same king Henry proceedeth with the conuo∣cation of the saide estates, and commaundethe, that these perso∣nages should be cited thither, to wit Philip King of Castile as sonne of Isabell eldest daughter of the said King Emanuell, which Isabell (as is afore alleaged) was married to the Emperor Charles the fift. Also the Duke of Sauoy as nephew of Beatrice daughter of the same King Emanuell. Also Katherine Duches of Bergantia daugh∣ter to the saide Edward sixt sonne of the saide King Emanuell, and lastlye the prince of Parma as father and tutor to his eldest sonne
which he had by Mary daughter also to the sayde Edward. All the which princes and potentates, were cyted by the sayde King Henry to appeare at a certain day to thintent euery of them, by his Ambassador or Agent might propound and set downe in the sayd assembly of thestates all such right and tytle as euery of them after his death could pretend to the sayd kingdome. Saying hee was minded to determine the same cause in his lyfe time if possibly he could bring it to passe. But if death shoulde preuent his purpose therein, his meaning was to commit and appoint not onelye cer∣taine persons to gouerne the kingdome, but also certaine Iudges to determine who had best right, and title to succeede & enioy the crowne, alleaging he tooke that course, to auoide all controuersies inconueniencies, & warres which otherwise were like to happen. Whereuppon all the sayde princes and potentates thus lawful∣ly cyted, sent their Ambassadors or deputies, with sufficient instru∣ctions on their behalfe to propoūd in the said assembly of thestates their seuerall rightes and tytles which they pretended to the said kingdome, Except onely Phillip King of Castile, who answered, he neyther had, nor acknoledged and Iudge in earth, but onelye in heauen. And therfore woulde not commit his righte and tytle to the determination of any Iudges that shoulde bee appointed con∣cerning that matter, adding withall howe hee was sufficiently in∣formed by his best learned lawyers in his owne kingdome, that there was no other personage in the world sauing onely himselfe that had lawfull right to succeede in the sayde kingdome of Por∣tugall after the death of the sayde King Henry, which right in case it shoulde be denyed vnto him, that then hee woulde obtaine the kingdome by force of armes. When the most excellent pryncesse Katherine de Medicis the french Kings Mother, was aduertised of these matters, namely that King Henry had commaunded all them to be cyted whiche pre∣tended auy tytle to the kingdome, she sent into Portugall for her Ambassador the Byshop of Comminges to propound in lyke man∣ner on her behalfe in the sayde assemblye of thestates, the righte which she pretended to the sayde kingdome, grounding her ty∣tle, vpon her descent from King Alfonsus brother to King Sancho the seconde of that name, who before he was King, had marryed in Fraunce, Mawde Countesse of Bulloyne, by whome he had two
sonnes, one of the whiche was marryed in Fraunce, of whome the sayde Katheren de Madicis descended, the other of the same sonnes deceasing in Portugall without issue: and the plea exhibi∣ted on the behalfe of the sayde Kathereine de Medicis, was receaued by the saide Kinge Henry in the saide assembly of the-states. Also when the people of Portugal vnderstoode the right of suc∣cession of the kingdom was committed to examination, and con∣sidering themselues had lawfull power & right to elect & choose a Kynge for and in default of a lawfull heire Masle descending directly of the Masculine line, therefore they exhibited a supply∣cation to king Henry, that his maiesty would voutchsafe to graunt them lycence to propounde and alleage thier right in that behalfe and to exhibite a plea whiche they had made thereof, contey∣ning in substaunce and effecte as followeth: To wit. That the people of Portugall had made and chosen for their Kinge, Al∣fonsus the first Kinge of Portugall, sonne of Earle Henry. Also that the same people had deposed from the administration and gouernement of the kingdome, Kinge Sancho, the seconde of that name after hee had Reigned by the space of fiue and twentye yeares, and that thereupon the same people committed the admi∣nistration and gouernement of the kingdome to his brother Al∣fonsus Earle of Bulloyne who had marryed Mawde the Countesse, and after the death of Sancho, they elected the same Alfonsus to be their King. Further that the same people had elected & made their king, Iohn the first of that name, the base son of King Alfon∣sus the fourth, notwithstanding there remayned liuing two legit∣timate daughters of the same king Alfonsus. Which King John, the same people of Portugall did confirme in the royall seate & main∣teyned and defended him, againste John Kinge of Castile also the first of that name who pretended title to the succession of the said kingdome of Portugall, for and in the name of his wife eldest and legittimate daughter of the saide King Alfonsus. Whereuppon there grew sharpe warre betweene the same two Kinges concer∣ning that matter, wherein the Kinge of Castile in thende was ouerthrowne in battayle, aboute a certaine towne of Portugall called Algibarotta. Moreouer that the same people had cre∣ated
their King, Emanuell the first, for that King Iohn the second had lefte no issue male descending of the righte Masculyne lyne. Lastlye that they had made the sayde Cardinall Henry their King after the decease of Kinge Sebastian who was slayne in the bat∣tayle of Affrica leauing no lawfull issue of his body to enioy the Crowne. By all these reasons the sayde people concluded, that their power and righte to make the sayde election, was offarre greater force and effecte, then the righte and tytle of succession, whereuppon the other pretenders grounded them selues, and the same people added withall, that by the Lawe, called the mentall Lawe, made by the sayde Kinge Iohn the firste of that name, no woman can nor oughte to inherite anye goodes or possessions depending of the Crowne, and therefore neyther myghte they who descended of the issues female as all the sayde pretenders did, sauing onely the sayd Don Anthonio. Vpon thunderstanding of all these matters so propounded and set down on the beehalfe of the people, Kinge Henrye lykewise admitted their plea. Hereuppon whyle the states of the Kingdome of Portugall were assembled treating vppon the nomination and election aswell of those persons whiche after the death of the sayde Kinge Henrye should haue the administration and gouernement of the king∣dome, as also of suche as shoulde decyde and iudge the que∣stion and controuersie touchyng the succession of the crowne, Thagent of Don Anthonio was informed that one Alphonsus of Alburquerque an aduocate of the Cytye of Lysbone was sub∣crned and wonne by some of the King of Castiles fautors, and that hee had manifestlye declared his aduise and opinion to certayne greate menne of the kingdome whereby it euidentlye appeared that hee was altogether bent and enclyned to the King of Castiles parte. Wherefore the same Agent propoun∣ded and put in againste the same Alfonsus a plea or byll of re∣cusation to thintent hee shoulde haue no voyce in thelection neyther of the sayde administrators or gouernours of the king∣dom, nor of the Iudges that should haue the hearing and determi∣nation of the cause touching the succession of the crowne, & also the same Agente auoutched how hee woulde declare sufficiente
causes that mooued him to make the sayde recusation in case the sayde Alfonsus woulde not admit the same. Whereat the sayde Alfonsus conceaued greate displeasure and made greeuous com∣plaint thereof to certayne speciall men that fauoured the Kinge of Castiles parte, at whose handes hee obtayned so muche fa∣uour that they went with him to king Henry, to whome they de∣clared this matter as they thought most fit for their owne purpose, alleging vnto his maiestie that Don Anthonios Agent had pro∣pounded this scruple of recusation for no other intent but onelye to hinder and diuerte thelection of the sayde Iudges for this pur∣pose that Don Anthonio after the death of the sayde king Henry might with the more facillitye attayne to the kingdome. This complaint wrought so effectually in the minde of the sayde kinge Henry, that forthwith without hearing the saide Agent in his ans∣were and defence touching the same he commaunded him to be cast into close prison where he was deteined by the space of nine daies vntill the sayde Gouernors and Iudges were ordeyned and established according to the kinges will and minde. Vppon the accomplishment wherof, king Henry caused the sayd Agent to be deliuered out of the prison where he remained, commaūding him neuerthelesse immediatlye to repaire home to his owne house, and not to returne to the Court, without his Maiesties speciall licence. Whereby the same king most manifestlye vttered his extreme ha∣tred against the saide Don Anthonio beeing his owne nephewe, sith before that tyme (as is before alleaged in this treatise) he had giuen his consent to the saide Agent, yea and expresly commaun∣ded him freelye to prosecute the cause of the sayde Don An∣thonio. Within a while after: the kinge commaunded Don Anthonio then remayning at Colimbre, to repayre to his Maiestie to Lisbone to take an oath to obey the Iudgement, that should be giuen, tou∣ching the righte of the Crowne, by the Iudges in that behalfe ap∣poynted. Affirming that the other pretenders woulde doe the like, by themselues their Ambassadors or agentes. Vppon this com∣maundement, Don Anthonio came to the king, and when the said oath was offered vnto him he aunswered he was ready to take the same in case the king of Castile would doe the lyke, but if hee refu∣sed it there was no reason why eyther the sayde Don Anthonio
or any of the other pretenders should bee constrained thereunto. Notwithstanding kinge Henry persisted and in greate rage com∣maunded him to take his oath, in so much that in thend he did so, with this protestation firste made in the presence of certaine of his friendes, that hee tooke not the same oathe with a franke and free will but by compulsion and commaundement of the king. The next day after, Don Antonio had taken this oath, king Hen∣ry caused the Popes letters pattents to be shewed vnto him wher∣by the same Henry was constituted to take notyce and informa∣tion of the cause touching Don Anthonios legittimation, and ther∣uppon commaunded him to appointe his procurer to pleade his cause before his maiesty as iudge. And that yet neuertheles, within foure and twentye houres the sayde Anthonie shoulde departe a∣gaine thirtie miles from the Courte. Whereunto Don Anthonio answered that the King coulde not bee Iudge in the cause for two reasons: thone for that he was partie himselfe, thother for that in his former actions hee had plain elye shewed a great hatred a∣gainst him, alleaging a fresh example thereof, in that the said King Henry had lately before imprisoned his Agent, for prosecuting his cause as he thought conuenient by order of lawe: And that ther∣fore he doubted he coulde not finde any other that would take vp¦pon him to pursue and follow his busines. Vppon this aunswere, the king with all expedicion sendeth woorde to the sayde Agent that hee might freely come to the courte and prosecute the cause of Don Anthonio denying expresly, that himselfe was partie there∣in, and therefore signifying how his will and meaning was to pro∣ceede therein, yea and that he woulde proceede against the sayde Anthonie as contumax for defaulte of answere in case he refused to pleade his cause before him & to informe him therin as should be meete and conuenient. Wherefore King Henry graunted vnto the sayde Agent his lybertye and commaunded him to prosecute Don Anthonios cause. Now when the saide agent was returned to the Court, he pray∣ed one of the kinges confessors, to be a meane to his maiestie, that syth he was by the kinges commaundement vrged to take vppon him the prosecution of Don Anthonies, cause, he might therefore freely employ and endeuoure himselfe in the same as hee shoulde
thinke to bee moste meete and conuenient for the safegarde and preseruation of his maysters righte and tytle. And that his maie∣stie woulde neyther bee displeased nor take in euill parte if he pro∣ceeded in the same sorte that hee did when (as is afore recyted in this treatyse) hee soughte to remooue the sayde Alphonsus of Alburquerque as a person suspected. But if hee myghte not prosecute the cause freelye as appertayned, then hee besought his maiestie to voutchesafe to discharge him of that burden and to graunt him lycence to returne agayne to his owne house where he dwelt when King Henry commaunded him to bee sente for to take the charge and administration of those goodes whiche Don Anthony possessed in Portugall when he remayned in Aphrica. When the Kinge was aduertised hereof, his maiestie gaue in com∣maundement agayne to this Agent to prosecute this cause freely before him in as good and ample sorte as he should thinke moste behouefull. When Don Anthonie sawe himselfe thus pressed to pleade his cause before the king & that his maiestie purposed to giue sentēce against him for default of answere, he commaunded his Agent to nominate the witnesses which were there at hand protesting hee had yet further proofes to produce, whereuppon hauing giuen perfect instructions to his Agent, Don Anthonie departed from the Court within the tyme appointed by the king. Then the king com∣maundeth those three witnesses to bee called before him whiche were produced before thaforesaid Bishop and conseruatour of the priuileges of thorder of the knights of S. Iohn at Malta, Who be∣ing come before the king persisted in their former depositiōs made before the saide conseruator, to wit, that they were presente when marriage was secretly celebrated betweene the saide Lodowike & Jolenta. The king vppon the hearing thereof, vsed great threatning speeches vnto thē, saying he would cause them al three to be han∣ged in case they would not vpō their oaths confes, they were wōne by promises and otherwise, by Don Anthonio or some other in his behalfe, to giue thaforemencioned testimony before the conserua∣tor. And when two of those witnesses affirmed that no bodie had induced or perswaded them thereunto, and that their deposition therein was according to the plaine and simple trueth, the Kinge caused them to be committed to prison, and the thirde witnes for
feare reuoked part of his former deposition saying he was not pre∣sent when the said marriage was priuily had & concluded, but the truth was, hee had hearde it by reporte of others by reason hee was houshold seruant to Iolentaes parents. The King by reason thereof was mooued immediately to sent for all the Actes, depositions of witnesses & instruments exhibited on the behalfe of Don Anthonio before the said Bishop and conseruator to proue his matter, togea∣ther with the sentēce giuen thereupon, al the which being brought before him he caused to bee cast into the fire, & would not admit any other witnesses & profes which the said Agent offered yet fur¦ther to produce in the same cause amongst the which were diuerse religious men of good calling who had bin confessors to the saide Lodowike, besides diuers other witnesses of good credite & estima∣mation. Howbeit the king contemning and reiecting all the same, contrary to all order of law gaue sentence whereby he pronounced the former sentence before giuen by the said bishop and conserua∣tor to be void & of no force or effect. And thereuppon gaue order to the high marshal of the kingdom called Edward de Castle bran∣co (whom since the Kinge of Castile hath made one of the chiefe Treasorers of the kingdom) that he should binde and bring Don Anthonio to the Courte as Captiue & prisoner, and commaunded that the two witnesses which remained prisoners should be banni∣shed, but contrariwise, greatly rewarded him that had altered his deposition graūting vnto him a crossado of the knights of thorder of Saint Iames withall the rent and reuenues thereunto appertay∣ning, but Don Anthonio beeing in due time aduertised of all these things remooued immediately from the Cytie of Colymbre, so that the marshall came thither in vaine & so retourned to Lisbone. Assoone as the said sentence was giuen Don Anthonies Agent, sent a supplycation to the byshoppe of Rome, complayning of the great iniustice done to Don Anthonio by the king, beseeching the said bishop to voutchsafe his ayde to Don Anthonio by remedy of lawe againste that sentence so wickedly giuen, and also to inhi∣bite the Kinge that by force of the same hee shoulde proceede no further nor execute any thing against the sayd Don Anthonie. Vp∣on the exhibiting of this supplication, the Pope with all expedici∣on caused his letters pattents to bee dispatched whereby hee de∣clared the sayde sentence of Kinge Henry to be altogether voyde and of no force, most specially for that he had rashly proceeded to
to sentence diffinitiue, withoute commission or authoritie, foras∣much as the former letters by vertue whereof he proceeded against the sayde Don Anthonio conteyned no other matter sauing onely that hee might heare and examine all the witnesses, and receaue therewithall all instrumentes and suche like thinges whereby Don Anthonio ment to prooue his cause, and that vpon the hearing of the witnesses, and the cause duly pleaded, all the actes instruments and proofes should be sent to the sayde Bishop of Roome that hee mighte Iudge and determine of the same as hee shoulde thinke to bee most conuenient. Expresly commaunding the sayde Kinge Henry to proceede no further nor attempt any thing against Don Anthonies person by vertu of the said sentence giuen against him by the same kinge Henrye, but to sende vnto the Pope all thactes instruments, and proofes produced before king Henry on the bee∣halfe of Don Anthonio, to thintent the cause mighte bee deci∣ded and Iudged by the Pope himselfe or such Iudges as he should appoint. When these letters were by the Popes legate denounced to king Henry: immediately theruppon the same kinge comman∣ded Don Anthonies Agent, within ten dayes, vpon payne of death to departe out of his kingdome, bycause the king vnderstoode the Popes letters were obtained through his industrie and and dili∣gence, by reason whereof the same Agent vppon this commaun∣demente departed presentlye from Lysbone to a monasterie of Ca∣stile adioyning to the borders of the kingdome of Portugall. Nowe when king Henry, by reason of the Popes inhibition, could proceed no further, nor attempt any thing against Don Ant∣hony by vertue of the said sentence: he determined to take anot∣her course for thexecution of his rancour against him. Wherupon, vnder pretence and coloure that Don Anthony had come within six miles of his Court contrary to his commaundement, hee com∣maunded him likewise uppon paine of death to depart oute of his kingdome within fifteene dayes, declaring and decreeing with all that by the same occasion he had forfaited all his right whiche he pretended to the kingdome, commaunding moreouer that none of Don Anthonies seruants vpon paine of death should attend & serue their maister in that extremitie. This most hard and rigorous sentence he presently caused to be signified to Don Anthonio then
being at the saide towne of Colimbre, whereof when the Burgesses of the towne, and chiefelye the schollers of thuniuersitie there a∣mongst whome remained many of the nobilitye, were aduertised, there arose such trouble that they put them selues in armes, cry∣ing euery where in the towne, howe King Henry doting with age and mooued with hatred against Don Anthonie, would deliuer the kingdome of Portugall into thandes of the Kinge of Castile, and for the same occasion, had giuen this rigorouse sentence against him, Wherefore they would not suffer him in this manner to bee expelled out of the kingdome. Offering themselues to bee his valiaunt and faithfull defenders herein, and ready to spende their lyues and goodes for his safetye. Neuerthelesse Don Anthonio not mynding to stirre vppe anye tumulte in the Realme for his cause, gaue greate thankes to the multitude for their readye good will and affection towarde him, desiring them to pacifie and content themselues. For hee was wholy determined to o∣bey the kinges commaundement, in hope that when his Ma∣iestye had better weighed the matter, hee woulde at the last re∣uoke the same sentence, whereuppon hauing by this meane pacified the tumulte and dismissed thassemblye, hee departed towarde the kingdome of Castile, and wente to the same place whither his Agent within a fewe dayes beefore was gone, whiche was a monasterie of Franciscan Fryers distant one myle from the towne of Ʋalentia of Alcantara. When the king of Castile vnderstoode of Don Anthonioes ban∣nishment out of Portugall, hee sent letters forthwith to all Go∣uernours, Maiors, and other highe officers of his townes, Castles Borowghes and Villages bordering towarde Portugall, to shewe vnto him in case he resorted thither all manner of courtesie and honorable entertainmente, but yet neuerthelesse to take heede and haue speciall regarde, that he retourned no more into Portu∣gall. Thereuppon the saide Agent vppon aduertisemente to him thereof giuen, required a specyall friende of his then remayning in Portugall neere the confines of Castile, to spye oute in those quarters some secrete place farre from the common passages, where Don Anthonie might saelye remayne for a certaine space. In the meane while when thagent vnderstoode what daye Don Anthonie woulde come to the monasterie, hee caused a notarie of
the saide towne of Valentia to come thither the very same day, by whome assoone as Don Anthonio was come, hee caused a cer∣tificat or testimoniall to bee made wherein was conteined that he was then come to the sayd monastery, causing the same testimoni∣all, for the better credite of the matter to be subscribed by the chie∣fest religious persons of the sayde monasterye. This instru∣ment thagent sent forthwith to tharchbishop of Lisbon to be she∣wed to the King, and wrote withall to the said Archbishop, how Don Anthonio was alreadye departed from thence for thaccom∣plishmente of a pilgrimage which he had vowed to make when hee was captiue in Aphrica. But contrariwise Don Anthonio dismissing a greate parte of his traine which hee had brought thy∣ther, wente the same daye accompanyed with his Agente and onelye two seruauntes to the secret place prepared for him, where hee contynued the space of about twentye dayes, but his A∣gente in the meane while returned presentlye to the sayde Mo∣nasterye. Within fewe dayes after: letters were brought to the saide A∣gent, wherein certaine of Don Anthonios friendes wrote, that it was not conuenient for Don Anthonio to absent himselfe far from the Court, least after King Henryes death (who was verye sickelye and full of infirmities) the people shoulde bee mooued to choose the Duke of Bergantia for Kinge. For as touching the Kinge of Castile hee was to bee feared in no respecte sauing onelye thinua∣sion of the Realme by force and violence, further for asmuch as King Henry had in all places appointed spyes, and likewise the Duke of Bergantia, and the Kinge of Castiles Ambassadours, who made dilligent searche whether Don Anthonio stayed secretlye within the limites of the Kingdome of Portugall, to thintent, (in case hee did) hee mighte then bee apprehended and put to death by vertue of that latter and most rigorous sentence giuen against him by Kinge Henrye. Don Anthonios Agente vppon thunder∣standing thereof appointed one of his sayde maysters seruauntes called Sebastian Figueira; then remayning in the sayde Monastery, a verye trustye and faithfull man, to hyer a Barke in a towne neere thereunto called Brantos scituate vppon the Ryuer of Ta∣gus, and to furnishe the same with victualles and all other neces∣saries,
that Don Anthonio by the space of certayne dayes mighte bee kepte secrete in the same vppon the sayde Ryuer and so escape thandes of the spyes, so when the saide Barque and all thinges seruing thereto were in a readinesse, Don An∣thonyo, not withoute greate daunger to bee knowne and intrap∣ped in the waye, at last came to the sayde Barque, and goeth aboarde the same, wherein he was carryed vppe and downe and Riuer, about the space of eyghte or tenne dayes without arri∣uing in anye Hauen, but in thende beeing wearie and sickelye, hee came priuilye to Lisbon and secretlye conueyed himselfe in∣to a Priestes howse, where his Agent had informed him hee mighte continue in safetie. Aboute the same time or shortlye after, the Kinge of Castile sent a gentleman of good calling to the sayde Agent, to the monasterye where hee remayned, requiring him to exhorte Don Anthonio, to compounde with him touchinge the controuersie that was lyke to aryse beetweene them aboute the succession of the kingdome, and for the better bringing to passe thereof, the same gentleman required the sayde Agent to goe with him to Madril to the Kinge of Castile. But thagente suspecting all that was propounded on the Kinge of Castiles behalfe, aunswered howe the same course was not in any respecte conueniente for the King of Castile himselfe, aswell for that the people of Port∣ugall vppon thunderstanding of Don Anthonios treatye aboute a∣greement with his maiestye woulde bee quickelye mooued to electe the Duke of Bargantia for their Kinge, as also for that the sayde Agente coulde doe nothing therein without expresse commission from Don Anthonio whome the matter concerned, saying hee woulde with speede repayre vnto him aboute the same cause, and in the meane tyme the sayde gentleman might make his retourne to the King of Castile. Heereuppon this Gentlemanne retourned to the Kinge of Castile, and the Agente in greate daunger came se∣cretlye to Lisbone where hee founde Don Anthonio in the Priestes howse. And hauing signified vnto him, what hadde passed beetweene him and the Gentlemanne afore∣sayde
Don Anthonio aunswered hee was verye glad his Agent had thus escaped the kinge of Castiles handes. And as touching the making of anye accorde with the same Kinge, it was farre from his meaning, but his determination was rather to expecte what shoulde bee resolued and determined by the Iudges there∣fore ordeyned. Within a little while after Don Anthonio was ad∣uertised, howe Kinge Henry was informed of his secrete beeing in Lisbone, and had already serched many howses for him. Vppon thunderstanding whereof, hee repayred secretlie with his Agent, Didaco de Carcamo, Anthony de Sosa, and Anthony Sres, into a Barque whiche his sayde Agent kepte alwaies readye for a neede in the hauen of Lisbone. Wherein after hee had beene by the space of a fewe dayes conueyed agayne vp and downe the riuer, he re∣ceaued newes that Kinge Henry was dead, Whiche happened a∣bout the beginning of Februarie 1580. When Don Anthonio was more certainelye aduertised of these newes, he came forthwith to Lisbone, giuing notyce of his com∣ming to the gouernours and Captayne generall of the same Cytie, who resorted presently to him to congratulate his comming, offe∣ring to make him king. Whereunto he answered very discreetely that king Henry was but newly deceased and howe thestates, and gouernours of the kingdome were assembled to dispose of the suc¦cession of the same, and that there were also other princes and po∣tentates pretending to haue right and action thereto, and therfore hee determined to expecte what shoulde bee Iudged therein by waye of Iustice. The next day Don Anthonio withdrew himselfe into a monaste∣ry neere the Citie of Lisbone, called Belen of thorder of S. Ierome, halfe a mile from the same cytie, where his grandfather king Ema∣nuell and thother two kinges descending of him were buried. And hauing there accomplished his deuotions, he repaired to Santaren a myle from Almerine where the sayde Gouernoures of the king∣dome were then assembled: who being suborned by the King of Castiles ambassadors and very desirous to deliuer the kingdom into his hands, tooke it in very euill part that Don Anthonyo came thither, sith by king Henries commandement he was vpon pain of death bannished the realme. Wherfore they commanded him to departe ten miles from thence vntill Kinge Henries testamente
were opened, thopening whereof, they intended to de, the Ambassadors or deputies of thother Princes ending yte to the kingdome, were come. Hereunto Don Anthonie answe∣red, he supposed the rancour and hatred of King Henry against him, had not taken so deepe roote, as that he did perseuere there∣in to the ende, but rather before his death had shewed some tokē of repentance thereof. And therefore very instantly prayed them to open the sayd testament without further delay, that it might be manifest what king Henry had ordeined, touching the succession of the kingdom: insomuch that the gouernours moued therewith, commanded the kings last will and testament to be opened, in the presence of thambassadors of the king of Castile, the dukes of Sa∣uoy, and Bargantia, and of the Prince of Parma: whereby it was found, how King Henry had ordeined, that the Iudges appointed to determine the matter, touching the succession of the kingdom, should proceede no further nor decree any thing therein, vntil the cause concerning Don Anthonyes legittimation were decided by the Iudges therfore authorised by the Bishop of Rome, which suf∣ficiently proueth all the rigorous dealing of king Henry a∣gainst Don Anthonie, to haue proceeded rather through diffi∣dence or for feare of the king of Castile, then otherwise of any rea∣son grounded vpon right and iustice. Vpon the sight of this testa∣ment, the gouernours declared to thambassadours, of thother pretenders, howe they could not nowe determine any thing tou∣ching the succession of the kingdome, except the cause of Don Anthonies legittimation were first decided. Wherefore they sent worde to Don Anthonio to prosecute the cause touching his legiti∣mation, before the Iudges thereunto authorised, namely the Popes nuncye then being in Portugall and tharchbishop of Lisbone. In the meane space, the king of Castile (hauing since the death of king Sebastian, by little and litle gathered a mightie armie toge∣ther, vnder pretence of attempting some enterprise against Aphri∣ca,) not minding to stay for iudgement in the matter of Don An∣thonies legitimatiō, nor in the cause of the successiō of the crowne, commaunded all his men to ioyne together vnder the Duke of Alua captaine generall ouer the same armie, about the towne of Badaioz in the kingdome of Castile, bordering vpon the limittes of Portugall. Vpon notice whereof, the gouernours and Iudges
authorised to decyde the cause of the succession of the kingdome, sent certaine deputyes to the Kinge of Castile, praying him to voutchsafe to leaue the waye of armes and take the course of iu∣stice sith there were Iudges ordeyned to heare and examine the cause and to Iudge & determine the same according to right and equity. To whose Iudgement thother pretenders were readye to stande: Informinge hym withall that by proceedinge to ob∣tayne the kingdome by force of Armes hee stoode in daunger to loose all his righte and tytle thereto by meanes of a decree made for that cause by Kinge Henry, whereby it was ordeyned and pro∣uided, that euerye of the pretenders goeing aboute by force of Armes to gette the kingdome and refusinge to stande to the iudgement of the Iudges aucthorised to decide the cause, should thereby lose and forfaite all his righte and tytle which hee had or might pretend to the kingdome. Howbeit the King of Castile, (who as is afore mencioned) had long before hand declared, how hee woulde not submitte his right to anye mannes iudgement,) trusting vppon his owne power, and thendeuour of the sayde gouernours and other noble men whom hee had wonne to his side by giftes and fayre promises, without anye regarde of that information, commaunded the Duke of Alua with his army (which hee had in a readinesse) to proceede and in∣uade the kingdome of Portugall by force. Vppon notice whereof, the gouernors foorthwith departed from Almerin to Setuball fif∣teene myles from Santaren fearinge leaste the people of Portugall vppon knowledge of the Duke of Aluaes comming to inuade the realme, woulde first fall vppon them and then proclaime Don An∣thonio King. Within a short space after the departure of the go∣uernors from Almerin, newes came to Santaren howe the Duke of Alua had taken two townes in Portugall bordering vppon Ca∣stile, to wit Eluas and campo maior. Whereat the Citizens of San∣taren being greatly mooued first toke counsell together for the for¦tifying of their towne against the violence of thennimy, and there∣fore went in all solemnity with the clergy and nobillity to suruey and vewe the walles, & giue order for the beginning of the worke. After that they resorted all together in great multitude to Don An∣thonyo then remayning in a monastery not far from thence, where ill with one voice salute & call him king leading him from thence to the principall church, and then to the townhowse, instantly re∣requiring
him to accept the royall name and dignitie and to bind them to him by oath. Howbeit Don Anthonio contrariwise aleged vnto them how the cause touching the succession of the Crowne was in controuersie betweene him and other Princes pretending tytle thereto, wherefore he would not accept the royall name, but rather expect the determination of the Iudges therfore authorised. But if they would vse him as their defender he was ready to spend his life and goodes for them and the common liberty of the coun∣trey. Whereunto the Citizens of Santaren aunswered againe howe their resolution was to make him King, sith the people of Portugall (as is before expressed) might lawfully doe it for defaulte of heyres masles in the right line. Which they were the more desirous to ac∣complish, for that the king of Castile in contempt of all other Iudg∣mēt, would be his own iudge & went about to possesse the kingdō by violence & force of armes. Therupon whē Don Anthonio could no longer resist, he was sworne, King, by the three members of the same place, namely, the Clergie, the nobillitie, and the common people, with erection of the Kinges standarde and all other solem∣nities according to the auncient custome of the countrey, beinge conducted from thence with the saide standarde to a Chappell of great deuotion, called Sancto Milagre and other accustomed pla∣ces and last of al to the royal Pallace. Of all which things publique acts were made & subscribed by the said three members, and ther∣upon registred in the townhowse of the same city. Vpon thaccom∣plishment wherof Don Anthonio protested openly in the presence of the same three members and many others that he accepted the royal name more by force, then of his owne accorde, and that ther∣fore he determined to lay downe the same, and expect the Iudge∣ment of the Iudges, in case the King of Castile would call backe his army which he had alredy sent into Portugal, & submit his cause to the iudgment of the iudges authorised as aforesaide, of which pro∣testation hee caused a publique act to bee made and enrolled the same amongest the recordes of Santaren. Within three daies after, Don Anthonio went to Lisbone where within a mile from the city, he was mette by the ordinary garisons of the realme with their Captaines, and many of the cheefe of the nobilitie, amongst whom were Peter Dor a French gentleman a∣gent for the most excellent Princesse the french queenemother & M. Edward Perin eche of them with a goodly cōpany of strangers.
When he came to the gate of the citie, there stayed for him the re∣ligious men of the three orders of the Fryers minors, who receiued his maiestie with great deuotion and reuerence, and in forme of procession marched before him singing Te Deum laudamus. &c. In this sort the king was first brought to the Cathedrall Church, and in all places where he passed, the people shewed themselues so ioyfull, as the like thereof was neuer seene before at thelection or receiuing of any of the saide former Kings. When he came to the Cathedrall Church, he was there receiued with great honour and reuerence by all the Cleargie, with the celebration of all cere∣monies thereunto by custome appertaining, and from thence was conduced to the Regall Pallace. The next day, the gouernours & magistrates with the most noble and principal men of the citie to∣gether with the three estats of the realme, caused the royall stan∣dard to be caried before them, through all the principall streets of the citie, crying aloud, God saue king Anthonie, & grant him long life. In thend they came all to the said Pallace, where they swore him for King, binding themselues to him by othe: whereof likewise publique actes were made. Don Anthonio making protestation thereupon in the like sort that he had made at Santaren, when hee was there chosen and sworne for king: whereof also a publique act was made and enrolled as abouesaid. Now when it came to the knowledge of the gouernours of the Realme then remaining at Setuball, that Don Anthonio was cho∣sen King, the greater part of them withdrew themselues into Ca∣stile, to wit, Iohn Masquerennas, Frauncis de Sa, and Diego Lopez de Sosa, thother two, namely tharchbishop of Lisbone, and John Tello de Meneses came within three myles of Lisbone, and sent to King Anthonie, beseeching him to voutchsafe to receaue them into his fauour: which they easely obtained at his hands, sith the one of them namely John Tello de Meneses had alwayes shewed himselfe to beare a good affection to the common wealth, and tharchbishop had alwayes shewed himselfe a neutre, where con∣trariwise thother three which were fled into Castile, being wonne and corrupted by the king of Castile with giftes and promises, had alwayes openly mainteined his quarrell: and yet in thende did pennance for their horrible treason. For shortly after they dyed al for very griefe and melancholy that they had sold their countrey,
and could obtaine little or nothing of all that had bene promised vnto them on the behalfe of the king of Castile by his ambassadors. Within certaine dayes after, king Anthonie departed from the citie of Lisbon, to Setuball, where still remained the deputies of the townes, with the high Chauncelour, the principall Counsel∣lours of the realme, and many of the nobilitie: By whome he was likewise created and sworne King with all solemnities thereunto conuenient. Where the third time he made the like protestation that he had made afore in Santaren, sending two of the said depu∣ties from thence to the king of Castile, with commission to declare vnto him, that if he would desist from force of armes, and submit his cause to the determination of the Iudges thereunto authorised, that then he would doe the like, and lay downe the name and dig∣nitie of king. And hauing first giuen order for the defence of a towne called Monte Maior (which was in daunger to be besie∣ged by the duke of Alua) he returned from thence to the citie of Lisbon. In the meane while the king of Castile, howe much the more he was moued by Don Anthonio and others to commit his cause to be determined by way of iustice, so much the more he en∣deuoured to get the kingdome by force, making great offers not∣withstanding to Don Anthonio, in consideration that he shoulde yeeld vp the royal name, and renounce his action to the kingdom. But neuerthelesse Don Anthonio seeking the libertie of his coun∣trey, more then his owne benefit, would neuer yeelde to accept a∣ny condicions, howe great soeuer they were. Now when Don Anthonio was come backe to Lisbon, hee dis∣patched letters immediatly to all cities and townes of the kingdō, and to the townes and castles of Aphrica, and thylandes and firme lande, subiect to the crowne of Portugall, certifying them how he was chosen and sworne king, and therefore required them all from thenceforward, to take & knowledge him for their king, the like also was written to all the said townes, Castles, Islandes and firme land, by the said gouernours and magistrates of the citie of Lisbon. Immediatly vpon the deliuerie of these letters, Don Anthonio was in all places acknowledged and proclaimed king in all solemnitie, and that so greatly to the ioy and contentation of all thinhabitantes as is scant possible to bee beleeued. In the meane space king Don Anthonio ceased not to prouide as farre as
laye in his power, for the defence of the saide Citye of Lisbone, (which is the chiefe Citye of the realme,) for that the Duke of Al∣ua approched from daye to daye with a greate armye whiche hee brought by land & sea, amounting to about sixe and twenty thou∣sand fighting men aswell horsemen as footemen, all olde soldiors and well appointed, the most parte of them comming by lande & the rest by sea in fiftye gallyes and about as manye great shippes. At laste these two armies comming by lande and sea, mette and ioyned together at the towne of Setuball whiche was quickelye brought vnder the power of thennimie by reason it was neyther anye strong towne, nor prouided of gunpowder, whiche in greate plentye together with thartillerie and other munitions of warre had bene before that conueyed into Castile by the sayde gouer∣nours vnder coloure of thexpedition whiche was pretended into Aphrica. The Duke of Alua hauing thus taken this towne of Setuball, caused the moste parte of the footemen to be imbarqued in the gallyes, and the rest in the greate shippes wherewith he wente to the towne of Cascais standing by the Ocean sea, seuen myles from Lisbon, hauing in his company Anthonie de Castro lorde of the same towne, who a little before yeilded him selfe to the sayd Duke. Through this mans labour and industrie, the Duke in fewe daies easilye got this towne into his handes, where Diego de me∣neces a gentleman of a noble house was gouernour, who after the yielding vp of the towne was beheaded by the Duke of Aluaes commaundement, and one of the Captaynes called Henry Perera hanged vppon a gibette notwithstanding that eache of them had yeilded himselfe. After the taking of this towne of Cascais the Duke of Alua re∣moued his campe to the strong castle of Saint Iohn within three myles of Lisbone, wherein Iristan vaz de vegna was captayne, a man verye notable in militarye experience hauing made greate tryall of his valiauncye in theast Indie, and nowe when the sayde Duke by the space of one daye had beaten the Castle with great
ordinaunce, withoute doing it anye harme, the nexte daye the sayde gouernour thoughe hee wanted neyther munition nor anye other necessaries, yet after parle with the Duke of Alua, yeilded the Castle into his handes vppon the Dukes promise that the King of Castile should yeilde vnto him a greate pencion yeerelye during his lyfe, but euen as traitors by gods iuste iudgemente are commonly payde according to their desert, so this man was so farre from hauing promise kept with him, as that contrariwise hee was presentlye by the King of Castiles commaundement ban∣nished into Affrica for the space of ten yeares there to serue a∣gainst the Moores because hee had withstoode the Duke of Alua a whole daye and yeilded not the Castle at the firste somonce but after by composition, whereas hee had beefore promised and written, that immediatelye vpon the Dukes comming he would yeilde vp the Castle. Wherefore hee purchased the name of a Traytor without reaping anye commoditye thereby as it often happeneth to traytors. When this Castle was thus yeilded (whereby the free passage of Gallyes and Shippes to Lisbon was greatelye hindered,) The Duke of Alua remooued his campe to the subburbes of the Cyty of Lisbon where King Anthony then remayned in the subburbes called Alcantara, with his Armye consisting of aboute sixe thou∣sande footemen, and eyghte hundered horsemen of his owne kingdome, the greatest parte thereof beeing smallye experien∣ced in feates of armes. Wherefore althoughe it seemed not sufficiente to resiste so puissaunte an armye as the Duke of Alua brought, yet King Anthonie more regarding the common wealth and lybertye of his Countrey, then the safetie and pre∣seruation of his owne person, determined to hazarde the battayle rather then lightlye and ignominiouslye to yielde himselfe and his people into thandes of the Tyrants, hoping for the lyke good suc∣cesse that in tyme paste Kinge Iohn the first, of that name had who with sixe thousande Portugalles in a verye lyke quarrell ouer∣came Iohn Kinge of Castile the firste also of that name, with his Armye of thirtie and two thousande men, in a battayle foughte beetweene them neere the village of Algiba Rotta
But after certaine skirmishes, wherein two-thousand Castillians were slaine, it fortuned the same day that the said king Don An∣thonio thought to haue ioyned battell with the king of Castiles po∣wer (which was the xxiiii. day of August) earely in the morning, many of them that were with him, seeing thenemie approch, be∣ganne to flye: whereof certaine went to thenemies, specially the horsemen, a great part whereof (as afterwardes manifestly ap∣peared) were corrupted by the king of Castile, besides there was great want of gunpowder in King Anthonies campe: for at that time by the default and treason of the said gouernours (who as is afore declared) had conueied a great quantitie of gunpowder in∣to Castile, there could not be found aboue two thousande pound weight of the saide powder in all the citie of Lisbon. Vpon consideration of all these thinges, King Anthonies most principall & faithfull seruants counselled him to prouide in time for the safetie of his person, for as long as it was safe, there remai∣ned some hope of the recouerie of the libertie of the countrey, which in case he were lost, was vtterly vnrecouerable for euer. Which aduise by his maiestie well weighed and considered, hee determined with many of his noble men and others that were ve∣ry faithfull vnto him, to breake thorow a squadron of horsemen, whereby thenemie supposed to haue cut away from him all possi∣bilitie to escape away. And thereupon without delay causing the Kings royall standard to march before him, they all set spurres to their horses, and so furiously assayle thenemies, that straitghtwaies they droue them from their place, and so with their weapons pro∣cured their passage. Wherein King Anthonie himselfe receiued two great woundes in his head by staying (and that not without effect) to helpe Ferdinando Valeroso out of the handes of thene∣mies. And although the King was greatly troubled and weake∣ned by meanes of those woundes whereout the bloud ranne in great abundance downe his eyes and face: yet more by Gods prouidence then by mans strength or industrie he escaped from the ennimies, and yet not once but diuers times was driuen to breake thorowe the middest of them with foure or fiue horse∣men that continually followed him (of the which number was Fraunces of Portugall Erle of Vimioso) the residue of those that holpe to make the saide passage being turned another waye
carrying the Kings standarde before them. Nowe when the kinge had passed through all the Cyty, of Lisbone, meeting his enemies in diuers places, at last he came to the shoreside of the riuer of Tagus which runneth by thest end of the Cyty where he found Emanuell of Portugall Vncle to the saide Erle of Ʋimioso, already imbarqued to fly to the City of Santaren. Who assoone as he knew the King, caused the Barque to be brought to the shore, that his Maiestye might bee receaued thereinto and so passe awaye with the sayde Erle and others amongst whome was Simon Masquerennas deane of Ebora who came to the king at that very instante when he was ready to enter the Barque. Nowe as the king was sayling vp the riuer in the saide barque towarde Santaren, his Agent (hauing followed the standard) came presently by great chaunce to the same place where the king was taken into the barque, and vnderstanding his Maiestie to be therin seeing the same a farre off, and perceauing how certen of the king of Castiles galleys pursued the same verye neere discharging store of harquebush shot thereat, he galloped after by the riuer side in all possible haste to ouertake the barque and beeing come righte against the same, ceased not to make signes from the shore side that it shoulde come to lande in the place where he was, and as it was comming towarde him, hee caused two of them that were in his companye to alight their horses namely Anthonie de Sosa, and Jerom de Sylua, appointing the best horse to the Kinge, and tho∣ther to therle of Vimioso and Emanuell of Portugall his vncle, and taking Simon Masquerennas behind him vppon his owne horse. In this maner they galloped away all as fast as they could through Oliue trees and other vnfrequented places, till they were in some better safetie. But scarsely was the King with thother three lords aforenamed landed, when the barque was presently assayled and taken by one of the Gallyes so as the reste that remained behind coulde not come to shoare, the greatest parte of thennimies lea∣ping into the water where it was shallowe for the easier taking of the saide barque, where they tooke many prisoners, amongest whome the chiefest were Emmanuell de Castro and Anthonie Bo∣tado and other the Kings seruants. When the duke of Alua was entred into Lisbon, supposing Don Anthonio had hid himselfe there, he made no great search after
him in the fieldes. In so much that while the souldiors were busie in spoyling the subburbes, and search was made in the towne for him, the King with them of his companye came firste to a Village three miles from Lisbon, where after he had stayed a little to dresse his wounds he passed further from thence by vnfrequented waies, and came that night to a house of pleasure a myle from Santaren, belonging to Peter de Menezes one of his treasourers who ouer∣tooke his maiesty in the waye, flying also from thennemye in the company of the Bishop of Guardia. The next day after his maie∣sties comming to this place, he sent his Agent to Santaren to de∣clare to the gouernour and Magistrates of the Towne, how he was determined to come thither, praying them to receaue and defend him in case thennemy pursued him thither. Wherevpon the go∣uernour and Magistrates, vppon notice of the Kinges comming, went with a great companye of the Citizens to meet him halfe a myle without the Towne, and there very humblye receaued him not without great lamentation for that which had happened at Lisbon the day before: and so conducted him to the royall palace of the City, offering all with one accorde to spende their liues and gooddes in his defence if he woulde staye there. Bur for that the Towne was not verye strong nor conuenientlye furnished, with a garrison, munitions of warre and other necessaryes, to abyde a siege, he stayed there onely twoo dayes to heale his woundes, and then tooke his iourney towarde Porto of Portugall a sea towne in∣different strong, about fifty myles from Lisbon, (whither the Duke of Aluaes armye easely coulde not passe) where the Kinge might haue conuenient place and oportunitie to repayre his armie and stay for ayde, which he hoped for out of Fraunce or England. In this iourney the king Don Anthonio was accompanyed, by the Byshop of Guardia, the Erle of Ʋimioso, Emanuell de Sylua then gouernour of the sayde Citie of Santaren, Peter de Meneses, and his maiesties Agent, beeing all of his priuie counsell, with manye other Lordes, Gentlemen, and other persons of great worshippe and calling to the number of about twoo hundred horsemen and a thousande footemen. And in the same by reason of his woundes became so weake and feeble, that he coulde not abyde to sit his horse nor be carryed in his Litter, but was dryuen to be borne vp∣pon mens shoulders. Then comming to the Towne of Mon∣temaior
not farre from Colmbre, his maiestie stayed there six daies to refresh himselfe and cure his woundes, gathering men togea∣ther in the meane space, to aboute the number of eyghte thou∣sande wherewith he martched to the Citye of Auero and was in all places as he passed through the countrey receaued and ac∣knowledged as Kinge, notwithstanding that the Kinge of Castile had alreadye subdued Lisbon the chiefe Cytye of the king∣dome. When the sayde Kinge Don Anthonio drewe neere to this Cytye of Auero hee sommoned thinhabitantes to take his parte and topen the gates of their Cytie vnto him accor∣ding to their oathe. Vppon refusall whereof on theire be∣halfe madehee gaue in charge to therle of Ʋimioso (whome af∣ter that hee made Counstable of Portugall) to doe his ende∣uour to take it by force, giuing also the spoyle of the Cytye to the souldiours. And thoughe it were well furnished with munitions of warre and other necessaries, yet the grea∣ter parte of the Citizens refufed to make resistaunce againste Kynge Anthonies men, insomuche that the Towne was taken easily by scaling the walles and otherwise, and so brought vnder his obedience and sacked. But yet vppon the taking of the same, his maiestie gaue suche order that the soldiours excee∣ded not in their insolencie, so that all thinges were soone in quietnesse, his maiestie lodging there first in the monasterye of rhe dominican freres by the space of three dayes, wente from-thence to a verye fayre large house pleasauntlye scituated vp∣pon the riuer and beelonging to Francisco de Tauares a gentleman who a little before was gone to the king of Castile to sue for pardon bycause he had saluted and acknowledged king Anthonie for king. When Kinge Anthony had caused certaine traytours in this Cyty to be executed by order of law, he continued his iourney towarde the said towne of porto of Portugall, lykewise sommoning the citizens of the same to acknowledge him for their king, and to open the gates of their cyty vnto him. In this towne was then gouernor Pan∣taleon de Sà brother of Frauncis de Sà one of the three gouernours, which presentlye after Don Anthonie was chosen King, fled to the king of Castile. This gouernour being likewise wonne to the King of Castiles side, was a meane with other of his complices that entrance into this towne was denyed to King Anthony, his
maiestie conceauing greate displeasure thereat assembled men from all partes thereaboutes to encrease his armie & made al pos∣sible preparation to passe ouer the Ryuer and take the towne by force. When all thinges necessary for the siege were in a readi∣nes, as the king was marching with all his hoste against the town hauing in his campe about twelue thousand men, and yet the most of them vnarmed, the Citizens began presentlye to ryse in such a mutinie against Pantaleon the gouernour and his complyces who pretended to resist Don Anthonio and his men, that the sayde go∣gouernor and his pertakers had much a doe to saue themselues by flight from the furye of the people, whereby it came to passe that al the religious and clergy men of the towne camme foorth to meete the King, beseeching his maiestie to pardon the Cytizens in that they had not yeilded the towne into his hands vpon the first som∣monce according to their alleagence and the dutye of their oath. Whereupon the King in thend, was content of his naturall clemē∣cie to pardon their offence vpon condition they should compound with the souldiours to whome he had graunted the sacking of the towne. By reason whereof the Citizens promised for the safe∣garde of the same from sacking, to giue the souldioures a hundred thousande Duckets. And so the Kinge at his entraunce into the towne was honorablye receaued by the Citizens, whereupon his maiestie presently sent the Bishop of Guardia from thence with al speede to the next prouince called Entre dueroe Minho to encou∣rage thinhabitans and gather men & victuals for thaugmenting and prouision of his campe, and so stayed certaine daies in the same towne expecting aide and gunpowder from Fraunce. Nowe the Duke of Alua (vnderstanding howe Kinge An∣thony was come to Porto and there encresed his army) feared least his Maiesty should receaue aide from Fraunce, and therefore in all hast sente Sancho de Auila (sometime gouernour of the Castle of Antwerp) with two thousand horsemen and eyght thousand foote men, Artillerie and all other munitions and necessarye prouision of warre to besiege the saide towne of Porto, who ariued there a∣bout thirtie daies after King Don Anthonio came thither. Nowe when the said King Don Anthonio was informed of thenimies com¦ming he gaue order to all townes where they should passe, to giue them free passage without resistaunce for that his maiestie coulde
not defende them by reason he wanted horsemen and gunpow∣der, and that the greatest part of his souldiors which serued him in the getting of Porto, were retyred hoame to their owne houses. When Sancho Dauila was come before the Towne of Porto, hee stayed with his armie and planted his artillery vppon the farther side of the riuer of Dureto ouer against Porto, from whence he be∣gan to batter the walles of the towne with his artillery, but foras∣much as he got little this way by reason of the great space which was betweene him and the towne, he determined to passe ouer the riuer to that side, which lyeth next Porto. And in the ende ac∣complished his determination with certaine barques and boates, which for the same purpose he had procured from all partes. For King Don Anthonies men were not able to hinder the said passage, by reason they were for the moste part vnarmed and vnexperi∣enced. King Anthonie seeing his affaires in these hard termes determi∣ned to make his retrayte to the towne of Ʋiane, a port also of the sea, intending there to embarque himselfe for Fraunce, with many noble men and others following him, to about the number of fiue hundred, with whom he came to Ʋiane verye late in the night, weary and euill at ease, & not yet throughly healed of his wounds. In this place, he prepared fiue ships the next daye, and furnished them with victualles and all other necessaries for the sayde em∣barquement. Now when all thinges were ready therevnto, and the king and his companye almost all embarqued, there chaunced a great tempest with a contrary winde out of the sea, whereby the ships were all stayed and could not depart out of the hauen. In the meane space Sancho Dauila sending his horsemen before, came after himselfe with the reste of his armye to besiege the towne. Wherefore King Anthonie fearing least the ships would from the the land at last be vexed and suncke with the artillery of the enue∣mie, and seeing he coulde not sayle out of the hauen by reason of contrary wind, determined (while he had time) to saue him selfe from so apparant a daunger, before thennemie had hemmed him in on all sides. And therefore in all hast forsaking the shippes, with great griefe, he tooke his leaue of the principall noble men, and o∣thers that were about him, exhorting them, euery man to prouide for their safety by the best meanes they could: amongst whom the
chiefe were, the sayde Erle of Ʋimioso, the Bishop of Guardia, E∣manuell de Sylua, Peter Fernando, and Diego de Meneses, with manye other of the auncient nobilitie, prayinge them to bee all of good courage, hopinge at laste fortune woulde so chaunge that hee mighte gyue them honourable recompence for their good seruices doone vnto him and which he hoped to receaue at their handes in time to come. Thus King Anthonie with all possible speede passed awaye on foot vp the riuer side, hauing in his companye onelye his sayde Agent, and one of his seruauntes called Thomas Cachero, with twoo honeste Burghesses of the sayde towne of Viane who knewe the coastes of the countreye, sending his treasurer before him with aboute fourtie men attending the same. But hauinge in this maner passed but a little waye, they spied vppon an hill not farre off, a troupe of the ennemies horsemen bee∣ing fiftie in number or aboue, who seemed to come downe into the plaine fielde, and directlye to take their course to∣ward the king. Wherefore for the auoyding of so present a daunger, by his Agentes counsell, hee caused the company attending his trea∣soure to depart from him and to martche and passe with the same ouer the playne fielde, whilest him selfe with his A∣gent, Thomas Cachero and the sayde twoo Burghesses of Ʋi∣ane helde on their waye by the riuer side. This deuise tooke good successe, for the ennemy directed his course straight to∣warde the greater companye, making none accoumpt of the smaller number which passed by the riuer side. Insomuch that while the ennemye spente his time to pursue and take the treasure (amounting to little lesse then a million of golde) The king founde meane (when he was got a good waye of) to saue him selfe (with those foure that were in his companye) by wa∣ding ouer the sayde riuer where it was shallow, but yet the wa∣ter came vp to their brestes as they passed thorough. When they were thus come to the other side of the riuer bee∣ing that side where the towne of Ʋiane is scituate, they spied a
farre off, other troupes of horsemen and foote men who (by all likelyhood) sought also for the King, for which cause his maiestye and his companye thought good to goe ouer the riuer agayne to the same side from whence he came. Vpon the accomplishment whereof they hidde them selues amongest bushes and young trees by the water side, where they aboade all the same daye which was the twelfth of October fastinge and wette, for it scant ceased from rayning all that daye. At night they went a foote from thence by pathes and otherwyse as they coulde, to a Village about two myles from Viane, beeing there receaued into a poore wydowes house where hee re∣sted all the same nighte and the daye followinge. The nexte night hee departed from thence to other places tho∣rough vnfrequented wayes and desartes, taking with him to the companye hee had before, a fift man whose name was Iasper de Gran, whome hee founde vppon the shore at his firste passage ouer the riuer. This Jasper was one of his olde and moste faythfull seruauntes, who was the greatest meane that the Kinge had, so happely escaped out of the Moores handes when hee was captiue in Aphrica. Now for that Sancho Dauila coulde not finde the Kinge in the shippes, neither in the Towne of Viane nor elsewhere there aboutes, hee gaue order to all his horse men and foote men to disperse them selues in diuerse troupes, and to passe into all places and Villages of the prouince adioyning, called in the Portugall tongue, Entre Dueroe Minho, to seeke for King Anthonie, promising great and ample rewarde to whosoeuer shoulde bringe him prysoner: and wrote to the Duke of Alua remayning still at Lisbone to appoynt sufficient watch and warde in euery of the sea portes to watch diligently that King Anthonie embarqued not him selfe to depart out of the kingdome. Also the Duke of Alua him selfe and Sancho Dauila withall, wrote to the like effect, to all townes and places of
the Kingdome of Castile bordering vpon Portugall. In somuch▪ that great and curious search was made in euerye place for Kinge Anthonie. Besides, manye Spaniardes and Portugals were hy∣red and appointed to that busines, by the Duke of Alua and other of the king of Castiles ministers. But the king of Castile not so con∣tent proclaymed in all places that whosoeuer coulde bring king Anthonie either dead or aliue, shoulde haue fiue and twenty thou∣sande Duckates of golde for his rewarde. Whereof open pro∣clamations were set vppon the principall Church dores, and also vppon the gates of the Citie of Lisbon and other places of Portugal and Castile, and besides all this, the King of Castile grieuouslye pu∣nished whomsoeuer he knew or suspected to beare good will to King Anthonie, some by death, some by perpetuall exile, not spa∣ring many men and women though they had let slip but a worde onely in fauour of King Anthonie. Yet notwithstanding the king of Castile got nothing by al these more then tyrannicall deuises and meanes. For King Anthonie beeing (more, by Gods prouidence and sufferance then by mans industry) preserued about the ende of seuen monethes wherein he had wandred about by rockes desartes and other solitarye places, at laste founde meanes to embarque him selfe for Fraunce the tenth of May 1581, neare the afore sayde town of Setubal, in a ship of Holland of the towne of Anckbuysen wherof wasmaister Corneli∣us de Egmont, and arryuod at the Port of Callais in Fraunce the ninthe of Iune following, hauing in the preparation of his embar∣quemente, verye greate helpe and furtheraunce at thandes of a diligent and faithfull wydowe whose name was Beatrice Gonsalues dwelling neere vnto Setuball, whose picture, after the matter was discouered and shee fledde awaye, was hanged by the kinge of Castiles appointment. There accompanyed Kinge Anthonie in his passage to Fraunce Emanuell de Silua (whome his maiesties af∣terwardes made Erle of Torres Vedras and gouernour of Thsles of Assories,) the Kinges Agent, (whose name is purposelye concea∣led in his booke for a certayne consideration) Thomas Cachero, Diego Roys, Constantine de Britto, and Diego de Quaresma the kings ministers, Dominicke Gonsalues brother to the sayde Bea∣trice, and Ferdinand Martines a man of the countrey whose helpe
and seruice the King had vsed to prouide his victualles, and other necessaries, during the tyme that he secretly remained amongest the Rockes and desartes. But if all perils and discommodities whiche King Anthony suf∣fered while hee thus wandered in desartes and solitarye places to escape thandes of his enimie, should here bee expressed and sette downe, scarse woulde a large volume suffice thereunto. Yet this is to be noted, how all this happened to his maiestie when he was aboue thage of fortye yeres, and not in perfite health, in the mid∣dest of winter, and coldest countrey of all Portugall, where hee was constrayned to spende many nightes in the playne fieldes and that very often in snowe and rayne all the night long, without ey∣ther fire or other remedy against the colde, being for the most part all the whole daye without meate or drinke, for his foode (such as it was) for the most part was brought vnto him in the nighte by the sayde countriman Ferdinando Martines. (Yea his maiestye thoughte himselfe happye when hee coulde put his heade vnder some roofe, and reste hymselfe vppon a padde of strawe, whiche kinde of lodging the countreymen vse in those partes of Portugall without eyther beddes or sheetes (specially where there bee no throughe faires) so that his maiestye was driuen commonly to lye in his apparell wrapped onelye in a couerlet whiche the sayd Tho¦mas Cachero alwaies carried with him for that purpose. Manye tymes also his maiestie was almoste apprehended by his enimies who lefte no place vnsifted for him, insomuche that the spaniardes often came to the verye same place where the King had beene, within an howre or thereabouts after his maiesties departure from the same, where they miserably afflicted the poore husband∣men that had harbored his highnes, executing some by the corde, and burning their houses. But yet for all that, other husbande∣men refused not to harbour his maiestie in their houses when oc∣casion required, notwithstanding they knew his person very well, for they were so well affectioned toward him, that none of them euer bewrayed him to the Castilians, and yet were they not igno∣raunt of the great quantitie of money which the king of Castile by open proclamations had promised to whosoeuer coulde deliuer him dead or aliue. In all these so great and incomparable daun∣gers
the sayde king Don Anthonio hath alwayes shewed so chere∣full and constante a mynde as though no misfortune at all had chaunced vnto him, alwaies encouraging and comforting those that were in his company, setting alwaies before his owne eyes a stedfast hope not onely to passe and ouercome all these dangers & toyles but also in thend t'attaine to the recouery of his kingdome. Heere also is to bee noted, that whilest Kinge Anthonie was tossed in all these daungers and misfortunes he omitted not anye thing that might further his escaping from the tyrants handes. For foure tymes he attempted to take shipping for Fraunce, before he coulde bring it to passe, hauing euery tyme made conuenient pre∣paration, defrayed the charges of his shipping, and made all o∣ther necessarye prouision for his voyage, first at the towne and porte of Auero, the seconde tyme at Lisbon, the thirde tyme at Villa Noua of Milfontes, the fourth tyme at the Hauen of Sizim∣bre nere Setuball, but the number of spyes and traytors aswell Por∣tugalles as spanyardes was so great, and their awayting and vigi∣lancie so extreme, that these the Kinges attemptes were frustrated (although moste secretlye handled,) yea his maiestie was not farre from his apprehension at what tyme he first prepared for his em∣barquing at Lisbon, for hee was there almost entrapped as more particularly hereafter shall be declared. Besides his maiesty in the moneth of December sent secretlye into Fraunce Jerom de Silua a gentleman of a noble and auncient house to signifie vnto the most Christian french King and the moste excellent princesse the Queene-mother that he was yet liuing and in good healthe, for that he vnderstoode, the King of Castile had written to many Princes of christiandome, howe he was dead. Nowe when the king of Castile had established his affaires in Portugall according to his pleasure, he sent incontinentlye lettres to all the townes of Aphrica, of the East Indyes, the country of Bra∣sile and other countreyes and Islandes depending of the Crowne of Portugall, requiring them from thencefoorth to acknowledge him for their soueraigne Lorde and Prince, whiche hee easily obteyned at their handes, by reason there ranne a rumour that Kinge Anthonie was deade, and for that they sawe no lykely∣hoode how he could euer recouer his kingdom, and besides these countreis and townes cannot want the traffique of Portugall from
whence they haue their prouision of victualls, munitions of warre and other necessaries. wherefore in thend they submitted them∣selues into the king of Castiles handes more by necessitie, then for any good will. The King of Castile also wrote to the lyke effect to thisles of Assores where at that tyme remayned gouernour Cipry∣an Figueredo de Vascogoncelos established there by king Sebastian before his going into Aphrica, in respect of his great wisedom and experience linked with a singular and commendable constancie and fortitude of mynde and courage. After good and mature deli∣beration had thereupon the same gouernour togeather with thin∣habitants of the Islandes answered howe they were bounde by oath to kinge Anthony, and in regarde thereof could not acknow∣ledge the king of Castile for their soueraigne lord nor do homage vnto him before they were certainly aduertised and sure that king Anthonie was dead, and therefore resolued to defende themselues againste all force, (wherewith the king of Castile threatned them) vntill they should receaue, certen newes of king Anthonyes death, or expresse commaundement from him to yeilde them selues into the sayde king of Castiles subiection and obedience. With this answere the king of Castile was highly offended, and therefore within shorte space after prepared an armye by sea a∣mounting to aboute three thousand men, whereof Peter Baldez was Captaine, who arriued with his nauie well appointed in the beginning of Iune 1581 neere thisle of Tercera the strongest of of all thislandes of Assores, and albeit the same Islande remained vnfurnished not onely of souldiours but also of armour, gunpow∣der, and other necessaries fit for the warres, yet by Ciprian Figue∣redo his vertue and industrie (whome the inhabitantes of thisland had chosen for their Captayne) thennimie was repulsed with the losse of aboute seuen hundred of his spanyards all olde souldiours and amongest them many of the chiefe gentlemen that first sette foote on land who were all presently slayne, which spectacle caste such a feare into the rest of tharmy remaining in the shippes, that none of them durst come a lande, insomuche that Baldez with this foyle was driuen to returne into Portugall to his greate shame. Aboute the same tyme, when Kinge Don Anthonio was (as is aforemencioned) come to Calais, hee stayed not long there, but passed with all expedition into England, from whence he present∣lye dispatched a Carauell, towarde the saide Islande of Tercera
with letters to Ciprian de Figueredo aduertising him of the successe of his voyage, and howe he was arriued in health in the realme of England. Vppon the receipte of these letters, Ciprian himselfe and all thinhabitants of thislande conceaued suche ioy as is scant possible to be beleued. For manye of them thought his maiestie had bene eyther dead or fallen into thandes of his enemy notwith∣standing the Constable, and Anthonye de Britto Pimentill had per∣swaded certaine of thislanders, (who repaired into Fraunce to in∣quire newes of him) howe his highnesse was come thither and for a certaine respectt kept himselfe secrete in a Castle, whereat thi∣slanders greatly reioyced, whome Cipryan confirmed in this good opinion, although he supposed the same to be cunningly inuented (as in truth it was) by the Constable and Anthonie de Britto to en∣courage the people and keepe them in good deuotion toward his maiestie, who came not into Fraunce till a good while after. But it fell so out that this was no small furtherance to thobteyning of the victorie whereof mention is before made. Ciprian and the rest of thinhabitantes of thisland sending backe the carauell to his highnesse certified him of the victorie obteyned, which was got∣ten but two dayes before the comming of the Carauell, offering their ready seruice to spend their liues and goodes for the mainte∣nance of his maiesties authoritye, and preseruation of thislance as they had alreadye done. At the retourne of this Carauell into Englande, Kinge Anthonie was there still preparing an Armie wherewith hee purposed to meete the fleete which was to come that yere to Spaine and Portugall from thest and west Indies. But But for asmuch as it was after knowne to be then to late to execute thenterprise, it remained in suspence, without anye thinge effected that yere. Wherfore King Anthonie departed out of England and in the moneth of October following, arriued at the hauen of Diepe and passed from thence to Parris, where he was honorably recea∣ued aswell by the most Christian king, as by the Queenemother. The King of Castile (considering howe greatelye it stoode him vppon to subdue the saide Ilandes of Assores, and specially Tarcera as the most principalle and chiefest amongst them that hee might therby better assure his nauigation from the East & West Indies,) determined to prepare a greate and puissant armye by Sea for the
yeare following 1582. Vppon notice whereof King Anthonie gaue aduertisement of the same presently to the queene-mother She for the repression of the Kinge of Castiles purpose gaue order for the preparation of another armye by sea in Fraunce for Kinge Anthony, appoynting her cosen the lorde Phillip Trossi generall of the same, and the countie of Brissake for his lieuetennant. This armye consisted of seuen and fiftye shippes of warre aswell great as small and foure or fiue thousande souldiours, with aboute sixe hundred frenche gentlemen of name and armes, and certen Por∣tugalles. King Don Anthonio determined to goe personally in the same armye, to see the sayde Islandes of Assores and thanke his good and faithfull subiectes thinhabitantes of the same, for theire duties and loyaltye thitherto shewed vnto him, and withall most principall to maintayne militarye discipline amongest his soldi∣ours, meaning also by the waye to take thisle of saint Michaell, one of the greatest of thislandes of Assores and then possessed by the Kinge of Castile. Whereuppon aboute the ende of Iune 1582 his maiestie sayled from Belisle with his sayde armye, and arriued before sainct Michaels Isle the three and twentie of Iuly following, whiche presentlye yeilded to his highnesse by reason thinhabitantes were well affectioned towarde him sauing certen traytors, who were constrayned with the spaniardes that lay there in garrison to about the nūber of eyght hūdred to flyinto a strong Castle there. In whiche Island Kinge Anthony landed with the principall heades of his army & many of his Captaynes and soldi∣ours, where his maiestie was well and humbly receaued by his sub¦iectes according to their duties. But the thyrde day after they spyed approching towarde the sayde Islande the King of Castiles nauy vnder the conduction of the Marquis of sainct Crosse brin∣ging therein aboute nine or ten thousande fightinge men. By occasion whereof it was thoughte necessarye for all them whiche were gone a lande, to repayre backe to theire shippes and to pre∣pare themselues for the battayle, howbeit the lorde Strossi, the Cō∣stable, and others of aucthoritye, counselled, and intreated kinge Don Anthonye to absent himselfe from the battayle, and to rytire into thislande of Tercera and not to hazarde his person in a doubt full battayle, sith thereof depended the libertye, not onely of the people of Portugall, but also of all the reste of Christiandome. The
King was against their aduise a good while, but in the ende (ouer come with their reasons) he resolued to followe their counsell, and in a little Carauell together with his agent, Edward de Castro, and certen others was conueyed into the saide Isle of Tercera, leauing in tharmye the Constable with aboute two hundred Portu∣galles aswell gentlemen as others who came to his Maiestie into Fraunce. The next daye being the sixe and twentith of Iulye, the Lorde Strossi hauing sette his armie in order, determined himselfe first of all to aborde thenimie, and therefore comming oute of a greate and mightie ship of seuen hundred tonnes which serued for thad∣mirall of his armye, he shipped himselfe with the Constable and many gentlemen aswell Frenchemen as Portugalles in an other shippe of smaller burthen whiche sayled well, wherewith hauing ouercome & sonke certen of thennimies shippes, hee set so fierce∣lye vppon the Marquis his viceadmirall conducted by Don Lopus de Figueroa, that he slewe aboute sixe hundred spanyardes therin, and had her rendred vnto him, howbeit at the very same instant he was so furiously assailed by the marquis of saint Crosse himselfe (cō∣ming in a very great & strōg ship called the galeon saint Martin,) that in the end he was vanquished for want of ayde; For hee was not ayded by anye other sauing onelye the sayde Erle of Brissack, who fighting valiantlye with two shippes greatelye endomaged thennimie, but yet at laste seeing himselfe sore wounded and that he laboured in vaine being not seconded by others as was con¦venient, he made his retrait in tyme retourning into Fraunce with the losse of manye of his men and his shippes in euill plight. Du∣ringe this greate battaile the Lorde of Sansolenne viceadmyrall to the Lorde Strossi, and the lorde of Fumei captaine of fiue shippes, for wante of winde, (as they pretended) neuer inuaded thenne∣mies. These two lordes, when they sawe the lord Strossi ouercome, retyred with twentie shippes to king Anthony into thisle of Terce∣ra. His Maiestie vppon notice of thill successe of the battayle, cō∣ceaued greate sorrowe, (as he had good cause) and that moste specially for the deathes of the lordes Strossi & the Constable both lordes of greate valor, and tooke it in verye euill parte, that Sanso∣lenne and Fumei had so miserablye forsaken them in the battayle.
These lordes of Sansolenne and Fumei shortly after by his maiesties lycence retyred into Fraunce, leauing in thislande about two thou∣sand and fiue hundred frenche souldioures for the defence of the Kings person in case thennemye woulde assalte thisle. But the Marquis of sainte Crosse hauing loste in the battayle aboute two thousande of his best soldiours durst attempte no further againste thislande of Tercera but onelye stayed for the fleete whiche came out of the Easte and Weste Indyes, and when they were ioyned with him hee tooke them vnder his conduction and so retourned presently towarde Spayne with all his atmye. Vppon the aduertisement whereof King Don Anthonio with all expedition gathering together all the shippes aswell frenche as others whiche were at the sayde Islande of Tercera and other places there aboutes to the number of seuen and thurtye shippes, embarqued himselfe with two thousande frenche souldioures and as manye Portugalls, to thintent to passe therewith to thislande of Madera, belonging to the Crowne of Portugall, but then holden by the King of Castile. But when the monethe of October was come (at what tyme the sea beginneth greatelye to swell in those parties) there arose so mighty and furious a tempest in the middest of their iourney with a contrary wind that it was vnpossible for thē to passe any further, and for their shippes to keepe company toge∣ther, but being dispersed diuerse waies, arryued with great trauaile and daunger, part in Fraunce, and parte with the Kinge in thisle of Tercera. After the Kinge had soiourned there aboute twen∣tye dayes, and sette suche order in thislande as was conuenyente, hee departed from thence with fiue shippes towarde Fraunce and arriued there with the helpe of a fauourable wynde within twelue dayes, taking in his companye Ciprian de Figuereds (who till then had gouerned the sayde Islandes of Assores), and appointing in his place Emanuell de Silua Earle of Torres Ʋedras (of whome more shall be spoken hereafter;) His maiestie beeing arriued in Fraunce, was there agayne verie honorablye receaued aswell by the moste Christian kinge, as by the Queene-mother who then offred to giue him any assistance to preuaile against his enne∣mye and as time and occasion should serue to restore him to his kingdome, naminge vnto him shortelye after, the Duke of
Ioyence for generall of tharmies. Whiche for that cause shoulde thereafter be prepared. But in the meane tyme the kinge of Castile (seeking all possi∣ble meanes for the cause afore alleaged, to bring the sayde Island of Tercera and the rest of thislandes of Assores vnder his subiecti∣on,) appointed therefore, to be prepared for the yere following a∣nother myghtie and greate armye of manye gallyons, galeies, & other vessels both greate and small to the number of a hundred and twentye. Of whiche nauye the Marques of sainct Crosse was appoynted generall agayne. In the meane space King Don Anthony vnderstanding thereof, omitted nothing that might tend to the defence and preseruation of thisle. For by the fauour & assistance of the queenemother, hee prepared a Nauye and leuied two thousande frenche soldiours to bee for that cause employed vnder the conduction of Mounsir de Chartres a noble gentle∣man and of greate valour, of whome the queenemother had made speciall choyse (amongest manye) for that seruice. This Moun∣syr de Chartres with the sayde nauie and number of soldiours a∣boute the beginning of spring tyme, departed towarde the sayde Isle of Tercera to furnishe it with a stronge garrison and defende it againste thinuasion of the King of Castile, & arriued there with a fauourable wynde without anye misfortune. Nowe when the Kinge of Castiles armie was ready, amounting to a hundred and twentie sayles, and ten or twelue thousande fighting menne, the Marques of sainct Crosse departed with the same from Lisbone about thende of Iune. 1583. and arriued be∣fore the sayde Isle of Tercera, the foure and twenty of Iuly follow∣ing, and hauing spent two or three daies in viewing where to land his men beste, vppon the thirde daye after by thelpe and bene∣fite of his Galleyes which (contrary to many mens opinions) he brought thither, he landed his men of war in a certaine place, least suspected by the captaines & inhabitants of thisland, where remai∣ned but a verie small garrsion. By reason whereof it came to passe that before the principall body of the garrisō which was two miles of, could come thither, then'nimy had leasure to land almost tenne thousande fighting men, and had halfe intrenched them. Firste therefore Mounsyr de Chartres came thyther in all expedi∣tion with his regimente of Frenchemen and hotlye skirmished
with the enemies, wherein manye were slayne on eyther side, but specially of the Spanyardes. At laste also came therle of Torres Ʋedras gouernoure of the Isle with a good number of Portugall souldioures and men of the Islande well armed and sufficientlye trayned. And perceauing in what case thinges stood, treated with Mounsyr de Chartres touching the ioyning of present battayle with the ennemy. Herevpon they all prepared themselues to fight, & the squadrons being set in order are apoynted to march against the ennemy. But for that the Marquise had twice as many men in his army as were in King Anthonies, and also it seemed very late in the day to gyue this battayle, the sayde Erle propounded to Mounsyr de Chartres to differre it tyll the next daye, and that in the meane space he would cause victuals, gunpouder, munition, and other ne∣cessaries to be brought into a conuenient place amongst the rockes of the Isle, to the intent to make their retraite thither to staye for ayde out of Fraunce or the other Islandes, if they fortuned to loose the victory: Alleadging withall that the ennemyes army could not stay long about the sayd Island for want of a hauen, and speciallye how the galleis could not abyde the Ocean sea when it began to swell, which happened commonlye about the moneth of August then beeing at hand: further how the ennemye with all his armye could not long remayne there if the commoditye of victuals were taken from him. When Mounsyr de Chartres had conferred with his captaines about these matters, some were of aduise to giue pre∣sent battayle, others and the greater part resolued with the Erle to differre it till the next day. The Erle beeing aduertised of this resolution, called before him certayne of the chiefe Portugall captaynes, declaring vnto them what had passed in this matter, exhorting them to keepe diligent watch that night, that none of their souldiours departed from the campe. But when the Portugals (who before were willing to ioyne battayle) vnderstood the differring of the same tyll the next day, their heartes began to faint, insomuch that by little and little they forsooke the campe and wente home to their houses. Vpon the vnderstanding whereof, the Erle distrusting the victory, con∣ueyed him selfe about midnight, with ten or twelue of his com∣pany out of the campe, to the intent to saue him selfe by flight (as appeared afterwardes by certaine barques which he had prepared
for that purpose,) yet faining to make present returne. But on the morow after thinking with his companie to be embarked, he was disappointed by certaine women dwelling aboute the place, where the barques laie, who brake them in peeces to stop his pas∣sage: Then seeing him selfe in this aduersitie and deceiued of his expectation, he went in dispaire, and hid himselfe in the best sort he could among the rockes. Nowe when it was light day, Mounsir de Chartres hearing no newes of therle, and perceiuing howe in a manner all the Portu∣galles were gone from the camp, thought no other but that therle had withdrawne himselfe with his Portugalls to the rocks, accor∣ding to his speeche had the daie before: Whereupon presentlie the saide Mounsyr de Chartres setting al his men in order of bat∣tell, marched straight to that place which therle had before nomi∣nated vnto him, But forasmuche as he founde there neither the saide earle, nor victuals and other necessaryes which hee had pro∣mised to conuaie thither, Therefore hee assembled all his Cap∣taines and officers with the cheefe of the Portugalles which yet stayed in the campe, to consult what was best to be done. There∣upon they al concluded how it was best to agree with the enimy, Insomuche that vpon conference had betweene him and them, at last a conclusion was made, whereby it was lawfull for all the souldiers, aswell frenchmen, as Portugalls to depart with bag and baggage out of the Island, whithersoeuer they would, leauing be∣hind them their armor, Ensignes, and Drummes. Also the enimie promised to furnish them with ships & victualles for their pas∣sage. Howbeit the saide earle of Torres Vedras and certaine na∣turall borne subiectes of thisle were excepted out of this treatie & agreement, whose pardon thennimie would in no wise yeelde to graunt. After this composition thus made, all thisle was miserably sacked by the space of 3 dais, many of thinhabitants hanged & E∣manuel Serradas beheaded, (who a little before, by king Anthonies commandement had taken & sacked thisle of Caboverde) neither could therle of Torres vedras escape his fortune, for the 3. day after thagreement made, he was found among the rocks, by meanes of a maid-slaue bewraying him, & therupon was also beheaded. And although the losse of this Islande of Tercera with thothers depending therof, was vnto the said king Don Anthonie a great & lamentable misfortune, yet for all that, neuer abating his courage,
he hath alwaies reposed his confidence in God, and thuprightnes of his iust cause, hoping by the grace of almighty God, & good as∣sistance of Christian princes, at last to recouer his kingdom which the king of Castile hath tirannicallie taken from him, as wee are taught by many histories, how the raign of tyrāts lasteth not lōg. And this is the verie reason that hitherto the saide King Don An∣thonie hath refused all manner of cōposition with the said king of Castile, notwithstanding he hath had very large offers at his hands of some of the which and specially of the cheefest, it shall not bee from the purpose here to make rehersall. It is therfore conuenient to be knowne, how the king of Castile by Christopher de mora, his ambassador in Portugall, offered vnto Don Anthonie yeerely (be∣fore he was created king), 500 thousand duckats and the gouer∣norship of Portugall during his life, with the free disposition of all offices, benefices and dignities aswell ecclesiasticall as temporall falling void in that time within al the kingdō of Portugal, vpon cō¦ditiō that he shold renoūce his actiō to the kingdō of Portugal. Af∣terwards whē Don Anthony was ouercōe & wādred in great dāger in deserts & vnfrequēted places: the king of Castile gaue in charge to Ieronimo de mendoza, a gētlemā & cōmander of thorder of the knights of S, Iames, to endeuor by al possible means to come to the speech of Don Anthonies agent, to propoūd some other meane of agremēt. Therfore this Jeronimo de Mendoza, taking in his cōpany Emanuell of Portugall, a speciall friend of the said agent, and vncle to therle of Vimioso, came to the wife of the said agēt to a house of his about 8. miles frō Lisbon, deliuering vnto her a safe cōduct frō the king of Castile, for the surety of her husbands persō with parti∣cular letters directed to him & desired her to send them to him, assoone as she could learn wher he was, telling her it was a matter of very great importāce, which he had to treat vpō with him, wher of depēded the wealth & tranquilitie generallie of al the kingdō of Portugal, & particularly of the said Don Anthony, & her husbāde his agent. It fortuned that within 8. dayes after the saide agent ig∣norant hereof, came fecretly to his wife, to thintēt to take order for the saide king Don Anthonies first shipping, which he thought to haue taken at Lisbon, leauing the same king Don Anthonio 2. miles from thence in a secrete place (where he was to stay) til al thinges were ready for his embarking, in a ship which thē vnladed at Lisbō
beeing couertly sent thither for that purpose, by the sayde queene mother, with maister Peter Dor a gentleman of great wisedome, and discretion, who alwayes had been well inclyned to King An∣thonies side, and had expresse commaundement to inquyre whe∣ther he were dead or alyue. Now when the sayde King Don An∣thonie vnderstoode by his Agent what Ieronimo de Mendoza pro∣pounded from the king of Castil, he was very vnwilling to consent that his sayde Agent shoulde enter into any communication with him, fearing it was but a drift to entrap his sayde Agent and yeelde him prisoner into the King of Castiles handes, but yet the sayde A∣gent more regarding the Kinges preseruation then his owne safe∣ty, very earnestly intreted his maiesty to permit him to confer with the sayd, Ieronimo, sith it woulde bee a good meane to further his highnes embarquing, which was in hand to be prepared. Inso∣muche that Kinge Don Anthonie at laste consented therevnto. Therefore the next day the sayde Agent signified aswell to Jeroni∣mo de Mendoza, as to Emanuell of Portugall that he was come to his wyfe to the place afore sayde, and therefore they might come and declare what they had to saye. First therefore came Emanuell the next day to the sayde Agent, and they concluded to meet Men∣doza the daye following in a place halfe a myle from the sayde A∣gents house. Now at the howre appoynted meeting togeather, the sayd Mendoza declared to the sayd Agent how the King of Castile woulde giue vnto Don Anthonio the Kingdome of Naples, vpon condition that he would yeeld himselfe into his handes, and renounce his right & action which he pretended to the kingdome of Portugall, promising also large recompence on the King of Ca∣stiles behalfe to the sayde Agent in case he could procure king An∣thony to accept this offer. Herevpon the sayd Agent to lengthen this busines and winne tyme, fained he knew not where King Don Anthonio was, but yet told Mendoza he was well content to break the matter to his maister assoone as he could vnderstand where to finde him, alleadging how his maiestie neuer stayed two dayes to∣geather in one place. At which communication the sayd Ieronimo de Mendoza made earnest entreatie to go in the company of the sayde Agent to conferre with Don Anthonio when it shoulde bee knowne where he was. Whereof the sayde Agent did put him in good hope and helde him in suspence about the space of twentye
daies space, applying neuerthelesse in the meane time the bu∣sinesse of his maiesties shipping, which beeing readie the saide a∣gent returned to king Anthony, certifying Mendoza thereof, and sending him word how he would with speed, aduertise him what resolution the saide king Don Anthonio tooke in those matters which the said Mendoza had propounded. But the said agent thought nothing lesse then to returne to Mendoza, fearing least he wold by sōe pretēce either deteine him captiue or not leaue til he had brought him to king Don Anthonie. Moreouer the king of Ca∣stile commaunded manie other most ample and beneficiall offers to be made on his behalfe to king Don Anthony, after his arriuall in Fraunce, yea and after the taking of thisle of Tercera, which for breuities sake are here omitted. Nowe when kinge Don Anthonio vnderstoode what offer Mendoza propounded vnto him, he made none account there∣of, but went by night with his agent, and others of his traine to a secrete place not farre from Lisbon, adioyning neere the sea, there staying for a barke which was to come from the saide citie of Lis∣bon to carrie him aboard the ship wherein hee was to saile away. This barke was partlie prepared by the care and diligence of Pe∣ter de Alpoen Doctor of the lawes, a man of great learning and in∣tegritie hauing alwaies constantlie maintained king Don Antho∣nies cause, wherein hee purposed himselfe with certaine of his freendes and kinred to meete king Anthonie and passe into France with him. But this matter being discouered by the tresō of one Pe∣ter de Oliuera (to whose charge king Anthonie had also committed this businesse) certaine gallies of Castile lying in waite for the said barke in the sea, in the place where it was to passe, assaulted and tooke it, wherein Peter de Alpoen with his vncle and nephue, and two religious men, and certaine other persons were taken, and all put to the torture to confesse whither they went. But it happened by Gods permission that before the barke was taken, Bastian Fig∣uera (one of the Kings seruauntes afore mentioned) passed along the sea side to seeke for his maiestie, and spied the Gallies there dispearsed about the same place where the barke (that his high∣nesse staied for) was to passe. And brought present word therof to his highnesse, who immediatlie tooke horse and in great hast re∣torned with his companie to his accustomed pilgrimage vntill a∣bout
two moneths after it was his hap to be embarqued in deede & to come into Fraunce as is afore declared. This also is not to bee omitted in this place, howe king Don An∣thonio in his passage from Lisbon towarde Fraunce, was driuen by contrary winde about two hundred leagues from land toward the west, where hee met a great and mightie ship of warre, whereof Ambrose de Guyar was captain, who had the conduction, of aboute 300 Spanish souldiers, to place in garrisons in the said Isle of Saint Michael. This ship (as the manner is) had a carauel with her, which came to aboard the ship wherein his maiestie was. The men of the carauel demanded of the master of his highnesse ship, frō whence they came, he answered from Calice in Andalousie. Being demaun∣ded, what newes there, he aunswered, how the people died of the plague, & some of his mariners were alreadie deade & others yet very sick of the same disease: Vpon thunderstanding whereof, they of the carauell abandoned the kinges ship, taking their course to¦ward the said ship of warre. When the King of Castile vnderstood how King Anthony was arriued in Fraunce, he was so highlie offended therewith, that hee caused Peter Dalpoen to be forthwith beheaded, and his vncle and nephue to be perpetually banished the realm, condemning the 2. religiouse men to the gallies, whō neuerthelesse afterward (chan∣ging his sentence) he condemned to close prison for manie yeres. causing the wife of King Anthonies agent, with his children & his cosens (of whom he had the bringing vp) and his mother in Law, & 3. religious sisters of his, of thorder of S. Clare, to be all brought into Castile, & put into diuerse monasteryes. Likewise appointing to be brought into the said kingdō of Castile the Countesse of Ʋi∣mioso mother of the said constable with 3. sonnes and 7. daughters, together with the wife of Emanuel de silua, thē gouernor of the said Isle of Tercera, whom he detained there vntill the said Constable & Emanuel de silua had lost their liues, as is afore mentioned. Also it is not to be passed in silence, how the King of Castile, euen since king Dō Anthony arriued in fraunce, hath vsed al practises pos∣sible, to procure the said king Don Anthonio his cousin germaine, to be murdered, sending many castilians and Portugalls into Fraunce for that speciall purpose. Of which the first & chiefe was, Edward de Castro, a man of base birth, though very rich, a portugal borne,
who notwithstandinge had in former time done much good and faithfull seruice to King Don Anthonio in Portugal. This man fai∣ning himself to be malcontent toward the King of Castile for de∣taining him prisoner a certain time, came into France to K. Antho∣ny, to whome at his first comming (for the better cloaking of his treason) he declared how for his deliuery out of prison, he had pro¦mised the King of Castile to assay by all manner of meanes to kill the said King Don Anthonie: Or if he could not bring that to passe, how at least he would finde the meane to procure certaine french companies or other strange souldiers (ouer whome he hoped to be appointed captaine) to rise against his maiesty at such time as hee should be readie to ioine battail, or in hand to execute any like en∣terprise, or else would do some such thing as should cast the per∣son and campe of the said King Anthony into some notable dan∣ger: wherein the very trueth is, his meaning was to haue kept pro∣mise with the said King of Castile. For it came to passe within a li∣tle after, when King Anthony was ouercome in a sea-battail at the Isle of S. Michael, while the Marquisse of S. Crosse remained in the same Isle, that the said Edward de Castro being with King Antho∣ny in thislle of Tercera, earnestlie perswaded the french companies which were there in garrison (whome he had won to him by gifts and otherwise) that the Portugalls went aboute to murther them all suddenlie, shewing to them for proofe thereof a letter written by King Anthonies agente, which (though falselie) he vouched to containe such matter, and likewise made the portugalles on the contrariside beleeue, howe they were in the like daunger at the Frenche mens handes. When he had laid this foundation, he went aboute to put the matter in execution, and so handled the same that one day the Frenchmen first made them readie to set vpon the portugalles and slewe Anthony Baracho a gentleman of por∣tugal. But as eche party began to put themselues in armes, it came to passe by the great dexteritie and wisedome of a portugall Cap∣taine, who in time smelled this treason, that the matter proceeded no further, but all was well pacified & the Traitour apprehended. Who vppon the falling out of the matter otherwise then he ex∣pected, woulde presentlie haue retired into the saide Isle of S. Mi∣chaell, to the Marquis of Sayncte Crosse in an Englishe
ship which he had hired for that purpose for a great some of mo∣nie. Thus the traitor being taken & conuict of his treason aswel by his owne confession in the prison, as openlie vpon the scaffold, was at last beheaded. Yet the saide king Don Antonie in remē∣braunce and consideration of his former seruices, would haue par∣doned him had not the common people & souldiers made great instance for the open punishment of so great & dangerous a trea∣son. About the same time Sebastian Caruaillo another Portugal was executed in the said Isle of Tercera for enterprising to kil the said king Don Anthonio. Also for the like cause, a Castilian gentleman of thorder of the knightes of Malta, was afterwardes executed in Fraunce, Further, for the like offence, Iohn Francisco, and John Ro∣drigues desosa were prisoners in France, and vpon their conuiction were sent in captiuitie to the said Islande of Tercera a little before the taking thereof, by means whereof they recouered their liber∣ty contrary to their desarts, But the saide Iohn Rodrigues had neuer escaped from execution in France, had not the most excellēt prin∣cesse the Queene of England (with whom he had beene king An∣thonies Ambassadour) made intercession for him. Whosoeuer therefore shall rightlye consider all these daungers and greate inconueniencies whiche the saide King Don Anthonio hath endured and escaped, may easilye iudge that all this came not to passe without gods peculier prouidence and diuine sufferance & that some great matter of importance is hid thereunder, namely a great hope is to be conceaued therof, that almightie God, will vse the sayd king Don Anthonio as a fit instrument, to breake the great powre & force of the King of Castile, wherby through his excessiue and vnmeasurable ambition, he would else in tract of tyme, inuade not onely all christiandom, but also al the rest of the worlde, & that vnder the faire colour of maintaining the Catholike Romish reli∣gion, vnder pretence whereof he hath thus manye yeeres afflicted thinhabitantes of the lowe countreys, otherwise a good and cur∣teous people, that in former tyme had alwayes bene good & faith∣full subiects to him & his auncestors: to thintent that vpon the sub∣duing of thē according to his fātasie, he might easily & freely spred his armies ouer England, Germany, France & other nations, either for that they receiue, or at least permit in their countries any other religiō thē only the catholike Romish religiō, or els vnder some o∣ther
kinde of pretence whatsoeuer. This is the marke he shooteth at & wil easily hitte except thother christian Princes (before theuill creepe any further,) haue speciall regard to oppose thēselues to his power & force by ayding the prouinces vnited of the lowe coun∣treys nowe greately afflicted, and also and that most specially, the sayde Kinge Don Anthonio who with thayde of some reasonable nauie of ten or twelue thousande men furnished with victualles, munition, and other necessaries, may in shorte tyme without anye greate difficultie recouer his kingdome. Whereunto thincredi∣ble affection which the Portugalls beare alwayes to their King & naturall prince, together with thauncient hatred they haue alwaies borne to the Castilians their auncient ennemyes, woulde serue for a greate furtherance. As the lyke meane serued the prince of O∣ranges for a greate effect in the sayde lowe countreyes, to maine∣tayne warres there so longe against the forces of the sayd Kinge of Castile. Further if King Don Anthonio had recouered Portugall & driuen away the castilians, he might also easily in short time aswel reduce into his power and dominion the townes of Aphrica with the townes and countreys of the Easte Indies, and Brasile (where the garrisons consist all of naturall Portugalles) as also take from the king of Castile, his power by sea consisting chiefely of Portugal shippes & Marriners. Who without doubte for the naturall affect∣ion they beare towarde their Kinge and Countrey, and the rather bicause their wiues, children, landes, and goodes remaine in Portu∣gall: and for the naturall hatred they beare to the Castilians (vn∣der whome they serue against their willes) will easilye come and yeilde themselues to the sayde King Don Anthonie, as wee haue seene the lyke example in the sayde lowe countreys, when the wars began, for the driuing away of the spanyardes. Also it is to be noted, how the people of Portugall beare a generall hatred against the king of Castile & his Castilians not onely in respect of their aun∣cient enmitye against the sayde Castilians but also and most prin∣cipally for the greate iniuries and indignities which they haue suf∣fered at their handes since the sayde King of Castile by force & vi∣olence possessed their countrey. Whereby all mens mindes are so bent and inflamed against him and his Castilians, that their chiefe wishe and expectation is for the sayde kinge Don Anthonie (by the ayde of some Princes) to enter into Portugall with an armie, not
onely for their deliuery from the yoke & bondage of the Castili∣ans (whose garrisons there exceede not the number of three thou∣sand men) but also to inuade Castile in reuenge of the said iniuries whereinto there is long & wide accesse and entry out of Portugall without any strong place to hinder free passage into the said king∣dom of Castile. Moreouer the hatred of the Portugalles against the Castilians, is growne so far, that they which before were addicted to the said King of Castile, and corrupted with money & promises to deliuer their natiue country into his handes, do nowe secretly fauour King Don Anthonio, auouching how they will rather yeilde their liues & goodes to his maiesties mercye, then liue any longer vnder the tyranny of the King of Castile. Who hath them in no esti∣mation, neither will perform what he promised when he solicited them to be authors to procure him the kingdome. Although all men know how smalle accompte the king of Ca∣stile maketh to fulfill his promises to suche men as he hath vsed in like kind of affaires, & most specially when he hath no more neede of them: yet it shalbe worth the noting in this place, how hee hath dealt with them that were the principall authors to bring his mat∣ters so easilye to passe in Portugall. These men, when King Don An∣thonio was ouercom & discomfited, & the King of Castile in peace able possession of the Kingdome of Portugall, & of the realmes lands & countreis depending therof (sauing onely the said Islands of As∣sores which held a good while as is afore recited for king Anthony) exhibited a supplication to the saide King of Castile declaring at large their seruices done in his behalfe for thobteining of the said Kingdome of Portugall, beseeching his maiestie to voutchsafe the performance of those promises which his ambassadors, the Duke of Ossuna and Christofer de Mora had made vnto them on his be∣halfe, exhibiting writings withall to prooue the saide ambassadors promises. Wherunto the King commaunded answere to be giuen, that this supplycation with thambassadors writing, should be sent to his counsell called in the Portugall language, Mesa da conscien∣tia. Wherupon followed a decree touching that matter, of the te∣nor or effect ensuing Forasmuch as the king of Castile, is true inheri∣tor of the kingdom of Portugal: it was not lawfull for the suppliants to sel the same for gifts nor promises, but rather they had incurred the penal¦ty of death for ths▪ of their own accord, & without these promises, they
deliuered not the kingdom to the said king of Castile: But if the king∣dom perteyned to Don Anthonio, then they could not sell it to king Phillip, wherfore the king was no way bound to performe the promises which thambassadors made to the suppliants, but of his benignity and clemencye hee absolueth the supplyants from the capitall punishment, whereunto for this cause they had endaungered them selues. A no∣table reward surely, yea & that such a one, as commonlye all tray∣tors receaue, & as the King of Castile accustometh to bestow vpon all them that doe him seruice in like affaires; Which may serue for an example to all men, that for giftes or promises they attempt no∣thing against their dutie nor consciences. For God is a iust iudge that neuer leaueth wickednes vnpunished, nor well doeing vnre∣compenced. Syth therefore it manifestly appeareth by the premisses, that the fayd King Don Anthonio hath a rightfull & most iust cause: it is to be wished, that al christian princes or the more part of them would of their owne accordes, offer them selues to aide & succour him to recouer his Kingdom whereof he is so vniustlye and tyrannouslye spoyled by the king of Castile, as it also appertayneth to all princes to helpe them that be afflicted and oppressed by tyranny. Where∣unto truly they ought to be the more forwarde and mooued, for that it seemeth the onely waye and meane to deliuer them∣selues and their posteritye from the tyrannye of the Spanyardes, whiche otherwise in the ende they shall hardelye auoyde, as more particulerlye hath beene de∣clared in this treatise. FINIS.
