7514 99841186 5748
The excellent Comedie of two the moste faithfullest Freendes, Damon and Pithias. Newly Imprinted, as the same was shewed be∣fore the Quéenes Maiestie, by the Children of her Graces Chappell, except the Prologue that is somewhat al∣tered for the proper vse of them that hereafter shall haue occasion to plaie it, either in Priuate, or open Audience. Made by Maister Edvvards, then beynge Maister of the Children. 1571. Imprinted at London in Fleetelane by Richarde Iohnes, and are to be solde at his shop, ioyning to the Southwest doore of Paules Churche.
THE PROLOGVE. ON euerie syde, wheras I glaunce my rouyng eye, Silence in all eares bent I playnly do espie: But if your egre lookes doo longe suche toyes to see, As heretofore in commycall wie, were wont abroade to bee: Your lust is lost, and all the pleasures that you sought, Is frustrate quite of toying Playes. A soden change is wrought▪ For loe, our Aucthors Muse, that masked in delight, Hath forst his Penne agaynst his kinde, no more suche sportes to write. Muse he that lust, (right worshipfull) for chaunce hath made this change▪ For that to some he seemed too muche, in yonge desires to range: In whiche, right glad to please: seyng that he did offende, Of all he humblie pardon traes: his Pen that shall amende: And yet (worwipfull Audience,) thus much I dare aduouche. In Commedies, the greatest Skyll is this, rightly to touche. All thynges to the quicke: and eke to frame eche person so, That by his common talke, you may his nature rightly know▪ A Royster ought not preache, that were to straunge to heare, But as from vertue he doth swerue, so ought his woordes appeare: The olde man is sober, the yonge man rashe, the Louer triumphyng in ioyes▪ The Matron graue▪ the Harlat wilde and full of wanton toyes. Whiche all in one course they no wise doo agree: So correspondent to their kinde their speeches ought to bee. Which speeches well pronoune, with action liuely framed, If this offende the lookers on, let Hrace then be blamed, Which hath our Athor taught at Shole, from whom he doth not swarue, In all suche kinde of exercise decorum to obserue, Thus much for his defence (he sayth) as Poetes arst haue donne, Which heretofore in Commodies the selfe same rase did roune: But now for to be briefe, the matter to expresse, Which here wee shall present: is this Dimon and Pithias▪ A rare ensample of Frendship true, it is no Legend lie, But a thinge once donne in deede as Hystories doo discrie, Whiche doone of yor in longe time past, yet present shalbe here, Euen as it were in dooynge now, so liuely it shall appeare: Lo hre in Siracusae thauncient Towne, which onceth: Romaines wnne, Here Dionisius Pallace, within whose Caue this thing most strange was donne▪ Which matter mixt with myrth and care, a iust name to applie, As seemes most fit wee haue it termed, a Tragicall Commedie, Wherein talkyng of Courtly toyes, wee doo protest this flat, Wee talke of Dionisius Courte, wee meane no Court but that, And that wee doo so meane, who wysely calleth to minde,
The time, the place, the Authours here most plainely shall it finde, Loe this I speake for our defence, lest of others wee should be shent: But worthy Audience, wee you pray, take thinges as they be ment, Whose vpright Iudgement wee doo craue, with heedefull eare and Eye▪ To here the cause, and see theffect of this newe Tragicall Commedie. EXIT. The Speakers names. Aristippus, a pleasant Gentilman. Carisophus, a Parasite. Damon▪ two gentlemen of Greece. Pithias, two gentlemen of Greece. Stephano, seruant to Damon and Pithias. VVill, Aristippus lackey. Iacke, Carisophus lackey. Snap, the Porter. Dionisius, the Kynge. Eubulus, the Kynges counselour. Gronno, the Hangman. Grimme, the Colyer.
¶Here entreth ARISTIPPVS. TOO strange (perhaps) it séemes to some, That I Aristippus, a Courtier am become: A Philosopher of late, not of the meanist name, But now to the Courtly behauiour my lyfe I frame, Muse he that lyst, to you of good skill, I say that I am a Philosopher styll: Louers of Wisdom, are termed Philosophie, Then who is a Philosopher so rightly as I? For in louyng of wisdom, proofe doth this trie, That Frustra sapit, qui non sapit sibi: I am wyse for my selfe, then tell me of troth, Is not that great Wisdom as the world goth? Some Philosophers in the stréete go ragged and torne, And féedes on vyle Rootes, whom Boyes laugh to scorne: But I in fine Silkes haunt Dionysius Pallace, Wherin with dayntie fare my selfe I do solace: I can talke of Philosophie as well as the best, But the strayte kynde of lyfe I leaue to the rest: And I professe now the Courtly Philosophie, To crouche, to speake fayre, my selfe I applie, To féede the Kinges humour with pleasant deuises, For whiche I am called Regius Canis: But wot ye who named me first the Kinges Dogge? It was the Roage Diogenes that vile grunting Hogge: Let him rolle in his Tubbe to winne a vayne prayse, In the Courte pleasantly I wyll spende all my dayes: Wherin what to doo, I am not to learne, What wyll serue myne owne turne I can quickly discearne: All my tyme at Schoole I haue not spent vaynly, I can helpe one, is not that a good poinct of Philosophy? ¶Here entreth CARISOPHVS. ¶I beshrew your fine eares, since you came from Schoole,, In the Court you haue made many a wiseman a foole: And though you paint out your fayned Philosophie, So God helpe me, it is but a playne kinde of flattery: Whiche you vse so finely in so pleasant a sorte, That none but Aristppus, now makes the Kinge sporte, Ere you came hyther, poore I was sombody, The Kinge delighted in mee, now I am but a noddy. ARISTIPPVS. ¶In faith Carisophus, you know your selfe best,
But I will not call you noddie, but only in iest, And thus I assure you, though I came from schoole, To serue in this Court, I came not yet to be the Kinges foole, Or to fill his eares with seruile squirilitie, That office is yours, you know it right perfectlie, Of Parasites and Scicophants you are a graue bencher, The Kinge féedes you often from his owne trencher, I enuye not your state, nor yet your great fauour, Then grudge not at all, if in my behauiour: I make the Kinge mery, with pleasant vrbanitie, Whom I neuer abused to any mans iniurie. CARISOPHVS. ¶ Be cocke sir, yet in the Courte you doo best thriue, For you get more in on day then I doo in fiue. ARISTIPPVS. ¶ Why man in the Courte, doo you not sée, Rewardes geuen for vertue, to euery degrée? To rewarde the vnworthy that worlde is done, The Courte is changed, a good thread hath bin sponne Of Dogges woll heretofore, and why? be cause it was liked, And not for that it was best trimmed and picked: But now mens eares are finer, such grosse toyes are not set by, Therfore to a trimmer kynde of myrth my selfe I applye, Wherin though I please, it commeth not of my desert, But of the Kinges fauour. CARISOPHVS. ¶ It may so be, yet in your prosperitie, Dispise not an olde courtier, Carisophus is he, Which hath longe time fed Dionisius humor: Diligently to please, styll at hand, there was neuer rumor, pread in this towne of any smale thinge, but I Brought it to the Kinge in post by and by, et now I craue your friendship, which if I may attayne, ost sure and vnfained frindship I promyse you againe: o we two linckt in frindshippe brother and brother, ull well in the Courte may helpe one another. ARISTIPPVS. ¶ Bir Lady Carisophus, though you know not Philosophie, et surely you are a better Courtier then I, d yet I not so euyll a courtier that wyll séeme to dispise, uch an old courtier as you so expert and so wyse, ut where as you craue myne & offer your friendship so willingly, ith hart I geue you thankes for this your great curtesie:
Assuring of friendship both with tooth and nayle, Whiles life lasteth neuer to fayle. CARISOPHVS. ¶ A thousand thankes I geue you, oh friend Aristippus ARISTIPPVS. Oh friend Carisophus. CARISOPHVS. How ioyfull am I sith I haue to friend Aristippus now? ARISTIPPVS. ¶ None so glad of Carisophus friendship as I, I make God a vowe, I speake as I thinke, beleue me. CARISOPHVS. ¶ Sith we are now so friendly ioyned, it séemeth to mée, That one of vs helpe eche other in euery degrée, Prefer you my cause when you are in presence, To further your matters to the Kinge let me alone in your absence, ARISTIPPVS. ¶ Friend Carisophus, this shall be done as you would wish, But I pray you tell mée, thus much by the way, Whither now from this place wyll you take your iournay? CARISOPHVS. ¶I wyll not dissemble, that were against Friendship, I go into the Citie some knaues to nip: For talke with their goodes, to encrease the kynges Treasure, In such kinde of seruice, I set my chéefe pleasure, Farewell friend Aristippus now for a time, EXIT. ARISTIPPVS. ¶ A dewe friend Carisophus: In good faith now, Of force I must laugh at this solempne vow, Is Aristippus linckt in Friendship with Carisophus? Quid cum tanto Asino, talis Philosophus? They say, Morum similitudo consultat amicitias. Then, how can this Friendship betwene vs two come to passe? We are as like in condicions, as Iacke Fletcher and his Bowlt, I brought vp in learnyng, but he is a very dolt As touching good Letters: but otherwise suche a craftie knaue, Yf you séeke a whole Region, his lyke you can not haue: A Uillaine for his life, a Uarlet died in Graine, You lose Money by him if you sel him for one knaue, for he serues for twaine: A flatteryng Parasite, a Sicophant also, A commen accuser of men: to the good, an open Foe, Of halfe a worde, he can make a Legend of lies,
Which he wyll aduouch with such tragicall cryes, As though all were true that comes out of his mouth, Where in dede to be hanged by and by, He cannot tell one tale but twyse he must lie, He spareth no mans life to get the kinges fauour, In which kind of seruis he hath got such a sauour, That he wyll neuer leaue, me thinke then that I, Haue done very wisely to ioyne in friendship with him, lest perhaps I Comming in his way might be nipt, for such knaues in presence, We sée oft times put honest men to silence: Yet I haue played with his beard in knitting this knot, I promist frendship, but you loue few words: I spake it, but I meant it not, Who markes this friendship betwene vs two, Shal iudge of the worldly friendship without any more a doo, It may be a ryght Patron therof, but true friendship in déede, Of nought but of vertue, doth truly proséede, But why doo I now enter into Philosophie, Which doo professe the fine kind of curtesie? I wyll hence to the Courte with all haste I may, I thinke the king be stirring, it is now bright day, To waite at a pinche still in sight I meane, For wot ye what? a new Broome swéepes cleane, As to hie honour I mynde not to clime, So I meane in the courte to lose ne time: Wherein happy man be his dole, I trust that I, Shall not spéede worst, and that very quickly EXIT. ¶Here entreth DAMON and PITHIAS lyke Mariners. ONEPTVNE, immortall be thy prayse, For that so safe from Gréece we haue past the seas, To this noble citie SIRACVSAE, where we The auncient raygne of the Romaines may see, Whose force, Gréece also here to fore hath knowne, Whose vertue, the shrill trump of fame so farre hath blowne. PITHIAS. My Damon, of right high prayse we ought to geue, To Neptune and all the Gods, that we safely dyd arryue, The Seas I thinke with contrary winds, neuer raged so, I am euen yet so Seasicke, that I faynt as I go: Therfore let vs get some lodgyng quickely: But where is Stephano?
¶Here entreth STEPHANO. ¶Not farre hence: a Pockes take these Maryner knaues, Not one would healpe mée to carry this stuffe, such dronken I thinke be accursed of the Goddes owne mouthes. DAMON. ¶Stephano, leaue thy ragyng, and let vs enter SIRACVSAE We wil prouide lodgyng, and thou shalt be eased of thy burden by STEPHANO. ¶Good mayster make haste, for I tell you playne, This heauy burden puts poore Stephano to much payne. PITHIAS. ¶Come on thy wayes, thou shalt be eased, and that anon. EXIT▪ * Here entreth CARISOPHVS. It is a true saying that oft hath bin spoken, The pitcher goeth so longe to the water, that he commeth home broke My owne proofe this hath taught me, for truly sith I, In the Citie haue vsed to walke very slyly, Not with one can I méete, that will in talke ioyne with mée, And to créepe into mens bosomes some talke for to snatche, By which into one trip or other, I might trimly them catche And so accuse them: Now not with one can I méete, That wyll ioyne in talke wt mée, I am shund lyke a Deuill in ye stréet▪ My credite is crackte where I am knowne, but yet I heare say, Certayne straingers are arriued, they were a good pray, If happely I might méete with them, I feare not I, But in talke I should trippe them, and that very finely, Which thinge, I assure you, I doo for myne owne gayne, Or els I woulde not plodde thus vp and downe, I fell you playne: Well, I wyll for a wyle to the Court to sée What Aristippus doth, I would be loth in fauer he shuld ouerrun mée, He is a subtile chyld, he flattreth so finely, that I feare mée, He wyll licke all the fatte from my lippes, and so outwery mée: Therefore I wyll not be longe absent, but at hand, That al his fine driftes I may vnderstande. EXIT. * Here entreth VVYLL and IACKE. I wonder what my Master Aristippus meanes now a daies, That he leaueth Philosophie, and séekes to please Kyng Dionisius, with such mery toyes, In Dionisius Court now he only ioyes, As trim a Courtier as the best, Ready to aunswer, quicke in tauntes, pleasaunt to ieste,
lusty companion to deuise with fine Dames, Whose humour to féede, his wylie witte he frames. IACKE. ¶ Be cocke as you say, your Maister is a Minion, foule coyle he kéepes in this Courte Aristippus alone ow rules the coaste with his pleasant deuises, That I feare he wyll put out of conceit my Maister Carisophus. VVYLL. ¶Feare not that Iacke, for like brother and brother They are knit in true Friendship the one with the other, They are fellowes you knowe, and honest men both, Therfore the one to hinder the other, they wyll be lothe. IACKE. ¶Yea, but I haue heard say, there is falshod in felowshippe, n the Court somtimes, one geues another finely the slippe: Which when it is spied, it is laught out with a scoffe, nd with sporting and playing, quietly shaken of: n which kinde of toying, thy master hath such a grace, That he wyll neuer blush, he hath a wodden face: But Wyll, my maister hath Béees in his head, f he finde me heare pratinge, I am but dead: e is styll rotting in the Citie, there is sumwhat in the winde: His lookes bewrayes his inwarde troubled mynde: Therfore I wyll be packing, to the Court by and by If he be once angry, Iacke shall cry wo the pye. VVYLL. ¶ Byr Lady, if I tary longe here, of the same sauce shall I tast, For my master sent me on an errand, and bad mée make haste, Therfore we wyll departe together. EXEVNT. ¶Here entreth STEPHANO. ¶Ofte times I haue heard, before I came hether, That no man can serue two maisters together: A sentence so true, as moste men doo take it, At any time false, that no man can make it: And yet by their leaue, that first haue it spoken, How that may proue false, euen here I wyll open: For I Stephano, loe, so named by my father, At this time serue two masters together: And loue them a lyke, the one and the other, I duely obey, I can doo no other, A bondman I am so nature hath wrought me, One Damon of Gréece, a gentleman bought me:
To him I stand bond, yet serue I another, Whom Damon my Master loues, as his owne brother: A Gentleman too, and Pithias he is named, Fraught with Uertue, whom vice neuer defamed: These twoo, since at Schoole they fell acquainted, In mutuall friendship, at no time haue fainted: But loued so kindly, and friendly eche other, As thoughe they were Brothers by Father and Mother: Pihagoras learnynge, these two haue embrased, Whiche bothe are in vertue so narrowly laced: That all their whole dooynges do fall to this issue, To haue no respect, but onely to vertue: All one in effecte: all one in their goynge, All one in their study, all one in their doyng: These Gentlemen both, beyng of one condicion, Both alike of my seruice haue all the fruition: Pithias is ioyfull, if Damon be pleased: Yf Pithias be serued, then Damon is eased: Serue one, serue both: so neare, who would win them? I thinke they haue but one hart betwene them: In trauelyng Countreyes, we thrée haue contriued, Full many a yeare: and this day arriued At SIRACVSAE in Sicillia that auncient Towne, Where my Masters are lodged: and I vp and downe, Go séekyng to learne what Newes here are walkyng, To harke of what thynges the people are talkynge. I lyke not this Soyle: for as I go ploddynge, I marke there two, there thrée, their heades alwayes noddinge, In close secret wise, styll whisperyng together: If I aske any question, no man doth answer: But shakyng their heads, they go their wayes speakynge, I marke how with teares, their wet eyes are leakynge: Some strangenesse there is, that bréedeth this musinge. Well: I wyll to my Masters, and tell of their vsing, That they may learne, and walke wisely together, I feare, we shall curse the time we came hether. EXIT. * Here entreth ARISTIPPVS and VVYLL. ¶Wyll, didst thou heare the Ladies so talke of mée, What ayleth them? from their nippes shall I neuer be frée? VVYLL. ¶Good faith sir, all the Ladies in the Courte, do plainl report, That without mencion of them, you can make no sporte:
They are your Playne songe to singe Descant vpon, If they weare not, your mirth were gone, Therfore master, iest no more with women in any wise, If you doo, by cocke your are lyke to know the price. ARISTIPPVS. Byr lady Wyll, this is good counsell, playnely to iest Of women, proofe hath taught mée it is not best, I wyll change my coppy, how be it, I care not a quinche, I know the galde horse will soonest winche: But learne thou secretly what priuely they talke Of me in the Courte, amonge them slyly walke, And bringe me true newes thereof. VVYLL. I wyll syr, maister therof haue no doubt, for I Wheare they talke of you, wyll enforme you perfectly. ARISTIPPVS. Doo so my boy: if thou bringe it finely to passe, For thy good seruice, thou shalt go in thine olde coate at Christmas. ¶Enter Damon, Pithias, Stephano. EXEVNT ¶ Stephano, is all this true that thou hast tolde me. STEPHANO. Sir, for lies, hetherto ye neuer controlde mée, Oh that we had neuer set foote on this land, Where Dionisius raygnes, with so bloody a hande, Euery day he sheweth some token of crueltie, With blood he hath filled all the stréetes in the Citie: I tremble to heare the peoples murmuring, I lament, to sée his most cruell dealyng: I thinke there is no suche tyraunt vnder the Sunne, O my deare masters, this mornyng what hath he done? DAMON. What is that? tell vs quickly. STEPHANO. As I this morning past in the stréete, With a wofull man (going to his death) did I méete, Many people foldwed, and I of one secretly, Asked the cause, why he was condemned to die? Whispered in mine eare, nought hath he doone but thus, In his sleape he dreamed he had killed Dionisius, Which dreame tolde abrode was brought to the kinge in poste, By whome condemned for suspicion, his lyfe he hath lost: Marcia was his name as the people sayde.
PITHIAS. ¶My deare friende Damon, I blame not Stephano. For wishyng we had not come hether, séeynge it is so: That for so small cause, suche cruell death doth insue. DAMON. ¶My Pithias, where Tirantes raigne, suche cases are not new, Whiche fearynge their owne state for great cltie, To sit fast as they thinke, doo execute All suche as any light suspition haue tainted. STEPHANO. ¶With suche quicke Karers, I lyst not be uainted. DAMON. ¶So are they neuer in quiet, but in suspicion styll, When one is made away, they take occasion another to kyll: Euer in feare, hauyng no trustie friende, voyde of all peoples loue, And in their owne conscience, a continuall Hell they prooue. PITHIAS. ¶As thynges by their contraryes are alwayes best prooued, How happie are then mercifull Princes of their people beloued? Hauyng sure friendes euerie wheare, no feare doth touch them, They may safely spende the day pleasantly, at night (Secure dormuatin vtranque aurem Oh my Damon, if choyce were offred mée, I would choose to be Pithias As I am, (Damons friende:) rather then to be kyng Dionisius. STEPHANO. ¶And good cause why: for you are entierly beloued of one, And as farre as I heare, Dionisius is beloued of none. DAMON. ¶That state is moste miserable, thrise happy are wée, Whom true loue hath ioyned in perfect Amytie: Which amytie first sprong, without vaunting be it spoken, that is true Of likelines of maners, tooke roote by company, & now is conserued by vertue Which vertue alwaies through worldly things do not frame Yet doth she arciue to her followers immortall fame: Wherof if men were carefull, for Uertues sake onely They would honour friendship, and not for commoditie: But suche as for profite in friendship do lincke, When stormes come, they slide away sooner then a man wyll thinke: My Pithias, the somme of my talke falles to this issue, To prooue no friendship is sure, but that which is grounded on vertue. PITHIAS. ¶My Damon, of this thyng, there néedes no proofe to mée,
The Gods forbyd, but that Pithias wt Damon in al things shuld agre For why it is said: Amicus alteripse, But that tr friendes should be two in body: but one in minde, As it wre one transformed into another, whiche against Though it séeme: yet in good faith, when I am alone, I forget I am Pithisas, me thinke I am Damon. STEPNO. ¶That could I neuer , to forget my selfe, full well I know, Wheresoeuer I go, that I am PAVPER STEPHANO: But I pray you sir, for all your Phylosophie, See that in this Coure you walke very wisely: You are but newly come hether, beyng straungers ye know, Many eyes are bent on you in the stréetes as ye go: Many spies are abroad, you can not be too circumspect. DAMON. Stephano, because thou art carefull of mée thy maister, I do thée praise, Yet thinke this for a suertie, no state to displease: By talke or otherwise, my friende and I entende, we wyll here As men that come to sée the soyle & maners of al men of euery degrée, Pithagoras said, that this world was like a Stage, Wheron many play their partes: the lookers on the sage Phylosophers are saith he, whose parte is to learne The maners of all Nations, and the good from the bad to discerne. STEPHANO. ¶Good faith sir, concernynge the people they are not gay, And as farre as I sée; they be Mummers, for nought they say, For the moste parte what soeuer you aske them▪ The soyle is suche, that to liue heare I can not lyke. DAMON. Thou speakest accordynge to thy learnynge, but I say, Omnis solum fortis patria: A wise man may lyue euery wheare: Therfore my deare friende Pithias, Let vs view this Towne in euerie place, And then consider the Peoples maners also. PITHIAS. ¶As you wyll my Damon, but how say you Stephano? As it not best ere we go further, to take some repast? STEPHANO. * In faith, I lyke well this question, r: for all your haste, To eate somwhat I pray you, thinke it no folly, It is hie dinner time, I know by my belly. DAMON.
¶Then let vs to our lodging departe, when dinner is done, We wyll view this Citie as we haue begonne. EXEANT ¶Here entreth CARISOPHVS. ¶ Once agayne in hope of good wynd, I hoyse vp my sayle, I goe into the citie to finde som pray for mine auayle: I hunger while I may sée these straungers, that lately Arriued, I were safe if once I might méete them happily, Let them barke that lust, at this kinde of gaine, He is a foole that for his profit will not take payne: Though it be ioyned with other mens hurt, I care not at all, For profit I wyll accuse any man, hap what shall But soft syrs, I pray you buysh what are they that comes here, By their apparell, and countinaunce some strangers they appeare, I wyll shrowde my selfe secretly, euen here for a while, To heare all their talke that I may them beguyle. * Here entreth DAMON and STEPHANO. ¶ A shorre horse soone curried, my belly waxeth thinner, I am as hungry now as when I went to dinner: Your philosophicall diet, is so fine and small, That you may eate your dinner & supper at once, & not surfaite at all. DAMON. ¶ Stephano, much meat bréedes heauynes, thinne diet maks thée light STEPHANO. ¶ I may be lighter thereby but I shall neuer run the faster. DAMON. ¶ I haue had sufficiently discourse of amitie, Which I had at dinner with Pithias and his pleasaunt companie Hath fully satisfied me, it doth me good to féede myne eyes on him. STEPHANO. ¶ Course or discourse, your course is very course for all your talke, You had but one bre course, and that was Pike, rise and walke, And surely for all your talke of Philosophie, I neuer heard that a man with wordes could fill his belly, Féede your eyes (quod you) the reason from my wisdom swarueth, I stared on you both, and yet my belly starueth▪ DAMON. ¶ Ah Stephano, small diet maketh a fine memorie. STEPHANO. ¶ I care not for your crafti Sophistrie, You two are fine, let mee be fed lyke a grose knaue styll, I pray you license mee for a while to haue my will:
At home to tary whiles you take vew of this citie, To finde some odde victualles in a corner, I am very wittie. DAMON. ¶ At your pleasure sir, I wyll wayte on my selfe this daye, Yet attende vpon Pithias, whiche for a purpose tarieth at home, So dooyng, you wayte vpon mee also. STEPHANO. ¶With winges on my feete I go. DAMON. ¶ Not in vain the Poet saith Natura furca expēllas, tamen vsque recurrit. For trayne vp a bonontan neuer to so good a behauiour, Yet in some poinct of seruilitie, he wyll sauour: As this Stephano, trustie to mée his Mayster, louyng and kinde, Yet touchyng his belly, a very bondman & him finde: He is to be borne withall, beyng so ist and true, I assure you, I would not chaunge him for no new: But mée thinkes, this is a pleasant Citie, The Seate is good, and yet not stronge, and that is great pitie. CARISOPHVS. ¶ I am safe, he is myne owne. DAMON. The Ayre subtle and fine, the people should be wittie That dwell vnder this Climate in so pure a Region, A trimmer Plotte I haue not séene in my peregrination: Nothyng mislyketh mée in this Countrey, But that I heare suche mutteryng of crueltie: Fame reporteth strange thynges of Dionisius, But kynges matters passyng our reache, pertayne not to vs. CARISOPHVS. ¶Dionisius (quoth you) since the worlde began, In Cicilia neuer raygned so cruell a man: A despightfull Tirant to all men, I maruayle I, That none makes him away, and that sodaynly. DAMON. ¶ My friende, the Goddes forbyd so cruell a thynge: That any man should lift vp his Sworde against the kynge: Or seeke other meanes by death him to preuent, Whom to rule on earth, the mightie Goddes haue sent: But my friende, leaue off this talke of kynge Dionisius. CARISOPHVS. ¶ Why sir? he can not heare vs.
DAMON. ¶What then? An nescis longas Regibus esse manus? It is no safe talkynge of them that strykes a farre off: But leauyng kynges matters, I pray you shew mée this curtesie: To describe in few wordes, the state of this Citie? A trauayler I am, desirous to know The state of eche Countrey, wher euer I go: Not to the hurt of any state, but to get experience therby: It is not for nought that the Poet doth crye, Dic mihi Musa virum, captae post tempore Troyae, Multorum hominum mores qui vidit & vbis. In whiche verses, as some Writers do scan, The Poet describeth, a perfect wise man: Euen so, I beyng a stranger, addicted to Phylosophie, To sée the state of Countreyes, my selfe I applie. CARISOPHVS. ¶Sir, I lyke this entent, but may I aske your name without scorn DAMON. ¶My name is Damon, well knowen in my Countrey, a Gentlem borne CARISOPHVS. ¶You do wisely to serche the state of eche Countrie, To beare intelligence therof whether you lust: He is a spie, Sir, I pray you, haue pacience a while, for I haue to do here by: Uiew this weake parte of this Citie as you stande, & I very quickly Wyll retourne to you agayne, and then wyll I show, The state of all this Countrie, and of the Courte also. EXIT DAMON. ¶I thanke you for your courtesie, this chaunceth well that I Met with this Gentleman so happely, Whiche as it séemeth, misliketh some thynge, Els he would not talke so boldly of the kynge, And that to a stranger, but loe were he comes in haste. ¶ Here entreth CARISOPHVS and SNAP. ¶This is he felow Snap, snap him vp: away with hym. SNAP. ¶Good felow thou must go with mée to the Courte. DAMON. ¶To the Courte sir, and why? CARISOPHVS. Well, we wyll dispute that before the Kyng, away with hym quickl DAMON. ¶Is this the curtesie you promysed mée? and that very lately.
CARISOPHVS. ¶Away with hym I say. DAMON Use no violence, I wyll go with you quietly. Exiunt omns. ¶Here entreth ARISTIPPVS. Ah Sira, yr lady, Aristippus lykes Dionisius Court very well, hiche in passyng ioyes and plasures doth excell: here he hath Dapsilae caena, gemalis lectes, & auro. gentii turgmani zonam. ue plied the Haruest, and stroke when the Yron was hotte, hen I spied my time, I was not squemish to craue God wotte: t with some pleasant tyoe, I rept into the Kinges bosome. whiche, Dionisius gaue me Aure talentum magnum, arge rewarde, for so simple seruices, hat then? the Kinges prayse standeth chiefly in bountifulnesse: hiche thynge, though I tolde the kinge very pleasantly, can I prooue it by good Writers of great Antiquitie: t that shall not néede at this time, since that I haue aboundantly▪ en I lacke hereafter, I wyll vse this poinctt of Phylosophie: t now, where as I haue felt the kynges lyberalytie, princely as it came, I wyll sponde it as regallie: is currant men say, and currant comes of currendo en wyll I make mony runne, as his nature requireth I trow, what becomes a Philosopher best, t to dispise mony aboue the rest: yet not so dispise it, but to haue in store ough to serue his owne tourne, and somwhat more, th sondrie sports and tauntes, yester night I delighted the kinge, at with his lowde laughter, the whole courte did ringe: I thought he laught not merier then I, when I got this money, mumbouget for Carisophus I espie▪ aste to come hether, I must handle the knaue finely: Carisophus, my dearest frinde, my trusty companyon, at newes with you? where haue you heen so longe? ¶ Here entreth CARISOPHVS. My best beloued friend Aristippus, I am come at last, iue not spent all my time in wast, e got a pray, and that a good one I trw. ARISTIPPVS. What praye is that? faine would I know. CARISOPHVS. a crafty spie I haue caught, I dare say,
As neuer was in Cicilia, before this day, Suche a one as vewed euery weake place in the Citie, Suruewed the Hauen, and each bulwarke, in talke very wittie: And yet by some wordes▪ him selfe he dyd bewray. ARISTIPPVS. ¶ I thinke so in good faith, as you did handle him. CARISOPHVS. ¶ I handled him clarkly, I ioyned in talke with him courteously, But when wée were entred, I let him speake his wyll, and I Suckt out thus much of his words, that I made him say playnely, He was come hether to know the state of the Citie. And not only this, but that he would vnderstande, The state of Dionisius Courte and of the whole land. Which wordes when I heard, I desired him to staye, Till I had done a little businesse of the way, Promising him to returne agayne quickly: And so did conuaye My self to ye Court for Snap ye Tipstaffe, which came & vpsnatched Brought him to the Court and in the porters lodge dispatched him: After I ran to Dionisius as fast as I could, And bewrayed this matter to him which I haue you tolde: Which thinge when he heard, beinge very mery before, He sodenly fell in a dump, and fomyng lyke a Bore: At last he swore in a great rage that he should die, By the sworde or the whéele, and that very shortly, I am too shamefast for my trauell and toyle, I craue nothinge of Dionisius but only his spoyle: Litle hath he about him, but a few motheaten crownes of golde Cha poucht them vp all ready, they are sure in hold: And now I goe in to the Citie to say sth▪ To sée what he hath at his lodginge, to make vp my mouth. ARISTIPPVS. My Carisophus, you haue don good seruie, but what is the spiesna CARISOPHVS. ¶ He is called Damon, borne in Créece, from whence latly he cam ARISTIPPVS. ¶By my trouth, I wyll goe sée him▪ and speake with him to if I may CARISOPHVS. ¶Doo so I pray you, but yet by the way: As occasion serueth, commende my seruice to the Kinge. ARIRTIPPVS. Dictum sapienti satest: friend Carisophus, shal I forget that thinge, No, I warrant you, though I say litie to your face,
wyll lay one month for you to Dionisius when I am in place: I speake one worde for suche a knaue, hange mée. EXIT. CARISOPHVS. ur fine Phylosopher▪ out timme learned elfe, gone to see as false a Spie as himselfe: amon smaters as well as he of craftie Phylosophie, nd can tourne Cat in the panne very pretily: ut Carisophus hath geuen him suche a mightie checke, s I thinke in the ende wyll breake his necke: hat care I for that, why would he then prie, d learne the secret estate of our countrey and citie? is but a stranger, by his fall let others be wise, are not who fall, so that I may ryse: for fine Aristippus, I wyll keepe in with hym, is a shrewde foole to deale withall, he can swym: d yet by my trouth, to speake my conscience playnlie, wyll vse his friendship to myne owne commodytie: hile Dionisius fauoureth him, Aristippus shalbe mine, ut if the kynge once trowne on him, then good night Tomaline: shalbe as straunge, as thoughe I neuer sawe hym before, ut I tarie too longe, I wyll prate no more: cke, come awaye. IACKE. ¶ At hande syr. CARISOPHVS. ¶ At Damons lodgyng if that you sée, y sturre to arise, be styll at hand by mée, ather then▪ I wyll lose the spoyle, I wyll blade it out. * Here entreth PITHIAS and STEPHANO. ¶What straunge Newes are these, ah my Stephano? my Damon in Pryson, as the vyce doth go? STEPHANO. ¶It is true, oh cruell happe, he is taken for a Spie, nd as they say, by Dionisius owne mouth condempned to die. PITHIAS. ¶ To die? alas to: what caus? STEPHANO. ¶ A Sicophant falely accused hym: other cause there is none, That oh Iupiter, of all wronges the Reuenger, eest thou this vniustice, and wilt thou staie any longer From heauen to sende downe, thy hote consumyng fire? To destroy the workers of wronge, whiche prouoke thy iust ire▪
Alas maister Pithias, what shall we do? Being in a strange countrey, voyde of friendes & acquaintance too Ah poore Stephano, hast thou liued to see this daye? To sée thy true Mayster vniustly made away? PITHIAS. ¶Stephano, séeyng the matter is come to this extremytie, Let vs make Uertue our frend, of me are necessytie: Runne thou to the Court and vnderstand secretly, As muche as thou canst of Damons cause, and I Will make some meanes to entreate Aristippus: He can do much as I heare with kyng Dionisius. STEPHANO. ¶I am gone sir: ah, I would to God, my trauayle and payne Myght restore my Mayster to his lybertie agayne. PITHIAS. ¶ Ah wofull Pithias, sithe now I am alone, What way shall I first beginne to make my mone? What wordes shall I finde apt for my complaynte, Damon my friend, my ioy, my life is in peril, of force I must now fain But oh Musicke, as in ioyfull tunes, thy mery notes I did borow, So now lend mée thy yernfull tunes, to vtter my sorow. ¶Here PITHIAS singes, and the Regalles play. AWake ye wofull Wightes, That longe haue wept in wo: Resigne to me your plaintes and teares, my haplesse hap to sho: My wo no tongue can tell, ne Pen can well descrie: O, what a death is this to heare, DAMON my friende must die▪ ¶The losse of worldly wealth, mannes wisdome may restore, And Phisicke hath prouided too, a Salue for euerie sore: But my true Frende once lost, no Arte can well supplie: Then, what a death is this to heare? DAMON my friend must die.
¶My mouth refuse the foode▪ that should my limmes sustayne: Let sorow sinke in to my brest, and ransacke euery vayne: You Furies all at once. on me your tormentes trie: Why should I liue, since that I heare? Damon my friend should die? ¶Gripe me you greedy greefs, and present pangues of death▪ You Systers three, with cruell handes, with speed now stop my breath: Shrine me in clay aliue, some good man stop mine eye: Oh death com now, seing I heare, Damon my friend must die. ¶He speaketh this after the songe. In daine I call for Death, whiche heareth not my complaint, But what wisdome is this, in suche extremytie to faint? Multum iuua in re mala annimas bonus. I wyll to the Courte my selfe to make friendes, and that presently, I wyll neuer forsake my friende in time of miserie: But do I see Stephano amazed hether to ronne? ¶Here entreth STEPHANO. ¶ O Pithias, Pithias, we are all vndone, Mine owne eares haue sucked in mine owne sorow: I heard Dionisius sweare, that Damon should die to morow. PITHIAS. ¶How camest thou so neare the presence of the kynge, That thou mightest heare Dionisius speake this thynge. STEPHANO. ¶By friendship I gate into the Courte, where in great Audience, I heard Dionisius with his owne mouth geue this cruell sentence By these expresse wordes: that Damon the Gréeke that craftie spie, Without farther Iudgement, to morow should die: Beleeue mée Pithias, with these eares I heard it my selfe▪ PITHIAS. ¶Then how neare is my death also, ah woe is mée.
Ah my Damon, another my selfe: shall I forgo thée? STEPHANO. ¶Syr, there is no tyme of lamentyng now, it behoueth vs, To make meanes to them which can did much with Dionisius: That he be not made awaye ere his cause be fully heard, for we sée By euyll reporte, thynges be made to Princes far worse then they bée, But lo, yonder cōmeth Aristippus, in great fauour wt kyng Dionisius Entreate hym to speake a good worde to the kynge for vs: And in the meane season, I wyll to your lodgyng, to sée all thyngs safe there. EXIT. PITHIAS. ¶To that I agrée but let vs slip afide his talke to heare. ¶Here entreth ARISTIPPVS. ¶Here is a sodayne chaunge in déede, a strange Metamorphosis. This Courte is cleane altered, who would haue thought this? Dionisius of late so pleasant and mery, Is quite changed now into suche melancoly: That nothyng can please hym, he walked vp and downe, Fretting and chafyng, on euerie man he doth frowne: In so much that when I in pleasant wordes began to play, So sternly he frowned on mée, and knit me vp so short, I perceyue it is no safe playing with Lyons, but when it please them, If you claw where it itch not, you shall disease them: And so perhaps get a clap, myne owne proofe taught mée this, That it is very good to be mery and wise: The onely cause of this hurly burly, is Carisophus that wicked man, Whiche lately tooke Damon for a Spie, a poore Gentleman: And hath incencest the kynge against him so despightfully, That Dionisius hath iudged him to morow to die: I haue talkt with Damon, whom though in words I found very wittie Yet was he more curious then wise in viewyng this Citie: But truely for ought I can learne, there is no cause why So sodenly and cruelly, he should be condempned to die: How so euer it be, this is the short and longe, I dare not gainsay the kynge, be it right or wrong: I am sory, and that is all I may or can doo in this case, Nought auayleth perswasion, where frowarde opinion taketh place. PITHIAS. ¶Sir, if humble sutes you would not despise, Then bow on mée your pitifull eyes: My name is Pithias, in Gréece well knowne, A perfect friend to that woll Damon, Whiche now a poore captiue in this Courte doth lie,
By the kinges owne mouth as I here, condemned to die: For whom I craue your masterships goodnesse, To stand his friend in this his great distresse: Nought hath he done worthy of Death, but very fondly, Being a straunger, he vewed this Citie▪ For no euill practises, but to féede his eyes, But seing Dionisius is informed otherwise, My sute is to you, when you sée time and place, To asswage the kinges anger, and to purchase his grace, In which dooyng, you shall not doo good to one onely, But you shall further too, and that fully. ARIRTIPPVS. My friend, in this case I can doo you no pleasure. PITHIAS. Syr, you serue in the Court as Fame doth tell. ARISTIPPVS. I am of the Court in déede, but none of the Counsell. PITHIAS. As I heare, none is in greater fauour with the Kinge then you at this day, ARISTIPPVS. The more in fauour, the lesse I dare say. PITHIAS. It is a Courtiers prayse to helpe straingers in miserie. ARISTIPPVS. To helpe an other and hurte my selfe, it is an euyll point of courtese. PITHIAS. You shall not hurt your selfe to speake for the innocent. ARISTIPPVS. He is not innocent, whom the kinge iudgeth nocent. PITHIAS. Why sir? doo you thinke this matter paste all remedie? ARISTIPPVS. So fare past that Dionisius hath sworne Damon to morow shall di PITHIAS. This word my trembling heart cutteh in twoo, Ah sir, in this wofull case, what wist I best to doo. ARISTIPPVS. ¶ Best to content your selfe, when there is no remedie, He is well reliued that for knoweth his miserie, Yet if any comfort be, it resteth in Eubulus, The chiefest counsellour about kinge Dionisius: Which pitieth Damons case in this great extremitie,
Perswadyng the kynge from all kynde of crueltie. PITHIAS. ¶ The mightie Gods preserue you for this worde of comforte, Takyng my leaue of your goodnesse, I wyll now resorte, To Eubulus that good Counseller: But harke, me thinke I heare a Trompet blow. ARISTIPPVS. ¶The kyng is at hand, stande close in the prease, beware: if he know You are friend to Damon, e wyll take you for a spie also: Farewell I dare not be séene with you. ¶Here entreth Kyng DYONYSIVS, EVBVLVS the Counseller, and GRONOO the Hangman. DYONYSIVS. ¶Gronoo, doo my cōmaundement, strike off Damons Icons by & by, Then bryng hym foorth, I my selfe will sée him executed presently. GRONOO. ¶O mightie Kyng, your commaundement wyll I doo spéedely. DIONYS. ¶Eubulus: thou hast talked in vaine, for sure he shall die. Shall I suffre my lyfe to stande in peryll of euerie Spie? EVBVLVS. ¶That he conspired against your person, his Accuser can not say, He onely viewed your Citie▪ and wyll you for that make hym away. DYONYS. What he would haue done, the gesse is great, he minded mée to hurt That came so flily to serch out the secret estate of my Courte: Shall I styll lyue in feare? no, no: I wyll cut off suche Impes betime▪ Least that to my further daunger, too hie they clime. EVBVLVS. ¶Yet haue the mightie Goddes, immortall Fame assigned▪ To all worldly Princes, whiche in mercie be inclined. DYONYSIVS. Let Fame talke what she lyst, so I may lyue in safetie. EVBVLVS. ¶ The onely meane to that, is to vse mercie. DYONYS. ¶A milde Prince the people despiseth. EVBVLVS. ¶ A cruell kynge the people hateth. DYONYSIVS. ¶Let them hate me, so they feare mée. EVBVLVS. That is not the way to lyue in safetie.
DYONYSIVS. ¶My sword and power shall purchase my quietnesse. EVBVLVS. ¶ That is sooner procured by mercy and gentilnesse. DYONYS. ¶ Dionisius ought to be feared. EVBVLVS. ¶ Better for him to be welbeloued. DYONYSIVS. ¶ Fortune maketh all thinges subiect to my power. EVBVLVS. ¶ Beleue her not she is a light Goddesse, she can laugh & lowre: DIONYS. ¶ A kinges prayse standeth in the reuenging of his enemie EVBVLVS. ¶ A greater prayse to winne him by clemencie. DYONYS. ¶ To suffer the wicked liue, it is no mercie. EVBVLVS. ¶ To kill the innocent, it is great crueltie, DYONISYVS. ¶ Is Damon innocent, which so craftely vnderminded Carisophus, vnderstand what he could of kinge Dionisius: hich suruewed the Hauen and eche Bulwarcke in the Citie, here battrie might be layde, what way best to approche, shall I ffer such a one to liue, that worketh me such dispite? , he shall die, then I am safe, a dead dogge can not bite. EVBVLVS. ¶ But yet, O mightie, my dutie bindeth me, geue such counsell as with your honour may best agrée, e strongest pillers of Princely dignitie, nde this iustice, with mercy and prudent liberalitie, e one iudgeth all thinges by vpright equitie, e other rewardeth the worthy, flying eche extremitie: to spare those, which offend maliciously, may be called no iustice, but extreame iniurie: vpon suspicion, of each thinges not well proued, put to death presently, whom enuious flattery accused, séemeth of tiranny, and vpon what fickle ground al tirants doo stand and Lacedemon, can teache you yf it be rightly scande: not only these Citezens, but who curiously séekes, whole Histories of all the world, not only of Romaines & Gréekes
Shall well perceyue of all Tirantes the ruinous fall, Their state vncertaine, beloued of none, but hated of all: Of mercifull Princes to set oute the passyng felycitie I néede not: ynough of that, euen these dayes do testifie: They liue deuoid of feare, their sleapes are found, they dréed no ene They are feared and loued, and why? they rule with Iustice & merc Extendyng Iustice to such, as wickedly from Iustice haue swarued, Mercie vnto those, where opinion, simplenesse haue mercie deserued: Of lybertie nought I say; but onely this thynge, Lybertie vpholdeth the state of a kynge: Whose large bountifulnesse ought to fall to this issue, To rewarde none, but suche as deserue it for vertue: Whiche mercifull Iustice, if you would folow, & prouident liberalyti Neither the Caterpillers of all Courtes, Et fruges consumere nati. Parasites with wealth puft vp, should not looke so hie, Nor yet for this simple facte, poore Damon should die. DIONYSIVS. ¶With payne mine eares haue heard this vayne talke of mercie, I tell thée, feare and terrour, defendeth kynges onely: Tyll he be gone whome I suspect, how shall I lyue quietly? Whose memorie wt chilling horror, fils my breast day & night violentl My dreadfull dreames of him, bereues my rest: On bed I lie Shakyng and trembling, as one ready to yelde his throate to Damon sword▪ This quakyng dread, nothyng but Damons bloud can stay, Better he die, then I to be tormented with feare alway: He shall die, though Eubulus consent not thereto, It is lawfull for kynges as they list all thynges to doo. ¶Here GRONOO bringeth in DAMON: and PITHIAS méeteth him by the way. PITHIAS. ¶Oh my Damon. DAMON. ¶Oh my Pithias, seyng Death must parte vs, farewell for euer. PITHIAS. ¶Oh Damon, oh my swéete friende. SNAP. ¶Away from the Prysoner, what a prease haue we here. GRONOO. As you commaunded, O mighty Kinge, wée haue brought Damo DIONYS. ¶ Then go to, make redy I will not stirre out of this place, Til I sée his head stroken off before my face.
GRONOO. ¶It shalbe done sir: Because your eyes haue made suche a doo, wyl knock down this your Lantern, & shut vp your shop window too. DAMON. ¶ O mightie king, where as no trueth, my innocent lyfe can saue, But that so gréedily you thrust, my giltlesse bloud to haue: lbeit, (euen for thought) for ought against your person: et now I plead not for lyfe, ne wyll I craue your pardon: But seyng in Gréece my Countrey, where well I am knowne, haue worldly thinges, fit for mine Aliance when I am gone, dispose them or I die, if I might obtaine leasure, would account it (O kyng) for a passyng great pleasure: ot to prolonge my lyfe therby, for whiche I reken not this, ut to set my thynges in a stay: and surely I wyll not misse, pon the faith which all gentylmen ought to embrace, o returne agayne at your time to appoynte, to yeld my body here in this place: raunt me (O Kinge (such time to dispatch this iniurie, nd I wyll not fayle, when you appointed, euen here my lyfe to pay. DIONISIVS. ¶ A pleasant request, as though I could trust him absent, ho in no wise I can not trust beinge present: nd yet though I sware the contrarie, doo that I require, eue me a pledge for thy returne, and haue thine owne desire: is as nere now as he was before. DAMON. ¶Ther is no surer nor greater pledge, then the faith of a Gentleman DIONYS. ¶It was wont to be, but otherwise now the world doth stande, herfore doo as I say, els presently yéeld thy necke to the sword, I might with mine honour I would recall my worde. PITHIAS. ¶Stand to your worde, O Kinge, for Kinges ought nothing say, that they would performe, in perfect deeds alway: you did require, when Damon his ute did méene, which, with heart and stretched handes, most humble thankes I geue, that you may not say, but Damon hath a frinde, loues him better then his owne life, and will doo to his ende: ake mee. Oh mightie Kinge, my lyfe I pawne for his, rike off my head, if Damon hap at his day to misse. DIONYS. ¶What art thou, that chargest me with my worde so boldly here? PITHIAS.
¶I am Pithias, a Greeke borne, whiche hold Damon my friend full deare DIONIS. To dere perhaps, to hazard thy life for him, what fondnes moueth thée PITHIAS. No fondnesse at all, but perfect amitie. DIONISIVS. A mad kind of amitie: aduise thy self well, if Damon fayle at his day Which shalbe iustly appine, wilt thou die for him, to mee his lyfe o pay. PITHIAS. Most wyllyngly, O mightie kyng: if Damon fayle, let Pithias die. DIONYSIVS. Thou séemest to trust his wordes, that pawnest thy lyfe so franckly. PITHIAS. What Damon saith, Pithias beleueth assuredly. DYONYSIVS. Take héede for lyfe, worldly men breake promise in many thinges. PITHIAS. Though worldly men doo so, it neuer happes amongest frindes. DIONISIVS. What callest thou friendes, are they not men? is not this true? PITHIAS Men they be, but such men as loue one an other onely for vertue. DIONISIVS. For what vertue, doste thou loue this spie, this Damon. PITHIAS. For that vertue, which yet to you is vnknowne. DYONYSIVS. Eubulus, what shall I doo? I would dispatch this Damon fayne, But this foolish felow so chargeth mee, that I may not call backe my worde agayne. EVBVLVS. The reuerent maistie of a King, stands chiefly in kéeping his promise What you haue, sayde, this whole Courte beareth witnesse: Saue your honour what so euer you doo. DYONYSYVS. For saueing mine honour, I must forbeare my wyll, go to, Pithias, seeing thou tookest me at my word, take Damon to thée: For two mounthes he is thine, vnbinde him, I set him frée, Which time once expired, yf he appeare not the next day by noone, With out further delay, thou shalt lose thy lyfe, and that full soone. Whether he di by the way, or lie sicke in his bead, If he retourne not then, thou shalt either hange or lose thy head.
PITHIAS. For this O mightie kinge, I yeld immortall thankes, O ioyfull day DYONYSIVS. Gronee, take him to thée, bind him, sée him kept in safetie. f he escape assure thy selfe, for him thou shalt die, ubulus, let vs departe, to talke of this straunge thinge within, EVBVLVS, I folowe. EXIT. GRONNO. Damon, thou seruest the Gods well to day, be thou of comfort, As for you sir, I thinke you wyll be hanged in sporte, You heard what the Kinge sayde? I must kepe you safely, By cocke so I wyll, you shall rather hange then I: Come on your way, PITHIAS. My Damon, farewell, the Gods haue thée in kepeing. DAMON. Oh my Pithias, my Pleadge farewell, I parte from thée wéeping But ioyfull at my day appoynted I wyll retourne agayne, When I wyll deliuer thée from all trouble and paine: Stephano wyll I leaue behinde me to wayte vpon thée in prison alone, And I whom fortune hath reserued to this miserie, wyll walke home, Ah my Pithias, my Pleadge, my life, my friend, farewell. PITHIAS. Farewell my Damon. DAMON. Loth I am to departe, sith sobbes my trembling tounge doth stay▪ Oh Musicke, sounde my dolefull playntes when I am gone my way. GRONNO. I am glad he is gone. I had almost wept to, come Pithias So God helpe me, I am sory for thy foolish case, Wilt thou venter thy life for a man, so fondly? PITHIAS. It is no venter, my friende is iust, for whom I desire to die. GRONNO. Here is a mad man I tell thée, I haue a wyfe whom I loue well, And if iche woald die for her, chould ich weare in Hell: Wylt thou doo more for a man, then I woulde for a woman. PITHIAS. Yea, that I wyll GRONNO. Then come on your wayes, you must to Prison in haste, repent this folly at laste.
PITHIAS. That shalt thou neuer sée: but oh Musick as my Damon requested thée Sounde out thy dolefull tunes, in this time of calamitie. EXIT. ¶ Here the Regalles play a mourning songe, and Damon commeth in, in Mariners apparell, and Stephano with him. ¶ Wéepe no more Stephano, this is but destinie, Had not this hapt, yet I know I am borne to die: Where or in what place, the Gods know alone, To whose iudgement my selfe I commit, therfore leaue of thy mone, And wayte vpon Pithias in Prison, till I retourne agayne, In whom my ioy, my care and lyfe doth only remayne. STEPHANO. Oh my deare Master, let me go with you, for my poore companie, Shalbe some small comfort in this time of miserie. DAMON. Oh Stephano, hast thou ben so longe with me, And yet doest not know the force of true amitie? I tel thee once agayne, my friend and I are but one, Waite vpon Pithias, and thinke thou art with Damon. Whereof I may not now discourse, the time passeth away, The sooner I am gone, the shorter shalbe my iournay: Therefore farewell Stephano, commend me to my friende Pithias Whom I trust to deliuer in time out of this wofull case. STEPHANO. Farewell my deare Master, since your pleasure is so, Oh cruell happe, oh poore Stephano: O cursed Carisophus, that first moued this Tragidie, But what a noyes is this? Is all well within trow yée: I feare all be not well within, I wyll go see: Come out you Wesell, are you séekinge Egs in Damons cheste, Come out I say, wylt thou be packing? by cocke you weare beste. GARISOPH. How durst thou villaine to lay handes on me? STEPHANO. Out sir knaue or I wyll sende yée, Art thou not content to accuse Damon wrongfully, But wilt thou rebbe him also, and that openly? CARISPH. The Kinge gaue me the spoyle, to take myne owne wilt thou let me? STEPHANO. Thine owne villaine: Where is thine authoritie?
CARYSOPHVS. I am authoritie of my selfe, doest thou not know? STEPHANO. Byr ladie, that is somwhat, but haue you no more to show? CARYSOPHVS. What if I haue not? STEPHANO. Then for an earnest penie, take this blow. hall bumbast you, you mocking knaue, schil put pro in my purse for this time. CARYSOPH Iacke geue me my sword and targat. IACKE. I can not com to you maister, this knaue doth me let. Hold maister, STEPHANO. Away Iacke napes, tis I wyll colpheg you by and by, slaue I wyll haue my peny worthes of thée, therefore if I die, oute villayne. CARYSOPH. O Citezens, helpe o defend me. STEPHANO. Nay, they wyll rather helpe to hange thée. CARISOPH. Good felow, let vs reason this matter quietly, beat me no more. STEPHANO. f this condition I wyll stay, yf thou swere as thou art an honest man ou wylt say nothyng to the Kinge of this when I am gonne. CARISOPH. I wyll say nothyng, here is my hand, as I am an honest man. STEPHANO. Then say on thy minde: I haue taken a wise othe on him, haue I not trow ye? o trust such a false knaue vpon his honestie, he is an honest man (quoth you) he may bewray all to the Kinge, o breke his oth for this neuer a whit, but my framon I tell you this one thing▪ you diclose this▪ I wyll deuyse such a way, at wilst thou liuest thou shalt remember this day. CARYSOPH. You néede not deuise for that, for this day is printed in my memory, warrant you, I shall remember this beating till I die: ut seeing of courtesie you haue granted that we should talke quietly, e thinkes, in calling me knaue, you doo me muche iniurie. STEPHANO. Why so? I pray thée hartely?
CARYSOPHVS. Because I am the Kinges man, kéepes the kinge any knaues▪ STEPHANO. He should not, but what he doth it is euident by thée: And as farre as I can learne or vnderstand, There is none better able to kéepe knaues in all the land. CARISOPHVS. Oh sir, I am a Courtier, when Courtiers shall heare tell, How you haue vsed me, they will not take it well. STEPHANO. Nay, all right courtiers will kenne me thanke, and wot ye why? Because I handled a counterfait Courtier in his kinde so finely, What syr: all are not Courtiers that haue a counterfait show, In a trope of honest men, some knaues may stand ye know: Such as by stelth créep in, vnder the colour of honestie, Which sorte vnder that cloke, doo all kind of villanie: A right courtier is vertuous, gentill, and full of vrbanitie, Hurting no man, good to all, deuoid of all villanie: But suche as thou act, fountaines of squirilitie, & vayne delightes, Though you hange by the courtes, you are bt flatring Parasites, As well deseruing the right name of courtesie, As the coward Knight, the true praise of cheualrie: I could say more, but I wyll not, for that I am your well willer, In faith Carisophus, you are no Courtier but a catterpiller, A Sicophant, a Parasite, a flatterer, and a knaue? Whether I wyll or no, these names you must haue: How well you deserne this, by your déedes it is knowne, For that so vniustly thou hast accused poore Damon, Whose wofull case the Gods helpe alone. CARYSOPH. Syr, are you his seruaunt that you pitie his case so? STEPHANO. No bum troth, good man Grumbe, his name is Stephano. I am called Onaphets, if néedes you wyll know, The knaue beginneth to sift me, but I turne my name in & out, Cretiso cum cretense, to make him a loute. CARYSOPH. What mumble you with your selfe Master Onaphets. STEPHANO. I am reckening with my selfe, how I may pay my debtes. CARYSOPH. You haue paide me more then you did owe me.
STEPHANO. Nay, vpon a farther reckoning, I wyll pay you more if I know Either you talke of that is done, or by your Sicophanticall enuye, You pricke forth Dionisius the sooner, that Damon may die: I wyll so pay thée, that ty bones shall rattell in thy skinne, Remember what I haue sayde, Onaphets is my name. EXIT CARYSOPH. The sturdie knaue is gone, the Deuyll him take, He hath made my head, shoulders, armes, sides, and all to ake: Thou horson villaine boy, why didst thou waite no better? As he payde mée, so wyll I not die thy debter. IACKE. Mayster, why doo you fight with me? I am not your match you sée, You durst not fight wt him yt is gone, & wyll you wreke your anger on mée CARYSOPHVS. Thou villaine, by thee I haue lost mine honour, Betten with a codgell like a Slaue, a Uacaboun, or a lae Lubber, And not geuen one blow agayne, hast thou handled me well? IACKE. Maister I handled you not, but who did handle you very handsomly you can tell. CARYSOPHVS. Handsomly thou crake rope. IACKE. Yea sir, very handsomly I holde you a grote, He handled you so handsomly, that he left not one more in your cote. CARISOPH. O I had firck him trimly thou villaine, if thou hadst geuen mée my Sword IACKE. It is better as it is, Maister beleue me at a worde: If he had séene your weapon, he would haue ben fierser, And so perhaps beate you worse, I speake it with my harte, ou were neuer yet at the dealing of fence blowes, bu you had foure away for your part t is but your lucke, you are man good enough, But the Wealche Onaphets, was a vengeaunce knaue and rough, Maister you were best go home and reste in your bedde, Ye thinkes your cappe waeth to little for your heade. CARISOPH. What? doth my head swell? IACKE. Yea as bigge as a odshed, and bleades too. CARYSOPH. I am asamed to show my face with this hew.
IACKE. No shame at all, men haue bin beaten farre better then you, CARISOPHVS. I muste go to the Chirurgians, what shall I say when I am a dreslyng▪ IACKE. You may say truly, you met with a knaues blessing. EXEVNT ¶ Here entreth ARISTIPPVS. ¶ By mine owne experience, I proue true that many men tell, To liue in Courte not beloued, better be in Hell: What criyng out? what cursyng is there within of Carisophus, Because he accused Damon to Kinge Dionisius: Euen now, he came whining & criyng into the Courte for the nonce▪ Shewinge that one Onaphets had broke his knaues scnce: Which straunge name when they heard, euery man laught hartely, And I by my selfe scand his name secretly, For well I knewe it was some madheded chylde That inuented this name, that the logheaded knaue might be begilde: In tossing it often with my selfe to and fro, I found out that Onaphets, backward spelled Stephano: I smiled in my sleue, how to sée by tournyng his name, he drest him, And how for Damō his Masters sake, wt a wodden congell he blest hi None pittied ye knaue, no man nor woman, but all laught him to scorn To be thus hated of all better vnborne: Farre better Aristippus hath prouided I trowe, For in all the Courte, I am beloued both of hie and lowe: I offende none, in so muche that wemen singe this to my great prayse▪ Omnis Aristippum docuit colore, & locus & res. But in all this ioylitie, one thinge maseth me, The strangest thinge that euer was harde or knowne Is now happened in this Court by that Damon: Whom Carisophus accused, Damon is now at libertie, For whos return Pithias his friēd lieth in prisō, alas in great ieopard To morow is ye day, which day by noone if Damon return not, ernestly The kinge hath sworne that Pithias should die, Wherof Pithias hath intelligence very secretly, Wishing that Damon may not returne, tyll he haue payde His lyfe for his friend: hath it ben heare to fore euer sayde, That any man for his friend would die so wyllyngly? O noble friendship, O perfect amitie, Thy force is heare séene, and that very perfectlie: The kinge him selfe museth here at, yet is he farre out of square, That he trusteth none, to come nere him not his owne doughters wit he haue
nsercht to enter his chamber, which he hath made harbars his beard to shaue: Not with Knife or afour, for all edge tooles he feares, But with hote burning Nutshales, they senge of his heares. Was there euer man that liued in such miserye? Well, I wyll go in with a heauye and ensue hart too, To think how Pithias this poore gentleman to morow shal die EXIT ¶ Here entreth IACKE and VVYLL. ¶Wyll, by my honesty, I wyll marre your monckes face if you so fondly prate VVYLL. ¶ Iacke, by my troth, séeing you are without the Courte gae, f you play Iacke napes, in mocking my master, and dispising my face, uen here with a Pantacle, I wyll you disgrace: nd though you haue a farre better ace then I, et, who is better man of vs two, these sistes shall trie, nlesse you leaue your taunting. IACKE. ¶ Thou beganst first, didst thou not say euen nowe, hat Carisophus my Master was no man but a cowe, takinge so many blowes, and gaue neuer a blow agayne? VVYLL. ¶ I sayde so in déede, he is but a tame Ruffian, hat can swere by his flaske & twiche hor & Gods precious lady: nd yet be will be beaten with a faggot stick: hee barking whepes were neuer good biters, e yet great crakers were euer great fighters: ut seeinge you eg mée so much  wyll somewhat more resight, ay Cariopus thy master is a flattring Parisite: lening away the sweet from the worthy in all the Courte, hat tragiie hath he moued of late? ye deuell take him he doth much hurt. IACKE. ¶ I pray you what is Aristippus thy master, is not he a Parisite to, hat with scoffing and testing in the Court makes so much a doo? VVYLL. ¶ He is no Parisie, but a pleasant Gentlman, full of curtesie, hy master is a chulth loute the heyre of a doung forke, as voyde of honestie, thou art of honour. IACKE. ¶ Nay yf you wyll needes be prating of my master styll, faith, I must coole you my frinde Dapper Wyll. ake this at the beginning. VVYLL. I Prayse well your winning, my Pantacle is as readie as yours.
IACKE. By the Masse I wyll boxe you. VVYLL. By cocke I wyll Foxe you IACKE. Wyll, was I with you. VVYLL. Iacke, did I flye? IACKE. Alas pretie cockerell, you are to weake. VVYLL. In faith Dutting Duttell, you wyll crye creake, ¶Here entreth SNAP. Away you cracke ropes, are you fighting at the Courte gate? And I take you heare agayne, I wyll swindge you both, what? EXIT IACKE. I beshrew Snap the Tipstaffe that great knaues hart, y• hether dicom Had he not ben, you had cried ere this Victus, victa, victum, But seing wée haue breathed our selues, if ye list, Let vs agrée like friends, and shake eche other by the fist. VVYLL. Content am I, for I am not malicious, but on this condition, That you talke no more so brode of my master as here you haue done, But who haue wée here, is Cobex epi comming yonder. IACKE. Wyll, let vs slipp aside and vewe him well. ¶ Here entreth GRIMME the Coliar whistling. What Deuell, iche wéene ye Porters are drunke, will they not uy the gate tooday Take in Coles for ye Kings owne mouth, wyll no body stur I say? Ich might haue layne tway bowers longer in my bdde, Cha taried so longe here, that my teeth chatter in my heade. IACKE. Wyll, after our fallinge out, wilt thou laugh merily▪ VVYLL. I mary Iacke, I pray thée hartely. IACKE. Then folow me, and hemme in a worde now and then: What braulynge knaue is there at the Courte gate so early? VVYLL. It is some brainsicke Uillaine, I durst lay a pennie. IACKE. It was you sir that cryed so lowde, I trow, And bid vs take in Coles for the Kinges mouth, euen now. GRIMME Twas I indéede. IACKE. Why sir? how dare you speake such petie treason? Doth the Kinge eate Coles at any season? GRIMME.
Here is a gaye worlde, Boyes now settes olde men to scool, I sayde well enough, what Iacke sauce, thinkst chain a foole▪ It Bake house, Buttrie hatch, Ritchin, and Seller; Doo they not say for the Kinges mouth? VVYLL. What then good man Coliar? GRIMME. What then? seing wtout coles thei cannot finely dresse ye kinges meat, May I not say, take in coles for ye kinges mouth, though coles he do not eate? IACKE. Iames Christe, came euer from a Colier an aunswere so trimme? You are learned, are you not Father Grimme? GRIMME. Grimme is my name in déed, cham not learned, & yet ye Kinges colier This vortie winter cha bin to the Kinge a seruiler, Though I be not learned, yet cha mother witte enough whole & some VVYLL. So it séemes, you haue so much mother wit, that you lacke your fathers wisdome. GRIMME. Masse, cham well be set: heres is a trimme cast of Murleons What be you my pretie cockerels, that aske me these questions. IACKE. Good faith maister Grimme, if such Marlines on your pouch may light Thei are so quick of winge yt quickly they can carie it out of your sight And though we are cockerels now, we shall haue spurs one day, And shall be able perhaps to make you a Capon: But to tell you trouth: we are the Porters mn, which early & late, Wayte on suche Gentlemen as you to open the Caurtegate. GRIMME. Are ye seruants then? VVYLL. Yea sir, are we not pretie men? GRIMME. Pretie men ({quod} you) nay, you are stronge men, els you could not beare these briches. VVYLL. Are these great hose? in faith goodman Colier you sée with your nose By myne honestie, I haue but for one lining in one hose, but vij els of Rug▪ GRIMME. That is but a little, yet it makes thée séeme a great Bugge. IACKE. How say you good man Colier, can you finde any fault here? GRIMME. ay you should finde fault, mary heres trimme geare, as little knaue, doest not sweat, thou goest with great payne, These are no hose, but watter bougets, I tell thée playne:
Good for none, but suche as haue no buttockes. Dyd you euer sée two suche little Robin ruddockes, So laden with bréeches? chill say no more, lest I offende, Who inuented these monsters first, did it to a gostly ende: To haue a male, readie to put in other folkes stuffe, Wee sée this euident by dayly prooffe: One preached of late not farre hence, in no Pulpet, but in Waayne carte, That spake enough of this, but for my parte, Chil say no more, your owne necessitie, In the ende wyll force you to finde some remedy. IACKE. Well, holde this raylynge knaue with a talke when I am gone, I wyll fetch him his filling ale for his good sermone. VVYLL. Go thy way: father Grimme, gayly well you doo say, It is but youngmens folly that liste to playe: And maske a whyle in the net of their owne deuise, When they come to your age, they wyll be wyse. GRIMME. Bum troth, but few such roysters come to my yeares at this day, They be cut off be times, or they haue gone halfe their iourney: I wyll not tell why, let them gesse that can, I meane somwhat thereb ¶Enter IACKE. with a pot of wyne, and a cup to drinke on. Father Grimme, because you are sturring so early, I haue brought you a boule of wyne to make you mery. GRIMME. Wyne, mary, that is welcome to Colliers, chyl swapt of by & by Chwas sturringe so early that my very soule is drye. IACKE. This is stoutely done, wyll you haue it warmed father Grimme. GRIMME. No, it is warme enough: it is very loustous and trimme, Tis Musselden ich wéene, of fellowship let me haue an other spurt, Ich can drinke as easly now, as if I sate in my shurte. IACKE. By cocke and you shall haue it, but I wyll beginne and that anon It bit avow mon companion. GRIMME. Ihar vow pleadge pety Zawne, IACKE. Can you speake Frenche? here is a trimme colier by this day.
GRIMME. What man? iche learned this when ich was a Souldier, When ich was a lusty fellow, and could yarke a whip trimly, Better then these boy Coliers that come to the Courte daily: When there were not so many captious fellowes as now, That would toruppe men for euery trifell. I wot not how: As there was one Damon, not longe since, taken for a Spie, How iustly I know not, but he was condemned to die. VVYLL. This Wine hath warmed him, this comes well to pas, We shall know all now, for in VINO VERITAS, Father Grimme, who accused this Damon to Kinge Dionisius? GRIMME. A vengaunce take him, twas a gentleman, one Maister Crowsphus. VVYLL. Crowsphus, you clippe the Kinges language, you would haue said Carisophus But I perceue now, either the winde is at the South, Or els your tounge cleaneth to the roofe of your mouth. GRIMME. A murian take thik Wine, it so inticate my braine, That to be hanged by and by, I cannot speake plaine. IACKE. You speake knauishly playne, seinge my master you doo mocke, In faith ere you go, I wyll make you a lobbe cecke: Father Grimme, what say they of this Damon abrode? GRIMME. All men are sorie for him, so helpe me God. They say a false knaue cused him to the King wrongfully, And he is gone, and should be here to morow to die, Or els his fellow which is in prison, his rowme shall supplie: Chil not be his halfe for vortie shillinges, I tell you playne, I thinke Damon be to we to returne agayne. VVYLL. Wyll no man speake for them in this wofull case. GRIMME. No chill warrant you, one maister Stippus is in place, Where he may doo good, but he frames him selfe so, Whatsoeuer Dionisius wylleth to that he wyll not say no: Tis a suttell Uor, he wyll not tread on thornes for none, A mery Harecope tis and a pleasant companion, A right courtier, and can prouide for one. IACKE.
Wyll, how lyke you this geare▪ your master Aristippus also, At this Coliers hande hath had a ble: But in faith father Grimme cannot ye Coliers, Prouide for your selues far better then Courtiers. GRIMME. Yes I trow, blacke Coliers go in threade bare cotes, Yet so prouide they, that they haue the faire white groates: Ich may say in counsell, though all day I moyle in dourte, Chill not change liues with any in Dionisius Courte: For though their apparell be neuer so fine, Yet sure their credit is farre worse then mine: And by cocke I may say, for all their hie lookes, I know some stickes full déepe in Marchants bookes: And déeper will fall in, as fame me telles, As long as in stéede of Money, they take vp Haukes hoods & Belles: Wherby they fall into a swelling disease, which Coliers doo not know Tath a mad name, it is called ich wéene, Centum pro cento. Some other in Courtes, make others laugh merily, When they wayle and lament their owne estate secretly: Friendship is dead in Courte, Hipocrisie doth raigne, Who is in fauour now, to morow is out agayne: The state is so vncertaine, that I by my wyll, Will neuer be courtier, but a Colier styll. VVYLL. It séemeth that Coliers haue a very trim lyfe. GRIMME. Coliers get money styll: Tell me of trouth, Is not that a trim life now as the world goeth? All day, though I toyle with mayne and might, With mony in my pouche, I come home mery at night, And sit downe in my chayre by my wyfe faire Alison, And tourne a Crabbe in the fire, as mery as Pope Iohn. IACKE. That Pope was a mery fellow, of whome folke talke so much. GRIMME Had to be mery withal, had goulde enough in his hutch: IACKE. Can goulde make men mery? they say who can singe so mery a note, As he that is not able to change a grote? GRIMME. Who singes in that case singes neuer in tune I know for my parte That a heauy pouch with goulde makes a light harte:
Of which I haue prouided for a deare yeare good store, And these Benters I trowe, shall anone get me more. VVYLL. By seruing the Courte with coles you gaynde all this money. GRIMME. By the Court onely I assure ye. IACKE. After what sort I pray thée tell mée? GRIMME. Nay, ther bate me an ace (quod Boulon) I can weare a horne & blow it not IACKE. Byr lady the wiser man. GRIMME. Shall I tell you by what lite I got all this money Then ich weare a noddy in déede: no, no, I warrant ye, Yet in few words I tell you this one thinge, He is a very foole that can not gayne by the Kinge. VVYLL. Well sayde father Grimme, you are a wilie Colier & a braue, I sée now there is no knaue to the olde knaue. GRIMME. Suche knaues haue mony, when courtiers haue none, But tell me, is it true that a brode is blowne? IACKE. What is that? GRIMME. Hath the Kinge made those fayre Damsels his daughters, To be come now fine and trimme Barbers. IACKE. Yea truly to his owne person. GRIMME. Good fellowes beleue me, as the case now standes, I would geue one sacke of Coles, to be washt at their hands: If ich came so neare them, for my wyt chould not geue three chippes, If ich could not steale one swap at their lippes. IACKE. Wyll, this knaue is drunke, let vs dresse him, Let vs riffell him so that he haue not one pennie to blesse him, And steale away his Debenters too. VVYLL. Content, inuent the waye, and I am readie. ACKE. Faith, and I wyll make him a noddie: Father Grimme, if you praie me well, I wyll wash you & shaue you too Een after the same fashion as the Kinges daughters doo: In all poyntes as they handle Dionisius, I wyll dresse you trim & fine
GRIMME Chuld vayne learne y•: come on then, chil geue thée a whol pint of win At Tauerne for thy labour, when cha mony for my Benters heare. ¶Here Wyll fetcheth a Barbers bason, a pot with water, a Raysour, and Clothes and a payre of Spectacles. IACKE. Com mine owne Father Grimme, sit downe. GRIMME Mas to beginne withall, heare is a trimme chayre▪ IACKE. What man I wyll vse you like a prince: sir boy, fetche me my geare. VVYLL. Here syr. IACKE. Holde vp father Grimme. GRIMME. Me séeme my head doth swimme. IACKE. My Costly perfumes make that, away with this sir Bay: e quicke▪ Aloyse, aloyse, how how pretie it is, is not here a good face? A fine Oules eyes, a mouth lyke an Ouen, Father you haue good Butter téeth, full séene, You weare weaued, els you would haue ben a great Calfe▪ Ah trimme lippes to swéepe a Manger, here is a chinne, As softe as the hoose of an horse. GRIMME. Doth the Kinges daughters rubbe so harde? IACKE. Hold your head straite man, els all wyll be marde, Byr ladie, you are of a good complexion, A right Croyden sanguine, beshrew mee, Hould vp father Grimme, Wyll can you besturre ye? GRIMME Me thinks after a maruelous fashion you do besmoure me. IACKE. It is with VNGVENTVM of Daucus Maucus, that is very costly, I geue not this washinge ball to euery body: After you haue ben drest so finely at my hande, You may kisse any Ladies lippes within this lande: A, you are trimly washt, how say you, is not this trimm water? GRIMME. It may be holsome, but it is vengeaunce sower. IACKE. It scours the better, syr boy, geue me my raysur, VVYLL. Here at hand syr.
GRIMME. Gods aymes, tis a chopping knyfe, tis no Raysour. IACKE. It is a Raysour and that a very good one, It came lately from Palarrime, it coste mée .xx. crownes alone Your eyes dassell after your washing, these spectacles put on? Now vew this Raysour, tell me, is it not a good one? GRIMME▪ They be gay Barnikels, yet I sée neuer the better. IACKE. In déede, they be a young sight, and that is the matter, But I warrant you, this Raysour is very easie. GRIMME. Go too then, since you begonne, doo as please ye. IACKE. Holde vp father Grimme. GRIMME. O your Raysour doth hurt my lippe. IACKE. No, it scrapeth of a pimpell, to ease you of the Pippe, I haue done now, how say you? are you not well? GRIMME. Cham lighter then ich was, the truth to tell. IACKE. Will you singe after your shauinge? GRIMME. Mas content, but chill be polde first or I singe. IACKE. Nay that shall not néede, you are pould neare enough for this time. GRIMME. Go to then lustyly, I wyll singe in my mans voyce, Chaue a troublinge base busse. IACKE. You are like to beare the bobbe, for wée wyll geue it, Set out your bussyng base, and wée wyll quiddell vpon it. GRIMME singeth Busse. IACKE Singes, Too nidden, and too nidden. VVYLL. singes. Too nidden, and oodle toadle doo ndden, Is not Grimme the Colier most finely shauen.
GRIMME. Why my fellowes thinke iche am a cowe, that you make such tooyin IACKE. Nay byr lady, you are no cow by your singing, Yet your wyfe tolde me you were an Oxe. GRIMME. Did she so? tis a peslens quene she is full of such mockes▪ But go to, let vs singe out our songe merely. The Songe at the shauing of the Colier. IACKE. ¶Suche Barbers God send you at all times of néede. VVYLL. That can dresse you finely, and make such quicke spéede. IACKE. Your face like an Incorne, now shineth so gay, VVYLL. That I with your Nostrels of force must néedes play, With too nidden, and too nidden. IACKE. With too nidden, and todle todle doo nidden, Is not Grimme the Colier most finely shauen. VVYLL. With shauing you shine lyke a pestle of Porke: IACKE. Here is the trimmest Hogges flesh from London to Yor▪ VVYLL. It woulde be trimme Baken to hange vp a while, IACKE. To play with this Hogline, of force I must smyle, With too nidden, and too nidden VVYLL. With too nidden, and todle &c. GRIMME. Your shauing doth please me, I am now your debter. VVYLL, Your wife now wyll busse you, because you are sweate▪ GRIMME. Neare would I be poled, as neare as cham shauen. VVYLL. Then out of your Ierkin néedes must you be shaken▪ With too nidden, and too nidden, &c. GRIMME. It is a trimme thinge to be washt in the Courte.
VVYLL. Their handes are so fine that they neuer doo hurte. GRIMME. Me thinke ich am lighter then euer ich was. VVYLL. Our shaueinge in the Courte hath brought this to passe. With too nidden, and too nidden. IACKE. With too nidden and todle todle doo nidden. not Grimme the Coler most finely shauen. Finis. GRIMME. THis is trimly done, now chill pitche my coles not farre hense, And then at the Tauerne chil bestowe whole tway pence. IACKE. Farewell cocke, before the Colier againe doo vs séeke, t vs into the Courte to parte the spoyle, share and share like. EXIT VYLL Away then. ¶Here entreth GRIMME. Out alas, where shall I make my mone? y Pouche, my Benters and all is gone, her is that villayne that dyd me shaue? ath robbed me alas of all that I haue. ¶Here entreth Snap. Who crieth so at the Courte gate. GRIMME. I, the poore Colier, that was robbed of late. AP Who robbed thée? GRIMME. Twoo of the Porters men that dyd shaue me. SNAP. Why? the Porters men are no Barbers? GRIMME. A vengance take them they are quicke carners. AP. What stature weare they of? GRIMME. As little dapper knaues as they trimly could scoffe. SNAP. They were Lackeyes, as neare as I can gesse them. GRIMME. Such Lackies make me lacke, an halter beswenge them, am vndon they haue my Benters too. SNAP.
Doest thou know them if thou seest them? GRIMME. Yea that I doo? SNAP. Then come with me, we wyll finde them out and that quickly. GRIMME. I folow mast Tipslafe, they be in the Courte it is likely. SNAP. Then crie no more, come away. EXEVNT. ¶Here entreth Carisophus, and Aristippus. If euer you wyll shew your friendship, now is the time, Seing the king is displeased with me, of my parte without any crime ARISTIP. It should appeare it comes of some euell behauiour, That you so sodenly are cast out of fauour. CARISOPH. Nothing haue I done but this in talke I ouerthwarted Eubulus▪ When he lamented Pithias case to Kinge Dionisius, Which to morrow shall die, but for that false knaue Damon: He hath left his friend in the briers and now is gone. Wée grew so hot in talke, that Eubulus protested playnely, Which held his care open to parasiticall flatery. And now in the Kinges eare like a bell he ringes, Criyng that latterers haue ben the destroyers of kinges: Which talke in Dionisius harte hath made so déepe impression, That he rustes me not as heretofore in no condition: And some wordes brake from him as though that hee, Began to suspect my trouth and honestie: Which you of friendship I know wyll defend, how so euer the world goeth▪ My frind for my honestie, wyll you not take an othe? ARISTIP. To sweare for your honestie, I should lose mine owne. CARISOPH Should you so in déede? I would that were knowne, Is your voyde friendship come thus to passe. ARISTIP. I folow the prouerbe: Amicus Vsque ad auras. CARISOPHVS. Where can you say, I euer lost mine honestie. ARISTIPPVS. You neuer lost it, for you neuer had it, as farre as I know. CARISOPH.
Say you so friend Aristippus whom I trust so well? ARISTIPPVS. Because you trust me, to you the truth I tell. CARISOPH. Wyll you not stretche one poynt? to bringe me in fauour agayne▪ ARISTIP. I loue no stretching, so may I bréede myne owne payne. CARISOPH A friende ought to shonne no payne, to stand his friend in stead. ARISTIP. Where true friendship is, it is so in very déede. CARISOPH. Why sir? hath not the chaine of true friendship, linked vs two together▪ ARISTIP. The cheifest linke lacked therof, it must néedes deseuer. CARISOPH. What linke is that? faine would I know. ARISTIP. Honestie. CARISOPH. Doth honestie knit the perfect knot in true friendship, ARISTIP. Yea truly, and that knot so knit wyll neuer slippe. CARISOPH. Belike then there is no frindship but betwéene honest men. ARISTIP. Betwéene the honest only, for Amicitia inter bonus: saith a learned man CARISOPH. et euell men vse frindship in thinges vnhonest, wher fancy doth serue ARISTIP. That is no frindship, but a lewde likeing, it lastes but a while. CARISOPH. What is the perfectst frindship among men that euer grew? ARISTIP. Where men loued one another, not for profit but for vertue. CARISOPH. Are such frindes both a like in ioy and also in smarte? ARISTIP. They must néedes, for in two bodies they haue but one harte. CARISOPH. Friend Aristippus, deceaue me not with Sophistrie, there no perfect frindship, but where is vertue and honestie?
ARISTIPPVS What a Deuell then ment Carisophus, To ioyne in frindship with fine Aristippus? In whom is asmuch vertue, trueth and honestie, As there are true fethers in the thrée Craines of the ventrie: Yet these fethers haue the shadow of liuely feathers the truth to sa But Carisophus, hath not the shadowe of an honest man, To be playne, because I know thy villany: In abusinge Dionisius, to many mens iniury: Under the cloke of frindship, I playd with his head, And sought meanes how thou with thine owne fancy might be lead, My frindship thou soughtest for thine owne commoditie, As worldly men doo by profite measuring amitie: Which I perceauing, to the lyke my selfe I framed, Wherein I know of the wise I shall not be blamed: If you aske me Quae. I answere, Quia prudentis est multu disimul▪ To speake more playner, as the prouerbe doth go, In faith Carisophus, Cum cretence cretiso: Yet a perfect frinde I shew my selfe to thée in one thing, I doo not dessemble, now I say I wyll not speake for thée to the King, Therfore sinke in thy sorrow, I doo not deceaue thée, A false knaue I found thée, a false knaue I leaue thée. EXIT CARISOPHVS. He is gone? is this frindship to leaue his friend in the plaine fields▪ Well I sée now, I my selfe haue beguylde, In matching with that false for in amitie: Which hath me vsed to his owne commoditie. Which séeing me in distresse, vnfainedly goes his wayes, Loe this is the perfect frindship among men now a daies: Which kinde of frindship toward him I vsed secretly: And be with me the like, hath requited me craftly. It is the Gods iudgement, I sée it playnely, For all the world may know, Incide in foeam quam fed. Well I must content my selfe none other helpe I knowe▪ Untill a merier gale of winde may happe to blowe: EXIT EVBVLVS. Who deals with Kinges in matters of great waight, When froward wyll, doth beare the chefest swa: Must yeld of force, their néede no subtle eight: Ne paynted speach the matter to conuay, No prayer can moue, when kindled is the ire, The more ye quench, the more increased is the fire.
This thinge I proue in Pithias wofull case, Whose hauuy hap with teares I doo lament: The day is come when he in Damons place, Must lose his life the time is fully spent: Nought can my words now with the Kinge preuaile, Against the wind and striuinge streame I sayle: For die thou must alas thou sely Gréeke, Ah Pithias, now come is thy dolefull houre: A perfect friend none such a world to séeke. Though bitter death shall geue thée sauce full sower: Yet for thy faith enrold shall be thy name, Among the Gods within the booke of fame: Who knoweth his case, and wyll not melt in teares? His giltles blood shall trickle downe anon. ¶Then the Muses singe. Alas what happe hast thou poore Pithias now to die, Wo worth the which man for his death hath geuen vs cause to crie. EVBVLVS. ME thinke I heare with yelow rented heares, The Muses frame their notes my state to mone: Among which sorte as one that morneth with harte, In dolefull tunes, my selfe wyll beare a parte. MVSES. Who worth the man which for his death. &c. EVBVLVS. With yelow rented heares come on you Muses nine, Fyll now my breast with heauy tunes, to me your plaints resigne▪ For Pithias I bewayle which presently must die, Wo worth the man which for his death hath geuen vs cause. &c. MVSES. Wo worth the man which for his. &c. EVBVLVS. Was euer such a man that would die for his friend, I thinke euen from the heauens aboue, the Gods did him downe sen To shew true friendshipps power, which forst thée now to die, Wo worth the man which for thy death, &c. MVSES. Who worth the man, &c. EVBVLVS. What Tigars whelp was he, that Damon dyd accuse? What faith hast thou, which for thy friend, thy death doth not refuse O heauy happe hadst thou to play this Tragidie,
Wo worth the man which for thy death, &c. MVSES. Wo worth the man, &c. EVBVLVS. Thou young and worthy Gréeke, that showest such perfect loue, The Gods receaue thy simple ghost, into the heauens aboue: Thy death we shall lament with many a wéepinge eye, Wo worth the man which for his death, &c. MVSES. Wo worth the man which for thy death, hath geuen vs cause to crie. FINIS. EVBVLVS. ETernall be your fame ye Muses, for that in miserie, Ye did vouchsafe to strayne your notes to walke: My harte is rent in two, with this miserable case, Yet am I charged by Dionisius mouth, to se this place, At all poynts ready for the execution of Pithias. Néede hath no law: wyl I or nil I, it must be done, But loe the bloody minister, is euen here at hande. Gronno, I came hether now to vnderstand, If all thinges are well appoynted for the execution of Pithias, The Kinge him selfe wyll se it done here in this place. GRONNO. Sir, all thinges are ready, here is the place, here is ye hand, here is the sword▪ Here lacketh non but Pithias, whose head at a worde, If he were present▪ I coulde finely strike of, You may reporte that all thinges are ready. EVBVLVS. I go with an heauy harte to report it, ah wofull Pithias▪ Full neare now is thy misery. GRONO. I mruell very much, vnder what constilation, All hangmen are borne, for they are hated of all, beloued of none▪ Which hatred is showed by this poynt euidently, The Hangman alwayes dwelles in the vilest place of the Citie: That such spight should be, I know no cause why, Unlesse it be for thir offices sake, which is cruell and blondye▪ Yet some men must doo it to execute lawes? Me thinke they hate me without any iust cause:
But I must loke to my toyle, Pithias must lose his head at one low, Els the Boyes wyll stone me to death in the streat as I go: But harke, the prisoner cometh, and the Kinge also, I sée there is no help, Pithias his life must forgo. ¶Here entreth Dionisius and Eubulus. Bring forth Pithias that pleasant companion, Which tooke me at my worde and became pleadge for Damon: It pricketh fast vpon noone, I doo him no iniurie, If now he lose his head for so he requested me. If Damon returne not, which now in Gréece is full mery: Therfore shall Pithias pay his death, and that by and by, He thought belike, if Damon were out of the Citie, I would not put him to death, for some foolishe pitie: But séeing it was his request, I wyll not be mockt he shall di▪ Bring him forth. ¶Here entreth Snap. Geue place, let the prisoner come by, geue place. DIONISIVS. How say you sir? wher is Damon your trustie friend? You haue playd a wise part I make God a vow, You know what time a day it is, make you ready. PITHIAS. Most ready I am mightie king and most ready also, For my true frinde Damon this lyfe to forgo, Euen at your pleasure. DIONISIVS. A true frend, a false Traytor that so breaketh his oh, Thou shalt lose thy life, though thou be neuer so loth. PITHIAS. I am not loth to doo what so euer I sayde, Ne at this present pinch of death am I dismayde: The Gods now I know, haue heard my feruent prayer, That they haue reserued me to this passynge great honour, To die for my frind, whose faith, euen now, I doo not mistruste: My frinde Damon is no false traytour, he is true and iuste: But fith he is no God but a man, he must doo as he may, The winde may be contrary, sicknes may let him, or som misaduēture by the way, Which the eternall Gods tourne al to my glorie, That Fame may resound how Pithias for Damon did die: e breaketh no oh, which doth as much as he can, His minde is heare, he hath some let, he is but a man. That he might not retourne, of all the Gods I did require,
Which now to my ioy, doth graunt my desire: But why do I stay any longer, seing that one mans death, May suffise O king, to pacifie thy wrath? O thou minister of iustice, doo thyne office by and by, Let not thy hand tremble, for I remble not to die: Stephano the right patrone, of true fidelitie, Commend me to thy master my swéet Damon, & of him craue libertie When I am dead in my name, for thy trustie seruices, Hath well deserued a gift farre beter then this, Oh my Damon farewell now for euer, a true friend to me most deare Whyles lyfe doth laste, my mouth shall styll talke of thee, And when I am dead my simple ghost true witnes of amitie: Shall hoouer about the place wheresoeuer thou bée, DIONISIVS. Eubulus, This geare is straunge, and yet because, Damon hath falst his faith, Pithias shall haue the lawe: Gronnoo, dispoyle hym, and eke dispatch him quickly. GRONNO. It shal be done: since you came into this place, I might haue stroken of seauen heads in this space: Ber lady here are good garments, these are myne by the roode, It is an euyll wynde that bloweth no man good: Now Pithias knéele downe, aske me blessyng like a pretie boy, And with a trise thy head from thy shoulders I wyll conuay. ¶Here entreth Damon running & stayes the sword. Stay, stay, stay, for the kinges aduantage stay, O mightie kyng, myne appoynted time is not yet fully past, Within the compasse of myne houre loe, here, I come at last: A life I owe, a life I wyll you pay: Oh my Pithias, my noble pledge, my constant friende, Ah w is me for Damons sake, how neare were thou to thy ende: Geue place to me, this rowme is myne, on this stage must I play, Damon is the man, none ought but he to Dionisius his blood to pay. GRONNO. Are you come sir? you might haue taried if you had bene wyse, For your hastie comming you are lyke to know the prise. PITHIAS. O thou cruell minnister, why didst not thou thine office, Did not I bidde thée make hast in any wyse? Hast thou spared to kill me once that I may die twyse: Not to die for my friend, is present death to me, and alas, Shall I sée my sweet Damon, slaine before my face:
hat double death is this? but O mightie Dionisus, true iustice now, way this aright, thou noble Eubulus: mée haue no wronge, as now sandes the case, mon ought not to die, but Pithias: misaduenture, not by his wyll, his howre is past, therfore I ecause he came not at his iust tyme, ought iustly to die: was my promise, so was thy promise O Kynge, this Courte can beare witnesse of this thinge. DAMON. Not so, O mightie Kynge, to Iustice it is contrarie, hat for an other mans faulte, the Innoent should die: yet is my time playnly expirde, it is not fully noone, f this my day appointed, by all the Clockes in the Towne. PITHIAS. Beléeue no Clocke, the houre is past by the Sonne. DAMON. Ah my Pithias, shall we now breake the bondes of Amitie? Till you now ouerthwart mée, whiche heretofore so well did agrée. PITHIAS. My Damon, the Goddes forbid, but wée should agrée, herfore agrée to this, let mée perfourme the promise I made for thée et mée die for thée, doo mée not that iniurie, oth to breake my promise, and to suffre mée too sée thée di hoe so dearly I loue: this small request graunt mée, shall neuer aske thée more, my desire is but frindly: oo me this honour, that fame may reporte triumphantly, hat Pithias for his friend Damon was contented to die. DAMON. That you were contented for me to die, fame cannot denie, et fame shall neuer touch me with such a villanie: o reporte that Damon did suffer his friend Pithias, for him giltles to die, herfore content thy selfe, the Gods requie thy constant faith, one but Damons bloud can appease Dionisius wrath: nd now O mightie Kinge, to you my talke I conuay, ecause you gaue me leaue, my worldly thinges to stay: o requite that good tourne ere I die, for your behalfe this I say, lthough your Regall state, dame Fortune decketh so, hat like a kinge in worldly wealth, abndantly ye fle: et fickle is the ground whereon all Tirrants treade, thousand sundrie cares and feares, doo haunt their restles head: o trustie band; no faithfull fiendes dd garde thy hatefull state, nd why? whom men obey for deadly feare, sure them they deadly hate
That you may safely raigne, by loue get friends, whose constant fait Wyll neuer fayle, this counsell geues poore Tamn at his death: Friendes are the surest garde, for Kinges golden time doo wear away And other precious thinges doo fade, frindship wyll neuer decay: Haue friendes in store therfore, so shall you safely sleape, Haue friendes at home of forraine foes, so neede you take no kéepe: Abandon flatring tounges, whose clackes truth neuer tels, Abase the yll, aduance the good, in whome dame vertue dwels: Let them your play felowes be, but O you earthly kinges, Your sure defence and strongest garde, sandes chifely in faithfull friēd Then get you friends by liberall déedes, and here I make an ende, Accept this counsell mightie Kinge of Damon Pithias friende: Oh my Pithias, now farewel for euer, let me kisse thée or I die, My soule shall honour thée, thy constant faith aboue the heauens shall fli Come Gronno doo thine office now, why is thy colour so dead? My neck is so is short, that thou wylt neuer haue honestie in striking o this hea DIONISIVS. Eubulus, my spirites are sodenly appauled, my limes waxe weake This straunge friendship amaseth me so, that I can scarse speake. PITHIAS. O mightie kinge, let some pittie your noble harte méene, You require but one mans death, take Pithias, let Damon liue. EVBVLVS. O vnspeakeable frindship. DAMON. Not so, he hath not offended, there is no cause why? My constant frind my Pithias, for Damons sake should die▪ Alas he is but young, he may doo good to many, Thou coward minister, why doest thou not let me die? GRONNO. My hand with soden feare quiuereth. PITHIAS. O noble kinge, shewe mercy on Damon, let pithias die, DIONISIVS. Stay Gronno, my flesh trembleth, Eubulus, what shall I doo▪ Were there euer such frindes on earth as were these two? What harte is so cruell that would deuide them asunder? O noble friendship, I must yeld, at thy force I wonder: My hart, this rare frindship hath pearst to the roote, And quenched all my fury, this sight hath brought this aboute: Which thy graue counsell Eubulus, and learned perswasion could neuer doo:
noble gentlemen, the immortall Gods aboue, ath made you play this Tragidie, I thinke for my behoue: efore this day I neuer knew what perfect friendship ment, y cruell mind to blouddy déedes, was full and wholy bente: y fearefull life, I thought with terrour to defende, ut now I sée there is no garde vnto a faithfull riend: Which wyll not spare his lyfe at time of present néede, happie kinges within your courtes haue twoo such frinds in déed: honour friendship now, which that you may playnly sée, amon, haue thou thy lyfe, from death I pardon thée: or which good tourne, I craue this honour doo me lend? Oh frindly harte? let me linke with you, to you make me ye third friēde y courte is yours, dwell here with mée, by my commission large, y selfe, my realme, my welth, my health, I commit to your charge: ake me a thirde friend, more shall I ioye in that thing, Then to be called as I am, Dionisius the mightie kinge. DAMON. O mightie king, first for my lyfe most humble thankes I geue, nd net, I prayse the immortall Gods, that did your harte so meu That you would haue respect to friendships heauenly lore, orseing wel, he néed not feare which hath true friēds in store or my part, most noble king, as a third frind, welcom to our friendly societie But you must forget you ar a king, for frindship stands in tru equalitie DIONISIVS. Unequall though I be in great possessions, et full equall shall you finde me in my changed conditions: irranie, flatterie, oppression, loe, hear I cast away? ustie, truth, loue, frindship shall be my ioy: True friendship▪ wyl I honour vnto my liues end, My greatest glorie shalbe, to be counted a perfect friende. PITHIAS. For this your déede most noble King, the Gods aduance your name nd ince to friendships lore, you list your Princely harte to frame: With ioyfull harte, O Kinge, most wellcome now to me, With you wyll I knit the perfect knot of amitie: Wherein I shall enstruct you so, and Damon here your friend, That you may know of amitie the mighty force and eke the ioyful end: nd how that kinges doo stand vppon a fickle ground, Within whose Realme at time of néed, no faithfull friends are founde DIONISIVS. Your instruction wyll I folow, to you my selfe I doo commite, Eubulus, make haste to fet new apparell fitte:
For my new frindes. EVBVLVS. I go with a ioyfull hart, O happie day. EXIT GRONNO. I am glad to heare this word, though their liues they doo not léese, It is no reason the Hangman should lose his fées: These are mine, I am gone with a trise. EXIT ¶Here entreth EVBVLVS with new garmentes. DIONISIVS. Put on these Garmentes now, go in with mée the Iewelles of my Court. DAMON and PITHIAS. We go with ioyfull harts. STEPHANO. Oh Damon my deare master, in all this ioy remember me. DIONISIVS. My friend Damon he asketh reason? Dam. Pithias. DAMON. Stephano, for thy good seruice, be thou frée. EXEVNT. DION STEPHANO. O most happie, pleasant, ioyfull, and triumphant day, Poore Stephano, now shall liue in contintinuall ioy: VIVE LE ROY with Damon and pithias in perfect amitie, VIVE TV STEPHANO, in thy pleasant liberalitie: Wherein I ioy as much as he that hath a conquest wonne, I am a free man, none so mery as I now vnder the Sonne: Farewell my Lords, now ye Gods graunt you al ye som of perfect amitie And me longe to enioy my longe deāred libertie. EXIT. ¶Heare entreth EVBVLVS beatyng CARISOPHVS. Away villaine, away you flatringe Parasite, Away the plague of this Courte, thy filed tongue that forged lies, No more here shall doo hurt, away false Sicophant, wilt thou not? CARISOPHVS. I am gone sir, seing it is the kinges pleasure, Why whyp ye me alone? a plague take Damon and Pithias since they came hither I am driuē to seke relee abrod alas I know not whither, Yet Eubulus, though I begone, here after time shall trie, There shall be found euen in this Court as great flatterers as I: Well for a while I wyll forgo the Court, though to my great payne,
I doubt not but to spie a time when I may créepe in againe. EXIT. EVBVLVS. The Serpent that eates men aliue, Flattery with all her broode, Is whipte away in Princes Courtes whiche yet did neuer good, What force▪ what mighty power, true Friendship may possesse? To all the worlde Dionisius Courte now playnly doth expresse, Wo since to faithfull Friendes he gaue his willyng eare, Most saey sitteth in his Seate and sléepes deuoid of feare, Pourged is the Court of vice, since Friendship entred in, Tirrannie quailes, he studieth now with loue eche hart to win, Uertue is had in price, and hath his iust rewarde: And painted speache that gloseth for gayne, from gifts is quite debard, One loueth another now for vertue, not for gayne, Where Uertue doth not knit the knot, there Friendship cannot raigne, Without the whiche, no house, no land, ne kingdome can endure, As necessarie for mans lyfe, as Water, Ayre, and Fier, Which frameth the minde of man, all honest thinges to doo, Unhonest thinges Friendshippe ne craueth, ne yet consents thertoo, In wealth a double ioye, in woe a present stay, A swéete compagnion in eche state true Friendship is alway: A sure defence for Kinges, a perfecte trustie bande, A force to assayle, a Shield to defende the enemies cruell hande, A rare, and yet the greatest Gifte, that God can geue to man: o rare, y• scarce foure couple of faithfull frends haue ben since ye world began A Gift so strange, & of such price, I wish all Kyngs to haue, But chiefely yet as duetie bindeth I humbly craue, True friendship, and true friendes full fraught with constant faith, The geuer of friends, the Lord grant her most noble Quéene Elizabeth. ¶FINIS.
¶ The last songe. THe strongest garde that Kynges can haue, Are constant friends their state to saue: True friendes are constant, both in word and deede, True friendes are present, and help at each neede: True friendes talke truly, they glose for no gayne, When treasure consumeth, true frindes wyll remayne, True frindes for their tru Prince, refuseth not their death The Lorde graunt her such frindes most noble Queene Elizabeth▪ ¶ Longe may she gouerne in honour and wealth, Uoyde of all sickenesse, in most perfect health: Which health to prolonge, as true friends require, God graunt she may haue her owne hartes desire: Which friendes wyll defend with most stedfast faith, The Lorde graunt her such friendes most noble Queene Elizabeth▪ ¶ FINIS.
