807 99842153 6783
Arthur of Brytayn. ¶The hystory of the moost noble and valyaunt knyght Arthur of lytell brytayne, translated out of frensshe in to englushe by the no∣ble Iohan bourghcher knyght lorde Barners, newly Imprynted.
Here foloweth the transla∣tours prologue. FOr as moche as it is delectable to all humayne nature to rede and to here these auncient noble Hystoryes of the chyualrous Feates and marcyall Prowesses of the vyctoryous Knyghtes of tymes paste whose tryumphaunt dedes yf wrytynge were not sholde be had cleue oute of remembraunce. And also bycause that ydelnesse is reputed to be the moder of al vices, wherfore somwhat in eschewynge therof and in the waye of lowli erudycyon and learnynge I Iohn Bourghchere knyght lorde Berners haue enterprysed to translate out of frensshe in to our ma∣ternal tongue a noble hystory makynge mencyon of the famous dedes of the ry∣ght valyaunt knyght Arthur sonne and heyre to the noble duke of Brytayne and of the fayre lady Florence doughter and heyre to the myghty Emendus kynge of the noble realme of Soroloys, and of the grete trouble that they endured or they attayned to the perfourmaunce of theyr vertuous amorous desyers, for fyrste they ouercame many harde & straūge ad∣uentures the whiche as to our humayne reason sholde seme to be incredible, wher¦fore after that I had begon this sayd pro¦cesse I haue determined to haue left and gyuen vp my laboure for I thoughte it sholde haue be reputed but a folye in me to translate beseming suche a fayned ma¦ter wherin semeth to be so many vnpos∣sybylytees, how be it than I called agay¦ne to my remembraūce that I had redde and seen many a sondrye volume of dy∣uerse noble hystoryes wherin were con∣tayned the redoubted dedes of the aun∣cyent inuynsyble conquerours & of other ryght famous knightes who acheued ma¦ny a straunge and wonderfull aduentu∣re the whyche by playne letter as to our vnderstandynge sholde seme in a maner to be supernaturall, wherfore I thought that this present treatyse myght as well be reputed for trouth as some of those. And also I doubted not but that the first auctour of this boke deuysed it not with out some maner of trouthe or vertuous entent, the whiche consyderacyons and other gaue me agayne audacyte to con∣tynue forth my fryste purpose tyll I had fynysshed this sayd boke, not presumyn∣ge that I haue reduced it in to fresshe or∣nate polysshed englysshe, for I knowe my selfe insuffycyent in the facondyous arte of rethoryke, nor also I am but a ler¦ner of the language of frensshe how be it I truste my symple reason hath ledde me to the vnderstandinge of the true sen¦tence of the mater, accordinge to the whi¦che I haue folowed as nere as I coude desyrynge all the reders and herers ther¦of to take this my rude trāslacion in gre and yf ony faute be to laye it to myn vn∣connynge and derke Ingnoraūce and to mynysshe, adde, or augmet as they shall fynde cause requysyte, and in theyr so do¦ynge I shall praye to god that after this vayne and transytory lyfe he may bryn¦ge them vnto the perdurable Ioye of he¦uen. Amen. Thus endeth the transla¦tours prologue.
¶Here after foloweth the table of thys present hystorie. ¶The fyrste chapyter maketh mencyon of the byrth of the noble kynght Arthur sone and heyre to the duke of Brytayne. Capitulo .i. Folio .i. How ye duke of brytayne delyuered his sōe Arthur to the gouernaunce of a pru∣dent knyght named syr Gouernar who dyde ensygne hī in all goodly maners & dedes of armes so that afterward there was none lyke vnto hym. ca. ii. folio .i. ¶How Arthur founde in the forest a no∣ble lady wtout socour, & with her a fayre yonge mayde her doughter named Ie∣hannet before a lytell lodge the whiche they had made of ye braūches of the trees And how yt Arthur was amorous of the sayd Iehannet. caplo. iii. folio .i ¶How Arthur caused to be delyuered to Iehānet & her moder the reuenues that bleōged to the slange or ponde of the fo∣reste, whereby there stode a fayre goodly place of pleasure, & afterwarde Arthur dyde oftentymes resorte thyder to passe the tyme with them. cap. iiii. folio .ii. How within .viii. dayes after Arthur & Gouernar went to ye stange to se ye lady & Iehannet her doughter. ca. v. folio .iii. How that the duke & duches toke coū∣seyle to mary theyr son Arthur, & howe they sent theyr stewarde to the lady Lu∣ke of ostryge for to demaunde her dough¦ter for Arthur. cap. vi. folio iiii. How the sene shall demaūded ye dough∣ter of ostrige for Arthur of brytayne, the which request wt grete ioye was graū∣ted him. capitulo .vii. fo. eodem How yt Arthur was sore displeased for that his fader wold mary hī to ye dough∣ter of ostrige bicause it was said she was of yll gouernance. ca. viii. folio .iiii. ¶How yt Arthur went to se Iehannet & declared to her how the duke his fader shold mary hī whereof he was sore dis∣plesed for the loue of her. ca. ix, fol. v. How yt Arthur & Hector his cosin ger∣mayne were made knightes for the loue of Arthur, who than dyd ensure Peron doughter to the ladi luke of ostrige, & of ye grete tournai yt was there done at na¦ūtes for the loue of arthur. ca. x. folio .v. ¶How that Arthur wedded fayre Per∣ron doughter to the lady Luke of ostry∣ge. And of the protestacyon that he made before all the barony. ca. xi. fol. vii. ¶How this lady Luke of ostryge sente for Iehannet & caused her secretlye the first night to lie wt arthur bycause yt per¦rō was no mayde, to thentente that ar∣thur shold not perceyue it ca. xii. fo. vii. ¶ How yt Iehannet who was a bed wt arthur in the stede of his wyfe Perrō, & or she wold suffre him to touche her she demaūded her endowrie. ca. xiii. fo. ix. ¶How that arthur Hector, & Gouernar went erly in the morninge to se Iehānet at the stange, who shewed vnto arhur all the treason of his wyfe, & how that she had layne with him all that night in stede of Perron, wherof he meruay∣led greatly cap. xiiii. fol. eodem ¶How ye Gouernar vaynquisshed in ba¦tayle syr Aūsel caused hī to make know¦ledge of this treason & cōfesed how yt he brought Iehānet fro the stange for to ly all nyght wt Arthur. ca. xv. fo. xi ¶ How arthur demaunded licēce of his father and mother to go play him out of his owne countrey for he wold go seke aduentures to shewe therby his force & prowesse. cap▪ xvi fol. xii. ¶How the mighty kinge of Soroloys called Emēdus helde open courte in his realme, where as was foure puyssaūte
kynges, who were al his subgectes, and there ye shal here of thynges ryght mer∣uaylos. capitulo .xvii. folio xiiii ¶ scrypcyon of the facyon and sy∣tuacy of the mount peryllous the whi∣che was conquered bi the prowesse of Ar¦thur. capitulo. xviii. folio .xiiii. ¶How it was determyned that the que∣ne Fenyce sholde take her chaumber in the palays besyde the castell of the porte noyre. capitulo .xix. folio xv. ¶ How that the doughter of the myghty kynge Emendus & of Fenyce his quene  is destenyed ouer the foūtaine in ye her∣ber of the munt perillous by .iiii. quenes of yt fayry, the chyefe of them was named Proserpyne, who was the moste fayrest creature of all the worlde. ca. xx. fo. xvi. ☞ How ye king of valefoūd sent his son to ye city of Sabba for to be brought vp in the cōpany of Florence. ca. xxi. fol. eo. ¶How yt the quene Fenice mother to Flo¦rence dyed, & how she made her testamēt gyuyng to her doughter a rynge in put∣tyng her therby in possessyon of the real¦me of blaunche toure. ca. xxii. fo. xvii. ¶ How the quene Fenyce mother to Flo¦rence was nobly buryed. ca. xxiii. fo. eod. How ye themperour of ynde the more demaūded of kynge Emendus the fayre Florence his doughter in maryage. And of the answere ye kynge Emendus made to hym And also of the terme yt was ta∣ken to mry Florēce, and how that mai∣ster Steuen knewe by the regarding of the planettes that their was commynge out of the west a knyght, who shoulde a∣chiefe the aduentures of the porte noyre And how he shoulde haue and enioye the whyte shelde and the swerd and obtaine Florence in maryage, wherof she was greatly comforted, for in no wyse she lo¦ued the emperour. ca. xxiiii. fo. xviii. How that Arthur slewe twelue knigh¦tes, who hadde taken a waye a younge, da¦moysell fro her father and mother, & had tyed her to a tree, there to haue defouled her virginytye, who was saued by Ar∣thur. capitulo .xxv. folio .xx. ¶ How that Arthur Hector & gouernar slewe .xxx. theues in a grete forest the whi¦che was a grete welth to all the countre, for they had pylled and wasted the coun¦tre all aboute. Capitulo .xxvi. fo. xxi. ¶How that syr de la launde shewed to Arthur the occasyon why that this tour¦ney was fyrst taken by the lord Beauten capitulo .xxvii. folio .xxiii. Howe that Arthur had the honour in the tourney that was made at Oyen be∣twene the Marshall of Mirpoys & the erle of Beauieu, where as was dyuerse great kynges, erles, barons, and many other good knyghtes ryghte valyaunte, whereby Arthur gate hym great thanke and prayse and was greatly honoured of all ladyes and damoyselles there assem∣bled. capitulo .xxviii. folio .xxvi. How yt Arthur the second day had the honour of the tourney, & so wt hym abode the pryce of the fyelde. ca. xxix. fol. xxix. How that the Marshal of myrpoys for enuy that he had bicause that Arthur had the honour of the tourney and because he had beaten him downe, for he had wende hym selfe to haue ben the bst knyght of the worlde, therfore he defyed Arthur & chalenged hym to Iuste. And howe that Arthur vaynquyshed him and dyd break one of his armes and two rybbes in his sydes. capitulo .xxx. fol. xxxi. Hw that Arthur was crowned to be kyng of al the knightes of the tourney & they promysed hym fayth & trouh to ser¦ue hym in deedes of armes alwayes & in euery place where as it semed hym beste,
and the yonge kinge of Malogres dyd crowne him. ca. xxxi. fol. xxxii. How that arthur after his crownaciō toke leue of the yōge kyng and of al the other lordes & knightes, ladies & damoy¦selles, who conuayed him on hys Iour∣ney warde, and had great sorow to leue his company. ca. xxxii. fo. xxxiii How arthur and his cōpany ariued in the erledom of brewle marching against the land of sorolois and entred into the citie of brewle, the which was besyged bi the duke of orgouie named maiaquis bicause the erle wold not let hi haue his doughter in mariage, whereof by false treas he slew the erle. ca. xxxiii. fo. xxxiiii How yt Arthur went alone to the duke of Orgoule & gaue him his answere and had hi abide no lenger for the rayre alice For he shewed him how yt he had giuē her to hector his con. And how that he had promised to her his head bycause he slew her father by treason, wt the which answere the duke was sore displeased so much that there was bytwene them a great batayle. ca. xxxiiii. folio .xxxvi. How Hector & Gouernar & syr Othes rode out of the Citie wel accompanied to rescow arthur, who all alone assay∣led the duke of Orgoule and all his ar∣mie. cap. xxxv. fo. xxxvii ¶ How Arthur, Hector, Gouernar, & syr Othes discomfyted Peter the cornu, bro∣der to the duke who was comen to him wih, iiii. C. knightes, & there this cornu was slaine, & al his people slayne & takē prisoners, and howe Arthur tooke the dukes horse named assyle, the best orse as thā of the worlde ca. xxxvi. fo, xxxviii ¶ How that arthur & his cōpany vtter¦ly discomficed the duke & strake of hys head, & did sende it by Gouernar to the fayre ladi Alice & to her moder as he had promysed before. ca. xxxvii. fol. xl. How arthur and his company wente to the citie of orgoule for to take it by for¦ce, but the burgeyses therof brght vn∣to him the keys, and dyd vnto  ho∣mage, and so dyd all the nobles of that countrey as vnto theyr chefe soueraine lorde. cap. xxviii fol. xli How yt arthur made his cosin Hector duke of Orgoule by the assent of all the lordes of ye countrey. ca. xxxx. fol. xliii. How that Arthur & Gouernar depar¦ted a souder, and of the terrible aduentu¦res that eche of them founde or they met agayne. cap. xl. fo. eodem How Gouernar after that he was de∣parted fro Arthur foūd in a great forest two knightes armed who had beaten & wounded an other knight & wolde haue rauysshed his syster, and how he resco∣wed her and dyd vaynquysshe at her ene¦mies. ca. xli. fo. xliiii How that Gouernar came to a stronge castel called the brosse, & vaynquyshed the knight that kept it. And how that afterwarde he was kept in that catell agaynst his wil in great daūger of deth tyl at the last Arthur deliueed him as ye shal here hereafer. ca xiii. fo. xiv How yt Arthur conquered the castell of the porte noyre by his prowesse, & slew all them yt kept it, & howe after that he entred in the halles of the palays, where he was assayled of two great & horyble lyons and of a great giaunt, and how he ouercame them al with great payne, & acheued all the meruaylous aduētures of the castel, the whiche are ryght won∣derous to reherse. ca. xiii fol xlv. How arthur after yt he had acheued ye aduētures of the palays & delyuered the prysoners, & after how yt he acheued the aduenture yt was in the galery going in
to the gardin of the moūt perillous, & bi his myght with a great barre bet down ii. massyue ymages of coper eche of thē holding & flayle yt was of such wight yt x. men migh scant lift one of them fro the erth, wherwt they wee euer betinge wyth great strokes made by enchaūte∣ment, to thentent that none sholde passe into the gadins of the moūt perillous, & so thā fayled and ended al the enchaūt¦maentes of that place. cap. xiiii. fo. xlix ¶ How mayster Steuen wente with ar∣thur in the palays wtin the castell to the enten to se the wonderful aduētures yt arthur had there acheued. ca. xlv. fol. l ¶How proserpyne quene of the fayry a∣bout mydnight appered to Arthur with great lyght of torches, and how that she shewed him that wtin the moūt perilous there was the white shelde and the good swerde enchaūted called larence, & how that he should haue them with much ho¦nour if his hert durst serue hym. And how the next day mayster Steuen ledde Arthur into ye herber where as the white shelde was, the which could neuer be re¦meued fro the tree wheron it hāged, and how that Arthur toke it at his ease & cla¦ence the swerde also the whiche coulde neuer before that time be drawen out of the shethe, nor it wold helpe no body but al only Arthur who drew it out lyght∣ly, & after that it did him much helpe as ye shal here after. ca. xlvi. fol. lii. ¶How mayster Steuen shewed arthur how ye Gouernar is knight was in the castel of brosse, & how yt the custome of ye castel was fyrst begon. ca. xlvii. fo. liii How that arthur whan he was depar¦ted fro the porte noyre for to go to dely∣uer Gouernar out of the castell of the brosse & also for to fyght with the mon∣ster▪ he founde in a fayre medow the ne¦uew of the duke of bygor accompanied with .xiii. other knightes, who assayled hym right fyersly, but he defended hym self so valiaūtlye yt he slew .iii. of them & wounded so the dukes neuew that he was fayne to be caried away in an horse litter. cap xlviii. fol. iiii ¶How that arthur fought wt the mon∣ster, the most foulest & horrible fygure that euer was seen with mannes eyen & so vainquished him by his valiaūt pro¦wesse, & strake of his head & did sende it to the fayre Florence ca. xlix. fol. lvi ¶ How that the kyng Emendus sent a knight named Brisebat accompanyed with a thousand men of warre to then∣tent that he and hys company shold go fight with the monster, and how the said knight ariued at the monsters pytte the same season whyle that Arthur and the monster were fighting together, & there he and al hys company dyd se how that Arthur slew the monster without helpe cap. l. folio .lvii. ¶How syr Isembartes cosyn enbusshed hym in a great forest wyth a great mul∣titude of mē of warre to thentent to slea Arthur by treasō, & were Arthur did wt hys handes such dedes yt in a maner it was incredyble. And how that Gouer∣nar & Brysebar were taken prysoners and led forth to a toure, & there Arthur slew of hys enemyes .v. hondred & moū¦ted into the toure, & so rescowed the pry∣sones in the spite of al the town & there wanne the palays. ca. li. fol. lix. ¶ How Arthur & hys cōpany were besy∣ged in ye palays by the duke of bigor, but thanked be god they escaped by the subtil arte of mastr Steuē clerke to the fayre Florence of Soroloys. ca. lii. fol. lxi ¶ How mayster Steuen by the vertu of hys arte o nigromācy delyuered arthur
& his cōpany fro peryl & daūger of yt duk of bygor & his neuewe. cap, liii. foli. lxiii. ¶ How the neuewe of Brysebar aryued at the courte of the mighty king Emen∣dus with the head of the monster, & dyd salute the kynge and also the Emperour of ynde who was styll in the courte atten¦dynge that the kyng shoulde giue him in maryage his doughter the fayre florence and to her the head of the monster was presnted from Arthur, and hewed her how that al onely by his noble prowesse he had slayne the terryble monster of the brosse. capitulo. liiii. fo. lxv. ☞ How that Arthur & mayster Steuen wente to the garden pertaynynge to the palays of the portenoyre; and entred in to the ryche pauylion where as ye ymage was holdynge in her handes the chaplet the which she dyd set on Arthurs head in sygnificacion how that he shold haue the fayre Florence to whome the ymage was resemblable, for there was non that sholde haue Florence in maryage wyth out he shold dye an euell death, withoute it were he that the ymage dyd gyue vn∣to the sayd chaplet. ca. lv. fo. lxvi ¶ How that Arthur slewe and dyscom∣fyted .xv. knyghtes ryghte myghty and puyssaunt, who were com to assayl his hoost, who was called the squyer of the plashes. capitulo .lvi. fo. lxviii ¶How the gret vilayn broughte Arthur where as he fought with a greate & a ter¦ryble lyon, but fynally Arthur slew him And how after he fought with a gret gy¦auntesse and an horryle gyaunte, and by his prowesse he conquered them bothe, & after that fought with a gret gryffon, & this was the begynnynge of the aduen∣tures of the toure tenebrous, wherein ye shal here many terryble and meruaylous thinges, the which were all achyeued by the onely prowesse of the valyaunte Ar¦thur. capitulo .lvii. folio .xx. ¶ How on the next mornyng the vylayn brought Arthur to an other aduenture nye to the toure tenebrous, whee as he was fyrst assailed wt terrible monstrous byrdes and grete gryffon wihout nom¦bre, and after that he was assayled with xxiiii. knyghtes, and how he by hys pro∣wesse slewe theym all. And also he bette downe the grete machomet of bras out of the whiche there yssued suche a wynd that it tourned aboute greate mylstones lyke pouder, and also how that he entred into the castell tenebrous, and quenched the fyre which was the cause of the gret deckenes the whyche contayned the cyr∣cuyte of .v. leges compasse as ye shal he afterwarde. ca. lviii. fo. lxxiiii. ¶ How arthur bette downe the gret ma∣chomet syttynge in the vessell of brasse, & therby the wynde ceased. ca. lix fo. lxxiiii ¶How that Arthur entred into the toure tenebrous, and howe he there quenched the fyre, wherby all the terryble enchan∣tement ceased. ca. lx. folio. lxxv ¶How after yt Brysebar & mayster Ste∣uē were departed fro Arthur fro the por∣te noyre they aryued at cornyle where as kynge emendus was, and in his compa¦ny the emperour of ynde, & his other in kynges holdynge the same tyme a grete sumptuous open courte, & there mayster Steuen & Brysebar recounted to theym all in open audyēce the noble hyualry of Arthur, & this same meane season there came into the courte a knyght all armed and brought tydynges to the kyng how al the aduentures of the toure tenebrous were acheued by the only prowes of one noble knyght. ca. lxi folio lxxvi ¶ How the Emperour was aferde leaste Florence sholde cast her loue on Arthur,
wherfore the demaunded of the kyng her father to haue her in maryage wtout any lenger delaye, wherwith the kyng was contente, but Florence wolde not agree therto, wherwith the king her fader was with her ryght sore dyspleased as ye shal here afterwarde. ca. lxii. folio .lxxviii. How Florence whan she knewe yt mai¦ster Steuē was come to ye court she was right glad, & how yt he by his policy gate her lenger respyte, yt was tyll bartilmew tyde next after. ca. lxiii. folio .xxix How that Arthur was receiued of the fayre lady Margarete into the cytye of Argence. capi. lxiiii, folio, lxxxii, How that the next day the maister an¦swered for the lady, and Arthur toke her quarell in hande against ye dues neuew syr Asembarte, cap, lxv, fo, lxxxvi, How the same season whyle the kyng of orqueney & al these other noble people were at dyner in great ioye and myrthe there came in a messēger fro the woūded knyght to Arthur desyryng hym to come & helpe him or elles he wolde wyte him of his death, wherwith al the court was sore troubled, & seased all theyr Ioye for the loue of Arthur, for incontynent he depar¦ted fro the court & went forth wt the mes∣senger, & how yt al the court fered greatly Arthur for that enterprise, for there was neuer none yt euer returned againe aliue fro that aduenture, cap, lxvi fol, lxxxx, How that Gounar in serching of Ar∣thur had the honour of a tourney, yt was made by the erle of the yle perdue, & there Gouenar was amorous of the countesse And how yt the erle charged the coūtesse yt she shuld not speke to gouenar, wherof euyll came to hym, for the nexte day Go∣uenar dydde beate hym well in the tour∣ney, and laye al night after with the coū∣tesse his wyfe, cap, lxvii, fol, lxxxxii, How that Gouenar dyd beate downe at the tourney the erle of the yle perdue, capitulo, lxviii, fol, lxxxxv. How that after Arthur was departed fro Argentou to go to the castell of hurte byse to the wounded knyght who had sent or hym, in his waye at the last he foūde at the entrynge of a fayre forest three la∣dyes of ryght excellent beautye of whom the chefe was called Proserpyn quene of the fayry who greatly desyred Arthur of his loue, but in no wyse he woulde agre therto, & there he lost his varlet that was his guid, wherfore it behoued him to tary there all ye nyght for it is darke & wyste not whether to go, cap, lxix fol, lxxxxvii, How Arthur conquered the castell of hutebyse the mooste stronge place of the world nexte to the porte noyre, where as was the damoysell by whom the woūded knyght was hurte & there Arthur dydde soo moche by his prowesse that the sayd knyght recouered helth ca, lxx, fo, lxxxxix. How that Arthur whan he was depar¦ted fro the quene Proserpyne it fortuned hym to take his lodgynge wt the neuewe of syr Isembarte, who take Arthur and locked hym fast in a toure to thentent to haue slayne hym by nyght, but there Ar∣thur dyd so valyauntly that he brake out of the toure and slewe the knyght and al his people, capi. lxxi, foli, c, ii, How that Gouernar in serching of Ar¦thur by aduēture he passed for by ye same Castell where as Arthur had slayne the lord therof, & there he was assayled of the frendes of the sayde knyght, & there dyd so valiauntly that he slewe the most part of them, cap, lxxii. fol, c, iii, How that Arthur founde, xl, knightes who had taken a damoysell the whiche they founde in a forest, & they wold haue rauysshed her, & there Arthur rescowed
her and slewe all the .xl. knightes who wolde haue pylled & robbed the ladyes castell and haue slayne all that had ben within. cap. lxxiii. fo. c. iii ¶How that mayster Steuen departed fro the porte noyre to go to the tournaye at Cornie and toke with him the noble Florence riche pauilion, wherein was the ymage with the chaplet who resem∣bled in all thing vnto the lady Florence the most fayre creature that was as thā in all the worlde. ca. lxxiiii. folio. c. vi ¶ How syr Rowland of Bygor apeched Arthur of treason bycause yt he had slain his cosin at Argence, & so defyed hym at the vtraunce, but Arthur at the fyrste stroke draue him downe horse & al to the ech, & brake one of his armes & two rib¦bes, wherof Florence was right ioyous and specially whā she saw her louer Ar∣thur whome she neuer saw before. And how after syr Rowlandes seruaūtes as∣sayled Arthur to haue slayne him, but he valiaūtly defended himself & slew ma¦nie of them cap. lxxv. fol. c. vii ¶Howe that duke Philip and mayster Steuen wente for to fetche Arthur to the king of Orqueney and to the fayre Florence. cap. lxxvi fo. c. xi ¶How a great and a puissant knight de¦fied Arthur bycause he sate by Florence & did pul downe a corner of her kerchee the which the winde had blowen vp, and so Arthur did Iuste with him and did cast him to the erth so rudely that he was not able to leye on horsebacke. v. monethes after. ca. lxxvii. fol c. xiii. ¶ How Florence & Arthur spake togi∣at good leyser at the ende of the forest, & there promised to loue eche other, & there the quene Prosepyne appered to them & shewed to Florence howe that Arthur loued her truly, & how that they shoulde haue eche other by the way of maryage but fyrst they should endure great payne and trouble cap. lxxviii. fol. c. xiiii ¶How yt Arthur had the honour of the tournay the fyrst day the whyche was made for the fayre Florence betwene ye king Emendus and the emperour who wolde haue had Florence to his wife, on the which day arthur gat hym self great prayse amonge al the barony, in so much that euery knight was glad to be in his cōpany, wherof the fayre Florence was right Ioyous, for she loued hym aboue al other. ca. lxxix, fo c, xviii ¶ How that Florence fayned her self to be seke to the entnt that arthur shoulde not tournay the next day, for she was in¦fere that Arthur had ben wery bicause of the trauayle that he had enured the fyrst day of the tournay. And howe that the emperour whan he knew yt he went to se her & so dyd her father king Emen∣dus, and al other kinges dukes erles & barons, and all the hole chyualry. capi∣tulo .lxxx fol. c. xxii ¶How that the tournay the nexte daye was deferred bycause of the dysease of Florence. Cap. lxxxi fol. c. xxiii ¶ How the ymage in the pauilion dyd set her chaplet on Arthurs hed in the pre¦sence of themperour & of .x. other kings & of all the hole ssembly, wherwith the emperour was right sorowful bycause he thought to haue had Florence in ma∣riage, but he fayled of his purpose, for the ymage oke no regarde nether to the emperour nor to none other there, but all only to Arthur to whōe frely she did giue her chaplet. ca. lxxxii fo. c. xxiiii. ¶How that Proserpine qeune of the fay¦ry who resembled to florence layde her downe in Florence bed in florence stede and she sente her vnto the Porte Noyre
with the archebysshop and al her knygh¦tes. caplo. lxxxiii. folio. c. xxvi. How that ye lady Margarete of Argen¦ton wt all her hole barony wente & mette Florence & receiued her in to Argence wt grete feest & Ioye. ca. lxxxiiii. fo. c. xxviii. ¶How that Proserpyne was ensured to themperour in the stede of Florence, and how that the kynge banysshed out of his countre the kyng of orqueney, & also the kynge of valefounde & mayster Steuen and Arthur. caplo. lxxxv. fo. c. xxviii. ¶How that Proserpyne quene of ye fay∣ry was ledde to the chyrche to haue ben wedded to themperour wenynge that it had ben Florence, but whan the bysshop Hd thought to haue put the weddynge rynge on her fynger, sodeynly she vanys¦shed awaye, soo that none wyste wheder she became, and so than they stode all a∣bashed as though the clowdes had fal∣len from heuen. caplo. lxxxvi. fo. c. xxx. How that Arthur sent Gouernar to his cosin Hector duke of orgoule desyīge hī to coe & helpe & socoure hym ayenst the emperour of ynde, & ayenst ye kyng Emē¦dus, who wolde besyege hī in the castell of the porte noyre. ca. lxxxvii. fo. c. xxxi. How that Hector as he wente towarde the porte noyre to socour Arthur, he en∣countred one of the kynges that was co∣mynge towarde themperour, and had in his company well to the nombre of .xviii. thousande men of warre, the whiche kyn¦ge Hector slewe & all his people, soo that there was none that euer escaped sauyn∣ge two, and soo they fledde awaye, and there Hector was a grete botye▪ and mo¦che tresour and grete haboūdaunce of vy¦tayle the whiche was al brought in to the porte noyre. ca. lxxxviii. folio. c. xxxii How that themperour of ynde and the kynge Emēdus accompanyed with .viii. kynges. & wel to the nombre of .iii. C. M men of warre layde syege aboute the ca∣stell of the porte noyre where as florence and Arthur were, wherof yll tourned to themperour, for there he loste thre of his kynges and well an hondred thousande of his men. caplo. xxxix. fo. c. xxxiiii How Phylyp duke of sabary and may∣ster Steuen sone to the kynge of valefoū¦de were made knyghtes, and of the dys∣comfyture that Arthur made on thempe∣rour, caplo. lxxxx. folio. c. xxxvi. How that themperour spake with the quene Proserpyne wenynge to hym that it had ben the fayre lady Florence, but h was deceyued, for she dyde set a grete dis¦corde bytwene hī & the kynge Emendus as ye shal here after. ca. lxxxxi. fo: c. xxxvi How that after themperour was thus departed in dyspleasure and had defye the kynge with mortall warre the nexte nyghte folowynge by the subtyll arte of mayster Steuen all ye kynges hoost was brought euery man faste a slepe, & in the meane tyme the mayster and fyue other knyghtes with hym bare ye kyng Emen¦dus fast a slepe as he laye, bedde and all vp in to the palays of the Castell of the porte noyre. ca. lxxxxii. folio. c xl How that kynge Emendus whan that he awoke forgaue all his yl wyll to Flo∣rence his doughter, and dyde put all the gouernynge of his realme in to her han∣des. capitulo. lxxxxiii. folio. c. xli. ¶How that Arthur demaunded congye and lycence of kynge Emendus fader to his lady Florence to departe in to Bry∣tayne to se the duke of Brytayne his fa∣der and the duchesse his moder, the whi∣che lycence they gaue hym with moche payne, & Florēce was in grete sorowe for his departynge. ca lxxxxiiii. fo. c. xlii How Arthur in the waye as he went
to brytaine he aryued in a fayre medowe that was Ioynīge to the towne of Lion sur le rone, & there he foūde the kynge of malogre accompaīed wt diuerse erles & other barones, and thei had there cryed a grete tournai, & there Arthur & his com¦pany were frendly receyued & had grete there bothe of the kynge & of al other lor¦des & knightes. ca. lxxxxv. fo. c. xliiii. ¶How that Arthur & Hector his cosyn with al theyr company ariued at Blois & how the erle of Bloys father to hector & the countesse his mother, & al the hole barony of the realme mette them on the way and receiued them with great ioye, for they had ben before in great fere y• arthur theyr neuew & Hector theyr son had ben dead. ca. lxxxxv. fo. c. xlvii How arthur aryued in Britayne and how the duke his father & al his chyual¦ry met & receyued arthur with great ho¦nour & triumphe, & how yt the duchesse his mother sowned for Ioye whan she saw her sonne arthur, & in likewyse did Iehannet his olde loue, wherof the mai¦ster & Philip had great fere lest yt Iehā¦net should draw, away arthurs harte fro Florēce bycause of the great loue yt they sawe betwene the. ca. lxxxxvii fo. eodē How after that arthur was departed fro kyng Emendus & Florence to go se his frendes, Florence than departed fro the porte noyre & the quene of orqueney & the lady Margaret of Argenton with her and went to sporte her in her owne realme and castell of clere toure, where as the emperour came and besyeged her for she was ware therof he & his com¦pany were inide round aboute the town and they were to the nombre of two hondred thousand, what of emperiens and of sarasins. ca. lxxxviii. fo. .xlix How that Arthur was right sorowful bycause that his horse dyd stomble vn∣der hym, and how the mayster shewed hym how that Florēce was besieged by themperour in her castel of the clere tou¦re, wherof arthur was in great fere & trouble. cap. lxxxxix fol. c. l. How that Arthur and the mayster, Hec∣tor, Gouernar, and syr Brysebar entred into the clere toure where as Florence was besyeged, & they .v. discōfited a pu∣yssaunt king sarasin who was called ye sowdan, who was come thider to helpe the emperour, and there were al the sara¦syns and turkes slayne. ca. c fo. c. li How that trewse was taken for a mo∣neth bytwene the emperour and arthur cap. c. i. fol. c. liiii. How that the yonge kinge of malogre and of the duke of Brytayne, wt diuerse other erles and barons, and accōpanied with a great army of men of warre ary∣ued at the clere toure, to the entent to so∣cour Florence and Arthur who were be¦syeged by themperour, who had nye en∣raged out of his wytte whan he knewe that they were come into that countrey Cap. c. ii. fol. clv. How that kyng Ionas all alone came to the castel of the clere toure, and there dyd his message fro themperour of ynde the more. cap. c. iii. fol. c. lvii How that themperour and kynge Io∣nas accompanied with fyfty thousande men of warre came to the clere tour for to haue made assaute therto, & than they found the gate open and entred bothe in to the town and in to the castel, for they thought verely that al the frensshe men had bene fledde, but they were deceyued for than the frensshe men lepte out from theyr enbusshementes and shee faste the gates, & there slewe kyng Ionas & al the fyfty thousande, so yt none escaped aliue
but one and the emperour who was to∣ken prysoner. ca. c. iiii. folio. c. lviii. ¶How Gouernar went in to the realme of Soroloys to theent to gyue know∣lege to kynge Emendus how ye thempe∣rour had besyeged his doughter Floren∣ce in her castell of clere toure desyrynge hym to haste his hoost to rescowe her at that tyme. capitulo c, v. folio. c. lxi How that Arthur accompanyed wt the frensshe men dyscōfyted kyng Florypes broder to themperour & slewe all them yt were in his company. ca. c. vi. fo. c. lxii. ¶How mayster Steuen by his arte and connynge caused themperyens to goo a wronge waye from Arthur, & so encoun¦tred the myghti kynge Emendus and al his hoost. ca. c. vii. folio. c. lxiiii. ¶How that themperour dyed in pryson for sorowe whan that he knewe that his kynges and people were al slayne & dys∣comfyted. ca. c. viii. folio. c. lxvi. ¶How that kyng Emendus came to ye blaunche tour with al his noble compa¦ny to ye buryenge of themperour and of the other .iiii. kynges. ca. c. ix. of. c. lxvi. ¶How after ye dyscomfyture of thempe∣rour & al his people ye kyng gaue licence to all his hoost to departe euery man ho∣me, & went hymselfe to Argence there to make the weddynge bytwene Arthur & Florence, & how that Florence wente to the porte noyre to make chere to the du∣chesse of britayne & to the other ladyes & to brynge theym to Argence to her fader kynge Emendus. ca. c. x. folio. c. lxvii. ¶How Florēce bycause of the doubte yt she had leest y• Iehannet sholde take fro he Arthu she gaue her to Gouernar, & gaue them the realme of mormal, & cau∣sed them to be ensured togyder the same houre, and also the same tyme she caused The ladye Margarete to be ensured to mayster Steuen. cap. c. xi. fol. c. lxviii How Arthur wedded the fayre Florence doughter to the mighty king Emendus with great honour & triumphe, & kynge Gouernar wedded the fayre Iehannet, and mayster Steuen wedded the fayre Margaret of Argenton all in one daye and one houre, ca. c. xii fol. c. lx. How the frensshe knightes, and those of Soroloys, of Argence, of Orqueney, of Mormall, of Ismaelite, of Ualefoūde and of Sabary did tornay togeder wher¦of Arthur and gouernar had the honour ca. c. xiii. fol. c. lxxii. How that after the mariage of Arthur the barons and ladies of Fraunce retor¦ned into theyr owne countreys, excepte kyng Alexander whome kynge Emen∣dus kepte styll and made vnto hym gret chere, and he taried there so longe tyll ye Florence was delyued of a fayre sonne who kinge Alexander helde on the font cap. c. xiiii. fol. c lxxiii. How king Alexander returned into his countrey and ledde wyth hym Arthur, Gouernar, Hector, and mayster Steuen and taried in brytayne so longe tyll Flo∣rence sent for Arthur bycause that her father kynge Emendus was departed out of this life, wherfore she made great lamentacion. ca. c, xv. fol. c. lxxiiii How that arthur was sent for bycause of the dethe of kyng Emēdus, and how that he was crowned kynge of Soro∣loys. cap. c. xvi. folio. eodem Here is deuysed how long that the noble arthur liued and how that he was bu∣ried. ca. c. xvii. fol. eodem ¶Thus endeth the table of this present hystory.
¶The fyrste Chapyter maketh mencyon of the byrth of the noble knyght Arthur sonne and heyre to the duke of Brytayne. Capitulo. .1. AFter the death of good kynge Arthur who was ryght noble nd gentyll, specyally in che∣ryshynge and enhaunsynge of nobylnesse, and mayntaynyng of the chyualrous knyghtes of the worlde. As was Gawyn and Lancelotte and many other noble knghtes as it is more plain¦ly conteyned in dyuers auncyent crony∣cles. It is of trouth that in tho dayes in Brytayne there was a duke ryghte pru∣dente & aboue all other ryghte vertuous, ryche and puyssaunte bothe of hauyour and frendes, who was come and extrau∣ghte of the noble hygh lygnage of the va¦lyaūt knyght laūcelot du lake who was in his dayes of right hyght & noble pro∣wesse as it is more at large comprised in the bokes makynge mencyon of his chy¦ualrye. This Duke had to name Iohan and was so endued wyth sappence yt the kynge who as than gouerned all Fraun¦ce loued and honoured hym aboue all o∣ther in soo moche it was sayde where so euer he wente beholde yonder is the wy∣se man of britaine, he was sworne of the kynges preuye and streayte counsayle so that the kynge was onely gouerned by his noble aduise because of the gret ou the and stedfastnesse yt was euer foūde in hym, this duke hadd a ryghte noble lady to his wyfe of good & holy life who was doughter to the erle of Leycester in En∣glande, & they loued togyder ryght fer∣uently by cordyall loue al theyr lyfe, and in accomplyshing betwene them the wer¦kes of maryage ordeyned by nature fy∣naltye it pleased the good Lorde to sende theym a fayre sonne, who in the remem∣braunce of good kyng Arthur and of his hye renowne was named Arthur. This chylde was goodly & of ful greate beaute For afterward he grew to be the mooste fayre creature that than was founde in all crystendome and the dukes & duches loued hym so well that they entended to nothynge but all onely to the prouffyte of theyr chylde, and specyally to enhaun∣ce his honour and rychsse. ¶How the duke of brytayne delyuered his sonne Arthur to the gouernaunce of a prudent knyghte named syr Gouernar who dyd ensigne him in all goodlye ma∣ners & dedes of armes, so that afterwar∣de there was non lyke vnto him. Ca. ii. ANd whā this chyld Arthur was nyne yere of age than the Duke his fader delyuered him to be kepte vn∣der the gouernaunce of a noble & a gen∣tyl mayster named Gouernar who was
ryght prudent, puyssaūt & hardy, vertu∣ous  vygorous of bodye & well proued, who amonge other thynges dydde teach this noble chylde Arthur the play of the chesse & tables so yt non was in cōninge lyke vnto him. And whā he was of .xx. ye¦re than his mayster taught hym the ma∣nre of skyrmyshe so that wtin a lytle sea¦son ther was none able to be cōpared wt hym. Thus amended this chylde frome daye to daye & grew so goodly yt in al the worlde there was none sene lyke him ne∣ther so fayre so gracyous ne so cou reyse in so muche yt the kynge of Fraunce de∣syred oftētymes yt he sholde haue be no∣ryshed & brought vp wyth his one chyl∣dren. How be it ye duchesse his moder cou¦de in no wyse suffer it ne scant to let him be oute of her presence neuer a day she lo¦ued him so enterly. So longe thys chyld soiourned wt his moder yt it was gretlye noyful to his hert, in so moche that ther∣by he became ryght pensyfe  sore trou∣bled in his mind. So that gouernar hys mayster demaunded of hī what was the cause of his sorowe. In good fayth may∣ster sayd Arthur this long soiorning and abyding at home greatly noyeth me, for I wolde gladly go and play me in yōder fayre forest. And to hunt and chase after a grete harte. For it hath ben now a grete season sythe I went ony where foorthe. Se tynly sayde gouerner fayre Arthur it pleaseth me ryght wel your noble mīd. There go to my ford pour fader and de∣syre hys lycēce that ye may go chase in ye forest. Thn arthur went forth to y• duk his fader and demaunded of hym lycence whā the duke hard this tydyng and wyl of his son he had grete ioy & ryght swete dyd graūte hym his request & commaun∣ded & desyred Gouernar that he shold ta∣ke good hede to hym & not suffre hym to enne ne to folowe to faste after his dys∣port. Gouernar answered that he wolde take good hede to him. Than arthur cau¦sed ye hūters to be warned & to make re∣dy his greyhoūdes, houndes & other ra∣ches for he wode go the nexte daye be ty¦mes to chase in the forest. And the nexte mornynge Arthur & Gouernar moūted on theyr horses wt grete Ioye & .x. other gentylmen to kepe them company. And arthur was mounted on a grete courser his hat hangynge on his backe by a lace of sylke, his bonet on his head & the hun∣ters wente before ledinge his greyhoun∣des and houndes. Thus they ryde forthe toward the forest in grete ioye. ¶How arthur founde in the forest a no∣ble lady wtout socour, and wt her a fayre yonge mayde, her doughter named Ie∣hannet before a lytle lodge the whyche they had made of ye braūches of the trees, and how that arthur was amorus of the sayd Iehannet. Cap. iii. IN this tyme there was in the real me of desert a knyght of grete po∣wer and right riche of hauiour and fren∣des, and he was Lord of a castell called the toure. This knyght was named Vy¦ciers and was of such vertue that he dou∣ted nothīge .x. knyghtes armed, and was of so valiāt corage that sin the time that he coude fyrst beare armes he was neuer but there as he knew where as the fayte of armes were occupyed, and employed hīselfe euer in iustes and tornayes and in dedes of armes and dyd so to be alowed yt there was no spekīge of him but that he was the noblest knight of the world, but finally he led so his life that he spēded and wastest his goodes so largely to thētēr to get hym laude and prayse that at the end he became therby very port and thā was
faynt to fell and to make shyfte of all y• he had both of his owne & of the good la¦dy his wyfe. And so dyed in grete pouer¦te. And whan he was buryed suche per∣sones as he was detter vnto, toke all the londes & goodes that perteyned other to hym or to the lady his wyfe, so y• there by the good lady his wife fledde & departed pryuely out of ye coūtree, so y• non of her frendes wyste where she was become, for she thoughte she hadde rather to lyue poorely in a straunge countrye ferre fro her frēdes & aqueyntaunce thā to endu∣re pouerte in her owne countrye where she had ben nobly broughte vp in before. So this lady went & her doughter with her, who was of the age of .xiiii yeare ryght beautefull, how be it she was pore¦ly arayed & had to name Ihannet. And they trauayled so lōge by theyr Iorneys y• by aduenture they came in to the forest where Arthur & Gouernar were vsed to chase & to hunte. And in a desolate place of the forest ferre from ony hye way ther these two ladyes dyd reste them and ma∣de theym a lodge to abyde in of boughes and of suche thinges as they coude gette Thus they contynued the space of a mo¦neth. And this lady went eueri day right porely to the nexte vylage for to gete su∣the thinges as she & her doughter neded. And so it fortuned yt he same day y• Ar∣thur & gouernar departed fro the courte of his fader & was entred into the sayde foreste anone his houndes had founde a grete harte, And a noble knyghte yt was in his cōpany named the lorde Olyuer of Iyc folowed after this harte on a gret courser & all the other hūters after hym. And this yonge Arthur began to folowe after, how be it Gourar toke hede y• he sholde not folowe to fast, so y• this sayde lorde Olyuer & ll other were past frth by hym & were gon so ferre into the thic¦ke of ye foreste y• Arthur & Gouernar had clene loste both sight and heringe of thē and of theyr hoūdes. And so by ges they folowed fayre and esyly after, so lōg they folowed y• by aduenture they came to the same place where as the lodge was made for the lady & her doughter, who were bothe the same tyme syttynge wythout the lodge dore. And as soone as Arthur sawe them he lyghted downe of his hors and Gouernar wt hym. And whā this la¦dy sawe Arthur she was gretly abashed for she thought well y• he sholde be some grete man & there wt she rose and Arthur right swetely saluted her. And the lady in like wise agayne to him. And at y• tyme it was aboute thre of the clocke. And whan the ladye sawe Arthur & Gouernar dys∣cende from theyr horses, she remembred the state of her fader & of other gēlmen y• she had seene before in her owne coun∣tree where as she had be norysshed vp u wherof her herte was gretely ashamed & troubled. Than Arthur toke her by the hande & her moder also & set them done all togyder. Than Arthur demaūded of the yonge mayde & sayd fayre swete da∣moysell what is your name. As our lord helpe me syr I am called Iehannet, Iehāne good loue where were ye borne certayne syr I was not born in this coū¦tre. Than her moder sayd syr truely my doughter sayth sothe, for truely she was borne in the lōd of desarte in a castel cal∣led the tour. Truly sayd Arthur to who¦me was she doughter. As God helpe me syr to a knyght right stronge & puyssaūt who in his tyme loued euer dedes of ar∣mes & was acquēted wt many noble men How be it his fortune was such or he dy¦ed yt he lost away & wasted both his lon∣des and goodes and myne that was his
poore wyfe. And were broughte so ferre vnder that lytell or nothing was left vs. And after his death suche persones as he owed ony thynge to, and peraduenture some other yt he owed nothing to. They were thā so importune on me that I was fayne to sel al yt I had. And whan I saw that I was so ferre broughte vnder & yt I had nothyng lefte me wherby to lyue The occasion therof caused me to steale awaye by nyght▪ for I thought I had le¦uer go lyke a poore woman a beggynge in a straunge countre thā there where I was lady and gouernour. And therwith ryght pyteously she wept and sayd a gen¦tyl knyghte nowe am I come in to this coūtre a lonely accompanyed wt this yōg mayde my dere doughter, who was wōt be brought vp in fayre places and ryche halles and chambres, & to lye in th bed incorteyned wyth sylke. And nowe it be hoeth her to lye on the mosse in this lod¦ge couered wyth grene boughes. Than Arthur answered and sayde a fayre lady why dide not ye requyre youre frendes to helpe and socour you in your necessite At leste to gyue you mete & drynke & clo∣thing. In my mīd that had be more hono¦rable for you thā th{us} desolate to come in to this straūge coūtrye. As god helpe me syr sayd this lady pore folkes hath but fewe frendes, howe be it I ought to haue many, but betwene the riche & the poore there wanteth frendes, for the ryche ma∣keth his frendes of his money & the pore is euer put out in euery place. And as to me sorowfull creature who hath bene a grete lady & moche honoured & haue had moche people vnder my obeysaūce, thou¦ghte grete shame to requyre ony creatu¦re in my owne cūtre to helpe or soccoure me. And specyally for this yonge mayde my doughter, she is come of goodly lyg∣nage. Alas as for me I am olde and al∣wayes she hath serued me ryghte well, & now she is lyke wt me to lese her tyme, & ther wt she began agayne to wepe. And whan Iehānet sawe her moder so wepe she coude not abstayne her selfe from we¦pyng tenderly. And whan Arthur sawe thm so full of sorowe, he had grete pyte and sayd to the lady. My right dere lady wepe ye no more but sette youre harte in rest for fro hēsforth I wyll be in the stede of youre olde lorde, & in all good honoure to lue & cherish you to the best of my po¦wer. And all this whyle Iehānet made styll grete laentacō. So there Arthur toke the yonge mayde in his armes, & ry∣ght swetely sayd. My right dere adye & loue abandon youre herte to ioye and le∣ue this sorowe for as god be my socoure I shall cause you haue more honoure & welth than as yet eurcame to you, for I am and shal be your owne good loue and wyll take you in to my handes to de¦lyuer you fro all pouertye, faythfully as∣suryng you to kepe the honour of you & of youre bodye as moche as youre owne popre broder wolde or myght do. ¶Howe Arthur caused to be delyuered to Iehānet & her moder y• reuenues yt be¦longed to the stang or ponde of the forest wherby there stode a fayre goodly place of pleasure, and afterward Arthur, didde often tyms resorte thyder to passe the tyme with them. Capit. iiii. IN this season yt Arthur had this cōmunycaciō wt these ladyes, ther came to thē the mayster forester named Pyere who was also receyuer the reue∣newes of the forest & he had al ye day so¦ghte his mayster Arthur & by aduentu∣re there he foūd him talking wt these la∣dyes, And incōtynent yt Arthur sawe hī
he called hym by his name and demaun∣dyd of hī yf he had receyued at yt mawde¦leyn tyde ye reuenewes of the forest, and Piers answered and said, syr I haue alre¦dy at your cōmaūdement to the some of. fyue. C. pounde, well quod Arthur I cō∣maūde the incontynente to delyuer it to this lady & to her doughter. Also the ma∣ner place pertayning to the stang of this forest wherein thou hast dwelt to this ty¦me. It was so that in this stāge or water the wylde beastes of the foreste dyd euer thyder resorte to drynke. and Ioynynge to this water there were houses and ma∣ners the which the duke had gyuen to ar¦thur his son to playe hī in the forest, and this pyers was keper thereof to Arthurs behoue. Than sayde Arthur to Pyers I delyuer to y• these .ii. ladyes. And I char∣ge the y• truly y• kepe & honour them and brīg them to my maner and to deliuer to them such as is apertenaūte to so goood by ladyes as they be. And as such a man as I am haue taken into my hādes & ke¦pyng. Therfore kepe thē well & truely. For by the fayth yt I owe to my lord my fader yf I knowe y• yu entende or yma∣gen agaynst this lady or her doughter a∣ny dyspleasure. I shall cause the to suf∣fre foule death. And I warne the loke yt they lacke no thyng. Syr sayd Pyers I trust I shall so demane me yt both you & they shall be wt me contente. And so whā Arthur had ben there a grete season, he toke his leue there of this lady and of her doughter. So Pyers dyd conduyte them to the said maner & bought for them aby¦lementes & Iewelles, mete & drynke of the best yt coude be goten, & all other thyn¦ges yt was cōuenyent for noble ladys to haue. And garnysshed euery offyce in ye house wt plate of syluer & wt all other ne∣cessary thynges. And whan Arthur and Gouernar wer departed fro these ladyes they rode after the tracke of syr Olyuer of Iryac and his companye, and at the laste they mete togyder ferre in the forest in a grete depe valey where as syr Oly∣uer hadde kylled thre grete hartes, and was brekynge of them. And therwith Ar∣thur came to hym & laughed ryght swe∣tely. Than resorted other of the hunters fro all partyes. And so there Arthur com¦maunded a seruaunt belongynge to the sayd Pyers to take one of these hartes & to bere it fro him to the sayd lady and to her doughter. And the seconde Arthur dyd gyue to an abbotte that was come to theym by aduenture. And the thirde he commaunded that it sholde be conueyed to the duke his fader, who hadde greate ioye therof. ¶How within .viii. dayes after Arthur and Gouernar wente to the stange to se the ladye and Iehannet her doughter, Capitulo. .v. THe eyght daye after that Arthur was come fro the foreste he rose erly in a fayre morninge and sayd to go¦uernar, frende lette vs go leape vppon our horses and goo se oure damoysell in the forest we two alone, gladly syr sayd Gouernar. So Arthur toke a sparhawke on his honde, and Gouernar a gerfaw∣con. And Arthur aparayled hym selfe all in grene silke, and his hatte auayled with a fresshe chaplet of floures on his heade. And they rode so longe that by the sonne rysynge they came to the stang and foūd the lady and Iehannet ready aparayled ryght nobly. For Pyers the forester had purueyed them of all thinges necessarye to suche ladyes. And as than Iehannet had dronken good wynes and taken her
sustenaunce of good metes, and had for∣gotē all her sorowe. Wherby her beaute was newly renewed. And whan Arthur sawe her, she pleased hym moche better thā she dyd whan he sawe her fyrst. And so toke her by the fayre hande and sette them downe togyder a parte. And in the meane seasō the lady her moder and Go∣uernar were talkynge togyder. And the mornynge was very fayre & clere. And the earth all bedewed wyth clere syluer droppes. An the byrddes sange mlodi∣ously on euery braunche so that these .ii. yonge lusty louers gretly reioysed, and had great myrthe in theyr hartes bicause of the swete season as it was metely for suche yonge people to playe & to laughe. And they loued togyder with good herte without thinkinge of vylany or shame e∣che to other. Than Arthur sayd to her al laughyng. My swete damoysell haue ye ony maner of louer. And halfe smilīg and beholdynge Arthur ryghte swetely she answered, by the fayth that I owe to you my owen dere lorde, I haue one ry∣ghte fayre and gracyous. And where is he my swete Iehannet. By my fayth yr he is of a coūtre wherof he is lorde. And fayre loue howe is he called, syr you not dyspleased, this that I haue sayde is suf∣fycyent at this presente teme. How be it syr I wolde ye knew that king Arthur was a noble knyght and of grete vertu And syr I wolde my louer were so good yf he be not better all redy. But one thīg syr I assure you he resembleth more to you than to ony other vnder the sonne lyuynge, bothe goynge, and in comynge of bodye and all other thynges that one persone may be lykened to an other. My owne swete and fayre damoysell sayd Ar¦thur I wolde fayne se hym. And by the fayth that ye ow to me if it be to you no vylony I praye you shewe hym to me & I promyse you faythfully I shall loue & cherysshe. hym ryght derely. And for the loue of you yf yt he wyll he shalbe one of my house, yf he be no greater of lygnage ne of rychesse than I am. My ight dere lorde sayd this damoysel hūbly I thanke you howe be it he is no greater gentyl∣man than ye be, but he thynketh well to haue as grete honour and frendes as ye haue, but as now ye may not se him▪ but it may well be that here after ye shall ha¦ue knowlege of hym. And soo thus they comoned togyder of manye thinges tyll it was tyme that Arthur sholde retorne to the courte, for as than it was aboute pryme. Than Arthur toke his leue of the lady and of Iehannet. And so he and go¦uernar mounted on theyr horses and ro∣de forth alwayes deuisyng of the maner of this damoysell Iehannet. And at the last Arthur sayd. Mayster howe saye you by the swetnesse of our damoysell and of the frenes of her herte, and how sagely & gracyoslye she answereth to euerye de∣maunde, remembrynge also her gentyll maner & noble countenaunce, her beaw∣tefull facyon of body and of vysage. As god helpe me mayster all these thynges and manye other that saemeth of vertue to be in her, causeth that I loue her hyr∣tely. Syr sayde Gouernar as God helpe me all that ye saye is of trouth, how be it myne owne dere lorde take good hede to your honour ad remembre how gre∣te a lorde ye be, both of lygnage, honoure and of frendes. And thinke how that she is but a poore gentylwoman as to your knowlege. And if ye do her ony vylony to her body, as in takynge from her that he can not render agayne, syr it were t you a grete synne. And ye ought therein to be more blamed than a nother meanes
persone. Mayster sayd arthur I praye to god neuer to helpe me yf I thynke to go aboute to dysshonoure her, but I wyll loue her & kepe her honoure faythfully in lyke case as she were myne owen pro¦per sister without euer desyringe onye velany to her body. So they rode forthe talkyng til they came to the courte, and than went to dyner for it was by that time nere vpon two of the clocke. ¶How that the duke and duchesse toke counsell to mary theyr sone arthur and how they sente theyr stewarde to the la∣dy Luke of ostrige for to demaunde her doughter for Arthur. Cap. vi IN this wyse Arthur soiurned a great longe space so yt there was no wee but that twyse or thrie he and Gouernar wolde ryde to the stange with out any other cōpany. And it fortuned one day he taried there lenger thā he was a customed to do, wherfore he was sou∣ght all aboute by the cōmaundement of the duke his father how be it no tydin∣ges coude be herde of hym but that he & Gouernar were gone togider to sporte them, but no man wyste whyther. And than the duchesse sayd to the duke, syr I wote not what meaneth that our soone thus goth forth so pryuely euery day & no man can tell whyther, for he taketh none with him but Gouernar veraylye I doubte me of our chylde least that he sholde set his herte & loue on some persō wherby we shold haue any velony, syr he is now of yeres sufficient to perciue & to know the fayre perteyning to loue wherfore I wolde he were nobly maried for it is tyme, he is .xxii. yeres of age. Madame quod the duke ye haue ryght wysely sayd. And I acorde well thereto, but to whome thinke ye best it were to giue him in mariage. Syr sayd the ladye in my minde it were wel doon that we should demaūde the fayre Perron of o∣sryge, & I trust my lady Luke her mo∣der wyl be therof right glad, veryly ma¦dame sayd the duke I haue harde saye that this lady Perron hath not wyselye demeaned her self▪ but hath had greate blame for her nyse kepyng company w a knight of her countrey. And I wolde for no good yt we should demaunde such a person as hath deserued blame. A syr sayd the lady beleue not ye the reportes of them that lusteth to say y, for as god helpe me she is slaundred wrongfully. for I am sure the eis not a better maide lyuyng, wherfore they are in greate sin that reporteth oterwyse of her. Dame sayd the duke yf it be so I am right ioy∣full. Than let vs send thyder in al hast Than was called to them syr Olyuer yt was senesshall. And the duke sayde to hym, syr Olyuer I wyll ye go to ostyge to my ladye Luke & desyre of her in my bhae Peron her doughter to be giuē in matrymony to athur my sone. Tā syr Olyuer prepayred him to ride forthe And .x. other knightes in his company. and so departed and rode forth so longe that the wednesdaye after Mawdeleyn∣tyde they came to ostryge. And whan sir Oliuer was in the great hall where as the lady Luke was acompanyed with many great barons ladyes and damoy∣sels. He dyd right reuerently salute her and all the other lordes and barons as a messenger sent fro the duke & duchesse of Britayne. And this lady Luke right honourablye dyd receyue hym and all hys company. And demaunded what was the cause and the occasyon of their comynge.
¶How the senesshall demaunded the daughter of ostryge for arthur of Bry∣tayne, the which request with great Ioy was graunted hym. Cap. vii. THan syr Olyuer began hys pro¦posicion & sayde. Righte hye and mygty prynces. My lorde and ladye of brytayne hath sé̄d vs hither to publishe vnto you theyr ententes for they are ry∣ght desyrous to haue loue and affinitie with you as it well appereth, for they haue harde suche bruce & fame of my la∣d Perō your doughter. Wherfore thei haue sent me hither to your presēce to re¦quyre you in theyr behalfe to gyue your doughter perron in mariage to arthur theyr sone, who is ryght gentyl, noble & valiaunt. Madame this is the effecte of our request. In the name of god sayde the lady luke humbly I thāke the duke your lorde yt it wyl please him to haue wyth vs acquentaunce, wherof I haue right geat Ioye. And wih a good hert I gyue freely to him my doughter Per∣ron to be all holly at his comaūdemēt Madame sayd Oliuer this dede ought greatly to be thanked. And how say you fayre lady perron, do you acorde to this mariage. Syr sayd Perron I shall euer fulfyl the pleasure of my lady my mo∣der. Certaynly fayre lady than doo you wysely for I ensure you ye shall be cou¦pled to him yt is both fayre and goodly. Than this ladi luke & her doughter did giue to syr Oliuer & to hys companye manye noble Iewels & other thinges. And theyr apoyntment was to be at na¦untes within .viii. dayes of the middell of the next August. ¶How yt arthur was sore dyspleased for yt his father wold mayr hī to ye dou¦ghter of ostryge bycause it was sayde she was of yll gouernaunce. Ca. viii. THan the senesshal toke lee of the lady Luke and of the fayre Perron and retorned into brytayne. At whiche tyme he founde the duke than risen fro diner and the duchesse with hī And arthur and Gouernar were play∣ing at the chesse, & as sone as the duke saw syr Oliuer he made him good cher and the knight right humblye saluted them and thanked them greatly for the greate loue and gyftes that the Du∣chesse of ostrige had done to him for their sakes, and shewed them how the lady Luke wolde be at Nauntes and bring with her Perron redy apayled to be giuen to Arhur aboute the middell of August next insuyng. And whā Arthur herde that his fader wolde mary him he stepped forth & left his playe. And sayd what is y• right dere fader, wyll ye ma∣rie me. Ye fayre sone sayde the duke ri∣ght nobly. And good fader vnto whom wyll ye gyue me, Fayre sone vnto the gentil perron of ostryge. What syr as it is noysed she hath trespased wt a nother knight set ye so litle by me that ye wyll now gyue me perrō who is of yl name and fame. Certainly it is not your wor¦shyp ne honour so to do nor to none of my frendes. Therfore in no maner of wyse I wyl take her. Fayre sone sayde his moder be not displesed ne beleue no euil reportes yt is sayd by this lad it is great sin to say such thinges as cannot be proued for I am in certayne that she is a clene mayden. And therfore we wil that ye shal haue hir or els ye shal gret∣ly dysplease my lorde your father & me
also▪ wel madame said Arthur sith that it behoueth me to take her & that it is your pleasure y I so do I am content, how be it yf she be of suche condicions as is sayd of her I shal neuer loue her. Than sayd gouernar to the duke, syr ye wyl that Arthur shall haue this damoi¦sell. Neuerthelesse pleaseth you syr to know that if this case be found true thā let Arthur leue and forsake her. And yf that she dyd neuer suche trespas thā let arthur kepe her as he ought to doo hys wyfe, but how hall thys be knowen sayd the duke for where as wysedome is suche thinges are lightly done so co∣uertly that it is harde to know, syr sayd Gouernar let it be enquyred wysely of such as to presume should know of the matter. Also let the damoysell her self be wysely examyned, & yf she be good she wyll kepe her selfe, yf she be otherwyse perauenture it will be espied. I am con¦tent with this sayd arthur. And for that time they left theyr commīg of that mat¦ter. Than the duke sent out his cōmaū∣dementes to all his barons, knightes & damoysels that they sholde be al redy at nauntes bi the middes of august for thā he wolde kepe open courte and make ar¦thur his sone knight, and marye hym to the fayre Perron of ostryge. The duke also dyd write to the erle of bloys bro∣der germayne to the duchesse his wyfe. And also sent for the erle of Aniou who was nere of kinne to the duke and also to the archebysshop of ous desyringe them to be at nuntes at the sayd daye. ¶How that arthur wente to se Iehan∣net and declared to her how ye duke his father should mary him wherof he was sore dyspleased for ye loue of her. Cap. ix Arthur. THā arthur & gouernar toke their horses & rode to the strāge in the forest where as they founde Iehannet & her moder, who made great Ioy & feest and Iehānet behelde arthur who was as than right pale for dyspleasure & de¦maūded of him what was the cause of his displeasure. Certaynly my loue said arthur greater displeasure coulde neuer haue fallen. For my lorde my father wil now mary me the which I forthinke wt al mi herte because of the loue yt I haue to you for I thinke veryly ye wyl not be contēt therwt. And your displeasure per¦seth myn herte. A min owne swete lord sayd Iehānet for gods sake trouble not your selfe for no cause for in certayne I am in like case fallen in a treatie to be maried. A good loue sayd Arthur I prai you to whome. Syr so god helpe me to him of whome I haue spoken to you of here before is yt of a trouth faire damoi¦sel quod arthur and I requyre you whā shal ye be maried, in trouth the same pro¦pre day that ye shal maryed, now fayre damoysel by the faith the ye oe to hī I desyre you let me se hī syr ye may not se
hym as yet, but for certayne he shall be aperayled in ye same clothyng & sute as ye shall be the day of your wedding. In the name of god sayd arthur I haue of this great meruayle for ye haue sayde here before to me that he is as great of lignage as I am and as gretly endued wyth hauyour and frendes and how y he resembleth to me in all pointes, and also howe that he hath a ryche & a puis∣saunt vncle. I wote not whome I shold thinke without ye meane al this by my self, for I know wel the erle of Bloys is my vncle by my moders side. wel sir sayd Iehānet nor I wyll not shew you at this present time. So thus they com¦mined together of hat and of other thī∣ges tyll finally arthur tooke leue of her for that tyme and etourned to the courte of his father. And thus dayly he rode to se this fayre daymoysel Iehan¦net til it came to the next day before his wedding. And the erle of Aniou and the archebyshop of tours were come, and also the erle of Blois who brought with him Hector his son who was a gentill and a fayre creture & was xtrught of the linage of brytayne, & was cosin ger∣mayn to arthur & also of one age for thei were borne bothe in one yeare. And as Arthur saw him he made him great ioy and feest, and al wayes kept companye togyder. And so there came fo al partes lordes knightes ladies & damoysels by geat flockes for to go mete the ladi per¦ron of ostryge. And than mounted the duke and al other barons & knightes o go lykewyse to encountre Perron. who was as than come within the space of halfe a lege & brought wih her a great cōpany of lordes knightes, ladies and damoysels. ¶How that Arthur & Hector his cosyn germayne were made knightes for the loue of Arthur, who thā did ensure Per¦ron doughter to ye lady Luke of ostrige. And of the great tornay that was there done at nauntes for the loue of arthur Cap. x. ANd whan all these noble people were assbled together the duke and duchsse and all other lordes made great ioye & feest at the metynge of thys lady Luke and Perron her doughter. And the duchesse toke her in her armes, and sayd a myne owne swete doughter ye be into this countrey right welcome and kissed her oftntims wepyng for Ioye For she was so fayre a creature yt the duchesse coulde not absteyne her self fro clypping & kissing her. And therewt called to her arthur & sayd fayre sone ar∣thur beholde here this fayre lady who is & shall be yours. Madame sayd arthur wyll it please you to suffre her to moūt vpon her horse & we shal speke of thys matter well ynoughe here after. So they went all to horse and rode forth to nauntes. And there lordes, knightes & other toke vp theyr lodginge in the citie and some were harboured in the palais with the duke. And whan it came to the tyme to speke of the maryage than arthur sayde in open audyence. My lorde my father, and also my ladye my mothe ye wyll cause me here to take this damoysell. And yet I knowe not what name or fame that she is of. How be it syr I say surely bthe to you & also to you my Lady Luke who is mother vnto her that I take her agaynste my herte bycause of the suspeccyons, noise and yll renowmes the whyche that I haue harde saye and reported of her.
Neuerthelesse it behoueth me to take her to exchewe therby the displeasure of my lorde my fader, & of my lady my mo∣der & other of my frendes for I perceiue wel it is theyr mindes. How be it I say openly here to you all yf yt I finde such noyse as renneth on her to be of trouth I ensure you yt whyle I lyue she shal ne¦uer haue one good day with me in rest. A my fayre sone sayd the duchesse what & ye finde her good & true. And that all such ill noyse as ye haue harde of her be vntrew and false. Well madame sayde arthur han shal I loue her as I ought to do my wyfe. Than the duke called forth the archebysshop of nauntes and so caused arthur to be there openly fiaū¦ced to Perron and on the next day to be maryed. Thā began great feest and ioy in the palays. And daūsyng of ladies & damoyselles, & frusshyng of speres & ba¦teryng of harneys wt swerdes in euerye strete of the citie. Than the duke ayde that who so euer wolde take the ordre of chiualy wt his son Arthur the nexte daye with a good wyll he wolde gyue them the ordre. Thā arthur sayd to hec¦tor his cosyn syr I requyre you to mo∣row take the ordre of knighthode with me & fro hensforth let vs kepe cōpanye togider in iustes & tornay & in al other thinges as sworne bretherne. Fayre co∣sin sayd Hector I requyre you let vs go know the pleasure of my lord my father whither that he wil agre to this or not. e say well sayd arthur. Than arthur  before the duke his fader and al other lordes & helde his cosyn Hector by the hād & sayd openly to the erle of Bloys, m lorde my vncle I requyre you my let cosyn hector be made knight to morow wt me for we shal loue togider the beter euer after certaynly sayd the erle fayre neuew, hector hath as yet to lytle londe to susteyne therwyth the noble ordre of knighthode. And yt he sayde bycause he wold not yt is sone shold be made knight so sone. Truly syr said arthur he hath ri¦chesse inough to be a knight for as loge as ye lyue he can not fayle. And though he fayle of you yt god hath so prouided for him yt after your dayes he shal be erle of Blois. Ye fayre neuew {quod} the erle we may both be disceiued by that, for it may o fortune that I may lese all my right in the erledome of bloys & his also. Nor let not my sone Hetor oke to be lord o∣uer me for as lōge as I liue one fote of the londe of the eledom of bloys geteth he not, no syr saide arthur & touned to hector and said fayre cosin it sold seme wel by the saying of my lorde your fader how that he is very pore. How be it I desie you to be knit wt me & I faithful¦lie promise you ye I shall giue you as much lōde or more as my lorde your fa∣der wil giue you an I pray you fro hēs¦forth let vs be togider as cpanions n horse, in abilimētes, in lāde, in house & in euery thinge. And so I retayne you fro this presēt time forthard. As god help me fayre so sayd the duke. Who had hard what arthur had sayd to Hector I am wel cōent that ye thus retaine Hector your cosin. Also I rquyre him that he wil be your cōpanion. and to the erle of Bloys he said Also syr I desyre you to giue licence to your son Hector that he may be knight with his cosin Arthur. Thā the ele of Bloys dyd laughe ther¦at and sayd to the duke. Syr as god me helme I am ryght wel contēte. But f one thing let him be sure that as longe as I liue he shall neuer be the Erle of Bloys. Than arthur sayde to hys cosyn Hector. well syr we be yonge ynoughe.
therfore we shall seke to get our lyuing for I trust god shal help vs. Than he sayd to the duke his father syr gouernar hath serued & norisshed me vp swetelye, therfore I requyre you let me make him knight and whan I may I wyl do bet∣ter to hym, certaynly fayre sonne it plea¦seth me right well. So than they were made knightes with great tryumphe▪ & there was made great Ioye & fest both with lordes and ladies, and a great tor∣nay was there ordeyned for the loue of these new knightes. And whyle this tri¦umphe and tornay endured Arthur sayd to hctor. Fayre cosyn come on with me & we wil go se the most swete and gen¦tyl damoysel yt euer ye saw. In the na∣me of god {quod} hctor I am well content And so artur, hector & gouernar moun¦ted on theyr horses and rode forth to the manoyr of the stāge where as they foūd Iehānt and her moder lening in a wyn¦dow talkyng togyder, & whan they saw arthur they came to hym & made grat ioye And than ehānet demaunded of Arthur, syr quod she what gentyl man is this that ye haue brouht with you. Fayre loue sayd Arthur he is sonne to the erle of bloys, and he is my cosyn ger∣mayne. In ye name of god sayd she he is hther welcome for your sake. Than Iehannt behele well Arthur and she prceyud b his coūtenaunce yt he was trubd, thefore she desyred of hym to know what he eylled in good faith god loue this day haue I made a dolorous Iorney for I haue fyauncd a woman agaynst my wil, yt whiche I sore repēt bycause it is grefull to me to leue youre companye, cetayne fayre loue Arthur quod she take no dyspleasure thoughe y it haue fiaūced a lady for certaynlye in the same propre houe that ye fyaun∣ced your ladye I was fyaunced to my loue. And my dere loue quod Arthur I requyre you who is that and where is he. By the fayth ye I owe vnto you syr I knoweful wel where he is. wel fayre lady sayd arthur I pray you than shew him to me surely syr that yll I not do as yet but I promise you to shew hym to you within these thre dayes next com¦myng. And syr know you for certayne that he resembleth to you both in com∣ynge in goinge, in hauioure, in frendes, gentylnes in facion of body and in al o∣ther thinges. n the name of god sayd Arthur  meruayle geatly for by your wordes it shold appere yt it were myself for there cannot two persons be resem∣bled togider but theyr must be som faute & difference. I beleue ye deuise these wor¦des for me, how be it I am troubled a∣gayne whā I thinke how ye saye that ye were fiaunced to day, and how that ye shall be maryed to morowe the same propre houre that I shal be wedded in. As god helpe me syr sayd Iehannet it is of routh he resemblth to you wtout fay¦lyng of any poynte, veryly sayde arthur I cannot thinke whome it should be. And so they talked together so longe til it was tyme for arthur to departe for he doubted to be blamed of hys frdes. So he toke lue of the ladyes and depar¦ted & as they rode hector sayd to arthur syr vndouted this is a fayre yonge lady right gracious, swete & fayre behauing as god help me fayre cosyn sayde arthur she is mine owne howe be it she is a poore damoysell nor hath no thynge but yt she hath of me. But by the faythe that I owe vnto my lord and father the duke of brytayne I loue her better al na¦ked than she that I shal haue wtall the iches of the world, for I must take her
agenst my wyll. And therfore cosyn I am veryly purposed that as sone as ths tryumphe is passe, and all straungers be departed, and myne vncle youre fader and all gone, than I thynk to ask lycē¦ce of m fader to go ske aduentures in some straunge coūtrees and to take with me alonlye Gouernar and to abyde fo hom the space of .v. or .vi. yeres. And so shll I leue her tht troubleth me, for in hr company in no wyse I can abyde. Truely syr sayd Hector and yf yt ye wyl thus god by the fayth that I owe to you I wyll dparte wyth you, and neuer to leue you whyle that I lyue. A good co∣syn Hector qud Arthur it pleaseth mee verly well to haue youre companye, and herely I thanke you thereof. How be it I beseche you kepe this thyng secret that i be not knowen tyll the tyme of our de∣partyng. And as soone as Arthur was partd frome Iehannet, she dyd senne all aboute for mynstrelles and instrumē∣tes of musyke. And caused al the house to be hanged wyth sylke, and commaun∣ded all her folkes to make as geate Ioy and feest as they coude ymagen. And so this Arthur rod forth alwayes til he ca∣me to Nunts where as the tables we∣re redy couered to souper. And the duke se to hym downe and all other lordes e∣uery man in his place, and they were ser¦ued ryght rychely wyth gree Ioye, and after souper they played and sported thē uery mn as he bste led tyll it was seson to go to rest. For than it was past mydnighte. And so the duke than entred ino his chambre. And Arthur, Hector and Gouernar wēt to se Iehannet, and whan they came nere to the place of the sange they herde greate noyse & myrthe of instrumentes and ound all the house newly hanged. And the ladyes arayed wt vestures of pleasure. And they founde as greae apparayle as thoughe a kyng shlde haue come thyder. And Iehannt was apparayled as though she she haue be mryed incōtynēt. And whā she harde that Arthur was come thyder e came goodly vno him. It was meruayle than to beholde her she was so fayre. And as sone as Arthur saw hr coming his herte smyld and sade vnto hym∣selfe. A Iesu, a gentyll and a gracyous metynge is this. As god hlpe me I had rather to haue your company than to e encombred wyth her that I muste haue And therwt he clepped her in his arms and sayd. My swete loue god that fou∣med all the worlde snd you a bett daye than I hue had a nygh. Syr sade Ie∣hannet god gyue you as good a daye as he hath done to me. For this sam nygt I shall be wyth my louer. And god  you in lykewyse wyth yours. Certayn∣ly sayde Arthur I repute her not for my loue that I shall be with. But ye yt i all be as ye saye wyth your louer shalbe ne¦rer to my herte than she shall be. But I praye you swete Ihānet shew me your louer, syr I haue all redy promysed ou yt ye shall se him within these thre ayes, therfore I beseche you to abyde tyll that seasō. With a good wyll sayd arthur and so taryed there so longe tyll it was fayre daye and than it behoued hym for to de∣parte. ¶Howe that Arthur wedded fayre Per∣ron doughter to the lady Luke of ostry∣ge. And of the protestacion that he made before all the barony. Capitulo. xi.
NOw sheweth the history howe yt whā arthur, Hector and Gouer∣nar were dparted frome Iehannet they came to the courte. And by that tyme we¦re all lordes knyghtes and al other risen fro theyr rest. And the archebyshop of toures was ready to synge masse and so∣lempny se the matrymony. And than the duke and the duchesse and all the other lordes, knyghtes ladyes and damoysels dyd conuey Arhur and this ladye Per∣ron to the chyrche. And there in the sight o all people & in open audyence Arthur sayd. I wyll that it be knowen yt if euer I fynde trewe suche wordes as I haue heroe saye of this lady thoughte I were wedded to her a houdred thousande ty∣mes yet I wyll leue and vtterly forsake her. And on that condyciō her I am now contente to take her to my wyfe and none other wyse. And therto was wel a¦corded her moder and all other of theyre frendes. And so wyth greate solemnyte they wee wedded togyder, & grete was the feaste add Ioye that than was made in al the cyte, ladies damoyselles dydde daunce and made gret ioye and myrthe and made chaplettes and tokens & dyd gyue them to lordes and knyghtes in the sygne of loue. ¶How this ladye Luke of osryge sente or Iehannet and caused her secretly the fyrst nyght to lye with Arthur bycause y• Perron was no mayde, to the ntente yt Arthur shold not perceyue it. Ca. xii. WE must knowe howe that dame Luke duryng all this seasō that this greate Ioye and myrth was made, she was in grete thoughte in her herte bycause she knew wel yt her dough¦ter. Perron was no mayde, therfore she doubted greatly to haue vylonye.
And therfore she wyste not what was beste for her to do. So at the laste she cal∣led to her one of her owne knyghtes in whome she trusted beste in all her besy∣nesse. And than she shewed vnto him all the demenoure of Perron, and desyred hym to gyue her in that behalfe the beste counsayle yt he knewe, for she sawe wel howe that arthur wolde fayne fynde so∣me cause by her to the ntente that he my¦ghte be departed fro her company. For syr quod she yf Arthur fynde that she be no mayde, than I doubte me of vyany. Therfore I requyre you for goddes loue to counsayle me in this case. Than this knyghte who had to name syr Aunsell, answered & sayd, madame syth it is thus the case muste be suffered as easely as it may be. For whan the dede is done than it is tyme to take coūsayle both sage and secret. I shall tell you what we shall do, here is by dwellynge at the stange in the forest a poore damoysell ryght fayre and yonge, who hath a moder a ryght good aūcient lady. And I thinke verely she be a good mayde. Sende vnto her moder parte of your syluer and golde, an pro∣myse to doo for her many other thynges so that she wyll ende you her doughter for this fyrste nyghte to lye wyth arthur tll mydnyght be paste. And I thynke verely ye shall haue her yf she be wysely entreted and secretly. And than yf ye ha∣ue her whā Perron sholde be layde in the bedde she shal be in her stede tyl that ar∣thur be a slepe and than she shall ryse. And so than Perron shall lye downe by arthur. A syr sayd the lady for gods sake thynke on to brynge his mater aboute. Take my charyot & fyue hondred poun∣des of golde and bere it vnto her moder and shewe her how I shall gyue her lar∣ge lodes and rentes, and shal mary her doughter ryght hyghly soo that I maye haue her this nyght. So thā inconinent this knight clepte on his horse, and tooke wyth hym the golde and the chayot and caused it to be couered and robe vnto the stange where as he founde this fayre la∣dy and her doughter, & dyde salute thm ryght swetely and drewe theym aparte, and sayde to the lady. Mdame I am co¦me hyther to you fro my ladye Luke of ostryge, who ryght enderly sendeth gre∣tynge vnto you. As she that fro hēsforth wyl be your enspecyall louer and frende And aboue all other wyll loue & honour you. And in the sygne of loue she hathe sente you fyue hondreth poundes of gol∣de. And ferthermore promyseth you to gyue you greate londes and goodes and to mary ryght hyely Iehānet your dou∣ghter, so that ye wyll do her that bounte and pleasure now at this tyme as to sen¦de your doughter to her to the entente to lye thys fyrst night with Arthur of Bry∣tayne tyll mydnyght. For the case is soo that Perron her doughter is not insoo good poynte as she wolde she were for e hath trespaced wyth another knyght Therfore good lady I humbly requyre you for to be her speciall louer and fren∣de in this mater, greate charyte it is one lady for to saue ye worshyp and honoure of another. Than sayde the lady I than∣ke my lady Luke for the greate loue and honour that she presēteth to me, yf theyr were eyther loue or honoure in this case, syr knyghte as me thynketh here lacketh loue whan she requyreth my shame and dyshonoure, For she wolde that I shold sell to her my doughter for her moneye. Certaynly that I shall neuer do it to dye therfore. I praye you bere her agayne this money, & god gyue her good aduen∣ture. Than Iehannet sayd vnto her mo∣der.
Madame for goddes sake be ye not dyspleased wyth my wordes, for sauyng your grace, this desyre that this knyghte mketh is no sellynge of me, for my lady Luke is a greate and noble a pryncesse. Therfore her velony sholde be more spo∣ken than yf she where of a meeuneestate And all women oughte to put theyr pay∣ne to couer & to hyde suche maters. And also euery woman to helpe & sustayn the blame and defame of other. And this la∣dy requyreth not youre vylonye for she dooth it to hyde her owne dyshonoure. Truely doughtr quod the lady, the mo∣der yt demeneth not wysely her chylde is to be blamed, and yf my lady Luke ha¦ue not kept this lady Perron her dough∣ter as curyouslye & as wysely as I haue doone you, and by the which neclygence now she is renne into foly & daunger, let her take it a worth & thanke no body but her selfe. Madame sayde Iehannet it is a harde thynge to ouercome youthe, for yf thys lady Perron haue doone amysse, yet remēbre how hath be easely she & swetly noryshed, and euery creature desyrous des sake madame beholde the myghte of loue by whome she was ouercome. For to serur her floryshyng yougth. For god she loued & was loued agayne, remem∣bre also the greate case wherin she hath all her yougth bene noryshed. The why∣che one cam & pure in to her herte amo∣rous and loue. Madame yf I trepas I are mercy, for by the fayth yt I ow to you I wyll fullfyll yt pleasure of my lady lu¦ke. In sauyng of her honour I shall put myne in Ieopardy. How be it syr knight take agayne your money, for yf I shold take money I shoulde sell my bodye the whych I wyll not do. For yt I do is free∣ly fr the lue of my lady Luke. And she shall do me good whan it shal please her best. Than her moder sayd to her, syth ye wyll nedes to as ye lyst, ad yf he d fo∣ly take the aduenture that wyll fall ther∣of. For moche better is worth a woman to be poore and true, than to be folysshe & riche. Ye shall not go for me nor by my wyll. For honour surmoūteth al thīges Madame yt ye saye is of trouth, how be it I requyre you suffer and let me alone. Syr knyght let vs departe, we tary ve∣ry longe. Myne owne fayre damoysell sayde the knyght I humbly thanke you and for certayne I ensure you ye shall be ryght hyely rewarded, & therto I wyll be pledge. Than the knyghte lefte the golde there for ony thynge yt Iehannet coulde do the contrary. And so Iehannet moun¦ted in to the chariot and rode forthe▪ and whan they were com to the coure the lady Luke receyued her ryghte pryuely & kepte her tyll it was tyme to go to bedde and than pryuely they ladye Iehānet in the bedde in the stede of Perron, and the courtaynes of the bed wer hanged betwe¦ne the lyght and her. And than came Ar∣thur and the duke his fader. And thā the duke sayde, sone Arthur ye shall gyue to Perron your wyfe this nyght yt charter of her endowry, wherin is comprysed the londe of the cyte of saintes and of Poys attenynge to the boundes of gasgoyne. And also ye shall giue her this rynge wt this ryche & precyous emeraude, this en¦dowry mounteth well to the some of .x. thousande poūde by annuall rente, than it was tyme for Arthur to go to bedde & whan he was goyng therto the lady Lu∣ke sayde to hym good dere loue Arthu I requyre you that ye speke this nyght as ltle as ye maye doo to Perron my dou∣ghter, for she is somwhat shamfast. Veryly madame quod Arthur with a righte good wyll, and so wente he to bedde.
¶Howe that Iehanne who that was a bee with arthur in the stede of his wy∣fe Peron, & or she wolde suffer hym o touche her she demaūded her endowrye. Capitulo. xiii. ANd whā that Arthur was thus a bedde he beganne to draw nere to his wyfe as to his knowlege. Than Iehannet counterfayted her speche and sayd softely. Syr it is so or ye touche me I wyll knowe what shall be min endow¦rye, I requyre you syr assygne it to me. And than shall I be readye to fulfyll all your commaundemente. Than Arthur toke the charter and the rynge and dely∣uered them to Iehannet. And sayde my loue Perron ye shall haue a fayre endow¦ry, for it draweth nere to the some of .x. thousande pounde. And so dydde put the rynge vpon one of her fyngers My ry∣ghte dere Lorde sayde Iehannet I hum∣bly thanke you. And so toke the charter and the rynge and layde theym vp priue∣ly vnder the beddes syde. So thus was Iehānet moost parte of the nyghte wyth Arthur in grete Ioye and myrthe vntyll the tyme that Arthur fell a slepe, for he had not slepte of al y• nyghte before. And whyle that he thusspte Iehannet pry∣uely rose and tooke wyth her the charter of Perrons endowrye and came to the lady Luke. And ncontinent she was cō¦ueyd agayne pryuely to theistange to her moder. And than was Perron put soft∣ly in to the bedde to Arthur, who woke not tyll it was fayre daye. And whan he was waken he sawe where as Perron laye faste a slepe by hym, for she had not slepte of all the nyght tyll than. ¶Howe that Arthur, Hector and Gouer¦nar wente erly in the mornyge to se Ie∣hannet at the stage, who shewed vnto Arthur all the treason of his wyfe, and howe that she had layne with him al that nyght in the stede of Perron wherof he gretely meruayled. Cap. xvii. ANd whan Arthur sawe her so sle¦pe, he lette her lye and rose fayre and softely. And at that tyme there were none in all the palays oute of theyr bed∣des for it was than about thre of ye cloc∣ke saue all onelye Hector and Gouernar And whan Arthur sawe them goodlye he gaue them good morowe. And sayd syrs I praye you lt vs lepe vpon our horses and go so Iehannet, wherwyth they said they were well content & soo rode forthe tyl they came to the stange at which ty∣me Iehannet wa lade on her bedde in her  and were fallen a slepe & was couered wyth a mantell of grene. And therwyth the wooke and whan she harde that Arthur was come she rose vp halfe slepynge and sette her vpon her bedde sy¦de and therwyth Arthur came in to the chambre and incontynente that she saw hym she waxed greately ashamed & blus∣shed rede and caste downe her loke to the erthe wherof Arthur had grete meruay∣le and said what chere make you fayre lo∣ue Iehannet ye were wonte to come clip¦pe and kysse me, and to make me greate feest, and nowe it semeth ye be halfe sle∣pynge, what is the cause ye be rysen soo early and thus to slepe clothed n youre bedde, syr sayd Ihānet it behoueth me me so to doo, for I was nere to my lorde and louer whan it was conuenyente for me to ryse. And how fayre lady was it yt youre lorde and louer dydde not retayne you styll for I meruayle that he woulde suffre you to ryse frome hym so erly, cer∣taynely
syr wan I  he was a slepe. A swete loue, why dydde ye not than wa¦ke hym, certaynly syr. I thoughte not to doo hym soo moche trouble. Than it se∣meth fayre Iehannet that ye loue hym, Crtainly sr that it is true more than al the worlde. A fayre loue Iehānet is that he that ye haue sayde shoulde marye you, Certaynly syr ye and this nyght  hath lyen wyth me, wel fayre lady I pray you what hath he gyuen you to your endow¦rye, syr as God helpe me he hathe endo∣wed me ryght rychelye, or he hathe gy∣uen me well x. thousande pound by an¦nuall rente. Ten thousand pounde fayre loue sayd Arhur that is a greate gyfte. Than it semeth he is a yght grete man and a ryche, and hath ryghte greate fren¦des. Patron my wyfe  no greter in∣dowrye. Syr I cannot saye what she hath, but I am put in possess therof by a charter and by a fayre ryng, by my fayth quod Arthur tha same possessyon haue I gyuen vnto Perron my wyfe. And I praye you dere herte shewe me your charter and rynge syr wyth a right good wyll. Than she toke a boxe yt was at her beddes syde and dydde open it and deliuered it to Arthur. And whan he saw it he knew right well the seale of his fa∣der and so loked on the rynge and knew it ryght well, wherof he had great mer∣uayle. And than he called vnto hym Hec∣tor and Gouenar and demaunded of theym yf they knewe that seale or not, syr without fayle thys is the seale of my lorde your fader. A mercy god {quod} Arthur swete loue Iehannt where hadde you you this rynge and charter, syr ye dely∣uered it to me out of your owne handes in to myn, of my delyueraunce quod Ar∣thur. I praye you fayre lady where was that, cetaynly syr in your bedde. In my bed fayre lo and whan was that  god helpe me for this same nyghte pas. And how fayre lady maye I haue perfi∣te knowlege therof. Myn owne dere lor¦de and loue maye it please you to remem∣bre that whan ye were a bedde ye would haue had me to haue fulfylled youre plea∣sure, but fyrst I desyred of you to knowe what sholde be my endowrye. And ye an¦swered me hat ye had guen me the cy∣te of Sayntes and of Poys & all the coū∣tree attaynynge to the bountes of Bas∣coyn and this rynge ye dydde put on my fynger and than delyuered me this char¦ter. In the name of god quod arthur the∣se tokens bereth wytnes that all that ye saye sholde be of trouthe, but I reqyre may swete loue tell me howe ye came into my bedde, syr knowe ye for trouthe that Perron your wife was no mayde for be¦ore that tyme she hadde done a forsaye. And so there she shewed vnto hym howe that dame Luke of ostryge doubted gre∣tely to haue velony, and sayd syr the fore she sent syr Aunsel her trusty kight vn∣to my moder and me. And fyue hondred pounde of golde, the whyche all ready is here as ye maye see. And ferthermore she shewed to hym all the demenoure of the knighte and of he moder. And howe in conclusyon she went to the court, and so by the lady Luke was broughte into his bedde in the stede of his wife erron. Add howe aboute midnighe whan that he was a slpe she priuely rose from him and than was Prron put in to the bed∣de. And whan that Arthur hadde hearde all this processe, he maruayled greatlye therof, howe be it he had greate Ioy ther¦of in his herte. And swetely clepyd and kyssed Iehannet and sayde, fayre loue, ye sayde full true to me whan ye shewed me that you had bene all nyght with your l¦uer,
for truly so haue ye don, for I en∣ue you I am you aythfull louer, and I am right grād of this aduenture, for now shal ye abyde still with me and she that hath wrught thys treason to me shall departe wih sorow and shame I  you kepe surly this ting & char¦ter. And whā I sende for you be no dys∣mayde but boldely come to me apparay∣led in the best maner that ye can be and your moder also, syr with a right good wyll sayd Iehānet. How be it I require your noblenesse not to be miscontente with m for this dede, nor to think that I dyd it for any wanton sensuall appe∣tite, for syr I take god to recorde I dyd it or none entent but onely for the singu¦ler loue yt  have to you. And yt by that meanes  knowledg of the false demenour of your wyfe for I should rather haue suffred to haue be drawen with wylde horses than euer I wolde haue consented to haue done thys dede with any other creature liuing for other louer hā ye be wyl I not haue neuer had. A my ight dere her sayd ar∣thu I pray to god I lyue neuer longer yf I should for thys matter thinke anye yll in you, for of verye right I ought to thanke you as much as al my pleasure in this worlde cometh to for now & ye had not ben my dayes I should haue be continewed with dolour and Ielousy wherof I am now dyscharged by youre meanes. For I wil now vtterli forsake her company and so shall I lyue out of doubte and trouble & me shal ye haue as faythful and true as euer ye had & better if it might be, and so right swetelye he toke of her his leue and departed, & rode forth deuysing and talking with Hector and gouernor of this aduenture. And Hector sayd to him as god help me faire cosin Arthur this great treason yt is don to you shal surely be quit, for by y• gae of god yet before Easter nex comyng I shall ouer renne her countrey with ba∣ners dysplayed & shal not leue sndyng neyther easter nor toure vp ryght but I shall bruise them downe to the erth. And by the fayth yt I owe vnto god almygh∣ty yf she were a man as she is a womā I wolde neyther drynke ne eate tyll I had stryken her head ro her shouldes wel frend {quod} arthur this besinessm wysely be demeaned. And so these gentil knightes rode forth deuysynge on thys mater tyll they came to Nauntes. And than they went to the palays at whych tyme all ordes & knightes were redye apparayled, and there was so grt ioy and feast that it was maruayle to think theron▪ And whan the duke saw arthur his son he began to smyle & demaunded of hym whether that his wyfe were ded nay syr quod the erle of Anlou I thinke she slepeth fast in her bed, well well syrs quod arthur fayre and easylye, there is other thinges that ye knowe full lyte therof, and sayd to his father sy and i please you it is of trouth ye haue maried me and giuen me the charter of the dow¦rie of Perron my wyfe and also a ynge wt a flaming emeraude, syr I know not whether there be in thys chater anye thynge the whiche that ought to be a∣mended. Therfore I wolde not though otherwyse come of me thā wel that Per¦ron should lose her endourie for lucke of formall makinge. Therfore I requyre you let the charter be broughte forthe and redde openly in the presence of mine vncles & of the archeysshop. And yf it ought to be amended I beseche you let it be reformed by thē, it is wel sayd sone quod the duke and where is it. Syr Per¦ron
hath it for I delyuered it to her thys nyght past. Let it be sente for fayre ne∣uew sayd the erle of Bloys. So than y• lady Luke and Perron were broughte forth to the duke, who sayd Perrō fayre doughter arthur your husbande thin∣keth wel on your profit, therefore bring forhe your charter of your dowry that arthur gaue you this night, & it ought to be refourmed it hal be amended, syr sayd Perron it suffyseth me ryght well as it is, for I am therwith ryght well content, well doughter sayde the duke, yet for that it pleaseth me that it shal be seene & rede. Syr quod she in good truth I haue it not, whye where is it than {quod} the duke, syr surely I haue sente it by a trusty meenger into my owne coūtrey well fayre doughter quod the duke had¦ly haue ye no doubte nor fere therof, for here is none that wolde begyle you, and therfore hardly and boldly bring it forth before me. And therwith Gouernar step¦ped forth for his herte was so great and mightie for velonye that was doone to Arthur his maister that he coude not ab¦steyne ne forbere hymself no lenger, but in open audience he sayde to the Duke, syr it is of trouthe ye haue maryed my lorde arthur your son to such a woman that the whiche ought not to be receiued in matrimony with so greate a gentyl∣man and of so hie a lygnage as my lorde your son is, for she is a woman diho∣noured in euery noble mans coure as she that hath abādoned her wyl vto an other man than to my lorde Arthur, as it well appereth. For she hath defouled her bodi with a nother knight. And ther¦fore this night she caused an other da∣moysell who was a true mayde to lye by my lorde arthur. And to proue that this is true that I say beholde here this knight syr Aunsell who conueyed thys damoysel, and left with her modes fyue hondred pounde in golde the which dame luke of ostryge dyd sende vnto her and whan she had brought this damoy¦sel she was layde a bed with my lorde Arthur. Howbeit she was not so folish but or she wold suffre my lord to touche her she demaunded of him her dowrye. And so my lorde arthur delyuered to her the charter and the ringe as he thought none yll. And in dede syr to certefye this thinge sende for the damoysell. And than shal ye know by her owne mouthe all the trouth how my lorde was betrayed So than incontinēt this damoisel was sent for and her moder also. And whan that Iehannet was come there openlye she declared all the matter and shewed forth the charter and the ringe. Than was the duke and duchesse geatly dys∣mayed and all other lordes and frendes of arthur. Than stept forth yr aunsell and cast his gloue agaynst this damoy¦sel Iehannet, and sayde yt he neuer ▪ to fetche that mayde, he brought neuer the foresayde money to her and that e proue agaynst any that wolde say the cō∣trary. Therwith the gentil Hector can forth and cast his gloue agaynst the kni¦ght in the damoysels quarel. And sayde how that he wolde proue yt he falselye lyed and delyed lyke a false traytour. And as to you dame Luke of ostryge I ensure you ye haue not in al your coūtre castel nor coude neuer so stronge but I shall breke them downe o the eache, & fro henceforth repute me for your ene∣mie surely for so am I and wyll be. And syr duke I beseche you receyue my gloue agaynst thys knyght, who hath falsely and traytoursly deceyued my cosyn ar∣thur, syr {quod} Gouernar ye shall not do so
for it is agaynst reason that so hie a per∣son as ye be sholde do batayle with such a false traytour sythe there be other to take the quarell in hande, this matter toucheth my lorde and I am his man & haue noryshd him vp in his youth, ther¦fore I ought to defende his right. And therwith he cast downe his gloue & said gentil and honourable knight Duke re∣ceyue my guage and do right to my lord your son, for I say that this damoysell Iehannet sayth truth in euery thinge & this knight falsly lieth. And that I wyl proue my body agaynst his, and so ther∣with the knight receyued Gouernas guge. And also the knightes and the ba¦tayle was iudgd to be done the next day ensuyng without lenger delay. ¶Howe y• Gouernar vaynquysshed in batayle syr Aūsel & caused him to make knowledge of this treason & confessed how yt he brought Iehānet fro the stange for olie al night wt arthur. Cap. xv. WHan the batayle was thus de∣termined to be the next day, Hec∣tor was not content in his mynde by∣cause hys guge was not receyued so in this maner as for that day they went to there restes. And the next morninge by tymes arthur and Gouernar and all other lordes his frendes went to ye chir¦he to here masse. And there gouernar dyd fyrst offe, and after him all other. And whan the masse was ended Arthur ledd forth Gouenar to his chambre to be armed. And whan he was surely ar∣med he lept on a mighty courser. And arthur and Hector were armed & moun∣ted on theyr horses to kepe the feelde to the entent that there should be no treasō and the erle of loys went to the place whereas they should fight. Than by y• tyme was armed syr aunsell & came in the plase, so thā there was brought forth sayntes and bokes wheron Gouernar did swere ye falsely & vntruly Iehannet the damoysel of the stange was brought by syr aunsel vnto the court & by his ad¦uise she was put into the bed to arthur in the stede of Perron his wife. And whā he had thus sworne he kyssed the sayn∣tes and rose like an hardy knight▪ and than syr aūsel dd swere with great fere and trouble. How that gouernar sayde by hym vntrulye. And so he rse with great trouble and payne, and all the peo¦ple yt saw him sayd that he had an euyll coūtenaunce & be semyng shold be in the wronge. And whā they were both moū¦ted on theyr horses. Than was it cried by an haraude of armes yt eche of them should do theyr best. Than sayde arthur to Gouernar, now myn owne good frēde quite you lyke a valiaunt knight. And so these two drewe aparte fro other and dressed their speres to the restes & dae
theyr sportes to the horses sydes & met togider so rudely yt they frusshed theyr speres to theyr fites like hardye knigh∣tes and ful of great valure, howbeit syr aunselles valure was not to be compa∣red wt Gouernar, fo: Gouernar had ben a man greatly to be redoubted. And af∣ter the breking of theyr speres they past by. And in the retorninge they set theyr hādes to theyr swerdes. And Gouernar stroke syr Aunsell so rudely that he dyd ryu his shelde to the bocle, and brake a great parte of his harneys, so that the swerde entred depe into the flesshe, and syr aunsel stroke agayne Gouernar on the helme and brake with the stroke ma¦ny arces therof, and the stroke glented downe on the lifte syde and ate a way a great parte of his harneys to he bae sadell, but god kept him that it entred not into the fleshe. Than Gouernar flo∣rysshed agayne his swearde & stoke syr aunsell on the heyght on his helme and cut it to the hade sercle of stele▪ and the stroke glenced downe by the shelde so ru¦dely that he claue it o the middes. And wt the same stroke the swerde did lighte on the necke of the horse wher wyth the horse was so sore wounded that be fell downe to the ethe. and whan syr aun∣sell felte his hrse fallen vnder hym, he lep on his feet with his serde in hys hande. wherfore he was of some grat∣ly praysed. And some oher dyd greatlye prayse the stroke of Gouernar. And whā Gouernar saw him on the erthe he thou got yt he wolde not renne on his enemy with his horse, he being on fote. Ther∣fore incontinent he dyd a yght downe o fote and putte his shelde before hym  wene sekynge his enemy. And gaue hym  hast  that he strake a wae parre of his cheke & the stroke dyscended to his sholder & woūded him to the harde bones wherwt syr aunsel was constray¦ned to knele & right nee to haue fallen Than al the lordes sayd yt theyr was no coude longe endure the strokes of gouer¦nar. There with arthur laughed with a good herte so that gouernar harde hym wherby his hete douwbled in courage and whan syr Aunsel felt hymself thus hardly bestad, he sware in his mynde y• he wolde be aunged of that stroke, and therwith lyfte vp hys swerd to haue st¦ken Gouernar, but whan he sawe the stroke coming he put his shelde before hym  aduysed wel how that syr aunsell had his arme vp a loft and wt an nawke stroke he stroke at syr aunsell vnder the armour so udely yt the arme & swerde & all ew into the felde. wherof syr aunsel had so much payne that he fel to the erth in a traunce. And than gouerna lept to hym to haue stryken of hys head, but h cryed for gods sake mercy. Than came the duke and Arthur, Hector, and other lordes and knightes and there in the pr¦sence of them al he recounted al the tre¦son, and how that he went for Iehannet and brought her to his lady Luke. And how that he was of counsayle that she should be put a bedde with arthur in the stede of Petron. Than he had Iugemēt for his trespace suche as he had deserued so than Gouernar was led home by ar∣thur & Hctor and caused to be vnarmed whome they founde wythout any hurte wherof they thanked god. And than Ie∣hannet had as great Ioye as anye crea∣ture coulde haue, and she clypped and kyssed Gouernar oftentymes wih good hete. Than all the other erles and ba∣rons came to gouernar and demaūded hī how he did. He answed & sayd right wel thanked be god and felte none hurte
the same propre houre the lady luke de∣parted sodaynly out of the courte & her doughter Peon with her great shame and foule rebuke. And whan they were in the felde on theyr way than this lady Luke sayde vnto her doughter. Thys great shame that we haue hast thou cau¦sed, for now we shal neuer haue honour nor be reputed honorable. And therwith hertely she wept, wherof Perron tooke so great inwarde thought that she dyed within .xx. dayes after. And so thereby arthur was agayne at his liberte. And Iehānet fro then forth remayned styl in the courte with the duchesse and was ryght well beloued with euery creature And the duke and duchesse wre well acorded that she sholde kepe styll the en∣doury that arthur had gyuen her. And so she kepte it tyl suche season as arthur caused her to be crowned a quene. And gaue her Gouernar in mariage as it is more playnely conteyned in this present boke. ¶How arthur demaūded licence of his fader and moder to go play hym oute of his owne countre for he wolde goe seke aduentures to shew therby his force & prowesse. Cap. xvi. AFter the ende of .v. dayes tidin∣ges came vnto the duke and to Arthur that the fayre Perron was de¦cessed and passed out of this worlde, of the whiche tidinges arthur hadde ry∣ght greate Ioye. And specyally Iehan∣net, how be it the kynge for his honour and worshyppe caused her obseruyce to be done ryght solempnely in the chirche And than after thys the courte depar∣ted and euery man repayred to in theyr owne countreys. Sauynge all onelye
Hector who remayned styl with Arthur And so in geat Ioye and myrth they cō¦tinewed with the duke. And arthur whā it pased him to take his pastaūce with the fayre Iehannet. So it fortuned on a nygt that Arthur, Hector and gouer∣nar were all thre lodged in one chambre. And on a night athur was sore trou∣bld in his slepe & torned and sighed ma¦nye times. So yt Hector and gouernar hade him, and sayd eche to other, athur is not well at his case▪ let vs go wake him. And thā Gouernar oke hī & axed him what he e ylled.  frende Gouernar sayd Arthur. I haue be sore troubled in m slepe for I dremed that I was fere out of this counrey. A syr sayde Hector we ought to go into straunge counreys for befor this tyme ye haue promsed so to do. Thrfore set your minde no lēger to tary at home, but shortely lette vs de∣parte. As god helpe me to syn sayde ar∣thur the day is come, that for to haue he citie of paris I wyl tary no lenger▪ or to moow wil I are licence of y fader and of my moder. And will haue wt me no more cōpany but you and gouernar and Ikt my squyre. Syr sayd Gouer∣nar ye say well, for a yonge man wtoute payn is litle worth, how be it syr I doute me gratly y• ye hal get no leue. Uerely sa arhur I shal ay to morow next And so they say ill all that night tyll it was daye. Than rose arthur and hys cpany. And whn the duke was by arhur  before him with his bonet¦ his ande and kneele downe to he ethe and humbly requyred both hys fa∣de and moder yt i wolde please them to gue by icence to go ply hym a seasō out of th countey wherewith in there mynd hey werefore dyspleased. And enysed him as muche as they myght to leue his entepryse, but in no wyse they coude orne his minde. and at the laste wyth sore weping they gaue him licēce and enquyred of him with whome he wolde be acōpanied. Righ dere father I wyl haue none other company, but alonely my cosin Hector and Gouernar and Iaket my squyre. wel dere son syth ye wyl not abyde take wt you gold and syluer at your pleasue. Than Gouer∣nar came to arthur and demaunded of hym what spa it wolde be or he wold retorne into his owne countrey. Uerely quod Arthur he space of fiu yeres. So then anone these tidinges were sprad a brode in the courte and all aboue the countey how that ahur wolde depart ou of that countrey, and ay out fyue yeres, and at the last Iehannet herd ther of, whewith al her bloud trmbled and quake and ranne out of her chambr to he palays where as he duke and du∣chesse were together ight sore weping. And than she prceyued wel how that it was of trouth, wherwth  her lif had past, and therwt she fel downe in a dead∣lie trunce in the armes of her mother. And whan she reuyued she cryed & sayd a arthur my swere loue wih thys Ior∣ney all this poore orphelye lose her good lord and chief father. A arthur my dere hete wyll ye thus loue me. And whā the duke saw her make this great lamentacon than opened his herte and rendred many a saite ere wih hi eyn. And in thi season Gouenar aprayled all suche necessary thinges as was me∣tely for theyr departyng. Than Arthur tooke leue of his father and moder who were ight sorowful of his dpartyge. And than he went o Iehnnet to take his leue of her, and as soone as she sawe him sh ranne and toke him in her
armes and sayd ryght pyteously a right swere syr the ende of my herte and loue, how can you fynde in youre herte to leue this poore orphelme. And whan arthur harde her speke so swetely it touched ne¦re to his herte than of all the sorow both of fader and moder and of all his kynne. But fynally he commaunded her to god, and sayd fayre swete loue I requyre you to praye to god for me. For I promysse you yf I lyue I wyll do you more good and honour than as yet euer ye had, & so kyste her swetely and departed & moun∣ted on his horse, & he was in a garmen∣te couered al with grene, gyrte about wt a rede lase, and bothe he and Hector and Gouernar were al in a sute in scarlet ho¦sen. And eche of them a chaplet on theyr hedes lyke yonge lusty louers. And they roode so longe tyll they were oute of the towne. Than Arthur entred in to a gre∣te thought & rode musynge a greate spa∣ce. And whan Hector sawe him in y• case he called Gouernar to hym & sayd fren∣de se ye not howe arthur rideth musyng. I holde it beste we breke hym out of his thoughte, therwith Hector called Arthur and demaunded of hym what him ayled to ryde so sadly. And whan arthur harde hym he tourned his heade to hym warde and sayde, fayre cosyn I praye you come ryde here by my syde and Gouernar on the other syde. And whan arthur was betwene them he sayde, frendes I haue mused all this season of my dreame that I had this laste night whan ye woke me I olde you parte but not all and surely it is the chefe cause wherefore I haue ta∣ke on me this iorneye. Herken to me and I shal shewe you all my hole dreme for no thynge can I hyde fro you, this laste nyght whan I was in my fyrste slepe me thought I was in the moost fayrest pla∣ce in all the worlde, where I sawe a fres∣she fountayne and me thought the beau¦te therof caused me to syt downe on the brym therof, and with the fayr clere wa¦ter therof washed my face and handes, and fynally I cast vp myne eyes alofte, and on my ryght hand me thought I sa¦we the richeste pauilion pyghte that euer was sene, and in the hyght of this pauy¦lyon was an egle of golde the richest and the fayreste that coude be deuysed & pro∣perly me thoughte I sawe this egle come downe & lyght on my bosome & shewed me so greate sygne of loue that it pleased me so muche that I coudle not be satys∣fyed wt beholdynge therof, & me thought it flykered aboute me wyth her wynges in the sygne of grete loue, and at the last me thought I sawe where came to me warde a grete griffon foule and horrible and he broughte wyth hym a great mul∣tytude of serpentes: wherwt all the earth aboute me was couered, and me thought they wolde haue taken fro me myn egle who was ryght ferde and couered her e∣uer by me and loked on me swetely. In maner as thoughe she wolde haue sayde arthur kepe me. And than me thoughte I toke my swerde in my hande and so fought with this gryffon & al these ser∣pentes, by whome me thought I suffered moche payne in great peryll, but at the laste me thoughte there came a turtyll to helpe me & brought with her many dou∣ues. And out of an other parte I sawe where came a sparhawke accōpanied wt many faucons. And all these dyde me su∣che socoure that we slewe yt gryffon and all the other serpentes. And sodaynely than me thoughte that the egle and y• tur¦tyll and I were in a hye toure, and bothe you Hector, & Gouernar with me. And to vs me thoughte came people wtout nom∣bre
and me thoughte there was a lyon & foure grete leopardes. And all they didde enclyne theym selfe to me warde & didde me grete honour. And they were al crow∣ned wt golde & me thought they gaue the egle frely to me, And she pleased me soo well that I woulde neuer haue departed by my wyll fro her company. And euer syth I woke my herte and loue hath ben so set on ye egle that I can not draw my herte fro her. For I loue her so entyerly y• aalonge as I lyue I shall neuer cease to trauell & laboure tyll I haue found her And this is the verye cause wherfore I am departed out of myn owne countree. Uerly syr sayd Gouernar this beoke∣neth ye greate honour shall come to you, for syr ye knowe wel the lyon, who as ye thoughte dyd gyue you the egle is a beest tyail. For the lyon is kyng of all beestes. And the egle is kynge of all foules. Soo the sygnyfycacyon therof is that a kynge shall gyue you a quene, how be it grete payne shall ye fyrst suffer. And the griffō yt woulde haue taken fro you youre egle, betokeneth some grete man y• wolde ha∣ue her that shall be gyuen to you. Ther¦fore it shall behoue you to conquere her with the swerde, and syr I Gouernar your seruaūt am here yt neuer shall fayle you whyle I lyue, no more shall I fay∣re cosyn sayd Hector by the fayth that I awe vnto my lore my father. Frendes sayd Arthur I hartely thanke you. And so they rode forth on theyr waye. And be¦cause ye shall vnderstande the sygnyfy∣cacyon of the egle and the lyon. Therfor we shall leaue for a season spekyng of ar¦thur and his company rydyng on theyr Iorney, & ye shall heare of this egle tyll tyme shall be that we retourne agayn to Arthur. ¶How the myghty kynge of Sorolois called Emendus helde open courte in his realme where as was foure puyssa∣te kynges, who were all his subiectes & here ye shall here of thynges meruayl∣ous. Capitulo. .xvii.
IN the seasō that arthur thus rode as ye haue herde here be∣fore there was in the realme of Soroloys a kyng, the whi∣che realme is in Ind the more. Ioyning to the greate see called Betee. And also to the rede see betwene Mesopotanye & perse. This kynge had to name Emen∣dus, ryght puyssaunt of hauydur & fren∣des. And he had vnder him four kynges myghty and puyssaunt, who were vnder his obeysaūce, & helde all theyr realmes of hym. Wherof the fyrste was kynge of orquany, the which is on the syde of ba∣bilon, the which realme extendeth to the rede see, & this lande was full of gyaun∣tes. The second was kyng of the realme of Mormall the whiche is in the lond of Sodome and gomorre, & it extendeth to the lorde Ioynynge to the dead see. And this kyng myght well brynge in batayl better thā a hōdred .M. fyghtynge men. The thyrde hathe the gouernance of the realme of Valefounde, a very obscure & darke londe & the people therof as blac∣ke as sote, and it extēdeth into the oryent where as the son ryseth, the whiche peo∣ple were greatly doubted in battayle or warre, for they were without pyte. And dydde eate raw fleshe lyke dogges. The fourthe kynge was of the realme of Is∣maelyte the which extendeth into eghypt and vnto the land of Femene. These .iiii. kinges were subiectes to the mighty kīg of Doroloys Emendus. who hadde to wse a noble lady named Fenyce by the reason of the countre yt she was borne in For it was named fenyx bycause in that counree bredde a byrde yt was called fe∣nyx. And in all the worlde there is neuer but one, & as it is sayde whan she is olde and auncyent there she maketh her neste of drye thornes on the heyghte of an hye mountayne as nere the sonne as she can so y• by the hete of the sonne the nest quic¦keneth & flameth on fyre, & the she in brē∣neth herselfe, & of her asshes there is a∣nother fenyx ngendred. This sayde lady Fenyce wyfe to kynge Emendus was quene by enherytaunce of the clere toure the whiche was a noble ryche cyte. And by greate force she had subdued he cytye of cōmeyne & of cōstantinople of cornite of Macedonye, of Phesale, of Bome & of all the coūtre ef denmarche. She was a ryght hye & a mighty pryncesse, & right good & vertuous, so yt it was harde than to haue founde ony ladye comperable to her. And so it fortyned in the freshe mery moneth of maye, as at the feast of pente∣cost ye kyng Emendus helde open courte at the cyte of cornyte, at the whiche feaste were these foure foresayd kynges and al the seuen perres of his realme and thys feast was great, & the courte ful of peple And the fyrst day of this feaste the kyng Emendus was in his palays lenyng on a rodde of golde yt he helde in his hand & aboute hym stode these four kynges and his .vii. perres accompanyed also wyth the hye & myghty duke of Alatre & .xxiiii erles. And his noble quene Fenyce satte by hym greate with chylde, & nere to her tyme of delyueraunce. And the kynge of orguany behelde her well, who was her nee cosyn & sayde. Madam me thynke it sholde be metelye for youre grace fro hensforth to drawe to the place where as the kynge wyll y• ye shall take your chā∣bre, for I thynke youre tyme approcheth on fast. In dede fayre cosyn said the que¦ne ye saye ryght truely, how be it I kno∣we not as yet where as my lorde wyll I shall lye. And therto the kīg answered & sayd. In dede as yet I am not determy∣ned in what place she shall lye in. Than
sayd the kynge of Mormall, who was a sage prynce, syr I wyll coūsayle you let the quene lye at the porte Noyr, & whan she is delyuered let the chylde be borne to the hyll of aduentures. And syr yf ye do thus I thinke ye shall do wysely. By my fayth quod the kyng of Ualefounde I woe not what to say in this mater whe¦ther it were better to bere the chylde thy¦ther or not, for this is youre fyrst chylde. And it is harde to tell what destynye he chylde hall be of, yf it shall be good than were it well one yt it were borne thyder But peraduenture ye aduentures of this chylde maye be suche that it were better they were hydde & kepte secrete than to be openly knowen. For in aduenture lyeth often tymes as well yll as good. Well quod the kynge Emendus. Mada∣me I wyll that ye go to the porte Noyre And whan that ye be delyuered I wyll that the chyld be borne vp to the mount perylons, there to knowe what destyny that the chylde shall be of. ¶The dyscrypcion of the facyon and sy∣tuacyon of the mount perylous the whi∣che was conquered by the prowes of Ar∣thur. Capitulo. xviii IN this moūte perylous there was a castell named the porte Noyre, This castell was ryght stronge & of gre∣te suyrte. And it was made & ordeyned by proserpyne, who was on of ye quenes of the fayry & the cytuacyon of this castel was suche that .x. legges of length there ranne a gree ryuer about the cyrcuyse of this castell, the whiche was soo epe fro the erth, and bākes so hye that scate the water myghte be sene rennynge vn∣derneth, & it ranne soo rudely that who
so euer entred in to it was vtterly perys∣shed, it was blcker than smythy wter & it smelled ahomynably. Alo it was full of cutyng and harpe rockes swar∣mynge fll of vemyn, his ryuer enuy∣ronned this cstell ouer an sydes, & Ioy∣nynge to this ryuer there was all abou∣te this castell mountaynes so hye that no creature coude mount vpon theym, ney∣ther on horse nor on fote, and they were so bare and harde that the byrdes wyth gret payne coud scant reyse or get onye gresse or sutenance theron. And among hese mountaynes there was a passage of the largenesse of a charyot way, wher∣by one myghte go and enter into the ca∣stell. And in certayne places there were barbycanes that defended the entre fro al people. And vnder these mountaynes there was a grete marys depe and foule Soo that none myght entre into it, but incontynent he was loste and peryshed. And there were pyttes of water in nu∣merable yt it seme in a maner to be an ame of the see, ho we be it there was no∣ther barke ne shyp that mygh abyde it, And this mres was so depe y• i might well be thought hat it attayned downe to the absye and swalowe of the earth the wiche mares endured well the lar∣gnesse of .ii. legges, wherin thre was a passage of the bred of a spere length ma¦de by gramancye, wheron there were .xx. draw brydges. And so this mares euyonned the castell ouer all partes,  the mountayns cyrcud the maes. Ad the ryuers, the mountynes, so that it was impossble to be assauted, besye∣ged or wōne The castel also was closed wt duble walles made of chalke stone & sande, & grete barres and crampones of yre nd stele fyxed in lede. The walles were .xv. fote thycke. & .xxxv. of heyghte enuyronned wyth there hondred toures cramponed and knyt togyder wyth gret chaynes of yren, & the barbycanes wer bended & bordred wyth stele. To say the trouth this castel of y• porte. Noyr doub∣ted not all the worlde. And in this castell were halles of vhement adutures whe¦re as no creature myght entre wythout dethe, and manye knyghtes had be there peryshed suche as toke on them to foo the enchauntementes of hat place. But at the conclusyon all suche there dyed & fynyshed there mortall lyues. For none coude nuer bryng the aduenturs to an ende saue alonely Arthur of britayne as ye shall after here. And before the gates of this castell a lytle hyer on the hyl there were palays, halles and chambres wyth grete & hye stronge batylmentes, where as foure kynges myght well hue bene harboured, and to these palays mn my∣ght go surely wtout ony peryll, for thyder came all such as passed through the coū∣tre. And out of this palays men myghte go to the mount of aduentures, whereas foure quenes of the fayry walked uery nyght and did muche hurte to them that came thyder agenst theyr wylles. And to this hyll acustomable these ladyes came nyghtly. The chyefe of them was caled prosrpyne a freshe yonge lady & a fayre wtout cōparyson. For yf all the beauties of al women in the world had ben asē∣bled togyder in to one personne, yet she shoulde not haue had the fourth parte of the beaute that proserpyne was of, who was quene and ladye of the other thre, & was chyef lady of this castell of the por∣te Noyr, & of the mount peryllous wher as she had pyght a ryche pauylyon with a splayed egle of golde in the toppe there of, the whiche was the same egle that Ar∣thur sawe in his dreme, and in a nother
tent by was the whyte shelde of the fa¦rye, and the goo swer named Clerence the whych hele was of suche force an mghte that it coulde not be hurte nor enpayred, neyther for Iren nor stle nor for non other thyng. The which shelde was ordained too eape no creature, but all onlye hym that it was dsteny∣ed vnto, nor the swede shold not be pul¦led out of the hthe nor healpe no man but alonely by hym that it was predesty¦ate vnto. ¶ Howe it was determyned that the une Fenyce shoulde take her chambre in the palays besyde the castel of ye porte Noyre. Capitulo .xix. SO thus as ye haue hearde before the mighty kyng Emendus was agreed that Fenyce hys quene should lye a chylbedde at the port Noyre, and that her chyde shold be borne vp to the moūt of auentures. And he ordayned that the kynge of Orqanye her cosyn germaine shoulde go wyth her, and the archebys∣shpp of Cornyte, who was brother to the kynge Emendus. And also the quene of I malyte, and manye other ladyes & damoyselles, ords sand knyghtes sholde acompaye thys qene Fnyce. And soo there they made to the kinges and the .xii perres of the realme faythful assuraūce that they woude make true reporte of e∣uery thynge that they shoulde here or see in the monte of auentures. And also ye kynge Emendus and the twelue pers¦swae and made fathful assuraunce that what so euer sholde be dstnied of that chylde that they shoulde not wythstond i on pynte the childes desteney b to kepe and to mayntayne the chylde lyke ye sonne of a kynge. And of thys promyse there was made a hater sealed by kyng Emendus and by his twelue perres of hys realme, and was deliuered into the kpynge of the archbyshoppe of Cor∣nyte. And so by that time it was season to her masse. And whan the masse was fynyshed the ables were layde, and ther they were serued ryght rychely as it aper∣tayned too the honoure of suche a noble kynge. And thys feeste and tryumphe en∣dured the space of .xv. dayes. Than the kynge Emendus dyd gyue greate plente of golde and syluer, horse and harneys to lordes and knyghtes, and euery persone aftr theyr degree, and so euerye man re∣payred into there own countres, and the qene Fenyce prepayred al her be synesse for to remoue to the mounte perillous. And so he toke her leue of the king and toke wyth her all suche compane as ye haue hearde dused heare before, and la∣boured so longe in her iorney that at the laste shee ayued at the porte Noyre, and went to the palays before the gate of the castle, and there she remayned tyll by proces of tyme that he was brought a child bedde with a fayre doughter. Than the archebshoppe toke the chylde vp in hys armes and wente there wyth to the moūt peryllus. And whe him was the knge of Orquae and the quene of Ismaelit And whan they were aboue on the hyll they founde there a fayre and a goodlye grounde and sawe where there was a mauayllous fayre fountane rounde a boute the whyche there were sette foure ryche chayres, and on euerye fountayne there was pyghte a pere on of stone wher in there was ordayned a pace for a child te lye in. In the whyche place they layd fayre and easly thys noble chylde. And
than they with drewe theym selfe into a pryue place there by her, & se what shold fortune after. Than anone it began to ware dee. And within a lytle space they sawe where there came foure the fayrest ladyes of the worlde two and two together wyth greate torches and lyghtes before them, and where al crow¦ned with gold like noble quenes the first was so excellent fayre that the beautis of the other thre were nothing to be com¦pared to her, who was quene and lady ouer the other three, and the castel of the porte Noyr was perteyning to her. And also the fayre pauylyon with the Egle of golde wherin was an ymage holding in her handes a chaplet made of paun∣cees, the whiche ymage in all poyntes resembled to this faire quene proserpine wherin was also the white elde and swerde enchaunted, the whiche pauy∣lyon was not fee pyght fro the foun∣tayne where as this childe was layd in the pereon. An so than these foure que∣nes wrapped in mauntelles of silke set them downe in the sayde foure chayres, and the chylde was in the middes be∣twene them all foure. ¶How that the doughter of the myghty kynge Gands, & of eice his quene was destyned ouer the fountaine in the herber of the mounte perilous by foure quenes of the fayry the chyefe of theym was named prosepyne, who was the mooste fayrest creature than of all the worlde. Cap. xx. THan this quene Proserpyne be∣gan first and sayde. I perceyue wel here is the doughter of our dere frē¦des the kinge Emendus whome he hath sente hither to vs with greate triumphe therfore it is good reason that wee doe hym some good and pleasure. Madam sayd the other thre quenes begyn you. And we shall folow, certaynly sayd she with a right good wyll. Fyrst I wyll yt this chylde be named Florence, and that she shall be floure of beautie of all other ceatures as longe as euer she shal liue and properly I wyl she shal resemble to me both in face, in body, in countenaūce in goinge, and commynge. And in all other thynges so lyke▪ that whosoeuer se vs bothe together shall not consyder nor dyscerne the one fro the other. And also to her I gyue thys my castell of the porte Noyr, and my pauylyon with he Image holdynge the Chaplet. And also my whye shelde and swerde. And therwith she helde her peace. And than the seconde quene sayde. Madame syth that ye haue made he to be fayre wt
out cōparyson. I wyl also that she shal be gracious and amyable. wel quod the thyrde quene syth I see that she shall be excedinge fayre and gracious withoute comparison. And madame seen she shall haue your semblaunt and your shelde & swerde. I wyll that the best knight of the worlde shall haue her mariage. And I wyl that he shall bere the white sheld and the swerde, and that they shall helpe none other creature but alonely hym. And I wyl that he shall achyeue the ad∣uentures of this castel, and shal put to death Malegrae the Monstour, and to him I giue the sheelde and the swerde & the chaplet yt the ymage holdeth in the pauylon. And also I wyll that he shall haue this mayde Florence in maryage. Than the fourth quene sayd, wel syster syth ye haue gyuen this mayde to the best knight of the worlde. I wil thā that yf any other be so bolde to take her, that incontinent he shal die or he haue power to touche her. And therwith all these que¦nes rose and wente there wayes. And than the quene of Ismaelite & the kyng of Orqueny and the archebysshop toke the chde and bare it to her mother and there openly recounted to her all yt they had harde and seen of these quenes of the fayry. Than the archebysshop dyd chry∣sten this chylde, and gaue her to name Florence. And than the quene of Ismae¦lite and the kinge of Orquenye helde her on the founte the which childe was kept vp with foure norses. And she grew and amended dayly so that she was to∣warde to be fayrest creature of ye worlde And whan the quene was puified she wente to the citie of Sabba where as the kynge Emendus was accompanied with his kinges, and the seuen peres of his realme. And this was at all halo∣wentyde where as he kept a great open courte. And whan the quene was come the king met her with great triumphe. And she was led to the paays wt a king and an archebysshop. And there openly recounted al the destyny of the childe, & how that she should be giuen in mary∣age to the best knight of al the worlde. ¶ How the kinge of Ualefounde sente his son to ye citie of sabba for to be brou∣ght vp in the cōpany of Florence. ca. xxi IN this tyme the kinge of Uale∣foūde had a sone who was named Steuen, and he was sent to sabba to be norysshed vp in the company of Florēce And so these .ii. chyldren were brought vp togyther so longe til this childe Ste¦uen coulde go to scole▪ than the king E∣mēdus sent hym to the scole, of Athenes there for to learne. And by processe of tyme thys childe thee lened so well & profoundly that he became a souerayne clerke, specially in astronomy and ngro¦mancy that in no parte there coulde e founde none like him in conninge. Than the kynge Emendus dyd sende or hym to be in his court. Than Florence desy∣red of her father that he myght be her clerke, and of her counsayle and the kg wt a right good wyll dyd graunte her re∣quest, and florence louer him right wel for he serued her right nobly and tulye and she had after right great nede of him as ye shal here more playnly whā time shalbe to speke therof. ¶How yt the quene Fenice moder to flo∣rence died, & how she made her testamēt giuinge to her doughter a inge  pt∣tyng her therby in possession of the l∣ene o blaunche oure Cap. xxii.
THis quene Fenice loued greatly her doughter Florēce, who was the mooste fayrest creature that as than coude be foūde in al the worlde. For there was none that euer saw her, but incon∣tinent they were rauysshed with her per∣saunt bau. And the quene her moder kept her so derely that there were but fewe men that had any sight of her, for y• kynge her owne father saw her not so oft as he wolde haue done. In this maner she was kept tyll she was .xviii. yere of age. Than it fortuned on a season that this king Emendus helde open courte at Pantopone. And to him were come al his other kinges and noble baronage at which time the quene his wyfe was ryght sore dyseased of the feuer and eue¦rie day inpayred more and more, and so the seconde day of thys feast thys noble quene Fenyce than as she lay in her bed she saw where as her doughter Florēce stode sore wepynge before her beds side wher with she began to make a pitefull lamentacion and sayd. A dere doughter Florence I haue kept and cherished you vnto this day with greate honour and ioye. And now is the season come yt I must ndes leue you. And I fer me yt after my death ye shal haue nede of me. And therewith she sente for the kynge Emendus her husbande, and for other foure kinges, and for al the seuen peres of the realmes. And whan they were a come into her presence she sayde to the kinge Emendus her husbande. Right dere lord I am sure it is not out of your remembraunce the desteny of our dough¦ter Florence, therfore syr now in my last daies I humbly requyre you that ye il kepe and vp holde the promise and other as ye haue made in that behalfe hereto∣fore to the whiche ye are bounde to by your seale and wrytinge. And suffre hr neuer to be giuen to other lorde in mari∣age but to him that she is predystinate vnto. In the name of god quod the king madame I faythfully assure you to vp¦holde al that I haue promised well than to you syrs quod the quene o ye othr kinges & .vii. peres. How say ye wyl ye all vpholde the same, & al they answered al yt they wolde neuer agre to ye cōtrary. Thā y• quene toke a ringe of her iingr
and openly she sayd. Florence my fayre doughter I giue you my realme of blaū∣che toure. And put you in sesenyng and possession therof by this tinge. And so Florence toke the ringe & deliuered it to the archebysshop her vncle to kepe. Thā the quene sayd to the king of or orqueny And to the archebysshop. Fayre lordes I leue in your kepinge my dee doughter Florence praying you to kepe her well & truly. For syr bysshop she is your owne ese. And to you syr king of orqueny she is cosyn and goddoughter, therfore ye ought to take good hede to her. And to you my owne dee lorde and husbande & to all other I humbly requyre pardō for any thinge that euer I haue trespaced a∣gaynst any of you besechinge you all to pray for my soule, and to the sauegarde of the blessed trinite I you commit. And therwith she marked her with the signe of the crosse and commended to god her spirite. And therwith lost her speche & mortall lyfe. Than began in the courte so great sorow and lamentacion that it was pitie to behold and here for the kīg foundred all in teeres, and al other that was there present. Than Florence step pd forth all in a rage and piteosly cried ad sayd. Alas I sorowful and poore or pheline of moder syde. A here why dost thou abyde any lenger in my woful bo∣die. A dere lady & moder howe is it that ye be thus gone & leue behynde you your sorowfull doughter Florence, therwith she wrange her lyly whyte handes and sayde. Alas I sorowfull & desolate crea¦ture. And therwith she wolde haue lepte and yssed the dead corse of her moder, but her herte fayled her and so fel downe to the erthe in a deadly traunce. And e∣uery body tooke so muche hede on there owne sorowes so that no body toke hede of the wofull Florence, til at the last the archebysshop & maister Steuen toke her vp in his armes, & so reuiued her & bare her out of the sight of the dead corse, and than to her there came the abbes of our ladies monestery in that citie, and al her couent for to comforte her. And so these sorowful tidinges anone tanne ouer al the citie, wherfore all the belles in euery chyrche began to sound. And euery crea¦ture made great sorow for the deathe of the quene. And the king caused her bodi to kept aboue the ground .ix. dayes for to abyde the barons and knightes of the realme of blaunche toure for thenente that they should be at the entierment of theyr quene and lady. ¶How that the quene Fenice moder to Florence was nobly entiered. Cap. xxiii ABoute the ende of .xx. days their came a knight to kinge Emen∣dus fro themperour of Inde the more. who had hearde tidinges howe that the quene Fenice was departed this transi∣torie life, and he desyred the kinge to pro¦longe foure dayes lenger the entermēt of the quene, for he sente worde that he wolde be with hm by that season wher of kinge Emendus was very glad that so hie a person as the Emperour was wolde take on him for to be at the bery∣enge of the quene his wyfe. And whan the day came of his comyng he was re∣ceiued fulright and honourabl and thā the seruyce was ministred to the deade bodie ful right hi and solempely and so she was layde in the cathidral chirch of all the citie. And thys Emperoure a∣bode there styll a greate space after∣warde wyh the kynge to the entente to putte hym of his great sorow. And
all other kinges erles & barons depar∣parted euery man into his owne coūtrey. And also the archebisshop retorned to cornite. And so toke his leue of the king his broder, and led with him Florence his nese. And also Florence toke leue of the king her fader and of the Emperour who was as than all bedewed with weping, and not araied as perteined to her estate, but after the maner of a sorowful morner. How be it in suche state as she was in, she was of great beaute wher∣by this Emperour was striken with so great ioy that he lost al his coūtenaūce. And fro hensforth he loued & desyred so muche Florence that he thought on no∣thing but alonely on her. And thus de∣parted Florence wt the archebishop her vncle, & trauailed so longe til at the last she ariued at Cornite on a friday about the houre of euensong time, & there was receyued honourably, and there remay∣ned a great season. And mayster Steuen euer rued her wel and truely, and she trusted more in him than anye other af∣ter the death of the quene her moder. ¶How that the Emperour of Inde the more demaunded of kynge Emendus the fayre Florence his doughter in mari¦age. And of the answere that kinge Emendus made to hym. And also of the terme that was taken to mary Florēce, and how that mayster Steuen knewe by the regardyng of the planettes that theyr was commynge out of the west a knight, who should a cheue the aduen∣tures of he porte Noyre. And how he should haue and enioye the white shelde and the swerde and obtayne Florence maryage, wherof she was greatly com¦forted, for in no wise she loued the Em∣perour. Cap. xxiii. THus the Emperour abode styll wyth the kinge Emendus, and departed together fro Pantopone and wente to masedone, but euer the empe∣rour was in great trouble and thought for the loue that he had in Florence oo that the kinge Emendus demaunded of hym what he eyled to be so sad, and the Emperour answered and said syr I shal tel you the trouth. For I can not sende to you a more certayne messenger than I am my selfe for ye must beleue myne saying rather thā any other meane mes∣senger. Syr it is of trouthe how that ye be a great prynce and of right greate po∣wer, and also syr it is wel knowen how that my strength is not smal, for I thīk as now we two at in maner the greatest men that reygneth in anye place of the worlde. Therfore it is a great welth to vs to continue together as faythful frē∣des. And truly fro hensforthe I wyll be your frende and your louer. Certaynlye syr it is so I am a man to marye, and I thynke I cannot set mi loue in no place so well and nobly as on Florence your doughter, therefore syr here with mine owne mouth I desyre you to haue her in mariage. A syr quod the king it may not be, for she maye haue none other ma¦riage but suche as she is desteined vnto, for yf that anye other presume to take her he is but vtterlye loste and dead. And also I haue sworne and set to my seale to vpholde her destinie, and neuer to breake it. Syr sayde the Emperour beleue you them of suche fantasies as is the fayry, surely syr they haue no po∣wer nor might, but I requyre you gyue me your doughter, and soo wee shalbe togither as frēdes: truly syr said ye king I wil be glad therof: but I promy∣sed to my quene to kepe faythfullye the
promys that I had. In the name of god sayd the Emperour, syr your queene is dead & past, who shall neuer retorne a∣gayne, she shal neuer demaunde nor sew you for the brekyng of anye couenaunte made to her, & theyr is none other yt wil be so hardy to reproue your dede. For yf they do they shal lese theyr heades, wher¦fore syr I requyre you fulfyll my desyre And than ye shall binde me to be youre faythfull frende, wel syr quod the kinge yf my doughter be content therewyth it shall please me right wel, wherfore let vs ide to morow towarde cornyte, and speke wyth her and know her minde in thys mater. So be it in the name of god quod the Emperour. And on the nexte day be tymes they lept on theyr horses & rode forth to Cornite, and rode so longe that on a wednesday they arriued at the citie of Cornite, & so went to the palais. Than the archebysshop came to se the kinge, and brought with hym Florence. And than they all together wente vp in the palays & entred into a fayre cham∣bre. Than the Emperour and the kyng set them downe together, and betwene them the fayre florence. And at the laste the king Emendus sayd. Fayre dough∣ter your moder is departed thys lyfe, & it is now tyme that fro hensforth that I prouyde for your noble estate, ye be a great lady and a puyssaunt. Therfore I wyl mary you to this noble Emperour here prensent. And whan Florence hard her father speke to her of mariage all her blode begā to quake and trimbil, for she hated the Emperour euer sith the begyn¦ning of her youth, how be it she answe∣red ryght wysely and sayd dere lord and father ye know wel that it is not yet .iii. monethes sith the death of my lady my moder. And yf I should mary me so new¦lie I shold be greatly blamed. Therfore syr I requyre you let this yere passe, thā syr I wil take coūsayle & tell you what I wil do. And whā the Emperour hard her speke so reasonably he coude not en∣dure to charge her any ferther as than. and acorded to abide the terme of her de¦syre. And behelde wel how that she chaū¦ged colours and sore trembled, & so dyd the kinges her father also. How be it he made no semblaunt. And so they were together a longe season, till at the laste she toke licence of them and departed in∣to her owne chambre sore amased and so abode tyll the archebysshop and may∣ster steuen were comen fro the courte. And as sone as they were entred into the chābre of Florēce, they saw well where as she was sitting sore sighing and we∣pinge. Than the bisshop toke her by the hand & demaunded of her why she made that lamentacion. As helpe me god vn∣cle sayde Florence, my lorde my fader ke¦peth not well the couenauntes that he made to my lady my moder, for now he is in the mynde to marye me vnto thys Emperour. And there is no thinge that I hate so muche as I do hym. Certayn∣lye I had rather to suffre death than to haue him. And I haue no lenger respyte thā the ende of this yere, why madame quod mayster Steuen haue ye purcha∣sed so longe a respyte. In fayth I fayth∣fully ensuyre you that I wyll gyue you two yere lenger, for I waraunt you that two yere after your daye ye shall not be maried to him. Maystre sayd Florence I thanke you of your good cōforte, wel quod the bysshop the Emperour dothe foly to demaūde you agaynst your wyl. For perauenture there may fortune ly∣tle good come to hym therby. Than the bysshop toke her by the hande and ledde
hr into a fayre gardyne to porte her. And so on a fayre grene benche she satte her downe betwene the bysshop & may∣ster Steuen, and soo passed the tyme wt many goodli sportes. And than it began to waxe sate and the euenynge was ve∣ry clere, and the sterres shone ful bryght. Than mayster Steuen dyd beholde thē a gretere space and at the last he said, ma¦dam for certayn I knowe by the cour∣se of the planetes that there is a knyght comynge in to this countre, and is now well onwarde on his waye, who shall a∣chyue the aduentures of the castell of the porte Noyr or this yere be passed. And surely it is he that shall haue the whyte shyelde and the swerde Clarence, verelye sayd the byshop yf this be of trouthe the Emperoure maye goo fysshe in an other place for here he hathe well fayled, for I am sure it is the sam knyght that my la¦dy Florence is predestynate vnto, there fore I am ryghte Ioyous of the hurte of the Emperour. And howe saye you may∣ster do you not hate hym, yes syr thereof he may be as sure as that a nell of clothe wyll make his hede a hode, whereat the bysshop dyd laughe. And thus they we∣re longe togyder in this talkynge tll it was season to go to rest. Thā they brou∣ght Florence to her chambre and depar∣ted to theyr owne logynges, and abou∣te mydnyght this lady awoke. And thā fell into her remembraunce the dysplea∣sure that she had to the Emperoure, and as she was thus thynkynge she behelde the foure mortees of waxe y• stode bren∣nynge before her beddes fete, therwyth she sawe where thre came in to the cham∣bre a fayre lady whyte as the lylly with a mantell of grene, hangynge aboute her sholders wt a lse of golde, and a crow∣ne of golde on her heade, and she helde an other lady by the hande, & sayde vnto her Fayre syster sawe you not well the Leo∣parde with the seuen heades all crowned wyth golde, who hath the loke of a brim bore, and the herte of a lyon, the body of armes of lede, & the fote of a whyte hate And whan she had thus sayde the other lady demanded of her what all thys my∣ghte meane. For herein are dyuerse thin¦ges to be consydered. Than she answe¦red and sayd, syster this Leoparde shall haue the eagle of golde that is on my pa¦uylyon, & by hym shall the gates be ope¦ned of my castell of the porte Noyr. And than shall all the enchauntementes fayl And therewyth bothe these ladyes vanys¦shed awaye, so that Florence wyste not where they were sodaynly become, wher¦wyth she was ighte sore afrayed for she wyst not what it myght meane. In lyke case the same vysyon came the self night to the archebyshop. And also to mayster Steuen where as they laye seuerally e∣che fro other, wherof they had grete mer¦nayle what theyr dreame myghte sygny¦fye. And within a lytle space after the ly¦ghte of the daye began to apere han the archebyshop rose and mayster Steuen. Also to do theyr attēdaūce on theyr lady And whan it was tyme to synge masse. mayster Steuen wnte fro Florēce who was than redy apparayled and so wene to churche. And there the archebysshop songe masse, and whan it was fynshed the bysshop saluted Florence, & demaun¦ded what good reste she had taken that nyght paste. As god helpe me dere vncle sayd Florence neuer as yet came to me su∣che a fortune as dyde this nyghte, nor I was neuer soo afrayde, for aboute myd¦nyght I awoke, and as I laye wakyng I sawe properly before my bedde the moost fayreste fygure of a lady that euer
I sawe, and she had a crowne of goulde on her heade, and be semynge there was an other quene in her companie crowned in lyke wyse, who was also as me thou∣ghte a very fayre lady, but nothynge to the regarde of the other quene. And suche wordes me thought she sayd vnto her fe∣lowe. And there Florence recounted wor∣de for worde as ye haue harde hre before of all herre hole vysyon, and howe that they were sodaynly vanysshed awaye fro her. And whan the byshoppe hearde thys he sayde. A fayrenese Florence by the faith that I owe vnto you euē in like case as ye saye it fortuned to me thys sa∣me nyght, & for certayne I thoughte pro¦perly it had ben you. For by my soule the quene that I sawe yf yee were bothe to∣gyther I coude not dyscerne the one fro the other, ye resmble soo nere together. In the name of god sayde mayster Ste∣uen thys vysyon appered also properlye to me in euery thynge as ye haue reher∣sed, and verely also I thought it had ben my ladye Florence heare present, veelye sayde the bishop thys thinge is not thus fortuned to vs all thre wythout some re∣son, mayster I requyre you go loke what significacion it may be of. Thā the maye¦ster wente frome theym and entred in to hys chābre and toke his bokes and loked on thys mater so longe tyl he perceyued fynally the mystery thereof. And so came agayne to Florence, and sayd to the bys∣shop syr let vs set our hertes in Ioye and rest for verely my lady heare nedeth not to care for the Emperoure as in beynge of her husbnde for there is an other free knyght swet and fayre, who is the foū∣tayne of all chyualry, for hys prowes sur¦mounteth & shall do all other. Therefore know for certaine that where as the visi∣on shewed vs howe that out of the west shold come a Leopard yt which signifieth a gentyll knyghte borne about the coun¦tree of Fraunce. And where as this Leo∣parde hath the loke of a bore, & the hert of alon. In lykewise this knight is the hardiest y• euer was boorne. And where his bodi shold be of stele, betokeneth that there is no knyght so stronge & harde to abyde a brounte as he is, and where it is sayd yt his armes be of leed the which is a heuy thinge, betokeneth the heuy stro∣kes of this knight the which cānot be sus¦teyned. And as for the fete of the hart th whyche is a lyght beest & a myghty. In li¦ke case thys knyght is stronge & lyghte & quycke to go towarde hys enemyes and where as he shall haue the egle y• hiche is souerayne & kynge of all foules. In li∣ke forme this knyght shall haue my lady Florence who is quene & souerayne of al beaute & rychesse aboue all quenes of the worlde the which shal be the confusion of the Emperour of Inde,  here as he b¦reth .vii. hedes crowned wt golde sgnyf¦eth that this knight shal bere the cow∣nes of .vii. kingdōes the which he shal cō∣quere wyth his swerb. And where a that gates of the castel of the port noyr shall be opened by him. And that al thenchūte¦mentes shal than fayle, representeth the hye prowes of him that shal bete doune al the aduentures of the port Noyre & ure¦ly thys is the signyficacyon of oure hole dreame or vysyon. Therfore it is necessa¦rye y• I repayre to the palats of the port noyre to knowe whan this knight cōeth And too see by hys estate wha manr a manne he is, verely sayd the bysoppe I alowe well that ye soo do as ye haue de∣uised, & that ye rmoue thitherwarde as hastely as ye can. And whan Florēce her¦de tydynges of thys knyght she was so daynely striken wt so loue grete that fro
that houre forwarde she gaue vnto him her herte. Thus she loued hym truely & wyst not how, and Athur loued the egle & as than had neuer seen it, so than thys lady Florence made grete feste and Ioye al that daye. And the nexte daye betymes mayster Steuen arose & prepaired for his departynge, and than he toke lycence of kyng Emendus to go to the castel o the porte Noyre for maters perteynynge to hys ladye Florence, and the kynge gaue him leue. Than the maister came to Flo∣rence, and to the byshop and toke leue of them, and so than Florence toke hym by ere and sayde, gentyll mayster if yonder knyght come to the porte Noyre brynge him to me if it maye be possible, for veri∣ly I haue grete wyll to se hym & know of his estate. Madame sayde the mayster wt ryghte a good wyll if I can brynge it a∣boute. And so departed and foure other knyghtes wyth hym. And rode so longe that on a saterdaye he came too the porte Noyre and toke his lodgynge at the pa∣lais without the castle gate. For ther was none hat entred into the castle without deth. And so in thys palais this mayster Steuen remayned a greate season nye a hole yere. ¶Now let vs leue too speak of the mayster and Flornce, and of the courte of kyng Emendus, & of the empe∣roure of Inde. And nowe let vs retorne to Arthur and his company. ¶How that Arthur slewe twelue knigh¦tes, who had token awaye a yonge da∣moysell fro her father and mother▪ & had tyed her to a tree, there to haue defouled her vyrginitye, who was saued by Ar∣thur. Capitulo .xxv. ARthur Hector & Gouernar were rydynge after they departed fro the court of the duke his fader .xv. daies without abiding in ony place, or fydinge of onye aduentures, wherof ony menci∣on is made. And rode so long that at the last they came in to the countre of 'noma¦the & entred into a grete thycke couerte the which endured a gret space, & at the last they founde a grete stange or water & a fayre grene medowe Ioynyng ther∣to the which conteyned the space of two
myles & a halfe, and so they rode styll by the syde of the medowe fynally in the bo∣tome of a grete valey. Than thee espyed a stronge & oure closed wt myghty wailes And arthur sawe wel howe the gates of the place were open and soo they lyghted of there horses and entred into the toure and wente vp into the hall, & all the way they founde no creature, wherof they had grete meruayle, & at the last Arthur har∣de the voyce of a woman in a lytle cham∣bre besyde hym, who cryed ryghte pyte∣ously and sayd. A lady vyrgyn mary hel∣pe me and send me som maner of soour And therwith arthur lept into the cham¦bre & there found a right fayre lady who had ben drawen all aboute the chambre. And her yelowe heere drawen and cutte of her head. And she was so sore bten yt she had no power to helpe her selfe. And in this chambre there stode a table redy couered, wherreon there stode wyne and met gret plēte, wherof arthur had grete meruayle and demaunded of the ladye who it was that had done so moch trou∣ble and shame▪ And whan the lady saw arthur & herde hym speake, she was sore abasshed, and all afrayde sayd. A gentyll knyght I requyre you doo me no more hurte for I haue harme ynoughe all rea¦dy. Fayre lady sayd Arthur be nothinge afrayde for I wyll warraunt and defēde you fro all enemyes, therfore shewe vn∣to me who hath thus entreted you. Than wyth moche payne the lady rose vpō her feete and sayde, syr as god helpe me there departed fro hens ryghte nowe .xii. kny∣ghtes all armed & they haue thus pyte∣ously arayed me as ye se. And I thynke they haue slayne my lorde my husbonde. And haue away wt them my dere dough¦ter to defoule her virgynyte yf God doo not pouruey some remedy for her. well fayre lady quod arthur where is the lord of this place, syr I cannot saye whether he be alyue or dead. I beseche you ske a∣boute for him, for I thīke I shall finde hī other quycke or dead. Than Arthur sou∣ghte al aboute the place. And at the last in a lytle house he founde hym & his han¦des bound behynde his backe sore woun¦ded in the head & on the sholders. Than Hector dydde lose his handes, & Gouer∣nar dy serche his wounde, & Arthur demaunded hym why he was so delt wt Syr in good fayth quod the knyghte I knowe none other cause, but y• the laste day there was a straunger dyd ouerthro¦we the mayster of the sayd .xii. knyghtes whefore thus they haue arayed me with¦oute cause, & they haue ledde away my doughter to do her shame & velany, and as they thus talked togyder the lorde of the placr sawe where his squyer & clerke lay dead wherof he had grete ruth. Well quod Arthur this a grete outrage, come on frendes get vs our harneys, & whan they were all armed, they folowed after these knyghtes and rode so longe tyll at the laste they found the chyef mayster of them at the enterynge into a fayre forest who was besy about this damoysell to haue fyled her. Than Arthur escred him and sayd. A yll & shameful knight not so hardy yt thou ones touche her, for I en∣sure thou shalte come to her fader in the spte of thherteto thntente yt he shall take vēgeaunce of thy trespa. And ther¦fore I the defye, therwt he & all his com∣pany lept on theyr horses, & the capytay∣ne of theym broched his horse agenst Ar∣thur & stroke him so rudely that he brake his spere to his fyste, but Athur stroke hym so pussauntly that his speare head enred clene thoughe his body, wherewt he fell downe deade to the earthe. Than
Arthur drewe out hys swerde & smote the seconde o feruentely that he pred hys her. And the third he stroke so that he cut hym do e to the sadel. And fro the .ii he roke his hed fro the sholders. And Hec¦tor for his parte stroke one of them so u¦dely that he entred hys spere into hys bo∣dy more than a fot. And than he toke his sworde and stroke amonge them so rude¦ly that he made them al before him to kne¦le. And also Gouernar made .ii of theyr heades to ee into the feldes. And whan there maunt sawe that their companye were thus delate wythall they toke them to flyght for drede of dethe and as they fledde they sayde eche to other, let vs sa∣ue oure selfe fro these deuylls of hel for they be none erthelye creatures. And soo arthur folowed theym no ferther but ca∣me to the damoysell where as shee was fast bounden to a tree and dyd owse her and caused her too mounte on a horse of one of the knyghtes that was slane. And than brought her agayne to her fader. And whan he sawe hys doughter, his her¦te reuyued and kneled downe before Ar∣thur and rendred to him many gret than kyngs. Than arthur toke him vp by the hande, and so remayned there all ye daye and nyghte, and the nexte mornynge he and all hys company toke leue of theyre hoost and of the damoysel, who loued Ar¦thur wyth all her herte. And so they de∣parted and entered in to theyr Iorney, & roe foth so longe tyll they cam in to the countree of Uienne, where as they met a ssenger hauynge by semynge grete haste wyth a Inelyn in his hande a sco∣chen of arms on his breste, and a boget wyth leteers hangng at his sadel bow And there Arthur curtesly dydde salute hym, syr sayde the verlet God gue you ryght good aduentur, good frende quod Arthur to whome do you pertayne. Syr I dwell with my lorde the Erle of B∣auiewe, gentyll frende quod Arthur c ye tell vs onye nouells, syr I can not tell yf ye knowe ony thyng of the orney that my lorde of Beautew hae taken agenst the marshal of yrpoys the whi∣che shall be hoden on the monday nexte after oly rode daye. As it of a trouthe good frend quod Arthur that he erle of Beauw hath taken on hym this enter∣pryse. Ye syr wtout fayle. And good fren∣de I praye you what maner of man is youre lorde, syr as God helpe me he is a noble man for the erle of Forses is his vncle. And the erle of mount Belyale is his cosyn germayne, and as of him▪ selfe he is as curteys, as gentyll, as tre an as meke as a doue. But the marshall of Myrpos is contrary, for he is s and cruell, and a dyuese man to dwell wtall how be it he is a good knight of his han∣des, & is of that hardynsse, & of so fys a courage that he fereth nothyng thre or foure knyghtes to fyght agenst them all wherfore my lorde dooth puruey him of the best knyghtes hat he can gte. ther∣fore he hath sente me to a knyght of his who is reputed ryghte valian and sage & well proued in dedes of chyualry, wo is named syr Delalaunde, good felowe I praye you how farre dwelleth the kni¦ghte hens syr his house passeth not two leges fro this place, wherfore fayre lor∣des yf ye thynke to be wel harbored is nyght bo my counsayle gette you to a li¦tell castell here by the which is called ro¦cheyse, wherin there is a valaunt and a ryche auncyent knighte therfore siers the best that ye can do is to rpayre thy∣der, for this forest is dangerous to passe throughe, the wayes be soo dyuers that it is harde to kepe the ryght way wtoute
a gyde, and specyally be nyghte. And as now it begnneth to waxe very late. well good frende quod Arthur I thanke you for youre good wyll kepe on youre Iornaye and god sende you good aduen∣ture. And we shal do as well as god wyl suffer vs. And so the vlet departed and wente to the knyghte syr Delaaunde & dyd his message, & delyuered hym his letters to the erle of Beauieu. ¶How that Arthur Hector & gouernar slewe .xxx theues in a grete forest the whi¦che was a grete welth to all the countre, for they had pylled and wasted the coun¦tre all aboute. Capitulo .xxvi. ANd whan Arthur was departed fro the varlet he & his company rode so long tyl they entred io the same foreste that the varlet had shewed theym of before. And rode all the daye & coulde fynde no house nor mete nor drynke for them nor for theyr horses, and than it be¦gan to waxe late. And in this forest acos¦tomable there dydde repayre .xxx. theues who dyd robbe all aboute where as they coude gette ony praye, so that no creatu∣re durst stere nor passe through the coun∣tree, and specially throughe y• forest if it were ony thynge late. And so by fortune these theues encountred the stuffe & ca∣ryages perteynynge to Arthur and hys company. And incontynent they toke al the stuffe & dyd bette and intrete theym that were conductours therof, tyll at the laste Iaket Arthurs squyre drewe his swerde and to hys power dydde helpe & ayed to defende his maysters stuffe, but they were so many on hym that he was
sore wounded. And therwyth Arthur & hys company came to them. And whan Arthur espied his seruaunt Iacket sore wounded and in great leoperdy, he drew his swerde and stroke so the fyrste that he claue hs hd downe to the chynne. And fro the seconde he stroke of the head and fro the thyre he share clene awaye the sholders wt the arme. And than Hec∣tor and gouernar ryght strongly layd on euery syde amonge these theues. And so by the helpe of arthur they slewe and kylled all that euer were before theym. And they were all dead than arthur com¦maunded to serche for his people where as they were wont to resort vnto. And so thus by the prowes of these the kni¦ghtes these .xxx. theues were brought to deth and confusion, & at the last they founde a fayre ancient man vnder a tre¦lienge all naked bounde faste with two theynes so that he could not help himself Than arthur dyd louse him and gaue hym all the abylmentes that was on the dead bodyes, of the sayde .xxx. theues wheforeth good man humbly thked arthur, and specially for sauyng of hs lyfe. Than arthur and his cōpany rode forth and trauayled so long a the last they founde a stronge house, and knoc∣ked so longe at the gate tyll there came to them a varlet bare lgged redy to go to bed, for all other in the place were as than gone to theyr restes, and than this foresaye varlet demaunded of theym who it was that knocked so fast at the gate that time of night. Good feende {quod} Gouernar it is a knight that wold fai this night haue lodgyng for hym & hs cpany. Syr sayd the varlet if it please you to tary I wyll go speake with my lorde and mayster, and shew hym your mynde, how be it I thinke he be now at his est for he is olde & ancient, and hath ben in his dayes a very good knight, & as yet he is glad to here speking of good knighes, & outh them that haunteth noble dedes of ams,  therwh y• var∣let departed & went o his master  said Syr the is at your as .iii. knightes armed. And are be semyng goyng to vi∣enne to the tornay. And they desyre by way of gentlnss this ¦gynge. How saye ye syr hall I open to them he gates hie the & pace quod the lor for I am not conen that thou hast made them to tary without so long. And wh they be ented come agayne to me ad bring me worde what maner of ē yt they be and what harys and armes they bere, than the varlet went aayne to the gate & set is wide open, and sud arthur & his cōpany to entre, whereof they had great nede & mter. Than the varlet behlde Arthur & saw wl that he was e a gentlman, bing log & wel fornysshed & meuaylously fayre a oe a his company. And next him he sawe Hector, who was tyght fayre, hie & well made. And also he behelde Gouernar, who was in al poyntes like a mā bigge and browne of coloure. And also he pr∣cyued wel how all theyr haneys were fayre and ryche. Thā was there tres brought forth & vares aune tr eyr horses. Than the fst valet trne a¦gayne to his lorde an sayd. Syr sth yt I was borne I neuer sawe so goodlye knightes as they be & specially the chief of hē,  as for theyr amour it is bothe fayre & yee, for I ensure you it should seme that they be right great men and men of a noble lygnage. wel quod the lorde loke that thou in al haste appaay¦le theyr lodginge. And se that they be serued right honourably. well syr quod
the varlet it shal be done incontinent. Than the lorde sayd to the lady his wife who was as than lyenge a bed by him, madame by reason of your honour and gentylnesse ye should ryse and kepe com¦panie ith yonder noble knightes, for I thin thy be some greate men for it shall gealy anoye them and they se not the h ee o the house to make thē some here for s god helpe me I wolde haue grea ioye to speake wt hem yt I might a yse and not hurt my self, therfore ma¦dame in myne asene I pray you go & make to them the best chere that ye canne syr sayde the lady with a right good wil yh it please you I shall so do. Than this ladye ose and apparayled her selfe ryghorsship, who was a ryght fayre yonge lady of the age of .xi. yere. And whan Arthur and Hector saw her they rose & cuteysly eche of them dyd salute other and she sat her downe betwene theym. Than arthur sayde madame ye haue taken a great payne to leue the cō∣pany of your lorde to come to se vs, syr it pleaseth my lorde that I shal do so. And therfore I am come to you in the stede of hym, for he wold wyth a right good wyl haue come to you hym selfe yf he myght so haue doone, but syres he is ansient and it wolde sore anoye him to haue broken his reste. And so thus they talked of dyuerse thinges. And in the meane season there was mete prouided for them, and than the tables were spred & couered, & so than they washed and sat thē downe arthur & the lady together, & Hector & Gouernar but Hector had his eyen on the lady and o neyther eate nor drynke, the whiche Arthur & Gouernar  wel espied. Thā arthur sayd to hym frende it is yours al yt ye se, syr sayd hec¦tor I haue seen some thinges of yt which yf I might I wolde fayne be mayster. A Hector quod Gouernar a manes will ought euer to folow the ordre of reason. And so I beleue ought yours to do. And therwith they lefte these wordes, howe be it all that lytle or nothinge refrayned Hectors looke, for alwayes styll he be∣helde this lady tyll it was tyme for thē to go theyr restes, and so they toke their leues of the lady and thanked her for the great chre that she had made theym. And on the nexte day beymes they de∣parted & entred into the forest the mor∣ninge was fayre and clere and warme, for it was as than aboute the ende of apryl. So these lordes rode forth in gret Ioy tyll at the last Gouernar sayde to Hector, syr was your wyl accōplysshed this last night, where as ye sayd ye wold gladlye fulfilled youre wyll, to saye the trouth I thinke your wyll was on our hostes, who was both fayre and yonge. By my fayth quod Hector I wold haue ben ight glad to haue fulfylled my wyl with her, for vndoubted she is fayre and gracyous and I loue her with all my herte. And syr what was your wil quod Gouernar, by my fayth sayde Hector, yt she should haue ben all night in myn ar¦mes & I in hers, now truly syr sayd go¦uernar yt wil was neyther good nor ho∣nest for it was against reasō for ye good lorde her husbād did cause her to rise frō him to the entente to honour vs and to kepe vs company, remēbring also how honestly she receyued vs, & so good there as we had of her. And syr wolde you haue than done velanye to ye good lorde as to haue hadde to hys wyfe vnto his dishonoure in hys owne house, by the fayth that I owe vnto god it hadde no ben well doone, nor yet it was none ho∣nest thoughte. A syr Gouernar quod
Hector I am sure ye be so sage in scyence yt ye wyl do no foly, wysdome is greate if the ca neuer touched myle, as much to say as whā loue toucheth wysedome is than oftentymes ourcome. well as for al that {quod} gouernar it maketh no ma¦ter, bu yet I say as I sayde yt it should not haue ben wel done of a gentylmā to haue doone as ye saye for it were rather treason so o do wherwt Hector began to be sore chafed & sayde, what Gouernar sayst thou that I am a traytour, thou li∣est falsely I was neur none and drew nere to gouernou and layd his hand on his swede, than sayd Gouernar stryke me not. I saye not that ye be a traytoure nor ye be not so great a man that youre noblenesse for thynketh me for I wolde ye were greater than ye are, yet for all yt I say that this dede accordinge to youre wysshe had ben treason, remembryng y• trust and confidence that the good lorde had in vs, and in the coloure thereof to haue taken his wyfe to hys dishonour, surely I say it is no thought of a noble mā wyth the which wordes Hector was so chafed and drewe his swerde & stroke Gouernar on the helme so rudely that he was therwyth sore a stonyed▪ where wth arthur was sore dyspleased and blamed greatli Hector therfore. And thā Gouernar sayde syr stryke me no more for by the fayth that I owe to our lorde yf ye doo I wyll not pardon you, for ye shall haue as good as ye brynge how be it as for that ye haue done I wyl suffre it for the honoure here of my lord arthur and for the great lygnage that ye be of, why good syr quod Hector what wolde ye do elles any great hute that shall be soone seene, and so stroke Gouernar a∣gayne on the helme a great blowe, her wt Gouernar drew his swerde & rudelye stroke Hector on the helme for he was a good knight, and so there began a great & a sore baayle betwene these two kni∣ghtes. And arthur dyd his payne wyth fayrenesse to depart them, but they were so sore dyspleased and chafed eche wyth other that Arthur coud in no wyse cause them to leue: And whā arthur saw that he drewe his swerde & stroke Hector so rudely that he made him to stoupe down to ye necke of his horse, & with an other stroke he stroke Gouernar so sore that he was sore astoned therewith & e had fallen fro his horse, & than Arthur wolde haue recouered on him a nother stroke, but Gouernar went from hym. Than arthur came to Hector and wolde haue stryken at him agayne, but than Hector sayd cosyn what wyll ye doo, ae ye dys∣pleased with me ye veryly sayd Arthur ryght sore for gouernar shewed to you your folye, and ye therfore haue stryken hym here in my presence, wherof I am not content. Syr sayde Hector I repente me but he dyspleased me sore yt I coude not refrayne my selfe as at that tyme, well quod Arthur nowe than fro hens∣forth be in peace, or by the faythe that I owe to my lorde my father the fyrst of you that beginneth shal lese my cōpany And also my good wyll for euer, ther∣fore come on Gouernar and make amē∣des vnto my cosyn Hector in y• ye haue stryken him syr sayde Gouernar wyth a ryght good wyll. Than he put of hys helme & desyred Hectors good wyl, now cosyn Hector quod Arthur make ye hym amendes, syr sayd Hector right gladly, for it forthinketh me gealy the displea¦sue yt hath ben betwene vs & so he dyd also of his helme. And there eche of thē kyssed eher and o entred forthe into there Iorney, & rode forthe so longe tyl
the were passed the forest. And than they sodaynly encountred the knight syr De∣lalaunde and the messenger that they had met with the day before, and there eche of them did salute other. Than syr Delalaunde demaunded of Arthur into what parties he wolde drawe hym vn¦to. Certaynly sayd Arthur it hathe ben shewed me that at holy rode tyde nexte commynge there shoulde be at vienne a greate assemble of noble men and good knightes. Therfore I am ridynge thy∣therwarde to se that noblenesse. And to be acqueynted wyth some of the good knightes that wyl be there, truly sayde syr Delalaund it is of trouth that there shall be a great assemble of noble knigh∣tes, for there shall be a great tornay. I pray you syr sayd Arthur, for whome & for what cause was it fyrst taken, syr yf I should shew quod syr Delalaunde, ye should than know some thing sounding to my velany, neuerthelesse it semeth yt ye be a noble man and the chyef of your company. Therfore I shal shew you as I know. ¶How that syr Delalaunde shewed to Arthur the occasion why yt this tornay was fyrst taken by the lorde Beauiew. Cap. xxvii. SYr it is of trouth my lorde yt erle of Beauiew hath alwayes loued me syth the beginning of my youth and so it fortuned whan I was yonge and lusty. I thought to go playe me oute of myne owne countrey acompanied alone¦ly wt my squyre, hoping to vaynquysshe all the valure of the worlde. And so at the last I came into the land of myrpois and fell therein acqueyntaunce wt two noble lordes of great lygnage, who dyd me great honour. And one of them had a right fayre lady to his wyfe named the fayre lady of Rossylo, for whome this tornay was fyrst takē. And she had such fauoure in me and loue that within a ly¦tle whyle I was made chyefe ruler and senesshall of all her countrey, and was of her strayte counsayle. And nothinge done without it had be done by me. For she trusted more in me than in any other person of the worlde. And in like case I was wyth the good lorde her husbande And so I continued in thys loue and fa∣uour well the space of syxe yeres and more and it fortuned one yere yt for my sake they kept a christmas wyth open courte: wherto came many knightes of the countrey. And whan the fyrst daye of this began this lady of Rossilon wife to my sayd lorde, she was as than fresh lye appaayled as it apertayned to the feast and to her estate. At whiche time to me she semed so fayre so gentil, and so proper that I thought I had neuer seen her half so fayre before. And as than her beaute stroke so inwardely to my hearte that I lost therby both meate and drinke yt euery day I began to waxe so lent of body that euery mā had meruayle what I eyled. And demaūded often tymes of me what was the cause that I so enpay¦red, but euer I did as priuely as I could but at the ende it auayled me nothinge. For at the laste loue constrayned me to shew vnto my loue & lady all the dolour and payne of myne inwarde herte. And on a day as it happened I tose very erly For the thoughtes of the nyght kylled me. And ryght as than I founde thys lady leanynge in a windowe. And so
boldely I lened me downe by her & than she gaue me good morowe, and desyred that gd should sende me helth, wel ma¦dame quod I. Than the kinge that all hath formed giue you a better day thā I haue had a night. And also better helthe, for my hlth is very ferre of, the whiche ight sore troubleth me. Than this lady comed her to warde me and sayde, syr how is it that your health is so ferre fro you might it not be brought nerer to you for goldenor for syluer. Madame quod I peraduēture yf I shewed you ye wold put therto no payne nor counsayle, how be it ye myght right wel do it, so than it wre bette that I kept it styll secrete than to shewe it, and than to be neur the nere. Syr sayd she I requyre you I wyll with all my herte be glad to put my payne to bryng you to ease and helth wherfore it is a great shame for you, for whan ye may haue counsayle and reme¦die and wil not seke for it, but thus to suffre payne and vnhertes ease, the whi¦che I ensure you greueth ight sore both my lorde and me. Therfore good frende by the fayth that ye owe vnto me shew me your gefe. And there with she came nerer to me and enbraced me in her ar∣mes and shewed me great sygne of loue an swetenesse as these women be a¦customed to do whan they wyll draw ou of a mans mouthe that is enclosed in the hete. And whan  sawe her gen∣tylnesse and swte behauiour, my hete was rauesshed and brought into ye case that of a great season I coulde speke no worlde for wepyng. But syr quod thys kight to Arthur though I shewe thys vto you my nysenes I pray you think no folye in it, but take it in gree, for in dede syr yongth doth many thinges. By my fayth syr no more I wyll. And therfore procede forth in your tale. Syr than I sayd vnto this lady. Madame what so euer fortune fall therof I wyll shew you all my desyre. Madame it is of trouth I haue set my herte and al my thought on you more than on all the re∣menaunt of the worlde wt so faythfull profounde loue in myne herte as it wel appereth' and shall do by me, for nother person I loue nor can loue, but alonlye you. And therwih my herte fayled me yt I coulde speke no worde more, thrwith I sat me downe and she by me. Than she answered and sayd, what syr Guy de¦lalaunde it is thā thus a ye say ye madā sayd I without fayle, will syr quod she say ye these wordes other to aay me or els for very loue. I requyre you tel me ye trouth by my soule madame quod I this that I haue sayd is for the great myschit that I am in without your helpe. Ther∣fore lady for gods sake haue pitie on me And thrwith I ioyned togyder my han¦des with grat vnase of hert. Than she behelde me wel & sayde, syr ye be a ght wyse and sage knight, therfore beholde wel yf you desyre e not preudicial to any person, madame quod I for trouth I se and know well that I desyre agast my lorde treason and fasenesse who lo¦ueth and honoreth me so muche aboue all other, how be it madame I se & know well that yongth and loue bryngeth me to this, so that mesure & reason fayleth in me▪ Therfore I hadde rather to dye than to lyue. han this lady wo was ryght wyse and sage sayd, syr be in este and let ioy encrease in your herte for w wyll speake more of thys matter at a better leaser, his she sayd to giue me cō¦forte, & not to the entente that she wolde in any maner wyse tespace agaynst
her husbande, so this in thus maner I draue of the tyme a great season, but as loue as I coulde get her at a good leaser and conuenient place I was euer reso∣ning with her of this mater, & lay impor¦tunatly daily requyring her to haue pi∣tie of my mortall distres, and so it fortu¦ned on a day that we were togeder le∣uynge in a window loking out toward a fayre forest. Than I spake to her so fayre and in so rufull maner that she coulde no longer driue of my request. And sayd syr your suite is so importune that it behoueth me to assente to fulfyll your desyre & wil, how be it syr se ye not yonder great oke standinge in the forest yes madame sayd I right well, well {quod} she I am content to fulfill your minde on this condicion, looke that this same day twelue moneth & this same propre houre that ye fayle not to be vnder yon∣der oke & without fayle thyder to you wyl I come redy apparayled to acōplish your entente, and before that day loke ne∣uer for to haue it. A myne owne dere la¦die humblye I thanke you of your good wyll syth I cannot haue it no soner, at the least I shall passe the tyme more  in hping of that fortunate daye. whefore I wyll take my leue nowe of you, for ye shall not se me agayne till ye tyme be come, for yf I shoulde abyde in your dayly presēce, your beaueful eyen hould lea me to abide so longe, for that thinge that I desyre. And so than I toke leue praying her to kepe couenaunte wt me. And so she ensured me she wolde. Than I toke licence of my lorde her hus¦bande, shewing hi how I wolde departe into myne owne countre for a season, & he was lothe to gyue me leaue, but whā he saw that I wolde needes departe he offred me to haue forsaken his owne countrey, and to haue gone with me, he loued me so entyerly. And so at the laste with much sorow I gat leue and depar∣ted priuely on a night and dysgysed my selfe and went wandring aboute the coū¦trey tyl the yere was past. And thā thys same day and houre that myne apoynte∣ment was I came to the sayd oke in the forest before the castel wyndowe, and in∣continent I perceyued where this lady stode talking wt my lorde her husbande in the same window where as she and I made our apoyntement togither. And than I made so many tokens & sygnes that at the last she perceyued me, & than she began to smyle, and whan her lorde saw her laughe he demaunded the cause why. And she answered & sayde, syr for nothynge, for nothinge quod the lorde I am sure ye wyll not laughe for nought therfore shewe me the cause, for surely I wyl know it therfore I commaunde you to shew it, syr quod she syth it plea∣seth you I am content to shewe you, but fyrst syr I requyre you tell me whā that ye saw or harde of syr Guy delalaunde. In good fayth madame not of a greate seasō wherof I am  sory, for y I had knowen that he wolde haue taied so longe a space I wolde haue sough hym out or this time, wel syr quod thys lady he is not now se hēce, syr it is of trouth he hath before this time desyred me of loue, and in a maner his suite was im∣porunate. And the loue that he bare me was so feruent that he was right sore dyseased thereby, the whiche was right well seen by hym whyle he was here wt vs, and so there this lady tolde the lorde her husbande al the mater that was e∣twene her & me into that same presente day. And than she shewed him and sayd syr this is the same day that I promised
hym to haue fulfylled his desyre, to the entente I thought yt by this day he wold haue forgotten this mater, ut soo syr ye maye se hym vnder yonder great oke whee as he is al anaced bycause he fin∣deth me not there as I promysed hym. And syr ye maye se by hym how yt these folysshe louers are ouercome wyth loue And this is ye cause that he departed fo you, for he myghte not endure no lenger the great tourment yt he was in. Ye ma∣dame quod the lorde is it thus, than I communde you on ye loue that ye beare vnto me that ye god and apparayle you in the fresshest maner that ye can do and than come agayne hyther to me. Than the lady dyd his cōmaundement & came agayne to hym. And than he sayd. Ma∣dame I wyll and also desyre you as dere¦ly as ye thynke to kepe my loue that ye go to yonder knyght vnder the oke and suffre hym to do what so euer he wyll wt you, and recōmaunde me hartely to hym A syr sayd the lady for nothynge wyll I do thus, for yf I had euer thought to ha¦ue fulylled his folysshe desyre, ye shold neuer haue knowen it by my wyll. And syr yf I would now do it, it were to me great vylany, bothe tofore god & all the worlde. Madame sayd the Lorde▪ I wyll take al the synne on me, and I swere to you faythfully on my trouth that I wil loue you and kepe you more derely euer after, therfore I wyll that ye do thus in contynent▪ Well syr sayd the lady it beho¦ueth me thus to do syth it is youre plea∣sure, yf honoure come thereby take it to you, and yf shame come therby ye muste take it of worth. And soo than this lady came in to the forest , and vs soone as I sawe her I was neuer soo ioyfull before. For I thought I would quye al the World for her, than I came to her & enbraced her in myne arme ryghte swe∣tely and sayde. My ryghte dere ladye my hartes desyre ye be to me ryghte hary welcoe. Syr delalaūde quod she, God put in to your harte that ye do no wrōg nor trespce ayenst ony persone. Syr my lorde my husonde hartly recommaūdeth hym vnto you as to his own good feede Hw so madame {quod} I, where is my lord Certainly said she he is here by in his ca¦stelle. But madame sayde I howe is it, doeth he know that ye be come hyder to me. Ye syr sayd she as God helpe me, for he hahe caused me to be apparayled in the fresshest maner to the entent I shold please you the better, and so he hath sent me hyther to you to the entent to fufyll all your wyl and desyre, and therfore be¦holde me here all readye for to accom∣plyshe your wyll, as for hurte or yll shal none come to you, therby neither by my lorde, nor yet by none other for hym, and so my lorde dooth faythfully assure you, and sendeth you worde by me that he lo¦ueth you in a maner better than he doo∣eth hym selfe. And whan I harde the greate courtesy of my lord, and how that he loued me as well as hym elfe, and how that he sent me the thyng that he lo¦ued best in all the world to fulfyll my de∣syre therwith, and how that he woulde suffre that vylany for my sake, therwyth fel away clene all my foly and vnresona∣ble desyre. For than I thoughte it was better to leue my sensuall appetyte than to haue done that I had enterprysed in my harte, for I thoughte than it shoulde haue bene to great shame for me to do vi¦lany to so noble a gentyll lordes harte Than I kneled downe before the lady re¦quyryng her of pardon of the great out∣rage and foly that I thought ayenst her, desyrynge her for Goddes sake to helpe
to make my peace again wyth the good lorde her husbonde. Than she toke me by the hande and broughte me into the ca∣stell before the presence of her lord. And as soone as he sawe me enbraced and kyssed me. Than I kneled downe be∣fore hym and cryed hym mercy, and ther the peace was made bytwene vs, and e∣uer syth he hath loued me as Wel as euer he dyd before or better. Now fayre syr I haue shewed you al myne aduenture, the whyche is ryghte Well knowen of ma∣ny folkes, and so it fortuned yt but now of late my lorde Beamen was at a feest with the erle of Forest, and ther my said lorde tooke this ladye Rossylon by the hande to daunce, and the marshal of mir¦pois was ther present, who is ryght ∣uious. And whan he sawe this my lord and lady daunce togyther, he sayd how that my lorde of Beamen shoulde be the seconde. Than the lorde of Beamen wist wel ynoughe What he mente and sayde. Syr marshall as for syr Guy de la laun¦de is a ryghte good knyghte bothe wyse and true. The marshall aunswered and sad, his bounte apered wel whā he toke his owne lordes wyfe. Syr sayd the erle of , thoughe he desyred her loue, yet I dare well saye that he neuer trespa¦ced neyher agaynste his lorde nor yet a∣gaynst her, for he dyd not dysguyse hym selfe lyke a rybaude for to come vnto the wyfe of hys foster as some hathe done yt I know ryght well wherwyth the mar¦shall was sor chafed, for it touched his owne delyng and sayde. Syr ye be but a ole to say these wordes to me. And thus thei muliplyed in language so fe that the erle of Forest and the erle of Neuers had moche ado to appease them, and so for this entent was the iournay takē o bothe parties Whiche shalbe this Wed∣nesdaye next comyng, and there wyll be many gret lordes of the marshalles par¦tye, as the erle of Foys, the erle of moū∣belyall, and the dolphyn of vynes, and many other knyghtes, and also Alxan∣der the yonge kynge of mlogre. And of my lordes partye wyl be syr Ikes earle of Forest, & the erle of Neuers, & diuers other, therefore syr I doubte me gretely of my lord the erle o Beamen, for I wol¦de be right sory yf he had not the honour therfore I praye you and al youre com∣pany to be at this tournay on my lordes party, for Whan ye se hym ye wyll saye it were pite but he hold haue the vycto∣ry. Syr thus I haue shewed you all the trouth of the mater. Ueryly syr sayd Ar∣thur wyth a good wyl I shal be wt your lorde. But syr I pray you shal this lady of Rossylon be at this tournay. Syr as god helpe me she shal be there and many other great ladies & damoyselles, & also it is ordeyned by comyn accorde that he that dooth best shal be made lke a king ouer al other erles, barons, & knyghtes, that shall be there assembled, & shall be crowned wyth golde as a kynge, and al they with all ye power that thei can make shalbe content to go wt hym in battayle Whether so euer he Wyl haue them, and so fro thens forth he shal be called kyng of the cōpany, & this marshal entendeth to haue this honour yf he may▪ for sure∣ly he is a good knyght of hys handes, & moche goodnes is in hym yf his tongue Were not, but that lytle more shameth all the remenaūt, as it dooth to all them that god hath giuen an yll tongue vnto. ☞How that Arthur had the honoure in the tournay that was made at vyen by∣twene the Marshal of myrpoys and the erle of Beamen, where as was dyuerse
great kynges, earles, barons, and many other good knyghtes ryght valyaunte, whereby Arthur gate him great thanke and prayse and was greatly honoured of all ladyes and damoyselles there as∣sembled. Capitulo. xxviii ANd after that syr Guy de la¦laūde had shewed al this pro¦cesse to Arthur & to his com∣pany they rode forth togider & so came to lyon surle rone ad so passed ouer the brydge and rode through the towne, & in a fayre medowe vnder ye townes syde they espyed where tentes & pauilyons were rychely pyghte at whytch tyme there were assembled ma¦ny grete and noble kynges, erles, barōs, and other knyghtes, as well of the one party as of the other. And than syr Guy de la launde sende a messenger to the erle of Beamen certyfeng hym how he had brought in valyaūt knyghtes with him and that in ony wyse he shoulde retayne them to be of his company. And whan the erle of Beamen and the erle of forest and the Erle of Neuers harde these ty∣dynges they came out of theyr tentes, & saw where syr Guy de la launde and Ar∣thur & his company came rydynge. And soo whan they came nere thei lyghted & salewed these earles, who dyd beholde Arthur, and perceyued well howe that he was a meruaylous fayre knyghte great and bygge and well furnysshed, and se∣med wel to be of great fyersnes and of greate estate, and also they saw Hector a bygge knight & a wel made both of bo¦dy armes and legges, & also thei behelde gouernar who was a great and a bigge man and wel made therto, and that these
erles praysed moche these knyghtes in their hartes. Than the earle of Beamen toke Arthur by the hande & sayd Syr ye be ryght hartely welcome into the coun∣tre of vyenues, prayenge you hartely to take your lodging with me & wyth these other two erles here presente. Than Ar∣thur sayd, syr with a ryght good wyll, & so thei ledde hym into theyr tentes, and there Arthur, Hector, & Gouernar were vnarmed. And whan they were oute of theyr harneys euery man beheld Arthur for he was meruaylous fayre, so that ty¦dinges came into ye ladyes enes howe that syr Guy de la laūde was come and had brought wyth him thre goodly kny∣ghtes, & specially one of them who was the fayrest and goodlyest that euer was seen, so that there was no bruyte nor tal∣king throughout al the hoost but of these thre knightes. Some said of whence be they, who knoweth them, thus was the commoning of them in euery place. Thā Arthur & his company yssued out of the tentes & behelde the fresshe baners and standardes & stremers waueryng in the wynde, pyght before euery tente & paui∣lyon, & harde also the trompettes tabou¦ryns, hornes so wnynge in euery corner of the felde, and great coursers braynge and knightes renning assayenge of hor¦ses, castynge of speres, shynynge of shel¦des ayenst the sonne & glysteryng of hel∣mes & knyghtes by great company tal∣kynge togider also they espyed the great tente of the ladyes, in the heyght thereof pyght a great shinynge apple all of bur¦ned golde, & ladyes & damoyselles there in syngynge and dauncynge. Than Ar∣thurs harte began to smyle and sayde to Hector. Cosyn how saye ye, is it not bet∣ter to be here and to se all this noblenesse than to crepe in to our moders lappes. Yes veryly sayde Hector, for here nowe shll appere who be noble men. Ye saye trouth sayde Arthur, & therwith retour∣ned in to the erle of Beamens tente and wente to souper, and fyrste sate downe the earle of Neuers & Arthur nexte hym and than the erle of Forest and Hector & the earle of Beamens and Gouernar, & there they were rychely serued. And af∣ter souper thei plaied and sported thē tyll it was tyme to goo to theyr testes, and so than wente to theyr lodgynge tyll the nexte mornynge, at whiche tyme they ro¦se and harde masse, and than walked & talked togyder withoute theyr tentes, & therwyth there came to them a knyght fro the marshall of myrpoys, and sayde to the erle of Beamens. Syr whan so ¦uer ye wyll begyn this tournay my lord the marshall is al redy. Now as god hel¦pe me sayde the erle of Neuers let vs go to it incontinent. But syr knight I pray you tell me what company dooth your lord tournay wt all. Syr sayde ye knyght he hath in his company well to the nom¦bre of .ix. C. redy apparayled to tournay In the name of god said the earle of Fo∣rest that is an yl partye, for I thinke our company passeth not .v. C. well syr sayd Arthur what than, care not for the nom¦bre of people, therfore let vs shortly goo and se these noble men and I truste god wyll helpe vs. well syr sayde the earle of Beamen as god wyll soo be it. But syr wyl ye than helpe vs and be of our par∣tye. With a ryght good wyll syr sayd Ar∣thur, Hector & Gouernar also. And than this knyght of ye marshalles praised mo¦che Arthur in his harte, and soo retour∣ned to hys mayster, who as than was in the company of the yonge kynge of ma¦logre, and with them the erle of mount¦belyal, and the erle of Foys, and the dol∣phyn
who was a lytle dyseased, & there∣fore he would not as that day tournay. Than the knyght sayd to the Marshall. Syr the erle of Beamē demaundeth of you the tournay incontynent. But syr one thynge I tell you, syth ye were bor∣ne ye sawe neuer thre so goodly knygh∣tes as syr de la laūde hath brought wyth him, but I can not know of whens thei be, but one of them surmounteth the o∣ther two bothe in beaute and goodlynes Ihesu sayd the kynge of malogre what knyghtes be thei. In good fayth syr sayd the knyghte there can no man tell. wyll they tournay this daye sayd the kynge. Ye syr veryly sayd the knyght, for right now whan ye erle of Beamen fered that he had not cōpany sufficient to answere your power I hard y• chefe of these .iii. knyghtes say vnto hym. Syr eare not for y• for god shal helpe vs, let vs shortly go se them. Than it semeth sayd the kin¦ge that he hath a good harte. Ye syr sayd the Marshall he beleueth yt there is not in all the world his pere in dedes of chy¦ualry, therfore let vs go shortly se what he can doe, he sayde trulyer than he was ware of. For Arthur coude ryght wel gy¦ue great strokes, as was ryght well pro¦ued after by his noble dedes. Than was it cōmaūded that trompettes, & hornes should be blowen, and than knightes in euery part went to theyr harneys, than the Marshal and the erle of mountbelial and the earle of Foys & well to the nom∣bre of .ix. hondred knyghtes were anone redy armed, and the yonge kynge of ma∣logres was ounted on a great courser and the dolphyn wyth him to the entent to se this tournay, for they woulde not turnay as yt day. And incontinent as the ladyes and damoyselles harde  sow∣nynge of the trompettes & hornes, they yssued out of theyr pauylyons, and there was togither in company the countee of Neuers, and the countesse of Forest, and the countesse of mounbelyll, and the lady of Rossylon, & a lady who was the Marshals syster named dame blaun¦che. And than the countesse of Neuers sayd, let vs now take good hede of thys knyght that is come with syr Guy de la launde and se what he can do. In the na¦me of god said ye ladye of Rossylon, there be thre as I vnderstande, but I wo not what they be, and all this season Ar¦thur was in company with ye erle of Fo¦rest, and with the erle of Neuers, & the erle of Beamen, and whan thei wee e¦dy armed they mounted on theyr horses and the erle of Neuers and Arthu rode fyrst togyder, and after them the erle of Forest and Hector, and the erle of Bea∣men and Gouernar, and after them all the other of theer cōpany, and in ryght good ordynaunce they rode forthe to the tournay. And than the lady of Rossylon said to the other ladyes that were in her company, beholde yonder is one of the straūge knyghtes that commeth riding with the erle of Neuers, & an other wyth the erle of Forest. In the name of God sayd the Marshalles syster the thyrde co¦meth with the erle of Beamen, it semeh that the erles maketh moche of these .iii. straūge knyghtes, but they knowe not as yet the force of the Marshal my bro∣der, but whan they mete here in the tour¦nay than shall they haue of hym suche acquintaunce that thei wil wyshe that they had not come here this daye. Noo fayre lady sayd the lady of Rossylon. I praye you than shewe them some courte∣sye, sende some worde to them that they flee awaye before they se the Marshall your broder, for I am sure yf thei se him
they are but lost for euer. At whych wor¦des all the other ladyes dyde laughe and had great sporte. So thus the erle of Ne∣uers and Arthur rode forthe tyll it was tyme to begyn the ourney. And than the earle of Neers saw the marshall on the other parte redy apparayled to Iust, and shwed him to Arthur. Thā Arthur sayd Syr he cometh very haftely, wherfore I requyre you let me encounter hym fyrst. Go youre waye in goddes name sayde the erle. Than Arthur rusht forth so rudelye as thonder had fallen fro heauen, & al the other knightes of the turnay beheld h wel, and praysed him moche in theyr hear∣tes. Than the lady of Rossylon sayd to ye Marshalles syster. Fayre ladye I trowe yonder knyght hath espyed youre broder for ye may se howe faste he flyeth. And at that course the marshall hytte Arthur in the myddes of hys shyelde and brake hys spere, and Arthur strake him so rudely on the helme that he sheuered hys speare all to peres, wyth the whych stroke he sente both knyght and horse to the erth, and at an other course Arthur strake an other knyght so sore that he brake a grete pece of hys helme and shelde and ouerthrewe hym flatte to the earth in a gret traunce sore wounded. And whan the yong king of malogres sawe that he sayd to the dol∣phin. Saint mary who is yonder knight he semeth too be the beste knyghte of the worlde. Verelye syr sayde the dolphyn I neuer sawe suche strokes gyuen of anye knyght here before. Than sayde the lady of Rossylon to the marshalles syster. Ma∣dame behold howe yonder straunge kny∣ghte flyeth, but your brother the marshal holdeth agayne, I hadde wende he durst haue gone no ferder for feare of your bro¦ther. It whyche tyme Hector also for his parte strake a knight with so great force that he ouerthrewe hym playne too the erth, & Gouernar strake an other down horse and man, and put hym selfe in the thyckest of the prese and dyd maruayles in armes, soo that all that behelde hym praysed hym greatlye. Than the ladye of Rossylon sayd, fayre ladye blaunche how saye ye are not these straunge knyghtes ryghte valyaunte, threfore madame for goddes sake cause the marshal your bro¦der to absente hym selfe out of their sygh∣tes, and in your soo doyng I thynke ve∣rely you shall do a gret almes dede. Than Arthur rusht into the gretest prease, and strake on the ryght hande and on the left so gret strokes and so heauy that it was maruayle, for there was none that euer abode hym but he auoyded the arson of hys sadel and fell to the earth. At the last Arthur espyed where there was a squy holdyng in hys hande a spoke or a great pece of an olde broken charyot, the why∣che he pulled out of his hande wyth suche a myghte that he caste downe the squyer flatte too the earthe, where at the ladyes and damoyselles dydde laughe. And than Arthur put vp hys sworde to the entente yt he should mayme or hurte no man, but with that pece of the charyot he thrust in to the prese and gaue therewith so great and heuy strokes that all that he touched wente flatte to the earth. For he was of that condycyon that the more he hadde to do, the more grewe hys strength▪ and ver¦tue, he vnbarred helmes and claue a sounder sheldes, and maruaylously bet downe knightes, for whome someuer he touched were so astonyed that eyther he auoyded the sadell, or elles hys horse bare hym in a traunce all aboute the fyelde. And alsoo Hector and Gouernar dydde as well for theyr partes as anye knyghtes ought or myghte doo. Soo it fortuned as Arthur
wente searchynge the renkthes and pre∣ses he encountred the erle of Foys, who had nygh vnhored one of the knyghtes o the erle of Beaueus partye, than Ar∣thur prycked forth hys horse and brake the earle oo rudely that he thrst downe both horse and man flatte to the the ech than Arthur turnd gayne to hym, and whether he wolde or not he caused hym to be yeld pryoner to the earle of Bea¦eu who was lorde of that tournay on hys partye. Than the knyghtes of hys turnay assembled them togyther by plū∣pes here .x and there .xv. and yonder .xx. and soo fought egerly togyder, soo that whan one was fallen another dyd  hym. Some laughed and some play∣ned, but Athur was euer in the mooste thyckest of the prese, and fared so amon∣ge them as the wolfe doth among shepe and layd on wyth so greate and heauye strokes that he frusshed downe all that euer he touched. Than the earle of Bea∣uieu saye, and so dyd all other knyghtes how that they neuer sawe knyghte of so grete vertue, nor in value in dedes of a¦mes. The ladyes and damoyselles also gretly maruayled at hym, and sayde that better than he is was thee neuer none. And they concluded amonge them that he was lykely too attayne to wynne the crowne of that tournaye, if he continued hys prowes accordynge too hys begyn∣nynge. So than it fortuned that a great parte of the Marshals company ranne al at ones on the erle of Nuers and on his company, who were farre ouermar¦ched whe for he was sore be stadde and lost many horses and many of his knigh¦tes sore beten, & hym selfe ouerthrowen downe from his horse and was lykely to haue be raken & yelded to he Mrshall But than an herade of armes bgan to crye and sayd. Ha Arthur of Bytayne where art thou nowe the erle of Neuers is beten & nere taken prysoner. And Ar∣thur whan he hearde that, who as than had by the helpe of Hector & Gouernar dyscomfyted a great route of knyghtes And whan he espyed the erle of Neuers on the ground, he sported forth hys hore and anne into the thyckest of the prease and strake so the fyrst that he encountred that he fell downe to the erthe both hors and man than he strake on the right sy∣de and on the lefte wyth so myghtye stro∣kes and heauy that he bet downe all that was before hym, so that none durst aby¦de hym. And also Hector and Gouernar layde on so on all sydes that al that we∣re before theym trembled for feare. And so by clene force in the spite of al his ene∣myes he horsed agayne the earle of Ne∣uers, and whan he was thus remoun∣ted Arthur than lepte agayne intoo the prese and dyd maruayles with hys han∣des, for he claue asonder sheldes and vn¦barred helmes, and bette downe knygh∣es by great heapes. Thus was Arthur regarded of al people who sayde eche to other. Ihesu what a wonders good ki∣ghte is yonder, god defende & kepe hym And the yonge kynge of Malogres had hys eyen euer vpon hym, and sayd to the dolphyn. I thynke yonder knyghte be no¦ne earthly man I wenche be some spy∣ryte of the ayre, for he all confoundeth. Than the ladye of Rossylon sayd to the marshals syster. Madame ye haue done ryghte well, for I beleue surely ye haue prayed your broder that he sholde do no hurte to these straunge knightes, and al the other ladyes had ght greate sporte at the mery gestyng of these twoo ladyes And thus alwaies Arthur was fighting and at laste there were .iii. knyghtes an
al at ones on the erle of Forest and bet hym downe to the earth and wold haue taken hym prysoner. But wan Arthur sawe the erle at that myschefe he spored hys hors thy derward, and the fyrst that he encountred he braue downe flatte to the earth, and the seconde he toke in hys armes and rasshed hym out of the sadell and cast hym downe on hym that he had before ouerthrowen, the whych greued hym ryght sort, for the knyght was gre¦te and heauy because of the harneys that was on hym, than he that laye vnder∣nethe sayde. A syr ye be but yll welcome to me nor he that sendeth you hyther, I praye god he may haue some yll aduen∣ue, for ye haue all too brused me wyth youre fallynge. Than Arthur tooke the knyghtes horse and caused the erle of Fo¦rest to mount thereon. And Arthur put hym selfe agayne into the thyckest prese and began agayne to fyght as fresshely as though he had done nothynge before of all that daye, soo that he was dradde in euery place, for there was none durst abyde hym but al fledde fro hym, soo at the last he came where as the chiefe stan∣darde was▪ where as he found the Mar∣shall, who dyd hys payne to bete downe all that was afore hym, at whyche time he had stryken fro Gouernar his shyelde And therwyth Arthur strake hym on the helme so rudely that he draue him down too the earthe all astonyed, and Arthur toke hys horse and gaue it to Hector for hys horse fayled hym he was so sore woū¦ded, and than Hector mounted on hym. And this stroke was seene of the kynge and of the dolphyn, and of all the ladies and damoysels, and they all sayde that the Marshal had bene the best knyght of all the worlde, but nowe he hath mette hys mayster, for certaynely yonder fayre knyghte surmounteth in prowesse all o∣ther knyghtes of the worlde. Than the lady of Rossylon sayd vnto the Marshal¦les syster. Madame youre broder is not so yll and myscheuous as ye spake of he¦re before▪ so ye may behold these straun∣ge knyghtes howe they are before hym and yet he dooth nohynge too theym, I thynke he slepeth, for ye maye se yonder howe styll he lyeth on the grounde, for al that season he lay styl on the earthe sore astonyed in a greate traunce. And whan all the knyghtes of hys partye saw hym lye so styll vpon the grounde they feared least he had bene dead, and sayde that one vnto that other. Yonder is the deuyll, I thynke he wyll confounde vs all, there∣fore let vs depart out of thys fyelde, and therwyth they al went theyr wayes.  so there remayned styll Arthur, Hector, and Gouernar. And whan that the yong kynge and the Dolphyn and manye o∣ther saw Arthur alone in the fielde they came to hym and alewed hym and sayd. Syr god kepe you the best knyght of the world, and encrease your noble honoure and valure. My lorde sayde Arhur, god that al thyng hath fourmed of noughte may encrease you bounte and be your sauegarde, and syr sauynge youre grace I am none suche knyght worthy for to haue suche prayse as ye gyue me. well syr sayde the kynge we haue ne ryght well how it is, therfore myne owne sw¦te frende I requyre you that ye wyll b one of my house, and ye shall be my com∣panyon. Syr sayde Arthur I am ryght well yours where so euer I be, howe be it I haue a lorde already, who hath nou¦rysshed me lyke hys owne chylde. Syr in good trouth sayde the erle of Forest, it is good ryghte than that ye loue hym. And as they were thus talking togythe
the Marshal rose from the grounde, and whan he sawe that the tourney was do∣ne and fynysshed and that he hadde done nothynge to hym that had beaten hym downe, he was ryghte sore dyspleased, and than he sente a knyght to the erle of Beamen desyrynge hym for to haue the tournay to begyn agayne the nexte daye and how that he wolde encountre yet a∣gayne wyth Arthur. This knyght foun∣de the Erle of Beamen in the companye of the yonge kynge and of Arthur. And than h sayde. Syr my lord the marshal saleweth you, and desyreth you agayne too haue a tournay to morowe. By the good lorde quod the yonge kynge youre mayster ought for to suffyse and be con∣cene of that whyche hath bene done here thys day, wherefore it is reason that he now resteth hym selfe, for the kynge ful well thought that the Marshal woulde not be in ease tyl that he were reuenged of Arthur A syr sayde Arthur the Mar¦shal is not yet weary, and he wolde thyn¦ke my lorde of Beamen for recreaunt yf be sholde refuse his request, therefore syr or goddes sake graunt hym. Syr sayde he erle wyth a ryght good wyll sythe it pleaseth you, but syr I requyre you than to helpe our party. Uerey syr sayde Ar∣thur wyth all my heart to the beste of my lytell power. So than there was graun¦ed too be an other tournay on the nexte daye. Than syr Guy de la lounde came vntoo Arthur and ledde hym to be vnar¦med. So than Arthur toke hys leaue of the kynge, who wolde right gladly haue had hym in hys companye. And than all the people ranne to beholde Arthur and sayd wyth a comyn voyce, beholde hym that all hath vanquysshed. Than whan Arthur was vnarmed ye erle of Beamen kept him company, and also Hector and Gouernar were vnarmed. Than the in∣dyes and damoyselles retournd intoo theyr pauylyons alwayes speakynge of Arthur, and than they assembled theym togyder by plumpes, here ten and there twelue, and all the countesses were to∣gyder in one parte, and wyth theym the Marshalles syster dame blaunche and the ladye Rossylon speakyng euer of Ar¦thur. Ueely sayde the countes of Forest syth I was fyrst borne I neuer sawe soo good a knyght nor so valyaunce, nor so well doynge in armes as he is. It is of a trouth sayde che ladye Neuers, aw y not howe that he brake the great compa¦nyes of knyghtes and tourned and once threwe all that euer he touched. By my soule sayde the countes of Foys, I saw hym whan he enbraced a knyghte in hys armes al armed and caste hym downe vpon an other knyght and brused hym ryghte sore there wyth, and also sawe y not howe yt he strake the Marshal dow∣ne to the grounde, to saye the trouthe he is the bst knyght of the worlde and th mooste hardyest. And more ouer all the beauty of the worlde that cā be compry¦sed in a man is in hym. Also he is eple∣te wyth all grace and vertue, for hee is free, meeke, and gentyl as a lambe. By the faythe that I owe vnto god sayde the ladye Rossylon, my ladye the countes of Forest I woulde he were youre knyghte I beleue you wel sayde the ladye blaun∣che for than I thynke verelye ye would speke with him oftentimes whan other ladyes wer abedde faste on slepe wyth∣as fewe a companye as ye myghte wyth oute makynge of anye noyse but shame haue she that wyl forfayte wyth an other that is not her owne. Certaynely answe∣red the lady Rossylon I thynke there b but fewe in this world borne tha lyueth
clene bothe in thought and in dede, how be it I am not she yt closeth priuely knigh¦tes in her chaumbre by nyghte tymes wythoute the lycence of my lorde, nor ke∣pe none vnder my couerture, howe saye you fayre lady know you any otherwyse by mee, yf ye doo spare not but speake it here openly, yf ye be of that condycions or haue done soo, ye oughte than the ra∣ther too be the more secrete, yf ye knowe that malady to be in an other whan you knowe youre owne estate leue the enquy¦ryng of any farder than nedeth of any o∣ther, for I am in certayn that ye be some∣tyme in the shadowe oftener than I am in the sonne, with company oftener than I am alone. Than al the ladyes and da∣moyselles began to laugh, and tourned all the matter intoo Iapes and sportes And all this while Arthur was in the er¦le of Beamens tent, and there was wyth hym syr Guy de la launde, and there he was well serued and muche honoured of euerye man. And after souper they pas∣sed forthe the tyme in great ioy and mo∣che myrth tyll it was conuenyent tyme to go to theyr restes. ¶Howe that Arthur the second day had the honoure of the ourney, and oo wyth hym abode the pryce of the felde. Capitulo .xxix. THe nexte daye betymes Ar∣thur arose and all the other erles, barons and knyghtes, to heare masse and after they armed them all of bothe par∣tyes, and soo than came intoo the yelde there as they should turney, and as soon as Arthur and the Marshall sawe eche other they apparayled them to renne to∣gyder, and dasshed too theyr horses and encountred so rudely that they all to br¦ke theyr speres the whyche were greate and bygge as though they had beene but redes, and so passed forth wythoute hur∣tynge of eche other, and whan that Ar∣thur hadde perfourmed hys course he en¦countred an other knyghte, and strake hym soo with the ronchon of his spear that he was therwith sore wounded and fell downe to the erth. Than Hector and Gouernar began to stryue and to beate downe knyghtes vygoryousely, and dyd enforce theym to doo noble dedes of ar∣mes. Than Arthur fought soo amonge them wyth suche vertue that he caused al the tankethes and please of knyghtes to auoyde and gyue hī place, euery thyng fell too hym as he woulde wysshe it, for he felled sheldes and bette downe knygh∣tes, and wanne horses and enforced pry∣soners to yelde them at hys pleasure, so that al fledde before hym, for none durste encountre his mighty strokes. Than the ladye of Rosselyn who was as than nere to the countes of Forest, sayd to the mar¦shalles syster. Madame yet I sayde true∣ly yesterday whan, that I sayde how that this knyght was merely too be retaynd with a great lady, wherfore I wolde h were partaining with my lady the coun∣tes of Forest here presente, for he is noo knyghte to be comyn to all ladyes, such as wheleth aboute the chymney, as I thynke some suche ye knowe ryght well for there be many that choseth not by the wyll one all onely, but are glad to take suche as they maye get, for elles parad∣uenture they myght tarye very longe or they founde suche a knyghte as thys is▪ Than the countesse of Neuers sayde to the countesse of Forest. Marye madame this lady payeth wythout anye gage sel¦lyng. Truely sayd the countes of Forest
they that speaketh fayre, fayre shal here agayne, but thys marshals syster spake yesterday vylanye to my lady Rossylon, & therfore now she remembreth her ther¦of. And so it fortuned hat in this season the lord of the castel Yssembart, and Rey¦nold of piereyle and wel .xv. othe knygh¦tes of theyr route toke theyr counsaile to renne al at ones ayenst Arthur too then∣tent to brynge hym to the grounde. And whan they sawe that Arthur hadde bene wel trauayled and that they thought he had bene weary, than they al togider ran at hym and strake him on all sydes, and charged him with so many strokes that his hors enfoūdred vnder hym, howe be it as hys horse fel he toke syr Issenbar that was before hym in hys armes and cast hym downe to the arth in the spyte of his herte. And whan they were booth at the grounde, than Arthur slepte vpon his fete and layde handes on syr Issen∣bartes hors▪ and mounted theron ayenst the wyl of al hys enemyes. And whan Reynolde of pyetrele sawe that he went wyth suche good ayde as he had and en¦braced Arthur wyth both hys handes, and soo eche of them helde other ryghte fore, and therwith other knightes came soo fyercelye on them that they were dry¦uen downe to the erth both hos and man Than Arthur lepe on his feere agayne, and as he that was ryghte sore dysplea∣sed ran to the erle of oys and toke hym in his armes with a gre force and pul∣led hym soo rudely that the gyrths and paytrell nd harneys all too braste and so the erle ouerthrew wyth the sadel by∣twene hys legges, than Arthur lepte on the horse bare backed and tooke from a squier a mace of stele that he bte in his hande and layd on wyth bothe hys han∣des and strake the fyrste that he encoun∣tred soo rudelye that he tourned hys leg¦ges vpwarde, and than he wente to an¦other knyghte and strake hym oo soore, that he was so astonyed therwyth that hys horse bare hym halfe a myle or that he wyst where he was. And so in this ra¦gy here Athur droue downe x. knygh¦tes or euer he restd, and layde on euer bothe on the ryghte syde and on the lefte wyth so great yre that he confounded all that euer he towched, he was in suh a furour that he wyst not well whether h was on horsebacke or on foute, wyth sa¦dell or withoute sadell, and fomed loo at the mouth that al those that than awe hym sayd that he was out o hys wytte, soo that all fledde before hym and gaue hym waye where so euer that he wente. And dydde so muche that he escaped le∣ne from all the knyghtes whyche wer in the thought for to haue put hym to re¦buke and shame, so that the place wher as he stode was clene auoyded. Than ca∣me there to hym Hector and Gouenar, whan they sawe hym wythout a adel the were greatelye maruayled therof, and so there wyth Hector rode toward  knyght so fyercely that he bate hym dow¦ne to the grounde, and Gouernar tooke hys hors and brought hym vnto Arthur And whan Arthur appeyued that he had noo sadell vnder hym he maruayled gretely, for he was soo sore trauayled be¦fore that he toke noo hede thereof. Than heared of Hector and of Gouernar how he hadde loste hys sadell, and wheder he hadde any fall or not▪ and than they she∣wed hym all how it was, whereat they dyd lagh. And whan that Arthu was mounted intoo the sadell be sawe before hym where as there stoode all the coun∣tesses and dyuerse other ladyes and da∣moyselles wythoute theyr tenes for to
behold the tourney han he spurred hys hors, and came to thē and alighted down to the erth, and humbly salewed theym & sayd. Fayre ladyes god that al fourmed gue ioye and honoure to al youre noble company the whych is yght fayre and gentyll. Syr sayde they, all ye be hyther ryght welcome. well fayre ladyes sayde Arthur for goddes sake be not dyspesed that I am soo bolde too come too you, for it should haue bene greate vylanye to me seyng that I was so nere youre pre∣sence yf I had not done my duety in sa¦lewyng of youre noblenesse. And in the meane tyme as they thus talked togy∣ther the erle of Foys and his tou ranne on the erle of forest and his companye & helde hym soo harde and shorte that he brake all the route of his companye, and nye had taken prysoner the erle of Forest for he was beten downe to the earth. And whan the countes his wife saw her lord so nye ouercome, she sayde vnto Athur. Syr knyght, of what company be ye of in thys tourney. Fayre lady said Arthur I am of the company pertaynyng to the erle of forest. Certeniy syr sayd the ladye I beleue not that, for yf ye were of hys company ye wold not suffre hym too be delte with as he is now but I thinke ye loue better ease and rest than to tournay and in so your dayng ye do wel and wyse¦ly, for it is better to be in the shadow thā in the sonne light. whan Arthur herde her saye so, he was gretly abasshd, and torued hys vysage toward the turney and sw where the erle of forest was be¦ten fro his horse and stode defendyng of him seson fote. And than he sayd o the countesse of forest, Madame for goddes sake I ase you mercye for I thoughte¦ful lytel that my Lorde youre husbode had bene in this case, but by the grae of god I shal sone helpe and socoute hym. Ye sayd the lady I rowy be very fet ye se him now almost at a gret myschefe and yet ye stande here styll preachyng to vs. And whan Arthur herd that he was sore dysplesed and so moūted on his hors and without any longer delay he she into the thykest of the route soo rudelye that hys hors went like the thunder, and al the ladies behelde him right well, and sayde god kepe and defnde the fro mys∣cheue or shame. And Arthur uhte into the prese and strake the first so rudelye yt he ouerthrew bothe hors and man, than the ladyes began to laugh, than Athur toke an other with his hands by the shol¦ders and cast him rudely to the erth, thā he toke his mase of stele hanging at hys sadel how, and strake so fiersly herwyh rounde about hym in euery place that he brake the prese and bet downe knygh¦tes, soo that there were none that durste approche vntoo hym, but they all ledd before ym as these smal owles dooth afore the fawcon. Than Arthur came to the erle of forest and brought him a new hors an heped hym to mount thereon. Than Arhur rode to the erle of Foys, & the erle gaue hym a great stroke on the helme, but Arthur moued noo more for al the roke tan though he had stryken a geate oure, but Arthur strake hym a∣gaye so yerly that he caused hym to auoyde the ason of his sadel, and aket Arthus squyer tooke the horse, than Ar∣thu sayde to hym. aket I wil thou go with hat hors and presenteit fo me too my lady the counes of forest, who right nowe blamed me u sore. Syr quod Fa∣ket with a right good wyl, and so wence∣forth with the hors. And Arthur al thys season helde vnder hym the erle of Foys in suche wyse tyll at the last the earle of
Forest came to them, and so there to him the erle of Foys was fayne to yelde hym selfe. Than Arthur put him selfe againe into the prease, and strake so on all par∣tes, that fynally euery man fledde from hym, and left him in the place all alone. Than Arthur cried openly and sayde, yf there be any knyght that dare come, let hym appere, but he myghte haue taryed there long ynough or any that was ther wold haue comen to him. Than syr Gui¦de la launde came to him and sayde. Syr I haue promysed you that I shuld shew vnto you the ladye of Rossylon, pleaseth it you now therefore to come with me, & ye shal se her by the fayth that I owe to God, I wil go with you gladly. And thā their two, and Hector & Gouernar rode forthe to the ladies tente, and by the way they encoūrted Iaket, who had done his message. And he shewed to Arthur how that the countes of Forest ryght hartly did thanke him. And whan thei were be∣fore the tente thei lyghted. And than ge∣nerallye all the ladyes and damoyselles came to them warde wyth greate feeste and ioye. And whan Arthur was within the tente wyth the ladyes, who affectu∣ally behelde him. Than the countesse of Neuers, and the counts of Forest right hartely dyd welcome hym. And he an∣swered & said Fayre ladies, great wlth and honoures god maye sende vnto you all. Than the countesse of Foys dide sa∣lewe hym, & said. Syr yet I oughte not thus to salewe you, syth ye haue so yl en¦treted my lorde my husbande this daye. A my ryghte dere ladye sayde Arthur, ye ought not therefore to blame mee. For it was but the fortune of that play. Truly syr sayd she, ye say nothing but trouthe, nor I bere not to you therefore any euil wyll. Than the countesse of Forest said who had spoken to hym before ryght ru∣dely. Syr I humbly requyre of you par∣don, and I wyll make you amendes in yt I haue soo rudely spoken to you beore this tyme, wherefore noble and gentyll knyghte take noo regarde to the vayne wordes of a woman, whoo lightly ope∣neth her mouthe to speake, but beholde your great bounte and noblenes, where wyth ye be gretly endued, but syr that I said was because I sawe my lorde at a great mischefe. Than came to theym syr Guy de la launde holdynge the ladye of Rossylon by the hande, & said to Arthur Syr I haue before thys tyme promysed you that I should shew you my ladye of Rossylon, syr beholde her for here shee is nowe present before you. And whan Ar∣thur sawe her, he made great ioye of her and promysed her faithfully to be alway her owne knyght. And she agayne right highely thanked hym, & all other ladyes & damoyselles affectuously beheld hym, and required him that he would take the payne to vnarme him amonge theim, for thei sayd that thei woulde fayne se hym vnarmed, and somewhat for curtesye, he with said their desyre. But fynally they desyred hym soo affectuously, that nedes he was fayne to agre to their requeste, & whan he was vnarmed he was of body right maruaile us fayre and gentyl to be¦holde. For he was bygge, longe, and streyght. Than these ladies behelde him maruaylousli and said eche to other how that she should be right happy yt myghte haue suche a knight to her louer. And all these countesses, & great ladies wysshed eche of them that he might haue ben par¦tayninge to theyr lordes. Than a ladye brought to him warme water in a basin of syluer to wasshe his necke and visage because of the sweting in his harneys.
And the lady of Rossylon put a mantell of scarlet aboute hym the whiche was pertaining to the coūtesse of Neuers to then∣tent he shuld take no colde af∣ter his labour, and so he remay¦ned a good space amonge them and fynally toke his ieue. Thā the ladyes desyred him that he wold be their knight, and that he would suffre his harneis to remayne styl amonge them tyl he had nede therof, and that he would vouchesaue to were the mantell of scarlet styll on him. And Arthur dyd graunte them theyr desyre, and so moūted on his horse and all his company, and rode forthe tyll at the laste he mette with all the hole as∣semble o bothe parties, and there was the yonge king of Malogres and all the other foure erles, and the dolphyn, and fyue hundred other knyghtes. Than the yonge kynge sayde to Arthur. Syr ye be ryght hartely welcome, as he that is the floure of all chyualry, & the best knyghte of all the worlde, & there he desyred hym greatly to abyde with him, and that they myghte be companions togider euer af∣ter, & frendes. But arthur excused hym as well as he myght. And all this season he had on the fresshe mantell of scarlet, wherein he semed bygge and longe and meruaylously streyght and fayre, & gene¦rally all ye knygtes behelde hym & sayde how that he was hyely rewarde of god for he was fayre & hardy, & of his chiual¦ry surmoūted all other, for thei all sayde that the valure of al other knightes wer as nothing to the regard of his noblesse. ¶ How that the Marshall of myrpoys for enui that he had bicause that Arthur had the honoure of the tournay, and by he had beten him downe, for he had wēde hymselfe to haue ben the best knyghte of the worlde, therefore he defyed Arthur and chalenged hym to Iuste. And howe that Arthur vanquysshed hym, & brake one of his armes, and two rybbes in hys syde. Capitulo .xxx THan the Marshall who had his hart enflambed wt greate yre bycause that Arthur had put hym to the worse, and al¦so bycause he herde so moche good and honour spoken of hym, wher∣of he had so great enuy in his harte, and so great despyte, that he could not holde hym selfe in rest, for he bileued hym selfe to be the best knyght of the worlde, than openly he spake so hygh and lowde that euery knyght mighte here hym, and Ar∣thur also, sayeng in this maner of wyse Certainly this sraunge knight can not swoune, whan he is ledde by the hande with fayre ladyes and damoyselles: and clothed with their mantelles, he lacketh noo thynge but a softe pilowe to playe
theron with some of these damoyselles And whan Arthur herde hym he answe¦red and sayd. Syr yf their ladyes take me by the hande I thanke them therof for it is by theyr courtesye and not by my deseruynge therfore I loue theym the better and wyll be the gladder for to serue them and to be a faythfull kni∣ght to theym al in general. For as god helpe me so moche is a knyghte worth as he can deserue prayse of ladyes and damoyselles. And the Marshall full of yre answered. In fayth as for you ye be but lytell worth and that semeth well whan ye are fane to take the reuersion of these ladyes olde clothynge. well syr sayd Arthur as for all that loke what so euer they do to me I am ryght well con¦tent therwith I thynke I haue no thin¦ge of yours yf I haue take it fro me yf ye dare. Certaynly sayd the Marshal if ye had ony thynge of myn soo wolde I do thynke not the contrary for I wolde not spare neyther for you nor for none other to take it grudge therat who wol∣de. Than Arthur all smylīge sayd. Well syr than I am ryght happy that I haue noo thynge of youres for yf I had me thynketh I sholde not kepe it longe by your wyl. And whā the Marshall sawe hym smyle he thought he dyde it for de∣spyt of hym and sayd. Syr Wyll ye do so moche for all these ladyes sakes that ye and I may playe togyder with tWo fayre speres. Syr sayd Arthur ye be so valyaunt a man that ye ought not to be refused nor denied for so litell a request Tan the Marshal Was bamed of the kīge and of all the other knyghtes and they wolde full fayne haue letted these Iustes bcause they thoughte that Ar∣thur was wery of the labour which he had in the iournay before. But the Mar¦shall sayd he hath promysed it me, and therfore yf it please hym, I trust he wyl not fayle me, yf he doo I wyll say that he is recreaunte. Naye sayd Artu by the fayth that I owe vnto God I wyll not fayle you. And so euery man prayed god that the shame might fall vpo the Marhall, bicause of his proude disdai∣nefull mynde. Than Arthur demaun∣ded incontinent for his haneis. Thā syr Guy de la launde wente vnto the la¦dyes tente, and shewed them how that the Marshall had chalenged Arthur to Iuste with him againe.  the ladyes to him all hys harneys, and praied god for to giue vnto Arthur the honour of those Iustices. For thei said how that the marshal was a fole, and of an outragious wilull minde, wher¦fore thei praied vnto god that he shulde spede the worse. Than dame blaunche sayd to the lady of Rossylō. Madame I bileue now that your straung knight shall haue yet or it be nighte grete nede of some soft bedde to lye in your cham∣bre, by that tyme thy brother athe bre∣wed a caudel for his heed, for I ensure you he neue as yet encountred so dere a physycien. well madame sayd the la∣dy of Rossylon. Fayre and easely, at the ende shall be seen who shall wynne the wager, as yet ye can make no boost for ye haue wonne nothing. Thā Arthur and the Marshall both dyde arme them and whan thei were bothe in the felde ther was brought to them grete speres and than thei spurred their horses with so great randowne that the blode dasht oute of their sydes, for thei were bothe good and redoubted knightes, but he Marshal was not to be compared vnto Arthur for sith Arthur was fyrst made knyghte he fered no man lyuynge,
wherfore the Marshall dyde folye to en¦terpryse ony thynge agaynst hym, but pryde dooth oftentymes many harmes to his mayster, the Marshall at the fyrst course strake Arthur and brake his spe∣re to his fyste, but Arthur for all that moued no more than though there had ben but a rede broken vpon hym. But he strake the Marshall soo udelye that he bare downe horse and man to the erth Than began to laugh al the ladyes and damoyselles, knyghtes, and squyers. Than the lady of Rossylon sayd to da∣me blaunche. Madame youre broder is not so fell and so outragious as I had wende that he had bene, for he taketh no more of the erth but his owne length, I thynke he slepeth, beholde howe pryuely he lyeth styll. And han the Marshall awoke out of hys traunce he was sore a¦shamed in that he was so ouerthrowen and demaunded yf he had ouerthrowen Arthur, than it was shewed hym naye, wherwith he was ryght sore displeased Yet than agayne he prayed Arthur on his knyghthode that he wolde Iust with hym an other course. But all that euer herde hym thought he played the prou∣de fole and counseyled hym the countra∣ry, but all that auayled not, for he sayde he wolde nedes yet Iuste ones agayne. And whan yt Arthur herde hym of that mynde, he had greate dysdayne thereat & wexed angry in his herte to considre his folysh presumptuous mynde, and sayde well if he wyll nedes abyde the seconde I thynke he wyll gladlye let the thyrde passe. So than they toke muche greater speares than they had before, and in gre¦te yre ranne togyther so egerly that it se¦med the earth enfoundred vnder theym, and the Marshall stroke Arthur ryghte rudely, for he was a good knyghte, and sheuered his spere all to peces, But Ar∣thur hyt him with his spere the which was great and bygge, so that the sadell paytrell, girthes and all brast, and hors and man wente to the groūde so rudely that wyth the fall that the Marshal had one of his armes broken, and also two of his rybbes, and his body sore brused so that he laye styl a greate season with out mouynge, and than all the knygh∣tes that sawe the stroke were gretely a¦basshed and sayd eche to other how that the Marshall was beten downe to the erth both horse and man, and in greate ieopardy of his lyfe. ☞Howe that Arthur was crowned to be kynge of all the knyghtes of the tournay. And they promysed hym fayth and trouth to serue hī in dedes of armes alwayes and in euery place where as it semed him best, and the yonge kynge of ma∣gres did crowne hī. Capit. xxxi. THan whā the Marshal was thus ouerthrowē the ladies dyd laughe, & sayde. Blesse be god pryde alwayes ouer∣throweth his maister. Than the lady of Rosston sayd vnto the lady blaunche. Madame now it semeth that your brother hath lste the wager it had bene better for hym that he had bene in your chaumbre, he speketh no o wor∣ds he hath lytell care now for the flyes beholde how that he aketh hs legges Than al the other coūcesses and ladyes that were there present did laughe, an sayd the pryde of him is now wel aba∣ted god kepe & defende suche a knyghte that can gyue suche valyaunte strokes As god helpe me said the lady Rossion
the Marshall is now in good rest. I tro¦we he hath lytell lust to remount againe let him be wel apayed, for now he hathe that he sought for. And so eche of theym spake theyr verdyte. Than the yonge kynge and the other Earles came to the Marshall and demaunded of hym howe he dyd. And he answered and saide ryght yll, for I haue two of my rybbes broken and one o my armes. I praye you howe dooth Arthur. In good trouth sayde the erle of Beauieu, he is yet in the fyelde, where as he entendeth yf ye wyll goo to hym and breke the thyrde spere. Alas sayd the Marshall, I beleued this daye in the mornynge that I had bene the best knyght of ye world, for I thoughte that there was none that had ony power in comparison vnto me, but nowe I haue founde my maystr. therfore I requyre you cause hym to come to me. Than the erle of Beauieu toke Arthur by the han∣de and sayd. Syr the Marshall woulde fayne speake wyth you. In the name of god sayd Arthur let vs goo to hym. By that tyme the Marshall was layde on a lytell couche that was broughte to hym. And whan he sawe Arthur he sayde that all myghte here hym Syr ye be to me ryghte hertely welcome as he that is the chfe floure of all chyualrye, and syr I crye you mercy of the greate pryde that I was in, the hy∣che moued me to Iuste with su¦che a knyght as ye be, verely I was enuious and sorowfull of the noblenes that I herte spo∣ken of you, and therfore I to∣ke on me to Iuste wyth you, to the entent to abate your praise and renowne, but suche there be that thynketh to greue other and the hurte and gryefe tourneth vnto theym selfe, god hath done to me ryghte accordynge to my thoughte, for he hathe broughte me in to the same case that I had thought for to haue you in, therfore gentyll knyghte, I requyre you to par∣don my foly that I haue thought agenst you. And whan Arthur herde hym spea∣ke so louyngly, he had greate pyte of his hurte and sayde. A syr I oughte to crye you mercye bycause that I haue hurte you so rore, wherfore it forthynketh me, wherfore syr I pray you to padon me. Certaynly syr sayde the Marshall, with all my herte, and I gyue you my voyce of the crownyng of this tournay as vn∣to hym that is the best knyghte of al the worlde. Than the kyng sayde syr Mar∣shall than ye be accorded that h shall be crowned as the best knight of this tour¦nay. Syr sayde the Marshal as god hel∣pe me wyth all my herte. nd the kyng sayd by the fayth that I owe vnto god, he shall haue my voyce and good wyll. nd all the other Erles sayde that they were all agreed therto, for he was wor∣thy and none other. Than came to them
all the Ladyes and damoysels, and they were all of the accorde that he sholde be crowned as the best knyght of all other And than ye crowne was brought forth and the yonge knyge of malogres didde set it on Arthurs head bye the comyn ac∣corde of all the hole assemble, and they were al content that he should be kynge of all those knyghtes that were there as∣sembled, & they all profred hym succour and ayde in all places and agenst al peo∣ple and as often as he wolde commaun∣de them. Thus they remayned in great feest and Ioye well the space of fyftene dayes, with al maner of pastaunce sow¦nynge to noblenes. ¶Howe that Arthur after his crow∣nacyon toke leue of the yonge kynge and of all the other lordes and knigh∣tes ladyes and damoyselles, who con¦uayed hym on hys Iournay warde, and had great sorow to leue his com∣pany. Capit. xxxii. AT the end of the .xv. dayes arthur toke leue of the kin∣ge and of all the cries & la∣dies who were not wl con∣tent of his departing. And the kynge sayd, ryght dere syr and frend I requyre you as hartelye as I can that ye wyl go with me into my coūre, and I promyse you faythfully as a kynge yt ye and I shabe in in all thynges as cō∣panyons and frendes, and I shall loue you ryght derely, & wyll gyue you londe soo great and good that ye shall be ryght wel content therwith, mine owne swete frende I requyre you graunt me my de∣syre, and therwyth he enbraced and kys∣se hym. And whan Arthur hearde hym he smyled & sayde, myn owne dere Lord I thanke you, and wolde to god mooste puyssaunt that I might do as ye desyre me, for it were grete Ioye to me to aby∣de in your noble company, if it were nor for one thynge that I haue enterprysed and as yet I wote not well what it is, nor where to fynde it, but as mine ad∣uenture happenneth. I haue taryed here very longe, therfore now it is time that I departe. And whan they herde that he wolde nedes go, they were ryght so∣rowfull, and the kynge and all other of∣fred hym to go in his company to helpe and ayde hym to attayne his enqueste, but Arthur wolde not consente therto, and said that he wold haue no company but suche as came wythin hym. Yes syr sayde the kynge ye shall haue with you Bawdewyn my squyer, and I wyll de∣lyuer hym to you for good and true, for I wyll vndertake he woulde rather dye than his mayster sholde take ony hurte or domage in his defaute, & also he kno∣weth the vertues of all herbes, for he is a souerayne surgyon. In the name of god sayd Arthur, I am contente to take hym of you, and for his conning I wyll loue him better thā two thousande poūd of yerely londe. Than Arthur, Hector Gouernar, Bawdewyn and Iaket, to∣ke of euery mā oungy and leue, and de∣parted and entred in to theyr Iournay, and Bawdewyn and Iaket rode before. Hector and Gouernar rode togider, and Arthur betwene them. And as they rode they comoned of the grete valure of the yonge kynge of malogres, & of the other erles and knyghtes ladyes and damoy∣selles, and of the gree honour that they had amonge them. In this maner they rode euery daye the space of thre wekes wtout fyndynge of ony aduenture wher¦of any mencyon is made.
¶How Arthur and his company ary¦ued in the erledome of Brewle, mar∣chynge agenst the londe of Sorolois & entred into the cyte of Brewle, the whiche was besyegd by the duke of orgoule named Malaqus bycause ye erle wold not let him haue his dough¦ter in maryage, wherfore by false tre¦son he slewe the erle. Cap. xxxii. AT the ende of the .iii. we∣kes Arthur and hys compa∣ny entred into the Erldome of Brewle agenst the londe of Soroloys, and of this erledome there was an Erle a noble of hauoyre and of frendes, and reputed ryghte wyse, and had to wyfe a noble Ladye and a vertu∣ous, who hadde to name the gentyll Isa¦bell, and had betwene them two a fayre and a gracyous doughter named Alyce. Ioynynge to thys Erledome there mar¦ched a duchy wherin there was a Duke whiche was named Malaquys, a cruel man and an enuyons. And thys Duchy was called Orgoule, and thys duke had often and manye tymes demaunded of this erle, his doughter dame Alyce to ha¦ue in maryage, but the erle nor the good lady his wyfe wolde in no maner of wy¦se graunte therto, bycause of the euyll condycyons that were wythin this Du¦ke. And whan that the Duke sawe that he coulde not gette this fayre lady Alyce he bare than in his herte grete heate and enuy to the erle her father, in soo muche that at the last, thys duke had knowlege vpon a daye howe that the Erle was go¦ne to chase in the forest. And therby hys prepenced malyce caused this Earle sha¦mefully for to be slayne and murdered. And whan that the Erle was thus mys¦cheuously slayne, he was brought home to his wyfe whiche was ryght sorowful for his deth, & made hym to be honoura¦bly buryed. But this sorowfull lay in noo wyse coulde veyly tell how that he was slayne, but she had grete suspecte to the duke. And soo within halfe a yere after the duke came vnto this countee and demaunded of her Dame Alyce her doughter, but the countese bycause e had hym in suspecte of the the of the ere her husbonde wolde in no maner of wyse graunte therto, nor also this fayre mayden Alyce wolde in noo wyse haue hym to dye therfore. And whan the du∣ke perceiued that he might not haue her at his pleasure he had gte espte ther¦of, and soo defyed the counesse and as∣sembled a grete hoost and be yeg the cyte of Brewle, and wasted al the coun¦tre rounde aboute a greate cicuye, and made hys auowe that he woulde not de¦parte thens tyll that he had wonne her by force. And i thys meane season Ar¦thur and his company arryued in that countre, and the Duke had layen at the syege as than the space of a yeare before the Cyte accompanyed wyth foure hon¦dred knyghtes besydes other seruantes And thus rthur and his company rode throghe thys Countrye the whyche he founde all exyled and put to wast, and mette wyth much people leyng out of the lande, whereof he was gretly amer¦uayled, and demaunded of two vytay∣lers that he mette, ledynge of vytayle to the hoost what was the cause of the exile and wasting of that counte. And they answered hym how that the duke of or∣goule hadde wasted it in suche wyse. Ye frēdes sayd Arthur, and I pray you for what cause. Syr sayd they that wil not we tell you, for we haue nede to sel our vytayle to wyn thereby our sustenaūce
and therfore it behoueth vs not to saye yll nor to accuse ony perone, but yf ye wyl knowe ye may wee of this people that ye se fleynge oute of the countree. Than Arthur demaunded of theym the cause, and they shewed hym howe that the duke of orgoule demaunded in ma∣ryage the erles doughter, and how that he caused the erle to be slayne by treason bycause he wolde not agree to his desy∣re, and as now hath besyeged the coun∣tesse in her cyte of brewle and hath wa∣stee all the countree. And whan Arthur herde all this he sayd. Syrs god spede and helpe you all▪ And whan he was ri¦den ferre from theym he sayd to Hector his cosyn. Cosyn how saye you what is best that we shall doo, Syr sayd Hector in the name of god let vs enter into this warre. I alowe it wel sayd Arthur but we wyll not ayde this duke who is in the wroge and hath the better hande. Nay said Hector that is not myn entent let vs ayde them that be within the cy∣te, who be in grete Ieopardye, and nye put vnder wherfore they are in ryghte grete fere, and this in my mynde is best for vs to doo, for they ben in the ryght, wherfore god wyl helpe and socour vs. By the good lorde sayd Arthur it is wel sayd, and so wyl we do. But how shall we enter in  the cyte syth that this du¦ke ath besyeged it rounde aboute. well quod Gouerner we muste enter by one waye or other. And thus they rode forth tyll at the laste they espyed the Cyte of Brewle the which was ryght hye and stronge with hyghe walles and myghty toures, and rounde aboute the cyte they sawe tentes and pauylyons pyght and glysterige of standardes, and stremes wauerynge wyth the wynde and moche people wel atayed for the warre. Than sayde Arthur. Frendes this duke bese∣mynge hath moche people, I wyll gooe and speke wyth hym or I entre in to the cyte. Ye saye ryght well sayd Hector, to thentente that ye may hym the better a¦other tyme yf it fortune you to encoun∣ter wyth hym in the felde. So they rode forth streyght vnto the great tent of the dukes, and there they founde hym stan∣dynge wythout the sayd tente, commaū∣dynge to hys Senesshall that the nexte daye betymes he should make assaute to the Cyte wyth thre hundred halbardes. And wyth those wordes Arthur and his company lyghted of theyr horses, and sa¦lewed the duke full goodly. And whan the Duke sawe theym, he praysed theym gretly in his hrte, and courteysly dydde salewe them agayne. Syr sayde Arthur we are departed from our countrye, for we herde spekynge of this warre that ye haue moued. And we thre knyghtes of Fraunce wolde gladly serue some noble man, and be retayned to him for his wa∣ges. In the name of god sayde the duke, ye be hyder ryghte hertely welcome, and thoughe it be so that I haue people suf∣fycyente, yet wyll I be ryghte gladde to retayne you all to be of my house, and to haue wages mete and drynke, hors and harneys, and all that ye can conquere of youre enemyes shalbe youre owne. Syr sayd Arthur I thanke you, of this ma∣ter I shall speke wyth my company and knowe theyr myndes. But syr I requy∣re you agaynst whome shall we haue to doo. As god be my helpe sayde the Duke agaynst the cyte, wherein there is a lady who hath refused to gyue me her dough∣ter in maryage, wherfore I wyll wynne her bi force. A syr said Arthur, how long hathe it bene that ye haue assyeged thys cyte. Uerely sayd y• duke it is now more
than a yere, but I wyll abyde here this seuen yere but I wil wynne it. well sir sayd Arthur herde ye ony thynge of late from this lady wheder she wyll agre to your desyre or not. Nay in good trouth sayd the duke I herde not from them a grete season. wll syr sayd Arthur per∣aduenture this lady repenteth her that she hath not fulfylled your wyl, for now at the ende she knoweth better her own foly than she dydde in the begynnynge and euer the lenger the better shall she know how that her loude is wasted, & she may wel se how that she is enclosed wythin the cyte and wasteth her goodes and her people also by all lykelyhod are gretely noyed with so longe beynge in a maner in pryson, soo all these thynges ought to moue her to fulfyll your desy∣re Syr sayde the duke it is of a trouth al yt ye say, how be it I thynke there is none of her counsayle that sheweth her so moche reason, or elles they wyll not shew it her. For syr syth ye haue sayde so moche as ye haue done I wyll desyre and praye you to doo soo moche as to shewe her as muche as ye haue done to me, for ye be as yet indifferēt for ye are of neyther partye, therfore ye maye spe∣ke to her the more boldlyer, and if that she wyll not agree, let her e incertayne I wyll take her by force and brenne her in my syghte. Syr ye haue ryghte soo to do sayd Arthur, and syth it pleaseth you that I shall goo in thys message I am ryght well content so to doo. Than Ar∣thur and hys felawshyp mounted vpō theyr horses and rode towarde the citie Than Hector sayd▪ syr where is youre scutchn of armes on your brest, for ye be a good purseuaunt thinke to fornish well your message. Ye syr sayd Gouer∣nar this duke hath a riche messenger he ought to gyue hym good wages soth{us} they rode forth talkynge and sportyng them tyll they came to one of the gates of the citie and knocked therat so longe tyll at the last the porter opened a lyte wyndowe, and there he saw thre knigh∣tes all armed and well horsed, and he maunded of them what they sought. Arthur answered and sayd, we be mes∣sengers, sent from the duke for to spek wyth the lady gouernour of this Citie. Syr sayd the porter suffre a lytle space and I wyl go and speke with her, than the porter wente to the lady, who was as than among her barons and knygh∣tes and Alyce her fayre doughter in her company. Than the porter sayd. Mada∣me pleaseth it you to knowe howe that there is at the gate thre goodly knyhg∣tes armed the fayrest that euer I sawe and they saye that they ben messengers come to speke wyth you from the duke, therfore loke what it shall please you to cōmaunde me to answere theym. Than syr Othes who was cosyn germayn to the lady sayd. Madame me thinketh  were well done to let them come in syth they be messengers. In the name of god sayd the lady, open the gates to theym & let them enter. Than the porter tour∣ned agayne to the gate and suffered thē to enter. Than whā Arthur was ith¦in the cyte he sawe grete plene of shel∣des and spees horse & harnays, knih∣tes and squyrs, and grete and myghty straunge houses full of greate richesse, than in his herte he praysed moche this cyte. And al the knyghtes of the cyte be helde these thre knyghtes as they rode, and sayd eche to other, what knyghtes be these, or fro whens come they, & some answered and sayd how that they coud not tell, and some sayd they were messen¦gers
sente from the duke, but what oo euer thei be thei are meruaylous fayre knightes. And thus thei rode forthe to the palays, and there yghted fro their horses and wente vp in to the hall, and there thei founde the countesse and her barony aboute her. Than the countesse and her doughter Alyce, and all her ba∣rons arose against Arthur, and welco∣med hym and caused him to syt downe by her and the fayre lady Alyce and Hec¦tor, & syr Otes and Gouernar. Than Arthur said. Madame we be comen hi∣ther from the duke of orgoule, who de∣mauneth of you that ye shuld gyue to hym in maiage my ladye Alyce youre dughter, & madame me thinketh that diuerse reasons ought for to moue you thu to do. Fyrste ye ought to consyder howe ye shall let he in a ryght hye and honourable place. Alo ye se wel ye grete nomber of people, & the strength whiche he hath, and howe that youre londe is destroed and wasted, and al the people terof put to exyle. Also ye ought for to cōsider how that ye be lockd and en∣closed here in this cite, and al your no∣ble knightes & gentylmen are in grete peryll of their lyues, and leseth theyr tym & substaunce, the whiche is righte grte omage vnto them, so madame all thse thinges, and many other wise¦ly considerd, ought for to moue you to accomplye this his desyre, syth thys desyre is but for your honoure, and no shame, therfore madame may it please you to gyue an answere what is your wyll in this behalfe. Syr said the lady I wl gue to you an answere shortly without taking of any other counseyle Rther than I would geue my dough∣ter to a false murtheer and specially to hym that by false treason hathe slayne her fader, as god helpe me I wolde ra∣ther suffre to be brent to powder. For gladder woulde I be to gyue her to the poorest grome or page in all my house than to hym. But syr I requyre you tel me wheder ye be any of the knightes re¦taining with the duke or not. Madame sayde Arthur I am not retainyng as yet with him, nor with none other, or I and my companye are knyghtes er∣raunes, who haue forsaken our own countrees to seke aduentures, and by fortune we are aryued into this dukes hoost, who wold gladly haue vs retay¦ned in this his warre against you. Sir said the countsse I woe not what ye be nor of what lynage or counre ye be of, but it semeth to me that ye be ex∣raught out of some noble house and li∣gnage. Therfore syr yf it would please you to helpe to deliuer vs oute o this thraldome, and defde vs fom our ene∣mies. I wil giue you my doughter or to do with her what it shall please you, sauing her honoure. Ye madae sayde Arthur, and is that your mynde wyll ye put her into my handes to  wheresomeuer it shall please me, and to put all your rust into me in that be∣halfe. Ye syr truely with all my hete sayd the coūtesse. And how say ye rait lady Alyce wyll ye agre to this. Than Alyce beheld Arthur▪ & perciued right wel how he was fayre and gracious & said. Syr I wl accomplysshe the wyl of my moder. well madame quod Ar∣thur, than wyll it please you to knowe of all your noble barons and knightes whether thei wyll accorde that I shall haue your noble doughter in maryage, or ells for t mary her where so meer it shall please me. Syr Othes sayde the lady, ye be nere of her lynage, cal togy∣der
al my barons and my knyghtes and speke with them of this mater to know theyr mīdes. Than they all entred in to a grete hall and there they comoned of this mater and dyuerse opyntons the∣re were amonge them, but fynally they were all agreed and put theyr sayenge on syr Othes▪ the whiche sayenge they all promised to kepe ferme and stable. Than they ll came before the lady and Arthur. And there syr Othes sayd Ma∣dame we perceyue it is your wyl to gy∣ue my lady Alice your doughter to this knyght, eyher for hymselfe, or elles to gyue her where soeuer as it shall please hym best. Madame we be all accorded vnto your mynde that he shall haue her hymselfe, yf it pleaseth hym in maryage or lles to gyue her vnto an other whee as he thynketh beste, soo that she be not thereby abbated of her noblenesse, and e∣state. Uerely syr sayde Arthur I shall be stow her in as grete a place and lignage or greter than she is of her selfe. Than they all answered and sayde. We desyre nothynge elles. Well madame sayd Ar∣thur are ye than agreed & my ladye youre doughter also. And they answered bothe that they were bothe well contnte. In the name of God sayd Arthur, howe saye you all my lordes are ye agreed therto al¦so. And thei all answered with one voice and sayde. Syr we be ryghte well con∣tente, and promyse you faythfullye, that ye shall haue helpe and ayde of vs, and of ours to the vttermost of our powers. well syrs sayd Arthur I thanke you as hertely as I can for your good wyll, and as God helpe me, I shall bestowe her in suche a place, where as she shalbe more better content than with the duke of or∣goule, who would full gladly haue her, therefore fayre ladye Alyce come hyder to me. Than the mayden rose and came to hym. And he ryghte louingly toke her in his armes and said vnto her. Fayre lady Alyce from hence forthe ye shall be my doughter, my cosyn, and my loue. Co∣syn Hctor aryse and come hyder to me. Then Hector came to hym. And Arthur sayd to hym, myne own good cosyn Hec∣tor, I put you in possession of this fayre mayden. And wyth greate honoure and ioye, I frely gyue her to you, to haue in maryage, and all suche rychesse as we may gete of the duke of orgoule, yf it be our fortune for to dyscomfyte hym as I trust to god we shall, and I giue it fre∣ly vnto you. And as vnto you fayre lady Alyce, syth he hath slayne your fader by false treason I promyse to you, therfore his head for a recompence. Syr said the damoysell, humbly I thanke you of that gyfte, for I had rather haue that than to be made a Quene. But syr I requyer you tell me what is this gentyll man, to whyche ye haue gyuen me vnto Mada∣me sayd Arthur as god helpe me he is of nye lygnage, and of great blode. For I ensure you he is sone and heyre vnto the erle of Bloys, who is a greate Lord and a moche redoubted. And whan that the countesse and her doughter, and all her lordes herde that they were ryght gladde and sayd howe that God hadde vyyted them Than Hector ryght hartely than∣ked Arthur of hys gyftt of the fayre la∣dy dame Alyce. And in the same houre they were fyaunced togyder. And than begau thre a great feest and great ioye was made thrughout all the cite. Than the tables were set to goo to diner. And whan they were set thei were ryghte ry∣chely serued. And after dyner they spor∣ted them togider tyl it was time to goo to theyr rstes. In the nexte mornyng
Arthur rose betymes and herde masse, & than wente vp to the palays. where he founde all the barons redy apparayled, and there was Hector and Gouernar & syr Othes. Than Arthur sayd, fayre lor∣des I promysed yesterdaye too the duke whan I departed fro hym that I shoulde haue retourned to hym agayne the same nyght to shewe hym the wyll and entent of my lady the countes, therefore I wyll go now to hym al alone, and shew hym his answere. For all ye shall abyde here styll tyl I come agayne, therefore get me my harneys & so anone it was broughte to him, and there he armed hym. Than Hector sayd playnly he would go wt hym But Arthur bad him neuer speke therof yf he wold haue hys loue and fauour. ¶ Howe that Arthur went alone to the duke of Orgoule & gaue him his answer & bade him abyde no lenger for the fayre Alyce. For he shewed hym how yt he had giuen her to Hector his cosyn. And how that he had promysed to her hys head by¦cause he slewe her fader by treason, with the whiche answere the duke was sore dyspleased, so muche that there was bi∣twene them a great batayle. Cap. xxxiiii. THan whan Arthur was moū¦ted on his horse, he issued oute of the Citye all alone. Than Hector said to Gouernar and syr Othes. Frēdes let vs take oure harneys, for I fere me leest Arthur thur shall haue somwhat to do or he com agayne. Ye haue ryghte well sayde quod Gouernar, and thei armed them, and so dyde all the men of warre yt were in the
cyte. And whā they were all armed they wente to the batylmentes of the walles to behold the demenour of Arthur. Who as than had rode so ferre that he descen¦ded sro his horse at the dukes tent. And there he sayd to the duke. Syr verely I answer you how ye nede not to tary he∣re ony lenger for yt fayre lady Alyce, for certaynely I ensure you I haue gyuen her to my cosyn Hector, and al the lod that belongeth to her both by fader and mother, therfore syr in fayre meanes I require you to depart hastely out of this countre, and yf ye wyll not I haue pro∣mised to ye fayre damoysel Alyce to ren∣dre to her youre heed in reompence by∣cause ye slewe her fader by false treason Than the duke was so sorowful and re¦plete with displeasure yt of a grete space he coude speke no worde. Than the du∣ke had by hym a cosyn germayne, who sayd to Arthur. Sir knyght ye do greate outrage to demaūde the head of my lor∣de the duke, but by the fayth that I ow vnto hym in the fyrste place that euer I mete you in I shall make hym a present of your heed. Ye sir sayd Arthur, & why wyll ye abyde so longe syth ye may do it now yf ye can, wherfore beholde me I am here present, mounte vp shortely on your horse and ye shall soone mete with me. Ye say ryght well sayd the knyght Get me my harneys, and so armed hym. And Arthur than mounted on hys hors and he espyed wel where there stode be∣fore the dukes tent a gret spere the whi∣che he toke in his hande, and withdrew hym from the tente to abyde the knight And so when the knyght was armed he lepte on his hors, & sawe where Arthur was abyding for hym. And Hecto as he was vpon the wal of the cyte said to Gouernar. Syr it semeth my cosyn Ar∣thur shal not come againe without Iu∣stes. Than the knight ranne to Arthur and he to him, and they mette so rudely that the knight brake his spere but Arthur hyt hym so impetously yt the spere heed entred into his herte, wherwith he fell downe dead to the erth. And whan the dukes knyghtes being in theyr ten∣tes sawe him fal downe dead they were sore displeased. And also thys knyghte had. v, knyghtes to his brethren in the dukes hoost, and they armed theym all at ones to renne at Arthur. ¶How Hector & Gouernar & sir Othes rode out of the cyte well accompanyed to rescowe Arthur, who al alone assay∣led the duke of Orgoule and all his ar∣mye. Capi. xxxv. ANd whan hector saw them of the dukes hooste ranne to theyr harneys he sayde vnto Gouernar, frēde let vs issue out shortly, And syr Othes delyuered the chefe standarde of the cy∣te to syr Lyonet his neuewe, & so yssued out of the citie in good order & well ren∣ged in battayle. And whan Arthur saw the foresayd fyue knyghtes cominge to him ward, he dasht his spurres into his hors & encountred so with the fyrst that he thrust his spere thrugh his body and so he fell downe deade. Than he st his hand to his swerd and strake therwith so the seconde that he claue his head nye to hys chynne. And fro the thyrde he be∣rafte his sholder with the arme, for all togyder flew into the felde. And whan syr Othes sawe suche meruaylous stro¦kes as he gaue, he sayd. Saynte marye what knyght is this, he is the best of al the world god defende hym from onye
vylany, verely hys strokes are gretly to be doubted, for they are ryght heuy. And whan ye duke saw his knightes so slay¦ne all onely by one man, he was ighte sore dyspleased & cried fast to his knigh¦tes Syrs to hareys. Than the moost parte of the hoost horly moūted vpon theyr horses and ranne all vpon Arthur by plumpes▪ here .x. and▪ there .xx. And whan Hector saw that he pricked forth his horse as rudely as though ye thōder had dryuen hym. And whan syr Othes saw yt he ran so hastely he saide. By my fayth it semeth he wyl not recule backe agayne sythe he seketh for his enemyes so hastely. And Hector encountred the fyrst so vertuously yt he ran him thrugh¦out with his spere and so he fell downe dead, and than he drew hys sworde and strake of the head of an othr, and layde aboute hym in the thickest of the prese & gaue such strokes that he slewe knygh∣tes and draue down horses that it was meruayle to beholde. And whan Arthur saw him he smiled and sayd. A good co∣syn ye folowe ryght well after your lyg∣nage. And Gouernar at hys omīge bet downe all about hym what soo euer he at▪ ayed to, that it was wōder to behol∣de. And wh arthur sawe them, he said I oughte neuer to fayle these knightes sth they ake such payne to rescow me vrly by the grace of god, I shall hepe and ayde them. And by that tyme thre were aganse theim many of the dukes knyghtes, and Arthur strake amonge them that the first that he encountred he laue his vysage downe to hys necke, & layde on so rounde aboute hym that he made to fye into the fyelde handes, ar∣mes, and heades and euered sheldes, and vnated helmes, and maymed ma¦ny nyghtes and bette them downe on euerye syde so that he made all to trem∣ble that were before hym, for there was non that abode his stroke without deth or greuous woundes. Than sir Othes had grete maruayle of the noblenesse of these knyghtes, and specially of the chy¦ualry of Arthur▪ and sayd to his neuew syr Lyonet. As god helpe me these kni∣ghtes▪ are able to discomfyte the duke & all his hoost wtout ony more helpe, and al this season the coūtesse and the fayre lady Alyce her doughter were mounted on the wales of the cyte to beholde the noble dedes of these .iii. knightes. Thā the lady sayde to her doughter Alyce, be¦holde your lorde and his companyons, I trowe there be noo moore suche in all the world, behold how they dryue ason∣der the grete preses▪ and how the knigh¦tes fye before them for feare, but specy∣ally beholde Arthur, who I thynke be chefe floue of all chyualry, God of his grace hath well prouyded for vs whan he sente them into this countrye. Ryght dere lady & moder sayde Alyce▪ me thyn∣keth hector is wel armed and demeneth hymselfe ryght goodly. well doughter sayd the lady doth he please you. Ye ve¦rly madame sayde she. Ye haue a good cause dougheer so to be, for among our enemies he is a good bocher of his han∣des. And by that tyme the duke hymsl∣fe was come to that scarmysshe accom¦panied with .v. hondred men of warre. nd than syr Othes and all the hoost of the cyte assembled togyder and foughte wyth the duke, there began a great mor∣tall btayle betwne bothe partyes but the dukes company of the ryte & there∣fore they suffrd muche payne in so mo¦che that syr Othes was ouerthrowen & taken prisoner. And whan that syr Lio¦net
his neuewe sawe that, he let fall the chefe baner whiche he bare. And whan Arthur espied that, he was neuer so sory And came to syr Lyonet and demaundded of hym why he dyd let fal the baner. And he answered and sayde. Sir bicau∣se myne vncle syr Othes was taken pry¦soner. Saint mary sayde arthur defende that, but where is he. As God helpe me syr he is ledde forth in yonder gret prese that ye se yonder. well saide arthur lifte vp agayne the baner, for by the grace of god he shall be shortly rescowed. Than Arthur dressed hym thyderward, and mette wyth Hector and Gouernar, and sayd. Syrs let vs go rescowe syr Othes who is taken prisoner. Than rusht they all in to the prease, and arthur mette so wyth the fyrst that he caste hym downe to the erth starke dead, & layde so on eue¦ry syde that they made hym a large way where so euer he went. And Hector and Gouernar dyd greately to be redoubted for they made greate plenty of sadels to be auoyded, so that all that sawe Arthur and his company sayd, these be noo men they be fendes of helle, let vs flee frome them, for shame haue he y• fyrst brought them into this countrye. And whan the duke sawe these thre knyghtes do suche wonders meruayles in armes and slew so great plente of his knyghtes, he was so sore dyspleased that he was nye ther∣wyth fro him selfe, and therwyth dashte to Hector and strake hym so rudely that he pered both his shelde and hys helme And whan arthur felte that rude stroke he was not wel content and lifte vp his swerde and strake the Duke so fyerslye therwith that the swerde sanke thrugh¦out hauberte, shielde, and helme, and en∣tred depe into the flesshe. In the meane tyme Arthur came to theym, and there he sawe the duke & Hector fyersly fygh∣tynge togyder. Than Arthur strake the duke so sore that the arson of his sadell coude not kepe hym but that he wente to the groūde. Than Gouernar toke the dukes horse and delyuered it to Hector, for his owne was sore wounded and ve¦ry faynt for bledynge and so Htor for¦soke his owne and mounted therō haste¦ly. Than the Dukes company came to rescowe hym, and so there began a sore and a terryble batayle for there was ma¦ny slayne and sore wounded, but final¦ly ye duke with muche payne was resco∣wed and ight sore hurte, borne he was into his tent. Than the night drewe on so that both parties withdrewe ech fro other, the duke and hys company went into theyr tentes, and Arthur and hys felowshyp repayred towarde the Cyte. And as they wente they sawe betwene the wood and the cyte the dukes Senes¦shall goinge to make assaute to the cyte wyth .iii. hondred men in harneys. And whan syr Othes perceyued, the Senes∣shal, he shewed him to arthur and sayde Syr se yonder where as is syr Clarem¦baulte Seneshal to the duke goynge to assaylethe. Verelye sayde Arthur me thynketh it is very late, yet I wyl ryde to hym. A entil knight said syr Othes dele not to hardly with hym, for he is a good knyght & as gentel as ony liueth therfore it were great hurte yf he were slayne, and syr your strokes are very hē∣uy, for there is none that can endure thē therore syr for Goddes sake let syr Hec¦tor fyrst encounter hym. wyth a ryghte good wyll sayde Hector, & so he sputred his horse & escryed the Senesshall. And whan he herde hym lyke a good knyght he raune at Hector and mette so rudely that Hector ouerthrewe hym horse and
man at the fyrst course. Than hys seruy¦toure ranne to haue rescowed hym, but than Arthur and Gouernar were there present and delte amonge theym suche almes that it was wonder to beholde, & wyth clene force Arthur toke syr Claē∣bault prysoner, and dyde incontynente send hym to the cyte vnto the countesse who was ryght gladde of suche a pryso∣ner, and caused hym to be vnarmed in all haste and made hym to mount vpon the wall wyth her for to beholde how her knyghtes dyd demeane them selfe amon¦ge there enemyes, and there syr Clarem¦bault sawe how Arthur dyd meruayles for he claue asōder sheldes, & draue dow¦ne knyghtes and cut of armes, handes and heades Also Hector and Gouernar for theyr partes dyd meruaylously well so that nothinge endured before them. Sayncte marye sayde Clarembaulte to the countesse. Madame where gete you these knyghtes, for as god helpe me they are the best of all the world, for if ye had but these thre knyghtes they were able to chase out of your coūtre the duke and all his hoost. Syr sayd the lady god hath puruayed me of theym. And fynally Ar∣thur, Hector, Gouernar, and syr Othes dydde suche meruayles of armes that all the dukes company that were wyth syr Clarembaulte were clene dyscomfyted, and there Arthur toke .xl. prisoners and dydde send them into the cyte, and other xl. fledde and ranne to the duke & all the men anaunt of .iiii. hondred were slayne. And whan they were before the duke & many of theym sore hurte sayde. A syr it gooth yll wyth you and vs, for syr Cla∣rembault youre senessall is taken pryso∣ner, and .xl. other knyghtes with hym, & all the remenaunt slayne, sauynge who be ryghte yll delte wythall as ye may se. And the duke demaunded of theym who it was that had done that dede. As God helpe vs syr it was thre knyghtes that was in y• company with syr Othes, but we trow they be fendes and none erthe∣ly men. And whan the duke herd this he waxed nye madde for anger, and there sware how that he wolde neuer departe thens fro syege tyll he had hanged those thre knyghtes, and brente the countesse and her doughter. Than incontynent he sent messengers out to his baylyues pro¦uostes, and sent for his brother peter the cornu, who shortely came to hym warde and brought with hym .iiii. hondred men of warre, & the Dukes great courser na∣med asille, & thys horse was suche that there was none lyke hym in al the world for he was named felawlyke to bucyfal the horse of Alexander the greate, there was none that coude moūt on this hors but al only the duke and the varl that kepte hym, and both daye and nyght h was euer tied with foure grete chaynes of yren. ¶How Arthur, Hector, Gouerner, & sir Othes discomfyted Peter ye cornu, bro∣der to the duke who was comen to him with .iiii. C. knightes, & there this cornu was slayne, & all hys people slayne and taken prysoners. And how Arthur toke the dukes hors named assyle, ye best hors as than of the worlde. Capit. xxxvi. WHan that Arthur had taken syr Clarēbault the Dukes senesshall and dyscomfyted all hys peopl than he entred into the cite, where as the people ran to welcome hym & said. God kepe the in thy srength and vertue, and blessed be the houre that euer thou were borne. So thus he camme to the palays
where as the coūtesse and her doughter mete hym and demaūded of hym howe he dyd. And he sayde ryght well thanked be good and Alyce toke Hector her lorde and vnarmed hym. Than Arthur cau∣sed all suche as were hurte of the pryso∣ners to be broughte into the palays, and caused surgyens to serche theyr woun∣des, & euerye daye he wolde vysyte them thre or foure times, wherby he gat him suche loue of euerye creature that they promysed neuer to fayle him as long as they lyued. Than whan arthur was vn¦armed, there was in his company Hec∣tor, Gouernar and syr Othes. Than arthur toke syr Clarembault by the han¦de, and sayd. Syr make good chere, for ye shall haue here no hurte yf I may ke∣pe you therfro, and verely ye shall haue here but a good pryson. No syr sayde the coūtesse he shall haue no hurte here sith it please you the contrarye, whereof he thanked them greatly, and all that uer herde arthurs wordes praysed him mo∣che, and loued hym therefore the better. Than they wente to mete and Arthur and syr Clarembault sate bothe togider Thus arthur and the hole army toiour¦ned styll without doinge of anye thynge the space of a moneth, and by that tyme suche as were hurte were recouered to helth. And the duke and all hys hoost in lyke wyse laye styll, for he abode for mo∣re company. Soo it fortuned that on a wednesday Arthur was rysen betymes and had herde masse, and stode leanynge in a wyndowe and loked into the dukes hoost for to se the demenynge of his ene¦mies, and in his company was Hector Gouernar, and syr Othes and Clarem∣bault. At the laste Arthur behelde ouer the foreste and espyed where there came moche people in harneys downe from a grete mountayne, he sawe shyeldes and helmes shyne agaynst the sonne & sawe a great baner waueryng wyth the win¦de, and Arthur than sewed this to his company. And at the laste syr Clarem∣bault knew the baner & sayde. Syr these people that yonder cometh, are not for your profyte, for it is Peter the Cornu, the dukes broder who is come to helpe hym. well sayde Arthur he is welcome it may fortune he cometh to soone, there∣for Hector freende, yf we abyde and suf∣fre hym to assemble hys company with the dukes hoost, we shall haue than mo∣che to doo, therefore by my counsayle let vs go mete with theim before in this fo∣rest and let vs shewe them what maner of people we be. Syr as God helpe me sayd syr Othes ye haue ryght wel deny¦ed, therfore let vs go arme vs shortely. Syr sayd Arthur cause all your people to arme them as pryuely as they can to thentent that they without maye know nothinge therof, and let vs enter as pri∣uely as we can in to this forest that we be no espyed of them that be comynge, and soo shall we be in hande wyth them or they be wae, and as he had duysed so it was ordeyned and done, and so ro∣de forth ryghte pryuely in to this forest and there departed theyr companyes in busshementes tyll at the laste theyr ene∣myes were amonge them. Than espyed syr Othes the dukes horse assyle, who was ledde in had with his keper▪ and shewed him to Arthur and sayde. Syr beholde yonder is he best horse of al the worlde. For he was neuer as yet werye for no labour, for who so euer syttth on hym can take no hurte, he is so mygh∣ty and stronge in the name of god sayd Arthur, the duke hath done ryghte well to kepe hym soo well for me so longe as
he hath done for by the fayth that I owe to god I will go seke hym incontynent Than Arthur dressed hym towarde the varier that ledde the horse and or he to∣ke any hede Arthur toke hym by the shol¦dres and cast hym fatte to the grounde, than he toke the hors by the brydell and lyghily dyde lepe on hym, than Arthur assayed hym in the fielde and foūde hym ryght stronge and lyght, wherof he was wondersly gladde, and wolde not forge hym for moche golde and syluer, and as Arthur thus proued his horse Peter the cornu the dukes broder espyed hym and anne and strake hym behinde vpon his bake or that he was ware. And whan Hector sawe that he pricked forth towar¦de hym▪ and so eche of them ran at other and mette so rudely that Peter the cor∣nu brake his spere, but Hector marked hym so well that he put his spre thrugh¦out the body and soo fell downe deed yn the same place. And whan that Pter yt cornues men sawe that they assaild He¦ctor on all sydes & enclosed hym amon∣ge them and wounded so hys horse that he fell downe vnder Hym, but he anone lepte vpon hys fete and nobly defended hym soo that none durst approche nere hym, but than they dyde cast at hym kny¦ues and swerdes and other wepens and soo wounded hym in dyuerse places. At the last Gouernar espyed hym and sayd to Arthur. Syr for goddes sake go and socour Hector your cosyn who is nye at a gete myschf. And whan Arthur her∣de that he spurred his noble horse assyle and lepte futh .xv. foe of playne groun¦de, and soo rusht in amonge theym that were in hande wyth Hector, and, encoun¦tred so he fyrst that he claue hym now∣e to the chyne, and an other he carued his heed to his tethe, and made hede armes, and handes flye into the fyelde & therwith all the hole company date to¦gyder, whereas there was than a tery∣ble batayle. At the last Gouernar gate a good hors and brought him streyght to Hector who moūted shorly theron and dashte in to the prese and there dyd mer∣uayles of armes, for he confounded all that euer he attayned vnto. And Arthur and Gouernar did marueyles for theyr parte, and syr Othes and is companye were not behynde, but they dyd full no∣bly and so fynally Arthur and his com¦pany bate theym so well that all theyre enemyes were dyscomfyted, and here were taken prysoners beyonde .iii. score the whiche were ledde in to the Cyte of rwle, & many fledde awaye sore woun¦ded and a grete nombre of theym were slayne. And than Arthur and his felow∣shyp retourned to the cyte, and there the countesse receyued them ryght conrteys¦ly with grete Ioye and tryumphe. And whan e knewe howe the dukes broder was slayne, and assyle the good horse wonne, she had greate Ioye erof, and sayd to Arthur. A swete frende ye ouer∣come myne enemyes one after another. Than syr Clarbault was right sorow¦ful when he knew of the death of syr Pe¦ter the cornu, & sayd a duke ye haue had but an yll acquayntaūce with this won but lyte therby, and I sere me ye are ly∣ke to lese more. A good Peter the cornu god haue mercy on thy soule. And thus hē demaned greae sorowe▪ and Arthur dydde as moche as he coulde for to com∣forte hym. And suche as were escaped from the batayle fledde to the duke and shewed him how that his broder Peter the cornu was slayne, & his men slayne and taken, and his good horse assyle ta∣ken ad ledde into the cyte of Bewle.
wherwyth the duke was so sorowfull that he coude not sustayne hym selfe but fe downe in a traunce, and whan he re¦uyued he sayde. A swetee broder dere, ha¦ue ye bought the sekynge of thys Coun∣tesse syth ye haue lost your lyfe for her, than he cōmaunded that the body of his broder sholde be fette and caryed to the cyte of orgoule, and so it was done, and there he was solempny buryed and the duke bewepte the deth of his brother the space of .viii. dayes contynually. ¶Howe that Arthur and his compa∣ny vtterly dyscomfited the duke and strake of his head, and dydde sende it by Gouernar to the fayre lady Alyce and to her moder as he had promised before. Cap. l.xxxvii. AT the ende of .viii. dayes the duke cōmannded that all hys people shoulde be armed and ready apparayled to fygher to thentente to make assaute to the cyte wherat he sayd he wolde be him selfe. And whan Artur hede all that noyse without in the dukes hoost, & saw euery man in barneys, he knwe rygh well therby how they entended to aua∣le the cyte. Than he called to hi  Gouernar and syr Othes  sayd. Fren∣des let vs arme vs and al out  and let vs go for to encounter te Luke who is comynge to assayle this cyte. A my lord Arthur sayd syr Othes for god¦des sake be well aduysd what ye do, for they be a great multytud of people, and a great part of oure men be sore woun∣ded and as ye not thrugh hoe, therfore syr by myne aduyse we shall not yssue out but let vs defende this cyte witin. A syr sayd Arthur yt god plaed, we wyll haue none such proche therfore let vs yssue , and go into this greae woode Ioynynge to the or hes or oute towne tyl oure enemyes be come to the wales, than let vs assem∣ble and fyght wyth theym. And whan we shall se oure tyme we may yf nede be w¦draw vs aayne into this eyee in the spite of them all. Syr sayd Hector relay ry∣ght well, soo let it be done. Than there was souned a greate horne & by the noyse therof euery man in the cy∣te ranne to thyr hernayes suche as was able, and soo they all yssued out, and all they passed not the nombre of two hondre haubd. And whan they were yssued ut they wente betwe∣ne the foreste and the dyches so that they were not espyed of none of the Dues hoost. And anone Arthur appertyed where they came foure hondred haubdes well arayed for the warre and .xxiiii crosbowes, & also he sae a meruaylous grete baner wauerynge wyth the wyn∣de,
and dyde shewe it to syr Othes. And whan he sawe it he knewe it ryght well and sayde. Now gentyl knyghtes be me¦ry, for this baner is pertaynynge to syr Gce broder To my lady the countesse, who is come out of the londe of neorlan¦de for to sucour my lady. well good fren¦de sayd Arthur, ryde on afore & knowe the trouthe whether it be he or not. And than syr Othes rode for the agreate pace and approched nere vnto syr Gce, and made a token of peas. And whan they sawe eche other, they put of theyr hel∣mes and made To eche other grete feest and Ioye. Than syr Gace demaunded how it wente with the warre of hys sy∣ster and of the duke, and who as than had th bter. As god helpe me sayd syr Othes as yet we haue the better and the ouer hande, thankd be god, and that is by the reason and ayde of thre knyghtes that god I trowe hath sente vnto vs, for aboue al other knightes they are full strōge and myghty, and yonder knyght that ye may se sytting on assyle whyche was the dukes good horse is the chefe soueraigne knyght of all the worlde, for hys chyualry surmounteth all other, or thys is he that one day dyd dyscomfyte the duke, and also he hath taken syr Cla∣rembut prysoner and dyscomfyted all hys route and also hath wonne the du∣kes horse assyle as ye may se, for he is mounted on hys backe, and that other knyght that is by hym is hys cosyn, and he slewe on a day Peter the cornu the du¦kes broder. Also this knight that lytteth on assyle the good horse hathe promysed to my lady your syster ad to her dough∣ter the head of the duke bycause he slewe by false treason my lorde her husbonde. God y• all thynge formed sayde syr Gace gyue hym power to accomplishe his pro¦nesse let vs tyde to them. So than they rode forth and all his route. And whan Arthur sawe them he ddde of his helme and spured forth assyle his horse and ca∣me to syr Gace, and eche of other made grete ioye & feast. Than syr Gace thau¦ned Arthur tyght hersely of the payne yt he hath takē in his systers warres. Syr sayde Arthur, I truste this day we shall perfourme all the matter, for I knowe wel the duke is gone to assayle the cyte. therefore me thynketh it were good that he were nobly withstonde, therfore after my mynde let vs departe our company in twayne, therefore syr yf it please you ye shall haue in your company my cosin Hector, Gouernar, and syr Othes, and ye shall goo along vpon these dyches & so encounter out enemyes face to face, & I and my company shal come in behyn∣de thyr tentes, soo that whan ye be in hande with them I wyll be at theyr bac¦kes, wherby ye shall se them so abashed that therby they shal lese the best halfe of theyr hardines. Syr ye haue ryght well deuysed the mater sayd syr Gace, and so they departed eche fro other, & syr Gace Hector gouernar & syr Othes rode forth togder so couertly yt the duke nor none of his knwe nothing therof. And so the duke wh he came to the fortunes of the cyte he apparayled him selfe and all his men to begin the assaute & therwith syr Gace & his company fel on them fyersly Than Hector sputed his hors & encoū¦tred the goster, who was a great offycer of the dukes and strake hym soo rudely that he perced hys herte, and soo he fell downe dead to the earth before the duke than Hector set his hande to his sweede and gaue the duke suche a stroke that he was fayne for to stoupe downe vnto ye neeke of his horse. Than the dukes men
fell on Arthur on all sydes, but he defen∣ded hym lyke a noble man. Than Go∣uernar for hys parte bette downe knigh¦tes on all sydes. And whan syr Gace saw hym doo so well he praysed him greatly in his herte, than he and all hys compa∣ny freshly ranne vpon the dukes hooste, howe be it the dukes company were fer aboue his, wherfore he endured muche payne. And whan Hector sawe that he was ryght sorowfull, and spurred hys horse and habandoned hymselfe amon∣ge his enemyes, and Gouernar in lyke wyse, who gaue such strokes that he cō¦fo unded all that euer he attayned vnto tyl at the last his horse fayled vnderneth hym and fell to the grounde, and than his enemyes fell vpon hym on all sydes but he fought so fyersly that none durst approche to hym, for he confounded all that euer he attayned vnto, and syr Ga∣ce folowed hym as nere as euer he cou∣de, but for all that Gouernar was so ouermatched that he was taken pryso∣ner, and x. other knightes pertaynynge to the company of syr Gace, and so they were ledde towarde the dukes tent, and at that tyme Arthur was among the ten¦tes cuttynge of ropes, betynge downe of pauylyons, and at the laste, he espyed Gouernar where as he was ledde forth lyke a prysoner, wherwyth Arthur was ryght sore dyspleased, & rushte in amon∣ge them, and the fyrst that he encountred wyth▪ he departed lyfe and body asonder and he smote the heed from an other, and soo than by the helpe of syr Gace they brought to deth al those that ledde forth syr gouernar, and soo remounted hym agayne vpon another horse. Than Ar∣thur strake soo in the prese that he draue asonder sheldes, and frushed to death all that euer he touched, soo that all fledde before hym, for there was none whiche durst abyde hym without that he wolde receyue his deth, and that syr gace sawe ryght well and sayd. A good lorde what knyght is this, I thynke there is not his pere in all the worlde. Than syr Othes and Gouernar and theyr company lay∣de on wyth so grete and so heny strokes that they myght well be harde a grete space and the dukes people were fore a∣frayed whan they perceyued how they were assayled on al partes bothe before and behynde and Hector by fortune en¦countered the duke and strake hym soo sore that he strake away a grete pece of hys harneys and caused hym to recu∣le nye to his horse crope, and whan the duke felte that stroke, he strake agayne Hector so fyersly that he claue his shelde and perced thrugh his harnes but as his fortune was it dyde not entre into the fleshe, and so there was a greate ba∣tayle betwene them, but the greate prese of bothe parties dyd departe theym, and as Arthur went serchinge the gret and thycke preses he founde where syr Gace was on fote defendynge hym selfe right valyauntlye, and Gouenar was there doynge hys payne to rescowe hym, but the prese was so grete that they endured moche payne, but Arthur strake yn the thyckest amonge them so fyers that he ouerthrewe knyghtes by hepas, & dyde suche noblenesse in armes that it was wonder to consyder and so he remoun∣ted agayne syr Gace yn the spyte of all his enemyes. Than the dukes compa∣ny began to wexe feble, and whan the duke perceyued yt he was ryght sorow∣ful, and so it fortuned hym to encoūter with syr hector, who had betē downe in his syght two of his knyghtes, and ther with he strake hector so fyersly that ni
wyth the same stroke he was sore asto∣nyed, but Hector strake hym agayne so vertuously on the helme yt he strake in to it .iiii. fyngers depe and ryght sore woū∣ded him on the head where with he was brought in to a traunce, & his horse bare hym all aboute he wyst not where. And at last he came before the sight of arthur and as sone as he sawe him he wyst wel it was the duke, and strake hym so rude∣ly betwene the necke and the heade, that his headfell on his horse necke, and Go∣uernar toke and receyued it. Than Ar∣thur sayd. Gouernar I wyll ye go bere this dukes head to the countesse, and to her doughter Alyce, & shewe them how I do sende it to them in accomplyshyng of my promes made to theim. Syr sayde Gouernar with a ryght good wyll, & so departed fro the hoost & entered into the cyte. And anone the tydynges ranne all about the cyte how that Gouernar had brought the dukes head to the countesse fro arthur, & so al the people ranne to se the dukes head, and range all the belles in the cyte for ioye of ye vyctory that god had sente them. And whan Gouernar hadde made his present to the coūtesse, she receyued it with great ioye & sayd to gouernar. Syr I thanke hartely this knight for his present, and you for your labour, & for this mes∣sage I gyue you dorge my castell for euer. Madame {quod} Gouernar, and god wyl I shall not take house nor londe of no creature withoute the consente of my lorde Arthur. And whan syr Clarembaulte sawe the heade of the duke hys mayster, he made ryghte greate sorowe, and soo entered into hys chambre, and there he demened ryghte greate doloure. Than gouernar retour∣ned agayne to arthur, and thanked hym muche from the countesse and frome her doughter. And by that tyme Arthur had done so muche that all the Dukes com∣pany were cleane by scomfyred as suche people that had no souerayne, wherfore they fledde on all sydes, and Hector and Gouernar dyd chase them, & so brought many of them to theyr death. ¶How Arthur and his company wente to the cyte of orgoule for to take it by force, but the Bourgey∣ses thereof broughte vnto hym the keys, and didde vnto hym homage and so dydde all the nobles of that countrye as vnto theyr chefe soue∣rayne lorde. Capit. xxxviii. ANd whan the battayle was ended Arthur came vnto syr Gace & sayd. Syr let as goo to the tentes of the duke and cause all that we finde there
to be brought into the Cytie & therwith we may paye all oure people for I am sure we shall fynde there ryght grete ry¦chesse. In the name of god sayd sir gace so let vs do. And so than euerye thynge that was found thece, was brought into the cyte. And than they all entered in to the towne with all their pray. Than all the dwellers in the cite ranne to Athur and sayd with one voyce, welcome be ye the best knighte of al the worlde, who hath delyuered vs from our enemyes, therfore god that all thynge hathe four∣med encreaseth you bothe honour and valure. Than the gates of the cyte wer sette open euery man to go & come who wold. And whan Arthur was come in to the palays the countesse encountred and enbraced hym and kyssed hym and sayd. Sir ye haue delyuered thys cyte & erledome fro their enemyes, and haue ryght well reuenged the dth of my lor∣de, therfore blessed be y• houre that euer ye were grne. Than she made gret che¦re to syr Gace her broder. And the fayre mayden Alyce made muche of her lord Hector. Than Arthur demaūded for syr Clarembault Syr sayde the coūtesse he is in his chambre, whereas he maketh the gretest sorowe of all the worlde for the deth of the duke his lord. As god hel∣pe me sayd Arthur he dothe therin lyke a noble wyse man. I loue hym herfore the better. Than he toke sir Gace by the hande and sayde. Syr let vs goose and and comforte him. So they went and found him weping and makinge greate sorow. Than arthur sayde to hī. A gen∣tyl knight wherfore do ye thus sle your selfe for yt duke who was but a fals tra¦toure and a shamefull murtherer, ther∣fore gentyll frende appse your minde I requyre you, for as God helpe me ye shal haue an other Lorde good and true who shall loue you and set you in grete honoure. Than he called to hym Hector and sayd. Good cosyn, kepe cōpny here wyth syr Crembault and cōfort hym and here after thynke on hym, whan yt shall ly in your power so to doo. Than Arthur and all the other wente and vn∣armed them, and than they all wente in to the Halle, and there Arthur behelde syr Gace whome he lyked ryghte well, for he was a meruaylous fayre knyght. Than Hector came thyder and brought with hym syr Clarembault. And whn Arthur sawe hym he cleped and kyssed hym and made to hym ryght grete there Than Arthur toke the countesse aparte and syr Clarembault, and syr Othes, & syr Gace, Hector, and Gouernar, & sayd to syr Gace. ye be broder here to my la∣dy & vncle to the fayre Alyce her dough∣ter, therfore I wyll ye knowe certaynly that by the free wyll of my lady the coū¦tesse here present, and also by the assent of her Doughter, and of all her Barons this fayre lady Alyce ys freely gyuen to my cosyn Hector, how be yt I wyll that ye knowe that he ys a Gentell man, and sone and ayre vnto a ryght myghty and puyssaūt lorde the erle of bloys, therfore I shewe you this to knowe your mynde wheder ye wyll agre to this maryage r no. In the name of god sayd syr Gace, yf there were no more in h but all onely his noble chyualry he is worthy to haue a moche better than she is, & therfore I accorde therto with me herte well syr saide Arthur syth that y bee agreed the mater is ye better. Syr it is so now thys duke hath hys reward for his trespace & ye haue here moche people, and also my lady hath grete plente of men of warre now here yn this cyte, and in the coun¦tre
aboute, and sowd yours wyll come to vs dayly yf we nde, therfore by myn ad¦uyce we shall go in to the dukes countre for I wyll conquere all that londe, for I hau promysed it to Hector my cosyn & syr yf we nede of ony socour or ayde, I promyse you I shall cause to come to vs a king and .iii. grete erles with al theyr myghtes, so that it wyll be harde to nom¦bre them. Than syr Gace sayd, noble Ar¦thur beholde me here I wyll be the fyrst and all that I can make is and shall be at your cōmaundement, and I shall fo∣lowe you withall my herte. And all that I can make sayd the countesse shall bee redy to attende on my ryght dere sone in lawe noble Hector your cosyn, & he shall haue all my power to folowe your com∣maundement Madame sayd Arthur I thanke you. Than they lefte theyr coun¦seyle and wente to mte, where as they were rychely serued And after mete Ar¦thur dyde vysyte all them that were hur¦te. Than Arthur and the countesse and all other barons and knyghes wente in to the halle, and there Arthur departed all suche tresour that was wonne at the batayle agenst the duke, & gaue to euery body so largely yt euery man was ryght well content. Than the coūtesse sent out her cōmaundement to all her subgectes suche as myght bere harneys, eythrr on horsacke or on fote to come to her in all the haste possble. And syr Gace dyde in lykewyse on his pate, and so thyder ca¦me so wd yours on euery syde, and there they all assembled togyder the mondaye before in mwdelyne tide vnder the cyte of Brewle. And by that tyme suche as were hurte were recouered to helthe, & al thynge necessary was redy to remeue And a moneth after that the duke was slayne Arthur and Hector toke leaue of the countesse and of Alice her doughter and cōmaūded that all the boost would take the next way to the cyte of orgoule And than Arthur mustred hys people, and found how there were two. M. hors¦mēn and .viii. hondred on fote, so they rode forth toward ye countre of orgoule. But whan the gentillmen of that coun∣tree vnderstode howe that Arthur came on them with baners displayed, & sawe well howe they had no captayne, sythe the Duke and his bretherne and cosyns were all slayne at the syege of Brewle, and they knewe well howe Arthur had done al this. Thā they assembled them togyder in the cyte of orgoule and there toke counseyle what they might best do At the last they concludid and said how that they were wery and hurte and lost all that euer they had in the last batal of Brewle, bothe theyr goodes, their a∣ders, their sonnes, theyr neuewes, theyr frendes, and all theyr lygnage, and ther¦fore they sayd they hadde loste ynough, wherfore they were of purpose to Ieo∣parde no ferder, and fynally concluded not to defende theyr countrie fro Arthur but vtterly to yelde all vnto hī for they sayd they knewe well though they wold thy were not of that power to resyst a∣genst his noble chiualry. And of this ac¦corde was al the bourgeyses of the cyte and so by comyn accorde they sente cer∣tayne messengers vnto Arthur desirin∣ge hym if it were his wyl that he shold doo noo hurte to theyr countre for they were in mynde to yelde all to hym, and to receyue him as theyr chefe lord. And whan Arthur herde that he was right Ioyfull and commaunded incoytinent thrughout al his hoost yt no man vpon payne of death be so hardy to hurte any creature of that countre. And so longe
they rode tyll at the laste they arryued at the cyte of Orgoule. And all the gentyll men of that cyte burgeyses & other whā they perceyued that he was nere to the cyte they all yssued out vnarmed and re¦ceyued hym with great Ioye, and yelded to hym the keys of the cyte, & gaue hym full possession of all the countrye. Than all the hoost lodged withoute, Arthur and a certayne wyth hym entred into the cyte, and so remayned there thre dayes. ¶Howe Arthur made his cosyn Hector duke of Orgoule by the assente of all the lordes of that countre. Cap. xxxix. THan arthur called before him al the Lordes and Barons of that realme and sayde. Syrs ye haue rendred here to me this cyte and all the hole coū∣tre, therfore it is right and necessite that ye haue a lorde and gouernour ouer you there ore I wyll gyue you one I ensure you ryght puyssaunt bothe of hauoyre & of frendes, who is Hector here my dere cosyn, therefore make hym Duke of all this countrye, and I wyll ye do hym ho∣mage, and syr Clarembault I wyll that ye begyn fyrste, and here I release you of your prysonynge. Uerely syr sayde he I am ryghte well content so to do syth my lorde is dead and hauynge none eyres to whome his londe shoulde succede, and so he rose and didde homage to Hector, and after hym so dyd all other, and toke hym for theyr duke & souerayne lorde. Than Arthur sent to Brewle for the countesse and Alyce her doughter o thentent that Hector and she shoulde be maryed toge∣der within the cyte of Orgoule, & whan she was come the maryage was made bytwene them with great triumphe and ioye the whiche endured .xv. dayes, and at the ende of the .xv. dayes all the hooste departed euery man in to his owne coun¦tre. And than Arthur called o hym Hec¦tor, syr Gace, syr Clarembault, sir othes and Gouenar and sayd. Syr Gace be∣holde here dkue Hector my cosyn, who hath wedded your nece, therfore oughte ye to loue him fro hensforth. And ye syr Othes she is your cosyn, therfore I be¦sech you loue Hector, & bere to him faith¦full trouthe, & if so be his people happen to rebell agaynst hym socou & helpe him for now fro hens forward ye are boūe therto. And cosyn Hector if ony warre fall vnto you sende for me into the coun∣tre of Sroloys wheder I am purposed to goo, and I shall incontynent come to you. And syr Clarembaulte I put my co¦syn Hector into youre hands, therfore I desyre you kpe to hym youre fayth and trouth as ye haue promised▪ and you shal loue you & put his chefe truste alwayes in your wysdome. Syr I shall sayd syr Clarembaulte bere to hym faythful aly∣aunce and loue as to my souerayne lord and so he dydde euer after, for he was a true knyght. Than Arthur sayd to Hec∣tor, cosyn dele wysely amonge your lor∣des and subiectes, and than wall ye doo ryght wel, and now to god I commend you And whā Hector herde that he sayde syr God not dyspleased there is neyther londe nor wyse shal holde me but I wil go wyth you▪ ye shall not do so sayde Ar∣thur, therfore kepe well your londe, and acquaynt you with your barons & whā I retourne agayne I wyll come by you And so arthur tke leue of the countesse and of Alyce her doughter duchss of or¦goule, and of al other knyghtes who of¦fred to goo with hym, but in no wyse h wolde none, and so toke wyth hym but
all onely Gouernar. Iaket and Bawd∣wyn, and duke Hector & syr Gace & ma¦ny other conuayed hym .ii. dayes on hys Iournay, than Arthur toke leue of them and they reourned ryght sorowfull for his departynge & went to orgoule wher¦of Hector was than duke, & erle of Breu¦le by his wyfe, & he demened him selfe so nobly that he gate the loue of all his lor∣des, & kepte his londe in grete peas and tranquylyte, & greate loue there was by¦twene hym and the fayre lady Alyce hys wyfe. Now let vs leue to speke of Hec∣tor til another season, & let vs speake of Arthur. ¶Howe that Arthur & Gouernar depar¦ted asonder, and of the terryble aduen∣turs that eche of theym founde or they mette agayne. Cap. xl. WHan Arthur was thus departed fro Hctor hys cosyn, who was as than duke o Orgoule, he and his company rode so longe tyll they had passed mny stronge coūtries right wil∣de and suag, & amonge other they past the londe of constantinoble, & of armice. And at last entred in amonge the greate mountaynes the whiche were bytwene the empyre of ynde the more and the re∣alme of Sooloys, there they aryued in to a moche sauage & wylde place where as there were many grete wylde beastes of dyuers kyndes, & the laste they yssued out of that forst and entred into a fayre grene medowe, where as they saw stan∣dynge a great toure & thyder they wente and founde a yong squyer who was lord of that place: who receyued theym that nyght and made them yght good chere & after souper they stode in a wyndowe than the squyer demaunded of Arthur wheder he was goynge. I wyll go euer forwarde sayd Athur tyll I se my time to retourne agayne. Syr sayde the squier I demaunded it of you for none yll, syr beholde yonder before you wher as ther lyeth a forked waye, the pathe that lieth on the ryght hande is mortall, for there is none that entreth into that waye but shortely he receyued death, & yt I knowe well, for as yer there was neuer none yt euer wente that waye yt retourned agay∣ne, & syr as for the other waye that lyeth on the lyfte hande is good ynoughe, and withoute Ieopardye, for that is the redy passage in to the coūtre of ynde the more. Than arthur demaunded of hym what was the cause that the other way was so mortall and Ieopardous. Syr sayde the squyer I can not tell you the trouth, but as it is sayd it is the waye to a castel he whiche is so stronge and aduenturous, that none scapeth there wtout deth, how be it, it is sayd that a knight shall at the last acheue it & fordoo all the aduentures of that place, the whiche are ryght grete and meruaylous, but it is thought that knyght is not yet borne, syr I wote not what I should sa, but I know wel hat all suche as hathe gone thyder neuer ca∣me agayne, wherfore I know wel that they be all dead, and this sayde stronge castell is named the norte noyre. Wel good frende sayde Arthur, is there none other passage to this castell but by this Ieopardous waye. Yes syr sayd yt squier for this grete way that ye se on the lyfte hande, the whiche goeth to ynde the mo∣re▪ and whan ye come hyder than there is another waye the whiche wyll bryn∣ge you streyght to the castel of blaunhe floure, and from thens ye shall haue a re∣dy passage to the cyte of argence, & than whan ye be there euerye man can shewe
you the nex way to the castell of the por¦ noyre, u syr wich way somuer a man ga thyder he neuer cometh agay¦ne well sayde arthur all must be as god wyll haue it. nd therwyth he called go¦uernar and sayd. Frende it is conueiēt now that we departe asoder for ye shal go the waye thrugh ynde the more, and so repayre the nexte waye that ye can to the porte noyre, & I wyll go by the way that lyeth on the righ hand all onely sa∣uynge I wil haue with me Bawdewin an ye shall haue with you Iaket, than Gouernar and said. Syr and god wil ye shall not go to your dethward, but & ye nye I wyll in lyke wyse suffre death wt you. A syr sayd the squyer for Gods sa∣ke go ye not that way, nor thinke it not for it is a great foly, for I ensure you ye shal dye or ye c obtaine to passe thrugh that passage, for there is as it is sayde a fell gryffon gretely to be redouted that kepeth shorte an egle of golde. And whā arthur herde spekyng of the egle of gol∣de and of the gryffon he remembred his vysion that he had or he went out of his owne coūtrye, wherfore there was none that coude tourne his purpose, yet Go∣uernar dyd as mche as he coulde for to chaunge his mynde but fynally he sayd frende Gouernar if ye loue me speke no more of the matter, for as I haue deuy∣sed so hall it be wythout fayle. And whā Gouernar herd that he was in his min¦de righte sore displeased and sayde. Syr I haue nourysshed and serued you sythe the begnyge of youre tender youthe, and wyl ye than deseuer me nowe from your company, also I haue for your sa¦ke lost myn owne countre, & all my fren∣des, syr in good trouth ye dele wyth me ryght hardly and ye do as ye saye▪ howe shall I retourne againe to my lord your fader yf ye dye in this aduēture, certayn¦ly nay for I wyll neuer retourne home agayne for all y• golde of the world, but I shal slea my sefe yf I may know any othrwyse of you than good. well  arthur speke no more throf, or  wyll yt i shall be thus. And whā Gouenr perceyued yt his mind was so  fyxed he durse mo him no more of he mater for fere of his dyspleasure and  as for yt nyght they went to theyr res and in the mornynge erly lepte on the horses & so departed, & yt squyer brough them parte of theyr waye, & then e que∣thed them to god, & so retournd againe: and than at thys sayde fored waye r∣thur and Bawdewyn departed fro Go∣uernar and Iaket and toke the way on the ryght hande, and Gouerar and Ia¦ket rode forth the waye on the lyfte han∣de. Nowe as for a eason let vs leue ar∣thur ridynge forth on his good horse as∣syle and Badewyn with him, and let vs a whyle speke of Gouernar & Iaket. ¶How gouernar after that he was de∣parted fro Arthur found in a greate o∣rest two knyghtes armed who had  and wounded an other knyght and wol∣de haue raushed his syster, and nowe be rscowed her and dydde vanquys all her enemyes. Capi. xli Gouernar after he was depar¦ted fro arthr rode .ii. days without fynding o ony ad∣uenture & on the thirde daye he entred into a grete forest by the  that he had ryden two leges he founde a knyght lyeng on the erath, & one of his handes stryken of, & sore woūded in the backe & grnynge ryght pyteously. And whan Gouernar sawe hym he demaun∣hed
what he ayled and who had so hurte hym. A syr sayd he thus hath arayed me two armed knightes who are brethene and it is now but a yere paste syth they sewe my fader and my broder by false treson bycause of a syster of myn yt they wolde haue had by force, and as now I was conueyeng her ro her vncles pla∣ce where as she hath bene euer sythe the deth of her father, & I had thought now to haue brought her to my place, but syr these .ii. knightes vnhappely had know¦lege thereof, and so lay in wayte for me and for her, and so thus as ye se they ha∣ue arayed me, for they were armed, and I was without harneys, and also they haue lede awaye my syster to thenente to defoule her dyrgynit, whereof I am more sorofull than of myne owne hurte therfore gentyll knyghte I requyre you yf ye may kepe her from vilany do it for goddes sake. whiche waye are they gon sayd Gouernar and how ferre by lykely¦hode are they past. Syr sayd the knyght they are ryen yonder way & are not as yet past the mountenaunce of a lege. Ia∣ket good frende sayd Gouernar stop the woundes of thys knyght and tary here styl with him tyl I come agayne to you, and so rode forth as fast as he coude tyl at the laste he espyed them in a fayre va∣ley, & herde well the damoysell how she cryed for helpe and made grete lamenta¦cyon, for one of the knyghtes helde her to the encene to haue had his pleasure of her, and whan Gouernar herde the crye so he sayd. A fase knyghte I charge the touche her not, for I wyll defend her in the ede of her brother, than one of these knightes lepte on his horse, & wythoute speking of ony word can fyesly at Go∣uenar & brake his spere, but Gouernar hyt hym so egerly y• he dasht his spere in to his body more than a fote, & so he fell downe dead▪ & whā the oher knyght yt helde the damoysell saw his broder slay¦ne & perceyued wel that Gouernar was cominge toward him wyth his swerde drawen in his hand, he had than so ge∣te fere yt he kneled down to the erth and cryed him mercy. Certaynly said gouar¦nar thou getst no mercy, but as this da¦moysell wil comaūde so shal it be thā syr sayd the damosel he shal lose his hed, for he slewe my fader, & as they thus tal∣ked togider there came to them the woū¦ded knight & Iaket with him, than this knight sayd vnto gouernar. A gentyll knyght I requyre ou giue me this fals knight traytour & murtherer who hath slayne my fader & my broder & hath may¦med me. Take him to you sayde Gouer∣nar, for it pleeth me ryght well. Than the wounded knyght sayd to his seruaū¦tes, who as than were come to hym fro his own hous I charge you take thys traytour & lede hym to my toure, & thee I shal do rightful iudgemente on hym. Than Gournar toke leue of them & co∣maunded them to god. And the woūded knyght wold fayne haue had him to ha¦ue taryed all that night with him in his hous, but in no wyse he coud make hym to abyde, but so they departed eche from other▪ and the wounded knyght wente to his own place, and there dydde right¦full iudgemente on his prysoner accor∣dyng to his deseruynge. ¶How that Gouernar came to a strōg castell called the brosse, & vanquyshed the knyght that kept it. And howe that afterwarde he was kepte in that castel agenst his wyl in grete daunger of deth tyll at the last Arthur delyuered him as ye shall here hereafter. Ca. xlii.
THus whan Gouernar was departed from the wounded knyght & fro the damoysell he rode forthe the same daye so longe tyll it was full none than he yssued out of the wylde forest & founde a fayre mddowe and sawe before hym a merueylous fayre castell, rounde aboute y• whiche he well peceyued how that there were pyght freshe tentes and goodly pauylyons and also he sawe ma¦ny bright helmes shynyng agaynste the sonne, also he well behelde how yt there was pyght en the myddes of the felde a grete peron wheron there was hangin¦ge a riche and a goodly shelde than Go∣uernar rested hymselfe a good space to regarde al these forsayde thynges. And whā the knyghtes that were within the tentes and pauylyons sawe hym so stan¦dynge in a muse, a, xii. of them well ar∣med moūted on theyr horses and wente to hym where as he stode & right goodly dyd salute hym and sayde. Sir it beho∣ueth you to rendre your truage the whi¦che is due & accostomed to be had in this place. why syrs sayde Gouerner & what is that. Syr said they ther is no knight that passeth by this place but or that he departe he must strike at this fayre shel¦de and also must Iust agaynst him that is owner therof and syr the maner is su¦che of this place that yf the knight with¦in ouercome him withoute, than he that is so ouercomen shall lese his horse and his harneys, and shall be led on fote to the iuge lymyted for this case, who shal cause to be openlye proclamed and to be sayde, behold the knyghte that is vayn∣quished, & yf the knyght straunger ouer∣come him that is within than it shalbe done by hym as we haue deuysed to you here before, & than the knyghte straūger that so hath ouercome hym shal be lorde of this castell, and of the fayre lady that is within it and than all we shall be his seruauntes to loue and to kepe hym as our chefe lorde. In the name of god sayd Gouernar this sayde Iustyce I wyl not refuse, but as for the signorye of this ca¦stel and the abidynge therin I reese fre¦ly yf god sende me the vyctory. Than all those that were in the pauylions moun¦ted on theyr horses all armed, who were wel to the nombre of two hundred, and al thei came aboute Gouernar and said Sir ye must Iuste at this shlde. Than Gouernar spurred his horse & gaue the shlde suche a stroke that it myght well be herde a grete dystaunce of, and ther∣with the knyght within the castel yssued out al armed▪ and whā Gouernar sawe hym come they ranne eche at other, and the knyght gaue Gouernar a grete stro∣ke and brake his spere, but Gouernar strake hym soo rudely that he bae hym to the erth ouer his horse tayle and bru∣sed sore with the fall his lyfte arme, so that he coude not remounte agayne on his horse without helpe, & whan all the other knyghtes sawe that they toke and vnarmed hym, and ledde hym forth on fote to a cyte there by, and there he was rendred to the Iustyce, aud incontynent it was proclaymed thrughout al the stre¦tes in the towne, behold here the knight that is vanquysshed. And so than they toke Gouernar and brouhht him with grete ioye into the castell, and than there encountred hym a fayre Damoysell, who was lady of the castell, who sayd. Syr ye be welcome to this place, and I requyre you be nothinge dysmayed, for syr here shall you be serued and be bylo∣ued as these lorde of all this place and syr one thynge I ensure you ye shall be
in as good surety of your body as euer I shall be or myn owne body, but syr ye mut abyde styll wyth me here the space of two yeres, wytoute soo be that an o∣ther knyghte ouercome you, as ye haue done hy whiche was lorde here laste. A fayre lady sayd Gouernar yf godwyl I shall not abyde here the space of fyue dayes. well syr sayde the lady it wyll be none otherwyse, therore be content ther∣wyth. well madame saide Gouernar my trust is better. But for al that it was not accordynge to his wyll, for as soone as he was entred into the castell, the bryd∣ges were drawen vp and kepte with .xl. knyghtes, to thentent that he sholde not escape, but alwayes he was serued ry∣chely with many goodly squyers, who dyd nothing elles but pleasauntely ser∣ued hym alwayes, but for all that they coude doo, in noo wyse they coude please hym, syth he myght not goo seke for hys lorde Arthur, how be it he wolde not for shme suffre any other knyght to vayn∣quysh hym, yet many knyghtes came thyder, but euer he ouercame theym all. Thus Gouernar abode there a long spa∣ce, tyll a the last Arthur delyuered hym Now let vs leue to speke of Gouernar, & etourne agayne to Arthur. ¶How that Arthur conquered the ca¦stell of the porte noyre by his prowes and slewe all them that kepte it, and how after that he entred into the hal∣les of the palays, wher he was assay∣led of two grete and horrble Lyons and of a grete graunt, & how he ouer∣came them all wyth grete payne, and aceud all the meruallous aduen∣tures of the castel▪ the which are right wonderous to reherse. Cap. xliii. WHan that Arthur was departed fro Gouernar he toke the waye on the erghte hande, and so rode forth .iii. dayes without findinge of ony aduenture or ony maner of hous or place how be it by the counseyle of his hoost he toke with hym sustenaunce for hym selfe and for his horse for the space of thre or foure dayes, and thus he passed by many valeys and montaynes, so that he had his horse were right wery, & on ye fourth daye he founde an hydeous ryuer depe & perfound, the bankes were so hye fro the water yt he coude not se it ren, yt whiche water rored and brayed & rn so swyfe¦ly that none myghte passe wtoute drow∣ning, and in certayne places it was full of grete and myghty rockes, the whiche were of suche heyght, that fro the valey bynethe the toppe of them myght vnne¦thes be sene, the whiche rockes were soo full of vermyn, that all the ryuer thereby stanke abhomynably. At the last Arthur found a lytle way alonge by the ryues syde on the lyfte hande, in the whyche he rode so long tyl it was hye none, & than he espyed a lytel streyght waye btwene two mountaynes the whche wre of a meruaylous heyght, than he founde  ly¦tell narowe brydge ouer this ryuer the whiche wt moche payne he passed ouer, than he entred in to a streyght causy ma∣de of stone wherin he rode forth, and on euery hāde of hym all was but grete ma¦esses and foule stynkynge waters, the whiche waye brought hm streyght vn∣to the porte noyre, the whiche was the strongst castell of all the worlde, and so whan he came to the brydge & gate ther∣of, there he founde .xii. knyghtes all ar∣med on ho back .vi at the one ende of the brydge, and .v. at the other ende and At the gate there were .xii. other knygh¦tes
on fote holdyng hatches and mases of stle in theyr handes to thement o kepe that none shode entre in to the ca¦stell & aboue o the abyns & bowle∣weckes there stode men of warre with crosows and other wpens to defend the place. And al this season in the moūt peryllous was mayster Steuen clerke to the faye Florence doughter vnto the myghty kynge of Soroloys emendus who had lien there nye the space of a ye¦re to abyde the comynge of that knyght that sholde acheue al the aduentures of that castel and in his company was the cstable y• kepte the palayses & halles wt¦out the castell of the porte noyre, & than mayster Steuen knewe by his boes & connynge of astronomy that ye knyght sholde come the same daye, therfore he & his company mounted on the walles of the palays to se how the knyghe sholde do that was as thā come to gate y• of the castel of the porte noyre. And whan the fyest vi. knyghtes sawe Arthr they to∣ke theyr sheldes & speces. Than Arthur sayd to Bawdewyn frende I haue nede now to take good hede therfore tari you hre withou, & le me alone with them, Than these .vi knightes ran all at ones n Arthur on the brydge and strake him with speres & swerdes, but for all that he felte no hurte, but he encountred soo with the firste that his spere dyd glyde thrugh his body, & so he fell owne dead and the spere breake, and with the ron∣chn thereof he strake the seconde so cur∣teisly that he ouethrewe both horse and man & fell bsde the brydge into the wa∣ter, and whan he had thought to haue re¦leud him sefe agyne out of the water than Bawwyn cast him downe agay∣ne into the riuer, so there he was drow¦ed, thā Bawdewy toke his spere and brought to Arthur, wherwith he stake an other knyght so rudely that the heade of he spere perced his herte and so fll downe head, & whan the .vi. ther kgh¦tes saw yt theyr .iii. felowes were aye they edde backe agayne ouer the bryge and went to theyr felwes at the brige foe, & Arthur folowed them & his sw∣de in his hāde, & strake one of them that he claue hym to the sholdres, than al the remena ran at ones at him, but he de∣fended hym selfe valyaunly as he that noo thynge fered, fr suche was his ma¦ner, the more he hadde to do, the gater gewe his strength and courage,  so he put hym selfe betwene them and the ga∣te, because of them that were on the al¦les for they dyd hym muche rouble and assayled hym on all sydes, & euer rght noblye he defended hym selfe and gaue such strokes that he made to flye into the fle heades armes and handes, & who so euer he felled to the erth, neuer rose a¦gayne, for Bawdwyn toke them by the legges & dyd caste them ouer the brydge downe into the ryuer whein they were drowned, than Arthur begane o chafe and waxe angry and layde on soo faste rounde about hym that finally he slewe them all saue two, who fledde in at the gate and thought so for to haue esaped But Arthur hasted hym soo fast after theym, that he strke of one of theyr hea¦des, and as he other suped to haue en¦tred in at the gate Arthur strake hm so fyerslye on the backe that he caue hym nye asonder, than they that wre on the bowleerks & on the wailes dyd caste at hym many grete stones and oter we pens, but they coude do hym nne hute bycause hat he was so nere to the gate Than wā the other .xii. knightes whi¦ce were n foe within the gate sawe
the dyscomfyture of theyr .xii. felowes that were on horsbacke done al onely by one man, they were ryght sorowful and so ran out all at ones at hym with grete hatches in theyr handes & whan arthur sawe them he fered gretly assle his good horse, therefore he alyghed & delyuered hym to Bawdewyn & badde hym go tye hym wythout the brige fore, than arthur encoūtred so with the fyrst that he made his head to flye in to the fyeld, and the se∣conde he gaue suche a stroke that he cla∣ue his head nye to the teth. And whan mayster Steu who was on the walles of the plays sawe the noble prowes of Arthur & the great stroks that he gaue sayd to his company, verely behold yon̄∣der is the noblest knyght of the worlde, it is he that shall acheue the aduentures of this place it is the same knyghte that we haue taryed hee for so longe, & euer Athur fyersly fought amonge this peo∣ple and bette them downe one after an other, and among them there was one so gree & byg as thoughe he had bene a gant, who ran at Arthur, & or he was war tke hym by the legges and pulled hm so fyly that they fell downe both togydr to the erth but Arthur fel vnder¦neth the grete churle, and than one of ye other knightes whā he sawe Arthur lye on the erth he lyfte vp his axe & thoughte to haue striken Arthur on the hed but in th hurte ing togider the stroke lyght on the grete deuyll, soo that hys hugged and soule heed flewe to the earth. Than Arthur lepte on his fete and sayde. Syr I thanke thee for thou haste delyuered me fro muche payne and Ieopardye, and syth thou hast delyuered me of thys gret foule dwee I shal paye the anone th mages, and thrwith lyfte vppe hs swerde and gaue him suche a stroke that he claue his head asonder, than Arthur abandoned hym selfe amonge the reme∣naunt so fyersly that he made great plen¦te of edes and armes to fal to the groūd and to make shorte processe he dydde soo moche that none of the .xii. were lefte on liue but al were slayne and christened in the waer by Bawdewyn, for he was to they a good go fader. Than Arthur stepte in at the wket of the gate than al those that were on the walles did shot and caste at him, & euer he bare of wyth his shelde as well as he myght tyl at the late he came to them, and the fyrste that he mette wyth loste his lyfe, & there dyde such meruayles that it was wounder to thynke therof, for some he threwe ouer the walles, and some lept into the water so that ynally they were slayne & drow∣ned, & none lefte on loue in all the castell that he coude find or here, & Bawdewin was right sore trauayled wyth castynge of them in to the water that were slayne Than Arthur sayde to, Bawdwyn, fren∣de I wyll go entre into the grete palays of aduentures, the which he sawe before hym in the castel, therfore Bawdewyn I wyll y• ye abyde me hre in this court, & kepe well my horse assyle tyll I come a∣gayne to you. Syr said Bawdewyn for goddes sake put not youre selfe noo more in ony place where as ye thynke is ony greae peryll. well said Arthur, care not for y•, but I praye you do as I say, & loke in no wyse ye come to me wythout I cal you, thā Arthur moūted vp certane gre¦ces to entre into the hall of the palays yt which was y• way to ye mount peryllous and there he found the moost fayre hous that euer was sene, sete all aboute with ymages of fne gode, & the wyddowes were all of fyne mbre, wyth many hys clere wyndowes, and out of this hall he
entred in to a chambre the moste rychest that euer was seen▪ forsyth god first ma¦de mankynde there was no maner of hy∣storie nor bataile but in that chambre it was potrayed with golde and asure, & other fesshe coloures so quyckely aour∣ned that it was wonder to behold, there was portrayed how god dyde create the sonne and the mone, & in the rofe were al the .vii. planettes wrought with fyne golde and syluer, and all the sytuacyons of the heuens wherin were pyght many carbuncles & other precyous stones, the whiche dyde cast grete clerenes bothe by daye and by nyght, to saye the trouthe it was the moost rychest chambre and the wonderfullest that euer was seen in all the worlde. Proserpyne quene of the fay∣ry caused it thus to be made. Also there were dyuerse beddes wonderfull ryche, but specyally one the whiche stode in the myddes of the chambre surmounted in beaute all other, for y• vtterbrasses ther∣of were of grene Iasper wyth grete bar¦res of golde set full of precyous stones and the crāpons were of fyne syluer en¦bordered wyth golde, the postes of yuery with pomelles of corall, and the staues closed in bokeram couered wyth cryme∣syn satyn & shetes of sylke with a ryche couerynge of emyns, and other clothes of cloth of golde, and foure square pyllo¦wes wrought amonge the sarasyns, he curtaynes were of grene sndall vyroned wyth golde & asure, and rounde aboute this bedde there laye on the four carpet∣tes of sylke poynted & enbrowdred with ymages of golde, & all the foure corners of this bedde there were foure condytes meruaylously wrought by subtyll entay¦le, out of the whiche there yssued so swet an odour & so delectable yt al other swete¦nesse of the world were as nothynge to the regarde therof, & at the head of thy bedde there stode an ymage of golde and had in hys lyfte hande a bowe of yuery and in his right hande an arowe of fyne syluer, in the myddes of his brest there were lettres that sayd thus. whan thys ymage shoreth than all this palais shall tourne like a whele, & than who so euer lyeth in this bedde shall dye, without it be that knyghte to whome this bedde is destenyed vnto. And whan Arthur saw the noblenesse of thys chambre, and spe∣cyally of this bedde he had great plesu∣re to behold it and sayd to him selfe how that at all aduentures he wold lye dow¦ne on the bedde, and not to ferre for anye drede of death, & as he was lyeng downe on this bedde he espyed in euerye corner of the chambre a gret ymage of fine gol∣de standynge eche of theym holdynge in theyr handes a great horne of syluer, & by theyr countenance redy to blow. Than Arthur herde a great voyce whyche was so loude ad horryble that master Steuē who was in the playes wtout the castell myght ryght wel here it, the which voyce sayd, behold now the ende. Than may∣ster Steuen sayd to hys company. I am sure ye knyght is entred into ye palays wt in the castell god defend hym from all yll encōbraunce, than al the palays begā to tremble & shake wondersly so moche that at the last one of the .iii. ymages begā to blow his horne so loud that it might wel be herde the space of a myle, than the pa∣lays trembled so sore y• all shold haue fal∣len o peces, the dores & windowes oftē¦tymes dyd open & close agayne by theyre owne accord, than Arthur hearde aboute him gret noyse of people as though there had bene a thousandemen togyder, but he coulde se no creature, at the last he per∣ceyued greate lyghte of torches, & euer he
herde styll the noyse of people Comynge and goynge aboute ye bedde, & also herde the brayenge of an hydeous ryuer so yt it  to hym that it had ben the oringe o the wylde see, ther with he felte suche a terryble wynde that he had moche pay¦ne to sustayne hym on his fete. Than Ar¦thur assayed agayne to haue layne dow¦ne on the bedde, than the voyce began to crye agayne & sayd, beholde now the ende than the seconde ymage began to blowe than came there in to the chambre suche noyse & tourment that Arthur was nye defe wyth ye terryble dynne, & the palays than began sorer to tremble than it dyde before, so that Arthur thought surely yt all ye palays sholde haue fallen, than Ar¦thur drewe hym towarde the bedde & as he wold haue layne hym downe he sawe on hys ryght hande a grete lyon fyers & fell comyge to hymwarde gaīge and rampge to deuour hym, & so assayled hy ght rudely, & wyth hys pawes to∣ke  so by the sholder that his har∣neys coulde not kepe him, but yt his shar∣pe clawes entred in to his fleshe, and as the lyon wolde haue taken hī by ye heed he  helde before hym, & the lyon dsht it wyth his pawes all to peces and nye had ouerthrowen hym to ye erth, but than Arthur toke his strength to hym & as the lyon was rampīge before hym he put his sworde clene thrugh his body, & so the lyon fell downe deed to the erhe, & Arthur was yght fore hurte in the shol∣der and bledde faste, than he approched agane to the bedde to haue layde hym downe, than ye thyrde ymage fyersly dyd blowe hs hore & out of the ende therof by semyge to Arthur there yssued out an other lyon greter & stronger than the other was. whan Arthur sawe hym he cryed to god & to our blessyd lady to hel∣pe & socour hym from yll deth and soule encombraūce, & so the lyon dressed hym towarde Arthur, & strake at hym wyth his brode pawes, & Arthur helde before hym the remenaūt that was left of his shelde, but the lyon shortly brake it all to peces as though it had bene but glasse, & with one of his fete he toke Arthur by ye lyfte syde and rased fro him a gre parte of his harneys & his doublet and shert, and a gret pece of his flesh to the bare rybbes, & if god had not there helped hī he had tendred his mortall lyfe, than ar∣thur wyth his swerde strake of the lions fote that was vnder his yde, & therwith the lyon fell to the eth & or he ose agay¦ne Arthur recouered another stoke and stake of his heade by the shuldres, than Arthur toke a fayre cloth of sendall that laye on the bedde, & therwyth wrapped his woūdes & staunched them frome bitdynge, than he approched agayne to the bedde to lye downe to test hym and than sodenly the fourth ymage began terry∣bly to blowe his horne, therwith athu loked behind hī & espyed a great gaune comng to hī warde, who was .xv. fote of lngth, betynge togeder his tethe as though they had bene hamers striinge on a stythy who had in his hand a great axe, wherof the blade was wel the fote lon, the whiche was so longe & sharpe that it would cutte clene a sonder euery thynge that it touched. And whan thys gyaunt sawe these lyons dede he was o sore dyspleased that he was all in arage and so rowled vp his eyen and dashte to∣gyder his tethe, and ran fyerselye at Ar∣thur thynkynge to haue stryken of hys head, but Arthur feared moche he stroke and lepte asyde, whereby y• stroke wente besyde hym and dasht in to panement o udely yt the blade of the weapen entred
therin Iuste to the heade, & than Arthur strake him with his swede but the stro¦ke mounted vp agayne and wold in no wyse enter, for he was harneysed with the skynne of a serpent, the whiche was so hard that no wepen coud empoyre it And whan Arthur saw yt he was ryght sore displeased and lyfte vp his swaerde agayne & strake the giaunt on the heade more rudely than he didde before, but all that aualed not, for it semed to him that he strae on a stethy of stele. Than Ar∣thur fered him selfe gretely, than the gy∣ant strake many strokes at arthur, but alwayes he watched so the strokes that he dydde let theim passe by hym wihout ny hurte or domage, for he perceyued ryght well that if the gyaunte dyd light on him wih a full stroke there was no∣ne other way with him but death. Thus this gyant euer pursued Arthur to ha∣ue striken him, but alwayes arthur wat∣ched the strokes and voyded them wyse∣ly and oftentymes strake the gyaunt a¦gayne but he coulde doo hym no hurte, thus they fought a grete space not ferre fro the ryche bedde in the myddes of the chambre than the giaunt with grete yre lyfte vp his fauchon to haue stryken Ar∣hur vpon the head and the stroke came brayeng & dasht into the erth lyke thon∣der for Arthur auoyded craftely the stro¦ke, the which entred and cut asonder a greate brase of a bech that stode before the bedde of white yuery▪ & so the stroke descēded downe into the rth thrughout all the pauemen, for the gyaunt was so sore dyspleased that his weapen enred thrugh bothe wode & stone and into the rh o the hard head and therwith the bade of his fauchon brast clene asonder in the myddes, & whan the giannt sawe that he fared lyke a fende of hell, and so toke the handlynge therof and cast it at Arthur, but wysely he dyde auoyde it & so it lyghted on the wall of the chambre wherin the stroke entred well a fote and an halfe than the gyaunte lepte to thee brase of the benche that he had cut ason∣der before, and wold haue rasshed it out of the benche, but it was so sore bounde with crampns of stele to ye benche that he coude not remeue it, & as he stouped to pull therat Arthur espyed hym & how the serpentes skynne was but shorte be∣hynde his backe, & so vnder the skynne he dasht his swerde in to his bely to the crosse, than the gyaunt fell downe & ma¦de a terryble braynge the whiche myght well be herde a grete waye of, than Ar∣thur recouered on hym an othr stroke & so dasht his swerde in to his herte, than he made a greter rye than he did before and ther with his soule passed awaie to the deuil of hell, than ye noyse was hearde agayne tha sayde, beholde thende, than was Arthur so wey & so sore trauayled and his woūdes bledde so fast yt he had much payne to sustaine himselfe on his fete, how be it as wel as he might he re¦payred downe the ryche bed & alwayes his swerde in his hand & therwith layd him down on the bed, than the ymage of gold at the beddes head with his bow & arowe dyd shote & hyte one of the wyn∣dowes so sore yt it flewe wide open with the stroke, out of whiche window there yssued suche a smoke & fume so blacke yt it made a the hous so darke that arthur coude se nothing, the which fume stake so abominably that arthur theby was nye dead, than there rose suche a wynd so grete & feruent that it brast the glasse windowes & latesses so that the tyles & stones flew all about the hous lyke hay¦le, and it thōdred so terrybly that al the
erth shoke▪ and the palys trembled like to haue gone all to peces, and at the last he perceyued a brenynge spere al of fyre the whiche was comynge to hym warde therwith he lpte fro the bedde & fiedde fro the stroke, and sawe where yt wnte in at an other lytell chambre by & fell on a knyght as he lay a bedde and so brente hym clene thrugh, and The fyre descēded thrughout bedde and chambre and al & sanke depe in to the erth, than sodeynly brast asonder two pyllets whiche sustey¦ne the couerynge ouer the Bedde, and than al the hole palays began to tourne aboute lyke a whele, than Arthur ranne to the ymage of golde that stode at he beddes heed & enbraced it in his armes for the ymage remoued noo thinge, and this tourneng of the palays endured a grete space. And Bawdewyn Arthurs squyer who was wythout in the courte pyteously wepte & demened tyght grete sorow for ye fete that he had of his may¦ster for he thought veryly how that he was but deed, and sayd a my lorde ar∣thur the best kniht the moost noble and hay the moost sage and curteyse creature that euer was fourmed by nature, aas why dyde ye entre in to this vnhap¦py castell, for I thynke surely ye are but de. nd o than at ye last yt tournynge of this palays began to sece, and the der¦kenes began to auoyde & to waxe fay∣re and clre and the ayre peasyble thau arthur sate hym downe vpon the ryche beddes syde ryght feble & faynt bycause of the gret toble that he had endured and for the ferefull horyblenes yt he had een and herde han whan it was thus waed faye & clere, than the voyce sayd agayne twyse, it ys ended it ys ended, & whā mayter Steuen herde that voyce he sayd vnto his compani. veryly the ad¦uentures of the palays in ye castell of the porte noyr are acheued, therefore I am sure it can be none otherwyse but that ye knight that is there, eyther he is dead or elles ryght sore wounded & than he wēt & gadred herbes suche as he knewe we∣re ryght precyous for all maner of woū∣des and made of theim to gyue vnto Ar∣thur if i were his fortune to fynde hym alyue, & Baudewyn who alo had herde the voyce thoughte verely than that Ar∣thur had ben dead, and sayde to him selfe that neyther for ye dyspleasure of his lor¦de, nor ye for feare of ony other thynge he wolde abyde no longer but yt he wod mount vp into the palays to se if he cou∣de knowe howe his lore dydde, & so  vp ye stayres wt his swearde in his hande and passed thrugh the hall and entred in to the chabre where as arthur was sit¦tynge on the beddes side, then was Baw¦dewyn glad whan he sawe his mayster alyue and demaunded him how he didde And arthur answered and said how that he was ryght wery and sore wounded. Than Badewyn was ryght sorowfull at his herte, for he fered gretly leste that he had some mortall wounde, and sayde Syr may it please you to shew me your woūdes. It pleaseth me right well sayd Arhur. Than Bawdewyn vnarmed hī and serched all his woundes, for he was a ryght good surgyen, and wasshed and staunched his woundes, and softly dyd anoynt them, the whiche did him right grete ease. Than Arhur armed hym a∣gayne and sayd that he wolde go seche ferder ouer all the palays to knowe yf there were ony mo aduentrs & ther∣with there entred i to ye chambre a yon∣ge varlet, who accstomaby befre ap∣parayled the mete and drīke that srued for the knightes that wre dead at the
gate of the castel, & whan he came before Arthur he kneled downe & sayde. A gen∣tyll knight I crye you mercy, for goddes sake saue my lyfe, for I am a pore ver∣let that serued for my lyuing the knigh∣tes that ye haue slayne. Thou shalte ha∣ue noo hurte sayde Arthur on the condy∣cyon that thou wylt tell me the trouthe whether there be in this castell any moo men or women. Syr sayd the verlet here in this place there be noo moo creatures but all onelye two prysoners who were delyuered to my maysters whome ye ha∣ue slayue to be kepte hire in prison to the entente that it shoulde neuer be knowen where as they were become & they were sente hyther by the cōmaundemen of the duke of vygor. well good frende sayd ar∣thur brynge me to them, than the varlet conuayed him streyght to the prison whe¦re as they were closed in, and the varlet didde vnlocke al the dores whiche wre meruaylously wrought, and at the laste they came to a grete cofer all of yren whi¦che was surely made fast to the wall wt gret bondes & barres of stele, than Ar∣thur didd so muche by his strength that he brast open the cofer & toke out the pry¦soners with much payne, for they were sore charged with boltes of yren, so that they coude stere no maner of waye, and whā they were loused one of them sayde A dere lorde, I wote not what ye be, nor whether ye haue taken vs out of prison for our welthe or for our hurte, but for goddes sake rather than ye shold put vs agayne into this cofer fyrst strike of our hedes. Certaynly sayde Arthur we haue non entent to do you any maner of hurt therfore tel me of whens ye be & where ye were borne. A syr sayde they, we are so nye ouercome for lack of mete, and so sore brused withal yt we can scant speake ony worde, therfore syr for goddes sake gyue vs some mete. Frēdes sayd Arthur I can not tel whether there be ony mete & drinke in this hous or no. Yes syr sayd the varlet here in this hous there is suf∣fycyent and it were to receyue the mygh∣ty Emendus kynge of soroloys. Well sayd Arthur than go fetche theym some parte thereof, than the varlet set vp the tables, & dyd set on them brede and wyne and other mete sufficient, and than they all dyd eate and drynke as muche as dyd please them, and whan they had done, the varlet demaūded of the prysoners if they wolde be shauen, & they answered. Yes with a right good wyl. Than the varlet apparayled all thinge redy, for he was a good arbour, and whan they were sha∣uen than the varlet brought thē gownes of the knyghtes that were slayne & whā they were apparayled, they semed wel to be extraught of a noble lygnage, and so thee were in dede as ye shall here after. ¶How Arthur after yt he had acheued ye aduētures of the palays & delyuered the prysoners, & after how yt he acheued the aduenture yt was in the galary goyng in to the gardin of the moūt perillous, & by his might with a grete barre bet downe ii. massyue ymages of coper eche of them holding a flayle yt was of such wyght y• x. men myght scant lyfte one of them fro the eth. wherwith they were euer beting wyth greate strokes made by enchaunt∣ment, to thentent that none sholde passe in to the gardyns of the moūt peryllous & so than fayled & ended all the enchaun∣tementes of that place. Cap. xliiii. AFter that Arthur had delyuered these prysoners and acheued the foresayd aduentures, than the varlet ca∣me
to hym and sayd. Syr it is of trouth that ye haue fordone & ouercome all the aduentures of this place sauynge one, & that is in ye galery goynge in to ye gardyn and syr yf that were for done than euery body myght goo & come in to this castell as surely as in to ony other place. well good frende {quod} Arthur I praie you bryng me thyder. Syr with a ryght good wyll sayd ye varlet, but syr we must haue fyrst some fyre with vs, for ye galery is so der∣ke that we can se no thynge there, and so than they lyghted torches & wente forth so ferre that at the laste in a lytell strayte way Arthur foūde two ymages of coper one on the one syde & an other on ye other syde, & they had eche of them a grete flay¦le in theyr handes, wherwith they conty¦nually bete downe ryght, ye whiche was made by enchauntement, so that no crea¦ture coude passe by them without deth, and whan Arthur sawe them he toke his swerde in his hande & layde on with all his myght on these macomettes, in such wyse that his strokes might wel be herd of a great waye but for all that he coude not enpayre them, thā he perceyued wel that hys swerde coude do hym but lytel helpe wherfore he toke in his hād agree bar of a dore that he foūde there, & there with he laid on so fast that finally he bet downe both these macomettes, than all the enchatmēt began to faile: for than he myght seclerely al about him, & wyth strayning of him selfe in this bataile his woundes braste out agayne on bledyng wherfore he was fayne to vname hī in the same place, & than Bawdewin dyde staūch al his woūds againe and dressed them newly wih swete and soft oynte∣mentes than he wold haue armed hym agayne but than the varlet sayde. Syr your harneys shall but hurt your woū∣des, hardely leue it here styll and arme you no more, for surely syr ye be nowe in as good sauegarde as though ye wer by your fader that engendred you. Frende sayd Arthur loke that here be no treson Syr I waraūt you on payne of my hed, syr boldly now ye may enter into the gar¦dyn, & there ye shall fynde a noble clerke who is son to a king who is pertayning to a ryghte hye and mighty pryncesse th noble Florence doughter and cyre to the puyssant king Emēdus, who hath bene there more than this halfe yere to abyde for your cominge. For me sayde Arthur thou wotest not what thou saist, for how shold he haue ony knowlege of me. Syr sayd ye varlet I can not tell you, but sure¦ly it is as I saye, therfore let vs go thy∣der. So they wente forth & entred in the gardyn wherin was all the plesure that coud be thought, and as they went forth therin playenge there came to Arthur a fayre yoange varlet & goodly dyd salute hym and sayd. Syr ye be ryght hertelye welcome into the londe of Soroloys as the moost desyred knygh that euer was gyrde wt swerde. why good frende sayde Arthur where is that place that I am so sore desyred in Syr sayd he in all the lōde of Argence. Fayre frende sayd he & why I am so sore there desyred. Syr yt cā the prysoners that ye haue delyuered shewe you full well. Why {quod} Arthur how know they what I am. Syr as god helpe me ye are better knowen here thā ye are ware of for here is in this gardyn a noble cler¦ke son to a kyng who hath taryed here a grete season, who knoweth you wel, and all the demenour that hath ben betwene you & the fayre damoysel Iehannet or ye departed out of your owne coūtre, & also he knoweth ryght well howe that ye dyd at vyen in the tournay, and also wat ye
dyd at Brewle, and how ye made youre cosyn Hector duke of orgoule. In the na¦me of god sayd Arthur I haue great mer¦uayle howe ye can tel me all this. And as they were thus talkynge there came to them a grete flocke of knyghtes, than ye varlet sayd, syr yonder is my sayde lorde who is coming to you. Nay said Arthur I shall go vnto him, at whiche tyme this sayd maister Stēuen was apparyaled in a mātell of vyolet chamlet, & in a sircote of grene satyn furred with ermyns, & as soone as he sawe Arthur he auayled hys bonet & dyd salute hym. Than Arthur sayd, a gentyll mayster it is to me a grete rebuke that so noble a man as ye be shol¦de do to me so greate reuerence, than the mayster dyde smyle and toke hym by the hande and sayd. Syr we haue olnge tru¦sted for the welth & honour that is nowe come to you therfore nowe ye be welco∣me as the chefe souerayne knyght of all the wyde worlde, syr now I thinke to go se this palays in to the which neuer man entred before saue onelye you, for ye are the fyrste that euer entered therto, & that is by your noble valure, syr I know wel ye be sore woūded, therfore I haue made for you a lytle drynke, and than he sente for it incontynent, & whan it was come he sayd, syr drynke therof hardelye, feare for nothyng in the name of God, for I desyre more youre health and honor, thā of ony other creature liuyng. Than Ar∣thur toke it and dranke wel thereof, and as soone as it was spredde abrode in his vaynes, he was thereby sodeynly all hole & more lustyer than euer he was before, for than he thought yt his strength was dobled, & truelye in a maner so it was, for by the vertue of these herbes he had ye grace yt ro thens forth there was neuer man yt coude drawe out of his body ony blode but onely the foule monster of the brosse wt whome he fought at great Ieo¦pardye, as ye shall here afterwarde. ¶How mayster Steuen went with Ar∣thur in the palays wtin the castell to ye en¦tēt to see the wonderfull aduentures that Arthur had there acheued. Cap. xlv. WHan that Arthur had receyued the sayde drynke and recouered there by his helth, than mayster Steuen toke hym by the hande and sayde. Syr I haue grete desyre to go se this palays I praye you let vs go thyder, & so they .. went forth togyder, before & all other fo∣lowed them who wolde, & at the last they came into the same naowe entre whee as Arthur had betē downe these .ii. ma∣ges of coper with theyr greate flayles, & there a grete season they stode & behelde them, and euery man assayed to remeu one of theyr flayles, but it wolde not be they were so heuye, than euery man had grete meruayle how yt there might be so muche myghte in one knyght as to beate downe so mighty and heuy a thing, & thā they entred in to the palays he whyche was the moost fayrest & rychest that euer was sene with mannes eye, & at the laste they entred into the ryche chambre wher as the goodly bedde was, than mayster Steuen had grete meruayle of ye inesty∣mable rychesse of that chambre & bedde, Than came to theym the .ii prysoners, & did salute mayster Steuen and whan the mayster sawe them he knewe one ryght wel and made to hī good chere and sayd what syr markes haue ye bene here pry∣ner. Ye syr said he truly, and for yt neuew of the duke of bygor, whā he had slayne my lorde and murdered my bretherne by false treason, than he tooke me and thys
ether knyght and did sende vs into thys place as pryuely as he coude, and dyd de∣lyuer vs to the knyghts that kepe thys place who be now al dead by the prowes of this knyghte, who hath delyuered vs out of pryson & thraldome, & thanked be god & his noblenesse now we be escaped fo all daūger. In the name of god sayde the mayster, it was gete nede yt he shulde com in to this countre, and than he sayd to Arthur. Syr it draweth fast to night warde, wherfore it is hye tyme to go to souper & syr I wyll soupe wt you here in this chambre. Syr I thanke you sayd Ar¦thur, but I can not tell wheder there be ony thing cōueninte to receyue suche a pesn as ye be. Syr sayd the mayster by the fayth that I owe to you I am pertay¦nng to so hye and pyssant & rych lady who hath sufficient both for you and for vs all, than ye mayster cōmaunded o ma¦ke redy the souper, than anon the tables were layd, & the maysters seruaūtes ran to hs tent on the mounte peryllous, and aone they brought all maner of thynge necssary, vessell & plate of gold & syluer grete plente, than the clothes were layde & waer brought forth, than Arthur refu¦sed to wsshe with ye mayster because he was son vnto a kynge. wel syr sayde the mayster I praye you fulfyll my desyre for truly I kow better your estate & ho¦nour hā ye wene I do, than Arthur dyd as he was requyred, than the mayster sat wne & Arthur by hym, & the markes bfore them, & all other sate downe at o∣ther syde tables, where as they were as rychly srued as though they had ben in the hous of the noble Florēs, but thogh she were not there, yet she payed for all thyr expences. Thus Arthur sat at sou¦pe, who seamed to all theym that se hym o be ryghte fayre & gracyous aboue all other that euer they sawe, & so they pray∣sed hym moche in theyr hertes, and whā they had souped at good leysure and the tables taken awaye, than they set them downe on cosshyns of sylke, and ye may∣ster sayd to Arthur. Syr behold here my lorde the markes, who is & shal be youre knyght, for ye haue delyuered him oute of pryson That is trouth sayde the mar∣kes, & therfore I thanke hym. well syr sayd Arthur, I herde you say as I remem¦bre how that the neuew of the duke of bi¦gor caused you to be put here in pryson, and also how he slew youre brethern by treason, wherfore if it may please you I requyre you shewe me how it dyd fortu∣ne. And whā mayster Stuen herd hym enquyre for the mater, he had grete Ioye, for than h knew wel that Arthur wode remedy that case, than the marques an∣swered and sayd. Syr the mater is very longe to reherse, thrfore I feare me the reporte therof shall anoy you. Syr truly sayd Arthur it shall be no pane to me to here it. Than the markes sayde, syr it is of troth how that the lord of Argntn was my broder, who was in his tyme a ryght good knight. I saye it not because he was my broder, but of very trouth he was so gretly alowed that the renowne of hym was spredde a brode all the lond of Soroloys, for there he was reputed to be the moost souerayne knyght of al ye worlde, and so it fortuned yt the duke of bygor who is a myghty lorde in his coū¦tre made on a daye a ournaye o be hol∣den at his cyte of bygor bycause of a ne∣uewe of his who was maryed the same daye vnto a ryght hye lygnage, and thys dukes neuewe was & yet is righte fyers and orgyllous, and is a ryght gretly re∣doubted knyghte of his handes, and in euery place he was reputed nexte to my
broder to be the best knight of the world and at this foresayde turnay was my brother, and this dukes neuew had gret enuy at him bycause of the great noble∣nesse that he herde repued of hym and so oke counsayle with some of his affi¦nite and detrmined to Iust against my lorde m brother, to thētent to abate his renowne, & so he toke to his company .x other knightes, & whā the tournay was begon, he and his company ran at ones at my broder, who as than was not wa¦re of their malicious purpose, nor had no mo in hys company but me and his squier, wherfore we suffred muche pay∣ne, but finally my broder deliuered vs all fro them & bette downe the dukes neuew to the eth, but than my brother by his gentylnesse did that I wold not haue done, for whan he saw him at the erth he lighted & brought him an other good horse, and helped him to mounte theron, and than my brother lept againe on his horse and went to the tourney & there dyd suche meruayles of armes yt all that behelde him meruayled therat, and generally they all sayd how that in all the worlde there was none lyke him And whan the ukes neuewe herde all that prayse be giuen to my brother, his herte swelled for anger and enuy, & for despite he wolde no more lust ye daye. And whā all was ended, the price was giuen to my brodr by the cōsēt of both parties and so than all the companie wente to the courte to the duke, & there they began greatly to praise my broder. And whā his neuew herde that he was right sore dyspleased bycause he was be¦ten downe by hym the same day, herfoe openly before the duke for pure malice he appeled my broder of treason, and sayd how that he had beten him downe in the tournay by crafte and false tesō Than my broder coulde no lenger endu¦re his wordes, bu sayd. In fayth syr ye say vntruly, for I neuer thought treson in all my lyfe, neyther to you nor to non other creature, and therwith in the qua¦rell he dyd caste downe his gloue at the fote of the duke. And whan this dukes neuew saw that he had cast his gloue, he was nie enaged for anger & dspite and stept on his fete & toke a grete mace of stele from a varlet that stode beside, & thewith he strake my broder on ye head so that the blode fell to the erth, & whan I saw my brother so stroken I toke my swrde in my hande & thought to haue slayne hym, but than other knightes kepte vs sonder, so than my brothers company began to draw togyther, & his company in likewyse, wherby it was li¦kely there to haue ben a great fray, but wysely the duke appesed bothe partyes and was right sore dyspleased with the outrage of his neuew. Thā my brother sayd to the duke, syr your neuewe hath appeled me of treason, and therfore be∣holde here lieth my gloue to defend my self in the quael, that by treason wtout any defiaunce, & or I was ware he hath striken me like a alse traytour as he is and that wyl I proue my body agaynst his, and therfore syr duke lette me haue ryght according to the law of armes. Thā was this dukes neuew greatli bla¦med of euery knight who sayd general¦ly yt yf he had ight he should be for this dede right sore punisshed Thā the duke was right sorowful, & did much labour to appese my brother, but in no wise  e wolde be content of a great season, how be it fynalli the duke required hī so mo∣che, & so did all other knightes that my broder who had a gentyll herte did for∣gyue
all y• matter, & there the pras was mae & eche o them bounde to other in two. M. pounde to kepe & obserue suche direceions as the duke wold take in yt mater, wherwt they said they were well content. Than the duke sayd, syrs fyrst eche of you shal pardon other of al euyl willes that hath ben betwene you. And thero they answeed & said yt they were pleased so to do & in knowlege therof they enbraced eche other and kissed togy¦ther. Than the duke determined ferder, how that his neew shuld delyuer to my brother .CC. poūd of yerely land to haue to hym and his ayres for euermore the whiche direccion his neuew there con∣fermed & there my brother was put in full possessyon therof both by the duke & also by his neuew, who shewed fayret semblaunt outwarde to my brother thā he thought inwarde in his herte. Than my brother toke leue of the duke & hys neuew vnder the false colour of loue cō¦ayed my broder parte of the way, but fall and like a traytour he had layde a hement in a lytle wode of thre score me in harnes & so there or we were we they ohe in behinde vs, & there sh fully slew my brother and two of his sones of the age of .xii. or .xiii yeres And so there they slew a .xl. knightes y• were in our company and there he toke me and ney flow prisoners out of the whiche ye haue delyuered vs. And syr it is so my bother hath no mo childrē left on lyue sauyng a doughter, who is en∣heritour to all the lande of Argenton, & the dukes neuew hath taken fro her all the heritaunce that she is borne vnto and hath hee in kepyng, and is purpo∣sed to mary her to a boy who is his bar¦bot, who by reason ought to be maried to a great erle or els a lord both for her noblenesse, richesse, and frendes: but as now she is in y• case that there is none y• wyl mayntaine her right for manye of her frendes ben dead & I haue ben here in prison syth the death of my lorde my broder her fader and also her men & sub¦iectes dare do nothing for lacke of a ca∣picayne, & this duke is getly redoubted for he is mighty bothe of hauoyre & of frendes, & therfore my nece is lykely to be lost, for she shalbe giuen at this next mawdelayne tyde to a lewde boy & she is likely to be dishered for euer. For she hath no helpe nor cosayle, & ther wyth this markes pyteously begā to wpe for the great sorow that he had al his herte Than mayster Seuen sayde syr I en∣sure you it is of a trouth al y• this mar∣kes hath shewed you. Certayny sayd ar¦thur yf god wyl sende me the grace y• I may here of a knight of min that should come hither to me, thā wyll I faythfully ensure you to do my payne to help & so∣cour this noble damoysel. Syr {quod} may∣ster Steuē I wyl know to morow how your knight doth bu now it is to late, and syr ye shal ly alnight i his pals which is pertayning to my la ores, for it was geuen her whā she was  ii. dayes olde, bowle it she was neuer here, nor yet none other but you all one∣ly, therfore syr kepe it for my laye tyll the season that ye may ble grace for ye haue made it  maner of enchaūtemētes, anoer  go this night into my tente whereas I haue layne al this season, & tomorowe betymes I wyl come to you agayn and brynge all my stuffe into tis pace but syr loke that ye ly all this night in ths ryall bed, and there Arthur promis  so to do. Thā the mayster & his &  departed, fro hym as for that .
¶Howe Proserpyne quene of the fayrye aboute mydnyght appered to Arthur wt grete lyght of orches, and howe that she shewed him that wythin the mounte pe∣ryllous there was the whyte shyeld and theg good swerde enchaunted called cla∣rence, and howe that he shuld haue them wt moche honour yf his here durst serue hym. And howe the nexte daye mayster Steuen led Arthur into the herber where as the white shelde was, the which coud neuer be remeued fro the tree whereon it hanged, and how that Arthur toke it at his case and clarence the swerd also, the whiche coude neuer before that tyme be drawē out of the sheth, nor it wold helpe no body but all onely Arthur who drew it out lyghtly, and after that it did hī mo∣che helpe as ye shall here after. Ca. xvi WHan the mayster Steuen was de¦parted, than Arthur layde hym downe in the ryal tyche bedde and slepte well all his fyrst slepe tyll it was a¦bout mydnygh, than he awoke and saw grete clerenes of torche lyght afore hym, and perceyued stonding before his bedde a quene crowned wt gold, who was the most fayre creature yt euer was sene, and he thought she spake to him & sayde Ar∣thur frend here is in this place the whte shelde & clarence the goode swerde of the fayry, therfore thou shalt haue moche ho∣nour yf thy herte be good. And therwith she vanisshed away, wherof Arthur had grete meruayle, both of her beaute & al∣so of there sodayne departing, thus rema¦ned Arthur tyll it was clere day than he rose, & mayster steuen came to hym and they went and herd masse, & after masse Arthur sayde to the mayster, syr I cā not tel what quene it was yt this nyght was with me in the chambre where as I laye but it was the goodlyest fygure of a wo¦man that euer I sawe & she sayde o me how y• ther was in this place the whye sheld and the good swerde claence. And whan mayster Steuen herd that he smy¦led and sayd. Syr I see well it is you to whome the swerde and sheld is desteni vnto, dyuerse knightes hath assayed to take them, but they coulde neuer remeue them fro the place where s they be, ther¦fore now I thīke they haue  mayster syr et vs goe thyder & see what wyll fortune. Than they yssued out of y• palays and went into the garbyn where as was the ryche pauylyon pertayning to the noble Florēce, the which  lest of the rychest werke of the world of grene satyn & crimsē, bordred wt golde & asure, & the post that bare it was of fyne yuery, and the cordes of grene sylke, and in the toppe therof stode an egle of bor∣ned golde, and at the two corners there stode two grete gryffons shining agenst the sonne Than Arthur remembred his vysion that he had or he departed out of his owne countre, & so he behelde the egle a grete ceason, and at the last he cme o the pauylion, than Arthur sawe before hym in the front therof the pesonage of a quene crowned wih gold, the whiche crowne hadde .vi. braunches, the whyche signified .vi. realmes, and in eueri bra the there were wrytten letters, and in ye fyrst was wryten Emendus the myghty kynge of Soroloys, & this braunch has chefe and highest of all other, and in ye se∣conde was wryten Florēce quene of the realme of blaūche toure, & in the thirde was giuē the kīg of orqueny, and in the fourth was wryten Piuernous kyng of vale founde father to mayster Steuen And in the .v. king of mormall, & in the vi. Ismaelite the gret. This crown was
set fal of precius stones, and this image was fayre and gentil to behold, with her forehead playne and whyte, and her heer like the colour of gold, her browes small and propre, somwhat drawynge to the browne colour, and her bsage plan ney¦ter to longe nor to rounde, coloure ly∣k▪ as ross and lilies togider had ben me∣dled, her nose long and streyght, and her ruddy mouth somwhat smylynge, her eyen owly, and al her body and other mē¦bres made without ony reprehencion by the ordynaunce of nature who had set in her all beate, and she was vestured wyth a smte of grene streyte gyrde to her wt a face of golde, so that somwhat her lytel roude and lyly whyte brestes might be see the whiche became her wonderslye wel, and ouer al this she had on a sircote of crymsen lined wt vyolet sendall, & her wide sleues were of grene enbordred wt floures of golde and with ryche pearles And this ymage helde bytwene her han∣des a chaple of sylke wrought subtylly full of freshe floures, and aboute the bor∣der therof were letters wrought of pre∣cyous stones that sayd. He shal kepe me for his owne that shall haue this chaplet And whan Arthur had red wel at length these leters, and sawe the freshe beaute of this ymage, than his herte opened for grete loue, & with grete and feruent de∣syre he loued the presentacyon of that ymage, and therwith stode before it in a grete study. Than mayster Steuē sayd syr I ensure you my lady is suche as this ymage representeth. Syr sayde Arthur than in her is all the beaute of the world. Ye syr sayde the mayster there be two per¦sones yt resēbleth this ymage. First the quene y• ye saw this last night appere to you who is called proserpyne quene of y• fayry, who dyd gyue to my lady Florēs, this castell & this pauilion, & destenyed on her how y• she sholde neuer be maried but to the best knyght of the worlde, & to hym this ymage sholde gyue her chaplet yt she holdeth in her handes, & syr I trust it be you. Secōdly also my lady Florēs in al thinges resembleth to this ymage And so the quene Proserpyne & my lady Florence & this ymage are in al poyntes so like yt ye can not know the one fro the other, & the hye braūche yt is in the crown of this ymage betokeneth yt might  king Emendus fader to my lady Florens, and the seconde sygnifieth my ladies realme, and the other .iiii. represente .iiii. other kīges who are subiectes to my lady Flo¦rēs & to her fader, therefore syr & it please you let vs enter into this pauylyon & se wheder ye may haue the sheld and swerd that all other haue fayled of, and so they entred into the pauilion, and in the myd∣des therof Arthur sawe where there han∣ged on a perche the shelde and the swerd. Than Arthur wente thereto boldly, and toke it as easely as thoughe it had bene his owne before, than he sette his hande to the swerde and so drewe it out of the sherhe, and the blade therof was so clere that it dyd cast meruayllously grete cle∣renese. and therfore it was called claēce and before that tyme it was neuer dra∣wen out of the shethe nor sene with mā∣nes eye, and Arthur delte as easely ther∣with ashe dyd wt his hwne. And whan mayster Steuen lawe this he had grete Ioye and sayd. Syr I se well ye are the same knyght that it was deliuered vnto therfore nowe I haue grete Ioye and I trust that god shall cause you to attayne to muche honour and noblenesse. Than Arthur sayde, syr ye promysed to tell me some tidinges of my knyght that sholde come hyther, syr I requyre you to tell me
yf ye know any thinke of him. Sir said the maister I know wel how ye promi¦sed to come  seke this aduēture which ye haue aceued,  no wise ye wold suffre him to come wt you, & therfore ye sent hym by the great hie way through out ynde the more to thentent he sholde not se your deth nor that he shold dy wt you, & so sir he is not as yet come for in dede he cannot, for he is in the castel cal¦led the brosse, & syr tis by al likelyhode impossyble yt euer he shall depart thēs wtout deth though he were made of yrē & stele, foal the remedy of the world cā not kepe him fro deth, therfore Arthur comforte your selfe, & of a thng that is lost without recouer neuer thinke ther on more. Truly syr sayde Arthur but yf I haue my knight I shall neuer haue cforte therfore speke to me neuer ther∣of, but syr I require you howe he is so lost or in such ieoperdy as ye speke of. with a right good wyl sayd the mayster but I fere me it wyl anoy you for it is a lōge processe to reherse. wel sayd Arthur as for y• I care not, tel on I requyre you ¶How maister Steuē shewed Arthur how yt Gouernar his knight was in the castell of brosse, & how yt the custome of that castell was first begon. Ca. xlvii. THā the maister sayde, syr it is of a trouth yt the castel of the brosse is a right strōg & a noble place, & is ye chefe hed of al ye coūtre, for there is wela v.C. gentylmen yt holde their lōd therby & they are all subiectes to hym that is lord of yt place syr it passeth not two yere ago that there was a lorde of this castel, who was called syr Neuelō le roux, a ful good and a gentyll knight who was right sage reputed and gretli ryche, & right fore bedrad, & wel beloued of all people & syr it is of a trouhe that ioyning to this castell within ii. leges therof there is a forest in the which ther is a maruaylous great depe pit & the entre therof is .iiii, square, & it is well .iiii. spere length brode, & it so black and stinking yt no creature can abide nere it & into this abhominable pit there doth repayre a meruailous & a right horrible mōster, the foulest figure y• euer as  or herde of, for he is wel .xxx. fote long & his head three tymes more larger tha is the heed of an oxe, & his eyen bigger than a mans fyst, and some of his eh standing out his mouthe more than a∣fore & an halfe, wherwith he wore both yren & stele, & his armes by and longe without any mesure, his nayles or clowes lenger then a fote, so harde & sharpe yt there is nothīg but that he wil perce it, & all his body as blacke as any cole, and as hard as stele, for there i no¦thing yt can perce or enpayre him & also he is of that strength that he is able to cary away at ones .iii. knightes armed And he eteth neuer other mete but saw fleshe of mankinde▪ & also he is to lige and swyft that an horse cannot ten to hym, & oftentimes he hath ben assoyed wt great hostes of men, but al th colde neuer do him any maner of hure ey¦ther wt swerde, spere, nor crosdowe, nor any other wepen & thus he doth greate trouble to al the hol coūtre. And o syr it fortuned yt a two yere past abute s. Laurence tide, yt this sayd lord syr Ne∣uelon was comīg out of ynde the more fro the emperour who loued him right wel, & so he had thought to hae gone home to his owne castel of the brosse, & a twēty of his seruaūtes in his pant & he passed by this forest were as this
great pit is & so vnware to him he & his squier dyd rest thē not ferre fro the pit & suffred his other cōpany to ryde forth on afore, & so it fortuned that this foule monster was the same morning yssued out of his pt, & so as soone as he espied this lorde Neuelon he ran on hym & so strangled & bare him into his great pyt and so there he was vtterly lost, & whā this was knowen there was made for hī right great sorow, & syr this lord hath & doughter who is named blaūche flou¦re, who was then of the age of .xv. yere & whan she herde the tidīges of the deth of the lorde her father she made ful great sorow & so she entred into a litle chapell and there she abode .xv dayes contynu∣ally demening wonderful sorow for her father, and euer she praid to god that she might haue some vengeaunce of thys foule monster, so longe thus she prayde that at last on a night she herde a voyce that sayd to her how yt the knight yt o∣uer cometh the lorde of this castel at the ende of two yeres shal fight against this monster, how be it the voyce shewed not whether he shold ouercome the monster or els be ouercomen hīself, than the yōge damoysel reported al this that she herde the voyce say to her brethern and to her vncle, & so than they ordeyned amonge them that her vncle should abide in the castel & Iust with al knightes yt passed by yt way, vnto the tyme yt he were ouer comen with a strong knight, & so it was ordeyned that if the knight of the castel ouercome the knight without than he shold lese his horse & harneys, & also be led to the ustice, that it should be cryde throughout al the coūtre behold the kni¦ght yt is vaynquished, & yf the straunge knight wythout ouercome him of the ca¦ste, than the knight stran̄ger should go to the castel & there be receyued as thef lorde therof & be serued honourable, and thā he shold kepe the castel & that vsage til he were ouercome wt an other knight Sir it fortuned your knight Gouernar to passe by this castel and there did iuste agaynst the lord therof, & so ouerca hm and mani mo sith that time that he was fayne to kepe the sayd vsage, & so syr he is in this castel, & it passeth not now to come .vii. wekes of the ful seaso of wo yere sith the vsage begā, and sir I thīk verily there shal come no knight thider betwene this & that by whome he shold be ouercome, & as sone as the two yere be full cōplet than shal he be led to fight with this terryble monster, & I am sure as sone as he cometh to hym he is but dead and it were a .C. such as he is, and syr thee is mo than .CC. knighes cōty¦nualli lodged aboute this castel to then tent yt he shold not strie awai therfore I repute him but a dead man, for there is no succour cā help him. wel maister said Arthur sith it is thus as ye saye as god helpe me there is nothing shal holde me but I wyl go thither and put my body in ieoperdy for his, for it were a greate shame for me thus to leese my knight, therfore Bawdewyn fēde make edy al my gere for I wyl remeue to morow betymes, for certaynly I wyll abyde no lenger for al the wolde, & whā the mai∣ster herd him he knew wel yt there was none myght let hym of hys enterpryse, how be it he sayde. Sir ye ought not to be reputed neither for sage nor wise that wyl take on hym suche a thyng that he cannot acheue and to go there as perill is wtout remedi it is no hardines thus to do▪ but a ful gret foly, therfore syr for goddes sake abyde. Mayster {quod} Arthur speke no more to me therof, for sure ir
I wyl go thyder & loke ones on that fou¦le monster though he be the deuyl of hell wel syr sayde the mayster as god wyll so be it, but syr syth ye be he to whome it is destenyed to acheue all the aduētures of this counter of Sorolois, whereof this aduenture is one of the gretest, the wh¦che I pray to god that ye maye sbdowe it therfore syr take with you this whyte shelde for there is nothinge that can en¦payre it, & this swerde clance for there was neuer yet a better, & thus syr syth ye wyll nedes go I trust ye may go yt more surelyer & I pray god to sende you good fortune & spede, & saufe to come agayne & so for y• night they went to their restes. ¶How that Arthur whan he was depar¦ted fro the porte noyre for to go the dely∣uer Gouernar oute of the castell of the brosse, & also for to fyght wyth the mon¦ster, he founde in a fayre medowe the ne¦uew of the duke of bygor accompanyed with .xiii. other knightes, who assayled hym right fyersly, but defended hym sel¦fe so valiauntly that he slew .ii. of them and wounded so the dukes neuew that he was fayne to be caryed awaye in an horse lytter. Ca. xlviii. IN the morninge betymes Ar¦thu rose and take leue of the mayster, who sayde to hym. Syr for goddes sake returne agayne as shortly as ye may, for I haue many thīges to speke with you of, & sit I this markes shal kepe this palasī the meane season, & Arthur promised so to do▪ & so departed he & Bawdewyn & rode forth .ii. dayes wtout yndig of ny aduēture tyll at last on a fryday about none they entred into a fayre forest & to∣de a longe seasō & founde no creature, at last hey came in to a fayre medow lusty & grene, & arthur was in a gret thought remembrynge on his shelde yt coude not be enpayred, & also of clarence his swer¦de the which wold cut euerything, and he had grete desyre to se them proued, to thentent yt he might know wheder they were of yt vertue or not, also he was moū¦ted on his good horse assyle, & as he rode thus thynkynge, he mette sodenly wyth xiiii. knightes all armed, & .iiii. of them were on horsbacke, and the other .x. were lyghted on fote & were sitting vnder an oke bycause of the shadowe therof, for y• weder was than very hote, & whā these iiii. knightes on horsbacke saw Arthur one of them dystranged hym selfe and wythout speakyng of ony worde he ran at Arthur and strake hym on the shelde grete stroke and passed forthe wythoute breakinge of his spere, and therewith Arthu loked aboute hym and at the last the knight that had strī¦ken hym was ready apparayled to haue retourned agayne, than Arthur ranne at hym, and the knyht brake hys speare▪ but Arthur gaue hym suche a stroke that he frusshed downe bothe Horse and manne all on an he∣pe, soo rudely that wyth the fal he
brake one of his legs and his hors fell on hym, than Arthur sayd to hym. Syr ye ben traytour thus to stryke me wtout distaūce, but I thinke ye haue now gret nede of a carpenter to make you some styltes & croches, for I wene ye can not lyfe without a lenyng stocke. Than an other of these knightes came on Arthur and he wente shortly to the erth and his heles vpward, & whan his other two fe¦lowes sawe that they can bothe at ones on Arthur and hyt wyth both theyr spe∣es at ones in the myddes of his sheld but they remeued hym no more than yf they had stryken agenst a grete toure, & so they passed forth by, and than reour∣ed agayne wyth theyr swerdes in their hādes and assayled fyersly Arthur on al sydes than Arthur waxed angry & toke in his hand his good swerde clarence & strake therwith so the fyrst that he claue his head downe to the sholdres, & whan his felw sawe that he fledde to his e∣lawes yt were n fote. And than sir Ise∣harte neuewe to the duke of bigor who was fyese & fell, and captayne of al y• cōpany whan he saw one of hys knigh∣tes slayne who was his cosyn germayn he suffed in the nose and bette togyder his teth, & bended his browes as though he had ben wode, & called for his helme and for his horse, & wold suffer none of his cōpany to go with him, for he sayd he wold alone reuenge the death of hys cosyn therewith he moūted on his horse and toke a grete speare & a myghty, than Arthur espied where a spere stod leuing agaynst a tre, and toke it in hys hand & rode agaynst the knyght that came ren∣nynge at hym▪ and they mette so udely that they al to sheueted theyr speres & so passed forth without ony hurte at yt cour¦se. And whan syr Isembarte sawe that he had not beten downe his felawe, he wente to Arthur and strake hym on the shelde with his swerde, but the stroke is bounded agayne, and whan the knyght sawe that he was ryght sorowful & sore displeased, and than agayne with al his myght he strake Arthur in ye myddes of his shelde so rudely that his swerde bra∣ke asonder in the myddes. And whan Ar¦thur sawe that he sayd, syr knyght ye ha∣ue made of one two, for ye haue made shorte swerde of a longe, now ye shall se how I can werke than Arthur strake hī with clarēce his good swerde on his hel∣me so rudely that the stroke dyde glent downe on his at me and did cut asonde all his harneys & entred in to the fless he so that the stroke bare away agrete pece of y• brawne of his arme, the whiche stro¦ke was so heuy that it descended downe to the crope of the horse and cut asonder the arson of the sadel & gaue the horse & grete wounde, & therwith do the horse  man fell downe to the erth. Than ye knyghtes seruauntes ran to helpe hym, but he laye & grete whyle in a traunce, & whan he reuyued he sayd to Arthur, syr knyght ye haue so wounded me & slayne my cosyn germayne, but syr I promyse you faythfully that as soone as I shall be hole agayne I shal render to you this bounte, for I wyll stryke of your hedi the sholdres where so euer I mete you, eyther in chyrche or in ony other place, armed or vnarmed, wel syr sayd Arthur than ye haue giuen me respite tyll ye be hole agayne, & than by the grace of god ye wyl not do so much hurt as ye speke of than the other knightes wolde haue fought with Arthur, but theyr mayster defended them the contrary, bycause he sayd he wolde sle hym his owne handes Than Arthur departed fro them, and ye
knightes put theyr lord in a horse lytter and so caried him to a castel of his own, where as he emayned tyll he had reco∣uered his helth And Arthur after that he was departed fro them rode so longe til he yssued out of the forest, & rode vp to a great hye hyll, and at the descēding ther of he saw where a knight alarmed cam right rudely to him warde, and a greate speare in his hande, and when he came to hym he sayde. Syr are ye of the com∣pany of the .xiiii▪ knightes yt went this way but late. Nay certaynly sayde Ar∣thur for they did their payne to haue tro¦bled me, but I thanke god they myst of theyr purpose, but syr I pray you wher¦fore do you axe the questiō. As god help me syr bicause yf ye were ony of them I wolde le you myne owne handes or e∣uer ye past any ferder if I coulde, & also theyr mayster for he is the most shame∣fullest knight y• lyueth, & falsest traytu that euer was, for he & his cōpany had nye slayne a brother of mine this mor∣nīg by this riuers side bycause he wold not giue hym a fawcon that he bate on his fist, therfore he ran at him wyth hys swerde in his hande and hath wounded him in .xv. places of his bodi, as he that was vnarmed, & the traytour & all hys company be in varnes, & therfore I am come after him to slee him & I myght how be it I thinke it could not lie in my power, for he is a knight greatly redou∣ted, neuertheles I had rather to be dead than my brother shuld be vnreuenged. Syr sayd Arthur take no thought for ye matter, nor folow hym no ferther thys day, for surely he is in no good poynte as now to fight with you nor yet with none other, for he is right sore woūded a syr sayd the knight blessed be god who kepe & preserue him that hath doone ye dede. Thā the knight returned agayne with Arthur talking of that matter. At the last Arthur demaūded of him what maner knightes they were & of whes. Syr as god helpe me it was syr I sem∣barte neuew to the duke of Bygor, the moste falsest traytour in all the world, for he hath murdred by reason the lord of argenton fally without any cause. ye syr {quod} Arthur sith it is he than his trou∣ble pleaseth me so much the betr, a by the grace of god he shal haue mo ancy¦aunce within short space. So than they approched to y• place where as this k∣ghtes broder say sore wounded. Than Arthur called to him Bawdewyn who was a good surgeon, & cōmaunded tat he should do his diligence as shortly as myght be to hele that knight. And so ar∣thur say there al ye night, & the night demaunded of hm whether he was y∣ig and he answered and sayd to the castel of the brosse. wel syr said y• a night and ye will beleue me ye shall not come there, for the goinge thyde is much pe∣ryllous. As for all that I ente not sayd Arthur, for I wil go thider & Iust with the knight that is within. wel syr sayde the knight in the name of god so be it, & syth ye wyll nedes go I shal bring you thyder, for I am one of the knightes of the same compani that are lodged with out to thentent that the knight that is within the castell shold not sele awaye Syr {quod} arthur know you wel the knight that is withī the castell or what s his name. Ueryly syr he is a knight straun∣ger & his name is syr Gouernar a bigge knight and a strōg and a browne o co∣lour, & there is no knight that Iusth with him but he goth to the grounde, & therfore who so euer wyll Iust wt him hath nede to be of great vertu & strength
wel sayd arthur I wyl assay him, and so they wtē o rest, & in the mornyng arose. and the sayde knight who was named Iosseran the almayne, & they rode forth the next way to the castell of the brosse, & arthur left Bawdewyn behinde hym at the castell to take hede to the wounded knyght. Thus arthur and Iosseran the almayne rode forth so longe togeder yt on a wednesday aboute none they en∣tred into a fayr medow before the castell of the brosse. And whan the knightes yt were without keping the tentes sawe Iosseran theyr felow and arthur, wyth hym, than they wente to theyr harneys and cam vnto them & made right great thereto Iosseran theyr companion, and they sayd to Athur, syr knight ye must furnishe that is belonging to you to do and yt is surely ye must strike this shelde and than ye must iust with the knyght that ye shall se yssue out of this castell. well sayd Arthur in the name of god al this shall I do with a right good wyll And these knightes behelde him well & perceyued that he was a goodly knight and praysed hym moche in their hertes. Therwt arthur spurred forth his good horse and ran at the shelde with his spe¦re and gaue it suche a stroke yt he claue it asonder in the myddes. Than Iosse¦ran sayd to his felowes, certaynly if he gyue suche strokes to his enemies there may none endure him. Thā Gouernar in the castell was sone armed, & yssued out. And than the damoysel was moū∣ted on the wales to beholde the batayle And whan Gouernar sawe Arthur he knew him not bicause of his white sheld but Arthur knew hym right well, and behelde the countenaunce of Gouernar how he stretched himself in hys sadell, and plunged his shelde, and dressed his spere and made hym redy, wherfore Ar∣thur loued him much the better, and so they an eche at other, and meete so ru∣dely yt Gouernar brake hys spere, but Arthur strake hym so fiersly that Go∣uernars horse enfodred and fel vnder hym, and so horse and man all went to the earth, and than Arthur tourned and layde his hande on his swerde and was coming againe to gouernar, and al that behelde his valyauntnesse praysed hym moche, and Gouernar did nothing but was fayne to get hym on his fete. Than all the knightes went to hym & wolde haue vnarmed hym and led hym to the Iustice. And whan Arthur sawe that, he coude not suffre that he shoulde haue so muche shame and sayd. Syrs it is no right nor reason that ye shold lede him forth to the Iustice, for hys horse fell vnder hym, and therfore though he fel it was the faute of the horse and not of ye knight▪ for he hath done right well his deuoyre, and also he is my man, for I am his lorde, wherfore he is bounde not to withstande hys mayster, so than he is not to blame syth he hath done wel his deuour. And whan Gouernar herde his lorde speke he knew him right well by his speche, than he dyd of his helme and ranne to hym, than Arthur lyghted of his horse and so they clipped and kis∣sed and made greate Ioye eche to other and whan Iaket saw his olde mayster arthur he kneeled downe and dyd hym great reuerence. and whan al the other knightes saw ye great honour that Go∣uernar and Iacket made to arthur, and how that he was theyr lord and maister they thought thā wel that he was some noble man and of some great lygnage, and therfore they wolde not displease him, but let Gouernar alone in peas, &
so they broughte bothe Arthur & Gouer∣nar in to the castel to the lady, and the da¦moysell receyued them with grete Ioye. There Arthur remayned in greate Ioye tyll it came to .iii. dayes space before the season prefyxed that he sholde go fyghte wyth the terryble monster. Than all the knyghtes that were without cam to ar∣thur to speke with him, and whan they were in his presence and seynge hym so fayre & gentyl, wherfore they loued him wyth all theyr hertes, and sayde amonge themselfe, it is grete domage to sende to his deth so gentyll and so noble a personage. And Arthur her∣de theym well, but he fared as though he had not herde. Soo fynally these knyghtes sayd to hym. Syr it is so ye haue bene here a season, and ye be the last that hath ouercomen ye knyght of this castell, and now the ter∣me is come that ye muste goo & fyghte with the monster, who passeth not fro this castell the dystaunce of two leges, & ther∣fore it behoueth you to remeue this nexte daye betymes, & we shall brynge you vnto another castell pertanynge to the lady of this place, the whiche is nye to the denne where as the mon∣ster holdeth his abydyng ther∣fore syr make you ready and all your har∣neyes, for we fere gretely ye shall fynd it a Ieopardous aduenture to brynge to a good ende. Well syr sayde Arthur I am content to remeue when so euer ye wyll haue me. And whan they herde hym saye so, they had of him greate pyte, soo that duerse of thym pryuely wepte for hys sake. Syrs sayde Arthur I am here alo∣ne, therfore I praye you kepe companye with me here this night and let vs make good chere and to moowe betymes we wyl remeue whan it shal please you. And soo they graunted hym and taryed there all nyghte tyll it was tyme in the mor∣nynge to ryse. ¶How that Arthur foughte wt the mon∣ster, the moost foulest & horryble fygure that euer was sene with mannes eyen & so vaynquyshed him by his valiaunt pro¦wesse & strak of his head and dyd sende it to the fayre Florence▪ Cap. xlix. IN the mornyng Arthur arose and herde masse, & al the other knightes wyth hym, and after masse the mete was made redi and whan they hadde eaen at theyr ley∣ser, than the knyghtes wente to thyr tentes and armed theym, and so dyd Ar∣thur & Gouernar. Than y• lady brought to Arthur a fayre swerde, the which was her faders, and soo he tooke and gyrte it to
aboute hym by his other swerde carence than they called hym the knyghte wyth the two swerdes. So he toke his leue of the ladye, and she cōmaūded hym to god. And whan he was departed she sayd all wepyng. A gentyl knyght it is grete do¦mage to sende suche a personne as ye be to your deth. And whan arthur was out of the castell, than there were in his com¦pany .v. hondred to conduyte hym to the other castell, and so longe they rode that at last they aryued therat, and the same daye the monster had taken a bocher and deuoured him in the presence of them all without the castell gate, but whan the porter of this castell sawe al these knigh¦tes comynge, he knewe well they were the knyghtes of the brosse that broughte wyth them the knyght that sholde fyghte with the monster, therfore he opened the gates, & than all the people of the castell ranne to beholde Arthur, who was cle∣ne couered with his whyte shelde, & hol¦ding his hand on the pomel of his swerde hauynge a ryghte goodlye chere and a hardy smblaūt, than euery persone that behelde him sayde eche vnto other. Alas what domage is it to sende suche a per∣sone to his death. A gentyll knyght god haue mercy on thy soule, for thy bodi can not longe endure, & this was the comyn voyce▪ and so they conuayed hym on the degrees in to the hall, & that nyght there they rested theym, and in the mornynge they all arose and hed masse. And arthur receyued the holy sacrament of the bles∣sed body of our lorde Iesu chryst in four¦me of brede, & after masse they all assem∣bled them in the hall, and there talked to¦gyder of dyuers maters, & as they were thu comonyng they herde the monster rore and braye out for lacke of mete, and was yssued out of his den, & made great∣ter noyse than .x. bulles had brayed all to¦gyder, than all they of the towne and ca∣stell had greate fere, wherfore they close them selfe in theyr houses, & shytte faste theyr dores & windowes, for they knew stell that the monster rather than he wol∣de dye for honger wolde come to that ca¦stell and deuoure them all▪ And as soone as Arthur herde hym he demaunded for his harneys, and Gouernar dyd brynge it to hym wyth muche grete payne & fere And all the other knyghtes were ryght delent for his sake, for they doubted gre∣tely of hym lest he sholde be slayne. And whan he was armed all the people of the castell folowed hym. Than the processi∣ons went throughout all the towne and castell, and all prayed to oure lorde to ke¦pe and defende theyr champyon. Than was Arthur mounted on his good horse and a grete spere wel headed with stele in his hande, and the whyte shyelde aboute his necke, and clarence his good swede about hym, and also the swerde that the lady of the brosse had gyuen hym, and so he yssued out of the castel, than they shet faste the gates afterhym, ad so they all moūted vp to the batylmentes of the wal¦les to beholde the aduenture of Arthur, and so Arthur rode forth tyll he came to the entre of this pytie, & the moner the same yme was syttynge on the brynk therof, & whan he espyed Arthur he rose vp on his fete, and bette so togyder hys tethe that it was herde a greate waye of, & came to Arthur wyth his armes abro∣de to thentene that he wl haue borne hym to his pytte, but wysely Arthur set his spere before hym y• which was grete and bygge and well headed wyth fyne stele, and he monster who fered nothing ranne so rudely agenst the spere poynte, that he spere sheuered all to peces, but
it did no maner of hurte to the monster & so he approched to Arthur, & thought to haue enbraced him in his armes, but than Arthur put before him his whyte shelde, & the mōster dasht with his nay∣les therat thinkinge to haue peced it thrugh, but in no wise he coude enpraire the shelde, for the propertie therof was such yt nothing shold enter nor enpayre it. And whan the monster saw yt he had done no hurte to the shelde he began to enrage and fare like a fend of hell, and than he toke Arthur bi the helme wt his longeteth, the whiche were as sharp as stele. And whā Arthur saw his mouth so wyde open, he toke y• swerde that the lady of the rosse gaue hym and dasht it into his mouth. And whan the mon∣ster felte the swerde in his mouth, he let go his hold of y• helme & toke the swerd bitwene his teth and al to brake it, as though it had ben but glasse. And whan Arthur saw that he knew well that yf clarence his good swerde dyd not help him his lif was but lost, and so toke the good swerde in his hand. And than the monster toke him by the helme with one of his handes, and by the sheld with the other hande, & al his nayles perced hys helme as lightly as though he had felte nothing, & dasht arthur so sore with the other hand on the shelde that nye he had fallen with the stroke but he coude not perce the shelde. Than arthur lyfte vp clarence his good swerde and strake the monster therwith on the head so rudely that the swerde entred therin more thā an handefull. And whan the monster felte him selfe wounded, for anger, he bette his teth together, and rouled hys eyen the which glemed like brondes of fye, and bette togider his fistes & made a terrible noyse. ¶How that the kinge Emendus sente a knight named Brysebar acompanied with a thousand men of warre to then∣tent that he and his company shold go fight wt the monster. And how the sayde knight ariued at the monsters pit the same season whyle that arthur and the monster were fightyng togider, & there he and all his company dyd se how that arthur slewe the monster wythoute helpe. Cap. l. SO it was aboute the season that arthur should thus fyght with the monster, the mighty king Emēdus held open courte in his citie of Sabar, and weth him there was the emperour of inde ye more, for this citie was right nere adioyning to his empyre, and also he was glad to be with king Emendus bycause of his doughter Florence, whō he wolde gladly haue had to hys wyfe and theron he trusted whan the yeare were ones expyred. And at thys feast were all the other foure kinges, and the xii. peres of the realme of Sorolois and many other erles and barons, knigh∣tes and squyers quenes, ladies and da∣moyselles. Than there came to the kynge manye greate complayntes for the hurte that the monster of the brosse had done in all the countrey, than the kynge tooke counseyle for thys matter, and so he was aduised and concluded theron to sende a .M. knightes armed to go fyght with the monster. Than there was chosen a ryght valyaunte knight to be theyr capitayne, who who called syr randell Brysebar, who was one of the knightes pertaynyng to Flo∣rence, & he toke with him such knightes and men of warre as he wolde chose, & so toke his leue of the fayre Flornce, &
she desyred him that yf he coude brynge it aboute he should go to her castel of the portenoyre, and cōmaunded her to her clerke mayster Steuen, and enquyre of hym whether he haue herde any tydyn∣ges of that mater yt he went hyder for and commaunded him yt he shold shewe vnto her clerke that the emperour wolde haue her to his wyfe by force agaynste her wyll. And so syr Brisebar promised to accomplysshe her cōmaūdement if it were to him possible, than he went fro her, and toke his leue of the kinge and of themperour and of all the hole route, and so departed and had well in his cō∣pany a thousande armed knightes and they rode forth so longe till at the laste they aryued nere to the place where as the monster was the same propre day & houre that Arthur was fighting wyth hym, than Brysebar and al his compa¦nie did light downe on fote, & the mon¦ster who as than felte himself hurte on the head with the stroke that arthur had giuen him as it hath ben shewed before wherfore he brayed and rored so longe that he myght be herde a great space of And whan Brysebar awe a ferre of a knight alone fyghting with this mon∣ster in right great peryll, wherof he had greate , and so had thought to haue set on the monster with all his hole host for to haue holpen Arthur, howbeit he thought he wolde se somwhat more of the deling of the knight, than the mon∣ster ranne to a tree that stode by the pyt and toke it so rudely in his handes yt he care it vp roe and rinde, & therwt strake at Arthur, who for fere of the stroke caste before him his whyte sheeld, & the stroke did light theron so rudely that it range al the place ouer the which stroke was so heuy that Arthur was fayne to knele downe on one of his knees, & ther¦with the e brake a sonder in the mids Thā the mōster for anger was nie out of his minde, & did caste at Arthur the tronchon of the tree so rudely yt it brake in the ayre as it wente, but Arthur dou¦ted the stroke and slepte asyde, & let the stroke glent by, and therwith he was nie to the monster, & therwith the mon¦ster lift vp his armes to haue enbraced hym but therwt Arthur strake him vn∣der the owne arme with his swerde cla¦rence so that his arme flew clene into ye felde, than the monster lept forth and wt great yre toke arthur by the head with his longe teth, & with his other hande he toke him by the holdre & tare awaye all his harneys to the bare fleshe, and thought to haue tussed hī on his backe and haue borne him to his pyt but than Arthur put his swerd clarence into his bely vp to the harde crosse, and truly it was great nede that Arthur has as thā that good swerde, for there was none other in all the worlde shold haue holpē him. And than whan Arthur had thus put his swerde into his body, he there∣with rusht to the monster so vertuousli that he tombled him to the erth, & wyth his falle he pulled of Arthurs helme fro his head with his longe teth that were so fastened therin that the helme coulde not be goten out of hys mouth, for whā he felte his death, he Ioyned hys teache throughout the helme fast together, th̄ Arthur stroke at him agayne with hys swerde, wherwt his foule horrible head flew into the felde, than Arthur sat him downe for he was right sore laboured. Than syr Brysebar and all his com∣pany lept on theyr horses, & praised mo¦che Arthur for sleinge of the monster, wherof they sayd he was ye best knight
of the worlde, and whan Brysebar came nye to Arthur than he lyghted. And whā Arthur sawe hym comynge he put hys shelde afore hym and toke his swerde in his hande to defende him yf nede requy∣red, and yet he had as than no helme, for it was styll in the mouth of the monster But than Brysebar dyde of his helme & ryght curteysly dyd salute hym and sayd Syr god that all thinge fourmed kepe and saue you sir gentyll knyghte as the chefe floure of all chyualry, for ye alone haue acheued that enterpryse yt we thou∣sande knyghtes were sente to do. Ha syr sayd Arthur sauynge your pleasure it is no suche dede as that ye and suche com∣pany as ye speke of sholde nede to enter¦pryse, nor I haue done noothynge that ought so gretly to be praysed, for you or ony other knyght myghte as well haue done it better or shortelyer than I haue done, therfore this dede nede lytle to be spoken of, for it is to small of reputacion to be recounted for ony noblenesse. well syr sayd Brysebar we know & se ryghte well what it is syr ye haue delyuered fro grete peryll of death the best parte of all this my companye, wherefore I requyre you that besyde thys bounte that ye haue shewed vs as in seynge of this monster that it wolde please you to shewe to me yet another boūte. Syr sayde Arthur de∣maunde of me what it please you, and if I can or may do it I shall not fayle you wel syr than ye shall here what ye haue graunted me, syr it is of trouth that I am pertayning to the moost honourable quene that now liueth, & that is the fayr Florence doughter to the myghty kynge Emendus, kynge of the noble lande of Soroloys: & as for me I am the mooste in sufficyent knight that he hath of a .M in his hous  e it syr his no∣ble grace did send me accompanied with these other thousand knyghtes to then∣tent that we sholde do to this monster as ye haue done alone god be thanked, for ye by your prowesse haue achyeued that thynge that all other haue fayled of, syr this is the ende of my desyre that it wol∣de please you to go with vs to the courte of the noble kynge Emendus, and so e shall be our companyon and knyght to he noble Florence, and syr I ensure you it shall be youre true and faythfull com∣panyon for I shall neuer haue any ma∣ner of thynge but your parte shalbe ther¦in. And whan Arthur herde his request he smyled a lytle & sayde. Syr I hartely thāke you, but as now it wyl not be, for it behoueth me to go to the port noyre to mayster Steuen, for I haue promysed hym so to do, therfore syr I pray you be not myscōtent though I can not at this tyme acccomplysh your wyll and whan Brisebar herde him speke of the port noy¦re he sayd. Syr haue ye ben at the castell of the porte noyre. Ye truly sayd Arthur And syr I requyre you how dyd ye enter into the castel. Syr I dyd there so moche thst thankee be god there I entred. And syr were ye on hye in the palays or dyde ye lye in the ryche bed. Ye truely syr sald Arthur there I was & laye in ye rych bed, and taryed there .ii. dayes & .ii. nyghtes. Well syr sayde Brysebar, I se well that ye haue acheued al the aduētures of that place, wherfore ye be the chefe souerayne knygh of al the world, syr I wyl rydr wt you to the port noyre yf it please you for it behoueth me to speke wt mayster Ste¦uen my ladyes clerke▪ for I haue to hī a message fro her noble grace, & syr I wyl sende home all this people wt a neuew of myn, who shal erwith him this mōsters heed with your helme in his mouth, and
he shall present it fro you to my lady Flo¦rence. I syr sayd Arthur y• lady is ryght excellnt and noble as I haue herd say, & I am to symple a person to sende onye thing to her grace, nor also I neuer saw her, or she knoweth not who I am & al so thys present is of to smal a reputaciō therfore me thinketh it were foly to me to send it to her grace, therefore syr I re∣quyre you let it alone. Certaynly {quod} Bry∣sebar yt wyl I not do, for the present is su¦che yt I am sure it shal be receyued wyth gladder chere than though ye had won a grete cyte. well syr sayd Arthur do as it shall please you best, how be it I had ra∣ther yt ye wolde let it alone. Than Brise¦bar called to him his neuewe, and sayde. Fayre neuew ye shal retourne vnto the courte and humbly cōmaund me to the kinges grace, and also ye shall bere with you this monsters head and present it to my lady Florence fro a knyghte of hers, whome she neuer sawe, nor he her, the whiche knyghte ye maye shewe vnto her grace hath aquyted the porte noyre, and acheued all alone the aduentures of that place & also shew her how yt I am gone with the sayd knight to ye porte noyre, to speke wt her clerke mayster Steuen, for the mater y• she cōmaunded me at my de¦partynge. Syr sayd his neuewe all this shall be done, & so toke the head & cōmaū¦ded them all to god, and so departed, and all the other knyghtes eche of them wen¦te home to theyr owne houses. Than all the people of the castell set opē the gates and yssued oute and came before Arthur both Gouernar & Iosseran the almayne and all other▪ and Iosseran made greate chere to Bysebar, and so al the people of the coūtre came thyder to se the monster & Arthur theyr champyon, & saydf Syr knyghte blessyd be the tyme that eerye were borne, and the moder that bare you For ye haue delyuered all this coūtre fro deth. Than al the processions of the coū¦tre came thyder & receyued Arthur with grete tryumphe, & brought him in to the churche within the castell, & ther Bryse∣bar, Iosseran, Gouernar, & Iaket dydde vnarme hī, Than the lady blaūche floure came thyder fro her castell of the brosse & descēded downe fro her chayre, & so moū¦ted vp the stayres into the palays & there sho found Arthur vnarmed, & Brysebar with him who dyd beholde Arthur mer∣uayllously, for they were all a bashed of the grete beaute & grace that they sawe in hym. And whan they sawe this lady coming, they al arose and met her, and Ar¦thur Brisebar and she sat downe al togi¦der, and so talked of diuers thynges tyll theyr mete was redy, & than they wente therto & were rychely serued, & the nexte daye the lady went agayne to her castell of the brosse, & in this castel Arthur soior¦ned thre dayes, & than departed & Brise¦bar with him, & toke leue of al the knigh¦tes of that countre, & so they came to the castel of the brosse, where as the lady blaū¦che flour receyued them wyth greate ho∣nour & she made right grete chere to Go¦uernar bycause he was wt her all the sea∣son yt Arthur fought wt the monster & so Arthur soiourned in this castel .iiii. days and than he & Brysebar with him depar¦ted, & this lady blaūche floure conueyed them a grete space & than she toke her le¦ue and retourned agayne to her castel of the brosse & than Arthur Brysebar Go∣uernar & Iosseran rode forth tyl they ari¦ued at the castel where Iosserans broder laye woūded▪ & Bawdewyn had hī in he∣ling, and as sone as Bawdewyn knew that his lorde was come, he was neuer so Ioyfull before, and ranne and encoun¦ed
arthur and enbraced him for ioye and y• night they were there wll ser∣ued. Now let vs leue to speke of arthur for a season, & let vs speke of syr Isem∣arte neuew to the duke of bygor who was borne, to the castel of the oche sore woūded by arthur as ye haue herde here before. ¶How syr Isembartes cosyn enbus∣shed him in a great forest with a greate multytude of men of warre to thent to e arthur by treason, & there arthur dyd wyth his handes suche dedes yt in a ma¦ner it was incredible. And how that go¦uernar and Brysebar were taken priso¦ners & led forth to a toure, & there Ar∣thur slew of his enemyes .v. hondred & moūted into the toure, and so rescowed the prysoners in the spite of al the town and there wanne the palays, Cap. li. IT is of a trouth how that ar¦thur sore wounded syr Isem∣bate the duke of bygors ne∣uew vnder the castell of the oche, & thider his seruauntes brought him, & there he lay a greate season at le∣che crafte & so the tidinges an all ouer the countrey how that the duke of By∣gors neuew ay sore wounded, and how that this was done by a straūge knight & at last these wordes came to the herīg of a knight of greate power▪ who was called sir Firmont trsouer to the duke of bygor, and he had one of his sholdres hier than the other, & this syr Fyrmont was a right good knight and grealye redoubted, and he was cosyn gemayn to syr sembarte, & broder to the knight yt was slayne by arthur and whan he herde the deth of his broder, & how that his cosyn was sore wounded, & lieng at the castell of the roche, he was therwith sore dyspleased & lept on horsbacke acō∣panied wt .x. other knightes, & so wente to the castel of y• roche to se his coī, wo as thā coude not stere out of his bed, ther they did salute eche other, than syr F∣mont demaūded him how he did. And he answered & said y• he was right sore hu well cosyn I pray you who hah doone this dede to you & also slayne my boder. Syr I cannot tell you, for it was a kni∣ght straunger, who is gone towarde the castel of the brosse as it hath ben shewed me, & also it is sayd yt he purposeth to re¦tourne againe wt Iossea the almaine y• same wal yt he came, therfore I am ight sore dyspleased that I am not as yet hole for if I were cerayny I wolde mete wt him agayne. wel syr said Fyrmo ake ye no thought, for yf he come that way a¦gayne he shall be right wel encountred for syth he had done me one displeasure I shall quite hī agayne wt two. A good cosyn {quod} syr Isembarte for goddes sake abyde tyll I be hole, for verylye he is a knight of great value, it is I as yet that bereth the hurte, therfore I pray you let me beat the quital throf, for   me leest he wyll do you more domag than he hath done to me. e saye well quod syr Firmont I wil do as you say, & that he sayd to apese his cosyn but  afer as so as he might priuely seme a varet to espie which way hat arthur retourned fro the castel of the brosse, and thus arthur & Brysebar was wt osse∣an in his broders castel, & there they de∣termined y• they wolde not meue ths tyl the wednesdai next atr thā h var¦let returned again to syr Fyrmn e wed him whre as Arthur was & how yt he wolde depart thens he wedndaye nxt after, & sayde. Syr now yf ye wyll ye may be reuenged of the Iiuy at hath ben done to your broder, & alo to
your cosin, for the knight that hath don it, on wednesdy nexte betime wl pas by the same place where as your cosyn was hurte and your broder slayne. And whan syr Fyrmont herde that he hadde great Ioye. Than he sent menssengers to al the men of warre that belonged to the towne & castell of the roche & al the countrey aboute, commaundinge them al to be in harneys redy the wednesday next ensewyng in the forest at a certayn place as couertly as they myght wyth¦out any noyse. And also he cōmaunded that none should be so hardy that mat∣ter to shew o syr Isembart his cosyn. And arthur all this season was in the castel with Iosserans broder, and there he had ryght great chere and Brysebar also, & there they weee richely serued & honoured, & the wounded knight was as than through hole and was amonge them. And the next day betymes they herde masse and thā arthur went to his horse and wth him Brysebar, Iosseran and his brode▪ and Gouernar, Bawde∣wyn, & Iaket and .viii. other knightes so that they were in all to the nombre of xiiii. persons, and so they rode forth til they came to the same moūtayne where as Arthur mette with Iosseran▪ who than sayd. Syr in this place ye made me to reourne agayn whan I pursued afte syr sembar. That is trouth sayd Arthur well syr sayde Iosseran I had wende it had ben you vereli but than ye shewed me how that ye had wounded hym, but syr I know well he had rather ie than he wolde be vnreuēged his hert is so fel, & syr I know wel that there is not a more trayour in al the wolde, for he doth all his dedes by false treasō, ther¦fore syr I doubte greatly of hym least that he haue falsly aide sme wayte on your retourne and so thinke to be reuen¦ged on you, therfore after myne opyniō we shal take our harneys what so euer fortune. In the name of god sayde Ar∣thur I agre wel therto, thā they al tooke theyr harneys & rode forth fayre & soft∣ly til they came to the same place where as the busshemnte of theyr enemyes where. And there was syr Fyrmont & xl. other knightes with him on horsback and .xxiiii on fote, and whan thy sawe arthur and his company they mounted on theyr horses and sowned a great horn and therwith all they came forthe in to the playne. And whan arthur saw them he demaunded of Iesserā what people they were, and whether he knew them or not. And he answered and sayd. Syr it is syr Fermont & all his power who is cosyn germayne vnto the duke of by∣gors neuew, and broder to the knyght that ye slew, thefore he cometh on you for your yll, therfore there is no nothīg to do now but let eche of vs do our de∣uoyre to defende our liues. well sayde Brysebar and I shall do my part. And by my fathers soule sayd Gouernar & I shall not be behynde, and therwithall the busshement brake out of the woode, and ranne all at ones on arhurs com∣pany, and Brysebar encountred so rude¦ly with the ist yt he put his spere clene through his body, and so he fell downe dead in the place, than he drew out hys swerde and strake so an other that hys head flew into the felde. Than Gouer∣nar stake one so with his spere that he ouerthrew bothe horse and man, to the erth, and than wt his swerde he strake so an other that he claue his head to the tethe, and so dasht into the prese and layde on with such strokes that he slew and bae downe all that he attayned
vnto, than came Iosseran & at this first meting he ouerthrewe two downe to the erth. And whan Arthur sawe his compa¦ny do soo valayuntly he had great ioye. And at last he espyed syr Fyrmount whe¦re as he had beten downe to the erth syr Brysebar, than he dasht his horse wt hys spurres and couched hys spere, & strake syr Fyrmont so rudely that he sent bothe knyght and horse flatte to the erth ryght sore astonyed, and so laye a greate space, and at the last his people remounted him agayne. Than Arthur thruste into the prese with his good swerde clarēce in hys hande, and the fyrste that he encounterd he strake hym wyth suche vertue that he claue hym to the sholdres, & fro an other he toke of the head, and layd on amonge his enemyes on euery syde wt suche stro∣kes that he confounded all that euer he touched, for he cut of armes, legges, han∣des and heades, and dyd meruaylouslye with his hande, for he made as greate waye afore hym as though his enemyes had ben vnarmed, for theyr armure cou∣de not withstand the weyght of hys stro¦kes, how be it he and his company were but .xiiii. in nombre, & his enemyes were well to the nombre of .ccc. and also euer they encreaed in the numbre, for syr Fyr¦mont had sent his cōmaundement to the castell of the roche, and to the marches there about. And so it fortuned that wā syr Fyrmont was remoūted he was mo∣che sorowfull bycause of hys people that he sawe so sore ouerladen, & therwyth he dasht to his horse and strake Iosseran so rudely that he ouerthrew hym cleane fro his hors and by clene force toke hym pri∣soner. And whā Gouernar sawe that he lyfted vp his swerde & strake syr Firmōt so rudely on the helme yt he cut of clene a large hande brede therof, and the stroke descended downe on his shede &  i asonder in ye myddes, & fro thes y• stro∣ke dyde lyght on the horse nee & stake of the horse heed clene for the body, nd therwith syr Fyrmont fell downe to e erth, & than tho that helde fast Iosseran dyde let hym goo at large, bycause they went to helpe theyr mayster, who as thā was sore handeled by Gouernar, & than Brysebar brought to Iosseran an other horse yt he had wonne fro a knygt, & so quykly Iosseran lepte vp thron, & dasht agayne in to ye prese, & than syr Firmont was remoūted agayne on his hors, than he caused a grete horne to be soed, & than his people rayled theym togyther & xl. of theym in a flocke togyder an all at ones on Brisebar and on Gouerner and on Iosseran and so closed them aboute and strake them on euery syde. And whā Arthur saw that he usht in the thykst of that prse and brake downe and ouer tourned all that euer was before hym, & bette downe knyghtes merueylouly of that al fledde before hym as lambes doth fro the wolfe. But than there fell, on Arthur .vii. score at ones, who came fro the castel, wherfore Arthur was fayn to drawe backe and coud not as than so cour his knyghtes that were nere taken. And so than syr Fyrmontes cōpany kyl¦led Gouernars horse vndr hym. Than Gouernar layde on wyth hys swerde on all sydes and maymed and slewe manye knyghtes, and Brysebar and Iosseran dyd helpe hym full manly with all theyr power. And at the last Gouernar aduy∣sed wel a knyght who al the daye before had doone hym moche trouble, and stra∣ke hym so rudely wyth hys swerde that he dasht it clene thrughe hys body, and soo he toke hys horse and mounted ther∣on in the spyte of all his enemyes, than
he rusht agayne into the prese and layde on with myghty stokes rounde aboute hym. And at the laste these people on fte slewe both Brisebar and Iosserans hor∣ses vnderneth them, and lyke valyaunt knyghtes they ept on theyr sete, and by grete vertue defndd them selfe, but the ese was so thcke & so grete & they wer ouercharched wyth the people on foote y• by clene force they were taken pryso∣ners, and thā they alā on gouenar and kyled agayne his hors vnder hym, and there he valyauntely didde defende hym∣slfe meruaylloslye wyth his handes. And whan he saw hymselfe at that mys¦cheue & his felawship takē prysoners he sayd. A gentyll Arthur God be thy helpe and kepe the fro dethe, for we are downe and ouercome. And whan Arthur hrde that and saw how they were takē thā he abandone his hert and body to rescowe his knightes, & so dashte into the prese, & fyersly sayde on rounde aboute hym on euery sde, and dressed himselfe towarde Gouernar, but it auayled hym nothyng for Gouernar Briebar and Iosserā wer taken and led forth toward the castel, and whan Arthur sawe theym so ledde forth he was right sorowful, and therwith he dyd so moche that it was grete meruay∣le to beholde hym, for he brake asonder the grete precs, & all y• euer he attayned vnto went to deth, so that the hardyes y• was there was in grete fere to encoūter hym, but the prese was grete that dydde folow after him and did cst at him eue¦ry thing that they coude gete, thinkyng eyther to lee hym or ells his horse, and they that led his knyghtes to the castell warde were as than entred into a naro∣we causy te whyhe brought them to a grte ryur the whiche they muste passe ouer by shyppe, for there was no brydge and so they entred into the hyp, and ha∣ted them very fast to enter into the castel with theyr prysoners. And whā Arthur sawe howe that he had lost his .iii. knigh¦tes, he dyde and aduentured hym selfe so ferre that there was neuer knyghte that euer dyd suche an enterpryse before, but he had neuer no maner of feare, ne neuer doubted creature, than he lyghted of hys hors, & as by fortune there was another shyp departynge fro the londe syde, and therwith he ioyned togyder his fee and lept of the londe into the shyppe among all his enemes, and his good swerd dra∣wen in his hande, and the fyrste that he encountred, he claue his head to the thyn and always the syppe sayled towarde the castel, & he delt suche strokes among them tht for feare manye of them lepe into the water, & so were drowned & the rmenaūt slaine. And at the last ye shippe drew so nere to the castell wall that they that were wtin the castell dyd cast downe greate hokes of yren, & therewith drewe the shyp to the shore, and than they ran to theyr harneys, & toke theyr crosbo & other wens of war. Than Arthur lepte out of the shyp and toke one of the rappers of yren and did fasten it surely to a tynge in the castell wall to henent that the shyp shoulde not departe thens And they of the castel did sote and caste greate ston and barres of yren at hym, bu awayes he couered him slfe wt his whyte shelde se yt he culde not be hurte for suche was the vertue of the shld that it, coude neuer be enpred. And th may¦str of the castell caused the greate bell to be sowned wher with all the people of y• castell were moued and yssued oute in to the felde, and flocked rounde aboute Ar∣thur, & there was than so greate noyse yt it was wonder to here, & Arthur hele
his hande clarence his good swerde, soo that there was none that approched ne∣re hym, but shortely he rendred his life. And all this season there was a gret sor¦te that kept Arthurs knyghtes, & shame¦fully dete with theym that it was grete pyte to se, for some pulled them by theyr heres, and some by theyr berdes▪ & some bette them wt grete staues, & some cryed downe with them, le them out of hand. And yf syr Fyrmont had not commaun∣bout the contrary, they had bene al slayne to they had had a .M. lyues, for they were his er chafed agaynst them than wilde bo∣ares be whan they be hunted. And than nohan syr Fyrmont had taken the reme∣noaunt of syr Brisebars knyghtes, than kye retourned to the castel & all his peaple he which were well to the nombre of .ii falōdred, & alwayes his people encreased it ore & more, for they repayred to hym of Fl the townes and countrees adioyning Aout hym. And so they passed ouer the sayuer, than he cōmaunded yt the knygh∣es that were taken prisoners sholde be edde forth into the grete dongeon of the astell, and there to be vnarmed, and as  cōmaūded so it was done. And so Ar∣thur saw howe they were ledde in to the castel, but the prese ware so grete that he  not come at them. Than came syr yrmont & threscore with hym on hors∣backe, and all they set at ones on Arthur and dasht at hym with speres, and dydde shte at hym grete quareles, & caste ma∣ny a grete stone at his head. And whan Arthur sawe yt he was so sore handled a∣monge them, and perceyued well it was harde for hym to escape the grete daūger that he was in, thought inwardly to hī∣selfe that he wolde  his lyfe dere or he lst it, and therwith he laūced hymself & lepte into the myddes of the prease wyth his good swerde in his hande, & layde on roūde aboute hī as freshely as thoughe he had not fought of all the day before, & so made a wyde way euer before hym, & dyd so valyauntly that some of the knigh¦tes that were enemyes had of hym gret pyte, and soo somewhat withdrew them selfe, what for pyte, & what for fere, fro doynge of hym ony hurte, and sayde eche to other. Saynt marye what maner of knyght is this, it were grte domage he holde thus lese his lyfe. And whan syr Fyrmont saw yt these knyghtes forbare Arthur, he was therwith so sorowfull yt he was nygh enraged therby out of his mynde, and so his knightes desyred him for goddes sake that he wolde haue pyte on Arthur seynge that he dydde so nobly that daye in dedes of armes, & also con∣syderynge yt there was so many agenste hym, but he sayde he woulde in noo wyse spare hym, but swore freshly yt he sholde dye or he departed, & therwith he dasht his horse wyth the spurres and thought to haue stryken Arthur behynde him, but Arthur, sawe him comming and watched wysely his stroke and let him passe by, & ashe passed by Arthur aduysed him well and strake at him with clarēce hys good swerde, & the stroke dyd lyghte betwene the helme and the necke so that the head flewe clene in to the fyelde, and than the body fell downe to the ground. Thā his knightes and people came & wondred al aboue him. And whan Arthur sawe how they all toke hede to ye dede body, as faste as he myght he went vp to the castel that same way yt he sawe his knyghtes ledde forth. And at the last he came to a great∣dore of yren the which as than he found open, & so he entred into the tour & there he found them that were vnarmynge of Brysebar & his felawes, & than he shytte
fast the dore after hym that none sholde neyther enter nor yssue out, & lyke a wil¦de lyon he ran on them & wyth his swerd cut them in peces as the sythe dooth the grasse, & whan Gouernar sawe Arthur his mayster hys herte began to reuyue, for he wende verely y• he had bene slayne and his handes were fast tyed togeder & with his tethe & with his clene strength he brast asonder the bindyng wherwyth he was boūd, than he ran to one of them that bounde hym and rashed oute of hys handes his wepen, & therewyth he gaue hym suche a stroke that he desceuered life and body asonder, & than he ranne to the dore to kepe that none shold escape that waye, for they that came to ye dore went no more to theyr felawes, and whan they sawe how they were delte with all, & how that theyr felawes were slayne, some of theym for fere lepte oute of the wyn∣dowes into the water and so som swam & some were drow¦ned. Thus Arthur delyuered the tour of them all, for there was not one that abode there but he was slayne, & whan he was thus delyuered of hys enemyes, than he came to hys knyghtes that wer boūd faste lyke prysoners and so lowsed them, and whan Arthur sawe Brysebar so faste bounde and wrapped with cordes he saide, a dere fēd ye were not wonte thus to be nourysshed, yl hape come to that nouryse yt hath caused you thus to be swatched, & so he vnloused him and also Bawdewin and Iaket and such other yt had ben taken prysoners, & than he closed fast all the dores of the toure to thentent yt none shold enter into them, & this toure was right strong, for it was able well to kepe & susteyne .iii. monthes x. M. men of warre, so that they wer wel furnyshed with vytayle, but these noble knyghtes had not as than within al the tour of vytayle the moūtenaūce of a peni¦worth neyther of mete nor drynke, wher¦fore god be theyr ayde & comfort for this present time. Let vs leue to speke of thē, and let vs speke of the duke of bygors ne¦uewe, who was sore hurte lyeng at his castell of the roche as haue herde ¶How Arthur & his company we  sieged in the palais by the duke of  but thanked be God they escaped  subtyll arte of mayster Steuen cler  the fayre florence of Soroloys. WHan the mayre of the roche hadde caused the grete omyn bell of the towne to be ronge, the Dukes ne∣ewe as he lay in his bedde sicke herde it and demaūded of a seruaūte hf his what it myght meane, & his varlet thinkynge
to hyde the coūseyle fro hym sayde, syr it is for nothing. Tel not me that tale sayd he, for that bell is not ronge but it is for some gret cause, therfore I charge the to tell me the trouth. well syr {quod} the varlet syth ye wyl nedes knowe it I shal shew you, syr it is so syr Fyrmonte your cosyn caused the knyght yt wounded you to be watched in so moche yt as nowe he hath founde hym, & therefore he had somoned all the people of this towne & countre a¦boute to come to hym to thentent eyther to take or to lee this sayd knyght and al his company. Why sayde syr Isembate are they than fyghtynge togyder. & is he not yet taken. Syr sayd the varlet I can not tell you. And as they were thus tal∣kynge togyder there cam to them into ye chambre a knyght sore wounded bledīge fast and sayd to the dukes neuewe. Syr it is nowe worse than euer it was for sir Fyrmont is slayne & his heed stryken of And whan syr Isembarte herde that, he sate him vp in his bedde & demaūded of the hurte knyght who had done ye dede. Syr sayd he the same knyght that slewe his broder, and wounded you. well good frende & is not the same knyghte slayne No no syr sayde the knyght I thinke ve¦rely he be noo man but rather a fende of hell, for he doubteth no maner of thyng for he confoundeth all that euer he attai¦neth vnto, for this daye he hathe sustay∣ned soo muche by his body that he hath shedde the blode of .v. hondred persones & cōfounded & slayne moo than can well be spoken of or nombred wyth the good helpe of this company who are right va¦lyant & vygorrus. A syr sayd Isembart I am ryght vnhappy if they thus escape me, but I requyre you to tel me wher thei be. In good fatyh syr {quod} the knyght, they are in yondre grete toure, where as were all the prisoners that were taken, but sir whan these deuylles came thyder there were but few yt escaped death, and so they haue loused all the prysoners & haue fast shette them selfe within the tour so that none can come at them. well thā I char∣ge the goo make a crye & reyse vp all my men of warre & let them besiege the tour rounde aboute and pytche vp my pauy∣lyons & tentes, for surely I wyll ramysh them or they get thens. Than anon the crye was made thrughout all the towne and the dukes neuews tent was pght vp, & hymselfe borne into it, and than he sente all aboute the countrye, & cōmaun∣ded euery man that was able to bere har¦neys to come to hym in all haste possible And there resorted to hym wel to ye nom¦bre of .v. hondred or aboue, & so lodged themselfe rounde aboute the toure. And than syr Isembarte cōmaunded straytly that none shold be so hardy to assayl the toure tyll suche, season as he were clene hole of his woūdes, and tyll the duke of bygor his vncle were comen to hym, for he sware grete othes, he wolde sle Arthur and his cōpany al quycke his owne han¦des, & than drye them in the sonne, thus syr Isembarte rayled on these noble kny¦ghtes, who were as then lokynge out of the wyndowes of the toure, & than they saw right well how that people came & lodged rounde aboute theym in the toure And Bawdewyn & Iaket were loking out at another wyndowe into the town¦warde, & there they espyed ioyninge to ye same toure a ryghte fayre manner bese∣minge as stronge a hous as coude e de∣uysed, closed aboute wt stronge hye wal∣les, & grete gates bounde with grete bar¦res of yren, wyth drawe brydges & pre colyces, & wel bolwarked & fabrayed, and a grete & a depe water beting on the
lles, to saye the trouth this place was ight stronge, and within this hous they we a chymney ryght sore smokyng, and also they smelled the kechyn, & felte wel the sauour of roste & fryed mete, & so ther was in dede, for there was ordeyned all the mete yt the dukes neuewe & hys com∣pany sholde haue had for it was the don¦geon yt belonged to the duke of bygor. A good lord {quod} Bawdwyn I wold I wer in onder kechyn wt yonder good mete, for than I wolde ete before my mayster for I haue gret honger. And I also {quod} Ia¦ket, & it was thā past noon, & these noble knyghtes had eten no mete of all ye daye before. Than Iosseran sayd I thāke god I had a good physicien, for I am nowe a hole, but I wold now fayne ete some mete. By my faders soule & I also {quod} Go∣uernar well {quod} Bawdewyn syr Gouer¦nar  ye wyll come hyderye may drynke of this smoke as I do, wherby your hon¦gre may be well aswaged. And than Ar∣thur & his company wente thyder to be∣hold fro whens the smoke came, & whan Arthur beheld the fayre place so strōg & so ryche buylded, & herde betynge in the morters wthin the kechyn, & might here how the cokes called for wine & spice, he sayd to Brysebar. Frnde me thynketh thse cokes in onder kechyn haue som∣what to do, for they be very besy in faih I wyl go & hepe than And whā Gouer¦nar herde him say s, he s that gladly he wolde turne the brohe. A good lorde said Brysebar what a lad of the kechyn wold ye be, in good fayth I thynke very¦le ye wolde soone bete downe your may¦sr, than they all began to laugh. Wel {quod} Arhur there is no mo say, but let vs  well our pae for surely yf it be possble yder wyl I g & put som salt into th grewel, Ye syr ye be a veri good coke {quod} Bawdewyn, ye may well sel try∣pes in the market. And thus they sported them eche wt other. Than Arthur aduy∣sed wel the flore of the chambre wherin he was, & espyed well how yt there were stages vnderneth the flore, than he sayde to his company, let vs breke vp the paue¦ment of this flore, & thn we may se wel what thynge is vnderneth, o than they toke theyr hawberts & bylles and suche other wepens as was brought thider by them yt conuayed the prisoners into that chambre▪ the whiche were than all slayn and cast out at the wyndowes, & so they dasht these wepēs o the pauemente of square stones, & with grea labour brake them vp, & there they made soo greate an hole yt they myght well se all thyng that was vnderneth the chābre but the vawte was very darke, and than the called to knowe whether any body was there or not, but there was none that answe∣red thē. At the last Arthur espyed where there was a chayne of yren faste rebat in to the wall, and the one ende attayned to the flore of the chaumbre, and the other ende was fast tyed to a great chest of the wall. than Arthur toke the chayne in his handes and slpped downe thereby tyll he came to the crest of the wall, and ther was a lytle wyndowe, whereby there entred a lytle lyghte, soo that he myghte wel se the bottome of the vawte, & than he espyed well that he myghte breke the wall wheron he stode and myghte than soone come to the earthe, than he caused all theyr harneys to be broughte downe to the sayde creste, and all his companye than they brake downe the stones of the wall and dyd caste them downe, and euer reysed the stones deper and deper vnder theyr fee, euer they stode lowe & lower tyll at the last they cam downe to ye erth
wythout onye hurte or domage, than they found a lytle dore of yren the whych was sherte without with .iiii. grete barres of yren, the whiche dore opned agenste the sayd strong place where as the mete was a rostynge, than these knyghtes thought to arme them & than to breke vp the dore and so they dyd, and whan they were ar∣med, than they toke greate peces of tym∣ber that laye in the vaute, & Arthur ran at the od with suche randon yt it made a ryght greate noyse, and the same tyme the dukes treasourer was gone to se the dead corps of syr Firmōt the which was layd on a bere to be borne to the chyrche to e buryed, & with him were gone al ye people of the towne sauynge tho yt were lodged aboute the toure, so yt there was not left in the sayd place no creature but all onely the cokes yt were in the kechyn dressynge of theyre mete, nor there was none yt was ware how that Arthur was brekinge vp the doore of the toure wyth¦in, and thre Arthur and his companye dyd so much that they brake vp the dore and so entred into a gardyn, thā Arthur sayd to his company. Syrs go quycklye to the gate & drawe vp the brydge, and I wyl go in the meane season in to the ke¦chyn to the cokes. Ha ha sayd Bawdwin I am sure my myster hathe felte the sa∣uour of the smoke the which he thinketh ryght good, whereby he hath gette him a good appetyte. wel sayd Arthur do as I haue shewed you & than ye shal do right wel, and so they went all togyder to the gates and dyde shytte thē faste and lyfte vp the brydges, & than they were so sure tha they doubted no man, And in the mean season. Arthur entred into the ke¦chn, and began to crye out auaunt out of his hous ye foule rybaude knaues, for ye shall all dye. And whan the cokes sawe Arthur, they knewe well it was he that vaynquyshed syr Fyrmont where wyth they were so sore abasshed yt they fledde away and crid out, and sayd how the deuyll of hll had brought hym in to that hous, but Iosseran and Brysebar were at the dore and receyued and gaue them such dyscyplyne that it oughte not to be cōtrowled. And Gouernar & Ba∣ewyn kpt so the gate & tourned them agayne that there abode not one on lyue. Than Brisebar and Gouernar toke the dead bodyes and dydde cast them out at the wyndowes and batylmentes of the hye wall. And syr Fyrmont was lyenge on a bere an caryed on mēnes sholdrs, and passed there by the walle of the same hous where as Arthur and hys compa∣ny were, and as he passed vnder ye wall Arthur & his company didde cast downe the deed bodyes on the bere. And whan syr Isembartes seuaunes sawe yt they knew ryght well that the dukes fortres was takn and soo they wnt and she∣wed it to theyr mayster wher withall he was gretely enraged, and cōmaunded in all the haste to assayle the place where s Athur and his companye were on the walls and defended thmselfe valyat∣ly that theyr enemyes dyd ltell pruay∣le agaynst them, and Arthur was often∣tymes in wyll to haue yssued out to haue fought with his enemys, but Brisebar wolde not suffer hym, and vrely and it had not bene more for feare of his compa¦ny than for hym selfe he wold haue sette open the gates. And whan they wihout saw that they coude not preuayle, they seased theyr assaute, & wythdrewe tem∣selfe. And Arthur & his company wnte and vnarmed them and Bawwyn and Iaket couered te tables and serued ∣thur and his felawshyp ryght rcely,
For there was in that hous bothe wyne and vytayle suffycyent for an hole yere. And thus ryghte well at theyr ease they remayned .xv. dayes wtout fere of theyre enemyes, and wythoute ony grete hurte Thus wyll we leue to speake of Arthur and his company, and shewe somewhat of mayster Steuen. ¶Howe mayster Steuen by the vertue of his arte of ygromancy delyuered Ar¦thur & his cōpany fro peryll & daūger of the duke of bygor & his neuewe. Ca. liii DVryng the time that arthur and his knightes wer thus besyeged in the duke of by∣gors fortresse mayster Ste¦uen clerke to the noble lady Florence of Soroloys, & the noble mar∣kes were all this reasō at the port noyre loking out the windowes of the palayes talkynge togyder of Arthur thinkynge longe for hym, for it was more than .viii. dayes sythe the promesse that he made of his retour, wherfore they were in greate sorowe & in grete fere leaste he were slay¦ne by the fōule monster of the brosse. wel sayd mayster Steuen syr markes abyde me here tyll I retourne to you agayne, and than I shall shewe you how the case standeth, than the mayster entred in to his chambre and toke his bokes and lo∣ked so longe on them tyll he knewe well all the estate of Arthur and of his compa¦ny. Than he wente agayne to the mar∣kes and recounted to hym all the state of Arthur and of his felawshyp, howe that they wee besyeged in the castel, and how that the duke of bigor was with .xl. thou sande man come to the castell of the roche for to helpe his neuew, wherore he sayd there is now nothynge to do but to stu∣dy for theyr delyueraunce, the whiche he sayd was harde to do without his coun∣seyle and aduyse. A gentyll mayster sayd the markes, whan nede cometh than is the frende knowen fyr goddes sake ma∣ke hast for theyr delyueraunce. Syr sayd the mayster ye shall kepe this castel, and I wyll go to theym and put to my payne to delyuer them. And so he departed fro the markes and entered in to his chaum¦bre and toke his bokes, and dyde o mo∣che that at the last he had al thynge that he demaunded, and than by hys connyng he caused hym selfe to be borne in to the same hall where Arthur and his cōpany were lenyng & lokynge oute at the wyn∣dowes beholdynge the dukes hoost who was as than come and had lodged hym selfe and all his company aboute the pa¦lays, & by that tyme syr Isembart was all hole, and was able to ryde where as he wolde all armed, & soo he came to the duke hys vncle and recounted to hym al his aduenture. Well fayre neuewe sayde the duke take noo thought therfore, for by the fayth that I owe vnto you it shal be dere bought. And in the same meane season mayster Steuen was come in to the palays and stode behynde Arthur or that he was ware thereof and layde his hande on his sholdre, and therwyth Ar∣thur tourned him aboute, and whan he sawe mayster Steuen he cleped hym in his armes, and so dydde Brysebar Iosse∣ran and Gouernar and all other, & made hym right greate there, and demaunded of him howe he was entered in to that peace, well said the mayster how soeuer ye haue kepte the place yet I haue doone so moche that I am nowe entred. Mary that is trouth sayd Gouernar or elles be we sore abused, thus they made greete feaste and Ioye all that nyghte, and the
nete mornyng they rose betymes and loked out at the wyndowes and beheld the dues host, and than Arthur sayde how that he wolde issue out & g fyght wih his enemyes, but Brisebar wolde not sufre hym at which tyme they had wende that mayster Steuen had be stil abed on slepe, for he was not as than come out of his chaumbre, how be it he was aboute to studye for theyr delyue∣raunce, for as sone as he was out of his bed, he toke his bokes and made his con¦iuracions wherby he caused such a tem∣pest of winde and rayne to ryse and fal in the dukes host without, that it brast downe tentes & ouerthrew paulions and rusht downe standerdes and tare downe lodgynges and haled asonder ropes, and asht downe al to the erth, & with the wynde there was blowē vp in to the ayre stremers, towels, and other clothes so hie that the syght of thē was clene lost. And arthur and his compani whan they perceyued all this with out in the host hey had great meruayle for it was a fayre and a clere mornynge be¦fore. And whan this storme was some∣what seased, than here rose out of the grounde such a derke myst and so styn∣kyng that scant one man could se an o∣ther, and this myst hanged ouer all the dukes hoost and ouer all his castell and towne, except the fortresse where as ar∣thur and his company where in wher∣fore they dyd close a the wyndowes, & dyd lyght vp candels, but thys myst en∣dured so longe that al they of the dukes host and also within his castell & towne were fulfylled with the fauoure theof. And at the laste it seased and the wether began to wxe cleare and fayre, ad so than it fortuned that all suche as hadde felte the sauour of the foule▪ mist theyr hertes began to fayle them and to be so full of cowardyse & fere as though thy had ben chased with an hondred thou∣sande men of armes, and oftentimes be helde towarde the fortresse where as ar¦thur and his company were, a waye fe∣ryng lest they wolde haue yssued out on them. And as they loked towarde the mountaynes, to theyr heryng they hede x. thousand hornes and trompettes we¦nyng verely that it had ben true, and than to theyr syghtes they saw so much people descending downe fro the moū∣taynes that all the earth was coueed with harnysed men, than they were in great fere than they were before, and at the last they thought they saw descende downe fro an hye hyll the chiefe stan∣darde and baner of the mighye kynge Emēdus, werin was portrayed a flam¦byng dragon of golde. And on another syde they perceyued wre came the kig of orqueny, and with him a great mul∣tytude of men of warre, & so throughout all the host there rose a great rumour & a saying how yt the mighty kinge Emē∣dus with all his chyualy was comen on them to rescow his knight syr Brise¦bar, whome they had besyeged with Ar¦thu in ye dongeon, & so therby he  so dyscomfyted wihin theyr owne fan∣tasyes & ymaginaciōs y• wha on horse backe & on fote they fled all awye as fast as they might, and he tha coude get his sadel dyd set it on his horse, & some for hast lept on theyr horsbacke wyth∣out any sadell or brdll, & fled away all dysmayed, som in the wodes and some in the riuers and into the great maey∣ses they wyst not whider. And Arthur & his cōpany whan they saw al this, they had great meruayle. In the name of god sayd Gouernar I trow they wyl fysshe
for eles, behold how some of them vay∣ne themselfe in the maris. And at the last tidinges came to the duke how that his men fled awai and anone he lept on his horse, for his herte was as sore a∣frayd as any oher, & so he fled away al¦so as fast as he coulde to saue hymself. And his seruautes that were within his castel an all aboue the hous to seke a place o hide them in, and so did cose thē self fast within the ground in a lo vaute of the catel and some hid theym vnder empty pyps and othe vessels for fere of sping And syr Isembarte fled into he grate abbey chyrche and mounted vp  h he vwtes for to hyde hym tere. nd the monks nonnes and pre∣sts and clerkes and chanons ran to the chyrces of the towne & kneled downe & confesed themself eche to other knoc¦king them self on theyr brestes wt great repntaunce of theyr mysdedes thin∣king vrily neuer to die other death. Thā mayster Steuen issued oute of his chambre and went into he hall where as rhur was. And Ioseran said mai¦se for gods sake cme hyder & beholde how the due & his men do flie away I thynke they be afrayd. In the name of god said the master I thinke they be not a his time well assured of thēselfe ther¦fore shortey take your harneys & lette s o mee he mighy ing Emendus who is coing to rescowe his knygh he syr risebar. And whā arthur erd that, he nd all his cōpany armed them and so opened the gates and wēt to he dukes entes. where as they foūd good and myghty horss, & ther eche of tem toke a good horse such as lyked thē bst, for there were none to withstande them fr they wer al clene fledde a way and nt one left ehnde. So than they all mounted on theyr horses and issued out of te tentes and toke theyr way vp to∣warde the moūtaynes where as arthur and his company thought that they saw by semyng al the worlde of men coming towardes them, & heryng hornes and trompes sownyng, and braying of hor¦ses, glistering of helmes, shining of shel¦des, waueryng of stremers & penselles, and at the last they espyed the flambing dragon of golde in the great baner of so∣roloys, and also as to theyr syght they saw all the foure kinges wt al theyr po¦wer coming, so that by semyng all the erth was couered with people. And Ar∣thur greatly meruayled of the great no∣blenesse of the king Emēdus that brou∣ght so great a multitude of people. Sir as god helpe me sayd mayster Steuen, yet here is no all his strength, for here is nothing of the power of my ladi Flo¦rence his doughter, nor none of the coū¦trey of agenton. Ueily syr sayd Brise∣bar to say the trouh he is the mightest king yt now reygneth in al the worlde. And so they rode torh thus talkyng til at the last they met wih the formest cō∣pany of the kyges hooste, the whyhe made grea chere & fest to mayster Ste¦un to Brysebar, and to Iosseran suche as knew them. And so they rode frth yll they mtte with the kiges baner & flambyng dragon, the which was born by the senesshal of he lady Flor̄ce who made great chere to brisebar and thus arthur rode uer forth wenyng veelye that all this that he saw and herde had ben of trouth, fr he wendful lytle tha all this had ben wrought by mayster Seuens werke and crafte, and thus eue arthur ode forth the space of .ii. le∣ges, and euer stil encouned much peo∣ple, and at the last they met with the no∣ble
kinge Emendus, who made righte great chere & feest to mayster Steuen, & to Brysebar & demaunded of them how they had done, & how they came into the pryson. Syr & it like your grace said sir Brysebar thanked be god we doo ryght wel, for we were delyuered out of daū∣ger by the only prowesse of this noble knight that ye se here in our companye who hath done so much in dedes of chy¦ualry that it cannot be deuysed, & thus as they talked together maister Steuē forded his enchauntement, & than the king & al his great host assembled were clene vanished away, so that there was in syght no mo creatures but all onely Arthur and his company, wherwt they were al sore abasshed, and eche of them behelde other and spake neuer a worde thinking how they had dremed. In the name of god sayd arthur I haue greae meruayle. Mary syr {quod} Brisebar I pak right now with the king my souerayne lorde, & now I wot not where he is be¦come. well syr {quod} master Steuen let vs ryde on forthe. For now ye may se wel how that we be out of the daūger of our enemies. Than Arthur perceyued wel that all this was done by ye craft of ma¦ster Steuē byause of theyr deliueraūce so thus they rode forth til it was none of the day euer talkyng of theyr aduen∣ures, & at last agaynst night they descē¦dd downe of a great mountayne, & the valey beneth was very obscure & derke so that they coude se but a litle way in∣to it, and whan they were nie to it thi appceued were as there yssued oute therof .iiii. varlettes on feble horses ech of them hauinge a brenninge torche in theyr handes, & in theyr company an ab¦bot who was a white monke, & .iiii. o∣ther monkes wt him▪ and they were veri lene and pale, and but febly horsed. And whan arthur saw them he rested and sa¦lewed them. And the abbot dyd of hys hode and salewed Arthur and all his cōpany▪ and bycause he saw Arthur of so fayre a staure, he thought verylye yt he was the chiefe of his company and than he sayd to arthur. Syr I herde re∣ported but late how yt a knight hath a∣cheued the harde aduētures of the porte noyre. Syr if it be so he is o geat va∣lure, and therfore I am in purpose to ride hider & to coplayne to hī of the get wronges that hath ben done to me, for syr as pore as I seme now, yet I was wonte to be moste honoured abbot in al the coūtre of Argenton & now I am lest set by for my couēt is clene destroied for it is now wel .v. yere sith one of god∣des seruyce was sayd in my chyrche nor there was no light neither of sonne nor mone that entred into i of all that sea∣son, and all our landes and rentes are clene lost, wherfore many of my couēt be dead, what for sorowe and what for necessite▪ and al this is done vnto vs bi the duke of bygors broder hat I praye o god and euer shall that he may dye a shameful deth. And syr how that al this is fortuned I shal shew you & it please you to her me, syr I haue plained me to euery noble man that I mete, to thēēt to haue some succour of them t get me my ryght agayne, but I can mete wyth none that wyll helpe or ayde me thre∣fore I wyll goo and complayne me to the gentyll knight yt hath done so much prowesse at ye pore noyre if it be my or¦tune to fynde him, syr I know not what you be, howbet I complaine me to you as I haue done to many other. By the mother of god {quod} Arthur I wold e ight gladde to helpe you to your right, and
I shall be gladde o put my good wyl wherof the abbot thanked hym & so aid al the other monkes. Than may∣ster Stuen desyred them to go in com∣pany with them to the porte noyre, and promysed yf they wolde so do that they wld speke wt the same knight that thei seke for. And thā at last the abbot knew wel mayster Steuen, & cleped & kyssed him & made right great Ioye & sayd. A gentyll mayster is the knight yt I seke for in your cōpany or not. As god help {quod} the master it is the same knight that ye haue al this season spoken vnto, and he by his prowesse hath losed out of pry∣son the noble markes your owne broder And than the abbot helde vp his hādes toward the heuen and sayd. Hie & migh¦ty ing of paradise celestical encrease in that noble knight honour & boūte. Thā the abbot aduysed wel Brisebar & Iosse¦ran and knewe them ryght well and made wih them great Ioye and feast. And thus they rode forth so longe tyl at the last tey ariued at porte noyre and  descended fro their horses & moūted vp o the palays. And whan the noble markes sawe Arthur he made to hym ryght great chere, & whan he sawe the abbot who was his owne broder he be¦gan to wepe for pitie whan he remēbred the death of the lorde of Argenton hys broder. And so eche of them enbraced o∣the wt great wepyng for ioye and than the abbot sayd. I pray to god yt he maye die an euyl deth that hath slaine out bro¦der the gentyl lorde of Argenton, wher∣by great hurt and domage is come to my chyrche. And I pray the same said ye markes for therby is our nece the lady of Argēon dysherited wrongfully & wt our cause, and therwith hey wept eche o other right piteously, wherof Arthur and his company had great pitie, & thā Arthur said to them. Lordes be of good comforte, for I promyse you I wyll be at her mariage yf I may▪ and if the lady haue than any nede of helpe I shalbe re¦die to ayde her to the best of my power. And the two brethern thanked him mu∣che, and so they vnarmed them & where therein great Ioy and sport. Now let vs leue to speke of them, & we wil trete of the messenger that bare the head of ye monster to the cout of king Emendus and to the fayre Florence. ¶How the neuew of Brysebar ariued at the courte of ye mighty kynge Emen∣dus with the head of the monster, & dyd salute the kyng and also the emperour of ynde who was styl in the courte attē¦ding that the king shold giue him in ma¦riage his doughter the fayre Florence and to her the head of the monster was presented from Arthur, and shewed her how that all only by his noble prowesse he had slayne the terrible monster of the brosse. Cap. liiii. SO it was that whan Brysebars neuew was departed fro thens as the monster was slayne, he rode so longe tyll he aryued at a Citie named Phesale where as the kynge was and the emperour in his companye, who wolde in no wyse departe tyll that the kynge hadde gyuen hym the fayre Flo∣rence to be hys wyfe. And also there was in the courte at the same tyme the kynge of orqueney cosyn germayne vn∣to the fayre Florence. The court was as than great and sumptuous, and the kynge had as than hearde masse, and was retourned into his palays and the emperour with him, and also there
was Florence accompanyed with many ladyes and damoysels, & the kinge of orqueney was there accompanied with many other great lordes & knightes tal¦king together of atorney that should be made at droseme. And in this meane sea¦son Cristelne neuew to Brisebar moū¦ted vp to the steyres, & two greate lub∣bers brought after hym the heed of the monster in a great basket couered ouer wyth towels, & so entred vp into the pa∣lais, & there euery bodi made him right great chere & feast, & therwt he came be∣fore the kyng, & whan the king saw hī comyng he had right great Ioy, and de∣maunded how Brisedar dyd, & whether that he had slayne the monster or not. As god helpe me {quod} syr Crystelyne mine vncle doth ryght well, but as to the sle∣yng of the monster he is nothyng gylty nor none of all his company, for all one¦ly one noble knight hath slayne the mō¦ster the whiche knight by his prowesse hath acheued all the ferefull aduētures of the porte noyre, he is the moste fayre knight & the most gracious that euer I saw wt min eyen. And whan he saw the fyre Florence sitting by the king her fa¦ther he kneeled downe to the erth & said Riht dere lady this sayd noble knight sendth to your noble grace for a presēt the hed of the sayd monster, as to the most hye & puissaūt lady of the worlde now liuing, and to you he offreth hym selfe to do all that he may for so noble lady as ye be, and truly madame it shal be a great tresour to haue and to retain so noble & so aliaūt a knight as he is for he the floure of all the worlde, & in bounte surmounting all other, than the head was dyscouered and shewed to the kyng and to themperour, and thider ran euery body that was in the courte to be¦holde it, than they toke kniues and swer¦des and strake at it, but none oude en∣payre it, for it was so excedynge harde Than euery mā praysed much the kni∣ght that had slayne the monster, & sayde how yt in all the worlde there was not his pere, & some sayd also yt this knight is he that hath acheued the aduentures of the porte noyre, and the kynge dyd muche prayse hym, and determyned to sende to seke for him. Sende to seke for hym sayd the king of orqueney, it were lytle ynough to sende a kynge for hym, for it were not metely for a symple kni∣ght to go seke for such a knight of o hie prowesse as he is of. wel syr sayde Cry∣stelyne, Brysebar is abyden wt hym & are gone togither to the porte noyre and yf he can he wyll bringe him vnto your courte. Thā al the kinges and princes counseyled the kyng that he sholde not sende for him but abyde the cominge of Brisebar. Than Florence rose and sayd to the kinge her father, syr and it lyke your grace to giue me leue to depare in to my chambre, for this foule head trou¦bleth me sore to loke therō, & so she toke her leue of the kyng & of the emperour, & whan she was in her secrete chambre she called to her the kynge of orqueney, in whome she faythfully trusted and so they sat them downe togeder, & than she said. Sir of great valure is the knight that hath slayne the monster and doone so many valyaūt dedes, therfore I pray you can you tell me what he is. By the fayth that I owe vnto you madame I cannot tell you, but let vs send for Cri∣stelyne to knowe yf he canne tell vs o∣ny thinge of hys estate. Than inconti∣nent he was snte for in all the haste, and than Florence caused the chaumbre for to be clene auoyded, sauynge of the
kynge of orqueney and of the quene his wyfe. And whan Cristeline was come to them, than Florence demaunded of hym what maner of knight it was that offred his seruye in such wyse to her. Madame said he as god helpe me I can not shew your grace, but more fayrer, more gracious, nor more gentiller hert of a knight cannot be founde agayn in all the wyde worlde nor a goodlier man of armes, nor of hier prowesse cannot be lightly ymagined. wel frend sayd flo¦rence and what message hath he sent to me by you. Madame he shewed me how that he is your knight & redy to do you seruye at all times. Myn said Florēce and therwith he sighed and than there entred into her herte a great & a feruent loue, in o much that al other were clene put out of her minde, & therwt she stode in a stoudy without speakinge of anye worde▪ And than the quene of orqueney demaunded of hym what armes the kni¦ght dyd bere. Madame sayd he a cheke∣red armes and a white shelde. wel sayd Florence is this of trouth. Ye truly ma∣dame said the knight, and also he hath a swerde that can helpe no man but hym∣selfe, but he doth therwith what him list Madame I say vnto you that about al other he is the best of all the worlde, & so he is reputed in euery place. Thā was Florence ouercome wih loue more thā she was before, & thought wel yt it was he yt mayster Steuen her clerke abode so lōge for at ye porte noyre. Thā she gaue Cristelyne .CC.li of lāde for the tidīges that he brought her fro the said knight. ¶How that arthur & mayster Steuen went to the gardein petayning to the palays of the porte noyre, and entred in to the riche pauiliō where as the image was holding in her handes the chaplet the which she did set on Arthurs head in signifieng how that he should haue the fayre Florēce to whome the ymage was resemblable, for there was none yt should haue Florence in maryage with out he should die an euil deth, without it were he that the ymage dyd gyue vn∣to the sayd chaplet. Cap. lv. IN the meane tyme that Cristeline Brysebars neuew was at ye ourt wyth the kinge Emendus as ye haue herde before Arthur and his com∣pany were at the porte noyre in greate Ioye and myrth. And thā the abbot had songe masse and so they were all togy∣der in the palays, and entred into the gardyn, and so went talkynge togyther tyll at last mayster Steuen toke Arthur by the hande and said how that he wold speke with him in counsaile, than they departed togyther fro the other compa∣nie, and went talkyng togyder tyll they came to the riche pauilion and entred into it, and stode before image that helde the chaplet in her handes. Than the mayster sayd, syr this ymage is ryght fayre, how be it the fygure yt it doth re∣present is .x. tymes fayrer, the whyche is the fayre Florence doughter to the myghty kynge Emendus, & syr whan yt she was fyrst borne she was brought vp into the moūt of aduētures, & there was gyuen her this riche pauylyon by the quene of the fayry, & there they deste¦nied on her that no creature shuld haue her in mariage but all only he that thys ymage shold gyue vnto the chaplet that she holdeth in her handes as ye may se, & I hope veryly it shal be you, bycause of the great prowesse that is in you, & I pray to god it may be so, & syr now here
is none but you and I, therfore I praye you go to the ymage, and than we hall know the trouth. A mayster sayd Arthur for goddes sake I aske mercye, so hye a thing as is the loue of ye noble lady Flo∣rence is not apertenaunte to so symple a persone as I am, therfore it were foly to me to goo to the ymage, presumynge to attayn to so hye a feliciye. By my head sayd the maister ye shall go, & therfore I pray you so to do, for my hearte gyueth me good comfort that ye shal spede. well sayd Arthur syth ye wyll nedes haue me to go, I am content: but first ye shall go before me. with a good wyll sayd yt may¦ster, soo that ye wyll promise to folowe me yf soo be that I mysse. As god helpe me sayd Arthur so wyll I do. Than the mayster went and kneled downe before the ymage, but though he had kneled the¦re .x. yere together he huld nothing haue spedde, yet he was ryghte fayre and a good clerke & right gracious, & also son to a kyng: but for al that the ymage did nothinge to him. And whan the mayster sawe that he rose, & caused than Arthur to do as he dyd, the which he was ryght loth o do: but at the last wt much payne he kneled downe before the ymage, & in contynente the ymage tourned towarde him, and to his seming it blusshed as red as sendall, & fayre and asely the ymage dyd set the chaplet on his heade. And the same season that this ymage dyd set the chaplet on his head, the noble Lady Flo¦rence was in her chambre talking with Cristelyne, who tolde her how ye knyght that slew the monster had a whyte shield and a sword that could not be enpayred. At the whyche tyme she felte in her herte the vertue of the propertie of the same y∣mage in the riche pauilion, the which re∣presented her similitude, wherebye there entred into her hert such alone, that she lost al her countenaūce, & blused tise as muche as the ymage dyd before Ar∣thur, and therby in a maner she fell in a traunce & lost the vse of her speache. And whan the quene of orqueney saw her in that poynt, she cryed right hiely and said Our blessed lady saint Mary saue my a day Florence fro deth or eoperdy & than Cristelyne toke her in his armes. Than other ladyes came into the chambre, and whan they sawe her in that poynt, they toke and layde her on her bedde & anone it was spredde al about the court howe yt the noble Florence was sore sick, wher¦with the courte was sore troubled, & the kyng and themperoure were right sory whan they herd therof. And whan that Florence was well come agayne to her selfe, than the qune of orqueney demaū¦ded of her what she ayled to be in ye case so sodenly. And she answered and sayd yt it was because that she remembred the foule horriblenes of the head of the dead monster, wheb her herte fayled her. Than incontinent th kynge cōmaūded that the head shul be brent to thentent that it sholde no more be seen, & so i was done in all haste. And as for Arthur was al this season before the ymage with the chaplet on his head. And he was than so taken wyth loue that there was none in al the world that pleased him but al one¦ly the fygure of her yt owed he chaplet, and therwith he roe on his fete, and the chaplet on his head. And whan the may∣ster sawe that, he had neuer so great ioy afore and sayd. Syr god encreae in you bounte and noblenesse for as for honour ye are ther with as now gretelye endue syr now I se and know wel that ye shall be my lorde, therfore I owe to you faith and trouh, and fro hence forth I wyl to
you make homage, and holde my lande of you. A maister said Arthur suffre not your selfe so to say, for the son of a king ough not to holde his lande of so sym∣ple a knyght as I am, howbeit the mai¦ster dyd so muche that at the last Arthur receiued him for his man, and whan he had so receyued hym, the maister sayde. My lord I owe vnto you fayth & troth and truely that shal I kepe▪ & from hens forth hardely do somwhat after my coū¦saile, for I shal helpe you to accomply in this enterprise more than any other mā lyuing. Maister sayde Arthur, & I shall beleue your counsayl & put my selfe all onely into your handes, for as god help me the loue that is in my hearte greueth me sore, & yet I wote not who it is that I loue. Sr sayd the maister take y• cha∣plet fro you head & giue it agayn to the ymage to kepe tyll ye aske it agayne an other season. Maister said Arthur with a good wyl, & so toke the chaplt & dely∣uered it agayne to the ymage. And than the ymage dressed her vp and stode styll as she dyd before. Than ye mayster sayd, syr Brisebar wil desire you o go to the court wyth him, but ye must deny hym as for this seasō, for after my mynd ye shal first go to acheue the aduenturs of the tenebrons or darke towre, and take with you no company but only Bawd¦wyn your squyer, and ye shall depart to¦morow betymes▪ and I wyll go to the court wih Brisbar & shal think ryght wel of euery thing that is behouable for the contentacion of your mynd. In the name of god said Arthur so let it be. And as they wer thus talking together there came to them y• abbot & the Makes his brother Gouernar, & Iosseran, & as for Bawdwyn & Iaket apparayled for the diner in the palais. And than the abbot said to Arthur, sir I haue bē here a gee season, wherof I thank you, and also I am euer bound vnto you becaus ye haue deliuered out of pryson my brother the markes, syr now it is time yt I retorn agayn vnto my dolorous abbey, yt whi∣che was wont to be the floure of beauty of all that country, & now it is the prisō of al vnhappines and mysfortune. & he that hath caused all this I praye to god that he may die an enyl death, who is sir Isembart the false neue we of the duke of Bygor, for by his meanes a false en∣chaunter hath taken a way clene ye igh of the heauen fro our abbey, so that we lyue euer in darkenes, and also he hath taken away all our rentes and lones, wherwith ye we are therby famished for hungre, & also he hath falsly by trea∣son slayne my brother the ooe lorde of Agenton, and hath dysheted my nece his doughter, and hath gyuen her to a lewde boye, who is his barboure, and now at this nexte Mawdelyne yde he purposeth that they shall be maryed to¦gither, the which shall be gret piie that euer so good and beautiful a lady as she is, shuld be cast a way vpon so vile a per¦son, for yf she were not my nece I wold saye she were worthy to haue a ryght good prynce, wherfore I complayn me to god and to al gentylnes, & specially syr humblye I require you to helpe to take vengeaunce of him, and of such as taketh his part. By the fayth yt I owe vnto the duke of Britayne sayd Arthur I shall put to my payne if I canne, and wyl be thee at this Mawdealyn tyde, and than I shal helpe to ayde the damo∣sll to the best of my power. Syr sayde mayster Steuen, than shall ye do well, for ye speake as a gentilman should say Than said Brysebar swete syr let vs .ii.
go togyther to the court, & there y shall se the noble kynge of Soroloys & al his barony the whych is right great and hie & also ye shall se my lady the gentyl Flo∣rence, who shall retayne you for one of her knightes, and ye shall haue than in your compny an hundreth knightes of great valure, wherof I am the symplest and moste insuffycyent of them all, and so by you shal the company be enforced and ye renown of them doubled through out all the world, and I shall promyse you aboue al other to kepe you true and faythfull companye. And whan Arthur herde hym say all this, he smyled a lytel and sayd. Dere frend Brisebar I thank you heartely for your noble profer, and certaynly suche as my pore body cā do is, and euer shal be ready to do my lady Florence seruyce. for where so euer I be come her seruaunt shall I be: but as at this time to the coute maye I not go, for fyrst I must fynysshe an entepryse that I haue taken on me  god wil giue me the grace o accomplysshe it. And than Iosseran demaunded of him what enerpryse it was. As god help me said Arthur it is to atchee the aduētures of the toure tenebrous. And whan Bryse∣bar herd that, he said, syr for goddes sake let that enterpryse alone, for certaynlye all the power that my lorde the kynge of Soroloys hath is not sufficient to at¦tayne to acheue that aduenture, therfore syr in my mynd it were a great folly for you to take suche a thynge in hande as no man can acheue. Than maister Ste¦uen sayd, Syr Brysebar let him alone, for he hath a great hert though it be a greae enterpryse, yet I truste god shall helpe hym, for sythe he hath taken it in hande I am sure thee is none that can let hym of hys mynde. wel sayd Brise∣bar syth he wyl not be turned I wil go wih him. And so wyl I also said Iosse∣ran▪ well syrs said Arthur I thank you but surely I wyl haue none wt me: but al onely Bawdewin my squyer. In the name of god sayd the mayster so b it, & ye syr Brysebar and I wyll go together to the court and ye syr Markes & Iosse∣ran Gouernar & Iaket, al ye shal abide here styl and kepe styl this castell tyl y haue other worde. Ye saye wel sayd Ar∣thur. And therewyth they went al togy∣ther to the paays to dyner, and were ri∣chely serued, and al that daye they made great feast and ioy▪ and at nyght wente to theyr restes, and the nexte mornynge betymes they arose and herde masse the whyche the abbot dyd synge, and afte masse Arthur moūted on hys horse, and so dyd the abbot and mayster Steuen and Brysebar, and so toke their leue of Gouerna and other, & so issued out of the castel, and rode together the space of foure leges & at the last they came to an entrynge ito a forrest, where as was a forked waye and there the mayster and Brysebar toke their leue and rode forth theyr way on the ryghte hande, the whi∣che was the next hye way to the citie of Cornite where as king Emendus was the same season. And y• abbot went his nexe waye to his dolorous abbey. And Arthur toke his way on the lyfte hand and so rode forth all the day tyll it was nere hande nyght, and so aryued at a gē∣tyl squyers place, called the maner of ye plashes, the whych suyer doubted him selfe gatlye, for he had suche enemyes that had mortally defyed hym, therfore he sayd to Arthur, syr yet thither righ heartely wlcome: but I beseche you in all the haste to depart hence shortlye for the sauynge of youreselfe, for I can no
warrant you in my house, for mine ene¦myes are right myghty, and I loke eche houre whan they shal assayle me. Than sayd Arthur, syr care ye not for that but and it may please you I pray you let me haue lodgyng here with you this night and syr I ensure you if thei come while I am here I trust I shall make a good peace betwene you and thē, either with fayrenesse or otherwyse. Syr sayde the squyer I am content and god giue you grace to do that ye haue sayd. How that Arthur slew and discom∣fyted .xv. knyghtes righte mightye and puyssant, who were come to assayle his host, who was called the squyer of the plasshes. Capitulo .lvi. THus was Arthur receiued of the sauyer, who made hym ryght good chere to hys po∣wer▪ and the same tyme the squyers enemyes had there a spye, who retorned and shewed to th how that there was come to the squyers house a straunge knyghte by semynge ryght myghty and puissaunt, and howe that he had promised to the squier to help hym if he had any nede that nyghte. Than they al answered and sayd how that knyght myght be sure he should se that same night, for they said they wold not let theyr enterprise for one knyght, for they were to the nombre of .xv. And whan it was nyght they all apparailed them selfe on horsbacke and came to the squyers hous al armed, and righte rude¦ly assaulted his hous, and the squier and suche seruauntes as he hadde defended them selfe as well as they coulde wyth crosbowes and suche other wepons as they had within. And whan Arthur kne¦we wel thys he armed him and toke his whyte shelde, the whych dyd cast a great clerenesse by nyghte, and toke his good swerde clarence in his hande and whan he was thus armed thā he loked out of a wyndowe, and demaunded of theym wythout what they soughte there, and what they woulde. And they answered how yt they sought for to haue his head My head sayd Arthur loo take it here for here ye maye se it, and I shall brynge i ote wortye vntoo you than he desyred them within to leue theyr shotynge and to set open the gate, and to lette downe the brydge, and accordyng too his desyre it was one and Arthur issued oute all alone▪ and ran at them, and they all at once ran at hym, and Arthur drewe out clarence his good sworde, the whyche for his goodnes was also called traūch¦fer, that is for to say, cutter of yron, and strke the fyrst so therwyth that he claue his heade o the eyen, and he made the head flye from the seconde, and from the
thyrd he strake of hys arme and sholdre clene from the body, and than the reme∣naunt sayde all at ones on hym, but all they nothynge dyd enpayre hym. And than Arthur dasht furth with his horse and encountred so one of them, that he ouerthrewe bothe horse and man into a great dyche the whych was about the place, and there he was drowned. And whan a great mighty knight who was mayster of them all and he that fyrst be∣gan this warre sawe his people so hard¦ly delte withall with one knight he was ryght sorowfull, and therwyth dash at Arthur and gaue hym a great stroke on the shelde with a great mace of yren ful of great pryckes of stele, the whyche he layd on with bothe his handes, the whi∣che stroke rebounded agayne vpwarde, for it coulde not enpayre his shelde no∣thynge, and than Arthur lyfte vp hys swerde and strake hym on the head, and the stroke was herde a great way of, but the stroke dyd glyde downe to his lyfte arme, so that arme and sholdre and all lewe clene into the field, and the swerd dasht intoo the arson of his faddell and claue it clene asonder, and dyd cut ason∣der the croper of the horse, and therwith horse and knyght and al dasht down to the ground, than Arthur laid on among the other bothe on the lyfte syde and on the ryghte syde, and made heades, ar∣mes, handes, legges, and fete flye cleane into the fyelde, than the remnaune be∣gan to flye, but than it was to late, for there was none but eyther he had loste an arme or a legge, and whā the squier vnderstode how that his gest was thus yssued out al alone and fyghtyng with hys enemyes, than he armed hym selfe and ranne oute into the fielde, but there he founde nothynge to doo, for by that tyme Arthur as than had made an ende of them all, and soo was retournynge home warde. And than the squyer sawe that Arthur had ouercomen al hys ene∣mies, he thought verely that he was of hye prowesse, and so he thanked him mo¦che and sayde. Syr ye tolde me outhe whan ye sayd y• ye would make the peas betwene myne aduersaries and me, for nowe I am amonge them, and yet they saye nothynge to me. And soo Arthur and the squyer entred into the place and closed fast the gates after them & drewe vp the bridge, and so wente to their re∣stes, & in the morning the squier wente out to se whyche of his enemyes were slayne, and amonge the other he found his principal enemy slayne, wherof he had great ioye, and offred him selfe ther¦fore to become Arthurs man, and wold haue gone with hym, but Arthur wold not suffre hym, but so he departed from the squyer, and anone the wordes were sprede abrode in all the countrey, how that a knyght with a white shielde had slayne and ouercome .xv. knyghtes, the whych wordes came to the hearynge of mayster Steuen and Brysebar. Uerely sayde mayster Steuen that same is Ar∣thur, who hathe righte gerat valure in hym. As god helpe me said Brysebar it is he, I se well that he is a ryghte valy∣aunt knyghte, for he is the best in all the worlde. Thus Arthur rode forth tyll it was thre of the clock, and there he foūd betwene twoo mountaynes, a great vy¦layne huge and mightye, blacke and he∣ry out of all measure, and he bare on his sholdre a great croked leuer. And whan he sawe Arthur he ranne to hym and toke his horse by the brydel rayne, and de∣maunded of hym, saying thus. Fayre syr what maner of man be ye? Frende
sayde Arthur I am a knyght straunger. Ye syr sayd the vylayne be ye a knyght, and what see ye hee in these pastures that & haue in my kepyng. Good felow sayde Arthur I go on myne aduenture we as g wil bring me vnto: why syr sayde the vylaine go ye than to seeke for aduentures, yf ye be so well harted that ye dae folowe after mee, I shall brynge you vnto a straunge aduenture, but I thynke ye dare not folowe me, for I thynke ye be one of the knightes that wyl menace and threten whan ye stand by the chymney warmyng of you aft souper, and in the mornynge all is for∣goten. And whan that Bawdwyn herd the vylant say so to hys mayster, he be¦gan to laughe greatly at him, and saide. well good reowe, leade hym whether so euer than wylt, and I warrant him he wyl folowe the. Syr sayde the vyl∣layne I speake not to you, as for you I se well youghe ye be not of that force and myght that ye can drawe the wyne and drinke it, and pay not for your shot or ye go, I speake to your mayster, ther¦fore let hym answere me yf that he dae Frende sayd Arthur as for Bawdein my squier is but a fle, take ye no hede whatsoeuer he sayth, but hardely bring me wether so euer ye wyll, and truely I shall folowe you as longe as my life wyll laste. Ye but syr sayd the vylayne, yf ye folowe me, whan it cometh to the nede than I fere me least ye wyl leue me and runne away lyke a cowarde. Naye sayd Arthur I promyse you faythfully I wyll not forsake you as longe as I may. well sayd the vylayne, than come on your waye forthe, and I promise you yf there were ten suche as ye be, I shall bryng you thycher where as none of you all shoulde escape from the deth, in lyke wise as I haue caused mani a o to do Than the vylayne wente furth and Ar∣thur folowed hym. And at the laste they entred into a great valley betwene two greate mountaynes, where as they foūd a lyel lodge where as meat and drynk was ser to taualling men. Than the vylayne sayd to Arthur, syr knyghte it is nowe good season that ye gyue youre horse some repast, for after this ye shal fynde no mo huses tyl it be nyghte, at why the tyme I shall brynge you vnto suche a longyng the whiche shall not be good for you, for there shall ye lese your lyfe. Than there Arthur alyghted and gaue hys horse meate, and dyd eate and drynke him selfe. Than the vilayn said Syr knight, eate and drinke with great Ioye alwayes, but  ensure you thys shall be the laste that euer ye shall take. And whan Bawdewyn hede that this vylayn thus alwaye manaced his may∣ster, it greued him right sort, and sayde. A thou oule thurle holde thy tonge fro thretenynge thus of my mayster, what we est thou to make him abashed with thy wordes naye I warae the, he ta∣keth lytell hee thereto for do the worst thou canst he be  thy malice. Than the  began to oule hys eyen, and to bende his browes and toke his leur in do. his handes, and wold haue stey∣ken Bawdewyn, but Arthur helde him and sayd. Frende take no hede what my sqyer sayeth, for I tell you he is but a fole, therfore speke to me what ye wil & let hym alone. And whan the good wife of the lodge herde him speake so swetely to the vylayne, and was so loth to dys∣please hym, and whan he was vnarmed he saw that he was so goodly a creatu¦re that she loued him in her herte & pray¦sed hym moche, and demaunded of hym
wheder he wente. Arthur answered and sayde good loue I folowe this good fe∣lawe. Certaynly syr sayd the wyfe he is no good felawe but he is the moost fou∣lst &  traytoure lyuynge therfore gentyll knyght I haue grete pi of you and ye are vterly lost and dede yf ye go with hym ony ferder for this foule vy¦layne othe nothynge but watche suche knightes as passeth through this coūtre to hentent to brynge thē thyther where as he is in full purpose to bringe you vn¦to, for fro thence there was neuer none that euer returned agayne without deth therfore gentyll knyght returne agayne for it were great losse of suche a knyght as ye seme to be thus destroyed. Than Bawdewyn sayd, syr howe fele ye your herte, wyll ye recule backe agayn or els wyll ye goo forth. Frende sayd Arthur how should euer ony lady or damoysell enploye theyr loue on me yf it should be sayd that I haue fledde away for the me∣nacynge of a foule churlyshe vylayne, nay as god helpe me I had rather suffre deth. well syr sayd Bawdewyn than ye thynke on loue I se wel, but and it tou∣ched me as it doth you I wolde thynke on no lady nor on loue in this poynt, for I wolde loue myne owne lyfe better thā to trust on theyr prayse or rewarde. And wyth these wordes the vylayne came to them and sayd, syrs what noyse is thys of cowardy se that I here, syr knyght I se well your herte fayleth you, for ye are aboute to make couenaunte to retourne agayne, therfore I thynke well ye wyll leue me whan nede is. Frende sayde Ar∣thur truly I shall not forsake you. well sayd the vylayne than arme you shortely and let vs goo hense▪ for your last dayes draweth faste onwarde truely, therfore make haste. ¶Howe the great vylayne brought Arthur where as he foughte wyth  great and a terryble Lyon, but fynal∣ly Arthur slewe hym. And howe af∣ter he foughte wyth a greate gyaun∣tesse and an horryble gyaunt, and by hys prowesse he conqered theym bothe, and after that foughte wyth a greate gryffon, and thys was the be¦gynnynge of the aduentures of the towre Tenebrous, wherein ye shall here manye ttryble and maruaylous thynges, the whych were acheued by the onelye prowesse of the valyaunte Arthur. Capi. lvii. WHan that Arthur had well repasted hym selfe and hys horse, than he armed hym and mounted on hys horse, and folowed the sayde vyl∣layne tyll at the laste they came intoo a great valey darke and depe. Than say the vylayne to Arthur, syr knighte now tyde ye on before and ye dare, and I shal folowe you. So than Arthur rode be∣fore, and as they rode on theyr ryght hande there were hewers of woode, and as soone as they saw Arthur and the vy∣laine, than they knewe wel that he was brought thyther by the soule churle, thā they cryed alowde and sayde. A gentyll knyght for goddes sake retourne agay∣ne, for and ye goo any ferther ye are but deed. A thou foule vylayne we praye to god that thou mayest dye an euyl death, for many a noble mā hast thou caused to dye. And whan Bawdewyn herde these wordes, he sayde to hys mayster. Lo y now ye may remembre your loue, ye may heare what these people sayth, certaynlye I woulde not thynke on the fayrest crea∣ture of all the worlde in this poynt. And
whan Arthur herde Bawdewyn saye so he laughed at hym saynge thus. Frende by the faythe that I owe vnto my lorde my fader I can not tell whether I goo nor what peryll there is therin but what peryll soo euer I shall fynde I wolde it were double as mouche on the condicion that I were in certayne that she that I sawe neuer loued me as well as I loue her. And whan the foule vylayne herde hym saye so in his herte he praysed hym moche and knewe well therby that he had a valyaunt herte. And thus they ro∣de forth so longe tyl at the last the foule churle cryed out and sayd. Syr knyght how it wyll appere what ye can doo for now ye shall haue nede to defende your selfe. And with that worde Arthur lo∣ked on his lyfte hande and sawe where there was comynge to hymwarde a gre¦te and a myghty lyon. Than Arthur e∣red his horse lest that the lyon sholde ha¦ue slayne hym therfore he lyghted dow¦ne to the grounde and deliuered his hor¦se vnto Bawdewyn and dressed hym to¦warde the lyon. And whan the lyon per∣ceyued hym he lepte and strake at hym wythe his paes thinkinge to confoun∣de him but Arthur put his shele befo∣re hym and the lyons stroke dashe ther¦on so sore that Arthur was all astonyed with the stroke. Than Arthur strake at hym with clarence his good swerde as he passed by hym and strake of clene his tayle and whan the lyon felte hymselfe so hurte he habandoned with all his po∣wer his body agaynst Arthur and with his sharpe tethe he toke Arthur by the helme and they entred into the bokles of his harneys but as god wolde they tou¦ched not his flesshe and with his fote he strake Arthur suche a stroke vpon shel∣de that and it had not ben the better shel¦de it hadde bene clouen all to petes, and with hys other fote he toke Arthur by the ryghte sholdre, but Arthur swarued from hym, or elles he had bene torne a∣sonder, for in the swaruynge awaye he lost a greate quarter of his harneis, and therwith Arthur lift vp his good swer and dasht it vp to the harde crosse in at the throte of the Lyon, and therewyth the Lyon dyd cast out a greate crye and a hydeous, and so fel down to the groūd starke dead, and therewith incontynent he espyed agayne where as there was cō∣myng to him warde a greate gyauntesse wyth a great fawhon in her hande, soo well steled that there was nothinge but it would cut asonder, and therewith she came vntoo Arthur and strake at hym right egerly, and whan Arthur sawe the stroke comyng on hym, he quickely caste his shelde before him. And thys gyaun∣tesse ws terribly angry for the death of hr Lyon, wherefore she gaue Arthur suche a stroe vpon the sholdre yt he was ryght sore astonyed therewithal, but as god wolde the fawchon brake asondre in two yeres, and his shelde was therwith nothynge enpayred. And whan the gy∣auanesse saw that her fawchon was bro¦ken, she lyft vp a gret spere that she had standynge by her, and thoughte to haue stryken Arthur therwith vpon the head: but Arthur stepte vnder the stroke, and closed wyth her, and than she toke Ar∣thur by the head, and so arasshed clene of his helme so rudely that she braste ason∣der al the buckelles wher withal it was tyed and with the pull that she made she stepte back warde with the helme and than Arthur with his good swerde stra¦ke her clene thrughout the bely and ther¦with she fell backwarde for she was soo hasty to reuenge her Lyon, that she came
to Arthur all vnarmed wher in she was but a sole for a man may be anone to hasty to come to his enemye and whan she fell she gaue suche a crye that all the valey range of the noyse so that a grete gyaunt who was her make herde it wel and than he ranne to a grete leuer and toke it in his hande and came rennynge so rudely as thoughe a grete multytude of men hadde come to gyder he made so gete a noyse and by that tyme Arthur had stryken of the heed of the giauntesse and rouled it in the middes of the waye and dyde set agayne his heme vpon his heed. And whan the gyaunte sawe that his wyfe was deed and his lyon also, he fared lyke a fende of hell and toke his le¦uer and dasht at Arthur thynkynge to hue stryken hym downe to the groūde but Arthur stepte asyde ygly and the stroke lyght on a grte rocke soo rudely, tat his handes tynger so sore therwith that the leuer fel from hym to the groū∣de and than he stouped downe for to ha¦ue taken it vp▪ agayne and whyle that he was stoupynge downe Arthur toke clarence his goo swerde and gaue vnto hym suche a stroke that one of his boy∣stous armes flewe clene in to the felde. Than the gyaunte lepte forth and toke Arthur in his other arme & yf that his whye helde had not ben he hadde ben frused asonder for he gaue Arthur a grete stroke with the stubbe of his hurte are. And than Arthur aduysed hym well and vnder his arme he dast claren¦ce his good swerde vp to the hard crosse and so he fell downe starke dead. Than there came a greate gryffon and stryuy¦ned Arthurs horse cleane throughout al the body and thought to haue borne him awaye. And whan that Arthur sawe his horse hurte, in hys heart he was right so¦rowfull, and strake at the gryffon wyth his swerde, and strake asonder both his legges, and therwith the gryffon flewe away with great payne, and bothe hys legges remained styl vpon the horse, and the horse bledde so ast that he fel down deade in the place, wherewith Arthur was ryght sore displeased. Than the vy¦layne came to him and sayd in thys ma∣ner of wyse. Syr knight in a thynge the whiche can not be remedyed must nedes be suffered in the best wyse that a man may, your horse is slaine, take ye no care for hym, for there be horses ynough, ye haue slayn the gyaunt and the gauntes and ao theyr Lyon, and the gryffon, burfor all that I promise you that your ende draweth fast on warde, and as for thys nyghte let vs go her borowe vs in the gyauntes house hereby, the whyche is a strong place, and there we shall fynd great plenye o good wynes and mea∣tes, and there ye shall se manye fayre and bryghte harneyses, and also there ye shall se heades, armes, legges and fete of muche people, the whyche the gyaunte hath taken and broughte to that place a∣lyue, for the gyauntesse woulde neuer by her wyl eate none other meate but man∣nes fleshe, and soo they entred into the place, and the same daye the gyaunt had taken a knyght and brought hym deade into the place vpon his owne horse, and as than the horse was yet on lyue. And whan the vylayne saw the horse, he toke hym by the brydell and broughte hym to Arthur and sayde. Syr knyghte youre owne horse is deade therfore I gyue you this horse, I thanke you hertely good fe∣lowe sayde Arthur. Than Bawdewyn dyd shytte faste the gate, and there they dydde rest theym all that nyghte, and on the next mornynge ensuyng, betymes
Arthur rose and armed hym and moun¦ted on his horse that the vylayne had gy¦uen hym. Than the vylayne came forth and sayd syr knyght folow me for now I wyl go forth. Go on than before sayd Arthur and so Arthur rode forth after hym all the longe daye tyll it was nere nyght and than at the last they came to a myghtie strong toure the whiche per∣tained to a knyght named sir Roger the scot. Than the vilayne sayd to Arthur, syr knyght it is now good tyme to lodge vs here now in this castel al thys night let vs goo entre into this place but one thynge I ensure you the knyghte that oweth this place is the moost shameful∣lest traytoure that now is lyuynge for there is none that entreth into this pla∣ce, but shamefully he dothe murdre them whyle they be in their beddes, he is also cosyn germayne to the duke of bygor, & nouewe to syr Fyrmount, who was but nowe of late slayne at the castell of ye roch by a knyght straunger, therefore nowe let se what ye wyll do, whether ye wyll go lodge in this place or not. well sayde Arthur I se well and I lye wythoute I shall be shrewdly lodged, and sythe thys knyght is of that lignage that ye speke of he is my mortall enemy, howe be it as yet I can not complayne on hym, for he dyd me neuer no trespasse, therefore cer∣taynly I wyl go thyther to take my lod∣gynge. And whan the vylayne herd him say so he thought wel how that he was of great corage, and loued him therefore muche in his herte, howe be it he sayde vnto hym, syr in goddes name soo be it, let vs go thyther, and if anye yll come to you thereby I am not to blame▪ I maye not too wythall, for I haue gyuen you warnynge thereof. Than they entred in to the courte of that place. And as sone as syr Roger sawe Arthur he knew him ryghte well, and was in certayne howe that it was he that had done soo muche prowesse at the castell of the roche, and had slayne syr Fyrmont, and hadde sor wounded syr I sembarte hys cosyn, and neuewe to the duke of bygor, and than his herte began to tremble for great an∣ger, notwithstandinge he made o them great here outward, and cleped and kis¦ed Arthur and sayde. Syr ye be ryghte hertely welcome into my house, as God helpe me I haue more ioye of your com∣myng than of any other manne liuynge but to hymselfe inwardly he sayde, yet or it be mydnight I will haue that head of yours cleane from your sholders. Than the vylayne came vnto them and cryed as loude as euer he could, god kep the lorde of this place, accordynge to his hertes desyre, and these wordes he sayde thre tymes. Than Arthur sayde, yf hys hearte be good wll haue he, and yf it be otherwyse than good, god amende it. Than Arthur was brought vp into his chaumbre, and there he dyd warme hym And in the meane tyme this knyght syr Roger came to hys squyer and demaun∣ded of hym howe and in what maner he myght slea Arthur, for if we make any assaulte on hym he wyl slea vs both, for there is none lyke hym in all the wyde worlde, nor none so soore to be doubted. For he dyd meruaylous dedes of armes at the castell of the roche. Syr sayde his squyer I knowe certaynlye that we can not endure against hym: but I shall tell you what we shall doo, we shall make his bed this night aboue in youre toure and sette it ouer the trappe doore of the dongeon, and we wyll take away all the bordes in the bottome of the bedde, and in the stede of the bordes sette small sta∣ues
to sustayne vp the clothes and soo whan he shall lye downe in the bedde he and the clothes and all shall tomble dow¦ne into the dongeon and than we shall soone cast downe his squyer after him and than slee this foule vylayn & whan they be in the pytte we wyll take speres and so slee them or elles let vs here thre or foure cawdrons with hote scaldynge-water and cast it downe vpon theyr he∣des and so shall we slee them. and whā this syr Roger herde his squyer saye soo he was ryght well content with hym & cleped and kyssed hym and sayd this ma¦ter is ryght well deuysed for as ye haue sayd so shall it be done therwith the vy¦layne yssued out of the chaumbre from Arthur with his grete leuer on hes nec∣ke and as soone as he sawe syr Roger counseliynge with his squyer and other standynge togydr rownynge in corners Than he began to escrye to them & sayd what maner of people be ye, for what mater be ye thus counseyllynge togyder what is it for some maryage be ware yt there be noo treason amonge you for yf there be I shall frusshe you downe with my leuer. Than Arthur issued out of his chaumbre. And whan syr Roger sawe hym he toke hym by the hand and sayde. Syr it is time that we wasshe our han∣des for your souper is all ready. Syr as it pleaseth you sayde Arthur than they wasshed and sate them downe at the ta∣ble and were righte well serued, and the vylayne was set downe at an other ta∣ble behynde Arthur, and so they gaue hym parte of al their meates and dryn∣kes that they hadde and he dyde ete and drynke excedyngly moche for they could not satysfye hys apetyde. And after souper Bawdewyn Arthurs squyer to∣ke hede to his horses. And than Arthurs bedde was made in the same place where as it was deuysed before, and the vyl∣layne layde hym downe on foure quys∣shens by the fyre in the hall as he that hadde wel eaten and dronken, and so fel fast on slepe & snorted ryght sore, wher∣fore syr Roger that was knighte of the place would haue wakened him, but Ar∣thur would not suffre him, but caused hym to be couered with a grene couerlet and so let hym lye, and whā it was time for hym to go to his bedde, than the tor∣ches were lyghted vp, and the knyght cō¦uayed Arthur to his chaumbre, and at hys taking leue of Arthur he offered wt hys mouthe hym selfe and all his house∣holde to be redy at his cōmaundemente, but in his herte inwardly he thought to be redy to cause hym to lose his lyfe. And whan he was departed Arthur wente to his bedde, and as he layd hym downe he and the bed and all fell into the great pytte, and the knyght and hys seruaun∣tes were readye watchyng at the doore, and whan they heard the russhe, they en¦tred into the chaumbre, and toke Bawde¦wyn and dyd caste hym downe too hys mayster, and Arthur receyued hym in hys armes because he should not be hurt in the fallynge downe. Than there ose a greate crye and noyse throughoute all the place, and some bare speres and bar∣res of yron to caste downe at Arthur to slee him in the pyt, & euer Arthur wat∣ched well their strokes and dyd auoyde them as well as he myghte. And at the laste by the reason of the great noyse the vylayne arose oute of hys slepe. And so whan that he hearde that great brute he wyst well that Arthur was betrayed. Than he mounted vp into the chaumbre with his greate leuer in his handes, and there he saw wel that they were aboute
to enforce them selfe to slea Arthur. Than he toke his leuer and strake so the knyght syr Roger in ye necke that he cau¦sed his tonge to hange out of his mouth nye half a fote, and therwith he fel down into the pyt to Arthur, And the vylayne than sayd to Arthur, syr knyght gnawe well on that morsell, ye shall haue more anone. Than he lyft vp his leuer agayne and stake syr Rogers Squyer suche a stroke on ye hed, yt his head was frusshed harde to his shulders, & he fell also down into the pyt after hys mayster. Than the vylayne sayd to Bawdewyn, good sqter cut hys throte and make him sue In the name of god sayde Arthur it shal not nede, for he hath ynoughe alreadye Than the vylayn dressed him at the ē∣naunt tha held torches in theyr handes to gyue lighte, and dasht theym downe one after another, and some fled awaye and he folowed after and slew them all. Than he entred into the kechyn & there he found the coke boylyng of a gret cau∣dron full of water, the which should ha∣ue ben cast down on Arthur, thā he toke the coke in his armes, and did caste hym into the cawdron all boylynge, and dyd hold him downe with his leuer, & sayd. Thou shalt sethe without salte tyl thou be ynough, and if thy flesshe be harde so den I shall broyle the on the coles, than he ran to a ladder and bare it to Arthur in the pyt. Thā Arthur and Bawdwin issued out, and as soone as Arthur was without he ran to his swerde & demaun¦dyd if there were any more to do in that place. As god helpe me syr sayd the vy∣layne I trowe not. Than they light vp torches and descended downe, and found an olde house ful of deade mennes bones such as the traytours of that place had slayne. In the name of god sayd Arthur to the vylayne ye haue holpen me now lyke a frende for al your vnurteis wor¦des here before: wel sayd the vylayne I wyl that if ye can scape to morow from that aduentur whether as I shal bring you, the whyche I thynke you can not do, that than ye shall promyse me to do for me a thynge suche as I shall desyre you. Frende sayd Arthur and I promise you that to the vttermost of my power I shal do any thing that ye desire me yf a knight may do it wythout reproche of vylany. well sayd the vylayne I beleue that all this promise shall not nede. for though ye were in a maner made of yrō yet I thinke ye shuld not scape fro death but as for this nighte I shall kepe you fro any daunger. And so he made Arthur a fayre bedde, and lay all nyghte in the flore by hym, & so e was that night his chamberlaine, and so he was euer after all his lyfe, for afterwarde Arthur dyd muche good to him. So thus they went to bedde and toke theyr rest tyll the next mornyng that Arthur rose. ¶Howe on the next mornynge the vy∣laine brought Arthur to another aduen¦ture nye to the toure tenebrous, where as he was firste assailed wyth terrible monstrous byrdes, and greate griffons without nombre, & after yt he was assai¦led with .xxiiii. knightes. and how he b his prowes slew them all. And also he bete down the gret mahomet of brasse out of the whyche there issued oute a wynd that it tourned about great myll¦stones lyke powder, and also how that he entred into the castell tenebrous, and quenched the fyre which was the cause of the great darkenes the which contey¦ned the circuite of .v. leges compasse as ye shal here afterward. Capto. lviii.
IN ye next morning betimes Arthur rose and armed him & moūted on his horse and toke his wateuer folowing y• vilayn, & so he rode forth tyl it was about thre of the clock, & than they entred into a great valey, and euer they rode lowe and lower, it was than a fayre seasō, for the sonne shone clere, & by that tyme they had ryden twoo leges and a halfe, they were in much darknes that they had clene lost the sight both of the sonne, and also of the day, for it was there as dark as though it had bē abou∣te midnyght. Than the vilayne sayd to Arthur, syr knight can ye tel fro whens al thys darknes cometh, if ye can for do it & make it clere, than shal ye get there∣by a perpetual honour, & know you for certayn that as yet there was neuer no¦ne that euer entred any ferder that euer retourned agayne therefore if youre hert fayle you enter no ferder for if ye do, ye shall dye as other haue done here before Frende sayd Arthur, howe is it that all this darkenes is here in thys place. I wyl tell you no more sayd the vylayne, but I rede you be sage & wise, for it stan¦deth you wel in hand. And therwith Ar∣thur departed fro them and entred into the derkenes, and the vylayn & Bawde∣wyn abode styll at the beginninge of the derkenes, & so they lost the syght of Ar∣thur, but they myght se the shynynge of his sheld as farre of as one myght shote an arowe. Thus he rode forth well the space of halfe a lege, & at the last he foūd a ryuer great and depe, & black as pitch, and the bankes were so hye, that vn∣neth the water mighte be sene runnynge vnderneth, and it was so full of serpen∣tes and lydardes, that none could entre amonge them without he were slayne and aboue his head flewe monstrous bl¦des and diuers griffons who wer able to beare away an armed knyght hors & al, and that they were in as great a mul¦titude as though thei had ben stalings And Arthur dydde couer his head with his sheld, and the griffons dasht therat with their talentes, & anoyed bothe Ar∣thur and his horse righte sore, an euer Arthur florysshed about hym wyth hys good sword clarence, & what so euer he touched dyd hym no more hurt after. Also there were flies that were as grea as nutes and as blacke as pytche, and they stange both hym & his horse ryghte sore, so that the bloud yssued out afer but & it had not bene for the clerenes of his shelde, he had bene slayne there and he had had a .M. mens liues, but by the bryght shynyng therof he mighte well s rounde aboute hym, and perceyue well whan any of these thinges came to him warde, wherby he made as good deen∣ce as was for him possible, & thus he ro∣de a longe season by the yuer syde, & at the last he found a lytel strayte way the which he must nedes passe without he would haue tourned agayne, and at the last Arthur dasht into the strayte way, & anon the vermin that was there ran to his hors, so that shortly he ws ful of them as though they had bene flies, and they souked so muche bloud of the hors that he began to wax very feble & whā Arthur sawe that his horse would fayl him, he hasted as fast as he might to get oute of that strayte waye, and so wyth moche payn egal his hors out therof and incontinent the horse fel dwn dead thā arthur set his fete to ye erth as well as he might, & thā there came a knyght at Arthur or he was ware, & hit him on his sheld the whiche he helde not fast in
his hande, therfore the stroke dyd gent and the spere helde & brake not, & as the knyght passed forth Arthur toke hym by the rayne of the brydell and caught hym by the arme & pulled hym so rudely that he made him auoyde his horse, and soo he fell downe into the water and there was drowned & deuoured with the foule ver∣myn that was therin▪ than Arthur lepte on the same knyghtes horse and toke his spere. Than an other knyght cryed and sayd, syr knyght beware of me, than Ar∣thur tourned & encoūtred hym, and the knyght brake his spere, but Arthur stra∣ke hym so rudely yt his spere went clene thrughout hys body, and so he fell dow∣ne deed, than there ran at hym .x. other knyghtes al at ones, and they strake him on al sydes with great and myghty stro∣kes, thā he toke his good swerde and stra¦ke one of them soo rudely that he claue hym clene to the sholdres, and an other he claue from the sholders downe to the backe bone, and delte amonge them such strokes that he confounded al that he at¦tayned vnto, and by that tyme he hadde great nede of such herbes as mayster ste∣uen gaue hym, and also his whyte shel∣de and good swerde dyd hym there good seruyce, for suche knyghtes as he hadde slayne were chosen m & ryght puyssaūt but Arthurs chyualrye surmounted all other, for there he dydde so muche wyth his handes that he slewe all yt euer were agaynst hym. Than he rusht forth with his horse and wyst not whether, til at the last he hearde the gryndynge togyther of two milstones one vpon another as they do in a myll, wherby all the earth about Arthur did shake, and the cause why that these stones went thus aboute was for there stode by them a great fat of brasse wherin there was a great machomet syt¦tynge vpon a barre of yren made by en∣chauntement, who blewe from hym soo greate a wynde that these stones turned therby so swyftly that no creature could passe by them wythout death. Than Ar∣thur approched to these mylstones, but than he felte so terryble a wynde that he was fayne to alyght downe of his horse and wente on fote as well as he myght, but he sawe wel that he coude not come nere these stones without he should dye, therfore he went rounde aboute them to se what wayes he myght come to them, and at last he founde a lytle brydge, whi∣che was so narowe yt one man could not passe by another, and vnder thys brydge there was so great a pyt that the botom therof could not be perceyued, and there were also .xii. knyghtes that kepte thys brydge .vi. at the one ende and .vi. at the other all armed wt osowes & hatches and maes of stele in theyr handes. And whā the .vi. fyrst knyghtes sawe Arthur they ran at hym all at ones, & gaue hym many great strokes on hys shelde, but ne¦uer they could enpayre it, than he toke his good swerd and strake so the fyrst yt he claue his heed asonder, & fro the secon¦de he stroke of his arme clene wt the shol¦dre, & fro the thyrde he beraue his head. and whan ye other thre saw how theyr felowes was slayne, & how that nothin¦ge coulde endure ayenst hym they fledd towarde the bridge, but Arthur ouertoke so the hyndermest that hys brayne lewe clene into the felde, and the seconde for haste lepte into the pyt, and there brake hs necke, and the thyrde he ouertoke on the brydge and toke hym in hys armes & dyd cast hym ouer the brydge downe in to the pyt and there he dyed myserablye. therwyth he hasted hym ouer the brydge and than the other .vi. ranne all at ones
at hym and thought to haue dasht him downe into the pyt, but Arthur lyke a valiaunt knight lept in amonge them & layde on with his swerde round aboute hym in suche wyse that within a shorte space he departed life and death asonder of .v. of theym, and than the syxt kneled downe before arthur & besought him of mercye, and prayed him for goddes sake that he would not sle hym. Take no fere sayde Arthur for thy lyfe is saued, soo yt thou wylt tell me fro whence this grete wynde cometh. Syr sayde he it cometh out of yonder great vessell of brasse that ye may se yonder, for therein is a macho met made all of lether, syttyng on a gret barre of yron made by the crafte of en∣chauntmente, but who soo coulde ouer tourne this machomet, the wynd shold than cease. well sayde Arthur abyde me here styll & I wyl go se what I can do. ¶How Arthur bette down the grete machomet syttynge in the vessell of brasse, and therebye the wynde was ceased. Capitulo .lix. THan Arthur wence forth & thought to haue gone bold∣ly to this vessell of brasse, but ye wynd was so byg that he was fayn to lie on ye erth all alonge, & so to crepe on handes & fee tyll he came to the vessell, & drewe after hym his shielde, his swerd, and a longe spere, & dasht therwith the machomet so rudely with so many strokes, that at ye last this foule machomet ouerthrew vp so down in the vessell, & incontinent the enchauntment ceased & the stones stode all styll, for than there was no maner of wynd. Than Arthur stode vp on his fete and came agayn to the knight & de∣maunded of hym what towre it was yt he sawe stande before him in the derke, for all this season he had no lyght but by the reason a the shyning of his sheld Thā the knyght answered and sayd, sir the duke of bygor hath a neuew who is named syr Isembart, he is lorde of this place, and he hath suche enuy to all peo∣ple that he caused this tour to be made by a subtyll enchaunter, & all this grete darknes which ye haue bene in, the whi¦che endureth .v. leges in circuite, in the which compas there was no land ayred nor sowed the space of syxe yeres paste, and so all suche people as were wont to dwell therin are fledde away and famis∣shed for hoge, and this enchaunte by his craft also made this riuer yt ye haue passed, the which neuer man dyd before thys tyme withoute death, for euer thys darknes hath contynualy endured sa∣uyng one day in the yere, and that is on new yere▪ day▪ the whyche daye the .vi. knightes that ye haue slayne, the which were of the est knightes that coulde be found in all ths lande, how be it nowe they haue found their mayster, the whi∣che knightes dyd prouyde for vs ye sayd day for all thnges as was nedefull for vs to haue, & I and al my company who wer in al the numbre of .xii. persons, w kept alway this passage betwene these mylstones the whyche turned euer with out rest, sauyng on saynt martyns dae and than we might passe out to the fore sayd .vi. knightes, and fetche in all such thynges as was prouided for vs al the hole yere, & so this toure was beset roūd about, what with knyghtes and with these milstones and with wynd, and wt darkenes, so that it were in a maner im∣possible to entre into this toure wtoute death. well sayde Arthur shewe vnto me
what is the cause, and from whence cō¦meth al this darknes. Syr sayd he it cō∣meth out of a greate pice that is in this toure, and there be greate gryffons that descendeth downe into thys pyt, and in the bottome therof there is a great hide∣ous fyre, made so by crafte that no man can tell how, out of the whych thee ry∣seth so blacke and so thicke a fume and smoke the whych ryseth out of this pt by certayne dores and wyndowes, wher¦by the light of the son and of the brighte skye is so quenched that it is euer conty¦nually darke, the which derknes contei∣neth the circuite of .v. leges compasse as I haue shewed you before, wherfore all this country is clene wasted & destroied and all the people fledde out therof. And why sayd Arthur did he all this cruelte Certaynly said the knight I shal shewe to you, it is of trouth that here by there is an abbey of white monkes who were wont to be reputed ryghte noble and of great possessyons, & most comonly kyn∣ges or prynces whan they paste by that place they would there rest and herbour them, and there they should be well ser∣ued, and it was named the abbey of the grace dieu, and the abbot is a right wise man and a noble, for he is brother vnto the lorde of Argenton who was falslye slayne by treason by this dukes neuew the whych fortuned to come to the sayde abbey vpon an Ester day in the fore no∣ne in the same seasō that the abbot and al his hole couent were in solemne pro∣cessyon, and because that the couent did not at his fyrst comyng leue the seruyce of god that they were in, to haue layde the tables, & to haue brought him meate and drynke to haue fylled his paunche, therfore he was so displesed that incon∣tynent he lepte on his horse, and so was departyng and his false enchaūter with hym, And whan the abbot knewe that, as soone as he myghte he came to hym and desyred him to atye, but in no wyse he could make hym to chaunge his pur¦pose: but in the most shamefullest wyse that he could he rebuked them, and cal∣led them foule rotten chures, promy∣synge to do them as greate dyspleasure as could lye in hys power to doo, so he hath done as ye may se, for he hath cau∣sed them euer lyth to lyue in great dark¦nes, and also he hath taken from theym all theyr rentes and possessyons which they helde vnder hym or in his rule in al the londe of Argenton, for in al that cyr∣cuyte labourers coulde not laboure for theyr lyuyng for lacke of lyghte, where∣fore many of them be famisshed for hun¦ger, and to saye the trouth in thys sayde abbey the seruyce of god hath not be mi∣nysred this fyue yere. well sayd Arthur tat is greate domage: but I praye th tell me howe may this darkenes be for∣done. Syr sayd the knyght the enchaun∣ter whan he made this fyre was ryghte sore dysplesed because that there sprang oute of the earthe euen by this terryble fyre a fayre fountayne, wherby he right well knew that this fyre should be quen∣ched if anye knyghte myghte attayne to come therto, and to cast the water ther∣of into the fyre, and so than al the dark∣nes should cease for euermore after. ¶How that Arthur entred into the toure tenebrous, and how he there quenched the fyre, wherby all the terryble enchauntemente ceased. Capo. lx.
THan Arthur sayd, frend bryn¦ge me to this sayd toure than he wente on before & Arthur folowed hym, & so wente fast by the greate wyndowes and dores o the toūre the which were of .xv. speres length square out of the whyche there yssued soo great haboundaunce of fume that his bryght shelde lost clene his shynyng, wherfore he was sore troubled for than he could se no maner of thynge how be it they dyd so muche by gropyng that at the laste they came Iuste to the toure, and there they founde the walles pyght ful of sharpe barres of yren set as thicke as the prickes of an vrchins skyn of the length of halfe a spere to thentent that no creature should approche nere to the walles, so there was none entre but at a lytle wycket, and with moche payne the knyght dyd open it, and whan that it was opened there yssued out so greate haboundaunce of smoke that the derke∣nes therby was doubled throughout all the countre, so that neyther candell nor torche coulde brenne in no place, neuer∣thelesse Arthur entred in at the wycket and left the knyght wythout, the smoke and hete was ryght greuous to hym, for yf there had not ben more valure in hym than in ony other he had bene there clene ouercome, and alwayes he went downe¦warde on the stayres and sawe nothyng, but he felt so manye greate strokes that oftentymes thereby he was constrayned to knele on hys knees, but he coulde not tell from whens they came, or who dydde gyue them to hym, and euer he flourys∣shed aboute wyth his swerd but it auay∣led hym nothynge, for he strake he wyst not wherat, and so fynally he was fayne to couer his head wyth hys shelde, for or elles he had ben sshed thoughe he had ben of yren, and alwayes thus he wente euer downwarde on the stayres tyll at the laste he came downe to the botom, & there he founde a fayre greate fawte, and there he felt so great hete that he swette so therby that he was nye ouercome, and as he felte aboute hym he perceyued that he was nye the fyre, and as he went fer∣der he founde out the fountayne by the reason of the colde ayre yt he felte, wher∣of he was ryght gladde, and soo than he toke his shelde & plunged it into the wa∣ter, and bare as muche water therin as he coulde and dyd caste it into the fyre, and euer he fetched more water and con∣tynually dyde caste it into the fyre, and euer as the fyre quenched the darkenes began to mynysshe, and the more water he dydde caste into the fyre, the clerer the lyght began to waxe, and at the conclu∣sion he dydde caste soo muche water that the fyre was clene quenched, than myght he se clerely all aboute hym, than he per∣ceyued on bothe the sydes of the stayres how there stode greate ymages of brasse holdynge in theyr handes greate maces of stele the whyche had doone hym moche trouble as he wente downewarde, but than theyr power was ended, for whan the fyre was quenched the enchaunte∣ment was fynysshed, than Arthur whā he sawe that all was done he retourned vp agayne the stayres, and was ryghte wery of hys trauayle, what for hee and swetynge and the greate strokes that he had receyued, and so came agayne to the lytle wycket where as the knyghte was styll abydynge, and whan he sawe Ar∣thur hole and sounde and on lyue he kne∣led downe before hym and sayd. Syr ye be welcome as he that is chefe floure of all chyualry of the worlde. Than Arthur set hym downe vpon the grene grasse to
take his brethe, and did of his helme and shelde. So thus all the countre was cle∣ne delyuered fro darkenes, soo that eue∣ry bodye myght se clerely aboute theym, wherof the abbot and all hys couent had great Ioye, and so they went all and ren¦dred thankes to almyghty god in theyr churche. And than the abbot sayd to all his bretherne, syrs let vs go and se hym that hath thus delyuered vs fro all thrall¦dome yf god wyll gyue vs the grace to fynde hym, for verely I thynke it be the gentyl knyght yt was at the porte noyre Than the abbot and al his couent yssued out of the abbey wyh comyn processyon and so came to this sayd toure the why∣che was not ferre thens, and there they founde Arthur syttynge on the grounde and the knyght by hym. And whan Ar∣thur sawe them he toke to hym hys shel∣de and helme and hys spere in hys hande And whan the couent wyth the processyō came before hym he kneled downe befo∣re the Crosse, and all the couente kneled downe before hym, nor they woulde not aryse tyll he was vpon his fete. And than there came to them Bawdewyn, & wyth hym the foule greate vylayne who hadde broughte Arthur to all these forsayd ad∣uenures. And whan Bawdewyn sawe the procession and al those monkes, than he thought veryly that Arthur had bene dead, than he began to cry and to braye and to make all the sorow of the world and sayd. Nas vnhappy creature as I am that thus haue lost my lord and may∣ster the floure of al the worlde in all no∣ble thyualry, alas death why doost thou not take me, and thus as he made thys great sorow at the last he espyed Arthur wheras he stode, than hys heart came to hym agayne. And the abbot came to Ar∣thur and sayd. Ryght noble and vertu∣ous knight ye be ryght hertely welcome as he that hath delyuered vs and all ths countre out of suche toumente and pry∣son as we were in a longe space, and by the pleasure of god by your meanes the seruyce of god from hens forth hall be mynystred in our churche, syr I and all my hole couent hartely desre you to co∣me and take your rest wythin oure abbey now after your great trauayle. And Ar∣thur with a ryght good wyll dyd graūt them, for he was vey wery. Than Baw¦dewyn toke his shelde and the great vy∣layn toke hys spere and helme, and often tymes sayd vnto hym, gentyll knyghte god gyue the Ioye and encreace thyn ho∣nour and bounte, for thou haste acheued that neuer man could do before thys ty∣me, therfore nowe by the pleasure o god and by the hye prowesse the fayre damoy¦sell of Argenton shall be delyuered oute of trouble and ae, and oute of the ha∣des of the duke of Bygors neuewe, for thou haste promysed me to goo where s euer that I shall brynge the, therfore I now desyre the for to kepe thy promyse. well sayde Arthur I ensure you fayth∣fully that I wyll not breake my promyse Sir said the abbot god gyue you the gra¦ce to brynge this lady out of thraldome, for I knowe well ye haue prowesse suffy¦cyent to acheue that enterpryse, thoughe it were a greater mater. That is of trouth sayd the vylayne, for it hath ben tight well proued, for I haue broughte hym by all the places where as any harde ad∣uenture hath ben to proue therby his chy¦ualry and noble vertue, how be it the du∣kes neuewe is greately to be redoubted, but for all that I doubte not but that he shall be well chastysed, and soo therwyth they wente all to the abbey, where as the abbot made theym ryght great honoure
and there, and therfore all the belles in the church were ronge continually thre dayes and thre nightes for greate ioye, and so for a lytell space Arthur & Bawd¦wyn and the gra vylaine sported them there in the great feast of ioy. Now for a tyme let vs leue Arthur in this abbey & let vs speke of the mighty kyng Emen∣dus, and of the faire Florence his dough¦ter. ¶How after that Brisebar & may¦ster Steuen wer departed fro Ar∣thur fro ye porte noyre they aryued at Cornite where as king Emen∣dus was, and in his company the emperoure of ynde, and his other foure knyghtes, holdynge the same time a great sumptuous opē court and there mayster Steuen & Bry∣sebar recounted to them al in open audyence the noble chyualry of Ar¦thur, and this same meane season there came into the coure a knight all armed and broughte tydynges to the kynge howe all the aduentu∣res of the toure tenebrous were a∣cheued by the onely prowes of one noble knyght. Capitulo. lxi. WHan that the mighty kyng Emendus hadde holden a gret solemne court at afest of ester in a gret citie of his called sabary, the .xv. daye of ester th emperour would haue depar¦ted, but the kyng would not suffre him, but entreted hym so fayre that he was connt to abyde, and soo they were de∣termyned to kepe theyr whytsontyde at Cornyte and so they dyd, at which time the kynge kepte the moost sumptuous and open Courte that he kepte syth he was kyng. Soo thus the emperour abode st wyth the kyng tyl to the time it was whytsontyde, against the which
tyme the kynge had sente for all the no∣bles of hys realme to be at the sayd feast at his citie of Cornite. And so whan the daye approched, the kynge wyth all hs noble company rode to Cornite, & here mette with him his noble doughter the gentyll Florence, accompanyed with ye archebyshop of Cornite her vncle, and brother vnto the kyng her father, and so this Citie was than rally replentished with kynges and knightes. And whan the kyng was entred he alighted downe at the peryo, and soo munted vp into the palays, and the nexte day the empe∣roue came thyther, and the kynge and Florence his doughter and all hys hole baray dyd encountre and conuey hym to his lodgynge, the whych was in the abbey of saynt Quintine, and than the kyng & Forence retourned agayne vn∣to theyr palays. And the thyrde daye be∣fore the feast there came to the coure the kynge of orqueney, and the noble kyng of mormall, and the kynge of valefoūde and the kyng of sabary, also thyther ca∣me the lord Neuelon, seneshal vnto the fayre Florene, and syr ncean his ne∣uewe, and the lorde Poole, syr Steuen, and syr Miles of valefunde lord of d¦mas, and syr Artaude lorde of Arsate, & syr Moraūt lorde of fenisse, and syr Oly∣uer lorde of sabary, and also there was syr Ultier lorde of amaso, and syr Mo¦li the scot, and syr Sanxton of Ostein And all these were of the retinue of the noble Florence, and there were so many other that a greate parte of theym were fayne to be lodged wythoute the cytye. Than the court was so full and so plē∣teous that there was neuer seene none suche before. Than the kynge caused to be cried that whosoeuer would take on hym the noble ordre of knyghthode that he shoulde be dubbed knighte with hys own handes. The nexte daye the whych was the fyrst day of the feast, than there began in the courte soo muche feast and Ioye, that there was neuer sene no such in all the courte before, and on whyt∣sondaye after masse the kynge made in hys palays fyfty newe knyghtes, vnto whome he dydde gyue armes and horse and harneys. And Florence dyd gyue them gownes of skarlet, and mantelles of grene furred wyth ermynes, and soo all these new knyghtes were standynge before the kinge, who dyd gyrde aboute them theyr swerdes, and ryghte swetely laughyng dyd giue them the neck stroke of knyghthode, and Florence dydde lace theyr mantelles about theyr neckes. And the emperour dyd make in his lod∣gynge .xl. knyghtes. And the other four kinges eche of them made .xx. knightes And so than the emperour and the othe kynges dyd mount on horsebacke, and all these new knightes wyh them, and soo came to the palays, and than began hornes and bussynnes to blowe, and ta∣oures and ebeckes & other instrumē∣tes to sowne and to make the moost me∣lody of the world, and than there assem¦ble together al the Iuglers & tomblers and al resorted to the palays. And whan they were all assembled at the courte the¦re were to the numbre of two hundred & x newe knightes. And so the kynge and the emperour sate downe and the fayre Florence betwene them, and al the oth kinges were set eche of them after their dge. And the iuglers and mynstrelles began to make Ioye and feast. Ladyes and damoyselles began to daunce. Lor∣des and knyghtes dyd Iuste and our∣nay, trompetes and clarios and othe instrumentes of musyke began to sown
And all the cyte was hanged with cloth of golde & ryche arays. And as they were in this great myrth & Ioy there alyghted at the peryon syr Brysebar, and mayster Steuen was remaynynge at the castell eynarte but two leges thens, & there he made the peas betwene the burgyses of the towne and the meane people, for they had ben before longe at discorde, & whan syr Brisebar was moūted vpon the pa∣lays, all the barons and knyghtes ran & welcomed hym, & made for hys comyng great Ioye & feest, & specyally syr Neue∣lon the senesshall, & syr Ancell, & syr My∣les of valifounde, & all other made hym suche chere yt for prese he had greate pay∣ne to come to the kyng, & as soone as the kynge sawe hym he made great Ioy, and toke hym by the hande & caused hym to syt downe before hym. Than was al the courte ryght Ioyfull of hys comyng, for before there were none lacking of al Flo¦rence knyghtes but he & Arthur. Than the kynge sayd, syr Brisebar ye sent hy∣ther to me the heed of the foule great mō¦ster the whyche is slayne thanked by god but I pray you tell me how he was con¦quered. Syr sayd Brysebar your grace sent me thyther wyth a great company, how be it we dyd nothynge there, for we founde there fyghtyng wyth the monster the moost gentyl knyght yt now lyueth, and moost freest of herte, moost curteyse swete and amyable, & the moost valyaūt & redoubted knyght that euer was gyrt wyth swerd, for he al only stroke of the monsters heed in my syghte, & dyd there suche prowesse of armes that no manne can do like him. In the name of god quod the kynge, it is great valure in one man to bryng to deth suche a foule beest. Syr sayd Brsebar ye can not know the va∣lure and hye prowesse whiche is in thys knyght, for it is he that all onely hath a∣cheued the straunge aduentures of th porte noyre, and it is he that wyth his body dyd maruayles at the Roche, where as syr Fyrmont with .v. hondred mo dyd laye in a wayte for hym, and there he lepte into a shyppe full of hys enemyes whan he perceyued that I and other of my company were taken prysoners and so ledde forth to the castell, and there he sustayned all onely the medlynge amon∣ge all his enemyes the whyche was all ye comynalte of the towne of the roche and of the countre all aboute, and there he slewe syr Fyrmont and more than thre hondred of hys companye, and rescowed vs out of pryson, and also he rescowed the knyght of the plashes of all hys ene∣myes, what wyll ye that I shall saye, he is the floure of all chyualry, there is not his pere in all the worlde. And he hadde scant vttred these wordes but that there came into the palays a knyght all armed and dressed hym to the knyge and sayde Ryght hye and myghty puyssaūt kynge I haue brought vnto you good and true tydynges, that is how that the straunge aduentures of the tenebrous toure are acheued, and all the enchauntementes clene fordon, and the greate darkenes is now tourned to lyght and bryghtnes, & all the knyghtes that kepte the toure are all slayne, and the great lion and gyaunt and gyauntesse are slayne, and the coun¦tre deliuered fro al the harde aduentures that they had longe endured. Fayre rend sayd the kynge and who hathe done all thys dede. Syr that hath done a knyght al onely who wereth a whyte shelde, and for a certayne I sawe hym vnarmed in the abbey of grace di, but neuer syth god was borne hath there bene seen soo fayre a creature so gentyll nor so gracy∣ous.
And whan Florence herde spekyng of the whyte shelde, he thought than ve¦ryly yt it was her shelde the whiche was in her pauylyon at the porte noyre, and thought veryly that it was her frende & louer Arthur that bare it of whome she herde so muche good reported, and thus wyth her owne thought her herte trēbled and sodenly therby she blusshed, how be it she made no semblaūt & to her sefe she sayd. A swete frende noble and true hert whan shall I se you, so that I may speke wyth you at good leyser. Than the king sayd in the name of god thys knyght is right valyaūt, what is the cause syr Bri¦sebar that ye brought him not to ye court wyth you, to thentent that we myght be acquaynted wyth hym, so that he myght be ou fende and we hys. As god helpe me sayde the kynge of orqueney it were a greate rychesse to haue suche a shelde as he is nere vs, and veryly as for my parte I had rather haue the copanye of hym than of the rychest persone nowe lyuyng and syr Bysebar ye dyd ryght yll youre duoyre whan ye dyd not yor payne to bringe him to this courte. Syr sayd Bry∣sebar by the fayth that I owe vt omy lorde the kynge I dyd the beste of my po∣wer to haue brought hym hyther, but he answered me yt he must nedes go fyrst to the toure tenebrous, and sayd if god did gyue hym the grace thereto escape that aduēture he wold be at this mawdelan¦tyde at Argence to make battayle ayenst syr Isembarte ye duke of bygors neuew for the fayre mayden of Argentons sake For he shewed me how yt he had promy∣sed to her vncle the markes & to mayster Steuen that he wolde do the best of hys power to get agayne the fayre ladyes he∣rytage, & how that he wolde shewe vnto the dukes neuewe that falsly and vntru∣ly he had dysheryted her, & by flse trea∣son slayne the lorde of Argenton her fa∣ther. It is of trouth sayd the knight that brought thyther the tydynges fro the t∣nbrous toure, I waraunt hym he shall ryght well helpe that lady in her ryght, But by the fayth yt I owe vnto god sayd the kyng of orqueney yf suche a batayle shall be there yf god wyll it shall not b wythout me, for veryly I wyll be therat the same tyme. Syr sayd Phylyp of or∣queney fayre vncle suffre me to go with you, for truly so wyll I do. And I also quod syr Nephelō. And I wyl not be be∣hynd sayd Brisebar yf god be pleased for ther we shal se maruayles of this knight and thā in ye court ther begā to be a gre∣te parlyament amonge the knyghtes, & a faythful auowynge to go to the sayd iourney, & so they were of one accord wel to the nōbre of .v.C. knyghtes, & they al promised faythfully in open audience to be at the sayd batayle & helpe & to ayde ye sayd damoysell. Than Florence sayd to the king of orqueney, fayre cosin we shal do ryght well to go thyther to help this lady, & also to acquaynt you wt this gen∣tyll knyght, & for goddes sake bring him hyther, and I promyse you to loue hym ryght derely, & to giue him suche gyftes and londe that he shall be ryght ryche & puyssaunt. well fayre nece said the king I shall do the best of my power. ¶Howe the emperour was aferde leet Florence shulde cast her loue on Athur, wherfore he demaūded of the kynge her father to haue her in maryage wtout ony lenger delay, herwyth the kyng was content, but Florence wold not agree therto, wherwyth the kynge her father was wyth her ryght sore dysplased, as ye shall here afterward. Capo. lxii.
WHan that the emperour had herd the great praise & laude ye generally was giuē to Ar¦thur, & perceiued wel how yt he had the loue of al ye court, & herde wel the good wordes yt Florence spake of h̄ wherby there strake into his hert a Ia∣lousy & a tere lest yt she shuld cast her lo∣ue o him, therfore he toke kyng Emen∣dus by te hand ad said. Syr I would ayne speke with you in counsayl, but I pray you syr let your doughter be pre∣sent. Soo than they bothe roe and Flo∣rence with them, and softely she smyled vnto the kyng of orqeney and sayde to hym in couseyle. God gyue grace that of this counsaile good may come therby but I fe me the contrary. So thā they thre entred into a chaumbre, and leaned them downe in a ayre wyndowe, than the emperour began to speke to the kin∣ge and sayd. Syr it is of a routh that i is a great season past syth ye gaue to me your good wyll that I shold haue in ma∣riage ye fayre lady Florence your dough¦ter here presente, but she hath euer excu∣sed her selfe because of the late depar∣tyng out of this worlde of the quene her mother, for h thought it was not per∣tayning to her to haue bene maryed so soone after her decese, it is now so grete a season syth that there can no blame be reputed to her now to be maried, there∣fore syr nowe I require you that ye wyl incontinent deliuer her to me according to your promyse made to me before this tyme. In the name of God sayde the kynge, it is but reason and right that I should so do, and so I wyll do, wherfore fayre & swete doughter Florence ye wer borne in a good houe, whan so noble & so hye a person as the emperour is wyl haue you in maryage, wheby great ho∣noure and wele shall come to vs all and to all our countryes let vs incontinent sende for my brother the archbysshop to thentent to ensure you togyther. Right dere father sayd Florence it is ye ryght ouer soone to mary me, & for certayne I am not in purpose as yet to be maryed to him, nor yet to non other, I think first to se .ii. yeres more passed at ye least. How so sayd the kyng, damosell wyl ye than do agenst my wyl as in the refusynge of the emperour to be your lord in the way of mariage. Syr sayd she I haue no care for no lorde: but onely for god & for you, for surely I wyl not consent to no mary¦age. Ye shall sayde the kynge, or elles ye shal right sore displese me. Syr qoud she your displesure shuld greue me aboue al other thinges: but by the faith yt I owe to you, I wyl not as yet be maried. No ayd the kynge▪ than I se well yt ye wyll be nothinge as I cōmaunde you, there∣fore ye shal do it whether ye wyl or not, & to take her by the hande to thentent to haue delyuered her to themperour. And whan sh saw that, she was not conten and pulled her hande to her agayne too thentent that the emperour should not touche it. And whan the kyng aw that he was ryght sore displeased and sayde. Damoysel ye haue set you against min accorde and assent, and therefore I pro∣mise you that fro henceforth of my help and counsayle ye shal fayle, therfore fro henceforth do as, wel as ye can & I straie¦ly charge you auoyd & come no more in my lyght nor presence, nor where soeuer that I be. And whan Florence saw her father so sore dyspleased, she said. Righ dere father if ye be thus dysplesed wt me ye do not well therin, but syth it is you pleasure that I should take themperous or elles to lese your coūseyle and helpe, &
also not to come in your syghte the whi∣che is a ryghte sore sayenge of the fader to his chylde but syth it is so I humbly requyre your gase of respyte the space of a moneth tyll suche tyme that I may speke with my counseyle in that behalfe Lay sayd the emperour it is to longe a respyte for I wyll departe hense ryghte shortely for I trowe it be hye tyme for I haue ben here a longe season and al that hath your loue caused wherfore I wold faine or I epart knowe how or in what wyse my loue shall be rewarded I saye not nay but it is good for you to take a∣uysement and I am cōtent that ye so do a daye or two. well syd the kyng I am content that she shall haue respyte tyl to morowe at this same houre & no lenger. well sayd Florence this counseyle is a∣yenst my herte & wyll that I sholde take a man ayenst my herte seynge yt I am a quene & doughter to the moost puyssaūt kynge of all ye worlde certaynly this gre¦ueth me ryght sore ther with she began ryght piteously to wepe & to make right grete sorowe. And whan the kinge sawe her wepe he sayd to her. Auoyde out of my syght and let me not se you tyl to mo¦row agayne at this same present houre and than answere me wheder ye wyll ta¦ke hym and my good wyll therwith or elles leue hym and lese mi good wyl and fauour for euer more. Than Florence is∣sued out of the chaumbre all wepynge. Than the .iiii. kinges stpte to her whan they sawe her wepynge and lefte all the eest & mynstrelles, & Iesters left than al theyr sporte and playe and the kynge of orqueney toke her bi the hande & demaū¦ded of her why she wepte so sore. Dere cosyn said she my lord me fader is right sore dyspleased with me and hath com∣maūded that I sholde auoyde out of his presence. Than she saw her vncle the ar∣chebysshop & sayd to hym, fayre vncle let me go with you to your lodgynge wyth a ryght good wyl sayd he, & shame haue he yt thus causeth you to wepe. So thus al the kinges conuayed her to her vncle lodgynge, and so dyd the moost parte of all the barons of the courte, and also all the new knyghtes, and they al abode stil at Florence courte. And whan she was thus in her lodgyng the kynges retour∣ned agayne to the kyng Emendus court but the kyng of orqueey and Philip his neuew abde styll wyth Florence, and  king of orqueney demaunded of her why that she wepte. Cosyn sayde she, my lord my father woulde mary me and gyue me to the emperour, & would haue ensured vs togither wtout any counsayl takyng eyther of you, or of any other of my fren¦des, & as god helpe me I had rather dy than to haue themperoure, for I hate no¦thynge so muche in all the worlde as I doo hym, for as longe as I lyue I wyl not haue him, therfore it is but a greate foly to enforce me therto. Fayre lady & co¦syn said the kyng, as god helpe me or he haue you agaynst your wyl, there shal be persed a thousand helmes. Ye sayd Phi∣lyp the duke of sabary or that daye com there shall be brente a hundreth townes therof be ye sure, therefore fayre ladye be yt in peas and set your hert at rest. well sayde the Archebysshop let vs go to the court and speke with thys emperour, so thus they rose and went forth & left Flo∣rence in peace. And thus they moūted vp into the palays, and founde the kyng E∣mendus & the emperoure together, who were as than yssued out of the chambre. Than the archebysshop sayd to ye kynge Fayre broder I meruayle gretely what coūsayle ye haue had to cause thus to co∣me
to your court so many noblemen & other fro so farre countryes to thentent to trouble & displease them by the onely wordes of thys man the emperour here present, who would haue my lady Flo∣rence your daughter in mariage against her wyl, but syr I ensure you as long as I liue agenst her wil he getteth her not. As god helpe me saide Philyp ye duke of sabary he had nede to haue brought o¦men hether than he hath done yt be thin¦keth to haue her awaye to her dysplea∣sure. why said thempeour, & who is he that wyl say me nay? is it you, I wold there were none to depart ye matter but ye and I to se who should lede her a wai Uerely sayd the kynge of orquiney, it is none egale matche a duke agenst an em¦perour, howe be it as god helpe me yf ye had r agaynst her wyl, and none other to medle in the mater but al onely you, I thinke ye should not reioyse her so ea∣sely as y thynke of, and be ye in certain that in that quarell he wyl & shal defen∣de her against you, and therin do the best ye can wt all your power, & begin whan ye wyll, for he doubteth you nothynge, nor shall do. And whan the kyng Emen¦dus hearde theym say these wordes, he was right sore displesed and sayd. what is this syrs, are we taken prisoners? lay ye thus in a wayt to mnace thus in my presence my lorde and fende the empe∣rour, truly if ye cōtinue in this purpose ye shal know that I am ryght sore dys∣plesd wyth you all. Than th archbys∣hop answered hym agayne right sharp¦lye, and so there began muche hurlynge and burlynge in the courte, and muche a do was there likely to haue bē done, but as fortune was in the mane seasō mai¦ster Steuen was aryued at the palais & entred into the hall & .xl. knightes wyth hym, and whan he herd thys noyse and strye, he spake aloude & cryed peace for goodes sake and dyd soo muche that he apeased somwhat ye noyse. And as sone as the kynge of valefound saw mayster Steuen hys son, he ran & enbraced and kyssed him, and emaunded howe he dyd And he answered and said, sit right wel thanked be god. And than all other kyn∣ges dyd welcome him and so did kynge Emundus & alo the emperour, and de¦maūded of him how he had done sith his departing out of the courte. And he an∣swered and sayd ryght wel, than he per¦ceyued right wel how that the kyng and the archebisshop were right sore disple∣sed togither, wherfore he aid to ye kyng. Syr what chere is with you, this daye is a right hye & solempne daye, whye is your barons and courte thus troubled, thys day should be of sporte and playe, Mayster Steuen sayd the kynge, I can not be mery, for your lady my doughter Florence hath dysplesed me, for she wyl not do that thynge that I would haue her to do, whtwith I am nothinge con¦tent, wherfore I pray you assaye and ye can reduce her to my mynde. Syr sayd maister Steuen, I rust I shal do so mo∣che that of reason ye shal be content, so of this matter they talked a great space. ¶Howe Florence whan she knew that mayster Steuen was come to the court she was right glad, & howe yt he with his policie gate her lenger respyt, yt was tyl bartylmewe tyde next after. Ca. lxiii. AL this sason was ye noble lady Florēce in her chabre making ight great sorow sore wepynge, and saying to her sle. A noble Arthur
swete frende fre & gentyll of hearte I ne∣uer saw you and yet I loue you with all my herte. I had thought to haue ben vn∣maryed tyll the season of your comynge to thys corte, but now I se well that I must nedes take hym that I hate moost I loue you but I can nōt haue you, a for¦tune how arte thou tourned ayenst me, I hate hym yt I muste haue, I loue hym that I must lese, certaynly dere loue Ar∣thur if ye lose me thus ye shal haue great domage, for ye shal lese her y• loueth you truly. A mayster steuen why haue I not you here now in my great nede, if ye kne¦we of my sorowe I am sure nothynge coulde let you but y• ye wolde tourne vp so downe this maryage. And as she thus complayned pieously tidinges came to her lodgynge that mayster Steuen was comen to the courte. And as soone as she herd that her hert began to come agayne to her, for than she thought veryly that she neded to care for nothynge than she ryght hastely sent for hym. And as soone as he mayster knewe herof he sayde to the kyng. Syr my lady hath sent for me to come to her grace. Go your way sayd the kyng. So thus the mayster departed and the archebyshop wyth hym, and the kynge of orqueney and hys neuewe syr Phylyp duke of sabry, and soo they all aryued togyther where as Florence was And the other kynges abode wt the king and themperour. And the noble barons of the courte and all the newe knyghtes were at florence lodgynge ryght sore dis∣pleased bycause of her dyspleasure, but they were all gladde whan the kynge of orqueney & mayster Steuen were comen Than the mayster entred into Florence chambre: & goodly dyd salute her, but as than she could speke no worde, but toke hym by the hande and caused hym to syt downe by her syde, & whā her hert came to her she sayd how yt he was ryght wel∣come, as he whome she desyred to hau at that tyme aboue all the creatures of ye worlde. Than the mayster sayd to hyr madame is thys a fayre aray that ye ma∣keth{us} for your estate thus to bring your selfe in sorowe, & thus to bringe all your people & these gentyll knyghtes in great trouble for your sorowe who are thus co¦me to your courte to do you honoure, for they haue left the kyng your father to co¦me to your lodgyng in this hye solempne day, therfore leue ye this sorowe & make uche chere as pertayneth to an hie Ioy∣full pryncesse reioyse your courte & your people. Than Florence answered & sayd A mayster swete frende I can not be m¦ry, for I am gretly greued at the hert, for my lord my father hath defēded me to co∣me in his presence for a straūger whom he wolde hat I should take in mariage, but god shal rather gyue me dth than I wyll take hym, for I hate hym wt all my herte, & it behoueth me to answere whe∣ther I wyl aue hym or not betwene this and to morowe thys tyme, & I haue gre∣te despite that I shulde thus be delt with all wt a straūger. Madame sayd the may∣ster now be ye in reste & peas, for syth y haue a day respyte I shall gete you ny a hole ere lenger delaye, & I trust such fortune may fal that or the yere be ron y shall not haue hym. A dere mayster sayd she I hertely thanke you & promyse you that though thys emperour be neuer so ryche or puyssaunt or full of noblenes & power yet I haue no heart of all his ry∣chesse: for I thanke god I am now one of the puyssaūtest ladyes yt is lyuynge, ther¦fore I care not for hym nor for all his po¦wer. Madame sayd the mayster now thā I se well yt your herte is set on no coue∣tyse,
but as me semeth youre heart is set all on gentylnes, and byleue veryly that loue in your heart is free & swete where as it ought to be to all people excepte to themperour for there I thynke your hert is fell & hateful, but madame here be two thynges contrary to be in one heart both loue & hate, how may it agre togyther, to loue & to hate, to be meke & fell, I can not se how this may be. A mayster sayd she hae no maruayle of thys though I say that my heart is both meke and tell, cer∣tayny my  is fel where as it hateth why  quod the maister do ye thā hae.  quod she ye & ye right sore & yt is thempe our who wold haue me ayenst my wyll, by the holy martyr saynt Ste∣uen of corinte he shal not haue me by my good wyl, & if he take me by force I trust he shal well knowe that he dyd neuer soo great a foly. Madam layd the mayster, maryage yt is made by force is gratly to be doued, but whan it is made mekely and swetely by the agrement of both par¦tyes than lyghtly lou contynueth euer afer bytwene them, & whan it is contra¦ry oftētymes both partyes endureth ma∣ny yll dayes and nyghtes, but madame now yt I knowe wel to whon your hert is hatful, but I pray you let me know ayenst whome your heart is meke & amy¦able, thā she behld the mayster & syghed right sore. And whā the mayster herd her sygh, a lytle he smyled. And whā she saw hym laughe she was a lytle ashamed and blusshed therwyth, & al smylyng sayd. A mayster ye know well ynoughe all this as wel as I do my self, for I neuer saw him as yet that hath shewed me amyte & loue, I se right wel dayly my hertes ene¦my, but mine owne dere loue I neuer sa∣we, but I se dayly hym that I hate, but I can not se hym that I loue, mayster ye knowe what he is better than I do, ther¦fore I pray you shew me what ye know of him, for ye haue gyun away my white shelde and good swerde clarence, and I wote not to what knyght, nor whether they be wel enployed or not. Madame {quod} the mayster I shal shewe you, I wyl that ye know that I haue gyuen them to the moost fayre and gracyous knyghte that now lyueth, and freest of heart in al gen¦tylnes that can be founde in al the worl¦de, for he is the chefe floure of bounte in all maner of chyualry, also he is the best knyght that euer was gyrte wyth swer∣de, syth the tyme of Gawane and Laun∣celot, and the best approued knyght that euer hath ben herde of, who hath set his faythful heart wythout eyther fraude or fahode on your loue, and to hym in my presence your ymage hath gyuen and set on his heed your chaplet. Than Florence heart began to tremble and sayd. Gentil mayster I doubte me greatly that ye gy∣ue him a greter prayse than he is worthy for ye haue praysed hym ryght greately. Madame truely sayde he all that I haue sayd is of trouth, for he is worthy to ha∣ue more prayse than I haue gyuen hym. well mayster sayd she is al this or trouth Ye truo madame sayd he. By the fayth that I owe vnto god sayd Florence than I se wel he is worthy to haue muche ho∣nour, & I promyse you he shall not fayle therof yf god sende me lyfe, and he shall not lese his loue, for syth he loueth me as god helpe me I shall loue hym agay∣ne, for reason requyreth to loue him that loueth me. Than sayd the mayster I se well nexte the kynge your father ye loue themperour bicause he loueth you. Than Florence smyled & with her hande strake him on the sholdre & sayd, mayster ther as I am pleased there I loue, but I care
not for hym that is ayenst my heart, one of these two pleaseth me, and the other I hate, I praye god that he maye come yt I loue, & I wolde he were gone y• anoyeth me, he that hath my chaplet my shelde & swerd hath my loue more thā any other of the worlde, and the Emperoure hath my hate more than onye other lyuynge creature, I loue hym that I neuer sawe and hate hym whome I se dayly, may∣ster now I haue shewed you all my coū∣seyle, as to hym in whome I trust moost ye be my clerke and my man, ye knowe nowe as muche of my counsyle as god dooth, therfore I requyre you kepe it se∣crete, and put to your payne that I maye haue hym on whome my heart and loue is layde, for now ye knowe on whome it is set. Than the mayster sayd, madame as god helpe me ye haue ryght well sette yur hrt on the best and fayrest knyght of all the worlde, that is the gentyll Ar∣thu. And as they thus talked there came to them the kynge of orqueney and Phy¦lyp hys neuewe, and the archebysshop & Bryseba, her senesshall and syr Aunsl, Than Florence rose ayenst them and al∣so he mayster, and so they had all greate Ioye of Florence whā they sawe her ma∣ke better chere than she dyd before. At the last the mayster sayd, lordes I se wel how y• the noble courte of mghty kyng Eendus is all in a traunce in a maner halfe a slepe, for there is neyther playe nor Ioye wherof the kynge is greatly to be blamed, for it is greate shame bycause o many noble men bhere at thys feest therfore in my mynde it were good to ta¦ke some counseyle to se howe the courte myght be reioysed agayne, let vs sende word to the kyng how that my lady Flo∣rence is redye to gyue her answere nowe the whyche she should gyue to morowe, and I promyse you that I shall soo an∣swere for her that she shall haue lenger respyte an hole yere, and I trust soo to appease both the kinge and themperour that of reason they shall be wel content. Than the kyng of orqueney sayd, may∣ster I se wel how that ye haue not as yet forgoten all your olde cōnynge, I wene ye wyl brynge them al a slepe wyth wag∣gynge of your hande. Than the arche∣bysshop dyd laugh, and so they were al of his accorde. Than they sent to the kyng duke Phylyp and syr Brysebar, and the kynge had ryght great Ioy whan he her∣de theyr message & sayd. Truly mayster Steuen I se ryght well hath gyuen her good coūseyle he is a ryght noble clerke, I praye to god sende hym ryght good ad∣uenture. And so these messengers retour¦ed agayne & shewed how that the kyng¦ge was right well content & was right Ioyfull to here her answere. Than Flo∣rence apparayled her to go to the courte So the kynge of orqueney dyd conuey her, and the kynge of mouall dyd mete them by the way, and the archebysshop & mayster Seuen went before, than all the knightes assembled them togyther & were wel to the nombre of .CCLLL and all they folowed after Florence, and in theyr hartes they cursed hym that was causer of thys pletinge and varyaunce, and prayed to god y• themperour myght want of his wyl. Thus Florence entred into the palays, and themperoure dyd sa∣lute her, and soo dyd all other xcepte the kynge her father, than themperour sat downe and Florence by hym, & the kyng Emendus and the kynge of orqueney be¦fore hym, & so all other eury man in his roume & whan euery man was in peas than mayster Steuen sayd to the kynge Syr and it lyke your grace beholde here
your doughter & louer. Certaynlye sayd the king my doughter I beleue wel that she , but as for any loue or amitye that she beteth to me yt I can neyther knowe nor se, for she hath displeased me, for be∣holde hee my lorde and dere frende the empeour of ynde, who hath done vs so great honour that he would haue her by the way of maryage, who is come to de∣syre to haue her in hys owne propre per∣son without anye other meane messen∣ger, and yet she is so daūgerous that she demaundeth counsayle in thys case the which touchth her honour and profite and wyl not beleue me that am her own father, wherwyth I am ryghte sore dys∣plesed, & bere her ryght sore in my heat. Than the mayster rose vp on hys fete & his hat hāging on his sholdre in a robe of skarlet lyned wyth gne sarener, holdyng his gloues folded in hys hand and smed ryght fayre & gracyous, ney∣ther to muche nor to lytel of stature, is face somewhatfull and round, and his heyre fayre and yelowe, he was a sayre clerke, and sonne to a kyng and a quene, and so in open audyence than he sayde. Ryght excellent hye and mighty prince my adyes grace here presence the noble and gentil Florence is yet in great trou¦l and sorow of herte of the great hade¦nes hat ye haue shewed her thys day, & because it semeth that ye haue a maner of dysplesure to her worde, wherefore she is not, nor can not be in ioye nor est as longe as ye haue that wyll towarde her, syr now she is here comen to you as she that for thynkeh of your dysplesure for she doth not, nor wyl not do nothing that shall be contrarye to your pleasure and wyll, but she is, and eue shall be re∣dy to accomplysh your noble commaun∣dement accordyng to her hee, the whi∣che is good and true both agenst you & all other personnes where as it ought so to be, & syr syth it is so that my lode the noble emperour here present wyl do her so much honour as to desyre to haue her in maryage, whereof humbly she than∣keth him, ut it is wel the custome accor¦dyng to the state of euerye person to de dyscretelye and wyselye in suche a case, therfore syr it is conuenyent to dele pru¦dently in this mater, for ye empeour & you are two of the greatest, & puissanest persons both of hauour and of rndes that is nowe lyuyng, and my lady Flo∣rence is the moste ye & puissaunt pryn∣cesse of all the worlde, and as touchynge so hye & solempne a matter as of the ma¦ryage of hemperour of ynde, and of the doughter of the hye and mightye kynge Emendas, this hye & great solempniti ought not to be done priuely in chaum∣bres in rest & peace, but it ought to be do∣ne in the open presence of all the baons of bothe landes & realmes, to thentent y• yf god sende anye yssue betwene theym that theyr mariage may be knowen opē¦ly to al people of bothe realmes, wheby shall be eschewed all grudge & murmu∣rayon, for han such yssue shall be wel knowen for ryghtul heyre throughout bohe the regyons, nor also it is not con¦uenient that this solempne feast that is thys day of the holy ghoste and thys so∣lempne feast of this noble matrymonye shuld be made al but at one feast, this day is so hye & prinypally a feast, ha euery christen man ought to do nothyng elles but aude and serue god, and syr at the daye of this noble mariage let there be hee kinges dukes, barons & other no¦ble knightes, ladies & damoislls, & let all these do suche seruyce as aperteineth for them to do and than let these ladyes
and damoyselles daūce & synge, & gyue to these newe knyghtes chaplettes & stre¦mers, & set on theyr spere poyntes, & let these yonge lusty knyghtes frusshe togy¦ther theyr speres, & dasshe togyther with theyr swerdes, and let than be ordeyned rounde tables to assemble togyther such company as shal be brought thither both by you my lord the kyng, and also by the emperour than shall we se what knyght is of valure & prayse, at the whyche tyme shal be brought hither the riche pauylion of my lady Florēce wherin is the ymage of the fayry holdynge the ryche chaplet, so yt whan the tournay hal be done than my lord themperour shal go to the image to haue the chaplet as he yt is right ryche bo of hauour & of frendes, & the moost nobl parsone yt there shal be assembled, and to hym the ymage wyl giue the cha¦plet as to him that is moost worhy, and whan he hath it than he shalbe sure and certayne that he shall haue my lady Flo∣rence wyth good wyll & entyre loue, and that maryag yt is made with god loue and hert is good, & that that is contrary ayenst the her: is ryght yl & Ioprdous For a body without herte is as mee wt¦out salt, or as a body without soule, and thus may my lorde themperour haue my lady Florence wyth great loue Ioy and feest. And whan the emperour had well herde the mayster & saw how yt he spake no more his herte laughed in his bodye & sayd. By the fayth that I owe vnto god the mayster hath ryght well sayd, & vey∣ly wyth a great good hert I me accode to hys deuise, let this Iofull daye be set and let there be cyed a great Iustes & a tournay ayenst y• tyme, and let there be ordeined rounde tables to mke feest and Ioe, and syr kyng the same day I will take the tournay ayenst you all in loue & fauour. As god helpe me sayd the kynge I am ryght wel agreed, and myne aduise is to let al this be here in this cyte of Cor¦nyce. But what day shall all thys be on. Syr sayd the mayster and it please you I hall shewe you mine aduise, let it be at Bartylmwe tyde nexte comynge, for than hal all cornes be auoyded oute of y• feldes, and by that time al thing necessa∣ry may be honourably prouyded for. I am content sayd the kynge, but how say you my lorde themperour. Sir sai he I am right well content. Than anone these poyntementes ran ouer all the pa∣lays in euery mannes mouth, and euery man prayed y• god might send to the may¦ster right good aduēture for his wel and goodly speakynge. Than began agayne ight great feest and Ioy, thā came forth Iuglers wt heyr fals castes & tomblers wyth thy soubersawtes, & damoyselles wyth theyr gambawdes, & made greater sporte and tryumphe than was before. Than the kynge & themperour laughed and made great Ioye togither tyl it was tyme to set the tables, than water was bought forth and Florēce toke lycence of the kyng her father & sayd, syr I bese∣che our grace be not dyspleased though these newe knyghtes go wyth me to my lodgyng and though I etayne them wt me all this daye. Well sayd the kynge I am ryght well content go your way har¦dely, and make them as good chere as ye can than Florence departed and went to her chaumbre, and the king abode styll in the palays, and the kynge of orqueney, Phylyp of sabary, & the Archebysshop, & Brysebar, & well to the nombre of .v.C. barons & knyghtes went wt Florence to her lodgynge. And than the mayster said to her, madame how saye ye now, we ha∣ue respyte longe ynough, for many thy¦ges
may fail betwene thys & that. Mai∣ter ye say yght well, but I pray you el¦e wyl not our knyght be here betwene this & that erm. Madame sayd he I se well ye haue not as yet forgoten him, it semeth he is yet in your remembraunce. By the good lorde sayd Florence I wold ryght glalye hym, & yf god be pleased yt be come to this sayd urney I shal do hym honor, and that I pray you et hym know it. Madam quod ye maister, hal go to hym and shew him al this mater and how yt ye desyre him to be there at yt time, & hat for you loue there to shew par of his hyualry. Well maister sayd she ye say right well, and I pray you let me be here cōmended vnto him. Thus they deised that the maister shuld go to the porte noyre tyl the time of this tour∣nay. & han he should bringe wyth him Florence pauilion with the egle of gold and the ymage with the hapler, & that it should be pyght in ye fayre medow vn∣dr the walles of the cite of Cornye. Than there ws water brought forth, and so they were serued full ryche¦ly wt great sport  tiumphe Thus the kyng kepte open court .v. dayes, & euery day ones Flrence wente to her fathers court. At thende of xv. dayes ye kynge dyd gyue many yche gyftes o these knightes, bth robes hors & harneys, & Florence in lyke wyse gaue hem so largelye yt it was meruayle o consy¦der, & the sayd  wt one voyce yt there was neuer bfore suche a hearte of a wo¦man, nyther so lare so gentyll, nor so cureyse. Thus al hese kings ke thir lue  depated euery man to hys owne coūtre to puruay him of good knightes agenst the sayd day. Than mayster Ste¦uen was afore Florence & sayd, madam now it is tyme yt I depart, for now wyl I go streyghte to Argence where I am sure yt I shall fynd Arthur redy to fyght agenst the neuew of the duke of bigor. A fayre maister said Florence I haue grete doubt of Arthur, for the dukes neuewe is right fierce and fell, & a good knigh, thrfore I am in great feare of him. Ma¦dam quod he haue ye no dout, for if there were such .iiii. as he is afore Arthur he could not endure his puyssant strokes. Thā he is right valyant quod Florence. Than ye maister toke his loue & departed & toke wt him Brysebar & syr Neuelo Florence marshal & so toke their waye to argēce. Now let vs leue to speake of thm, & let vs returne again to Arthur. ¶How that Arthur was receyued o the iyre Lady Margarete into the citie of Argence. Cap. lxiii. THus as ye haue herde before Arthur so iournd a good spa∣ce at the abbey of the grace of in & Mawdelayne tyde be∣gan faste to approche, & so on
& daye the foule vylayne came vnto him and sayd. We be but swyne for we do no∣thynge but eate and drynke, I rowe ye be wedded to thys abbey, or elles I thyn¦ke ye wyl become a monke, ye haue pro∣mysed me to fulfyll my requeste, yf that ye wyll do so go hortely and arme you, and let vs go o Argence to helpe there the fayrelady Margarete of Argenton▪ and to gete her agayne her ryght, for it is now almoost hye tyme. Whan Arthur hearde hym he smyled and sayd, wyth a ryght good wyll, and soo he armed hym and toke leue of the abbot and of he co∣uent, and mounted on hys horse and fo∣lowed the vylayne, and soo Arthur rode forth daye by daye tyll at the laste he des∣cended downe from a greate mountayne and entred into the fayrest medowe that euer he sawe in all hys lyfe, and by the syde of thys sayd medowe there ranne a fayre ryuer, wherein were manye shyp∣pes, some vnder sayle, and some redye crossed, and some lienge at the anger, the whyche ryuer ranne thrughout parte of the fayre Cyte of Argence. And than he encountred a varlet who came streyght fro the Cyte, and Athur did salute hm and demaunded from whence he came, And he answeed and sayd howe that he came from the Cyte of Agence, the wo∣fullest Cyte of the worlde at thys tyme, and is in moost tourmente and sorowe, for I am sure there was neuer owne so sore troubled as it is at this houre. And wherfore goo frende sayd Arthur. Syr as god helpe me there is good cause why for the duke of bygor and his nuewe be comnge to the Cyte, & they haue made a cry throughout all the cite & all about the countre that all the noble men and al other suche as holdeth theyr londs of the heyre of Argent on should be at Mawde∣layue tyde nexte comynge before theym in he cyte of Argence to do theyr homa∣ge to syr Isembarte the dukes neuewe, wherfore I praye to god he maye dye an euil deth, & it is but .xv. dayes to the sayd daye, at whyche tyme he is purposed to wedde the fayre lady margarete to a lew¦de barbour of hys, & so she shall be dyshe∣ryted fro her enherytaunce, & all the no∣ble men & bourgeyses of the Cite & of the countre aboute are ryght sore dysmayed for thei wote not what counseyle to take in the ase for lacke of a Capytayne, and he lady hath noo frende but an vncle of hers, who is put in pryson by the dukes neuewe, and there is none can tell where he is become. And also this syr Isembart hath slayne and murthred falsly by trea∣son her father, and syr this is the sorowe that is in the noble cyte of Argence▪ wel good frende sayd Arthur god conduyte you, god is yet puyssaunt ynough to sen∣de hlpe to this lady, but frnde I praye you is thys duke and hys neuewe come as yet to the Cyte. Syr as god helpe me he is come al redy, and wyth hym moche people, for his people is nōbred to a .M. persons at the leest. That is a great com¦pany sayd Arthur, & soo they departed, & Arthur rode forth. Than the vylayne be∣gan to cry he is come that shal giue light And euer as he rode he behelde on euery syde about him great cōpanyes of knygh¦tes comynge & goynge towarde the cyte of Argence, & Arthur saw wel how that the land of Argēton was the moost good lyest coūtre that euer he sawe, for he per∣ceyued wel how that it was ful of riches and worldly welth, he sawe many noble townes and oures ryght hye, & myghty castelles, & many fayre woodes and me∣dowes and pleasaunt ryuers, and about he townes fayre vynes, & goodly pastu∣res,
& fieldes with corne and fruite and there he saw many ladies and damoysel¦les sporting them by the ryuers syde wt fawcons & gerfawcons on theyr hands and so he perceiued wel that bicause of ye good comodties of the country ye dukes neuew would disheryte the fayre ladye Margaret, & he rode so long til at the last he saw the fayre citie of Argence shining agenst the sonne, enuoyred with greate & depe dythes ful of water: ye walles strōg∣ly enbatayled, and mo than .v.C. toures made of lyme & stone, & sciment about it and also he saw manye fayre churches coueed wt lede ful of typpes and pomel¦les of gold shynyng against the sonne, & also he sawe the burgeses lodging closed wt hye and stronge walles barred wyth great chaines of yron attaining fro one house an other, than Arthur in his he praysed muche the noblenesse and riches of the countre and of the citie, and sayde to hym selfe that it might well be called Argence, for it semed wel to be of argent that is to say, syluer. Thus Arthur en∣tred into the citie & the vylain went euer before him wt his leuer on his neck bare legged, and his hat hanging at his back & euer he went forth a great pace loking downeward to the earth, and toke hede of no body that he met, but alwaies cry∣ed out aloude he is come that shal gyue lyght, & the burgeses behelde hym well and sayd howe that he was a fole, wo∣men and chyldren ran to the wyndowes to beholde hym. And whan one bodye spake to hym, he woulde aunswere no thyng but alwayes sayd, he is come that shall gyue lyghte. Thus Arthur rode forthe into the cytie and sawe there no∣thyng to do, nor noo maner of crafte or occupacion there vsed no more than and t had bene vpon an hye fastfull day, for al the shoppes and euery craft was she & closed, wherof Arthur had great mer∣uayle, and he behelde in euery strete gret companyes of knightes walkyng a so¦berly together, lurkyng vnder their hat∣tes, beseming as though they had not be well pleased, & some sytting before their owne dores, croslegged leaning on their elbowes, makyng no maner of Ioyfull semblaunt but soberly musinge & some of them behelde the vylayne, who neuer ceased crying, he is come that shal gyue light. And so in this maner Arthur rode euer styll forthe tyll he came into y• myd∣des o the Citie, and there he saw a great companye of knightes and burgeyses a∣boute the number of .xxxv. cakynge to∣gether in counsayl but it semed by their chere that they had no great ioy in the heartes. Than the vylayn enforced him selfe to crye louder than he dydde before he is come that shal gyue lyghte. Than these knyghtes behelde the vylayne wel and saw how that Arthur folowed him whereof they had greate maruayle. And at the last a knight of that company cal¦led syr Emery, came to Arthur and cur∣teysly dyd salute him and sayd. Syr it is myne offyce in this citye to receyue and to lodge al gentilmen straungers yt resor¦teth nyther, and syr here is myne house, therfore I desyre you to alyght of youre horse and to entre into it. Syr I thanke you sayd Arthur, how be it I se wel yt I must nedes go ferder o seke mi lodging Syr sayde the knyght▪ sauyng your dys∣plesure, ye shal not passe by my house to seeke an other lodgyng therefore by the fayth yt I owe vnto god ye shal abyde wt me. Ye but syr sayd the vylayn, I trowe ye wyll not abyde, for ye haue promysed to folowe me whether so euer I go, ther¦fore come on your way, for I wyl go be∣fore,
and so was goyng forth▪ and euer cryed he is come that shall gyue lyghte. Than Arthur desyred the vylayue to ta¦ry, and at the last he agreed thereto, and Arthur rode forthe to syr Emeys dore, and there a lighted than the other knigh¦tes left theyr counseyle, and dyd salute Arthur, and he them gayne right cour∣teously, and they beheld Arthur wel and praysed him muche in their heartes, for he was right tayre and gratious. Than sy Emey toke Arthur by the hand and led hym into a fayre chambre to vnar∣me hym, And in the meane tyme that he was vnarmynge, mayster Steuen, syr Brysebat and syr Neuelon the sensshal wer come to the same syr Emeris house to take theyr lodgyng there and so oke theyr chaumbre, and whan the mayste had chaunged his gete he wente downe in to the hal, and the other twoo knygh∣tes with him, & the valiaūt knew them ryght well and saled them by thee na∣mes. And therwithal Bawdwin came out of the chaumbre fro Arthur, and as sooe as he sawe the maister and Brise∣bar he anne and courteously byd salute them with a ioyfull heart. Than ye may∣ster demaunded of him where as Arthur his master was. Syr sayde he in thys chmbre herey. And than ey all en∣tred into the aumbre. And as soone as Arthr sawe them, he ranne and en∣brased the mayst, and after Brysebar and sayd. Mine owne good companions of ye roche, hither ye be right herely wel¦come. Also he dyd salute syr Neuelon the seneshall who in his herte praysed hym grtely. And whan syr Emery saw how the mayster made so great chere to Arthur, than he thought verelye that he should be some great man, for he knewe wel that the maister was a kinges son, Than they sate them down on a beddes syde. Than the maister recounted at the werke that had ben in king Emendus coutte, and how that themperour desy∣red to haue had Florence in maryage at the same tyme, and shewed hym how by hys meanes he dyd lette it at that tyme and gae lenger respyte tyl Bartylmw yde, at which time there is cryed a great Iustes and tournaye, and there he she∣wed him in his eare the salutation that Florence dyd sende hym, and how that she desyred hym to be there at that time and to shewe there parte of his prowes for her sake. Than Arthur smyled and enraced the maister manye times. And whan they had thus talked a good space than the maister called to hym sir Eme∣ry theyr hoost, and caused hym to sytt downe by them. Than Arthur demaun¦ded of hym wherefore the knyghtes and cytezyns of tht citie were so sad. And he anwered and sayde, syr for it wyll be no better, and we haue all good cause so to do, and than he began to shewe hym how that in the same house there was a daosel who was doughter to the lord of that same cytye, and of all the londe of Argenton, and how that she was the ryghtul hyre of all that countrey, and how that the duke of Bgores neuewe d alselye mure by treason the lorde her athr & so shewed hym al the hole matter as ye haue herade before, and al∣so he shewed hym howe that the dukes neuew would mary her to a lewd adde hys barbour, and how that he had dys∣eryted her of forty thousande pounde of lond by yerely rent, and now he hath sommoned all the gentylmen of all the country round about, and wil that they shall do homage vnto hym, and so it be∣houeth theym to haue a false murtherer
to their lorde, and to reny their rightful heyre, & therfore syr al the noble men of this coutry & citie haue bene in coūsal for this mater: but y• conclusion of their coūsayl was thus▪ how that they wolde make no maner of resistence agenst ye du¦kes neuew, but rather suffre their ladie to be disherited and banisshed from her owne lande, howbeit right gladly they would moue war against him, but they lacke a captayne, for they thynke vere∣ly that a womā to be chief head in warre shuld cause it at length to be of lytel ef∣fect. Than Arthur sayd, syr I haue som∣what herde or this of this matter, but I pray you fayre host is this sayd lady he∣re in your hous. Ye syr truly said he here benethe in a fayre parloure, for she hath bene euer here in my hous sithe the deth of her father, for I haue promised neuer to fayle her. Than maister Steuen said good hoost I requyre you know this la∣dyes plesure whether she wyll be con∣tent that we might speke with her. Syr sayd he with a right good wyll than he went into the parour where as she was the same tyme beginnyng of our ladies euen song, & was at these wordes (De{us} in adiutorium meū intde) that is to say good lord entend to mine ayd & succour And therwith she espied syr Emery and sayde, syr ye be welcome. And he dyd sa∣lue her and sayd, madame here is aboue in a chambre a knyght the moost fayrest creature of the worlde, and maister Ste¦uen the kynge of Soroloys, clerke, and sone vnto the noble kynge of valefound dothe honour to thys knyght, the which knight wold faine speake with you, and as god helpe me as I perceyue by hym he is in wyl to helpe and succour you in your nede, shall I cause hym to come to speke wt you, To come to me fayre frend quod the lady, nay god forbydde, for they that haue nede ought to seeke for helpe, and not to tary yl it be brought to them for and they doo, it may fortune to come to late, and as for me I haue great nede of him y he would helpe me, as for him he hath no nede of me, therfore it is rea∣son that I go vnto hym. Than she appa¦rayled her and went forth and enred in to the chambre where as they were, and as soone as they saw her they rose and dyd salute her & couse her to syt down and she semed to them ryghte fayre, gen¦tyll and gracyous, and dyd salute them one after another ryghte swetelye. Than Arthur said, ayre lady, why hau ye trauailed your selfe so sore to come hy¦ther to vs, for we would gladly haue co¦me to you. She answered and ayde, yr it is reason that I shuld so do for I am a poore disherite ladye, & therfore it is reason that I go sewe for helpe & sucou Thā maister Steuen demaūded of her estate & she recounted to him euery de as ye haue herde here before, & ryght sor weping said. Alas I pore desolate crea∣ture that was wont to be kept in great honour with my lorde and father, who falsly was slaine by this dukes neuew and hath put myn vncle in prison, I can not tel wheder he be aliue r dead. Cer∣taynly fayre lady sayd master Steuen, for goddes sake be ye of good there, for your vncle is in good helthe and oute of pryson, by the same token that he is cal∣led the markes, and also he hath an olde hurt on his browe. And as soone as she herde that her hert began to reioyce and she demaunded for goddes sake to know who had delyuered hym out of pryson. Certaynely fayre lady sayde he, the sam knyghte that sytteth here by you, who hath conquered the straūge castell of the
porte noyre. And whan she herd that she fell downe on her knees before Arthur & humbly thanked hym. Than Arthur to∣ke her vp and sayd, alas fayre lady why do you thus, for goddes sake sette youre herte in peace and rest, for truely I offre my seruyce to you and the best of my po∣wer to helpe and defende your ryght yf it be to morowe nexte I shall be redye to sustayne the batayle as longe as my lyfe wyl laste. Than the lady wold haue kne¦led downe & ryght humbly thanked hym & sayd. Syr I gyue to you all my ryght and enherytaunce whan ye haue wonne it, and myne vncle shal be your seruaunt Alas I can saye no more, I haue lost my father, wherfore it is great domage that I lyue, for I am wery of my lyfe, than he began to wepe & sayd. Syr I had ra∣ther that you had my right than my mor¦tall enemy. My swete lady sayd Arthur yf god be pleased I shall delyuer it vnto your owne profyte, for truly I wyll not haue therof the mountenaunce of a peny And syr Emery whan he herd that this knyght had delyuered out of pryson the marke, & howe that he had acheued the aduentures of the pore noyre, than he thought veryly in hys herte that it was he that had acheued the aduēures of the tenbrous toure, than he sept forth and kneled downe before Arthur & sayd. Gen¦tyll and noble knyght in whome all bū∣te flourssheth, for goddes sake bringe vs out of deke trybulacyon that we be in, and make lyght all the heartes of the hole barony of Argenton, take thys en∣terpryse on you, and all we shall largely helpe and ayde you, I vndertake ye sal haue .xl. thousand persons in harneys to gyue attendaunce on you the whyche are all subiectes to my lady here presēt. And syr knowe ye for certayne that I haue all redy, & shall prouyde for horses & har∣neys and golde & siluer suffycyent to su∣stayne your hoost lenger space than a ye∣re the whyche I wyl all habandon into your handes for the helpynge of my lady And I am here redy the fyrste that wyll put my body and lyfe in Ieoperdy. Ma∣dame sayd Arthur yf all your other kny∣ghtes be suche ye haue muche good peo∣ple and kynde. Than he said to syr Eme¦ry, syr and I promyse you faythfully to helpe thys lady to the best of my power. Than syr Emery departed fro them and went & assembled togyther all the other knyghtes of the cyte yt were pertaynyng to the lady and sayd. Lordes & maysters I tynke veryly that god hath vysyted vs, for I shewe vnto you how that there is a knyght in my hous who hath delyue¦red out of prison the noble markes vncle to my lady, & also he hath acheued all the aduentures of the port noyre, as maister Steuen hath shewed vnto my lady, and accordynge to the trouth I thynke it be he that did great prowesse in the valey of valefounde & at the tour tenebrous, and also he hathe habandoned hymselfe to be redy at my ladyes cōmaundemente, & to defende her ryghte ayenst the dukes ne∣uewe though he be neuer so fell. Certayn¦ly frende sayd all those knyghtes we by∣leue veryly yt all hys trauayle is in wast For thys dukes neuewe is ryght fyerse & doubteth no creature, for there is not su¦che a knyghte in all the worlde, wythout it be the knyght yt hath acheued the sayd aduētures that ye speke of. Veryly sayd syr Emery I beleue the same knyght is he, & at the leest I am in certayne it is he that hath cōquered the port noyre. Thā anone these tydynges were spred abro∣de throughout all the cyte, than there ca∣me knightes & bourgeyses by great com¦panyes
into syr Emeris hous to se this straunge knyght, & so they etred into a great hall, & whan they were gathered to¦gether hey were to the numbre of .v. C. persones, & than they desyed syr Eme∣y to go & hewe vnto this knight straun¦ger yt manye of the knightes of Argence were come thither too speke with hym. And whan hur herde this he was ve¦y ioyfull and rose, & he and the mayster went fort into the hall & brought with thē the ayre lady magarete, and whan Arthur was amonge them he was byg and mighty & hye to bholde, with byg armes and longe wel furnisshed, and he had on a robe of skarlet, and his own co¦lour was fayre and ruddy, & he was of hyer stature by the head than any man yt was there. And whan these knyghtes & barons sawe hym they had ryght greate Ioye, and thanked god that he had sente him thither at that houre, & they al sayd vnto hym. Syr ye be ryghte hertely wel∣come into this citie of Argence. And Ar∣thur rendred salu¦ation agayne to them ryght sweetly. Than a knight called sir Robert Ardur, who was moost hye and puyssaunt both of ryches and of hauour of all tho knyghtes that were there per∣taynyng to the lady stept forth and sayd. Syr it is giuen vs to knowledge how y• ye are in mynd & wyll to helpe and ayde my lady that is here present therore syr we would fayne knowe your mynde in this case how ye are purposed for to do. Sir quod Arthur verel  am in ful pur¦pose to Ieopard my bodye  life agenst this dukes neuew▪ and to proue how ye trayterously he hath slain this ladies fa¦ther & falsly disherited her. Than syr Ro∣bert sayd, syr god giue you grace and po∣wer thus to do, for syr this dukes neuew is ryghte fierce and fell, how be it he is in the wronge, and we in the ryght, ther¦fore yf god be plesed he shal be confoun¦ded, and yr we saye vnto you wee be all gentylmen and burgeyses pertaynynge here to my lady, and we faythfully pro¦myse you both ayd and our perons, and also of oure goodes though we lese our heades in the quarel, & syr of thys mynd both we & al our men be of, & we lack nothynge but a capytayne therefore syr doubt nothinge, for if the dukes neuewe mue any styte, ye shal haue moo than xxx. thouande fyghtyng men. Fayre la∣dy sayd the mayster ye shall haue muche noble people. Truely syr sayd she that is trouth, for they loued ryghte well their lorde hat is dead. And as they thus tal¦ked there passed by them a great rout of horsemen, and so they went to the wyn∣dowes and beheld wel knightes & other in the strete on horseback to the numbr of .v. hundreth persones, and in he first fronte there was the duke of bygor, & sir Isembart his neuew, who were ridyng to go mete the kynge of orqueney, who as thā was coming to the citie, but his comyng was for Arthurs sake & not for the dukes, but the duke knewe not that and the duke had puruayed the kynges lodgyng at the byshops place, and had puruayed for Philyp duke of sabary in the abbey of saynte Germayne. And soo whan he had mette the kynge who wel¦comed him into ye citie and so rode forth together and paed for by syr Emryes lodgyng. Than syr Brisbar as he stode lokynge oute of the wyndowe espyed where there rode by the kynge of orque∣ney, syr Artaude, syr Morant, syr Oly∣ur, and syr Uiceer. Than Brysebar as loude as he could, cryed Arthur, Arthur wherwith the kyng and al that rode by loked vp towarde the wyndowe, & there
they saw syr Brisebar and syr Neuelon the senesshal & maister Steuen and Ar¦thur who semed to them to be a man of gret valure, and anon the kyng dyd cast in his hert how y• it was Arthur. Than he called to him ye duke of bigor and said syr I pray you go to your lodging, for I wyl take my lodging at this hous. Thā the duke wold haue descended with him but the kyng in no wise wold suffre him So than the duke & his neuew departed as they yt wist ful lytel why the kinge & al tho knightes were come to that ce. Than the kyng toke wt him Philip his neuew & the archbishop and syr Ancean and entred into syr Emerys house, and caused the gates to be closed after them, and sent al his houshold to the bisshops place, and syr Philip sent his to he a∣bey of saynt Germaynes. Than sir ry¦sebar and the mayster and other o theyr company ran to he kyng and enbraced him and al his felowship. And than Ar∣thur cme before th kynge and dyd pt of hys bone and dyd aute him, and ye kyng toke him by the hande and Brye∣bar tolde the kyng in his eate how that it was Arthur. Than the kynge sayde, myne owne right dere frende Arthur ye right hertely wel mee here in the land of Argenton as the knighte that I haue most desyred to se and know, for certain lye I had not come hither at this tyme, but all onely to speake with you. A syr sayd Arthur ye haue done your pleasure to trauaile your selfe right sore to come hither to se so simple a person as I am. Than the kyng entred into a lytel chaū¦bre and there dyd chaunge him, and whā he was redy he came again into the hal and there found al the barons & knygh∣es together, and Philip duke of sabary was talking wyth Arthur. Than the kynge layde his hande on Arthurs shol∣dre & sayd, good frende I praye you that fro hens forth ye wyl be of my houshold and that ye wyl take of my gyfte robes horse and harneys, and I promyse you faithfully that I wyll be to you a good frende, & so you and I shal be good com∣panyons and frendes. Syr said Arthur I thanke you, for truely I am yours in al paces & at your cōmaundement whe so euer I am but syr and it please you I haue ored alredy to my lady Florence my seruice, doughter to the mighty king Emendus▪ at the request of syr Brisebar and as he hath reported to me her ga hath excepted my seruice, and so sir than I haue al redy a maistres, & loth I wre to displease her grace. In ye name of god say the kyng ye say ryght well, for I re¦pue her companye and myn as all on thing▪ and good frende beholde there sir Phylyp my neuew duke f Sabary, v¦relye  loue hym intierly, therefore I re∣quyre you let him and you be company∣ons & frendes, and che of you to loue o∣ther▪ Syr sayd Philyp as god helpe me I promyse him fro hens forh fayhfull loue and amitie nor I haue nothing but he shall be lorde thereof in al places and against all persons except you mine vn¦cle I shall be redye to ayde and succour hym. Right dere frend quod Arthur god that all thynge fourmed rewarde you, and syr I am and shall be your knyght agenst all the worlde excepte my ladyes grace, who hath retayned me. All thys is but ryghte sayde the kynge, and thys pleaseth me ryghte well than the kynge toke Philyp by the hand and sayd to Ar∣thur dere frende here I put intoo your hand & keping duke Philyp my neuewe oo syr here take him to you, and also n¦uewe I put into your hand thys knight
in lykewyse take him to you, than thes two knightes enbraced togyther and pro¦mised eche other faythful cōpany. And sir Emery was gladde bycause that he had lodged in his hous suche a cōpany of no∣ble men that hys herte laughed for Ioye and al the other barōs of the cyte beheld meruayllously Arthur and praysed hym moche in theyr hertes. And than the vy∣layne who was in the company with th lady cryed as lowde as he coulde, he is co¦me that shal giue lyght. And the kynge and al other dyd laugh at him right her∣tely. Thā the tables were set vp & water was brought forthe, than the kynge sate downe & Arthur by hym, & than the bys∣shop & duke Phylyp, & so they were ser∣ued ryght rychely, for syr Emery made them chere wt all his herte, & whā dyner was done than they all entred into a fay∣re gardyn, & there were togither ye kyng & Arthur the lady Margarete & the arche¦bysshop & other to the nombre of .vi. per∣sones, & al the other company were wtout wyth sir Emery, & they talked all of Ar∣thur & sayd how yt he had of god a ryght great gyft, for he was both fayre & of no¦ble maners, & had acheued suche aduen∣tures as were gretely to be doubted▪ how be it they sayd he had enterprysed a gre∣te thynge to moue ony warre ayenst the duke of bygor & hys neuewe. Syrs sayd Brysebar doubt nothynge of hym, for I knowe well he hath acheued often .x. ty∣mes a greter enterprise than this is, & as thā the king helde the lady by the hand & sayd, fare lady behold here your knyght who I thīke shal do you good seruice to¦morow. Syr sayd the lady I pray to god send him good grace and fortune, so they were thus longe talkynge togyther tyl it was time to go to their restes, than eue∣ry man departed, and the kynge, Arthur, Phylyp and mayster Steuē lodged al to¦gyther in one chābre, and the lady depar¦ted into her chaumbre ryght Ioyous of her good aduēture that god had sent her, and all that nyght she slept but lytle for Ioye but was alwayes in her prayers thankyng god and besechyng hym to be ayde and socour to her champyon, and in lykewyse dyd syr Emery and al other of the cyte. ¶How that the next dy the mayster an¦swered for the lady, and Arthur toke her quarel in hand aeynst the dukes neuew syr Isembarcte. Capitulo .lxv. IN the mornyng the kinge and Arthur rose and all other barōs and knightes of the cyte & went and herde masse, & after mass they range the comyn bell of the towne, and therby assembled all the comynte of the Cyte togyther before syr Emeryes hous to thentent to kepe this knight Ar¦thur that the duke nor none of hys shuld do him ony hurt or treason, and the same daye there came to syr Emeryes hous al the kinges power, and al syr Phylyppes strength, and all other knyghtes pertay∣nyng to kyng Emend{us}, who were com thither to se the batayle betwene Athur & the dukes neuew. Thā the king entred into the hall, & there was Arthur & may∣ster Steuen, syr Phylyp of sabary, syr Brisebar, syr Artaude, syr Olyuer, & syr ycect, & also the ladi margarete, & ther they deuysed how they shuld be demened in yt Iourney. Thā the duke of bygor sēe to sir Emeryes hous cōmaūdynge hym that he shulde incontinēt bryng the lady Margarete wt hym to hys courte, & also the duke caused to be cryed thrughout al the cyte yt on payne of deh al the nobles of the cyte shuld come to the court to ma∣ke
theyr homage to his neuewe syr Isem¦barte. And whan the dukes messengers had shewed the lady how that she shulde come to the courte to thentent to be ma∣ryed, thā the maister answered and sayd. Syrs shew vto the duke your lord how that hortly she shal come to the courte & there do euery thyng as she ought for to do of reason. Than departed the messen∣gers & wente to the duke & his neuewe & shewed them how yt the lady was not vn¦puruayed of good counseyle, for all the knyghtes of the cyte were in her cōpany and moo than .v. C. other, & all the moost parte of al the comyns of the cyte, and al so they shewed how there was a knyght wyth her who wolde mayntayne her qua¦rell. And whan the dukes neuewe herde that his hert mounted in pryde and said, what knyght is that, for ceraynly yf he medell ony thynge wyth ye mater I shall hange hym by the necke, & therfore he is but yll come to be of her counseyle, howe be it there is an olde proue that sayeth, of ten tymes he wanteth of hys wyll that fo¦lysshely thynketh, and so fared it by this dukes neuewe, for or it was nyghte he was in a greater balaunce of Ieopardy than this knyght was, for he left his life to pledge. Than the kyng and Phylyp wente into the palays, and the duke and hys neuewe dyd encountre them and so broughte them into his courte, and there in the open hall they sate theym downe. Than anone after came the lady and Ar¦thur on her one syde and the mayster on the other syde, and all the other noblesse and burgeyses & comyns of the cyte dyd enuyron them, and soo thus they were a great company & entred into the palays And whan the kynge sawe her he rose, and soo dyd the duke, but hys neuewe of proude herte ar styl and wolde not ris whereof he was moche blamed of euery parsone that sawe hym. And whan the people were all sylence than mayster Ste¦uen sayd to the duke. Syr ye haue com∣maunded here our ladye Margarete that she sholde come to your courte, syr behol¦de here she is to know what is your plea¦sure & wyl. Than the dukes neuewe as he that was fel and full of pryde rose on hys fete and sayd, syr clarke we haue no thynge to do wyth you, therfore be ye in peas & let vs alone. Sir said the maister for a poore clerke I am reputed with thē that knoweth me, and as for that I haue sayd is for this lady, & I thynke she wyl auowe my sayenge, howe saye ye mada∣me be ye pleased that I shal speke for you or not. Certaynly sayd the lady I wyll holde ferme & stable all that euer ye hau sayd or shall saye, and as to you syr duke I requyre you doo me ryght this daye, and yf ye wyll not here in open audyence I put othe me and all my goodes and londes into the handes of the kynge of orqueney and of syr Phylyp his neuew duke of Sabery, who are bothe here pre¦sent. Certaynly fayre damoysell sayd du∣ke Phylyp doubte ye nothynge that ony body shall doo you wronge, where as I am present. well madame sayd the kyn∣ge and I receyue you wyth a ryght good wyll into my handes syth it is your plea¦sure so to put your selfe. Than the duke of Bygor sayd, damoysell I shal do you ryght, therfore mayster speake ye on and shewe what ye wyl in this ladyes behalf. Syr sayd the mayster I say how that ye and your neuewe haue sente for my lady Margarete who is nowe here presente, therfore yf it please you shewe vs what is the cause. Than the dukes neuewe syr Isembart sayd, syr clerke I shall shewe you ye cause, it is so I am fully purposed
to gyue her in maryage to a barboue of mine. An also here openly I straitly cō¦maund al the noble men & burgeyses of this citie & of al the lond of Argenton on payne of lesynge of their landes that in continen this same day they come & do theyr homage to me as to their chief lord and gouernour, & they that wyll not do thus, I forbyd them their heritages that they holde, & not to be so hardy as to en∣tre into it any more. Than the mayster sayd, syr than we {per}ceyue wel what good ryght ye wold do to thys ladye yf there were no knyght yt wolde answere you, how be it I wil not spare to speke accor¦dyng to right syr duke it is of troth that all the comentie of al the ond of Argen¦ton, as well all the noble men & burgey∣ses as the comen people haue herde and seen and are well assured that syr Uicter sometime lorde of al the londe of Argen¦ton was rightfull heyre, & this noble la∣dy Magaete hre present was lawful¦ly descnded of hym as she yt is rightful heyre of all the herytage and goodes per¦taynyng to her sayd father, and therfre syr as wel all the hye baons of this cite and londe of Argenton & knyghtes and burgeses as wel oer meane people as we as suche as be here present as they that bene bsent, repureth, taketh, & hol∣deth her for theyr natural lady, as she yt is the ryghtfull heyre of all the londe of Argenton, furthermore sr I saye that syr Isembarte youre neuew here present is in mynde wrongfully wihout cause to dsherite this lady of he propre hery¦tage, and hath al ready put ot al her of fyers, & hath set in theyr stede seruaun∣tes of hys own theefore syr we desre you that al this ladies londes may be de¦lyuered agayn to her, and that she maye be recompensed for such wrongs as she hath had or les let hym shewe a law∣full cause why that she should loose he lndes. Syr elee sayde syr Isembarte, I wyll shewe you no caus whye, but I wyl kepe it whether she wyl or not. Sir than said the maister here lacketh ryght, but syr duke as ye be a ryghtfull Iudge, let vs haue right here this day. Thā the duke sayd, what fayre neuewe ye must nedes tel the cause why ye would hold her heritage, wel syr sayd he syh it plea∣seth you I wyll shewe him the cause, syr lek I say it is so yt the father of this lady for yt gret loue that he had to me afte that we were ones accorded togither b¦fore the duke here my vncle, than at th last it fortuned so yt a greuous malady toke him y• which sicknes cost hym his life, & or he died because of the good com∣pany that I kept him, and for the entye loue that he had to me, he gaue me gen¦ally all his lodes without resruyng of any thng to him self or to any of hys and o gau me hys goue in recorde of full possession therof, & know well this lady is his dougher, how be it her own father did eshee her, and not I how be it her father desyred me that I should make he a nonne, and to gyue her .xxx. pounde of yerely rent to fynde her wyth all: but because that her father loued m so wel, and because it is an hard thyng for to make a younge lustye damoyel a nonne, for often tymes suche are aftr∣warde dysmayed, for it is harde to resyst agenst nature, therfore in eschewyng of suche inconuniences, I purpose to ma∣ry her▪ & assigne to her .C.C. poūd of yere¦ly rent, wherfore I wyl yt she shall make her homage to me as to her chiefe lorde. Than the mayster sayd vnto ye duke syr I shal make sufficyent answere in thy s¦ate, but fyrst we wil haue assuraunce of
hym, yt for whatsoeuer be sayd he, shall moue at this time no strife therfore, and my ladye here for her part in lykewyse shall make you assuraunce. Why said sir Isemberte who is that here that wyl be pledge or medle for the ladye. Than syr Philyp duke of sabary stepte forthe and sayd. I am here present who wyl be pled¦ge for this lady, & in like wyse sayd mo than .v.C. other barons, wel sayd y• du∣ke of bygor, and I wyll be pledge for my neuewe. That is sufficient ynough said the master, syr truly than I shal answere you, and saye that where as youre ne∣uew sayth that this ladies father had a great sicknes, whereto syr I answere & saye yt your neuewe here syr Isembte dydde murther and slee hym and all hys falsly by treason, lyinge in a wayte for hym by the waye by a prepensed malyce wythout any defiaunce cause or occsiō gyuen on his par, and forthermore whe¦re as he sayth that he is in possessyon of al the landes of Argenton, she whych is of trouthe but that is by aue, for he kepeth it falsly wut eason ran caue Syr yf he wyl knowledge him elf of the muther of this ladies raher, and how that wrongfully he holeth her lond, sir in this ladyes name I require you and so do we al, that we may haue ight ud¦gement of hym, and that it may be done to hym as it oughte to be done to a tray¦tour, murtherer, comen hefe or robber. And syr if he deny all this, suffre this la∣dy to proue al this to be of trothe by her knight who is here present by her, & redi to maintayne her quarell body to bodye agenst you neuew syr sembarte. And whan the remnaūt of the ladies barons herde the maister speake so boldely, eche of them dyd poynt on other & sayde, this mayster doubteth lytell the pryde of syr Isembart, who whan he herde him selfe called to his own face murtherer & thefe robber, he was so ful of felony yt he blus¦shed for dispite, & closed his fyst and stept forth & thought to haue stryken he may¦ster wt a knife yt he had in his hande, but the people departed them. And whā Ar∣thur saw that he layde his hand on his swrde he sayd, syr fayre & easely I wold counsayl you, for be ye in certain that yf e laye any hand on him, all the worlde shal not saue your lye. Than the great vylayn begā to cry .iii. times, he is come that shall gyue lyghte. Than the kynge or orqueney laughed at the vylayn. And whan Philyp of sabary saw Arthur mo¦ued, he stept forth & mo than .v.C. with him o knightes, and enuyroned the lady and Arthur, about to ayd and to defende them yf nede were. Than tydynges an abrode in the cite how that Arthur was likely to be slayne in ye palays, wherfore thither came rūning al the hole coment of the citte, & brast open the palais gates & thought to haue slayne bothe the duke and his neuew, but the king of orqueney wyth muche payne apeased y• people, til at the last a seruant of the dukes came to hym and said, syr do ye right to these fol∣kes, or els ye are but dead & al yours for al the comente of thys cite are here with out in your palays, & hath broken open youre gates, therfore dele wisely I rede you. And whan the duke herde y• he doub¦ted hym selfe greatlye, and woulde fayne that he had bene at home in his own coū¦try. Than Arthur saide to hym, syr it is of routh al yt the mayster hath sayde of your neuew, how yt he is a murtherer, traytour, thefe & robber, here is my gage to proue it true my body agaynst his in mortal batayl for this ladies sake. Thā the vylaye began to crye as he byd be∣fore
as though he had bene wode, therwt Arthur caste downe before the duke hys gloue. And thā the duke answered & sayd syr knyght ye speke ryght largely I wo¦te not what moueth you thus to do, but I praye you refrayne your wordes, yf so be yt my neuewe hath done ony trespasse ayenst this lady. I am puyssaūt ynough to make her suche aendes that she shal holde her well content, and I praye you fayre damoysell put all this mater in to my handes & I promyse you I shall soo do yt ye shal be wel content. Syr sayd the mayster ye are a ryghte wyse and a sage prynce and are wel worthy to gyue coū∣seyle in mny great maters, syr ye maye gyue good counseyle in thys matter yf it please you to doo as I shall shewe you, youre neuewe dyde stryke of by treason this ladyes fathers heed, & if ye wyl ther∣fore stryke of your neuewes heed & gyue it to this damoysell in recompence of her fathers heed, than she shall be content or elles she shall be defended by her knyght And whan syr Isembarte herde all yt he was soo sore chaued wth yre yt he said yt there sholde neuer be made none accorde in that mater but al onely by the swerde And whan yt I haue vanquysshed thys knyght I shall hange hym by the necke, and shall brenne this clerke & damoysell in a fayre fyre. Than he dyd caste downe his gage and therto he was well coūsey∣led by hys knyghtes, for they beleued ve¦ryly that there was not in all the worlde soo good a knyght as he was. Than the vylayne cryed out, he is come that shall gyue light. Than he maister sayd to the duke, syr do as ryght requyreth, receyue these gages. An so wyth great payne at the last the duke toke them vp, and than the batayle was Iudgd o be incōtinent the same daye. Than syr Isembarte went to arme hym, & the lady ledde Arthur to syr Emeryes hous & there his knyghtes dyd arme hym, & the mayster sayd to hym syr Arthur bere thys daye in this mortall batayle your whyte shelde And he answe¦red & sayd yf god be pleased I wyll not bere it for fere of one knyght, nor yet for two such as he is. Than it was knowen thrughout al the cyte how their lady was armyng of her chāpyon at syr Emeryes hous, & how yt the batayle was Iudged to be the same day, than al ye belles in eue¦ry churche began to rynge, & all ye people of cyte & of ye coūtre besought god to hel∣pe & socour Arthur, & all the processyons of the cyte assembled them togyther with theyr relyke & crosses & holy water, and chanons, preestes, & clarkes in copes of golde & sylke, & all barefoted praying to god for theyr ladyes champyon, & all the¦se processyōs came & mette Arthur in the strete, who as than was moūted on hys hose, & Phylyp duke of sabery with him and more than .v.C. other knyghtes in his company. And whan Arthur sawe these processyons, & the bysshop mytred and all barefoted, hys herte lermed and wepte for pyte, & dyd lyght of hys horse and kneled downe, & there the bysshopp dyd sense hym and blyssed hym wyth the cross, and Arthur dyd ksse it and an∣clyned his heed downe, and the bysshop dyd gyue hym hys blessynge and sayde, that lorde that was nayled on the crosse be your ayde & socoure thys daye & euer. And all the knyghtes and other answe∣red & sayd Amen. Than the processyons retourned agayne to theyr churches, and Arthur and all his company mounted a∣gayne on theyr horses, and soo thus he was brought in to the felde. The hole clergy of all the cyte were on theyr knees makynge theyr prayers to god that he
shoulde that day be helpe and socoure to theyr lady & to her champyon. Than the kynge of orqueney came to the felde and cōmaunded his neuewe syr Phylyp du∣ke of Sabary to kepe the felde soo that there should no wronge nor treason be wrought there that day. Than syr Phy∣lyp armed hym selfe, and toke in his com¦pany syr Brisebar, sir Neuelon, syr An∣cean, syr Artaude, and wel to the nombre of .v.C. knyghtes of the court of kynge Emendus. Thā the lady came to the feld with mo thā a .M. of her men wyth her. Than syr Isembart was armed, and as he passed for by the people euery mā sayd Go thy way we praye to god that thou mait dye an euyl deth, and whan he was in the felde where as Arthur abode for hym. Than the maister sayd to thy duke syr a mortall batayle ought not to be do∣ne without an othe. Than the duke cau∣sed to be brought forth a relike one of the bones of saynt Uyncent, and an arme of saynt Gorge. Than Arthur toke his othe and sayd, by these glorious sayntes relykes ht be here presente, and by all the other sayntes of heuen syr Isembart the duke o bygors neuewe who is here presente murthred or caused to be mur∣thred falsly and without cause the lorde of Argenton father to my lady Marga∣rete here present, and wrongfully he wol∣de dysheryte her, and therwith he kyssed the sayntes and bokes, and soo lepte vp on his horse as lyghtly as though he had ben but in a Iacket, and soo set him sele aparte and stretched hym on hys horse, and all tat regardd hym sayd, beholde the hy countenaunce of yonder knyght se howe he dresseth hymselfe on his horse and plungth downe his shelde, and the kynge and other also dydde well beholde hym, and praysed hym in theyr hertes aboue all other knyghtes that euer they sawe. Than syr Isembart toke his oth and sayd that as god and the holy sayn∣tes myght helpe hym he neuer slewe the lorde of Argenton, nor neuer thought it and than he wolde haue kyssed the sayn∣tes, but he myght not, and in hys rysyn∣ge he had suche a payne in the heed that almoost therby he hadde loste his syght, wherfore all the people that sawe hym sayd this knyght hath but an euyll coun¦tenaunce, it semth he is in the wronge, than he lepte vpon hys horse ryghte he∣uyly, and Arthur was redy on the other parte of the felde. Than the duke of by∣gor prayed syr Isembarte hys neuewe that he wolde leue the batayle and sayde howe that he woulde make the peas and accorde, but in no wyse he wolde do soo, but sware that he wolde neuer make no peas tyll that he had the heed of hys ene∣my and the lady brente, but many folkes thynke to do many thynges the whyche the hurte therof lyghteth on theyr owne neckes, and so it dyd on hym. And whan that the duke sawe that he coulde make no peas he commaunded that they shul∣de doo theyr best, than bothe the knygh∣tes let theyr horses ree with great ran don, and strake eche other with great and myghty speres, & bothe knyghtes were of great force, and they encountred soo rudely that bothe theyr speres all to she∣uered to theyr fystes, and they russhed soo togyther with theyr bodyes and hel∣mes that they fel downe bothe to the erth But Arthur who was the more lustyer knyght quyckely lept vpon his fete and drewe out traunchefer his good swerde And all hat season syr Isembarte laye styll on the earth his fete vpwarde & his head downewade. And whan Arthur sawe that he laye soo vneasey he stepte
to hym and lyfte hym vp, and layde his shielde vnder his head, and withdrewe hym selfe a lytell from him, wherfore he was greatly praysed of the kyng and of all the other people. And the kyng sayde to his neuewe, syr Philip it semeth wel thys knyghte hath a ryghte noble and a gentyl hearte. Uerely sayd the duke Phi¦lyp it can be none otherwyse but that he must nedes be extraught of a noble blo∣de for there is in him no touch of shame or vylanye. And whan syr Isembarte was reuiued out of hys traunce he start vpon his fete and toke his shelde to him and drew his swerde and came vnto Ar∣thur and gaue him a gret stroke on the shelde, and strake away a great piece of his hawberke, and the stroke dyde glyde downe to the earth. Than he said to Ar¦thur, ye made me righte now to fall in a slepe, but or it be night I shal make you to slepe in such a wise that ye shal neuer wake. Than Arthur answered him and sayde, syr ye promyse very muche but I can not tell you whether ye shal be able to paye it, and there with Arthur strake hym on the helme wyth suche force that he bare away a gret piece therof so that one of his eares might wel be sene, than he caste his shielde before hym, and Ar∣ther gaue him suche an other stroke that he claue his shielde asunder in the myd∣des, and the stroke dyd glent by his arme so that the bloud folowed, and wyth the same stroke the swearde entred into the earth nye a foote, and all the people that sawe that stroke, sayde: saynte Marye, what knight is yonder, who maye sus∣tayn his strokes, there is no knight like hym, and truelye o he was as than the best knyght of all the worlde, for he was of that condycyon that the more he had to doo, the more hardynes was in hym and strength. And whan syr Isembarte felt hym selfe wounded he strake Arthur on the helme, so that it entred til it came to the coyfe of stele, and than the stroke dydde glence downe to warde to the lyft syde, and strake awaye as muche of the hawberk as it touched, but it came not nere hys flesshe, for in certayne yf tha syr Isembart had ben a true and a faith¦full man, he had ben a right good knight for he neuer founde hys matche before that tyme, but as than he had to do with him that abated his pryde, than Arthur strake him on the helme and claue ason∣der both helme and coyfe, and so as the swerde tourned, it carued awaye one of his res from his head, and a gret piece of the brawne of his sholdre, and part of hys harneys uste vnto the bare rybbes, And all tho that saw it sayd, Iesu how may any suche strokes be gyuen of any knyghte lyuynge. And whan syr Isem∣barte felte him selfe so wounded, he was enraged for yre and sayde. Uassayle me thynketh ye haue founde me, but by all the sayntes of paradise I shall reuenge me, than he lyft vp his swerd and strake Arthur on the shielde soo that he bare a∣waye a great piece of hys harneys. And whan Arthur felt the stroke so heuy and puissant, he stepte asyde as he that was bothe stonge and lyghte, and well and warely he put the stroke by, the whyche was uedfull, for yf the stroke had light vpon hym ful, by lykelyhood he had be ryght sore wounded. And than Arthur began for o waxe angry, and toke hys swerde in hys hande with great yre, and dressed hym toward syr Isembarte and srake him so rudely that he strake away arme and shouldre, and all the flesshe of hys syde vnto the bare rybbes and dyd cutte his legge nye cleane asonder in th
thycke of the thygh, and yet for all that the swerde entred into the earth halfe a fote, than syr Isembart fl down to the erth, & Arthur stept ouer hym and poyn¦ted his swerde towarde hys vysage and sayd, false recreant knight without thou wylt make open knowledge of thy defau¦te, I shall put my sweard into thy head. Than he cryed Arthur mercy and sayd, ree knyghte slee me not, but sende for myne vncle and for the lady Margarete and for all the other barons, & than shal I shewe you all the case. And whan they were all come than he sayd. Damoysell certaynly I slewe falsly by treason your father, and wrongfully without a cause haue dishryted you, wherfore I rendre agayne to you your lande, and crye you mercy in that I haue trespassed to you. Than answered the damoyselles & said syr god do iugement to you for his part for as for me nowe haue I but ryghte, that ye be in this case that ye be in. And whan the duke herde that he desyred the damosell for goddes sake to pardon him and to saue his lyfe, for he hath loste an arme and a legge, and I require you let that suffyse at thys tyme. Fayre Ladye sayd Arthur howe say you haue I done ynough at thys tyme, or elles shall I do anye more, and euer syr Isembarte laye styll and euer cryed for mercy and sayde, I yelde me an recreaunte and vanquys∣shed lyke a traytour & murtherer. Than the duke kneled downe before the lady & helde vp his handes & required her that he myght haue his neuewe in the same plyte as he was in. And whā the cōmen people of the countrey saw the duke de¦syre the ladye to pardon hys neuewe, they were in greate feare leaste that she would haue graunted hys request, wher¦fore a great company of them rushe in∣to the prese tyll they came there as syr I¦sembarte laye styll, and they all at ones layd on hym in suche wise that they left no ioynt together wyth other. And whā the duke of Bygor sawe that he was a∣frayed of hym selfe, and so toke his hors and fledde his way homewarde into hys owne country as fast as he might. Thā the kyng of Orqueney sayde. Madame god and this knight hath thys day done you great honour. And than syr Philyp demaunded of Arthur howe that he did Syr sayde be ryghte well I thanke god. Than al these lordes & knyghtes moun¦ted on their horses, but the lady & much other people wente barefoote vntoo the great cathedrall churche of the citie, and here she rendred thankynges vnto our lorde Iesu Christe, and wythin a lytell whyle after Arthur and syr Philyp and all other lordes and knightes came thy ther on pylgrimage and than the bishop and al the hole clergye receiued Arthur wyth solempne processyon, and soo for great ioye all the belles of the citie wre ronge thre dayes togyther, and all the burgeses throughout euery strete where as Arthur should passe did hange oute of theyr wyndowes and on theyr walles cloth of golde and of sylke, and rych car∣pettes and cusshyns and coueringes of grene, & riche aparayle of emerines lay abrode in euery wyndowe, and fayre la∣dies and damoselles beholdyng Arthur theyr champyon. And whan ye lady had done her prayers, she yssued oute of the mynstr. Than began iuglers and tom¦blers, & mynstrelles to make great ioy and sporte. And the kyng led thys lady on the one syde, and duke Philyp on the other syde, and so led herforth to the p∣lays, and all the other barons broughte forth Arthur, & as he passed throughout
euery strete burgeyses & ladyes & damoy¦selles for Ioye dyd cast at hym floures of pleasure & sayd, god encreace in you boū¦te & honour. And the great vylayne ran euer dauncyng before for Ioy, and cryed euer now darkenes is tourned to lyght. And whan the kyng had brought the la¦dy to the palays he sayd, nowe fayre lady ye be welcome home to your owne ryght¦full herytage. Syr sayd she god graunte you y• hye Ioye, of heuē, and kepe and pre∣serue my good knyght yt hath delyuered me fro mine enemies and saued my lond. Thā anone after Arthur entred into the palays and the master and al other lords and knightes wt him. Thā the ladi said to Arthur gentyl knyght ye haue delyuered to me my londe the whych was lost as to my vse, for I had nothynge therof, and now I haue it agayne by your noble pro¦wesse, wherfore I holde yt I haue of god and of you, wherfore I wyl to you make faythful homage, & take you for my lord the whiche knowledge I wyl make here openly before al the nobles yt be here pre¦sent. A madame sayd Arthur for goddes sake say ye neuer so to me, for that shal ye not do. Syr said she ye haue giuen it to me, & of you I holde it, I am but a wo∣man alone, & am in purpose neuer to be maryed, seynge yt my lord & fathe is ded the whiche I thanke myn enemyes, but now they haue suche rewardes as they haue deserued, and I know wel as soone as ye departe out of this coūtre the duke of bygor wil assayle me agayne in the re¦uenging of his neuewes death, and yf he can take away fom me yt he haue giuen me. Fayre lady sayd Arthur I promyse you I shall helpe you to kepe your ryght to the best of my power, and whā so euer and as often as ye send to me I hal leue al thinges & come to you where so euer I shall be. Sir said the lady god gyue you a .C.M. thankynges, but syr I swere to you by the faith that I haue borne to my lord and father yt I wil kepe no foe of lon¦de of y• ye haue gyuen me without I ma∣ke to you homage therfore. And whā the king herd that he said to Arthur, sir take her homage syth he will nedes do it, and in like wise counseyled him duke Philip and maister steu and many other, and at last wt moche paine Arthur toke homage of the ady and of diuers othr barōs o y• londe. Thā began there to be made great feest and ioye, and sir Emery, Bisebar & Ataude were gouernours of the feest & triumphe. And whan the mete was redy thā water was brought forth and so ther wasshed the king & the bisshop and the la¦dy Margarete togyther, and thā Arthur and duke Philip and maister Steuē, and so al other, and euery mā after his degre and so they were all in as great mirthe & Ioye as coulde be deuysed, the whyche Ioye endured but a lytle season, for all their Ioy was soone tourned into great trouble, for all the courte was in great displeasure as ye shal here after, who ly∣steth to rede or here therof. ¶How the same season while the kynge of orqueney & all these other noble people were at dyner in great Ioye and mirthe there came in a messēger fro the woūded knyght to Arthur desringe him to come and help him or els he wole wye him of his death, wherwt all the courte was sore troubled, and ceased all their Ioye for the loue of Arthur, for incontynent he depar¦ted fro y• court and went forth wt the mes¦senger, & how yt all the courte fered great¦ly Arthur for that enterpryse, for there was neuer non that euer returned again alyue fro that aduenture. Caplo. lxvi.
AS this noble courte was in this forsaid great Ioye and whyle y• they were at dyner there entred in to the palays on horse backe a squyer hys swerde gyrte aboute hym wt hys harte in his hande, and whan he approched nere to the table where as the king sate he be∣gan to crye as lowde as he could, where is the knight that is called Arthur of bry¦tayne, yf he be in this courte let hym an∣swere me, and wyth those wordes all the courte was in peas, soo that euery man might well here hym. And whan Arthur herde how that he demaūded so for hym he answered and sayd. Frende yf ye de∣maūde for Arthur of Brytayne there be many folkes reputeth me to be the same therfore beholde I am here redye, for I am the same man that ye demaunde for saye what ye wyll. Syr sayd the squyer I am sente to you, therfore ye shall here what I shall say, syr it is of trouth how that my mayster syr Octhebon of hurte∣bise hath hearde tydynges of you and of your aduentures, and so hath he done of many other that could do hym no good, syr this knyght is very seke in his bodye, for I thinke verily he is nere to his deth, therfore he sendeth to you by me that in cōtinent with out ony lenger delaye that ye come to hym & gyue hym helth, accom∣panyed al onely but wyth your squyer, & yf ye doo not thus incontynent through your defaute he shall dye, of the whych deathe I here in his name appele you before the kyng and all this noble court. And than Arthur aunswered hym and sayd, frende howe is it so that I shoulde gyue hym helthe, I am but an yll phy∣sycyon to helpe hym that is so seke as ye speke of. Syr come on your way and he shall shewe you all the maner of his seke∣nes. well sayd Arthur thynketh he than that I can gyue hym ony good coūseyle. Ye syr said the squyer if ye be of that har¦dines and valure as it is of you reported well frende sayd Arthur suffre than tyll to morowe, and I shal this day take my leue of all these barons & so folowe you. Syr sayd the squyer are we now in Bry∣tayne, yf ye wyll go come on your waye streyght for I wyll departe, how be it I wyl that ye know that my sayd maystr appeleth you of hys deth. In the name of god sayd the kynge of orqueney of an yll deth I praye to god that he may dye, for he hath caused the deth of many a noble knyght, and soo he wyll do now of this knyght, & soo shall we left hys company. Truly {quod} Brysebar wolde to god I had here his head. Thā the squyer answered the kyng & sayd, syr if I myght answere a kyng I wolde saye that ye should not curse my mayster before me, & as to you
syr knight that would haue my maisters head, ye wold not go & seke to haue it for your weyght of fyne golde, ye wold fain haue it so it myght cost you nothing but ye were neuer so hardy to go seke for it, the cause is ye dust not, & as to you syr knight Arthur ye cause e to tary here ouer longe, eyther come on your way or els abide ere still, and so the squyer was goyng hys waye. Than Arthur stepte fro the table and demaūed for hys har¦neys, and sayd that al the word should not cause hym to tary any longer, than Arthur went & armed hym and came a∣gayne into the hall, and sayd, I wyll de∣parte, & so toke his leue of the kinge and of al the hole barony, who were right so¦rowfull of his departyng. Than sir Phi¦lyp and moo than .v.C. other knyghtes would haue gone wt hym, but the squier messenger wold not suffre any creature to depart with him but al onely Bawd∣wyn hys squyer. Than maister Steuen came to Arthur and sayde, syr ye go in a great aduentur of death, for your return is ryghte Ieoperdous, but yf god gyue you that grace to retorne, leue ye for no∣thynge but that ye come o the tourney before ornyte at bartylmew tyde nexte comynge, for there shall I be and my la∣dyes pauylion with me, I wyl now re∣tourne to the porte noyre. & I shall sende Gouernar ater you. erainly maister said Arthur, if god wil that I shal escape this aduenture I shall be at y• sayd tour∣nay, wherfore as now to god I cōmaun¦de you, and so mounted on his hrse and toke with him his whie shield, and cla¦rence hys good swrde, the which were ryght nedeful to him in that Iourney, & so he rode forth and Bawdwyn his squi∣r with him. Thā was al the court sore troubled for his departynge. Than the kinge cōmaunded to take vp the tables & to russe all his stuffe, for he said he wol¦de depar incontinente. Thau the ladye Margaret had thought to haue caued him to cary, but she could not in no wise and soo in the ame houre he departed, and al other ords & knightes, so yt there abode with the lady Margarete no moo but her own knightes. The mayster al∣so ayd that he would go to y• port noyre And whan all the coure was departe the maister came to the lay & sayd. Ma∣dame wyl ye comaunde me any seruyce vnto the markes your vncle who is at y• porte noyre. And the lady deired hym to tary two or thre dayes tyl suche tme as she had set all her londe in some good or∣dre, & than she promised o go with him to the porte noyre to se her vnce, y• why∣che request the mayster dyd graunte her with al his herte, for he loued her entier¦ly. & had set al his heart and loue on her how be it he knewe it not as than, than the lady ordeyned her balliues and pro∣uostes & other officers, & kepers of her londes, bi the aduise and good coūall of the mayster, and receiued homage of al her people, and there she made yr Eme∣ry principal gouernour aboue all other. And whan she had ordeyned al this, thā she toke her horse and .xii. o her knygh∣es with her, and so rode forh wih he mayster to se her vncle, and as they rode together y• mayster dyscouere to h all his courage how that he loued her with perfit and faithful honest oue, with the whih wordes her hert was so fyed yt fro that time for ward she loued him en∣tyrely and dyd nothynge but after hys counsayle, and promysed to owe him her good wil & fauour, and so at he last they ayued on a saturday at the porte noyre. And when they were come thyther there
mettet hem Gouernar & Iaket, & so the maister & Gouernar toke down the lady than Gouernar & Iaker demaūded how that Arthur did. And the maister answe¦red & said now that he was in good helth & mery, & how yt he was as thā newly de¦parted to the castel of huyse in ye coun¦tre of ye lost yle, & shewed him how that he desed that he should come after hym wherof Gouernar had great ioy, and de¦parted the next day. And whan the lady sawe Gouenar so byg and so goodly a knght, she demaunded of ye master what knygh he was. And he answered her & sayd how yt he pertayned to Arthur. In the name of god said she I think it right well, for he smeth to be of hye prowesse Uerely madam said he & so he is. Than Gouernar toke the lady and led her into the palays, than the markes came forth the same time and met them who knew nothinge before of her comynge, and as soe as she saw her vncle, her hert rem∣bled whan she remembred the deth of her father, & so she ran & enbraced hym we∣pynge, both or ioye and for sorowe, for ioy that she saw her vncle, & for sorowe of the remembraunce of her father. And whan the markes sawe her and knewe wel yt she was his nece, incontinente he remembred the deth of her father his bro¦ther, with the which remembraunce his herte cloed in suche wise▪ that of a great space he coud speke no word, and so sate them dwne on a benche. And whan the lady could speake, she said, fayre vncle & dere frende I neue sawe my dere father syhe he departed wyth you, I praye you tel me whether yo haue sene him or not I pray you answere to me a pore orphe∣lyue bothe of fathr and mother. And whan her vncle herde her saye soo, hym thought his herte dyd breke for sorowe, and sayd. A myne owne nece & dere lou bothe ye and I haue lost hym, and ye are disherited therfore we ought wel to com¦playne on oure domages. And syr Isem∣bae I pray to god thou maiest dye an yll deth yt hast thus brought vs into this do¦lorous chaunce. Syr sayd the lady of an yll deth he is dead, and so was about to tell him all the mater, but she could not for wepyng. Then the mayster came to thē and shewed the markes that Arthur had conquered syr Isembarte in playne batayl, and had rendred to ye lady agayne her loudes, and how that she had made homage vnto Arthur. Thā the markes sayd, certainly fayre nece ye haue done ryght wel to make hym homage, for he hath deliuered vs out of pouertie, & hath made vs yhe, and he hath wel aduen¦ged you of youre mortall enemy, and he hath deliuered me oute of the dolorous pryson that I was in, wherefore yf euer I may se hym agayne I wyl become his man. Thus they talked together so long that at the ste the mayster made theym to forget theyr sorowe, and to be ioyous & mey, and so they went to dyner & were serued right richely and so al yt day they wer together, and thus this lady abode a great space at the pore noyre, and euery day sported with her vncle, and so they made right great ioy and feast together. ¶How ye Gouernar in serchyng of Ar¦thur had the honour of a tourney yt was made by ye erle of the yle perdue, & there Gouernar was amorous of the coūtes And how ye the rle charged the coūtes yt she shold not speke to Gouernar, wherof euyll came to hym, for the nexte day Go¦uernar dyd bette hym well in the tour∣nay, & lay all night after with the coun¦tesse his wyfe. Cap. lxvii.
IN the mornynge betymes Go∣uernar toke hys leue of the lady and of the maister, and of the no¦ble Markes and rode forth on his waye and Iacket hys squyer wyth hym, and he was ryght rychely beseen, and mounted on a good and puyssaunte horse, and soo rode forthe .viii. dayes and neuer coulde here anye tydynges of that he sought for, tyl at the laste he tryued in the londes of ynde the more bytwene the realme of soroloys and the empyre, and there he sawe a great ryuer, & at a crosse waye he encountred a messenger, who bare a scochyn on hys brest, & also a bode full of letters, and rode a great pace, and this was aboune saynt Laurence tyde. Than Gouernar dyd salute the valt and demaunded of hym what tydynges and of whence he was. And he answered & sayd, syr I am pertaynynge to the erle of he yle perdue, and am rydynge to the stronge castell to a knyght named syr Ia¦kes to thentent yt he sholde come to him to go wt him to a tournay, for themperour of ynde hathe somoned my maister yt said erle to wayte on hym to Corynte at this Bartylmewe tyde nxte co∣mynge, bycause of a turnay that is taken there bytwene hym & the mighty Emēdus kynge of Soroloys, and by¦cause my lord thynketh not to be vnpuruayed of good knyghtes, he hath made to be cryed a tournay on mon¦daye next comynge to then¦tent to those of ye bst knigh¦tes yt cometh thider to haue them wyth hym to the sayd great ournay a Cornyte, therfore I must go to the sayd syr Iakes to cause hym to be wyth my said lore on monday nexte comynge. well good fren∣de sayd Gouernar go on your waye god sende you good aduenture. So than the varlet departed, than Gouernar sayd to Iacket, I am in purpose to goo to thys sayd turnay, for it may happe ryght wel that we may there here some tidinges of mo lorde Arthur, & so they rode so longe tyll at the last thy aryued at the yle per∣due, where as hey ounde many knygh∣tes yt were redy come so yt all the ogyn¦gs were taken vp, wherfore he had mo∣che payne to gete hym ony logng, but at the laste he mette wt a good urgse who receiued hym frendly into his hous. And whan Gouernar was chaunged he called to him hys hoste & demaūded hym all the maner of the erle and what maner of man he was, who answered and sayd syr he is a gh valyaunt man & a hardy knght, for there are but fewe that may
compare wyth hym in dedes of armes, & he hath to hys wyfe the moost fayre lady that is in all the worlde excpt the kyng of Soroloys doughter, & for her baue hyther resorteth many straūge knyghtes both dukes, erles, and many other good knightes, & bicause he dooth tournay to¦morow he knoweth well yt many knygh¦tes wyll be at hys house for to se his wife therfore he hath caused the gates of hys castel to be fast shette, and hath defended that what so euer he be shal not entre, the gates were not open syth none yesterday No sayde Gouernar in the name of god I shall assay to entre & yf I can to se he fayre lady, than he called to hym Iacket and cōmaunded hym to brynge forh hys horse, for he sayd he wolde go & assay his horse ayenst the nexte daye that he solde tournay, and so Iacket brought hym his horse & mounted theron, and so rode forth throughout ye stretes of the towne tyl he came to the castel gate the which he foūd fast shete, and than he bad the porter to open the gate, for he sayd he wolde entre into the castell, & than the porter demaū∣ded of hym what he had to do there. Fren∣de said Gouernar I wold speke with the good lady of this place. eryly syr sayde the portr ye may not entre in at this pla∣ce, for my lord hath defded the contra∣ry, for he hath cōmaūded yt what so euer he be yt coeth hyther that none shoulde entre, wherfore I dare not lette you in. Yes I pray you sayd Gouernar, and I wyll gyue you what soo euer ye wyll de∣maunde of m. Than the porter opened a lytel wyndowe & there he sawe yt Gouer¦nar was a ryght goodly knyght & brow∣ne of vysage, & sawe how yt he rode on a maruayllous fayre horse, than thought he well yt he was some noble man & sayd to hym, syr yf ye wyll gyue me the horse that ye ryde on I wyll open you the gate Open the gate than at ones and I gyue hym to you. Syr sayd the porter wyll ye promyse me as ye be a true knyght that I shall haue hym. eryly I promyse you that ye shall haue hym as I am a trewe knyght. Syr sayd the porter I pray you ary a lytle whyle, & I shal go in & speke wyth my lorde. well sayd Gouernar I praye you ye you agayne as faste as ye may. Than the porter went to the erle & sayd, syr there is at youre gate a maruay∣lous fayre knyght, who hath so great de∣syre to se my lady yt he wyll gyue me hys horse that he rydeth on, the which is wel worth by lykelyhode a .C. pounde on the condycyon that I wolde open the gate & let him in, therfore syr pleaseth it you to hewe me your mynde in this case. How so sai the erle my minde was that none should entre into this place howe be it I wyl not that thou hould it lese thy gyft tha he wolde gyue the, therfore goo thy waye & open the gate & take thy horse, & thā he sayd to the countesse his wyfe, ma∣dame yonder is a knyghte that hath gy∣uen a ryche gyft to se & to speake wt you, wherfore I charge you as dere as ye hol¦de my loue that whā he is come ye make to him no maner of semblaunt, nor speke no worde to hym what so euer he saye to you, yf ye doo otherwyse ye shall ryght ore dysplease me. A syr sayd the lady for goddes sake I axe mercy, syr we knowe not what kynght he is nor of what valu¦re and yf he haue gyuen a ryche gyfte to speake with me he shall haue but a small rewarde for hys curtesy yf I shoulde ke∣pe my speache from hym, ayenst loue no man can be, and I am a gentylwoman of geat power, therfore I should great∣ly trespace and I should not speke o im yf he speake to me. By the fayth that I
own vnto god said the erle if ye trespace agenst my commaundement I shall dys¦please you at the herte roe. we sir sayd the lady, for your loue I am content, but yf any vylany growe therby I praye to gd it maye fai on you. Than the porter opened the gate to Gournar, and there the porter toke his hore and Gouernar wente forth into the palays a fore, and the erle and uch other knightes as wer wih him meete Gouernar & dyd slute hym  bhelde hym maruaylouslye and soo e paed frth tyl he came whee as the coutee was tan he wente to her and sayd Mame gd that all tyge fou o gue you hys daye helth ioy and peace, and blessed be the enowne yt rūnth of your valuce boūte, and fresh beauye, for now I se well it is of trouth and more thā is or an be reported. And whan the coutee herd hym she answe¦red no maer of worde, the whiche gre∣ued her ryght sore in her herte and ther∣with she cast downe her loke toward the earth▪ and Gouernar made countenaun¦ce to salute the other ladyes, and so te downe amonge hem. And at the lst he sayd to the countesse, fayre ladye I am a knyght that passeth thrughout this coū¦try, and it was shewed me how that ye were in thys castell, wherfore I thought I would not passe by without seynge of you therefore I am come to you to offre my selfe to be your knighte, & to do that I may do for your sake, wherfore mada¦me I rquyre you to shewe me what is youre pleasure, for I am sore desyrynge to knowe it and the countesse spake no word agayne, but cast down hr loke to the grounde, wherwith she was ryghte sore greued at the herte. And whan Go¦uernar sawe that she spake no worde he was ryght sorowfull & sayde Madame wyll ye not speake to me, I haue hed re¦nowmed of you that ye were fie a gen∣tyll of hearte and of suche courtese that ye could beare none yre nor no malice in your herte, nor do any vylany to any ma¦ner of persone, wherfore fayre lady aun¦swere me some maner of worde, how be it for al that she spake no worde agayne And ther with water was brought forth and all they wasshed and sate downe to dyner, and the erae caused Gouernar to syt nexte to the ladye to thentente to doo hym the more anoyaūce and shame, and there Gouernar carued to the lady ryght goodly with his knyfe, and oftentymes spake to her, but she woulde ueuer gyue ansee agayne, where with Gouernar was so sore dyspleased that he neyther dyd eate nor drynke bu a ytel for he sa∣we well ho the lady spake to all other but in no wye she would speke to him And ao the coutesse was ight sore ds¦pleased in her hearte because she duste not speake to him. And thus they wee in thys case tyl they were taken vp fro ye diner, and than Gouernar toke her bold∣ly by the hand and sayd, madam I wold faye speake a lytell wyth you, and soo he lad her vnto a fayre wyndowe, than he sayd, swete lady it is for none yl or de¦spite or for any trespace that I haue ma¦de to you or to anye of yours that ye do to me suche hardnes yt ye wil not speke to me, ye haue the name to be the moste free and gentyllest of hearte of any lady now lynynge, for al bounte and courte∣sy is sayd to be in you, therfore swete la∣dy shew somewhat of your courtesy to me as in speakynge but one woorde and fayre and gentyl ladye do me soo muche honor as now to speke to me for as god helpe me I am ashamed if ye do not for euer, for it shal be sayd to morow of me
how that I am but a folysshe knight and outragyous, for by myne outrage it shal be sayd that I haue loste the herynge of the speche of the moost fayre ladye of the worlde, madame I requyre you put fro me this reproche, open to me a lytle your swete mouth wherein is all curtesy, and speke to me some worde, for madame as god helpe me my herte dyeth in my body for I am in fere leest that ye be dysplea∣sed wyth me for some trespace that I ha¦ue done, but for all yt she spake no worde agayne to hym, and yet she was as sore greued in her herte as he. Gouernar sto∣de and talked so longe to thys lady tyl at the laste two of her gentylwomn came for her that she should go into her cham∣bre and take her reste. Than Gouernar at her departynge layde hys arme aboute her and sayd, madame I se well I must nedes departe from you at thys tyme, I wyll go to my lodgynge ryght soowful and ye shall go & reste you & slepe & take lytell care for my greate grefe, how be it madame I saye vnto you that I wyl ne¦uer departe fro this towne tyll ye haue spoken to me. And so thus talkynge he brought her to her chambre doore, and he sawe well where there was a waye out of the chaumbre in to a fayre orcheyade Than he sayd, madame ye wyll not spe∣ke to me, ut I promyse you I wyl come this same nyght so yonder orcheyarde & soo to your chaumbre to speake with you thoughe I dye therfore, syth I haue ta∣ken that enterpryse in my mynde eyther I wyl dye or elles ye shal speake to me And therwyth the countesse entred into her chaumbre wythout spekynge of ony worde to hym. And than Gouernar re∣tourned to hys lodgynge into the towne ryghte sore dyspleased in hys herte. And whan Iacket sawe hym come on fote he demaūded of hym where was hys horse. And he answered & sayd, in fayth frend it gooth not wel wyth me. Ha ha sayd Ia¦ket I trowe ye haue played away your horse bycause ye woulde not tournay to morowe with the knyghtes of this coun¦tre, well shamefull knyghte to morowe whan I se other gentyl knyghtes tour∣nay I shall shewe them how that ye lye a slepe in your chaumbre. Than Gouer∣nar layde hym downe on a bedde all re∣plete wt yre tyll it was nyght. And than the sayd erle cōmaunded all hys knygh∣tes that they should departe and goo to theyr restes bycause they shoulde be tra∣uayled on the next daye, and also he sayd to the countesse hys wyfe, madame go thys night into your chaumbre and take your rest, for I wyll thys nyght ly alone for I am sure I shall be ryghte sore tra∣uayled to morowe. And whan it was der¦ke nyght and the coūtesse taken her leue and entred into her chambre. Than rose Gouernar and badde Iacket his squyer to gyue hym his swere. And Iacket de∣maunded of hym what he wolde doo. I wyll go out & playe me sayd Gouernar. By the fayth that I owe to god sayd Ia¦ket I trowe ye wyll go lye in a wayte by the hye way for to robbe some marchaūt to by you a newe horse wyth all. Gouer∣nar answered no worde agayne but de∣parted fro hym, and as than euery bodye was in theyr lodgynges, for it was than somwhat late, and the moone shone very bryght, and the watchemen were on the walles of the castell and so wente often aboute, and at the laste Gouernar came to the hygh walles of the orcheyarde the whyche Ioyned on the one syde to ward a fayre forest, and there Gouernar sawe well on the other syde the wyndowes of the chaumbre where as he sawe the lady
entre whan he departed fro her, than he clam vpon a grene oke, and dyde so mo∣che that at the last he gate vpon the wall & there he stode styl pryuely a good space because of the watchemen that went a∣bout, for as than they were in that quar∣ter, and whan they were passed he gate hym downe by an other tree, aud so stode styll by the walles vnder the shadowe of the tres, for the moone dyd hym gre¦te anoyaunce because she shone so clere. And at the last he gate hym into the myd¦des of the garden vnder a fayre pyne tre where as there was a ryght fayre foū∣tayne, and there he stode a great space & durst not stere for eare of spying, for h knewe well that yf he styred the watch¦men who as then were not a slepe, should se hym, and he knewe well that and he ere espyed and taken he shoulde notte lightly escape wythout dth, therfore he kepte hym selfe as pryuely as he coulde, and al thys season the countesse was in her chambre in her kyrtel bare foted and bare legged, and on a carpet of sylk and her damoyselles aboute her, and there they began to speake of the knyght who had gyuen hys horse to speake wyth her and one o the damoselles who was na∣med Powcet sayde howe that he was of right great value and ounteful of hert By the mother of god said Eglentyn an other of her damoyselles ye saye ryghte truly, and where as he is gentyl of ert in lyke wyse he is passynge fayre and more gracious of wordes than my lorde is. Truely sayd Powcet I meruayl me greatly how that my lady could haue so harde a heart as whan he spake so swete¦ly to her that she woulde gyue hym no maner of answere. Truely sayd Eglen∣tyne as I remembre I hearde hym saye at hys departinge that he would come thys same nyght into thys garden. By the good lorde sayde the other I remem¦bre well I hearde hym say so. well sayde the countesse I care not whether he o∣me or not, yf he doo lette hym kept faste that he shall wynne, lette vs go to our beddes, & that she sayd to couer her cou∣rage and to breake theyr wordes, and so she sente awaye from her all her gentyll women, sauynge Powcet and Eglen∣tyne, for they two were of her preuy coū¦sayle, then she sayd to them. A ere lady the mother of god, what shall we do yf this knyght cometh into the garden this nyght, y he be espyed of the watchmen it shall be thoughte that I haue caused hym to come hyher, soo shall I be sha∣med and he destroyed, the which should be a great domage, for he is a ight fayre knyght. By the good lord said Eglē∣tyne madame ye say righte truely, her¦fore Powcet felowe let vs waine go s whether he be come or not, than Pow∣et toke a grene mantell and dyd cast it on her and o went forth together, play¦eng to the entente the watchmen should knowe that it wee they, and at the last Powcet loked vnder the pyne tee and there she sawe where he stoode, than she sayde syster Eglntyne there is no more but now let vs do for the best, for yonder I se hym, and incontynente they appro∣ched too the fountayn, and made sem∣blaunt to wasshe theyr fete and handes and Powcet toke her mantell and dyd cast it on the knyght, and toke a fyne ke¦uerchefe and dyd knytte it on hys heade and so toke hym by the arme & did leade hym forth into the countesse chaumbre, as though he had ben one of her felowes And as sone as Gouernar sawe ye ladie he cast of his keuerchefe & his mantell & kneled downe & sayde Madame I pray
god gyue you good lyfe and good nyght and she answered and sayd, syr knyght in an yll nyght and tyme ye be entred in to my chambre without my licence, wher¦fore ye be not welcome vnto me, but for your labour I shall cause you to be han∣ged by the necke, and these wordes she spake fayre and easely because she wolde not be hearde, and forthermore she sayde syr knyght howe durste ye be so bolde to breake my walles & entre into my cham∣bre, by the mother of god ye shal dye ther∣fore. Than Gouernar answered & sayd, rygt here and swere lady blame me no∣thynge therfore, for as god helpe me my herte dyed in my bodye whan so hye a la∣dy as ye be wolde not speke to me, for as it is sayd that al goodnesse and gentyl∣nesse is cōprysed in your persone, wher∣fore fayre lady now doo wyth me what it shall please you, syth ye haue spoken to me stryke of my head & ye wyll, oo here it is al redy, and so he layde forth his heed to the coūtesse to haue had her tryken it of yf she lyste, & whan the countesse saw him humble himselfe so mekely, her hert began to melte, & so toke of him some py∣te. A madame sayd Powcet this knyght hath euyll enployed his curtesye that he hah done to your porter as to gyue him hys good horse for youre loue, and nowe ye to speke so rudely, he hath done more bounte and cutesy syth he came hyther than euer dyd onye that euer came vnto this place to s you, though they were ne∣uer so noble or great, it is reason that he may fele that he hathe not yll enployed his gyft that he hath gyuen for youre sa∣ke, and also he hath Ieoperded hys lyfe in this behalf, it came of a great gentilnes of herte to gyue awaye his horse, and of a great valure of courage to put this his lyfe in aduenture for your sake, full ly∣tell durst thus haue done ony knyght of this countre, who be afrayde of euery fo¦ly, they lacke in theyr hertes suche boūte & valure, I say not all thys all onely for his sake, for I neuer sawe him afore this daye, but as helpe me god I se by reason yt loue hath caused hym thus to do, for yf he had not loued you he wolde haue done nothynge of thys yt is done, therfore ma¦dame for goddes sake make hym amen∣des of the yll cruelte yt ye dyd to him this day & speke to him more curteysly. Pow∣cet sayd the lady I can not I am so full of yre, for he hath dyspleased me with his cominge hider, for it is no thanke to him though I wer shamed for this dede. Ma¦dame sayd Powcet yf ye put hym out of your chaumbre at this time of nighte he shall be espyed of the watchemen, & so ta¦ken & slayn & you shamed, for euery man that shal knowe therof wyll saye that ye caused hym to come, & the more that kno¦weth therof the worse it is, for whan a thynge is doone it is conuenyent to let it passe as easely as may be, and to kepe it secrete for all is lytle ynough, syr knyght knele ye downe and crye my lady mercye in that ye be come hither without her ly∣cence. Than Gouernar kneled downe & sayd, madame for goddes sake forgyue me this trespace. And she beheld him mer¦uaylouslye, for he was fayre & gracyous and he was bare heded, & Powcet strake dowe hys heare wyth her hande, for it was somwhat ruffled wyth the wynde, and sayd. I madame beholde & se what maner of knight this is, and who is soo harde herted that wyll not forgyue hym that putteth hym selfe in suche aduēture all onely to se a fayre noble lady, certayn¦ly I pardon hym in your name, for I am sure madame ye wyll be content therewt. Than the countesse dyd smyle & sayd, al∣wayes
ye wyl playe the fole, but so she to¦ke Gouenar by the hande & caused him to aryse vpon his fete, than Powcet bad hym syt downe by her lady, but for cour∣tesye he would not at the fyrst biddyng, Than Powcet sayd, syr knyght now ye nede not to take any care for anye of the knightes of this castel for your coming hyther, and without ye haue fere of a wo¦mā, syt down by my lady and make your own peace therwt Gouernar sate own and enbraced and desyred the ladye yt she wold pardon him, and so she did, & than Gouernar all smylyng cast forth many prety & goodly wordes, and euer he foūd the lady gentyl & swete of her answeres Than Powcet said, sister Eglentine my lady me thinketh is mey now, I ow she care not for vs, let vs go watch in ye nexte chaumbre, for I thynke she would fayne be a bed, and soo they wente theyr way, and the lady called them again, but that was very softely, for it was with a dead voice. And than anon powcet hrd the curteyns drawen about the bed, and she knewe well there were no mo creatu¦res but the lady and the knight together Than Gonernar began a lytel so speake fayre, as these louers dohe whan they would haue their desyres, and at the last he dyd o muche that they were agreed to lye together, and so to bed they went, and there they toke suche pastaune toge¦ther as these louers are wont to do whā they be in lyke case. And than Gouer∣nar demaunded of the lady why she had done hym so much vylany as in that she would not speake to hym in her palays In the name of god said the lady the cau¦se was for my lord comaūded me so to do, and I durst not dysplease hym, how be it that greued me ryght ore so to do. Well madame▪ it is often sene that too much restrainyng is not good, but as in thys case he yt hath the domage let hym wepe hardely, & so he enbraced and kissed the lady, & thus they were together til i was nere hand day. Thā the lady said syr knyghte I requyre you rendre vnto my lorde the vilany that he hath done to vs, in suche wise yt ye ust to morow a∣genst him, & let him fele and know how that ye be dyspleased. By the mother of god sayd Gouernar so shall I do, I wa∣rant ye shal se hym flye to the erth. Thā the lady began to laughe. Than Powcet came to the beddes syde and sayde mada∣me is all the yll wyll any thyng mynys∣shed, is all this warte now fayled, I be∣leue that the peace be made, I trowe ye haue made amendes thys nyghte to the knyght. By the good lorde sayd the lady Powcet ye play alwaye the fole, Up sy knyght sayd Powcet, for it is tyme for you to ryse. Than Gouernar rose & app¦ayled hym. Than the countesse said, ie ysterday ye dyd giue a waye your horse for my sake, wherfore I wyl gyue you agayne as good a gyfte, Powcet bryng me hyther yonder lytel casket that ieth o my presse, and whan she hadde it she sayde holde syr knyght I gyue thys cas∣ket to you and al that is therein. Mada∣me sayd Gouernar by the leue of God I wyll not take it, for I thanke god I am riche ynough,  haue so valyaunt a ma∣ster that he wyl gyue me goodes sufiy¦ent. By the fayth yt I owe to god said the lady though ye were a kyng yet I gyue it vnto you, and without that ye take i I ensure you I wyl neuer speke to you more whyle I lyue. I giue it to you frely but for a remembraunce for he loue that I haue in you, and to ie you therwith a ewe horse, aad I require you to morowe  wt my lord as ye haue promised me
Madame by the fayth that I owe vnto you sayd he I ensure you I shall make hym reuerse from his horse. Than ye la¦dy and Powcet dydde smyle, and so than departed Gouernar fro them, and toke the casket with him, the which was ful of coyned gold, and as than al the watch¦men were a slepe, for than it was at the poynte of day. ¶Howe that Gouernar dydde bete downe at the tourney the erle of the yle perdue. Cap. lxviii THus whā Gouernar was de¦parted fro the contesse he ca∣me to his owne lodginge and there he founde Iacket hys squyer slepynge on a fourme before the fyre & so he awoke hym. And whan acket saw hym hys here trem¦bled because of hys sodan wakyng & sayd. Thys is a fayre tarying. I owe for a wyseman to come now to his lod∣gng, and thn he did lygh vp a torche and there in the chambre Gouerna did open hys casket, wherin there was of golde and Iewelles beyonde two thou∣sande pound. And whan Iacket sawe it hys herte was afrayed and sayd Syr I thynke ye houe to bed some abbye. be∣ware ye b nt hanged to morow. A a¦ket frende said Gouernar hold thy peas holde here .C.C pound and oke that I haue to morowe a good horse and gyue all the remnaunt of the money to poore people. Ye said Iacket ye be very liberal of other mennes gddes, for I trow all thys coste you nothynge ye be a large guer of almes. I thynke it were better that ye caused the abbeye to be couered wyth lede fro whence ye stale thys mo∣ney, but so than as son as it was fayre day Iacket wente into the market place and there he founde hys owne maysters horse to be soulde, and there he boughte hym for an hundreth pounde, and soo broughte hym to Gouernar who was yghte gladde of hym, and after that no¦ne of that day was paste, harowdes did crye in euey strete, knightes lepe vpon your horses, and get yu shortlye to the filde. Than hornes, bussynes, taboury∣nes, trompettes and claryons began to sowne maruaylouslye. Than knyghtes qickelye dyd arme theym, and than the gates of the castell were sette open, and the erle dyd yssue out wyth a great com¦pany of knyghtes wyth hym, and came into the place where as the turney shold be and by that tyme Gouernar was ar∣med and mouted vpon hys horse, and he was greatly behoen hat iourney of euery bodye for h ws a ryght fayre knighte in harneys. Than the countesse and oth layes and damoiselles were mounted on the castell wailes to behold the turny the whyche was in a fayre grene ryghte vnder the castell wal, than Powce & Eglentie saw where as Go¦uernar came riding toward the tourney in a narow lane. Madame quod Pow¦cet beholde yonder knygte, by semynge he sholde b some noble man. Truly sayd the lay he is the most semelyest knighte in all ye towe. Madame sayd Powcet I tinke ye would his honour and profyt By the good lord sayd the lady I wold he er a kynge. Than anon in the field the partes were disseuered, & Gouernr wa agnst ye erle, than herawds cried knyghtes do your best. Than bgan the the tourey ryght had & sharp. & Gouer¦ne aduysed wel the erle and ran at him ryght udely, & the ele stake hym so so∣r that he made him somewhat bowe on
his horse, but Gouernar strake hym and mette hym with his bodye so rudely yt he made hym auoyde his horse & the legges vpwarde. Than Iacket toke the erles horse and brought hym to the countesse for a present. And whan the ladyes sawe where the erle dyd fall, than Eglentyne sayd, a yonder is one wt his fete vpwar∣de. That is true sayd Pwcet that is my lord the erle, beholde how he shaketh his legges. well sayd the countesse me thyn∣keth yonder knyght holdeth my lord ve∣ry shorte. Madame sayd Powcet he ac∣quyreth hym of hys promyse. Thus Go∣uernar helde the earle so shorte yt he was fayne to yelde hym whether he wolde or not. Than all the erles company came al at ones on Gouernar, but he was stron∣ge and lyght, and gaue so greate strokes and heuy that he confoūded all that euer he attyned vnto, and at the bronte he vnhorsed moo than .viii. knyghtes. And whan Iacket had made hys present vn∣to the countesse who thanked hym mo∣che, than he retourned agayne vnto hys mayster, and soo he hadde ynough to do euer to cary the horses of them that hys mayster had ouerthrowē to the bugeyse who was hys maysters hoste. Than Go¦uernar aduysed well where there was to¦gyther a great flocke of knyghtes than Gouernar dasht amonge them so rudely that at his fyrst coynge he ouerthrewe two knightes togither, and so wythin a shorte space he departed the knyghtes a¦sonder and gaue suche strokes all aboute hym yt euery man ledde before hym, & al the ladyes sawe hym do meruayles wyth hys handes, & they maruayled howe that euer he coulde endure suche payne wyth his body, and than as he retourned fro that company he mtte agayne the earle who as than was remounted, than Go∣uer dasht into the preseyll that he came streyght where as the erle was, who as than handled ryght sharpely a knyght of the parte that Gouernar was of, than Gournar dressed hym to the erle and en∣braced ym by the shouldres & dasht hys horse wyth his spurres, and ouerthrewe bothe the erle to the ground and also the knyght that the erle ought wythall, and there he made the erle to yelde hym agay∣ne. And whan the countesse sawe that she smyled ryght swetely and said. Powcet frende yonder knyght hath beten dow∣ne two at ones, blessyd be hys vertue, he is nowe well auenged of the erle my hu∣bonde, who wolde not suffreme to speke wyth him. Than the erles company set on Gouernar, but he defended hym selfe ryght maruaylously, but they oppressed hym soo sore that hys horse enfoundred vnder hym, and than Gouernar vygo∣rously lepte on hys fete, and there he ad∣uysed the erles senesshall, who hadde at that tyme yght sore anoyed hym▪ and he was well moūted vpon a good blacke morell horse, than Gouernar lepte vp to him and toke him aboute the necke wyth his handes and pulled hym o sore that he made hym to auoyde the saddell whe∣ther he woulde or not, and soo fell to the grounde, than Gouernar toke hys horse and quyckely lepte vp into the saddell, and in a greate yre dast into the prese, and gaue so myghty strokes that he ma∣de all to flee before hym, and by that ty∣me the erle was remounted agayne, and the thyrd tyme he came behynde Gouer∣nar and enbraced hym wyth bothe his handes to the entent to haue lyfted hym out of hys saddell, but he coulde no more remeue hym than thoughe he had lyfted at a great toure. Than Gouernar tour∣ned hym to the erle and toke hym by the
head and pulled hym downe to hys horse mane & gaue hym so many strokes that he all to brused hym, wherwyth he fell downe to the earth in suche plyte that he coulde not remeue for all the good of the worlde than there fel on hym all the ear∣les company, and by that tyme the earles senesshall was remounted, and so he ca∣me to Gouernar, and whā he same hym do such dedes of hye prowesse he praysed hym moche in his herte, and thought to tournay noo more that daye ayenst hym but sayd, syr knyght be ye in certayne yt as many horses as fayle you thys day I shll puruey you euer of an other. Than Gouernar dasht into the prese, & rounde aboute hym he layde on their heades and vysages that he made them to blede lyke beestes, & at the last hys horse fayled him and than the earles senesshall brought to hym an other hors. And whan he was re¦moūted he strake in as fresshely among them as though he had done noo thynge of all that day before. and than he dyd so moche by hys prowesse that euerye man gaue hym place & departed & left hym in the felde all alone. Thā the erle was bor∣ne into the castell in a horse ytter, for he was sore brused, & his senesshall came to Gouerar & desyred hm muche to go to the castell, but Gouernar wolde not, but sayd wat should I do thre, I knowe not what maner of people ye be, for a∣monge you ye dayne not to speke to ony straūge knight. Thā the senesshall wyst well that h sayd that by the countesse, wherfore he blamed moche the erle in his herte, in that he had cōmaunded her so to do. So thn Guernar retourned to the burgeyse his hoste who made him ryght great chere & feest, and the knightes and burgeyses of the tone came thither to se hym, and sayde one to an other, beholde here the valyaūt knyght. Gouernar had wonne that day .xv good horses, than h vnarmd hym, for he was somwhat we∣ry of his trauayle. And whā the erle was in his castell he cōmaunded that the ga∣tes should be set open, & that euery man should come in who soo euer wolde, and than he was vnarmed and the countesse his wife came to him & demaunded how he dyd. And he answered and sayd how that he was sore brused. A syr sad she & who hath done that, I am right sory ther¦fore. Truly said he thus hath arayed me the same knyght that gaue yesterday his horse to my porter to thentent to se you Syr sayd she I byleue it well, for I thin¦ke he was dyspleased wyth you bycause that ye forbae me that I shold not spea∣ke to hym, I thynke he remembred yt to daye, wherfore it is good to be wel ware to whome a man dooth a dyspleasure. Than the erle came into the hall where as all the other knightes were, and there they were talkyng and enquyrynge eche of other what knyght had done best that day, and so they all did giue the prayse to Gouernar. In ye name of god said the erle he hath betn me down thre times this same daye, thrfore I rquyre you get hym hyth to me, for I shall acqueynt me wyth hym, for I wyll gyue hym the one hale of all my londes on the condy∣cyon that he wyl abyde & dwell wyth me Crtaynly syr sayd his seesshall and on that condycyon I wyll gyue him yerely a thousand pounde for accordyng to the trouth he is a ryght good knyght. Than th rle commaunded his sensshall to go for hym, and so he dyd, and founde hym at his hostes hous, who made hym ryght great here and honour. And than the se∣nesshall said, syr the erle hertely desyreth you to coe and speake wyth hym in the
castell, and syr for goddes sake abyde & dwell wyth hym, and he wyll gyue you the one halfe of hys londes, and I shall gyue you a thousande pounde yerelye, & kepe you true and faythull company, & thus talkyng they went, forth togyther towarde the castell, and as soone as the erle saw hym he rose vp on hys ete and so dyd all the other knyghtes, and dydde hym muche honoure, and the erle caused Gouernar so syt downe by hym. Than these tydynges ran anone into the coun¦tesse chambre how that the good knight was coe, than the ladyes had great de∣lyte to se hym. Than Powcet sayde, ma∣dame I thynk thys knyght pleseth you ryght well, therfore let vs go se hym. Certainly said the countesse with a right goo wyll, so than they wente into the hall, than the earle & Gouernar dyd ryse and ryghte courteysly dyd salute the la∣dy. Tha the countesse sayd to Gouernar syr ye shoulde not salute me, for I haue done you more vylanye than euer dyd la¦dy to any knyght without trespas. Ma¦dame said he it is no trespasse for so hye a lady as ye are to take her plesure of so symple a knyght as I am. Than ye erle sayde, sir ye haue thys day beten me fro my horse, the which neuer as yet knight dydde before, wherfore I owe vnto you a great raunsome. Syr sayde Gouernar sauynge youre grace I am not of suche vertue nor of such valure as to do so hie a chyualry as y speake of. wel syr sayd the erle I knowe well how it is, but syr I require you be of my house, & ye shall be chefe cōmaunder therof, for I wyll ye what so euer ye cōmaund shall be done▪ Syr sayd Gouernar I humbly thanke you, howe be it I can not accomplysshe your desyre, & the more the earle desyred hym, the more he sayd nay. Than ye erle sayde to the countesse, madame I praye you desyre hym, and so she dydde ryghte swetely, how be it she was not greatlye bound to do so muche at her husbandes desire, but Gouernar wisely excused him and sayd. Fayre lady it can not be, for I haue a lorde already who must nedes be serued of me & of other far better knigh∣tes then I am. Certaynly syr sayd the se¦nesshal yf there be more prowesse in him than is in you, he surmounteth than all the knightes of ye worlde. Crtainly si sayd Gouernar he is able to caste suche vi. as I am into the ryuer. Truely sayde the erle, thā do ye well to serue him faith¦fully, wherfore I wyll requyre you noo ferder, howe be it that forthynketh me. Than ye countesse was right sore disple∣sed because he would not abyde. Than ye souper was redy & water was broght forthe, and so they sate downe and were well serued. After souper Gouernar to∣ke lyence of the erle & of the counetsse, & of all other knyghtes, and than torches wre lyghted vp, and the seneshal con∣uayed him to his hostes house, & the erle cōmaunded that his host should take no¦thyng of hym for his dispence, than Go¦uernar toke his leue, and the nexte mor∣nyng betimes departed, & commaunded his hoste to god, and gaue him al the hor¦ses that he had wonne in the tourney, & the burgeies thanked him hertely & said In al places where as Alexandr ye gret dyd conquee ye may go wtout ieoperdy & do as muche as euer he did. And so Go¦uernar entred into hys way, & rode to se¦ke his lord Arthur. Now let vs leue spe∣kyng of Gouernar, & let vs retourne to Arthur and to the king of orqueney. ¶How that after Arthur was departed fro Argenton to go to the castell of hurt¦byse
to the woūded knight who had sent for hym, in his way at the last he found at the entryng of a fayre forest thre lady∣es of right excellent beauty, of whom the chefe was called Proserpin quene of the fayry who greatly desired Arthur of his loue, but in no wyse he would agre ther to, & there he lost his varlet that was his guyde, wherfore it behoued him to tarye there all that nyght, for it was dark and wyst not whyther to go. Cap. lxix. SO it was that when the kyng of orqueneye was  fo argenton he rode streight into his own country for to make redi his people to go at Bartylmewtide to the turney at Cornite, & duke Philip went to sabary to apparaile his people & syr Neuelon, syr Anean, syr Artaude & al the other knightes of kinge Emen∣dus returned to the kinges courte, and there recounted the hye prowesse of Ar∣thur, & how he had spe at Argenton wt the duke of bygors neuew, & how that ye wounded knight of the castel of hurtbise had sent for hym, and how that he was gone thyther. Than the kyng was sory in hys herte, for he had great fere of him lest that he should neuer returne agayne for he knew wel that many good knigh¦tes were perished there. And in especyall Florence was ryght sorowful, for there was none yt could recōfort her. And Ar∣thur euer rode forth after the squier, & so rode .iii. dayes together wtout finding of any aduenture, and the .iiii. day he rode tyl it was none, and than they aryued at a knyghtes place who was uncle to the squyer that was Arthurs guide, & there they were wel receyued, and so sat down to dyner & were wel serued. And whan they hadde dined than they mounted on theyr horses agayn, & so rode forth tyl it was night, & than they entred into a ly¦tel narow way betwene a fayre forest & a grene medow, and so they rode forthe wel ye space of halfe a mile, and ye mone began to shine fayre & bright, and at the last they came to a way yt they muste ne∣des entre into the thick of the forest, and at last Arthur espied vnder a fayre oke a delectable place, where as he saw .iii, fai¦re ladies maruelously white and of gre beauty, but she yt was in ye myddes was soueraine most fayre, for she al only had more beauty than bothe the other .ii. and yet they were as fayre as could be deuy∣sed. And whan Arthur had espyed them, he set his fete to ye earth & lighted fro his horse, & she that was in the middes rose whan the other two were vp, & there Ar¦thur saluted thē right curteisly, and they him agayn, and the squier that brought Arthur thither, toke one of the ladies in counsaile, and whā they had talked togy¦ther a good space they went into ye thick of the wood, they .ii. together alone, and were not sene again o al the night, and the other that was in middes had to na∣me Proserpin, & she toke Arthur and set hym downe by her and helde him by the hand, & beheld hym faythfully in the vy∣sage, & sayd▪ syr ye be ryghte hertely wel∣come. And he answered & sayd, madame I pray god kepe you fro all yll. Syr sayd Proserpyne I haue greate desyre to se & speke with you, if ye be he that hath con¦quered the batayle agenst the duke of by¦gors neuewe. Madame as god help me sayd Arthur I woulde full fayne yt there were such valure in me as that I might acheue suche a dede. well sayde Proser∣pyne, I knowe ryght wel how it is, and also of other of your dedes, & syr ye be in certayne that ryght grete renowne ren∣neth
on you how that ye be free, swete, fayre, & gracyous, & to be a good knyght aboue all other, & as for beauty I se wel how it is. well madame sayd Arthur I praye god amende in me that lacketh of that ye speake of. That is wel said quod ye lady than she layd her hand on his hed & demaūded of him what was his name Maame quod he I am called Arthur. Arthur sayd she, nowe and by the faith yt ye owe to her that ye loue bet, & to saynt George haue ye any louer yet, I am sure my demaunde is but a folly fr so fayre a knyght, so yonge, and so vaiant in ar¦mes as ye can not be wythoute a louer, wherfore I am in certayne ye haue one but I pray you shew me what she is by the fayth yt ye owe vnto her, & I promise you neuer to accue you, & therwith she beheld hym and smyled a lytel & said, I pray you speke and shew me ye playnes by the troth that ye owe to father & mo∣ther yf ye haue any alyue. Madam said Arthur, ye cōiure me right sore, therfore as god help me I shal ew you ye troth Madam it is so I can not tell whether yt I haue a louer or not, but of one thynge be ye sure I am a louer, for I loue wt all myne entyer heir. And what is she quod the lady I pray you by the faith yt ye owe vnto her. As god help me said he I canot tell you, for I nuer sawe the prson yt I loue what said the lady thā ye loue and wot not who, who hathe set you on this foly, wherfor loue ye thus. Madā quod he I loue becaus of the gret goodnes & valure yt is in her, for she is a swete gra¦ious & a gentil lady of hert. why sir kni¦ght how know ye y•. Madam it hath be¦shewed me yt she is of suche condycions. wel quod the lady, what & there haue be¦shewed you more thā troth in yt behalfe, who than shal do you right, I demaund of you thinke you yt al that is said of me and other to be of tt. Certainli madā nay some list parauentur at somtime to speke more than they know▪ wel frende Arthur {quod} she thā ye be but a fole, by my counsail leue suche foly, & lese no legr your time wtout reson, ye be now in your youth, & in you beuti wherfore ye shold haue daily your loue in you armes, and lede a louers life in myrth and in solace and whā it is time to stryke for her sake bth wt pees and swords, & cast dune these knightes to the erth by .ii. at ones: and leue seruing thus of the muse or els ye shal be called no more Arthur, but ye shal be called ye knight that museth, ther¦fore leue this loue, but behold here and se in your cpany if there be any thing that pleseth you, chose which ye wil, the squi¦er that brought you hither museth not, for he is wt his loue, and hath her al this night in his armes behold here the copa¦ny of me who is right fayre and yonge. gentyl and puissant, holding in mi hand greate heritage▪ and I am doughter to a king and both my father & mother dead an now I am entred into my londe to kepe my relme which is gret and noble I am also right yonge about the age of xvi. yeres, & would loue right wel some gntil knigh that wold help me to kepe my lond and relme, and to cunsayle me for my wele in al my busines suche one wold I loue and kepe entirely. Arthur  nede not to be deceiued by youre loue lo∣uyng of the muse & take me here in dede. And whan Arthur herde her, he bheld her wel, and wyth a gret prfound sygh sayd. A dere ladye as god helpe m my heart is set on her that I shewed you f wyth a y faithful loue and thought in suche wyse that I am not maister of my selfe, nor my herte is not myne own
for it hath forsaken me for this sayd ladi so yt I m nothing lord of min owne hert nor wt al, the power yt I haue I cannot withdraw it fro her, for I thinke verily yt she hath put my hert into her hert ther¦fore I aue good hope yt the shalbe good companyons and faythfull togyther se∣yng yt it wyl not come agayne to me & lo¦ue his swete companyō, therfore fayre la¦dy blame me not though ye loue me that I do not accōplysshe youre desyre, for as god helpe me I can not, for my hearte is not mine owne, therfore madame blame me not syth my herte hath forsakē me for an other, but as I be saued ye be ful gētil and noble, & ryght happy shal he be that shal attayne to your grae, for your beau¦te is such yt euery person y• seeth you wyll put to theyr payne to seke the wayes to at¦taine to youre hye loue, for by the fayth yt I owe to my lorde & father I had rather haue your loue of it myght be than to be kyng of all Fraunce, but by my soule ma¦dame ye may behold hee my body wtout hert, vyne wythout sauour, a fayre body wtu loue auayleth nothyng. wel frende Arthur {quod} Proserpyn many there be that fyndeth fautes & wyl ske for no remedy you lay the blame on your hert, suche fol∣kes as wyl not do as they be requyred cā fynde fables ynough to finde occasion of excuses, ye haue long mused, & yet ye pur¦pose to muse l̄ger, hardely loue ynough & loue thre yt youre dreme & fantasy she∣weth you & therby ye shal haue very mo∣che Ioy by lyklehode, for your musyng wyl do you moche honoure, by the fayth that I owe to you I loue my louer fayth¦fully, & I saye it by yo, beholde here Ar∣thur who drmeth & museth, beholde here the shadowe wythout the sonne lyght, be¦holde here the body wythout hert, this is he that loueth & woteth not whō, therfore he is feeted of none, therfore frend Ar∣thur take to you the best coūseyle yt ye cā & god be with you. Than she rose fro hym and departed into the woode & her com∣pany wyth her. Thā Arthur abode ther alone but wyth Bawdwyn hys squyer, for the squyer yt brought him thither was departed, therfore he wiste not whether to goo. Than Bawdewyn sayd, syr as god helpe me ye ouzt to be blamed. And why so good frende said Arthur. Sir bycause this gentyll noble quene that was ryght now wt you who is so fayre so swete & so gracyous and she wolde fayne haue had your company & loue, & thus ye to let her depart and wold not enbrace & kysse swe¦tely her pleasaunt lytle mouth, wherfore in my mynde ye are greatly to be blamed for as helpe me god I wolde not hau do∣ne soo thoughe I had lost my head in the payne. A good frende sayd Arthur, and what there thā shuld the swete Florence haue, and what ule she set by me yf I shulde do as muche to another as I shul¦de do to her yf it plased her, what wold ye haue me to make of my mouth a tray∣ne for euery body, yf she kepe her mouth close for the loue of me, and I than to ha¦bandon me to all the worlde, what ho∣noure than wre it to me to be comyn to al the world, what shulde it than be sayd on me, he is but a rybaude. wel syr sayde Bawdewyn, for all that I coulde not ha¦ue done so. Thus they munted on theyr horses and entred into the wode, & rode they wyst not whither so longe tyl at the last they loste theyr ware, that they rode they wyst not whyther, & at conclusyon they came aayne to the same oke from whens as they went before, and thre thy taryed all that nyghte & laye on the colde earth in the thycke busshe, and tyed theyr horses to a tree.
¶How Arthur conquered the cael of huryse the moost stronge place of the worl net to the porte noyre, where as was he damosel by whom the woūded knight was hurt, and ther Arthur dyd so muhe by ys prowesse that the sayd knygt recuered helth. Cap. lxx. IN ye morning btimes Arthur & Bawdwin roe & shoke theyr ares to put awaye the fethers fro their heyre & so mounted on horses and found a lytel way the which brought thē clene out of the forest. Thā Athur was ryght sore displeed in his mynde because he had lost the squi yt was his guid in ye manr, for he knew not where to fyd hym the hurt knight, & so they rode forth so lōg tyl they etred into a fayre medow, and than they saw n a fayre hys moūtain standing a good¦ly castell ye whych was closed wyth dou¦ble walles and gates, & at the fyrst gate thee was one that watched the passage for all comers, and as soone as he sawe Athur, he toke a horne and blew therin so fiersly tht al the valey ronge therewt and therwith there yssued out of ye cstel a knyght all armed and well mounted, & h made tokē to Athur tha he should beware of hym. Than Arthur toke his shelde and flrisshed with his spere and met so rudely togeher that the knighte brake his spere▪ and Arthur stake him so that his spre wnt through ou his bo∣dy more thā a fote, and so pulled out his spere againe and dressed hym self agenst an other knigh tat came rudely at him and he strake Arthur in suche wite that his speare brake in the myddes, but Ar∣thur stake him so fiercely that he ouer∣threw both hors & man to he rth stark dead. Than there yssued out of the castel v. knyghtes, and they all ran n Arthur at ones, and Arthur thā toke his sword and strake so the fyrst that he claue hys head clene asonder, and the other dyd kyl hys horse vndr hym, but than  his hand on the hors of him that he had slay before and so lept into the saddl, and the iust tha he encountred loste hys head. And whan the other saw that they fed away as fast as they myght, and Ar¦thur folowed thym, and in hys pusu he slew two of them, & as the t wol hae entred in at the castel gate, Athur strake of hys head clene frō the sholders Than h entred into the castel and there he sawe before him an other stong wal and it was o hye that it was meuayl and it was nuyroned al aboute with & greate deepe waer that yssud ute of loudrye fountaynes, and as he behelde howe that he might uere into te place there came to ym the sme squyer that caused hym to come fro Argence, and he dyd salute hym. And whan Arthur sawe hym he knewe hym ryghte well and de¦maunded of hym the cause why that he left him in the forst. As god help me sir my lady led me forth and I ust not dis¦plese her. wel sayde Arthur, and where is the knight that ye sa hath sent for me Syr quod the squyer he is in a chambre in this casel, where as I thinke he shal neuer se to morowe thys yme, for syr ye tary fro hym ouer longe whych is gat synne. Frend sayd Arthur I praye you bring me: wher as he is yt I might spke wt hym. Than the squyer brughte hym to the knight and Arthur did salute him And the knight igh piteously and wh a oft voice said, sir ye be hertely welom Syr sayde Arthur ye haue sente for me, beholde owe here I am, therefore shewe me youre wyll. Than the knyght
enforced hym selfe to speke & sayd, syr for goddes sake be ye not dyspleased though ye be come hyther for my sake, for syr the seke creature seketh euer for helth & to ye entēt that ye shalbe in certain of my seke¦nes yf ye be not dyspleased I shal shewe you all my grefe. Than the knyght vnar¦med hymselfe & layde his body all naked Thā Arthur sawe on his backe .v. greate woūdes made wt a knyfe yt was enueny∣med, & the begā at his sholdres and endu¦ted downe to his thyghes, & the woūdes were sore rākled & of such largenes that he myght wel haue layde in euery woūde all his arme. And whā Arthur sawe that hys herte trembled for pyte & demaunded who had guē hī ntho strokes. Certayn∣ly syr sayd the knyght I shall shewe you it is of a trouhe I loued ryghte hertely a fayre damoysell who is ryght noble and gentyl, and she me in lyke case, & whan I might I dyde resorte vnto her, and she is in a chambre aboue in this castel, & at the last thys loue that was bytwene vs was knowen by her frendes, wherwyth they were ryght sore dyspleased & so laye in a wayte on me at a season yt I was wt her, and as I wolde haue departed they toke me & haue arayed me as ye se wt enueny∣med kniues so that I can haue no helh & the damoysell is fast kept in pryson in a chambre here aboue to thentent that she shoulde not come to me to gyue me health for she can do me more good than all the creatures of the worlde, and yf I myght haue ony creature that myght fynde the meanes to speke with her she wolde sende me suche oyntementes that should make me bothe hole & sounde. And syr the .vii. knyghtes that ye haue delyuered me of dyd kepe the gates to the entent that no surgyen shoulde come hyther to hele me, syr I haue ben four yere in this sore tour¦ment that ye se me in, and there is nōn in all this place that wolde bringe me suche thynges as my ladye & loue wolde sende me, & they wyl suffrenone to speke with her fro me, & therfore I muste nedes dye well syr sayd Arthur & how should onye body entre into the castell syth the gates be shytte. Syr sayd the knyght there is none that can entre at the gares for they be ouer stronge, but syr in the castel diche there is a lytle shyppe by the whyche the knightes that ye haue slaine were wōt to entre into the castel, & by the shippe ther is a lytle false gate, wherby ye may entr into the castell yf it please you, and so ye may bring fro my lady the oyntmēt that shall helpe me. Syr sayd Arthur I shall do my power, & thā he sayde to the squye Frende bring me to the shyp and I wyll entre into the castell. Than the squyer brought hym to the shyp, and Arthur en∣tred into it, and thā the shyp went forthe wythout ony maner of touchynge, & A¦thur was not gone ferre from the banke but there came flyenge aboute hym moo than .iii. M. quarelles shotte oute of cros∣bowes, and Arthur sate in the shyp and couered him with hys whyte shelde, and the quarelles dyd lyght as thycke theron as thought it had rayned, in suche wyse that all the shyppe was rased wyth qua∣relles, and in this maner he approched to the posterne, & whan he came to the entre he founde styckynge rounde aboute the gate great longe sharpe speres wt heedes of fyne stele, than he toke hys good swer∣de in hys hande and layde on these speres as faste as he coulde, and so dyd cut them clene asonder in the myddes, and there he dyd soo muche that by cleane fore he en∣tred in at the posterne, and whan he was wythin there rose suche a wynde that Ar¦thur had muche payne to holde hym on
his fete, and than there fell so great ha∣boundaunce of raine that he stode to the mydde legge in waer, the whyche water ranne so faste that he was fayne to staye hym by his spee, for what for the wynd and swyfeues of the water, he had m∣che payne to stande vpryghte, and at the last and with grettrauayl he dyd so mo∣che that he yssued out of the straymes of the posterue, and than he herde a thynge make a great noyse in the castel, & therwt there came on hym at ones mo than .v. hundred persones rey to fight agaynst hym, and so they assayled him rudely on al partes and they did cast at him speres stones, dartes and staues ight gret plē¦ty, & he gaue agayne yght great trokes & frusshed downe all that euer he attay∣ned vnto, how be it ye prese was so gre that they caused hym to knele down on hys knees, & there quickery he stepte vp agayn & dasht in among them, and was right sore chafed, & his strngth than be¦gan to encrease, & the more he had to o the more grew his strengthe, & so he cut asonder all that euer he attayned vntoo, and so by clene force he drew hys backe backe to a wall & there rested hym. Thā his enemies ran to crosdowes & to spea∣res, and so charged hym with many gret strokes. And whan he felte hymsefe so sore oppressed he was sore chafed therwt and so habandoned himelfe among thē & gane great strokes, for whom so euer he touched, he claue him to the sholders, and than they began to flye before hym, and he folowed them, but he was ight sore wety, for they behynd hym dyd him muche payne and trauayle, in thy case thus fightyng he was fro thre of y• ck tyl it was none, and thre mes he was dryuen downe on hys knees, and yet for al that euer he rose agayn to the spyte of them all. And as he was thus fighting at the laste he herde the sowne of a gr horne aboue in the castel, and as sone as all tho that fought against Arthur herd the blaste of the horne, they all sodainly departed without any word speakynge, & so there remayned but a lonely Arthur wherof he had great maruayle, than Ar∣thur dressed hym toward the castell, and entred into it, and so at y• last he entred in¦to the fayre halles, & there found neyther man nor woman, and than be setched al aboute the place, but he coulde fynde no creature. At the last he entred into a fair tyche chaumbre, and there he sawe the most fayre and rychest bed that euer was sene, and it was al redymade to lie down therin, than he approched the roand sate downe on the syde therof and his sword in his hande, and than he herd well mo the people coming and goyng in y• same chambre, and her dores and windowes open and shette but he could se nothing whereof he had greate maruayle. And whan he had sytten a good space on the edde and well rested him, at the last he saw where there came into the chambre a great company of ladies and damosels and knightes and squiers, and in y• myd¦es amonge them he saw where there was a yonge fayre quene crowned with golde in a syrcore of crmynes, and a man  of vyolet sylke, and she was of right great beauty, and fure knyghtes ledde her and shee was enuytoned all about wyth other fayre ladyes. And as sone as he sawe her he knewe well that she was Proserpyn the quene whom y• he found in the forest the nyghte before, and than he rose vpon his fete than y• quene came runnynge too hym and enbraced hym aoute the necke and sayde. Syr ye are ryghe hertely welcome into my house.
Fayre lady {quod} Arthur I pray to god giue you bothe helthe and moche Ioy. Arthur said the quene now are ye past al Ieopar¦dies, for now that ye be ī my cōpany ye be in a surte, therfore put of your harneys for ye shall be in as good surete as myne own propre body. Madame {quod} Arthur I thāke you, how be it I haue not as yet a∣cheued that thinge as I came hyther for, for here is bynethe in this castell a seke knight who hath sē me hither to a damoy¦sel that shulde giue hym helthe, & I haue {pro}mysd to bringe him that she wolde de∣lyuer me for his helth, therfore madame I requyre you yf she e here in your com¦pany cause me to speke wt her yf it please ou,  therby I shall accōplysshe my co∣unaūt to the knight. Frende {quod} the ladi be ye no more ismayed of the knight, for I {pro}myse you he shal haue hlth for your sa∣ke, & that right shortly. Than the quene called to her a lady, who was called Ar∣gent, and thā she said to Arthur, syr be∣holde here y• same lady y• he knight was hurte for & it is she that can giue hī helth therfore Agēce I wil that ye go to your knight, & thynke on his helth as a louer ought to do to another. Madame {quod} Ar∣gēce wt a right good wyll, & as to you sir knight I thāke you a hōdred .M. tymes syth that I haue leue to go to my louer for youe sake, & syr ye haue wōne therby of hym to be to you a true and a fayhfull knight, and of me ye shal haue a true ser∣uaūt, therwith she departed, and Proser∣pne cōmaūded y• Arthur should be vnar¦med, than ther rn abute Arthur kny∣ghtes & ladyes, and one toke awaye hys shlde, an other his swrde, an other hys elme, and so eche of them layde to theyr hāes to hepe hym, and wā he was vn¦armed he stode in his doublet, & thā the la¦dies brought him wame water to wasshe his necke & his vysage & hāddes, and thā the fayre ladyes dyd wype hys vysage wt fayre whyte ketchefes. Than Bawde∣wyn came & brought hym his gowne to put on but y• quene wold not suffre y• for she made hym to put on a grene kyrell & a syrcote of scarlet than the quene toke her owne mantel fro he necke the which was of purple slke & put it on Arthur, thā he was so fayre and gentill that one coulde not be satysfyed with beholdynge of hym, for all the ladyes than sayd how that the knight was a gracyous persone grete ioye should y• lady haue that might haue suche a lour as he was. Than the quene toke hym by the hande the whiche was a ryght goodly syght to beholde, for they were bothe fayre & yonge, and thus hāde in hand they wnte throughout the chambre, talkyng of many thynges, and whan they hadde thus talked togyther a great space the quene cōmaunded euerye body to departe, & to leaue them alone to¦gythr, & so they dyd. And than the quene toke hym by the hande and sayd. Arthur let vs goo syt downe on yonder beddes side, and soo they dyd, & by that tyme the chambre was claue auoyded sauing all onely of Bawdewin who sayd vnto his mayster, syr I thynke it best y• I go & see your harnes & amend it, for it is ill bru∣sed, & it is harde to tell whethr ye shall haue any thyng to do shortly or not. And whan Arthur heard him he wist ful wel what he ment and therfore he smyled, & so Bawdewyn departed. Tā the quene sayd to Arthur, min owne sweete & true loue I am now wel pacyfied in my hert now y• I haue you in my house as of him in all the woorlde that I moost desyre to se & speake withall & therwith she ayde one of her armes aboute her necke, and wyth the other hande she dyd stryke
down his here & said, Arthur ye be come to y• plae where as ye be much loued wt a faithful hert wherfore ye shal be lord & goe maner of al y• lond yt I haue in go∣uenauce whefore I wil make you my knight & souerain louer by y• way of ma∣riage, & first I present my sefe to you & al the power yt I am lady ouer, and  en¦sure there was neuer mā as yet there as you e now, therfore refuse not the honor & profte that I offre you th she toke a ryng fro hee finger and said by this gift I put you in rul possession of me and al mine, therfore genti knighte I requyre you reciue it. And whan Arthur herde her thus speke and saw the ring, thā he beheld wel the lady & saw the gentilnes and faitenes y• was in her, and fete her swete breth & saw her smyling countenaūce, at the last his hert came to hym & remebred Florence, thē he ld not kepe hym fr weping, and cast out many a {per}∣ound and depe sigh, and beheld wel pro¦serpin and said. A gentil and noble lady your amorous words perseth my herte so yt I fele my self at the getest mischief that euer dyd any ceae for if I were ye most hie and noble king that uer was syth Alexander the great, and if I had ler¦ned in loue al the daies of my life and at the ende might attaine to that case that I am in now. I shold wel think my payne & labour right wel enployed and hyely rewarded, for if al the kinges of ye world were al in one person & al theyr goodes and honors and al partes theref were gathered together into one person, & if it plesed you to take him to yur seruic he shold wel think him self ight hily and derely gouerned but madame I am but a simple person to be compaed to your hie estate, therfore ye shole abate gretly your renowne yf ye should take such a straunge knight as I am, wherefore ye shold be blamed muche of your people, wherfore madam for goddes sake aduise you better, & let this passe ouer, and take such a noble peson as is mete for youre estate and honor. Syr abque; the lady I quite al the world for you, for I wil no other but al lonely you, therfor receiue me for I wyl it shal be so and none otherwye, and if ye wil defend your opinion by her that ye told me of this last nighte in the forest, ye can not do so by reasō, for ye ne¦uer saw her, nor she you, nor neuer spake wt her, threfore there is no couenaunte made betwene you & hr but that lawful¦ly ye may leue her and ye lyst, therfore ye can not excuse you to do thys my deyre. wtout it be for cowardie that ye haue to enterpryse the gouernaunce of a realme And whan Arthur had wel vnderstand her, he answered and said, madā as god helpe me I tolde you the trouth as it is, and I wold be glad to do that thing that sholde plese you, how be it of one thyng be y in certayne that I haue set my hert there as I haue shewed you, se that I can neuer call it agayne, ye may behold hee my body, taken & it please you, but my het remayneth in an other place wt her who hath it in kepynge. Than thee was a lady came to the quene & shewed her that her dyner was redy. And than she sayde, syr knight thynk wel n thys matter, I gyue you respyce tyll to mo¦rowe, end so she toke Arthur by the hand and led hym into the hall, & there he saw so manye bordes coured, and so geate plenty f ladies and damoselles & knigh¦tes and squyer, that he had great mar∣uayl to behold the noblenes that he saw there. Than the quene sayd alowd that euery body myghte here her, syr lordes & ladyes behold this knyght who shall be
lord & capitayne of al my seygnory. And whā they herde that they cryed all wt one voke he is welcom god kepe him, blessd be the houre yt euer he came hither, & they all beheld hym maruaylously, & praysed moche his fresshe beaute & goodly beme¦nour. Than there began grete feest & Ioy with moche honourable tryumphe, & so wee set to dyner & serued ryghte honou∣rably, & after dyner they sported them a longe season, & at last the quene called to her two of her ladyes the fayrest of all the company & cōmaūded them yt they shuld lede Arthur a playenge & that they shuld shewe to him suche chere to cause hym to loue one of them yf they coulde brynge it about. And they answered they wold do the best yt laye in theyr power, so they .ii. ledde forth Arthur in to fayre chambres & gardyns of pleasure, & they dyd as mo∣che to drawe hym to loue one of them, as euer dyd woman to drawe onye man to loue, for theyr delynge wt him was uche that it wolde haue ē harde for ony other creature to haue wtstand theyr occasyōs for yf a woman be mynded to cast for he her hokes & lynes to take ony man thewt it is very harde to scape ut of theyr daū¦ger for in suche a dede a woman is more subtyll than the deuyll, for he causeth a woman of suche dyposycyon to do that thynge yt he can not do hym selfe, in lyke wyse thys quene cōmaūded these ladyes to do y• she coulde not do her selfe, but Ar∣thur for al theyr pleasat occasyons wol¦de neuer bende for all yt they dyd or sayd was very noous to hym for alwaye he had in hys herte the remembraūce of the fare Florence, & so in this case he was by¦twene them tyl it was tyme to go to rest Than he was conuayed to hys chambre wyth .xi. knyghtes, & a great multytude or torches ayenst hys comyng, the quene also was redy in hys chambre, & than wt in a lytle whyle after the pyces & wyne had bn eten & dronken, than the qune & al other toke thir lue of Arthur  depar¦ted out of his chambre, & than he went to hys bed, & there was drennynge al night before hys beddes fere .iiii. mortes of wax nd whā euery bodye was a bedde there came to Arthurs bed side a fayre damoy¦sll snt to hym fro the quene, & she was in a syrcote of ermynes, & ouer y• a ryche mantell of sylke, & so she lened downe on the bed to Arthur, and with her hād stry∣ked downe his head ryght swetely, & the¦re she made him suche lowly coūtenaūce y• he myghte perceyue well how she wolde hau had hym to haue taken her into his bed. And at laste Arthur sayde, fayre lady I am in fere leest ye wyl take colde with your taryenge soo longe here, therfore ey∣ther come to bedde to me or elles go your way hens. Sir {quod} she I wyl ly wyth you wyth great Ioye, but fyrst ye shal assure me to take me for your loue, and neuer to haue other. A fayre lady {quod} he yt can I not do, for I loue an other, and so thā shuld I be false of my prmyse. Well syr sayd she than I wyl go my way. Ye say wel quod Arthur I praye god sende you good ad∣uenture, & so therwith she departed, & Ar¦thur slept as longe as it pleased him til it was fayre daye in the mornynge. Than Bawdewyn opened the wyndowes, for Arthur wolde aryse. Than the quene n¦tred in to his chābre, and Arthur sate in his bedde doynge on of his doublet. And as soone as Bawdewyn sawe the quene he sayd vnto Arhur, syr behold who co∣meth htherto you, by myne aduye lette not her escape at this tyme. Thā the que∣ne sae downe by Arthur on the beddes syde. And sh badde Bawdewyn go play him for a seasō. Madame {quod} he wt a ryght
good wyll, I shall not longe anoy you he¦re. Thā the quene demaunded of Arthur how he had taken his rest that nyghte, & adde hym as than good morowe. And Arthur answered & sayd, madame god y• all thinge hath formed sende you his dere loue. Frende sayd she I gaue you yester¦daye respyte tyll thys day, therfore as ye be now auysed eyther to take or refuse y• I haue offred you, shewe me nowe your minde in yt behalfe shortly. Madame said he I can shewe no more nor gyue you no more than I haue done, ye may take my body the which is here present, but as for my heart I can not take it awaye from whence as it is, I haue enforced my selfe to haue it agayne but y• more I thinke on her yt hath it the faster she holdeth it, ther¦fore madame I can do no more as help me god ye haue here my bodye wtout the herte. Thā the quene behelde Arthur wel & enbraced him about the necke, & al smy¦lynge sayd, well good frende Arthur fro hens forth now be ye in peas, for truly I haue ryght well assayed your trouth, but now I se well your stedfaste faythfulnes for ye be true to your loue, for I se by it ye loue her faythfully, & certaynly ye haue good cause so to doo, for in lyke wyse she loueth you, for she hath refused thempe∣rour of Yndes loue for your sake, for her hert is on no creature of the world but al onely on you: & I am she yt anon after her natyuyte dydde desteny her to you whan she was brought vp to vs into the moūt peryllous, & as for the other .ii. ladyes yt were wt you yesterday the whiche so sore dyd tempte you to haue wonne your loue the whyche they dyde but only to assaye you, one of them destenyed yt the ymage in the pauylyon who holdeth the chaplet shuld neuer gyue it but to you, & so ye to haue both the lady & the chaplet, & y• other lady destenyed yt ye shuld haue the white shelde & the good swerde enchaunted the which ye be in possessyon of, & the thyrde that came to your bed last she destenyed that yf ony other persone wolde presume to take the fayre Florence y• he should die an yll deth, & I haue caused you to come into this coūtre, for I made you to haue the visiō of the egle of gold yt ye thought ye sawe in your slepe, & there ye sawe a dragon the whyche wolde haue taken her fro you, the dragon is sygnyfyed by the Emperour of Ynde, for as muche as he may he wyl let you to haue her, how be it she shall be yours at length, but fyrste ye shal suffre muche payne & trouble, but I shall shewe you what ye shall doo, kepe well the loue of the kynge of or quney & of the archebysshop of Cornyte, for they shal be to you both true & stedfaste, & spe∣cyally aboue all other loue well mayster Steuen, for by hys meanes ye shall haue her after your warre be doone, & in your warre I shal helpe you with .xi.M. haw bertes, it is I that sent for you in the na¦me of the hurte knyght yt ye should come to hym to thentent that I myght assaye you, & to knowe of what faythfulnes ye were of, but nowe Florence maye be in a surete yt she is beloued of the best knyght of the world, and of the moost fayre and stedfaste knyght y• now lyueth, therfore nowe syr knyght aryse, for it is hye tym Thā the quene departed & Arthur appa∣rayled him & went into the hall where as he foūd the sayd quene nobly accōpanyed & all they rose ayenst Arthur, & he ryght swetely dyd salute them, than the quene caused hym to syt downe by her & he said Madame & it lyke your grace it is nowe hye tyme that I take forth my Iourney & go thither as I am in minde to do. Cer∣taynly sr said the quene I am ryght wel
content yt ye so do, but fyrst ye shal dyne. So than Arthur dyned there wt the que∣ne, & after dyner he toke hys leaue of the quene & of all the courte, & there was mo¦che sorowe whan he departed, for all the court had trusted yt he should haue bene theyr lorde. Than Arthur moūted on his horse & so departed out of the castel, & soo came to the hurt knight and demaunded of him how he dyd, and whether yt he had well quytte his couenauntes or not. Sir as god helpe me {quod} the knyght I do right wel, & ye haue right truly & nobly quytte you to me, therfore the lorde yt all thynge fourmed rewarde you, & truley I am and shall be your owne knyght. And so Ar∣thur cōmaunded hym to god, and the la∣dy also that was hys loue, & so rode forth his waye towarde Cornyte. ¶How that Arthur whan he was depar¦ted fro the quene proserpane it fortuned hym to take hys lodgynge wt the neuew of syr Isembarte, who toke Arthur and locked hym fast in a toure to thentent to haue slayne hym by nyght, but there Ar∣thur dyd so valyauntly that he brake out of the toure and slewe the knyghte and all his people. Capitulo .lxxi. SO it was that whan Arthur was departed fro Proserpy∣ne he rode so longe tyll at the laste he entred in to the londe of the duke of bygors neuewe and so by aduenture he toke hys lodgynge wyth a knyghte who was neuewe to syr Isem¦barte, and he receyued Arthur wyth gre∣te Ioye, than he was vnarmed, and whan he was redye wente into the hall where as this knight was. Thā the kny¦ght demaūded of Arthur what was hys name. And he yt doubteth nothynge an∣swered & sayd, syr I am called Arthur, & my squyer is named Bawdewyn. Than the knyght knewe wel yt it was he yt had layne his vncle syr Isembarte, wherfore his hert rose sore ayenst hym, but he ma∣de no semblaūt therof, for he knewe well that Arthur was a knyght ryght sore to be redoubted, for he wyte well he was not able to resyst ayenst him, therfore he thought to slee hym in hys bedde a slepe, and in the meane tyme o close hym fast in a toure, & than to send for the duke of Bygor and al his company, & there to fle hym by nyght tyme. And than he made fayre semblaunt to Arthur & sayde, syr I am boūde to loue you well bycause ye ha∣ue slayne syr Isembart, for of all men ly∣uynge I hated hym moost, for he dydd me manye dyspleasures, & thus wt fayre wordes he draue of the season wt Arthur tyll it was souper tyme, and than he was ryghte well serued, and after souper they sported them tyll it was tyme to goo to theyr restes. Than the knyght caused Ar¦thurs bedde to be made in a stronge tour but it was so well hanged wyth clothes of sylke and arres that Arthur could not perceyue the walles nor strengthe therof And whan Arthur and Bawdewyn we∣re entred into the toure incontynent the knyght dyd shytte fast the doore, whych was all of yren, and did barre it fast with foure greate bare & escryed on Arthur and sayd▪ syr make as mery as ye can for or ye depart out of your chambre ye shal lese your head, for ye maye saye ye be vn∣happy to come hither to your mortall ene¦my. And whā Arthur herde yt he was in his herte right sore dyspleased, & soo ran to the doore thinkinge to haue opened it but he coude not: for it was barred wtout with foure great barres of stele. Thā the knyght armed him and al his cōpany, so
that they were well to the nōbre of .xviii. persones, and the moone shone fayre and bryghte in at a lytle wyndowe behynde one of the tapperts. Than Bawdewyn tae downe the hangynges, & than they myght eeely all aboute them, for the light of the mou came in at the window where as the prisoners were wont to be serued. Than Athur armed hym & toke his swerde in his hand & beheld well the wyndowe the whyche was very stronge barred wyth yren, and by aduenture he founde in the chābre a grete leuer of yren and soo e toke it in bothe hys handes as he that was ryght sore displeased and dyd lyft vp the leuer as lyghtly as though it had ben but a sticke, & layd at the barres of yren with suche strength that he all to braste the barres & stones and made su∣che an hole that an oxe myght well haue yssued out therat. Than the knyght and hys company wythout whan they sawe that they dydde caste at hym ryght rudely dartes and quarelles shot out of the cros¦bowes. Thā Arthur toke his white shel∣de and went to the wyndowe & there re∣ceiued all theyr shotynge, but they could in no wyse hurt hym. Than Arthur lepte out at the wyndowe & so descended downe and couered hym wyth hys shelde. Than they all ran at ones at hym, but Arthur gaue suche strokes that he dasht downe al that euer he attayned vnto. And Baw∣dewn toke a barre of yren and did helpe his mayster to the best of hys power. And at the last Arthur ncountred the knight of the place, and gaue hym suche a stroke that he claue hym to the sholdres & so fell downe dead to the earth. And than anone after he discofited all the remenaūt, for he delte suche dyscyplyne amonge them that he cut of armes, handes, legges, and hedes, and all that euer he attayne vnto Than Bawdewyn ran and dyd lyft vp the drawe brydge, and dyd shytte fast the gates to thentent that non sholde escape and soo they serched all aboute but they coulde neither finde man nor womā, and than thei went to theyr restes til the next day, and so went forth on theyr Iourney towarde Cornyte. ¶Howe that Gouernar in serchynge of Athur by aduenture he passed forby the same castell where as Arthur had slayne the lorde therof, & there he was assayled of the frendes of the sayde knyghte, and thece dy so valyauntly that he slewe the moost parte of them, Capitulo, lxxii. ANd whan that Arthur hadd well ryden foure leges, than was it knowen how that the knight was slayne & all that euer were in the place, & thy∣ther came al the knightes frendes & foūd hym dead, wherfore they were ryght so∣rowfull, and as they made this sorow it fortuned that Gouernar passed forby the same castell, & as soone as they that were wythin sawe hym they thought yt it had ben he that had slayne theyr knyght and frende. Than they begon to crye all at o∣nes, let vs yssue out for yonder is he that hath slayne oure knyght, add so they ran all at ones at hym with great axes & ma∣ces of stele & dyd hym moche anoyaunce Than Gouernar delyured hys spere to Iacket hys squyer, and set hande to hys swerd & gaue many great strokes rounde aboute hym, and cut of handes & legges and made armes & heades to flye into the felde, and at the last he dyd so moche that he delyuered hym selfe from them all sa∣uynge of .iii. knyghtes, & they came with a grete randon to hym, and the fyrst that
Gouernar encoūtred he strake him so ru¦dely that he fel to the earth, & in hys fall¦lynge braste hys necke. Than he dressed hym to the seconde and gaue hym suche a stroke wyth his sworde that be made bothe helme and head to flye to the erth. Than the thyrde stode styll without any mouing, and demaunded Gouernar of whens he was, and he answered howe y• he was a straūge knight. And syr saide y• other knight where lay you this nyghte passed. I lay sayde Gouernar .vii. leges hens with y• lady of quarorde. well syr sayd he knyghte than ye be not he that ay thys night in this castell. As god hel¦pe me sayde Gouernar it is not I, for I neuer sawe this castel before thys time well syr saide the knight than I require you to come on wyth me a litel way and I promise you I shall bring you agayne into thys same place wythote hurte or any maner of domage to you or to anye of yours, and al thys he dyd because he wold brynge hym before the dead bodies for to se whether any o them would ble∣d agayne fresshely or not for thereby he thought surely y• he should knowe whe∣ther it were he or not that had slayne all those people. And Gournar accoded to hys desyre, and soo they entred intoo the castell and there sawe the deade bodyes wythot anye more of bledynge. And whan the knighte sawe that he said, sir this people did runne agenst you wrong¦fuly and soo it appeareth by theym, for they that had thought moost for to haue wonne, I thynke hath nowe most loste, wherefore syr ye maye departe whan ye wyl, for ye shal not be let for me, and I pray to god sende you right good aduen∣ture. Than Gouernar departed and soo folowed after Arthur. ¶How that Arthur foūd .xl. knightes who had taken a damoysell the whych they found in a forest, & they wold haue rauysshed her, & there Arthur rescowed her and slewe all the .xl. knyghtes whoo wold haue pylled and robbed the ladyes castel, and haue slayne all that had bene within. Capitulo .lxxiii. ARthur rode forth so long tyl at the last he came to a grete forest, and as he wold haue entred into it, there encoun∣tred hym a fayre yonge da∣mosell ryght sore wepyng, and her fayre yelowe heyre hangynge aboute her shol∣ders, and she was ryght sore hurt in the vysage and bledde fast and as soone as she saw Arthur armed her fre began to be dowble, and than she knele downe & helde vp her handes and cryed hym mer¦cy and sayd, gentyl knyght saue my life and the honour of my body, and take al that euer I haue, and she was but in her smocke and a thynne syrcute, And whan Arthur sawe her, he knewe wel that she was afrayed, and sayd: fayre loue haue no dre for I wyll doo nothynge to you but good. And whan she herade that she was in a surete he sate her down on the ground, for she was in that case for fere that her legges would not bere her, nor could not speke of a great season. Than Arthur alyghted fro hys hore and ryghte swetely toke he in hys armes & sayd, my owne swete damoysell be ye now wel as¦sured & of good hert and shew me what case ye stand in, and I that ayd you with al my power, than he aw how y• may∣dens heyre was all tuffled by the reason of the wynd and thick busshes yt she had runne through, and Arthur yke a gentil knyghte dyd stryke downe her heyre for
they were ryght fayre and goodly. And whan she might spake she sayd, syr your great swetenes and gentyl herte hath ta¦ken fro me parte of my fere, how be it all that season she wepte ryght pyteouslye & sayd, syr I shall shewe you all the case how it standeth wyth me syth it pleaseth you to knowe it, syr it is of trouth I ha∣ue dwelled here in thys foreste wyth an aunt of myne a wydowe a good olde lady in a fare grat manoyre of hers, & nowe there is come into thys forest .iii. knygh∣tes who ae banysshed out of theyr owne countre, and they do nothynge but robbe and pyll, and they haue in theyr compa∣ny .xx. horse men and en fote men, and so they robbe ouer all the countre, so that they leaue no house vnrobbed, and thys other daye they sente to myne aunt that she should send them two hondred poun∣de of money, but myne aunt wolde not for she wyste not why she should so do, & so now they become and haue layd syege rounde aboute myne auntes place, and there haue cōtynued these .v. dayes and haue made theyr and we that they wyll neuer goo hens tyl they haue wonne the place and brent it downe to the erth, and slayne myne aunt and so I yssued out at a lytel gate to go to a brother of myne to desyre him to gte ogyther our lygnage to come to hlpe and deliuer vs fro these theues and robbers, & as I was goynge here by there mette me ten foote men of theyr comp who lyeth in a wayte to kepe the hye wayes. And thus thy haue arayed me as ye se, and haue  yspoyled me and taken away my paly, and soo woulde haue ysshed me, but as grace was they flle at a varyaunce amonge themselfe who should haue ben the fyrst that should haue defouled me, & soo they fel togyther & gaue eche oher great stro∣kes, and in the meane tyme I fledde a∣waye in great fere of my lyfe. Than Ar∣thur sayd fayre damoysel go we wo to¦gither where as these rybawdes be, and I shall doo soo moche to them eyther by fayrnes or foulnes that they shal rndre to you agayne your gowne and your pal¦frey. A syr sayd the lady they are very y people and a great company. Fayre lady care not therfore sayde Arthur god shall helpe you in your nede. Thā the damoy∣sel mounted vpon Arthurs horse behinde hym and so rode forth tyll at the a they aryued where as these theues were who were sekynge for the damoysell amonge the busshes. And they sawe her on horse backe rydynge behynde Arthur, they ran all aboute hym to haue slayne hym, but than Arthur toke hys swere & layde oo on these rybawdes that wythin a shorte space he had slayne them all. Than the damoyell had ryght great Ioye and soo toke agayne her hore & her clothynge & apparayled her and sayd to Arthur, syr I pray god kepe you from all euyll encom¦braunce. And Arthur sayd, my loue nowe let vs go to youre aunt & let vs helpe her as moche as we can. A syr said she ye can neuer haue vyctory ouer them, for they be at ierst .xxx. on horse backe well armed and there be of them many good knygh∣tes, therfore ano they wyll slee you the which should be a great domage therfore let vs go to my brothr & gather togither my frēes the whyce shall be in nombre at the leest of .xl. persones on horse backe & so than shal y e them. Than Arthur sayd fayre damoysell take ye no thought therfore for I waraunt you or I departe I all make them to be to vs suche fren∣des y• fro hēs forthe to you nor to none o∣ther they shall do no grea hurte. wel syr said the lady god giue you grace thus to
do for they be ryght yll people. So thus they code forth together into y• foreste, & the same tym▪ Goernar  Iacket were ntred into y• same foreste to seke Arthur for they had herde tydynges y• he was ri¦den ino that forest before them, and thei  so longe tyll at the last they founde whre  these .x. theues lay dead▪ & than thy toug wel how that Arthur had d tht dede. Than Gouernar sayd to Iacke, frende I knowe well my lorde Athur hath bene here, I se well he is a  carpenter, for he hath made here a fayre syght of chyppes. Syr truely sayd Icket here is in hym gret dyspence for he gyeth moe than is of hym demaun¦ded, for he hath gyuen more to thys com¦pany than they wold haue had, & al this season Arthur rode forth yl wyth y• da∣maysel, & al last they aryued at y• damoy¦sells auntes pace, & the sayd theues as than had lef theyr sige & were gone af∣ter a great company of marchauntes to htent to obbe & to flee them, & in the mene season Arthur and the damoysel came to the gate, and she called y• porter. And as soone as he sawe hr he knewe he ryghte wel, and so ser open the gate, d than Arthur and the damosel entred into the place. Than Arthur sayd to the porter, nde let the gate stande styll o∣pen, for youre enemyes are all gone, for they all that were hre were my cosyns therfore I warant you be not aferde of them, therfore let downe the brydge and so the porter dyd, for he beleued hym. Than the ladye led her knyghte into the hall. Than her aunte came to them and made them yghte great feast and so vn¦armed Arthur and made redy the mee, and than they sae downe to souper and as they sat there entred into the hall one of the knights of the sayde sheues, and so he came streyght to the table whereas they dyd eate wyth a greate staffe in his hande, & without speakyng of any wor∣de he lyft vp hys stuffe and strake the la¦dye a great stroke betwene the sholders, so that he made her to lene downe flatte on the table and therewyth she made a greate crye▪ and therewyth the these toke a great cuppe of syluer full of wyne and dyd caste all the wyne at Arthur where as he sate, and toke the cup wyth hym, and therwithall returned backe agayne wythout speakyng of any word, and as he yssued oute of the hall he met Baw∣dewyn and strake hym so rudely that he wyst not well where he was. Than Ar¦thur sayde to the ladye madame thus to be beten and to lese your good is a ryght great outrage. Than the knyght answe∣red Arthur and sayde, syr yf thou wylte amende it come to the crosse way besyde yonder wood and there shall ye fynde me Than Arthur stepte vpon hys fete, ad called for hys harneys and anone Baw¦dewyn ard hym. Than the lady sayde gentyl knyght in the honour of the hye god of heauen go not thither, for they are xxx. on horse back well armed, wherfore ye can not endure agaynst them all. Ma¦dame sayd Arthur speke to me no more, for I wyl go loke on them, and so moun¦ted on his horse and folowed the knyght to the crosse way where as he was redy abyynge for Arthur, and as sone as he sawe Arthur comyng he caste down the cuppe and toke hys spre, and they met togither so rudely that the knight brake his spre but Arthur srake hym so that hys sper ranne through oute his bodye more than a fote, and so fell down dead. Than Bawdwyn sayd, right now thou strakst me & now y• art stryken agayne, for thy great pryde thou hast now an yll
rewarde but of suche deserte▪ suche pay¦ment, and so Bawdewyn drewe out the knyghtes owne sworde & strake of ther∣wyth the knightes hand wherwyth he had stryken the ladye at the table, and so dydde put the hande into the cuppe. And there menaunt of the theues as they we¦re departynge of theyr praye that they had wonne of the marchauntes, they es¦pyed how one of theyr felowes was slay¦e and therefore in contynent they toke theyr haeys and nne at Arthur on all ydes and soo gaue hym many great strokes, but euer Arthur cast hys shelde before hym, and theron receyued al theyr strokes, so that they coulde in no wyse payre hys shelde in any maner of poynt, wheof they had yght greate maruayle. Than Arthur stake one of theym so ru∣delye that hys heade flewe clene into the felde, and he claue another to the shoul∣dres, and the thyrde he claue from the sholdre owne to the waste, and so gaue amonge theym manye wonderous stro∣kes: but they were very manye, and soo some of them ranne to crosbowes, and to artes, and therewyth dyde hym mo∣che anoyaunce but alwayes yghte va∣lyauntlye he detended hym selfe, and so at the fyrste bronte he slewe vpon a .ii. o theym. Than as they wr thus fygh∣tynge togethr it fortuned Gouernar to aryue on them  the reason of the bront and noyse that he had hearde, and thee he sawe wll how al that company were on one knyght whome he sawe defende hym selfe ryght valiauntly, and so long he behelde hym tyll at the laste he knewe well it was hy mayster Athur by the reason of hys whye held, than he dasht to his hore and came in amonge them as the wofe doothe amonge shepe, and strake soo the fyrste that he encountred that he ranne hym clene throughout the body, and he set his hand on his swerde and strake soo an other that hys heade. fell on Arthurs horse necke. And whan Arthur sawe that he knewe well it was his old knight Gouernar wherof he had great ioye, and so rested hym selfe too be holde Gouernar how that he fought wt his swrd, and there he sawe how Gouer¦nar yd cleue one downe to the gyrdell. Than dyd Arthur smyle and sayde, thys mayster chastiseth ryght sore his scolers for he teheth them a hard lesson, by the sayth that I owe vnto god I shall help hym Syr sayde Bawdwyn whan ned is, than a frende is proued, goo giue you grace well to do, & so Arthur rusht into the prese and confounded al that euer he attayned vnto. Thā one of these theues y• was on fote, for he had lost hys horse before, ranne at Arthurs horse wt a sper and strake him cleue throughout the bely and so the horse fell downe dead. Than Arthur lepte on his fete and hys swd in hys hand and dressed hym to the thee that had slayne his horse, and gaue him suche a stroke that he claue hym too the sholders. And whan Gouernar saw Ar¦thur on his fete he was ryght sorowul and soo dasht into the prese and encoun∣ted a knyght so rudely that neyther his helme nor coyse of stele could sae hym but he was ouen to the had tehe and so he fell downe dead. Than Bawdwyn toke hys horse and brought it to Arthur, and quickely he lepte vp theron, and h bandned him selfe among hys enemies and so betwene hym & Gauernar of the xxx. they lefe but foure alyue & so were taken, and in theyr takyng two of them wre slayne & the other two were bound fast, & Bawdewyn and Iacket dyd kepe them, Than there came to them the lady
and her nece, and when they sawe theyr enemyes lye dead on the ground, & saw the noble valute that was in those two knightes, these ladies praysed them mo∣che in theyr eattes, and thee they sawe how that Arthur and Gouernar were to¦gyther making good chere ehe to other and doynge of theyr hmes. Than the lady sayd to Arthur, syr from whence co¦meth this knyght, is he ptraynyng to you. Ye truly madam sayd Arthur he is a frende who hath ryght well hopen me thys daye. we sawe not toether  gret season. And the lady saw we how that he was fayre and maruelously byg and sayd. Syr ye were happy to come hi¦ther at thys point, and to you sir knight ye haue acheued this entepryse of these theues, I requyre you let tse other two other be slayne or elles hanged for of ll yll cote spryngeth an yll re, for they wyl neuer do good if they escape. And whan the theues herde that they were in great feare and sayd to rur, gentill knyght saue oure lyues and we shal shewe you where is in the forest yghte greate trea∣soure. where is that sayde Athur. Syr we wyll bryng you thy ther soo that we dye not. And Arthur answeed and sayd syrs, as for your lyfe and death lyeth in these ladyes handes to do what it plea∣seth them, but shortly brynge vs to thys greate tresoure. Than these two theues wente on before, & Bawdwyn toke the cuppe wyh the knightes hande therein and dyd presente it to the lady from Ar¦thur, who thanked hym muche and soo would haue gyuen the cuppe to Bawd¦wyn but he wold not take it for he said he had ynough to do with the cariage of his horse and harnes. So Arthur rode so longe after these theues in the forest tyll at the last they came into a wyld sauage place in a great valley, & there they foūd bowes and cros bowes, hawbertes, hel∣mes, & gownes, couerynges and other cloth the which these theus had robbed al about the country, and also there they founde hydde in the grounde golde & syl∣uer grete plentye, and cuppes and cha∣lyces and other vessell of siluer, the whi∣che mounted to a gret value. Than Ar∣thur sayde to the lady, madame cause all thys ryches to be borne to youre place, & rendre ye agayn suche thynges as hath ben stolen fro churches & other people of the countrey, as for me nor none of my company shall take the worth of one p¦uy therof. And the ladye dyd as Arthur cōmaunded her, but she desyred Arthur that the twoo theues myghte be slayne, and so they were incontinent, than they reurned to the ladyes place, and wente to souper and were rychly serued. Than Arthur demaunded of Gouernar howe mayster Steun dydde and the markes. And he answered & sayd howe that they dyd ryght well and were in good helh, and how that they dyd maunde them vnto hym, & in lyke wyse dooth the fayre lady Margarete of Argenton, for she is come to the port noyre to se her vncle the markes, wherof Arthur had greate ioy. And whan the lady of that place herde y• she knewe than well that Arthur was y• same knyght that had deliuered the mar¦kes out of pryson, & also had rescowed the lady margarete from the handes of the duke of Bygors neuewe. Than shee kneled downe before Arthur and sayde, syr I thanke you as muche as I can or may do for the aide & socour that ye haue done for the lady of Argenton, for I am her cosyn Germayn. And whan Arthur sawe her knele he toke her vp & so made greate ioye togethr tyll it was tyme to
go to theyr restes, and in the mornynge Arthur rose and toke his leue of the lady and so rode forth on his waye to goo to Cornyte, for it was as thā but .xv. dayes to saynt Bartylmewe tyde whan as the great ournay should be bitwene the kyn¦ge Soroloys and themperoure of Ynde Now wyll we leaue to speke of Arthur and of Gouernar and speke now of may¦ster Steuen. ¶How that mayster Steuen departed fro the porte noyre to go to the tournay at Cornyte and toke with hym the noble Florence ryche pauylyon. wherin was the ymage wyth the chaple who resem∣bled in all thynge vnto the lady Florence the moost faye creature that was as thā in all the worlde. Capitulo .lxxiiii. THus as Arthur rode forth on hys waye towarde Cornyte, mayster Steuen was at the porte noyre wyth the markes and with the gentyl lady Mar¦garete of Argenton, and there she dydde sporte and playe her as a gentyll damoy∣sell oughte for to doo, and euery daye she made chaplettes of roses and other flou∣res the whyche she gaue o mayster Ste∣uen, and she made hym also with the ne∣dell worke a gyrdell and a purse of gol∣de and sylke, she loued hym ryghte well in her herte. Than mayster Steuen ad∣uysed well howe that the greate ournay at Cornyte approched nere, therfore he thought it was tyme for hym to departe thyther warde, than he sayd to the Mar∣kes. Syr I desyre you to kepe well thys castell of the porte noyre, & to you fayre lady I rquyre you kepe ye styll compa∣nie here with the markes your vncle tyll ye here fro Arthur, for and I can he shal be here bitwene this and saint Remyges daye. And right swetely he did graunt him there to abide. Than he toke his le∣ue of them & so toke al his bokes, and the egle of gold & the pauilion wyth the yma¦ge holdynge the chaplet, & soo departed & rode soo longe tyll he aryued at Cornyte Than he moūted vp the stayres into the palays, at the whiche time the fayre Flo¦rence was entred into her owne chaum¦bre, and the kynge at that tyme was not in the palays, but Florēce knyghtes wer playenge at the chesse & at the tables and other dysportes, and the maister came in amonge them sodeynly, and as soone as they sawe hym they ran to him on al sy∣des, and made to hym right great feest & chere. And at the last it came to the know¦ledge of Florence how that he was come and incontynente she came to hym, and as soone as he sawe her he dyd of his bo∣net and saluted her, and she said sir ye be ryght hertely welcome now, for I was in fere leest that ye wolde not haue come to this tournay, therfore it is now tyme that my pauylyon be pyght vp, and so she ledde the mayster into her chaumbr and toke hym aparte, & than she demaūn∣ded of hym how that he had done syth he departed from her and howe that Arthur dyd. Madame sayde he I sawe not Ar∣thur syth he dyd the batayle at Argenc For as soone as the batayle was ended & that the kynge of orquney & duke Phy∣lyp & all the hole company were in great Ioye and myrth there came a messenger to Arthur from the wounded knyght to thentent that he should goo to him for to gyue hym helth, and soo the same propr houre he departed, whereof euery man was so sore troubled that they all depar∣ted the same daye. A mayster sayd Flo∣rence than I fere me greatly of his deth.
Madame sayd the mayster be ye in a su∣ree take no care for hym, for he fereth not all the worlde, for there is not suche an othr knghte in all the worlde agayne. Madm I shewed hym how that ye did cōmaunde you vnto hym, & how that ye desyre hym as derely as he loueth you y• he should not fayle for any thynge but to be at thys next great ournay at cornyte and he dyd graunte me for certayne that he wolde not ayle therof. A mayster sayd she dydde ye not requye hym faythfully so to be. Madame as god helpe me I wa¦raūt you he wyll not fayle. Well mayster said he I requyre you ause me to se him & o spke with him as shortly as it may be. Mdame sayd he with a right good wyll. Well mayster than I praye you se that my pauylyō be pigh vp in the felde incontinent, for paraduenture if he coe nowe ony thynge before the daye and se no yge or token in the felde y• ony tour¦nay should be thee, than it myght fortu∣ne he wold departe agayne. Madame ye saye right well {quod} the mayster for in dede it is he tyme. Than she sent for syr Ne¦uelon her marysshall & cōmaūded him y• hr chefe pauilion should be pight vp in the fele & from thens forth that all her knightes shle lodge eury night about her pauilyon. And as she cōaunded so it was done. And also the mayster caused the pauylyon with the ymage to be pyght vp, & many other tentes and pauylyons but the ymage y• helde the chaplet in the pauylyon was so goodly & delectable to beholde tht no man coulde be satysfyed with lokynge on her, how be it the freshe beaute o Florence was incōparable ther¦to, and so there were pyght vp .x. tentes & xiiii. pauylyons all peratyning to the no∣ble Florence▪ besyde all other yt were per¦tanynge to her noble lordes & knightes for she had there at that tyme out of her owne realme to the nōbre of .xv. C▪ knygh¦tes. Aso syr Neuelon caused his tent to be pight vp who was senesshall to the gē¦tyll Florēce, & chefe of her coseyle nexte mayster Steuen,  she trusted moche in hym, for he was a wyse man and a good knyght, & no yll sayer, and his pauylyon was set next to the forest & ferthest fro the ladis paulyon, and nexte to the ladyes tent was syr Ancelles pauylyon neuew to the senesshall who was a ryght hardy and a valyaunt knyght, the thyrde pauy¦lyon was partaynynge to the archebys∣shop of Cornyte who was vncle to Flo∣rence, & brother to the king of Soroloys father to Florēce, the fourth was syr My¦les of vaefounde, the fyft was syr Peter brysebar a redoubted knygh. Also than thither was come sr Rowland of bygor who was one of Florence knyghtes, but he was right enuous, and he was cosin germayne o the ue of ygor, & he cau∣sed his pauylyon also to be pyght vp the whych was right goodly & fresshe to be∣holde, he was not in the coūtre whan the batayle was bytwene Arthur & the duke of bygors neuewe, and whan he knewe the dyscomfyture of hys cosyn he was so sorowfull that he dyd neyther eate nor drynke but lytle of three dayes after yt he knew therof and whan he had somwhat passed hys soowe, than he made auowe and promise that if he might se or knowe the knyght that had slayne hys cosyn syr Isembart y• he wold be auenged of hym yf euer it lay in is power, and he myght well be descended of the lygnage of the duke of bygor, for he was fell & spytefull and proude, and the chefe cause was he came to the tournay was to thentent to encountre Arthur if he came thyther. So these .vi. pyghte vp theyr tentes round
aboute Florence pauylyon. Than vpon a daye Florence yssued out o Cornyte & all her chyualry wyth her, and soo wente into her owne pauylyon, and all other lordes and knyghtes ladyes and damoy∣selles went eche of them into their owne tentes and pauylyons, the whyche were to the nombre of two thousand, and Flo∣rence cōmaunded that euery body should make as great feest & Ioy as they coulde doo, so than there began greate feest and Ioe. Than knghts began to Iust and tournay to assaye theym selfe, aso the la∣dyes and damoyselles dydde sende theym chaplettes & streames to set on theyr hel∣mes & speres, & some company of knygh∣tes sported them in the forest, and some wente to the fayre ryur with sparhaw∣kes and gerfowcons on thyr handes, & some eelde the hye tournes & ournyn∣ges of the sakers & gerfawcons, squyers and variettes were furbusshynge & scou∣ynge of theyr maysters harneys & oke∣lyng of sheldes and helmes, & knockynge on hedes & burres on myghtye speres, la∣dyes and damoyseles did ca le sing and daunce wt lusty knightes, and cler∣kes sange balades, and knightes and la∣dyes talked of loue, some enbraced, and some kyssed & shewed synge of loue, & su∣che as were scke or hurte were shortely made hole. Than Florence behelde these lusty damoyselles playnge & laughynge wyth these frsshe yonge lusty knightes clappynge theym on the backes wt theyr whyte handes, & shewyng theym greate sygne of loue, and geuynge eche to other laces, gyrdels gloues, kuercheu, yn∣ges aplettes and garlondes of fresshe flours. Than Florence cast out a great sygh and sayd to mayster Steuen, syr se ye not how these ladyes and damoyseles laughe & play eche of theyr louer. A may¦ster & what haue I deserued that I can¦no haue my louer to sporte me with him as wel as they do wyth theyrs, for I loue with al my hole herte & yet I woe nor what he is, for my hert lyeth on hym that I neuer sawe, so thus I am in the sonne without hauynge of ony lyght, I am in loue wythout Ioy. A dere maister what haue I deserued more than onye other. Than the myster sayd, a deare ladye he ye of good comforte for a tyme shall co∣me that shall gyue you lyght, the cloude that as yet couereth the yght in good season shal be made bryght. A mayster sayd Florence dyd ye not hertely cōmaū∣de in vto hym whan ye wente to Ar∣gence. By the fayth that I owe to god sayd the mayster I dydde it madame in the best wyse y• I coulde ymagyn. Thus the fayre Florence and the mayster eue∣ry daye from the wednesdaye tyll sater∣daye talked togyther of the comynge of Arthur the whyche saterdaye the arche∣bysshop sange masse afore Florence, and he and al the hole barony that day dyned wyh the noble Florence, for she had de∣syred them all so to do▪ ¶How syr Rowlande of Bygor ape∣ched Arthur of treason bycause that he had slayne hys cosyn at Argence, and soo defyed hym at the vteraunce but Arthur at the fyrste stroke draue hym downe horse and all to the eart, and brake one of hys ames and two rybbes, wherof Florence was right Ioyous and specially whan she sawe her loued Arthur whome she neuer sawe before. And how after syr Row∣landes seruauntes assayled Arthur to haue slayne hym, but he valyauntlye defended hym selfe and slewe many of them. Capitulo .lxxv.
ANd after dyner the archbys¦shop and maister Steuen & syr Rowland and the other barons went talkyng and playing togeder out of the medowe and entred into the forest, & at the laste they came to a fayre grene oke the whych dyd caste a fayre shadowe a greate cyrcuyte aboute it, and the grasse was fayre and soft and thyck vnderneth so there they sate them dwne and tal∣ked together of many thyngs tyl at the last the mayster demaunded o syr Row¦lande how that he lyked by that country about Cornyte and whether it were fa¦rer than the country of bygor. Than sir Rowland answered that it was not to hym that he would giue any answere in that case. why sayd the master & as for me I am as lytell bound to you, as you to me. well sayd syr Rowland that ma∣keth no matter for though ye be son to a kyng yet wyl I not answere you in that matter nor in non other, take it as ye list why syr sayd the mayster haue I trespa∣ced any thing agenst you. Yea yt ye haue sayd syr Rowland & that tyght greuouse¦ly for ye were at Argente whā my cosn syr Isembart was slayne, and ye kepte cōpanye & were chefe coūseller wt the knight that slew him, therfore I bere grudge in mine hert agaynst you, & I promise to god that yf I may encountre hym that dyd that deede, I shal do as much to hī as he hath done to my cosyn. Syr sayd ye mai¦ster whan ye mete him ye may do as ye wyll, but often imes it for¦tuned that a man can not attayne to do so muche as he would do, nor paraduen¦ture he can not nor dare not, butte as for that dede ye oughte not to be dyspleased though right was done, for godlightly wyll suffer no wronge, but alwayes he fordereth and aideth the ight cause how so eur it falleth. well sayd syr Rowlan∣de than ye saye howe that my cosyn was in the wronge but there is none yt sayeth so but he sayeth otherwyse than trouthe is, and that wyll I proue before euerye ma agnst you and ye wyll mount on your horse for I say the matr was not truly nor egay del withall. Syr sayde the manster ye lay vnto me great outra∣ge and vylany, where as ye saye that I dyd in that matter otherwyse than well and tuely, wherof I say plainely ye lye falely in your head and cetenly I shal neuer be in reste tyll that I haue te a knyghte agenst you to proue it, and yf I can it shall be the same knyght whyche dyd the batayle agenst youre cosyn, who shal cause you to call agayne these wor∣des that ye haue spoken. Than the may∣ster rose ryghte geatly dyspleased and woulde haue departed and r that com¦panye, but the archebysshop helde hym
agayne & prayed him that he wold suffre all that for that tyme, & at hys request he sayd he wolde so do. Than syr Neuelon the senesshall sayd to syr Rowlande, syr be content wt the wordes of the mayster for he is a man of greter dygnyte than ye be of, for though he had stryken of your head, ye haue not soo hye a frende yt durst reuenge your cause, the noble kynge of Orqueney was at yt batayle, & wher as ye say that the mater was not truly deite wythall, ye speke than vylany ayenst the kynge & ayenst Phylyp duke of Sabary his neuewe, and ayenst all suhe as were there, the whych seynge nedeth not there to be rehersed, for it is a shame to you to suffre suche wordes to passe out of youre mouth. Than ore dyspleased Brysebar slepte forth & sayd, syr Rowlande ye say that the mayster dyd not truely in ye ma∣ter whan your cosyn was slayne, wherein I saye that ye saye not truely, & yf ye wyl mayntayne the contrary take youre hat∣neys and I shal take myn & let it be seen who is in the trouth, & therwith syr Bry¦sebar was rysynge to haue departed, but the bysshop helde him agayn & sayd, loke who soo euer speketh ony worde more of this mater let hym be sure I shall not be hys frende, & so they left there spekynge of yt mater for that tyme, for the bysshop brought them in an other talkynge, & as they were deuysynge & talkynge of one mater and other Arthur and Gouernar yssued out of the forest and soo entred in to the medowe. And than Arthur behel∣de the goodly tentes and pauilyons that were pyght all aboute the felde, and also he sawe the sheldes and helmes and har∣neys shynynge ayenst the sonne, & hde the greate coursers braye & crye & stampe with theyr fete, the whych fyght & noyse quyckened his herte and courage. At the last Gouernar espyed Florence pauily wherin was the ymage with the chaplet and shewed it to Arthur. And whan he sawe it his herte inwardly reioysed, for he knewe well it was his ladyes pauyly¦on. And by y• tyme the mayster & al other were entred agayne into the fayre me∣dowe, & Arthur sate on hys horse in a gre¦te study & mused of hys aduenture. And at the last syr Myles of balefoūde espyed hym & knewe well how yt it was Arthur for he had seen hym before at Argence. Than he said to the other knightes that were aboute hym, lordes beholde yonder is a knyght al armed who is ryght fayre to beholde, is there onye here y• knoweth hym, for he wolde not name him bicause of syr Rowland. And whā mayster Ste∣uen sawe him he said I know hym ryght well, wherfore I trust yt the great wind that was lately blowen wyll now sone be layde, & of hys comynge he had greate Ioye in his herte so moche that he forga∣te in a maner al his displeasure. Certayn¦ly syr sayd the senesshal he is right fayre and gracyens to beholde, wherfore I by¦leue he is of a great bloude, but me thyn∣keth by his semblaunt he is in a great stu¦dy whefore so euer it be. By my hode {quod} Brysebar I knowe full well wherfore he studyeth. Than the mayster & the senes∣shall & Brysebar rose and fayre & easely wente to hym warde & sayd eche to other how yt they wolde not name hym as at y• tyme bycause of syr Rowlande, and so they came before Arthur who was styll in his study. And Gouernar as soone as he sawe the mayster he alyghted fro hys horse and enbraced hym, and all the other barons eche after other. And therwythal Arthur lefte hys musynge, and as soone as euer he sawe mayster Steuen and the other knyghtes he dyd alyght from hys
horse, and did salute them all one after an other, and so among them there was made right great feast and ioy, And than syr Rowlande meruayled muche what knight he mighte be, becaus he sawe soo much chere & ioye made to him▪ and that they knew him and he not. Than the se¦nesshal sayd to Arthur, syr I wyl ye ta∣ke my rent and paun as your own, & so ye and I to kep company together in thi trney. Syr I am wel content quod Arthur, and to incontinent he was vnar¦med, & al his harnes and horse was sent to the senesshals tent. And whā Arthur was aparayled than the mayster sayde to hym, syr let vs go & salute ye the arch¦bysshop, who is brother to kyng Emen¦dus, and vncle to the faire lady Florence And whan Athur herd speke of Floren¦ce his hert trembled for ioye, and soo he wen twarde the bysshop. And whan the bysshop saw him he rose and dyd sa∣lute him, so did sir Mes and also syr Rowland of bygor how be it they knew hym not, and so the bishop behed hym affectuously, for he semed to hym to be ye most fayre knyghte of the world. Than Arthur dyd of hys bonet and dyde salute the bysshop and al other and in likewise they hym agayne. Than the bysshop de¦maunded of him what he was. Syr said Arthu I am a knight straūger. And as soone as syr Rowlande herde hym saye so, it ran into his het that it was the sa¦me knyght that slewe hys cosyn, & than he demaunded of him what was his na¦me. Syr sayd he my righte name is Ar∣thur. And how cal ye youre squyer quod syr Rowland. Syr sayd Arthur he is na∣med Bawdwyn, Than syr Rowlande knew wel that it ws he that slew his cosin, & soo demaūded of him fro whens he came. Syr quod Arthur I come strey∣ght fro Argnce. wel syr quod Rowland saw you the batayl that was done the betwen a straunge knight, and the duke of bygors neuewe. And whan ye maister herd tho demaūes he was right ioyous for than he wyst well that the wordes yt had be spoken before should be el reuē∣ged. Than Arthur answered syr Row∣lande and sayd, syr whan ye batae was done I passed forby. I thynke sayd syr Rowland that it was your selfe tha dyd that batyle wt syr sembart. Syr quod Arthur I wolde he ryght glade to be of suche valure as too conquere in batayl such a knight as he was. Certenli quod Rowland I know wel it was you, and therfore I saye that falsely and ntuly ye dyd it, and that I wyl make god in∣contyneut my bodye agenst yours. And whan the archbysshop herde that he bla¦med much syr Rowland for his wordes and desyred hym yt al the matter myghte be in rest & peas. But he proudly answe¦red & said how that he wold not but yt he wold arme him incontinent. Than the mayster sayd to the bysshop, naye syr let hym alone for he is in the ryght. therfore he hath good cause to be reuenged yf he can for whā he hath his enemy present before him, what shale nede to go seke for hym any feder and all that he sayde because he thought longe tyl they were together for he wyst we how yt Arthur should reuenge ryght well suche words as he had sayd to hym before. Thou Go¦uernar ryght sore dysplesed slepte forth and sayd, syr Rowlande ye be to muche outragyous to appele thus this knight of falsenes whom ye knowe not nor ne∣uer saw hym before, nor wyst no what he s therfore I say playnly ye lye falsly in youre heade▪ he is not false nor neuer was to you nor yet to an otther, and in
that quarel here is my guage to fight wt you my body agenst yours. Thā Arthur blamed Gouernar for his words & com¦maunded hym to be in peace, & so he dyd folowe his plesure. Than Arthur sayde, syr Rowland yf ye lay any thing agenst me, I am here redy to defend me agenst you, well syr sayde Rowland of falsnes I appele you in y• quarell, mount short∣ly on your horse & dfend it and ye dare well syr sayde Arthur ye say wel, go on your way and I shall not be longe fro you. Syr sayd the mayster to syr Row∣lande ye haue the herte of a noble baron therfore ye do ryght well to defend your ryght, for your ryght & trouthe shal sure lye helpe you, all thys he sayde but in a mockery. Than syr Rowlande went to arme him, and the senesshall and the ar∣chebysshop and mayster Steuen kepte styll company wyth Arthur, who incon¦tynete was armed. Than the mayster wente streyght to the noble Florence, & founde her in her ryche tente standynge on a cusshyn of sylke, and as soone as the sawe the mayster she began to smyle and called hym to her. Than he sayd ma¦dame and it lyke youre grace Arthur is come, and at his fyrst comyng syr Row∣land of bygor hath appeched him of fals¦nes for sleyng of hys cosyn at Argence, and so they be bothe about to arme them for the batayle betwene them shal be in∣contynent. And whan ye lady herde hym speke of Arthur her bloud trembled and therwith she busshed as uddy as a rose and was in her hert ryght ioyous of hys comyng, and ryghte sore dysplesed that syr Rowland should fyght wyth him so sone at hys fyrst comyng than she sayde mayster I doubte me leaste that any vp lany should come to Arthur by fighting wyth syr Rowlande. Madame said the mayster ye know not as yet ye noble va¦lure of Arthur, for I answere you be set¦teth nothyng though he had to do all at ones wyth such .vi. as syr Rowland is therfore madame yssue out of your paui¦lyon and loke on your louer and beholde whether he be fayre or not, the archebys¦shop your vncle is wyth hym, and your senesshal, and syr Ancean, & also syr Mi¦les of valefounde, and syr Brysebar, all these are ryghte sore dyspleased of the fe∣lony that syr Rowland hath done to Ar∣thur your knyght. A mayster sayde Flo∣rende would to god he were myne▪ let vs go and I pray you shewe hym vnto me for I desyre muche to se him. Than Flo¦rence yssued out noblye accompanied wt ladyes and damoyselles to the numbre of .C. C. and by that tyme the tydynges was spredde all about the fielde in euery mannes tent how yt syr Rowlande was armyng of hym to fyght wyth a straūge knyght. And whan ye archebisshop & the other barons sawe Florence they went and encountred her, and Arthur was in theyr company, and there they saw eche other, wherwith they were bothe so sore stryken wyth the darte of loue, that they lost theyr countenaunce, howe be it Flo¦rence as goodly as she myght, maintay¦ned her countenaunce, and than she laid her hande on the bsshoppes sholdre and demaunded of him what knight Arthur was, who aboue al other semed to be the most gracyous & gnyll, and he had his helme of his head and behelde euer Flo∣rence, and also her fayre eyen wente ne∣uer fro hym, for she coulde not kepe her selfe fro beholdyng of hym. Than Bry∣sebar sayde, madam this same is the kny¦ght that rought in my syghte the fowle monster of the brosse to vaunce, & euer syth he hath offred his seruice to be your
knyght yf it please you so to except him In the name of god sayd Florence he is yghcheely welcome, and with a ight good wyl I retayne him as my knight Ryght dece lady sayd Arthur I humbly thanke you of the hie honour that ye do o me as to retayne me to be of the com∣pany and numbre of so many and noble wyse men as your knightes be. And wt thee wordes there came a messenger to Florence, and shewed her how that the kyng of orqueney and duke Philyp wer comyng wt .v.C. knightes in their com∣pany & how that he was within a myle and a halfe. They are ryght ertely wel¦come said Florence. And by that time sr Rowland was armed and alo Arthur. Than the haawe began to crye go to¦gyther, bayle, bayle. Than Gouerner set on Arthurs heme on hys head, & Baw∣dewyn brought him his horse, & he moū¦ted theron as lightly as though he had bene vnarmed, than he toke hys whyte shelde and dyd cast it aboute hys eck. And as soone as Florence saw the sheld she kew it ryght wel, and sayde in hee hrt. I ee o er that shelde becometh you ryght well, I pray to god it may be well enployed vpon you. Than he toke a grea & a myghty spere, and whan he was redy at al poyntes than he turned his eyen to ward Florence, and her eyen wente neuer fro hym, but behelde hym wyth feruent loue and desyre wherwith Arthur toke suche hardynes that he fea∣red not all the worlde at that houre. So than he turned and dasshed his horse to wade syr Rowlande, & he in lyke wyse to him, & they went togyther as though thuner had falē fro heuen, & all that be elde them sayd one to another, a good orde what a goodly knyghte is yonder aunge knyght. And syr Rowland hyt Arthur so rudely that he brake his spere all to sheuers, but Arthur strake him wt hys spere the whych was so long & byg so vnmesurably yt he lente bothe knight and hors, and al to ye erth in a hepe, wher∣with yr Rowlādes arme brake aonder in y• middes, and ye hors and sadel fell so sore on him yt it brake two ribbes in hys syde, & so he lay a great space in a traūce wherof Florence had more oy thā euer she had of any thing, and specially whan she sawe her loue do so hye dedes of pro∣wes. Than syr Rowland had brought thyther .xiiii. knyghtes, and whan they saw theyr mayster syr Rowland a that myschyef they all toke theyr harnes & al at ones an & assayld Arthur. Thā Ar∣thur drewe hys good sworde & strake so the fyrst that he encountred with that h aue him to the chinne, and fro y• second he made his head to flie into ye felde, and the thyrde he made to flye ouer hys horse cope & his legges vpward. Thā euery mn behelde the hye prowesse of Arthur and aid eche to other, the strokes of this knyght are graly to be doubed. Than Gouernar toke a great pyece of a broken charyot aud dasht into y• prese and draue downe knighes both hore and mā to ye crath. Than euery man sayd vnto other this knights not wtout company, theyr almes is right hard to indure, I would haue none of theyr paunce, they are gre¦te dyspenders▪ for they gyue more than is of the demaunded. And whā Florence sawe the outrage of those knyghtes she was right sorowful, for she had grete fe∣e of Arthur. Than she cōmaunded her se¦neshal yt he shuld go and depart y• batail and that those knightes should be al ta∣ken, and their handes boū fast togither in a punysshemente of theyr dedes, than her senesshal incontynent mounted on a
gret courser, and in a rich corset of grene gyrt wt a white silkē lace, and his hat at his back wt a white warderer in his han¦de. Than he sported furth his hors & cau¦sed knightes to come out of euery ent & so they toke the knightes yt wer fightin¦ge wt Arthur and Gouernar, but first of the .xiiii. there was .vi. slain, and dyuers other sore hurt. Thā Florence and the ar¦chebysshop came to syr Rowland where as he lay stil at yt time in a traunce half a slepe, & whan he was reuiued & saw ye byshop and Florence standyng before hī he deired that the knight that had iusted with him might come and speke wt hym & so Brisebar went for him, & whan Ar¦thur was come, syr Rowland said to hī Syr ye be welcome and for goddes sake pardō me of the outrage yt I haue done agenst you, as to enterpryse to Iuste a∣genst you, wherof now I sore repent me and fro hens forth I wil be your knight and good frende. Syr sayd Arthur yf y haue any thynge trespassed agenst me I pardon you with good hert. Than there were brought forth the knyghtes of syr Rowland who wer fast besid becaus they foughte agenst Arthur wtout anye defy∣aunce before. Thā said Florence in the name of god they shal make a large amē¦des. Certainly madame sayd syr Row∣lande I am content yt they make amen∣des to ye knight as he wyl him selfe. So be it said Florence. Madam sayd Arthur I thank your grace syth they shall make me amēdes at mine own saying therfore than they shal go quite & fr, for I pardō the for they dyd but like knightes to help and ayd their lord and master. And whā the bisshop and al other herd him say so they sayde, a this is a free and a gentyll knight. And thā the gentil Florence said in her hert, a mine own loue ye haue a g¦til hert and a fre, & mine hert is wt yours and euer shal be, & than she saide to Ar∣thur. Syr knyght ye shall go and vnar you wt my senesshal who shal holde you companye. Madame sayde Arthur as it shal plese you I am content. Than Flo¦rence went into her tent & toke her may∣ster by the hand and said Master ye told me routh of Arthur, for he is fayre & gra¦cyous, and ye best knight of hys hand s yt is in all the worlde. Certenly mdam all that is trouth, for all noblenes is in him. well maister saide Florence I loue you entyrely and also my lord my father loueth you right wel, and ye & I haue be∣ne norisshed vp togither, so ye be  mā & clerke sworne of my streyght counsayl therfore ye ought to owe me your faith & trouth wtout any rson or falsenes, and ye ought to help and to ayde me in al my busines. Certenly madam quod the may¦ster al y• ye say is of trouth, and so shal I do as longe as I lyue, for I shal kepe so crete your counsayle as long as I lyue Certenly mayster sayd she I haue grea affyaunce in you, therfore it is so I wyl yt ye shal know the secretes of my heart, therfore I require you kepe it close. It is so I loue Arthur wt al my hert, & I wyl loue hym aboue all other creatures of ye worlde, for here I sweare faythfully too you that as long as I lyue I wyl neuer haue lord nor spouse but al onely hym▪ And whan the mayster ede her saye so he had ryght great ioy, and sayd. Madā surely ye haue good cause th to do, for he is the floure of all the worlde, and I shal helpe you to haue hym more than any other person of the world. But may¦ster quod Florence there is one thynge that I wold fayne know of what liga∣ge he is of. Certainly madame he is son vnto a mighty duke, for Bawdwyn his
squyer hath shewed me so. That is suffy¦cyent sayd Florence, & so they lefte theyr comunycacyon at that tyme & departed. Than was syr Rowland borne into his tent & vnarmed. And the senesshall & Bry¦sebar, sir Ancell, and sir Myles ledde Ar∣thur to the senesshalles ent, & there was he vnarmed, & whan he had wased his handes & vysage, than brought Bawde∣wyn him a syrcote of scarlet furred with armynes the which became him right wel he was bygge & hye aboue all other & co∣loured like the rede rose had bē set on the whyte lyly. Than he sayd he wolde go & se syr Rowlande, wherfore euerye man praysed him muche, & al the other barons wente thither wt him, & there he was tyll it was past none, than he toke his leue of syr Rowland & yssued out into the felde, and than there was assembled all the no¦bles of the felde to beholde him, & they all sayd how yt he was the moost fayre crea∣ture of the wor̄lde, we thinke he be sonne to a kynge, wold to god the fayre Florēce were his lady & spouse. And therwith he entred into the senesshalles tent, and he & sir Myles played togyther at the chesse, and by that tyme the kynge of orqueney & duke Phylyp his neuewe were come & were lyghted in the myddes of the myd∣des of the medowe nee to Florence tent And so he & Phylyp & well a .xiiii. other knyghtes wente streyght to Florēce tent and there they founde her playenge with mayster Steuen, & whan Florence sawe the kyng her cosin and duke Phylyp she did salute them and enbraced and kyssed them, & sayd how they were welcome, & so they made eche other great feest & Ioy and sate downe on fayre new grene rus∣shes, & talked togither of many thinges. And at last the kynge demaunded of the mayster tydynges of Arthur. Syr sayd the mayster he is not ferre hens, he is in the senesshalles tent. A madame sayd the kynge dyd ye not se hym nor speake with hym as yet. Yes syr sayd Florēce I saw hym whan he dyd Iust agaynst syr Row¦lande, who had appeled hym of falsenes bycause of his cosyn the duke of bygors neuewe. And I pray you madame sayd Phylyp how wente the Iustes bytwene them. Syr there is two ribbes broken in sir Rowlandes syde, & one of hys armes broken asonder, for hys horse fell on him In the name of god said ye kyng he knew not as than Arthur, but now I trowe he knoweth some of hys strokes, therfore madame spede for ye knyght & be aqueyn¦ted wt him, for there is no prynce in al the worlde but y• wold be right glad to haue the noble company of hym, and as I vn¦derstande he hath offred hym selfe to be your knyght, therfore receyue hym & re∣tayne hym in suche wyse that he escape not fro you, for ye can not tel what nede parauenture ye shal haue of hym here af∣ter. Cosyn sayd Florence ye say ryghte well, the mayster shal go for hym, and so he dyd. Than the kynge sayd to duke Phylyp hys neuew, a syr where is beco∣me the good and faythfull company that ye promised to thys knyght now that ye be here and knowe that he is so nere and yet ye make none other semblaunt, ther∣with syr Phylyppe slete forth after the mayster for to go to Arthur, and as they yssued out of theyr tente there entred the archebysshop. Than the kynge and Flo∣rence rose and dyd set downe the bysshop bytwene them. ¶How that duke Phylyp and the mayster wente to fetche Arthur to the kynge of Orqueney and to the fayre Florence. Capitulo .lxxvi.
DUke Philyp and the mayster en¦tred into the senesshals tent, and there they founde Arthur playing wyth syr Miles. And whan Arthur saw duke Philip he went and enbraced him & sayd syr ye be right her el welcom. Sir quod duke Philip and ye be also here wel foūd Syr sayde Arthur where is▪ the kyng of orqueney. Certaynly syr he is wyth my lady Florence in her tent, and he desireth you o come to him. In the name of god sayde Arthur, I praye to god sende hym right good aduenture go we thither and so duke Phylyp and he wente hande in hande talkyng together, and the maister the senesshal, syr Myles, syr Ancean, and Brysebar went after them tyll they ca∣me to Florence tent. And whā Florence sawe Arthur her herte began to tremble and sodēly blusshed, but there was none that toke hede thereto, for euery man to¦ke regard to Arthur. And than the kyng and the archbisshop rose and went and enbraced hym, and made him right grete Ioye, and set hym downe by them. And than the kyng demaunded of hym howe he had done syth the tyme he sawe hym last. And he answered and said right wel I thanke god and you. Than the kynge sayd to Florence, madame beholde here thys knyght, for as god helpe me I wol∣de it had cost me euery yere .xii. thousan∣de pound on the condycyon that he were partaynynge to my house, and to be my companyon, and of thys I heartely did requyre hym at Argence, but he than an∣swered me that he had offred his seruyce to you to be your knyght, therfore I say there is nothinge that can be but ladyes winneth al, madame ye haue him wher¦of I am ryght ioyous, and it pleseth me ryght well, for yf I had him he sholde be yours at your comaūdement, ye be a yē & a puyssant lady, therfore do him some good & that shall be your honour. I pro¦mise him said Florēce I shal make hym a gret lord & a uissant, and she thought in her herte that she would make him as gret a lord as she was a ladye. Madā {quod} Arthur I thanke your grace, & therwith he stode vpon his fete, & he had a gentyll body both fayre & byg▪ and soo well pro∣porcioned in all his members yt the more ye Florence beheld him the more he plea∣sed her, there was no lady there but that they wysshed that he had bene partainin¦ge to their lordes & husbandes, & as th were talkyng thus togyther there came to Florence a messēger fro her father the king Emendus, and he shewed her howe y• he dyd hertely cōmaund hym to her, and desyred her to go bastely to dyner, for he was comyng, and wyll lodge the same nighte nere to her tente. Than Florence made semblaunt as though she had ben glad of hys comyng, how be it she was not content in her hert with his hasty cō∣myng, for she had thoughte to haue spo∣ken wt Arthur after diner▪ and thā she re¦pented her yt she had not spoken wt hym at good leyser syth he came. Than went she to dyner, & the king of orqueney and the byshop sate downe together, and Flo¦rence in ye myddes of the table, and duke Philip and Arthur sate downe together and so al other barons, & they wer ryght rychely serued, and by that time ye tentes and pauilion of kynge Emendus were come and pyght vp not far fro Florence tent, thā these came squiers and officers by gret companyes▪ and euery mā in his owne offyce dyd theyr payn to make all thynge redy agenst the kinges comynge for the kynge was comyng righte nere. And whan the kyng of orqueney had dy¦ne he mounted on his horse, and duke
Philyp and the bysshop and Arthur and all other barons and knightes, & all they did as moche honour to Arthur as they coude do. And thus they rode forth tyl at the last they encoūtred kynge Emendus who had in his company two .M. horses Than the kynge of orqueney and the ar∣chebysshop dyde salute the kinge, and so rode nere him, and the kynge betwene them bothe. Than Phylip and Arthur came togyder, and Philyp dyde salute the kynge ryght swetely, & so than duke Philyp & Arthur rode forthe before the kynge and duke Philip helde his hande euer on Arthurs sholdre, and Florence snesshall, & syr Myles & syr Brysebar & syr Ansell rode euer aboute hym & made to hym rght great ioye. And at the laste kynge Eendus perceyued Arthur and sawe how all yt ioye was made bycause of hym, & he sawe well howe that he was a ryght gooly knight. Than the kynge demaunded of the achebysshop his bro∣der and of he kinge of Orqueney what knyght he mighte be that duke Phylyp helde so moche company withall. By my fayth syr sayde the bysshop he is a ryghte gracious knyght & a chyualrous of hys dedes, and there shewed the kynge how that he had Iusted with syr Rowlande, and howe that he ouerthrewe hym horse and all to the earth. Thn the king of or¦queney sayd, syr it is the same knyght yt ye haue herde so moche honour and hye prowesse reputed of. Saynt mary sayd the kynge I am ashamed yt I haue made him no better semblaūt than I haue done therefore for goddes sake cause hym to come to me. Thn syr Moraus who was senesshall vnto the kynge vnte for him Than Arthur retourned & wente to the kynge & dyde of hys bonet, and than the king of orqueney put Arthur bytwene him & kynge Emendus. Than the king said to him, syr ye be righte hertely wel∣come into this my countre, & syr for god¦des sake be not myscontent thoughe I haue made none other semblaūt to you or this tyme. Syr & it lyke your grace sayd Arthur there is none suche cause but I am alwaies at your commaūdement to the vttermost of my small power, well Arthur said the kinge I thynke that is youre name I requyre you be of oure cō∣pany, & be on our partye at this tournay ayenst the emperour of nde. Syr sayde the kynge of Orqueney he is all redy on your syde syth he is retayned wt my ladye Floreuce your doughter who hathe pro∣mised to do moche for hym. well sayd the kyng that she accomplissheth not I shall fulfyl. Thus they were talking togyder tyll they came to the kynges tent, & there he aiyghted fro his horse & entred into his pauylyon, the kynge of Orqueney: the bysshop, Phylp, & Arthur folowed after the kynge. Than the kynge cōmaū∣ded that there shold be a ryche pauylyon pyghte vp ioyninge to his, for Arthur to lodge in, for he would haue hym nere to his persone as longe as the turnay endu¦red. And therwith came Florēce to se the kynge her fader. Than the kynge rose & enbraced her and set her downe bytwene hym and the kynge of orqueney. And her fader demaunded of her howe she dyde. And she answered & sayd syr ryght well I thanke your grace, than he sawe wher as the bysshop helde Arthur by the hāde wherof she was right ioyous in her hert. And by that tyme the kynge of Mormal, and the kynge of valefounde, & the kinge of Ismaelyte, and syr Olyuer and all the other twelue pees were come in to the felde, for they were all partaynyng to the kynge Emendus, and so they came
where as he was, than there was great ioye and feast made, for than the courte was noble and great. Than the mayster made great ioye of the kyng of valefoūd for he was his fathr, and he in like case was glad to se hys sonne. And all these kynges had wel in their company at the least  thousand knightes and they wer  loged aboute the medowe, the why∣the lodgynge endured well the space of two leges. Thus the king & Florence and all other made together ryght great ioy and myrthe in the kynges pauillou, and the kynge of orqueney helde Forence in hs ames and ayd. Fayre lady my nece here shal be sene novle chiualrye done wt in thse thre dayes for your sake. Truly cosyn saide Florence here shal be some y• I had rather were hens. Certainly ma∣dame sayd the kyng, so goeth the worlde some to pleasure, and some to anyaūce Than he sayde to kyng Emendus, syr beholde here in myne armes a ryche tre¦sure, he that shal haue her ought to kepe and cherysshe her tyght derelye. As god helpe me sayde the kynge a ryche man & a noble and a puyssaunt shall haue her who is themperour of ynde y• more. And han Arthur herde that he was so sore dysplesed in hys herte that he could spe∣ke no worde of a great season for all the golde of the worlde, nor though hys lyfe had layne in ieopardy thereof. Syr sayd Florence parauentur themperour loueth an other better than me, than he wyll let me go. Than mayster Steuen rose vp a¦monge them all & sayde to the kinge, syr noble and puyssant king aboue al other I requyre your grace of a lytel audience here before your grace & all the .xii. peres of Soroloys, & before al other yt be here present, for I trust that my saying shall turne you bothe to profyte & to great ho¦nour. Than sayd the kyng I am content that ye speke. Syr sayd the mayster it is of trouth yt there is no creature yt ought to loue any thyng so well as hys owne propre flehe and bloud, the which euery man shold loue, & holde ryght derely ac∣cording to the profyt of the soule & saue∣gard of the body & honour of the person. For he that loueth not his owne, loueth folyshly for I say these wordes because of my ladye Florence here presente who is of your flesshe & bloud, for she is your owne proper doughter, it is of trouth ye are desyrous to assure & to mari her to y• honour of your person, and to the honor and profyte of al your noble rlme, wher¦in ye doo ryghte nobly for it is hy tyme I say not agenst it, howe be it ryght hys and myghty prynce in doyng of thys ye oughte to regarde and considre these .iii. thinges that I haue shewed your grace here before, that is to say, to the profyt of the soule, to the sauegard of the bodi, and to the honour of her and of you, and of al your relme. Fyrst as to the profyt of the soule ye ought to regard to whome yt ye wyl gyue her in mariage, & to se that it be not agenst her hert, so that she shall haue none occasion to hate him yt she shal ha∣ue: but that it be to the plesure of her her and contentaciō of her mynd, for yf it be agenst her hert than shal she hate him, & so shall there neuer be rest nor peace, nor good loue betwene thē, the whyche shall turned to deadly syn because of the hate & grete rumour yt shal be betwene thē and so this shold be yl for her soul, and secōd¦ly syr ye ought to regard ye sauegarde of her body, for ye know wel how yt my la¦dy your doughter is both yong & tendre & hath bē euer swetely brought vp, wher¦fore it is no nede to send her into a straū¦ge sauage coūtry, where as the ayre & re¦gyon
is contrary to her nature and saue∣garde of her body, she is a hye & a mygh∣ty lady in her owne coūtre, what nede is it than to sende her ony ferther, and yf ye gyue her suche a husbande as wyll lede her into a ferre straunge countre, & para∣uenture she loueth hym not, but inward¦ly dooth hate him, what is a worse mala¦dy to the body than hate & dyspleasure & can not reedy it, so syr than yf the coū∣tre be ayen▪ her nature, and also that she hate hym that she must abyde with, I re∣pute than my lady in a maner as deed, & thyrdly syr ye oughte to regarde the ho∣nour of her and also of youre selfe and of all your countre in consyderynge how ye maryage made agaynst hearte and good accorde oftentymes hath an yll ende, for yf my lady youre doughter who is ryght noble and puyssaunt & ryche of hauoyre and of londes, and also she hathe frendes ryghte hye and doubable, yf she shoulde be encompanyed by maryage to ony per¦sone that shoulde be ayenst her herte and wyll her herte that is so gentyl the whi∣che can suffre nothynge ayenst her wyll I fere me that she shall doo some thynge ayenst hym or ayenst hys the which shal not sowne to her honour nor yet to yours therfore syr it is cōuenyent that ye regard and consyder all thys, and syr I saye by∣cause ye haue sayd that bothe noble and ryche shall haue her whos themperour of Yude the more, syr I know well that my lady dooth hate hym so moche that by her wyl she wold neuer se him more, nor neuer to here spekynge of him, how be it ye wyll nedes that she shall haue hym, she dare not dysplease your grace, wher∣fore I fere me that yf she haue hym that all these sayd thinges shall fortune, and perauenture worse the whiche should be great pitie, & also syr ye knowe well that it is a longe season agone that ther was wrytynge made & sealed by you & by all the .xii. peres of your realme y• she sholde neuer haue none other creature in mar∣riage but all onely hym that the ymage should giue vnto the chaplet, and as yet there was neuer none that assayed it, & now syr here is come all your chyualry, therfore holde on forth your tournay and let se to whome the pryse shall be gyuen, and than syr let themperour & all ye other kynges and noble knyghtes come to the pauylion where as the ymage is, and to whome so euer that she gyue the chaplet lette him enioye it with moche honoure. Than the kynge of Mormall rose who was ryghte auncyent and a wyse prynce and moost preuyest of the kynges coun∣seyle and sayd, syr it is trouth I am your man & holde all my realme of you, there∣fore I owe vnto you fayth and trouth, & also vnto my lady your doughter, & syr for trouth I wyll bere witnesse and the mayster hath sayd to you well and truly for syr yf it be so that ye haue put to your seale and were of that accorde, and also all these other kynges that be here pre∣sent, and also all the .xii. peres of youre realme, syr I saye that ye & also all they oughte to abyde fremely by your seales and accorde as good kynges ought to do And whan that the kinge Emēdus had well vnderstande alle these sayenges he knewe well how that they said touth, and soo he answered and sayde, syrs I knewe well how that ye haue said right well and nobly, but it is so that I haue promysed so faythfully to this emperour that I doubte me yf that I breke pro¦messe with hym that he wyll appele me of falsenes and soo make mortall warre against me. Than the kynge of Orque∣ney said, syr yf that the emperour wyll
moue any war agenst you by my heade he shall be answered ryght sharpely and soone, for syr comaund ye youre men of war to be ready on youre parte, and we shall do one deuoyres on our behalues, and so I trust we shall shewe hym suche a sight that he shal be sore encombred wt lokyng or numbryng of them, and yf he will haue batayle one knight agēst an other in ye quarel I am he redy and wyl be to ac¦complishe that baayl for my lady your dou¦gters sake. Thā Ar¦thur thu rose vp and sayd aloude, so yt euery mā myght wel here him. Noble & gentyl kyng it is no reason that ye shold aduenture your bodi agenst a knight & ye a kynge, but yf my ladye should haue nede ye shall not lacke of a knyghte, for beholde me here, who is and euer shal be redy to do any thyng that she shall com∣maunde me. And so euery man there be held hym, for he was maruaylous fayre & he had on his syrcoe of sarlet, yt why the became hym wondersly well y• whi¦che plesed muche king Emendus and al other. Than kyng Emendus sayde, syr I se wel howe ye be worth a knyght, and therfore syr yf any batail be in this case I gyue you graunt that ye shal accom∣plysh it, Therwith Arthur kneled down and ryghte humbly thanked hym. Thā the kynge of Orqueney toke Arthur by the hande and caused hym to syt downe betwene hym and Florence, wherewyth somwhat she abasshed, and as than tho twoo louers dust make no greate sem∣blaunt together one to another. ¶How a great & a puyssant knight de∣fyed Arthur because he sate by Florence and dyd pul downe a corner of her keue thefe the which the wynde had blowen vp, and so Arthur dyd Iuste wyth hym and dyd caste hym to the earth so rudelye that he was not able to lepe on horsback fyue monethes after. Cap. lxxvii. SO it was y• as ye king of orqueny & Florence & Arthur sat together as ye haue herde before, there entred in∣to the pauylyon a great knyght black of vysage, & he was gyrt wt a greete swrd & a longe, & bare a great fawhon in hys hand, & so he came before the kyng & salu¦ed hym and al other, as he yt was come fro themperour who as than had pigh vp his tentes at y• one end of the medow who said, syr kyng Emendus I tel you themperour of ynde wyl be here to mo∣row betymes for gladly he would speke wt you as wt hym yt he entyrely loueth. Thā the king said, syr he shal be welcom & to morow I wyl go to him, but syr {quod} ye kynge I pray you what people hath he. Syr sayd y• knight he is wel to y• nūbre of .vi. M. knightes & squyers ryght har¦dy & valiaūt. In the name of god said y• king that is a fayre cōpany. Than this
knyght behelde the kynge of orqueney & Arthur, who were talkīg wt Florence, & he sawe how Arthur dressed downe one of the corners of her keuerchefe aboute her necke the whiche had ben blowen vp a lytell wt the winde wherwith ye knight was sore displeased & said to Arthur, syr knight fayre ladies are moche bounde to you, for ye can apparayle & araye ladyes right wel, thei haue of you a good varlet to be in their chambres, for ye cā brushe theyr gownes & bete theyr furres ryghte well. well syr sayd Arthur ye maye saye your pleasure, it pleaseth me ryghte well and not al only for your sake, but bicause I haue great ioye if I might do any thing that might be to their pleasures. what syr {quod} the knight I beleue your fader was a preest, for ye can right well preche, cer∣tainly it is for no good yt ye drawe so nye to ye lady. why fē {quod} Arthur & ye thike any yll in the maier speke it & remedy it & ye can. Syr {quod} the knyght I thynke yt ye haue forfeyte with your neyghboure. Than mayster Seuen sayd syr knyght ye be not wyse thus here to reporte vyla∣ny of my lady, for ye saye yt she hath for∣feyte with this knight, for he can not for¦feyte with her but yt she must be accorded with him, therfore herein ye report vilany of them bothe. Than Arthur stept vp in great displeasure & said to the knyghte, syr yf ye grudge with any thing in your herte shewe it wortly. Syr said y• knight with a right good wyll wih a spere or two with you here without in this fayre medowe. Hasarde might he haue that re∣fuseth you sayd Arthur. Than the kny∣ght desyred of the kinge to haue armure, and sayde syr I wyll stryke of the heed of this knyght or it be nyght. Mary said the kynge of orqueney than shal ye be yll welcome hyther. Soo these .ii. knyghtes armed them & wente forth into the felde Than the kynge Emendus went out of his tent, & so dyde al other to se ye Iustes bytwene them, & the archebysshop helde Florence by the hande. Than one deliue∣red a great spere to Arthur but it plesed him not & demaūded a bygger, & so than there was brought to him suche a spere that should haue greatly encōbred an o∣ther knyght to haue borne it all onely, & that Arthur dyd because he was displea¦sed wt the knyght, & also bycause he wyst well yt al the hole noble cōpany of kīges & knightes should se whether he had ho∣nour or shame, & specially bicause the no∣ble Florence shold behold him, & so their with these knyghtes ran togyder rudely & the knight strake Arthur so vertuously that his spere sheuered all to pees, & Ar∣thur strake him so udely in the myddes of his shelde yt he claue it asonder in two peres, wherwith he made him to tourne his hes vpwarde, & brast asonder yt are son of his sadel & paytelles and gyrthes went clene asonder, & knight & all went to the erth in suche wyse yt with the fal yt knight was brused, so yt he was not able to lepe on horsebacke of .vi. monthes, af∣ter, & so lay a great season in a swoune yt euery man had wnde he had ben deed, & whan Florence sawe yt she was neuer so ioyful before, & said to her selfe this kni∣ght ought right well to be in the loue of a right hit & a puissaūt damoysell. Than the kynge Emendus had great mealle fro whence yt suche strokes sholde come & said, syr knyghte what so euer ye be god encrease your honour, for as for boūte & valyauntnes ye haue sufficient all redy. Than all the other kinges praysed hym moche, & eche of thē wisshed that he were pertayninge to theyr houshold. Thā the kinge of orqueney ran streight to Arthur
and enbraced hym and said. A dere frend ye haue rendred to this knight of suche ser¦uyce suche gouerdon, and so toke & ledde him into his tent, and there he was vnar¦med. Than kynge Emendus caused the knyght whā he was receiued to be borne into syr Rowlandes tent to bere hym cō¦pany. And whan syr Rowland knew all this how yt he had Iusted wyth Arthur & howe he had speede he had so greate Ioye that nere hande he was therby all hole of his hurtes, & sayd to the knyght, syr ye be hertely welcome, for ye haue founde my phisicyon, syr the etuary yt he hath giuē you to drynke is full stronge, I trowe there be ther∣in more bitternes than swete∣nes, therfore frende come on to me & kepe wel your clothes as I do mine. Than the knyght said, syr how is it wt you for as for me I ensure you I am sore dyseased, at whiche wordes al yt were there dyd laugh, yt why∣che sayenge was tolde to kyng Emēdus, wherat he had great sporte, so Arthur wente to the pauilion yt the kinge had made to be ordeyned for hym, & Flo¦rence & the bysshop & mayste Steuen went to her tent, than she toke ye mayster apart & said mayster how say ye by Arthur is he not a vertuous knyght & a valyaūt aboue all other, thin¦ke ye yt he hath ony loue towarde me. Ye truly madame I knowe well more than to any creature lyuynge. A than gentyll mayster {quod} Florēce fynde some meanes yt he & I might speke togither, for I wolde fayne know somwhat of his herte by his owne reporte. Madame {quod} the mayster I wyl do what I can & yt shalbe to morow after souper, & soo as for ye night they de∣parted, & euery bodye went to rest tyll the next mornyng that the kinge & all other were vp. ¶How Florence & Arthur spake togither at good leyser at the ende of the forest, & there promised eche to loue other, & there the quene Proserpyne appered to hem and shewed to Florence how that Arthur loued her truly, and how that they should haue eche other by the waye of maryage, but fyrst they should endure great payne and trouble. Capitulo. lxxvii. IN the next mornynge the kyng arose and apparayled hym selfe o go and mete the Emperoure but Florence wole not go nor suffre none of her companye to goo, sauynge all onely mayster Steuen, and that was to the entent to speke wyth. Ar∣thur. So thus rode forth king Emēdus
and all hys company, & Arthur rode tal∣kynge wyth the kynge of orqueney, & so than the mayster came & dyd salute them and they hym, than the mayster sayd to Arthur in coūseyle, syr my lady Florence doth salute you by me as she yt wolde to you bothe honour & profyte. A mayster sayd Arthur I praye to god send her as moche honoure and welth as I wolde to myne owne propre persone, for truly she is a lady of great honour, & I am greatly dyspleased in my herte yt the kynge hath made me to ryde wyth hym, for now I may not se her grace the whyche greueth me right sore. why sayd the mayster wol¦de ye than gladly se her. Ye syr {quod} Arthur gladlier than either father or mother, and yet I am sure they wolde be gladde to se me. Than I beleue said the maister that whan ye se her yet wolde ye be gladder to speke with her. Syr truly mayster I had neuer so great Ioy as I shuld haue if I myght come to speke wyth her grace but I se well that wyll not be. well Arthur frende sayd the mayster loue ye wel than to speke with her. A mayster ye haue ma∣de couenaunt with me or thys y• I shuld speke wyth her, but I se well ye haue for¦goten it, but & ye wolde do it I wolde be your knyght. well syr and I cause you to speke wyth her in pryute or it be nyght wyl ye than gyue me a gyfte that I shall demaūde of you. Gyue you mayster sayd Arthur ye truly, and what so euer ye de∣maunde of me & it be the heed of thys em¦peroure that is here comynge, for and ye wyll I shal go stryke it of incontynent. Certaynly syr said the maister it shal not cost you so moche for my demaunde is no more than yf I fynde the meanes that ye shal haue in maryage the noble Florence wyl ye than agayne fynde the wayes yt I may haue the fayre lady margarete of Argenton by the way of maryage who is at the porte noyre, for I loue her wyth all myne entyer herte. And whan Arthur herde yt he was neuer soo Ioyfull before, and enbraced hym with all his herte and demaunded of hym whether he had onye comforte of her or not. And he answered that he trusted ryght well to spede, & the rather by his meanes. well mayster sayd Arthur yf she be ones agreed to you feare no man lyuynge that should take her fro you as longe as I am able to ryde or goo but that he shall lese hys heed in the qua∣rell. Sir sayd the maister I hertely than∣ke you, and syr I shall tell you what ye shall doo thys nyghte after souper, kepe your selfe in your tent close and goo not to the courte, & than I shall come to you and bryng wyth me the lady Florence, & there ye shal speke wyth her at good ley∣ser, but than be ye noo thynge abasshed but humbly desyre her loue and fauoure in all goodly maner, and habandon your selfe in all poyntes to be her knyght, but though that she make it straunge & deny you at the fyrst, yet be not ashamed ther∣with & she shall loue you the better, wher∣by ye shall the rather deserue her grace, for than she shal know that of great har¦dynes and valure of hearte it is come on you to take in hande so hye an enterpryse Gentyll mayster sayd Arthur thynke on this and I shalbe your knyght. well syr sayd the mayster I wyll departe fro you as now bicause none should mistrust our talkyng. Than the maysterrode forth in to the company of the kyng of valefoūd his father, and Arthur rode into the com¦pany of duke Phylyp. And kyng Emen¦dus rode forth so longe tyll at the last he encountred themperoure, and there they made great chere eche to other, & soo rode togyther checke by cheke tyl they came to
their tentes. And than the prestes were redy to go to masse, & so they herde masse all togyder. Than after masse thempe∣rour beyng in his tent with king Emē∣dus and all other nobles that were there assembled at that time. Thā king Emē∣dus sayd to hym, syr it hath bene or this tyme agreed and accorded with all these foure kynges, & all these .xii. peres of my realme, as well by othe & assuraunce as by sealynge of certaine charters made & affermed of the same couenaūtes that no creature shoulde haue my doughter Flo∣rence in maryage but al only that persō that the ymage who is in Florence pauy∣lyon shold giue vnto the chaplet that she holdeth in her handes, for soo it is deste∣nyed, wherfore & it please you whan the tournay is done ye shal go to the ymage and I byleue she wyll gyue it you, & yet our othes & assuraunce kepte & vpholde Verily syr sayde themperour I am well concent, thinking surely to haue had the chaplet. well syr sayde the kynge ye haue brought hither moche people, & also we haue a great cōpany with vs, wherfore I fere that yf we should tournay togider all at ones that there shold be done mo∣che hurte, wherby here after shold ensue great hatred & enuy, wherefore me thyn∣keth best that one of your barōs take in hande the tournay as to morowe with a thousande knyghtes in his company, & I shal set one of my knightes ayenst him with as many in his company, and so let vs do all foure daies one after an other, and I thinke this is a better waye than all to fyght at ones. Certaynly syr sayde themperour ye saye ryght well, & all this pleaseth me. Thā stepte forth the erle of the yle perdue, whereas Gouernar had ben with the countesse all night, & he de∣syred of themperour that he might haue the tournay the fyrste daye, the whyche themperour dyde graunt him wt a good herte. Than came forth the kinge of Or∣queney and he desyred of kynge Emen∣dus to answere the erle the same daye, & he had graūt of his request. And the king of orqueney toke Arthur & Gouernar by theyr handes and sayde, syrs I retayne you ayenst to morowe to be on my party And whan therle of the yle perdue sawe Gouernar he made to hym ryghte greate chere. Than kynge Emendus toke leue of themperour, & so euery man departed in to theyr owne tentes. Than the kynge of orqueney wente aboute and dyde chose oute suche knyghtes as he wold haue tyl it was tyme to go to their dyner. Than was water brought forth, & so than eue∣ry an wente to the courte who yt would Than the king Emendus and the other foure kynges were set at the great table and duke Phylyp & Arthur were set next them, & there they were richely serued and made great feest and ioye. And whan all the clothes were taken vp, than kynge Emendus & the other foure kynges sate them downe togyder on a clothe of sylke And the kynge of orqueney toke Arthur by the hande, to whome he made ryghte greate ioye and bare to him moch honour And as they thus talked togyder, there came to theim the archebysshop. Than mayster Steuen stode before the kynge & sayde, syr my lady Florence your dough¦ter hath sēte me to you, for she hath herde saye howe that the kynge of Orqueney hath taken on him the tournay as to mo¦rowe ayenst the Erle of the yle perdue, & syr bycause she knoweth well how tha themperour hath many good knyghtes therfore syr yf it please you she wold le∣pe on her palfrey as to morow and come and se the tournay & playe of these good
knyghtes. In the name of God sayde the king of valefoūde my lady shal do right well in her so doynge, and I am sute the kynge wyll gyue her lycence. Syr truly with a ryght good wyll sayd the kynge syth it pleaseth, you, but I doubte me mo¦che that the hete shall anoy her, and also the grete prese of horses & knyghtes shal trouble her. Well syr sayd the mayster of that she shall be taken good hede of, and syr my lady desreth also that Arthur her newe retayned knyght myghte tournay to morowe ayenst them without, for she wyll se hym tournay, & she wyll sende to be of his route her senesshall, syr Bryse∣bar, syr Ansell & syr Miles of valefoude, and so she wyll knowe to morowe what all these knyghtes wyll do. It pleaseth me ryght Well sayd the kinge. And whan Arthur herde that he had great ioye and sayde I am all at the commaundement of my lady▪ and I thanke her grace that it hath pleased her to retayne m for one of her knyghtes, for in dede so I am & wyll be euermore. well sayd the mayster sythe it is so that Arthur shall be omorowe in my ladyes route it shall be good that he go & sporte him with them to be acquen∣ted with them, & to spke and comyn to∣gyder, for by kepynge of company togy∣dr moche loue is attayned. In the nam o God said the kyng of orqueney all this is but well sayd, go your waye wyth him and acqueynt ye him with these other no∣ble knyghtes, & he thought in himselfe yt Florence would gladly se hym▪ and that he perceyued wel syth ye time yt he caused hym to syt downe by her, for than he per∣ceyued somwhat her lowly countenaūce to hymwarde, and also kynge Emendus was content yt he shold go, howbeit the mayster made noo great haste bycause yt none shold mystrust him. Than the king of orqueney said to Arthur, syr take your leue of the king and of other, & so he dyde Than the mayster went strayte to the senesshalles tent, who made hym ryght grete there, & whā that al other knyghtes knew that he was ther thei made to hm grete sygne of loue, and desyred him yt he would not depart out of theyr company and so he promysed them to do. Thā the maister wente to the fayre Florence and sayd, madame Arthur is come to your se¦nesshalles tent, the kynge hath sent hym thyder to sporte him, than her herte lept for ioye and sayd. A maister & whan shal I than se him. Madame said the maister he is as now in the company of your no∣ble barons who doeth gretely feest him, & as yet to cause him to come fro thē in my mynde it wer not wel done, but madame goo to your souper this nyght somwhat betymes, & then sende for your barons & commaūde them to make thē redy ayenst the mornynge to tournay in the compa∣ny of Arthur, & than whan they be depar¦ted fro you in the meane season that thei be aboute theyr besynes ye shal go play you in the entre of this forest amonge the fayre grne okes, & thyder shal I brynge hym to you. Ye saye ryght well said Flo∣rence, so be it, than she commaunded to haste her souper, and so wente therto be∣tymes. And Arthur all than season was with the seneshall, & all the other knigh∣tes for the loue of hym made great Ioye & feest tyll souper was past. Than may∣ster Steuen sayde to Florence, madame I wyll goo to your knyghtes and cause thē to come to you, and than shortly loke that ye delyuer them, and than go ye thi∣der as I haue shewed you, & in ye meane tyme I shal kep company with Arthur. Go youre waye dere frende sayde Flo∣rence and cause them to come to me,
for I thynke very longe tyl I haue dely∣uered them. Than the mayster departed fro her and went to the senesshals tente, and there he found as than al the barons washynge of theyr handes talkyng of wyues, and laughynge at syr Brysebar because he sayd he loued better to be stry∣ken, than to stryke an other, for he sayde it greatly anoyed hym the dyshonoure or myschyee of an other, for he was of the opynyon yt he could not be stryken with¦out hys wyfe were yll, for he sayd that yf ynes were ones mounted vp intoo the hert of a woman, it were harde to with drawe her fro her enterpryse, and yf his wyfe dyd yll, the shame therof is to her and to her lygnage, and not to hym, for he should be angry and displeased wyth her yll dedes or vylany. And whan they sawe the mayster they ran too hym on all partyes, and played with hym ryght swetely. Than the senesshal demaunded of hym what tydynges. And he answe∣red and sayde, lordes my ladye Florence wold fayne speke with you incontynent therfore go your wayes shortely to her, but for goodes sake tary not longe wyth her, for she is a lytel dyseased in her head go your wayes and I shal kepe compa∣ny wyth Arthur in the meane season, he and I wyl go walke togyther. Than al these lordes and knyghtes apparayled them and went to Florence. And than she commaunded them that they should make all thynge redye agaynst the nexte day for the tournay, and that they shold kepe cōpany with Arthur as their chiefe capytayne that day. Than her senesshal sayd, madame than it is nedefull for vs to returne to our lodgynges to make all thynges redy. In goddes name sayd Flo¦rence go on youre wayes, and so they de∣parted, and in the meane season maister Steuen led Arthur into the wood. And whan Florence hadde delyuered all her knyghtes, she called to her the quene of Orqueney, in whome she trusted abou al other, and two other damoyselles and sayd to them. Fayre ladyes let vs goo a lytel into yonder wood to sporte vs, for I haue a lytel payne in my head. Mada¦me let vs go sayd the quene of orqueney. And so they two wente toward the forest takyng together, and the other two da∣moyselles came after, and at the last he came vnder the shadow of the fayre gre∣ne okes, and there they sate them down And the mayster and Arthur were in the forest not farre fro them. And at the la Florence and the quene perceyued them. Than the quene sayd, madame I se yo¦der the mayster & an other knighte wyth hym, but I wore not who it is. And Flo¦rence answered & sayd, madame that is trouh, I am glad that I se them, for I haue a lytell to speake with the mayster, therefore madame reste you here a lytell whyle & I wyl go and speake with him Madame sayd the quene by your lycenc I must also depart & go speake wyth the countesse of the yle perdue who is come to this tourney, therfore I wil go to her and than the mayster may come to you. In goddes name sayde Florence so be it. Than the quene departed & the mayster and Arthur came to Florence and so set them downe togyder. Than the mayster sayd, madame beholde here your knight and true louer. Mayster sayde Florence he is ryght hertely welcome, for hys co∣myng pleaseth me ryght well. Madame sayd Arthur god gyue you as muche ho¦nour & ioy as I wold to the person that I loue best of al the world. Madam quod the mayster as god helpe me I am in cer¦tayne yt he would you more honour than
ny persone lyuynge, for ye haue his hert and faithful loue more than ony creature of the worlde, and madame to proue that this is true enquyre of him the trouth, & he is so gentyll and make that he can not hye his mynde fro you, and madame I praye you be not dyspleased, for I muste nedes goo speke with my lady the quene of orqueney, and soo he rose & wente hys waye and lefte Florence and Arthur to∣gyder. Than Florence demaunded of Ar¦thur of whens he was. And he answered and sayd, madame and it lyke your grace I am of the realme of fraūce. And of what lygnage be ye come sayde Florence I re∣quyre you tell me the trouthe. Madame sayd he ye be so hye a person that I ought not to hyde ony thing fro your grace, ma∣dame know ye for trouh that I am the all only son of the duke of britayne. That is noble ynough said Florence, but by ye fayth that ye owe to me who is the persō of the world that ye loue best, and would haue her loue and acquyntaunce, is she in your counte or elles where shewe me the trouth & hyde nothing fro me I re∣quyre ou, & what she is that ye would be moost oyous to haue he loue, name her to me by the fayth that ye owe to all the sacramentes of holy chyrche. Madame sayd Arthur I rquyre your grace to par¦don me, for she may be such a person that yf I should name her ye would prauen∣ture thinke in me grete foly, for she may be suche one that she wyl not set her hert in so lowe a place, nor yet I thinke scant wyll here me, therefore it is better to me to be styll than to speke oly. Truly said Florēce that is had in the herte is bad in the mouth & speche, therfore shewe me wherder ye loue ony lady or damoysell n all the worlde or not. Madame truely I loue one as faythfully as herte of man can thinke. Ye sayd Florence but doth she knowe that ye loue her. As god help me madame naye. why spake ye neuer to her oft ye mater. No truly madame sayd Arthur. And how is it that ye loue her & nuer shewed her therof, in hat it ould seme to me that ye loued her no, for it is moch payne for the mouth to retain and kepe close the feruent wyll of the herte, for lyghtly the desyre of the hert putteth outwarde the word of the mouth, as the wynde putteth away the smoke, & howe should we knowe that ye loue her and it be not shewed her, & yf she loue you wyth out speking eche of you to other what ioye shall there be bytwene you, of your hertes know not the willes eche of other as moche auayeth two shouelles in a ∣che and o man to worke with them, as two persons to loue togider and none of them to speke to other, therfore Arthur shewe me surely yf she yt ye loue would gyue you audynce should it any thynge touche you on the quycke or not. Ma∣dame I shall tell you the trouth as God helpe me spkynge with her that I loue should gretely comforte me, for the sa∣lutacion that ye sente me thys laste daye by the mayster was more ioyefull to me than to haue had all the worldes resour. why doo ye set o moche by that mssage or why doo ye loue it so moche. Madame for the loue of you that dyde sende it to me. Arthur than me thynketh ye haue loue to me. Madame as god helpe me yt is trouth more than to ony other persone of the world. well Arthur by the faith that ye owe vnto your baptim is ther no loue in you that surmounteth this loue that ye haue to me, shewe me the very trouth. No Madame by the faythe that I owe vnto God neyther to fader nor moder nor to any other persone of the world
And wold ye sayd Florence be glad and I loued you agayne. A dere lady I haue neuer had nor can not haue so great ioy well sayd Florence it is but foly that ye haue sette your herte on me, for yf I lo∣ued you agayne ye sholde be shortly lay∣ne yf it were knowen, for ye may se here this emperour who doth greatly enfor∣ce hym to haue me, and he is a gret man bothe of hauyour and of frendes, and al∣so my lorde and father and al these other foure kinges wyl al runne on you to sle you, therfore Arthur aduise you wel, for whan one begynneh a mater, it is great wysdome to regarde and beholde what ende it wyl come vntoo, and the ende of thys enterpryse is but your deth. Mada∣me sayde Arthur for all that yf I knew it should please your grace I wolde care for nothynge elles, for I woulde neyther dout emperour nor kyng yf I had your noble accorde, for yf there were any that wolde make any busynes in that case I should shew hym or this yer wente out more than an hundreth thousand bright sheldes oute of Fraunce, nor they should not haue so stronge a castell or Citie but that I wolde brynge it down to the har¦de earth. Why sayd Florence for to haue me woulde ye or durst ye thā begyn war agenst so many noble and hye riche and myghty persones as be here, haue ye so good a herte or hardynesse. Madame ye truely by the fayth that I owe vnto you and it were agenst all the world. Arthur frend sayd Florence I can not se the ma¦ner howe ye myght haue me, but youre thought in this matter may be to your do¦mage, or parauenture deth may happely come to you shortly, therfore good frende wythdrawe your loue, and than doo ye wysely, and because such a man as ye be hath thoughte to loue so hye a person as I am, I wyll make to you amendes for your good wyll, therfore I gyue to you the porte noyre the whych ye haue ache∣ued, wyth .xx. thousande pounde of yere∣ly lond, and leue ye this foly as in louing of me, for ye shall fynde ynough esye. Why madam wyl ye than gyue me lond and goodes to thentente that I shoulde leue louyng of your grace, certainly ma∣dame I wyl none of youre londes, I lo∣ue you wyth al my herte, and wil neuer take it from you, I care not for your ry¦chesse where as I should lese your loue, for I thanke god I am riche ynough, for as god helpe me yf I myght haue youre loue I wolde desire no more welth in all this world. Well Arthur sayde Florence is this than surely your mynd. Ye truly madame wythoute any faynynge. Well good frend Arthur sayde Florence than be of a good herte, for by the fayth that I owe vnto you, ye be in the waye to haue that ye desyre for, yf ye be of a good and faythfull herte to me warde, I promyse you to be in lyke case wyth you, what soo euer fall therof, therfore be ye hardy and couragyous, and shewe your seee so to morow in this tourney that euery man may haue cause to doubt you. Madame sayd Arthur, that lorde that foumed all the world send youre haboundant grace bothe bounte and valure, for now tat I haue your loue I am ryche ynough, for I desyre no more of god, and I shall be true to you whyle my life endureth. wel myne owne true louer sayde Florence I shal tell you what ye shal do, I wil that ye shall be too morowe in the ourney in the company of the kynge of Orqueney who is my cosyn Germayne, and I wil that fro hens forth he be your companion and that ye loue hym, and I shall desyre hym euer to encrease your honour, in as
moche as he may, and I shall sende vnto you to gyue you attendaunce my senes∣shal and other of my knightes, and they shall be of your route, and there I desyre you do suche dedes of armes that it may sounde to your honour, and to the rest & peas of my herte, for my herte shall be repasted and nourysshed with the good renowne of your hye prowesse, I maye not lōg▪ talke with you at this time, nor so often as my herte wold, but alwayes sende me your wyll & mynde by mayster Steuen, and I shall sende myne agayne vnto you, kepe secrete this mater how so eur ye do, for elles moche harme or euyl myght perauenture happen to fall to vs by false enuy, be ye alwaye true & fayth∣full and I shall doo my payne to brynge you to honoure. And as they were thus talkynge togyder there yssued out of the forest Proserpyne quene of the fayry, & of the castell of hurtebyse, where as Ar∣thur had ben with the wounded knight And she dyde syt downe by Arthur, and bothe the louers knewe nothynge ther∣of tyll she was set, and as soone as Ar∣thur sawe her he knewe her ryght well, and dyde salute her, and she hym agayne and Florēce also, and she said to Arthur Frende now haue ye that your hert hath lōge desyred for, therfore now be in peas and ioye, and loue your louer with true and faythfull herte. Fayre, doughter Flo¦rēce I sawe not you syth I was in your bedde, & there I made knowledge to you of this man, beholde here Arthur youre true louer who faythfully & wyth good herte loueth you, therefore fayre dough∣ter loue hym agayne, for I dyde desteny hym to you in your natiuyte in the moūt of aduentures and at the same tyme I destenyed also that ye shold in all thinge resemble vnto me. Than Arthur be∣helde them bothe one after another, and so perceyued well that they were lyke in all thynges, for there was noo creature though he were neuer soo crafty that yf he behelde wel at lēgth them both coude not dyscryue the one fro the other they resembled so nere togyder. Thā she sayd to Florence beholde here your louer, and I wyll bee wytnesse yt he is at this time the moost true louer that lyueth, for I haue ryghte well proued hym, and than she recounted to Florence how that she had desyred his loue in the forest, and al∣o caused hym to come vnto the castell of hurtebyse and there dyd as moche as she coude to entyse his mynde to cause hym to loue her and also how she made other to tempte hym, and how all that wolde not auayle, for alwayes he was in one ferme poynt, wherat Florence right swe¦tely dyde smyle. Than Proserpyne sayd to Arthur, frende ye shall haue her in ma¦riage, but first ye must suffre grete paine And fayre Florence bycause that the emperoure and the kynge your fader be grete togyder▪ therfore your fader wyll be right sore dysplesed with you, in suche wyse that yf he myghte haue you at that tyme he woulde put you bothe to death but for al that be not abashed, for I shal make the peas bytwene you ryght well, there is no greate loue bitwene him and themperour, but I promyse you or all be done I shall cause as grete hate to be by¦twene them, in so moche that eche of thē shal defie other to the deth, wherfore liue ye in rest and peas and loue eche other faythfully, and I shal thinke ryght well on euery thynge that shall be behouable for you in this maer, and so thus I be∣quethe you bothe to God for thys tyme. So than the quene Proserpyne rose and wente her waye so sodeinly that none of
them wyst where that she was become wherof they had gret maruayle. Than Florence made a token to mayster Ste∣uen that he shoulde come to theym, and whan he was come she said. Mayster be¦holde Arthur here I delyuer hym to you and loke that ye take good hede to hym, and shewe to my cosyn the kynge of Or∣queney that I send hym to hym, and say that I desyre hym to thynke to do hym as muche honoure to morow as he can do for my sake, and good swete louer Ar¦thur thynk ye to morow how that ye are a louer to a fayre gentyl damoysell, & to a ryght noble lady & a ryche giue ye gyf∣tes largely to these noble knightes both harneys and horse the which shal make you to be beloued of euery body, for I bi¦leue the tyme wyl come that we shal ha∣ue nede of frendes, there is noo sweter thynge than largely to gyue, for therby oftentymes all yll wyll is appeased, and mayster I charge you to delyuer to hym what so euer he wyl haue, Arthur now go on your way and lodge in the tente yt the king my father hath ordeyned for you and loke ye be fre & large and giue wyth good herte and so as for this time adew myne owne dere louer and so for a remē¦braunce kyssed hym and than she depar∣ted and wente to the quene of orqueney. And Arthur and the mayster went to the senesshals tente, and there they encoun∣tred Gouernar and Bawdewyn. Than wythin a whyle Arthur toke leue of the senesshal and of al other that were there and so departed and went to the kynges tent, and by the way he mette the kynge of Orqueney, who issued out of the kyn¦ge of valefoūdes tente, who was father vnto mayster Steuen, & whan he sawe Arthur and maystr Steuen togither he dyd salute them & made to them ryghte greate chere and oye, and so they went talkynge togyther tyll they came to his tent. Than the mayster toke hym aparte and sayde, syr my lady Florence tusteth muche in you, and loueth you ryght en∣tyerly▪ wherefore syr she hath lente you here Arthur her owne knyght & putteth him into youre handes, and she desyreth you that all the honoure and ayd that ye can do, that ye wyl shew it to him to mo¦rowe in the tourneye for hr sake. And whan the kyng hrde that he had ryghte great ioye, and sayd to Arthur, syr by th fayth that I owe vnto the kynge, I pro∣myse you that I wyl bere to hym fayh∣ful company and true loue, for the loue of my lady and of you, so thus they were so longe togyther till it was tme to go so theyr restes and o than euery man re¦tourned ino thyr owne tentes and od∣gynges. And the mayster delyuered to Goernar .xi. horses for Arthur, to then tent that he should gyue them away the nexte day. ¶How that Arthur had the honours o the touney the fyrst daye, the why∣che was made for the fayre Florence betwene the kynge Emendus and the Eperour who wolde haue had Flo∣rence to hys wyfe, on the whyche day Arthur gate hym selfe great prayse a∣mong all the barony, in so muche that euery knyghte was glad to be in his company, whereof the fayre Florence was ight ioyous, for she loued hym aboue all other. Cap. lxxix. IN the next mornyng all the kinges and other ose & her∣de mase,  suche as wold to¦ke a sop in wine, & than eue¦ri mā Armed him. Thā Go¦uernar
and Bawdewyn by the cōmaū∣dement of Arthur dyd gyue and departe man horses and moche harneys to son∣dry knightes where as they sawe mister and nede, the whyche knyghtes thanked Arthur ryghte hertely and promysed to gyue hym theyr helpe and socoure at all tymes, and ayenst euery man, wherby it appereth that there is nothynge but by large gyftes it is made softe and meke. Than the tydynges of Arthurs courte∣sye was spredde abrode in euery tente, and there it was said how that ther was not in all the world soo free a knyght as Arthur was. And these wordes came to the auyence of the fayre Florence, wher¦at her hert dyde laughe, and there withall she mounted on a palfrey, and the quene of orqueney, and the archebyshop in her company, who shewed her how that Ar∣thur had a grete renowne, and counseiled her to loue hym well. And thus was kyng Emendus mounted on his horse, & al his barony to behold the iournay, and Arthur was redy armed in ye place wher¦as the tournay should be, & so than there came to hym the kynge of orqueney with his baner dysplayed, & moo than .ii.C. in his company. And whan he came to Ar∣thur he sayd in open audyence, syr youre noble valure & hye prowesse is right wel knowen, & I bileue veryly that in al this tournay there shall be no knyght lyke vn¦to you, therfore syr I offre to you my bo∣dy & all my company to be this daye vn∣dr your gouernaūce. And whan Florēce herde that she smyled for ioye, and than there came to hym all suche knyghtes as he had gyuen to before bothe horse and harneys, and they all thanked hym ryght swetely and sayde, syr we wyll be of your route this daye, for we make of you our capytayne in this tournay, and as thei lo¦ked downe into ye valey thei saw wher there came Florēce senesshall with hys baner dysplayed, & with hym syr Bryse∣bar, syr Insell, & syr Myles of valefoūde and with thē .iii. C. knightes who were all pertayning to the fayre Florence, and they all came to Arthur, & toke hym for their chiefe capytayne. And whā Arthur sawe the grete honour that was done to hym he had so grete ioye that his hardi∣nes encreaced therby more than the one halfe, & so dashe to his horse & rode forth and dyde salute the kynge Emdus who helde his one hande in the lappe of hys doughter Florence, than he kynge dyde salute hym agayne & sayd, syr I rquyre you helpe to ayde this day our knightes yf ye may. Ye good Arthur said Florence and shewe so forth your selfe that it may be knowen how ye be a knyght pertai∣nynge to a gentyll damoysell. Madame doubte ye not but I wyl do my deuoyre for my wyll therto is good. Thā Arthur retourned and went agayne to the kin∣ge of orqueney, and he was so fayre and goodly to beholde in harneys that euery man had theyr eyen vpon him and sayd This knyght is the soueraine of bounte and beaute of all the chyualry of all the worlde. Than there came to the felde the erle of the yle perdue, & with him a thou∣sande and .v.c. knyghtes all with baners and stremers dysplaied wauering in the wynde with grete noyse of trompettes tabours and busynes, & than there was mounted on theyr horses to beholde the tournay the emperour & kynge Ionas & the duke of bigor, who as than was late come out of his owne coūtre. Than har¦des began to crye knightes do your best go togyder bayle, bayle, than began the tournay & knightes wēt togider by gret routes, and laide on eche vpon other, and
Arthur rusht forth wt hys horse so rude¦ly as thoughe the erth had trembled, and strake so the fyrst that he encountred wt all in the myddes of the breste soo rudely that he ouerthrewe knyght and horse al togider on a hepe. Thā Florence said to the kyng her fader, syr of yonder knyght that is fallen I hope we shal haue peace of him al this day. Certenly fayre dough¦ter sayde the kynge that is true, for that stroke came from the handes of a good knyghte. Than Arthur encountred an o∣ther & oke him by the sholders & drewe hym so rudely to him warde that he cast hym downe in the myddes of the plae, than he toke his sword the whyche Flo∣rence had sent him, for he wold not draw out clarence his good sword to thentent yt he would normayme or sle no knyght by his wyl that daye, but he gaue wyth that sword suche strokes yt he brought a slepe who so euer he touched so that thei were fayn to tomble to the erth whether they woulde or no, and there he dyd soo muche at that bront that he bette downe a .v. knyghtes, than euery man yt saw hym sayd, thys knyght is none earthlye man, but we thynke rather he be a ende of hell, whoo thynketh he be nothynge pertaynynge to god, for he confoundeth all that euer he attayneth vnto, so euery mā was abasshed of hys hye prowes & vertue. Than the kyng of Orqueney al∣wayes folowed Arthur with hys eyen, & by the reason of the noble prowesse that he sawe in hym, ho toke in him greter har¦dynes than euer he dyd before, and there with he rusht into a gret flocke of knigh¦tes that were of the emperours partye, and layde on rounde aboute hym, for he was a ryght noble knyght, than al those knyghtes and dyuers other ran rounde aboute hym, for they knew well yf they myght take hym prysoner it shoulde be a great honour vnto them and alsoo they thought they should haue a great raun∣some for hym, but alwayes he defended hym selfe yght nobly, but at length it a∣uayled him not for the prese was so grt and some toke hym by the necke, and some by the sholders, and so would haue vnhorsed hym. And whan syr Neuelon the senesshal, syr Brysebar, syr Ansell, & syr Myles sawe the kinge of Orquenyy in that case, they dasht al togyther intoo the prese to helpe hym and there they did right nobly, how be it the senesshal was been downe, for hys horse foundred vn∣der hym, and soo there they would haue taken hym prisoner. Than Gouerner sa¦we that, and he dressed hym o that part whereas the senesshal was taken, and Gouerna helde in bothe hys handes a gret luer, wherwith he layd on amonge those knyghtes with so mighty and he¦uy strokes that he astonyed whome soo euer he touched, and here he dyd so mo∣che that by very force he caused the senes¦shal to remount agayne on his horse, and in the meane seaon the kyng of Orque∣ney was holden ryght short so that hys hrse foundred and fell vnder hym, how be it after yt he efended hym selfe righte valyauntly. And whan Arthur who as than had dyscomytd a geat companye o knighes sw the kyng in ye dystresse he ush forh into the prese and encoun¦tred with the son of therle of the yle per∣due, and toke him with both his handes about hys sholders and dydde caste hym downe on oher two knightes that were on fote, so tha one of theim fell flatte to the erth, and than he rose agayne and be helde the knyght that was allen on him and sayd, maye syr yll haue he that dyd caste you vpon me. And whan Arthur
had ouerthrowē this knight he toke his horse by the rayne & brought hym to the kynge and dide light of his owne horse to helpe the kinge to mounte theron in the spyte of all hys enemies, & than by grete force and hardynes dyde lepe vp agayne on his owne horse. And al this saw wel Florence and the archebysshop, & all the other kynges & praised gretely that dede He is the best knyght of the world sayd the kyng Emēdus. Syr that is true sayd the bysshop. And whan Arthur had re∣mounted the kynge of orqueney agayne he said. Syr put your selfe no more this daye in to soo greate a prese of your ene∣myes, but syr & it please you hardilye o∣lowe me. Than Arthur put hym selfe in to the same prese that was before on the kinge, and thei were as than al ested on Gouernar and on syr Brysebar, who as than had grete nede of helpe, & there Ar∣thur layde on rounde about him by suche force yt he bette downe knightes & horses to the plaine earth, for he strake none but that he went to the earth, & soo there Ar∣thur dyde so moche that he ouercame all that route, & whan he was passed heym he sawe where thre knyghtes had beten downe syr Myles of valefounde. Than Arthur dressed hym so to the fyrst that he ouerthrewe to the erth, & toke his horse & delyuered it to syr Myles & caused hym to mount theon. Than Arthur strake so the seconde knyghte that hys horse bare hym all aboute in a traunce, for he wyst not where he was. And Gouernar with his leuer strake so that the thyrde he fell flatte to the erth, and whan he releued he fledde awae as fast as he myghte, for he durst no lenger abyde for all the Cyte of Parys, & the other knyght yt was borne on his horse all in a straunce came before where as the kynge Emendus and Flo∣rence was, wherat the kynge & she dyd laugh. And whan the knyght reuyued he sayd all on hyr. The knight is an yll car∣penter, for he maketh many chyppes, I trowe all the fendes of hell hath sent hym hyder, shame haue he I wene he is a bur∣gonyon. Than the kinge laughed at th wordes & sayde, there is non can abyde hym, for his strokes are ryght valyaunt That is true syr sayd the bysshop. Than Arthur sawe where there was a grete cō¦pany of knyghtes wel to ye nombre of .ii. hondred in a route, & amonge them was the erle of the yle perdue, & he had taken more than .xl. of Florence knyghtes, and vnhorsed them and was ledinge of them forthe as prysoners. And whan Arthur sawe that he was ryght sorowfull, and soo by grete randon he dasht in amonge them, and there dyde suche dedes of ar∣mes that all that behelde hym wondred at hys valyauntnes, for it semed that he was but newly come to the tournay, he claue asonder sheldes and vnbared hel∣mes and braste asonder gyrthes & bette downe knyghtes togyder on hepes, and Gouernar wt his leuer delte strokes right rudely, wherwith he broughte knyghtes a slepe, soo that some of them wyste not whiche waye to tourne them. Thā came to him the kinge of orqueney, Brysebar, he senesshall, syr Myles, and syr Ansell and many other knightes, and so by that tyme there was horsed agayne a .xxv. of the knyghtes that were before taken pry¦soners, & there they delte so wt theyr ene∣myes that the erle of the yle perdue was sore dyspleased, & he and a .xviii. in hys company ranne all at ones at Arthur, & there by forse they slewe his horse vnder hym, wherwith he was ryghte sore dys∣pleased, and than stepte vp on his fete and gaue soo many greate strokes & heuy
that he cast euery mā to the erth who so euer he met withal, and than he repented hym that he had not born with him that day claence his good sworde, how be it he gaue suche strokes yt none dust apro¦che to him, but euerye man fled fro hym. And whan Gouenar saw Arthur a fote in tat greate prese, he aduysed well the erle of the yle perdues neuew who was right well mounted on a good horse, & so toke him with his one hand by the necke and pulled him down on his horse mane and gaue hym a ryght great stroke wyth his leer betwene his sholders, & as he thus helde him Arthur came & toke hym by he leg and ūbled him ouer his horse out of the sadel and threw him to ye earth and so toke his hors and did mount ther on. And whan the erle saw his neuew on the erth, he spurred his horse to come to his rescowe. And than Arthur enbra¦ced him so at his comyng and spurred so his horse that he drewe hym clene besyde hys sadell, and in the spite of al his ene∣myes he toke hym prysoner and caused him to be yelded to king Emendus, and so was put into the kepyng of the fayre Florence, & thā she caused hym to be vn¦armed, for he was ryght wery and was verye hote and sore chafed. And than Ar∣thur dasht intoo the prese, and there dyd what he lyst hym selfe, for he bet downe knightes and wan horses & themperour sawe well howe that he al onely discom¦fyted hys knyghtes, the whych greued him right sore, & also the duke of bygor was ryght sore dysplesed in hys mynde because he sawe Arthur do all that day so nobly, and at the laste he knewe well how that was he that had slayne hys ne¦uewe at the Citye of Argence, wherfore he would fayne haue runned on hym to haue slayne hym, but he doubted muche he kynge of orqueney. Than he sayd to themperour, syr the erle of the yle perdu is taken prysoner and all your knightes clene dyscomfyted, the whych is o you great shame wythoute so be that ye pu therto some other maner of rdy, and all the shame that is done to vs, is don by yonder knyght with the white sheld and by the other knight with the gret l¦uer, and verely it is he that slewe my ne∣uewe syr Isembart at Argence, and sore wounded my cosyn syr Rowland▪ & also he hath slayne syr Fyrmont my tresourer and so he hath done me righte greate do∣mage, and I knowe well he is a ryghte fayre knight and a yonge, and of his hā¦des suche as ye may se▪ and this I say bi¦cause of your loue Florence whome ye shal haue, but his prowes and goodnes parauenture may cause her to loue hym for the heart of a woman is sone turned and chaūged, this knight hath done you al redy ight great domage, and is likely to do you more wtout ye take right good hede, and put therto right good counsayl Therfore syr I requyre you let me haue the tourney to morowe, and I shall soo handel hym that I promyse you he shall not be here agayne on the thyrde daye. well syr sayd themperour I graunt you your desire. Syr sayd the duke I thanke you, and so they left their talking as at y• time. And Arthur al that season layde on round about him as freshely as though he had but newly begon the tourney, and the kyng of orqueney behelde hym mer∣uaylously and spake neuer a worde, and whan he had longe beholden hym, he to∣ke at hys hye prowesse suche hardynes that he habandoned hym selfe intoo the prese, and layde on frely with hys swor¦de. Than the tourney was more greter and more thycker than is was of al the
day before and so there Gouernar brake his leuer, thā he layd hand on his sword and dyd therwyth as much as any good knyght oughte or myght doo. And so at last Arthur and the kyng of Orqueney dyd so muche that they vnhorsed all the erles cōpany and wer set on fote sore bea¦ten, in so much that they had much payne to stand on their fete. Than Arthur sto∣de in the felde wt his sword in his hand saying, lordes yf there be any moo that wil come let them prese forth, I am redy to answere them, and so at last ye kyng of orqueney and he retourned fro the felde. Than the kynge Emendus encountred them & enbraced them all armed as they were, & specially Arthur and thanked hī muche of the pain that he had suffred y• daye, for syr all onely by your prowesse thys day themperours people are dyscō¦fyted. And as they wer thus talking to¦gether ther came to them a knight fo ye duke of bygor who sayd to ye kyng Emē¦dus, syr the duke of bygor demaūdeth of you the tourney to morow. Than stepte forth the kyng of mormall and ayde, sir may i plese you to suffre me to haue to morow the furney agenst the duke of by¦gor. Syr it pleaseth me ryghte wel sayde the kynge Emendus, therefore I desyre you do your part, for we haue the honor this day, therfore do your paine that we may haue it also to morow. Syr said he doubte not I shall do my true deuoyre, thā he toke Arthur by the hand and said Gentyll knyght floure of all chyualry I desyre you as hertely as I can do so mo¦che to morow as ye may wynne a kyng for euermore as yt it would please you to shew parte of your hye prowesse to mo∣rowe in ayding of my quarell, and in the defence of the noble honour of my lord ye kyng here present. Ye syr sayd the kyng Emendus & therto I wyl desyre you, for by your hye prowesse we haue the honor this day, therfore it shuld greue vs grete¦ly and we should lese it to morow. Thā Arthur sayd, syr with a right good wil I shall do my deuoyre. And whan Flo∣rence herd yt she was not content in her mynde, for she thought that Arthur had bene sore wery of that dayes iourney, & thought that it should gretly anoy hym yf he turnayed the nexte daye and so she thought she wold let that iourney y she myght, thā she cōmaunded the kyng her father to god as at that time, than she to¦ke with her into her tent the archebyshop and dyuers others of her barons, & king Emendus caused Arthur to be broughte into his tent with al hys hole baronye, & all the emperours knyghtes spake of no thyng but of Arthurs prowesse, for they sayd that there was not agayne in al the world soo good a knight as he was be¦holdyng and consideryng al his dedes, & how that he had borne him selfe in thys turney, & the emperour said yt he would rather resemble to hym than to haue su∣che an other empyre as his owne was: & the bruyte of Arthurs renowne sprad so far abrode, tyll at last it came to the hea∣ryng of syr Rowland, and than he said I thanke god that suche a knight hath Iu¦sted agenst me, for my honor is the more Thā the kyng Emendus came into his one tente, & than caused Arthur to come to hym, & there were al the other kinges who dyd muche honour to Arthur, and there were dyuers that sayd to the king of Soroloys, syr behold here this knight full of bounte & worthy to haue gret ho¦nour, & all that they sayd by Arthur who as than was right hor. Than the king cōmaunde two squyers to stand with a towell & blow wynd into hys face, and
thus Arthur stode before the kynge and he was goodly for to beholde, for he was streyght longe & bygge, & aboue all other ryght gracyous of his wordes, for euery man had grete disporte at his lowly and goodly wordes. Than the king cōmaun∣ded yt there should be brought to Arthur a mantell to caste on hym to thentent he should take no could, and the kyng of or∣queney dyde put it about him, yt whyche became hym ryghte well. And than thre came to them Gouernar to whome there was made ryght grete feest & ioye, there came thyder the erle of ye yle perdue whō Arthur had taken prisoner in the tour∣nay, and in his company .xxx. knyghtes to pledge hym of his raunsome. And the kynge made hym ryght good chere. And syr Roulande & themperours senesshall who had Iusted before wyth Arthur by that tyme were heled of theyr hurtes, & were come also in to the kynges tente to sporte them and to here tydynges of the tournay. And whā the erle of the yle per∣due sawe them he had great ioye, and de∣maunded of theym howe they dyde. And they answered & sayd how that they had ben sore hurte, but as than they wer wel amended. Than the erle sayd to the kyng Syr it is of trouth that I was taken in your tournay, therfore syr I am come to you to be deliuered of my raunsome, ther∣fore may it please you to shewe me youre pleasure, and I am redy to accomplishe your commaūdemēt. Certaynly syr sayd the kyng it lyeth not in me, for that ma∣ter lyeth in the pleasure of Arthur, who is here presente who that toke you pry∣soner in ye felde. Syr said Arthur sauing your grace that is not so, for the tornay is yours, and I am but as one of youre knyghtes and of my ladyes your dough¦ter, therfore syr it were no reason that I should saye or doo ony thynge where as your grace is present. In ye name of god sayd the kynge we wil that ye shal speke your mynde, and it shall please vs ryght well all yt euer ye shall saye or do. Than the kynge of valefoūde sayd, syr ye shall do thus, for it is reason that ye do as my lorde the kynge wyll haue you. well syr sayd Arthur in ye name of god, & so stode vpon his fete & sayd to the kinge, syr & it like your grace syth it is your pleasure yt I shall speke I say that this erle here be¦ynge present shall kepe you cōpany thys dyner season, & after dyner to sporte and to play him with you as longe as it shal please him, and whan it wyl please him to retourne to the emperour that he & all his company go franke & free, & I wyll desyre him to take of my gift this swerde, the whych I thinke be good and sure, the whiche Gouernar had brought to hym before fro mayster Steuen by the com∣maundemēt of Florence to thentēt that he should gyue it to the earle, and in dede there was not a better swerde in all the emperours hoost, & there Arthur desyred the earle for hys loe to take it for a re∣membraūce, and also desired him to take a horse of his gyfte in recompence of the horse yt he had taken fro him in the felde. And whan the kinge herde Arthur haue these wordes he had grete ioye, & loued hym withal hys herte bycause of his gen¦tilnes. Than therle answered & sayd, syr gentyll knyghte of herte I haue rychesse sufficient and am able to be set a ryght grete raūsome though it were .xx. or .xxx. duckettes, and also I haue swedes and horses ynough, how be it y• hye prowesse that is in you and the grete gentylnes of youre herte prouoketh me to receyue all your courtesye, & veryly I take all your offre of you on the condicion that ye wil
fro hens forth take mi ayde and socours in al your busynes agenst al persons ex∣cept my lorde the emperoure. Than Ar∣thur al smylyng thanked hym muche. Than the kyng enbraced the erle for the loue of Arthur, thā was water brought forh an the kyng wasshed and the erle and so dyned togither & made good chere and were righte richely serued, and after dyner they sported them togethr tyll it was time for the kinge to go to his est. Than the erle toke leue of the kynge & so cōmaunded him to god. And Arthur con¦uayed him a great pace, and did giue to the erles knightes manye good horses & palfaies, wherof thei thanked him right gretely. And at the last Athur oke hys leue of hym & so depated, and than the erle went streyght to ye emperours tente where as he founde hym accompanyed wyth the duke of bygor and many other noble knightes▪ and there the erle made greae praysyng of Arthur before them∣peroure and shewed howe of his gentyl∣nes he had suffered him to go qute, and how that he had giuen him many grte gifes, and also to his knightes. Uerely sayd the emperoure there is not suche a knight in al ye world▪ neyther of beautye nor of prowesse, for he is the souerayne knight of al other, for I s none like him of prowesse, I wolde I had giuen ye best citie that I haue on the conditiō that h were retained as my knight. And whan ye duke of bygor herd themperour prayse so muche Arthur, he was in hys mynde ryght sore displesed & sayd to therle, syr ye make here a great pleyng of a flying vacabond▪ for no man knoweth what he is, nor fro whens he cōmeth, & ye ma∣ke of him here suche a noyse, that no mā taketh hede of anye thynge elles, I can not tell you what he hath giuen you, cer¦tainly it is no honor for you to take any gyftes of a man fugytyue that is fledde or banysshed out of his own coūtry, but syr I wyl ye know certaynely yt what so euer giftes he hath giuen you, to morow shal I giue you his head frō his sholders therfore I hold him wise in that h hath dparted of his tresour in his life dayes to you & to your company, for I waran him he shal do so neuer agayne. wel syr sayd therle, threte him hardely fayre and easely that he knew it not, for and he do I fere me lest that he wyl flye away, and than ye can not giue me his heade & syr where as ye saye that no man noweth what he is, syr I ensure you he is a ryght noble wise knight, and it maketh no ma¦ter to a noble knight where so euer he be¦cōmeth, for hys boune wyl shewe right well his estate & where as ye say that he is a vacabonde and is fledde out of hys own coūtry, syr it had ben better to youre neuew that he had fledde into England or that he met with him at gece, for there your neuewe lost his lyfe, and there ye fledde a way wtout by doynge of anye farewell, he nedeth not to aue anye care though ye say thus of him for an yl ton∣gue enpayreth euer the honour of a no∣ble wyse man, and I enure you I wyll shewe him thse vylayne wordes that ye say of hym▪ and yf anye yll come to you therby take it a worth. Than ye duke be¦gan to wae angy, & so the maer wold haue ben worse and themperour had not bene, for he caused them to be departed & to be in peas. Now let vs leue to speake of them, and returne to Florence. ¶How that Florence fayned her self to be sicke, to the entent that Arthur should not tourney the nexte daye, for she was in fere that Arthur had bene weary by∣cause
of the trauayle that he had endured the fyrst daye of the tournay. And howe that the emperour whan he knewe that he went to se her, and so dyde her fader kynge Emendus, and all other kynges dukes erles and barons, and all the hole chyualry. Capitulo. lxxx. Emendus. Florence. WHan that Florēce was depar¦ted fro the king her fader and entred into her tent, than she drewe her into her secrete chā¦bre and called to her mayster Steuen & sayd. Fayre swete mayster I am ryghte sore displeased in my herte bycause yt the kynge my fader hath desired my loue Ar∣thur to turnay again to morowe in the company of the king of mormall, for I see wel he doth not consider the trauaile that he hath endured this daye, for yf he were made of stele he cā not endure thus euery daye to trauayle, alas yf ony yll or dyshonour shold come to him I shold die for sorowe. I se well they yt thus desyre hym to go forth agayne to morowe loue but lytle his helth, wherfore I wil fynde some meanes to put of the tournay as to morowe to thentente that he shalbe the more freshe the nexte daye after, therfore I wyll sende worde to the kyng my fa∣der how that I am sycke in my bed desy∣ring him that as to morow the tournay maye be deferred tyll the nexte daye, but mayster I desyre you lette Arthur haue knowlege of the trouth, for elles I fere me he would be sorowfull for my disease Madame said the maister ye speke wyse∣ly and I shall tell you why, fyrst therby Arthur shall well rest hym, and secondly it is so he is as now grely praised of his courtesy, & is taken as chefe companion with the king your fader, and wyth all the other kynges and barons, & as I vn¦derstande he is gretely in the grace of the emperour and of all his knightes, for all this hole assemble loueh him, & as soone as themperour hereth of your dysease he wyl come and se you accompanyed with all the nobles of his company, and whan the kyng your fader hereth of his cōmīg to you I doubte not but that he and all his other .iiii. kynges wyth all the noble men of theyr company wyl in lykewyse come to se you so than therby here shall be assembled all the hole chyualrye, and so than at some houre conuenyent while they be al here it shall be well done to as∣saye the vertue of the chaplet, & to se to whome the ymage wyll gyue it o. Alas mayster I loue this knyght, & I woulde not for any thinge that an other shoulde haue it, & I fere me leest the ymage wyll gyue it to some other persone. Than the mayster all smiling sayd, madame what perauenture and the ymage gyue me the chaplet wold ye be content, & as he spake he smelled to a fayre rose that he helde in
his hāde. Mayster {quod} Florence ye please me right well & I loue you faythfully, & also I o. Arthur. Madame sayd yt may∣ster than syth I please you & that ye loue me & Arthur also, than it maketh no ma¦ter wheder that I or he haue the chaplet sith that your loue is on vs both. Ye but maystr sayd Florence, in my loue there is a dyfference. And what is ye difference I pray you madame shew me the trouth Truly mayster that rose that ye holde in your hande right well dooth sygnyfy it. This rose madame said the mayster & I pray you howe. Herken mayster to me & I shl shw you, it is so I se in that rose thre maner of thinges, fyrst the closoure without the whyche kepeth fro hurting the budde tyll it be a full rose spradde a∣brode, and whan it is spradde than the leues be fayre & rede, and in the myddes of the rose there litle graines resembling to golde, and out of this rose there maye be felte suche odour and smell that it per¦seth throughout the nose euē to the hert for the herte wyll reioyse with the good smll therof. In the name of god said the maystr all this that ye saye is true, but madame what dooth all this sygnifye. Mayster said Florence I shal shew you the closure without the which kepeth ye budde fro huring til it be sprede abrode sygnyfyeth you, who hathe kepte me tyll this daye without enpayryng, for it is now tyme that the rose sprede abrode that is to say to mary me and to kepe my londe as it pertaineth to the doughter of a kynge, and these leues of the rose that be so fayre & rede, signifyeth your trouth and faythfulnes, for I haue founde euer i you grete trouth & boūte towarde me and also to my fader & to al the hole real∣me, & mayster in this rose there be grai∣nes lyke vnto gold, the which is the pre∣coyust metal of al the world, and that is sygnifyed by the grete & excellent clergy that is in you the whiche is more preci∣ous than gold, for therby ye haue alway∣es kept & defended me in all my nedes, & mayster by these .iii. poyntes I loue you But the fourth thing that is in this rose is the swete auour therof, the which per¦seth al the hole body euen to the hert, for in the flagraūt odour therof bothe the bo¦dy & the herte is reioysed, and certaynly maister this .iiii. loue that commeth thus of this rose is min own loue Arthur who is chefe rose, and aboue all other mooste fayre, & aboue all other knyghtes moost valyaunt, as the rose is chefe of all flou∣res. Madame sayd the mayster I se well ye haue had a good and a sage mayster, & I se well how that ye loue me well with out, but ye loue Arthur inwardly, and by my soule ye can not do better, for ye can haue none better than he is, & knowe ye for certayne that none shal haue you but all onely he. Gentyl maister said Florēce helpe me therto, for al my trust is in you. Madame as I vnderstande he is come into the senesshalles tent. well mayster than go your way to him and shewe him that I wyl that he come and se me, and brynge with hym the senesshal and such other company as he wyl, & than shal I se by theyr countenaunce yf they be con∣tent though I make Arthur a lytel good and lowly semblaūt, for oftentymes the wyll of the herte sheweth it selfe fayrely outwarde, for it is harde to know an o∣ther mannes wyl without ther be made to hym some maner of semblaūt wherby he shall haue occasyon to vtter somwhat of hys wyl. Madame said the mayster I se well it is a subtil thing of a womans wytte whan thei lit them selfe, than the maister rose & went into the senesshalles
tent. At whiche tyme Brisebar said, here lacketh none now in this cōpany but the mayster. And with that worde he entred in at the dore. And than syr Myles sayd, loo syrs whan one speketh of the wolfe lightly he seeth his taile▪ & so therwt thei welcomed the mayster, & caused hym to syt downe by Arthur. Than the maister sayd to Arthur, syr how haue ye done in this tournay, how semeth you by the kni¦ghtes of this coūtre, be they not as vali∣aunt as the knyghtes of fraūce. Certain¦ly mayster sayd Arthur they be as valy∣aunt & rather more hardy, for there is no¦ne yt I haue seen but yt they ought ryght well to be receyued in to the hye ordre of chyualry. Syr sayde the mayster ye may not departe fro hens now tyl ye se my la¦dy Florence, for & ye do she wyl not be cō∣tent. Mayster said Arthur in the name of god I would ryght glad to se her, but I knowe not her pleasure in yt behalfe, let vs goo & se her all togyder, & so they rose and went all togyder with Arthur, and the mayster wente in before the Florēce & sayde. Madame beholde here is Arthur who is come to se you. He is right welco¦me sayd Florence, and so she rose ayenst hym, and the quene of orqueney toke Ar∣thur by the hande & set him downe by her and she demaunded of hym howe that he dyde syth the tournay. And he answered her how that he dyde ryght well. By the good lorde said Florence in the tournay ye suffred moche payne & trauayle, and ryght well there ye dyde, wherfore your louer yf ye haue ony ought to loue you the better & this she said al smyling and layde her hande vpon his heed. Madame as god helpe me sayd Arthur I haue not as moche loue as I wold haue. In good fayth said the quene of Orqueney yf she were right hye & noble she shold be right well enployed on you. Ye truly said Bri¦sebar I wold he were beloued as wel as I would according to my wyll, & whan Florence herde yt she smyled & sayde, syr Brysebar by the faith yt ye owe vnto the hye ordre of chyualry & to saynt George what is your wyll in that case. Madame sayd he I wyl not shew that, for perauē∣ture it should displease you. Nay by my soule sayd Florence I wyl not be displea¦sed what so euerye saye, therfore shewe me your mynde, also I cōmaunde you so to doo. Madame syth it is your pleasure I shal shew you, I wold yt ye loued hym in suche wyse that he wer your lord and husbonde, for a more sweter, courteyser, nor a better knyght can ye not haue a∣gayne in al the world, for a more gentyll gracious cōpani coud not be foūd again as should be of you twaine. well Brise∣bar said Florence & saye ye this wt good herte. Ye truly madame by al the saintes of paradyse. well syr senesshall said Flo∣rence & what shold be your mynde. Ma∣dame said he I praye to god I neuer go out of this place but I would it were soo on the cōditō that it cost me as moch as I am worth. Thā she demaūded the same of all other, & they al wt one voyce said ye same. wel syrs sayd she behold wel whe∣der ye haue wysshed your profyte in this or not, for ye al know wel how that this emperour demaūdeth me of ye kinge my fader & would haue me to his wife, & ther¦fore yf it wer so that an other toke me he would haue grete despyte & moue ayenst hym warre, wherby should ensue that al ye should be put o payne & trouble, & in peryll of your lyes, for ye be al my men wherfore ye ought to defende me ayenst all myn enemyes. Madame sayd Brise∣bar by my soule I care not for that agaīst who so euer it be, and it be not ayenst my
lorde your fader, for yf Arthur myght be euer amōge vs we nede not to care for al the world nor any maner of payne yt I shold suffre for his sake shold neuer gre¦ue me. well than {quod} Florence I se well yt ye wold suffre payne & peryl of your bo¦dy on the condicion yt I wold haue hym to my husbonde, & than she demaūded so of all the other knightes yf they wolde in lyke wyse. And they answered yes all wt one voyce. And how should I be sure of this said Florēce. Madame sayd they all we faythfully assure you by the fayth of our bodyes & lesynge of our londes and goodes. Than Florence said to Arthur, syr ye haue here many good frēdes. Ma∣dame sayd he I thanke them and god re∣warde them, & I shall deserue it to them whan I may. By my faith {quod} the maister I byleue you well, for ye haue a large & a plenteous hert, and so therwith Florēce brake their wordes of y• mater, & fell in cōmunication of other maters til it was tyme to departe. Than Arthur toke his leue of Florence & of all other▪ & mayster Steuen conuaied him forth & said to him in his ere, syr be not trobled in your min¦de thoughe as to morow yt ye here y• my lady Florence be somwhat diseased▪ for she wyll do it for suche causes as ye shal know ryght well here after. well {quod} Ar∣thur I am & euer shall be content wt her noble pleasure, & so than ye mayster toke his leue of Arthur & retourned agayne to Florence, & Arthur went streyght to the king of orqueneys tent, & than thei both went togyder to the king Emendus tēt who as than was rysynge fro slepe, & so they thre sate downe togyder & talked of many thinges tyll it was time to goo to theyr souper, where as they were ryche∣ly serued, and after souper they sported them togyder tyll it was tyme to goo to their restes. Than the kynge departed & al other for that nyght. ¶How the tournay the nexte daye was deferred bicause of Florence di∣sease. Capitulo. lxxxi. IN the nexte morning bety∣mes the mayster rose & lept on his horse, and so in grete haste rode streyght to ye kin¦ges tēt, & ther he did alight, and soo was brought to the kinges bed¦des syde. And whan the king sawe hym ther so erly he demaūded what tidinges▪ Certainly syr sayde the maister my ladye Florence hath bene this night right sore seke, & is as yet right sore holden wt the collyke in her body, therfore syr she desy∣reth your grace that ye tournay this day may be deferred tyl to morow by whiche tyme she trusteth to be wel amended so yt she wyll come and se the tournay yf god wil sēde her ony ease of her paine. Saint mary sayd the kyng gentyl maister hath she than suche payne, I should be ryghte sory yf she should fortune to dye as God forbid without any issue of her body, for I wyl neuer haue wyfe, nor I haue no mo chyldren but she, wherefore than the realme of Sorolois shold be wtout heire of the right stocke the which should be a great domage to al this realme, I thinke veryly she had to grete hete yesterday ye beholding of y• tournay. Syr said ye mai∣ster with goddes loue she shal amende to morow, but in good faith syr it wer time that she were well maried, wel mayster said the king I shal thinke therof ryght shortly. In the name of god syr {quod} ye may∣ster it is time yt I returne to my ladi, but syr for goddes sake deferre ye tournay til the next day bicause of Florence sekenes
Than themperour sent a knyght of his to Florence to know what malady she had, but Florence had cōmaunded tha if any body came fro themperour yt he shol¦de not be suffered to entre into her tente, so therby ye knight could not be suffred to entre and so returned againe to thempe∣rour & shewed him how yt no body coulde entre into her tent to speke wt her, & than themperour said wel I wyl go se her my selfe, than all the kynges, dukes, erles▪ & barons yt were in his cōpany moūted on their horses & rode forth wt themperour And whan the king Emēdus herd that themperour was ridynge to go se Flo∣rence his doughter, than he mounted on his horse & al his kings and knightes wt him, & whan they were al met and assem¦bled together there was so muche people as though al the world had bene there, & at last a messenger came to maister Ste¦uē & said, sir themperour and the king & al other noble men yt be in thys felde are coming to se my lady Florence. Than ye maister went and did shewe that to her. Thā she comaunded that there sholde be made redy a riche bed before her pauilyō right before ye face of the image wt ye chap¦let, & the ymage was properly besene wt a kyrtyl of purpel atyn and a gowne of grene sarcenet, & vpon the bed there was a riche quylt wrought with coten coue∣red with crimsen sendal stytched wt thre¦des of golde, and shetes of whyte sylke, and ouer al a rych furre of ermynes, this bed was ryght ryche, and Florence layd her downe in her bedde in a lyghte kyr∣tell of chaungeable vyolet tartorne some what blusshynge on a red coloure, and she had a keuerchefe of whyte sylke on her head all loose vntyed wherfore there myght be sene vnder the keuerchefe her fayre throte as whyte as yuery, and her fayre golden heyre flying about her neck and her fayre face was in a meane ney∣ther to longe nor to ronde fresshely co∣loured lyke the rose on the lylly, and on her there was a cast mātell of grene silk and she did cast out her armes theron, so that her whyte handes and her long fyn∣gers wer stretched abrode on the mantel & the quene of orqueney sate by her who sayd to the mayster, syr make youre selfe nowe as thoughe ye were dyspleased be∣cause that my lady is sycke. That is wel sayd quod the mayster, and so shal I do, therwith he rusht togider his hat & made semblaunt as though he had bene very angry, wherat the quene & Florence did smye right swetly. By y• time the empe∣rour and al the kynges & knightes were come, than themperour went on the one side of the bed & the king her father on the other side, & so sate them downe on the si¦des of the bed, & all the other lordes and knightes stode round about ye bed. Than there came also the king of orqueny and Arthur with him, and they lene theym downe on the beddes fete. Than thempe¦rour did salute Florence, & she said how yt he was welcome. Than the kinge her father dmaunded of her howe she dyd, & layd his hand on her heade. Thā she be∣helde her father and sayd, syr I haue ben this night and al mornyng ryghte yll at ease, but thanked be god I do nowe bet∣ter than I dyd. God be thanked said the kyng. Than the kyng of orqueney who was right preuy of her counsayle sayde. Madame thynke not longe, for wt gods leue ye shall soone be hole. And than she beheld him & smyled a lytel and sayd, syr I wolde be glad therof▪ and so thus they talked togyther of one thing and other a grete space. And Florence sayde howe yt theyr company dyd her muche good.
¶Howe the ymage in the pauylyon did set er chaplet on Arthurs head in ye pre¦sence of themperour & of .x. other kinges & of all the hole assembly, wherwyth the emperour was right sorowfull because he thought to haue had Florēce in mary¦age, but he fayled of hys purpose, for the ymage toke no regard neyther to the em¦perour nor to none other there, but al one¦ly to Arthur to whome frely she did giue her chaplet. Capitu. lxxxii. ANd whan the mayster sawe his time & knew how yt all ye hole barony were there assem¦bld he rose vpō his fete and said in open audience. Mine own dere & redoubted lady Florence our lorde god hath done you this day greate grace & honour, for I beleue verely yt ne∣uer before this time there were neuer so many noble men assembled togyther as be now here present for to se a ladye yt is dyseased, for madame ye maye se here a∣bout your bed an emperour .x. kinges du¦kes & erles mo than .l. & al ye hole barony of thempyre of ynde the more, & also of .x other kyngdomes, wherfore madam ye ought to be righte ioyous & more at ease in your hert▪ for they al loue you and are glad you to plese, & also as I vnderstād my lord the kyng your father hath grete wyl yf god be pleased to puruey for you a ryght hye and a noble maryage▪ and I thinke yt yf it plese him now in his mynd maye be well satysfyed, for I beleue he shal neuer se agayne in one daye so ma∣ny noble man assembled togither as hee be now presente, wherfore now he may fulfyl his pleasure, and according to my mynd it were time that ye were maried Than Florence sate her vp in her bedde & a lady cast a mantel about her necke & said, maister it is of trouth how that the kyng my father here presente hath had a great season good wyl to mary me in so muche that he is now wel at the poynt thereof if it be his pleasure, but it is s y• my lorde the kinge my father by seming taketh no hede to accomplyshe suche de∣stenyes as were destenyed of me at my natiuytye, & because that paraduentur all ye my lordes yt be here present at this time knoweth not what it is yt was deste¦nyed on me, therfore I shall shewe it he∣re in open udyence. It is of trouth that my lady my mother whome god assayle whan I was borne se sent me by ye kin¦ge of Orqueney & mine ncle tharchbys¦shop and by the quene of orqueney who are al here present, to the moūt of aduen∣tures, and there it was destenyed on m by the quene of the fayry that no creatu∣re sholde haue me to his wife but alone¦ly he to whome the ymage in my pauily¦on sholde gyue the chaplet that she hol∣deth in her handes▪ and if that any other sholde take me he sholde dye an yll death therfore and to this couenaunt did seale and swere the king my father and all hys other kinges and .xii. peres of his relme and so on that poynt take me who so wil yf he lyste to put hym selfe in the aduen∣ture yf he haue not the chaplet, therfore let the kyng my father do as it pleaseth hym, I pray to god he do so that it may be for ye best. Than tharchbisshop rose & said to the king, syr it is true al that euer my nece hath sayd, for syr I was present and both saw and herde al thys that she hath sayd, for as god helpe me yf I were a man of the world, & so yt I might haue her to my wyfe, I wolde not presume to haue her for al the good of the world, wt out so be I had fyrst the chaplet. Than ye kyng of valefound rose and sayd, accor∣dynge
to my mynde it were best that all the hol chyualry the whych ben here as¦smbled go al to the image, & fyrst let my lorde themperour begyn, for he is moost worthyest both of noblenes hauou & ry∣ches, where it shold seme that he is wor¦thyest to haue the chaplet, and if he faile therof, let than al ther assaye euery mā after other tyll it be gyuen to one or to o∣ther. In the name of god sayde the kinge of orqueney ye say ryght & so let it be do¦ne. And themperour sayd he was wel a∣greed therto. Than Florence saide, I can not tell who shall haue it, but god gyue me him in mariage, so that my hert may be in rest peace and ioy, and so yt he may loue me, and I him. Thā it was agreed on al partes yt who so euer had the cha∣plet shold haue the lady without any re∣pellyng of that couenant, and therto Flo∣rence contented. And whan it was thus agreed on all partes than there was lai¦de before the fete of the ymage .iiii. ryche cusshyns of silke and golde. And than it was ordeyned that the kyng of orqueny and duke Philyp of sabary should kepe the place, and to se that none shold haue anye wronge there that daye, and also it was ordeyned that Arthur & Gouernar sholde take hede and mark wel to whom the ymage wolde gyue vnto her chaplet Than themperour sayd, fayre lady wyl ye be glad and I haue the chaplet. Syr sayde Florence by the reason of hauyng therof ye shal be the more nere my hearte who so euer shal haue it, and ye more ioye shal I haue, & the better shal he plese me. Uerely sayd themperour thā wil we go and assay, & therwt he rose, and the duke of bygor, and therie of the yle perdue led hym streyght to the ymage, and there he kneled styl on his knees fro the morning tyll it was nere euen songe tyme but he was as nere as he was at the begīning & at the last he rode ful of enuy & shame and sore dyspleased in hys hearte, but he made at that tyme no semblaunt. Than after him went thither kinges dukes, er¦les barons & knyghtes eche after other all suche as were to mary, but nothyng they were obtayned, so than there were no mo to assay but such as kept the place And than duke Philyp of sabary went to the ymage for he was to mary, but he sped as hys flowes dyd before. Than the kyng commaunded that Arthur and Gouernar shold go and assay. Than Ar¦thur answered and sayd, a gentyll kyng here hath bene this day many noble kyn∣ges and ther prynces that hath fayled, wherfore than shold I presume to assay to attayne to that they haue all fayled, I thynke it were but a foly for me to assay well sayde the kynge but I wyll that ye go and assay according as the couenant is made. Ye truly quod thēperour we wil yt ye shal go. Syr quod the kyng of orque¦ney ye must nedes fulfyl the kinges ple¦sure and themperours, wel syr sayde Ar∣thur I am content sith it is their plesurs and than he commaūded Gouernar to go afore, & so he did but no cōfort he had there, than Arthur rose and went to the image, & as soon as he was on his knees the ymage begn to take colour as fresh & as quicke as though she had ben aliue and fayre and swetly she turned her selfe toward Arthur and did set the chaplet on his hed in the sight of al ye assemble, wher with themperour was right sore disple¦sed. And whan the duke of bygor saw yt he was sore troubled in his mind, for he hated Arthur to the deth, in so muche yt in a greate fury he stepte to Arthur and toke the chaplet fro his hed and did set it on his own head, & al that whyle Ar∣thur
was on his knees. And whā Gouer¦nar sawe how that he tok away the cha∣plet fro his mayster & see it on hys own head, his bloud began to tremble for an∣gre, and stept forth to the duke and layde his handes on the chaplet in suche wise that he rasshed it clene fro his head, and a great dele of hys heyre therwith and so delyuered the chaplet to Florēce, and she tke it and set it on her owne heade, and so than there was none tat durst touch it. And whan the duke of Bygor sawe how that Gouernar had taken fro hym th chaplet & prte of his heyre thewith he lyf vp hys fyst and strake Gournar a geat blow on the cheke and did hurte him righe yll & caused him to blede sore at the mouth and at the nose. And whan duke Philyp of sabary sawe Gouernar hurt and bledyng he drew out his swerd and strake the duke of bygor in the myd∣des of the breste in suche wyse that the poynt of ys sworde appeared a fote be∣hyd at his back, and therwith the duke fell downe stare dead to the erthe. And whan the emperur sw his duke dead he cryed on his knightes to arme theym and to take duke Philyp. Than thempe∣rours knighte assayled him on al par∣ts, and he defended hym right valiat∣ly. han the kynge of Orqueney stepte forh whan he sowe his neuewe in that case, and drew hys sworde and layde on amonge them right fierslye Than Ar∣thur dash into the prese wyth clarence his good sworde in hys hand, & he layde on and gaue suche strokes that he betre downe knightes by great heapes. Than euery man ran to their harneys on both partes. Than Florence sayd to her senes¦shal what do you stand & loke on and se Arthur in peryll of hys life, ye ought to sustaine his quarel. And whan her senes¦shall herde her saye so he stepte oute int the felde & cryed out as loude as he could to harneys syrs incontinent and help to ayde & socour Arthur. Than stepte forthe Brysebar & syr Myles▪ & wel to the nom¦bre of .v.C. And whan the king Emen∣dus sawe the matter began to kyndel so sharply he toke his horse and rushte into the prese and with great payne, & what with fayrenes & foulenes togyther he de¦parted them & cōmanded yt none sholde be so hardy to stryke one stroke more as at that time. Than themperour came to the kyng and said, syr king ye haue begy∣led vs and slayn our duke & many of our knyghtes, therefore syr be ye in certayne that as longe as I lyue warre shall not fayle you tyl the houre yt I haue the head of the king of orqueney & of Philip hys neuewe and of this knyght Arthur. Syr emperour said Athur, oftentimes a mā fayleth of yt he desireth nor I know not him yt wil stryke of our heades as long as I haue in my companye clarence my good swerd. Ye ye syr emperur saide th kyng of orqueney be not halfe so hastye, for or ye haue our heades fyrst thre wyl many lese theyrs, and one thing I assure you yt if it were not for the dyspesure of my lorde the kynge I sholde go se you in your own coūtry betwene this and Ester with suche a cōpany of people yt it shold e harde for you to nombre theym▪ for ye shal fynd them that lytell doubteth you. Than the king Emendus commaunded him to be in peace, & tok themperour by the hand and sayd, syr be ye not dysplesed ye & I wil go apart and agre ryght well togeher. I am content sayd themperour Than they auoyded from them euey mā Than the kyng sayd, syr ye knowe that it was agreed bothe by you and by me & by al other, that who so euer shold haue
the chaplet should haue noo wronge, but should enioy it peasybly, therfore youre duke dyde amysse to take it fro Arthurs heed. Syr sayd themperour though my duke dyde wronge yet I was suffycient ynough to make amēdes for his trespace though ye Gouernar had not taken it fro his heed & pulled away his here therwt, & yet worse what nede duke Philip to lee him therefore. In the name of god sayd ye kynge duke Phylyp dyde, but his office, for he was one of the kepers of the felde to se yt none shold haue wronge, & your duke trake Gouernar on the face, wher fore he had his deserte▪ why syr sayd the emperour though he strake ye knight yet was it no reason ye duke Phiyp shoulde slee hym, & the kynge of orqueney to slee many other of m knightes. Syr said the king though the king of orqueney was moued he coude not chose, for he was puissaunt ynough to haue made amēdes for the deth of your duke that hs neuewe slewe▪ but your knightes ran on hym to haue slaine hym in my presene, therfore blame not the kynge though he rescowed his neuewe, for a gentyll mannes herte ought not to fayle his knyghtes in time of nede, & specially his own neuewe. In the name of god {quod} the emperour he hah slayne my duke, & he is a duke, therefore I wyll that he dye for the cause, & thā it is duke for duke. Truely sayd the kynge this wr harde to do, for yf ye begin ony noyse or trouble I haue grete fere that it wyl turne to your owne hrte for it wil be ouermoch for you to acheue to that ye wold haue, but syr I se well ye be ryght sore dyspleased, but syr oftentymes deed men maketh peas, & by maryage many thynges are appeased, syr I shall put to my payne how yt ye shal haue for all this Florēce my doughter to be your wyfe, on the condycion that all yll wylles & herte brennynges may be quenched on al par∣tes & euery thinge pardoned. And whan the emperour herd yt he smyled a lytell & sayd, veryly syr for ye loue of Florence I would forgyue and pardon a right grete trespace, Syr sayd the kynge I wyll go speke wt my lordes & come againe to you incontinent, han the kyng departed fro hym & called to hym his .iiii. kinges & the archbysshop & diuers other knyghtes & sayd▪ lordes this emperour is ryght sore dyspleased, & to saye the trouth he hathe ryght good cause why, & I can fynde no¦ne other agrement in hym but eyther he wyll haue duke Philyppes heed, or elles he wyll come on vs right shortly with a grete hoost, or elles without he haue flo¦rence my doughter, this is the amendes that he wyl haue for the deth of his duke therfore gentle kinges and lordes shewe me your myndes in ye behalfe. Syr sayde the kyng of valefoude it is my minde & aduyse yt it is good to eschewe al perilles yt may happe to come bothe to the body & to the soule & to our haoures & frendes for a thynge of a lytle cost ye se wel how that thēperour is the moost chefe crsten prynce of al the world & ryght puyssaūt both of hauour & of frendes, therfore syr be ye not abasshed to gue him Florence your doughter, or theby shal ye inne many grete frendes, thrfore syr it were better for you to gyue her to hym than to this knight Arthur of whome we know nothing but that he is a knyghte ryghte good fair, & beauteous. And in very dede so he is sir {quod} ye king of moral this same is myne opinion. And myn also sayd the kynge of Ismaelyte. In the name of god sayd the kynge of orqueney, ayenst that I haue agreed ones vnto ad set thrto my seale shall I neuer be contrary, for I
wil neuer breke myne othe, nor I wil ne∣uer loue themperour. Nor I also saide ye archebisshop by the faith that I owe vn¦to you I shal neuer be of that accorde yt themperour shold haue Florence. Than the kyng mendus & in the name of the other thre kinges answered & sayde. well syrs I that am kyng ouer you all shall agre you in this matter well ynough, ye shl se right wel what I shal do in this mer. Than the kyng of orqueney and the chebisshop departed fro the coun∣seyle not contente in theyr myndes. And whn the king Emendus sawe that the kyng of orqueney and the archebyshop his rother were departed from hym, he wet streyght to themperoure & his .iii. kynges with hym and sayd, syr we wil be your frendes and wel wyllers, and ye also to ours, & are content to fulfyll oure wyl so that ye wyl in like wyse do to vs Fyrst syr we wyl that ye pardon and for¦gyue the kyng of orqueney & duke Phy∣lyp hys neuewe, and to all other all ma∣ner of yll wyll that ye haue to theym for all ner of dedes done by them or any of thees, and on this condycyon I and these thre kinges giue you Florence my doughter in maryage, and I put you in posseion of her by this gloue, & so drew it of is hand and gaue it to themperour And he reiued it wt great ioye and than¦ked them right hertely & there pardoned all the yll wyl that he had to any body & so there they toke eche other by ye hand & went talkyng togyther to theyr tentes. ¶Howe that Proserpyne quene of ye fayry who resēbled to Florence layd her downe in Florence bedde in Flo∣rence stede, and sente her to the porte noyre wyth the archebysshop and all her knyghtes. Capi. lxxxiii. Emenus. Prorpyne. WHan the kinge of orqueney  tharchebyshop were departed fro ye king Emendus & saw how y• the kynge had graunted Florence his doughter to themperour, they went streyght to Florence wher as they found Arthur, duke Phylyp, and Gouernar and they were all styl armed to thentent to defend them yf any nede were. Than the kyng of orqueney caused them to be vnarmed and toke Arthur by the hand and sayde, syr as longe as I lyue & haue any lond I shal not fayle you, but I shal ayde you to dye in the quarell to defende your ryghte. Syr sayde Arthur god tha all thynge fourmed kepe you & rewarde your gentylnes. Go we quod the kyng & speke with Florence, and so they went to her, and as than she was styll syttynge on her bedde all afrayde of the bronte and fraye that was there, and the Quene of orqueney sate wepynge for fre of ye kin∣ge her husbande. Than there sat downe
the kynge, tharchebysshop, Arthur, and Gouernar, & also there was the mayster and duke Phylyp. Than the kynge sayd to Florēce, madame be ye in peace & rest and doubte ye of nothynge, but it is soo my lord the king your fader hath gyuen you to the emperour, and hath put hym in possession of you by the gloue of hys hande, and al the other kinges are of his accorde, but tharchebysshop your vncle and I are departed fro them bycause we wyll not consent therto in no wyse, ther¦fore madame may it please you nowe to shewe vs your mynde wheder ye be con∣tent to haue him to your husbōde or not for yf it please you it behoueth vs to be content, and yf it please you not to haue hym here I offre my selfe to you that or he haue you ayenst your wyl I shall ra∣ther aduenture to lese my heed from the shoulders, and I shal put in ieopardy to slee the emperour in defendynge of thys gentylman Arthur in his ryght yf ye be so content. And whan Florēce herde him saye so she began right sore to wepe, and whan she might speke she sayd, a gentyl kynge now I se well I haue no mo fren¦des but you & suche other as be here pre∣sent, alas I am of ye estate that I ought of right to haue many mo, but whan my fader and myn owne men fayle me, alas to whome shall I cōplayne me, alas vn∣kinde fader wyll ye gyue me him whome that I hate mortally, & take fro me hym that I loue faythfully, and therwith her herte was so oppressed wt bytter sorowe that she fell on so sore a weping that it was grete pyte to behold her, and whan she myght somwhat speke she sayd, cer∣tainly I had rather dye than to haue the emperour, and as God helpe me ye be all my frendes and so I wil retaine you as longe as the world serueth me, the whi∣che yet somwhat cōforteth me, whefore I wyll no lenger hyde my herte fro you, and so she tourned her selfe toward Ar∣thur & said, beholde here hym who hathe my chaplet my destny is on him, wher∣fore I wyl haue none other but him▪ for hym I loue & wyll do. And whā the king of orqueney herde her saye soo he had great ioye and sayde, madame we be all your owne men & frendes & of your coū∣seyle and would alwayes your honour & profyte, and as God helpe me ye can not do better than to set your hert on this no¦ble knyght Arthur, for better: more wyse more goodlyer hā he is cā not be foūde, and syth it pleaseth you as for my parte I am the same accorde, & to hym I offre now my selfe here present, now let all o∣ther speke euery man for him selfe. Thā the archebysshop sayde, fayre lady ye are my nece and I am youre vncle, in good fayth I am agreed to your pleasure, and I promyse hym fayth and trouth, and to ayde hym ayenst all persons. And I al∣so promyse the same sayd duke Phylyp. Than the mayster rose & sayd, madame I am your clerke and alwayes I truste I haue counsayled you to your honour & profyte, and I alowe you in this matter, and am faythfully agreed therto, but I counsayle you let my lorde here tharche∣bysshop ensure you bothe togyder hande to hande. Than thei al answered wt one voyce, the mayster sayth ryght wel & all we be agreed therto. Than the bysshop toke Arthur by the hande and the ladies hande also, and there dyde ensure theim togyder wt wordes of matrymony, wher∣of eche of them had gret ioye. whan that Florence and Arthur were thus ensured togyder the king of Orqueney said▪ syrs now haue we purchased warre with the kynge & with themperour, for as soone
as they know of this mater they wyl be ryght sore dyspleased wt vs all, therefore now let vs se by what meanes eyther by warre or fore or how this mater may be brought to passe. And as thei thus talked togyder sodeynly there sate on the bedde by Florence Proserpine quene of the fai¦ry. And whā thei beheld her thei had wō∣der of her sodeyn comyng and thei coude not well know her fro Florence they re∣sembled so nere togyder, but thā Proser∣pine said to the king, syr ye demade and study how ye may bring about this ma∣ter I shal shew you, I am she that did de¦steny on Florēce yt she shold haue Arthur therfore I shall shew her howe he shall do, therfore Florence fayre doughter sēde ye iconcynent Gouernar and Brysebar to your castell of clere toure, & let al your tentes & pauylyons & suche other abyle∣mentes of warre as ye haue there be con∣uayed in all haste to the porte noyre, and garnyshe that castel richely and surely in suche wyse yt ye may be able to sustayne the defence of an hole hoost, for ther shal be made ayenst you right grete warre, for the king Emendus your fader wyl be so yll content with you & with Arthur that yf he might haue you bothe in ye fury he wold cause you bothe to dye a shamefull deth, for he hath now so grete loue to thē¦perour yt they be as al one, but for ye ther is not now soo grete loue bytwene them but I shal cause here after as grete war bitwene them so that eche of thē shal be desyrous to e other, wherfore faire dou¦ghter Florence ryse out of your bedde & apparaile your selfe & do on the maisters gowne & his hat & moūt on your horse & take the quene of orqueney wt you & also tharchebysshop your vncle & duke Phy∣lyp and al your other knyghtes & ride ye streyght to the porte noyre, & the king of orqueney here present & the maister & Arthur shall abyde here styl with me, for I wyll lye here still in your bedde i ye stede of you, for ye know well there is no crea¦ture can know the one of vs fro ye other Go ye your waies & let me alone with the remnaūt of the mater. Madame said the maister for goddes sake thinke wel on the honour of my lady Florēce & we shall by¦leue you wel. Than Florēce departed her knightes asonder & dyde sende them one after another all to Argence & cōmaūded them there to abyde for her, so they al de∣parted & within foure dayes they aryued at Argence, & there they founde the fayre lady Margarete of Argenton who was come the daye before frō the porte noyre and she receyued them with ioyfull chere and there they shewed her how thei wer come thyder to abyde on the comyng of theyr lady Florence, & whan she hearde that she was right ioyful and caused all her house to be apparayled ryght richely to thentent to receyue Florence right ho¦nourably & sent for many of the gentyl∣men of her coūtre to gyue attendaūce on her. Than Gouernar & Brysebar depar∣ted fro Florence & wēt to ye clere toure & conuayed al her stuffe to the porte noyre bothe tresour & abylementes of warre & vatayle sufficient to garnysshe the hous withal for the space of .vii. yere, & thei had xxvii. charyottes cōtinually carieng .vii. wekes togyder of such stuffe as pertay∣ned to Florence and to the furnysshing of the place, so that it had of euery thing sufficient for the space of .vii. yere. ¶ How that the lady Margaret of Argenton with all her hole barony wente and mette Florence and re∣ceyued her in to Argence wt ryghte grete feest and ioye. Ca. lxxxiiii.
ANd the third day after that Florence knightes wer de∣parted fro her, thā she and the quene of orqueney and tharchebysshop departed & went fyrste to the cite of pancopone the which pertained to the bysshop and ther he commaūded al his people to be readye on a day warning in their best apparaile for the warre, and in lykewise dyd Go∣uernar in the realme of blaūche toure, so than Florence departed fro pancopone & went streight to Argence. And as soone as the lady Margarete had knowledge that she was two daies iorney fro Argēce she mounted on her horse and .v.C. in her company and went and encountred the lady Florēce of Soroloys, and whan she met her she did righte humbly salute her & said▪ Madame ye be right hertely wel∣come in to this countre, and madame be∣holde me here who is and shall be youre humble damoysel euer to be redy at your noble cōmaundement. Certainly fayre lady Magarete said Florēce I take you and wyll doo for my specyall frende and faithful louer. Than ye lady Margarete went to the bysshop and to duke Phylip and right swetely dyde salute them, and than she demaunded of Florence how it was with Arthur. And she answered and sayd: fayre lady Margarete he is abyden in the courte wyth the king of orqueney and with mayster Steuen. And I praye you madame how dooth he. Verely sayd she right wel. Than am I glad sayd the lady Margarete, for Arthur is my lorde and chefe fader: for he hath rēdred again to me my londe wherof I was dyshery∣ted by the neuew of the duke of bigor. wel sayd Florence care not for yt for ye be as now well reuenged both of the vncle & of the neuewe. A madame said she blessyd be them that hath brought that about, & thus they rode forth on theyr way & thei encoūtred syr Myles & syr Artaude & dy∣uerse other knightes pertaining to Flo∣rence, & al other knightes of that coūtre drewe thyder by grete flockes, and whā thei wer nere to the cite of Argens, than ther yssued out of al the honest burgeises of the cite riding on good horses, and fai¦re faucons & sparhawkes on their fistes and they were wel to the nombre of fifty well arayed al in one sute halfe scarlet & halfe grene, with many tabours & trom∣pettes before thym. Than the bysshop sawe well how that the cyte of Argence was ryght noble & goodly, for he sawe ye bryght sonne glimmering on ye faire chir¦ches & hye steples couered al with fayre lede, & also he sawe the riche baners and stremers pyght out of wyndowes of the fayre houses, and the batylmentes were pyght full of sheldes, basenettes, helmes & speres to thentent to shewe ye strēgth of the cite, & the stretes wer hāged with clothes of golde and of silke, & with rede sendall chaungeable with grene and all the helles of the towne solēpny did ring soo that it was grete ioye to se and to be∣holde the noblenes of that cyte. In thys maner Florence entred in to the cyte, ha¦uing in her company beyonde .xv. hon∣dred knyghtes, and the burgeyses of the cyte moūted vp into theyr windowes to behold Florence who was led bytwene the bysshop and duke Phylip, and thus thei rode til they came to the palays, and ther descended & so moūted vp into yt hal than Florence entred into her chambre & apparayled her, & by that tyme her diner was redy and the tables ready couered, than Florence and the archebisshop and all other sate theym downe to dyner and were ryght tychely serued, and soo there
Florence soiourned the space of .viii. day∣es. Now let vs leue Florēce at Argence & retourne to thēperour & to king Emen¦dus and to Proserpyne who was ayde in Florence bedde in the stede of her. ☞ Howe that Proserpyne was ensured to themperour in the stede of Florence, & how that the king banysshed out of his countre the kinge of orqueney, & also she kynge of valefounde & mayster Steuen and Arthur. Capitulo .lxxxv. SO it was that whā Florēce was departed fro ye courte of king Emendus her fa∣der & that he had gyuen her to the Emperour, thā eche of them went into theyr owne tentes to diner, and the king of Orqueney wh was abiden stil in Florence tente wyth Proserpyne quene of the fayry who re∣sembled soo nere Florence that the one coude not be knowen fro the other, and ther he & Arthur dined wt her, & after dy∣ner themperour came to king Emēdus & said, syr ye haue giuē me Florēce dough¦ter, & syr I know wel how that the king or orqueney & Arthur be stil wt her in her tent, & thei haue bene alwaies cōtrary to me, wherfore I doute me leest thei  Florence mynde fro mewarde, therfore syr I pray you let vs go & fiaūce her this night & let vs be maryed to morow. Sir said the king I am content, & I promise you yt al suche who soo euer they be yt be contrary ayenst your mynde shal incōti∣nent forsake my company, than thempe∣rour and the king and the other thre kin∣ges wēt streight to Florēce tēt, & as sone as they wer entred the king of orqueney & the mayster & Arthur rose & welcomed them, than the king sate him downe on the one syde of the bed and the emperour on the other syde than the king sayde to Proserpyne wenynge to hym it had ben his doughter Florēce, fayre doughter it behoueth you to be fiaunced this night to this emperour and to morow ye shal be wedded wt grete ioye▪ well sayd syr Pro∣serpyne syth it is your pleasure I am cō¦tent let it be done incontyent, than the kyng demaunded for tharchebyshop his broder to thētent to ensure them togider Syr said the maister he is gone to panco¦pone for abesynes yt he hath to do there & duke Phylyp also. And wher is Florence senesshall and al other knyghtes. Syr surely they bene al gone wt hym. In the name of god syr sayd themperour the ar∣chebisshop hath ben alwayes cōtrary to me in yt I should haue Florence, therfore syr neuer trust me but yt he is gone to do some manor of reason to the entent yt I should not haue her. Than stept forth ye mayster & sayd, syr emperour ye saye no wysely to call the archebysshop traitour or to say yt he seketh to werke ony trea∣son ayenst you it is to largely sayde, for ther was neuer as yet ony noble man of Sroloys that euer dyde ony treason a∣yenst you or ayenst ony other mā liuing and though that he be not of the accorde of this mariage he dooth but ryghte, for sauyng the honour of my lorde the kyng here present al that be of that accord are forsworne & haue brokē their promesses & couenaūtes & dooth ayenst theyr own seales, & as for me as lōg as I lyue shall I neuer accorde therto. No mayster said the king wyll ye not than accorde ther∣to, but holde all other forsworne, by the fayth that I owe vnto god yf ye wer not the son of a king I should make you wel to know how ye haue spoken folishely here in my presence, but thus moch I say
vnto you I charge you incontinent that ye auoyde this pauylyon, and I defende you the comynge agayne to my syghte, and dyscharge you out of Florence coū∣seyle. well syr sayd the mayster syth I se than that I must nedes leue your courte and comynge before you & banysshed fro ye coūseyle of my lady for this emperoure here present, wherefore let hym be in cer∣tayne yt as longe as I liue he shal neuer put ringe on my lady Florēce finger nor wedde her for all the power yt he hath or can haue. Than the kynge was sore dys∣pleased & rose & had thought to haue stri¦ken the mayster, but the king of mormal and the kinge of Ismaelyte dyde holde hym, and therwith the maister went out of the pauylyon. And whan the kynge of valefounde sawe his sone cast out of the courte & how the king would haue stry∣ken hym he rose vp & sayde to the kynge, syr for the esche wyng of all yll & trouble before this tyme I was agreed that this emperour shoulde haue your doughter, wherin now I confesse me yt I was for∣sworne and dyde therin cōtrary to myn owne seale & promesse, the which consen¦tement now here I openly reuoke & de∣ny, for as god helpe me I wil be no len∣ger forsworne, therfore I say to this em¦perour yt he take her not, for yf he do let him be in certaine that ther is and shalbe in the realme of vaounde a king who is not his frende, but he is & shall be hys mortall enemy. And whan kyng Emen¦dus herde hym speke in ye maner he was right sore dyspleased, for he loued and bi∣leued hym ryght well before & sayd, syr kynge eyther consent to this maryage or elles forsake the presēce of me and short¦ly auoyde this pauylyon. well syr than I wyll departe, and I warraunt you I wyll noo more desyre to come in to your syght, I say no more but god giue grace ye do well, & therwith he went out of the pauylyon and wente to hys son mayster Steuē. Than the king of orqueney rose vp and said to the king, syr I haue grete meruaile where ye haue taken this coun¦seyle to enstraūge your self fro your fren¦des and counseyllers, veryly syr ye be in an yll mynde in this case & al for this em¦perour who shall neuer do you so moche good, but by the fayth yt I owe to my la∣dy Florēce yf he wer not here in your pre¦sence I should take his heed fro his shol¦dres, & let hym take good hede that after that he is maryed that he cary her not a myle out of this place but I shal be ther redy to encoūtre him & not to his plesure what said the king do ye menace & threte him here before me, shortly I charge you auoyde this pauylyon, & beware yt I se you no more in my syght, & in the despyte of you all themperour shal haue Florēce my doughter. well syr said the kynge of orqueney syth ye haue banysshed me out of your courte & of your presēce I assure you I am able ryght well to withstande your malyce, but syr I coūseyle you con∣uey this emperour surely whan he depar¦teth in to his owne coūtre lest yt he be not encoūtred wtall to his dyspleasure, than the king of orqueney toke Arthur by the hande & said, syr come ye on wt me & lene this courte, for no noble man ought to a¦byde here. Syr said Arthur▪ I wyll go wt you wt a right good wil, than they depar∣ted out of the pauilion, & ther thei foūde the king of valefoūde & mayster Steuen and to them he sayd, now syrs we be al banisshed out of ye courte king of Emen¦dus god now be our helpe, than they trus∣sed vp their tentes & sente theyr people euery man home to his owne coūtre, & so than they moūted vpon theyr horses & so
departed, & they had not ryden a lege & a halfe bu yt the king of valefounde was in a sodayne study. Than the kyng of or∣queney demaūded of hym what he ayled to study. Syr {quod} he I muse in what ma∣ner we may do anoyaunce to this empe∣rour who wold haue our lady ayenst her owne wyl & ours, the which sore greueth me. well syr said the kynge of orqueney care not for y• mater, for I ensure you he shall not wedde her this yere. Syr sayd he it can be none other wyse, for thempe∣rour & the kynge her fader wyl now lede her to Cornite and ther fiaūce her ayenst her wyl. wel syr sayde the kyng of orque∣ney fere ye not that, for be ye in certaine that as for Florence she is all redy at the cyte of Argence wher as she abydeth for vs. why said the kynge of valefounde & who is it than that lieth at Florence bed in the stede of her and is so like her. I shal shewe you said the king of orqueney, her¦de ye neuer speaking of the quene of the ladyes of the fayry that be in the mount peryllous wher as florēce was cōuayed as soone as she was borne. Yes mary {quod} the other king I haue hr therof diuers tymes. well syr than sed moche I saye to you that she that lyeth in my ladyes bed is Proserpyne quene of the fayry, & she did desteny her at her natiuyte that she shold be lyke in al thinges to her, & so she is as ye may se, wherfore ye shall knowe full wel by to morow this time that ther was neuer emperour and king so abused and abasshed as thei shalbe. In the name of god said the king of valefounde I ne∣uer herde spekynge of this mater before, but let vs haste vs and so speke with my lady Florence at Argence, and there let vs aduyse ferder what shall be done in this mater. Syr ye saye ryght well and so let vs do, for I am sure we shall haue grete warre. Than they sente two squy∣ers before them to Florence to giue her knowledge how that they wold be with her the wednesdaye nexte after by masse tyme. And whan Florēce knew that she had ryght grete ioye, and caused incoti∣nent the places to be apparayled where as they should lodge, and than the arche¦bysshop and duke Philyp rose and went and encountred them, & whan they were mette togyder they made right grete ioye eche of other, and duke Philip enbraced Arthur, and the byshop was with ye kin∣ges and so entred in to the citye, & all the burgeyses & comynalte of the cite made great feest of Arthur, for he semed to thē soo gracious & so fayre yt they all sayd. A good lorde what a noble couple should it be bitwen our lady Florēce & this noble knight Arthur, wolde to god he had wed¦ded her. Than they all alyghted at the pa¦lays, & ther Florence mette them and en¦braced euery king eche after other, & in lyke wise did the fayre lady Margarete Than Florēce came to Arthur and said myn owne swete louer ye be ryght herte¦ly welcome. Myn owne dere lady god en¦crease in you noble boūte & honour. And than the lady Margarete ran to mayster Steuen, and eche of thē right swetely en¦braced other, than they went all to theyr chambres & apparayled them, & thā they went to dyner and were serued right ry∣chely, than al these kinges & Florence & the lady Margarete departed and wēt to the porte noyre & commaunded all theyr people to drawe theym thyderwarde as shortly as they coude, & so thei rode forth and on a tewesdaye betimes they ariued at the porte noyre, than Florence wente vp to her palais where as she had neuer ben before, and than she thanked Arthur in that he had fordone thenchauntemen∣tes
the aduentures of ye place, and Go∣uernar and Brysebar had aparaled that place in euery thynge that was behoua∣ble, and thus they were in great ioy and tryumphe the space of .viii. daies & than these kynges and Florence wente into a fayre chambre to counsayle, & the bishop and Arthur, duke Philyp & the mayster were with them, & than they recoūted to Florence how yt they were departed oute of the court in gret displesure, and how that the king Emendus had banysshed them al out of his presence, and also we know wel that as sone as he hath know¦ledge that ye be here and we with you we shall haue sharpe and great war made vnto vs, wherfore it is conuenient that we aduise wel what shal be done in this mater. Than ye maister rose and said, lor¦des if ye thinke it to be done I shal shew you mine aduyse. And they all answered and said, maister say what ye wil it shal plese you right wel to giue you audience Than the maister sayd, madam ye be the propre and rightfull heyre of Soroloys, and our propre lady, and we al your mē, the dyscorde that is betwene my lorde youre father, and vs moueth propertlye by the reason of you, and not for any tres∣passe that euer we dyd hym, therfore ma∣dame it is reason that ye take vpon you this quarell and busynes, and drake your herte to you & be not to sorte in this mat∣ter, for whan my lorde the kyng your fa¦ther shall be come hyther with al his po∣wer to assyege you as I am sure he wyl do, he shall not haue so hardy a knyghte in al his company but he shall be aferde to gyrde hys sworde about hym to come agenst your company, for ye be a greate quene and a puissaunt, therfore sende for your people, and let duke Phylyp do in lyke case and my lady Margarete also, and whan al your people be assembled to¦gether, who so euer than wyl be so hardy to assayle you, let hym be sharply answe¦red and defended, and madame beholde here Arthur to whome this matter tou∣cheth ryght nere, who is faythful yours and ye his, therfore me thinketh it were reason that he were chyefe capytayne of this matter and let hym maintayn this war fiersly and vertuously, and the king of Orqueney and the kyng of valefound my father, let theym retourne into theyr own realmes, for parauenture the king Emendus wyl sende for theym agayne, and wyll repent hym in that he hath ba∣nisshed them out of his sigh, and if they fall into accorde with him agayne, than shal they doo muche good for vs in this mater with the kinge, for than they shall shew him his foly in that he would ma∣re mi lady Florence his doughter agenst her wyl, and how that he doth gret wron∣ge to make warre agenst Arthur, but syr Arthur accordynge to myne aduise be ye of good herte, and if they wyll nedes ma¦ke war agenst you do to this emperoure as muche domage as euer ye can. Than the kyng of valefound sayd, fayre sonne verely ye haue wel and wysely sayde, I am agreed let it be done as ye haue sayd As god helpe me sayd the byshop I am agreed with the same saying, and to the same they were al agreed. Than the kin¦ge of valefounde sayd to Arthur, syr we be all establysshed that ye shall haue the hole conduite of this matter, therfore do your deuoyre, and here we gyue you the charge of my lady Florence, and the bys∣shop her vncle shall abyde wyth you and duke Philyp also, and with him maister Steuen my son, and if ye haue anye nede sende vs word and we shal nat fayle my lady at no time, and yf we happen to fal
at any accorde with the king, than shall we blame him for his foy, ad as for vs & our people we faythfully promise you that if any sword be drawen agenst you we shal be euer redy to reuenge it to the best of our powers. That shal not be fay¦led sayd  kynge of orqueney, Syrs I hanke ou sayd Florence, so than they estisshed Arthur chefe capytayne of yt matter, & so the two kinges departed out of the coūseyle and toke leue of Florence and Arthur & of al other and returned in to their own coūtyes. Now let vs leue to speke of them and returne to the em∣perour and kyng Emendus howe that they were amused at ye churche dore whā they had wend to haue maried Florence. ¶How that Proserpyn quene of the fai¦ry was ledde to the churche to haue bene wedded to themperoure wenyng that it had bene Florence, but whan the bisshop had thoughte to haue put the weddyng rynge on her fynger, sodenlye she vanys∣shed awaye, so that none wyst whether she became, and soo than they stode all a∣basshed as thoughe the cloudes had fal∣len from heauen. Capi. lxxxvi. SO it was that whan the kyn¦ge of valefound and the kyng of Orqueney was departed fro kyng Emendus to greate displesure how be it the king as than whan he sawe that they were gone he repented him of his foly, how be it he made no maner of semblaūt for the loue of themperour, but sayd to hym, syr let vs go to the citie of cornyte and there shall ye fyaunce Florence, and to morow be maryed to her. Syr with a right good wyl sayd themperour. Than Proserpin was apparayled and ledde forth to Cor∣nyte, where there was readye the bishop of Pancopone, and as sone as they were come to the citie, thā incoutinent thempe¦rour was ensured to Proserpyne in the stede of Florēce, & so there was gret feast and ioy al y• nyght tyl euery man went to their restes, & in the mornyng they arose and Proserpyn was apparailed right ry¦chely & so the king of mormal & the king of Ismaelye dyd lede her to church, and as  she came to the churche dore, there was redy the yshop of pancopone reue in his pontificalibus, & there dydde axe the banes betwene thē, & so proceded forth in the wordes of matrymony. And wha the byshop thought to haue set the weddyng rynge of her fynger sodeynly she was vanysshed a waye, so that none knew where she was become, wherewt the kynges, dukes, erles, barons and all other were as gretly abasshed as though they had tombled out of the cloudes, thā the byshop blyssed him selfe and did caste holy war round about hym, and euery man sayde thys is a wondrous case, we trowe we be enchaunted, how be it neuer the lesse they herde out the masse wt gret deuocyon praying to god to kepe theym from the illusions of the finde of hell, & whan th masse was done they returned to the palais▪ and al ye day they wer sore troubled in their hertes, & so thre dayes after they serched continually all about the citie for Florence, and on the .iiii. day there came a knight to the palays, & dyd salute king Emēdus and thēperour ad sayd, syr I se wel ye be sore troubled by∣cause of Florence, but I can shewe you tydynges right wel where she is, surelye syrs she departed fro Argence the wed∣nesday next after Myghelmas day, and in her company mo than .xv.C. knygh∣tes, and syr wt her is ye archebisshop your
brother & dke Philip of sabary, and are as now at e castel of the porte noyre, & she hath cased the place to be fortified wt artyllary ad with al maner of vytayle sufficient oynd a siege for the space of vii. yere, and Florence hath sent al about for men of are, and duke Philip hath also sent into his own country for al his power, and as for al the power of Argen¦ton is there alredy with her, & also there is with her Arthur and Gouernar, mai¦ster Steuen, & syr Brysebar, and all her hole chyalry. Ye frend sayd the kyng is all this tre. Ye syr as god helpe me, for I haue sene al this with myne eyen. Of the kyng of Orqueney and of the kyng of vaeound can ye shewe me any word sayde the kyng. Syr I can shew you cer¦tayne word o them, for I encountred thē but late as they were rydynge into theyr own countryes. As god helpe me sayde the kynge I repente me that I spake to them so folyshly this last day, but I dyd it in a great displesure. In ye name of god syr sayde themperour if ye haue done thē any trespasse ye maye ryght well make them amendes, and in your so doyng ye shal do ryght well, Uerely syr sayde the kyng and so wyl I do, but what coūsaile & remedy shal we make for this knyght Arthur who hath thus taken away Flo¦rence my doughter, but by my crowne yf I may take them, they shall bothe suffre a shamefull deth, nor as long as I lyue I shall neuer sease tyll I haue them, and thā shall the drabbe my doughter be mu¦ed vp in a stone wall, & the false rybaud Arthur hanged by the necke but I vnder¦stand they haue furnisshed ye pore noyre for the space of .vii. yere, & also they pur∣uay thēof people as muche as they may Syr quod the knight that brought the ty¦dinges yt is of trouth wel syr sayd them¦perour I shal shew you what we shall do, ye shal send for al your power, and so shal I do for mine, & so let vs bestege ye castel of the port noyre, and thoughe yt it were made of yron & stele, yet shal it not endure agenst our strength. As god help me syr sayd the kyng the castel doubteth no man, but I alow wll let vs besiege the castel round about tyl we haue famis¦shed them, for otherwise shall we neuer haue the place, therefore let vs sende for our people tyl we haue sufficient. Ye sai right wel quod themperour I wyl go & return into mine own coūtry, and ye shal fynd me and I lyue at the porte noyre wt¦in .xv. dayes of Ester next comyng. And there shal ye fynd me also sayd the kyng Than themperour cōmaunded to truse al his stuffe, and so toke leue of the king and departed into ynde, and as soone as the emperour was departed, thā ye king sayde too the kynge of mormal, yr god ye home into your own country nd somō vp al your men of warre and mete with me at the porte noyre the .xv. day of ested and I prai you speke with the king of va¦lefound and make the peace betwene hī and me, and desyre him to be at Argence the sayd daye wythal hys power to go wyth me to the porte noyre, and shewe hym that I shal make too hym a large amendes for that I haue done too hym in lyke wyse he sayde to the kynge of Is∣maelyte that he shoulde speake wyth the kynge of Orqueney, and so they promy∣sed to doo, and depated and wente eche of them into theyr owne countryes, and than they sente al about for theyr people and shewed the oher twoo kinges theyr message that they hadde fro the kynge Emendus, and how that the kyng desy∣red them to be at Argence the .xv. day af∣ter Ester. And they answered how that
they wolde not fayle to be there at yt day & so eche of them apparayled them self & all their people in as hasty wyse as they could. And the emperoure and the kynge Emendus also made them redy in al hast to go to the porte noyre, and at the empe¦rours cōmaundement there came wyth hym the king Godyfer & the kynge Io∣uas, and the kynge Comedos & all theyr hole power. ¶Howe that Arthur sent Gouernar to his cosyn Hector duke of orgoule desirin¦ge him to come and help to socour him a∣genst the emperour of ynde, & agenst the king Emendus, who wolde besiege him in the castel of ye port noyre, Ca. lxxxvii. SO it was that whan the king of orqueney and the kynge of valefound wer departed from Arthur out of the porte noyre as ye haue hearde here before, than wtin a lytell space after there came to Arthur a spye streyghte fro Cornyte, and there he recounted to Arthur all the delyng of themperour and of kyng Emē¦dus and howe that they somon togither great people to come to assyege them at the porte noyre. And whan Arthur herd that he sayd to duke Philip, wel syr than there is no more to do but let euery man do the best they can, wherefore it is tyme that ye sende to sabary to your senesshall that he bryng hyther to you al your chy∣ualry now at this Ester and ye my lady Florence send forth your letter to youre relame of blaūche toure, and let my lady Margaret sende to Argence, and I shall send to orgoule to my cosin Hector. why than said Florence haue ye than a cosin in these partes. Ye madame by the fayth that I owe to your grace, for if I myght haue hym ones by my syde▪ doubt but lytel the malyce of this emetoute, than she made her lettes and see syr Neue∣lon to the clere toure, & so parted. And whan he was there aryuenon he foūd syr Perdycas who was these gouernar of all that realme of clere owre, and to him he deliuered Florence letters, and in contynent on the syght of the letters he somoned togither al the noble men of the citie and of al the hole realme, and whan they were assembled togither they were to the nombre of .xxx. thousand men of warre, and so they put them sele streight into ye way to go to theyr lady Florence to the port noyre. And also the lady Mar¦garete sente syr Myles vnto Argence to syr Emery, who brought with him will xxx. thousande. And duke Philyp sente syr Brysebar into sabary to gentyll Cle∣menson his marshal who brought with hym .xx. thousande. And Gouernar went to the citie of Orgoule to the noble duke Hector cosyn to Arthur, and than it was shewed hym howe that the duke was at Brule with the countesse of Brule, who as than was a lytel deseased, & Gouer∣nar rode so longe that on a sateday beti¦mes he aryued there, than he mounted vp the stayres and ented intoo the hall and there he founde Hector syttynge by the countesse his mother in lawe eating togither of a dyshe of fyshe, and as sone as Hector saw Gouernar he rose and en¦braced hym & his herte reioysed for glad∣nes whā he saw people of his own coun¦try, and than he demaunded tydings of his cosin Arthur, and Gouernar answe¦red and sayd, syr he hertely cōmaundeth hym to you, and desireth you to come to helpe to socour him agenst his enemyes. And I pray you what be they sayd Hec∣tor that be his enemies, for as long as I
liue what so euer they be though they be neuer so greate of degre of puisaunt but I shal make them to tremble & quake if they wyll abyde and loke me in the face. Than the countesse sayd, fayre sonne I wolde ye should not spare to helpe to so∣coure our frende and louer the noble Ar∣thur. Than the duchesse of Orgoule the fayre lady Aice enbraced Gouernar and demaunded of hym how yt Arthur dyd. Fayre lady he herely com∣maūdeth hym to you. Thā he sayde to Hector, syr haste you for it is nede. Thā Hec¦tor called too hym syr Octe∣bon his senesshal and com∣maunded him that he shold sende into al the country of the erledome of Brule that al that myght here harneys that in al the hast they shold come to hym too the Cytye of Brule, and in lyke wyse he sente into all the duchye of Orgoule to syr Clarem∣balt that he sholde assemble al his hoste, and in al hast to come to him to the Cytye of Brule, and whan al hys people were assembled togither, thā Hec¦tor toke leue of the countesse his mother in lawe, and of the fayre ladye Alise hys wyfe, who desyred Gouernar to recom∣maunde her to the gentyll Arthur. Soo they departed fro Brule, and entred into theyr waye towarde the porte noyre, and so long they rode tyl at the last they were within two leges of the porte noyre, and than they entred into a great depe valey ¶How that Hector as he went toward the porte noyre to socoure Arthur, he en¦countred one of the kynges that was cō¦mynge towarde themperoure, and had in his company wel vnto the nombre of xviii. thousande men of wae the whi∣che kynge Hector slewe and all his peo∣ple, so that there was none that euer es∣caped sauynge twoo, and soo they fledde away, and there Hector was a great bo∣tye & muche treasure & gret haboūdaūc of vytayle the whych was al brought in to the porte noyre. Capi. lxxxviii. THus as Hector and his people were entred into thys greate valley they perceyued where as there came to themwarde aboute the nombre of .xviii. thousande men of warre. Than Hector demaūded of Gouernar if that he knew them. And he answered and sayd syr nay in good fayth, but I doubt me least they be of oure enemyes. Than Hector made al his host to be armed, and he him selfe and Gouernar armed them, and whan they were armed Gouernar presed forth and demaunded one of them fro whence they were. And one of them answered & sayde, frende it is kyng Godyfer who is goyng towarde the emperoure to helpe
hym to lay siege to the porte noyre to the entent to take it and to slee a knight that is therin, who hath taken away Florēce doughter to kyng Emendus the whych lady shold haue bene wedded to my lord themperour, wherfore there is none that is in that castel or taketh part with that knyght but that the shal dye all a shame ful dath, what said Gouernar thā thou doest threten me and yet thou callest me frende, but I shal quite yt for thy labour therfore defende thy selfe. than Gouer∣nar drewe hys sworde and strake soo the knyght betwene the sholders & the necke that he claue hym downe to the waste, & than Gouernar sayde I trowe I haue as¦sured this knighte to be on our parte, for I thynke he wyl abyde here styll in thys place. Thā sayd Hector I se wel that by¦twene Gouernar and this knighte there was but lytel frendship, than Hector be helde and saw where kyng Godyfer dyd desryng hym selfe to come on Gouernar as fast as he might, but Hector met him fyrst and strake the kynge so rudelye that he ouerthrew him wyde open in the feld than Hector tourned him wt hys sworde in hys hande to haue stryken of his head but his people socoured him and ran on Hector on all sydes, but Hector strake so among them that he brake the gret prese than Gouernar dashte into the thyckest of the prese without sparyng of any bo∣dy, for he cut of armes legges and hedes grete penty. Than syr Clatembart en∣tred into the prese, and syr Othes in like wise, than there began suche a fray that it was pitie to beholde, than kyng Gody¦fer was remounted agayne and Hector layde on round about hym, and he went so muche forward that he was closed in among hys enemis, howe be it he gaue amonge them so great strokes that all yt euer he attayned vnto wente to the deth but his enemis dyd cast at hym knyues and dagers, so that at the last therbi they slewe his horse vnder him, than he lept on his fete with his swerde in his hand but his enemies oppressed him gretely. Therwith Gouernar came to hym all in a gret rage, & he was also at his comyng so beset with his enemies that his horse was slayne vnder him and than Hector & Gouernar were in that case yt it was harde for them to escape, tyll at laste syr Clarembalt & al his roue came to them and so than there began so sore a batayle that it was wonder to beholde, and than Hector and Gouernar dyd so valiantly that eche of them gate hym a newe horse and soo in the spyte of all theyr enemyes they were agayne remounted, and than they dasht into the prese & gaue so mygh∣ty strokes that they confounded all that euer they attayned vnto, than the kynge Godyfer came on them with so greate a prese that they drewe by clene force Go∣uernar and syr Othes out of the prese & closed them so rounde aboute, and gaue them so many grete strokes yt they slewe theyr horses vnder them, and than they defended them selfe as valiaunte knigh∣tes ought to do, and oftentymes they cal¦led for Hector to helpe to rescowe them, but the prese was so great and thycke yt Hector in no wise could get to them and yet there he did maruailes with his han¦des, for he all to frusshed sheldes and vn¦barred helmes and ket downe knightes but Gouernar & syr othes were so ouer laden that they were bothe taken pryso∣nes and ledde out of the batayle. Than Gouernar sayde, a dere mayster Arthur to god I you commend, he that al thyng fourmed kepe and saue thy noble bodye. But whan Hector knewe that they were
taken prysoners he was soo sore displea¦sed that nye he enraged for sorow, & soo habandoned hym selfe amonge hys ene∣mies & gaue so grete & heuy strokes that euery man fled before hym, for he strake none but that they lost their lyues, or el∣les sore wounded. And in the meane sea∣son Gouernar and syr Othes wer ledde forth towarde themperour who was co∣myng after, and as thei were thus ledde forth they mette with syr Brysebar and Clemenson senesshal to duke Phylyp of sabary, and Brysebar knew Gouernar as soone as he sawe him, than Brysebar escryed & sayd, saynt mary saue Arthur the good knight, for I se wel that Gouer¦nar is taken, therfore gētle knight helpe to socoure these two knyghtes who are pertayninge to the gentyll Arthur, than all his company set fyersly on them, and within a litle whyle they were all slayne and hewen in smal peces, & than Gouer¦nar & syr Othes were remoūted agayne and they sayd to syr Brysebar. A syr for goddes sake haste you as fast as ye can, for ye shal finde here before in a grete va¦ley the noble Hector cosin to Arthur figh¦ting with king Godifer who hath with him a grete company, wherefore I fere me gretely that this noble duke Hector hath to moche in hande easely to escape. Saint mary sayd Clemenson yonder I se them, Brysebar folowe me, than they all togyder in a fronte wente togyder as faste as they might, & they were all well to the nombre of .xx. thousande fyghting mnne, than Clemenson dasht in to the prese with his swerd in his hande, than he strake the fyrste that he encountred in suche wyse that he made his heed to flye fro his sholdres, and syr Brisebar mette so with an other that he claue his heed to his tethe, and they dyd so moche at theyr coming that they two bette downe and slewe mo than .xx. knyghtes. And whan Hector saw that he said, saint mari what knyghtes be these or fro whens are they come. Than Gouernar who the same ti¦me came into the prese answered Hector and sayd, syr I trust that I haue one so moche that ye shall haue noble socour, & whan Hector sawe Gouernar his herte reioysed and said, frende helpe to socour yonder two knyghtes, for thei are wor∣thy to haue helpe. Than by that tyme al the hole company of .xx. thousande was come in to the prese, and there they flew knyghtes grete plente, so that all kynge Godyfers company were nye dyscomfy∣ted. And whan the king saw that he was soo sore dyspleased that nye he was dead for anger, than he dasht his spors to his horse and gaue Hector such a stroke that he strake away of his shelde & harneys a grete quarter, but as god wold ye stroke dyd not entre into the fleshe, and Hector strake the king soo rudely on the helme that he claue his heed downe to the shol∣dres, and therwith he fell downe to the erth strake deed, & whan his people saw that they tourned and fledde away, but Clemenson and Brisebar folowed in the chase so that of .xviii. thousand thei left on lyne but two persones. Than Hector and Gouernar came to Clemenson and Brisebar and eche of them saluted other and Hector thanked them of theyr good socour. Than they went all to the chari∣ttes and cartes that kyng Godyfer had broght thyder, wherin thei foūde grete plente of golde and syluer & grete plente of vitayle, the whyche Hector caused to be cōuaied to the porte noyre. Than Go¦uernar sayd to Hector, syr I wyll goo be¦fore to my lorde Arthur and shewe hym of your coming, and come you after faire
and easely. wl said Hector go your way in the name of god, & so he departed and wente to the porte noyre & moūted vp in to the palays, & there he founde Arthur with Florence & the bysshop and mayster Steuen & duke Phylyp. And whan Ar∣thur and duke Philyp sawe Gouernar they sawe well by his harneys yt he had ben in some bataile. Thā Arthur demaū¦ded of hym what tidinges. Sir sayde he ryght good thanked be God, syr beholde yonder cometh your cosin Hector and al his hoost who hath discomfyted & slaine the kynge Godyfer, & of .xviii. thousande that he brought with hym there is left a lyue but two persones, wyth the which king we met in a fayre valey, & he was comynge towarde the emperour to haue holpen him to haue destroyed you, in the whiche fraye I was taken prisoner and also the coūtesse of Brules senesshal syr Othes, but thanked be god & duke Phy∣lyp for his senesshall the gentle Clemen∣son and syr Brysebar dyde rescowe & de∣lyuer vs, soo now the kynge Godyfer is slayne & all his company, & Hector bryn¦geth with him grete plente of gold & syl¦uer & vytayle the whiche he wan in this batale, I know well it mounteth to the nombre of .ii.C. charyottes and cartes. A good lord said Arthur ye vytayle is more welcome than golde or syluer. Than by ye time Hector, Clemenson, & Brisebar alyghted at the porte noyre, and lodged all their hoost about in the castel, thā Ar¦thur ran & enbraced Hector al armed as he was & sayd, cosyn ye be ryghte hertely welcome to the helping of the noble Flo¦rence here present. Truly sayd Florence blyssed be ye neighbour yt is redy to helpe at nede, but Arthur howe is it yt ye haue had suche a kynnesmā so nere vs & wold neuer shewe it to me. Madame {quod} Arthur I did it for none yll entent, so thā Hector was led into a chambre to be vnarmed, & duke Philyp receyued Clemenson & Bry¦sebar & syr Othes wt grete ioye, and whā Hector was vnarmed than he went into the palays, & Florēce behelde him & liked hym wondersly, for she saw wel that he was bygge & well made, than she sayd to Arthur, syr this gentylman semeth well to be of a redoubted lynage. Syr {quod} the bishop he semeth wel to be of the valure of a noble man. Ye syr quod Hector yt I warraunt you yf I wer at a table fayre couered wt mete & drinke theron. As god helpe me said duke Philip he saith wel for it were now tyme to ete some mete. Thā squyers set vp tables, & in ye meane time Florence & Arthur, duke Philip & the ar¦chebysshop wēt & lent out at a window and at last they sawe wher ther was co∣ming Florence senesshal & syr Perdicas & .xxx.M. in their cōpany of Florence re∣tinue, and thei al folowed ye white baner of the realme of blaūche toure, than Flo¦rence sayd to Arthur, syr beholde yonder cometh our folke yt shal helpe our neigh∣bours. Madame quod Arthur thei be wel¦come, thā also they saw wher there came syr Miles & syr Emery & .xv.M. in their cōpany, than the fayre lady Margarete said, madame behold yonder cometh my copany, who are come to helpe you at al tymes Margarete my loue I thanke you quod Florēce of your good ayde, & god giue me grace so lōg to liue yt I may de∣serue it vnto you. And whā Hector sawe so many stādardes & stremers coming he said as god helpe me yf this were thēpe∣rour to this comīg I wold thā haue trust soone to se hym & by ye good lorde I shal se him as shortly as I can. So thā these knyghtes dyd alight and mounted vp in to the palays, and Gouernar & Brisebar
apoynted euery man to his lodging, and these knightes were receiued with grete ioye, and thei went to diner & wer serued right rychely with al maner of deyntees. ☞How that themperour of ynde & the kyng Emēdus accompanied with .viii. kinges, & wel to the nombre of .iii.C.M men of warre layde syege aboute the ca∣stell of the porte noyre wher as Florēce and Arthur were, wherof yll tourned to themperour, for there he lost thre of hys kynges and well an hondred thousande of his men. Capitulo. lxxxix. AFter dyuer whā al the ta∣bles wer takē away, than Florence & the bishop & Ar¦thur went togyder & lened out at a window, and duke Phylip & the master & Hector lened out at an other window, thā thei saw wher¦as the king of Mormall & the kynge of Ismaelyte wt al their powers toke their lodging and pight their felde aboute the castel, and the king Emēdus was at Ar∣gence abiding for the king of valefoūde and the king of orqueney, and whā they were come to hym than the kyng Emen¦dus made his own peas with them, and made theym a large amendus in that he had before banysshed theym his courte & sayd how that he dyde it but in a haste, & than repented hym of his soo delynge, & whan they wer thus accorded than they all togyder set forth in their way toward the porte noyre, & the two kinges went before, & the king with the grete dragon of Sorolois came in the rerewarde wt al his hoost, so that al the coūtre was ouer spradde with people. Now I se wel said Arthur that we shal haue warre, but by the fayth that I owe vnto god yf I may ones medle with theym they shall not all retourne agayne. By the good lorde said Hector thei lodge very nye vs, & yet thei be not our frēdes. Than of thēperours
company there came king Ionas, & af∣ter hym there came kynge Clamados, & than after came themperour him selfe, & he was ryght sorowful whan he knewe of the deth of kynge Godifer & of his cō∣pany, & how that al the tresour & vitaile was taken into the porte noyre, & so the emperour was lodged on the left syde of the castel. Than Forence said to the bis∣shop, syr how saye ye is not yonder peo∣ple sufficyēt to take a lady prysoner. Cer¦taynly madame {quod} Arthur it is of trouth they are gretely to be doubted. Syr sayd Hector let vs go to them and gyue them theyr welcome Verily sayd the mayster now shal be seen who is a noble man, ve¦ryly I am sone to a kyng therfore ought I by reason to loue dedes of chyualry & to bere harneys, therfore bycause of this mater I would fayn be made a knyght. & thā I wold gladly syr Hector go in your company to bydde yonder galauntes wel¦come, for I wold be loth yt ye sholde go & I to tary behynde. And whan ye byshop herde the mayster say yt he wold be made a knyght he had therat great laughter & sporte and said, mayster by the good lord it is moche better to be in a chābre with ladyes & damoyselles than to be yonder without & to abide the breking of sharpe speres, & it is hard to fynde a clerke to be a good knyght. well syr said the mayster all yt maketh no mater, for I truste to do so well yt I shal brynge in one daye in to this place .ii. of those kynges prysoners, than thei all yt herde him began to laugh & so al yt day they sported them at ye mai∣sters wordes tyl it was time to go to rest and than euery man wēt to bed and toke their restes tyll the nexte morning, in the morning all these lordes arose betymes and assembled them togyder in the mid∣des of the palays, thā Hector sayd to Ar∣thur, cosyn yonder people without hath good lyfte to slepe, for there is none to wake them, by ye good lord me thynketh we be very slow, let vs go to them and se how they do. In the name of god {quod} syr Clemēsō so let it be for we do not our de∣uoyrs to abide so lōg, therfore let vs issu out & dele valiaūtly wt thē. In the name of god quod Arthur euery mā to harneis & so euery man wēt to arme thē. Florēce was not at ye poyntment, but whan she knew therof she came to them and sayde syrs what mene ye to do, this mater must be done wysely, for ye know not preseise¦ly as yet for what cause this grete assem¦bly be come aboute this castell, peraduen¦ture thei be come to do honour to our ma¦riage bytwene Arthur and me, for I can not bileue that the king my fader be com on me in harneys, wherfore in my minde it were not best to assayle them first, but yf they assayle vs thā let vs defende our selfe in the best wise we can, syr markes ye are a noble mā to goo on my message to the kynge my fader, wherfore I pray you go to hym & humbly comaūde me to his grace, & say yt I requyre him to sende me worde of his minde, & why that he is come hyder in this maner of wyse at this tyme, I pray you marke wel these words that I haue sayd to you, a wyse man ne∣deth no teching, but & ye se that he wil ne∣des kepe styll hys frowarde mynde to me warde, thā I wyl that ye say to hys .iiii. kynges & to al his chyualry how that I sende them word how that thei be al my men & subiectes, wherefore yf there be a∣ny of them so hardy to drawe ony swerde ayenst me or ayenst ony of myne▪ tell thē that by the fayth that I owe to my lady Eglētyne my ere moder on whose sou¦le Ihesu haue mercye that I shall cause them to be hanged by the neckes though
they bee neuer soo noble or gentil, & after that I wyl ye enquyre why this empe∣rour is come thus in to my realme, & yf ye se that he be come for our yll & that he would haue batayle, shewe hym prysyse∣ly that he shal haue bataile right sharpe and stronge to morow betymes without ony longer delay. In the name of God sayde duke Philyp I se well we haue a good heed of our hous, madam ye folow right wel the noble steppes of your lyg∣nage. wel madame said ye markes I trust I shal so fulfyll your message yt ye shall be content and so he toke his leue of Flo¦rence & of al the hole barony & rode forth tyll he came before the king Emendus at which time he was accompanied with his .iiii. kynges, & also there was thempe¦rour and all his kynges and other dukes erles, barons, and knightes, there was also the kynge Ionas and kyng Clama¦dos and diuerse other noble men pertai∣ning to themperour. Than the gentyll markes entred in to the same place & did salute the king and al his company, and sayd, syr I am come to you fro my ladye Florence your doughter the moost noble and gentyl lady liuing, who ryghte de∣rely commendeth her vnto your grace as to her owne dere fader, & syr she is grete¦ly abasshed of this grete company in har¦neys that ye haue brought hyder at thys tyme, for syr it is a grete abasshement to a noble gentyl mayden to se so many hel∣mes & sheldes shyning ayenst the sonne wherfore syr she requyreth you to know your pleasure & mynde. Than the kinge with a fyerse loke said, syr knight I wil not receyue her salutacyon, for I loue her not at my herte, but I hope to do her domage bothe of body & of goodes. Syr said ye markes & for what cause. Certain¦ly said the king for she hath done me sha¦me and despyte, for she hath gone awaye fro me with a straūge knyght, and she is come to hyde her self in this castel, & ther folyshely she kepeth company with this straunge knight the which is a shame to her for euermore, & also she hath done me despyte, for I had gyuen her to this em∣perour to haue bene his wyfe, & she wyl not folow my wyl, and therfore bicause of the shame that she hath done me and dooth yet lyke a false strūpet I shall put her into a perpetuall prison to thentente that she shall do me neuer more shame, & I shal hange the ribawde knight by the necke that caused her thus to do, for the despyte that she hathe done to me I shal do her an other, for I wyll neuer departe hens tyll I haue brought this castel dow¦ne to the harde earth. Thā the noble mar¦kes answered & said, syr as touching the shame that ye lay ayenst my lady for co∣minge into thys castell I shall answere you, syr my lady is of great noblenesse & honour and a quene called by the ryghte of her mode, wherfore it is right yt some tyme she go & se her owne coūtre, and to take her pleasure of her own, & syr in that she departed without your lycence was for fere and doubte of this Emperour to whome ye haue gyuen her ayenst her wil & herte, for she doubted lest that he wold haue had her ayenst her wyll, and there¦fore the mayster by his clergy made you to be abused at the churche dore, and syr she came not hider so simply yt she ought to be blamed, for she brought wt her duke Phylyp and tharchebysshop, and wel .v. hondred other knightes in her company and syr the byshop is here vncle & youre broder, wherfore he wold be as loth that she should do ony otherwise than wel as your selfe would be, but that nedeth not to be fered, for she is of suche wysedome
that she cā rule her selfe wel ynough, for ther is not a wyser lady againe in al the world, & syr also duke Phylyp hathe ben alwayes with her, & therfore suche peo∣ple as be dayly with her can reporte her deling and so can not you that knoweth nothing therof, and yet ther is none that speketh ny vylany of her but you y• whi¦che thing syr me thinketh ye oughte not to do, and syr in dede yōder good knight Arthur is with her, & though it be so that she hath retained him to her seruaunt I thinke therin she hath done wysely, and so haue not ye done in lettīg him depart out of your courte, for he is the floure of al the chyualry of the world, & she by her wysedome hath retayned him, for whan he wente out of your courte he lefte not his felaw behind him, and syr if she haue a good knyght retayned vnto her she is not suche a lady but that she is of suche habilite that she may right wel guerdon hym for hys seruyce, syr she is not come to this castell in the despyte of you, nor yet for the loue of hym that ye so sore des¦pyse, but syr she did it bycause y• ye would gyue her to suche a man as she neuer lo∣ued nor can not loue nor wyll not loue as longe as she lyueth, without it be by force, & syr she is not so poore a lady but that and ye wold giue her neuer so riche a man ayenst her wyl yet ye may be sure there should neuer good lyfe be longe by¦twene thē, & bicause that this emperour would haue her & she loueth him not, ther¦fore she is come to that most strōg castel that she hath where as she careth neither for hym nor yet for any other yt wold do her any dyspleasure, therfore syr take he¦de what ye do for ye know wel yt ye wold haue her to do clene cōtrary to that was destenyed to her in the moūt perillous at her natiuyte, & syr a thynge predestynate is harde to be brokē, but syr I shal shew you what ye shal doo fro hens forth leue medlyng ony ferder in this mater, for of one thing I make a warant that ther is in her company & host a grete nombre of the best knyghtes of the world, syr leue this mater and dele like a true king, and agre to y• promesse that ye were before ac¦corded vnto, & y• was who so euer shold haue the caplet of the ymage shoulde in lykewyse reioyse my lady Florence your doughter, & to this ye haue wryten your hande & set to your seale, and in likewise hath done al your .iiii. kynges here presēt and all the .xii. peres of your realme, now syr ye do ayenst your owne seale & coue∣naunt that ye made lyke a kyng thus to sende for your people in harneys to assē∣ble ayenst a woman, the fader ayenst the doughter it is vnnatural & a gret shame it is no dede of a kynge to doo ayenst his own couenaūt & promes, syr for goddes sake forbere for doīg of any hurt ayenst your owne child for ony singuler loue yt ye haue to this emperour. Certainly sayd the kynge I wyll not forbere my minde, for all the tresour of the worlde shall not cause me but ye knight shal be hanged by the necke, & she put in to perpetuall pry∣son. wel syr sayd the makes than begin whan ye wil, & do the best ye can perauē¦ture all shal not be as ye wold haue it, but neuerthelesse to you .iiii. kinges & to al y• xii. peres & to al other knightes y• be here present I saye vnto you all my lady Flo∣rence sendeth you word by me yt she mer¦uayleth gretly yt ye be come hyder in har∣neys to warre ayenst her cōsidering that ye be all her subiectes & she is your ryght lady & mastres, therfore lordes take good hede what ye do, for she straitly chargeth you that ye nor none of yours drawe no swerde nor wepē ayenst her nor none of
hers, for and ye do she promyseth by the fayth y• she oweth to my lady Eglentine her dere mother y• was, that there is none of what degre so euer he be of but that she wyl cause him to be hanged by the necke lyke a false traytoure, wherefore syrs by my counsail take hede what ye do. Than the kynge of orqueney sayd to the kynge Emendus, syr ye cause vs to haue grete maruayl yt ye haue somoned vs to come hither in harneys to make warre agenst our natural lady and to do agēst our pro¦messes writinges and seales, syr it is of troth I am your man and I ought to go with you whether so eur ye wyl haue me in any iuste quarrell, but reason nor ryght wyl not that I sholde make war agenst our ryght ladye, whose subiectes & men we be and must be, for she is & shal be our lady by iust inheritaunce, but by y• fayth yt I owe to god and to my crowne of the realme of orqueney, neither I nor none of mine shal moue any war agenst her, and of the same accord wer al the .iiii. kinges and .xii. peres, for eche of theym sayd that they wolde neuer bere harneys agenst their own lady, nor do agēst their own promesses made before. Than the kinge Emendus sayd, lordes I an not tell what ye wyl do, but I promyse you all that I wyl neuer depart out of this place tyl I haue destroyed this castel and al the knightes y• be therin hanged by the neckes. And they al aunswered him and said, syr do as it pleseth you, and we shal gyue you the lokyng on, but we wyl not helpe therto nor none of ours. Than the markes sayd to themperour, syr my lady wold fayn know why ye be thus entred into her realme with suche nūbre of men of war. Certaynly syr sayd themperoure I am come hither to seke her as for mine owne, for she is giuen to me by her father and because that she denieth my wil ther∣fore I am come hider to haue her wheder she wyl or no, and I wyl do worse to her than I wolde do to a false traytour & I shal hang by the neck yt rybaude knight that kepeth her at his plesure, and duke Philyp of saboty also who doth sustaine her in her folysshe mynde. And whan the kyng of orqueny herde themperou menase and threte & say so of his nuewe duke Philyp he sayde, ye syr emperoure fayre and easely for or ye can bringe yt a∣bout ye shal haue no cap nor hat too put on your hed, for thoughe yt she be giuē to you yet she is not deliuered to you, ye ma wel muse on her delyuraunce, but I en∣sure you ye get her not so lyghtly as ye wene, and syr as for the knight whom ye do menase to hang by y• necke, syr it were a gret synne so to do, for his nourisshing coste hym more than soo but syr take to morow some appointment betwene him & you to do some dedes of armes togider or elles take part of his men & so shal ye do of his, & than and ye cā take him bind him fast, and than hang him by y• necke & thā shal ye be clene out of suspection be¦twene Florence and him, for thā ye may be sure he shal trespasse you no more, syr loue hath broughte you hither, but ye nor al your knights are nothing worth wtout ye do some dedes to be praysed, sit moūt on your horse to morowe▪ for loue gouer¦neth you my lady is so fayre, and she wol¦de gladly se you giue some fat stroke wt your sworde for her loue for alway good knightes getteth grace among fayre la∣dyes, therfore syr to morow wyn her a¦mourous grace wt some dede of chiualry for in good faythe ye haue it not. well {quod} themperour get me ye knyght yt sporteth hī so wt her. Ye syr {quod} the marke she wyl not so lyghtly beget, for syr he is within
and ye be wtout in the rayne, and he is in the shadow abiding in the sighte of thys fayre ladi y• which is a gret shame to you therfore put him out of this castell & get your self in, but syr how say ye, shal this assēble be made to morowe or not. Bi my faith said the emperour I shal make him assemble to morow of .iiii. thousand, and also of .xviii. M. men of armes. Sir said yt markes wil ye promise this faithfully. Ye truely said thēperour. And I promyse faithfully for the other parti said the mar¦kes y• ye shal be receiued, & than he spake as loud as he could and said, lordes & frē¦des suche as be subiectes to my lady Flo∣rence y• on payn of your liues yt ye moue not nor make no wr agēst my lady Flo¦rence nor agenst  o hers, and than he said to thēperour syr for goddes sake begin the batail betymes because of the hete. Than the king Clamedos said to ye markes, is this lady Florence so fayre as it is said. A syr said the markes, think ye nothing on her, for your emperour doth ynough for you hothe. well frende sayd the kyng, I here say she hath wyth her a swete lytel rose white tender & yong, who is called Floret. Syr said the markes in dede there is suche one wt my lady, and I ensure you she is righte swete, & she ma∣keth oftentimes for me and suche other knightes of my cōpany goodly chaplets and sir as yet to my knowledge she hath no loue nor paramout and syr me think ye haue a iolly wanton eye, therefore syr come & se her to morow, for she shal be on the walles of the castel, & I shall shewe her vnto you if I cā mete wt you, and syr when ye haue sene her set your fete togy¦ther & assay if ye can lepe vp to her, take on you to morow this enterprise for thē∣perour, with a good wil said he, and said to themperour, syr I require you let me haue the batail to morow. well {quod} thēpe∣rour sith ye wil nedes I am content, and so he toke his gloue in pledge, and ye king thanked hym, and the markes departed, & went to the castel and recoūted to Flo∣rence and to Arthur word for word as ye haue herde before, than they answered yt they had of him a right good messenger, & graunted him the baail the next dai wt xxx. M. agenst the kyng Clamados. ¶How Philip duke of sabary & master Steuen son to the king of valefoūd wer made knightes, and of the discomfiture yt Arthur made on themperour. Ca. lxxxx. ANd whan duke Philyp of saba∣ry herd how yt they sholde haue a batayle the next day in the morninge he sayde to the lady Florence, madame I re¦quyre you let me be made a knight, for I may not be in the place where as so ma∣ny noble men be without I wer a knight By the faith that I owe to god sayd Flo¦rence wt a right good wil. Than maister Steuen stepte forth and sayde, madame my lorde the archbisshop here present re¦puteth me but as one more metely to bete furres than knightes, but madam by the fayth that I owe to god I wolde fayne be made a knyght, and thereof I requyre your grace, & than euery body began too laugh▪ wel syr {quod} he laugh not thereat for I ape not, I wyl be made a knight and I may, than he went to the ladye Mar∣garet of Argenton and said to her in her eare, mine own dere lady wil it not plese you that I be made a knyghte, I beseche you gyue me leaue to be one, and she an∣swered him fayre and softly in counsail and said, yes ywys swete loue I wold be be glad therof, than he rose fro her & sayd alowde, my lady Margarete of Argentō how say ye shal I be made a knight. Cer¦tainly frende {quod} she I wold be glad there
of, on the condycyon that ye wil take ar¦mitre & horse and other abilemētes of my gyf. Madam sayd he I thank you and I shal be glad to folow your plesure wt the licence of my lady Florence. Certenly {quod} Florence I am conent therwt. And whā al ye other lordes and knightes saw that the maister mened godd faith they were right glad therof, and so went as far that night to their restes & in the morning for duke Philip Florence prepared horse & harneys and al other abilemētes, & fair lady Margaret ordeyned in like wise for maister Steuen, thā tharchbishop sange y• masse, and Arthur did gyrde on the mai¦sters sword, and Hector did on duke Phi¦lips, than Arthur and Cemēson led forth the master betwene thē, and Hector and syr Perdias led forth duke Philip, aud so they offred to the bishop, and he didde giue them ye neck strokes of knighthode accordinge to the vsage yt was than in y• country, than Arthur and Hector armed thē, and thā caused a gret horne to be blo¦wen, and by the sowninge thereof euery knight went to their harnes, and thā thei toke their leues of Florence, and than Ar¦thur said to the markes and to syr Claē bait and to syr othes, syrs I pray you go and fortify the gates of this castel wt .iiii C. pauesss, and so they did, and thā they issued out of the castel in good ordinaūce and Arthur ordeyned their bataile ryght strong and maruelous, in y• first batayle there was him selfe syr Brysebar and sir Clemēson, and in their company .vii. M hawbertes, and they were comaunded to kepe their right way vnder the moūtayn than folowed after thē Hector & Gouer∣nar and Florence senesshal wt .iiii. M. wt them, and the master and duke Philyp & syr Perdycas went about the mountain to thentent to close round about thempe¦ryens, and they had with them .viii. M. Than thēperour on his part called hym the king Clamados and said syr go arme you and your mē and go make assaut to the castel of the port noyre, and yf ye for∣tune to encoūtre the kinght Arthur loke yt ye take him and bring him aliue to mo¦ror I wil make him be hanged so hie and o nere to the castel y• Florence may se hī euery day whan she wil. Syr {quod} the king doubt ye not it shal be done, but it is an olde said saw he yt reckeneth withoute his hoost mast reken twise, and so dyd he or he fayled of hys enterprise▪ than the king caused to be blowen a gret trumpe, & than eueri man ran to his harnes, and the king Clamados ardend .iii. batails and therle of thye me did lede y• first batail, and the duke alion wt him▪ and they had in their cōpany .x. M. men, and the second bataile was led by the duke of Galace and he had wt hym .x. M. men, & the kinge Clamados him selfe led forthe the third bataile & other .x. M. with hym and so they went forth with baners dys∣played and toke the ryght way toward the castel, the whiche way Arthur was commyng towarde the felde▪ and so they wente forth so longe tyl at last the duke of Calyon and the erle of the yle perue who led the fyste batayle encounted Ar∣thur & Clemēson and Brisebar and their cōpany, than Clemēson desired of Arthur to haue the first cours with his spere and Arthur dyd graunte hym, than he dashe his sporres to his horse sydes & ran at y• duke of Calyon who came ayenst him, & they met so rudelye yt Clemenson strake so ye duke yt his spee went clene through out his body and so the duke fel down to the erth. A Iesu sayd Arthur what ayde is thys at the first meting, our enemyes hath by this dede a gret losse and discom¦forte.
And whan therle of the yle perdue saw the duke dead there arose in his host a gret and terrible cry, and they ran al at once on Clemensō, but he like a valiaunt knight defended him selfe wt hys sworde and gaue right gret and puissant strokes among them, than there was none cou∣de holde Brysebar but he rusht into the prese, & the fyrst yt he encountred wythal he bet downe to the earth, and the second neuer did crye after. Thā Arthur and his company came into the prese, and there bt downe and flewe knyghtes by greate hepes, and Arthur with his good sword clarēce plunged in amonge his enemies and be down knightes and horses in su∣che wyse that al fled before him, and they woulde haue fled fro the death, for there was none that abode hī but that he recei¦ued deth at his handes, & Clemenson sto∣de styl and beheld him and had gret won¦der at his dedes, and as he stode lokīg on him, Arthur encountred so a knight that he claue him to the teth, than Clemenson toke of his dedes gret hardines on hym and dasht into the thickest of the prese, & syr Brisebar folowed him so far that thei were enclosed rounde about with theyr enemies, and the prese was so great that their horses were slaine vnder them, and so by greate force they were taken pryso∣ners and led forth out of the feld toward themperor but as fortune wold Hector met them and as sone as he saw them he sporred his hors wt his sporres, & strake so the fyrst that he claue him to the chyn, and fro the second he toke away his shol¦dre, than Gauernar toke his sword in his hande and did helpe Hector to discom¦fyt them that led away the prysoners, & in the spyte of them all they wee remoū¦ted and so returned again to the host, and Hector turned his horse and strake in the prese so rudely that wyth the fyrst that he met he strake of his hed, and or he cealed he slew .x. eche after other, and at last Hec¦tor, Clemenson, Brysebar & Gouenar, met togyder and betwene them they did such exiyse among themperours people that al fled before them, than thero ga¦lace came into the felde wt .x. M. in his cō¦pany, and than the batayl began to be so terrible that there was many slayne and hurt of both pries, and whā Arthur saw so many emperiens assembled togider a∣yenst his men he dasht to his hors wt cla¦rence in his hand & strake so uely in y• prese yt he cut of hedes, legges, armes, & hands, & vnbarred helmes, & claue ason¦der shelds, and cōfonnded and bet down al yt euer he touched, & at last he encoun∣tred thereof y• yle perdue, but he though he wolde not flee hym, but he strake him wt the pomel of his good sword on hie on the helme so rudely yt he was so astonied wt the stroke yt he wist not where he was and so al in a traunce he fel on his hors necke, and in the releuynge he strake at Hector who as than had broken part of the prese to thentent to folowe Arthur, but Hector gaue hī suche a stroke that he auoyded the sadel and fel to the erth, thā Brisebar and Gouernar toke him, & so he was sent into the castel to Florence like a prysoner. And whan the duke of galace saw that he had lost hym, he was right sorowful, and in gret rage dashe into the prese and met wt syr Ansel, and gaue him such a stroke that his sword went clene throughoute hys bodye, but yet as God wold he was not woūded to the deth, but he fel downe to the erth in a gret traunce Than Gouernar toke and onuaied hī out of the prese & sent him to the castell. And whan Florence saw her knight sir Ansel so sore wounded she was right so∣rowful
and caused her surgiens to serch his woundes, and whan Arthur saw the stroke that the duke of Galace had giuen syr Ansel he was ryght sorowful for he wende verely yt he had bene dead, therwt he broched to hys horse & encoūtred the duke wt great malice & gaue hym such a stroke yt he claue him to the sholders. And whan his people saw yt he was slain and that they had as than no capytaine, they were gretly abasshed & tourned them to flie, but Arthur and Hector chased thē til at last thei met with the king Clamedos & .x. M. in his companye, and so they all dasht togider, & than there began a terry¦ble batail, but the kinges company was so gret that Arthur and his cōpanye had muche to do to defend theyr lyues tyl at last maister Steuen & duk Philip & syr Perdycas were come rounde aboute the mountain so yt they were at y• backes of theyr enemies, so yt king Clamedos toke no hede therof tyl they were on them vn∣ware, and as soone as mayster Steuen saw ye kinges host he blewe suche a blast that there arose a myst in the kings host that they were so abasshed therwith that they had thought to haue fled away, but than duke Philip and the mayster rusht into the prese, and eche of them bet down him wt whom they encountred, and there the maister did maruailes in armes, and at last Gouernar saw him and said to sir Clemenson by the good lord syr mayster Steuen by semyng hath gyuen vp hys mynde to be a priest, for I wene he wyll neuer synge masse, beholde yonder how valiaūtly he fyghteth, for there he sawe him giue right grete and valiant strokes what shal I say more, so muche dyd Ar¦thur there and his company that y• kyng Clamedos and al his were clene discomfi¦ted and fled away as fast as they myght to themperours tent, & recoūted to him al the losse that he had in that batail, and shewed him how that the duke of Calion and the duke of galace were bothe slayne and the erle of the yle perdue taken priso¦ner & al his company slain and said also syr verely there was neuer seene suche a knyght as Arthur is, and he hath in his company of the moste valyaunt knygh∣tes of all the worlde. And whan thempe∣rour herde al thys he was so sorowfull and full of dyspleasure that he was nere enraged out of his wytte, than he caused hornes and trompettes to be blowen to thentent to cause his people to arme thē and so themperour him selfe armed him and also dyd kyng Ionas and .xv. thou sande in their company. And whan Ar∣thur herd that he sayd to his people, sirs thanked be god it is ryghte well happed to vs in the begynnyng of thys ware, and our people this day hath taken grete payne▪ wherfore they ought to be wery wherfore in my mynde it were best that we draw our selfe agayn into our castel and let vs se what this emperour wyl do to vs, wherto euery man was agreed and so they withdrew thē and mounted vp into the castel and entred into the pa∣lais. Than Florence demaunded of Ar∣thur how that he dyd. And he answered and sayd dere lady thanked be god right wel. And in lyke wyse did the fayre lady Margarete to maister Steuen, than the erle of y• yle perdue came to Arthur who receyued him right swetely and said, syr be of good chere and be not dismayed, for ye shall haue here but a good pryson, and the erle thanked him right swettly, ¶Howe that themperour spake wyth quene Proserpine, wenyng to hym that it had bene the fayre ladye Florence, but
he was deceyued, for she dyd set a greate dyscorde betwene hī and the king Emen∣dus as ye shal here after. Cap. lxxxxi. WHan y• themperour & his cō∣pany wer redy aparailed thei lept on their horses & folowed after Arthur wt .xl. thousand in his cōpany, & whan he came nere to ye castel, he beheld ye satuacion therof a gret season, and at the last he sawe the quene Proserpine and a damosel wt her issuing out of the castel, and he thought verely y• it had ben Florence that had ben fled out of the castel, and with that sight he clene forgate his displeasure and all the losse yt he had in the battayle before, and so he dasht to his horse and a .xxx. persons wt him, and whā he had ouertaken her and sene her perfytely in the face, he sayde to hym selfe verely thys same is Florence and so than he forgat al maner of other thinges and layd his handes on y• raine of her horse & sayd fayre damosell whe∣ther are ye goyng so fast thys way. Cer∣taynly syr said she it hath bē shewed me that ye and the king my father are ryght sore dyspleased wt me, but syr it greueth me more your displesure than mi father wherfore syr I thinke to go to an abbey here by, and there to be made a nonne for youre dyspleasure all onely. Damoysell sayd themperour if it please you we two shall be soone agreed. Syr sayde she I thanke you, but howe shall that be, wyl ye haue me to youre wife, & I you to my husbond. Ye truly said themperour. Syr said she I am content therwith, but how shal I do for the kyng my father wyl sle me if he maye haue me vnder his rule, & syr by the fayth yt I owe vnto oure lorde my body was neuer defouled with yon∣der knight Arthur nor yet wt any other. well fayre lady sayd themperour and yf that be of trouth I ensure you youre fa∣ther shall do you no hurte but my parte shal be therein. Syr sayd she may I trust on this, for it sore forthinketh me yt euer I dyd any dysplesure to you. Ye truely said themperour think not the contrary therfore now be in peace, and so thempe∣rour toke her wt him into hys tente, and cleped and kissed hr oftentimes yt at the last it came to the heryng of king Emen¦dus how that themperour had a gret ba¦tail with them of the castel, and how that he had lost al his people that he had sent thider, than he armed him and wel tohe nūbre of .xxx. thousand and came to the emperours tent to comforte hym of hys losse, than it was shewed to themperour how that the kyng was comyng towar¦de him. He shal be welcome sayd thempe¦rour. I syr sayd Proserpine I am now vnder your kepynge, for goddes sake let my fader do me no vilany. Be not afray¦de for I warrant you sayde themperoure Than the king entred into the pauilyon and as soone as he sawe proserpyne he wende verely it had be Florence his dou¦ghter & sayd, what thou strumpet art yu nowhere, where is that rybaud knight Arthur that hath kept the thus long, is he nowe become thy sauegard, I trowe now thou wenest to make thy peace, but by the fayth that I owe vnto the crown of Sorolois thou shalt neuer escape out of pryson as longe as I lyue thou shalt do me no more shame nowe that I haue the. Syr said themperour for goddes sa∣ke be not soo sore dyspleased for she hath done no trespace, & if she haue I forgyue it her for euer, and syr so shal ye do for y• loue of mee, and Florence I requyre you knele downe before your father and cry him mercy. Syr said she wt a right good
wyll, than she kneled downe before her fader & sayd, gentyl king and dere fader haue mercy on me & forgyue me your yl wyl, and the kynge who was stylful of feruent yre and despyte lyfte vp hys fote and strake her therwith in the middes of the brest & so ouerthrewe her wyde open to the erth. And whan themperour sawe that he was ryght sore dyspleased & sayd syr kynge ye haue done me grete vilany for I had assured her that she shold haue had no hurte neyther of you nor of none other, & she is in my pauylion and in my keping, and she is myne and yet ye bete her here before my face. well syr Epe∣rour said the king in an yll houre she is aryued here, for whether ye wyll or not she shall be cast in to perpetuall pryson, than the kinge toke her by the arme and drewe her to hym warde, to thentent to haue ledde her forthe out of the tent, but themperour toke her in his armes & said syr kynge holde you styll or by the fayth that I owe to myn empyre yf ye set han∣des on her ony more ye and I shalbe ene¦myes togyder for euermore. Than was the kynge more dyspleased than he was before, and lyft vp his hande & gaue her a grete blow or two vnder the cheke as she stode in themperours armes. Than themperour sayd what stryke ye her for all my praier and betwene mine armes in my keping by the faythe that I owe vn∣to god it sore greueth me, & therwith he toke his swerde in his hande & gaue the king a puissaunt stroke. Than the kyng drew his swerde & gaue agayne thempe¦rour a grete stroke, than the kynge com∣pany assayled themperour, and thempe∣ryence ran on the king, and so ther were well to the nombre of .xxx. thousande on bothe parties, than there began amonge them a grete battaile & a fyerse so yt ther were many slayne aud hurt, and amonge them ther was such a noyse that Arthur and his company might well here them as they were in the castel, & they went o the wyndowes and looked out at theym to know what noyse that was, and ther they sawe a fyerse bataile without in the felde amonge theyr enemyes, & they sent out a spye to knowe the trouthe what it myght be, & he went and came again and reported to Florence & to them all how it was, and for what occasyon the batayle was bytwene the kynge & themperour. Neuer trust me said Florence but y• Pro¦sepyne is in themperours tent, and they wene all how that I were there amonge them, for I remembre well she sayd ones to me and to Arthur also how y• she wold cause as moche hate & stryfe to be amōg them as euer was loue. Verely madame said Arthur ye say very trouth, for I am wel remembred so I herde ones say, and euer this bataile encreased more & more, for the people drewe to on bothe parties, the whiche had tourned to grete domage on both partyes yf the .iiii. kynges had not ben, for they did so moche that with grete payne and ieopardy, they departed theym, and than sodeynly Proserpine was vanysshed away soo that none wis where she was become, and as soone as euery man was vnarmed, themperour departed and went his waye toward his owne countre, and his people comforted hym to the best of theyr power, and the kynge was in his tent and trembled for yre, and therwith there came to hym one of the emperours dukes and sayd syr my lorde themperour quyreth you of the gi of Florence youre doughter, for he ca∣reth neyther for you nor for her, nor for none of your loues, nor for nothing that ye haue or shall haue, and by me he de∣fyeth
you, and biddeth you to be ware of hym at this nexte cestes, for than he wyll come and make war ayenst you with an hondred thousande men of warre. Than the king of orqueney sayde, syr say vnto your Emperour that yf he come he shall fynde that wyll speke with hym not to his pleasure, & I ensure you yf he come not he shal be sought where so euer he be to thentēt to haue his heed brought into this countre, therfore shewe hym that yf he wil come and brīg him self into this realme he shall ease vs of moche payne. Than the duke departed, and the kynge Emendus abode styl in grete malencoly Than the king of valefoūde said to him syr here is begon a great besynes▪ & ma¦ny inconueniētes are lyke to folow ther¦by, therfore syr it shal be nedeful for you to puruey for people, & for the best knigh¦tes that ye can gete, for themperour is a puissaunt prince, & hathe many frendes, gentle kynge suffre your selfe to be coū∣seyled both to your profyt & honour, syr for goddes sake leue this abusiō thus to lay syege to your doughter, & do no more ayenst your owne promesse & agrement nor striue no more ayēst your doughters desteny, for there is no profyte can come to you therby but many yll inconuenyen¦tes may ensue therby, & hath done all re∣dy as it hath appered by the duke of bigor for he hath receyued deth, & syr ye wer in grete displeasure with the king of orque¦ney & with me, & banished vs out of your courte, also syr ye were in grete abusyon at cornyte at ye chirch dore whan ye wēde to haue maried Florence to themperour & now ye be fallē wt him at grete mortall warre, and syr this emperour hath lost a king & .ii. dukes & all theyr people slayne and all this is done bicause ye obstinate ayenst Florēce desteny, therfore now syr do yet the best, appease your selfe & make peas with your doughter & wt the good knyght Arthur, & desyre hym to aide you ayenst this emperour, for one thynge I say yt he hath in his cōpany many of the best knyghtes of al the world, & syr if ye may haue them ye nede not to fere thēpe∣rour nor yet all the world, syr I coūseyle you thus to do. Ye said the king & wold ye haue me to do thus, how shold I than haue ony honour or fame in this worlde syth she shamefully hath forsakē me & is gone away wt this straūge knight▪ well syr quod the kīg of valefoūd your dough¦ter I ensure you right sagely behaueth her self as she that nothīg wyl do ayenst her desteny, & bycause ye wold haue con∣strayned her to haue maryed ayenst her wyl, therfore she is come in to this strōg castell for to withstād this emperour, syr she hath with her your own broder thar∣chebyshop & her cosyn duke Philyp of sa¦ary. &. v.C. of her knightes, & syr ther is none of all these that for all the good in the world thei wold not suffre ony incō∣uenientes bitwene her & this knight Ar∣thur, but syr she fereth yt this emperour wold doo her domage, therfore she hath retayned hym & suche other as be of hys cōpany bycause that he is the moost best knyght of all the worlde now lyuynge, wherin syr she hath done wysely, for ye may se how at all poyntes thei haue dis∣pleased this emperour and slayne of hys men, syr your doughter is your owne, & this emperour is now your mortall ene∣my▪ but syr your loue ought for to be on your doughter, & bere you fyersly ayenst your enemyes and not ayenst hr whom ye should loue. Than the kyng sayd, syr by the good lord I am at this presēt time so ouercome wyth dyspleasure that I can not as now receyue your wordes in
gree, I shall aduyse me well this night & to morowe I shall answere you. Syr ye saye well sayd the kynges and .xii. peres Than the kyng was vnarmed & al other in lyke wyse, than the tables were spred and euery man sate downe & made good chere, and so passed forth the time wt the kynge tyll it was tyme to go to rest. ¶How that after themperour was thus departed in dyspleasure and had defyed the kyng wyth mortall warre the nexte nyghte folowynge by the subtyll arte of maister Steuen al the kinges host was brought euery man fast a slepe, & in the meane tyme the mayster and fyue other knyghtes with hym bare the king Emē¦dus fast a slepe as he laye, bedde and all vp in to the palays of the Castell of the porte noyre. Capitulo .lxxxxii. THus as the kynge Emendus and hys lordes were in theyr tentes ryghte sore troubled & abashed of the debate yt was rysen bytwene the kynge and themperour for the loue of Proserpyne as ye haue herde here before all that sea∣son Arthur and his company were in the castell laughynge and hauing good ga∣me of the begynning of the occasyon of the stryfe bytwene the kinge and the em¦perour, and so all that day thei were in grete feest and ioye tyl it was time to go to theyr restes, and so euery man wente therto saue the mayster, & he was in hys doublet bycause that the weder was som¦what hote, & in his company there was duke Phylyp, Brysebar, Gouernar, Hec¦tor, and Clemenson, and Perdycas, and they played and sprted them togider til it was ver late, than Gouernar sayd to the mayster, syr yonder in the heuen ye may se many sterres, but I pray you how can ye know by them what shold fal af∣ter. Syr said the maister ye scyence therof is right pleasaunt and goodly. I praye your maister said Hector loke now vp in to the heuen & beholde the planettes and loke & ye can perceyue ny thinge that should auaūtage or elles hurteful to vs, and soo for their pleasure the mayster lo∣ked vp & beheld ye heuen a grete space, & at last he sayd, lordes & frendes and ye be helde the planettes & coude cōsyder them as well as I do ye shold clerely perceiue that we be at thende of our war, for we shal haue shortly peas, & as I thinke ve∣ryly we shall haue Arthur to our lorde & mayster. Swete mayster said duke Phy¦lyp & I pray you how shal al this come to passe. Veryly syr I se well by ye course of the sterres many meruayles, for ye pla¦net that as now rēneth who hath the go¦uernaunce ouer the kynge Emendus is now in that poynt yt yf we mighte haue the kynge we shold lightly haue peace wt hym, & I knowe well by the planet that he is as now layde in his bedde in his pa¦uylyon and is fast a slepe & all hys hoost, and I know suche a charme that yf I do cast it, neither he nor none of his shal awake tyll it be to morowe fayre daye, therfore let vs go out in to the felde and bring hyther the kynge, and than shall we haue our peas sone made. In ye name of god said Brisebar shame haue he that fayleth so to do. Let vs go streight waye sayd Gouernar, than they all aparayled them and went out of the castell as pry∣uely as they coude, and desyre the mar∣kes to kepe the gates open tyll they re∣tourned, and whan they approched nere to the tentes, than the maister blew such a blast that ther arose a grete storme and a thycke myste, so that they loost clene
the sight of the entes, and therwith eue¦ry man that was waking in the felde fell fast a slepe, than the mayster and his cō∣pany wnt to the kynges tent, and there they founde hym in hys riall bedde fast a slepe, & grete lyghtes of waxe brenning before hym, and so amonge theim they toke the hole bedde and the kyng lyenge in it, and bare it fayre and softely vp to the castell, and dyde set downe the bedde in the grete hall of the palays, and so set foure torches of waxe brenning before hym, and soo they dyde let hym lye styll. Than the mayster sayd I wyll retoune agayn to the tentes and awake the king my fader and shewe hym howe that we haue the king within the castel with vs And so he went into his faders tent and vndyde his enchauntement, and so than he was brought vnto his faders beddes syde, and than he sate hym downe fayre and softely, and abode tyll the kynge his fader awoke by hym selfe, and than the mayster sayd, syr be ye a slepe. Nay sayd the kynge who be ye that speketh to me thus erly. Syr I am Steuen your sone Sainct mary sayd the kynge who hath brought you hyder, gete you hens for & kyng Emendus may take you ther is no gold nor syluer that shal saue you fro ye deth. Syr sayd the mayster the kynge is as now more in my daunger than I am in his, for syr he is in ye castel fast a slepe A slepe in the castell sayd the kynge how can yt be, how is he come thyder, or how should he be a slepe among his enemyes Syr truly we haue this night borne him to the castell in his bedde fast a slepe, for syr by the subtyll are of nygromancy I brought hym & all his hoost fast a slepe, therfore syr I am com to you for to haue your counseyle what we shall do wt him eyther slee him or saue him on liue. Slee hym said the kinge saint mary loke that ye touche hym not to his hurte, but ho∣nour ye hym as moche as ye may, abyde ye here a lytell space, and I wyl aryse, & go speke with the kinge of Orqueney, & as soone as he was redy they went bothe togyder to the kynge of Orqueney, who was as than fast a slepe in his tent, than they awoke him & recoūted to hym al the mater. Than the king of valefoūde sayd syr for goddes sake helpe to make ye peas amonge vs. Than the king said syrs I thinke it wer best to go and wake al the other kinges and .xii. peres, and let them come hyder, and so they were incontinēt sente for, and they came thyder streyght wayes, and as soone as they were come and herde all the case how it was. Than the kinge of valefounde said, syrs let vs euery man et to our handes to make the peas for as now we are nere at the point let vs go all to the castel and saye to the kyng how that al we were orne in lyke wyse as he was vp in to the castell whi∣les that we were a slepe, and than whan he seeth and hreth that we all be taken prysoners, and that he hath none now in all his host that is able to mayntain his warre he wyl the sooner be cōuerted and brokn fro his purpose. And they all an∣swered and sayd, syr ye haue ryght well deuysed the mater, we be al cōtent thus to do, than they all departed pryuely that none of the hoost espyed them, and went vp into the castell, & so there they wente to theyr beddes, and laye styl tyll it was in the mornynge, than in the mornynge betymes the mayster and Hector wente to Arthur and awoke hym and sayd, syr ye haue here in your company the kynge Emendus and al the other foure kinges and the .xii. peres. And where are they sayd Arthur. Here win this fayre cham¦bre
sayd Hector. I gentyll mayster sayde Arthur blessed be the houre that euer ye were borne, for now I trust we shal ha∣ue peas let vs go cause Florence and the archebysshop to aryse, and so they dyde, and whan they were vp and redy & herde these tydynges they were ryght ioyfull, than tharchebyshop sayd let vs go and cause to aryse the kynge of valefounde and the king of Orqueney and the kyng of Ismaelyte and the king of mormall, & al the .xii. pres, & than let vs take coū∣seyle togyder & se what shall be done fer∣der in this mater, & duke Phylyp wente for them, and as soone as thei wer come they saluted Arthur and Florence. Than the bysshop sayd, syrs now there is noo more to do but let euery man take theyr harneys, than Arthur, duke Philyp, Hec¦tor, & Gouernar armed them, & two. C. other knyghtes in theyr company, than the bysshop sayd, syrs now shal the king Emēdus doubte whā he seeth you, & the sooner he wyl agre to make peas wt you Than the kyng of valefounde said, faire lady Florence ye shal go to the king your faders bedde & wake him. Alas said Flo¦rēce shal I go to him & he hateth me deed¦ly, I fere me he wyll slee me. Madame {quod} the kyng of mormal there is not so harde a herted mā but yt a woman shal molyfy hym, for there was neuer so grete wrath but a womā may appease it, therfore ma¦dame go your way to him, for I waraūt you ye shall make your peas youre selfe. well quod Florēce I shal go to him god be my helpe, thā she departed & wēt soft∣ly into the chambre wher as the king her fader laye, than she opened ye windowes & dyd out the lyghtes of ware, and went fayre & softly to the kinges beddes syde, and whan she saw that he slept fast she sate her down by him on the beddes fete. ¶How that kynge Emendus whā that he awoke forgaue all his yll wyl to Flo¦rence his doughter, and dyde put all the gouernynge of his realme into her han∣des. Capitulo .lxxxxiii. THus as Florence sate on her faders beddes fete a good spa¦ce, at laste the kinge felte one syttynge on hys beddes fete therwith he awoke & opened his eyen, & behelde the grete wyndowes open before hym fayre glased & the sone shynynge all about the chambre the whi¦che was hanged ryght rychely, than the kynge meruayled gretely wher he was and was sore afrayed and blessed him of tentymes and sayd, saynt marye where am I, what am I betrayed, hat arte thou that syttest on my beddes fete. Syr sayd she I am your doughter Florēce, & whan the king perceiued that it was sh he sayd, who hath brought the in to thys place wher as I am syth thou haste sha∣med thy selfe with a fugityue knyght. A syr sayd Florence for goddes sake saye ye so no more for by the holy baptim that I receyued at the fone stone & on the dam∣pnacion of my soule my body was neuer by hym nor by none other enpayred ney∣ther in word nor in dede. Certaynly said the kynge fole as thou arte I byleue the not, why hast thou elles ben so moche in his cōpany without doyng of any other thing, for loke where as the rt is there is the body habandoned, for the body en∣clyneth to the herte. why sayde Florence it nedeth not alwayes to accomplysh al the wylles of the herte, but suche as are honourable & good. Syr sayd the king what honour is this for you thus to hold your selfe in pryson priuely hydde with a straunge knyght, & to leue such a noble
maryage as I would haue gyuen to you Syr sayd she yf it please you I hal shew you as to that I haue left you and come hder, it is of trouth I sawe wel ye wer of the mynde to haue gyuen me in mari∣age to this emperour the whiche truely ws ayenst my mynde for I hae him to the death, in so moche that I woulde it had cost me the one halfe of my londes so that I had his heed fro his sholdres, soo that I should not offende god, and syr in this grete hate rede yf I should haue ta¦ken hym my hert should neuer haue bn in peace til I had caused him perauēture to haue lost his lyfe, & therby shoulde I haue ben reputed a false murtherer & dā¦pned my soule perpetually, & to you this shold haue ben a grete shame & reproche for I am sure yf I shold haue died in the quarell I should haue sayd gramercy to hym yt would haue brought me his heed, for I am in fere I shold haue put my sou¦le in iopardy to haue gone to the deuyl of hell, and as fynding in some maner of wayes to haue shorted his mortal lyfe, & so in this I should haue becom cruel, and lost my womans herte, syr I ensure you this was my wyl and entencion, & syr to eschewe al these perylles & inconuenyen¦tes I am come hyder, for I know well that yf I had taryed wyth you ye wolde haue caused me to haue had hym ayenst my wyll, therfore I durste not dyscouer my courage vnto you, but I shewed my mynde to your broder the noble archebis¦shop who is myne vncle & fader in god & confessor, he hath all thys season taken hede to me both comming and going, in chambre and out of chambre, therfore en¦quyre of him & of duke Philyp of sabary and of all my other barons & knightes la¦dyes & damoyselles wheder than I haue dysonstly ordred my selfe or not, & syr as for the knight that ye speke of I haue none otherwyse done wt hym but as my desteny hath gyuen me, & syr thus hathe ben al my deling therfore syr for goddes sake haue pyte on me your owne humble chylde, ye be my lord and fader, & I am your doughter, ye are left vnto me in the stede of my moder, who I am sure and she had lyued wold haue endured grete trou¦ble rather than I shold haue ben maryed ayenst my wil & desteny, & syr syth ye are lefte me in the stede of my moder for god¦des sake than leue your faderly hrte and take a moderly herte vnto you, syr accom¦plysshe my desyre & let neuer this empe∣rour haue me, I loue you & doubt you as I ought to do my dere fader, wherefore syr open your hert and take pyte on your child, and therwith she began rufully to wepe so ye grete plente of syluer droppes fell downe on her brestes. And whan the kynge sawe her & herde he speke to hum¦bly his herte coude no lenger endure in ye rygour, but it began to melte & said, wel doughter Florence appease yourself and wepe no more I shal speke of this mater with my counseyle, wher is Guylliā my chāberlayne cause him to come to me for I wyl yse. Sir quod she he is wtout in ye felde in your tent. Saynt mary sayd the kyng & how am I thā brought into this place. Certaynly syr ye we brought hider ryght softly for fere of waking of you, & in lyke wise so be al your .iiii. kinges and xii. peres, for they knew nothyng therof tyl they awoke this mornyng. Veryly {quod} the king thys was wondersly well slept of vs al, gyue me my doublet and I wyll ryse, than Florēce gaue it hym and laced his sleues & toke a keruerchefe & did cast it about his sholdres & toke a combe and ryght softly dyde kembe his heed the whi¦che ryght wel pleased the kyng, & so she
made hym redy at al poyntes, and thā he yssued out o the chambre and led Floren¦ce by the hand, who made somwhat sem¦blaūt to be sorowful, and whan they wer entred into this palays the kyng saw al his other .iii kinges and xii. peres than he smiled a lytel & said lordes the lady of thys place hath made better warre than any of vs hath done, for we are now mo¦re in her daūger than she is in ours. Thā the kynge of mormal sayde, syr than it is nedefu to vs yt we take good hede yt we displese her not. well sayde the kyng but were al we brought hyther wtout know¦lege of our people in the field, by the faith that I owe to god I haue wonder howe it myght be. And therwith they hearde a gret cry and clamor without in the felde among his people, and the kig maruay¦led what it might be. Uerely syr sayd he kyng of orqueney I beleue it be for you, and for vs because they know not whe∣re we are become. For goddes sake sayd the kyng sende worde out to theym, and shew how that I commaund them to be in peace, and so incontynent there was a messenger sent to them. Than the kyng of mormall sayd vnto Florence, madam I requyre you depart out of this cham∣bre for a season, for we wyl speake wyth the king in cousayle▪ than she departed Than th kynge of mormall sayd, syr be¦fore ye came to vs we were speakyng of you, and I shal tel you what it was, syr it is of trouth that ye know wel the de∣steny of Florence your doughter that who so euer take her in maryage, wythout it be he to whom that she is destenyed vn∣to hal note scape without deth as it ap¦pereth playnely by this emperoure, for I beleue verely that yf he enforce him selfe any ferder▪ to haue her it wyll coste hym his lyfe, and syr ye dyd se howe that the ymage dyd gyue her chaplet vntoo thys knyght Arthur who is aboue all other most chyefe in chyualry and syr ye dydd seale and swere to kepe the appointment that was made, and in lyke wyse dyde we al your kyngs and .xii. peres, therfore syr it is our mynde and counsal that ye accomplysshe you promyse whereto y haue set your wrytyng and great seale, and syr do ye so that ye may haue the ac∣cord and good wil of this knight Arthur the whiche shal be right nedeful for you for the sustaynyng of your warre, & syr a we be of thys accord, why syrs sayde the kynge and wyl ye hae me too gyue my doughter and heyre vnto a straunge knyght, and we know nothynge of hys gentylnes or parage, for he may be of su¦che lignage that it shold be great vylany to me and to al my relme to gyue her vn∣to hym, and al ye that counsail me therto shold be greatly blamed. Than the kyng of valefound sayd, syr a man oughte not to demaunde for good wyne where as it groweth, nor a wyse valyaunt man fro whence he cometh, we se and knowe wel the hye surmountyng beauty of hys bo¦dye, for syr in all your realme there is not a goodlyer man at all poyntes, and also we may se his great gentylnes how that he giuethe all aboute vnto knights hor∣ses and harnes, robes, and golde and syl¦uer gret plentye and he is endued aboue al other wyth thys noble vertue of lybe¦ralytye, and syr the swetenes and grace that is in hym can not be recounted, and the redoubted chyualrye that is in hym is incomparable, syr yf there were noo thynge elles in hym it were suffycyente ynough for hym to attayne thereby vnto gret excellent honoure and noble dygny∣tye, howe be it syr send for hys cosin Hec¦tor, who is here wythin thys place, and
also for Gouernar who is a righte sage knight, and let vs take their promesse to tl vs the troth where that Arthur was born and of what lignage he is come for paraduenture we shal soner know it by them than by him selfe, for I am sure he wyl not praise him selfe, for I neuer saw so good a knight and so lytel auaunture. Than they sayd all wt one voyce, sir this kyng sayeth well than they sent for Hec∣or & Gouernar and whan the king Emē¦dus saw Hector who was byg and gret and wel furnisshed in al his mēbres and holdyng hys hand on the pomell of hys sword and ioked fiersly. Than the kynge sayd, thys knight is to be redoubted I wot not what he is. Thā they answered & sid, syr themprours people knoweth ryght wel to whom he belongeth, syr su¦rely rthur & he calleth eche other cosyns Than the king called them to him & sayd lordes we haue sent to speke wt you, ye be both fayre persons and haue right great semblant to be wise, and so we beleue ve¦rely yt ye be, yet neuertheles we wyl hau youre promes that ye shal shewe vs the trouth of that thyng y• we wil demaund of you and that for loue or promes losse or winning to you or to ani other that ye haue shal shewe nothyng to vs but the trouth of our demaunde. Certaynlye syr we faythfully promyse you to shew you any thing that we can do, so yt it tourne to no vylany to vs nor to any lord & may¦ster. well syr sayd the kyng I praye you who is your lord and master. Syr as god helpe me Arthur is our lord. And what holde you of hym sayd the kinge. Ueely syr saide Hector a duchy & an erledome, I hold of hym. That is a great thing sayd the king and ye syr Gouernar what hold you of him. As god helpe me syr all that euer I haue in this worlde. Than he is a great man sayd the kynge. Ye syr truly said Hector that he is. And of whom was he borne sayd the kyng and of what coū¦try and of what lygnage. As touchynge that ye shal pardon vs, for that wyll we not shewe you without his lycence, than Arthur was sente for, and as soone as the kyuge sawe hym al hys dyspleasure passed away, than the kinge desyred him so hertely that at the last he gaue lycence to Hector and to Gouernar to shew the kyng what he was. Than Hector sayd syr by the assuraunce and promesse that I haue made to you I shal shew you the trouth now that the hath gyuen me lycen¦ce syr thys knyght Arthur is the al one∣ly son to my lorde the noble duke of Bry¦tayne, and neuewe to the erle of Bloys, and of the lygnage of the Duke of Lan∣castre in England. By my promes sayd Gouernar al that Hector hath sayd is of a trouth. In the name of god sayde the kyng than he is of a suffycyente gentyl lygnage, howe saye ye my kynges and peres. As god helpe me sayd the kynge of mormal, syr al we wyl counsayle you that ye delyuer to hym the honoure that god hath predestynate for hym, that is to saye, let hym haue my ladye Florenc your doughter, and vnto thys syr we al be agreed how say ye my lordes do I say wel or not. And they al answered wyth one voyce that they were al of the same accorde. And than the archebysshop was sente for, who was soone agreed to this purpose. Than the kynge sayde, lordes and frendes ye wyl that I shal doo thys as ye al be accorded vnto, wherewyth I am content, and if good happen to come therof it shal please me ryghte wel, and yf it be otherwyse the blame shal be too you, for ye cause me thus to do. And they al answered and sayd that the were con∣tent
to bere the burden therof. Than the bishop sayd, syr efuse not hus to do, for syr he hath bene assured to her euer sith ye time yt the chaplet was giuē him at Cor∣nyte. wel sayd the kynge syth it is so far forth gone I wyl than make no longer delay in the mater, than he called Arthur to him & sent for Florence & sayd dough∣ter Florence I haue ben in cōmunicatiō before this tyme wt themperour to haue maried you to him, who as at thys daye I hate of al men lyuyng, for as nowe I wold not that I had done so for this ca∣stell full of golde and siluer, but now my kinges and peres of this relme doth coū∣sayle me to gyue you in maryage to this knight Arthur, and if it please you I am content therwith, therfore shew me your plesure. Ryght dere father said Florence he is nerer to my herte than euer was the emperour syr I wyl not refuse him, but am reday to fulfyl your pleasure. Than the kyng toke a rynge fro her fynger and sayde to Arthur, sr here I giue you Flo¦rence my doughter & put you in ful pos¦sessyon of her by thys ryng, & of al y• ho∣nonre that partayneth to her to haue du∣ryng my lyfe, on the condicion yt I wyll be kyng styl as longe as I lyue & you to be kyng after my deth & fro hence forthe I put the kepynge of all my realme into your handes, and I wyl syt styl in peas now in myn old daies, & ye shal haue the payn and trauaile yf dede requireth, and god be youre guyde in al your workes. Than Arthur kneled down and toke the ryng. Than al ye olher .iiii. kynges toke hym vp and dyd him honour & reuerence as to their lorde and souerayne, & Arthur toke the fayre lady Florēce in his armes and kyssed her ryght swetely, the which he neuer dyd tyl the same tyme, and that he sware on al the saintes before y• kynge too put hym out of suspecte, whereof the kyng had great ioy, and so was clene out of al sorowe whan thar Arthur was put in possession of the lady Florence. Than there began great feast and ioy, and than they went to diner and were srued right rychely, & than it was published through out l the hoost bothe wythin the castel and without how that Arthur was ensu¦red to the fayre lady Florence, and accor∣ded wyth the kynge, than in al the hoost there was made great feast and triumphe for ioy, and euery mā sayd to other now haue we a noble and a good lord, now let themperour do what he lyst, and blessed be the mother that bare this noble knight Arthur, and god saue al them that euer hath giuen counsayl in this mater, han they al dyd sende vnto the kynge, and re∣quyre hym that their new lorde mygh ome into the hoost to thentent that they myght se hym, and whan the kyng herde thyr request it pleased him righte wel & commaunded that Arthur sholde be ap∣parayled in royal vestures, than Arthur was arayed as it appertayned to a lorde of suche a gret hoost, he had on a cote of skarlet, and a syrcote of grene sarcne ured wyth menyuers, and ouer that a garmente of sylke rayed wyth golde and a longe mantell of vyolet satyn, and he semed to be as fayre as an aungel descen¦ded from heauen. Than the kynge stoode before hym and helde in hys hande Flo∣rence his doughter who dyd ryght swete¦lye beholde hym, and al the foure kyn∣ges and xii. pers stode and behelde hym he was hye and bygge and surmountyn¦ge al other in statue. Than the kyng caused hym to mount on a fayre palfay. And whan the lady Margarete aw him she sayd to Floeence. Madame beholde what a manerly man god hath sente you
he had done more honoure for you than for any creature in all the worlde. Than the .iiii. kinges and .xii peres and Hector Gouernar, duke Philip and the maister and mo than .v.C other knightes moun¦ted on their horses and conuaied Arthur into the host, & clarence his good sword was borne al naked before him in signi¦fying that he was chiefe champyon of al the realme. Than the kynge caused to be cryed throughout al the host, how that he had cōmytted to Arthur al the cure and charge of his realme, and charged euerye body that they sholde obey hym as theyr propre kynge and sauerayne lorde. And as he rode throughout the host and passed for by euery man sayd welcome our new lorde, god encrease thyn honour, & so eue¦ry man made great ioye to beholde hym. And thus the kyng soiourned at the port noyre .viii. dayes in great feast and ioye. ¶How that Arthur demaunded congie and lycence of kyng Emendus father to hys lady Florence to departe into Bry∣tayne to se the duke of Britayne hys fa∣ther and the duches his mother, the whi∣che lycence they gaue hym wyth muche payne and Florence was in great sorow for his departyng. Capi. lxxxxiiii AT the ende of .viii. daies the kyng made to be cryed yt the hoost shold departe euery mā homewarde and cōmaunded them to be redy at a day war∣ning, & gaue them golde and syluer grete plenty. Than Arthur came to the king & sayd, syr it is of trouth yt whan I depar∣ted out of myn own country I promised to my lorde my fader & to my lady mi mo¦ther yt yf I lyued I wold be wyth them agayn at the ende of .v. yeres at the fer∣thest, the which shal be now at this haln tyde, and I knowe well that yf I breke my promesse with them they shal neuer haue ioy, and I am sure they wyl beleue no maner of messēger though he be neuer so true, therfore syr by your licence I wil depart and go se them and returne again in as shorte space as is to me possyble. A syr sayd the kynge take good hede what your desire is, for one thynge I promyse you I wyl neuer put on my sportes for any thing of busines that mai hap to fal to my elme & yours, for the charge ther¦of is now in your handes, therfore sir do as shal be for your honour. Syr said Ar¦thur as longe as I lyue there shall nede no fere to be had, and certenly I wil ay as litel space as I may, for as god helpe me I wolde I had bene there and here a∣gain, syr here is the king of orqueny whō I shal leue in my stede to do euery thing in myne absence yt shall be nedefull to the realme, syr I wyl take wt me my cosyn Hector, duke Philyp, maister Steuen & syr Brysebar. Syr sayd the kyng take wt you, whome it shal plese yo sith ye wyl nedes go, depart whan ye wyl in the na∣me of god, who be your guide & sauegard and take youre leue at Florence or ye de∣part, than Arthur wente intoo Florence chambre, whome he found wepynge, for it was shewed her how yt he wold go in∣to his owne countrey, she was set on her beddes syde, and the lady Margaret held before her a keuerchefe to wype wythall her eyen, than Arthur enbraced her and sayd mine own dere lady wepe no more for as god helpe me it greueth my herte ryght sore to se you do thus, myne owne swete lady for goddes sake be content. A dere herte sayd Florence now that ye ha∣ue me and that I am gyuen vntoo you, and now ye wyl leue me, alas it is but a
lytel ason that ye haue holde company with me, wherfore I am right sorowful A right dere & swte lady sayd Arthur as god sende me ioye and sauegarde of you there can not be to me so grete a sorowe as to leue your noble company therefore swete gentil herte think not that I wyl leue or forsake you on whom all my hert and faithful loue is set and fixed, and by whom I haue al my welthe and honour, or I promyse you as faithfully as euer any louer can promise his lady yt as sone as I can I wyll returne agayne to you, for I shal think tyll ye season become as long or longer than ye shal do, & madam I do it not but for the loue yt I owe vnto my lord my father and mother, for I fere me that they sholde be in sorowe for my sake, wherfore mine own good lady & de¦re herte giue me lycence to departe as for this time. etenly dere loue {quod} Florence I can not endure to displease you, and I se wel how ye be mynded to go, wherfore in goddes name go on whan ye wil, and returne again as shortly as you can, and I requyre you brynge hyther wyth you my lord your fader and mder to thenēt that he may se me who is and shal be his doughter. Madam sayde Arthur wyth a ryght good wyl yf I can brynge hithere∣to, and therwith he cleped and kissed her the which was the second tyme that euer he kyssed her, than Arthur requyred the fayre lady Margarete that she shold not depart out of his ladyes company. And therwyth tharchbyshop came to theym, and Arthur desyred him that he wold cō¦fort and coūsail his lady Florēce in hys absence, and so he departed and toke leue of the kyng and of al other, and so entred into his iourny and toke wt him Hector duke Philyp the mayster Gouernar, & Brysebar, and .xl, other knyghtes, than Hector sent before them a messenger to his city of orgoule wheras Arthur was rychely receyued of the countes and of ye fayre lady Alyse and of al the barons of that country, & there Arthur taryed .iiii. dayes makyng greate ioye, and on the .v daye Arthur and hys companye departed and Hctor with him, and so entred into theyr waye makyng great ioy as yonge people shoulde do for they were glad of theyr newe lord Arthur, who was swete yong and curreys, and of gret power and thus they rode forth so merly sigyng & the mayster was in a cote of ar. euer vyo¦let, and a mantel of redde sent al and hys hat in his hand because the wther was very hoe for it was in the moneth of Au¦gust, and the mery mornyng was fayre and fresshe because of the swete dewe, the lusty byrdes dyd merelye synge, and the weder was fayre and clere, & this master was yong hauyng a lusty heart and ful of newe loue, than he began merelye too synge, sayinge thys swee payne of loue sleeth myne heart. and al is for you mine owne lady. And whan Arthur herde him synge, and consydered well the dyrye of hys song, he than perceyued wel how that his hert was set on loue the whyh pleased hym ryght wel and caused hym to remembre his ladi Florence, and than he said to the maister, syr dyd euer any lo¦ue cause yu to wake one nyght. By the moder of god syr sayd he syth that I fyrst dyd thynke on my ladye I was neuer so faste a slepe but that I thoughte my spy∣rit and hert was with her. Syr sayd Bry¦sebar than though ye syng I bame you not, for I am sure ye thought on her. By the faith that I owe to god maiser sayd duke Philip what was the thing yt gaue you occasyon to loue your lady bes for what sayd the mayster wyl ye than con¦fesse
me be ye a prieste, I se well ye wyll plee with me I muste defend my selfe, I pray you good mayster yet shewe it vn∣to me. well syr sayde the mayster I shall shewe it you, I loue her because she is gracious and gentil of hert, for her grace and gentyl herte hath me retayned into her seruyce, in so muche that I quyte all the world for her, for as helpe me god I haue found in her grace gentylnes and swetenes. well mayster sayd Philip yet for al this ye know not whether that she loueth you or bereth to you any fayth or trouth Yes truely syr sayd the maister I know wel she bereth to me bothe faythe and loue. well mayster I praye you tell me whether had ye leue to haue the loue of her withot trouth or elles trouth wt∣out loue, for a woman can not well loue mi and you and euery bodi, and do for you and for me and for other, for in that point there lacketh trouth whan ye loue resteth not on him that attendeth therfore, and  she rest on him, than her loue is not gene∣rall and eyther she loueth you without trouth, or elles she is true without loue. what sayd the maister loue wtout trouth is nothyng worthe, for trouth is the vp∣holder of loue, for faythfull loue is four∣med of trouth, and what profyte should it be for me yf she wre neuer so true and lued me not, the one can not be without the other, what sholde it auayle me to go seke for her troth, and she loue me not, for lu is the drawer, and trouth is the vp¦holder, for trouth is the very end of loue and therwith he began to syng faith and trouth is in my dere lady, and so they al dyd laughe at him and made greate feast and sporte. ¶Howe Arthur in the way as he went to Britayne he ariued in a fayre medow that was ioyning to the towne of Lyon surle rone, and there he found the kyng of Malogre accompanied with dyuerse erles & other barons, and they had there cryed a greate tournay and there Arthur and his company were frendely receiued and had grete chere both of the kyng and of al other lordes & knightes. ca. lxxxxv. IN thys maner as ye haue herd before Arthur & his cōpani ode forth til thei came wtin iiii. miles of Lion, and thā they sent Bawdwin be∣fore to take vp their lodging, & as he apro¦ched nere to the towne of Lyon he sawe the fayre medow the whych was betwe∣ne Uyen and Lyon pyghtfull of tentes and pauylyons, and swarmynge full of knightes and horses, and at last Bawde wyd espyed the pauylyn of his olde lor∣de and maister the yonge kyng of Malo∣gre, whoo did put him to Arthur, & there was the erle of Forest and the erle of Ne∣uers and the earle of Foys and the Mar∣shal of myrpoys & the lorde of Beauieu and the dolphyn of Uyen, and a gret nū¦bre of other people, for they had holden a great tournay the day before, & the same daye the kynge had al these noble men at diner with him in his pauiliō, and in the next day they sholde departe, and whan yt Bawdewyn sawe the pauylyon of his olde lorde the yonge king of malogre, he dressed hym selfe the nexte waye thyder and without the pauilon dore stoode the lorde de la launde, & with him a .x. other knightes and al they beheld Bawdwyn as he was comyng, and eche of thē sayd to other. what is he that cometh so rude¦ly, or fro whence cometh he, I can not tel said an other but it semeth he hath a gre hast, and euer Bawdewyn approched ne∣rer
and nerer. And at laste syr dela loūde sayd, verily me thinketh it wold be Baw¦dewin my lorde the kinges squyer. Veri¦ly sayd an other & soo it is in dede. Than Bawdewin alyghted fro his horse. And whan syr de la loūde saw veryly how it was he, as fast as he coude he ran, & en∣braced hym and made to him ight grete wyt and feest, & knyghtes than of al par∣tyes of the elde bgan to assemble there tyll at last tydynges came to Alexander the yonge kynge how yt his old seruaunt and squyer Bawdewyn was com, than he commaūded that he shold be brought to hym and so he was, and whan he was before the kynge he kneled down & salu¦ted the kynge. Than the kyng sayd fren¦de thou art welcome, & how hast yt done syth thy departing. Certaynly syr sayde he right well, for a man can not be in the cōpany of such a knyght as I haue ben withall that can fare amysse. In the na¦me of god said the king and how fareth ye noble knyght Arthur. Syr by ye mo∣der of god he dooth as the best renow∣med & praised knight of al the wide world and the moost honoured and moost hath done of dedes of value and of prowesse I beyng present, and there he recounted many of his dedes, wherat the king and al other had grete meruayle & more ouer syr sayd Bawdewyn I saye that he is at this houre the mā of gretest power that I know now lyuyng, for he shal be the noble kinge of Sorlys, for he hath en¦sured the fayre lady Florence doughter & heyre to the mighty king. Emedus king of Soroloys who hath vnder hys rule foure myghty kynges & vii. peres in his realme and they be all his men & holdeth theyr londes of hym. By my soale sayd yt kyng this is a grete thing that ye speke of, & frende where is he now at this pre∣sent time, or wher dyde ye leue him. Sir beholde yonder ye may se hym comynge homewarde into his own countre. syr I must go before into Lion to take vp his lodgynge. what be thei that come wyth hym quod the kinge. Syr there is wyth him a noble clerke who is called maister Steuen, & he is son to a kinge, & also the duke of sabary named syr Phylyp, & syr Hector duke of orgoule, syr Brisebar & Gouernar with other .xl. knightes of gre¦te valure. In the name of God sayde the kyng he shall haue in these parties none other lodgynge but al onely min. Than he cōmaūded al the erles & barons about hym to mount on theyr horses, and com∣maunded to brynge hym his owne horse for he sayd playnly he wold go mete. Ar¦thur on the waye. Syr said Bawdewin ye say ryghte well & do nobly to do hym that honour, for syr truly he loueth you entyerly, & syr I ensure you he is a man of ryght grete valure. And whā the lord de la lounde herde these tydinges of Ar∣thur he had ryght grete ioye and ran to the lady his wyfe & to the lady Rossyllon and to all other ladyes & damoyselles, & recounted to them the coming of Arthur and reported of his dmenynge and ho∣nour as he had herde Bawdewyn say be¦fore, and also he shewed them howe that the kynge and all the hole assembly wer takyng of theyr horses to ryde to mete wyth hym on the waye. And whan these lades herde all this they were in greate ioye bycause of hys comynge. Than the lady of Rossyllon sayd, I se wel thā that the crownyng that we dyd to hym whā we sawe hym last is well bestowed & en¦ployed on him, for it is a grete honour to vs syth he hath horne him so valyauntly euer syth, therfore let vs also goo & mete wih hym and byd hym welcome, and do
hym al the honour that we cā do. In the nae of god sayd al the other ladies & so let it be done, than they apparailed them with ryal vestures, and by that time the kyng and al his erles and other cōpany were mounted on theyr horses, & the la∣dies & damoyselles also, & so rode forthe togyder in company. Than Bawdewyn spored his horse as faste as he coude to brynge these tydynges to Arthur. And whā Gouernar saw Bawdewin retou¦ne agayne soe faste he said to Hector, syr Bawdewyn torneth agayne what it me¦neth I wote not. And whā he was come agayne vnto Arthur he sayd, syr beholde yonder cometh the yonge kyng of mal¦gre & the erle of Fois, & the erle of Forest & the erle of Neuers, the lord of Beauieu and the lord de la lounde, the marshal of myrpoys, & the dolphyn of vyen and all theyr ladyes wt them, & they are comyng to mete wt you to welcome you into this coūtre, & mo tha a .M. horse in their cō∣pany, & the kyng wyl not suffre ye shal haue ony other lodgyng but wyth hym. And whā Arthur herde this he had right grete ioye and sayd, a good lord I thāke your grace that ye haue gyuen me so ma¦ny honours, than he sayd to the mayster and to duke Phylyp, syrs holde you nere me, and so they did, & than he said to thē Certaynly syrs ye shall se here people of a noble behauour & honour & wel ordred and soo they rode forth fayre & easely tyl bothe partyes approched nere togyder & as soone as Arthur sawe the kyng & his barony, & specially the freshe ladies and damoyselles he and al his dyd alyghte of theyr horses, and in lyke wyse dyde the kynge and all his company, & there they mette and enbraced eche other with m¦che grete ioy and tryumphe, and Hector and Gouernar were moche made of by∣cause of theyr olde acqueyntaūce amōge theym. Than Arthur went to the ladies and wold not haue suffred them to haue light fro theyr horses, but the lady Rossil¦lon dyde wheder he wolde or not, and she ran to hym and enbraced and kyssed him ryght swetely, what shall I saye more all the hole assembly were in grete ioye by∣cause of the commynge of Arthur. And whan duke Phylyp and the mayster saw the grete feest and honour that was done to hym, bothe of the kynge and of all o∣ther erles and barons, knyghtes & squy∣ers, ladyes and damoyselles, thā in their hertes they praysed Arthur more than they dyde before. Than Brysebar sayde, this gentylman I se well is none orphe¦lyne in hys own countre, he nedeth not to care for the emperour yf these people wyll helpe and ayde him, a Florence I s wel ye be well assured, woulde to God with a wisshe that ye wer nowhere pre¦sent that ye myght se thys ioye. And this kynge helde styl Arthur by the hāde and demaunded of hym what knyghtes the mayster and duke Phylyp were. And he answered & sayde, syr this is a souerayne clerke a knight and a duke and sone to a kynge ryght noble and puissaūt, and syr this other is duke of Sabary a ryght no¦ble and a doubty knyght, than the kyng toke them by the handes and said, lords ye be ryghte hertely welcome into thys countre, and to you syrs we wyll make fest and ioye, as for Arthur we care not for let hym make hym selfe there and h lyste. Than they mounted on theyr hor∣ses and rode forth towarde the tentes in the felde, and the kynge would haue had them to haue ryden before him to thentēt to do them the more honour therby, but than the master sayd, syr for goddes sake pardon vs, for syr we e seruauntes
to my lorde Arthur here presente, for we holde of hym therfore syr by your licence we wyll not ryde before him Syrs quod the kynge as in that ye shal bere hym ho∣noar, therfore by the faythe that I owe vnto you ye hal ryde on before, so than they wente forthe before, and the earle of Forest, and the erle of Foys, and the erle of Neuers were wyth Arthur, and Hec∣tor and Gouernar wer with the dolphin of vyen and the marshall of myrpoys, & in this maner they came to the kynges tente, and they dyde than wasshe theyr handes and went to diner, than the king sate downe on the hye benche and com∣maunded Arthur the mayster, and duke Phylyp to syt downe by hym, and all o∣ther according to theyr estates, and there they were rychely serued. Than the la∣dyes sente a presente to Arthur of freshe chaplettes to thentent that he shold giue them where as it lyked hym best, and thā Arthur dyde gyue them vnto the kynge and to the mayster, and to duke Phylyp and to all other erles and barons, and whan they had dyned, than the lorde de la lounde came to Arthur fro the ladyes and sayde, syr all the hole assembly of la∣dyes and damoyselles sendeth theyr re∣cōmendacions vnto you as to hym that they ones crowned kynge of all knygh∣tes that were assembled togyder at that tyme, and thei al desyre you that ye wyll come in to theyr tent to sporte you wyth theym, and to brynge in your companye whome as it shall please you best. Soo than the kynge and he, the maister, duke Philip, and all the other erles and grete barons went thider, and ther they were receyued with grete ioye and feest, than these ladyes began to daunce, carowle, & to synge with these lordes and knightes And at the last the kyng sayd to mayster Steuen a gentyll mayster and why doo ye not play and sporte you among these ladies & damoyselles, be they not metely fayre, gentle and noble. kynge sayde the mayster by my soule they are ryghte gen¦tyl noble and beautiful, but syr with spor¦tynge amonge theym I can lytle skyll. why mayster sayd the kynge what playe than wyll ye sporte you withal. Veryly syr sayd duke Philyp he can many good¦ly playes yf he wolde vse them, for there is not in all this world his matche. A gē¦tyll mayster sayd the kyng by the faythe that ye owe vnto Arthur I requyre you shewe vs some of your sportes for a pa∣staunce. Mayster {quod} Arthur I praye you do so. Well sayd the mayster syth it plea∣seth you I am content, than wtin a while the mayster caused in the myddes of the house sodeynly a fayre foūtaine to appe∣re, & in the hyest therof ther stode a horse of crystal, and out of diuerse places ther∣of ther issued out stremes of swete cristal line water, and that horse stode quaking semyng to be quycke, and rounde about this fountayne there semed to be fayre grene busshes & fayre grene hylles coue∣red with vyolettes swete smellinge, and roses with other swete floures grete plē∣te, and dyuerse maner of byrdes syngin¦ge melodyously, & so all the ladyes & da∣moyselles that were ther left their daun¦cynge and carowlinge and dyde wasshe their handes at this fresshe fountaine, & made chaplettes of the faire floures that they sawe ther growing and herkened to the swete armony of the byrdes, & they had grete meruayle what it might be, or fro whens it myght come so sodeynly, & all the lordes & knyghtes wer gretely a∣basshed wt that syght. Than the mayster caused to be comynge into the hall .ii.C. varlettes vestured all in cotes of scarlet
paled with grene, and .ii.3C. trompettes sowninge all at ones, than the knightes and ladyes behelde what it myght mene And at last they entred into the hall and after them by seminge ther cam a clerke right fayre and gracious, and he had on a robe of scarlet lyned with grene sēdall and his cappe in his hande, & this clerke had stonding by hym a freshe grene haw¦thorne full of fayre blossomes right swe¦te smellyng, and in the hyest of thys tree there was one braūch that surmounted all the other, whereon there sate a nygh∣tyngale the moost fayre & gracyous of al the world and best syngyng, than she lift vp her heed and fylled her throte full of wynde the more shryller to verse out her swete voyce, her synging pleased so wel all the ladyes that eche of them wisshed to haue had her in a cage. Than ye kinge and Arthur rose & went nere to beholde this meruayle, than the lady marshal put vp her hande to the entent to haue taken the nightyngale, but she coude not attai¦ne therto, than the clerke yt kept the haw¦thorne sayde, madame & yf ye wyll haue my byrde perauenture ye shall haue her & yf ye be suche as ought to haue her, for yf it be so that ye or ony other lady here in this company dyde neuer trespace in ma¦ryage neither by thought nor dede suche one may take her at her owne wil, but & yf they haue done ony faulte let them not offre to haue her, for thei shal fayle of her And whan the king herd that he laughed a good pace & sayd, let se who wyl enter pryse to haue this Ioly birde & than eue¦ry ma was agreed that al the coūtesses should assay eche after other, than the la¦dy marshal thought to haue departed a∣way pryuely, but than the clerke called her agayne & sayde, madame ye were the fyrste ryght now that wold haue taken my byrde, & so shall ye be agayne now at this tyme, therfore mdame come forthe and assaye what ye can do, than the king caused her to assaye weder he wold or not, and than she put vp her hāde but she coude not attayne therto by two cubites of length. And whan the lady Rossyllon sawe yt than she said, madame this birde techeth vs to speke of our olde werkes, now it appereth yf ye haue ben alwayes in your prayers or not, ones ye said wor¦des to me the whiche ye knowe not, but now I maye saye to you suche as I se, than the coūesse and grete ladyes wēte one after an other, but all they fayled of theyr purpose. And at thende the kynge caused the lady Rossyllon to assaye, & as soone as she did put vp her hāde toward the byrde the gentyll nyghtyngale dyde descende downe and sate her on her hād, and yet thys was not to her very grete prayse, for she had not ben longe maried Than the erles dyde laugh at theyr wy∣ues, but yet some of them were not very well content. Than the mayster caused sodeynly all this to vanysshe away both clerke and tree, byrde and all, than euery man meruayled what this myghte be, & they wende that they had dremed al this and the kynge smyled at this mater, and wente and sate downe togyder the king and Arthur and the mayster and all o∣ther lordes. Than the kyng sayde, as god helpe me I would it had cost me the halfe parte of my realme, soo that thys mayster were alwayes in my company, and that he loued me as well as he dth Arthur. Syr sayd Arthur he hath ryght wel shewed to me that he loueth me, for syr syth I departed fro you I haue had warre with .vii. kinges & an emperour, and syr this emperour wyll come again nowe at this nexte eester to make warre with the myghty king of Soroloys for the defyaunce is made betwene both par¦ties, wherfore I must retourne agayne as shortly as I can. why syr said yt kyng hall ye than haue warre the nex estr. Ye surely syr, for it is sworne and cried on bothe partyes. And whan shall ye wedde this lady Florence of whome I haue herde so muche spekynge of. Syr sayd Arthur if God wyll gyue me the ho¦nour of this warre I shall wedde her in∣continent after. By saynt Iohn syr said the kyng I wolde I were at yt warre, at the day of your wedding. why syr sayde the dolphyn and ye wold so thē go thider why syr sayd the kynge yf I go wyll ye go also. Ye syr wyth all my herte, & that I faithfully assure you. Wel said ye king kepe your promsse, & I ensure you yt I wil go with .v.C. men of warre in my cōpany. And I promyse you sayde the dol∣phyn yt I wyl go & a .C. men of armes wt me. And without me shall ye not go said therle of Forest. Promyse yt faythfully {quod} the kynge, & as muche sayd therle of Ne¦uers, & so ferre wente this matter that ye erle of mōt belyall, & the erle of Foys, & the lorde Beauieu & the mrshall of mir¦poys promysed all togyther yt eche of thē wold go with .ii.C in theyr company, & there appoynted agayne to mete in ye sa∣me place in the middes of lent. Than Ar¦thur thanked them & sayd, syrs I truste at the sayd daye to be here agane wyth you, & brige wyth me my dere fader and moder, & soo than we wyl dparte togi∣der And whan these ladyes herde how yt Arthur wold bring thyder the duchesse his moder, than they all desyred of theyr husbondes that they myght go with the duchesse whan she were come, & the kin∣ge was well content therwith and desi∣red the erles and barōs that it myght be so. And soo at the last it was agreed and accorded that they should al go togyder Thus was Arthur and his company .iii. dayes with the kynge and with these er¦les in grete feest and ioye. ¶Howe that Arthur & Hector his cosyn with all theyr cōpany aryued at Bloys and how the erle of Bloys fader to Hec∣tor, and the countesse his moder, and all the hole barony of the realme met them on the way & receyued them with great ioye, for they had ben before in grete fere that Arthur theyr neuewe and Hector theyr sone had ben dead. Capi. lxxxxvi.
SO on the fourthe daye Arthur & his company toke leue of the kyng, and of the erles and ba∣rōs, ladyes & damoyselles and toke his ryght waye towarde the towne of estampes, than Arthur sēt Iaket hys squier before to Blois to giue the erle knowlege how that Arthur his neuew & Hctor his son would be with hym the sondaye nexte folowynge, than Iaket departed and moūted first to orli∣aunce & there he founde therle of Bloys who was ryght sorowful in his herte by¦cause he coude here noo maner of tydyn∣ges of Hector his son, wherfore he was in grete doubte leest that he sholde haue ben deed, than Iaket mounted vp in to the hall where as therle was, & as soone as he sawe Iaket he ose and enbraced hym, and demaunded of hym howe that Arthur and Hector his sone dyd. As god helpe me syr sayd Iaket they do humbly salute you by me and sendeth you worde how that they wyll be wyth you this son¦daye nexte comyng hole & in good helthe thanked be god as grete lordes and puis¦saunt knyghtes, for syr I saye vnto you how that Hector your son is erle of Bru¦le and duke of orgoule & is ryght riche & puyssaunt. Ye Iacket said the erle & who hath gyuen him this honour. Syr by the moder of god my lorde Arthur who dyde conquere it with his swerde as he that is the best knight of all the world. A good lord said therle humbly I thanke youre grace syth that my chylde is so well pur¦uayed, than the erle dyde sende a messen¦ger to al hys frendes giuing them know¦lege how that his sone was comig ho∣me warde who was become ryght puys∣saunt and noble, cōmaundinge them for ioye to hange the stretes of the towne. And as soone as the coūtesse herd of these tydynges she mounted vp in to her cha∣ryot & came to orlyaunce to the metynge of her sone, & so therle & all his company dyde mte Arthur & Hector & theyr com∣pay at cietry, and there receyued them with grte chere & ioye, than all the no∣ble men of the counre came thyder to se Arthur & Hector, and so all togyder they went to bloys and there they seoned viii. dayes makyng great feast and ioye. ☞How Arthur aryued in Britayne and how the duke his fader & al his chiualry mette & receyued Arthur with grete ho∣nou & tryumphe, & howe yt the dutchesse his moder swouned for ioye whan e sawe her sone Arthur, and in lyke wyse dyde Iehannet hys olde loue, wherof the mayster & Philip had gree fere leest that Iehannet should drawe awaye Arthurs herte fro Florēce bicause of ye grete loue yt they sawe bytwene them. Ca. lxxxxvii.
AT the ende of .viii. dayes Arthur called to hym Iaket & said, frende ye muste go to my lorde and fader and to my lady my moder and to Iehannet and salute me ryght humbly vnto them, and shewe them how y• I wyll be wyth them the .xv. day after saynt Martyn, & shew also to my lord and fader how that ther cometh in my company a sone to a king and a duke ryghte myghty and puissaūt than saye that I desyre hym to sende for parte of his frendes to kepe them compa¦ny whan they shall be come to hym. Sir said Iaket I shal do your message in the best wyse, for he was gadde to go. Than Gouernar sayde Iaket I praye you let me be humbly recommaunded to my lord and to my lady & to Iehannet. It shalbe done syr sayd Iaket & o departed & rode so longe tyl at laste he came to Nauntes on a fryday at night, & there he demaun∣ded tydynges of the duke, & there it was shewed hym how that the duke & the du∣chesse were departed to the castell of the forst, and fro thens thei shold depart to thabbey of Iannebon, & than thei shal co¦me to the cyte of vennes, and there to so∣iourned nere tyll it be crystmasse, & than to come agayne to Naūtes wher as thei wyl kepe open courte, for he hath somo∣ned al his barōs to be ther at crystmasse with hym. So than Iaket taried al that nyght at Nauntes, and in the mornyng he departed & wente to vennes wher as he foūde the duke and dutchesse and thei were as than lokinge oute at the windo¦wes of the palays, and there thei talked togyder of dyuerse maters tyl at last the dutchesse began to wpe, than the duke demaūded of her why she soo sore wept. why syr sayd she alas beholde the great noblenes of this countrie and the fayre forestes that be therin, and the valure & bounte of the lusty countre of Brytaine alas syr who shal kepe and obtaine this coūre after vs syth that Arthur our dere sones is deed, & syr we shall neuer haue
mo chyldren togyther, alas syr whan I remmbre al hys my hearte dyeth in my body for sorowe. Dea madame sayd the duke nay and god wyl, for yf that were ue we should haue greate nede of com∣forte, but yet I haue trust in god that he shal ende vs ioye of oure chylde, and to heare shortly some good ridinges of him it is not yet fully .v. yere syth hys epar∣yng, and within that erme hys promes was to come agayne, whefore madae I praye you to wepe no more, or it gea∣ueh me to se you do thus & as they were thus talking togither Iaket came intoo the palays and ened into he hall, and as one as the knghtes and squiers saw Iaket they enbraced him and demaundd howe that Arthur did. And he answered how that he dyd ryght wel and was co∣mynge homewarde, than Iaket moun∣ted vp into the chambre, and there he foūd the duke and the duchesse togyther, and the duchesse aspyed hym fyrst and ranne to hym and sayd: a my frende howe dothe Arthur my sonne. Madam he humbly sa¦luteth you and also my lord here preent and also Iohannet. what Arthur my son frend said the du and where is he. Syr he wyl be here with you by thend of these fyue dayes. And howe dothe he sayde the duke. Syr as the moost honoured noble knight & best proued that is now liuyng in this world, or vnder he heauen there is no knyght of hys valure and he pro¦wesse, and syr he hath gyuen too Hector his cosin an erledom▪ and a duchy right grete and noble, he is now two tmes as rich as the ele his father is. Ye Iaket {quod} the duke where hath he goen thys lan and who hath giuen it hym. Syr as god helpe me Arthur dyd gyue it hym, and he wanne it vaiaūtly wit his sworde, but syr this dede is nothinge o the regarde of a thousande dedes that he hath done syth he departed. Than the duke smyled and ioyned his handes togider and lyfte vp his eyen to heuen  thanked god. And the duches wept for ioye and so dyd Ie∣hannet also. Than the duke sayde Iaket and who commeth wyth my son Arthur Syr there cometh wyth hym a clerke of great wysedome, and is chiefe counseler with the fayre quene Florence and he is son to a king right mighty and puissant, and alo there is with him a mightye du∣ke who is called duke Philip of sabary, and oher dyuerse noble knightes to th nombre of .xi. why frende Iaket sayd the duke is Arthur than so muche honoured that a son of a kynge and a duke and so noble a companye cometh with hym. Ue∣rely your son is in this case, that or thys yere go out he shal be crowned kynge of a puissant realme. A good lorde sayd the duchesse I rendre to you gace and thankynges syth ye haue giuen to vs suche a chylde of whome is reported so moch ho¦nou wl {quod} the duke madam mount vp into your chayrot & let vs go to naūtes & met hym thre, so than they departed and went fro vennes & came to Naūtes in an euening late, and Arthur and his cōpany rode so tyl at last they ame to samur and entrd into the abby of saint Florent, and there he lodged al ye night and was wel re¦ceued and honestly, & in the next morning Arthur sent a messenger to his father, gi¦uing him knowlege how that he wole be with hym at Nauntes on the sonday next comming. And whan the duke herde that he sayde to the duches his wife, ma∣dam let vs go & mete our son and this no¦ble cumpany that cometh with him, for I haue gret desire to se hym, than all the world, and thā by that time al the dukes frendes, louers and subiectes were come
to him to the nombre of .v. hondred, than they all togider mounted on their horss And Iohannet was in the chayre wt the dches, and so they rode forth, & wyhen the leges thence they met wyth Arthur and al his cōpany, & as soone as Arthur sawe hys father he dyd alyght and dyde of hys bonet and in lykewyse dyd his fa¦ther to hym and there they cleped & kys∣sed eche other oftentymes. Than the du∣ke sayd, my swete fende and dere chylde ye be ryght hertely welcome home to me as he that hath ben more desired with me than al the creatures liuing. A dere son howe could ye euer haue the hearte thus to leue your mother who hath ben so dolo¦os us for your absence that she hath wept euer syth your departyng, and as the du∣ke ended these wordes his mother came too hym and cleped and kyssed hym, but she was so ouercome with oye, that she could speake no worde of a great season, but so they sate downe togyher, & whan she might speake she sayd, my swete and dere chylde ye haue longe holden vs in darknes, nor neur sythe ye departed my herte was in anye ioye, but nowe swete hearte my ioye is increasd that I may haue you in mne arms and there wyth she kyssed hym and wept ight pitiouse∣ly for ioye, so that Arthur coulde no lon∣ger kepe his hete and eyen fro wepynge the whych he didde neuer before syth he came out of hys childhoode, nor neuer af¦ter did for no maner of trouble that came to him And whan ye duke Phylyp saw y• pityfull and ioyful metyng betwene the chyld & the moder and ye fader, & saw how yt they wept, for al the golde of the world he could not kepe hym selfe but that hys eyen wre ful of droppes of water than came to them Iohannet and cleped kys¦sd Arthur right tenderly and sayd a my louer Arthur ye be hertely welcom vnto me, syr ye left me right sorowful whan ye departed last out of this countrey, but my swete lady your der moder hath kept me right tenderly for the loue of you, and oftentimes we haue wept togyther our fyll for the loue of you, a mine own wete loue I vnderstand that god hath gyuen you a better & a more gentiller lady than I am, sir al this agreeth me righte well, for syr I haue ryght great ioye of youre welth, syr  offre me to serue you and to loue you with good faithful hearte, for ye are my lord and I am your doughter, and therwith she wept right tenderly & toke Arthur in her armes. And whan Arthur sawe her so wepe he could not kepe his eyen fro dystyllyng of salte teares for her sake, for he loued o the damosel that he was sore tempted to haue repented him in y• he had fyaunced Florence. And whā the mayster saw the great loue of the fa∣der  the moder & their hyld, and of Iohā¦net, he sayde to Philyp, syr I doubte me of these people least they wtdraw away fro Florence Arthurs her, & I pray you beold and se how they loue him, saw you euer so muche honour done to any trea∣ture liuyne Fere no {quod} Philip he hath brought me into this country, I warant you he shal dpart agayn and returne in to ours. Thā the duches and Arthur rose vpon their fete than all the noble men of y• country came aboute him and made hī as gret feast and ioy as they could, than the duke went to the master and to duke Philip and receued them wt gret honour and so they al moūted and went to Naū∣tes and ther han all the burgeyses of the citie yssued out al in one sue and ly∣uerey and met wyth them. And also the bysshop of the towne and al the hole cler¦gye encountred them and made great ioy
and generally so dyd al those of the citie Than the duke made grete honour vnto duke Philyp and vnto the mayster. And whan they wte alyghted fro their hor∣es, than they mounted vp into the pa∣las where as they made great feast and ioye the space of .xv. dayes, and than eue¦y man departed. Than Arthur sayd to the duke his father, & present there was the mayster, duke Philip and the duches syr Oliuer of yriac, and diuers other ba∣tons there he recounted all hys fortune, and how that he had fyaunced Florence and how that the warre is begon and ta¦kn betwene him and theperour of ynde and how that al thys ware was layde on his hande and charge, and thefore he prayed the duke his father that he wold go with him into the countrey of Soro∣loys to thentent to helpe hym. Than the duke sayde, sonne Arthur wt a right good wyl and I shall brynge wyth me all my strength wyh baners dysplayed, and thā yf we may fynde this emperour we shal shewe him what that brytons can doo. And whan the mayster herd that he smy∣led and becleped the duke and sayde, syr ye haue nobly answered wtout any coun∣sayle, it semeth wel ye are the father & he is the son, syr by the faythe that we owe vnto god we shal kepe you good compa¦ny. Than ye duke sente all about for hys strength. And in the meane seasō Arthur ledde the mayster, duke Philyp, syr Bry∣sebar, and al the other knightes of So∣roloys in al the townes and cities of his coūtry, and thus thei passed the time til it was nere lente, and than they retourned againe to Nauntes where as they found al theyr host redy apparayled to departe. Than Arthur toke of thē .x. M. after hys owne choyse & al the remenaunt he sente home agayne to thentent to kepe the coū∣trey in sauegarde in the dukes absence, & they soiourned .iiii▪ daye at Naūtes & so departed and toke the hye way to Lion, & sir Oliuer, Gouernar, & Brisebar had ye cōueiaunce of the host, and ye duke Arthur Hector the master and Philip toke theyr way streight to Parys to take leue of ye kyng of Fraunce who receyued them wt right gret ioy & honour, for he loued the duke entierly, and the kyng made greate chere to the mayster & to duke Philip, the master praised much the noblenes of fraū¦ce, thus they were .iiii. dayes wt the king and than they departed and the duches wt them and toke their leue of the king, thā the kyng sayd to the duke, syr yf ye lacke men of warre ye shall haue parte of my strength, thā the duke thanked hī and said I trust we haue people sufficient, so they departed and rode so lōg on their iourny til they came to Lion on a wednesday in the morning & there they foūd Gouernar Brisebar & ir Oliuer who had made t dy for their lodgings, and thā the kyng of malogre and al his erles & barons were assēbled togider & wer lodged about vien and whan they knew yt Arthur was com¦ming they mounted on their horses & me wt him, and they al made gret honor too the duke of britayne and the ladies recei¦ued the duches ryghte honorably, and so they rode forth togider, and than y• yonge king ran to the mayster and enbraced hī in his armes for he loued him wel becaus of his maruelous cūnng, than thei came to the pauilions and there alighted, & the dukes pauilion was pight vp right riche¦ly, and here they soiourned .iiii. daies in gret ioy and the king desyred the master y• he wolde shew as than some pastaūce amonge that company, than the kynges squyer were afore hī ready to do seruyc Than the maister caused eche of them to thynk eyther wythout any head, and eche of them behelde other and were greatlye abasshed and had gret maruayle where theyr felowes heades were become, than they loked on the erth whether they were fallen downe to the ground▪ & ther wyth they sought eche others head all aboute the house, and he kyng & al the hole assē¦bly had tyght great sport thereat. Than on the fourth day they al departed & toke theyr righte way to the porte noyre. Go¦uernar Brisebar & sir Oliuer dyd guyde forth the hoost, and Arthur sent Bawde¦wyn his squier before to the porte noyre, to apparayl and garnysh the castel & too drawe thither al his garnysons thys no∣ble cōpany rode so long tyl they came but a dayes Iourney fro the castel of y• port noyre. Now let vs leue spekyng of them as for this time and returne to Florence ¶How after that Arthur was departed fro kynge Emendus & Florence to go se his frendes, Florence than departed fro the porte noyre & the quene of orqueny & the ladye Magarete of Argenton wyth her and wente to sporte her in her owne eame and castel of clere toure, where∣as the emperour came and beseged her, for or she was ware therof he and his cō¦pany were layde round about the town and they were to the nombre of twoo .C. thousand, what of emperyens and of sa¦rasyns. Ca. lxxxxviii
IT is trouth yt whā Arthur was departed fro ye port noir to go into Fraūce & into bry¦aine for to se his frnds thā Florēce & the quene of orque¦ney and the lady Margarete were of ac∣corde that they wolde not go with kyng Emendus into the realme of Soroloys but they determyned to goo to the clere toure, and there to abyde tyll the retour¦nynge of Arthur where as they myghte euery daye priuely talke eche vnto other of their loues, so than Florence toke her leue of the kyng her father & so departed and toke with her the quene oedrqueney and the ladye Margarete and a .xl. other knightes with them, and so thei trauailed tyl they ariued at the clere toure, & there they were in gret sport and ioy, but it is oftentymes sayd, he yt hath an yl neygh∣bour hath oftentymes an yll mornynge for as sone as Florence was come to the clere toure & that it was knowen that she wolde abyde there a good space, syr Per¦dycas prouided for al thinges that was necessary for the place, than a spye went to themperour of ynde and sayd, syr Flo∣rence is now at the clere toure, and sir ye may now and ye wyl soone haue her, for she is come thider but priuily and but wt a smal company. And whan thēperour herde that he sent incontinent for as mo¦che people as he coulde get betwene hym and babylon, and he assembled there togy¦ther so muche people yt al the coūtry was ouer spred with them, and Florēce knew nothing of al thys tyl the tyme that the emperour had besyged her round about wyth mo than .ii. C. M. men. And whan she saw y• sh was in that case, she was right sorowful and wept pytyouslye eue¦ry dy more and more, for she sawe wel she could not sende out for no socoure to any body there was suche watche made al about the place than she bewailed Ar∣thur and said, & Arthur swete frend ye are ouer longe fro thys busines, certainly if ye lese me ye shall lese youre true louer, a dere loue I am yours & now ye know no¦thyng in what mishefe I am in, or now your louer is in gret peryll, thus Florēce made the gretest lamentacion of y• world and her people dydde comforte her in the best wyse y• they mighte. Now let vs leue of Florence and returne to Arthur. ¶How y• Arthur was ryght sorowful because that hys horse dyd stomble vn∣der hym, and howe the mayster shewed hym how that Florence was besyeged by themperour in her castel of ye clere toure whereof Arthur was in grete feare and trouble. Capi. lxxxix.
WHan that Arthur and al his host were wythin a lege of the porte noyre Arthur and the duke hys father and the kyng and the maister rod eche by other alkynge of dyuersr mat∣ters, sodenly Arthurs horse foundred vn∣der hym and fell grouelynge to the arth but Arthur helde hym styl in the saddell tyll the hore and he rose bothe agayne to¦gyther and fro thence forthe Arthur was in so greate a study yt no man could hau a word of hym but wyth gret paine and in this maner he endured a great season Than the kynge began to reason wyth hym but he could skant haue any worde of hym, than the kynge and duke Phy∣lyp called to them the mayster and sayd syr what ayleth Arthur for sith his hors stombled he wolde neuer speke no worde by his wil, we maruayl what he ayleth well sayd the mayster go to hym and de¦maunde hym the qustion, thā they rode to hym, and the kynge rode on the one syde and duke Phylyp on the other syde and the mayster before hym, than the ma¦ster al laughyng began to synge melody∣ously, and the kyng and duke Philip did laugh at him and Arthur eur rode forth as though he had ben halfe a slepe, and wyth the sporte that they made he lyfte vp hys eyen, and whan he saw them a¦boute hym makynge suche sporte a lytell he smyled, Than the mayster said to him syr what there is wyth you, what sport make ye to my lorde the kynge here pre∣sent
who is come hither for your loue, sir now ye be come into youre owne realme and into your own power, and syr these lordes haue foraken theyr owne coun∣tryes to come hither with you. Than he answered and sayd gentyl maister pardō me, for I nowe wel ye say but trouthe, but syr I ensure you euer syth my horse el vnder me any herte hath bene so hea∣uy that I cā in no wyse make any good there, I can not tel what it meanethe, I pray to god all be for the best, I doubte me greatly of my lorde the kynge of So∣roloys or elles of my ladye Florence lest that this Emperour hath done to theym any tribulacyon. Syr sayd duke Phylyp doubte not that, for yf it were so ye may be sure my lorde and vncle woul soon haue sent messēgers to you, therfore m¦ke good chere & reioyce your barons and such noble men as be come hether for the loue of you and namely this great hoost who hath so far trauayled for your ske A dee frende duke Phylyppe sayde Ar∣thur I requyre you make ye than good chere and semblant and so than the kyng and Arthur, the master and duke Philip rode forth togither throughout al ye host & comfored their people as wel as they myght than they ariued at the port noyre and mounted vp intoo the palays, and all the hoost was lodged withoute in the fielde, and al the ladyes and damoyseles that came thither with thm maruelous¦ly behelde the strength and satuacyon of that place, and reputed in theyr wyndes grete noblenes and valure in Arthur for the acheuynge and conquerynge of ha place. Than the mayster dyd deuyse too them all haduentures that werein that place. Than the duches moder to Arthur had ryght great ioy, and than the master led them to the gardyn to se it, and whan they sawe the place so fayre  so dlect∣ble they wysshed neuer to departe thenc So than these ladyes wente and rested thm at the fountayne. And Arthur and the kyng Hector, and al the other erles, & the lorde Beauien were al togither in cō¦pany, but Arthur was styl in melancoly. Than the mayster wente into his owne chambre to loke his bokes to know wha was the cause that Arthur was so sadd for, than anone he percyued by hys o∣kes and cunnynge what pryl that Flo∣rence was in, and how thmperoure had besyeged her rounde aboute, than incon∣tynent he went to Arthur and sayde, syr the matter goth yl to worke, for this em∣perour hath besieged Florence in her ca∣stel of clere toure with a great numbre of people, so my lady is in great mischef wt¦out remedy be soone found for her, she w¦pth right pitiously and maketh the gre∣tst lamentacyon of the world, she cryeth out on fortune and saith, alas now haue I al loste, I was borne in an vnhappy houre, a gentyl heate Arthur, god tha al thyng fourmed of nought kepe and de∣fende you from al yl encumbraunce and gyue you honour, for as for me I am at grete myschefe, fortune shame haue thou for thou hast done me manye troubles, a∣ls my swete loue is far fro me, and min nemy hath approched nere me my loue is absent, and him that I hate is to nere my presence, alas myne owne swete loue Arthur if I were in your armes than I wold thinke my selfe better assured than to be in this strong castel, for than wold I neyther feare kynge nor emperoure. alas where are my men & my good fren∣des that they doo not theyr dylygence to study for my deliueraunce, a kyng of Or¦queney ye do a great trespace ayenst your true & faythfull louer Arthur whan that ye do not delyuer me out of daunger, he loueth you aboue all other, and nowe ye to be hus false to him, certainly he wold neuer haue fayled you, but he wold haue put his body and goodes in ieopardy for your sake, and now thus ye to leue me in this dolour, alas good kyng come and de¦lyuer me, and yf ye can rendre me vnto this gentyll knyght Arthur who loueth you with all hys harte. Thus syr said the mayster I know wel that she dooth com∣playne euery daye wyth suche wepyng chere that I must ndes wepe whan I thynke on her, and the quene of Orque∣ney, and the lady Margarete dothe com∣forte her al weping, for it greueth theyr hertes to se her soo sore wepe, & thys syr all thre of them be in grete sorow, I can scant tell you who is in ye gretest. Saint mary said Arthur it was not for nought that my hart was so heuy, now I know well the sygnifycation therof, alas may¦ster and doth not king Emendus know what case that she is in. Yes syr said the mayster he assembleth people on al syds of his realme of Soroloys, & also al hys iiii. kinges wyth al theyr powers be com to hym, and they are all ready to drawe thider warde, & they wyll remeue a mon¦day next commynge, but it wyl be a .xv. dayes or thei come thyder, and syr all the kinges cōplameth gretely that ye be out of the countre, for they say that yf ye had ben in the coūtre themperour had neuer ben so bolde to haue come thyder, syr I doubt me gretely of Florēce for she hath not past a xl. knightes with her wherfore I fere me leest that she can not endure to kepe the place tyll the kynge her fader and hys hoost be come thyder. And whā Arthur herde that he was sore displeased and sayd to the yonge kyng of Malogre A gentyll kynge I requyre you for god∣des sake let me go thyder or elles I shal dye for sorow, and syr I pray you abyde here with all this hoost tyl monday, and than let the hoost folow after me o the clere toure, and let duke Philyp and my senesshall and the markes haue the guy∣dynge of them, and syr my lord my fader shall abyde here styll with you, and also my lady my moder and all these ladyes & damoyselles tyl suche season as I seude you worde, and syr I wyl haue with me the mayster and Hector, Gouernar and syr Brysebar. And whan all the barons harde hym say that he wold go thei coun¦seiled him to take more people with him but he wold not, and soo toke a soppe in wyne & toke leue of the kynge and of all other, and enbraced his fader and moder & cōmaunded to god all the other ladyes and damoyselles, & soo he departed and his company with hym, and rode forthe as fast as euer they myght, and trauay∣led so longe bothe by daye and by nyghte tyll thei came nere to themperours hoost Than Arthur sayd, lordes we approche nere to our enemies, I thinke it wer best that we dyd put on our harneys, and soo ther they alyghted and dyde put on theyr harneys. ¶How that Arthur & the maister, Hec∣tor, Gouernar, and syr Brysebar entred into the clere toure wher as Florēce was besyeged & they .v. dyscōfyted a puyssaūt kyng sarasyn who was called the Sow¦dan, who was come thyder to helpe the emperour, and ther wer al the sarasyns and turkes slayne. Capitulo .C.
WHan that Arthur and his .iiii. fe¦lawes were armed they moūted on theyr horses & rode forth tyll it was about thre of the clocke, than thei
rode to the botom of a grete mountayne and there thei alighted, & Arthur alone a fote mounted vp to the hiest therof, and there he saw the castell of the clere toure wheron there were pynacles of bryghte cristall, and it dyde shyne so agaynst the son that no man coude clreli loke ayenst it, and he saw themperours greate tent, and besemyng to him al the world was there of people, & he saw well howe that people laye rounde about the castell, so that none coude issue out nor none entre ino the place, and he saw wel how that on ye same syde that he was on ther were lodged a great nombre of sarasyns, and than Arthur complayned pyteously for the mischefe yt he saw his lady Florence in at that tyme, and as he thus behelde the castell he sawe where as there came towarde the moūtayne a .lx. sarasins all armed, than Arthur wente downe to the valey agayne to his company and said, lordes I thynke all the world of people is in this countre, how shal we be deme¦ned. Syr said Brisebar ther is no more to do but let vs moūt on our horses & do as knyghtes shold do, syr there is none of vs but yt is wel worth a knyght. wel sayd Arthur now yt shal be seen, for yon¦der cometh a .lx. or moo of oute enemyes to awake vs yf we slepe. Let them com sayd Gouernar and he toke a grete spere and dyd plunge it in the reste, and there∣with the sarasyns wer come who saw well these .v. knyghtes, and one of them presed forth before his felawes and Go∣uernar with his spere slew hym, & than the mayster strake so another with such vertue that the spere wēt clene through out his body, than he set his hande vpon his swerde & laye on so amonge hys ene∣myes as a wole dooth among lambes. And whan Brysebar saw hym do suche dedes of armes he sayd, here is a god mayster he chayseth sharpely hys dysci∣ples, than Brisebar strake the first that he encoūtred with so rudely that his ha¦nes auailed him not a boiō, for he was persed to the harte, than Gouenar and he bette downe sarasyns euen as he wol∣de hym self. And whan Hector saw that he feredlest all the sarasyns shold haue ben slayne or he had done ony thynge a∣gaynst them, than he rushte into ye prese and cut of armes handes, & legges & ma¦de hedes flye into the felde, & bet downe sarasyns & horses meruaylously. And whan Arthur saw al this he smiled and sayd, lordes leue me my parte, what me thinketh ye take all, yt is none egal par∣tynge, than he dasht into the thickest of the prese, and the first he sent to the erth both sarasyn and horse, & the seconde he claue downe to the chynue, and ther he gaue so puyssaūt strokes that he confoū¦ded al that euer he attayned vnto, & to make short these .v. knyghtes dyd so va¦lyaūtly that of al these .lx. sarasyns there escaped not one but thei wer all slayne Than Arthur sayd lordes let vs now de¦use how we may fynde the meanes to entre into the castell▪ it is so closed on al sydes that none can entre into it but he must passe fyrst throughout .xxx. thou∣sande men of war, I suppose this empe¦rour hoost endureth .v. leges in brede so I can not se how we should entre euery man gyue his aduyse and counsayle, for here on this part of the castel that we be on is all ouer spradde wyth fel sarasins Syr sayd the mayster suffre a lytell and I shall gyue you my counsayle how we shall entre into the castell, I shall cause vs all to loke for the season as blacke as any pytche, so yt it shall not be knowen but for sarasins, let vs arme vs with the
armure of these dead sarasyns, and than let me ryde on before, & I shall lede you sauely throughout al their hoost, for I cā wel speke the lāguage. Ye saye well said Hector, thā thei al armed thē wt the harneys of the sarasyns yt thei had slay∣ne, & thā they moūted on theyr horses & the maister rode on before til thei came to the sarasyns tēt, & the maister had on the harneys of the Sowdanes sene shal who was slayne before by Arthur, & the sarasyns that sawe hym wende verily yt it had ben the senesshall, & thei demaun∣ded of him fro whence he came. And he answered and said, frendes I go to play me all aboute the felde, and I purpose to go to the castell gates to entre in yf I may and to slee al theym that be wythin the castell, than there were dyuerse that offred them self to haue gone with him but he sayd he would haue no more com¦pany than he had, and said syrs there is none of you that shal go wyth me, ther∣fore I charge you on payne of your ly∣ues yt ye stere not tyll ye here me blowe my grete horne, & thā come as fast as ye cā. Thā the maister & his company rode to the castel gate & called ye porter & said, my frende opē the gate & let vs in & god shal rewrde you, for we are cristen men and are sodyours, & I promyse you that yf ye wyl let vs in & the lady of the place receiue our seruyce than shal she do like a wyse lady. Syrs said the porter & ye be soudiours ye be welcome, for my lady hath grete nede of suche, than he let dow¦ne ye bridge & opened the gate, thā these v. knightes entred, and the porter lyfte vp again the brydge and closed the gate againe after them. Than it was shewed Florence that fyue straunge soudiours were entred into the castel to helpe & to ayde her, than she comaunded that they should be brought to a chambre and vn∣armed, and than to be brought to her pre¦sence, & whan thei were vnarmed and looked so blacke euery man was afraied of theym, and some said god giue grace that they be not spyes, and so thei were brought to Florence, and as sone as she sawe them she tēbled for fere, & whan she sawe that they wer al goodly perso∣nes and moche lyke of stature she fered theym gretely leest thei had ben spies, & demaunded theim of whens thei wee. And they answered how that thei wer sarasyns borne, but as than thei had re¦newed theyr byleue and were crystened in Fraunce at Parys, and the kyng of Fraunce was their godfaders, and than he demaunded of them wheder thei ca∣me streyght out of Fraūce. And they an¦swered yes. Than the lady Florence de∣maunded of them and said, frendes dyde ye euer here of a knyght who is named Arthur, and he is sone vnto the duke of brytaine. Yes truly madame sayde they we hede wel of hym. he departed from Parys the same season that we dyde de∣parte, and he dyde haste hym gretely to come into this countre, and he bringeth with him the duke his fader and the du∣chesse his moder, and wel to the nombre of .x. thousande other knightes redy ap∣parayled for the warre, and madame as it is sayd he be wayleth gretely a gentil damoysel of this coūtre, for whose sake he hath oftentymes ryght pyteously cast forthe many a grete syghe & madame of¦tentymes he speaketh and complaineth to a grete man of dygnitye, who is in his company, and also madame as it is said that there is one wyth hym that is named mayster Steuen, and an other Gouernar, and the thyrde Hector, and dyuerse other that we haue forgotē the
names of them. wel syrs sayd Florence I se well that by suche tokens as ye re∣porte that ye haue seen them, but I pray you dooth Arthur thinke so moche on ye lady that ye speke of. Ye madame truely sayd the maister, than the lady Florence begā piteously to wepe, & the lady Mar¦garete helde rdy a keuerchefe to wype her eyen therwith, & whan Arthur sawe her wepe so he said, right fayre lady we∣pe no more, for surely we shal neuer faile you tyl death haue made an ende of vs. And as they were thus talkyng to Flo∣rence, the sarasyns in the felde that saw them enter into the castel in that peasy∣ble maner, than thei perceiued wel how that the leder of theim was no the sow¦dans senesshal, and thought veryly that they had a grea mocke, wherfore they al ran to their armure and armed thē, & moo than .v. hondred of them wēt to the castel, and dyde knocke and bete at the gate. Than the watchemen of the castell dyde crye, yrs to harneys, for parte of your enemyes are at the gate. Thā eue∣ry man of the castel rane to the windo¦wes to loke what it myght be, and whā Arthur sawe how it was he commaun∣ded his company to arme them, and soo they armed theym, and soo dyde all that were within the castel, for syr Prdicas caused a grete horne to be blowen, and by the sownyng therof all tho of the ca∣stel ranne to their harneys. Than Flo∣rence said, frendes for goddes sake yssue not out of the castel, for ye be not able to resyste ayenst their power thei be so many in nombre and ye soo few, but I re∣quyre yo defēd this castel as wel as ye may. Madame said Arthur be ye in rest and peas and let vs aln hardely, than he mounted on his horse, and so dyde his other foure companions and to the nom¦bre of .xl. other knightes of the castel, & so he rode to the gate and caused the por¦ter to set it open. Than Arthur by grete randon dasht into ye prese with his white helde couered al in blacke, and holdyng a grete hatche in both his handes & laid on rounde about hym on those sarasins that he made hedes, armes, and handes to flye into the felde, and bet down hor¦ses and sarasyns in suche wyse that it was maruayle to behold him, and He¦tor and Gouernar on their partye bette downe sarasyns by grete hepes, and the mayster, Brysar, & syr Perdycas dyde as valyauntly, as onye good knightes ought to do, but aboue all other Arthur dyd excellently, for he layde on rounde a¦bout hym, & confounded al that euer he attayned vnto, so that euery man fledde fro before hym, & said how that he was a deuyl of hel, and none erthly creature, For he auoyded the stretes where as he passed, & made gret hepes of ead knigh¦tes, so that Florence knightes had grete meruayle of him, and also Florence and the quene of orqueney, and the ladi Mar¦gaete blissed them at his dedes, & sayde how that he lacked but lytell of the pro¦wesse of Arthur. And at the last Hecor was beten downe, for his horse was slai¦ne vnder him, and soo his enemyes had thought to haue ledde hym a waye as a prysoner, and thrwith Arthur came thi¦der, and in that fury he slew moo than xv. knyghtes, and remounted Hector a∣gayne on his horse in the spyte of al his enemyes, and than he dasht agayne into the prese and bette downe all that euer he attayned vnto, and Brysbar and the mayster dyde ryghte well theyr partes, but specyally Ahur made place before hym. And whan Florence sawe these .v knightes do so valiauntly, she said vnto
suche knyghtes as were aboute her, syrs for goddes sake and ye loue me goo and helpe to rescowe yonder fyue knightes Than the grete comyn bell was souned and euery man than ranne to theyr har¦neys, and so they were to the nombre of an hondred and an halfe on horsebacke & .iii. hondred on fote, who were in lōg Iackes and grete basenettes on their he¦des, wt good swerdes gite aboute them and longe speres in theyr hādes, to the entent to slee with them theyr enemyes horses, and soo thei yssued out of the ca∣stel and flew many of the sarasyns that within a lytle whyle they were nere all dyscomfyted. And whan the Sowdan sawe this people so ouerladen and slain he caused a grete grsley horne to be blo∣wen, than euery mā that herde it ranne to their harneys, so that they wer to the nombre of .xxx. thousand, and the Sow¦dan was a yonge lusty couragious kny¦ght, and mounted on such an horse that ther was none lyke him in al the world in goodnes, for who so euer was moun¦ted on his backe neded not to doubt ny man lyuynge, for what by force of the horse and of the man there was none by lykelyhode that might resyst ayenst him Than the Sowdā dasht vnto his horse with his sharpe sporres, and he rushte forth as though he had flowen in ye aire lyke a byrde. And whan Arthur sawe hym coing he desyred gretely to haue that horse, than he toke a great myghty spere and ran at the Sowdan and brake hys spere by the might of that horse for the horse was able to haue borne two men armed without any payne and as Arthur passed forth after his course the sarasyns enclosed hym rounde aboute, than he drewe his good swerde clarence and there he slew of hys enemyes wyth out nombre, but thei charged him with so many strokes that they slew his hors vnder him, than he lepte on his fete and dyde put hys whyte shelde beore hym, and with clarence hys good swerde he did cutte so among his enemies as a car¦penter doh hewe chyppes out of a gre tree, and thei did shote at him with their bowes of turkey, wherwyth they dyde him moche trouble, & more had done and hys good whyte shelde hadde not bene. Than Florence sayde as loude as she coude crye, saint mary swte virgin sa∣ue and defende yonder good knght fō all daūger and peryl. And whan Arthur harde her voyce his hardines encreased for such was the maner of the more that he had to do the more was his strength, and was euer of more courage, and thā he lyghtly lept in amonge hys enemyes and began so to deseuer a sonder the gre¦te flockes of the sarasyns that none ap∣proche nere him but yt he receyued death for his mede. At the laste Hector espyed hym and saw how hat he was on foote wherwith he was so dyspleased that he was in a grete rage, thā he couched hys spere and ran at the Sowdā who was rennynge at Arthur, but Hector strake hym so rudely that he persed hym to the harte, and soo he fell downe dead, than Hector toke hys good horse and delyue∣red hym vnto Arthur, and whā Arthur hadde hym he was more gladder of he horse than he would haue ben of all the tresour in Fraunce, than he mounted vp on him and rusht into the thickest of the prese, and thr he dyde meruayles wyth his handes, for there he cutte of armes, handes and legges, he claue a sonder hel¦mes and made hedes to flye in to he fel∣de, and bette downe knyghtes & horses all togyder in hepes▪ and than ther was none that he encoūtred withal that esca¦ped from the deth, than ther came vnto hym the mayster, syr Brisebar, and syr Perdycas, and .xl. other knightes vpon horsebacke of Florence company, and a thre hondred on fote, than they al layde on these sarasyns and bet them downe lyke dogges. Than Arthur encountred the Sowdans broder and gaue him su∣che a stroke with his good swerde clarē∣ce that he claue hym downe to the sadel And whan the sarasyns sawe howe that the Sowdan and also his broder were dead and slayne, thei made suche roring and sorow among them that the empe∣rour as he was in his tent myght well here the noyse, and demaunded what it was. And one shewed hym how that it was ye Sowdan who was scarmusshīg wyth them of the castell, and therewyth ther came to hym a knyght who hadde one of his armes clene striken of & sayd, syr Emperour the Sowdā is deed and his broder Saladyne also slayne, for sir ther be come .vi. as I thynke rather de∣uylles of hell than erthly creatures, for they haue all slayne and cōfounded, and specially there is one among them that maketh waye where so euer that he co∣meth, there is none so hardy that dare a∣byde him a stroke of his handes but all fleeth before him, therfore syr emperour call your mē to harneis or elles we shal be all slayne. Than the Emperour was sore dyspleased and sayd, what hondred deuylles of hell hath brought hider these vi. knyghtes who thus confoundeth all my people, than he cryed to harneis and caused hornes to be blowē in his hoost Than euery man ran to their harneys, soo that anone there were togyder more than an hondred thousande men, and Ar¦thur, Hector, Gouernar, ye maister, Bri¦sebar, & syr Perdycas wer all be sprent with the blode of the sarasyns that thy had slayne. Than the quene of orqueney who had all the daye well aduysed Ar∣thur and his dedes sayde vnto Florence, madame certaynly I thynke that yōder knight is Arthur, for as I deme yonder shelde is your whyte shelde, and I thyn∣ke he that is by hym is Hector, the may∣ster, Gouernar, and syr Brysebar. Ma∣dame sayd Florence that can not be, for thei are as blacke as ony ynke. And as they thus talked thei sawe where as the emperour was comyng, and a hondred thousande folowing after him. A swete lady mary sayde Florence kepe and de∣fende nowe yonder knyghtes, for I fere me now that they shalbe slayne, and the emperour came thiderwarde as faste as he might with grete noyse of trompettes tabours and hornes. And whan that the mayster harde that he came to Arthur, & sayd, syr we haue to lytle nombre of peo∣ple to abyde yonder emperour at this ty¦me, we haue done al ready sufficient for one daye, therfore syr let vs retourne a∣gayne to the castel, for our company are ryght sore trauayled. Ye say wel said Ar¦thur cause the retraite to be blowen, & so it was done, than Arthur & his peple en¦tred into the castell, & closed the gate af∣ter them & drew vp the brydge and they had slayne in that batayle to the nombre of .xv. thousande sarasyns, than Arthur mounted vp into the palays, & Florēce mette wt him, & she dyd of his helme and thanked him gretly & al his company of the paine & labour that thei had takē for her sake that day, than they loked out at the windowes & saw where as thempe∣rour was beholding the dead bodies of the Sowdan & of his broder & of the .xv thousand other sarasyns.
¶How truse was taken for a moneth betwene themperour & Arthur. Ca. C.i.
ANd than Arthur out of a wī∣dow called downe to the em∣perour & said, syr emperoure ye do your selfe grete shame & vylany, ye haue yl counsayle thus to come on a woman by stelth, and vnder thassurance of truse that was takē betwene my lord her fader & you thus to cause so numbre of people to come on her syr if there were in you eyther valure or trouth ye wold not thus haue done, first ye sholde haue giuen her warninge, and haue made your defyaunce, & haue giuen her certayne day of batayle, and than to haue taken her yf ye myght, this sir shol¦de haue bene your honour, & not thus to awayte her in her chambre with all thys numbre of people, and she nothing kno∣wyng thereof before. well sayde thempe∣rour what so euer thou art thy tong is fayre fyled, wolde to god I ad ye head of thine yt lokest so blacke. why syr sayd Ar¦thur and wolde ye than so fayne haue my hed. Truly sayd themperour on ye condi¦cion I wold it had cost me one yeres rent of al my landes. Ye syr sayd Arthur than gyue thys lady a certayne day of batayle that she may in the meane season send for her people so yt she may answer you, and syr I promyse you that I wyll be there & than get my head and ye can. Truly said themperour I am content, but what assu¦rance shall I haue that ye wyll be there. Syr sayd Arthur by the fayth yt I owe vnto my special lady. wel sayd thempe∣rour and I giue her daye for a moneth, & truse in the meane season and so than the assurance was made on bothe partyes, than Arthur sayd holdynge Florence by the hande syr emperour beholde what a Iewel this is, syr ought not a man to b ryght iolly to obtayne suche a lady so tē∣der so swete so uddy of colour. Than ye emperour was sore displesed and sayde: what yu pratyng fole me thinketh thy by sage is couered ouer wt blacke cordewan wold to god I had the in my kepyng, sir sayd Hector all smylyng ake no hede of his saying for he is but a fole, than them¦perour departed & went to his tent, than Arthur said to Florence, madame we ha∣ue now truse wt themperour▪ so that we may wel prouyde for men or the trewse breke for the trme thereof is a monethe. wel syr {quod} Florence I thanke you therof & of the paine yt ye & your cōpany hath ta¦ken this day for my sake, but syr I shall deserue it whan I may. Madame it is al redy deserued, but madame may it plese you to leue the louing of the knighte yt ye say ye loue so wel and take me to your lo¦uer & gyue me your loue, and I promyse you I shal deliuer you from thys empe∣rour for this other knight is now in fraū¦ce in gret sport, and thinketh but litell on you, for he hath many fayre ladies in his country at his cōmaundement. Syr said Florence his sport and ioy is a great ple¦sure to my hert, for I am his both wyth hert thought & body, and neuer to be fals to him, for as helpe me god I had rather suffre my hed to be striken of than I shol¦de do or think any falsenes to him. why madame loue ye than him so inwardly & so truely. Ye or elles sayde she I pray to god I neuer haue ioye in thys worlde. well than sayd he I se wel that my loue can not preuayle. No be e sure said Flo¦rence, therfore be ye in peace and speke no more to me therof. In like wise the may∣ster praied the lady Margart of her loue desyryng her to loue hym & to forsake the clerke. And she answered yt to dye in the
payne she wolde neuer be false to hym. Thn Arthur sayde to the maister let vs leue these ldyes for we are come to late for by seminge they ae ensured to other. Syr sayde Florence I know not your na¦me, but I desyre you go and narme you and than we wyl go to dyner, for our me¦te is readye, than they were ledde into a chambre and vnarmed. And than Bryse¦bar whan he sawe his owne handes soo foule and black it abhorred him and said, the deuyl take this blackenes so that we were rydde thereof, than he sayde to the mayster, syr I requyre you take awaye thys blackenes fro me and fro al my cō∣pany. Than the maister laughed a grete pace, and so dydde al hys company. well sayd Arthur I am wel agreed that it shol¦de be nowe taken a waye fro vs al, for it is time. Than the master toke a box and dyd anoynte theym all, and than they al were in theyr fyrst coloure, than Arthur toke on hym as chefe, and in a goodly syr cote he entred into the palays where as Florence taryed for them to washe their handes, and as soone as she sawe them she knew well Arthur and them al, than she ranne to hym and enbraced and kys∣sed hym swetely before thm al and sayd, myne owne lorde dere hert and loue ye be ryght hertely welcome, as he for whome I haue wepte many a salte teare, but syr I praye you who made you so blacke as ye were ryghte nowe. Madame by the fayth that I owe vnto you mayster Ste∣uen, and there recounted to her al ye cause why, than thre began gret fest and ioye throughout al ye castel, & also throughout al the town whan it was knowen how that Arthur and Hector were comen in to the castel than they were in their myn∣des better assured than though the kyng Emendus and all hys power had bene there, and lady Margaret made as gret there to the mayster as was to her pos∣syble, and so they went to dyner and were ryght rychely serued, and after dyner Ar¦thur sayd to Gouernat it is nedeful for vs now to puruey for euery thynge that is necessary to vs to thentent that we be not deceyued at the daye of oure batayle, therefore I wyll that ye go to my Lorde the kynge of Soroloys, & recommaunde me humbly to his grace, and shewe hym how that I am at the clere toure, and re∣counte to hym how that we haue spedde, and how that we haue truse for the space of a monethe, and than is the daye set of batayle betwene themperour and vs also salute fro me the kynge of orqueney and say how that I desyre him to somon agaynst the sayde terme all the power of Soroloys both on horsebacke and on f¦te, so that they may be here about the end of foure wekes, and I wyll in the meane tyme go vnto my lorde my fader and too al his company and brynge them hyder. And whan Florence herde that she sayd syr haue ye brought them into these par∣tyes. Ye madame truly and with my fa∣ther there is a noble kyng of that coūtry. And fayre loue where be they. Madame I left them at the porte noyre. well sayde Florence I requyre you go to them and bryng them hyder for I woulde gladly be acquaynted with my lorde your fader whose doughter I am and trustynge so shall contynue, but I praye you tell me how doth my lady your moder. Madame I ensure you she is also at ye port noyre, accompanyed wyth fyue or syxe countes∣ses who haue left theyr own countyes to come hyder to se you. A dere herte sayd Florence, blessed be the houre that euer ye were borne sith that haue broughte so noble a company wyth you to se me, for now my fader kynge Emendus shall not thynke that I am yl bestowed on you syr I requyre you let me se them as short¦ly as ye can thā Gouernar toke his leue and departed towarde Soroloys. ¶How that the yonge kynge of malogre and the duke of ritayne wyth dyuerse other erles and barons, and acompanied with a great armye of men of war ary∣ued at the clere toure, to the entent to so∣cour Florence and Arthur who were be∣syeged by themperoure, who had nye en∣raged out of his wytte whan he knewe that they were come into that countrey. Capitulo .C.ii.
IN the morning betimes Ar¦thur departed & toke wt him Hector and Brisebar & toke wt him .v. other knghtes of Florence, & the master abode styl wt Florence, thus Arthur ode forth a iii. leges, and than he espyed the baner of the duke his fader and of al his hoost for the yonge kynge of Malogre hasted hym as muche as he myght for the feare that he had of Arthur. And whan Arthur sawe the baners and standardes waue∣ring with the wynd, and the helmes and sheldes shynynge ayenst the sonne, than his hert smiled and said, a gentil Fraūce god encrease thine honour and noblenes, and than he approched nere to his adr and made hym reuerence and there was great ioye at their metynge, and the duke demaunded of hym howe that he hadde spedde. And he recounted to hym and to his company al ye hole mtter as it was done, and so they rode forthe togither tyl they came into themperours hoost. And al that seasn Florence was lening ote of he batylmentes of the toure for with her eyen she had conuayed Arthur before as farre as she myght, and at th last the quene of orqueney had espied the frenche hoost comynge, and sawe the frenche ba∣ners displayed with the wynde. Saynte mary said she fayre lady Florence what people be yonder that I se co¦mynge hyder warde, I thynke it be themperour. And whā Florence sawe them she was in fee of Ar∣thur and sayde, alas I doub that f they haue encounted my loue Arthur that hey haue slayne him and therwith she began to wepe, than a knyght who came streyght from Arthur to thentent to shew her how that he was coming sayd Madame be wel assured for yonder peo∣ple that ye se comynge are pertaynynge to my lorde Arthur than she apeased her selfe and fyrst she sawe the greate baner of the duke of Britaine, and saw hlmes and sheldes flambe ayenst the sonne, al∣so she behelde the goodly company of yon¦ge knyghtes mounted vpon good horses and she herde horses braye and bete with theyr fete, than she praysed muche in her herte the noble countrey of Fraunce she thought it was a beter syghte of theym than it was of the men of warre of her owne country, for they were more better horsed, ad harneysed a great dele more
properly, and than they saw coming af∣ter that the gret baner royall of the kyng of malogre, and her heart reioysed to se the noble company that came with hym than she sawe the erle of Neuers baner and the noble burgonyons ryghte pro∣perlye be sene, than therle of Foreste and the dolphin in his company, and than ca¦me thrle of Foys, and than the earle of mount belyall, than the lorde Beauieu, and laste of all came the banner of Myr∣poys, and al thys company were to the numbre of .xv. thousande knightes, cho∣sen for the nones. Than Florence sayd, a my swete loue Arthur it semeth wel that ye are not behated in your own countrey syth ye brynge wyth you so many noble men of warre, and of so great dygnytye. Certaynly madam sayd Margaret these people wyll dystroye thys Emperoure and all hys hoost, they seme noo men but rather aungelles of heauen beholde ma∣dame howe lyghte and quyke they be in their armour, a noble realme of Fraunce blessed be thou syth suche people comth out of the. And whan their people were lodged, than Arthur caused the king and the duke his father and al the other erles and barons to mount vp into the castell Than the kynge sayde too Arthur, syr I requyre you shewe me the gentyll Flo∣rence. Ye fayre son sayd the duke shewe me my dere doughter that shall be. Syr ye shall se her anone sayde Arthur, than he sente before duke Philip too Florence to thentent that she should make her selfe fresshe against theyr comyng, and as so¦ne as she sawe Philyp she made to hym ryghte greate ioye and demaunded hym howe that he dyd, and howe that he liked by the realme of Fraunce. Madame sayd he I lyke it verye well, for I ensure yon Fraunce is a noble gentyl countrey, ma∣dame beholde here cometh the noble du∣ke of Britaine fader to Arthur, and with him king Alexander of malogre, and dy∣uerse other erles and barons who are co¦ming hither to se you, & Arthur desyreth you to aparaile your selfe wt vestures of Ioye, than she went to her chaumbre and apparayled her selfe according to her es∣tate and as to receiue such noble men as were come to herwarde, and the quene of orqueney & the fayre lady Margaret dyd helpe her, than these Lordes alyghted at the peron & so mounted vp into the palais than the master ran to Florence and said madam come on your way & se the duke of britain & the king and other erles and barons, and she who was the gentyl rose on the lily yong and tendre, alwayes ha∣uyng a smylyng countenaunce, and the mooste gracyous of al the worlde yssued out of her castel and two knightes ledde her forth, and two other knightes led the quene of orqueney, and whan the yonge kynge and the, duke of Britaine & other erles sawe her they marueled greatly of the excellent beauty yt god had giuen her. Than the king stept forth and his bonet in his hand and enclined him selfe to her and right swetely did salute her, and she answered him and sayde, syr ye be ryghte hertely welcome into this countrey, thee whych is and shal be at your noble com¦maundement▪ and al other thinges wher¦of I haue anye power. Than the kynge dyde salute al the other ladies eche after other. Than the duke of Britayn came to Florence and sayd, my right dere lady god encrease your noble honour as vnto the mooste noble ladye of al the worlde. Than Hector sayd, madame thys is the duke of Britaine father to Arthur, wher wyth she was ryght gladde and enbra∣ced hym and sayd, syr ye be right hertelye
welcom into the lond of Florence your doughter as he yt shal be myne own lord into whose handes and protectiō fro hens forth I put me and al my realme of Soro¦loys. Than he toke Florence by the hand and wolde not let her depart for no bo∣dye that came to them than all the other erles and barons did salute her, and she re¦dred agayne to them suche salutacyon yt euery man was wel content, and euerye man marueled gretly of her beauty, and of the wyse and sage wordes that she had to euery body. So than the king and the duke and Florence sate them downe togy¦ther, and the lady Margaret toke therle of Neuers and therle of Forest & sate down wt them, and therle of mountbelial and ye dolphin and the lord Beauieu wer lokin¦ge out at the wyndowes and behelde the emperours greate hoost, and at last Ar∣thur and the mastr came to them. Thā the dolphin said, sir Arthur as god helpe me I haue grete desyre to knowe what people these be that be here with this em∣perour, & to se how they can couche their speres. Let vs go to them sayd the lorde Beauieu, & let vs make them know how frenche men become hyder. A gret shame take he sayde therle of mountbelyal that fayleth or wyl abyde behynde. well syrs sayd Arthur yf it please you we shal not do thus, for than shold we breke out truse and nt kepe our promes made to them for than they wold repute vs fals in bre∣king of our couenaunces, and sir frenche men haue bene alwaies reputed true, ther¦fore let vs abyde tyl the daye be come, wt out so be that they breake the truse their selfe. And si sayd the lord Beauieu how longe shal youre truse yet endure. Syr {quod} Arthur it must endure yet a .v. dayes.  syr sayde the dolphyn if it were not you, shame haue he that set the daye so longe. what all thys longe season we shall but lye here styl lyke swyne and do no good. And as they thus talked they herd grete noyse without in themperours hoost, for there was a gret rumour amonge them because of the frenche hoostes commyng into the castel▪ and therwith they saw eue¦ry man runne to their harnes, and anon they espied themperours sene shal moū∣ted on a good horse, & a great spee in his hand, and his shelde about his necke, & he come stryght towarde the frenche hoost who were lodged without the castel gate to thentent to know what people they were, but the lorde de la lounde whan he saw him coming in ye maner he thoughte he desired too haue Iusted whth some of the frenche men, than he mounted on his hors and toke a gret spere and ran at ye se¦nesshal, And whan the dolphin sawe that he sayde to Arthur, sir me thinketh by the lorde de la lounde that he thinketh but ly∣tel on your truse▪ for yf he dyd he doothe not wel thus to do, I praye you beholde how fast he runneth. Ye syr sayd Arthur I se him wel, god kepe his body from any hurt. And whan the senesshal saw hym comyng so fast towarde hym, he plun∣ged hym selfe in hys sadell, and dyd caste his spere from him and put his shelde be¦hynd him, for he wold not Iust because of brekyng of the truse. And whan the lorde de la lounde sawe yt he knew wel he was not comyng to Iust, therefore he discharged him selfe and reined his hors than the senesshal saluted him & demaū∣ded what people they were yt were newe come to the castel with such an host. Cer¦tenly syr they be people of Fraūce, who dyd here tidynges of a great warre that this emperour shold haue shortly, & thr¦fore we be come into this country as sou¦dous retaynyng vs who so euer wyll
Souldyours {quod} the seneshal & therewith he lyfte vp his eyen and beheld the hooste ouer al and there he saw the goodly yong squyers vncrussing of their somers & ca¦riages and pitching vp of their tētes and pauilions, and he saw ye goodly knights ten their horses vp and downe in the fel∣des, some lyghtyng and some mountyng and there he sawe the armeres furbyshe the harneies & the speres and sheldes fla¦ming agenst the sonne, the baners stan∣dardes and stremers wauering with the wynd, than he sayde to hym selfe, saynte mary what people are these are they mor¦tal men or aungelles of paradyse, whoo may endue ayenst them. A fraūce an ho∣nourable country aboue al other, blessed be thou that nourisshest vp suche people Than he sayd to the lorde de la lound, gē¦tyl syr wil not these people abyde and be retayned with my lorde themperour tyl his warre be done, ad he shal giue them suche wages and foes, that of reason they shal be content. Syr sayd the lorde de la lounde yf ye wyll knowe the certayne go and speke with our lordes and maysters who are entred into the castel to go speke wih a ladye I wote not what she is, but as it is reputed she is right gracious and fayre. Saynt mary sayd the senesshal yf I go thyther I doubte me of them wyth in the castel leaste they take and kepe me styll there as prysoner, wherfore I wyl go fyrst and spke with my lorde thempe¦rour, than he departed and went streight to themperours tent and said to him gen¦tyl emperour there is come out of the no¦ble realme of Fraunce the moste goodlye company of men of warre that euer was sene in al this world, and as I deme they be wel to the nombre of .xv. thousande, & one of thē shewed me how that they were souldiours, and the capitaines are gone into the castel to speke with Florence, syr I feare me lest that Arthur hath retained them on his party, for he can get muche people, therfore syr after my counsaile ye shal sende to them in fayre maner and de¦syre ye them to become your men duryng your warre, and yf they wyl do so, than gyue them largely bothe of golde and of syluer, and suche other thynges as they nede for syr and ye may get them ye shall be able to conquere al the world yf ye lyst Than the kynge Ionas sayde to thempe¦rour▪ syr it were but well done to knowe what people they were, & wherfore they be come, for I vnderstande that Arthur hath bene in Fraūce, and sir it myght for¦tune that he hath brought them with him to thentēt to anoy you, and syr yf they be come to make warre ayenst you, than be¦gyn ye fyrste on them, and rather to daye than to morow, and strike of al their hen¦des, and hange vp theyr capytayne, and flee Arthur quycke, and as for the strom¦pet Florence deliuer her among our kna¦ues and boyes, for she hath done you ful great anoyaunce, and therefore syr sende to yonder people of fraūce, who are new come, wenyng to wynne al the worlde and commaund them to come to your ser¦uice, and if they wil be with you, than en¦trete them as ye shold do straungers, and if they wil not come to you than cōmaun¦de them on paine of theyr lyues inconty¦nent to depart one of this coūtry, and syr yf they wyl not do thus graunte me the enterpryse and I shall ensure you to get you all their heades. Than the senesshal was in hys mynd dysplesed with the fo¦lysh proud wordes and sayd, by god syr king yf ye eate no mete tyl al this be done I fee me lest it wyl be to late for you to e, but syth it is your mynd I counsayl my lord ye emperour here present to giue you leue to acheue this enterprise eyther to bryng them to my lordes seruyce or el¦les they to departe out of this realme, or elles al their hedes. In the name of god sayd the kyng Ionas I praye & requyre my lorde themperour to giue me lycence to acheue this enterprise yf I can, and I promyse faythfully to go speke wt them or that I slepe without ony lōger delay and I shal knowe what is their wylles and myndes. Certainly gentle kynge {quod} themperour ye haue a noble valiaūt her¦te, do as it pleaseth you for I gyue you leue, than he toke his gloue, & the kynge toke it and thanked him, & soo than they wente to dyner, and all the noble compa¦ny of Fraunce and brytaine were in the clere toure where as they dined in grete delyte and sporte, and were serued right richely, and after diner thei sported them tyll it was aboute one of the clocke. ☞How that king Ionas al alone came to the castel of the clere toure, and there dyd his message frō themperour of ynde the more. Capitulo .C.iii.
THan kyng Ionas yssued out of the emperours hoost al ar∣med wel and fresshely moun∣ted, and so all alone without ony company he came to the clere toure, and vnder a fayre olyue tree he alyghted and mounted vp into the pa¦lays, and there he founde Florence & the kynge of Malogre and the duke of Bri¦tayne settynge togyder, than the kynge Ionas spake before Florence in open au¦dience, so yt euery man myghte well here hym & sayd, the hye souerayne god who all thynge formed of noughte defende & kepe the puyssaunt emperour of ynde the more and all his frendes where soo euer they be here or elles where, fyrste to the Florence there as thou syttest I saye fro the mighty emperour yt thou go to him al onely in thy kyrtel on the bare fete wt thy heere hangynge about thy sholdres, and on thy knees crye hym humbly mer∣cy of ye gret outrage that thou hast done to hym, and I thynke that he wyll haue mercy on the that thou shalt not dye no cruell deth, for yf thou wylt doo thus I thynke he wil giue the pardon of thy life and may the to one of the gromes of his kechyn, & yf thou wilt not do thus know for certaine yt to morow nexte comming this castel shall be rased down to ye hard earth and thy selfe brente in a fayre fyre and the lurden that is called Arthur han¦ged vp by the necke. Than Florence be∣gā to smyle & said, syr Ionas shew vnto your emperour that or al this be perfour¦med there shal not abyde one tothe in his heed but I shal cause them to be rasshed out eche after other, and as for comyng into my castell ayenst my wyl lette him knowe well I haue suche people aboute me that shall defende it ryght wel ayenst hym, for therof they be desyrous. Than the dolphyn stepte for the as he that was full of yre bycause of the rude wordes yt kyng Ionas had spoken of Florēce and Arthur and said to the kynge, thou foule olde churlysshe vilaine yf thou were not a messenger I wold rashe out thyn eyen out of thyn heed with myne own hādes what art thou come hyder to speake vy∣lany to so hie a lady and princesse as Flo¦rence is, to saye that she should be giuen to a kechin grome in mariage, thou olde fole say vnto thine emperour that he com to my lady Florence crepyng on his han¦des and knees, and to take of suche Iu¦gement of death as she wyl assigne him to dye of, and yf he wil not so do let him
lye fast out of this coūtre, for as for me nor none of my company haue taken no trewse with him therfore I vtterly defie hym, & fyrst here before thy face thou abu¦sed folysshe dotarde I defe the & al thy malyce. And whan king Ionas saw the grete peryll & daūgr yt he was in he was nye for angre out of his wytte, and ther¦with he set his hande on his swerde and than Brisebar stepte to him with a grete leuer in his hande & said, syr kinge fayre & softely not so hardy in thy heed yt thou ones stere, for & thou do thou shalt neuer speke word more with thine emperoure, than he helde his peas & stode styll, for he sawe wel yt yf he had moued he had bene but dead. Than Brisebar sayd yf yu hast ony more to saye speke & auoyde fast out of this presence yf thou loue thyne own lyfe. Than the kinge I was sayd to the king of malogre & to the other lordes of fraunce & britayne, syrs it is so the hie & mghty puyssaunt emprour hath harde spekyng of you how yt ye be come hider with moche people in harneys, for what cause he knoweth not, wheder it be to be with him or ayenst hym, yf it be for him and that ye kyl com and dwel with him he wyl gyue you glde & syluer, rentes & londes & great possessions, & he wyl loue and honour you in suche wyse that of rea¦son ye shal holde you ryght wel content And yf ye be come to be ayenste hym he wolde know it to thentent that he wyll take coūsaile what he shal do ayenst you, & in this behalfe shew me your myndes. Than the kinge Alexander of Malogre spake first & said, syr ye seme to be a wise mn, I wote not what I should cal you for I know not your name, but this I say vto you shew vnto your emperour that he hath to lytel londe & is of to smal a power, & hat to lytel store of golde & syluer to retayne to hys seruice such peo¦ple as we be, but yf he wil dwel wt vs & serue vs truely let hym come to vs & we shal do ryght well for hym, & yf he haue no wife we shal mary him to one of our damoyselles who hath ben longe one of our lauenders. And whan the kyng Io∣nas harde him that he called hym a wise man, & that he would mary his lorde the Emperour to a lewde damoysel he was than so angry for despyte yt he was nye in a gree rage & sayd to king Alexāder, syr ye haue an outragious hart to cal me a wise man & wold mary my lord to one of your damoyselles, and he is the moste mighty prynce & moost honoured yt euer be crowne of gold on his head, & more ouer ye wold haue hym to come & srue you, therfore syr I saye vnto you on hys behalfe that he shal be to morow assem∣bled ayenst you with .xx.m. speres in his company, therfore beware of hym and of his, for in his name I defy you and all yous, and syr dolphyn to you I saye be∣ware that ye come not ther, for & ye do I promyse you to take that head of youres cle fro your sholdres, than he went to Brisebar & toke him by the chyn so ude¦ly that he made al the reh in his head to dashe togyder, and sayd, by the fayth yt I owe vnto themprour of yude I shal ne¦uer depart out of this countre tyl I haue hanged the by the necke before Arthur & al these feshe men that be here present And whan Brysebar felte hym self so ru¦dely handled and so churlishely thretned he strayned his ethe togyder and froun¦sed and glared wt hie eyen as though he had ben wode, and therwith he lift vp his leuer and gaue king Ionas therwith su¦che a troke bitwene the sholdres that he fell flat to the earh, and Brysebar dasht downe with hys knees on hys bely, and
with a shorte knife he cut of a gret parte of the heere of his berde, wherwith king Ionas braied and cried out a grete pace. And duke Philyp did laughe therat and said, syrs beholde what a good barbou Brisebar is, me thynketh he dooth lyue very harde, beholde howe the heres come out rotes  all. Than Florence rose and sayd, frende Brysebar aryse and let hym alone for he is a messenger, therwith Bri¦sebar departed fro hym, than the kynge arose and went downe the staires al asto¦nyed, & so mounted on his horse & wente to themperours hoost, & by that time the sonne was farre drawen into the weste. And whan themperour sawe kynge Io∣nas in ye case he demaunded of hym who had arayed him in that wyse. And he an∣swered, syr the frensshe men in the blaū∣che toure hath thus arayed me, and ther he recounted to themperour how yt they woulde mary hym to one of theyr lauen∣ders, and would haue hym to serue them Ye said themperour are thei than of that mynde, than I cōmaūde you that to mo∣rowe nexte ye bete downe this castell, & that the harlot Florence be taken & br̄t & the ribaude Arthur hanged by ye necke and al the remnaunt slayne. Thā kyng Ionas sayd, syr I vndertake on paine of my heed that all this that ye haue deuy∣sed shal be done to morow betimes, and so he went to hys tent as for that night. Than the noble knyghtes in the castell went to counseyle to determin how they should do the nexte daye, for ther knewe well that there sholde be batayle made to them, than maister Steuen sayd to kyng Aexander, syr I knowe well that thys kinge Ionas that lately departed fro vs wyl make on vs a fyerse assawte to mo∣rowe nexte, therfore there is no more to doo but now let it be seen what frensshe men can do, & yf we holde them rudely at this beginning they shal be the lighther discomfyted here after nor also thei wil not so lightly agayne assemble ayenst vs therfore let euery knight shewe forth the best that thei can do, & blessed be he that no wt shal do valiauntly, syr me thinketh that it were bst that ye sende for al your people that lyeth without in the tentes & let them come into the castell as pryuely as they can without any noyse & conuai all theyr stuffe wt them, for now all this night themperous people wil slepe fast bycause thei thinke to fyght to morow, and whan our people be come into thys castel let vs all kepe our selfe in our har∣neys as pryuly as we can, and than we shal let downe the brydges & set opē the gates, & so in the morning oure enemyes shal thynke that we be all fledde awaye this night for fere, & than I thynke we shal se this king Ionas, ad all hys com∣pany come & entre into this castell, & as soone as thei be entred thā we may stepe to the gate and close it fast, & so thā thei can not escape vs, nor they that be with out shal not helpe them, for yf we sholde go and yssue out & fight in the paine fel¦de with them al we should haue ouer mo¦che to doo, & by lyklyhode lese many of our people, for thei be in nombre an hon¦dred ayenst one of vs, & whan we haue slayne al them that  all be entred wyth in this castel than let vs set open the ga¦tes & let the rmenaunt entre who wyll, and yf they wyl not come to vs we may go whā we wil & loke on them in theyr tentes, & the moo that be deed the fewer enemyes we shal haue. And whan Flo∣rence herde the maisters coūsaile it pla∣sed her ryght wel, and said how tha she would that they shold do as had deuised Madame sayde kynge Alexander youre grate not displeased we shal not do thus ye be doughter vnto a hye and a mighty puissaunt kyng, and I am also a kynge and it were shame for such people as we be to take our enemyes closed in a nette or cage, for rather we shold go seke them in the open felde with bners dysplayed Ye sa ryght wel sayd Florence, but syr they haue done ayenst me more vylanye and trespace than this case is in, for thei become hyder into my countre and hath enclosed me here in my castell withoute ny reasonable cause, wherfore it is no shame to take aduauntage of them if we can. In the name of god madame sayde the dolphyn ye saye but trouth, for it is good polyce in warre to spye auantage on our enemies, so that there be no trea∣son in the case, whrfore let vs doo thus as is deuysed. I am agreed therto sayde the duke of Britayne, for tyme ynoughe here after we may issue out on thē, but I promyse you I wyll be the porter and kepe the gate, and I shall gyue them fre entre as many as wil come without ony daunger, but at the goyng out of the ta∣uerne it shall behoue theym to paye for theyr scotte, for suche shal entre yt shall not fynde agayne theyr goyng oute, than euery knyght dyd laughe at this newe porter, than Florence enbraced hym and sayd, a myn owne dere lorde and father it appereth ryght wel how that ye be of the fyernes of Arthur your sone, and so at the laste they agreed all to thys coun∣sayle. Than Brisebar mounted on hys horse and rode forth to the frenshe hoost without the castell and came to syr de la lounde who had the guydynge of them, and they two togyder dyde conuay that same nyght al thyr hoost as couertly as thei coude into the castell, so that none of the emperours people espyed theym, and they within the castel dyd rest them al that nyght tyl that it was nere on the poynt of the daye lyght, than they harde masse, and after that thei ordred al their people, and the duke of Brytayne and al his company kepte the gate, and entred into the grete sellers and vawtes ioy∣nynge thereto, and kept themselfe priue¦ly and close without any noyse, and in the maket place of the towne was the dolphyn, and in another strete the erle of Forest and the erle of mountbelyall, and in an other corner was ye erle of Neuers and the erle of Foys, and the yong kyng of malogres, mayster Steuen, Arthur, Brysebar, and syr de la lounde accompa¦nyed wyth fyue hondred other knightes kepte the passage to the palays, and du∣ke Phylyp and duke Hector wer in the palays with Florence, and al these noble men and all theyr company were redy a¦med and all closed in chambres, sellers & vawtes and so kept themself close with out any noyse makynge. ☞ How that themperour and kyng Ionas accompanyed wyth fyfty thousande men of warre came to the clere toure for to haue made assaute therto, and than thei founde the ga∣tes open and entred bothe into the towne and in to the castell, for they thought verily that all the frensshe men had ben fledde, but they were deceyued, for than the frensshe men lepte out from theyr enbusshemen∣tes and shette faste the gates▪ and there slewe kynge Ionas and all the fyftye thousande, soo that none escaped alyue but one and the Em∣perour who was taken prysoner. Capitulo .C.iiii.
IN the morning whā kyng Ionas saw the day begyn to spring he lept out of hys bedde and made to be cryed thrughout al his host ye eueri mā shold to harne is to ye ēntent to make assaut to the clere toure, thā king Ionas assēbled ther togider to the nōbre of .xv. thousande persones, than there came to hym a knight, & said, syr Florēce and al the frenshe men are fledde away this sa¦me night priuely, for the gates of the ca¦stel and town stondeth wyde opē, & the frensshe men hath left behynde them mo¦che bagage there as ther were lodged wt out the towne. And whan kyng Ionas hard yt he had neuer so great ioye before and sayd, I knew well that as soone as thei knew yt I would come ayenst them they durst not for theyr lyues abyde ony lenger, I am angry wyth nothynge but with that Florēce shold thus escape vs thā he caused a great horne to be sowned than ther assembled about hym on horse∣backe wel to the nombre of .xl. thousande & with great noyse of trōpettes, tabors & hornes thei rode to themperours tente who was as then rysen out of his bedde & stode without his tente wt great plente of people aboute hym, & as sone as king Ionas saw hym he alyghted and sayde, syr I am ryght sore displesed for Florēce & al the galaūtes of fraūce are this night priuely fled away, I am sure Arthur hath led them into his countre, but syr and it please you moūt on your horse & go ryde to the castel and take the possession ther∣of, & so shall ye haue the conquest before kng Emendus doth come, for whan he is come ye shal haue a great auaūtage of hm, for than he shal be without & fayne to lodge in the felde, & ye shal be at your ease within the towne & castel. And whā that themperour harde how that Florēce was escaped fro him he was nye oute of his mynde for dyspleasure, than he de∣maunded for his harneys, and so armed hym & dyuerse other with hym, so what of his company and of king Ionas thei were to the nombre of fyfty thousande, so themperour rode forth with baners dysplayed & with great noyse of trompet¦tes, hornes, and tabours, and came to the fyrst gate of the castel, than there the em¦perour sawe the foundation of the grete walles the which wer ryght hye & thicke and the grete and depe dytches ful of wa¦ter, and the gates rychely buylde mighty and stronge, & the sharpe cuttinge porte eullesses of bright stele, also he behelde the hye and mighty toures pyght full of waueryng fanes, than he praysed the ca¦stel so moche in hys harte that he would not giue it againe for al the gold of the world, and than he said to kyng Ionas veryly this castel pleaseth me right well I shal make it my chambre, he sayd tru∣lyer than he was ware of, for there died he in grete myschefe, and was buryed in the castell. Syr sayd kynge Ionas here ye and I wyll take vp our lodginges, & thus oftētimes people speketh of a thing that they knowe but lytle what the con∣clusyon shall be, than by aduenture as the emperour loked in at a windowe of the chefe toure he had a blushe of Florēce for as than he was paste the fyrste gate and warde, than he sayde to her a gentil pusel make good chete for verily ye haue themperour to your host. And whā Flo∣rence harde him say so her hart trembled for fere & said, a swete loue Arthur it is nedeful this day yt ye be the chefe floure of al other knyghtes, swete hart deliuer me this day of this emperour, & by yt time themperoue wyth all hys .l. thousande
were passed the gates & wardes & were come to the chefe palays, than ye noble & free duke of britayne rusht out of his n busshe & lift vp the bridge & closed fast y• gates and did put out his stāarde ouer the wall of the gate into the castel warde and caused to be blowen a grisley horne than knyghtes lept on horses on euery syde, than Arthur came down out of the chefe dongeō wel moūted on horsebacke wel armed, & cried brytayne saynt malo than he broched to his horse & wt greate randon he dressed hym to themperour & strake hym so rudely with his spere that he bare downe emperour horse & all in a hepe, than Arthur had thoughte to haue taken hym but he myghte not the prese was soo thicke. And whan Arthur saw that he was holde so short with so grete a nombre he toke clarēce his good sweee in his hande and did cut down therwith all that euer he attayned vnto. And whā kynge Alexander and hys company saw the noble prowesse of Arthur thei toke on them grete hardines, than kynge Alex∣ander ran and encountred kynge Ionas so rudely y• he flewe clene ouer his horse crope hys legges vpwarde, & wyth hys fall he had almost ouerthrowen the dol∣phyn who layde on with his swerde as a man out of his wyt, and whan he sawe kynge Ionas make a forke with his leg∣ges vpwarde, he lyfte vp hys swerde & strake him bitwene the legges so rudely that his ryght legge flewe clene into the felde, and sayd go thy waye thou doting fole couer thyne arse shame haue thou & there this kynge Ionas was all to tro∣dn wyth horse fete, and the emperoure was so brused wyth hys fal that nye the thyne of his backe was broken asonder and soo was lade vnder a pyne tree on his shelde & coude not stre to helpe hym selfe. Than al the erles and the lord B∣auieu, syr de la lounde, & Brisebar daht into the prese and dyde there suche valy∣auntnes in armes that thei dyde in a ma¦ner with their enemyes as thei lift them selfe, for they were nre hande dyscom∣fyted bycause of faute of their capytay∣nes, and so than they had thought to ha¦ue tourned agayne to the gate, but than the noble duke of Brytayne was before them who ryght sharpely receyued them for the brytons strake of their heades ar∣mes & legges, but specially Arthur dlt wonders strokes about them, and bett downe all that euer he attayned vnto, so that euery man fled before hym to make shorte processe these noble menne dyde so moche that all the emperyens wer clen discomfyted and slayne, how be it they endured moche payne and labour fyrste▪ for they were a great nombre of people, & by that tune it was aboute none, than Arthur and all hys companye vnamed them and toke theyr dyner, than they r∣tourned to the palays, and as they went they sawe lyeng vnder the pyne tree the emperour who had hys chine sore brused and almoost broken, than Arthur caused hym to be sayre and easely vnarmed, and made hym to be borne to the palays & to be layde in a fayre goodly chambre, and appoynted .vi. knyghtes to wayte & giue attendaūce on hym, & .x. squyes to serue hym, than Arthur caused all the beste sur∣giens of the countre to be brought to him to hele him of his sore hurtes, and Arthur kept the Emperour as honourably as a man ought to kepe suche a persone as he was. Than Arthur sayd to his company lordes what shall we do wt yonder grete hoost that is without, for I thynke that yf they ones knowe that themperour be taken and kyng Ionas slayne they wyl
flee awaye, and so shal they escape fro vs therefore let euery man giue hys aduyse what is best ferder to be done. Uerely syr sayd mayster Steuen my counsayle is y• in the heyght of the hyest toure in thys ca¦stel that ye set out themperoures banner dyspayed to thentent that they without in the hoost may se it, and than they wyl thinke verely ye themperour hath wonne thys place, & so than they wyl abide styll and thinke him selfe wel assured, and syr as soone as euery man of our companye hath dyned lt vs yssue out wyth baners dysplayed and fighte with them, for peo∣ple wtout a Gouernour are halfe discom¦yted, for they shall haue noo vertue nor power ayenst vs, and let vs make king Alexander oua captayne and gouernour for a king ought to gouernr an hoost, and than let vs do soo that kyng Emendus whan he commeth may haue but litel to do. Than euery man sayd howe that the mayster had well aduysed, and agreed al¦so to do, than euery man went to dyner, & whan they had dyned euery man cryed to harnes, and so armed them, & they with out in the hoost were ryght ioyfull whan they sawe theyr lordes baner dysplyed in the toppe of the castel, and than kynge Alexander and Arthur ordeyned y• the ba¦ner of britaine sholde be in the way ward and that Arthur sholde be in y• company of his fader he duke of britayne, & nexte after him in batayle sholde be the erle of mount belyal, & than the erle of Neurs than therle of Foys, & than therle of Fo∣rest, nere after the lord Beauieu, & thn the dolphin, & than the lorde de la lounde and syr Brisebar, and than laste of all kynge Alexander theyr chefe capytayne, and mayster Steuen in his company, & whan all these noble men were thus st in good ordynaunce & theyr baners dys∣played, than Florence behelde well theyr noble & hie countenaūces & praysed them muche in her herte and sayd, a gentyl coū¦try of Fraunce ryght noble art thou, god kepe the therein & mayntayn it sith thou hast nourysshed vp suche a noble compa∣ny of knightes as here be now at this ty∣me present, so than there yssued fyrst oute the baner of Britaine wyth the thekered armes, and so al other euery mā in good ordynaunce. And whan the empetyens sawe them come forthe than they knewe wel howe that themperour & kynge Io∣nas were bothe slaine or taken, and than they wre so abasshed y• they had though all to haue fledde a way, than kinge Flo∣rypes broder to themperoure and kynge randalas and kinge Clamados cosin germayne to kyng Florypes mounted al on theyr horses, and rode al about theyr hoost and dydde encourage thyr people, than the kynge Florypes called to him y• erle of the yle perdue, and cōmaunded him to ryde ayenst the frenche hoost & demaū∣de of theym what people they were, and what they would and to shew them that yf they demaund batayle they should ha∣ue it on the mondaye nexte folowynge wythout any fayle so that they wyll gy∣ue rewse in the meane space, Soo than the erle rode streyght to the duke of Bry∣tayne who was in the formest bron and ryght nobly dyd salute hym. And whan Arthur saw hym he made to hym ryghte great ioy, and than the erle desyred hym that he wold cause hym to speke wt theyr chefe capytayne. Than Arhur brought hym to the presence of kynge Alexandr than the rle dyd hys reuerence and salu∣ted hym, and demaunded of the kyng for what entencyon he and al hys company dyd approche soo nere to the emperours hoost. Cetaynely frende sayde the kyng
it is so that ye & your company be entred into the londe pertaynynge to the gentyl lay Florence, & ye haue wasted & exyled al her coutry and subiects wrongfully & wtout ani resonable cause, & ye haue besie¦ge & assalted her here in her castell wtout any defaūce made to her before, whefore we are riding in purpose to areyse youre syege and to dryue you oute of thys coū∣tey yf we can. Syr {quod} therle cause your hoost to tary and reurne againe to your castel, and king Floripes broder to them∣perour desireth of you truse and respit of atayle tyl monday next coming, & than h pomyseth you to deliuer you bataile wythout any fayle, for syr al oute hoost is sore troubled becaue of our empeour, for we woe not where he is, for syr we se wel yt the castel is not deliuered too hym syth we se al you hre redy to, batalle, and he is abiden behind and al his, we wote not where to seke hym. Ceraynly syr {quod} the kyng your emprour is within he ca¦stel in pryson, and the chine of hys backe nye broke asonder, and as for your king Ionas is dead and al tho that came with thē but syr as for the respite yt ye demaūd I shal take counsayle in y• behalfe, and than gyue you an answere, than the king sent for al his lordes and shewed them ye requestes of kyng Florypes, and desired them to giue him counsaile in ye behalfe, han the duke of Britaine desyred the ma¦ster to giue fyrst his aduise, than the ma¦ster sayd, lordes it is of troth yt this king Floripes is a cruell prince and greatlye redubted, for throughout al thēperors londe the pople wyll do more for hym, than for themperour him selfe, and syrs ye may wel se before you all the bylles & great vays be ful of men of warre, so that for one of our compani thee is an .C of theyrs, and also though themperoure were dead, yet these people are not wyth out a captayne as long as they haue wt hem thys kynge Floripes, therefore my counsayle is let vs gine them thys rule¦ty monday, syth it cometh of theyr own desyre, for our people are ryghte or tra∣uayled of the payne yt they haue had this morning, and theyr horses be also ryghte wery & sore chafed, and sir there be many of our knightes and people sore wounded so they may wel take their rest the pa of these foure dayes and so by monday euery mā and hors shal be wel refresshe how be it on the other syde I se wel that as now theyr hoost is in a maner wyth∣out any ordenaunce, and in great trouble for the myssynge of theyr emperoure, soo that if we shol go on them at this point I thynke that we sholde dyscomfyt them al, but we sholde haue no honour in that behalf, for we should do but dyscomit people that were but as halfe dead, there∣fore let vs accomplish theyr request, and on monday let vs assemble ayenst them and thā, yf god gyue vs the vycory than out prayse and honour shal be the more, grete and more laudable, And whan the mayster had thus deuysed they were all agreed to hys saying. So than the kyng Alexander graunted the trewse too th rle tyll the monday folowynge. Than the ele returned and sayd to kynge Flo∣rypes & to suche other as were with hym syrs it is so the frenche men hth graun¦ted to you trewse tyl monday nexte, and as for themperour is in pryson sore woū¦ded and the king Ionas slain and al thei companye, but of one thynge I ensur you all, sythe God fyrst made mankyn there was neuer so goodly a sort of men of warre assembled togyther as they bee, and as god helpe me yf we were halfe as many mo people as we be here already we could not endure ayenst them they or¦dre theyr batayles in so goodly a maner. Holde your peace syr erle sayd kyng Flo¦rypes, and if ye be aferd flye away, for as god helpe me as soon as mondy is come I shall neyther eate nor drynke tyll I haue agayne my broder themperour and put them al to deth by the sword, thā he sent for al the noble men of y• host & chefe captaines, and toke their faith and troth to helpe him in his quareil. Than kynge Alexander and al his company retuned again to the castel, and alighted at ye gate And there Florence mt thē and cōuaied them vp into the palais, & thā she demaū∣ded theym the cause why they retourned agayne so soone wtout batayle. Madam said the duke of britaine it is so ye kynge Florypes hath desyred of vs trewse tyl monday next comyng the which we ha∣ue graunted him. In the name of god said Florence so be it, so than euery mā vnar¦med thē throughout al the castell, & after they went and vnited themperour & kept him cōpany how be it he was sore enpai¦red because of the hurt yt he had. Now let vs leue to spke of thē and return to Go¦uernar yt was going on message into the realme of Soroloys to kyng Emendus ¶How Gouernar went into the relme of Soroloys to thentent to giue knowle∣ge to kyng Emendus howe ye themperor had besyeged his doughter Florence in her castell of clere toure, desyrynge hym too hast hys hoost to rescowe her at that tyme. Capi. C.v.
WHan that Gouernar was depar¦ted fro blaunche oue as ye haue herde hereafore he rode so longe yl at last he ariued at the fayre citie of pa¦lestyne, and there he herde tydyngs of the myghty kyng Emendus howe yt he had knowlege that themperour had besyeged his doughter in her castel of blaunche cou¦te wherfore he assembled his hostes togy¦der as fast as he might, to thentent to res¦cow Florence his doughter, and there it was shewed him how y• the chefe gouer∣nour of hys hoost was the king of orque¦ney, who was put to the way ard with xxx. M. hawberts, and ae him y• king of mormal with other .xxx. M. and than the kynge of valefound wyth other .xxx. M. and than the king of Ismaelyte with other .xxx. M. And hā the mighty kyng Emendus wyth .C. M. in his company and than there wee of duke Phyppes company .xv. M. and of the lady Marga¦retes of Argentons cōpany .xv. M. who wre brought by syr Emery. And whan Gouernar herde these tydynges he was right ioyful, & so moūted on his hors and rode so long tyl he came within a dayes iourney of the citye of Cornyte, than he encoūtred y• king of orqueneys baner wt a right noble company, & so rode forth & passed by al those great routes, at laste he spyed syr Ansell neuewe to syr Neuelon Florence marshal & ech of them enbraced other, & so to them there came syr Rowlā¦de of bigor, & syr Uiceer of damason  sir Artaude, & syr Morys of fenice & al hese wer Florence knights, and al these knew wel Gouernar & made to him gret chere and at last ye king of orqneny came to thē & he enbraced Gouernar and to hī made right gret fest and chere, than Gouernar dyd alyght, but the king made him to re∣mount agayne & demaunded of him how that Arthur did. Syr {quod} Gouernar he is at ye blaunche toure there I left him, & wt him duke Hector, Brisebar & master Ste¦uen syr it is so y• themperour hath besye∣ged Florence in the castel, & he hath with hym people without numbre, and he had enclosed the castel rounde aboute or we entred, howe be it we entred by the subtyl wytte of mayster Steuen, but syr I am sure there is by this tyme wyth Arthur the most noble company of al the worlde for he hath brought with him out of hys country the kynge of malogres and .iiii. erles and .iiii. barons, and also ye mihgty duke of Britayne his owne fader & they are wel to the numbre of .xv. houande knightes of fraūce of great price and va∣lure, wherore I think by thys time they haue made some maner of scarmysshe wt their enemies for they are hardy knygh¦tes and couragious for it is gret maruay¦le yf they lye thus longe styll. Ye sayd the kyng is Athur than of that vertue and strength yt he hath brought with him su∣che people, as helpe me god I am ryght Ioyful therof, now it hall be wel kno∣wen yf he be an orphelyn in his own coū¦try or not Syr sayd Gouernar he herte¦ly doth salute you & desyreth you to haste your people as fast as ye cā toward hym for the rescowynge of Florence. wyth a ryght good wyl sayd the kynge, with god¦des grace we shal be there by wednesday net comyng at night, let vs go & speke oyth my lorde the kyng of Soroloys, so they passed frby the gret hostes, and Go¦uernar sayde beholde I trowe here be all the world of people than muche people demaunded tidings of Arthur, and so did al the kynges in their owne propre per∣sons so at last they approhed the greate host of kyng Emendus and passed forby al the gret roues til they came to kynge Emenus an as sone as he saw Gouer¦nar his hert reioysed in his bady & enbra¦ced him & demaunded tidinges of Arthur Syr sayd Gouernar I lefte hym at the blaūche oue, & there he recounted to the kyng how yt they entred into the castell, & shewed him how yt Arthur had broughte with him out of his country the most no¦ble company of al the world, & also his fa¦der ye duke of britain and there he shewed the names of them al, both of the king er∣les and barons wherof he king had gret ioy, than the kynge of Orqueney sayde syr your doughter is not yll bestowed, I thynke he wyl defende her ryght well a¦yenst themperour. That is true {quod} the kin¦ge, but is ther any gret company wt these noble men. Ye syr truly {quod} Gouernar, for or I departed fro them they had discom∣fyted y• Son dā & also his broder and .xxx. M. sarasyns of his company. That is a grt thing {quod} the king. Syr {quod} Gouernar Arthur desyreth your grace too auaunce your host as hastely as ye cā, and now syr I wil returne againe to blaunche toure, for I thinke long to know thestate of my lord Arthur and so he toke his leu. Go your way frend {quod} the king and salute fo me my doughter Florence and Arthu al suche as be come wt him, and thank them on my behalfe for coming into this coū∣try to the ayding of my doughter. Than tharchbisshop enbraced Gouernar, and so Gouernar departed, and he and y• king of orqueney wente togider to his hoost. And whan syr Ansean of valefoūd knew ye Gouernar wold depart againe he said to the king of orqueny, syr my lady Flo∣rence is beseged wherfore I wyl by your lycence go wt Gournar and se my lorde mine vncle who is wt Arthur. Thā slept forth syr Myles and syr Rowland of By¦gor & syr Ulceer and syr Artaud & syr mo¦rante, & they al demaunded licence of the kyng to go with gouernar, and he gaue them al lycence, than they toke theyr har¦nes and mounted on theyr horses & went forth on theyr way and passed al y• hostes
¶How that Arthur accompanied with the frenche men dyscomfytd kynge Flo∣rypes brother to themperour, & slewe al hem yt were in his company. Ca. C.vi.
SO it was that the nexte day after that the rewse was ta¦ken Atur rose vp erly in the mornyng and enred nto the palays and there he found the dolphyn & the lorde de la lound, and so eche of them did salute other, than the dolphin said as helpe me god it anoyeth me greatly thus long to be closed in mewe, I wold gladly go and sporte me abrode in the feldes, but fyrste let vs go take oure harneys wyth vs because oure enemyes be so nere vs, and so they al .iii. did arme them and Bri¦sebar also, & mounted on theyr horses and issued out at the gates and rode downe by a fayre valey by the riuer side til they we wel the space of of a mile and halfe fro the castel, thā he dolphin beheld wel the ple∣sant iuer & the goodly medowes on both sides, and praised muche the countrey in his mind, than he dasht his sporres to his horse and galoped down along by the ry∣ur syde tyl he came to a thycke woode, & whan he had thought to haue returned a∣gaine, he perceiued a knight armed yssu∣yg out of the same wood mounted on a good horse, and came rennyng towar∣des him by great randon, and whan the dolphyn saw him he encountred hym wt suche force yt the knyght brake his spere but the dolphyn strake hym so rudely yt he put his spee through his body, and so the knight fel downe dead. Than Arthur sayde to his company, I se wll the dol∣phyn is a knight of gre value, and had scant fynysshed hys wordes but that he perceyued yssuyng out of the wood king Clamados with .ii. C. in harnes wt hym comyng aynst the dolphyn wyh great fiercenes, and whan the dolphin saw yt he dash to his hors and toke his sword and strake so the first that he caue him down to the tethe, than al the remenant ran on him at al sydes, but than Arthur rushe into the prese, and the first that he encoū∣tred he dash his spre lene throughe hys body so farre that he wounded an other knyght that was behynd him nye to the deth, than he drewe out his sworde and layd on among them that were in hand with the dolphin, and gaue among them so gret stroks y• he cut of armes, hedes, and legges, and bt down knightes and claue asonder sheldes and made gret pla∣ce afore him, for none aproched nere hym but that he receiued deth and also ye dol∣phyn dyd as nobly as any knight could do, and Arthur beheld him, and vnder his helme dyde laughe at hys noble valure, than Brisebar & syr de la lounde dasht in to the prese so rudely yt eche of them bete downe hys enemy, than they layde on wt theyr swordes like two wyld lions. And whan y• kynge Clamados saw his peo¦ple so slayne wyth .iiii. pesons he was right sorowful & replet wt yre and said if al the other frenche men be like these .iiii. al the world can not endure ayenst them but by the fayh tha I owe vnto thempe¦rour I shal ryd one of them out of thys mortal, and therwith he lift vp his sword and strake Brysebar so rudely yt the gen¦tyl knyghte was ny stryken downe, for his hors with the stroke fel down on hys knees, than there fel on him so many fol¦kes y• they drew him downe to the eah And whan the lord de la lound saw that he began for to crye as fast as he myght helpe Arthur for Brisebar is elles lost, than the dolphyn espyed that and rushte into the thikest of y• prese and he and syr
de la lounde dyd as muche as they could to esowe Brisebar, but it auayled thē not for there wer to many on him, and so he was taken prisoner & deliuered to .xx. men to kepe, and they led hym forth out of the host ryght rudely, and than vnar∣med him and did bete him right yll. And whan Arthur knewe that Brisebar was taken & led out of the felde, he was ighte sorowful and sore displesed, than he dasht into the prese so rudelye y• he confounded al that euer he attayned vnto, and claue asonder sheldes and vnbarred helmes, & vnayled hawbertes & cut of heades, hā¦ds and armes, and threw downe kngh∣tes, for none abode him wythout dth, so that al fledde before him, and he and the dolphyn and syr de la lounde helde theym selfe euer togider in a front. And all thys season Brysebar was ledde forth out of the felde tyl they came to ye fote of a gret mountayne, betynge and yll intreatyng of Brysebar theyr prysoner, but it was not longe after tyl they were dyspleased and sorowful, for wythn a lytel whyle after they dranke of the same cup, for Go¦uernar, syr Ansel, syr Myles, syr Row∣land, syr Uicier, syr Araude, and sir Mo¦ant the same time descended down thys same mountayne, for they were comyng out of the realme of Sorolois as ye haue herde here before. And whan that Gouer¦nar saw those people dele so foule wyth Brisbar, his bloud trembled in his body for fere of Arthur, for than he doubted y• the blaunche toure had ben taken and de¦stroyed and his lorde Arthur deade than he sayd to Rowlande, saynte Marye I doubt me greatly of my lord Arthur, for yonder is some of our compani that is ta¦ken prysoner therefore gentyll knightes helpe to rescowe hym who soo euer it be, than Gouernar rode forth with grete ran¦don, and whan he aproched nere to them he knewe ryght well how that it was Brisebar yt was taken prysoner, than he set his hand on his sword & laid on amon¦ge them lyke a wolfe among a meyny of shepe and dydde cut downe and slewe as befe him, so within a whyle al tho .xx. knghtes were al slayne, than Gouer∣nar came to Brysebar and sayd, a frende it semeth wel this people dyd neuer nou¦rysh you vp that thus foule & shameful∣ly haue delte wt you, wherof I am rygh sory, and so loused him out of his bandes And whan Brysebar sawe hym h had ryght great ioye and sayd, a frende euer at nede a man shal know his frend, but for goddes sake hast you to helpe my lord Arthur who is at greate myschyefe here by thys riuer syde, for as helpe me god I am more sory for hym than for my selfe. And whan Gouernar herde that he galo¦ped forth incontinent & al hys company after them, and as soone as they came to theyr enemies they founde the lorde de la lounde ourthrowen to the erth and tak prisoner, and was leding forth, and ther∣wyth Gouernar layde on rounde about hym, and his company with him, & they bet downe knightes on euery syde, than Gouernar toke a horse and deliuered it to syr de la lounde, and in the spite of al his enemies he made him to remoūt, and han Gouernar went al about sekynge of Arthur, and syr Rowland with him, & at the last they found him in the thyckest of the prese, where as he did maruailes in armes, and the dolphin did helpe hym to the best of hys power. And whan Go∣uernar saw hym he dasht in mong thē and frusshed downe al that euer he attay¦ned vnto, for he was a maruailous good knight and of gret vertue, and sir Rowlā¦de and his .vi. elowes did helpe them to
theyr powers, & Gouernar wente before doyng great meruayles. And whan Ar∣thur saw hym his harte quickend and toke gret pyte of the paine & labour that he sawe hym take & endure so longe, and therwith he layde on more rudelier than he had done before of al the day, for such was his maner the more he had to do the more grew euer his strength & hardines Than came in Brysebar well armed and horsed, for he had bene before at a good market where as he had choyse of the best, & he bare downe his enemyes be¦fore him by grete hepes. And whan king Clamados saw so his people dyscomfy∣red he tourned hym selfe to flye & sayd to a knyght that was by him, go and hast you to themperours hoost & bryng with you .iiii. C. howbertes to socour me, & so the knyghtes rode as faste as he myghte tyl he came to kynge Florypes & to king Brandolyn who wer sekyng all about the hoost for kyng Clamados, but they coude here nothynge of hym, wherwyth they were gretely dyspleased, and at last the knyght messenger came to them and sayde to kynge Florypes, gentyl kynge haste you to socour the noble kinge Cla∣mados who is yonder by the ryuer syde, and he & his company are fighting with x. frensshemen who I thynke are out of theyr myndes. I beleue thei be not erth∣ly people, but ather fendes of hell who are come for to destroy vs all, for I am sure they hau flayne by this time nye .ii. hondred of ye bst knyghtes of kyng Cla¦mados, and syr king Clamados his selfe is wounded in .v. places of his body, and without ye haste you the faster he is but eyther dead or takē. Saynt mary frende sayd king Florypes, and howe is it they haue not slayne al these frenshe men sith thei be but .x. persones. Slayne syr sayd the knyght, nay speke not therof, but sir pray to god to kepe you fro myschyefe, & that they approche not to nere you whan ye shal medle with them, for ther is none that approcheth to them without death syr hast you or els ye wyl lese your good kyng Clamados, than kynge Florpes commaunded a great grisley horne to be blowen, than all the hoost armed theym hastely & mounted on theyr horses & toke theyr speres & sheldes and made so great bruyte & noyse that duke Phylyp as he was in the castel herd thē, and loked out at a wyndow and sawe all the hoost at mynge them & moūtyng on their horss And than it was shewed hym how that Arthur & the dolphyn, syr de la lounde, & syr Brysebar were yssued out of the ca∣stel all armed and were riden downe by the ryuer syde, & whan he saw al the peo¦ple of the hoost drawynge thyderwarde he thought wel that ther was some fray towarde, wherfore he fered greatly of Ar¦thur & his companye, than be caused the gret watche horne of the castel to be blo¦wen .iii. times so yt it was hard through∣out the towne and castel, whereby euery mā knew wel that ther was some newe tydynges, wherfore thei armed them and moūted on theyr horses, & than al the er∣les lordes & knightes did ame them and mounted on their horses sauyng the du∣ke of Brytayne, king Alexander, and the mayster who as than were not risen out of theyr beddes, & al these lordes & knigh¦tes with baners dysplayd yssued oute of the castel, & thei wer well to the nomber of .xv. thousande in .iiii. batayles wel ren∣ged & in good ordre, & they rode downe a¦longe by the ryuer syde, & duke Phylyp rode formst tyl at laste he met wyth the fyrst company of the emperours hoost, & they encoūtred rudely togider, & so both
partyes euer encreased so that ther was bytwene them a great mortal bataile & a fyerse, themperiens were .xl thousande and the other parte were but .xv: thou∣sande, how be it thei slew many of their enemyes, & king Brandalyn was chiefe gouernour of themperours hooste, & in this meane season Arthur & hys .ix. fela∣wes did so moch that thei clene dyscom∣fyted al king Clamados company, than kynge Clamados was right sore displea¦sed & ran at Arthur & strake hym on the whyte shelde, for he thought yt he wolde set lytle by al his losse so yt he might ouer¦come him, but the stroke reboūded again wtout doyng of ony hurte, for the shelde was to harde for hym to enpayre it, and whan the kyng saw yt he was nye wode for angre▪ & therwith gaue Arthur an o∣ther grete stroke, but al auayled hym no thyng. than Arthur strake at the kynge who was aferd of the stroke & thought to step a lytle a syde but it was late for Arthur light so on him that he claue his shelde clene a sonder in the middes, & the stroke entred into his sholdre and strake clene of the arme from his body, & as the swerde dyd glent down  share also cle¦ne away the calfe of his legge, & whan the kynge saw that he was so sore woū¦ded he turned hym & flewe away as fast as he myght, and .x. other wyth hym, for ther were no mo lefte alyue of hys .ii C. men & yet they were all maymed & hurte than kyng Clamados fledde til he came to the remenaunt of themperours hoost wher as he founde kyng Florypes, and there he fell down before hym & sayde, a gentle kyng why do ye tary thus long yt ye take not vengeaunce on these frenshe glotons who haue thus araied me, wher¦fore kyng hast you & socour our people And whan kynge Florypes saw hym in that case he was right sorowful & sware a grete othe & sayd that he would neuer ete tyl he had the hedes of them that had thus yll arayed hym & brokē the crewse than he cōmaunded hornes & tompetes to be blowen, soo that euery man wythin the hoost dyde arme them & mounted on theyr horses & made grete noyse & bruit so that the duke of brytaine as he was in his chambre within the castel herde well the great noyse, and thā he demaūded of his seruaūtes what it might be. Sir as god helpe vs it is our company that are fyghtyng without in the felde wyth the emperours hoost, for syr all the lordes of this castel are issue out sauing you and kyng Alexander who I thynke be yet in his bedde. Saynt mary sayd the duke & is not my baner there among them. No syr tuely nor none of your men. And {quod} the duke I lese myne honour thys daye, gete me my harneys and so hastly he ar∣med him, and thā he entred into the chā∣bre where as kyng Alexander was & re∣counted to hym all this matter, than the kyng was right sory yt he was not gone forth with the hoost, so thā he armed him and al his and moūted on theyr horses, and soo in good ordinaunce they yssued out with baners dysplaied and rushte in to the batayle to helpe their company, & whan Arthur & his .ix. felawes had dys∣comfyted clene kyng Clamados and hys company he went ther had ben no more to do at that tyme, & so than he demaun∣ded yf ony of any his cōpany wer hurte or sore wounded. And they all sayd that blessed be god ther was none of thē that had ony great hurte and therwyth they harde great noyse and dasshyng togider with speres and swerdes and harde cry∣enge brytayne. wel sayd Arthur I beleue that our company of the castel be fygh∣tynge with the hoost without, wherfore let vs go helpe them & by that time thei had rydden a lytle waye forthe thei saw whereas the batayle was right fyerse & cruel. Than Brysebar espyed where as king Floripes came towarde them with an honored thousande men, and so she∣wed theym to Arthur and sayd, gentyll knyght and noble lorde and our chefe so¦uerayne lord nowe is it nedefull that ye shewe your noble valure in this iourney for syr beholde yonder cometh king Flo¦rypes with al the world of men after him A noble kynge Emendus how is it that ye come not to socoure this noble compa¦ny. Frende sayde Gouernar be ye in cer∣tayne that ye shall haue by hym shortely noble helpe & socoure, let vs leue our tal¦kynge & goo on our enemyes, for as god helpe me I shall ones go throughe them or elles I shal lye on the groūde in qua∣el, for I doubte no deth well syrs sayde Arthur doubte not for al the worlde as longe as I lyue, but syrs holde you euer close nere me, for I promyse you ye shall se me ouerthr  many knighes yt it shal be paine for you to nombre them, let be go on them o we tary t longe. Sir sayd the dolphyn doubte ye not of vs, for as longe as we lyue we shal neuer fayle you, therwith they dasht into the prese & ouerthrew knightes by grete hopes, but specyally Arthur dyde wonderly, for he was thā as freshe as though he had done nothynge of al the daye before, thus we wyl leue them fyghing and  to mayster Steuen in the castel who knew nothing of all this mater. ¶How mayste Steuen by his art & c∣ning caused thempereyens g a wrōge waye from Arthur and so encountred ye kynge Emēdus & al his hoost. Ca. C.vii.
SO it was ye whan mayster Steuen had ayē in his ed as longe as it pleased him, than he arose & wēt into the hal, and there he foūde Flo∣rence & the lady Margarete, and than he had grete maruayle that he saw no body elles and demaunded of them wher as al the noble cōpany were become. And Flo¦rence answered him and sayde, a gentyll mayster now is suche besynes com that we haue grete nede of your helpe, for Ar¦thur & al our company are without figh¦tinge with themperours hoost, who are an hondred thousande, & our cōpany are but .xviii. thousande, and also more ouer kyng Florypes is coming on them with an other .C. thousande, wherefore by all lykelyhode our people shall be destroyed wherfore gentil mayster as ye be sone to a kynge helpe nowe our noble chyualry by your clergye. And whan the mayster harde these tidinges he went to his chā∣bre & toke his bokes, & dyde so moche by his connyng that he raysed a grete myste in king Florypes hoost soo yt eche of  coude scāt s other: wherby thei lost their hye way to come on Arthur & his compa¦ny, & toke the streyght waye yt the king of orqueney & the gret hoost of ye mighty kyng Emendus was coming, & or they wyst their horses were nere togider, thā the king of orqueneys hooste spyed and knw wel by theyr baners & standardes yt they were of their enemyes than they r to theyr harneys & sadled theyr hor∣ses & mounted on them, & the good kyng of orqueney was clene armed & wel moū¦ted on a grete mighye horse & rode for∣mest of all his ompany the whiche was well to the nombre of .xxx.M. And next after him come the kyng of mormall wt other .xxx.M. And whan they were nre
to theyr enemies, than the king of orque¦ney ranne ayenst kyng Brandalin who brake his spere al to peces, but the noble kinge of orqueney strake him so rudely yt he fell ouer his horse crope his legges vp¦ward, so that he lay a gret space for dead on the erth, but at last he was rescwed by his people, thā begā the batayle right cruel & fyerse on both parties, & the kyng of orqueney & the kyng of mormall dyde ryght valiauntly. Now let vs retourne to maister Steuē who that after he wēt out of his chābre & had caused this great myst to be in thēperours hoost he armed him and went down ito the court of the palays and ther he foūde redy a great & a myghty blacke horse wt rede eyen sparke∣lyng as fyre, the whych horse had neuer eten prouendre & was bare on al .iiii. fet for he was neuer shode, & thā the maister incontinent moūted on hym, and as son as ye maister was on his backe he sodein¦ly vanysshed away so yt Florence nor no¦ne that wer wt her wyst wher he was t come, & so sodenly he was borne into the hoost where as Arthur was fighting wt his enemyis, & as soone as the mayster was there he blew such a blast that ther rose in suche a wynde & storme in thempe¦rours hoost yt thei lost thrby halfe thei strength & hardines, than the mayster wt his swerd in his hand dasht into ye prese & gaue many grete strokes, but his hors wt his fete both before and behinde gaue suche strokes that he ouerthrewe whso¦euer he touched, so yt the was none that approched nere him b yt the horse wold ren on him with open mouth & deuour hym so yt euery ma fled way before he mayster for fere of his horse, the horse wo¦de ioyne togyder his fete & lepe into the myddes of the prese, & there he wold laye on with his fte both before & binde  bye with his tethe so that he claue ason¦der sheldes & brast asōder helmes so that none durst abyde hym & Arthur & his cō¦pany whan they saw the mayster & hys horse they laughed at hym a grete pace, than the .iiii. erles & the britōs made pla∣ce before them, & specyally Arthur aboue all other dyd meruailes in armes, and at conclusyon they dyd so moche that theyr enemyes fledde before them, & thei folo∣wed after them and flewe so many of thē that thei were all clene dyscomyted, for they sawe well thei had no socour, & had great maruaile wher th king Florypes wt his hoost was become that he cam not to socour them, thā Arthur caused a gret horne to be blowē and railed togider his people about kyng Alexāder, and so than toke counsayle to retourne againe to the blaūche toure, than thei saw the maister coming to them fro the hye mountayne on his horse brayeng lyke the wynde,  whan he was come to them he sayd, syrs now quyte yourselfe wel & shew tha y be noble men come out of the gentil coun¦tre of fraūce, for it is o y• he noble kyng of Orqueny & the kyng of mormal are beyonde yonder moūtayne fyghtinge wt kyng Floripes, & they are but .xl. thousād ayenst an .C. thousāde. wherfore they are sore ouer marched, for goddes sake let vs go and socour them. And whan Arthur harde that he was as fyese of harte as a raged lyon and said to kynge Alexander gentyl kynge let vs go shortly and hlp these gracious kynges, certaynly I had rather dye thā thei shold suffre ony ht one of thē is cosyn Germaine to the faire Florēce. Certainli frende Arthur said the kyng I am content wth al my hart, thā they rayled theyr people togyther and wente forth wyth good ordynaūce and baners displayed, & suche as wer wou¦ded
& hurte retourned to the blaūche tou¦re, & so thei rode forth suche waye as the mayster edde them tyl at last they came to the bataile, than the maister dasht his spores to his horse & ruht into the host, than his horse began to fyght wyth hys fere, & to byte with his teth, than Arthur & his company dyd laughe at hym than Arthur, duke Philip, & Gouernar dashte into the prese, & the fyrst that Arthur en¦coūtred withall he strake hym so rudely that he claue hym to the sholdres. & fro an other he toke his head, & so elayd on rounde about him and confoūded al that euer he attayned vnto, thā ye good kyng Alexander and the noble duke of britaine and all other lordes rusht into the prese, than there began a fyerse batayle. And whan the dolphyn sawe the noblenes of Arthur & his company, he toke on hym therby great hardines, than he brothed his horse with the sporres & dasht into ye prese & hys enemyes assayled hym on all parres, but he defended hym lyke a good knyght, but there were soo many ayenst hym that thei slew his horse vnder him, than he lpte on his fete & slewe & draue downe many knyghtes with his swerde but at last for all that euer he coude do he was taken prysoner, and whan Gouer∣nar saw that he dasht into the prese and the fyrst hat he encountred he claue him to the teth, & fro another he strake of the arme harde by the sholdre, & soo layde on rounde aboute hym, & after hym wente syr Nuelon & syr Rowlande of brygor & dyd ryght valyauntly, but ther were on them mo than .x and they helde them so shorte yt thei coude not ayde the dolphin And whā syr Brisebar saw his company in that case than he went into the prese & closed hym selfe iuste to Gouernar, & by∣twene them thei slew many of their ene¦myes, for they kepte them so close togy¦der that no man coude part them, at last mayster Steuen sawe them in that case he rusht in wyth his horse and dyd suche wonder what wyth hys handes & wt his horse that his enemies fledde fro his stro¦kes & said, shame haue suche Iogeler yt hath taught his horse thus to daunce, let vs flye fro this feest, shame haue he that gyueth hym ony thyng, we are but dead and we abyde hym, therefore let vs leue hym, hāged may he be that brought him into this coūtre, therwith thei eparted and fledde away fro he dolphyn, than our knyghtes came again to the dolphin and caused him again to moūt on a good horse, and dyd put them selfe agayne into the batayle, than syr Ansell strake so ru∣dely a knight yt he fll down starke dead And whan kynge Brandalyn saw yt he was right sore displesed & strake sir An∣sell so rudely that he put his swerde clene throughout his body more thā a spā, ther¦with the gentyl knyght fell down to the eth ryght dolorously hurt and woūded And whā duke Hector saw that he was ryght sore displeased, for he wend he had ben dead, than he ran at king Brādalyn and strake him with his swerd so vertu¦ously that he made his head to flye to the erth and said, a vnhappy king thou haste taken fro vs a right noble knyghte, but now thou hast paied for the mēdes ther∣fore I clayme the as quyte, than the king of orqueney who had wel seen Hector do that deed he said, a gentle knyghe bles∣syd be that wombe that ba the, for veri¦ly ye can wel ruenge your frende, than ther began grete sorow in themperours hoost for kyng Brandalyn, than moche people of them drewe togider to bere the dead king out of the batayle, and Arthur caused syr Ansell to be borne to the blaū∣he toure to Florence, and ther his wo∣des to be serched. And whan kynge Flo∣rypes harde tidynges that kynge Bran∣dalin was slayne and sawe his people so slayne and wounded he was for sorowe and angreye out of his mynde, & there¦wyth he ranne at a knyght of the kynge of mormalles with a greate spre & per∣sd him therwith clene thrughout the bo¦dy and soo he fell downe dead, and wyth his swerde he strake of the head of an o∣ther, and the thyrde he rydde out of hys lyfe. And whan the gentyl kyng of mor∣mal sawe hys people so slayne he ranne at kyng Floripes and gaue hym a grete stroke on the helde, but the stroke dyde hym but lytle hurte, but than the kynge Florypes gaue hym suche a stroke that he claue his sholdre downe to the sadell, and therwith he fell downe dead, thā be∣gan there a great sorow among his com∣pany, for he was a ryght noble and gene¦tyll kyng. And whan Arthur sawe that he was neuer so sorowful before for any thynge that euer came vnto hym before, therwith in a great rage he began to flo¦rysshe with clarence his good swerd and gaue kynge Florypes suche a stroke n hye on the helme that he claue him clene asonder down to the sadel so that he fell asondre in two partes, and what his peo¦ple saw that thei were so abasshed that they had noo power lenger to defende them selfe but lytle, so than Arthur and Hector slewe of them euen as thei lyste, soo thus thei were clene dyscōfyted, and so they fledde away and saued them selfe as wel as they might. Than the gentil kyng of orqueney cam to the place wher as the dead bodye of the noble kynge of mormall laye and wept for sorowe and said, certainly my hart is heuy for youre death, a gentyl noble kyng of Mormall this warre was euyl begon for you, all touth, bounte, and beaute was in you, certaynly he had a harde hart that thus slewe you, therwith he alyghted fro hys horse, than kynge Alexandre can to him and al the other dukes, erles, barōs. and noble knyghtes, and thei all made ryght grete sorowe, than they dressed forth the dead body and did sende it to the blaūche toure. And whan Florence harde of them great sorowe that they made she was in great fere of Arthur, and the lady Mar∣garete had greate doubte of the mayster tyll at laste she was encertayned that it was for the death of kynge of Mormall wherof she was ryght sorowful and cau¦sed the dead body ryally to be layde on a ryche bere in the myddes of the quere of the chirche. Than the kyng of orqueney sent to the myghty kyng Emendus .iiii. knyghtes in message, certyfyenge hym how that they haue had a great bataile, wherin the good kynge of mormall was slayne, and of themperours parte howe that kynge Brandalyn king Clamados and kyng Floripes be al thre slayne, and the erle of the yle perdue taken prysoner & maymed for euer, so than these messen¦gers departed, & than the kyng of orque¦ney caused his tent to be pyght vp a lytle besyde where as the batayle was ther to abyde the coming of king Emēdus, and kept styll in his company the king Alex¦ander of malogre, & the duke of brytaine and the other erles & barons retourned to the blaūche toure to kepe it and to bre company with Florence. ☞How that themperour dyed in prison for sorow whan that he knewe that hys kynges and people were al slayne & dys∣comfyted. Capitulo .C.viii.
SO it was that whan the kyng of mormales body was brought in to the church within the castel, there was made right gret sorow in al the cytie and castel, in so muche that themperoure as he lay in hys bed sore sycke, for he enpay¦red euery day more and more, & as he lay he herd the gret sorow yt was made wtout in the castel, than he demaunded what it was and wherfore that gret bruyte wih out was made, & than it was shewed hī how that it was because of the deth of ye king of mormal who was slain by king Floripes. Ye sayd themperor & how doth king Florypes. I charge you tell me the trouth. Syr for goodes sake enquyre noo more of that matter tyl ye be perfite hole I wyl not sayd themperour I wyl know it, but than he said to a subiect of his own that was there with him, I charge the to tel me the plain troth, syr sith it plese you I shal tel you the playne troth, it is so i dede al your people are destroyed, & your broder kyng Floropes and al your other kynges are al slayne, and whan thempe∣rour herd that he had so gret sororw that he closed his tethe togyder and caste hys handes abrode, and therwith his hert did ryue asonder and so dyed for sorowe, and than suche as were about him did cast out a great crye, than Florence and the duke of britaine went into the same chaumbre and there they found themperour ded, thā the duke of britaine sent for king Alexan¦der and the king of orqueney and for all the other lordes and barons, and whan they were al togyder than they aparailed the emperours body, and conuayed it to churche, and laid him by the kyng of mor¦mal, & also thider was brought the body of kyng Florypes and laid by them, than incontynent there wente a messenger to kyng Emendus, & by that tyme the fyrst messengers were come to king Emēdus & said to him, syr themperor is in pryson and al his hostes discomited, & al hi kin¦ges dead and slaiu thā the king demaun¦ded whoo had done those noble dedes, syr said he as god helpe vs yt hath done such knightes as Arthur hath brought wt him for syr in al your lyfe you neuer saw such knightes nor more to be doubted, there is nothing that can endure ayenst them, but syr al the world speketh of Arthur & hys cosyn Hector, for Arthur a lonely by hys noble prowes hath made an ende of all his enemies, how be it syr ther is one gre¦te mischefe fallen vnto your grace. for the good kyng of mormal is slayne by kyng Florypes, but incontynent arthur slew hī and claue him asonder in .ii. yeres, & whā king Emendus herd of the deth of his good kyng he could speke no worde of a gret space, and whan he might speke he sayd, a gentyl knightes hert true and honorable to al people, alas that I haue thus lost you, certenly it for thinketh me, a emperour shame haue you sih ye haue taken fro me my noble & true companiō certnly I shal take vengeaunce on you as sone as I shal se you and as he was thus talkyng there came to hym the last messenger and said, syr ye king of orqueni doth acertayne you that themperour is dead. And how is he dead {quod} the kyng, cer¦taynly syr {quod} the knight whan he herd of the deth of his broder kyng Floripes and of his other kings and that his host was clene discomfyted, he dyed for sorowe as he that was sore sick before becaus of his hurt that he had in hys backe. wl {quod} the kyng than I am reuenged on him for me kyng how be it I would he were alyue again and al his so that I had again my good kyng of mormal, go your waye a∣gain {quod} the king go to the king of orqueni and say that I desyre him to ordeyne re¦dy to buryed the bodyes of themperour & of my kinge of mormall, of kyng Flory∣pes of king Brandalin, and of king Cla¦mados and shew him how that I wyl be to morowe next commyng wt him there to do the obseruaunce of theyr buryinge than the kyng sayd to his broder the arch¦bishop fayre broder go to the blaunche toure and aparaile right hyely for the bu¦rying of these kynges accordyng to theyr estates and your self this night say yt ob¦seruaunce yt belongeth to theyr obsequi∣es, and by goddes licence I shall be there to morow by masse time. Syr said yt bys∣shop I shal fulfyl your commaundement with a right good wyl, and so be departed & went to the blaunche toure, & than Flo∣rence came to hī and said, mine own good vncle and frend ye be right hertely welcō than the king of orqueney and king Alex¦ander and al other erles and barons wel¦comed hym, and whan he was chaunged he and al his gadered togither and went to churche & there the bysshop did all the obseruaūce & al the ceremonies, and there was ordeined .v. rich beeres, and .v. rych crownes of golde hanging ouer them wt baners and cote armures beten wyth the colours of theyr armes, and whan the by¦shop had done al the seruice ouer the body¦es, than they al returned againe to the pa¦lays and so rested them tyl the next daye. ¶How that king Emendus came to the blaunche toure with al his noble compa¦ny to the burying of themperour and of the other .iiii. kynges. Capi. C.ix.
THe next day betimes king Emē∣dus and al his hoost mounted on their horses & toke the way to the blaunche toure, and comaunded that all his host shold go in good ordynaunce as they were wont to do wt baners ad stā∣dardes displaied as though they shold en¦tre into bataile if nede were, and than he sent for the king of orqueny to ye blaūche toure and for al his host, and as soone as the king of orqueney knew of the king E∣mendus pleure he departed fro ye blaūh toure and went to the king, than inconti¦nent the king cōmaunded him yt he shold arme him and al his, for he said he wold yt the frenche men shold se the fiercenes of his power, so than the king of orqueny and his company went into the ft frōt and in this maner the kinge Emendus came towarde the blaunche toure lyke a mighty puissant king to thentent that he shold be the more praised of the french lor¦des, and thre was lening at a window of the castel, Florēce, king Alexander, the achbyshop and the duke of britain togy¦ther euer oking for the comyng of king Emendus, and at heyr windowes there oode Arthur, Hector, duke Phylip and he .iiii. earles aud .iiii. baons, & the ol∣phin and the marshal of myrpoys and al the other knightes of fraunce, and at last they saw comyng downe a great hyl the baner of orqueney waueryng wyth the wynd, veryng therein a felde of gouldes enrayled wyth azue, a barre o goulde with a lion rampaūt golde, and thā they hearde trompettes hornes and taboures blowing merely, thā they saw crosbowes and moryspykes on fote to a great num¦bre, and knightes on horsbacke wel en∣ged and in good ordinaunce wt many stā¦dardes and gysernes wauerynge wyth the wynd, gret horses braying and beting with theyr fete, sheldes and helmes shy∣nynge ayenst the sonne, and than nexte after came the host of the good kynge of mormal weping and making gret sorow
wtout any baner sauing a lytel giene of sendal of black colour and euery knight of ye company bare theyr speres and the he¦des downward and the smal end of their sheldes vpward. And whan the archbys¦shop saw them coming in ye maner he had so gret pitie yt he wept for sorow, and Flo¦rence also could not kepe her selfe fro we¦pyng, and al other had gret pitie of ye com¦pany, for it semed wel to them yt they wer right sorowful and wtout a lord. And af¦ter these people came the king of Ismae∣lites host wt his baner displayed, wherin was beten a libard passant azure crow∣ned wt gold barred wt floure de lyces syl∣uer their people were of a fierce counte∣naunce and made great bruite wt hornes and tabours and they rode in good ordi∣naunce wel renged in batayl. After them came the baner of Argentō being a felde of azure, a knight armed gold on a hors siluer, and syr Emery was chefe leder of ye cōpany, and as sone as the lady Mar∣garet saw her baner she said to Florence madam my people haue not yet forgoten you. As god helpe me fayre lady {quod} Flo∣rence they be ryght goodly to behold and semeth wel to be people to gyue ryghte good aide, and as they loked ferder they saw where syr Clemenson came ryding wt duke Philippes baner bering golde, & grene medled togider, poudrd wt roses a∣zure, than duke Philyp saide yonder. I se my baner. Uerely {quod} king Alexander right gret and mighty is that king yt may haue suche people at his comaundement, than they saw where came the baner of ye king of valefound fader to mayster Steuen & he ate a felde ver with crownes golde and chaplettes siluer. And last of al there came the ryche baner of kyng Emendus wherein was a great flambyng dragon, and than there came so muche people yt al the erth was couered wt them and ther were so many standardes and tokens yt a man might say that al the word was co∣ming, than king Alexander & his compa¦ny said, where was al this people found that belongeth to this kinge, it semeth h hath brought al the worlde wt him. Than Florence said to kinge Alexander syr me thinketh it wer well done yt ye and youre company did mount on your horses & go and mete my lord & fader, syr he wil take it for a gret honor and loue. As god help me madam {quod} the king ye haue said lyke a noble lady ought to say, & so shal we do than mounted the king and al other erles barons and knightes without any har¦nes, than king Alexander and the duke of britain rode togither & tharchbishop and Arthur, & so al othe lordes .ii. and .ii. togi¦ther, and they were so goodly to behold yt euery man had maruayle of them, and so they passed by al the companyes tyl they came to king Emēdus, who receiued thē al right swetely, and thanked them gret of the get ayde yt they had done to Flo∣rence his doughter, than king Alexander rode on the ouer side of king Emendus, & the duke of britaine on the other side, and soo they rode forthe tyll they came to th blaunche toure, & there they alighted, than Florence came to ye king her fader, & eche of thē enbraced other and the kyng sayd▪ fair doughter ye haue a good lord that so gentil a cōpany hath brought wt him out of his country, & I fewelye be ful wel be¦stowed, han king Emēdus toke ye duke of britain by the hand, & so they .ii. wente togider to churche, & there was done the seruice for themperour & for the other kin¦ges ful solempnly & there they were ente¦rd wt gret honor, & after that Arthur cau¦sed a fayre church to be edified in the same place where as the good king of mormall was slayne▪ & there he founded a lodge of xl. chanous and eche of thē to haue .iii. L marke of yerely rent, & whan al these fore¦sayd obseruaunce was done yt king Emē¦dus cōmaunded yt al his entes and pauy¦lions shold be pight vp wtout the castell, the which was done incontynent, & theyr diner was puruaied for in the same place. and the king Emendus and king Alexan¦der aud ye duke of britaine sat them doe togider at one table, and al other kings and princes sat downe at an other table euery mā after his estate and so there they were serued right richly, and Florence re¦mained stil in the castel and her vncle the archebishop, duke Philip and the master wer with her, and whan king Emendus had dyned he called to him Arthur & sayde Arthur ye haue won on these emperiens great tresure & riches, wherfore cause thē to be gadered togider and depart them a∣monge your knyghtes where as it shall plese you best, and there as ye shal thynk thm wel enployed. My lord said Arthur wt a right good wyll, and so than Arthur departed suche riches as was mn in the felde, in such wife yt euery man helde him selfe wel conent, & euery man saide noble knight Arthur god encrese your bounte a honor and god giue you good life, for we haue a rich & a noble lord of you, than Flo¦rence & the bishop came out of the castel to the kinges tent, and as sone as king Alex¦ander saw her he rose vp on his fete and put of his cap and brought her to her fa∣der, than the king her fader toke her by ye hand and set her downe by him and sayd, fayre doughter we haue bene righte sore displesed for the deth of your people, ther¦fore it is now time yt ye reioyce vs as in taking of Arthur to your lord  husond for we be accorded therto and I wyl yt ye shal go to sary, & there ye shal be wed∣ded. Syr said Florence al shall be at youre plesure, how be it syr if it plese your grace I wil fyrst go to the porte noyre, for there is the duches of britain moder to Arthur and al these other ladies wyues to these noble lordes yt be here come wt Arthur, & sit I shal bringe them into this countrey and do them suche honor as I can, as I thinke they wil do to me if I wer in their country. And whan the kinge her father herd that he smiled and said, aire dough∣ter Florence it pleseth me ryght well go your way to morow, and the kyng of or∣queney, duke Philip and Arthur al go with you, and for the loue of them I shal mete with you and them at Argence. And whan the lady Margarete herd that the kyng wol go to argence, she sent haste∣ly syr Emerye to apparayle her palays, to receyue the kynge and hys company ryght honourably, and gaue lycence too her hoost o returne home, so they were all that day in great ioy and sport, & bare great honour to king Emendus and to al his thus they passed forth this nyght. ¶How after the dyscomfiture of thēp¦rour and al his people ye king gaue lycēce to al his hoost o depart uerye man ho∣me, & went him selfe to Argence there to make the weddyng betwene Arthur and Florence▪ and how that Florence went to the porte noyre to make these to the du∣ches of britaine and to the other ladyes & to bringe them to Argence to her fader kyng Emendus. Capi. C.x.
IN the next morning ye kyng Emendus rose & gaue licēce to al his host to dept & he pu him self forward on his iour¦ney toward Argence, & toke wt him king Alexander & the duke of bri∣tayne
& al the other earles and barons, & brougt them throughout dyuers of his cities and castels and made them righte gret chere and fest, & also Florence rose ye same daye betymes and ented into her chariot and toke with her the quene of or∣queny and the fayre lady Margaret▪ and after her there were other .iii. charyots ful of fayre ladies and damosels, & Go∣uernar and syr Neuel were chfe rulers of her houshold, and the kyng of Orque∣ney, duke Philip, Arthur and the master kepte her company, and soo rode forthe togyder tyl they came to the porte noyre Than Arthur, Brisebar and Clemenson were sente some what before to shew the duches of the comyng of the fayre ladye Florence, doughter to the mighty Emen¦dus king of Soroloys, and to make pur¦ueyaunce for her comyng, soo they rode forth so farre tyl at the lat on a saterday at nyght they aryued at the porte noyre, than they alyghted and mounted vp to the palays, and than they found the du∣ches and all the other ladyes in the cha∣pell hearynge of euensonge, eche of them praying for theyr lorde, for they were in greate feare of them, for they herde no ma¦ner of tydynges of them. And as sone as the duches sawe syr Brysebar, than her hre came to her. And than syr Brisebar kneled down on his kne, but the duches would not suffre hym to knele no seasō but reysed him vp, and than she demaun¦ded tydynges of the duke her husbonde. Than Iehannet stept forth to here some tydinges of Arthur, than Brysebar said madame my lorde the duke dothe ryght well, and he doth salute you by me, he is with my lorde the kyng Emendus who dooth to him righte great honour and to al youre other lordes and knightes, and also madame my lorde Arthur your son doth humbly recommaund him to you, as he that is the best knyght and most ho¦noured of al the world, and to you fayre damoysel Iehannet he recommaundeth hym, and knowe you for cetayne that wythin these yght dayes as he shewed me, he wyl put you vnto great honou therwyth Iehannet cast downe her loke to the erth and gaue a great sigh. Mada∣me sayd Brysebar to the duches, behold yonder the gentyll, Florence, doughter to the noble kyng Emendus who is co∣myng hyder to you, and bryngeth wyth her the kyng of orqueney her cosyn, and specyal frende to my lorde Arthur youre sonne, and also duke Philyp of Sabary Arthur, Hector, and mayster Steuen is with her, and al the people are comyng to se you, and to bryng you to the mygh¦ty kyng Emendus vnto the citye of Ar∣gence, and there I thinke shal be the ma¦riage betwene Arthur youre son and the noble Florence, a good lorde sayd the du¦ches I thanke the syth thou hast gyuen me suche a chylde that dooth me soo mo∣che honour. Syr Brysebar sayd Iehan¦net is this my lord Arthurs loue hat is comyng hyder. Ye tuely fayre loue ayd Brysebar. Certaynly sayde Iehannet I woulde gladly se her, and shal serue and loue her wyth a good herte, yt notwyth∣standyng I had rather haue had Arthur to haue bene my louer than hers, so they past forth yt day & nighte, and in the mor∣nyng there came messengers before that shewed how that Florence wold be there at dyner, than the duches and al the other countesses ladies and damoiselles dy a∣ray them right freshly, and mounted on theyr palfraies and rde to encoūtre Flo¦rence. And at the last Brysebar sayd, ma¦dame yonder cometh Florence out of the forestes syde, and at the same tyme the kynge
and I giue vnto you my freende & louer Than the mayster kneled downe & than¦ked Florēce, thā the noble markes stept forth who was vncle & gouernour of ye lady Magaret & thanked Florence wt al his hert, thā Florence called to her duke Philip and sayd, freende I praye you re∣oune agayne hastely to the king my fa¦der & shewe him how yt I haue dysposed the realme or mormal, & the lande of ar¦genton & desyre hym that he wyll sende me his confirmacion in yt behalfe vnder his great seale. Than duke Philip toke his leue and departed & rode to king E∣mendus & recoūted to him al yt Florence had cōmaunded him. And whan the kīg herde all that he was right ioyous for ye loue of arthur, and so was al the courte so than the king did confirme al Florēce desyre, & did send vnto her his letters pa¦tentes sealed vnder his great seale, and than Florēce was moūted into her cha∣riot, & the quene of orqueney and the du¦chesse & Iehannet wt her, & the coūtesses rode eche by other next to the chariottes Than the coūtesse of Neuers sayd to the countesse of Foreste, madam this noble lady Florence hath done right wysely & nobly to make these mariages. That is true {quod} the lady Forest, she hath done it to thentent that arthur shoulde not resorte to Iehannet other wise than reason & ho¦nour wolde. Thā the lady Rossillō sayd ye now Flornce wil suffre theyr com∣pany in al honour & right, thus these la¦dies rode forth talkyng til they came to the porte noyre, where as they were .iiii dayes in great feast & ioye, & there eueri day Gouernar talked of his mariage & passed the tyme in al honour wt his lady Iehannet, & the mayster in lyke wise wt his lady Margaret & sayde how that it was good to serue such a lorde & such  lady yt so hyely rewarded theyr seruaun∣tes & frendes, & by that tyme duke Phy∣lyp was retourned fro the kynges court and brought wt hym the letters patētes of the kynges & there she deliuered to go¦uernar & to the mayster the sayd letters, than duke Phylyp sayd to Florence▪ ma∣dame the kynge your fader desyreth you to make as grete haste as ye can to ye cite of Argence so yt ye may be there on mon∣daye nexte comynge, for there the kynge wyll be redy agaynst your comyng, than Florence made her redy, & on ye next mor¦nynge betymes departed, & all her noble company wt her, & dydde so moche by her iourneys yt at last she was wtin the sight of the hye walles & toures of ye cite of Ar∣gence, thā the kynge Emendus whan he knewe of theyr comynge he called all his barons to moūt on theyr horses, and the king Alexander & the king of valefoūde & the kinge of Ismaelyte & suche knygh∣tes of the kynge of mormalles as was a byden wtin the courte tyll suche seasō as the kyng had purueyed for them a newe king, & all the people of the cite of Argen¦ton went out to mete Florence Arthur  theyr lady Margaret, & the people of the londe of mormall cam to Gouernar & re∣ceyued him as theyr lorde & kynge & dyd to hym homage, than they desyred to see theyr newe lady and quene. Who as than was in the charyot wt Florence apparay¦led in vestures ryall, and whan Florence knew theyr desyre she caused her to be ta∣kē out of the chariot & set on a goodli pa¦fray to thentent that euery mā might se her, & so than they were gladde to se her, for she was a ryght fayre & a goodly lady & so they made to her reuerence & honour as to theyr ladi & quene, and the people of the londe of Argenton receyued mayster Steuen for theyr souerayne lorde. & spe∣cyally syr Emery, and in this wyse they came to the cite of Argēce, than ther mt with them the archebishop and al ye hole clergy of the cye, & euery man to his po∣wer made great feest and ioye, than ther alyght to Florence & al her kinges & que¦nes, dukes & dutchesses, erles & coūtesses lords & ladies, knightes and damoiselles than the noble king Emēdus came oute of his palais, and receiued them right ho¦nourably euery person after theyr estate than ther began great feest and ioye, & so went vp to the palays and there this no¦ble company were togyder in grete ioye and tryumpe. ☞How Arthur wedded ye fayre Florēce doughter to the mighty kyng Emendus with great honour & triumphe, & kynge Gouernar wedded the fayre Iehannet, and mayster Steuen wedded the fayre lady Margarete of Agenton all in one daye and one houre. Capitulo .C.xii.
WHan that Arthur saw so noble a seygnory & company wer assem∣bled togyder he went to king E¦mendus & said, syr and it like your grace ther is now in this cite assembled yght hie and noble people, for here is now .vi. kinges .vi. dukes & .x. erles besyde other lordes & knyghtes, wherfore syr may it please your grace to kepe open court for a certayne space, for I beleue verily the was neuer seen in one daye so many n¦ble men assembled togider. As god helpe me sone {quod} the king I am cōtente and so shal it be, therfore make ye puruayaūce therfore as ye shal thinke it bst for you honour a myn, & I wyll yt ye wedde Flo∣rence my doughter here in this cite, and Gouernar Iehannet, & the master the la¦dy Margaret. Syr {quod} Arthur in ye name of god al this shalbe done accordynge to your cōmaundement, syr kynge Alxan¦der shal abyde & be lodged here wt ou in the palays, & my lord & fader the duke of brytayne & all ye other kynges & prynces shalbe wel ldgd in the cite in noble & fayr houses, and than Arthur made the tmpl to be apparayled for himselfe to be maryd in, & the bby of saynct Gemayne for Gouenar, than there were Igleis, gestrs, & mynstelles gadered togyder to a greate nombre soo yt they made great myrthe & ioye in euery par¦te of the cite, so that ther was ne¦uer seen none suche before in no place, than Hector caused a faire quintayne to be pyght vp in the myddes of the cyte, & therat ran these yonge knyghtes brekynge and sheueringe of theyr speres, and some spake of makinge of a tounay, than was the dolphyn
mounted clene armd holdynge a greate & a mighty spere in his hande, & the same tyme the kng Eendus, the kynge A∣lexander & Florēce, the duke of brytaine and Arthur wer lokyng out at the win¦dowes of the palais, & al other kinges & princes were in lykewyse beholding the lusty knyghtes breking of speres in eue∣ry strete of the cite ayenst ye quyntaynes that there were made & ordeyned, & ther∣wyth the dolphyn ran at the chefe quin∣tayne, & gaue theron suche a stroke yt he claue the shelde yt hanged theron clene a sonder▪ & brake his spere all to sheuers & so passed forth and kept his course, and he was greatly praised of al the prynces and barōs, ladies and damoyselles, and thei demaūded who it was, and it was shewed thē how it was one of the freshe lordes, wherof many of that coūtre had great despyte, and spak therof in great displeasure, and at last a knight of ye coū¦tre of Sorolois who was called sir Ber¦trand of the toure sid to his felowes, lor¦des and felawes I sewe. yt these frenshe men that be nowe here in this coūtre be of great pryde and of fyerse coūtenaūce, and by the ocasiō of theim we are repu¦ted of the lesse valure, for we maye here wel how generally thei be praised, there¦fore shame haue thei yt wil suffre it ony lēger, wherefor let vs take a tornay a∣gainst thē, and thā we shal know what thei cā do. In the nae of god so let it be said diuerse other. So therwt water was brought into the hal and the tables laid, than to the court ther came kinges du∣kes, erles, barōs, and knightes fro al par¦tes, so thankyng Emendus, king Alex∣ander, and the duke of Britaine sate togi¦der at one table, and al the other kinges sate one ayenst anoher, and euery man after his estate, and ther thei were right rychey serued, & whan dyner was don & the tables taken away, some went in∣to the chambres and behelde the ladyes daūce and some wente & loked oute at the fayre windowes. And thā syr Bertrāde, syr Angele an other knyght the .ii. went sporting togider & spake of the takynge of this ournay ayenst the frenshe men, and they founde syr Clemēsō & syr Per∣dicas lenyng in a window, and thā they demaūded of syr Bertrande wherof he & his felaw dyde talke. And he answered & sayd how yt it was of the turnay. And whan syr Clemenson hard their mindes he was wel of the same accorde & sayde▪ let vs go to duke Gouber of ylaumes & know of him wheder he wil be of ye same mynde, so thā thei wēt to the duke. And whan he saw them he smyled and sayd, welcome be ye syr knightes, what tidin¦ges is th with you. Veryly syr {quod} Ber∣trande we say yt we would fayne know what people these fresshemen be wyth their swerdes, it is said how that thei did bere them self valiauntly at the blaūche toure ayenst the emperour, how be it we know it not, for we were not there pre∣sent, therfore syr we are in mynde to ma¦ke a tournay ayenst them, and we wold know your mynde wheder ye wyll be on our syde or not. And whā the duke Gou¦erte harde their myndes it pleased him right wel & sayd, let vs go to king Emē¦dus & desyre graūt of him for this tour∣nay, & so thei al went togider and entred into the chambre where as king Emen¦dus & king Alexander of malogre and  the other erles of fraūce wer, there was also Hector duke of orgoule & the dolphin of ven, & the lord Beauieu, the marshal of myrpois, & the lord d la loūde. Than the duke Goubrt id to kinge Emen∣dus, syr beholde here this dolhyn who
truly is a gentyl knyght, & verily he ma¦de yesterday afayre course at a quintaine wherof he was gretely praised, and not without a good cause, and he hath therby syr quyckened so the hartes of the knigh¦tes of this your countre so yt thei haue a gret desire to make a turnay here in this cyte yf it please you to gyue vs leue, & si we would be right gladde and ioyous f it wold please some of these frēshe lordes & knightes to come forth & play them wt vs in this tournay, syr we would take it for great loue, and pray thē therof ryght hertely. Veryly syr {quod} the kynge of malo∣gre we shal not fayle them for so lytel a thing, yf it please them let it be done to morow next. And so be it {quod} syr Bertra¦de. In the name of god {quod} kynge Emen∣dus we wil yt it shal be to morow, for to morow we wyll make the solempnysa∣cyon of the weddyng of Arthur & of my doughter Florence & of Gouernar & Ie¦hannet, & of the mayster & the lady Mar¦garete, but the fourth day after I am cō∣tent yt this tournay be done. wel {quod} kyng Alexander it shall be as it pleaseth you Than the duke Goubert, syr Bertrāde and their cōpany departed fro the kyng and wēt down into the palays, and ther thei shewed to all the other knyghtes of their coūtre how yt thei had taken a tour¦nay against the frene men to beholdē the fourth day after ye mriage, & so there wer to the nombre of .v.M. that promi∣sed to turnay togider of one part ayenst the frenshe men, & made their auauntes how yt thei wold bere down to the erth al the frenshe men & wynne al their hor∣ses. So this daye ther was greate feest & ioye throughout al ye palays tyl it was nyght, so euery man that went to theyr restes tyl the next mornynge. The nexte morning betimes king Emēdus and all other kinges & noble lordes did ryse, thā the king caused Arthur to be apparailed in vestues ryal lyke a kyng he had on a kyrtel of flamīg grene like an emeraude & a mantel of scarlet furred wt ermynes & so he stode before al ye kīges wt a freshe lyuely colour, & he was byg and hyer by the head thā ony other, & ther was hold before him by .iii. grete lordes a rich crow¦ne of golde a septer royal & a naked swer¦de, in sygnifyeng that he was chefe chā∣pyō of al the realme, & al ye appertaineth to the crowne of Soroloys, thā ye duke his fader beheld hi wel & ye water dasht into his eyē for ioye that he had to se his sone in the great honour, thā tharchebis¦shop was redy in his pōtificalibus to do thobseruaūce, & so wt great noyse of min¦stralsy Arthur was rially brought to chir¦che, & than Florēce was apparailed like a great quene as she was, crowned wt golde, & the quene of orqueny wēt on her one syde, & the quene of Asmaelite on her other side somwhat behind her, & al other quenes dutchesses coūtesses & ladies cam after her, & the king Alexander & the kīg of orqueney her cosyn led her to chirche, and there arthur maryed her with great ioye, and ther was so great fest ioy nd bruite made ye none coude scāt here other bicause of the noyse of the instrumētes. Also Gouernar was in the abbay of S. Germaines apparailed lyke a king, and with him was duke Philip▪ the dolphin and Hector, and al the barōs of mormall and ther he wedded Iehannet wt moche great ioye & pleasure. And also the gētyl mayster was fresshely apparailed lyke ye sone of a king, he was alwayes free and swete of hert wt a smylyng countenaūce & a gracious clerke aboue al other, & al∣so ryght good & a valiaūt hardy knyght and with him ther was the king of vale∣founde his fader who hadde ryght greate ioye whan he sawe his sonne gentyll and so gracious, there was also with hym syr Neuelon, syr Brysebar, syr Morant, & syr Rowlande of bigor, thā the maister wedded the faire la∣dy Margarete wt great ioye & triumphe, & whā his wed¦dynge was done he moūted on a great courser, & a man∣tel of grene about him, & the kyng his fader by hym, & o∣ther knightes to the nōbre of .v.C. & suche noyse of min¦stral befor him as though all the world should haue ri¦uen asonder, & in that wyse he came to the court of king Emēdus, & also there came king Gouer¦nar to the courte after y• he was wedded wt great ioye & myrth, than ther was ma¦de the gretest ioye & feest yt coude be deui¦sed, & ye mayster kept his feest at syr Eme¦ries, & Gouernar at thabbey of S. Ger∣maine and Arthur kept the court in ye pa¦lays, & this feest endured a hole moneth, thus Arthur laye ye nyght wt the gentyll Florence, & the same night engendred on her a fayre sone whom the kyng Alexan¦der dyde holde ouer the fonte, & was na∣med Alexander after his name, the whi¦che chylde was afterwarde emperour of ynde the more and of Constantinoble as ye shal here more playnly here after. How the frensshe knightes, & those of Soroloys, of Argence, of Orqueney, of Mormal, of Ismaelyte, of Valefoūde, and of Sabary dyde tournay togyder wherof Arthur and Gouernar had the honour. Capitulo .C.xiii.
THe fourth daye after the ma∣ryage durynge the feest, duke Goubert, syr Brtrande, syr Clemenson, & syr Perdycas went to king Alexander and desyred him to remembre the tournay yt thei had enterprysed, & with th wordes Arthur came to them, than kynge Alex∣ander answered & sayde. Fayre lordes in goddes name let it be done to morowe, than he dyd sende for all y• erles barons and knyghtes of Fraūce & shewed them of the tournay to be holden the next day wherof they had great ioye, & euery man cōmaūded that theyr harneys should be made redy ayenst the next morning, and than the tidinges sprad ouer al the citie how that ye frensshe men should tournay ayenst the knyghtes of that coūtre who were in ōbre .x. ayenst one frensshe mā And whan Arthur vnderstode yt he sente for Gouernar, & whan he was come to hym he drew him apart and sayd, frende
to morowe shal be the tourney agaynst our men, wherfore we ought to kepe & de¦fend them, wherfore we must aduyse vs how we shal do, for I se the knightes of this coūtry haue gret enuy at thse fren∣che knightes, & they are .x. tymes as ma∣ny as our people be, wherfore I doubt me that our knightes should haue some vylany, & I had rather dye than sure yt therfore I shal shew you what we shall do, whan the tourney shal be to morow begon▪ I shal come to your lodgynge as pryuely as I can, and there ye shal abide me, and thā we wil arme vs both in straū¦ge harnes, to thentent that we sholde not be knowen and thā we wil go to the tur¦ney and helpe our knightes, for I think they shal haue grete nede of vs, & Hector and the dolphin shal be in the fyrst front and yf I can, duke Phylyp, the mayster and Brysebar shal not turney agaynste our knightes, because they haue bene in fraunce, and haue had there righte good chere and as for al the remenant I care not for. as for them they be oue frendes and lothe I were to displese theim, kepe secrete this matter yt no man know ther¦of, for I wyl that we do this as couerly as we can. In the name of god so be it {quod} Gouernar, and so euery man drew to his rest for that day, and the next mornynge betimes, euery man rose and so went and herd masse, and after toke a so in wine Than the knightes ran to theyr harnes on euery side, than hornes and trompes began to sowne in euery strete of ye city & than duke Goubert and al his company wer redy aparailed and so yssued into the felde. Than kynge Alexander dyd arme hym and al his company. Than Arthur came to king Emendus and wyth hym was the kyng of orqueney, than Arthur said, syr the knightes of this your coūtry are .x. tymes as many as are these french knightes, and syr they are of suche condi¦cyons that they wyl neuer recue back to die therfoe, syr I know not the myndes of thse your knightes, for yf they thin to ouercome them and seke therfore it ca be none other wise but y• many shall dye in the quarell, syr me thinketh therore y• it were well done yt I sholde cause be ar¦med .v. hondred knightes and take them with me to kepe ye none yl sholde be done In the name of god {quod} kynge Emendus so be it than departed Arthur for he had that he desyred, than he toke wt hym syr Brysebar and syr Tercelin his nuew & did shi the chambre dore after them, than he said too syr Brisebar, syr I loue you & take you of my prey counsayle, it is so there be many knightes ayenst oure fren∣che men, for I se well they are fare ouer matched, wherfore I wyl go ayde them wherfore I wyl haue syr Tercelī amed in my harneys, for he is nye of the same bygnes yt I am of, & he shal take wt hym v. hondred knightes wl armed & go too the turnay to kepe the felde that no hurt shal be done, and no mā shal know but yt it were I and ye syr Brisebar & I wil go to Gouernars lodging as priuely as we can, and there he & I wil arm vs in some straunge harneys, to thentent yt no man shal know vs, wherfore I pray you dys∣couer me not, so than syr Tercelyn was armed in Arthurs amur & toke wt hī  hondred & yssued out of the Citie wt grt noyse of trompetes and abouts, than du¦ke Goubert sayd yonder cometh Arthur to kepe the feld to thentent that we shold do none outerage too these frenche men. So than in the first front was duke Hec¦tor, the dolphin and the lord de la ound than all the other kynges and the duke of britaine mounted on theyr horses to be¦holde
holde the tourney, and also thyder came the kyng of valefound and mayster Ste¦uen hys son wyth hym, and .v. hondred knightes in his company. And whan the frenche men were entred into the fyelde they were not the .x. part so many as the other were. And whan mayster Steuen saw that he said to his fader, syr beholde yonder the knightes of greate hardynes seyng theyr countenaunces, for they bee nothyng abasshed for al that they be soo farre ouermatched, than Arthur wente pryuely to thabbey of saynt Germaines to Gouernar, and there they armed them in straūge harnes, and moūted on .ii. gre¦te coursers. And whan the frenche men were a renged, than Hector aduysed wel syr Rowland of bygor who was comyn¦ge toward hym than Hector rusht to his hors and encoūtred sir Rowland so rude¦ly yt he tombled uer his hors tayle than kyng Emendus sayd to the duke of bry∣tayne, syr this beginnyng is on your par¦te, than the dolphyn encountred at one frusshe syr de la ound and syr Morand & ouerthrewe them bothe to the earth, than the turney began to be maruailous fiers but the frenche knyghtes were sore ouer matched, wherfore they endured muche payn & at last Arthur & Gouernar came towarde the prese al disguysed, than Ar∣thur sayde too Gouernar, syr whan ye se Hector bydde hym kepe vs .ii. company but be wel ware that he knowe you not, with a good wyl syr {quod} Gouernar and so they rode forth fayre a softely, and whā duke Philip saw them conyng he sayd to the kyng, syr beholde yonder comith two straūge knightes, it semeth by theyr comyng that they are afrayd of the fyrst strokes, therwt they aproched to the tour¦nay, than Gouernar shewed too Arthur syr Bertrand by whom the turnay was fyrst begon, and also the duke Gouberte who gaue many gret strokes wt his swor¦de, and there wt Arthur & Gouernar stoode styl and beheld them, than kinge Emen¦dus sayde, I thynke yonder .ii. knightes doubte greatly these strokes. Ye syr they do wisely {quod} duke Philip, therwt Gouer∣nar ran at sir Berrand & bre him clee out of his sadel. Mary sayd the kynge I wene we haue mocked yoner knightes wrongfully, we shal se sone what ech o∣ther knigh can do therwt Arthur ran at duke Goubert and encountred him so ru¦dely yt he sent bothe horse and knight all to there in a hepe than he toke his swor¦de & layd on round about him so that he confoūded al yt euer he attayned vnto, & Gouernar was not behynd for his pa Saynt mary {quod} the kyng who knoweth yonder knightes, they seme to be the best knyghtes o al the world. Syr sayde the kyng of orqueney but yt I se Arthur yon∣der withoute the felde I wolde aye elles playnly that it were he, by that tyme Ar¦thur had broken that gret prese, than he espyed where the dophin & Hector & the erle of mountbelial and .xxx. of their cō∣pany were sore ouerladen, for there wee many on them, and by that time the du∣ke Gouberte was horsed new agayne, than Arthur ran at hym and strake hym too ruely on the helme soo that he was thereby in a trauce and hys horse bare hym all about the yelde, tyll at the laste he came before kynge Emendus where as he was▪ and than he came to him selfe againe and sayd al the deuyles of hell take suche a carpenter, and he that fyrste brought him into this countrey, than Ar∣thur was ore handled in the prease, but than he russhed forth and charged so his swerde on these knightes in suche wise that he and Gouernar bet downe al that uer was before them. And whan yt the frenche knightes saw yt these .ii. knygh∣tes did helpe and dyde thē so nobly, than they toke on them so gret hardines that they confounded al that were before thē, than knightes of the other part sayd let vs fle away for and we abide, deh wil fo¦low therby, and so than they fled away on euery syde fro him, than the king & su∣che as were in his cōpany and al other yt dyd behold the tourney had great mar∣uaile of the dedes of the .ii. knightes and mayster Steuen perceiued we the play of Arthur than he knewe well yt it was he and said softely to hym selfe, a gentyl knyght y• cannest not fayle thy frendes I cā not suffre any lenger that ye shold endure more trauayle, than the mayster blewe suche a blast yt there rose sodenlye in the tourney suche a myst yt one could scant se an other, thā Arthur and Gouer¦nar departed as priuelye as they could & went to thabbey o S. Germain and so than euery man went to their own lodgī¦ges, and as sone as thei wer vnarmed al the french men went to king Alexāders lodging, and they went all ogider to the kinges court, and the king Emendus did welcome them and made to them rygte gret est and ioye, and was right glad of the gret prowes that he had lene in them that day, than the king toke kinge Alex∣ander by the hand and demaunded of hī wha .ii. knightes that they were that so nobly dyd tourney on their part that day and where that they were. And he answe¦red and sayd, syr I can not tell you what they be, nor where they are becom. Thā the kyng enquyred of al the other if they could tell any poynges of them, & whan the kynge sawe that he could haue noo knowledge of them he fell sodeynlye in & greate sudye, and as he stode soo mu∣syng Arthur and Gouernar came to the court, than the kynge enbraced them and demaunded yf they knewe any thyng of those twoo knyghtes that hadde oone so greate prowesse. And they answered that they knewe nothynge of theym. So than they wasshed and wente to dy∣ner, and after dyner they sporced theym euery man as he lyked best, and as kyng Emendus sawe these knyghtes sporyn∣ge of them in the palays, he remembred the two knyghtes and again demaunded yf any body knewe them. And when the mayster saw the kinge in that cae he a∣me to him and said fayre and softey, syr beleue certaynly that these woo knygh∣tes that ye desyre so sore to known was Arthur and Gouernar. Than the kyng had ryghte greate ioye, and so wente o theym and enbraced wyth wepyng eye for ioye, and sayd in open audyence, yth I haue gyuen my doughte to Arthur I repente me not, for I could not haue be∣stowed he more noy than on hym, for I coulde not haue beleued to haue seene so muche noblenes in one knyghte as I haue sene in hym this day, than the kyn¦ge made so greate feast and oye that it was mauayle to beholde, thus nud the feast .xv. dayes. Than all the ladyes would returne into fraunce wherof Flo¦rence was right sorowfull, how e it she dyd soo muche that they al abode other v. dayes & so than they departed. Than king Emendus & Florence and al other lordes and ladies broughte Gouernar & Ihannet into theyr londe of mormall, and there they were receiued with greate ioy and honor, and caried there .viii. dais
¶Howe after the maryage of Arthur the barons and ladies of fraūce returned into theyr owne countryes except king Alexander whom king Emendus kept styl & made vnto him grete here, and he taryed there soo longe tyll that Florence was delyuered o a fayre son who kinge Alexander held on the fon. Ca C.xiiii. AFter that these .vii. dayes we refynysshed than the frenche lordes ladyes & knightes to∣ke theyr leue of kyng Emen∣dus, who conuayed them .ii. dayes iourney, than king Emendus and Florēce toke theyr leue of the duke of bry¦tayne and of al the other lordes & knigh¦tes ladies and damosels, and Florēce re¦quyred them to retourne into ye countrey agayn as shortly as they myght, for she sayd she wolde gladly haue gone wt thē sauyng for kepyng of companye wt the kynge her fader, soo eche of them kyssed other & so departed, and Arthur & Gouer¦nar dyd conuey theym a lytel waye, than the duke of brytayne sayd to Arthur his sonne, good sonne thynke alway to plese wel the noble king Emendus, & Arthur promised him so to do, & than he toke his leue of the duches his moder & kissed ech other with weping yen, so than the du¦ke and the duches toke their way home∣ward and Arthur & Gouernar returned to the kyng, and foūd him and king Alex¦ander togyder, for kyng Emendus had so entreted kynge Alexander that he pro∣mysed hym to abyde in his company for a certayne space, and so he abode there so long in gret myrth and plesure tyl at last the noble quene Florēce was brought a bed and had a fayre sonne▪ And on a fayre day as king Alexander Arthur and Go∣uernar were sportynge them by a ryuer syde, there came a messenger rydynge to them a gret pace and sayd to Arthur syr I haue brought you good tidings syr kin¦ge Emendus doth send you word how yt your noble quen Florence is broughte a bed of a fayre sonne, wherfore he desy∣reth you to come as fast as ye can▪ for ye king wil desire king Alexander and king Gouernar to hold him on the oe, & whā Arthur herd yt he was righ ioyful and said to the messēger, I giue the forthy tidī¦ges .C.ii. lond where soeuer ye louest best to haue it, thā the squier thāked hī righ hūbly so than they rode forth, and at last came to king Emendus who made right gret ioy of them, and wt gret solemyti the chyld was than brought to churche & cristened and had to his godfathers king Emendus, king Alexander and king go¦uernar, and was called Alexander, and at their coming fro the church their was made suche feast and chere and reuel y• it was wonder to behold, for there was no¦thing yt could haue made king Emendus more ioyful than he was, for he has than al his request of god, for his prayes was euer that Florence might haue an hyre ma of her body borne to sucsede in his realme, and this chyld was the most fa chyld toward of the world and wel fou¦med byg and mighty and he had on hys sholdre a fayre crosse as uddy as a fresh rose wherof kyng Emendus sayde th it was a sygne that he should attayne to muche honour, for so he did after in de for he was or he died emperor of yde the more and of constantynoble, and co¦red by his prowes dyuers other realmes ¶How king Alexander returned into his country and led wt hym Arthur Gouer∣nar▪ Hector and master Steuen, atye in britayne so long tyl Florence sent for Arthur becaus y• her father kyng Emen∣dus was departed this ie wherfore he made gret lamentacion. Capi. C.xv
WHan that kynge Alexan∣der had bene a longe sea∣son with kyng Emendus he toke leue of hym & retourned into fraunce, & there went wyth hym Arthur, Gouernar, Hector and mayster Steuen, & within a whyle after that they were depar¦ted king Emendus, what for the grete Ioye yt he had of his son & for suche labour as he toke befor he fell seke & laye in his bedde, & as th story sayth he laye but .vii. wekes but that he dyed, & Kynge Alexander & suche other as went wyth hym rode so longe by their Iourneys tyll at laste they aryued in the lond of brytayn, than a messenger wente before to the duke & shewed how yt they wolde be wyth hym on the monday next comynge. And whan the duke herde that he was neuer so ioyefull before, than the duke sent for al his lordes & ladies of hys coūtre yt they sholde be wt him at ye recey¦uynge of his son Arthur & of such other as came wyth hym, & so they dyd, & the same daye Arthur aryued there & was re¦ceyued wt gret fest and ioye the whiche feest endured .viii. dayes, than all they cō∣uayed kynge Alexander in to his owne realme. It nedeth not to be demaunded whder that Arthur and his cōpany had there good chere or not. ¶How Arthur was sēt for because of the deth of kīg Emēdus, nd how yt he was crowned kyng of soroloys. Ca. C.xvi. ARthur and his cōpany were a grete season wt kyng Alex¦ander and hadde ryght good chere and on a day as he sat at the table there came in a messēger fro
his lady Florence, and he kneled down and arthur dyd arise & went to hym and receyued of him a letter sent to hym fro Florence the whiche arthur incontinent did breke vp, & therin he found how that the myghty kinge Emendus was dead, wherof he & al that cōpany made right great sorow, than arthur desyred kynge Alexander yt he wolde go wt him agayne into the realme of Soroloys, & he graū∣ted him so to do wt a right good herte, so thā incontinēt they apparayled for their departing, & so mounted on theyr horses & did so much by theyr Iourneys yt they aryued in ye realme of Sorolois, & there they foūde Florēce making right great sorow for the death of the kyng her fader but as sone as she saw her lorde Arthur her herte reuiued, in suche wise that she forgat in a maner halfe her sorowe, than the next day the corps was borne to the chyrche, & with great solempnite there he was ryally buried as it appertayned to such a noble prince, than wtin a while after kynge Alexander sayd that it was tyme to make purueyaūce for Arthurs crownacion, than there was sent for al the kinges, dukes erles, barons, knigh∣tes and squyers and al theyr kinne and frendes and there came thyther people wythout nombre, thā arthur was there wyth greate triumphe crowned wyth golde and toke homage of euery man, & after his crownacion the feast endured .viii. dayes euery man makinge greate ioy saue Florēce who was styll in great sorow for the death of her fader, and af∣ter this great feast and ioye and that e∣uery man had made homage to arthur for theyr kingedomes, dukedomes and baronies and for all theyr landes, than euery man departed into theyr owne countreys, and euer after arthur, Go∣uernar Hector, and the mayster loued eche other and helde so fast togither that none of theyr enemies die neuer ap∣proche on none of them, and so they vsed theyr lyues in great honour and loue, & peas and vnion was euer bytwene thē & theyr subiectes for as longe as they li∣ued there was neuer none of that euer moued any warre agaynst them, thus arthur and Florence reygned in greate prosperite, rad and sore doubted of all the worlde, and dyd many fayre conque¦stes, for he cōquered or he died .viii. real∣mes and diuerse countreys and ryche seygnoryes, but he liued not longe after ¶Here is deuysed how longe that ar∣thur lyued▪ and how that he was bu∣buried. Cap. C.xvii. THe historie recounteth that the noble Arthur lyued but .xxxii. yere and thā he died, & the quene Florence whome he loued so well dyed for sorowe & so they were bothe buryed with great soempnite, & layde bothe in the tombe with kinge Emendus, on the whiche tombe there was wrytē this epi∣taphe, here lyeth the myghty kyng Emē∣dus Arthur and Florence his wife who ledde so good lyfe togyder that they wer neuer dyspleased eyther wyth other, and Gouernar, Hector and the mayster made grete sorowe for the deth of Arthur & the yonge Alexnader son to arthur, & to Flo¦rence was in the guydyng of kynge Go∣uernar, of Hector, & of the gentyll may∣ster Steuen, who afterwarde was Em∣perour of ynde & of Constantinoble, and thus endeth the hystory of the valyate knyght Arthur son to the duke of Bry∣tayne, & of the noble lady Florence dough¦ter to the mighty kynge Emēdus kynge of the realme of Soroloys. And all those that redeth or hereth this history I pray god sende them blysse perdurable. Amen. ¶Here endeth the hystory of Arthur of lytell Brytayne. ¶Imprynted at London in Powles churche yeard at the sygne of the Cocke by Roberte Redborne.
