A1195 12637713 64934
THE Whole Duty OF PRAYER, Containing DEVOTIONS FOR Every Day in the Week, AND FOR Several Occasions, Ordinary and Extraordinary. By the Author of The Whole Duty of Man. Necessary for all Families. Psal. 65. 2. O thou that hearest Prayers unto thee shall all flesh come. London, Printed for I. P. and sold by Ric. Ianaway, in Queens-Head-Alley, in Pater-Noster-Row. 1692.
THE Preface. I Need not Recommend this small Manual to the World, since it hears the Name of so Learned an Author, whose Works have given sufficient de∣monstration of his Worth and Excellency, and will to his last∣ing Honour be venerated in all Ages.
This Pattern of Piety hath lay concealed for many years, and was at first Dedicated to the service of an honourable Lady, in whose Ca∣binet it hath been choicely kept as one of her precious Iewels; it was never design'd for the Press, by reason the Reverend Authors Modesty should not be offended. Upon her Bed of Mortality, she was pleased to honour me so far, as to commit it to my Care, with a particular Charge not to publish it; but one of her Mercenary Servants, by their vigilant In∣dustry, had Plagiary-like, got a Transcript, and since this Pious and Honourable Persons Decease, did design it for the Press, being unwilling so much Injustice should be acted against so Worthy a Per∣son,
I was forced to Cancel my Obligation, and to hand with all speed the Original to be Printed, that I might prevent any Surrep∣titious Copy. What Alterations I was forced to make, was leaving out the Praying for our Royal Ancestors, and placing in our Royal Sove∣raign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, &c. Some additional Prayers I thought proper to insert, as Thanksgiving for His Majesties Safe Return, and the Success of his Royal Navy and Armies, a Duty enjoyned on the Church in Publick, and ought to be the Duty of every Christian in Private. Lastly, I have added some few Graces which may be ne∣cessary for Minor Christians; I
shall now conclude with the Words of St. Paul to Timothy, 2 Epistle, 2 Chapter, Verse the 7th. Con∣sider what hath been said, and the Lord give thee Understand∣ing in all things. G. B.
THE Whole Duty OF PRAYER. What Prayer is, and the Parts of it. PRayer is the Duty both of Soul and Body; it is an humble address unto God, for whatsoever we stand in need of, either in relation to this Life, or that which is to come: The First part of this Duty is Confession, which is the ac∣knowledging of our Sins in all Humility before the great Author of our Being: Now Confession is twofold, general, and particular; the general is when we Confess only we are sinful, without nam∣ing any particulars, which indeed be∣longs
to publick Prayer, but the acknow∣ledging our Sins to God is very neces∣sary, whether Publick, or Private: Par∣ticular Confession is when we express the several sorts, and acts of our Sins, and what ill habits we are most prone to; this is proper for Private Prayer, and ought often to be used, for we cannot repeat too often our soulest Sins which we are guilty of, nor cannot enough bewail our own unworthiness in com∣mitting them. THE next part of prayer is by way of Petition, which is begging of God what∣ever we stand most in need of, either for our Souls or Bodies; first for our Souls we must beg pardon and absolution for all our Sins, in the name of Jesus Christ, who obtained it with his blood: Second∣ly we must earnestly beseech the grace and assistance of Gods blessed Spirit to enable us to forsake all sin and wicked∣ness, and to live in obedience to him: then it will be very necessary to beg all these particular graces, faith, hope, Cha∣rity, love, zeal, purity, and repentance; if thou art proud, pray for Humility, if lustful for Chastity, if guilty of gluttony pray for temperance, and so for all other vertues thou standest most in need of.
IN Petitioning for our Bodies, we are to beg of God such accommodations of life, as are necessary for us, but in such a de∣gree and measure, as his all-seeing Wis∣dom Knows is most suitable to our state, and Conditions the next duty, and Third part of Prayer is deprecation, which consists in praying to God to turn away from us either the evil of sin, or the evil of punishment; to pray against the evil of sin, is to beg earnestly of God to pre∣serve us by his Grace from falling into any sin; and when we are under any great temptation, and even ready to yield, then we must Humbly beseech him, ei∣ther to withdraw the temptation, or else by the Power of his Grace Strengthen us against it: next we are to pray against the evil of Punishment, which are, two sorts, Spiritual and Temporal; Spiritu∣la punishments, are the wrath of God▪ the with-holding of his Grace, and Ever∣lasting Damnation: temporal punish∣ments, is loss of Friends, goods or repu∣tation, but in these things we must wholy Submit to the will of God, unto whom all we have belongs. A Fourth Duty in Prayer is intercession, which is praying for all sorts and Condi∣tions of Men, as Governours in Church
and State, our Parents, Husband, Wife, Children, or other Relations and Friends, for all those in affliction either in Body; mind or Estate; nay even for our very Enemies according to the example of our Lord and Master, who prayed for his very Crucifiers, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do: The fifth Duty of Prayer is thanksgiving, praising and blessing God for all his mercies Spiritual and Temporal, Spiritual bles∣sings are his sending his Son into the World for our Redemption and his holy Spirit to Sanctifie us, that we are born Christians and are made partakers of his holy word and Sacraments: We are likewise to return him thanks, for his patience and long suffering, in not Cutting us off in our Sins and Follies: Temporal blessings, which we are to give thanks for may be for the prosperity of a Church or Nation, and all diliverances which are remarkable: Some belongs to our selves, as Health, Wealth, Food, Ray∣ment, Friends, with many other Mercies we daily receive from God, which who∣ever receives the least blessing is indebted all his life time to Praise the author and giver of all good things.
THESE forementioned parts of our du∣ty in Prayer, are to be made use of both in private and publick, that is in the Church and in our Closet, but more especially in the Church to which place there is a peculiar Blessing belongs, which Christ hath promised, that where two or three are gathered together in his Name he will be in the midst of them: The se∣cond Duty of publick Prayer, is that in a family, and that indeed ought to be the Masters Care to provide for the Souls of those that belong to him, as to provide food for their Temporal Nourishment: Now if he neglects this Duty and takes no care of his House∣hold in this important affair that Man cannot well be esteemed a Christian, but a Heathen. PRIVATE Prayer is a Duty to be used in secret, where we can more particularize our sins when alone then is requisite to be done in publick: Next we are to be frequent in Prayer, and not Complain we want leisure for so doing; for he which is most busie may find some time to perform this Duty, else how can he expect his Employment should be Sanctified; now it is a great advantage for Men to seek God, at least
Morning and Evening, if they expect a Blessing upon their endeavours: Next, the advantages we reap by Prayer are many: First It is a great honour, to speak freely to the Almighty: Secondly It is a great benifit, for it brings down Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal to us; Thirdly it is a pleasant Duty, it draws us nearer to God, which qualifies us for the joys of Heaven, where Christ is, at whose right hand are pleasures for ever∣more. NEXT we must take care that we ask nothing which is unlawful, but what∣soever we stand in need of to ask it in faith, and great humility; Secondly we must be attentive and mind what we are about, Considering that it is the Majesty of Heaven we are to treat withal, and that our necessities cannot be supplied without his Divine aid and assistance. Thirdly, Vigilancy, Zeal, and Purity of intention must not be omitted, for the Sacrifice of the wicked are abomination to the Lord: Lastly what we Pray for, must be to a good end, that is, not to Pray for Wealth, to Consume it upon our Lusts: Or for grandeur to exercise our malice upon our Enemies; but whatever we do must be done to the glory of God, through
whom we have Redemption in his blood, even the forgiveness of our Sins. Ejaculations at uprising. AWake, O my Soul, and sing unto the Lord. Glory be to the Holy and undivided Trinity for watching and preserving me this Night. I laid me down and slept, for thou Lord sustainest me. Lord arise, and lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon me. A Prayer for a Private Person in the Morning. MOst gracious God, whose Mercies are rich and infinite, to all thy Servants that call upon thee; accept I humbly beseech thee this my morning Sa∣crifice of Praise and Thanksgiving which I now am to offer up unto thy Divine Majesty: O Lord, in thee I live, move, and have my being; thou formdst me in the womb, and hast writ my name in the Book of Life, and that I might not
be miserable, but happy, thou sentest thy only beloved Son to dye for me and to redeem me from all iniquity. WHAT shall I render unto thee, O Lord, for all these thine inestimable benefits, pour forth thy Grace upon me, I beseech thee, that I may abound in Thanksgiving and Praise for them; En∣large my heart with thy Love, that I may in some degree Comprehend with all Saints, the measure of thine in∣finite Mercy and goodness manifested to me, by thy dear Son and my alone Sa∣viour. To whom therefore with thee and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed the whole glory of my Creation, Re∣demption, Sanctification, and Salvation. FORGIVE, O Lord, the mani∣fold Sins which I commit daily and hour∣ly against thee, and grant that for the time to come thy restraining Grace may subdue my unruly: inclinations, and distempered affections; and as I have been a Servant of Sin, I may now be∣come an Example of reformation: That so I may rejoyce in thee as my only Treasure, and rest in thee who art the Center of my felicity; and be throughly convinced how good it is to draw nigh unto thee, accounting all things
but dross and dung in Comparison of the excellency of Jesus Christ and my alone Saviour and Redeemer. O LORD, as thou in thy tender Mercy and Compassion hast watched over me this Night, and defended me from my Ghostly adversary, so I beseech thee, let thy all-seeing Eye of providence guide me this day in all my Thoughts Words, and Actions, whereby I may fall into no Sin, nor run into any kind of danger: But that all my doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do alwayes that which is Righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour, in whose Blessed name, and Words, I shut up these my imperfect Prayers in that most absolute form of Prayer which he himself hath taught me, saying, Our Father, &c. A Prayer at Departure from Home. ALmighty and Everlasting God, who art the way, the truth, and the Life; looke down from thy Throne of Mercy to thy scorstcol of Compassion, and behold me now betwixt the Assaults of the Devil, the allurements of the
World, and my own vain inclinations; I cannot look abroad, but they are ever ready to molest me; but O thou that leadest Ioseph like a sheep, thou most faithful and Almighty guide, lend me thy hand, open mine Eyes, direct my steps, and cause me to walk in thy fear. THOU that didst go out with Iacob from Beer sheba unto Padan aran, guiding him in the wast-plains, and watch∣ing over him on his pillow of Stones, be not now far from me; lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, make my Paths straight, and strengthen my goings, that having finished my course here, I may sit down in thy Kingdom hereafter, an inheritance undefiled, purchased for me with the blood of my Saviour, and thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, Amen. Ejaculations for the Evening. LET not the Sun go down upon thy Wrath, Eph. 4. 6. Watch ye, for ye know not when the Master of the House co∣meth, at Even, or at Mid-night, or at the Cock crowing, or in the Morning, lest co∣ming suddenly, he find you sleeping, Mark 13. 35
An Evening Prayer for a Private Person. OEternal God, full of loving kind∣ness, and long suffering, whose Mercy is above all thy Works, and thy Glory above the Heavens, forgive me, I beseech thee, my transgressions this day, my vain thoughts, idle words, and loose Conversation; my exceeding neglect and forgetfulness of thee, my headstrong inclinations and lusting after the World, preferring this Land of Cabul before the Snow of Lebanon, and a broken Cistern before the Well of Life. JUSTLY, O Lord, might'st thou have cut me off this day, and cast me into the Lake of thy Displeasure, but thou hast had Mercy, and not Sacrifice; thou hast shed upon me the Light of thy Coun∣tenance, and removed my sins far out of thy sight. I know, O Lord, it is not in Man to Establish his own Ways, it is thy Almighty Arm must do it; it is thou alone that hast led me through this day, and kept me both from doing and from suffering Evil. AND now, O thou Preserver of men! What shall I do unto thee? What shall I render unto my Lord, for all the mer∣cies
and loving kindnesses shewed unto thy Servant this day, and all the days of my life, even to this moment? I will offer unto thee the Sacrifice of Thanks∣giving, and call upon the Name of the Lord: I will ever love thee, fear thee, praise thee, and trust in thee; my Song shall be of thee in the Night Season, and in the Day time I will be speaking of thy wondrous Works. AND forasmuch as thou (out of thy tender Love and Compassion on thy Creatures) hast ordained this time for their rèpose and refreshment, that having past through the Cares and Dangers of the Day, they might under the shadow of thy Wings find rest and security; keep me, I most humbly beseech thee, from the Hours and the Powers of dark∣ness; watch over me this Night in thy Almighty Providence, and scatter all the Rebellions and Devices of my Adversa∣ries; enlighten my Soul, sanctifie my Body, govern my Affections, and guide my Thoughts, that in the fastest clo∣sures of my Eye-lids my Spirit may see thee, and in the depth of sleep be con∣versant with thee▪ This, and what ever thou knowest is needful for me, I hum∣bly beg at thy hands, through the me∣rits
of Jesus Christ my Saviour and Re∣deemer. Amen. Ejaculations to be used on several Occasions. When you awake in the Night. HOly, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath! Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory. When the Clock strikes. BLESSED be the hour in which my Lord Iesus was Born, and the hour in which he Died! O Lord, remember me at the hour of Death, and in the Day of Iudg∣ment. When you intend any Business or Journey. O do well unto thy Servant! that I may live and keep thy Word. Prosper thou the Work of my hands upon me, O prosper thou my handy Work.
When thou art Persecuted▪ HASTE thee, O God, to deliver me, make haste to help me, O Lord! Upon some sudden Fear. O set me upon the Rock that is higher than I, for thou art my Hope, and a strong Tower for me against my Enemy. Upon any disorderly Thoughts. MAKE me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Upon any occasions of Sadness. THY rebuke hath broken my Heart, I am full of Heaviness, but thou, O Lord, shalt lift me up again. Upon any Diffidence. THOU art my Hope, O Lord, even from my Youth, through thee have I been holden up ever since I was Born; though thou shouldst kill me, yet will I trust in thee.
When thou perform'st any good Work. NOT unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but unto thy Name give the praise. When thou art provoked to Anger. GIVE thy peace unto thy Servant, O God, let no man take away my Crown; in patience, O Lord, let me possess my Soul. For thine Enemies. LORD, lay not this Sin to their Charge, they know not what they do. Upon any Deliverance, or Mercy received. THE Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not Want; he maketh me to lie down in green Pastures, he leadeth me besides the still Wa∣ters; he hath prevented me with the blessings of Goodness, he hath granted me my Hearts desire, and not with-holden the Request of my Lips. Surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the days of my Life, and I will dwell in the House of my God for ever.
Upon any Loss or Adversity. SHALL we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and Naked shall I return thither; the Lord Gave, and the Lord hath taken away, bles∣sed be the Name of the Lord. When you hear the Bell Toll for one Departed. TEACH me, O Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom. Upon thought of thy Sins. TURN away thy Face from my Sins, O Lord, and blot out all mine Offences. Praise the Lord, O my Soul▪ and forget not all his Benefits, who forgiveth all thy Sins, and healeth all thine Infirmities. When thou art weary of the Cares and Vanities of this World. LIKE as the Hart brayeth for the Water-brooks, so thirsteth my Soul after thee, O God.
O who will give me the Wings of a Dove, that I may fly away and be at rest. Meditations for Sunday. THis is the day which the Lord hath made, let me rejoyce and be glad therein, it is a day of rest and sweetness unto my Soul, and a day of Ease from Labour unto my Body; as thou, O God, didst rest this day from the Works of thy Creation, so grant that I may cease this day from all Sin, and by an earnest Repentance implore thy Pardon; thaw this frozen Heart of mine, that this day it may melt at thy presence; and say unto my Soul those comfortable Words which thou wert pleased once to say to Zacheus, This day is Salvation come to thy House, O Lord, I am utterly unworthy in my self to stand at the Door of thy Sanctuary, much less to appear in thy presence, and be made partaker of thy Heavenly Gifts, for thou, O Lord art a God of pure Eyes, and canst not be∣hold Iniquity; and I am thy sinful Crea∣ture, not only wilfully opposite unto thee, but even Enmity it self against thee.
Unto thee therefore belongeth Righte∣ousness, and unto me shame and confu∣sion of Face. Lord, when I thus see my self in the Glass of thy Law, my flesh trembleth for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Iudgments. I HAVE sinned against Heaven, and be∣fore thee, by my sad refusal of thy gracious offer of Eternity, in my sinful relinquish∣ing of thy Sacred Word; and am now no more Worthy to be called thy Child. I have been too long feeding on the empty husks of vanity, amongst the fil∣thy Swine of sensuality, and am now willing, by thy Grace, to return home unto thee, and to humble my self low before thee, that thou mayest have the Glory, and I the Comfort of thy Graci∣ous Pardon. Amen. A Prayer for Sunday Morning. O Lord I acknowledge this day to be thine, as consecrated and set a part for thy Worship and Service, and to be obeserved not only as a Holy day, but a glorious day unto thee, where∣in I ought to pay my vows, present my Person and my Prayers before thee,
to hear thy word, and Meditate upon the same, to thy Glory, and my own Everlasting Comfort. To this end re∣move far from me all wandering thoughts, and Worldly Affections, and work in me a desire of studying thy Law, and walking in the Truth, that thy word may not prove unto me the Savour of Death unto Death, but of Life unto Life. LET my Ears be attentive, that I may hear those things which thou shalt instruct me, that hearing I may understand them; understanding, I may remember them; re∣membring, I may practice them, to adorn that profession which I have in∣vocated in thy name, and confirm me in the Faith of thy Son Jesus Christ, wherein I was Baptized and made a Member, raise me, O Father, by the power of my Saviours Resurrection from Sin and iniquity, and give me Spiritual rest, Peace of Conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, and Fellowship in the Communi∣on of Saints, that when I shall leave this Earthly Tabernacle, I may keep an Everlasting Sabbath with thee in the Kingdom of Heaven. BEHOLD, O Lord, I knock at the Door of thy Mercy and tender Com∣passion,
with all the Faculties of my Soul and Body, for all these Graces and particular favours, beseeching thee to con∣tinue unto me the right use of them, that thy Spirit may witness unto my Spirit that I am thy Son, and shall be Heir of thy Kingdom of Glory, and that I may be partaker of the inheritance of thy Saints in light, where are Pleasures that last for Evermore. Grant this O Father for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. A Prayer for Sunday Noon. O God, thou art great in Majesty and infinite in Mercy; wonder∣ful in thy goodness unto thy Church and Children: Thou hast Commanded me to offer up my Prayer and supplications for those that shall enter into the Mini∣stry, and stand before thee to wait at thine alter; the heaviest, O Lord, is very great, and the painful and Conscion∣able Labourers but few; I beseech thee, be pleased to send able Ministers into thy Church, and place such over particular Congregations as like Iohn the Baptist, may be burning lights, burning, as be∣ing zealous in fervency; and lights also
as being conspicuous and eminent for Charity, Sanctity of life, and all ho∣ly Graces of thy Spirit. LET thy Urim and thy Thummim be upon them, as upon thy Holy one; let them be sound for Doctrine, and holy for Life and Conversation; Preaching, let them practice, and by practice let them preach and teach the things which concern thy Kingdom: Open wide unto them the Door of utterance, that they may deliver thy Word freely and boldly: Take away all differences and animo∣sities from amongst them; make them examples to those that believe, in sound∣ness of Doctrine, and integrity of Con∣versation; bless them with all Graces befitting so high a Calling, that I may give thanks unto thee for them, finding the benefit of thy blessing upon me through their Labours, and may praise thy Name for evermore. Amen. A Prayer for Sunday Evening. O Lord, look down from Heaven, thine holy Habitation, and behold with the Eye of thy Love, and tender
Compassion, a wretched Creature, who now calls upon thee in the Words of the poor Publican: O God be merciful unto me a Sinner. Write not bitter things against me, neither suffer me to possess the Sins of my Youth. O forgive, and forget all my Transgressions, and cast mine Iniquities as far from thy presence, in distance, as the East is from the West. LORD pardon, I humbly beseech thee, the faults and frailties which I have escaped this day in the sanctifying of thy Sabbath, whether they be Sins of Omis∣sion or Commission; wash them all away in the Blood of thy Son, sanctifie me by the Word, thy Word of Truth, that this day hath sounded in my Ears. Grant that like good Seed sown in good Ground, it may take root downward, and bring forth Fruit upwards to the Glory and Praise of thy great Name, and the Salvation of my Immortal Soul. O LET thy Word be ever in my Mind, to meditate of it; in my Mouth, to speak of it; and in my Life and Con∣versation, to practice it. By it Work in my Heart Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other supernatural Graces, which
accompany Salvation; open mine Eyes that I may see thy Law; and incline my Heart, that I may love the Truth; and loving the same, may yield Obedi∣ence to it; doing thy Will on Earth, or at least endeavouring to do it, as the Angels in Heaven; willingly, without murmuring; speedily, without delay∣ing; constantly, without ceasing; and universally, without omitting what thou commandest and commendest in thy Word, so shall I not be distracted with Foolish fears, nor dispair of thy Mercy, but ever Hope and Trust in thee, and find Grace to help me in time of need; to whom be ascribed all Honour, Pow∣er and Glory, World without end. Amen. Mondays Meditations. O GOD, the Father Almighty, ma∣ker of Heaven and Earth, who Created the Evening, and the Morning, continue, I beseech thee, unto me, as well the Comfortable rest of the Even∣ing to refresh my weariness, as the most necessary Light of the Morning to ma∣nage my affairs and business; make my
Conscience serene and clear, and let the pure Light of thy Gospel guide my Feet in the way of peace. This Light of thine, O Lord, sheweth what I was in my Birth, Slime and Filthiness; what I am in my Life, Vanity and Folly; and what I shall be in the Grave, Stench and Corruption. LET these ponderous Considerations, Lord, humble me, that Christ may raise me; wound me, that Christ may heal me; load me, that Christ may ease me; and make me most vile in my own Eyes, that I may be most dear and pre∣cious in his sight. O thou, which as upon this day createdst the Clouds to Rain upon the Earth, shower down thy Graces plentifully into my hardned heart to mollifie it, whereby I may be fruitful in all good Works. LORD, who this day didst separate the Waters, separate, I beseech thee, and distinguish betwixt the Water of Tears which I shed for my Sins, and those which I shed for Worldly crosses and afflictions; cast away the one, and put the other into thy Bottle. This day thou madest the Heavens and the Air, with∣out which I cannot breath naturally; no not one moment: Infuse into my Soul
thy blessed Spirit of Grace, without which Spiritually I cannot breath forth my Prayers, nor sigh, nor so much as move any Faculty of Soul and Body unto thee. But, Lord, as oft as I take in, or let out the Air which I breath, let me receive in Grace from thee, and breath out Praise unto thee. Amen. A Prayer for Monday Morning. O GOD, as thou hast now rais'd up my Body from Sleep, the Image of Death, so I beseech thee deliver my mind and affections from the Sleep of Sin, and from the Darkness of this World; and as thou hast brought me to the be∣ginning of this day, be thou present with me, and president in me. Let thy holy Spirit be my Counsellor and Instructor, my God and my Guide to lead me into all Truth; help me by assistance of the same Spirit to watch over my Thoughts, Words and Works, that I may neither think, speak, nor do any thing which is not agreeable to thy holy Word. LET me in all reverence and humi∣lity of Soul, submit my self unto thy ho∣ly Will, so that ordering my Conversa∣tion
aright, and walking according to thy Golden Rule, peace may be upon me, as upon the Israel of God. Suffer me not to oppress, or defraud my Bro∣ther in Bargaining, Buying, and Selling, by using false Weights, and Ballances, or any other unlawful means, but Guide me so by thy Grace, that my Consci∣ence may ever cheer me up through a delightful apprehension of thy blessed Favour. TO this end order thou my Paths▪ and establish my goings in the way of Peace, Grace and Salvation; cause thou me to walk upright before thee; make me to provide things honest before thee, and Men; behave my self as in thy sight, and do unto others as I would they should do unto me. Let no Sin, inordinate Lust, or unruly Passion, have dominion over me, but help me to lead Captivity Captive, to kill and crucifie my Lusts, and sinful Affections, and wage War with my Corruptions, until through Christ which strengthens me, I shall prove more than Conqueror. Grant this unto me for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.
A Prayer for Monday Night. O GOD, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I do in all humility prostrate my self before thy Divine Ma∣jesty, to offer up unto thee this my Evening Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanks∣giving, who didst offer up thy Son upon the Cross to be a Propitiation, and meri∣torious Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. Lord hear me, and help me, and be merciful unto me; my Sins are great, but thy Mercies are greater; my Tres∣passes Finite, but thy Compassions Infi∣nite, and never fail. LORD hear my Prayers, and let my Praises be acceptable in thy sight, for un∣to thee, O Lord, upon the Altar of my Heart do I offer up all possible Praise and Thanksgiving, for all thy Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal, which thou hast in a great measure bestowed upon me; but above all, for Jesus Christ the Fountain of them all, by whom I have Redemption through his Blood, and Access through his Life. I also thank thee for thy Sacred Word, and for the Confirmation and Strengthning of my Faith, by those Sacred Signs and
Pledges of thy Love which thou Exhi∣bitest to me, and unto every Believing Soul in the Sacraments. I RENDER all thanks unto thee, for my Life, Liberty, Food, and Raiment, Health, Wealth, Peace, and Plenty, which thou in much mercy hast afforded unto me, from time to time; and I be∣seech thee, to continue this thy provi∣dence over me, and as thou hast hither∣to been a Sun to comfort me, so be thou now a shield to protect me: Keep me in Soul and Body, goods and good name: Vouchsafe me this Night Peace unto my Soul, and rest, and quietness to my Body, that so being refreshed, I may Praise thy name for evermore. Amen. Tuesdays▪ Meditations. O LORD, who on this day madest dry Land, and firm ground to ap∣pear; dry up my Tears with the beams of thy Mercy, and give me firm ground of Comfort in thy Word: Thou who on this day Createdst all kind of Seeds, Sow in my heart the incorruptible Seed of thy Sacred writ, that I may thereby be regenerated to a lively, hope: And as
on this day Createdst all kind of fruitful Trees, make me, like a good Tree, bring forth good Fruit here, that I may hereafter eat of the Tree of Life, in the midst of the Paradise of God. LORD, let me enter into a serious Contemplation of the vanity of the World, and the deceitfulness of Riches; the shame of Pleasures, and folly of sports; the in constancy of honours, and danger of greatness, with the strickt account which one day must be given for all: per∣swade me by thy Spirit, that I have here no abiding City, but ought to seek for one hereafter: and that I am, but a stranger and Pilgrim on this side Heaven. LET me desire Temporal blessings only for Spiritual ends: Wealth, that I may be Rich in good works; prefer∣ment, to advance the honour of the Gospel; Health, and Strength, the bet∣ter to enable me to do thee service; and length of dayes, that I may Praise thee, in the Land of the Living: O Lord this day, thy Life was sought to be destroy∣ed, seek thou mine, I beseech thee, to save it. This day thou wast anointed to thy death and burial, anoint me with thy Spirit to eternal Life. Save me from
the hands of all mine Enemies, that I may serve thee without fear, in holiness, and Righteousness all the dayes of my Life. Amen. A Prayer for Tuesday Morning. O LORD, what am I but Dust, and Ashes; and confess, I am utterly lost, having walked after the vanity of my mind, and lived in all manner of Wickedness; but O, if thou shouldst be extream to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who were able to abide it? Enter not therefore into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Flesh living be justified: Though my Sins have magnified themselves in infinite length, breadth, depth, and height, yet let thy Mercy, which passeth all understanding, far exceed them. AND howsoever, by reason of my Sins, I have justly deserved to be not only deprived of thy blessings, but for ever deserted and forsaken, yet for his sake in whom thou art well pleased; cast me not away from thy presence of Grace here, or glory hereafter, but by the one, lead me to the other, by Holi∣ness;
bring me to Happiness. Behold, O Lord, how I am thy Servant, and the Son of thy Hand-maid; O grant me Grace, that I may live with thee for ever. THOU hast redeemed me, O let me not fall into Captivity and Bondage unto Sin and Satan, but so confirm and strengthen me, that both in life and death, I may continue thine, and never draw back unto Perdition, or forsake thee, the ever-living God, or renounce my Saviour, who hath the Words of Eternal Life; and who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, but that both in Prosperity and Adversity, I may live in thy Fear, die in thy Favour, rest in thy Peace, and reign with thee in thy Glory. Amen. A Prayer for Tuesday Night. O LORD, how often mightest thou cut me off in the midst of my Sins? but thine Eye hath spared me, thou hast given me space of amendment, and Grace to return unto thee, to seek thee whilst thou maist be found, and call upon thee whilst thou art near. O Lord,
be not far from me, but draw near unto my Soul; make haste to deliver me, and help me. Thou hast promised to such as call upon thee, to be a present help in Trouble, to be their Shield and Buckler, their Castle and Fortress, and the Horn also of their Salvation. AND now seeing thou hast brought the Night upon me, wherein thou hast ordained Man to take his rest, keep me, O Lord, as the Apple of thine Eye, save and defend me from Delusions; cause thine Angels to pitch their Tents round about me, and watch over my Soul and Body, that I may not commit any Sin either in Word or Deed, but persevere in Grace until the appearing of my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ unto Judgment. DELIVER me, I beseech thee, from sudden Death, Fears and Affrightments, Casualties by Fire, Water, or Tempestu∣ous Weather, Disturbance by Thieves, or any other Dànger whatsoever; vouch∣safe me peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; guide me here by thy Councel, and after that receive me to Glory; let my lying down in the Bed, put me in mind of my resting in the Grave, and my rising from thence,
of my Resurrection, that both in Life and Death, I may continue thine, through Jesus. Christ. Amen. Meditations for Wednesday. WOnderful are thy Works, O Lord, to the Children of Men; thou hast provided all Creatures, the Fowls of the Air, Fish in the Sea, and Beasts of the Field, to furnish his Table, cloath his Nakedness, and serve his Necessities. The Earth thou Createdst to sustain him, the Waters to wash and cool him, the Air to breath him, the Fire to warm him, the Flowers to refresh him, the Herbs to cure him, the Fruits to nourish him, the Mines to enrich him, the pre∣cious Stones to adorn him, and the glo∣rious Luminaries of Heaven, the Sun, and the Moon, to light him; the one in the Day, and the other in the Night, and both to measure his time, to direct his Husbandry, to divert him in his Peregrinations, to ripen his Fruits, and to encrease his Stores. I CANNOT plead Ignorance of thy Deity, for the Heavens declare thy Glo∣ry, and the Firmament sheweth thy▪
Handy-work. I cannot pretend Igno∣rance of thy Law, for thou hast put thy Word into my Mouth, and written thy Law in my Heart; nor I cannot affirm that I never heard of the Light of thy Gospel, for the Light came into the World and shined in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not; but Men love darkness rather than light, because their Deeds are evil. FOR which thou mightest most justly have cast us into utter Darkness, where there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, but there is mer∣cy with thee, that thou maist be feared; there is Balm in Gilead to cure our dead∣ly Wounds; there is Unction in Christ, and Salvation in Jesus; out of his pre∣cious side, he opened to all the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth a Fountain for Sin, and all Uncleanness, whereby we might be Purified even as he is pure. A Prayer for Wednesday Morning. O ETERNAL God, who art of In∣finite Majesty, look down from Heaven, the Habitation of thy Holiness, upon me thy unworthy Servant; thou
art a God of Power, and canst relieve me; of Goodness, and wilt in thy good time mercifully help me. O Lord, the Fountain of thy Mercy can never be dryed up, nor the Merits of my Saviour diminished; O therefore Bath my Soul in them, that being Sanctified and Justi∣fied, I may appear in thy sight more pure and white than the Snow in Salmon. I BLESS thy Name for keeping me this Night past, and bringing me to the beginning of this Day; let thy Eyes always attend upon me, prosper, pre∣serve, cherish, guide, and govern me in all my Studies, Actions and Employ∣ments, so that I may spend this day, and the remainder of my life, according to thy blessed Will. Grant, O Lord, that whatever I do, it may be acceptable in thy sight, to the Glory of thy most Ho∣ly Name, the peace of my Conscience, and the Salvation of my own Soul. TO this end, be thou, O Lord, my God and my Guide, my Protector and Defender: Keep me unspotted of the World, teach me to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly towards my self, Righteously towards my Neighbour, and Piously towards
thee, my God; repenting truly of my Sins, and serving thee in holiness and righteousness all my daies, that in life, thou mayst be my God, in death my deliverer, and after death, my Eternal rewarder. Amen. A Prayer for Wednseday Night. O MOST glorious God, I do here at this time with the good Samaritan return to give thee thanks for all thy Mercies and Blessings bestowed on my soul and body, in things Spiritual and tem∣poral; for my Election before all time; my Creation in the beginning of time; and my Redemption in the fulness of time; I praise and glorifie thee, for thy preservation of me this day, and that thou hast yet spared me, and hast given me Liberty, and a gracious opportunity once more to call upon thee. LORD; I acknowledge and confess, that thou mightest have taken me away in the midst of my Sins, and in the very act of Committing them; but thou hast dealt more merciful with me; Keep, me O Lord, this Night from fear and danger, and from all noysome
Dreams, and from all hinderances of sweet repose, which thou hast appointed for the refreshing of wearied Nature. SEAL unto me a full, and a free Pardon of all my Sins, of what Nature or quality soever they be, whether they be Sins of omission or Commssion, of knowledg, ignorance, weakness, or wil∣fulness; O Lord, deal not with me ac∣cording to the magnitude and multitude of them, but for thine infinite Mer∣cies blot them out of thy Book of re∣membrance, and Cast them out of thy sight into the bottomless Sea of thy Compassion, that they may never rise in this Life to shame me, nor in the Life to come to Condemn me. Amen. Meditations for Thursday. LOrd Teach me of what Spirit I am, or should be; even of that which descended upon thy Son in the likeness of a Dove, without gall: By this Spirit mortifie in me the Lusts and affections of the Flesh, such as envy, wrath, and re∣venge; by the still small voice, in which thou discoursest with Elias, let me ob∣erve, that thou art not in the fire of
my rage, nor in the storm of my Passion, but in the soft gale of Grace. Thou, didst on this day replenish the Sea, and Rivers with Fish, and the Ayr with Fowls, in Shapes admirably various, and in number almost infinite; stir me up by this Consideration, to admire thy power; and Wisdom in thus enriching this vast and seeming solitude. BLESSED Lord, who this day madest the Waters fruitful, let thy Spi∣rit move upon the waters of my Tears that they may abound in the fruits of Repentance, and be blessed in the en∣crease of Spiritual Consolation. This day thou Commandest the Fowls to fly through the Ayre, lift up my Soul from ths Earth, with the wings of Faith and hope, that She may mount up, towards Heaven: Make me light and cheer∣ful, after my heavy Sorrows and afflicti∣ons, and though I have been, as if I had layen among the Pots, yet I may be by the Grace of thy Spirit, like that Dove, whose wings are Silver, and her feathers like Gold. FOR my light and momentary Afflictions are no way worthy the Glory that shall be revealed unto me hereafter: And for the present, what are Afflicti∣ons,
or Crosses, or Persecutions, but the common lot of thy Children, when I am thus chastned, I am Judged of thee, that I may not be Condemned of the World. How can I ever forget thee, who rememberest me at all times, and in all places; Amen. A Prayer for Thursday Morning. O LORD God, who dwellest in that light which no mortal Eye can ap∣proach; yet beholdest in Mercie the Sons and Daughters of Men; thou makest the outgoings of the Morning full of thy Glory, and causest the Sun to shine up∣on the just and the unjust, mercifully chasing away the darkness of the Night and shadow of Death: I praise thy holy Name that thou hast vouchsafed me to pass this Night in rest and quiet∣ness, and hast brought me safe to the beginning of this day. I HUMBLY beseech thee, by the holy incarnation, and blessed Na∣tivity of thy Son Jesus Christ, the thrice happy day Star that appeared to the World, let thy Mercy this day rest up∣on me, and the bright beames of
thy heavenly light shine forth in the dark corners of my heart, that I may not be transported either through the Corrupti∣on of my Nature or the power of dark∣ness to spend this day after my own perverse will and pleasure, but carefully perform thy holy will, willingly, speedi∣ly, and constantly. INCREASE in me, O Lord, the gift of faith, and hope, that I may be∣lieve thee, and relie on thy merciful▪ pro∣mises made unto me, in Christ Jesus bless my Body and Soul, that no evil happen to them, and preserve my memory and senses that they pass not the limits of rea∣son and understanding: Enlighten my mind, O Lord, to look upon good things, inflame my heart with the love of them, and conduct me with thy Grace, that as thou hast raised my Body from sleep so my Soul may daily be raised from Sin, and Soul, and Body, and Spirit, may be renewed in Righteousness to serve thee, the Living God for evermore. Amen. A Prayer for Thursday Night. O Lord God, great in Mercy, and constant in truth; I acknowledge,
and do here in all humility offer unto thy Divine Majesty my duty of praise, and thanksgiving for all thy manifold Graces and benefits bestowed upon me; and though I am unable to recount them; and much unworthy to be a partaker of them, yet in full assurance of thine un∣speakable love, I presume to come unto thee, and now again commit to thy almighty protection this night, my Soul, and Body, with all its Faculties; be∣seeching thee to keep them day and night, blameless and undefiled, against the day of thy coming. LORD, pardon, and forgive, what∣ever Sins I have wretchedly effected, or wickedly imagined against thee, or my Neighbour: O lay not the faults and frailties of my Youth unto my charge, but forget, O Lord, and forgive, and cancel the hand writing that is upon the wall, which will be ready to wit∣ness against me; strike my Heart with an awe of thy fear, that I may labour to escape thy threatnings, and give me the comfort once more of thy Salvation. GRANT, O Lord that I may this night quietly rest under the shadow of thy Wings, free from fears, dangers, and Spiritual darkness; and when the
dark end of this mortal life is approach∣ed, grant me, O Lord a vigilant Heart, freely disposed to abandon all transitory things, and depart hence in the Peace of a good Conscience, into thine ever∣lasting rest, through Jesus Christ, my Lord, and Saviour. Amen. Meditations for Friday. THIS day the first Man Adam, was made a living Soul, and Christ the second Adam, was made a quickening Spi∣rit; this day he Sinned in a garden, and this day the Saviour of the World sorrowed in a Garden: he took upon this day, the fruit of the forbidden Tree, and thou, O Blessed redeemer wert hung▪ upon the accursed Tree; this day, Adam, was cast into a deep sleep, and his Wife Eve was formed of his rib, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; like∣wise was the Son of God cast into a deadly sleep, and his Side was pierced with a Spear, from whence sprung out two blessed Sacraments, the water of regeneration, and the blood of Expiati∣on and Sanctification. THIS day our first parent borught the curse upon himself, and all his
posterity; but thou, O God hast provid∣ed an everlasting Blessing for thy self, and all thy Members; thy Law, O God, is just, holy, and pure; but I am wick∣ed, profane, and impure: That Medi∣cine is for the most part the best, which the Patient least approves of, because it exasperates the pain for a time. Have I the less affection for the most holy Faith, because it restraineth my carnal Liberty, and abridgeth me of Worldly Contentments? Have not I a Law in my mind which opposeth the Law of my members? And is it not much better to Sow unto the Spirit, thereunto the flesh, which produces only Corruption? IS it not as easie for thee, to raise me out of ashes, as at the first to raise me out of the dust? To send back my Spirit into my Body, as at the first to breath it in? I behold the Seed in the Earth, the plants in the Garden, dye before they spring forth: I see Wormes and insects, that spend the Winter sea∣son in a kind of death, yet revive in the Spring; I know, I am my self dead in sleep every▪ Night, but alive in the Morning: Why then should I call in question any one Article of my Belief, but humbly say, Lord, I believe help thou my un∣belief.
A Prayer for Friday Morning. O LORD God, maker and gover∣nour of all things both in Heaven, and Earth, I come unto thee, with a broken and a contrite Heart, lamenting my Sins, and seeking to find Comfort at thy merciful hands: Lord, thou know∣est my grief, my anxity, and care, Oh let me feel thy comforts to refresh my Soul: Be with me this day in all my worldly affairs, and let thy holy Spirit evermore defend me and preserve my integrity, that I may be acknowledged thine at the last day. I YEILD thee all laud and praise, for thy preservation of me this night past, and for safely bringing me to behold the glorious light of this day: Lord, excite my heart, that I may express my thank∣fulness, by my serviceable obedience, preserve and keep me from Sin, and all irregularities both of Soul and Body: Mortifie all my Corruptions and sensual Appetites, and purge me throughly from filthiness both of flesh and Spirit, that I may perfect holiness in thy fear. STRENGTHEN me against all the
vanities of the world, the lusts of the Flesh, the lusts of the Eyes, and the Pride of life; and give me Grace to employ this day, and the remainder of my Life, in all peace and purity, sanctity and sobriety, to thy Glory, the good Example of others; and finally, the Salvation of my own Soul. This, and whatsoever for want of memory I have omitted, I hum∣bly beg in the Name of thy▪ dear Son, and my alone Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. A Prayer for Friday Night. O GOD, thou camest into the World to save Sinners, behold me, I be∣seech thee, the vile of them; but wash! oh! wash away all my sins in the Blood of thy Son, sanctifie my Nature, abo∣lish my Corruptions; guide me here by thy Councel, and after that receive me into Glory: Keep me now, and ever, send me a quiet repose, and grant that lying down to rest, I may rise again in thy peace, and walk in thy fear, that so the succeeding day may learn me to grow Wise, and for ever Glorifie thy Holy Name.
INSPIRE me, O Lord, with the Spirit of sweet Consolation, and though sleep is the Image of Death, and my Bed as the Grave, yet suffer me not to perish suddenly, or unprepared, but watch over me for good, guide me now, and evermore, let no appalements di∣sturb me, keep me from Fire, Storms, Tempests, Thieves, sudden Death and Danger; cause thine Angels to pitch their Tents round about me, my House and Habitation, and preserve all that is near and dear unto me. [Here name your par∣ticular Friends] REMEMBER thy Church, and eve∣ry Member of it, have pity on the poor afflicted Protestants in all parts beyond the Seas, who suffer for the Testimony of their Faith and a good Conscience; send them help from thy Holy place, and evermore mightily defend them; be un∣to them a Sun and a Shield, a Sun to Comfort, and a Shield to defend them to all Dangers and Tribulations; put a period unto all their afflictions, and in hy good time vouchsafe them a happy Deliverance. Lord, receive them and me, and all that appertain unto me, this Night and for ever, into thy Gra∣cious protection, through the Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Meditations for Saturday. THE great Creator this day rested from all his Work which he had made, and blessed it; O Lord, grant that after this painful life is ended, I may enjoy a comfortable rest with thee in Heaven, where I may keep an eternal Sabbath, and hold a perpetual Feast; there will be rest without Labour, tran∣quillity without Molestation, and joys without End: There, my Soul, wilt thou behold a Glorious City, the Streets of Gold, the Gates of Pearl, and the Foundations garnished with all sorts of precious Stones. I SHALL behold thee, the Father, in thy Majesty, Christ thy Son in his Glo∣ry, the Spirit in his Sanctity, the Arch-Angels and Angels in their Exceilency, and the Saints in their Felicity; then shall I no more hunger, labour, nor tra∣vel; I shall no more fear, grieve, nor desire; I shall want no more an earthly House, for the Heaven of Heavens shall be my Habitation, God will be my Temple, and the Lamb that shineth for ever shall enlighten me. LORD, let the hope and expectation▪
of this eternal rest and felicity sweeten all my labours, and ease my torments, let it mitigate my afflictions, and com∣fort my spirits, that I faint not in my Journey, nor be depressed under my bur∣den, but hold on cheerfully and valiant∣ly, till I arrive at the Land of Promise, and there receive the Lot of mine Inhe∣ritance with the Saints in light for ever∣more. Amen. A Prayer for Saturday Morning. MOST Gracious God, sanctifie I hum∣bly beseech thee, this day unto me, and my self, now and ever unto thy service; thy Mercies, O Lord, they are new every Morning, and therefore my Thanks ought every day to be a new repeated: I praise thy holy Name, for keeping me this Night past, unto this present hour and moment, and hast now brought me unto the last day of the Week; grant that I may spend the same soberly, righteously, and holily. BRING me to the knowledge of thy Blessed Will in all things, that I may en∣deavour to perform the same to thy Glory, the peace of my Conscience, and
the preservation of my own Soul; purge and cleanse my Heart and Conscience from all dead Works, that I may serve thee, the living God, for evermore. Be thou my Guide in all my ways, my stay and support in all my necessities; put an end to the motions of the Flesh, en∣large my Heart for all pious Duties, and habitual Graces of thy Spirit, that I may bring forth the Fruits of them in my Life and Conversation. BLESS the Kingdom wherein I inha∣bit, and thy holy Catholick Church, whereof I am an unworthy Member; bless thy Servants, and our dear Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary, as thou hast Crowned them with a Temporal Crown here, so in thy due time give them a Crown of Glory here∣after. Bless Katherine the Queen Dowa∣ger, her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark▪ with the rest of the Royal Family. Bless all persons, whe∣ther dignified or distinguished, from the swayer of the Scepter, to the drawer of Water; have mercy upon all sick per∣sons, Women travelling with Child, and those who are troubled in Body, Mind, or Estate; O Lord, speak peace unto their Consciences, and as thou hast laid
laid them down with the one hand, so raise them up with the other, if not to this life, to life eternal, for the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord Amen. A Prayer for Saturday Evening. O GOD, the maker and preserver of all things, look down with thy eye of pity and compassion upon me a mise∣rable sinner; I here prostrate my self, Soul and Body, before thy Divine Ma∣jesty, beseeching thee in much mercy to pardon my sins, to Sanctifie me, with thy grace, and to bring me to thy glory: That so my Soul may be refreshed with such things as Eye hath not seen, Ear hath not heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of Man to conceive. ENTER not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no Flesh living be justified: Examine not my wayes, this Week past, by the strickt rule of thy Law, neither reward me in the severity of thy Justice: But have Mercy upon me a miserable of∣fender, that have deserved the sharpest of thy Judgments; but as the Heavens
are higher than the Earth, so is thy Mert cy over all thy Works▪ of and great exten to poor Sinners. SATISFIE my Soul with thy Mercy, and that right soon, so shall I rejoyce, and be-glad in thee, and learn to praise thee Evermore: And now, O Lord, as this Week is ended, so let my Sins be ended, and never be repeated again any more: Be pleased to be my merciful protector and preserver from all perils; and dangers this Night: Refresh my▪ Body with quiet rest, that my mind may be chearful, and be fit to serve thee, in. Sanctifying thy Sabbath, and keeping it as a glorious day unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen Meditations on the Lords Supper. HOW can I approach so divine a▪ banquet, and not by an humble confession wash my hands in innocen∣cy; holy things must not be given to Dogs, nor Pearls cast before Swine: What is so holy as the Body and blood of Christ, and what Pearl so precious as this Sacrament? There is no Dog so filthy, or Sow so unclean as I am by
Nature; but with great detestation of my Rebellious Corruptions, I confess that never Dog so often returned to his Vomit, nor Sow to her wallowing in the mire, as I have to the sink of Sin and mire of sensual filthiness. O WASH my hands in purity, cleanse my Mouth and purge my Heart, that I may take with a pure Hand, eat with an undefileth mouth, and keep in a faith∣full heart this bread of life, and food of An∣gels: give me grace, throughly and sincere∣ly to examine my self, and grant that af∣ter Examination, I may find my desire fervent, my knowledge Competent, my Sorrow for Sin unfeigned, my purpose of amendment sled fait, my love sincere, and my Faith lively. AND finding my self thus apparelled in a wedding garment, let me be found of thee in Peace, and both cheerfully ap∣proach unto, and joyfully and thankfully depart from thy holy, and Heavenly Table; receiving by▪ and with the Bread broken thy Crucified Body, and with the Wine poured out thy blood shed: And by both remission of my Sins, re∣admission into thy presence and favour, incorporation into thy mytical Body, and finally the glorification of my Body
and Soul with thee in thy Kingdom of glory, Amen. A Prayer before the Communion. O LORD Jesus, the Son of the living God, who freely offeredst thy most Sacred Body to be broken, and thy blood to be shed for my Sins that I might be ransomed from Hell, and delivered from wrath and etern∣al Condemnation; O Lord, my sins, origi∣nal and actual, of weakness and wicked∣ness, have deserved thy Wrath and heavy indignation; and had not thine eye spared me I had long since been in everlasting burnings, and wholly banished from the presence of thy glory. LORD, wash away all my Sins in the streams of thy preious blood, which Speaks better things than that of Abel's thou hast loved me, in laying down thy life for me, and hast left unto thy Church▪ this holy Sacrament as a pledge and as∣surance, that through thy death, all that truly partake of this Sacred and Heaven∣ly inititution, apprehending the myste∣ries, and applying the mrits of Christ Crucified, they may receive Comfort and Peace in believing those promises which thou hast expret unto us in thy
word, and be partakers of the benefits of thy Sons passion, and have fruition of thy saving vertue here, and life and Glory hereafter. ACCEPT me, O Lord, in thy dear Son, as washed, justified and Sanctified, and by thy Spirit cleanse and purifie me daily more and more, Sanctifie my affections, and enlarge my heart for holy and Heavenly things; and grant that through a stedfast, lively, and con∣stant Faith, I may receive, and worthi∣ly eat this Sanctified Bread, and drink of this Sacred Cup, in a holy remem∣brance that thy Body, O Lord Jesus, was Crucified, and thy blood was shed for the remission of my sins, and grant that it may so effectually operate in my Soul, that I may ever hereafter live in a holy obedience, according to thy hea∣venly Will, through Jesus Christ. Amen. An Ejaculation before Receiving the Bread▪ BLESSED Lord, as thou hast given thy Flesh to be the Bread of eternal Salvation, so vouchsafe to work in me by a lively Faith, that I receiving the same, may evermore continue in me, and thou in me, Amen.
An Ejaculation before Receiving the Cup. O LORD, vouchsafe that as thy Blood was shed to wash me a sin∣ner from the Corruption of Old Adam, so grant that it may, through a lively Faith, take effect in me, washing me from the filth of sin, and renew in me the Fruits of Righteousness, that I may become a fit Member to live in thee, and dye in thee. Amen. A Prayer after the Communion. O GOD, I praise and bless thy holy Name, for thine unspeakable fa∣vour and loving kindness, in feeding me at this time, with the spiritual Food of the Body and Blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, whom thou vouchsafest to send for our Redemption, and to offer him up to Death for me, in remembrance where∣of he hath commanded me to eat his Body, and drink his Blood, to the end, that by Faith I should be united to him, and made a lively Member of his Mysti∣cal Body, and being washed from all my sins, in his Blood. I should lead a new life in all obedience, holiness and righteousness.
VOUCHSAFE, I humbly beseech thee for his sake, to endue me with thy holy Spirit, that by casting away the works of darkness, I may walk in the true light of thy holy Spirit, and ever remain in the number of thy holy and elect Children; give me an earnest de∣sire to partake often of this holy Institu∣tion, and to lead my life according to thy holy Will in all things, keeping my Body and Soul unspotted and undefiled, as fit receptacles of so heavenly Food, that my Soul may be partaker of the Mysteries thereof by faith in Christ Jesus. AND now Glory be to God on high, on Earth peace and eternal Consolation in my Conscience; I am sed now with thy Body, and my heart is refreshed with the Cup of the New Testament in thy Blood: Now I am a Member of thy Mystical Body, Flesh of thy Flesh, and Bone of thy Bone. Lord let nothing be ever able to separate me from thee, but since all things work for the good of thy Chosen, let all things more and more unite me to thee, that I may grow from Grace to Grace, and Strength to Strength, till I come to the full measure of thy perfect Age, and not be refused by thee, who hast given thy self for me, and unto me. Amen.
A Prayer before hearing the Word. O LORD, Illuminate my dark un∣derstanding, to receive thy Word, and prudently retain it; give me Grace that the Seed of thy Word being sown in my heart, it may take deep root downward, and bring forth Fruit up∣ward, to the Credit of thy Gospel, the Comfort of my poor Soul; and above all, to the Glory of thy most holy Name. Let thy spirit rule and guide the Lips of thy Minister, that he may utter nothing but the Word of Truth, with that fer∣vency, that neither fear nor affection may stop the current of the same. AND because the Harvest is great, and the Labourers but few, I beseech thee, who art Lord of the Harvest, to send forth such into thy Vineyard, as may with a zeal discharge their Ministerial Function; let thy Urim be upon them, as upon thy holy ones, that sincerity of Doctrine, and integrity of Conversa∣tion, may adorn their persons. Lord, guide the Heart and Tongue of him whom I shall hear this day, grant he may speak home to my Conscience, and leave no Corruption unbowelled, but that his
Words may chase away all sinful affecti∣ons from me, whereby I may depart from all Iniquity. BLESS all thy people, and grant that they may be not only hearers of thy Word, but doers of the same, not de∣ceiving their own Souls; and grant that thy Messengers dividing the Word aright, and thy people keeping it care∣fully, and practising it conscionably, they may through Jesus Christ, obtain the remission of their sins past, and re∣ceive thy Grace for the time to come. Give them light instead of darkness; peace for trouble, and eternal happiness instead of Felicity, that tasting the sweet∣ness of Caelestial Comfort, they may de∣spise Terrestrial, and after this life end∣ed, they may enter into everlasting Glo∣ry, through Christ our Lord. Amen. A Prayer after hearing the Word. MOST gracious God, of thy bounti∣ful Goodness, thou hast, through thy Son Jesus Christ, made known, for my instruction and unspeakable comfort, the glorious Gospel, thy Word of Truth, which none can learn but by hearing,
and none can hear but by preaching; and none can preach except they be sent; to this end, give me thy grace, I humbly beseech thee, that as I have heard thy word at this time by thy Minister and messenger, so grant, that I and all that have heard, may Know, understand the same, retain and practice it, according to thy Heavenly will, that I may there∣by grow in knowledge, increase in Grace, and be a lively instrument of thy Glory unto my lives end, Amen. A Prayer for Necessary Blessings of this Life. O LORD, thou hast promised ne∣ver to fail those that depend up∣on thee; thou openest thine hands and fillest all things living with plenteous∣ness, never suffering any of thine to perish, that carefully seek relief from thy most gracious bounty: I humbly beseech thee dermit me not to want necessaries for this present Life; enable me to live without distracting cares; to this end, bless my labours, that I may have a sufficiency for me, and mine, and not be burdensome unto any but rather
be able to administer unto others, what∣soever refreshing Comforts they shall stand in need of. GIVE me neither Poverty, nor Riches, but feed me with Food convenient for me; lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord; or lest I be poor and Steal, and take the name of my God in vain afford me such a portion of Health, and Wealth as thou in thy Divine Wisdom shalt think most con∣venient for me; succour all such as be in want, relieve the oppressed, comfort the Afflicted, raise the lowly, and aid the needy. AND O Lord, I humbly beseech thee, never let me want thy favourable assist∣ance, but bless my Basket and encrease my Store, with thy never failing blessings, that I may be able to live in thy Faith, Fear, and Love, and out of the Depth of misery, and danger of all Men, through Jesusus Christ my only Lord, and Saviour, Amen. A Thanks giving for Gods Benefits. O GOD Almighty, the giver of all good things, thou art my stay, my
Comfort and only guide, direct me, I pray thee, to employ that talent which thou hast allotted, me, for the advance∣ment of thy Glory: Lord thou hast been abundantly gracious, and bounti∣ful unto me, and hast blest my Store, in∣somuch that I have not only what satis∣fieth my own occasions, but have also sufficient to Relieve others in the time of their necessity. GIVE me therefore a free Heart, to cast my Bread upon the waters; and to Relieve my poor distressed Brethren, according to the utmost of my ability; to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, and minister unto thy distressed Saints that I may not live unto my self, but for the help of all those that want my assistance, that I may lay up in Store a good foundation against the time to come, and be found of thee in peace, enjoying Life, and Salvation through Jesus Christ, Amen. A Prayer for Wisdom. O MOST great and glorious Lord God, I confess that whilst I bear about me this Body of sin imprisoning the
Soul, my Nature corrupted and depra∣ved with Iniquity, original and actual, seeks by all means possible to oppose the spirit, and do those things which are dissonant and contrary to the motions, inspirations, gracious influences, and working thereof; my Flesh lusteth against the Spirit, so that the things I would do I cannot, and the things which I suppose to be done in much knowledge and wisdom, will be found not only ig∣norance, and erroneous, but sinful wicked∣ness in thy sight. WHEREFORE I humbly beseech thee, O holy Father, to send out thy Light and Truth, thy spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, to Teach and Instruct me, to be my God and Guide, to lead me into all Truth. Lord, send down that Wisdom that waiteth about thy Throne, and plant the same in my Heart, that all my sayings and doings, being always ordered by this Wisdom from on high, I may do that which is pleasing in thy sight, and profitable for my own Salvation, and shun the con∣trary in all things, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour. Amen.
A Prayer for Defence against our Enemies. O LORD my God, be not far from me in trouble, and in all dangers Ghostly and Bodily, draw near and make haste to help me, I am, I confess, a most sinful Creature, and have justly deserved thy Wrath and Indignation against me, yet, O Lord, for thy mercy sake, turn thee unto me, and have compassion on me; let mine Enemies prevail not in their mischievous devises, lest they be too proud; in thy Mercy convert them, or in thy Justice consound them; make them as stubble before the Wind, and thine Angel scattering them. LORD, I am in thy hand, and they are within the compass of thy power; stay and allay their fury, let them not take effect in their wicked Imaginations and Attempts against me, but put them to confusion; rid me, and deliver me in thy Righteousness; and be thou a Sun and a Shield unto me, to comfort and protect me. TO this end cause thine Angels to pitch their Tents round about me, that being defended under the shadow of thy Wings, and armed with the power of
thy Might, I may not fear what Man can do unto me. Lord, regard me with the eye of thy Grace, and guard me with the hand of thy power, that being pre∣served both in Soul and Body, I may live in Piety, Peace and Godliness, unto my lives end. Amen. A Morning Prayer for a Family. O ETERNAL, and All-seeing God, wonderful in thy Majesty, and In∣finite in thy Mercy, who hast the Hea∣vens for thy Throne, and the Earth for thy Footstool; the Heavens are full of the Majesty of thy Glory, and cannot contain the same; look down therefore from thence, upon us thy Servants, who now prostrate our selves before the Footstool of thy Throne of Grace, hum∣bly beseeching thee, for thy dear Sons sake, to be merciful unto us miserable sinners; one deep calleth upon another, the depth of Misery unto the depth of Mercy, have Mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, and in the multitude of thy Mercies do away all our Offences. WE Confess we are not worthy to think of thee, much less speak unto thee,
we being so vile and miserable, thou so glorious and admirable; yet being assured that in forgiving of Sins and helping afflicted Souls, thy fountain of Mercy is never dryed up; we thine un∣profitable Servants are emboldned to present our selves this Morning before thee, to offer up unto thee a lively Sa∣crifice of Prayer and thanksgiving, who didst offer up thy Son upon the Cross to be a propitiation for our Sins: O let this lifting up of our hearts and hands be a morning Sacrifice pure, and ac∣ceptable in thy sight: Let not the great∣ness of our Sins, with-hold thy emplored Mercy, but wash us from all uncleanness, and remove thy judgments due unto us for them, as far from thy presence, as the East is from the West. O, BURY them in the Grave with Christ, raise us up by the power of thy Spirit unto newness of Life, that we may walk in all holy obedience before thee this day, and that endeavouring to keep our Faith and a good Consci∣ence void of offence, we may now, and in the hour of death be, and remain alwayes thine, Defend us from all evil, and sence us against the assaluts of Satan, watch over us by the Eye of thy good
providence, and cause thy Angels, to pitch their tents about us for our safety and continual preservation. INTO thy hands, we now commit our Souls and Bodies, guide our thoughts, words, and actions, and if we forget thee, our God at any time, O! do thou in mercy remember us, and forgive us our trespasses; make us to see our Sins in the glass of thy Law, to mourn for them in the Closet of our hearts, and Confess them in the bitterness of our Souls, teach us to cast off the rags of ini∣quity, and by Faith, put on the Robes of Righteousness: Help us to manage the Sword of the Spirit, and the Hel∣met of Salvation, that we may be able to fight against the Wiles of the Devil, the vanitics of the World, the Lusts of the flesh, and the pride of Life. BE favourable to Sion, build up the walls of Ierusalem, more particularly, preserve and enlarge these Churches of great Britain, and Ireland; feed them as thy flock, and Family: Dress them, as thy Vineyard, and adorn them, as thy Spouse: Defend our Soveraign Lord and Lady, King William, and Queen Mary from all Enemies, at home, and a∣broad, preserve their Bodies in Health,
the Hearts and Souls in soundness and truth, their lives in honour, and their honour from underminers. Bless Kathe∣rine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark, with the rest of the Royal Family. Bless those which rule in Church and State, all Schools of good Education and sound Learning, all thy Ministers and Magi∣strates, with all our Relations in the Flesh, and Friends in the Spirit, to whom thou hast any ways made us bounden. O Lord, enable us to requite them, or lay it on thine own account to restore it unto them, and their Posterities. And here we yield thee all laud and praise, for Creating us when we were nothing, for Predestinating us unto the Adoption, and choosing us in Christ be∣fore the Foundation of the World. We thank thee for our Preservation this Night past, and for bringing of us this day to behold thy glorious light. Lord, awake our Souls from Sin, and Carnal Security, that we may be prepared like wise Virgins, with Oyl in our Lamps, to meet the sweet Bridegroom of our Souls, whether at the hour of Death, or the Day of Judgment. These and all other Graces, which for blindness,
we cannot, and for our unworthiness we dare not ask, we beseech thee to give us, for the worthiness of thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose most holy Name and Words, we conclude these our imperfect Prayers, in that most per∣fect Form of Prayer, which he himself hath further taught us in his holy Gospel, saying, Our Father, &c. A Collect for the Day. LORD bless us, and make thy Face to shine upon us; keep us from Sin and Satan, sickness and sorrow, shame and servitude, loss of Goods and good Names, or of any thing more near and dear unto us, if it be thy good pleasure; preserve us evermore in thy Faith and holy Fear, guide us constantly by thy Councel, and after that receive us to Glory. Amen. An Evening Prayer for a Family. O GOD, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, the high and lofty one that Inhabitest Eternity, who hast made the
Earth by thy power, Establish'd the World by thy Wisdom, and stretched out the Heavens by thy discretion; the Father of Eternity, and Fountain of Mercy, the giver of all good things, the forgiver of all sins, and the comforter of all such as fly unto thee. Lord, we are here present before thee, be thou present with us, and President amongst us; we appeal from the Seat of thy Justice, to the Throne of thy Mercy, beseeching thee to give us a sense of our own Mise∣ries, and an assurance of thy Mercies; let us not be possess'd with over much fear, but that with a holy confidence of thy goodness, we may with joy ap∣pear in thy presence, in an humble ac∣knowledgment of our sins. TO this end, we confess that we have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and are no more worthy to be cal∣led thy Children; we have transgressed thy holy Laws and Commandments, not only by our Thoughts and Words, but by our Deeds and Actions; our Iniqui∣ties are more in number than the hairs of our Head, and make us seem vile in our own Eyes, but much more in thy sight. Lord, unto thee we confess our sins, O grant us Pardon and Absolution for
them; open unto us Penitents, that ever streaming Fountain of thy Sons Blood, that our sins being Bathed therein, we may appear without blemish in thy sight; by his Death mortifie our sinful Corrup∣tions, hide them in his Wounds, and bury them in his Grave, that they may neither rise in this life to shame us, nor in the World to come to condemn us. GIVE us thy holy Spirit, let him purge our Consciences, heal our Cor∣ruptions, illuminate our Understandings, confirm our Memories, and consecrate our Souls and Bodies, that they may be fit Temples for thy holy Ghost to dwell in. Be merciful to thy Church, and en∣large her borders; shower down the choicest of thy blessings upon the heads and hearts of thy Servants, our Sove∣raign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, bless them with length of days here, and with a Crown of Glory hereafter; bless Katherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Prin∣cess Ann of Denmark, with all the rest of the Royal Family. Bless the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, Magistracy and Com∣monalty, our Relations in the Flesh, and Friends in the Spirit; protect all that stand up for thy Truth, but as for thy
Foes, let them be ashamed and con∣founded. AND now seeing thou hast brought the Night upon us, wherein thou hast ordained man to rest in, we humbly be∣seech thee, who art the Keeper of Israel, who never slumberest nor sleepest, to watch over us by thy Providence; cause thy holy Angels to pitch their Tents round about us, that being freed from the terrors of the Night, and refreshed with moderate rest and sleep, we may the better be enabled to praise thy Name, and to walk before thee in all good Works, and holiness of Conversation, all the days of our lives. Let our Bed, O Lord, put us in mind of our Grave, and our rising from thence of our Resur∣rection, that whether we wake or sleep, we may be always thine. AND knowing that thy Name, O Lord, is a strong To ver of Defence, we here commend our selves this Night, to thy most holy protection; if it be thy Divine Will to call any of us hence in our sleep, O Lord, for thy Sons sake, have mercy upon us, and receive our Souls into thy most blessed Kingdom; but if it be thy heavenly pleasure to add more days unto our lives, add more
amendment unto our days, that living we may live in thy Fear, and dying we may dye in thy Favour, and in the end, Reign with thee in Glory. Amen. A Collect for the Night. INTO thy hands, O Father, we com∣mend our Spirits, for thou hast re∣deemed us, O thou God of Truth; into thy most merciful Tuition, and gracious Preservation, do we commend our selves, our Souls and Bodies, our Relations, our Goods and good Names, all ours, and all that call upon thy Name. Lord, be thou present with them and us, and about our Beds, unto our lives end; let not our fantasies be troubled with vain Imaginations, nor the Dreams and Visi∣ons of our heads, like Nebuchadnezzar's, make us affraid, but give us quiet and comfortable rest, that our Souls and Bodies being refreshed, we may when we awake, laud and praise thee, and joyfully perform the business of the next day in our particular Callings. LET our whole life be a serving and glorifying of thee, that we may live in thy Fear, dye in thy Favour, and rest
from all our Labours, and be blest with thy glorious Vision, enjoying the pre∣sence of our blessed Saviour, the com∣fort of thy holy Spirit, and the Commu∣nion of thy most holy Saints and Angels, that we, together with them, may ascribe unto thee the Glory of our Redemption from Sin, Satan, Hell, and Death, World without end. Amen. Prayers for several Persons. The Husbands Prayer. MOST gracious God, have mercy upon me, and upon all those which appertain unto me; in the beginning thou didst Institute Marriage, for the propagation of Mankind, a remedy to avoid unlawful Lust, and for the mutual Comfort and Consolation of thy Chil∣dren; give me, O heavenly Father, I humbly beseech thee, the assistance of thy Grace, that I may according to thy Commandments, love and cherish her whom thou hast allotted for my help and comfort in this life. MORTIFIE in me all fleshly Lusts,
and let not the heat of unlawful Concu∣piscence, take possession of me, but grant that we may live in Peace and Unity, and equally praise thy holy Name: [If any Children] Bless, O Lord, those Children thou hast bestowed upon us, give us understanding hearts and minds, to bring them up in thy Faith and Fear, and give them obedient hearts to thee, and to all thy Commandments; grant that they may not prove a Curse but a Blessing to us, and thereby attain that reward which thou hast promised to those which honour and obey their Parents. TEACH me, O Lord, to Govern and Instruct my Family, whereby they may walk in thy Fear; and grant that I may, according to my ability, provide what is necessary as well for their Bodies as their Souls: And do thou, O Lord, endue them with thy Grace, that they may perform their Duties, in Fear and Obedience, not with Eye-service, but in singleness of Heart as in thy presence. Give me, O Lord, I beseech thee a com∣petency to maintain that which thou hast committed to my Charge, and grant that we may in all humility rely upon thy blessed Will, who knowest what is
fitter for us then we do for our selves To whom be all Honour and Glory Amen. The Wives Prayer. O LORD, I give thee humble thanks for calling me to the Honourable State of Matrimony; give me, O Lord, thy heavenly Grace, that I may fear thee, and love, reverence, and obey him whom thou hast appointed to be my head in all good things, to live peaceably and quietly with him; suffer me not to be puft up with the Vanities of the World, but grant that I may frame my mind and habit suitable to the Estate of my Husband, and adorn my self with that which may become a modest Woman to wear. Assist me, O Lord, that I may with his Consent, prudently and with discretion, Govern his Family, and care∣fully mind that nothing be wasted, nor∣permit any evil to be committed in his House. FURNISH me, O Lord, with those Gifts and Graces which the Royal Preach∣er described in a good Woman, and en∣due me with such a Care in the Educa∣tion
of my Children, as belongeth unto my part to perform, that I may live and rejoyce to see the prosperity of them in this life, and after this life is ended, grant that we all may be received to thy eter∣nal Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Childs Prayer. MOST gracious God, to whom the Childs obedience to the Parents is always acceptable, but their disobedi∣ence most displeasing, I humbly beseech thee to remove far from me the horrid sin of Disobedience and Rebellion against my Parents; O give me Grace to ob∣serve them with all diligence in Duty, obey them in all lawful Commands, and aid and assist them in all their Necessities; give me Grace to receive all their reproofs patiently, and not to perplex them by Stubbornness and bad Courses. SUFFER me not to scoff or deride at their Age or Infirmity, but rather supply their Wants, and cover their Weaknesses. Forgive, O Lord, the many offences I have committed against them, increase their days, and preserve them sound in
Body and Mind; let them see their Childrens Children, to their Comfort and thy Glory; let them Govern me, and the rest of their Family, with Pru∣dence and good Example, that when this life is ended, they may depart hence in peace, and come to thy Kingdom un∣spotted, through Jesus Christ. Amen. The Widows Prayer. O ALMIGHTY God, who hast pro∣mised to be a Father to the Father∣less, and a Husband to the Widow, let thy tender Eye of Compassion look down upon me, and my Children; pre∣serve me and them from all Oppression and Wrong, and relieve us, we beseech thee, in all our Necessities. BLESS, O Lord, that small portion thou hast lent me, for a competent main∣tenance of me and mine, O let it be like the Widows Barrel of Meal, never to waste, and like the Cruse of Oyl, ne∣ver to fail. Dispose our hearts to all Obedience, and give us Grace to walk worthy of thee, and thy Mercies which we daily and hourly receive. And last∣ly, in all our Afflictions, let me put my
whole trust and confidence in thee, and praise thy Name for evermore. Amen. The Orphans Prayer. O ALMIGHTY and most merciful Father, thou hast promised that when my Father and my Mother forsa∣keth me, thou O God, wilt take me up. O Lord, I am now, by thy appointment, deprived of my Parents, who under thee, were the only stay I had in this World. Be thou, O Lord my God, my Father and my Deliverer, teach me to seek thee early, and endue me with thy Grace, that I may be obedient to those whom thou art pleased to place over me. MAKE me to remember thee my Creator in the days of my Youth, that I may lead my life according to the rule of true Godliness; Govern and Guide, I beseech thee, all my Actions, pre∣serve my Body in health, and my Soul om all evil thoughts which may molest it; add unto me length of Days, Grace and Vertue, and guide my Feet in the way of peace. Amen.
A Prayer for a Young Man or Maid. MOST gracious God, vouchsafe to me thy Heavenly Grace now and at all times; more especially in this most dangerous part of my Life, when the heat of Youth, and many tempta∣tions do surround me; O preserve me, I beseech thee, as the apple of thine Eye, and though the flesh strives against the Spirit, yet do thou exercise thy power and strengthen my imbecillity: Stifle Sin in me at the beginning that it arise not up to a habit, and prevent in me all evil and unworthy thoughts against thy Divine Majesty. O LORD I recommend unto thee my Soul as a Child that can of it self do nothing; defend me from all enemies Spiritual and Temporal, keep my Soul, and Body, pure, chast, and undefiled, that I offend not either in thought word, or deed: Give me grace, O Lord, to obey my Parents, and those to whose tuition I am committed; and grant that if thou shalt be pleased to call me to the honourable estate of Matri∣mony, I may be joyned with one, with
whom I may serve thee, in peace and holiness, all the dayes of my Life. Amen. A Prayer for a Servant. O HOLY, and blessed Lord God, who tookest upon thee, the form of a Servant, and wast obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, that thou mightest work the Salvation of all people, as well bond as free; thou hast been pleased to call me to the State and Condition of a Servant, below many others in the world, O make me humbly submit to it, and alwayes praise and mag∣nifie thy holy Name that thou hast given me Health and strength of Body to per∣from my Duty. LORD cast forth all murmurings and repinings in me, and all Envy at the prosperity of others; Endue me with meekness and humility, and deliver me from the slavery of Sin, that I may be made a Servant of Righteousness; teach me to understand my duty, and to reverence those whom I serve, account∣ing them worthy of that honour which appertains to them: Preserve me from Pride, unseemly passions, or disrespect∣full
behaviour towards my Superiors; quicken my diligence in businesse, and grant that whatever I shall take in hand, I may not do it with Eye Service, but in singleness of heart; and obtain thy Grace and favour for Evermore, Amen. A Prayer for the fruits of the Earth. MOST gracious God, thy Works are to be wondered at through the World; thou makest the grass to grow for the Cattel, and Herb for the service of Man: Thou bringest forth food out of the Earth, and blessest the encrease of it: look down O Lord, I beseech thee, upon all the dwellers upon earth wherein we inhabit: That our Land may be∣come fruitful and yield forth plenty in its proper Season. And O thou, who openest thy hand, and fillest all things Living with good things; fill our hearts with wisdome, and all Christian vertues, that we may bring forth abundantly the fruit of good works, to the honour and glory of thy holy Name And: as thou Crownest the Year with thy goodness, and thy Clouds
drop fatness: So grant that we may evermore praise thee for all thy Mercies, from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, to whom be ascribed all honour, power and glory, now, and for∣ever, Amen. A Praier for Seasonable Weather. O LORD God, who for our sins art justly displeased at us, and dost now chastise us by keeping back thy rain from watering the Earth; where∣by we are in danger of losing the di∣ligent labour of our hands: Pardon, O Lord we humbly beseech our high provocations, and accept of our hearty and true Repentance, and favourably and Mercifully forgive all our trans∣gressions committed against thee. SHOWER down again thy blessings of Rain upon the Earth, and water it, O Lord, that it may be softened and replenished: But let not immoderately the Floods overflow us, nor the Seed be spoiled under the Clod: But let thy loving kindness renw the face of the Earth' and make the green Pastures rejoyce: Hearken unto the Cry of the
Poor and Needy, and though we eat our Bread in the sweat of our Face yet punish us not with the Scarcity of it, which is the Staff and Support of our Lives: Lord prosper all our labours, and let us with moderation enjoy the fruit of it, this we beg for thy Sons sake our blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Thanksgiving after a good Havest. WE Bless and praise thy holy Name, O Lord, for sending us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, whereby thou hast filled our hearts with Food and gladness: Thou hast made the Grass to grow upon the Mountains, and given Food to the Beasts of the field, and hast filled us with the finest of the Wheat flower, thou hast given Seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater, and hast loaded the Earth with thy bounty, that our Barns might be filled. BLESSED for ever art thou O Lord, and magnified be thy Name for these and all others this benefits which thou from time to time hast bestowed upon us; O that our hearts may overflow with love, and our Tongues with expressions of thankful∣ness
to thee; grant that we may never forget nor abuse thy loving kindness towards us, but by a sober and chari∣table use of these thy Mercies, we may be made fit for a continual supply of them, and at the last be made heirs of thy glorious Kingdom. Amen. A Prayer for a Woman with Child. O GOD, the Creatour and pre∣server of all things, who in the be∣ginning didst place mankind in unspeak∣able happiness, and had there continued, had not our first Parents broke thy Di∣vine precepts given them in Paradise: So that the Earth for their sakes was accursed; and unto us the Daughters of Eve for our transgressions thou hast alotted most grievous pains and torments of Body in bringing forth Children. LORD extend unto me, and to all Women thy Mercy, mitigate the tor∣ments thereof, that we may be able patiently to endure the pains of our travell at the hour appointed: And make that easie and light to us, which our defects have made heavy and burden∣some; and that wherewith I am now
laden, may graciously be delivered from my frail Body: and send us all, good Lord, a safe deliverance, that we may be made joyful and happy Mothers. VOUCHSAFE unto me and to all that have conceived with child strength to bring forth that which thine omnipotency hath so wonderfully wrought in us, in our greatest perils, O Lord help us, and mightily deliver us; let thy powr might, and Love, be no less manifest en the delivery, then in the forming of thiy Creature, that being through thy good∣ness, made a joyfull Mother I may ob∣tain my perfect strength again, and live to praise thee for evermore, Amen. A Prayer for a Woman near the time of her Travel. O GOD most holy, the speedy helper of all those who relie upon thee, by thy almighty power I was formed, and fashioned in the Womb, by thy tender care I was brought from thence, and by thy Mercifull providence, I have been preserved even to this momenthin laud and magnifie thy holy Name, and implore thy never failing aid in this ap∣proaching
time of my necessity: O be not far off rom me when trouble is nigh at hand, but hear my voice and save me when I call upon thee! mitigate my pains or endue me with patience; and support my Spirits in that great conflict. LORD perfect what thou hast be∣gun, and what thou hast wrought in secret bring forth I beseech thee into thy most marvellous light; that we may all behold the wonders of thy Wisdom and extol thy power: O Lord in thee alone do I humbly place my Confidence, for thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth; I wholly resign my self unto thee, beseeching thee to have Mer∣cy upon me, and when ever thou shalt be pleased to call me from this Life, Lord fit me for a better, where all sorrows and tears shall be done away, and ever∣lasting joyes possess our hearts for ever∣more. Amen. The Midwives Prayer before Deliverance MOST gracious God, who by thy never failing providence hast kept me even from my Mothers Womb to this moment, and hast now deputed me
the unworthiest of all thy Servants to this great office, for a help and comfort, in that great pain and peril of Child birth: Be with me, O Lord, I beseech thee, and assist me in this great work, which I am now ready to undertake; prosper thou, O Lord, the work of my hands, O prosper I beseech thee, my handy work. O PUT thy fear into my heart, that I may be as sincere to the Poor as to the Rich, to save life and not to destroy, let me not be too timerous, nor too violent, but endue me with those ver∣tues and graces, which thou knowest most convenient for me, and give a Blessing to this undertaking, preserve me I humbly beseech thee, in the dangerous times, from contagion, infection, or any bodily diseases, which may be received from sick Persons. AND as thou hast by thy Almighty power made her Conceive, and hast now even brought it to the Birth, so give her strength also to bring forth: Support her Spirits in her labour, bless the en∣deavours of those who are present with her, preserve the life of that which strug∣les in her Womb to be delivered: And let us behold the operation of thy hands,
to all our Joy and Comfort: Lord hear our Prayers, and let our cry come unto thee; save her, and help her, we hum∣bly beseech thee, O Lord. Our Father, &c. A Thanksgiving after Deliverance. FORASMUCH as it hath pleased thee, O Almighty God, of thy gra cious Goodness, to ease me of my pains and deliver me of my burden, and from the great danger and peril of Childbirth, I here humbly prostrate my Soul and Bo∣dy before thee, to be unto thee a reaso∣nable, lively, and living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable in thy sight, giving thy Divine Majesty infinite and unfeigned thanks for this thy gracious preservation of me, and delivering me out of this great danger of Death, under which I might have perished, had not thy mercy and goodness embraced me on every side. TO thee alone, most heavenly Fa∣ther, be given and ascribed all Praise and Thanksgiving, now and for ever; as thou hast been graciously pleased to give me a Child, so Lord, give me thy Grace which is sufficient for me, to de∣vote
and consecrate it wholly to thee, and thy service; to this end work mightily in it, by thy holy spirit, sancti∣fie it from the Womb, not whilst it hangs upon the Breasts, but so long as it shall breathe in the Land of the Li∣ving, until thou translate it hence to Reign with thee in Glory. Amen. A Prayer for one near any Temptation. O MERCIFUL God, thou exer∣cisest thy Children with sundry Trials and Temptations, leaving them to themselves, as thou didst Hezekiah, to the end he might see his frailty; some like St. Peter, thou exposest to the boy∣sterous Winds of Satans Winnowings; and others, like St. Paul, to the blows of the Adversaries vehement Buffetings; O God, thine only Son thou didst not exempt from Satans sharpest and stout∣est Trials, when thou conductedst him into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil. IF thou, O Lord, shouldst permit me in like manner to be tried and temp∣ted, suffer me not at any time to be overcome, but hold me up by thy Al∣mighty
power, animate by the presence of thy blessed Spirit, and let thy Grace be ever sufficient for me, whereby I may foil my Enemy, and in the end get the Victory; detect his Policies, disco∣ver his Subtilties, defeat his doings and dealings which are against me; to this end endue me with such Wisdom, as may make me foresee his Stratagems, such vigilancy as I may avoid his Snares, which he prepares for my Souls de∣struction. LET no temptation take me, but what is common to Man, try me not above my strength, but with the temp∣tation make me a way to escape; let me never yield to the motions of Satan, sug∣gesting unto me Death or Desperation, but grant me patience to expect the hour of my Departure, my Souls Separation, the dissolution of my Body, and delive∣rance from the misery of this wretched World; let my trouble be without di∣stress, my perplexity without despair, my persecution without forsaking, and my casting down without destruction; if Tears fall from my Eyes, in thy good time wipe them away, and preserve them in thy Bottle, that they may be precious in thy sight.
O LORD, if thou leavest me for a while, draw nigh again unto me in great Compassion; cover my head in my spiritual Conflicts; let thy Love be my Banner, thy Faithfulness and Truth my Shield and Buckler; let no trial sur∣prize me, but give me a right Judgment, that I may count it all Joy when I fall into divers Temptations; O let not my heart be hardned by them, as the Israelites were who provoked thee in the Wilder∣ness, but sanctifie all thy visitations unto me, that I may be bettered and reform∣ed by them, that my Faith being tryed, patience may have her perfect work in me intire, lacking nothing. I KNOW, O Lord, in all thy Temp∣tations thou ever hast one end, and Sa∣tan another; thou triest me to the end, that being faithful, thou mightest give me a Crown of Life, but Satan seeks to seduce me to Wickedness; but O holy Spirit, thou preserver of all Men, keep me by thy Grace, and strengthen me by thy Power, be present with me, and president in me, and as thy suffer∣ings abound in me, so let thy consola∣tion much more abound; and in the midst of my greatest Agonies of Mind, let thy Comforts refresh my disquieted Soul.
LORD, let thy mighty Hand, and stretched-out-Arm, be now and always my Defence, thy mercy and loving kindness in Christ Jesus thy dear Son, my Salvation, thy true and holy Word my Instruction, thy Grace and holy Spirit my Comfort and Consolation. THE peace of God which passeth all Understanding, keep my Heart and Mind in the love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be with me, and remain with me and mine, and with the whole Church of God, from this time forth, and for evermore. GOD be merciful unto me, and bless me, the Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon me, and be merciful unto me, and grant me his everlasting peace. Amen. A Prayer for one afflicted in Mind. O FATHER of Mercy, and God of all Consolation, vouchsafe I be∣seech thee, relief and succour, unto me a wretched Sinner, who am much tor∣mented in Mind, and afflicted in Con∣science;
Lord, I am afraid of thy Judg∣ments, and the severe Threatnings writ∣ten in thy Law against those sins I have committed, but, O Lord, break not the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoaking Flax; wound not my humble and con∣trite Heart, but revive my Spirit that goes mourning all the day long; though Satan thinks thou hast smitten and for∣saken me, yet frustrate his hopes and expectations; leave me not destitute of thy Grace, as a prey unto the Enemy of my Soul, but mightily preserve, and evermore defend me. AND though my Conscience accu∣ses me, my Memory witnesses against me, and my Reason condemns me; though I am overwhelmed in discomfort, and have lost the voice of joy and glad∣ness, and have neither worth to appease thy wrath, nor patience to endure thy tryal, yet send me, O Lord, the com∣fort of thy holy Spirit into my heart, that I may not be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness, but may rejoyce in thee with joy unspeakable and full of Glory: Open, and set open, the Gate of thy Mercy, to the greatness of my Misery, for my mind is sorrowful, my heart heavy, my spirit is oppressed, my
words are stopt with sighs, and my complaints watered with tears. IN executing thy Judgments, Lord, remember Mercy, try me not least I be condemned; weigh not my offences, but pardon my offences; sanctifie all those means unto me which may afford me relief, as Prayer, Conference, Medita∣tion, reading and hearing of thy Word, and receiving the Sacrament of the Bo∣dy and Blood of thy Son, and my alone Saviour and Redeemer; mitigate my extremities, abate my fears, and mode∣rate my afflictions; let not Night Vi∣sions, like Nebuchadnezzar's, make me affraid, but when I awake, stay me with Flaggons, and comfort me with Apples, thy precious promises, which are pleasant to the Soul. RECTIFIE my Understanding, as in the days of Old, and Drink no longer unto me in the Cup of Affliction, but in the Chalice of refreshing, that I may pay my Vows unto thee, and call upon thy Name in the sight of all thy Con∣gregation; but if it be thy good pleasure to try me, and not take away this Cup from me, confirm my Faith, and conti∣nue unto me that Hope which is to be revealed; to this end, cause me with
the Eye of Faith to look up to thee, who chastisest me, and wait for the appoint∣ed time of my delivery out of all my Troubles. LORD, suffer me not to be swallow∣ed up with despair, but vouchsafe me a full assurance of thy Mercy, that thou wilt never leave me, nor forsake me, but wilt be in life my God, in death my De∣liverer, and after death my Eternal Re∣warder. Lord hearken, and incline thine Ear unto these my Requests for thy Sons sake, my only Lord and Sa∣viour. Our Father, &c. THE Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the most comfortable Fellowship of God the holy Ghost, be with me, bless, preserve and keep me, both in Soul and Body, in Goods and good Name, in Life, Health, Peace and Godliness, together with thy whole Church, and all that appertain unto me, now, and for evermore. Amen. A Prayer to be used in behalf of one troubled in Mind. ALMIGHTY God, the only Guide and Comfort of our Souls, and to
whom alone we fly for succour in all afflictions; O Lord we presume now to appear before thee in behalf of this thy afflicted Servant, Support him I beseech thee, in his greatest conflicts, silence and appease his troubled Spirit, that he may quietly hearken to thy blessed Words of, Come unto me all ye that labour, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. THOU hast solemnly proclaimed, O Lord, in thy holy Scripture, that thou dost not delight in the death of a Sin∣ner, but rather that he should turn from his Wickedness and live. O make him with joy feel his Soul turning to thee, since no satisfactory Comfort can be acquired but only in thy love and favour which to all thy Servants is bet∣ter than life it self; We beseech thee, speak peace to his Conscience and say unto him and all that are here pre∣sent, that thou art our Salvation. ENDUE him with thy Grace, give him peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; O give him the Comfort of thy help again, and Establish him with thy free Spirit: quicken him, O Lord, for thy Names sake, and for thy Righteous∣ness sake bring his Soul out of this trouble: Put gladness into his heart, and
restore him again if it be thy Blessed will, that he and we may Evermore rejoyce in thee, who art the Father of all Mer∣cies and the God of all Consolation, to whom be Glory and Praise now, and for Evermore. Amen. Meditations for the Sick. O GOD, thou dost what thou pleasest in Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep places; thou art full of Compassion and tender Mercy, long suffering and aboundest in goodness and truth, thou alone forgivest Sins and savest all those, that trust in thee, in time of affliction. I KNOW that all Flesh is Grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field; the grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but the Word of thee, our God, shall stand for Ever: In thy word therefore, and gracious promises is my hope, which is my greatest Comfort in my affliction. IN the multitude of thy thoughts within me, thy Comforts shall delight my Soul; I will rejoyce even in the midst of my tribulation, and glory in
thy Holy Name, who makest all things work together for good to them that love thee: Though I walk through the vally of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff doth Comfort me. WE are but of Yesterday, and know nothing; because our dayes upon Earth are as a shadow: When thou with rebukes dost correct Man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to Consume a∣way like a Moth: Surely every Man is vanity; my time is in thy hand: Make thy face to shine upon thy Servant: Save me for thy Mercies sake. HIDE not thy face from me; put not thy Servant away in thine anger: Thou hadst been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God my of salvation: Thou shalt shew me the Path of Life, in thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for Evermore. WE have had Fathers of the Flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in Subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live: he draweth the mighty with his power; he riseth up, and no Man is sure of Life.
WE have received good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Affliction cometh not forth of the dust; neither doth Travail come forth of the Ground: Let us search and try our wayes▪ and turn again to the Lord, for though our outward Man decay, our in∣ward Man is renewed. WE are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be Condemned with the World: For we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God that raised the dead, who hath delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver: And in whom we trust, that he will yet de∣liver us. BUT we know that all things work together for good to them that love God: Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well doing, as unto ae Faithful Creator. We that are in this Tabernacle, do groan, being burdened. I KNOW, O Lord, that thy judg∣ments are just, and that thou of very faithfulness hast caused me to be troubled O let this lightaffliction, which will quick∣ly pass away, cause unto me afterward a more excellent and eternal weight of Glory.
REMEMBER, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the Clay, and wilt thou bring me into the Dust again? De∣liver me, O Lord, from Eternal Death, in that day wherein Heaven and Earth shall be dissolved, when thou comest to judge the Earth, I know thou wilt bring me to Death, and to the House appointed for all Living. A Prayer to be used by a sick Person. O GOD, my Creator and Preserver, thou hast made me after thine own Image, in Knowledge, Holiness, and Righteousness, but I have sinned, most holy Father, against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called, or reckoned amongst thy Chil∣dren; for this Image of thine I have defaced, I have filled my Understanding with Ignorance, my Will with Stub∣bornness, my Affections with Perverse∣ness, my Heart with Deceitfulness, and my whole Life with Disobedience; ever since I drew my Breath, I have drank Iniquity like Water, so that I can ex∣pect nothing but Death, and to be Ar∣raigned
at the Bar of thy Justice, there to receive an irrevocable Doom. BUT O most merciful God, for thy dear Sons sake, blot out all my Offences, and receive me Graciously; enlarge my patience to endure thy Tryal, and lay no more upon me than I am able to bear; give a happy issue unto all Temp∣tations, and make a way for me to escape, and in the end, grant me a full Deliverance. As thou hast made me of Dust, so thou canst take from me my breath, and cast me forth again to that Earth from whence I was taken; but I humbly beseech thee, for to spare me a little, that I may recover my health and strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen. I CONFESS, O Lord, there is no soundness in my Flesh, because of thy Displeasure, nor any rest in my Bones; by reason of my sin; my heart panteth, my strength faileth, and my beauty con∣sumeth away like a Moth fretting a Gar∣ment. O Lord, if it be thy holy Will, ease my Agonies, mitigate my Extremi∣ties, be mindful of my Sorrows, and be merciful unto my Sins; redeem my Life from Destruction, strengthen my Weak∣ness, heal my Malady, and cause me
again to walk before thee, in the Land of the Living, but if thou hast determi∣ned to call me hence, thy Will be done; grant me patience under thy Correction, and a lively Faith in the All-sufficient and Efficacious Merit of Christ my Sa∣viour; seal unto me a free, and a full pardon of all my sins, in the Blood of thy dear Son, and say unto my Soul, that thou wilt be my Salvation. IN assiance of thy merciful Absolu∣tion, cause me to confess mine Iniquities, and fill my heart with such a Godly sorrow, as may work my Repentance unto Salvation, never to be repented of; sprinkle me with the Blood of Jesus, and purifie me from my daily Pollutions, that being washed, justified, and sanctified, I may be presented unto thee, without spot or wrinkle; let nothing separate me from the love of thee, grant me thy pre∣serving Grace, that dying, thine Angels may convey my Soul into Abrahams Bo∣som, there to reign with thee, World without end. Amen.
A Prayer to be said by the Friends of the Sick. O LORD, our God, and great Crea∣tor, thou madest us innocent, but by sin we have brought Death and De∣struction upon our selves, for we have profaned thy Sabbaths, contemned thine Ordinances, cast thy Word behind our backs, lived in all sin and sensuality, spiritual slumber and security, so that thou mightest justly cut us off from the Land of the Living, and give us our Portion with Hypocrites, where there is weeping and gnashing of Teeth. BUT, O Lord, for thy Mercy sake, and for the Merits of thy Son spare us a little, and give us space of amendment, before we go hence, and be no more seen; correct us in thy Mercy, and not in thy Justice, lest we should be consumed and brought to nothing; whilst we live, teach us to die daily, to mortifie the deeds of the Flesh, and to contemn the World, with the Vanities thereof; wean us from inordinate Self-love, that we may not endear our selves too much to these Transitory lives of ours, but may be ready and willing to depart, when it
shall stand with thy good pleasure to call for us; take away from us the bitterness of Death, and sweeten by the Cross of Christ these Waters of Marah, that we may sigh and lament in our selves, desi∣ring to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious Liber∣ty of the Sons of God. LET our lives, and the life of this thy sick Servant, be now and ever pre∣cious in thy sight, look mercifully upon him that is grieved with sickness: Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make him whole, send him therefore help and health from thy holy place, and evermore mightily defend him; let the Enemy have no ad∣vantage against him, nor the Wicked approach to hurt him, but be thou pre∣sent with him, strengthen his Faith, in∣crease his patience under thy Correcting∣hand, raise him up from his sorrowful Bed, and if thou art pleased longer to exercise him, lend him strength to endure thy Tryal. BUT if thou hast determined to take him hence, Lord, certifie unto him how long he hath to live, make him to know his end, and the measure of his days, that by Prayer and Repentance, he may provide wisely for his last end, and be
found of thee in peace, and enjoy ever∣lasting happiness; dispose his Medita∣tions aright for Mortality, and at that last hour, make him to deny himself in renouncing his Justification by any inhe∣rent worth or righteousness, and in all sorrows and sufferings let thy comforts rejoyce his Soul. TO this end, mortifie in him the Corruption of Nature, quicken him with the Soul of new life, and establish him with thy free Spirit; purge his heart from all worldly thoughts, and his mind from carnal desires, motions and affecti∣ons; wash his Soul and Body with the Blood of Christ, and sanctifie him throughout in Spirit, Soul and Body, with the Grace of thy holy Spirit, that departing in the true Faith, not casting away his confidence, nor hope of rejoy∣cing, in full assurance of a blessed Resur∣rection, he may have boldness in the day of the Lord Jesus, and so pass from Death to Life, and be ever with thee to behold thy Glory; grant this for the sake of thy dear Son, our Lord and Sa∣viour. Amen.
Another Prayer to be used by those that are about the Sick. O LORD our God, thou art the Judge of all the Earth; we Dust and Ashes, vile and miserable Sinners, do here in all humility cast down our selves before thee for our Sins, which are the occasion of all the evil of punishment thou▪ inflictest on the Sons and Daughters of Men. Lord hear us, and forgive whatsoever is past, and grant that we may for ever hereafter serve and please thee through newness of life, walking be∣fore thee in holiness and righteousness all our days; and because the days are evil, give us Grace to redeem the time, that numbring our days aright, we may ap∣ply our hearts unto true Wisdom; make us constantly to eschew evil and do good, to seek peace and ensue it. LOOK with thine Eye of Mercy and Compassion upon this thy Servant, who is grieved with Sickness; sanctifie this thy Visitation unto him, that those Gra∣ces which thou hast begun to work in him, may be strengthened, increased, and by degrees perfected; restore unto him the voice of joy and health, that the
Bones which thou hast broken may re∣joyce. And seeing we have need of pa∣tience, send this thy Servant such a de∣gree of patience and consiancy, that he may continue thy Faithful Soldier and Servant unto his lives end; work in him a sense and seeling of sin, and true sorrow for the same, which may cause repen∣tance unto Salvation never to be repent∣ed of. O LORD, if it be not thy good plea∣sure to raise him up from his Bed of languishing, prepare his heart for Death, and his Soul for Heaven, and wash away his Sins in the Blood of Jesus; wean his affections from the love of this World, and set them on those things which are above, that being absent from the Body, he may be present with thee, O Lord. Repair in this thy Servant thine own Image, and renew it in knowledge, ho∣liness, and righteousness, that thou may∣est acknowledge him for thine; raise him up from the Grave unto the Re∣surrection of Life, and for ever satisfie him with thy likeness, and transform him into the same from Glory to Glory. Amen.
A Prayer to recommend the Soul to God when it is departing the Body. O MOST Gracious God, we com∣mend into thy holy hands the Soul of this thy Servant, beseeching thee to defend it from all evil, and from thy wrath, which he hath deserved; let thy holy Angels receive this Soul from this ruinous habitation of Clay, and carry it unto the bosom of thy dear Son; O say unto this Soul, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, and fear not, for it is my Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. GIVE unto his decaying Body, a bles∣sed and a glorious Resurrection, to his weary and afflicted, his penitent and re∣deemed Soul, a portion in the blessed sentence of the right hand amongst the happy Children of thy Father, who shall receive the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the World; let his Soul dwell in heavenly Mansions, be supported with thy hope, comforted with a holy conscience, rejoyce in a con∣firm'd pardon, be recreated with the visitation of Angels, and be arrayed in white to follow after the Lamb whither soever he goeth.
A Prayer for a Soul departing. O LORD, remember the good things which by thy Grace, and by the Inspiration of thy holy Spirit, thy Ser∣vant hath performed, and remember not his evil Deeds, nor the frailties of his Youth, which by the weakness of the Flesh, and the temptations of Satan, and the vain contingencies of this World, have afflicted and humbled his poor, but penitent Soul. O God, remember thy only Son did die for these, and thy blessed Spirit occasioned the other; and for whom thou hast given thy Son▪ and to whom thou hast vouchsafed to give thy Spirit, give thy eternal Pardon, and thy everlasting Glories, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. An Act of Resignation when a Friend is deceas'd. O ETERNAL God, who bringest good out of evil, comfort out of sorrow, and after a gentle visitation dost refresh thy Children, have mercy upon us, and return to us with thy lo∣ving
kindness, exchanging our present sorrow into the advantages of holiness and blessing. Thy Judgments, O Lord, are unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out, but we will bless thy holy Name at all times, for thou, O Lord, hast given, and hast taken away, bles∣sed be the Name of the Lord. BE thou now, and for ever, what thou hast so graciously promised; a Fa∣ther of the Fatherless, a Husband to the Widow, and a God of Comfort to them that mourn in secret. Grant that we thy Servants may not weep as them without hope, neither murmur at thy dispensation, nor complain of any thing but our selves, nor desire any thing but that thy Will may be done, nor do any thing but what is agree∣able to thy holy Word and Com∣mandment. GRANT O Lord, that when thou smitest any of us it may encrease thy fear in us, and when thou dost good to any of us in smiting or forbearing, in chastising or Comforting it may encrease thy love in us: And let thy holy Spirit so prevail over all our wills and under∣standings, our Affections, and the out∣ward Man, our interests and our hopes,
that we may live in this World pleasing to thee, and may depart out of this World with the peace of a good Conscience, and may attain to a joyful Resurrection in the last day, and to a participation of thy Glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Meditation after Recovery from Sickness. O COME hither and behold the Works of the Lord, how wonder∣ful he is in his doings towards the Chil∣dren of Men: O come hither and hearken all ye that fear God; and I will tell you what he hath done for my Soul: I called unto him with my mouth, and gave him praises with my Tongue: O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou hast healed me. THOU Lord hast brought my Soul out of Hell: Thou hast kept my Life from them, that go down to the pit: O what great troubles and Adversities hast thou shewed me, and yet didst thou turn and refresh me! yea and broughtest me from the deep of the Earth again: Praised be god which  not cast out my Prayer, nor ned his Mercy from me.
LORD what is Man that thou hast respect unto him! Or the Son of Man that thou so▪regardest him: The Lord is Righteous in all his wayes, and holy in all his Works: The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him; yea all such as call upon him faithfully: He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their Cry and will help them. SING Praises unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks unto him for a remembrance of his Holiness: for his Wrath endureth but the twinkling of Eye, and in his pleasure is Life: Heaviness may endure for a Night, but joy cometh in the Morning: Praised be the Lord daily, even the God which helpeth us and pouereth his benefits up∣on us. HE is our God, even the God of whom cometh Salvation: God is the Lord by whom we escape Death: I will be glad and rejoyce in thy Mercy: For thou hast Considered my trouble, and hast known my Soul in adverity, thou hast turned my heaviness into joy; thou hast put off my Sackeloth, and girded me with gladness. PRAISE the Lord, O my Soul: And
all that is within me Praise his holy Name: Praise the Lord, O my Soul; and forget not all his benefits, Which forgiveth all thy Sin, and healeth all thine infirmities: Which saveth thy life from destruction and Crowneth thee with Mercy and loving kindness: I shall not dye but live, and declare the works of the Lord: The Lord hath chastned me, and corrected me, but he hath not given me over unto Death. A Thanksgiving after Recovery from Sickness OMNIPOTENT Lord God the Au∣thor of Life, who bringest down to the Grave and raisest up again, I most humbly confess to the Glory of thine infinite Majesty, that if thou hadst not out of thy tender Compassion blessed and sustained me in my sickness, I should have gone down to the Gates of Death; but it was thy goodness, and loving kindness to spare and deliver me from all dangers: Let me for ever Praise and glorifie thy holy Name for this and all other thy Mercies towards me. THOU art gracious when thou smit∣est me, but I cannot express thy infinite
sweetness, when thou Relievest my ne∣cessity, when thou sustainest my Sorrows, when thou dot deliver me from thy Wrath, when thou hearest my prayers, and when thou pourest thy Benefits up∣on me: O give unto me thy unworthy Servant a thankful Heart, and obedient and loving Spirit, a carefulness of my Duty, Charity, and Humility, Zeal of thy Glory, and a submission to thy Divine will and Pleasure: that serving thee in all things, I may be conducted at last to thy Heavenly Kingdom. TEACH me alwayes to remember my latter end, and that this Life is but a shadow, that declineth, and withereth like Grass; But thou O Lord shalt en∣dure for ever, for thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no end: Bring me by an unchangeable love and obedi∣ence to thee in all the changes and chances of this mortal Life; for his sake who loved me, and gave himself for me, even thy Son, and my alone Saviour. Amen. A Prayer before a Iourney. O MOST gracious and Merciful Lord God who art a God a far
off, as well as nigh at hand, be pleased to send thy holy Angel before me thy Servant, to defend me in this my journey from the heat of the day, and the Cold of the night, from the Arrow that flies at Noon, and the evil Spirits that walk in darkness, from errors and falls, from precipices and fracture of bones, from Robbers, evil intentions, and bad acci∣dents, from violent Weather, and violent Fears, from all impressions of evil Men, and evil Spirits; let this Journey be safe and useful to me thy Servant, Comfortable to my Relations, and holi∣ness to thy great Name. THE Lord bless me and keep me, the Lord make his Face to shine upon me, and be gracious unto me; keep me from all evil, and lead me into all good by the Conduct of thy good Spirit; let thy providence and love, be my defence and security, thy Grace be my portion, and thy Service my Employment; do thou O Lord, go in and out before me, and keep me in all my wayes, and lead me in thy Paths: bring me back again in peace and safety, and prosper all my innocent and holy purposes; and when the few and evil daies of my Pilgrimage are ended, do thou of thy in∣finite
Mercy bring me to the Regions of holiness and eternal peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Thanksgiving after a Iourney. O GOD, the great Creator and pre∣server of all Men, I give thee humble and hearty thanks for thy great Mercies shewed unto me, all the dayes of my Life; how often O Lord, hast thou turned away thy Face from my sins, and made as if thou perceivest them not? How often mightest thou have with-held thy hand of preservation from me, and yet thy patience hath extended so far towards me, that thou hast suffer∣ed no prejudice to befall me? And as I owe thee infinite thanks for thy former preservations, so now I am further obliged to thee, that thou hast at this time not only guided me to the place, whither I designed to go, but hast also brought me back in safety, and in my ab∣sence hast preserved all things unto me. GIVE me thy Grace, O Lord, to be alwaies mindful of these, and all other thy Mercies towards me, and make me truly thankful unto thee for them; and
grant that as by this thy Mercy I have well finished my affairs abroad, and am returned safe to this my Temporal habi∣tation; so grant that my Spirit after this Pilgrimage here on Earth, may return to thy Heavenly mansion, and there dwell with thee for ever, and that for the sake and merits of Jesus Christ, my Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer before a Voyage. OETERNAL God, even the God of our Salvation, the hope of all the ends of the Earth, and of them that remain in the wide Ocean; under the shadow of whose Wings we are always secure, and without whose protection we can∣not expect safety; I have been, O Lord, preserved by thee until this moment from many dangers, for which I have not expressed my thankfulness in acknowledging those dayly blessings I have received from thee; but O Lord, forget and forgive those manifold sins which I have Committed against thee, and blot them out of thy Book of re∣membrance. PURGE me O Lord, I beseech thee
from all vile affections, and grant I may bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit; go along with me with thy blessed Spirit in this my Voyage, preserve me from Pirates, Robbers and Enemies, defend me from Rocks, Sands and Shelves, and keep me from Thunder and Lightning, Storms and Tempestuous Weather, or any other danger that may dismay me. To thee, O Lord, I commend my Bo∣dy and Spirit, to dispose of me accord∣ing to thy holy Will and Pleasure; if thou art pleased to call for my life upon the surface of the Waters, I know thy Almighty Word can command the Sea to give up her Dead at the last and great audit. BUT if thou hast determined to bring me safe to my desired Haven, give me thy Grace which is sufficient for me to walk according to thy holy Will in all things; make me to lay hold of eternal Life, which as the Anchor of Hope, is both sure and stedfast; keep me from all temptations Ghostly and Bodily, and from sudden Death, and in thy good time bring me to the Land of the Li∣ving, there to reign with thee for ever∣more. Amen.
A Thanksgiving after a Voyage. O IMMORTAL God, I have seen thy Works O Lord, and thy Won∣ders in the Deep; thou spakest the Word and the stormy Wind arose, which lifted up the Waves thereof, but when we cried unto thee, thou madest the Storm to cease, so that the Waves thereof were still; then did we rejoyce because we were at rest, and thou broughtest us safe to that Haven where we would be: O that men would therefore praise thee, O Lord, for thy Goodness, and declare the Wonders thou dost continually for them. I BLESS thy holy Name, for con∣ducting me through those many dangers which encompassed me, and praise thy Mercy that the Deep hath not swalloyed me up, and that I am not gone down into the place of Silence. I also praise thy holy Name, and admire thy loving Kindness towards me, that thou hast not delivered up my Body and Goods as a prey into the hands of unreasonable Men, but hast brought me to my desired Haven, and at last hath returned me back in safety to my Habitation.
O LET me never forget to pay those vows I made to thee, when I was in trouble; but give me an awful sense and apprehension of thy great power, and possess my Soul with a true reve∣rence of thy Divine Majesy; that I may evermore serve thee in holiness and Righteousness all the dayes of my Life; Endue me with thy holy Spirit that I may become acceptable in thy sight, and may be fitted at lenght for future Glories this I beg for thy Son Jesus Christ sake, my only Saviour. Amen. A Prayer in a Storm. O LORD, our God, thou hast com∣manded us in the day of Calamity to call upon thy Name, and thou hast promised to hear us; Lord, I fly unto thee, who art a sure refuge, thy Flood∣gates are opened, and the Floods lift up their lofty waves. But thou O Lord, most high art mightier than the noise of many Waters; yea, than the mighty Waves of the Sea: Thou canst in a moment if it stand with thy Divine will and pleasure, rebuke the Winds and the Sea and this Storm into a Calm
I KNOW I justly deserve, to be cast away and utterly to be rejected by thee; but Lord save us or else we perish, ac∣cept of my unfeigned Sorrow for all my sins and trangressions, and endue me with a stedfast resolution to forsake them; be merciful unto us, O God, be merci∣ful unto us, and save us from perishing in these deep Waters; O refresh us with thy Mercy and that soon, lest we go down into the place of silence; O com∣fort us in this great distress, that though the Sea rage and swell, our hearts may be quiet and still in this time of our disconsolation. AND as I earnestly desire to be pro∣tected from this great Peril and danger which now terrifies us, so I earnestly be∣seech thee, that thou wilt for ever fill my heart with such an awful dread of thy Ma∣jesty, that I may fear thy Name and praise thy power in the great Congrega∣tion; awake my dull and drousie Soul, from the sloth of Sin, and renew a right Spirit within me; fill me with the gifts and Graces of thy holy Spirit, that I may live the life of the Righteous, and never forget thy loving kindness; save us now from death I beseech thee, from the merciless Waves who are now ready to
swallow us up, and bring us home in safety for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, our on∣ly Lord and Saviour, Amen. A Thanksgiving after a Storm. I PRAISE and glorifie thy holy Name, O Lord, for all thy mercies and bles∣sings vouchsafed unto me, especially for this thy last great Deliverance, wherein I was encompassed in that wide Ocean, whom thou hast set bounds and limits to; if thou, O Lord hadst not been on my side, the Sea had swallowed me up quick, and I had gone down into the deep of silence; but thou hast been my God and my deliverer, and hast put a new Song into my Mouth, even a Song of Praise, and Thanksgiving unto my God. I ACKNOWLEDG O Lord, that thou art the God of all the Earth, and of them that remain in the broad Sea; Blessed for ever, and magnified be thy Name, that thou hast not cast me out of thy sight, nor turned thy Mercy from me; I have escaped thy raging Sea, and the noise of the proud Waves have done me no harm; if thy Almighty provi∣dence
had not protected me, the Streams had gone over my Soul: But the stormy wind and Tempest I have narrowly es∣caped, the storm is ceased, and I am safely delivered. AND now what shall I render to thee O Lord, for this and all other thy great benefits? I will offer up unto thee, the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will pay those vows I so solemnly made unto thee when I was in trouble; I will ever∣more remember, that my help is in the Lord who made Heaven and Earth, and that thou art that God that can and will deliver me; let this thy mercy and loving∣kindness never depart my memory, but let me praise thy goodness and sing of thy power, unto my lives end. Amen. A Prayer in time of Thunder and lightning. O MOST mighty, and terrible Lord God, before whom the Earth shakes and the Heavens drop at thy presence; thou overturnest the mountains by the roots and removest them in thy anger; thou dost great things and thy wayes are past finding out; yea thou dost wonders without number: Thy voice O Lord,
is very powerful, full of Majesty, that it rends the Air, and casts forth flames of Fire. Thou canst, O Lord, at this time, tear us in pieces, and none can be able to deliver us, for there is none but thee alone that delivers after this sort. O WHO would not dread thy All∣glorious Name, O Lord? Who would not stand in awe of thy Majesty? Who would not fear thy Judgments, when thou shoots forth thy Arrows of Thun∣der and Lightning? It is of thy meer Mercy, O Lord, that we are not at this time consumed, but that thy tender com∣passions fail not toward us poor, but miserable Sinners; the blast of the breath of thy Notrils, can drive us like Chaff before the face of the Wind, and chase us into the bottomless Pit, from whence there is no Redemption. BUT thine Eye, O Lord, hath spa∣red us, and we are yet alive, O make us living Monuments of thy Mercy, that we may work out our Repentance unto Salvation, and let it be such a Repentance never to be repented of; possess my heart with such a fear and a love of thee, that I may tremble at thy Word, and melt at the sight of thy Judgments; deliver me, I humbly beseech thee, in that great
day of thy appearance, and let me not be in the number of Depart ye Cursed, but among those whom thou callest, Come you blessed of my Father, inherit the King∣dom prepared for you. This I humbly beg for thy Sons sake, our only Lord and Saviour. Amen. The Marriners Prayer. O GOD, the great Creator of Hea∣ven and Earth, thou dost whatso∣ever thou pleaset in the Sea, and in all deep places; I, the most unworthiest of all thy Servants, am at this time called upon to behold thy Wonders in the Deep, and to perform my Duty in great Waters. Guide me, I beseech thee, in all times and in all places; be thou our skilful Pilot to steer us, and protect us from all Dangers, and rebuke the Winds and the Seas when they molest us; preserve our Vessel from being rent by the loud cracks of Thunder, or from being burnt by Lightning, or any other accident; keep us and save us from tempestuous Weather, from bitter Frosts, Hail, Ice, Snow, or Whirlwinds, and from Captivity and Slavery.
TEACH me, O God, to remember thee my Creator in the days of my Youth, to continually think upon thee, and to praise thy Name for all thy Mer∣cies; bless all our Friends, I beseech thee, that are on Land, and let their Prayers for us be acceptable in thy sight, and grant that our next meeting together may be for the better, and not for the worse, even to the praising and magni∣fying of thy holy Name, and the Salva∣tion of our own Souls, in the great day of the Lord Jesus, to whom with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed all Ho∣nour, Power and Glory, Adoration and Subjection, now and for evermore. Amen. The Soldiers Prayer. O MOST Omnipotent Lord God, Heaven is thy Throne, and Earth is thy Footstool, and the whole Host of Heaven continually pays obedience to thee. O Lord, I present my self before thee, acknowledging my own vileness, but thy infinite goodness, my own weakness, but thy infinite Power and Majesty. O thou that teaches our hands to War, and our fingers to Fight, endue
me with a courage and resolution to run through those difficulties I may meet withal, and when any engagement pre∣sents it self for the publick good of my King and Country, then, O my God, animate me with that vigour and Christi∣an fortitude, that I may overcome all those which oppose thee, and thy people. PRESERVE me, I beseech thee, and bless me in all my Enterprises; save me from Death, and cover my head in our day of Battel; prosper our Arms with good success, make our Religion and Country, like the House of David, grow stronger and stronger, but let the Ene∣my, like the House of Saul, grow weak∣er and weaker; let no covetous desires, greediness of spoil, ambition, vain-glo∣ry, hatred, malice, uncharitableness, or any thing that exalts it self against thee and thy Kingdom; ever take hold of me, keep me from all Atheism, Infide∣lity, Blasphemy and Prophaneness; from all Rioting, Chambering and Wanton∣ness; grant that I may do no violence to any man, nor accuse no man falsly, but be content with my Wages, that when ever Death approaches, I may joyfully, giving up the Ghost, pronounce this saying, I have fought a good fight,
I have finish'd my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Iudge, shall give unto all those which love and fear him, and put their trust in his mercy. Amen. The Magistrates Prayer. O GOD, thou Supreme Judge of the World, thou didit ordain Man through thy Wisdom, and gavest him dominion over thy Creatures, and autho∣rity to govern the World, according to equity and righteousness, and to execute Judgment with all uprightness; thou hast appointed me a Minister, O Lord, and a Judge of thy Sons and Daughters, but none can discharge so great a trust, with∣out thy divine power and assitance. TO thee therefore, O Lord, do I humbly address my self; thou art the Fountain from whence every good and perfect gift cometh, and none can rule without thy Wisdom guides them. Endue me, O Lord, with that wisdom which is from above, which is first pure, and then peaceable; inspire me with an under∣standing Spirit, that I may discern be∣tween
Good and Evil, between Light and Darkness, that I may be always rea∣dy to pronounce a just sentence in all Causes; let the Scales of Justice be ever even, and let my Eyes be blind, and my Ears deaf, to all gifts or popular ap∣plause amongst men; suffer me not to bear thy Sword in vain, but fill me with that Zeal and Courage, that I may be ready to punish Wickedness and Vice, but encourage true Religion and Vertue, so that at the last, when thou shalt be pleased to call me hence, I may give up my accounts with joy, and not with grief, and receive those blessed Words which thou hast pronounced, of Well done thou good and faithful Servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord. Amen. A Prayer of a Debtor in Prison. O GOD, the helper of the poor and needy, and all those who are in ad∣versity; look down, I beseech thee, with an Eye of Pity and Compassion, upon thy afflicted Servant, the place I am in is miserable disconsolate and comfortless, but withdraw not the light of thy coun∣tenance from me. O Lord, I confess I
have abused all those mercies I have enjoyed, I have not employed that pre∣cious time thou hast given me to improve, but on the contrary, I have been neg∣ligent and guilty of all profuseness; I have been worse than an Infidel, in not making that provision for my Fa∣mily which I was obliged in Justice to perform, neither have I paid those due Debts which I became bound to do, therefore a I plunged into this depth of misery. Divers ways I am apprehensive, I have highly offended thy Divine Majesty, both in thought, word, and deed, for which I earnestly implore thy gracious pardon and forgiveness; I acknowledge thy Divine Goodness and Mercy, that thou hast not snatched me hence, and sent me into everlasting burnings amongst the damned, but thou hast preserved me unto this moment, that I might live and praise thy great Name. My Body, O Lord, is now confin'd, but I beseech thee enlarge my Spirit, whereby I may offer up the Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving with all cheerfulness, for all thy innumerable benefits, which I have from time to time received from thee; dispose the hearts of my Creditors
to a free compliance, and enable me I beseech thee to make them restitution, that when Ever I shall be released, I may walk more Circumspectly, and re∣deem that time I have so vainly lost: Bless all those whose Charity have ex∣tended to my relief, or have sought to procure my Liberty, and bring us all at last to thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen. A Prayer of a Malefactor in Prison. O MOST merciful God, thou art Holy in all thy ways, and righteous in all thy Works; vouchsafe thy Grace, O Lord, to a vile wretch and incor∣rigible sinner; I implore O Lord, that Mercy which formerly I have a∣bused, I sigh and groan now under the Weight of my sins, and they are become a burden too heavy for me to bear; my presumptuous and wicked proceedings stick like so many arrows within me, and when with an awakened Conscience I re∣member them, I am ready to sink down into the Pit of perdition, and utterly de∣spair of any Mercy or Compassion. HOW brutish have I been, in hating instruction, and all manner of reproof. I have not obeyed the voice of my
Teachers, neither did I incline my Ear to them that admonished me, but like the Daf adder I stopped my Ears and ad∣hered not to wise Councel; thy most holy Laws I have broken, thy Sabbath I have prophaned by excess of drunkenness and all manner of riot and debauchery, which have been as forerunners of this crime, for which I stand now committed, and the hand of justice hath overtaken me. But O Lord, I beseech thee, have Mercy upon me even for his sake who redeemed me and all Mankind; accept of his atonement for my sins, and save my Soul for thy Mercies sake; wash away all my sins in his most precious Blood, and blot out all my offences out of thy remembrance; O shew me some taste of thy tender Mercy, whereby the fear of death may be abated, give me some assurance of a hope in thee that when my day of dissolution comes, my unworthy Soul may be received into thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen. A Submission to the sentence of Death. O ETERNAL God, in all humility of Soul and Body, I cast my self at
the Feet of thy Divine Majesty; thou art the Soveraign Judge of the all the World, and hast fully pronounced a∣gainst me and all sinners, that dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt return, in obe∣dience to thy Divine Justice, I wholly resign all the faculties of my Soul and Body to thy sentence pronounced against me, acknowledging it most just and due to me for those infinite Sins I have com∣mitted against thee. O Let it never slip from my Memory, that bloody and shameful Death of thy Son Jesus Christ, who after he had suf∣fered in his Soul unspeakable sorrows, and in his Agony and bloody Sweat of∣fered up himself a Sacrifice for mine, and the sins of the whole World: Never let me never repine at what the hand of Justice hath decreed to my Body, but let me by a sincere repentance, seek thy face to preserve my Soul; the Death I am to suffer is painful and even a shame∣full death; but thou, O my God canst make my passage Easie. THOU O my God didst remember the Thief upon the Cross, O remember me I beseech thee in my last Hour, and say unto my Soul, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise; keep my heart and
mouth from pronouncing words which may be offensive to Christian Ears, but let me never be ashamed to confess thy holy Name, and to continue thy Soldier and Servant, manfully fighting under thy Banner, unto my lives end. Strength∣en me, O Lord, in this great conflict, and shew me the light of thy Counte∣nance for evermore. Amen. A Preparation for Death. MOST gracious God, the Fountain of all goodness, I bless and mag∣nifie thy holy Name, for all thy mercies extended to me and all Mankind; I bless thee for my being and well-being, from the hour of my Conception, to the day of my Nativity, from my Mino∣rity to my riper Years, and age of full strength, and even to this present mo∣ment; I praise thy holy Name for all the means of Grace; and for the hope of Glory, for my Creation, Redemption▪ Preservation, and all the blessings of this life. I MAGNIFIE thee for all thy mer∣cies, in forgiving my infinite Transgres∣sions; for all thy patience and long∣suffering
towards me, I have, like the Prodigal Son, absented my self from thee, and at my return thou hast received me graciously. Lord, I humbly beseech thee, raise me up from the death of Sin unto the life of Righteousness, that be∣ing made a partaker of the death of Christ, and a follower of his holy life, I may be made a partaker of his Spirit, and of his Promises. O LET me never charge thee, O my God, foolishly, nor offend thee by my impatience, and uneasie Spirit, nor weaken the hands and hearts of those that charitably minister to my Necessi∣ties, but let me pass through this vale of tears, and the valley of the shadow of death, with peace and safety, with a meek spirit, and a sense of thy divine mercies; grant this, eternal God, for the merits of thy only Son, my ever blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer for Pardon of Sin. O MOST merciful God, who would∣est not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wick∣edness and live, have mercy upon me,
and heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee, I have committed Iniquity with greediness, and have added unto sin daily and hourly, I have made reso∣lutions and purposes of amendment, but in a moment I have started aside like a broken Bow, and have returned to my former custom, like the Dog to his vomit, and the Swine to her wallowing in the mire. BUT thou art a God, gracious and merciful, pardoning Iniquity, Trans∣gression and Sin, and there is forgiveness with thee, that thou maist be feared; therefore to thee, O God, I come like an ungracious Child, but to a gracious Father; I come in all humility of Soul and Body, and appeal from thy Throne of Justice, unto thy Mercy-seat. Mercy good Lord, I beg at thy fatherly hands, for I acknowledge with grief of heart, and sorrow of spirit, that I have infinite∣ly sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. GIVE unto me, O Lord, a new heart, and a right understanding, that I may perceive the evil of my ways, and repent of all my transgressions: Lord, where Iniquity did abound, there let
thy Grace much more abound; hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine Iniquities, and receive me graci∣ously; and that for his sake who died for Sin, and knew no Sin; even that Immaculate Lamb, thy dear Son Jesus Christ the Righteous, my only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.
ADDITIONAL DEVOTIONS FOR Several Occasions, ORDINARY AND EXTRAORDINARY. Phil. iv. vi. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your re∣quests be made known unto God. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1692
ADDITIONAL DEVOTIONS. A Prayer for Christmass- Day. O BLESSED Lord, who as up∣on this day took our Nature upon thee, and wast born of a pure Virgin, keep me from de∣filing my self with sinful pollutions, or abasing, or enthralling it to Satan; let thy Spirit quicken me, thy Flesh nou∣rish me, thy Wisdom guide me, thy Grace sanctifie me: Let thy holy Ghost of whom thou wast conceived, beget thee in me, by the Immortal Seed of thy Word; let my Faith conceive thee, my Profession bring thee forth, my Love embrace thee, and Devotion entertain, and continually keep thee with me, un∣thy second coming. Amen.
A Prayer for New Years Day. O Lord, who this day wast Circum∣cised and Bleddest for my sins, have pity and compassion, who with weeping Eyes and a bleeding heart come unto thee; beseeching thee, that those drops of blood which fell from thee this day, may satisfie for the sin of my un∣worthy Birth; and as thou hast begun a new Year, begin in me a new re∣formation, make me, I beseech thee, a clean heart, and renew a right Spirit within me; let me now cast off the old Man, and put on the new; and from this day to the end of my life, walk in newness of life, that I may become a fit guest to be admitted into the new Hea∣ven, where dwelleth Righteousness, and to be entertained at thy Table, and drink new Wine with thee, in thy Hea∣venly Kingdom, for evermore. A Prayer for Twelfe Day. O GOD, thou light of all the World, who guidedst the Heathen Sages by a Star, to seek after thee, give me
Grace to hearken to the more sure Word of Prophesy in thy holy Scripture, till the day dawn, and the day-star arise in my heart, the Star guided them, till they approached thy presence, so, O Lord, let the light of Faith guide me in all the Paths of this Life, even till I come to behold thee, not in a poor Stable littered with straw and dung, but in a celestial Palace founded, upon Pearls, and built with Saphyrs; not receiving a pre∣sent of Gold which fades away, but wear∣ing a never fading Crown of Glory; not having a quantity of Frankingense or Myrh in thy hand, but a golden Censor full of Sweet odours, which are the praises of thy Saints and Angels; amongst which I beseech thee offer up the Prayers of me a Sinner, that I may become a Saint thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen. A Prayer for Ash-wednesday. O ETERNAL God, who dist fast forty dayes in the wilderness, ac∣cept of my humiliation these forty days; and grant that I may not only fast from accustomed Meats, but that all my senses
may be restrained from their usual af∣fections of this World, let no object de∣light me till I behold my sins removed like a mist, and the light of thy Counte∣nance shine upon me: Let no sound or voice delight my Ear, till I hear thee by thy Spirit, speak peace to my Con∣science, and say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation: Let no other pleasures take hold of me, till with the lower Herbs of Sorrow and anguish I have Eaten the Christian passover, the flesh of thee, that Immaculate lamb, slain from the beginn∣ing of the World: Hear me, O belssed re∣deemer, and as thou wrotest in dust when thou tookest the woman in a adultery: So I beseech thee write my sins in dustand bu∣ry them all in the ashes of oblivion. Amen. A Prayer on good Friday. O MOST Merciful and Gracious Lord God, who by thy obedience unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, didst become the Sacrifice of the whole universe, the magnificent example of patience, the Lord of Life, the good shepherd laying down thy Life for thy sheep, and the only Mediator between
God and Man; let thy bleeding wounds heal, thy precious blood cleanse, thy shameful death make me to live, and thy holy Spirit make me to work righte∣ousness all my dayes; that I may by thy aid, and example obey my Heavenly father with all my powers and faculties, reason and affections, with my Soul and Body, time and Estate in prosperity, and in adversity; that I may bear my Cross patiently, do thy work cheerfully, and be ready to benefit mankind, with great Charity and industry, that being a follower of thy Life, and a partaker of thy death, I may receive a part in the Resurrection of the just in thy inheritance for evermore. Amen. A Prayer on Easter Day. O MOST glorious redeemer, thou didst pass from a painful life to an Ignominious death, and from the bitterness of it to the darkness of the Grave, and by thy Divine power didst raise thy self from thence to Life; I give thee thanks for thy infinite love to me and all Mankind; I acknowledg thee to be my Lord, and confess thee to be my
God, I adore thy Majesty and rejoyce in thy Mercies; I humbly pray thee, to enable me with thy Spirit to believe all thy Doctrines, and obey all thy Com∣mandments, that after a holy and religi∣ous life spent in doing honour to thy holy Name, I may be a partaker of thy holy Resurrection, passing from death to life, from the darkness of the Grave, to the light of Heaven, from an imperfect duty to the perfection of holiness in the fruiti∣on of the joyes of God in thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen. A Prayer upon Ascension Day. O BLESSED Jesus, thou didst ascend to thy holy Father and didst open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers; thou hast espoused thy Church unto thy self with the Everlasting circles of thy providence, with thy Love and with thy Care with thy Word and with thy Spirit, thy promises and thy holy intercession; thou hadst a feeling of my infirmiteis, and art my Merciful high Priest making intercession for me for ever; O be thou pleased to represent all my wants, and supply them, and excuse all my in∣firmities
pity all my Calamities, pardon my Sins and send down thy holy Spirit of Grace into my heart, that though I wander here upon Earth, yet my Con∣versation may be in Heaven, where let my inheritance be for ever. Amen. A Prayer on Whitsunday. O GOD, the Father of all Spirits, who didst send thy holy Spirit up∣on thy Church in the day of pentecost, and hast promised that he shall abide with thy Church for ever, let thy holy Spirit lead me into all truth, defend me from all Sins, enrich me with his gifs, re∣fresh me with his Comforts, rule in my heart for ever, Conduct me with his truth and lead me in the way▪ Everlast∣ing, that living by thy Spirit and walk∣ing in him, I may by him be Sealed up to the day of my redemption; O let thy Spirit witness to my Spirit, that I am thy Child, and make me to be so▪ for ever, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer, who liveth and reigneth with thee in the unity of the same Spirit, one God, world without end. Amen.
A Prayer upon Trinity Sunday. O HOLY, Blessed and glorious Trini∣ty, the Angels are amazed in the beauties of that glorious presence, how then can I poor sinful wretch praise thee either according to my Duty, or thy Glories; I confess and glory in thy om∣nipotency, thy omniscience, thy truth, and thy Mercy, O let me also receive thy blessings and gracious influences, that I may adore thee with all my power for ever, and serve thee with my best and earliest industry; that being here wholly inebriated with Love, and employed in thy service and the Duty of a holy obe∣dience, I may to all eternity rejoyce in the beholding of those Glories which are above all capacities, even those Glories which stream forth from the Throne of the Eternal God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to whom be Glory and Dominion, Honour and adoration, world without end. Amen.
A Prayer to be used upon any Apostles Day. O ALMIGHTY God, who has built thy Holy Church upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, I bless and magnifie thy holy Name, for thy great Graces thou gavest to thy Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, in the days of their Flesh, and this day I have thy Servant [Here name the Apostle] in remembrance, praising thee for the be∣nefit the Church hath received by his Ministry and Example; and I beseech thee give me thy Grace, that obeying thy Doctrine which he taught, and fol∣lowing his Example as he followed Christ, I may also with safety and holi∣ness pass through this Valley of Tears, that serving thee in my Generation, ad∣vancing thy Honour, and obeying thy Laws, I may in the Society and Com∣munion of Saints and Angels, Sing eter∣nal Hallelujahs to the honour of thy Mercy, and of thy Majest, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A Prayer for the Church. O LORD God Almighty, I beseech thee keep thy holy Church, in Peace, Unity, and Safety, preserve it against all Storms, Temptations and Enemies, that she offering to thy Glory the never-ceasing Sacrifice of Praise and Yhanksgiving, may advance the honour of her Lord, and be partaker of his Glory, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer for the King and Queen. ALMIGHTY God, by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, I humbly beseech thee to save, and with the choicest of thy Benedictions, bless thy Servants, and our Soveraign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary; preserve their Royal Persons in Health and Honour, their power in Wealth and Dignity, their Dominions in Peace and Plenty; the Churches un∣der their Protections, in Piety, Know∣ledge, and a strict and holy Religion. Let not the Wicked approach to hurt
them, nor any Weapon that is formed against them prosper, but keep them perpetually in thy fear and favour, and Crown them at last with Glory and Immortality. Amen. A Prayer for the Royal Family. BLESS, O Lord, I beseech thee, Ka∣therine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess▪ Ann of Denmark, with the rest of the Royal Fa∣mily; keep them in thy fear, and pro∣tect them with thy favour, and after this life is ended, Crown them with ever∣lasting happiness in the World to come. Amen. A Prayer for the Clergy. O ALMIGHTY God, protect thy Stars in thy right hand, the mo Reverend the Archbishops, the right Re∣verend the Bishops, with all other Infe∣rior Priests and Deacons; grant that all Congregations committed to their charge, may edifie by their Doctrine, and live Godly and Peaceable lives under them,
to the saving of their Souls in the day of the Lord Jesus. Amen. A Prayer for the High Court of Parlia∣ment. BLESS, O Lord, I beseech thee, the great Councel of the Nation, the Lords and Commons assembled in Par∣liament, grant that all their Consultati∣ons may tend to thy Glory, the good of thy Church, and the Safety, Honour, and Welfare, of our Soveraign Lord and Lady, and their Kingdoms; let Justice run down like a stream, and Righteousness like the mighty Waters, that there may be no leading into Cap∣tivity, nor no complaining in our Streets, but that Mercy and Truth may meet together, and Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other; grant this, O Lord, for thy Sons sake, and my alone Redeemer. Amen.
A Prayer for the Navy and Army. O ETERNAL God, thou art the Lord of Hosts, and the strength of all Nations is from thee, and no Victory can wait upon the justest Designs, upon the wisest Councels, upon the strongest Armies, if thou teach not their hands to War, and their fingers to Fight. Lend us, O Lord, thy assistance, by Land and Sea, be with our Armies, and the Armies of our Allies and Asso∣ciates by Land, and be with our Navy at Sea; be not from the one, nor from the other, until thou hast brought them back with Honour, Victory, or a settled Peace: Let not that proud Disturber, and Destroyer of Mankind, any longer Insult over thy People, but turn his Sword into his own Bosom. O Lord, thy Servants are unfeignedly sorrowful for those Sins they have committed against thy Divine Majesty, O do thou pardon us, and receive us graciously, and then we may trust in thy goodness, that thou wilt pour down all thy Bles∣sings upon this, and all other designs and actions of this State, undertaken
for thy Glory, the Honour of our most gracious Soveraign Lord and Lady, the Peace and Welfare of the whole Church, and Their Majesties three Kingdoms; grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen. A. Prayer for Gods People in General. MOST gracious God, I humbly be∣seech thee to bless all thy People, wheresoever dispersed, or howsoever distressed, over the face of the whole Earth, more especially in these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland; give us all humble and obedient hearts to thee our God, Loyal hearts to our So∣veraign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, and charitable thoughts one towards another; Convert and bring home thine own People the Iews, and bring in the fulness of the Gentiles; save and have Mercy upon all Asiaticks and Affricans, and all those that never heard of a Crucified Saviour; this I humbly beg for thy Sons sake, my alone Saviour. Amen.
A Thanksgiving for our deliverance from the Spanish Invasion. WE laud and magnifie thy holy Name for this thy wonderful de∣liverance from Roman Slavery, and Po∣pish Usurpation, which would have de∣stroyed the Renowned and Glorious Queen Elizabeth and her Kingdom; their Gallies and Ships came to assault us, being full of pride, and nominating themselves Invincible; but thou, O Lord, our strength, didst awake us out of sleep, and like a Giant refreshed with Wine, and smote our Enemies in the hinder parts, and didst put them all to Confusion. Grant, O Lord, that we may never want thankful hearts to praise thee, for this and all other thy Mercies, even to our lives end. Amen. A Thanksgiving for our great deliverance from the Powder Treason, and from Po∣pery and Slavery, and Arbitrary Power. O MOST mighty God, whose All∣seeing Eye of Providence didst dis∣cover to us that Train which Popish ma∣lice
had laid to destroy the King, his Nobles and Commons, then assembled in Parliament; they had contrived by their barbarous Invention, to have blown up the Bodies of that great and wise Councel, but thou, O God, didst defeat their Bloody Enterprise, whereof we rejoyce. WE likewise praise and extol thy great Name, for this second and never to be forgotten Deliverance; O let after Ages, and the Children that are yet un∣born, when they come to understand this thy wonderful Mercy, let it never slip from their memory. Thou, O Lord, didst raise up thy Servant, our Soveraign Lord, King William, who like Moses, stood in the Gap between us and Roman Slavery, which like a Torrent was pouring upon us; O let us never forget thy double Mercy ex∣tended towards us this day, thou hast plucked us as a Firebrand out of the burning, and hast restored to us those good and wholsome Laws, and Liber∣ties, which our Ancestors have enjoyed; inspire our hearts that we may extol thy Name, O Lord, for these great Mercies and Deliverances, and let all the people with one voice say, Amen.
A Thanksgiving for the happy success of Their Majesties Arms in reducing of Ireland, and for His Majesties safe re∣turn to England. O GOD, the great Preserver of the Universe, I offer up unto thee all Praise and Thanksgiving, for putting an end to those troubles and disorders which were in Their Majesties Kingdom of Ireland; thou hast done great things for us, O Lord, whereof I rejoyce; thy Servant, and our Dear and Dread So∣veraign King William, did expose his Person to the danger of the Enemy, but thou didst protect him from their Ma∣lice, gavest Success to his Arms and Royal Undertaking, and didst cover his Head in the day of Battel, and at last, thou hast brought him safe home with Joy and Victory. Prosper, O Lord, I beseech thee, both Their Majesties with long Life and Happiness, and grant that all their Subjects may be furnished with Loyal and Obedient Hearts towards them, and Love and Charity one to∣wards another; give Peace in our time, O Lord, and put an end to all differen∣ces
amongst us, for thy Sons sake, our only Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer for Charity. GRANT, O Lord I beseech thee, that I may abound in Charity, yeild∣ing up my self first to thy service, and then according to thy blessed will to the service and relief of my poor Brethren; let me ever remember, that thou, O Lord, madest thy self poor, that I might be made rich; and he that Soweth sparingly, shall also reap sparingly, but he that Soweth liberally, shall also reap liberally; for thou lovest a cheerful giver: Make me to abound, O Lord, with thy Grace that I may be plentiful in every good word and work; and never let me hide my Face from the poor and needy: Thou, O Lord givest seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater, encrease my wealth and augment the re∣venue of my Righteousness, whereby I may be enriched in all frankness of li∣berality. Amen.
A Prayer to renounce the World and affect Spiritual things. O GOD the Father, who raised from the dead, our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered up himself a Sacrifice for the sins of the whole World; to the end he might withdraw our affections from Temporal, and fix them upon that which is Eternal; give us hearts to obey thy truth, and infuse into us thy Spirit, which may produce thy vertues in us: And because we are thy Children, send the Spirit of thy Son into our hearts whereby we may cry Abba Father, that' being thy Children, we may be heirs through Christ, and walk according to the Spirit, not fulfilling the Lusts of the flesh, knowing that what a Man Soweth, that shall he reap, for he that Soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption, but he that Soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life Everlasting. LET us glory in nothing; save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world may be drucified unto us, and we unto the World; that in him we may
become new Creatures, not growing weary of well-doing, knowing that we shall reap in due season, if we faint not: Wherefore while we have time, let us do good to all Men, but especi∣ally unto the Houshold of Faith, and all they that shall walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, and upon the Israel of God. A Conclusive Prayer. O ALMIGHTY God, who hast promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy Sons Name, I beseech thee mercifully to incline thing Ears unto me, who have now made my Prayers and Supplication unto thee, and grant that those things which I have faithfully asked according to thy Will, may be effectually obtained, to the re∣lief of my Necessity, and to the setting forth of thy Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Blessing. THE Peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep my heart and mind in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, with the Virtue of Christs blessed Cross, Passion, Resurrection and As∣cension, be with me now, at the hour of Death, and in the Day of Judgment. Amen. GRACES. A Grace before Meat. O GOD, who art the giver of every good and perfect Gift, sanctifie we beseech thee, these thy Creatures now prepared for us, mae them whol∣some for our Bodies, and ou Souls and
Bodies serviceable unto thee for them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Or this. MOST merciful Father, which openest thy hand, and fillest all things with Plenteousness, we pray thee sanctifie these thy good Creatures unto us, that we may eat to preserve life, and living serve thee our God, through thine only Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. Or this. O LORD our God, by whose Pro∣vidence it is that we live, move, and have our Being, send thy Blessing upon us and our Provision, and grant that whether we Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever we do else, we may do all to the Glory of thy Name, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen.
After Meat. THE Lords most holy Name be now and ever blessed and praised for all his Mercies, and for his blessings at this time bestowed upon us. Lord, as thou hast fed our Bodies with corporal Food, so feed our Souls likewise with spiritual Food unto life Eternal. Save thine Uni∣versal Church, these Realms, the King, the Queen, and all the Royal Family, and grant us thy Grace, Mercy, and Peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Or this. THE God of all Grace and Goodness, who at this time hath fed and plen∣teously refreshed us, his most holy Name be blessed and praised, from this time forth, and for evermore. God save his Universal Church, &c.
Or this. WE laud and praise thy Name, O Lord, for all thy blessings and favours, and for feeding us so plenti∣fully at this time, desiring thee of thy Grace, that our thankfulness may not be in Word and in Tongue, but expressed by our careful study to glorifie thee our God, in all our Words and Works, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Save thy Universal Church, &c. THE END.
THE TABLE. WHat Prayer is, and the parts of it pag. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Ejaculations at uprising p. 7 A Morning Prayer for a private Person ibid. When you depart Home p. 9 Ejaculations for the Evening p. 10 An Evening Prayer for a private Person p. 11 Ejaculations on several Occasions. When you awake in the Night. p. 13 When the Clock strikes ibid.
When you intend any Business or Iourney. ibid. When thou art Persecuted p. 12 Upon some sudden fear ibid. Upon any disorderly thoughts ibid. Upon any occasions of sadness ibid. Upon any diffidence ibid. When thou performest any good Work p. 15 When thou art provoked to Anger ibid. For thine Enemies ibid. Upon any Deliverance, or Mercy received ibid. Upon any Loss or Adversity p. 16 When you hear the Bell Toll for one De∣parted ibid. Upon thought of thy Sins ibid. When thou art weary of the Cares and Va∣nities of this World. ibid. Meditations for Sunday p. 17 A Prayer for Sunday Morning p. 18 Sunday Noon p. 20 Sunday Night p. 21 Mondays Meditations p. 23 A Prayer for Monday Morning p. 25 A Prayer for Monday Night p. 27 Tuesdays Meditations p. 28 A Prayer for Tuesday Morning p. 30
A Prayer for Tuesday Night p. 31 Wednesdays Meditations p. 33 A Prayer for Wednesday Morning p. 34 A Prayer for Wednesday Night p. 36 Thursdays Meditations p. 37 A Prayer for Thursday Morning p. 39 A Prayer for Thursday Night p. 40 Fridays Meditations p. 42 A Prayer for Friday Morning p. 44 A Prayer for Friday Night p. 45 Saturdays Meditations p. 47 A Prayer for Saturday Morning p. 48 A Prayer for Saturday Night p. 50 Meditations on the Lords Supper p. 51 A Prayer before the Communion p. 53 An Ejaculation before receiving the Bread p. 54 An Ejaculation before receiving the Cup p. 55 A Prayer after the Communion ibid. A Prayer before hearing the Word p. 57 A Prayer after hearing the Word p. 58 A Prayer for necessary Blessings of this life p. 59 A Thanksgiving for Gods Benefits p. 60 A Prayer for Wisdom p. 61 A Prayer for Defence against our Enemies p. 63 A Morning Prayer for a Family p. 64 A Collect for the Day p. 68
An Evening Prayer for a Family ibid. A Collect for the Night. p. 72 Prayers for several Persons. The Husbands Prayer p. 73 The Wives Prayer p. 75 The Childs Prayer p. 76 The Widows Prayer p. 77 The Orphans Prayer p. 78 A Prayer for a Young Man or Maid p. 79 The Servants Prayer p. 80 A Prayer for the Fruits of the Earth p. 81 A Prayer for seasonable Weather p. 82 A Thanksgiving after a good Harvest p. 83 A Prayer for a Woman with Child p. 84 A Prayer for a Woman near the time of her Travail p. 85 The Midwives Prayer before Deliverance p. 86 A Thanksgiving after Deliverance p. 88 A Prayer for one near any Temptation p. 89 A Prayer for one Afflicted in Mind p. 92
A Prayer to be used in behalf of one troubled in Mind p. 95 Meditations for the Sick p. 97 A Prayer to be used by a Sick Person p. 100 A Prayer to be said by the Friends of the Sick p. 103 Another Prayer to be used by those that are about the Sick p. 106 A Prayer to recommend the Soul to God when it is departing p. 108 A Prayer for a Soul departing p. 109 An Act of Resignation when a Friend is deceas'd p. 109 A Meditation after Recovery from Sickness p. 111 A Thanksgiving after Recovery from Sick∣ness p. 113 A Prayer before a Iourney p. 114 A Thanksgiving after a Iourney p. 116 A Prayer before a Voyage p. 117 A Thanksgiving after a Voyage ibid. A Prayer in a Storm p. 120 A Thanksgiving after a Storm p. 122 A Prayer in time of Thunder and Light∣ning p. 123 The Mariners Prayer p. 125 The Soldiers Prayer p. 126 The Magistrates Prayer p. 128 A Prayer of a Debtor in Prison p. 129 A Prayer of a Malefactor in Prison p. 131
A Submission to the Sentence of Death p. 132 A Preparation for Death p. 134 A Prayer for pardon of Sin p. 135 Additional Devotions. A Prayer for Christmass. Day p. 141 For New-years Day p. 142 For Twelfth-Day ibid. For Ash-Wednesday p. 143 On Good-Friday p. 144 On Easter-Day p. 145 Upon Ascension-Day p. 146 On Whitsunday p. 147 Upon Trinity-Sunday p. 148 Upon any Apostles Day p. 149 For the Church p. 150 A Prayer for the King and Queen ibid. For the Royal Family p. 151 For the Clergy ibid. For the High Court of Parliament p. 152 For the Navy and Army p. 153 For Gods people in General p. 154 A Thanksgiving for our Deliverance from the Spanish Invasion p. 155
For our great Deliverance from the Pow∣der Treason, and from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power ibid. For the haypy success of Their Majesties Arms in reducing of Ireland, and for His Majesties safe return to England p. 157 A Prayer for Charity p. 158 To renounce the World, and to affect Spi∣ritual things p. 159 A Conclusive Prayer p. 160 The Blessing p. 161 Graces before Meat p. 161-2 Graces after Meat p. 163-4 FINIS.
