B1758 11271053 47214
POEMS UPON Several Occasions; WITH A VOYAGE TO THE Island of LOVE. ALSO The Lover in Fashion, being an Account from LYCIDUS to LYSANDER, of his Voyage from the Island of Love. By Mrs A. BEHN. To which is added a Miscellany of New Poems and Songs, by several Hands. The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed for Francis Saunders in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, 1697.
Mrs. Behn pa: 204 Vo 11
TO The Right Honourable, JAMES, EARL of SALISBURY, VISCOUNT CRAMBORN, AND BARON of ISLINGTON. MY LORD, WHO should one celibrate with Verse and Song, but the Great, the Noble and the Brave? where dedicate an Isle of Love, but to the Gay, the Soft and Young? and who amongst Men can lay a better claim to these
than Your Lordship? who like the Sun new risen with the early Day, looks round the World and sees nothing it cannot claim an interest in (for what cannot Wit, Beauty, Wealth and Honour claim?) The violent storms of Sedi∣tion and Rebellion are hush'd and calm'd; black Treason is retir'd to its old abode, the dark Abyss of Hell; the mysterious Riddles of Politick Knaves and Fools, which so long a∣mused and troubled the World's repose, are luckily unfolded; and Your Lordship is salu∣ted at Your first coming forth, Your first set∣ting out for the glorious and happy Race of Life, by a Nation all glad, gay and smiling; and you have nothing before you but a ravi∣shing prospect of eternal Joys, and everlasting inviting Pleasures, and all that Love and Fortune can bestow on their darling Youth, at∣tend You in the noble persuit; and nothing can prevent Your being the most happy of her Favourites, but a too eager flight, a two swift speed o'er the charming flowry Meads and Plains that lie in view, between Your setting out and the end of Your glorious Chase. A long and illustrious race of Nobility has attended
Your great Name, but none I believe ever came into the World with Your Lordship's advanta∣ges; amongst which, my Lord, 'tis not the least that You have the glory to be truly Loy∣al, and to be adorn'd with those excellent Principles, which render Nobility so absolute∣ly worth the Veneration which is paid 'em; 'tis those, my Lord, and not the Title that make it truly great: Grandeur in any other serves but to point 'em out more particularly to the World, and shew their Faults with the grea∣ter magnitude, and render 'em more liable to contempt and that Reward which justly per∣sues Ingratitude; nor is it, my Lord, the ma∣ny unhappy Examples this Age has produc'd that has deter'd you from herding with the busie Unfortunates, and bringing Your power∣full aid to their detestable cause, but a noble Honesty in Your Nature, a Generosity in Your Soul. That even part of Your Education had the good fortune not to be able to corrupt; no Opinion cou'd byass You, no Precedent debauch You; though all the fansied Glories of Power were promis'd You, though all the Contempt thrown on good and brave Men, all the sub∣tile
Arguments of the old Serpent, were us'd against the best of Kings and his illu∣strious Successour, still You were unmov'd; Your young stout Heart with a Gallantry and Force unusual resisted and desied the gil∣ded Bait, laugh'd at the industrious Politicks of the busie Wise, and stubbornly Loyal, con∣temn'd the Counsels of the Grave. Go on, my Lord, advance in Noble resolution, grow up in strength of Loyalty, settle it about Your Soul, root it there like the first Principles of Religion, which nothing ever throughly defa∣ces, and which in spight of even Reason the Soul retains, whatever little Debaucheries the Tongue may commit; You that are great, are born the Bulwarks of sacred Majesty, its defence against all the storms of Fate, the Safety of the People in the Supporters of the Throne; and sure none that ever obey'd the Laws of God and the Dictates of Honour ever paid those Duties to a Sovereign that more truly merited the Defence and Adorations of his People than this of ours; and tis a bles∣sing (since we are oblig'd to render it to the worst of Tyrant Kings) that we have one
who so well justifies that intire Love and Sub∣misson we ought to pay him. You, my Lord, are one whom Thousands of good Men look up to with wondrous Veneration and Joy, when 'tis said Your Lordship amongst Your other Vertues is Loyal too, a true Tory! (a word of Ho∣nour now, the Royal Cause has sanctified it,) and though Your Lordship needs no encou∣ragement to a good that rewards it self, yet I am confident You are not onely rank'd in the esteem of the best of Monarchs, but we shall behold you as one of our Preservers, and all England as one of its great Patrons, when Ages that shall come shall find Your noble Name inroll'd amongst the Friends to Monar∣chy in an Age of so villainous Corruption: Yes, my Lord, they will find it there and bless You. 'Tis this, my Lord, with every other Grace and Noble Vertue that adorns You, and gives the World such promises of Wonders in You, that makes me ambitious to be the first in the Croud of Your Admirers, that shall have the honour to celibrate Your great Name. Be pleased then, my Lord, to accept this Little Piece, which lazy Mi∣nutes
begot and hard Fate has oblig'd me to bring forth into the censuring World, to which if any thing can reconcile it, 'twill be the glory it has to bear Your Noble Name in the front, and to be Patronized by so great and good a Man: Permit but my Zeal for Your Lordship to attone for the rest of my Faults, and Your Lordship will extremely oblige, My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, A. Behn.
TO Mrs. BEHN, ON THE PUBLISHING HER POEMS. Madam, LOng has Wit's injur'd Empire been opprest By Rhiming Fools, this Nations common Jest, And sunk beneath the weight of heavy stafes, In Tory Ballads and Whig Epitaphs; The Ogs and Doegs reign'd, nay Baxter's zeal, Has not been wanting too in writing Ill; Yet still in spight of what the dull can doe, 'Tis here asserted and adorn'd by you. This Book come forth, their credit must decay, Ill Spirits vanish at th'approach of day:
And justly we before your envy'd feet, There where our Hearts are due our Pens submit; Ne'er to resume the baffled things again, Unless in Songs of Triumph to thy Name; Which are outdone by every Verse of thine, Where thy own Fame does with more lustre shine, Than all that we can give who in thy Praises join Fair as the face of Heaven, when no thick Cloud Or darkning Storm the glorious prospect shroud; In all its beauteous parts shines thy bright style, And beyond Humane Wit commedns thy skill; With all the thought and vigour of our Sex The moving softness of your own you mix. The Queen of Beauty and the God of Wars Imbracing lie in thy due temper'd Verse, Venus her sweetness and the force of Mars. Thus thy luxuriant Muse her pleasure takes, As God of old in Eden's blissfull walks; The Beauties of her new Creation view'd, Full of content She sees that it is good. Come then you inspir'd Swains and join your Verse, Though all in vain to add a Fame to hers; But then your Song will best Apollo please, When it is fraight with this his Favorite's praise. Declare how when her learned Harp she strung, Our joyfull Island with the Musick rung; Descending Graces left their Heavenly seat, To take their place in every Line she writ; Where sweetest Charms as in her Person smile, Her Face's Beauty's copy'd in her style. Say how as she did her just skill improve In the best Art and in soft Tales of Love.
Some well sung Passion with success she crown'd, The melting Virgins languish'd at the sound. And envying Swains durst not the Pipe inspire, They'd nothing then to doe but to admire. Shepherds and Nymphs, to Pan direct your Prayer, If peradventure he your Vows will hear, To make you sing, and make you look like her. But, Nymphs and Swains, your hopes are all in vain, For such bright Eyes, and such a tunefull Pen. How many of her Sex spend half their days, To catch some Fool by managing a Face? But she secure of charming has confin'd Her wiser care t' adorn and dress the Mind. Beauty may fade, but everlasting Verse Exempts the better portion from the Hearse. The matchless Wit and Fancy of the Fair, Which moves our envy and our Sons despair. Long they shall live a monument of her Fame, And to Eternity extend her Name; While After-times deservedly approve The choicest object of this Ages Love. For when they reade, ghessing how far she charm'd, With that bright Body with such Wit inform'd; They will give heed and credit to our Verse, When we the Wonders of her Face rehearse. J. Cooper. Buckden, Nov. 25. 1683.
To ASTRAEA, on her Poems. 'TIS not enough to reade and to admire, Thy sacred Verse does nobler thoughts inspire, Striking on every breast Poetick fire: The God of Wit attends with chearfull Rays, Warming the dullest Statue into praise. Hail then, delight of Heaven and pride of Earth, Blest by each Muse at thy auspicious birth; Soft Love and Majesty have fram'd thy Mind, To shew the Beauties of both Sexes join'd: Thy Lines may challenge, like young David's face, A Female Sweetness and a Manly Grace; Thy tender notions in loose numbers flow, With a strange power to charm where e'er they go: And when in stronger sounds thy voice we hear, At all the skilfull points you arm'd appear. Which way so'er thou dost thy self express, We find thy Beauty out in every dress; Such work so gently wrought, so strongly fine, Cannot be wrought by hands all Masculine. In vain proud Man weak Woman wou'd controul, No Man can argue now against a Woman's Soul. J. C.
To the excellent Madam Behn, on her Poems. 'TWas vain for Man the Laurels to persue, (E'en from the God of Wit bright Daphne flew) Man, Whose course compound damps the Muses fire, It does but touch our Earth and soon expire; While in the softer kind th'Aetherial flame, Spreads and rejoices as from Heaven it came: This Greece in Sappho, in Orinda knew Our Isle; though they were but low types to you; But the faint dawn to your illustrious day, To make us patient of your brighter Ray. Oft may we see some wretched story told; In ductile sense spread thin as leaves of Gold. You have ingrost th'inestimable Mine; Which in well polisht Numbers you refine, While still the solid Mass shines thick in every Line. Yet neither sex do you surpass alone, Both in your Verse are in their glory shown, Both Phoebus and Minerva are your own. While in the softest dress you Wit dispense, With all the Nerves of Reason and of Sense. In mingled Beauties we at once may trace A Female Sweetness and a Manly Grace. No wonder 'tis the Delphian God of old Wou'd have his Oracles by Women told. But oh! who e'er so sweetly could repeat Soft lays of Love, and youths delightfull heat? If Love's Misfortunes be your mournfull Theme, No dying Swan on fair Cayster's stream,
Expires so sweet, though with his numerous Moan, The fading Banks and suffering Mountains groan. If you the gentle Passions wou'd inspire, With what resistless Charms you breathe desire? No Heart so savage, so relentless none, As can the sweet Captivity disown: Ah, needs must she th'unwary Soul surprise, Whose Pen sheds Flames as dangerous as her Eyes. J. ADAMS. To the Authour, on her Voyage to the Island of Love. TO speak of thee no Muse will I invoke, Thou onely canst inspire what shou'd be spoke; For all their wealth the Nine have given to thee, Thy rich and flowing stream has left them dry: Cupid may throw away his useless Darts, Thou'st lent him one will massacre more Hearts Than all his store, thy Pen disarms us so, We yield our selves to the first beauteous Foe; The easie softness of thy thoughts surprise, And this new way Love steals into our Eyes; Thy gliding Verse comes on us unawares, No rumbling Metaphors alarm our Ears, And puts us in a posture of defence; We are undone and never know from whence.
So to th' Assyrian Camp the Angel flew, And in the silent Night his Millions slew. Thou leadst us by the Soul amongst thy Loves, And bindst us all in thy inchanting Groves; Each languishes for thy Aminta's Charms, Sighs for thy fansied Raptures in her Armes, Sees her in all that killing posture laid, When Love and fond Respect guarded the sleeping Maid, Persues her to the very Bower of Bliss, Times all the wrecking joys and thinks 'em his; In the same Trance with the young pair we lie, And in their amorous Ecstasies we die. You Nymphs, who deaf to Love's soft lays have been, Reade here, and suck the sweet destruction in: Smooth is the stream and clear is every thought, And yet you cannot see with what you're caught; Or else so very pleasing is the Bait, With careless heed you play and leap at it: She poisons all the Floud with such an art, That the dear Philter trickles to the Heart, With such bewitching pleasure that each sup Has all the joys of life in every drop. I see the Banks with Love-sick Virgins strow'd, Their Bosoms heav'd with the young fluttering God; Oh, how they pant and struggle with their pain! Yet cannot wish their former health again: Within their Breasts thy warmth and spirit glows, And in their Eyes thy streaming softness flows; Thy Raptures are transfus'd through every vein, And thy blest hour in all their heads does reign; The Ice that chills the Soul thou dost remove, And meltst it into tenderness and Love;
The flints about their Hearts dance to thy lays, Till the quick motion sets 'em on a Blaze. Orpheus and you the stones do both inspire, But onely you out of those flints strike fire, Not with a sudden Spark, a short liv'd Blaze, Like Womens Passions in our Gilting days; But what you fire burns with a constant flame, Like what you write, and always is the same. Rise all ye weeping Youth, rise and appear, Whom gloomy Fate has damn'd to black Despair; Start from the ground and throw your Mourning by, Loves great Sultana says you shall not die: The dismal dark half year is over past, The Sea is op'd, the Sun shines out at last, And Trading's free, the storms are husht as death, Or happy Lovers ravisht out of breath; And listen to Astraea's Harmony, Such power has elevated Poetry. T. C. To the Lovely Witty Astraea, on her Excellent Poems. OH, wonder of thy Sex! Where can we see, Beauty and Knowledge join'd except in thee? Such pains took Nature with your Heav'nly Face, Form'd it for Love, and moulded every Grace;
I doubted first and fear'd that you had been Unfinish'd left like other She's within: I see the folly of that fear, and find Your Face is not more beauteous than your Mind: Whoe'er beheld you with a Heart unmov'd, That sent not sighs, and said within he lov'd? I gaz'd and found, a then, unknown delight, Life in your looks, and Death to leave the sight. What joys, new Worlds of joys has he possest, That gain'd the sought-for welcome of your Breast? Your Wit wou'd recommend the homeliest Face, Your Beauty make the dullest Humour please; But where they both thus gloriously are join'd, All Men submit, you reign in every Mind. What Passions does your Poetry impart? It shews th'unfathom'd thing a Woman's Heart, Tells what Love is, his Nature and his Art, Displays the several Scenes of Hopes and Fears, Love's Smiles, his Sighs, his Laughings and his Tears. Each Lover here may reade his different Fate, His Mistress kindness or her scornfull hate. Come all whom the blind God has led astray, Here the bewildred Youth is shew'd his way: Guided by this he may yet love and find Ease in his Heart, and reason in his Mind. Thus sweetly once the charming W—lr strove In Heavenly sounds to gain his hopeless Love: All the World listned but his scornfull Fair, Pride stopt her ears to whom he bent his prayer. Much happier you that can't desire in vain, But what you wish as soon as wish'd obtain.
Upon these and other Excellent Works of the Incomparable Astraea. YE bold Magicians in Philosophy, That vainly think (next the Almighty three) The brightest Cherubin in all the Hierarchy Will leave that Glorious Sphere And to your wild inchantments will appear; To the fond summons of fantastick Charms, As Barbarous and inexplicable Terms: As those the trembling Scorcerer dreads, When he the Magick Circle treads: And as he walks the Mystick rounds, And mutters the detested sounds, The Stygian fiends exalt their wrathfull heads; And all ye bearded Drudges of the Schools, That sweat in vain to mend predestin'd fools, With senseless Jargon and perplexing Rules; Behold and with amazement stand, Behold a blush with shame and wonder too, What Divine Nature can in Woman doe. Behold if you can see in all this fertile Land Such an Anointed head, such an inspired hand. II. Rest on in peace, ye blessed Spirits, rest, With Imperial bliss for ever blest: Upon your sacred Urn she scorns to tread, Or rob the Learned Monuments of the dead: Nor need her Muse a foreign aid implore In her own tunefull breast there's wonderous store.
Had she but flourisht in these times of old, When Mortals were amongst the Gods inrolld, She had not now as Woman been Ador'd, But with Diviner sacrifice Implor'd; Temples and Altars had preserv'd her name And she her self been thought Immortal as her fame. III. Curst be the balefull Tongue that dares abuse The rightfull off-spring of her Godlike Muse: And doubly Curst be he that thinks her Pen Can be instructed by the best of men. The times to come, (as surely she will live, As many Ages as are past, As long as Learning, Sense, or wit survive, As long as the first principles of Bodies last.) The future Ages may perhaps believe One soft and tender Arm cou'd ne'er atchieve The wonderous deeds that she has done So hard a prize her Conqu'ring Muse has won. But we that live in the great Prophetesses days Can we enough proclaim her praise, We that experience every hour The blest effects of her Miraculous power? To the sweet Mcsick of her charming tongue, In numerous Crowds the ravisht hearers throng: And even a Herd of Beasts as wild as they That did the Thracian Lyre obey, Forget their Madness and attend her song. The tunefull Shepherds on the dangerous rocks Forsake their Kinds and leave their bleating Flocks, And throw their tender Reeds away, As soon as e'er her softer Pipe begins to play.
No barren subject no unfertile soil Can prove ungratefull to her Muses Toil, Warm'd with the Heavenly influence of her Brain, Upon the dry and sandy plain, On craggy Mountains cover'd o'er with Snow, The blooming Rose and fragrant Jes'min grow: When in her powerfull Poetick hand, She waves the mystick wand, Streight from the hardest Rocks the sweetest numbers flow. IV. Hail bright Urania! Erato hail! Melpomene, Polymnia, Euterpe, hail! And all ye blessed powers that inspire The Heaven-born Soul with intellectual fire; Pardon my humble and unhallow'd Muse, If she too great a veneration use, And prostrate at your best lov'd Darling's feet Your holy Fane with sacred honour greet: Her more than Pythian Oracles are so divine, You sure not onely virtually are Within the glorious Shrine, But you your very selves must needs be there. The Delian Prophet did at first ordain, That even the mighty Nine should reign, In distant Empires of different Clime; And if in her triumphant Throne, She rules those learned Regions alone, The fam'd Pyerides are out-done by her omnipotent Rhime. In proper Cells her large capacious Brain The images of all things does contain, As bright almost as were th'Ideas laid, In the last model e'er the World was made.
And though her vast conceptions are so strong, The powerfull eloquence of her charming tongue Does, clear as the resistless beams of day, To our enlightned Souls the noble thoughts convey; Well chosen, well appointed, every word Does its full force and natural grace afford; And though in her rich treasury, Confus'd like Elements great Numbers lie, When they their mixture and proportion take, What beauteous forms of every kind they make! Such was the Language God himself infus'd, And such the style our great Forefather us'd, From one large stock the various sounds he fram'd, And every Species of the vast Creation nam'd. While most of our dull Sex have trod In beaten paths of one continued Road, Her skilfull and well manag'd Muse Does all the art and strength of different paces use: For though sometimes with slackned force, She wisely stops her fleetest course, That slow but strong Majestick pace Shews her the swiftest steed of all the chosen Race. V. Well has she sung the learned Daphnis praise, And crown'd his Temples with immortal Bays; And all that reade him must indeed confess, Th' effects of such a cause could not be less. For ne'er was (at the first bold heat begun) So hard and swift a Race of glory run, But yet her sweeter Muse did for him more, Than he himself or all Apollo's sons before;
For shou'd th' insatiate lust of time, Root out the memory of his sacred Rhime. The polish'd armour in that single Page Wou'd all the tyranny and rage Of Fire and Sword defie, For Daphnis can't but with Astraea die. And who can dark oblivion fear, That is co-eval with her mighty Works and Her? Ah learned Chymist, 'tis she onely can By her almighty arm, Within the pretious salt collect, The true essential form, And can against the power of death protect Not onely Herbs and Trees, but raise the buried Man. VI. Wretched O Enone's inauspicious fate, That she was born so soon, or her blest Muse so late! Cou'd the poor Virgin have like her complain'd, She soon her perjur'd Lover had regain'd, In spight of all the fair Seducers tears, In spight of all her Vows and Prayers; Such tender accents through his Soul had ran, As wou'd have pierc'd the hardest heart of Man. At every Line the fugitive had swore By all the Gods, by all the Powers divine, My dear OEnone, I'll be ever thine, And ne'er behold the flattering Grecian more. How does it please the learned Roman's Ghost (The sweetest that th' Elysian Field can boast) To see his noble thoughts so well exprest, So tenderly in a rough Language drest;
Had she there liv'd, and he her Genius known, So soft, so charming, and so like his own, One of his Works had unattempted been, And Ovid ne'er in mournfull Verse been seen; Then the great Caesar to the Scythian plain, From Rome's gay Court had banish'd him in vain, Her plenteous Muse had all his wants supplied, And he had flourish'd in exalted pride: No barbarous Getans had deprav'd his tongue, For he had onely listned to her Song, Not as an exile, but proscrib'd by choice, Pleas'd with her Form, and ravish'd with her voice. His last and dearest part of Life, Free from noise and glorious strife, He there had spent within her softer Armes, And soon forgot the Royal Julia's charmes. VII. Long may she scourge this mad rebellious Age, And stem the torrent of Fanatick rage, That once had almost overwhelm'd the Stage. O'er all the Land the dire contagion spread, And e'en Apollo's Sons apostate fled: But while that spurious race imploy'd their parts In studying strategems and subtile arts, To alienate their Prince's Subjects hearts, Her Loyal Muse still tun'd her loudest strings, To sing the praises of the best of Kings. And, O ye sacred and immortal Gods, From the blest Mansions of your bright aboads, To the first Chaos let us all be hurld, E'er such vile wretches should reform the World,
That in all villany so far excell, If they in sulphurous flames must onely dwell, The Cursed Caitiffs hardly merit Hell. Were not those vile Achitophels so lov'd, (The blind, the senseless and deluded Crowd) Did they but half his Royal Vertues know, But half the blessings which to him they owe, His long forbearance to provoking times, And God-like mercy to the worst of crimes: Those murmuring Shimei's, even they alone, Cou'd they bestow a greater than his own, Wou'd from a Cottage raise him to a Throne. VIII. See, ye dull Scriblers of this frantick Age, That load the Press, and so o'erwhelm the Stage, That e'en the noblest art that e'er was known, As great as an Egyptian Plague is grown: Behold, ye scrawling Locusts, what ye've done, What a dire judgment is brought down, By your curst Dogrel Rhimes upon the Town; On Fools and Rebels hangs an equal Fate, And both may now repent too late, For the great Charter of your Wit as well as Trade is gone. Once more the fam'd Astraea's come; 'Tis she pronounc'd the fatal doom, And has restor'd it to the rightfull Heirs, Since Knowledge first in Paradise was theirs. IX. Never was Soul and Body better joyn'd, A Mansion worthy of so blest a Mind; See but the Shadow of her beauteous face, The pretious minitures of every Grace,
There one may still such Charms behold, That as Idolaters of old, The works of their own hands ador'd, And Gods which they themselves had made implor'd; Jove might again descend below, And, with her Wit and Beauty charm'd, to his own Image bow. But oh, the irrevocable doom of Nature's Laws! How soon the brightest Scene of Beauty draws! Alas, what's all the glittering Pride Of the poor perishing Creatures of a day, With what a violent and impetuous Tide, E'er their flow'd in their glories ebb away? The Pearl, the Diamond and Saphire must Be blended with the common Pebbles dust, And even Astraea with all her sacred store, Be wreckt on Death's inevitable Shore, Her Face ne'er seen and her dear Voice be heard no more. And wisely therefore e'er it was too late, She has revers'd the sad Decrees of Fate, And in deep Characters of immortal Wit, So large a memorandum's writ, That the blest memory of her deathless Name Shall stand recorded in the Book of Fame; When Towns inter'd in their own ashes lie, And Chronicles of Empires die, When Monuments like Men want Tombs to tell Where the remains of the vast ruines fell. To the excellent Astraea. WE all can well admire, few well can praise Where so great merit does the Subject raise:
To write our Thoughts alike from dulness free, On this hand, as on that from flattery; He who wou'd handsomly the Medium hit, Must have no little of Astraea's Wit. Let others in the noble Task engage, Call you the Phoenix, wonder of the Age, The Glory of your Sex, the Shame of ours, Crown you with Garlands of Rhetorick Flowers; For me, alas, I nothing can design, To render your soft Numbers more divine, Than by comparison with these of mine: As beauteous paintings are set off by shades, And some fair Ladies by their dowdy Maids; Yet after all, forgive me if I name One Fault where, Madam, you are much to blame, To wound with Beauty's fighting on the square, But to o'ercome with Wit too is not fair; 'Tis like the poison'd Indian Arrows found, For thus you're sure to kill where once you wound. J. W. To Madam A. Behn on the publication of her Poems. WHen the sad news was spread, The bright, the fair Orinda's dead, We sigh'd, we mourn'd, we wept, we griev'd, And fondly with our selves conceiv'd, A loss so great could never be retreiv'd.
The Ruddy Warriour laid his Truncheon by, Sheath'd his bright sword, and glorious Arms forgot, The sounds of Triumph, braggs of Victory, Rais'd in his Breast no emulative thought; For pond'ring on the common Lot, Where is, said He the Diff'rence in the Grave, Betwixt the Coward and the Brave? Since She, alas, whose inspir'd Muse should tell To unborn Ages how the Hero fell, From the Impoverisht Ignorant World is fled, T' inhance the mighty mighty Number of the dead. II. The trembling Lover broke his tuneless Lute, And said be thou for ever mute: Mute as the silent shades of night, Whither Orinda's gone, Thy musicks best instructress and thy musicks song; She that could make Thy inarticulated strings to speak, In language soft as young desires, In language chaste as Vestal fires; But she hath ta'n her Everlasting flight: Ah! cruel Death, How short's the date of Learned breath! No sooner do's the blooming Rose, Drest fresh and gay, In the embroy'dries of her Native May, Her odorous sweets expose, But with thy fatal knife, The fragrant flow'r is crop't from off the stalk of life.
III. Come, ye Stoicks, come away, You that boast an Apathy, And view our Golgotha; See how the mourning Virgins all around, With Tributary Tears bedew the sacred ground; And tell me tell me where's the Eye That can be dry, Unless in hopes (nor are such hopes in vain) Their universal cry, Should mount the vaulted sky, And of the Gods obtain, A young succeeding Phoenix might arise From Orinda's spicy obsequies. In Heaven the voice was heard, Heaven does the Virgins pray'rs regard; And none that dwells on high, If once the beauteous Ask, the beauteous can deny. IV. 'Tis done, 'tis done, th' imperial grant is past, We have our wish at last, And now no more with sorrow be it said, Orinda's dead; Since in her feat Astraea does Appear, The God of Wit hath chosen her, To bear Orinda's and his Character. The Laurel Chaplet seems to grow On her more gracefull Brow; And in her hand Look how she waves his sacred Wand:
Loves Quiver's tyde In an Azure Mantle by her side, And with more gentle Arts Than he who owns the Aureal darts, At once she wounds, and heals our hearts. V. Hark how the gladded Nymphs rejoyce, And with a gracefull voice, Commend Apollo's Choice. The gladded Nymphs their Guardian Angel greet, And chearfully her name repeat, And chearfully admire and praise, The Loyal musick of her layes; Whilst they securely sit, Beneath the banners of her wit, And scorn th' ill-manner'd Ignorance of those, Whose Stock's so poor they cannot raise To their dull Muse one subsidy of praise, Unless they're dubb'd the Sexes foes, These squibbs of sense themselves expose. Or if with stolen light They shine one night, The next their earth-born Lineage shows, They perish in their slime, And but to name them, wou'd defile Astraea's Rhime. VI. But you that would be truely wise, And vertues fair Idea prize; You that would improve In harmeless Arts of not indecent Love: Arts that Romes fam'd Master never taught, Or in the Shops of fortune's bought.
Would you know what Wit doth mean, Pleasant wit yet not obscene, The several garbs that Humours wear, The dull, the brisk, the jealous, the severe? Wou'd you the pattern see Of spotless and untainted Loyalty, Deck't in every gracefull word That language can afford; Tropes and Figures, Raptures and Conceits that ly, Disperst in all the pleasant Fields of poesie? Reade you then Astraea's lines, 'Tis in those new discover'd Mines, Those golden Quarries that this Ore is found With which in Worlds as yet unknown Astraea shall be crown'd. VII. And you th' Advent'rous sons of fame, You that would sleep in honours bed With glorious Trophies garnished; You that with living labours strive Your dying Ashes to survive; Pay your Tributes to Astraea's name Her Works can spare you immortality, For sure her Works shall never dye. Pyramids must fall and Mausolean Monuments decay, Marble Tombs shall crumble into dust, Noisie Wonders of a short-liv'd day, That must in time yield up their Trust; And had e'er this been perisht quite Ith' ruines of Eternal night, Had no kind Pen like her's, In powerfull numbers powerfull verse,
Too potent for the gripes of Avaritious fate, To these our ages lost declar'd their pristine State. VIII. But time it self, bright Nymph, shall never Conquer thee, For when the Globe of vast Eternity; Turns up the wrong-side of the World, And all things are to their first Chaos hurl'd, Thy lasting praise in thy own lines inroll'd, With Roman and with the British Names shall Equal honour hold. And surely none 'midst the Poetick Quire, But justly will admire The Trophies of thy wit, Sublime and gay as e'er were yet In Charming Numbers writ. Or Virgil's Shade or Ovid's Ghost, Of Ages past the pride and boast; Or Cowley (first of ours) refuse That thou shouldst be Companion of their Muse. And if 'twere lawfull to suppose (As where's the Crime or Incongruity) Those awfull Souls concern'd can be At any sublunary thing, Alas, I fear they'll grieve to see, That whilst I sing, And strive to praise, I but disparage thee. By F. N. W.
To Madam Behn, on her Poems. WHEN th' Almighty Powers th' Universe had fram'd, And Man as King, the lesser World was nam'd, The Glorious Consult soon his joys did bless, And sent him Woman his chief happiness. She by an after-birth Heaven did refine, And gave her Beauty with a Soul divine; She with delight was Natures chiefest pride, Dearer to Man than all the World beside; Her soft embraces charm'd his Manly Soul, And softer Words his Roughness did controul: So thou, great Sappho, with thy charming Verse, Dost here the Soul of Poetry rehearse; From your sweet Lips such pleasant Raptures fell, As if the Graces strove which shou'd excell. Th' admiring World when first your Lute you strung, Became all ravisht with th' immortal Song; So soft and gracefull Love in you is seen, As if the Muses had design'd you Queen. For thee, thou great Britannia of our Land, How does thy Praise our tunefull Feet command? With what great influence do thy Verses move? How hast thou shewn the various sense of Love? Admir'd by us, and blest by all above. To you all tribute's due, and I can raise No glory but by speaking in your praise. Go on and bless us dayly with your Pen, And we shall oft return thee thanks again. H. Watson.
POEMS UPON Several OCCASIONS. The Golden Age. A Paraphrase on a Translation out of French. I. BLest Age! when ev'ry Purling Stream Ran undisturb'd and clear, When no scorn'd Shepherds on your Banks were seen, Tortur'd by Love, by Jealousie, or Fear; When an Eternal Spring drest ev'ry Bough, And Blossoms fell, by new ones dispossest; These their kind Shade affording all below, And those a Bed where all below might rest.
The Groves appear'd all drest with Wreaths of Flowers And from their Leaves dropt Aromatick Showers Whose fragrant Heads in Mystick Twines above Exchang'd their Sweets, and mix'd with thousand Kisses, As if the willing Branches strove To beautifie and shade the Grove Where the young wanton Gods of Love Offer their Noblest Sacrifice of Blisses. II. Calm was the Air, no Winds blew fierce and loud The Skie was dark'ned with no sullen Cloud; But all the Heav'ns laugh'd with continued Light And scatter'd round their Rays serenely bright. No other Murmurs fill'd the Ear But what the Streams and Rivers purl'd, When Silver Waves o'er Shining Pebbles curl'd Or when young Zephirs fan'd the Gentle Breez, Gath'ring fresh Sweets from Balmy Flow'rs and Trees
Then bore 'em on their Wings to perfume all the Air: While to their soft and tender Play, The Gray-Plum'd Natives of the Shades Unwearied sing till Love invades, Then Bill, then sing agen, while Love and Musick makes the Day. III. The stubborn Plough had then, Made no rude Rapes upon the Virgin Earth; Who yeilded of her own accord her plentious Birth, Without the Aids of men; As if within her Teeming Womb, All Nature, and all Sexes lay, Whence new Creations every day Into the happy World did come: The Roses fill'd with Morning Dew, Bent down their loaded heads, T' Adorn the careless Shepherds Grassy Beds While still young opening Buds each moment grew
And as those withered, drest his shaded Couch a new; Beneath who's boughs the Snakes securely dwelt, Not doing harm, nor harm from others felt; With whom the Nymphs did Innocently play, No spightful Venom in the wantons lay; But to the touch were Soft, and to the sight were Gay. IV. Then no rough sound of Wars Alarms, Had taught the World the needless use of Arms: Monarchs were uncreated then, Those Arbitrary Rulers over men; Kings that made Laws, first broke 'em, and the Gods By teaching us Religion first, first set the World at Odds: Till then Ambition was not known, That Poyson to Content, Bane to Repose; Each Swain was Lord o'er his own will alone,
His Innocence Religion was, and Laws. Nor needed any troublesome defence Against his Neighbours Insolence. Flocks, Herds, and every necessary good Which bounteous Nature had design'd for Food, Whose kind increase o'er-spread the Meads and Plaines, Was then a common Sacrifice to all th' agreeing Swaines. V. Right and Property were words since made, When Power taught Mankind to invade: When Pride and Avarice became a Trade; Carri'd on by discord, noise and wars, For which they barter'd wounds and scarrs; And to Inhaunce the Merchandize, miscall'd it 'Fame' And Rapes, Invasions Tyrannies, Was gaining of a Glorious Name: Stiling their salvage slaughters, Victories; Honour, the Error and the Cheat Of the Ill-natur'd Bus'ey Great,
Nonsence, invented by the Proud, Fond Idol of the slavish Crowd, Thou wert not known in those blest days Thy Poyson was not mixt with our unbounded Joyes; Then it was glory to pursue delight, And that was lawful all, that Pleasure did invite, Then 'twas the Amorous world injoy'd its Reign; And Tyrant Honour strove t' usurp in Vain. VI. The flowry Meads the Rivers and the Groves, Were fill'd with little Gay-wing'd Loves: That ever smil'd and danc'd and Play'd, And now the woods, and now the streames invade, And where they came all things were gay and glad: When in the Myrtle Groves the Lovers sat Opprest with a too fervent heat; A Thousand Cupids fann'd their wings a-loft,
And through the Boughs the yielded Ayre would waft: Whose parting Leaves discovered all below, And every God his own soft power admir'd, And smil'd and fann'd, and sometimes bent his Bow; Where e'er he saw a Shepherd uninspir'd. The Nymphs were free, no nice, no coy disdain, Deny'd their Joyes, or gave the Lover pain; The yielding Maid but kind Resistance makes; Trembling and blushing are not marks of shame, But the Effect of kindling Flame: Which from the sighing burning Swain she takes, VVhile she with tears all soft, and down-cast-eyes, Permits the Charming Conqueror to win the prize.
VII. The Lovers thus, thus uncontroul'd did meet, Thus all their Joyes and Vows of Love repeat: Joyes which were everlasting, ever new And every Vow inviolably true: Not kept in fear of Gods, no fond Religious cause, Nor in Obedience to the duller Laws. Those Fopperies of the Gown were then not known, Those vain those Politick Curbs to keep man in, VVhoby a fond mistake Created that a Sin; VVhich freeborn we, by right of Nature claim our own. Who but the Learned and dull moral Fool Could gravely have forseen, man ought to live by Rule? VIII. Oh cursed Honour! thou who first didst damn, A VVoman to the Sin of shame;
Honour! that rob'st us of our Gust, Honour! that hindred mankind first, At Loves Eternal Spring to squench his amorous thirst. Honour! who first taught lovely Eyes the art, To wound, and not to cure the heart: VVith Love to invite, but to forbid with Awe, And to themselves prescribe a Cruel Law; To Veil 'em from the Lookers on, When they are sure the slave's undone, And all the Charmingst part of Beauty hid; Soft Looks, consenting Wishes, all deny'd. It gathers up the flowing Hair, That loosely plaid with wanton Air. The Envious Net, and stinted order hold, The lovely Curls of Jet and shining Gold, No more neglected on the Shoulders hurl'd: Now drest to Tempt, not gratify the VVorld, Thou Miser Honour hord'st the sacred store, And starv'st thy self to keep thy Votaries poor.
IX. Honour! that put'st our words that should be free Into a set Formality. Thou base Debaucher of the generous heart, That teachest all our Looks and Actions Art; What Love design'd a sacred Gift, What Nature made to be possest, Mistaken Honour, made a Theft, For Glorious Love should be confest: For when confin'd, all the poor Lover gains, Is broken Sighs, pale Looks, Complaints, & Pains Thou Foe to Pleasure, Nature's worst Disease, Thou Tyrant over mighty Kings, What mak'st thou here in Shepheards Cottages; Why troublest thou, the quiet Shades & Springs Be gone, and make thy Fam'd resort To Princes Pallaces; Go Deal and Chaffer in the Trading Court, That busie Market for Phantastick Things; Be gone and interrupt the short Retreat, Of the Illustrious and the Great; Go break the Polititians sle ep,
Disturb the Gay Ambitious Fool, That longs for Scepters, Crowns, and Rule, Which not his Title, nor his Wit can keep; But let the humble honest Swain go on, In the blest Paths of the first rate of man; That nearest were to Gods Alli'd, And form'd for love alone, disdain'd all other Pride X. Be gone! and let the Golden age again, Assume its Glorious Reign; Let the young wishing Maid confess, What all your Arts would keep conceal'd: The Mystery will be reveal'd, And she in vain denies, whilst we can guess, She only shows the Jilt to teach man how, To turn the false Artillery on the Cunning Foe. Thou empty Vision hence, be gone, And let the peaceful Swain love on; The swift pac'd hours of life soon steal away: Stint not yee Gods his short liv'd Joy. The Spring decays, but when the Winter's gone, The Trees and Flowers a new comes on
The Sun may set, but when the night is fled, And gloomy darkness does retire, He rises from his Watry Bed: All Glorious, Gay, all drest in Amorous Fire. But Sylvia when your Beauties fade, VVhen the fresh Roses on your Cheeks shall die, Like Flowers that wither in the Shade, Eternally they will forgotten lye, And no kindSpring their sweetness will supply. VVhen Snow shall on those lovely Tresses lye And your fair Eyes no more shall give us pain, But shoot their pointless Darts in vain. VVhat will your duller honour signifie? Go boast it then! and see what numerous Store Of Lovers, will your Ruin'd Shrine Adore. Then let us Sylvia yet be wise, And the Gay hasty minutes prize: The Sun and Spring receive but our short Light, Once sett, a sleep brings an Eternal Night.
A Farewel to Celladon, On his Going into Ireland. Pindarique. FArewell the Great, the Brave and Good, By all admir'd and understood; For all thy vertues so extensive are, VVrit in so noble and so plain a Character, That they instruct humanity what to do, How to reward and imitate 'em too, The mighty Cesar found and knew, The Value of a Swain so true: And early call'd the Industrious Youth from Groves VVhere unambitiously he lay, And knew no greater Joyes, nor Power then Loves; VVhich all the day The careless and delighted Celladon Improves;
So the first man in Paradice was laid, So blest beneath his own dear fragrant shade, Till false Ambition made him range, So the Almighty call'd him forth, And though for Empire he did Eden change; Less Charming 'twas, and far less worth. II. Yet he obeyes and leaves the peaceful Plains, The weeping Nymphs, and sighing Swains, Obeys the mighty voice of Jove. The Dictates of his Loyalty pursues, Bus'ness Debauches all his hours of Love; Bus'ness, whose hurry, noise and news Even Natures self subdues; Changes her best and first simplicity, Her soft, her easie quietude Into mean Arts of cunning Policy, The Grave and Drudging Coxcomb to Delude Say, mighty Celladon, oh tell me why, Thou dost thy nobler thoughts imploy In bus'ness, which alonewas made To teach the restless Statesman how to Trade
In dark Cabals for Mischief and Design, But n'ere was meant a Curse to Souls like thine. Business the Check to Mirth and VVit, Business the Rival of the Fair, The Bane to Friendship, and the Lucky Hit, Onely to those that languish in Dispair; Leave then that wretched troublesome Estate To him to whom forgetful Heaven, Has no one other vertue given, But dropt down the unfortunate, To Toyl, be Dull, and to be Great. III. But thou whose nobler Soul was fram'd, For Glorious and Luxurious Ease, By Wit adorn'd, by Love inflam'd; For every Grace, and Beauty Fam'd, Form'd for delight, design'd to please, Give Give a look to every Joy, That youth and lavish Fortune can invent, Nor let Ambition, that false God, destroy Both Heaven and Natures first intent. But oh in vain is all I say,
And you alas must go, The Mighty Caesar to obey, And none so fit as you. From all the Envying Croud he calls you forth, He knows your Loyalty, and knows your worth; He's try'd it oft, and put it to the Test, It grew in Zeal even whilst it was opprest, The great, the Godlike Celladon, Unlike the base Examples of the times, Cou'd never be Corrupted, never won, To stain his honest blood with Rebel Crimes. Fearless unmov'd he stood amidst the tainted Crowd, And justify'd and own'd his Loyalty aloud. IV. Hybernia hail! Hail happy Isle, Be glad, and let all Nature smile. Ye Meads and Plains send forth your Gayest Flowers; Ye Groves and every Purling Spring, VVhere Lovers sigh, and Birds do sing, Be glad and gay, for Celladon is yours; He comes, he comes to grace your Plains.
To Charm the Nymphs, and bless the Swains, Ecchoes repeat his Glorious Name To all the Neighbouring Woods and Hills; Ye Feather'd Quire chant forth his Fame, Ye Fountains, Brooks, and Wand'ring Rills, That through the Meadows in Meanders run, Tell all your Flowry Brinks, the generous Swain is come. VI. Divert him all ye pretty Solitudes, And give his Life some softning Interludes: That when his weari'd mind would be, From Noise and Rigid Bus'ness free; He may upon your Mossey Beds lye down, Where all is Gloomy, all is Shade, With some dear Shee, whom Nature made, To be possest by him alone; Where the soft tale of Love She breathes, Mixt with the rushing of the wind-blown leaves, The different Notes of Cheerful Birds, And distant Bleating of the Herds: Is Musick far more ravishing and sweet, Then all the Artful Sounds that please the noisey Great.
VII. Mix thus your Toiles of Life with Joyes, And for the publick good, prolong your days Instruct the VVorld, the great Example prove Of Honour, Friendship, Loyalty, and Love. And when your busier hours are done, And you with Damon sit alone; Damon the honest, brave and young; VVhom we must Celebrate where you are sung For you (by Sacred Friendship ty'd,) Nor Love nor Fate can nere divide; VVhen your agreeing thoughts shall backward run Surveying all the Conquests you have won, The Swaines you'ave left, the sighing Maids undone Try if you can a fatal prospect take, Think if you can a soft Idea make: Of what we are, now you are gone, Of what we feel for Celladon. VIII. 'Tis Celladon the witty and the gay, That blest the Night, and cheer'd the world at Day▪
'Tis Celladon, to whom our Vows belong, And Celladon the Subject of our Song. For whom the Nymphs would dress, the Swains rejoice, The praise of these, of those the choice; And if our Joyes were rais'd to this Excess, Our Pleasures by thy presence made so great: Some pittying. God help thee to guess, (What Fancy cannot well Express.) Our Languishments by thy Retreat, Pitty our Swaines, pitty our Virgins more, And let that pitty haste thee to our shore; And whilst on happy distant Coasts you are, Afford us all your sighs, and Cesar all your care. On a Juniper-Tree, cut down to make Busks. WHilst happy I Triumphant stood, The Pride and Glory of the Wood; My Aromatick Boughs and Fruit, Did with all other Trees dispute.
Had right by Nature to excel, In pleasing both the tast and smell: But to the touch I must confess, Bore an Ungrateful Sullenness. My Wealth, like bashful Virgins, I Yielded with some Reluctancy; For which my vallue should be more, Not giving easily my store. My verdant Branches all the year Did an Eternal Beauty wear; Did ever young and gay appear. Nor needed any tribute pay, For bounties from the God of Day: Nor do I hold Supremacy, (In all the Wood) o'er every Tree. But even those too of my own Race, That grow not in this happy place. But that in which I glory most, And do my self with Reason boast, Beneath my shade the other day, Young Philocles and Cloris lay,
Upon my Root she lean'd her head, And where I grew, he made their Bed: Whilst I the Canopy more largely spread. Their trembling Limbs did gently press, The kind supporting yielding Grass: Ne'er half so blest as now, to bear A Swain so Young, a Nimph so fair: My Grateful Shade I kindly lent, And every aiding Bough I bent. So low, as sometimes had the blisse, To rob the Shepherd of a kiss, Whilst he in Pleasures far above The Sence of that degree of Love: Permitted every stealth I made, Unjealous of his Rival Shade. I saw 'em kindle to desire, VVhilst with soft sighs they blew the fire: Saw the approaches of their joy, He growing more fierce, and she less Coy, Saw how they mingled melting Rays, Exchanging Love a thousand ways. Kind was the force on every side, Her new desire she could not hide: Nor wou'd the Shepherd be deny'd.
Impatient he waits no consent But what she gave by Languishment, The blessed Minute he pursu'd; While Love and Shame her Soul Subdu'd. And now transported in his Arms, Yeilds to the Conqueror all her Charmes, His panting Breast, to hers now join'd, They feast on Raptures unconfin'd; Vast and Luxuriant, such as prove The Immortality of Love. For who but a Divinitie, Could mingle Souls to that Degree? Now like the Phenix, both Expire, While from the Ashes of their fire, Sprung up a new, and soft desire. Like Charmers, thrice they did invoke, The God! and thrice new vigor took. Nor had the Mysterie ended there, But Cloris reassum'd her fear, And chid the Swain, for having prest, What she alas cou'd not resist: Whilst he in whom Loves sacred flame, Before and after was the same,
Fondly implor'd she wou'd forget A fault, which he wou'd yet repeat. From Active Joyes with some they hast, To a Reflexion on the past; A thousand times my Covert bless, That did secure their Happiness: Their Gratitude to every Tree They pay, but most to happy me; The Shepherdess my Bark carest, Whilst he my Root, Love's Pillow, kist; And did with sighs, their Fate deplore, Since I must shelter them no more; And if before my Joyes were such, In having heard, and seen too much, My Grief must be as great and high, When all abandon'd I shall be, Doom'd to a silent Destinie. No more the Charming strife to hear, The Shepherds Vows, the Virgins fear: No more a joyful looker on, Whilst Loves soft Battel's lost and won. With grief I bow'd my murmering Head, And all my Christal Dew I shed.
Which did in Cloris Pity move, (Cloris whose Soul is made of Love;) She cut me down, and did translate, My being to a happier state. No Martyr for Religion di'd With half that Unconsidering Pride; My top was on that Altar laid, Where Love his softest Offerings paid: And was as fragrant Incense burn'd, My body into Busks was turn'd: Where I still guard the Sacred Store, And of Loves Temple keep the Door. On the Death of Mr. Grinhil, the Famous Painter. I. VVHat doleful crys are these that fright my sence, Sad as the Groans of dying Innocence?
The killing Accents now more near Aproach, And the Infectious Sound, Spreads and Inlarges all around; And does all Hearts with Grief and Wonder touch. The famous Grinhil dead! even he, That cou'd to us give Immortalitie; Is to the Eternal silent Groves withdrawn, Those sullen Groves of Everlasting Dawn; Youthful as Flowers, scarce blown, whose opening Leaves, A wond'rous and a fragrant Prospect gives, Of what it's Elder Beauties wou'd display, When they should flourish up to ripning May. Witty as Poets, warm'd with Love and Wine, Yet still spar'd Heaven and his Friend, For both to him were Sacred and Divine: Nor could he this no more then that offend. Fixt as a Martyr where he friendship paid, And Generous as a God, Distributing his Bounties all abroad; And soft and gentle as a Love-sick Maid.
II. Great Master of the Noblest Mysterie; That ever happy Knowledge did inspire; Sacred as that of Poetry, And which the wond'ring World does equally admire▪ Great Natures work we do contemn, When on his Glorious Births we meditate: The Face and Eies, more Darts receiv'd from him, Then all the Charms she can create. The Difference is, his Beauties do beget In the inamour'd Soul a Vertuous Heat: While Natures Grosser Pieces move, In the course road of Common Love: So bold, yet soft, his touches were; So round each part's so sweet and fair. That as his Pencil mov'd men thought it prest, The Lively imitating rising Breast, Which yield like Clouds, where little Angels rest▪ The Limbs all easy as his Temper was; Strong as his Mind, and manly too; Large as his Soul his fancy was, and new: And from himself he copyed every Grace,
For he had all that cou'd adorn a Face, All that cou'd either Sex subdue. III. (Pride, Each Excellence he had that Youth has in its And all Experienc'd Age cou'd teach, At once the vigorous fire of this, And every vertue which that cou'd Express. In all the heights that both could reach; And yet alas, in this Perfection di'd. Dropt like a Blossom with a Northern blast, (When all the scatter'd Leaves abroad are cast;) As quick as if his fate had been in hast: So have I seen an unfit Star, Out-shine the rest of all the Numerous Train, As bright as that which Guides the Marriner, Dart swiftly from its darken'd Sphere: And nere shall light the World again. IV. Ah why shou'd so much knowledge die! Or with his last kind breath,
Why cou'd he not to some one friend bequeath The Mighty Legacie! But 'twas a knowledge given to him alone, That his eternis'd Name might be Admir'd to all Posteritie, By all to whom his grateful Name was known. Come all ye softer Beauties, come; Bring Wreaths of Flowers to deck his tomb; Mixt with the dismal Cypress and the Yew, For he still gave your Charmes their due: And from the injuries of Age and Time, Preserv'd the sweetness of your Prime: And best knew how t' adore that Sweetness too; Bring all your Mournful Tributes here, And let your Eyes a silent sorrow wear, Till every Virgin for a while become; Sad as his Fate, and like his Picture's Dumb.
A Ballad on Mr. J. H. to Amoret, asking why I was so sad. MY Amoret, since you must know, The Grief you say my Eyes do show: Survey my Heart, where you shall find, More Love then for your self confin'd. And though you chide, you'l Pity too, A Passion which even Rivals you. Amyntas on a Holy-day As fine as any Lord of May, Amongst the Nimphs, and jolly Swaines, That feed their Flocks upon the Plaines: Met in a Grove beneath whose shade, A Match of Dancing they had made. His Cassock was of Green, as trim As Grass upon a River brim; Untoucht or sullied with a spot, Unprest by either Lamb or Goat:
And with the Air it loosely play'd, With every motion that he made. His Sleeves a-many Ribbons ties, Where one might read Love-Mysteries: As if that way he wou'd impart, To all, the Sentiments of his Heart, Whose Passions by those Colours known, He with a Charming Pride wou'd own. His Bonnet with the same was Ti'd, A Silver Scrip hung by his Side: His Buskins garnisht A-la-mode, Were grac'd by every step he Trod; Like Pan a Majesty he took, And like Apollo when he spoke. His Hook a Wreath of Flowers did Braid, The Present of some Love-sick Maid. Who all the morning had bestow'd, And to her Fancy now compos'd: Which fresher seem'd when near that place, To whom the Giver Captive was.
His Eyes their best Attracts put on, Designing some should be undone; For he could at his pleasure move, The Nymphs he lik'd to fall in Love: Yet so he order'd every Glance, That still they seem'd but Wounds of Chance. He well cou'd feign an Innocence, And taught his Silence Eloquence; Each Smile he us'd, had got the force, To Conquer more than soft Discourse: Which when it serv'd his Ends he'd use, And subtilly thro' a heart infuse. His Wit was such it cou'd controul The Resolutions of a Soul; That a Religious Vow had made, By Love it nere wou'd be betra'd: For when he spoke he well cou'd prove Their Errors who dispute with Love. With all these Charms he did Address Himself to every Shepherdess:
Until the Bag-pipes which did play, Began the Bus'ness of the day; And in the taking forth to Dance, The Lovely Swain became my Chance. To whom much Passion he did Vow, And much his Eyes and Sighs did show; And both imploy'd with so much Art, I strove in vain to guard my Heart; And ere the Night our Revels crost, I was intirely won and lost. Let me advise thee, Amoret, Fly from the Baits that he has set In every grace; which will betray All Beauties that but look that way: But thou hast Charms that will secure A Captive in this Conquerour.
Our Cabal. COme, my fair Cloris, come away, Hast thou forgot 'tis Holyday? And lovely Silvia too make haste, The Sun is up, the day does waste: Do'st thou not hear the Musick loud, Mix'd with the murmur of the Crowd? How can thy active Feet be still, And hear the Bagpipes chearful Trill? Mr. V. U. Urania's drest as fine and gay, As if she meant t' out-shine the day; Or certain that no Victories Were to be gain'd but by her Eyes; Her Garment's white, her Garniture The springing Beauties of the Year, Which are in such nice Order plac'd, That Nature is by Art disgrac'd: Her natural Curling Ebon Hair, Does loosly wanton in the Air.
Mr. G. V. With her the young Alexis came, Whose Eyes dare only speak his Flame: Charming he is, as fair can be, Charming without Effeminacy; Only his Eyes are languishing, Caus'd by the Pain he feels within; Yet thou wilt say that Languishment Is a peculiar Ornament. Deck'd up he is with Pride and Care, All Rich and Gay, to please his Fair: The price of Flocks h' has made a Prey To th' Usual Vanity of this day. My dear Brother J. C. After them Damon Piping came, Who laughs at Cupid and his Flame; Swears, if the Boy should him approach, He'd burn his Wings with his own Torch: But he's too young for Love t' invade, Though for him languish many a Maid.
His lovely Ayr, his chearful Face, Adorn'd with many a Youthful Grace, Beget more Sighs then if with Arts He should design to conquer Hearts: The Swains as well as Nymphs submit To's Charms of Beauty and of VVit. He'll sing, he'll dance, he'll pipe and play, And wanton out a Summers day; And wheresoever Damon be, He's still the Soul o'th' Companie. My dear Amoret, Mris. B. Next Amoret, the true Delight Of all that do approach her sight: The Sun in all its Course ne'er met Ought Fair or Sweet like Amoret. Alone she came, her Eyes declin'd, In which you'l read her troubled Mind; Yes, Silvia, for she'l not deny She loves, as well as thou and I. 'Tis Philocles, that Proud Ingrate, That pays her Passion back with Hate;
VVhilst she does all but him despise, And clouds the lustre of her Eyes: But once to her he did address, And dying Passion too express; But soon the Amorous Heat was laid, He soon forgot the Vows he'd made; VVhilst she in every Silent Grove, Bewails her easie Faith and Love. Numbers of Swains do her adore, But she has vow'd to love no more. Mr. J. B. Next Jolly Thirsis came along, VVith many Beauties in a Throng. Mr. Je. B. VVith whom the young Amyntas came, The Author of my Sighs and Flame: For I'll confess that Truth to you, VVhich every Look of mine can show. Ah how unlike the rest he appears! VVith Majesty above his years!
His Eyes so much of Sweetness dress, Such Wit, such Vigour too express; That 'twou'd a wonder be to say, I've seen the Youth, and brought my Heart away. Ah Cloris! Thou that never wert In danger yet to lose a Heart, Guard it severely now, for he Will startle all thy Constancy: For if by chance thou do'st escape Unwounded by his Lovely Shape, Tempt not thy Ruine, lest his Eyes Joyn with his Tongue to win the Prize: Such Softness in his Language dwells, And Tales of Love so well he tells, Should'st thou attend their Harmony, Thou'dst be Undone, as well as I; For sure no Nymph was ever free, That could Amyntas hear and see. Mr. N. R. V. With him the lovely Philocless, His-Beauty heightned by his Dress, If any thing can add a Grace To such a Shape, and such a Face,
Whose Natural Ornaments impart Enough without the help of Art. His Shoulders cover'd with a Hair, The Sun-Beams are not half so fair; Of which the Virgins Bracelets make, And wear for Philocless's sake: His Beauty such, that one would swear His Face did never take the Air. On's Cheeks the blushing Roses show, The rest like whitest Daisies grow: His Lips, no Berries of the Field, Nor Cherries, such a Red do yield. His Eyes all Love, Soft'ning Smile; And when he speaks, he sighs the while: His Bashful Grace, with Blushes too, Gains more then Confidence can do. With all these Charms he does invade The Heart, which when he has betray'd, He slights the Trophies he has won, And weeps for those he has Undone; As if he never did intend His Charms for so severe an End. And all poor Amoret can Gain, Is pitty from the Lovely Swain:
And if Inconstancy can seem Agreeable, 'tis so in him. And when he meets Reproach for it, He does excuse it with his Wit. Mr. E. B. and Mrs. F M. Next hand in hand the smilling Pair, Martillo, and the Lovely Fair: A Bright-Ey'd Phillis, who they say, Ne'er knew what Love was till to day: Long has the Gen'rous Youth in vain Implor'd some Pity for his Pain. Early abroad he would be seen, To wait her coming on the Green, To be the first that t' her should pay The Tribute of the New-born Day; Presents her Bracelets with their Names, And Hooks carv'd out with Hearts and Flames. And when a stragling Lamb he saw, And she not by to give it Law, The pretty Fugitive he'd deck With Wreaths of Flowers around its Neck;
And gave her ev'ry mark of Love, Before he could her Pity move. But now the Youth no more appears Clouded with Jealousies and Fears: Nor yet dares Phillis softer Brow Wear Unconcern, or Coldness now; But makes him just and kind Returns; And as He does, so now She burns. Mr. J. H. Next Lysidas, that haughty Swain, With many Beauties in a Train, All sighing for the Swain, whilst he Barely returns Civility. Yet once to each much Love he Vowd, And strange Fantastique Passion show'd. Poor Doris, and Lucinda too, And many more whom thou dost know, Who had not power his Charms to shun, Too late do find themselves Undone. His Eyes are Black, and do transcend All Fancy e'er can comprehend;
And yet no Softness in 'em move, They kill with Fierceness, not with Love: Yet he can dress 'em when he list, With Sweetness none can e'er resist. His Tongue no Amorous Parley makes, But with his Looks alone he speaks. And though he languish yet he'l hide, That grateful knowledge with his Pride; And thinks his Liberty is lost, Not in the Conquest, but the Boast. Nor will but Love enough impart, To gain and to secure a heart: Of which no sooner he is sure, And that its Wounds are past all Cure. But for New Victories he prepares, And leaves the Old to its Despairs: Success his Boldness does renew, And Boldness helps him Conquer too. He having gain'd more hearts then all, Th' rest of the Pastoral Cabal.
Mr. Ed. Bed. With him Philander, who nere paid A Sigh or Tear to any Maid: So innocent and young he is, He cannot guess what Passion is. But all the Love he ever knew, On Lycidas he does bestow: Who pays his Tenderness again, Too Amorous for a Swain to a Swain. A softer Youth was never seen, His Beauty Maid; but Man, his Mein: And much more gay than all the rest; And but Alexis finest Dress'd. His Eyes towards Lycidas still turn, As sympathising Flowers to the Sun: Whilst Lycidas whose Eyes dispense No less a grateful Influence, Improves his Beauty, which still fresher grows: Who would not under two such Suns as those? Cloris you sigh, what Amorous grown? Pan grant you keep your heart at home: For I have often heard you Vow,
If any cou'd your heart subdue, Though Lycidas you nere nad seen, It must be him, or one like him: Alas I cannot yet forget, How we have with Amyntas sat Beneath the Boughs for Summer made, Our heated Flocks and Us to shade: Where thou wou'dst wond'rous Stories tell, Of this Agreeable Infidel. By what Devices, Charms and Arts, He us'd to gain and keep his Hearts: And whilst his Falsehood we wou'd Blame, Thou woud'st commend and praise the same. And did no greater pleasure take, Then when of Lycidas we spake; By this and many Sighs we know, Thou'rt sensible of Loving too. Come Cloris, come along with us, And try thy power with Lycidas; See if that Vertue which you prize, Be proof against those Conquering Eyes. That Heart that can no Love admit, Will hardly stand his shock of VVit;
Come deck thee then in all that's fine, Perhaps the Conquest may be thine; They all attend, let's hast to do, What Love and Musick calls us to. SONG. The Willing Mistriss. AMyntas led me to a Grove, Where all the Trees did shade us; The Sun it self, though it had Strove, It could not have betray'd us: The place secur'd from humane Eyes, No other fear allows, But when the Winds that gently rise, Doe Kiss the yeilding Boughs. Down there we satt upon the Moss, And did begin to play A Thousand Amorous Tricks, to pass The heat of all the day.
A many Kisses he did give: And I return'd the same Which made me willing to receive That which I dare not name. His Charming Eyes no Aid requir'd To tell their softning Tale; On her that was already fir'd, 'Twas Easy to prevaile. He did but Kiss and Clasp me round, Whilst those his thoughts Exprest: And lay'd me gently on the Ground; Ah who can guess the rest? SONG. Love Arm'd. LOve in Fantastique Triumph satt, Whilst Bleeding Hearts a round him flow'd; For whom Fresh paines he did Create, And strange Tyranick power he show'd;
From thy Bright Eyes he took his fire, Which round about, in sport he hurl'd; But 'twas from mine, he took desire, Enough to undo the Amorous World. From me he took his sighs and tears, From thee his Pride and Crueltie; From me his Languishments and Feares, And every Killing Dart from thee; Thus thou and I, the God have arm'd, And sett him up a Deity; But my poor Heart alone is harm'd, Whilst thine the Victor is, and free. SONG. The Complaint. AMyntas that true hearted Swaine, Upon a Rivers Banck was lay'd, Where to the Pittying streames he did Com∣plaine On Silvia that false Charming Maid. VVhile shee was still regardless of his paine.
Ah! Charming Silvia, would he cry; And what he said, the Echoes wou'd reply: Be kind or else I dy, Ech:—I dy Be kind or else I dy: Ech:—I dy. Those smiles and Kisses which you give, Remember Sylvia are my due; And all the Joyes my Rivall does receive, He ravishes from me not you: Ah Silvia! can I live and this believe? Insensibles are toucht to see My Languishments, and seem to pitty me: Which I demand of thee: Ech—of thee Which I demand of thee Ech:—of thee. Set by Mr. Banister. SONG. The Invitation. DAmon I cannot blame your will, 'Twas Chance and not Design did kill;
For whilst you did prepare your Charmes, On purpose Silvia to subdue: I met the Arrows as they flew, And sav'd her from their harms. Alas she cannot make returnes, Who for a Swaine already Burnes; A Shepherd whom she does Caress: With all the softest marks of Love, And 'tis in vaine thou seek'st to move, The cruel Shepherdess. Content thee with this Victory, Think me as faire and young as she: I'le make thee Garlands all the day, And in the Groves we'l sit and sing; I'le Crown thee with the pride o'th' Spring, When thou art Lord of May. SONG. VVHen Jemmy first began to Love, He was the Gayest Swaine That ever yet a Flock had drove, Or danc't upon the Plaine.
T'was then that I, weys me poor Heart, My Freedom threw away; And finding sweets in every smart, I cou'd not say him nay. And ever when he talkt of Love, He wou'd his Eyes decline; And every sigh, a Heart would move, Gued Faith and why not mine? He'd press my hand, and Kiss it oft, In silence spoke his Flame. And whilst he treated me thus soft, I wisht him more to Blame. Sometimes to feed my Flocks with him, My Jemmy wou'd Invite me: Where he the Gayest Songs wou'd sing, On purpose to delight me. And Jemmy every Grace displayd, Which were enough I trow, To Conquer any Princely Maid, So did he me I vow.
But now for Jemmy must I mourn, VVho to the VVarrs must go; His Sheephook to a Sword must turne: Alack what shall I do? His Bag-pipe into War-like Sounds, Must now Exchanged bee: Instead of Braceletts, fearful Wounds; Then what becomes of me? To Mr. Creech (under the Name of Daphnis) on his Excellent Translation of Lucretius. THou great Young Man! Permit amongst the Crowd Of those that sing thy mighty Praises lowd, My humble Muse to bring its Tribute too. Inspir'd by thy vast flight of Verse, Methinks I should some wondrous thing rehearse, Worthy Divine Lucretius, and Diviner Thou.
But I of Feebler Seeds design'd, Whilst the slow moving Atomes strove, With careless heed to form my Mind: Compos'd it all of Softer Love. In gentle Numbers all my Songs are Drest, And when I would thy Glories sing, What in strong manly Verse I would express, Turns all to Womannish Tenderness within. Whilst that which Admiration does inspire, In other Souls, kindles in mine a Fire. Let them admire thee on—Whilst I this newer way Pay thee yet more than they: For more I owe, since thou hast taught me more, Then all the mighty Bards that went before. Others long since have Pal'd the vast delight; In duller Greek and Latin satisfy'd the Appetite: But I unlearn'd in Schools, disdain that mine Should treated be at any Feast but thine. Till now, I curst my Birth, my Education, And more the scanted Customes of the Nation: Permitting not the Female Sex to tread, The Mighty Paths of Learned Heroes dead. The God-like Virgil, and great Homers Verse, Like Divine Mysteries are conceal'd from us.
We are forbid all grateful Theams, No ravishing thoughts approach our Ear, The Fulsom Gingle of the times, Is all we are allow'd to understand or hear. But as of old, when men unthinking lay, Ere Gods were worshipt, or ere Laws were fram'd The wiser Bard that taught 'em first t' obey, Was next to what he taught, ador'd and fam'd; Gentler they grew, their words and manners chang'd, And salvage now no more the Woods they rang'd. So thou by this Translation dost advance Our Knowledg from the State of Ignorance, And equals us to Man: Ah how can we, Enough Adore, or Sacrifice enough to thee! The Mystick Terms of Rough Philosophy, Thou dost so plain and easily express; Yet Deck'st them in so soft and gay a Dress: So intelligent to each Capacity, That they at once Instruct and Charm the Sense, VVith heights of Fancy, heights of Eloquence;
And Reason over all Unfetter'd plays, VVanton and undisturb'd as Summers Breeze; That gliding murmurs o're the Trees: And no hard Notion meets or stops its way. It Pierces, Conquers and Compels, Beyond poor Feeble Faith's dull Oracles. Faith the despairing Souls content, Faith the Last Shift of Routed Argument. Hail Sacred Wadham! whom the Muses Grace And from the Rest of all the Reverend Pile Of Noble Pallaces, design'd thy Space: VVhere they in soft retreat might dwell. They blest thy Fabrick, and said—Do thou, Our Darling Sons contain; We thee our Sacred Nursery Ordain: They said and blest, and it was so. And if of old the Fanes of Silvian Gods, VVere worshipt as Divine Aboads; If Courts are held as Sacred Things, For being the Awful Seats of Kings. VVhat Veneration should be paid, To thee that hast such wondrous Poets made!
To Gods for fear, Devotion was design'd, And Safety made us bow to Majesty; Poets by Nature Aw and Charm the Mind, Are born not made by dull Religion or Necessity. The Learned Thirsis did to thee belong, Who Athens Plague has so divinely Sung. Thirsis to wit, as sacred friendship true, Paid Mighty Cowley's Memory its due. Thirsis who whilst a greater Plague did reign, Then that which Athens did Depopulate: Scattering Rebellious Fury o're the Plain, That threatn'd Ruine to the Church and State, Unmov'd he stood, and fear'd no Threats of Fate. That Loyal Champion for the Church & Crown, That Noble Ornament of the Sacred Gown, Still did his Soveraign's Cause Espouse, And was above the Thanks of the mad Senate-house. Strephon the Great, whom last you sent abroad, Who VVrit, and Lov'd, & Lookt like any God; For whom the Muses mourn, the Love-sick Maids Are Languishing in Melancholly Shades.
The Cupids flag their Wings, their Bows untie, And useless Quivers hang neglected by, And scatter'd Arrows all around 'em lye. By murmuring Brooks the careless Deities are laid, Weeping their rifled power now Noble Stre∣phon's Dead. Ah Sacred Wadham! should'st thou never own But this delight of all Mankind and thine; For Ages past of Dulness, this alone, This Charming Hero would Attone. And make thee Glorious to succeeding time; But thou like Natures self disdain'st to be, Stinted to Singularity. Even as fast as she thou dost produce, And over all the Sacred Mystery infuse. No sooner was fam'd Strephon's Glory set, Strephon the Soft, the Lovely and the Great; But Daphnis rises like the Morning-Star, That guides the VVandring Traveller from afar. Daphnis whom every Grace, and Muse inspires,
Scarce Strephons Ravishing Poetick Fires So kindly warm, or so divinely Cheer. Advance Young Daphnis, as thou hast begun, So let thy Mighty Race be run. Thou in thy large Poetick Chace, Begin'st where others end the Race. If now thy Grateful Numbers are so strong, If they so early can such Graces show, Like Beauty so surprizing, when so Young, VVhat Daphnis will thy Riper Judgment do, When thy Unbounded Verse in their own Streams shall flow! What Wonder will they not produce, When thy Immortal Fancy's loose; Unfetter'd, Unconfin'd by any other Muse! Advance Young Daphnis then, and mayst thou prove Still Sacred in thy Poetry and Love. May all the Groves with Daphnis Songs be blest, Whilst every Bark is with thy Disticks drest. May Timerous Maids learn how to Love from thence And the Glad Shepherd Arts of Eloquence. And when to Solitude thou woud'st Retreat, May their tun'd Pipes thy Welcome celebrate.
And all the Nymphs strow Garlands at thy Feet. May all the Purling Streams that murmuring pass, The Shady Groves and Banks of Flowers, The kind reposing Beds of Grass, Contribute to their Softer Hours. Mayst thou thy Muse and Mistress there Caress, And may one heighten to 'thers Happiness. And whilst thou so divinely dost Converse, We are content to know and to admire thee in thy Sacred Verse. To Mrs. W. On her Excellent Verses (Writ in Praise of some I had made on the Earl of Rochester) Written in a Fit of Sickness. ENough kind Heaven! to purpose I have liv'd, And all my Sighs & Languishments surviv'd. My Stars in vain their sullen influence have shed, Round my till now Unlucky Head: I pardon all the Silent Hours I've griev'd, My Weary Nights, and Melancholy Days;
When no Kind Power my Pain Reliev'd, I lose you all, you sad Remembrancers, I lose you all in New-born Joys, Joys that will dissipate my Falling Tears. The Mighty Soul of Rochester's reviv'd, Enough Kind Heaven to purpose I have liv'd. I saw the Lovely Phantom, no Disguise, Veil'd the blest Vision from my Eyes, 'Twas all o're Rochester that pleas'd and did sur'prize. Sad as the Grave I sat by Glimmering Light, Such as attends Departing Souls by Night. Pensive as absent Lovers left alone, Or my poor Dove, when his Fond Mate was gone. Silent as Groves when only Whispering Gales, Sigh through the Rushing Leaves, As softly as a Bashful Shepherd Breaths, To his Lov'd Nymph his Amorous Tales. So dull I was, scarce Thought a Subject found, Dull as the Light that gloom'd around; When lo the Mighty Spirit appear'd, All Gay, all Charming to my sight; My Drooping Soul it Rais'd and Cheer'd, And cast about a Dazling Light.
In every part there did appear, The Great, the God-like Rochester, His Softness all, his Sweetness everywhere. It did advance, and with a Generous Look, To me Addrest, to worthless me it spoke: With the same wonted Grace my Muse it prais'd, VVith the same Goodness did my Faults Correct: And Careful of the Fame himself first rais'd, Obligingly it School'd my loose Neglect. The soft, the moving Accents soon I knew The gentle Voice made up of Harmony; Through the Known Paths of my glad Soul it flew; I knew it straight, it could no others be, 'Twas not Alied but very very he. So the All-Ravisht Swain that hears The wondrous Musick of the Sphears, For ever does the grateful Sound retain, Whilst all his Oaten Pipes and Reeds. The Rural Musick of the Groves and Meads, Strive to divert him from the Heavenly Song in vain. He hates their harsh and Untun'd Lays, Which now no more his Soul and Fancy raise.
But if one Note of the remembred Air He chance again to hear, He starts, and in a transport cries,—'Tis there! He knows it all by that one little taste, And by that grateful Hint remembers all the rest. Great, Good, and Excellent, by what new way Shall I my humble Tribute pay, For this vast Glory you my Muse have done, For this great Condescention shown! So Gods of old sometimes laid by Their Awful Trains of Majesty, And chang'd ev'n Heav'n a while for Groves and Plains, And to their Fellow-Gods preferr'd the lowly Swains. And Beds of Flow'rs would oft compare To those of Downey Clouds, or yielding Air; At Purling Streams would drink in homely Shells, Put off the God, to Revel it in Woods and Shep∣herds Cells; Would listen to their Rustick Songs, and show Such Divine Goodness in Commending too, Whilst the transported Swain the Honour pays With humble Adoration, humble Praise.
The Sence of a Letter sent me, made into Verse; To a New Tune. I. IN vain I have labour'd the Victor to prove Of a Heart that can ne'er give Admittance to Love: So hard to be won, That nothing so young, Could e'er have resisted a Passion so long. II But nothing I left unattempted or said, To soften the Heart of the Pityless Maid; Yet still she was shy, And would blushing deny, Whilst her willinger Eyes gave her Language the Lye. III. When before the Impregnable Fort I lay down, I resolv'd or to die, or to Purchase Renown,
But how vain was the Boast! All the Glory I lost, And now vanquish'd and sham'd I've quitted my Post. The Return. I. AMyntas whilst you Have an Art to subdue, And can conquer a Heart with a Look or a Smile, You Pityless grow, And no Faith will allow; 'Tis the Glory you seek when you rifle the Spoil. II. Your soft warring Eyes, When prepar'd for the Prize, Can laugh at the Aids of my feeble Disdain; You can humble the Foe, And soon make her to know Tho' she arms her with Pride, her Efforts are but vain.
III. But Shepherd beware, Though a Victor you are; A Tyrant was never secure in his Throne; Whilst proudly you aim New Conquests to gain, Some hard-hearted Nymph may return you your own. On a Copy of Verses made in a Dream, and sent to me in a Morning before I was Awake. AMyntas, if your Wit in Dreams Can furnish you with Theams, What must it do when your Soul looks abroad, Quick'nd with Agitations of the Sence, And dispossest of Sleeps dull heavy Load, When ev'ry Syllable has Eloquence? And if by Chance such Wounds you make, And in your Sleep such welcome Mischiefs do;
What are your Pow'rs when you're awake, Directed by Design and Reason too? I slept, as duller Mortals use, Without the Musick of a Thought, VVhen by a gentle Breath, soft as thy Muse, Thy Name to my glad Ear was brought: Amyntas! cry'd the Page——And at the Sound, My list'ning Soul unusual Pleasure found. So the Harmonius Spheres surprize, VVhilst the All-Ravish'd Shepherd gazes round, And wonders whence the Charms should rise, That can at once both please and wound. VVhilst trembling I unript the Seal Of what you'd sent, My Heart with an Impatient Zeal, VVithout my Eyes, would needs reveal Its Bus'ness and Intent. But so beyond the Sence they were Of ev'ry scribling Lovers common Art, That now I find an equal share Of Love and Admiration in my Heart. And while I read, in vain I strove To hide the Pleasure which I took;
Bellario saw in ev'ry Look My smiling Joy and blushing Love. Soft ev'ry word, easie each Line, and true; Brisk, witty, manly, strong and gay; The Thoughts are tender all, and new, And Fancy ev'ry where does gently play. Amyntas if you thus go on, Like an unwearied Conqueror day and night, The World at last must be undone. You do not only kill at sight, But like a Parthian in your flight. Whether you Rally or Retreat, You still have Arrows for Defeat. To my Lady Morland at Tunbrige. AS when a Conqu'rour does in Triumph come, And proudly leads the vanquish'd Captives home, The Joyful People croud in ev'ry Street, And with loud shouts of Praise the Victor greet;
While some whom Chance or Fortune kept away, Desire at least the Story of the Day; How brave the Prince, how gay the Chariot was, How beautiful he look'd, with what a Grace; Whether upon his Head he Plumes did wear; Or if a Wreath of Bays adorn'd his Hair: They hear 'tis wondrous fine, and long much To see the Hero then they did before. So when the Marvels by Report I knew, more Of how much Beauty, Cloris, dwelt in you; How many Slaves your Conqu'ring Eyes had won, And how the gazing Crowd admiring throng: I wish'd to see, and much a Lover grew Of so much Beauty, though my Rivals too. I came and saw, and blest my Destiny; I found it Just you should out-Rival me. 'Twas at the Altar, where more Hearts were giv'n To you that day, then were address'd to Heav'n. The Rev'rend Man whose Age and Mystery Had rendred Youth and Beauty Vanity, By fatal Chance casting his Eyes your way, Mistook the duller Bus'ness of the Day, Forgot the Gospel, and began to Pray.
VVhilst the Enamour'd Crowd that near you prest, Receiving Darts which none could e'er resist, Neglected the Mistake o'th' Love-sick Priest. Ev'n my Devotion, Cloris, you betray'd, And I to Heaven no other Petition made, But that you might all other Nymphs out-do In Cruelty as well as Beauty too. I call'd Amyntas Faithless Swain before, But now I find 'tis Just he should Adore. Not to love you, a wonder sure would be, Greater then all his Perjuries to me. And whilst I Blame him, I Excuse him too; Who would not venture Heav'n to purchase you? But Charming Cloris, you too meanly prize The more deserving Glories of your Eyes, If you permit him on an Amorous score, To be your Slave, who was my Slave before. He oft has Fetters worn, and can with ease Admit 'em or dismiss 'em when he please. A Virgin-Heart you merit, that ne'er found It could receive, till from your Eyes, the Wound; A Heart that nothing but your Force can fear, And own a Soul as Great as you are Fair.
Song to Ceres. In the Wavering Nymph, or Mad Amyntas. I. CEres, Great Goddess of the bounteous Year, Who load'st the Teeming Earth with Gold and Grain, Blessing the Labours of th' Industrious Swain, And to their Plaints inclin'st thy gracious Ear: Behold two fair Cicilian Lovers lie Prostrate before thy Deity; Imploring thou wilt grant the Just Desires Of two Chaste Hearts that burn with equal Fires. II. Amyntas he, brave, generous and young; Whom yet no Vice his Youth has e'er betray'd: And Chaste Urania is the Lovely Maid; His Daughter who has serv'd thy Altars long, As thy High Priest: A Dowry he demands A the young Amorous Shepherds hands:
Say, gentle Goddess, what the Youth must give, E'er the Bright Maid he can from thee receive. Song in the same Play, by the Waver∣ing Nymph. PAN grant that I may never prove So great a Slave to fall in love, And to an Unknown Deity Resign my happy Liberty: I love to see the Amorous Swains Unto my Scorn their Hearts resign: With Pride I see the Meads and Plains Throng'd all with Slaves, and they all mine: Whilst I the whining Fools despise, That pay their Homage to my Eyes.
The Disappointment. I. ONe day the Amorous Lysander, By an impatient Passion sway'd, Surpriz'd fair Cloris, that lov'd Maid, Who could defend her self no longer. All things did with his Love conspire; The gilded Planet of the Day, In his gay Chariot drawn by Fire, Was now descending to the Sea, And left no Light to guide the VVorld, But what from Cloris Brighter Eyes was hurld. II. In a lone Thicket made for Love, Silent as yielding Maids Consent, She with a Charming Languishment, Permits his Force, yet gently strove; Her Hands his Bosom softly meet, But not to put him back design'd, Rather to draw 'em on inclin'd:
VVhilst he lay trembling at her Feet, Resistance 'tis in vain to show; She wants the pow'r to say—Ah! What d'ye do? III. Her Bright Eyes sweet, and yet severe, VVhere Love and Shame confus'dly strive, Fresh Vigor to Lysander give; And breathing faintly in his Ear, She cry'd—Cease, Cease—your vain Desire, Or I'll call out—What would you do? My Dearer Honour ev'n to You I cannot, must not give—Retire, Or take this Life, whose chiefest part I gave you with the Conquest of my Heart. IV. But he as much unus'd to Fear, As he was capable of Love, The blessed minutes to improve, Kisses her Mouth, her Neck, her Hair; Each Touch her new Desire Alarms, His burning trembling Hand he prest Upon her swelling Snowy Brest,
VVhile she lay panting in his Arms. All her Unguarded Beauties lie The Spoils and Trophies of rhe Enemy. V. And now without Respect or Fear, He seeks the Object of his Vows, (His Love no Modesty allows) By swift degrees advancing—where His daring Hand that Altar seiz'd, VVhere Gods of Love do sacirfice: That Awful Throne, that Paradice VVhere Rage is calm'd, and Anger pleas'd; That Fountain where Delight still flows, And gives the Universal VVorld Repose. VI. Her Balmy Lips incountring his, Their Bodies, as their Souls, are joyn'd; VVhere both in Transports Unconfin'd Extend themselves upon the Moss. Cloris half dead and breathless lay; Her soft Eyes cast a Humid Light, Such as divides the Day and Night;
Or falling Stars, whose Fires decay: And now no signs of Life she shows, But what in short-breath'd Sighs returns & goes. VII. He saw how at her Length she lay; He saw her rising Bosom bare; Her loose thin Rohes, through which appeat A Shape design'd for Love and Play; Abandon'd by her Pride and Shame. She does her softest Joys dispence, Off'ring her Virgin-Innocence A Victim to Loves Sacred Flame; While the o'er-Ravish'd Shepherd lies Unable to perform the Sacrifice. VIII. Ready to taste a thousand Joys, The too transported hapless Swain Found the vast Pleasure turn'd to Pain; Pleasure which too much Love destroys: The willing Garments by he laid, And Heaven all open'd to his view, Mad to possess, himself he threw
On the Defenceless Lovely Maid. But Oh what envying God conspires To snatch his Power, yet leave him the Desire! IX. Nature's Support, (without whose Aid She can no Humane Being give) It self now wants the Art to live; Faintness its slack'ned Nerves invade: In vain th' inraged Youth essay'd To call its fleeting Vigor back, No motion 'twill from Motion take; Excess of Love his Love betray'd: In vain he Toils, in vain Commands; The Insensible fell weeping in his Hand. X. In this so Amorous Cruel Strife, Where Love and Fate were too severe, The poor Lysander in despair Renounc'd his Reason with his Life: Now all the brisk and active Fire That should the Nobler Part inflame, Serv'd to increase his Rage and Shame,
And left no Spark for New Desire: Not all her Naked Charms cou'd move Or calm that Rage that had debauch'd his Love. XI. Cloris returning from the Trance Which Love and soft Desire had bred, Her timerous Hand she gently laid (Or guided by Design or Chance) Upon that Fabulous Priapas, That Potent God, as Poets feign; But never did young Shepherdess, Gath'ring of Fern upon the Plain, More nimbly draw her Fingers back, Finding beneath the verdant Leaves a Snake: XII. Than Cloris her fair Hand withdrew, Finding that God of her Desires Disarm'd of all his Awful Fires, And Cold as Flow'rs bath'd in the Morning-Dew. Who can the Nymph's Confusion guess? The Blood forsook the hinder Place, And strew'd with Blushes all her Face,
Which both Disdain and Shame exprest: And from Lysander's Arms she fled, Leaving him fainting on the Gloomy Bed. XIII. Like Lightning through the Grove she hies, Or Daphne from the Delphick God, No Print upon the grassey Road She leaves, t' instruct Pursuing Eyes. The Wind that wanton'd in her Hair, And with her Ruffled Garments plaid, Discover'd in the Flying Maid All that the Gods e'er made, if Fair. So Venus, when her Love was slain, With Fear and Haste flew o'er the Fatal Plain. XIV. The Nymph's Resentments none but I Can well Imagine or Condole: But none can guess Lysander's Soul, But those who sway'd his Destiny. His silent Griefs swell up to Storms, And not one God his Fury spares; He curs'd his Birth, his Fate, his Stars;
But more the Shepherdess's Charms, Whose soft bewitching Influence Had Damn'd him to the Hell of Impotence. On a Locket of Hair Wove in a True-Loves Knot, given me by Sir R. O. WHat means this Knot, in Mystick Order Ty'd, And which no Humane Knowledge can divide? Not the Great Conqu'rours Sword can this undo Whose very Beauty would divert the Blow. Bright Relique! Shrouded in a Shrine of Gold! Less Myst'ry made a Deity of Old. Fair Charmer! Tell me by what pow'rful Spell You into this Confused Order fell? If Magick could be wrought on things Divine, Some Amorous Sybil did thy Form design In some soft hour, which the Prophetick Maid In Nobler Mysteries of Love employ'd, Wrought thee a Hieroglyphick, to express The wanton God in all his Tenderness;
Thus shaded, and thus all adorn'd with Charms, Harmless, Unfletch'd, without Offensive Arms, He us'd of Old in shady Groves to Play, E'er Swains broke Vows, or Nymphs were vain and coy, Or Love himself had Wings to fly away. Or was it (his Almighty Pow'r to prove) Design'd a Quiver for the God of Love? And all these shining Hairs which th'inspir'd Maid Has with such strange Mysterious Fancy laid, Are meant his Shafts; the subt'lest surest Darts That ever Conqu'red or Secur'd his Hearts; Darts that such tender Passions do convey, Not the young Wounder is more soft than they. 'Tis so; the Riddle I at last have learn'd: But found it when I was too far concern'd. The Dream. A Song. I. THe Grove was gloomy all around, Murm'ring the Streams did pass, Where fond Astrea laid her down Upon a Bed of Grass.
I slept and saw a piteous sight, Cupid a weeping lay, Till both his little Stars of Light Had wept themselves away. II. Methought I ask'd him why he cry'd, My Pity led me on: All sighing the sad Boy reply'd, Alas I am undone! As I beneath you Myrtles lay, Down by Diana's Springs, Amyntas stole my Bow away, And Pinion'd both my Wings. III. Alas! cry'd I, 'twas then thy Darts Wherewith he wounded me: Thou Mighty Deity of Hearts, He stole his Pow'r from thee. Revenge thee, if a God thou be, Upon the Amorous Swain; I'll set thy Wings at Liberty, And thou shalt fly again.
IV. And for this Service on my Part, All I implore of thee, Is, That thou't wound Amyntas Heart, And make him die for me. His Silken Fetters I Unty'd, And the gay Wings display'd; Which gently fann'd, he mounts and cry'd, Farewel fond easie Maid. V. At this I blush'd, and angry grew I should a God believe; And waking found my Dream too true, Alas I was a Slave. A Letter to a Brother of the Pen in Tribulation. POor Damon! Art thou caught? Is't ev'n so? Art thou become a So he called a Sweating-Tub. Tabernacler too?
Where sure thou dost not mean to Preach or Pray, Unless it be the clean contrary way: This holy Lent. time I little thought thy sin Deserv'd a Tub to do its Pennance in. O how you'll for th' Aegyptian Flesh-pots wish, When you'r half-famish'd with your Lenten-dish, Your Almonds, Currans, Biskets hard and dry, Food that will Soul and Body mortifie: Damn'd Penetential Drink, that will infuse Dull Principles into thy Grateful Muse. —Pox on't that you must needs be fooling now, Just when the Wits had greatest I wanted a Prologue to a Play. need of you. Was Summer then so long a coming on, That you must make an Artificial one? Much good may't do thee; but 'tis thought thy Brain E'er long will wish for cooler Days again. For Honesty no more will I engage: I durst have sworn thou'dst had thy Pusillage. Thy Looks the whole Cabal have cheated too; But thou wilt say, most of the Wits do so. Is this thy writing He pretended to  Write. Plays? who thought thy Wit An Interlude of Whoring would admit?
To Poetry no more thou'lt be inclin'd, Unless in Verse to damn all VVoman-kind: And 'tis but Just thou shouldst in Rancor grow Against that Sex that has Confin'd thee so. All things in Nature now are Brisk and Gay At the Approaches of the Blooming May: The new-fletch'd Birds do in our Arbors sing A Thousand Airs to welcome in the Spring; VVhilst ev'ry Swain is like a Bridegroom drest, And ev'ry Nymph as going to a Feast: The Meadows now their flowry Garments wear, And ev'ry Grove does in its Pride appear: VVhilst thou poor Damon in close Rooms art pent, Where hardly thy own Breath can find a vent. Yet that too is a Heaven, compar'd to th' Task Of Codling every Morning in a Cask. Now I could curse this Female, but I know, She needs it not, that thus cou'd handle you. Besides, that Vengeance does to thee belong, And 'twere Injustice to disarm thy Tongue. Curse then▪ dear Swain, that all the Youth may And from thy dire Mishap be taught to fear. Curse till thou hast undone the Race, and all hear, That did contribute to thy Spring and Fall.
The Reflection: A Song. I. POOR Lost Serena, to Bemoan The Rigor of her Fate, High'd to a Rivers-side alone, Upon whose Brinks she sat. Her Eyes, as if they would have spar'd, The Language of her Tongue, In Silent Tears a while declar'd The Sense of all her wrong. II. But they alas too feeble were, Her Grief was swoln too high To be Exprest in Sighs and Tears; She must or speak or dye. And thus at last she did complain, Is this the Faith, said she, Which thou allowest me, Cruel Swain, For that I gave to thee?
III. Heaven knows with how much Innocence I did my Soul Incline To thy Soft Charmes of Eloquence, And gave thee what was mine. I had not one Reserve in Store, But at thy Feet I lay'd Those Arms that Conquer'd heretofore, Tho' now thy Trophies made. IV. Thy Eyes in Silence told their Tale Of Love in such a way, That 'twas as easie to Prevail, As after to Betray. And when you spoke my Listning Soul, Was on the Flattery Hung: And I was lost without Controul, Such Musick grac'd thy Tongue. V. Alas how long in vain you strove My coldness to divert!
How long besieg'd it round with Love, Before you won the Heart. What Arts you us'd, what Presents made, What Songs, what Letters writ: And left no Charm that cou'd invade, Or with your Eyes or Wit. VI. Till by such Obligations Prest, By such dear Perjuries won: I heedlesly Resign'd the rest, And quickly was undone. For as my Kindling Flames increase, Yours glimeringly decay: The Rifled Joys no more can Please, That once oblig'd your Stay. VII. Witness ye Springs, ye Meads and Groves, Who oft were conscious made To all our Hours and Vows of Love; Witness how I'm Betray'd. Trees drop your Leaves, be Gay no more, Ye Rivers waste and drye: Whilst on your Melancholy Shore, I lay me down and dye.
SONG. To Pesibles Tune. I. 'Twas when the Fields were gay, The Groves and every Tree: Just when the God of Day, Grown weary of his Sway, Descended to the Sea, And Gloomy Light around did all the World survey. 'Twas then the Hapless Swain, Amyntas, to Complain Of Silvia's cold Disdain, Retir'd to Silent Shades; Where by a Rivers Side, His Tears did swell the Tide, As he upon the Brink was lay'd. II. Ye Gods, he often cry'd, Why did your Powers design
In Silvia so much Pride, Such Falshood to beside. With Beauty so Divine? VVhy should so much of Hell with so much Heaven joyn? Be witness every Shade, How oft the lovely Maid Her tender Vows has paid; Yet with the self-same Breath, With which so oft before, And solemnly she swore, Pronounces now Amyntas Death. III. But Charming Nymph beware, Whilst I your Victim die, Some One, my Perjur'd Fair, Revenging my Despair, Will prove as false to thee; Which yet my wandring Ghost wou'd look more pale to see. For I shall break my Tomb, And nightly as I rome, Shall to my Silvia come, And show the Piteous Sight;
My bleeding Bosom too, Which wounds were given by you; Then vanish in the Shades of Night. SONG. On her Loving Two Equally. Set by Captain Pack. I. HOw strongly does my Passion flow, Divided equally 'twixt two? Damon had ne'er subdu'd my Heart, Had not Alexis took his part; Nor cou'd Alexis pow'rful prove, Without my Damons Aid, to gain my Love. II. When my Alexis present is, Then I for Damon sigh and mourn; But when Alexis I do miss, Damon gains nothing but my Scorn.
But if it chance they both are by, For both alike I languish, sigh, and die. III. Cure then, thou mighty winged God, This restless Feaver in my Blood; One Golden-Pointed Dart take back: But which, O Cupid, wilt thou take? If Damons, all my Hopes are crost; Or that of my Alexis, I am lost. The Counsel. A Song. Set by Captain Pack. I. APox upon this needless Scorn: Sylvia for shame the Cheat give o'er: The End to which the Fair are botn, Is not to keep their Charms in store: But lavishly dispose in haste Of Joys which none but Youth improve;
Joys which decay when Beauty's past; And who, when Beauty's past, will love? II. When Age those Glories shall deface, Revenging all your cold Disdain; And Sylvia shall neglected pass, By every once-admiring Swain; And we no more shall Homage pay: When you in vain too late shall burn, If Love increase, and Youth decay, Ah Sylvia! who will make Return? III. Then haste, my Sylvia, to the Grove, Where all the Sweets of May conspire To teach us ev'ry Art of Love, And raise our Joys of Pleasure higher: Where while embracing we shall lie Loosly in Shades on Beds of Flow'rs, The duller World while we defie, Years will be Minutes, Ages Hours.
SONG. The Surprize. Set by Mr. Farmer: I. PHillis, whose Heart was Unconfin'd, And free as Flow'rs on Meads and Plains, None boasted of her being Kind, 'Mong'st all the languishing and amorous Swains. No Sighs or Tears the Nymph cou'd move, To pity or return their Love. II. Till on a time the hapless Maid Retir'd to shun the Heat o'th' Day Into a Grove, beneath whose shade Strephon the careless Shepherd sleeping lay: But O such Charms the Youth adorn, Love is reveng'd for all her Scorn.
III. Her Cheeks with Blushes cover'd were, And tender Sighs her Bosom warm, A Softness in her Eyes appear; Unusual Pain she feels from ev'ry Charm: To Woods and Ecchoes now she cries, For Modesty to speak denies. SONG. I. AH! what can mean that eager Joy Transports my Heart when you appear? Ah Strephon! you my Thoughts imploy In all that's Charming, all that's Dear. When you your pleasing Story tell, A Softness does invade each Part, And I with Blushes own I feel Something too tender at my Heart. II. At your approach my Blushes rise, And I at once both wish and fear; My wounded Soul mounts to my Eyes, As it would prattle Stories there.
Take, take that Heart that needs must go; But, Shepherd, see it kindly us'd: For who such Presents will bestow, If this, alas! should be abus'd? The Invitation: A Song. To a New Scotch Tune. I. COme my Phillis let us improve Both our Joyes of Equal Love: VVhile we in yonder Shady Grove, Count Minutes by our Kisses. See the Flowers how sweetly they spread, And each Resigns his Gawdy Head, To make for us a Fragrant Bed, To practice o'er New Blisses. II. The Sun it self with Love does conspire, And sends abroad his ardent Fire, And kindly seems to bid us retire,
And shade us from his Glory; Then come, my Phillis, do not fear; All that your Swain desires there, Is by those Eyes a new to swear How much he does adore ye. III. Phillis, in vain you shed those Tears; VVhy do you blush? Oh speak your Fears! There's none but your Amyntas hears: VVhat means this pretty Passion? Can you fear your Favours will cloy Those that the Blessing does enjoy? Ah no! such needless Thoughts destroy: This Nicety's out of Fashion. IV. When thou hast done, by Pan I swear, Thou wilt unto my Eyes appear A thousand times more Charming and Fair, Then thou wert to my first Desire: That Smile was kind, and now thou'rt wise, To throw away this Coy Disguise, And by the vigor of thy Eyes, Declare thy Youth and Fire.
Silvio's Complaint: A SONG, To a Fine Scotch Tune. I. IN the Blooming Time o'th' year, In the Royal Month of May: Au the Heaves were glad and clear, Au the Earth was Fresh and Gay. A Noble Youth but all Forlorn, Lig'd Sighing by a Spring: 'Twere better I's was nere Born, Ere wisht to be a King. II. Then from his Starry Eyne, Muckle Showers of Christal Fell: To bedew the Roses Fine, That on his Cheeks did dwell.
And ever 'twixt his Sighs he'd cry, How Bonny a Lad I'd been, Had I, weys me, nere Aim'd high, Or wisht to be a King. III. With Dying Clowdy Looks, Au the Fields and Groves he kens: Au the Gleeding Murmuring Brooks, (Noo his Unambitious Friends) Tol which he eance with Mickle Cheer His Bleating Flocks woud bring: And crys, woud God I'd dy'd here, Ere wisht to be a King. IV. How oft in Yonder Mead, Cover'd ore with Painted Flowers: Au the Dancing Youth I've led, Where we past our Blether Hours. In Yonder Shade, in Yonder Grove, How Blest the Nymphs have been: Ere I for Pow'r Debaucht Love, Or wisht to be a King.
V. Not add the Arcadian Swains, In their Pride and Glory Clad: Not au the Spacious Plains, Ere coud Boast a Bleether Lad. When ere I Pip'd, or Danc'd, or Ran, Or leapt, or whirl'd the Sling: The Flowry Wreaths I still won, And wisht to be a King, VI. But Curst be yon Tall Oak, And Old Thirsis be accurst: There I first my peace forsook, There I learnt Ambition first. Such Glorious Songs of Hero's Crown'd, The Restless Swain woud Sing: My Soul unknown desires found, And Languisht to be King. VII. Ye Garlands wither now, Fickle Glories vanish all:
Ye Wreaths that deckt my Brow, To the ground neglected fall. No more my sweet Repose molest, Nor to my Fancies bring The Golden Dreams of being Blest With Titles of a King. VIII. Ye Noble Youths beware, Shun Ambitious powerful Tales: Distructive, False, and Fair, Like the Oceans Flattering Gales. See how my Youth and Glories lye, Like Blasted Flowers i'th' Spring: My Fame Renown and all dye, For wishing to be King. In Imitation of Horace. I. WHat mean those Amorous Curles of Jet? For what heart-Ravisht Maid
Dost thou thy Hair in order set, Thy Wanton Tresses Braid? And thy vast Store of Beauties open lay, That the deluded Fancy leads astray. II. For pitty hide thy Starry eyes, Whose Languishments destroy: And look not on the Slave that dyes With an Excess of Joy. Defend thy Coral Lips, thy Amber Breath; To taste these Sweets lets in a Certain Death. III. Forbear, fond Charming Youth, forbear, Thy words of Melting Love: Thy Eyes thy Language well may spare, One Dart enough can move. And she that hears thy voice and sees thy Eyes With too much Pleasure, too much Softness dies IV. Cease, Cease, with Sighs to warm my Soul, Or press me with thy Hand:
VVho can the kindling fire controul, The tender force withstand? Thy Sighs and Touches like wing'd Lightning fly, And are the Gods of Loves Artillery. To Lysander, who made some Ver∣ses on a Discourse of Loves Fire. I. IN vain, dear Youth, you say you love, And yet my Marks of Passion blame; Since Jealousie alone can prove, The surest Witness of my Flame: And she who without that, a Love can vow, Believe me, Shepherd, does not merit you. II. Then give me leave to doubt, that Fire I kindle, may another warm: A Face that cannot move Desire, May serve at least to end the Charm: Love else were Witchcraft, that on malice bent, Denies ye Joys, or makes ye Impotent.
III. 'Tis true, when Cities are on fire, Men never wait for Christal Springs; But to the Neighb'ring Pools retire; Which nearest, best Assistance brings; And serves as well to quench the raging Flame, As if from God-delighting Streams it came. IV. A Fancy strong may do the Feat Yet this to Love a Riddle is, And shows that Passion but a Cheat; Which Men but with their Tongues Confess. For 'tis a Maxime in Loves learned School, Who blows the Fire, the flame can only Rule. V. Though Honour does your Wish deny, Honour! the Foe to your Repose; Yet 'tis more Noble far to dye, Then break Loves known and Sacred Laws:
What Lover wou'd pursue a single Game, That cou'd amongst the Fair deal out his flame? VI. Since then Lysander you desire, Amynta only to adore; Take in no Partners to your Fire, For who well Loves, that Loves one more? And if such Rivals in your Heart I find, Tis in My Power to die, but not be kind. A Dialogue for an Entertainment at Court, between Damon and Syl∣via. Damon. AH Sylvia! if I still pursue, Whilst you in vain your Scorn improve; What wonders might your Eies not do: If they would dress themselves in Love.
Silvia. Shepherd you urge my Love in vain, For I can ne'er Reward your pain; A Slave each Smile of mine can win, And all my softning Darts, When e'er I please, can bring me in A Thousand Yeilding Hearts. Damon. Yet if those Slaves you treat with Cruelty, 'Tis an Inglorious Victory; And those unhappy Swaines you so subdue, May Learn at last to scorn, as well as you; Your Beauty though the Gods design'd Shou'd be Ador'd by all below; Yet if you want a Godlike Pittying Mind, Our Adoration soon will colder grow: 'Tis Pitty makes a Deity, Ah Silvia! daine to pitty me, And I will worship none but thee.
Sylvia. Perhaps I may your Councel take, And Pitty, tho' not Love, for Damons sake; Love is a Flame my Heart ne'er knew, Nor knows how to begin to burn for you. Damon. Ah Sylvia who's the happy Swain, For whom that Glory you ordain! Has Strephon, Pithius, Hilus, more Of Youth, of Love, or Flocks a greater store? My flame pursues you too, with that Address, Which they want Passion to Profess: Ah then make some Returns my Charming Shepherdess. Silvia. Too Faithful Shepherd I will try my Heart, And if I can will give you part. Damon. Oh that was like your self exprest, Give me but part, and I will steal the rest.
Silvia. Take care Young Swain you treat it well, If you wou'd have it in your Bosom dwell; Now let us to the Shades Retreat, Where all the Nymphs and Shepherds meet. Damon. And give me there your leave my Pride to show, For having but the hopes of Conquering you; Where all the Swaines shall Passion learn of me: And all the Nymphs to bless like thee. Silvia. Where every Grace I will bestow, And every Look and Smile, shall show How much above the rest I vallue you. Damon. And I those Blessings will improve; By constant Faith, and tender Love. [A Chorus of Satyrs and Nymphs made by another hand.]
On Mr. J. H. In a Fit of Sickness. I. IF when the God of Day retires, The Pride of all the Spring decays and dies: Wanting those Life-begetting Fires From whence they draw their Excellencies; Each little Flower hangs down its Gawdy Head, Losing the Luster which it did Retain; No longer will its fragrant face be spread, But Languishes into a Bud again: So with the Sighing Crowd it fares Since you Amyntas, have your Eies withdrawn' Ours Lose themselves in Silent Tears, Our days are Melancholy Dawn; The Groves are Unfrequented now, The Shady Walks are all Forlorn; Who still were throng to gaze on you: With Nymphs, whom your Retirement has un∣done.
II. Our Bag-pipes now away are flung, Our Flocks a Wandering go; Garlands neglected, on the Boughs are hung, That us'd to adorn each Chearful Brow, Forsaken looks the enameld May: And all its wealth Uncourted dies; Each little Bird forgets its wonted Lay, That Sung Good Morrow to the welcome Day. Or rather to thy Lovely Eies. The Cooling Streams do backward glide: Since on their Banks they saw not thee, Losing the Order of their Tide, And Murmuring chide thy Cruelty; Then hast to lose themselves i'th' Angry Sea. III. Thus every thing in its Degree, Thy said Retreat Deplore; Hast then Amyntas, and Restore; The whole Worlds Loss in thee. For like an Eastern Monarch, when you go, (If such a Fate the World must know)
A Beautious and a Numerous Host Of Love-sick Maids, will wait upon thy Ghost; And Death that Secret will Reveal, Which Pride and Shame did here Conceal; Live then thou Lovelyest of the Plaines, Thou Beauty of the Envying Swaines; Whose Charms even Death it self wou'd court, And of his Solemn Business make a Sport. IV. In Pitty to each Sighing Maid, Revive, come forth, be Gay and Glad; Let the Young God of Love implore, In Pity lend him Darts, For when thy Charming Eies shall shoot no more; He'll lose his Title of the God of Hearts. In Pity to Astrea live, Astrea, whom from all the Sighing Throng, You did your oft-won Garlands give: For which she paid you back in Grateful Song: Astrea, who did still the Glory boast, To be ador'd by thee, and to adore thee most. V. With Pride she saw her Rivals Sigh and Pine, And vainly cry'd, The lovely Youth is mine!
By all thy Charms I do Conjure thee, live; By all the Joys thou canst receive, and give: By each Recess and Shade where thou and I, Loves Secrets did Unfold; And did the dull Unloving World defy: VVhilst each the Hearts fond Story told. If all these Conjurations nought Prevail, Not Prayers or Sighs, or Tears avail, But Heaven has Destin'd we Depriv'd must be, Of so much Youth, Wit, Beauty, and of Thee; I will the Deaf and Angry Powers defie, Curse thy Decease, Bless thee, and with thee die. To Lysander, on some Verses he writ, and asking more for his Heart then 'twas worth. I. TAke back that Heart, you with such Caution give, Take the fond valu'd Trifle back; I hate Love-Merchants that a Trade wou'd drive; And meanly cunning Bargains make.
II. I care not how the busy Market goes, And scorn to Chaffer for a price: Love does one Staple Rate on all impose, Nor leaves it to the Traders Choice. III. A Heart requires a Heart Unfeign'd and True, Though Subt'ly you advance the Price, And ask a Rate that Simple Love ne'er knew: And the free Trade Monopolize. IV. An Humble Slave the Buyer must become, She must not bate a Look or Glance, You will have all, or you'll have none; See how Loves Market you inhaunce. V. Is't not enough, I gave you Heart for Heart, But I must add my Lips and Eies; I must no friendly Smile or Kiss impart; But you must Dun me with Advice.
VI. And every Hour still more unjust you grow, Those Freedoms you my life deny, You to Adraste are oblig'd to show, And give her all my Rifled Joy. VII. Without Controul she gazes on that Face, And all the happy Envyed Night, In the pleas'd Circle of your fond imbrace: She takes away the Lovers Right. VIII. From me she Ravishes those silent hours, That are by Sacred Love my due; VVhilst I in vain accuse the angry Powers, That make me hopeless Love pursue. IX. Adrastes Ears with that dear Voice are blest, That Charms my Soul at every Sound, And with those Love-Inchanting Touches prest: VVhich I ne'er felt without a Wound.
X. She has thee all: whilst I with silent Greif, The Fragments of thy Softness feel, Yet dare not blame the happy licenc'd Thief: That does my Dear-bought Pleasures steal. XI. Whilst like a Glimering Taper still I burn, And waste my self in my own flame, Adraste takes the welcome rich Return: And leaves me all the hopeless Pain. XII. Be just, my lovely Swain, and do not take Freedoms you'll not to me allow; Or give Amynta so much Freedom back: That she may Rove as well as you. XIII. Let us then love upon the honest Square, Since Interest neither have design'd, For the sly Gamester, who ne'er plays me fair, Must Trick for Trick expect to find.
To the Honourable Edward Howard, on his Comedy called The New Utopia, I. BEyond the Merit of the Age, You have adorn'd the Stage; So from rude Farce, to Comick Order brought, Each Action, and each Thought; To so Sublime a Method, as yet none (But Mighty Ben alone) Cou'd e'er arive, and he at distance too; Were he alive he must resign to you: You have out-done what e'er he writ, In this last great Example of your Wit. Your Solymour does his Morose destroy, And your Black Page undoes his Barbers Boy; All his Collegiate Ladies must retire, While we thy braver Heroins do admire.
This new Utopia rais'd by thee, Shall stand a Structure to be wondered at, And men shall cry, this—this—is he Who that Poetick City did create: Of which Moor only did the Model draw, You did Compleat that little World, and gave it Law. II. If you too great a Prospect doe allow To those whom Ignorance does at distance Seat, 'Tis not to say, the Object is less great, But they-want sight to apprehend it so: The ancient Poets in their times, When thro' the Peopl'd Streets they sung their Rhimes, Found small applause; they sung but still were poor; Repeated Wit enough at every door. T'have made'em demy Gods! but 'twou'd not do, Till Ages more refin'd esteem'd 'em so. The Modern Poets have with like Success, Quitted the Stage, and Sallyed from the Press Great Johnson scarce a Play brought forth, But Monster-like it frighted at its Birth:
Yet he continued still to write, And still his Satyr did more sharply bite. He writ tho certain of his Doom, Knowing his Pow'r in Comedy: To please a wiser Age to come: And though he Weapons wore to Justify The reasons of his Pen; he cou'd not bring, Dull Souls to Sense by Satyr, nor by Cudgelling. III. In vain the Errors of the Times, You strive by wholesom Precepts to Confute, Not all your Pow'r in Prose or Rhimes, Can finish the Dispute: 'Twixt those that damn, and those that do admire: The heat of your Poetick fire. Your Soul of Thought you may imploy A Nobler way, Then in revenge upon a Multitude, Whose Ignorance only makes 'em rude. Shou'd you that Justice do, You must for ever bid adieu, To Poetry divine, And ev'ry Muse o'th' Nine:
For Malice then with Ignorance would join, And so undo the World and You: So ravish from us that delight, Of seeing the VVonders which you Write: And all your Glories unadmir'd must lye, As Vestal Beauties are Intomb'd before they dye. IV. Consider and Consult your VVit, Despise those Ills you must indure: And raise your Scorne as great as it, Be Confident and then Secure. And let your rich-fraught Pen, Adventure out agen; Maugre the Stormes that do opose its course, Stormes that destroy without remorse: It may new Worlds descry, VVhich Peopl'd from thy Brain may know More than the Universe besides can show: More Arts of Love, and more of Gallantry. Write on! and let not after Ages say, The Whistle or rude Hiss cou'd lay
Thy mighty Spright of Poetry, Which but the Fools and Guilty fly; Who dare not in thy Mirror see Their own Deformity: Where thou in two, the World dost Character, Since most of Men Sir Graves, or Peacocks are. V. And shall that Muse that did ere while, Chant forth the Glories of the British Isle, Shall shee who lowder was than Fame; Now useless lie, and tame? Shee who late made the Amazons so Great, And shee who Conquered Scythia too; (Which Alexander ne're coud do) Will you permitt her to retreat? Silence will like Submision show: And give Advantage to the Foe! Undaunted let her once gain appear, And let her lowdly Sing in every Ear: Then like thy Mistris Eyes, who have the skill, Both to preserve a kill; To thou at once maist be revengd on those That are thy Foes.
And on thy Friends such Obligations lay, As nothing but the Deed; the Doer can repay. To Lysander at the Musick-Meeting. IT was too much, ye Gods, to see and hear; Receiving wounds both from the Eye and Ear: One Charme might have secur'd a Victory, Both, rais'd the Pleasure even to Extasie: So Ravisht Lovers in each others Armes, Faint with excess of Joy, excess of Charmes: Had I but gaz'd and fed my greedy Eyes, Perhaps you'd pleas'd no farther than surprize. That Heav'nly Form might Admiration move, But, not without the Musick, charm'd with Love: At least so quick the Conquest had not been; You storm'd without, and Harmony within: Nor cou'd I listen to the sound alone, But I alas must look—and was undone:
I saw the Softness that compos'd your Face, While your Attention heightend every Grace: Your Mouth all full of Sweetness and Content, And your fine killing Eyes of Languishment: Your Bosom now and than a sigh wou'd move, (For Musick has the same effects with Love.) Your Body easey and all tempting lay, Inspiring wishes which the Eyes betray, In all that have the fate to glance that way: A carless and a lovely Negligence, Did a new Charm to every Limb dispence: So look young Angels, Listening to the sound, When the Tun'd Spheres Glad all the Heav'ns a-round: So Raptur'd lie amidst the wondering Crowd, So Charmingly Extended on a Cloud. When from so many ways Loves Arrows storm, Who can the heedless Heart defend from harm? Beauty and Musick must the Soul disarme; Since Harmony, like Fire to VVax, does fit The softned Heart Impressions to admit: As the brisk sounds of Warr the Courage move, Musick prepares and warms the Soul to Love.
But when the kindling Sparks such Fuel meet, No wonder if the Flame inspir'd be great. An Ode to Love. I DUll Love no more thy Senceless Arrows prize, Damn thy Gay Quiver, break thy Bow; 'Tis only young Lysanders Eyes, That all the Arts of Wounding know. II. A Pox of Foolish Politicks in Love, A wise delay in Warr the Foe may harme: By Lazy Siege while you to Conquest move; His fiercer Beautys vanquish by a Storme. III. Some wounded God, to be reveng'd on thee, The Charming Youth form'd in a lucky houre, Drest him in all that fond Divinity, That has out-Rivall'd thee, a God, in Pow'r.
IV. Or else while thou supinely laid Basking beneath som Mirtle shade, In careless sleepe, or tir'd with play, When all thy Shafts did scatterd ly; Th'unguarded Spoyles he bore away, And Arm'd himself with the Artillery. V. The Sweetness from thy Eyes he took, The Charming Dimples ftom thy Mouth, That wonderous Softness when you spoke; And all thy Everlasting Youth. VI. Thy bow, thy Quiver, and thy Darts: Even of thy Painted Wings has rifled thee, To bear him from his Conquer'd broken Hearts, To the next Fair and Yeilding She.
Love Reveng'd, A Song. I. CElinda who did Love Disdain, For whom had languisht many a Swain; Leading her Bleating Flock to drink, She spy'd upon the Rivers Brink A Youth, whose Eyes did well declare, How much he lov'd, but lov'd not her. II. At first she Laught, but gaz'd the while, And soon she lessen'd to a Smile; Thence to Surprize and Wonder came, Her Breast to heave, her Heart to flame: Then cry'd she out, Now, now I prove, Thou art a God, Almighty Love. III. She would have spoke, but shame deny'd, And bid her first consult her Pride;
But soon she found that Aid was gone; For Love alas had left her none: Oh how she burns, but 'tis too late, For in her Eyes she reads her Fate. SONG. To a New Scotch Tune. I. YOung Jemmy was a Lad, Of Royal Birth and Breeding, With ev'ry Beauty Clad: And ev'ry Grace Exceeding; A face and shape so wondrous fine, So Charming ev'ry part; That every Lass upon the Green: For Jemmy had a Heart. II. In Jemmy's Powerful Eyes, Young Gods of Love are playing,
And on his Face there lies A Thousand Smiles betraying. But Oh he dances with a Grace, None like him e'er was seen; No God that ever fancy'd was, Has so Divine a Miene. III. To Jemmy ev'ry Swaine Did lowly doff his Bonnet; And every Nymph would strain, To praise him in her Sonnet: The Pride of all the Youths he was, The Glory of the Groves, The Joy of ev'ry tender Lass: The Theam of all our Loves. IV. But Oh Unlucky Fate, A Curse upon Ambition: The Busie Fopps of State Have ruin'd his Condition. For Glittering Hopes he'as left the Shade, His Peaceful Hours are gone:
By flattering Knaves and Fools betray'd, Poor Jemmy is undone. The Cabal at Nickey Nackeys. I. A Pox of the Statesman that's witty, Who watches and Plots all the Sleepless Night: For Seditious Harangues, to the Whiggs of the City; And Maliciously turns a Traytor in Spight. Let him Wear and Torment his lean Carrion: To bring his Sham-Plots about, Till at last King Bishop and Barron, For the Publick Good he have quite rooted out. II. But we that are no Polliticians, But Rogues that are Impudent, Barefac'd and Great, Boldly head the Rude Rable in times of Sedition; And bear all down before us, in Church & in State.
Your Impudence is the best State-Trick; And he that by Law meanes to rule, Let his History with ours be related; And tho' we are the Knaves, we know who's the Fool. A Paraphrase on the Eleventh Ode Out of the first Book of Horace. DEar Silvia let's no farther strive, To know how long we have to Live; Let Busy Gown-men search to know Their Fates above, while we Contemplate Beauties greater Power below, Whose only Smiles give Immortality; But who seeks Fortune in a Star, Aims at a Distance much too far, She's more inconstant than they are. What though this year must be our last, Faster than Time our Joys let's hast; Nor think of Ills to come, or past. Give me but Love and Wine, I'll ne'er Complain my Destiny's severe.
Since Life bears so uncertain Date, With Pleasure we'll attend our Fate, And Chearfully go meet it at the Gate. The Brave and Witty know no Fear or Sorrow, Let us enjoy to day, we'll dye to Morrow. A Translation. I. LYDIA, Lovely Maid, more fair Than Milk or whitest Lilies are, Than Polisht Indian Iv'ry shows, Or the fair unblushing Rose. II. Open, Maid, thy Locks, that hold Wealth more bright than shining Gold, Over thy white shoulders laid, Spread thy Locks, my Charming Maid. III. Lydia, ope' thy starry Eyes, Shew the Beds where Cupid lies, Open, Maid, thy Rosie-Cheeks, Red as Sun-declining streaks.
IV. Shew thy Coral Lips, my Love, Kiss me softer than the Dove, Till my Ravisht Soul does lie Panting in an Ecstasie. V. Oh hold—and do not pierce my Heart, Which beats, as life wou'd thence depart, Hide thy Breasts that swell and rise, Hide 'em from my wishing Eyes. VI. Shut thy Bosome, white as Snow, Whence Arabian perfumes flow; Hide it from my Raptur'd Touch, I have gaz'd—and kist too much. VII. Cruel Maid—on Malice bent, Seest thou not my Languishment? Lydia!—Oh I faint!—I die! With thy Beauties Luxury.
A PARAPHRASE On Ovid's Epistle of OENONE to PARIS. THE ARGUMENT. Hecuba, being with Child of Paris, dream'd she was delivered of a Firebrand: Priam, consulting the Prophets, was answer'd the Child shou'd be the De∣struction of Troy, wherefore Priam commanded it should be deliver'd to wild Beasts as soon as born; but Hecuba conveys it secretly to Mount Ida, there to be foster'd by the Shepherds, where he falls in love with the Nymph OEnone, but at last being known and own'd, he sails into Greece, and carries Helen to Troy, which OEnone understanding, writes him this Epistle. TO thee, dear Paris, Lord of my Desires, Once tender Partner of my softest Fires; To thee I write, mine, while a Shepherd's Swain, But now a Prince, that Title you disdain.
Oh fatal Pomp, that cou'd so soon divide What Love, and all our sacred Vows had ty'd! What God, our Love industrious to prevent, Curst thee with power, and ruin'd my Content? Greatness, which does at best but ill agree With Love, such Distance sets 'twixt Thee and Me. Whilst thou a Prince, and I a Shepherdess, My raging Passion can have no redress. Wou'd God, when first I saw thee, thou hadst been This Great, this Cruel, Celebrated thing. That without hope I might have gaz'd and bow'd, And mixt my Adorations with the Crowd; Unwounded then I had escap'd those Eyes, Those lovely Authors of my Miseries. Not that less Charms their fatal pow'r had drest, But Fear and Awe my Love had then supprest: My unambitious Heart no Flame had known, But what Devotion pays to Gods alone. I might have wondr'd, and have wisht that He, Whom Heaven shou'd make me love, might look like Thee. More in a silly Nymph had been a sin, This had the height of my Presumption been.
But thou a Flock didst feed on Ida's Plain, And hadst no Title, but The lovely Swain. A Title! which more Virgin Hearts has won, Than that of being own'd King Priam's Son. Whilst me a harmless Neighbouring Cotager You saw, and did above the rest prefer. You saw! and at first sight you lov'd me too, Nor cou'd I hide the wounds receiv'd from you. Me all the Village Herdsmen strove to gain, For me the Shepherds sigh'd and su'd in vain, Thou hadst my heart, and they my cold disdain. Not all their Offerings, Garlands, and first born Of their lov'd Ewes, cou'd bribe my Native scorn. My Love, like hidden Treasure long conceal'd, Cou'd onely where 'twas destin'd, be reveal'd. And yet how long my Maiden blushes strove Not to betray my easie new-born Love. But at thy sight the kindling Fire wou'd rise, And I, unskill'd, declare it at my Eyes. But oh the Joy! the mighty Ecstasie Possest thy Soul at this Discovery.
Speechless, and panting at my feet you lay, And short breath'd Sighs told what you cou'd not say. A thousand times my hand with Kisses prest, And look'd such Darts, as none cou'd e'er resist. Silent we gaz'd, and as my Eyes met thine, New Joy fill'd theirs, new Love and shame fill'd mine! You saw the Fears my kind disorder show'd And breaking Silence Faith anew you vow'd! Heavens, how you swore by every Pow'r Divine You wou'd be ever true! be ever mine! Each God, a sacred witness you invoke, And wish'd their Curse when e'er these Vows you broke. Quick to my Heart each perjur'd Accent ran, Which I took in, believ'd, and was undone. "Vows are Love's poyson'd Arrows, and the heart So wounded, rarely finds a Cure from Art. At least this heart which Fate has destin'd yours, This heart unpractis'd in Love's mystick pow'rs, For I am soft and young as April Flowers. Now uncontroll'd we meet, uncheck'd improve Each happier Minute in new Joys of Love!
Soft were our hours! and lavishly the Day We gave intirely up to Love, and Play. Oft to the cooling Groves our Flocks we led, And seated on some shaded, flowery Bed, Watch'd the united Wantons as they fed. And all the Day my list'ning Soul I hung Upon the charming Musick of thy Tongue, And never thought the blessed hours too long. No Swain, no God like thee cou'd ever move, Or had so soft an Art in whisp'ring Love, No wonder for thou art Ally'd to Jove! And when you pip'd, or sung, or danc'd, or spoke, The God appear'd in every Grace, and Look. Pride of the Swains, and Glory of the Shades, The Grief, and Joy of all the Love-sick Maids. Thus whilst all hearts you rul'd without Controul, I reign'd the absolute Monarch of your Soul. Each Beach my Name yet bears, carv'd out by thee, Paris, and his OEnone fill each Tree; And as they grow, the Letters larger spread, Grow still a witness of my Wrongs when dead!
Close by a silent silver Brook there grows A Poplar, under whose dear gloomy Boughs A thousand times we have exchang'd our Vows! Oh may'st thou grow! t' an endless date of Years! Who on thy Bark this fatal Record bears; When Paris to OEnone proves untrue, Back Xanthus Streams shall to their Fountains flow. Turn! turn your Tides! back to your Fountains run! The perjur'd Swain from all his Faith is gone! Curst be that day, may Fate appoint the hour, As Ominous in his black Kalendar; When Venus, Pallas, and the Wife of Jove Descended to thee in the Mirtle Grove, In shining Chariots drawn by winged Clouds: Naked they came, no Veil their Beauty shrouds; But every Charm, and Grace expos'd to view, Left Heav'n to be survey'd, and judg'd by you. To bribe thy voice Juno wou'd Crowns bestow, Pallas more gratefully wou'd dress thy Brow With Wreaths of Wit! Venus propos'd the choice Of all the fairest Greeks! and had thy Voice.
Crowns, and more glorious Wreaths thou didst despise, And promis'd Beauty more than Empire prize! This when you told, Gods! what a killing fear Did over all my shivering Limbs appear? And I presag'd some ominous Change was near! The Blushes left my Cheeks, from every part The Bloud ran swift to guard my fainting heart. You in my Eyes the glimmering Light perceiv'd Of parting Life, and on my pale Lips breath'd Such Vows, as all my Terrors undeceiv'd. But soon the envying Gods disturb'd our Joy, Declar'd thee Great! and all my Bliss destroy! And now the Fleet is Anchor'd in the Bay, That must to Troy the glorious Youth convey. Heavens! how you look'd! and what a Godlike Grace At their first Homage beautify'd your Face! Yet this no Wonder, or Amazement brought, You still a Monarch were in Soul, and thought! Nor cou'd I tell which most the News augments, Your Joys of Pow'r, or parting Discontents. You kist the Tears which down my Cheeks did glide, And mingled yours with the soft falling Tide,
And 'twixt your Sighs a thousand times you said, Cease my OEnone! Cease my charming Maid! If Paris lives his Native Troy to see, My lovely Nymph, thou shalt a Princess be! But my Prophetick Fears no Faith allow'd, My breaking Heart resisted all you vow'd. Ah must me part, I cry'd! that killing word No farther Language cou'd to Grief afford. Trembling, I fell upon thy panting Breast, Which was with equal Love, and Grief opprest, Whilst sighs and looks, all dying spoke the rest. About thy Neck my feeble Arms I cast, Not Vines, nor Ivy circle Elms so fast. To stay, what dear Excuses didst thou frame, And fansiedst Tempests when the Seas were calm? How oft the Winds contrary feign'd to be, When they, alas, were onely so to me! How oft new Vows of lasting Faith you swore, And 'twixt your Kisses all the old run o'er? But now the wisely Grave, who Love despise, (Themselves past hope) do busily advise.
Whisper Renown, and Glory in thy Ear, Language which Lovers fright, and Swains ne'er hear. For Troy they cry! these Shepherds Weeds lay down, Change Crooks for Scepters! Garlands for a Crown! "But sure that Crown does far less easie sit, "Than Wreaths of Flow'rs, less innocent and sweet. "Nor can thy Beds of State so gratefull be, "As those of Moss, and new faln Leaves with me! Now tow'rds the Beach we go, and all the way The Groves, the Fern, dark Woods, and springs survey; That were so often conscious to the Rites Of sacred Love, in our dear stoln Delights. With Eyes all languishing, each place you view, And sighing cry, Adieu, dear Shades, Adieu! Then 'twas thy Soul e'en doubted which to doe, Refuse a Crown, or those dear Shades forego! Glory and Love! the great dispute pursu'd, But the false Idol soon the God subdu'd. And now on Board you go, and all the Sails Are loosned, to receive the flying Gales.
Whilst I, half dead on the forsaken Strand, Beheld thee sighing on the Deck to stand, Wafting a thousand Kisses from thy Hand. And whilst I cou'd the lessening Vessel see, I gaz'd, and sent a thousand Sighs to thee! And all the Sea-born Nereids implore Quick to return thee to our Rustick shore. Now like a Ghost I glide through ev'ry Grove, Silent, and sad as Death, about I rove, And visit all our Treasuries of Love! This Shade th' account of thousand Joys does hide, As many more this murmuring Rivers side, Where the dear Grass, still sacred, does retain The print, where thee and I so oft have lain. Upon this Oak thy Pipe, and Garland's plac'd, That Sicamore is with thy Sheep-hook grac'd. Here feed thy Flock, once lov'd though now thy scorn, Like me forsaken, and like me forlorn! A Rock there is, from whence I cou'd survey From far the blewish Shore, and distant Sea, Whose hanging top with toyl I climb'd each day,
With greedy View the prospect I ran o'er, To see what wish'd for ships approach'd our shore. One day all hopeless on its point I stood, And saw a Vessel bounding o'er the Flood, And as it nearer drew, I cou'd discern Rich Purple Sails, Silk Cords, and Golden Stern; Upon the Deck a Canopy was spread Of Antique work in Gold and Silver made, Which mix'd with Sun beams dazling Light display'd. But oh! beneath this glorious Scene of State (Curst be the sight) a fatal Beauty sate. And fondly you were on her Bosome lay'd, Whilst with your perjur'd Lips her Fingers play'd; Wantonly curl'd and dally'd with that hair, Of which, as sacred Charms, I Bracelets wear. Oh! hadst thou seen me then in that mad state, So ruin'd, so design'd for Death and Fate, Fix'd on a Rock, whose horrid Precipice In hollow Murmurs wars with Angry Seas; Whilst the bleak Winds aloft my Garments bear, Ruffling my careless and dishevel'd hair, I look'd like the sad Statue of Despair.
With out-strech'd voice I cry'd, and all around The Rocks and Hills my dire complaints resound. I rent my Garments, tore my flattering Face, Whose false deluding Charms my Ruine was. Mad as the Seas in Storms, I breathe Despair, Or Winds let loose in unresisting Air. Raging and Frantick through the Woods I fly, And Paris! lovely, faithless Paris cry. But when the Echos sound thy Name again, I change to new variety of Pain. For that dear name such tenderness inspires, And turns all Passion to Loves softer Fires: With tears I fall to kind Complaints again, So Tempests are allay'd by Show'rs of Rain. Say, lovely Youth, why wou'dst thou thus betray My easie Faith, and lead my heart astray? I might some humble Shepherd's Choice have been, Had I that Tongue ne'er heard, those Eyes ne'er seen. And in some homely Cott, in low Repose, Liv'd undisturb'd with broken Vows and Oaths: All day by shaded Springs my Flocks have kept, And in some honest Arms at night have slept.
Then unupbraided with my wrongs thou'dst been Safe in the Joys of the fair Grecian Queen: What Stars do rule the Great? no sooner you Became a Prince, but you were Perjur'd too. Are Crowsn and Falshoods then consistent things? And must they all be faithless who are Kings? The Gods be prais'd that I was humbly born, Even thô it renders me my Paris scorn. For I had rather this way wretched prove, Than be a Queen and faithless in my Love. Not my fair Rival wou'd I wish to be, To come prophan'd by others Joys to thee. A spotless Maid into thy Arms I brought, Untouch'd in Fame, ev'n Innocent in thought. Whilst she with Love has treated many a Guest, And brings thee but the leavings of a Feast: With Theseus from her Country made Escape, Whilst she miscall'd the willing Flight, a Rape. So now from Atreus Son, with thee is fled, And still the Rape hides the Adult'rous Deed. And is it thus Great Ladies keep intire That Vertue they so boast, and you admire?
Is this a Trick of Courts, can Ravishment Serve for a poor Evasion of Consent? Hard shift to save that Honour priz'd so high, Whilst the mean Fraud's the greater Infamy. How much more happy are we Rural Maids, Who know no other Palaces than Shades? Who wish no Title to inslave the Crowd, Lest they shou'd babble all our Crimes aloud. No Arts our Good to shew, our Ill to hide, Nor know to cover faults of Love with Pride. I lov'd, and all Love's Dictates did pursue, And never thought it cou'd be Sin with you. To Gods, and Men, I did my Love proclaim; For one soft hour with thee, my charming Swain, Wou'd Recompence an Age to come of Shame, Cou'd it as well but satisfie my Fame. But oh! those tender hours are fled and lost, And I no more of Fame, or Thee can boast! 'Twas thou wert Honour, Glory, all to me: Till Swains had learn'd the Vice of Perjury, No yielding Maids were charg'd with Infamy.
'Tis false and broken Vows make Love a Sin, Hads thou been true, We innocent had been. But thou less faith than Autumn leaves do'st show, Which ev'ry Blast bears from their native Bough. Less Weight, less Constancy, in thee is born, Than in the slender mildew'd Ears of Corn. Oft when you Garlands wove to deck my hair, Where mystick Pinks, and Dazies mingled were, You swore 'twas fitter Diadems to bear: And when with eager Kisses prest my hand, Have said, How well a Scepter 'twou'd command! And when I danc'd upon the Flow'ry Green, With charming, wishing Eyes survey my Mien, And cry! the Gods design'd thee for a Queen! Why then for Helen dost thou me forsake? Can a poor empty Name such difference make? Besides if Love can be a Sin, thine's one, To Menelaus Helen does belong. Be Just, restore her back, She's none of thine, And, charming Paris, thou art onely mine. 'Tis no Ambitious Flame that makes me sue To be again belov'd, and blest by you;
No vain desire of being ally'd t' a King, Love is the onely Dowry I can bring, And tender Love is all I ask again. Whilst on her dang'rous Smiles fierce War must wait With Fire and Vengeance at your Palace gate, Rouze your soft Slumbers with their rough Alarms, And rudely snatch you from her faithless Arms: Turn then, fair Fugitive, e'er 'tis too late, E'er thy mistaken Love procures thy Fate; E'er a wrong'd Husband does thy Death design, And pierce that dear, that faithless Heart of thine.
A TABLE. THE Golden Age, a Paraphrase on a Translation out of French page 1. A Farewell to Celladon on his going into Ireland 13. On a Juniper-Tree cut down to make Busks 19. On the Death of Mr. Grinhill the famous Painter 24. A Ballad on Mr. J. H. to Amoret, asking why I was so sad 29. Our Caball 33. The willing Mistress, a Song 44. Love Arm'd, a Song 45. The Complaint, a Song 46. The Invitation, a Song 47. A Song 48. To Mr Creech (under the name of Daphnis) on his Excellent Translation of Lucretius. 50. To Mrs. W. on her excellent Verses (writ in praise of some I had made on the late Earl of Rochester) written in a fit of sickness 57. The sense of a Letter sent me, made into Verse, to a New Tune 61. The Return 62. On a Copy of Verses made in a Dream and sent to me in a Morning before I was awake 63. To my Lady Morland at Tunbridge 65. Song to Ceres, in the wavering Nymph or mad Amyntas 68. A Song in the same Play by the wavering Nymph 69. The Disappointment 70.
On a Locket of Hair wove in a True-lovers Knot given me by Sir R. O. 77. The Dream, a Song 78. A Letter to a Brother of the Pen in Tribulation 80. The Reflexion, a Song 83. A Song to Pesibles Tune 86. A Song on her loving two Equally set by Capt. Pack 88. The Counsel, a Song set by the same hand 89. The Surprise, a Song set by Mr. Farmer 91. A Song 92. The Invitation, a Song to a New Scotch Tune 93. Sylvia's Complaint, a Song to a fine Scotch Tune 95. In Imitation of Horace 98. To Lysander who made some Virses on a Discourse of Loves Fire 101. A Dialogue for an entertainment at Court between Damon and Sylvia 102. On Mr. J. H. In a fit of sickness 106. To Lysander on some Verses he writ, and asking more for his Heart than 'twas worth 109. To the Honourable Lord Howard, on his Comedy called the New Utopia 113. To Lysander at the Musick meeting 118. An Ode to Love 120. Love Reveng'd, a Song 122. A Song to a New Scotch Tune 123. The Caball at Nickey Nackeys 125. A Paraphrase on the eleventh Ode out of the first Book of Horace 126. A Translation 127. A Paraphrase on Oenone to Paris 129. A Voyage to the Isle of Love 144. FINIS.
A VOYAGE TO THE Isle of LOVE. An Account from Lisander to Lysidas his Friend. AT last dear Lysidas, I'l set thee Free, From the disorders of Uncertainty; Doubt's the worst Torment of a generous Mind, Who ever searching what it cannot find, Is roving still from wearied thought to thought, And to no settled Calmness can be brought:
The Cowards Ill, who dares not meet his Fate, And ever doubting to be Fortunate, Falls to that Wretchedness his fears Create. I should have dy'd silent, as Flowers decay, Had not thy Friendship stopt me on my way, That friendship which our Infant hearts inspir'd, E're them Ambition or false Love had fir'd: Friendship! which still enlarg'd with years and sense Till it arriv'd to perfect Excellence; Friendship! Mans noblest bus'ness! without whom The out-cast Life finds nothing it can own, But Dully dyes unknowing and unknown, Our searching thought serves only to impart It's new gain'd knowledge to anothers Heart; The truly wise, and great, by friendship grow, That, best instruct 'em how they should be so, That, only sees the Error of the Mind, Which by its soft reproach becomes Refin'd;
Friendship! which even Loves mighty power controuls. When that but touches; this Exchanges Souls. The remedy of Grief, the safe retreat Of the scorn'd Lover, and declining great. This sacred tye between thy self and me, Not to be alter'd by my Destiny; This tye, which equal to my new desires Preserv'd it self amidst Loves softer Fires, Obliges me, (without reserve) 't impart To Lycidas the story of my Heart; Tho' 'twill increase its present languishment, To call to its remembrance past content So drowning Men near to their native shore (From whence they parted near to visit more) Look back and sigh, and from that last Adieu, Suffer more pain then in their Death they do, That grief, which I in silent Calms have born, It will renew, and rowse into a Storm.
The TRUCE. With you unhappy Eyes that first let in To my fond Heart the raging Fire, With you a Truce I will begin, Let all your Clouds, let all your Show'rs retire, And for a while become serene, And you my constant rising Sighs forbear, To mix your selves with flying Air, But utter Words, among that may express, The vast degrees of Joy and Wretchedness. And you my Soul! forget the dismal hour, When dead and cold Aminta lay, And no kind God, no pittying Power The hasty fleeting Life would stay; Forget the Mad, the Raving pain That seiz'd Thee at a sight so new, When not the Wind let loose, nor raging Main Was so destructive and so wild as thou?
Forget thou saw'st the lovely yielding Maid, Dead in thy trembling Arms Just in the Ravishing hour, when all her Charms A willing Victim to thy Love was laid, Forget that all is fled thou didst Adore, And never, never, shall return to bless Thee more. Twelve times the Moon has borrow'd Rays; that Night Might favour Lovers stealths by Glimmering Light: Since I imbarqu'd on the inconstant Seas With people of all Ages and Degrees, All well dispos'd and absolutely bent, To visit a far Country call'd Content. The Sails were hoisted, and the Streamers spread, And chearfully we cut the yielding Floud; Calm was the Sea, and peaceful every Wind, As if the Gods had with our Wishes joyn'd To make us prosperous; All the whispering Air Like Lovers Joys, was soft, and falsly fair.
The ruffling Winds were hush'd in wanton sleep, And all the Waves were silenc'd in the deep: No threatning Cloud, no angry Curl was found, But bright, serene, and smooth, 'twas all around: But yet believe false Iris if she weep, Or Amorous Layis will her promise keep, Before the Sea, that Flatters with a Calm, Will cease to ruin with a rising Storm, For now the Winds are rows'd, the Hemisphere Grows black, and frights the hardy Mariner, The Billows all into Dis-order hurl'd, As if they meant to bury all the World; And least the Gods on us should pity take, They seem'd against them too, a War to make. Now each affrighted to his Cabin Flyes, And with Repentance Load the angry Skyes; Distracted Prayers they all to Heaven Address, While Heaven best knows, they think of nothing less;
To quit their Interest in the World's their fear, Not whether,—but to go,—is all their Care, And while to Heav'n, their differing crimes they mount, Their vast dis-orders doubles the account; All pray, and promise fair, protest and weep, And make those Vows, they want the pow'r to keep, But sure with some, the angry Gods were pleas'd; For by degrees their Rage and Thunder ceas'd: In the rude War no more the Winds engage, And the destructive Waves were tir'd with their own Rage; Like a young Ravisher, that has won the day, O're-toil'd and Panting, Calm and Breathless lay, While so much Vigour in the Incounter's lost, They want the pow'r a second Rape to Boast. The Sun in Glory daignes again t' appear; But we who had no Sense, but that of fear, Cou'd scarce believe, and lessen our dispair.
Yet each from his imagin'd Grave gets out, And with still doubting Eyes looks round about. Confirm'd they all from Prayer to Praises hast, And soon forgot the sense of dangers past; And now from the recruited Top-mast spy'd, An Island that discover'd Natures Pride: To which was added, all that Art could do To make it Tempting and Inviting too; All wondering Gaz'd upon the happy place, But none knew either where, or what it was: Some thought, th' Inaccessible Land 't had been, And others that Inchantment they had seen, At last came forth a Man, who long before Had made a Voyage to that fatal shoar, Who with his Eyes declin'd, as if dismaid, At sight of what he dreaded: Thus he said,
THis is the Coast of Africa, Where all things sweetly move; This is the Calm Atlantick Sea, And that the Isle of Love; To which all Mortals Tribute pay, Old, Young, the Rich and Poor; Kings do their awful Laws obey, And Shepherds do Adore. There's none its forces can resist, Or its Decrees Evince, It Conquers where, and whom it list, The Cottager and Prince. In entering here, the King resigns, The Robe and Crown he wore; The Slave new Fetters gladly joyns To those he dragg'd before.
All thither come, early or late, Directed by desire, Not Glory can divert their fate, Nor quench the Amorous fire. The Enterances on every side, Th' Attracts and Beauties Guard, The Graces with a wanton Pride, By turn secure the Ward. The God of Love has lent 'em Darts, With which they gently Greet, The heedless undefended Hearts That pass the fatal Gate. None e're escapt the welcom'd blow, Which ner'e is sent in vain; They Kiss the Shaft, and Bless the Foe, That gives the pleasing Pain.
Thus whilst we did this grateful story learn, We came so near the Shoar, as to discern The Place and Objects, which did still appear More Ravishing, approaching 'em more near. There the vast Sea, with a smooth calmness flows▪ As are the Smiles on happy Lovers Brows: As peaceably as Rivulets it glides, Imbracing still the shaded Islands sides; And with soft Murmurs on the Margent flows, As if to Nature it design'd Repose; Whose Musick still is answer'd by the Breeze, That gently plays with the soft rufl'd Trees. Fragrant and Flowry all the Banks appear Whose mixt dis-orders more delightful were, Then if they had been plac'd with Artful care, The Cowslip, Lilly, Rose and Jesamine, The Daffodil, the Pink and Eglintine, Whose gawdy store continues all the year, Makes but the meanest of the Wonders here.
Here the young Charmers walk the Banks a-long, Here all the Graces and the Beauties throng. But what did most my Admiration draw, Was that the Old and Ugly there I saw, Who with their Apish Postures, void of shame Still practice Youth, and talk of Darts and Flame I laught to see a Lady out of date, A worn out Beauty, once of the first rate; With youthful Dress, and more fantastick Prate, Setting her wither'd Face in thousand forms, And thinks the while she Dresses it in charms; Disturbing with her Court: the busier throng Ever Addressing to the Gay and Young; There an old Batter'd Fop, you might behold, Lavish his Love, Discretion, and his Gold On a fair she, that has a Trick in Art, To cheat him of his Politicks and Heart; Whilst he that Jilts the Nation ore and ore, Wants sense to find it in the subtiller Wre.
The Man that on this Isle before had been, Finding me so admire at what I'd seen; Thus said to me.——— LOVE's Power. LOVE when he Shoots abroad his Darts, Regards not where they light: The Aged to the Youthful Hearts, At random they unite. The soft un-bearded Youth, who never found The Charms in any Blooming Face, From one of Fifty takes the Wound; And eagerly persues the cunning Chase: While she an Arted Youth puts on; Softens her Voice, and languishes her Eyes; Affects the Dress, the Mean, the Tone. Assumes the noysy Wit, and ceases to be Wise;
The tender Maid to the Rough Warrier yields; Unfrighted at his Wounds and Scars, Pursues him through the Camps and Fields, And Courts the story of his dangerous Wars, With Pleasure hears his Scapes, and does not fail, To pay him with a Joy for every Tale. The fair young Bigot, full of Love and Prayer, Doats on the lewd and careless Libertine; The thinking States-man fumbles with the Player, And dearly buys the (barely wishing) Sin. The Peer with some mean Damsel of the trade, Expensive, common, ugly and decay'd: The gay young Squire, on the blouz'd Landry Maid. All things in Heaven, in Earth, and Sea, Love give his Laws unto; Tho' under different Objects, they Alike obey, and bow;
Sometimes to be reveng'd on those, Whose Beauty makes 'em proudly nice, He does a Flame on them impose, To some unworthy choice. Thus rarely equal Hearts in Love you'l find, Which makes 'em still present the God as Blind. Whilst thus he spake, my wondering Eyes were staid With a profound attention on a Maid! Upon whose Smiles the Graces did a-wait, And all the Beauties round about her sate; Officious Cupid's do her Eyes obey, Sharpning their Darts from every Conquering Ray: Some from her Smiles they point with soft desires, Whilst others from her Motion take their Fires: Some the Imbroider'd Vail and Train do bear, And some around her fan the gentle Air, Whilst others flying, scatter fragrant Show'rs, And strow the paths she tread with painted flow'rs The rest are all imploy'd to dress her Bow'rs;
While she does all, the smiling Gods carress, And they new Attributes receive from eachAddress. The CHARACTER. SUch Charms of Youth, such Ravishment Through all her Form appear'd, As if in her Creation Nature meant, She shou'd a-lone be ador'd and fear'd: Her Eyes all sweet, and languishingly move, Yet so, as if with pity Beauty strove, This to decline, and that to charm with Love. A chearful Modesty adorn'd her Face, And bashful Blushes spread her smiling Cheeks; Witty her Air; soft every Grace, And 'tis eternal Musick when she speaks, From which young listening Gods the Accents take And when they wou'd a perfect Conquest make, Teach their young favourite Lover so to speak.
2. Her Neck, on which all careless fell her Hair, Her half discover'd rising Bosome bare, Were beyond Nature form'd; all Heavenly fair. Tempting her dress, loose with the Wind it flew, Discovering Charms that wou'd alone subdue, Her soft white slender Hands whose touches wou'd Beget desire even in an awful God; Long Winter'd Age to tenderness wou'd move, And in his Frozen Blood, bloom a new spring of Love. All these at once my Ravisht Senses charm'd, And with unusual Fires my Bosome warm'd. Thus my fixt Eyes pursu'd the lovely Maid, Till they had lost her in the envied Glade; Yet still I gaz'd, as if I still had view'd The Object, which my new desires pursu'd.
Lost while I stood; against my Will, my sight Conducted me unto a new delight. Twelve little Boats were from the Banks unty'd, And towards our Vessel sail'd with wondrousPride, With wreathes of Flowers and Garlands they were drest, Their Cordage all of Silk and Gold consist, Their Sails of silver'd Lawn, and Tinsel were, Which wantonly were ruffled in the Air. As many little Cupids gayly clad, Did Row each Boat, nor other guides they had. A thousand Zephires Fann'd the moving Fleet, Which mixing with the Flow'rs became more sweet, And by repeated Kiss did assume From them a scent that did the Air perfume. So near us this delightful Fleet was come, We cou'd distinguish what the Cupid's sung, Which oft with charming Notes they did repeat, With Voices such as I shall ne're forget.
You that do seek with Amorous desires, To tast the Pleasures of the Life below, Land on this Island, and renew your Fires, For without Love, there is no joy, you know. Then all the Cupids waiting no Commands, With soft inviting Smiles present their Hands, And in that silent Motion seem'd to say, You ought to follow, when Love leads the way. Made with delight, and all transported too, I quitted Reason, and resolv'd to go; For that bright charming Beauty I had seen, And burnt with strange desire to see agen, Fill'd with new hope, I laught at Reasons force, And towards the Island, bent my eager Course; The Zephires at that instant lent their Aid, And I into Loves Fleet was soon convey'd, And by a thousand Friendships did receive, Welcomes which none butGod's of Love coud give.
Many possest with my Curiosity, Tho' not inspir'd like me, yet follow'd me, And many staid behind, and laught at us: And in a scoffing tone reproacht us thus, Farewel Adventurers, go search the Joy, Which mighty Love inspires, and you shall find, The treatment of the wond'rous Monarch Boy, In's Airy Castle always soft and kind. We on the fragrant Beds of Roses laid, And lull'd with Musick which the Zephires made, When with the Amorous silken Sails they plaid. Rather did them as wanting Wit account, Then we in this affair did Judgment want, With Smiles of pity only answer'd them, Whilst they return'd us pitying ones again. Now to the wisht for Shoar, with speed we high; Vain with our Fate, and eager of our Joy,
And as upon the Beech we landed were, An awful Woman did to us repair. Goddess of Prudence! who with grave advice, Counsels the heedless Stranger to be Wise; She guards this Shoar, and Passage does forbid, But now blind Sense her Face from us had hid; We pass'd and dis-obey'd the heavenly Voice, Which few e'er do, but in this fatal place. Now with impatient hast, (but long in vain) I seek the Charming Author of my Pain, And haunt the Woods, the Groves, and ev'ry Plain. I ask each Chrystal Spring, each murmuring Brook, Who saw my fair, or knows which way she took? I ask the Eccho's, when they heard her Name? But they cou'd nothing but my Moans proclaim; My Sighs, the fleeting Winds far off do bear, My Charmer, coud no soft complaining hear: At last, where all was shade, where all was Gay; On a Brooks Brink, which purling past away, Asleep the lovely Maid extended lay;
Of different Flowers, the Cupids made her Bed, And Rosey Pillows, did support her Head; With what transported Joy my Soul was fill'd, When I, the Object of my wish beheld, My greedy View each lovely part survey'd; On her white Hand, her Blushing Cheek was laid Half hid in Roses; yet did so appear As if with those, the Lillys mingled were; Her thin loose Robe did all her shape betray, (Her wondrous shape that negligently lay) And every Tempting Beauty did reveal, But what young bashful Maids wou'd still conceal; Impatient I, more apt to hope than fear, Approacht the Heav'nly sleeping Maid more near; The place, my flame, and all her Charms invite To tast the sacred Joys of stoln delight. The Grove was silent, and no Creature by, But the young smiling God of Love and I; But as before the awful shrine, I kneel'd, Where Loves great Mystery was to be reveal'd,
A Man from out the Groves recess appears, Who all my boasted Vigor turn'd to fears, He slackt my Courage by a kind surprize, And aw'd me with th' Majesty of his Eyes; I bow'd, and blusht, and trembling did retire, And wonder'd at the Pow'r that checkt my fire; So excellent a Mean, so good a Grace, So grave a Look, such a commanding Face; In modest Speech, as might well subdue, Youth's native wildness; yet 'twas gracious too. A little Cupid waiting by my side, (Who was presented to me for a guide,) Beholding me decline, the Sleeping Maid, To gaze on this Intruder,—Thus he said.
RESPECT. I. HIM whom you see so awful and severe, Is call'd Respect, the Eldest Son of Love; Esteem his Mother is; who every where Is the best Advocate to all the fair, And knows the most obliging Arts to move: Him you must still carress, and by his Grace, You'l conquer all the Beauties of the Place; To gain him 'tis not Words will do, His Rhetorick is the Blush and Bow. II. He even requires that you shou'd silent be, And understand no Language but from Eyes, Or Sighs, the soft Complaints on Cruelty; Which soonest move the Heart they wou'd surprize:
They like the Fire in Limbecks gently move, What words (too hot and fierce) destroy; These by degrees infuse a lasting Love; Whilst those do soon burn out the short blaz'd Joy. These the all gaining Youth requires, And bears to Ladies Hearts the Lambent Fires; And He that wou'd against despair be proof, Can never keep him Company enough. Instructed thus, I did my steps direct, Towards the necessary Grave Respect, Whom I soon won to favour my design, To which young LOVE his promis'd aid did joyn. This wak't Aminta, who with trembling fear, Wonder'd to see a stranger enter'd there; With timorous Eyes the Grove she does survey, Where are my LOVES she crys! all fled away? And left me in this gloomy shade alone? And with a Man! Alas, I am undone.
Then strove to fly; but I all prostrate lay, And grasping fast her Robe, oblig'd her stay; Cease lovely Charming Maid, Oh cease to fear, I faintly cry'd,—There is no Satyr, near; I am of humane Race, whom Beauty Aws, And born an humble Slave to all her Laws; Besides we're not alone within the Grove, Behold Respect, and the young God of LOVE: How can you fear the Man who with these two, In any Shade or hour approaches you? Thus by degrees her Courage took its place; And usual Blushes drest again her Face, Then with a Charming Air, her Hand she gave, She bade me rise, and said she did believe. And now my Conversation does permit; But oh the entertainment of her Wit, Beyond her Beauty did my Soul surprize, Her Tongue had Charms more pow'rful than her Eyes!
Ah Lysidas, hadst thou a list'ner been To what she said; tho' her thou ne're had'st seen, Without that Sense, thou hadst a Captive been. Guess at my Fate,—but after having spoke, Many indifferent things: Her leave she took. The Night approach't, and now with Thoughts opprest, I minded neither where, nor when to Rest, When my Conducter LOVE! whom I pursu'd, Led to a Palace call'd Inquietude, INQUIETUDE. A Neighbouring Villa which derives its name, From the rude sullen Mistress of the same; A Woman of a strange deform'd Aspect; Peevishly pensive, fond of her neglect; She never in one posture does remain, Now leans, lyes down, then on her Feet again;
Sometimes with Snails she keeps a lazy pace, And sometimes runs like Furies in a Chase; She seldom shuts her watchful Eyes to sleep, Which pale and languid does her Visage keep; Her loose neglected Hair disorder'd grows; Which undesign'd her Fingers discompose; Still out of Humour, and deprav'd in Sense, And Contradictive as Impertinence; Distrustful as false States-men, and as nice In Plots, Intrigues, Intelligence and Spies. To her we did our Duty pay, but she Made no returns to our Civility. Thence to my Bed; where rest in vain I sought, For pratling LOVE still entertain'd my thought, And to my Mind, a thousand Fancies brought: Aminta's Charms and Pow'rful Attractions, From whence I grew to make these soft Reflections.
The REFLECTION. I. WHat differing Passions from what once I felt, My yielding Heart do melt, And all my Blood as in a Feaver burns, Yet shivering Cold by turns. What new variety of hopes and fears? What suddain fits of Smiles and Tears? Hope! Why dost thou sometimes my Soul imploy With Prospects of approaching Joy? Why dost thou make me pleas'd and vain, And quite forget last minutes pain? What Sleep wou'd calm, Aminta keeps awake; And I all Night soft Vows and Wishes make.
VVhen to the Gods I would my Prayers address, And sue to be forgiven, Aminta's name, I still express, And Love is all that I confess, Love and Aminta! Ever out Rival Heaven! II. Books give me no content at all; Unless soft Cowly entertain my Mind, Then every pair in Love I find; Lysander him, Aminta her, I call: Till the bewitching Fewel raise the fire; VVhich was design'd but to divert, Then to cool Shades Iragingly retire, To ease my hopeless panting Heart, Yet thereto every thing begets desire. Each flowry Bed, and every loanly Grove, Inspires new VVishes, new impatient Love.
Thus all the Night in vain I sought repose, And early with the Sun next day, I rose; Still more impatient grew my new desires, To see again the Author of my Fires, Love leads me forth, to little Little Arts to please. CARES we pass, Where Love instructed me Aminta was; Far from Inquietude this Village stands, And for its Beauty all the rest commands; In all the Isle of Love, not one appears, So ravishingly Gay as Little Cares. Little CARES, or Little Arts to please. I. THither all the Amorous Youth repair, To see the Objects of their Vows; No Jealousies approach 'em there; They Banish Dulness and Despair; And only Gayety and Mirth allow.
The Houses cover'd o're with flow'rs appear, Like fragrant Arbours all the year, VVhere all the dear, the live-long day, In Musick, Songs, and Balls is past away: All things are form'd for pleasure and delight, VVhich finish not but with the Light; But when the Sun returns again, They hold with that bright God an equal Reign. II. There no Reproaches dwell; that Vice Is banisht with the Coy and Nice. The Froward there learn Complyance; There the Dull VVise his Gravity for sakes, The Old dispose themselves to Dance, And Melancholy wakens from his Trance, And against Nature sprightly Humour takes. The formal States-man does his Int'rest quit, And learns to talk of Love and VVit;
There the Philosopher speaks Sense, Such as his Mistress Eyes inspire; Forgets his learned Eloquence, Nor now compares his Flame to his own Chimick fire. III. The Miser there opens his Golden heaps, And at Love's Altar, offers the rich Prize; His needless fears of want does now despise, And as a lavish Heir, he Treats and Reaps The Blessings that attend his grateful Sacrifice. Even the Fluttering Coxcomb there Does less ridiculous appear: For in the Crowd some one unlucky Face, With some particular Grimmas, Has the ill fate his Heart to gain, Which gives him just the Sense to know his pain; Whence he becomes less talkative and vain.
There 'tis the Muses dwell! that sacred Nine, Who teach the inlarged Soul to prove, No Arts or Sciences Divine, But those inspir'd by Them and Love! Gay Conversation, Feast, and Masquerades, Agreeable Cabals, and Serinades; Eternal Musick, Gladness, Smiles and Sport, Make all the bus'ness of this Little Court. At my approach new Fires my Bosom warm; New vigor I receive from every Charm: I found invention with my Love increase; And both instruct me with new Arts to please; New Gallantrys I sought to entertain, And had the Joy to find 'em not in vain; All the Extravagance of Youth I show, And pay'd to Age the Dotage I shall owe; All a beginning Passion can conceive, What beauty Merits, or fond Love can give.
With diligence I wait Aminta's look, And her decrees from Frowns or Smiles I took, To my new fixt resolves, no stop I found, My Flame was uncontroul'd and knew no bound; Unlimited Expences every day On what I thought she lik'd, I threw away: My Coaches, and my Liverys, rich and new, In all this Court, none made a better show. Aminta here was unconfin'd and free, And all a well-born Maid cou'd render me She gave: My early Visits does allow, And more ingagingly receives me now, Her still increasing Charms, Her soft Address, A Partial Lover cannot well Express, Her Beautys with my flame each hour increase. 'Twas here my Soul more true content receiv'd, Then all the Duller hours of Life I'd liv'd. —But with the envying Night I still repair To Inquietude; none lodge at little Care.
The hasty Minutes summon me away, While parting pains surmount past hours of Joy, And Nights large Reckoning over-pays the day. The GOD of Sleep his wonted Aid denys; Lends no repose, or to my Heart or Eyes: Only one hour of Rest, the breaking Morning brought, In which this happy Dream Assail'd my Thought, The DREAM. ALL Trembling in my Arms Aminta lay, Defending of the Bliss, I strove to take; Raising my Rapture by her kind delay, Her force so charming was and weak. The soft resistance did betray the Grant, While I prest on the Heaven of my desires; Her rising Breasts with nimbler Motions Pant; Her dying Eyes assume new Fires.
Now to the height of languishment she grows, And still her looks new Charms put on; —Now the last Mystery of Love she knows, We Sigh, and Kiss: I wak'd, and all was done. 'Twas but a Dream, yet by my Heart I knew, Which still was Panting, part of it was true: Oh how I strove the rest to have believ'd; Asham'd and Angry to be undeceiv'd! But now LOVE calls me forth; and scarce allows A Moment to the Gods to pay my Vows: He all Devotion has in dis-esteem, But that which we too fondly render him: LOVE drest me for the day; and both repair, With an impatient hast to Little Care; Where many days m' advantage I pursu'd, But Night returns me to Inquietude; There suffer'd all that absent Lovers griev'd, And only knew by what I felt I liv'd;
A thousand little Fears afflict my Heart, And all its former order quite subvert; The Beauty's which all day my hope imploy'd, Seem now too excellent to be enjoy'd. I number all my RIVALS over now, Then Raving Mad with Jealousie I grow, Which does my Flame to that vast height increase; That here I found, I lov'd to an Excess: These wild Distractions every Night increase, But day still reconciles me into Peace; And I forget amidst their soft Delights, The un-imagin'd torment of the Nights. 'Twas thus a while I liv'd at little Care, Without advance of Favour or of fear, When fair Aminta from that Court departs, And all her Lovers leave with broken Hearts, On me alone she does the Grace confer, In a Permission I shou'd wait on her. Oh with what eager Joy I did obey! Joy, which for fear it shou'd my Flame betray,
I Veil'd with Complisance; which Lovers Eyes Might find transported through the feign'd disguise; But hers were unconcern'd; or wou'd not see, The Trophies of their new gain'd Victory: Aminta now to Good Reception goes; A place which more of Entertainment shows Then State or Greatness; where th' Inhabitants, Are Civil to the height of Complisance; They Treat all Persons with a chearful Grace, And show 'em all the pleasures of the Place; By whose Example bright Aminta too, Confirm'd her self, and more obliging grew. Her Smiles and Air more Gracious now appear; And her Victorious Eyes more sweetness wear: The wonderous Majesty that drest her Brow, Becomes less Awful, but more Charming now: Her Pride abating does my Courage warm, And promises success from every Charm. She now permits my Eyes, with timorous Fears, To tell her of the Wounds she'as made by hers,
Against her Will my Sighs she does approve, And seems well pleas'd to think they come from Love. Nothing oppos'd it self to my delight, But absence from Aminta every Night. But LOVE, who recompences when he please, And has for every Cruelty an ease; Who like to bounteous Heaven, assigns a share Of future Bliss to those that suffer here: Led me to HOPE! A City fair and large, Built with much Beauty, and Adorn'd with Charge. HOPE. 'TIS wonderous Populous from the excess, Of Persons from all parts that thither press: One side of this magnifick City stands, On a foundation of unfaithful Sands; Which oftentimes the glorious Load destroys, Which long designing was with Pomp and Noise;
The other Parts well founded neat and strong, Less Beautiful, less Business, and less Throng. 'Tis built upon a Rivers Bank, who's clear And Murmuring Glide, delights the Eye and Ear. The River of PRETENSION. THis River's call'd Pretension; and its source T' a bordering Mountain owes, from whence with force, It spreads into the Arms of that calm space, Where the proud City dayly sees her face; 'Tis treacherously smooth and falsly fair, Inviting, but undoing to come near; 'Gainst which the Houses there find no defence, But suffer undermining Violence; Who while they stand, no Palaces do seem, In all their Glorious Pomp to equal them.
This River's Famous for the fatal Wrecks, Of Persons most Illustrious of both Sex, Who to her Bosom with soft Whispers drew, Then basely smil'd to see their Ruin too. 'Tis there so many Monarchs perisht have, And seeking Fame alone have found a Grave. 'Twas thither I was tempted too, and LOVE Maliciously wou'd needs my Conduct prove; Which Passion now to such a pass had brought, It gave admittance to the weakest thought, And with a full carreer to this false Bay I ran. But met Precaution in my way. With whom Respect was, who thus gravely said, Pretension is a River you must Dread: Fond Youth decline thy fatal Resolution, Here unavoidably thou meets Confusion; Thou fly'st with too much hast to certain Fate, Follow my Counsel, and be Fortunate.
Asham'd, all Blushing I decline my Eyes, Yet Bow'd and Thank'd Respect for his advice. From the bewitching River straight I hy'd, And hurried to the Cities farthest side. Where lives the Mighty Princess Hope? to whom The whole Isle as their ORACLE do come; Tho' little Truth remains in what she says, Yet all adore her Voice, and her Wise Conduct praise. The Princess HOPE. I. SHe blows the Youthful Lovers flame, And promises a sure repose; Whilst with a Treason void of shame, His fancy'd Happiness o're-throws.
Her Language is all soft and fair, But her hid Sense is naught but Air, And can no solid reason bear; As often as she speaks, Her faithless Word she breaks; Great in Pretension, in Performance small, And when she Swears 'tis Perjury all. Her Promises like those of Princes are, Made in Necessity and War, Cancell'd without remorse, at ease, In the voluptuous time of Peace. II. These are her qualities; but yet She has a Person full of Charms, Her Smiles are able to beget Forgiveness for her other harms;
She's most divinely shap'd, her Eyes are sweet, And every Glance to please she does employ, With such address, she does all persons treat, As none are weary of her flattery, She still consoles the most afflicted Hearts, And makes the Proud vain of his fancy'd Arts. Amongst the rest of those who dayly came, T' admire this Princess, and oblige their flame, (Conducted thither by a false report, That Happiness resided in her Court) Two young successless Lovers did resort: One, so above his Aim had made pretence, That even to Hope, for him, was Impudence; Yet he 'gainst Reasons Arguments makes War, And vainly Swore, his Love did merit her. Boldly Attempted, daringly Addrest, And with unblushing Confidence his flame confest. The other was a Bashful Youth, who made His Passion his Devotion, not his Trade;
No fond opiniater, who a price, Sets on his Titles, Equipage, or Eyes, But one that had a thousand Charms in store, Yet did not understand his Conquering Pow'r: This Princess with a kind Address receives These Strangers; and to both new Courage gives. She animates the haughty to go on! Say—A Town long besieg'd must needs be won. Time and Respect remove all obstacles, And obstinate Love, arrives at Miracles. Were she the Heir to an illustrious Crown, Those Charms, that haughty meen, that fam'd renown, That wond'rous skill you do in Verse profess, That great disdain of common Mistresses; Can when you please with aid of Billet Deux, The Royal Virgin to your Arms subdue, One skill'd in all the Arts to please the fair, Shou'd be above the Sense of dull despair: Go on young noble Warrier then go on, Though all the fair are by that Love undone.
Then turning to the other: Sir, said she, Were the bright Beauty you Adore like me, Your silent awful Passion more wou'd move, Than all the bold and forward Arts of Love. A Heart the softest composition forms, And sooner yields by treaty, then by storms; A Look, a Sigh, a Tear, is understood, And makes more warm dis-orders in the Blood, Has more ingaging tender Eloquence, Then all the industry of Artful Sense, So falling drops with their soft force alone, Insinuate kind impressions in obdurate stone. But that which most my pity did imploy, Was a young Hero, full of Smiles and Joy. A noble Youth to whom indulgent Heaven, Had more of Glory then of Virtue given; Conducted thither by a Politick throng, The Rabble Shouting as he past along, Whilst he, vain with the beastly Din they make, (Which were the same, if Bears were going to stake)
Addresses to this faithless Flatterer; Who in return, calls him, young God of War! The Cities Champion! and his Countries Hope, The Peoples Darling, and Religious Prop. Scepters and Crowns does to his view expose; And all the Fancied pow'r of Empire shows. In vain the Vision he wou'd dis-believe, In spight of Sense she does his Soul deceive: He Credits all! nor ask's which way or how, The dazling Circle shall surround his Brow; Implicitly attends the flattering Song, Gives her his easy Faith, and is undone. For with one turn of State the Frenzy's heal'd, The Blind recover and the Cheats reveal'd. Whilst all his Charms of Youth and Beauty lies, The kind reproach of pitying Enemies. To me she said, and smiling as she spoke, Lisander, you with Love, have Reason took, Continue so, and from Aminta's Heart, Expect what Love and Beauty can impart.
I knew she flatter'd, yet I cou'd not choose But please my Self, and credit the Abuse; Her charming Words that Night repos'd me more, Then all the grateful Dreams I'd had before. Next day I rose, and early with the Sun; Love guided me to Declaration, A pleasant City built with Artful Care, To which the Lovers of the Isle repair. In our pursuit Respect dissatisfy'd, Did the unreasonable Adventure chide; Return unheedy Youth cry'd he, return! Let my advice th' approaching danger warn: Renounce thy Purpose and thy haste decline, Or thou wilt ruine all Loves great design; Amaz'd I stood, and unresolv'd t' obey, Cou'd not return, durst not pursue my way; Whilst LOVE who thought himself concern'd as Guide, I'th' Criminal Adventure. Thus reply'd:
LOVE's Resentment. MUst we eternal Martyrdom pursue? Must we still Love, and always suffer too? Must we continue still to dye, And ne'r declare the cruel Cause; Whilst the fair Murdress asks not why, But triumphs in her rigorous Laws; And grows more mighty in disdain, More Peevish, Humorous, Proud and Vain; The more we languish by our Pain? And when we Vow, Implore, and Pray, Shall the Inhumane cruel fair, Only with nice disdain the sufferer pay? Consult her Pride alone in the affair, And coldly cry—In time perhaps I may— Consider and redress the Youth's despair; And when she wou'd a Period put to's Fate, Alas, her cruel Mercy comes too late!
But wise Respect obligingly reply'd, Amintas Cruelty you need not dread, Your Passion by your Eyes will soon be known, Without this hast to Declaration; 'Tis I will guide you where you still shall find, Aminta in best Humour and most kind. Strong were his Arguments; his Reasonings prove Too pow'rful for the angry God of Love. Who by degrees t' his native softness came, Yields to Respect and owns his haste a blame. Both vow obedience to his judging Wit, And to his graver Conduct both submit, Who now invites us to a Reverend place, An ancient Town, whose Governor he was. Impregnable, with Bastions fortify'd, Guarded with fair built Walls on every side, The top of which the Eye cou'd scarce discern, So strong as well secur'd the Rich concern; Silence with Modesty and Secresy, Have all committed to their Custody.
Silence to every questions ask'd, reply With apt Grimasses of the Face and Eyes; Her Finger on her Mouth; and as you've seen, Her Picture, Handsom, with fantastick mean, Her every Motion her Commands express, But seldom any the hid Soul confess. The Virgin Modesty is wond'rous fair, A bashful Motion, and a blushing Air; With un-assur'd regard her Eyes do move, Untaught by affectation or Self-love; Her Robes not gaudy were, nor loosely ty'd, But even concealing more then need be hid. For Secresie, one rarely sees her Face, Whose lone Apartment is some Dark recess; From whence unless some great affairs oblige, She finds it difficult to dis-ingage; Her voice is low, but subtilly quick her Ears, And answers still by signs to what she hears; —Led by Respect we did an entrance get, Not saying any thing, who ere we met.
The City of DISCRETION. THE Houses there, retir'd in Gardens are, And all is done with little noise, One seldom sees Assemblies there, Or publick shows for Grief or Joys. One rarely walks but in the Night, And most endeavour to avoid the Light. There the whole World their bus'ness carry, Without or confident, or Secretary: One still is under great constraint, Must always suffer, but ne'r make complaint, 'Tis there the dumb and silent languishes, Are predic'd, which so well explain the Heart: Which without speaking can so much express, And secrets to the Soul the nearest way impart; Language which prettily perswades belief; Who's silent Eloquence obliges Joy or Grief.
This City's called Discretion, being the name Of her that is Lieutenant of the same, And Sister to Respect; a Lady who Seldom obtains a Conquest at first view; But in repeated Visits one shall find, Sufficient Charms of Beauty and of Mind: Her vigorous piercing Eyes can when they please, Make themselves lov'd, and understood with Ease. Not too severe, but yet reserv'd and wise, And her Address is full of subtilties; Which upon all occasions serves her turn; T' express her Kindness, and to hide her scorn; Dissimulations Arts, she useful holds, And in good manners sets 'em down for rules. Twas here Aminta liv'd, and here I paid My constant visits to the lovely Maid. With mighty force upon my Soul I strove, To hide the Sent'ments of my raging Love. All that I spoke did but indifferent seem, Or went no higher than a great esteem.
But 'twas not long my Passion I conceal'd, My flame in spight of me, it self reveal'd. The silent Confession. AND tho' I do not speak, alas, My Eyes, and Sighs too much do say! And pale and languishing my Face, The torments of my Soul betray; They the sad story do unfold, Love cannot his own secrets hold; And though Fear ty's my Tongue; Respect my Eyes, Yet something will disclose the pain; Which breaking out throw's all disguise; Reproaches her with Cruelties; Which she augments by new disdain; —Where e're she be, I still am there; What-ere she do, I that prefer; In spight of all my strength, at her approach, I tremble with a sight or touch;
Paleness or Blushes does my Face surprize, If mine by chance meet her encountering Eyes; Twas thus she learn'd my VVeakness, and her Pow'r; And knew too well she was my Conqueror. And now— Her Eyes no more their wonted Smiles afford, But grew more fierce, the more they were ador'd; The marks of her esteem which heretofore Rais'd my aspiring flame, oblige no more; She calls up all her Pride to her defence; And as a Crime condemns my just pretence; Me from her presence does in Fury chase; No supplications can my doom reverse; And vainly certain of her Victory, Retir'd into the Den of Cruelty.
The Den of Cruelty. A Den where Tygers make the passage good, And all attempting Lovers make their Food; I'th' hollow of a mighty Rock 'tis plac'd, VVhich by the angry Sea is still imbrac'd: VVhose frightful surface constant Tempest wears, VVhich strikes the bold Adventurers with Fears. The Elements their rudest VVinds send out, VVhich blow continual coldness round about. Upon the Rock eternal VVinters dwells, VVhich weeps away in dropping Isicles; The barren hardness meets no fruitful Ray, Nor bears it Issue to the God of day; All bleek and cale, th' unshady prospect lies, And nothing grateful meets the melancholy Eyes. To this dire place Aminta goes, whilst I, Begg'd her with Prayers and Tears to pass it by;
All dying on the Ground my self I cast, And with my Arms her flying Feet imbrac'd; But she from the kind force with Fury flung, And on an old deformed Woman hung. A Woman frightful, with a horrid Frown, And o're her angry Eyes, her Brows hung down: One single Look of hers, fails not t' impart, A terror and despair to every Heart: She fills the Universe with discontents, And Torments for poor Lovers still invents. This is the mighty Tyrant Cruelty, Who with the God of Love is still at enmity; She keeps a glorious Train, and glorious Court, And thither Youth and Beauty still resort: But oh my Soul form'd for Loves softer Sport, Cou'd not endure the Rigor of her Court! Which her first rude Address did so affright, That I all Trembling hasted from her Sight, Leaving the unconcern'd and cruel Maid, And on a Rivers Bank my self all fainting laid;
Which River from the obdurate Rock proceeds, And cast's it self i'th' Melancholy Meads. The River of Despair. ITs Torrent has no other source, But Tears from dying Lovers Eyes; Which mixt with Sighs precipitates its course; Softning the sensless Rocks in gliding by; Whose doleful Murmurs have such Eloquence; That even the neighbouring Trees and flow'rs have pi- tying sense; And Cruelty alone knows in what sort, Against the moving sound to make defence, Who laughs at all despair and Death as sport. A dismal Wood the Rivers Banks do bear, Securing even the day from entering there;
The Suns bright Rays a passage cannot find, Whose Boughs make constant War against the Wind; Yet though their Leaves glimmers a sullen Light; Which renders all below more terrible than Night, And shows upon the Bark of every Tree, Sad stories carv'd of Love and Cruelty; The Grove is fill'd with Sighs, with Crys, and Groans, Reproaches and Complaints in dying Moans; The Neighbouring Eccho's nothing do repeat, But what the Soul sends forth with sad regret; And all things there no other Murmurs make, But what from Language full of death they take, 'Twas in this place dispairing ere to free Aminta from the Arms of Cruelty, That I design'd to render up my Breath, And charge the cruel Charmer with my Death.
The RESOLVE. NOw my fair Tyrant I despise your Pow'r; 'Tis Death, not you becomes my Conqueror; This easy Trophy which your scorn, Led bleeding by your Chariot-side; Your haughty Victory to adorn, Has broke the Fetters of your Pride, Death takes his quarrel now in hand, And laughs at all your Eyes can do; His pow'r thy Beauty can withstand, Not all your Smiles can the grim victor bow. He'll hold no Parley with your Wit, Nor understands your wanton play, Not all your Arts can force him to submit, Not all your Charms can teach him to obey, Your youth nor Beauty can inspire, His frozen Heart with Love's perswasive fire; Alas, you cannot warm him to one soft desire;
Oh mighty Death that art above, The pow'r of Beauty or of Love! Thus sullen with my Fate sometimes I grew, And then a fit of softness wou'd ensue, Then weep, and on my Knees implore my Fair, And speak as if Aminta present were. The QUESTION. SAY my fair Charmer, must I fall, A Victim to your Cruelty? And must I suffer as a Criminal? Is it to Love offence enough to dye? Is this the recompence at last, Of all the restless hours I've past? How oft my Awe, and my Respect, Have fed your Pride and Scorn? How have I suffer'd your neglect, Too mighty to be born?
How have I strove to hide that flame You seem'd to dis-approve? How careful to avoid the name Of Tenderness or Love? Least at that Word some guilty Blush shou'd own, What your bright Eyes forbad me to make known. Thus fill'd the neighbouring Eccho's with my Cry, Did nothing but reproach, complain and dye: One day— All hopeless on the Rivers Brink I stood, Resolv'd to plunge into the Rapid Floud, That Floud that eases Lovers in despair, And puts an end to all their raging care: 'Tis hither those betray'd by Beauty come, And from this kinder stream receive their doom; Here Birds of Ominous presages Nest, Securing the forlorn Inhabitants from rest:
Here Mid-night-Owls, night-Crows, and Ravens dwell, Filling the Air with Melancholy Yell: Here swims a thousand Swans, whose doleful moan Sing dying Lovers Requiems with their own: I gaz'd around, and many Lovers view'd, Gastly and pale, who my design pursu'd; But most inspir'd by some new hope, or won To finish something they had left undone; Some grand Important bus'ness of their Love, Did from the fatal precipice remove: For me, no Reason my designs disswade, Till Love all Breathless hasted to my Aid; With force m' unfixing Feet he kindly graspt, And tenderly reproacht my desperate hast, Reproach'd my Courage, and condemn'd my Wit, That meanly cou'd t' a Womans scorn submit, That cou'd to feed her Pride, and make her vain, Destroy an Age of Life, for a short date of pain:
He wou'd have left me here, but that I made, So many friendships as did soon perswade, The yielding Boy, who Smil'd, resolv'd and staid, He rais'd my Head, and did again renew, His Flatteries, and all the Arts he knew: To call my Courage to its wonted place. What cry'd he—(sweetly Angry) shall a Face Arm'd with the weak resistance of a Frown, Force us to lay our Claims and Titles down? Shall Cruelty a peevish Woman prove, Too strong to be overcome by Youth and Love? No! rally all thy Vigor, all thy Charms, And force her from the cruel Tyrants Arms; Come, once more try th' incens'd Maid to appease, Death's in our pow'r to grasp when ere we please; He said—And I the heavenly voice attend, Whilst towards the Rock our hasty steps we bend, Before the Gates with all our forces lye, Resolv'd to Conquer, or resolv'd to dye;
In vain Love all his feeble Engines rears, His soft Artillery of Sighs and Tears, Were all in vain—against the Winds were sent, For she was proof 'gainst them and languishment: Repeated Vows and Prayers mov'd no Remorse, And 'twas to Death alone I had Recourse: Love in my Anguish bore a mighty part, He pityed, but he cou'd not ease my Heart: A thousand several ways he had assay'd, To touch the Heart of this obdurate Maid; Rebated all his Arrow's still return, For she was fortify'd with Pride and Scorn. The useless Weapons now away he flung, Neglected lay his Ivory Bow unstrung, His gentle Azure Wings were all unprun'd, And the gay Plumes a fading Tinct assum'd; Which down his snowy sides extended lay, And now no more in wanton Motions play. He blusht to think he had not left one dart, Of force enough to wound Aminta's Heart;
He blusht to think she shou'd her freedom boast, Whilst mine from the first Dart he sent was lost: Thus tir'd with our Complaints; (whilst no relief, Rescu'd the fleeting Soul, from killing Grief) We saw a Maid approach, who's lovely Face, Disdain'd the Beauties of the common race: Soft were her Eyes, where unfeign'd Sorrow dwelt, And on her Cheeks in pitying Show'rs they melt; Soft was her Voice, and tenderly it strook, The eager listening Soul, when e're she spoke; And what did yet my Courage more augment, She wore this sadness for my languishment. And sighing said, ah Gods! have you Beheld this dying Youth, and never found, A pity for a Heart so true? Which dyes adoring her that gave the Wound, His Youth, his Passion, and his Constancy, Merits ye God's a kinder Destiny.
With pleasure I attended what she said, And wonder'd at the friendship of the Maid. Of LOVE I ask'd her name? who answer'd me, 'Twas Pity: Enemy to Cruelty: Who often came endeavouring to abate, The Languishments of the unfortunate; And said, if she wou'd take my injur'd part, She soon wou'd soften fair Aminta's Heart; For she knows all the subtillest Arts to move, And teach the timorous Virgin how to love. With Joy I heard, and my Address apply'd, To gain the Beauteous Pity to my Side: Nothing I left untold that might perswade, The listening Virgin to afford her aid. Told her my Passions, Sorrows, Pains and Fears, And whilst I spoke, confirm'd 'em with my Tears; All which with down-cast Eyes she did attend, And blushing said, my Tale had made a Friend; I bow'd and thankt her with a chearful look, Which being return'd by hers, her leave she took:
Now to Aminta all in haste she hyes, Whom she assail'd with sorrow in her Eyes, And a sad story of my Miseries. Which she with so much tenderness exprest, As forc'd some Sighs from the fair Charmers Breast; The subtil Pity found she should prevail, And oft repeats th' insinuating Tale, And does insensibly the Maid betray, Where Love and I, Panting and Trembling lay; Where she beheld th' effects of her disdain, And in my languid Face she read my Pain. Down her fair Cheeks some pitying drops did glide; Which cou'd not be restrain'd by feebler Pride; Against my anguish she had no defence, Such Charms had grief, my Tears such Eloquence; My Sighs and Murmurs she began t' approve, And listen'd to the story of my LOVE. With tenderness, she did my Sufferings hear, And even my Reproaches now cou'd bear:
At last my trembling Hand in hers she took, And with a charming Blush, these Words she spoke: I. FAithful Lisander, I your Vows approve, And can no longer hide, My Sense of all your suffering Love, With the thin Veil of Pride. II. 'Twas long in Vain that Pity did assail, My cold and stubborn Heart; Ere on th' insensible she cou'd prevail, To render any Part.
III. To her for all the tenderness, Which in my Eyes you find, You must your gratitude express, 'Tis Pity only makes me kind. IV. Live then Lisander, since I must confess, In spight of all my native modesty, I cannot wish that you shou'd Love me less, Live then and hope the Circling Sun may see, In his swift course a grateful change in me, And that in time your Passion may receive, All you dare take, and all a Maid may give. Oh Lysidas, I cannot here relate, The Sense of Joy she did in me create;
The sudden Blessing overcame me so, It almost finisht, what Grieffail'd to do; I wanted Courage for the soft surprize, And waited re-enforcements from her Eyes: At last with Transports which I cou'd not hide, Raising my self from off the ground, I cry'd. The TRANSPORT. REjoyce! my new made happy Soul, Rejoyce! Bless the dear minute, bless the Heav'nly voice, That has revok't thy fatal doom; Rejoyce! Aminta leads thee from the Tomb. Banish the anxious thoughts of dying hours, Forget the shades and melancholy Bow'rs, Thy Eyes so oft bedew'd with falling show'rs; Banish all Thoughts that do remain, Of Sighing Days and Nights of Pain, When on neglected Beds of Moss thou'st lain:
Oh happy Youth! Aminta bids thee live; Thank not the sullen God's or defer Stars, Since from her Hand thou dost the Prize receive; Hers be the Service, as the bounty hers; For all that Life must dedicated be, To the fair God-like Maid that gave it Thee. Now Lysidas, behold my happy State; Behold me Blest, behold me Fortunate, And from the height of languishing despair, Rais'd to the Glory of Aminta's care: And this one moment of my Heaven of Joy, Did the remembrance of past Griefs destroy: And Pity ceas'd not here; but with new Eloquence, Obliges the shy Maid to visit Confidence.
CONFIDENCE. A Lady lovely, with a charming Meen, Gay, frank, and open, and an Air serene; In every Look she does her Soul impart, With ease one reads the Sent'ments of her Heart; Her Humour generous, and her Language free, And all her Conversation graceful Liberty: Her Villa is Youth's general Rendezvous, Where in delightful Gardens, winding Groves, The happy Lovers dwell with secresie, Un-interrupted by fond Jealousie: 'Tis there with Innocence, they do and say A thousand things, to pass the short-liv'd day: There free from censuring Spies, they entertain, And pleasures tast, un-intermixt with pain. 'Tis there we see, what most we do adore, And yet we languish to discover more.
Hard fate of Lovers, who are ne'er content, In an Estate so Blest and Innocent. But still press forward, urg'd by soft desires, To Joys that oft extinguishes their Fires; In this degree I found a happiness, Which nought but wishing more cou'd render less: I saw Aminta here without controul, And told her all the Secrets of my Soul; Whilst she t' express her height of Amity, Communicated all her Thoughts to me. The REFLECTION. OH with what Pleasure did I pass away, The too swift course of the delightful day! What Joys I found in being a Slave, To every Conquering Smile she gave,
Whose every sweetness wou'd inspire, The Cinick and the Fool with Love; Alas, I needed no more Fire, Who did its height already prove: Ah my Aminta! had I been content, With this degree of Ravishment, With the neer satisfy'd delight I took, Only to prattle Love, to sigh and look, With the dull Bartering Kiss for Kiss, And never aim'd at higher Bliss, With all the stealths forgetful Lovers make, VVhen they their Little Covenants break: To these sad shades of Death I'd not been hurl'd, And thou mightst still have blest the drooping VVorld; But though my Pleasure were thus vast and high, Yet Loves insatiate Luxury, Stillwish'd, reveal'd the unknown Mystery. But still Love importun'd, nor cou'd I rest, So often, and impatiently he prest,
That I the lovely Virgin wou'd invite, To the so worshipp'd Temple of Delight. By all the Lovers Arts I strove to move, And watch the softest Minutes of her Love, Which against all my Vows and Prayers were proof. Alas she lov'd, but did not love enough: And I cou'd no returns but Anger get, Her Heart was not intirely conquer'd yet; For liking, I mistook her Complysance, And that for Love; when 'twas her Confidence. But 'twas not long my Sighs I did imploy, Before she rais'd me to the height of Joy. And all my Fears and Torments to remove, Yields I shall lead her to the Court of LOVE. Here Lysidas thou thinks me sure and blest, With Recompence for all my past unrest; But fortun'd smil'd the easier to betray, She's less inconstant than a Lover's Joy: For whilst our Chariot Wheels out-stript the Wind, Leaving all thought of Mortal Cares behind.
Whilst we sate gazing full of new surprize, Exchanging Souls from eithers darting Eyes, We encounter'd One who seem'd of great Com∣mand, Who seiz'd the Reins with an all-pow'rful hand: Awful his looks, but rude in his Address, And his Authority roughly did express; His violent Hands he on Aminta laid, And out of mine snatch'd the dear trembling Maid; So suddenly as hinder'd my defence, And she cou'd only say in parting thence. Forgive Lisander what by force I do, Since nothing else can ravish me from you; Make no resistance, I obey Duty. Devoir. Who values not thy Tears, thy Force or Prayer, Retain thy Faith and Love Aminta still, Since she abandons thee against her Will.
Immoveable I remain'd with this surprize, Nor durst reply so much as with my Eyes. I saw her go, but was of Sense bereav'd, And only knew from what I heard, I liv'd; Yes, yes, I heard her last Commands, and thence By violent degrees retriev'd my Sense. Ye Gods in this your Mercy was severe, You might have spar'd the useless favour here. But the first Thoughts my Reason did conceive, Were to pursue the injurious Fugitive. Raving, that way I did my haste direct, But once more met the Reverend Respect, From whom I strove my self to dis-ingage, And faign'd a calmness to disguise my Rage. In vain was all the Cheat, he soon perceiv'd, Spight of my Smiles, how much, and why I griev'd; Saw my despairs, and what I meant to do, And begg'd I wou'd the rash Design forego; A thousand dangers he did represent, T' win me from the desperate attempt.
I ever found his Counsel just and good, And now resolv'd it shou'd not be withstood; Thus he ore-came my Rage, but did not free, My Soul from Griefs more painful Tyranny; Grief tho' more soft, did not less cruel prove, Madness is easier far then hopeless Love. I parted thus, but knew not what to do; Nor where I went; nor did I care to know; With folded Arms, with weeping Eyes declin'd, I search the unknown shade, I cou'd not find, And mixt my constant Sighs with flying Wind. By slow unsteady steps the Paths I trace, Which undesign'd conduct me to a place Fit for a Soul distrest; obscur'd with shade, Lonely and fit for Love and Sorrow made; The Murmuring Boughs themselves together twist, And 'twou'd allow to Grief her self some rest, Inviron'd 'tis with lofty Mountains round, From whence the Eccho's, Sighs, and Crys rebound;
Here in the midst and thickest of the Wood, Cover'd with bending Shades a Castle stood, Where Absence that dejected Maid remains, Who nothing but her Sorrow entertains. ABSENCE. HER mourning languid Eyes are rarely shown, Unless to those afflicted like her own; Her lone Apartment all obscure as Night, Discover'd only by a glimmering Light: Weeping she sate her Face with Grief dismaid, Which all its natural sweetness has decaid; Yet in despight of Grief there does appear, The ruin'd Monuments of what was fair, E'r cruel Love and Grief had took possession there. These made her old without the aid of Years; Worn out, and faint with lingring hopes and fears, She seldom answers ought but with her Tears.
No Train attends, she only is obey'd By Melancholy, that soft, silent Maid: A Maid that fits her Humour every way, With whom she passes all the tedious day: No other object can her Mind content, She Feeds and Flatters all her languishment; The noisy Streams that from high Mountains fall; And water all the Neighbouring flowry Vale: The Murmurs of the Rivulets that glide, Against the bending Seges on the side; Of mournful Birds the sad and tuneful Noats, The Bleats of straggling Lambs, and new yean'd Goats: The distant Pipe of some lone Mountain Swain, Who to his injur'd Passion fits his strain; Is all the Harmony, her Soul can entertain. On a strict league of Friendship we agree, For I was sad, and as forlorn as she; To all her Humours, I conform my own, Together Sigh, together Weep, and Moan;
Like her to Woods and Fountains I retreat, And urge the pitying Eccho's to repeat My tale of Love, and at each Period sound Aminta's name, and bear it all around, Whilst listening Voices do the charm reply, And lost in mixing Air, together dye. There minutes like dull days creep slowly on, And every day I drag an Age along; The coming hours cou'd no more pleasures hast, Than those so insupportably I'd past. I rav'd, I wept, I wisht, but all in vain, The distant Maid, nor saw, nor eas'd my pain; With my sad tale, each tender Bark I fill, This—soft complaints, and that—my Ravings tell; This bears vain Curses on my cruel fate, And Blessings on the Charming Virgin, that The Willow by the lonely Spring that grows, And o're the Stream bends his forsaken Boughs. I call Lisander, they like him I find, Murmur and ruffl'd are with every Wind.
On the young springing Beech that's straight and tall, I Carve her name, and that Aminta call; But where I see an Oak that Climbs abové, The rest, and grows the Monster of the Grove; Whose pow'rful Arms when aiding Winds do blow, Dash all the tender twining Shades below, And even in Calms maliciously do spread, That naught beneath can thrive, imbrace or breed; Whose mischiefs far exceed his fancy'd good, Honour I call him: Tyrant of the Wood. Thus rove from Thought to Thought without relief: A change 'tis true; but 'tis from Grief to Grief; Which when above my silence they prevail, With Love I'm froward, on my Fortune rail, And to the Winds breathe my neglected Tale.
To LOVE. I. FOnd Love thy pretty Flatteries cease, That feeble Hope you give; Unless' twoud make my happiness, In vain dear Boy; in vain you strive, It cannot keep my tortur'd Heart alive. II. Tho' thou shou'dst give me all the Joys, Luxurious Monarch's do possess, Without Aminta 'tis but empty noise, Dull and insipid happiness; And you in vain invite me to a Feast, Where my Aminta cannot be a Guest.
III. Ye glorious Trifles, I renounce ye all, Since she no part of all your splendour makes Let the Dull unconcern'd obey your call, Let the gay Fop, who his Pert Courtship takes; For Love, whilst he Profanes your Deity, Be Charm'd and Pleas'd with all your necessary vanity. IV. But give me leave, whose Soul's inspir'd, With sacred, but despairing Love. To dye from all your noise retir'd, And Buried lie within this silent Grove. For whilst I Live, my Soul's a prey, To insignificant desires, Whilst thou fond God of Love and Play, With all thy Darts, with all thy useless Fires,
VVith all thy wanton flatteries cannot charm, Nor yet the frozen-hearted Virgin warm. V. Others by absence Cure their fire, Me it inrages more with pain; Each thought of my Aminta blows it higher, And distance strengthens my desire; I Faint with wishing, since I wish in vain; Either be gone fond Love, or let me dye, Hopeless desire admits no other remedy. Here 'twas the height of Cruelty I prov'd, By absence from the sacred Maid I lov'd: And here had dy'd, but that Love found a way, Some Letters from Aminta to convey, Which all the tender marks of pity gave, And hope enough to make me wish to Live.
From Duty, now the lovely Maid is freed, And calls me from my lonely solitude: Whose cruel Memory in a Moments space, The thoughts of coming Pleasures quite deface; With an impatient Lovers hast I flew, To the vast Blessing Love had set in view, But oh I found Aminta in a place, Where never any Lover happy was! RIVALS. RIvals 'tis call'd, a Village where The Inhabitants in Fury still appear; Mali cious paleness, or a generous red, O'r every angry face is spread, Their Eyes are either smiling with disdain, Or fiercely glow with raging Fire. Gloomy and sullen with dissembl'd pain, Love in the Heart, Revenge in the desire: Combates, Duels, Challenges, Is the discourse, and all the business there.
Respect of Blood, nor sacred friendship tyes; Can reconcile the Civil War, Rage, Horror, Death, and wild despair, Are still Rencounter'd, and still practis'd there. 'Twas here the lovely cruel Maid I found, Incompass'd with a thousand Lovers round; At my approach I saw their Blushes rise, And they regarded me with angry Eyes. Aminta too, or else my Fancy 'twas, Receiv'd me with a shy and cold Address, I cou'd not speak—but Sigh'd, retir'd and Bow'd; With pain I heard her Talk and Laugh aloud, And deal her Freedoms to the greedy Crowd. I Curst her Smiles, and envy'd every look, And Swore it was too kind, what e're she spoke; Condemn'd her Air, rail'd on her soft Address, And vow'd her Eyes did her false Heart confess, And vainly wisht their Charming Beauties less. A Secret hatred in my Soul I bear, Against these objects of my new despair;
I waited all the day, and all in vain; Not one lone minute snatcht, to ease my pain; Her Lovers went and came in such a sort, It rather seem'd Loves-Office than his Court, Made for eternal Bus'ness, not his Sport. Love saw my pain, and found my rage grew high, And led me off, to lodge at Jealousie. JEALOUSIE. I. A Palace that is more un-easy far, Then those of cruelty and absence are, There constant show'rs of Hail and Rains do flow, Continual Murmuring VVinds a-round do blow, Eternal Thunder rowling in the Air, And thick dark hanging Clouds the day obscure; Whose sullen dawn all Objects multiplies, And render things that are not, to the Eyes. Fantoms appear by the dull gloomy light, That with such subtil Art delude the sight, That one can see no Object true or right.
I here transported and impatient grow And all things out of order do; Hasty and peevish every thing I say, Suspicion and distrust's my Passions sway, And bend all Nature that un-easy way. II. A thousand Serpents gnaw the Heart; A thousand Visions fill the Eyes, And Deaf to all that can relief impart, We hate the Counsel of the Wise, And Sense like Tales of Lunaticks despise: Faithless, as Couzen'd Maids, by Men undone, And obstinate as new Religion, As full of Error, and false Notion too, As Dangerous, and as Politick; As Humerous as a Beauty without Wit; As Vain and Fancyful in all we do: —Thus Wreck the Soul, as if it did conceal, Love Secrets which by torturing 'two'd reveal.
Restless and wild, ranging each Field and Grove; I meet the Author of my painful Love; But still surrounded with a numerous Train Of Lovers, whom Love taught to Sigh and Fawn, At my approach, my Soul all Trembling flies, And tells its soft Resentment at my Eyes: My Face all pale, my steps unsteady fall, And faint Confusion spreads it self o're all. I listen to each low breath'd Word she says, And the returns the happy Answerer pays: When catching half the Sense, the rest Invent, And turn it still to what will most Torment; If any thing by Whispers she impart, 'Tis Mortal, 'tis a Dagger at my Heart; And every Smile, each Motion, Gesture, Sign, In favour of some Lover I explain: When I am absent, in some Rivals Arms, I Fancy she distributes all her Charms, And if alone I find her; sighing cry, Some happier Lover she expects than I.
So that I did not only Jealous grow, Of all I saw; but all I fancy'd too. The COMPLAINT. I. OFT in my Jealous Transports I wou'd cry, Ye happy shades, ye happy Bow'rs, Why speaks she tenderer things to you than me? Why does she Smile, carress and praise your Flowers? Why Sighs she (opening Buds) her Secrets all Into your fragrant Leaves? Why does she to her Aid your sweetness call, Yet take less from you than she gives? Why on your Beds must you be happy made, And be together with Aminta laid? You from her Hands and Lips may KISSES take, And never meet Reproaches from her Pride; A thousand Ravishing stealths may make, And even into her softer Bosome glide. And there expire! Oh happy Rival flowers, How vainly do I wish my Fate like that of Yours?
II. Tell me ye silent Groves, whose Gloom invites, The lovely Charmer to your Solitudes? Tell me for whom she languishes and sighs? For whom she feels her soft Inquietudes? Name me the Youth for whom she makes her Vows, For she has breath'd it oft amongst your listening Boughs? Oh happy confidents of her Amours, How vainly do I wish my Fortune blest as Yours. III. Oh happy Brooks, oh happy Rivulets, And Springs that in a thousand Windings move; Upon your Banks how oft Aminta sits, And prattles to you all her Tale of Love: Whilst your smooth surface little Circles bears, From the Impressions of her falling Tears, And as you want only reflecting pass, Glide o're the lovely Image of her Face;
And sanctifies your stream, which as you run, You Boast in Murmurs to the Banks along. Dear streams! to whom she gives her softest hours, How vainly do I wish my happiness like yours. Sometimes I rail'd again, and wou'd upbraid, Reproachfully, the charming fickle Maid: Sometimes I vow'd to do 't no more, But one, vain, short-liv'd hour, Wou'd Perjure all I'd Sworn before, And Damn my fancy'd Pow'r. Sometimes the sullen fit wou'd last, A teadious live-long day: But when the wrecking hours were past, With what Impatience wou'd I hast, And let her Feet weep my neglect away. Quarrels are the Reserves Love keeps in store, To aid his Flames and make 'em burn the more.
The PENITENT. I. WIth Rigor Arm your self, (I cry'd) It is but just and fit; I merit all this Treatment from your Pride, All the reproaches of your VVit; Put on the cruel Tyrant as you will, But know, my tender Heart adores you still. II. And yet that Heart has Murmur'd too, And been so insolent to let you know, It did complain, and rave, and rail'd at you; Yet all the while by every God I swear, By every pitying Pow'r the wretched here; By all those Charms that dis-ingage, My Soul from the extreams of Rage; By all the Arts you have to save and kill, My faithful tender Heart adores you still.
III. But oh you shou'd excuse my soft complaint, Even my wild Ravings too prefer, I sigh, I burn, I weep, I faint, And vent my Passions to the Air; Whilst all my Torment, all my Care Serves but to make you put new Graces on, You Laugh, and Rally my despair, VVhich to my Rivals renders you more fair; And but the more confirms my being undone: Sport with my Pain as gayly as you will, My fond, my tender Heart adores you still. My differing Passions thus, did never cease, Till they had touch'd her Soul with tenderness; My Rivals now are banish'd by degrees, And with 'em all my Fears and Jealousies; And all advanc'd, as if design'd to please.
The City of LOVE. IN this vast Isle a famous City stands, Who for its Beauty all the rest Commands, Built to delight the wondering Gazers Eyes, Of all the World the great Metropolis. Call'd by LOVE's name: and here the Charming God, When he retires to Pleasure, makes abode; 'Tis here both Art and Nature strive to show, What Pride, Expence, and Luxury, can do, To make it Ravishing and Awful too: All Nations hourly thither do resort, To add a splendour to this glorious Court; The Young, the Old, the Witty, and the Wise, The Fair, the Ugly, Lavish, and Precise; Cowards and Braves, the Modest, and the Lowd, Promiscuously are blended in the Crowd. From distant Shoars young Kings their Courts re∣move, To pay their Homage to the God of Love. Where all their sacred awful Majesty, Their boasted and their fond Divinity;
Loose their vast force; as lesser Lights are hid, When the fierce God of Day his Beauties spread, The wondering World for Gods did Kings adore, Till LOVE confirm'd 'em Mortal by his Pow'r; And in Loves Court, do with their Vassals live, Without or Homage, or Prerogative: Which the young God, not only Blind must show, But as Defective in his Judgment too. LOVE's Temple. MIdst this Gay Court a famous Temple stands, Old as the Universe which it commands; For mighty Love a sacred being had, Whilst yet 'twas Chaos, e're the World was made, And nothing was compos'd without his Aid. Agreeing Attoms by his pow'r were hurl'd, And Love and Harmony compos'd the World. 'Tis rich, 'tis solemn all! Divine yet Gay! From the Jemm'd Roof the dazling Lights display, And all below inform without the Aids of day.
All Nations hither bring rich offerings, And 'tis endow'd with Gifts of Love-sick Kings. Upon an Altar (whose un-bounded store, Has made the Rifled Universe so poor, Adorn'd with all the Treasure of the Seas, More than the Sun in his vast course surveys) Was plac'd the God! with every Beauty formd, Of Smiling Youth, but Naked, un-adorn'd. His painted Wings displaid: His Bow laid by, (For here Love needs not his Artillery.) One of his little Hands aloft he bore, And grasp'd a wounded Heart that burnt all o're, Towards which he lookt with lovely Laughing Eyes: As pleas'd and vain, with the fond Sacrifice, The other pointing downward seem'd to say, Here at my Feet your grateful Victims lay, Whilst in a Golden Tablet o're his Head, Diamond Characters this Motto stood, hold the Pow'r that Conquers every GOD.
The Temple Gates are open Night and Day, Love's Votaries at all hours Devotions pay, A Priest of Hymen gives attendance near, But very rarely shows his Function here, For Priest cou'd ne'r the Marriage-cheat improve, Were there no other Laws, but those of Love! A Slavery generous Heav'n did ne'r design, Nor did its first lov'd Race of men confine; A Trick, that Priest, whom Avarice cunning made, Did first contrive, then sacred did perswade, That on their numerous and unlucky Race, They might their base got Wealth securely place. Curse—cou'd they not their own loose Race inthral' But they must spread the infection over all: That Race, whose Brutal heat was grown so wild, That even the Sacred Porches they defil'd; And Ravisht all that for Devotion came, Their Function, nor the Place restrains their flame. But Love's soft Votaries no such injuries fear, No pamper'd Levits are in Pension here;
Here are no fatted Lambs to Sacrifice, No Oyl, fine Flower, or Wines of mighty price, The subtle Holy Cheats to Gormandize. Love's soft Religion knows no Tricks nor Arts, All the Attoning Offerings here are Hearts. The Mystery's silent, without noyse or show, In which the Holy Man has nought to do, The Lover is both Priest and Victim too. Hither with little force I did perswade, My lovely timorously yielding Maid, Implor'd we might together Sacrifice, And she agrees with Blushing down-cast Eyes; 'Twas then we both our Hearts an Offering made, Which at the Feet of the young God we laid, With equal Flames they Burnt; with equal Joy, But with a Fire that neither did destroy; Soft was its Force and Sympathy with them, Dispers'd it self through every trembling Limb; We cou'd not hide our tender new surprize, We languisht and confest it with our Eyes;
Thus gaz'd we—when the Sacrifice perform'd, We found our Hearts entire—but still they burn, But by a Blessed change in taking back, The lovely Virgin did her Heart mistake: Her Bashful Eyes favour'd Love's great design, I took her Burning Victim: and she mine. Thus Lysidas without constraint or Art, I reign'd the Monarch of Aminta's Heart; My great, my happy Title she allows, And makes me Lord of all her tender Vows, All my past Griefs in coming Joys were drown'd, And with eternal Pleasure I was Crown'd; My Blessed hours in the extream of Joy, With my soft Languisher I still imploy; When I am Gay, Love Revels in her Eyes, When sad—there the young God all panting lies. A thousand freedoms now she does impart, Shows all her tenderness dis-rob'd of Art, But oh this cou'd not satisfy my Heart.
A thousand Anguishes that still contains, It sighs, and heaves, and pants with pleasing pains. We look, and Kiss, and Press with new desire, Whilst every touch Blows the unusual Fire. For Love's last Mystery was yet conceal'd, Which both still languisht for, both wisht reveal'd: Which I prest on—and faintly she deny'd, With all the weak efforts of dying Pride, Which struggled long for Empire in her Soul, Where it was wont to rule without controul. But Conquering Love had got possession now, And open'd every Sally to the Foe: And to secure my doubting happiness, Permits me to conduct her to the Bow'r of Bliss. That Bow'r that does eternal Pleasures yield, Where Psyche first the God of Love beheld: But oh, in entering this so blest abode, All Gay and Pleas'd as a Triumphing God, I new unlook'd for difficulties meet, Encountring Honour at the sacred Gate.
HONOUR. I. HOnour's a mighty Phantom! which around The sacred Bower does still appear; All Day it haunts the hollow'd ground, And hinders Lovers entering there. It rarely ever takes its flight, But in the secret shades of night. Silence and gloom the charm can soonest end, And are the luckyest hours to lay the Fiend, Then 'tis the Vision only will remove, With Incantations of soft Vows of Love. II. But as a God he's Worshipt here, By all the lovely, young, and fair,
Who all their kind desires controul, And plays the Tyrant o're the Soul: His chiefest Attributes, are Pride and Spight, His pow'r, is robbing Lovers of delight, An Enemy to Humane kind, But most to Youth severe; As Age ill-natur'd, and as ignorance Blind, Boasting, and Baffled too, as Cowards are; Fond in opinion, obstinately Wise, Fills the whole World with bus'ness and with noise. III. Where wert thou born? from what didst thou begin? And what strange Witchcraft brought thy Maxims in? What hardy Fool first taught thee to the Crowd? Or who the Duller Slaves that first believ'd? Some Woman sure, ill-natur'd, old, and proud, Too ugly ever to have been deceiv'd;
Unskill'd in Love; in Virtue, or in Truth, Preach'd thy false Notions first, and so debaucht our Youth IV. And as in other Sectuaries you find, His Votaries most consist of Womankind, Who Throng t' adore the necessary Evil, But most for fear, as Indians do the Devil. Peevish, un-easy all; for in Revenge, Love shoots 'em with a thousand Darts. They feel, but not confess the change; Their false Devotion cannot save their Hearts. Thus while the Idol Honour they obey, Swift time comes on, and blooming Charms decay, And Ruin'd Beauty does too late the Cheat betray. This Goblin here—the lovely Maid Alarms, And snatch'd her, even from my Trembling Arms,
With all the Pow'r of Non-sence he commands, Which she for mighty Reason understands. Aminta fly, he crys! fly heedless Maid, For if thou enter'st this Bewitching shade, Thy Flame, Content, and Lover, all are lost, And thou no more of Him, or Fame shall boast, The charming Pleasure soon the Youth will cloy, And what thou wouldst preserve, that will destroy. Oh hardy Maid by too much Love undone, Where are thy Modesty, and Blushes gone? Where's all that Virtue made thee so Ador'd? For Beauty stript of Virtue, grows abhorr'd: Dyes like a flower whose scent quick Poyson gives, Though every gawdy Glory paints its leaves: Oh fly, fond Maid, fly that false happiness, That will attend Thee in the Bower of Bliss. Thus spoke the Phantom, while the listening Maid, Took in the fatal Councel; and obey'd: Frighted she flys, even from the Temple door, And left me fainting on the sacred floor:
LOVE saw my Griefs, and to my rescue came, Where on his Bosom, thus I did complain. The LOSS. WEep, weep Lysander, for the lovely Maid, To whom thy sacred Vows were paid; Regardless of thy Love, thy Youth, thy Vows, The Dull Advice of Honour now pursues; Oh say my lovely Charmer, where Is all that softness gone? Your tender Voice and Eyes did were, VVhen first I was undone. Oh whether are your Sighs and Kisses fled? VVhere are those clasping Arms, That left me oft with Pleasures dead, VVith their Excess of Charms?
VVhere is the Killing Language of thy Tongue, That did the Ravisht Soul surprize? VVhere is that tender Rhetorick gone, That flow'd so softly in thy Eyes? That did thy heavenly face so sweetly dress, That did thy wonderous Soul so well express? All fled with Honour on a Phantom lost; Where Youth's vast store must perish unpossest. Ah my dear Boy thy loss with me bemoan, The lovely Fugitive is with Honour gone! Love laughing spread his Wings and mounting flies, As swift as Lightning through the yielding Skies, Where Honour bore away the Trembling Prize. There at her Feet the Little Charmer falls, And to his Aid his powerful softness calls: Assails her with his Tears, his Sighs and Crys, Th' unfailing Language of his Tongue and Eyes.
Return, said he, return oh fickle Maid, Who solid Joys abandon'st for a shade; Turn and behold the Slaughter of thy Eyes; See—the Heart-broken Youth all dying lyes. Why dost thou follow this Phantastick spright? This faithless Ignis Fatuus of the Light? This Foe to Youth, and Beauties worst Disease, Tyrant of Wit, of Pleasure, and of Ease; Of all substantial Harms he Author is, But never pays us back one solid Bliss. —You'l urge, your Fame is worth a thousand Joys; Deluded Maid, trust not to empty noise, A sound, that for a poor Esteem to gain, Damns thy whole Life t' uneasyness and pain. Mistaken Virgin, that which pleases me I cannot by another tast and see; And what's the complementing of the World to thee? No, no, return with me, and there receive, What poor, what scanted Honour cannot give,
Starve not those Charms that were for pleasure made, Nor unpossest let the rich Treasure fade. When time comes on; Honour that empty word, Will leave thee then fore-slighted Age to guard, Honour as other faithless Lovers are. Is only dealing with the young and fair; Approaching Age makes the false Hero fly, He's Honour with the Young, but with the old necessity. —Thus said the God! and all the while he spoke, Her Heart new Fire, her Eyes new softness took. Now crys, I yield, I yield the Victory! Lead on young Charming Boy, I follow thee; Lead to Lysander, quickly let's be gone, I am resolv'd to Love, and be undone; I must not, cannot, Love at cheaper rate, Love is the word, Lysander and my fate. Thus to my Arms Love brought the trembling Maid; Who on my Bosom sighing, softly, said:
Take charming Victor—what you must—subdue— 'Tis Love—and not Aminta gives it you, Love that o're all, and every part does reign, And I shou'd plead—and struggle—but in vain; Take what a yielding Virgin—can bestow, I am—dis-arm'd—of all resistance now.— Then down her Cheeks a tender shower did glide, The Trophies of my Victory, Joy, and Pride: She yields ye Gods (I cry'd) and in my Arms, Gives up the wonderous Treasure of her Charms. —Transported to the Bower of Bliss we high, But once more met Respect upon the way, But not as heretofore with Meen and Grace, All formal, but a gay and smiling Face; A different sort of Air his looks now wears, Galljard and Joyful every part appears. And thus he said— Go happy Lovers, perfect the desires, That fill two Hearts that burn with equal Fires;
Receive the mighty Recompence at last, Of all the Anxious hours you've past, Enter the Bower where endless Pleasures flow, Young Joys, new Raptures all the year, Respect has nothing now to do, He always leaves the Lover here. Young Loves attend and here supply all want, In secret Pleasures I'm no confident. Respect here left me: and He scarce was gone, But I perceiv''d a Woman hasting on, Naked she came; all lovely, and her Hair, Was loosely flying in the wanton Air: Love told me 'twas Occasion, and if I, The swift pac'd Maid shou'd pass neglected by. My Love, my Hopes, and Industry were vain, For she but rarely e're return'd again. I stopt her speed, and did implore her Aid, Which granted, she Aminta did perswade. Into the Palace of true Joys, to hast, And thither 'twas, we both arriv'd at last.
Oh Lysidas, no Mortal Sense affords, No Wit, no Eloquence can furnish Words; Fit for the soft Discription of the Bower, Some Love-blest God in the Triumphing hour, Can only guess, can only say what 'tis; Yet even that God but faintly wou'd express, Th' unbounded pleasures of the Bower of Bliss. A slight, a poor Idea may be given, Like that we fancy when we paint a Heav'n, As solid Christal, Diamonds, shining Gold, May fancy Light, that is not to be told. To vulgar Senses, Love like Heaven shou'd be (To make it more Ador'd) a Mystery: Eternal Powers! when ere I sing of Love, And the unworthy Song immortal prove; To please my wandering Ghost when I am Dead, Let none but Lovers the soft stories read; Praise from the Wits and Braves I'le not implore; Listen ye Lovers all, I ask no more;
That where Words fail, you may with thought supply, If ever any lov'd like me, or were so blest as I. The Prospect and Bower of Bliss. I. TIS all eternal Spring around, And all the Trees with fragrant flowers are Crown'd; No Clouds, no misty Showers obscure the Light, But all is calm, serene and gay, The Heavens are drest with a perpetual bright, And all the Earth with everlasting May. Each minute blows the Rose and Jesamine, And twines with new-born Eglantine, Each minute new Discoveries bring; Of something sweet, of something ravishing.
II. Fountains, wandering Brooks soft rills, That o're the wanton Pebbles play; And all the Woods with tender murmuring fills, Inspiring my Love inciting Joy; (The sole, the solemn business of the day) Through all the Groves, the Glades and thickets run, And nothing see but Love on all their Banks along; A thousand Flowers of different kinds, The neighbouring Meads adorn; Whose sweetness snatcht by flying Winds, O're all the Bow'r of Bliss is born; Whether all things in nature strive to bring, All that is soft, all that is ravishing. III. The verdant Banks no other Prints retain, But where young Lovers, and young Loves have lain. For Love has nothing here to do, But to be wanton, soft and gay,
And give a lavish loose to joy. His emptyed Quiver, and his Bow, In flowry Wreaths with rosy Garlands Crown'd, In Myrtle shades are hung, As Conquerors when the Victories won, Dispose their glorious Trophies all around. Soft Winds and Eccho's that do haunt each Grove, Still whisper, and repeat no other Songs than Love. Which round about the sacred Bower they sing, Where every thing arrives that's sweet and ravishing. IV. A thousand gloomy VValks the Bower contains, Sacred all to mighty Love; A thousand winding turns where Pleasure reigns; Obscur'd from day by twining Boughs above, Where Love invents a thousand Plays, Where Lovers act ten thousand Joys: Nature has taught each little Bird, A soft Example to afford;
They Bill and Look, and Sing and Love, And Charm the Air, and Charm the Grove; Whilst underneath the Ravisht Swain is lying, Gazing, Sighing, Pressing, Dying; Still with new desire warm'd, Still with new Joy, new Rapture charm'd; Amongst the green soft Rivulets do pass, In winding Streams half hid in Flowers and Grass, Who Purl and Murmur as they glide along, And mix their Musick with the Shepherds Pipe and Song, Which Eccho's through the sacred Bower repeat, Where every thing arrives that's ravishing and sweet. V. The Virgin here shows no disdain, Nor does the Shepherd Sigh in vain, This knows no Cruelty, nor that no Pain: No Youth complains upon his rigorous fair; No injur'd Maid upon her perjur'd dear, 'Tis only Love, fond Love finds entrance here;
The Notes of Birds, the Murmuring Boughs, VVhen gentle VVinds glide through the Glades, Soft Sighs of Love, and oft breath'd Vows, The tender VVhisperings of the yielding Maids, Dashing Fountains, Purling Springs, The short breath'd crys from faint resistance sent. (Crys which no aid desires or brings) The soft effects of Fear and Languishment; The little struggling of the fair, The trembling force of the young Conqueror, The tender Arguments he brings, The pretty Non-sence with which she assails, VVhich as she speaks, she hopes it nought prevails. But yielding owns her Love above her Reasonings, Is all is heard: Silence and shade the rest. VVhich best with Love, which best with Joys consist, All which young Eccho's through the Bower does sing, VVhere every thing is heard, that's sweet and ravishing.
VI. Recesses Dark, and Grotto's all conspire, To favour Love and soft desire; Shades, Springs and Fountains flowry Beds, To Joys invites, to Pleasure leads, To Pleasure which all Humane thought exceeds. Heav'n, Earth, and Sea, here all combine, To propagate Love's great design, And render the Appointments all Divine. After long toyl, 'tis here the Lover reaps, Transporting softnesses beyond his hopes; 'Tis here fair Eyes, all languishing impart The secrets of the fond inclining Heart; Fine Hands and Arms for tender Pressings made, In Love's dear business always are imploy'd: The soft Inchantments of the Tongue, That does all other Eloquence controul,
Is breath'd with broken Sighs among, Into the Ravish'd Shepherds Soul, VVhilst all is taken, all is given, That can compleat a Lovers Heav'n: And Io Peans through the VVoods do ring, From new fletch'd God, in Songs all Ravishing. Oh my dear Lysidas! my faithful Friend, Woud I cou'd here with all my Pleasures end: 'Twas Heaven! 'twas Extasie! each minute brought New Raptures to my Senses, Soul and Thought; Each Look, each Touch, my Ravisht fancy charm'd, Each Accent of her Voice my Blood Alarm'd; I pant with every Glance, faint with a Kiss, Oh Judge my Transports then in higher Bliss. A while all Dead, between her Arms I lay, Unable to possess the conquer'd Joys; But by degrees my Soul its sense retriev'd; Shame and Confusion let me know I liv'd.
I saw the trembling dis-appointed Maid, With charming angry Eyes my fault up-braid, While Love and Spight no kind Excuse affords, My Rage and Softness was above dull Words, And my Misfortune only was exprest, By Sighing out my Soul into her Brest: A thousand times I breath'd Aminta's name, Aminta! call'd! but that increas'd my flame. And as the Tide of Love flow'd in, so fast My Low, my Ebbing Vigor out did hast. But 'twas not long, thus idly, and undone I lay, before vast Seas came rowling on, Spring-tides of Joy, that the rich neighboring shoar And down the fragrant Banks it proudly bore, O're-flow'd and ravisht all great Natures store. Swoln to Luxurious heights, no bounds it knows, But wantonly it Triumphs where it flows. Some God inform Thee of my blest Estate, But all their Powers divert thee from my Fate.
'Twas thus we liv'd the wonder of the Groves, Fam'd for our Love, our mutual constant Loves. Young Amorous Hero's at her Feet did fall, Despair'd and dy'd, whilst I was Lord of All; Her Empire o're my Soul each moment grew, New Charms each minute did appear in view, And each appointment Ravishing and New. Fonder each hour my tender Heart became, And that which us'd t' allay, increas'd my Flame. But on a day, oh may no chearful Ray, Of the Sun's Light, bless that succeeding day! May the black hours from the account be torn, May no fair thing upon thy day be born! May fate and Hell appoint thee for their own, May no good deed be in thy Circle done! May Rapes, Conspiricies and Murders stay, Till thou com'st on, and hatch em in thy day! —'Twas on this day all Joyful Gay and Fair, Fond as desire, and wanton as the Air; Aminta did with me to the blest Bower repair.
Beneath a Beechy Shade, a flowry Bed, Officious Cupid's for our Pleasure spred, Where never did the Charmer ere impart, More Joy, more Rapture to my ravisht Heart: 'Twas all the first; 'twas all beginning Fire! 'Twas all new Love! new Pleasure! new Desire! —Here stop my Soul— Stop thy carreer of Vanity and Pride, And only say,—'Twas here Aminta dy'd: The fleeting Soul as quickly dis-appears, As leaves blown off with Winds, or falling Stars; And Life its flight assum'd with such a pace; It took no farewel of her lovely Face. The Fugitive not one Beauty did surprize, It scarce took time to languish in her Eyes, But on my Bosom bow'd her charming Head; And sighing, these surprizing words she said: "Joy of my Soul, my faithful tender Youth, Lord of my Vows, and Miracle of Truth:
Thou soft obliger-: of thy Sex the best, Thou blessing too Extream to be possest; The Angry God, designing we must part, Do render back the Treasure of thy Heart; When in some new fair Breast, it finds a room, And I shall ly-neglected-in my Tomb— Remember-oh remember-the fair she, Can never love thee, darling Youth, like me. Then with a Sigh she sunk into my Brest, While her fair Eyes, her last farewel exprest; To aiding God's I cry'd; but they were Deaf, And no kind pow'r afforded me relief: I call her name, I weep, I rave and faint, And none but Eccho's answer my Complaint; I Kiss and Bathe her stiffening Face with Tears, Press it to mine, as cold and pale as her's; The fading Roses of her Lips I press, But no kind Word the silenc'd Pratlers will confess; Her lovely Eyes I kiss, and call upon, But all their wonted answering Rhetorick's gone.
Her charming little Hands in vain I ask, Those little Hands no more my Neck shall grasp; No more about my Face her Fingers play, Nor brede my Hair, or the vain Curls display, No more her Tongue beguiling Stories tell, Whose wonderous Wit cou'd grace a Tale so well; All, all is fled, to Death's cold Mansion gone, And I am left benighted and undone, And every day my Fate is hasting on. From the inchanting Bower I madly fly, That Bower that now no more affords me Joy. Love had not left for me one Bliss in store, Since my Aminta cou'd dispence no more. —Thence to a silent Desert I advance, And call'd the Desert of Remembrance; A solitude upon a Mountain plac'd, All gloomy round, and wonderous high and vast, From whence Love's Island all appears in view, And distant Prospects renders near and true;
Each Bank, each Bower, each dear inviting Shade, That to our Sacred Loves was conscious made. Each flowry Bed, each Thicket and each Grove, Where I have lain Charm'd with Aminta's Love. (Where e're she chear'd the day, and blest the Night) Eternally are present to my Sight. Where e're I turn, the Landskip does confess, Something that calls to mind past happiness. This Lysidas, this is my wretched state, 'Tis here I languish, and attend my Fate. But e're I go, 'twou'd wonderous Pleasure be, (If such a thing can e're arrive to me) To find some Pity (Lysidas) from thee. Then I shou'd take the Wing, and upward fly, And loose the Sight of this dull World with Joy. Your Lysander.
LYCIDUS: OR THE Lover in Fashion. Being an Account from LYCIDUS to LYSANDER, Of his Voyage from the ISLAND of LOVE. From the French. By the same AUTHOR Of the Voyage to the Isle of LOVE. Together with a MISCELLANY OF New Poems. By Several HANDS. LONDON: Printed for Joseph Knight, and Francis Saunders, at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New-Exchange, 1688.
TO THE Earl of Melford, &c. KNIGHT Of the most Noble Order OF THE THISTLE. My LORD, THis Epistle Dedicatory which humbly lays this Little Volume at your Lordships feet, and begs a Protection there, is rather an Address
than a Dedication; to which a great many hands have subscrib'd, it Present∣ing your Lordship a Garland whose Flowers are cull'd by several Judgments in which I claim the least part; whose sole Ambition is this way to congra∣tulate your Lordships new A ddition of Honour, that of the Most Noble Order of the Thistle, an Honour which preced's that of the Garter, having been supported by a long Race of of Kings, and only fell with the most Illustrious of Queens, whose memory (which ought to be Establish'd, in all hearts can not be better preserv'd,) than by reviving this so Ancient Or∣der; well has His Majesty chosen its Noble Champions, among whom none merits more the Glory of that Royal Favor than your Lordship: whose
Loyalty to His Sacred Person and interest through all the adversities of Fate, has begot you so perfect a ve∣neration in all hearts, and is so pecu∣liarly the Innate vertue of your Great mind; a virtue not shewn by unrea∣sonable fits when it shall serve an end, (a false Bravery for a while when least needful, and thrown off when put to useful Tryal; like those who weigh∣ing Advantages by Probabilities only, and fancying the future to out-poyse the present, cast there their Anchor of Hope,) but a virtue built on so sure and steady Basis's of Honour, as nothing can move or shake; the Royal Interest being so greatly indeed the Property of Nobility, and so much even above life and Fortune: Especially when to support a Monarch so truly just, so
wise and great; a Monarch whom God Almighty Grant long to Reign over Us, and still to be serv'd by men of Principles so truly Brave, as those that shine in your Lordship. Pardon, my Lord, this Digression and the meanness of this Present, which to a Person of your Lordships great and weighty Employments in the world may seem Improper, if I did not know that the most Glorious of Statesmen must somtimes unbend from Great Af∣faires, and seek a diversion in trivial En∣tertainments: Though Poetry will Justle for the Preheminency of all others, and I know is not the least in the Esteem of your Lordship, who is so admira∣ble a Judg of it, if any thing here may
be found worthy the Patronage it Im∣plores, 'twill be a sufficient Honour to, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, most oblig'd, and obedient Servant, A. BEHN.
To Mrs. B. on her Poems. HAil, Beauteous Prophetess, in whom alone, Of all your sex Heav'ns master-piece is shewn. For wondrous skill it argues, wondrous care, Where two such Stars in firm conjunction are. A Brain so Glorious, and a Face so fair. Two Goddesses in your composure joyn'd, Nothing but Goddess cou'd, you're so refin'd, Bright Venus Body gave, Minerva Mind. How soft and fine your manly numbers flow, Soft as your Lips, and smooth as is your brow. Gentle as Air, bright as the Noon-days Sky, Clear as your skin, and charming as your Eye. No craggy Precipice the Prospect spoyles, The Eye no tedious barren plain beguiles.
But, like Thessalian Feilds your Volumes are, Rapture and charms o're all the soyl appear, Astrea and her verse are Tempe every where. Ah, more than Woman! more than man she is, As Phaebus bright; she's too, as Phaebus wise. The Muses to our sex perverse and coy Astrea do's familiarly enjoy. She do's their veiled Glorys understand, And what we court with pain, with ease command. Their charming secrets they expanded lay, Reserv'd to us, to her they all display. Upon her Pen a wait those learned Nine. She ne're but like the Phosph'rus draws a line, As soon as toucht her subjects clearly shine. The femal Laurels were obscur'd till now, And they deserv'd the Shades in which they grew: But Daphne at your call return's her flight, Looks boldly up and dares the God of light.
If we Orinda to your works compare, They uncouth, like her countrys soyle, appear, Mean as its Pesants, as its Mountains bare, Sappho tasts strongly of the sex, is weak and poor At second hand she russet Laurels wore, Yours are your own, a rich and verdant store. If Loves the Theme, you outdo Ovids Art, Loves God himself can't subtiller skill impart. Softer than's plumes, more piercing than his Dart. If Pastoral be her Song, she glads the Swains With Livelier notes, with spritelier smiles the plains. More gayly than the Springs she decks the Bowrs And breaths a second May to Fields and Flowrs. If e're the golden Age again return And flash in shining Beames from's Iron Urn, That Age not as it was before shall be, But as th' Idea is refin'd by thee. That seems the common; thines the Elixir, Gold, So pure is thine, and so allay'd the old.
Happy, ye Bards, by fair Astrea prais'd, If you'r alive, to brighter life you're rais'd; For cherisht by her Beames you'l loftyer grow, You must your former learned selves outdo, Thô you'd the parts of Thirsis and of Strephon too. Hail, mighty Prophetess! by whom we see Omnipotence almost in Poetry: Your flame can give to Graves Promethean fire, And Greenhills clay with living paint inspire; For like some Mystick wand with awful Eyes You wave your Pen, and lo the dead Arise. Kendrick.
Advertisement TO THE READER. WHereas Mr. Higden, at the end of his Translation of the Tenth Satyr of Juvenal, has Printed a paper of Verses, entitul'd Cato's Answer to Labienus &c. without the Author's consent or know∣ledge; and either he or the Printer has so alter'd'em, that the Author cannot own 'em for his: This is to let the World know, that that Copy so Printed by Mr. Higden, is false almost in every line, and that here is in this Miscellany a true Copy of the same Verses printed with the Author's consent, from the Original paper writ in his own hand, and corrected by him at the Press.
Licensed, May 13. 1687. R. L. S.
LYCIDUS: OR, THE Lover in Fashion, &c. I Have receiv'd your melancholy Epistle, with the Account of your Voyage to the Island of Love; of your Adventures there, and the Rela∣tion of the death of your Aminta: At which you shall forgive me if I tell you I am neither surpris'd nor griev'd, but hope to see you the next Cam∣pagne, as absolutely reduc'd to reason as myself. When Love, that has so long deprived you of Glory; shall give you no more Sighs but at the short remembrances of past Pleasures; and that af∣ter you have heard my Account of the Voyage I made to the same place, with my more lucky one back again, (for I, since I saw you, have been an Adventurer) you will by my Example become of my Opinion, (notwithstanding yourdismal Tales of Death and the eternal Shades,) which is, that if there be nothing that will lay me in my Tomb till Love brings me thither, I shall live to Eter∣nity.
I must confess 'tis a great Inducement to Love, and a happy Advance to an Amour, to be handsom, finely shap'd, and to have a great deal of Wit; these are Charms that subdue the Hearts of all the Fair: And one sees but very few Ladies, that can resist these good Qualities, especially in an Age so gallant as ours, yet all this is nothing if Fortune do not smile: And I have seen a Man handsom, well shap'd, and of a great deal of Wit, with the ad∣vantage of a thousand happy Adventures, yet finds himself in the end, fitter for an Hospital than the Elevation of Fortune: And the Women are not contented we should give them as much Love as they give us, (which is but reasonable,) but they would compel us all to Present and Treat 'em lavishly, till a Man hath consumed both Estate and Body in their Service. How many do we see, that are wretched Examples of this Truth, and who have nothing of all they enjoyed remaining with 'em, but a poor Idaea of past Pleasures, when rather the Injury the Jilt has done 'em, ought to be eternally present with 'em. Heaven keep me from being a Woman's Property. There are Cullies enough besides you or I, Lysander. One would think now, That I, who can talk thus Learnedly and Gravely, had never been any of the number of those wretched, whining, sigh∣ing, dying Fops, I speak of, never been jilted and cozen'd of both my Heart and Reason; but let me tell those that think so, they are mistaken, and that all this Wisdom and Discretion, I now seem replenish'd with, I have as dearly bought as
any keeping Fool of 'em all. I was ly'd and flatter∣ed into Wit, jilted and cozen'd into Prudence, and, by ten thousand broken Vows and perjured Oaths, reduced to Sense again; and can laugh at all my past Follies now. After I have told you this, you may guess at a great part of my Story; which, in short, is this: I would needs make a Voyage, as you did, to this fortunate Isle, and accompanyed with abundance of young Heirs, Cadets, Coxcombs, Wits, Block∣heads, and Politicians, with a whole Cargo of Cullies all, nameless and numberless we Landed on the Inchanted Ground; the first I saw, and lik'd, was charming Silvia; you believe I thought her fair as Angels; young, as the Spring, and sweet as all the Flowers the blooming Fields produce; that when she blush'd, the Ruddy Morning open'd, the Rose-buds blew, and all the Pinks and Dazies spread; that when she sigh'd or breath'd, Arabia's Spices, driven by gentle Winds, perfum'd all around; that when she look'd on me, all Heaven was open'd in her Azure Eyes, from whence Love shot a thousand pointed Darts, and wounded me all over; that when she spoke, the Musick of the Spheres, all that was ravishing in Harmony, blest the Adoring Listener; that when she walk'd, Venus in the Mirtle Grove when she advanc'd to meet her lov'd Adonis, assuming all the Grace young Loves cou'd give, had not so much of Ma∣jesty as Silvia: In fine, she did deserve, and I com∣pared her to all the Fopperies, the Suns, the Stars, the Coral, and the Pearl, the Roses and Lillies,
Angels Spheres, and Goddesses, fond Lovers dress their Idols in. For she was all, fancy and fine ima∣gination could adorn her with, at least, the gazing Puppy thought so. 'Twas such I saw and lov'd; but knowing I did Adore, I made my humble Court, and she, by all my trembling, sighings, pantings, the going and returning of my Blood, found all my Weakness and her own Power; and using all the Arts of her Sex, both to ingage and secure me, play'd all the Woman over: She wou'd be scornful and kind by turns, as she saw conve∣nient, This to check my Presumption and too ea∣sy hope; That to preserve me from the brink of despair. Thus was I tost in the Blanket of Love, somtimes up, and somtimes down, as her Wit and Humor was in or out of tune, all which I watch'd, and waited like a Dog, that still the oftner kick'd wou'd fawn the more. Oh, 'tis an excellent Art this managing of a Coxcomb, the Serpent first taught it our Gran∣dam Eve; and Adam was the first kind Cully: E're since they have kept their Empire over Men, and we have, e're since, been Slaves. But I, the most submissive of the whole Creation, was long in gaining Grace; she used me as she meant to keep me, Fool enough for her Purpose. She saw me young enough to do her Service, handsom enough to do her Credit, and Fortune enough to please her Vanity and Interest: She therefore suffer'd me to Love, and Bow among the Crowd, and fill her Train. She gave me hope enough to secure me too, but gave me nothing else, till she saw me lan∣guish
to that degree, she feared, to lose the Glory of my Services, by my death; only this Pleasure kept me alive, to see her treat all my Rivals with the greatest Rigour imaginable, and to me all sweet∣ness, exposing their feblesses; and having taken No∣tice of my Languishment, she suffered me Freedoms that wholely Ravish'd me, and gave me hopes I shou'd not be long a dying for all she cou'd give. But, since I have a great deal to say of my Ad∣ventures in passing out of this Island of Love: I will be as brief as I can in what arrived to me on the Place; and tell you, That after Ten thousand Vows of eternal Love on both sides, I had the Joy, not only to be believ'd and lov'd, but to have her put herself into my Possession, far from all my Ri∣vals: Where, for some time I lived with this char∣ming Maid, in all the Raptures of Pleasure, Youth, Beauty, and Love could create. Eternally we loved, and lived together, no day nor night sepa∣rated us, no Frowns interrupted our Smiles, no Clouds our Sun-shine; the Island was all perpetu∣al Spring, still flowery and green, in Bowers, in Shades, by purling Springs and Fountains, we past our hours, unwearied and uninterrupted. I cannot express to you the happy Life I led, during this blessed Tranquility of Love, while Silvia still was pleased, and still was gay. We walked all day together in the Groves, and entertained ourselves with a thousand Stories of Love; we laught at the foolish World, who could not make their Felicity with out Crowds and Noise: We pittied Kings in Courts in this Retirement, so well
we liked our Solitude; till on a day, (blest be that joyful day, though then 'twas most a-curst,) I say upon that day, I know not by what accident I was parted from my Charmer, and left her all alone, but in my absence, there incountred her a Woman extremely ugly, and who was however very nice and peevish, inconstant in her temper, and no one place could continue her: The finest things in the World were troublesom to her, and she was Shagreen at every thing; her Name is Indifference; she is a Person of very great Power in this Island, (though possibly you never incoun∣tred her there,) and those that follow her, de∣part from the Isle of Love without any great pains. She brought Silvia to the Lake of Disgust, whe∣ther, in persuing her (at my return,) I found her, ready to take Boat to have past quite away, and where there are but too many to transport those Passengers, who follow Indifference over the Lake of Disgust. I saw this disagreeable Creature too, but she appeared too ugly for me to approach her, but forcing Silvia back, I returned again to the Palace of True Pleasure, where some days after there ar∣rived to me a Misfortune, of which, I believed I should never have seen an end. I found Silvia in∣viron'd round with new Lovers, still adoring and pleasing her a thousand ways, and though none of 'em were so rich, so young, or so handsom as I, she nevertheless failed not to treat 'em with all the Smiles and Caresses 'twas possible to imagin; when I complain'd of this, she would satisfy my fears with so many Vows and Imprecations, that I
would believe her, and think myself unreasona∣ble, but when she would be absent whole days, in an hundred places, she would find such probable Excuse, and lye with such a Grace, no mortal cou'd have accused her, so that all the whole Island took notice that I was a baffled Cuckold, be∣fore I could believe she would deceive me, so hear∣tily she damn'd herself: Through all the Groves I was the pointed Coxcomb, laught at aloud, and knew not where the jest lay; but thought myself as secure in the Innocence of my deceiving fair One, as the first hour I Charmed her, and like a keeping Cully, lavish'd out my Fortune, my plenteous Fortune, to make her fine to Cuckold me. 'Sdeath! how I scorn the Follies of my Do∣tage; and am resolv'd to persue Love for the fu∣ture, in such a manner as it shall never cost me a Sigh: This shall be my method. A Constancy in Love I'll prise, And be to Beauty true: And doat on all the lovely Eyes, That are but fair and new. On Cloris Charms to day I'll feed, To morrow Daphne move; For bright Lucinda next I'll bleed, And still be true to Love.
But Glory only and Renown My serious hours shall charm; My Nobler Minutes those shall Crown, My looser hours, my Flame. All the Fatigues of Love I'll hate, And Phillis's new Charms That hopeless Fire shall dissipate, My Heart for Cloe warms. The easie Nymph I once enjoy'd Neglected now shall pass, Possession, that has Love destroy'd Shall make me pitiless. In vain she now attracts and mourns, Her moving Power is gone, Too late (when once enjoy'd,) she burns, And yeilding, is undone. My Friend, the little charming Boy Conforms to my desires,
And 'tis but to augment my Joy He pains me with his Fires; All that's in happy Love I'll tast, And rifle all his store, And for one Joy, that will not last, He brings a thousand more. Perhaps, my Friend, at this Account of my Hu∣mor you may smile, but with a reasonable consi∣deration you will commend it, at least, though you are not so wise as to persue my Dictates. Yet I know you will be diverted with my Adventures; though there be no love in 'em that can resemble 'em to yours. Take then the History of my Heart, which I assure you, boasts itself of the Conquests it has made. A thousand Martyrs I have made, All sacrific'd to my desire: A thousand Beauties have betray'd, That languish in resistless Fire. The untam'd Heart to hand I brought, And fixt the wild and wandring Thought.
I never vow'd nor sigh'd in vain But both, thô false, were well receiv'd. The Fair are pleas'd to give us pain, And what they wish is soon believ'd. And thô I talk'd of Wounds and Smart, Loves Pleasures only toucht my Heart. Alone the Glory and the Spoil I always Laughing bore away; The Triumphs, without Pain or Toil, Without the Hell, the Heav'n of Joy. And while I thus at random rove Despise the Fools that whine for Love. I was a great while, (like you,) before I for∣got the remembrance of my first Languishments, and I almost thought, (by an excess of Melancho∣ly,) that the end of my Misfortunes were with my Life at hand: Yet still like a fond Slave, willing to drag my Fetterson, I hop'd she would find Argu∣ments to convince me she was not false; and in that Humor, fear'd only I should not be handsomly and neatly jilted. Could she but have dissembled well, I had been still her Cully. Could she have play'd her Game with discretion, but, vain of her
Conquest, she boasted it to all the World, and I alone was the kind keeping Blockhead, to whom 'twas unperceived, so well she swore me into be∣lief of her Truth to me. Till one day, lying un∣der a solitary Shade, with my sad Thoughts fixt on my declining Happiness, and almost drown'd in Tears, I saw a Woman drest in glorious Gar∣ments, all loose and flowing with the wind, scour∣ing the Fields and Groves with such a pace, as Ve∣nus, when she heard her lov'd Youth was slain, hasted to behold her ruin. She past me, as I lay, with an unexpressable swiftness, and spoke as she run, with a loud Voice. At her first approach, I felt a strange trembling at my Heart without knowing the reason, and found at last this Woman was Fame. Yet I was not able to tell from whence proceeded my Inquietude: When her Words made me but too well understand the Cause: The fatal Subject of what she cry'd, in passing by me, were these; Poor Lycidus for shame arise, And wipe Loves Errors from thy Eyes; Shake off the God that holds thy Heart; Since Silvia for another burns, And all thy past Indurement scorns While thou the Cully art.
I believed, as she spoke, that I had ill under∣stood her, but she repeated it so often, that I no longer doubted my wretchedness. I leave you, who so well can guess, to imagin, what Complaints I made, filling the Grove, where I was laid, with my pitious Cries; somtimes I rose and raved, and rail'd on Love, and reproached the fair Fugitive. But the tender God was still pleading in my Heart, and made me ever end my noisy Griefs in Sighs and silent Tears. A thousand Thoughts of revenge I entertained against this happy Rival, and the char∣ming ingrate: But those Thoughts, like my Rage, would also end in soft reproaching murmurs and re∣gret only. And I would somtimes argue with Love in this manner. Ah, cruel Love! when will thy Torments cease? And when shall I have leave to dye in Peace? And why, too charming and too cruel Maid, Cou'd'st thou not yet thy fleeting Heart have stay'd? And by degrees thy fickle Humor shewn, By turns the Enemy and Friend put on: Have us'd my Heart a little to thy scorn, The loss at least might have been easier born.
With feigned Vows, (that poor Expence of Breath,) Alas thou might'st have sooth'd me to my death. Thy Coldness, and thy visible decays In time had put a period to my days. And lay'd me quietly into my Tomb, Before thy proof of Perjuries had come. You might have waited yet a little space And sav'd mine, and thy, Honour this disgrace; Alas I languish'd and declin'd apace. I lov'd my Life too eagerly away To have disturb'd thee with too long a stay. Ah! cou'd you not my dying Heart have fed With some small Cordial Food, till I was dead? Then uncontroul'd, and unreproach'd your Charms Might have been render'd to my Rival's Arms. Then all my right to him you might impart, And Triumph'd o're a true and broken Heart.
Though I complained thus for a good while, was not without some secret hope, that what I had heard was not true; nor would I be persuaded to undeceive myself of that hope which was so dear and precious to me. I was not willing to be con∣vinced I was intirely miserable, out of too great a fear to find it true; and there were some Moments in which I believed Fame might falsly accuse Silvia, and it did not seem reasonable to me, that, after all the Vows and Oaths she had made, she should so easily betray 'em, and forgetting my Services, receive those of another, less capable of rendring them to her advantage. Somtimes I would excuse her ungratitude with a thousand things that seem'd reasonable, but still that was but to make me more sensible of my disgrace; and then I would accuse myself of a thousand weaknesses below the Cha∣racter of a Man; I would even despise and loath my own easiness, and resolve to be no longer a Mark-out-fool for all the Rhiming Wits of the Island to aim their Dogrel at. And grown, as I imagined, brave at this thought, I resolved first to be fully convinced of the perfidy of my Mistress, and then to rent my Heart from the attachment that held it. You know, that from the Desart of Remembrance, one does, with great facility, look over all the Island of Love. I was resolved to go thither one day; and where indeed I could survey all things that past, in the Groves, the Bowers, by Rivers, or Fountains, or whatever other place, remote or ob∣scure 'twas from thence, that one day I saw the faithless Silvia, in the Palace of True Pleasure, in
the very Bower of Bliss with one of my Rivals, but most intimate Friend. 'Twas there, I saw my Rival take Pleasures, he knew how to make; There he took, and there was given, All the Joys that Rival Heaven; Kneeling at her Feet he lay, And in transports dy'd away: Where the faithless suffer'd too All the amorous Youth cou'd do. The Ardour of his fierce desire Set his Face and Eyes on fire. All their Language was the Blisses Of Ten thousand eager Kisses. While his ravish'd Neck she twin'd And to his Kisses, Kisses join'd. Till, both inflam'd, she yeilded so She suffer'd all the Youth cou'd do.
In fine, 'twas there I saw that I must lose the day. And I saw in this Lover Ten thousand Charms of Youth and Beauty; on which the ingrate with greedy languishing Eyes, eternally gazed with the same Joy she used to behold me when she made me most happy. I confess, this Object was so far from pleasing me, (as I believed a confirmation would,) that the change inspired me with a rage, which nothing else could do, and made me say things unbecoming the Dignity of my Sex, who ought to disdain those faithless Slaves, which Hea∣ven first made to obey the Lords of the Creation. A thousand times I was about to have rush'd upon 'em, and have ended the Lives of the loose betray∣ers of my repose, but Love stepp'd in and stay'd my hand, preventing me from an Outrage, that would have cost me that rest of Honour, I yet had left: But when my rage was abated, I fell to a more in∣supportable Torment, that of extream Grief to find another possest of what I had been so long, and with so much Toil in gaining: 'Twas thus I re∣tir'd, and after a little while brought myself to make calm Reflections upon this Adventure, which reduced me to some reason. When one day as I was walking in an unfrequented Shade, whither my Melancholy had conducted me, I incountred a Man, of a hauty look and meen, his Apparel rich and glorious, his Eyes awful, and his Stature tall; the very sight of him inspired me with coldness, which render'd me almost insensible of the infidelity of Silvia. This Person was Pride, who looking on me, as he past, with a fierce and disdainful Smile,
over his Shoulder, and regarding me with scorn, said; Why shou'd that faithless wanton give Thy Heart so mortal pain, Whose Sighs were only to deceive, Her Oaths all false and vain? Despise those Tears thou shedd'st for her, Disdain to sigh her Name. To Love, thy Liberty prefer; To faithless Silvia, Fame. I knew by his words he was Pride, or Dis∣dain, and would have embraced him; but he put me off seeing Love still by me, who had not yet abandoned me, and turned himself from me with a regardless scorn, but I, who was resol∣ved not to forsake so discreet a Counsellor, rather chose to take my leave of little Love; who had ever accompanyed me in this Voyage. But oh! this adieu was not taken so easily and soon as I ima∣gined. Love was not to be quitted without abun∣dance of Sighs and Tears at parting, he had been a Witness to all my Adventures, my Confident in this Amour, and not to be deserted without a great deal of pain; I stayed so long in bidding the dear Boy adieu, that I had almost forgot Disdain; at last, though my Heart were breaking to part with the dear fondling, I was resolved and said;
Farewel, my little charming Boy! Farewel, my fond delight, My dear Instructer all the day, My soft repose at night. Thou, whom my Soul has so carest, And my poor Heart has held so fast, Thou never left me in my pain, Nor in my happier hours; Thou eas'd me when I did complain, And dry'd my falling showrs. When Silvia frown'd still thou woud'st smile, And all my Cares and Griefs beguile. But Silvia's gone, and I have torn Her Witchcrafts from my Heart; And nobly fortify'd by scorn Her Empire will subvert; Thy Laws establish'd there destroy, And bid adieu to the dear charming Boy.
In quitting Love I was a great while before I could find Disdain, but I, at last, overtook him: He accompanyed me to a Village, where I received a Joy I had not known since my Arrival to the Isle of Love, and which Repose seemed the sweeter be∣cause it was new. When I came to this place, I saw all the World Easie, Idle, and at Liberty: This Village is like a Desart, and all the Inhabitants live within themselves, there is only one Gate, by which we enter into it from the Isle of Love. This place is called Indifference, and takes its Name from a Princess inhabiting there, a Person very fair and well made; but has a Grace and Meen of so little Wit, and seems so inutile and so silly, that it renders her even ridiculous. As soon as I arrived there, I called to my remembrance all those affronts and cheats of Love, that Silvia had put upon me, and which now served for my diversion, and were agreeable thoughts to me; so that I called myself Ten thousand Sots and Fools for resenting 'em; and that I did not heartily despise 'em, laugh at 'em, and make my Pleasure with the false One as well as the rest; for she dissembled well, and for ought I knew, 'twas but dissembled Love she paid my Rivals. But I, forsooth, was too nice a Coxcomb, I cou'd not feed as others did, and be contented with such Pleasures as she cou'd afford, but I must ingross all, and unreasonably believe a Woman of Youth and Wit had not a longer Race of Love to run than to my Arms alone. Well, 'tis now confest I was a Fool, nor could I hinder my∣self from saying a thousand times a day;
That Coxcomb can ne're be at ease, While Beauty inslaves his Soul. 'Tis Liberty only can please, And he that's Fetter'd is an Owl. I found it very convenient and happy to disin∣gage from Love, and I have wondred a thousand times at the Follies that God has made me commit: And though I somtimes thought on Silvia, I thought her less charming and fair than she was be∣fore her fall; and the Humour I now was in re∣presented her no more meriting that Passion I once had for her, and I fancied she had lost all those Gra∣ces for which once I lov'd her: In fine, I was so wholly recovered of my disease of Love for Silvia, that I began to be uneasie for want of imploying my Ad∣dresses; and a change from so violent a Passion to such a degree of coldness, became insupporta∣ble to one of my Youth and natural Gayety; in∣somuch, that I was seized with a Dulness, or Lan∣guishment, and so great a fit of Melancholy, as I had never felt the like; and my Heart, that was so accustomed to Love, was so out of Humour, that it had no Object or Business for thought, that it lost all its Harmony and Wit; it having nothing to excite it to Life and Motion, passing from so vast a degree of tenderness to an unconcern equally ex∣tream. I thought it rude, ill-bred, and idle, to live so indifferent and insignificant a Life. And
walking perpetually by myself, (or with those of my own Sex, that could not make my diversion,) I sung all day this following Song to a Hum-drum Tune, to myself; Not to sigh and to be tender, Not to talk and prattle Love, Is a Life no good can render, And insipidly does move: Unconcern do's Life destroy, Which, without Love, can know no Joy. Life, without adoring Beauty, Will be useless all the day; Love's a part of Human Duty, And 'tis Pleasure to obey. In vain the Gods did Life bestow, Where kinder Love has nought to do. What is Life, but soft desires, And that Soul, that is not made To entertain what Love inspires, Oh thou dull immortal Shade?
Thou'dst better part with Flesh and Blood, Than be, where Life's not understood. These were my notions of Life; and I found myself altogether useless in the World without Love; methought I had nothing to animate me to Gallant things, without Love, or Women: I had no use of Wit or Youth without the fair, and yet I did not wish wholly to ingage myself neither a second time, having been so ill-treated before by Love: But I found there were ways to enter∣tain one's self agreeably enough without dying or venturing the breaking of a heart for the matter: That there were Beauties to be obtained without the hazard of hanging or drowning one's self: I never had tryed, but I found it natural enough to my Humour and Constitution, to flatter and dissemble, swear and lye; I viewed my self in my Glass, and found myself very well recovered from the Ruins my first Amour had made, and believed myself as fit for Conquest, as any Sir Fopling, or Sir Courtly Nice of 'em all. To this fine Person and good Meen and Shape, (as I thought,) I ad∣ded handsom Dressing, the thing that takes the Heart infinitely above all your other Parts, and thus set out a snare for vain Beauty; I every day went out of the City of Indifference, to see what new Adventures I could meet withal. One day I incountred a Woman, who, at first sight appeared very agreeable; she had an Air ea∣sie,
free, and Galliard; such as fails not to take at first view: This was Coquettre, who, the very first time she saw me, Addrest herself to me with very great Complisance and good Humour, and invited me to her Apartment, where she assured me I should not fail to be entertained very agreeably; and at the same time pulling out of her Pocket a Paper, she shewed me these Words written; Let Love no more your Heart inspire, Thô Beauty every hour you see; Pass no farther than desire, If you'll truly happy be. Every day fresh Objects view, And for all have Complisance. Search all places still for new, And to all make some Advance; For where Wit and Youth agree, There's no Life like Gallantry. Laura's Heart you may receive, And tomorrow Julia's prise: Take what young Diana gives, Pity Lucia when she dies:
Portia's Face you must admire, And to Clorin's Shape submit. Phillis Dancing gives you Fire, Celia's Softness, Clara's Wit. Thus all at once you may persue, 'Tis too little to Love two. The powerful smiling God of Hearts So much tenderness imparts, You must upon his Altars lay A thousand Offerings every day: And so soft is kind desire; Oh! so Charming is the Fire, That if nice Adraste scorns, Gentler Ariadne burns. Still Another keep in play (If One refuse,) to give you Joy. Cease therefore to disturb your Hours, For having two desires A Heart can manage two Amours. And burn with several Fires.
The day has hours enough in store To visit two or half a score. I gave her thanks for her good Counsel, and found I needed not much persuasion to follow Co∣quettre to a City that bears her Name, and I saw over the Gate of the City at my Entrance, these Verses writ in Gold Letters; The God of Love beholding every day Slaves from his Empire to depart away; (For Hearts that have been once with Love fatigu'd, A second time are ne'r again intrigu'd: No second Beauty e'r can move The Soul to that degree of Love.) This City built, that we might still obey, Thô we refus'd his Arbitrary Sway: 'Tis here we find a grateful Recompence For all Loves former Violence; Tir'd with his Laws we hither come To meet a kinder softer doom.
'Tis here the God, without the Tyrant, Reigns, And Laws agreeable ordains; Here 'tis with Reason and with Wit he Rules, And whining Passion Ridicules. No check or bound to Nature gives, But kind desire rewarded thrives. Peevish uneasy Pride, the God Has banish'd from the blest abode: All Jealousies, all Quarrels cease, And here Love lives in perfect Peace. This agreeable description, gave me new desire to enter into the City; where I incountred a thou∣sand fine Persons all gloriously drest, as if they were purposely set out for Conquest: There was nothing omitted of Cost and Gallantry, that might render 'em intirely Charming, and they employ'd all their Arts of Looks and Dress to gain Hearts. It is, in a word, from these fair Creatures you are to draw your Satisfaction, and 'tis indeed at a dear rate you buy it, yet, notwithstanding the Ex∣pence, a world of People persue 'em. When I came into the City, I was soon percei∣ved to be a Stranger there, and while I was consi∣dering whither I should go, or how to address my∣self
to these fair Creatures, a little Coquett Cupid presented himself to me for a kind Instructer; and to explain him, this in a word is his Character: He is of the same Race with the other Cupids, has the same Mother too, Venus: He wears a Bow and Arrows, like the rest of the young Loves; but he has no Bando, nothing to cover his Eyes, but he sees perfectly; nor has he any Flambeau: And all the Laws of Coquettre he understands and observes exactly. I had no sooner received the little Charming God, but he instructed me in all the most power∣ful Arts to please, in all his little wiles and agreea∣ble deceits; all which he admits of as the most ne∣cessary Recourses to that great end of Man, his true diversion: With all which I was so extreamly plea∣sed, that resolving to be his Votary, I followed him to the most delightful place in the World, the City of Gallantry. Gallantry is a City very magnificent; at the En∣trance of the Gate you incounter Liberality, a Wo∣man of great Wit, delicate Coversation and Com∣plisance: This Lady gives her Pasport to all that enter, and without which, you cannot pass, or at least, with great difficulty; and then too you pass your time but very ill; and the more Pasports you have, the better you are received from the fair In∣habitants, and pass your time more agreeable with the fine Conversation you meet with in this City. Love told me this, and it was therefore that I took a great many Pasports from this acceptable Person Liberality. But what renders you yet more Fa∣voured
by the Fair and the Young who reside at Gallantry, is, to have a delicate soft Wit, an assi∣duous Address and a tender way of Conversing; but that which best cullies and pleases the Genera∣lity of People there, is Liberality and Complisance: This place of so great Divertisement is refrequen∣ted with all the Parties of the best and most amia∣able Company, where they invent a thousand new Pleasures every day; Feasting, Balls, Comedies, and Sports, Singing and Serinads, are what em∣ploys the whole Four and twenty hours. By the Virtue of my Pasports from Liberality, I was introduced to all the fine Conversations and Places that afford Pleasure and Delight: I had the good Fortune to make Parties, insomuch, that I was soon known to all the Company in the City, and past the day in Feasting, going with the Young and Fair to delightful Villa's, Gardens, or Rivers in Chaces, and a thousand things that pleas'd; and the Nights I passed in Serinading, so that I did not give myself time for Melancholy; and yet for all this I was wearied and fatigued; for when once one has tasted of the Pleasure of Loving and being Beloved, all, that comes after that, is but flat and dull; and if one's Heart be not a little inflamed, all things else are insignificant, and make but very slight touches. I began therefore for all this to be extreamly Sha∣green and out of Humour, amid'st all these Pleasures, till one lucky day I met with an Adventure, that war∣med my Heart with a tender flame which it had not felt since my happy beginning one for Silvia: One
day, as I said, I was conducted by my officious Cupid into a Garden very beautiful, where there are a thousand Labyrinths and Arbours, Walks, Grot∣to's, Groves and Thickets; and where all the Fair and the Gay resorted; 'twas here I incountred a young Beauty called Bellinda; she was well made, and had an admirable meen, an Air of Gayety and Sweetness; but that which charmed me most of all, was her Wit, which was too ingaging for me to defend my Heart against: I found mine immedi∣ately submitting to her Conversation, and you may imagine I did not part with her so long as De∣cency and good Manners permitted me to stay with her, which was as long as any Company was in the place; nor then, till by my importunity I had gained so much upon her to suffer my Visits, which she did with a Condescention that gave me abun∣dance of hope. I was no sooner gone, but my Cupid, who took care of me, and entertained me to the best Advan∣tage, carryed me that Evening to a Ball, where there were a world of Beauties, among the rest one fair as imagination can conceive; she had all the Charmes of Youth and Beauty; though not so much Wit and Air as Bellinda. To this young ado∣rable I made my Court all the time I remained there, and fancied I never found myself so Charm∣ed, I fancied all the Graces had taken up their dwelling in her Divine Face; and that to subdue one so fair and so innocent, must needs be an ex∣tream Pleasure: Yet did I not so wholly fix my de∣sires on this lovely Person, but that the Wit of
Bellinda shared my Heart with the Beauty and Youth of Bellimante, so was this young Charmer called: I was extreamly well pleas'd to find I could a-new take fire; and infinitely more, when I found I should not be subdued by one alone; nor con∣fined to dull Dotage on a single Beauty; but that I was able to attain to the greatest Pleasure, that of Loving two amiable Persons at once: If with two, I hoped I might with Two score if I pleas'd and had occasion; and though at first it seemed to be very strange and improbable to feel a Passion for two, yet I found it true, and could not determin which I had the greatest tenderness for, or inclina∣tion to: But 'tis most certain, that this Night I found, or thought I found, more for Bellimante, who fired me with every Smile; I confess she wan∣ted that Gayety of Spirit Bellinda had, to main∣tain that fire she raised: And ever when I was thoughtful a moment, Coquettre (who is ever in all the Conversation, and where she appears very magnificent and with a great Train,) would, smi∣ling, sing softly in my Ear this Song, for she is ve∣ry Galliard; Cease to defend your Amorous Heart, Against a double flame; Where two may claim an equal Part Without reproach or shame.
'Tis Love that makes Life's happiness, And he that best wou'd live By Love alone must Life caress, And all his Darts receive. Coquettre is a Person, that endeavours to please and humour every Body, but of all those who eve∣ry day fill her Train, she caresses none with that Ad∣dress and Assiduity as she did me, for I was a new Face, to whom she is ever most obliging and en∣tertaining. However, notwithstanding the Advice of Coquettre, I fancied this young Charmer had in∣gaged all my Soul; and while I gazed on her Beauty, I thought on Bellinda no more; but be∣lieved I should wholly devote myself to Bellimante, whose Eyes alone seemed capable to inflame me. I took my leave with Sighs, and went home extream well pleas'd with this days Adventure. All this Night I slept as well as if no tenderness had toucht my Heart, and though I Lov'd infinitely, it gave me no disturbance; the next morning a thou∣sand pleasant things Bellinda had said to me, came into my mind, and gave me a new inclination to en∣tertain myself with that witty Beauty; and dres∣sing myself in haste with the desire I had to be with her, I went again, the morning being very invi∣ting, to the Garden, where before I had seen her, and was so lucky to encounter her; I found her blush at my approach; which I counted a good
O men of my future happiness; she received me with all the Gayety and Joy good liking and Wit could inspire: Nor was I backward on my part, but addrest myself to her with all imaginable res∣pect, and as much Love in my Eyes as I was able to put on; which, I found, she saw with Pleasure; she had not entertained me half an hour, but I was so absolutely charmed, that I forgot there was a Bellaminte in the World. Thus for several days I lived; every day visit∣ing both these attracting Beauties, and at Night, when I was retired, was not able to inform myself which I liked best: Both were equally beloved, and it was now, that methought I began to tast of true Joy; I found myself in Love without any sort of inquietude, when I was Melancholy, I went to visit Bellinda, and she with her Gayety and Wit would inspire me with good Humour; If I were over-prest with good Company, and too much Conversation and Noise, I would visit Belli∣mante, who by a certain softness in her discourse, and a natural Languishment in her Eyes and Manners, charmed and calmed me to a reposed tranquillity; so that to make me fortunate in Love, I could not have fixed my desires better: I had too little Love to be wretched, and enough to make my happiness and Pleasure. After I had past my time a while thus in Coquet∣tre, this little Love, who was my Guide, carried me to Declaration: I thought then upon the time of my first Arrival on the Isle of Love; and how Respect, that awful hinderer of our Pleasure, pre∣vented
me from going to this Place: I urg'd this very argument Respect then made me, to my Coquet Love now, who for answer return'd me nothing but loud Laughter; and when I askt his reason, he replyd, that Respect did not forbid any to go to Declaration, but those only who knew not how to behave themselves well there, and who were not so well fashion'd and bred as they ought to be, who go thither: And that it was a mere cheat in Respect to conduct people to Love by Discretion, that being much the farthest way about, and under favor to Monsieur Respect he is but a troublesome companion to a Lover, who designs to cure those wounds the fair has given him, and, if he have no better counsellor, he may languish all his life without revealing the secret of his soul to the object belov'd, and so never find redress. But this Sir Formal, (Respect, says Love,) is a very great favorite of the Lady's, who is always in fee with them as a Jilt with a Justice; who manages their Fools just as they wou'd have 'em; for it is the most agreeable thing in the World to them, and what the most feeds their vanity, to see at their feet a thousand Lo∣vers sigh, burn, and languish; the fair are never angry to find themselves belov'd, nor ever weary of being Ador'd. I was extreamly pleas'd at this frank Humour of my little Love who told me this, and without much scruple or consideration to Respect I follow'd him towards Declaration, and in my way he gave me this Advice.
When you Love, or speak of it, Make no serious matter on't, 'Twill make but subject for her wit And gain her scorn in lieu of Grant. Sneeking, whining, dull Grimasses Pale the Appetite, they'd move; Only Boys and formal Asses Thus are Ridicul'd by Love. While you make a Mystery Of your Love and awful flame; Young and tender Hearts will fly, Frighted at the very name; Always brisk and gayly court Make Love your pleasure not your pain, 'Tis by wanton play and sport Heedless Virgins you will gain. By this time we were arriv'd to Declaration, which is a very little Village, since it is only for Passengers to pass thrô, and none live there, the Country is very Perilous, and those that make a
false step run a great risque of falling from some Precipice: Round about rises a very great mist, and people have much ado to know each other; of these mists there are two sorts: The one on the side of Denial, the other on that of Per∣mission, the first is very disagreeable and draws a very ill consequence with it; the other directs you to a place of intire divertisment, but I had so good a guide that the entrance gave me no trouble at all. When I came to the Village, I found Bellimante, and Bellinda, to whom by turns I told all my heart; and discover'd all its passion or its tenderness which was to me much better. When to the charming Bellinda I came, With my heart full of Love and desire, To gain my wisht end I talkt of a flame, Of sighing, and dying, and fire, I swore to her charms that my soul did submit, And the slave was undone by the force of her Wit. To fair Bellimante the same tale I told, And I vow'd and I swore her fair Eyes No Heart-Ravisht mortal cou'd ever behold But he panting and languishing Dys,
And while I was vowing, the ardor of youth Made myself even believe what I swore was all truth. I confess to you, my dear Lysander, that it was a great while before I cou'd make myself be be∣liev'd by Bellinda, or gain any credit upon her heart, she had a great deal of Wit and cou'd see farther into the designs of her Lovers than those who had not so much, or had had so many vows pay'd them: I perceiv'd well enough, I was not hated by her, and that she had not a heart whol∣ly insensible; so that I never quitted her till I had gain'd so much upon her to accompany me to Permission, where for some time we pass our days very pleasantly; and having so good fortune with Bellinda, I had now a great desire to try my power over Bellimante: and where indeed, con∣trary to my expectation, I was not so happy: But she went from me to Denial; and I was for that hour oblig'd to return again to Bellinda, it was some time I searcht her in vain, but at last found her at a little Village, extreamly agreeable. There are very few Inhabitants, but those that are live in perpetual union, yet do not talk much, for they understand one another with half words: A sign of the Hand, the Head or the Eye, a glance or smile is sufficient to declare a great part of the Inclination. It is here where the Lover takes all freedoms, without controul, and says and dos
all that soft Love can permit: And every day they take and give a secret Entertainment, speak∣ing a particular Language, which every body does not understand, and none but Lovers can reply too, in effect, there are as many Languages as persons. The Governess of this Village is very charm∣ing to those that are acquainted with her; and as disagreeable to those that are not; she is a per∣son of a great deal of Wit, and knows all things. She has a thousand ways to make herself under∣stood, and comprehends all in a moment, that you wou'd or can say to her. In this place, to divert, we make a thousand pretty sorts of Entertainments; and we have a∣bundance of Artifices, which signify nothing, and yet they serve to make life Agreeable and Pleasant. 'Twas thus I liv'd at Intelligence; when I under∣stood that Bellimante was retir'd to Cruelty. This news afflicted me extreamly, but I was not now of a humour to swell the Floods with my tears, or increase the rude winds with my ruder sighs; to tear my hair and beat my Innocent breast as I us'd in my first Amour to do. However I was so far concern'd, that I made it my business not to lose this insensible fair one, but making her a visit in spight of her retreat, I reproacht her with cruelty.
Why, fair Maid, are you uneasy, When a slave designs to please you; When he at your feet is lying Sighing, languishing, and dying? Why do you preserve your charms Only for offensive Armes? What the Lover wou'd possess You maintain but to oppress. Cease, fair Maid, your cruel sway, And let your Lover dy a nobler way. Who the Devil wou'd not believe me as much in love now as I ever was with Silvia: My heart had learn't then all the soft Language of Love which now it cou'd prattle as naturally as its Mother Tongue; and sighing and dying was as ready for my mouth as when it came from my very heart; and cost me nothing to speak; Love being as cheaply made now by me as a barter for a Horse or a Coach; and with as little concern almost: It pleas'd me while I was speaking, and while I believ'd I was gaining the vanity and pleasure of a conquest over an unvanquisht heart. However I cou'd yet perceive no Grist come to my Mill; no heart to my Lure; young as it was, it had
a cunning that was harder to deceive than all Bellinda's Wit: And seeing her persist still in her Resolution I left her with a heart, whose pride more than Passion resented the obduratness of this Maid, I went as well compos'd however as I cou'd to Intelligence; and found even some pleasure in the cruelty and charming resistance of Bellimante, since I propos'd to myself an infinite happyness in softning a heart so averse to Love, and which I knew I shou'd compel to yeild some time or other with very little pains and force. Oh! what Pleasure 'tis to find A coy heart melt by slow degrees; When to yeilding tis inclin'd, Yet her fear a ruin sees. When her tears do kindly flow, And her sighs do come and goe. Oh! how charming tis, to meet Soft resistance from the fair; When her pride and wishes meet And by turns increase her care. Oh! how charming 'tis to know, She wou'd yeild but can't tell how,
Oh! how pretty is her scorn When confus'd 'twixt Love and Shame, Still refusing (though she burn,) The soft pressures of my Flame. Her Pride in her denyal lies, And mine is in my Victories. I feigned nevertheless abundance of Grief to find her still persist in her rigorous Cruelty; and I made her believe, that all my absent hours I aban∣doned myself to sorrows and despairs; though Love knows I parted with all those things in Silvia's Arms. But whatever I pretend, to appear at Cru∣elty and before Bellimante; at Intelligence I was all Galliard and never in better Humour in my Life than when I went to visit Bellinda: I put on the Gravity of a Lover, and beheld her with a Solemn Languishing Look: In fine, I accustomed myself to counterfeit my Humour, whenever I found it convenient for my Advantage: Tears, Vows, and Sighs cost me nothing, and I knew all the Arts to jilt for Love, and could act the dying Lover, whenever it made for my Satisfaction.
He that wou'd precious time improve, And husband well his hours, Let him complain and dye for Love, And spare no Sighs or Showers. To second which, let Vows and Oaths Be ready at your will, And fittest times and seasons chuse, To shew your cozening skill. In fine, after I had sufficiently acted the Lan∣guishing Lover, for the accomplishment of all my Wishes, I thought it time to change the Scene, and without having recourse to Pity, I followed all the Counsels of my Cupid; who told me, that in stead of dying and whining at her Feet, and damning myself to obtain her Grace, I should affect a Coldness, and an Unconcern; for, Lycidus, assure yourself, said he, there is nothing a Woman will not do, rather than lose her Lover either from Vanity or Inclination. I thanked Love for his kind Advice; and to persue it, the next day I drest myself in all the Gayety imaginable: My Eyes, my Air, my Language, were all changed; and thus fortified with all the put-on indifference in the World, I made Bellimante a Visit; and after a thousand things all cold and unconcerned, far from Love or my former Softness, I cried laugh∣ing to her;
Cease, cease, that vain and useless scorn, Or save it for the Slaves that dye; I in your Flames no longer burn, No more the whining Fool you fly; But all your Cruelty defie. My Heart your Empire now disdains, And Frown, or Smile, all's one to me: The Slave has broke his Servial Chains, And spight of all your Pride is free From the Tyrannick Slavery. Be kind or cruel every day, Your Eyes may wear what dress they please, 'Twill not affect me either way, How my fond Heart has found its Peace, And all my Tears and Sighings cease. I must confess you're wondrous fair, And know, to conquer such a Heart; Is worth an Age of sad despair, If Lovers Merits were Desert:
But you're unjust as well as fair, And Love subsists not with despair, No more than Lovers by the Air. I've spar'd no Sighs nor Floods of Tears, Nor any thing to move your Mind, With sacred Vows I fed your Cares; But found your rebel Heart unkind, And Vanity had made you blind. No more my Knees shall bow before Those unconcern'd and haughty Eyes, Nor be so sensless to adore That Saint, that all my Prayers despise: No, I contemn your Cruelty Since in a Humor not to dye. Having said all this with an Air of Disdain, I, smiling, took my leave, with much less Civility and Respect than I used to do; and hasting to In∣telligence, I past my time very well with Bellinda, to whom I paid all my Visits, and omitted nothing that might make Bellimante know I had forgot her: But at the end of some days by a very happy change,
she finding more inclination to Love than to Cru∣elty, banishing all Obstacles in Favour of a Lover, she came to Intelligence; where at first sight she made me some little Reproaches, and that in so soft a manner, that I did not doubt but I had toucht her Heart: I swore a thousand times, that all I had done, was only put on to see if it were possible she could resent it, and force from her Heart some little concern for my supposed loss. At this time I had abundance of Intreagues upon my hands, for it was not with Bellinda and Bellimante, with whom I lived in this manner; and indeed it is impossible to remain at Intelligence and to make a Court but to two Persons only, where there are so many of the Fair and the Young. I writ every day several Bil∣lets; and received every day as many: I had every day two or three Rendezvous; and one ought to manage matters very discreetly, that neither Par∣ty might come to the knowledge of the others con∣cern; and one ought to be a Man of great Address and Subtilty to love more than one securely; and though this gave me some pain, it was nevertheless an Ambaras very agreeable, and in which I could have lived a great while; if Envy, which cannot suffer any Body to be happy in Intelligence, had not arrived there and told a great many things which discovered my Intreagues; so that Bellinda, with whom I had lived there with great Tranquilli∣ty a long time, and Bellimante, with whom I was but just beginning to be happy, were both obli∣ged to quit this delightful place, where we enjoy∣ed so many happy hours; and they retired till the
noise was a little over; and with them all those who had afforded me any hope: If any one of these had stayed, I had been contented well enough and one might have consol'd me for the loss of the other, but in one day to lose all that made my hap∣piness, put me into such a Melancholy, I knew not for the present what to do for myself; but Coquet Love conducted me to a Village, that gave a me new Pleasure: The scituation of it is marvellous, the Fields and the Groves all about it the most plea∣sant in the World; the Meadows enamel'd with Rivulets, which run winding here and there, and lose themselves in the Thickets and the Woods. In going, Love said to me: In absence it is in vain to abandon yourself to sorrow. Alas! What signifies it to sigh night and day; the Absent does not hear us; nor can the most tender Affliction or Com∣plaint render a Lover happy, unless the Fair One were present to hear all his Moans, then perhaps they might avail. There was reason in what he said, and I was pleas'd and calm'd; and we arri∣ved at the same time at this Village: All the Hou∣ses were fine, and pleasant, we saw all the Graces there by Fountains and by Flowery Springs, and all the Objects that could be imagined agreeable; and the least amiable ones, we saw, gave us a Joy! All the World that inhabit there contribute to Di∣version; and this place is called Amusement: Amusement is a young Boy, who stops and gazes at every thing that meets his Eyes, and he makes his Pleasure with every Novelty. As soon as I arrived at this Village I thought to
divert myself, as others did; and to hinder my Thoughts from fixing on the loss of my two Mi∣stresses, and to banish from my mind the Sha∣grins their Absence gave me; withdrawn from the fair Eyes of Bellimante, and the Charming Wit of Bellinda, and to give my sighing Heart a little ease; upon a thousand Objects I formed my desires, and took a thousand Pleasures to divert my Melancholy: And all the time I lived at this dear place, I passed my time without any inquie∣tude; for every day afforded me new Objects to give me new Wishes. And I now expected, with∣out much impatience, the return of Bellinda and Bellimante; nor did I tire myself with writing to 'em every day; and when I did write, to save the expence of thought, the same Billet served both; a thousand little tender things I said of course to both: And somtimes, especially while I was wri∣ting, I thought I had rather have seen them than have lived at Amusement, but since it was necessa∣ry they should be absent, I bore it with all the Patience I could; somtimes we were in a fit of writing very regularly to one another, but on a sudden I received no Letters at all; the reason of this was, they both understood I lived at Amuse∣ment, and had retired themselves to the Palace of Spight: I no sooner received this News, but I rendered myself there also; it is a place where there is alwaies abundance of Tumult, Outrage, Quarrels and Noise: And Spight is a Person who eternally gives occasion of Discontent and Broil; causing People often to fall out with those they
love most, and to caress those they hate: But the Quarrels she occasions us with those we love, last but a very short season, and Love reconciles those differences that Spight obliges us to make: Thô 'tis somtime pleasant enough to see those we Love extreamly, and violently, fall into the highest rage, and say a thousand things injurious and un∣reasonable, and to swear all the Oaths that angry Love and Fury can inspire, never to see or con∣verse with one another again, and in a moment after to grow calm, weep, and reunite; to be perjured on both sides, and become more fond than ever they were. A Lovers Rage and Jealousie One short moment do's confess: How can they long angry be Whose Hearts are full of tenderness? In this Place there wou'd be eternal War, but for a person who inhabits there, and is always the Mediator for Peace, tis he that assists to accommo∣date and bring the Lovers together. This is a very honest person, call'd Right Understanding, he brought me to Bellinda, whom I found accom∣pany'd with a Man that made her a thousand ca∣resses, at my approach she made as if she knew me not, which I took in such disdain, that I ap∣ply'd myself to Spight, with a design to be re∣veng'd on this Haughty scorner. In this humour
I made a visit to Bellimante but found her as Implacable as Bellinda, whom no excuses, no reason, cou'd reduce to the temper I had once seen her; in a rage, ten times more than I was before, fill'd with disdain and revenge I complain'd of this treatment to my little Love, who immedi∣ately led me into a Grove, where the Beauties and the Graces us'd to walk, to consult upon what return to make for my affront; from one place to another we past on till we came to a lit∣tle Thicket, on the other side of which, by a lit∣tle Rivulet we cou'd hear, but not see, two per∣sons discoursing, they were women, and one seemed in a violent Rage against her Lover, who had newly offended her, whilst the other strove in vain to reconcile her, but she went on, vowing to revenge herself with the next object she shou'd Incounter that had but Wit, Youth, and fortune enough to Justifie her Love, and make her con∣quest glorious; her resolution agreeing so with mine, and her manner of speaking, gave me new hope and pleasure, and a great curiosity to see her face; I found by her Resentment she was young and of Quality, and that alone was enough to make me resolve upon Addressing myself to her, and the other person had no sooner left her, but I ad∣vanced towards her, with as good a grace as I cou'd put on, she was a little surprised, and blushing at first, but I soon reconcil'd her to my conversation. I found her handsom enough to ingage me, and she was as well pleased with me as I was with her, both having the same design which was that of
revenge, and you may Imagin, our business be∣ing the same, our entertainment was not at first extraordinary, but as my cause of Anger was more reasonable than hers, I began to find myself to soften into liking of this new fair one, who was called Cemena, and who, to spight her former Lover, endeavor'd to be seen with me in all the publick places she cou'd, which gave him Infinite torments of Jealousie. One day as I was walking with this Cemena in a place where the young and the fair frequent, Bellinda and Bellimante often passed by us, and saw us both well pleas'd and in good humour, I cou'd perceive their colour goe and come, and that they were as uneasy at this object, as my heart cou'd wish, and by their quitting of the place immediatly after, I was as∣sured of all my hope, and believed I had gained my Point; at the end of two or three days, one Morning walking alone in the same place I in∣countered Bellimante, who hapned to be attend∣ed with her Woman onely, she chang'd colour at my approach, and wou'd have passed me by but I stay'd her by the Robe; and said a thousand things to her that angry Love inspir'd me with, while she on her side did the same, till we had talk'd ourselves by degrees into reason, and good understanding. I found her Resentment to be only the excess of Love, and all those faults are easily forgiven, I immediatly threw myself at her Feet, and made her a thousand protestations of my fidelity, and she, in her turn, excused herself with all the tenderness imaginable, she made me
a thousand new vowes and caresses and forgot nothing that might persuade me, that all she did was by the Counsel of Spight. Oh! how soft it is to see The fair one we believe untrue, Eagar and impatient be To be reconcil'd a new; When their little cheats of Love Shall with reasons be excus'd, Oh! how soft it is to prove, With what ease we are abus'd! When we come to understand How unjust are all our fears; And to feel the lovely hand Wiping from our Eyes the tears. And a thousand Favors pay For every drop they kiss away, Oh! how soft it is to yeild, To the maid just reconcil'd.
I found this accommodement extreamly agree∣able, and it was in these transports the Lovely Bellimante detain'd me for some days without quit∣ing her, but I found too much Joy in a new re∣conciliation not to endeavor to make one also with Bellinda; as soon then as Bellimante grew a little off my heart by so long a conversation with one and the same Woman, I, on pretence of some af∣fairs, left her extreamly charm'd and satisfi'd, and hasted to Bellinda, who, methought, was now a new Beauty; at least I found her too consider∣able to lose the Glory of ingaging her intirely; tis possible that both these Ladys, being agitated with as little faith as myself, deceiv'd me with the same design I did them, to make their pleasure on∣ly, and thô this very often came into my thoughts, yet it gave me no great inquietude, they dis∣sembl'd well, and I cou'd not see it, I had the satisfaction and the vanity of 'em, that was as much as I desir'd from any of the fair since Silvia toucht my heart, they both swore they lov'd and both fear'd to displease, if they were unfaithful they had a thousand stratagems to hide their infidelity, and took a great deal of care to keep me, which shew'd a value in me above all the rest of my Ri∣vals, and I beheld myself with some Pride and e∣steem for having so much power; when ever they offended me they had all the Arts to mollify me, and who wou'd be so critically in love as not to be willing to be so well abus'd? For my part, I will not be so nice, as to penetrat into their thoughts, to find what wou'd but displease me if
found; but content myself with all I see and find that looks like Love at least and good humour. Nay even in their worst I find a thousand plea∣sures, those of their quarrels which somtimes hap∣pen twenty times a day, when every reconciliation is like a new Mistress, so well they strive to please and be reconcil'd. But all these pleasures did not satisfy me, there were greater yet behind which I had not arriv'd to with these fair charmers, and however I liv'd at Amusement, making a thousand Amours with a hundred of the most Beautiful, still I had a desire to subdue intirely to my pleasure these two the most hard to gain, but now I was pretty well se∣cur'd of both their hearts and yet neither knew, they were each others Rivals in mine. They knew one another, converst, and play'd and walkt to∣gether, yet so discreet I was in this Amour that neither was jealous of the other, nor suspected I lov'd both with an equal Ardor; when I hapned to be with 'em both I carried myself so equally Gal∣lant that both commended my conduct and ima∣gin'd I did it to hide the secret passion I had for herself, and so many little Arts my Coquet love had taught me I cou'd with ease manage abundance of intregues at one and the same time. But as I said, this did not suffice, nor cou'd the fires, that some more willing Beauties allay'd, hin∣der me from wishing and burning and persuing those two fair persons with an Ardor that had no appearance of decay from any others goodness to me, but in my daily visits to'em, I eternally so∣licited
them to suffer me to accompany them to that charming place call'd Favors, which is a very Beautiful Castle rais'd in a Vally. I confest to you that my Coquet Cupid advis'd me not to go, for fear of attaching myself too much to a place so extreamly agreeable; the Mountains, that inviron this Castle, are very high and full of hollow Rocks, which made the scituation very sullen. The Castle itself was delicately built, and surrounded with tall Trees, so thick that one cou'd hardly see the Edifice, nor cou'd the Sun-beams dart throw the gloomy shade; and eternal Night seem'd to sit there in awful state and pleasure: For the more obscure this place is and secret from all Eyes, the better and more acceptable it is to all that enter there, and thô this Vally have many inhabitants, it appears to have none at all; because they love solitude, and, banishing all Publick society, con∣tent themselves only to be but two in company together, if there be more they are receiv'd with a very ill welcome, for a third Person in this place wou'd destroy the Pleasure and the harmony. The Inhabitants of this Castle never shew them∣selves but to those that are very importune, and then not every day, the Ladies that command there are many Sisters all of the name of the Castle; and all very fair, and still one more fair than the other, and when you visit 'em you see'em not all at once but by degrees and the last you behold is the fairest, and by the pleasure you have in seeing one, you desire to see'em all. For there are no limits to be given to desire; and as they are
never seen by any body altogether, it happens very often that you see but one, and you must have address and great assiduity, abstinence, and good fortune to obtain one of these Favors; but the last will cost you much more trouble than all the rest put together, so very fair, so very nice and coy she is: But when once obtain'd she brings you to the Palace of intire Pleasure; which is neighbouring to the Castle of Favors; but I, who wou'd very fain, at once, have brought to this delicate place both Bellinda and Bellimante; found myself extream uneasy, because, as I said, only two can be well entertain'd at a time! I found it against my humour and against the advice of Love to a∣bandon all, and retire with one only, for in de∣cency and good manners, those, who go to this Castle of Favors, are oblig'd to continue there some time; and I found, I shou'd be extreamly shagrin after a little while with one alone; but both were obstinate and wou'd not suffer a third: and having been so very importune with both, I was asham'd to repent and recant all those things I had said, to persuade them to go, thô in my heart I was very ill satisfi'd I had not persu'd the counsel, Love had given me not to go to Favors at all; he foreseeing an inconveniencie in such a retreat, which I, with all my young desires a∣bout me and fond of novelty, cou'd not, so well as he, discern, however I had propos'd it with some ardency and wou'd not go back, but resolv'd to make the best advantage of my voyage, and wou'd not declare my regreet till I cou'd no longer hin∣der
it: So that Bellimante, yeilding to my Implo∣rings, consented next day to go with me to this retreat of Favors. Accordingly the next morning we set out for this amiable place; where we arrived, and find∣ing myself all alone, without interruption or fear, with this very fair Creature, I advanced to a thou∣sand Freedoms which she, with some resistance, per∣mitted me to take: I was all Joy and Transport at every advance, and still the nearer I approached to the last Favour, the more blest I imagined my∣self; I grew more resolved, and she more feeble: and at last, I was the Victor and Bellimante the Vi∣ctim; I remained some days with her, and one would have imagined I should have been intirely happy in this place with one so young and fair: But behold the fickleness of Youth, and Man's nature. Thô my Heart were full of Passion, And I found the yeilding Maid Give a loose to inclination While her Love her Flame betray'd; Yet thô all she did impart, Pain and Anguish prest my Heart.
Thô I found her all o'r Charming, Fond and sighing in my Arms; Yet my Heart a-new was warming For Bellinda's unknown Charms; Thought, if Beauty pleas'd me so, What must Wit and Beauty too? And though next day I found myself an hundred times more in Love with Bellimante than before, yet unless I could possess Bellinda too, I thought myself miserable: Yet every time she charmed me a-new I was upon the point of renouncing eternal∣ly Bellinda, and sacrificing her to my Passion for Bellimante: But I did not remain long in that Hu∣mour, but every day grew more and more unre∣solved in that point; and as Bellimante grew more fond I grew more cold; not but I had learnt to say so many kind and soft things in the time of my real Passion with Silvia, that I found it easie to speak every day such endearing Words as gave her no doubt of my Heart; nor was willing she should see to the bottom of it, where she would most cer∣tainly have found Bellinda; yet with such a mix∣ture of Passion for herself, that it would have been hard to have distinguished, which had had the as∣cendant there; only my desire at present was the most considerable for the fair Object I had not yet possest, and whom I long'd to vanquish; perhaps,
as much for the Glory, as the Pleasure, though my Heart did not at this moment think so. After some time that I had lived here with Belli∣mante, I made some pretext to leave her for a lit∣tle while; she; who was extreamly charmed with that Solitude, resolved to wait there my return, so that I had some pain in contriving how I should bring Bellinda to the same Castle as I wished to do; but it had in it many Mansions and Apartments, and, as I said, so retired from one another, that it was difficult to come at any time together or to meet: This consideration made me resolved, and very pressing with Bellinda, to go to this place, assuring her of such Diversion as she never met with in any other part of the World: She loved and was not long in persuading, and I had the Glory to conduct her in spight of all her Wit and Gayety, to this retreat of Solitude with me; where, unperceived, I obliged her to render me all that Love could allow, and more than Honour would permit: And I was for some days extreamly hap∣py, and possibly had continued so, (going from one Apartment to another, and, like the Great Sul∣tan, visiting by turns my Beauties,) had not a ma∣licious fate prevented my Grandeur and Pleasure. It hapned one day that I had sued a repetition of Favours from Bellinda; she seeming resolved to grant me no more, repenting of those I had taken, and with a charming Sorrow reproaching me, making me a thousand times more pressing than before: At last her force growing weaker, her denials fainter, and my importunities more ra∣ging;
I found her yeilding, the Lilly in her Face gave place to the Roses, and Love and Trembling made her Eyes more fair, and just ready to render me all. We saw approaching us Bellimante, who, having heard how I sometimes past my hours, re∣solved to surprise me in my perfidie; and accor∣dingly found us in a gloomy Arbour with all the Transports of Love in both our Faces, which it was too late to resettle and hide from this too sen∣sible and jealous fair One: In vain I strove with all the Arguments of Love and Tenderness to appease her, or, if by any thing I said, I found her incli∣ned to pardon me, on the other side it but served to incense and inrage Bellinda, to whom I had made equal Vows (at her coming to that place,) of eternal Fidelity. I am not able to express to you, my dear Lysander, what confusion I found myself in, I divided my Heart and my Intreaties between 'em, and knew not to which I most ar∣dently meant 'em; I was very sensible, that while I treated both with equal Love and Respect, that I should gain neither, and yet if what I said to both had been addrest to any one of 'em, it would have prevailed; and I found it easie to have kept either, if I would resolve to quit the other; but my heart not inclining to that, or if it wou'd, not knowing which I shou'd chuse, made me re∣main between 'em both the most out-of-countenan∣ced coxcomb, that ever was taken in the cheats of Love, while both were on either side reproach∣ing me with all the malice and noise imaginable, so that not being able longer to endure the
clamour, I took my flight from 'em both, and ran with all the force I cou'd to a Village call'd Irre∣solution; and where Coquet Love abandon'd me saying that place was not proper for him. The Houses of this Village are for the most part not half built, but all appears very desolate and ruinous: It appertains to a Lady very fantastique of the same name. She maks a Figure pleasant enough, she never dresses herself, because she can∣not determin what habit to put on; she is ever tormenting herself, still turning to this side and to that, yet never stirs from the place, because undetermin'd she knows not whither nor which way to go: And having so many in her mind re∣solves to go to neither; one always sees an Agi∣tation in her Eyes, that keeps them in perpetual motion and fixt on nothing. You see her perpetu∣ally perplext with a thousand designs in her head at once, but puts none of them in execution. I found myself in this place Ambarassed with a thousand confusions and thoughts, for Bellinda and Bellimante had equally shar'd my soul, and I knew not for which I shou'd declare; nor whether the Wit and extream good Humour of the first were more powerful upon my heart, than the Beauty and softness of the last, so that I was wholly un∣able to determin which I shou'd quit, having the same sentiments for one as for the other, and re∣solv'd to abandon both rather than content myself with one: And the fear of losing one was the oc∣casion of my losing both, in fine I was in the most
cruel incertainty in the World. And I cou'd not forbear saying a thousand times to myself, When Love shall two fair objects mix, And in the Heart two passions fix: 'Tis a pleasure too severe, Cruel Joy we cannot bear. Too much Love for two I own, But too little flame for one. While I was thus perplext betwixt these two vi∣olent passions, when no reason cou'd resolve me which to choose, as I was one day meditating what to do in this extreamity, a Woman presented her∣self to me, whose Beauty was infinitely transcend∣ing all I had ever beheld; she had a noble and Majestick meen, a most Divine Air, and her charms cast so great a Lustre that I was dazl'd with Gazing on her; she struck me with so profound a respect at the first sight of her Glory's, that I cou'd not forbear throwing myself at her feet, imploring I might be eternally permitted to Adore her; and to become her slave. When raising me from the ground, and looking on me with Eyes more Majestick than kind, she said to me in a loud voyce.
Fly, Lysidus, this hated Place, Too long thou'st bin a slave to Love. Thy youth has yet a nobler Race In more Illustrious paths to move. Glory your fonder flame controuls, Glory, the life os generous Souls. Once you must Love to learn to live, 'Tis the first lesson youth shou'd learn; Useful instructions Love will give, If you avoid too much concern: Loves flame, thô in appearance bright, Deceives with false and glittering light. But, Lysidus, the time is come You must to Beauty bid adieu; Recal your wandering passions home, And only be to Glory true; She is a Mistress that will last When all Loves fires are gone and past.
Those words, repeated to me with an Air haughty and imperious, toucht me to the very Soul, and made me blush a thousand times with shame to behold myself in that ridiculous state, al∣most reduc'd to the same tenderness for Bellinda and Bellimante I had before had for Silvia; but I soon found my error and in an instant became more in Love with Glory than I had ever been in my life. Insomuch that I resolv'd to leave Irresolution and follow her. I confess at first it gave my heart som little pain to withdraw and disingage it from so long and so fond a custom, and I was more than once forc'd to parly thus with my imtractable and stubborn heart. Oh! fond remembrance! do not bring False notions to my easy heart. And make the foolish tender thing Think, that with Love it cannot part; Or dy when e're the charming God Forsak's his old and kind abode. And thou, my heart, be calm and Pleas'd, For better hours thou now shalt see, Of all thy Anxious torments eas'd From all thy toyles and slavery free,
From Beauties Pride and peevish scorns From Wits Intregueing false returns. 'Tis Honour now thou shalt persue, Her dictates only shalt obey; Yet Beauty en Passant may view And be with all loves Pleasures Gay, Quench when you please resistless fires, But make no business of desires. Thus, my dear Lysander, following Glory, I soon arriv'd at the extent of the Island of Love, and there I incounter'd a thousand Beauties, At∣tractions, Graces and Agreements; all which en∣deavor'd a new, but in vain, to engage me. I past by 'em all without any regard only sight, as I be∣held 'em with the remembrance, how once the meanest of those Beauties wou'd have charm'd me. I lookt back on all those happy shades, who had been conscious of my softest pleasures, and a thou∣sand times I sighing bid'em farwel, the Rivers, Springs and Fountains had my wishes that they might still be true and favor Lovers, as they had a thousand times done me. These dear remem∣berance, you may believe, stay'd some time with me, yet I wou'd not for an Empire have return'd to'em again, nor have liv'd that life over a new I had so long and with so much pleasure persu'd.
After this I took a Vessel and put off from that shore, where, thô I had met with many Misfor∣tunes, I had also receiv'd a thousand joys: While it was in view I found myself toucht with some re∣gret, but being sail'd out of sight of it, I sigh'd no more, but bid adieu to fond Love for ever. All you Beauties and Attractions, That make so many hearts submit; Soft inspirers of affection Mistresses of dear bought wit. To whose Empire we resigning Prove our homage justly due After all our sighs and whining Dear delight we bid adieu. After all your fond Caprices, All your Arts to seem Divine, Painting, Patching and your Dresses, Easy votaryes to incline. After all your couzening Billets Sighs and tears, but all untrue, To your Gilting tricks and quillets, I for ever bid adieu.
The Table TO a fair Lady, sent with a Miscellany of Poems. P. 1 To Urania in Mourning. 2 SONG. 3 On Beauty, A Pindarick. 4 SONG. 10 SONG. Ibid. To the Heroick Antonia. 11 To Laurinda. 13 On a Lady singing. 15 To Mr. W. 16 Armida: Or, the fair Gill. 17 Predictions for Saturday next. 21 To Astrea, on her sending me a Bottle of Orange Flower-Water. 22 To Cloris, going into the Country. 23 SONG. 24 To a Lady, (whom he never saw, nor had any descrip∣tion of,) to prove he loves her, By a Person of Quality. 24 Song by the same hand. 26 Sleeping on her fair hand. 28 To Gloriana, on saying I had a tough heart. Ibid. Sent with Ovid's Epistles to a fair Lady. 29 Sent with a Basket of Fruit. 30
Love cannot be indifferent. 31 To Astrea. On her absence, during which I could not write. 32 To the most accomplisht Heroick, and incomparable, the Lady Antonia. 33 Sent with Cowley's Works to Astrea. 35 To my Heart. 36 Dialogue. Thirsis and Clarona. 39 SONG. 40 Strephon, to his three Mistresses. 42 To the Fam'd Antonia. On her Duelling. 44 SONG. 47 On an ungrateful and undeserving Mistress, whom he could not help loving. 49 On the Death of Melantha. 55 To the Nightingal coming in the Spring. 60 A Pastoral on the Marriage of the Right Honourable the Earl of Ossory, to the Lady Mary Somerset. By Edw. Arwaker, M. A. 71 A SONG. 80 A Pastoral on the Death of His late Majesty, writ∣tet by M. Otway. 81 SONG. 83 Strephons complaint banisht from Sacarisa, 84 An Elegie written by Mr. W. O. 85 A Pindarick to Mrs. Behn, on her Poem on the Co∣ronation written by a Lady. 89 To Mr. Wolseley on his Preface to Valentinan. By a Lady of Quality. 95 Mr. Wolseley's Answer to the foregoing Copy. 96 To the Honourable Sir Francis Fane on his Play called the Sacrifice, by Mrs. A. B. 102
Cato's Answer to Labienus, when he  consult the To his  the Gove SONG. To Damon. Song of Basset, by Sir George Etherege, To the Lord Bishop of Rochester on his  Plot. 120 Upon the arrival of his Excellency the Earl of Cla∣rendon in Ireland, by a M. of A. 122 A Poem against Fruition, by Alexis. 127 To Alexis in Answer to his Poem against Fruition. 129 To Alexis, on his saying, I lov'd a man that talkt much by Mrs. B. 132 A Pastoral on the Marriage of the Right Honourable the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, to the Lady Mary Compton by Mrs. Behn. 134 On desire. A Pindarick by Mrs. B. 145 Song. By a Person of Quality. 152 Song. By a Person of Quality. 153 Song. By the same hand. 154 A Pastoral Song on the late King. 157 The departure, by Damon: Novemb. 78. 159 To Amintas, upon reading the lives of some of the Romans by Mrs. B. 161 On the first discovery of falseness in Aminta, by Mrs. B. 164 SONG. 167 On a Blew spot made in a Ladys neck by Gun-powder, by a Person of Quality. 168
On Dido. 169 SONG. Ibid. The Choice. 170 A Letter to Astrea: 171 To Mrs. B. from a Lady who had a desire to see her. 172 To the fair Clarinda, who made Love to me, imagin'd more than Woman. By Mrs. B. 175 FINIS.
A Miscellany OF POEMS. To a Fair Lady, sent with a Miscellany of Poems. FAir Charmer see how various Poets meet To lay their several Labours at your Feet, Whose different Fancies different Passions move, The grinning Satyr, and the smiling Love, And sure there's somthing that you may approve. The Volume like a Landskip will appear, Some parts less Beautiful, some Bright and Clear; But where Defects i'th' Picture you shall spy, Be pleas'd their want of Lustre to supply, And gild it with a Beam from your bright Eye.
To Urania in Mourning. SEE where she sits in mourning Robes aray'd, Like Night's bright Goddess shining thro' a shade. What Charms has this fair Mourner that can make The sable dress of Grief such Beauty take. Dull Custom has prescrib'd this sad Attire, When Sorrow reigns, and Beauty wou'd retire. But Sorrows self when by Urania worn, Looks fair and charming as the rising Morn. Thus when descending Angels would disguise Their bright celestial Form from human Eyes; Their Splendor thro' the borrow'd shape will shine, And we perceive an Excellence Divine. But while this lovely mourning Nymph we view, We sigh, weep, languish, and turn Mourners too; Yet with this difference, that while others weep For Friends expir'd, and lodg'd in Death's calm Sleep,
A restless waking Passion makes our Grief That ne're can dye, nor ever hope Relief: Yet would Urania from her Sorrows spare To my Distress one balmy pitying Tear; That Charity wou'd make me bless my Pain, And never wish to be at Ease again. SONG. AS wretched, vain, and indiscreet Those Matches I deplore, Whose Bartering Friends in Counsel meet, To huddle in a Wedding Sheet Some miserable Pair that never met before. Poor Love of no account must be, Tho' ne're so fixt and true, No Merit but in Gold they see, So Portion and Estate agree, No matter what the Bride and Bridegroom do.
Curst may all covetous Husbands be That Wed with such Design, And Curst they are; For while they ply Their Wealth, some Lover by the By Reaps the true Bliss, and digs the richer Mine. On Beauty. A PINDARIC. SAY all ye Judging wise, Who into Nature's Secrets dive, And can her unknown Reasons give From whence great Beauties wond'rous power do's rise, Whose Universal Tyranny Subdues the Tributary World, and brings In equal Fetters Slaves and Kings, To languish in a soft Captivity. It triumphs o're the Strong and Proud, It calms the Stormy and the Loud.
The stubborn and the frozen Cold dissolves, Perverts the wise Mans best Resolves. The Genius of the Wits, and Braves imploys In the important Subject of its Praise. The Fool and Coward too inspires This with prevailing Wit, that with Heroick Fires. Judah's wise King, when he Had studied Nature o're and o're, Surveying all her hidden Store, Even from the Reed to the triumphant Tree, Thro' all the spacious Universal round, Soft Beauty was the only good he found Worth setting his select Affections on. 'Twas there he bounded his Delights, His chearful Days, and charming Nights, On that most perfect Bliss beneath the Sun. Beauty alone inspir'd him with the Theme Of the bright Virgins of Hierusalem. From that alone his Divine Raptures sprung, Beauty his Business was, and Love was all his Song.
When Alexander had his Conquest hurl'd O're all the yielding Tributary World, And found no more that could afford New Business for his Glory, and his Sword, 'Tis said, He wept; but when the Persian Maid (With greater Charms) the Hero had survey'd, He found the toil of Conquering her much more Than all his worthless Worlds before. He sigh'd and bow'd, lookt pale and red by turns, To serve her was his whole delight, Thinks it as brave, while thus he burns Under soft Venus, as rough Mars to fight. And Sieges lays of Sighs and Tears, And tells soft Stories of his Heart, Of restless Nights, and Days of Cares, Of Pains, and Flames, and wild Despairs, Of bleeding Wounds and Smart, And found that no Fatigues of War Were half so great as vanquishing the Fair!
But oh, no Victory cou'd so Charming prove, As that of the dear Maids confessing Love! David, whose harmonious String Cou'd Saul's infernal Tempest calm, And by the Musicks strange mysterious Balm, Appeas'd the Frenzies of a raging King; Yet stranger Charms in the fair Hittite found, Which kindled to a softer Fire His cold and languishing Desire. And strugling Virtue in strong Fetters bound, That pow'rful Aid was useless now, When yet more pow'rful Beauty was in view, He found no Musick cou'd appease The troubled Spirits her fair Eyes did raise. The Musick of her Voice did but inspire A more tormenting Fire; So great a Sympathy There is between soft Love and Harmony. In the wild darkness of Idolatry Did Clodovaeus see
'Twas more than vulgar Light That made the fair Clotilda look so bright, When from her conquering Eyes Surpriz'd, he saw such sparkling Flames arise, And therefore wisht to know The Spring from whence such streams of Light did flow. Why then shou'd I, Ye learned Stoicks tell me why? Think it unworthy of my Name To own a Generous and a Noble Flame, Since Love's Almighty Pow'r To whom the Young, the Great and Brave, The Wise, the Politick and Grave, Have bow'd to as their Conqueror. What reasonable Man desires to pass For one more great and good than David was? Or who for Wisdom ever hop'd Renown Like wise, like sacred Solomon?
Or who in glorious Arms cou'd ever dare Like the fam'd Son of Jupiter? Or if thou ly'st beneath the common Curse Of being Bad, what than a Heathen worse; Yet Clodovaeus by Beauties piercing fight Was brought from his Egyptian Night, Directed by so fair a Hand, He cou'd not miss the promis'd Land. Then ye fond Stoicks flie Your Learn'd, your Dull-School Foolery, And lay your Speculation by, Or you are greater Fops than I. Lay by your Books, and this believe By charming Beauty 'tis alone, That true and false are to be known, 'Tis Beauty is alone Superlative.
SONG. FReedom is a real Treasure, Love a Dream, all false and vain, Short, uncertain is the Pleasure, Sure and lasting is the Pain. A sincere and tender Passion Some ill Planet over-rules, Ah how blind is Inclination, Fate and Women dote on Fools. SONG. AH how Dull it is to love, Ah how Dull is past Desire, How insipidly we move In the flames of dying Fire. Maidens if you will be Wise, Rather dye than lose the Prize.
Ah what Angel things are Men Ere the last Desires obtained, But alas are Devils when Cold forc'd Kisses are but fained. Maidens ah be warn'd by me, Rather Dye than Conquer'd be. To the Heroick Antonia. Madam, WHen first I saw your Conquering Face, You appear'd so Charming, and so full of Grace, My Soul was into a new Wonder wrought, Which took increase from every look and thought. In all your Actions all the Virtues shin'd, And every Word confest your generous Mind. The Number of such gallant Maids are few, Our Ages Birth has but produc'd us two, The fam'd Astrea, and more famous you.
Thou Monarch of your Sex alone dost Reign, And their lost Glory Nobly dost regain; Thou shewst the Paths that do to Honour guide, How to be Great without the Vice of Pride. That vanity of a Spirit basely born, Thy Nobler Flights thy Sexes Arts do scorn. In thy gay Temper more true Graces lie, Than all their boasted fond Formality. Would they arrive at an Immortal Fame, And at the Amazonian Glory's aim, They must your generous Presidents persue, Tho' still alas they must submit to you. With the learn'd Pen of some fam'd ancient Wit, In thy high Praise a Volume might be writ; But humbler I with Blushes do confess, The Muses never did my Fancy bless To dip in Helicon have no pretence, And aim no higher than to praise with Sense; Since at your Feet no Scepters I can lay, Let a mean Wreath of Flowers the Tribute pay.
To Laurinda. PRoduce aspiring Muse thy Noblest strain, To sing the Charmer of our Court and Plain, No common one Laurinda's Praise can fit Empress of Beauty, Patroness of Wit. 'Twere Sacrilege this Tribute to defer, For Wit was born and flourishes with her. She makes Wits Court where ere she do's repair, The Muses and the Sacred Train are there. Where ere she moves the Graces lead the way, And just Devotion to their Goddess pay. This is the she, whose Praise we must Indite, Transcending mortal Verse, and common Flight. Hear then industrious Muse, and understand The vast important Task thou hast in hand. Fetch me the Beauties of the blooming Spring, The richest Odors spicy Gales can bring.
All Nature's scatter'd Glories join'd in one, A Present to the bright Laurinda's Throne. The Smiles that did the Infant World adorn, The fairest Lustre of the Rising Morn, The Calm, the Joy that breaking Day inspires, When it to Anthems wakes the fether'd Quires, The Souls of Stars are yet more pure and bright, Abstracted Beams, and Empyrean Light. The Pride of Halcyon Seas, unclouded Air, All these my Muse with wond'rous skill prepare A Diadem for bright Laurinda's hair. Desist deluded Muse, we vainly toil, All these will prove but fair Laurinda's Foil. In vain thou seekst abroad the blooming Year, The Beauties of the Spring are all in her. All Nature's scatter'd Glories thou wilt find Already center'd in her Form and Mind. The Smiles that did the Infant World adorn, Less bright than those that on her Face are worn.
Her Presence Joy and Summer calm, supplies, And Day is always breaking in her Eyes, Herself the sweetest Anthem, will inspire, And teach us to excel the fether'd Quire. Her Charms excel the pride of Earth and Air, No Sea-born Venus e're was half so fair. Thus slender Muse thy daring Course is crost, And in the Ocean of Perfection lost. Yet somthing thou art still oblig'd to say, Thy grateful Offering on her Altar lay, And own at least the Debt thou canst not pay. Seize the Occasion, and this Boon obtain To be the humblest Waiter in her Train. On a Lady singing. HOw like Elizium is the Grove When chaste Dorinda sings of Love, It charms the troubled Soul to rest, And makes a Calm in every Breast,
With various kinds of Harmony She strikes at once the Ear and Eye; So soft a Voice, and she so Fair, Gives double sweetness to the Air. The wretched Strephon dumb with Pain And Grief, too heavy to complain When young Dorinda tunes her Voice, Forgets his Woes, and dreams of Joys, Ah lovely Charmer be so kind To ease somtimes a tortur'd Mind, His Groans with gentle Sighs controul, And breathe a Calm into my Soul. To Mr. W. WHY this talking still of Dying, Why this dismal Look and Groan, Leave fond Lover, leave your Sighing, Let these fruitless Arts alone,
Love's the Child of Joy and Pleasure, Born of Beauty, nurst with Wit, Much amiss you take your measure, This dull whining way to hit. Tender Maids you fright from loving By th' effect they see in you. If you wou'd be truly moving, Eagerly the Point persue. Brisk and gay appear in Woing, Pleasant be if you wou'd please; All this Talking, and no Doing, Will not Love, but Hate, increase. Armida: Or, The Fair Gill. NOT Circe nor Medea had such Art, Or pow'rful Charms to captivate a Heart; Nor Syren's Voices with so pleasing sound, Lull those asleep whom they design to wound.
For a new Conquest all her Skill she tries, But yet by different ways to gain the Prize, As Time and Humors fit, Her Looks appear Bashful somtimes, and full of Virgin fear. Then earnest and lascivious as she finds Her Beauty work upon her Lovers minds, When e're the bashful Youth fears his Success: She gives the Trembler hopes by soft Address, Advances with more sweetness in her Face, And fires him with some kind peculiar Grace, Sooths his fond Heart, and dissipates his Fear, And thaws the Ice her Scorns had gather'd there. But if the God of Love infuse his Dart, And captivate a bold and forward Heart. Her Eyes assume their state, and her neglect Creates a doubtful Fear mixt with respect. Yet lest too much of Scorn produce Despair, Some glance of kindness in her Eyes appear, While hardly gain'd she makes the blessing dear. But still the Cloud she cunningly declines, And fits her Looks to second her Designs.
Somtimes she seems to smother Sighs with Pain, And calls up Tears, then turns 'em back again. As if the softning Tide she wou'd not shew, But that in spite of all her Pride, they flow. And all to make a thousand easie Hearts To weep in earnest by her coz'ning Arts. And with the flames of Pity tempers so The Darts of Love, none can resist the Blow. And when she finds a Lover coming on, Yet not so fast to be too soon undone, There all her Arts of Languishment she tries, Sweetens her whispering Voice, softens her Eyes, Touches his hand as if it were by chance, And yields herself to every kind advance. Looks on his Eyes, then strait declines her own, And seems to love, as not to have it shewn. And having thus proceeded in her Art, Breaks forth, as if she cou'd not guard her Heart. Too long, she cries, I have supprest my Fire, Take all my Heart, and all Love can desire.
Thus while she softly speaks, and sweetly smiles, And doubly charms the Senses by these Wiles, She do's a Faith in strongest Souls create, And gains a Conquest in despite of Fate. Ah cruel Love! the Honey and the Gall, Which thou afford'st, do equally Enthral; And all our Ills, and all our Cures from Thee, Are mortal to us in the same degree: If any of Inconstancy complain Of broken Vows and her unjust disdain, She fains herself unpractis'd in Loves Arts, And that she wants the charms should vanquish hearts. And looks with such a Blushing Modesty, As undeceives your fancy'd Injury. And thus the Thorne lies hid that she does bear Under the Roses which her Beauties wear. So in the earliest rise of day, we spy The ruddy Morning mingled with the Sky.
While shame and anger in her looks appear, Both seem confus'dly mixt together there. Thus in delusive Dream the time being spent, Weary with cozenage and discontent, Even hope itself he scarcely now retaines, But like a Hunter at the last remaines, Who having to no purpose spent the day, At last loses the track of the lost Prey. Such were the Practices and such the Arts, By which she can insnare ten thousand hearts; Or rather such the pow'rful armes do prove, By which she conquers and makes slaves to Love. Predictions for Saturday next. ON Saturday the twenty fourth, (The wind fresh blowing from the North,) Two glorious Stars their Spheres shall change, And into other Climats range.
Then tell me, Muse, and tell me true, What Alterations shall ensue: Predict at least, what weather shall Our Dark Horizon then befal. Tempests and Earth-quakes, I presage, Shall at that Dreadful season rage. A Cloud of dark desponding Fears, A storm of Sigh's and flood of Teares; And many a wretched Lovers heart Be wreckt and torne, when they depart. To Astrea, on her sending me a Bottle of Orange-floure Water. COu'd I but half so rich a Verse invent, As was the Cordial which Astrea sent; My Muse herself the Messenger wou'd prove, Born on the wings of Poetry and Love: But all the Muses spring can ne're repay The Present my Astrea did convey.
Now, Strephon, hope, Astrea does incline To Pity thee, since Cordials so Divine Are only fit for hearts that bleed, like mine. To Cloris going into the Country. OH, tell me Cloris, tell me, why You take delight to see men dy. And, Parthian-like, kill, while you fly. Return, if not for charity, At least for Pride, return to see The Trophies of your Victory. Can you such crueltie persue? And make your Eyes those mischeifs do, Which they despise, or fear to rue? Ah Nymph, if you persist to take This course, and every place forsake, Assoon as you a Lover make.
No Residence for Cloris can be found, Since where soere she goes she's sure to wound. SONG. IN vain does Hymen with Religious Vows Oblige his Slaves to wear his chaines with ease, A Privilege alone that Love allows, Tis Love alone can make our Fetters please. The Angry Tyrant lays his Yoke on all, Yet in his fiercest Rage is charming still: Officious Hymen comes whener'e we call, But haughty Love comes only when He will. To a Lady, (whom he never saw, nor had any description of,) to prove he Loves her. By a Person of Quality. BRightest of Virgins! Whose high Race and Name Bespeaks you worthy of the Noblest flame,
Armes you with power Divine, that can dispense Its Influence beyond the reach of sence, Making us frame of you, as Heaven above, Idea's of our Ignorance and Love. Disdain not, fairest, such Devotions then As the best worshippers offer to Heav'n. Nor think'em feign'd, since things above do grow (Concealed and distant) more admir'd below. Absence creates esteem, and makes that fire (Which the Suns near approaches quench) aspire, While those who do enjoy perpetual rays Curse those bright Beames that Crown our Halcyon days. Know then, my Passion Real is and Great, Not such as from dull sence derives its heat, But Sympathy; that Royal Law that binds In a close union things of different kinds, That secret charm of Nature which inspires The whole creation with Harmonious fires.
Heads Cupids Arrows, guides his Roving, Bow, Extends its Empire o're all things below. Since then you know I Love, how much, and how, If of my Passion you still disallow, Know then the Lot is cast, the Gods approve The Fates Decree, and have pronounc'd, I Love? Song by the same hand. SOme Brag of there Cloris, and some of their Phyllis, Some cry up their Celia's and bright Amarillis, Thus Poets and Lovers their Mistresses Dub, And Goddesses frame from the Wash-boul and Tub; But away with these fictions, and counterfait folly, There's a thousand more charmes in the name of my Dolly. I cannot describe nor her Beauty and Wit, Like Manna to each she's the Relishing Bit
She alone by enjoyment the more does prevail, And still with fresh pleasure does hoist up your sail, Nay had you a surfeit took of all others One Look of my Doll strait your stomach recovers. But when I consider her Humour and feature, I'm apt to suspect she's inclin'd to the creature, What contrary winds in my Breast then arise, What hopes and what fear and what doubt do surprise? What Storms do I feel of trouble and care, While my wishes themselves at variance are? For somtimes I wish her more cruel, less fair, But then I should either not Love, or despair: I'd have her to Love too, not Amorous be, I'd have her be coy, but kinder to me. But should she in me this Humour discover, She'd quickly discard her Impertinent Lover.
Sleeeping on her fair hand. IF custom those for Poets does allow, That once have slept upon Parnassus brow, Why may not I to that Ambition grow, Who Slept upon this fairer Hill of Snow. At least in this our fancies do agree They of their Mountain write and I of thee. And as they beg the favor of the nine, To match their noblest flights I ask but thine. To Gloriana on saying I had a tough heart. FIrst let the Lyon dread the bleating Sheep, The winds be husht, the Sea's and Fountains sleep. The day's bright Empire to the night resign, And water freez beneath the burning Line, These contradictions sooner shall be found Than Gloriana's Beauty fail to wound.
Allow, fair charmer, that (as you have said,) My heart were of the toughest Temper made, What privilege can thence to me befal, 'Gainst those prevailing powers, that conquer all. If feebler charmes the force of Love can shew, Then how much deeper must his Arrows go When Gloriana's Eye-brow is the Bow. Sent with Ovids Epistles, to a fair Lady. A Juster Present sure was never made, Than these Epistles to your hand convey'd. For there the Loves of Ladies most appear. These cuplets only Strephons Passion bear. A Passion true as theirs, more full of heart And brings in substance, what it wants in Art. But if in slighted Flames they ever burn'd Their wrongs upon our sex are now return'd For never they their Lovers did persue With half that Passion that I sigh for you;
Of Love, the only Picture there you see But have the true Original in me. Your Justice therefore must this truth approve, They better write of Love, I better Love. Sent with a Basket of Fruit: THe Streets with flowry Garlands we shou'd croun To welcom fair Astrea to the Town. Officious Cupids at her feet shou'd lay The fairest Treasures of the Blooming May; But now we seek the Summers store in vain, For these Autumnal Fruits alone remain, Which mourning Loves shou'd to Astrea bear, As Legacies of the departed year. But when the little Messengers shall spye The Charming Nymph, transported they will cry, No more, my Mates, your Winter Presents bring, For we have found the Goddess of the Spring.
Love cannot be indifferent. INdifference in Love? it cannot be, 'Tis contradiction to the last degree? Cool temp'rate Passion is an empty name, And greater nonsence than a freezing flame: Hope, fear, and joy may with degrees dispense, These Passions but by halves affect our sense, But when we love, 'tis still with violence. And that dull Shepherd, who this truth denies Sure never must have seen Astrea's eyes; Half Beauties may perhaps half Passions move, But She still wounds with all the force of Love: Yet whilst such rigorous flames she does inspire, Preserves herself Unmov'd by any fire: Who gaze upon her Charms are sure to burn, And are as certain to have no return, Yet ne're repent them of their destiny, But count it greater Bliss for her to dye Than in the Armes of other Beauties lye.
To Astrea, On her absence, during which I cou'd not write. IF e're I had a sparke o'the Poets flame From fair Astrea's quickning Beams it came. And since the meanest Writer will aspire To call his faculty a sacred fire; Why may not I presume that mine is so, That from a cause so excellent did grow? But its not strange, since it was born so high That like an earthly vapour it shou'd dye. No, no, Astrea, tis my greatest Pride, That in appearance for a while it dy'd: This seeming weakness proves its birth was true, And that the noble flame was caus'd by you: 'Twas in your absence, that my Muse lay dead But at the sight of you lifts up its head: She wakes Astrea's Graces to rehearse, And pay the tribute of a thankful verse;
So the Springs Bird, the Swallow's seen no more When Winters stormy Blasts begin to roar. But with the Springs return, she sings again And takes her nimble flight o're ev'ry Plain. Yet thô the Poets fire grew cold, my breast Retain'd one flame, that cou'd not be supprest, A flame, that like the other did arise, And first was kindled by Astrea's Ey's. But, This no Absence can destroy, 'twill burn Thô with despair opprest and sure of no Return. To the most accomplisht Heroick, and incom∣parable, the Lady Antonia. Madam, YOur charming sex, tis true, can only claim By native right th' exalted Poets flame. But nature has so frugally to most Dispens'd her gifts, that few perfection boast. Beauty for one she thinks a Portion fit, Where Beauty failes she makes amends with wit.
But where her niggard hand does neither grant, A generous soul supplys the double want. On all the rest her favours singly fall, Antonia only has engrost them all. Thus when my Muse wou'd shew herself with Grace I bid her Copy from Antonia's face, And when with wit she wou'd my verse inspire, Take from your Eyes the brisk enlivening fire. Or if she wou'd present an Empress part, Than to consult Antonia's generous heart. Oh! had Apelles, when he Venus drew And robb'd the Sex to make his Picture true, Had the great Artist once Antonia seen, Once view'd her Beauty and Heroick Meen, The whole sex to his Aid he need not call To glean the several charmes— For in your Person he had found them all.
Sent with Cowleys workes to Astrea. THe Gentle Cowley, in a mournful strain, Once of Injurious fortune did complain. But thought not then, that our obliging times Wou'd recompence his unrewarded Rhimes; For now presented at Astrea's feet His noble Muse her full reward does meet: The Mistress, whose bright charmes such fame did gain, Was but a fair creation of his Brain. And nature griev'd, to see the Art of thought Exceed the finest Pieces, she had wrought, Resolv'd to try the best her Power cou'd do, Expressing all his fancy'd charmes in you: Since then in you those reall beauties live, That to those Poems such applause cou'd give, No wonder that I feel a flame for you, Beyond what Cowley e're describ'd or knew,
Think therefore, when his tender lines you see, Your self the Mistress, and the Lover me. To my Heart. WHat ail'st thou, oh thou trembling thing To Pant and Languish in my Breast, Like Birds that fain wou'd try the callow wing And leave the Downy nest? Why hast thou fill'd thyself with thought Strange, new, fantastick as the Air? Why to thy Peaceful Empire hast thou brought That restless Tyrant, Care? But oh alas, I ask in vain Thou answer'st nothing back again, But in soft sighs Amintor's name. Oh thou betrayer of my liberty, Thou fond deceiver, what's the youth to thee! What has he done, what has he said That thus has conquer'd or betray'd?
He came and saw but 'twas by such a light, As scarce distinguisht day from night; Such as in thick-grown shades is found When here and there a peircing Beam Scatters faint spangl'd Sun-shine on the ground And casts about a melancholy gleam, But so obscure I cou'd not see The charming Eyes that wounded thee, But they, like gems, by their own light Betray'd their value through the gloom of Night. I felt thee heave at every look, And stop my Language as I spoke. I felt thy Blood fly upward to my Face, While thou unguarded lay Yeilding to every word, to every Grace, Fond to be made a prey. I left thee watching in my Eyes And listning in my Eare.
Discovering weakness in thy sighs Uneasy with thy fear. Suffering Imagination to deceive, I found thee willing to believe, And with the treacherous shade conspire, To let into thyself a dangerous fire. Ah foolish wanderer, say, what woud st thou do. If thou shou'dst find at second view, That all thou fanciest now were true, If thou shou'dst find by day those charms, Which thus observ'd threaten undoing harms. If thou shou'dst find that awful meen, Not the effects of first Address, Nor of my conversation disesteem But noble native sullenness; If thou shouldst find that soft good-natur'd voyce (Unused to insolence and noise,) Still thus adorn'd with modesty.
And his minds virtues with his wit agree, Tell me, thou forward lavish fool, What reason cou'd thy fate controul, Or save the ruin of thy Soul? Cease then to languish for the coming day, That may direct his wandering steps that way, When I again shall the loud form survey. DIALOGUE Thirsis and Clarona, Thirsis. HAil, Clarona, clear as Morning In its brightest gay attire, Love and Beauties chief adorning Mistress of all soft desire; Hail, Clarona, Joy of Swains, Charmer of the Fields and Plaines.
Clarona. Thirsis, often have you crown'd me In the Shady Cyprus Grove, And your flowing sighs did wound me, When you wept and talk't of Love. And when for kisses you have strove, Thô I cha'ft and thô I cry'd, With much ado you were deny'd. But, Thirsis, if you will be true, I can Love as well as you, Thô once I said I wou'd deceive ye, Yet, my Thirsis, dont believe me. Thirsis. Oh, Clarona, Joy attend thee All the Gods and powers defend thee; Sweeter are thy words, than Song, Melting Musick's in thy Tongue.
Chorus. Now we'll chant, we'll live and love And welcome in the Spring. Our Pleasures we will still improve, In every Thicket, Shade and Grove, With Love and Musicks trembling string. SONG. BEneath a cool shade, where some here have been, Convenient for Lovers, most pleasant and green; Alexis and Cloris lay pressing soft Flowers, With Kissing and Loving they past the dull hours. She close in his Arms with her head on his brest, And fainting with pleasure; you guess at the rest: She blusht and she sigh'd with a Joy beyond measure, All ravisht with Billing and dying with Pleasure. But while thus in Transports extended they lay, A Hansom young Shepherd was passing that way!
She saw him and cry'd—oh Alexis, betray'd! Oh what have you done—you have ruin'd a Maid; But the Shepherd being modest discreetly past by, And fest 'em again at their leisure to dy. And often they Languish'd with Joy beyond measure, All Ravisht with Billing and dying with Pleasure. Strephon to his three Mistresses. SEE, fair Astrea, what your charms can do, To make a Lover and a Poet two. Where yours and Gloriana's Powrful Beams With Beautiful Eliza are the Theams, The heaviest fancy to a Height must soar, So easie 'tis to write when we adore. Each like a Planet singly and apart Can thro' the Soul your piercing fancy's dart; How strangely then must you affect the mind, When thus in Glorious constellation joyn'd?
Ah! too like Planets each her powr employs, Bright while she wounds; and shines while she destroys. Each is the dazling object of desire, But oh! alike creates a hopeless fire. Astrea, alwaies Airy, Witty, Gay, As Nymphs that by Diana's fountain play, Against th' assaults of Love her heart maintains, And ne're regards the sighs of dying Swains. In vain I gaze on Gloriana's Eyes Already made another Shepherds prize. One truely happy Swain injoys intire Those precious charms for which the rest Expire. And thô Eliza's free, I'm wretched still: For what availes the powr without the will. How strange a fate ha's Love for me decreed, For one I burn, and for other Bleed, Dy for the third, and yet with none succeed.
To the Fam'd Antonia, on her Dwelling. THou Glory of the Age, best of thy kind, An Angels fabrick, and an Angels mind. Thou, whose Heroick vertues may atone For all the vice thy frailer sex have shewn: To more than common greatness thou wer't born No scanty Glories did thy fame adorn, Thy Soul all Man; soft Woman all thy Form. At once his Arms possess, who thee▪ embrace, A Heroin Venus, and a Love-sick Mars. All that thy sex cou'd ever render fair All that fond man thinks worthy of his care, In thy bright Mind and Body center'd are, Some power Divine still dwells upon thy Tongue, And all thou speak'st is one Immortal Song;
Angels and Gods of Love do listning sit, Charm'd with the Musick of thy voyce and wit. A wit uncircumscrib'd by femal rules, That nice, that dull, excuse for silent Fooles. You never speak, but like the sacred Word It does a blessing to mankind afford; Use and instruction tis, that never fails, A Rhetorick, that in spight of force prevailes. Generous as nature, when first Spring she bred, And o're the new-born World her Bounties shed, Like Heaven dispensing goodness all a round, And thy large Soul, like that, admits no bound. Oh hadst thou liv'd in those Illustrious days, When Rome did Statues to vast Merits raise, Thine in their Temples had Triumphant stood, And found an equal worship with some God. Fondly they now adore their Portia's name, Who for one single wound atchiev'd such fame, When 'twas but female cunning at the best, To buy the secret from her Husbands breast.
'Twas Lust of curiosity alone, Thy undesigning valor's all thy own. Born in thy mighty Soul, and lives and Reigns Scorning returns of mercenary gains. Had'st thou bin Portia, thou had'st farther gone, And not content the great design t'have known Had'st help't the Generous youth the deed to do, And 'mongst the number fixt thy Dagger two; She but th' indulgent Wife exprest alone, But thou much more the Wife and Friend had'st shewn. And with a just disdain of Tyrannie Assisted in the noble Victory, On thy firm faith great Brutus might rely, Who seeing him conquer'd cou'd as bravely dy: Let Rome adore recorded Portia's fame, While Britain boast's alone thy mightier na
SONG. on occasion. ALL Joy to mortals! Joy and mirth Eternal Io's sing, The Gods of Love descend to Earth Their Darts have lost the sting. The Youth shall now complain no more On Silvias needless scorn, But she shall Love, if he Adore; And melt when he shall Burn. The Nymph no longer shall be shy, But leave the gilting Road; And Daphne now no more shall fly The wounded panting God! But all shall be serene and fair, No sad complaints of Love Shall fill the gentle whispering Air; No Ecchoing sighs the Grove.
Beneath the shade's young Strephon lies, Of all his wish possest, Gazing on Silvia's charming Eyes, Whose Soul is there confest. All soft and sweet the Maid appears, With looks that know no Art; And tho' she yield with trembling fears, She yeilds with all her Heart.
On an ungrateful and undeserving Mistress, whom he cou'd not help Loving. Being a Paraphrastical Translation of Ovid's 10th Elegie Lib. 3. Amorum. I Have too long endur'd her guilty scorn, Too long her falsness my fond love has born: My freedom and my Wit at length I claim, Be gon, base Passion! dy, unworthy flame! My lifes sole torment, and my honours stain, Quit this tir'd heart and end my lingring pain. I have resolv'd to be myself once more; Long banisht reason to her rights restore. And throw off Loves Tyrannick sway, that still incroching powr. My growing shame I see at last, thô late, And my past follies both despise and hate; Hold out, my heart, nor let her Beauti's move, Be constant in thy Anger, as thy Love.
Thy present pains shall give thee future ease, As bitter Potions cure, thô they displease. 'Tis for this end, for freedom more assur'd, I have so long such shameful pains endur'd. Like a scorn'd slave before her door I lay, And proud repulses suffer'd every day. Without complayning, banisht from her sight, On the cold ground I spent the tedious night. While some glad Rival in her Arms did lye, Glutted with Love and surfeited with Joy. Thence have I seen the tir'd Adulterer come, Dragging a weak exhausted Carkass home; And yet this curse a blessing I esteem, Compar'd to that of being seen by him! By him descry'd attending in the street, May my Foes onely such disgraces meet. What toyl and time has this false Woman cost, How much of unreturning Youth has for her sake bin lost?
How long did I, where fancy led or fate, Unthank'd, unminded, on her Rambles waite; Her steps, her looks, were still by mine persu'd, And watch'd by me, she charm'd the gazing crowd. My diligent Love and over-fond desire Has bin the means to kindle Others fire. What need I mention every little wrong, Or curse the softness of her soothing Tongue: The private love-signs that in publick pass Between her and some common staring Ass, The Coqutes Arts her faithless heart allows, Or tax her with a thousand broken vowes. I hear she's sick and with wild haste I run, Officious haste, and visit Importune. Entring, my Rival on her bed I see, The Politique sickness onely was to me, With this and more oft has my Love been try'd, Some other Coxcomb let her now provide, To bear her jilting and maintayn her pride.
My batter'd Bark has reach'd the Port at last, Nor fears again the billows, it has past. Cease your soft Oaths and that still ready showre, Those once dear words have lost their wonted Power. In vain you flatter, I am now no more That easy fool you found me heretofore. Anger and Love a doubtful fight maintain, Each strive by turns my staggering heart to gain. But what can long against Loves Power contend? My Love, I fear, will Conquer in the end. I'll do what e're I can to hate you still; And if I Love, know 'tis against my will. So the Bull hates the Plowmans Yoke to wear, Yet what he hates his stubborn neck must bear. Her Manners oft my indignation raise, But streight her Beauty the short storm always. Her Life I loath, her Person I adore, Much I condemn her, but I Love her more:
Both with her and without her, I'm in pain, And rage to lose what I shou'd blush to gain, Uncertain yet at what my wishes aim: Loth to abandon Love, or part with Fame. That Angel-Form ill suits a Soul all sin, Ah! be less fair without, or more within. When those soft smiles my yeilding powers invade, In vain I call her Vices to my Ayd. Thô now disdaining the disguise of Art, In my esteem her conduct claims no part, Her Face a natural right has to my heart. No crimes so black are to deform her Eyes, Those Clouds must scatter when these Suns shall rise. Enough, fair Conquerour, the day's your own; See at your feet Lov's Uanquish'd Rebel thrown. By those dear Joys, Joys dear thô they are past, When in the kindest links of Love we held each other fast.
By the injur'd Gods, your false Oaths did profane, By all those Beauties that inspire disdain, By that Lov'd face from the whole sex elect, To which I all my Vows and Pray'rs direct. And equal with a Power divine respect, By every feature of a form so fine, And by those Eyes that charm and dazle mine, Spare from new triumph, cherish without Art This ever faithful, this too tender, heart. A heart, that was respectful while it strove, But yeilding is all blind impetuous Love. Live as you please, torment me as you will, Still are you fair, and I must Love you still, Think only if with just and clement Reign, A willing subject you wou'd chuse to gain, Or drag a Conquer'd Vassal in a chain. But to what ever conduct you incline Do, suffer, be, what my worst fears divine; You are, you ought, you must, you shall be Mine.
Reason, for ever the vain strife give o're, Thy cruel wisdom I can bear no more; Let me indulge this one soft Passions rule, Curb vexing Sence, and be a happy fool. With ful-spread Sayls the tempting gale obey, That down Loves-current drives me fast away. On the Death of Melantha. WEep, all you Virgins, meet o're this sad Hearse, And you, great Goddess of Immortal Verse: Come here a while and Mourn, Weave not with Rosy Crowns your hair, Let tears be all the Gems you wear. And shed them plentifully on this Urne, For 'tis Melantha, 'tis that lovely fair, That lys beneath this weeping Marble here.
But wou'd you know, why she has took her flight Into the Bosom of eternal night, Before her Beauties scarce had shew'd their light. Hark, and lament her fate; As the young God of Love one day Sate on a Rock at play, And wantonly let fly his darts Among the Nymphs and Shepherds hearts. Melantha by unhappy chance came by, Love jesting cry'd, I'le make her prove The Godhead, she contemn'd, of Love. In scorn she bad him strike and did his shaft defy, While the Boy slightly threw a dart To wound, but not destroy, her Heart, But greedy Death, fond of this Beauteous prey, Caught the swift Arrow as it flew, And added to't his own strength too, Which made so deep a wound, that, as she lay, In silent sighs she breath'd her Soul away.
Then all the little Gods begun to weep, Oh let your sighs with theirs due measure keep: For fair Melantha she is dead. Her Beauteous Soul to Deaths dark Empire's fled. Flora, the Bounteous Goddess of the Plains, Who in fresh Groves and sweetest Meadows raigns, Hearing the fair Melantha dead, Brought all her Odorous wealth to spread Over the grave where she was laid. Then straight the Infant Spring began to fade, And all the Fields where she did keep, And fold her bleating Flocks of Sheep, Their influence lost, with her fair Eyes, decayed; For fair Melantha, by whose cruel pride So many sad despairing Swains had dy'd, Felt Love at last, but death she rather chose Than own she Lov'd, or the hid flame disclose.
Speak, Muses, for you hold immortal state With Gods and know the Mysteries of fate, You all what ever's past or present see, And read the unwritten Pages o're Of times great Chronicle before Events, and time, had writ what fate resolv'd shou'd be. Tell me, what Beauty is, whose force controuls Reason and Power, and over mankind rules: Kings stoop to Beauty and the Crowns they wear Shine not with so much lustre, as the fair. Beauty a larger Empire do's command Than the great Monarch of the Seas and Land. She can the coldest Anchorits inflame, Cool Tyrants rage, and stroke their passions tame. She can call youth to her forsaken seat In wither'd Veines, and give new life and heat. She can subdue the fierce, the proud, and strong, Give courage to the weak, the fearful▪ and the young.
Beauty, the only Deity, we know, With fear and aw we to her Altars go, And there our purest zeal of Prayers, and vows, bestow. Sure then it onely seems to dy, And when it leaves us, mounts above To the Eternal roof of Jove, To be a Constellation and inrich the Sky, But shou'd I search the spangled sphear For Metamorphets Beauty there, Nothing of Helen now is seen, Nor the fair Egyptian Queen: Or thou, whose Eyes were constellations here, Oh then thy fate we can't enough deplore With thee thy Beauty dy'd and 'tis no more, Then let us give Melantha's fate 'its due; Strew Cyprus on her Hearse, and wreaths of Yew, For fair Melantha, poore Melantha's dead, Her sighing Soul to deaths eternal Empire's fled.
To the NIGHTINGAL coming in the Spring. To invite Cloe from the Tumults of the Town to the innocent retreat in the Country. Written by a Person of Quality in 1680. LIttle Songster, who do'st bring Ioy and Musick to the Spring, Welcome to our grateful Swains, And the Nymphs, that grace the Plains. How the Youths thy absence mourn? What their Joy at thy return? For their mirth and sports are done All the year that thou art gone, But at thy approach, their joys Take new date from thy dear voyce.
Every Shepherd chuses then Some fair Nymph for Valentine. While the Maid with equal Love Do's the happy choyce approve: Underneath some shade he sits, Where soft silence Love begets And in Artless sighs he beares Untaught passion to her Eares, No deceit is in his Tongue, Nor she fears, nor suffers wrong; But each others faith believe, And each hour their Loves revive. Often have I wisht to be, Happy Damon, blest as thee, Not that I for Silvia pine, Silvia, who is onely thine, But that Cloe cannot be Kind, as Silvia is to thee.
Thou, dear Bird, whose voice may find Charms perhaps to make her kind, Bear a message to her Breast, And make me happy as the rest. [London in the Plot. time.] In the Place where Tumult dwells, Treasons Lurk, Ambition swells, Pride erects her monstrous head, And Perjury swears the guiltless, dead, Powr oppresses, envy pines, Friends betray, and fraud designs. Fears and Jealousie surprise Rest and slumber from our Eyes, And where vice all Ill contains, And in gloomy glory reigns; Where the Loyal, Brave and Just Are victims to Phanatick Lust, Where the noble Staffords blood Calls from Heaven Revenge aloud. In this place there lives a Maid, Bright as nature ever made.
Fair beyond dull Beauties name Can express her lovely frame. In her charming Eyes reside Love, disdain, desire, and pride. Such, we know not which to call, But has the excellence of all. The first blushes of the Day Or the new-blown Rose in May, Or the Rich Sidonian dy Wrought for Eastern Majesty, Is not gayer than the Red, Nature on her cheeks has spread. Her soft Lips still feed new wishes Of a thousand fancy'd kisses. Gently swelling, plump and round, With young smiles▪ and graces crown'd; Her round Breasts are whiter far Than the backs of Ermins are. Or the wanton Breast of Jove, When a Swan for Leda's Love.
Eyes that charm when e're they Dart, And never miss the destin'd heart. Woud'st thou have me tell thee more, And describe her Beauties o're; I perhaps might make a Rape On my Ideas naked shape, Therefore fly, you'l quickly see By this Picture which is Shee. Tell her the loud winds are Dumb, Winter's past and Spring is come, The delightful Spring! that reigns Sweets and plenty o're the Plains. And with shady Garlands crown'd All the Woods and Groves around. If she see the wing'd Quire, Chuse this season to retire To the shelter of the Grove, 'Tis by Instinct (say) of Love.
If she see the Herds and Flocks Wanton round the Meads and Rocks, Thus their wishing Males to move, 'Tis the Instinct (say,) of Love. If she see the Bull among Crowds of Femals sleek and young, Fight His Rival of the Drove, 'Tis by Instinct (say,) of Love. If she see the blooming vines, In their season, fold their twines Round the Oake that neer her grows, Say, 'tis nature mixt their boughs: Then if Instinct these do move, We by reason ought to Love. Tell the fair one, every day Youth and Beauty steale away, And within a little space Will destroy her charming face. Every grace and smile, that lyes Languishing in Lips and Eyes,
First he'l make his prey, and then, Leave to Death, what do's remain. Who old Time do's only send To begin what he must end. If she ask, what hour and place, Where and when, Time wounds the face? Say, it is not in the Night, Nor when Day renews her light. In the Morning, or at noon. Or at Evening when alone, Or when entertained at home, Or abroad this hour will come, But swift time is always by, First to perfect, then destroy. And in vain you seek a cure Since his wounds are every hour: Bid her view Aurelia's brow, Naked of her Glories now, Yet she once cou'd charm the throng, Conquering with her Eyes and tongue.
Now, only's left this weak relief, (To support her years and grief,) When she cou'd she us'd her prime And enjoy'd the fruitis of time: And where ever she profest Love, or hate, she kill'd, or blest. While the neighbouring Plains were fill'd With their names she Lov'd and kill'd. Oh, when youth and Beautie's past, That poor pleasure that do's last Is to think they were admir'd, And by every youth desir'd, While the Dotage of each Swain She return'd with scorn again. Oh then let my Cloe know, When her youth is faded so, And a race of Nymphs appears, Gay and sprightly in their years, Proud and wanton in their Loves, While the Shepherds of the Groves
Strive with Presents who shall share Most the favors of the fair; And herself she do's behold Like Aurelia now grown old, Sighing to herself she'l say I was once ador'd, as they! Yet with Pleasure think, that she Lov'd and was belov'd by me. Therefore bid her haste and prove, While she may, the joys of Love. I will lead her to a soyle Where perpetual Summers smile, Without Autumn which bereaves Fairest Cedars of their leaves; Where she shall behold the Meads Ever Green, the Groves with Shades: Lasting Flowrs the banks shall wear, And Birds shall warble all the year. Where the rustick swain do's ow Nothing to the Spade and Plow.
For their Harvest, natures care Without toyle relieves 'em there, And no differing seasons bring Changes to the constant Spring. In the Morn she shall awake With the noyse the Shepherds make, Cheering, with the Ecchoing sounds Of their Horns, the eager Hounds. Nymphs, as well as Shepherds too In these Groves the chase persue. While at their backs their flowing hair Loosely wantons in the Air; Guilded Quivers on their thighs, With Darts less fatal than their Eyes. Each the others sloth do's blame, While they seek the Hart for game. Who, poor Fool, his Feet employs And thr'ow Woods and dales he flys. Over plains and Rivers bounds, And out-flies the Winds and Hounds.
When perhaps some Nymph, whose Eyes Makes both men and Beast her Prize, Swifter than Camilla's pace Soon o'retakes the winged race, And with one bright Glance she wounds, And his fancy'd hope confounds. Who, reflecting his faint Eyes On her Face, with pleasure dy's. When the sports are done, they rest Underneath some shade, and feast On sweet Beds of Violets crown'd With sweet Roses on the ground. Where they Garlands weave and Poses Of Green Mirtle, Pinks and Roses: For which grace the ravisht Swains Pay soft kisses for their Pains. Thus they Dally till the Light Falls behind the Scene of Night.
A PASTORAL On the Marriage of the right Honourable the Earle of Ossery to the Lady Mary Somerset. In a Dialogue between Damon and Menal∣cas, written by Mr. Edmond Arwaker. M. A. Damon. WHat mighty Joy affects Menalca's breast, Who's Extasie is in his face exprest? Sure his Laurinda now to smile begins, Or his full Ews increase his Flocks with twins. Men. Laurinda's frowns or smiles are now despis'd, Far less her favors than this bliss are pris'd. And all my Ews henceforth may barren be, 'Tis wealth enough this happy day to see.
Dam. What has this day produc'd to make it blest? Men. Joy too transporting to be well exprest! Joys which to Damon should not be unknown, Since they concern the lovely Celladon. Dam. The lovely Celladon! ah courteous swain! Repeat and bless me with that name again! Say, what new Triumph, what deserv'd success, Do the large volume of his fame encrease: Has he at wrastling purchas't more Renown Or won some other Race and weares the Crown! Men. He has, and justly, won a Nobler Prize, The Dazling Joy of all beholders Eyes, For what can Heav'n inlarge to him beside, Now the admir'd Clorinda is his bride.
Dam. Clorinda, his? then for this happy day A sacrifice of six choyce Lambs I'le pay, That Ewe with twins shall recompence thy news, Or, cull my Flocks, and, what thou fancyest, chuse, I'm so o're joy'd that should'st thou take'em all, I still shall think it a reward too small. Men. The Gods do merit sacrifice, 'tis true, But the bright pair deserve an offering too; To them we'll now an humble Tribute bring: Clorinda you, I Celladon will sing. Dam. 'Tis well propos'd, and now the Song begin. Men. Then rouse, my Muse, and let thy subject be Gay, soft, and fair, yet lofty too as he; To Celladon thy verse is justly due, Thou learn'd thy Art, whence his first Honours grew▪
From his great Ancestors magnificence, And ow'st thy growth to that blest influence: Then what that gave, thou must return again, And to his service consecrate thy pen. Young Celladon, the glory of our Plains, Joy of the Nymphs and envy of the Swains; Whose charming voyce each melting passion moves As gentle Zephyrs bend the yeilding Groves. To him the Nymphs their easy hearts resign, For him despairing Shepherdesses pine. Serene his face, as a rejoycing sky, And Glorious, as a rising Sun, his Eye. Dam. Sweet, as a blooming Spring, Clorinda's face, More sooth and clear than her own chrystal Glass; For her with folded Armes and heads hung low The hopeless Shepherds vent their restless woe; While o're the Plains their flocks neglected stray, As in loves maze themselves have lost the way.
But she do's all for Celladon despise, And at his heart alone, the noblest Prize, She darts the poynted Glories of her Eyes. Men. The God of Love had not another Dart, Able to peirce the wondrous Shepherds heart. Had he alone attack't th' Heroick Swain The mighty Conqueror had been captive ta'ne, For Celladon inur'd to wars Alarms And, thô all peaceful, takes delight in Arms, Best pleas'd when most expos'd, with noble heat He danger seeks and dares the hand of Fate. Once he persu'd it to a foreign shore, Where his great Fathers name was fear'd before. France. But all the damage by that terror done Has ample reparation from the Son: The favor, they from his Access receiv'd, Aton'd for routed Troops and Towns releiv'd. Monts.
Not only glory did engage his Sword, Duty unsheath'd it too to serve his Lord. When bold Rebellion did the Throne invade With broken faith, and fortune for 'its aid. The Western War. With early zeal the Shepherd did appear; His valor now had found 'its proper sphear: Call'd to the Battle by these loud Alarms. He broke away even from Clorindas Armes. Death, in the Royal cause had more, than Beauty, charms. Dam. He left Clorinda's Armes but not her heart, There he was still, nor thence cou'd ever part: That, to the bloody field marcht bravely out, And there with pious prayers and wishes fought. While she at home was never free from fear, For the rich venture she had trusted there; Yet hop't him safe in her great Fathers care.
Nor could she justly any danger dread For him who fought along with Diomed: Duke of Beaufort Eternal Laurels Crown that happy name, The dear, the sweet, the noble theme of fame; To all his proofes of Loyalty before The glorious Hero still is adding more. Firme to his Prince and faithful to his trust And daring to be hazardously just: Profuse of Life in his great Masters cause, And better pleas'd with service than applause. Some happy Muse, worthy a Theme so great, In lofty strains thy fame shall celebrate. Whose noble blood, which no corruption stains, Gives the rich Tincture to Clorinda's veines. Men. While Diomede with Armes protects the Throne, Nestor with Councel do's support the Crown; Duke of Ormond.
Nestor, no less couragious still than wise, And able once to act as to advise. Nestor, the partner of his Master's fate, Did all his injuries participate, When usurpation banisht him the Throne, Nestor indur'd not he shou'd go alone, His Kingdom lost, and loyal subjects few, Himself a King in Nestors heart he knew; The Monarchy for which he was design'd Was there preserv'd as thither 'twas confin'd. Nor were his limits scant, for his large soul Has 'its unbounded sphear above the pole. One subject of such vast Magnificence Might make at any time a Glorious Prince. But time sits heavy on his shoulders now, And his declining head begins to bow; Yet still so gracefully he treads the stage, He makes th' admiring World in love with age, Long may he cause their wonder and delight, Long be his day and far remote his night,
The night, when he to us shall disappear, Call'd hence to gild some other Hemisphear. Excellent Prince! in whom the World do's see A Species of untainted Loyalty. May Heav'n indulge our wishes long in thee, But if the fates deny this bliss to give, The Phaenix will in Celladon revive: To him our Homage we must then transfer, As much thy virtues, as thy fortunes, Heir. Dam. See, Swain, the Sun exalts his shining head, Brisk as a Bridegroom from Aurora's Bed, While, like a blushing Bride, the dawning morn Do's in her Gay attire herself adorn. 'Tis time the lovely pair, like them, shou'd rise, And we their presence want to bless our Eyes; The expecting World 'its patience has outstay'd, Lets hast and wake 'em with a serinade.
A Song. AH! Blame me not, if no despair, A passion you inspire, can end. Nor think it strange, too charming fair, If Love, like other flames, ascend. If to approach a Saint with Prayer Unworthy votarys pretend, Above all merit Heaven and you To the Sincere only are due. Long did respect awe my proud aim And fear t' offend the madness cover, Like you it still reproves my flame And in the friend wou'd hide the Lover. But by things that want a name I the too bold truth discover. My words in vain are in my pow'r My looks betray me every hour.
A PASTORAL On the Death of His late Majesty written by Mr. Otway. WHat horrors this that dwells upon the Plain, And thus disturbs the Shepherds peaceful Reign? A dismal sound breaks thro' the yeilding air Forewarning us somedreadful storm is neer, The bleating flocks in wild confusion stray The early Larks forsake their wandring way And cease to welcome in the new-born day. Each Nymph possest with a distracted fear Disorder'd hangs her loose dishevell'd hair, Diseases with her strong convulsions reign, And deities not known before to pain Are now with Apoplectick seizures slain: Hence flow our sorrows, hence increase our fears Each humble plant do's drop her silver tears.
Ye tender Lambs stray not so fast away, To weep and mourn let us together stay, O're all the universe let it be spread That now the Shepherd of the flock is dead. The Royal Pan, that shepherd of the sheep, He, who to leave his flock did dying weep, Is gone, ah gone, ne're to return from deaths Eternal sleep. Begin, Damela, let thy numbers fly Aloft, where the safe milkey way does ly, Mop'sus who Daphnis to the Stars did sing Shall joyn with you and hither waft our King. Play gently on your Reeds a mournful strain And tell in notes thro' all th' Arcadian Plain The Royal Pan, the Shepherd of the sheep He who to leave his Flock did dying weep Is gone! is gone, ne're to return from death's eternal sleep.
SONG. NO more will I my Passion hide Tho' too presuming it appear, When long despair a heart has try'd What other torment can it fear? Unlov'd of her I would not live Nor dy till she the sentence give. Why shou'd the fair offended be If vertue charm in Beauty's dress: If where so much divine I see My open vows the Saint confess. Awak'd by wonders in her Eyes My former Idols I despise.
Strephons complaint banisht from Sacarisa. HOW long shall I thus live condemn'd to mourn In vain my Sacarisa's cruel scorn? For ever let these Eyes be shut to light, Since the bright Nymph has robb'd me of her sight All other objects dull and useless grow No more their wonted form of colour shew. In glooming shades may I for ever live Sad as my sorrows, silent as my grave. Since Sacarisa's Eyes withdraw their light Darkness to me is Day, the Morning Night. No more the Sun, the Worlds majestick Eye, Shall dart his golden Beams thrô th' Azure Sky: Let sullen darkness on the Earth display His sable wings t' eclips the hated day As when in Chaos, uncreated night Sat Brooding on the seeds of Infant-light,
And no kind Beams did on the surface play Till the Sun rose and made a perfect day; So till my Nymph brings back her sparkling light Darkness to me is Day, the Morning Night. An Elegie written by Mr. W. O. Damon, and Thirsis. Dam. WElcome, dear Thirsis far above, The sweetest Emphasis of Love. More welcome than the fairest Dame That ever crost this awful Plain, With all her tender Virgin Train. Thirs. I thank thee, Shepherd, for thy Love, But how canst thou so soon remove The Passion which inrag'd thy brest, And kept thy better part from rest?
Dam. Believe me, Thirsis, for tis true They that Love long are very few, I pip'd, I sung, I liv'd in pain, In hope the Shepherdess to gain; Now vain my sute, in vain I cry, I sigh in vain, unhappy me, Condemn'd to such a Destinie Only to see the once lov'd Deitie. Thirs. Tell me, Damon, prithee do, Who's this Nymph that grieves thee so, By great Pan's all sacred name The wildest heart for thee i'le tame: Dam. Oh my friend! she's gone too far, Thou can'st not reach the charming fair: She's fled into the wisht for place, Where Love is acted o're in every grace.
Thirs. Whats her name? I can't contain, My blood runs swift in every veine. I'le ravage all the Woods and Groves, Th' intreguing Court for billing Lov's: No pains nor toyle for thee I'le spare, Come—let me know the cruel fair. Dam. Phillis, the Glory of our Isle, Who charm'd my Soul with every smile, Ah shee! the lovely torturing maid H'as now my heart, my all, betray'd; And my adoring Love with scorn repaid. Unhappy swain! dejected and forlorn, Ah me! how sadly am I left alone, To envy those Transporting charms She yeilds up to my happy Rivals Armes. Thirs. Ile go—
Dam. Stay, Shepherd, tis in vain to try To disappoint the Nuptial tye. No, no, shes gone to make my Rival blest, And left her Image only in my brest. Hence forth in Lovers tales let it be said, That thy poor friend, thy Damon, dy'd a maid. While no one part of me remains with her, But constant wishes and this humble Pray'r. Fairest of Nymphs— May all your Glorys, like the youthful Sun, Beame forth and in their purest lustre Burn. May all your days be as a day of bliss, And all your sorrows close still with a kiss; Happy the God, that succor'd your desire, And set the Hymenean Lamp on fire: May he in whole blest Armes you slumbringly, Be sensible of the vast envyed joy, While I who lost you lay me down and dy.
A PINDARICK To Mrs. Behn on her Poem on the Coronation. Written by a Lady. HAil, thou sole Empress of the Land of wit, To whom all conquer'd Authors must submit, And at thy feet their fading Laurels lay, The utmost tribute that a Muse can pay, To thy unlabour'd Song o'th' Coronation day. The subject was Divine we all confess, Nor was that flame, thy mighty fancy, less. That cloth'd thy thought in such a pleasing dress, As did at once a Masculine wit express, And all the softness of a Femal tenderness.
No more shall men their fancy'd Empire hold, Since thou Astrea form'd of finer mould, By nature temper'd more with humid cold, Doth man excel— Not in soft strokes alone, but even in the bold. And as thy purer Blood, Thrô more transparent vessels is convey'd Thy spirits more fine and subtil do thy brain invade. And nimbler come uncall'd unto thy aide; So the gay thought— Which thy still flowing fancy does inspire New, uncontroul'd, and warm, as young desire, Have more of kindling heat and fiercer fire; Not to be reach't, or prays'd, unless by such As the same happy temperament possess; Since none with equal numbers can reward thy Lays, May the just Monarch, which you praise, Daine to acknowledg this.
Not with a short applause of crackling Bays But a return that may revive thy days; And thy well-meaning grateful loyal Muse Cherisht by that blest theam its zeale did chuse. Maist thou be blest with such a sweet retreat, That with contempt thou maist behold the great; Such as the mighty Cowlys well-known seat. Whose lofty Elms I wou'd have all thy own, And in the mid'st a spacious shady Throne, Rais'd on a Mount that shou'd Parnassus be, And every Muse included all in thee. On whose coole top alone thou shoud'st dispense The Laws of Wit, Love, Loyalty and Sense: The new Arcadia shou'd the Grove be nam'd And for the guift our grateful Monarch fam'd. Amidst the shade, I'd wish a well built House, Like Sidneys Noble Kalendar shou'd stand, Raising its head and all the rest command. Its out-side gay, its inside clean and neat With all of lifes conveniencies replete,
Where all the Elements at once conspire To give what mans necessities require, Rich soyle, pure Aire, streams coole, and useful fire. The fertil spot with pleasure shou'd abound And with Elizium-Spring be ever crown'd. When thou thy mind unbend'st from thoughtful hours, Then shou'dst thou be refresht with Fruits and Flowrs, The Gods and Nymphs of Woods and Springs Shall Dance in Antique Rural Rings: While scaly Trytons and grim Satyrs play Such Tunes, as Birds compose, to welcome day. Till the glad noyse to distant shores resound, And flying Birds joyn in th' Harmonious sound. Which listning Echo's catch at the rebound. Here without toyle, or pining want perplext Thy Body easy and thy mind at rest, With all Lifes valu'd pleasures blest,
Thy largest wishes still thou shoud'st enjoy Inviron'd with delights that ne're can cloy. Accept, thou much lov'd Sappho of our Isle, This hearty wish, and grace it with a smile, When thou shalt know that thy Harmonious Lire Did me, the meanest of thy sex, inspire. And that thy own unimitable lays Are cause alone that I attempt thy praise. Which in unequal measure I rehearse Because unskill'd in numbers Grace, or Verse; Great Pindars flights are fit alone for thee, The witty Horace's Iambicks be Like Virgils lofty strains, alas too hard for me. And if enough this do not plead excuse, Pity the failings of a Virgin Muse. That never in this kind before essai'd, Her Muse till now was, like her self,—a Maid. Whose Blooming labours thus she dedicates to you, A Tribute justly to your merits due;
At least her part of gratitude to pay For that best Song o'th' Coronation day. How bad wou'd the Ill-natur'd World requite Thy noble labours if they do not write, Who have, perhaps, been happy in this kind To own thou'st now out-done all that they e're design'd. Sure none with malice e're was so accurst, This to deny but will with envy burst, Since even thy own more envious sex agree The glorious theam had right alone from thee; The femal Writers thou hast all excell'd, Since the first mother of mankind rebell'd.
To Mr. Wolseley on his Preface to Valen∣tinian. By a Lady of Quality. TO you, the generous task belongs alone To clear the injur'd and instruct the Town: Where, but in you is found a mind so brave To stretch the bounds of Love beyond the grave? Anger may last, but friendships quickly dy, For anxious thoughts are longer-liv'd than joy. Yet those, whom active fancies have misled So far as to assault the mighty dead; Now, taught by your reproofes a noble shame, Will strive by surer ways to raise their fame. But from our sex what praise do you deserve? We by your help may all our rights preserve, While others rob the Deities they serve,
For never sacriledge cou'd greater be Than to steal Honour from a Deitie. Such are the paths to fame, in which you tread, You bafle envy, while you nobly aide The helpless living and more helpless dead. Mr. Wolsely's Answer to the forgoing Copy. WHile soaring high above Orinda's flights, Equal to Sappho fam'd Urania writes; And feareless of an Host of byast men In my defence draws her all-conquering pen. While forcing every caviller to submit, Her approbation stamps my question'd wit. And a new way, by all the Nine inspir'd, Commending mine she makes her own admir'd. While that kind Balme's restoring virtue cures The Criticks bite and lasting life assures.
Delight extream rewarding all my pain, Spirits my genius and improves my vein. A useful pride the unhop'd Honour brings, Like that which from a sense of virtue springs. While thro her Sexes finer mould she pours Thoughts of the substance and the strength of ours. And in her draughts, grac'd with a sweeter Air, The Poet borrows softness from the fair: While with a wit that does the Age surprise, Just as her heart and powerful as her Eyes, My Panegyrick's fame she do's intend, Her easyer turn instructs me how to mend, Her still-fresh flights inriching every Theam Flow equal, like a smooth untroubl'd stream, Whose cheerful current, without tides is strong And thrô green Meadows purling glides along. How rare is praise in fitting words exprest With judgment heighten'd and with skill addrest Those who deserve it most can give it best.
How flat and tastless is a fool's applause, Whose want of knowledge do's his wonder cause? More fulsom is the fawning of a knave Whose narrow mind his little ends enslave: Whose Pen for ever fear and int'rest guide Whom each his stage which like contemning Pride All wealthy fops and prosperous villains ride; Who can to none but fortune faithful be, False to desert, and Prostitute as she. But just Urania, truth and virtues friend, Quick to discern, and sparing to commend, Whom in-born worth above mean aimes does raise Can no more give than need such hackney Bays. Her mind to Earth, wits rightful Soveraign came, By Heaven instructed to distribute fame; What Stoick soul has temper to refuse Th' uncommon favors of so chast a Muse? While her soft strain, in which no toyl appears, With divine Musick bribes our ravisht eares.
And her wit varying a thousand ways With that strong Philtre baits her powrful praise, Her flowing lines such skilful measures bound, The sense is not more charming than the sound: So does her verse in words well-plac'd and chose Her rich Invention's beauteous store disclose. As calm Favonius with his gentle wing Opens the Flowers and spreads the sweets of spring. When stopt by Trees, chance into arbour weaves His murmuring voyce, some Lovers care deceives, And breathing Roses whistles thrô the leaves When thus like Her's which no rich Rogue can share Praise comes both from the knowing and sincere, Just is the pride, as the delight is rare. Like Hope, it flatters; like Ambition, warms; And like a Lovers happy moment, charms. When first to ease the long unpitied swain His cruel fair confesses equal pain,
When first he sees within her kindling Eyes A guilty care and Bashful sweetness rise. Oft when perplext with timorous doubts unrest, I read her praise in which my Muse is drest With all the grace and all the power of Poetry exprest. Raptures so strong my happier thoughts employ, As pain perception, and oppress with Joy. The rich Ragoust, wit's too profuse expence, A flavor gives that conquers human sense; A tast too high for weak man to digest, Ambrosia 'tis, on which Immortals feast, The Fruit of life's fair Tree to Martyrs given When fin'd from flesh and purg'd of Earths dull Leaven Their frames can bear the Luxury of Heaven. Cease England, thy late loss so high to rate, Here learn thy mighty sorrow to abate, By her instructive gentle song half reconcil'd to fate.
Your tender moan, you tuneful Nine give o're, Lament your darling Bion's death no more. In her lov'd Lays his better part survives, He dyes not all, while soft Urania lives. Her Heaven has warm'd, with the same pleasing fires The Earl of Roche∣ster, her Uncle, In her like nobleblood, like noble thoughts inspires. His perishing goods to others let him leave, To Her his deathless Pen he did bequeave; And if my humble Muse, whose luckless strain Was us'd alone of Beauty to complain And sing in melancholy notes love's unregarded pain, Rais'd by that theme, above her usual height Cou'd clear his fame, or do his virtue right, How well do's she the trifling debt acquit, She whose resembling Genius shews her fit To be his sole Executrix in wit.
On the Honourable Sir Francis Fane, on his Play call'd the Sacrifice. by Mrs. A. B. LOng have our Priests condemn'd a wicked Age, And every little criticks sensless rage Damn'd a forsaken self-declining stage: Great 'tis confest and many are our crimes, And no less profligate the vitious times, But yet no wonder both prevail so ill, The Poets fury and the Preachers skill; While to the World it is so plainly known They blame our faults, with greatones of their own, Let their dull Pens flow with unlearned spight And weakly censure what the skilful write; You, learned Sir, a nobler passion shew, Our best of rules and best example too. Precepts and grave instructions dully move, The brave Performer better do's improve,
Ver'st in the truest Satyr you excel And shew how ill we write by writing well. This noble Piece which well deserves your name I read with pleasure thô I read with shame. The tender Laurels which my brows had drest Flag, like young Flowers, with too much heat opprest. The generous fire I felt in every line Shew'd me the cold, the feeble, force of mine. Henceforth I'le you for imitation chuse Your nobler flights will wing my Callow Muse; So the young Eagle is inform'd to fly By seeing the Monarch Bird ascend the sky. And thô with less success her strength she'l try, Spreads her soft plumes and his vast tracks persues Thô far above the towring Prince she views: High as she can she'll bear your deathless fame, And make my song Immortal by your name. But where the work is so Divinely wrought, The rules so just and so sublime each thought,
When with so strict an Art your scenes are plac'd With wit so new, and so uncommon, grac'd, In vain, alas! I shou'd attempt to tell Where, or in what, your Muse do's most excel. Each character performs its noble part, And stamps its Image on the Readers heart. In Tamerlan you a true Hero drest, A generous conflict wars within his breast, This there the mightyest passions you have shew'd By turns confest the Mortal and the God. When e're his steps approach the haughty fair He bows indeed but like a Conqueror, Compell'd to Love yet scorns his servial chain, In spight of all you make the Monarch reign. But who without resistless tears can see The bright, the innocent, Irene die: Axalla's life a noble ransom paid, In vain to save the much-lov'd charming maid, Nought surely cou'd but your own flame inspire Your happy Muse to reach so soft a fire.
Yet with what Art you turn the pow'rful stream When trecherous Ragallzan is the theam: You mix our different passions with such skill, We feel 'em all and all with pleasure feel. We love the mischief, thô the harms we grieve, And for his wit the villain we forgive. In your Despina all those passions meet, Which womans frailties perfectly compleat. Pride and Revenge, Ambition, Love and Rage, At once her wilful haughty Soul engage; And while her rigid Honour we esteem, The dire effects as justly must condemn. She shews a virtue so severely nice As has betray'd it to a pitch of vice. All which confess a God-like pow'r in you Who cou'd form woman to herself so true. Live, mighty Sir, to reconcile the Age To the first glories of the useful Stage.
'Tis you her rifl'd Empire may restore And give her power she ne're cou'd boast before. Cato's Answer to Labienus, when he ad∣vis'd him to consult the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon. Being a Paraphrastical Translation of part of the 9th Bookof Lucan, beginning at—Quid quaeri, Labiene, Jubes, &c. WHat shou'd I ask my friend, which best wou'd be To live inslav'd, or thus in Armes die free? If any force can Honour's price abate? Or virtue bow beneath the blows of fate? If fortunes threats a steady Soul disdains, Or if the Joys of Life be worth the pains? If it our happiness at all import Whether the foolish scene be long, or short.
If when we do but aim at noble ends The attempt alone Immortal fame attends? If for bad accidents, which thickest press On merit, we shou'd like a good cause less? Or be the fonder of it for success? All this is clear, wove in our minds it sticks, Nor Ammon, nor his Priest's can deeper fix; Without the Clergy's venal cant and pains Gods never-frustrate Will holds ours in chains, Nor can we Act but what th' All-wise ordains. Who needs no voyce, nor perishing words to aw Our wild desires, and give his creatures Law: What e're to know, or needful was or fit. In the wise frame of human souls 'tis writ, Both what we ought to do, and what forbear, He once for all, did at our births declare. But never did he seek out Desart Lands To bury truth in unfrequented Sands; Or to a corner of the World withdrew, Head of a sect and partial to a few.
Nature's vast fabrick is his house alone, This Globe his foot-stool, and high Heav'n his throne. In Earth, Air, Sea, and in who e're excells In knowing heads and honest hearts he dwells; Why seek we then among these barren sands, In narrow shrines and temples built with hands, Him whose dread presence does all places fill? Or look but in our reason for his will? All we e're saw is God! in all we find Apparent Prints of the eternal mind; Let floating fools their course by Prophets steer And always of the future live in fear; No Oracle, or Dream the crowd is told Can make me more or less resolv'd and bold. But surer death, which equally on all Both on the coward and the brave must fall. This said, and turning with disdain about, He left scorn'd Ammon to the vulgar Rout.
To his Grace the Duke of Ormond, upon his leaving the Government of Ireland. HAve we a farther trouble yet in store, And can our destinie afflict us more? To lose our Prince we thought too great a blow, And must we lose his glorious Image too? Ireland for more than twice seven years has bin Envy'd without, for being so blest within; While Plague, Fire, Famin, War abroad has Reign'd, This only was the safe and happy Land; Which happiness, great Sir, to you we owe Next to the God above and God below. The Irish Harp, which long abus'd had lain, Your skilful hand first brought in tune again. And when some others by our King were sent To play upon the noble Instrument,
Such was their Ignorance, or their Error such They prov'd but foyles to your Melodious touch. Into your hands then, which before it grac'd, The noble Instrument again was plac'd. On which a long, soft tune again you play'd, When Jarring discord did all else invade, And we rejoyc'd to think you wou'd play on: But Heavens and the Kings will must still be done, While we submit as humbly to that power Which can the bliss, it takes away, restore, More we can't have, nor do we wish for more. Adieu then, much lov'd Prince, With mournful hearts we make this Prayer for you, Greatest and best of uncrown'd Heads adieu, And since you must goe hence— We'll waft you o're with steady Gales of Prayers, And bear you on a Sea of humble tears, All the Amends which for your mighty toyle, Can be return'd by a poor widow'd Isle.
Such now alas, She is, and ne're till now That Ormonds noble house did wholly from her go, Not leaving to support her mighty Mind, An Arran, or an Ossory behind. May Heavens choice blessings on 'em all attend, And bring'em to a calm and glorious end. Glorious and calm may all their passage be As was the hour in which they put to Sea. And landed, wheresoere her Ormond goes, May England doat on him as Ireland do's. SONG. BReak, Break, sad heart, unload thy grief, Give, give, thy sorrows way. Seek out thy only last relief, And thy hard Stars obey: Those Stars that doom thee to revere What do's themselves outshine.
And plac'd her too in such a Sphear That she can ne're be mine. Because Endymion once did move Nights Goddess to come down, And listen to his tale of Love, Aim not thou idly at the Moon. Be it thy pleasure and thy Pride That wreckt on stretch't desire, Thou canst thy fiercest torments hide, And silently expire. To Damon. To inquire of him if he cou'd tell me by the Style, who writ me a Copy of Verses that came to me in an unknown Hand, by Mrs. A. B. OH, Damon, if thou ever wers't That certain friend thou hast profest,
Relieve the Pantings of my heart, Restore me to my wonted rest. Late in the Silvian Grove I sat, Free as the Air, and calm as that; For as no winds the boughs opprest, No storms of Love were in my breast. A long Adieu I'd bid to that Ere since Amintas prov'd ingrate. And with indifference, or disdain, I lookt around upon the Plain. And worth my favor found no sighing Swain; But oh, my Damon, all in vain I triumph'd in security, In vain absented from the Plain. The wanton God his Power to try In lone recesses makes us yeild, As well as in the open feild; For where no human thing was found My heedless heart receiv'd a wound
Assist me, Shepherd, or I dye, Help to unfold this Mystery. No Swain was by, no flattering Nymph was neer, Soft tales of Love to whisper to my Ear. In sleep, no Dream my fancy fir'd With Images, my waking wish desir'd. No fond Idea fill'd my mind; Nor to the faithless sex one thought inclin'd; I sigh'd for no deceiving youth, Who forfeited his vows and truth; I waited no Assigning Swain Whose disappointment gave me pain. My fancy did no prospect take Of Conquest's I design'd to make. No snares for Lovers I had laid, Nor was of any snare afraid. But calm and innocent I sate, Content with my indifferent fate. (A Medium, I confess, I hate.)
For when the mind so cool is grown As neither Love nor Hate to own, The Life but dully lingers on. Thus in the mid'st of careless thought, A paper to my hand was brought. What hidden charms were lodg'd within, To my unwary Eyes unseen, Alas! no Human thought can guess; But ho! it robb'd me of my peace. A Philter 'twas, that darted pain Thrô every pleas'd and trembling vein. A stratagem, to send a Dart By a new way into the heart, Th'Ignoble Policie of Love By a clandestin means to move. Which possibly the Instrument Did ne're design to that intent, But only form, and complement. While Love did the occasion take And hid beneath his flowres a snake
O're every line did Poyson fling In every word he lurk't a sting. So Matrons are, by Demons charms, Thô harmless, capable of harms. The verse was smooth, the thought was fine, The fancy new, the wit divine. But fill'd with praises of my face and Eyes, My verse, and all those usual flatteries To me as common as the Air; Nor cou'd my vanity procure my care. All which as things of course are writ And less to shew esteem than wit. But here was some strange somthing more Than ever flatter'd me before; My heart was by my Eyes misled: I blusht and trembl'd as I read. And every guilty look confest I was with new surprise opprest. From every view I felt a pain And by the Soul, I drew the Swain.
Charming as fancy cou'd create Fine as his Poem, and as soft as that, I drew him all the heart cou'd move I drew him all that women Love. And such a dear Idea made As has my whole repose betray'd. Pigmalion thus his Image form'd, And for the charms he made, he sigh'd and burn'd. Oh thou that know'st each Shepherds Strains That Pipes and Sings upon the Plains; Inform me where the youth remains. The spightful Paper bare no name, Nor can I guess from whom it came, Or if at least a guess I found, 'Twas not t'instruct but to confound.
SONG of Basset, by Sir George Ethrege. LEt Equipage and Dress despair, Since Basset is come in, For nothing can oblige the fair Like Money and Morine. Is any Countess in distress She flys not to the Beau, 'Tis only Cony can redress Her grief with a Rouleau. By this bewitching Game betray'd Poor Love is bought and sold. And that which shou'd be a free Trade, Is now ingross'd by Gold. Even sense is brought into disgrace, Where company is met
Or silent stands, or leaves the Place, While all the talk's Basset. Why, Ladys, will you stake your hearts, Where a Plain cheat is found, You first are rookt out of those Darts, That gave your selves the wound. The time, which shou'd be kindly lent To plays and witty men, In waiting for a knave is spent Or wishing for a ten. Stand in defence of your own charms, Throw down this Favorite, That threatens with his dazling Arms Your Beauty and your Wit. What pity tis, those conquering Eyes, Which all the World subdue, Shou'd while the Lover gazing dyes Be only on Alpue.
To the Lord Bishop of Rochester, on His History of the Plot written by His late Majesties command. And an Apologie for these Verses call'd the Advice to a Pain∣ter, by the same Author. My Lord, WIth humble hope your goodness will excuse The hasty zeal of an aspiring Muse; I with unequal pace your steps persue, And thought I trod securely following you, Repenting now, like Phaeton, too late I feebly sink beneath the Glorious weight. And own the work for all but you too great: The hand that rivall'd Heaven took thence its fire Er'e he the sensless Machin cou'd inspire; And the rash Author wou'd attempt in vain, Unless he borrow'd your diviner Pen;
To imitate or praise with equal flight What only Charles cou'd Dictate, only you cou'd Write. If trouble past by repetition please, Thô meaner tongues the grateful tale reherse, What mighty Raptures must these Ills create, Which bravely, as he conquer'd, you relate; Our joys without our sufferings had been less, And for the remedy, the wound we bless. So did not Catilines defeated rage Your much-lov'd Tullies daring Pen engage, His Rome wou'd want one Glory of his tongue, The World a Master-peece, and Fame a Song.
Upon the Arrival of his Excellency Henry Earle of Clarendon, And his entring up∣on the Government of Ireland, Jan: 1685/6. by a M. of A. Mart: Ep: Phosphore, redde diem, quid Gaudia no∣ster moraris, Caesare venturo, Phosphore, redde Diem. WHen Glorious Ormond, as belov'd as Great, His gentle course of Government being run, With the Day's ruler in the Ocean set And layd the burden of his Empire down. Like Northern Mariners, our longing Eyes A thousand times towards the East were sent, Expecting still the same bright Sun wou'd rise, And bring us back the joys that with him went.
Meane while, the wisht-for blessing to ensure, Our earthly God design'd for us below, His absence that we better might endure, Two shining Planets did on us bestow. Stars to benighted Travellers still dear, Benign and Joyful, as the God of Light, Who whensoer'e together they appear, Quickly remove all terrors of the Night. Ever Immortal Castor first did shine, The Churches Angel and the kingdoms Eye, With whom our Jove did noble Pollux joyn, To share in Castor's Immortality. The Radiant pair both now and heretofore Have made us safe with their united Beam. We fear'd no Rocks, nor heard we Tempests roar, Enlighten'd once and influenc'd by them.
Perhaps some noysy bug-bears of the Night Or stalking shade, which dares not see the Day May howl and menace and the feeble fright And huff the timorous—because they may. Such empty Mormo's possibly might scare The unexperienc'd Mariners awhile, But these bright Stars such happy omens are, As make the knowing at their threatnings smile. For now the shining Twins about to set Point out to us another rising Sun, Which will the fantôms of the Night defeat And make grim Specters from his presence run. Not the Illustrious Ormond, whose bright ray So long had cheer'd us, we desir'd it still. But a new Sun will walk in Ormonds way And all that Princes brave desire fulfil.
Sprung from a Loyal Sire! Renoun'd, and wise; Akin to Princes and to Crowns allied: Whom Great men Honor and whom Good men prise. How happy are we in so blest a guide! Hail, Glorious light! long lookt for Sun, all Hail, Welcome as Day to Winter Passengers, Whose warm and powerful influence will not fail To raise our Spirits and repress our fears. He with wise conduct and resistless Art Will charm our foes and all our doubts will clear, Fresh vigor and new courage will impart, A frighted Church and fainting Kingdom cheer. Then, Ireland, once more lift thy drooping head, And read thy safety in thy Rulers face; His Power which cou'd ev'n raise thee from the Dead Will soon restore thee to thy former grace.
From forth an Orbe of able Statesmen chose By our discerning Monarch, wise, and just. He's judg'd most fit thy troubles to compose, And to make good thy Princes mighty trust. Our Churches firm support, and friend he'l prove, The Laws Instructor, Learnings Patron too, The good will cherish, and the Loyal love, All this, and more than this he'l be, and do. Arise then, Gracious Clarendon, and sway That People who have long'd for your Arrive Who love your Person, and with joy obey Even while the God-like Ormond is alive. The Sun and you do now together get, And give new life, new influence to men, May you, (unlike to him,) or never set, Or like him ever rise to us agen.
A Poem against fruition written on the read∣ing in Mountains Essay: By Alexis. AH wretched Man! whom neither fate can please Nor Heavens indulgent to his wish can bless, Desire torments him, or fruition cloys, Fruition which shou'd make his bliss, destroys; Far from our Eyes th' inchanting objects set Advantage by the friendly distance get. Fruition shews the cheat, and views 'em near, Then all their borrow'd splendours plain appear, And we what with much care we gain and skill An empty nothing find, or real ill. Thus disappointed, our mistaken thought, Not finding satisfaction which it sought Renews its search, and with much toyl and pain Most wisely strives to be deceiv'd again.
Hurried by our fantastick wild desire We loath the present, absent things admire, Those we adore, and fair Idea's frame, And those enjoy'd we think wou'd quench the flame In vain, the Ambitious feaver still returns And with redoubled fire more fiercely burns. Our boundless vast desires can know no rest, But travel forward still and labour to be blest. Philosophers and Poets strove in vain The restless anxious Progress to restrain, And to their loss soon found their Good supream An Airy notion and a pleasing Dream. For happiness is no where to be found, But flys the searcher, like enchanted ground. Are we then masters or the slaves of things? Poor wretched vassalls, or terrestial Kings? Left to our reason, and by that betray'd, We lose a present bliss to catch a shade.
Unsatisfy'd with Beauteous natures store The universal Monarch Man is only poor. To Alexis in Answer to his Poem against Fruition. ODE. by Mrs. B. AH hapless sex! who bear no charms, But what like lightning flash and are no more, False fires sent down for baneful harms, Fires which the fleeting Lover feebly warms And given like past Beboches o're, Like Songs that please, (thô bad,) when new, But learn'd by heart neglected grew. In vain did Heav'n adorn the shape and face With Beautyes which by Angels forms it drew: In vain the mind with brighter Glories Grace, While all our joys are stinted to the space
Of one betraying enterview, With one surrender to the eager will We 're short-liv'd nothing, or a real ill. Since Man with that inconstancy was born, To love the absent, and the present scorn. Why do we deck, why do we dress For such a short-liv'd happiness? Why do we put Attraction on, Since either way tis we must be undon? They fly if Honour take our part, Our Virtue drives 'em o're the field. We lose 'em by too much desert, And Oh! they fly us if we yeild. Ye Gods! is there no charm in all the fair To fix this wild, this faithless, wanderer.
Man! our great business and our aim, For whom we spread our fruitless snares, No sooner kindles the designing flame, But to the next bright object bears The Trophies of his conquest and our shame: Inconstancy's the good supream The rest is airy Notion, empty Dream! Then, heedless Nymph, be rul'd by me If e're your Swain the bliss desire; Think like Alexis he may be Whose wisht Possession damps his fire; The roving youth in every shade Has left some sighing and abandon'd Maid, For tis a fatal lesson he has learn'd, After fruition ne're to be concern'd.
To Alexis, On his saying, I lov'd a Man that talk'd much. by Mrs. B. ALexis, since you'l have it so I grant I am impertinent. And till this moment did not know Thrô all my life what 'twas I ment; Your kind opinion was th' unflattering glass, In which my mind found how deform'd it was. In your clear sense which knows no art, I saw the error of my Soul; And all the feebless of my heart, With one reflection you controul, Kind as a God, and gently you chastise, By what you hate, you teach me to be wise.
Impertinence, my sexes shame, (Which has so long my life persu'd,) You with such modesty reclaim As all the Woman has subdu'd. To so divine a power what must I owe, That renders me so like the perfect—you? That conversable thing I hate Already with a just disdain, Who Prid's himself upon his prate And is of word, (that Nonsense,) vain; When in your few appears such excellence, They have reproacht, and charm'd me into sense. For ever may I listning sit, Thô but each hour a word be born: I wou'd attend the coming wit, And bless what can so well inform: Let the dull World henceforth to words be damn'd, I'm into nobler sense than talking sham'd.
A PASTORAL Pindarick. On the Marriage of the Right Honourable the Earle of Dorset and Midlesex, to the Lady Mary Compton. A DIALOGUE. Between Damon and Aminta. By Mrs. Behn. Aminta. WHither, young Damon, whither in such hast, Swift as the Winds you sweep the Grove, The Amorous God of Day scarce hy'd so fast After his flying Love? Damon. Aminta, view my Face, and thence survey My very Soul and all its mighty joy!
A joy too great to be conceal'd, And without speaking is reveal'd; For this eternal Holyday. A Day to place i'th' Shepherds Kalendar, To stand the glory of the circling year. Let it's blest date on every Bark be set, And every Echo its dear name repeat. Let 'em tell all the neighbouring Woods and Plains, That Lysidus, the Beauty of the Swains, Our darling youth, our wonder and our Pride, Is blest with fair Clemena for a Bride. Oh happy Pair! Let all the Groves rejoyce, And gladness fill each heart and every voyce! Aminta. Clemena! that bright maid for whom our Shep∣herds pine, For whom so many weeping Eyes decline! For whom the Echos all complain, For whom with sigh and falling tears The Lover in his soft despairs
Disturbs the Peaceful Rivers gliding stream? The bright Clemena who has been so long The destinie of hearts and yet so young, She that has robb'd so many of content Yet is herself so Sweet, so Innocent. She, that as many hearts invades, As charming Lysidus has conquer'd maids, Oh tell me, Damon, is the lovely fair Become the dear reward of all the Shepherds care. Has Lysidus that prize of Glory won For whom so many sighing Swains must be undon? Damon. Yes, it was destin'd from Eternity, They only shou'd each other's be, Hail, lovely pair, whom every God design'd In your first great Creation shou'd be joyn'd. Aminta. Oh, Damon, this is vain Philosophie, 'Tis chance and not Divinity,
That guides Loves Partial Darts; And we in vain the Boy implore To make them Love whom we Adore. And all the other powers take little care of hearts, The very Soule's by intr'est sway'd, And nobler passion now by fortune is betray'd; By sad experience this I know, And sigh, Alas! in vain because tis true. Damon. Too often and too fatally we find Portion and Joynture charm the mind, Large Flocks and Herds, and spacious Plains Becoms the merit of the Swains. But here, thô both did equally abound, 'Twas youth, 'twas wit, was Beauty gave the equal wound; Their Soules were one before they mortal being found, Jove when he layd his awful Thunder by And all his softest Attributes put on,
When Heav'n was Gay, and the vast Glittering Sky With Deities all wondering and attentive shone, The God his Luckyest heat to try Form'd their great Soules of one Immortal Ray, He thought, and form'd, as first he did the World, But with this difference, That from Chaos came, These from a beam, which, from his God-head hurl'd Kindl'd into an everlasting flame. He smiling saw the mighty work was good, While all the lesser Gods around him gazing stood. He saw the shining Model bright and Great But oh! they were not yet compleat, For not one God but did the flames inspire, With sparks of their Divinest fire. Diana took the lovely Female Soul, And did its fiercer Atoms cool; Softn'd the flame and plac'd a Chrystal Ice About the sacred Paradise, Bath'd it all or'e in Virgin Tears,
Mixt with the fragrant Dew the Rose receives, Into the bosom of her untoucht leaves, And dry'd it with the breath of Vestal Prayers, Juno did great Majestick thought inspire And Pallas toucht it with Heroick fire. While Mars, Apollo, Love and Venus sate, About the Hero's Soul in high debate, Each claims it all, but all in vain contend, In vain appeal to mighty Jove, Who equal Portions did to all extend. This to the God of wit, and that to Love, Another to the Queen of soft desire, And the fierce God of War compleats the rest, Guilds it all or'e with Martial fire; While Love, and Wit, Beauty and War exprest Their finest Arts, and the bright Beings all in Glory drest. While each in their Divine imployments strove By every charm these new-form'd l'ghts t'improve, They left a space untoucht for mightyer Love.
The finishing last strokes the Boy perform'd; Who from his Quiver took a Golden Dart That cou'd a sympathizing wound impart, And toucht 'em both, and with one flame they burn'd. The next great work was to create two frames Of the Divinest form, Fit to contain these heavenly flames. The Gods decreed, and charming Lysidus was born, Born, and grew up the wonder of the Plains, Joy of the Nymphs and Glory of the Swains. And warm'd all hearts with his inchanting strains; Soft were the Songs, which from his lips did flow, Soft as the Soul which the fine thought conceiv'd. Soft as the sighs the charming Virgin breath'd The first dear night of the chast nuptial vow. The noble youth even Daphnis do's excel Oh never Shepherd pip'd and sung so well.
Aminta. Now, Damon, you are in your proper sphear, While of his wit you give a character. But who inspir'd you a Philosopher? Damon. Old Colin, when we oft have led our Flocks Beneath the shelter of the shad's and Rocks, While other youths more vainly spent their time, I listen'd to the wonderous Bard; And while he sung of things sublime With reverend pleasure heard. He soar'd to the Divine abodes And told the secrets of the Gods. And oft discours'd of Love and Sympathy; For he as well as thou and I Had sigh't for some dear object of desire; But oh! till now I ne're cou'd prove That secret mystery of Love; Ne're saw two hearts thus burn with equal fire.
Aminta. But, oh! what Nymph e're saw the noble youth That was not to eternal Love betray'd? Damon. And, oh! what swain e're saw the Lovely maid, That wou'd not plight her his eternal faith! Not unblown Roses, or the new-born day Or pointed Sun-beams, when they gild the skys, Are half so sweet, are half so bright and gay, As young Clemena's charming Face and Eyes! Aminta. Not full-blown flowrs, when all their luster's on Whom every bosom longs to wear, Nor the spread Glories of the mid-days sun Can with the charming Lysidus compare. Damon. Not the soft gales of gentle breez That whisper to the yeilding Trees, Nor songs of Birds that thrô the Groves rejoyce, Are half so sweet, so soft, as young Clemena's voyce.
Aminta. Not murmurs of the Rivulets and Springs, When thrô the glades they purling glide along And listen when the wondrous shepherd sings, Are half so sweet as is the Shepherds song. Damon. Not young Diana in her eager chase When by her careless flying Robe betray'd, Discovering every charm and every Grace, Has more surprising Beauty than the brighter maid. Aminta. The gay young Monarch of the cheerful May Adorn'd with all the Trophies he has won, Vain with the Homage of the joyful day Compar'd to Lysidus wou'd be undone. Damon. Aminta, cease; and let me hast away, For while upon this Theam you dwell, You speak the noble youth so just, so well, I cou'd for ever listning stay.
Aminta. And while Clemena's praise becoms thy choyce, My Ravisht soul is fixt upon thy voyce. Damon. But see the Nymphs and dancing swains Ascend the Hill from yonder Plains, With Wreathes and Garlands finely made, To crown the lovely Bride and Bridegrooms head, And I amongst the humbler throng My Sacrifice must bring A rural Hymeneal song, Alexis he shall pipe while I will sing. Had I been blest with Flocks or Herd A nobler Tribute I'd prepar'd, With darling Lambs the Altars I wou'd throng: But I, alas! can only offer song. Song too obscure, too humble verse For this days glory to reherse, But Lysidus, like Heav'n, is kind, And for the Sacrifice accepts the Humble mind.
If he vouchsafe to listen to my Ode He makes me happyer than a fancy'd God. On Desire A Pindarick. By Mrs. B. WHat Art thou, oh! thou new-found pain? From what infection dost thou spring? Tell me—oh! tell me, thou inchanting thing, Thy nature, and thy name; Inform me by what subtil Art, What powerful Influence, You got such vast Dominion in a part Of my unheeded, and unguarded, heart, That fame and Honour cannot drive yee thence.
Oh! mischievous usurper of my Peace; Oh! soft intruder on my solitude, Charming disturber of my ease, That hast my nobler fate persu'd, And all the Glorys of my life subdu'd. Thou haunt'st my inconvenient hours The business of the Day, nor silence of the night, That shou'd to cares and sleep invite, Can bid desyance to thy conquering powers. Where hast thou been this live-long Age That from my Birth till now, Thou never coud'st one thought engage, Or charm my soul with the uneasy rage That made it all its humble feebles know? Where wert thou, oh, malicious spright, When shining Honour did invite.?
When interest call'd, then thou wert shy, Nor to my aid one kind propension brought, Nor wou'd'st inspire one tender thought, When Princes at my feet did lye. When thou coud'st mix ambition with my joy, Then peevish Phantôm thou wer't nice and coy, Not Beauty cou'd invite thee then Nor all the Arts of lavish Men! Not all the powerful Rhetorick of the Tongue Not sacred Wit cou'd charm thee on; Not the soft play that lovers make, Nor sigh cou'd fan thee to a fire, Not pleading tears, nor vows cou'd thee awake, Or warm the unform'd somthing—to desire. Oft I've conjur'd thee to appear By youth, by love, by all their powrs, Have searcht and sought thee every where, In silent Groves, in lonely bowrs:
On Flowry beds where lovers wishing lye, In sheltering Woods where sighing maids To their assigning Shepherds hye, And hide their blushes in the gloom of shades Yet there, even there, thô youth assail'd, Where Beauty prostrate lay and fortune woo'd, My heart insensible to neither bow'd Thy lucky aid was wanting to prevail. In courts I sought thee then, thy proper sphear But thou in crowds we'rt stifl'd there, Int'rest did all the loving business do, Invites the youths and wins the Virgins too. Or if by chance some heart thy empire own (Ah power ingrate!) the slave must be undone Tell me, thou nimble fire, that dost dilate Thy mighty force thrô every part, What God, or Human power did thee create In my, till now, unfacil heart?
Art thou some welcome plague sent from above In this dear form, this kind disguise? Or the false offspring of mistaken love, Begot by some soft thought that faintly strove, With the bright peircing Beautys of Lysanders Eyes? Yes, yes, tormenter, I have found thee now; And found to whom thou dost thy being owe, 'Tis thou the blushes dost impart, For thee this languishment I wear, 'Tis thou that tremblest in my heart When the dear Shepherd do's appear, I faint, I dye with pleasing pain, My words intruding sighing break When e're I touch the charming swain When e're I gaze, when e're I speak. Thy conscious fire is mingl'd with my love, As in the sanctify'd abodes Misguided worshippers approve The mixing Idol with their Gods.
In vain, alas! in vain I strive With errors, which my soul do please and vex, For superstition will survive, Purer Religion to perplex. Oh! tell me you, Philosophers, in love, That can its burning feaverish fits controul, By what strange Arts you cure the soul, And the fierce Calenture remove? Tell me, yee fair ones, that exchange desire, How tis you hid the kindling fire. Oh! wou'd you but confess the truth, It is not real virtue makes you nice: But when you do resist the pressing youth, 'Tis want of dear desire, to thaw the Virgin Ice. And while your young adorers lye All languishing and hopeless at your feet, Raising new Trophies to your chastity, Oh tell me, how you do remain discreet?
How you suppress the rising sighs, And the soft yeilding soul that wishes in your Eyes? While to th' admiring crow'd you nice are found; Some dear, some secret, youth that gives the wound Informs you, all your virtu's but a cheat And Honour but a false disguise, Your modesty a necessary bait To gain the dull repute of being wise. Deceive the foolish World—deceive it on, And veil your passions in your pride; But now I've found your feebles by my own, From me the needful fraud you cannot hide. Thô tis a mighty power must move The soul to this degree of love, And thô with virtue I the World perplex, Lysander finds the weekness of my sex, So Helen while from Theseus arms she fled, To charming Paris yeilds her heart and Bed.
SONG. By a person of Quality. AH cruel Beauty, cou'd you prove More tender or less fair. You neither wou'd provoke my Love Nor cause me to despair. But your dissembling charming Eyes My easy hope beguiles, And thô a Rock beneath'em lys The tempting surface smiles. To what your sex on ours impose My humble Love comply'd, And when my secret I disclos'd Thought modesty deny'd; Yes sure, said I, her yeilding heart Pertakes of my desire, But nicer Honour feigns this part To hide the rising fire.
Against your mind my sute I told, And slighted vows renew'd, Yet you insensibly were cold And I but vainly woo'd. Then for return a scorn prepare Or lay that frown aside, Affected coyness I can bear But hate insulting Pride. SONG. By a person of Quality. UNder the Beams of Celia's Eyes, See the fair Shepherd panting lys, For whom all other Beauty dys? Him thô she burn with equal fire She suffers at her feet t' expire Preferring glory to desire.
Dye then, oh dye, unhappy swain, And leave her to lament in vain The cruel sports of her disdain; You fall a Publique sacrifice Since she will weep away those Eyes By whose each look a lover dyes. SONG. 1. by the same hand. WHen sable night had conquer'd day, And Beauteous Cynthia rose, As I in tears reflecting lay On Cloe's faithless vows. The God of Love appear'd to me To heal my wounded heart, The Influencing Deity With pleasure arm'd each Dart.
Fond man, said he, here end thy wo, Till she my power and Justice know, The foolish Sex shall all do so. 2. And for thy ease, believe no bliss Is perfect without pain, The fairest Summer hurtful is Without some showrs of Rain. The Joys of Heaven who wou'd prise If men too cheaply bought, The dearest part of mortal Joys Most charming is when sought. And thô with dross true Love they pay, Those that know finest metals say, No Gold will coyn without allay.
3. But that the generous Lover may Not always sigh in vain, The cruel Nymph that kills to day To morrow shall be slain. The little God no sooner spoke, But from my sight he flew, And I that groan'd with Cloe's yoak, Found Loves revenge was true. Her proud hard heart too late did turn; With fiercer flames than mine did burn; While I as much began to scorn.
A Pastoral Song on the late King. WHy, Phillis, in this mournful dress, Ah! why so full of Tears, These sighs, my dearest Shepherdess, Suit not thy tender years. Thy sheep lye panting on the plain Not one of them will feed; Thy Lambs in peircing crys complain Whence, whence, does this proceed? Ah, Strephon, we are all undone, With trembling voyce, she said, The best of Men to Heaven is gone, The great Amintor's dead. What will become of thou and I, Of these dear Flocks that moan, They will be Stole, and we shall dye, Now wise Amintor's gone?
Best blessings rest upon his Soul, The Loyal Swain reply'd, Yet let this thought thy greif controul, Pan does for us provide; And thô the brave Amintor's gone, Alexis does remain, Since he is left we're not undone, Nor ought we to complain. In him our loss is made amends, He'll us in safty keep From whigish Swains he'll us defend, From the French Fox our Sheep; Then cheer thy Flocks and weep no more, But stop that pious tide, With Voice and Pipe lets Pan adore, For sending such a guide.
The Departure. [by Damon: Nouem. 78.] I Never knew what 'twas to mourn, Ere the too hasty glass had run Which measur'd every thought of mine: Still as I offer'd at Loves shrine My heart a bleeding Sacrifice, The conquest of Aminta's Eyes. Those shining objects of my Love, How did the searching passion rove, O're all my soul its quickning fire Melted my heart with soft desire, While my Aminta blest this plain, I never felt another pain Than Love; which always do's belong To the gentle Amorous throng;
But now— Oh! wonder not, great God of Love, If the strong passion cease to move Within my soul; Aminta's gone, And left me here to sigh alone. How vain do's the vast Globe appear No sweetning pleasures can live here, While bright Aminta is not neer. No warbling notes which fill the Wood, Nor murmurs which the streams afford, Can raise in me that harmony Which ravisht with such extasie. When the fair she approacht, each charm Guarded my humble soul from harm, Nothing can now transport or cheer A tortur'd soul that's fill'd with fear; Since lov'd Aminta quits the place, Which she with Innocence did Grace. Then will I wander to some Grove Where I'le lament my absent Love,
And with cold Winter still complain Till the lost spring return again. To Amintas, Upon reading the Lives of some of the Ro∣mans, by Mrs. B. HAd'st thou, Amintas, liv'd in that great age, When hardly Beauty was to nature known, What numbers to thy side might'st thou engage And conquer'd Kingdoms by thy looks alone? That age when valor they did Beauty name, When Men did justly our brave sex prefer, Cause they durst dye, and scorn the publick shame Of adding Glory to the conqueror.
Had mighty Scipio had thy charming face, Great Sophonisbe had refus'd to dye, Her passion o're the sense of her disgrace Had gain'd the more obliging victory. Nor less wou'd Massanissa too have done, But to such Eyes, as to his Sword wou'd bow, For neither sex can here thy fetters shun, Being all Scipio, and Amintas too. Had'st thou great Caesar been, the greater Queen, Wou'd trembling have her mortal Asps lay'd by' In thee she had not only Caesar seen, But all she did adore in Antony. Had daring Sextus had thy lovely shape, The fairest Woman living had not dy'd. But blest the darkness that secur'd the Rape, Suffering her Pleasure to have debauch't her Pride.
Nor had he stoln to Rome to have quencht his fire, If thee resistless in his Camp he'd seen, Thy Eyes had kept his virtue all intire, And Rome a happy monarchy had been. Had Pompey lookt like thee, thô he had prov'd The vanquisht, yet from Egypts faithless King He had receiv'd the vows of being belov'd, In stead of Orders for his murdering. But here, Amintas, thy misfortune lys, Nor brave nor good are in our age esteem'd, Content thee then with meaner victorys, Unless that Glorious age cou'd be redeem'd. A. B.
On the first discovery of falseness in Amintas. By Mrs. B. MAke hast! make hast! my miserable soul, To some unknown and solitary Grove, Where nothing may thy Languishment controle Where thou maist never hear the name of Love. Where unconfin'd, and free, as whispering Air, Thou maist caress and welcome thy despair: Where no dissembl'd complisance may veil The griefes with which, my soul, thou art opprest. But dying, breath thyself out in a tale That may declare the cause of thy unrest: The toyles of Death 'twill render far more light And soon convey thee to the shades of night.
Search then, my soul, some unfrequented place, Some place that nature meant her own repose: When she her-self with-drew from human race, Displeas'd with wanton Lovers vows and oaths. Where Sol cou'd never dart a busy Ray, And where the softer winds ne're met to play. By the sad purling of some Rivulet O're which the bending Yew and Willow grow, That scarce the glimmerings of the day permit, To view the melancholy Banks below, Where dwells no noyse but what the murmurs make, When the unwilling stream the shade forsakes. There on a Bed of Moss and new-faln leaves, Which the Triumphant Trees once proudly bore, Thô now thrown off by every wind that breaths, Despis'd by what they did adorn before,
And who, like useless me, regardless lye While springing beautys do the boughs supply. There lay thee down, my soul, and breath thy last, And calmly to the unknown regions fly; But e're thou do'st thy stock of life exhaust, Let the ungrateful know, why tis you dye. Perhaps the gentle winds may chance to bear Thy dying accents to Amintas ear. Breath out thy Passion; tell him of his power And how thy flame was once by him approv'd. How soon as wisht he was thy conqueror, No sooner spoke of Love, but was belov'd. His wonderous Eyes, what weak resistance sound, While every charming word begat a wound? Here thou wilt grow impatient to be gone, And thrô my willing Eyes will silent pass, Into the stream that gently glides along, But stay thy hasty flight, (my Soul,) alas,
A thought more cruel will thy flight secure, Thought, that can no admittance give to cure. Think, how the prostrate Infidel now lys, An humble suppliant at anothers feet, Think, while he begs for pity from her Eyes. He sacrifices thee with-out regreet. Think, how the faithless treated thee last night, And then, my tortur'd soul, assume thy flight. SONG. REason at last has got the day, To Silvia's yoke no more I bow, The harder 'twas to break away, The sweeter is my freedome now, Yet I resolve the scornful Nymph to see, And tell her, I'm as unconcern'd as she.
But why shou'd I a visit make, To her whose charms I did admire, Unless my soul her part d'ost take, Unknowing of i'ts amorous fire? Alas! my flames are greater than before, For he loves most, who thinks he loves no more. On a Blew spot made in a Ladys neck by Gun∣powder, by a person of Quality. WHat blew is that that do's so charming shew, A Hill of Saphire in a Field of Snow. Where Love in ambush lys to shoot his Darts, And make a prey of the beholders hearts. Of that fine spot what cause can be assign'd, Was it by nature or by art design'd? Nature so busie was to make your face, In beautyfying it with every grace, Shee cou'd not mind any inferior part, So that this needs must be the work of Art:
Powder, which first was for destruction meant, Was here converted into ornament; But yet retains its wonted nature still, And from your neck, as from a Port do's kill. On Dydo. UNhappy Dydo, all her life As well a Mistress, as a Wife, No sooner dys her Husband, but she flys; No sooner flys her Lover, but she dys. SONG. AS the inamour'd Thirsis lay With his Silvia reconcil'd, Whose Eyes did brighter beams display, While the lovely charmer smil'd.
With Joy transported cry'd, my dear, Let us, let us, often jar, Peace always sweetest do's appear After sharpe fatigues of War. No, said the Nymph, mistaken swain, 'Tis best our quarrels to give o're. Kingdoms may jar, and close again, But broken Love cements no more. The Choyce. SIlvia, of all your Amorous train The Black, the Brown, or Fair, The wealthy Lord, or humble Swain For whom will you declare? If wealth or Beauty do prevail, My claim I then resign; If truth and love, I cannot faile, And Silvia must be mine.
A Letter to Astrea. THe Muse, which fair Astrea first inspir'd, Has droopt and lost its flame since she retir'd; And to the feather'd Poets which belong To Groves resigns her fainting Song. Nor is this Lethargy her fate alone For general dulness has possest the Town, The Town that now can boast no crowded street, Where none but sharp-set younger Brothers meet For well they know their mirth and Wit, (alas! Their only coyn,) will not i'th country pass. Yet in a cloud of smoke o're Coffee dry, What pleasure tis to hear the Sharpers cry. Pox o' this business, that still sticks and dwells Upon my hands and keeps me from the Wells, But I resolve a bold escape to make, And to throng'd Tunbridg a short Jorney take;
My humblest service to Eliza give, And when your Gloriana shall receive Your next, let my respects have then a place. Let fair Astrea last be pleas'd to grace These lines with her acceptance, and excuse The broken Language of a dying Muse. Since she's already drawing to a close, To write in verse I can no more propose, What next I send expect in honest prose. To Mrs B. from a Lady who had a desire to see her, and who complains on the ingra∣titude of her fugitive Lover. KInd are my Stars indeed but that so late And I stranger to a gentle fate, If such a one I meet and chance to know, I have not proper words to call it so, Wondering at happiness, surpris'd as far As a rough General always train'd to War,
Snatch'd from the midst of cruel fierce alarms, Into a thousand unexpected charms; A joy like this, how shall I entertain, With a heart wounded, and a soul in pain; In my laborious enterprises crost, My life near Finis, and the Day quite lost. Cleone had a Swain, and lov'd the youth, Not for his Beauty but his seeming truth, Not for a goodly herd or high descent, (Ah that no God my ruin would prevent,) What thô the Swain had neither Sheep nor land, I scorn'd the goods of fortunes partial hand; So generous was my passion for the slave, Because I equally suppos'd him brave. Oh! give me leave to sigh one sad adieu, Then wholly dedicate myself to you. I have no business here but to complain Of all the treasons of an ingrate Swain, Since my inhumane perjur'd Shepherd's gone, Night four seven times has put her mantle on,
And three seven times Aurora has appear'd, Since last I from the cruel Strephon heard; Whither he lives, is dead, or on what shore, (Patience, ye Gods! alas I know no more, Then why my Stars do my destruction press, Send me your pity, bounteous Shepherdess; That I the face of grief no more may know, If I deserve it that cou'd Love so low; Consult not that, but charity and give One tender pittying sigh that I may live: (That I may thus make my complaint to you,) Kind are my Stars indeed at last 'tis true; Let not my rude and untam'd griefs destroy, The early glimmerings of an infant joy: And add not your neglect, for if you doe, Cleone finds her desolation too! Know this it yet remains in your fair breast, To render me the happy or unblest. You may act miracles if you'l be kind, Make me true joys in real sorrows find;
And bless the hour I hither did pursue A faithless Swain and found access to you: Accept the heart I here to you present, By the ingratitude of Strephon rent; Till then gay, noble, full of brave disdain, And unless yours prevent shall be again; As once it was, if in your generous brest, It may be Pensioner at my request No more to Treasons subject as before To be betray'd by a fair tale no more, As large as once, as uncontroul'd and free, But yet at your command shall always be. To the fair Clarinda, who made Love to me, imagin'd more than Woman. By Mrs. B. FAir lovely Maid, or if that Title be Too weak, too Feminine for Nobler thee, Permit a Name that more Approaches Truth: And let me call thee, Lovely Charming Youth.
This last will justifie my soft complaint, While that may serve to lessen my constraint; And without Blushes I the Youth persue, When so much beauteous Woman is in view. Against thy Charms we struggle but in vain With thy deluding Form thou giv'st us pain, While the bright Nymph betrays us to the Swain. In pity to our Sex sure thou wer't sent, That we might Love, and yet be Innocent: For sure no Crime with thee we can commit; Or if we shou'd—thy Form excuses it. For who, that gathers fairest Flowers believes A Snake lies hid beneath the Fragrant Leaves. Thou beauteous Wonder of a different kind, Soft Cloris with the dear Alexis join'd; When e'r the Manly part of thee, wou'd plead Thou tempts us with the Image of the Maid, While we the noblest Passions do extend The Love to Hermes, Aphrodite the Friend. FINIS.
